Library of Congress. 



UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. 






c 



j 



~aJ 




M~ H.Kitcliae , sc . 




I 



THE 

LIFE 

OF 

WILLIAM TUTTLE, 

THE 

self-made man 

AND 

CONSISTENT CHEISTIAN. 

BY RER. JOSEPH F. TUTTLE. 

ROCKAWAY, NEW J E P. S E Y . 
SECOXD EDITION, ABRIDGED BY THE AUTIiOIi. 



PUBLISHED BY THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU -STREET, NEW YORK. 



^Yv^^ 



■JFRnzS 






Entered according to the Act of Congress, in the year 1852, by Robert 
Ca.rter & Brothers, in the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the 
Southern District of New York. 

Right of publishing transferred to the American Tract Society. 



d 

CONTENTS, 



CHAPTER I. ' 

PAGE 

His Parents 7 

CHAPTER II. 
"Mr. Sternheart" 12 

CHAPTER III. 
His first dollar - 20 

CHAPTER IY. 
" Pay as you go" 26 

CHAPTER V. 
Unpleasant comparisons 35 

CHAPTER VI. 

"Caroline of Litchfield" 42 

CHAPTER VII. 

A social glass — Mr. Goodwill 48 

CHAPTER VIII. 
The place where two ways meet 55 

CHAPTER IX. 
"Honor thy father and thy mother" 61 



4 CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

CHAPTER X. 

The beginning of wisdom 65 

CHAPTER XI. 
"I'm afloat" 73 

CHAPTER XII. 
"A good name is better than precious ointment*' . . SO 

CHAPTER XIII. 
"Born again" — Dr. Griffin 90 

CHAPTER XIV. 
"Faithful in all Ms house" 103 

CHAPTER XY. 
"They watch for your souls" 124 

CHAPTER XVI. 
Pure religion and un defiled 133 

CHAPTER XVII. 
"Clouds and darkness" 141 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

The fruit of righteousness 157 

CHAPTER XIX. 

Sabbath-school and Bethel church 170 

CHAPTER XX. 

"Brethren, the time is short" 17(3 

CHAPTER XXI. 
"And he was not, for God took him" 187 



PREFACE. 



" A man is the child of his own actions," proudly 
exclaimed Napoleon Bonaparte. "By the grace 
of God, I am what I am," ejaculated the apostle 
Paul, The real Christian undoubtedly prefers the 
humble ascription of the saint to the boast of the 
warrior ; and yet there is a sense in which every 
person should be taught that he is the child of his 
own actions, without disparaging the higher and 
nobler principle which attributes all to the grace 
of God. 

Abstract truth is adapted to the well-disciplined 
intellect ; but when a strong impression is to be 
made on common minds, especially the young, 
truth must become a living picture. It was for 
this our blessed Lord taught by parables. As he 
speaks, living realities move before us, seeming 
not so much to tell us what we ought to be and 
do, as to throw on us the responsibility of deciding 
for ourselves. Concerning the subject of these 
memoirs, one has said, " I honor his memory. His 
life shone as that of an humble, consistent, heav- 
enly-minded Christian. There was a tenderness 
of spirit about him, an affectionate sympathy with 



6 PREFACE. 

his neighbor, and an honest-lieartedness that drew 
to him the love and esteem of his townsmen. He 
was an Israelite in whom was no gnile. He fol- 
lowed the Saviour with humble and willing foot- 
steps. He loved his closet, and there recruited 
his strength for conflict. His best, unmistakable 
memorial, is the preciousness of his memory in 
Newark, where he lived and died." 

Even this beautiful character, as drawn by the 
Hon. Theodore Frelinghuysen, would not of itself 
be sufficient to claim the public attention. There 
are many whose virtues might be justly celebrated 
in such a tribute, and yet their public lives be 
comparatively useless. But when the struggles of 
a man from poverty to independence, from igno- 
rance to intelligence, from obscurity to shining 
usefulness, are grouped in a living picture, show- 
ing to every one who looks at it that this is an 
example which he can follow ; then it becomes a 
question whether that picture shall be kept en- 
shrined in the holy place of private, affection, or 
be reproduced for the benefit of others. If this 
volume shall teach the two lessons, " A man is the 
child of his own actions ;" "By the grace of God, 
I am what I am:" if it shall lead one youth to 
imitate a good example, or comfort one of Christ's 
little ones, the author will have a rich reward. 



LIFE 

OF 

WILLIAM TUTTLE. 



CHAPTER I. 

HIS PARENTS. 

"William Tuttle, the eldest son of Joseph 
and Esther Parkhurst Tuttle, was born near 
New Vernon, Morris county, New Jersey, 
August 22, 1781. His ancestors were among 
the earliest settlers of that county. They were 
prominent members of the first church which 
was organized in that part of the state, and 
were active soldiers during the revolutionary 
war. It is a fact of interest that his grand- 
father and five sons were in the service of their 
country during that trying period. Joseph 
Tuttle, the father of "William, was a black- 
smith of industrious habits, and by his trade 
was enabled to purchase a house and lot; 



8 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

but unfortunately having "been elected to an 
office, the duties of which sometimes conflicted 
with his kind disposition as a friend and neigh- 
bor, he lost his property. Yet, in the language 
of his son, " though depressed in his outward 
circumstances, and forced to leave his house, 
he thanked God for his health, strength, and a 
trade — bestowments of Providence, with which 
he might still sustain his family honestly." He 
w T as a pious man, conscientiously endeavoring 
to teach his children their obligations to God. 

"While William's father exerted a decided in- 
fluence over him, he owed more to his mother 
than to any other earthly friend. She was a 
woman whose native sw T eetness of disposition 
added charms to the piety which she daily 
exhibited to her children. She died before 
William was eight years old, yet her image 
never lost its place in his memory. His mother 
did much, by her prayers and example, to 
mould his character ; and he could say of her 
with truth, 

"The record fair, 
That memory keeps of all thy kindness there, 
Still outlives many a storm, that has effaced 
A thousand other themes less deeply traced." 



HIS PARENTS. 9 

She left to her motherless children the leg- 
acy of her ardent prayers that Grod would 
guard and guide them through this world, and 
bestow upon them "an inheritance incorrupt- 
ible, and undenled, and that fadeth not away." 

The misfortunes of his father were probably 
no disadvantage to William. The recollections 
of his father's " being sold out," and of the 
distress occasioned by that event, made an 
abiding impression on the boy. It is interest- 
ing to recur to the very day-book kept by this 
mechanic, to see how his son acquired those 
habits which befriended him so greatly in after- 
life. Entries in this book show that William 
was frequently employed by the neighboring 
farmers " to cover corn," " drive oxen," " thresh 
grain," "chop wood," "plough," and other 
kinds of work common in a farming community. 
The father strove to teach his children that it 
was both necessary and honorable to help them- 
selves in all honest ways ; and so well was the 
lesson learned, that when protracted and severe 
illness disabled him, they earned for the family 
a comfortable living. 

After the death of Mr. Tuttle the subject of 



10 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

this memoir, there was found among his pri- 
vate papers the history of "John Homespun/' 
reaching to the period of his life when he he- 
came established in a prosperous business. 
Until his death the existence of this manuscript 
was unknown, even to his most intimate friends. 
Under this unostentatious name he has recorded 
his own early struggles, in a style which often 
reminds the reader of "Poor Richard." "We 
are left entirely to conjecture as to the occasion 
and design of this autobiography ; but one thing 
is certain, he would have shrunk from speak- 
ing even the truth concerning himself, had he 
supposed that his words would ever come be- 
fore the public eye associated with his own 
name ; yet the story is so simple, artless, and 
truthful, the incidents in it so pleasing, and 
the principles so valuable, that it is believed 
minor considerations ought to be waived in 
view of the useful ends which may be attained 
by its publication. So far as this narrative ex- 
tends, and is appropriate to the design of this 
memoir, the author of "John Homespun" will 
be allowed to give his own interesting and in- 
structive history. 



HIS PARENTS. 11 

" John Homespun," he says, "was a boy of 
but common capacities. Though of an active 
disposition, and not peculiarly dilatory in his 
studies while at school, it required more labor 
and study to keep a fair standing in his 
class, than was necessary for most of his school- 
fellows. "With a memory much less retentive 
than others', he strove by increased hours of 
study to commend himself to his teacher with- 
out the ferule or rod. So diligently did he 
apply himself with his limited means of educa- 
tion, as to be accounted a respectable scholar 
in the elementary branches, and a lad of fair 
promise by the neighorhood. John's father was 
an industrious man, whose means went but 
little beyond the support of his family, yet he 
took special care that his children should fully 
share in the benefits of the village school. As 
this was the chief patrimony he expected to 
leave them, he was intent on keeping them at 
school to acquire the more plain and useful 
branches of an English education. At all times 
the improvement and education of his children 
was a leading object with Mr. Homespun." 



12 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

CHAPTER II. 

ME.. STERNHEAET. 

In the fall of 1796, "William's father had 

an offer from Mr. of Newark, N. J., to 

take his son, then at the age of fifteen, as an 
apprentice to the printing business. 

"Thus passed the youthful days of John 
Homespun, mostly spent at school until old 
enough to labor. He frequently assisted his 
father in the shop ; sometimes he aided the 
neighbors in the hay or harvest field. Even 
when at school, he made it a point to assist his 
father as many hours as he could. From prin- 
ciple, he was an early riser, and in this way 
did much to lighten his father's burdens. 

"But the time had now come when John 
must think of some permanent employment for 
life. His father was willing to give up his 
services, if he could thereby secure the means 
of an honest and independent livelihood. It 
was decided that he must learn a trade. It 
was not long before Mr. Homespun learned 



MR. STERNHEART. 13 

that an apprentice was wanted in a printing- 
office, in a thriving village some twenty miles 
distant. It was agreed that John should make 
a trial. 

"With all promptness, and with such means 
as the limited circumstances of his parents 
would admit, his father having married again, 
arrangements were made for apparel more suit- 
able to one who was to leave his rustic home 
for the more particular circles of a town. 
John's homely suit of butternut and his straw 
hat were laid aside for the younger brothers 
who were still at home, and some plain clothes 
were purchased from the store. To wear cloth 
purchased at a store was an era in John's life. 

"At length the time for John to leave home 
arrived, and his feelings on the occasion may 
be more easily imagined than told. He was 
only fifteen years old, and had hardly been 
twenty miles from home in his life. His 
longest journey hitherto, had been when assist- 
ing to drive the cattle to the mountains west of 
his native place. As for being away from 
home, he had scarcely ever slept from under 
the paternal roof. And now to leave that pleas- 



14 "WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

ant circle to dwell among strangers, called 
forth all the resolution of his youthful mind. 
But John knew that other boys had experienced 
just the same trial, and had left homes they 
loved just as well as he loved his. He he- 
thought himself, also, that if spared to man- 
hood he must look out and provide for himself. 
He was convinced — no trivial thing— that his 
only prospective resource was his industry, his 
integrity, and his hands. "With such manly 
motives prompting and encouraging him, John 
hade his friends at home a tender farewell. 
The parting injunction of his father to be a 
good boy, cheerfully to do all that might be 
required by his new master, not to expect those 
indulgences abroad which he had shared at 
home, in short, to fear Grod and keep his com- 
mandments, and by industry and good behavior 
to make himself a man — this most valuable 
injunction was never forgotten, and was in 
some measure heeded by the young adventurer 
upon untried scenes. 

" John's first journey was made in the humble 
stage-wagon which plied between the shire town 
of his native county and the town which was 



MR. STERNHEART. 15 

to be his future residence. For a trifling sum 
the boy was allowed to make his journey in a 
public conveyance, one in amazing contrast 
with the 'iron horse,' which now carries mul- 
titudes between the same towns with such 
astonishing rapidity. On reaching town, John 
was immediately introduced to Mr. Sternheart, 
his new master, who kindly received him. 
Without any delay John put in practice one of 
his principles, to do all he could to please his 
master and win his good feelings. One thing 
is worthy of note: as soon as he acquired a 
knowledge of the duties expected of him in the 
printing-office and in the family, he endeavored 
to anticipate rather than be reminded of them." 
"In the new situation in which John found 
himself were four apprentices, and one journey- 
man bookbinder, a decided deist. The master, 
Mr. Sternheart, was a man of stern character, 
self-complacent, and of rather morose disposi- 
tion. His authority was undisputed, his word 
was law, and John really feared the man. 
None of the four apprentices loved him over- 
much, but yielded reluctantly to his authority. 
His lady was no more loved than her husband. 



16 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

The boys were always civil in her presence, 
because they dared not act rudely, but behind 
her back nothing w T as too bad for them to say. 
Attempts to draw John into this ' opposition 
line 5 proved unavailing, and in this prudent 
and magnanimous course even the deistical 
bookbinder sustained him. The injunction of 
John's father, to be a good boy and do all he 
could to please his master and mistress, and 
not unnecessarily to incur even the ill-will of 
a dog, was too fresh in his memory to be un- 
heeded. 

"He had scarce learned the alphabetical or- 
der of the type-case, when he was placed at the 
press for w^eeks together in applying the ink to 
the types, a laborious task, which made his 
arms ache. He was often very tired, but did 
not yield to discouragement. Sometimes his 
hands were blistered, but he always found that 
they soon recovered by the relaxation of the 
night, and the repose of the Sabbath. 

"Thus he continued and labored for Mr. 
Sternheart for months on mutual trial, the 
master evidently pleased, and the apprentice 
having no special reason to find fault. His 



MR. STEENHEART. 17 

pleasant home, however, could not be forgotten, 
although it was an humble one. He was not 
homesick now, for that desolate feeling had 
been overcome ; but he longed again to visit 
the family circle from which he had so long 
been absent. Accordingly a visit home was 
planned, and occupied much of his thoughts. 

" The summer and fall business being chiefly 
accomplished, John applied for permission to go 
home. This request Mr. Sternheart readily 
granted, and in doing it he said with an affabil- 
ity quite unusual to him, ' John, I am pleased 
with your industry and attention to business, 
since you have been with me ; and my family 
are gratified with your attention to their wants. 
I see nothing in the way of your becoming a 
printer, and hope you will become my appren- 
tice. But, 5 continued Mr. S., 'X shall not press 
business this winter ; we have hands enough 
for what I purpose to do. Say to your father 
that, if agreeable to him, you can remain at 
home during the winter, and further improve 
yourself at school ; or, if more agreeable to him, 
you may return after making a visit, instead of 
waiting for spring.' 

Wm. Tuttle. 2 



18 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

"This was in the autumn of 1796. A few 
days after this, John was at liberty to make 
the visit which he had anticipated with such 
pleasure. This time he was not even to take 
the rough stage-wagon which had brought him 
to town. He was to take a still plainer con- 
veyance. It may well be imagined that pleas- 
ant visions of home mingled in his dreams the 
night before he started. At the dawn of day 
he was up, and Mrs. Sternheart, who by this 
time had really become attached to him, pre- 
pared him an early breakfast. And then with 
a name as pure as when his father gave him 
his 'parting injunction,' and with the proud 
feeling that he had done so well as to make 
friends of his employer and family, with elastic 
footsteps he began his journey home. It was 
only twenty miles to walk, and what was that 
to a son and brother going home ? Yes, that 
morning John, wending his way home on foot, 
was happier and more cheerful than if he 
had been an emperor or a millionaire. It 
is needless to speak of the affectionate wel- 
come he received when he reached his father's 
house. 



Mil. STEHNHEAHT. 19 

" Although there was every reason to be- 
lieve that Mr. Sternheart was pleased with 
John, and desired his return as soon as his 
business should recommence in the spring, yet 
his father's feelings were a little wounded at 
the implied unimportance attached to his son's 
services, which would permit him to be absent 
for the winter. Perhaps this arose more from 
pride than from sound discretion ; but be this 
as it may, Mr. Homespun resolved not to press 
his son on his new situation. He therefore 
quietly acquiesced in his son's remaining at 
home, and waiting the leadings of Providence 
as to his future course. Accordingly John was 
again entered at the village school, paying fair 
attention to those studies which might be use- 
ful to him in coming years." 



20 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 



CHAPTER III. 



HIS FIRST DOLLAR. 



" Before John's return home an incident 
occurred, which may be recorded as interesting 
to lads who leave their parents without money, 
poor in every respect but a spotless reputation. 
While at his brief apprenticeship, as before 
intimated, he had scarce a penny to line 
his pocket. His fellow-apprentices had richer 
friends, and consequently plenty of pocket- 
money. It was no easy task for him to earn 
even a small amount. He had the privilege 
of doing what is called overivork ; that is, 
after performing his daily labor, if he chose, he 
could fold books in the bindery, for which he 
was paid by the page. Although this was a 
branch of business distinct from his own trade, 
yet he resolved to avail himself of the privilege. 
Being a raw hand he could not accomplish 
much, and the compensation was so despicable 
in the view of the other apprentices as not to 
be entertained by them for a moment. In the 



HIS FIRST DOLLAR. 21 

evening after his own work was done, he ap- 
plied his hands to this new branch of business, 
and persevered in it until the proper hour for 
sleep. With all his tact and perseverance his 
earnings seldom exceeded five or six cents an 
evening. But he had learned the multiplica- 
tion table. He calculated that if he should 
work four nights in a week, earning six and a 
fourth cents each night, it would make twenty- 
five cents a week. If he worked thus four 
weeks; it would amount to one dollar, a large 
sum of money for him in those days. Thus 
stimulated by the pleasant prospect, he worked 
night after night, without disturbing any one, 
or being disturbed ; but meanwhile esteemed 
by his comrades a real 'green' country lad 
for his pains. 

"On his leaving for home, John was not a 
little disappointed that Mr. Sternheart did not 
offer to pay him his hard-earned extra-wages ; 
still he was too modest to demand it, glad 
enough, as he was, in fact, to make his way 
home, with few or even no cents in his pocket. 
But John's wages were not forgotten. A 
month or two afterwards, he accidentally met 



22 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

Mr. Sternheart in the county-town of his na- 
tive county. The interview was friendly. 
John thought of his dues, as must be con- 
fessed, but was too timid to dun even for an 
honest debt. Before parting, however, he was 
joyfully startled by Mr. Sternheart's inquiry, 
' John, did I pay you for your overwork?' 
' No, sir,' was the prompt reply; upon which 
his employer handed him a silver dollar, a 
great prize for John, more money than he had 
ever before claimed as his own." 

Mr. Tuttle often referred to that dollar as 
the choicest and most highly prized that he 
ever earned, and at that time it seemed a 
greater treasure than a hundred in after-life. 
In the perseverance which he displayed in that 
overwork is found the secret of his future 
successes. He was never a bold speculator, 
but through life he was the same diligent 
worker and economist as in "Mr. Sternheart's" 
bindery. 

There is a casual allusion in this anecdote, 
which throws light on William's religious hab- 
its at that time. In alluding to his multipli- 
cation table, it will be remembered that each 



HIS FIRST DOLLAR. 23 ■ 

week furnished him only four for a multiplier. 
On Saturday night he would not work, for he 
had been taught by his parents that it was 
proper then to prepare for the Sabbath. Still 
there were five nights besides, which he could 
have used, had he been so disposed, for his 
"overwork," and yet he only worked four 
nights each week. How was the remaining 
evening spent ? His industry is proof that it 
was not in idleness or dissipation. In this, as 
in every thing else, the young apprentice had 
settled it as a principle strictly to be adhered 
to, that he ought to devote one week-day even- 
ing to religious purposes : and he was found 
regularly in his place at the Thursday evening 
meeting, which has been observed in Newark 
from time immemorial. Dr. McWhorter was 
then in that church, and his friends testify 
that this venerable man had no more attentive 
hearer than "William Tuttle. His life then is 
a fulfilment of the promise, " Them that honor 
me I will honor." 

"William attended the grammar-school in 
Morristown at one time, and this was probably 
during the winter after his brief "apprentice- 



24 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

ship" in Newark. His father at this time re- 
sided between Morristown and Mendham, three 
or four miles from the former place. The son 
boarded at home, and twice each day walked 
this distance, so formidable to modern effemi- 
nacy. The cost of his tuition, we may con- 
jecture, was in part met by that precious 
" silver dollar," of which he has given so enter- 
taining an account. We have also learned 
from his brother, that many hours of each 
week were spent in assisting his father. The 
son's principles were too high-minded, and his 
sense of propriety too nice, to suffer him to ex- 
cuse himself from sharing the burdens of his 
father, by the plea that he was compelled to 
walk such a distance to school. 

It may not be irrelevant here to learn from a 
contemporary the estimate which others placed 
upon William Tuttle at this period of his life. 
"He was then fond of books," says one who 
had the best of opportunities of knowing him. 
"As nearly as I can now remember, he was a 
pattern of industry, sobriety, and morality, 
always considerate, affectionate, and devoted. 
He possessed apparently an elevation of prin- 



HIS FIRST DOLLAR. 25 

ciple far above the standard which governed 
most of his companions. This attracted the 
notice of ail who knew him, and many even 
then predicted that he would be good and use- 
ful, as the event has proved. He was in all 
stations trustworthy." 



26 "WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

CHAPTER IV. 

"PAY AS YOU GO." 

"In the spring of 1797, Mr. Sternheart sold 
his printing establishment, and John Home- 
spun, who felt under no special obligations 
even to his old employer, now considered the 
matter entirely optional with himself and his 
father, whether or not to enter the service of 
the new purchaser. It was not long, however, 
before his father received a letter from another 
printing firm, making inquiries as to John's 
engagements and disposition to enter their em- 
ploy. Either the proprietors of this establish- 
ment had obtained some favorable knowledge 
of John while in Newark the year before, or 
some friend in town had mentioned him as a 
lad of industry and good morals. Be this as it 
may, there was a reputation for character, 
real or fictitious, which even then called forth 
not only a first but a second application for his 
services, and that from entire strangers. Upon 
careful reflection, Mr. Homespun agreed that 






PAY AS YOU. GO. 27 

his son should make a trial of the new situa- 
tion. The result of this was his being regular- 
ly indentured as an apprentice in that printing- 
office. 

"The new family in which John lived and 
worked was that of Mr. Groodheart. He was 
himself a working man, and as much the kind 
companion of his apprentices as their master. 
His wife was tidy, and spared no labor to 
manage well her domestic concerns. Both 
husband and wife were affable, frugal, and 
sympathizing. The law of kindness and not 
of coercion predominated. No lordly authority 
was manifested by Mr. Groodheart. The ap- 
prentices were also very different from those he 
had associated with in Mr. Sternheart's office. 
Their circumstances were more on an equality 
with his own, and this materially increased the 
pleasures of his new home. It was one family. 
The apprentices were not boarded out, as is 
too common in these days ; and by the ju- 
dicious firmness of the master, each one was 
led to conform to wholesome regulations, among 
which was one on which he insisted : Every 
member of the family must be at home and in 



28 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

bed at a seasonable hour. This valuable rule, 
thus enforced, was a shield from the various 
temptations which so often ensnare the inex- 
perienced youth, and prove destructive of good 
morals and a character for virtue. 

" John was not slack in performing the la- 
bors assigned him. He tried to be faithful. 
He neither grumbled nor hesitated. A prompt 
and cheerful compliance with duty w T as a pre- 
vailing mark. He endeavored to avoid the 
meanness of being an ' eye-servant ;' so that, 
whether his employer was present or not, it 
made no difference as to the industry of his 
apprentice. "When the old town-clock an- 
nounced the hour of labor, he was at his post ; 
and when business thrived, the pleasure of 
John was as great as that of his employer." 

When William's indentures were to be signed 
by his father, he made a visit at home, and in 
connection with this event we have a pleasing 
picture of his feelings. 

"With his indentures in his pocket, and in 
his own handwriting, he again walked home. 
The countenances of his friends seemed to say 
to him, ' John, we are most happy to see you. 



PAY AS YOU GO. 29 

No tidings of disgrace to yourself or us have 
reached our ears. Welcome home ; welcome 
home.' It was a real comfort to John to he 
ahle to look his friends in the face without an 
upbraiding conscience. 

"The few days assigned to John for his 
visit passed away quickly, and not without 
much cheerful mirth ; for notwithstanding his 
attention to business, no one loved to be merry 
with his friends more than he. The time hav- 
ing expired, he promptly returned, because he 
knew Mr. G-oodheart needed his services, and 
because that was the time appointed for his 
return. It was a cardinal maxim with him, 
during his whole apprenticeship — and I would 
add, during his whole life — to make mere in- 
clination or gratification yield to duty. In fact, 
he very early learned that there is no happiness 
aside from duty. Accordingly, with some plain 
refreshments in his pocket to eat by the way, 
he left home. It is true that now, by such 
industry as he had shown in Mr. Sternheart's 
bindery, he had a few shillings of his own ; 
but he deemed it better to save them than 
spend them in riding in the public conveyance. 



30 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

A penny saved was as good as two pence 
earned. His allowance for clothing was small, 
and to make both ends meet and yet appear 
neatly clad, the strictest economy was indis- 
pensable. He could never bear to be in debt 
Then and through life he rigidly maintained 
the wholesome rule, 'Let not your outgoes ex- 
ceed your income.' " 

"While some may look at this artless nar- 
rative with the feeling that it has no such 
importance as to warrant its publication, one 
thing is certain, that in this narrative is found 
the way by which most youth must rise to an 
honorable and independent station in life.. How 
often do we see the same way followed and 
proved. In one of our western states we find 
a boy barefooted, as one describes it, living in 
a cabin, and working under the scourge of 
poverty, but animated with an honest ambition 
to do all he can for himself. That boy, after 
his day's work is done; is stretched before a 
blazing fire, with no candle, intensely studying 
perhaps a borrowed book. In a few years we 
find him in college. He rigidly follows the 
rule, "Let not your outgoes exceed your in- 



PAY AS YOU GO. 31 

come ;" and when his means are exhausted, 
nothing discouraged, he walks some forty miles 
to engage in making salt, so intent on securing 
the means of an education that he works day 
and night. Even when he has thrown himself 
upon his heap of straw to rest tired nature, the 
prevailing passion animates him, and he is 
seen walking in his sleep around his boiling 
salt-kettles. It would be strange if such a man 
did. not make some figure in the world, and no 
one expresses as much surprise as admiration 
to find him at last occupying a place either in 
our national Senate or Cabinet. We do not 
feel surprised that this man is no more proud 
than his friends to hear the people with ad- 
miring affection calling him, even now, "Tom 
the salt-boiler." 

We look at another in the same state, an 
apprentice, an industrious, enterprising boy, 
who devotes his leisure hours to the diligent 
reading of books ; and in a few years we are 
charmed with his eloquence and learning on 
the platform, "the stump," at the bar, and in 
the halls of legislation. 

We look at another boy brought up to labor 



32 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

and self-dependence by his admirable mother, 
a widow. On a certain morning, some forty 
years ago, w T e see him starting en foot with a 
small budget of clothes for New York city. 
He has already learned all that he can of the 
village blacksmith, and now is ambitions to 
excel in his business. At low w r ages he en- 
gages himself to a good workman in the city. 
Early and late he is at his place. His mind 
labors with his body, and in a year or two he 
becomes so great a proficient as to command 
any wages he chooses to ask. All this time, 
as an apprentice, a journeyman at low wages, 
and as a finished workman, he- acts out the 
maxim, "Let not your outgoes exceed your in- 
come." That man yet lives. His efforts have 
conducted him to opulence, which he is using 
liberally in the cause of his divine Master. 

Said the eccentric John Randolph of Roan- 
oke, "When I succeeded to my father's estate, 
every inch of it was mortgaged nineteen dollars 
on every twenty of its value. In a few years 
I cleared off this enormous incumbrance by the 
magic power of four words, ' Pay as you go.' " 

There is not a town in New England, and 






PAY AS YOU GO. ~ 33 

perhaps not in the United States, which has 
not some man who has risen high in the esteem 
of society, even when the circumstances in 
which he began life were to all appearance un- 
favorable. Whether you look at the life of the 
" salt-boiler" or the "learned blacksmith," or 
the accomplished secretary of the Smithsonian 
Institute, it will be seen that they all followed 
substantially the course of the Morris county 
apprentice-boy, who has here so truthfully told 
his own story. In this country, if the young 
have not the energy to walk in this way, they 
must expect, with few exceptions, to live in 
poverty, which in many cases will become de- 
pressed into pauperism. Here and there one 
will have the gold showered into his lap, it 
may be, by the death of a friend, or by stum- 
bling into some successful speculation ; but the 
most, if they secure competence at all, must 
do it in this way. As for those stations which 
require mental discipline and acquirements, 
the exceptions to this principle are still more 
rare. These "boys of genius" and these men 
of indolence, who expect to rival a Marshall or 
a Story in the law, a Grriffin or an Alexander 



34 "WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

in the pulpit, a Hamilton or a "Webster in the 
cabinet, without intense application and dili- 
gence, are doomed to a woful disappointment. 
Grod creates powers for us, but he has made it 
a universal law, that we must use those powers 
if they are to do us any good. 



UNPLEASANT COMPARISONS, 



CHAPTER V. 

UNPLEASANT COMPARISONS. 

"Having resumed his station, things movee*. 
on smoothly with John. He made commend- 
able progress in his trade. The family of 
which he was now a member were courteous 
and happy, and John did what he could to 
continue this state of things. "Were errands to 
be performed, John was at hand, ready and 
willing to execute them. Had he accomplished 
his own daily labor, while yet some out-door 
work remained to be done, he did not meanly 
shrink away to escape duty. In working-hours 
or not, it was the same with him. In con- 
sequence of this, he was apparently much 
esteemed by his employer. His employer's 
wife was also his friend, and he endeavored to 
deserve this friendship. As a slight incident, 
it may be stated that during the first year of 
his apprenticeship water for family use was 
procured at a public inn on the opposite side 
of the most public street in the town. Mrs. 



36 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

Groodheart had no domestic help, and in carry- 
ing water was often assisted "by her husband 
and the apprentices. In this, John endeavored 
to anticipate her wants. Sometimes, when 
she was seen on her way to the pump, John 
has thrown down his work, and taken the pail 
from her hand to do the duty himself. Boys 
enough are found nowadays, who would dis- 
dain such humble acts. 

"What think you? Were John's acts of 
kindness to his mistress appreciated, or did 
they pass unnoticed and unrewarded? The 
sequel will answer. Mrs. Groodheart was a 
tailoress, and an industrious, frugal housewife, 
a fortune for a poor man. One day she said to 
him, 'John, when you want any article of 
clothing made, bring me the materials, and I 
will make it for you. I wisli to pay you for 
your kindness to me.' This was a matter of 
some importance to him in those days, as it 
aided him in carrying out the principle about 
his outgoes and income ; and in doing this, he 
acted on the conviction that neat though cheap 
clothing, and freedom from debt, was greatly 
to be preferred to more expensive and fashion- 



UNPLEASANT COMPARISONS. 37 

able attire not paid for — a preference which the 
writer would suggest as worthy of the imitation 
not only of apprentices, but of those in every 
station of life. 

" Don't run in debt : never mind, never mind 
If the clothes are all faded and torn : 
Fix them up, make them do ; it is better by far 
Than to have the heart weary and worn. 
There 's no comfort, I tell you, in walking the street 
In fine clothes, if you know you 're in debt ; 
And feel that perchance you some tradesman may meet, 
Who will sneer, ' They 're not paid for yet.' " 

"It might have been the second year of 
John's apprenticeship, when an incident oc- 
curred further showing the kind regard which 
Mrs. Groodheart had for him. In those days it 
was fashionable for young men to wear ruffles 
on the bosoms of their linen. John procured 
materials for a shirt of rather finer quality 
than he was accustomed to wear, intending it 
for special occasions. Mrs. Groodheart most 
cheerfully offered to make it. "When it was 
done, you may imagine John's surprise at be- 
holding the bosom embellished with an elegant 
ruffle. Mrs. Groodheart, out of pure regard to 
John, at her own expense, had procured it and 



38 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

affixed it to his linen, thinking it would gratify 
him to be in the fashion. For a moment he 
was astounded. A ruffle to his linen! A 
rustic boy like him, with a ruffle in his bosom ! 
He could not for a moment harbor so novel a 
stranger. 'My dear madam,' said John with 
his usual decision, J I give you a thousand 
thanks for your kind intentions, but I must 
beg you to relieve my linen of this trapping of 
pride, or I shall have to do it myself,' The 
lady yielded her taste to his decided request, 
and the ruffle was taken off. Even in after- 
years, when his circumstances were indepen- 
dent, much more so than those of many who 
wore ruffles, he uniformly resisted the use of 
such articles, as an unnecessary appendage to 
his dress. 

" Some months after the affair of the ruffles, 
John's employer removed his family from the 
building in which was the printing-office, to 
one about a quarter of a mile distant. He was 
still the youngest apprentice. His duty, there- 
fore, was to sweep the office, and in winter to 
make the fires. He was an early riser. ' E arly 
to bed, and early to rise,' was an habitual trait. 



UNPLEASANT COMPARISONS. 39 

He always did his office-work before breakfast, 
and was the first of the family to rise. To re- 
lieve Mrs. (xoodheart, who was still without a 
domestic, before attending to the office-work, 
he would often build the fire and hang on the 
tea-kettle, while the other members of the 
family were still in bed. No one who has not 
made the experiment knows how much can be 
accomplished by a young man, or even an old 
man, by early rising. In after-life, it was pleas- 
ant to John that he could not recall more than 
two or three instances during his apprentice- 
ship, in which he overslept and was called up 
by his employer." 

William was accustomed modestly to say, 
that among his acquaintances were lads who 
were in circumstances more pleasant than his 
own. Their anticipations were cheerful. They 
had friends not only to assist them with money, 
but to introduce them into society and business. 
He had no such resources to rely on. This 
disparity, at times, was the cause of mortifica- 
tion and depression of spirits, but it was a 
wholesome part of the discipline which finally 
made the man. 



40 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

" He continued to occupy his leisure hours 
with books. He devoted very little time to 
society. In this way much may be gained by 
a young man of limited education. He con- 
sidered it the very harvest season, in which 
every young man should be diligent in storing 
his mind with useful history, and preparing for 
the responsibilities of manhood. As he grew 
older, a knowledge of men, nations, and cus- 
toms seemed highly desirable. To a good de- 
gree his leisure time was employed in reading 
history, travels, and other such books. The 
rise and fall of the ancient republics, the history 
of the mother country, the life of Washington, 
and the records of other eminent men whose 
patriotism and virtue formed a constellation 
worthy of imitation, shared his attention. The 
perusal of useful books he thought had a salu- 
tary influence on his mind ; and the more it 
was stored with the wisdom of other genera- 
tions, the better he would be able to act a 
responsible and meritorious part on the theatre 
of human life. His memory was not retentive, 
and this was a source of trouble through life. 
But to remedy this defect in part, John made 



UNPLEASANT COMPARISONS. 41 

notes of interesting and remarkable events for 
future reference. 

"It was a resolution which he formed after 
leaving his father's house, not to associate with 
low, mean, dissipated youth. The regard he 
had for his own reputation, and for the feelings 
of his parents and friends, stimulated him to 
keep this resolution. Still he looked forward 
to the time when his rustic manners, his bash- 
ful timidity would be overcome, and when es- 
pecially his character would introduce him to 
that portion of society with which he aspired to 
mingle. Months and even years passed away 
before he could overcome his timidity and gain 
courage enough to mingle even with youth of 
bis owi 2 g^ 3S 



42 WILLIAM TUTTLE, 



CHAPTER VI. 

"CAROLINE OF LITCHFIELD." 
"Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well. " 

"At an early period of his apprenticeship 
John Homespun got hold of a novel entitled 
' Caroline of Litchfield.' He read the work 
with the credulity of an inexperienced youth, 
and was foolish enough to suppose there w r ere 
such angels in human form as the heroine of 
that story. It was the first work of fiction he 
had ever read, and it filled his mind with ex- 
travagant notions of happiness and love. For 
a short time his head was affected with that 
sort of bewilderment which so often comes 
over those who devour fictitious works. This 
led him into a misstep, which in the end was 
scarcely to be regretted. In the adjacent 
dwelling resided a girl of sixteen, who seemed 
in John's heated imagination to be as lovely 
as 'Caroline of Litchfield.' She might often 
be seen at a window opposite to that where 



CAROLINE OF LITCHFIELD. 43 

John was working ; and with her book or sew- 
ing she seemed to him an angel of beauty. 
Sometimes John seated himself at his own 
window with a book, and a sly glance towards 
each other seemed to speak volumes. He was 
certain that the merchant's daughter regarded 
him with such tenderness as ' Caroline of 
Litchfield' entertained for her lover. So sure 
was he of this fact, that at last he made bold 
to address a letter of friendship to her. By 
some mishap the note was intercepted by her 
father, and John soon learned its fate. To him 
it was like an earthquake ; for back came the 
letter with her father's injunction to drop the 
correspondence on the spot. It was a good 
lesson. Now his folly was transparent even 
to himself. For days his feelings were greatly 
disturbed, not so much with regret that his 
bubble was burst, as that he had been led to 
so foolish a deed. The timely 'earthquake' 
not only cured him of his silly love, but con- 
vinced him that it was better for him to per- 
fect himself in his trade than in a correspond- 
ence like this. Ever after he was very care- 
ful to abstain from two pernicious practices, 



44 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

the building of air-castles, and the killing 
of time by reading novels. 

" Now, a word to youth on the evils of reading 
novels and romances." 

Here the narrative breaks off abruptly, and 
the writer proceeds to other scenes in his life. 
"Why he did not speak that " word to youth 
on the evils of reading novels and roman- 
ces," must be conjectured. A blank page is 
left, and he may have intended to do it at 
another time. We find the following par- 
agraphs, which doubtless expressed his views, 
marked by him, and lying in the sheet which 
contains the anecdote just quoted. 

" Bad books are like ardent spirits, they 
furnish neither ' aliment ' nor ' medicine f 
they are poison. Both intoxicate, one the 
mind, the other the body. ***** Books 
of mere fiction are bad in their influence and 
character. Their authors are commonly bad 
men, and wicked men do not often write good 
books. A stream does not rise higher than its 
fountain. Their principles are often corrupt, 
encouraging chivalrous notions, worldly honor 
and pleasure, at war with the only true code 



CAROLINE OF LITCHFIELD. 45 

of morals. They insult the understanding 
of the reader, by representing as truth what 
is confessedly false, and by assuming that the 
great object of reading is amusement and not 
instruction. A habit of reading for amuse- 
ment simply, becomes so fixed that science 
loses its charms ; sober history becomes dull 
and tedious ; whatever requires thought and 
study is cast aside ; religious treatises, like 
those of Baxter, Bunyan, Flavel, and Dod- 
dridge, though glowing with celestial fire, be- 
come insipid and uninteresting ; the Bible be- 
comes a wearisome book ; sermons lose their 
power, or if any religious impression is made 
upon the conscience, the bewitching novel fur- 
nishes a ready means of stifling conscience and 
grieving away the Spirit of God. The gospel is 
thus undermined and souls lured to ruin by a 
pleasant and easy, but straight road. Beware 
of the habit of indiscriminate novel-reading. 
Although this may be but the fermented bev- 
erage from the literary dram-shop, it is intoxi- 
cating and poisonous, and excites a thirst for 
what is maddening and destructive. 

" Beware of the foul and exciting romance. 



46 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

All that is said above of the character and in- 
fluence of the ordinary novel, will apply with 
tenfold intensity to this class of reading, for 
which it paves the way. The writer of mod- 
ern romance chooses his scenes from the places 
of debauchery and crime, and familiarizes his 
readers with sentiments, characters, and 
events that should be known only to the po- 
lice. Licentious scenes and obscene imagery 
are unblushingly introduced, and the imagina- 
tion polluted by suggestions and descriptions 
revolting to the pure in heart. It was lately 
testified in open court by the father of one 
whose guilty course has brought ruin upon 
herself and disgrace upon her family, and 
death upon her lover, that all was occasioned 
by his daughter's Q reading the impure works 
of Eugene Sue and Bulwer?' To yield to 
such a charm, is like the voluntary sacrifice 
of one's body and soul on the drunkard's altar. 
Mental delirium tremens is as certain a con- 
sequence of habitual intoxication from such 
reading, as is that awful disease the certain 
end of the inebriate. Beware of it. 

" Do you still need to be persuaded to be- 



CAROLINE OF LITCHFIELD. 47 

ware of the poison that would paralyze your 
conscience, weaken your intellect, pervert your 
mdgment, deprave your life, and perhaps ruin 
your soul ?" 

Let these stirring passages, selected by a 
wise man as expressive of his feelings and 
views, sound a note of warning to every 
youth. 



48 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 



CHAPTER VII. 

A SOCIAL GLASS — MR. GOODWILL. 
1 'At the last it biteth like a serpent, it stingeth like an adder " 

" On a certain occasion, a few of John 
Homespun's acquaintances, merchants' clerks 
and apprentices, invited him to spend a social 
evening in a dry-goods store, after business was 
closed and the store shut up. He was one of 
the youngest members of the party, and, not 
conscious of evil intentions, he gave way to 
the arrangements which the others made. 
Besides this, the customs of the times did not 
forbid the practice of drinking intoxicating 
liquors. A small contribution from each 
member of the company procured the ingre- 
dients for a bowl of eggnog, with some crack- 
ers and cheese. They remained together until 
rather a late hour, spending the time in a social 
way, but without any marked effects of the 
liquor. But before John got home or had re- 
tired to rest, he could not but reflect on the 



A SOCIAL G-LASS. 49 

misspent evening, a whole evening lost from 
regular reading, a complete blank evening 
There was an internal feeling of reproof which 
it was difficult to repress. He was ashamed 
that his time had been thus dissipated. Re- 
flecting on it in subsequent years, John could 
not but condemn his conduct as altogether 
wrong. 

" This cured him of evening sittings of this 
character, and during the remaining years of 
his apprenticeship he was not again overtaken 
in a similar fault. This incident is mentioned 
to show what an estimate he put on time, even 
in his youthful days ; and how much more 
profitable it would be to youth of the present 
day, to recreate their minds in the perusal of 
wholesome standard works, than to vitiate 
their morals and contract evil habits by idly 
wasting their time in haunts of dissipation or 
in low associations." 

" Despise not thou a small thing for evil or 
for good." Let us not be guilty of attributing 
too much to that unconverted youth who was 
saved where others fell. It was of Grod ; and 
in after-years he himself took great delight in 



50 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

ascribing all the glory to G-od. The following 
incident may he inserted here appropriately. 

" John Homespun had been with Mr. Grood- 
heart some three years, when he made the 
acquaintance of a young man whom I may 
call Mr. Goodwill. He was the son of a 
wealthy man; was possessed of a sprightly 
imagination, and was better educated than 
John. At stated seasons they met for mutual 
improvement of mind. They read together 
works of merit, and wrote compositions, in- 
dulging freely in mutual criticism on each 
other's performances. Eventually, they had 
the boldness to prepare some essays for the 
press on the politics of the day. Among the 
patriots of Rome of whom they had read, and 
whose characters they had weighed, was 
' Cincinnatus? This name was chosen by 
the friends to be signed to their articles. 

" The essays, copied in a disguised hand, 
soon reached the editor through the post-office, 
and were graciously received. No one can 
tell the feelings of John, when, time after 
time, he saw the manuscripts placed in the 
hands of the printer to be 'set up' for the 



MR. aOODWILL. 51 

paper. But so it was ; the first, second, and 
third numbers followed in quick succession, 
and even met with an occasional remark of 
approbation from the editor, who had not the 
remotest idea that his own apprentice was a 
large contributor to the articles he was dishing 
out for the amusement and profit of his 
readers. 

" John's intimacy and friendship with Mr. 
Goodwill continued many years. Though the 
latter was far his superior in family connec- 
tions, in literary attainments, and in polished 
manners, yet he seemed to appreciate John's 
society. Even after both were married and in 
business for themselves, they regarded one 
another with more than ordinary friendship. 
Middle life had not passed when his friend, 
his good friend, became addicted to the use of 
intoxicating liquors, although at first the fact 
was only known to himself and the one who 
sold it to him. It may well be supposed that 
the discovery, when made by his friends, was 
most mortifying to them. It was a shock to 
the communion of which both he and John 
had become members. 



52 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

" In a short time after this painful fact 
came to John's ears, he was walking with his 
friend Mr. Goodwill in the public street, and 
he felt it to be his duty to try to reclaim him. 
With a trembling voice, and yet a good con- 
science, he told Mr. Goodwill his own appre- 
hensions, and kindly warned him of impending 
danger. Mr. Goodwill appeared greatly sur- 
prised, and told his friend it was a great mistake. 
"When informed in reply that his habits had 
become so notorious as to occasion remark, and 
that at that very time he was under the in- 
fluence of intoxicating liquor, as could not be 
disputed, he acknowledged that on account 
of some bodily infirmities he did occasionally 
drink porter or some such thing as a medicine. 

" Let me drop the veil on this painful event, 
and simply say that remonstrances and warn- 
ings did not avail. The unhappy victim of a 
terrible habit found it hard to break away 
from the destroyer, and only a few years 
passed before his charming companion be- 
came a widow, and his children were left 
fatherless !" 

Alas, alas, this is too common a picture of 



MR. G-OODWILL. 53 

life, not only at that early day, "but now. 
The young, especially those who are away 
from home, are tempted to taste a little, as 
was "William Tuttle on the night which he has 
described with such pleasing artlessness ; and 
in many cases they are brought into a circle 
which has such charms that they cannot break 
away from it. At first the society has more 
charms than the drink, but by and by the drink 
becomes a necessary part of their daily com- 
forts. The more they drink, the more they 
wish to drink ; until at last manhood and 
virtue and love, all that is dear and desirable 
and noble, are sunk in the appetite which 
consumes them. Said a distinguished member 
of Congress to his friend who was urging him 
to abandon his cups, " The difference between 
me and a person just beginning to drink, is 
this : he could give up drinking if he would, 
but I could not if I would ! " 

Said another, under the tyranny of this 
habit, ""Were I certain that I should sink to 
perdition the next moment, I must drink that 
liquor !" 

Said an enterprising mechanic, trying to 



54 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

reform, "I work away at my anvil with all 
my might, to try and forget my hankering 
for rum ; I try and think of the "best of wives, 
my children, and their unhappy prospects; 
I try to think of the value of a good name 
among men, and of heaven and hell ; and yet 
my appetite for rum increases, until I suffer 
such agonies as cannot be described." 

Says one who had inspiration to aid his 
natural wisdom, hi describing that which was 
to destroy more lives and blight more happi- 
ness than war or plague, "Who hath woe? 
who hath sorrow ? who hath contentions ? 
who hath babbling? who hath wounds with- 
out cause ? who hath redness of eyes ? They 
that tarry long at the wine ; they that go to 
seek mixed wine. Look not thou upon the 
wine when it is red, when it giveth his color 
in the cup, when it moveth itself aright. At 
the last it biteth like a serpent, it stingeth like 
an adder." 



TEMPTATION RESISTED. 55 



CHAPTER VIII. 

"THE PLACE WHERE TWO WAYS MEET." 

"While rehearsing some of the temptations 
which this youth escaped, we may refer to 
another scene of a different character. It is 
quoted from a letter written to his brother. 
He here unbosoms himself to one who was 
very dear to him, with the generous and deli- 
cate freedom which ever characterized their 
intercourse. 

" After leaving home for an apprenticeship, 
I remember w T ith satisfaction some cardinal 
principles with which I started. Poor as I 
then was, I cannot forget the inequality I felt 
in company with boys whose parents were in 
easy or affluent circumstances. It produced 
in me diffidence, and led me to retirement. 
I resolved not to mingle with low company, 
male or female ; and it was not until I could, 
by moral character and a fair reputation, 
command respect, that I enlarged my asso- 
ciations. 



56 "WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

"Another point I assumed was this, that 
my moral deportment should he such, that 
when I visited my friends at home I could 
meet them with a clear conscience, neither 
having dishonored them nor myself. All my 
future prospects rested on a spotless character, 
united with industry and economy. "With 
passions strong and rebellious, I had to repress 
and contend with them ; and perhaps this was 
less from the fear of God, than the fear of 
blasting my own character. 

"I recollect an instance, while an appren- 
tice, of a young female in the family where I 
lived, who, by various indications which I 
considered improper, led me to distrust her 
motives. At the breakfast-table the next 
morning, surrounded by the family, and the 
girl herself waiting on the table, I said to the 
mistress of the house, ' This girl must leave 
the house, or I will V The declaration was 
astounding to all. ' What is the matter ? what 
has she been doing?' inquired the lady. I then 
described precisely what it was which had not 
only disgusted, Jbut alarmed me. The effect 
was decisive, for the girl left soon after. 



TEMPTATION RESISTED. 57 

" I do not mention these things boastingly. 
If I have been restrained from sins, and pre- 
served amid temptations and snares which 
have overwhelmed others with rain and dis- 
grace, I ascribe it to that kind Providence 
which has upheld us all our days, and which 
permits not a sparrow to fall without his no- 
tice. Experience and observation combine to 
make the words of the poet more impressive 
than they seemed to me in my early life : 

u ' Honor and shame from no condition rise ; 
Act well your part — there all the honor lies.' " 

"When at last he was brought to "the place 
where two ways meet," the one the way of 
wisdom, virtue, and honor; the other, "the 
way to hell, going down to the chambers of 
death," he seemed to hear a heavenly voice 
saying to him, " Enter not into the path of the 
wicked, and go not in the way of evil men; 
avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass 
away ; " and with a resolution and a sensi- 
tiveness to the appearance of evil which we 
cannot too much admire, he was "not disobe- 
dient to the heavenly vision." 



58 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

x 

" John's apprenticeship had hardly half ex- 
pired when his original master sold out his 
business, and John lost the friends with whom 
he had lived happily. It w r as an interruption 
of friendship which he did not soon forget. 
After Mrs. Groodheart became a widow, John 
called occasionally in a neighboring city to see 
her. The remembrance of what he had* en- 
joyed in former years in her family could not 
be obliterated. 

" The new family into which he was now 
introduced proved to be a very kind and agreea- 
ble one. It was a family bountifully supplied 
with every comfort, and from this time having 
nothing to do except at his regular work in 
the printing-office, he applied himself with 
diligence during the hours of business, and at 
night took up his books. Time passed away 
agreeably. John had the confidence of his 
new master, and that confidence he was care- 
ful not to betray. The master's interest was 
John's interest. 

" And here I may relate an incident or two, 
showing on what principles he acted. On a 
certain occasion John was intrusted with a 



TEMPTATION RESISTED. 59 

horse and wagon to distribute and sell books 
in a district of country some sixty miles from 
home. He had not forgotten the frugal habits 
of his early life. He started with the resolu- 
tion of spending as little as possible on the 
trip. He was from home nearly a week. 
While his horse was well taken care of, John, 
instead of getting regular meals for himself at 
the public-house, saved the expense of dining 
by carrying in his pocket some crackers and 
cheese. After putting up his horse at night, 
he took a regular meal, and in the morning 
he did the same. This lasted him till night. 
He returned safe home with some three hun- 
dred dollars, and an accurate account of his 
expenses, much to the gratification of his em- 
ployer. 

" On an another occasion John was subpoe- 
naed as a witness to a neighboring town in a 
cause in which his employer was plaintiff. He 
expected to be waiting two or three days be- 
fore the case would come on. He reached 
the town before noon. While others sat down 
to rich and inviting dinners, John was un- 
willing to tax his master with that expense. 



60 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

He meant to dine on a few crackers, and then 
make his supper answer for the day. Con- 
trary to all expectation, towards sundown of 
the first day his employer's lawyer came to 
him and told him the case had either been 
settled or postponed, and he could return that 
evening or the next morning, as he liked best. 
He soon decided to return that night ; but he 
was hungry ; regular tea-time would give him 
a late start. The landlord removed this diffi- 
culty by furnishing him supper in advance. 
In the simplicity of his heart, John supposed 
a man was charged according to what he ate, 
so he partook sparingly. His bill amounted 
to about double what he expected. He then 
travelled fourteen miles home, and to the sur- 
prise of his employer was at work in the morn- 
ing with the other hands." 



FILIAL OBEDIENCE. 61 

CHAPTER IX. 

"HONOU THY FATHER AND THY MOJHER." 

About the year 1800, when Mr. Tuttle was 
nineteen years of age, his father was attacked 
with an obstinate and painful disease. At 
times his sufferings were extreme, and yet, 
whenever he was not absolutely prevented, 
with the aid of a crutch he would get to his 
shop, and do something to keep his family from 
want. He was a man of great independence 
of character, and we have an evidence of it in 
the fact, that suffering as he did from his dis- 
ease, he would sit in a chair between the fire 
and anvil, and strike feeble but noble blows 
for an honest and unbegged livelihood. 

" John lacked some two or three years of 
being of age, when his father was laid up with 
a sore foot. For two summers he suffered 
excruciating pain, disqualifying him almost 
wholly from labor. Eventually this was suc- 
ceeded by a paralytic stroke, which reduced 
one side of the body to entire uselessness. 



62 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

"By this time John had improved his ap- 
parel, hut never in violation of the sensible 
rule, ' Cut your coat according to your cloth, 5 
or in other words, he bought nothing but what 
his scanty allowance would permit without run- 
ning into debt. He could not but be touched 
by the condition of his father and family, the 
support and comfort of which greatly depended 
on the industry and frugality of his step-mother. 
Had she not possessed these qualities in an 
eminent degree, the family would have suffered 
much. 

"Twice a year John endeavored to visit his 
parents ; and on leaving home, if he could hand 
his father a dollar or two from his own earn- 
ings, with what tearful affection was it accepted 
with the remark, ' John, I am afraid you can't 
spare it.' And it is doubtful who was the 
happier, the father receiving such a token of 
love, or the son in the kind providence of God 
able to bestow it." 

The death of Mr. Tuttle's father took place 
the 9th of April, 1802, when the son was at 
home on a visit. He informs us in the auto- 
biography that his father died suddenly, when 



FILIAL OBEDIENCE. 63 

none were present but his wife and children. 
" The next day the remains of poor mortality 
were committed to their quiet resting-place, 
and John never forgot the thrilling exhortation 
of the parish minister on the occasion, from the 
90th Psalm, ' So teach us to number our days, 
that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. 5 

"Duty to his employer required that he 
should return ; and he would not take the ad- 
vantage even of such an event to protract his 
absence. As soon as he consistently could, he 
left the afflicted family to resume his accus- 
tomed labors. His best friend and counsellor 
was no more, and therefore he felt more than 
ever the necessity of a good character, industry, 
and frugality, to aid him in future life. He 
often thought with deep feeling on that promise 
of (rod to the orphan, 'When my father and 
my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take 
me up. 5 55 

"We cannot refrain from mentioning his kind 
attentions to his step-mother. He was old 
enough when his own mother died to remem- 
ber the smile which played so sweetly on her 
countenance, and the tears and prayers which 



64 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 



**. 



ascended like incense before God, as she sought 
his blessing upon her children. And now that 
another had taken her place, he sought by 
every attention to relieve her of care, and to 
make her happy. He learned to love her, and 
her heart fixed en him as if he were her own 
son. Towards the close of her life, this vener- 
able woman leaned on him almost as much as 
on her own child, and her voice would tremble 
and her tears often flow as she mentioned his 
name. 

She attained to the age of fourscore, but did 
not make a profession of religion until late in 
life. As though she were his own mother, he 
labored with ceaseless diligence to lead her 
hopes and confidence to Christ ; and when at 
last, having almost attained to second child- 
hood, she rested like a little child on the Rock 
of ages, his cup seemed to overflow. 



THE BEGINNING- OF WISDOM. 65 

CHAPTER X. 

"THE BEGINNING- OF WISDOM." 

Of Mr. Tuttle's early religious history, we 
have not the materials to speak as much in 
detail as is desirable, and yet, sufficient may 
he gathered from incidental allusions to make 
an important chapter. To the end of life, he 
was accustomed to speak of his own mother, 
and especially of her concern for the religious 
welfare of her children. 

While the early life of "William Tuttle affords 
no such entertaining scene as that of the youth- 
ful Doddridge studying the u Dutch tiles," yet 
we have every reason to suppose that his mother 
instructed him diligently out of the Scriptures. 
There was that sort of religiousness and con- 
scientiousness in his deportment even when a 
child, which we do not expect in one who has 
not felt the influence of decided piety at home. 
It was under the ministry of Dr. Johnes of 
Morristown that Mrs. Tuttle had spent her 
days, and she may be supposed to have formed 



66 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

habits of parental faithfulness. "The cahle 
of a furlong is lost through an ill-wrought 
inch ;" and we are not wide of the truth in 
saying that the brief time which his mother 
was spared to the subject of this memoir, al- 
though but as an "inch" to "the cable of a 
furlong," being a id ell-wrought inch, was of 
incalculable importance in his future course. 
Had "William heard no maternal prayers and 
seen no maternal tears, as he was borne with 
such affection and faith to Him who took little 
children in his arms and blessed them, his 
course might have been entirely different. 

In the history of his first dollar it will be 
remembered that he took but four nights each 
week for labor. There can be no doubt but, 
from the first of his apprenticeship, he made it 
a rule to attend a religious meeting at least 
one evening during the week ; and thus he 
began the formation of a habit from which he 
rarely varied to the end of life, and never, 
without a good excuse. When the books shall 
be opened in which record is made of that part 
of his life, we shall probably find that the affec- 
tionate words weekly uttered by the patriarch 



TEE BEG-INNING- OF WISDOM. 67 

McWhorter, had much to do in leading him to 
the foot of the cross. 

It has often been remarked by close ob- 
servers, that when an impenitent person has 
been led to form a character distinguished for 
pure morals and scrupulous integrity, there is 
great danger he will make a shield of his un- 
blemished morals to ward off every w r eapon 
which might disturb this false repose. Mr. 
Tuttle did not put too high an estimate on a 
"good character, industry, and economy," when 
he alluded to these things so often in his 
history of "John Homespun;" nor can any 
youth overestimate these grand qualities, ex- 
cept it be in their relations to the atonement 
made by Jesus Christ the Son of Grod. He 
who values his good name for virtue, integrity, 
and benevolence, so highly as to think that he 
can dispense with the "blood of atonement," 
as the only way of salvation, has valued that 
good name for much more than it will bear at 
the judgment of the great day. 

The subject of this memoir ran a narrow 
risk of shipwreck on the rock of morality. 
Let us read the account in his own words. 



G8 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

""While in Mr. (xoodheart's family, another 
incident occurred perhaps worthy of record. 
John placed a high estimate on the value of 
character to a poor boy. He not only deemed 
industry and economy two essential requisites 
to a lad in his condition, but he regarded a 
good moral character as indispensable as a 
crowning excellence to the whole. It must be 
frankly acknowledged that he had become 
rather vain in this particular ; for on one 
occasion so foolish and wicked was he as to 
remark in the presence of his comrades, that 
he did not see w T hy he was not as good as Mr. 
Punctuality, a professor of religion and chor- 
ister of the church, a man w T hose standing and 
character were respectable. But John was then 
but poorly acquainted with the deceitfulness of 
his own heart. That heart had not then been 
slain by the law. Rom. 7 : 11. He had as yet 
but faint ideas of the evils of sin, and that 
though outwardly restrained, yet the unre- 
newed heart is like a cage of unclean birds. 

" Custom and an inward monitor seemed to 
impose on him the necessity of attending the 
sanctuary, and reading the Bible, especially on 



THE BEGINNING OF WISDOM. 69 

the holy Sabbath. The birth, life, and cruci- 
fixion of the Saviour of men, the Acts of the 
Apostles, and the gracious admonitions and 
instructions found in the epistles, were not as 
pleasant to him as they afterwards became. 
These portions of the sacred volume poorly 
suited the taste of his carnal mind. His con- 
science was more at rest after reading a few 
chapters in the New Testament, an exercise in 
which he frequently engaged, because he did 
not dare to slight the New Testament by neg- 
lecting it entirely. The Old Testament, and 
not the Neiv, was his usual resort. The his- 
tory of the Hebrews, their bondage in Egypt, 
their deliverance from the oppressive hand of 
Pharaoh, the mighty and oft-repeated wars de- 
tailed in the books of Samuel, Kings, and the 
Chronicles, were mostly selected to beguile his 
Sabbath hours. The cruel treatment of Joseph 
by his brethren, his menial condition for a 
while in Egypt, and his subsequent glory, often 
arrested his attention. The steadfast virtue 01 
this noble youth, assailed by the solicitations 
of his wicked mistress, could not be obliterated 
from his memory. This portion of sacred writ 



70 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

at least made a good moral impression on the 
mind of John. He ever venerated the char- 
acter of Joseph, and delighted in perusing his 
history, whether found in sacred writ, or as 
embellished and expanded by other writers. 
John's natural temperament was rather ardent, 
and he was therefore obliged to wage a con- 
stant war against the natural propensities of 
youth. When assailed by temptations or al- 
lured to that which was wrong, the reply of 
Joseph to his wicked mistress sounded in his 
ears, 'How can I do this great wickedness 

AND SIN AGAINST GrOD V 

"But I fear that John, in taking heed to his 
ways, was more influenced by the fear of man, 
the loss of reputation, and the blasting of his 
future prospects in life, than by any feeling of 
the odious nature of sin, as an abominable act 
in the sight of God. 

" It was the occasional practice of a Univer- 
salist preacher from a neighboring city, to visit 
and preach in the village in which John Home- 
spun resided. He had no affinity of feeling 
with this sect, nor did he believe their peculiar 
doctrines ; but he was induced, on two or three 



THE BEG-INNING- OF WISDOM. 71 

occasions, to hear the stranger. The last time 
he heard the Universalist, was on the public 
common, on Sabbath afternoon. Though the 
doctrine that ail men would be saved, greatly 
commended itself to the feelings of his carnal 
mind, and was congenial with hearts, like his, 
unrenewed by divine grace, John was con- 
science-stricken that he should be there, using 
holy time to hear what he was certain was 
false. Under this feeling he left the congrega- 
tion, with the petition which the Saviour has 
given us impressed on his mind, ' Lead us not 
into temptation.' He never afterwards at- 
tended a meeting of that character. In after- 
life, as well as then, it appeared like ' the blind 
leading the blind, and that both would fall into 
the ditch.' The religion of the Puritan fathers, 
the religion of his deceased mother, in short, 
the religion of the Bible, even then, was deemed 
good enough, if duly regarded." 

From what has already been written, it may 
be inferred that "William, outwardly, was a 
careful observer of the Sabbath. Experience 
and observation prove that this trait of char- 
acter is usually associated with "the begin- 



72 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

ning of wisdom." There may be exceptions to 
this, as to all other general rules. Mr. Tuttle 
has alluded to some of his early acquaintances, 
whose conduct did not answer the pleasing ex- 
pectations of their friends. Their misconduct 
he was wont to attribute to their low estimate 
of the sacredness of the Sabbath. 

His mother had engraved the holiness of the 
Sabbath, as with the point of a diamond, on the 
heart of her first-born ; and this truth was 
deepened by the conscientious example of his 
father. And when he himself once said with 
affecting earnestness to a young man, "To 
neglect or disregard the Sabbath, is to make a 
moral breach which is lasting hi its character 
and its consequences," he not only repeated the 
teachings of his sainted parents, but the stern 
lessons which he had drawn from the personal 
history of his associates. 






I'M AFLOAT. 73 

CHAPTER XI. 

"I'M AFLOAT." 

"At the death of John Homespun's father, 
four months of his apprenticeship still remained. 
Like other boys, he was looking forward to 
that period when he would be free, when the 
labor of his hands would be for his own im- 
mediate benefit, when, in short, he would be 
his own man. He continued to occupy his 
leisure hours with books. Only a small portion 
of time was devoted to male or female asso- 
ciates. John thought it was the very harvest 
season, in which every young man should be 
diligent in storing his mind with useful facts 
from history, biography, and solid literature in 
general. 

" He continued to labor in the printing-office ; 
and thus the days and months soon glided 
away. He was true to the interest of his em- 
ployer, and in return his employer reposed con- 
fidence in him. He was allowed to make his 
accustomed visit to his mother and other rel- 



74 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

atives in the country, and always bore in mind 
the straitened circumstances of his father's 
widow and her family, and did what he could 
to relieve their wants. 

"On the 22d of August, 1802, John reached 
his twenty-first birthday. For weal or woe, 
he w 7 as of age ; and for which, none could say 
but He who knoweth all things. John gave no 
party, and had no ' spree ' w r ith his companions, 
on the attainment of his freedom. He kept to 
work quietly. His employer had plenty of 
work, and soon an understanding took place 
between him and John as to the amount of his 
wages. A new impulse was given to his feel- 
ings. He was now setting out for himself. 
The wide world was before him. His entire 
capital to begin with at the age of twenty-one 
was his reputation for industry, his character 
for uprightness, and ten dollars in cash, which 
he had saved from the allowance made him by 
his employer for clothing, 

"And here let me say a few words on the 
high responsibilities of a young man on reach- 
ing the important period of twenty-one years of 
age. "What a prospect stretches before him. 



I'M AFLOAT. 75 

His youthful anticipations brighten every thing. 
His blood circulates with .unimpeded rapidity. 
All in prospect appears as a summer's day ; 
and yet a dishonest act, a youthful indiscretion, 
a giving the rein to unhallowed passion, would 
blast his bright prospects, and undo him, per- 
haps for life. Alas, that so many at this very 
stage of life should make shipwreck of all that 
is valuable in character and self-respect, and all 
that is prized by fond friends. With the money 
which his labor procures for him, perhaps he 
indulges in degrading and hurtful vices. Per- 
haps his first earnings are spent in visiting the 
theatre, in extravagant dress, in the tavern, or 
in haunts of vice. Young men ought to be 
warned that a misstep here is very apt to be 
fatal. To slide into vice is easy ; to recover 
from its effects is no easy matter. Beware 
then, young man, of the very first act of de- 
parture from duty. As you value competence, 
character, and usefulness in society, beware of 
the temptations which so easily decoy the un- 
wary, and so often ruin body and soul. 

"John Homespun, though fond of amuse- 
ments, did not often indulge in them, For this 



76 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

his means were too limited, and his conscience 
too tender. During an apprenticeship of five 
years, he was allured into a public theatre on 
two or three occasions. Like most of the 
young, he was charmed with the scenery, 
the music, the gayety, and the performances. 
At one time, he was led more than half to 
believe that amusement and moral instruction 
were actually combined in what he afterwards 
learned to regard as the demoralizing and dis- 
sipating haunts of iniquity. 

"It was in a neighboring city during one of 
these occasions, and in a boarding-house where 
he was well known, that at tea-time he notified 
the landlord he was going to the theatre. 
John understood that the doors were kept open 
to a late hour, and that he could have access 
to his bed-chamber without inconvenience to 
any one. Judge then of his surprise, when, 
returning direct from the place of performance, 
he found the front door bolted, and every light 
in the house extinguished. For aught that 
appeared or was heard, it was as quiet as the 
repose of the dead. What should, what could 
John do ? There seemed no resource but to 



I'M AFLOAT. 77 

seek lodgings elsewhere. Away he started to 
a house in which he had occasionally been en- 
tertained. It was open, but every bed was 
taken. To another hotel he wended his way, 
but without any better success. Two or three 
other hotels he found open, but lodgings for a 
single individual could not be found. Every 
bed where he went was occupied. He was in 
danger of wandering the streets alone, if happily 
he should escape the hands of the city- watch. 
His present situation was in lively contrast 
with that in which he had been an hour be- 
fore. 

" Almost discouraged and still wandering 
from pillar to post, about midnight John noticed 
a light in the second story of a rather mean- 
looking two-story frame house, over the en- 
trance door of which by the reflection of the 
lamps he most eagerly read the word tavern. 
A lighthouse to the sailor who has long been 
buffeting with the winds and waves on a 
dangerous coast without knowing where he 
was, could not have been more cheering to him 
than was this tavern to John. He was soon 
knocking at the door, and the window was 



78 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

raised. A man asked him what he w T anted. 
With great simplicity and honesty, John ex- 
plained the dilemma in which he found himself, 
and earnestly asked the favor of a bed. The 
man yielded, the door was opened, and with 
little ceremony John was introduced to his 
lodging chamber, a mere i cubby-hole ' on the 
ground floor, in the, rear of the stairway. It 
proved to be a real filthy place, so infested 
with vermin that he slept but little. But he 
was consoled with the old adage, ' any port in 
a storm.' Before daylight, however, his ears 
were assailed with all kinds of noises, male 
and female voices mingled, from the other end 
of the house. For the first time John mis- 
trusted the character of the house. Before it 
was light and he could withdraw, he had time 
to reflect on the evils of dissipation. He arose 
and dressed himself before the sun was up, and, 
in seeking for a place to wash, what was his 
surprise in seeing young men hastily leaving 
this den of shame. His suspicions were fully 
confirmed ; and when he had paid for his 
night's lodging, he left with all expedition, 
ashamed heartily even to have slept in such a 



I'M AFLOAT. 79 

place and for such a reason. He never got in 
such a fix again. 

u John Homespun continued diligent at his 
daily employment, still boarding in his em- 
ployer's family — a family not professedly pious, 
but one where good morals, integrity, economy, 
and industry were distinguishing traits. The 
heads of it were themselves happy, and made 
all the members of their family happy also. 

" John continued with the new firm, pleas- 
ant and happy. At the end of six months 
the junior partner sold his interest to the other, 
with the intention of trying his fortune in a 
neighboring city. The result of this arrange- 
ment was the advancement of John one step 
higher. From that time he acted in the ca- 
pacity of foreman in the office. That he sat- 
isfactorily discharged his duties and still re- 
tained the good feelings of his employer, may 
be inferred from what afterwards took place." 

The young mechanic who has toiled for six 
years as an apprentice, to the satisfaction of his 
employers and with an unsullied reputation, 
could now fairly say, " I 7 m afloat." 



80 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 



CHAPTER XII. 

"A GOOD NAME IS BETTER THAN PRECIOUS 

OINTMENT." 

" In this new situation — as foreman of tho 
office — John Homespun remained for an addi- 
tional six months, when his employer proposed 
to sell the establishment to him and his fel- 
low-journeyman, Mr. . The circum- 
stances of the case were such, that it was 
necessary to make an immediate decision as 
to the offer, as otherwise the main object of 
it would be defeated. Mr. and John be- 
gan to discuss the matter with great serious- 
ness, and with the greater earnestness because 

the time was so limited. Mr. consulted 

with his parents, who were in a condition to 
help him ; but John had none with whom to 
advise, or from whom to expect a shilling. 
After a year's toil with his own hands, he had 
saved two hundred dollars ; which sum was 
still in his employer's hands. This was his 
cash capital when he was twenty-two years 



A GOOD NAME. 81 

old, and showed that in one year he had in- 
creased his overplus of ten dollars twenty-fold. 

" The price asked for the establishment was 
two thousand five hundred dollars, of which a 
small part was to be paid down, and for the 
remainder a liberal credit was offered. The 
young men, after such an examination of the 
matter as they could give in a short time, 
concluded to purchase, and the bargain was 

made accordingly. Mr. , aided by his 

friends, paid in cash two hundred and fifty 
dollars ; but the most Mr. Homespun could 
raise, was the two hundred dollars which with 
much economy he had acquired by his labor. 
A credit was generously tendered for the 
balance. 

"Under promising circumstances, the new 
partners embarked in business on their own 
account. They labored pleasantly together 
for a year, and their business was rather pros- 
perous than otherwise. John stuck to his 
business, determined to make the most of it. 
He was in debt, and must therefore economize ; 
carefully shutting down the gate on all unne- 
cessary expenditures. 



82 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

" One day Mr. said to Mr. Homespun, 

' "What do you think of my selling out?' ' Why 
so ?' asked Mr. Homespun ; ' are we not getting 
along as well as we anticipated ? "Why hack 
out V ' I cannot say hut we are, hut the heing 
tied down to husiness does not exactly suit me. 
I think I would rather ramble and see more of 
the world.' 

" Sure enough, only a few days elapsed 
when, by a forfeiture of the first payment, one 
half of the business reverted to the original 
owner, and John found himself a partner, not 
with Mr. — — -, but his old master. Such are 
the wonderful ways of Providence. The son 
of the mechanic, who came to that town a few 
years before penniless, is now associated with 
the man to whom he was indentured as an ap- 
prentice, and is in a fair way to independence. 

"His new partner was engaged in another 
distinct business, requiring the most of his 
time. Besides, he had no practical knowledge 
of the art of printing ; his business from the 
first having been of another kind. Though 
his name appeared as a partner, the manual 
labor, the buying, selling, and collecting de- 



A G-OOD NAME. 83 

volved on Mr. Homespun. He increased the 
stock, and added to the efficiency of the enter- 
prise in other ways ; having the occasional ad- 
vice of his friend and partner. 

"And here, for the encouragement of young 
men without capital, it should he remarked, 
how important it is that they have the con- 
fidence of their employers. "Without this, 
could John Homespun ever have expected to 
get into so prosperous a business so readily ? 
In this case, a character for honesty and in- 
dustry was capital to the orphan hoy. And it 
ought to be mentioned, to the credit of his old 
master's kindness, that he did not require 
security of John for his original purchase, but 
simply charged it to him. Regularly John 
paid his annual instalment of two hundred 
dollars, with interest on the whole debt, until 
by and by the debt was extinguished. 

" Thus passed the first years of John's busi- 
ness life. Having at last paid the debt con- 
tracted for half of the establishment, he made 
an offer for the other half; and in the course 
of four or five years, the business of the office 
had grown to such a degree, that Mr. Home- 



84 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

spun readily agreed to pay nearly double the 
price, for the half belonging to his partner, that 
he had paid for the other half. By the pay- 
ment of some two thousand dollars, he be- 
came the sole proprietor of an establishment 
worth probably four thousand dollars, and with 
no debt of sufficient magnitude to damp his 
energies. 

" He continued firm in the resolution which 
he adopted when he began to learn his trade, 
not to mingle in low and degrading associa- 
tions, but patiently to wait until his character 
should be so formed, and his circumstances so 
improved, as to be a passport to such acquaint- 
ances and families as would be most advan- 
tageous to him. Accordingly, even when he 
became his own man, he applied himself with 
more zeal to his business, than to the forming 
of new acquaintances ; and his improving 
circumstances were not permitted to prove a 
snare, in leading him into extravagance and 
dissipation. With such principles he soon 
found many congenial spirits, especially among 
the middling classes in society. His mental 
improvement, and the change in his pecuniary 



A GOOD NAME. 85 

circumstances, enabled Mr. Homespun to over- 
come the diffidence which had so greatly 
'embarrassed him at first." 

Here closes this modest, truthful, and in- 
structive autobiography. Alluding chiefly to 
this earlier period of- Mr. Tuttle's life, his 
brother, who received from him assistance in 
gaining an education preparatory to the minis- 
try, and additional aid from time to time, says, 

" He was a brother who never deceived me, 
never raised an expectation which he did not 
gratify. Indeed his early life was so consider- 
ate, so discreet, moral, and all but strictly re- 
ligious, that such golden fruits as these were 
anticipated by his particular friends, and gen- 
erally, as, I well recollect, by his acquaint- 
ances in our neighborhood. His overwork in 
the office, while yet an apprentice, was mostly, 
as I believe, devoted to aid the comfort and 
supply the necessities of his father's family, 
rendered helpless by the father's long and ex- 
hausting illness. During this period of some 
three or four years, until our father's death, which 
occurred in April, 1802, when my dear brother 
was yet a few months under age, he was 



86 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

constantly anticipating our wants by sending 
us money, articles of clothing, and other com- 
forts ; and finally, at the death of father, before 
he returned to Newark, Yfilliam paid out of 
his own earnings all the funeral charges, 

" Since his death, I have often looked back 
over his life to gather up what was instructive 
and consoling, what worthy of imitation, and 
what to be avoided in my brother's career, and 
I cannot refer to one act of his life, coming 
under my own observation, or one trait of 
character, that does not give me pleasure in 
the retrospect, instead of pain and regret. He 
was perfectly companionable, but his mirth 
and glee, wdien he was yet a boy, were always 
marked with so much consideration .and kind- 
ness, as often to render him an object of ad- 
miration among his companions. Besides this, 
he seems early to have formed the resolution 
to be something himself, and to do all in his 
power for his family. Therefore when our 
older sister was married he was at the whole 
expense, I believe, of her outfit, making a lib- 
eral provision for furnishing her house. Some 
of the articles then purchased still remain in 



A G-OOD NAME. 87 

the family to testify his fraternal generosity. 
The brother and sister still surviving may well 
say that in his death they have lost a parent 
as well as a brother." 

From other sources we learn that, after his 
father's death and previous to his reaching his 
majority, he embraced every convenient op- 
portunity to visit home, " always bearing in 
mind the straitened circumstances of his 
father's widow, and doing what he could to 
relieve her wants." From incidental allusions 
in his conversations and his autobiography, we 
know that he earned considerable amounts of 
money by overwork, and that the most of this 
he gave unsolicited to his step-mother, to aid 
her in supporting her fatherless family. It is 
a beautiful commentary on his benevolence, 
and again reminds us of the "first command- 
ment with promise." 

. Mr. Tuttle's early friend, Rev. 0. B. Brown 
of "Washington city, says of him, 

" He was a good man, with whom I was 
intimate in youth, and for whom I have ever 
cherished the highest regard. When he came 
to Newark to learn the printing business, I was 



88 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

a youth near his own age, almost a daily- 
visitant of the printing-office where he was 
employed, and of course I formed a familiar 
acquaintance with him. In a debating society 
which we afterwards formed, he was regarded 
by all as a youth of promising talents, quite 
above mediocrity, and he evinced a disposition 
to improve his mind by the acquisition of 
general and useful knowledge. In our juvenile 
debates, it was my lot often to come into con- 
tact with him, and we always found him well 
informed and ingenious in his arguments, 
which he not unfrequently intermixed with 
strokes of pleasantry which rendered him quite 
entertaining. He could give and receive a 
repartee with as much good-nature as any 
person, and often excite an agreeable smile 
with such good-humor, that the person at 
whose expense it was raised could not help 
joining in it. But his more general turn was. 
that of gravity. I never heard him use a 
profane or obscene expression. In his most 
unguarded conversation, he would never offend 
the ear of modesty or piety ; and had he then 
been a professor of religion, I should not have 



A G-OOD NAJIE. 89 

doubted his sincerity. I suppose he had like 
passions with other men, but I never saw him 
angry, nor ever saw another person angry with 
him. Afterwards, as the editor of a political 
paper, he was always firm and conscientiously 
sincere in the principles which he advocated, 
but never offensive in his language or opprobri- 
ous in his epithets." 



90 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

"BORN AGAIN"— DR. GRIFFIN. 

When Mr. Tuttle went to Newark in 1796, 
lie attended the ministry of Dr. McWhorter ; 
and it will probably be found at the day of 
judgment that his prayers and teaching had 
much to do with the character then forming 
under his ministry, and destined to be a faith- 
ful laborer in the church over which that 
venerable man so long presided. We know 
from various intimations that his conscience 
was not at rest. There are several facts show- 
ing that the influence of his deceased parents, 
his constant perusal of the holy Scriptures, 
and his punctual attendance on the outward 
means of grace, were all affecting his mind. 
At one time he ran a narrow risk of becoming 
a moralist, but the Holy Spirit did not suffer 
him to rest there. 

Although Dr. McWhorter's preaching was 
ever held in affectionate veneration by him, 
yet it was not until the powerful revivals un- 



BORN AGAIN — DR. GRIFFIN. 91 

der Dr. Griffin, that he became savingly ac- 
quainted with the truth as it is in Jesus 
Christ. He was accustomed to speak of this 
great man with delight ; and when he return- 
ed to Newark to close his useful life, it was 
one of Mr. Tuttle's pleasures to sit at the feet 
of the man who had been the instrument in 
leading him to Christ. It is pleasing to know 
that, dying in the bosom of the church he 
most delighted in, he was refreshed and en- 
couraged by the frequent presence of this spir- 
itual son. 

To this effect Mr. Tuttle writes to his sister, 
under date of February 8, 1837 : " Dr. 
Griffin and family now reside with Dr. Smith. 
He came last fall in very poor health, and 
has since appeared to be near the grave. He 
is much engaged for an old-fashioned revival 
of religion. He visits considerably, and his 
heart is much engaged for Zion. You and 

brother "W remember him well. You 

seemed almost to adore the man, when you 
and my first companion used to attend his 
meetings, and had the hope of eternal life 
imparted. I take great pleasure in going over 



92 "WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

and chatting with him a half-hour or so at a 
time, recounting the goodness of God in lead- 
ing us along in the journey of life since our 
first acquaintance." In another letter, dated 
October 30, 1837, he says, "Dr. Griffin's 
labors of love are mostly over. He is in a 
peaceful and happy state of mind, unconcerned, 
as he told me, about the time and maimer of 
his death." And in a postscript he adds, "Dr. 
Griffin died this morning, November 8." 

And here the readers of this volume will 
pardon an allusion to the last appearance of 
Dr. Griffin, at the anniversary of the Ameri- 
can Board for Foreign Missions, as narrated by 
an eye-witness. He had been sick, and when 
his once towering but now bowed form was 
seen advancing up the centre aisle of the first 
Presbyterian church in Newark, the vast audi- 
ence seemed moved by a common feeling of 
veneration and sorrow. "When he arose to 
speak he was too weak to stand, and was 
raised in his chair. The once mighty voice 
was not mighty now ; but 0, how eloquent it 
was when he began by saying, with the most 
subduing pathos, " Mr, President, and my 



BORN AGAIN — DR. GRIFFIN. 93 

brethren, I feel myself standing on the verge 
of heaven !" It had been false to nature not to 
weep, as such a man, in such circumstances, 
spoke such words. And then he prayed ; and 
as he approached the mercy-seat, with the 
simple eloquence of a little child and the 
wrestling fervor of a dying saint, the fountains 
of the great deep were broken up, and hundreds 
wept because they knew they should see that 
face and hear that voice no more. It was an 
impressive scene, which will never be forgotten. 
There was every quality in Dr. Griffin, 
when he entered on his pastoral labors in 
Newark, in 1801, to impress the mind of a 
young man who, from his infancy, had been so 
educated as to have a tender conscience. The 
very presence of the man was power ; but 
when he strove to unburden his anxieties for 
dying men with vehement words and action, 
his eye, suffused with tears, glancing rapidly 
from one upturned face to another, all knew 
that this was not the mere eloquence of talent, 
but that these lips had been touched with a 
live coal from the altar of G-od. Even when 
his sun had nearly reached its setting, the 



94 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

writer, then a child of eleven years, remem- 
bers Dr. Griffin in that pulpit, from which he 
had so often uttered the promises and the 
threatenings of the gospel years before. It 
was Sunday evening, and the house was 
thronged. The majestic tones of that voice 
still linger with us ; and his words and his 
manner when, near the close of his discourse, 
he made a most thrilling appeal to the impeni- 
tent to flee from the wrath to come, are as 
fresh as if they were of yesterday. The feel- 
ings of his audience had steadily risen with his 
own ; and when he exclaimed with such ex- 
quisite pathos, " Oh, if by kneeling before you, 
and entreating yon with tears to fly now to 
Christ, I could persuade you, I would do it ;" 
and suiting the action to the words, he bowed 
his stately form to a kneeling posture : when 
he thus spoke and acted, so natural and har- 
monious were his words and his manner, that 
the vast congregation seemed bowed as before 
an irresistible influence. 

He had amazing power not only on polished 
and disciplined minds, but on the yeomanry of 
our country churches. In 1803, meetings were 



BORN AGAIN — DR. GRIFFJN. 95 

frequently held in the different congregations 
of Morris county ; and they were so largely 
attended as to render it impossible to hold 
them, except in the open air. Such a meeting 
was held in a grove near the Mendham church, 
and is referred to with great interest by old 
inhabitants of the place who still survive. 
They say that Dr. Griffin's sermon was char- 
acterized by such pathos and power as they 
never witnessed in any other ; and they relate 
particularly, that he dwelt upon the glories of 
heaven with such eloquence as took his hearers 
completely captive. At last, having soared 
higher and higher till he seemed almost super- 
human, stretching his giant person to its fullest 
stature, and glancing his eyes upwards all 
glowing with emotion, and holding up his 
hands as though they were wings ready to 
bear him up to the place he was describing, 
he exclaimed with overpowering emphasis, 
" Shall I go ?" It would be no wonder that 
common people should be almost beside them- 
selves ; but the Christian orator achieved a 
higher triumph, for immediately behind him 
sat Dr. Finley of Baskinridge, the founder of 



96 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

the Colonization Society. This remarkable 
man was so completely borne aw r ay by the 
almost unearthly eloquence w T hich then fell on 
his ear, that when Dr. Griffin exclaimed, 
" Shall I go ?" he clasped fast hold of him, by 
an involuntary impulse, as if to prevent his 
upward flight ; which, under the magic of the 
hour, seemed about actually to take place. 

A minister still resident in New Jersey 
heard Dr. Griffin preach his sermon, " On the 
Worth of the Soul ;" and he says that no lan- 
guage can describe the impression made by 
the passage which thus begins: "I return to 
the street. I follow another of the crowd 
through his round of dissipation, through 
many serious thoughts, many broken resolu- 
tions, until I trace him to a dying-bed. His 
soul is forced from the body amidst the agonies 
of distracted friends, and staring with wild 
affright, is dragged to the mouth of the pit 
and plunged into hell. And is not this enough ? 
Good G-od, is not this enough?" "When he 
exclaimed, " Good God, is not this enough? 5 ' 
'such was the look, emphasis, gesticulation, 
and tone, all united to force the horrible 



BORN AGAIN — DR. GRIFFIN. 97 

thought as a reality on the mind, that this 
clergyman remarked, " I was so overpowered 
with it, that I thought I should have died." 
He was not alone ; but the appearance of the 
whole audience plainly proved that they were 
affected by one of the mightiest efforts of one 
of the mightiest orators since the days of 
Whitefield. 

How could it have been otherwise than that 
William Tuttle, then a youth, should have 
been impressed by the eloquence and fervent 
piety of such a man? In common with the 
younger members of the congregation, he was 
fascinated ; and the severe and discriminating 
doctrines which were preached by Dr. G-riffin, 
were well calculated to drive him to the only 
sure refuge. It will be both relevant and inter- 
esting to quote Dr. Griffin's own words, de- 
scribing one of the revivals in that church. In 
the history of American revivals, there cannot 
be found a more thrilling passage than the 
following, describing the commencement of the 
great revival in 1807 : " The appearance was 
as if a collection of waters, long suspended 
over the town, had fallen at once and deluged 



98 WILLJAM TUTTLE. 

the whole place. For several weeks, the 
people would stay at the close of every evening 
service to hear some new exhortation ; and it 
seemed impossible to persuade them to depart, 
until those on whose lips they hung had retired. 
At those seasons you might see a multitude 
weeping and trembling around their minister, 
and many others standing as astonished spec- 
tators of the scene, and beginning to tremble 
for themselves. This work, in point of power 
and stillness, exceeds all that I have ever seen. 
While it bears down every thing with irresist- 
ible force, and seems almost to dispense with 
human instrumentality, it moves with so much 
silence that, unless we attentively observe its 
effects, we are tempted at times to doubt 
whether any thing uncommon is taking place. 
The converts are strongly marked with hu- 
mility and self-distrust ; instead of being elated 
with confident hopes, they are inclined to 
tremble. Many of them possess deep and dis- 
criminating views ; and all, or almost all, are 
born into the distinguishing doctrines of grace." 
It was during the progress of this wonder- 
ful revival, that Mr. Tuttle became the subject 



BORJ^ AG-AIN— DR. GRIFFIN. 99 

of converting grace. For years, nay, from 
the time he saw his mother die, it had been 
a settled matter in his mind that he must be- 
come a new creature in Christ. He felt this 
when the venerable McWhorter was his sole 
pastor ; but when the stirring and searching 
eloquence of Grrifhn fell on his ear, he was 
agitated. It was a trying time with him, 
when his energies were grappling with the 
responsibilities of business and the burden of a 
heavy debt. The editing of a political paper, 
and the management of its fiscal concerns, 
crowded upon him. He is anxious to succeed, 
and spares no labor on his own part. The 
cares of this world choke the word, so that it 
does not bring forth fruit to perfection. Still 
he is not at rest. He reads the Bible, frequent- 
ly offers prayer, and is punctual at religious 
services on the Sabbath, and during the week 
when it does not conflict with his business. 
Meanwhile, about one year and a half after he 
is fairly embarked in business, he enters upon 
marriage relations ; business increases, and he 
is in danger of settling down into indifference 
to religion as a present concern, when that 



100 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

powerful revival already alluded to broke liis 
slumbers. 

As soon as he was awakened, he began to 
examine his past history to see whether he 
was as guilty as was charged. He entered on 
this work with severe honesty, and with a zeal 
which despised all that is superficial. He soon 
discovered that his heart was altogether wick- 
ed and corrupt; and he now tried " to make 
himself better." In this he failed, and at last 
was led to cry for mercy as a sinner at the 
hand of God. His prayer was answered, not 
with ecstasies, but with some hope and peace. 
He had so diligently considered his own 
character, as judged by the law of Grod, that 
he was very cautious about his hope. The 
next step of progress is to be found in his 
establishing the family altar ; but so diffident 
was he, that he had not courage to call his 
journeymen and apprentices together to this 
exercise. For this reason, he and his com- 
panion observed it together privately in their 
room. He had seasons of doubt, which drove 
him back to an examination of himself and 
the Scriptures. He saw multitudes coming 



BORN AGAIN — DR GRIFFIN. 101 

out in a public profession, and he was distress- 
ed that he could not see his own way clear to 
do the same ; but he was afraid of his own 
heart, and he watched it with the severest 
scrutiny for more than a year after he hoped 
in the mercy of Christ. By this time he had 
permanently settled the matter. He had 
sought heavenly wisdom that he might reach 
a right conclusion ; and at the spring com- 
munion in 1809, the last time Dr. Griffin as 
pastor administered that ordinance, he made a 
public profession of religion. Through the 
blessing and guidance of the Holy Spirit, his 
light shone steadily to the close of life. " The 
path of the just is as the shining light, 
which shineth more and more unto the perfect 
day." 

About the time he made a public profes- 
sion, he was led to review his course in the 
matter of family worship. A brother still 
resident in Newark relates the fact, that 
being ignorant of his habit of private family 
worship, he came suddenly into the room one 
morning while he was engaged in that exer- 
cise. Mr. Tuttle seemed greatly embarrassed 



102 



WILLIAM TUTTLE. 



by the presence of an unexpected spectator, 
but went forward. This led him to consider 
whether he was doing right, as the head of a 
family ; and he was not long in determining to 
insist on the presence of all his workmen and 
apprentices, as well as his own family, 



FAITHFUL IN ALL HIS HOUSE. 103 



CHAPTER XIY. 

"FAITHFUL IN ALL HIS HOUSE." 

No one seriously questions the propriety of 
a religious education at home ; hut in this age 
of cheap religious hooks, of Sabbath-schools, 
and other means of religious instruction, there 
is danger of our departing from the plan of 
Grod, which is of perpetual and binding force. 
"We are liable, in our practice, to place the 
system of Raikes above that of God, and to 
commit to other teachers the work which be- 
longs to the head of the household. Jehovah 
is perfect in wisdom, and he knew the wants 
of mankind as well when he instructed Moses 
as he knows them now. The Lord did not 
command Moses to organize public schools, in 
which the young Israelites should learn the 
dealings of Grod with their fathers. Such a 
course might have left the nation to degener- 
ate into a horde of barbarians. Jehovah well 
understood the system by which the occur- 
rences of the exodus w T ere to be kept in lively 



104 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

remembrance, and every head of a household 
was a divinely appointed oracle to answer the 
inquiries of the young, and impress upon their 
minds the lessons of truth. 

" These words which I command thee this 
day, shall be in thy heart ; and thou shalt teach 
them diligently unto thy children, and shalt 
talk of them when thou sittest in thy house 
and when thou walkest by the way, and when 
thou liest down and when thou rises t up. 
And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thy 
hand, and they shall be as frontlets between 
thine eyes. And thou shalt write them upon 
the posts of thy house, and on thy gates." 
Deut. 6 : 4-9. This w r as a family school ; 
the parent was the teacher appointed by God, 
who dared not at his peril resign his own du- 
ties to others. How admirable this school ! 
How cold and lifeless any school, compared 
with a properly regulated home ! "We cannot 
too much admire the wisdom of this arrange- 
ment, nor too closely follow it, in the religious 
education of children. 

In this divine arrangement, we have a 
teacher who is ever at his post. Fidelity here 



FAITHFUL IN ALL HIS HOUSE. 105 

causes the very charms of infancy, and the 
more elevated and refined endearments of 
youth, to be identified with a deep sense of 
obligation to Grod. "Would that this sacred 
custom of family instruction were universally 
revived ; that religion might be taught at home, 
and the best lessons of truth learned at the 
fireside ; that the gentle courtesies and sweet 
attachments of home might engrave the words 
of Grod, and the gospel of his Son, on the heart 
of every child and member of the household. 
But how often is the parent more ready to talk 
on spiritual themes to a stranger, than to his 
own child; how often do we see whole fami- 
lies leave the family hearth-stone without hav- 
ing enjoyed any systematic means of salvation 
at home. The Sabbath-school, the pulpit, the 
casual visit of a pastor, instead of being the 
auxiliaries, become the substitutes for home 
instruction. 

A son now in the gospel ministry wrote thus 
to his parents : "I verily believe that, had my 
religious training been confined to the glean- 
ings of the Sabbath-school, instead of the 
steady enforcement of the Mosaic arrangement 



106 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

at home by my parents, I might now be pursu- 
ing a far different course and living for a 
far different end. Many, very many times, 
as early in, childhood as I can recollect, has 
the Spirit of God convicted me of sin as my 
father at home taught me out of the Scrip- 
tures ; and I cannot easily forget, that the 
same high-priest of the home church once tore 
from me the hypocrite's hope. And that dear 
place had another to carry forward the same 
work, gentler but not weaker ; and memory 
recalls a mother pressing her face close to 
mine, as she often knelt with me before the 
mercy-seat. I will not cast reproach on any 
institution which has been productive of 
good to myself and others ; but with profound 
gratitude I may say, home was the place of 
my spiritual nativity, and my parents were 
principally God's instruments in leading me 
to Christ." 

These views were practical with Mr. Tuttle. 
The lady to whom he was united in marriage, 
Miss Hannah Camp, was a subject of the great 
revival under Dr. Griffin, and gave undoubted 
evidence of true piety. They were sorely 



FAITHFUL IN ALL HIS HOUSE. 107 

afflicted in the loss of two children in infancy ; 
and this trial led them to perform, with greater 
carefulness, their duty to the survivors. The 
latter days of the mother's life were days of 
weary sickness and pain ; and yet, we have 
reason to believe that they were days of great 
spiritual benefit to her children. When dying, 
she was strong in faith, giving glory to God, 
especially for the confident assurance she had 
that her children would be converted. She 
died much esteemed and regretted, in Decem- 
ber, 1824. 

Let us now trace Mr. Tattle's means of in- 
struction as the head of a family. We have 
already seen his prompt entrance upon the 
duties of family religion. As soon as he was 
convinced of his duty, he set himself about its 
performance. The family altar was erected ; 
and very rarely did he fail to worship before it, 
and never but for the best reasons. He was 
by nature inclined to cheerfulness, and he 
sought to cast an air of cheerfulness around 
religion. He had but little of that austerity of 
manner which is repulsive, especially to the 
young ; and the living can now testify that he 



108 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

was able to give interest to Sabbath evening 
instructions from the catechism. Even when 
called to admonish delinquents, he did it so 
kindly and so convincingly as to disarm re- 
sentment or prejudice. 

One quality which characterized his influ- 
ence in the family was its steadiness. His 
path was "that of the shining light," and the 
consequence was, the. absence of every thing 
fitful and spasmodic in the family. Each one 
knew what to expect ; and each one residing 
in his household came early to feel that the 
prayers at the family altar were only a part of 
his devotional exercises. There were with him 
three distinct seasons of private devotion dur- 
ing the day ; and very often has he been found 
in retired places upon his knees. In fact the 
family, composed of his own relatives, domestics, 
and workmen, knew that he habitually "walk- 
ed with Grod ;" not by an austere bigotry, or 
sanctimonious observance of outward forms, 
but by his whole bearing and conversation. 
Here was an influence which answered °the 
design of God in the family relation. The 
family were diligently instructed in the doc- 



FAITHFUL IN ALL HIS HOUSE. 109 

trines and facts of religion, and they had a 
living illustration constantly before them. This 
was as it should be in every family. Not that 
he was constantly exhorting his children and 
family to seek their salvation, or that he 
obtruded the subject on them without respect 
to times and seasons. He was a proficient in 
human nature, and knew that " King Agrippa " 
must not be approached like " Simon the 
Sorcerer ;" and also that a " word spoken in 
due season, how good is it !" Though this was 
true, yet his words carried great influence in 
his own family, and in those circles where he 
was known. His anxieties for the conversion 
of his children were unceasing, and his way 
of addressing them on this subject may be seen 
in some quotations from letters to his two sons 
away from home. 

"My dear Son — In not writing to you 
before, you must not conclude that I am loss 
solicitous than ever for your temporal and 
eternal welfare. They both weigh upon my 
mind, and both are the subject of frequent 
prayer before the throne of eternal mercy. I 
hope, nay, I expect, that you yourself seek the 



110 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

same important blessings from the Father of 
all mercies. Oh, my child, remember that 
from infancy your surviving parent, and that 
tender mother whose remains now repose in 
the grave, not only taught you to pray, and 
enjoined it as a duty you owe to your Creator, 
Preserver, and Redeemer, but prayed much for 
you themselves, that you might be preserved 
from vicious ways and vicious companions, and 
that you might feel the evil of sin as an offence 
against God, and in early life be brought to 
flee to the ark of safety as provided in the 
gospel. Preparing as you are for activity on 
the theatre of human life, can you conceive me 
indifferent as to how your early impressions 
are moulded ? Or think you, if the redeemed 
in heaven are permitted to take knowledge of 
things done below, that the sainted spirit of 
your mother does not now watch over your 
ways, and, for aught w r e know, is a minister- 
ing spirit to keep you in the hour of temp- 
tation, and to warn you to flee from the wrath 
to come ? The value of time and the worth 
of the soul will not be fully disclosed, until 
the tabernacle of clay is broken down, and the 



FAITHFUL IN ALL HIS HOUSE. Ill 

soul awakes in the world of spirits. AVhen I 

think of young B , and F , and B , 

and other young persons who have renounced 
the world as a portion, and publicly avouched 
the Lord Jehovah to be their God, I ask, why 
does not my son also ? Is it because his 
parents have not sufficiently warned him that 
the way of transgressors is hard, and that their 
prayers have not been mingled with faith for 
their son? They may indeed plead guilty in 
this respect, and 0, that the Parent of all 
mercies may pardon our unfaithfulness. But 
now that your mind is opening and strengthen- 
ing in knowledge, now that a Saviour's love is 
presented to you from Sabbath to Sabbath in 
tones most inviting and affecting, you must 
know, and you do know, that genuine piety is 
a work exclusively between Grod and the soul : 
you must know that prayer is the appointed 
medium to draw down the divine blessing, and 
that the influences of the Holy Spirit are es- 
sential to the awakening and conversion of the 
sinner ; for by nature we are carnal, sold under 
sin, and to be Christians, we must be born 
again." 



112 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

He again writes to the same son, "I sup- 
pose there are some who would gladly allure 
you into temptation and vice. But he watch- 
ful as to "both. Your father and your friends 
would be greatly pained w T ere you to make a 
misstep. He often remembers you at a throne 
of grace ; but you ought to pray for yourself. 
The things of eternity should never be forgot- 
ten. We live in a dying world. How long 
our probation will last is unknown to us ; but 
the injunction of the Saviour is, seek first the 
kingdom of heaven. Your dear deceased moth- 
er in her time prayed much for you." 

This son had written to him concerning a 
revival of religion in Princeton ; and Mr. Tuttle 
thus responded, March 19, 1827 : 

" Revivals of religion, wherever or whenever 
they take place, are matters of congratulation 
among Christians, and angels too. To hear that- 
there is a gracious work of the Holy Spirit in 
Princeton is good news ; and my prayer is, that 
it may be deep, pungent, and radical, to the 
salvation of a great multitude of souls ; and 
that all classes may participate in this infinitely 
important blessing. And I would hope that 



FAITHFUL IN ALL HIS HOUSE. 113 

the power of divine grace may not be limited 
to the citizens of the village. Are not the 
young men in college hastening to the bar of 
their Maker ? Have they not souls to save or 
lose ? Will not religion be beneficial to them 
in life, whatever station they occupy ? Believe 
me it will ; ' for what is a man profited, if he 
shall gain the whole world and lose his own 
soul V Those young gentlemen in college who 
are contending against the convictions of their 
own consciences, and the Spirit of (rod, should 
pause before they come to the conclusion that 
they will turn their backs upon the Redeemer 
of men ; for to some of them, this revival in 
Princeton will probably be the crisis in which 
their die for eternity will be cast. That you, 
my son, should be the subject of early piety, 
has been the often repeated petition of your 
father ; and that it was the petition of your 
mother ', you have no reason to doubt. Choose 
you this day whom you will serve," 

These letters, which were written for the 
eye of his son alone, show how deeply inter- 
ested he was in his welfare, and with what 
jealous care he watched every thing which 



114 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

might affect him. The quotation which fol- 
lows is from a letter to his second son, who 
was then in Caldwell, N. J., at school. 

"You did not mention in your letter that 
your mind was turned to the great subject of 
your soul's salvation, hut I thought such might 
be the case. I was happily informed of this 

by Mr. D , who called yesterday, who said 

he had conversed with you, and that you had 
expressed to him that you thought you felt 
different from what you ever did before. I 
have only time to say now, my dear son, that 
true piety is most desirable to every rational 
being. Without it we are wretched and miser- 
able, enemies of Grod, exposed to his wrath, 
unprepared for life, or death, or judgment. "We 
must be born again, or not see the kingdom of 
God. And why not give our hearts to the 
Lord in the morning of life ? We cannot serve 
the Lord too long. This is the experience of 
every Christian in a dying hour, that he has 
served the Lord too little. But it is of the 
highest importance not to cherish a false hope. 
Remember that the heart is deceitful above all 
things. Be jealous of yourself, therefore, and 



FAITHFUL IN ALL HIS HOUSE. 115 

pray the Lord to give you those convictions 
which are genuine — that repentance which is 
unto life, I have remembered you in my 
prayers, and shall continue to do so. I have 
long prayed for my dear children ; and your 
deceased mother ! nothing could he nearer to 
her heart, than to see her children walking in 
the truth. She often prayed for this, and I 
hope her prayers will he heard." 

The son whom he thus addressed was the 
first of his children who became professedly 
pious ; and the father not only felt joyful at 
such an event, but he trembled lest the work 
might not be genuine. Accordingly we find 
him writing in the following admirable strain : 
"If your exercises are genuine and ultimately 
lead you to the Rock Christ Jesus, it will be 
a memorable year in your pilgrimage, and not 
less so in eternity. AVhat a blessing, like 
Enoch to walk with Grod ! How rich the in- 
heritance — how lasting its effects : what mind 
can appreciate its value ? 

"As it seems inconvenient at present to pay 
you a visit, it would be gratifying to know 
something of the exercises of your mind. 



116 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

"Were I present, perhaps I should ask, after 
your mind was turned to reflect on the peril- 
ous state of a sinner, were you agitated because 
it exposed you to the miseries of perdition ; or 
was it because sin appeared exceedingly sinful — 
that you had offended a holy God ? * * * Upon 
what evidence is your hope founded ? Is it 
because you have experienced some convictions 
for sin, were alarmed at your danger, and now 
your fears, have subsided ? This is but what 
thousands have experienced, and after all they 
turned back to the beggarly elements of the 
world. These and similar questions I should 
ask, to lead you to a prayerful examination of 
your motives and feelings, and evidences of a 
Christian hope. "With youth of your age, it is 
peculiarly important to be watchful lest animal 
excitement be substituted for genuine repent- 
ance and the hope of the hypocrite be cher- 
ished, which will not stand the test. Besides, 
it is a great thing to be a Christian — not in 
name, but in deed. To take up the cross and 
follow Christ, to separate from young and 
thoughtless companions, to renounce the world 
as a portion, to be separate from sinners, and 



FAITHFUL IK ALL HIS HOUSE. 117 

to live the Christian as well as profess to do it, 
is a great moral change. But the Holy Spirit 
can effect it. Be much in prayer for the guid- 
ance of the Holy Spirit." 

This searching epistle is closed by alluding 
to a young person, known to his son, who was 
suddenly smitten with fatal sickness ; whose 
"last hour was spent in calling for mercy, 
mercy ! ' A solemn warning to the young not 
to postpone the work of making their peace 
with God." 

In looking over his letters to his children, 
and those nephews who were in his family as 
children, we find him ever reminding them of 
their obligations to G-od. Even in the most 
trivial communications, about a text-book or 
an article of clothing, the same thing is to be 
observed. 

He closes a letter full of family items cal- 
culated to interest his absent child, with the 
following words : " And now, dear son, I close 
with reminding you of your obligations to 
your Grod and Saviour. ' My son, give me thy 
heart.' This is a reasonable duty. They that 
seek me early, shall find me. Let your Maker 



118 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

and Redeemer have the dew of your youth. 
Real religion is worth infinitely more than all 
other objects combined, without it. It is hap- 
piness here ; it is glory and an immortal crown 
in the world to come. Duty to Grod, present 
comfort to ourselves, and the awful interests at 
stake for eternity, forbid procrastination. Now 
is the accepted time, now is the day of salva- 
tion. I hardly think it necessary to repeat 
my admonition to watch and take care of you. 
moral walk and reputation. Your good sense 
must dictate this ; and I must say, I have 
much confidence, by the blessing and assist- 
ance of Heaven, that you will prize a good 
character above rubies. It is easy to maintain 
a fair reputation, but not easy to regain it 
when impaired." 

Mr. Tuttle's marriage to his second wife, 
Miss Julia Ann Tuttle, occurred in 1826. In 
1834, her health was such that she spent the 
winter in a southern latitude. This led to a 
voluminous correspondence, which is still pre- 
served. These letters are models of their kind, 
and well calculated to cheer up an invalid 
among strangers. The spirit of the writer 



FAITHFUL IN ALL HIS HOUSE. 119 

cannot be mistaken. Under the trial of such 
a separation, he is cheerfully submissive. 
" However, I am not uneasy or impatient, 5 ' 
he says. " The kind Providence which has 
hitherto led you on in safety, I trust will still 
watch over and guide your steps. Let us cast 
our cares on the Lord. Oh, how much we are 
indebted to his forbearance and mercy, that we 
are not consumed." He was such a confident 
believer in the providence of (rod, that he 
could say, 

" In each event of life, how clear 
Thy ruling hand I see;" 

and for this reason, no one of his relatives or 
friends can recall one fretful or complaining re- 
mark made while suffering either the heaviest 
calamity, or the lighter but more annoying 
trials of every-day life. " I am not uneasy or 
impatient." This was his spirit ; and a most 
admirable spirit it is. And again he says, 
" Separated as we are, I feel lonely, but my 
spirits have continued cheerful ; but, my dear 
friend, let us not lean on an arm of flesh." 
It was after a communion-season that he 



120 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

wrote to his absent companion in the follow- 
ing chastened strain : " While at the commun- 
ion-table, I could not help dropping a tear, 
when I looked around and found your seat 
empty. Though absent in body, I verily be- 
lieve you were present in spirit ; and that you 
did not forget the day or the occasion in which 
we were wont to renew our covenant vows to 
the King of kings. Oh, what a privilege it is, 
that ' sinful worms 9 may have a standing in 
the church of Christ ; that they should thus 
be redeemed by his precious blood, and made 
heirs of an incorruptible inheritance ! Let us 
prize our privileges, and press toward the mark 
of our high calling. Why were we made the 
subjects of grace ? Not by works, lest any man 
should boast. If we have been made to differ, 
when we were no better than thousands of 
others, to grace how great a debtor ! How 
sweet that passage of the apostle John, 6 Be- 
hold what manner of love the Father hath 
bestowed upon us, that we should be called 
the sons of (xod !' If Christ be precious to us, 
and if we believe Christ to be the only Saviour, 
how should we exhort and pray that our un- 



FAITHFUL IN ALL HIS HOUSE. 121 

converted friends and relatives should be 
brought into the ark of safety." And he 
adds, with reference to two dear friends, also 
at the south, for whose salvation he was so- 
licitous, " The same grace that has humbled 

your and my proud heart, can also bring 

and — — to the foot of the cross." Well might 
such a Christian say, as he does in this very 
letter, "I do think I would rather be a door- 
keeper in the house of the Lord, than dwell in 
the tents of wickedness." 

His letters show the skill with which he 
was accustomed to approach his friends on 
points where he felt they were pursuing a 
course which they might regret. For instance, 
in one he gives an abstract of a sermon he had 
just heard, in which was a very novel inter- 
pretation of a text ; the very announcement of 
which was well calculated to excite curiosity ; 

and he says, as if incidentally, " Tell to 

examine Dr. Scott on this point. And is it 

not time for her and to lay aside light 

publications, and feast on the treasures of 
everlasting truth ?" 

We cannot forbear quoting from one of his 



122 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

letters to a friend, some remarks on intemper- 
ance, excited by painful occurrences which 
fell under his own notice : " Oh, what a curse 
to man is intemperance ! How many fond 
mothers have wept tears of blood ; how 
many affectionate wives have become desolate 
and widows ; how many brothers and sisters 
have had to lament over ruined relatives w r ho 
have been infected with this curse of the 
human family ! If God has enabled us and 
our family circle to differ from those who 
indulge in this beastly vice, this forerunner of 
destruction to soul and body, to His name be 
all the glory. When we see the awful evils 
which overwhelm individuals as well as fam- 
ilies, and society at large, is it strange that 
the good and virtuous in every part of the 
land are raising their voices and hands against 
the use of intoxicating liquors ? Is it strange 
that they cry aloud and spare not, ' Touch 
not, taste not, handle not' the liquid poison? 
I am persuaded that our temperance societies 
are right, when they endeavor to bring all to 
feel the absolute necessity of yielding to total 
abstinence." 



FAITHFUL IN ALL HIS HOUSE. 123 

These truthful and earnest words show that 
the heart of their author beat in unison with 
one of the most philanthropic and hopeful move- 
ments to which Christianity has given birth in 
the present age. 



124 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

CHAPTER XV. 

"THEY "WATCH FOR YOUR SOULS." 

The most successful ministers have usually- 
been aided by discreet, pious, and devoted 
officers and members of the church, who have 
given them their cordial and efficient coopera- 
tion. Happy is that pastor who has a band of 
laymen fall of the Holy Grhost to aid him in 
caring for "the flock over which the Holy 
Grhost hath made him overseer." Mr. Tuttle 
in 1816, then comparatively a young man, 
was elected an elder of a prominent church of 
more than five hundred communicants,- min- 
gling with a circle of officers whose names are 
fragrant with earnest and successful labors in 
the cause of Christ, and endeavoring to fulfil 
his responsibilities as one "that must give 
account." Several manuscript volumes, found 
among his private papers at his death, mani- 
festly intended merely as a remembrancer of 
duty for himself, give evidence of his fidelity. 
In the winter of 1816-17, there was a powerful 



WATCHING- FOR SOULS. 125 

revival which resulted in adding: to the church 
"in May, 1817, sixty-nine persons, and in 
July, fifty-four ; making one hundred and 
thirty-five in the space of six months : besides 
a considerable number on certificate. 5 ' The 
officers of the church districted the whole con- 
gregation, and visited these districts from house 
to house, warning and entreating Christians 
and the impenitent. This was done early in 
September, 1816 ; and was carried on during 
the fall and winter as late as February, 1817. 

Under date of October 4, 1816, Mr. Tuttle 

writes in his diary, " Yisited Mr. 's family, 

consisting of the united head, one infant child, 
and two apprentices. Conversed with them on 
the duties of religion, and what we could do to 
promote a revival. Nothing particular in their 
late experience ; admitted the general declen- 
sion in the church, and were exhorted to zeal 
in the Redeemer's cause. Concluded with 
prayer." The "infant child" here mentioned 
now occupies a distinguished position in the 
church, and the prayer of that night may have 
been one of the means of leading him there. 

"Oct. 3. This evening we spent an hour 



126 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

in Mr. — — 's family. He joined us in lament- 
ing the declension of religion in our church, 
and the churches in general. He was asked 
what Christians could and should do to pro- 
mote a revival. The conclusion was, by us 
and him, that more personal religion was 
necessary, that our petitions should be more 
ardent, and our closets oftener visited. Con- 
cluded with prayer." 

" Oct. 12. Yisited Mr. 's family. Con- 
versed with Mrs. , who admitted the 

low state of religion in the congregation, and 
that we ought to be more watchful and prayer- 
ful. Had much free conversation with Mr. 

— . He respected religion, but thought 

some did not live up to it ; which he esteemed 
a block of stumbling. He was reminded that 
though all professors did not live agreeably to 
their solemn engagements, religion was still 
the same, an institution of God ; and instead 
of making the faults of professors an excuse 
for neglecting it, we should be happy if such 
persons should be prepared to unite themselves 
with the church, and by a better example and 
closer walk with God do more to honor religion 



WATCHING- FOR SOULS. 127 

than we did, and when we strayed, to bring us 
to the discipline of the church. The whole 
conversation was free and friendly, and closed 
with prayer." 

It is very pleasant to mark in this record, 
that these men paid an especial attention to 
instructing children, domestics, and appren- 
tices. Thus Mr. Tuttle writes, "Mr. "W- 

particularly addressed the children of the family, 
as also the young man present, and two young 
daughters of Mrs. — ." They visited an- 
other family, in which "were fourteen hoys — 
apprentices. Agreed to visit the apprentices 
the following evening, with Mr. ? s appro- 
bation." The record of that interview is given. 

"Agreeably to appointment, visited Mr. 's 

apprentices. He had named our hour to them, 
and requested them to attend. "We waited but 
a short time, when we had a company of 
twelve young immortals, including two female 
domestics. These were seated in the family 
room. Their behavior was perfectly orderly, 
and the sight was interesting. Mr. "W- — — 
addressed them generally for half an hour in 
a solemn and interesting manner. The duty 



128 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

they owed to (xod and their own souls was 
explained, as well as the way to escape those 
snares and evils which destroy character and 
ruin souls. After prayer, and thanking them 
for their attendance, we left them, much grati- 
fied ourselves. Mr. was present." 

In the course of their visitation these breth- 
ren found some impenitent persons " tender." 
These were " directed to look to Christ." Many 
they found " deploring the lukewarm state of 
religion in the congregation," and such were 
instructed to begin the work at home. One 
" lamented the stupidity of her children. Her 
duties as a parent were pointed out distinctly, 
and she was solemnly exhorted to be faithful 

even unto death." They " found Mrs. 

very free in conversation, and we hope enjoy- 
ing spiritual life. Mrs. ," another lady in 

the family, " tender, and her mind stirred up of 
late to consider her ways. * * * A considerable 
address was made to the young people, and 
they were solemnly warned not to put off the 
concerns of religion. Concluded with prayer ; 
being affectionately invited to visit them again." 

They found some smarting under " affliction 



WATCHING- FOR SOULS. 129 

and many trials. Such were advised to look 
away from temporal things, and seek a better 
portion." One family had but "one professor 
in it ; but all the others are tender, and we 
think inquiring the w T ay to Zion. We were 
much pleased to find that the morning and 
evening sacrifice was offered at their altar. 
They were asked why they did not openly 
profess Christ. They were afraid, not of the 
world, but lest coming unworthily they should 
eat and drink judgment to themselves. This 
objection was answered. After an hour and a 
half spent individually with those present, we 
concluded with prayer, with urgent invitations 
to come again." To another circle of young 
Christians in one family, they "recommended 
an association to visit and converse with their 
acquaintances on the things of the kingdom." 

Another case of much interest may be cited, 
as showing what advice was given in a diffi- 
culty which not unfrequently arises in families. 

"Conversed freely with Mr. , who seemed 

convinced in his judgment of the necessity of 
repentance and faith in the Saviour, and 
thought he wished to be a Christian. Appro- 



130 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

priate advice was given him. He was es- 
pecially admonished of his duty to bring his 
family to the altar of prayer. Mrs. — — said 
she wished to know if it was not her duty to 

pray in the family, if Mr. neglected it. 

She was answered in the affirmative, especially 
when it could be done without offence to the 
husband. It was stated that in some families 
a portion of Scripture v\ T as read, with prayers, 
such as are found in 'Jenks 5 Devotion. 5 

Mr. agreed thereafter to establish family 

devotion ; and Mr. W informed him, that 

if he wished it and would get his family to- 
gether now, or at any future time, he would 
inform them of his resolution, and commence 
the exercise for him with exhortation and 

prayer. Mr. chose the present time, and 

the family altar was forthwith set up." 

It is exceedingly interesting to find in this 
diary the labors of an humble man brought to 
bear on individuals and families whose con- 
version to G-od has been among the signal 
blessings bestowed on the church. Such is 
the following sketch: "Nov. 27. Called on 
Mr. 's family. Spent near three hours in 



WATCHING- FOR SOULS. 131 

conversation and exhortation with them. Both 
Mr. and Mrs. appeared to "be solemnly- 
impressed with the importance and duty of 
religion, but neither of them, in the judgment 
of their own minds, had experienced that 
change of heart which is unto salvation. Mr. 

conversed freely, and related what his 

experiences were. He had no peace of mind ; 
his judgment was convinced, but his heart 
not changed ; and at times he was tempted to 
relax in seeking. He was advised of his de- 
pendence on (rod as a sovereign ; that though 
Grod is a sovereign dispenser of his gifts, he is 
a God who employs means, and has promised 
to reveal himself to those who diligently seek 
him. "We attempted to remove various obsta- 
cles in his mind. The visit was received very 
friendlily, and we hope profitably. Concluded 
with prayer." 

Thus they went from house to house, re- 
building the family altars which had been 
broken down, comforting the feeble-minded, 
stirring up those who had forgotten their first 
love, exhorting the impenitent, directing the 
inquirer, instructing the young, and doing all 



132 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

that in them was to bring the church into such 
a state that the Lord might refresh it with a 
revival of religion. 

During the year 1841, he so arranged his 
"business that he was able from that time 
to devote himself almost exclusively to the 
work of visiting the families of the church in 
which he was an elder, for the purpose of 
religious conversation and prayer, and to the 
furthering of benevolent objects of a more 
public nature. 



PURE RELIGION. 133 



CHAPTER XVI. 



'PURE RELIGION AND UNDEFILED.' 



-It is twice blessed, 



It blesseth him that gives and him that takes." 

As Mr. Tuttle's business prospered, we find 
him acting with generosity for one of his means. 
His friends, the poor, and the church all shared 
in his liberality. 

It is pleasing to remark his reliance on 
divine Providence even in little things. Shortly 
after he began business, when his income was 
needed to meet his debts, he listened to some 
benevolent appeal made at a crowded meeting. 
He had but one dollar in his pocket, and after 
considering the matter gave the dollar, saying 
to himself, "Providence will assist me in some 
way." The next morning a gentleman brought 
an advertisement to be inserted in his paper, 
of a valuable article lost at that very mis- 
sionary meeting. The price for the advertise- 
ment was one dollar. Providence had not dis- 
appointed him. 



134 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

At a later date, he felt the deepest interest 
in the Bible Society, and on one occasion sub- 
scribed fifty dollars to that cause, although he 
said, "I do not now see where the money is 
to come from to meet the promise, but I believe 
Providence will assist me." Some would con- 
sider this as rashness, but with him it was 
faith in God. The very next day, he received 
the unexpected news from Trenton that his 
proposals to do the printing for the Legislature 
had been accepted. It was often so ; and many 
other instances equally striking might be re- 
lated. 

There are evidences still in existence that 
the church in West Milford, Passaic county, is 
largely indebted to the liberality of Mr. Tuttle 
in assisting their pastor to continue in labors 
resulting in the hopeful conversion of some two 
hundred persons. When that people wished to 
purchase a parsonage, the same judicious friend 
not only contributed from his own means, but 
suggested a plan by which the same object 
might be brought to the notice of wealthy 
Christians in Newark and New York. He 
was not obtrusive in his suggestions or conduct, 



PURE RELIG-ION. 135 

and yet he secured assistance from sources 
usually considered inaccessible. Nor was this 
the only church which has occasion to remem- 
ber him. 

But in his own congregation he seemed to 
have before him constantly the words of the 
apostle James, "Pure religion and undefiled 
before Grod and the Father is this, to visit the 
fatherless and widows in their affliction, and 
to keep himself unspotted from the world." 
Accordingly in his diary is the frequent mention 
of his calling on this class of the afflicted. 
For instance, "April 6, 18 — . We visited 

widow and daughter, both professors. 

Conversed and prayed with them." "May 8. 

Called on widow % Found her unwell. 

Conversed with her and closed with prayer." 

"May 13. Called on widow , conversed 

and prayed with her. Called on widow , 

and conversed with her. Called on widow 
and her daughter. Had a pleasant con- 
versation." Almost every page has the evi- 
dence of his calling on some aged or sick 
widow, or the fatherless ; and doing something 
to cheer them in their sorrows. During the 



136 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

latter years of his life lie was made an almoner 
of the church, and we find the account of his 
stewardship recorded with scrupulous exact- 
ness. In some cases, learning that some of 
the class before referred to had been acciden- 
tally passed by the elders who visited that 
district, he repaired the omission by calling on 
them himself. His life was marked with such 
acts as these, which evidently were recorded 
for the sole purpose of aiding his own rec- 
ollections, and not for the eyes of other per- 
sons. " July 5. Called on -, who is sick, 

and gave her three dollars I had collected for 
her. I had given her the same amount on a 
former occasion. Closed with prayer." " July 
13, Called on — — ," the same person, "and 
handed her two dollars I had collected. She 
remains in poor health. Recovery hardly to 

be expected." " July 22. I called on , 

who is sick and feeble, and gave her two dol- 
lars from Mr. -, and four shillings from 

." "July 24. I called this morning on 

, who is very feeble, and prayed with her, 

and gave her three dollars and a half I had 
collected for her from the following persons." 



PURE RELIGION. 137 

He ministered to this pious woman, whose out- 
ward circumstances were very much straitened, 
until she died. What he did himself he did 
not usually record, but as the almoner of 
others' bounty he kept his accounts accurate. 
It would have been impossible for him to bear 
every burden he met in his extensive and fre- 
quent visitations, but he was a faithful steward 
in reporting such cases to his brethren, upon 
whom he never called in vain. Many a poor 
widow and orphan have thus been gladdened 
in sickness by his presence, and their pathway 
of sorrow has been lighted up by the kind and 
unobtrusive benevolence which he has shed. 

The comfort of society greatly depends on 
little acts of kindness, and the talent to perform 
these little acts skilfully is somewhat rare ; 
but when possessed, it secures very strong 
attachments. Mr. Tuttle's benefactions were 
usually bestowed literally on those who could 
"not recompense" him. It was his practice 
to send " something nice" to the poor, es- 
pecially to aged and pious widows, on special 
days, such as a Thanksgiving, a Christmas, or 
a New-Tear's day. Sometimes it would come 



138 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

in the form of a load of wood or coal, or a 
barrel of flour, and such articles as would tend 
greatly to prolong the happiness of the receiver 
beyond the day which occasioned the gift. 
He delighted to surround his table with these 
excellent women, whose poverty in this world 
did not prevent their being rich in faith ; and 
on thes© occasions, it would be difficult to say 
which was the happier, the host or his guests : 
and when he died, none mourned for him more 
sincerely than this very class, whose homes and 
hearts had so often been cheered by his pres- 
ence. 

He ever placed a high estimate on the gos- 
pel ministry, and it was a favorite wish that 
he might have a son worthily engaged in that 
calling. For this he was fitting his second 
son ; and when his brother removed to Ohio, 
he generously promised to see that one of his 
sons should also be fitted for the same office. 
For eight years he carried out that promise 
with as much kindness and generosity as if 
he were doing it for his own son ; and when 
his nephew had entered the ministry, Mr. 
Tuttle made out a minute account of the ex- 



PURE RELIGION. 139 

penses incurred in his education, and presented 
it to him with the following characteristic re- 
ceipt : 

"As a freewill-offering to the cause of pro- 
claiming the everlasting gospel to rational and 
accountable men, I acknowledge payment of 
my nephew in full of the above expen- 
ditures made for him, as also for various items 
during his academical and collegiate studies of 
which I have made no record — provided he 
continues to labor in the gospel vineyard, and 
gives his best efforts to win souls to the blessed 
Redeemer, in his own or any other land, with 
the further provision that his life and health 
are continued ; at the same time recommend- 
ing, yet to be entirely optional with himself, if 
blessed by divine Providence in future life with 
more than a competent living, to confer a like 
favor on any one of our kinsmen in the flesh 
who may need assistance in preparing to enter 
the gospel ministry." 

There is good reason to believe that from 
the time he entered the church he made drafts 
on his income which amounted at least to a 
tenth, and during the latter years of his life 



140 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

he bestowed nearly all his income, except what 
was necessary for the use of his family. And 
it ought to be remarked that these facts which 
have been alluded to are mostly saved by his 
sudden death ; for had he approached the dark 
valley through protracted sickness, w r e have 
reason to suppose he would have destroyed the 
records of his own deeds. He loved the mode 
pointed out by the Redeemer, "Let not thy 
left hand know what thy right hand doeth." 
And so strictly had he complied with this rule 
in all possible cases, that his benevolent deeds 
were not recited even to his dearest friends. 



CLOUDS AND DARKNESS. 141 

CHAPTER XVII. 

"CLOUDS AND DARKNESS." 

Mr. Tuttle's assistance of his nephew, as 
related in a former chapter, is proof of the 
estimate he placed on the gospel ministry, 
and of his desire to be directly instrumental in 
introducing young men into it ; but if he had 
such a desire with reference to pious young 
men in general, that desire was intense as to 
his second son. This youth became hopefully 
pious while at school in Caldwell, in 1831. 
He was an apt scholar, and it was not long 
before he determined to devote himself to the 
ministry of reconciliation. About this time 
the Christian generosity of the father brought 
his nephew into the family, that he might 
pursue his studies for the same calling to the 
best advantage. While these youths were 
students at Nassau Hall, Mr. Tuttle watched 
over them with a truly paternal care. 

To his son he writes, "I suppose we at 
home are rather neglectful in not writing to 
you and L oftener. Were you without 



142 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 



Christian friends, and were you unbelievers 
yourselves, I should esteem line upon line and 
precept upon precept more indispensable ; and 
this would lead to more frequent communica- 
tions. But I trust your enlistment under the 
banner of the Redeemer, your native sense 
of right and wrong, and the importance of 
honoring as well as professing godliness, will 
keep you from many temptations and snares. 
It is well, however, to mistrust our own 
strength, and daily seek that wisdom and 
grace that come from above and are alone 
able to keep us from dishonoring Christ in the 
house of his friends." 

He was very much delighted with the prog- 
ress made in their studies "by the lads," and 
writes thus: "My dear Boys — Day before 
yesterday I received the circulars from the 
Faculty, and am gratified. * * * I have no 
doubt your attention will still be continued to 
your studies, and that your conduct will be 
such as to reflect honor on yourselves, and 
credit to your parents and friends. Surround- 
ed as you are with many temptations, and pro- 
fessing to be the friends and followers of the 



. 



CLOUDS AND DARKNESS. 143 

blessed Redeemer, it is not only necessary that 
you should sustain a good reputation as schol- 
ars, but that your moral and religious walk be 
such as to reflect light and heat on all around. 
The heart, which the Scriptures represent as 
deceitful and desperately wicked, must be 
watched, and that narrowly. We need divine 
grace every hour to uphold us, and enable us 
like Enoch to walk with God. If we wouid 
have the smiles of the Saviour, we must live 
near to him ; we must cultivate a spirit of 
piety, and meditate upon his word. We feel a 
deep interest in your temporal and spiritual 
welfare ; and though you are absent from us, 
we often plead that the Lord would keep, pro- 
tect, and lead you in the way everlasting." 

Again he writes to the young men at Prince- 
ton, " We all take great interest in your wel- 
fare, and hope you will not only be prospered 
in your studies, but that your souls may be in 
health and prosperity. Be attentive to your 
closets, as also to other duties. As long as I 
am assured of this, I shall have confidence to 
hope that you will be freed from the snares and 
temptations that too often overcome youth in 



144 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

college life. I hope that you and L — — do 
constantly keep in mind that you have enlisted 
in the service of the Captain of salvation, and 
how religion would be dishonored and your 
friends pained, should you fall into sin. The 
members of Christ are to be lights in the world, 
and I hope your example will be such to your fel- 
low-students as to recommend religion, rather 
than prove a stumbling-block to them." 

To his nephew he writes, " Try, my dear 
nephew, to be as much distinguished for Chris- 
tian graces as for mental endowments, yea, 
more. Your parents and other friends are 
hoping that, if you are spared, one day you 
will proclaim the everlasting gospel of the bless- 
ed Saviour to your fellow-sinners. Therefore 
cultivate the spirit of piety. Look constantly 
to the Captain of salvation for grace and 
strength, that the enemy of souls may not gain 
an advantage over you." 

He writes again, when his nephew had com- 
pleted his course, "And now, it is scarcely 
necessary to remind you with what solicitude 
your whole circle of friends are watching your 
approach to the duties of public life, and how 



CLOUDS AND DARKNESS. 145 

necessary for their comfort that not a blot or 
stain should mar their anticipations. It some- 
times requires years to recover from one mis- 
step. Therefore it is wise always to "be watch- 
ful, jealous of ourselves, always feeling our de- 
pendence on divine grace to keep us from er- 
rors, from dishonoring ourselves and our friends. 
I remember well, that when a young man, be- 
set with strong temptations, my resolution was, 
not to be seen in company I should be ashamed 
of, and never to do an act which would make 
me afraid to look my friends in the face. I have 
sometimes thought, that perhaps the fear of 
dishonoring my kindred had more influence 
than the fear of offending my God. I trust, 
however, the latter consideration had more or 
less weight. * * * In all your intercourse with 
the young, gravity of deportment is expected 
by the pious, and when departed from, is noticed 
by the world. In theological students, this is 
expected more than of ordinary Christians. 5 ' 

There is much sound discretion in the fol- 
lowing words, which show what were his views 
of the ministry into which he was laboring to 
bring his son and nephew, at great cost and 

Wm. Tuttle. 10 



146 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

sacrifice . They were written to another nephew, 
who had just been licensed to preach. 

" I am gratified to learn that you have set 
yourself comfortably to work in the station in 
which you are at present located. I trust God's 
smiles may rest upon you, and that your pres- 
ent labors will only he a prelude to greater 
usefulness in the gospel vineyard. 

" The apostle said, ' "Woe is me if I preach 
not the gospel.' You will doubtless keep this 
object in view, not so much as a profession^ to 
become rich and distinguished, but to glorify 
God and win souls to the Redeemer. In this 
preparation to become a workman that needeth 
not to be ashamed, you ought not to under- 
mine your health by laying on nature more 
than it can bear. Due exercise of body is in- 
dispensable. You must look to that. The 
mental faculties, however richly cultivated, at 
the expense of a weak and broken down con- 
stitution, will illy compensate the sacrifice. As 
a Christian, and above all as a minister of the 
gospel, cultivate the spirit of evangelical piety. 
While you shun moroseness, gravity and sound 
words are most desirable traits of Christian 



CLOUDS AND DARKNESS. 147 

character. Jesting and foolish conversation are 
condemned by the apostle, and are to be watch- 
ed against as unprofitable to ourselves and those 
who hear us. Young men, as well as old, in- 
dulge sometimes too much in this particular, 
and it often proves an offence and a stone of 
stumbling to others. When I first began to 
mingle in clerical associations, the jokes and 
repartees of ministers tended to lessen that high 
veneration I had entertained for them ; and it 
may be so with others. I merely throw it out 
as a hint for general application." 

Such were the views of Mr. Tuttle with ref- 
erence to the gospel ministry, and to see his own 
son worthily filling such a station was his most 
anxious wish. He was not indifferent to that 
popularity which secures high political prefer- 
ments ; but these did not seem so desirable for 
his son as preferment to the position of an am- 
bassador for God. By prayer and parental 
faithfulness he sought the early conversion of 
his children ; and when his second son was first 
given to him a new creature in Christ, he con- 
secrated him anew to Grod as a candidate for 
the gospel ministry. He spared no pains thor- 



148 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

oughly to qualify him for that position, both 
mentally and spiritually. In his frequent let- 
ters to Parkhurstj'3nd at home, he sought to 
impress him with a deep sense of the respon- 
sibilities he was seeking; and it was an un- 
speakable gratification to see that beloved son 
ripening into rare loveliness and spiritual 
strength. As a scholar, he ranked high in col- 
lege ; and as a Christian, no one had an un- 
kind word to speak against him. When his 
collegiate course was ended, his cousin and 
friend, who was graduated at the same time, 
spent a year among his friends at the "West ; 
but he chose to proceed immediately to the 
Theological Seminary at Auburn. During that 
winter his letters exhibited a striking develop- 
ment of piety, and a growing likeness to the 
image of his Master. He spent the spring va- 
cation of 1837 at home. During this season 
his friends remarked a great change in his 
character, which showed itself in his tender 
interest in the spiritual welfare of his impeni- 
tent kindred. To such he was unusually faith- 
ful, admonishing and entreating them with tears 
to be reconciled to Grod. After his return to 



CLOUDS AND DARKNESS. 1-19 

Auburn he was honored by his fellows in being 
elected to deliver an address before the Society 
of Inquiry, at the close of the term. But all 
these hopes were to be disappointed by a sud- 
den and mysterious providence. 

This thrilling incident took place on Saturday, 
June 24th, 1837, and can be best related in 
the following letter written to Mr. Tuttle by 
Dr. Cox, at that time a Professor in the Theo- 
logical Seminary at Auburn. 

"Auburn, Sat., 10 p. m., June 24, 1837. 

" My dear Friend — When I last had the 
pleasure of an interview with you last month 
in the city of New York, our conversation turn- 
ed very naturally, and very gratefully to me, 
on the character and promise of your excellent 
son ¥m. P. Tuttle, of the Junior class in our 
institution. Little did I then think, my dear 
sir, while congratulating you as the father of 
such a son — little did I think five hours ago, 
that I should be called, in the providence of 
(xod, to perform such an office of solemnity and 
sympathy as that in which my pen is now en- 
gaged. May you be prepared by the grace of 
that Providence that has dictated the necessity, 



150 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

to receive the tidings, which cannot he so dis- 
guised by tenderness or skill as not to strike 
with severity the bosom of a father. Yes, my 
dear sir, his heavenly Father loved him with 
an everlasting love, I doubt not : and has chal- 
lenged his right, at your expense as it might 
seem for a moment, to transfer your son to his 
service and his presence, in his kingdom of 
glory. Your precious son is in a better world. 
' How many fall as sudden, not as safe !' That 
God, ' whose way is in the sea, whose path is 
in the great waters, and whose footsteps are 
not known,' is your God, and his faithfulness 
is everlasting. You can trust Him at all times, 
knowing that 6 clouds and darkness ' around his 
goings, are no prejudice to the light and the 
love in which he dwells, and in which ' is no 
darkness at all.' 

" The circumstances of the solemn event, so 
far as we have been able to ascertain them, 
affect equally four of the Junior class, together 
ushered into the presence of God ; your son, 
Mr. H. Smith of Johnson, Mr. ¥m. "Woodbridge 
of Stockbridge, Mass., and Simeon S. Johnson 
of Sweden, Monroe county. They all went 



CLOUDS AND DARKNESS. 151 

this afternoon to take a sail on the Owasco 
lake. They obtained a sail-boat, and as it was 
windy, and rather rough and showery, they put 
a number of stones in her bottom as ballast. 
When in the middle of the lake, about a mile 
from shore, they observed a storm of rain ris- 
ing, and endeavored to make way towards the 
shore previously to its arrival. A squall struck 
their sheet ; she lurched, and the stones sud- 
denly shifted into the bow : the consequence 
was that the boat immediately lost its equilib- 
rium. It filled and sunk 'in the twinkling of 
an eye/ * * * Allthat can be done under the 
impulse of humanity, piety, and skill, by us, 
rest assured, my dear brother, will be done. My 
soul sympathizes with you. I, too, have lost 
children. Five have been removed — -four in less 
than six weeks — three in four days, and two in 
one coffin. But G-od is wise, good, and faithful ; 
and ' blessed be the name of the Lord. 5 * * * 

"It is a great shock to our seminary, and 
particularly to the Junior class. Your son had 
just been chosen by his peers, and approved by 
the Faculty, as one of the speakers at the ap- 
proaching commencement in August. His char- 



152 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

acter was lovely, regular, and honorable. His 
talents, attainments, and spirit, won for him 
the esteem of all the students and all the pro- 
fessors, in a degree uncommon. His memorial 
is fragrant, and will he cherished hy us all with 
pious and affectionate sensibility. * * •* I com- 
mend you to Grod. Vain is the help of man in 
fetich an hour. 4 It is well.' * * * There is 
great sympathy universally felt. Many feel and 
many pray. You and other afflicted relatives 
will he remembered at the throne of grace in 
our supplications. May you be enabled to say, 
' The Lord livetii, and blessed be my Rock, 
and let the Grod of my salvation be exalted.' 
It is a solemn appeal and admonition to us all. 
0, may it be greatly blessed to all the youth, 
especially of Auburn and Newark, (xraee be 
with you to ' glorify Grod in the fires.' "With 
great sympathy and sincere affection, your 
friend and brother in the hope of Jesus Christ, 

" SAMUEL H. COX." 

On Monday about one o'clock, p. m., the body 
of Parkhurst was " recovered from its deep^ 
repose in the bottom of the wasco." His watch 
indicated one quarter past four as the time when 



CLOUDS AND DARKNESS. 153 

he sunk ; as it was probably stopped instantly by 
" the flooding of the water." The body of Mr. 
Johnson was not recovered until Saturday, 
about one week after the fatal event, and on Sun- 
day those of Mr. "Woodbridge and Mr. Smith. 
The interment of the bodies of Parkhurst and 
Mr. Johnson took place on Sunday at two, p. m., 
and that of the other two the same evening 

Dr. Richards wrote to Mr. Tuttle on Monday, 
June 26th, " I am almost overborne by this 
distressing disaster. I was not at home when 
it occurred ; and the news reached me while at 
Aurora, yesterday, whither I had gone to spend 
the Sabbath. It gave such a shock to my feel- 
ings that I could not continue the service in 
the afternoon; but felt it my duty immedi- 
ately to return. But the will of the Lord is 
done, and we must not complain. It is a most 
painful stroke to our institution ; and must be 
long and deeply felt by the immediate relatives 
of the deceased. May G-od support you, my 
dear friend, and your bereaved family." 

From the address of Dr. Cox on Sabbath 
evening, at the graves of these regretted youths, 
we may take a single paragraph. 



154 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

" Respected Friends and beloved Breth- 
ren — This is a solemn day to us. It is a 
solemn place where we meet. When was the 
occasion paralleled ? We do not dream ; it is 
indeed a reality. "We stand by the graves of four 
late students of the Junior class ; four young, 
lovely, promising brethren ravished away from 
us as ' in the twinkling of an eye,' with the 
fulness of health, in the morning of their days, 
from the bleeding affections of the kindest 
relatives, and during the charm of the bright- 
est prospects for a career of usefulness and 
honor in the present world. Since Auburn 
had 'a local habitation and a name/ has no 
such prodigy, or rather tragedy, of grief occur- 
red. Nothing like it was ever known in the 
annals of our Theological Seminary before. And 
since the silver waters of the Owasco owned 
their present confines, its deep bosom never 
held a treasure so valuable and so honored as 
that which it has been coerced but recently to 
resign. This spot is consecrated in the future 
history and tradition of our time. Many a 
pilgrimage of tender and Christian sentiment, 
of affecting and enlightened sympathy, will 



CLOUDS AND DARKNESS. 155 

hereafter "be made to it by the wise and good. 
Their memorial will live in the recollections 
and the interests of future ages and centuries. 
Their history will combine with that of our 
village and seminary ; and many an inquirer 
will direct his footsteps to the graves of Tuttle 
and Johnson, of Smith and Woodbridge, with 
a thrill profound of ingenuous feeling, and a 
consciousness of the incertitude of all terres- 
trial things, instructive and salutary, cherished 
and devotional. Here they rest, among the first 
fruits of our contributions from our seminary to 
this Machpelah of the departed ; where also are 
deposited the remains of the late venerable Per- 
rine, our professor, our brother, and our friend. 
0, solemn indeed is the place where we stand, 
and sympathize, and weep, and worship. Fare- 
well, ye well remembered, and ye tenderly 
beloved brethren, in the faith of Jesus. Fare- 
well, ye friends of once sweet affection, and 
now sundered endearment. Your memory shall 
not perish with your corruptible forms. Your 
signal and ever affecting history we will not 
forget. They were lovely and pleasant in their 
lives, and in their death they were not divided." 



1j6 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

Rarely is an event of such deep and thrill- 
ing interest chronicled ; and rarely is the sym- 
pathizing and Christian generosity displayed 
by the inhabitants of Auburn and vicinity 
excelled. For a week, a hundred persons 
nobly searched the depths of the lake, and 
seemed to say in the admirable lines of Mrs. 
Sigourney, occasioned by the event, 

" B,estore the dead ! give back those precious gems 
Which thou hast ravished from us ! r ' 

Such was the event which broke so suddenly 
upon friends, " whose dreams were full of 
hope," concerning these lovely and promising 
youths, who were on the threshold of the 
gospel ministry. It excited the deepest feel- 
ing throughout the church, and elicited many 
prayers in behalf of the bereaved. Mrs. Sig- 
ourney consecrated the event by one of the 
most touching effusions of her pen ; and 
withal, it stands as a marked event, which 
will not be forgotten for many years. 



THE FRUIT OF RICriiTEOUSNESS. 157 

CHAPTER XVIII, 

"THE FRUIT OF K.IGHTE OUSNE SS." 

"Judge not the Lord by feeble sense, 
But trust him for his grace ; 
Behind a frowning providence, 
He hides a smiling face/' 

This intelligence fell on Mr. Tuttle with 
stunning power. The very circumstances of 
his son's death but added poignancy to his 
grief; and with characteristic fervor, he has- 
tened to the mercy-seat and "told Jesus." 
The interview he had there with Him who is 
not a High-priest who cannot be touched with 
a feeling of our infirmities, was not in vain ; 
and then, instead of hurrying away to care for 
the lifeless remains of the departed, he went to 
a neighboring town where his only daughter 
was at school, to break to her the overwhelm- 
ing sorrow which had fallen on them, and to 
teach her young heart how to bear it. It was 
just like him, and it was worthy of him. His 
nephews could well enough see to the sepulture 



158 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

of the dead ; but who so well could tell the 
event to the stricken sister, and tow with her 
before a righteous God, in that hour of agony, 
as he her father ? 

The spirit with which he himself met this 
sudden calamity is best exhibited in his own 
words, which will be expressive to show "the 
fruit of righteousness" which this grievous 
affliction wrought out for him. To his nephew 
he thus writes, under date of August 6, 1837 : 
"I have to acknowledge the receipt of your 
sympathizing letter, the early part of the past 
week. The sudden and unexpected exit of a 
beloved, affectionate, and obedient child — one 
whose promise of usefulness to the church of 
Christ, and of comfort to Ms parents and dear 
friends, had, as you intimated, excited some 
fond anticipations for the future, has been in- 
deed an afflicting dispensation of Providence to 
me and the remaining members of my family. 
That four beloved youths, thus far in prepara- 
tion for the ministry of reconciliation, should be 
snatched away in the twinkling of an eye, to 
the feeble ken of mortals seems to be dark and 
mysterious. My mind often reverts to the 






THE FRUIT OF RIGHTEOUSNESS. 153 

melancholy scene with deep emotion ; but I 
dare not question the rectitude and wisdom 
and goodness of Jehovah, even in this pain- 
ful affliction. I dare not quarrel with God, 
because he gave me a beloved child, and just 
as the bud of promise began to open, saw it 
wisest and best to take to himself his own pre- 
cious gift. When a rebellious feeling arises, I 
endeavor to meet it with the armor of sacred 
truth: 'Be still, and know that I am God;' 
6 Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right V 
and similar passages. 

"But still the breach is very painful. "We 
have had the prayers of very many friends ; 
and in answer to them, I trust we have ex- 
perienced some of those gospel consolations 
which the world cannot give, or take away. 
Our duty is, to make a sanctified improvement 
of the affliction sent upon us. Our sorrows are 
greatly mitigated in the hope that our child 
was a child of grace ; that he had sincerely 
embraced the Saviour ; and that his immortal 
spirit has been carried by angels to Abraham's 
bosom and the paradise of God. If so, why 
should we mourn departed friends ? 



160 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

a Dr. Cox and Dr. Richards, in their letters 
to us, speak in the highest terms of the respect 
and esteem in which Parkhurst was held 
by them and his fellow-students. Professor 
McLean in his letter, and the Cliosophic 
Society in their resolutions, and indeed many 
others, all testify to his moral w T orth ; and not 
only of our loss, but the loss which the com- 
munity at large has sustained. So modest, so 
unassuming was he, that with all my parental 
feelings, I now think I did not appreciate his 
worth. * * * While I thus mourn over the 
loss of one beloved son, you will learn with 
pleasure, that I have some reason to hope and 
bless G-od for the spiritual life of the other." 

To his sister in Ohio Mr. Tuttle writes, 
October 30, 1837, "The sudden death of 
our dear Parkhurst, one whom you loved in 
common with us, was a painful trial to us. 
It cannot soon be forgotten. It yet weighs 
heavily on us ; and his memory, his affectionate 
kindness, his moral worth, and the manner of 
his death, often, very often, recur with pain- 
ful sensations. But we dare not doubt the 
wisdom, the mercy, and the goodness of this 



THE FRUIT OF RIGHTEOUSNESS. 161 

affliction. To mortal eyes it seems a myste- 
rious providence, that, in a moment of time, 
should be cut down four lovely youths look- 
ing to the gospel ministry, whose education, 
morals, and abilities promised much useful- 
ness to the church of Christ ; but even so, 
Father, so it seemed good in thy sight. We 
endeavor to hush our murmurings. It is a 
great consolation to us to indulge the hope 
that he sleeps in Jesus ; that he has joined the 
happy spirits in heaven, and now unites in the 
song of redeeming love. Let us endeavor to 
make a wise improvement of this affliction — 
be more watchful, more prayerful, and more in 
readiness for our own last change." 

Under date of December 13, of the same 
year, he writes to his brother in Ohio, "The 
loss of our dear Parkhurst is still sensibly felt. 
My mind often turns to the affecting catas- 
trophe with deep emotions ; but I endeavor to 
repress all contention with Grod on account of 
this afflicting dispensation. It is all right — 
ordered in infinite wisdom, and well adapted 
to make us who survive more holy, more 
humble, and mindful of death. It is of the 

Wm. Tuttle. 1 1 



162 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

divine mercy that any of us are spared. Our 
afflictions are lighter than our sins. 

"In memory of our dear hoy, we united 
with Mr. "Woodbridge, brother to one of those 
who found a watery grave wdth Parkhurst, 
in procuring a monument in New York, and 
having it erected at Auburn. On the whole, 
it was thought best that their remains should 
be undisturbed, since the effect on the semi- 
nary for years, perhaps ages, might be salu- 
tary ; and, we hope, more for the glory of 
God and the good of his cause, than the grat- 
ification of our selfishness. "We had the 
names of all the four inscribed, with their 
residences and ages." 

No one can read without interest the lively 
gratitude with which he speaks of the same 
trial, and its special results in his family, in 
the following letter : 

"My dear Nephew — By the good hand of 
our heavenly Father, we are permitted to 
commence the cares and labors of another 
year — 1838. The old year has passed ; and 
while one dearly beloved has been snatched 
from our circle, the rest remain under cir- 



THE FRUIT OF RIG-HTEOUSNESS. 163 

cumstances of mercy. "While our hearts often 
throb with deep emotion, in recollection of the 
unexpected and painful dispensation of Prov- 
idence towards us during the year just closed, 
we have still mercies remaining for which I 
desire to he devoutly thankful. "What are we 
sinners that we should he the recipients of 
any divine favors ? Yet, are not his mercies 
new every morning, and repeated every even- 
ing ? Shall we not, therefore, he humhled 
under his frowns, and thankful for remaining 
mercies ? Bless the Lord, my soul, and ail 
within me bless his holy name. 

" The paths of the Lord are often in deep 
waters. His counsels, how unfathomable ! 
The death of one son was a great trial to me ; 
but if, by the Holy Spirit, it has been spiritual 
life to the other, shall I not bow with humility 
to God's holy will, and rejoice that he is on 
the throne, and that ail things are ordered in 
infinite wisdom by him that cannot err V 

In the summer of 1838, Mr. Tuttle gratified 
his wish "to drop a tear over the grave of our 
dear lamented Parkhurst. I have thought it 
might be esteemed a parental duty," he writes 



164 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

to his brother, in July of that year ; " and yet, 
when there are so many calls for our means, 
I have sometimes reflected that the expense of 
the tour might be more appropriately applied." 
in October, he writes again to his brother; 
and the following extract from that letter will 

tell its own message : "I presume L gave 

you an account of our visit to Auburn. It was 
a pleasant, but, in some respects, a melancholy 
privilege. We found many tender and sym- 
pathizing friends. We visited the lake where 
our dear Parkhurst found a watery grave, and 
the place where his remains were interred ; 
but that kind voice, so grateful to a parent, 
was silent as the grave : no reciprocation of 
feeling, no response to the falling tear. But, 
blessed be God, we were sustained through 
all the thrilling feelings the occasion was cal- 
culated to inspire. It was enough for us to 
see the hand of God in the dispensation, to be 
humbled under it, and to be still and know 
that he is God. Though we mourned, it was 
not without hope. If his immortal spirit has 
entered the pure abode of heaven, why should 
we wish him back in this world of suffering, 



THE FRUIT OF RIGHTEOUSNESS. 165 

care, and sin ? However much he lovea his 
friends on earth, were there not dearer friends 
in heaven ? I think I do pray and desire that 
the painful dispensation may be sanctified for 
the spiritual and eternal good of all his sur- 
viving friends." 

In December, 1838, he writes to his 
brother, among other things, that "the news 
of the explosion of the General Brown, on the 
Mississippi river, reached Newark last week. 
Two of our esteemed young men of this city 
were among the thirty or forty who were hur- 
ried into eternity without a moment's notice. 
# # # The melancholy occurrence has created 
much sensibility in this city. Oh, how brittle 
a thread is human life ; how liable to break 
at an hour least expected ! How forcibly does 
this speak to the young, yea, to all ages, to be 
in readiness for the coming of the Son of man. 
It has keenly reminded us of the sudden 
and painful exit of our dear Parkhurst a 
year and a half ago. The will of the Lord 
is done, and blessed are surviving friends un- 
der such painful dispensations if they can 
acquiesce, and with the Psalmist say, 'I was 



1G6 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

a weaned child, even as a child weaned of its 
mother.' " 

This chapter may be closed appropriately, 
with an extract from a letter to his nephew r , in 
July, 1839, at that time a member of the 

Auburn Theological Seminary : " Dear L , 

though absent, I often think of you, and, I 
hope, try to commend you to the guidance and 
care of that Providence which suffers not a 
sparrow to fall without his notice. I have no 
doubt you feel that you are now attaining a 
very important and eventful era of life. If 
spared a little longer, you anticipate the pleas- 
ure of becoming a herald of the cross, and an 
ambassador of Christ ; and in this, you may 
judge how cordially your friends unite. Your 
course of preparation thus far, has been by no 
insignificant means, and I trust they have not 
been misimproved. To be a gospel minister is 
a great attainment ; and next to vital god- 
liness and sound discretion, a thorough mental 
preparation is of the highest importance. A 
very familiar acquaintance with the whole 
tenor of Scripture, as well as a sound ortho- 
doxy, ought not to be neglected. A great 



THE FRUIT OF RIGHTEOUSNE SS. 167 

display of oratorical power seems to me un- 
desirable in the meek and humble follower of 
the Saviour ; the minister ought always to be 
behind the cross. Plain, practical truth, in- 
stead of a pompous display of words, should 
be prominent in discourses from the sacred 
desk. But there is such a great variety in the 
tastes of hearers, that I am not surprised that 
even great and good men tremble when they 
attempt to speak to their fellow-sinners. The 
labors of a gospel minister are very arduous. 
The apostle seemed to view them so when he 
exclaimed, ' Who is sufficient for these things V 
And I have no doubt every devoted minister 
feels his constant need of divine influence to 
direct, uphold, and cheer, amidst the dis- 
couragements and trials which he must en- 
counter. Had dear Parkhurst lived and grad- 
uated this fall, a father's anxieties, as well 
as pleasures, would have been augmented. 
But it pleased Grod to order otherwise. While 
I still feel the pang of separation, I desire to 
be humble and submissive. I trust he truly 
loved the Saviour, and that now he rejoices in 
his smiles— his faith swallowed up in vision ; 



168. WILLIAM TLTTTLE. 

and however dearly he loved his earthly 
friends ? no inducement could tempt him to 
leave the holy and happy society of heaven. 
He is gone a little before us ; he has escaped 
the tempestuous sea of manhood and riper 
years ; he has escaped much trial, much toil, 
•perhaps much persecution for righteousness' 
sake. Dear, beloved child, peace to thy mem- 
ory ; gratitude and love for all thy endearing 
virtues.' " 

From the time of Mr. Tuttle's experiencing 
this affliction, he acted as if he felt that his 
principal business w r as, to comfort the sorrow- 
ing, visit the w r idow and fatherless in their 
affliction, provoke the brethren to love and 
good w r orks, warn the impenitent, and in one 
word, to "watch for souls as they who must 
give account." The hallowed influence of 
that bereavement, to which he so often alluded, 
and the remembrance of which was tenderly 
cherished to the day of his death, was to be 
seen in his laborious visits of mercy, in his in- 
creased longings for heaven, in his meek and 
benevolent face, in his fervent prayers, and in 
every relation which brought him in contact 



THE FRUIT OF RIGHTEOUSNESS. 169 

with liis fellow-men. He was a proof of what 
the apostle has said: "Now no chastening 
for the present seemeth to be joyous, but 
grievous : nevertheless, afterward it yieldeth 
the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them 
which are exercised thereby." 



170 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 



CHAPTER XIX. 






THE SABBATH-SCHOOL AND BETHEL CHURCH. 
"Go ye out into the highways and hedges." 

For a number of years, Mr. Tuttle was either 
a teacher or superintendent in the Sabbath- 
school ; and his feelings concerning this great 
cause are well set forth, in an address which 
he made at a monthly concert of prayer for 
Sabbath-schools. 

"Is not the kingdom of Christ to be pro- 
moted and advanced by the instrumentality of 
Sabbath-schools ? Yes, verily. Next to the 
preaching of the gospel, I know of no means 
more destructive to Satan's kingdom, than 
well-regulated Sabbath-schools. Have we not 
seen, have we not heard, in a multitude of 
cases, of their transforming influence on the 
hearts of teachers and children ? Have we not 
heard of powerful revivals of religion haying 
their origin in Sabb ath- schools ? And what 
numbers, who now adorn the visible church of 



THE SABBATH-SCHOOL. 171 

Christ, and have become , or are becoming 
lively stones in the spiritual edifice, will ever 
remember with gratitude their Sabbath-school 
advantages, and reverence the name of Robert 
Raikcs the founder of the enterprise. 

"Were the object of Sabbath-schools limited 
to the simple idea of cultivating the minds of 
the thousands of the young and ignorant who 
swarm the streets of every village, town, and 
city, it would be a most worthy and important 
undertaking ; but when we connect with it 
the moral influence it is to exert in society, 
the magnitude of the object is greatly increas- 
ed. But these objects, however important in 
themselves, are as a mole-hill to a mountain 
when contrasted with the primary object of 
Sabbath-schools ; which is, to impress religious 
truth on the mind of the rising generation ; to 
make them acquainted with the divine require- 
ments ; to convince them that they are sinners, 
and totally depraved ; that they must repent 
and believe, and be regenerated by the Holy 
Spirit, or perish ; and that there is no other 
Saviour but the Lord Jesus Christ. To fit 
young immortals for usefulness in the church 



172 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

below, and for glory and blessedness in the 
church triumphant in heaven, is what good 
men in every age have desired to accomplish ; 
is what angels rejoice to witness; and is a 
most impressive echo of the prayer of our 
Saviour, ' Thy kingdom come.' 

"Now in this great and good work, you, 
my fellow-teachers, are engaged ; and in it you 
cannot "be engaged too actively and devoutly. 
Will you shrink from the delightful and hon- 
orable employment? "Will you repress your 
efforts to do good ? Are you willing to see the 
youth neglected, and again roaming the streets 
on the Sabbath ? I will anticipate your reply. 
I hear your unanimous resolve. i Nay, we will 
go forward, we will not relax our exertions ; 
having put our hand to the plough, we will not 
look back. It is a privilege as well as a duty, 
to be permitted to be coworkers for the king- 
dom and glory of our Redeemer on earth." 

These were not idle words with their author. 
He was a practical man, who strove to carry 
out his own suggestions ; but while thus 
actively engaged - in the Sabbath-school, he 
never relaxed for a moment his instructions 



BETHEL CHUKCH. 173 

at home. This sphere was his peculiarly ; and 
he never felt that his own family could be 
instructed adequately in the Sabbath-school, 
nor even from the pulpit, without his keeping 
in energetic operation the home-school. "What 
he did from principle, and with his might, for 
this, he did for every benevolent enterprise, 
at home and abroad. But there was one for 
which he had a very special interest. This 
will be shown by the following letter from the 
chaplain of the Bethel church in Newark. 

" My acquaintance with Mr. Tuttle com- 
menced in 1837, when he became a subscriber 
to the Bethel cause of twenty-five dollars a year. 
In 1838, I had occasionally an opportunity of 
some Christian conversation with him, which to 
me was always pleasant and profitable, as there 
was so much of that simplicity which charac- 
terizes the truly devoted follower of the Lord of 
life and glory. His religion was not that of the 
head or tongue merely, it was that of the heart ; 
it was Bible religion, as it is described in the 
thirteenth chapter of the first epistle to the Co- 
rinthians. I have often admired his counte- 
nance when telling of some good the Lord was 



174 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

doing here or there. It mattered not to him 
what denomination it was which was thus hon- 
ored of the Lord ; he could say with the apostle 
James, ' If any of you do err from the truth, 
and one convert him, let him know that he 
which converteth the sinner from the error of 
his way shall save a soul from death, and shall 
hide a multitude of sins. 5 

"In the year 1842, Mr. Tuttle aided in 
organizing a Bethel Union Society for the 
express purpose of providing for the support of 
the pastor of the Bethel church. He often 
encouraged me with his presence some part 
of the Sabbath, when he would be usually 
accompanied with one or two friends. In the 
absence of his own minister, he would so 
arrange often as to have me lecture on Thurs- 
day evening. These were refreshing seasons 
to me, from previous prayer and conversation 
at his own house, thus exhibiting to all around 
his Christian motto, i Peace be with all them 
who love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.' 
In this trait of his character, you will pardon 
me when I say, he was no sectarian, only in 
the sense in which every man ought to be ; 



THE BETHEL CHURCH. 175 

that is, he loved his own church, his own 
minister, his own people ; at the same time 
that he held out the right hand of fellowship 
to all, believing that the children of Grod were 
to he found in every church. 

" His willingness to do good I have often wit- 
nessed. "When I have related any tale of dis- 
tress which came under my observation, how 
cheerfully he would give me something to re- 
lieve their necessities ; and when he would pick 
up ten or twenty dollars for me, he would give it 
to me the same day, and hand it over with as 
much joy as one who had found great spoil. On 
Thanksgiving day, or New- Year's day, he was 
sure to make some provision for me ; if not other- 
wise, he would do it out of his own purse. 

" The close of his valuable life was marked by 
the same zeal in the Bethel cause, which had 
been so conspicuous in former years. By his 
death, I have lost a sincere, long-tried friend ; 
and the church, one of her brightest ornaments." 

Such is the testimony of a fellow-laborer in a 
most difficult and trying department of Chris- 
tian effort. " Blessed is that servant whom his 
Lord, when he cometh, shall find so doing." 



176 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

CHAPTER XX. 

'•BRETHREN, THE TIME IS SHORT. 
" For the shadows of the evening are stretched out." - 

"We have already seen that Mr. Tuttle was 
a severe economist of time in early life. These 
habits he maintained to the last. He was an 
early riser ; and we find that many of his epis- 
tles to his friends were written in the morn- 
ing by candlelight. As an editor and publisher 
of a political paper, he had as many cares as 
one man could well attend to. In addition to 
this, he had a bookstore, and transacted the 
notarial business of one of the banks in New- 
ark. And yet, with all these labors, such was 
his rigid husbandry of time, so perfectly did 
every thing arrange itself into a well-consid- 
ered system, that it was a rare occurrence 
that any business ever interfered with his 
attendance either at the weekly lecture or 
prayer-meeting. In the greatest press of busi- 
ness he managed to secure a little time every 



THE TIME IS SHOUT. 177 

week to step into some sick-room, or to make 
a visit of mercy to the afflicted. It is almost 
certain, that not many weeks during the last 
twenty years of his life passed, without his 
making some call as a Christian and an elder 
of the church, on some families which his cata- 
logue told him needed either comfort, exhor- 
tation, or prayer. It is the object of this chap- 
ter to trace out his abiding impression of the 
shortness of time, as manifested in his letters 
and conduct. As far back as 1832, he thus 
writes to his brother : 

" I think how soon our days will be num- 
bered and our spirits be in the eternal world, 
even should our span be lengthened out to 
threescore and ten ; which we have scarce a 
right to expect. How important that we im- 
prove the fleeting years, to fill up the measure 
of our days with usefulness and duty. * The 
night corneth, in which no man can work.' " 
And as if to show how practical his views 
were, he developes a plan to extricate a feeble 
church from debt, as that which must be pleas- 
ing to the Head of the church. 

As might have been expected, the death of 

Wm. Tuttle. 1 2 



178 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

his son produced a marked change in him ; 
and from that period we find him gradually 
closing up his business, in order that he might 
devote the principal part of his time to actual 
labor in the cause of Christ. By his economy, 
notwithstanding his never-ceasing liberality to 
every good cause, he had secured such a com- 
petence as was sufficient, he says, "to afford 
an economical living to the family, and at the 
same time contribute a little to the almost 
weekly calls of benevolence at our doors ;" 
and in 1840, he writes to one of his nephews, 
"I feel great reluctance to enter on new en- 
gagements calculated to incur debt ; but wish 
to keep even with the world, owing no man 
any thing but love? After referring to some 
facts which had compelled him to step over 
this rule to aid a friend, he adds, " I advert to 
these matters, not to ' proclaim it on the house- 
top,' but merely that you may, in some meas- 
ure, appreciate my circumstances." He had 
thought his nephew might need assistance, 
although no application had been made to him 
for it. He continues his letter to this young 
man in the following kindly strain: "I have 



THE TIME IS SHORT. 179 

teen pleased to hear from time to time of your 
advances in your collegiate course, and I ar- 
dently hope your learning will be for the glory 
of G-od and the salvation of souls. Though I 
intimated at the outset of your studies, that 
perhaps your age might render it inexpedient 
to commence a course of education with the 
ministry in view, yet after you resolved to do 
it as a duty, my feelings have he en kind to the 
object, and I have all along participated with 
other friends in the hopeful prospect that with 
the blessing of G-od you would at some future 
time be inducted into the ministry of the gos- 
pel of Christ. I am now rejoiced that with 
your economy, diligence, and partial assist- 
ance, you are so soon to terminate your col- 
legiate course, and with so little pecuniary 
embarrassment. The result demonstrates how 
much more can be accomplished by young men 
of enterprise and economical habits, than they 
themselves anticipate. At this point let your 
Ebenezer be erected to the Lord. * * * In 
order to do what I desired for - — -, I have 
denied myself many indulgences ; many things 
in the family, needful, but not absolutely ne- 



180 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

cessary, to keep myself from being embarrass- 
ed. ' The muck-rake* has "been kept too stead- 
ily in operation, until I am nearly sixty years 
old ; and advancing age reminds me to retire 
as much as possible from the cares and busi- 
ness of the world." 

It is very plain from this letter, that its 
author felt that the "shadows of the evening 
were stretched out," warning him that sunset 
was near. "W hen he spoke of his being tired 
of his " muck-rake, " although condemning 
himself as an unprofitable servant, lie could not 
truthfully have carried out Bunyan's homely 
but expressive figure of the man ever whose 
head there stood one "with a ^celestial crown 
in his hand, and proffered him that crown for 
his muck-rake ; but the man did neither look 
up nor regard, but raked to himself the straws 
and small sticks and dust of the floor." Prov- 
idence in a very marked manner had assigned 
him a position of usefulness, a part of which 
was "to rake up the straws and sticks and 
dust of the floor ;" not to prefer them to the 
proffered crown, but because in their proper 
place they are the good man's instrument for 



THE TIME IS SHORT. 181 

advancing the glory of Grocl. He used that 
muck-rake assiduously, hut as a duty to God ; 
and when duty to his Master permitted it, he 
joyfully laid it down to engage in more con- 
genial employments. 

In 1841, he writes to his brother, ""With 
my advancing age, I am. often reminded of the 
exclamation of the apostle, < Brethren, the time 
is short ;' and I feel increasingly the obligations 
I am under to Gfocl to fill up the remainder 
of life with usefulness and duty." 

Notwithstanding; his low estimate of his own 
improvement of time in visiting the members 
of the church and others, there is evidence that 
his labors were very abundant, even at that 
time ; and they became gradually much more 
so, until his death. 

In 1843, he writes, " Verily it is of the Lord's 
mercies that we live- — live under the light of the 
gospel, and have in prospect the joys of an im- 
mortal crown, where sin and sorrow shall no 
more obtrude, and where Christian friends meet, 
to part no more for ever. As age and infirmities 
advance on us, I am often reminded of the dec- 
laration of the apostle, ' Brethren, the time is 



182 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

short ;' and of the great importance of having 
our lamps trimmed and our lights burning." 

In December, 1844, Mr. Tuttle addressed a 
letter to the Hon. Henry Clay on the occasion 
of his defeat at the presidential election, then 
just passed. The allusions to Mr. Clay's early 
history, etc., although well-timed, are not to our 
present purpose hi referring to the correspond- 
ence ; but otlier parts of it are more general, 
and at the same time eminently Christian in 
spirit, ,and may be here selected without im- 
propriety. He says, " Shall we quarrel with 
Him whose providence is so extensive and 
minute that not a sparrow falls to the ground 
without his notice ? * * ! The Lord reigns : he 
can bring light out of darkness, order out of 
confusion." 

"With great deference the writer presents the 
interesting subject which more than all others 
occupied his mind. " In age you are ten years 
my senior ; and yet I am accosted by those 
around me as an old man. Certainly my earth- 
ly sun is far advanced toward the western ho- 
rizon ; and I cannot but feel the scriptural 
declaration, ' Brethren, the time is short.' To 



THE TIME IS SHORT. 183 

men of our age this must especially "be true. 
Most of the companions of my youth have 
already reached that "bourne whence no trav- 
eller returns. A new generation has taken their 
place. Can we refrain the plaintive inquiry, 
' Our fathers, where are they ?' Under such 
impressions, when age is causing i the almond- 
tree to flourish,' and bodily infirmities admonish 
us that the ardor of youth is gone, is it not pleas- 
ant to retire to our own homes, there to spend 
what remains of life in pursuits adapted to our 
condition and anticipations ? * * * * And in the 
day when the keepers of the house shall trem- 
ble, the strong men shall bow themselves, and 
the pitcher shall be broken at the fountain, may 
your end be peaceful, and may it be your un- 
speakable happiness to receive the greeting, 
1 Well done, good and faithful servant; enter 
thou into the joy of thy Lord.' " 

To this letter Mr. Clay sent the following 
reply : 

"Ashland, December 31, 1844. 

"■Dear Sir— I tender you my cordial thanks 
for your friendly letter. The topics of consola- 
tion for my recent defeat in the presidential 



184 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

election, are kindly selected by you, and are 
entitled to great weight. ' But my personal con- 
cern in the event does not deserve much consid- 
eration. Our solicitude should he for our country ; 
and I sincerely hope that its honor, its peace^ 
and its prosperity may not he affected by it. 

"Your interesting letter is worthy of a much 
longer reply than I am able to transmit ; but 
such continues to be the oppressive extent of 
my correspondence that I am constrained to be 
very brief. I cannot conclude, however, with- 
out cordially reciprocating all your friendly 
wishes for my welfare and happiness here and 
hereafter. 

"Your friend and obedient servant, 

<- H.CLAY." 

In 1845, he thus writes to his sister again : 
" We desire to record the mercies of our heav- 
enly Father, that so many of us are still spared ; 
but months and years are fast passing away ; 
the sun is descending towards the horizon ; we 
are getting along in the front ranks of those who 
are old, and our places must soon give place to 
another generation. Are we looking out for the 
coming of the Son of man, our lamps trimmed, 



THE TIME IS SHORT. 185 

and our lights burning ? Though now separat- 
ed by distance, if we are among the ransomed 
of the Lord, a few more rising and setting suns, 
a few more years of cares and toils, and the 
heavenly Canaan will burst into view— that 
' land of pure delight, where saints immortal 
reign;' whence tears and sighs and sin and 
separations are for ever banished." In another 
letter, he says, " Is it not our heavenly Father 
who has kept our eyes from tears, our feet from 
falling, and our souls from death? Yet the 
wheels of time are in rapid progress, hurrying 
us through our mortal state to our last account. 
Verily our years are as a tale that is told ; they 
fly quickly away. As we draw nearer the heav- 
enly Canaan, does our faith strengthen, and do 
our joys increase in the humble hope of the rest 
which remains for the people of God— of being 
with the Saviour, and that innumerable com- 
pany which no man can number, made white 
by the blood of the Lamb ? I often think of the 
admonition of the apostle, ' Brethren, the time 
is short.' And how important it is, to gird up 
the loins of our minds, and be in readiness for 
the Master's coming !" 



136 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

In his frequent letters, especially to his broth- 
er and sister at the West, it is remarkable how 
often he repeats the apostle's words, " Brethren, 
the time is short. 5 ' It was a becoming motto 
to one who wished to be in readiness for the 
Master's cominsr. 



HIS DECEASE. 187 

CHAPTER XXI. 

"AND HE WAS NOT, FOR GOD TOOK HIM.' 
"Tell me, my soul, can this be death?" 

Mr. Tuttle's diary extends to the Saturday 
previous to his death, which occurred on Mon- 
day, February 22, 1847, at the age of 65 years 
and six months. Amons: these records are to 
be found the names of widows, of the poor, the 
sorrowing, the careless, the aged ; and almost 
every day has some testimony that he was 
feeding the flock of which he was an under- 
shepherd. It will be pleasing to extract a few 
of these records : " February 11. Yisited Mrs. 
and Miss — — , about to remove to New York. 
Also called on widow — . Conversed with 
her and her daughter-in-law. Also on Mrs. 
— — and her mother-in-law. Also on Mrs. 
— — -. After conversation, closed with prayer. 

I also called on -, whose wife is a member. 

Found his mind in quite an interesting state ; 
willing to talk on the subject of religion ; con- 



188 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

versed and prayed with him." " February 13. 
Called on widow — - — , and spent some time 
with her and her mother. Closed with prayer." 
"February 19. This evening met Mr. — — ; 
had conversation with him ; entreated him and 
his wife no longer to 'halt between two 
opinions.'" "February 20. Called on - — — , 
and had a general conversation with him. 
Also on Mrs. — — , who is unwell, -and has 
recently buried her youngest child. Tried to 
impress on her the duties of a holy and Chris- 
tian life." 

A meeting was held at the house of Mr. 
Tuttle on the Saturday previous to his death, 
to raise the balance due the chaplain of the 
Bethel church. As some few dollars were 
needed in addition to the collection made at 
that meeting, on Monday he was engaged in 
this work ; and the money thus collected was 
carefully rolled up in a piece of paper, marked, 
"Bethel Church." This was found in his 
pocket that evening after death had done its 
work. 

It now remains to give an account of his 
death ; and this will be done by transcribing 



HIS DECEASE. 189 

the letter of Mr. Uzal J. Tuttle of Newark, to 
Rev. Jacob Tuttle of Columbus, 0. 

a Dear Brother— I have to tell you sad news, 
which will cause your heart to bleed with ours — 
news which has come upon us like the light- 
ning's flash and rent our hearts to the very 
core ; and which will cause many hearts in the 
midst of us, not immediately connected with 
us, to mourn. Our dear brother, and, I may 
say, our father, is no more. Yes, brother 
William Tuttle is dead ! He has entered upon 
that rest that remaineth for the people of God, 
for which he ardently panted, and for which a 
well-spent life, a life filled up to the very last 
with industrious preparation for it, gave him, 
as he has often recently expressed it to me, 
an assured hope of his interest in an atoning 
Saviour. 

"On Monday, February 22, he was about 
his usual business, and engaged in various calls 
until about half-past four in the afternoon. He 
then went down Broad-street ; and when on 
the corner of Broad and Market streets, stopped 
and looked in different directions for his horse 
and sleigh, which a young boy had taken for a 



190 ' WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

ride. Standing there only a minute or two, 
he spoke to one of his Sabbath-school scholars 
passing along ; which was probably the last 
word he ever spoke. Then turning to go home, 
it is supposed that he felt suddenly unwell, 
and made an effort to get into the store on the 
corner, but fell on the door- step, and instantly 
expired. Physicians were immediately called, 
but could render no assistance ; and his body 
was taken to his dwelling amid the tears of 
surviving friends, and a sorrowing community. 
His disease was undoubtedly apoplexy ; of 
which he had had some symptoms, but of no 
serious nature as was supposed. But he haSs 
gone. "We can but remember his many virtues, 
and take the consolations which religion affords, 
and wait with patience until our change come. 
* * * But my heart is too full, to add any 
more at present. Still the thought recurs, that 
before you read these lines the clods of the 
valley will be pressing that heart, whose pul- 
sations through life beat only to do good, and 
whose warm benevolence Ave have so often 
experienced." 

It was not an unfitting death ; nor, to one 



HIS DECEASE. 191 

so well prepared, was it an undesirable way 
of passing through the dark valley. "The 
heavenly Canaan had burst suddenly into 
view." Yigorous, active, and on duty, the 
curtain which separated him from heaven was 
suddenly drawn aside, and he was at home. 
There was no horror of great darkness, no 
sinking of soul, no trembling before 'the last 
enemy, death. 5 It was as though God had 
sent sweet sleep upon his servant ; and when 
he awoke, it was in heaven. "Let me die the 
death of the righteous, and let my last end be 
like his." 

Such was the life, and such the usefulness, 
the peace, and the translation of a humble, 
unpretending, yet most highly-honored servant 
of G-od. Is it too much to suppose, that the 
gorgeous imaginings of John Bunyan were 
realized by this ascending Christian ? " These 
trumpeters saluted Christian and his fellow 
with ten thousand welcomes from the world ; 
and this they did, with shouting and sound of 
the trumpet. This done, they compassed them 
round on every side ; some went before and 
some behind, and some on the right hand and 



192 WILLIAM TUTTLE. 

some on the left ; continually sounding as they 
went, with melodious noise, in notes on high, 
so that the very sight was, to them that could 
behold it, as if heaven itself had come down 
to meet them. * * * Thus I heard in my dream 
that all the bells in the city rang again for joy, 
and that it was said unto them, Enter ye 
into the joy of our Lord. I also heard the 
men themselves, that they sang with a loud 
voice, saying, Blessing, and honor, and glory, 
and power, be unto Him that sitteth upon 
the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and 
ever /" 



NOV 9 1900 



