
MEMOIR 



AMELIA S. CHAPMAN. 




MEMOI R 

OF 

AMELIA S. CHAPMAN. 



BY REV. ISAAC PARSONS. 




PUBLISHED BY THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 
150 Nassau Street, New-York. 



MEMOIR OF AMELIA S. CHAPMAN. 



CHAPTER L 

Her early childhood — Obedience to her parents— Docility, 

mildness ) and amiahleness of disposition — Early advan- 
tages. 

Amelia Strong Chapman was the daughter of 

o 

Samuel and Rachel Chapman, and was born at 
East Haddam, Connecticut, July 13, 1818. Her 
parents were both professors of religion, and ex- 
emplary in their conduct, as visible believers. 
Amelia was their third child. An elder sister and 
brother gave evidence of piety before her, and 
united with the church of Christ, and became com- 
mendable examples of filial duty. 

God often permits pious parents to witness en- 
couraging results of their labors and prayers in 
behalf of their children even in this life. These 
parents found the Lord very gracious to them in 
this respect, while laboring to train up their chil- 
dren in the way they should go. The early educa- 
tion of their children, both for this life and that to 
come, engaged from the first their united and per- 
severing efforts* 



MEMOIR OF 



There was nothing uncommonly remarkable in 
Amelia's childhood. She early manifested a do- 
cile temper. She was, from a very little child, 
obedient to her parents ; and had an uncommonly 
pleasant and mild disposition. At the common 
school she was carried through the elementary 
branches of instruction. Her progress in know- 
ledge was commendable — it showed a well-bal- 
anced mind and powers susceptible of almost any 
degree of cultivation. 

At an early age Amelia was enrolled as a mem- 
ber of the Sabbath-school. She went regularly from 
year to year ; her attendance w r as cheerful, and her 
lessons regularly studied and well recited, even 
when a small child. The instruction she here re- 
ceived in five years, from the age of seven to twelve, 
proved an important help to Amelia in her reli- 
gious education. She was early convinced of the 
importance of religion, and a respect was excited 
in her mind for the Bible as the word of God, and 
for the Sabbath as the Lord's day, so that she did 
not trifle with the means of grace as some children 
are left to do, who are without proper early in- 
struction and restraint. Her behavior in time of re- 
ligious worship, even in childhood, was respectful, 
and in the Sabbath-school her amiable and good con- 
duct always procured her the love of the teachers. 

She was a member of the Sabbath-school at the 
time of her hopeful conversion, and continued a 



AMELIA S. CHAPMAN. 



5 



pupil for several years afterwards. She chose to 
remain a scholar even after she was considered 
competent to be a teacher. 

After leaving the common school, Amelia was 
placed in the grammar-school. Her parents gave 
her the best advantages they could in their circum- 
stances, that by her education she might be quali- 
fied to be useful, and she was taught to seek know- 
ledge for this purpose. 

While a member of the grammar-school she ex- 
celled in propriety of behavior, and became well 
versed in the common and some of the highest 
branches of an English education. Her amiable- 
ness and kindness won the affection of her teachers 
and schoolmates ; and her influence as a member of 
the school was mild, affectionate, and conciliatory. 



CHAPTER IT. 

Her conversion — and union to the visible Church. 

The means of grace in Amelia's life are not 
known to have been attended with any lasting, 
serious impressions, till she had entered on her 
thirteenth year. In the spring of 1831, while a 
member of the grammar-school taught by a pious 
instructress, Amelia's mind became deeply in- 
terested in the subject of personal religion. 



6 



MEMOIR OF 



There was a solemnity on the minds of several 
of the scholars. The teacher labored very faith- 
fully for their spiritual good. She availed herself 
of opportunities to converse privately with indivi- 
duals, on their state as sinners, their obligations to 
God, the necessity of repentance, and the impor- 
tance of being at peace with him : and she affec- 
tionately exhorted them to choose Christ for their 
Savior, and become interested in his salvation 
while young. 

The prayers and labors of her teacher were 
blessed to Amelia. Her religious impressions were 
deepened, her mind rendered more solemn ; she 
read her Bible, reflected on her past life, and saw 
that she had not obeyed her Savior, nor given her 
heart to him. Her sins seemed to be set in order 
before her ; she was deeply sensible of her guilt 
and ruin, and danger. 

She saw her need of a Savior, yet she could not 
see how to repent, nor how to go to Christ. She 
was told that she must repent or perish, that she 
must believe on Christ, or die in her sins : she as- 
sented to these truths as taught in the Bible, she 
acknowedged her duty, still she remained under 
sin, in distress in view of her condition, without 
any sensible relief. 

Such was her state for several weeks ; at times 
very much affected in view of her ruin, almost in 
despair ; and again at times her impressions seemed 



AMELIA S. CHAPMAN. 



7 



to be wearing off. She was remembered in the 
prayers of her teacher, and the few christian friends 
who were acquainted with her case. 

At length, as there is abundant evidence, she 
gave her heart to God. Her feelings were new, 
her views were different, her difficulties were re- 
moved, and her burden of distress gone. The way 
of salvation now appeared suited to her condition : 
it seemed easy to love God, to trust in Christ, and 
to repent of her sins ; and it was matter of sur- 
prise that she had not had these views and these 
feelings before. Instead*of finding it hard to love 
God, she wondered that she could have lived so 
long without loving him. She in vain attempted to 
recall her anxiety and distress of mind : she could 
not but feel happy in God, and rejoiced to commit 
her soul and all her interests to him for time and 
eternity. She saw that he would be just to cast her 
off, but saw his excellency and glory ; and felt that 
he was worthy of her love, and that she must love 
and praise him for ever. His character seemed to 
engross her affections, and she rejoiced in that won- 
derful plan of redemption, whereby he can be just 
and yet justify the sinner that believeth in Jesus. 
It is not possible now to recall all the distinct exer- 
cises of her mind. They were such as induced her 
to hope, and her friends also to hope for her, that 
she had passed from death unto life. That hope 
she continued to cherish, and the change became 



3 



MEMOIR OF 



more manifest in the effects in her suosequent 
character and conduct. Though she was but a 
child, her walk would have been commendable in 
one of riper years. The advantages of early re- 
ligious instruction were very apparent in the pro- 
gress of her new life as a child of God. In about 
five months from the period of her hopeful conver- 
sion she was received to communion in the church 
of God in East Haddam, when a little more than 
13 years old. Her parents at first advised her to 
wait a while lonsrer, fearing that she misrht not act 
understanding^ in so solemn a transaction ; but she 
felt it to be a duty and a privilege to enter into 
covenant with God ; and with the consent of her 
parents she went forward. She regarded the trans- 
action as a very solemn one, yet she never regret- 
ted that she thus early in life joined herself to the 
people of God. The sacramental ordinance of the 
Lord's supper had a most happy influence on her 
piety. The solemnity of entering into covenant with 
God and his church was very affecting to her feel- 
ings; the impression on her mind was deep that she 
had much to do in fulfilling the covenant obligations 
she had in this public manner taken on herself. 



AMELIA S. CHAPMAN. 



9 



CHAPTER III. 

Character of her Piety. 

As a member of the visible church, Amelia felt 
in some good degree the importance of sustaining 
a holy character in her manner of life ; and such 
was her consistency, that her impenitent and irre- 
ligious acquaintance all believed her sincere in her 
religion. Her natural amiableness, under the grace 
of God, rendered her piety peculiarly lovely. There 
was nothing repulsive, austere, or harsh in Amelia's 
christian walk. In school she lost nothing of the 
affection and respect of her school-mates. The law 
of kindness, written on her heart, restrained also 
her speech ; and she studied to recommend religion 
to her youthful associates. When any of these 
were about to leave the school, not expecting to 
return to be again connected with it, if she had 
been intimate with them, she would frequently ad- 
dress to them parting notes as little remembrances 
of her affection. The following extracts are from 
such notes, 

" My Dear L , We have been permitted to 

meet in this present world, and have spent many 
happy hours in that beloved school-room ; but the 
hour has now come when we must bid each other 



10 



MEMOIR OF 



adieu, perhaps never more to meet In this vale of 
tears. Should it be so, let us trust in the hope 
of meeting in a brighter, better world than this. 
Think you that friends who have long been sepa- 
rated will not recognize each other ] — What a 

•ZD 

meeting ! — There is no separation there ! 

Your friend, Amelia/' 

lt My Dear J , Soon we are to be separated : 

perhaps for time and eternity. Almost a year has 
rolled over our heads since we first met. Another 
y ear — ail d where are we 1 — Perhaps one or both of 
us in the regions of immortality ! That you may ever 
live in a state of preparaVon to meet death, the king 
of terrors, is the sincere wish of you friend, 

?c Amelia." 

Her religion was that of the heart and closet. 
She had been instructed in the duty of secret prayer 
from early childhood, but she did not know the 
privilege of secret prayer and its blessedness tVl 
aftqr her conversion. As a Christian she was re- 
gular and persevering in its performance : her most 
intimate religious friends testify, that it was her 
practice to retire regularly for secret devotion. Her 
fidelity in this duty may serve to account for her 
consistency in attendance on other duties. De- 
clension in religion generally begins in the closet, 
and Christians are drawn away from God in their 



AMELIA S. CHAPMAN. 



11 



affections, and from their secret communion with 
God, before declension becomes visible in other 
duties. 

The Bible was her daily companion. It was her 
practice to read it through in course, once in each 
year ; the devotional parts she read oftener, as she 
was able. The Bible was the book with her, in dis- 
tinction from all others, as containing the revealed 
will of God and the way of salvation. She respect- 
ed all the appointed means of grace and the posi- 
tive institutions of religion. 

She was strict in her observance of the Sabbath, 
and attendance on public worship. She did not 
forget the Sabbath nor her obligations to the Lord 
of The Sabbath, when residing from home, or among 
strangers, or in company with the irreligious. It 
was remarked by some of her acquaintance, that 
they never knew so young a person so uniformly 
strict in the observance of the Sabbath. 

She was early instructed in sacred music, and had 
naturally a taste for it, as well as a fine voice. She 
of course took great delight in that part of devotion 
which is appropriately denominated frwse. 

She was an attentive hearer of the word when 
preached, and usually wrote down after service 
the heads of discourse and leading thoughts, so far 
as she remembered them. This practice tended to 
promote, in her the habit of strict attention to pub- 
lic preaching, and contributed also to her profiting 



12 



MEMOIR OP 



from what she heard. She regarded the Sabbath 
as sacred to the worship of God in distinction from 
the other days of the week, and yet she delighted 
in the occasional religious meetings of other days, 
and was found in them when favored with oppor- 
tunities for attending-. 

Her piety was manifest in her attachment to the 
people of God, and to the benevolent institutions of 
the age for extending the church of God in the 
world. I never knew her indifferent to the claims 
of any object of benevolence that was presented 
as worthy of patronage. She loved to cast in her 
mite to the varied religious charities of the ase. 
The Tract cause, the cause of Sunday Schools, tho 
Missionary cause, and Bible cause are kindred en- 
terprises which she loved, as they stand connected 
with the welfare of souls and the enlargement of 
the kingdom of Christ on earth. She was never 
prone to spend any thing superfluously for dress or 
for toys, but her savings were kept for better uses, 
and they were cheerfully devoted in the cause of 
well doing. 

Though young, she was made a Collector in two 
successive years in the Female Tract Society of 
East Haddam. She performed the duty cheerful- 
ly and very faithfully ; but this society has oppo- 
sers as well as other benevolent institutions, and 
Amelia met with opposition while she persevering- 
ly urged its claims. 



AMELIA S. CHAPMAN'. 



13 



To one who objected to contributing any thing 
and spoke lightly of the cause, she said, when about 
to go from the house, ct Did you know, that the 
little you might give would be instrumental in sav- 
ing one soul, would you not give ¥' She took her 
leave, when the objector called her back and said, 
,f I will give you a little, because you have begged 
so handsomely, not because I think well of the 
cause." On reaching home and relating the cir- 
cumstance in the family, she wept, and being 
asked, ?? Why do you weep, Amelia 1" cc I weep," 
said she, •* that so much indifference should be 
manifested in a Christian land," 

To another, who plead poverty as an excuse for 
not contributing, she said, ft If you cannot bestow 
your alms you certainly can give your prayers, and 
those, if presented in faith, will be beard and ac- 
cepted." The extension of the Gospel and the 
salvation of sinners were precious in her estima- 
tion. 

Her education had been conducted with a view 
to her usefulness. She thought much of becoming 
a teacher. She was fond of children, and looked 
forward with delight to the time when she might 
enter on some humble sphere of usefulness in this 
employment. Before she was seventeen years old, 
in the spring of 1835, she was employed as a teach- 
er in a school in Deep River, in the town of Say- 
brook She was much respected as a teacher, and 



14 



MEMOIR OF 



is still remembered with affection by her pupils 
and acquaintance in that place. 



CHAPTER IV. 

Her growth in grace. 

There was manifestly a growing conformity to 
the will of God in the heart and life of this young 
Christian. As she increased in years her piety 
seemed to mature. Though not at all times equal- 
ly devoted, yet she was never known in the indis- 
cretions of her youth and inexperience, to fall into 
any gross improprieties of conduct. In the early 
part of her christian life she felt restraint, on ac- 
count of her youth, in introducing religious conver- 
sation with persons older than herself, and to whom 
she looked for example ; still she often spake to 
her associates in age, as many of them have testi- 
fied since her death. Such as were hopefully pious 
were her most intimate companions. 

In the close of the year 1834 one of her christian 
companions died who had gained hope of an inte- 
rest in Christ about the same time with Amelia, 
and public!)' professed religion with her. The 



AMELIA. S. CHAPMAN. 



15 



death of this friend was uncommonly peaceful and 
triumphant. Amelia visited her repeatedly in her 
sickness, and heard from her own lips the precious- 
Bess of her Redeemer, and her happiness in the near 
view of death. 

This providence led Amelia to contemplate her 
own death, and occasioned her to speak often of 
meetness for it. She seemed to be quickened in 
her graces, and very frequently spake of this friend 
and visited her grave. {t -Never shall I forget," 
says a friend, in a letter written since Amelia's 
death, ?t the tear that stole down her cheek, and 
the emotion which heaved her breast, while we 
were walking in the grave yard, and approached 
the grave of this friend she loved."* 

In the commencement of the year 1S36 Amelia 
appears to have renewed her covenant with God. 
and to have entered on a more spiritual manner of 
life. From this period, it is hardly to be supposed 
that, had she foreknown that she was on the last 
year of life, her manner of living would have been 
greatly different from what it was. 

She began a private journal with the year, in 
which she daily made some entry of a religious 
character, up to the time she was taken sick. It 
is an occasion of deep regret that the greater part 

* This friend was Susannah E. Bingham, whose Memoir 
is published by the American Sunday School Union. 



16 



MEMOIR OF 



of this journal was lost irrecoverably during her 
last sickness. Under dal e of January 1, 1836, she 
says in her journal : ft Another year has rolled over 
my head, and I yet remain the spared monument 
of G od's mercy. O that I, an unworthy worm of 
the dust, might feel and realize the importance of 
rightly improving time. I would now come to a 
solemn resolution, (the grace of God assisting me) 
to begin, with a ncio year, a new life." 

From this date she was more devoted and active 
in the cause of Christ. She expressed an increas- 
ing desire for the salvation of souls, and conversed 
more with the impenitent. In the course of the 
winter she spent several weeks on a visit at Deep 
River, where she had taught school the preceding 
summer. The people of Deep River were then en- 
joying a revival of religion. The visit was blessed 
to Amelia's spiritual good. She returned to East 
Haddam quickened in her religious affections, and 
strengthened in her purposes of holy living. 

She often wept in remembrance of her own sin- 
fulness and neglect of duty, even after she had made 
a public profession of religion. She mourned, also, 
over the state of the church, and conversed with 
individual members, and exhorted sinners, as she 
had opportunity, and it could be done with proprie- 
ty She seemed to feel and to act as if what she 
did for Christ and his cause must be done soon. 

Her conversations with individuals during this 



AMELIA S. CHAPMAN. 



17 



period will doubtless be remembered by them as 
testimonials of her piety, if they should not be 
blessed to their spiritual good. In the month of 
February she said to a friend, where shall we be 
next year at this time 1 perhaps in eternity." And 
to the same friend afterwards, a short time before 
she left home for the last time, " perhaps the next 
time we meet it will be in eternity." 

The following is from a letter she addressed to a 
friend and former school-mate about this period : 

*! Dear J . Will you forgive me for so long 

neglecting to answer your kind letter 1 I have not 
forgotten you, or ceased to think of her whom (if 
I know my own heart) I very much love. Per- 
haps you will inquire how I have been spending the 
winter. I will tell you. I calculated and expected 
last fall to teach school, but was disappointed ; and 
then concluded to attend school ; but disappoint- 
ment, fell destroyer of human happiness, again 
aimed his blow at me. Yet I could say, It is all 
right. Since it was the hand of my heavenly Fa- 
ther, I could bear it. I have spent four weeks at 
Deep River, where there is a revival of religion, 
and for two weeks I enjoyed the privilege of at- 
tending religious meetings every day. 

* Most of my companions, and a number of my 
scholars are subjects of the revival, and are now 
rejoicing in a Savior's love. O J , you may 



18 



MEMOIR OF 



imagine what my feelings were when they told 
me what they used to think of professors of reli- 
gion ! How awful beyond description, thought I, 
that those who profess to love and honor the Sa- 
vior should live in such a manner that sinners 
should stumble over them to endless perdition." 

It was peculiarly interesting to witness the en- 
gagedness and devotedness of this young disciple 
in the cause of her Redeemer. It seemed as if she 
could not again leave home without being permit- 
ted to sec another revival of religion in her native 
place. Her mind was very solemn, and the things 
of the unseen world evidently engrossed her 
thoughts, and she was looking beyond the bounda- 
ries of time to her home in heaven. 

God was doubtless thus preparing her for her 
early departure. At this period she seemed to 
delight more than ever in praise, and some of her 
favorite hymns she would sing often, sometimes 
alone, sometimes in company with her mother and 
sister. The character of these hymns shows the 
heavenly frame of her spirit and the subjects she 
loved to dwell upon ; and some of them are pecu- 
liarly appropriate to her state, when God saw that 
her end was near. One is the well known hymn, 

14 When I can read my title clear," 



AMELIA S. CIIATMAN. 



19 



The hymn for the evening twilight is another 
in which she delighted. 

" I love to steal a while awa) 

" From every cumb'ring care, 
" And spend the hours of setting day 

" In humble, grateful prayer." 

She would almost daily ask her sister to sing 
with her the following hymn, entitled, 

Death of a Christian. 

"Behold the western evening light, 

" It melts in deep'ning gloom — 
" So, calmly, Christians sink away, 

" Descending to the tomb. 

" The winds breathe low, the with' ring leaf 
"Scarce whispers from the tree — 

"So gently Hows the parting breath, 
" When good men cease to be. 

" How beautiful on all the hills 

" The crimson light is shed — 
" 'Tis like the peace the Christian gives 

" To mourners round his bed. 

" How rmldly on the wand'ring cloud 

" The sun- set beam is cast — 
" 'Tis like the memVy left behind, 

" When lov'd ones breathe their last. 

"And now above the dews of night, 
44 The yellow stai appears— 



go 



MEMOIR OF 



" So faith springs in the breast of those 
u Whose eyes are batlf d in tears. 

" But soon the morning's happier light, 

u Its glory shall restore— 
w And eye-lids that are seal'd in death, 

" Shall wake to close no more." 

Another hymn which she very frequently suncr 
with her sister at this time was the following- : 

" My days, my weeks, my months, my years, 
<: Fly rapid as the whirling spheres 

u Around the steady pole ; 
(t Time, like the tide, its motion keeps, 
"And I must launch through boundless deeps, 

u Where endless ages rolL 

" The grave is near the cradle seen, 
"How swift the moments pass between, 

" And whisper as they fly, 
" 1 Unthinking man ! remember this : 
" Thou, 'midst thy sublunary bliss, 

f< Must groan , and gasp, and die? 

" My soul, attend the solemn call, 

" Thine earthly tent must quickly fall, 

" And thou must take thy flight 
"Beyond the vast ethereal blue, 
" To love and sing as angels do, 

" Or sink in endless night" 

The following, from a letter to an impenitent 
friend, shows her progress in holy living, and her 
fidelity to those who she feared were perishing in 
sin. It is probably the last letter she ever wrote. 



AMELIA fcS. CHAPMAN. 



21 



" Will you excuse the boldness I use, and from 
a sincere friend who feels extremely anxious for 
your welfare in another world, receive in kindness 
a few lines % 

u I have for a few weeks past, been reflecting on 
my manner of life as a Christian. Often have I 
been led to make the inquiry, 1 What did I, four 
years since, solemnly promise, in the presence of 
God, angels, and men V and the answer is, r To be 
the Lord's for ever.' Yet my heart is sorely pained 
within me when I think that perhaps 1 have been 
the means of hindering others from entering the 
kingdom of heaven ! And is it possible that you 
are one of the number % Again and again you have 
been warned to flee the doom which awaits the 
impenitent, — but not by Amelia : Can you, will you 
forgive her, and no longer stumble over her imper- 
fections ; but take one friendly warning from her. 

M First allow me to ask you a few questions. 
Have you an interest in the blessed Savior % Have 
you repented of your sins 1 Have you evidence that 
your heart is changed 1 Tf not, where are you I 
Pause a moment and consider ! ontm um to w'alk 
in the broad way, you will at last plunge into the 
gulf of perdition." 

" Will you continue unmindful of God's threat- 
en in gts ; will you still cast off fear, and restrain 
prayer'? Will you longer be an enemy of God? 
Say not that there is time enough yet; this is one 



MEMOIR OF 



of Satan's suggestions to influence you to delay 
repentance ! Yield not to the temptation. Look 
forward to the hour of death — what will you then 
do without a Savior? No earthly friend can retain 
you here ! Nothing but darkness and deep despair, 
weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth, is the por 
lion of the sinner ! O flee this doom ! come now 
and accept offered mercy ! See the condescending 
Savior calling, inviting, entreating you to come and 
be saved ! O slight not his love ! The Holy Spirit 
has often been striving with you, and you, I fear, as 
often have resisted those strivings. Be careful how 
you trifle with God's Spirit. Accept now, offered 
mercy, lest he swear in his wrath, you shall not en- 
ter my rest. Amelia." 



CHAPTER V. 

Leaves home to engage in a school in Chester — her last 
sickness and death — testimonies to her worth. 

On the 30th of Ar>ril Amelia left her father's 

j- 

house, in company with her sister, to engage in 
teaching a school in the town of Chester. The two 
sisters were employed in two different schools, they 
were near each other, and they commenced their 



AMELIA S. CHAPMAN. 



13 



respective schools, happy in the prospect that they 
should be able to see each other often, and reci- 
procate each other's joys and sorrows. 

The small pox had mysteriously entered Ches- 
ter before these sisters went there, but it was not 
then known what the disease was, nor was it sup- 
posed to be contagious. It soon broke out in each 
of their schools; they were both exposed; the dis- 
ease spread rapidly in the place.; and at the end of 
three weeks Amelia, and, soon after, her sister also, 
were seized with it ; both sisters lay sick at the 
same time ; both their schools were broken up ; 
and a general alarm was excited among the inha- 
bitants, as it became certain that the epidemic was 
the small pox. The elder sister recovered, but the 
epidemic proved fatal in case of Amelia. 

At first it was trying to her to relinquish her 
school : she had just become acquainted with her 
pupils, had gained their affections, and began to be 
useful to them ; but to this trial she yielded with- 
out a murmuring word. She had also found a home 
in a christian family, in which she had become ac- 
quainted during her residence at Deep River in 
the preceding year. In this family she was loved 
and treated as a daughter, and here her piety and 

worth were duly appreciated. Mrs. L had an 

infant daughter, a few months old, which she 
named Amelia Chapman, in token of her respect 
for Amelia. 



* MEMOIR OF 

It was the practice of this family to sing, in con* 
nection with reading a portion of Scripture at fa- 
mily prayer, and also to spend a part of the Sab- 
bath in this exercise. This was a source of peculiar 
satisfaction to Amelia. The last hymn she was 
permitted to sing with them was the following, on 
Sabbath morning, May 22 : 



" There is an hour of peaceful rest 
" To mourning wanderers given ; 
" There is a tear for souls distress'd, 
" A balm for every wounded breast, 
" 'Tis found alone in heaven. 

" There is an hour for weary souls, 

" By sins and sorrows driven ; 
" When toss ; d on life's tempestuous shoals, 
" Where storms arise, and oceans roll, 
" And all is drear, but heaven. 

" There faith lifts up the tearless eye, 

" The heart with anguish riven; 
" It views the tempest passing by, 
" Sees evening shadows quickly fly, 
" And all serene in heaven. 

" There fragrant flowers immortal bloom, 

" And joys supreme are given ; 
" There rays divine disperse the gloom, 
" Beyond the dark and narrow tomb 
" Appears the dawn of heaven." 



On that Sabbath she was at church in the on- 



AMELIA S. CHAPMAN. 



25 



joyment of health, and with as fair prospects of life 
and usefulness as any young person in the circle of 
her acquaintance. She was taken sick on the fol- 
lowing day, and in less than two short weeks closed 
her eyes in death. 

Her character as exhibited in her sickness and 
death corresponded with that of her life; her resig- 
nation was calm and uncomplaining, and her confi- 
dence in God unshaken. Disease in a great measure 
unfitted her for conversation ; and on account of the 
alarm excited by its contagious nature, but few per- 
sons saw her, and these were such as were supposed 
to be exempt from liability to take it. Her physician 
also recommended that she should be kept as still 
as possible, that she should see little or no com- 
pany, and that she should not engage in conversa- 
tion more than was absolutely necessary. It was 
the privilege of her mother to be with her and ad- 
minister to her wants while sinking under disease. 

A week before her death she asked what day it 
was; and being told it was the Sabbath : fc Yes," 
she replied, (C the Lord's day. O best of days !" 

On hearing the family sing as usual, she said to 
her mother, u O how heavenly that music sounds ! 
Do open the door that 1 may hear it plainer ! Once 
I could raise my voice with them, I wish I could 
a^ain, but I cannot." 

To an impenitent member of the family, who 
came to her bedside, she said, cc Do assure me 



26 



MEMOIR OF 



A , that you will seek religion ; you need it 

now, you will need it on a dying bed." 

She frequently expressed a desire to see her fa- 
ther, brothers, and sister ; but when requested to 
make herself as easy as possible, and told that her 
tdckness was such that it was not prudent for her 
friends to see her, she replied, " I will, I will be 
resigned." 

On Thursday preceding her death, being in the 
possession of her reason, and perfectly composed, 
she asked her physician what he thought of her 
case, — whether he thought she should recover or not l 
He replied, cc Amelia, if the aid of your physician, 
and your friends can save you, you will live." She 
paused a moment, and said, - c "Well, I think I am 
willing to recover, and I am willing and feel ready to 
die, — -just as God shall be pleased to order respect- 
ing rne." 

On the Friday before her death she called her 
mother to her bed-side, and said, c? Those who 
wish to see me must come soon, for I can live but 
a short time." She then inquired for her sister, 
anxious to know how she was, and expressed a de- 
sire to see her a^ain. 

She also said, " I do want to see my father once 
more. I have no doubt I have his prayers, tell, 
tell him I hope to meet him in heaven." 

" Tell T 55 (this was a younger brother, for 

whom she had no hope that he was then a Chris- 



AMELIA. S. CHAPMAN*. 



27 



tian) " many a prayer have I offered for the salvation 
of his soul, I hope in sincerity and faith. I hope 
they may be answered. 

' c O. E , (this was her elder brother, residing in 

the State of Ohio,) I want to seehim, but I cannot." 
Being- asked if she knew where he was," O yes," 
she replied, t! he is in the western wilderness, un- 
der the protection of his Almighty Father and 
Friend." 

Mrs L. asked her if she had ever regretted that 
she came to Chester. She replied, " No. It is one 
of the mysteries of Providence, that I should come 
here to die." Mrs. L. remarked, " Amelia, we do 
not know how to spare you ; what will become of 
all the little children you have had the care of?" 
Said she, " God will take care of them — he can do 
far better for them than I can." 

Mrs. L. then brought her babe to the bed, and 
said, " what shall I do for this little one, Amelia V 
Amelia replied, t! bring her up for G od — train her 
for heaven." 

At times her sufferings were great, yet she could 
not bear to see others grieve for her. Seeing her 
mother weep, she said, " I am a poor sick girl, but 
mother, do not weep for me. I suffer; but what are 
these sufferings to what my Savior suffered for me ?" 

Sabbath morning, June 5, she evidently was fast 
failing She said to her mother, ct It will be but a 
little while." She seemed to feel that the hour of 



r 



*° MEMOIR OF 

her departure had come. It was with difficulty 
that she could speak audibly, but she raised her 
hands and exclaimed— rt Come, Lord Jesus, O 

come quickly, and receive me to thyself— take me 

take me, O take me quick, quick, quick." 

With this effort she sunk down apparently ex- 
hausted, yet continued to breathe and to utter 
words, but with such indistinctness that but very 
little could be understood. At length, about 11 
o'clock A. M. without a struggle or a groan, her 
happy spirit gained its release. 

Her mortal body, in the evening of the Sabbath, 
was conveyed to East Haddam, and interred in her 
native village in the silence of the dead of niffht 
unattended by any religious solemnities. Some im- 
provement was afterwards made of the providence, 
in a sermon from the words, M The one shall be ta- 
ken, and the other left." Matt. 24 : 40. 

Thus closed the mortal life of this lovely youth 
and amiable christian, in the eighteenth year of her 
age. "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the 
death of his saints." 



The people of Chester were in a state to receive 
impression from this providence. The epidemic 
was prevailing among them. Fifty or sixty were 
reported as on the sick list when this death occur- 



i 



AMELIA S. CHAPMAN. 



29 



red. It was unexpected to most, and it excited a 
general sympathy and solemnity. We do not know 
that it was the means of awakening any souls, but 
some have said they thought her death was sancti- 
fied to their good. It was the only instance in which 
the epidemic proved fatal. 

A little boy in the family where Amelia resided, 
when told that she was dead, said, cc Then she will 
never talk to us any more about good things. She 
used to talk to us a great deal, and now I will re- 
member what she said." Another little boy said 
to his mother, Cf Our teacher prayed in school — she 
prayed for us, and now I will pray too." 

Some of her impenitent acquaintance were heard 
to remark that, were they as well prepared for 
death as they thought she was, they should not wish 
to live longer. The young people of Deep River, 
where she had taught school the summer before, 
addressed a note to her parents in testimony of 
their respect for her worth, and expressive of their 
sympathy with them in their bereavement. 

Mr. L. at whose house she died, wrote as follows 
to her parents : 

" Sabbath, June 12. 
IC Dear and afflicted Friends, — It is one week 
to-day since we paid the last office of kindness to 
the remains of the once beloved Amelia. I have 
spent much of this day in calling to mind our inter- 



30 



MEMOIR OF 



views, our devotions around the family altar, and 
our public opportunities in the sanctuary — and when 
I reflect that these are closed up for eternity, my 
heart swells with emotions of grief. I do not express 
my feelings to call up your parental sympathies, but 
I imagine you are often speaking one to the othei 
of Amelia, and mourning with holy resignation 
Permit me to mingle my sympathies with yours — 
it is the law of nature and religion. I do not wish 
her memory to be eradicated from my mind — I 
will cherish it to stimulate to perseverance in holi- 
ness, that our songs may again mingle in praising 
redeeming love. 

"When we sang this morning at our family devo- 
tions I fondly thought of Amelia's cognizance of 
our worship. Three weeks ago this morning we 
together sang many hymns, and I believe the last 
she was heard to sing was, 

1 There is an hour of peaceful rest/ &c. 

" I have often thought it strange that I took so 
deep an interest in Amelia. She seemed to me 
like a child. I advised her as such when I thought 
it necessary. But the hand of Providence was in 
it ; and may the God of grace assist me in improv- 
ing the dispensation to his honor and glory, and 
the good of my own soul. 

" Let God be praised for trials. If no trials 
awaited us here, we should not appreciate that 



AMELIA S. CHAPMAN". 



31 



world of rest, where there shall be no sighing, nor 
sorrow, nor fear of separation ; and where, if we 
should at last arrive, we no doubt shall praise God 
for this dispensation of his providence, which now 
causes our hearts to bleed. 

" Mrs. L unites in sympathy and love. 

-Yours, L 



CHAPTER VI. 

Closing remarks. 

In the life of this young Christian the reader is 
furnished with, 

L A lovely exhibition of a Christian spirit. Very 
many, and especially the young, are prejudiced 
against religion, as if it would deprive them of all 
happiness in this life, and render them less worthy 
of the affection and respect of their friends and 
acquaintance. But early piety, instead of lessen- 
ing the happiness of the young, is the only true 
source of happiness. There is no natural endow- 
ment which does not receive embellishment from 
the grace of God, and there is no young person, 
whether in affluence or poverty, in more or less 
favorable circumstances for enjoyment, that is 
without religion, who would not be vastly happier 
with it. Let then the example of youthful piety 



AMELIA S. CHAPMAN. 



contained in the preceding sketch, commend the 
religion of Jesus Christ to the attention and choice 
of the young reader. This religion abounds in 
sources of consolation for all who embrace it, and 
its influence on the character and life of its pos- 
sessor is altogether lovely and desirable. 

2. It is a great 'privilege for children to have Chris- 
tian -parents. Parents sustain a very important re- 
lation to children — a relation which gives them u 
controlling influence in forming their early reli- 
gious habits. Those children that have praying 
parents, who instruct them in their duty, and re- 
strain and govern them, and train them up in the 
way they should go, are under great obligations 
of thankfulness to God for giving them such pa- 
rents. 

The early education of Amelia was a restraint to 
her in childhood, when a wanderer from God in 
the way to death, and it prepared her, when she 
became a Christian, to act with enlightened views 
of duty, and to be stable and consistent in her pur- 
poses of holy living. Her early religious training 
fitted her to bring forth fruit in honor of her Sa- 
vior. So it is with early religious education in 
other cases. The young are often insensible to its 
value and impatient under its restraints; still it is 
an inestimable advantage, and all children and 
youth should feel it to be a great privilege to have 
Christian parents ! 



AMELIA. S. CHAPMAN. 



33 



3. Sabballi Schools exert an important influence 
in the religious education of the rising generation. 
But in order to extend the influence of Sabbath- 
schools, and embrace in them the largest number 
possible of the rising generation, it is requisite 
that parental influence should be in favor of them : 
it is through parents that the rising generation are 
to be reached by Sabbath-schools, if reached at all. 
By this it is not intended that parents should leave 
their duty as parents to be performed by others 
in the Sabbath- school ; but that they should bring 
their children into the Sabbath-school, and suffer 
and encourage them to enjoy this additional ad- 
vantage, and study to have them duly improve 
it. How many children and youth become sub- 
jects of renewing grace in Sabbath-schools ! The 
reader will remember that Amelia was a Sabbath- 
school scholar at the time of her hopeful conver- 
sion ! 

4. In removing the young and useful from the 
world, God is not unmindful of his cause. As 
" the heavens are higher than the earth, so are his 
ways higher than our ways, and his thoughts than 
our thoughts." His children live as lonsr as it is 
his pleasure they should live ; they die no sooner 
than he appoints ; and notwithstanding it is often 
mysterious to our minds that individuals who 
bid fair for usefulness are cut off in early life, and 
that others are called away in the midst of their 



34 



MEMOIR OF 



usefulness, yet \vc have no reason to distrust the 
wisdom of God, or his covenant faithfulness to his 
people and cause. We see but in part, and we 
know but in part, the wisdom and benevolence of 
his providence. 

Nor are we allowed to indulge the thought that, 
any who have died in the Lord are lost to the holy 
kingdom of Jehovah. Though they have disap- 
peared from their stations and relations in the 
church of God on earth, yet they are removed to 
other stations in the redeemed church — the church 
of the first born in heaven, where it is probable 
they are more active and more useful than they 
were on earth, and where they arc far more glori- 
ous and happy. So far as they followed Christ in 
the relations of this life, and have left behind them 
a pious example and pious counsels, they may still 
be useful to the living, who, in remembrance of 
their counsels, and stimulated by their good exam- 
ple, should press forward in holy living, in prospect 
of soon being called to follow them, and in hope of 
sharing in the same glorious reward with them. 

The saints on earth and the saints in heaven are 
but different branches of the same holy family. 
The separation at death between the living and the 
dead is not an eternal separation. The children of 
God who have mingled in the relations of this world, 
will again meet— not in the relations of earth, but 
in the relations of heaven, beyond the changes of 



AMELIA S. CHAPMAN. 



35 



this changing world, where their union and com- 
munion will be without interruption and without 
end, and where they may look back upon the scenes 
of this life, and review with gratitude the wonders 
of God's grace in training them up for heaven. 

5. We see the importance of living in a state of 
constant preparation for death. « It is appointed 
unto men once to die." « There is no man that 
has power over the spirit, to retain the spirit, and 
there is no discharge in that war." No child is ex- 
empt, no youth is exempt, no age, no rank, no con- 
dition is exempt. Life at every period, and in all 
possible circumstances, is uncertain. All are lia- 
ble to be called away in their present state of 
preparation. 

_ It is indeed surprising with what unconcern mul- 
titudes live on the borders of the grave and the 
verge of an awful eternity, in neglect of the things 
which have respect to their salvation ! Numbers 
acknowledge their dependance on God and their 
obligations to him, and assent to the way of salva- 
tion and the terms of reconciliation in the Gospel, 
who still live as if they might continue to sin against 
God and prosper. They seem to feel and to act as 
if all men were mortal but themselves. They see 
others die, their own friends die— they have no 
power to retain them, nor to sustain their own lives, 
nor to insure their own health, nor any thing they 
call their own ; and yet they rashly put off repent- 



36 



MEMOIR OF 



[288 



ance and other duties to distant uncertain oppor- 
tunities ! 

And why should moral beings in ruin, on proba- 
tion for eternity, thus trifle with the means and 
waste the day of grace 1 Why should they be so 
slow to learn heavenly wisdom ( Why so loth lo 
come to Christ, while in condescending love he in- 
vites them to him 1 Why so reluctant to confess 
and forsake their sins, as the condition of pardon 1 
Why so willing to brave the threatenings of God's 
word, and remain exposed to his displeasure! 
Why so careless of life, when unprepared for 
peace in death 1 

It is but a little while, my dear reader, at long- 
est, that you will tarry in this world ! Soon these 
days of mercy will be gone, and continuing im- 
penitent, the door for your salvation will be 
closed! Behold, now is the accepted time. God 
still waits in forbearance ! linger not in your 
sins, and flatter not yourself in hope of future 
opportunities! You have no abiding possessions 
here — no security of life for an hour ! Why should 
you feel nnd act as if you had 1 Why seek to lay 
up your treasure here, and to prolong your stay, 
unmindful of your departure] And let the chris- 
tian live near to God in daily communion with 
him, faithfully doing his will, and constantly look- 
ing for his coming. " Blessed is that servant whom 
Ids Lord, when he cometh, shall find so doing!" 



VALUABLE WORKS, 



AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY 

Fit AVE It'S f AHM ©IF Mm 

METHOD OF GRACE; 

BISHOP HOPKINS; 

ON THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.; ffe 

GREGORY'S LETTERS ON INFIDELITY 

tknn's Complete iDutji of Man; 

EDWARDS ON REV IV A L S ; 

JAY'S. CHRISTIAN CONTEMPLATED 
•/AMES' ANXIOUS INQUIRER, 

YOUNG MAN FROM HOMEjlf! . 

AND NUMEROUS OTHER WORKS OF 'KINDRED CHAR- 
ACTER, ADAPTED TO ALL CLASSES OF READERS. 

ALSO A LARGE VARIETY OF BOOKS ADAPTED TO YOUTH, 
aW'8UITABLE FOR FAMILIES AND SABBATH 
SCHOOL LIBRA RIE S. ., .; ' 



TO BE HAD AT 150 NASSAU-STREET, NEW-YORK 
23 CORNHILL, BOSTON, 
> AND IN OTHER PRINCIPAL CITIES AND TOWNS. 



