I^ 



£Yy 




'Mother, I don't think he will strii<e nie any more.'' Page 2i, 



M E M O I R 

MARY LOTHROP; 



DIED IN BOSTON, MARCH 18, 1831, 



AGED SIX YEARS AND THREE MONTHS, 



'Oat of the mcuthe of babes, thou liast ordained r raise."' 



PUBLISHED BY Trie 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU. fSTREET, NEW-YORK. 



^ 



THE NEW York/ ' 
fOBLIC i,,BRARyf 

344932 

ASTOR..4ENOX AND 

I Ti.DPN ^O'JNOATIONS. 



Entered according to act of (Congress, in the year 1832. 

Br Perkins and Marvin, 

in the Clerk's Office of the District Court of Massachusetts 



Riglit of publishing transferred to American Tract Society 






'■■• ';*T^' t^^fE3l^&r From ^ 
A^^lJp«gt0X':ja€rigM.s BRANCH 



INTRODUCTION. 



This Memoir has been prepared for 
the purpose of adding another to the 
bright pictures, set before children to 
allure them into the paths of piety, 
and before parents to encourage and 
stimulate them in the religious educa- 
tion of their children. The writer 
aims, also, to erect a monument, though 
humble, to the condescending good- 
ness of God, whose grace was so 
remarkably exhibited in this child. 
Nothing of course has been admitted, 
v/hich she did not herself regard as 
strictly true ; and it is believed that 



4 INTRODUCTION. 

persons most acquainted with the sub- 
ject of the Memoir will be the least 
Hkely to think the account exagger- 
ated. Indeed several of these, after 
reading the entire Memoir in manu- 
script, have given it their cordia' 
sanction. 

A clerical friend, after having at 
tentively perused the work, submitted 
the following remarks. 

''Long continued pain, when it does not 
prostrate the mental faculties, frequently pro- 
motes their developement. Such was, proba- 
bly, its influence in the present case. The 
unwearied religious instructions of the mother 
should, also, be particularly noticed. But much, 
very much, must doubtless be referred to the 
illuminations and excitements of the Spirit of 
God. And we may ask, too, are not the grand 
doctrines of the gospel, though the most sub- 
lime in the world, among those which are most 
adapted to the canacities of the young ? Lika 



INTRODUCTION. 5 

the fundamental laws of nature, though many 
of their relations require study and effort to 
comprehend them, they are themselves simple 
and plain. 

" Children can very early be made to 
miderstand that God is holy, just, and good. 
They can early understand the law of God, 
requiring them to love its Author with all the 
heart, soul and strength, and their neighbor as 
themselves. They can understand that sin is 
a transgression of the law. They can under- 
stand what it is to be a sinner, and that ' Christ 
Jesus came into the world to save sinners.' 
They can understand that Christ died for 
sinners; that he lives to intercede for them; 
and that he is able and willing to save all who 
love him and trust in him. They can under- 
stand that the Holy Spirit helps sinners to 
forsake tlieir sins, and trust in Christ, and 
overcome the temptations of this wicked world. 
They can understand the difference between 
heaven and hell, and can feel a great power of 
n\otive pressing on them to make heaven sure 
before they die. 



6 INTllODUCTlOxN. 

" These things we should begm to teach 
our children in the very dawn of their reason ; 
using the simple manner of tlie Scriptin-es, 
unencumbered with the technical language of 
our systems of divinity ; and accompanying 
our instructions by frequent prayer, not only 
for our young pupils, but with them : nor 
should we forget, for a moment, the indispen- 
sable necessity of so living, that our conduct 
shall exemplify and enforce the doctrines and 
duties we inculcate. With an attentive child, 
and the teachings of the Holy Spirit, enougli 
of the gospel may in this way be infused into 
the mind, at a very tender age, to serve as a 
basis for an exalted Christian experience: 
and it is strange that parents, and Sabbath 
school teachers, and the church of God, 
should have been so backward to expect and 
credit the evidences of piety in children. No 
where on earth is there a better soil, when 
properly cultivated, for the genuine fruits of 
the Spirit, than in the minds of young chil- 
dren." 



INTRODUCTION. 7 

Soon after the writer commenced 
her task, a note was addressed to her 
by a lady, a much esteemed friend, 
part of which it is thought proper to 
insert. 

"It gave me pleasure, my dear Mrs. A., 
to learn that you were preparing a Memoir of 
the interesting Mary, at whose couch we so 
frequently met during the last months of her 
illness, and exchanged looks of delighted sur- 
prise while hearing the gracious words she 
uttered. Though you were not alone in your 
affectionate concern for the litde sufferer, your 
visits were more frequent and protracted than 
those of others ; so that you possess the great- 
est power of recalling and arranging, with 
the help of her dear mother, the facts exhibit- 
ing the feelings of her heart. 

" That something should be written, I have 
thought very important; not doubting that 
the result would be a saving influence on the 
minds of children, and honor to Him bv 



8 INTRODUCTION. 

whose Spuit her soul was so prepared for 
heaven. 

" You, my dear Mrs. A., were an eye-wit- 
ness of her expressive looks, telling, more 
forcibly than words, that her very heart re- 
ceived the truths of the gospel, while it glowed 
with love to their divine Author. Indeed, her 
piety was more discriminating and spiritual, 
and more m.ature, than I ever saw in aiiy 
other child. 

"I have no desire to eulogize her; she is 
now, doubtless, a happy spirit in heaven, 
where she ardently longed to be, and with 
that blessed Saviour whom she supremely 
loved: but 1 earnestly desire that the power 
of divine grace may be known, and its beau- 
tiful operations on the mind of a little child 
exhibited, so that many other children may be 
induced to yield their hearts to the same hap- 
py influences, and, like her, be joyful when sick 
and dying, in the prospect of dwelling for ever 
with Christ in heaven.'* 



INTRODUCTION. 9 

The Rev. Howard Malcom, pastor 
of the Federal-street Baptist church 
in Boston, of which Mr. and Mrs. 
Lothrop are members, has kindly 
written the following testimonial, to 
be prefixed to the Memoir. 

"It gives me pleasure to say, that this 
IMemoir has been read to me in manuscript, 
and that, so far as my knowledge extends, 
nothing Is exaggerated, or too highly colored. 

" I consider her history, though very brief 
compared with what it might easily have been 
made, an important acquisition to the cause 
of goodness, not only for its adaptedness to 
the instruction and conviction of the young, 
but as an encouragement and stimulus to 
Christian parents. 

"In one respect this narrative transcends 
m value almost all others of a similar kind, 
fnstead of disclosing symptoms of piety only 
towards death, or in a last sickness, tliis dear 



]0 INTRODUCTION. 

child furnished the far more satisfactory exhi- 
bition of piety without the excitement of ap- 
proaching dissolution. After the sickness in 
which her piety became obvious to those with 
whom Mary felt sufficiently at ease to express 
her feelings with freedom, she enjoyed several 
months of tolerable health, and seemed to be 
recovering from the disease which had threat- 
ened her removal. It was then, that I, who 
had before hesitated, became fully convinced 
of her real change of heart. Then, amid the 
amusements and temptations of a large family 
of children, her deportment was even more in- 
teresting than in the chamber of sickness, and 
we had the sweet satisfaction of seeing her 
faith proved by her works. Then, as well as 
in her subsequent long and very painful con- 
finement, she showed a fear of offending God, a 
regard for the Sabbath, a filial dutifulness, a 
meekness under injuries, a love of souls, a 
preference for Christian company and a spirit 
of prayer; which, with other evidences of 
piety, will be discovered in the Memoir, and 



INTRODUCTION. ] i 

which, though the ycriod of her conversion is 
not distinctly marked, make the fact of it un- 
commonly clear. 

" I commend this book to the Christian 
public with a happy confidence, that, where- 
ever it is read, the effect will be salutary on 
persons of every age." 



It is hoped, that the grace of God, 
which was so richly manifested in 
Httle Mary, will bless this memorial 
of her life and character to many chil- 
dren and youth. 

BosioTij January J 1832. 



MEMOIR 



MARY L O T H R O P 



CHAPTER I. 

]\Iary Lothrop was bom in Boston, Dec. 
13th, 1824. Her parents were pious, and 
desired, more than all things else, that their 
children might be prepared for heaven. To 
this end they carefully instructed them in the 
great truths of religion. The health of little 
Mary was always delicate, so that she had 
more of her mother's attention than children 
usually have. She was also fond of being 
taught, v/hich made the task of teaching her a 
pleasant one. Indeed this child never ap- 
peared more happy than when her mother 
had leisure to talk with her, and at such times 



J 4 MEMOIR OF 

there was no place she loved so well as a seat 
by the side of her beloved parent. In this 
way she learned to think for herself when very 
young, and gained much useful knowledge. 

When Mrs. L. first began to tell jMary 
about God, she chose the most simple and 
attractive manner. Before the child was two 
years old, whenever her mother showed her 
flowers, or any thing of the kind, she would 
tell her there was a God in heaven who made 
them, that he was kind and good, and loved 
little children, and that it was to Him her 
father and mother prayed. And when it 
rained, or the wind blew, her mother would 
tell her that it was the same God who gave us 
rain, and caused the wind to blow, and that 
she must love him and fear him. Mary used 
to listen to such instruction v/ith much in- 
terest, and as soon as she could talk would 
often say, that she did love God, and desired 
to be a good child so that she might go to 
heaven. 

Before she was three years old, she was 
observed to be very still while the Scriptures 



MARY LOTHROP. 15 

were read and prayer was offered in the family, 
and never seemed disposed to amuse herself 
in time of prayer ; and by her appearance it 
was evident she attended to what w^as said. 
She loved to have the usual seasons of prayer 
return, that she might hear something of God 
and heaven. 

At one time, when her parents w^ere absent 
from home, at the usual hour for family wor 
ship, Mary said to the person who had charge 
of the family, 

* Are you not going to pray with us ? Wont 
there be any prayer in this house because 
father and mother are gone ?' 

Her questions being evaded, she said, ' Will 
you not pray for them, that Gt)d may take 
care of them, and bring them safe home again ?' 
And she w^ould not rest satisfied until the 
promise was made, that her parents should be 
remembered in prayer. 

She early showed a disposition to honoi 
and please her parents in all she did, and it 
was delightful to witness her cheerful obedi- 
ence She did not wait for hei father and 



15 - MEMOIR OF 

mother to tell her she must or must not do 
such and such things, but she would watch 
and do that which she thought would be 
pleasing to them. As Mary grew older, this 
desire to study the wishes of others became so 
much a habit of her life, that, while it gave 
great pleasure to all around her, it was a con 
stant source of happiness to herself 

One morning her mother noticed that sha 
was very busy, trying to assist her about her 
work. After the room was in order, she asked 
for the brush, tried to brush her hair, smoothed 
her apron, and said, 

'Do I look neat now, mother?' And, as if 
in haste, said, ' May I have the Bible, and will 
you tell me something to read ?' 

Her mother was surprised at the request, 
out as it was her usual time for reading the 
Scriptures, and as the child could not read, 
she put the Bible into Mary's hands, and 
read several verses which were seriously re- 
peated after her. Mary also repeated a hymn, 
which she had been taught, and then said, 

' May / pray now ?' 



MARY LOTHROP. 17 

After she had tried to pray, she said, 

* Is this the way to serve God ? Do you 
do so, mother ? Did my little sister, who has 
gone to heaven, do so ?' 

She had a litde sister, who died some time 
before, after giving great evidence of piety, 
and was often spoken of in tlie family as being 
in heaven; and Mary had a great desire to do 
right, that she also might be prepared for that 
blessed world. 

There was a modesty in her appearance, 
and a propriety in her conduct, which were 
striking in so young a child ; and, though she 
was sprighdy and playful, she would not en- 
gage in rude or noisy play, or where deception 
was used. As this was noticed by her com- 
panions, they would sometimes lay plans to 
interest her in their amusements, or tempt her 
to say something she ought not; but she would 
appear to be displeased by their improper con- 
duct, and w^ould leave them and go to her 
mother ; or, if her mother was absent, would 
prefer to stay alone, rather than do or say 
what slie thought would be wrong. Once, 

Lnthron. 2 



13 MEMOIR OK 

when she was quite young, she remained alone 
nearly three hours, because she did not wish 
to be in the company of those who were in the 
habit of talking foolishly. 

Mary began to attend school in her fourth 
year. Her first teacher remarked, that she 
was a quiet and obedient s<:holar; that she 
could not recollect her needing reproof, or 
doing any thing wrong ; and that she listened 
with attention to all that was said to her, but 
was particularly interested in religious in- 
struction. 

Another teacher says, " When I first knew 
little Mary, she was about four years old, and 
even a that early age, she would often aston- 
ish me by the interest she manifested in every 
thing relating to the subject of religion. She 
would frequently come to me, and v;ith an 
animated countenance say, 'Miss G., will you 
please to read what Jesus said to little children ? 
And will you let me repeat it after you, that I 
may learn it?' When I had complied with 
her request, she would ask, ' Will Jesus love 
little children now, and will he dve me a new 



MARY LOTHROP. 19 

heart, if I ask him ?' I can never forget the 
apparent delight with which she entered school 
one morning, saying, ^ You need not read that 
to me any more, Miss G., for I have learned 
it now, and can say it myself, and I think 
about it all the time.' " 

For several months, when she was between 
four and five years old, she appeared to be 
seeldng for a new heart. One morning, while 
in this state of mind, as her father was reading 
the Scriptures in the family, she stood by 
his side, and as he read she wept. Her father, 
supposing he might have hurt her by moving 
his chair, asked her if she did not wish to sit 
down. She said, ^ No, father ;' and silently 
wiped away her tears. In the course of the 
day, when she was alone with her mother, she 
said, 

^ Mother, you thought I was hurt this morn- 
ing when father was reading, but I was not. 
I want to know certainly, that I have a new 
heai't. Will you read that chapter to mo 
again?' 



QQ MEMOIR OF 

Her mother said, ' Why do you wish me to 
read it ?' 

Mary answered, ^ 1 want to hear more about 
that heavenly world.' 

The chapter she wished to hear read was 
the 21st chapter of Revelation. This after- 
wards became a favorite chapter, and the last 
part of the last verse a frequent expression in 
prayer. She often prayed that her own nam^e 
might be written in ' the Lamb's book of life,' 
and would implore the same blessing for dif- 
ferent members of the family, and for other 
friends. 

She frequently asked during the day to have 
the chapter read to her, which had been read 
in the family at the morning devotions. 



MARY LOTIIROP. 2\ 



CHAPTER ]l 

L\ the auldmn of 1829, when JMary was 
nearly five years old, she was afflicted with 
a Hngering ilhiess, through which she ap})eared 
to be sweetly resigned to the will of God. 
From that time, she discovered, more decid- 
edly than ever before; an aversion to all that 
was sinful, and a love for every thing of a re- 
ligious nature, so far as she understood it. She 
would say to her mother almost every day, 

'Dear mother, I want God to make me a 
good Christian. I want him to take away my 
wicked heart, and give me a new heart. I 
want to be like my little sister that has gone 
to heaven. Oh mother, will you pray for 



me t 



V 



She was sick many weeks, but recovered 
so far as to be able to attend school occasion- 
ally through the winter. 

Mary used to pray frequently, and loved to 



22 MEMOIR OF 

pray. If any poor person was mentioned as 
being greatly m want, if any family in the 
neighborhood was afflicted, or if her own feelings 
had been injured, or her brothers and sisters 
did wrong, she would retire to pray. This 
was her constant habit, and thus she appeared 
to find relief and peace of mind. 

When she awoke in the morning, her first 
thoughts seemed to rise to her Father in 
heaven, and she was not willing to leave her 
chamber, till she had returned thanks for his 
goodness and implored his blessing upon the 
day. She usually met her parents with a 
smile, and often on entering the room repeated 
the little hymn, 

" Good morning, dear Ma' ; through all the cold night 
How sweet I have slept, and how still, and how warm ' 
My heavenly Father watched over your child, 
And guarded me safe from each danger and harm. 
And precious new blessings each moment he gives , 
I will love him, and thank him, and bless him each day; 
I will beg him to make me his own little child, 
And all his commands I will gladly obey." 

While repeating the last verse, she would 
often be affected to tears; and this was not 



MARY LOTHROP. 23 

unfrequenily vhe (ase when she attempted to 
pray. 

One vei'} cold morning in Febmary, when 
the children weie ready for school, Mary ap- 
peared reluctant to go, and, with a low voice, 
said, 

'Mother, it was so cold that I didn't pray 
up stairs this morning. May I stay and pray 
with you ?' 

Her mother permitted her to remain. She 
then kneeled and prayed so earnestly, and for 
so many objects, that her mother was much 
affected, and felt that her child had been taught 
by the Spirit of God. 

In the winter of 1829, there was frequently 
the cry of ' Fire ' in the city ; and while the 
other children were agitated, fearing that their 
liouse might take fire, Mary would express her 
anxiety for others. At one time when there 
had been a fire at night, as she was looking 
Dut of the w^indow, in the morning, over a 
range of small low houses, she said, 

' Mother, when they cried Fire, last night, 
I thought there w^ere so many sinners that 



24 MEMOIR OF 

didn't love God, I was afraid their houses 
would get on lire and burn them up, before 
they learnt the way to heaven, and then they 
could never go to that happy world. It 
troubled me so, that I couldn't help crying ; 
and then I tried to pray for them.' 

It has already been mentioned that litdc 
Mary was very desirous her brothers and 
sisters should do right. She wished them to 
be forgiving and mild, like the blessed Saviour, 
and in this respect was careful to set them a 
good example. One day her brother, younger 
than herself, struck her, and was punished for 
the offence. She appeared to be grieved, and, 
taking him by the hand, led him out of the 
room. When she returned, she said, ' Mother, 
I don't think he will strike me any more ;' and 
her mother found she had been praying with 
liim. 

Not many days after this, her brother strucK 
her again. Mary said, 

' Dear mother, don't punish him j I think I 
can learn him not to do so again.' And shf 
led hmi away as before. 



flIARY LOTHROP. 25 

Her mother followed softly, and, through 
the nearly closed door, saw her Ivneel down 
by the same chair with her brother, and heard 
her say, 

• O Lord, forgive my little brother, and give 
him a new heart, that he may not strike me 
any more ; and if he does strike or push me, 
O Lord, put it into my heart not to strike him, 
but to say, Don't do so, little brother.' 

Once hearing a little girl say she was pro- 
voked, Mary said, 

'Don't s^ij provoked ; say it hurt your feel 
ings. And I will tell you what to do when 
you are angry. Don't speak, but go right out 
of the room, and pray to God. That's the 
way I do.' 

The Sabbath was always a pleasant day to 
Mary. She wished to attend church con- 
stantly, but feeble health often prevented. If 
her mother remained at home, she would 
cheerfully stay, and would wish to have the 
time spent in reading, singing, or prayer. As 
soon as the family w^ere gone, she would 
say, 



26 MEMOlll Oh 

' Now, mother, let us have a meeting. Will 
you read in the Bible, and pray?' Her 
mother would sometimes be attending to her 
infant, and would not be able to comply with 
her request immediately; but she would 
sweetly urge her, saying, 'I will fasten the 
door, and I can get the Bible ; you needn't 
wait, mother.' 

She seemed to regard the Sabbath as the 
Lord's day, and to wish that all the time might 
be spent in his service. One Sabbath, when 
her mother was sitting by the window as 
people were passing to churcli, Mary came to 
her, and said, 

' Dear mother, don't sit by the window ; it 
don't seem like keeping the Sabbath day holy.' 

She attended the Sabbath school in Boston 
only a few times, but, had her health allowed, 
would have been a constant and punctual 
scholar. While in South Reading a few 
weeks, the last summer of her hfe, she attend- 
ed the Sabbath school frequently, and always 
remembered it with pleasure. 

Mrs. L. took great pains to teach her 



MARY LOTHROP. 27 

cliildreii, that, next to gratitude to God, they 
should be grateful to their father for the many 
comlbrts they enjoyed. She would tell them, 
that when they saw him fatigued or depressed, 
they should think it was his love for them 
which led him into those cares and perplexi- 
ties ; that it was his desire to send them to 
school, and to give them every thing which 
could make them happy ; that they ought to 
be obedient and grateful, and show their grati 
lade by being careful of every thing he gave 
them. 

And it was cheering to a mother's heart to 
observe, that while her other children needed 
line upon line, and precept upon precept, such 
instruction to Mary was like a nail fastened 
in a sure place. She remembered it. And 
when she had a pair of new shoes, or a new 
dress, she would put them up carefully and 
say, 

'I will take good care of these things, so 
that father will not have to buy me any more 
for a great while.' 

When she saw that her father's mind was 



2S MEMOIR OF 

troubled, or her mother had told her he was 
fatigued, she would not unfrequently retire to 
pray for him, and has been overheard praying 
for him in the following manner : 

* O Lord, w^ilt thou bless my dear father, 
and comfort him, by making him think of his 
heavenly home, and remember that when he 
gets there, he will not have to provide for his 
large family.' 

She was particular to observe her mother's 
directions respecting neatness and order, fold- 
ing her clothas with care, and putting a book 
or toy in its place after it was used. And it 
troubled her greatly in her sickness to see any- 
thing soiled, or out of place. 

Her mother found her, young as she was, 
an assistant in promoting order in the family, 
but more particularly useful in the happy in- 
fluence she exerted over the minds of those 
around her. 



MARY LOTHROP. 29 



CHAPTER III. 

Early in the spring of 1830, Mary had 
another long and distressing illness, which 
proved to be an affection of the spine. One 
Sabbath morning, about the time she was 
taken sick, when she awoke, she reminded her 
sisters, as she often did, that it was the Sabbath 
day, talked with them for some time, and 
prayed \vith them. When they entered their 
mother's chamber, Mrs. L. at once per 
ceived that something had affected them, and 
as Mary had been weeping, inquired the 
cause. 

Mary answered, * I can't tell you, mother ; 
Sarah will tell you ; I have told her.' 

Her sisters being much affected, her mother 
again said, 

'Mary, my dear, tell me what is the 
matter.' 

She replied, ' Oh, mother, T don't wisli to 



30 aiEAlOIR OF 

live in this wicked world any longer. I want 
to go to heaven, and be where God is. When 
I look up to heaven, and think that God is 
there, and the holy angels are there, and the 
blessed Saviour is there, I can't live in this 
world and be a sinner any longer.' 

Her father said, ' My dear Mary, God has 
made this a beautiful world, and given u? 
pvery thing pleasant.' 

'I know it,' said she, 'but I want to he 
where God is.' 

Her sickness came on gradually, but as long 
as she could bear it, she desired to be carried 
down stairs to be present at family worship, 
and would kneel through the time of prayer 
even when others thought her unable to 
do it. 

One morning, when she was unable to rise, 
she called her mother to her bedside, and 
said, 

* I feel now as if God had given me a new 
heart.' 

'What makes you think so?' said her 
motlier. 



MARY LOTIILOr. 3J 

She replied, 'Because none but God can 
take sinful thoughts out of our minds, and none 
but God can put good thoughts into our 
minds.' 

' How does it make you feel now that you 
think you have a new heart ?' 

* It makes me very happy. I love to pray, 
and when I begin, I want to keep praying all 
the time. It is easy to pray now ; I am very 
happy.' 

She wished every day to have her mother 
read a chapter in the Bible, and pray with her. 
These were her most delightful seasons, and 
she knew not how to have them delayed. 
One morning her mother was engaged when 
she asked her to read, and Mary said, 

' Well, mother, when I get to my heavenly 
home, I sha'n't have to w^ait.' 

* No, my sv/eet Mary,' said her mother ; 
'then, 

" No vain discourse shall fill our tongue, 
Nor trifles vex the ear ; 
Infinite grace shall be our song, 
And (Jod deliorht to hear " 



32 MEMOIR OF 

' Yes, mother,' said Mary, ' I long to be 
there; then we can praise him all the time, 
and the blessed Saviour will rejoice to hear us 
too. It makes me feel very happy.' 

When she was suffering greatly, she would 
sometimes say, 

'I want to be patient, and bear my pain 
The blessed Saviour suffered a great deal more 
than I do.' 

At other times she said, 

' Oh mother, lift your thoughts to God for 
me, that he would ease my pain ; but if he 
does not, I will try to bear it.' 

One evening, when Mary was very sick, and 
had been lying for some time in a suffering 
state, as her mother was leaning over her 
rocking-settee watching her appearance, she 
suddenly roused up, saying, 

' Praise Him, dear mother, praise Him !' 

Her mother then sang, 

" Praise God, from whom all blessings flow; 
Praise him all creatures here below ; 
Praise him above, ye heavenly host; 
Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost." 



MARY LOTHROP. 33 

* Oh, that' is sweet,' said Mary, ^ sing it again, 
dear mother 1' 

One Sabbath, after her sisters returned from 
meeting, she said to them, 

' Do not think that going to meeting and to 
Sabbath school, and not doing any thing else, 
is keeping the Sabbath day holy. You must 
talk about what you have heard, and read the 
Bible, and pray ; that will be keeping the day 
holy. I want you should take my Bible, and 
go into the other room alone, and read a 
chapter ; then kneel down and pray to God. 
Let me know that you do it, and God will 
hear you, if you pray to him. Perhaps you'll 
say, How do you know that God will hear? 
I know that he will, for he has given me a new 
heart ; and I know he will hear you, if you pray 
to him.' 

She was so earnest and solemn in her re- 
quest, that her sisters wept, and, taking her 
Bible, did as she had desired. 

On another Sabbath day, in the afternoon, 
she said, 

' Mother, the Sabbath is almost gone, and w^e 
hav'n't had a meeting. Can we have one now ? 

Lothrop. 3 



34 MEMOIR OF 

Her mother then read the 14th chapter of 
John, a chapter she loved to hear read often. 
When the second and third verses were read. 
— '' In my Father's house are . many man- 
sions ; if it were not so, I would have tok^ 
you. I go to prepare a place for you. And 
if I go and prepare a place for you, I will 
come again, and receive you unto myself; 
that where I am, there ye may be also ;" — 
Mary said, 

' I know what that means. The blessed 
Saviour has prepared mansions in heaven for 
all that love him ; that is, a place where we 
can be with him in heaven. And when it 
says, the Saviour is coming, that does not 
- meail"*"the day bT; judgment, does it? but 
wdien we die, the Saviour will come for us to 
be where he is. Oh, how happy it makes 
me to think that we may be where he is ! 
And I wish poor sinners to know, that if they 
pray and repent, they, too, may be where the 
Saviour is.' 

She was very feeble, not able to sit up ; 
but, lying on the bed, folded her hands and 
prayed for herself, for the family, and for her 



MARY LOTHROP. 35 

minister. She then prayed that God would 
put it into the hearts of the neighbors to keep 
the Sabbath day holy. 

*And oh/ she added, ^may parents teach 
their little children to keep the Sabbath day 
holy.' 

Mr. and Mrs. Lothrop were members of the 
Federal-street Baptist church in Boston, under 
the pastoral care of the Rev. Howard Malcom. 
Mary was tenderly attached to her pastor, and 
alihough he was kindly attentive, and \isited 
her often, she repeatedly asked that he might 
be sent for, because she loved to hear him talk 
and pray. 

She often said, 'I love dear Mr. M., and it 
makes me feel happy to have him visit me. 
I think it is very kind in him to walk so far to 
see a Httle girl hke me.' 

Even when she was unable to speak to him, 
she would lie in her rocking-settee, and look 
upon him with the most evident pleasure. 
How important would be the results, were all 
children thus trained to venerate the minis 
terial office ! 



3t, BIEaiOlR OF 



CHAPTER IV. 

One dav ?>Iaiy's brother G. bought her 
some toys, supposing that she would be niglily 
gratified. They were all placed before her, 
and she thanked him aifectionately, but her 
mother noticed .that she was not as much 
pleased as had been expected. After her 
brother left the room, she said, 

' ^Mother, I didn't love to tell brother, be- 
cause he thought I should be so much pleased, 
but such things do not seem to me as they 
used to ; they cannot maice me happy ; I would 
rather have the money kept and put into the 
missionary box.' 

Mary received many kind attentions fiom 
neighbors ?nd friends, and would often pray 
for those who thus remembered her. One 
morning she received a present, and imme- 
diately inquired, as she often did, if the person 
who sent it was pious. The mother answered 
that slie did not profess to be. 



xMARY LOTilROP. 37 

Mary said, ' Can't you tell me that she is 
pious, dear mother? Then I must pray for 
her. Will you raise me up, and shut the 
door ?' 

She then prayed that God would bless the 
person, and put it into her hean to love him 
and repent, that she might go to heaven. She 
frequently afterwards prayed for the same in- 
dividual, and once said, 

' I wish I could talk with her, and pray with 
her. I don't think I should be afraid or 
ashamed to, now. The hymn says, 

" Ashamed of Jesus ! that dear friend, 
On whom my hopes of heaven depend : 
No; when I blush, be this my shame, 
That I no more revere his name." ' 

Mary would often express concern for the 
souls of others, and would entreat different 
members of the family to seek the Lord ; and 
this interest in serious things did not diminish, 
as she began to be relieved from disease. 

She was much interested for a poor old 
colored man, who was occasionally employed 
in doing errands for the family. WTienever 



33 MEMOIR OF 

she saw him from the window, she appeared to 
have an anxiety for him, and would speak as if 
she feared he was not prepared for death. One 
day, when she was taken out to ride, she saw 
him, and in the night said, 

^ Mother, do send for poor Caesar to come 
here. God has put something into my mind 
to say to him.' 

Her mother at first supposed she had been 
dreaming, and said, 

' What made you think of him now ?' 

Mary rephed, 'I saw him to-day when 1 
was riding.' 

The next time she saw him in the street, 
she said, 

'Mother, there is Caesar, do call him in, I 
must talk with him.' 

Her mother called him in, not knowing 
what her child wished to say. When he 
came into the room, Mary thus addressed him. 

* Caesar, do you love God? Do you pray 
to him ?' 

The old man appeared confused, as if he 
Knew not what to say. 



MARY LOTHROP. 39 

* If you do not,' continued Mary, ' you must 
pray a great deal, and then God will let you 
know whether you are a Christian or not. 
Do you read the Bible ?' 

* I do,' said Caesar. 

J[I. Have you got one of your own ? 

C. Yes, I have a Bible. 

M. If you hav'n't, I'll give you mine. 
You know we've all got to be sick and die, 
and be laid in the grave ; but God will raise 
these bodies again. 

' O wonderful !' said the old man, the tears 
dropping from his aged face. 

The child continued, 

* You have got to be sick, and suffer a great 
deal, and you don't know why you suffer so 
much here, but in the heavenly world He will 
let you know. Will you tell me, Caesar, that 
you'll love God, and try to serve him ?' 

'I will, httle Mary, I will try to,' said 
Caesar. 

Mary was too much in earnest to stop, and 
«aid, 

' God has made a glorious, happy world, 



40 MEMOIR OF 

and has prepared mansions where he Is going 
to take all that love him here helow when 
they die ; and oh, God is there, and the 
blessed Saviour is there, and I have a little 
sister there ; and I want you should be a 
Christian, so that, when you die, God may 
take you there to praise him with me in 
heaven.' 

The poor old man wept as he retired, and 
said, 

^ Good by, little Mary ; you wont be here 
with us long — you'll be better off.' 

After he went out, she prayed for him. 

Next morning, she said to her mother, 

* I hav'n't done all that God meant I should 
for poor Caesar. I wish, mother, that you 
would send for him again, that I may pray 
with him, for if he should hear me pray, God 
might put a prayer into his heart.' 

She discovered so much solicitude, that 
her mother requested Caesar to come in again ; 
but no particular time was appointed, and the 
next that Mary heard of the poor old man 
was, that he was in eternity. He died of a 



MARY LOTHROP. 41 

short illness, a few days after her conversation 
with him. 

Soon after this, Mrs. L. was obliged to be 
absent from home one afternoon. As soon as 
she returned, she inquired of the domestic how 
Mary had been. 

* Very pleasant,' was the answer. 

Being told that a man had been playing upon 
an organ in the street, Mrs. L. asked if it had 
amused JMary. 

The girl replied that she did not seem to 
care much about it. 

When Mary was alone with her mother, she 
said, 

' Mother, how it makes me feel to see that 
poor man with the organ, and so many people 
standing round him; and those little colored 
boys, they looked so poor and so dirty. I'm 
afraid they hav'n't any body to take care of 
them, and tell them about God, and being good, 
I was going to pray for them, when somebody 
came in and interrupted me.' 

* You can pray for them now, my daughter/ 
said her mother. 



42 MEMOIR OF 

Slie then kneeled down, and prayed fer- 
vently for the man, the people around him, 
and the poor little boys, while her heart seemed 
full of compassion for them. 

Being relieved in some degree from disease, 
Mary w^as at length able to go down stairs, 
and some of her companions came in to visit 
her. They played about, and Mary, although 
she w^as too weak to join in play, was greatly 
amused to see them, and once or twice 
laughed very much. Her mother, knowing 
that she was feeble, feared the excitement 
might injure her, and gently cautioned her 
about laughing. After her playmates were 
gone, Mary went to her mother, and asked 
if it w^as sinful to laugh and play. Her 
mother told her it was not, that she was glad 
to see her so much pleased wuth the company 
of her little friends, and that she w^as told 
not to laugh only because she was so weak. 

Maiy burst into tears, and said, 

' Oh mother, I'm afraid I am growing a sinner 
again.' 

Mary's obedience to her parents has been 



MARY LOTHROP. 43 

already mentioned. An incident is recollected, 
which shows how much she tried to be satisfied 
with all her mother's arrangements, even when 
they were contrary to her own wishes. She 
had been promised that, on a certain day, she 
should visit a lady of her acquaintance ; but 
when the time came, it was not convenient for 
her to go. Mary had anticipated much pleas- 
ure in the visit, and when her mother told her 
she could not go, she was sadly disappointed. 
Trying to smile through her tears, she said, 

^It wont be \ATong for me to cry, will it, 
dear mother ? The tears will come.' 

While Mary was recovering, an infant of a 
friend to whom she was much attached, was 
dangerously ill. Mrs. L. often visited the sick 
chamber, and when she returned home, Mary 
would inquire particularly about the sick babe. 
One evening Mrs. L. said to her children, 

* I fear JVIrs. A. will be called to part with 
her deal* child. It is very sick, and we do not 
think it will live through the night.' 

Mary was in bed, but heard her mother say 
this, and soon after asked if she might get up. 



44 MEMOIR OF 

She was then so weak, that she needed as- 
sistance in leaving the bed, but as soon as she 
was placed upon the floor, she kneeled down, 
saying, 

' 1 wish to pray for dear Mrs. A. and her 
little babe.' 

She then said, 

* O God, wilt thou bless the dear babe ; may 
she not suffer a great deal, but w^ilt thou 
take her to heaven very soon; and wilt thou 
bless her mother ; may she not be too much 
grieved because thou art going to take her 
little child to heaven ; and wilt thou bless 
her father now that he is far away ; may he 
not be too much troubled, but remember that 
thou wilt soon take him to his heavenly 
home.' 

Mary had anticipated pleasure in being re- 
stored to health, in going out, and associating 
with children of her own age ; but she found 
so much that was sinful mingled with every 
pleasure, that she w^as often disappointed and 
sad. Her mind appeared to have undergone a 
great change during her sickness. She had 



MARY LOTHROP. 45 

enjoyed being with her mother, reading and 
prayer, and she seemed to be fast ripening 
for a better world ; but she was now grieved 
by the faults of others, and that so few loved to 
talk upon that subject which gave her the 
greatest happiness. She would sometimes say 
of different persons, after she had been told 
that they were pious, 'But they don't seem 
heavenly.' There was a maturity, as well as 
spirituality of mind, which was tmly surprising. 
Her feelings, though expressed w^ith all the 
simplicity of a little child, were like those of an 
advanced Christian. 

Before her sickness, she had been in the 
habit of singing with her sisters, and praying 
with them morning and evening; and she 
wshed, as soon as she was able, to go back 
vo their chamber and be with them again. 
But, in a day or two, she came to her mother 
and said, 

' If 1 can have my own Bible and hymn 
book, and pray in a chamber alone, that will 
suit me better.' 



40- MEMOIR OF 

She once said to her sister, weeping as she 
spoke, 

' You pray too fast ; I cannot hear the name 
of God repeated so ; I do not think God will 
hear such a prayer.' 

Frequently, when the children were repeat- 
ing hymns, she would say, ' Oh do not say 
that solemn verse so fast.' 

Whenever she spoke of God, it was with 
reverence, and when she mentioned the Sa- 
viour's name, she would generally say the bless- 
ed Saviour. 

In July, 1830, Mary went with her parents 
to Bridgewater, a distance of about twenty 
miles from the city. On their return home, it 
rained, and several circumstances occurred to 
render the ride unpleasant. Mary was much 
fatigued, and as she was retiring to rest, her 
mother said, 

* My dear, I suppose you will pray after 
you are in bed, to-night r' 

Mary replied, ' I would rather kneel down, 
and I wish you could stay and pray with me.' 



MARY LOTIIROP. 47 

Her mother, although she had many cares 
pressing upon her at that moment, remained, 
and found her own mind calmed and stimulated 
to gratitude, by hearing her child, then not 
six years old, acknowledge the goodness of 
God ; and, instead of being dissatisfied with 
what was unpleasant, thank Him for making 
the high hills, and the pretty flowers, and that 
the wind did not blow any harder, and that 
it did not rain any more. 

It was a habit with INIrs. L., when about 
leaving home for an hour or two, to say to her 
children, that if they were obedient and atten- 
tive to her wishes while she w^as absent, she 
would, on her return, give them an account of 
what she had seen and heard. This she found 
had a salutary effect upon her own mind, as it 
obliged her to notice passing events, and draw 
some useful lesson from them, that she might 
be able to entertain and instruct her children. 
After attending a meeting, she was careful to 
give an interesting account of it, if possible, and 
make it the means of doing good to her family. 
In this way she interested them greatly :n the 



48 MEMOIR OF 

Maternal Association, and made them feel its 
influence. Mary, however, took the lead in 
this, as she did in all other things of a serious 
nature. Her sisters now remember, that she 
would often say to them while they were en- 
gaged in play, 

' Don't let us forget, that our dear mother has 
gone to the meeting where the ladies pray for 
their children.' 

One afternoon, when Mrs. L. was at the 
Maternal Association, Mary sat in her little 
chair with her head resting upon a higher chair 
for a long time, and wept. One of her sisters, 
supposing she might be sick, asked her what 
was the matter. She replied, 

* I've been thinking where mother has gone, 
and that they will pray for us at the meeting.' 

She then called her little brother L. to her, 
and asked him if he knew where their mother 
was, and told him she wished him to be a good 
child, that he might become a missionary when 
he was a man, and go to Burmah to teach 
the heathen. She talked several minutes, and 
then, calling her sisters, proposed that they 



MARY LOTHROP. 49 

should all kneel down, and pray to God to bless 
them. 

Mrs. L., in teaching her children to pray, 
endeavored as much as possible to excite a 
right state of feeling, and then lead them to 
express their desires in their own childlike 
manner, gently correcting whatever might be 
improper in their expressions, and using no 
form except the Lord's prayer. She wished 
them really to desire from the heart all that 
they asked for, and to make known their re- 
q\iests to their heavenly Father with the same 
freedom they would to their parents, yet with 
great reverence and solemnity. In this way 
they early learned to pray with each other 
without embarrassment. 

When IMary was about four years old, she 
became quite fond of hearing accounts read of 
missionaries, and wished to join the other chil- 
dren in giving something for those w^ho know 
nothing of God and a better world. She was 
taught to pray for them, and to pity them, and 
as her mind was interested in serious subjects, 
and she was led to feel for the souls of others, 

r,othrop. i 



50 MEiMOm OF 

the heathen world excited her attention, and 
she was found to possess m a high degree what 
would be called in older persons a missionary 
spirit. A little box was kept in the family, 
into which the children dropped a part of the 
money that was given them ; but Mary was 
not long satisfied with her small share. About 
a year before her death, she began in earnest 
to do something for the heathen. When she 
felt well, she would be very industrious to gain 
a cent for this cause, and would urge her 
sisters to make the same exertions to increas*^ 
their little sum. If she could get permission to 
have a small piece of money for her own, she 
would, unperceived, drop it into the missionary 
box. 

At one time she found some money in the 
house, and with much animation said, 

^ Mother, may I have this for my own, to 
do what I please with it ?' 

' Yes,' said her mother, intending to propose 
having it spent to purchase some useful litde 
articles for herself But when it was afterward 
inquired for, Mary said. 



MARY LOTHROP. 51 

Oh, I put it into the missionary box ; that 
was what T wanted it for.' 

Her mother said, ' I intended to have bought 
you a new thimble and some other things 
with it.' 

' I can use my old thimble,' said Mary ; ' I 
would rather give the money to help get Bi- 
bles for the poor heathen children.' 

She often expressed the wish that more 
missionaries could go to teach the heathen, 
because she feared they would die before they 
were told about the blessed Saviour. At one 
time when she was sick, her mother told her 
that two or three missionaries w^ere in the city, 
who were going to Burmah. Her coun- 
tenance brightened at once, and she said, 

' Now, dear mother, you will send some- 
thing to the poor heathen children. 1 can 
spare some of my clothes, and some of my 
books too ; and I think 1 shall pray for them 
as long as I hve.' 

She was often heard to pray, that *the 
heathen might have houses, and clothes, and 
a good minister, and schools such as we have, 



52 MEMOIR Oh 

and the Bible ; and always added, ' Wilt thou 
bless my little brother L., and make him a 
good missionary.' 

In August, 1830, when several other mis 
sionaries w^ere about saihng for India, ]\Iary 
was so much interested and talked of it so con 
standy, that her mother took a carriage, and 
rode with her to the ship to see them embark. 
On their return home, Mary said, 

' I think the missionaries must be very hap- 
py, to go and teach the poor heathen. I am 
glad so many are going. If God spares my 
Ilk, I hope I shall be a missionary lady. I 
have much in my mind that I could tell th.^ 
heathen, about the blessed Saviour.' 

Not far from this time, being absent fron 
home, she expressed something of this feeling 
and a lady said to her, ' But do you know how 
much missionaries sometimes suffer ?' and then 
told her of Mr. Judson's sufferings, that he had 
a chain fastened around him, and was carried 
to prison, and cruelly treated in other w^ays, 

* Oh yes,' said Mary, ' mother has read to 



MARY LOTHROP. 53 

me about it ; but he was just as near heaven 
then, as if he had been here.' 

Mary had a great respect for all ministers of 
the gospel, and seemed to feel that they were 
highly favored, in being allowed to do so much 
good. She once inquired where Mr. M.'s store 
was ; slie was told, he did not keep any, but 
spent his whole time for the church and in 
doing good. Being also told that other minis- 
ters did the same, she seemed filled with de- 
light, and said, 

' How glad I am that they have nothing else 
to do, but to serve God and make people 
better 



54 MEMOIR OF 



CHAPTER V. 



In October, 1830, Mary's health suddenly 
declined again. She appeared cheerful most 
of the time, but seemed to lose strength daily. 
She would amuse herself a while, and be in- 
terested in her little sewing work, or the 
children's play, but was soon tired, and noth- 
inir like amusement satisfied her mind. One 

o 

afternoon, when the children were at home 
from school, and were playing in the room. 
Mrs. L. saw the tears on Mary's face, and 
said, 

' What is the matter, my dear ?' 

Mary replied, 

'Something solemn came into my mind, 
and I was going to speak to you, but the 
children played and laughed, and I couldn't 
say what I wished to. Can I go into the 
other room with you ?' 

Her mother knew that she was very feeble, 



MARY LOTHROP. 55 

and, perceiving that her mind was in a sad and 
troubled state, carried her into another room 
alone. Mary began to weep again, and said, 

' Mother, this isn't so pleasant a sickness as 
the other; I don't feel so happy as I did then. 
VVe are not alone as we used to be, and we 
do not read and pray so much. I wished to 
come into this chamber for you to pray with 
me. I feel so sick to-day, that when I try to 
pray, it goes riglit out of my mind. I shut 
my eyes, and tried to pray, but the noise of 
the children made me forget all that I wanted 
to say.' 

' My dear Mary, I should love to hear you 
pray,' said her mother, ' but I think you are 
too v;eak to kneel.' 

Mary said, 

* I feel as if I must kneel.' 

But, in attempting it, she fell over on the 
floor. 

This was the last time she ever attempted 
to kneel in prayer. 

It appeared that she was losing the use oi 
her limbs, and even before she was confined 



56 MEMOIR OF 

to the cliamber, she had repeatedly fallen on the 
floor when walking. 

Her friends had serious apprehensions that 
she would never recover. But as her little 
form w^as wasting away by disease, her mind 
seemed to expand, to become purified, and to 
be preparing rapidly for heaven. 

Her mother was convinced that retirement 
was necessary to her happiness, and that her 
mind required particular attention. She there 
fore made an arrangement to be alone with 
Mary a part of every day. This was ver) 
gratifying to the little invalid, and she told he 
feelings to her mother daily with entire freedoii! 
She would often say, 

'Dear mother, 1 don't feel as happy as 1 
used to. I am afraid I hav'n't a new heart. 
I think I am growing wicked again. Do pray 
for me that I may know that I have a new 
heart, and be happy.' 

She was at times much depressed, anfi 
would w^eep v/hile talking about her wicked 
heart, and her fears that she wa:: not a true 
Christian. For two or three weeks sh^ was 



iMAllY LOTHROP. 57 

in this state of mind. Her pastor visited her 
frequently, and had several conversations with 
her about the Saviour suffering for the sins of 
men, and explained the nature of the atoning 
sacrifice which the Lord Jesus Christ had 
made. She now saw more clearly than she 
had done before, that however vile and guilty 
her soul might be, he could purify and save it, 
and she was led to give up herself more en- 
tirely mto his hands. She then became tran- 
quil, and was never aftenvards knoAvn to express 
fears with regard to her prospects beyond the 
grave. 

She would sometimes say, 

' I think I shall never again fear that I have 
not a new heart.' 

In November, being now nearly six years of 
age, she lost the use of her limbs so far, that 
she could neither sit or stand alone, and was 
unable to feed herself. She was never heard 
to regret that she could not walk, excepting in 
one instance. On thanksgiving day her broth- 
ers and sisters were permitted to be in her 
chamber, and vrhile she w^as looking; at them» 



68 MEMOIR OF 

and seeing them engaged in play, her mother 
said, 

•^ Does the noise trouble you, my dear ?' 

' Oh no, mother,' said she pleasantly ; ' 1 
love to see them, and I sometimes wish I 
could play with them.' 

This mild expression pierced the heart of 
her mother, .for she had been looking with 
tender regret on her helpless little daughter: 
but, checking her own feelings, she said, 

' It does not make you unhappy that you are 
not able to play with them, does it? You 
think it is all right ?' 

' Oh yes, dear mother,' she replied, ' I am 
not unhappy. I don't think God deals hardly 
with me, for he knows that I am sick, and he 
could make me to be as well as the other 
children.' 

She was pleased to see her mother's friends 
and different members of the family ; but the 
greater part of the time preferred being alone 
with her mother, and wished her either to 
read, sing, or pray with her. This evidently 
soothed and comforted her under her sufferings, 
which at times v:ere very severe. 



MARY LOTHROP. 59 

She would frequently say, that the blessed 
Saviour was near her to comfort her, and at 
one time in the night when she w^as very sick, 
and her mother asked if she was willing she 
should leave her a while to get some rest, she 
said, 

' Oh yes, mother, you and father will be near 
me then ; but the blessed Saviour is nearer than 
you.' 

Feeling one day better than usual, she re- 
quested that her sisters might come into her 
chamber, and appeared very happy to see 
them. After they had talked together a while, 
she reminded them, as she often did, that they 
should be grateful for health and for the use 
of their limbs, and said that she did not expect 
ever to be well again. She then desired them 
to come nearer to her, and said, 

'I've something I wish to say to you. 1 
wish you to remember what that hymn says, 

" There is a dreadful hell, 
And everlasting pains, 
Where sinners must for ever dwell 
In darkness, fire and chains." 



(30 MEMOIR OF 

I don't repeat this because I am afraid of 
going there. I think I shall go to that happy 
world. But I wish you to remember that, 
except you repent of all your sins, you must go 
there. You must 

" Love and serve him here below, 
And pray to have your sins forgiven." 

If you don't, we can never meet in heaven. 
And do remember that the same hymn says, 

" There is, beyond the sky, 
A heaven of joy and love, 
And holy children, when they die, 
Go to that world above." 

Now do promise me that you will try to meet 
me there.' 

Her mother, seeing that she was much ex- 
liausted, said, 

' My dear Mary, I hope your sisters will 
remember what you have said to them, and 
how often you have prayed for them. I would 
not say any thing more now.' 

' Dear mother, I hav'n't done yet,' said Mary; 
'I must pray myself that God would put it 
into their minds to remember what T have said.' 



MARY LOTHROP. gj 

She then prayed very earnestly, and for 
some thiie, and was so much engaged that 
once or twice she raised her hand. This was 
the last time she was ever seen to move her 
hand, all muscular power being lost. 

One Sabbath, towards night, she said, 

'The Sabbath is almost gone, and I feel as 
if it had not been kept holy to-day ; but I shall 
not be here long, and w^hen I get to my heavenly 
home, it will be all Sabbath day.' 

She wished to have every one that was able 
attend meeting, and would often say, 

' I wish a minister could be sent for, and 
some of the neighbors come in, and have a 
meeting here. I should love to hear them sing 
and pray.' 

One day, when one of her sisters obeyed a 
command reluctantly, she said to her, 

*The hymn says, 

" Let children that would fear the Lord, 
Hear what their teachers say ; 
With rev'rence meet their parents' word, 
And with delight obey." 

That's what I want — to see you delight to obe) 
inother.' 



52 MEMOIR OF 

Tlievo was a poor sick woman in the neigh- 
borhood, for whom Mary had felt much com- 
passion, and, in reference to her, she once said 
to her mother, 

' I feel as if I hadn't done any thing for God, 
but I wish to do something. And now that I 
am sick, and not able to go with you to talk to 
poor sinners, and God knows that I am not able, 
won't it be the same if I send that poor woman 
something, and tell you what to say to her ?' 

Then, turning to her sister E., who was nine 
years old, she said, 

^Only think how much good you could do 
if you were a Christian, in talking with poor 
sinners about the blessed Saviour : and you 
could go and see that poor woman for me, and 
carry her something ; but oh, how it makes me 
feel to think that you are not a Christian ! This 
is what the Saviour means we should do for 
him, to go and see poor people when they are 
sick, and give them a part of what we have. 
Will you, dear mother, send that poor woman 
something, and tell her it came vi'om me ? and 
I will tell you what to say.' 



MARY LOTHROP. 63 

Then addressing her sister again, she said, 

*When I look at you, and see that you can 
walk, and do as you please, 1 want you should 
love and serve the Lord. He has taken away 
the ase of my limbs, but I don't think it hard, 
for 1 am happy. I wish you to serve God 
while you are well. You must not think that 
if you pray night and morning, God will forgive 
you, and comfort you when you are sick — oh 
no, you must love and serve him all the time.' 

jMrs. L. was deeply affected by her conversa 
tion, and said, 

' jMy dear, 1 have been thinking how much 
God loves you, and that you ought to be com- 
forted. He might have dealt with you as he 
does with many children, taking them away 
suddenly, as for instance with the croup, and 
then they have no time to think how much 
the Saviour suffered for them, or to know how 
much he could comfort them. Perhaps God 
sav*' that your little feet would have gone astray, 
and he has gently laid them aside.' 

' It comforts me, dear mother, to hear you 
talk so,' interrupted Mary. 



64 MEMOIR OF 

'And your little hands,' continued Mrs. L., 
' God may have seen that they would do 
wrong, and he has gently laid them aside too. 
How good God is to my little Mary.' 

* Oh yes, mother,' said Mary, ' 1 feel happy 
Will you repeat the hymn that says, " And be 
an angel too ?" ' 

Her mother then repeated the verse, 

" Now let me mount and join their song 
And be an angel too : 
My heart, my hand, my ear, my tongue, 
Here's joyful work for you ' 

After this, Ivlary said, 

'Now will you sing " 'Tis best?"' Her 
motlier then sang the hymn, of which the fol- 
\0win2; IS one of the verses : 

" 'Tis best, 'tis infinitely best, 

To go wiiere tempters cannot come , 
Where saints and angels, ever blest, 
Dwell and enjoy their heavenly home. 



MARY LOTHROP. f^^ 



CHAPTER VI. 

IMary often appeared to be in a holy and 
delightful frame of mind, and would then spend 
much of the time in prayer and praise. She 
once thouglit she should hve but a few 
hours, and requested that her sisters might be 
caUedj adding, 

* Oh how much I wish they would become 
pious.' 

After they had come into the room, she said 
to them, 

' Dear sisters, I feel very weak ; I can't talk 
much ; but I do want you to love the blessed 
Saviour. Perhaps you think it is hard to love 
God, but it isn't ; it is very easy. 

" 'Tis easy work, if we begin 
To serve the Lord betimes; 
But sinners that grow old in sin, 
Are hardened in their crimes.' 

'And the blessed Saviour says, "Take my 
yoke upon you, and learn of me ; for my yoke 

l.othrop> 5 



55 MEMOIR Of 

is easy, and my burden is light." Do prom- 
ise me that you will pray God to give you 
a new heart, and then O how easy, how 
j)leasant it will be to pray. I used to think 
it was very hard, and that God never would 
give me a new heart, but he will — lie will 
hear you ; for he says, " I love them that love 
me, and those that seek me early shall find 
me." ' 

Seeing her sisters weep, she said, 

* The blessed Saviour says, 

" To him let little children come, 
For he hath said they may ; 
His bosom then shall be their home 
Their tears he'll wipe away." 

*Dear sisters, if you are Christians, when 
you get to heaven, he will wipe all your tears 
away.' 

Mrs. Lothrop was too much moved to con- 
ceal her feelings; and when Mary perceived 
that her mother was also weeping, she turned 
to her, and said, 

* Dear mother, he will wipe away your tears 
too ; for he says, 



MARY LOTHROP. 57 

" His own soft hand shall wipe the tears 
From every weeping eye, 
And pains and groans, and griefs and fears 
And death itself shall die." 



* Don't weep for me, dear mother, when I am 
gone to heaven, for then I shall be happy, then 
I shall praise God as I want to.' 

She kissed her sisters before they left her, 
and, bidding them 'good night,' said, 

* Perhaps you will not find me here in the 
morning; I may be gone to my heavenly 
home.' 

She was so much exhausted by the effort 
of talking to her sisters, that it was feared she 
would not survive the night. Many wearisome, 
suffering days, however, were appointed her, 
and many similar scenes were witnessed. She 
often had spasms, in which it seemed that she 
must die instandy ; then again she would be 
so oppressed for breath, that death appeared 
inevitable. And after hours of extreme suf- 
fering she would revive, her countenance would 
become animated, and with a sweet smile, like 
the smile of health, she would greet a friend, 



58 MEMOiR OF 

and appear to participate in ail the pleasures ol 
those around her. 

When the Ivlemon^ of Nathan Dickerman 
was puhlished, it was read to her, in part, and 
she w^as much interested in it. As different 
conversations w^ere read, she would say, '1 
feel just so.' And at one time she said, 

' Well, little Nathan is safe in heaven, and 
I think I shall soon be there.' 

The children read the Memoir of Nathan in 
the family, and one of them w^as heard to say, 
' This seems like Mary : she talks just so, and 
has always talked so.' 

On a Sabbath in November, Mary had a 
suffering day, and it was thought doubtful 
whether she would live through it. In the 
evening her mother left the room, and when 
she returned was surprised to find Mary raised 
up in bed, and listening while lier father read 
some passages in the Memoir of the late Pliny 
Fisk, missionary to Palestine. 

'Oh,' said she, Miow happy it makes me to 
think that he was such a good minister and 
missionary.' 



MARY LOTHROP. qq 

Soon after this, she bad a turn of severe dis- 
tress, and as she revived she said, 

' Oh mother, I've come back again.' 

' Why, my dear,' said her mother, ' did you 
think you were dying?' 

' 1 thought my breath was going to stop,' said 
Mary, ' and tb.at God would take me nght home 
to heaven. But he's sent me back to hfe again, 
and perhaps I shall have to suffer a great deal 
more. I don't wish to think much about dying, 
or about getting well. I want God to do just as 
he pleases. I know I can suffer a great deal 
m-ore, but I never can suffer as much as the 
blessed Saviour did for me. He can comfort 
me ; he does comfort me ; I feel very happy. 
Dear mother, I wish you would help me praise 
God. Will you sing some heavenly hymn ? I 
want to praise — O I want to praise him.' 

Mrs. L. then sang a hymn, of which a few 
verses are quoted on account of the remarks 
to which they gave rise. 



70 MEMOIR OF 

Oh happy souls, how fast you go, 

And leave me here behind : 
Don't stop for me, for now I see 

The Lord is just and kind. 

And when you get to worlds above 

And ail their glory see. 
When you get home, your work all done, 

Then look you out for me." 

* Yes, sweet mother,' interrupted little Mary, 
* when I get to my heavenly home, tlien I sliall 
look out for you ; how I shall want to see 

you.' 

Mrs. L. then sang — 

" Then all together we shall be, 
Together we shall sing, 
Together we shall praise our God 
And everlasting King." 

Here Mary again interrupted — 

' Oh yes, mother, how happy it makes me 
There all together — all this family will praise 
God. Oh, how happy we shall be ! I am 
willing to suffer as much as God sees best, for 
it will be but a little while.' 

After a few minutes she said, 

* All the good Christians that come to this 



MARY LOTHllOP. 72 

house will praise God in heaven too. I wish 
you would sing it again, mother.' 

The word ' aW seemed to till her mind with 
rapture, and she said, 

*A11 the poor sinners — O how I want 
Christians to pray for them, that they may love 
the Saviour. How happy that verse makes me, 
to think that all who love God will praise him 
together in heaven.' 

The greatest alleviation that could be afford- 
ed to Mary under her daily sufferings was to 
sing hymns, or to read suitable passages of 
Scripture, or such parts of serious books as she 
could understand. It might have appeared to 
an inattentive observer, that her frequent re- 
quests for reading or singing arose from habit, 
and that the sound lulled her to rest. But this 
was far from being the case. She was an at- 
tentive listener, and had a very quick and de- 
cided choice of what should be read or sung. 
Her selection was often surprising to tliose 
around her. Many spiritual hymns never tired, 
though sung from day to day ; and she would 
often express her feelings and wishes in the 
language of some familiar verse. But many 



72 ME 3101 R OF 

Other books (and as she was sick for so lonj: a 
tmie, a great variety was brought her) she never 
wished to hear read a second time. Her re- 
marks upon wh.at she heard, show^ed how 
entirely she was interested. 

One day as her mother was singing a favorite 
hymn — 

" Children of the heavenly King, 
As ye journey sweetly sing, 
Sing the Savicur's worthy praise, 
Glorious in his works and ways. 

We are travelling home to God, 
In the way our fathers trod ; 
They are happy now, and we 
Soon their happiness shall see." — 

Mary interrupted her mother, saying, 
' Dear mother, that hymn is very sweet to 
me. 

" We are travelling home to God, 
In the way our fathers trod;" — 

that means, that they too were sick and suf- 
fered a great deal, and w4ien they w-ere dying 
suffered a great deal, and this is the way that 
God takes his children to heaven. [ do feel 
willing to sufl'er, and I shall try to be very 
patient.' 



IMAllY LOTHROP 73 



CHAPTER VII. 

The months of December and January 
were exceedingly trying to Mary. She was 
entirely helpless, and could only turn her head 
upon her pillow. Her disease was beyond the 
control of the most skilful physicians. Much 
was done to relieve her from pain for the time, 
but it seemed certain she could not recover 
Her attending physician. Dr. Bigelow, often 
said, that it w^ould not be surprising if she 
should die at any hour, and still that she might 
live and suffer many weeks. 

When relieved from distress, she was happy 
to see her mother's pious friends, but her diffi 
culty of breathing was so great, that much of 
the time it distressed her to have any person 
near her, except some famihar friend who 
knew her feelings, and whom she could ask to 
leave her at any time. She soon perceived a 
change of air when two or three persons were 



74 MEMOIR 0¥ 

in the room, and would often request that the 
doors might be opened, so that she could have 
fresh air. She would sometimes say, 

' Oh that I could have one long breath. 
Do open the window, perhaps I can breathe 
netter.' 

She could not be moved without great suf- 
fering, and would often lie for hours in the 
same position, dreading any change. A part 
of the time she lay in spasms, her mind insen- 
sible. 

Thus passed the tedious days with Mary, 
month after month. The sun would rise, and 
finish his appointed hours, and set ; but she 
gained no relief Day and night found her 
the same httle sufferer. Her mind, however, 
was at ease. She did not wish to recover, and 
had no fear of death ; but would comfort her- 
self with thoughts of heaven, and waited to be 
released from earth. The following hymn, al- 
tered to suit her case, was often read or sung 
to her. It was soothing to her feelings, and 
she would speak of tlie different verses with 
much animation. 



MARY LOTHROP 75 

" I see the pleasant bed, 

Where Hee the dying saint; 
Though in the icy arms of death, 
She utters no complaint. 

Her aspect is serene, 

She smiles in joyful hope ; 
She knows that arm on which she rests 

Is an unfailing prop. 

She lifts her e3'es above 

To her Almighty Friend, 
Whose power from every fear secures, 

And guards her to the end. 

She knows her Saviour died, 

And from the dead arose ; 
She looks for victory o'er the grave, 

And death, the last of foes." 

* Yes, dear mother,' she would say, ' I know 
the Saviour died, I knoio he did. When 1 
have these distressed turns, I feel as if I could 
not breathe again, and I think this will be my 
dying bed ; and, mother, it is very pleasant, 
because 1 am so near heaven. And if God 
should see best that I should suffer a great deal 
when I come to die, I hope I shall be patient, 
and utter no complaint, for it will soon be 
over, and then I shall be with the Saviour.' 



7(5 MEMOIR OF 

She very often prayed for patience to suffer 
all that God saw best for her, and when friends 
were about to implore the blessing of the Lord, 
and asked what they should pray for, she 
would say, ' That I may be patient.' 

When greatly oppressed for breath, she 
would ask to hear some hymn, to make her 
more patient, and would sometimes say, ' Sing 

" Patience, O what a grace divine !" 

She often wished to hear the following 
hymn : 

" Dear Lord, though bitter is the cup 
Thy gracious hand deals out to me, 
I cheerfully would drink it up : — 

That cannot hurt, which comes from thee." 

These and similar hymns were cheering to 
little Mary. 

Many times in a day she would say, 

*Do sing some heavenly hymn to comfort 
me. Tell me about the sufferings of the 
Saviour, then I can bear this pain better.' 

The following was among her favorite 
hymns : 



MARY 1.0THR0P. 77 

Dear friend of friendless sinners, hear, 

And magnify thy grace divine; 
Pardon a child that would draw near, 

That would her heart to thee resign ; 
A child by self and sin opprest, 

That pants to reach the promised rest. 

Thou say'st thou wilt thy servants keep 
In perfect peace, whose minds shall be 

Like new born babes, or helpless sheep, 
Completely stay'd, dear Lord, on thee 

How calm their state, how truly blest, 
Who trust in thee, the promised rest. 

She appeared constantly to feel that the 
great object of life was to prepare for heaven, 
and, whenever she felt able, would exhort 
those around her to love the Saviour, that 
they at last might reach that glorious world. 

About the first of January, Mrs. L. received 
a note from a friend with a new year's present 
for each of the children, excepting Mary ; the 
lady supposing either that she might not be 
living, or that she was too feeble to be inter- 
ested in any thing of the kind. The parcel 
was brought to Mrs. L. while sitting by Mary's 
side, and was opened before her. She looked 



78 MExVIOIR OF 

at every article, and asked what there was for 
her. Her mother answered, 

' There is nothing for you, my dear ; Mrs, 
H. would have sent you something, for she 
loves you, but she thought you were too sick 
to enjoy any such thing/ 

' Well,' said Mary, ' she prays for me, and 
that is more to me now than a new year's 
present would be.' 

The affectionate disposition whicli she mani- 
fested through her sickness was truly delight- 
ful. The tender and grateful love she con- 
stantly expressed for her mother will never 
be forgotten by those who spent much time 
with her. 

*Dear mother, sweet mother,' she would 
say, ^1 don't wish you to sit up with me to- 
night. You can lie down, and turn the settee 
so that I can see you. I love to look at 
you, for you look as if you wanted to re- 
lieve me.' 

After Mary had been for a long time, as it 
seemed, near death, she had a day or two 
when her sufferings w^ere less severe, ^nd he/ 



MARY LOTHROP. 79 

mind more than usually clear and clieerful. 
She seemed to take a deep interest in all that 
was done around her. Hearing her mother 
give an older sister some particular directions, 
she said, 

'Dear mother, if God should spare my 
life, I think I should know how to do every 
thing to suit you entirely.' 

Her mother feared from tliis remark, that 
Mary might think she was really better, and 
begin to anticipate being restored to health. 
And as the physician had that morning ex- 
pressed the opinion decidedly, that there was 
no ground for encouragement, and that a single 
nour might entirely change her appearance, she 
thought it desirable to undeceive her, if she 
had begun to hope for life again, and turn her 
thoughts towards heaven. She therefore said, 

' My dear Mary, you always have done every 
thing to please your mother, and you must 
now be comforted by it ; but you know you are 
very sick, don't you ?' 

' Yes, dear mother,' replied IMary. 

' The doctor came in while you were asleep, 



80 MEiMOIR OF 

this morning,' said her mother; 'should you 
like to know what he thinks of your case ?' 

a should/ said Mary. 

' My dear little daughter, Dr. B. thinks you 
cannot get well again, and I fear you will 
never be able to help your mother any more.' 

She then paused, but soon added, ' How 
does it make you feel, my dear, to think you 
can never be any better ?' 

Mary had closed her eyes, and her mother 
anticipated a pensive reply. But with unusual 
animation she said, 

' Why, dear mother, what would it be to get 
v/ell again ? It would only be to live a sinner ; for 
I always have sinned, and if I live, I always 
shall sin. Because, you know, if we don't do 
any thing that is sinful, we have wicked 
thoughts, and we can never love God and 
praise him as we ought to, while we live in 
this world. But, dear mother, in heaven \\q 
can praise God all the time, and who wouldn't 
rather go to heaven ?" 

Mrs. L. then sang a part of a hymn, to 
which Mar}^ was ever ready to respond : — 



MARY LOTHRUP. Qj 

" Shall aught beguile us on tlie road, 
When we are walking hack to God •' 
For strangers into life we come, 
And dying is but going home. 

Welcome, sweet hour of full discharge 
That sets our longing souls at large. 
Unbinds our cliains, breaks up our cell, 
And gives us v/ith our God to dwell. 

To dwell with God, and feel his love, 
Is the full lieaven enjoyed above ; 
And tlie sweet expectation now. 
Is the young dawn of heaven below." 

Through the first months of Mary's illness 
she was uniformly calm and patient. Her 
long and painful disease, however, and her 
entire helplessness at length caused her some- 
times to speak quick and impatiently ; but af- 
terwards she would be grieved, and would say, 
*1 have not had a happy day.' 

One morning she said to her mother, 

*I have been praying, and I don't think I 
shall speak impatiently any more. I have not 
prayed enough lately, but I think v/hen 1 am 
well enough to eat, 1 can pray.' 

About the last of January, an asied ladv 

Lothrop. Q 



82 MEMOIII OF ^ 

died In the neighborhood. At the hour for the 
funeral, Mary wished to be carried to the 
window to see the procession. Her motlier 
had some fears lest her own feelings might be 
excited, and Mary receive some unfavorable 
impression. She, however, gratified her child, 
who looked silently on the scene before her. 
She seemed particularly desirous of seeing the 
coffin, and watched till all had passed away. 
At length, she said, 

* That don't make me feel unpleasant, dear 
mother.' 

' I am glad it does not,' replied her mother. 

' How happy she must be,' said Mary, ' how 
easy and how safe in the arms of the Saviour ; 
I wish I was there.* 



MARY LOTHROP. 



CHAPTER VIII. 



About the first of February, 1831, IMary'i 
disease appeared to be coming rapidly to a 
crisis, and from this time it was almost daily 
expected that she would die. Her distress for 
breath was greater than it ever had been, and 
for one or two days she was thought to be 
dying the greater part of the time. Her life 
was, however, strangely protracted six weeks 
longer. Death was spoken of in her hearing 
with the same familiarity that a visit would have 
been, and she was even congratulated by some 
of her friends as being near her home. When- 
ever she was at all relieved, some friend would 
read short passages of Scripture, or from some 
other book, and would converse with her, to 
console and sustain her spirits. Extracts from 
the Memoirs of Dr. Payson seemed particularly 
applicable to her case, and she was often com- 
forted by them. 



64 MEMOIR OF 

Mrs. A. once read to her the following 
passage : 

" It seemed this afternoon as if Christ said 
to me, 'You have often wondered and been 
impatient at the way by which I have led you ; 
but what do you think of it now ?' " 

She then paused and said, 

* I suppose, my dear Mary, you often wonder 
that you are sick so long, and suffer so much 
pain, don't you ?' 

Mary was at this time laboring for breath, 
and could speak only short words, and those 
with difficulty ; but with a mild, submissive 
look, she answered, 

' No.' 

The dear child appeared at this time to be 
almost suffocated. She had lain nearly four 
months without being able to move a finger, 
with no prospect of relief, except in death ; and 
still did not wonder at the way in which she 
was led. There could be no deception, for it 
was evident from the question, and from the 
manner in w^hich it was proposed, that a differ- 
ent answer was expected; and wha* was 



MARl' LOTHROP. 85 

more, a child would naturally v/isli to think 
and feel like such a holy man as Dr. Pay son. 

But ' No' was the reply of little Mary, and 
the answer was doubtless given in childlike 
sincerity. 

Mrs. A. then read another sentence, in which 
Dr. Payson says, 

" And now, when I am a cripple, and not able 
to move, I am happier than I ever was in my 
life before." 

She then asked Mary if she could say the 
same. 

' Yes,' was now her answer. 

*What,' said Mrs. A., M:appier than you 
used to be when well, and playing with your 
companions ?' 

* Yes, yes,' was her reply. 

Mrs. O'B.. whom Mary loved tenderly, and 
who spent many hours by her side, has 
communicated the following facts respecting 
her: 

"It was to me an interesting fact, that I 
never could induce little Mary in her most se- 
vere sufferings to say she was desirous of being 



86 MEMOIR OF 

well iigain ; even when presenting the strongest 
attraction earth could afford — to enjoy the 
society of her beloved modier. 

" ' 1 had rather go to heaven,' was ahvays 
her reply ; assigning as a reason, ' This is not 
such a glorious, happy world as heaven.' 

" Another fact that surprised me was her 
entire fearlessness of death. Not one lingering 
fear could I ever discover. In reading to her 
Watts's hymns on death and heaven, which she 
heard with untiring delight, 1, at first, omitted 
those verses which spoke of death and the 
grave ; but I found this was unnecessary. She 
did not, as she said in reply to my question, 
^ Shiver on the brink, and fear to launch away.' 

" At one time on Monday when I visited her, 
I spoke of the Sabbath school ; said that I told 
the scholars of her, and how the Saviour com- 
forted her. She said, 

" ' I wish I could talk with them ; I am not able 
to talk with them, but I can pray for them.' " 

On a Sabbath in February, an excessively 
cold day, Mary was so much oppressed for 



WARY LOTHROP. Q7 

breath, that the window was opened, and her 
settee removed near it. Being a httle revived, 
she said, 

*Dear mother, come sit by me, and sing 
some hymn to comfort me. I think I am near 
heaven. Oh how I want my brothers and sis- 
ters to love and serve God. Dear mother, will 
you see that they read the Bible, and that they 
pray every day ? Perhaps they'll tell you, 
Y" es, mother, I do read and pray ; but I want 
you to see that they do. I w^ant all this neigh- 
borhood to be holy. Will you try to m^ake 
them holy when I am gone ?' 

She was obliged to make a great effort to 
speak, but appeared to feel that she must speak. 

The last few weeks of her life she was so 
emaciated, and her nervous system so suscep- 
tible, that it was exceedingly trying to her when 
strangers attempted to do any thing for her. 
Different members of the family therefore at- 
tended her at night, and this was found to be a 
relief to her. 

At one time, when her brother G. watched 
with her, she said, 



58 MEMOIR OF 

^ ] will see how long I can do without moth- 
er, so that she can get some rest.' 

Soon after, she said, 

' I am afraid a distressed turn is coming on ; 
out 1 know how much laudanum they give me, 
and if you can drop it, I will take it without 
waking mother.' 

When her mother rose, she gave her some 
coffee. 

^ It is God who gives coffee its pleasant taste,' 
said Mary ; ' man could not do it. Oh how good 
God is, to give us so many things to make us 
happy here.' 

She then enumerated many things, which 
were particularly pleasant to her, such as oranges, 
lemons, and figs, and said, 

' We could not make them grow. This is all 
tlie work of God.' 

This train of thought was interrupted by see- 
ing some wood laid upon the fire. 

' God makes the wood grow, too,' said she. 
'Wood is prepared from trees. Oh how 
good God is. I remember when I rode out 
last summer, how beautifully the bills and the 



MARY LOTHROP. SO 

trees looked. How many there were, and how 
pleasant it seemed. And the sweet hltle flow- 
ers that lie made to grow out of the ground, we 
read in the Bible that all these things are the 
work of God, and my parents have told me so 
too. If ever so many men should tell me he 
did not, I should never believe them.' 

' For the same reason,' said her mother, ' you 
believe there is a heavenly world, where God 
and angels dwell, and to which the blessed Sa- 
viour is taking all that love him.' 

Looking up sv/eetly, she said, 

* Oh yes, mother.' 

After remaining silent for some time, she 
wished to be raised up to kiss her mother, 
which she could seldom do, on account of the 
difficulty in her breathing. 

^Mother,' said she, 'there is something in 
my mind 1 wish to tell you ; it is about the 
heavenly world. I have had a happy night. 
I couldn't sleep. I have been thinking about 
heaven. INIother, heaven looks to me like 
beautiful high hills, where the angels go and 
come. I don't mean tliat I see it — 1 don't 



90 MEMOIR OF 

know how to tell you — but it makes me feel 
very happy. I think God will soon send his 
angels to take me there.' 

After her brother left the room, Mary said, 

* Brother G. has taken good care of me 
to-night ; he has moved my pillow softly, and 
rocked me so easy. I think he feels something 
I have said to h.im, and I do believe God will 
hear my prayer for him. Don't you think he 
will, if I pray very earnesdy? I must have 
his name written in the Lamb's book of life.' 

* Dear mother,' she soon after said, ' will you 
«ing me some hymn about heaven ?' 

Her mother then sang, 

" Do we not dv/ell in clouds below, 
And little know the God we love ? 
Wliy should we love this twilight so, 
When 'tis all noon in worlds above ? 

There shall we see him face to face ; 

There we shall know the great unknown; 
And Jesus, with his glorious grace, 

Shines in full light around the throne." 

' How sweet that is,' said IMary ; ' 'tis whei\» 
I long to be.' 



MARY LOTHROP 9| 

Then she repeated, 

" Blessed Jesus, meet me on tlie road, 
First born of the eternal God, 
Tiiy hand shall lead a younger son, 
And place me near my Father's throne." 

'The blessed Saviour does meet all that 
love huTfi on the road/ she added, ' doesn't 
he V 



92 MEMOIR OF 



CHAPTER IX 

Often as tlie writer entered the house, 
during the last six weeks of Mary's life she 
has thought, Is the spirit of the little sufTeror 
still imprisoned in its diseased casement of clay, 
or has it winged its way to realms of happiness 
and light ? The door of her room I usually 
found open, and sometimes the window, even 
when the weather was extremely cold, that 
she might breathe more freely. Still it did 
not seem like the chamber of death ; for not 
unfrequently lier mother was singing in a low 
and soothing voice, and Mary, even when she 
could- not speak, would always welcome me 
with the sweetest smile. Day after day I 
found her much the same, comforted and sus- 
tained by the promises of the Saviour, and 
borne above her sorrows by the bright hope 
of heaven. 

I^iloi-e than once have I been reproved, when 



MARY I.OTHROP 93 

engaging with Mrs. L. in conversation that did 
not suit the spiritual state of Mary's mind, 
slie would look wearied, and would gently say, 

' Will you read some hymn about the Sa 
viour ?' 

It was evident she wished to turn our 
thoughts from earth to heaven. Reading or 
singing was almost the constant employment 
of a familiar visitor, and it was owing to this fact 
tnat I\Iary so often repeated a verse to express 
what she wished to say to others. She would 
almost daily ask for the hymn, 

*' Jesus, lover of my soul, 

Let me to thy bosom fly ; 
While the raging billows roll, 

While the tempest still is high , 
All my trust on thee is stay'd ; 

All my help from thee 1 bring 
Cover my defenceless head 

With the shadow of thy wing. 
Other refuge have I none — 

Helpless hangs my soul on thee 
Leave, oh ! leave me not alone ! 

Still support and comfort me. 
Hide me, O my Saviour! hide, 

Till the storm of life be past; 
Safe into the haven guide ; 

Oh, receive my soul at last ?' 



Q4 MEMOIR OF 

Her mother one day said to her, 
' My dear, why do you prefer that hynirt 
when you are in pain, to any other ?' 
Mary immediately repeated the hnes, 

'^ Jesus, lover of my soul, 
Let me to thy bosom fly." 

She spoke slowly, emphasizing almost every 
word, and added, 

' When I am in pain, and you begin to sing, 
" Jesus,'* it makes me think of the land and 
blessed Saviour ; and when it says " lover of 
my soul," I think that he loves me. And 
when you sing '' Let me to thy bosom fly," 
that means my heavenly home, and I hope 
that the blessed Saviour will soon take me 
there.' 

Seeing a sister do something which was not 
entirely right, she said, 

^ Oh sister, when shall I see you all that 
mother wishes you to be ? It will break my 
heart to die and leave you a sinner. How can 
you appear happy, and know that you do not 
love God ? Who has taken care of you all 
your life, and given you food and clothes and 
all that you have had ? Perhaps you will say 



MARY LOTHllOP. 95 

It is father and mother ; but it is God, who has 
been looking down from heaven and has taken 
care of you, and what have you done for him ? 
You know that if you should say you love 
God, and do not keep his commandments, you 
are a liar, and the truth is not in you. / do 
not say it, sister, but the Bihle says it. You 
must tell me that you do not love God. I 
know it will be hard, but I wish you to tell 
me so.' 

Her sister remained silent. Mrs. L. said, 
* My dear, you must answ^er Mary ; she 
does this for your good.' 

After the reply, Mary continued, 
' That is because you don't keep his com- 
mands. Do begin ; then you will love him, 
and it will be easy for you to obey. I can die 
happy, if you have a new heart, and you will 
then be a comfort to our mother.' 

Her brother, a member of college, now en- 
tered the room, and the conversation was in- 
terrupted. She had often expressed concern 
for this brother, and had said to her mother 
that she wished to talk with him : but as he 



96 MEMOIR OF 

was so much older than herself, and absent 
from home a great part of the time, she seem- 
ed to feel a diffidence in talking with him as 
she did with others. Her mother knowing 
that her life was uncertain, and that she was 
seldom able to converse, said, 

* Now, my dear, you have an opportunity 
of talking with your brother E.' 

She looked up at him, and in an affection 
ate tone said, 

' Dear brother, I want you to becomiC pious, 
and love and serve God all your life. Who 
has been taking care of you so many years, 
and wdien you were sick ? It was God wdio 
raised you from your long sickness, and nov/ 
I wish you to think of him, and serve him. 
Will you promise me that you will never give 
up till God lets you know that you are a 
Christian ? ' 

Here she waited for an answer. 

* If you will, you must begin to pray in ear- 
nest, and pray as many times a day as David 
did. He prayed seven times a day. And 
you must read the Bible very often. 



MARY LOTHIlOr. 97 

Her mother then said, 

' Mary, you know you are near your heav- 
enly home, and your brother is going away 
very soon ; will you now decide who shall 
have your little Bible ? Do just as you please, 
my dear.' 

Her brother had at some time expressed the 
wish that she would give him her Bible, when 
she could use it no longer. 

She closed her eyes, and, after lying a few 
moments apparently in deep thought, said, 

' I wish my Bible to be given to that one 
who will first seek the Lord, and that will read 
It most and pray the most. I don't care 
which has it, whether it is the oldest or the 
youngest.' 

All were silent with surprise, when their 
mother said, 

* My dear children, you must now decide, 1 
can do nothing about it.' 

A day or two after this, she said to her sis- 
ters, 

* I have but a httle while to be here, now 
do let me know that you will seek the Lord. 

r.-othrop. 7 



98 MEMOIR OF 

Is not one of you coming for my Bible ? And 
I do not wish you to tliink that but one can 
nave it. There are more Bibles than one like 
mine. Dear mother, will you promise that 
when I am gone to heaven, if they will be in 
earnest to beco^ne Christians, and will tell you 
so, that you will buy them Bibles like mine ? 
And I wish their names and mine to be 
written in them.' 

A few days before her death, after she had 
been lying silent for some time, she roused as 
if from sleep, and said, 

' Mother, I have been thinking about brother 
E. now that he has gone away, and I wish you 
would write to him and tell him, that I shall 
not see him again, but he must not live a sin- 
ner. He must read the Bible, and pray every 
day ; and I wish he would send me word if he 
is going to set out m earnest to do it, and then 
I shall die happy. Tell him God will let me 
know when I get to heaven, if he becomes a 
Christian. And, mother, I wish you would 
take my Bible and send it to Providence to 
iM-olher, and put an old one with it, and tell 



MARY LOTHROP. 99 

Inni that after he has read the old Bihle through, 
lie may call my Bihle his own.' 

Within the last week of her life, she said, 
' These sufferings are very great, but I think 
ihey are my last. It makes me feel some un- 
pleasant, dear mother, to leave you, but 1 want 
you to get ready to come to heaven soon. Do 
you remember the Sabbath day when my settee 
was by the window, what you promised me you 
would do?' 

* Yes, my dear jMary, I rem.ember.' 

* Will you do it .'" said Mary ; ' will you try to 
make this neighborhood holy, that they all may 
become pious ?' 

One evening, after much sympathy had been 
expressed for her, she said, 

* I don't hke to have people call me a suf- 
fering lamb, and say, how much you suffer. I 
would rather they would call me a sinner. I 
don't mean that I wish them to call me so, but 
] would rather they would talk about my being 
a sinner, and tell me of the sufferings of the 
Saviour: that makes me forget how much 1 
suffer.' 






1 00 RIEMOIR OF 

At one time, after a day of stupor, she said, 

*What time is it, dear mother? have you 
dined ?' 

' Oh yes,' said her mother,.' some time since ; 
it is almost night.' 

' Will you raise the curtains ?' said Mary ; 
Uhere have been no good Christians here 
to-day ; it has not been a happy day to me ;' 
and added, as her mother raised the curtains to 
admit the light, ' but in heaven it will always be 
* Sacred, high, eternal noon.* 

She referred to her favorite Sabbath hymn, 
beginning with the line, 

" Thine earthly Sabbaths, Lord, we love, 

which contains those words. 

On Sabbath day, March 13th, the last Sab- 
bath Mary spent on earth, she was very ill, and 
it seemed that she could live but a short time. 
In the afternoon, after many hours of severe 
suffering, she revived, and it was noticed that 
she looked towards the window very intently. 
Her countenance beamed with animation, and 
at length she said, 



MARY LOTHrcOP. 101 

* Mother, something has come into my mind 
that makes me very happy. When I was 
looking out o'' the window, I felt as if 1 wanted 
to rush througii, nd go up to heaven as quick 
as you would rush from a hot fire to a cool 
room.' 

In the evening of the same day she had a 
violent spasm ; as she recovered from it she 
said, 

* Oh that this might be the last.' 
Her mother said, 

' My dear Mary, this is perhaps to purify you, 
and prepare you for heaven.' 

It was with great difficulty Mary could speak, 
but she was understood to say, 

' I think I am prepared.' 

Her mother said, 

^ Do you feel happy ?' 

* Yes, very happy,' she replied. 

She was at the time in great distress, 
apparently dying. 

Mrs. A. stood by, fanning her constantly, 
and seeing that her eyes were strangely altered, 



I 02 MEMOIR OF 

' Can you see, dear Mary ? 

•No,' she replied, and added, 'oh, 1 am 
going.' 

She however recovered from this spasm, and 
as soon as she could speak, she asked that a lady 
who had been present might pray with her. 
Being told that the lady had gone home, Mary 
said, 

' Some one 7nust pray ; oh do pray for me.' 

Her sufferings were very great, and it 
seemed impossible that she cor.d survive the 
night. 

She several times repeated, ' I am going- 
1 am near heaven — I shall soon be there.' 

At one time she said, ' Dear mother, these 
are some of my worst spasms ; I hope they are 
the last.' 

Her mother said, 

'Don't be disappointed, my dear, if it is not 
so. God may yet spare you to suffer a great 
deal more. Do you think you should be 
willing?' 

The little sufferer replied, 

' Yes, mother, if it is to make me more holy, 



MARY I.OTlIllOr 



103 



and all that sec me ir.oro holy, 1 shall be 
willing.' 

She then desired again that some one would 
pray. 

Her mother prayed with her, and it seemed 
to soothe and comfort her. Mrs. L. then san«; 
one of Mary's favorite hymns. 

" I cannot bear thine absence, Lord ; 
My life expires, iftliou depart; 
Be iJiou, my heart, still near my God, 
And thou, my God, be near my heart 

1 was not borji fi»r earth and sin, 

Nor c:in I live on thini^s so vile; 
Yet 1 will stay my Father's time, 

And Jmpe and wait for heaven a while 

Then, dearest Lcrd, in thine embrace 
Jjet me resig'n my fleeting breath ; 

A)id, v/ith a smile upon my face, 
Pass the important hour of deatii." 

The few remaining days of Clary's life were 
spent much as the previous had been, though 
perhaps her sufferings were increased by greater 
difficulty in breathing. Reading, singing, and 
prayer were cheering to her whenever she was 
able to listen. 



104 



ansMom of 



An account oi* tlie last evening and night of 
her life is given in the words of Mrs. H., a 
beloved fnend of the family, who was present 
when Mary ceased to breathe. 

" When I entered her chamber, which to me 
had become a most interesting spot, about thres 
o'clock on Thursday afternoon, she appeared in 
dying agony, and we soon thought that her suf- 
ferings had ceased. We knelt by her, and tried 
to commend her departing spirit to God ; but 
she revived, and her distress continued great 
until about eight o'clock, when it so much 
increased, that it was truly heart-rending to wit- 
ness it, and hear her with childlike simplicity 
utter such expressions as tliese : — 

"'Oh that I could have one breath.' ' Oh 
that I could cough.' 

" ' My sweet Mary,' said her motlier, ' this 
is the way that good Dr. Payson went to 
heaven.' 

" ' Oh yes, dear mother, 1 will try to be pa- 
tient — rock a little faster — give me more air — 
it will soon be over — it will soon be over.' 

" About ten o'clock she said v;ilh the most 



MARY LOTIIROP. 1Q5 

impressive earnestness, *Mrs. H., come, kneel 
down by me, and pray to God — -pray earnest — 
^pealc loud.'' 

" After I began she repeated, ' earnest — 
earnest — O God, do relieve me.' 

" As I proceeded, I perceived that she grew 
easier, and continued much longer than I other- 
wise should have done. AVhen I closed, she 
said, with an emphasis 1 shall never forget, 

" * You have been a great comfort to me, 
dear Mrs. H. You have been a great comfort 
to me. God has heard your prayer and re- 
lieved me a little.' 

" She soon after desired her mother to 
wipe the phlegm from her mouth, which had 
ahfnost stopped her breath, and which she had 
been entirely unable to raise before. She im- 
mediately said, evidently with a desire that they 
might pray w^ith her, 

" ' I wish Evil's. O'B. was here — do send for 
Mi-s. A.' 

" ?»Ir. and Mrs. A. were sent for, and soon 
came in. Mr. A. prayed with lier, and she 
then desired them to sing, 



106 MExMOIR OF 

" Jesus, lover of my soul," &c. 

" But it soon appeared that, as the number 
m the room became greater, her distress for 
breath increased, and she said, with that ad- 
mirable sincerity I have witnessed in older per- 
sons near to death, after replying to her mother 
that it had been a comfort to her, 

" ' But now you may go — you may go now.' 

" She appeared rather easier, and slept until 
half past one o'clock ; then her distress in- 
creasing, she seemed soothed and comforted, 
as she had always been during her sickness, by 
reading her favorite portions of Scripture, and 
singing hymns. She mentioned particular' 
hymns, ar.d requested to hear about the sulTer- 
ings of the Saviour, and once or twice said, 
* Sing of heaven.' 

" At four o'clock she again requested that 1 
would pray with her. When 1 had closed she 
said, 

" ' Pray again — pray all the time.' 

" Not long after this she said, 

" ' ]\Iother, come to me — come now — sli 
close to me — call father — call him quick.' 



MARY LOTHROP. 107 

" From her earnest and affectionate manner 
it was evident she thought the hour of sepa- 
ration was near. 

" Her distress was too great for her to con- 
verse, but as we sat silently watching her we 
could hear her faintly whisper, 

" ' Dear Ma'— sweet IMa'— sweet Ma' '—till 
the sound died away upon her lips. 

" She continued to breathe till after eight 
o'clock on Friday morning, March i8th, when 
her happy spirit took its upward flight to that 
Saviour she had so much loved and honored ; 
and I could respond to the words of the Rev. 
Dr. Cornelius, who soon after entered the 
room, 

" ' Happy mother ! happy mother ! I camiot 
weep, I rejoice with you. 



J jj 



Tlie funeral of little IMary was attended on 
the following Sabbath by her pastor, and her 
eartlily remains now rest in the burying-ground 
at tlio north end of the city, in sure and certain 



108 MKiMOIR OF MARY LOTIIROP. 

hope of a glorious resurrection. Her age was 
SIX years and a little more than three months ; 
and her life is an afFectin2: illustration of tlie 
passage, ■' Out of the mouth of babes — thcu 
hast perfected praise." 



PUBLICATIONS Ox^ THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY 



D'Aubigne's History of the Reforma-lDr. Spring's Bible not of Man, or the 



tion. A new translation, revised 
by the author, in four volumes 
l'2mo, with portraits. Price $1 75, 
extra cloth. 

Baxter's Saints' Everlasting Rest, 
l'2mo, in large type; also Ibxno. 

Banyan's Pilgrim's Progress, I'imo, 
in large type^ and ISmo. Both edi- 
tions neatly illustrated. 

Memoir of Jas. Milnor, D. D. 

Mason's Spiritual Treasury, for every 
day in the year. Terse, pithy, and 
evangelical. 

'FlaveTs Fountain of Life, or Re- 
demption provided. 

Flavel's Method of Grace, or Re- 
demption applied to the Souls of 
Men. 

Flavel's Knocking at the Door; a 
tender, practical appeal. 

Bishop Hall's Scripture History, or 
Contemplations on the Historical 
Passages of the Old and New Testa- 
ments. 

Bishop Hopkins on the Ten Com- 
mandments. Two standard works 
of the times of Baxter. 

President Edwards' Thoughts on Re- 
vivals. 

Venn's Complete Duty of Man. 

Owen on Forgiveness, or Psalm 130. 



Gregory's (Olinthus, LL.D.) Evi- 
dences of Christianity. 
PaJey's Natural Theology. 

ELEGANT PRACTICAL WORKS. 



Argument for the Divine Origin of 
the Scriptures drawn from the 
Scriptures themselves. 

Nelson's Cause and Cure of Infi- 
delity. 

.Memoir of Mrs. Isabella Graham. A 
new and standard edition. 

Memoir of Mrs. Sarah L. Huntington 
Smith. 

Sacred Songs for Family and Social 
Worship. H>'mns and Tunes — 
with a separate edition in patent 
notes. Also, the Hymns separately. 

Elegant Narratives, Select Tracts, 
illustrated. 

Willison's Afflicted Man's Com- 
panion. 

Doddridge's Rise and Progress of Re- 
ligion in the Soul. 

Edwards' History of Redemption. 

Volume on Infidelity, comprising five 
standard treatises : Soame Jenyns 
on the Internal Evidence; Leslie's 
Method wilii Deists ; Littleton's 
Conversion of Paul ; Watson's Re- 
ply to Gibbon and Paine. 

Pike's Persuasives to Early Piety. 

Pike's Guide to Young Disciples. 

Anecdotes for the Family and the 
Social Circle. 

Universalism not of God. 

Dibble's Thoughts on Missions 

The Bible True. 



Wilberforce's Practical View. 
Hannah More's Practical Piety, 
james' Anxious Inquirer. 
Elijah the Tishbite. 
Nevins' Practical Thoughts. 
Melvill's Bible Thoughts, selected by 
the late Rev. Dr. Milnor. 



Harris' Mammon. 
Gurney's Love to God. 
Foster's .Appeal to the Young. 
Abbott's Young Christian. 
Abbott's Mother at Home. 
Abbott's Child at Heme. 
Jaunes' Young Man from Home. 



CHRISTIAN MEMOIRS. 



Btv. C. Buchanan, LL.D., including 
his Christian Researches in Asia. 

R.)» John Newton. 

R3V. Henry Martyn. 

Riv David Brainerd. 

Rev. Edward Payson, D. D. 

Harriet L. Winslow, Missionaxy in 
India. 

I&nies Brainard Taylor. 



Harlan Page. 
Normand Smith. 
Richard Baxter. 
Archbishop Leighton. 
Matthew Henry. 
Rev. Samuel Pearce. 
Rev. Samuel Kiipin. 
Madam Rumpff and Puohes 
Brogli*. 



2 OTHER sr: 

Edwardi on the AlTections. 



TUAL WOUKS. 

!Gu \e to Acquaintance with God. 



Baxter's Call to the Unconverted. iPik 's Rel gion and Eternal Lif«. 
Alleine's Alarm to the Uiiccnverted. iBaxter's Dyinjj!; Thfug its. 
Flavel's Touchstone. lAi ^rev Fuller's l^ack.slider. 

Flavel on Keeping the Heart. Redeemer's Last Command. 

KelfTeustein's Self-Deception. |l3urder's Sermons to the Aged. 

MISCELLANEOUS WORKS. 
Bci^ue's Evidences of Christiatiity. j?.la?on on Self-Knowledge. 
Keith's Evidence of Prophecy. Divine Law of Beneficence 

Morlson's Counsels to Young Men. Zaccheus, or Scriptural Plan of B*^ 
Spirit of Popery, [1"2 engravings.] | nevolence. 
The Colporteur and Roman Catholic. iHynins for Social Worship 

POCKET MANUALS. 



Clarke's Scripture Promises. 

The Book of Psalms. 

The Book of Proverbs. 

Daily Scripture Expositor. 

Ten Commandments Explained. 

Advice to a Married Couple. 

Hjonns for Lifant Minds. 



Daily Food for Christians. 

Chaplet of Flowe -s. 

Heavenly Manna. 

Ceci^ ■>. d "lavel's Gift for ^lournor* 

Crurnos from the Master's Tal>l« 

:Milk for Babes. 

Dew-Drops. 



BOOKS FOR THE YOUNG. 

MANY OF THEM BEAUTIFULLY ILLUSTRATED WITH EXGRA^^^G8 

Narratives of Pious Children. 



GallauJet's Scripture Biograpliy. 

Youth's Book of Natural Theology. 

Peep of Day. 

Line upon Line. 

Precept upon Precept. 

Anzonetta R. Peters. 

The Night of Toil. 

Richmond's Letters and Counsels. 

Advice to a Young Christian. 

Charles H. Porter. 

Missionary's Daughter. 

Scudder's Tales about the Heathen. 

Trees, Fruits, and Flowers of the 

Bible, [9 cuts.] 
Elizabeth Bales. By J. A. James. 
Nathan W. Dickerman. 
Grace Harriet. 
Childien Invited to Christ. 

Also, Dr. Edwards' Sabbath Manual and Temperance Manual, aiiJ 
more than 6U vols, in German, French, Spanish, Welsh, and Danish. 

Also, upwards of 1.000 Tracts and Children's Tracts, separate, bound. n« 
in packets, adapted for convenient sale by mercliants and traders, many ol 
them with beautiful engravings — in English, German, French, Spaiii^li, 
Portuguese, Italian, Dutch, Danish, Swedish, and Welsh. 

[Cr" It is the design of the Society to issue all its publications in good 
type, for the poor as well as the rich ; and to sell them, as nearly as may be. 
it cost, that the Society may i->either sustain loss nor make a profit by all 
its sales. 



The Dairyman's Daughter, etc 

Charles L. Winslow. 

Withered Branch Revived. 

Peet's Scripture Lessons. 

Child's Book of Bible Stories. 

Children of the Bible. 

Amos Armfield. 

The Child's Hymn-Book. 

Scripture Animals, [1(3 cuts.] 

Letters to Little Children, [1:3 curs.] 

Great Truths in Simple Words 

Clementine Cuvier. 

Rolls PLumbe. 

Pictorial Tract Primer. 

Watts' Divine and Moral Songs. 

With numerous similar works. 



wr-iii J 



I3J4 



