LIBEARY 

OF THE 

Theological Seminary, 

PRINCETON, N. J. 

Snelf, I05~X$^ 

Hook, ^_ # 



I 






MEMOIR 



OP 



OR, 

CHRISTIAN ACTIVITY, AND TRIUMPH 
IN SUFFERING. 



BY REV. ROBERT G. ARMSTRONG, A. M. 

PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN FISHKILL, N. Y. 



PUBLISHED BY THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 
150 NASSAU-STREET, NEW-YORK. 



D. Fanahtw, Printer. 



Entered according to act of Congress, in the year 1837, by 
Robert G. Armstrong, in the Clerk's Office of the District 
Court of the Southern District of New-York. 

Right of publishing transferred to American Tract Society. 



PREFACE. 

Memoirs of the pious dead should be regarded as 
intimately associated, in theirobject and tendency, with 
the instructive biographies of the sacred Scriptures ; 
and as carrying out the original designs of the Spirit 
of Inspiration in the abounding narrative of the Bible. 

This method of communicating instruction is admi- 
rably adapted to secure, in reference to such beings as 
we are, the most important ends. 

We are taught, alike in Scripture biography and in 
the lives of departed saints, the practical effects oj 
divine truth upon the heart and conscience. We see 
the influence upon those of like passions with us, of 
principles purifying and controlling ; at war with every 
sinful inclination, and successfully struggling with 
every unruly passion ; and are thus effectually taught 
what we, by grace, may be. 

The recorded dealings of God's providence with his 
people are also an instructive commentary by which 
the import of his promises is clearly and impressive- 
ly illustrated. Here we see how much he does for 
them ; how freely he forgives their sins ; how faithfully 
he keeps his word, and how he watches over them 
with a warm, a lasting, and a sleepless friendship. 

Besides, the history of each individual who has 
finished the christian course in triumph, adds another 
to the "great cloud of witnesses" by which we are 

H. H. 



4 PREFACE. 

11 surrounded" who testify to the faithfulness of God, 
and the reality, power, and excellency of religion. 

If the humble, retiring individual, whose narrative 
is here given, "being dead," shall " speak" with pow- 
er to any — if this little volume shall pay a visit ot 
mercy to the sufferer — if it shall ever be found the 
companion of a sleepless pillow, guiding the inquiring 
soul to Christ, or kindling the graces of any of his 
people, or lighting up a smile in the hour of death, 
its errand of love will not be in vain. 

It is proper to state that the selections from what 
she had written are frequently abridged, condensed 
and simplified ; but the original sentiment is in all 
cases carefully retained. 

H. H. * 



« <s> av a sr 3? 8 • 



CHAPTER I. 



Early life of Hannah Hobbie— pious education— con- 
viction of sin — sickness — mistakes — sufferings — 
dream — false refuges forsaken — conversion — joy 
— view of her afflictions — illustrations of Divine 
truth. [October 13, 1806, to 1825.] 9 

CHAPTER II. 

Power of religion in sickness — afflictions blest—in- 
terview — letters to aunts and a cousin. [1825 to 
April, 1827.] 22 

CHAPTER III. 

Commences her Journal — how written— devotes her 
self to God — resignation — views of the Sabbath — 
thinks her life short — revival of religion — anxiety 
for her father — renews her covenant — letter to an 
aunt — her father's conversion — she unites with the 
church — beautiful scenery — reflections— self-dedi- 
cation. [August to November, 1827.] 31 

CHAPTER IV. 

Views of duty— desire for God's presence — letter 
to a cousin — wishes to die — submissive — letter to 
1* 



CONTENTS. 



Page. 



her cousin J. H: H.— delightful exercises— inter- 
view — reflections — desires to be useful and holy — 
Lord's supper — carried into the garden — an era in 
her christian life. [December 1827 to May, 1828.] 53 

CHAPTER V. 

Death of Miss L. — reflections — letter to her cousin 
Frances M. — no fear of death— delight in God's 
word — prayers answered— renews her covenant 
with God every Sabbath — letter to a cousin re- 
cently married — to an aunt— great sufferings — 
given over by her physicians. [May to Sept. 1828.] 73 

CHAPTER VI. 

Joy and triumph in God — death solemn — certain — 
welcome to her — letter to an afflicted friend — visit 
of a minister — high enjoyment — prayer of faith — 
answered — exalted themes — heavenly state of 
mind— the Bible her chief study — the Psalms — de- 
lightful interview — watchfulness— redemption — 
joy in God. [September to November, 1828.] 94 

CHAPTER VII. 

Her modesty — Female Benevolent Society — revi- 
val—secret of her eminence — marriage of her 
sister — reflections — New- Year— visit — grave-yard 
— animal creation — interview— letter to a fellow- 
sufferer — resolves to overcome hindrances to duty 
—speaking for God. [Dec. 1828 to March, 1829.] 114 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Renewed attack of her disease— God purifies by af- 
fliction — clear views of sin — sister removes — re- 



CONTENTS. 



Pagt. 



newed efforts to do good — letter to four female 
cousins — female prayer-meeting — letters — her cup 
of blessing overflows— prayers and meditations- 
rides out. [March to August, 1829.] 138 

CHAPTER IX. 

Blessing of relief from pain — death of J G , 

a female friend — visit to her residence — reflections 
on the death of H.— birth-day— letter to her cou- 
sins — Lord's supper at Capt. C's — severe conflict — 
erects her Ebenezer — Lord's supper — letter to 
Frances M.— rides to Capt. C's. [August 1829 to 
February, 1830.] 159 

CHAPTER X. 

Christian progress — she prays much— salvation 
of relatives — views of a profession of religion — 
reflections after seven years' sickness — letter to an 
uncle — meeting — her sister's conversion — her Sab- 
bath-school formed. [February to June, 1830.] 178 

CHAPTER XL 

Ride to Mr. Hobbie's — the house — beauty and subli- 
mity of the landscape — letters to J. H. H. — Mrs. 
G's death— letter to J. H. H — to Miss E. B.— meet- 
ing at Capt. C's— her birth-day— resolutions. [June 
to October, 1830.] 192 

CHAPTER XII. 

Rapid decline— death seems near— prepares — influ- 
ence of habits of life on piety— clear hope— let- 



8 CONTENTS. 

Pago 
ters — care of her heart — rejoices in view of death 
—her quiet spirit. [Oct. 1830 to Feb. 1831.] 211 

CHAPTER XIII. 

Prominent traits of her christian character — her stand- 
ard of piety high— deep sense of sin — evil of her 
heart — repentance— love to Christ— love of the 
truth— of the Sabbath — of prayer — of christians — 
anxiety for sinners — for success of the cause of 
Christ— joy in doing good — fellowship — how to 
prepare for death. 226 

CHAPTER XIV. 

Delightful interview — her heavenly spirit — visit to 
her death-bed — affecting incident — disposes of her 
Journal — directions respecting her funeral — fare- 
well reflections — her death — conclusion. [Feb. to 
March 21, 1831.] 343 



MEMOIR 



OF 



HANNAH HOBBIE 



CHAPTER I. 



Hannah Hobbte was the daughter of Caleb K. 
and Clarina Hobbie, of the town of Northeast, 
Dutchess county, New-York. She was born Octo- 
ber 13, 1806. 

Her family were of that respectable and substan- 
tial class which stands at an equal remove from 
the rich and the poor. Possessing what Agur so 
wisely desired, neither poverty nor riches, they 
were happy in comparative exemption from the 
temptations which are incident to both. 

From this class of society I believe God has ever 
taken the greatest proportion, and, if I mistake not, 
the most efficient of his people ; and the members 
of this family have been consecrated by the Spirit, 
one after another, to his service, as fast as they have 
grown up to maturity. At the time at which this 
narrative commences, none of the family but Mrs. 
Hobbie belonged to the church of Christ. I have 
had the happiness since of receiving, at different 



10 MEMOIR OF 

times, her husband and three of her children, as 
members of the church to which I then ministered. 
Others have joined themselves to the people of 
God in a distant part of the state. 

Hannah was the second daughter. She was re- 
markable from childhood for a solidity of mind and 
sobriety of deportment not frequently found in 
the buoyant season of youth ; was dutiful to her 
parents, and affectionate and even-tempered to- 
wards her brothers and sisters and companions. 

The religious instruction which she received 
from her mother, and which, doubtless, greatly con- 
tributed to establish the equanimity of temper and 
sobriety of behavior which so strongly character- 
ized her early years, seems to have made an abid- 
ing, though not an awakening impression upon her 
mind. From a sketch she left of her sufferings and 
exercises, I find that though at an early age she 
seems to have been sensible of the importance of 
religion, and to have had many serious impressions, 
none of them were lasting. Her first decided con- 
victions of sin were during a revival of religion in 
the neighborhood in which she lived, when she was 
about fifteen years of age. At that time her atten- 
tion became fixed upon her eternal welfare in a 
manner which, to her, was new, and she saw that 
to that period she had lived (under all her advan- 
tages) in strange ignorance of herself, of sin, and 
of God. She was deeply sensible that, under the 



HANNAH HOISBIE. 11 

holy administration of God's government, gracious 
and merciful as it is, there is no peace to the wicked; 
and felt that, as she had been a great transgressor, 
there was none for her. 

In the paper which I have mentioned, and which 
begins with that appropriate expression of the 
Psalmist, M Come, all ye that fear God, and I will 
tell you what he hath done for my soul, ,, having 
alluded to the visit of a pious missionary, who had 
called upon the family and conversed with her, 
she says : 

" Eeing deeply impressed with a sense of my 
lost and perishing condition, soon after he left us 
I retired by myself to pray ; and solemnly resolved, 
that, let what would be the consequence, I would 
endeavor to seek that religion which I considered 
of the utmost importance, and without which I was 
sensible I never should know true happiness. My 
health was pretty good ; but I knew enough of the 
influence of disease to convince me that repent- 
ance should not be put off till a time of sickness, or 
the hour of death. I therefore prayed that I might 
not delay the important work." 

This was six months subsequent to her being 
awakened ; and after the expiration of another half 
year, she says of herself: 

11 I continued to seek for peace and pardon ; but 



12 MEMOIR OF 

depending too much on my own strength, instead 
of submitting entirely to God, I was, in a measure, 
left to myself, and in the course of the following 
winter grew somewhat careless, sometimes neg- 
lecting the duty of prayer. My health, for some 
time, appeared to be declining; but I was not 
aware of the danger which threatened me, and 
made very little complaint. Knowing that the Lord 
did it, I opened not my mouth.'* 

Her state, a half year still later, is thus de- 
scribed : 

" On the 26th of April, 1823, I was laid upon a 
bed of sickness, and commenced a course of medi- 
cine. My physician, after making two or three 
visits, intimated that such was the nature of my 
complaint, it would probably be permanent. A con- 
sulting physician was called, and coincided with 
this opinion. This excited neither fear nor alarm ; 
I thought it was intended for my good, and that it 
was all for the best. I was brought, apparently, near 
the grave. For several weeks after this I was al- 
most insensible of spiritual things.' ' 

She speaks of her physician very kindly and 
thankfully; and having been relieved, in some mea- 
sure, from her pains two or three months after this, 
she ascribes it (under God) to his " kind and unre- 
mitting attention." 



HANNAH HOBE1E. 13 

Who does not sec that in her distress she fled 
to every refuge but the right one ] She prayed to 
he made happy, but she found no relief; she wept 
at the misery of her condition, and in view of coming 
wrath, but her guilt still lay heavy upon her, and 
her conscience troubled her with ceaseless upbraid- 
in £s. The congregation to which she belonged was 
then without a pastor ; and like many others in her 
situation, she concealed the state of her mind, and 
became at length almost as careless as before. 

It was at this critical period of her spiritual con- 
dition that I was called to that field of labor, and 
became acquainted with the state of her mind, 
which she has herself briefly described : 

" I was almost insensible of my sin and danger ; 
but after one or two visits from our friend and pas- 
tor, who urged upon me the necessity of being pre- 
pared for death, I was led to reflect on the past 
exercises of my mind, and to renew the practice of 
that duty which I had so much neglected. I suf- 
fered much ; but thought it a punishment for my 
sins which I justly deserved, and seldom felt the 
least disposition to complain, or to think my lot 
hard. When I considered how much less my suf- 
ferings were than they might be, and how much 
less than I really deserved, I found I had more 
reason to be thankful than to complain. 

H. Hobble. 2 



14 MEMOIR OF 

" About this time I was greatly alarmed by a 
dream. I had been more unwell for a week, which 
probably was the occasion of it. In my dream, my 
physician came to see me, and on his first entering 
the room there seemed an unusual solemnity on 
his countenance. He examined my symptoms, said 
but little, and did nothing for me. He seemed to 
hesitate about leaving me. I could not imagine the 
cause of his solemnity. He at length departed ; but 
soon returned, and with the same solemnity, and 
apparently with great reluctance, told me that I 
was not as well ; that I should not live longer than 
till the next week ; that by that time I should be 
so poor that my bones would pierce through my 
skin. I knew that I was not prepared for the im- 
portant event. «I supposed my time short, and, in 
dreadful agony, wrung my hands and cried aloud 
for mercy ; urging the doctor not to leave me. He 
promised to come the next day, and departed. I 
awoke in a profuse perspiration, and in great agi- 
tation on account of my dream. Though only a 
dream, it made a strong impression on my mind. I 
told it to no one. 

" My sufferings greatly increased, and I was in 
great distress of body as well as mind. The next 
Sabbath was, I think, the most trying day I had 
ever experienced. In my distress 1 cried unto the 
Lord : I said within myself, surely the hand of the 
Lord is upon me. My dream was continually before 



HAWAII HOBBIE. 15 

me ; nor did I soon forget it. I thought it was to 
show me that my time was short, and to awaken 
me to immediate preparation for death." 

Her own remarks respecting this dream show 
that she attached to it no undue importance, but 
improved it wisely. The reader will perceive, that 
though her life was continued many years, the suf- 
fering and emaciation of which she now dreamed, 
became at last a matter of history. 

Some time after this she thus writes : 

<c It seemed as if I had endured enough to wean 
me from the world ; but I still felt that my attach- 
ment to it was strong. My sufferings, however, 
tended somewhat to draw off my affections from 
terrestrial enjoyments, and to engage me more 
earnestly in pursuit of those which are incorrupti- 
ble and fade not away. 

<( In the following summer I had some degree of 
hope, but I soon found that I had still a heart of 
unbelief, and again almost despaired of mercy." 

During the latter part of the period embraced in 
these extracts, I had visited her, and felt anxious 
to learn the real state of her mind. Although she 
seemed at first reluctant to rive me a faithful ac- 

o 

count of her former and present feelings, I at 
length, by patient assiduity, succeeded in obtain- 
ing the knowledge which I so much desired. 



16 MEMOIR OF 

During these interviews I found her more and 
more impressed with a sense of sin ; and discover- 
ed also that she was fast treading again her former 
mistaken course of selfish desire for mercy, merely 
that she might he happy ; seeking only deliverance 
from her sorrows, and praying, under the impres- 
sion that, for so doing, she ought to be regarded of 
God. I endeavored to show her that there was 
but one way in which she could become a child of 
God ; that a mere desire of happiness for herself, 
and laying claim to the favor of God because of her 
frequent prayers, was not what he required : but 
that she must come in all her guilt, and wretched- 
ness, and ruin, looking to the blood and spirit of 
Christ for cleansing and for life ; and at the foot of 
the cross make a full and cheerful surrender of her 
heart and all she had to the Savior, to be his — con- 
secrated to his service and glory for ever. * 

Her religious exercises soon assumed a new 
character. She saw that all was wrong within. 
Sin appeared to her exceeding sinful. She abased 
herself before God, and cried with the Psalmist, 
Create in me a clean heart, O God, and reneiv a right 
spirit within me. Then her prayer was heard, and 
graciously answered. By degrees light came, and 
peace and joy in believing. 

She now knew what it was to believe in Christ, 
to rest upon his covenant promises. Now she saw 
and acknowledged that God was right in refusing 



iiawaii iionniE. 17 

to liear her prayers, because she regarded not his 
glory. She saw that she had been unwilling to 
give up all for Christ ; that she had possessed a 
proud and rebellious spirit, having no fellowship 
with a plan of salvation which plucked away every 
merit from herself, and bound all the laurels fresh 
and flourishing upon the Redeemer's brow. Now 
she rejoiced in God her Savior, and fully and freely 
ascribed to him all the glory of her deliverance. 
Her own account of this great change is deeply 
interesting. 

" When about to sink in despair, the Lord in 
infinite mercy heard my cry, and brought relief. 
Then I could truly say, c I love the Lord, because 
he hath heard my voice and my supplications* Be- 
cause he hath inclined his ear unto me, therefore 
will I call upon him as long as I live. The sor- 
rows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell 
gat hold upon me : I found trouble and sorrow. 
Then called I upon the name of the Lord; O Lord, 
I beseech thee, deliver my soul. Gracious is the 
Lord, and righteous; yea, our God is merciful. The 
Lord preserveth the simple. I was brought low 
and he helped me.' 

" At times before, I entertained flattering hopes 
that I had passed from death unto life, but not till 
then, was I willing to give up all for Christ, and ac- 
cept of salvation on the terms of the Gospel. 



18 MEMOIR OF 

" How much did I now mourn the loss of sanc- 
tuary privileges, and the privilege of reading. I 
considered them the greatest I could enjoy ; but the 
Lord was my effectual Teacher. 

" After I had experienced this happy change, 
which filled me with that peace which c passeth all 
understanding/ I was led to wonder — to love and 
praise the Lord for his goodness in my happy de- 
liverance. I beheld and admired the perfections 
of God in every thing around me ; in the works ot 
creation and the ways of providence. O the won- 
ders of redeeming love ! How astonishing t Sin- 
ners may be reconciled to God, and, through a 
Savior's merits, have hope in his mercy ! 

" I now look upon my many afflictions as among 
the means appointed by infinite wisdom and good- 
ness to bring me into possession of that ' exceeding 
weight of glory' which the Lord has prepared for 
his people ; and though I have hitherto been pre- 
vented, through fear and shame, from making 
known the wonderful goodness of God to me, I 
now bless the Lord who hath opened my mouth to 
show forth his praise." 

This peace of mind was, at intervals, interrupted 
a little, for some time afterwards, by fears and 
doubts, arising from the very thing which gave 
others the strongest confidence in her piety — a very 
tender conscience — a quick and delicate susceptibili- 



IIANNAH HOBBIE. 19 

ty, respecting even the appearance of evil. This 
sometimes presented her own heart to her view in 
such a light as threw a shade for a moment over the 
usual brightness of her hope ; but, under all this, it 
was manifest to others that she was rapidly grow- 
ing: in crace. 

From this time (nearly four years from the first 
appearance of her decided convictions of sin) a 
new era in her life commenced. She saw that it 
was her mistaken views of the divine plan of show- 
ing mercy to sinners which had caused her feet to 
stumble, and kept her so long in darkness. Now 
she was afraid of being left to her own understand- 
ing in any thing. She dared not trust her deceitful 
heart any more, for it had too often betrayed her 
already. With entire distrust of her own compe- 
tency to direct her way, she felt that in all things 
she needed the guidance of that u wisdom which 
cometh from above. ,, From the wilderness in which 
she had wandered so long, and where she had 
found the way so dreary, she "came up leaning 
upon her beloved. ,, She earnestly desired to be 
taught wholly — in every thing — of God; and he 
fulfilled to her the promise, M They that wait upon 
the Lord shall renew their strength : they shall 
mount up with wings as eagles ; they shall run, 
and not be weary ; and they shall walk, and not 
faint." Though her outward man was perishing 
her inward man was renewed day by day. 



20 MEMOIR OF 

I cannot pass on without looking back from this 
point, to gather up two or three striking illustra- 
tions of divine truth, afforded by the history of 
Hannah's conversion. 

In external strictness of moral deportment there is 
nothing in the view of the true penitent which can 
palliate or excuse opposition of heart to the truth. 
How then can it be otherwise than lightly esteem- 
ed of God % This amiable female, though faithful 
in the discharge of the social and relative duties of 
life, found that one thing was lacking. She saw that 
she had ?iever loved God — that her heart was enmity 
against him — and she loathed and abhorred herself 
in dust and ashes, as altogether vile. 

We see that a humble, broken heart — a heart re- 
ally distressed because of the evil of sin, of its odi- 
ous character, as opposed to God's holy, and just, 
and good law, God will never despise ; while such 
as have no desire to be holy, to be pure as God is 
pure, he will not regard. We see this weeping 
sufferer at times in deep distress of soul for four 
years before she came to the Savior in all her sins 
for healing and salvation. She found no rest, be- 
cause she saw not the dreadful character of sin, 
and consequently was not driven wholly to Christ, 
renouncing sin and herself, and giving all to his 
service and glory. But when she saw that sin was 
Tier crime ; that she stood in open and desperate re- 
bellion against God, so great, so excellent, so mer- 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 21 

ciful, that he ought to be loved, and obeyed, and 
chosen above all ; then, filled with grief and self- 
abasement, she came and cast herself, weeping over 
past transgressions, at the Savior's feet, like the 
woman which was a sinner, and teas forgiven. 

Watchmen of Israel, let us heed the admoni- 
tion to be faithful to the souls committed to our care. 
For a long season Hannah was in darkness, because 
she had none to teach her what she must do to be 
saved. We may find, if we search our congrega- 
tions with diligent attention, many who conceal 
their feelings. When the real state of her mind 
was elicited, and the way of salvation pointed out 
clearly in simplicity, then she saw her duty — and 
took up her cross and followed Jesus. We must 
at the fire-side, as well as in the public assembly, 
preach, as did the Apostles, the Gospel of the king- 
dom ; and endeavor to ascertain from themselves 
individually, who among our people accept of the 
terms of salvation — who among them are resisting 
the Holy Ghost. Thus shall we find those, who, 
but for this paternal solicitude, might succeed in 
quenching the Spirit. How many has God saved 
through such fidelity as this ! Let us lk watch for 
souls as they that must give account.''' 



MEMOIR OF 



CHAPTER II. 



I love to sit down by the bed-side of a dying be- 
liever, when the process of removal from the world 
is slow, and the approaches of death gradual, but 
steady. I love to watch the developements of 
christian character — the manner in which God il- 
lustrates the import of his covenant engagements, 
and mark the excellency of religion. There, more 
than under any other circumstances, have I seen it 
displayed in all its purity of principle, its eleva- 
tion of purpose, its loveliness of character, its 
brightness of hope, and its strength of consolation. 
There the mind has time and opportunity to think, 
and to search out the foundations of its confidence. 

I retrace with fond remembrance, and often with 
deep emotion, the scenes which I witnessed during 
the painful and protracted sickness of this beloved* 
but now departed friend ; the clear and edifying 
light in which truth has often been presented to my 
mind, by the impressive simplicity with which she 
would tell of the dealings of God with her soul, 
and recount her views, and trials, and comforts ; 
and above all, I love to look back upon the humble, 
and patient, and child-like spirit with which, dur- 
ing years of bodily suffering, often intensely severe, 
she kissed the rod, and rejoiced in him who, she was 



HANNAH UMBBIE. 23 

enabled to see, had wisely and kindly appointed it. 

In my frequent visits to her at this period, I 
found her bodily sufferings, in general, great ; but 
her mind, for the most part, sweetly and firmly 
stayed on Christ. It was manifest throughout, that 
the promise which secures good to them that trust in 
God, as the result of all the allotments of his pro- 
vidence, was, in her case, remarkably fulfilled. 
Under all her severe pains, in her greatest debili- 
ty (which at this time was excessive) she was al- 
ways patient, always resigned to her Master's will, 
always trusting every thing to his hand. She firm- 
ly believed all the trials she endured to be, in her 
ca.se, necessary ; that they were all intended for her 
good ; and her uniform choice was, that God should 
dispose of her as seemed best in his sight. 

For two years she had not been able to sit up, 
at any one time, more than ten or fifteen minutes. 
Repeated attacks of severe pain had so racked her 
constitution, that, through weakness of her ner- 
vous system, at times she could scarcely bear the 
softest voice in her room. I have passed to her sick 
chamber through doors with every latch muffled, 
and, with all this precaution, lifted in the most gen- 
tle manner ; while the family would steal away 
from place to place, in their household occupa- 
tions, with a step as noiseless as the falling of a 
leaf; and yet I have found her happy in her Savior's 
love. When these seasons of extreme prostration 



24 MEMOIR OF 

passed away, it seemed as if she could not be suf- 
ficiently thankful. 

As I was one day sitting at her bed-side, when 
she enjoyed rather more than her usual strength, 
and seemed anxious to improve the opportunity of 
christian intercourse, I felt desirous to ascertain her 
views of God's dealings with her more fully than 
I had ever before done. 

" Hannah," said I, " you have been long and 
greatly afflicted. You have been shut out from the 
world in the bloom of life, deprived of its enjoy- 
ments, and for years visited with severe suffering : 
is it all right V 

She replied, in a voice so feeble, and tremulous, 
and sweet, that its very tones seemed to plead for 
sympathy with her sorrows, " Yes ; it is all right. 
The Lord has done it ; why should I complain ? 
My sufferings have been great ; but Jesus suffered 
more for me. My lot is not hard ; I deserve it all, 
I have often wondered at the Lord's goodness in 
preserving me from death, while unprepared to 
meet it. These afflictions do me good ; and are c not 
worthy to be compared with the glory f that I trust 
will follow. I am in the Lord's hands, and I feel 
entirely submissive." 

"When I asked her what her greatest desire with 
respect to her sufferings had been, she said, 

11 It has been my prayer from the first, continu- 
ally, that it might not be in vain that I was afflicted ; 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 25 

that God would sanctify his dealings with me to 
ray soul, and cause them to bring me to himself." 

" Well," said I, " what do you think is the result]" 

M I can sincerely say, that ■ it is good for me that I 
have bee?i afflicted ;' in this I cannot be mistaken : 
I do humbly trust that God has glorified himself 
in causing my afflictions to work for my eternal 
good. It is a great privilege to say so ; but I think 
I can truly say it." 

Anxious to know her whole heart in this matter, 
I said, " But when you see so many brought 
from darkness to light in firm health and with few- 
er sorrows, do you not sometimes feel as if God 
had been needlessly severe ?" 

<c O sir," said she, while feeling about her pillow 
for her handkerchief to wipe away a tear that start- 
ed from her eye and lay upon her cheek, M you 
know not my heart. God is clear in all. I was 
very obstinate ; I wanted every thing my own way. 
God could not move ?ne, as others have been moved, 
by kindness. His mercies I slighted, his entrea- 
ties I disregarded, and his threatening^ did not af- 
feet me. It appears clear to me now, that he had 
no other way to bring me to himself but to do just 
as he has done; and I bless him now, and hope to 
praise him forever for it." 

I looked at her while uttering this language of 
meek submission ; and a heavenly smile was mel- 
lowing and softening the usually sweet expression 

H. Hobbie. 3 



26 MEMOIR OF 

of her countenance. She turned her eye full upon 
me, beaming with the calm assurance of hope, and 
said, " My dear Pastor, I am a favored being /" 
When the starting tear had been wiped away, and 
the melting scene had gone by, I prayed with her, 
and departed. " I came here," said I, as I left the 
door of the dwelling, " to impart instruction and 
comfort a mourner, but I feel it a privilege to sit at 
her feet and learn." 

In a letter to her aunt at Bedford, dated April 
14, 1827, she says : 

,c I still languish on my sick bed; but it is all 
right ; I ' own the sentence just.' My deprivations 
are many ; but my mercies are many more. I can- 
not go to the house of God, but I thank him that I 
can hear the preached Gospel at home. Last Sab- 
bath I enjoyed this privilege. Like water to the 
thirsty, or meat to him that is hungry, so was the 
word of life to me. The text was in the 117th 
Psalm, * O praise the Lord, all ye nations, praise 
him all ye people ; for his merciful kindness is 
great towards us, and the truth of the Lord endur- 
eth for ever/ Surely his merciful kindness is great 
towards . me ; and because his truth endureth for 
ever, therefore I will put my trust in him and not 
be afraid. 

rt How astonishing it is that many hear from the 
lips of the faithful preacher their awful condition 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 21 

while unreconciled to God, apparently with no con- 
cern. Though the Savior died to redeem them 
from eternal death, they regard it not. What a 
manifestation of the awful hardness of the human 
heart is this ! Can any thing but mighty grace sub- 
due it ? Indifference to religion prevails in this 
place, and I sometimes fear lest heavy and de- 
served judgments may come upon us ; but the Lord 
is infinite in goodness and plenteous in mercy; 
I sometimes therefore hope that, as he is reviving 
his work in other places, we too may behold his 
glory in the salvation of sinners. 

" Spring has again returned with all its loveli- 
ness. How great and glorious is that God, at whose 
word the seasons perform their successive rounds ! 
his glory shines in the firmament, and his good- 
ness fills the earth : the hills and the valleys rejoice 
and sing — the fields and forests praise him. 

1 All nature seems at once combined 
1 In songs of wonder, love and praise.' 

But in the plan of salvation God's glory shines 
brighter still ; here he demands our highest praise. 
There is nothing in creation for which God has 
done so much as for man. As we are the peculiar 
objects of his favor, let it be our delight to serve 
him while we remain sojourners here, that we may 
reign with him in heaven.' ' 



28 MEMOIR OP 

In a letter to another aunt, four days later, she 
says : 

" It is now about four years that I have been 
deprived of the blessing of health : I have passed 
through many trying scenes, I have had cause to 
weep, and I have had cause to rejoice and be glad. 
Had any one told me that I should thus have 
suffered, I should probably have sunk under the 
thought ; or, on the other hand, had I been told of 
the benefit I should derive from my afflictions, and 
of the happiness which I now possess, I should have 
been ready to exclaim, impossible ! But the Lord 
himself has done it ; his righteous arm inflicted the 
stroke, and in mercy and compassion he has made 
it a blessing to my soul. Yes, my dear aunt, if I 
am not greatly deceived, I have reason to believe 
my present sufferings will be my eternal gain. As 
adversity has been your lot, I have sympathized 
with you. 

" How different the lots assigned to man ! While 
some have every enjoyment of life, others suffer 
greatly, as we do. But if we have an interest in 
Christ ; if it be our greatest delight to do the will 
of our heavenly Father, as I hope and trust it is, 
I sometimes think it is a matter of little consequence 
in what condition of life we are placed. Health is 
indeed most desirable, and the things of this life are 
a blessing ; but Agur saw that fullness in these things 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 20 

was unfriendly to a spirit of entire dependence on 
God ; and, lest he should deny him, he prayed that 
he might not have riches. For my part, whatever 
of this world's good I enjoy, I would receive as a 
blessing and not as a portion ; and because all be- 
neath the sun is fading and transitory, I look for- 
ward with joy to an inheritance which is incorrup- 
tible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away. 

*' It is painful to me to be separated from those 
friends whom I hold dear; but the joyful period will 
soon arrive when the friends of Christ will meet at 
the right hand of God, where pains and parting will 
be no more. There I hope to meet my dear aunt, 
never more to endure the trial of a separation." 

Another letter, written about the same time, was 
addressed to a cousin, who was still a thoughtless 
girl, though admonished by disease to prepare for 
a dying hour. 

" Northeast, April 20, 1827. 
" Dear Cousin, — I should not be excusable were 
I to neglect this favorable opportunity of writing to 
you. But O that I could address you as one that 
felt the importance of that religion which enables 
me, and all who feel its renovating and sustaining 
power, to be happy, and contented, even in sick- 
ness. I have not heard from you in a long time, but 
from the knowledge I have of your complaint, I sup- 
pose that you are still suffering. Have you felt the 
3* 



SO MEMOIR OF 

need of that solace which arises only from a sense 
of the love and favor of God ] If not, I sincerely 
pity you. Yes ; I have, by painful experience, learnt 
to pity all those who are living without God and 
without hope in the world. I know not what could 
please me more than to hear that my dear Eliza- 
beth had renounced the world and all its vanities, 
and made choice of that good part which can never 
be taken away. Should I attempt to tell you the 
happiness of a soul that loves God, I could not do 
it. I well remember, when I was yet a stranger to 
God, and was often entreated by Christian friends 
to forsake the ways of sin, they told me of the folly 
and danger of my course, and of the delights of the 
ways of wisdom. I can now say that the half of 
either was not told me. I never knew what true 
happiness was till I found it in religion. 

" Separated as we now ara, I often ask myself, 
shall we be separated beyond the grave % Were I 
assured that we should meet in heaven, I should 
feel much more reconciled to see you no more be- 
low, as I probably never shall. Good and evil are 
set before you ; O that you would choose, and be a 
follower of that which is good ! 

"I should be highly gratified to "have you write ; 
for to receive letters from my distant friends is next 
to the pleasure of seeing them. 

" Your affectionate cousin, 

" Hannah Hobbie." 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 31 



CHAPTER III. 



Miss Hobbie was a plain unlettered female, 
trained to habits of industry in a farmer's family, 
and enjoying limited privileges for the improve- 
ment of her mind. In this respect she was most 
emphatically self-made : she was fond of reading, 
and embraced every opportunity at her command 
to gain instruction. 

Her journal was commenced on the 24th of Au- 
gust, 1S27, and exhibits the exercises of her mind 
until within about seven weeks of her death, a pe- 
riod of nearly three and a half years. Here the 
true christian appears portrayed in a most amiable 
and edifying light. O that all who read it may im- 
bibe its spirit. 

It was written, and also her letters, as she re- 
clined on her bed, too weak to sit by a table, hav- 
ing a book before her for a writing-desk, and her 
ink standing at her bedside. Under such circum- 
stances few would have felt themselves able to 
write at all ; few, very few would have persevered 
as she did. The trembling and faint characters in 
which many parts of this journal are delineated, in- 
dicate the pain and weakness under which it was 
frequently continued. She felt the object to be 
great — her own advancement in the divine life; and 



32 MEMOIR OP 

faithfully pursued the plan of recording her exer- 
cises as the best method of ascertaining her spiri- 
tual as well as mental improvement. To a mind 
disciplined, like hers, to self-examination, it ap- 
peared the most eligible method of furthering her 
great object, that of being holy. In order to know 
her progress in the christian life, she felt that some 
permanency must be given to her passing impres- 
sions. From several records it would appear that 
she was in the habit of frequently reviewing her 
journal, for the purpose of ascertaining her growth 
in grace ; and her manner and design in giving it 
into my hands, just before her death, which will be 
hereafter noticed, make it evident that she had not 
the most distant idea of its being published. 

This journal, which appears to me so like a rich 
vein of gold throughout that I scarcely know what 
to omit, commences as follows : . 

w August 24, 1827. In taking a review of the 
last eighteen months of my life, which I have en- 
deavored to devote to the service of God, I find 
much cause to mourn my misimprovement of time, 
and to regret that I have made so little progress in 
the divine life. Having been much impressed of 
late with a sense of the importance of so improv- 
ing the short season allotted me on earth, that I may 
render a good account at last, I am induced to 
adopt this measure for the improvement of my 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 33 

mind and for my growth in grace, believing it to be 
a very effectual method for keeping alive a flame 
of heavenly devotion in my heart, and increasing 
love to God, as the great source of christian ex- 
cellence. 

M And now, O Lord, I would make an entire sur- 
render of myself to thee ; and, through the merits 
of Lhy dear Son, hope to find acceptance with thee. 
May thy Spirit guide me into all necessary truth ; 
save me from all error ; influence me to receive 
the truth in the love of it ; and transform me more 
and more into a likeness to thyself. ,, 

" August 25. Reason and revelation both teach 
me that I have an immortal soul, which, after leav- 
ing this present abode of flesh, must enter a state 
of inexpressible happiness in heaven, or sink into 
the depths of endless wo : and as the present is 
the only time for securing the favor of God and an 
inheritance in heaven, it becomes me to examine 
myself, and know whether I have been actually 
born again ; whether a right spirit is renewed with- 
in me. Have I so repented of sin, that my heart is 
really set against it ] Does the love of God appear 
to me to be the first, greatest, and best of all ob- 
jects ? O Lord, thou knowest that my greatest de- 
sire is to know and do thy will ; wilt thou show me, 
if I am indeed thine ] Manifest thyself unto me, as 
thou dost not unto the world, and make me such as 
thou wilt delight to own and bless/ ' 



34 MEMOIR OP 

M August 26. The returning Sabbath reminds 
me of the privilege I once enjoyed of going to the 
house of God and hearing the Gospel's joyful sound. 
But alas ! I have long been deprived of the inesti- 
mable blessing. I nevertheless rejoice that God, 
whose presence makes glad the hearts of his chil- 
dren worshiping in the sanctuary, likewise conde- 
scends to visit the humble and contrite while lan- 
guishing on a bed of sickness at home. Be pleased, 
Heavenly Father, to favor me with thy gracious 
presence, and make this day a blessing to my soul. 
My Sabbaths on earth will soon end ; then may I 
be prepared to enter upon that Sabbath of rest 
which ends — never. There I may worship Thee, 
without the weaknesses and infirmities of flesh to 
interpose. ,, 

" Aug. 28. As the heavens are high above the 
earth, so great is thy goodness unto me, O Lord, from 
day to day. But alas ! how ungrateful ! What poor 
returns do I make for the mercies innumerable that 
I enjoy ! How often am I contented with the form 
of godliness, without feeling its enlivening and in- 
vigorating power ! With what indifference do I 
read the word of God ! O Lord, awaken me from 
carelessness, stupidity, and unbelief. Thou know- 
est my wants and barrenness ; how feeble my gra- 
ces, how cold my love, how weak my faith, how 
lukewarm my zeal, how negligent my fear, and 
how imperfect all. O strengthen me with might 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 35 

in the inner man ; fashion my soul after thine own 
blessed image ; and daily, out of thy fullness, give 
me to partake of the abundance of grace : give me 
clearer views of the riches of grace, that my unbe- 
lief may be confounded, and deeper discoveries of 
my own wretchedness produced. Let my pride be 
abased ; and O, may I thankfully embrace thy free 
salvation, and be content to be saved, from first to 
last, as a sinner." 

See how soon this prayer was answered. The 
next day she thus expresses herself : 

" Aug. 29. To-day I feel religion to be indeed 
the one thing needful ; and I bless the Lord for the 
hope that I have a share in that good part which 
shall not be taken away. Glorious hope ! With 
this assurance I am contented and happy under the 
deprivation of health, one of the greatest blessings 
of life. With this assurance I am encouraged to 
f fight the good fight of faith/ and to ' run with pa- 
tience the race that is set before me.' " 

" Aug. 31. Yesterday I felt sorely afflicted in 
body, and somewhat depressed in mind, so that the 
day passed away not comfortably. But towards 
evening the Lord was pleased to grant me near- 
ness to the throne of grace. I was enabled to re- 
turn him my unfeigned thanks for his multiplied 
mercies ; to ask for the pardon of sin ; and, through 



36 MEMOIR OF 

the Savior's merits, to hope for salvation and eter- 
nal life. I think I can truly say that I found joy 
and peace in believing. The comforts of the Lord 
delighted my soul, and I was enabled to commend 
myself to the care and protection of the great 
Guardian of my sleeping hours, and close my eyes, 
unsolicitous whether I should awake in time or 
eternity. This morning I awoke, and found my 
thoughts still with God ; aspiring after more grace 
and greater holiness ; anxiously desiring to become 
more and more conformed to the blessed image of 
my Savior. O Lord, wilt thou show me the way of 
life ] * In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at 
thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.' 

1 God is my portion and my joy, 

' His counsels are my light ; 
1 He gives me sweet advice by day, 

' And gentle hints by night. 5 " 

" September 1. I have to record the abundant 
goodness of God to me during the past week. 
Richly favored with the gifts of Providence, and, I 
trust, with the better blessings of grace, I have 
been called upon, by love and gratitude, to devote 
myself wholly to the service of God. I think I 
have found that true happiness consists not in the 
enjoyment of health or the good things of this life. 
I thank thee, O Lord, that thou hast taught my 
thoughts and affections to ascend, and fix upon 



HANNAH HOBBIE, 37 

those joys that never die. Thou art the fountain of 
life ; the only source of true happiness : unto thee 
would I look for all that I need." 

y< September 2. I hail the return of another Sab- 
bath ; but, sensible of my own utter insufficiency, 
would look to God for a fresh supply of grace^ 
through which alone I can rightly improve it. O 
Lord, may thy blessing make this day more profit- 
able to me than any one I have spent before. I 
deplore my imperfections ; may my afflictions be 
the means of removing them; and as the Captain 
of salvation was made perfect through sufferings, 
so. may I be fitted by them for thy blessed will. He 
was without sin ; I have many sins to be forgiven 
and to be forsaken. " 

u September 4. Through the mercy and goodness 
of the Lord to me the past night, I have been blest 
with refreshing sleep, and brought to behold the 
light of another morning. For two days I have 
had humbling views of myself as a sinner. In re- 
flecting on the past, 1 have much cause for humili- 
ation, because of the spirit of pride and selfishness 
which has hitherto been so prevalent within me. O 
when shall I be willing to render unto God all his 
due ! He alone is worthy of all praise, honor, and 
glory. O when shall I be willing to live only to 
the honor and glory of that Savior who has called 
me from darkness to light ! O that I might possess 
the Savior's meek and lowly spirit ! O Lord, 

H. Hobbio, 4 



28 Memoir op 

poor and needy I would come, and through thy 
strength resolve to devote the remainder of my life 
to thee. Of myself I can do nothing. O for grace 
to help me in this time of need. I would present 
my soul and body a living sacrifice, holy and accept- 
able to thee, which is my reasonable sei'vicc. Ac- 
cept thou the offering, and make my heart thy con- 
stant abode. Make me willing to sit humbly at the 
feet of Jesus, and submit myself altogether, impli- 
citly to his teaching.' ' 

" September 5. Like a stranger and pilgrirn 
below, I wander in search of purer and more sub- 
stantial joys than this world ean give, I look for a 
city which hath foundations, whose Builder and 
Maker is God. I feel and am assured that my 
days on earth are few : I am, therefore, more re- 
conciled to the trials of life, and I count all these 
sufferings but light, when compared with the glory 
that shall be revealed in me hereafter.' ' 

" September 9. Another week is added to my 
mortal existence, which brings me nearer to eter- 
nity. I would ask myself whether I am nearer to 
God and heaven. I think I can say that I do more 
ardently hunger and thirst after righteousness ; and 
. feeling the inadequacy of earthly good to satisfy 
my soul, without the continual enjoyment of the 
love and presence of God, I desire to live near 
to him, and to- be more conformed to his* blesseJ 
innate." 



UANNA1I H015UIE. ~9 

She then mentions the calls of many of her 
friends who were not pious; regrets that their at- 
tention could not be drawn to the subjects which 
interested her more deeply than their worldly con- 
versation, and complains of the interruption, as de- 
priving her of the profit of recording her exercises 
of mind, and interfering materially with the privi- 
leges of meditation and prayer, as she was reduced 
at this time to a state of great bodily weakness- 
But having been favored in the meantime with a 
few opportunities of intercourse with the children 
of God, she proceeds to show the difference, in her 
view, between them. 

u I find much pleasure in the society of christian 
friends, particularly those whose conversation shows 
most of a spiritual mind. Indeed, I feel a pecu- 
liar attachment to the friends of Christ. But on 
the contrary, I seldom find satisfaction in the visits 
of those whose conversation is about the things of 
this world. O how do I pity those who know not 
God, nor consider the worth of their souls. I do sin- 
cerely pity them ; and my constant prayer to God 
is, that they may repent before it be for ever too 
late. O that all my friends were tne friends of God !" 

She closes the entry in her journal this day by 
a renewed dedication of herself to God, which was 
not only her frequent, but her tccekly practice. 



40 MEMOIR OF 

In reference to a revival of religion with which 
we were at this time favored, and which exerted its 
blessed influence among the different denomina- 
tions in the vicinity, she thus expresses herself: 

11 September 21. How does it rejoice my heart 
to hear of the conversion of sinners ! The glad 
news that God has commenced a glorious work 
here, has filled me with ecstacies of joy, awakened 
my drowsy powers, and made me more earnest at 
the throne of grace in behalf of sinners. I rejoice 
in the hope that the Lord will bless us abundantly 
with the refreshing showers of his grace. I have 
long mourned for the desolations of Zion, and la- 
mented the carelessness and stupidity which have 
so long prevailed. O Lord, wilt thou arise and 
have mercy upon Zion, and visit us greatly with 
thy salvation.' ' 

In this work of divine grace, (though at this 
time she was very feeble,) Hannah took hold ot 
God's covenant as with the grasp of death, and con- 
tinued to plead for sinners,' especially for her father 
and family, with a faith which could not be denied. 
As often as I visited her during its progress, she 
seemed to forget herself in the deep interest she 
felt for others. She would inquire very anxiously 
after the subjects of the work, and rejoice greatly, 
as one after another gave evidence of having re 



HANNAH H0EBIE. 4i 

I 

ceived Christ. The world offered her its promises in 
vain ; nothing could draw her away from heavenly 
things and the progress of Christ's kingdom. She 
felt the wickedness of her own heart so sensibly, 
and so dreaded its palsying influence, that she was 
constrained most diligently to watch and pray 
against it. This is no anomaly : a discovery of the 
sin and deceitfulness of the heart, in connection 
with unshaken trust in God, is one of the best 
evidences of growth in grace. It was so with her ; 
for when she complained to me the most of this, 
she still said, " In the smiles of God my happiness 
is complete ; his froicn alone is darkness. God is 
my defence against every foe, whom shall I fear ! 
He is my hope and my salvation.' ' 

She again said, M At times I have great freedom 
and delight in prayer and devotion. I have felt 
pity for the miserable state of sinners around me, 
and have entreated the Lord to draw near unto us ; 
especially that a parent, who is yet at a distance 
from God, and brothers, and sisters, and neighbors, 
may partake of the blessing of his salvation. The 
Lord is rich in mercy ; O that I could live more 
upon him by faith, and derive more of my happi- 
ness from things above, and less from things below !" 

Under date of October 10, she thus writes s 

M What shall I render unto the Lord for all lib 
4* 



42 MEMOIR OF 

benefits to me 1 What am I, that God, whom the 
heaven of heavens cannot contain, should conde- 
scend to dwell in my heart ? I have enjoyed much 
of his presence for three days past. His presence 
is life, light, joy, and peace. 

"A meeting was appointed here yesterday, in the 
enjoyment of which I anticipated much happiness. 
It being very stormy, no one came except our pas- 
tor and a christian friend. I was somewhat disap- 
pointed; but the afternoon passed away very plea- 
santly. The revival was the principal subject of 
conversation. The work is progressing. My prayer 
to God is, that it may go on without interruption, 
till all shall be brought to the knowledge of the 
truth as it is in Jesus. Our friends closed their visit 
with us by prayer. I was most affectionately re- 
membered. I desire to be thankful for the many 
tokens of affection and regard which I receive from 
my christian friends. The visit was profitable to 
me ; and I am this day encouraged to persevere in 
the ways of the Lord. May I so run that I may 
obtain.'* 

" Oct. 13. This day I am twenty-one years old. 
This calls for self-examination. In taking a review 
of the past year, how great the catalogue of mer- 
cies ! The Lord has seen fit to continue my bodily 
afflictions ; I have mourned the loss of many valu- 
able privileges ; but my comforts have been neither 
few nor small. Through the summer my unfaith- 



HANNAH UOBBIE. 43 

fulness to God and neglect of duty often caused 
darkness of mind. I was often constrained to say 
within myself, 

1 Why is my heart so far from thee, 
4 My God, my chief delight V 

But I hope I do record it with humble gratitude, 
that for two months past my affections have been 
more given to God and religion. Prayer, which 
was formerly a task, has become a privilege in 
which I delight. I have felt more freedom in sriv- 
ing myself to God, and have had increased desires 
after holiness. Yes, I long to be holy, as I long to 
be happy. 

M I would this day solemnly renew my covenant 
with God, and through the strength of Jesus resolve, 
henceforth, to be more diligent in duty — more in- 
stant in prayer. Sensible I am that my chief hap- 
piness depends upon this, for prayer is the chris- 
tian's breath. When prayer is omitted, farewell 
enjoyment I I would commit myself, my health, and 
the disposal of all that pertains to me in future, into 
the hands of God — to his unerring wisdom. Do 
thou, O Lord, perfect that which concerneth me. 
I sometimes think, were it not for the possibility of 
becoming useful to my fellow-creatures, I should 
have no desire to live. But I would calmly wait 
my Father's will. Thy will, O Lord, be done. I 
can say this now — O that I may be able to say it to 



44 MEMOIR OF 

the last ! — Heavenly Father, whether it be thy will 
to restore me to health, or that I should still linger 
upon my bed, may I henceforward be more meek 
in my disposition ; more amiable in my temper ; 
more devout in the frame of my mind ; more spiri- 
tual in my conversation ; more zealous for thy 
glory ; more conformed to the image of my Lord 
and Master ; and the life which I live in the flesh, 
may I live by the faith of thy dear Son, who loved 
me, and gave himself for me." 

" October 28. 

* Another six days' work is done; 
c Another Sabbath is begun;' 

and I feel myself under renewed obligation to the 
Father of mercies for his increase of favor to me. 
With very little interruption I have enjoyed the 
light of God's countenance and a sense of his favor 
the past week ; and this morning I find myself hap- 
py in the possession of that peace which passeth 
understanding. Others are permitted to-day to wor- 
ship and pay their vows in the sanctuary ; I am 
compelled to spend my Sabbath in the retirement 
of home ; but I would not repine ; gratitude be- 
comes me more than complaint. 

" The Lord has indeed visited us with his salva- 
tion ; the Spirit of the Lord is still working in the 
hearts of this people, and reconciling sinners to 
himself. I trust a parent, who has long lived with- 



HANNAH HOBBIE. ,45 

out God and without hope in the world, has been 
led to see the exceeding sinfulness of sin, and has 
resolved to come out from the world and join him- 
self to the people of God. A goodly number pre- 
sented themselves yesterday and applied for ad- 
mission into the church, and among them were my 
dear father and my eldest sister. Under a sense of 
duty I have also presented my request. I have fled 
to Christ, and humbly hope my name has long 
since been recorded in the book of life ; but I de- 
sire now to unite myself to the visible church of 
God, that I may do all my Master's will, and enjoy 
the benefit of his precious ordinances. I long for 
the privilege of joining his people in the Lord's 
supper, believing it will be blest to my spiritual 
nourishment and growth in grace.' ' 

On the 29th she wrote to an aunt in Bedford ; 
speaks of the privilege of writing as the sweetest 
solace to separated friends ; mentions that her phy- 
sician proposed trying a new remedy; and then 
adds : 

" I feel it to be my duty to use means for my 
bodily health ; but the great blessing is to enjoy 
health of soul. I can indeed say, that I never en- 
joyed so much peace and tranquillity of mind as for 
two months past. With little interruption, 1 have 
enjoyed a sweet sense of God's presence and favor, 



46 MEMOIR OF 

I think you will rejoice to hear that the Lord is 
visiting us with his salvation. Twenty have already 
joined the church over the mountain, and twenty 
or more expect to unite with our church next 
Lord's day. My father, my sister Elizabeth, and 
myself, are among the number who have applied 
for admission. As soon as convenient, after the com- 
munion is administered at the house of God, I ex- 
pect the members of the church to meet here for 
the same purpose ; and I wish my dear aunt could 
be with us, to commemorate a Savior's dying love. 
I hope to be strengthened with spiritual life, and 
to receive much benefit from this ordinance. 

" Four weeks ago last evening my father attend- 
ed a meeting at Captain C 's. Mrs. C-< was 

very much distressed, and wept and cried aloud 
for mercy. My father saw, and, for the first time, 
felt, that he too was a sinner. His convictions were 
deep and pungent. On his way home, a distance of 
nearly a mile, he was several times on his knees in 
the woods, begging for mercy. When, late at night, 
he reached home, he had found comfort. And now, 
my dear aunt, can you not rejoice with me in the 
conversion of a parent, brought from darkness to 
light — from the service of sin and Satan, to the ser- 
vice of God his Redeemer ? I have often felt thank- 
ful for a pious mother ; and now I trust I have a 
praying father. On this pleasing topic I could long 
dwell, but I must close. Tell our pious friends to 



HANNAH HOBSfE. 47 

rejoice with us, that salvation has come to this place, 
and I trust to this house. Adieu. 

M I am your affectionate niece, 

" Hannah Hobbie." 

In her journal, November 15, she thus speaks 
of the anticipated meeting of the church at her fa- 
ther's house : 

" A special meeting is appointed here next 
Lord's day, when I expect to confess Christ before 
the world, and enter into covenant with God and 
his dear people. I think I feed daily, by faith, on 
the living bread; and when partaking of the me- 
morials of the Savior's death, I hope to be enabled 
to exercise a stronger faith over those simple but 
expressive emblems. O that my heart may be drawn 
forth in love and devotion to him who gave him- 
self on the cross for me. May I be enabled to view 
Christ in his humiliation and exaltation ; view him 
suffering, bleeding, groaning, dying y view him ris- 
ing, ascending, and reismins: \ and at God's ri^ht 
hand living to make intercession for his people- 
Though I have many times before endeavored to 
give myself to God, may I then be enabled to give 
myself more unreservedly to him, taking the Lord 
as my Redeemer and all ; and may he be my Friend 
and my portion for ever." 

So clear was Hannah's view of her duty, and *J 



48 MEMOIR OF 

ardently did she desire to do all her Savior*s will, 
that we unanimously and joyfully consented to 
meet at her father's house, that she might have the 
opportunity to obey an affecting, a dying command 
of Christ. This meeting was appointed for the 
1 8th of November ; and after the public worship 
of the sanctuary, I set out with my companion for 
the place of her abode, distant about five miles. 

I had often passed over the same ground before, 
but the present occasion called up associations new 
and interesting. I was going to carry the children's 
bread to one not able to receive it in the house of 
God ; a worn and weary pilgrim ; fainting, even in 
the morning of life, under the trials of the joui ney> 
and lons;inor for the hour when she should finish her 
course, and get safely home, to rest eternally in 
heaven. 

For the first mile the road led through a narrow 
Valley. On the right were high hills, divided to 
their summits into separate enclosures, stretching 
away far to the south, all brown with the effects of 
autumnal frosts. On the left was a range of lofty 
cliffs, covered with oak and chesnut wherever a 
tree could strike its roots, now pressing hard upon 
the road-side, and now receding a little distance. 
At the southern extremity of this narrow pass, on 
a slight elevation, the church where we had just 
been worshiping the God of our fathers lifted its 
white spire. The road here wound around the ter* 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 49 

Blitiation of this range of cliffs towards the north- 
east, leaving on the right an extensive tract of 
meadows level as the surface of a lake, and then 
led onward through another valley, till, by easy ac- 
clivities, we ascended the amphitheatre of hills which 
curved beautifully around on either hand and be- 
fore us. They reminded me of that covenant which 
stands more firm than the everlasting hills ; and I 
felt that all was safe that my beloved friend had 
committed to her Heavenly Father's keeping. The 
giant oaks that stood there, stripped of their foliage, 
stretched their arms on high, as if exulting in the 
better preparation of their nakedness to brave un- 
harmed the wintry storm and bid defiance to the 
fury of the tempest. They seemed an emblem of 
the christian — established on the Rock of Ages — 
stripped ofself— looking up with confidence for grace 
to sustain the storms of life, and saying, None of 
these things move me," A few scattered leaves, 
tinged by the frost with varied hues, but still cling- 
ing to their branches, hung out their signals of de- 
cay around us ; and I said, as I thought of the sick . 
bed to which we were hastening, <c \V T e all do fade 
as a leaf." The sun was now and then obscured 
by passing clouds, and the chill winds of autumn 
were sweeping by us in short and fitful gusts. So 
varied, so changing, so uncertain are all earthly 
hopes ; so unstable the foundations of earthly joy. 
From such surrounding objects, and with such 

H. Hubble. 5 



50 MEMOIR OF 

reflections, I reached the place of our destination* 
and before me lay in all its loveliness the fading 
flower, about to be cut down in the very spring-time 
of life. She gave me a smile of welcome as I took 
her hand : there was*a calm serenity upon her counte- 
nance ; the light of hope and the firm resolve of faith 
were mingled sweetly in her eye ; while every fea- 
ture spoke of solemn joy, and told of peace within. 

I stood near her bed-side ; the bread and wine 
were placed on a table before me. After a short 
discourse, I proposed to her the questions usual on 
such occasions, and to all she gave her free and full 
assent. The people of God were seated around me, 
and I broke the bread for her and for them ; we 
took the cup of salvation, and called upon the name 
of the Lord. It was to me, and I believe to others, 
a very precious season. It was as if the times of 
primitive simplicity had returned, when the apos- 
tles, and those whom they had begotten through the 
Gospel, assembled to commemorate the Savior's 
dying love. 

In her journal, under date of Nov. 19, she thus 
expresses herself in reference to this affecting oc- 
casion : 

M I very much enjoyed the services of yesterday. 
The exercises were solemn, interesting, and delight- 
ful to me. Our pastor's text was Deut. 32 : 9-12. 
God's jjortion is his people. Though all by right is 



HANNAH HOBBIB. 51 

his, yet how much is taken from him, and claimed 
by other masters, and given to other uses. His 
people only are strictly and peculiary his portion 
and his care. He finds them in "a waste, howling 
wilderness, ,, and leads them, as a shepherd leads 
his lost sheep, to the fold. He keeps them "as the 
apple of his eye. ,, As the "eagle stirreth up hur 
nest" when she thinks it time for her young to 
leave it, so the Lord breaks up the places of 
worldly rest, where his people sometimes slumber 
wickedly, to show them that they must not fix their 
affections here. As the eagle "fluttereth over her 
\oung," to teach them the use of their wings; and 
"bears them on her wings" on high, and then lets 
them fall suddenly, to show them the necessity of 
effort; but shoots down under them, if she sees they 
are yet too weak to fly, and takes them upon her 
own wings again ; so the Lord tries the strength of 
his people's faith, but will not let them fall utterly. 
When they first engage in his service, they are more 
led by love than faith. The Lord leaves them often 
to try them, and to increase their faith; but is sure 
to help them in due season. This was the train of 
thought. How sweet and refreshing ! 

" It was a precious privilege to commune with 
the people of God at his table. O may I have grace 
to fulfill the solemn vows which are upon me to be 
wholly his, and to walk worthy of my profession. I 
did find the refreshing effects of this spiritual pro- 



52 MEMOIR OF 

vision, though not so much at the time as since. 
I have felt his banner over me to be love. I hope 
it is the beginning of better days. I thirik I never 
before felt such freedom in giving myself to God. 
I sincerely desire to devote myself wholly to his 
service; to glorify him in my soul and body, which 
are his. 

"A short time since, as I was reading and medi- 
tating on the Lord's supper, I was suddenly con- 
victed of my sin in so long neglecting the Savior's 
dying command, and making no public profession of 
my choice of God's service ; but after a season cf 
grief and sorrow I found forgiveness. I have nov 
most willingly and cheerfully obeyed; and will not 
he, who received gifts for men, send some perfct 
good upon his willing servant] I pray that I may 
honor the cause which I profess to love. May I 
never bring shame or reproach upon it. 

" SELF-DEDICATION. 
" I here, O God, by a free and deliberate act, 
devote myself to thy service, and entirely submit to 
thy requirements. I renounce the glories and vani- 
ties of the world, and choose thee as my supreme 
felicity, and my everlasting portion. This is my 
sincere determination; a determination which, by 
thy grace, I never will retract. O Thou, by 
whose power alone I shall be able to stand, put 
thy fear in my heart, that I may never depart from 



HANNAH H0BBIE. 53 

thee. Let not the world, with all its flatteries; 
•death and hell, with all their terrors, entice or in- 
fluence me to violate this sacred vow. O let me 
never live to abandon thee, nor draw the impious 
breath that would deny thee ! And now let surround- 
ing angels witness for me, that I solemnly devote 
all the powers and faculties of my soul and this poor 
body to thy service ; and when I presumptuously 
employ any of the advantages thou hast given me 
to thy dishonor, let them testify against me, and 
let my own words condemn me. 

"Hannah Hobbie." 



CHAPTER IV. 



We are now to view this humble, but distin- 
guished disciple, as sustaining new and solemn re- 
lations to God her Savior, to the church, and to the 
world. She had voluntarily given herself to God, 
and, bought with such a "price" as the precious 
blood of Christ, she knew and felt that she was 
not her own. She was sensible that she was con- 
tinued in the world for some wise purpose, and 
evidently that she might be useful to others. In 
the revival at that time Hannah was an efficient 
5* 



54 MEMOIR OP 

helper, notwithstanding she was extremely feeble, 
and confined to her chamber, and, for the most part,* 
entirely to her bed. If a christian brother or sis- 
ter visited her, she would urge them to their duty 
by every motive which she could command. If a 
careless sinner was there, an earnest and affection- 
ate entreaty to flee from the wrath to come was al- 
most always a part of the interview. Many a letter 
did she write to those to whom she could have no 
personal access, especially the absent female com- 
panions of her youth. The things that she did, her 
work of faith and labor of love, will be found in- 
terwoven with her whole history. 

In her journal, December 10, she thus mourns 
and prays : 

" Once more I have to seek after an absent God* 

' ?Tis just, I own, if thou depart 

1 From so insensible a heart ; 

c Nor would I shun the sad decree, 

* To spend my days in grief for thee. 

1 'Tis not the painful I deplore, 

i But sin's benumbing, pois'nous power. 

' Illusive charms impede my way, 

1 And tempt my faithless heart astray.' 

v< 1 acknowledge my unfaithfulness to God. With- 
out the Spirit of God I find myself altogether faith- 
less to my solemn engagements. My strength is in 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 55 

(he Lord, and from him cometh all my help. If I 
trust my own heart, it is treacherous — deceitful 
above all things, and desperately wicked. The 
world has often disappointed my most confident 
expectations ; but thou, O God, hast never deceived 
me. Thou art faithful and true. Thy word is es- 
tablished, and abideth for ever. Suffer me, who am 
but dust, to plead with thee. Show me the light of 
thy countenance ; for without thee I cannot live ; 
my spirit dies within me. Bless me with the assu- 
rance that thou art mine, and let me once more 
taste the comforts of thy presence. Renew the 
expressions of thy goodness to a poor, ungrate- 
ful sinner. Deal not with me in severity, for 
shouldst thou mark iniquity, I could not stand be- 
fore thee. ,, 

Miss Hobbie had entered into covenant with 
God, sensible that he demanded her efforts to build 
up his kingdom ; that, in the infinitely wise econo- 
my which he had organized to accomplish his de- 
signs of mercy, and spread the influence of truth 
through the world, he could not dispense with the 
instrumentality of his people. However little her 
influence appeared to herself, she considered it due 
to God's cause; and, little as her strength was, it 
was wholly'his. In order to do her duty as a sol- 
dier of the cross, she felt that she needed the joy of 
God's salvation in her soul, to animate her, inspire 



56 MEMOIR OF 

her with courage, and fire her with zeal. I never 
found her in spiritual darkness but I found her a 
sincere and bitter mourner. The feelings express- 
ed in the preceding extract are those which seem 
ever to have existed when God's face did not shins 
upon her. Her first business then, was to "seek 
after an absent God ;" nor did she fail to find him. 
Hear what she says five days after this : 

i 
" December 15. Why should I leave the foun- 
tain of living waters, for broken cisterns which can 
hold no water. The Lord has rebuked my folly, 
and put a new song of praise into my mouth. 
r Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget riot all his 
benefits ; who forgiveth all thine iniquities ; who 
healeth all thy diseases ; who redeemeth thy life 
from destruction ; who crowneth thee with loving- 
kindness and tender mercies, so that thy youth is 
renewed like the eagle's/ Surely I choose not to 
forsake thee now. All my happiness centres in 
thee ; I have no hope but in thee, and no substan- 
tial joy but what flows from thee. My greatest fear' 
is that of losing thee, and my greatest care that of 
securing thy favor. 

Prone to wander, Lord, I feel it ; 

1 Prone to leave the God I love ; 

1 Here's my heart, O take and seal it, 

1 Seal it from thy courts above/ n 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 57 

To a cousin, Frances M , who had recently 

been awakened to a sense of her guilt and danger 
as a sinner, she thus wrote on the ISth of this 
month : 

" The deep interest I feel in the welfare of your 
soul is my best apology for writing. Since I heard 
of your anxiety I have been very desirous to see 
you. 1 have not ceased to pray for you, that the 
Lord would carry on and perfect the work which, 
I hope, is begun in your heart. My prayer to God 
is, that you may have no rest until you find it on 
the Rock of Ages. 

11 If you have been led to see yourself a sinner, 
and now stand condemned by the* law, oppressed 
with a sense of guilt, let me direct you to Jesus 
Christ, the only Mediator between God and man — 
the ' Lamb of God who taketh away the sin of the 
world/ My dear Frances, are you willing to hum- 
ble yourself at the foot of the cross, and accept of 
pardon and salvation from the Savior who calls you 
to come to him, and stands with open arms to re- 
ceive you ? He is willing, and he is able. You 
will need the comforts of religion in health and in 
sickness ; and did you know the happiness of a 
soul at peace with God, you would not rest until 
your eternal interest is secure. I would here tell 
you of the joys which 'flow from the love of God, 



58 MEMOIR OF 

but have not room, and must close, with my best 
wishes for your present and eternal welfare. 
M Very affectionately yours, 

" Hannah Hobbie." 

In a note, she sends her love to her cousins 

C and E , and is very pressing upon the 

individual to whom she was writing, to urge them 
to be in earnest about their souls' salvation. There 
are also annexed, with a pencil, those beautiful 
words : " Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy 
house — the place where thine honor dwelleth. ,, 

Her journal continues : 

" December .24. How much reason I have to 
thank God for restoring to me the privilege of read- 
ing. I have just been reading, with great delight* 
the memoirs of a pious female, who died at the age 
of sixteen. Though young, she was the subject of 
renewing grace, which enabled her to endure, with- 
out a murmur or complaint, a painful and trying 
sickness of three weeks,, which terminated her life. 
During her illness, her great anxiety seemed to be 
for the advancement of the Redeemer's kingdom. 
She was enabled to smile upon death. O may my 
last end be like hers ! 

,? Ever since I have arrived to years of under- 
standing, I have found great delight in reading the 
memoirs of departed saints ; and have desired o 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 59 

imitate their bright example. I feel now that God's 
grace alone can enable me to do it. That the Lord 
has renewed my hard heart I cannot doubt, after 
the evidences I have received of his covenant fa- 
vor. Q that he would loose my tongue and enlarge 
my heart to praise him for what he has done for 
my soul ; then would I shout the praises of my Re- 
deemer while I can speak. But now, how slow are 
my returns of praise ! How backward to acknow- 
ledge his goodness ! If I cannot speak the praises 
of my Redeemer on the earth, how can I hope to 
join the happy choir above, in singing praises to 
God and the Lamb for ever and ever 1" 

" January 1, 182S. Another year is gone, and 
I still linger and wander, a stranger and a pilgrim 
here, far from my native home. 

4 Fly swifter round, ye wheels of time, 

1 And bring the welcome day, 
' When I shall reach that peaceful clime : 

1 Must I yet longer slay f 

M I am tired of these vanities, and the world 
grows more and more insipid and uninteresting. It 
has lost its power to charm me. With cold indif- 
ference I view these transitory glories, inspired 
with nobler prospects and vaster expectations ! By 
faith, I see the promised land ; and every day brings 
me nearer to the possession of my heavenly inhe 
ritance. There shall I see my God, not through a 



60 memoir op 

glass darkly, but face to face. Then shall I be * s&* 
tisfied, when I awake with thy likeness/ I look for- 
ward with joy to that happy period when my earth* 
ly pilgrimage will end ; when ' this corruptible shall 
put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on 
immortality :' when this trying warfare shall be 
finished, and when the last conflict with my spiritual 
enemies shall be over. Then shall I cry, through 
my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Victory, Vic- 
tory !" 

<c January 6. I have for some time desired to 
experience some change : that the Lord would 
either restore me to health, to activity and useful* 
ness in life, or that he would prepare me for him* 
self, and take me to a better world ; for. what am 
I, in my present condition, but a poor worthless 
creature % But I would, gracious Father, that thou 
shouldst glorify thyself in me. Should it be thy 
will that I should still linger upon this bed for 
weeks, months, or years, may I say at all times, and 
under all circumstances, Thy will, O Lord, be dont i 
and not mine. Comfort .me by thy word and pro- 
mises, and support me by thy grace, in this season 
of languor and trial. May thy grace be sufficient 
for me, and thy strength be made perfect in my 
weakness. Though weak in body, make me strong 
in the Lord and in the power of his might. Should 
this sickness prove my last, O that my reason may 
be continued, that I may be enabled to glorify God 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 61 

in my dying moments. ' When my flesh and my 
heart fail, be thou the strength of my heart, and my 
portion for ever.' " 

" February 3. Shall I cease to record the good- 
ness of Divine Providence to me, the least and most 
unworthy of all the servants of my Lord. His good- 
ness pursues me with unwearied course. Every 
day's experience brings me some new evidence of 
his faithfulness. As the week begins so it ends, 
with a series of mercies. And what shall I render 
for all these unmerited favors ] How prone is my 
ungrateful heart to forget his benefits, or make mi- 
serable returns ! Blessed Lord, again do I dedicate 
myself to thee. Though the world entice me, yet 
In thy strength, in the power of thy might, I icill 
7iot consent. Though it offer the choicest Gfifts, I will 
hold on my way. Nothing henceforward do I desire 
to know but Jesus Christ, and him crucified/' 

,f February 11. Still under chastisement; but in 
every pain I desire to recognize the hand of my 
heavenly Father. This renders the affliction light. 
I find the grace of God sufficient for me. The Lord 
Jehovah is my strength and my song ; he also shall 
become my salvation. 

u Yesterday was to me a most delightful day. I 
was enabled to read the word of God with unusual 
pleasure. I found much comfort in prayer, and 
could say with the Psalmist, ' In the multitude of 

H. Hubbic. $ 



63 Memoir o# 

my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my 
soul/ 

* How sweet, a Sabbath thus to spend, 
1 In hope of one that ne'er shall end.' " 

On the 25th of February she wrote to a cousin 
whom she had not seen since she was a child, but 
of whose conversion she had just heard : 

" My dear Cousin,— As I am denied the pleasure 
of a personal interview with you, I must have re- 
course to a letter. It is so long since I saw you, 
that I can form, probably* no correct idea of your 
personal appearance ; but since the glad news of 
your hopeful conversion, I have felt how near we 
now are to each other, 

M I heard of the death of your little brother, and 
sympathized with you in the bereavement. When 
I last saw him, it appeared to me that he would 
not stay long here. He is gone ! And now, my 
dear friend, let the number of his days teach us 
that life is short, awaken us to diligence, and ani* 
mate us in the performance of every duty ; know- 
ing that we must soon give up an account of the 
deeds done in the body, and reap our reward. 

" The revival of religion has not yet ceased with 

' us. It is now nearly six months since it com* 

menced. Twenty-two have been added to our 

church* and next Sabbath a number more will 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 63 

join. Additions have also been made to other 
churches. Meetings among us are still frequent 
and interesting. My father appears to be very ac- 
tive and zealous in the cause, and spends much 
time in attending meetings and visiting the anx- 
ious and inquiring. 

" Your affectionate cousin, 

" Hannah Hobbie." 

The following thoughts from her journal are 
beautiful and impressive : 

V March 5. I have now been without medical 
assistance more than a year. My physicians find 
that the natural powers of my constitution cannot 
of themselves effect any improvement of my health, 
and think it advisable to enter upon a new course 
of treatment, in which they feel some confidence. 
Should I be restored to such a degree of health as 
would enable me to associate with society, I feel 
as if, by the strength of grace, I should exert myself 
to the extent of my ability in the cause of my ever- 
blessed Redeemer ; for his love* and mercy to- 
wards me demand my icholc service and my highest 
praise. 

M My physicians give me flattering hopes of being 
raised from my sick bed ; but I dare not anticipate 
much from such a hope, lest I should be disappoint- 
ed. O that the Lord would keep me from all vain 



64 



MEMOIR OF 



and unprofitable desires after earthly joys, and 
suffer not a diminution of my love to him, who is 
the centre of all my happiness. While I submit to 
the direction of an earthly physician, I would com- 
mend myself to the care of the great Physician of 
soul and body; for'hemaketh sore and bindeth 
up : he woundeth, and his hands make whole.' 
He will be with me in six troubles, and in seven 
he will not forsake me." 

In the same delightful strain of heavenly-mind- 
edness and close discrimination as to the genuine- 
ness of her exercises, she continues her record : 

" March 14. How cheering are the frames of 
soul which are given me ! I have often inquired, 
why is it thus with me ? I can only ascribe it to 
the goodness of God. I know it to be great folly 
to build on a frame of soul, and that the noblest 
attainment is to go icholly out of myself and rest 
only on Christ. If I do otherwise, I provoke him 
to depart from me, because I place the effect of his 
presence in the room of himself. These glorious 
manifestations I ought not to rest upon, but seek 
them only for refreshment. I often feel satisfied 
in the gift, when I should^ honor him that bestoweth 
it; then he withdraws his visits, and refuses to 
come again till I confess my folly. Hence it is that 
I feel so many changes ; sometimes on Mount 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 65 

Pisgah, then groping in the valley of Achor; 
sometimes walking in the light, then without the 
sun ; sometimes permitted to come to his throne 
of grace with boldness, where he fills my mouth 
with arguments then kept back by a cloud around 
it, that my prayer cannot pass through, and that I 
cannot order my speech by reason of darkness ; 
and all this to chasten me for my folly, and make 
me adore his sovereignty. When he is absent, de- 
spair comes ; when present, spiritual pride is apt 
to spring up ; but while he in wisdom goes and 
co?nes, it keeps my soul in exercise ; it prevents me 
from sitting down in sinful security or delusion — it 
keeps every grace more active. His coming keeps 
me from despair, and his absence from spiritual 
pride. Yet, Lord, I do plead that thy presence 
may cheer me while traveling through this dark 
wilderness ; for if thy presence go not up with me, 
I shall faint by the way. O may thy Spirit dwell 
with me, and seal me for salvation !" 

In reviewing the journal from which these ex- 
tracts are taken, I have been forcibly reminded of 
conversations with her which had passed entirely 
from my memory. I often find in it traces of these 
interviews. This accounts for that which once I 
was surprised at beyond measure, viz. that she 
preserved the most clear and distinct recollection 
of what I had said, though months had passed 
6* 



66 MEMOIR OF 

away. I find she carefully noted it down at the 
time in her journal ; and as she was in the habit of 
looking over that very frequently, to compare her 
feelings and exercises, and ascertain her progress 
in the divine life, the subjects of conversation at 
these interviews came frequently before her mind; 
and her constant habit of gaining instruction from 
every thing which could possibly give it, led her to 
treasure up, with peculiar care, all that she heard 
in reference to the concerns of her soul, and the 
dealings of God with her. 

I have often been deeply affected with the eager- 
ness with which she sought light on subjects which 
were not very clear to her mind ; and have as often 
been delighted to see the independence which cha- 
racterized her reception of the truth. She would ask 
questions, and state difficulties, if she really thought 
they existed, until every doubt and perplexity was 
removed, and her view of the matter was clear and 
satisfactory. Sometimes, when the subject of in- 
quiry respected the dealing of God with her own 
soul, and she was at a loss to account for the course 
which he was taking with her, I have seen her lie, 
with her full blue eye fixed upon me with an earn- 
estness which I cannot describe, while I was sug- 
gesting what might be the designs of infinite wis- 
dom in the matter ; and if I succeeded in clearing 
away the cloud, she would gently close her eyes 
(evidently in prayer) for a little season, and then 



IIANNAH HOBBiE. 67 

with a smile of satisfaction would say, " It must 
be so." 

One day I learned from her mother, before en- 
tering her chamber, that she suffered much in body, 
and that her mind was also in darkness ; she feared 
that God was angry with her. When I entered the 
room, and she gave me her hand as usual, it was 
with a sad countenance ; she looked at me with 
such a pleading earnestness, that I was greatly 
moved. For a moment I was at a loss what to say, 
for I saw that she was miserable. Those beautiful 
lines of Cowper soon came to my mind, 

" Behind a frowning providence, 
" He hides a smiling face." 

It was all 1 said. She fixed her full gaze upon mo 
for a minute ; then gently turned away her head 
and covered her eyes with her hand. I stood by her 
for a minute longer ; the tears were slowly steal- 
ing between her white fingers ; I knew she would 
be in prayer for a season, and softly retired into 
the room with the family. The door being open, I 
could see, from where I sat, the bed on which she 
lay. For some time she remained still in the same 
position; and when she moved, it was to wine off 
the tears, now almost dried, from her cheek, and 
look up to tell me that all was right. I went to her, 
and heard her acknowledge this, with full confi- 
dence in the promises — though yet, she said, it was 



68 MEMOIR or 

trusting God in darkness. Yet she believed that God 
was merciful in laying upon her all these burdens, 
and that they would work together for her good. 

11 Perhaps," said I, " you have been rejoicing, 
not in God, but only in the comforts which he gives 
you : if you do this, he will surely teach you that he 
will not give his glory to any ; and when any thing 
stands between you and him, it must, by some pro- 
cess, he removed." 

She saw the difficulty before I left her, and in 
prayer I commended her to our common Father's 
keeping. It was evidently in reference to this oc- 
casion that the foregoing extract was penned ; for 
a flood of light soon after burst upon her soul, and 
she rejoiced in God her Savior. 

Four days after this she recorded some views of 
her afflictions, which should not be omitted. 

M March IS. I have now been confined almost 
five years. It is a long time. But in this providence 
I behold the wisdom, power, and goodness of God. 
I know, I feel that it is good for me that I have 
been afflicted. How little did I know of God, of 
religion, of myself, before I was brought to this 
state of trial ! What mercy and grace have been 
displayed in my case ! I consider not that pain and 
sickness come by chance, but by the will of God. 
When disease came upon me, then I saw that I was 
poor, and wretched, and helpless, — then I saw the 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 69 

vanity of all earthly things — that Christ alone could 
help me — that religion was the one thing needful , 
and that all else is dross, in comparison with the 
excellency of the knowledge of Jesus. I believe 
that this affliction was sent upon me at first to cor- 
net evil, and is now continued to prevent it. It 
shows me my sin, and I am humbled under it. 
What an evil and bitter thing must sin be, when it 
brings, even in this life, so many pains and such 
deep distress. O Lord, I would humble myself un- 
der thy chastising hand ; and when I feci this ta- 
bernacle shaken, as I daily do, may I remember 
that it must soon fall." 

M April 4. O the importance of making a wise 
improvement of time ! I confidently believe that 
the whole number of my days will be few ; and 
this consideration leads me repeatedly and earnest- 
ly to inquire, How ean I spend my time, strength, 
end ability in the way that will be most subservient 
to the glory of my Heavenly Father, and for the 
good of my own soul ? I have been able for some 
time to read at least a chapter in the Old Testa- 
ment and one in the New every day, and a little in 
other religious books. This course I intend to 
pursue while I have strength ; but I often regret 
that I read to so little advantage. What ean be the 
cause ? I attribute it to my too ofteu endeavoring 
to understand the Scriptures without divine assist- 
ance. I regret that I make so little proficiency in 



70 



MEMOIR OF 



grace and knowledge. In future, I would look to 
God for his blessing and guidance in all my re- 
searches after divine instruction. 

" In my exercises of devotion, how the weakness 
of flesh hinders ! how it disturbs my peace ! O 
when shall I be released from this prison, that I 
may serve God without infirmity and without sin I 
How short is life ! How precious are souls ! How 
awful is eternity ! I feel for the souls of others. I 
feel the obligations I am under to the God of my 
salvation. How much has he done for me ! Now, 
what shall I do for him ] O how shall I set forth 
his glory, and speak of his goodness towards the 
children of men ? 

" Father of spirits ! thou from whom all light, 
life, and strength proceed ! may I be an active in- 
strument in the promotion of thy glory. O that my 
temper and conduct may exert a holy influence, 
and be the means of doing good, that in my present 
feeble state I may not be altogether useless." 

" April 6. The welcome day has again returned, 
the day which to me is a day of joy, of instruction, 
and of praise. While many profane it, I desire to 
spend it in the service of my Lord and Master. 
How many pleasing reflections occur to my mind ! 
This day commemorates the triumphant resurrec- 
tion of my blessed Savior. It calls me to hold com- 
munion with my Lord, and to devote myself with 
renewed zeal to his service ; to anticipate an eter- 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 71 

tial Sabbath of rest, where I hope to enjoy the di- 
vine presence, and be employed in celebrating 
divine praises for ever." 

On the 13th we met again at Mr. Hobbie's, to 
give Hannah an opportunity of joining with us in 
the Lord's supper. I preached on that occasion on 
the subject of the Christian pilgrimage; showed 
how the path lay through a waste, barren wilder- 
ness ; that the Lord had not only provided a glori- 
ous land of rest for his people, but, in this journey, 
had provided many places of refreshment by the 
way ; such as the Sabbath, the word, the sanctuary, 
the mercy-seat, his table, &c. This is all minutely 
referred to in her journal for the day, which closes 
thus : 

" I thank God that I have again been favored 
with an opportunity of waiting upon him in the or- 
dinance of the Lord's supper. It was a pleasant, 
and, I think, a profitable season to me. O that my 
seasons of communion here below may prepare me 
for an eternal communion. with God in heaven !" 

" April 1G. Have had great discoveries of the 
depravity of my heart this day ; and, under a sense 
of it, am constrained to cry, ' God, be merciful to 
me a sinner V If I am not guilty of those sins 
which appear great in the sight of men, yet I be- 
V-ail those of which none on earth can accuse me. 



rd MEMOIR OP 

I am often led to cry to God in the language of 
David, ' Cleanse thou me from secret faults/ O 
for grace and strength to crucify sin ! O that I 
might walk in all the statutes and ordinances of the 
Lord blameless.'' 

" May 9. This day have been utrried into the 
garden. It is now eight months and eighteen days 
since I was out of the door. How delightful the 
return of spring ! Should my strength permit, I 
will go out for the purpose of seeing more of the 
Creator's power and wisdom. Should it be so, the 
Lord grant that it may lead me to a more delight* 
ful contemplation of his wonderful works." 

" May IS. In taking a review of the last three 
months, I find I have made very little progress in 
grace or knowledge. Although I have, at times r 
been favored with sensible exercises of grace and 
elevated joys, I have experienced interposing sea* 
sons of darkness, one of which lasted nearly three 
weeks. Great weakness of body seemed an excuse' 
for being less watchfuL My medicine, also, tended' 
to stupify me. I soon found myself at a laments* 
ble distance'fiom the Lord of life. I was convinc- 
ed of my folly, and felt reproved for having almost 
willingly departed from God. I had brought my- 
self into a dreadful state of darkness ; the Lord had 
departed ; and O, the anguish of my soul ! I could 
compare it to nothing but the pains of those who 
are shut out from the presence of the Lord. tc> 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 73 

dwell in the blackness of darkness for ever. But 
though perplexed, I was not in despair. The lan- 
guage of my heart was, * Turn me again, Lord 
God of hosts ; cause thy face to shine, and I shall 
be saved.' I have gradually been brought again to 
the enjoyment of light and comfort. I feel greatly 
humbled for my awful backslidings, and feel more 
my dependance on God. The hiding of God's face 
is indeed a sore chastisement ; but it teaches me to 
trust him in the dark — to live by faith. 

" I resolve to make this an era in my life. I 
have this morning called to mind my former vows 
and promises, and have been enabled to look to God 
by faith, for grace to influence me to the continual 
performance of them." 



CHAPTER V. 



The concluding paragraph of the last chapter 
represented this devoted disciple as calling to re- 
membrance her vows and pledges to the Lord her 
Redeemer, and as making this an important era in 
her short but remarkable life. Such it really was. 
To those who saw her, she appeared from about 
this time to be preparing daily for a purer and 

H. Hobble* 7 



74 MEMOIR OF 

happier community than earth affords — to be ri- 
pening for heaven. The attentive reader will dis- 
cover this in her journal and letters. 

About this time a sister in the church, long and 
deservedly beloved and respected, became, by some 
iuscrutable providence, subject to seasons of me- 
lancholy, which terminated in mental derange- 
ment. She was long afflicted in this distressing 
manner, and enlisted universal sympathy, for she 
was universally esteemed. With respect to this 
dark dispensation, Hannah thus writes : 

" Thus God deals with her. Why is it that she, 
who for years has given evidence of possessing the 
love and favor of God, is thus dealt with ] All that 
I can say is, that I doubt not it is for some wise and 
good purpose. We are short-sighted, and therefore 
should be humble and submissive. The ways of 
Providence are often, to us, dark and mysterious, 
Yesterday was the Sabbath ; and, by the request of 
her friends, the church met, at the intermission of 
worship, to pray for her. O that she may yet be 
blest with the exercise of her reason ; that her deai 
friends may have the consolation of seeing her in 
her right mind; and, when called to leave the 
world, may she depart in peace and triumph. ,, 

" May 23, 1828. Have just received a visit from 
a female friend, one of the companions of my child • 
hood. I have not seen her before in a long time , 



HANNAH H0BB1E. 75 

When at the age of eleven or twelve, she appeared 
to be penitent ; but, I think, has given no decided 
evidence. While here, I conversed with her upon 
the important subject of her soul. She admitted 
that she knew nothing of the comforts of religion, 
but seemed to realize its necessity, and the vanity 
of all earthly enjoyments. I endeavored to show 
her the importance of seeking the Lord while he 
may be found. She was much affected. I told her 
if it was her desire to give herself to the Lord, I 
would gladly pray for her. She said it was. O that 
she may be born of God. I rejoiced in this opportu- 
nity of conversing with her; I trust it will do good. 
M How many opportunities of usefulness have I 
lost heretofore ! I might have been the means, per- 
haps, of a blessing to many souls. I often feel con- 
demned for my silence ; but, such is my natural 
timidity, as well as bodily infirmity, that I am often 
deficient in duty. Surprising as it is, I often feel a 
sinful reserve when conversing upon the all-impor- 
tant subject of religion ; w T hen, at the same time, I 
can speak freely upon other subjects. O that my 
mind were more impressed with divine things ; 
that I might be better prepared to set forth the 
glory of God, and speak to all of his goodness. 
When I consider how little I have done for God, 
for the honor of Christ, and the good of others, I 
am constrained to cry, O Lord, renew my strength, 
increase my faith, and love, and zeal." 



76 MEMOIR OF 

M May 26. Yesterday was the funeral of Miss 
O L , (referred to in a preceding para- 
graph.) Our dear sister was indeed afflicted with 
great and sore troubles towards the close of her 
life, not having been favored with the exercise of 
her reason, except at very short intervals. I cannot 
but trust that she has made a happy exchange. 
While the Lord is preparing and receiving one and 
another into a blessed communion with himself in 
his church below, he is making others ready for, 
and callinsr them to a more glorious communion 
with himself, with saints and angels, in the church 
triumphant above. This is the second member of 
our church that has been called away since I be- 
came connected with it ; and perhaps the next 
coming of our Lord will be for me. This provi- 
dence shall help me to be in readiness. I think I 
would fain leave all that I hold near and dear on 
earth, to go and possess an everlasting inheritance 
in heaven. Nothing is here to detain me — nothing 
that can win my affections from God. While I con- 
tinue here, I shall probably be subject to tempta- 
tions and sin ; but O may I never be left to discou- 
rage myself in unbelief, as did my sister L . 

God forbid that I should ever be so ungrateful as 
to doubt my interest in the great atonement, after 
having been blest with so much light and evidence, 
and such a long continued assurance of his love and 
favor. I often feel reproved for this sin of unbelie£ 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 77 

I know I have an evil heart of unbelief, in depart- 
ing from the object I love. The Lord pardon me ; 
and when the evening of life sets in, may I enjoy 
the light of thy countenance. As my outward man 
perishes day by day, may my inward man be day 
by day renewed ; and O, may I retain the free use 
of all my mental faculties, in their undiminished 
energy, in my last moments, arid bear an honorable 
testimony to the truth as it is in Jesus, when on the 
eve of departing to receive the crown of righteous- 
ness, which the conquerors shall wear." 

(To her cousin Frances M .) 

11 Northeast, Jane 10, 1828. , 

M My dear Cousin , As you sent your love 

to me in your letter to sister Elizabeth, I assure 
you I received it with much pleasure. I do indeed 
thank you for your kind remembrance, and, agree- 
ably to your request, 1 now engage in the delight- 
ful employment of writing to you. I hope you en- 
joy a comfortable assurance of the love of God, and 
daily make proficiency in grace and knowledge. 
By your letter, I am made acquainted with the feel- 
ings of your heart, and am pleased to find them so 
much in conformity with the religion of Jesus 
Christ. From the views which you have of your 
own heart, I conclude you have indeed been blest 
with the influences of the Spirit of God. If you in- 
7* 



78 MEMOIR OF 

deed know the Lord, you surely must feel your ob- 
ligations to acknowledge him before the world, and 
publicly devote yourself, with a pure heart and a 
willing mind, to his service ; for, be assured, my 
dear friend, by so doing you will find liberty, joy, 
and abundance of peace to your soul. I know not 
but you have made a public profession of your at- 
tachment to Christ before this j but if you have not, 
I hope you will soon be constrained, by the love 
you bear to the Savior, to take up your cross and 
follow him, regardless of what the world may say of 
you ; unreservedly give yourself to God in an ever- 
lasting covenant ; and, trusting in him, perform your 
vows. Seek to know the Lord's will, and ask of him 
grace to do it. 

11 O how can we duly estimate the unspeakable 
love of God manifested in our redemption ! How 
great the price that ransomed us ! It calls upon me 
to surrender my all to him, as I have many times, 
in the strength of the Lord, endeavored to do — to 
be his willing and obedient servant. As often as I 
feel myself constrained to dedicate myself anew to 
him, I never fail of receiving so often the blessing 
of peace and comfort to my soul. When I consider 
the abundant goodness of God to me, the least and 
most unworthy of all his servants, I am lost in won- 
der, love, and praise. It is by the grace of God 
alone that I am made to differ. 

M Some who, perhaps, know but little of the life 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 79 

and power of religion, have concluded that I must 
be miserable, because deprived of health, and made 
to suffer so much and so long. But ah ! how mis- 
taken ! I know, by experience, that to be deprived 
of the light of God's countenance alone can make 
me truly miserable. 

11 Since the first of March, we have tried new 
medicines, but without effect. I never expect to 
enjoy health again ; but think I shall go gradually 
down to the grave. I am confident I fail. In gene- 
ral, I sit up about an hour in the day. I know not 
that I have any choice whether to live or die. I 
feel myself an unprofitable servant. But if I choose 
to live, it is that I may do something for the glory 
of God, the honor of Christ, and the good of others- 

,{ This mortal frame of mine has more and more 
the appearance of death. Indeed, I have something 
like the image of death continually before me, 
which reminds me of its near approach, and which 
makes me feel the importance of being continually 
prepared to meet it. If I know my own heart, I 
have no fear of death, and often think I could wel- 
come it, as the sweet messenger of peace. 

1 Our life, how short ! a groan — a sigh ; 
'We live— and then begin to die :— 
4 But O how great a mercy this, 
4 That death's the portal into bliss !' 

" And now, my dear Frances, Jet us put on the 



80 MEMOIR OF 

whole armor of God. That grace which will en- 
able us to stand against the foes which daily assail 
us, will also bring us off conquerors over death. 

" I have not room to say much with respect to the 
state of religion amongst us now ; but we trust the 
Spirit of the Lord has not departed. Some are yet 
inquiring the way to Zion. 

u I am your affectionate cousin, 

" Hannah Hobbie." 

Her journal thus proceeds : 

" June 26. When I look abroad from my win- 
dow, from the place of my long confinement, and 
behold the face of the earth revisited with the 
beauties of summer, I think, O that I could now 
and then retreat into some solitary shade, far 
from the noise and bustle of the busy scenes of life. 
Often would I betake myself to such a spot, conse- 
crated to meditation and devotion. 

" How delightful to trace my Maker's hand in his 
works ! O Lord, thou art near in every thing around 
me ; but nearer in thy Son. In the heavens I see 
thy wisdom and power; but in thine Anointed I 
see thy grace and share thy love. Thou art near 
in the works of thy hands, to convince Atheists ; 
but nearer in thy word of grace, to convert sinners 
and comfort saints; therefore in my confinement 
I will think upon thy word, peruse the divine 
pages, and dwell upon the plan of redeeming Jove, 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 81 

where all the attributes and perfections of God 
beam forth with a radiance and beauty that cannot 
pass through the grosser creation ; too bright for 
the eye of seraphim to fix upon. Here then will 
I study and learn for eternity !" 

On the 7th of July, having heard from a minis- 
ter, providentially in the place, a sermon from Gal. 
5 : 22, 23, on the fruits of the Spirit, she thus ex- 
presses herself: 

M I have endeavored to examine myself by this, 
and some other texts, to know whether I am indeed 
a child of God ; whether I have the Spirit of Christ. 
If I have not, I am none of his. But herein I may 
know, if I possess the fruits of the Spirit mention- 
ed in this text, which alone constitute the christian 
character. Happy the soul which is endowed with 
' love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, good- 
ness, faith, meekness, temperance ! against such 
there is no law.' I do think the attainment of 
these divine qualifications so essential to my present 
and future happiness, that, were I intentionally de- 
ficient in the least of them, I should consider that 
I had no right to expect an inheritance among the 
sanctified. I feel my weakness and imperfections ; 
but am confident of this one thing, that he that hath 
begun a good work in me will perform it until the 
day of Jesus Christ. The hope of a blessed inv 



82 MEMOIR OF 

mortality is predominant in my breast ; and I feel 
happy in the conclusion, that in some measure I 
possess the Spirit, and bear its fruits ; and I hope, 
through grace, to go on from one degree of strength 
unto another, till I arrive at a perfect state of holi- 
ness, through Christ, my Lord, in heaven." 

We pass on to July 31, when she seems to have 
had a very oppressive sense of her insensibility and 
ingratitude, and of the depravity of her heart. I 
never knew a person who appeared to see more of 
their own vileness than she did ; and seldom have 
I found one so pained in heart on account of it. 
She says, 

V I have been favored with an unusual degree of 
comfort and strength of body for a little time past ; 
and how reasonable that all the powers of my soal 
should be engaged in the delightful service of my 
Divine Master ! But to these mercies I have been 
almost insensible. Surely it is of the mercy of God 
that I am not consumed. I am surrounded with 
mercies, yet feel myself a vile and ungrateful 
wretch. The more I receive, the more insensible I 
seem. Alas ! what has been my life, but a life of 
rebellion against God, and ingratitude to him. Such 
is the depravity of my heart, that, at times, it ap- 
pears almost swallowed up in the pollutions of 
the world. Behold, I ain vile ! O Lord, let not 



HANNAH HOBBLE. S3 

iniquity prevail against a careless and a sinful crea- 
ture ! Save, or I perish. I beseech thee, purify my 
sin-defiled soul. I have no righteousness of my 
own ; I come pleading for mercy alone through 
the merits of Christ ; I would lie low in the dust, 
and confess my sins, and acknowledge my unwor- 
thiness. Send thy reviving grace, I pray thee, and 
strengthen my soul. That which I know not, teach 
thou me. If I have done iniquity, O for grace that 
I may do so no more ! Suffer me not, O Lord, to 
live in. a state of carelessness and indifference. Let 
this renewed experience of my weakness and 
wretchedness influence me to seek more earnestly 
that grace by which alone I can be kept from 
falling into the greatest sins here, and into the 
depths of misery hereafter." 

It is worthy of observation, and yet no more than 
might be expected, that there is no instance, as I 
believe, in all her christian life, when she poured 
out her soul in such deep repentance and self- 
abasement for her sins, and in such fervent desires 
for new life and quickening grace, in which she 
was disappointed of a speedy answer to her prayer. 
She felt that it was a matter of the utmost moment 
to be assured that her heart was right with God, 
and that God was her Friend and her portion. She 
could not be satisfied without the joy of God's sal- 
vation and the upholding of his free Spirit. On 



84 memoir or 

the 5th of August we see this clearly exhibited, 

te I earnestly besought the Lord that he would 
make me more sensible of his goodness ; dis- 
cover to me the evil of my heart, and show me 
wherein I do wickedly, that I might repent and 
reform ; and now I praise his name that he has 
graciously condescended to hear my prayer, and in 
a measure to grant it. I acknowledge his faith- 
fulness, and would here record his goodness to his 
poor, ungrateful servant. I thank thee, O Lord, 
that thou hast appeared for my help. 

• I hate the sins that made thee mourn, 
* And drove thee from my breast/ 

H I look upon him whom I have pierced, and 
mourn. Lord, bless me with a broken heart, and 
lead me weeping and mourning for my sins, all the 
way to Canaan, if need he. O for wisdom to direct 
my unwary feet ! Lord, I would learn at the feet of 
Jesus alone — learn thy will — learn to do it, and 
learn to bear it. ' Make me to walk in the way of 
thy commandments, for therein do I delight/ " 

M Aug. 10. How shall I recount the many bless* 
ings I have enjoyed of late. The Lord has, in wis- 
dom, taken from me some outward mercies, yet, I 
trust, with the blessed design of showing me great- 
er. I have suffered, at times, an increase of bodily 
pain, and find my strength more impaired ; but O 
how great the mercy that enables me, in the bit- 



RAXNAH H0BBIE, 80 

terness of pain, to be peaceful, happy, resigned, 
and even cheerful. Nothing intrudes so much 
upon the calmness of my mind as a sense of my 
own vileness and unprofitableness. The words of 
an eminently pious lady, who often tasted the cup 
of affliction, frequently occur to me, and I feel a 
pleasure in adopting them as my own : * Let me 
never complain of the burden of suffering, while I 
remember my manifold transgressions ; but rather 
wonder at the Lord's gracious long-suffering, and 
admire his goodness, who is, with the chastisement 
of his love, driving me to heaven, when he might, 
by the strokes of his wrath, have long since driven 
me to hell.' 

11 This is the Lord's day : I am debarred the 
privileges of the sanctuary. ' How amiable are 
thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts ! my soul long- 
eth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the 
Lord ; my heart and my flesh crieth out for the 
living God !' O when shall I appear before thee ! 
They are called blessed who dwell in thy house. 
1 They go from strength to strength/ Though de- 
prived of the blessing of God's house, yet I rejoice* 
The Savior has said, ( Blessed are they that mourn, 
for they shall be comforted. Blessed are they that 
hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall 
be filled.' Surely in the word of the Lord is abun- 
dant consolation; therefore I will delight myself 
in it ; and in his law my meditation shall be sweet, 
H.Hobbi* 8 



66 MEMOIR OF 

H At the beginning of another week, and on this 
holy Sabbath, (as I have long been wont to do,) I 
desire to reneio my covenant to be the Lord's ; and 
may the blessing of the Lord be upon me through 
the week. ,, 

The blessing of the Lord was upon her ; and she 
delighted to do good as God gave her opportunity. 
The same week, besides many other things which 
she did, to show her love for God and evince her 
strong desire for the good of her friends, she wrote 
to a cousin, recently married, the following letter : 

" Northeast, August 15, 1828. 
M My dear Cousin, — As we are now separated 
far from each other, and deprived of the happiness 
of personal intercourse, I avail myself of an oppor- 
tunity of addressing you by letter. The scenes of 
our childhood often occur to my mind, and the 
time has been when I took pleasure in thinking 
upon them ; but now I look back with shame and 
regret, that the time we spent in those amusements 
(however innocent they then appeared) had not 
been occupied in preparing for future usefulness in 
this life, and for a never-ending eternity. But as it 
is of no use to dwell upon our past errors, except to 
repent and reform, let our time past suffice to have 
done wickedly, and may we, in time to come, do 
only that which is good. 



IIANNAH JIOBBIE. 87 

H We were led by the hand of Providence in 
the earlier stage of life apparently alike, in the 
same smooth and even course ; but how vastly dif- 
ferent have been the dealings of God with us since ! 
While you, to human appearance, have been led 
quietly along, blessed with uninterrupted health, 
enjoying the pleasures of youthful folly, and the 
comforts of this world ; I have been led through a 
wilderness of sorrows ; afflicted and rendered inca- 
pable of joining my gay companions in the follies 
and amusements of life. I have now no relish for 
them. But here let us learn wisdom ; for the hand 
of an all-wise Providence hath done it all. Sinful 
and foolish, we naturally prefer the poor and short- 
lived pleasures of this world to the happiness 
which religion offers us ; but happy is it that some 
are not left to their own choice, which would lead 
them on to irrecoverable ruin. My dear friend, I 
can most truly say, that it is all in love that I have 
been chastised. By this I have been led to see the 
error of my ways ; to embrace the Savior in such 
great love provided, and walk in the way which 
leads to happiness and heaven. 

M O how happy should I be, were I assured that 
you too had been convinced of the evil of sin, and 
that you forsake and abhor it as rebellion against 
the God of heaven. It is a pernicious cup; drink 
it, and it brings eternal death. We have seen but 
a few years of human life, yet I doubt not, as 



88 MEMOIR OF 

you look back, even now, you can say with me, 
• childhood and youth are vanity.' 

" As you are now settled in life, you probably 
expect to live long in the enjoyment of domestic 
happiness ; but be entreated, my dear cousin, not 
to permit the concerns of this life to engross your 
time and your affections. O consider that you are 
mortal — that all beneath the sun is fading and 
transitory ; and let this excite in you an immediate 
concern for the welfare of your never-dying soul. 
I pray you, delay not the important work of re- 
pentance; but * remember now your Creator in 
the days of your youth/ before the evil days come, 
when you will say, ' I have no pleasure in them.' 

" My health, upon the whole, is no better than 
when you last saw me. You recollect my promise, 
that if I ever found strength enough I would visit 

you at S ; but as I did not anticipate much 

the pleasure of doing so, I am not at all disappoint- 
ed. I fancy I see you, many times, seated in your 
new habitation, alone and pensive, your mind fixed 
upon your native place, and perhaps sighing for 
the company of those to whom you have so long 
been attached. But I hope you have found in 

S a society kind and obliging, which will 

in a measure make up the loss you have sustained 
by a removal. 

" I should be highly gratified to receive a few 
lines from you, and to know how you have en- 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 89 

joyed yourself since you left your father's house. 
Sister E. sends love. 

M Perhaps my letter is of too serious a charac- 
ter to meet your approbation ; but I think the 
importance of the subject a sufficient apology for 
even more than I have said. I consider it most 
worthy of my own time and attention, and surely 
there is none upon which I so much delight to 
dwell, either in my meditations or my interviews 
with others. My sincere desire is, that you may 
profit by it also. 

"Your most affectionate friend and cousin, 

" Hannah Hobbie." 

There is in this letter an admirable simplicity, 
an honest fidelity and frankness, mingled with an 
easy and touching allusion to former scenes and 
friendships, which are well adapted to the great 
object she had in view, in respect to an individual 
not only careless of her soul's concerns, but averse 
to the whole subject. 

(To an aunt in New- York.) 

" Northeast, August 23, 1828. 

" My dear Aunt, — I acknowledge the receipt 

of the recent tokens of your affection, and return 

you my sincere thanks. It would be rude in me 

QOt to express my gratification on hearing that you 

3* 



90 MEMOIR OF 

have also named your little daughter Hannah Hob* 
bi&, I was surprised that such a mark of affection 
should be conferred upon the most unworthy of all 
your friends and connections. Be assured, that 
while I retain the use of my faculties, it will be my 
happiness to commend her in my prayers to the 
special care of a merciful Providence. O that she 
may be a child of grace — an everlasting monument 
of divine love and mercy ! 

tc We are very much pleased with our young 
cousins. I am happy to discover in them, at so 
early an age, such an inclination to obtain useful 
instruction. I learn that they are favored with the 
privilege of attending Sabbath-school when at 
home, and I trust the instruction they there receive 
will be a lasting benefit to their souls. I rejoice to 
hear of the flourishing state of the churches in 
New- York; that though iniquity abounds, grace 
does much more abound. I rejoice to hear, also, of 
the prosperity of Zion in other places. I learn that 

the Lord is reviving his work in G . O that it 

may extend to the dear society of our friends in 
B . The revival which has existed in our so- 
ciety for a few months, has, in a measure, subsided ; 
but the pious among us are still awake to duty 
more than before. A Sunday-school has been com- 
menced this summer at the church, and has, we 
think, increased our congregation not a little. The 
fcchool wears a pleasing aspect at present ; and I 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 91 

think, if continued, it will greatly alter the charac- 
ter of the place, and be an inestimable blessing to 
us. I esteem this the best plan ever adopted for 
instilling into the minds of children and youth the 
all-important things of religion. How necessary to 
have good teachers ! Such as have the love of God 
in their own hearts are demanded, and ought to be 
obtained. How favored are we in this enlightened 
and peaceful land ! We may truly sing of mercy 
as well as of judgment. O that we may ever see and 
acknowledge the hand of God in this, and in every 
affair of life, and learn to adore him in all his deal- 
ings with us, whether in prosperity or adversity ! 

" I sympathise with you in your afflictions, and 
pray that the best of heaven's blessings may rest 
upon my dear uncle and aunt and their family, es- 
pecially upon my little namesake. 

" Please to give my love to uncle and aunt C. 
and tell them I know not how to be sufficiently 
thankful for the Tracts they were so kind as to 
send me. Your affectionate niece, 

M Hannah Hobbie." 

I now come back to her journal with delight ; 
indeed, when I designed to make selections for the 
public eye, and took it up for that purpose alone, 
I have often been insensibly betrayed into a con- 
tinued and absorbing perusal of it for many pages ; 
while my heart has become affected, and my sensi- 



92 MEMOIR OF 

bilities strongly awakened. It has thus often en- 
gaged my attention, and drawn forth the tear, when 
I only sat down to select for others. Under date 
of August 29, she thus writes : 

"O for language to extol the religion of Jesus ! 
O for an angel's tongue to proclaim the wonders of 
his grace ; to sing the praises of him who has given 
me to share in the comforts of his pardoning love! 
Surely, never did my heart possess more sincere 
love to God ; never did I more ardently desire the 
promotion of his glory and the enlargement of his 
kingdom than of late. By the love of God I have 
been constrained to exercise faith in the promises 
of his word, and have been led to discern so clearly 
the hand of God in answer to prayer, that I think I 
may never again distrust him. The mercies of a 
kind Providence are, to me, a sufficient incentive 
to more diligence in duty, more activity in his ser- 
vice. Though languishing on a bed of sickness, I 
am surrounded by kind and affectionate friends, 
ready to administer outward comfort, and, many 
of them, inward consolations. Some, more dis- 
tantly related to me, have of late evinced their at- 
tachment and sympathy in a peculiar manner. 

" While this is so, and those who are bound to 
me by the ties of nature are ever desirous of per- 
forming kind offices for my temporal good, can it be 
justly said that I am a child of adversity ] In the 



HANNAH HOBBIE. V6 

midst of bodily suffering the Lord is pleased to lift 
upon me the light of his countenance, which puts 
into my soul the most sublime joy and gladness. I 
have trusted in his mercy, and I am enabled to re- 
joice in his salvation from day to day." 

Soon after this date her physicians despaired en- 
tirely of her recovery. The ravages of a relent- 
less disease, working its issue with a process so 
painful and distressing that probably few have ever 
been placed under circumstances equally trying, 
were now developing themselves with more dis- 
tinctness and inveteracy. None can judge of her 
sufferings from her journal or letters. We, who 
saw her, could form a better opinion ; but as 
she seldom complained, even when her counte- 
nance strongly indicated the raging of the terrible 
commotion which frequently racked her frame with 
agony, even her most intimate companions and at- 
tendants, I am certain, knew little of what she 
really suffered. To this interesting point her his- 
tory is now brought ; but as that occurrence stands 
intimately connected with a subsequent season of 
uncommon brightness in her christian life, I reserve 
it for the succeeding chapter, which will embrace 
a season of about three months, wonderfully mark- 
ed with the light of her Heavenly Father's coun- 
tenance. 



04 MEMOIR OP 



CHAPTER VI. 

JOY AND TRIUMPH IN GOD. 

It is a solemn thing to think of dying ; to bring 
the awful reality home to ourselves, and fix the eye 
steadily upon it. Visions of death, dim and distant, 
have often flitted before those whose eyes may fall 
upon these pages ; but did they ever come very 
near, and clothe themselves in something like the 
distinctness of reality ] To feel the fangs of a fatal 
disease, fastened with a firm and relentless hold 
upon our vitals ; to contemplate the grave as our 
speedy abode, and lie upon its verge, without hope 
of rescue from its dark and dreary dominion ; to say 
to corruption, thou art my father ; and to the worm, 
thou art my mother and my sister ; these will try 
the heart as it never has been tried before. It is a 
trying thing to leave all below, and that for ever; 
to part with the kindred who have grown up by 
our side ; who have met with us at the same table, 
and warmed at the same fire ; who have endeared 
themselves to our hearts by a thousand proofs of 
true and tried affection. 

My dear reader, did you ever think of dying? 
Remember that death will come upon you and upon 
me. Not all the fortifications that we can throw 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 95 

around the citadel of life will arrest the entrance of 
the destroyer for a moment. 

The cold hand that has stopped the vital current so 
often, and peopled the grave with so many genera- 
tions, will one day be found thrusting in its icy fin- 
gers upon the fountains of life within our bosoms, 
and feeling after our heart-strings. Perhaps you 
think that will be an hour of consternation and dis- 
may. But grace, almighty grace, what can it not 
accomplish 1 It can smooth the rough pathway of 
life, and has done it for many a mourner. It can 
make the soul calm, and even joyful, in the imme- 
diate prospect of death. Such grace was given to 
Hannah Hobbie. 

The following passage in her journal will show 
her feelings when the physicians in attendance an- 
nounced to her that they had no hope of her re- 
covery : 

" September 12. A long and faithful applica- 
tion of the means prescribed for the restoration of 
my health has proved ineffectual. It appears to be 
the Lord's will that I should labor under a compli- 
cation of disorders, which will inevitably bring me 
down to the grave. There the wicked cease from 
troubling, and there the weary are at rest. Notwith- 
standing all this, I have reason to adopt David's 
language, and say, * How many are thy thoughts 
of mercy towards me ; how great is the sum of them. 



96 MEMOIR OF 

Thou hast made me glad, according to the days 
wherein thou hast afflicted me ;' and, praised be thy 
name, that, though abandoned by earthly physi- 
cians, I yet may have recourse to the great Physi- 
cian of souls, who is ' God over all, blessed for ever- 
more/ Unto him I apply ; to his will I most cheer- 
fully submit ; and in it I freely and fully acquiesce* 
11 To thee, O Lord, I consecrate my all. In thy 
service I desire to spend all the remnant of my 
time upon earth. I beg that thou wouldst instruct 
and influence me so, that, whether my abode here 
be longer or shorter, every day and hour may be 
used in such a manner as shall most effectually pro- 
mote thine honor, and subserve thy wise and gra- 
cious schemes of providence. Use me, O Lord, I 
beseech thee, as an instrument for thy glory, and 
let me, either by doing or suffering what thou shalt 
appoint, bring some revenue of praise to thee, 
and of benefit to the world in which I dwell*" 

The following was written on the 26th of Sep- 
tember, to an aunt, also a child of affliction : 

M It appears to be the Lord's will that we should 
yet continue in the school of affliction, and I hope 
we are both making proficiency daily in the Wise 
and important lessons which it so effectually 
teaches. I consider it the best of all schools, be* 
cause the Teacher is heavenly and divine. 



HANNAH HOBBIE, 97 

M I think I can say, with humble gratitude, that 
my spiritual joy and strength, for a short time past, 
have surpassed any thing which I ever before expe- 
rienced. that I may not forfeit the continuance 
of the Lord's mercies, by forgetting this season of 
his loving-kindness. 'Tis true, I have been occasion- 
ally disturbed by temptations, but in the strength 
of grace I have been enabled to resist ; and my faith, 
hope, and joy have been, for the most part, abiding. 

M I desire to bear testimony to the truths and 
comforts of religion, that others may be encouraged 
to ' fight the good fight of faith/ trusting in the 
Lord, who alone is our righteousness and strength. 
I hope my dear aunt enjoys much of heavenly com- 
fort while passing through this world of trouble. 
Let this, especially, afford abundant consolation, that 
the hour of release will shortly come. Let the con- 
sideration of the shortness of life contribute to re- 
concile us to its trials. 

' When a few more years are wasted, 

' When a few more months are o'er, 

* When a few more griefs we've tasted, 

We shall rest on Canaan's shore.' 

M O how precious to the believer are the pro- 
mises of the Gospel ! how sweet the consolation 
the book of God affords ! may it be our guide until 
death ! Farewell. 

11 Hannah Hobbie " 

H. Hobbie 9 



98 MEMOIR OF 

•* October 3. I here record as among the mul- 
titude of the Lord's tender mercies to me, an un- 
worthy worm of the dust, that last evening a minis- 
ter, almost a stranger in the place, was providen- 
tially led to our house, by missing his way. O the 
happiness I enjoyed in joining with him in conver- 
sation and prayer. In conversing upon heavenly 
and divine things, especially about the dealings of 
God with myself, I felt a freedom which I seldom 
have felt before. Truly, it was a delightful season 
to me ; one which, I trust, will long be remembered. 
How sweet the society of the friends of the blessed 
Jesus ! O how do I love them that bear my Savior's 
image, especially the ministers of the Gospel." 

I had at this period frequent interviews with this 
beloved child of God, and found that, though her 
" outward man" was perishing day by day, there was 
the most gratifying evidence that she was growing 
eminently holy. All that she said evinced the en- 
ergy of her spiritual life — the daily renewal of the 
inner man, and displayed the power of divine grace 
ripening her spirit for heaven, while the flesh and 
the heart were failing under the pains which she 
suffered. At intervals, however, God kindly gave 
her a partial relief from excessive distress of body, 
and such seasons were always precious, because 
they afforded opportunities to be more useful to 
others, and to enjoy the society of her christian 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 99 

friends. She was always calm at this season, under 
the full and delightful impression that her interests, 
for time and eternity, were in the wisest keeping. 
During the period on which we have now entered, 
I never heard her mourn over any thing respecting 
ner outward condition but this, that she was kept 
away from the house of God ; and she bowed al- 
ways to this deprivation with a sweet and quiet 
spirit, because it was her heavenly Father's will. 

The attentive reader has discovered, doubtless, 
that God was gradually manifesting himself to this 
waiting disciple more and more, and apparently 
preparing her for some precious tokens of his lov- 
ing-kindness. These expectations were evidently 
excited in herself, and, step by step, she was brought 
nearer and nearer to God, until a full and refresh- 
ing blaze of light burst upon her in unclouded glo- 
ry ; and for a considerable time not a single doubt 
obscured her spiritual vision. But I hasten to 
adopt her own language, in giving a view of God's 
dealings with her at this interesting period of her 
history. 

u October 6. Shall I cease to speak of the di- 
vine favor % Shall this long season, in which I have 
enjoyed peculiar benefits, be forgotten ? O Lord 
forbid it ! While I have strength to use my pen I 
will record thy goodness ; and when I am no longer 
able to do this, I will think with delight upon all 



100 MEMOIR OF 

that I now enjoy, and turn back to these records of 
thy doings with me, that I may praise thee for the 
past, and be encouraged to trust thee for the future. 

ce It is one of the Lord's mercies, that my body, 
so feeble, is supported under the elevated comforts 
and ecstacies of joy which I, at times, experience 
in meditating upon the glorious attributes of God. 
It is now some time since darkness or doubt has 
disturbed my peace ; and I find my 'joys almost 
daily increasing. O for a heart and tongue to mag- 
nify the Lord, who is manifesting the riches of his 
grace to such a poor, worthless sinner as I am ! 
What unmerited mercy ! Yet these blessings are 
offered in the Gospel, to all such as seek diligently 
for them. Shall I then be satisfied with a crumb, 
when I may be filled with the bread of life? How 
can I be content to dwell here, when there are so 
many mansions on high, where is happiness un- 
mingled for evermore !" 

" October 10. Mr. H , the minister who 

missed his way and came here last week, attended 
a meeting with us last evening, and preached from 
1 John, 3:1;' Behold what manner of love the 
Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be 
called the sons of God.' Application and address 
by my dear pastor. Through the blessing of God, 
1 was enabled to hear the word, I think, with faith 
and profit. 

" I am still enjoying sensible communion with 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 101 

him whom my 60ul loveth, and abundantly filled 
with heavenly consolations. Yet I have a thorn in 
the flesh ; something to keep me from being lifted 
up with these large measures of comfort. I feel my 
own helplessness. O Lord, be thou my help, and 
let me not forget that my safety is in thee. May I 
not grieve thy Spirit, nor fall into folly that shall 
provoke thee to depart." 

M October 12. My mind has become almost 
wholly absorbed in the contemplation of heavenly 
and divine things. The time has been recently, that 
it was with difficulty I could disengage my thoughts 
from these things to obtain sleep for my feeble body. 
Last night was almost a sleepless one ; and to-day, 
though 1 feel weak in body, yet thanks be to God, 
who strengthened me with might, by his Spirit, in 
the inward man. All these blessings I believe to 
be obtained by the prayer of faith ; and I am con- 
fident that the Lord is about answering prayer for 
me, in many things which of late I have so much 
desired, in a most wonderful manner. I have found 
these words true in my own experience, ' They 
that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength ; 
they shall mount up with wings as eagles ; they 
shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk 
and not faint.' " 

" October 13. Last night I enjoyed refreshing 
rest ; and as I am permitted to see the return of 
this, my natal day t in such comfortable circum- 
0* 



102 MEMOIR OF 

stances, I resolve to devote the strength of it, in a 
great measure, to God, in thanksgiving and prayer. 
This last year of my life has been the happiest, and 
I think the best. Although I have come far short 
of doing my duty to God, yet I trust I have been 
graciously accepted of him. One evidence of this 
is, the great blessings he is now conferring upon 
me, in answer to long-continued and earnest prayer 
that he would renew my spiritual strength, increase 
my faith and love, and give me more zeal in his ser- 
vice, and for his glory. 

" When I look upon the many blessings herein 
recorded during the year, I am filled with wonder 
and praise. I must si?ig of mercy as tvell as of judg- 
ment. And now, O Lord, on this day I give myself 
entirely to thee, to do with me as seemeth good in 
thy* sight ; only enable me to say at all times, and 
under all circumstances, Thy will he done. O that 
Christ Jesus may be manifested in me, whether it 
be by life or death; and let me have this evidence 
that my path is that of the just, that it * shineth 
brighter and brighter unto the perfect day.' " 

" October 15. This day I have not such elevated 
comforts as I enjoyed three days since ; for then, 
in consideration of what the Lord was doing for 
me, I could only wonder and adore. But thanks be 
to God that I still joy in the Lord, my trust and 
my salvation. I know that it is only by humbly 
waiting upon thee that I shall obtain blessings; 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 103 

therefore my waiting eyes are unto thee ; for giv- 
ing doth not impoverish, withholding doth not en- 
rich thee, and thou art ever ready to communicate 
unto such as are of a broken heart and a contrite 
spirit. My heart aspires after more holiness, greater 
conformity to thine image. If I am indeed a branch 
of the true vine, wilt thou purge my heart, that 1 
may f bring forth more fruit;' and ' as the branch 
cannot bring forth fruit of itself, except it abide in 
the vine,' O that I may abide in thee, and thou in 
me, that I may ' bring forth much fruit.' O that I 
may keep thy commandments and abide in thy love, 
that my joy may be full." 

" October 18. God and his salvation have be- 
come a theme of the most delightful contemplation. 
The hope that I have been washed in the blood of 
atonement — that my feet have been plucked from 
' the horrible pit and the miry clay,' and set upon 
the Rock Christ Jesus, against which the gates of 
hell shall never prevail ; and the fact that I am now 
permitted to drink so freely of the cup of salvation, 
are causes of perpetual joy and thanksgiving. 

1 Perpetual blessings from above, 
1 Demand perpetual songs of praise.' 

" For ever blessed be thy name, O most gracious 
God, that thy Spirit has excited in my heart such 
fervor of love to thee ; for surely, if ever I knew 
what hunger is, I do hunger after righteousness — af- 



104 MEMOIR OF 

ter greater conformity to thy blessed will. If ever 
I knew what it is to thirsty I do thirst for God, for 
the living God, and pant for the more abundant 
communications of his favor; if J ever desired rest 
and refreshment for this body, my soul, with sweet 
acquiescence in thy will, rests, dear Savior, upon 
thy bosom, and returns to its repose in the em- 
braces of God, who hath dealt so bountifully with 
me." 

" Oct. 19. — In contrasting my present happiness 
with all that the world ever offered, I cannot find 
words to express how poor, and mean, and despi- 
cable all earthly gratifications appear to me, when 
compared with this joy and peace which now fill 
my soul. 

'God is my all-sufficient good, 

* My portion, and my choice ; 
1 In him my vast desires are fill'd, 

1 And all my powers rejoice. 

1 In vain the world accosts mine ear, 

1 And tempts my heart anew ; 
' I cannot buy your bliss so dear, 

c Nor part with heaven for you.' 

" When I look back upon all the way in which 
the Lord has led me, it is with gratitude that I ac- 
knowledge the blessing of this long bodily affliction, 
as the means he has appointed to bring me to a 
knowledge of himself. Although the way has been 
peculiarly trying to my sinful nature, yet the more 



HANNAH HODBIE. 105 

I reflect upon it, the more I adore him who has 
done it. 

" I consider it a special mercy, that external ob- 
jects are in a great measure shut out from me, so 
that I may enjoy more entirely spiritual things. 
How different my situation from that of those who 
have not God for their Friend ! O how do I pity 
those who have no comfort but such as this world 
affords ! How should I love God for giving me 
grace to cheer and support me under his chasten- 
ing hand ! Surely nothing but the grace of God 
could enable me to endure so long without com- 
plaint. For several months I have not felt the 
smallest disposition to complain — the least rising 
of any thing like impatience. * Bless the Lord, 
O my soul, and let all that is within me bless his 
holy name.'" 

M Oct. 20. Feeling myself inclined this day to 
wander from the object of my love — from the 
source of my inexpressible joy, I have found occa- 
sion to be more earnest in prayer, and frequent- 
ly raise my heart to God for the continuance of his 
favor. O that I may continue to delight myself in 
the Lord, then will he give me the desires of my 
heart. M«^ I commit my way more entirely to him, 
and trust also in him, that he may bring to pas9 
what I pant after; that he may ' bring forth my 
righteousness as the light, and my judgment as the 
noon-day/ 



106 MEMOIR OP 

" Lord, thou hast said that thou wilt ' withhold no 
good from him that walketh uprightly/ O ' put away 
iniquity far from me/ that thou mayest continue 
thy loving-kindness towards me ; and glorify thy- 
self in me yet more abundantly, through the riches 
of thy grace." 

" Oct. 22. I still enjoy the light of God's coun- 
tenance and the consolations of his Spirit, which 
are neither few nor small. Unto thy name, O Lord, 
be all the glory, for thou art my strength and song, 
and thou art become my salvation. Unveil, I be- 
seech thee, the beauties of thy character to me yet 
more and more, that I may see thy glory as it is 
manifested in thy works of creation, of providence, 
and redemption.' } 

" Oct. 29. — The Bible has become my chief study . 
It is a delightful employment. I read it with in- 
creased interest. The more I read it, the more I 
love it. Alas! how little knowledge I obtained of 
the Scriptures before I sought the illumination of 
the Holy Spirit in reading them ! I am persuaded, 
that, as the Scriptures were inspired at first by the 
Spirit, they owe all their influence and effect to the 
Spirit's co-operation. Not long since I was made 
particularly sensible of my ignorance of the Scrip* 
tures, and felt reproved for my formerinattention 
to them. I therefore besought the Lord more ear- 
nestly to instruct me and enlighten my dark mind, de- 
siring him to teach me by his Spirit, in all things, the 



HANNAH HOBBIH. 107 

meaning of his word, that I might grow in know- 
ledge and grace together more and more ; and 
surely I have not looked in vain for the blessing. 
I have had such experience of the truth of God's 
word, that I can fully adopt the language of David, 
1 I will praise thee with my whole heart ; I will 
praise thee for thy loving-kindness and thy truth, 
for thou hast magnified thy word above all thy 
name.' 

,f The Psalms of David I find peculiarly adapted 
to the devotional frame of my mind. Bless the 
Lord, O my soul, who has given me to delight in 
his holy word! * The law of the Lord is perfect, 
converting the soul. The testimony of the Lord 
is sure, making wise the simple ; the statutes of the 
Lord are right, rejoicing the heart.' 

" O Lord, give me faith in thy word ; what I 
know not teach thou me. I will hide thy word in 
my heart, that I may not sin against thee. O let 
thy word be ' a light unto my feet, and a lamp un- 
to my path/ according to thy gracious promises, 
which in Jesus Christ are • yea and amen.' " 

M Oct. 31. I have to sing this day of a great de- 
liverance which the Lord, in his goodness, has 
wrought for me. The passing scenes around me 
had, in a great measure, diverted my mind from 
spiritual and divine things. A circumstance (al- 
luding to the contemplated marriage of a sister) 
which is seldom attended with much seriousness, is 



108 MEMOIR OF 

about to take place in the family. It absorbed my 
thoughts too much, notwithstanding my constant 
endeavors to prevent it. Satan laid a snare for my 
soul, but the Lord * upheld me by the right hand of 
his righteousness,' and has restored to me the joy 
of his salvation. O thou all-sufficient Friend, unto 
thee do I look for grace to help me in this time of 
need ! Give me the shield of faith, by which I shall 
be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked ; 
and the whole armor of God, that I may be able 
to stand in the evil day." 

n Nov. 7. Yesterday I in some measure forgot 
my Almighty Helper, and satan sought to take ad- 
vantage of my soul, through the weakness of my 
body ; but at evening I received strength to call 
upon God, and t'hereby obtained grace as my day 
demanded it, 

" This afternoon I expect a visit from my dear 
pastor ; and in the evening, the Lord willing, I shall 
again hear the sweet sound of the Gospel from his 
lips. The Lord seal instruction to my heart, and bless 
the means of grace which I enjoy, to my soul. Let 
me not be a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the word*. 
O Lord, make thy word effectual this night to the 
conversion of souls," 

I visited her that day, as she expected. She wel- 
comed me with unusual joy, but she was evidently 
in more than ordinary pain. There was a mingling 



HANNAH HOEBIE. 103 

of serenity and agitation in every feature of he* 
countenance, which denoted the struggle within, 
and proclaimed the present crazy tabernacle to be 
unsuitable for the permanent abode of a spirit as- 
piring after eternal life and peace. Her cheek was 
flushed, and her eye, occasionally, was restless; but 
peace was reigning triumphantly, notwithstanding 
the fruitless efforts of an already defeated enemy. 
Her state of mind was heavenly, and pain of body 
could not permanently disturb it. 

Having ascertained this, I felt anxious, as far as 
her strength would allow, to know whether she 
could look upon the evidences of her hope stead- 
fastly, and derive satisfaction from inspecting its 
foundations. She had enjoyed a long season of 
spiritual prosperity ; her sky was all cloudless and 
serene, while a fair and steady breeze was wafting 
her towards the haven of rest. I feared that she 
had been looking aloft so long, and contemplating 
with such absorbing delight the swelling canvass 
under which she was pressing onward, that she had 
almost forgotten the dangers that lay in her course, 
and remembered not that she was yet upon a treach- 
erous and stormy ocean. I seated myself at her bed- 
side, and spent a short time in testing her heart by 
the touchstone of eternal truth. The interview of 
that day comes up, even now, before me with the 
freshness of the scenes of yesterday. She stood the 
trial well. 

II.Hvbbie. 10 



110 MEMOIR OP 

The character and law of God, his government, 
his will, his salvation, his Sabbath and ordinances she 
loved; Jesus Christ was precious to her soul ; the 
Word of God was her delight, and her guide in all 
things ; the people of God her dearly beloved and 
chosen companions, and sin the object of her un- 
mingled hatred. She relished the truth, and rejoic- 
ed that God's precious promises secured its future 
and universal triumph, while she pitied with her 
whole heart the miserable and perishing condition 
of a benighted world. Without prayer she could 
not live ; and, weak and languid as she was, she 
was devising (as will presently be seen) plans to 
render herself more extensively useful while she 
remained in the field of labor. 

I felt as if a word of caution was nevertheless 
called for, and this settled the subject for the even- 
ing's discourse. Of this she speaks largely : the 
following are extracts : 

" Nov. 8. The text last evening was Mark, 13 : 
21, What I say unto you, I say unto all, watch, 
I fear I have been too unmindful of this duty ; the 
Lord grant that I may henceforth be more diligent 
in this respect ; and may the solemn admonitions, 
the all-important lessons I received, make an abiding 
impression on my mind : may I lay up the word in 
my heart, and practice it in my life. The Lord 
bless him who watches here for souls, and make 



HANNAH HOEBIE. Ill 

him faithful over his charge ; O strengthen his 
lianas and encourage his heart, and return into his 
own bosom sevenfold his labors of love amon^ us." 
"Nov. 10. I cannot easily, nor would I, forget 
the solemn impressions I received from our pastor 
the other evening, while in his sermon he exhorted 
christians to awake to their duty, and try to do 
good to sinners around them, and proposed to our 
serious consideration the inquiries which may be 
made of us, in respect to the discharge of this duty, 
in the day. of judgment. I have since resolved, in 
the strength of the Lord, to make it a part of my 
great business so to discharge' my duty to my neigh- 
bors, whose souls I ought to love as my own, that 
at the last great day of trial, when I shall be judged 
according to my works, the blood of souls will not 
be required at my hand. Shall I, who have named 
the name of Christ, and upon whom rest the most 
solemn vows, shall I slumber while the broad road 
that leads to death is so crowded % x Deliver my 
soul from blood-guiltiness, O God, thou God of my 
salvation/ " 

Nov. 16. The work of redemption is a great 
mystery. The angels desire to look into it ; and it 
is often to me a subject of delightful contemplation. 
But who can comprehend the breadth, and length, 
and depth, and height, or know the love of God ? 
Praised be the Lord's name, that he has established 
bis covenant of grace with men, and that thousands 



112 MEMOIR OF 

in every age have rejoiced in its inestimable bless- 
ings. To him be glory for ever, for the happy as- 
surance that he has made with me c an everlasting 
covenant, ordered in all things and sure ;' for this is 
all my salvation, and all my desire.' ' 

ft Nov. 25. Notwithstanding my forgetfulness 
of God, my ingratitude and remissness in duty, 
his loving-kindness is still manifested towards me. 
He is merciful to my unrighteousness, and I would 
acknowledge his goodness with humble gratitude. 
When my foolish heart has felt disposed to leave 
him and fix on inferior objects, he has proved to 
me his unwillingness to forsake me. For several 
days I have maintained almost a continual warfare 
with my soul's enemies ; earth has sometimes gain- 
ed a share of my affections, when at other times it 
has had no power to charm me. How, O my soul, 
canst thou be delighted with these transitory glo- 
ries when in pursuit of nobler objects, since God 
is the object of thy supreme love, and all thy desires 
centre in him 1 

1 What sinners value I resign ; 

* Lord, 'tis enough that thou art mine.* 

"O Heavenly Father, forbid that I should leave 
thee, for thou art the fountain of life whence flow 
streams of inexpressible delight. Let not the 
passing scenes around me divert my mind from 
spiritual things ; let nothing impede, but every 



HANNAH HOBBIB. 113 

thing further my progress heaven-ward ; that I may 
grow in grace until I am perfect in glory." 

You have seen, christian reader, the love of God 
as it was manifested to this humble but distinguish- 
ed individual : now pause and inquire, Do I walk 
in the light of God's countenance day by day % Do 
I enjoy these sweet, and animating, and refreshing 
views of his love ] Does the Savior manifest him- 
self to me as he doth not unto the world % You will 
perhaps say, she was highly favored ; all may not 
look for such seasons of unmingled comfort and 
assurance. But why was the loving-kindness of 
God thus manifested to her? We know he is sove- 
reign in bestowing his mercy ; but she sought it 
earnestly by faith. She found from the Bible that 
God did hold such sweet communion with his chil- 
dren ; and she took hold of his covenant with a 
firm grasp — with a heart panting after God — and 
with the words of the patriarch upon her lips, I 
will not let thee go, except thou bless me. She wrest- 
led with God, and prevailed. All that she enjoyed is 
set before you. All these tokens of the Divine favor, 
these antepasts of heaven, it is, in the strength of 
divine grace, the privilege of every christian to 
possess. By faith and prayer you too, as she did, 
may walk in the light greatly comforted. " Light 
is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the up- 
right in heart. " As you travel onward to heaven, 
10* 



114 MEMOIR or 

you too may look for and haste unto the coming of 
the Son of man. You may drink deeply at the same 
fountain of life ; you may rejoice in the same salva- 
tion ; you may live under the same sunny skies, and 
breathe the same refreshing and delightful atmos- 
phere of love. O that we may be followers of 
those who, through faith and patience, have become 
inheritors of the promises ! 



CHAPTER VII. 



As the design of Miss Hobbie in keeping a jour- 
nal was chiefly to preserve the passing exercises of 
her mind, that she might avail herself of the bene- 
fit of frequently reviewing them, she was not in 
the habit of recording much of what she did in the 
service of God. There was in her a modesty and 
diffidence in reference to this point, exceedingly deli- 
cate, and perhaps too sensitive. I discovered this 
early, and found it a uniform trait of her character ; 
not knowing then that she kept a journal at all. 
By her silence in respect to her efforts to be useful, 
I am thrown almost entirely upon my own recol- 
lection, to gather up the fragments of her active 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 115 

exertions in her Master's cause ; and probably but 
a small part of her endeavors for the good of others 
ever came to my knowledge. But I have treasured 
up enough to shame us all, who have more strength 
to labor, and better opportunities of extensive use- 
fulness by mingling with society, from which she 
was in a great measure excluded. For the greater 
part of her time she was confined closely to her 
sick bed, weak, emaciated, and often agonizing 
under severe pain. But feeble as she was, she did 
much for her Master's glory ; her faith was exem- 
plified by her works. If the clusters of fruit can 
speak for her, she was a true branch of the living 
vine ; for they were rich, and they were many. In 
a condition where few would have thought of doing 
any thing — where the distressing anguish that wore 
away her strength would have been deemed a jus- 
tifiable exemption from active exertion in the 
Lord's vineyard, her burning zeal would not allow 
her to be idle ; she studied how she could still be 
useful to the world while she remained in it. 

She exerted her influence with many, both chris- 
tians and others, in personal conversation, as they 
visited her chamber, with reference to their souls' 
salvation ; and some, I trust, will meet her at the 
judgment, who will be as jewels in her crown of 
everlasting glory and rejoicing. More than fifty let- 
ters were written from her sick bed to different in 
dividuals, all of them breathing the same refresh- 



116 MEMOIR OF 

ing spirit of evangelical piety and 'deep concern for 
souls. 

As has been seen, she pitied the perishing world, 
and felt called upon to do what she could for its 
rescue from the dominion of sin and the prison- 
house of eternal despair. She exerted herself suc- 
cessfully with her female christian friends, to form a 
benevolent society for the purpose of assisting mis- 
sions ; a society which, as her records show, con- 
sisted of eighty members, and with a little assist- 
ance from the congregation, soon made their pastor 
a life-director of the Missionary Society by the pay- 
ment of one hundred dollars. That precious band 
of sisters, as I have learned, are yet steadfastly pur- 
suing their object and abounding in labors of love. 

There is now lying before me an address, written 
by her, which was read at their first meeting, and 
heard* with delight and profit. One thought she ex- 
presses should speak to all who profess attach- 
ment to the ordinances of God's house : " We en- 
joy the light of God's word, and most of us the con- 
stant preaching of the Gospel. We have, richly, all 
the means of grace necessary for our salvation and 
the present comfort of our souls ; and may not our 
estimate of them be measured by the pains we take, 
and the sacrifices we make to communicate them to 
others ?" The same spirit of active benevolence 
will appear, from time to time, in all her remain- 
ing history. 



HANNAH HOBBIB. 117 

It will also be seen, that the Lord, in infinite 
wisdom, saw fit now to withdraw, in some measure, 
the rich consolation which for a long time she had 
almost uninterruptedly enjoyed. She was not yet 
to be taken from the world, and under this disci- 
pline gained a knowledge of her own heart and of 
duty, which perhaps she would not have obtained 
had the light of God's countenance still been lifted 
upon her in such unclouded splendor. 

Under date of December 2d, she thus complains 
of her insensibility : 

" I dare not say that the God of mercies has, in 
a great degree, withholden his blessing, but rather 
acknowledge my dreadful insensibility, at which I 
have often been deeply astonished. O when shall I 
awake from this death-like stupidity V 9 

" December 6. O to know my own heart! O 
that I were more sensible of my exceeding depra- 
vity ! O the pride of my heart ! Put away, Lord, I 
beseech thee, the pride of my heart; that thou 
mayest receive all the glory for the great things 
which thou hast done for me. Take off from me 
the filthy rags of my own righteousness, that, being 
entirely naked, I may be clothed with the righteous- 
ness of Christ. May I walk softly in the valley of 
humility all the days of my life. O for more fervent 
love to God, deep humility, and strong faith." 

At this time the Lord in mercy granted a gentle 



118 MEMOIR OP 

season of refreshing from his presence to a single 
and distant section of the congregation; and it 
greatly rejoiced her heart. From the commence- 
ment of our meetings in that neighborhood she had 
been unusually anxious that God should grant his 
blessing, as it was a place of peculiar desolation ; 
and I always attributed much of the success which 
attended our efforts to the fact, that she and others 
were helping together in their prayers for us. She 
thus speaks of it : 

" December 7. Joyful news ! The Lord is pour- 
ing out his Spirit and reviving his work in a part 
of our society. Some are already rejoicing in hope, 
while others are crying for mercy. 

tl When I think of my former danger, how can I 
slumber while thousands are yet exposed as I was ? 
The Lord has heard my humble prayer for myself, 
and, glory be to his name, I have seen, I think, in 
some measure, my desires upon others. O for the 
fulfillment of them yet more and more ! O that the 
Lord would revive his work in the hearts of his 
children, especially those of this church, and pour 
out upon us a spirit of prayer for the conversion of 
sinners and the enlargement of Zion ! O Lord., 
visit us again with thy Spirit ; have mercy on pre- 
cious souls ; carry on thy good work of grace in the 
neighborhood where thou hast begun it ; and may 
that place, which has long been a seat of the most 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 119 

profane wiokedness, soon become a habitation of 
holiness, and a dwelling for our God." 

Such was the character of her letters, that the 
pastors of the churches to which her friends be- 
longed, in some instances solicited a copy for pub- 
\ication. Several letters thus found their way into 
the religious periodicals of the day, which greatly 
surprised and affected her. Of this she thus speaks : 

M December 12. I have been informed that some 
of my late letters to my friends have been published. 
Can it be that there is any thing in them that is 
worthy of public notice ? It may be ; for as the dia- 
mond, though unpolished, possesses intrinsic worth, 
so the truths of the Gospel, ever excellent, will be 
relished by true christians, even from the pen of 
the most unlettered individual. Blessed be the 
Lord who has made me to know and understand 
that he is God, and besides him there is no Savior ; 
and has influenced me to declare his mercy, good- 
ness, and truth. Shouldst thou, O Lord, make me, 
in anywise, serviceable to others, unto thy name be 
all the glory. Blessed be thy glorious name for 
ever and ever, that thou hast manifested the riches 
of thy grace to such a poor, unworthy sinner ! O 
what distinguished mercy !" 

M December 14. Have just been reading of an 
eminent christian, though he was a plain uneduca- 



120 MEMOIR OF 

ted man, and moved in the humble walks of life* 
Most works of a biographical character place before 
us the lives of persons eminent for their station and 
talents, as well as piety ; which is calculated to pro- 
duce an impression upon many minds, that such 
excellence is not to be aimed at, except by those 
who, in the providence of God, possess similar ad* 
vantages. But if we do not aim high, we cannot 
reach spiritual eminence. God requires perfection, 
nor can he, consistently, require less. So then I 
will aim to be perfect, as my Father in heaven is 
perfect. I will r press forward toward the mark for 
the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.' ' 

Here is the secret of her distinguished piety. 
She fixed for herself a high standard, and steadily 
pursued the great object at which she aimed. She 
was weak and languid in body — the reader per- 
haps enjoys health and vigor. Use them then for 
God ; employ them steadfastly for the same ends ; 
and through divine grace you will be successful. 

n December 19. Time flies swiftly, and the 
question arises in my mind, What am I doing for 
God? My guilty conscience is forced to make the 
painful reply, Nothing / For several days I have 
been sorely grieved with a view of the sins of 
others, besides being greatly burdened with a sense 
of my own. I am astonished at the iniquity that 



HAfcN'AIt BOfifite. 121 

abounds. Alas ! my wicked heart also, what a foun- 
tain of corruption ! A retrospect of the past fills me 
with surprise and grief. I have to mourn over a 
carnal mind, a rebellious will, and an unprofitable 
life. O that the Lord would giant me true re- 
pentance ! O that a sense of the exceeding sinful- 
ness of sin might lead me to forsake it ! O that I 
could abhor it ; and that myself and others might 
repent of provoking sins, and walk humbly before 
God all the days of our lives/ ' 

te December 20. O that I were more sensible of 
the purity of the divine law and the preciousness 
of Christ ; that I could feel more sensibly the in* 
sufficiency of my own righteousness, and humbly 
and implicitly rely on the merits of Christ for jus- 
tification before God !" 

M December 24. Last evening my sister T » 

was united in marriage to Mr. E W — «*-i. Let 

their union be long and happy. O that both may 
embrace thankfully the great salvation ; remember 
their Creator in the days of their youth ; and be 
instrumental of building up the kingdom of Christ 
greatly ! May they assist each other in preparing 
for glory, and at last be received into heaven, 
where they ' neither marry nor are given in mar- 
riage.' M 

M December 25* This is said to be the day on 
which the glad tidings were brought by the angel 
of the Lord to a perishing world, eighteen hundred 

II- liobbie. . 11 



122 MEMOIR OF 

and twenty-eight years ago: 'Behold, I bring you 
glad tidings of great joy, which shall be to all peo- 
ple ; for to you is born, this day, in the city of Da- 
vid, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord.' Well 
might the angels sing, • Glory to God in the high- 
est, and on earth peace, good will toward men/ 
Well may the church break out into loud songs of 
praise. O what stupendous love ! O that this ex- 
hibition of love might warm my cold and languid 
affections !" 

" December 27. Saturday evening. 

{ Safely through another week 
c God has brought me on my way; 

'May I now a blessing seek 

1 On th' approaching Sabbath day ; 

1 Day of all the week the best, 

c Emblem of eternal rest.' " 

" December 28. Bless the Lord, O my soul, 
through whose goodness thou art permitted to be- 
hold the return of another Sabbath, under circum- 
stances of so much mercy. I feel myself under 
unspeakable obligation to devote myself, my all, 
my life to his service ; but I feel myself an unpro- 
fitable servant ; I fear I am a cumberer of the 
ground. O for the quickening influences of the 
Holy Spirit to put new life into every duty ; and 
more especially at this time, when I am sensible of 
so much coldness and formality. To-day my father 
is to be set apart as an officer in the church. The 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 123 

Lord grant that he may be duly qualified, and ful- 
fill the duties of his station in the fear of God. O 
that the Lord would be pleased to bless this church, 
and enlarge the borders of Zion ! O that he would 
lengthen her cords, and strengthen her stakes. 
Bless, O Lord, all thy churches ; ' let thy kingdom 
come, and thy will be done on earth as it is in 
heaven/ I long to have the millennial glory come, 
when all the earth shall be filled with thy praise I" 

M January 1, 1S29. Another year of my life's 
short pilgrimage is gone. What vast numbers du- 
ring the year have closed their mortal existence, 
and gone to try the realities of eternity, while I 
am spared to see the beginning of another year. 
For what do I live ? a poor, vile, unprofitable crea- 
ture ! I am sick of sin ; I am tired of this lassi- 
tude ! 

" Deeply impressed with a sense of my innumer- 
able sins, my utter nothingness and unworthiness, 
I am constrained to make renewed application to 
the blood of Christ which ' cleanseth from all sin,' 
that I may be prepared to stand before the throne 
of God. I would let the time past suffice for sin- 
ning; I would now resolve, in the Lord's strength, 
to break off sin by righteousness. O that I may no 
longer be engrossed with my little self, but seek 
alone my Master's glory 1 may I live for God, and 
act for eternity. 

M I desire to live as ' a stranger and a pilgrim* 



124 MEMOIR OP 

below, that ' when my earthly house of this taber- 
nacle shall be dissolved, I may have a building of 
God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the 
heavens.' " 

" January 4. Sabbath. O that I could go up to 
the house of God with the multitude who keep holy 
day ! O that I could meet with them to-day around 
the table of the Lord, to commemorate a Savior's 
dying love ! but a good and gracious God has de- 
termined it otherwise with me, and it is well. I 
rejoice that the Lord is making accessions from 
time to time to his people here. O may those who 
this day in his courts, before God and men, enter 
into a solemn covenant to consecrate their lives to 
his service, consider what the solemn vow binds 
them to do, and keep that vow for ever ! O may 
they never bring reproach upon the religion of the 
cross, but manifest its power before all, and be 
blessings to the church and to the world !" 

I soon again visited her. It was near the close 
of the day, in the dead of winter. All around me 
as I passed along, was locked in his cold embrace. 
As I emerged from the narrow defile where the 
church stood, and turned to the eastward between 
it and the grave-yard, the latter attracted my atten- 
tion, and spoke to my heart. All within its enclo- 
sure looked more cold and desolate than ever. 
There stood the monuments of the departed, some 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 125 

of them weather-beaten by the storms of many 
years, while others, more recently erected, contrast- 
ed feebly with the snow, almost as white and pure 
as itself. 

I had stood by many of those graves and seen 
them closed over the blasted hopes of the mourner. 
There I had seen the tears of affectionate sisters 
falling fast and freely upon a brother's coffin. 

There I had witnessed the sisrhs of those who were 

o 

left childless, and the agony which wrung their 
bosoms as they thought of the desolation that would 
meet them in the home of their former joys, when 
they should return to see the little empty chair, 
and sit down to weep together in their loneliness, 
and there I had sympathized with the bitter sor- 
rows of widowhood and orphanage. All was still 
in this empire of corruption. The silence of the 
death-sleep was there. Plans, and purposes, and 
toils, and cares, all were ended ; and those whose 
flesh rested in hope of a blessed resurrection, were 
waiting the summons of the last trumpet, to call 
them, in a glorified body, to their home in heaven. 
Thoughts of eternal scenes occupied my mind 
as I proceeded ; the subduing admonitory influence 
of death and the judgment was upon me, and for 
a moment the veil seemed lifted, that I might look 
in upon another world, and call up before me the 
solemn realities which will one day displace the 
expectations of deluded man. 
11* 



126 MEMOIR OF 

The noisy crows were hurrying to and fro, clam- 
orous for their evening repast, before retiring to 
their nightly resting-place. The full clear whistle 
of the quail was heard from the neighboring stack 
yard. The little snow-birds, braving the storms of 
winter without anxiety or distrust, were picking up 
their scanty pittance from the pathway before me. 
The patient sheep, closely huddled into a living 
mass, were quietly waiting in the fold their expect- 
ed supplies, and the ox was lowing for his fodder. 
By all I was instructed. I was reminded of the 
restlessness of man in pursuit of the things that 
perish ! of the care of God for the sparrow, much 
more for the children of his love — of the spirit of 
the little flock to whom the kingdom is promised, 
and to whom it will be given, though they may wait 
long, and lift the eye of faith in meek submission, 
under severe and trying seasons of denial. " The 
ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's 
crib." O that Israel would know ! O that men 
would consider ! Why should we give Jehovah oc- 
casion to testify against us, and to call upon the 
heavens and the earth to witness, with horrible as- 
tonishment, " I have nourished and brought up chil- 
dren, but they have rebelled against me !" 

Indulging such reflections, I found myself at 
length at the residence of this meek sufferer. She 
was unusually tried with the deceitfulness of her 
heart. Sin was dreadful in her view ; and she fear- 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 127 

ed, notwithstanding her hope continued as an an- 
chor to the soul, that this terrible enemy might yet 
ruin her. She was greatly agitated in the conflict 
which she was vigorously maintaining. It seemed 
to me, as I listened to her bitter complaints of her- 
self, and her ascriptions of righteousness to God, 
that her anchor was indeed cast within the veil, but 
the billows of a furious tempest threatened to over- 
whelm her : I was anxious to see the storm abate, 
and suggested many sources of comfort ; but all 
seemed unavailing. Presently I said to her, 

" Do you remember that Jesus Christ is a Medi- 
ator between God and you?" 

" Yes, sir," said she, M and his name is precious." 

M Do you know," said I, u what offices he sustains 
as a Mediator V* 

M He is a Prophet, a Priest, and a King," said she, 
looking at me, apparently in wonder at the question. 

H Well, let us look at him a little as a Priest. 

This office consists of two parts, his sacrifice and 

intercession. The sacrifice has been finished once 

for all ; but he has not yet finished his intercession, 

has he?" 

" No, sir." 

" Do you know that ' if any man sin, we have an 
Advocate with the Father, who ever liveth to make 
intercession for us V " 

M That is true ; the Bible says so ;" (after a short 
pause,) " I know it is so." 



128 MEMOIR OF 

"You know that you cannot plead your own 
cause with God ; but here is an Advocate whom the 
Father alioays hears ; and when Jesus pleads with 
his Father for you, he will he heard; remember, too, 
that as an Intercessor, Jesus sympathizes with his 
people under their trials ; for ' we have not a high 
priest who cannot be touched with the feeling of 
our infirmities, but was, in all points, tempted like 
as we are, yet without sin. It behoved him to be 
made like unto his brethren ' in all things, that he 
might c know how to succor them that are tempt- 
ed/ Do you remember the dreadful trials through 
which the Savior passed V 9 

"I do," said she, and her voice faltered. 

" He remembers them too," said I, M and will he 
not feel for a poor suffering sinner, struggling in 
the deep waters which overwhelmed his own soul?" 

Her eye kindled as I was speaking ; a rich vein 
of consolation was struck, and I doubted not the 
waters would flow freely. Before I left her she 
seemed more calm, though there still remained an 
abiding dread of sin. The next passage in her 
diary is as follows : 

"Jan. 22. Jesus, how precious thy name! Heavy- 
laden with sin and burdened with guilt, I find relief 
in the thought that there is c an Advocate with the 
Father, even Jesus Christ the righteous, who ever 
liveth to make intercession for us, and is able to savo 



HANNAH HOBBI& 129 

unto the uttermost all that come unto God by him.' 
To me belongeth shame and confusion of face, be- 
cause of all my sins and follies ; but how consoling 
the thought, that there is a High Priest who is 
'touched with the feelings of our infirmities/ Je- 
ms pleads for us poor sinners, and by his merits 
renders us acceptable. I love him ; I accuse my- 
self ; I hate this carnal mind. In view of my sins, 
I abhor myself, and repent as in dust and ashes. O 
that I could put this worthless world behind me, and 
live as becometh an heir of immortality !" 

M Jan. 29. A remark in the Rev. Legh Rich- 
mond's diary respecting himself, I would at pre- 
sent adopt as appropriate to my own experience. 
1 Much ado about nothing ; and little done about 
the one thing needful.' Every day brings me near- 
er to eternity, and I want to feel — sensibly feel — that 
I am advancing towards the kingdom of heaven. I 
long to be more spiritual — more heavenly-minded 
— less conformed to the world, and more trans- 
formed by the renewing of my mind, that I may 
prove what is that acceptable, that good, that per- 
fect will of God." 

To Miss L H , a neighbor, a member 

of the same church, and also a very intimate friend 
and fellow-sufferer, she wrote the following letter: 

11 February 6, 1829. 
"My dear Friend, — Affliction is a mark by 



130 MEMOIR OF 

which a gracious God oftentimes distinguishes his 
beloved disciples. I feel it to be a blessed truth, 
that the Lord chasteneth those whom he loveth. I 
am aware that where grace is, trials will not be 
wanting. I delight to trace the doings of divine 
mercy, and as I find them in no case more con- 
spicuous than in my own, I gladly tell you what 
God has done for me since I last wrote you. I de- 
sire to do it with no other motive than to extol his 
abundant grace, and magnify his great and holy 
name." 

Having spoken minutely of the state of her 
health, she proceeds : 

" Thus you see I still linger under a protracted 
illness, but when I compare my pains with my mer- 
cies, they are but as a drop to the waters of the 
ocean. The precious promises of the Gospel and 
the smiles of my heavenly Father abundantly 
sweeten the bitter cup.. 

" The spring was to me rather a dark and gloomy 
season, but it was succeeded by a gradual increase 
of light, which poured in, ray after ray, upon my 
dark and benighted mind, and kept continually in- 
creasing, till about the beginning of October, when 
all darkness was dispelled, and for two or three 
weeks especially, my beloved friend, it is beyond 
the power of words to describe the happiness and 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 131 

bless uigs I enjoyed. So transporting were the ex- 
ercises of my mind, that at times sleep departed 
from my eyes. The glorious perfections of God, 
the infinite loveliness of the Savior, the great plan 
of salvation, were the delightful and absorbing 
themes which occupied my mind. The thought 
that the God of heaven should condescend to visit 
in such a glorious manner a vile and worthless 
worm like me, filled me with wonder and admira- 
tion, and occasioned continual joy and thanksgiv^ 
ing for many days. Like Peter on the mount of 
transfiguration, I fain would have tarried ; but infi- 
nite wisdom and goodness taught me that I must 
come down and wander again in this wilderness, 
and ' dwell in the tents- of Kedar.' 

" I have since had sore conflicts with many foes, 
and have been conversant with grief, painful anx- 
iety, and fearful despondency, concerning myself 
and others. But the more I reflect upon the way 
in which the Lord is leading me, the more cause I 
find to love and adore him. Often I think of these 
beautiful lines, and exultingly acknowledge his 
sovereignty over me : 

c Good is the way by which my steps he leads ; 
1 Sweet is the pasture where my spirit feeds ; 
1 Bright are my prospects in the world to come, 
' And a few steps will bear me safely home.' 

H Perhaps what I have said of the joy and peace 



132 MEMom or 

I have found in believing, may tend to dishearten 
you, if you have not felt the same ; but let me tell 
you, my dear friend, growth in grace is not to be 
measured by joys or raptures. These are the com*- 
forts of a christian faith and hope, but humility and 
love are the substantial graces. It is, nevertheless, 
desirable to rise above all earthly gratifications, 
all transitory glories, and from Pisgah's summit 
view with an eye of faith, though afar off, the pro* 
mised land-^transcendently glorious— -abounding 
with satisfying riches, large as our desires, and 
lasting as our souls. 

11 But such a state does not long suit an earthly 
inhabitant. Pride, that dreadful pride> would soon 
ruin us in so high a place ; we should lose sight of 
our helplessness, and forget our dependance on 
God. May we ever live in obedience to the com* 
mands of God, make his law our delight, and strive 
to be wholly conformed to his will ; may we ever 
have a deep sense of our vileness and un worthiness, 
while we exalt Christ our Savior and our all. 

" How necessary to know our own hearts ! I think 
my dear friend is by no means a stranger to hers, 4 
I very much regret that I am so little acquainted 
with mine ; but the little knowledge I have of it, 
convinces me that it is deceitful above all things a#d 
desperately icicked. So deceitful, that it is folly in 
Ihe extreme to trust it, and so wicked, that sin 
stains most deeply the purest actions of my life. But 



HANNAH HOBBie. 133 

of what avail is a knowledge of our hearts, unless 
we apply to the great Physician of souls, who only 
can cure the disease of sin, and wash us from all its 
pollutions ] I think I do feel the need of a conti- 
nual application to him for the blood of sprinkling. 
What abundant consolation do these words afford, 
The blood of Jesus Christ clcanseth from all sin. He 
is exalted to give repentance to Israel, and remission 
of sins. 

M How much do christians lose from an undue 
attachment to the world. I know it is alluring, and 
Satan is busy baiting us with it, to draw us away 
from the one thing needful. But are there not still 
greater attractions in the cross of Christ] Over all 
the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the 
pride of life — over every enemy, the Captain of our 
salvation, if we follow him, will cause us to triumph, 
Even Satan shall be bruised beneath our feet short- 
ly. Let his people follow him, and lean on him, and 
they will neither be barren nor unfruitful in the 
work of the Lord. 

M O how should a sense of the shortness of time, 
the unutterable worth of the soul, and the solemni- 
ty of eternity awaken us, and make us not only 
anxious for the salvation of our own souls, but also 
for the souls of the precious ones around us. Alas ! 
how many are going on heedless to the eternal 
world, without an interest in the Savior; and shall 
we not lift the warning voice, and above all, plead 
H.Hobbio. 12 * 



134 MEMOIR OP 

with our great Advocate in their behalf, that he may 
be glorified in their salvation ? 

" Standing as I do upon the borders of the eter- 
nal world, I wonder, I am greatly astonished, that 
I am not more affected with eternal realities. With 
a heart glowing with supreme love to God and com* 
passion for souls, I should not fail to recommend 
the religion of Jesus to those around me— that bless- 
ed religion which has been my consolation and sup- 
port through years of tribulation, and which even 
now enables me to bid defiance to all the powers of 
earth and hell, and look down into the grave with 
triumph. I am too remiss in duty, and vainly en- 
deavor often to justify my negligence by many a 
sinful plea. Will not my dear friend, when at the 
throne of grace pleading for poor sinners, some- 
times remember her unworthy Hannah, and pray 
that she may awake, as one alive from the dead— 
that her remaining days may be filled up with use- 
fulness ; and may the best of heaven's blessings rest 
upon my dear Lucretia. 

" Farewell. 

11 Hannah Hobbie*" 

11 February 1L Have just been favored with a 

visit from uncle and aunt C , of Bedford, and 

two dear cousins. How dear to me are those kin- 
dred friends who are also the friends of Christ. O 
that all my friends may possess that good part. My 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 135 

dear aunt expressed a wish that I might be able to 
visit Bedford. I immediately replied, that I did not 
know as I desired it. I thought I had rather depart 
and be with Christ, which is far better. Still, if I 
could be of any use to my friends or the world, I 
should desire to be restored to health. But I am 
so neglectful of duty now, that if I should be re- 
stored I should probably prove unfaithful. O when 
shall I be enabled to shake off this spiritual sloth ] 
When shall I do my duty V 

" February 23. I hope God has pardoned my 
sins, and given me peace — his own peace. He gives 
me talents and time, and now he is giving me un- 
usual relief from pain. Under all these, is not the 
command addressed to me, Occupy till I come ? If 
I have but one tatent, and neglect to improve it, 
shall I not incur guilt and the just reprehension of 
my God and Judge ] O Lord, thou knowest how 
painful to me is the idea of lying here useless ; let 
thy Spirit arouse me to duty, wake up my drowsy 
powers, and enlarge my heart greatly in the know- 
ledge of thy will, and with a desire to do it ; then 
shall I run with joy in the way of thy command- 
ments. If I can do nothing to promote thy glory 
and advance thy kingdom here, then prepare me 
for thyself, and take me hence, that I may not be a 
reproach among thy people. ,, 

M February 24. The sound of death is again in 
my ears. Mr. S W is no more. He has 



136 MEMOIR OF 

left family and friend, and gone to the eternal 
world. Death is a faithful monitor. He has taken 
one in the meridian of life, and surely we who yet 
live, are admonished to be ready, for in such an 
hour as we think not, the Son of man cometh. O 
that all might be excited to work while the day 
lasts. Be thou the God of the widow, O Lord, and 
the Father of the fatherless." 

" March 4. There is one talent entrusted to 
christians, which is so badly employed, or rather so 
seldom employed at all, that it ought to be a se- 
rious question with many, how they can escape the 
doom of the unfaithful servant who went and bu- 
ried his talent in the earth. It is the talent of speak- 
ing for God. How many in this respect prove mi- 
serable stewards, myself among. the number. How 
seldom do I speak to professing christians of the 
state of religion in their own hearts — of the Savior's 
love — of their duty to sinners. And how little do I 
speak to sinners ! "Why is it so with me ] I account 
for it in this way : 

" 1. I do not feel sufficient concern for souls. 

"2. I fear man. 

"3. I fear I shall do them no good. 

u Did my Savior weep over sinners — did he feel 
so much concern for them as to leave the realms of 
bliss and come down to die for their salvation, and 
shall I feel no concern for them 1 

V Do I fear man ? I will remember what God 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 137 

says : e Fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be 
ye afraid of their reviling*. Who art thou, that thou 
shouldst be afraid of man that shall die V God for- 
bid thai I should be taken in this snare ! 

M Will it be of no avail to warn the wicked ! 
How shall I dare indulge such a thought ? God 
says, A word fitly spoken, hoio good is it. The word 
of God, even by my mouth, may be as afire and a 
hammer to break in pieces the flinty heart. Shall I 
shut my eyes against all experience and observa- 
tion 1 How often has a word, spoken in season, been 
blest to the conversion of a soul ] Can I then look 
upon the sinner as condemned, and know that par- 
don is offered to him through Christ Jesus, and not 
urge him to accept it ] 

" Much have I suffered from the lashes of con- 
science because I have neglected this duty; and 
yet how afraid to begin to perform it. I have long 
endeavored to surmount these difficulties that ap- 
pear to lie in the way of faithfulness to sinners ; and 

THROUGH DIVINE GRACE I AM RESOLVED TO FIGHT 

until I overcome. O may the Lord grant me that 
perfect love which caste th out fear !" 

What a noble resolution ! what a holy purpose ! 
Here is a poor, sick, suffering female, struggling so 
manfully against hindrances to this important duty 
vijhile many in health, and with every advantage 
and opportunity, are regardless of their obligation 
L2» 



135 MEMOIR OF 

to be faithful to sinners. It must not be inferred 
from this record that she had heretofore done no- 
thing in this part of her work, for she had done 
much ; but she had not done enough to satisfy her 
conscience ; she felt that she had not done all her 
duty. Brother, sister in Christ, read over again this 
last record from her pen, and go and do likewise. 



CHAPTER VIII. 



About the beginning of March, 1829, Miss Hob- 
bie was visited with a more severe attack, which 
brought her, in the course of two or three weeks, 
very low. It seemed to me for some time that she 
could hardly survive it. But the Lord designed 
by this visitation to prepare her for doing his will a 
little longer, and still more faithfully upon the earth, 
before he should call her away from it for ever. He 
does not grieve willingly- the children of men ; he af- 
flicts his people to purify their souls and fit them 
better for his service on earth, and for the eternal 
enjoyments of the better world on high. 

There is something very touching and beautiful 
in the illustration given by the prophet Malachi (3 : 
3,) of the process by which Jehovah purines his 
people. And he ' shall sit as a refiner and purifier 



HANNAH HOBDIE. 139 

of silver.' The Lord, when there is need of it, puts 
bis people into the furnace of affliction, and kindles 
around them, as the refiner of silver around his im- 
pure metal, an intense heat. As the refiner keeps 
up the fire until the dross is consumed and the metal 
becomes pure, so does God with respect to his 
people. The refiner sits, looking intently into the 
glowing furnace and watching the contents of his 
crucible, until he sees in the molten silver the 
reflection of his own face, and by this, he knows it 
to be pure ; so, when the Lord afflicts his children, 
he sits intently and anxiously watching them ; and 
as soon as he sees his own image in them, the end 
is secured, and he puts out the fires lest they should 
utterly consume them. 

When God sends afflictions upon his people to 
purify their hearts, and bring them to seek their 
portion in him, and do more faithfully his will, he 
may have also other things in view. We cannot 
fathom the depths of God's providence, or explain 
its mysteries while we * see through a glass darkly.' 
We cannot perhaps fully understand why he often 
afflicts his beloved people, precious to him as the 
apple of his eye, while he allows the man who has 
lifted the standard of revolt and proclaims war 
with his Maker, to live in health, possessing every 
earthly blessing, and perhaps to go down to the 
grave with no bands in his death. But, we are 
taught in his word something in relation to thb 



140 MEMOIR OP 

deeply interesting matter. We are told (whatever 
else God, in infinite wisdom, may think proper to 
conceal from us) that chastening comes with adop- 
tion into his family ; • whom the Lord loveth he 
chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he re- 
ceiveth.' 

There are benefits flowing from this heavenly dis- 
cipline which are obvious ; we can sec, we can feel, 
we can appreciate them. They vindicate the ways 
of God with his people. Many a child of the king- 
dom has found affliction good ; and has sent up from 
a warmer and holier heart the song of thanksgiv- 
ing and praise for the visitations of the rod. It was 
so with Hannah Hobbie. Listen to her own 
account. 

M April 4, 1829. Being relieved m a great mea- 
sure from a state of unusual suffering, I take my 
pen from my drawer for the purpose of adding to 
the records of divine mercy and favor. The Lord 
has manifested his love to me in the hours of deep 
distress, when this poor tabernacle was shaken as 
with a mighty wind. When my spirits were low 
and weak the Lord graciously vouchsafed to me 
spiritual strength, and laid underneath me his ever- 
lasting arms. I have been brought through suffer- 
ing, and revived ; and O that I could say, purified 
and refined entirely from sin and pollution. I thank 
thee^O Heavenly Father, that thou dost enable me 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 141 

to acquiesce in thy will, when indeed it is painful 
to me. Thou knowest the discipline I need ; thou 
seest the * folly bound up in the heart' of thy poor 
froward child ; and thou knowest what strokes of 
the rod are necessary to drive it out. Knowing 
that thou dost not chastise me but for my profit, 
may I ever be ' in subjection to the Father of spirits 
and live.' 

"I praise thy name, O Lord, that thou wilt have 
so much regard for me as to apply such remedies 
as these to my spiritual diseases. Thou art kindly 
careful to train me up for glory. I beseech thee, 
O Lord, sanctify all my afflictions so that they may 
promote my communion with God, and my ripe- 
ness and meetness for heaven. " 

" April 11. Earthly good is inadequate to fill 
my soul ; but in the enjoyment of my God I am 
happy. The allurements of the world do not en- 
snare the soul which, with intense interest, pants 
after God. With longing desires my soul thirsts 
after God and heaven. f As the heart panteth after 
the water-brooks, so panteth my soul after thee, O 
God/ O give me to drink of living waters; feed 
me with the bread of heaven, and clothe me with 
the righteousness of thy dear Son." 

" April 17. * Sorrowful, yet always rejoicing :' 
continual sorrow because of the exceeding depra- 
vity of my heart, its native aversion to God, and 
inclination to do evil ; but well mavest thou ie- 



142 MEMOIR OP 

joice, O my soul, for God hath laid help upon one 
who is mighty to save. * I thank God, through Je- 
sus Christ, my Lord/ I have been made free from 
the law of sin, and shall be made free from the 
body of this death." 

" April 19. Long time I have vainly imagined 
that I should one day, even in this world, see my- 
self less sinful ; but alas ! the more I become ac- 
quainted with my heart, the more fully I am 
convinced of its dreadful sinfulness. / am a sinner ! 
great is the number and magnitude of my sins. 
But I will comfort myself with the blessed assu- 
rance that though I am a great sinner, I have a 
gi-eat Savior." 

Let us look back now upon the last three para- 
graphs in her journal, and see how deep were the 
discoveries of truth which God gave her. In the 
first, she loathes the tasteless morsel which earth of- 
fers, and longs to be fed with the bread of heaven ; 
in the second, she sorrows over her deep depravi- 
ty, but rejoices in the mighty deliverance ; in the 
third, she weeps to think that her heart is in itself 
no better, but clings with all her might to the pre- 
cious cross of Christ. She thus proceeds : 

<e May 7. This morning my sister, recently mar- 
ried, set out with her husband for the place of their 
abode at the west, nearly three hundred miles dis- 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 143 

tant. The Lord go with them, tarry with them 
where they tarry, and be their joy and comfort 
throughout the days of their pilgrimage. 

" Little did I know before what it was to part 
with a beloved sister. I took my leave of her, or 
rather, gave the parting hand, for I was for the mo- 
ment speechless. O may the Lord sanctify this 
trial to us all. May we learn to prize the blessings 
of kindred and friendship, and strive to do each 
other all the good we can, while we may ; and when 
called to leave this world of sin and sorrow, may 
we meet where all tears will be wiped away from 
our eyes; where adieus and farewells are not 
known." 

After her last severe attack, it was, more than 
ever, her practice to embrace every opportunity to 
do good, for she saw that the day in which she 
could do good below was drawing to a close. Having 
heard that four of her female cousins, residing at 
North-Castle, had recently made a public profes- 
sion of religion, she thus wrote to them on the 18th 
of May : 

" I have for a long time desired to speak to you 
upon the subject of religion, which, I trust, is deep- 
ly interesting to you all ; but through the spring 1 
have been most of the time unable to write. I am 
at present more comfortable, and therefoie I would 



Hi MEMOIR OF 

inquire, my dear fellow travelers to eternity, hew 
do you find your way through this troublesome 
world ] how stand your hearts affected with eter- 
nal things ] If your hearts are indeed changed 
through grace, you of course find almost every 
thing here unfriendly to the pursuit of heavenly 
things. Satan, the world with its thousand allure- 
ments, your own evil hearts of unbelief, all oppose 
your progress. To fight against all these, even 
through grace, requires the exertion of every facul- 
ty — all your resolution. But through grace, when 
the soul is intensely set upon serving God, you can 
do it all. Happy they, who are enabled with steady 
resolution, to maintain the conflict; the victory will 
be theirs. Here you are in an enemy's land, but 
the Lord, your help, can carry you safely through. 

" My dear friends, are you rejoicing in the hope 
of a blessed immortality ] Is that hope founded on 
the rock Christ Jesus ] Can you look upon death 
with composure, and contemplate the glorious- 
change which it brings with joy ] Is your con- 
science void of offence % Are you prepared to 
stand before the Judge of all 1 O let us examine 
ourselves, and see that we stand complete in the 
Savior's righteousness, which shall protect us in 
that day from the storms that will fall upon the 
wicked. 

" Have we, my friends, seen the evil of our hearts 1 
Have we felt the plague of our hearts I Have we* 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 145 

in view of this, cast ourselves wholly upon Christ % 
Is Christ precious to our souls ] Do we count all 
things but loss, in comparison to the excellency of 
the knowledge of him ] If this be so, we may in- 
deed rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of our 
salvation." 

The practical character of her piety will be seen 
in the following selection from her journal : 

" May 28. I view this to be a critical time with 
me as it regards duty. It has occurred to my mind 
that I have hitherto, perhaps, made my bodily 
weakness, as well as mental deficiencies, too much 
an excuse for inaction in the service of God. I am 
so far convinced of the truth of this as to be deter- 
mined, in the Lord's strength, to use my utmost en- 
deavors to form a female concert for prayer in thi3 
part of our society, and if the Lord permit, to 
assist in the duties of the meeting. Yes, in the 
strength of the Lord, I will join my dear sisters in 
Christ in imploring the blessing of heaven upon 
our guilty world ; and surely according to our si?i- 
ccrity and faith the Lord will hear our prayers and 
answer us in peace. The Lord give me wisdom 
and grace to help in this time of need !" 

Pious females, blest with health and favored 
Xvith the privilege of mingling with society, look at 

H.Hobbie. |3 



146 MEMOIR OF 

this, and ask yourselves whether you are doing all 
that you can to call down the blessing of God upon 
a dying world. 

(To an Aunt in B .) 

"Northeast, May 29, 1829. 

u My dear Aunt, — You will not probably be 
surprised when I tell you that I still remain a pri- 
soner. I say prisoner ; for I consider myself such ; 
I am confined to this narrow house, when my soul 
would fain burst its bars, and soar away to the 
bright world of liberty and peace. I am still chain- 
ed in this earthly tabernacle ; but the building has 
become so shattered by disease, that I am compell- 
ed to abide in one corner of it, so that I cannot do 
the things that I would. 

" I have sometimes thought it was a great mer- 
cy, as in my own case, to be shut out from the 
world, and not exposed to its many snares and 
temptations ; but again I have been at a loss to de- 
termine which was the greatest hindrance in the 
divine life, an exposure to worldly temptations, or 
severe bodily pain and infirmity. I perceive that 
this state of seclusion from the world has its advan- 
tages and its disadvantages. There is much time 
for the study of one's heart, and for the contem 
plation of an unseen world; while at the same 
time I am often inclined to make my bodily weak- 



HANNAH HOEBIE. 147 

ness an excuse for slothfulness and inactivity in the 
service of God. 

n Most deeply do I lament the little improve- 
ment I make of my mercies of chastisement. In- 
deed, much of my time passes away under exquisite 
pain, and in a state of apathy or great mental de- 
pression ; and I ascribe it to the mercy and good- 
ness of my heavenly Father that my pains have 
been less for two weeks past than before for some 
time, and I have enjoyed more of the sweets of 
meditation ; but, my dear Aunt, I would not have 
you infer from this that I think the hours in which 
I enjoy most case are the best of my life. The 
grace of God has taught me to esteem my greatest 
sufferings my choicest blessings ; they wean my 
heart from earthly things, and give a keener relish 
for things heavenly and divine. I feel it to be a 
source of comfort, as well as a cause of gratitude, 
that I can already look with a degree of indiffer- 
ence upon earthly enjoyments ; I can sacrifice them 
without a murmur for the sake of enjoyments which 
are heavenly. A pious writer says, ' It is a sore trial 
to the soul to be deprived of all earthly comforts, 
and reduced to the necessity of living upon God/ 
But since to live upon God is to partake of a luxu- 
ry of more than mortal excellence, I would never 
be guilty of such folly as to choose a meaner repast. 
" Your very affectionate niece, 

" Hannah Hobbie." 



148 MEMOIR OP 

Under date of May 31, she thus expresses her- 
self in her journal : 

lf Although I am ungrateful to God continually, 
yet he is very merciful to me. The Lord hears the cry 
of the righteous, I know, but he is merciful to my 
unrighteousness ! He has passed by my sins and in- 
clined his ear many a time to my broken requests. 
I am now so favored that I read considerably. I am 
inclined to think the rule I have adopted of reading 
a chapter in the Bible at once is not as good as 
to read, in my weak state especially, a smaller por- 
tion. Rules may be useful in binding such as have 
no relish for the Bible, but I desire to read it for 
instruction and profit ; I delight in it. In reading 
a whole chapter I find myself often fatigued, and 
of course less profited. Besides, my treacherous 
heart retains so little of what I read, that I purpose 
now to read such a portion as I can retain, and 
strive to dwell upon it till it has done its office. 

M What abundant reason have I to be thankful, 
that in my confinement I may still have recourse 
to the word of God ; and also what reason to be 
thankful, that though I may not go up with the 
worshiping assembly to his house, the Lord will 
condescend to make here a sanctuary for me." 

In a letter to an aunt, dated June 1, 1829, she 
says : 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 149 

M Acquiescence in the will of God makes us hap- 
py at any time and under any circumstances. It 
is in kindness that God afflicts me, and in kindness 
too, that he gives a season of respite. We are apt 
to be agitated with distress, and then it is not so easy 
to feel that God afflicts us because he loves us ; but 
when severer suffering is removed, then a holy 
calm fills the soul; and the pains that remain, in- 
stead of ruffling, soothe us, and melt us into sub- 
mission to the Divine will. The benefit of my af- 
fliction is most felt in the seasons of respite which 
are given me. I have felt a sweet and sacred sub- 
mission and repose, which are a rich compensation 
for all that I have suffered. How delightful the 
thought, that such seasons are only the earnests of 
that rest which we shall enjoy in heaven ! It is acqui- 
escence in the Divine will which causes ' this holy 
calm within the breast.' When we shall* be made 
perfect in heaven, there will be perfect acquies- 
cence in all the Lord's doings and will : This must 
be perfect peace. I would welcome, then, all that 
bows my will, and tends to reconcile me more to 
the sovereign and excellent government of God." 

To an aunt in New- York, already referred to, 
she writes on the Sth of this month — 

" How is my little namesake 1 Is she well ? I 
heard that she could articulate some words very dis- 
13* 



150 MEMOIR OP 

tinctly at twelve months old. O that the Lord, who 
ordains strength out of the mouth of babes and 
sucklings, would grant that she may, from a child, 
speak the praises of her Redeemer ! You have 
been called to yield up another of your offspring 
into the hands of him who gave it; not, indeed, with- 
out a mothers yearnings. But it is a comfortable 
reflection, that the little sufferer has gained at 
length a happy release. As the Lord does not take 
from his people outward mercies but to give a richer 
portion, I hope my dear aunt has received double 
at the hand of the Lord for all her sorrows ; that 
her seeming loss has been made up by abundant 
communications of grace ; and that the Lord will 
be to her a portion better than sons and daughters. 

M The loving-kindness of our God is never more 
conspicuous than when he chastises us : still it is a 
mark of hfe displeasure, and shows his hatred of 
sin. If left to our own courses, we should certain- 
ly find iniquity to be our ruin. What an unspeak- 
able mercy is it, then, to be corrected by a Father, 
who intends it all for our good. It is well that our 
trangressions are visited * with the rod and our ini- 
quities with stripes.' ' May the God of all grace, 
who hath called us unto eternal life by Jesus Christy 
after that we have suffered awhile, make us per- 
fect; stablish, strengthen, settle us/ And to him be 
all the glory for ever." 

" June 19. My present cup is full, and runs 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 151 

over with every good. I enjoy almost all the rich 
means of grace except public ordinances, and an un- 
usual degree of relief from pain ; but how little is 
my heart affected ; how difficult to give thanks al- 
ways/or all things through Jesus Christ. Indeed I 
can seldom feel that I do actually enjoy so much 
from God. Was there ever a wretch guilty of 
such base ingratitude to my kind Benefactor % 
Thousands of mercies I have been blest with, and 
tens of thousands, all marked by my ingratitude. 
But this is not my greatest sin ; for often when the 
blessed rod, (which brings me to God and keeps me 
near him,) has been partially removed, my heart 
has qrown careless and rav love has waxed cold. 
Creatures have become idols, and my affections have 
fastened to the world. But he who loves me far bet- 
ter than I love myself, never forsakes me altogether. 
I hear continually, either the voice of the rod, or the 
sweet calls of mercy, instructing me to repent, and 
bidding me return ; and I come back with lamen- 
tation and grief, with shame and confusion of face: 
then I receive pardon, always through Jesus, the 
precious Savior. Thus I go on through life, sin- 
ning and repenting — sinning and repenting. It is 
my way to destroy myself; but thine, O Lord, to 
redeem and save ; and God is ever known to me as 
* merciful and gracious, slow to anger and abun- 
dant in goodness/ O turn away mine eyes from 
beholding vanity ; lead me to Christ ; and let his 



152 MEMOIR OP 

* blood, through the eternal Spirit, purge my con- 
science from dead works, to serve thee, the living 
and true God ! 

" This heart has been bought with the blood of 
Jesus ; it ought to be his. O Lord, fix it upon him 
for ever, for thou knowest it is my desire to give it." 

" June 2S. I have very much enjoyed the so- 
ciety of my friends the week past ; but, (probably 
lest I should forget that his friendship is still bet- 
ter,) the Lord has increased the burden of suffer- 
ing. Several have called to see me ; and I bless thy 
name, O Lord, that thou hast enlarged my heart 
and opened my mouth to speak to them of the things 
of thy kingdom. I thank thee that so many of my 
friends are thy friends. Wilt thou not pour out thy 
Spirit upon thy children, that it may be our happy 
portion to enjoy the blessing of those who fear the 
Lord, and ' speak often one to another? and think 
upon his name. * And they shall be mine, saith the 
Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my 
jewels, and I will spare them, as a man spareth his 
own son that serveth him.'" 

C( July 3. How many are my foes in this state 
of probation !' many and strong are those against 
whom I have to fight ! but ' the Lord is on my side; 
whom shall I fear ] I have not carnal weapons, but 
those which are mighty to the pulling down of 
strong holds ;' and I thank God that he has taught 
me to use them. By this I know, O Lord, that thou 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 153 

favorest me, because mine enemies triumph not 
over me. The Lord in infinite mercy save me both 
from corruption within and temptations without. 

" I am blest with strength to use my needle a 
little ; and is it so, that I cannot even look upon the 
things of this world, or touch them, but my foolish 
heart seems to cling to them 1 I know that all these 
things are vanity. O that I might be entirely weaned 
from these vain things, and be made to relish, and 
be familiar with, the things that lie beyond the 
grave !" 

" July 5. Sin, like a mighty deluge, sweeps 
over the earth, and death rejoices in his prey. How 
many are daily swallowed up, thou, O God, only 
knowest ; but I am kindly spared. Thou hast pre- 
pared an ark for the saving of thy people ; and I, 
through rich grace, may dare to hope that I shall 
make one of that happy number. The Lord has 
kindly taken me into the ark of safety. If I some- 
times leave it, I find, like the dove, no rest for the 
sole of my foot until I return. Here, then, in this 
place of refuge, will I abide, saved from the floods 
of wrath, and sheltered from the storm, until these 
troubled billows upon which I am now tossed shall 
be assuaged, and then shall I rest, not upon a 
mountain of the earth, but upon the holy hill op 

ZlON." 

Her journal contains several instances of prayer 



154 MEMOIR OP 

for rulers and ministers of the Gospel. They are 
all rich in pious feeling and pertinent thought ; and 
they usually have a very close connection with, and 
concentration in, the glory of the latter day. For 
this she earnestly and often prayed ; and she seem- 
ed deeply sensible that much depended upon the 
rulers of the earth and the heralds of the cross in 
reference to its speedy coming. The following is 
an example : 

u O most merciful Father, wilt thou bless the ru- 
lers of our land. May they be renewed by grace, 
that they may rule in the fear of the Lord and be a 
terror to evil doers ; let peace be multiplied through- 
out the earth ; may thy word have free course and 
be glorified. 

" Bless thy ministering servants — all who truly 
love thy work ; O give them success ; give testimo- 
ny to the word of thy grace wherever it is pro- 
claimed; let not thy servants labor in vain, nor 
spend their strength for nought. Send forth more 
laborers into the harvest. The land mourneth, the 
people perish. I beseech thee, O Lord, give them 
pastors after thine own heart ; faithful men, who 
shall exalt and glory in the cross of the Redeemer 
and gather many souls to Christ. 

"' Bless all the means that are used for the build- 
ing up of the' kingdom of Christ throughout the 
world in lands of darkness and superstition. O may 



HANNAH H0BBIE. 155 

' the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in his 
wings;' let the whole earth be filled with the glo- 
rious light of salvation, and resound with thy praise. 
The Lord hasten it. Amen." 

The following are her meditations on another 
Lord's day : 

M July 9. l This is the day the Lord hath made; 
I will be glad and rejoice in it.' O thou who gavest 
commandment concerning it, saying, ' Remember 
the Sabbath day to keep it holy/ I thank thee for 
setting apart one day in seven for a day oiholy rest, 
God has connected a blessing with the observance 
of his day. It is a matter of great thankfulness with 
me, that my heart has long been inclined to regard 
this day unto the Lord. Truly the remembrance of 
it is sweet. To give this day wholly to God's ser- 
vice is my greatest delight. I cannot say with others, 
let us go unto the house of God ; but ' Thus saith 
the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, 
whose name is Holy ; I dwell in the high and holy 
place, with him also that is of a contrite and hum- 
ble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to 
revive the heart of the contrite ones !' Blessed 
Jesus, my desire is unto thee, that thou wouldst 
revive my heart this day, and henceforth. O that I 
may be humble ! O for a heart of devotion, prayer, 
and praise ! 

M I have made this a day of particular confession, 



156 MEMOIR OP 

and renewed my covenant with God, taking a new 
and firmer hold on Christ, in whom I enjoy, and 
hope to enjoy, all things. I desire at this time, in 
the deepest humility, to confess my sins before God, 
entreating him to teach me, and show me that which 
I know not, that if I have done iniquity I may do it 
no more. I thank thee, O God, that I have been 
brought into the embrace of the everlasting cove- 
nant, where alone are found safety, joy, and peace ; 
that Christ is become the Lord, my righteousness ; 
and that I feel so often thy Spirit witnessing with 
mine that I am a child of God, Surely I can say, My 
Beloved is mine, and I am his. Although I sin 
against God, and thus mar my comfort, (and pro- 
bably shall continue to do so until delivered from 
this world of corruption and the body of this death,) 
yet Christ has become ' the end of the law for 
righteousness ;' by him I am delivered from its 
dreadful curse, and in him am I an heir of salvation. 
I have no hope in myself, I receive no good from 
God of any kind, but through the one Mediator 
Jesus Christ. I have seen that in him all wisdom is 
found; that in him alone is acceptance with God ; 
that fro?n his Spirit comes obedience ; that in him 
I find all my real happiness. If I know my own 
heart he is all in all to me. O that I may ever feel 
so, and go on trusting and rejoicing in, and resting 
upon the Lord, my righteousness and strength. O 
may thy power subdue the corruptions of my heart ! 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 157 

defend me from foes within, and foes without ; and 
when called to fight, wilt thou, O God, my King 
and Captain, arm me for the conflict, and lead me 
on to victory/' 

tc July 14. Wonder, O my soul, and be aston- 
ished at the long-suffering and forbearance of thy 
God ! I tread his mercies under foot ; I break my 
vows ; I perform not my engagements. O that a 
sense of God's goodness might lead me to repent- 
ance unfeigned ! I solemnly dedicated all the pow- 
ers and faculties of soul and body to my God ; but 
the advantages given me I have often employed to 
my disadvantage and to his dishonor. O this treach- 
erous heart ! how often, through its deceitfulness, 
am I turned aside ! May the Lord fix it on my 
heart, that in him only have I wisdom and strength, 
that it is not in him that walketh to direct his steps j 
then shall I learn to trust in him for all things ! 

" O Lord, my desire is unto thee, and from thee 
is all my fruit. May I enjoy thy bounty with thank- 
fulness — occupy my talents in thy service — devote 
my time to usefulness and communion with God, 
and find my steps directed of thee. Hold up my 
goings, and help me to find out my easily besetting 
sin, that I may set a mark upon it, and a double 
watch ; and, * laying aside every weight, and the 
sin that doth so easily beset me,' may I f run with 
patience the race that is set before me/ and at last 
obtain the prize." 

ILHobbic 14 



158 MEMOIR OF 

Having recovered from a fearful disease which 
brought me to the very verge of the grave, in re- 
ference to which I find ardent prayers inserted in 
the journal of our young friend ; and being permit- 
ted to resume the labors of the pulpit, amid the 
congratulations of an affectionate people, she thus 
notices the loving-kindness of him who bringeth 
down to the grave and raiseth up, according to his 
sovereign pleasure ; 

" July 27. The Lord hath dealt graciously with 
his servant. Although sorely chastened for a sea- 
son, he was not given over unto death. The Lord 
hath brought him back from the grave, and restored 
again to us our pastor, our friend, our spiritual 
teacher; blessed be the name of the Lord, who 
alone doeth wonders in Israel ! O Lord, thou hast 
spared thy servant, and he lives to declare the 
works of the Lord. Yea more, thou hast with 
thine own right hand opened to him the gate of the 
Lord into which the righteous enter, and brought 
him there to pay his vows unto the Lord in the 
presence of his people — in the courts of the Lord's 
house — in the midst of Jerusalem. Save now, I 
beseech thee, O Lord, save by the word of truth 
which thy servant speaketh." 

The present was a marked period in her sick- 
ness, as she was able for a few days to sit up con- 



HANNAH HOBBIE 159 

siderably, and once rode out to the distance of 
nearly a mile ; but it was only a short season of 
respite. 



CHAPTER IX. 



It is a great blessing to be raised up, even par- 
tially, from a sickness which has preyed upon us 
for years, though we may know that it yet has a 
firm hold upon the springs of life. The relief it 
gives to the weary spirit is unspeakable. None 
but those who have experienced it can tell what it 
is to lean upon the arm of friendship, and totter out 
from the prison where we have been held in close 
and long-continued confinement ; to leave behind 
us the walls of a sick-chamber, however comforta- 
ble they may have been made by the assiduities of 
friends, the kindness of sisters, and the affection 
that dwells only in a mother's bosom ; to leave the 
pillow that has witnessed so many of our tears, and 
afforded its companionship through many a weary 
season ; to go out and look upon the face of nature, 
and breathe the fresh air, pure as heaven gives it. 

Hannah was permitted for a?ice, after long and 
painful imprisonment, to look out upon the green 



160 MEMOIR OF 

fields and trees, arrayed in all the freshness of their 
summer beauties ; to hear the song of the birds, 
and see them in the ecstacy of their delight, as they 
sent up their notes of praise to him who careth 
even for the sparrow ; to gaze upon the fleecy 
clouds as they hung out to the view in surpassing 
loveliness in the soft stillness of a summer's morn- 
ing. Such scenes make usually a strong impres- 
sion upon the mind of one who is always looking 
out for God ; and Hannah never failed to see him 
in them. 

One night just before she died, she said to a lady 
who was sitting by her, that she had been reading 
of Orion, and wished to know if it was visible, that 
she might see it. It was hanging out its splendors 
directly in front of the window, but before her 
friend could speak to her, a violent paroxysm of 
pain, which continued for some time, rendered her 
incapable of looking at it. Is she not now behold- 
ing brighter glories 1 

She had been intimate with a young female in 
the neighborhood, who, after several years of great 
suffering, had departed in the hope of a blessed 
immortality. At such times, when we feel a little 
returning strength, we love to look upon dear 
friends, especially if they have been afflicted like 
ourselves ; or if they have been removed by death, 
we take a melancholy pleasure in looking in upon 
the fire-side which they have forsaken for ever, and 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 161 

upon the chamber where they suffered. It is not 
strange, then, that Hannah embraced the earliest 
opportunity to visit the dwelling where the com- 
panion of her childhood died. Her journal particu- 
larly notices this visit. 

M August 7. I have just returned from neighbor 
Gilbert's. I have been permitted to visit the place 
formerly occupied by my dear afflicted Julia. Long 
did she wait for her change ; but I trust her blessed 
spirit is now at rest in the Savior's bosom. The 
number of my years of confinement is now almost 
equal to that of hers ; and I still remain a prisoner, 
waiting for the accomplishment of my Heavenly 
Father's purposes concerning me. That I may not 
live in vain, may I learn to put all my trust in Christ ; 
and O may the rich means of grace I now enjoy be 
blest to my improvement in the knowledge of G od ; 
to my growth in grace ; to my usefulness in life, 
and preparation in the end, for the enjoyment of 
God for ever ! " 

<f August 15. Have been favored for several 
days with a visit from a beloved aunt from New- 
York. Her daughter named after me is with her ; 
a promising child. She acquired the faculty of 
speech very young. O may she early learn to know 
the Lord ; and may her tongue be soon employed 
in speaking the Redeemer's praise. As we are 
united by the ties of kindred, so may we be united 
14* 



162 MEMOIR OF 

in the bonds of the everlasting covenant to Christ ; 
and as we are one by name, so may we be one in 
Him. May the blessing of the Hope of Israel be 
hers, and may she far excel in all that is good, her 
whose name she bears.' ' 

" September 7. * O Israel, thou hast destroyed 
thyself, but in me is thine help.' Oftentimes do my 
iniquities prevail against me, yet as often does the 
Lord deliver me. Blessed be the Lord, that sin 
has not dominion over me ; and blessed be his Holy 
name that I am not under the law, but under grace. 
The Lord has discovered to me my most easily be- 
setting sin and humbled my proud heart. Thanks 
be unto God that he has brought me to sit again at 
the foot of the cross. Teach me, O Lord, thy way, 
that I may know thee, and henceforth keep mine 
eyes directly upon thee, for thou art my light, my 
guide, my salvation, my all" 

" September 16. The Lord is cutting down one 
and another on the right hand and on the left. As 
for me, I am not only a subject of his preserving 
mercy, but of his redeeming grace. What shall I 
render unto the Lord for all his benefits ] It is my 
misery that I do so little to promote his glory ; that 
I manifest so little concern for the souls of my fel- 
low-sinners. Quicken me, O Lord, to duty, and 
inspire my heart with new life for Christ's sake. ,, 

" September 23. The remains of our friend 
H . one of the officers of our church, are this 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 163 

day consigned to the grave, the house appointed 
for all living. The church, in this death, sustains 
a loss which God alone can make up. The Lord 
appoint a successor who shall faithfully perform 
the duties from which he has been called away, that 
the church may still prosper ! May her graces be 
more and more exhibited in her onward march ! 
Another of our number is gone ; may we who re- 
main, try ourselves, and closely examine our hopes 
for eternity. O may all our lamps be kept trimmed 
and burning ! 

"Let this be a day of thy power in the family of 
thy departed servant, among those of them who 
are yet without God. Turn them from darkness 
to light, and from sin unto thee, the living and true 
God. In their affliction may they seek thee early, 
and wilt thou be the widow's God, and the stay of 
the orphan." 

" October 13. Have this day entered my twenty- 
third year. I do humbly trust I have made some 
advancement towards my desired haven. I mourn 
and lament my unfruitfulness, but I bless God that 
I have been taught more of the depravity of my 
heart. In proportion to the knowledge I have 
gained of my own emptiness, has the preciousness 
of the Savior, and the excellency of his character, 
and the beauty of holiness increased. I thank thee, 
O Lord, for the present hope of glory in my soul. 
O grant, that as death approaches, my prospects may 



164 MEMOIR OF 

grow brighter and my faith stronger ; and may 1 
maintain a firm and unshaken confidence in thy 
mercy and thy covenant faithfulness to the last." 

" October 20. Mournful catastrophe ! A child 
of one of our neighbors fell yesterday from a loaded 
cart ; the wheel turned upon his neck and killed 
him in an instant. "What a sudden transition from 
this world to eternity ! In the midst of life we are 
in death. Comfort thine handmaid, the mother, 
for I trust she is thine. Let the father be brought 
by this distressing providence, to fly to Christ for 
refuge ; and let such as are supposing death to be 
distant be admonished that judgment and eternity 
may be very near !" 

" October 22. ' Lo, this have I found, that God 
made man upright, but he hath sought out many 
inventions. , O my God, save me from an ensnaring 
world, and save me from myself! I am trying to 
have my heart fixed, trusting in God; that I may 
remain steadfast amid the changing circumstances 
of life for it is too easily affected with outward 
things. Although the Lord has been gracious to 
me in showing me the pride of my heart, and, of 
late, has strengthened me against it, yet I know 
that I am still too easily elated with praise, and my 
heart wants more humbling in spiritual joy and 
prosperity. When God requires me to wait a little 
longer upon him for needed grace than I hoped, I 
grow impatient; I am too easily provoked when 



HANNAH H0BBIE. 165 

offended, either from without or from within. The 
latent evils of my heart, O how many ! Searcher 
of hearts, thou knowest my sins and follies ; par- 
don them, I pray thee, even all my past offences, 
and give me strength that I may walk humbly with 
God all the days of my life. ,> 

She received in this month a letter from a cousin 
residing in New- York, giving her an account of his 
hopeful conversion, of his employment as teacher 
in a Sabbath-school, and suggesting the idea of de- 
voting himself to the ministry. In answer to this 
she writes the following letter : 

" Northeast, Oct. 26, 1829. 
" My dear Cousin, — I have received your inte- 
resting letter, and hasten to congratulate you on 
your new course of life, and your present employ- 
ment, which you say you have found pleasant, and 
which, I venture to affirm, will be found so by all 
who choose the service of God. To such the whole 
way is pleasant ; it 



-Is peace, 



1 And leads to peace, and joys no more alloyed.' 

" Who can calculate the worth of a pious educa- 
tion ? We, my young friend, have been peculiarly 
favored in this respect, and how should our hearts 
be enlarged with gratitude to God, that the bless- 



16G MEMOIR OF 

ing has not been in vain. Though we have cause 
to regret our long delay to serve him, and our so 
long persisting in a course of sin and folly, yet let 
us bless God that we have not been left to remain 
in forge tfulness of him, and in the way to eternal 
death. I feel that my early advantages were great, 
but have not yours been still greater, as from your 
infancy you have been trained up in those schools 
which have become such nurseries of piety 1 How 
many this day can bless God for the benefit of Sab- 
bath-school instruction ! Eternity alone can disclose 
the full amount of good which this benevolent en- 
terprize has already accomplished under the divine 
blessing. What numbers have thereby been res- 
cued from eternal misery ! In the last great day 
it will be said, when God writeth up the people, 
this and that child was born there. 

" I rejoice to hear that the Holy Spirit has re- 
cently visited the school to which you belong, and 
that several have been hopefully converted to God. 
This season, I trust, you will long remember ; for 
I am happy to find that you have already tuned 
your harp to the song of praise for what you have 
experienced within the sacred confines of a Sab- 
bath-school. Words cannot express the joy I felt 
on first hearing this glad news. I think I felt 
somewhat as angels do when they rejoice ovei 
* one sinner that repenteth.' You say that when 
your anxiety commenced, it was because you saw 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 167 

yourself to be in the road to eternal perdition. The 
sinner must see the danger he is in before he will 
be induced to flee to Christ for safety. I was re- 
joiced at these words in your letter, which, though 
included in a parenthesis, did not escape me, viz. 
1 Praise, everlasting praise, be to Almighty God for 
that agonizing moment!' That agony which we 
feel at such a time for sin is a bitter cup ; but 
when peace succeeds, we begin a new song of 
praise to our Deliverer, which, though feebly sung 
on earth, is raised to louder strains upon the shores 
of immortality ! 

" But, my dear cousin, although your friends re- 
joice over you now, let me assure you it is with 
fear and trembling. O let me exhort you to dig 
deep, and see that you lay the foundation of your 
hope securely upon the Rock of Ages. There is 
folly and danger in building on any thing else. But 
O to escape the sins and follies of youth ! O to 
escape the jaws of the devouring adversary ! O to 
be saved from an ensnaring world, and even from 
yourself! Study much your own heart; watch 
and pray; make the Lord your strength always, 
and seek to be filled with the fullness of God. 

u I understand that you purpose, before long, to 
unite yourself to the church of God. Do this in the 
strength of the Lord, and prize its ordinances, and 
you will see the good of his chosen, and glory in 
his inheritance. Remember to pray for that dear 



168 MEMOIR OF 

brother of yours, and those dear sisters ; that they 
too may be brought to the fold and fitted for God's 
service. 

" I feel that the present is an important crisis 
with you ; and, aware that your future usefulness 
chiefly depends on the present decision, I am in- 
clined earnestly to pray, as you request me to do, 
that your decision may be the result of wisdom 
communicated from on high, and that it may be for 
the glory of God and the good of his kingdom. 

11 Devote some of your leisure moments to writ- 
ing me, and you will gratify your affectionate cou- 
sin. Hannah Hobbie." 

"November 8. Sabbath evening. The Lord's 
supper is to be administered this evening at Captain 

C — *s, for the accommodation of his aged mother, 

who has been blind for several months. Methinks 
it will be a precious season to the disciples who 
may be permitted to meet on the occasion ; and I 
had almost said, why am I not favored with a seat 
among them % But why should I reply against the 
wise and gracious dispensations of Providence ] It 
is indeed" painful to be deprived of the privilege of 
meeting with my christian friends, not only in the 
house of God, but at other times and places ; espe- 
cially do I mourn the loss of this evening's privi- 
lege with them. Shall I no more enjoy the sweets 
©f an ordinance designed to show what the Son of 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 169 

God has done to save such sinners as I am 1 O may 
the Lord give me perfect resignation to his will in 
all things ; may I wait patiently for the time when 
he shall be pleased to grant me admittance into his 
courts above, to join with saints and angels in that 
delightful worship which will be continued for 
ever." 

She was soon severely affected by a cold, or by 
one of the many unaccountable changes which oc- 
cur in such complicated cases of decline, and passed 
through a season of unusual distress of body with 
her accustomed patience and fortitude. The record 
which follows, is the expression of her heart in re- 
viewing this season of trial : 

" November 28. My disordered body has for 
several days been greatly agitated ; and as there 
exists an intimate connection between the body 
and the mind," I am induced to believe my mind has 
participated in the general derangement of the sys- 
tem. I have not been able to discern spiritual things 
so clearly as at other times ; but, thanks be to God, 
I am enabled, for the most part, to preserve clear 
evidence of -his love. I thank God for a Savior 
whose kindness and care never fail ; and whom I 
may trust when subject to changes of every kind, 
especially such as my bodily weakness often sub* 
H.Hobbi* 15 



170 MEMOIR OF 

jects me to. Committing myself to his care, I re- 
joice in the assurance of ever remaining safe. 

<{ A season now and then occurs when a sort of 
apathy pervades both mind and body ; but I feel 
myself under peculiar obligations to God for his 
dealing so kindly with me ; for, though such a sea- 
son is a hindrance, and occasions peculiar distress, 
I am enabled, nevertheless, to turn my eyes to my 
Great Deliverer, who early removes my burden, 
and enables me lightly and joyfully to advance, as 
I humbly trust, in the way everlasting." 

" December 6. ' Out of the depths have I cried 
unto thee, O Lord, and thou hast heard and been 
attentive to the voice of my supplications. In my 
distress I cried unto the Lord, and he hath delivered 
me from all my fears V After a sore conflict, fight- 
ing with many foes, and wrestling with God, I am 
constrained to erect here my Ebenezer, and say, 
f Hitherto hath the Lord helped me.' " 

M December 7. How great is the blessing of a 
sound constitution ! A change is sometimes produc- 
ed in my feelings which, -with all my resolution, I am 
unable to resist ; my apprehensions are awakened ; 
but I have learned not to ascribe every animal va- 
riation to the agency of Satan. External things 
affect the body, and through it the .mind ; hence, 
may I learn to distinguish between the influences 
which are purely bodily, and the state, disposition, 
and principles of the heart." 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 171 

The return of a communion season was to her a 
matter of very deep interest. She considered such 
seasons as having the tendency, more than all her 
privileges besides, to humble her own heart in view 
of what Christ had suffered, and to present him 
before her as the object of her supreme love. She 
hesitated about asking the favor often, lest a fre- 
quent compliance with her wishes should be a bur- 
den to others ; and when I proposed it, as I some- 
times did, discovering the delicate sensibility which 
prevented her requesting what I knew she would 
consider a great favor, she would manifest the most 
lively gratitude, and embrace the proffered privilege 
with a heart deeply affected. All who were intimate 
with her saw that on these occasions she was great- 
ly benefitted ; the fires of her devotion were kindled 
afresh, and the glow of her love was more fervent 
and intense. She was in the habit of preparing 
for such seasons, and also of improving them with 
great diligence. Self-examination and prayer were 
the employments of days both before and after the 
delightful occasion. The following passages exhi- 
bit the state of her mind. 

M December 12. To-morrow evening, if the Lord 
will, I shall again have access to the ordinance cf 
the Lord's supper. It becomes me to examine my 
title to the bread of the kingdom. I would recall 
my obligations to God, and acknowledge his signal 



172 MEMOIR OP 

benefits from an early period of my life. I was by 
nature a child of wrath, even as others ; but God 
has cared for me even from my infant hours ; and 
I stand a monument of his sparing goodness as 
well as mercy among his visible people. He 
makes me, through Jesus Christ, a tender of all 
saving blessings, and has, in all things, certified his 
readiness to become my God. It was of the Lord's 
goodness that I was early made sensible of my ob- 
ligation ; and I bless him for the rich grace that 
brought me to dedicate myself to a covenant God, 
by coming out from the world, and obeying the 
command to confess Christ before men. I have 
taken again and again the symbols of a Savior's 
broken body and shed blood ; and thus, by an ap- 
pointed seal, ratified my covenant with the most 
High. Amazing condescension of the King of 
Glory to a worm of the dust ! Wonderful grace of 
a holy and just God to an unworthy, ungrateful 
rebel ! What fervent love, what lively gratitude to 
him, should reign in my heart ! O, what shall I ren- 
der to my God for his marvellous kindness ! Will 
he deign to accept the poor defective returns of 
love and obedience, which, by his grace, I may be 
enabled to make ] He will. Then let me renounce 
every false way, and endeavor to walk in all his 
commandments and ordinances blameless.' ' 

December 14. Among the multitude of my mer. 
cies, I recognize the special favor I enjoyed last 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 173 

evening of joining with my christian friends in the 
worship of Jehovah, and while reclining on my bed, 
(as always before) being permitted to enjoy that 
ordinance which is so eminently calculated to dis- 
play the infinite love of God to fallen man. Most 
deeply did I participate in the comforts and bless- 
ings which the Great Head of the church is pleased 
to communicate to all those who receive him, and 
rest upon him by faith and humble reliance for the 
fulfillment of his many and precious promises. 
Our pastor addressed us from Luke, 24 : 26. * Ought 
not Christ to have suffered these things, and to en- 
ter into his glory V 

" Once more I have publicly evinced my attach- 
ment to Christ and my union to his church. O 
that I may walk more worthy of God ; more like 
a true disciple ! 

" How should the gracious manifestations which 
I receive from God through these blessed means of 
grace, inspire my heart with warm devotion and 
love to him, and excite me to increased zeal for his 
glory ! I have again renewed the dedication of my- 
self to God. May I ever feel that I am not my own, 
but that I am bought with a price, even with the 
precious blood of the Son of God. O that I may 
ever live under the impression that whatever I do, 
should be done with a single eye to the glory of 
God ! O Lord, lead me in the way of truth, and 
quicken me to holiness, for thy great name's sake." 
15* . 



174 MEMOIR OF 

" December 20. Whence arises this confusion 
in my mind 1 Can aught but sin produce disorder 
or distraction in the soul which has once found a 
refuge and rest in the embraces of God, reconciled 
in Jesus Christ ] With grief I have discovered of 
late the workings of pride, self-love, and self-will in 
my heart ; and I confess it with shame and remorse. 
Surely I cannot look upon myself 'with complacen- 
cy and satisfaction, when I remember how much 
yet remains unsanctified within me ! 

"Could I but see more of the exceeding sinful- 
ness of sin, and how much I have of it yet — could 
I see my extreme unworthiness of the Divine favor, 
I should only wonder and adore, when I think of 
the mercy which is shown to such a vile and guilty 
one as I am. 

" Show me, O Lord, the error of my ways, and 
' cleanse thou me from secret faults/ May my soul 
be made pure by ' the washing of regeneration 
and the renewing of the Holy Ghost/ and be fash- 
ioned after the image of God. Remove pride, self- 
love, and self-will, O Lord, and let me possess hu- 
mility unfeigned, the love of Christ supreme, and a 
sweet and child-like subjection to the will of God." 

To her cousin, Frances M , in Bedford, she 

wrote on the 20th of January a long and interest- 
ing letter, in which she thus speaks of the gradual 
approach of death : 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 175 

" Though nothing in my state of health at pre- 
sent indicates speedy dissolution, yet I am daily 
reminded by my languor of the end of all flesh, and 
the way, also, in which it comes. It is however 
with me a matter of little concern whether my re- 
maining days he few or many; my greatest anxiety 
is to live, while I live, to the glory of God." 

After speaking of her conflicts with sin, and her 
state of seclusion from the world as in some re- 
spects profitable, she says : 

" But a state of seclusion from the world does 
not place us beyond the reach of Satan's wiles nor 
the evils of our own hearts. In whatever condition 
we may be placed, we find ourselves surrounded 
by enemies, and must not be a moment off our 
guard. O what a happy period will that be, when 
Satan's kingdom shall be destroyed, and universal 
peace reign, and the will of the Lord be done, and 
none be found to hurt or destroy ! The appointed 
time draws near. The blessed Lord, with a strong 
arm, able to do all his will, reigns on earth as well 
as in heaven. The children of Zion may lift up 
their heads, for the day of their redemption draw- 
eth nigh. Earth and hell may oppose, but this re- 
demption will come, for the Lord shall send the 
rod of his strength out of Zion, and rule in the 
midst of his enemies. The language of God to the 



176 



MEMOIR OF 



church is, Awake, awake to duty ! Is my dear 
friend engaged in acts of christian benevolence 1 
How do your Bible, Tract, and Missionary Socie- 
ties prosper f* 

Again she says of the communion season she had 
just enjoyed : 

" On the evening of the second Sabbath of last 
month our pastor preached here, and administered 
the Lord's supper, for my accommodation. I as 
sure you it was a precious and delightful season to 
me ; I had long thought I should not ask such a 
favor again ; and the reflection that this was the 
la3t season of communion in the church below that 
I should ever enjoy, increased my desire for that 
communion with the saints above, which is with- 
out interruption and without end." 

Almost immediately after she became able to 
ride out in August, and was permitted to visit the 
residence of her beloved and departed friend and 
fellow-sufferer, Julia Gilbert, she was again laid 
upon her bed, with a renewed attack of unwonted 
violence. All that we have presented from her pen 
since* that time, was written in a state of severe 
suffering. God in great mercy, about the first of 
February, so far gave her ■ relief once more from 
her pains and debility, that with great care she wa3 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 177 

taken to a near and highly esteemed neighbor's 
once ; and if I mistake not, it was the last time she 
left her dwelling till she died, though she lived a 
year longer. Of this occurrence she speaks as 
follows : 

" February 8. Last Wednesday I rode to Capt, 

C 's; met with a cordial reception, and was 

treated with the greatest kindness. May the Lord 
reward them. May those dear friends receive for 
their kindness to one so unworthy the fulfillment 
of the promise, x Inasmuch as ye have done it unto 
the least of these, ye have done it unto me.' 

M I feel myself under peculiar obligations to my 
Heavenly Father for having permitted me to leave 
my place of confinement again, although it was not 
without increased suffering, occasioned by fatigue. 
Thanks be to God, I have again returned to my 
home in safety and peace. I feel that my obliga- 
tions increase with my strength. O what shall I 
render to the Lord for all his benefits to me 1 I 
will pay the sacrifice of thanksgiving. ' Teach me 
to do thy will, O Lord, for thou art my God ; thy 
Spirit is good ; lead me into the land of upright- 
ness. Quicken me, O Lord, for thy name's sake, 
for I have put my trust in the Lord God, that I 
may declare all thy works !' " 



178 MEMOIR OP 



CHAPTER X. 



A young Painter in the city of New- York, of 
fine talents, said to me, not long since, M Sir, I 
must stand at the head of my profession — I am de- 
termined to excel — I am aiming high." I saw that 
his purpose was fixed, for his eye kindled as he 
said it. And surely, as eternal realities outweigh 
the things of time, the christian should seek them 
with more unwearied diligence, and unshaken pur- 
pose. It is an attribute of true piety never to rest 
satisfied with present attainments or exertions. None 
who " follow on to know the Lord" suppose they 
" have already attained ; but this one thing they 
do, forgetting those things which are behind, and 
reaching forth unto those things which are before, 
they press toward the mark, for the prize of the 
high calling of God in Christ Jesus." Such is the 
nature of the soul, as immortal, that it will always 
press forward in pursuit of its supreme object, what- 
ever that may be. Even in a state of alienation 
from God, while striving to satisfy the soul from 
this world's fountains, how often have we been 
wearied with its ceaseless importunity for more 
substantial food. And under the influence of holy 
principles, the fountains of our spiritual supply 
satisfy us, only because they are exhaustless ; for 



HANNAH HOBDIE. 179 

every time we taste them, we find our appetite 
keener and our relish greater. The soul is called 
out in the exercise of its noblest powers, and led 
onward, and onward, continually crying, " Then 
shall I he satisfied, when I awake ivith thy likeness /" 
When the desire of the soul is fixed on God, it can 
never rest satisfied so long as there is any thing to 
learn of his perfections, or any thing undone that 
will promote his glory. 

In reviewing the history of this devoted female, 
the reader may have often exclaimed, O that I 
could feel as she did, and reach her attainments ! 
But he will find her still pressing forward. She de- 
sired to look deeper into f the mystery of godli- 
ness ;' to drink deeper of its spirit, and to claim a 
closer fellowship with all holy beings in doingvgood. 
Her journal thus continues : 

,( Lord's day, February 14. Awake, O my soul ; 
lift up thyself in thankfulness to God that he hath 
given thee another golden season : stir thyself up 
to improve it ; consider it may be thy last I May the 
Spirit of the Lord, who hath sanctified this day, 
sanctify it to my benefit, and make it a blessing to 
my soul, that I may be furthered on my heavenly 
way." 

" March 6. A little improvement in my health 
calls expressly for more diligence in the service of 
cny blessed Master — for increasing exertion to pro- 



180 MEMOIR of 

mote the best good of my own soul and the BOttfa 
of others. I do indeed bless God for the measure 
of an awakening spirit which he has recently given 
me ; but I am still amazingly indolent, and some- 
times fear that I shall incur the doom of the unpro- 
fitable servant. I desire to grow in grace and in 
the knowledge of the truth ; and to this end I give 
myself unto prayer, not only three but Jour and 
Jive times in a day. I love by prayer and thanks- 
giving to make known my requests unto God. I 
read and meditate upon his holy word ; and am led 
to inquire in what way my devotion may be ren- 
dered more fervent, more permanent, and conse- 
quently more profitable. O that the Lord would 
incline me to the practice of that holy diligence 
which the interests of eternity demand. I feel the 
power of indwelling sin ; the Lord grant that as sin 
has abounded, grace may much more abound ; and 
henceforth reign in my heart through righteousness, 
unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord. May 
the Lord assist me in the proper government of my 
thoughts ; may the Holy Spirit direct me and reign 
in my inmost spirit, 

" At present my anxieties relate to the salvation 
of my near relations. I K long after them in the 
bowels of Jesus Christ.' I long for the conversion 
of those of them that are yet enemies of God ; and 
pray for the sanctification of such as profess to love 
Mbw O most gracious God, if I am to be instru- 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 181 

mental in their salvation otherwise than by ray 
prayers, I entreat of thee, for thy name's sake, de- 
lay not to give me strength, and influence my heart 
to do what is necessary for the blessed work. O 
may my parents consider their awful responsibility, 
and bring up all their children in the nurture and 
admonition of the Lord ; teach them the fear of 
the Lord, set before them a holy example, watch 
over them, pray for them, and give themselves no 
rest, until Christ be formed in them, the hope of 
glory. Will the Lord be with my dear brothers and 
sisters, dispose their young minds to receive the 
truth, and by an early conversion may they be 
saved from youthful follies, and all sin, and be made 
pillars in the temple of our God, and in covenant 
love become the sons and daughters of the Lord 
Almighty/ y 

Christian reader, mark what she says upon the 
subject of a profession of religion : 

M March 29. When we separate ourselves from 
the world, and declare ourselves to be on the Lord's 
side, the woild expects to see us distinguished by 
our good woiks. But alas ! how often is it justly 
said of those professing godliness, \ What do ye 
more than others V Shall I be reckoned among 
them ? God forbid. I will even dare to be singu- 
lar, that I may thus glorify my heavenly Father. 

H.Hobbie. 16 



182 MEMOIR OF 

Through grace I will rise above the world, and ex- 
ercise myself, and employ my strength and talents 
in seeking the salvation of sinners. O may I rise in 
"holy emulation, and labor to glorify the name, and 
magnify the grace, of my adorable Savior, and 
show myself eminent for love and good works !" 

f< April 5. My heart rejoices in the Lord. Be- 
cause I have put my trust in the Lord, therefore he 
is to me a faithful Friend and a compassionate Re- 
deemer. In sickness and distress the Lord is my 
strength, and my joy and consolation, from day to 
day, are equal to my tribulation. Surely the eye of 
the Lord is upon them that fear him — upon them 
that hope in his mercy, to deliver their soul from 
death. The Lord redeemeth the souls of his ser- 
vants, and none that trust in him shall be desolate. 

" The tender mercies of God have been over me 
in another season of severe suffering. Though great- 
ly debilitated, I still retain the privilege of reading 
. a little daily, and, thanks be to G-od, I still enjoy 
communion with the Father, Son, and Spirit. In the 
multitude of my thoughts within me, the comforts 
of God delight my soul." 

" April 16. I am exceeding weak ; therefore I 
resolve to wait upon the Lord, that my strength 
may be renewed." 

" April 26. Seven years this day since the Lord 
laid me upon a bed of sickness. But as a father 
chasteneth his son so has a merciful and gracious 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 183 

God chastised me. I remember all the way in 
which he has led me these seven years, to humble 
me, and prove me, and show what was in my heart. 
And O how great is the good which he has done 
unto me in my latter days ! The Lord redeemeth 
my life from destruction ; he crowneth me with 
loving-kindness and tender mercy, and satisfieth 
me with good things, so that my youth is renewed 
like the eagle's. 

" Insensible as I am, I wonder and am amazed 
at the goodness and mercy of God, which follow 
me day by day. I am most ungrateful. For several 
weeks I have been quite subject to coldness of 
heart. Perhaps weakness of body may in some 
measure occasion it. I thank God that such sea- 
sons are short ; yet this has, of late, produced fear- 
ful apprehensions lest I shall not enjoy the free 
exercise of my mental faculties through the future 
season of decaying nature, especially in my last 
moments. I wish to live a holy and godly life, and 
to glorify God in a triumphant death. Shall I never 
more enjoy the comforts and privileges of a healthy 
constitution ] Such a consumption is trying to my 
sinful nature ; but through grace it is rendered to- 
lerable, and even desirable, if the consumption de- 
creed do but overflow with righteousness. Deliver 
me, O Lord, at last, lest the enemy say, the Lord 
was not able to bring her to the promised land. O 
leave me not in the midst of this wilderness to pe- 



184 MEMOIR OF 

rish ! O let the light of thy countenance be ever 
upon me ! A dead, cold heart is my burden. Then 
let me ever be enabled to look up to Christ, my 
High Priest, who is merciful to bear with my in- 
firmities, and who is mighty to help them. ,, 

The following letter to an uncle in the city of 
New- York exhibits the deep movings of her soul for 
the salvation of her kindred : 

" Northeast, June 13, 1830. 

" Much respected Sir, — Whatever duty I owe 
to my distant friends, my only resource is that of 
writing ; I can discharge my obligations in no other 
way. Yet in this way I feel that I can but imper- 
fectly perform my duty to my uncle. I never can 
remunerate him for his great kindness to me. The 
Lord will surely give, (though I cannot,) a recom- 
pense of reward to such as show kindness to the 
least of his servants. I desire to look to Him, who, 
in infinite compassion, bears with the infirmities of 
his people, that at this time he would be pleased to 
bear with mine, and help them, so that I may speak 
acceptably and effectually to my respected uncle 
and friend. 

" Having of late become deeply interested espe- 
cially for the eternal welfare of my dear relatives, 
I have regretted that I could no oftener hear from 
them. I have especially desired to hear whether 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 185 

my more than daily prayers have been answered in 
the conversion of my uncle. Were I to be assured 
that he was yet a stranger to God, how would it 
grieve my heart ! how would it quicken my desire 
that the Lord would bring him nigh by the blood 
of Christ. He is advancing in life ; his days and 
years, which will return to him no more, are swift- 
ly passing away ; and is my dear uncle yet in a state 
of carnal security ] Is there not cause for increas- 
ing alarm % Does he apprehend no danger ] Does 
he not know that G-od has called aloud upon him 
often, both by mercies and judgments ; by his pro- 
vidence and grace ; and is yet calling ] Does he not 
hear daily reiterated the sweet invitation of mercy, 
enforced by the strivings of the Spirit, Come to 
Christ I Come to Christ ? There is no other re- 
fuge ; and thanks be to God, thou needest no other, 
to shelter thee from the storm that is coming:, or to 
hide thee from the vengeance of the judgment . 
Soon the great day of God's wrath will come, and 
who shall be able to stand ] O to flee the wrath to 
come ! To come ! How will the sinner, after suf- 
fering thousands and millions of years, cry out, O 
to be delivered from the wrath that is yet to come ! 
M Painful indeed is the sinner's prospect ; and 
how can I endure the thought that one of my kin- 
dred should perish ! O that they may all be renew- 
ed by grace, glorify God on earth, be faithful unto 
death, and at last be received up to glory ! 
16* 



186 MEMOIR OF 

M Give my love to aunt H , and tell her I wish 

to thank her for all she has don^e for me. 
" With much esteem I subscribe myself, 
" Your dutiful niece, 

e Hannah Hobbie." 

The next day she entered in her journal the fol- 
lowing record : 

" June 14. Yesterday my heart was again cheer- 
with the preached Gospel. I feel reproved for my 
former unbelief. I had ceased to believe that the 
Gospel preached in this place would have any 
saving effect ; but at this time the Lord was pleased 
to pour out a spirit of prayer and supplication 
upon his children, at least some of them ; and a 
spirit of utterance was given to our dear minister, 
who opened his mouth boldly, making known unto 
us the mysteries of the Gospel. It was an enliv- 
ening and animating discourse from Eph. 5 : 4. 
1 Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the 
dead ; and Christ shall- give thee light.' He de- 
scribed first, the state of the wicked ; then spoke 
of the propriety of the call ; and lastly, adverted to 
the promise, O how was the professed christian 
who dared to slumber over eternal things urged to 
awake, and arise and shake himself from the dust, 
and not put his light under a bushel, but do good in 
the world I Nor less urgent was the call to those 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 187 

f dead in trespasses and sins/ The word was ren- 
dered powerful, and we have reason to believe 
reached the hearts of many. Especially did the 
Spirit carry it home to the hearts of Mr. and Mrs. 

P . O may the word prove a savor of life 

unto life, and not of death unto death. Sister J , 

also, again appears much impressed with a sense of 
guilt. God forbid that she should resist the striv- 
ings of the Spirit ! May she now give her youthful 
heart to God ! O may she now accept of mercy r 
lest it should be for ever too late ! O let the harp 
of God's children be taken down from the willows, 
and tuned to the praise of Him who hath remem- 
bered us in our low estate ! and O that what our 
eyes have seen, and our hearts felt, of the love and 
power of God since yesterday's meeting, may be 
but as a few drops before a plenteous shower upon 
this parched land. O that from henceforth righ- 
teousness may run down our streets like a river, 
and sinners be seen flocking to Jesus as a cloud ! 
Remember. O Lord, Jacob thy redeemed, and Israel 
thy chosen, and bring thy people from the east, and 
gather them from the west : Say unto the north, 
give up, and to the south, keep not back ; bring 
thy sons from far, and thy daughters from the ends 
of the earth. May all be made one in Christ, and 
in him be blessed for ever ! Amen." 

M June 23. Truly thy mercy is upon us, O Lord, 
according as we trust in thee. Alas ! what am I, 



188 MEMOIR OF 

or what is my father's house, that we should thus be 
visited. Rejoice, O my soul, and be glad in the 
Lord ! I will call upon my soul, and all that is with- 
in me, to bless God for his goodness, in calling 
another beloved sister from darkness to light, and 
from the power of Satan to God. Most gracious 
God, wilt thou continue to bless us as a family, and 
satisfy us all early with thy mercy, that we may be 
glad and rejoice in Thee all our days on earth, and 
then go to praise Thee and the Lamb in a world of 
blessedness for ever'?" 

We come now to the formation of her Sabbath 
school. The neighborhood where her father resid- 
ed was some miles distant from the centre of either 
of the surrounding congregations, and many of 
the children were not connected with any Sabbath 
school. A view of this destitution deeply affected 
her heart, and long and faithfully did she strive to 
incite others to undertake the enterprise, but in 
vain. Believing it to be a duty for some one, and 
finding others faithless respecting its success, she 
cast herself, in her weakness and feebleness, upon 
God, and put her own hand to the work. Hear 
her own language : 

" June 24. A serious consideration of the poor 
and perishing condition of most of the children in 
this neighborhood has led me to say much by way 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 1S9 

of argument and persuasion to induce some of my 
christian friends to establish a Sabbath school for 
their moral and religious improvement ; but no one 
seems to feel the necessity of such a measure 
enough to submit to the self-denial requisite for the 
undertaking. Therefore, receiving encouragement 
from God, and being continually strengthened in 
my design, I have concluded, with my sister's as- 
sistance, to invite the children into my room, where 
I may myself communicate that knowledge and in- 
struction which alone can make them good and 
useful members of society, and prepare them for a 
better world above. 

M O that I might enter upon the work with a 
heart warm with the vitality of godliness ! May 
the Spirit of all grace fill my mind with heavenly 
wisdom, and inspire my heart with love, zeal, con- 
fidence, and hope ! O Thou who art my continual 
strength and my gracious Redeemer, I give my- 
self to thee in the work ! If thou art pleased to 
make me instrumental in delivering the soul of my 
neighbor's child from a state of darkness, igno- 
rance, and misery, unto thy name be all the glory. 
And from this time, whenever thou dost call me to 
duty, I beseech thee to give me a willing mind, and 
supply me with every thing necessary to promote 
thy glory." 

Here we see a humble female, worn down by 



190 MEMOIR OF 

3 

disease and suffering, girding herself to a work 
which those who were in health had not courage to 
undertake, gathering up the miserable remnants of 
her shattered constitution, that they might all be 
concentrated in one more effort to do good before 
she should be taken from the field of labor, throw- 
ing her whole soul into her Masters service, and 
rejoicing that she was still permitted to be in some 
degree useful. 

This school was superintended by herself, (except 
when her health entirely prevented,) every Sabbath 
in her chamber. She would call up the children one 
after another to her bed-side, and give them, in the 
most earnest and feeling manner, instruction in the 
things of Christ ; and her labors, it is believed, 
were not in vain. 

How deeply interesting ! how affecting to see 
her thus forgetting herself and her sorrows in the 
delightful employment of instructing these young 
and tender minds into the truth, and making efforts 
to win their souls to Christ ! She would pray with 
them after these instructions, before dismissing 
them, while the hectic flush was glowing upon her 
cheek, and throwing out its rosy bloom to tell us 
of an early grave. That "plague-spot !" — I have 
seen it too often, and in too many interesting cases, 
soon to forget the feelings it always gives me. 

This labor was to her no burden ; her heart was 
in it ; she loved her work, and delighted to give to 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 191 

it her remaining strength. She continued as long 
as she was able this labor of love as well as others, 
and gave them up, one after another, with the 
greatest reluctance, when she could do no more. 

I was greatly affected one day, not long before 
she died, to hear her request to her sister, — M Eliza, 
will you be kind enough to collect all my Sabbath- 
school books together, and put them in my little 
trunk ; I may possibly need them yet." She never 
needed them again. 

I love Sabbath-school i, and I bless God that I live 
in their day. They work their healing influences 
into the very germ ex human misery, and correct 
at the fountain head the bitter streams of evil 
which have overran the world. They pluck away 
the incubus from the bosom of society ; and send 
continually their tribute of sanctified recruits, in the 
very morning of life, to swell the armies of the 
Lord. On these accounts I love Sabbath schools ; 
but none with which I have ever been acquainted 
has, under all circumstances, interested me as much 
as Hannah Hobbie's : it exhibited so much of the 
power of christian principle ; and exemplified so 
happily, in all its native loveliness, the spirit of ac- 
tive and diffusive benevolence, which is the chris- 
tian^ brightest ornament. 

Such instances of consecration to the Master's 
work, and unreserved devotion to his service, will 
condemn many a professed disciple at the Judg- 



192 MEMOIR OF 

ment, who, in the possession of health, excuse 
themselves from effort by the plea that they can do 
nothing. Let them try. as she did. 



CHAPTER XL 



Having made an appointment to preach at the 
house of Mr. Hobbie, I went to fulfil it. It was near 
the close of June, and the day was unusually plea- 
sant, even for that delightful season of the year. 
Every thing around me, as I rode along, indicated 
the smiles of a beneficent Providence. 

It is cheering to look out upon the landscape at 
any season ; God speaks to us through his works. 
But at this time the call to remember him was more 
distinct and forcible. He was scattering abroad his 
bountiful supplies for man and beast, and spread- 
ing over all the richest beauties. 

It was near mid-day when, after having passed 
the church, I entered the valley of which I have 
before spoken. A little brook, issuing from the hills 
before me, gently rippled by, winding its way 
through a narrow grove of great beauty, which 
overhung, for a short distance, the right side of the 
road. Into this shady and cool seclusion the little 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 193 

birds, after their morning songs of praise, had re- 
tired to escape the heat of the summer sun ; and 
sat, lazily drooping their wings, upon the lower 
branches of the trees, and upon the willows and 
hazels which tufted the banks of the stream. All 
was solitude and silence, save the whispers of the 
breeze and the hammering of the wood-pecker, as 
he clung to the side of the decaying limb, and 
pierced it for his prey, and now and then the short, 
clear note of the red-bird, as he sat calling to his 
fellow. 

The varying prospect, as I rode onward, awaken- 
ed grateful emotions to the great Giver of all our 
mercies. The meadow-grounds, on every hand, 
were buried deep beneath their luxuriant burdens ; 
some of them gaily tinted with the rich red of the 
clover-blossom. The young corn, recently cleared 
from intruding weeds, drew out its long and ver- 
dant lines of beauty and promise, to cheer the heart 
of the husbandman and tell him of the coming plen- 
ty. Large patches of wheat, not yet whitened for the 
reaper's sickle, stretched across the valley and up 
the hill-sides, over which the mimic waves, in rapid 
and restless pursuit, were chasing each other from 
the field, like successive generations. 

I wondered how any could gather up this rich 
profusion of bounties, and forget, and sin against 
the Being who was bestowing them ; especially as 
he was mingling so much beauty with the portion ; 

H. Hobble. 17 



194 MEMOIR OF 

throwing in the rose, and the lilly, and the violet, 
with the countless flowers of the field, and the song 
of the bird, to sweeten for man the cup of life — to 
relieve the monotony of his toil, and cheer him in 
the hours of his weariness. 

After winding my way up the range of hills to 
the right, I left the highway which led around the 
northern extremity of the highest point of eleva- 
tion, and took, as I often did when on horseback, a 
by-path, which passed directly over the summit. 
Many acres of the shrub-oak, scarcely rising to the 
stirrup, surmounted the height, interlacing their 
branches so closely as to form an impenetrable bar- 
rier on either hand, — the habitation of the sparrow, 
and the burrow of the rabbit. 

From the eastern side of the hill a most magni- 
ficent view presented itself. None possessing a taste 
for the beauties or grandeur of natural scenery ever 
visit that spot and come away unrequited. The 
vast landscape was clothed in the richness of its 
summer luxuriance. A long line of rolling surface 
extended to the north, bounded at the distance of 
thirty miles by the towering hills of Massachusetts. 
In the northeast, a branch of the Taghkannuc moun- 
tains threw up its bold and majestic outline upon 
the clear blue sky. It seemed, as I gazed upon it, as 
if the foot of man had never climbed its rocky ram- 
parts, nor ventured upon the wildness of its soli- 
tudes to wake the sleeping echo in its forests, or 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 195 

disturb the sullen serpent and call forth the warn- 
ing of his rattle. 

Beneath me, on a gentle swell of land which 
broke the regular declivity of the hill, a little to the 
left, at the distance of half a mile, lay the dwelling 
of Hannah. It was one of those antique structures 
reared by another generation, who considered du- 
rability the principal excellence of architecture, and 
taste as having little connection with substantial 
comfort. The long, low front, looking towards the 
south, presented a door in the centre, with two win- 
dows on the right and one on the left. In the western 
end were two windows below and two smaller ones 
in the attic ; the northern slope of the roof some- 
what the longest, while the heavy square chimney 
crowded up through the centre, a sufficient protec- 
tion to the frame-work against any wind that might 
blow. The room in the southwest corner was ap- 
propriated to the sick inmate ; the window on the 
south close by the head of her bed, and that on the 
west at its foot. Here she communed with God — 
here she wrote her journal and letters — here she 
taught her Sabbath-school — here for years she suf- 
fered, and here at last she died. 

A little to the south of the house, and beyond the 
sloping lawn in front of it, two woody eminences 
arose gracefully from the valley on either hand. 
The opening between them presented an extensive 
view of a richly cultivated country to the eastward, 



196 MEMOIR OF 

scooped out for a great distance between the beau 
tiful hills of Sharon and Salisbury. Over this pleas- 
ing expanse the eye wandered, till, through a wide 
gap in the intervening mountains, it rested upon a 
far distant range in the interior of Connecticut. 

Southeast lay the Sharon mountain, checkered 
with fences to its very summit, sweeping around to 
the right in a long and curving line of beauty and 
richness, seldom equalled in any landscape, until it 
lost itself, nearly twenty miles to the southward, 
behind the range upon which I was standing. Mid- 
way up its side, as if slumbering upon its lap, lay 
the village of Sharon, at the distance of six miles, 
canopied by the soft cloud of smoke sent up from 
its hundred chimnies ; while the tall spire that rose 
in the midst of its clustering group of dwellings, 
seemed to offer the protection of heaven to all, and 
to promise the throng that gathered under it skow- 
ers of blessings upon them, and upon their children 
after them. Over this wide field of richness and 
beauty, in every direction, flocks of sheep and herds 
of cattle were feeding in the green pastures or re- 
clining in the shade, till they became mere specks 
in the distance. Trees of every form and size, sin- 
gly and in clumps, and sometimes in small tracts of 
woodland, gave variety and grace to the scene 
throughout its whole extent. 

As my eye passed with delight from one part to 
another of these works of God, and rested at length 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 197 

upon the dwelling of the suffering but rejoicing 
subject of divine grace I was about to visit, it re- 
quired but little effort of the imagination to realize 
the bold and striking imagery of Isaiah, and antici- 
pate the blessedness of that day, when M the moun- 
tains and the hills shall break forth" before the be- 
liever " into singing, and all the trees of the field 
shall clap their hands.' ' 

I had that day the opportunity of much conver- 
sation with Hannah. I found that she was aiming 
more obviously than ever at active employment in 
the Lord's work. She felt that her time was short, 
and was in haste to occupy the talent entrusted to 
her. She seemed unusually anxious to get near to 
God ; but I found that it was for the purpose of in- 
quiring at his feet what more she could do to serve 
him, and asking strength to perform it. Especially 
was she anxious for the salvation of her kindred, 
and greatly rejoiced in the recent conversion of her 
sister Jane. Weak as she was, I discovered that she 
was making her life a busy one. Of our meeting 
this evening she thus speaks : 

" June 26. Again has the Gospel been pro- 
claimed in this house. Once more have the people 
of this neighborhood been exhorted to awake from 
their slumber in sin, and give themselves no rest 
until they have found a dwelling in their hearts for 
the Spirit of God. But alas ! the Lord was not with 
17* 



198 MEMOIR OF 

us in power as he was at the last meeting. Will he 
indeed withhold his saving mercy from us ] Will 
he not continue his divine work still, and add yet 
more to the recent trophies of his grace % Out of 
many, shall we see no more turning to God ] Poor 
deluded mortals, will ye not take warning and 
live ! The Lord pity and save I" 

During the present season she wrote an unusual 
number of letters to her friends. Indeed, all that 
she had it in her heart to do was now pursued with 
vigor and perseverance. Her efforts for the salva- 
tion of souls, for the promotion of the benevolent 
associations with which she was connected, and es- 
pecially to prepare herself to superintend well her 
Sabbath school, and to give the children suitable 
instruction, were greatly increased. 

To her cousin, J H H , in New- 
York, who had recently determined to enter upon 
a course of study with a view to the Gospel minis- 
try, she writes, July 6, 1830 : 

tr May the Lord in his good pleasure favor your 
design, and make you the honored instrument of 
bringing thousands, who might otherwise perish, to 
know the Lord. Your late visit to us will long be 
remembered with pleasure ; but you must have 
been pained to see how cold were this people. 
Happily you found better things when you return- 



HANMH HOBBIE. 199 

ed to your Sabbath-school in New-York, for I learn 
that the Lord of glory had just begun to pour out 
his Spirit upon it to convert young sinners. I can 
now tell you that even here, also, the Lord's ear is 
not heavy, neither is his arm shortened. His salva- 
tion has come nigh unto us, even us, also. Yes, my 
dear cousin, sister Jane and others have been hope- 
fully converted to God. I have heard, also, of two or 
three conversions in another part of our Society. 
The church seems awaking. We humbly trust our 
sky, so long dark, will ere long become brighter. 

that the day may speedily break upon us ! O my 
friend, will you not pray God to bless this part of 
his Zion, heal the backslidings of his people, pass 
by our iniquities, and enlarge our borders ] 

M At present my health is not as good as when 
you left us. I have, however, after encountering 
many difficulties, commenced a Sabbath-school, 
which, with the aid of my sisters J and M 

1 hope to continue. I thank God, at least, for 
giving me feelings of compassion towards the chil- 
dren around me, most of whom, I have reason to 
believe, have little religious knowledge, and for 
enabling me to use my endeavors to rescue them 
from their present ignorance and sin, and conse- 
quent misery. I am grieved to find christians so 
indifferent on this subject. O that the Lord would 
arise and plead his own cause in behalf of these 
perishing children ! 



SOO MEMOIR OF 

M I have been informed that another Sunday- 
school is to be organized next Sabbath in the 
school district west of us ; then we shall number 
three schools in our society, besides that at the 
church. I wish you to procure me some Sunday 
school books, such as you think we need." 

(To the same.) 

" Northeast, August 10, 1830. 

" My dear Cousin, — I delight to hear of the 
advancement of Christ's kingdom in any place; 
but when friends and kindred whom I so much 
love are the subjects of grace, it awakens emotions 
of livelier joy. What gratitude and praise should 
fill our hearts and swell our songs, that God, the 
Almighty Savior, has graciously manifested him- 
self to you and me, and to so many of ours! Why 
is it that we are so eminently distinguished ? Is it 
because we are so happily numbered among the 
generations of those to whom, and to whose seed, 
the Lord has showed mercy, because they have 
loved him and kept his commandments ? 

M Pride often takes possession of the heart and 
keeps us for a season in a state of starvation, even 
when we know that the blessing of the Lord mak- 
cth rich, because we are unwilling to be beggars 
for spiritual food. May the Lord make us humble, 
and give us more and more of the spirit of meek- 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 201 

ness, because he has said he will beautify the meek 
with salvation, and give to the poor in spirit the 
kingdom of heaven. O may we live as daily pen- 
sioners on his bounty, and put our trust under the 
shadow of his wings, that we may be sheltered 
from the storms of life — dwell securely in his pre- 
sence — be abundantly satisfied with the provisions 
of his house below, and finally drink of the rivers 
of pleasure that flow from his throne above ! 
V Your affectionate cousin, 

ft Hannah Hobbie." 
" P. S. In our Sabbath-school we have twenty- 
three scholars, and are in expectation of more. 
About seventeen usually attend at once. This num- 
ber may seem small to you. Will you take the trou- 
ble to procure me some more books for my school ? 
The Lord alone can sufficiently reward you for 
your kindness." 

In her journal she thus notices the death of a 
female member of the church : 

" August 11. In the providence of God another 
instance of mortality reminds me of my own latter 

end. Our dear Mrs. G is no longer a resident 

among us. We trust her ransomed spirit, which 
this morning was released from its tenement of 
clay, has been graciously and gloriously transmit- 
ted from this wearisome world, where all is com- 



202 MEMOIR OF 

motion and distress, to heaven, the peaceful abode 
of everlasting bliss ! May all of us who survive 
possess the peace which she so evidently possessed 
through a long season of distress, and meet her 
and all the ransomed of the Lord in the regions of 
immortal glory and light ! 

M Since I still remain in this state of trial, while 
others, one after another, are called away, how 
reasonable, how highly important, that I inquire 
whether ' I am prepared to meet my God !' How 
am I affected with regard to this and another 
world ] I am practically convinced that all earthly 
pleasures are vain, and if I look after things seen 
and temporal, they only vex and harass my feeble 
soul. O when will that happy period arrive, when 
my expectations from them, and my attachments 
to them, shall be taken wholly away ! O for that 
faith which overcometh the world !" 

The following letter shows her usual mode of 
acknowledging a favor. It was written to her 
cousin J H H , on receiving a dona- 
tion of books for her Sabbath-school : 

" Northeast, August 16, 1830. 

" Dear Cousin, — I hasten to inform you that on 

Thursday morning I received, with the utmost 

pleasure, the Tracts, Books, Magazines, &c. &c. 

which you were so kind as to send me for oar 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 203 

Sabbath-school. For this act of Christian benevo- 
lence in yourself and others, whose desire it is to 
do good to the rising generation, I most sincerely 
thank you, and pray that He whose rights you are 
endeavoring to maintain, and whose cause you are 
laboring to promote, may greatly comfort your 
hearts with the peace of the Gospel, and establish 
you in every good word and work. 

M Affectionately yours, 

M Hannah Hobbie." 



Under date of August 20th her journal contains 
the following : 



M * I will never leave thee nor forsake thee,' says 
the Almighty to his chosen people ; and, blessed be 
his name ! this word is a tried word. Although Sa- 
tan has desired to have me, and the world and my 
treacherous heart have unitedly engaged to pro- 
cure my downfall, yet the Lord is a Friend to me 
* that sticketh closer than a brother.' " 



On the 24th of August she wrote to her friend, 

J H H again to purchase more books 

for her Sabbath-school, and states that the school 
was nourishing, and that it demanded her " con- 
tinued and unwearied attention." 



204 MEMOIR OF 

(To her Cousin, Miss E B , of Bedford.) 

" Northeast, August 28, 1830. 

" Dear Cousin, — When I look at the date of 
your last, and remember your request, I conclude 
you have by this time almost pronounced me an 
unfaithful friend. Indeed, I know that I should have 
acknowledged before your kind favor, but I hope 
you will pardon my seeming neglect, as I have not 
willingly deferred it. I heard some time since that 
your health was more impaired ; if so, and you are 
still suffering under the chastisements of the Al- 
mighty, I do hope and pray that while you are in 
the furnace the fiery trial may be to the purifying 
of your soul, consuming the dross and separating 
it all from the gold. 

<c I still languish upon my bed, and feel that my 
outward man is perishing ; and were it not for my 
pride, and sloth fulness, and faithlessness, I could say 
that my inward man is renewed, even day by day. 
I find myself surrounded by innumerable foes ; and 
although my Lord has promised that as my day is 
so shall my strength be, yet I too often forget to 
hide his word in my heart, that I may not sin 
against him ; and presuming that I can, some of 
the time at least, direct my own steps, I am justly 
left to fall into temptation and sin. Thus my pro- 
gress in the divine life is often retarded by my own 
inconsistency, and my advancement towards heaven 



HANNAH HOEBIE. 205 

is slow and difficult — so at least it appears to me. 
Through the deceitfulness of sin I become blind to 
my real condition, and even lost to a true sense of 
what I am doing. The Lord forbid that I should 
be so un Grateful for the srrace given me as to reck- 
on myself yet a slave to sin ! The Lord forbid that 
I should lightly esteem the glorious liberty of the 
Gospel, by not rejoicing in it as one that has been 
graciously delivered from the bondage of corrup- 
tion ! But my depraved nature is not yet wholly 
sanctified. The workings of sin within me tend to 
mar my dearest enjoyments. I think I can truly 
say that I f delight in the law of the Lord after the 
inward man ;' but while there is f another law in 
my members, warring against the law of my mind 
and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin,' 
my cry will ever be, c O wretched being that I am V 
Yet, when I say, ' who shall deliver me from the 
body of this death V the answer is always ready ; 
' I thank God, through Jesus Christ my Lord,' it 
can be done. Yes, still my heart shall bless, my 
tongue shall utter thanks to God, ' through Jesus 
Christ our Lord.' 

1 How sweet the name of Jesus sounds 

' In a believer's ear, 
1 It soothes his sorrow, heals his wounds, 

' And drives away his fear.' 

" To live in hope of all the blessings which Je- 

H.Hobbie. 1Q 



206 MEMOIR OP 

8us died to procure for sinners is joy unspeakable. 
What then must be the happiness of those who are 
admitted to their Ml fruition ! O, my dear friend, 
let us leave those things which are behind, and 
reach forth to that which is before ! O let us 

1 Run up with joy the shining way 
1 T' embrace our dearest Lord,' 

that we may meet him in the full assurance of his 
favor, as our God, and in his presence abide for 
ever more ! 

" I am your affectionate cousin, 

'* Hannah Hobbie." 

Her journal notices the rich autumnal supplies 
in the following manner : 

" September 8. The harvest is past ; another 
summer has yielded a rich supply for the wants of 
man ; but alas ! it is to be feared that these earthly 
provisions of the Lord's bounty have been poured 
out upon an ungrateful people. But how much 
more distressing the thought, that so many despise 
even the gift of eternal life, so freely offered unto 
all ; and refuse to acknowledge God as the giver 
of every good and perfect gift. O that the Lord 
would prepare our hearts to receive with thankful- 
ness the bounties of his providence, and grant a 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 207 

rich supply of spiritual blessings; for all around ap- 
pears barren and unfruitful !" 

On the last day of September, 1830, a meeting 

was attended at Capt. C 's, in Mr. Hobbie's 

neighborhood, as an anniversary of the solemn 
meeting noticed under the same date in 1827. 
This meeting, I trust, was also blessed to many ; 
to some in the refreshings of the Divine presence, 
and to others, in showing them their sins and lead- 
ing them to the Savior. Of this meeting Hannah 
thus speaks : 

M October 2. Evening before last a meeting was 
held at Capt. C 's in remembrance of the inte- 
resting one held on the same evening three years 

ago. Mr. A preached on the occasion ; and 

addresses were made by others, some of which, I 

am told, were very reviving. Capt. C 's two 

sisters, with their husbands, Mr. B , of P , 

and Mr. T , of W , were there. Their 

hearts all appeared to be animated by the love of 
God, and their souls fired with heavenly zeal. A 
happy impression was made on the minds of both 
Christians and sinners. Many felt it good to be 
there. O may the impression be lasting ! 

M The visiters from P — •— and W were de- 
tained yesterday by the hopeful conversion of one 
of the household of Capt. C . Thanks be to 



208 MEMOIR OF 

God for the happy intelligence that another is born 
again ! O that the Lord would continue to pour 
out his Spirit here, and glorify himself more abun- 
dantly by bringing sinners to repentance !" 

The return <p£ Miss Hobbie's birth-day was al- 
ways to herself a season of deep interest. The so- 
lemn and affecting reflections which such a period 
is so well calculated to produce, were usually on 
such occasions brought before her mind in a very 
forcible manner. But the return of the 13th of 
October, 1830, was to her peculiarly solemn. She 
was sensible that it must be, in all probability, her 
last birth-day. It was therefore improved as such, 
and the thoughts it awakened made a deep and 
lasting impression. She contemplated the grave, 
however, with composure, and looked in upon the 
vast and awful eternity which lies beyond with a 
firm and steady gaze. 

tc The return of the 13th of October assures me 
that another year is gone — gone for ever ! The 
swift passing time, my wasting flesh, and my pow- 
ers of body, all gradually decaying, convince me 
that my stay on earth will be short ; that I must 
soon pass the Jordan of death, and enter the eter- 
nal world. Yes, indeed, death, judgment, and 
eternity are just before me ! Do I live under the 
impression of this solemn fact] Alas ! I still have 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 209 

cause to mourn over a carnal mind ; I am grieved 
at so much conformity to the world ; I too often 
find in myself a disposition to be angry and fretful, 
which I think exceedingly deplorable ; and I must 
add to the catalogue of my sins many short-comings 
in duty to God, to my neighbor, and to myself. O 
how does it become me, in view of all these my 
iniquities, to humble myself under a sense of sin 
and guilt ! And since these are but a small part of 
my transgressions, I humbly beseech thee, O God, 
to teach me that which I see not, that in all things 
wherein I have hitherto offended I may offend no 
more ! let me be holy as thou art holy ! 

I Save, save me from temptation, 

' Thou in whom my soul doth trust ; 

I I have long'd for thy salvation, 
' Yet am cleaving to the dust. 

' Oft returning and repenting, 

* I have sought thee as before ; 
1 And, to all thy law consenting, 

c Thought the contest almost o'er. 

4 But this treach'rous heart deceive* me ; 

* Who its desperate depths can trace ? 
1 Unless sovereign power relieves me, 

1 Mine's indeed a hopeless case ! 

• Be thy precepts deep engraven, 

' As with diamond, on my breast, 
1 'Till I reach the peaceful haven, 

1 Where my soul from sin may resU 4 
18* 



210 MEMOIR OF 

u On entering another year of my life, though 
I suffer much from bodily indisposition, I desire to 
make some new endeavors after holiness ; for my 
soul is pained to think of my barrenness and dead- 
ness — that I live so little to the glory of God. 

M "Will the God of all grace help me to form a 
few resolutions ! I would now record them for my 
frequent perusal, that I may thereby be assisted to 
live more righteously, be more holy, and be kept 
continually in the fear of God." 

RESOLUTIONS. 

" 1. I resolve to be more earnest in prayer to 
God for faith, which works by love, and purifies the 
heart, and overcomes the world. 

M 2. I resolve to guard against a petulant, hasty dis- 
position, and the sudden rising of passion on small 
occurrences ; and will endeavor to gain possession 
of a meek, gentle, and quiet spirit ; and fail not to 
manifest it before all, but in a special manner be- 
fore my little brothers and sisters, whom I am en- 
deavoring to teach by precept, that they may be 
won also by my example. 

M 3. I will see that the care of my body does 
not exceed that of my soul. 

"4. I resolve to pay particular attention to my 
diet, and endeavor to suppress the cravings of a false 
appetite, which oftentimes induces me to take more 
food than nature requires, that I may not be ren 
dered thereby unfit for duty. 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 211 

M 5. I am resolved to be more diligent in ob- 
serving the providences of God towards me, and 
treasuring up the instances of his goodness, and 
the different exercises of my mind. 

"6. In humble consideration of my dependent 
condition, I will strive to cultivate grateful and 
generous feelings both towards my Heavenly Fa- 
ther and my earthly friends. 

" O God, thou seest what I have here written ! 
May I ever, under a sense of my own weakness, 
look to thee for grace to keep these resolutions ; 
that as often as I read them I may do it with joy, 
my conscience bearing witness that I am not un- 
faithful in respect to them !" 

The 4th resolution is probably entitled to more 
consideration than will in general be given it. 



CHAPTER XII. 



Miss Hobbie's health began now more manifestly 
to exhibit the symptoms of rapid and permanent 
decline. It seemed as if the disease was exhibit- 
ing the collected results of its former powerful, 
but insidious and hidden workings. She had long 
been sensible that death, sooner or later, must be 



212 MEMOIR OF 

the inevitable issue ; but now that expected issue 
seemed to be near, and she contemplated her com- 
ing change with perfect composure. Her greatest 
anxiety was to be ready for the summons ; and this 
led her to an inquiry into the real state of her heart, 
which was characterized by the severest scrutiny. 
If we notice attentively her language at this pe- 
riod, we shall observe how much the pollution of 
her heart affected her. Her habits of self-exami- 
nation were such, that no day passed without dili- 
gent attention to the state of her heart ; and this 
review was systematic and thorough. 

I have often remarked that habits of life in other 
things generally mark very strongly the character 
of a person's piety. If he has been careless and 
slothful in regard to his ordinary concerns, and has 
grown up under the influence of such habits, his 
religion not unfrequently partakes more or less of 
his characteristic negligence ; while the person who 
has been trained to habits of neatness, and industry, 
and carefulness in other matters, will usually ex- 
hibit more of system and beauty in the christian 
life. Miss Hobbie's religion partook largely of the 
benefits of such early habits. Neatness, order, and 
enterprise reigned in the family abode. Her 
father's farm was always well tilled, and his cattle 
well fed, and himself doing something to good pur- 
pose, while his wife, the faithful companion of his 
pilgrimage through many a toilsome year, ' looked 



HANNAH ROBBIE. 213 

well to the ways of her household ;' and none there 
might be permitted to eat the bread of idleness. 

This exerted a happy influence on the religion 
of the family. Their system and enterprise were 
carried into it. The evening lectures and the 
prayer-meetings were seldom forsaken by them ; 
and on very stormy Sabbath mornings, it was a fre- 
quent remark, fC There will be meeting to-day, for 
the Hobbies will be there.' : 

Hannah did all that she was called to do with 
diligence and system. In her self-examination it is 
evident that all the exercises of her mind were dis- 
tinctly arranged, that they might be the more close- 
ly reviewed. She kept her heart with diligence, 
knowing that out of it were the issues of life. 

It was this that now caused her so many sorrows. 
She was dying inch by inch, yet she never remit- 
ted this duty. The great discoveries she obtained 
of the depths of iniquity within her filled her heart 
with grief; but her hope, as will be seen, continued 
strong and clear. 

An affecting sketch of the exercises of her mind 
will be found in the following letter to her friend 
and cousin, J H H . 

11 Northeast, Oct. 14, 1830. 
M My dear Cousin, — As I have been spared to 
enter upon another year of my poor unprofitable 
life, I would begin it by devoting a few of my pre* 



214 MEMOIR OF 

cious moments to my beloved Hervey. I trust I do 
feel, in some measure, the value of time, and there- 
fore am anxious, with earliest desi? e, in time to come, 
to make a wise improvement of it. The Lord grant 
me grace to do so ! 

•' In taking a review of my past life, especially 
the past year, I am utterly confounded and covered 
with shame to find how little of my time has been 
devoted, according to my many vows, to the ser- 
vice of God, when my motives and obligations have 
been greatly increased. What abundant reason have 
I for thankfulness, that through so long a season of 
sickness I have been favored with so much comfort 
of body, so much strength, and the greater bless- 
ing of the free exercise of my mental faculties ! 
what cause for gratitude, that I still possess so many 
privileges ! I. bless the Lord that he ever has shown 
me the truth of his tcord in my past experience ; for 
when I have committed my way unto him, he has 
given me the desire of my heart. 

" It was not long since that a sense of my vile- 
ness and unprofitableness lay as an indescribable 
burden on my mind. The Lord at that time lis- 
tened to my cries and groans. I wished either to be 
absent from the body or made useful in it ; and ra- 
ther than take me to himself, he was graciously 
pleased to open to me, and lead me into, a field of 
active duty ; and though poor and weak have been 
my services in it, I humbly trust that they have not 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 215 

been altogether in vain. I have often felt that the 
Holy Spirit has been my helper in this work of 
love ; and thanks be to God, my bodily strength 
has not failed in any one instance since I com- 
menced my Sabbath-school. The Sabbath-school 
cause i3 continually increasing in my estimation. 
The more I reflect upon the subject the greater 
does the importance appear of leading the mind 
early in the way of wisdom. Surely there is interest 
enough in this mighty work to engage the attention 
of every friend of Jesus and every lover of man- 
kind. O may the time soon arrive when the young 
and rising generation shall universally come under 
the blessed influence of Sabbath-school instruction, 
and be brought thereby to a saving knowledge of 
tne truth ! 

" All that you have sent for the use of the Sab- 
bath-school has been received with much pleasure. 
The scholars have been apparently much interested 
with the books, &c. 

<c I remain, as ever, 

" Your affectionate cousin, 

" Hannah Hobbie." 

We return to her journal : 

M October 22. How shall I account for the cold- 
ness which pervades my soul this day 1 O thou, 
who art the life and health of my soul, wilt thou 



216 MEMOIR OF 

apply the balm of Gilead, that I may be healed 
from the dreadful malady of sin, and, for thy name's 
sake, quicken me with thy grace !" 

" Saturday, Oct. 23. I would remember how in 
mercy and goodness I have been led through the 
past week. I have been more comfortable in body, 
and accordingly have been better able to attend to 
the concerns of my soul. But I fear I make too 
little advancement in holiness. O may a sense of 
duty and obligation excite me to constant faith- 
fulness and a warmer zeal in the cause of my 
adorable Savior!" 

" Oct. 24. Lord's day. Welcome, O my soul, 
the return of this blessed day, which brings to 
mind so many sweet reflections concerning God, 
and his love to sinful man ; and thrice welcome the 
day when I meet the Sabbath-school children under 
my care ! Though feeble are my endeavors, yet 
blessed be God for having put it in my power to 
do something towards bringing them to the know- 
ledge of the truth ! The Lord grant that they may 
become wise unto salvation ! Gracious Redeemer 
let me not be disappointed in the hope of seeing 
some of them, at least, convinced of sin, feeling 
their need of a Savior, and fleeing to the refuge 
of thy cross ! O that they may forsake the sins and 
follies of youth, and give up their hearts to the 
service of God their Savior ! O may thy grace be 
magnified, and thy name glorified, in their eaily 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 217 

conversion unto thee ! Wilt thou make one in the 
midst of those who assemble this day, and let it be 
profitable unto all ? Most merciful God, wilt thou 
show us some token for good, that our unbelief 
may be confounded, and that the tongue of reproach 
may be put to silence before thee ]" 

M Oct. 25. Have a good degree of bodily com- 
fort, and my mind is also less subject to distracting 
thoughts than it has of late often been. I thank 
God, that whenever my heart has been inclined to 
wander from him and go out after vanity, it fills me 
with great misery to find it so. I seek after unre- 
served resignation, O Lord, to thy wise and holy 
will, and after greater love to my fellow-men. O 
that I may grow in patience and fortitude of soul ; 
in humility, and zeal, and spirituality, and a heaven- 
ly disposition ; and be mainly concerned, that, 
whether I live or die, God may be glorified in me !" 

(To her aunt H , New- York City.) 

" Northeast, Oct 26, 1830. 
" My dear Aunt, — My friends inform me that you 
are still under affliction in your own sickness and 
that of some of the family. Do you feel like ac- 
knowledging the wisdom and goodness of God in 
all this ] It is better, surely, l to suffer affliction 
with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures 
of sin for a season/ and since our stubbornness and 

H.HobWe. 2.9 



218 MEMOIR OP 

self-will must be brought into subjection to the will 
of" God ; since all our sinful lusts and passions must 
be mortified and subdued ; in fine, since oui whole 
hearts must undergo a complete renovation, we 
need not think it strange that our Heavenly Fa- 
ther employs such thorough mearis to accomplish 
this work in the hearts of those whom he loves. 
Let us count ourselves happy when we are chasten- 
ed by him, for we are far more blest than the wicked, 
in all their prosperity. 

M When I survey the dealings of an all-wise and 
gracious Providence towards my beloved aunt and 
her family, it is with mingled emotions of sympathy 
and admiration. Fond nature sympathizes with 
your sufferings, while adoring praise and love re- 
cognize in a covenant-keeping Father's chastenings, 
at least some evidences of your adoption into his 
family, through the mercy that abounds in Jesus 
Christ. God will find means to purify his people. 
You ought to rejoice. 

M You, my dear aunt, have been the joyful moth- 
er of two who are now, as we humbly trust, glori- 
fied spirits in heaven. The hopeful state of those 
whom you are now endeavoring to train up for 
God is, I am sure, sufficient to give comfort in 
your darkest moments. Your anxiety for those 
around you, together with your own infirmities, 
may threaten to overwhelm you, but you will be 
supported* Happy, indeed, must be the reflection, 



HANNAH H0BBIE. 219 

tbat you have been made the honored instrument 
of bringing a son, at so early a period of life, to a 
saving knowledge of the truth ; who now, showing 
himself grateful unto all, but especially to God, for 
the blessings conferred upon him, designs to give 
himself to the service of God, in the Gospel of his 
Son, seeking the salvation of all to whom he may 
be sent in his Master's name and strength. 

" May God prepare you for all that he intends 
to do respecting you, whether mercy or affliction 
be given you, and enable you to profit by either 
that he may please to send ! May he be a God to 
you, and all yours, for ever ! 

M Your affectionate niece, 

M Hannah Hobbie." 

Her journal continues : 

M Oct. 27. On making inquiry this day concern- 
ing the health of my soul, 1 find the malady of sin 
still rages within. However, I only have to look to 
Christ ; He is my great Physician : he can make 
me whole ; blessed be his name !" 

M Oct. 30. I would make mention of the gracious 
privilege afforded me last evening of again hearing 
the Gospel preached by my dear pastor. He spoke 
from these words, ' Wherefore he is able also to 
save them to the uttermost that come unto God by 
him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for 



220 MEMOIR OF 

them/ Heb. 7 : 25. Truly, the word was to me as 
meat is to him that is hungry. It proved refreshing, 
consoling, and encouraging in my needy condition, 
distressed and disheartened as I was. O why is 
my faith so weak ! I do humbly thank God that 
since I first believed I have not been left (notwith- 
standing the enormity of my sins) to doubt, but 
have had continual hope in his mercy ; but since 
Jesus is able to save to the uttermost, and is offering 
rich mercy to all that will accept of it, I long for a 
stronger faith to lay hold on the promises for my- 
self, and for my dearest friends and relatives who 
are out of Christ. O precious Savior, able to save 
me and others, hear my prayer for myself and my 
friends ! As thou knowest my desires, teach me to ask 
aright, that I may receive, and thyself be glorified !" 

" Oct. 31. Blessed Sabbath day ! how it helps 
us on toward heaven !" 

e< Nov. -2. O why live at a distance from God, 
when I may be brought and kept nigh by the blood 
and Spirit of Christ % Why love my Savior so lit- 
tle, when his love to me is so great 1 Why is my 
faith so weak, when the promises are so many, and 
great, and precious? Why such leanness, when 
there is all the fatness of his house to feast upon ] 
Why mourn my sin and pollution, when all can be 
covered with the Savior's righteousness and for- 
given by his grace ? * The Lord will withhold no 
good thing from them that walk uprightly.' " 



HANNAH HOBBIK. 221 

M November S. In the providence of God I have 
been highly favored for several days. I am often 
greatly distressed in body, yet being blest with a 
considerable respite, I do, I trust with gratitude 
as well as joy, take for a few minutes my needle, and 
besides other things, have helped to enlarge the 
funds of our Benevolent Society. ^ 

M When enoaored in the concerns of this world, 
how difficult to keep my mind unspotted from it. 
I have continually to be on my guard lest the 
blessing which I have more especially been favor- 
ed with of late should prove a snare to my soul. 
Will the Lord save me from temptation and sin, 
and give me grace now and glory hereafter !" 

" November 14. From some cause, and I fear 
by some acts of rebellion, my mind has been for a 
little time past almost continually harassed and 
perplexed, so that I could not plainly discover the 
hand of God in my way. But I thank him that I 
can this day see his love and goodness in giving 
me greater discoveries of the wickedness of my 
heart, of the emptiness of the world, and of the 
great power of sin and Satan to deceive." 

" November 15. I see still to-day how poor 
and vain a thing the world is. It brings sorrow, 
and proves its vanity to all, even its votaries. Its 
allurements only rob us of better things, and leave 
us bitterness and sorrow. The Lord save me from 
all its snares !" 

19* 



222 MEMOIR OF 

*■ November 18. The degree of comfort and 
strength I but lately enjoyed I have in a great 
measure lost. I fear I have indulged a spirit ap- 
proaching to worldly ambition, and that this is, 
partly at least, the reason why I have forfeited the 
continuance of my mercies by my own folly. If 
so, I acknowledge the goodness, justice, and mer- 
cy of God in taking from me this, or any other 
earthly good, he in divine wisdom sees would 
prove detrimental to my soul's best interests. 
Blessed be God for his kind providence over such 
an ungrateful and inconsistent creature as I am!" 

From this date there was no intermission even 
for a short space, to her sufferings, but one contin- 
ued period of extreme distress of body, till nature 
wore away under it, and the hour of her dissolu- 
tion came. Ten days subsequent to this she says : 

M November 2S. Disorder raging, infirmities in- 
creasing, and distresses multiplying, evince that the 
solemn hour of my dissolution draws near Yes ; 
death with his fatal dart stands over me, and soon 
will strike the blow which is to hurry me away 
from all that I have held dear on earth. In view 
of the solemn scene before me, I would say to my 
soul, be thou in readiness ; — watch, lest the Son 
of Man come in an hour when thou thinkest not. 
O my blessed Savior, may I ever abide in thee ; 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 223 

that when thou shalt appear, I may have confi- 
dence, and not be ashamed before thee at thy 
coming !" 

" December 2. In the world have I tribulation 
and distress ; but why should I despond ] The 
great Captain of salvation, who has gone before to 
prepare a place of rest for his faithful people, has 
overcome the world — has gotten for me the victory ; 
and if I trust in him, obeying all his commands, I 
may conquer every enemy. O may the blessed 
Comforter which is promised to them that suffer 
tribulation, be given to me in this time of need, 
and afford me abundant consolation and support ! I 
would trust in the Lord, and take courage from the 
words of eternal truth. When I am tried, may I 
receive a crown of life, which the Lord has pro- 
mised to them that love him !" 

" December 9. This day is set apart by the 
Chief Magistrate of this State as a day of thanks- 
giving and prayer to Almighty God for his multi- 
plied bounties to us ; and feeling that no one has 
more cause than myself to be grateful, I will call 
upon my soul and all that is within me to bless 
and praise the Lord for the gifts of his providence 
and the richer blessings of his grace. Although a 
constant sufferer, pining away under the power of 
a relentless disease, I am surrounded with the pro- 
visions of God's earthly bounty, and have abundant 
cause for thankfulness for the spiritual mercies 



224 MEMOIR OP 

which I enjoy. Let my heart, then, in time to* 
come, abound with gratitude and praise. 

" The Lord spare our guilty nation, and visit us 
in mercy ! How long shall Satan hold this people 
in bondage % Bless every effort to send the Gospel 
throughout all the earth, and bring sinners every 
where to Christ ! 

" O thou Hope of Israel, and the Savior thereof, 
wilt thou not appear for the help of Zion in this 
place ? Thy people have perverted their way, and 
. seem to have in a measure forgotten God. O, most 
merciful God, for thy name's sake give us repent- 
ance, and turn away thine anger from us ; cause 
thy face to shine, and make Zion here a name and 
a praise /" 

" January 6, 1S31. Free grace! Free grace! 
grace abounding to the cliief of sinners ! powerfully 
sustaining my feeble soul in this season of tribula- 
tion and distress ; affording abundant consolation, 
and the hope of a glorious rest beyond this vale of 
tears ! O what shall I render unto the Lord for 
the hope of a blessed immortality beyond the 
grave ! I will ascribe glory to him, for he is the 
author and finisher of my salvation I" 

This seems somewhat like the shout of victory; 
but her warfare was not yet entirely over, her race 
was not yet fully finished. On the 12th she thus 
writes : 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 225 

" O for more grace ! O for a fresh supply to de- 
liver me from the deadly influence of sin ! I find 
myself, partly through the weakness and infirmity 
of the flesh, but mostly through the wickedness 
that is in me, disposed to sin against my Lord in 
thought, word, and deed. Those sins which are to 
me the greatest source of grief, are an ungoverned 
passion, an unruly tongue, and a dead faith. O that 
I might ever be kept in the fear of God, then 
should I not sin against him !" 

It is truly affecting to hear such an one as Han- 
nah Hobbie complain of such sins as are here men- 
tioned. Even the peevishness generally attendant 
on the last stages of the consumption was scarcely 
seen to manifest itself, so closely did she watch her 
heart, and so fervently did she pray against it. I 
never saw a person more like what I suppose the 
inhabitants of heaven are, in her whole spirit and 
conduct. 

M January 21. c J will never leave thee nor for- 
sake thee' How consoling the words of eternal 
truth !" 

This is the close of her interesting journal, with 
the exception of a single record, which falls more 
naturally within the concluding chapter. 



226 MEMOIR OP 

CHAPTER XIII. 

Prominent Traits of her Christian Character. 

Having chosen the service of God, as her duty 
and delight, Miss Hobbie was in the habit of re- 
minding herself frequently of her vows, and renew- 
ing her covenant with God, that she might keep 
more distinctly in view her great object, and pur- 
sue it with renewed and unshaken fidelity. Her 
standard of christian character was high ; — above 
the usual aim of those who profess to consecrate 
themselves to God. We have heard her say, 
lf God cannot require less than perfect holiness ; I 
will therefore aim to be perfect, as my Father in 
heaven is perfect." Supreme love to God was the 
controling principle of her life. 

Her distinctive traits of character were strongly 
marked. A few of them claim attention as the 
prominent points of her testimony to the reality, im- 
portance, and efficacy of the religion of Jesus Christ. 

She had a very deep sense of sin, and of the evil 
of her own heart. 

Sin appeared to her exceeding sinful. It was, in 
her view, nothing short of enmity to God ; nothing 
less than a chosen and determined rebellion against 
his holy and righteous government. It was throw- 
ing into the ranks that opposed God all the influ* 



HANNAH HODBIE. 227 

ence she possessed, to pull down the glorious and 
beautiful fabric which he was erecting, and pre- 
vent the acclamations of joy and praise, as the top- 
stone should be brought forth with shouting, 
" Grace, grace unto it!" It was opposition to de- 
signs of infinite love and mercy, which, carried 
out, would banish from the world confusion, and 
malice, and wo ; would bind together in the fra- 
ternity of a blessed fellowship, all the children 
of men, and fill this earth with the peace and 
joy of heaven. She saw that sin not only aimed 
at the subversion of all this wise and benevolent 
scheme, but rejected and despised the means by 
which it was to be accomplished ; that it was trans- 
gression of a law M holy, and just, and good ;" that it 
trampled under foot the Son of God, and counted 
<f the blood of the covenant an unholy thing;" 
spurned the offer of mercy, and disdained the sub- 
mission which would secure the unspeakable bene- 
fits of the great salvation ; it resisted the Holy Ghost, 
and quenched the kind influences by which the work 
of sanctification was to be perfected in the heart. 

Such was her view of sin ; and the more she 
looked at her own sin the greater did its enormity 
appear, and the more did she reproach herself for 
it. The more thoroughly she searched the hidden 
chambers within, the more sin did she discover. 
There she found the dreadful pride over which she 
so often and so bitterly mourned. She saw so much 



228 MEMOIR OP 

of the treachery and deceitfulness of her heart, that 
she dared not trust it in any thing. She found it 
pleading ever for forbidden indulgence and de- 
structive pleasures ; averse to the holy self-denial to 
which, as a servant of God, she was called, and 
whispering * peace when there was no peace/ Her 
impressions of its wickedness were lively and 
abiding. It was her daily aim to search her heart 
and carefully analyze its workings. She watched 
it with ceaseless jealousy, and kept it with untiring 
diligence. The effect of all, was to drive her near- 
er to the Savior, and to seat her beneath the cross. 
In connection with this was sincere repentance and 
deep humility. She understood not those nice meta- 
physical distinctions which sometimes render ob- 
tuse the quick and delicate susceptibilities of an 
awakened conscience, and blunt the keenness of 
self-reproach. Sin to her was sin ; M exceeding sin- 
ful ;" and in the childlike simplicity of her heart, she 
mourned over it with a godly sorrotv. To find all 
this in herself — to feel that she was justly chargea- 
ble with such wickedness — with strengthening the 
ranks of revolt from God, and swelling the current 
of disloyalty to the King of kings — to think that 
she had contributed to defeat the blessed purposes 
of Divine love and mercy, grieved her deeply ; her 
heart was pained ; it was broken. She was melted 
into deep and permanent contrition ; she loathed 
herself as altogether vile. 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 229 

How often have I listened to her bitter lamenta- 
tions over her former forgetfulness of God, and re- 
jection of his mercy ; and over her evil heart, which 
continually inclined to the same course of iniquity ! 
She has often expressed her wonder that the righ- 
teous vengeance of God could slumber as it did. 
Under such views of herself she was usually much 
affected. She was indeed a mourner; but she 
humbled and abased herself, and repented before 
God ; and in all her vileness and helplessness fled, 
with fervent cries, to the Savior for cleansing, and 
for grace to guard her against the enemy of her 
soul and strengthen her in the hour of temptation. 

This, then, is her testimony against sin ; against 
the selfish, wicked purposes and dangerous pride 
of the heart ; against the dark and hopeless enter- 
prise of erecting the standard of rebellion against 
God. This is her testimony, jointly with all the 
M cloud of tvitnesses" that a sense of sin, and deep 
repentance on account of it, can alone show us our 
need of the Savior, discover to us how helpless we 
are, and teach us that the strength of Christ alone, 
is made perfect in our weakness. 

Another prominent feature of her piety was her 
love to the Savior. 

Christ was very precious to her soul. She had so 

clear a sense of her wretchedness, and odiousness, 

and ruin as a sinner, that she knew none else could 

help her. She saw in him an all-sufficient deliverer, 

H. Hobbie. 20 



230 MEMOIR OP 

and fled to him broken-hearted and perishing. He 
washed away her sins with his own blood, con- 
troled and kept in check, by his Spirit, her way- 
wardness and corruption, and spake words of sweet 
comfort in her ear. No other being in the universe 
could have done it. She had suffered so long un- 
der a sense of sin, and the wickedness of her heart 
would start up so often in terrifying aspects before 
her, that she was taught day by day how much she 
needed his help. He had magnified and made 
honorable the broken law of God — he had pardon- 
ed her many offences — he had borne with her in- 
firmities — he had sustained her in many a severe 
conflict — he had heard her prayers — he had pro- 
mised her a crown of victory — he had supported 
her through many a long and trying season of un- 
utterable suffering ; and he was precious, very pre- 
cious to her soul — he was her all. When he with- 
drew the tokens of his favor, she could not rest. 
She always sought quickly an " absent God." In 
all his offices as Mediator, Jesus was precious. 
Prophet, Priest and King, all were necessary, and 
her own un worthiness only enhanced the value of 
his redemption. 

Another feature of her piety was love of the truth. 

She loved it for its own sake, and hesitated not to 
bow to its decisions, however much it cost her. 
Whatever the word of God said was her law. In- 
struction she took fast hold of as her life, and the 



HANNAH HOBDIE. 231 

channels through which it was communicated were 
precious to her. She delighted in the works of 
creation, because they told her much respecting 
God, and set before her the evidences of his power, 
and skill, and goodness. His providence was a pre- 
cious book, because it taught her so many lessons 
of heavenly wisdom, and purified her heart by the 
afflictions which it laid upon her and the mercies 
which it bestowed. 

" Each opening leaf, and every stroke, 
" Fulfili'd some deep design." 

But in her view, God had magnified his word 
above all his name. When she had strength to 
read, searching the Scriptures was her delightful 
employment. The Bible was her constant com- 
panion through all her sickness — under all her sor- 
rows. I never recollect visiting her when the 
same Bible did not lie on her pillow or on the small 
table at her bed side. She was also in the daily 
habit of reading a small portion of Scott's Com- 
mentary. She did not read the Bible as a task, — 
because conscience would upbraid her if she did 
not, — but because she loved it, and desired to hide 
the truth in her heart. 

She loved the law of God because it was holy — 
its claims right — its requirements* reasonable — its 
principles pure — promoting the good of all who 
obey it. But she knew that salvation could not 



232 MEMOIR OF 

come by the law ; and the Gospel, which revealed 
Jesus Christ, as " the end of the law for righteous- 
ness to every one that believeth/' was precious, be- 
cause it showered its rich and heavenly blessings 
upon the returning prodigal, while all the perfec- 
tions of God remained untarnished, and all the prin- 
ciples of his government undisturbed. 

She loved the influence of truth upon her own 
heart; it purified, it elevated her purposes, and al- 
lied her, in character and effort, to God himself, to 
Christ, to angels, and all holy beings in the uni- 
verse. 

The 'preaching of the Gospel was always esteem- 
ed by her a great privilege. In listening to it, she 
would recline upon her bed as quietly as her pains 
would allow, and sometimes seem entirely to forget 
them, fixing her eye upon the speaker, with its sub- 
dued and meek, but earnest expression, evidently 
drinking in every word. Sometimes I have observed 
her, after such close and absorbing attention, closing 
her eyes, and though not a muscle of her face mov- 
ed, the tear would steal down her cheek and tell 
what truth was doing within. 

If at any time her heart, in its iniquity, was trou- 
blesome, she would go to the Bible to learn how to 
keep it. If her faith was weak and wavering, the 
Bible was her instructor how to secure its increase. 
If she felt in darkness she went to it to find a pro- 
mise to rest upon, or some principle of the divine 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 233 

government disclosed, upon which she could stay 
herself in safety, and wait for the morning. When 
she thought of sin and hell, she would find what 
Christ had done to destroy the works of the devil; 
and when the terrors of the grave, the judgment, 
and eternity threatened, she would look for the as- 
surance of a glorious resurrection and an unfading 
inheritance in heaven. 

Another striking trait of her christian character 
was her love and regard for the Sabbath. 

How often have we read in the preceding pages 
expressions like this : " Blessed Sabbath, day of 
rest /" How often have we seen the overflowings 
of her grateful heart for such a precious institution. 
She was M in the Spirit, " usually " on the Lord's 
day." She hailed it as often as it returned as a wel- 
come, joyful season of peculiar devotion and com- 
munion with God. She obeyed the command to 
keep the Sabbath holy, with delight; and found, in 
this duty, usually high enjoyment. She was in the 
habit of renewedly dedicating herself to God every 
Lord's day ; and this weekly consecration of herself 
made the Sabbath a peculiar delight. It is one of 
the sweetest feelings attendant on religion to givo 
all to the Lord — to surrender ourselves and all that 
is near and dear to us into the Savior's hands. 

" Sweet in the confidence of faith, 
" To trust his firm decrees j 
20* 



234 MEMOIR OF 

11 Sweet to lie passive in his hands, 
" And know no will but his." 

And no season is more congenial to such a heaven- 
ly state of feeling than the Sabbath. This was fre- 
quently Hannah's Sabbath blessing. 

It is comforting to find in these days of general 
disregard of the Lord's day, any that highly value 
it. It was to her an excellent means of maintaining 
a habit of devotion. She found it salutary, even 
shut out as she was from the busy scenes of life ; as 
it broke in, at frequent and stated intervals, upon 
the cares and anxieties of the world, and kept the 
heart free from the fetters which otherwise would 
have been bound around it. It was to her a delight- 
ful employment, in the calmness of the Sabbath 
morning, to call off the mind from every other ob- 
ject, and let the whole soul hold intercourse with 
heaven. It made her familiar with the holy em- 
ployments and animating scenes of the eternal Sab- 
bath on high. She could not, indeed, go up to the 
house of God with the multitude of his people to 
keep holy day, but still the delight of her soul in 
the Sabbath was great. Her testimony in respect 
to the Sabbath, throughout her whole course is, 
keep it holy. If you wish the strong exercise of 
faith, the power of godliness to reign within you, 
the smiles of your heavenly Father, and rapid 
growth in grace, remember the Sabbath day to keep 
it holy ; value it as one of your greatest blessings. 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 235 

Another feature of her piety was her love of 
prayer. 

It was the channel of communication between 
God and her soul. It was the key which unlocked 
the treasuries where every good and every perfect 
gift is stored. If she needed grace, she went to 
her Heavenly Father, and asked and obtained it 
through Jesus Christ. If she needed forgiveness, 
she sought it in prayer, and found it. If pain and 
distress came upon her, she prayed that the afflic- 
tion might be removed, or if that were not best, 
that it might be good for her, and that she might 
submit with patient resignation. In trials sharp and 
fiery, she plead that God would help her, and that 
right early, and make all work together for her 
good. 

She found the influence of prayer upon her own 
soul to be sweet and tranquilizing. God was the 
source of her spiritual as well as her natural life, 
and she went to him for every supply. Every 
event — all things — were under his control, and she 
knew that through prayer alone the whole could 
further her eternal good. 

Besides, she had been renewed in the spirit of 
her mind, and therefore delighted in communion 
with God. A partaker of the divine nature, she 
loved every thing that tended to produce conformi- 
ty to the Divine image. Prayer, while it reminded 
her of her poverty and wretchedness, and broke 



236 MEMOIR OF 

down the pride of her heart, brought her nigh unto 
God, through Jesus the Savior — the great Advo- 
cate ; and she felt a pure delight in the privilege 
of coming even to his seat. It soothed her troubled 
spirit to come near to the throne of grace, and our 
her supplications into an ear that never was heavy, 
and lean upon an all-sufficient Friend, who felt so 
tenderly for all his people. 

We find her praying as often as four or five 
times a day statedly ; besides the many short but 
precious interviews with the Savior, which she en- 
joyed as occasion called her to his feet for help. 
She loved to pray, for she was well assured that 
God had often heard her, and sent in answer to 
prayer the richest blessings both upon herself and 
others. She felt in this employment like one who 
enjoys frequent interviews with a kind and faithful 
parent; secure of sympathy, and esteeming the 
near relationship as priceless, because that parent 
is able to do all that could be desired, and has never 
denied one reasonable request. She believed that 
the promises of God were- all meant to express fully 
and clearly what they do express; and trusting 
God according to his own words, she came near, 
and with the simplicity of a child, spread out her 
desires before him. 

Another trait in her christian character was her 
love for the people of God. 

They were her chosen, her dearly-loved com- 



HANNAH IIORRIE. 237 

panions. She took great delight in christian socie- 
ty, and always appeared to be unfeignedly thankful 
when she received a truly christian visit from a de- 
voted and heavenly-minded follower of Christ. 
Such visits were seasons of sweet refreshing, and 
she always imparted double for all that she receiv- 
ed. I ever felt that my visits were the greater 
blessing to myself. It seemed, as I bent over her 
to catch the feeble tones of her voice, like holding 
communion with one who had outstripped me in 
the race, and obtained clearer views of the promised 
land, because she stood nearer its borders and had 
gained the summit which overlooked it. Some- 
times I could hardly divest myself of the impres- 
sion that I was listening, breathless, to catch the 
distant sound of her voice calling me, from the 
more elevated position which she occupied, to 
come up and contemplate with her the glories 
which lay beyond. 

She took little interest in any conversation relat- 
ing merely to the things of this world. Her soul 
seemed to be absorbed in the great things of God's 
grace and kingdom ; she loved them all ; and when 
others loved them too, there was between them a 
flowing together of souls. The Savior's image, en- 
etamped upon any, of any denomination, was al- 
ways current with her, for she delighted in the 
kindred spirit, wherever it was found. 
, Another trait of her christian character was 



238 MEMOIR OF 

anxiety for the salvation of sinners, and the progress 
of the Redeemer's cause. 

Her's was not that selfish feeling of satisfaction 
with the mere evidences of personal safety which 
I am afraid prevails to an alarming extent, while 
the good, especially the eternal salvation of others, 
is almost wholly disregarded. Her heart was not 
only opened to receive the truth, but, under its ef- 
fects, it was enlarged with ardent desires for the 
salvation of men. She knew the dreadful bondage 
of sin from painful experience, and, to use one of 
her own expressions, "pitied" greatly pitied those 
who were still its slaves. She knew their blindness 
of mind and their hardness of heart — that they laved 
to have it so, and that distressed her the more. She 
knew they stood upon slippery places, that their 
feet would soon slide, and that tremendous ruin 
awaited them. Besides, she considered sinners 
as the enemies of God, whom she loved. They 
were trying to ruin his cause ; uniting their influ- 
ence against the Savior, whose honor to her was so 
dear. They were tramplmg the beloved of her soul 
under foot, despising the calls of his mercy, and 
making light of the agonies of his crucifixion. All 
this grieved her deeply. She wished them to be 
saved from everlasting death ; and greatly desired 
to see them gathering with Christ, and not scatter- 
ing abroad. She rejoiced, therefore, with great 
joy when any turned to the Lord ; for so far the 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 239 

ranks of hell were weakened, and those of her Mas- 
ter strengthened. 

She longed for the day to come when all should 
be of one heart and one mind, and live in love, and 
give their strength, purified and sanctified, to the 
service of her Lord and Master. She wanted all 
to possess an eternal inheritance, and wear an un- 
fading crown. It is not strange, then, that in those 
revivals of religion which existed around her be- 
fore she died she took so deep an interest. It 
seemed to put new life into her own heart when 
sinners turned to the Lord, for they were gained 
over to the side which she loved, and on which she 
had taken a stand so decided. As long as she lived 
she felt it a privilege to do what she could for the 
salvation of sinners. 

Another striking feature of her piety was her 
efforts to do good. 

It is painful to witness the apathy of multitudes 
who profess to be the followers of Christ, and their 
habitual neglect of effort to save sinners — to see them 
idle in the Lord's vineyard, even in the possession 
of firm health, and apparently contented, while 
hardly evincing a desire to spend and be spent in 
the Lord's service. The aged can look back with- 
out alarm upon a long series of years in which 
they have made few if any efforts for the salvation 
of a single soul. The young, in all the vigor of 
youthful enterprise, are laying plans to consume 



240 MEMOIR OF 

their years and spend their strength in the pursuit 
of worldly interests, and not in labors and sacrifices 
for the salvation of men. Such was not the piety 
of Hannah Hobbie. 

She was anxious to do something for the salva- 
tion of souls — to spend what little strength she had 
in doing good and glorifying God. Few would 
have done any thing situated as she was ; — nothing 
would have been attempted. Sickness is often 
considered a plea for giving up every thing like ac- 
tive effort ; but her views of obligation were such 
that she could not rest while any strength and op- 
portunity remained to promote the Savior's cause. 
Her obedience to his commands was cheerful ', and 
therefore universal and persevering ; as she loved 
God's work, she panted continually after more ex- 
tensive usefulness. Having done what she had 
purposed, she devised other plans of doing good, 
that she might still pursue her Master's work. 

Think of her practice of conversing with the im- 
pe?rite?it friends who visited her on the subject of 
their salvation — of the letters written from her sick 
bed, all breathing an ardent desire to be useful, and 
some of them expressly designed as a personal ef- 
fort for the salvation of a soul. Think of a suffer- 
ing and feeble young female exerting successfully 
her influence to form those of her own sex around 
her into a society fcrr assisting the Missionary and 
the Tract came; endeavoring also to assemble 



HANNAH J10HB1E. 241 

around her sick bed her sisters in Christ, in a stated 
concert of prayer, and resolving to take part in the 
necessary exercises of the meeting ; and then think 
of such an one, almost wasted away by years of 
excrutiating pain, using her influence with her 
friends to collect the wandering children of her 
destitute neighborhood into a Sabbath school ; and 
when she found those efforts fruitless, girding up 
her own loins to the work, and gathering them every 
Sabbath into her sick chamber, that she might her- 
self instruct them in eternal things. Think of all 
this, ye that are blest with health, and opportunity, 
and means to do good, and yet neglecting them ; 
and is there no reason to fear that she will in judg- 
ment rise up and condemn you ] 

Such activity is the result of real love to God. 
The fellowship of christians with one another, and 
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, em- 
braces fellowship of effort. God is love, and love 
is ever an attribute of godliness, and an active and 
efficient principle. God so loved the world that 
he gave his Son to die for it ; Jesus so loved the 
world, that he gave for it his life ; the Holy Ghost 
so loves the world, that he strives with men and sanc- 
tifies the heart ; angels so love the world, that they 
delight to minister to the heirs of salvation; and 
christians so love the world, that they are willing to 
spend and be spent in self-denying labors for the 
salvation of men. All who are really Christ's are 

H.Hobbie. 21 



242 MEMOIR OF 

to rejoice together in the successful issue of the 
great enterprise ; and unless, from the same com- 
mon principle of love, pursuing a course of active 
exertion, none can claim affinity with the blessed 
confederacy, or share in the glories of their future 
triumph. 

In this trait of her christian character she testi- 
fies to the practical nature of true godliness ; that 
faith without works is dead ; and calls out from the 
cloud of spectators by which we are surrounded, 
" Go on ; run with patience the race set before you, 
looking unto Jesus ; and then come and wear the 
crown of victory he has graciously prepared.' ' 

Some think that to prepare for death it is neces- 
sary for the christian to relax exertion and fall back 
from the noise and bustle of active warfare. But 
Hannah Hobbie felt that she must press foncard, 
endure hardness as a good soldier, and continue, 
even to the end y to fight the good fight ; that she 
must toil on, bearing the burden and heat of the 
day, and never give over till she lifted her dying 
eye at once to heaven and to the banner that float- 
ed over her, and laid her bones upon the field of 
battle. 

She has trodden the path before us, and shown, 
in her self-denying and persevering adherence to 
the cause of Christ what, by Divine aid, may he do?ie, 
and what tve ought to do. She calls upon us to fol- 
low the Savior, and do all that we can for his glory 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 243 

on earth, that we may reign with him as kings and 
priests unto God for ever and ever. That we may 
be qualified to serve God faithfully, and cheerfully 
devote all to him. She calls upon us to live near to 
him; to pray without ceasing ; to keep hold, by faith, 
of his covenant, and draw upon his fulness daily, 
that we may receive grace for grace; that we may 
endure as seeing him who is invisible ; and in the 
strength, and through the grace that is in Christ 
Jesus, be brought off at last conquerors and more 
than conquerors. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



Having seen in the traits of Miss Hobbie's chris- 
tian character her testimony for the truth, as one of 
the " great cloud of witnesses " we come back to 
the narrative, to mark a little further how God, in 
his providential dealings with her, illustrated the 
import of his M exceeding great and precious pro- 
mises" to his ])eople. 

I visited her near the last of February, and found 
her very weak and in great pain. She welcomed 
me with a smile, and pressed my hand with more 
than usual fervor. I knew her time must be very 
short, for I had seen the frail tabernacle giving 
way under the pressure of the violent and long-con- 



244 MEMOIR OP 

tinued storms which had beaten upon it. The re- 
sult of this interview was what might have been 
expected. It appeared more clear than ever that 
her spirit was about to mingle with purer society, 
and go to the participation of higher enjoyments 
and brighter scenes. She could say little ; but every 
desire seemed fixed above, and she panted for the 
hour when all her sufferings should cease, and she 
be admitted to the delightful companionship of the 
holy and the happy in a brighter world. 

" Hannah," said I, tc is God a present help in 
this time of need V 9 

In her faint and mellow voice, frequently inter- 
rupted by pauses to catch breath, she said, " He 
is — he always has been — since I first trusted him — 
and I am sure he will never leave me nor for- 
sake me." 

" Do you have any distressing anxiety on that 
subject of late V 

" None at all, sir. — God has kindly, for a long 
time — enabled me to trust him, — and I cannot fear 
while I have such a Friend — as Jesus. I am per- 
suaded — that he is able to keep all that I have com? 
mitted to him ; — and I have had so many — proofs of 
his willingness — to do every thing for me — that I 
need, — that I should be most ungrateful — to dis- 
trust him now — I have perfect peace." 

u Do you feel any impatience under tne Lord's 
dealings now V 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 245 

M I sometimes think, — as I can do no more good 
in the world, — I had rather be taken — to rest ; but 
if I can yet glorify God — by suffering longer — I 
ought not to murmur. All is right — as it is ; — but 
I feel a desire to depart, though — I sometimes feel 
it to be wrong." 

V Hannah," said I, M what do you now think of 
all your past sufferings and trials ; do you still feel 
as if God was right in laying them upon you." 

Ki I see that more clearly — every day; and I praise 
him — more and more for them. They are all right, — 
just as they should be, — all necessary — none of 
them — could have been spared." 

Said I, " You have been a very great sufferer." 

"All has been well done," said she; "none of 
them could have been spared" 

Her sufferings had been very severe for years ; 
but all teas well done. At this time she had become 
so emaciated — her flesh had so wasted away, that 
her bones had worn through her skin, and she 
could not be moved, even in her bed, without great 
pain. 

Who will say that God did not gloriously illus- 
trate the fullness of his promises in her history ? He 
did, indeed, dry up some streams of earthly comfort, 
but opened upon her the livers of never-failing de- 
light which issue from his throne. He was her ever- 
present, her never-failing helper. He had sup- 
21* 



246 MEMOIR OP 

ported her in all her trials — had taken a gracious 
care of her — had fulfilled to her every promise 
which secures good to his chosen, and had never 
forsaken her. All this had been done through years 
of sharp suffering and conflict. Thus far he had 
been her God. 

I was intimately acquainted with her feelings 
throughout her sickness, and never saw more strik- 
ing evidence that the riches of grace were magni- 
fied, than in her case. " Grace did much for Han- 
nah Hobbie," has been, since her death, a common 
remark. She cast all her care upon the Savior, and 
it was evident throughout that he cared for her. 

Her spirit was always tranquil. She knew that 
all she suffered was sent in covenant love ; and it 
was her great object to study the design of God in 
all her afflictions. How often have we seen her ex- 
pressions of praise and thanksgiving for her many 
chastisements ! 

Her spirit was always heavenly, and at times her 
enjoyment in God was very great. What but the 
fulness of divine promises fulfilled could have given 
her such a likeness to God, and such unspeakable 
joy and peace in believing 1 Let the infidel talk of 
the supports of philosophy, — we will unite with 
Hannah in singing of the covenant faiihfidness of 
God, and rejoicing in the fullness of his redemp- 
tion and the stability of his promises. 

Hannah's christian life, which had been of a 



HANNAH HOBCIE. 247 

character so highly spiritual, shone brighter and 
brighter ; and the perfect day was, in her own opi- 
nion, as well as in that of others, fast hastening, 
when she should see as she was seen, and know as 
she was known. To the last she continued to pos- 
sess the same sweet spirit of acquiescence in the 
will of God ; ever praising him that she was thus 
supported, that she had so many mercies, and that 
her sufferings were so much lighter than her sins. 
As she drew near the close of life, she saw still 
more clearly the evil of her own heart ; but it kept 
her nearer the cross, and called forth more full and 
frequent expressions of thanksgiving and praise 
that all was graciously forgiven. She was ripening 
fast for immortality, and waiting for her deliver- 
ance. 

On a Lord's day I received, before I left the 
church, a request from Hannah to see her, if pos- 
sible, that day ; accompanied by an intimation from 
her father, who brought it, that it would probably 
be our last interview on earth. I hastened to her, 
and found her sinking rapidly. She was fully aware 
that her end was approaching. Her conversation 
evinced a spirit of deep self-abasement, but her 
heart was full of light and joy, as she indulged the 
humble but assured expectation of soon resting 
from all her trials upon her Savior's bosom. She 
stood upon the summit of Pisgah, and was taking 
a calm survey of the billows of Jordan as they lay 



248 MEMOIR OP 

rolling between her and the land of rest which 
spread out its glories beyond. She was collected, 
and firm, and happy, in view of her expected 
change. She had long been waiting for it, and by 
grace was prepared for its coming. 

Not long before this Mrs. A spent a night 

wkh her. When her bed had been prepared, and 
she had been laid upon it for the night, after a 
season evidently spent in silent prayer she sung to 
a plaintive tune, in her sweet, and feeble voice, 
still sweeter because almost spent, 

" Our life, how short I a groan, a sigh ; 
" We live — and then begin to die j 
"But Oh ! how great a mercy this, 
11 That death's the portal into bliss ! 

" My soul ! death swallows up thy fears ; 
" My grave-clothes wipe away all tears ; 
" Why should we fear this parting pain, 
" Who die that we may live again 1" 

and then composing herself, was soon asleep. Such 
was her heavenly and tranquil spirit in view of the 
solemn change before her: 

During the afternoon she called me to her bed- 
side, and took from the drawer of her table, and 
put into my hands, the journal from which such re- 
freshing selections have been made, with some 
other papers ; requesting that I would after her de- 
parture read them, as comforting remembrancers 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 249 

that I had been useful to her, and then return them 
to her friends. None of the family knew until that 
moment that such a journal had been kept. They 
had often seen her writing ; but knowing that she 
wrote many letters, they supposed that she was 
employed in that way. I went to the window to 
compose my feelings, for they were deeply moved. 
While standing there I observed that a soft thin 
haze was spreading itself over the setting sun ; the 
sparkle and the glare were gone, so that I could 
look upon it ; and as it disappeared in its mellow 
beauty, it seemed an emblem of the immortal spi- 
rit before me, about to fade away as gently, and 
pass from our sight in the same mild loveliness. 

She had already given, in perfect composure, to 
the family such directions respecting her funeral 
as she thought important, and they all savored of 
her wonted humility and indifference to the world. 

She now gave me the text for her funeral ser- 
mon. It was Rev. 14 : 13. " And I heard a voice 
from heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are 
the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth ; 
yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their 
labors, and their works do follow them. ,, In the 
selection of this text there was no ostentation ; it 
was the simple confidence of a child feeling assu- 
rance from a Father^ pledges, and reposing upon 
a covenant which secured the sure mercies of Da- 
vid to every penitent believer. 



250 MEMOIR OF 

In the morning we all assembled in the chamber 
of the dying saint. We bowed before the throne 
of grace, and committed her with full hearts and a 
faltering tongue to a covenant-keeping God ; pray- 
ing for a gentle release and a triumphant depart- 
ure. It was a melting season ; we were filled with 
an awful but soothing sense of the presence of 
God ; and eternity appeared very near to us all. 
She wept not. Over her pale and sunken features 
was spread the strong expression of exultation and 
triumph ; and when I went to take my leave of 
her, she pressed my hand tenderly, and smiled : 

"We part for a little season," said she, "my 
dear pastor, but we shall meet again. I thank you 
for all your kindness to me ; I shall need it no 
more." 

There was a pause. 1 turned slowly away, 

and saw her no more in the flesh : but " we shall 

MEET AGAIN." 

My mind was full of the scenes through which I 
had just passed, and before proceeding far I reined 
up my horse and looked back upon the house in 
which lay the dying believer, with feelings of un- 
utterable interest. I doubted not that the angels 
of God, who are " sent forth to minister to them 
that shall be heirs of salvation," were there on their 
last errands of love to Hannah. A light snow had 
fallen during the night, and a bright sun was now 
pouring its beams upon it. It seemed to my busy 



HANNAH HOBBIE. 251 

imagination a pure and expressive emblem of the 
robes of white in which the departing spirit of my 
beloved friend would so soon be arrayed in her 
Master's presence. 

In the midst of reflections so sweet and affect- 
ing I gained the western summit of the hill, where 
a prospect of surpassing grandeur at once opened on 
my vision. Among the finely molded hills that 
lay extended to the northward, arose the solitary 
spire of Montross. To the northwest, apparently 
at my feet, but scarcely arresting attention amid 
the splendors of the scene, lay the Stissin Moun- 
tain. The undulating foreground of the landscape 
beneath me was beautifully wrought up with fields, 
and farm-houses, and remnants of ancient forests. 
Farther on, a vast expanse of country, possessing 
the same general features, lay spread out before 
me for scores of miles. Across the middle of thi3 
field of view could be distinctly traced from north 
to south, as far as the eye could reach, the broad 
valley of the Hudson. In the distant background, 
piled up almost above the pathway of the storm, 
the lofty and imposing Catskills, in the wild sub- 
i limity of their winter scenery, pushed down from 
the north their huge masses upon the western bor- 
der of this valley, as if to dispute the passage of 
the river, and then by a bold sweep receded to 
the southwest. The dark brown of their crowning 
oaks contrasted strongly with the dazzling white- 



252 MEMOIR OF 

ness of the snow which covered them, and deep* 
ened into heavier lines of shading, as intervening 
elevations, in endless succession, lapped upon other 
continuations of the far-extended range, till they 
melted away in the distance, and were lost in the 
line of soft blue haze which skirted the western 
horizon. 

Never did I seem so surrounded with God. 
These works of his hands were full of beauty and 
grandeur; but an object of far deeper interest was 
the immortal spirit about to leave these scenes, and 
rise to a brighter world and a better inheritance. 
As a vesture shall all these be folded up — the ele- 
ments shall melt with fervent heat ; but not a jot 
nor tittle of the word of promise upon which the 
believer rests for an eternal kingdom, and an un- 
fading crown, shall ever fail. 

Two days after this I received intelligence that 
Hannah had gone to her rest, and a request to at- 
tend her funeral. She departed on the 21st of 
March, 1831. I went at the time appointed. There 
was no unusual commotion in the family when 
Hannah died. All felt that death was her gain. Her 
sufferings had been extreme and protracted ; and, 
amid her anxious desires to depart and to be with 
Christ, which was "far better," she fell asleep in 
Jesus, as softly and as sweetly as an infant sinks to 
repose upon its mother's bosom. The presence of 
God forsook her not ; her Savior was with her to 
the last. 



HANNAH H0BBI1. 253 

In the days of her former vanity, while pursuing 
her voyage, she had often cast her anchor upon 
the treacherous sands, over which she was buffet- 
ing the billows and trying to ride out the storm ; 
but it would not keep its hold. Wearied with the 
fruitless efforts, and almost overwhelmed in the 
deep waters, she raised her loud cry for help to him 
who alone can give it. That signal of distress was 
heard above the roaring of the tempest ; she threw 
herself upon the Savior's omnipotence — cast her 
anchor M within the vail," and never swung from 
her moorings more. 

It was her request that her surviving friends 
should wear no weeds of mourning on account of 
her death ; and the white bonnets of her sisters, and 
the plain and usual apparel of the family at her fu- 
neral, appeared to me more suitable and touching — 
more in keeping with their impressions of her bet- 
ter condition above, than studied mourning-suits 
would have been. 

Agreeably to her request, I 6poke from the text 
which she had given me ; and endeavored to show 
wha it was to die in the Lord, and to point out the 
blessings of rest and recompense, which, through 
grace, the believer who has gone to a better world, 
receives from henceforth. I called upon all present 
to seek those blessings, and be followers of her 
who through faith and patience had become an in- 
heritor of the promises. It was a time of many 

H. Hobbie. 22 



254 ' MEMOIR OF 

tears ; and when I read the closing record of her 
diary, (which follows,) the sobs, which for some time 
had been with difficulty suppressed, burst forth 
from many of the assembly. 

" February 1. The Great Disposer of events, in 
the wise dispensations of his will towards me, has 
recently taken from me almost entirely the use of 
my limbs. Twelve days since I have walked a step 
without assistance ; and, alas ! I see no prospect of 
regaining the loss. I have however abundant cause 
to bless God for the degree of resignation with 
which he is enabling me to meet these trials, which 
of myself I could- not endure. I bless him, also, that 
it is a source of consolation to me to know that the 
cords of nature are breaking, one after another, and 
loosing me from earth. Although the process should 
cost me many a sigh, and groan, and tear, the cords 
of nature which bind me to earth must be sepa- 
rated; nature must be dissolved before my soul 
can leave these mortal shores to enjoy the more 
salubrious and delightful atmosphere of Heaven." 

Here I delight to close her history. The last 
word she ever wrote was Heaven; the place, I 
doubt not, of her eternal rest. 

At the close of the services I went to the coffin 
to take a last look at her remains. Her features 
were but little changed ; and over them was still 



HANNAH IIOBBIE. 255 

spread, fixed and abiding in death, something like 
the expression of exultation and triumph which 
they wore when I last saw her. Again I was re- 
minded, by the white folds of the death-robe, of 
the bright garments in which she was now clothed 
in "Heaven" 

We carried her to the house appointed for all the 
living, and placed her in the grave. Soothing and 
pleasant associations hang around the christian's 
burial. — Jesus had lain in the tomb and broken its 
bars. The dark chamber looked like a lovely and 
a hallowed spot ; and I said within myself, as we 
turned away in silence from the place, This mor- 
tal shall put on immortality ; and this corruptible 
shall put on incorruption : " We shall meet again." 
Though her body is moldering beneath the green 
sod that covers it, the dwelling of her spirit is 
" Heaven ;" and I am sure if she is looking down 
from her high and bright abode upon things below, 
and should see a single soul, by means of this little 
book, turning to the Lord, she would mingle her 
rejoicings with those of angels over that repenting 
sinner, and strike upon her golden harp a higher 
note of praise to him who had washed from sin 
with his own blood, and purified by his own spirit, 
another of the ruined and the perishing. 

THE END. 



DATE DUE 



^ -,„. 


ghbbsu. 














































































































































GAYLORD 






PRINTED IN USA 



