Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



:., Google 



■ Ka 2-roo 




:.C,oosIc 



:., Google 



„.;.„Goo8lc 



:., Google 



.....Goosic 



.....Goosic 



J^ey^^-^ 



:.C,oosIc 



MEMOIR 



JAMES BRAINERD TAYIOB. 



JOHN HOLT RICE, D. I>. 



BENJAMIN HOLT BICE, D. D. 



SECOND STEREOTYPE EDITIOK, 



THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIBTV, 



.C.H-yk 



K(j rvod 




Eotercd ueordlnf to Act of Congrcii, in ths jrgor 1833, by 
Khowlii TiTLOH, in tlie CIcrt'i Offiee of the Dlttiiet Court 
of Ihc SonthiTD Diatriet of Naw-VoTk. 

Kifhl of pubHbliinf tnuiifkrfol la Aaflrlcu Tnci aoeigtjF. 



:., Google 



eoirsBiiTS. 



Birth, childhood, uul aarly youth — raters a nott id N<w- 
yorc— coDTanioo— tibon in Ssbbalh School— cOiirti for 
good of otbeTi— f CM a UiutoDary lul (br Iiidia— contam> 
platu prgpariog for the Miiiii>uy--eoDiulu hii pwant*— 
deeitioD to conwcrate taimnlf to thii work— corraapond- 
CDca with frisodi on tho aabjact— detcminai od a tbo- 
lODgb eoaru of prepaiatioo 



Temptalioill niiitad— cipoiDrc to laddoD dauth — daiarip- 
tioD oT the ichool — anticipatioo of the nuDiitrj— daily 
atnjj of tha Bibia— ettabliihai a waaklj prayer-Deeting, 
connected nilh ■ Bible Clasa— Bible Claii of Vonag La- 
dies Id Lawreneavilla— labor* "from hooie to honie "—et- 
tbn* fill the ulTatioa of hii parent! and telatiTet— U- 
menti hii linfulaeia— topics for meditation and day of 



IhaakifidDf — Nair Vtu't IctUt to hii pu-niU— «Sbiti 
far other rcUtivM— letter to hit mother— to s friend pro- 
porisg for the mioutr;— vbligotioD Id preicnt uscfalneii 
— ueompiDui Major Ridge to ComwiU — letter to u> 
igei clergynum— to bia poreulf, ; 



CHAPTER Id. 



AtpiratkHufor JDCrenie of holineM— letter of BCkpowledg- 
ment from Major Ridge— letter from one brought to 
Chriit by hii fidelity— hii view of quatificallDUi for tb« 
miniitrj— ipecial refreshing from the Hoij Ghoit, April 
23, lS3S-iDcreaie of ipirilueJity— deiini to enter the 
miniitf iramediately, but reiolTei on a conrie of tho- 
rough preparation— letlsri to chriiiian friendi urging a 
high itandard of hoi JDeiv— Memoir of ParKini— New 
Year'* letter to hii parent! — Death of the Compiler, and 

' continoBIioD by anotfaer hand— bright antieipatloD* of 
hesTen-^etteri to an agad Clergyman — Saior of Chriat 
in all biicorreepoDdeuee — great joy in God— lettcii to a 
ladjin alBietion-Jonnial— warning of danger oT wealth 
and luxary — latter to an aged eolored woman — iteadfaat 
antldpatioui of the miniitry—great apiritnal joye— lal- 
ler* and journal— cloiai hii alndiei in the Aoadeaj— 
Tiaita to friendi ud abundant W>or*, "i 



CHAPTCE ir. 



TempUtnni and uUb of > CaDeca lile— pant* bi ■piritoal 
eoBTttM — latUT la a fiuail; — dif of futlng— lattat, 
" Looking uito Jenii " — nfrcibinx Tiut at Lawroie*- 
liDa— Naw Year'i latter to hii parent*— cSbRi to rooM 
othoTi to dotj-Jattar to ■ brothai^^Dniliatioa and J07 
in Ood— latter to affltoted rclatiTC*— to ■ lady ^parantl; 
naar dtatb— faitbfnliiaai to an indrndgal— blaiuof on Ua 
labor* in vacation— htijjoja—callafa Itonora-^oBdaat 
ud nueeaifal labor* in raTi*al> in ConuectieDt in Taea- 
tioD-joamal and lettan, 1 1 



CHAPTER V. 



LaborainaoBnaotion with thePaitorafaCharebinNaw- 
yoik— letter of wartiiuc to a friand— (readOB fioH iaeu 
rianiim— to an Sfad colored woman— New Year'i latter 
la hi* pannta— to a CoBiin— to a Female Friend— Diary 
— to ■ Yonng Chriitian— Diary — reqneited la aid a neigk- 
borisg eIergymaii-^T|Oe*Tiiit to hi* friend*, and ipend* 
TuatioB in a reifral-iDeoe** of hi* labor*— latter to the 
Tanng Canverta— to a young l«dy— death of SwB«Hr- 
fiald— toaminiatarof theOoipel, SX 



CHAPTER VI. 



Letter to a Lady ia fMhte baobh— to a lutcr opparuitly 
Dear death— letteri to relativH— ucnted b^ B ttUow ita- 
dmt— NewYaar'alettarlaUi parent*— to an agml cUr- 
gynau— to a Christian friend and family— to n endUata 
for the miaiitr; — Diary—entlra inrreiidcr to God— ra- 
■olrei to labor for ulialioii of the itadMiti IkdiridMlly 
— U* gentieneas— letter to a brother preparing for tin 
m)BiMr7— Diarjr— fear of ein— lore af the Bible— heaBfit 
or eroiMi— ta hb brotliar, Hi offlaer ia the cboreh— date 
of his college conrae, X 



CHAFTEa VU. 



Wanltif bMOU-JtHD* the Theok^JMl enrimi<r-to afk- 
milr at nintatiw-te s Clwgjiaan who hvd bid M Ike 
long*— la hit lODtbei— Mnn ia f sTiTali of T » llg i»« M 
CoBMMtieM— eODnrhon of hii&iBadL.P.— Itbenkin- 
Ivion* fnectiogt— Bible 



wKk afriend in view of hi* iltoa*e-tB« bl 
imU Maid-Nnr Vcar'i latUn, 



CHAPTER VIU. 



fofixe ta Chulaitoii, 8. C^'aarnici ut the 8oath-Ut- 
tcn rctpacting hii health— Dirine eoniolBlIoBr-Tcnini 
lo New-York and Middle Hkddam— lieeaied to pnacb 
(he Goipel— lalteri to frieadf— DI1U7— embirki (br 
Prince Edward, Va.— lettari to friend*— (radnal dedinc 
—death— letter! deicTibini; the cloiing iMane— letter* 
rM«iT*d by the Conpller*— CoBelnriop, 3( 



...Google 



:., Google 



MEMOIR. 



Eartf Liji, till coatmauing SluJt/. 

Jaue3 Brainerd Tatlor, sod of Col. Jeremiah 
Taylor, of Mi (Idle-Had dam, Connecticut, was bom od 
ihe 15tb of April, 1801. His parents were in the coni- 
iniinioa of the Proteslaot Episcopal Church, and 
greatly respected ia the circle of their acquaintance. 
On the mother's aide, he was conaected with the family 
of Brainerd, a name to l>e held in remembrance as long 
as the devoted zeal of the self-denying missionary 
shall be had in honor. On the father's side, an old 
record traces up the lineage to a branch of the family 
of Jeremy Taylor. But, while no wise man erer on- 
derralued the benefits of being born of worthy parents, 
no one of right spirit over relied on this providential 
circumstance to bear him on through life. Our cha- 
racter depends on ourselves. So thought James B. 
Taylor. And while he honored and revered his pa- 
rents with the truest filial aflcclion, he went forth with 
the spirit of genuine independence to make his own 
way in the world. 

Of his very early youth, the affection of friends has 
preserved many recollections of deep interest. He was 
particularly distinguished by an afleclionate vivacity, 
which greatly endeared him to his relatives, and made 
him a general favorite in (lie circle in which he moved. 



10 UEMOIR OP 

The Grsi deep religious iinpressioas on his min<l 
were made by an elder brother, who, while oa a risit 
to his father, took occasion, after family worship, to 
make some observatioDs oa a portion of Scripture, and 
10 apply them to the state of those around him who 
were out o( Christ. He was aEecIed even to tears; 
and, for the first time in his life, went on his knees in 
secret prayer. The feelings, however, which had 
been thus awakened, were almost entirely suppressed, 
in a way not at alt unusual. James had been exceed- 
ingly devoted to the gayeties of life, anil was particu- 
larly fond of dancing. Just about ibis time he was 
prevailed on by some young companions to go to a 
party formed for this purpose in the neighborbood. 
The result was the loss of his seriousness, and the 
commission of sins of which be never before bad 
been guilty. No one ever resists the Holy Spirit, and 
suppresses the convictions of bis own heart, without 
a great increase of sinfulness. 

In this state of mind he was placed as a clerk in the 
store of a merchant in New-York. Two brothers, 
both older than himself, watched over him with all 
the solicitude of fraternal affection ; and thus he was 
preserved from the paths of that destroyer which 
lurks in all our large cities, and takes in her snares SO 
many of our most hopeful young men. 

James attended the ministry of the Rev. Dr. John 
B. Romeyn, pastor of the church then in Cedar-street, 
New-York ; and there, at the age of fifteen, publicljt 
professed his faith in Christ, and joined in commemo- 
rating his dying love. 

Nothing in the history of his religious experience, 
at this time, shows it to have been very remarkable 



UMBS BIUUEBD 

It appears, however, ihat as soon as he felt the CraQS* 
forming power of religious truth, he mauifesled a de- 
cided disposition to active benevolence, and r«adily 
engaged in euch labors of love as a yonng mm in bis 
sitnation could perform. His letters also show a great 
concern for his younger brothers and sisters at home. 
Writing to a sister in the year 1815, be says : " Tell 
■lie dear little brothers and sisters the state of their 
hearts ; give them all the instruction you can as to 
their future welfnre ; and O may the Lord draw them by 
the cords of his everlasting love, and let his Spirit and 
blessing rest on them." In amjlhei letter written to the 
same relative, he gives this solemn eihoriation : " M — , 
as you are the oldest child of our dear parents, notv at 
home, do instruct our dear little brothers and sisters, 
and urge them to seek the salvation of their souls — ■ 
for it is your duty." 

It appears, indeed, that afterwards be had a very low 
opinion of his religious attainments at this time. Yet 
his correspoudence was almost entirely on the subject 
of religion, frequently indicating a deep sense of obli- 
gation ; and, though be was obliged during the whole 
week to perform the laborious services of a merchant's 
clerk in a place of great coinmerclal activity, he en- 
gaged with great alacrity as a teacher in the Sabbath 
school ; and his letters breathe a dsep solicitude in be- 
half of the children committed to his care. 

The compiler of this HllJe work gladly takes this 
opportunity of recording the very valuable services ren- 
dered to the community by many young men tn simi- 
lu situations. And they deserve the higher approba- 
tion on account of the peculiarly disadvantageous cir- 
cumstances in which they are placed. Little do pa- 



13 H£Stom OF 

TBDts think to what danger ihey expose iheir sona 
when they send them to a merchant's coud ling-house 
in a latge city. Removed from all the sacred inBuencea 
ofdomestic life, and surrounded by ten thousand temp- 
tations, .they usually have no society but that of lada 
in their own situation. With but liltle previo<is edu- 
cation, and of course few menial resources, it is Dot 
so much wondered at, as deplored, that when ihe buei- 
ness of the day is over, ihey should seek relaxation 
and amusement in those places near which thedeatioy- 
er is always lurking; and that often, before their time 
of service is expired, they should have acquired habits 
of dissipation, and a love of pleasu^, too strong ibr 
their principles of honor and morality. Nor is it sur- 
prising that, in many cases, the interests of the em- 
ployer should greatly aufTer from the profligatenesa of 

Surely the vaJue of religion cannot be loo highly 
appreciated, when it is sufficient to preserve the young, 
amidst all other temptations, from debasing pleasures 
and extravagant amusements. Of Ihe strength of this 
principle of action there is very slrong evidence af- 
forded by tlie Sabbath schools of our cities- While 
thousands, on the Lord's day, are pourii^ out through 
every avenue, under the pretence that their health re- 
quires a ride or a walk into the country ; and while 'every 
tavern and tipling shop in the vicinity is swarming with 
numbers, high in revelry and rioi, there are hundreds 
of young people, of both sexes, who need amueemeirt 
and relaxation as much as any ocliers, and who sc«k 
and find it in the delightful exercise of a most beneS' 
ctal charity. They meet the children of the poor; they 
even go among the outcasts of aociety, and take up 



13 

the neglected, and speak wcinls of kindaeag to Ibem, 
aad teach them to read ibe precepts of the purest mo- 
rality, aad cause them to hear the lessoos of heavenly 
wisdom. Thus, with every right feeling of the human 
heart greatly strengthened and refreshed by the con- 
buiousDeas of voluntary efforts la do good, they re- 
retnra to the labors of the week, more happy iu them- 
nelves, and more deserving of the confidence of others 
than ever. If the gratitude of the community has nu 
civic crown to reward such services, there is One, who 
will hereafter bestow the meed of approbation, when 
lie shall say, " Well done, good and faithful servants, 
enter into the joy of your Lord." 

In employments of this beneficial character James 
B. Taylor loot great delight ; and the peculiar kind- 
'less of his disposition induced him to engage in teach- 
ing the people of color, of whom there are very consi- 
derable numbers in New-York, and wlio have been 
tTeatly neglected in all the elTons to do good which 
had preceded the establishment of Sabbath schools. 
■' I am engaged," said he, in a letter to one of his 
sisters, dated April 5, 1818, " in a SunJay school — a 
pleasing task indeed 1 I have in my class eight, be- 
tween the ages of 19 and 40. Some of them leain, du- 
ring the week, to recite, on Sunday, one, two and three 
chapters in the Bible. We have in our school about 
sereDty regular attendants, between 16 and 72 years 
of aee. O bow that race has been neglected ! Bui 
I trust that the time has come for them to know more 
of their Creator. There have been many converts, and 
soine, both teachers and scholars, have connected 
Iheritselves with the church, who ascribe their convic- 
tioiis to the influence of Sunday schools. We.expeut 

2 J. B. Taj-lof.- 



14 HEUain or 

ft great day al ihe anniversary. We shall probably 
meet in the Park, wiih all the children, about Bve 
thousand. These children, or most of them, were 
once, I may say, vagabonds, wandering about the 
streets, and committing the worst of crimes." Such 
were (he first openings of a christian character, whicL 
afterwards rose to great eminence, and shone out 
with exceeding lustre. In the present day, opportunities 
of doing good are so broughl home to every individual, 
that if any one is contented with the determination to 
go to heaven by himself, and let others alone, he pro- 
bably needs no other evidence to prove that he is not a 
Christian al all. 

In letters to his friends, James B. Taylor, by sta- 
ling facts showing the great usefulness of Sabbath 
schools, and by earnest exhortations, urged (hem to 
set up similar institutions in (heir neighborhoods. In 
every way he endeavored, when a youth of only six- 
teen, to be the cause of good to others. 

'When ^oung men are sent from the country to a large 
city, and become engaged in its business and pleasures, 
they generally are.iceaned from home ; and its simple 
pleasures are regarded with contempt. This is one of 
the truest signs of corruption ; and is an omen too sure, 
of the ruin which is soon to follow. If religion is not 
the only, ii is certainly the best preservative from evils 
of this kind. Under its influence, James B. Taylor 
maintained all the simplicity of his character, and re- 
tained all his love of home, his'filial and fraternal af- 
fection, in futl vigor. Under date of Nov. 15, 181S, he . 

" It would give me great pieasure to receive a letter 
from my kind mother. I can never repay your good- 



Lo«. 15 

ness to mem my younger days. ButIhop«(hat Hewho 
aloae can gire happiness, wilt refrard you a hnndred 
fold. I never can, and I never would erase from my 
memory the bind admonitions whieh 1 here received 
from your lip's. 1 never can sufficiently thank the Lord 
that my parents have been so good to me. And it is 
impossible for me to express liow much I love and m-< 
teem you. For this also 1 desire to be thankful. I es- 
teem it a great blessing." 

In many other letters addressed to his parents, simi- 
lar sentiments are expressed in similar language. And 
the same strong natural affection was ever shown to- 
wards bis brothers and sisters. But religion is the 
great subject of every letter; and the most intense de- 
sire that the whole family might become disciples of 
Jesus Christ, and partalcers of his salvation, is mani- 
fested in every page. 

Jn his correspondence, as carried on from year lo 
year, there are clear indications of a growth of reli- 
gious feeling, and increased coosislency of religious 
character ; giving promise that one so devoted in early 
life would be employed by the Head of the church in 
some remarkable way for the advancement of bis cause. 

He was now pleasantly situated as a merchant's 
clerk, with a kind-hearted, pious man, whom he great- 
ly loved. His prospects were entirely favorable. But 
before the close of 1S19, he determined to abandon his 
pursuits, renounce bis hopes of becoming rich, and de- 
rote himself to the ministry of the Gospel. The pro- 
vidence of God was plainly in this whole affair. 

A physician in New -York, in full practice, and with 
n rising reputation, had determined to " leave all," and 



16 MEUOIR OP 

go with his family as a missicDaiy to the East lodiM. 
His departure from the city excited great iaterMl. 
James was engaged in bis ordinary business, ivhen a 
young christian friend, on passing his door, called, 
^nd asbeil hini to accompany him to the wherf, " to 
see Dr. Scudder off." The invitation was readily ac- 
cepted. The scene and ihc eflect produced may be 
luld in his own words : 

"Nev>.Yi>r&,May^i, 1819. 
" This morning I witnessed a scene highly interesi- 
ing to the heart of a Chnsiisn. It caused ihanksgic- 
ing and praise to rise from my heart, and tears to flow 
from my eyes. I saw a missionary and his wife take 
^ their departure from this port for India, to declare 
among the heathen the unsearchable riches of Christ. 
How pleasing is it to see the Lord, from time to time, 
raising up one and another to mate known hie truth 
to tbe children of men, and sending them to those wht 
hsTe nerer heard the To^ce of nietcy, have never been 
tnld of a Savior from sin, nor of a way of escape from 
the wrath to come. Let us rejoice in what be has 
done, is doing now, and has promised to do in time to 
come, for bis church. On looking back thirty years, 
there were do Bible, no Missionary, do Tract Socie>ie«, 
nor Sabbath Schools. Bnt now, we see them ^11, 
and hear of their happy results. We also see socie- 
ties for the education of pious youth for the miikislry, 
who, I trust, will prove a blessing to millions yet un- 
born. Christians, at this time, seem to be exerting 
tbemselres for the cause of Zion ; and while one min- 
ister is going among foreign pagans, another is taking 
his station among the Indians. 



JAHC8 BRAtNGHD TATLOa. IT 

"This, 1 think, is not 'a day of snutll thiogi.' Yet 
much remaina to be done. And all the followerB of 
Christ ought to be mote concerned and eogaged foT « 
' world which lieth in wickedness.' We must also 
be more careful about our own growth in grace, and 
advancement in the divine life. For it would be a 
poor cbaiiEy ta_ neglect our own calralion in securing . 
that of others. ' 

" The missionary who has just left us, was former- 
ly a physician in this city. This circumstance will be 
of great adrantage, for he will be able lo administer 
to the diseases of the body as well as the mind. It 
may be said of him and his wife, that they have left 
all, and followed their Savior. They cDunced not the 
blessings of home, and friends, or even their own lives, 
dear unto themselves, that they might ' win Christ,'.- 
and win others lo him. 

" I bad the pleasure of being introduced to Dr. and 
Mrs- Scudder. He appeared cheerful ; Mrs. Scudder 
was bathed in tears, but yet rejoicing. They were sur- 
rounded by many acquaintances and friends ; and we 
can with difficulty imagine iheir feelings when, just 
about to leave home, and country, and all the blessings 
of Christian society, they heard one and another say, 
' my friend, my sister, farewell, for ever !' Just as the 
steamboat was moving off, one of the Doctor's friends, 
-who came too late to go on board, called out and bade 
him adieu, wishing him a pleasant passage. I shall 
nerer forget Dr. Scudder's looks, or his words. As he 
spoke, bis eye kindled, and his cheek glowed with the 
ardor of christian benevolence. He waved his hand, 
and with a benignant smile on his countenaDce, said, 
'Only give me your prayers, and that is all I ask.' 



MEHOIB OF 



" I hare fell, since ibis morning, as .though 1 would 
be willing to forsake my ever-dear father and mother, 
brothers and sisters, and country, for my Savior's sake 
and the Gospel's. I have also thought, perhaps my pre- 
sent busioess is not to be my future employ. Yes, the 
Lord may have in reserve for me, unworthy as I am, a 
situation far different from my present one. May I 
ever be led in the path of duty, this has been my pray- 
er this day : and I have, more than at any former time, 
felt the importance of crying, 'Lord, make mc to know 
my duty, snd give me a heart to perform it.' Yes, ray 
Lord does know all my desires, and bears all my 
sighs." 

Again he writes ; 

" On teeing Dr. Scuddei uke his last leave of bis 
friends, and of the people on shore, with a true mis- 
sionary spirit, I felt a tenderness towards the poor 
heathen, to whom he was going', which caused my 
eyes to overflow. I thought that I would be willing 
to change my situation for his. On returning home, 
I felt thit I could not attend to business. My de- 
sire was to spettd that day with the Lord. I retired 
for piayer, and found the exercise sweet. My mind 
was impressed with the necessity for more ministen 
of the Gotpel ; and many reasons presented them* 



JAMBa IBAINEKD TAYLOR. 



The desire, which waa thus awakened, grew in 
strength. But no haaty resolutioa was taken. He con- 
sulted witli those in whose judgment he confided ; and 
with (hat warm filial affection and reverence which 
characterized him, asked counsel of his parent* : 

"JVra-yort, JWiy, 1819. 
"Will it not give you pleasure to hear of my deaiT' 
ing to enter on a course of study for the ministry of 
reconciliation ? Yes, my dear father, I have been led, 
within the course of a few weeks past, to think serious- 
ly on this subject. When I turn my eyes to the ezlen- 
sire Gelds which are presented to my view, they seem 
to he 'while unto the harvest.' The language of Scrip- 
lure is surely applicable to the present time, — ' The 
harvest truly is great, hut the laborers are few.' The 
calls of Providence are loud to young men to de- 
vote themselves to the ministry. And to whom can 
the Church look but to her sons for this service 7 The 
population of this country is growing very rapidly, and 
the proportion of its increase is much beyond that of 
the faithful ministers of the Gospel. The call of das- 
tttnie churches in different parts of our country is, 
'Come over and help na.' The voice of the Indians 
on our borders is, ' Come and make known to us the 
Savior, that we perish not.' The superstition and idol- 
atry of the heathen, beyond the seas, urge us to go 
aod preach the Qoapel, and proclaim to them the glad 
tidings of salvatioit. When we think of the Hindoos, 
who offer their own cbildrea in sacrifice to appeas* 
thsir offended goda; whose worship is a worse than 



uselesB superstitioD ; who, oa going down to the 
grav«, have no Sarior od whom to repose, and no hope 
of awaking ttt a happier life lo come, — how can w« 
help feeling for Ihem ! Surely every benevolent heart 
longs for their salvaiion. The heathen ara promised 
to Christ for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts 
of the earth for his possession. To whom can they 
look but to us who are Christians? And dnes not 
God require us lo be co-workera with him in the exe- 
cution of his grand designs ? Means always bavo been, 
and probably always wilt be used by the Lord, for 
evangelizing the nations. There is a want of faith- 
ful ministers throughout the world. 

" Now, when I reflect on the goodness and mercy 
of the Lord towards our family, in bringing; the chil- 
dren, as they grow up, to be acquainted with bis ways, 
and to become his professed followers, it seems to me 
as though some ot the number-were called to devote 
themselves to him in the work of the mioistry. We 
have been brought to profess his name at an early age. 
May God make known lo us the path of duty, and 
give tiB h heart to walk iherein. 

" He who enters on this great work ought to weigh 
the matter well, knowing that many go without being' 
called. In leaving my preseni business to engage in 
the mbistry, I do not enpect more ease or worldly 
comfort. Far from it! The life of a minister, who is 
faithful lo his Master, to himself, and to those around 
him, is not only laborious, but full of trials. Yet, do- 
ing good to the souls of men, and glorifying God, is 
more than double compensation for all the hardships 
and crosses which the devoted servant of Christ is 
subjected to. Very erroneous views are enlertained 



JAMES BIUINERD TAYLOB. SI 

by many reapectins the lire of a minisler. It hns b«ea 
supposed thai il is easy. Bui Che most arduous labora 
of a clergymau are not visible (o the world. They 
are performed in bis study. Lei people follow him to 
thai place, and a^e him praying, readint;, eTamining, 
coroposJDg — they will then have very different thoughts. 
But only they wh^o have entered on this course know 
alt the bitter and the sweet connected with it. The 
respoDsibiiiiy which presses on (lie mind of a truly 
conscientious minisler is probably more trying tfaaa 
any other species of care and anxiety. Self-deniat is 
also necessary in a minister, as indeed it is in all 
Christians. It is the very foundation of all active re- 
ligion. Without it nothing can be done to purpose in 
the greal work of reforming the world — this world that 
li«th in sin. 

"Do you ask me whether I am willing lo leave my 
present business 7 It Would indeed be a cross to leav4 
Mr. H — — , for he isone of the best of men. Some may 
think, if they do not say, that I am a fool for wishing to 
give up my present em ploy men t,whjch bids fair to make 
me rich, and which is far more honorable in ihe sight 
of the world. To this lean reply, and Ido think from 
the heart, that I am willing to give up my present si- 
tnatioD, with all its prospects, for one in which 1 think 
that I can be more useful. As far the riches of this 
world, T do not expect to find happiness in them ; and the 
more I think on the condition of tlie ' christian poor, 
who do not want,' the more I am convinced that tiiey 
enjoy higher happiness than those who share largely 
in the good things of the present life. The cottages 
of humble Ghrislians are more honorable than the pa- 
laces of the rich, where there is no fear nor lbv« of 



S3 MEMOIR OP 

God The language of my heart is, Lord, wbaterei 
may be denied lo me— health, friends, and comforts of 
this life— let roe never be denied the light of thy coun- 
tenance, and thy loving kindness. 

'- The number of ministers necessary adequately to 
supply the United States, is estimated at mora than 
11,000. There is thought to be at present less than 
one-fourth of that number. What is 'wanting to en- 
courage one to engage in this all- interesting service 1 
Why should not the call for more laborers be heard 
by me 7 Surely, If 1 have been called from ' darkness 
lo light,' it should be my chief aim and desire to point 
out the way of BaIva.iion to olhers. 

" But sometimes my heart shrinks when I think of 
entering on this service. 1 have so much logo through 
before I can appear in the pulpit; and then to come 
before the world — I am terrified by the anticipation. 

''I have now slated my feelings, and submit the 
same for your consideration. I hope that ihey may 
meet your views, and receive your approbation. 1 
doubt not that tbey will. My desire is to leave all, 
and become an ambassador for Christ. Of the dif- 
ficulties in my way, ihe most prominent at present ■■ 
the want of funds. I wish you to inform me whether 
you feel able and witling to support me through my 
course of study. 

" Should I enter on the work of the ministry, there 
are these promises to comfort and sustain me. Luke, 
12 : 43, ' Who is that faithful and wise servant, whom 
his Lord shall make ruler over bis household, to givr 
them their meat in due season T Ver. 43, ' Blessed is 
that servant, whom his Lord, when he cometh, shall 
find BO doing.' Matt. 26 : 20, 'Teaching them to ub- 



LOH. S3 

Bene all things whatsoever I have commanded yoii; 
and lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of 
the world.' Dan. Vi i 3, ' And [hey that be wifie shall 
^hine a.a the brightness of the firmament; and they 
that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for erer 
and ever. Luke, 21 : 13, ' I will give you a mouth and 
trisdom which all your adversaries shall not be ahle 
logainsay or resist.' 

"1 can say no more at present. My heart is open 
before the Lord, and I wait the direction of his provi- 
dence. Please to give me an early reply, and slate your 
views on the subject. There can be no objection on 
account of my age. Of my natural talents I wish yon 
to be judge. 

"Your affectionate son, James." 

Al^er receiving an answer to this letter, he conti- 
nued for some time in the employment of Mr. H , 

faithfully dischai^ing his duty as a clerk, and endea- 
voring in his place to do good. 

During the summer of 1819,New-York was Tisited 
with the yellow fever. It was a time of great alarm. 
Bat this served only to show the strength and steadi- 
ness of his religions principles. While engaged in 
doty, he appeared to have no fears or anxieties for 
himself. To hia parents he writes thus : 

" New- York, SepUnliiT 10, 1819. 
" Probably you have by this time heard of the yel- 
low fever in New-York, and given yourselves some 
anxiety about your children here. The fever has not 
yet spread much, and it is remote from us. At present 
there i^ not much occasion to be alarmed. 



94 HEUOIR OP 

. " Yon htre this one tbiog, my dear pareats, to com- 
fort you. Your cbildreo here hare an inteiest in the Sa< 
▼ioT, at whose command are all the diseases to which 
we are subject. They cqd proceed as far as he willSf 
and no farther. How cun we be thankful enough to 
him, who has called us to the knowledge of the truth ! 
As the Lord has sustaioed us in times past, lei us tnisi 
him for that which is to come. This seems to be my 
ItDgnage : — ' Lord, I wotild trust thee : I desire to be 
willing to submit to the ordering of' Ifay proTideoce, 
whether it send sickness or health, life or death ; for I 
know that all things shall work tt^ether for my good." 

Through the agency of his beloved pastor, the way 
was soon opened for him to enter on studies prepara' 
tory to the ministry in the academy al I^awrencefille, 
N. J., in Tiew of which he thus giTes ollerance to his 
full heart in letters to his parents and friends : 

"JVeK-Yark.yirctinberK, 1819. 
" Wy itaiiy bctond Fatlier ud Mslher, 

" I begin my letter in the langnage of the Psalmist— 
' Bless the Lord, my soul ; and all that is within me, 
bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, my sonl, snd 
foi^et not all hia benefits.* It may be truly said, that the 
ways of the Lord are not as our ways, nor his thoughtu 
BB OUT tbooghls ; and that his dealings with his chil- 
dren ate often very difiereot from their expectations. 
Thus my heavenly Father has dealt with me, his dis- 
obedient and unworthy child, in opening the way that 
I may be prepared to preach the everlasting Gospel. 
Yes, my dear parents, I hare concluded to leave roy 
prccent employment, to prepare for the minutry. This 



lAlCES BnA:NEBD TAYLOR. Si 

detcnni nation haa net tritii the approbation of tUl ray 
fiends liere, hs far as 1 have communicated it lo tbem. 
Mr. U. 01/ employer, on learniag the circumstances 
of the case, and my wishes, instead of making a single 
objection, immediately said, go! and added, that he 
shouH rejoice ii> il, if I were called to that work. He 
also lamented that, in the present great want of faith- 
ful laborers in the vineyard of the Lord, so few young 
men were inclined to devote themselves to the service 
of Christ in the church. Was not this favorable 1 My 
brother, (to whom I am under many obligations, and 
(vhom I iovc both as a hrolher in the flesh and in the 
liord,) on hearing my statements, said that he saw no 
objections to my going, and that as lo what I owed, it 
should ruse no difficulty, for he woald take care of 
that. 

"In view of these ciicum stances, I am constrained 
to adore and praise a gracious Providence, and to as^ 
irbat is there now to hinder my going forward? lean 
see nothing. I do not desire the office on account of 
worldly praise or honor, but, as 1 hope, for the glory 
of God, connected with the sHlvation of my fellow- 
men. 

" My heart at times rejoices in the prospect of being 
Useful to my fellow-sinners, and at times it shrinks 
back from the many difficulties which rise lo my view. 
The life of a faithful minister (and such may I be, if 
admitted to the office) appears to me to be more glo- 
rious than any other. He is prompted by true benevo- 
lence ; he labors not to destroy men's souls, but to save 
Ihem. He is engaged in a cause which must prosper, 
for Christ is the head. He shall receive a reward ac- 
cudiDg to Christ's proimse. 

, 3 J.B.Tvli'- 



'" Tbe land ia greatly deatUute of devoted and able 
minislera. The haivesl truly U gfeat, and ihe laborera 
itre few. My heart is turned towards this work ; and 
one proof of my being called to it, as it seems lo me, 
is thai I hare lost thai relish for my business which I 
once had, and am willing to be poor, if I only may be 
useful in my Master's cause. In entering on my course 
I bare nothing to fear but the commission of sin ; but 
erery thing to encourage me. The men of this world, 
after having accomplished their plans, are often at « 
loss to what tbey shall turn neit, and are unhappy for 
want of something in which to employ theinselvea 
with interest. But it is not so with the devoted ser- 
vant of Christ. The world is the field of bis labors. 
He always has enough to do, and is assured that his 
labor shall not be in rain. It will be sweet and animat- 
ing in bis last hoars to refiect that he has lived to some 
good purpose i that he has served the Lord by serriog 
others. And if he can know that he has been instru- 
mental in turning sinners from the error of their ways, 
and saving souls from death, it will be matter of ever- 
lasting thankfulness and praise. May this jrj, raj 
dear patents, be mine, to the glory of divine grace! 

" Id reflecting on this subject, 1 am led to ask, Can, 
OAN it be, that the Lord will raise me up to be one of 
his servants in the mioistry— me .' who am so igno- 
rant, so helpless, so needy 1 But while 1 am ignorant, 
helpless, needy, I know that my Lord is wise, power- 
ful, and possesseth -all things. Him I love — him I 
v;ould serve'and obey. 

" I shall probably take my departure from New-Tork 
for Lawrence rill e, nearPrincetoii,New-Jersey. Then 
I expect to spend two years in acidemical studies. Af- 



lAHES BRAINGRD TIYLOR. 27 

tet wLich I shall spend three years in some college; 
whence I shall repair 14 a theological seminary, and 
stud]' probably three years more. The lime acem* 
long : but this is the prescribed course. 

"Now, taking things ai they appear, does not the 
language of ProTidence seem to say, ao 1 In doing 
this, I would be mindful that I must deny all angod- 
liness, and every worldly lust, and live soberly, righ- 
teously, and godly. In pursuing this course, I must be 
holf in heart and in lire. Humility becomes ibe fol- 
lowers of Jesus — I must possess much of this grace. 
As a minister of Christ, 1 must be willing lo forsake 
all, and follow bim. I know lha.t there are many and 
awful responsibilities connected with this office ; such 
as do not reat on other Christians. The Lord knows 
this too, and imparts grace sutlicient for tbem. But 
he who, whether minister or private Christian, has 
the glory of God singly in view, need not fear the 
world, thejleth, nor the devil, for he shall be brought 
off more iban conqueror. ' They who put their trast 
in him shall never be confounded.* 

" Trusting in the Lord for strength, and confiding in 
him alone for help, I will go forward, hoping that I 
shall be made a workman that need never be ashamed ; 
H faithful soldier of the cross, having always the glory 
of God a.id the good of my fellow-men at beart. 

" My dear parents, 1 now see that the world has bad 
too mnch of my time. The remainder, I trust, will be 
spent more in the service of my blessed Lord. And 
may you find increasing delight in ' serving without 
ceasing.' Our stay here is short. The time is not far 
distant when death will enter our faqiily. And shall il 
be my father, my dear father, or my dear mother, a be- 



loved brplhei or sisier, who shall /r(f becoosi^edlo 
the lomb 1 My father, mother, brothers and sistetn, 
all be prepared ^ being washed, being sanctified, bA- 
iDg justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the 
Spiritofoui God. 

" Your affectionate son, 

Under a subsequeDt date, he writes: 

" The time necessary forme to go through the course 
marked out, ia eight years. I hope that in (he discharge 
of my duty during this period I may be usefitl, 

" The Lord has laid me under great obligaiiuus to 
be thankful, by singling me out from the rest of the 
dear family for this service. And I hope that you, my 
beloved father and mother, cease not to ihank and 
praise him, that he has condescended tn confer this 
honor on me. Should I be found a faithful minister of 
the Gospel, and you, with me, be admitted into the 
upper sanctuary, this one thing will no doubt be a 
theme on which we shall dwell with everlasting plea- 



To his sister, in a letter of the same date, he thus 
expresses his views of the solemnity of the work m 
which he was about to engage : 

" This age seems to require that a minister should 
be thoroughly furnished for bis work. They who have 
the greatest store of knowledge, connected with true 
piety, have the best opportunities of doing good. But 
while I set so great a value on a good education, I 
would not be understood to say that education is a 



JUtCS BRAIMERD TATLOK. 20 

maiter of the highest importsDce. Pure and uDdeflled 
religion is the chief thing in the characlet of a minis- 
ter of the Gospel. Without it he caoDot be useful. 
He who does noi possess love to God ; who has nerer 
been ' born of water and the Spirit ;' who does not 
feel the worth of immortal soals, and who does not 
preach as a dying and accountable man to perishing 
and accountable beingg, is not worthy of the name ol 
a minister of Jesus Christ. Feeling the awful respon- 
sibility which is to rest on me should I enter this of- 
dce, as I hope in due time to do, 1 am ready to say, 
'Who is sufficient for these things?' The Lord alone 
cut be my helper. Having him as ' my rock of de* 
fence,' I need fear nothing. I hope that the language 
of my heart is, 'none hut Christ;' and that the ten or 
of my life will be in conformity to it. My dear sister, 
the Lord has been kind to us in days that are past. 
He has given ua reason and made us capableof enjoy- 
ing him. He has brought us in early life to seek 
him, that we may ' be found in him :' let us then de- 
vote the remainder of life to his service. Let us not 
be content with barely getting to heaven ourselves; 
but in seeking our own salvation, let ns also seek 
that of others. 1 have often thought that, should my 
life be spared to enter the ministry, and should the 
blessing uf my Master enable me to do some tittle 
good in the world, the teSection would be sweet and 
cheering in a dying hour. And in the eternal world, 
bow delightful must it be to find souls in the enjoy- 
ment of everlasting test, who have been brought there 
throngh our instrumentality ! Let us set out then with 
renewed diligence, and endeavor to do something fot 
the glory of our Redeemer and the salvation of sinners-' 



30 »EMOia or 

To another frieoil he urges ihe followiDg requeil: 

"As I have it now in prospect 10 enter (hetniDistrf 
lei me solicit au inlerest in your prayers. Pray that 
I may, indeed, be willing to forsake all, and follow 
Christ ; that I may be meek and lowly ; a workman 
thai need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of 
truth, and giving to every one a portion in due season ; 
that I may, as ' before God and the Lord Jeaus Christ, 
who shall judge the quick and dead ai his appearing 
and his kingdom, preach Ihe word ; be instant ia sea* 
son and out of season ; reprove, rebuke, exhort, with 
all long suQering and doctrine ;' that I may be blame- 
less, nol a novice lifted op with pride ; that 1 may hold 
the mystery of faith in a pure conscience, and be holy 
in heart and in life, a child of God, without rebuke.'* 

To a young friend, wlio had entered on a prepara- 
tory course of study a little time before him, he un- 
folds himself with much freedom. 

" You having entered on your studies for the raima- 
Iry, and 1 having the same thing in prospect, tne ought 
to nnite in grateful acknowledgments to the Lord, that 
he has given ua a desire for this service. We are told 
by an inspired apostle, that ' he who desirelh the office 
of a bishop, desireth a good work.' On asking myself 
what reason I have to believe that the Lord has called 
me to preach the Gospel, I reply : My desire has con- 
.tinued for a considerable time, and has been strong. 
,My wish is to glorify God, and be useful to my fellow- 
men. Providence has, in a clear manner, opened tha 
way for me. Far be it from me to take this holy offics 



JUIEe BRAIKEHD TATLOB. 31 

on myself, unless I am ' called of God, as was Aaron.' 
But the time seems to have arrived, when I ought to 
go and prepare for preaching the Gospel. During my 
preparation, and through life, I expect to meet with 
trials. Those of a minister are, oflen, of no ordinary 
kind. But as are his trials, so will be his joys, if in- 
deed he has pure and uadefiled religion. This is, above 
all things, necessary. And as ' God resistelh ibe proud, 
hut giveth grace to the humble,' how important is it 
that ire should cullirate humility. ' He that exalteth 
himself shall be abased, but he that humblelh himself 
shall be esalled' — exalted to fellowship with ihe Fa- 
ther and his Son Jesus Christ ; and in being made a fit 
temple for the indwelling of the Holy Spirit In pros- 
pect of this, I have felt willing to be poor. If I can 
only be useful, it will be enough for me. But self- 
denial is indispensable for a minister : may I be will- 
ing to deny myself, and tahe up my cross ! 

" I feel desirous to go to my work, and to be about 
my Master's business. But I must he detained here a 
while longer. When I am awake, my mind is at all 
ttmes on this subject. My relish f6r business ts gone, 
and I shall not feel that I am in the right place, until 
lamafmy studies. When that lime shall come, I hope 
that I may so improTe in virtue and kaowledge, that 
I shall glorify God, and meet the ezpectii'.ions of my 
friends. 

" My Christian lirother, permit me to request that 
yon communicate with me as you may find time ; and 
as you are older in religion than I am, I shall look to 
you to give me such advice as may aid my growth in 
pace. As we have a common Lord, are aiming at the 
lame bearen, amidst the same difficultiM and dangers, 



32 KEUOiK or 

let us beu e>ab other on ibe heart, when we go tu a 
ihioue of grace." 

Id another letter to the same friend, be speaks of the 
long time to be employed in preporHiion for the minis- 
try ; and expresses the hope that he might be useful 
while prosecuting his studies. To ibis be adds a sen* 
timeot of very great value to all who are preparing for 
the ministry. It seems that he bad expected, on entei- 
ing hia course, that he should enjoy tlie fullest oppor- 
tunities of reading the Bible, meditation, and prayer in 
secret. But better information convinced him that so 
many hours would be occupied every day in literary 
and scientific pursuits, that very little time would re- 
main for those delightful employments. He therefore 
lesolced to caTry religion as fully as possible into hia 
studies; and daily engage in tbem, with the thought 
thai thus he might be rendered useful in the vineyard 
□f the Lord. 

His purposes and resolutions in relation to those 
who might be his fellow-students, also show the true 
spirit of christian prudence and benevolence. To the 
same friend he writes after this manner : — '^1 hope 
that those with whom we shall associate, will be of 
the right cast ; and that we shall be very cautious with 
whom we form intimate connections. But let ns, by 
the meekness of our temper and the kindness of our 
deportment, by devotedneas to the esitse of our Re- 
deemer, and the earnestness of our wishes lo promoM 
the real happiness of thc^ around us, interest them in 
us and gain their affections. Let the saying of Paul 
be OUT motto, ' Follow peace with all men, and hoU- 
«ie*«, without which no man shall gee the Lord.' " 



MMSa BBUNEBD TAYLOB. 33 

Shortly after the date of this letter, be joined the 
academy at LawreaceTille, under charge of the Rev. 
Isaac V. Brown, and began bis preparatory studies. 
Tbe reader cannot but- have remarked the earnestness 
of his desire to enter tbe ministry ; tbeslDglenesHof his 
motives in desiring tbe sacred office j and the grateful 
.joy manifested, v/hea ProTidence rendered plain the 
way for bim to begin his studies. With the utmos^I ala- 
crity he left an emplayment which promised weallli, 
and all Ihe consideration in the world which wealth in- 
sures, and devoted himselfto the service of Ihe church, 
with the eipeclslion of being poor and laboriug hard 
during his whole life. In all this, however, there was 
none of the rashness of a young enthuitiast, but tbe 
deliberate self denial of a true Cbristian. He adopted 
no plan, he took no step without first consulting hia 
parents and most judicious friends, and obtaining their 
approbation. 

At the age of nineteen he was willing to sit down 
to a course of eight years' study, that be might be qua- 
lified for usefulness, and, in some measure at least, 
prepared to meet the awful responsibilities of the mi- 
nisterial office. These responsibilities he deeply felt- 
and while he most earnestly desired to be a preacher 
of the Gospel, he was too coDscieolious and too pru- 
dent to rush into it without that menial discipline, 
and that culture of the heart which would, in his own 
deliberate judgment, justify him in going forward as 
a teacher of others. 

He who teaches religion, has to teach persons of all 
classes — the master spirits of the nation, who expect 
Justness and force of thought, propriety of language, 
cularged and liberal views, united with "the meek- 



34 H£MO!R OF 

nets of heavenly wisdom :"— and the uniDstnieied I 
poor, who Deed that the trniU should be set forth in 
tumig so clear and familiar, that they caDDOI be mis- 
taken. The man of real learDing alone is able to per- 
form this serrice. Accustomed to investigation, he ar- 
ranges his thoughts in a natural order; habituated to 
the search after truth, he employs words with preci- 
sion ; and knowing how greatly the energy of Ian* 
guage is increased by simplicity, be uses " great plain- 
ness of speech." Whereas, the untaught end the half 
taught foolishly imagine that they are great and pro- 
found, in proportion as they are unintelligible. The 
most eloquent men whom I have ever known, such as 
Patrick Henry and John Randolph, among statesmen ; 
and James Waddell and James Turner, among preach- 
ers, were remarkable for the simplicity of their ro»n- 
ner and the perfect inlelligibleness of their language. 
They made every one, learned and rude, feel their in- 
tellectual power.* The art consists mainly in setting 
the subject so plainly and distinctly before the people, 
that every one shall think that he can see it himaeif. 
But it requires much intellectnal discipline to enable 
a public speaker to do (his. 

It deserres also to be remarked, that James Brainerd 
Taylor did not rely for evidence of a call to the minii- 

*An old iDldier of the revolution told me, that in toiat m- 
vare ancDniiler dDria; the wnr, bii eommanding officer, per- 
ceiTingthnthii niEii,thou|ih flitbtinf bravely, were overihoot- 
ivg the eoamf, ia bi) peculiar ilaDf cried nut, 'tUAthem, 
boyi! riiwtheni!" anJ at the very fint fire after tbii com- 
miuid, the advoDciiii calumn of Britiah greDadieri jvaverad 
and rselediiuid wai very loan eulirety broken. Let the MiMiot 
of the cro» Lmitate the exampl*— let bunjSre itm 



JAMES BBAtHEIlD T«TU>R. 35 

Iry on the impulses of his own mJnd, or some nnde- 
Rnable reelings, hui looked carefully ai the teadiogs of 
ProvideDce, at the waals o( the world, and at the state 
of bis oVD heart. He consulted his friends, and Rrayed 
D*er the subject. In a word, he adopted every mea- 
sure to enable bint to fonu a wise de terminal ion ; and 
as the result of the whole, west f<»wsrd under a Qrm 
coariction of duty. 



Pint laie fmri in Aeademp. 

On tbe laih of January, 1820, Mr. Taylor arrived at 
Lawrenceville, and began a course of study prepara- 
tory to his entenug college. A young man in itus silu- 
BtioD is exposed to lemptHtions which require much 
vigilance and care; otherwise his religious interests 
will suffer ; and while be is growing in knowledge, lie 
will be declining in piety. 

A new, dry, and difficult study at once occupies 
and harasses the mind. If there is an ardent thirst for 
knowledge, and any waking up of ambition and rival- 
ry, the attention is so engrossed that little opportunity 
is found for prayer and that devotional reading of the 
Scriptures which is indispensable to one's growth in 
holiness. And if religious exercises afford high enjoy- 
ment, there is great danger lest the young student 
should go from them to his daily studies with reluc- 



30 HEUOia OF 

taoce, und in process of time vilh feeling of disgust, 
h requires, then, much firniness of religious principle, 
nod great seir-waichfulness, to go ttirougb this early 
part of prepartiiion wiili no dimiDution either of tbc 
piety of Ihe student or bis desire of intellectual im- 
provement. 

Besides, a promiscuous sciiool of tn-enty or Ihiit/ 
boys, lodging in the same or neighboring buildings, 
bes a spirit generally unfavorable to religious improve- 
ment. Ttieir petty jealousies, their occasional dissa- 
tisfactions, the general levity of boys, and a thousand 
things of this kind, operate injuriously. And it hap- 
pens, sometimes at least, that a young man enters col- 
lege with less of the spirit which becomes a ministei 
of Christ, than he carried with him to the grammai 
school. 

If, then, on example can be shown of one who went 
through these dangers without injury ; and if it can be 
aliown by what means he grew in grace, while others 
m similar circumstances often decline, this part ot 
James B. Taylor's memoir may be useful to nncibers, 
in whose high-ti>oed and fervent piety the church and 
the world have a deep interest. 

His Srst letter from Lawrenceville is addressed to 

his friend C H , who was then preparing 

tor college, at Bloomfield, N. J. 

" 1 left New-York on Tuesday, and lodged in New- 
Brunswick. On the next day, at six P. M. I set out 
for Lawrenceville. After we had proceeded about 
eight miles, the horses suddenly started oS*, and before 
we had discovered that (be driver was left beh)n<l, 



JUIES BHAINEBD TAVLOR. 37 

Aiey were on Ike run. There were fdw pasaeageTs in 
tiie srKge besides myself, wlw ippeared to be much 
agitated ; nor did [ woader at it, for they were very 
iixdigious pMsoBs, aid there appeared to be no way 
of escape. { did mA know what tbe issue would be, 
bat «f this I Wias eertaio, tiiat the Judge of all the 
evtk would do rigbt, and my miod was in a great de- 
gnte etmposed. The aaddenness of the afiair caused 
■ lit^ BBziety at first. But I thought of the dlstio- 
gMJAiag mercy of ray heavenly Father, who bad been 
pleased to eaU me to trust tn hiia; and t felt that it 
was a time to set a value on the religion of Jesus, and 
4ke hope vi^cli it imparts. O that J might value it 
more I The horses r»i about two miles at full speed, 
and them tnmcd into the yard where they are accus- 
•omed lo st<^, without any in j ury to the passengers or 
Mage. I consider tke escape as entirely providenttel, 
nd feel that I am called oa ' to praise the Lord for 
hu goodsesB,' end tay, ' hitherto hatb he helped me.' 
My tituBtioa is pleasant. Religious privilege^ are bet- 
ter than I eipecied. We have family worship morn- 
ing aod evening, preaching every Sabbatli, and prayer- 
tRectings en Tuesday, Friday, and Saturday. 

"As. yet I have made very little progress in my 
Lfttia. 1 find it pretty dry, and tatfaer trying, for I go 
Wi i&on slowly liian I expected. This has troubled 
me Botnewhat; but <m it is Ihe icmy to H&efalness, I 
hope 1 shall not yield to such feelings. I think that 
■we »ay be as happy now, as at any future period of 
life, if we only use our present privileges with a rignt 
spint. Having been here but a short time, I have not 
yet adopted an ;^ particular plan for disposing of my 
itsae. I design before long to dtaw up such an one fui 
4 1.9. Tsyttr. 



39 HEHOIR OF 

my guidance. Tjeremarksofthegreatmoralisti Jflblr- 
soDi on this subject 1 think aie good. ' I believe, ssys 
he, it is best to throw life into a method, that ereir 
hour may bring its employment, and every employ' 
ment have its faonr. If every thing be kept in a eer* 
tain place, wben any thing ia worn out or conaatned, 
the vacaity -vrhich it leaves will show what is want- 
ing : BO if every part of time has its appropriate duty, 
the hour will call into remembrance its engagemenU' 
Sbould you have drawn up any seheme for the dispo> 
sal of your time, I should like, if you hare no object 
tion, to see it, as it may be useful to me. 

" During the course of otir studies, may we have 
the smiles of our heavenly Father ! The responsibi- 
lities resting on us are of no ordinary kind ; let us, 
therefore, 'be up and doing.' As we advance in life, 
I hope that we shall grow in grace, and in the know- 
ledge of OUT Lord and SaviOT Jesus Christ ; counting 
it more than our meal and drink to do the will of hliD 
who, of his mercy, hath called us into his service. Il 
seems more and more necessary thai we should be ex- 
emplary in our conduct, thai we should be 'wise as 
serpents, and harmless as doves.' Thai this may be 
the case; that we may be found faithful soldiers of the 
cross ; the ' sons of God without rebuke,' and be final- 
ly received to mansions in the skies, b the prayer of 
your sincere friend, J. B, T." 

To two of his aunts, living in Tolland, (Conn.) he 
Addressed a letter, dated January S3, 1820, m which 

oconr the following passages; 

" The school which I attend consists of twenty-fira 



tUIEt BBAINEBD TATLOB. 39 

scholmn, of whom fire, iaclnding myielf, ore prepar- 
ing for the mtnutrr : the rest are wild, giddy-beaded 
boys. I am pleasantly eitiiated ia an agreeable family, 
and have two room-males, of whom one* is a pious, 
humble Christian, and 1 think as saitable a companion 
for me as could be found. He is about three weeks 
ahead of me in parsuii of ihe same object. In the 
Bummer season this will be a beautiful spot, baring 
many pleasant walks and much line scenery. Yester- 
day morning, early, 1 walked into the fields, and found 
a refreshing time for my soul. A view of the works 
of creatioD, and the echoes of various pleasant sounds, 
broke on tbe ear and warmed my heart. As 1 looked 
on tbe surrounding objects, 1 felt that ' my Father 
made them all.' How delightful is it to be ' calm and 
serene;' how sweet to repose with confidence on a 
covenant Ood, and to cast all our care on him, who 
cateth for us 1 The soul can then look down on the 
world with a holy indifference, knowing that it is not 
the believer's home. 

" ' The older I grow, the more I feel the necessity 
of living nearer to tbe Lord.' Do yon not find it so 
irith yourselves 1 for the power of quickening grace 
to Animate as in our Christian life I 

'Cons, Holy Spirit, hearanlj dora. 
With all thy qaick'niDg powani 
Kiodle B flame of iucfhI love 
In then cold hearts of our*.' 

" Having embarked in the cause of Christ, I hope 
dial my life may be one continued act of devotedncsa 

* Ear. Mr. Onlick, liaca miiiiDnary to the Sandwieb Idand*. 



to him. Httutg pat my ha»i to tbe plough 1 "*"* ^^ 
1 shall Derei look bfiek : ntd I depend on him wh* 
ru9« up, qiraliSes, snd thrusts laborers into his vine- 
yard, for grace to strengthen me. Is looking forwarl, 
1 see that years mil pasa before I appear ift pabtic aa 

' an ambaaaador for Christ. But this does not diBco»- 
rage me. 1 am sometimes anxioat, lest, while ooon- 
]Hed with my stiidies, 1 slionid lose my eajoyment <rf 
religion. Do yon tell me ' draw nigh to At Lord, wad 

" he will draw nigh to yon V for a elosar walk wiA 
GM ; & continual Itungerlng aitd thfrsting for (he wa< 
ler of life t Since my mind has been made op t« de- 
Tote myself to the serrice of Christ in the miaieiry, I 
feel more deeply my need of an intereat tn the prayers 
of my brelhren and sisters in the Lord. 1 hope ytm 
will not think that I am placing dependence on nan. 
The prayer of the righteous, yon know, arailelh mmkA. 
As then yoB are acqaainted wttb my situation, I •am-' 
estly beg to be remembered in your payers. HsJi* 
mention of me in all your aupplicalkna. Bn^eait ow 
heaTculy Patber that I may be a pattern of piety ; that 
I may manifest the reality and excellency of tbe reli* 
gion which I profess, by walking worthy of my high 
calling in Christ Jesaa ; and that I may ncTer Mng 
reproach on that cause which I have espoused. 

" The Loid being nestx and around me, and the Ho- 
ly Spirit abiding in my heart, anworthy as I am, during 
the part of my life devoted to preparatory studies, may 
I grow in grace, and in the knowledge of my Sarior. 
It is my earnest desire that I may be prepared for my 
work, and in due time become a foithful miniatei ot 
the New Testament." 



i^Copglc 



JIMU UIMUD TAYLOR. 41 

In letters to hit parenis, written shortly after com- 
neneing his studies, he further exhibits the state of his 
miBd in regard to the great work before him. 

" f\bT)iarif 4, 18!IX 

" M7 present situation is thai which 1 have for many 
months been wishing to oecnpy. The Lord, I trust, 
,has inclined my heart to engage in [his work, and by 
a kind provideace has placed me here, that I may pre- 
pare Id preach hia Qospel. In looking around for my 
former companioDs, I find that some are dead, oibers 
are living without any concern for their souls, while a 
precious few have fled to the ark of safety, and have 
found the Lord Jesus. O, what occasion for thankful- 
ness have II My dear parents, help me to praise the 
God of my salvation : for once your son was ' dead in 
trespasses and sins,' a despiser of that which is good, 
and a lover of evil. Bless the Lord for the hope which 
we have through the 'peace-speaking blood of the 
dear Redeemer.' 



I, who am so univorthy, am now on the way, under ' 
his direction, as 1 believe ; and should life and health 
be spared, I trust the time will come when I shall pub- 
licly declare the riches of his sovereign gr«ce to my 
fellow-sinners. It is delightful to think of being made 
the instrument of bringing even one of the lost sheep 
of Christ into his fold. How sweet, in a dving hour, 
loknow that one has done aome good lo the souls of his 
fellow-men. To be engaged in the service of him who 
came to seek and save the lost, is honorable ; for he is 
' King of kings and Lord of lords.' May my sool al- 



vnft delight in (fai4 aerrice, «b1 ay lot be «sM with 
tb« foUov^ of Jmui, L«t k t» our eontinual desin 
to live near to him, who gave hinself for U, that m 
might not perish, but have everlasting life. 

"I greatly admire the character of aministeiaf the 
goqiel, ai inym by Cowper: 

• ' Simple, grs**, rincere ; 
■lUdoctrlDe bwonrapt; in Iw^Mtge pUtat 
• And plain in nuaur i deetnt, M>l«inn, cbule 
'AndDBtnriliBgaitarCi raaoh ImpiuMd 
' MimieU; u coDaeioai of iU awful ckarfa, 
•AnduiiiDiiiinunl;tbst the flock he hpdt 
' Hay feel it too : affactiBD*te in look, 
'And tender initddTMa, a) well beCDmei 
' A mMMDger a! grace ta failtf mea.' " 

la a letter to Mr. H., written about a month aAsr he 
began his course of study, after expressiog a number 
of aentimenta similar to those contained in the forego* 
ing extracts, he gives a brief account of the manner ia 
which he employed his time. This account ia closed 
with the following sentence; "The last thiag before 
retiring, every night, my companion and I commit to 
memory a portion of Scripture. What may not thia 
amount to in eight years'?" 

This little quotation is introduced chiefly for the pur- 
pose of earnestly leeommendiug such a practice to ibe 
imitation of all theologioal students. During the loi^ 
course of prepiratioa for die miuiatry, while every 
term brings with it some sew and difficult study, with 
. which the miad is much occupied, and ofXen much per- 
plexed, the Bible is too frequently treated with con- , 
pRrativa neglect. And iLOtunfrequently young preadh- 



HttE9 UUUIGUI TITLOB. 43 

«n nnnifen more tadmate tcquaiDtBDce with critical 
rales, and the argaments of polemics, than with the 
Holy Seriptures. Bat nothing can compeiuate the 
preachetfir the want of a thorough knowledge of the 
Bible. It ought to be trvasttied up in the memory, and 
made the sabject of daily meditation and prayer. Now, 
if a yoting maii will, when he enters his preparatory 
course, adopt James B. Taylor's rale, and every night, 
before retiring to rest, commit to memory a short por- 
lion of the Bible, selecting those ports which may 
make suitable subjects foe meditation and devotional 
exercise the next day, he may, by the time he enters 
the minisHy, have half the Bible by heart. And he 
may be so familiar with its contents, as (o be able, 
when performing missionary services, to prepare ser- 
mons which shall be full of pertinent scriptural ilius- 
iration and proof, without the help of a concordance. 
^ The facilities which such preparation as this wonld 
aSbrd are invaluable. But in addition to this, if the 
truth is the only instnimeni of sanctificaiion, what bet- 
ter means for growth in grace can be adopted, than this 
daily increase of s^riptuml knowledge 7 Let students 
of theology read the Bible~\e\ them Mtudy the Bible 
—let them ptay over the Bible.* 

'Ifatt Ijr a/rini.— Mr. Tsylor'i fsmiUarity witli the eou- 
ttou sf An UiU* w» obaerrabla ky tli with whom ha uw 
dated. ftwuaninuruliagtTaitiiihlt hibitiaf tMercoBTM 
«ith fiiandi, tlut, Than ttw eooTcriMiaa M«Ba4 at a ■tand, h* 
maid tak* outhii littla pocket Bible, aayiag, "I gxttt t can 
fiMl aOMatUng here la aniHe atf ud than va«ld gi*B a Ca- 
uiliar axpoaitioD of aoaa paaiags, aod eonnasl wttb tba iUni- 
ifatien wame aneedota ; at the >UDa tine tepcaliag, aad tnni- 
iig to paraUal paaaagei; ao that no one ooold liitea to him 
wUhont beiD( decpl; interMtwL So pecBliarly htpfj waa b* 



44 HEMOIB OF 

^« bare new Been witk what riens and feelings 
James B, Taylor began his jitepaialions for the minis- 
try. Let ua next see liow be presecred the spirit with 
which he set out; and what measuTes he adopted to pre- 
pare for the office which he so ardently desired. 

Before he had been one month at Lawrencerille, he 
established, and with his pious rellow-students con- 
ducted a weekly prayer-meeting, about three miles froni 
the village. It was among a people, the most of whom 
seldom 01 Dever attended church. Bnl yet, won by the 
kind attentions of these young men, they came together 
weekly, in considerable uumberB, to hear hymns sung, 
listen to instruction, and join in prayer to the Father 
of all. After giving to a friend an account of this place, 
and of the spiritual condition of the people, Mr. Taylor 
adds, in a tone of peculiar earnestness, " Tbere I hope 
TO BE U3RF0L' " This is the true spirit of the pulpiL 
A man who enters it with any other view, had better 
be any where else in the wide world. 

There is Deed, therefore, that the candidate for the 
ministry, as well as the preacher of the Gospel, should 
watch the movements of his heart ; and every hour 
that he should pray, "Hold thou me up, and I shall 
be safe." 

This prayer-meeting, which had been established on 



1. Tlier 

were oftea in hii society, vho wilJ ntcoguize the tnilb of thi« 
reiaark in their avn experience. He wonJd often *peak ofbi* 
Bible, at "(te dear litdc &»«." I VM preienl Blhlacxvoioa- 
tiod, ud Dcrer hesrd any man qaote the Sacred BcriptOTM 
With Hich fluency, Tor eonfinnntkni oT Ll> doctrinal vtawb M 
Iba i|aeetieni were JuccaiiiTel; proposed to hisi. 



JAMES BRAUIEBD TATLOB. 45 

Friday ereuiag, wbm changed to Sabbath aflerDociii ; 
aud 'W89 regularly attended by Mi. Taylor. The re- 
ligious exercises thus held, soon produced a desire for 
further iDfonnatitm ; aad a Bible ela** was formed, 
whieh he was rpquetted to superiniead. A tbort time 
afteiwBids, the yonog ladies of LawrenceTille voluit' * 
tarily associated in a similar class, to meet befor« 
church time on SaMMh moming, and desired bim to 
bear their recitatione. To each of these requests b« 
assented. And thus his Sabbaths were Ailly occupied 
in labtas to do and to obtain good. At 10 o'clock he 
met the Bible class in Lawrence vU le ; at 11 he went 
to church ; and at^er dinner walked three miles to hear 
his Bible class in the country, a^er which he attend- 
ed the prayer-meeting, where he read a sermon, fre- 
qoenily addressed the people, sung thrice, r#ered two 
piayera, and sometimes held conTersatioas on the sub- 
ject of religion. This showed great earnestness of 
desire to be diHtig something for the cause of Christ 
and the good of men. His letters gire some interest- 
ing accounts of the effects of this prayei-nMCting. To 
one of his sisters be writes thus : 

*■ LaartatmlU, Am 19, ISStk 
" 'To do good wad communicate forget not,' is s 
maxim which we should keep in continual remem' 
brance. The more we conform our lires to it, the 
greater will be our resemblance to our blessed Savior, 
as he lired among men. To do good, we must seek 
opportunities ; and then opportunities will frequently 
And us. Since reading Cotton Mather's 'Essays to 
do Qood,' I feel that I have been exceedingly deft- 
cieot. In looking back to the time when I first made 



a public profession of religion — (you know that though 
dietaut from each other, and unapprised of our respnc- 
tive intentions, we both made the same solemn pro- 
fession on the same day)^Kin looking back, 1 am,coii- 
Etrained to say, O what a barren fig-tree 1 hare been 1 
my leanness ! my leanness ! But blessed be the Lord, 
I have a desire lo do good now. 

" Nodoubt you wish to hear something of my prayer- 
meeting. On Sabbath afternoon,' at four, 1 meet about 
one hundred people, assembled in two rooms, most of 
whom are ignorant of God. I stand in the door be- 
tween, and generally read to them a sermon ; after 
which I sometimes speak a few words of exhortation. 
As yet I have seen no effect, except that they have 
become more attentive ; and instead of profaning the 
Sabbath by laboring in the fields, Ac. ihey are seen 
at the meeting. I trust that good seed is sowing, and 
that it will spring up in due time. Fray that it may ; 
and engage your Christian sisters to pray for me. Th« 
Lord has done great things for us, whereof we ar« 
glad. Then for his distinguishing mercy, let us distin- 
guish ouTselTes by our piety, our love to God and men." 

To C H . 

" LaiertneeBiUe, Jtdy 12, 1830. 
"That millions of souls are perishing, is a truth 
that ought to have a place in all our thoughts. And 
we may profitably inquire, what can we do to meljotaia 
tbeir condition 1 This ruin is not confined to heathen 
lands— if is at our doors and our fire-*idea. Num- 
bers near us are dying for want of the bread nf life. 
To these last, situated as we are, our attention is now 



HMES MUIHEHD TITLOH. 47 

called. Whit ProTideDce majr do for the Tonner, in 
the course of time, by our instrninenttditf, we know 
not. Tbe Head of the church, who qualifies his ser- 
vants to do his work, disposes of them as 'seemeth 
him good.' But what are we doing for those that are 
near to as 1 My brother, I presume that yoa are faith- 
ful — I hope you are. For my part, I have to confess 
with sbame roy masy omissions. My failings slaie 
roe in the face. ' A beam ia in my own eye.' 

" But now I will iaform you what 1 have been en- 
, desToring lo do. The opportunity was afforded to 
me of attempting something, by a recess of three daya 
in our school. On Sunday, tbe 3d instant, 1 went as 
usual to attend my prayerTmeeting, and found the 
house filled to overflowing. At the close of the meet- 
ing, according to my previous plan, I told the people 
that I intended to spend two days in visiting, from 
house lo bouse, as many of them as 1 could. Accord* 
ingly I commenced on Sunday evening my new em- 
ployment. At the first house where 1 called, I found 
B young person greatly distressed on account of sin. 
This case of awakening had occurred at our piayer- 
nieeiing. There was very great dbtress. I endea- 
vored to offer such instruction as suited the case ; and 
I have strong hope that there will soon be joy and 
peace in believing. I say no more of this case, but 
only ask you to pray. — At the next house where I 
stopped, I found no appearance of religion. You can 
form a pretty good idea of what I said in such cases. 

" On Monday I made ten visits. In these 1 found 
four Christians and some persons well disposed to- 
wards religion, but the great majority caring only for 
the perishing things of this world. At the bouse where 



48 HUiOHi or 

I larried that uigkt, I found a young lady, in ciremt- 
stances similar to tboM of the person Grsi raentianed, 
bowed down under a sense of sin, and eameitly desi' 
nog the one tbinf needful. This greasy encouraged 
me; tot I do believe tliat she is seeking ibe way of 
truth, ' the good old way.' Here alao I met with one 
who appeared to be a Christian indeed. O how plea- 
sant ! It is like ■ well of water in a thirsty land. 

" On Tuesday I called at ten houses. At most of 
them 1 preseniedoneormore Tracts, such as I thought 
most likely to be useful. This was the fourth of July. 
In the evening I bad many reflections oa the niannar 
in which I had spent the day, so totally diSerenl from 
that in which 1 had hwetofoie spent that anniversary. 
' O how much greater cause of triumph, to be isstru- 
iiiental in delivering one sotil from the power of sin 
and Satan, than to be the conqueror of nations ! The 
COBtrast will be fiilly seen only above. 

"On the following day I attended the installment 
of the Rev. G. S. W— — — , at Princeton, and a so- 
lemn line it was. O C' , the awful responsibili- 
lies of the office to wkic£ we are looking forward ! It 
is coenected directly with the solemnities of the 
judgment-day. Should the Lord see fit to put us into 
that s^tion, the souls of those to whom we preach 
will be profited or injured by us. But the duties of 
the pulpit are not all — that of visiting. We know, ia 
expected. Wken 1 anticipate the time of my being a 
preacher, my mind dwells on this as a delightful task. 

" By visiting, the pastor knows all the wants of bis 
flock, and performs indeed the kindest port of the 
shepherd's office. Since I wrote to you last, theyuung 
ladies of lAwrenceville have formed a.l3;blti class. 



JAMEB MUINEKD TAVLOR. 49 

nsd (olJclted tne to hear lUeii recitaiioos. I waa glad 
to comply WL:h their request. To render this metisuri' 
beaeficUl, 1 have determiaed to make it a kind of pray- 
eT-meeting. The recitation is always opened with 
prayer, and closed with singing. Thus, you see, my 
daties increase ; and I hope that it will be so as long 
U I live. May I haye that wisdom from above which 
i) profitable to direct ; may the word of truth dwell in 
me richly in all wisdom ! This increase of duties con- 
vinces me that the grace alToided for yesterdny will 
Bol snpply my wants to-day. I trust that I have not 
httn called to this place for nothing. That I may be 
useiiil, is my desire. If my heart does not deceivo 
ne, I long to spend and be spent for Cbrisl." 

These extracts will serve to show how this devoted 
young Christian endeavored, while pursuing his stu- 
dies, 10 strengthen the desire of being useful- In the 
sequel ^ shall see more of his labors, and of their 
tesulis both in regard to himself and to others. 

While thus engaged in Lawreneeville, he felt the 
deepest solicitude respecting the spiritual interests of 
his near relations. He had natural affection in unu- 
sual strength, and it mingled in all its power with his 
religious feelings. Every leitN to bis parents, br»- 
then and dialers, breathes the most earnest desires 
that those who were Christians might advance in holi- 
ness, and that the others might feel all the power of 
divine truth, and be brought to a laving knowledge of 
Jesus Christ. 

To hii Parenu. 

" T(ie other evening, as I was reflecting on the pas- 
nge of Scripture contained in 8 Cor. 5: 10, 'Forwa 



60 HEMotB or 

mail all appeu befoie the judgm«Dt-Beat of Chnat, 
that every one may Teceive the things done in the bo- 
dy, according to that he hath done, whether it b« good 
or bad;' I thought on ihe siiiuition of my fellow-men 
who reject the offers of mercy I Alas ! where will 
the Binner appear in the great day of the Lord, when 
the elements shall melt with ferrent heat, aod the 
earth shall bb burned up 7 Id thinking of our relatives, 
1 could call to mind but few who had devoted (hem- 
eelvea to Chriat. And, when my thoughts turned to 
our own familj', they dwelt on some who had arrived 
at years of discretion, but who bad not given them- 
selvea to the Lord. Oh! shall they — can they perish? 
May Qod interpose for them, that not one, at the last, 
may be ' found a cast-away I' " 

Under a sense of duty to his nearest kindred, Jamea 
B. Taylor had a vary delicate task to pe^rm. At 
thai time, the only regular worship in b' father's 
family was reading prayers on the Sabbath. The ne- 
cessity of a change of heart, it appears, was not duly 
regarded by his father; and young Taylor was deeply 
distressed under the appiehensiou that some, whom he 
most loved in the world, were stopping short of 4hat 
religion which the Gospel required. He of^en resolved 
that he would speak to hia venerated father on this 
subject; but filial fear and youthful diffidence pre- 
vented. At length he resolved that he would write. 
But a direct address might appear as though the son 
were taking the place of the parent. Accordingly he 
determined to select as a subject, " The idea of a well 
regulated family." On this he wrote, in the form of 
letters to his parents, three essays; in which he c<»* 



JAMES BBAUIEaO TATLOK. 51 

tillered all the usaal topics o{ order, induttry, econo- 
my, &c, ; but with these be gave a very correct view 
of the religious abligaiions of heads of fauiilies. Af- 
ter going over the whole subject, he put the question 
lohis parents, whether ibeii views coincided with his 
on those important points, and on the obli^^ations of 
parents. He then, in turn, addressed his sisters on 
tiie subject of rital, expeiimental religion, with great 
earnestness ; rejoicing on account of those members 
of the family who gave evidenceof piety, and express- 
ing the deepest solicitude in regard to the rest. These 
letters exhibit the writer in a most interesting pointof 
vifiw. Few Christians feel as ihey ought their obli- 
gations to the souls of their near liindred i and many 
wbo do in some degree appreciate them, are so injudi- 
cious in respect to time, manner, and spirit, as to do 
harm la many cases where they meant to do good. It 
was not so in this instance. James B. Taylor's labors 
of tore were blessed in an eminent degree to bis kin- 
dred, as will more fully appear in ibe sequel. 

It appears from his correspondence, that be was 
very careful in keeping a diary, in which he noted 
down his religious exercises, bis joys and sorrows, his 
performances of duty, and bis sins. But there only 
remain parts of his journal from the years 1823 to 
1B27 ; the rest have been destroyed. His confidential 
letters which have been preserved, show great vigi- 
lance of self-iuspection, much humility under a sense 
of defective holiness, and strong desires to make 
greater advances in the knowledge of Christ; as will 
appear from the following extracts of letters loan emi- 
nent Christian, with whom be corresponded in terms 
(^ the greatest intimacy. 



SS HEMOiK or 

"Map9,lStO. 
"AU^! how dUlressing to the soul is a sense of 
ttie departure of the Comrorler! Let me call on you 
to unite with me in praising the Lord that the dark- 
ness has, in lome degree, gone bf. The billows hare 
rolled over tae; but thanks to our blessed Lord that 
hia mercy was not clean gone for eyer, ' Bless the 
Lord, O my aoul, and all that is within me, bless his 
lioly name,' for the Sua or righteousness has risen 
upou me." 

" AJy II, 1830. 

" Do you ask, ' how is it with you 7' Oh , I am 

the tame inconstaot, unsteady one you have always 
seen me to be; the same unrmitAii vine, on which 
barrenness seems to he written. O sin, thou art the 
enemy of my soul ! It is for this my heart is pained, 
li is the cause of all our trouble in this world ; and 
while it digs graves for our bodies, it kindles the fires 
of hell for the souls of those who love it. But I think 
that I really hate qin and love holiness. Yet I must 
say that 1 am not satisGed with any of my perform- 
ances, because so much sin is mixed with them. Ko- 
thing short of perfect holiness can ever satisfy the 
sool." 

« Nimmbcr IB, 1820. 
' I feel myself, as heretorote, unworthy of the re- 
gard of my Christian friends ; and at times I am as- 
tonished that any should love such a one as 1 am. 
Surely if they could see me as I sometimes see my- 
self, they would wander too. Alas ! in all thiitga 1 
come short, and in many I oflend. Yet I biws Otf 



JUni BRADIBBD TATLOB. 53 

Lord for what he has done for me, and I relr on his 
grace to make me more like himself. My soul daily 
pants for more holiness, more devotedness to the cause 
of mj Redeemer ; and through him I do hope lo be 
made useful." 

To another friend, a caudidate for the ministry, be 

" F^marf 10. ISZIL 
"I wish that I could give you some good account 
of myself. But I am too little engaged In my Master's 
service. Spiritual pride, that bane of the human soul, 
Jurks within me, and is erer ready to destroy my 
peace. Many and strong are my temptations to sin. 
Sometimes I stand strong ; and then f am brought 
low. But ibis I can say, tikat with divine help 1 will 
serve the Lord. I am determined lo carry on the war* 
, fare until every enemy is subdued." 

It would seem, from the style of his letters about 
this period, that tiis reading fur spiritual improvement 
was much in the old writers of the seventeenth cen-^ 
lury, those noble men, who, with some quaintnesa of 
manner, showed a most intimate acquaintance wiib 
the Bible, a profound knowledge of the most secret 
workings of the human bean, and a fervor of piety 
rarely equalled in the world. Writing to a friend, 
who had been walking in darkness, he addressed him 
in language certainly derived from these sources, aa 
the following sentences will show. " The greater the 
conquest, the brighter the crown. Stars shine bright- 
est in the darkest nighl — torches are better for beat- 
ing. Grapes come not to the proof till ibey come to 



the press. Spices smell best when bruised, f tiltt| 
(re^s root tfa6 faster for sbaking : gold looks brig-lMt 
for Bccmring : joniper smells aweetest in the fire : th* 
palm-ttee proves the belter for presaiog. Camomile, 
the more you tiead it, the more you spread it. Silcli 
is the coDditioQ of God's dear children : Ibcy are then 
most triumphant when most tempted ; most glorious 
when most afflicted ; most in favor with God when 
least in man's and least in their own ; as their con- 
fllets ao their coiiquesta ; as their tribulations m> theii 
triumphs : true salamanders, ih»t lire best in the Ah- 
naM of persecution. So that heavy afflictions are (fas 
best benefactors of heavenly aSections ; and wb«T» 
afflictions bang heaviest, corruptions hang loosest; 
tad grace that is hid in nature, as sweet water in 
tOBC leaves, is then tuost fragrant when the fire of •F> 
BictioB is pot under to distil it out. Ln us then ba 
encouraged, in all our trials, to say, 'Hope thou in 
God, for 1 shall yet praise him.' " 

la the year 1830, on a day appointed for hmnilM* 
fiofi, fbMksgiving, and prayer, he felt it to be his dir- 
ty to retire, and especially lo note down topics for 
meditation suitable to the season. 

RMsons for thankfulness. 

1. That through the greater part of his life he had 
enjoyed good health, while many had suffered mach 
pain and sickness. 

2. That the necessities of nature had been abun- 
dantly supplied, while many had pined in wont, 

a. Civil, and especially religious liberty. On this 
he ^ells with peculiar interest and force; eontraet> 
iif oat situation with that of most nations of the earft. 



JAMES BIUIKEBD TATI^B. 5S 

t. But that which calls fot ilouble thanks, is th« 
fiMndadoD and preaervationof (he church, the pieachr 
ing of the Oospel, and tha enjoymeDt of religion in 
lt> pntlt}'. 

5< A very apmial reason for thankfulneas, is the 
wunbet and the power of reviTola of religion, ss they 
had oecumd during the preceding year. 

6. Next lo this he places pious relations BDd friends. 

7. Last, though not least, he places the dispensation 
of Profidence, which had carried him lo Lawrence- 
Tilla to study for the mioistty. Great honor had thus 
been conferred on him, and heavy responsibilities laid 

This leads hiin to ask what he had rendered to the 
Lord for alt hie mercies. And this question suggests 
OBUSes for humiliation. 

1. Neglect of oppornioides of doiug good. 

2. Backsliding, coldnessj formality in religions 
Mirioe. 

3. The imperfection of bis example as a Christian. 

4. Negligence in self^xamination and closet exer- 
cites genertily. 

Hla prayM is for an increase of trne religion, espe- 
dlaUy hi biniMlf : that he may to iailh add rinue ; to 
rirtua knowledge; to knowledge temperance; to tem- 
perance patience ; to patience godliness ; to godliness 
brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charily. 

Thas we see bow James Broinerd Taylor spent the 
fkst year of his preparatory course, in respect to the 
cutairBtion of his heart and the acquirement of a spirit 
snited to the polpil. 

Ob tba first day of January. 1321, he writes to OM 
of his most valued CIsisliBa friends as follows: 



59 HEHoiB or 

" I hare found this a good day to my soul ; and J 
Icnoiv that you will be graliBed lo hear some of the 
particulars. This moraing I returned home from a 
prayer-meeliDg, which I conducted last evening, about 
four and a half miles from L. Of this meeting I irill 
tell you more by and by. On my arrival 1 retired to 
my room, and found it good to spend half an hour on 
my kneeg ; because it waa delightful 10 adore and praise 
ihe greatocss, goodness, mercy, and long suffering pa- 
tience of God ; it was good to have the privilege of 
pouring out my heart before him. O how astonishing- 
ly condescending is that great and fearful Ose, ' who 
inhabiteih eternity and the praises thereof,' that he 
should deign to visit a worm, a creature of a day, 
whose tabernacle is in the dust! I felt myself 'less 
than the least of all his mercies.' But the Lord doei 
condescend to regard those whose hearts are broken 
on account of sin. He will give ear to their supplica- 
tions, while they pour out their hearts before him, and 
cast their burdens, however great, on him. They are 
privileged to tell him all — guilt and fear, sins ana sor- 
rows, cares and crosses, wants and dangers, weak- 
nesses and temptations, darkness, ignorance, doubts, 
iiniieties, whether for themselves or others, the church 
or the world. 1 found it good, while 1 was ready to 
hide my face for shame, to confess my short-comings, 
my negligence, ray wanderings from the path of dutf 
during the past year. I found it good to cry for mercy 
to pardon, and for grace to help in time to come ; good 
to bless, and praise, and magnify the holy name of the 
Lord, for his loving-kindness in giving me a goodly 
heritage, and casting my lot in pleasant places. I 
foimd it good to lay my necessities before him, and to 



JAUES BBAINERD TAVLOB. j^ 

offer my body a liTicg sacrifice to bini, whose I am, 
by creatioD, preservatioD, redemption, and I hope by 
adoptioD. 1 found it good, and at this season pe^uliax- 
If soiemn, to dedicate myself, and all that I have and 
am, to his service and glory, and resolve, through 
grace, to walk in the vray of his commandmeats, and 
do as well as suffer his whole will concerning roe. I 
foand it good to plead that I might have faith, hope, 
and cbarjty; that I might be crucified unto the world, 
and the world be crucified unto me ; that I might be 
delivered in time of trouble, and have grace to over- 
come all my spiritual enemies ; that 1 might be hum- 
ble, ever lying at the foot of the cross, and looking to 
the Savior as my sacrifice, my advocate with the Fa- 
ther, my prevailing intercessor, my salvation; yea, all 
my salvation and desire for time and for eternity. 
Yes, I found it good to call on the name of the Lord ; 
and afterwards I found it good to read the Scripturea, 
to meditate and engage in self-examination. 

" Part of the afternoon I spent in visiting my ac- 
quaintances. I called to see a daughter of affliction, 
one of whom I have spokea to you before. She has 
not, for eighteen years, been free from lameness ; and 
for tixteen has been entirely unable to walk. Yel she 
rejoices in the midst of all her suOerings, knowing 
that the rod which is on her is not that of a tyrant, but 
of her heavenly Father, who afflicts, but not willing- 
ly, the children of men. She triumphs in the prospect 
before her, and well she may, for there temaineth for 
her a rest beyond the skies. I found it good to be with 
this safferittg Christian. 

" The evening has been spent in worshiping the 
Lord, and in supplicating bis blessing on a ruined 



58 MEHom or 

world. It waa goad to he tbere. And now I find it 

good lo address my rriend in Christ. 

" But I must tell you more of the meeting which I 
alteaded last evening. And I have good news for you, 
tidings which have gladdened the hearts of some here, 
and hare occasioned joy in heaven. In (hat ncigbboi' 
hooti about twenty souls have, as we hope, been born 
again. The meeting last night was & solemn one — the 
altention of the audience was fixed, while I addressed 
them for more than half an hour. After singing and ' 
prayer, I addressed them again. The meeting then 
closed, and they who had been lately brought into the 
kingdom stood around, while I conversed with them, 
for the purpose of encouraging them to be steadfast, 
and to tight manfully the battles of the great Captain 
of salvation. The concerts are mostly young, one not 
mote than thirteen years old. The good work seems 
to be increasing. May it go on and prosper, and spread 
all around. 

" Thus, , you see how I spent the last even- 
ing of the old year, and the first day of the new. May 
every succeeding day and year find us ripening for 
that place where time and change are unknown — for 
a seat at God's right hand, where are pleasures for 
evermore '. We shall be satisfied, when we awake in 
his likeness. Pray for me, that J may be humble and 
faithful." 

" JanvAry 7, 1821. 
" On asking myself this evening how shall I answer 
life's great end, which is to glorify God'? the follow- 
ing passage of Scripture came into my mind : Titus, 
2 : 12, ' Teaching us, that, denying ungodliness and 



lANEB BBAIKEBD TAYUIB. 99 

worldly lasts, we should live soberly, righleoosly, and 
godly, ia this present world.' O bow much is com- 
prised in this lesson ! It comprises all branches of our 
duly — what we owe to ourselves, to our fellow-men, 
and to our Creator. ' To deny ungodliness and world- 
ly lust,' what is it but to abandon all those eri] courses 
which wicfaed men are found in? 'To lire soberly,' 
is in a right manner to govern all our appetites and 
passions. To live ' righteously,' is to do to others as 
we would that they should do to us. And to live 
'godly,' is to hold communioo with the Father, and 
his Son Jesus Christ. O ! how fit and right is it that 
we should thus live. It is a life such as this which is 
connected with ' peace in believing,' and 'joy in the 
Holy Ghost.' 

" You concluded your last tetter with the exhorta- 
tion of the apostle, ' To do good and communicate, 
forget not.' 1 add, as a comment, 

' Bleat a the man who fpenda bii da^ 

In act! of good to tbois Around ; 
Hii ii ths path which nirelr eodi 
Whera >U ihall be nith glory crown'd.'" 

His deep concern for the salvaiion of his kindred, 
and his endeavors to promote a mote spiritual religion 
in his father's, family, have already been mentioned. 
In May of this year he adopted the expedient of ad- 
dressing a letter to his parents, brothers and sisters, 
who were heads of families. The general subject of 
this letter is the respomibility ofparentt. It is a re- 
markable instance of delicate fidelity. The duties of 
the relation are urged with great earnestness, and in a 



60 HEMOIB OF 

tnanner well suited to m&ke >ay one, who had not 
taken a decided tiand on the subject of religion in his 
tainily, deeply feel his deficiency. But in it there is 
nothing incoDaisient with the highest filial reverence, 
and the respect due from a younger to tiis eldec 
btoibeis. 

To the letter is subjoined a long postscript, address- 
ed to [wo young sisters who had not Diianifested any 
serious concern for the salvation of their souls. It coi- 
tains a most solemn and afieciionate warning of theii 
danger, and entreaties that they would, in early life, 
devote themselves with all the liean to the service of 
their Creator and Redeemer. To his mother he wrote 
as follows, April 1&, 1821, the day he was twenty 
years old : 

" The day of ray birth I hope that I shall, at all 
limes, have reason to bless and observe with tbanltful 
remembrance. Bui I hope that 1 shall have more abun- 
dant reason to bless and triumph io the day of my 
death, because 1 trust it will iutioduce me into a new 
and glorious existence. , 

" O ! my dear mother, how much have I cost you. 
In my infancy, while hanging on yoor breast, I doubt 
not that I witness^ many a tear and many an aiii- 
ious sigh, although entirely aneouscioui of your soli- 
oitude and of my helplessness. O what tendvness 
was manifested to me! what care to rear twi vtf and 
preserve me from every ill ! How many sleepless nights 
have you spent on my account ! Did the thought af 
that period ever enter your mind, that yon were iraia>- 
ing up a little immortal, destined to be a servant of 
the Most High? Did you look on me as one whom 



JUIES MUIXEKD TAYLOR. 61 

yoa might afierwaids heu, as a berald of the cross, 
bearing the iiDMuchabl« riches of Christ, preaching 
■ crucified Savior lo guilty and dying man 1 

" Instead of inditlgiDg such pleasing hopes, perhaps 
my fond mother thought of the innumerable eviln to 
- vhich I inighl be exposed in the slippery paths ol 
youlh ; or of the no less numerous dangers with which 
manhood is surroaoded. Yob might have contemjila- 
led me as a companion of those who wander from the 
ways of the Lord, and walk in the paths of the de- 
stroyer. And perhaps in your maternal fears you sigh- 
ed and said, Can il — ah ! shall it ever be — that this 
child will Ining' grief to bis father, and tnTow to the 
mother who bore him 1 Did you not ]»^y that God 
would undertake for me, and avert the storms to which 
the young voyager of life would be exposed 1 He has 
beard your prayers ; an answer baa been sent ; but not 
before I had done much to blast your hopes and in- 
crease your fears. ! how kind, how gracious was 
the unseen, but not unfelt hand, that turned me from 
my evil ways, and ' sweetly forced me in.' Well aaj 
I sing songa of deltveruice, and shoot—' a miracle of 
grace !' " 

He then adverts to a very &ingerou3 attack of ty- 
pbus fever, which he had in his twellth year, when 
every one expected that he would diejand, to heighten 
hia feelings of filial gratitude, dwells on the great 
kindness of his mother, in watching by him and nurs- 
ing him during his protracted illness. 

It seems that his death appeared so certain, that 
some kind friend prepared a shicud for him. On allud- 
ing lo this circumstance, he asks, with great solemnl- 

6 J.B.T.yl« 



63 UEUoiB or 

xy, pother, "how vere yoa exercised when taking 
your last look ai me 7 Alas ! had 1 been cul down as 
m cumberei of (he ground — my peace was not then 
made with God— death would have ccnsi^ed tne to 
the ' blackncaa c<f darkness, and to everlaaiing despair.' 
Who but Ood could have averted the stnike which 
was leveled at ray head 7 

" But yoor son, who was once on the verge of the 
grave, yet lives ; and lives in the enjoyment of hea- 
ven's blessing. He has been spared, and permitted to 
indulge the hope of heiog extensively useful in the 
church. At least, his desire is to spend his days in 
the cause of that dear Redeemer who gave his soul a 
sacrifice for sin, ' that we might not perish, but have 
everlasting life.' To compensate you for your sighs 
and tears, your fearful apprehensions and anxieties, 
see what God hath wrought. Out of our number it 
seems that he hath chosen me to be a minister of the 
everlastiug Gospel. May I be prepared to labor in his 
vineyard ! 

" I expect to occupy my present place for two years 
aRer the ensuing fall. I expect then to enter college, 
so advanced as to remain there only two years. After 
which I shall go t* the theological seminary for three 
years. As to my life after that, 1 can make no conjec- 
ture. Only I can say, that I hope to devote my life to 
ine service of Ood, soul, body, and spirit Yes, I had 
rather fall a sacrifice to my labors than be luke^varm 
and dead in his service. My whole self I would con- 
secrate to him, in whatever sphere the Lord nf the 
harvest may see St to appoint me to labor ; whether at 
home or abroad, on the land or on the sea. 

" God has blessed us both, and been very kind to 



LOK. 63 

m in times past— let us trust in him foi time to come. 
The Lord has blessed you, my mother, in peraiitliiig 
you to see the piospecl of my sntering the ministry ; 
and be has blessed you in your other children, my deaf 
brotbers and sisters. May they, who hare professed 
the rellKioa of Christ, be faithful, and keep ihetr gar- 
ments unspotted from the world. And may the rest, 
who are yet far off, be brought nigh, and be united 
with us in the bonds of an ev^rlastiDg covenant ; may 
the Lord by his Spirit convince them of sin, of righte- 
ousness, and of judgment, and make them heirs of the 
grace of life, that parents and children may all unite 
in anthems of praise in the upper sanctuary." 

The letter concladea with particular addresses to 
the several members of the family, containing appro- 
priate and most earnest exhortations. 

ToC H 

-HrBrgCklr, 

*' O tbal I could, with the hamble confidence of a 
little child, raise my voice to heaven, and with the 
faith of assurance cry, 'Abba, Father! my Father 
— my reconciled Father and portion, in and through 
Jesus Christ. O that I could lift up lay heart, hav- 
ing the witness of the Spirit, and say to Jesus, my 
Savior and Redeemer from sin and death; my advo- 
cate with the Father, and prevailing intercessor; my 
prophet, priest, and king ; my salvation ; my all in all ! 
O that I coold know the Holy Spirit to be my sancti- 
fier, gaide and comforter !' But, to my shame, I do not 
possess that unshaken confidence which I want. I ctua 



S4 HEHoiB or 

indeed say, ihtt not this world, nor tea Uousond loore^ 
could puTchtse (he hope which I hare. And if I know 
ray own heart, I do think thai th« desire to have God 
fts my Father, Jesns as my Savior, and the Holy Spirit 
as my SsDctiRer, is ptedominaot. But yet I feei that 
whereas T ought to be a fnll grown man in Christ, I 
em only a babe. To think that I hare been now fire 
yeare a professor of religion, and hare made so little 
progress, is indeed a cutting thogght. Alas, I feel my- 
self to be far behind those who set out widi me in the 
diTJne life. 

' O far a bncsii k haarealf f ali^ 
'Tqvslt ms through thii ghiamy cala, 
' That I Ms; jiHB Ihe Jajfnl baad 
'UCiMMi'i fair and bapp; land.' 

" Since our last separation, my course has been va- 
ried. The Lord has been good. 1 hare had seasons of 
enjoyment. Blessed be our heavenly Father, that I 
should at any season be permitted to sip of the good 
cup by the way. To many the water of life is dealt 
out more bountifally. My unfaithful nets and unbeUef 
hinder the blessing- O how much reason have I to 
chide and upbraid myself for past offences. 

" White we are preparing for the holy miniitry, and 
looking forward to it, our constant desire should be to 
bring many sons and daughters into the kingdom ; also 
to build up the humble believer in his most holy faith. 
And what a delightfal task will that be to us I While 
we are in Ihe school of the prophets, may the Lord 
impart to ns a right knowledge of ourselves and of 
him — may he endow us plentifully with heavenly gilts 
— convince us thoroughly of sin — give na true, «n> 



JAMES BBAItflBD TATLom. 65 

feigned repentance — strong faiih in Jesus Christ— and 
that zeal and lore which characterize the humble, 
meek, lowly, deroted, self-denyiog, spirilual, heaven- 
ly-minded child of God — and thus furnish us for every 
good work. Whether we shall erer go into the Tine- 
yard of OUT Lord, is known only to him. The hairest 
imly is great, and the laborers ire few. Should we 
enter the field, may we be found wise as serpents and 
harmless as dores — baptized with the Holy Ghoit and 
with fire. 

" But I think that onr views should not be altogether 
directed to the end of our preparatory course. There 
are many opportunities now of doing good, TVie call 
froTti many a lowly cottage is, ' Come ova- and help 
uaP And we ought to inquire for persons to whom 
we may be useful. If indeed we feet as we ought, we 
hold ourselves to be very tmall and unwonhy. But 
we are looked upon by those around ua as haviug al- 
ready entered on a ministerial course, and we have a 
particular character to sustain. Occupying such a situ- 
ation, how necessary it is that we should be circum- 
spect, and walk worthy of our vocation. 

"A few days since, I had some ioteresting intelli- 
gence from the east. The good work appears ib be go- 
in^ on. Some, whom I left distressed, have obtained 
a hope. The time is coming, when ' a nation shall be 
bom in a day.' We may see greater things than our- 
eyes have ever yet witnessed. O ! may the precious* 
ness of immortal souls, and our responsibility to Ood, 
to oarselves, and to others, be written on our hearts, 
uwilh a pen of iron and the point of a diamond. And 
may we be kept very humble, and very sensible of ova 
entire dependence ! Farewell." 
6* 



W HEHOIB OP 

To hi! sistet M . 

>'Mt.im. 

"perhaps you may wish to know hoir I harA ettf 
ployed myself during the past session. O that t eonld 
ten you I had been faithful ! Bat afaa ! in all things I 
come short, and in many I ofTend. Howeyer, I hare 
endesTored to do, at least, a liltle for my Redeemer, 
by Tisiting the people of this neighborhood, and con- 
versing with them on the coneeniB of their souls. In 
several instances I hare been encouraged. The piay- 
er-meetings are continned every other Sabbath. I have 
also been engaged in several other places. I am about 
establishing a Snnday school for colored people at the 
village where I bold my meetings. I hope that you 
are actively engaged in yoar sphere. Our working days 
will soon be over, and the consideration ooghf to sink 
deep into our hearts. Sonls may be waiting for ds (o 
be the means of their conversion. 'Up mo be notNO,' 
should be our motto." 

To . 

<> OetebiT, 1891, 
"Knowing that yon feel anxious aboul yotar friend, 
I give yon early information of my safe arrival id L., 
end of the improvement of iny health. I am neuty 
well of my cold — but alas 1 1 am compelled to say that 
my heart is not warm on a subject on which I ought 
to be all on fire. Piay for me. that the Sun at rig)it»- 
onsnesn may arise with healing in hia beams ; thsri my 
doubts and bars may oil be removed ; Iliat t^y serraw 
may be turned into joy. V«a know hmr painfU il i> 



)AHE« BBAraem f ATLOB. 67 

U b« undet a cload. Bat, bi«smd b« the Lord, I know 
that I do want more religioa, aad that my chief desire 
i« to be hotf. Nothing can satisfy me but the eiemal 
fimntain of life and light 

'Rvtofti, Mf Dere, mma, 

'SWMtlMUMfMorfMt) 

I kite tkt liM nut nwle Iht* Mnm, 
■Anddmrra tlMalfoiii Bf biMst.' 

" Ai^ Ihad tnitten the ptdediag, ((he other even- 
iig,)' I likij aside mf paipeif and took hold of Clarke 
M &6 ProHiitu, when I m^ with the following ha^ 
sig«: ■ The eternal Gfod is ihy refuge, and undemeaOi 
thee are the ererlasting and'S. He Shall drive out t6e 
enemy before thee ; and shall say, Deitroy them.' 
from this I derived sonie eilcouragemeill. I have sifece 
fouad it good to wait on thb Lord ; and feel stten£th- 
eaed to [feisevere: Pray fot me, that I ouy Aold/dat, 
tiddAoMontotheend. 

"December 8. — I haTe reason to praise the Lord 
for his goodness to my soul since I wrote tKe forego* 
ing. Last Slonday night particularly was a season of 
enjoyment to me. I enjoyed a delightful 'time of re- 
freshing from the presence oi the Lord/ It was ooi 
monthly prayer-meeting. I trust that I have not lost 
the blessed Savior yet. The world and alt its enjoy- 
sieois appeared, and do still appear diminutive and 
U^Bsitory. I fek, and still feel determined, the Lord 
helping me, to live nearer to him— '0 for grace to 
love him more.'" 



:. Google 



" LmrrmeniOe, Dee. 1, 18S1. 

" Since I wrote lut, I have made quite a tout through 
CoaDeeticut. The occasion vas this. While going to 
New-York at the commencement of our racation, on 
boaid tiie steam-boat between New-Brunswick and the 
city, I fell in with Major Ridge, an Indian chief, of 
the Cherokee tribe. My becomiag acquainted with 
him seemed providenliaL I saw his credeTitiaU, which 
were very gatisfactory, from our missionaries — and 
finding him a stranger in a strange land, without ft 
guide, 1 ofTered to him my friendship. With this he 
seemed to he highly gratified. I conversed with him 
as much as T could about his conntry and its produc- 
tions ; about the missionaries, schools, &c. among the 
Cherokees. This rendered our trip very agreeable. I 
was particularly pleased lo have beside me, from the 
wilderness, one of those for whom so much exertion 
had beep made. 

" Oq out arrival in New-York, I conducted Major 
Ridge Id my brother's, where the family immediately 
became interested in him. 

" On Sunday he attended church and prayei-meet- 
ing. In the evening I concluded to accompany him to 
Cornwall, where he had a son at school. Accordingly 
on Monday morning we set out for New-Haven, 
where we tarried for the night. On Tuesday we went 
to Litchfield. The country is beautifully diversified 
with bill and dale. I passed through the place where 
Mr, Newton formerly resided, who went with the last 
tnission family to the Osages. 

" 1 found Litchfield a beautiful place, situated on a 



MHES BIAIRSBB TAYLOR. 6lt 

cOMdMUtdfngemineiiGe, fromwhiekoaenwir lodcorera 
nfyfiae raDgtofcooDtty. TherelMwMi. NMtleion. 

"On WedDeaday ws anircd at Cornwall. It it a 
small Tillage on a plain Buironodtd with mountaiu. 
Bat K> retam to my oompaatma. Ha manifcKffd Ytrj 
gttM pleasnra in nMetkg kit ton. Boik parental and' 
fflwl afeciion wera stMagly dapla^d. Tean stole 
Keutlf down tbe cheeks of bMfa hther Md aon ) m that 
for some time they were incapable of much conrersa* 
tioa. When they had become more oomposed, the fu- 
tker, dirough hia son, began, apparently with mueh 
finling, to express his greiitnde for my unexpected at- 
tention. During tbe afternoon i had an iaierriew 
with ibe son. He is nearly of my size, abouteighleen 
yean of age, pots«ss«s^Ui intelligent mind, uses good 
lan^age, and exhibits refined mannets. He has been 
nearly thr^B years at Cornwall, aad has made rapid 
progress. He is regarded as a youth of first rate ta- 
lents. Bat he appeared quite a stnuiget to his owm 
heart. 

"In the etening I attended a coafennce netting 
conducted by the yoting men, and heard idoW of (he 
heathen youth speak and pny ! Darid Bfown is par- 
ticularly interesting. 

"Next day I had an inietriew with Major Ridge 
just before 1 left him. Mr. BrowQ Was my interpreter. 
At the close, tbe Major gave lae the assurance that he 
would hereafter give his wAoIe Miftd to the subject of 
religion. Hiswifehas become a member <^ the church 
in the wilderness, and he is desirous of becoming a 
member too. 

" I left Cornwall on Thursday. Mr. Brown accom- 
panied me as far as the burying ground, to view the 



70 H£MOM 

•tone erected to tbe memory or HeDrjr ObookUh. 
Many pleasing and many painfal ideu are aasockied 
with that place. It was there David Browa and I said 
farewell, and parted. 
" It will be glad tidings to you to hear thai my bro- 
' ther F. is expecting to atady for the ministry. I have 
some hope that he will be with me soon. Is not this 
the Lord's doing 7 May it prove to be so 1" 

The following is from a letter to the Rev. Mr. H— , 
an aged clergyman, with whom he was in habits of 
friendly intercourse, and in whose family he was inti- 
mately aeqviainied : 

"Is it well with your youngest daughter ; I mean, is 
she now rejoicing in thai ' hope which nialieth not 
ashamed, because of the love of Christ shed abroad in 
the heart, through the Holy Spirit given nnlo her V 
Such seemed to be her case when I had the pleatnre 
of seeing her. And if it be really so, you are ready, 
no doubt, to bless the great Redeemer for his grace in 
thus visiting yonr house in the decline of life. May 
she grow daily in grace, and iu the knowledge of our 
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ ! She has been tbe 
child of many prayers: may she love to pray, not only 
for herself, but also for others — may I not add, Jbr mt 
too, that the Lord would make me holy iu heart and 
in life, to the praise of the glory of his grace ! 

" But when I was with you, your eldest daughter 
could not see that she had passed the line which se- 
parates Christians from the world. May I not hope 
that ere this she has submitted herself to Christ 1 11 
so, how blessed the change ! a change which has not 



14HU raAniERD TATU>B. 71 

only imparted peaCe to ber own «ral, and glailness lo 
her patents and christian friends, bnt joy to the an- 
gels in heaven. She lias had lo lecord one of the hap- 
piest events in the annals of her pilgrimage — it is on 
en in her existence, on which she will reBect with 
peculiar pleasure and gratitude, not only in lime, Iwt 
through eternity. O tb«t I could know that it is tkut 
well with her. But if, indeed, she has made no pro- 
gress ; if she has not yet 'apprehended Christ Jesus' as 
her Savior, and found him the ' chief among ten thoa- 
>and,' I would ask her, why is it so? 'Is there no 
balm in Qilesd ;' * is there no physician there T Has 
not the Father called you 7 does not Jesus invite you 
by his life of toil, by his agony in the garden and on 
the cross, by his death and burial, by his resurrection 
■nil glorious ascension 7 And now, being exalted as a 
prince and a Savior, ta not his kind and winning lan- 
guage addressed to you, ' Come unto me T All bea- 
ten appears to be engaged to secure the salvation of 
returning sinners. You hsre been alarmed by feeling 
ikal you were in the city of destruction ; O slay not in 
all the plain, lest thou be consumed, but fly to the re- 
(iigejirovided for sinners by the sinner's Friend. Your 
best interests call foe it — the prayers, anxieties, and 
tears of your parents call tor it. As you love your - 
soul; as you value your everlasting all ; as you ever 
hope to meet God in peace, and dwell forever in hea- 
ren, do it. 01 do it I — May the Lord have you all in 
his holy keeping !" 



:. Google 



" Z. , Dtanitr, I83I. . 

" Wkcnlcallto mind ihM you 1mt« Hot h<Rrdfr«K 
me siaoe I left New-Yorb, I feel that I have not muiF- 
fested that lore tot you that J onghL Bol yen will 
escaae me, while I usure yon that I find my aflectien 
for you iDcreosiog in*lead of dimiaishing. Ton know, 
my dear father and motheT, tkat nearly two yean 
have elapsed since I airived at ii>is place to begin my 
studies. How rapid has been their progress ! I feci 
disposed to rejoice ralberlhan to meum that the Um« 
kas sped tts flight, t lot^ upon Ihem as two yeara of 
{Heparotton for that office which I aniicipaie witb 
pleasure. And the faster our years &y, the better, if 
God be onr Father, Jeaus our Savior, and the Holy 
Spirit our SsnctiSer ; fot the seoaer shall we be waft- 
ed orer life's tempcsluons sea, and tbc sooner shall 
we reach the wished for bavta. Glory le ear henveo- 
ly Benefactor, for derisiag the plan of salration ! Glo- 
ry to our Redeemer, who accomplished the m^htr 
work ! And glory to the Holy Spirit, who appliea il 
to our heariii and consciences ! ETerlasting thanks to 
□ur God, if we hate been made partaken of the giacs 
of life ; if we are his sons and daughters I Surely k 
has been a work of his own on our hearts, and we 
ought to praise him. He is worthy of our bigkest 
homage and best services. Then lei us spend ike re* 
maioing days of our pilgrimage to bis honor; that «o. 
when we are done with earthly things, an abutidani 
entrance may be administered unto us into Ihe ever- 
lasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior ^esus Cbrtsl. 



LOB. It 

" What distinguishing mercy has been displayed to 
our family 1 But to me in particular — to the in parti- 
cular j and you may well wonder at and admire that 
diriae grace which ' sweetly forced me in.' Once I 
was a child of many anxieties, and the occaaioD of 
many sorrows. I feel that Id my childhood I often 
taused you to suffer much pain on my account. Bat 
all was parental tenderness and affection on your part. 
forgiTe me the follies of my youthful dayq, my 
obstinacy, aelf-will, disobedience, and reWllioo. I 
know ihat you have fo^iven me ; but 1 cannot foi^five 
myself. No ! my ingratitude to you, the kindest and 
best of parents, is » reproach to me. May God for- 
give me— yea, I trust he has forgiren me, wherein I 
have been guilty in breaking this his command, ' Ho- 
nor thy father and thy mother.' 

" Once my home was under your roof— once I sat 
at your table — once I enjoyed the society of your fa- 
mily circle — and once I could call to you by the en- 
dearing appellation of father and mother. But now I 
am far away. My home, my table, my society, are 
among strangers. They, however, are my friends , 
ihig I am persuaded is of the Lord's kindness. And 
aa he has been good to me in times past, I can trust 
him in time to come. 

" Did not the Lord, when he gare me to you, say, 
'Take this child and nurse him for me, and 1 will 
fire thee ihy wages.' For all your,goodness to me, 
may heaven's best blessings rest tipon you. And may 
I be an honor to my father, and to the mother who 
bore me!— may I glorify my heavenly Father, and be 
made a blessing to society ! may I not live a cipher 

1 J-KTvlv. 



in Ihit world, but be made ezlensively Dteful. For this, 
let me ask your conlinuat, earnest, united prayers." 

The aboTe extracts from Mr. Taylor's letters ibow, 
it is thought, very disliuctly an increase in his pietjr 
and in his religious enjoyments. He appears to be 
gradually raising higher his atandard of ministerial 
botioess and usefulness, and making progresi in real, 
decided, heart-felt religion. 



CHAPTER III. 



Cam^icUon of lit cotrse in lie Aeademj. 

On the Isi of January, 1833, we find, in a letter loa 
valued and conGdeotial Christian friend, a brief state- 
inent of his religious views at that period- 

" The last time 1 wrote, yon recollect the slate of 
my mind. Since then, the Lord has been better than 
my expectations. I have had some precious seasons. 
1 have known what it is to bold commimion with my 
heavenly Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 
through the Eternal Spirit. My closet duties hare af- 
forded my highest enjoyments ; not always, indeed, 
equally great, but generally delightful. 

" During this year may I, and may you, be moi« 
than ever engaged in the Lord's service- I am desi' 
rous to spend aod be spent for him— to live the life of 



JAMn BltAJKEBD TAYLOR. 7S 

ihe righteous. But we majr not live to see its etose. 
This motDiDg 1 was laeditaiiog on the words ia Matt. 
26 : 18, My time it at hand ; and I thought that it it 
sliould be the Lord'^will to take me to himaeir this 
year, yea, even this day, 1 should rejoice at my de- 
parture. The grave seeiDed to lose its terrors — hea- 
ven and its glories appeared to be io sight — my aoul 
was joyful. O to live religion — to have heaven io 
fiew, the love of God in the heart, the world, the flesh 
aod the devil under one's feel ! Then, come life, 
tome death, all, all will be well. 

" O my friend, I am tired of living by halve*. God 
aays, ' Son, give me thy heart.' 1 answer, O for an • 
entire surrender — 1 long for complete deliverance from 
remaining corruption ; for sanctification in soul, body, 
and spirit ; for that perfect love which castelh out alt 
fear— nnd until 1 attain this, I shall feel that I shall 
Ite unfit to be a minister of Jesus Christ." 



It deserves to be noticed, that our young friend was, 
inaremarkable degree, exempt from seclariaD feelings. 
Among other tokens of enlarged and liberal feeling, it 
may be mentioned that he had correspondence with 
students of theology and private members of several 
religious denomioations, and that the interchange of 
fraternal afleciion and christian exhortation was cha- 
racterized by perfect confidence and entire freedom. 
This is what we may expect, when professors of 
Christianity have the spirit of their religion. It ia 
truly a religion of lore^ which eulbraces all, of every 
name, who show themselves to be true disciples of 
Jesus Christ 

From a letter of Major Ridge, dated, " Cherokee 



7b HEHCMR or 

Nation, Feb. 19, 1822," it appeHs that Mr. Tiytor 
had writleo biro, and that his bindDesi and christian 
faithfulness had deeply impressed his heart. 

" Dear friend, (he says,) we were made acquainted 
by a kind Providence, and I hope I shall never forget 
ail your kindness lo me. When I think of New-Yoric, 
it seems near, and I feel almost as if there. When I 
'went (here 1 was a stranger, and you were so kind as 
to be my guide and assistant lo the place where my 
son was, for which I am under great obligations of 
gratitude. You not only rendered me all neceaeaiy 
assistance on the way, but when we arrived at Corn- 
wall, you was so kind as to coaverse with me on the 
subject of religion. What you told me I ought to do, 
I am now fully delenuiocd lo do. I think 1 can say 
now that I do seek the Savior ; but I do not find him. 
1 hope the Lord will hear my prayers, and enable me 
10 find the right way. I (hank you for, and rejoice to 
think of what you told me. 1 also rejoice that the 
missionaries here tell me the same ; and that there 
arc some, even in this land, who care for my soul.'' 

Another extract of a letter addressed to Mr. Taylor, 
Feb. 25, 1823, by one to whom he hod been useful to 
an excursion during vacation, will give the reader 
some idea of the active zeal of this young Christian. 

" On looking back on my life, and recalling: past 
scenes, I remember with humility, with love and ado- 
ration, the occurrences of the past year. 1 adore the 
riches of that grace which, I hope, plucked me as a 
brand from everlasting burnings. To you, my friend, 
I feel peculiarly grateful ; and as loDg as I lire, I shall . 



IUU» BBAOIEBD TATLOR. 77 

rHuember your fmithful admonitions and prayer*. I 
have reason cTeiy day to adore and pnue that Provi- 
dence which directed you in my way, and made yon 
an inslrumeni of doing much good to my soul- When 
1 first Haw you I waa where 1 had been for years. I 
knew that I was a sinner ; that my situalioa was 
wretched ; and that remaining where I was, I must pe- 
rish. But yet I made no exertions to escape. I was 
waiting for the irresistible influences of the Spirit, 
with the excuse that I could do nothing myself. You 
were employed by an overruling band to rouse me 
from this state of awful stupidity and sio. Your words 
went like daggers to my guilty conscience, and 
wrought that conviction in my soul which I had 
never experienced before. It ia needless for roe to tell 
you what I then felt, as you were a witness to part of 
my anxiety and distiess. You also saw the change 
-wlfich took place in my feelings. O happy seasons of 
delight — how I love to call them to reinerobruice I 
The Lord has not only been kind to me, but has ex- 
tended hb mercy to my beloved companion ; and 
while we deserved nothing but wrath, has made us, as 
■wfi hope children of his grace and heirs of everlast- 
ing life." 

It would be easy to give many similar passages 
from other letters, showing that this young academi- 
cal student was made, to a surprising extent, useful in 
bringing sinners to a knowledge of their condition, and 
conducting them to Jesus Christ as their Savior. 

It is apparent from the following letter to bis friend 

H , that his mind was at the same time intent on 

his own pteparalion for the ministry ; and that while 



he wi|he4 to poiMia all the intellectual quftlifications 
required, his first object was to make eminent attain- 
ments in holiness. 

" March 9, ISK. 
" You no doubt rejoice witli me that our friend G. 
■ad ray brother F. have given themaelves up for the 
work of the holy ministry. O, my brother, what a 
gracious Providence it is that calls so many young 
meu from mercantile business to labor in the vineyard 
of our Lord. More than all, I wonder that I should be 
counted worthy to do any thing in the glorious work 
of salvation. How astonishing ! ' How condescending 
and how kind !' How signal was my escape ! When 
eireiy thing indicated that my situation was fiied for 
life, and that I should have to spend my days in buy- 
ing and selling, a kind Providence opened a way for 
me 10 enter upon my studies. You know what were 
my difficulties. I cannot, with the certainty I wish, 
say that 1 have been, and yet I dare not say that I 
Aotie not been, called of heaven — no, / iare not. But, 
would I 'look back 7' No, verily. I desire to be a 
minister of the Gospel above and before all earthly 
things. My mind is bent on it, with the most earnest 
wish to spend and be spent in the Lord's service. How 
elte cotild I be happy 1 

" The work of the holy ministry is, we hope and 
tiu«t, before us. No doubt you have dwelt, at I have, 
on the necessary work of preparation with feat and 
much tren^ling, yet with saiisiaclion and joy^ But 
yet it can never be amiss for u« to slir up each other's 
mindi by way ofremembranee. 

" Tb«t a nunisier of the Gospel should be a con- ' 



JAHE9 UtltREBO TATLOK. 19 

vetied man, is too pIniD, and commonly believed, foi 
me to insist on. He must be bom from above — be cre- 
ated in CbrisI Jesus unto good works — have his name 
written in heaven- Thither, when going out and com- 
. ing in, at home and abroad, he should direct his affec- 
tions' and desires, his whole walk and conversation: 
there should he lay up his treasures, and look to hea- 
ven as his eternal home. Nothing can be more unbe- 
coming in one who ministers in holy things, than 
worldly -mindedness. May Qod, of his infinite mercy, 
make u& peculiarly humble ; and fit us to bear the res- 
Bels of the Lord, by imparting to us much of Enoch's 

'' A minister of Jesus Christ ought to be thoroughly 
fiuTtished for his work. It need not be splendid furni- 
ture, to attract admiration ; but solid, substantial, and 
fit for use. Wemust seek it in the store-house of grace. 
There is enough treasured up in Christ — may we r^- 
ceire from bis fullness 1 Let us make our B^le* our 
text books. 

" But the preacher must have a call from the great 
Head of the church, whose prerogative it is to raise 
up, qualify, and send forth laborers. Alas ! how mise- 
rable must that man be, who preaches when he is aM 
sent. None of the truths which be utters — none of the 
warnings which he gives, but reverberate, 'Phywi' 
eian, heal thyself' O may you and I have our com- 
missions from Christ, to go into the world and preach 
his Gospel. May we receive an unction from the 
Holy One ; be set apart by the great High niest of 
our profession; he filled with the Holy Ghost, and 
with the fire of divine love— love supreme towards 
God, ardent towards our brethren, and utiivertal 



towards periibing siniierg. May the Spirit of the ' 
Lord real on our hearts as a spirit of prayer, a spiiil 
of coDTersatioD, a spirit of eihortatioD, a spirit of 
preaching. Then, settiog up our banner in tlie name 
of the Lord, we shall destroy the works of the devil, 
and advance the interests of the Redeemer's kingdom. 

"A minister has great need to look welt to all hii 
motives. Does he work for filthy lucre's sake ? then 
he cannot prospei. Does he seek the honor that 
comelh from raen, and not that which cometh from 
God only 1 then leanness and barrenness will rest on 
his heart, life, preaching, and conversation. O may 
we enter the work to win souls to Christ, and have, 
as our great motive, the honor of our blessed Redeem- 
er. May we forget every thing about ourselves but 
our responsibility, the shortness of our lives, our final 
account, and out eternal state j and may we always 
remember that many, Ttutny souls, in their eternal in- 
terests, depend on our faithfulness. May God make 
us faithful. 

" The greatness of this work should rest like ■ 
heavy weight on our minds. O ! it is a work for eter- 
nity. The mischiefs of unfaithfulness here can never 
be repaired. To fail here, is to fail for ever. If souls 
are lost through our neglect, they are murdered. May 
we, without might, doallforGod. ! to be devoted,.' 
servants of his, and workmen that need not be asham- ' 
ed. Then, when we come to give an account of out 
stewardship, we shall have joy and not grief. 

"Midiaters, of all others, should be holy men; 
Christians every where, and no common Christians; 
always setting an example for the flock to imitote. 



JAMES BBAUUD TAYLOR. 8l 

for perfect lore, for complete sBDCtifintion for the 
ckffice wLich awnits us I" 

It will be seen by all wbo read the preceding lines, 
ibat James B. Taylor was by no means saijsheil 
with bis religious attaiameals. His daily and moat 

earnest prayer was for higher and holier zeal, and 
mote fervent lore. He was fully persuaded that a 
Christiao, in the use of the appointed means, migbl 
make cpniinual progress in the divine life, and ad- 
vance far beyond his Cbristian stature. And this high 
attainment was tbe object of his continual desire. 

His repeated declarations show, that from the time 
be made a public profession of religion until the year 
1822, he tonged for, and with much earnestness sought 
clearer manifestations of the divine favor, and greater 
conformity to tbe divine will. He was under the abid- 
ing feeling that, without higher attainments in holi- 
ness, be never could enter the ministry. During the 
spring vacation of 1822 he visited his parents, and, as 
it would seem, resolved to consecrate this time of re- 
laxation from study to the special object of seeking 
such an increase of religion as would relieve him 
from many doubts which harassed his mind. It was 
bis privilege at this period to enjoy the society of 
some relatives, who, according to his account, were 
persons of very distinguished zeal and piely. He 
made much nse of (heir conversation and prayers, as 
well as of other means for the accomplishment of his 
object. All his subsequent papers refer to the t-aenty- 
third of April, iu this year, as the roost important era 
in his Christian life. He then gave himself up (o 
Cbrist with a strength offurpoie, a depth of feeling, 



82 UEHoiR or 

■nd an unretervediteag ofwhieh he had ncTcr before 
been conscious. And he was made lo partake of peace, 
ofjoy, of rapture, such as he had nerer exp«rienced. 
It was a fteax revival of religion in his heart. He 
knew eomething of that " hope which maketh not 
ashamed;" of that "perfect love which castelh ou^ 
fear ;" of that jof which is unspeakabie and full of 
glory. In a great number of letters wriiien about 
ihi^ time, and years afterwards, he dwells on this sea- 
son and its blessings. The fullest account, however, 
of the whole case, is given in a letter, dated May, 
1823, which is here introduced, as the event recorded 
had a very strong bearing on his religious character 
and his whole future conduct. , 

" LawrenceiilU, May II, 1823. 
"This is the Lord's day morning; and it comes lo 
me a welcome Sabbath. I awoke with the sensible 
presence of the Savior. How delightful the presence 
of Jesus ! It is he who mates us happy. Take him 
from the soul, and the sinner's hope of pardon is gone 
— take him from the Christian, and his peace is gone. 
If he is not with ihe believer in the svieiHngf of Jor- 
dan, he has no rod and staff to support him — take him 
from heaven, and it ia no place of bliss. Truly, Jesus 
.Christ is all in all. 

" This day brings wilh it a privilege of no ordinary 
kind. It is thai of witnessing the good profession of 
the church in this village, and of testifying to the 
world that I am on the Lordjs side. Once more I am 
called to sit at the table of the Lord Jesus and celi^- 
braie his dying love — may I do it in remembrance of 
him, penitently, humbly, with faith, with love, with 



JAHE8 BBAIHESD TAVLOK. S3 

peace, with joy I I would reraember him as the man 
who is Jehovah'a fellow, (Zech. 13 : 7,) set up from 
everlasliDg — I would remember him as ihe promised 
seed, who should bruise ihe serpeni's bead — as the 
locked for Shiloh — as ibe Messiah foretold by the 
prophets. I would remember him as already come— 
the babeof Bethlehem~-lhe manof sorrows— the des- 
pised Nazarene— the friend of publicans and siaaers. 
I would remember him as voluntarily humblins him- 
self, aud although rich, for our sakes becomiog poor, 
that we through his poverty might,be made rich. I 
would remember him io the garden in his agony— 
before an earthly tribunal, though Judge of all the 
earth — on ihe cross, thirsting, bieediag, groaning, dy- 
ing, although be is the Lord of life and glory. 1 
would remember him in the grave, ia his resurrection, 
and in his various manifeslaiious to his disciples. In 
a word, I would remember him as delivered for our of- 
fences, and raised again for our justification. 

" What an honor, to have a name and a place among 
his people here below. But what is a name and a place, 
'if we are destitute of the badge of true discipleship ? 
1 mean the badge of fove — supreme love to God, uni- 
vertal love to men. 

" But 1 would remember the forbearance and mercy 
of him whose name is love. I would never forget 
that fourteen years of my life were spent in folly and 
in sin, and yet 1 was not cut down as a cumberer of 
the Lord's vineyard ; that by the Holy Spirit I was 
convinced of sin and converted. I would remember 
/esus as my best friend, in the midst of temptations, 
' trials, and alBictions — as him who has not only per- 
jniCted me to taste of his grace, but has filled me with 



hia ' perfect love,' which ' caatelh out fear,' save th« . 
filial fear of offending my Father. 1 woald indeetire- 
member him as my Lord, my porcioD, and my all. 

" The Lord has often made himself known to me 
in the breaking of bread, particularly during the last 
year. My soul has, indeed, been richly fed at the 
conamunioB table. The intercourse between my heart 
and heaven has been frequent and full. Jesus has 
been exceedingly precious. May I find the taberoacle 
of the Lord of hosts ' amiable ' this day because of his 
presence ; may the banner of Jesus over me be loTe > 
and may his food be sweet to my taste I Then shall I 
sit under the shadow of the Almighty; my spiritual 
strength will be renewed i and I shall be happy in the 
Lord ray Savior. 

" I reperused with interest a letter received from 
you in 1819. Among other things contained in it, 1 
found ihe following: — 'It is thought by some pious 
persons, that the course of study usually pursued in 
the present day, by candidates for the ministry, is cal- 
culated to abate that fervor in religion which is so 
desirable.' However this may have appeared to the 
observation of others, 1 have not discovered it to he 
the case in many instances. On the contrary, it is to 
be hoped that young men, in a course of pteparatiou 
for the sacred office, grow in grace as they advance 
in knowledge. Surely, if they do not, they will hav^ 
occasion to accuse themselves of base ingratitude and 
very culpable negligence. That some are thus wo- 
fully remiss cannot be doubted. In the words of your 
correspondent, as quoted, they become, in the contM 
of their education, ' very different men, with k rtTf 



JAMES BRAINEHD TAILOR. 85 

differeDt kiud of piely ; and time must show whether 
It is betier or worse.' 

"But thanks, everlastiog thanks to the great Head 
of the church, that he hax not suffered my graces l.o 
languish and die. It is to hie rich grace thai 1 otee it 
all. He has done great afld wonderful things for me 
since I commenced studying for the ministry. Shall 
1 tell you 1 My tongue could not, much less can my 
)ien express the loving kindness of the Lord to me, 
who am less than the least of all his mercies. ' Eter- 
nity is too short to utter all his praise.' Bui I may tell 
you some of the merciful dealings of the Lord to my 

"You will doubtless recollect how oftpn I have 
complained tg you of the littleness of my attainments 
in the divine life ; how much of sin was still remain- 
ing within me, notwithstanding my profession that I 
had cruciSed the world, the flesh and the devil. I 
have had keener sorrows for indwelling sin than I 
ever ezperieneed before conversion. the distress 
which I have felt on account of pride, envy, lore of 
the world, and other evil passions, which have risen 
up and disturbed my peace, and separated between 
God and my soul. Bui the Lord heard my cries and 
gnmns, and was witness to liiy tears and my desires 
for holiness. I pleaded and wrestled with him ; and, 
praise to his name I after six long years 1 found 
what I had so long and so earnestly sought. Tt was 
on the a3d of April, 1822, when I was on a vUil at 
Haddam, in Connecticut. Memorable day ! The time 
and place will never, no, never be forgotten. I recur 
to il at this moment whh thankfal remembrance. For 

g J. D. Ttflot. 



efl MEUUIB OF 

»hen, through tlie great love and power of our Lord, 
1)1/ feet were set in a large place. 

" I canoot give you the particulars better than by 
nixing an extract from ray journal : 

' For some days 1 have been desirous to visil some 
ftieuds, who are dislinguished for fervor of piety, 
uiid remarkable for the happiness which they eujoy in 
religion. It was my hope, that by associating -vrith 
them, and through the help of their prayers, [ migfat 
find the Lord more graciously near to my soul. After 
my arrival, 1 took up a hymn book, where I founds 
hymn descriptive of my situalioli. The perusal of 
this increased my desire that the Lord would visit me, 
and fill me with the Holy Ghost — tny cry to him was, 
" geat my soul for ever thine." I lifted up my heart in 
praver that the blessing might descend. I felt that I 
needed something which I did not possess. There 
was avoid within, which must be filled, or t could 
not be happy. My earnest desire then was, as it had 
been eyer since I professed religion sis years before, 
that all love of the world might be destroyed— all sel- 
fishness extirpated — pride banished — unbelief remov- 
ed — all idols dethroned — everything hostile to Aoti- 
ness, and opposed to the divine will, crucified ; that 
holiness to the Lord might be engraved on my heart, 
and evermore characterize ray conversation. My • 
mind was led to reflect ou what would probably be 
my future situation. It recurred to me, I am to be 
hereafter a minister of the Gospel. But how shall I 
be able to preach in my present state of mind 1 I can- 
not — never ; no, never shall I be able to do it witli 
pleasure, without great overtarnings in my soul. I 
felt that I needed that, for whicif I was then, and for 



JAMES BlUIIieiilt TATLOR. 87 

a long lime had been, hungering and thirtting. I de- 
sireil it, Dot fur my bpnefit only, but for thai of ihe 
church and Ihe world. At thia very juncture I was 
most delightfully conscious of giving up all to God. 
I was enabled in my heari to Bay, Here, Lord, take 
me, lake my whole soul, and Beal me thine — tbine 
now, and ihine for ever. " If ihou wilt, thou canst 
make me clean." There then ensued such emotions 
as I never before experienced — all was calm aad tran- 
quil, silent, solemn — and a heaven of love pervaded 
my whole soul. I had a witness of God's love to me, 
and of mine to him. Shortly after, I was dissolved in 
tears of love and gratitude to out blessed Loid. The 
name of Jesuj was precious lo me, "'Twas music in 
my ear." He came as king, and took full possession 
of my heart ; and I was enabled to say, " I am crucified 
with Christ : nevertheless I live ; yet not I, but Christ 
liveth in me." — Let him, as King of kings and Lord 
of lords, reign in me, reign without a rival for ever.' 
"But this is not all — since that blessed season I have 
enjoyed times of refreshment, in which I have gained 
neareraccess to God. 1 have enjoyed his presence from 
day to day. Not one I believe has passed, in which I 
have not had the witness in myself thai I am born from 
above. O the peace which I have hnii, and joy in the 
HolyGhosi! It has flowed asa river. I have been hap- 
py in my Lord; I have exulted in the God of my salva- 
tion. But lasctibealllohisgrace. The Lord hath done 
great things for me, whereof 1 am glad, aLd for which 
I would praise his name. Not unto me, not unto roe '. 
1 am nothing — Jesus is all. To his name be the glory 1 
He is the author and finisher of faith. I know and 
am as fully assured of my acceptance with God as I 



8S ML-HoiB or 

can be of my eitateoce — that ia, if ' love, J07, peace, 
are evideocea of lecoiiciliaiioD. I hare a hope full of 
glorious immortality. The perfect love of God casi- 
eth out all fear of death, of the grave, of judgment, of 
hell. Filial fear — fear of ofleDding mj heaveDly Fa- 
ther and my brethren, possesses me. Surely I am ■ 
miracle of grace — a sinner saved by grace, free giace, 
sovereign grace, almighty grace. I feel that I love the 
Lord, because he first laved me. And, even now, I 
am favored with the gracious presence of Emmanuel. 
How suitable and delightful is the name — God with 
iu! — yes, oaAJoroied vjilMn wathe hope of glory. 

" I find the Scriptures increasingly delightful. 1 read 
no btJok with so much pleasure. It is indeed not a 
dead lelUr, but xpiHt and life. Divinity is stamped 
on its pages ; and when carried home to the heart, its 
truths are life and power. 

" In closet duties you douDtleas find most pleasure 
Here 1 loo find the heavenly manna. My soul has 
had Gospel measure in my evening's retirement. 'Ti!< 
here the Christian comes at the esaence of religion, 
while he holds intimate communion with heaven, and 
partakes of joys sublime and substantial, such as the 
world knoweth not, the unrenewed never taste. But 
ibey are real ; they are pure ; they are foretastes of 
good things to come, earnests of future endless bliss, 

" The prospect before me is a pleasant one. 1 have 
no anxiety about the future. My only wish is to know 
what my hearenly Father will have me to do, I have, 
indeed, the ministry in vieiv. 1 believe that the great 
Head of the church has called me lO prepare for it. 
But whether Ite will count inc worthy to be put into 
it, is not for me to decide. 1 would not duiermiiie. He 



ma; see Gt to femove ine hence before I shall have 
finished my course of study. PleastDg thought, if it be 
his will ! With some he has dealt thus, and so taken 
Ihem from rendering service below, to reader a perfect 
service above. But whether my life be protracted or 
shortened, my inquiry is, ' Lord, what will thou have 
me to do?' ' Speak, Lord, for thy servant heareth.' I 
am not ray owa keeper ; neither would I be at my own 
disposal. 'Godliness with contentment ia great gain.' 
1 trust that I have won this prize. Pray that I may 
keep and finish my course with joy. 

" Thus I have spoken of the Lord's dealings, and 
testified to his goodness. I have spokeato you with 
the familiarity and confidence of a friend. Do not 
think me an egotist. 

" And now may I ask you, ' Is it well with thee V 
If I mistake not, you were once not a little harassed 
with fears, and perplexed with doubts. Have you 
gained the ascendancy over your adversary? If not, 
be assured il is your privilege. 'For this purpose was 
Jesus manifesied, that he might destroy the works of 
the devil.' And it is not his pleasure that we should 
always be babes, or even young men. He would hare 
us arrive at the stature of perfect men in Christ Jesus. 
Alas ! how many seem to be ever learning, and never 
able to come to the knowledge of the truth. There 
are some who ate always complainiDg of their dead- 
ne^s and want of spirituality. Do you know the rea- 
aon? Certainly it is not because they have religion, 
but because ihey have no more religion. The effect 
of true piety is to quicken and enliven the soul, to 
make its possessor spiritual and heavenly-minded, 
'. 'which is life and peace.' AU, all should be onHhe 



90 MEMOMt OF 

alert ;' up and doing' for their Mastei's cause. Indeed, 
there is moch land lo be possessed; much in our own 
hearts ; much in out families ; much in oar neighbor- 
liood ; much in the world at large. Wlio will > e Chris- 
tiana in deed and in truth 1 who will be decidedly foi 
the Lord — eminently holy and devoted servants of the 
Most High 1 There is much to do ; much for you and 
much for me to accomplish; and our time is short. 
for more of Enoch's spirit, that 1 may walk with God 
continually ; for more of the meekness and the ardor 
of our Savior. In a word, let us live for Ood, for hea- 
ven, for eternity. Then shall we ' rejoice evermote, 
pray without ceasing, and in every thing give thanks.' 
The world will sink into nothing before us — souls will 
be valued according to their worth — the divine gloiy 
will be our chief aim, and heaven our final home. 

"What shall 1 say more? May you and I seek to 
be uncommon Christians ; that is, eminently holi/. Ho- 
liness becometh the house of the Lord. It is this which 
coofMins us to his image, which fits us for commnnion 
with him here, and which only will fit us for heaven 
and for glory." 

This letter is given at full length, because it con- 
tains the most clear and distinct account of the most 
remarkable revival of religion with which otir de- 
parted brother was favored after his conversion. He 
was af^rwards blessed with many similar seasons of 
refreshment; and the letters which follow this event 
are uniformly in a higher strain of joyful feeling. In 
a communication addressed to his parents, dated July 
IQ, 1833, there is a display of filial and fraternal love 
mingled with Christian affection and joy, evincing a 



high and suslaiued mental eieiiement. The father, 
mother, and all the grown up children, had become 
hopefully piou». In reference lo this subject he ex- 
presses himself thus: 

" When I look at my father's house my heart is filled 
with praiae for what Gad has wrought. 1 now rejoice 
in the assurance that the family altar b frequented 
every day, and that there is offered up the sacrifice of 
broken spirits and contrite hearts. How comforting ! 
Thif iookt like having a little heaven lo go to hea- 
ven in. My dear parents, may you ever abide under 
the shadow of the Almighty, find the banner of Jesus 
OTer you to be love, and his food to be sweet to your 
taste ! M>y your house be a Bethel to each of your 
soula," &c. 

After addressing most earnest and aifectionate ex- 
hortations to each of his sisters, he adds concerning 
himself, " Of all others I hare most reason lo praise 
the Lord, because he has kept me in perfect peace. 
Precious seasons, delightful hours I have enjoyed, and 
the remembrance of them is sweet. The Lord has 
manifested himself to me by his Spirit, and 1 now feel 
his presence ; my heart is stayed on the Lord ; Jestis 
is precious ; and I feel an increased determination to 
give up all for Christ, for he is worthy." 

Id another letter he says, " Thanks to my heavenly 
Father, I can write to you in a new strain. My former 
commuuicatioDs have been full of complaint, yet I did 
not tell you of half the distress which I felt on ac- 
' count of coldness in my Master's service, lest I should 



distieaa you with the narrative. But now I feel thst I 
can never sufficiemly praise the Lord for all that he 
baa doDe for toe. 1 will lake the cup of salvation and 
call on bis Dame. I would also call on my soul, and 
all thai is within me, to bless him for the great deli- 
verance which he has wrought. Surely he has deli- 
vered me from the snare of the fovi'ler— he has set my 
feet in a large place, and made me to rejoice in bid 
great salvation. Never have I enjoyed so much la re- 
ligion as since the 23d of last April. That was, and 
ever will be a memorable day to me. The kingdom of 
God, which is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the 
Holy Gliosi, was then, if ever, set up within me. 
Praise the Lord for it ! He is all. 1 am nothing. The 
glory~of my salvation, from first to last, shall be as- 
cribed to the Triune Jehovah." 

To another he expresses himself thus : " Since my 
arrival at Lawieuceville I addressed to you a letter 
testifying the goodness of God to my soul. 1 have now 
to say, to the praise of bis grace, that he hag con- 
tinued his favors. At this time I enjoy an indescriba- 
ble peace, it passes knowledge, and yet it is a bUsaed 
reality. And it is now my earnest desire that all 
Christians may strive for a. deeper work of grace la 
their hearts. 

" 1 am ready to testify to the world thai the Lord 
has blessed my sout beyond my highest expectations. 
People may call this blessing by xvhat name they 
idease, faith of ataurattce, holinega, perfect love, 
aanctification—H makes no difference with me whe- 
ther they give it a name, or no name, it continues a 
blessed reality, and, thanks to my heavenly Father, it 



JAUBB BHAINEKD TATLDR. VS ' 

ii my pTiTtlege to enjoy it — it is yours also, and ihe 
privilege of all, to enjoy the same, and lo go beyond 
Bay thing that I hare ever yet experienced." 

A careful pernsal of the letters written during ihe 
few months which followed the season so often ad- 
verted lo, has convinced the compiler of this memoir 
that it was followed by a great and permanent increase 
of holiness and of religious enjoyment. Yet that there 
was in connection with this, an eipoiure to a aeriooa 
error in the direction of his future life, ie undeniable. 
His desire to be engaged in preaching immediately 
was so strong that he came near to the resolution that 
he would abandon his course of preparatory study, and, 
if possible, forthwith enter the pulpit; and if he bad 
not possessed the degree of genuine scriptural piety 
which he actually had attained, there is no doubl but 
that ibe fervor of his feelings would hare carried him 
off in a very devious course. But when judicious 
friends presented to him the truth, and he carefully 
reflected on it, the path of duty appeared plain before 
him; and the power of conscience, as soon as it was 
belter informed, was sufficient to restrain the ardor of 
his wishes. And with a docility, and a frankness to 
iicknowlcdge his mistake, which does honor to his me- 
mory, he returned to his studies ; and pursued them, ai 
health permitted, with exemplary steadiness and re- 
gularity. And always, after he bad thoroughly ex- 
amined this subject, be felt, as will fully appear in the 
sequel, the obligation to improve, as far as possible, 
all his faculties, that he mi;;hi with more efficiency 
preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ to his perishing fcl- 



94 MEMOIR OF 

He had a powerful impTessioD of the necessity of 
raising much higher than ordinatf the standard of mi- 
nisterial piety. He thought that Christians universally 
might make, and must make, attainmeDls in religion 
far beyond those of ordinary professors; and he was 
convinced that this was not likely to lake place until 
preachers of the Gospel should become in a n:iost emi- 
nent degree holy men. But at the same time bis own 
experience and observation convinced him that young 
men, while laboring to kindle up the fire of zeal, and 
cultivating an ardent love for the work of the minis- 
try and for the souls of men, were liable to be drawn 
off from their preparatory studies, and hurried into the 
sacred office before they were suitably prepared for it 
He also knew that there are many Christians of indis- 
creet zeal, who very frequently suggest to students 
that they are wasting their lime and chilling their 
ardor in the prosecution of dry and barren studies while 
souls are perishing. And although he never in the 
slightest degree intimated an expectation that a me- 
moir of him would be prepared, yet he frequently ex- 
pressed the wish that candidates for ihe ministry might 
learn rather from the experience of others than their 
own, the unspeakable importance of uniting an t^- 
cowmon degree of piety and zeal with very thorough 
preparation for their work. He was convinced that 
it was exceedingly important that ministers of the 
Gospel should have religion enough to make them 
always happy ; because that would commend Chris- 
tianity to others, would make them love the arduous 
labors of their office, and carry them pleasantly through 
all its trials. 

From the 2M of April, 1S22, to the last day of his 



JAMES BRAINERD TAVLOB. 95 

life, he retained itnmoTably the coDviction, thai by 
(be diligent and faithful use of the meana appointed 
by Jesus Christ, there might be attainments in piety, 
and all its fruits, tove, joy, peace, hope, assurance, of 
which professors of religion ordinarily have no ade* 
qiiate idea. On this subject the reader will find him 
cxpresaiDg himself ih very strong terms, in letters 
hereafter to be inserted. And why may it not be so ? 
The economy of grace, so far from discouraging the 
use of means, does, when properly understood, afford 
the highest inducements to use them with all dili- 
gence. The relation between cause and effect is aa 
fully established in spiritual as in physical affairs. It 
is just as true in the one case an in the oilier, that the 
hand of the diligent maketh rich. And if one may not 
expect success in the use of measures presented for 
our growth in holiness, there can be no motive to em- 
ploy them, and no wisdom in their appointment. Now, 
who can set limits to a Christian's growth in grace, 
or to the increase of hia Epirilua! joy? May not one, 
who every day aets himself, with all the activity of 
intense desire, to make advancement in the divine life, 
expect daily to get forward ? If a Christian will never 
let unrepe^ted sin rest on his conscience — no, not for 
sn hour; if he never will omit any duty which for' 
the time he can possibly perform ; if he will not rest 
satisfied a moment without the light of his Father's 
countenance shining on him: why may not all joy 
abound in him, and he always abound in the work of 
'lie Lord? In perusing christian biography, and in 
observing the lives of ChrisEians, it is manifest that 
there is a very wide difference between the piety and 
■he religious enjoyment of different persons. And it is 



98 MEMOIR or 

very clear that there is also as wide a difference bf- 
tiveen llieir respective diligence and activity id usiu; 
the means of religious improTement. 

This subject is urged in this manaer, because the 
unhappy dispute which has risen on the subject of 
perfection, has been so managed as to induce in many 
the belief that doubt, despondency, and occasional 
gloom, are important evidences of Chiistian character. 
It is undoubtedly true, too, that the spiritual pride of 
some who have pretended lo be free from all sin, and 
to have attained the assurance of hope, has rendered 
more modest Christians unwilling to speak with con- 
lidence of their spiritual state. But it ought to be un- 
derstood that these two subjects are totally distinct. 
There will always be enoligh about the Christian, 
while he is in the body, to keep him humble, and to 
make him shrink from the claim of perfection. Yet it 
is certainly the doctrine of the Scriptures that belierera 
ought to rise to the stature of lull grown men in Christ 
Jesus; that they may attain to such a slate as to be 
able to say, " We know on whom we have believed ;" 
that it is Iheir privilege to rejoice evermore ; yea, evea 
with a "joy unspeakable and full of glory." But If all 
this is not believed — if it is taken for granted that we 
must go sorrowful and in doubt through this world; 
then no efforts will be made, no means will be em- 
ployed to rise to that happy and joyous state, of which 
the Bible speaks m frequent and strong terms. But 
noihiqg is more certain than the truth, that no bless- 
ing is obtained in religion, any more than in the aflaira 
of this world, without effort. The economy of grace 
M such, that, by following the plain directions of the 
Bible, Christians will grow up into Christ iheir head 



JANEB BKAINEKD TATLOR. 97 

in all things. Lelstudentgof theology then, and Chriit- 
tians generally, believe ibal they may become very 
emiDeutly holy and happy, and that it is their duty 
to be so. 

The de terra in alioD of Mr. Taylor to return to that 
course of study which he had first marked out, did not 
in the least abate the fervor of his 7eal, nor lessen his 
t^flbrts to make that continual process in piety which 
he felt that every one ought to make who has the sa- 
cred office in view. The following extracts froin his 
letters will show that his religious enjoymeuis were 
continued, and inde^ rendered more pemjauent and 
exalted. But it ought to be understood that he did not 
allow his piety to expend itself in mere feeling. His 
religion was not that of a retired contemplative mys' 
lie ; he was perfectly alive to all the charities of life } 
and he omitted no opportunity of doing good, which 
was either presented or could be made by him. In « 
word, the experience which he had acquired served 
the double purpose of making him conscientious in his 
endeavors to store his mind with useful and necessary 
knowledge, and to imbue his heart more and more en- 
tirely with the spirit of the Gospel. At the same time 
he was exceedingly desirous that his Christian friends 
should partake of such religious enjoyments as he 
himself was favored with. He thus writes to one who 
had, at an early period in life, made a public profes- 
sion of faith in Jesus Christ : 

" L , Odoier 31, 1833. 

" - " ' A hope of eternal life is indeed a treasure 
more precious than gold, yea, than much fine gold.' 
When 1 saw you last, yoa expressed doubts and fears 
a J. D. Tifoi- 



9B SIEHOIB OF 

respectiug yourself. Yon also wished to obtain a 
brighter evidence, a clearer wituess of your accep- 
tance with God. The desire is laudable, and it may 
De grailGcd : for full assurance U attainable. And 
who ia happy without it 1 
" To attain what you desire, two things ate ne- 

" 1. You must believe that it is attaiaable. 

" 2. You must seek it with your ichole heart. 

" 1. You most believe that it is attainable. That it 
IS so, see for proof, Heb. 6 : 11. We there find a de- 
sire expressed that the Hebrews might possess it to 
the end. Paul enjoyed it, 2 Tim. 4 : 6-8. The eighth 
verse plainly shows that the writer possessed full as- 
surance. ' There is laid up for me a crown of righte- 
ousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will 
give roe at that day.' See also Rom. 8 : 38, 39. 'For 
I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, 
nor principalities, nor powers, not things present, nor 
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other 
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of 
God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.' Many others, 
besides the apostle, to the lasting joy of their souls, 
have found this truth a blessed reality. 

" 2. Therefore you must look unto Jesus, the author 
and finisher of faith. Heb. 13 : 2. Mere belief that 
assurance is attainable, will not bring dowu the bless- 
ing to our possession. The prodigal son believed that 
there was bread enough and to spare in his father's 
house, while he was feeding on husks. But what 
would this conviction have availed had he not come 
to the resolution, * 1 will arise and go uDto toy father?' 
and what his belief and resolution, had he not ptit 



»MB8 BBAIKBBD TAVLSR. 90 

tbe resolve in eieculioii 1 Exertion is neceisaTf . Can 
we attain any abject of decire without using means 
adapted to the end in view 7 

"Snffer, tlien, the word of exhortation. Give all di~ 
ligence to secure that, which I tmst the Holy Spirit 
has caused yoti to desire. Let your cry be continually 
to the Lord, that your soul may be filled with 'perfxt 
•peace. Be encouraged — for the proniiee is. ' Ask, and 
you shall receive.' Yon have ' an advocate with the 
Father, Jesus Christ the righieous.' He has said, 'If 
ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it.' John. 
14 ; 14, dtc. Ask, O ask, that your joy may be fuU."" 

The following, to the same friend, is so fall of the 
fervor of piety, that the reader will peruse it with deep 



" The retrospect to you, as to me, is no doubt min- 
gled with .emotions of regret and joy. For, once we 
were aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and 
strangers 10 the covenants of promise. Nearly fifteen 
years of my life were spent at a distance from God, 
in pursuit of a pAanfoin a visionary object, denomina' 
ted by its votaries, phajiure. With what eagerness I 
followed that on which I have long since stamped va- 
nity and vexation of spirit, the companions of my 
youth could testify. But, alas! twoof ihemhave gone, 
never to return — their bodies lo the place appointed 
for all the living, their immortal spirits to the bar 
of their righteous Judge, One departed wilh bright 
evidence of a work of grace inwrcmght by the Holy 
Spirit— yes, even ioihetriumplis of faith, saying, just 



too MEMOtB OF 

befoK she left the world, ' 1 am going soon, my St- 
vior is near.' The other manifested no token of a 
change of heart. Should these peiaons now giVe tes- 
timony respecting the hilarity of out youthful days, 
how deep would be their tone of reprobation ! But 
soon the day of account will come, and all must an- 
swer for the deeds done in the body. 

" Besides the person first mentioned, only two othera 
of my youthful companioas, as I belicTe, haTe denied 
tbemBelves, ukea up the cross, and followed the Savior. 

' Wh; waj I made to hear thy TOke, 

* And BDter vfaile tbere'a room ; 
' While thouMndt make a wralchad choice, 

'And rather itiirTe than coma.' 

" When 1 had reached the age of fifteen years and 
five mouths, I publicly professed the religion of Christ, 
and joined myself to his people. This confession waa 
witnessed on the )5th of Sept. 1816. Tbe vows then 
made to be the Lord's, have often since been repeated 
in the closet and in the sanctuary. Eventful era in 
my life ! Never by me to be forgotten ! Its aanual re- 
turn always brings grateful recollections. 

" On last Sabbath 1 was privileged to obey the dy- 
ing command of the Lord Jesus, 'Do this in remem- 
brance of me.' It was a most precious season. Tho 
intercourse between my soul and heaven was open 
and free. _ I was brought into the banqueting house of 
the Beloved ; and his banner over me was love. Truly 
I had communion with tlie Father, and with his Son 
Jesus Christ, through the Holy Spirit. My brethren 
and sisters, both in tbe church militant and the church 
triumphant, were objects of my affection— yes, all 



JAMES BKUMEUI TAVLOB. 101 

who were purchased by the redempiion tbat is in 
Christ Jesus. 1 also with all my heart desired the 
conversion of impeaitent siDDers. Indeed the Lord 
was present to hless me with gotpel-meatvre, pressed 
down, shaken together, and mnning over. Commu- 
nion seasons grow better and better. And so it ought 
lo be. By and by I hope to drink new wine in the pa- 
Tidiee above. 



' I taid that the 15th of September, 1816, was, and 
ever will he an eventful era to me. But there is ano- 
ther day to which I shall ever recur with as much, if 
not more interest. It was the 23d of last April. On 
thai day the Lord wrought a deeper work of grace in 
ray soul than at any former period. Yes, blessed be 
his holy name for ever ! he condescended to bestow a 
favor, for which 1 had been longing for years — the 
vilne»» of which I have enjoyed daily ever since. I 
cannot tell you what I have enjoyed from his fullneai ; 
but let it suffice to aay that my peace hns flowed like 
a river ; and 1 can testify that I have experienced 
more of the presence of the Lord than during my 
whole previous ejisteoce. The earnest of the pur- 
chased possession has been given to me, and I hava 
rejoiced in the hope of the glory of God, and of the 
rest which remaineth for his people. 

" I wish you to understand that I advert to this sob- 



](n HmotB or 

jcct, and dwell on it, because I wiab-to »how forth th* 
divioe goodness as manifested to so unworthy a sin- 
ner as I am ; and to testify the loving-kiodness of the 
Lord. 

" It may eneounge my friend, who, I trust, has 
tasted that the Lord is gracious. Let me again vxge 
yon to seek until you obtain that bright evidence of 
your acceptance which you desire. Never give otm 
the effort. The adversary is ever near to cheat you 
out of the promiaed blessing. Btit the word of truth 
assures us, that if we resist him, he will flee from us ; 
and that if we draw nigh to God, be will draw nigh 
to us. 'Blessed are they that do hunger and thirst 
after righteousness, for they shall be filled.' 'If ye, 
being evil, know how to give good gifts to your chil- 
dren, Aou much more shall your heavenly Father give 
the Holy Spirit to them that ask him.' Such are the 
promises which encourage vs. If then you seek and 
find not, search narrowly into your heart, and~see it 
there is any thing cherished there inconsisient with 
your desires to obtain this blessing; any thing opposed 
to holiness, such as love of the world, pride, selGsH- 
ues9, &c. God does not come and dwell in the heart 
where he finds rivals. Before you venture to approach 
the holy presence of the Lord and offer sacrifice to 
him, examine yourself carefully, and put far away 
every thing that can hinder the blessing. If you feel 
how important it is that believers should be sanctified 
wholly, in soul, body and spirit, you will excuse the 
plainness of my speech. Allon me to propose a ques- 
tion, which has occurred to my mind since 1 wrote the 
preceding paragraph. Why may not you be an im> 
common Chriitian ? Do you see any thing to prevent 



ijMEB Bumns TATLOB. in 

it? Ii not the Lord on yoni side 1 Have you aoi tha 
Qod of Jacob for your lefoge i Have you not an Ad< 
Toeate with the Father, who is Also a tympathisiiig 
friend, hAving been in aU points templed as hb dls- 
ciplee, yet without sin 1 O then sbive for it. Ktep 
'^eWorld, the flesh, and Ihe devil 'continually under 
youi feet, and heaven continually in view ; that you 
nay have heaven within you. Is il not for this that 
yon ^ave been brought into the church at a very early 
period in life T Is it not your duty to be an vfuommom, 
that is, a very humble, self-nlenying, cross-bearing, (in 
a word,) BiBLG cHHinuN? And it i« no less your pri- 
vilege than youi duty. 

" Pray for me, that I may have mc«e faith, humility, 
patience, yea, every thing to make me Chriat-lAe. 

" With best regards, tc J. B. T." 

To thauuM. 

"NavemierSS,l&0. - 
' The soul may be in beaviikess through aanifold 
ttiaptations, 1 Peter, 1 : 6. Then, and in all linaa of 
difficulty, there is an opportunity for trusting in j|ie 
Loid, and scekios htm until he ooise and acoompbah 
a complete deliverance. To be templed it nota sis — 
but to yield to temptation. To endure it is a blBMUig, 
Jtunes, 1 : 12. But ^ twptalioB takei effect, it will 
bring forth death, ver. 15> Thanks to heaven'i high 
King, ' the Lord kooweth bow to deliver the godly ont 
ef temptnwins,'2Peter, S:9- Then let useomiBitottr 
WUM into the hands of ' the Author and Finithar of 
qiu faith,' who ' worketb ia us both to will and M> do 
of his good pleasore.' Ad4 after all onr «xertioiu fti 



104 MUfoiH or 

deepening the work of grace in our souls, may we lie 
passire in his hands. Although our whole life sboold 
be one continued scene of doubt and feai, heaven will 
make amends for all. BuC ask and look for overeom- , 
./ing grace here— now. There is enough and lo spare. 
. Let me leqaest that your prayers be offered up on my 
behalf— that the Lord would make me a faithful ser- 
vant in his vineyard, should he call me there to labor; 
and that duriTig my irorft of preparation I may bi 

The fallowing letter to his parents will show that 
he had been brought to view the subject of prepara- 
tion for the ministry in ■ proper point of light : 

" Dtcetaber 1, 1833. 
••Mj bttoni Fdhu ud llMhn, 

" I haye bee*, reading to-day and last evening, Mr. 
Parsons' Journal during his visit to Palestine. I found 
it delightful to follow tnm as he recorded his visits to va- 
rious places in and about the holy city Jerusalem. He 
visited the holy sefHilchre, Mount Calvary, Mount Oli- 
vet, the Podl of Siloam, Mount Zion, Bethany, Jericho, 
the Dead Sea, where Sodom and Gomorrah once stood, 
and Bethlehem. On his way from Jerusalem to Beth- 
lehem, from an eminence, he had, at the same mo- 
ment, a distinct view of three of the most imporlaDl 
places in the world — Bethlehem, where Jesus Christ 
was bom; Calvary, where he was crucified; and 
Mount Olivet, from whence he ascended on h^i. 
The associations connected with such a situation ar* 
at oace truly sublime and pleasingly melancholy. But 
Mi. Parsons is dead. He rested from his lahon a> a 



lAHES BtlAIKEKD TAVLOR. 10a 

missionar^f on th« 9tb of lut Febraary, at Aleiandha, 
ia Ej^fpt. He had lefl father and mother, and putting 
his life in his hand, had embatked in the missionary 
cause. The tidings of his death nust have been truly 
afflictive to his parents. Yet how honored ue tbey 
in having a child to lire and die for the Lord ! 

" While reading this journal, the question occurredi 
who knows but that that region is marked out as ffijf 
liboriog place. But I giTe myself no trouble about this 
thing. The Lord knows, and he will let me know, 
vhen the time comes for my going forth into the 
Tineyard. 

" I am indeed a wonder to myself, when I think 
what I once was, and contrast my former with my 
present situation and prospects. ' Not unto me — not 
unto me,' but to my gracioaa Qod be all the glory. 
To him I owe life, health and comfort. 

"1 am as highly farored as I have been. The Lord 
has taken care of me. At times, when my foot has 
well nigh slipped, he has been near to uphold me, so 
tbai 1 am under infinite obligations to love and serve 
him, and ever to speak well of his name. 

"I am more contented with my situation and pnw- 
pects, and more settled in mind, than 1 was at one 
period. I see more clearly than ever that I have ■ great 
work before me, and one that needs great prepara- 
tion. Since I commenced study, you know that I 
hare been much tried on account of the length of my 
course. I was anxious to ^et out. But I am now 
thankful to God that he did not let me go ; for had I 
gone, what should 1 have done ? At one time I felt it 
to be my duly to go forth as a preacher immediatsly 
—at another, to curtail my allotted course— I now 



106 ifuioni or 

look forward to a complete coiute, as I did al first I 
expect to go to college next /oU, and remaun three 
years ; thence to the itieological semtnarr, and gto- 
dy three years longer. I have learned some lessons 
from experience, which, probably, I could have leatD- 
od in no olber way. These lessons, I have good hope^ 
^vill benefit me through life. My studies are agreea- 
ble — my health is good. The Lord makes my dwell- 
ing a Bethel to my soul — I have enjoyed in secret 
most refreshing seasons. But I want more faith, more 
humility, more love, more meekness, more of the spirit 
of my Master: in a word, I want to be more like 
Christ, in all my thoughts, words, and actions. 

" By and by, I may become a preacher of the Gospel 
— but I may not. Life hangs on a brittle thread. All 
arc alike exposed to the shafts of death. Only a short 
lime since, a student at the theological seminary in 
Princeton, who had finished his collegiate studies, and 
just entered on his iheolc^cal course, sickened and 
died. A young man, also in New Brunswick, study- 
ing for the ministry, died but a little while ago. Aud 
Dr. Mason's son at Carlisle, a candidate for the mi- 
nistry, died about the same lime. These three young 
men prosecuted ttieir studies in the same class in col- 
lege, and all died in one month. How mysterious ! 
Butit is the Lord, and he doeth what seemeth him good. 

" These events show us that piety, talents, and pros- 
pects of usefulness in the world, are no barriers against 
I death. May those that are looking forward to the mi- 
nistry consider well that they are mortal ! If the Lord 
designs me for the great work of preaching the Gospel, 
he will spare my life. But should he take me hence 
during my preparatory studies, it will he, I tnisi, to 



lAHES BBAIREBD TAYLOR. 107 

te&der to him a perfect serrice in beBTen, instead tf 
•m impetfect one here on earth. Let noDe therefore 
monni roj death, should the Lord take me to himself. 

" There ia nothing worth living for in this world 
but to glorify God. And rather than not do this in my ' 
■ubsequent life, 1 should prefer lo go away to that house 
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. There, 
my dear parents, I expect to meet you — there I eipec- 
to meet my dear bioCheis and sisters — O ! what thanks 
belong to our blessed Redeemer, that he has called us 
with a holy calling. May ne, mho have given our- 
telres to Christ, be faithful unto death, and enter into 
the haven of eternal rest. And not we only, hot the 
dear little ones of the family. May God, for Christ's 
ralie, hear our prayers for them — may they all be 
brought into the fold of Christ — not one left oitt — that 
ours may be a holy, happy, devoted family. 

" Dec. 27. You will observe that this letter was be- 
gun some lime ago. By the time it reaches you, pro- 
bably yon will have entered on a new year. Hay it 
{KOre happy to you in its commencement, in its con- 
linnance, and in its end. 

"As ever, I would subscribe myself, - 
" Your affectionate son, 

" Jaues B. Taylor." 

This interesting young man was much accustomed 
to observe particular seasons and periods of time. On 
the firgt day of the year, 1S23, he wrote a letter to 
his family, which no doubt will long be preserved by 
them as a precious memorial of his piety and affection. 
He first takes a view of the dispensations of Provi- 
dence and grace towards the family during the year. 



Aad it appears' Ihat dating that period the fatber of 
ibe family and three of the children had experienced 
that change of heart, without which, according to the 
testimony of Christ, none can enter the kingdom of 
heaven. In producing these important changes, the in' 
sirumentality of the son was greatly blessed. Hia filial 
rererence and delicacy, combined with christiau fide- 
lily, have already been noticed. Theaame spirit ia 
raanifesied in this letter, but on this occasion it is min- 
gled with much holy joy. He speaks of 1822 aa a year 
o( jubilee to the whole &mily, and describes in rap- 
lure the domestic happiness enjoyed, whin ao many 
had become true Christians, and were mingling with 
the charities of natural telationskip, the hopes and 
joys of religion. 

" Having addressed yon all indiTidoally, I now come 
to testify to the goodness and loTtng-kindness of the 
Lord which have followed me. 

" Surely of all others I have most reason to apeak 
well of hU name, which is above every name ; for in 
the midst of deserved wrath be hath remembered unde- 
served mercy. 

" The year 1822 has, of a truth, been a year of ja- 
bilee to my soul. During that period Ood has done 
more for me than I ever expected in this world. On 
the 23d of April he accomplished a work which I had 
longed for during six years. I feel the blessed eSecIs 
of that visitation until Ibis day. And nniil my dying 
liny 1 shall have reason to recall that hour with thank- 
ful remembrance. No year before the one just past 
has afforded such solid peace in believing. I have had 
nem access to the throne of grace. Jesn^ has been pre- 



JIMES BHAINEU) TATLOI. 109 

eiotu. Mf endeavors to promote the caau of Christ, 
kowevet short 1 may have come, were put forth wiih 
increased pleasure. Preacbiog has come to my heart 
with greater power. Commuoioa seasons have been 
delightful — k little heaven on eanh — Ibreustes of the 
joys to come. Since that 23d of April 1 have enjoyed 
« BW^eel and lasting evidence of my acceptance with 
God, ao that 1 have looked on the grave with compo- 
snre, and on death as a messenger lo open that door, 
through which 1 should have an abundant entrance 
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior 
Jeaus Christ — and on heaven as my eternal home. I 
have had delightful seaaoas in praying for the family, 
collectively and individually — for Zioa and her pros- 
perily, especially for the Jews — for friends, and espe- 
cially for one who does not profess to love the Lord — 
and for enemies. Think me not boastful when 1 say 
that 1 do love my enemies, and earnestly pray for their 
salvation'. The Lord has commanded us to do this; 
ind he has helped me to obey the command. To him 
be all the praise ! ' O give thanks unto the Lord, for 
he is goodj for his meicy endureih for ever. Let the 
redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he hath redeemed 
from the hand of the enemy. O God, my heart is fixed. 
1 will sing and give thanks.' 

" The retrospect of the year shows that we have 
been most highly favored. The windows of heaven 
hare been opened, and have dropped — nay, rather 
have poured down blessings upon me. We have drunk 
of the wells of salvation, and have lasted that the 
Lord is gracious. Surely his eyes have been over us 
for good from the beginning to the close of the year. 
He has conducted us safely through dangers seen and 



110 MEHoiR or 

UB9KD : be his been ' on our right band anil on oni 
left, BO that we haie oot been moved.' Blesa ihe 
Lord, O our sould, and all that U within us bless bit 
holy Dame. Bless the Lord, O our souls, and forgvi 
Qot all his benefits; who forgireih all our iniquities, 
who healeth all our diseases, who redeemeth our lives 
from desiruction, and ctuwneth us with loving-kind- 
ness and lender mercies. Maf he at length give us 
the crown of glory, the heavenly diadem, purchased 
with the labors, the tears, the blood, the death of the 
Son of God. 

" For allour short-comings during the past year may 
we be suitably humbled ; and learn wisdom frum the 
consequences of our remissness. For all ibe good ob- 
tained for ourselves, or done to others, may we ascribe 
glory to (he Lord. For all the evil, may we take shame 
to ourselves. 

" Finally, 'what shall we tender to the Lord for all 
hii benefits 1 A new year has begun its courgie. It 
mores with as much rapidity as marked the Bight of 
the old. It will soon be gone ! but we may not live to 
see its close. How actively, then, should we be en- 
gaged — each one in his place fulfilling his du^I 
May every revolving day forcibly remind us that OOB 
last day is eomii^! and may we double our diligeaas- 
in preparing to meet our Judge, that we may render 
our accounts with joy, and not with grief. 

"Haling been enabled to raise our 'Ebenezer,' 
saying, ' Hitherto bath the Lord helped us,' let us in- 
scribe upon our hearts^ ' Jehovah- J ireh,' the Lord will 
provide. Abundant is the provision in heaven's store- ' 
house for all the needy. Let us seek and expect great 
blessings from on high. 



..C.r 



H^l.' 



JAKE! eBAIHERO TAVLoa. Ill 

"May we this year do more than erer for our tyifn 
growth in grace and for the welfare of Zios; and u 
we iraTel on our way heaveoward, may we bear ona 
auoiher's burdens, and so fulfill the law of Chrht ; in- 
terceding, each for all, that we luay walk as pilgrinia 
and atrangers who expect soon to become fellow-citi- 
leas of the saints iu glory." 

[Thus far had this interesting eompilation proceed* 
ed under the hand of the lamented John Holt Rice, 
when it pleased Ihe Lord lo say to him, in the faror- 
ite phrase of this heavenly -minded young man, '- Come 
up higher." And now upon anolhcr, incompetent in- 
deed, but willing friend, has the task devolved lo 
finith what had been so happily begun.] 

The piely, the zeal, the humility, the heavenly- 
nindedness, the ardent desire to be useful in the vine- 
yard of his Lord, which characterized the late James 
B. Taylor, hare beeii already exhibited with such a 
force of evidence,that every reader must see, what 
. every acquHiniaace felt, that he had become, as he 
proposed to himself, and often pressed upon others lo 
become, an ttncontmon Ckrittian. 

His failh seemed never to waver — his christian af- 
fections never to grow languid— his communion with 
God, through the mediation of the Son and by the 
■id of the Holy Ghost, was seldom inlemipled ; and 
-when a cloud intervened, and the divine communica- 
tions were suspended, he rested not till the cause 
ms ascertained, and the light of his heavenly Fa- 
ther's countenance again let down upon bis loul. Noi 
did be ever lose sight of the great object after which 



113 MBHOtB or 

hia bean panted, and in preparation for which he wn 
diligently engaged. Nerer, perhaps, did any one 
more intensely desire to preach the Gospel than did 
James B. Taylor. 

Of the truth of these Btatements ample proof wil) 
be found in the following extracts from his correspon- 
dence during this year, and in the fragments of a dia- 
ry found among his papers, commencing with the first 
of May, IS23. 

To a venerable minister of the Gospel, for whom 
he cherished the warmest affection, he wrote as fol< 

" LaurenceviUt, Jan. 37, 1623. 
" Rciennd ud belorcd Sir, 

"When I say that I have not had the priTilege 
of receiving a communication from my worthy and 
esteemed father in the Gospel, as 1 anticipated, he 
will not consider me as complaining of remias- 
nets ; far be it from me; for my letters are not, 
neither am 1 worthy of this notice. Yet the good 
counsel, the friendly admonitions of one so expe- 
rienced, might hare been incalculably useful to one 
so inexperienced as myself, who, if the Lord of 
the vineyard permit, will follow on in a course pro- 
bably not unlike your own. Last evening, as 1 waa 
reading the word of God, the following passage came 
in course : ' And the Lord said unto Moses, get thee 
up into this mount Abatim, and see the land which I 
have given lo the children of Israel. And wbui 
thou hast seen it, thou also shalt be gathered lo thy 
people, as Aaron thy brother was gathered.' In medi- 
tation, my mind dwelt upon the situation of Mosei 



LOB. 113 

and his blessed prospect. O! bow mncb better to en- 
ter the beaveoly Csoaau thao to eujoj' an earthly ooe I 
I endeavored to place myself upon the moaol and 
take a view of the goodly land. As I mused the fira 
burned, until I could say, Welcome death, that leli 
the captive soul at liberty 1 1 think 1 had some of that 
longing to, depart and be with Christ of which the 
apostle speaks, and could have finished my course 
with joy ; yet, from my very soul I could say, ' Not 
my will, O Lord, buL thine be done.' I saw 1 bad a> 
yet auSered but little for Christ, and was enabled to 
say, Lord, 1 will follow thee through toil, through 
persecution, to prison, and to death. Wait, wait pa- 
tiently, U my soul, till thy change coma." 

In the same letter Mr. Taylor wrote to the young 
members of the family as follows: 

"The yeartbat has just closed has been a memora- 
ble one to you ; upon it you can inscribe Jubilee, for 
thus it has proved to your souls. What mercy baa 
the Lord shown you ! Thanks to his rich, free, sove- 
reign, almighty grace, thai he has rescued you from 
goiug down to the pit. How has ii been with yoti 
since you found the Savior precious to your souls ? 
Has hi' been increasingly sol PJave you found your 
closet devotions' growing more delightful ? the Bible 
more sweet 7 and the duties of religion more plea- 
sant ? What fellowship have you then enjoyed with 
the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ 1 What • 
blessed religion! While it enjoins constancy in its 
duties, which to the pious is a privilege, it afliirds 
peace — peace with God — peace with the world — peace 
of cooseienee. The love of God, kindled up in ibe 
10* 



Hi MEMOIB or 

sonl bf the Holy Qboet, is the'pTinciple from which 
emanates lore to Chrisiians — love to sinners — love to 
all God's creatures. But, having been bom of God, 
we must remembei that we are not to remain babea ia 
Christ A necessity is laid upon us to leave the fint 
principles and go on to perfection. Therefore may 
we prett forward, and give all diligence to make our 
calling and election ntre. To this end we must never 
be afraid to know the worst of ourselves. Let us ever 
pray, ' Search me, O Qod, and know my heart; try 
me, and know my thoughts, and Bee if there be any 
wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.' 
May you be uncommon Christians ; that is, eminently 
pious and holy, and, like Mary, ever at the feet and 
around the cross of Jesus, the precious Lamb of| 
God. There is much to be done. The world is to be 
converted to God ; and why may there not be great 
and lasting good done through your instrumenialtty ? 
Then go on. The world may frowa — Satan ntay rage 
—but go on ; live for Qod. Greater is be that is for 
you, than all that can be against you aod the chris- 
tian cause. May I die in the field of battle. May the 
Lord make me a true son of Levi, holy ; and, like 
David and Sampdon, fosrless in bis service." 

To this letter he received an affeciianate reply, c<m- 
tainiog much salutary counsel, and particularly com- 
laending his decision to persevere in his studies pre- 
paratory to the miuistry. As the epistle of his aged 
friend closes with the words, " The elder in Christ 
Jesus salutes you," Mr. Taylor, on the 17th February, 
MSpotided as follows : 

'James, emjihaticidbi tJie le»», a servant of God utd 



LOR. Ill 

of the Lord Jesua Christ, to the elder, the well beloved, 
whom I must sincerely love in the truth ; mercy unto 
jrou and yours, and peace and love be multiplied from 
Qod the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the 
dear Son of the Father, and our precious Redeemer. 

"Your letter, fraught with most lender expressions 
of aBection for one who truly feels himself less than 
(he least of all saints, and so richly inslnictive, came 
to hand on the lOth instant ; for which 1 have thanked, 
and do still thank the Lord, and my reverend father. 

"Be assured, it gives me pleasure to devote a few 
passing moments to a correspondent I so highly prize 
u an experienced Christian, as a cordial friend, and 
as a master in Israel. 

"I proceed to notice in order some of the particulars 
in yout letter. For the sfiectionale regard which has 
led to the recilsl of my name in your domestic and so- 
cial circle, I am to be grateful to Him who causes his 
children to find favor in the sight (^ men. OAentimec 
does it happen that even Christians hesitate to wel- 
come the ransomed of the L(»d with the cotAMity 
which they should manifest, and particularly if they 
should happen to bear a different -name. 

"You readily join with me in saying, these things 
ought not so to be. And the loss which some have 
stisiained through prejudice, ignorance and bigotry, is 
incalculable. ' Forget not to entertain slrangera, for 
thereby some have entertained angels unawares.' 
Truly the badge of brotherly loee should characterize 
all who bear the christian name. 

" The eulogy you wrote upon my letter, the adver 
HUy would gladly have used to excite a spirit of self' 
exalMlion, which would only kf re procured my down- 



lis MEMOIR or 

Tall ; bul I had on the christian armor; and th« praiK 
beliiDgi to the Captain of my salvHlion, who helped 

mesotowieldthe^word of the Spirit as to turn (he vic- 
tory OQ tlie side of humility. Yes, iaglead of a means 
of producing self-coinpiacency, it was the occnsion of 
Gelf'abasemeat, and of going out of myself and trust- 
ing in the Lord as my teudonty my liglil, my strength. 
Thus I experieooed the blessedness of enduring temp- 
tation ; and while the enenay was defeated, I was made 
to triumph. It ij sufficient that the servant be as hia 
Lord. We need not eipect freedom from temptation 
till the earthly bouse of onr tabernacle be dissolved. 
Then may we receive (he crown of life, which the 
Lord baih promised to (hem that love him. 

" When you portrayed the feelings of a pious youth, 
you described to an iota my state whco I entered upon 
my present course, and while prosecuting it till last 
fall. What a miserable week I spent aSlei my arrival 
at Lawrenceville the first time ! My Latin Grammar 
— but you have bad, doubtless, somewhat of the same 
experience. 1 had come from an active life — 1 was 
enclosed within the walls of the academy with chil- 
dren — a long academical,' collegiate, and theological 
course was before me — I was growing old. Ac. This 
combination of disagreeables, together with my desire 
to be out, conspired to render me disconsolnte ; yet I 
was tbanbful for the prospect. 1 would dwell longer 
upon this particular, but suffice it to say, I am now 
contented to remain the appointed time — and I doubt 
not 1 shall ever have reason (o admire (be train ol 
providences which have been to me as 'a pillar ol 
cloud by day, and a pillar of Sre by night.' My fool 
had well nigh slipped, but the Lord has held me up 
and established my goings. 



JAHE9 BRAtNEBD TAYLOR. 117 

"Your suggestioQs are well worthy of myjrequtnt 
consideniEion. The olyect I have endeavored to keep 
b riew, viz. the glory of God bs it is conoected with 
the salvation of sinners. To this end I think 1 baTe 
coieled earnestly the bat gifts, which I conceive to 
be the spirit of prayer, the spirit of exhortation, and 
the spirit of prophecy, that is, the gifts of preaching. 
1 regard the Bible, the word of God, as the weapon 
mih which the minister ia to do execution in the field 
of ihe enemy. Therefore it should be not only in his 
siDdy and his pocket, but it should dwell richly in bis 
memory and in his heart. Ala.3 ! is it not lamentable 
that a young divine should come out and attempt to 
inetrnct the church with but little furniture froia '.he 
Bihlel Classical and Scientific knowledge are invalU' 
able auxiliaries, but to be destitute of Bible truth, a 
niinister must be greatly confounded when be comes 
in contact even with those who are esteemed illiter- 
ate, but who have made the word of God their study 
and theii guide. I lament that I am so much behind- 
hud in sacred literature. I long to be mighty in the 
Scriptures, to have them deeply impressed upon my 
heart — and that believing, I may therefore speak — and 
so bring from the treasury of the Gospel things new 
and old. Paul says to his son Timothy, 'preach the 
uonl' It is the word which must and will do execu- 
tion; for it is the power of God, and tbe wisdom of 
God, to the salvation of the soul. 

"Then I should, as you suggest, have a system of 
thinking upon theology. Doubtless you have witness- 
ed many cases where candidates for the holy ministry 
have n^lected this important point. Probably they 
thought it a matter to be attended to in course. This 



118 NEHOiR or 

has been too much the case with mysetf; 1 have nt,4 
more than 1 hare thought: I have meditated plans, but 
when 1 look back and gee how lillle proficieocy I have 
made, 1 am ashamed ; yet I do not think 1 have been 
idle. My time has been occupied. Is there not a de- 
fect in my system? Do you ask what it is? Uponray 
Rrst arrival here, 1 saw the absolute necessity of hav- 
ing for my motto, ' a place for every thing, and every 
thing in its place.' As to importance, I considered the 
objects demanding my attention in the following or- 
der: hours of devotion, time for acting, hours of study. 
For sleep I appropriate about seven hours; at present, 
and for the winter past, I have devoted eight hours to 
my academical studies, which are sufficient for the re- 
cital ion soft he class; will you please propose tome the 
best distribution of the remaining nine hours? For a 
system of theological thought, I have had in view, be- 
sides reading the Scriptures, onr catechism with the 
proofs. Please express your mind fully on this point, 
for I consider it of great importance ; and to facilitate 
my course, I desire to corae at every thing in the short- 
est and most practicable way. Many, for want of ju- 
dicious friends to advise, take a circuitous route, and 
peradventure, when they commence their theological 
course regularly, will have many things to unlearn. 

" More and more do 1 feel the necessity of a (it and 
adf^quate preparation for the holy office — much, much, 
very muck yet remains to be done — many a vacuttM 
needs to be filled. I would not daub with nntemper- 
ed mortar, but be thoroughly furnished — a worfamao 
that needs not be ashamed, rightly dividing the whole 
word and wo7k of truth — a polished shaft in the quiver 
of the Almighty. But what am U A worm, a crea- 



JAUES bbjjreud tatuir- 119 

'lure of a day. May 1 not szclaim, who is inflicieiil 
for these things? But I do not despond. Tlie Lprd 
reigns, let the earth rejoice; let our souls be glad 
thereof. I may, or I may not, live to enter the vine- 
yard; about iliis I am not solicitous. My days are 
numbered ; my destiny is fixed ; I would not alter il. 
loRnite wisdom is the directory I choose. I said I am 
not solicitous, i would ever live, leaving the morrow 
to take thought for itself. The Lord of the vineyard 
knows the very laborers he designs for it. Ifl be one, 
here am I, Lord, send me ; if not — Amen. Any thing 
or nothing, that God may be glorified and sinners sa- 
ved. Bless the Lord, O our souls. 

" I rejoice that you enjoy such nearness of access to 
. the throne of grace. I? it not the privilege of the Chris- 
tian to rejoice evermore, and to pray without ceasing, 
and in all things to give thanks 1 Surely ; for it is the 
will of God in Christ Jesus concerning him. And the 
more childlike simplicity and godly sincerity, the more 
free will be the intercourse between heaven and our 

" ])f y feelings of interest have been drawn out in an 

annsual degree towards the people in S . I feel as 

if it was the will of the Lord that I should make them 
a viaiL Why is this? Let the Lord send by whom be 
will send — my prayer is, that he would grant them a 
great oalpouriog of the Holy Spirit, aud that multi- 
tudes may be gathered into the fold of Christ. Help 
me to commit my cause to God, in whom I would 
' commence, continue, and end every work.' Make re- 
<li]est, if by any means, I may have a prosperous jour- 
ney, by the will of God, to come unto you ; for Hong 
to see you, that some spiritual blessing may be impart- 



130 HEUOIR OP 

cd to us, to the end that we may be more ind more 
eslabiisbed, that is, that we may be comforled together 
by the mutual faith both of you and me, 

" Since I wrote you last, I have enjoyed precious 
seasons in the closet ; have had the privilege of sitting 
Rt the communion fable, aod of a truth have fed on 
Christ by faith. It was a refreshing, blessed lime! 
When shall we eat bread and drink pew wine in the 
upper kingdom ! I could say more, but will not with 
ink and pen write unio thee ; but 1 trust I shall shortly 
see thee face to face. Peace be to thee. Farewell. The 
younger in Christ Jesus salutes the elder. 

"James B. Taylor." 

To other members of the family he wrote in the 
same interesting letter; — " This is our warking season, 
and what we would do for God, must indeed be done 
quickly. For our encouragement we have his assU' 
ntnee, My grace i» aufficient for tkee. Then, however 
arduous our duties, however responsible our station, if 
we be faithful, Goil will be a present help in every 
lime of need. My heart's desire and prayer to God is, 
that you may grow in grace, and in the kDOwledjje of 
OUT Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. In reading the 
Scriptures on the subject of prayer, I was ready lo re- 
proach myself for so much remissness in this sacred 
duty. Alas ! how many hours have been tost in sleep, 
which should have been devoted to closet duties. How 
much has my soul lost by this sinful gTatiRcation of 
the flesh ! Jesus arose long before day and sent hh 
holy aspirations to his native heaven ! How otlen did 
ha retire to solitary places to raise his voice in suppli- 
cation! Hislife was a life of prayer. He delighted iM 



JAMES IBAIKHID TATI^K. 131 

holding commoDioD with bis FalheT. See him in the 
garden and on the cross 1 If he prayed so consUBlIf, 
bow much more do we need to be engaged in (his duly I 
But Jesus atili pleads, and muet preTail. Let us then 
commit our cause to him, as our advocate and inter- 



It 19 delightful to observe how this dear disciple ol 
our Lord Jesus Christ made bim the alpha and omega, 
the beginuins and the ending of all that he did. 
Through all his voluminous correspondence a sweet 
savor of Christ is to be found in every page — almost 
in every line, His love to relatives aod friends, and to 
all.his fellow-creatures, appears to have been sanctified, 
aad elevated, and softened, and warmed by holy love 
to (he hlessed Hedeemer. Christ was indeed his all. 
Aud it is to his cooslant and atfectionale looking to 
Christ — his entire surrender of himself to Christ — his 
exclusive dependence upon Christ with child-like sim- 
plicity — we are to ascribe the great peace which con- 
stantly pervaded his bosom, and the holy joys which 
filled his heart, and the assurance of eternal life which 
cheered him under all the trials to wbich in the pro- 
vidence of God he was subjected. 

At every step of the delightful work of collecting 
and compiling his letters, new evidences of the fact, 
that faith, and holy love, and elevated piety, and 
esiraordinary devotedness mingled themselves with 
all Mr. Taylor's exercises, are constantly coming to 
light. 

Perhaps a stronger eithibition may not be furnished 
than is to be found in the foUowmg letter to his greatly 
beloved parents : 

jj I.B.T>7l(«. 



<• LaarauxriBt, April C, 1823. 
^ BdsTsd Pinui. 

"Beloved I yes, in the bttt bonds, the bonds of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. Often have I held sweet com- 
munioD with you in meditation and prayer. ThU 
eTeniog 1 have enjoyed such a. season. And while 
engaged in looking up for hearen's blessings to de- 
scend upon my dear father and mother, and upoo 
ihe happy family with which it ia my privilege to be 
connected, my own soul was watered. How deli^htfiil 
ihespiritoriDlerceasioo, when the soul is warmed with 
a flame of love towards those for whom we plead. In 
this delightful exercise there is Action and re-aclion, 
as I have eiperieaced l/iia night. The Lord gave me 
a spirit of prayer fur you all, and my heart melted 
within me while I prayed. Love lo Gk)d and love to 
man pervaded my soul. Doubtless you have been 
blessed with many such heavenly gales in prayiog for 
' others. May you ever have enlarged hearts when ad- 
dressing the throne of grace in behalf of your ever-af- 
fectionate James. And in answer to your prayers, may 
streams from the heavenly fountain descend to water 
the kingdom of God which is set up in my soul. I 
havenot,rny dear parents, a more convincing evidence 
of my nslurallife than I have of the spiritual life with- 
in roe, il fEAQE, LOVE, and JOt in.<he Holy Ghost, aie 
eridentei of one's acceptance with God ; for these are 
within me and abound. O what abundanl cause I have 
to speak of the Lord's goodness lo me. But my tongue 
cannot speak, much less can my pen describe the 
marvelous loving-kindness of the Lord. 0, he is good, 
and ' his mercy endureth for ever.' O that men would 
praise him for liis wonderful works lo Ihe children of 



UIOM BBAtXSBD TATI.OK. Vti 

men. Since I left New-York I bare bad a fiillDesi of 
joy and love iodescribable. Tbe wiodowi of heaven 
hare been opened, and hsTe poared down faioess. The 
oil and wine of consolation have been freely imparted, 
and I have gone on from day lo day praising the Lord. 
Jesus alone is ihe source of iny happiness. His pre- 
sence makes my paradise. Take Jesui from the Bible 
and the siaoer*a hope is gone. Take Jesus from the 
child of God below, and this world woald be a desert. 
Take him away in the hour of death, and all is dark- 
ness and despair. Take him from heaven, and heaven 
wonld be annihilated- Let Jesna, then, be our all. 
May we walk as he walked, live near to him, and ever 
follow him withersoever he leadelh. As the good 
shepherd, he will lead us into tbe green pastures, and 
make us to lie down beside the still waters. How rich 
his provisions ! How refreshing to our souls ! Fore- 
taste of heaven and endless felicity ! Lord, evermore 
give us thia food. I feel that I am a pilgrim, away 
from my home and from my Love, whom 1 can only 
see by the eye of faith. But by and by — O welcome 
hour! — my soul, and your souls too, will escape from 
these tenements of clay, and wing their flight to hea- 
ven and glory. And there we shall see him as he is. 
Who would not be there? 

' H; Savior imUM, and bids m* come.' 

"Behold, my parents, what Ood hath wrought for 
your BOD t Once, be was an unrenewed sinner — a child 
of the devil— an heir of bell, and pressing on in the 
way to the bottomless pit. What a mercy thai I am 
not calling for a drop of water to cool my tongue Id 
that unextinguishable Bret What grace, that 1 have 



134 MKMOM or 

beenboiaigaio — that I am a child of Qod amdan hot 
of life, trareliog lo Ike city of Qod — iIm new Jenua- 
iem ! What ihall we niider to tike Lord for his lore 
to me, bii lore to you, hii lore to our honiehold 1 
fFAot «Aa/i we render 1 Oniheam — 001 whole undi- 
vided affections I 

" My belored father I the Comforter, which is the 
Holy Gho*!, the pramiu of the Father, you har* 
had lo dwell with you, and 1 doubt not he will reinaia 
in you. Hay you and my dear mother be built ap m 
faith and holineta — grow in grace, and in the know- 
ledge of oar Lord and Savior Jesa* Chriat; and so 
ripen for hearen, and finally be gathered as shocks of 
corn in their seawn. May I meet yon there, where I 
expect we shall meet and praise God for erer. 

'* My brothers F. and S. arrived last night I re- 
eeired by them your token of sSeetion. We shall 
■bare it togelhu, with athankful remembrance of that 
hand wbicb lias so often fed and nourished us in our 
childhood. What pleasure would it give roe to enjoy 
a repast at your table! What pleaaure to enjoy a 
spiritual feast around your family altar, and together 
in the closet! 

" How are my grandmothera ? I hope the candle of 
the Lord shines around ihemaad in llieir souls, to light 
them safe to the world of life and glory. 

" How are our dear relatives ? O that ihey were all 
on iheLord'a side. May he convince th^unconrineed, 
and convert the unconverted ones, and i"ake those that 
love biin, like trees planted by the water-courses. My 
love lo Ibcm all. 

'■My health is good— my soul is happy — hearen 



JAMBS ■kahibks TAiLoa. 125 

luilea — Jasus ii precioas— God ii my portion, uid 
hearen my home— farewell. 

"Yoaraflectionate sod, 

"Jaueb B. TATLon." 

The rollowing extracts from two letters to a lad; ia 
ilie city of New- York, then confioed by a lingering 
and painful disease, which wilhia a few weeks re- 
leased her from [his worltt of sin and sorrow, will 
■how how kindly afieclionnle was Mr. Taylor toward* 
the afflicted, and how well qualiSed lo adminisiet con- 
iolaiioii to the saints in their trials. 

■Mf duiHn.R. 

" Shall 1 say that since I bade you farewell, expect- 
ing never to meet you again in this vale of tears, my 
thrughtg have often run back to youi habitation T Yes, 
ray sister, and ihey have as often dwelt upon your 
name and your situation with no ordinary emotions. 
Happy, thrice happy your lot j for all things are yours, 
whether Paul, or ApoUos, or Cephas, or the world, or 
life, or death, or things present, or thint^s lo cotne ; all 
are yours ; and you nre Christ's, and Christ is God's. 

" When last in New- York, I enjoyed ihe pririlege 
of sitting beside your bed and holding sweet converse 
vith you. Now, though far removed, I can and du 
tlill hold spiritual communion with you, and what I 
now write 1 pray God to turn to your spiritual com- 
fort, and to the good of tho<e connected with you. 

"I said the intercourse I had with you was sweet. 
Indeed, whenever I left the chamber of afflicttoo my 
loul exulted in God. The Lord bas blessed me while 
interceding for you since. I have gained nearness ol 
access to him while complying with your request, 
11» 



1S6 MEXoiR or 

' Pny for me.' And doobtlesi you hare rested \tnis 
the shadow of the Almighty with iQcteasiog delight, 
and fouDd hi« banner over you to be love — that lore 
which ca.4le[b out fear — fear of man, of death, of the 
grave, of judgment, and of hell. Have not your pros- 
pectg brightened? Have you not seen by faith the 
land of overlap tiog righteous neas 7 Have yoa notl 
Bui I slop — perhaps my sister has already passed away 
to her rest with the shout of victory, and received the 
crown of life ! 

" But my sister may be yet alire. It may still re- 
main for her to suffer as well is do the will of God a 
little longer on earth. Do you not reply, Amen, ' The 
will of the Lord be done I' If so, be attured the best 
is yet 10 come. God has great things in store for those 
who ihint of him, delight in him, and acquiesce in his 
will. Then count it all joy, that it is given you in be- 
half of Christ, not only to believe on him, but to suffin 
for'his sake. 'He is not an high priest which cannot 
be touched with a feeling of our infirmities, hsTins 
been tempted in atl points like as we are, yet without 
•in.' Are you tempted? Are yon tried? Donbtlea 
you are still exercised with agonizing pain. Look ts 
the Lctfd— behold the Lamb of Ood who parchased 
your present hope, your comfort, tore, joy, peace, par- 
don and folure prospects. See Jesus in the manger^ 
in hu life of labor and sufferiDg. See him affonizii^ 
in the garden and dying on the cross, and say, 

'Rsit— rcn,inTbipp;peae«rat ■ml. 
Red in tllj bleSHd SBvior'* mnu, 
Till all tb« blllowa o'er thM ralL 
Tin br* ihaU ■Dd witb «n iU stwM.' 



127 

"A few more day* and joat happy release Hhall 
come. Your soul is now above ; your aflection is on 
Gud as your satisfyiag portion; yet 'you pant for full 
enjoyment — your language is, 'Come, Lord JeBus, 
come quickly.' Tbeo fear not. Cast thy all upon the 
Lord ; he is not far off— he will not tarry. He waits 
lo b« your rod and staff— and O how strong his arm- 
he is mighty to save, even in the dying hour. How 
■weet lo lean upon our beloved ! his voice is sweet 
«nd his counienance is comely. When your work it 
done, Jesus will come. Do you ask, ^Vhat have 1 to 
do? Whalcanldo? Have you not la leil what Ood 
hath done for your 30ul? To warn — to exhoit some 
sinner to come lo Christ. May you be faithful to God, to 
yourself, and to those around your sick and dying bed. 
The Lord has chosen you in ilie furnace of affliction. 
This may not be joyous for the preseot, but grievous ; 
htit be of good cheer, il will produce the peaceable 
fruits of righteousness. It has done this already. God 
bss sanctified this visitation to you, and to the sslva- 
tionof yourdearcompanion. Shall it stop here ? May 
it lead to the conviction and conversion of your whole 
Iwusehold, and of all who shall witness the grace of 
Gh)d as already displayed. 

" A word to your sisters. When will you, my dear 
faUow-travelers to ihe grave — to the bar of God — lo 
eterBity, prepare for these awful scenes 1 Are you yet 
in, your sins? What— and exposed to llie shafts of 
de*ib which fly so thick around you ? Why will ye 
di»w^ie the death eternal? Need you? There yet is 
QHHO'-'room in Ihe love of God, room in the heart of 
t^ suflcfing, dying Savior. Come, then, and hav* 
yoni sins washed away— come sod be made the happy 



138 HGMOIB OP 

recipients of grace kod iove divine— now— now. Stsjr 
no lon^r at a disuoce. We are hastening to the tomb, 
uid soon our destiny wiil be unallerably fixed. I 
would rejoice to meet you at the right hand of the 
Jud|;e. Will you not pre|iare to meet God in peace ? 
Ail things are ready on his pari; are you ready to give 
yourselves unalterably away to Christ ? Then come — 
come without delay, with all your sins, with all yonr 
burdens come to the Friend of slDners, and he will 
make you whole. His call lo you is, ' Turn ye, turn 
ye.' 'He that believeth shall be saved; be that belier- 
eth not shall be Jamued,' 

" Mr. R., you need, aud I trust you find, the support- 
ing hand of OUT heavenly Father. You hare reason to 
sing of mercy while youlalkof the judgments of God. 
Be passive in his hands. Shalt not (he Judge of all the 
earth do right? And be is your friend, cleave to him 
— ' the alHiclions of the righteous are many, hut the 
Lord delivereih him out of them all.' Hope for the 
best ; prepare for the worst ; the heaviest trials are 
from the hand of a Father. The cup that he adminis' 
ters, shall we not drink it? Soon shall our cros!>e« 
give place to a crown ; shall we be counted woilhy to 
wear il at ihe feet of Jesus 1 

" I have enjoyed this day sweet hopes of heaven. 
The Lord is good lo me, and my cup often runs over. 
May your prospects brighten continually. O let ns 
strive to be uncommon — that is, eminently pious, de- 
voted Christian". As we go out and come in, at all 
times, under all circumstances, let us make it maai- 
feit th^t we are for Gbd. Jl viiU cost ta aomelhing-~- 
but the more we sacrifice and expend for him, the m<m 
will our Gonsolation abound." 



JUtEi aKAIHBIID TAVLOB- U& 

' Lavinntatille, JWtjr 9, 1S3. 
■MjdurHn-K. 

" Little did I dunk when I addregned you lait, that 
roa would hare mnrived until thia time. Do you in- 
qoire, why is it ao ? Secret things belong to God, but 
things revealed, to us ; and what we know not now, 
we shall know bereaner. 

" The Lord works in a mysterious way to eieeute 
his purposes of mercy towards the children of meB. 
In bringing some to the acknowledging of the truth, 
he chooses them in the furnace of affliction. Tbu* baa 
it been with yon and your belored companion. As mt 
txamjtle of patience to others, be ofientimes con- 
tinues the rod of affliction upon the afflicted one, yet 
it i« with the promise, ' My grace ia sufficient Cot thee,' 
Be, then, of good courage ; Jesus bus gone bef<«« 
you; he has suffered cruel tortures — he died an igno- 
minious death ; he entered the grave — but he arose 
triumphantly — and now is gur elder Brother, at the 
right hand of the Majesty on high. Would you not 
follow him? Yes, you reply ; follow the Lamb whither- 
weirer he goelh. Shrink not then from pain ; fear not 
the swellings of Jordan — the silence of the grave ; 
'forthe sting of death IS sin,' and when this isextracted 
through juslificaiion, and sanctification from sin, death 
eanntit hurt you, and t believe wilt not frighten you. 
No; it is not the child of God— it is not the heir of hea- 
ven (hat will Stan back from entering his eternal home ; 
bul the child of the devil and the heir of hell that 
must be alarmed and in despair. O, the joy and blisa 
of dying a Christian. The portals of Paradise are then 
Dot onlf seen, but thrown wide open, thai an heir of 
ghwy may enter in. Who would not die the death of 



130 mnoiB or 

the Christian 1 And we know that the life of tba 
Christian alone is atiendeil with peace and joy. 

"While yoQ are abseot from your Fathet's houM— 
while you remain a pilgrim here below — may yon hare 
mnch of heaven in your soul. I have longed to see 
your face once more; but farewell; I hope to meet 
yott at the right hand of God — I hope to hail your hap- 
py spirit in the hearenly Canaan, and there join with 
you in singing the song of everlasting deliverance. . 

" Since I wrote you, the Lord has been Tery gri- 
eious to me — I have enjoyed precious seasons. How 
good it is to drawnear to the mercy seat I Then it is 
that our souls cry out, ' Lord, erermDre give us this 
bread.' lam unworthy — I am noCbing — Jesus is all — 
he is the belored of our souls. May he ever be the 
chiefest among ten thousand, and altogether lovely. 

"Next L'jrd's day I expect to enjoy the privilege of 
witnessing to the world that I have chosen him for my 
all. It will be a communion season with us. Soon wa 
shall eat bread in the upper kingdom. Prayer will be . 
turned into praise, faith into vision, and ordinances 
into the enjoyment of hb presence face to face, whtun 
we now remember. 

"Mr. R., lean upon tbeI«ord: be says, 'Iwillnot 
forsake thee.' The language of your dear companion 
b, 'Weep not for me. the separation may be soon, bat 
cannot be long. We are all traveleTs to another 
world, and must soon be there. 

"With much affection, yours, 

James B. Tavloh." 

Reference has been already made to ihe fragments 
of a diary found among Mr. Taylor's papers. It is in 



JAHEa BKAINERD TATLOn. 131 

whil B Christian writes of himself, his exercisei, 
trials, sad (he means employed to keep alire the fltuiw 
of holjr love ia his heati— especially when it is desiga- 
ed eiclujively for his own inspection, and written un- 
dei the eye of God, and with a deep sense of his pre- 
Beoce, that we find a true and faithful exhibition of the 
iQDerman. Such was the diary of Mr. Taylor, and in- 
deed there is DO evidence that he erer wished or thought 
of the publicarion of either his journal or of the cor- 
lespondence, sofullof theefTusioosof amostalTection- 
ate and pious heart, from which the materials for this 
memoir are chieSy df rived. 

li is a matter of regret that twelve of the earliest 
nombersof Mr. Taylor's Diary caDDOl be found. There 
sreGie remaining, beginning with No 13, which beats 
date the IstofMay, 1833. The first notice is of pain, 
■ad of its being sanctified : 

rith a sciatic, which 
!. But the Lord or- 
dered it for good, for it had a tendency to lead me to 
himself, and 1 enjoyed a foretaste of heaven. I mused, 
and the fire burned ; my soul was caught up from 
einh, and the portals of paradise and the blessed re- 
sidence of the saints were opened to the eye of faith. 
' WbcD thsll I wake and Gud mc Itare r 

- Wrote this day to Miss W. May the Lord fol- 
low my communications wilh his peculiar blessing. I 
foaud when in Nrw-York that my letters had not 
been in vain, hut had comforted some and stirred up 
others." 



:., Google 



There is evidence tlini ihis very letter v*s also much 
blessed tu souls. We make Uie following extracts : 

" Do you ask how I enjoyed myself while in New- 
York 7 With some of the dear cliilttrcn of God 1 had 
■weet communion. Uui, ulas 1 with how many of those 
who profess religion, and cry, Lord, Lord, yet do not 
the things which he commands, did I meet! Was their 
conversation in heaven 7 No! Were their hearts therel 
No ! fur they dwelt upon things of earth. Out of the 
abundance of the heart the mouih speaketh : tlieir 
theme was not the g<)adaesE of God— not the love of 
God in their own hearts, and as manifes'ed to others; 
but dne houses, handsome furniture, fashionable dress- 
es, beaultful forms, riches, pleasures, and such like; 
and as a mailer of little moment, they talk of this min- 
ister as an eloquent orator ; that as a tine writer ; and 
a third as initiH'erent. True, ihe business of the world 
oughi to be attended to in its season, but for a pro- 
fessor of the name of Jesus, or any other person, to 
dwell upon these things continually and with delight, 
indicates such a one to be under blindness of miud, 
hardness of heart, and contempt for the word of God. 

" Of conversation the apostle Baiih, ' As he which ■ 
hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner ot 
coniiersaiion i because it is written. Be ye holy, fori 
am holy.' And we have the assurance that wiihoot 
kniiness no man, no woman, lei his or her name be 
what it may — their possessions, nay, their professions, 
what they may, ' shall see llie Lord.' What a re- 
quirement! how great! but nothing is impossible widi 
God, and with him there is plenleotis redemption. 

" But lo return : they are not without a hardened 



JAMES BKAmEBD TAYLOR. 133 

beart. Their convictions are lulled to sleep, if nut en- 
tirely expelled, by the sentiment, ' We must be some- 
what conformed to the world.' Others uy, ' We 
must mix with the multitude.' For the Tomier no ex- 
cuse can be allowed — the Bible allows noue — the 
world will Dol— their profession will not. ' Thus sailh 
the Lord,' should silence every excuse and quell every 
rising emotion of worldliness. And what does the 
Lord say? 'Be not coofonned to this world.' What 
is this but an axe laid at the root of every worldly 
thought, desire, and action which are not subservient 
to our growth in grace and the advancement of Christ's 
kiugdom in the earth? As to the latter, it is obvious 
that we must, in some degree, mix with the multitude , 
but does this make it necessary that we must be par- 
takers of theit^siits J No, nor of their follies, which 
are sias. Christ's prayer for his disciples is, ' Keep 
them from the evil ;' but those that I describe hold the 
word of God in contempt, for they disobey its com- 
mands, which are holy, just, and good. They mani- 
fest that they love the world, and the things of it, in- 
ordinately. The word of God says. Come out from 
among them, and be ye separate; and touch not the 
unclean thing. Out of their own mouths they are cod- 
demued. I these things ought not to be so — may 
our garments be kept clean and unspotted from the 
world. With those who mind earthly things the child 
of God can have little enjoy menl. May the Lord arouse 
by his Spirit and his word, all lukewaml and worldly- 
minded Christians— if indeed Uiere he such a com- 
pound as a worldlymiruled CKrittian. 

"You will not think me an egotist, for I comply 
with your requaat, wlteu 1 write of the Lord's deal- 
in i. B. T>;l«. 



134 HEHOiB or 

logs wilh myself. The day on which t bade you fare- 
wpII, was com mem oral i»e of the most eventful era cf 
my existence. You readily tecur lo the 23J April, ore 
year ago. From the circumstances attending me that 
day, traveling, 4.c. I enjoyed but little opportunity for 
rctireraeni. How gratefully did [ hail my habitation; 
for the Lord hail protected and brought me safe tu my 
resting-place. I made the Reld, screened with wood!;, 
my closet, where I could address my Father in secreL 
How ijiaity, driven from home for the name of Jesus, 
have sought shelter in the wooih, with the vaulted 
heavens for their covering, and tliere, as well as in 
dens and caves of the earth, poured out their souls be- 
fore the Lord, who hears when his children cry. 

" Shull I transcribe what I recorded of the Lord's 
goodness lo me the day after my arrival? 

'^ 'April 34. — Had a most precious season at the 
throne ofgrace. How often has the Lord blessed me is 
that very spot ! It appears sacred. My soul was melted 
this evening. My spirit cried, Abba, Father. Jesus, 
though unseen by mortal eye, was precious, as seen 
by the eye of faith. The oil and wine of consolation 
were poured into my soul — had a spirit of interces- 
sion for my dear friends.' 

" ' Sabtnth following, — What shall I render to the 
Lord for all his benefits? My cup has this day run 
over. My consolation has abouoded. The good Shep- 
herd has led me into green pastures, and 1 have fed 
upoo the rich foretastes of heaven. I have found my 
powers too feeble to praise and bless the God of my 
salvation as I would, and could only say, Glory to 
God! Glory to my dear Savior! Halleluiah to the 
Lamb for ever I O how sweet 1 have found it to oil 



jiMEi lunEBD ruvLos. 135 

Dpon Ood in wcret ! It ii not to be described, as yon 
know, if yon have Celt the lefininf flame of God's love ; 
but it is 'full of p;lury.' Perfect love lilted, and now 
fills my soal. 1 have w«pt tears of joy and gratitude, 
and tears of praise, at the feet of Jesus. I have called 
God my Father, wiUi the spirit of adoption. Ttuly 
the CoDifoTter has come, and I long to depart and be 
with Christ. How small, how vain the world ap- 
pears ! Alas ! that any Bbould seek their happiness 
here I O could they feel what I ezpetience, the worU 
would wane and dwindle into nothing. But why was 
I made to hear bis voice and enter in? Why was it — 
Lord, why was it 1 7 My heart melted again and again, 
and floods of tears flowed gently down. How delight- 
ful such an eiercise? What an antepast of heaven, 
when the soul holds converse with Ood ! While en- 
gaged in singing in the family, the Lord drew near, 
and my heart began to born with love. 1 then retired 
to my sacred retreat, and poured out my sout before 
him. Ah, how foolish is such language as this to the 
poor worldling, the gay, the thoughtless! But the 
child of grace, the renovated soul alone knows the 
joys of pardoned sin. ' I had rather be a door-keeper 
in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of 
wickedness.' 1 had an afiecting view of my otter im- 
worthiness; and truly I am a wonder to myself— 'a 
miracle of grace.' By the grace of Ood I am what I 
am ; a sinner saved by grace ; a sinner changed by the 
Spirit ; a sinner accepted of Ood, through Christ, and 
lending towards heaven, and longing to be there! 
Were it the will of God, this night would I go; yet I 
am willing to stay, and eufier, and do the will of God. 
I have given, and now give myself away to him; I am 



136 M£Nou or 

not my own ; I hftve been bought with a pric«. J«siu, 
be thou my all; tm thou King auprcme. Reign vrithoM 
arirgtl. Swiy thf sceptre UDiTenallr- Rule Tor erer, 
King of kings, and Loid of lords. Amen.' 

" The abore is an account of my exercises for two 
days. This day has the Lord giren me a memeaio of 
my mortality. Thit morning I was seized with a pain, 
which tender's it difficult for me to move. ' We bloisn 
to-day, to-morrow die.' But the Lord meant'it for good, 
and I have reason lo thank him for hii token of loT«. 
' What son hath he whom be chasteneth not V 1 have 
taken a view of the grave — of the bar of God, and hea- 
ven — and my desire was lo launch away — yet I sub- 
mit and wait. 1 see nothing here to live for, but M 
spend and be spent for God ; f nd no longer than I may 
be useful would 1 remain here below. O when shall 
We bear the sound, ' Come up higher.' 

" This bciog ihp Ursl of May, I presume you have 
been in the midst of bustle nnd confusion, yet doubt* 
less you have been in perfect peace. This is the ex- 
cellency of religion — that while the spirits of darkness 
rage, and wicked men blaspheme — while the world 
seek the pleasures of sense, yet never fiod any thing 
to slake their thirst — while the vain love themselves 
and follow the vanities of the earth — while they are 
disappointed in life, wretched in deaih, and lost for 
ever, the meek and humble folLowers of the Lamb find 
peace and quietude of soul below— peace or triumph 
in death, and God and hesvcii for ever. 

" Take your pleasures then, ye worldlings — enjoy 
the gayeiiesof life, ye vain spendthrifts of time — trifle 
with your souls — dance on the brink of loin — sell youi 
all for nought, and forfeit heaven at last. But let ma 



iiMEs BBAtMCBD taVlor. 137 

lire tlie lire ind die the death of ihe righteoui ; for 
(he righiemis, the righteous aloae have hope in death. 
Farewell. 

" Yours in the best of bonds, 

" J. B. TAYLom." 

' P. S. I wished to say somelhiag to Miss M 

upon thi:) all-importaol subject. I hope she riews it 
as all-importaot. Bqi howeier she may admit its im- 
paitauce, it will avail her nothing unless she feel its 
poner ia her own soul. This must be experienced, or 
she must be lost for ever. 

" To the young ladies too I would say, bear the 
irords of Jesus Christ ; ' Except ye repent, ye shall all 
likewise perish.' J. B. T." 

We return again to the interesting diary frcnn which 
we began to make some exliacts. 

"May 3, 1833.— Had a delightful commanioa sea- 
Km at my stated evening devotion ; and found much 
pleasure in reading the Word, and in calling upon tLa 
name of the Lord. 

" dabbalh, May 4. — Another Christian Sabbath hu 
dawned upon this world, which, but for religion, wonU 
be a hell, and its inhabitants incarnate devils. 

" The Sabbath shed forth its cheering light, butlfae 
Lord of the Sabbatii hid his face from me. Why ia 
this? He knows the reason ; and so do I. My guide 
has been forsaken, 1 have broken my covenant with 
him, and the consequence is, my soul is in darknew 
and distress. Surely ' the way of transgressors ii 
hard,' and pecufiarly so to the child of Ood, who has 
not only tasted that he is gracioua, bat ha« bean filled 
12* 



133 * HBHOIR OF 

with his perfect love. MoroiDg daties were attendMl 
toas usual, but the glory had departed. The fonu wis 
there, but where was the power? My soul had bf 
transgressioD left its rest, and leanness, the ineritable 
consequence of a departure from God, was inscribed 
upon it. J sought the, Lord, but found him not to the 
SRlisfyiogof my soul. 1 repaired tg the house of God, 
but my love was absent. Returning home, I felt dissa- 
tisGeil with ray situation, and refused lo be comforted, 
but by the Holy Ghost. O how keen the anguish, ' i/lf 
God to loTB, and not my God alone.' How keen ibe 
reproach of ingratitude, in forsaking my best friend. 
Thanks to the Lord that I felt my need and saw the 
remedy, and that I bad the disposiliun to return to him 
from whom I bad revolted. I wished to wander no fur- 
ther. My soul thirsted fur God. I could praise him for 
what he had done for me— I felt that he was jual in 
withdrawing from me, and that were I in hell I could 
but praise him. I looked to him for direction as 1 opened 
his blessed word, and he answered my prayer. I opened, 
T read, ' So fight I, not as one that bealeth the air; but 
I keep under my body and bring it into subjeciion, leat 
that by any means, when I have preached to others, I 
myself should be a casl-away.' 1'he Word was su> 
sonable; I had not kept my body under; it enabled me 
to hare right views of myself, I hastened to the throne 
of grace, and found it good. The Lord dispensed bit 
favor, and shed abroad his lore in my heart. Thnoki 
to his name for pardon and sanctification ! O, why wai 
I not left to hardness of heart? Not unto me, but unto 
the Lord belongeth praise ; for he bringeth salvation. 
Again I looked up to the Lord, and again opened and 
read lua blcMol wonl : ' Be strong and of good cott- 



:.Coo8lc 



n^; I will be with ihee: I will not fail ihee nor for- 
sake thee: onlf be thou strong mnd reiy courageou*.' 
May mv care and Tear evermore be this, not to do any 
ONE thing displeasing to my God; and he will t^e 
care of all the rest. 

" May lii.— Had a delightful season at the throneiOf 
grace, both in prayer and in reading the Scriptures. 
The Word ia spirit and life — Lord, open my mind 
more and more to understand the Scriptnrei — nuke 
me mighty in the Scriptures. 

"May 39. — Wrote lo Sarah, my colored friend." 

From this letter we make the following extract, as 
a specimen of the ajfectionate spirit of Mr. Taylor, ma- 
nifesied towards the children of God, of whatever co- 
lor or condition. - 

"How is Aont Sarah 1 Perhaps her mortal frame 
is sinking under the weight of old age, acd ready to 
fall a prey to death — doubtless you look to the day of 
your death as better than the day of your birth ifou 
will hail the hour of your departure as a release from 
yonr burdens and sorrows, when your happy spirit 
shall wing its way to the paradise of God. Does not 
your soul exult in the prospect 1 The New Jerusalem 
is just before you — that city that hath foundations. It 
is the borne of ibe saints There dwells our Savior; 
there you will see him as he is; and there meet the 
redeemed of the Lord out of every nation, and kiitg- 
dom. and tongue, and people. Do you expect to meet 
me there 1 1 know you do — and 1 hope to find some 
bumbie place at the feet of my blessed Redeemer. 1 
have already the earnest of the heavenly nal-^mf 



140 HGHOIB OP 

that I ma; ^njof yet more aod more, and so guw iqi 
inio Chmt our livJQj head. While you shall be prai»> 
iDg GoJ in glory, 1 may be souodiag ihe Qospel trum- 
pet. Pray that il may be to the awakeoiog of many a 
poor sinaer, and the meanaofgaiheriDg multitudes of 
precious soula into the kiagdoin of God's dear Soa. 

" The prospect or living to serve the Lord in his 
vineyard is pleasant, if it be his will. To die, I koov 
would be gain ; but I am not anxious. The Lord, whose 
I am, kaoiivs that I am his, by creation, by the pur- 
chase of the blood of Jesua, by the aanctificaiion ofhia 
Spirit. To the Lord Jesus, as to a faithful Creator, 
would I commit my all; corae sickness ot health, life 
or death, all, all will be well; not my will, but the 
will of the Lord be done." 

In the followios letterto amuch valued friend, beai^ 
iog dale Lawrenceville, June 7, 1823, will be fonnd 
BentimeDt9 and an expression of affections welt wor- 
thy the serious consideration of all wbo are in the mi- 
nistry, or who are seeking this most responsible otGce. 

" The past wears an aspect to me truly asloniahing. 
My long course of iniquity before converaioo — four- 
teen years spent in folly and in sin — my early impres- 
sions when compared with the multitude who throng 
the downward road — my being led to the Lamb of 
God ' that taketb away the sin of the world,' and 
made a happy partaker of grace and love divine — my 
being called of the Lord of the harvest to preach the 
Gospel, or rather to prepare for it — how wonderful I 
1 know not, indeed, that he will put me into the minia- 
try, but if not, I have the prospect of being taken fiom 



LOU. Ul 

KDderiog an imperfeet lerrice below, to a peifeet •«> 
Tke in ike upp«r HDctoBry . 

" I look ii,>ou taf residenee in New-York as hi^lf 
beoeficul. There I gained a fund of iofonDalion, to b« 
gained only in soch a Biinaiion. Liltledid I think that 
I was then acquiring a knowledge of men and man* 
ncra to fit me belter for the lacred office. 

" Do you atk bow I am affected towardt my forma 
employment T Never since 1 left it have I felt soy 
desire to return. My aversion to every thing of thia 
kiud liaa increaaed, and my mind would alcken at the 
thoaghtofeverretumingtotlie buiiueH of thii world, 
riejoice in the indiqiosilion to otmid to any thing 
that ia not intimately coDneeled with my calling. 

" It it to be feared that some (alas I for them) eon- 
Juence sliauy for the holy ministry from ainiaier lao- 
tives. Some seek worldly emolument— some popolai 
applause — others, and we hope ibese are the majorky, 
seek soula for their hire. Says a correspoudent, wsit- 
ing of a candidate for the miniatry, ' He has by bi* 
education become a different man, and baa a diflerant 
kind of piety, and time must develope Whether it is 
tot the better or the worse.' How sad, bow melaD- 
eholy, that any of the sons of Levi should grow cold 
in the service of the church of Christ. How afflicting 
lo the lover of Zioa to witness eogagedoess in any 
Christian decline ; but parlicnlarly to see a candidate 
for the ministry lose bis ardent zeal for the good of 
BDuIs. But ' let him that ibinketh lie standeth take 
heed lest he fall' Of ibis I have been mindful, and 1 
would ever keep it in mind ; nor would I be puffed up, 
or vain-glorious, that the good Shepherd hath led mt ' 
into his green pastures, and fed me, and made me to 



U2 KMon or 

lie down by lfa« itill w«ien ; for who maketh me to 
diSer from the impenitent, the thoughtless, ihe hird- 
ened, and incorrigible 1 And what have I, that I hare 
not received from him, who f irelh liberslly and np- 
braideth not 1 'Tis ail of grace, and to Ood only wiae 
be all the glory. 

" I apprehended danger npon eotcTing on my acade- 
mical course, from the many snares allendant upon 
such a life. I dreaded the thougiiE of becoming a for- 
malist The plan which 1 then considered best for « 
student with prospects like mine — nay, whatever otay 
be his prospects, (and I am confirmed in my opinion,) 
is, I, Strictly and mott punctually to perform hia 
closet duties. 2. He should exercise regularly for the 
benefit of his body. Thia will aid him in the first, and 
better prepare him for entering upon prosecuting the 
3d. — viz. diligent application to his studies. But the 
Lord has been better, a tkouaand timet belter than all 
my fears. Instead of declining, my inarch has been 
onward in the divine life. Were 1 to Bttempt a narr*' 
lion, it would be impossible for me to tell you even 
the half. SufGce it to say, I have had, during the last 
thirteen months, the Witnessing of God's Spirit with i 
mine that I am bom from above, and traveling lo hea- 
ven. The fruit of the Spirit has been, from day to day, 
love, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. 

" The prospect to me is pleasant. I glory in the 
thouglit of one day becoming an ambassador of the 
Lord Jesus Christ to dying men. Paul was an ambas- 
sador in bonds. What a privilege to die for the Lof4 
Jeaud ! I said I glory, but not in my own streng-th, for 
my sufficiency is of God: yet while 1 glory in the pros- 
pect, 1 am not anxious. I do consider myself not my 



JUIE9 BRAtHERD TAYLoa. 143 

own ; I bave been bousrht with a price ; I am the Lord'*, 
to be dealt with agreeably to hh will. My times aail 
seasooa, health and faculties, talents and ioDueace, 
life and death, all are in his ha^nds. He hith dune all 
ibtDgR well. Ad(I my language is, 'reign in me, over 
me; relgD universally. King ofking^ ami Lord of all.' 
"Years must revolve before my fathers in (he church 
will send me furth. But they are miniisiering as stew- 
ards in the hou.-ie of God. When sent forth, may I 
hear the voice of the great Head of the church sayiog 
tome, 'Go.' Then onward will be my watchword ; 
onieardt (o warn the Bioner to flee from the wrath to 
come ; nnward, to leail the ansious Inquirer to the fin- 
ner'a frienii ; onvard, lo feed the lambs and sheep of 
Christ's flock ; to visit the sick and afl[iic(ed ; to smooth 
the declining path of the aged ; to guide the young ; 
lo refresh the weary ; to illumine, if possible, by con- 
versation and prayer, the vale of death : onieard, lo 
live to and for God ; to finish my course with joy : 
onieard, to ihe grave ;fto the bar of God ; to glory." 

The reader cannot have failed to notice the high- 
toned and devoted piety of Mr. Taylor, as raanifesled 
in all his correspondence, and may well inquire by 
what means he made such atlainmenls in spirituality. 
To this question the answer is perfectly obvious: reli- 
gion with him was no secondary interest, but the one 
thing needful— the absorbing subject of his ihoughts 
and aSections ; and with great constancy did he prac- 
tice its duties, and especially those which bring the 
souls of God's people more immediately into his pre- 
secce, auch as secret prayer, meditation, and reading 
the Scriptures. These seemed to be the very elements 



oTbia btiug, ami to afford the fuel ihal kept alire the 
fire of holy lore in bis bean. Not only in the forego- 
ing letter, but in all hia correspoadeace, sad eTerr- 
where in hia diary, it is evident that he made coniaiu- 
nioD with God his first object, aor could he be lalia- 
fied without its actnal enjoymeat ; so that wbenem, 
throogh JaatleDtioD to the state of hia heart, the pre- 
valence oi temptation, or the derangement of the ani- 
mal economy, he found not 'him whom bis soul lof- 
ed,' he rested not till the joy of God's salration was 
Kstored, and he could again say, ' My belored b mine, 
and 1 am bis.' " 

What in this respect Mr. Taylor practiced himsell^ 
be affecttODalely recommended to his friends, as may 
be secD in many parts of bis most pious and affec- 
tionate letters. To his beloved friend, the Rev. C. H. 
he wrote, June 22, 1823 : 

"A Hated time, a particular place, and putict* 
ality, I find necessary to keep up the life and power 
of religion in the soul. To attend to the duties of the 
closet, an ancient disciple said to his company as an 
excuse for leaving them, ' I have a friend now in wail- 
ing to speak with me.' Intrusion upon the, hours set 
apart for God cannot fail to make serious inroads upoa 
the health of the spiritual man. Let ns, my friend, be 
punctual with God." 

It is appropriate to remark in this eonneetion, that 
Mr. Taylor sought and enjoyed this high state of piotn 
affection and constant communion with God, not as a 
duty, but a delightful privilege ; not merely for his 
own sake, but for the benefit of others, and as a most 



TAMES BRAmEnD TATLOI. 148 

impoTtsnt part of his preparation for the miDislry of 
the Gospel ; nor did he ever lose sight of the great 
work in which he so ardenlly desired to be employed, 
ta a letter to a much esteemed brother, bearing date 
2dlh June, 1823, on his being appointed to the office of 
deacon iu the church, he wrote : 

"I trust yoti accepted this office, not merely as call- 
ed by the church, but by the great Head of the church. 
It is the consciousness of moving in the sphere to 
which God cailt, that makes his servant patient and 
persevering, and affords the delightful testimony to 
himself, that be pleases God. This is an office in 
which Jesus himself ministered. How careful was he 
that the wants of the poor should be supplied. He 
sent none empty away, although he himself was often- 
times hungry, and thirsty, and weary, and heavy 
laden ; weary in traversing the country on foot, and 
heavy laden in bearing a burden nut his own. O mjr 
brother, what a privilege to follow in the footsteps of 
Gmmaouel, God with us. Do you not feel that you 
have much to dol We are looked upon as those who 
must enforce precept by holy example. The chnrcb 
and the world have their eyes upoa us. God requires 
us to be faithful. Our happiness depends upon it. Per- 
■ haps the comfort, the salvation of others depend il^n 
it. May it then be our study to be mighty in the Scrtp- 
tnres— full of fatth and the Holy Ghost. That we may 
be properly qualified for our stations, how much pmyec 
and watchfulness on our part — how much grace on 
God's part — is necessary ! Lord help, for vain is th« 

" To what I am deatitted I cannot tell, nor am I 

13 J. B, TMl« 



146 HiMoui or 

anxiotts. I am blest with contentment while the eon* 
vietion abides with me that it is my duly to prepare, if 
possible, for ani/ station in the church, and then to ac- 
cept of that 10 which ProTidcace shall call me. My 
views are changed vholly from what they were for S 
short time. I am very deeply irapiessed with the ne- 
cessity of a thorough ,/u/f course of preparatioD. The 
Lord has done great and good things for me, wheieol 
1 am glad." 

Diary. "July 4, 1823.— The Lord is as strangely 
good as i am in practice strangely perverse j yet I 
sometimes ihiak 1 am the happiest creature on earth. 
But why am I thus 1 Nerer do I feel myself more in- 
significant and mean than when I am blessed with an 
overpoweiing sense of the divine presence ; and yei 
with strong confidence do I approach my heavenly Fa- 
ther. I do not, cannot doubt my being a son of faithful 
Abraham, and therefore a child of promise. Not onto 
me be praise, but lo htm who hath procured it for n>«, 
and blessed me with this adoption. 

" 5. — Had a precious season before the throos of 
grace this morning. O the hidden mystery — 'tis hid- 
den from the world. Surely the sweetest moment* 
enjoyed by the children of God are when the world 
is 'entirely shut out. Could the world know this; 
could they have one glimpse of the light that beama 
upon the souls of the saints ; could they enjoy the 
hope which the flame of divioe love kindles in the 
heart that trusts in Christ, they mould be constrained 
lo call him ' the pearl of great price.' O the heaven 
of love ! This evening, too, I am astonished at tbe 
jfoodness of the Lord ; I am a wonder m myself when 



JAHES BBAINERD TATI^B. 147 

1 look at formet years ; my cup funneih otct— my 
bemri is too fall fpr utterance ; but ihe Lord koowetb 
its meaning. Went af^er meeting to meditate among 
the tombs. It was starlight, but yet the darkness nas 
sufficient to screen me from the viewof passiogalran- 
gers. Id this land of silence all was soleioa as death. 
And there, on the marble slab that covers the remains 
nt a young man who died at the age of eighteen, I sat 
down and meditated upon my own dissolution. I look- 
ed at my feet, ray hands, my body ; and must these 
M>on be mouldering in the dusti 1 recoiled not at the 
firospect ; I praised the Lord for his love to me, and 
for the calm serenity of soul 1 possessed. My mind 
was now led to our dear family. While whole fami- 
lies have been desolated, ours remain entire. What 
a mercy ihat they have been spared, and that nine of 
them are hopefully pious ! Here my soul cried to God. 
in behalf of all. I knew not but some of them might 
be dead, aud the tidings on the way. Would I have 
them mourn at my departure T Would they keep me 
from home 7 And should I wish them to stay were it 
the will of the Master lo come and call for them'? 
No, 1 replied, although it would be a great trial to bid 
them farewell — to see them no more on the earth. 

" I looked at what was before me — the work in 
which I long lo be engaged, and prayed for wisdom 
10 direct and grace to help. And now I retire. Come, 
sweet repose ; come life, come death, come what will, 
the will of the Lord he done. 

"6. Sabbath evening.— What shall 1 render lo the 
Lord for his goodness this day 1 Words fail : ' 'tis un- 
speakable and full of glory.' O the sweet communi- 
(.■ations of grace and love ! He ha* followed me with 



148 miKuB or 

hi* lonng-kindiiesi. I felt deeply the import <^ theic 
precious truths : ' In whom ye also trusted, after that 
ye keaid the word of truth, the Obspel of your salva- 
tion ; ia whom also, after that ye believed, ye were 
auLEP wilb tbe Holy Spirit of promise, which ia the 
earnest of our inheritance.' I doubt not I have expe- 
lieuced all ihis ; I feel that I have been ' tealed.' The 
■weet 'eametl' petradea my inmost soul, aod all is 
heaven there. How precious is Jesus ! It is he that 
charms aud comforts my heart. I bear men talk of the 
works of creation, of lofly mountains and pleasant 
Tales, of verdant plains, of foaming cataracts and gen- 
tle rills, the sturdy oak and the forests green, the fra- 
grant flowers end the standing com ; I bear ihem talk 
of fine bouses, handsome furniture, grand equipage and 
royal splendor; and a thousfind other things which 
they seem to admire almost to adoration. But these 
are not my Qod. The heavens indeed declare the glory 
of God } tbe firrosmeol showeth bis handiwork ; all 
nature is stamped with Deity. But what are these? 
One glimpse of thee, my dearest Lord, one glimpse ot 
thee, as seen in tbe Gospel, outshines ibem all ; and 
when thou art near, my soul rises above all sublunary 
things. Thou art my satisfying portion. To-day hare 
I been on Pisgah's top, and seen the promised land. 
Not long, and I shall rise higher. O blessed prospect' 
Now I go again to meditate among the tombs— I lore 
such aretreat — to look into my heart — into tbe grave — 
into eternity. How solemn is this place 1 Death with 
his iron grasp has dragged down his hundreds to this 
field of graves. The yonng, the old, the middle-aged.' 
lie promiscuous here ; the rich, the poor, the white, tbe 
black, all mingle and know no distinction. How many 



JAMES BBADtEBD TtVLOR. 149 

leasoni — important lessons ar« to be learned hete. Be 
wise, my soul ; the day of death comes on apace — 
Boon thi* body must be conveyed to ibe lomb — art thou 
ready 1 Thanks to him who is the Judge of the quick 
and the dead, with the utmost composure I cui look 
death in the face. I expect no pang ; the sting of death 
is sin; thia the Lord has plucked away. I feelnolfaiog 
contrary to lore. My body may be racked with pain — 
but what of ibat 1 my Savior suffered. But mjr soul, I 
have no doubt, will be tranquil and unrufficd. I can 
traly say, I am glad that I was boTB to die. Once, part 
of my grave-clothes were prepared for me. The Lord 
spared me. Alas 1 had I been taken away then, it bad 
been tn my tins. O the goodness, the long-suffering 
patience of the Lord! Praise his name for ever. 

"Saturday evening, July 11. — About to record the 
goodness of the Lord to an unworthy sinner — where 
shall I begin 1 where end t It is too wonderful for me ; 
I cannot attain unto it, The earth is full of the good- 
ness of the Lord. But my toid knoweth that he is 
good, and his mercy endureth for ever. It is indescrib- 
able. I took my usual walk, and at length reached the 
ofi-frtqamted tree, where 1 sat down and read, and 
my heart went up to the Lord; and bis word was 
'spirit and life,' 'quick and powerful,' and sweet to 
tnjr taste. Surely I never bad such captivating views 
of the Lord Jesus. He was there in bis power and 
love — but language fails me to tell all bis manifested 
glories. 

■While roith preienti the SsTier*! death. 
And nhitpcri 'tbi) i< thine;' 

Swtetl; mf riling hanri adTiaea, 
And paaecfillly dcellna. 



100 MEMOtE OP 

' While (Dch my Tie<n, the nditot nu 

9lied> a mars iprigbdy ray i 
Each object imilei I kll nttare chumi— 
I sing my ewai away.' 

"After attending prayer-mwting I betook myMlf 
sgwn lo the IbdiI of silence. How many mementos <A 
moitalityl They lie thick arouad. 'lam the resui- 
rectioQ and the life' was brought to my miad as I en- 
tered the graTe-yard, and leaned over the grave of one 
who had died io the faith, and contemplated the sleei»- 
ing dust, as it is now, and as it will be when the Iromp 
of Qod shall sound. I ibought of what I shall soon he 
myself. As I medicated, the Lord drew near, and my 
heart hurned with love. There I renewedly gave my 
bU to him, and as I returned to my ' Bethel,' felt my- 
self perfectly happy. Little did I once think I shonld 
ever be so highly favored. But for this 1 sought, and 
pleaded, and groaned for years. Blesa the Lord ; he is 
not alack concerning his promises — he came sud- 
denly to this temple— he baptized me with the Holy 
Ghost — to his name he all the glory. 

" 12. Sabbath.— Spoke to tbe colored people this P. 
M. ' Ethiopia shall soon stretch forth her hands unto 
God.' How they are degraded and frowned upon bf 
white people ! My very soul pities their condition, both 
in this country and in Africa. Heard that a murder 

was committed.n short distance from L , A man 

ran a pitchfork tlfrough the head of another. Alas ! the 
eflfects, the aieful efectt of sin ! When shall iniquity 
hide its hideous form? But why am not I the mur- 
derer ? Distinguishing grace ! Lord, keep my feet thai 
they slide not. And may ] never grieve the Holy Spi- 
rit, by which I have no doubt I have been sealed to 



JAHES BBAIHUD TATLOB. 161 

tbe day of Tedemplion. BletBed hope ! Sweet ezpee- 
tation ! Tronaporting prospect ! HeaTcnly aisurance ! 
Blees the Lord, O my soul ! 

" July 15. — It ii Jesus coastitules my heaven below. 
What a delightful maDifestatiou of Che Savior I have 
just had. An angel's tongue might tell, but mine utter- 
ly fails. This is the day of the week on which I re- 
ceived an unction from the Holy Ghost, in « manoM 
and measure of which before 1 had no conception. 
What a blessed reality is religion: O how divine! 
The Lord communicates with the soul as clearly, as 
eonviMciagly, and as feelingly, as man with man, 
face to face. 

" 19.— Since 1 wrote last I hare not had those lively 
feelings of nearness to God until last evening, when 
great grace rested upon me. 1 think I never had such 
hamiliaiiDg views of myself, and such a sense of the 
condeseension oTOad. My soul got low at the feet of 
Jesus, and I bathed them with my tears. How sweet ! 
and how welcome to my soul ! It was indeed refreah- 
ing, and I could only praise and adore my God, and 
admire the mysterious, wonderful telation I sustain to 
him as my Father — my Savior— my SanctiSer. What 
a debt of gratitude I owe for all the goodness of the 
I.oid 1 He has taken me up and set me among princes ; 
from being a child of the devil, to be an heir of heaven. 

" In contemplating my latter end, the question arose 
what inscription would you have on your tomb-stone) 
And in thought I answered ; 

" ' Here lies . A sinner, bom again ; a sinner, 

washed, and justified, and sanctified. A smner, once 
an heir of hell, a child of the devil, by wicked works ; 
bat fry grace, a child of God and an heir of heaveti ; 



162 HSMWR or 

d miracle of grace, deserving bU the miserieg of the 
twcond death; and yet an expectant of endleu gloiy 
and felicity. Farewell earth; welcome heaven. lam 
nothing ; Jesus is all.' 

" July 23. — In reviewing the goodness of the Lord lo 
me during the past monib, 1 think I hare experienced - 
clearer and more powerful manifestations of his love 
and tanctifying grace than in any former mouth of 1117 
life. What ahall I render unto the Lord for all bi> 
benefit* towards the unworihiest of his creatures 7 
Through fasting, my body is weak, though I feel strong 
in the inner man. May the mooihi to come find me 
more spiritual and heavenly -minded. 1 long for in- 
creased conformity to the Lord Jesoa. O for daily 
iransformalion into his likeness, till 1 shall see him aa 
he ia. I know not what a day may bring forth; but 
more and more am 1 impressed with the absolute ne- 
cessity of a weti-toHi/outHiafton for future usefulness; 
and yet 1 hare a most earnest desire to be in the field, 
whence is the cry, ' Gome over and hetp^ us.' Still 
the providence of God seems clearly and forcibly to 
utter his voice, 'Slay,' and I willingly submit; and 
enter the sophomore instead of the junior class, and 
to spend another year in hard study of the Latin and 
Greek, that I may be well grtnmded. How different 
my views from those entertained a year ago. With 
diaguMt I perused to-day some of my records made 
about that lime, and was strongly tempted to destroy 
them. But 1 still preserve them as mementos of mj 
folly ; yet lessons of wisdom have been learned from 
those very circumstances; lessons invaluable, ihotigh 
bought at a very dear rale. I hope they will be turned 
10 good account. ' All things work togelhei for good, 



LOR. 1S3 

to them that lore God.' This 1 believe, aod am p«r- 
Buaded Ihoie ihiaga were for mj good ; for through 
them 1 have seen and known more of myself— more 
of man — more of Qod. I hare since possessed a con- 
tented mind, which has been a continued feast. My 
feet had well nigh slipped, but the Lord held me up- 
To his worthy name be sU the praise. 

" Abraham weat out, not knowing whither he went 
I know noibin;; of my future destiny. I see, should 
my life be extended, six years of preparation before 
me. I feel much interest both in the Palestine and 
Burroan missions. But, speak, Lord, thy serraot hear- 
eth. If there be a spot on earth where thou wilt render 
me a co-worker with thyself, 1 consult not my own 
will. Nay, if ihou hast Qothing for me to do, 1 would 
stand still and see the salration of God. I am not my 
own — I am the bought property of the great Head of 
the church. Gk> or stay — live or die. Amen. 

"August 10. — Last evening's hour of devotion was 
spent on the bed, to gain relief for the suffering body. 
]t was a seasonable and 'light affliction.' It showed 
me my frailty — my insufficiency — my dependence on 
the Lord for every mercy. How ia^nant is health 
for usefulness. Hence the necessity of great watchful- 
ness and care to guard against disease, particularly iu 
the minister, and candidate for the holy office. AUs ! 
how many young men throw away their after-life, 
during their preparatory course. May 1 be guided wise- 
ly, having — 1st. devotion, 2d. exercise, 3d. study, as 
my principal daily objects, with an eye single to the 
glory of God. 

'' Aug. 21. — This evening I bad a blessed season, 
in waiting upon the Lord. My spiiilual strength was 



151 MEM OIK OF 

renewed. 1 had a refreshiDg view of Jesos. O bow 
much better than the pleasures pursued by the world 1 
There is a ball in the neighborhood this eTening. 
Once I loved such scenes : but then I was a child of 
Etn. Tbe Lord be praised for turning my mind from 
foliy at BO early a period. Was it that I might do 
something in his cause before t diel I trust he is 
training me for usefulness. / know not ;— but He will 
make it plain. Lord, make me holy. Help me to ex- 
ercise myself unto godliness, and to strive in all things 
to approve myself unto Ihee." 

In all Mr. Taylor's papers, whether journal, notes, or 
letters, we liod the same spirit of piety end Christian 
benevolence j the same ardent desire that others should 
enjoy tbe sweet com niun teal ions of divine ^raee with 
which his own soul was enriched. And while he la- 
bored and prayed for bis own growth in grace, be 
was ever ready to use all the means witbin his reach 
to awaken the careless, to bring sinners to repentance, 
end to ut^e on the Christian in his race Among the 
numerous letters from which our selections and ex- 
tracts ere taken, there is not one which does not 
breathe the spirit of lore to Christ and to tbe saints. 

To Miss H , he wrote from Lawrence villa, Au- 
gust, 1833. 

" Since I had the opportunity of inquiring, as I was 
wont to do, into your spiritual condition, you, doubi- 
less, have had many a conflict with the world, the 
Oeih, and the devil. But what are these 1 They are, 
indeed, enemies of our souls ; but he who ts ' made of 
Qod unto us wisdom, righteousness, sancti&caiion, and 



luata BBAINCBft TATLOn. 160 

rederaption,' will give ua the rictory. Whatever onr 
conflicts or triali, afflictions or disappointments, in 
(his vale of tesrs, let us receive them as included iu 
(he legncy of our Lord : ' In the world ye shall have 
rribulatioD ; but b« of good cheer, I have overcome the 
world.' 

" On how many places have we ioscrihed, ' Hilberlo 
bath the Lord helped us '.' Then let us believe that 
' the Lord will provide.' I am a witness that the Lord 
will provide—' The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not 
want.' — ' We are of more value than many sparrows.' 
Will not the Lord take care of his children 7 The cat- 
tle upon a thousand bills are his — the earth too, with 
all its fullness. He hath stores of blessings to supply 
not only out leniporal but our spiritual necessities, and 
will he not do iti Yes, there is in our Faiber's house 
bread enough and to spare. Even here on earth, we 
may feed on angels' food ; and how delicious 1 I trust 
yon have been richly fed at tbe table of our Lord from 
day lo day. Tbe time was when we were strangers — 
entire strangers to this sweet repast, because we knew 
Bol the grace of God ; but to me, though unworthy of 
the crumbs (hat fall from my Master's (able, (he Lord 
tias graD(ed Gospel-tneasure — pressed down, shaken 
together, and ruoning over ; grea( grace has been upon 
me. The windows of heaven have been opened, and 
showers have come down and more than filled roy 
eoul. Tbe Lord has Indeed done great things for me, 
whereof I am glad. I have no language to describe 
ibe be(tven of love towards God and roan which I have 
enjoyed during the last fifteen months. Of this I do 
Dul boast, for the Lord hath, in condescension and love 



166 HBHoiB or 

iofinile, beatowed it upon m wwin, the unworthicft of 
creation ; and to him be all the glory. 

" Doea the Holy Spirit bear witneaa with your spirit 
that you are a child of God 7 This is the privilege of 
every soul that has been born of the Spirit. The fruit 
of the Spirit is lore, joy, peace, &.C. Where these 
abound, there the witness of the Spirit is enjoyed. 
Then it ia that the aonl, with child-like aimplicity, and 
with filial confidence and affection, approaches Ood 
and cries— Father— Abba — Father; then it is that 
death loses its terrors — the grave its gloom — the bar 
of Ood its dreadful aspect — and hell its horrors — rather, 
the horrors of hell are deepened, but the fear ofthun 
is gone. The soul, with this experience, is coosctoui 
of reconciliation with God its Father — Jesus smiles — 
the Comforter is present — and heaven is desired as the 
home of the saint. 

" To enjoy alt this should be our constant aim; for 
Jesus, dying, purchased it for us, and living, he is 
ready to bestow it all upon us. The Lord make room 
in our hearts for the full reception of himself, with all 
his train of graces, and finally give ua an abundant en- 
trance into his kingdom to enjoy him for ever. 

" Farewell — yours in Christian bonds, 

" Jas. B. Tatloe." 

To return to those evidences of Chrisliao charactet 
B&brded so abuudantly in Mr, T.'s Journal, we tran- 
scribe the record of hia exercises, bearing dale Sep- 
tember 10, in whirh he appears, as might have been 
believed without this direct evidence, to have had a 
conscience remarkably lender, and much alive to every 
thing that bore even the appearance of evil. 



JAMES BBAINEBD TAILOR. 157 

" Hoir Tarlmis are the assauUs of Satan ! Last nigbt 
I bad a dream, id which a temptatioD was preseaietl 
to my mind, and 1 was orercome. Tbia morning I felt 
ehorn of ray spiritual slrenglh, which 1 aitribuied to 
that circumstance. Perhaps this was a chastisemeot 
for an nnguarded expression which I uttered lo a gen- 
tleman who came in during my hour of devotion — and 
seeing me engaged with a book, proposed to retire, say- 
ing he would not interrupt me ; to whom 1 replied, 
'No int«iTupiton.' This was intended only as a civi- 
lity; but my ccmscience smote me; for he was inter- 
rupting the sweet exercise in which I was engaged. I 
looked to the Lord for pardon, and afterward* enjoyed 
a blessed season of communion. 

" Sept. 14. — 1 found, on coming home tJiia ereniag, 
a note from Mrs. M. S., telling me of ber delirerance 
from distress, and her joy in the Lord. She says, ' My 
friend, I hope to hail you in heaTen, as the instrument 
in God's hand of bringing me to the feet of Jesus.' 

" 15. — This day brings to mind the time when I 
publicly declared myself the Lord's servant — seven 
years have passed since i professed religion — O how 
much ! What great and glorious things the Lord bas 
done for me since that time — and still I experience his 
goodness. 

" 16. — Blessed are they who are persecuted for 
ri^teousness' sake. I have had a small share of that 
blessedness to-day ; and I rejoice in it, because it arose 
froni dmng my duty in conversing with sinners with 
plainness, which is never acceptable to a proud heut — 
and from giving testimony of the love of God in my 
sonl, to lukewarm professors, and urging the necessi- 

jj i. B. Tiiylor. 



n 



W UBMOM or 

ty of t dwep work of gnee in the hvut, and of the coo- 
tiaual witness of the Spirit. 

" Did David sBy, ' Come and heai, all jre that feai 
Ood, and I will tell what he bath dooe for roy soul V 
and may not Christians now tell of the goodness ol 
the Lord to them ? Did Paul say, ' We know that il 
the earthly hooseof this tabernacle were dissolred, we 
have a building of God, a house not raade with hands, 
eternal in (he beaveus?' and may not tbe heart that 
enjoys the same assurance, express it in the same lan- 
guage, etea though professors of religion brand the 
assertion as an evidence of self-righteousness 1 

" Lord, nerei let the feut of man ensnare me ; and 
may I ever be a bold witness for Jesus, and for the nt- 
Uioment of that perfect love which casieth out fear. 

" Sept. IS. — Another death in the neighborbood ! 
How frequent and how swiA tbe sbaAs of Ihe destroyer 
amongst us! Whose time comes next 7 Loid, iaiti} 
After attending a funeral, at which I stood up between 
the liring and the dead, and spoke to the people, from 
'the time is short,' 1 took my accustomed walk, with 
a heart full of gratitude to the Lord for my sweet and 
cheerful hopes. I thought this might be my last walk 
along tliat oft-frequented path, as my time at Law- 
renceville is coming to a close. What a delightful re- 
treat this has been to me ! But this evening I agonized 
in spirit as I had never done before, in prayer for this 

people. While thus engaged I unexpectedly met , 

and with streaming eyes addressed bim. He wept— 
tbe Lord bless his soul with conversion ! As I lefV him 
I wrestled in prayer for him, and for our neighbors. 
Hy soul was pressed down with the weight of anxie- 
ty. 1 felt for their eternal interests. When anired tt 



LOH. 156 

the memoriAle tree, I fell before the Lord, lo vent my 
sorrows tbeTe. O the longing I had for tbia people ! 
Alt I asked was, for Christ's sake, that salTalion might 
come to tbera. While thus wrestling and weeping he- 
fore my heavenly Father, an aged man drew near. I 
espied him. but did not rise from my knees, and as he 
came near I spoke to him, and testiBed of the love of 
Jesus. I found be bad no religion. I spoke to him 
plainly and with a full heart. He eoon began to weep, 
and wished me to pray with him and for him, I did 
with earnestness and with tears, and then exhorted 
him to repent and to come to Christ now. He left me 
with apparent concern. Lord, save bis soul, and let it 
not be in vain that he came hither. He said he thought 
[he Lord had sent him. 1 returned home rejoicing in 
the Lord, and happy in his love. 

" Sabbath, Sept. 21.— How pleasantly this morning 
dawns upon me, a sinner saved by grace. 

" I betook myself to the mercy-seat, and held sweet 
communion with heaven. Had a spirit of prayer for 

the people of L , but more particularly for ray dear 

friend L. P. Rivers of waters ran down my eyes, while 
I forgot myself and interceded for him. Is this all for 
nought? Is ibis agonizing spirit given in vain? I ex- 
pect—I wait for the answer, while I hope tor his con- 
version. How long, O Lord, bow long? Come, Lord 
Jesus, come quickly. 

*' This has been a high day to my soul. The Lord 
was with me in his temple, and filled me with bis 
love. It is my last attendance upon divine worship, 
statedly, in this village, and I think it has been the 
best. Dr. N, preached on the leit, ' Ye were as sheep 
going astray, but are now returned to the shepherd 



100 HEMOiR or 

and bishop uf your souls.' The word was spirit and 
life i and 1 received the truth ia the love of it, while it 
melted my heart into love to Jesus, who had, as the 
good Shepherd, Marched me out, and reclaimed me 
from my waoderiogs. How ofteu has he led me into 
green pastures, and made me lie down beside the still 

" I went this morning to visit a sick person — and 
now it is a matter of aaionishment that I am recording 
the loving-kindness of the Lord and celebrating hi* 
praises on the earth — surely nothing but the provi- 
dence of God has preserved me." (Having been, on 
this visit, twice thrown by n wild ungovernable horse.) 

" I experienced but liiile iaconvenieoce from my 
falls, though I had a very onrrow escape. There seems 
to have been hot a step between me and death : but I 
thank God for these occurrences, for they have been 
already sanctitied to my spiritual good. The good 
Shepherd made it the occasion of rich and bounteous 
provision since my return. I was not frightened, bnt 
my soul was full of praise at the time, and I have since 
had a precious season, interceding before the Lord for 
myselfand my friend L. P. This friend has been much 
on my heart to-day. Can it be for nothing? Lord, 
Have, or he will perish — and bless his household. 

" Sept. 22, — I was examined in the morning, and in 
the evening delivered an oration on science, with the 
valedictory address. Thus ended my academical 
course, during which I have had a diversified expe* 
rience. May the Lord, hy his good providence, direct 
me in iny future goings, and lead me on to finnl vic- 
toiy and heavenly glory." 



...Google 



JAMES BRAIMIIBD TATLOB. 161 

Mr. Taytor now left Lawrenceville on a Tisil to his 
friends in New-York and Connecticut, previons to his 
entering college at Princeton. 

Dnrtng this visit, we find him the same engaged, 
activelr benevolent, and demoted Christian j endeavor- 
iDg to lei his light shine, both among Christians and 
before the world ; telling them what the Lord had 
done for him, and what he required of them. Both 
"jmblicly, and from houae to house," he was em- 
ployed in commending his Master, in laboring to in- 
duce Christians to strive for higher attainments in 
holy love and devotednesa to his cause, and in warn- 
ing and exhorting sinners to repent without delay, and 
submit themselves to Jesus Christ, as their Lord and 

Mr. Taylor seemed, even then, to hare very clear 
views of a subject, which to many Christians, and 
Christian ministers, appears to be still enveloped in 
darkness, viz. the duty of sinners immedintely to re- 
pent and give their hearts to Christ. While no one 
conld hnve had a. stronger faith in the doctrines of 
grace, and of man's entire dependence upon God; nor 
have been more ready and delighted to ascribe every 
thing to God, both in providence and in grace j yel his 
mind took a strong grasp upon the binding force of ob- 
ligation ) for his heart felt it, and he pressed duty upon 
both saints and sinners with a success which proved 
that God was with him blessing his labors : which 
has been acknowledged by many in life, and will doubt- 
less be gratefully owned by them in heaven for ever. 

There is reason to believe that during this vacation 
Ur. Taylor was made the instrument of exciting a 
14* 



US aiEMOta or 

mora ngoroiu tone of piety in acTcral churches, sod 
of bringing a number of sinnen to repentance. 

At length the time airired tor hia return 'o atudr; 
and, to usa his own langu^e, 

" Having spent a week in the houte of my Rer. fo- 

ther H , and in the bosom of his endeared family, 

and in laboring in the Lord's vineyard, the wind came 

fair,and I embarked on board the S , Capt. W , 

anticipating a pleasant passage : 1 have no doubt of its 
having been a profitable one ; for i( was trying to the 
faith of Ood's children, and alarming to the wicked. 
Our company consisted of the captain, two hands, fouc 
passengers, two children, and myself. We had pro- 
ceeded about twenty miles, when the wind increased 
and blew violently. In the midst of the gale our boom 
unshipped, and left us in a perilous condition— the 
prospect was that we ^houlil capsize, and be swallowed 
up in the waves. All above was teir^c. The billom 
dashed, the sea roared, the winds bowled, and the halt 
rattled. All below was solemn. We thought on awfiid. 
subjects — death — a watery grave — the bar of QoA — 
haaven— hell. The captain I believe to be a godly 
man : one more on board beside myself had a hop* 
wUch was an anchor to the soul : the rest were unre- 
conciled to God. Alas ! their prospect was despaiiv 
I thought, indeed, that 1 was nearei my heavenly horns 
than my father's house. It seemed that there was bnC 
astept betwixt me and death. But,ia themidstof tb» 
alarm God was with me to allay all turbulence withiia. 
I looked to him for a promise, and he gracionstyi ptve 
na this, ' Feai not, L am wiik ihM.' ItwasaweeilK 
my taste, and made me strong, while 1 lay in my berth 



I&MES BBAIKEBD TAYLOB. 18S 

lerolTiDg it ia my mind nnd calmly waiting the iMne, 
not knawiog but tbc next surge would enter uid fill 
the cabin and end my life. 

"A foang lady, one of those that experienced telt- 

gion at S , while I was there, was qnite composed ; 

but another— O, how different ! 0, her apparent peni- 
tence ! her cries for mercy 1 her weeping eyes ! in the 
prospeclofdeath and damnation. To me she came for 
help; but nottoroyself— toChtislI directedher. Alas' 
the infatuation of mortals, to put off preparation for 
eternity till the hour of danger. But thanks to the Lord 
for deliverance. His arm was stretched nut for our re- 
lief. We were soon moored, and rode out the gale in 
safety. 

" I found my friends exceedingly kind, both at home 
and in New- York. The Ijord reward my parents, and 
brotbets, and sisters, for alt their kindness to their son 
awl brother. I doubt not, that in this life they will 
have a hundred &>ld ; and at the resurrection of the 
just, be acknowlcdgsd as helpers of the helpless.'^ 



CHAPTER IV. 

fHra year in CaUligt. 

On. the 6th of Norember, 1S23, in the 23d year of 
hb age, Mr. Taylor was ezanuaed and admitted » 
ma«1hR e£ the Sophamere data, in the college □TPfa*- 
aan Hail, where he remained three years, which to 



164 NEMOia OP 

some, ud eapecinllf thoce preparing for the miDuli)r, 
will probftbly appear lo be ihe mo«t important period 
of his life. 

It can hnidly hare escaped th« obserraiion of thou 
nho are ioteresied iu the spirituat prosperity of the 
chureh, that there is in our literary institutions, arising 
from the character of the studies, and from almost ne- 
cessary associations, what may be catlcii the college 
spirit — the eiprit du corpg, which is very unfavorable 
to the attainment of a high-toned piety. Indeed, such 
is its contagion, that however pious and deroted our 
candidates for the ministry loay be at their commene- 
ing a college life, the instances are very rare in whieb 
a disinfecting process is not necessary to prepare them 
for entering upon the daties of the sacred office. To 
this cause must be attributed much of that want of 
■piritiiality which bas been the bane of the church 
through all her eventful history ; and to find an eSte- 
tual safeguard against the legion of evils arising from 
this source, has long been an object of intense desin 
with those who are wisely zealous for bet true and 
holy interests. 

On this important subject tbe life of Mr. Taylor 
sheds a cheering light, which shows that it is alto- 
gether practicable to pass through those trying scenes, 
not only without losing one's spirituality, but wiA 
large accessions to bis stores of self-knowledge, and 
of holy devotedoess to God and to the interests of tbe 
Redeemer's hingdom. 

None, indeed, may hope to encounter the trial* d 
nch a life withont many a hard conflict; but the n* 
ample before us will show that these trials mit ba m»- 



iAUGS BRAINESD TAVLOB. 165 

tBined vith advaDtage, and ihai io the issue riulory 
will crowD the arma of grace. 

Perhaps more than most Christians of his age, Mr. 
Taylor had his eye directed to the leadings of Provi- 
dence, and more Daifonnly saw the hand of God in 
crery thing iha.t occurred. With this habil of soul, it 
n-as natural for him lo seek and rely tipoa ihe divine 
direction and support. 

Having entered college, he writes in his journal, No- 
vember 6 ; 

" For what purpose have 1 come hither? Lord, 
Biake plain the path of duty, and give me grace to be 
faithful. 

" 8. — Have been somewhat depressed in spirits for 
two days past, owing to a combination of circum- 
stances } but this morniog I was eaabled lo cast my 
burden upon the Lord, and he sustained me. My soul 
enjoyed a. refresbiog season. Thus I find that these 
walls do not shut out my God. How blessed I am ! 

" 9. Sabbath.— Found it good to wait on the Lord 
in secret. The heavens were opened, and a blessing 
poured out upon my soul. Religion can be enjoyed 
in college. Lord, amidst so much iniquity keep me 
spotless, and make me useful. 

" 16, — The past week has been one of mercy and 
goodness from ihe hand of the Lord. Beside a token 
of declionace regard from my friend L. P., I received 
one from my brother K. These favors warmed my 
heart with praise lo God and gratitude to them. 

"I have enjoyed nearnessof access to God iu secret, 
and had a spirit of intercession for others as well as 
myself. With tenderness and anxiety 1 have ikoughi 



16(1 MEMOIR QF 

on friends, ked od this college ; and have been bleuei 
with a. spirit of prayer for ihem. O that the Loid 
would come in mighty power, and demoliah the king- 
dom of Satan, and build up his caoie. The Redeemei'i 
kingdom prospers at Ibeeastward, and soula are brought 
io by scores; Lord, send laborers iutothe harvest, and 
work by whom thou wilt work, only let souls come 
home to Jesus. 

"Nov. a3.— Lord, whai am I, ot what my fathert 
house, that thou sbouldst visit me 1 The Lord is good, 
and his mercy endnreth for ever. This day and thi* 
hour have I enjoyed the spirit of adoption sweetly 
drawing my inmost soal with cords of love. How con- 
descending and how kind to me, an nnworlhy worm. 
He manifests himself as my Fattier in covenant. Tfae 
precious Lamb of God shows himself to my faith as a 
full Savior, and reigns in my heart Icing supreme. 
The Holy Spirit comes down as showers that water 
the earth. Praise to my God for the holy unction with 
which I have this day been anointed. The beauties of 
my beloved Savior have captivated my hearl, end yet 
my cry is, ' more — my Lord, more faith wliich woii* 
by love.' 

" ' When thou fastest, anoint thy head and wash 
thy face ; that thou appear not unto men to fast, but to 
thy Father which is in secret ; and ihy Father, which 
seeth in secret, shall reward ihee openly.' Already have 
1 been rewarded. In ihe very act has my soul been 
abundantly blessed, and thus have I found it proGuble 
to fast before tlie Lord this day. The blessing which 
he gave me nineteen months ago, he has enabled ma 
to call to mind with thankful remembrance; maybe 



JAMES BBAIHERD TAYLOR. 167 

All make my babilation a dwelling of ligliteousnuij, 
of peace, joy, acd holy triumph. 

" I feel the want of a kin<]red spirit. Where is the 
atHTitualiiy of ihe chorchl Where are the men and 
women ' full of faiih and of the Holy Ghoat V Lord, 
purify thy church. Had an interview with one dear 
uhild of God, whose soul appeared warm with love 
and decided for God : with him 1 anticipate much 



" Nov. 30. — Let the warrior boast of his armor, and 
the victor of his conquest; let the scribe glory in hie 
knowledge, and the sophist in bis wisdom, and the 
worldling in his wealth and pleasures. Bui God forbid 
lh)t I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, by which I am crucified to the world, and the 
world unto me. 

" Tins has been a harvest day to my soul. The Sun 
of righteousness arose, and I basked in his beams, 
whose fructifying influence brought forth the good 
buk,love. Indeed it is heaven upon earth. God blesse!i 
me from day to day. During the past week my meat 
and drink have been sweet aniepasts of heaven — long- 
ing to see Jesus, and reign with him above. 

"Wrote to my dear friends, Mr. and Mrs. D-^. 
May my communication be a word in season to that 
dear family." 

Tp this letter Mr. Taylor supposes them to ask him, 
"How do you like college life? Can you enjoy reli- 
gion there 1" And ilieti answers ; "lam happy to re- 
ply that I am pleased with residing in this institution, 
for several reasons ; the chief of which is, because I 
believe it to he my duty to be here. The advantages 



IBS HEKom or 

Tot the acquisition of knowledge ate evmj vttj inffi- 
cient ; such as proper books and qualified teachers, and 
a complete system of operatioos. This regularity of 
procedure suits me well, and 1 eadea* ot ' lo btn a 
place for erery thing, sod erery thing in its plice.' 
To enjoy religion, as yon know, is to have a sense of 
pardoned sin, and the presence of God reconciled 
through Christ. This can only be felt where ' faith, 
that worketb by lore,' is in exercise. Where this hilh 
is in exercise tio college walls, no siak of iniquity, cut 
shut out (he Lord. ' 'Tis his presence makes our pa- 
radise below j' sod bis presence I hare fell from day 
to day. Glorious have been the manifestations of bis 
love to my beLieviog, rejoicing bearL In t/iit BetM 
I have experienced many such seasons, and ani look' 
ing for many more. They are the sweet earnests of a 
blessed immortality. Lord, erermore give us [his bread. 

" But a word to Miss S . Was my parting word, 

' Be faithful T I trust you are so, giriog diligence to 
make your calling and election sure. And we should, 
in imitation of our beloved Master, do good to aU. 
Why are we Dot more ingenious in discovering and 
(IbseroinaiiDg means of * doing goodT This is a day, 
if I DMiy call it so, of invention. Cannot you invent 
something for the good of the chorch? Think and 
pray over this su^estion until you are satisfied. 

"A word to S . 'Sonof Jonas, lovestthon Vie? 

Feed my sheep.' How mighty this question ! And the 
oSceof feeding the flock of Jesns Christ, bow delight- 
ful ! By your intended profession you will not be de- 
prived of (his privilege. May you prove to be a beloved 
physician. But can you aay. ' Lord, thou knowest that 
I love thee? 



)AME3 BRillIJERD TAVLOR. 169 

"ToW , 'Where art thoul' Rejoicing in 

hope, and giving glory to God? Let us noi be willing ' 
to spend one day without becoming more like Chriat; 
for it is conformity to Aim that will make us holy, and 
that alone. 

" A word to Miss . Wliai of that doubting and 

fearing? Are all lo»t in the sweet testimony that you 
please Godi Cast all your burdens upon the Lord ; 
and may yon, like Maiy, sit at the feet of Jesus — bang 
around his cross — make him your all — all your salra- 
liOD and alt your desire. 

" To Miss . Our Savior said, 1 am the good 

shepherd. Do you hear his voice, and follow him 
daily 7 As a lamb of the flock, may the good shepherd 
carry you in his bosom. Let us lean upon him — 
commit our all into bis hands, and thus lie at his 
disposal. 

" To Miss , ' One shall be taken and another 

lefL' is it true, that father and mother, brothers and 
sisters, have been taken? and you — you left? left for 
what 1 Ask yourself this qucatiou for days to come — 
days to come ! who can tell but, ere to-morrow's sun, 
you may have left the earth, and the soul gone — 
where 1 

" Finally, a word to all. Exercise yourselves unto 
godliness, in constant watchfulness and prayer, and 
frequent fasting. Let (he Bible be your companion — 
give yourselves to reading and meditation. Use it as a 
test to try every thought, word, and action. Let ua do 
good to all. In a word, walk humbly, penitently, and 
in faith ; so that we die daily. Advance heavenward, 
and be blessed continually, and be happy for ever. 

15 J. B. Taylor. 



With increased affection for joa all, 1 am, ia the best 
of booda, yours, 

"James B. T ay lob." 

"Dec. 7. — Another week has gone, and gone fat 
Fv«r. While passing, ihe inscriptions goodness anil 
mercy have been legible od every day. My enjoymeot 
has nol been so great as during the mo weeks pre- 
ceding. And Ihe reason is obvious — I wandered fronk 
tlie Lord ; and bitterness of soul took the place of 
sweet love : but tbe Lord heard my prayer, and again 
visited me with his grace. His mercy endureth forever. 
Last night also witnessed my yielding to the same 
temptation, which brought leanness and sadness uoto 
my soul. With what depression did 1 arise this Sab- 
bath rooming ! The Sabbath's Lord was absent— the 
Spirit, grieved, had left me, until I went into the cha- 
pel ; I prayed, and read, and sung, but my heart was 
gone. Still I had faith and a fixed purpose to wait on 
the Lord. 1 was solemn. I felt that the glory- had de- 
parted. While ihe chapter was reading, my heart be- 
gan to melt into penileolial grief ; I felt myself desery- 
ing the lottett hell. I also felt that if I were sent to 
hell, I could but praise God for what he kad done for 
me. At this juncture peace and consolation flowed 
into my soul, and I could praise the Lord. Blessed be 
bis name for ever." 

On the same date he thns writes to his friend Miaa 



" He who hath said, ' If 1 go away, 1 will coom 
again unto you,' visits my sonl with ht« love, and 
makes me happy here ; and does he not add, ■ to re- 



JAtlEB BBAmEBD TAyLOB. 171 

ceive jron unto myself?' I hare had a heaven upon 
earth, even in' this college ; and you do not think it 
strange, for you know that wAere the Prince of peace 
reignt there is peace. 

" Bnt what think you of those professors of religion 
who, when you tell then of all this, and assure them, 
itpon the authority of God'a word, that ihey may hava 
the desire of iheir hearts, reply, that they wisL they 
could enjoy more of Qod's presence, but they are sub- 
ject to 30 many temptations, and haye to encounter so 
many difficulties, they hardly know what they are 1 
■li Dol their state dangerous 7 And does not all their 
hungering and thirsting after righleousnesa end in a 
niereirisA? What saith the Psalmist ? 'Delight thy- 
self in (he Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of 
thy heart.' Who that delights in a conformity to an 
ungodly world, its fashions, its vain show — who of alt 
that follow the devices and desires of an unrenewed 
heart, can look for such favors from the Lord? They, 
and they alone, who make God their only portion, and 
delight themselves in the Lord as Iheir chief joy, can 
live in peace— can hope to die in triumph, and reign 
with the Lamb for ever. 

" Lei us give to those dead in trespasses and sins, 
all their sinful enjoyments ; let formal professors plead 
their excuses ; but let them know at the same time, 
that they will have to settle (hem at the bar of their 
just Judge. Let others glory in what they will ; but be 
It ours to glory only in the cross of our Lord Jesui 
Christ, to whom be praise for ever." 

Diary, Dec. 23.—" Fasted this day, and had a thank- 
ful remembrance of that season of divine communi- 



179 MEMOIB OF 

ntion so ofieo referred to, which I enjoyed twenty 
months ago. I beliere tfa« work of grace has been 
deepened since that joyful hour ; the experience of to* 
day assures me that I have sunk low in my own es- 
teem, and that it is by grace that I ani in the way (o 
f lory. At evening devotion could not find words to 
express the fullness of my heart ; but I could say, 
' Lord, thou kaowesl that I love ihee.' What precious 
hours I have spent thus far since 1 hare been in col- 
lege 1 The good Shepherd has fed me in his rich- 
est pastures, and here, my Lord, 1 give my little all 
to thee : still eolarge the vessel, aod bless me abund- 

Of this date we have another precious letter from 
Mr. Taylor to hia aged clerical friend H— , of S — . 

" Jfassau-HaU, Dec. 23, 1833, Saturday evening. 



" Another week is gone, and I rejoic^, inasmuch as 
i have one week less lo remain this side of heaven. 
Yes ! I give praise to our God that I was born lo die — 
to die ? lo live for ever. The thought is sweet. ' O the 
pain '—slay, for where is the pain to the dying saint ? 
The »ting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is 
the law. But for the believer Christ hath magnified 
the law and made it honorable ; and thus hath pvir- 
chased pardon, reconciliation, and sancliGcation, which 
being possessed, sets the soul at liberty and makes it 
free indeed. To me it seems that for a child of God lo 
die is but going from one room to another. His body, It 
is true, may be eiercised with exquisite pain, but the 
spirit will rest, and calmly commit all into the hands 



LOB. 173 

of God, and theie lie at his dispoial. And wheo the im- 
ponaat crisis arrives, how sweetly does the soul lean 
upon the breast of its beloved and repose ia his kind 
srms, while it breathes itself nway from the claf te- 
nement to become a fixed resident in glory. ' O the 
bliss of dying.' ' This moment for heaven I'd leave all 

" The reason why so many who live in the enjoy- 
ment of lively hope, fearfully apprehend the approach 
of death, I think is to be found in the noUons they 
have formed of his appearance. But what is death ? 
Is it to be supposed that he is a frightful form, hideous, 
and terrible 1 Is it not rather the gracious appearance 
of Emmanuel— God with ns ? What does he say 9 
' If I go away, I will come again unto you and receive 
you nnto myself; that where 1 am, there ye may be 
also.' When we die, we do not expect to see death 
set forth as in hieroglyphical form— no— but as Ste- 
phen beheld, to the joy of his sonl. We expect to see 
Jesus, who uo doubt presents his kind hand, and Unit 
welcomes his ransomed ones to his own kingdom. 
What then should we do — what could we do withoat 
Jesus ? Take him from our pilgrimage below, and our 
manna would fail ; lake him from the Jordan of death, 
its waves would overwhelm us, and our frightened 
■ohIs would sink in endless despair; take him from 
heaven, and -heaven would be annihilated for ever. 
Truly, he is all, and in all—' the desire of all nations.* 

." 'J'his evening my mind has been led to look to Je- 

WJs, as the apostle says, ' Looking unto Jesus.' I was 

thus led, more particularly, because lo-moriow is to be 

our communion season. ^ 

" ' iMokiiig unto Jetua.'' Before the world was, to 

15* 



174 MBMOIB OP 

dwelt wiibtb«Faiher. And, O what glory andddiglit 
be must bare bad from all rt«mity ! We may lodt 
unto him as Qcfd, by whom the worlds were made. 
But had be need of worlds 1 What do (hejr add to his 
infioUe, UDderived, eternal glory 1 For whom, but for 
man, waa this fair fabric formed, and lighted up, and 
adorned so richly 1 Upon God's equal we may gaze 
with wonder, and adore his condescension. O whit 
piiy touched bis sympathizing soul ! What the might 
of that lore which brought him down ! Well might 
the plains of Bethlehem resound with gtory to God ia 
the highest; peace on earth, and good will to mea. 
And well may we join the hearealy boat in praising 
God ; for unto us a Savior was bom, who ia Christ 
the Lord. 

' O for Ibi) lore, let roclu and hill* 
Tbeir katiaf lUanca braak.' 

" Let US look to Jesus during his state of bumiliatioo, 
for from the manger to the cross he was preparing the 
way to bring many sons onto glory. the contradic- 
tions he met from sinners I What temptatioaa in the 
wilderness I What agony in the garden! But the won- 
ders of the croas I It is here our hopes centre. For the 
hope which the cross inspired, the primitive Chrts- 
tians were ready to suffer; uay, did safler and die. 
However opposed, they preached ita doctiines, and 
said, God forbid that we should glory, save in the 
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

" Extending our view beyond the cross, we maf^ 
profiubt; look upon him whom we have pierced, U - 
arising from the dead. ' He rose again for our justii- 
cation.' What joy his disciples felt when iheir eyn 



lAHEW BUniBD TITLOB. ITS 

once moie beheld their Lord, whom the Juwa had era- 
cified aod stHJn I But he was soon to leave them, and 
triamphantly ascend up wkeie he whs before. 

" Thither oui forerunner hath entered — our captain 
has led the way ; and now we may look unto him at 
the right hand of the Majesty on high. By faith, too, 
we may look at the mansions he bath prepared. But 
what is faith's vision ? It is indeed a blessed reality ; 
' it is the substance of things hoped for, and the evi- 
dence of things not seen.' But we want more, wad 
more we shall have. Not through a glass darkly shall 
we see him, but face to face — see him as he is. Feai 
not, little flock, it is your Father's good pleasure to 
give you the kingdom. 

" Do we want stronger faith ? To Jesus must we 
look, who is the author and finisher of faith ; and pray, 
as by example we are taught, ' Lord increase our faith.' 
Would we be what God would have us to be, what 
do we need but to be conformed to the iotage of his 
dear Son t And how shall this be effected but by look- 
ing continually unto Jesus f Are we ignorant 1 He is 
our Prophet. Are we sinners 1 He is present to plead 
oor cause — a priest whom the Father heareth always, 
and whose hlood cleanseth from all sin. Would we 
have' all things brought into complete subjection to his 
law ? As King, he is on the holy hill of Zion. Where 
is such an example of patience under suffering ? and 
he knows how to succor them that are tempted. In 
doing the will of his heavenly Father, how assidnotisly 
M4 perseveringiy did he accomplish his work I What 
tt#flnd to do, may wedo it with our might. Themnv 
atafdily we loi^ to Jesus, the faster we shall nin, the 



176 Muiout UP 

tu(^er will be out kiuinmeaU, the happier we shsU 
be, and the more we shall honor God. 

" Bui wheu will our race be ended ? My rerertnd 
father, do not you feel that your course is alnvat 
finished? Looking forward, you behold the crown 
of righteousnesi. Besides your own liouseliold, you 
hope to meet mnny a departed saint who' once sat un- 
der your ministry, and was brought lo'God ihrougSi 
your instrumentality. If any thing could cause us lo 
•ing ' Hosaana to ilie Son of David,' next to our own 
•alTStion, it must be thai God hath honored us, in 
bringing , souls to Christ. Glory loGod in the highest, 
may he the united acclamation of pastor and people. 
Pray that I may never be satisfied with bread alone — 
that is, to labor for a living, but that 1 may have sonts 
for my hire. 

" Dear Mrs. H , may I not say to you as Eliza- 
beth said to Mar/, ' Blessed art thou among women.' 
Surely the Lord bath beard your supplioationa, and 
your offspring have been born again ; if so, what more 
could the Lord have done to his little vineyard than 
he hath done 1 May your nursery of piety still receive 
the early and latter rain— be continually visil^d by tha 
heavenly Gardener — and, when transplanted, I doubt 
not he will range you all among his trees of righteoa»- 
ness, to flourish for ever in bis courts. 

" By this time you are perhaps ready to ask, ' How 
do you like college life t Can you enjoy religion there F 
Not unto me, but to Qod be the praise ; these walb 
cannot shut out the Lord ; and where he is, there is 
heaven. I do not find the obstacles I anticipaied. 
The Lord has proved belter than all my fears, and ha* 
given me ' daily bread.' I hare fed on angels' food— 



lAMtS BRjtIKEKD TAVLOR. 177 

my room has been made a Bethel, and I find it ia 
growing better snd better, instead of diminishiug. 
My cup overtiows — I am on my journey to heaven, 
with (lie desire lo love God more, and serve him bet- 
ter. O let us keep near the cross, and be diligent to 
make our calling and election sure." 

The following extracts from Mr. Taylor's diaiy, 
sliow that he ended as he began tbe year, with Ood — 
in a high state of spiriiualily, and with an unremitting 

o tiie duties of religion. 



" December 25. — Last evening 1 walked to L»w- 
renceville, and once more hailed my dear brothers F. 
and S. and friends, who received me cordially. 

" This morning 1 arose with much pain in my breast, 
but the Ijght affliction was sanctified. After breakfast 
I took my old walk, and remembered the days of for- 
mer time:; — I slopped and overlooked the surrounding 
scenery — but I was on my way to that oft-fregumi^ 
tree. David said, ' I will remember thee from the hill 
Mizar.' What occasion have I to remember the Lord 
from that tree ! Although the morning was cold, the 
Lord warmed my heart as I knelt and prayed on that 
spot, from which many a prayer had ascended to the 
throne of grace. , 

" It was truly a melting lime — O what tenderness ! 
what resignation I And I returned, after my heart 
had enjoyed the season, blessing and praising God. 

" During the day my mind was solemn ; and on my 
way home, as 1 mused, the (ire burned. In the high- 
way Jesus was exceedingly precious. It is God— the 
triune, tbe holy God, that captivates my heart— and 



178 MBWtui or 

to be coDfoimed to the image of his de«r Son is wf 
■uprcme dMire. Lord, make me more holy! 

" Thii bai been a good Cbrislmas-day to me. Tba 
birth of the Savior has occurred to my mind, io alt it) 
ciroom stances, with pleasing reflections. But luw h« 
Migna on high, the Judge of all. What a mystetioui, 
yet consiateDt trhole ! And all to make bis people 
Messed for ever. 

" 28th, Sabbath.— This is the last Lord's day of the 
year, and it may be numbered among the best ; for 
•UTely ibe kingdom of heaven, which is righteoat- 
nest, peace, and joy in the Hoiy Ghost, baa been set 
up powerfully in my soul. Much of heavcD has come 
down to eanb. The powers of darkness have given 
way, while the King has been seated on his ibroar 
within me. 1 think 1 never had such a loving child- 
like spirit in pouring out ray heart before God, ray 
Father, as I had this evening. It was surely bit 
adopting love, into wbich/aun/t. How it overpowered 
me! my body shook with the delightful emotion. At 
noon, also, after walking, with a heart pouring oui 
praise to my God— my God in covenant — I sat down 
and meditated upon his works — all of which uttered 
their voice in praise of their Creator: my heart wsi 
broken, and caused my tears to flow. The remem- 
brance of my youthful follies impressively recurred, 
as 1 beheld groups of lads who had been wanderiig 
over the fields. The distinguishing grace of God, too, 
was manifest, for aa I sat, I saw two of my fellow- 
itudentg violating this sacred day by secular employ- 
ment — preparing recitations probably for to-morrav- 
' Hallow my Sabbaths,' is Heaven's high commaad. 

" Dec. 31, 1B23.— On Sabbath night I retired much 



lAKta SR*niEiiii TATLOB. 179 

t'teicised wiih pain of body, bnt with >t solid peace of 
mind. 1 did no[ rest well through the night, and arosa 
in the morDing much indisposed. I attended recitation 
il ihe forenoon ; hut at noon betook myself to bed, 
alter the Lord had poured ti blessing into my happy 
noul. The light affliction was sanctified, so that I 
could not pray, nor did 1 wisii others to pray, fur my 
recovery ; and the symptoms were Hlarming. My will 
was entirely resolved in this: ' Thy will be donej'— 
while 1 felt that ' to be with Christ is best,' and tb« 
thought of dying was sweeL 

' " Looking at my record, made one year ago this 
ereiHng, 1 find my testimony to the Lard's goodnew 
ihe year just then ending, and an invocation for the 
conlinuBQce not only, but for an increase of his faror 
and love, during the siicceediog year. My prayer has 
been heard. Great and glorious things have been done 
for my soul, in secret with my God ; and of all men I 
am under the strongest bonds of gratitude, of love, and 
of praise to him in return. 

" Why may I not expect greater things the coming 
yearl ' The path of the Just is as the shining light, 
that shineih more and more to the perfect day.' 

" Lord God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, 
whose I am, thine would I be. To thee, through At 
beloved, I renewedly and solemnly engage my love 
and obedience. O keep me— save me from all evil — 
and bless me abundantly, moi« than I can ask oi 
think — all things are possible with thee." 

Mr. Taylor's annual letter to his father and family, 
at Middle Haddam, which he called his neio^eor'a 
g^t, was written this year a little in advanee of iba 



180 UEiioiB or 

u»ual time, and bears date (he 14th December. From 
this communication, fult of affection, filial and frater- 
nal, we present our readers wiib some extracts, stroiig' 
If expressive of gratitude and piety towards the Giver 
ol' every good and perfect gift. 

" Reviewing the past year, many things which 
awaken pleasing reflections rise to my recollection. 
No period of my life has been marked with clearer in- 
dications of the Lord's goodness to his unworthy ser- 
vant. When surveying my room, I discover one arti- 
cle here, and another there, which reminds me of my 
dependence, and shows the liberality of dear relations 
and friends. How much they have ministered to my 
wants, I cannot say r only, for what I have, 1 am in- 
debted to Him who is the first cause of the openings, 
liberal openings, of the hands of those interested in 
my prosperity. But more of these will be manifested 
at the resurrection of the just, when our Lord shall 
say, ' Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the 
least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.' 
By the blessing of God, I have all things, and abound. 

" As to religious enjoyment, no year has witnessed 
such displays of divine love. And I may humbly and 
joyfully say, 1 have grown in grace. My trials have 
bean few, and have all worked for good ; my tempta- 
tiona many, but in henven's armor I have overcome. 
While my prospect for heaven gathers brightness, my 
determination to spend and be spent for God increuei. 
I daily feel my nothingness ; and that it is ' by the 
grace of God I am what I am,' a poor sinner saved 1^ 
grace. I am one year nearer the end of my preparatory 
course. Que year nearer 7 Who knows that the Lord 



JAMEB BKUREaD T«TLCIl. 181 

wtll cotint me failbful, pbtdag mC isMthc miDMtryl 
Concerning ibis, however, I ftia tut little anxious. I 
know that my object, my highest wiah, while on earth, 
is to be instrumenlal in bfioginf Mttts to Christ. If, 
then, 1 should be called hoiDB while ^eparing for the 
field, it wocJd be ooly caltitg me from the toil to map 
ihe rtmrd. The good iBbepherd accepts a willing 
mind-, and often, i»aiead of coiAiing one's labors ta 
earth, lakes the soul to heaven, to render a perfect ser- 
vice in bis pres«Bce, Aad who will say this is not lo 
he preferred? 1 endeavor to take no thought for lo- 
murrow ,' la-dly my iitquiry thoald be^ What is my 
duty? Thus 1 am eDdeavoring togs on, in a regular 
round of duty. My studies are attended to with ibe hope 
thai ihey may be sanctified to soma good use. My 
hows sacred to def otion are welcome, and bring with 
them streams from the fonncain of living waters, and 
thus keep toe alive. O how refreshing I how anima- 
ting ! The presence of God makes ns as trees planiell 
by the rivers of waters, which yield good fniii — fruit 
to the glory of God. 

" Tfl kni forward a year! Il is a precious— an in- 
raliMble period of time. Tbn», more ilian we d», the 
ransomed of the Lord, and the spirits of the lost view 
it. O One we may be wise, to make th« most of the 
year that is before us ! What new plans, then for do- 
, ing good can we devise? or how can we improve 
ihtMB already adopted ? Why shontd we nof strive, 
■3 mdividaals, to tmke onr infiuence to be felt all over 
the enth ? Th« Lord help tis to tabor faithfully. And 
this we should do, not mer<dy from a sense ot duty, as 
obligatory upon all, but aa binding iipo« each, attd liM 
' too iww, as we know not but, ere the close of 1834, we 

16 J.B.T«ytor. 



182 HEMOtR or 

may be summoned hence. Has not heaven someihing 
for us 10 do ; lomeihing to make known for the good 
of mankind through us T Let us pray over this inteiro- 
gaiory until we are satisfied. 

" What is before us as a family, and as individuals, 
we know not; but to Him who hath brought us 
hitherto, all is plain. Concerning this we should not 
be anxious ; for,'* shall not the Judge of all the earth 
do right ■?' 

" As for myself, I feet that the seeds tif tnortaliiy 
have taken deep root within me, and I am frequently 
leminded of my latter end. Bui does this alarm mel 
No: for every evidence of the approach of the me»- 
senger, dealh, I have cause to rejoice, rather than to 
be terrified. It is a sweet exercise to pass the valley, 
in imagination, and look beyond, upon ibe pearly 
gates. Faith enters within the city, and walks th( 
golden streets. 



As Mr. Taylor closed the last year, so did he com* 
menee the new one, with a gratefnl and devout ae- 
knowled^:menI of the goodness and grace of Ood. 

On the Isl of January, 1624, we find in bis diaryi 
this short btit expressive notice ; 

" T he Lord has indeed given me a happ^beginning 
of a Dew year. At evening devotion, had a blessing 
BO rich and<full that there seemed a want of room to 
receive it Carry on, cany on thy glorious worl^O' 
m; Qod, and make me more like Jesiu." 



lUas BSAIHEBD TAYLOR. . 183 

It is delightful to obeeTre how this devoted servant 
of Christ labored, not only to grow ia grace himself, 
Qut to slimuiate others in the' same blessed course. In 
this, perhaps as much as in any one tbing, he disco- 
Tered his own likeness to Him who continually went 
ahout doing good. In his diary, and ia all his corre- 
spondeuce, as well as in the recollections of his ac- 
quaiotanee and friends, be seemed never to lose sight 
of the spiritual improTement of those who professed 
to love the Lord Jesus Christ. In a letter, dated Nas- 
sau Hall, Jan. 13, 1824, addressed to Miss L , h« 

wrote as follows ; 

'' It seems from your testimony that God has lately 
deepened the work of grace in yoar soul. How blessed 
to be blessed of God I What can equal that peace 
which Christ imparts in some favored moment to his 
disciples 1 What joy is like that which flows from an 
unction of the Holy One? It may he said of those 
who are justified and sanctified, 'Ye arc the temples 
of the Holy Ghost.' And to them earlh has lost its 
charms — those scenes of former gayety are mourned 
over, as time worse than lost — forms and fashions no 
more seem becoming. With what holy contempt do 
such look upon the passing vanities of the world. 
Disgusted with these things, the soul seeks its happi- 
ness in retirement, and finding it there alone with 
God, leaves the worldling to his pursuits and plea- 
sures. Give me my Bible, a season for holy medita- 
tion, and an opportunity to call on my ' Father who 
seelh in secret,' and I envy not their joys. 

" Having been so richly blessed of Heaven, T tmit 
you will go on, renewing your strength from dajr to 



I9i UBimK or 

iMf. We neeJ 'daily braad.' A«d clow kDd intkiMte 
communioa with Ood tbe Father, and with fait So* 
Je»MM Christ, is the food belt adapted lu the aoul thai 
ha* lasted that the Lord is gracious. Ma^ to«i fiad 
your clout more and mtwe a Betkcl. It ia ihete that 
' the soul mast be trained. There the Bwecl«st koon 
are to be enjoyed. Bohf omu, in every age, btive lived 
BG«c to God in aeciel. It is this that fits one to live t 
Wy, self-dBoying, crote-bcanag life before the wotlJ. 

" Since my locatioa in college, the Lord has been 
very gracious in manifesting his love to my eou). He 
has communed with me frocn off the mefey-ecat, to 
that I have found that these walls cannot shut out the 
Comibilei from my heart- Were it not for thie refcesb- 
isg from the preaeuec of the Lord, what should I dot 
Hethinkt of all ineD I should be the most miserable i 
bat with this iny soul is happy, and often exutu ia 
Qod. 

" Were I to auggvit lotne ntes tor koh/ living, ibey 
should be tho following : 

" Let there be eonttant watchfulness, frequent fish- 
ings, and coBtinofl prayer. 

"Let the Bible be a eoneiant companion for read- 
ing and neditatioD ; and as a test to try every thought, 
word, and action. 

"Do aooD TO ALi. In « wotd, walk humbly, peni- 
tently, and believingly ; ao shalt iboa ' die daily,' ad- 
vance heavenward hourly, ba blessed always, aad 
happy for ever." 

Diary. " Jan. 16. At evening devotion the window* 
of heavea were opened, and showers of love refreshed 
my soal. My heart leaped for joy. What glorious 



JAHEB BKAIHBBD TATLOB. 185 

things doth my Qod bestow upon a worm I Orace ! 
free grace 1" 

Of the same date we find an inlereBliog and instruc* 
tire letter to one of hb brothers, strongly eviaciog bis 
fraternal aflectionand fidelity, and exhibiting a loveljr 
picture of that respect which the yoanger should eva 
feel for the elder. 

"My brother, I love yon 'in the bowels of Jeslu 
Christ.' la him you ore the elder, and I rejoice that I 
may coD7erse wiih you as a partaker of the sarae 
grace. ' You know the lore of God.' But according 
lo your testimooy, it is not with you as in days that 
are past. Since you addressed me, it may be you have 
came up out of the wilderness, and are now leaning 
upon the Beloved. If so, I will rejoice with you. If 
not, 1 will sympathize, and my prayer shall be, that 
aol many days hence you may be baptized with the 
Holy Gboal. Of myself I will not glory. 1 feel far 
from this ; but in Christ, through whom my peace is 
as a river, apd my righteousness as the waves of the 
sea, I will glory. O the love of God, into which I have 
sank, as intoanoceau! Peace, love, |oy, andezulta- 
tioo, like waves of ihe sea, have rolled over me. I am 
still looking to sink deeper, and am wailing to hear 
you tell me that you are happy in the visits of the love 
of God. 

" I know indeed that you have a thousand things to 
oppose your advance in .the way of holiness, that are 
not common with those in my situation. But still, 
'Foes we have, and we must flgbt.' We both need 
great grace to withstand our enemies. But, consider* 



186 HBHOiR vr 

ingjHir empleymeats, I conelude withont li«siUtioB, 
thai your temptations and crosses are more numerons 
iban mine. From the multiplicity of your cares in bu- 
slaess, your mind m«y often be disturbed. ' None of 
these things move me.' The day rolls nmnd, and I an 
charged with bnt ifaree things of import«nee — ray sool, 
ray body, and my studies ] and I have a time and place 
for each. If time and apportunity offer, a fourth is, a 
do good to my friends near and remote. 

" As near as I can jadge, the worid haa lost all iti 
ehanns for me. I go not into il fer its pleasures. 1 seek 
not my happiness anuing the wicked. No ; God is the 
soaree sf my happiness ; Jems the channel, and the 
Holy Spirit is the agent. Shut out from the world- 
shut i|p in Qod — surTDanded with dai^ess — filled with 
light, I live alone, and yet am visited from hearen. 
And If I do not grow in grace, I shall be visited with 
stripes. Pray for me, that the good hand of God-may 
still be upon me. I feel that Qod !s training me for 
something either in his vineyard here, or in glary 
above. I long for the best gifts, and to be found to be 
a workman thoroughly funished. 

" 1 suppose you do not gain that frequent and near 
access to Ood which you once enjoyed. Do you now 
give as much time to closet devotion as you then did? 
And wfaen you letire, do yon find your mind fixed on 
God, and your thoughts ahstracied from worldly ihingg, 
as formerly 1 Let not my brother think this the Ian- 
guage of reproach. It Is love. Ami be assured, I veriiy 
believe you would sacrifice all, rather than knowingly 
wound the cause of love. If I raistake not, you wish 
to live in, what I long to have you enjoy, ihefulbteti 
of God. Then let no cross be eonsideieil toe heavy M 



JAMEB nAOIBBV TATLOB. 1S7 

ba borne m following Christ ; no lost too great lo be 
sDsUined for Chtisi ; snd no ptth too holf in going 
■n«t Chridt. 

"That <foa may pmaeis ^1 — aay, more than foa 
Tigh tiDtT, or even ihink, ihere is not the least doubt 
in my mind ; and not only possess it for a day, but for 
years — nay, for ever, with the inereaae. And but for 
this, what is the religion of our Lord ? He led cap- 
tivity captive, that we might ga free. He invites ns 
iato a close union with himself. He waits for ■ renew- 
ed and foil surrender, to crown ns with joy — to feed 
us with plenty — to bless us abundantly, and to make 
us kings and priests for ever." 

Diary. — "Jan. 18. How repeated the goodnese of 
Ood! 'Ye are of more value than many sparrows.' 
' Your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of 
these things.' Yeaterdny I received an amount suffi- 
cient to pay my aeasion bill, besides a token from my 
dear friend L. P. ' Lacker! ye any thing t And they 
said, Nothing.' My wants have been supplied, and I 
eantinue to this day a witness of the faithfulness of a 
sorenant-^eping-God. 

"Jan. 81. How shall [ record the wonderful worka 
of God to a sinner saved by grace 7 Glory to God in 
the highest. Language cannot describe the overflow- 
ing, melting love of God ! Bui my Lord knoweth, and 
my heart felt it at evening devotion. Shut out from 
the world, I held sweet converse with heaven. But 
ibr these visitations of my God, what should 1 do ? 

"Jan. 33. May the twenty-third of each revolving 
month pass with grateful recollection. The loving* 
kindpess of the Lord, how great ! Enjoyed a sweet 



■«uon daring mr noon-day walk. While I htTs bt(- 
ed, 1 have been fed with heavenly manna. 

" ! am I DOt blessed of God 7 I somelimes think 
myself the happiest mortal on earth. And soon, glory 
to God, I expect to join the chorch above. 1 have daily 
roementos of my mortality ; and my soul gets on high 
more and more. May 1 live in heaven." 

The correspondence of Mi. Taylor was so exten- 
sive, that it is necesssiy, in order lo biiai^ this memoii 
wiihJD a reasonable compass, lo make selections ; and 
yet there runs so rich a vein of piety through all his 
papers, that the inducement is very strong just to ar- 
range and print the whole. We find neither letter, nor 
note, nor record, in his diary, that has not something 
of the same all-pervading spirit of devotion, love, 
zeal for God's glory, and desire for the salvtttioa of 

On the 29th of January he wrote to a Christian 
friend, whom he seems greatly to hare valued, a long 
letter full of affection, from which we give the follow- 
ing extract, as affording evidence of his deep humility, 
the legitimate fruit of those blessed communications 
of grace which he enjoyed. 

"M^deuPrisnd, 

" So far as 1 can judge of the highest enjoyment 
which heaven's rich muoiScence bestows upon my 
soul, it is when faith gets a view of God the Father, 
as reconciled, and smiling propitiously ; a view of the 
Son of Ood, that cbaruia and captivates my hea^t, as 
the beloved; and a view of the Holy Ghost, as 'the 
promise of the Father.' It is at such a season that the 



JAHEa BBAlHEail TtTLOB. 169 

windows of heaven are opened, and streams of lore 
poured down, which find a welcome leceptios with a 
humble heart that feels itself the unvorthittt of the 
unieortky. At no moment does the whole character of 
God appear more cleat. In all his attributes be beams 
forth ; and failh, and hope, and lore, and joy, mingle 
together, and flow oat under his benign influence. 
And in testimony that the soul does not arro^te to it- 
self the honor due to God, it renders up its all, its lit- 
tle all, in reinra for favors so divine. What exercise 
then takes up the soul 1 It is one that verges still near- 
er heaven — prayer is turned into praise. How do the 
goodness, the lore, and the mercy of God enlaige at 
every view ! And his holineat and his justice, too, 
gather JovelinM*. The soul feels forgiven and washed, 
but cannot forgive itself. With the conviction of its 
ill desert, viz. the lo»e»t hell, the soul wonders at its 
escape from the burning tatie. 

" The tone of piety is not so high among profess- 
ors of religion in our colleges as it should be. Alas ! 
why so much world ly-mindedness 1 Why so much 
formality 1 To tell you the plain truth, there is not 
enough of spirituality here ; not ao much as I expect- 
ed to find. My studies crowd upon me, so that I have 
a little more to do'in ray literary pursuits than /would 
choose: but it will doubtless be for the best. 

"The good Shepherd has eaused me to feed in green 
pastures since 1 wrote last. He is mindful of one who 
stands in need of continual and increased aid. 

" Not having a disposition to go out, 1 seldom leave 
my Bethel, save when duty calls. The more 1 tee ot 
the world, its forms and its fashions, the more do I see 
tbat all is vanity. .How blind, how infatoated is sin- 



190 UKUoat OP 

fill nun ! What a gaudy show is this world 1 Whtt 
thanks we owe to beaven for such a discovery ! Ma; 
our consiaut prayer ascend r ' Lord, turo off mine Met 
iVom beholdiDg Tauily.' 

" I trust you are all making rapid progress in the di' 
vine life. Amidst templatioDS and fiery darts, we need 
the whole armor of God. The armor of men, how 
ever curiously wrought, still leaves the warrior vol- 
Derable ; but with the whole armor of God we can 
utand — stand against the adversary and all his wiles. 
VVho then would resl shortof the ' whole ?' a part will 
[iot answer. The Lord put the lehole armor upon as, 
and help us to keep it bright by consLant use. 

" Soon these conflicts will be over. Who would re- 
main beyond the time appointed of the Father 1 And 
none ought to desire to depart, till Jesus comes agree- 
ably to his promise: 'I will come again and receive 
you unto myself, thai where I am, there ye may be 
also.' What will it be to be with Christ above 7 To 
be with him on earth makes our heaven below. This 
also we know, ' that when Christ, who is our life, 
shall appear, we shall be like him ; for we shall se« - 
him as he is.' " 

A letter written about this time to some relation!i 
in Tolland, Counecncul, shows that Mr. Taylor was 
nkilled in administering consolation to the afflicted, as 
well as in exciting the saints to that diligence through 
which the assurance of hope is attained : 

" I suppose N. is still ui|der the chastening rod of 
oat heavenly Father. Butmethinksyousay, Does this 
visitation deserve the name of ' rod ?' I doubt not ; ac- 



JAHBB BRAIKBRD TATLOB. 191 

eoning to your testimony, yon have found a rich re- 
muoeratioD for all yoor priTations. And we may set it 
dovro Eta a maxim established beyond queslion, that 
God will take nothing from his children without be- 
slowing something letter, either in kind or in amount. 

"The good and aSicted Jeremiah said, ' It is good 
for a. man to bear the yoke in his youth.' Lam. 3 : 27. 
And we are not to suppose that it is not good also for 
■hose of riper years. It has beeo the testimony of the 
saints, in erery age, that ' affliction works for good to 
them that love God.' 

"But how ia it good to bear the yoke, or to experi' 
eoueafBiction ? The context tells an, ' he sitteth alone.' 
"The atSicted one is blessed with retirement, free 
from the bustle and din of ihe world ; has an oppor- 
tunity for reflection, self-examination, and self-dedica- 
tion loGod, which the season calls for, and calls loudly. 
Not that th'is cannot aud ought not to be dnne at other 
times, and by all ; but when the hand of God is Upon 
lis, we feel liiore than ever the importance of a com- 
plete surrender, la not this good 1 

'"He putteth his mouth in the dust,' To bear the 
yoke tends to produce humility and submission. It 
shows one's frailty and entire dependence. Were we 
always in prosperity, we should not partake of alt the 
legacy which Christ hath left to his diaciples. By be- 
coming acquainted with ourweakoess, we are induced 
with more humble reliance to depend on Him who 
is the strength of our heart and our portion for ever. 
And would we not share in all the ingredients of the 
cnp which our heavenly Father hath prescribed for us? 
Certainly ; for though not joyous for the present, bat 
grievous, yet afterwards it yieldelh the peaceable fruits. 



1 



I9t MEMotB or 

of righieoHSDess. And let ooe bare peace iabelierh^ 
and joy JD the Hoty Oliost, ibe world may nge, utl 
the paius of dealb may gtl hold on him, but still he is 
ID peace, and can triumph. Here is a secret inreligion 
that the world caonot know, for it seeih not, norcom- 
preheiideth it. Bat, glory lo God, to ua it is no mys- 
tery. And wc erpect to triumph in a dying hoot. 

"'He giveth hia cheek to him that smitetb hjm.' 
AfBictions tend to produce patience. How much of 
this grace we need I 

" ' He is filled with reproach.' Sanctified alHictiona 
draw forth acknowledgmeats of the justness of Qod ; 
and the sool thus visited, condemn^ itself, and gives 
pnise to God. They greatly qoicken to duty. Earth 
fadea more and more. The grare is viewed with com- 
posure. Prayer i!i more ndent. Heaven appears nearer 
and brighter, and the loul longs to fly away attd dwell 

" If such be the fniiEs of bearing the yoke, who 
would not bear it? But we must not solicit it. It ii 
the prerogative of heaven lo put il on, to sustaia (» 
under it, and to remove it from us. 

" May you find more And more, that good fruit w 
produced by the pmning of the branch. The Hashand- 
man water thee by his S^ril ! and may he commtini- 
cate much of his vivifying influence, that you may 
Houriah as the palia-iree, and as the willow by the 
water-courses. 

" I haTe not much to say of myself; bnl I can yet 
testify of the riches of the grace of Clod, I am yet a: 
miracle of grace — yet a pilgrim ; and glory that I am 
counted worthy to bear the cross. Heaven's rich mu- 
nificence is manifested in the choicest of its stores be- 



iAHEB BRAIHERD tatlob. IBS 

■lowed upon the most unworthy. These college walls 
do not shut out my God ; my room haih become, from 
the first, a glorious Bethel— yes, a Httte heaven. It is 
a sacred spot, where my soul hatli often drunk of the 
rirer of the water of life. ' God is love.' This is my 
theme below ; ' God is love.' Help me to praise him 
for what he has done for my soul. He halh done great 
things and marvelous, whereof I am glad, and would 
rejoice. 1 wish to live for none else besides my God, 
and feel an increased determination to spend and be 
spent for him. 

" Twenty'One months have now g^ooe by since He 
so powerfully blessed me ; — rich seasons, and richer 
■till have I enjoyed since, and ricA«r still am I expect- 
ing below. Dul heaven 1 heaven I There is a heaven 
to come — a holy heaven — an eternal rest — a glorious 
habitation; and new glories are yet lo be revealed. 

" Well, we are on our journey ; but, alas ! some of 
' OUT dear relatives are yet behind — slill without a new 
heart — yet destitute of vital piety, however excellent 
and amiable in their moral deportment. But farewell, 
even tdthem; an eterDaI'ii!ar(-rencfing' farewell, even 
to those we love, if they will not regard the voice of 
God. We cannot give up oui hope for their joys, Dor 
join hands with the wicked. May they be saved— may 
Uiey be saved, and with us gathered into the fold of 
Christ." 



"Of you I have not heard a word for more than o 
month, and peradventure I may be addressins the 

17 1. B. Til.tlor. 



191 ueuom op 

dead. In every paper I receive, I generally look tint 
tor thos<! solemn mementos of man's mortality. Ah, 
, wc don't see the half of (he ravages (hat death ii 
making in our world. Hundreds upon hundreds crowd 
tlie dark valley from day to day—millions upon mil- 
lions, in quick succession, bave gone into the eiernal 
U'orld. But my friend may yet be on this side Jordan, 
yet suflering and doing the will of her heavenly Fa- 
ther. Well—he knows what is best. It is he that 
commences, continues, and ends the mortal existence 
of his creatures: and would we be at the disposal of 
any other? No. In bis will would we acquiesce, 
concerning life, health, and all onr enjoyments. To 
rest here is to rest safety ; and if we acknowledge the 
Lord in all our ways, he will direct our steps. Your 
cup for years has been one of suffering, but mingled 
with many a precious aweet. You can tell the world 
that you suffer, and they will believe you ; again, you 
may lell Ibem that the love of God helps you to for- " 
get, or to triumph over your pains, and they will only 
stare. But, however they may wonder, stilt it is true, 
so true that you may bless the Lord for the pains you 

" May you find more and more that the good Shep- 
herd feeds you as one of his sheep. May he keep yon 
in joyful anticipation of entering the fold above. 
' Where I am, there shall ye be also.' ' Fear nut, little 
flock ; it is youT Father's good pleasure to give you 
the kingdom.' We know in whom we have believed, 
And that he hath set up in our hearts that kingdom 
which is righteousuess, peace, and joy in the Holv 
Ghost. O may it be set up with more power. 

" The good hand of our God is upon me. My room 



JAMES BOAINEBD TAVLOB. IDS 

is Mill made a Bethel. Ii is religioo thai-shines mor« 
and more lo the perfect day." . 

Of the ume dale is a letter lo bis parents, iu wliich 
he shows (and this seems to have been ibe cooataut 
slate of his heart) how dead he was to the world, and 
how he lived ou the very contines of heaven. 

" 1 am still a pilgrim, and the good hand of God ia 
upon me. ' His lovbg-kiDdness, O how sirong!' I 
glory thai I am a pilgrim." 

How truly he acknowledged God in all his ways, 
deserves to be noticed and imitated. Noibing seems 
to have occurred, in which he did not distinctly recog- 
nize the band of his heavenly Father. In his diary 
he records, 

" Among other mercies, 1 unexpectedly hailed my 

dear brother J , who called upon me ibis evening 

on his way to New-York, from the south. My eession 
bills are all settled. The Lord has made provision 
for me without one exertion of roy own. Is not this 
providential? O he lakeihcare of the sparrows; and 
be has satisfied me wiih every good thing " 

" Feb. 8. — Returned this morning from visiting 
Lawrenceville, and it was grateful once more, after 
an absence of only thirty hours, to return lo my room 
again. Change of place is not favorable to growth in 
grace. Visiting and journeying, to me, unless imme- 
diately engaged in the service of God, are nol so ad- 
vantageous as sweet retirement. But I have been 
taught lessons whereby I hope to profit while the 



worlil aad ilg joys become tasteless to mj soul ; 1 hdih 
ger for the heavenly manna. 

" My rrtend L. P. conveyed me from LawrencevUle 
to Princeton in bb gig. Precious soul, I fear for him. 
However moral, amiable, and upright in his outward 
deportment, bis heart, 1 fear, is yet unreconciled to 
God. Nay, I have no doubt of it; for if beloved God, 
Tvould he not love to talk of the power of bis lovel 
If be loved Jesus, would he not lell of Ai« lovel 
But 110 ; when the subject comes home he seems to be 
a stranger lo grace. And shall I cease to pray for 
him? No — let my supplications be increased ia his 
belialf. Shall I not see an answer lo my strong cries 
and tears which have already been poured out for 
him 1 O that salvation might come to his house ! 

" At evening devotion bad a delightful season. Hf 
Father smiled — Jesus drew near — the Comforter de- 
scended — and I could praise the Lord and give glory 
to my God— and at church too, rich food — that bread 
which comeib down from heaven, was communicated, 
and my soul feasted.' 

' Love diiinc, all love cxcelUag.' 

" O the sweet peace of my happy soul ; ' Tell me 
no more of earthly toys;' Christ is roy theme, and 
Christ my song. None but Jesus and him crucified ! 

" Feb. 18— This morning, just before I arose, had 
a view in my steep, which has left a solemn irapre»- 
sion on my mind: I seemed to be iu a store, in com- 
pany with a few persons, when suddenly a sound 
came as the voice of thunder, and liglit spread all 
around, and a rider upon o frightened borse passed 
the window — alarm seized all around me, and odc in 



LOB. 1B7 

partieulmr. The scene waa again repealed in quick 
BDCcession ; and, lookUig up, I saw an appemTance like 
the sua descending majestically, but with mighty 
force, and dashed it upon the earth. Immediately after, 
there appeared, in various directions, large balls, as of 
melted iron, which were driven about with the velo- 
city of lightning. I awoke, but unalarmed, as in the 
midst of the shock, looking unto the Lord. 

"The reflection that arose was, how easily coold 
almighty God dissolve this earlh, and summon the 
world to judgment. And as easily can he dash his 
foes to pieces. O the day of the Lord will come as a 
thief in the night; iu the which the heavens, shall 
pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall 
melt with fervent heat ; the earth also, and (be works 
that are ' therein, shall be burned up.' 

" Feb. 20.— Although weary with my labor, before 
retiring I would record the rich display of the love of 
my covenant God. Weat into ibe prayer-hall this 
evening with my mind troubled, principally from the 
necessity of so constant attention to my studies, and 
that I had no more time for reading the Scripturu, 
meditation, and prayer. My heavenly Father wit- 
nessed the movings and the sincerity of my heart, and 
graciously smiled upon me. My Jesus sympathized 
with me— my Comforter drew near; and O what ■ 
blessing was poured into my sonl ! 

" Feb. 34, — Received two letters this morning iioin 
the east, br nging ' glad tidings of great joy.' Revivals 
of religion are multiplying, and souls are flocking to 
the cross. At evening devotion, had a ' gracious rain.' 
O what intimate communion with the Fatberl Tbe 
IT 



19S MMMoa or 

BelOTed, ii my beloved. And vdio is rich, and I am 
not rich ^ ' Praise the Lord, my soul I' 

" Hadji refreshing letter from sister M, corrobom- 
ling former intelligence of the revifml, with the meo- 
tton of its commencement in Old Hnddara ; also, that 
another relative testifies to the pardoning lore of God. 
Now all, BSTC one, of my mother's brothers and sisteis 
profess religion, and I trust tire near to Qod." 

To a letter of Re7. Mr. H , indicating his affec- 
tionate regard, and testifying to the blessing of God 
on Mr. Taylor's labors among his people during a 
late visit, be thus replied : 

" February 27, 1821. 
"Rar Fuhar, 

" For to me you have exercised an office not unlike 
that of Paul to Timothy, whom he styles his son ; 
and, Timothy-like, I trust your admonition and wise 
Instructions will greatly tend to lead me in the way of 
duty. Indeed, I bless the kind Providence that at first 
directed me to your happy mansion. 

" When I recount the goodness of God to me da- 
ring the past, and survey his loving-kindness, now 
BQrronnding me, and took heyond time, 1 have enough 
to sink my soul into the depths of gratitude and love. 
CUory to our God for ever ; and let every one say, 
amen ; for his mercy endureth for ever. 

" Sometimes the question arises, ' What doest thou 
here 7' But as often 1 have found that I could not 
remove, for I could not see that it ivas the will of lh« 
Lord. But what exercises my mind the most, respect- 
ing my course, is the right distribution of time, t'. e. 
how much to devote to each duty or study. Will yon 
oblige me with your thoughts on this subject? Had 



JAKES raAimn tatlob. 1M 

m 1(046111, had /better attend to my college iladieg in 
preference to e longer atientioD to mjr Bible? Would 
I not be tafi in omitting, during my course, any and 
all kinds of reading and iindy, except the Bible, and 
yAax is required in college 1 Would I not thereby be 
tbebetterprepared for usefulness? And would not one, 
by an intimate knowledge of ibe Scriptures, tvitb lore 
to God, be better prepared for heaven, if taken away 
in the midst of bis preparation for the pulpit 1 I find 
that the Bible is more and more precious ; and my 
regret is, that I have so little time to read and study 
ill I regret too my ignorance of a nameless variety 
of subjects, which, rising to my view, stamp vacuum 
upon my mind — but I want your reply. 

" O what a mercy that one need not be a Newton 
or a Locke to gel to heaven. And where does piety 
display itself with more brilliancy than in the humble 
poor? O for more of that wisdom that coraeth from 
above t Lord, what I know not leach thou me. 

*' Were it not for the arm of the Lord, where could 
a poor creainre rest? Where a minister? Where B 
candidate for the ministry ? The Loid hide us in his 
pavill ion— shelter us under hia wing, till all the storms 
of life be overpast. O how serene ! My soul this mo- 
ment anticipates the sweet repose : yes, I feel that the 
kingdom of God is set up in my heart, and that the 
King is on bis throne. Help me to praise the Lord! 
Are you not all captivated with our beloved? He is 
the chiefest among ten thousand. 

" To preach Jesus Christ and him cnicilied ! Ftir 
(Au would I live, end in this alone would I die. I have 
no higher object; I can have no higher. Do you Tt- 
epond, Lord, endow him with heavenly gifts — anoint 



800 HIHOU W 

him with lh« hoiy oil — mak« him an laraelite indeed ; 
ftrm bim with the Spirit's power, and own him as one 
of thy fovored ternols ! but, ere the ant icip&ted hoar, 
my prospect may be changed, and 1 obey the sum- 
mons, ' Come up higher.' Happy thought '. There I 
expect to meet you — your companion — your children — 
how then will we tell ? O the fire burns in my soul, 
and causes the ready tear to flow— will tell. But with 
these thoughts I will bid you, as I was wont, good 
night, and bear us all before the throne of grace, 
sweetly anticipating the time when 1 shall once more 
greet you with my right hand and affectionate heart. 
Adieu, James B. Tatlob. 

" Again I resume my pen to thank you for your last 
communication. I hope this will find you all feasting 
on love divine. My soul was blessed while writing the 
aboTe. I have, as usual, given you my thoughts as 
they flowed, for I have not time to think. May they be 
a blessing to your domestic circle, and excite your 
more earnest prayers in my behalf. I often think of 
the scene on hoard the sloop. 

' Hnw liappj are thaf 
Who their Satior obey.' 

' The Lord was with us. I remember too the case 

of Mrs. J , and as I call it to mind now, my 

thoughts go forward to the bar of God, I ask, Where 
shall I seq that friend stand at the judgment-day? 
Shall I be a witness against hei 7 May she repent, 
and mate Jesus her friend. With what pleasure did I 
read your testimony of the steadfastness of those two 
lambs of the flock 1 The Lord hold them still in hii 
arms. May they cling to the only refuge of siimert. 



lAMM BUnraBD TATLOl. 301 

B«t how alarming, my dear frieod, is the situation of 
your dear congregation. Althousb not retrogressive, 
why do we not sec those who profess religion with 
rapid pace march up the heavenly hill ? Alai for iha 
ungodly and impenitent in the midst of you ! Is there 
not a cloud of wrath impending? Ah, soon many an- 
eonrerted souls may hear their doom — depakt. 

" To Mrs. H. and Miss A. aad S. give ao affection- 
ale remembrance. J. B. T." 

••A'aiMi-HaU, Feb. 23, 1624. 
' To Ibr dear l^milji 1 lure, 

" Whence comes it that I have had no letter from 
any of yon thus far this session 7 It is true I am not 
worthy of your remembrance, yet your aEfectionate re- 
gard, 1 think, ought to have prompted the seeming 
inertness of my sisters during the frozen season. O, 
you know not of how much you may have deprived 
me, by not telling me of your affairs. But I have been 
happy i yes, anil although you have been silent, my 
Toice has ascended on high for you all. And while I 
have breath, I cannot cease to pray for, and while I 
have being, lo love you. 

" The Lord still remembers me wlihio these walls. 
My health is as usual. The prospect of seeing you in 
April gives me pleasure: but I make no definite cal- 
culation. I know not what is for me and for my friends 
— I feel that 1 am not my own. Be not ihen disap- 
pointed ; whatever change takes place, sudden or look- 
ed for, it will be for our good. 

" With increased affection, 

"J. B. TATLon." 

In the continuation of hii journal we trace that 



S03 HCiUHR or 

•ipiritiuilii; and devoiedness of heart by which he wu 
!io habitually characterized. 

"March 7. — This has been a high day withmysout. 
The banner of Jesus over me has been love. He has 
breathed on tue, and given me a refreshing from the 
Holy Obost. O, I love bis visits ! How animaiing his 
presence! It is my heaven below. Lord, enlarge the 
yeasel, and give me more. I am a temple of the Holy 
Ghost, with a sweet prospect of heaven. 

" 14th.— Yesterday went to seek a retreat in the 
woods — a place wbiiber I might resort to hold con- 
verse with God. I found such a place, and if permit- 
ted to resort thither, at morning, noon, or eventide, 
may I find the good Shepherd, as I was wont to find 
him under the well-remembered tree at L. 

" Before God, and in the presence of angels, in 
secret, and iu the great congregation, have I been 
sweeil; visited this Sabbath day. 

' Thine eartblj Sabbaihi, Lord, I love,' 

" Finished reading the Revelation to-day, which I 
have done in course, and with a commentary. Much 
light has been scattered in my path, and love has 
flowed into my soul, through the word. My heart haa 
experienced the liulb of God — I have felt its power — 
not as an uncertain sound, but as the voice of the Al- 
mighty. ' Thy law is my delight. How lore I thy 



■' ISih. — ' The way of transgressors is bard,' not 
only with the unconverted, but with those who are 
born again. So have I found it. Yielding to tempta- 
tion has brought leanness into ray soul. The Lord, 
B9 my covenant Father, exercised the dUcipline of the 



JAMES IRAINEBD TAYLOR. 303 

oovenant, and so visited my sina with siripea. ' Alas 
fer me !' cried loy dejected spirit — bowed down as a 
bnlniBh I went, seeking rest but findiog none, from 
morning till night. At i^reniDg devotion my heart 
bnAe with contrition and hatred of sin. — Repented 
and made tifull surrender to God, and felt the bless- 
edness of sins forgiven, and the restoration of life 
divine. 

"20th.— Pettan indweliing God to-night. 

"28th. — Yesterday rooming arose with a heavy 
load. 'If we sin, we have an advocate with the Fa- 
ther, Jesua Christ the righteous, who is the propitia- 
tion for our sins.' Upon this word my faith fastened. 
Also upon this, 'If we coofess our sins, he is faithful 
and just to forgive os our sins, and to cleanse us from 
all unrighteousness.' But the whole day was spent 
without the sensible presence of God. I sought him 
whom my soul loveth, but found him not. At night 
too, upon my knees — reading my Bible — in meditation 
— visiting the sick and the people of God ; but all in 
vain — the glory bad departed, and darkness covered 
my soul. Thus it was after my return to my Bethel. 
Being about to retire, I knew not but 1 must lie down 
under the frown of God, which I most justly experi- 
enced ; but I resolved upon one more effort, and went 
out of college with groans which could not be uttered. 
O the pressure that sunk me down ! I refused lo be 
comforted till my Beloved should visit me ' with the 
kisses of his mouth.' I made my way to a retired spot 
in agony of soul. There I sealed myself, and aiiempied 
to sing, 

'Mercy, O tboa Son of David!' 

"My mouth was Stopped. I felt guilty before a holy 



MH HUUHB or 

God: prostnle before him, with npltflad efea, aw- 
ih ought, 

' Cold iiHMDtailli ani tha miilnight air f 

Witneii'd tha famtr of tby prayer.' 
"It touched my heait, and faith's view of Jeatia 
broke the chaio : the burden glided off, and 1 returned 
giving glory to God. 

' Tha deaert thy temp'Mions kneir, 
Thy conflict, and Ihy »ietory too.' 

"I laid me down and slept sweetly, as in the em- 
braces of my Belored, and aroae thia morniog with k 
thankful remembrance of God's mercy. 

" I praise tUe Lord for his discipline of the coTenant, 
as promised in the 69th Psalm, 30th verse ; and that 
as the good Shepherd, he has restored a wandering 

"Lord's day, Aprils — Yesterday morning had a 
rich blessing from above. My mind baa been turoed 
towards the King of Zion for direction relative to my 
anticipated vacation. Heretofore I have made loo many 
calculations of my own, which in many instances have 
been frustrated. Upon the Lord have I been able to 
lean while pleading with him for guidance in the way 
I should go, and that he would attend roe as I go out 
and came in. I have no plan, nor perhaps do I need 
one ; for the assurance seemed to come to me, ' What 
ibou knowesl not now, thou shalt know hereafter,' 
But a larger blessing was communicated to roe during 
this evening's devotion. I called to roind, with a 
grateful le col lent ion, the refreshings the Lord had 
vouchsafed to roe in my little Bethel here, some oi 
which 1 have recorded for future review, should I havo 
The coming vacation again rested on my 



JAHCfl BBAinCSD TATLOS. 205 

mind, with a desire to know the will of the Lord, and 
again I was unburdened with, ' What thou kuowcst 
not now, thou shalt know hereafter:' ao I trust the 
Lord will make all plain before roe, and lead roe in a 
way in which he will be glorified and my soul greatly 
Mnefiled. The thought that 1 might possibly never 
Rturn, led me to contemplate my heavenly home. I 
knew not but the Master would call for me soon. I 
' groaned, being bardened ; not that 1 would be un- 
clothed, but clothed upon with roy bouse which is from 
heaven.' For a moment Jesus'aeemed tohide his face. 
But this made way for a brighter vision of the Father 
through the Sao ; and such a season of communion 
with my heavenly Father, with so much of the spirit 
of adoption, I think I never before eTperieoeed. With 
what melting of soul did I say, Abba, Father ! and 
the manifestation of the Son was with joy. 1 praise 
the Lord, the power of Ood was upon me. Afterwards 
I had an agonizing spirit of prayer for my friend L. P. 
auch as I had not felt for some time ; 1 knew not in- 
deed but I had lost it for ever. I am more encouraged 
for him. My only requegt is, that he may be converted. 
Iiord, send salvation to his soul. 

" This viaitation was indeed a crowning blessing ; 
acd 1 shall doubtless remember this 4th of April as an 
nncommoD season before the Lord. 

" Bnjoyed a delightful season with a colored bro- 
ther this night. Happy soul I I have found him a 
kindred spirit. We are all one in Christ Jesus. Al- 
though be cannot read, he can tell of wonders that 
God hath wrought for him. 

" April 8. — Left Princeton for New-York. For a 
day or two previous roy roind was in darkness, and 1 
18 '■ »■ T»yi"- 



306 HEMom or 

went mourDiDg my h«avineis. I inquired of tbe-Lord 
if I should go thtia on my way lo my father's house ? 
and laid my cause before the ibrone. The time soon 
arrired for the dismissal of my class, at which time 
the standing of each student was made koowD. Hav- 
ing found my standing to be No. 1, 1 repaired to my 
room, and once more looked to the Lord Jar his (£)>- 
tinguishing lose, with the strong feelirg that earthly 
distinction cannot satisfy my heart's desire. Here, 
while I remembered the goodness of God during the 
post winter, in blessing me in soul and body, growth 
In grace, and success in my studies, the Sun of righ- 
teousness seemed to break through the cloud ; but I 
was interrupted by the approach of a friend. Recol- 
lecting the standing which had been given me by the 
faculty, I said lo myself, What are honors 7 What is 
earthly applause 7 Ah, these are not my Gkid. I saw 
their emptiness, and not only desired, but longed for 
his presence in whom my soul takes delight. The 
Lord bowed the heavens, and while I wrote vanity 
upon all things beside his love, he let drop sweetness 
into my soul, and I was blessed with a blessing that 
' maketh rich, and addeth no sorrow.' ' Bless the Lrard. 

my soul.' 

" Having repaired to my room for prayer, for the 
last time before my departure, I met my God, who put 
upon me anew the armor in which 1 stood fast. Thence 

1 went to take leave of brother L. where (be Lord again 
manifested himself to me in povier. Before, and at 
t!ie throne of grace with him, 1 was happy and exult- 
ed in Jehovah, who is my strength and my salvation. • 
The season was a good one to brother L. too. May 
the Lord abundantly bless him. 



JUSta BRAIHEBD TAVU>II. SOT 

" AAei patting with him, with maoy tears, I set out 
foT New-Brunswick, whither, vritii the eiMptioo of 
two mileSj 1 journeyed an fool. By this means I was 
able to save one dollar and twenty-Gve cents to aid a 
poor widow. How sweet ia self-denial whan practiced 
for growth in grace, or to relieve the distressed-! The 
Lord gave me a liberal heart; I trust it has beeu en- ' 
larged of late. 

"Spent a night with my very dear friend Mr. D. 
and family, into whose mansion I was received with 
great cordiality. The Lord bless that household, and 
make it a household of faith and holiness. 

" Arrived in New-York on the 10th, and designed to 
leave for Middle Haddam in the afterooon, but was de- 
tained by advfirse winds to receive a propitious gale 

from beyond the skies. At brother J 'a, with my 

father and hia seven sons, togetlier with the beloved 
companions of brothers K. and J., the good Shepherd 
met us. We found it good to converse and pray to- 
gether. Yes, we had a blessing indeed. My soul, iit 
reconnlJDg the favors of the past session, melted be- 
fore the Lord in gratitude and praise. I testified to 
Ihem all concerning the loving-kindness of our God. 
They loo were melted, and it was a precious season. 

' Tell mc no ninrs of earthi; joys.' 

" Arrived at Middle Haddam on the 14ih, and was 
once more received into the bosom oi our dear house- 
bold. Thanks to the Lord for his goodness. White 
on my voyage I bad but little opportunity for retire- 
ment. Before, aud upon my arrival, I had a hungering 
and thirsting after righteousness, and the Lord filled 



IDS HEMom or 

me. I Tetired and held tweet commmtion with hemren. 
Soon tbe family was togelher, and we enjoyed a sea- 
*OQ of prayer. God wa* with ai and bleased us abwid- 
antly. The Belored spread his banner orer us, and 
om souls were filled with lore. Happy meeting I How 
much happier when we meet above ! 

"23d — This evening had a most fervent spirit of de 
*otion at family worship. The Lord richly blessed ua 
with bis luve. God it lave. With what tenderness and 
simplicity tbe child of Ood calls upon him, when the 
spirit of prayer is poured out. I have found evRry 
season of family worship precious, but this was ex- 
ceedingly precious. Wrote cousin M. A. — The I^rd 
■peed ber on her jooruey to the skies." 

This letter, with some slight omisaiona, Ikere fol 
lows: 

••MtdtUe Badiam, Jlpnt 33, 1S31. 

" Be assured it would give me heart-felt satisfaction 
to tender you my right hand, and again enjoy that 
christian communion ia which we have so often de- 
lighted. 

" My dear cousin, what shall 1 say 1 With you, I 
presume, it has been joy and rejoicing all the day 
long. How delightfully, then, has time passed away! 
How sweet have you found it to retire from the world 
and hold iniercourse with heaven ! And have you not 
had nearness of access in pleading for me ? O how 
it would afflict the soul of my cousin, should I tell her 
that coldness and deadness have prevailed over me 
since I saw her ! Would you not exclaim, 'O that my 
head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, 



JAMES BHAIDBBD TATLOH. 209 

tbdt I might weep day and nigbt for him !' But give 
praise to Him that sittelh upon the ibione, I have speut 
the happiest winter of my life ; yes, my soul has b«en 
in healih and prospered. And methiuks you will say, 
' Bless the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy enilur- 
eth for ever.' 

" Happy, happy seasons have I experienced since 
last I gave you the parting hand. For the most part I 
liave had the kingdom of heaven sensibly set up in 
my soul. Sometimes peace bath ruled my heart, some- 
times the oTerpoweriog love of God. The King has 
been and is now on the throne. I am crucified with 
Christ, nevertheless I live ; yet not I, but Christ liveth 
in me : and the life that I live in the flesh, I live by 
the failh of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave 
himself for me. 

" You will recollect the seasons we enjoyed when 
last together — seasons of prayer and praise. But, to 
me, none is more memorable than that enjoyed nearly 
iwo years agoai Mr. B.'s. Happy lime t glorious eral 
for tbe Lord then and there accomplished for a poor 
sinner the good pleasure of his will. What a blessing 
it was ! not libe tbe morning cloud and the early dew, 
but permanent as his love. 

" To enumerate the renewals of his presence I have 
had since, would be impossible. Suffice it to say, his 
banner over me has been love. Into the love of God, 
as an ocean, have I sunk. Giospel measure has been 
bestowed, and 1 have been richly fed from the Mas- 
ter's table. 

" Does not my testimony encourage you to continue 

your supplication? 1 long to have the windows ot 

heaven opened, and abundant blessings poured down 

18* 



£10 MBHOiB or 

from OB high. Let m thoo send up our ptajen that 
brighter, and still brighter maoifestatioDS niajr be loada 
tu us, that as (he ihiniiig light we nay ebiae more 
and more to the perfect day. 

" Those among lu who stand fast, seem to progress 
ID their way. But, alas, how many there are who say, 
Lord, Lord, but do not his commandments ! These 
things ought not so to be. Let as take warning and 
hold fast whereunto we have attained, that no one take 

" Seeing that the time is at hand, should we not be 
faithful 7 Our season for laying up treasure in heaven 
will soon be over ; our opportunities to warn the iio- 
peoitent all be past, and prayer be turned into praise^ 
hope into fruition, and time will be no longer. Bless- 
ed is that terTani, who, at the coming of the Lord, 
shall be found faithful. He will receive all Goch unto 
himself, that where he is, there they may be also. 
Does not your soul long for the blessed abodel < To 
be with Christ is best.' 1 eipect to see you in heaven 
there. The Lord has given me an earnest of the to- 
heriunce— a foretaste of glory. On earth we draw 
near to Ood. In heaven we shall see Jesus as he is. 
Angels and saints will be our companions. Then shall . 
we sing 'loud hallelujahs to the Lamb for ever and 



The reader will observe that James B. Tayttn waa 
now passing his college vacation among his frienda { 
but instead of wasting his precious time in seekiilg 
pleasure or in listless inactivity, as is the case with 
too many young men in such circumstances, the smi- 
son appears, from hat leccera and journal, to have been 



JAHEt BUOtlltD TITLOB. til 

one of constant and faithful labor. By day and night, 
'publicly, and from house lo house,' and at rarioua 
places— in Mkldie Haddam, Colchester, Bozrah, &c, 
did he exercise himself in exhorting, and praying, and 
conTersiog, and singing the songs of Zion ; endeavor- 
ing, by all the means he could employ, to diffuse his 
own spirit amtmg pK^essors of religion ; directing in- 
quiring sonis to the Lamb «f God ; rejoicing with 
young eoDTerts, and waraing the careless and impeni- 
tent of their danger. And there is reason to b^ltefe 
that \ery many souls will bless God lo all eternity 
for this college vacation of Mr. Taylor, which gare 
the time and opportunity for his labors among them. 
Kren on his way ba<^ to Princeton, being driven by 
stress of weathei to make a harbor at Sachem's Mead, 
be went ashore and continued bis faithful labors. 

" Here, says he, 1 found work lo do — visited {rota 
haute to home, and in the evening held a meeting. 
Thank (he Lord for another opportunity of sowing 
the good seed. May it be nuttuied by the Holy Spirit.' 

" May 14.— Arrived at New-York, and spoke in a 
■ojMting at night with apparent effect. After I had re- 
-tired, for some time sleep fled from me, while the coa* 
diUoB of this city pressed upon my mind. Thought I, 
what stays the thunderbolts of Jehovali's wrath from 
this people 1 O that salvation might visit them I 1 en- 
deavored to be faithful in bearing testimony to the 
tntth ; and I found that where the word of a King is, 
there is power. 

" 20. — Last evemng reached PrineetoQ, and re- 
joice that the Lord has led me in paths that I little 



2IS MCMOii or 

ihoDghtof, mheu I htd ihe aasDranee, 'What ikon 
KDOWOit not uov, tbou shall knoir hereafter.' H« is 
well led whom the Lord leadeth. HcDcefoTward let 
me lean npoo hia arm and be guided by his Spirit. 

" 21. — At ereniog derotion sought him whom wj 
tool loreth, aod found him the chief among ten thoo- 
aand, and altogether lovely. After reading Uie word, 
walked out to my retreat, away from the world, to 
hold intercoorM with heaven- The intercourse was 
open and free— the communion sweet — while I sunk 
into nothing before the Lord, and melted into love and 
lendemeis at the view of his abundant goodness. 
Praise the Lord, O my soul. May 1 ever find this placa 
a Bethel. Walked to see T., and found him alive. 
With him held communion. He seems, and I felt him 
to be, a fROfl of God ; and though a colored man, be- 
loTed of God, and by me. ' Every one that loveth him 
that begat, loveth him also that is begotten of him.' 
1 John, 6:1. 1 expect to talk to the colored people ;U 
his house on Sunday evening next. May good be done. 

" Two weeks ago this night I was blessed of God 
with a powerful visitation of grace and love in the 
closet, HtMr. C.'s, in Colchester ; after which we had 
an interesting meeting for old professors, young con- 
verts, and anxious souls. They are now doubtless as- 
sembled, and enjoying Qod's blessing. I love them in 
our dear Lord. And do they not pray for my pros- 
perity? Lord, hear prayer in my behalf. Salvatwml 
The Lord will provide 1 

" Hon good is the Lord ! How shall I praise him I 
Eternity is not too long to utter all his praise. My 
wants are supplied, and I have a surplus. For soul and 
body provision is made. And now to God, whose I 



wt. ai3 

■m, t woald commit mf wsy — acknowledge bim in all 
tay paths, and pray that ke vould diKct m; at«pa. 

"31. — Hadit evening derotion an OTerfloir of God'i 
lore, a/ier an absence of tbe Comibrter, grieved away 
by my lebetUoa. But ■pon my humble snbmissioa, 
widi deep repentance, my Savior returned to my souL 
Alas 1 why should 1 ever leave him J Bui bless the 
Lord Tor the diwipUna of kii covenant, aod for the 
maoifettationB of his t»xa and k)ve. Wrote to my 
frieud £." 

"IfiMUUirSaa, Mv 31, 1821. 

" Having passed the day in my ordinary pursaits, 
and been abundantly refreshed at evening devotion, I 
feel constrained to bless the Lord and take courage ; 
yes, I rejoice that another day has been numbered — 
anothet of the days of my pilgrim^e below} for the 
sweet prospect of heaven has gathered brighines!, 
while my soul has melted with the love of Ood, let 
down in streams from the overflowing fountain. Omy 
dear E., who is rich, and the Christian not rich t Who 
is happy, and the Christian not happy ? Let the world 
have the pleasures of the world ; but our souls cry 
out for God, for the living God, in whose presence 
below is joy unspeakable and full of glory. 

" I can tell you how my mind was led this evenmg, 
and it may prove a blessing to you. I read iha 2d 
chapter of Isaiah. The promise of prosperity to Zion, 
the mountain of the Lord's house, cheered my heart ; 
I could believe that all nations shall flow unto it, and 
I anticipate the glorious day, though dot on earth, to 
witness it, yet iu heaven to rejoice with the church 



214 HuioiR or 

iriuinpbtDi. Hy Boal cried onl, Let the Lord dtau 
be exalted ! But tbe lut veise, which speaks of ' maa 
wbose breath is in his nosiriiB,' came with a richei 
blessing. Thought I, sooBiny pilgiimage will end. 
Perchance these hands will toon, with all this frame, 
lie motionleBs in the grave. The thought was sweet, 
for my spirit laid fast hold on ' the resurrection and 
the life.' la bis name I could look up to God, and cry 
Abba, Father. My Father smiled — Jesus looked upon 
me — the Spirit comforted me— my heart exulted: O 
bless bis name for ever 1 Such a view of Jesus and his 
cross — his sofferings and death — his resuireclion and 
ascension — and his reigning power, I have seldom 
experienced ; 



" My friend, let na beware : we we surrounded by 
the world. Having been brought unto liberty, let lu 
not be entangled with the yoke of boada:ge. Let us 
give all our time to the Lord, by being diligent in bu- 
»ine4* a7>d fervent in epirit ; and may what we have 
to do be well done. 

■ " From the world we do not expect otir joys. They 
Sow from another sootce — a pure fountain. Let the 
world share but little of oor mind— but little I nay, *• 
must not love the world at all. ' Love not the world.' 
I believe you do not love the world— you delight in 
things heavenly. May you watch, and keep your gar- 
ments unspotted from the wwld ; and hold fast where- 
unio thou -hast attained, and show out of a godly con- 
versation that your citizenship and treaEure are above- 
Then, whether your days be few ot many, all will be 



lUtsa BRAHBRD TATLOB. 319 

well : Ood will be glorified, and youi soul happy foi 



A leUer, dated Nasnn-HBll, June 3, 1824, to Mr. 
and Mrs. L. and family, mentioas some of the reri- 
vala of religion, in which our young friend took much 
delight, and labored with great gncceaa. 

• • • * 11 Little did I ibiok that an idnence from 
college of *ix weeks would take place, without the 
pleasure of associating, for a short time at least, with 
those friends I so much esteem at M— : bnt so- it 
has been. The six weeks have gone by, and you have 
tared, in this respect, as other circles of friends else- 
where. If you should ask me why, 1 have to answer 
that ProTidence detained me. 

" When 1 left Princeton, and knew not whither the 
Lord TCould lead me, to him 1 committed erery thing, 
with the assurance that what I knew not then I should 
linow afterwards. And be assured I was led in a way 
1 had little thought of — a, way which has been at the 
sarae time both pleasant and profitable. Imagine me 
going from bouse to house, and in public, warning ine 
impenitent to flee from the wrath to come : sometimes 
in one place, sometimes in another, bearing testimony 
to the truth — seeing Christians alive in tiie cause of 
God, converts esulting, and einoers weeping. 

" I was located some time in Colchester, where, 
within ail months, upwards oi Jour hundred were 
hopefully born again. Were 1 with you, I could tell 
you of happy times in which the Lord blessed my soul 
abundantly — I could tell you of seasons when the peo- 
ple of God appeared to he refreshed from his presence. 



tl9 MMMOlM or 

The Lord u still doing wonders in CoDneeticot: juM 
only by scores, but by kondreds, are sinners fioeking 
to Christ. In Millington they nomber opwards of 
rmekimdred; Ea8iH»ddam,(woA«ndred andjJ/Jyy 
Old Haddam, seventy. Nonh Lyme and Oilcad wen 
witnessing the eommenerment of n gracioas work; 
nnd yesterday 1 heard of another place — Meriden, 
twenty miles from Old Haddam, where the work had 
begun. In Hartford coonty, abcwi a year ainee, there 
were about three hwtdred souls gathered in. Bat why 
speak of places ai a distance 1 How is it at home, and 
in your owb hearts f Are yon not encouraged? W* 
should indeed bless the Lord and take courage. ' O 
that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and 
for his wonderful works (o tlu children of men P 

" Since my return, the good Sbepherd has fed n* 
in green pastures, and led me beside the still waters." 

How tb« CTei^actire benerolenee and zeal of Hr. 
Taylor were coBlinaally manifraiing themsetres, say 
be leen in every thing he wrote: bat perhapa in no- 
thing more strikingly than in the following letter; 

" Itcsimt-Baa, JwKt 6, 1834. 
" AA^IloniM and tntmxtS Ponntt, 

" Your BOD is yet altre, and still the happy reeipr- 
ent of grace and loTe divine. You hare doubtless had 
an account of our voyage to H. Y. which was rather 
long ; but perhaps the Lord meant it for good. In dae 
lime I nrriTed at Princeton, and found new cause for 
gratitude and praise to out heavenly benefactor. 

" Often have I recurred to the state of onr family, 
and the families of Middle Haddam, since I left you. 



UHES BBAmCBD T&VLOB. 217 

And I have inquired with myself of their condition- 
how Me they 1 You recollect the pleasing prospecl 
among professors when I hade you farewelL I was 
much encouraged ; and still entertain the pleasbg 
hope that new fire has been enkindled ; and that what 
we then enjoyed was only the harbinger of good things 
to that people. As the Sabbath morning returns, I 
think of my father's house, and imagine an assembly 
of the neighbors all uniting in songs of praise, and in 
earnest supplication for Ood's rich blessing. When 
Friday evening arrives, I think of the appointed meet- 
iag for the people of Qod. And how cheering the 
thought that jrou have met with Jesns in your social 
assemblies, in yoor closets, and in the great congrega- 
tion. 

" I trust I have not been imagining a vain thing. 
May you go on then. Tell those who love our Lord, 
that I bid them Ood speed. And as the time to do 
much for God has come, they have need to put forth 
their united effort for the accomplishment of the great- 
ttt good. There is yet remaining very much land to 
be possessed. And will they not go up and possess 
all the la«d ? Alas 1 how many among you know 
not Ood! Howmanyprayerless families 1 How many 
in which no one soul professes hope ! And can one 
professor of religion stand still and see souls perish- 
ing without an effort to save them 1 Can one lover of 
Jesus r^ain night or day from praying and mourning 
in secret over such desolations 1 Shall one be found 
idle when so much is to be done t Shall one be sleeps 
ing at his post when the enemy stands thick around 1 
Shalt all heaven be engaged to rescue sinners from 
going down to the pit, and shall the disciples of htm 
19 IB Twto. 



2t8 MEMOIR OF 

who died and now reigns— shall th« dUciples of Jesoa 
let gioDers sink to helll It niosi not be. I hope bet- 
ter things of my brethren. Their eiertions, 1 trust, 
wilt not only continue, but increase ; and increasii^, 
Ibey will gather strength. O, be not weary in well- 
doing, and be determined to die in the cause — die, 
doing the will of our Father in heaven I Amidst other 
thoughts, I hare often reflected on the condition of ray 
relations and friends. How delightful to reroembcT 
that 1 have a. father and mother, paienia most dear, 
that love the Lord ! 

" While on my mother's side many have been 
brought to experience the same love, the thought has 
occurred, kow few on my father's side! Not only to 
you, but to me also, this is a painful subject. Duitns 
last winter my mind was much interested in their be- 
half, which drew forth many earnest supplicsticiQE. 
Is it not truly affeMingI I have tried to put myself in 
the place of my father, and to inquire, what if my bro- 
thers and sisters were without hope, and destitute of 
vital godliness? But, while your offspring have sub- 
mitted to Christ, you have to monm over the offspring 
of your departed father, our beloved graud-paienl. 
And do not your eyes run down with tears 7 Doe* 
not your heart oftentimes break within you, when you 
remember that those brothers and sisters are out of 
Christ 7 But what can be done for them 1 From me 
they are all far away. From you, with one exception, 
they are all at a distance. But stjll tomething can be 
done. One thing we can do. Let me suggest that odt 
united supplications ascend to God, in good earnest, 
for the salvation of their souls. Hitherto 1 have not 
prayed for them as 1 ought to have done ; and I woD' 



JAM KB BRAIKEID TAYLOR. SlU 

del that it has been thus vilh me. Shall ne then, ell 
of us, our whole family, awake and plead for them 7 
Who will say na; 1 Not one. Why may not salva- 
doa visit them and their houses 1 Shall we on each 
Mooday, then, remember ihem particutarly? and iu 
OUT derotions continually ? I need not wait your re- 
ply ; the suggestioa is enough to inlereat your feel- 
ings ; and I hope a spirit of prayer will be poured out 
upon us, so that we shall wrestle and prevail. V/hat 
we do, must be done quickly." 

To his friand Mr. D. he wrote, on the 13lh of June, 
a long letter, from which we copy the following pas- 
sage, as meriting the practical regard of all, and espe- 
cially those followers of Jesus Christ, to whose stew- 
ardship he has committed much of the wealth of this 

" We look around and find that very mtiek yet re- 
maiDS to be done for the conversion of sinners to God, 
Atkd this should occupy us continually . How shall it 
he accomplished 7 At once we perceive that a faith 
fuX ministry is the great means of bringing sinners to 
Christ. Should this be an educated ministry 7 We 
know that au ignorant ministry is not sanctioned by 
the word of God. To be able to teach, one must be 
taught \ and to such as are able to teach, this ministry 
must be committed. But how shall they be taught 7 
Do not our theological seminaries afford the best 
means for ttaining meu for this worki But how are 
those to be supported who would thus prepare to serve 
God in the Gospel of his dear Son 7 Here then is the 
point : if it be right to educate men for the holy office ; 



if m&Df are ' called of God, u was Abiod,' to prepare 
for this office, and are unable to defray the expensei 
attendant upon such a course, what must be done 1 It 
is true, ' ibe eaitb is the Lord's, and the fullness tb«c- 
of ;' but of all which w hit own, ke place* much i» 
tht hand* of men, to afford ikem an opportunity of 
thawing theiT benevolence to the world. )t requites 
about $150 to support a young nun at one of our se- 
minaries. 9S,500, at six per cent, would produce this 
amount. 

" The time is coming when we .sball be no mote. 
But if, through our inslrumentalitf, an object of this 
kind be accomplished before we go hence, when we 
are beyond the reach of doing good below, a scholar- 
ship will be the means of qualifying men for the rine- 
yard of the Lord ; and, while we sleep in tbe dnsi, 
heralds of tbe cross • • shall go through the land — 
sound the Qospel trump — give the alarm to thousands, 
and be the means, doubtless, of winning moltiludes to 
Christ. O what a Geld here for exertion on our fft^ I 
And if ever to commence, ^all we not begin now? 
In this way, one may ipore effectually preach the Gos- 
pel than he could were he to live a thoutmut yean. 
And let him know, that he which convertelk a «uifW 
from the error of hit wayt, ahall eave a soul from 
death, and hide a multitude of lint. How many tn 
be converted ! Hon few to (urn them from the jirror 
of their ways ! Shall we stand idle ? While the Mai- 
ler waiteth let us up and serre him." 



:., Google 



UMKB IBAIHEHD TAYIAR, 



"Princetm. June a 



" Yoni frieiM^ is jrel in (he land of the liring, to 
praise the Lord. Indeed, who should praise the Lord, 
and I not ptaise hicn ? Who should love him, and 1 
not love hint ? 1 who was once among the rebellious, 
■s a sheep going astray, but who hare been turned 
unto the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls. 

" Since I bade you farewell and left your happy 
mansion, the good Shepherd has watched over me, 
and fed me richly. From time to time my soul has 
been refreshed by the Holy Ghost ; and I have felt, 
and felt powerfully, an indinelling QoA. This day at 
evening I had an unction from the Holy One. The 
communion with tbe Father, aud with his Son Jesu* 
Christ, was sweet. And how sweet thv savor that re- 
mains. The peace of God rules in my heart. Like a 
river it flows ihioQgb the soul/rom God to God again, 
A royatery ibis to ihe ungodly, but known well to you 
and to all who love God; yes, to all who love God. 
People may talk about loving God, having his Spirit, 
and yet not feeling it. Bat to me ibete seems an ia- 
consistency here ; for meihinka that those who lovr 
Ood, will have bis Spirit as a refiner' i fire and as 
purifier of silver moving upon their souls. And wbera 
the Spirit moves, it^re«— kindles up the graces of the 
Spirit — iuQaraes the affections, and produces the tried 
gold of holy love, peace, and joy. As the soul sinks 
into the love of Qod, it sinks into humility, which is 
accompanied with unceasing prayerand thanksgiving. 
This is what 1 have experienced— God's precimtt 
19» 



gift, and bestowed in gmcioiu answer to mr pnyms. 
Not uQto me, but to God be all the glory {qi e*et. 
What a consolation that there are thoae who can tes- 
tify the same things, having enjoyed the same or 
greater manifestttions of the love of God to theii 
once tin-iound sMils, but who are now brought into 
the liberty of the children of God. that there were 
an hatl. 

" Bat, my dear friend, piofeisora of religion, for the 
most pa.rt, love the world too much. Having so much 
of the love of the world in their hearts, they have not 
room for the love of God. Rather than be adorned 
with ' a meek and quiet spirit,' they prefer the orna- 
ments conformable with fasbioD. Rather than walk 
humbly and near the Savior, they choose to walk in a 
vain ahow with a proud heart. Rather than be in 
their closet* mourning over their awful departure 
from God, and the desolations of Zion, they content 
ihemselres with a cold, heartless reciul of their dead 
ness, which becomes so stale a story that I am often 
discouraged, and in their behalf fear that their condi- 
tion will never be bettered. Is it not so ? 1 am con- 
sidetably in the world— you much more. I wilnesa 
much upon which I write, vanity, while I listen to the 
vain and worldly conversation of professors of reli- 
gion. 1 say, when I hear the expre.ssions of their nd- 
miralion of the fashions and splendors of the world, 
how can I refrain from exclaiming, 'Miw dvielleih tie 
looc of God in them P T hey talk of the things that 
give them pleasure, but say nothing of the work ei 
gracB in their souls. What think you of such 1 Have 
iheya«ametolive1 And are they alive ? TbemMlvM 
h«Ba judges, they ronsi say, No, What saith iba 



JAME0 MUIMBXD TAYU}R. S23 

SeriptDTes ? ' Wo to tbem that are mt ease id Zion.' 
' Love not the world, nor the things of the world.' To 
the aonl that is elevated lo God, there aie nobler pnr- 
nils than these phantoms ; higher confbmptations than 
earth's productions. Does not your heart find it so J 

"But of the young ladies. Have they conlinned, 
and do they slill continue, unreconciled to God 7 
Miss W. what will the end of these things be? I 
doubt not they share your affectionaie expostulations 
and piaycTS. It is true they are in themomiug of life, 
and, conscious of ihis, it may be often suggested that 
when years shall have rolled away they will make 
their peace with God. 1 doubt not that many now in 
bell had the same suggestion, and yielding to it, in 
some unexpected hour their lives were taken away. 
Letun contemplate one of your young ladies deferring 
this important work for years ; say til! she come to 
the vei^e of life. Then she is taken ill. She had en- 
joyed the pleasures of the world ; but now, sick, and 
with the prospect of soon exchanging time for eter- 
nity, hoivp*ll'd that once blooming countenance! how 
emaciated that once healthy, beauteous form I And 
DOW we hear uttered ia thrilling agony, ' I have bar- 
tered away a life of piety for a life of unsatisfying 
pleasures! Instead of the smiles of God as my hea- 
venly Father, I have to bear his frowns. My sin ! Ah, 
my sin is my-own folly '. Of gin I was often warned, 
often prayed for, often wept over; but my heart har- 
^ dened under reproof. Ah, where am I now 7 t^'riend* 
weep around, but they cannot help me. Soon this fast 
decaying frame will sink into the grave. But my soul ! 
Jl^ tout I My *oal is damned for ever.' Is it gafe, 
iken, to delay this great concern till iheni Is it safe 



'JS4 MENoiH or 

10 delay it a day? Will the jr not resolve to secure 
their salvation Uiis moment? It is, yes, it U impor- 
tant. To open the way of life to man, beaveD's darlioj 
Son left the gtory which he had with the Father ; he 
suffered, groaned, bled, and died for sinnei*. O that 
their hearts would melt — would break with humble 
penitence, and by faith lay hold on this Savior and 
be saved." 

Within the month following we find many mt»- 
resting rceords in Mr. Taylor's journal, of his commu- 
nion with God, and his labors and prayers for the con- 
version of sinners, and his visits and efforts to com- 
fort the afflicted, to prepare the dying for death, and 
the liviog to live to the glory of God. 

"June 27. — The morning succeeding found me 
shorn of my strength; bnt at evening devotion I sunk 
at the feet of Jesus, and, Mary-like, bathed them with 
tears of humble contrition. My soul again exulted in 
God. This prepared me for the worship of the sanc- 
tDBTj. 1 carried the King of Zion enthroned in my 
heart (o the temple where he held his court. My soul 
melted there again. Heard Mr. Summerfield — the se- 
cret of whose popularity, I think, lies much in'his holi- 
nest of heart. He has had a deep experience in divine 
things, and doubtless knows, from day to day, what 
it is to have his lips touched with halloned fre. 

" Sabbath, July II.— Have found this lo be of a 
truth the Lord's day, for the Sabbath's Lord has been 
near. For a few days past I have had less enjoyment 
than usual. The cause is obvious : I grieved die Holy 
Spirit the night afler the last powerful bleasing, which 



LOR. S2S 

wu five dayi tgo. Whit m meKjr that my btckiliding 
fau been heaald ! Blesi the Lord for the beKliog balm— 
for the good Pbyiiciao. 

" Aa 1 knelt in my uattal place, the thought arose, 
lhi« may be the last time I shall erer pray. My soul 
was hnagering for the bread of life, and faith seemed 
almost ready to lay hold on a blessing. My heart soon 
melted into penitence, and tears ran down my eyes. 
Had abasing views of myself, and exalted views of 
God, as he is in himself, and in his relation to fallen 
man in general, and to his children particuUily. My 
Father smiled, my soul was relreshed, and 1 could 
once mote rejoice. O the liberty of the children of 
God ! Had a peculiar and before unknown view ot 
myself as a candidale for the holy ministry. Rather 
than ikot hare the approbation of Jesus, and the pre- 
ieace of Jesus— rather than not be taught of him, let 
my other qualifications be what tbey may, I would 
cease to pursue this abject. Wherever I go, let bim go 
with me ; for through Christ Btrengtheninq; me, 1 can 
do and bear all things." 

To Rev. C. H . 

" NasM^Baa, Juts ^> l^^- 
"James, a servant of Jesus Christ, to his beloved 
brother Charles, now teaching publicly, and from 
house to house, testifying to every man repentance to- 
wards God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. May 
great grace, mercy, and peace from ' God our Father, 
and from out Lord Jesus Christ, be multiplied unto 
yoti. And the very God of peace sanctify yon wholly , 
and I pray God jourwhote spirit, and eoul, and body, 
bs |»eterved blameless unto the coming of our Lord 



236 MEMOIR OF 

Jesus Christ. Faithful is he that calleth 7011, whu aJao 
will do it.' 

"My dear brother, I address you from m; 'Be- 
ihesda.' I say Bethesda, because this little room has 
BO often been a house of mercy to tne, oace lame and 
halt, weary and heavy laden. 

" Hither, shut out from the world, have I resorted : 
Eougbt, found, and delighted in the Beloved. I might 
call it Pisgah'i top, but it is more, because of the 
manifestations of the Son of God to the most un- 
worthy. A heavenly land has opened to my view. 
Through faith't vUion earth has receded, and the 
soul has risen and entered the holy city — communed 
with saints and angels — sal down at the feet of Jesus, 
and sung hallelujahs to the E^amb. 

" My brother, I would not intrude upon you, but the 
love of Christ constraineth me. I love you beoauae 
you love the Savior and his cause. I love you, and 
therefore write ; and 1 hope that, for Christ's sake, this 
epistle may come to you with a bleeaing. 

" I might tell you of the gracious visilationa of Qod's 
love to me, from time to time ; how happy in commu- 
nion with my Savior — how resigned 10 his will — of the 
sweet prospects of heaven and glory that have opened 
to my soul. But you would hear of the prosperity of 
Zion in the land of our fathers. 

" After reaching Middle Haddam last April, I en- 
tered upon what I thought would be a pleasant route, 
to visit those places where the Holy Spirit had recent- 
ly showered down a gracious raio. But the Lord hin- 
dered me. I stopped at Colchester, where my time was 
to myself— and the last day will tell whether to othen 
or not— spent profitably. You can imagine in what 



UHi. S27 

war ^ ^^^^ employed in the midst of the impeaitent, 
the awakened, the iDxious, youog conTerls, aod en- 
gHged ChrisiiaDs. But how is it with your peo|)leT 
Is the chuh:h awake? Areyoureldersalive toihe best ' 
interests of Zion? Are professors wrestling in secret 
for the iDKalhering of souls t la Iherea general mourn- 
ing, with you, over the desolations of the church? If 
not, what shall the end of these things be ? O, how it 
woitld animate your heart to gee Christians alert— to 
hear sinners cry for mercy — to see them submitting to 
God — owning the Savior — and uniting themselves to 
the Lord's people. Be encouraged, for who can tell 
but a muUitnde of sinners may soon become, under 
your ministry, obedient to the faith. As it is your duty 
to labor for il, so it is your duty and privilege to look 
for it — to watch for it, more than ihey that watch for 
the morning. 

" I have become entirely contented with my present 
course. The good Shepherd scatters rich food as I tta- 
vel in the wilderness. My heart, loo, is still, and more 
than ever set upon the work of the ministry. To this 
one object I would hare every acquisition tend. In 
the accomplishment ' of this one thing I would live ; 
when it is done I would die ; for heaven is the home 
of God's children. 1 think I am willing to do the will 
of dod. When be commands I would obey; when he 
calls I would run. 

" Another watchman has fallen from the walls of 
Zion, to rise, we trust, to the city of our God. Mr 
Whelpley is dead. When shall it be said brother H. 
ia dead— when shall it be said of me, ' He is gone T 
What I say nuto yoti, I say unto all, match t An af' 



fectioBale lemembrance to Mra. H., anil believe me, 
youn in the best bonds, 

" James B. Taylor." 

Mr. Taylor, who labored to be an uricommon Chris- 
tian, seems to have excelled in a prevailing desire 
that Christians, in alt their relationa, should do their 
duly, and have la^ experience of the work of grace 
in ibeii own souls. To a friend, in prospect of her 
marriage, he wrote : 

" It is probable you will be connected with Mr. 
■ Does he grow in grace ? My friend, wfaaiever 

else you leave unlocked afler, see well to this ; see well 
to thit; as you value &i»nsefolness, as you value your 
own and his happiness. I do not commaud ; I exhort; 
O be faithful— kindly faithful. If he be a man of God, 
he will ever thank you ; he will love yoti the more for 
such faithfulness. Talk much and pointedly upon ex- 
periTtiental godliness." 

To one from whom he had received a friendly gift, 
he wrote : 

" lo heaven, I have not the least doubt you will re- 
joice for helping one on his way to the ministry. Help 
by your prayers, and thus speed me on my way." 

On the lubjecl of fasting, (a duty too little prac- 
ticed in the church, and sometimes abused to their in- 
jury, by persons of much piety, bnt of a morbid tem- 
perament,) Mr. Taylor made, about this time, the tot- 
lowing note in his journal : 



]«HES BHAINERD TAVLOR. ZStP 

" A day of abttinenee. Heretofore I have pnctioed 
fatting on a pailiculac day, lor more ihan Iwo years i 
and have found someof ihe seasons greatly beoeScinl. 
But fasting, connected with my usual iludies, has 
greatly debilitated my body, and left me generally 
with a severe headache, which has led me to the con- 
cluaion that, under existing circumstances, it is not 
my duty lo abstain altogether.'" 

This conclusion, which was cetlaiuly wise, shows, 
among many other things, that Mr. Taylor's high re- 
ligious feelings, in which perhaps he surpassed almost 
all persona of his day, were connected with a. sound 
mind and a sober consideration of duty. No man was 
farther remoTed from gloomy austerity, or relied less 
upon either his feelings or duties. The evidence of 
this will be apparent to every attentive reader, as it 
will be found in the fact, that in his bighetc exercises 
of derotioD, when his whtHe soul was filled with the 
love of God, aod his countenance made luminous with 
the holy fire that burnt within, he at the same time 
entertained the most humbling views of himself, as a 
sinner saved by grace; and was ever ready to say, in 
the language of Panl, "by the grace of God, lam 
what J ara." 

How he acknowledged the hand of Ood in all his 
ways — referred all events to divine providence, and re- 
hed upon the gracexif God, may be seen in the follow- 
ing extracts from his journal : 

" Aug. 7, 1834. — Met with a disappointment in not 

mitittg my friends at L . It was attended with 

a bleating, and I concluded it would still be followed 
20 t.B. Tuyi"- 



230 MCUOtB OF 

with a tnin of blessings. The disappoinimeni was 
uneipccted, and fiom a source, too, that was calcula- 
ted to excite stroDg feeling. But grace Bbonnded. 

" Sih. — Abundant reason to bless God for my deten- 
tioD yesterday. Last evening had an opening for doing 
good, and eternity loay sbow some ftuit. Visited seve- 
ral sick persons, and at every place endeavored lo 
speak faithfully and boldly for God, and afterwards at 
n meeting. 

" 9th.— This night, glory to owr God, bad a power- 
ful visitalioii fron> above — it is past telling — and it was 
to prepare me to stand up for God. This I did, and 
■poke boldly ; the word was attended with power, and 
the Spirit of power and luilinesa rested on me. Sin- 
ners trembled — backsliders too — and the engaged chilS 
of God exulted. Had I not been detained, where were 
all that has come upon me and been communicBied 
through me since the 7th. Appointed another meet- 
ing at the request of the people. 

"11th.— 'Who will take the first honor?' 'Did 
ne do well V &c. In this season of examinaiioa ran 
through the crowd ; but grace so gained the victory 
over me as lo enable me lo look down upon these 
meaner things, and say, these are not my God. No: 
the honor from above I seek, and to my studies let me 
go, as lo a duly for Christ's sake, and for the honor 
uf the Gospel. 

" Felt a strong attachment to the word of God ; and 
over that word, as the legacy of my Friend on high, [ 
cherished my allachmeni, my soul sunk low at the feet 
of Jesus, and I drank from the fountain. 

" Went out and visited the sick. I love my Mastw 
and my Matter's work. I love to comfort bia people— 



tUtEB BRAINERD TAVLOR. 231 

I la*e to talk lo sinners. Lord, help. Lord, leach tbou 
me, and bless me more and more. I can look upon 
tMg day's biessiogs as arising from my delention last 
Saturday, and it will probably prore, in time to com^ 
a link in the chain of providence not to be told. I.et 
me look at providence in small aa well as great things, 
ud wonder and adore. 

" 25th.— The chain is gathering links— little did I 
think that so much depended upon my disappointment 
no the 7th. Last Monday evening attended the ap- 
pointed meeting, and had a refreshing time. The peo- 
ple of God testified that it was heaven to be there. 
Did not feel so happy myself, but had liberty to speak 
a word in season to the people. 

" How exalted the privilege to help forward the chil- 
dren of God heavenward— even Ethiopia's degraded 
children. that they may be seen all of them stretch- 
ing forth the hand unto God. 

' " Find employment in visiting the sick poor. Called 
to see a colored woman. She is happy in God, in the 
prospect of death. Had an opportunity to converse 
with a beggar; prayed with him, and presented him 
with a lestament and the last sixpence I had in my 
pocket. The thought arose, give this away, and what 
will you do to-morrow t But stay : 



" O for more confidence in God — God is able lo 
make all grace abound towards you ; ' that you, always 
hsTing all sufficiency in all things, may abound lo 
erery good work." a Cor. 9 ; 8. 
. " 87th. — A door opened for me to exert myself for a 



poor child of Ood— put in two cents, the very last mitt 
I tDpposed I had— the word of God came, ' Give, u>d 
it shall be given unto you' — went out and be^ed mem, 
and with this and a needed garment went as the aV 
moner of heaven, and delivered up the contributioa. 
' Naked, and ye clothed me.' 

" 28ih.— ProTidence seems lo open the door still 
wider for ray prospectire usefulness amonj the poor; 
and the question arose, shall I live in Princeton _y!H 
years, and Princeton be none the better for m.e3 

" A new plan opened to my mind, upon the prose- 
CDtion of which I entered to-night. Open, Lord, ray 
eyes — 1 am tired of wailing for others ; there aie la- 
borers enough all aronnd, but they don't come into the 
vineyard to work. Let me be up and doing constantly, 
faithfully, firmly. 

" Opened a small trun^, and unexpectedly found 
ninepcnce. Is not this Gospel measure ? If a mer- 
chant had $2000 at evening, and gave it away, and 
the next day should find him in possession of $9000, 
would he not consider it an increase running oval 
Mine is as much in proportica, and how often is abun- 
dance poured into my hand !" 

To his christian sister Miss W. of New- York, in 
communion with whom he took much delight, he wrote 
OD the 35th as follows : 

" O Miss W. what a truth ! ' God is love ;' and I 
feel the indescribable weight of this truth resting upon 
my soul. To the world and to the formalist, I know, 
indeed, that these are unmeaning words; but mj 
friend can rejoice that God has imparted the kw>ir- 



iAHES BBAINBBD TAYLOB. 238 

ledge of Ibis hidden mystery to me, and is building 
ne up in faiih and holiness. Holiness ! O what 
charms in the very word ! Ood is holy — angels are 
holy — satnis in glory are boly — and ' without holiness 
no one shall see tbe Lord.' O to be more like oui 
blessed Jesus — more like God! 

" I still address you from my Bethesda — a houteof 
mercy to the most unworthy. My study is about five 
feet square ; and yet I cau siug, 

■ Thi> little Taom, forme duiga'd, 
Suila u well my e<u; mind 
A* palaces of kiae>'' 

" 1 hope God is training me for something ; I trust 
It is either to labor for bim oq earth, or to take me to 
himself. To labor for him now is sweet, increasingly 
sweet; and O, be is with me ! At home and abroad 
Jesus stands by me— the Spirit comforts me — my Fa- 
ther smiles— 80, 

' Tell me no more of cutbly toy*, 

Of ainful mirth oDdcuual joy», 

Tlie thinga I loved before.' 

" Let the world have these. Let the professor of 
religion who indulges in them, wish me to join him : 
but God forbid ! for, were I to indulge, even in what 
by some are called innocent pleasures, my spiritual 
joys would be gone. And for this I am spoken of, and 
that too by professors of the religion of Jesus. But 
what is it to he judged of man's judgment ? My wit- 
ness and record are on high. Bycensuring for this, they 
censure me for doing the work of the Lord. The spare. 



tU HBHOIK Cr 

timB I have from my college duties, I would radwT 
•pend with the kiek — the indigeat; and that too,!* 
win xmla. And my prosp«ct for doing good is noeit 
grutcr IK liuts and imokr cabins, thao in the dnw- 
ing-iooms of rich and tbonghllesc worldlings. They 
u« joined to theii idols. O, pray that 1 may finnlf 
and devotedly do the woA of the Lord, caring neither 
for their contempt nor ibeir applatise; alike indifle- 
teat to popalarily and persecution. And may our ^ 
forts be to turn men from tin to holinett. 

" Glory to our heavenly Father, for kit rich grace 
through out Lord Jesus Christ. ' By grace are ye 
saved, through faith.' This ia the way, the only way, 
of salvation. And it is a sweet way — the way of lioli- 
ness — the way to heaven." 

To a female relative, for whom, as for all his leU- 
tions, Mr. Taylor's bean seemed ever to overflow witk 
afiection, he wrote an interesting letter, well calcula- 
ted to instruct and reprove those professors of religion 
who, like the creaking door upon its hinges, ever com- 
plain, and yet make no progress. 

" Mutmt-HaU, Aug. S8, ISM. 
'Omr K — , 

" My soul blesses our heavenly Patent for the affec- 
tion I bear to you, both natural and christian. Instead 
of diminiahing, it gathers strength ; and I trust it is to 
be perfected in a fairer cjime. 

" Having the same round of duties from day to daf, 
you will readily conclude that I can have little new* 
to communicate; but there m a theme to which oVt 
hearts have been attuned. We love the Saviof Wfe. 



JAMEfl SBAIKEBD TAYLOR. 2SS 

lovt liifl caiiM I but whence is- it th*l we hare been 
tHrnedto theShepheid and Biibopof out souU? We 
love Qod becBuse he first lored ua. Here is the solu- 
tion of what would otherwise be an uDfaihomable 
depth, Bad for ever remain a mfitery. 

" Having been extricated from the miry clay, and 
our feet set upon a rock, what manner of persons 
a«ght we to be in all holy conversation ! Sorely as 
he who hath called at is holy, so ought we to be 
holy. 

" What are the signs of the times 7 Is muck sAid 
aboia religion, for and a^ost it ? Where is the hoM 
that/ee/, thai talk, that live religion? Alas, the con- 
sUot harping of professors of religion upon their for- 
mality, coldness, stupidity, want of life ! Why, in the 
name of my Master, are they not before God, on their 
knees, in their closets, mourning over their decleo* 
, tion 1 They need not tell the world of their indiffe- 
rence. It is alceady too evident. And the world sees 
it with astonishment. The world knows it to their (I 
was going to say) damnation ! It is true ; for sinners 
plead as their excuse, the ungodliness of professors. 

" May it be ours to walk worthy of our vocation. 
We owe, indeed, ten thousand talents to the Lord ; 
and I feel that I have nothing to pay. And after all 1 
shali have done and can do, I am an unprofitable 
servant ; and can only say. 



" SiirTounded as you are by multiplied cares, I pr^ 
Mine yon steal away now and then from all, to boM 
« with Ood in secret. If an/ where, it ii with 



S36 UEMOW OP 

God in secret, the bou) must prosper ; and there, if 
denied all things else, the child of God finds a Father, 
a Savior, a Comforter, a Frientt, a Brother. May you 
find your retirements places and seasons of washing 
and tenewing of the Holy Ghost. 

" How are all at 1 I have taken an interest in 

that people; noi becaose they are Episcopalians; no 
more than I would in Preshyterians, because they are 
aach, but because some of them appeared to have the 
spirit of Christ. And I think I have been brought to 
titia, to seek to have ChrUliaii« more holy; and sin- 
ners, yet unconverted, brought to Christ, Away with 
the prejudice of names ! away, for ever ! The child of 
God is my brother, my sister. The sinner, my fellow- 
sinner. The former let me lore and serve, as of the 
household of failh : the latter, let me labor to briD£, 
where ioe would be, at the feet of Jesus. And here at 
his feet we must lie, if on his throne we would ail 
down. 

" I might tell you that I have some pleasant retreats 
into the huts and smoky cabins of the poor of this re- 
gion. And there too, in some instances, piety in its 
most radiant form is seen to shine forth. I should like 
to have you at some of my little meetings. The chil- 
dren of the highest seem happy, and I am happy in 
doing thero.good. Thus let me live ; thus let ua live, 
thus let us die. 

" You have witnessed much of the bustle about La- 
fayette. He is a great man — worthy of esteem ! But 
in reading the accoimt of his landing and reception 
in your city, I thought of our Jesus, tke San of God, 
and inquired, if He should appear, who would go our 
to meet him and help him 1 Who helped him throng 



J.iHEB BRU.NERIt TAYLOR. 937 

tke land of JuJea? But his (riiiniph was great. Let 
us strive to be good." 

To a beloved chnstiao brother, who had recently 
visited ■ place where Qod was blessing (he church 
with a glorious reviral of religion, Mr. Taylor wrote 
a letter abounding with pointed tnterrogatories, such 
as every Christian should attentively consider, and 
especially when the tone of piety is low, and a stale 
of backsliding appears in the church. 

" Sept 1. — HaviDgheenin theinidst of so powerful 
a woik of God's Spirit, yon have doubtless relaraed 
with an increased solicitude for the Zioo with which 
you are so happily connected. Do you not find that 
it is the delight of your pastor to preach the word 
with all plainness 1 How are you blessed in having 
an overseer so desirous of the welfare of souls I And 
be assured, you cannot pray for him too much. The 
apostle said, ' Brethren, pray for us.' Could you fol- 
low your pastor, you would see that in all bis labors 
his heart cries out, ' Brethren, pray for me' 

" Inquiring concerning- the pastor naturally leads 
to inquire after the flock. How is it, then, with the 
sheep 1 How is it with you, my brother 7 Instead of 
engagedness, you may have become cold. Have you 
eloped from those green pastures in which you were 
wont to feed 1 Have you left those refreshing streams 
of which it was your delight to drink ? Ab ! what 
comparison do the gaudy weeds of the world bear to 
the sweet pasture which the good Shepherd has pro- 
vided? And who would choose the (uibuleut streams 
of sense, in preference to 'the still waters' of his 



838 MEUOIR OP 

love ? Bm I hope better Ihings-of you : that yon still 
walk with God, and follow tlie Lamb wtiitheisoerei 
he goeth. 

" Many Bheep compose the flock with which yon 
feed. Are they all in health 7 and do their souls pros- 
per? Do they feed contentedly BDd live healthfully ? 
la a large flock, how often are some sick ; how many 
wander and go astray! What dissatisfaction with 
themselves and all Bround-them, arising from unfaith- 
fulness on their part to God, to their own souls, ajid 
the souls of their brethren? 

" Were I with you at odc of your little meeting^, 
methinks I would ask my brethren', and say to each, 
1» it well with thee ? Is it well with thee ? As taf 
soul rejoices in the prosperity of Zion, how would my 
praise awake at an answer in the affirmative ! How 
would 1 send forth my voice in words of eihortaiion 
to the brothers or sisters in a luke-warm state ! And 
I would ask, what profit is there in robbing God? 
What advantage ia loving ibe world 1 What peace 
in dishonoring the Prince of peace, by indulging in 
sin? For it is sin, soul-blinding sin — sin, soul-ha- 
rassing sin, beloved bid, soul-damning sin, that has 
veiled the Sun of righteousness ; that has sent fearful 
forebodings of wrath into the soul, and stamped con- 
demnation where once was light— where once was 
peace, reconciliation, and heaven- Were my soul in 
such a condition, would you not say to me, 'Return, 
thou backslider, rove no longer ; seek the Lord with 
thy whole heart?' And I would say further. Look, 
precious soul, if thou hast ever had grace in thy heart, 
how art ihou fallen ! Do yon not fear a final removal 
of the candlestick from its place ? O diaboiiQT God, 



JAMES BRAINEBD TAyi.os. S3B 

your "heave Illy Father, no longer; wouikI your Savioi 
no mote ; grieve noi the Holy Spirit; come and con- 
fess ; bow tvitli penitcace; mourn with bitterness ; 
pieail witb faiiti ; procure pardon, peace, and holiness ; 
. be determined to have no more to ilo.wjth sinful con- 
' fonnity to the world, cost what it may ; make no com- 
promise with self; have no league wilh Salan ; in a 
word, deny thyself, lake up thy' cross, and follow 
Christ ; then you will show to the world that Christ 
Jesus, as you profess, is all ; sinners will take warn- 
ing at your example and precept ; saints will com- 
mune with you ; God will bless, and heaven finally 
receive your happy soul. Are convictions multiplied 
among you? Do sinners in Zion tremble'? 

" I have much reason to praise our heavenly Father 
that he hath kept me hitherto. He hath indeed made 
my Ltcle room a Beihesda to my soul. Grace, mercy, 
and peace have been multiplied unto me ; and i now 
bless the Lord, and take courage for time to come. 
Having heen blessed of God, it is our privilege — it is 
our duty — to look for greater blessings. From day to 
day may we 'be baptized with the Holy Ghost and wilh 
Gre. The Lord send down his holy unction, and make 
Ds, more than ever, fit temples for himself to dwell in. 
Then we shall rejoice evermore, pray without ceas- 
ing, and in every thing give thanks- 

" My affectionate salutations to the brethren. Fare- 
well. 

"Jaues B. Taylob." 



...Google 



CHAPTER V. 

Snand Year in CalUgt. 

Mr. Taylor's fond affection for his parenis snd ' 
friends canaot for a laoment be called in question ; 
and yei, though he had not enjoyed ibeir society fof 
five or six months, and was on his way to spend tbe 
college vacation at home, when he anived in New- 
York, " and found," ip use his own words, " things 

interesting under the labors of brother L , in the 

Rev. Mr. Patton's church, the pastor being absent and 
laborers needed, I, upOD solicitation, joined brother 

L for a season. At the resurrection of the just it 

will be known how many have been gathered in. On 
one evening thirteen expressed hope. The Lord bless 
the lambs of the flock." 

At tbe commeDcement of tbe college eeasiou we 
find the following entry in his journal: 

" Last night the Lord gave me— I cannot express 
it — such an exercise as 1 never had before : a view of 
the demerit of sin that sunk me lower than the lowest. 
And yet my soul exulted ill God. 

" Thus have I begun. May I find my winter loca- 
tion better than ever before — my health and my all ar« 
■I God's disposal. 

" Nor. 14.— Upon a review of tbe past week, I find 
it fraught with loving kindness from the Lord. ' Last 
evening bad a del^htful season in remembering the 
lambs of the flock in Mr. P.'s church, with whom I 



lAHEa BBAINCBD TAYUIa. Ml 

Dsed lo meet od Saturday eveDings. I Iota them for 
the love ihey bear to Jesus, the Lamb of God. 

" At evening deTotion had a siugular exercise. 
While aiDging, my soul diirsled for a blessing. The 
thought suddenly entered my mind : ' If you n^lect 
your tea you may obtain the blessing which you seek.' 
I inquired whence is ibis ? Is it from God, or from the 
devil 1 But I concluded that the Lord's blessing rame ■ 
not by a purchase of mine, and therefore that he could 
as well bless me then as afterwards ; and I determined 
to throw myself at his feet and seek his favor, and thus 
defeat the adrersary who was ready to cheat me out 
of the blessing- My Father smiled upon me — the 
work of grace was deepened — and my soul fed on man- 
na from above." 

To pious students Mr. Taylor has left an illustriotu 
example which should for ever banish the idea that 
the sad decline in the life and fervor of piety so often 
manifested in their college course, is necessaij, or that 
it is impossible in such circumstances to live a devo- 
ted life, and make progress in religion. To a piona 
family, to whom he frequently poured out all his heart, 
after giving a delightful narrative of what the Lord 
was doing for his soul from day to day, he wrote : 

" Do not yon rejoice that God has kept me hither- 
to? With your rejoicing connect a doubling of your 
pnyen that I may so live as to testify that the world 
19 mistaken in the iqiinion, that God cannot be enjoyed 
in a course of study. If I do not grow in grace n©W( 
when shall I V 

21 J. B. Ttkir. 



242 MEMon or 

It is both delightfal and iDBtnictive to ooserre that, 
while he wu striring continaally to grow in graca 
and in the knowledge of Christ, and so to let his light 
•hine, that others, seeing his good works, might glorify 
bis hesvenlf Father, he seemed almost as much en- 
gaged that others should walk worthy of God unto all 
pleasing. To a beloved friend he wrote, Nov. 30, 1824, 

" Has your soul been in health and prospered? I 
could wish to be near you and he^ the reply. 

" Did you ever question whether I have been truly 
converted? Perhaps you may have seen many things 
in me which might lead to such a conclusion ; but tf 
not to this, to another, viz. that 1 could not love God 
much, or thai I showed to ibe world an ungodly walk 
and conversation. Well, 1 am ready to acknowledga 
my errors; will you point them out to me? 1 will 
take it as tbe highest mark of your affection for me 
and love to the cause of Christ, if you will tell me 
plainly all that you may have seen amiss in me. And 
would you not wish your friends to do the same to 
yool IJut rather than offend you, I would get down 
at your feet and say what I purpose to write. 

" My dear friend, for whom I have prayed, and 
groaned, and wept ; as before God and the Lord Jeans 
Christ, I must warn yon. Do you say of what ? 
Pause and thiab. Do you find nothiugoutof the way ? 
Wbat meanetb that lightness in your walk and con- 
versation 1 Does it fit yon for prayer in secret ? Does 
it adorn the Christian? Does it tell the world that 
yon love religion — that your thoughts are much on 
God and heaven ? Does it show that the soul is walk- 
ing with God — that yon maintain close and intimate 



lUIGS BlUntElID TATLOS. 313 

communion with Godi This may be the last lime I 
may be permilled to write to you. My hand may be 
in the grave : and I may now be too late — my friend 
may have died' If alive, bear with my faithfulness ; 
for it is in love, aa I expect to meet you at the bar of 
Jasus Chriat. What meaneih these things 7 0, 1 urge 
you, I pray you — in Chrbi'a atead, I beseech you to 
judge. But what satih the Scriptures? ' Let every 
one that nameth the name of Christ depart from ini- 
quity.' Is it not iniquity to disobey Godi And it ia 
by keeping his comroaiidments we know that we are 
bom of God and love him. The Savior says, ' If ye 
love me keep my commandments.' ' As he that hath 
caUed you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of con- 
venation. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not 
as foob, but as wise. Wo unto you that laugh now, 
for ye shall weep. Let 'your laughter be turned into 
mourning. Let aai jetting not foolish talking he once 
named among you. Let all bUtemess, and Trraih, and 
anger, and clanwr, and evil speaking, be put away 
from you with all malice.' Thus, my dear friend, you 
see the will of the Lord concerning us. May I, and 
may you be freed from every unhallowed thought, 
word, and action, and put on, as the elect of God, 
bovela of merciet, kindnest, hun^lenetg of mind, 
meeknett, long-tuffering , but, above all things, put 
on charity— x}xti the peace of God may rule in our 
hearts. 

" Hy friend; if you are not satisfied with your hope, 
rest not till God shall speak your sins forgiven, and 
you shall know that you are the Lord's. Come, let us 
set out afresh, examine ourselves, and rectify all that 
is wrong. To do this, we must find out the wrong, 



2M HmoB or 

bring it before Ood, comfess it, mourn orer it, plead 
foi Chriat'i sake, foi pardon, and wait for salvation. 
Do yon pray for me ; 1 will piay for yon ; and let na 
strire to «nter in at the ttrait gate." 

The reader has obaerrcd hov pleasantly and in- 
straclirely the genoineneas of Mr. Taylor's christian 
character, and the elevation and enlargement of his 
christian love have been exhibited in the fact, thai hia 
sodI paused not at all at those barriers which sectari- 
anism has raised between the different denominations 
of Christ's disciples. Christ was the object of his af- 
fections ; and wherever he saw the spirit and image 
of his blessed Master, thither his heart flowed out In 
the saints, the excellent of the earth, was his delight ; 
accordingly, we find much of his correspondence, in 
which glowed the purest flame of Christian love, was 
with those who bore names different fi6m his own. 
The following letter is of this description, and shows 
at the same time the regard -he had to the word of 
God, as his infallible guide and instructor ; 

"Nataui Hall, Dk. 6, 18M. 
■BnchnnlMlnad, 

" Does not the same affection actuate us toward oim 
another, that filled the soul of the apostle towards his 
brethren at Rome, when he said, 'I would have you 
wise towards that which is good, and simple concern-, 
ingeWll' How like this is our Savior's precept, *Be 
wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.' 

" While reading the other day the former passage 
in connection with the context, I tbogght of my Wetk- 
len. ■ Now I beseech you, brethren, naik then wUdt 



JAMBS BBAINBBD TAT LOB. MS 

CUM dinsions and ofieacas, contrary to the doctrine 
which ye have learned, and avoid them. For they that 
■re such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own 
belly; and by good words and fair speeches deceive 
the hearts of the simple. For your obedience is come 
abroad unto all men. 1 am gladf therefore, on your be- 
half ; but yet I would have you wise unto thai which 
ii good, and simple concerning evil. And (he God of 
peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.' 
With the apostle I add the prayer, ' The grace of our 
Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.' 

"But whence this wisdom? What saith the word t 
' The holy Scriptures are able to make you icite unto 
■alration, through faith which is in the Lord Jesus 
Christ.' Again, ' The testimony of the Lord is sure, 
making wise the simple. How shall it be attained ? 
' The letter killelh, but the Spirit makelh alite.' How 
many read, and stilt are blind ! ' But if any man' — any 
Presbyterian man, or any Ohnrch man, or any Metho- 
dist man, or Baptist man, or any other man, ' lack ut»- 
dom, let him ask of God, who giveth lo alt men lUienl- 
ly, and opbraideth not, and it shall he given him.' 
Here then is ihe source, the word of God, accompanied 
by the Spirit of God illuminating the mind and work- 
ing powerfully in the soul. And the effect will be, 
wisdom that is profitable to direct, and the harmlttt- 
net* of the dove. 

" Let us appeal lo the experience of those who can 
testify. ButfoTtbefru(A,the word of God, what know- 
ledge of salvation could we have 9 Bui for the medium 
of access to God, the way of the sinner's return plainly 
marked out, who before us, or with us, but would, like lh« 
benishUd in heathen lands, feel after Ood in vmin? Bat 
21* 



240 HCMMH at 

fw the command, ' Repent,' who WMitd eT« thine of it T 
And unless coDTiaced of aia, of righteousness, and of 
judgment, by the Spirit of Goil, who would be broftpa- 
heaited? But for the Lamb of God, held out loc the 
taking away of bid, who would ever believe to the jus- 
tifying and saDCtifyi% of their souls 1 H«e we see 
something of the vEtlue of the word and Spiiit of God, 
90 much slighted by the world. ' Whoio is vue, uid 
will observe these things, even ihey shall understand 
the loving-kindness of the Lord.' 

" In the sense of the Scripture, then, it seems ihM 
that person is void of understanding, who knows not its 
commands and the blessing consequent upon obedi- 
eaea, which blessing b the loving'kindneaa of the 

" Do we read, ' Bepent— believe. Msivel not that 
1 said uDto thee, ye must be born again. Walk be- 
fote me, and be ye perfect. Deny oDgodlineas and 
Wwldly lusts ; and live soberly, righteously, and god- 
ly ia this present world. Love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart.' If we may expunge one of these, may 
we not expunge them all 1 But by so doing we take 
our names from the book of life. How much better 
to yield obedience. How much better ! O how 
sweet 1 The soul that has been at the feet of Jesus, 
wishes to be oAen there ; for he knows the peace <^ 
God (hat passeth knowledge. He that hath this ex- 
perience, hath what chaseth away all bis fears, save 
the holy filial fear of oflendmg a holy, loving, indwell- 
i»g Father— the loyal fear that wishes to be tubmU- 
•iee at the feet of King Jesus, who rules on the 
ibrone of his kingdom, set up in the soul— the aacred 
fisar that trembles at the thought of diatnrbii^ the hal- 



lAim BsinnaD taylob. M7 

lowed brmthinga of that Spirit, whose leuiple is tlw 
tody of the saint. How harmtess such guests would 
make the soul ! This fear is the fruit of love— and 
lore is the fulfllliog of the Jaw. Well, this is alt we 
want, that is, in kind. We want, and shall for erei 
want ,' and we may for ever have more, in mcatun, 
of God's lore. O may we sink^sink, and sink, and 
rink into this ocean J for this {aparadox to the world,) 
is the way to rise; and it will carry as higher than 
the stars, to an inheritance incomipiible, undefiled, 
and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for yon 
who are kept by the power of God, through faith, unto 
afidl and eternal salvation. We will talk of the rest 
when we shall walk the golden streets. Ah! shall we 
see each other there 1 If you do not get so high abov» 
me that I cannot reach you. By the grace of God I 
hope to shine forth even there — a sinner saved by grace. 

"A christian salutation to sister W. and the breth- 
ren R. and R,, whom with yourselves I beseech, for 
the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the 
Spirit, that ye strive together with me, in yourprayera 
to Ood for me. 

" Farewell. In the best bonds, your brother, in our 
Lord Jesus Christ, 

"James B. Taylor." 

The following was addressed to a colored woman, 
since gone to her rest, at the advanced age of lis 
years — whom Mr. Taylor seems to have regarded ai 
one of the excellent of the earth, in whom he do- 
lighted. 



:., Google 



216 MIMUH OP 

1 Prinuim, Dec 34, 18SL 
" AuDt Saiab, perhaps, is expecting to heat from Eicr 
friend Mr. Taylor. Coald 1 be with you for an boat, 
we would GOUTerse upon things that pertain lo the 
nogdom ; but you have a Friend on high, who deigns 
to Tisii your little room — nay, who takes up his abode 
in your heart — He has brought his Father with him; 
and the Holy Ghost, whom he promised to send, over- 
shadows and fills you. By and by, you will exchange 
your cottage for a palace; you will lay aside your gar- 
ments below, ' to walk in white above.' Instead of 
prayer, you will be all praise. Instead of seeing Jestis 
by faith, you will see him as he is, face to face. Do 
yon not exult in the prospect of dying — dying in the 
arms of Jesus, and of going to your Father, God 7 
There, too, you will m(tet those who died in faith, and 
some with whom you have sung, and prayed, and wept 
below. And this is the sweetness of it— the place, the 
scene, will never close. Those that enter in shall go 
no more out. 

" You will be glad to bear that the Lord blesses me 
with his presence — my soul is in health and prospers — 
still help me in your prayers for me, that I may indeed 
be a man of God — one in whom God will delight to 
dwell — and one whom Goi will deign to honor in 
bringing sinners lo Christ. 

" Should the Lord continue you, I trust yon will 
have a happy new year; but if he should take joa 
hence, it will be thrice happy. Farewell, 

"J. B, Tayloi." 

Of the same date, but a little in anticipation of the 



Jambs brainbro tatlm. S«t 

lime, we fiad Mr. Tayloi'a aew-yeu's letter to hii pi- 
renta, brothers, and Bisters. 

"XoMOK HaU, Dte. 24, 1834. 
■ EaiUmd runan. Bntben, ud BiiUn^ 

" The time has arrived for my aaniul gifl ; and, in 
anticipatioD, I wish yoa a luppy new-year. Should it 
not be realized on eartb, who of us donbta but it would 
be enjoyed at the right hand of God ? 

' Thcra <TarlutiDS •prinf abidai. 

And Derar withering flawer* : 

Dsath, like ■ narro* les, dividef 

Thii haavenly land from osri.' 

" To say that this may be the last epistle of this 
kind that I shall write, you know is to say what ibe 
closinfT year naturally suggests. But it may be thai 
the Lord of the vineyard has designed me as en ud- 
der-dtesser. 

"The close of the year generally finds men of busiT 
nets engaged in adjusting their accounts. Wonld it 
not be weU fan as, as stewards in the house of Qod, 
and transacting business for oar unseen Lord, to in' 
quire of each other, ' How much owestibou onto my 
Lord 7' My fsther, my brother, my sister, how much 
owesttAou? James, son, and brother, how much owesi 
thou? 

" How great is our debt as a family I In common 
with other families, we have enjoyed food, and ni- 
meat, and house, and home, and friends. The same 
•oeial privileges, the same civil and religious liberty, 
iMvebeengivennntonsastoour nnghbors. AnduiH 
dei heaven where is there a family morebleMod with 



280 MEMOU or 

fflllow-feeliog — more muled to adrance one another ta 
lae upper kingdom 7 What hath God wrought 7 To 
him be all the glory. 

" But the pa»t year his been fraught with lorintf- 
kindnesa and tender mercies! Hismercy! Oitreach- 
eth to the clouds. 

" Not less as iDdividuals, than as a family, do tr* 
owe unto the Lord. In looking over the past year, 
what a train of good hath followed, and in good order 1 
Prosperity hath been in the borders of each. How it 
hath been with you in particular circumstances yoo 
will remember upon a rfiview. What health continaed 
— what dangers escaped — what trials have been sanc- 
tified to wean yon from (he world — what lessons learn- 
ed by experience, whereby we are able to do more, 
and with greater facility, for God and each other — 
what seasons of refreshing from the presence of the 
Lord, both in secret, in the family, and in the great 
congregation ! 

" As for me, the Lord, that heareth the young ravens 
when they cry, and takelh care of (he sparrows, baih 
heard and taken care of me. As fully and as season- 
ably as he hath remembered them, so hath he admin- 
istered to me. Yes, 1 hare not wanted any good thing; 
I have all and abound. How unlike my blessed Mas- 
ter! When wandering up and down, he had not where 
to lay his head. But he makes my couch for repose, 
and imparts iweet sleep— and besides, as a pillow 
softer than down, he gives me (o lean upon his arm 
and rest on his bosom. It is impossible for me to do- 
ecribe the communion into which he hath admitted nw 
with himself during the past yeqr. * 
. "Have we not all been ripening for beaT»f Haw 



JUIBB BlUmBD TAVLOR. 3&1 

mneh hare we grown in grace and better acquainlaiie* 
vith our own hearts and with our God ? 

" How much owe we unto our Lord 1 ' More than 
ten thousand talent a.' And what have we to pay T Alt 
that WB hare, does it not belong to God 1 How then 
■hall the deht be cancelled 7 We must not aay, Lord, 
be paiient, and I will pay thee all ) but fall down and 
rejoice that for Christ's sake God hath forgiTen all onr 
tins — the whole debt. For one, I feel consttained to 
say, thon hast in lore to my soul delivered it from the 
pit of corruption, for thou hast cast all my aina behind 
thy back. 

" Let it be our aim to keep ourselves in the lore of 
Ood. God is love, and loTe is the fulfilling of the law. 
LoTe, then, should bethe reigning passion of our souls. 
This is the grace that aevii fnileth. 

"Respecting ourselves as a family, and as indivi- 
doals, if we 'seek fitst the kingdom of God and his 
righteousness,' we may expect the good hand of onr 
Ood still to be upon us for good, iu this the house of 
OUT pilgrimage. Whatever then is oegtected, let not 
our souls suffer. But I ihiak, as our aouU are in health 
Bud prosper, so our daily business will succeed, and 
thM to the glory of God. And may those committed 
10 onr care be greater sharers in our exertions, as 
though the next were to be our last year,- for, indeed, 
if not to all, it may prove such to some. Let us each 
inquire, 'Lord, is it ]■?' May we strive together more 
in out prayers for one another. On Mondays 1 think 
of .you all more particnhirly than at other times ; and 
I have had nearness of access to God in pleading tor 
AoB« I love, tk 

" Who can tul bnt we may contrive something new 



wbanby to do good ; or exert ouraelves more in pnr- 
sning former plus 7 Let us in all things lire to God, 
■nd eat, drink, aleep, nod act for his glory. 

" The succeeding year may prove to be a jubilee to 
mnltitndetof souU. For (Amout prayer, not our words 
merely should ascend, for our own sanctification, and 
f<» the purificalion of the church visible also. Let us, 
•• much as in ua lies, feed the hungry, clothe the 
naked, and help the helpless. As for our enemies, love 
them and do them good, for did not Christ manifest 
hia love for tis, while we were enemies ? He died for 
the ungodly. Let us be peace -makers. Be kindly affec- 
tioned one toward another. Loreai brethren. Ifinlifp 
we are undivided, cemented in love, in death we afaail 
not be sandeied. May you all find the grace of hope 
filling you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye 
may abound in hope through the power of the Hdy 
Ohost. And should I sbk, as I deserve, may you rise 
to life. The Lord give you, every one, an entrance 
abundantly into hh everlasting kingdom, and then 
nay our united hallelujaha resound to God and the 
Lamb for evtr and ever. If not before, I hope to me«t 
you in one of the many mansions. Adieu. Yotir affee- 
tionata son and brother, 

"James B. Tatlor." 

To his Coaain H A . 

«JMM«(m, Ac 33, ISK 
"Notwithstanding my long silence, my thov^ns 
have often flown aeross hill and dale to your habita- 
-tiBB, with the inquiry, how ia it with M. A. 7 

" Doubtless it has been well with 0u all the day 
lon^ Had I before roe this evening a view of your 



lAMBa uuiniSD TAiLoa. 263 

cxBTcises since we parted, perhaps I should discorei 
foa shut out from the world, and at the same time 
shut up in the love of God. O what ptace is like that 
io which the soul is blessed with intimate holy com- 
munion with Ood our Father, and with his Son Jesus 
Christ, through the iDdwelling of the Holy Ghost 7 
Bless the Lord that our souls are not strangeis to such 
visits of ioTe. The world knoweth them not, but unto 
us our God hath revealed the hidden mystery. 

"At another lime I should discover you holding 
sweet convMse with some dear child of God, who with 
yonrseir has drank deep into his love. What harmony 
between souls that vibrate in tinison when touched 
with love divine t 

"At another lime in your class or in the congrega- 
tion ; and there too you have renewed your streogth. 
How good the good Shepherd is! he feeds his sheep. 
How kind our Elder Brother ! he supplies our wants. 
How powerful our King ! he subdues our foes. And 
Ibrough all our journey we may expect that the Lord 
will provide. 

" If indeed you hare been tbtts favored at home and 
abroad, you have gone up in the way of holiness. And 
does not your purpose to follow on to know the Lord 
stand lirm ? Yes, my dear cousin, better things are 
hoped of you than of some who seemed to run well for 
a time. And from what the Lord has discovered to us ' 
of his goodness, we are looking for still greater things ; 
for the path of the just is as the shining light that 
shineth more and more to the perfect day. Verily, I 
believe there is such a blessing as titdting into the 
love of God. Ha thinking on this subject, I have com- 
pared the love of God to an ocean j and supposing 



SH ME^otB or 

mrMlf on the surfMce of this greal deep, 1 cooltl im«- 
guie myself siukiag and siaking; — but bow far? O 
there are attaionients in holy love which we have no' 
yet made I May we sink, and sink, and sink, and so 
get out of ihe sight and iaQuence of the world, and 
out of the reach of the devil, 

"My little room still wiloesses the maoifestations 
of God in melting my soul into lore and tenderness ; 
so that in testimony of his favor I tell you that I «ni 
on my journey. Christ, as King, reigns on the throne 
of my heart. I have a consciousness of reconciliatiou, 
and am waiting for an unction from the Holy One, 
more and more to stnk me into the ocean. God ia 
LovB. 

"Having been feasted at the rich banquets of our 
Lord, we long to see a multitude cotne and possess 
mote than we have enjoyed. O, when shall the sons 
of Le«i — when shall ministers of the Gospel be more 
holy ; — when shall the church, at a body, put on this 
beautiful garmenti 

" Are there those with you, who ' hunger and thirst 
after righteous ness V May they expect to ' bellied;' 
and not linger, but eat of the bread of life, and drink 
of the wells of salvation, till tatiafied. 

" How sweet a frame is this: to have the simple 
language of the soul — more love — enlarge the vessel, 
and give me more— more faith— more meekness — mote 

BOLINESS. 

" Day by day, may our souls test under the smiles 
of our Father God, and God the Son. May Jesus 
breathe on us, and say, ' Receive ye the Holy Ghost ;< 
and feeling that our bodies are his temples, may we 
keep them under — walk as becometh saints — as chil- 



lUaa BHAIKEBD TATLOR. 255 

(Iren of the day and not of the night. Be it ours io all 
things to keep consciences void of offence. To do this, 
we may often give offence lo man, but in the sight of 
heaven we shall be harmless as doves. 

" Soon -we shall be done with things below. Till 
then, we gball be sheep — pilgrims — soldiers ; sheep in 
the midst of wolves — pilgrims through a wilderness to 
a city out of sight — and soldien for the Lord of hosts. 
Let us then feed by our Savior's side, who as the 
good Shepherd cares for his sheep. Let us run and 
not be weary— let us fight and conquer. Then comes 
the crown: in company with my cousin I expect to 
wear it. 

" My mind is intent upon the work before me. Strive 
with me in your prayers, that 1 may receive a com- 
mission from the Lord, as well as from man, by being 
filled with the Holy Ghost. 

" As ever, your affectionate cousin, 

"jAMEa B, Taylob." 

To Miss W . 

" iVojuu fbU, Dee. 30, t8H. 

"Remembering your injunction not to forget the New, 
Tear's tetter, I again wish you, in anticipation, a hap- 
py New Year. 

" At the close of a year, the thought naturally arises, 
how many, who started with us at the commencement 
of this year, are do more in the land of the livingt 
And the prospect of as many dying the year just 
■bout to begin, is as serious as the fact that thousands 
bsre follen into their graves— appeared before their 



356 MEUOiR or 

Judge— niDk to bell, ot been raised lo henrcn daringihe 
past year. Among those who shall yield lo the de- 
•troyer before the close of the next year, we may be 
numbered. 

" Reriewiog the past year, 1 find ii fraught witli 
blessings lemponil and spiritual. I hare just left pe- 
nisins; ihe records of God's goodness to me— and could 
1 tell you all, you would say with me, ' that men would 
praise the Lord for his goodness, snd for his wonder- 
ful works to the children of men.' But 1 wit) not at- 
tempt a narration. Su£Sce it to say, I am under in- 
finite obligations to loTe God more tban ever. And I 
hope you will still strive with me in your prayers to 
God for me, for an increase of faith, hope, love joy, 
meekness, humbleness of mind, holy zeal, and boldness 
for God. 

" 1 should rejoice to have an hour's interview with 
you, as in former days, to hear you tell of ilie loving- 
kindness of the Lord. But it is unapcababie and full 
of glory. It is with you aa with some others, who can 
look forward to another world as a place to recount 
alt. What awaits us on Zion's hill, I leave for you to 
imagine. And may your soul get /urtfcer within the 
veil, and nearitr to the throne of love. 
^ "As usual, I suppose you are in the midst of gayety 
ind fashion. Do you &nd those professors, whose 
minds are taken op with outward ornament, best deco- 
rated within, I suppose you conclude with me, that 
a clean heart seeks the ornament of a meek and quiet 
spirit, which is so honorable in the sight of God, and 
so esteemed by the holy, rather than the embellish- 
ments of art which man honors 1 

" Miss W. every day's obaervatiou convinces me 



tJJOt nAtHEBD TIYLOB. 197 

more BDdmorelhat pietria not always connected with 
a profciBion. It costs but little (in this world) to ba 
aaited in form to Ood's people. In another, the tiypo- 
crite will find that he has been playing the fool with 
his soul at a dear rale. While others trust in forms, 
may we have the power of godliness. While some 
Rhare only io the name, be it ours to possess the vir- 
(ae of Christians — Christians justified and sanctified. 
While others feed on husks, may we eat the true bread. 
While others grasp at golden ore, and are unsatisfied 
let as obtain the true riches. 

" As this may be our last year, we should be excited 
to do our utmost for our Master. How many are around 
us that we can benefit? We still live, and they are 
on the footstool of mercy. What we wonld do for them 
and for ourtehet must be done quickly. I heard of 
the death of one of late, which caoaed me to ask, 
could not 1 hare done something for him 7 But he is 
gone. 

" Who can tell but some one of the yonng ladies of 
your household shall be followed to (he grare ere the 
close of the nest year 7 I know you wishto meet them 
at the right band of the Judge ; but are tbey anxious 
to meet you there 1 There is danger, it seems to me, 
danger of their retaining their unregenerated hearts, 
and carrying them to the bar of God. And who ever 
returned to tell ua (hat an impenitent siimer erer got 
rid of his wicked heart, after passing the threshold of 
eternity 7 Ah ! bis once proffered Friend is now his 
enemy — his state is fixed— he is lost — he is damned 
for ever ! 

" A word to the young ladies. The yeat that is 
gone haa witnessed the long-suffering patience of Ood 



2SS MEMOIR OF 

to hb ; while others are heyoDd ho^, ve ue still pti- 
aoners of hope. The opporTaoity is offered us to flee 
to the Strang hold— even to Christ. Commencing b 
new era of time, would it not be well to secure the 
faror of the Most High, and let future days or years 
bear witness to your allegisDce to the King of hingsl 
In answering this question, take into consideration 
the need yoa will have of Christ in the solemn scene* 
of the death-bed, the grave, and the judgment. 

" Bat, MiiB W. farewell ! A Christian salutation 
to the friends of Christ. Affectionately yonn, 

" Jah£B B. Tatlob." 

Diary. — " Awoke this momiog with a heaTenly 
■weetnesi, and tooh my usual walk as it began to 
dawn. Endeavored to follow Christ in his humilia- 
tion. This passage has been of comfort to medunog 
the disturbance in college, and I have considered it a 
stronger defence than a. wall. ' Whoso hearkenMh 
unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from 
the fear of evil." " 

As Mr. Taylor closed the former year, so, with the 
spirit of genuine piety, he began the new year with 
Qod. Perhaps no man more strictly complied with 
the injunction, " In all thy ways acknowledge him;" 
and none seemed more confidently to expect tha ful- 
fillment of the promise, " He shall direct thy paths." 
The commencement of his diary for this year is an in- 
teresting and instructiTe exhibition of his obedience 
and failh in this respect 

" Jan. 1 18S5.— That anotbcr ytmi hw loUed any 



JAUEa BHAIHEIID TATLOB. Sfi9 

is to me no matteT of ngteL Id time, and beyond time, 
it will be remembered as a season of disiiDguisbing 
mercy. Thanks to the good Sticpherd for ' the green 
pastures ' of the past year : to my heavenly Father, for 
his imiles: my Comforter, for his presence. 

" What will occur ibis year is hid from mortal man. 
But O, it is in the mind of the omniscient God. And 
this God is my God, to whom 1 am willing to refer 
all, boiii for myself and others. That he is on the 
throne, is enough for me. And his glory he will not 
give to another. 

" Direct me, O Lord, in the right way. Lead me 
in a plain path all paved with love — the path that 
leadeth upward, and leacheth the land of rest — the 
way of holiness — the King's highway. 

" I believe there are richer blessings in itore for 
me ; if not on earth, in heaven. And the Lord's will 
being done, it is not a matter of mnch concern to me 
whether on earth or in heaven. But should my life 
be spared thisyear also,mBy my soul sink — and sink — 
and sink into God, day by day. Then I shall groir in 
grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus — deny 
myself, take up my cross, and follow Christ — live to 
God~be a light in the world— salt of the earth— wise 
as a serpent, harmless as a dove- spiritual, and not 
carnal. 

" O that the lives of my relatives who are not yet 
for God, might be spared, to repeat this year, and come 
to Christ; that my friends, who love the Lord, may 
lioDor him more, by bringing forth much fruit. May 
this year be a favored season for Zion. 

" Lord, increase piety in the waichmen. Make the 
nodei-ahephenls careful of the flock. Hay the flock 



aeo iiBUQim or 

bepuriGed. Let souU be joined to the Lord in ihon' 
(audi. Prepare candidates for the holf ministry for 
ibeir office. Make all itial come after more holy and 
lelf-denyiog than those who have goue before. Pre- 
pare me eminently lo win souls to Christ, and build up 
the church. This is all I ask in this world in rcgari) to 
my relation to sinners. For thee would I labor; for 
thee, O Christ, would 1 die, rather tban be a hinder- 
ance to thy cause. But here I am ; do with me as 
seemeth good in thy sight. Thy will be done." 

To Re». Mr. S . 

" I must tell yon that the time passes, for the most 
part, sweetly, peacefully, and sometimes with joy and 
ezuliation. Perhaps, since I have been in college, I 
have not enjoyed more steadily the presence of our 
Lord than I do now. My studies are mote agreeablt, 
and my engagements are so regular, that 1 forget the 
day of the month, and sometimes hare to panse for 
the day of the week. Come and interrupt me. I say 
come, if the Lord will. However glad 1 should be to 
eee my brother, more happy would I be to have him, 
even from me, in the pathway of duty. Eternity is 
before us. Id time we may yet spend happy dafs to- 
gether. Beyond lime, we will hope to sit down toge- 
ther in the kingdom of God. And though 1 would 
not be light on so sacred a theme, will you not, then, 
introduce me to some whom, under God, you have 
sent thtiher 7 With what double ardor should we raise 
our sails and ply our oars ! Are you not among the 
*r»ftT« of Jesus Christ— a rowtr-miDister. (1 Cor. 
4 ; J.) May the Captaia direct your coune. IStf 



JAHU BBURSIID TATLOS. S61 

joa keep a good look-out— run ctesT— ship toultiiudes 
— enter the haven fully lad«u — cast anchor and be 
safely moored for ever. Pray that I also, with wide- 
spread sail, may be wafted over to the heavenly port, 
the New Jerusalem. The good Spirit blow upon and 
fill OUT sails." 

Diary. " Jan. 13. — ' His loving-kindness, O how 
great !' Have just risen from the floor, where my peace 
was like a river. I longed for more of God ; for a 
Eoitable preparation for the work of an evangelist. I 
fell myself a worm, and no man ; but, blessed be the 
Lord, I am in his hands. Here would I lie, and wait 
and long for his direction from day to day. I love the 
uutb, and long to be more and more sanctified through 
it. Praise the Lord for holiness— Tor a clean heart. 
May I keep myself in the love of God. 

" 16th,— The past week— this is Sabbath— has been 
ftaught with loving -kindness and lender mercy — and 
base ingratitude. After the rich blessing of last Thurs 
day, my spirit, before morning, was shorn of its 
strength, by what has so often shrouded my son! in 
darkness. But the Lord heated my backsliding. ' If 
any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father ;' 
and ' if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to 
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrigh- 
teousness.' He brought me to exercise confidence in 
God, and my soul was restored. Alas ! that I should 
leave the Lord and wander from the fountain. Make 
me. Lord, to know wisdom from my past falls, and 
may I set a double watch and repel my foes. Blessed 
be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only doeth 
wondrous things; and blessed be his holy name foi 



ever. Had, belweeo ten and eteveo o'clock A. M. a 
blessing of blessings. Took up ibe Memoirs of the 
dear Brainerd, and followed him through part of his 
last sickness. When I came to his interview with a 
clergyman concerning ihe great importance of the 
work of the ministry, mjr heart broke; it had heaved 
before, but now it melted and overflowed with unut- 
terable emotions, while floods of tears ran down mine 
eyes. The importance of the work increased in my 
apprehension, while, in my own view, I was but & 
worm, and no man ; yet I longed to preach the Gos- 
pel ; I thirsted to labor in God's vineyard; to be an 
under-shepherd was my only desire ; and the thought 
of ever relinquishing the glorions object increased stilt 
more my emotions, while my place seemed to be in 
the dull — nay, ii justice should take its course, the 
lowest bell. 

" Here I felt such an exercise as 1 am not conscious 
of having ever eiperienced before — a rising of sout to 
God ; and being filled with love, until I yielded myself 
up entirely to his disposal, to live or die, labor or not, 
I fell before God, and acknowledged his blessing with 
thanksgiving. 

" 1 soon repaired to the hall for worship. Had not 
been seated long before a heavenly breeze waHed my 
soul to higher communion with God. Never till then 
did I so feel the import of the pnssage, ' I am sick of 
love.' The sermon was attended with power to my 
soul. Thank the Lord for so faithful a servant as the 
preacher appeared to be. He seemed to be one who 
had drank at the fountain of holiness, and lived on an- 
gel's food ; hence I came away with the convictioB 
ibu holineat — &oItn«M, is thegrand aecretof eflectnat 



JAMES BBAJHEBD TIVLOR. 88S 

[HWchiDg. Upon this point my mind has been much 
escTciaed lately ; and I bless God ibai 1 am becomiojc 
more ftnd more cooformed to him. The thought was 
euggested, ' What will you do wliea you become a 
preacher? You will not be flueni.' My answer wos, 
ut which I take courage, ' Id the Lord have I righte- ' 
ouaneas and strength;' and I charged myself itot to 
feu, for tbe Lord is my light and my ulvation. No : 
I have nought to fear but offending God. I may take 
ctnirage: onward let me go, 'redeeming the lime,' 
Jiving as becometh one whom the I^rd thus favor*. 
How much depression and gloom rested upon Brain- 
erd— none upon me. I hardly know what it is. Health 
of body too is mine. O to lay il all out for God ! 

" 17th. — Since Sabbath 1 have, for the most part, en- 
joyed a sweel savor of divine things ; but this evening 
the Lord has come of a truth, to deepen his work in 
my soul. The effect seemed to be 



Incense bad been burning through tbe day. My will- 
ing soul looked upward. I longed for a deepening of 
the work of grace. Peace, in steady stream, glided me 
along; but my soul thirsted for God, for the living 
God. Sat down and opened the word, and read, 'Jesus 
stood and cried, If any man thirst, let him come unto 
me and drink.' Jesus 1 O, at that name what emotions 
arose; his loveliness; his condescension. My soul 
melted, and was filled with love. 

" What most occupied my miod, was my anticipated 
office. 1 it is more and more magnified in my view. 
.And as it gathers gieattiess, 1 long for the best qoali- 



864 UEHoiK or 

Itcaiion for it — bolioess. More of late ihao fonnerlj 
does this subjeci call forlh strong cries and tears, t 
now feel in my soul, ' Who is sufficient for these 
ibingd'?' Shall I be lefl to prove a drone among th« 
church's watchmen ? Shall I live as I see matty mi> 
oisters live? Forbid it, Lord. They are cipAers when 
they ought to be thouEandi. And what lukewarmness 
—what apathy — what wotldly-mindedaeas, pervade 
candidate for the ministry ! 

"How I longed for full preparation for the work; 
and of the kind the Lord would have me possessed of. 
And rather than live to prove a curse to the church, 
by being a mercenary — worldly — and thus, a aoul- 
damning minister, I would now be removed. But the 
great Head of the church is breathing on me from time 
to time. He gives me the holy anointing; he sends 
sweet longings for his glory — holy jealousy for his 
honor. On him let me still lean and cast every care. 
Then 1 fell willing to relinquish all for Christ, to go 
any where, and to be any thing for hira. And he 
showed me his countenance, and my strength wu 
renewed. 

" Sitting under the word this evening, honey from 
the rock dropped upon me. O, how good ! The rest 
is already begun— the earnest is given— it is witbri. 
If I should say, I know him not, I should lie, and do 
not the truth ; for I feel that I know God and his Son 
Jesus Christ, and am known of him. 0, when shall I 
see him as he is? When shall £ from earth away? 
' O, glorious hour 1' 1 am expecting his chariot; yet 
my prevailing preference is, if the will of the Lord be 
so, 10 live and do the work of an evangelitt, and mtk« 
full proof of my ministry ; and then there will be an 



eternity still. The will of the Lord be done. The 
kiD^dom is hia— the work is hia— and the gloiy is his. 
Ameo, and amen." 

To a youn;; Cbristian : 

" Soon a year will have gone by since that evening 
when you thought you ' determined to know nothing 
save Jesus Christ and him crucified.' Has the before 
barren fig-tree brought forth fruit corredponding with 
the t ran spUn ting and cjltivation? Once in the barren 
toil of the world — now in the garden of God ; once as 
a sheep going astray — but now returned unto the Shep- 
herd and Bishop of souls. Can the world bring in their 
testimony that you laid out yourself more in unrighte- 
ousness than the people of God can that you spend 
yourself in holy living? Asa tree planted by the riTer 
side — as a sheep in green pastures — as the son at its 
meridian — so you should bring forth fruit a hundred- 
fold. Always abound in spiritual health, and shine re- 
splendently in youi^e very -day walk 

" I hare before me some mottos, and I v 
wsribe ihecn for you : 

' Wbaterei jmi do, do it for OmL' 
For thee, l^ord, for thae.' 
Iidiii lawful t* 



I will add another — 

'Ho« will (Au appear tome on mfdf lag bedr 
When M^ht is presented, (o be, to do, or to «tt^r, 



B66 UGHOiB or 

we may appljr these tuU as ii| die light of God's 
word, and ia view of ihe retalioas we sustain to hio, 

10 the church, and lo the world, and decide. 

" Ever retiring, tubmittive, mild, let us act the 
part of little children, and so carry about wilh us the 
spirit of Jesus, whose ptaa of beneTolence, haviiig been 
devised, is now goiog on in its accomplishment In the 
temple that is going up on the foaadation rock Christ 
Jesus, let us try, by co-working with God, to have ai 
least one nail in the building. 

" Wilh earnest desire that you may be holy, hanu- 
less, undedled, and thus Chritt-likt, I say, press for- 
ward, and as you go onward, look tep-aiard." 

Diary. "Jan. 23. 

' Lot* divine, all lava escvUiag.' 

" This has been a high day to me. The Lord of the 
Sabbath has remembered me for good ; and I praise 
bis name. But how shall I record his visits of love 1 
They surpass ray powers of description. There is a 
certain something which is knovra only to those who 
hare felt the same, that requires a higher language 
than miae to express. 

" The exercises in the hall ^ere profitable. My soul 
was drawn out in prayer for a fitness for the work of 
God in his vineyard, and melted with longings, not 

only for myself, but for brother M , that God would 

make us emineoily meet to do his wilL 

'■ After preparing for Bible recitation, took the Me- 
moirs of Whitefield and read of his being a blessing 
lobuoisters, &c. when a thought crossed my mind, 



lAMEB BBAINERO TAVLOR. S67 

which was as an arrow dipped in poison. When I 
came to analyze ii, it appeared to amount to this . 
' What is the use of attiring to win aoals 7 you will 
never gain as many as he did.' The efiect was (for it 
seems I gave place to the devil) the removal of that 
ardent tliitst for preparation which I felt before. I look 
the atanii and chided myself— fell before the Lord, 
and acknowledged ell ; and 1 felt that that sinful 
thought was enough to separate me from the love and 
favor of God for ever — I could urge do plea, but the 
once-B offering, bleeding, dying Savior; and through 
him I could discern that the Lord bad only forsaken 
me in a tittle wrath, and that with everlasting kind- 
ness he would draw me- My heart melted a little ; 
and then I could recollect with thankful remem- 
brance the blessing with which I was visited, two 
years and nine months ago, about the hour I was then 
before the Lord. As yet, the longing to preach the 
Qospel, and anxiety for fmitfulneas, and solicitude for 
full preparation, had not re-entered my heart, nor did 
I know that they would ever return again. I felt that 
I did not deserve this grace ; and that God was under 
no obligation to bestow it — and that it was my follr 
that had brought me into this condition. Here I ven- 
tured to ask (he Lord his will concerning me; and 
that if it were his will that I should possess zeal for 
his glory and a longing desire to preach the Gospel, 
he would then show it me. I looked, and waited, and 
prayed — and the answer came, and ina measure which 
perhaps 1 never felt before — all else seemed vain. O 
the heavings of my inmost soul to be tliia one thing, 
ru. an under-ahepherd. Then the inquiry arose: Lord, 
shall I ever preach the Gospel? Lord, am I a chosen 



KB MGHOtB OP 

vMsel 1 Whether it waa «n answer or not, I took it to 
be such, and in the affirtuatire. I feel willing to liTe 
a hundred years on earth, if I might work for God 
and bring soula lo Christ, and then hare nothing di- 
miniihed froiD etebnitt. O who would not live a 
thousand years, if it were the wilt of Goil Let me 
b« no more anxious about living or dying; but let roe 
lire unto the Lord, that when 1 die, 1 may die unto the 

" From the experience of to-day, learn, my sonl, 
ever to apply to the fountain as soon as a stain is con- 
tracted, and with double earnestness. Rather learn to 
lire so neat as to drink for the keeping away all ma- 
ladies, and for constant refreshing. 

" 27th. — Last week was invited to attend a party, 
but had no inclination to comply — no, my soul waa 
too much set on heavenly, lo desire the earthly enter' 
tainment; and so long as eternal things are pressing 
upon me, 1 think I shall itnd no lime lo devote to the 
gay circle. Instead of mingling with that circle, was 
celled to speak for my Lord to a company of females. 
The Lord melted some of the audience, and I have 
now returned from seeing one who felt the word spo- 
ken. Endeavored to be faiihful to a student of theo- 
logy who called on me. Alas ! at how low an ebb is 
piety among candidates for the ministry ! Lord, save 
me from the contagioD. He raade a long acknowledg- 
ment of his coldness, but at the same time mingled 
with it many faahionahle excuses. He did not tan^ 
long. I pressed him to da his duly, and come out and 
live for God. May conviction drive him to bis closet 
and to his knees, until be find the reviving influenees 
of the Spirit. 



JJLMES BBAIXERD TATLOK, 909 

"Endeavored to aTouse two fellow-gtndeDts tomora 
life — alas t for professors of Teligion here. 

" 284h. — Spent pan of last ereDing in visiting the 
poor with brother -^. One poor old colored man, 
whom we found in deep kappy poverty, seemed near 
to the kingdom of heaven. He said, among other 
things, that he bad rather be as he was, with Jesus in 
his soul, tban to be a king upon a throne. 

" At evening devotion, read a pari of the last chap- 
ter of John. To the question, ' Lovest thoD me V I 
could appeal to the Lord with melting of soul. Hen- 
ry's remarks were profitable. I felt before the throne, 
and had a longing for souls— I thirsted to bring souls 
to Christ. I groaned to win souls, and almost with 
agoity pleaded to hare souls for my hire. I think I 
felt willing to lay out my life for souls. Money is not 
what 1 desire. Souls, souls, I want souls. ' Give me 
children,' was my cry, and 1 wept with desire to say 
at last, ' Here am 1, Lord, and the children ihou hast 
given me.' 

" I left my plea before the Lord for the coming Sab- 
bath, when 1 expect to go out to my little meeting — 
may preparation for the seed be made by some fore- 
runner — may the seed be sowed skillfully, sink deep, 
Uke root, and spring up, and bear fruit. 

" Feb. 7. — On Friday concluded on a subject for 
Saturday night, on which to speak to tbe congregation 
that expected me. Went and delivered my message, 
after a rich visitation from God, st evening devotion j 
and it proved a message of Ood to souls. Yesterday 
was the Sabbath, and it was a day of rest to me, al- 
(Iwtigh 1 labored for God. Anticipating my meeting 
in the afiemoon and evenmg, I committed my cause 



370 MBUOtB OP 

10 God. Haviny come from worship ia the hall, I 
mused, and the lire biuned — 1 waited upon God, and 
he heard my prayer. Haviog returned from dinner, I 
again proBiiated myself before Gud, and felt lees than 
the lea»t — the unworlbiest of ihe unworthy : ibinking 
upon my subject as it wu prepared, I concluded it 
was good for notbing, unless accompanied by ihe Spi- 
rit to Ihe hearts of the people. I wrestled with God for 
a blessing. 1 was burtheaed with a desire that could 
not be uttered for the coming of the Ijord. I felt ud- 
worthy to go out to Ihe people, yet panted to speak 
for God. I thirsted, I drank ; I hungered, and was 
JiUedi then took my staff and traveled on, and met 
the people. It was a beart-seaichiog time, as one tn- 
gagtd Christian testified to me this morning. The 
Lord follow it with his blessing. 

" Walked to attend another meeting abont three 
miles distant, where there seemed still deeper solem- 
luly, and where I was greatly helped. *0 Lord, how 
manifold is thy goodncsa to thy serrant !' 'I'll try to 
prove faithful' Felt happy in God, aAer the exercise 
of the day, although fatigued in body. 

" To-day has brought with it a trial. A repeated 
request reached me that I would leave college for a sea- 
son, and become a ' yoke-fellow ' with brother S., now 
laboring at Spiiogfield in New-Jersey, and where souls 
are joining themselfes to the Lord. Arguments, both 
in favor and against it, arise in my mind. I commit- 
ted myself and the decision as well as 1 conld into 
God's hands. My heart went np to the great Head of 
the church — the question arose, why here constructing 
a triangle, when souls may be perishing? My bent 
melted and my eyes ran down with tears. 



JAHE8 BItAINBBD TATLOR. 271 

"At evening devotion I fell before the Lord, and 
called upon God my heavenly Father. But my peti- 
tion could not find utterance. 1 only wanted to know 
the will of the Lord concerning me. This passage 
entered my mind, 'Be still, and know that lam God:' 
also, 'Commit thy way tmto the Lord — acknowledge 
him in all thy ways ; and he shall direct thy paths.' 
My tears were diied up. Afler petitioning in behalf 
of brother S. and the lambs around him, my father's 
house and friends, I arose to praise the Lord. I was 
only desirous to know his will ; and I trust in him to 
make the way plain. I felt willing either to stay or 
go at his command. If I find the door to open wide, 
so as to let me pass out, I shall consider it a call of God 
to go: if not, I remain to do his will here. 'Praise the 
Lord, O my soul.' 

"I knew not, nor do I know now, what I should do 
if I Avent, but 1 felt willing to do any thing to help on 
the work of God. 

"8th. It is decided. Dr. C.'s negative puts it out of 

my power to leave college. Wrote brother S ; 

may my letter refresh his spirit. Had an interview 
with an aged brother, who is a man full of faith and 
of the Holy Ghost. He refreshed my soul. O for a 
host of such pilgrims." 

In the letter to Rev. Mr. S., afier giving an Bccounl 
of his Btru^le between inclination and duty, he thni 



" Since Ae decision, I do not rebel ; -but consider it 
all for the best. 1 would gladly have become your 
helpet — but enough — I acquiesce. 



STS HEHOtR OF 

" Of late I have receired large blessings froni God. 
1 think 1 hare been more in the school of ChTisl lUs 
■essiou than em before. And I bare never had such 
evidences of being called of God lo spend far him — new 
such breaking of souls to do the work of ao eTangelist. 
Yes; I hare fell desiroug to live only to bring souls to 
Christ. I hare been Rlrengthened of the Lord to bear 
leilimony both to saints and sinners— and the Lord 
has owned the word. Direct effort is against wind 
and tide. And besides, a student's influence is too 
cheap where they abound. I long to see more dero- 
tedness among the stitdenta of the theological semina- 
ry. Every third Sabbath I attend a meeting three mile* 
distant, and generally once or twice a week I talk in 
town. Every tiling goes on pleasantly ; I spend my 
time with but few, except the indigent, the inquiring, 
and engaged Christians. Yet I am nothing but a sin- 
ner saved by grace. But this one thing I know, that 
'God is love'— thatl love God, and am loved of him; 
and should I deny it, I should deny the clearest de- 
monslnlion ever made to my taith and feelings. 'All 
praise to Him that sitteth on the throne.'" 

To the Rev. Mr. H., Mr. Taylor wrote on the 13th 
February, as follows; 

" That which has mostly occupied my mind this ses- 
sion, is a due preparation for the Oospel ministry. 
While 1 have given literary acquirements their duft 
tk6 be»t giftg have been earnestly coveted. My call of 
God has appeared to me more and more clear, and mj 
soul has burned with desire to win souls to Christ 
For ihit, and this alone, I hare wished to live, and 
to accomplish this I have felt willing to live a thoa- 



iAHES BRAINEBD TXyLOR. 273 

und rears. I have longed to tire and preach the Qua- 
pel ; and 1 fell that God waa either anoinling me for 
tab work on eaiih, or for a speedier flight to heaven. 
While willing to depart and be with Christ, I still 
strongly desired to preach the Gospel. At the same 
time, rather than go out without the approhation of the 
great Head of preachers, 1 would retire in silence, 
weep in secret, and there wait my appointed change. 

" On a certain occasion — let me tell you — on a cer- 
tain occasion, when, in answer to my prayer, the hea- 
rens were opened and let down ' peace like a river ' — 
1 left this solicitude to preach the Gospel remaining, 
and yet feared that t might not. Like a little child, I 
looked up and said, Father, am I a chosen vessel to 
preach the Gospel 1 My dear friend, whether it was 
an answer in the affirmative or not, judge thou ; but 
at that moment there came over me what I must 
leave to another world to furnish a name for. I was 
no more solicitous, not have 1 been since, whether I 
should live to preach the Gospel or not. 

" I feel that 1 have been in the school of Christ 
wherelnowBin: 1. as a Probationer. Thuswetethe 
disciples, before they were commissioned and sent out 
to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. While with 
Christ, their conduct was held up to the world — to 
angels— before the Lord himself. They were proved. 
1 Tim. 3 : 10. 

"2. I am in the act of preparing. The disciples 
went through a training. Tliey were brought up at the 
feet of the great Teacher in Israel, whose perfect ex- 
ample was proposed for their imitation. They were 
his intimates loo, and held communion with him. And 
be taught them lesions in theology, upon which, as a 



274 MEUOIK OP 

bkiis, all tlic DiJDisler'i furniture should rest; fot it 
ihe superstructure be not on thia Back, vha will in- 
sure it in the div of God's wratlil The apostles m- 
eeived a commission to go out for s season ; and this 
■eemed as a Irial and prepaTalion too. At length, in 
Christ's lasreommand, tbey received more power, bdi) 
bad a broader seal. Ood giant that that day, to whieb 
I am looking forward, may be as the day of my ta- 

" Like the apostles, I go out from time to time, every 
third Sabbath regularly, and frequently during the in- 
terval, locall lost sinners lorepentance. Last evening 
1 met a few anxious souls— plesd for me— plead for 



Diary. " Feb. 15.— Will God sanctify me to himself 
more than ever? Oto live — to labor — to spend all fot 
God. Help, Lord, help thy servant, 'whom thou bast 
redeemed to tliyaelf by thy precious blood.' 

"27th.— 'How amiable are thy labetnncles, O Lord 
of hosts !' Thus 1 found them this morning. My soul 
went out for the preacher, and be came with a message 
for me — I was blessed indeed. Through most of the 
sermon 1 could witness in my toul to the tnUh de- 
livered. My heart leaped within me for joy. Thus 
this day has been to me a day of gladness. By and by 
I hope to rest above. 

"March 5, — To-day I trust salvation has visited 
this college. A young man, in whom I have taken a 
lively interest ever since he joined us- who has been 
led a^vay contrary to my advice, but whom 1 have 
followed with the truth notwithstanding hisvicee, baa 
professed ho\K of eternal life. Thank the Lord, if I 



JUIEB BtAINEIID TITLOH. £75 

fa&ve been in anf way the mevu o( bringing him to 
Christ. This, he aays, is the case. This, with sonte 
tases in town, seems to be an interpretation of mjf de- 
testian from Springfield. , 

"March 10.— Returned from meelJDg the little band 
at anxious soals, where 1 found two of our number 
who professed hope. One seemed full of peace and 
joy. O what a change every way.' Others present 
to-night, seemed near to the kingdom ; but they are 
far off till they submit. Not one word of consolation 
has been offered in these cases, but I proceed with 
ibem as with others; 1. To induce the sinner to com- 
mit himself on the subject of religion. 2. When thus 
ccmmitted, to show him the awful responsibitily rest- 
ing upon bim, and the great danger of delay. 3. Show 
h'un his sins against the taw. 4. Urging, by Gospel 
motives, immediate submission — showing that God 
pats no barrier in the way of the sinner's coming to 
Christ, but that the obstacles are wholly in himself. 
5. That be grows worse erery hour he rebels against 
God. One thing particularly recommended was, be- 
ing alone. This course has been attended with a 
blessing. Trembling has seized some, and the con- 
sequence is, they justify God and condemn them- 
telves." 

In the following letter Mr. Taylor appears in a 
light most commendable and worthy of remembrance 



" Nasiaa HaU, MarA 9, IBSb, 

" Having a little time this morning, I cheerfully de- 
vote it to telling you of my afiairs. 



S7G " HtMOIH OF 

" I ftm neftrir recovered from ■ heavy cold whicta 
confined me to ray room for a few days. The 'light 
affliction' has been Eaniitified. 

" You are now looking out for your children's pre- 
sence — waiting to give them a cordial leception inln 
your new mansion, la times past we have bailed 
each othec with grateful emotions. The time befoi« 
the last, what a melting season we bad before tfaa 
family altar, soon after our unlled salutations. And 
how many seasons of refreshing have we enjoyed 
while we have conversed, and sung, and prayed, and 
wept together? 1 long to see your faces again, and 
again tell, and hear you tell, of the loTiDg-kindneas 
of the Lord. Again do 1 long to sit and kneel beside 
that father who has watched with anxious aolicitade 
over the wandering foot-steps of a once unruly son. 
Again do I long to sit and kneel beside that motber 
whose fostering band hath raised a child for the world 
—for the church— for God— for heaven. Yes, my dear 
parents, I long to see your faces, and be together bless- 
ed by our heavenly Father. Well, shall I ? Shall my 
friends be gratified 1 

"You will remember, that when at home last, 1 left 
you for a short lime, and again returned ; when yon 
concluded, from a combinHtioo of circumstances, that 
I ought to return again to Colchester. You bade me 
■ God speed,' for you believed that it was his will that 
I should go. . Did you ever regret your decision 1 
And have you not, even in praying for me, asked witb 
this petition, ' Thy will be doneT Then you are pre- 
pared to let the Lord and his church have me, instead 
of having me yourselves. You will endure the disap- 
pointment for Christ's sake, and pray forme the more, 



tiMEB lilAmEHD TAYLOR. 3T7 

M»j this erennore be your disposition. You ha*(! 
giren me up to Qod by frequent sunendets. Now yoii 
will not take me back again. No, you would not take 
me out of his hands. You would not take me from his 
disposal, if you could. Rather would you say, should 
we never more see our ton James, the Lord lead him 
— the Lord use him — the Lord be glorified by and ' 
through him. 

" It is probable you will not see me the ensuing va- 
cation; andfor several reasons: not because 1 cannot 
cross the rivers and hills that intervene', not because 
I am straitened in circumstances ; not because I want 
affection ; no ; but because a Macedonian cry seems 
10 come from another quarter. My friend Mr. S. has 
writen me thrice, and as often urged me to leave col- 
lege and go to his aid. He wished me to become his 
' yoke-fellow ' for a season. He is now waiting im- 
patiently for my arrival. I did not leave college. To- 
day I have received a verba! request from him. 

" The Lord is blessing his labors, and be wishes me 
to be with him: I may say it to you, but not to every 
one, he has such confidence in me as to make me his 
companion. By associating with him during vacation, 
1 may learn many important lessons, which, if I visited 
Middle Haddam, might be for ever Utit to me and to 
the church. This region seems to be the harvest-field 
at present. Laborers are wanted. I am drawn to him. 
Were 1 to go to Connecticut with my present convtc- 
liotu of duty, I should be unhappy. Thus, with all 
the affection of an affectionate son, I have now to 
leave father and mother, brothers and sisters, and go 
Jbrth. My own inclination would be to see you ; but 
Car Christ's sake 1 must leave all and fallow him. 
24 1. B. Twiw. 



&78 HEHom or 

" From these considerations, while you are dLnp- 
pointed do not munnar, but pray the more for me. 
You ha»e encouragement to pray for me and my suc- 
cess. The Lord baih already heard you. He haih 
' prospered me. 

"During the present session, God ^ath been with 
me, nod blessed me, and made me a blessing. Brother 
F. will lell you of the conversion of five souls over 
whom I have rejoiced. Praise the Lord for his good- 
ness. The Lord bless my father and mother. 

"As ever, your affectionate son, Jakeh." 
" To a Friend. 

"JMoriAW, 1835. 

" You speak of ministers' dying. How mighty their 
responsibility I How awful the account of the un- 
godly minister ! I have feit of late, willing to live a 
long life to be a co-worker with God. When 1 look 
around upon candidates for the holy ministry, what 
shall I say ) The Lord answer the prayer of his hand- 
maid. ' May you indeed be an exception from many, 
who, in preparation for the glorious work before them, 
lose tbeir ardor, which, as laborers in Christ's rine- 
yard, they particularly need.' I doubt not but this will 
be your o[t repealed and continued prayer for me. 

" The reason, in my humble opinion, wby profet- 
sors of religion in our colleges and tbeological semi- 
naries are not more alive to God, is either, 1st, because, 
if they brought Christ with them when they came, 
they have not been careful to walk in him as they hsd 
received him, and so have stepped aside, and were im- 
mediately out of the way ; or, 2d, if they bad Christ 
in them the hope of glory, and dethroned bim, if I may 



lAMSB BRAMERD TATLOR- 279 

•o speak, they have not been engaged to enthrone him 
■gain ; or, 3d, and most of all, because, notwilhslsLd- 
ing iheit name to live, they are still, as they have ever 
been, dead — nay, twice dead in trespasses and sins. 

" I know you take an interest in my prosperity. And 
10 encourage you still lo pray, I can tell you, I do proa- 
•per. God proapere me. The right hand of God w 
etreicked oat for me, and victory turtia on hit aide — 
on my aide — on our wide — yea, the Lord it for ii*. 

" ' Not of myself, but of the grace of God bestowed, 
upon me, I will glory ; not of myself, but of the grace 
of God in me I will glory.' And if, by that grace upon 
and in me, good halb been done to others, let the Au- 
thor be magnified. Atid 1 -will hope to be blessed with 
the blessedness of one who, though under God he may 
have turned one sinner from the error of his ways, yet 
is ready to own himself an unprofitable servant. 

" April 2, 18S5.~ Yesterday was much indisposed— 
mused upon my state — thought that soon 1 should be 
«old in the grave, and that possibly the present indis- 
position might terminate in death. This passage oc- 
curred : ' Set thy house in order.' 1 felt that I wanted 
one piece of furniture — a broken, a pure heart. Blessed 
be God, he gave me what I wanted. 1 felt that I was 
cleansed — that my house 'was in order — that I was 
ready, meet, on my way to glory. 1 had a spirit of 
prayer for the lambs of my little fold. Whatever he- 
came of me, I desired for them a holy life. They 
seemed precious to me as the apple of my eye. 

"From ibe means used last night, feel much better 
to-day. Will the Lord restore me fully lo health? 
' Nevertheless, not my will.' While I live, I would be 



2S0 HEMOiB or 

well, that \ might do the more for God. But be knowi 
what is best, and thai is best for me. 

"5th. — Called OD Miss W , who seems stroDger, 

and yet stronger in the faith. From bei testimony I 
beliere she is a child of God. Afiei much counsel I 
parted from her, not eipectiug lo see her again twfore 
she returns home. God Almighty protect her. God our 
Father keep her from the evil one, sancti^ her wholly, 
and make ber useful." 

To this lamb of the flock of Cbrisi, brought into the 
fold by the blessing of God apou Mr. Taylor's labors, 
he wrote the following letter of instructions and ex- 
horlalion, which not only shows how well he was 
qualified already for that holy office which he so ar- 
dently desired, but affords much that demands the at- 
tention of young converts, and may be useful to Chris- 
tians in every stage of their progress to bearen ; while 
it exhibits another trait of Mr. Taylor's character, viz. 
Ilia tender solicitude that those who had been brought 
into the charch through his instrumentality should be 
eminently pious : 

" Nusam-Ibll, April 5, 1^5. 
"HiHSvuli, 

" ' Grace be unto you, and peace, from God the Fa- 
ther, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, who gave him- 
self for out sins, that he might deliver us from this 
present evil world, according to the will of God our 
Fatlier; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.* 

" If an apology for this epistle were necessary, 1 
could say, God is my witness how I have ceased not 
in attempting to bring you to Christ, by conversation, 



ezhoitatioD, argument, watching, prayeis, and tear*. 
And now, having come to the Lamb of God that tak- 
eth awajr the sin of the world, you will doubtless iiill 
beiir with me. 

" Bnt a few days since you were gay, thoughtless, 
and unconcerned ; a lorer of pleasure more than i lover 
of God ; averse to serious conversation ; but in the good 
providence, and by the grace of God, you were led to 
think on your ways, to turn your feel to the testimo- 
nies of the Lord, and to make haste and delay not to 
keep his command ments. If asked whence you came, 
you would answer, ' He brought me also oat of a hor- 
rible pit — out of the miry clay — and set my feet upon 
a rock, and established my goings. And he hath put 
a new song into ray mouth ; even praise to our God.' 

" How does that horrible pit and miry clay, wbence 
yon have professedly come out, appear to you ? Could 
I hear your reply, t doubt not it would be, ' O that my 
head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, 
that I might weep day and ntgfai over' — ah, you well 
remember what— you remember the years that have 
rolled away— you call to mind the gayety and mirth 
of former days — you remember the misspent hours in 
the fashionable circle— in the ball-room— the misspent 
Sabbaths — the lost opportunities, when you might and 
ought to have turned to God; and you now see how 
much yon have lost by being avotary of the world in- 
stead of yielding obedience to God. O Miss Sarah, 
how much treasure you might have laid up in heaven, 
had you been as active for your soul's salvation as you 
have been to seek your own pleasures ; upon all of 
which you now write 'vanity and relation of spirit.' 

" Having had your feet set upon the rock Christ, if 



1 miitmkenot, you areoct ashamed of Jesus; and why 
ihbuld you be ashamed of himi Is he not Gtod your 
S»Tiot — your Redeemer, your all? Is he not your 
Prophet, Priest, aod King? Your Shepherd, elder 
Brother, Prieud, and Judge ? Ashamed of Jeina ? 

' No. wheD I blub, be tfaii m; ■tanme, 



Sing then of his loTing-ldndneas. His loTiug-kinduess, 
O bow free 1 how great t how stroog ! how good 1 It 
changes not; may you celebrate it in death, and be- 
yond lime, 

" Baid the Psalmist, *Come and bear, all ye that 
fear Ood, and I will declare what he hath done for my 
soul.' In secret we may consider and celebrate the 
loving-kindness of the L<Hd. In public, on proper oc- 
CBsions, we may declare it forth; 'for be is good, and 
his mercer endureth for erer.' 

" To me the whole duty of man seems to be epito- 
mized in this, ' Walk before me and be thon perfect.' 
It is more explicit in the following ; ' Thon shalt love 
the Lord thy Giod,' how much? 'with all thy heart, 
and soni, and mind, and strength. And thou shalt lore 
thy neighbor as thyself. On these two commandmean 
hang all the law and the prophets.' In giving such ■ 
command, did not Jesus appreciate the necessity of 
love to God in the highest degree? Are they not the 
words of Christ himself? O that Christians would du- 
ly eoasidei the privilege or enjoying, not merely for 
an hour, bat through life, the degree of love spoken of 
by the beloved disciple. 1 John, 4 : 18. 

" Miss Sarah, how much soever others may lose bf 



JAHia nAlKEU TATLOB. S83 

■tuiding idle, or waadering away from duty, may it 
be yours — and may it b« mine — to jiret* foTwaid into 
ihe/uIItiM* of this love. ' Fot ihts cause I bow my 
kaees unto the Father of out Lord Jesus Chriat, (^ 
whom the whole family ia heaven and earth is named, 
that he would grant yoti according to the riches of bis 
glory 10 he strengthened wiUi might by his Spirit m 
the inner man ; that Christ may dwelt in your heart 
by faith ; that you, being rooted and grounded in Jove, 
may be able to comprehend, with all saints, what is 
the length, and breadth, and depth, and height, and to 
kntrw the lore of Christ, which passeth knowledge, 
that you might be filed with all the fullness of God. 
And the yery God of peace sanctify you wholly. Aud 
I pray God your whole spirit, and soul, and body b« 
preserved blameless nnto the coming of our Lord Jasna 
Christ.' Would the apostle pray for an impossibility ? 
And he adds, ' Failbfid is he that calteth you, who als* 
will do ii.' Belierest thou thisl According to your 
fltitb be it unto you. 

" This appears to me to be the reason why aonlt 
born of God for the most part are no more sanctified: 
they are too soon satisfied with R ' name to live.' They 
forget that there is no truce in this war— that to lay 
down the armor is to be vanquished. Hence, however 
'well they may have begun, laying aside their armor, 
dismissing their watch, neglecting to pray, they are 
^overcame, and become again entangled vrith the world 
—ioat their evidence of pardon— are thrown into dsrk- 
iWss, and delaying to return from their backsliding, 
tftey w&ndcr wretched and forlorn. Shall I ask 1 But 
bott appalling the thought that you shall ever fall frmn 
yw sieadfastDSss ! Miss Sanfa, sbBll yonr clMiet ctr 



testify agaiast youl Will youi heart ever be frozen 
into tlie adamantine hardness of aome, who were onct 
melted into love and tenderness ? Shall the hearts ot' 
your praying friends — your Christian friends, who 
have wepi and wrestled on your behalf, bleed orer 
your love of the world T Shall angels witness, af\er 
your determination to come out from the world, your 
retrograde steps 1 O shall Jesus ever be wounded by 
you, his professed friend and follower'? Shall tha 
world, who are watching you with eagles' eyeSj 
b« gratified with one word or action whereby they 
may triumph ? Shall the church be disappointed — the 
church below, who are looking atiera full devotedness 
of yourself to Gk)d, both in prosperity and adversity— 
sickness and health— life and death? The church 
■hove, those ang«l bands — those blood-washed soub 
in the paradise of God, who are waiting to welcome 
the faithful? 

** Suffer the word of exhortation : — Whatever otbera 
do or say, (1 mean professors of religion,) wbatevet 
others may think sufficient to bring them to heavea — 
let it be well fixed in your mind that it will cost Bome- 
tblng to be a Christian. Having begun, may you con- 
tinue, and may you end well. To stimulate you to ac 
tion — to urge you on the way — is the object of thii 
communication. I need not tell you of my solicitude 
that you should walk worthy of your high vocation; 
yon have already had it evinced. ' Give, then, all dili- 
gence to make your calling and election sure.' Add to 
your faith vErtue, and all the Christian graces. ' LoTe 
not the world, nor the things of the world.' IC^ ' Be 
clothed with humility.' ' Watch unio prayer.' ' Pray 
without ceasing.' ' Deny all ungodliness — live sober> 



JAltCB BRllKKaD TAYLOB. 88S 

1;, righteously, and godljr.' ' Deny younelf^ take vp 
your cross, and follow Christ )' not like Peter, afar c£ 
' As yon received Christ Jesas the Lord, so walk in 
him.' How was this 7 Did you receive him in a state 
of indifference — in unbelief— in love with the world— 
in pride— in gayety— without prayer— in self-iDdal- 
gence 7 Qo back to that hour— examine the founda- 
tion of your hope — see how you submitted. Follow up 
your course, and see what have b«en your most pre- 
cious seasons, and then go on accordingly. Finally, 
set high your standard of piety— not higher nor lower 
than the Bible. Seek with all your heart the mind that 
was in Christ Jesus : then you will study to be faith- 
ful to God— faithful to yourself— and faithful to all 
around you. 

" With solicitude for your best interests, 

" 1 am, in the bonds of the Gospel, 
"Yours, &c. 

"Jaheb B. Taylob." 

To the same. 

" Aprii 11. ia26. 
" I thank my God upon every remembrance of you. 

And this I pray, that your love may abound more and 
more in knowledge and in all judgment — that yon may 
approve things that are excellent — that you may be 
sincere and without offence till the day of Jesus Christ ; 
being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are 
by Jesus Christ, to the praise and glory of God 

" I rejoice that, under God, 1 was the instrument of 
bringing you to Christ. It is, indeed, a cause of htiiu- 
ble acknowledgment to the Father of mercies, that I 



286 HEUOiB or 

hoTe bfen emploTcd and blessed a> a co-woiker wM 

" Your pmyer to liaTe the mil of God done, and nol 
youri, is one aAer the psdern of Jesus Christ. And 
vrbo so holy, Trho bo happy, aa He who came not to 
do bis owD will, but the will of him that seat hiui? 
Be it ours on all occasions to be conformed to the 
wiU of God. 

" Here 1 would repeat what yon remind me of say- 
ing in my first leiiei : PreMs for-aiard into thefuUna* 
of kit love- I trust you wilt — I pray you may : but do 
not put it off for a euilable occasion. Like other du- 
ties, like other blessings, the time is nov. Wbence 
issues the voice, delayl From the church abore, 
or the church below? Nay, but from hell — from a 
thoughtless world — from soul-damning guides; from 
nominal, lukewarm professors, the ciy is sent forth, 
delay. Alas! how many bear it and suffer from it. Of 
you 1 hope belter things. 

" Hungering and thirsting after righteousness, may 
you be filled. 

■ Jtiut, tny m/jr hfpe, th; blood can elauu« 
Uj diepeit (tains, and pnrifj my «ouI 
From all it* native aod coDtraeied guilt; 
la that claar fountuD of immortal lifo 
Let ma ba eleaaaad and tboroiifhty MnctiGeil. 
I come,a belplesi, miierable wretch, 
Aod throir myielf, and all my future bopea, 
On mercy infinite; reject me not, 
ThoD SaTiorof the aiaful race oTman.' — Urt. Raiet. 

" You said you had not conversed much with yonr 
friends. To do this profitably, we need the wisdom of 



tbe serpent and the hannlessness or the dove. Re- 
gard should be had to time, place, persons, and tbe pe- 
culiar circu casta Dees of iodiTiduals. While we may 
Dot hare tbe opportunity of beneGting; others Id cod- 
Tcrsation, yel tve may by example. 

" But I think, Miss S , should you fix tl as a prin- 
ciple of action for your ickole life — for you hare en- 
tered upon a life-service — you have enlisted for the 
■war — I say, should you fis it as a principle of action 
for life, so far aa in y<m lies, to benefit every indi- 
vidual thai approachea yoM, it is probable you wouM 
not regret it at your dying hour. Look to the ererlast- 
ing bills for atrengib. Perhaps you will conclude that 
you have already bound yourself to this by your oath 
at the communion-table. Be it so; you need not wish 
the obligation revoked. 

" At ihe communion-table ! Ah ! has Gtod, have 
angels and men, beheld yoQ seated at the table of the 
Lord? And, did you sing, 



And shall 1 say, be faithful to your rows7 

" As to doctrines, I would you were established firm- 
ly in ' tbe faith once delivered to tbe saints.' It is all 
in theB^BLG; and with (his promise: 'If any man will 
do bis will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it 
be of God, or whether I speak of myself.' These are 
Christ's words, who says, ' Search the Scriptures.' 
And the aposlle, ' Let the word of Christ dwell in you 
richly in all wisdom.' Like Apollos, may you be migh- 
Vf in the Scriptures ; and agreeably to die prayer of 



Cfaritt, be sutcli&ed thtougfa Uie tratb. O bow neaw- 
Mry to be justified and lanctifitd ; Tor ' vithovt hM- 
net* no man thall tee the Lord.' " 

Soon after wiiling the above, Mr. Tayloi left col- 
lege to spend the spiiiis racation in assietinf tbe 
K«T. Pi. C. S. in a revival at Railway, N. J. Al bi« 
anivat be found the work going od, and aboat fiTlees 
penoss eDiertaining the hope that they bad passed 
ttom. death unto life. Among this people he labored, 

in coDJuBctioft with Mr. S , about five weeks, very 

iWKb ts tbeir satisfaction, and with great succesa. 
Dtiting tbii favored season the number of hopefnl 
a<)nieiti iaeraased from fifteen to seventy or eighty, 
of ali ages, from eleven, yean old to seventy, and bI 
every condition in life. 

To his brothers K and J , Mr. Taylor wrote 

two letters from Rahway, giving an accoont of tb« 
progress of tbe work of grace in that town, in wbieli 
he says : 

"I am glad to inform you that the lerival is in- 
creasingly interesting. Upwards of sixty have ex- 
pressed hope. Among the yoong converts is one sixty- 
one years of age ; among the anxious, one of seveaty, 

" The cMld of sixty-one is a mother, who, with ber 
two daughters, became anxious on the same day; and 
on the same day they all expressed hope. This family 
I' visited, and they received me coolly — nay more, they 
were indifffrenC, approaching to opjwsition. But, to onr 

surprise, they soon sent tor brother S and myself 

ta visit i^etn. We went, and found them in deep dii- 
tresa. Judge bow diCerently they received at, from tbe 



muer ut which they roeeind my Tint I Qod be 
pnised. There u no oi^nition wtwthy of Dole. The 
work gocB oa in solemn KillDcit. 

" May yon aU be holy, nai wilhoBt blame, before 
him in lore. Affectionately, Jamei." 

Upon Ilia retnm to collie he wrote as followB to 
like funily at Middle Haddam : 

-Ifuiat^-Bta, M9 10, ISSfi. 

* * * "IbaveoAeDthouKlit of your delightful situ 
ukn on the hill— I have Aooghl too that yoa are a 
kottse on a hill, that cannot be hid. To ihine, we need 
10 be corered. ' Be clothed with bBmitity.' To be 
hi^, we need to get low in the vale, not of dejection, 
hat of humility— ' Before honoi is hnmility.' 

" Host of my enjoymeBti flow from a contented 
ain^ which, when possessed, is a ' eontimied feast.' 
Not in the world, not from the world, but from God, 
ibroogh Jesus Christ, we mast expect out happiness. 
It ia at the feet of Jesus we may find help in every 
time of need. 

"Siace ny retnm, the Lord has visited me with 
rick Uessings. I hope be is ripening me fot his sei- 
vice here, and for his glory heieafCer. 

" I think I never took more interest in reading the 
Bible than since I remroed. RevivaU of religion are 
a happy comoient upon the Bible. In reading the Acts 
of the Apoitles, read them in reference to revivals. In 
reading the epistles, read them as addressed to youti^ 
<onvens, 

" As ever, affectionately yonra, 

"Jambs B- Tatlob.' 
as i.aTv««f 



S90 HEUou or 

To his diary we are indebted for vety ranch thst Hr. 
Taylor said, and did, and thought, and felt, giving an 
interesting development of his chataeteT, and the more 
to be relied upon, because it was never designed for 
publication, or even the inspection of his friends. 

Though in the conversions which took place during 

the joint labors of Mr. S and Mr. Taylor at Bah' 

way, there is evidence that his efforts were much bless- 
ed, yet in this secret record of the matter he lays no 
claim to distinction. 

" May 8L— Went with brother S to Rahway, 

and found that, after hia labors there for about two 
weeks, fifteen had expreased hope. 1 became his as- 
sistant for about five weeks, during which tioie tbx 
number was increased to seventy'five or eighty. WiU 
God carry on hia work, and still own the efforts ot 

brother S in effecting a greater salvation among 

that pet^lel 

" During my labors I had too much hardness wfail« 
witnessing the displays of grace, and while God was 
evidently owning his word. I ofle 
fluence of lethargy. The Lord, 1 
me. But, 1 how much more hu 
might have been! There were i 
which my heart was broken and ci 
this apfaere of labor, and this oppoi 

8 , as among the happiest, prOf. 

Life. Siace my return, God has been gracious to me, 
and afforded uncommon seaaona of commnntoa with, 
himaeir, through Jesus Christ. I have been enabled lo 
cast nil my buidens on the Lord. 

In my walk this morning, met with a cross. As I 



JUIBa IBAMBtlD TAVLOH. S91 

wms passing a shop, a man neore by ihe sacred name 
of Ood. I passed on. Tlie query arose, ' Shall I let 
this sin go unooiieed T I stopped. Many excuses en- 
tered my mind — whether from the devil or my own 
heart, I cannot determine. At length this Scripture 
presented itaetf: ' Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy 
neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him.' I went back, 
called the person by name, and requested an interview, 
TVe walked aside, where 1 had a serious talk with him; 
the result so far was favorable. 

"June 1. — I rejoiced before God that there was an 
eternity to come, in which 1 might recount his good- 
ness — see him as he is — and associate with saints and 
angels. O how my heart moved at the thought of 
meeting some there who might recognize in me a 
spiritual father! I would rather live than die, for the 
present ; and this, God knoweth, is from the desire of 
being, if he would qualify me, eminently useful in 
bringing sinners to Christ. Yet if he were to call, I 
would go. Methought, how should I appear, seated 
with the saints in the new Jerusalem. I looked for the 
lowest seat. 

"Among others, my friend L. P came to my 

mind. I think I never before pleaded for him with 
such confidence and submission. My petitions were 
groans which could not be uttered, for his salvation. 
I left him, with myself, in the hands of Ood. He will 
do right ; and I rejoice that he is on the throne. 

" 61h.— Yesterday, ihe Sabbath, passed for the most 
part without mui:h feeling in divine things till even- 
ing devotion, when, singing, I made melody in my 
heart to the Lord. 

"June 9.— Evening.— To the honor of rich grace be 



it TMorded, tb«t God, oM of hU sxeaediBg £ 
hith jaat now ritiltd mj toul with aalvtttioD. After 
readiog ihe Beriptum, while fliagiog, the ihocghl of 
my hkfiiig spoken on the txtift this erening, when 
1 WIS coBiidenbljr applauded, entered my mind. 
Thought I, what a this? 01 if ray facnltieB might 
he all on God's aide, il woald be honor, ^joediatdf 
ray heart broke, aat} want out, not in aelf-complaceDce, 
but in self-fibaaciaeal. I fell upon my knees, t9 give 
myself away to God anew. I found 1 bad nothing to 
give. All 1 am was his alrtadi/. And besides, I owed 
him MO thousand talents. Then il occurred to ne to 
■sk of God lo eoasecrate me vKoUy ta himself, for his 
glory. The petiiion was too big for utterance ; I groan- 
ed and wept it out. 1 think I nerci: had such an over- 
poweting wiUiogness to spend for God. I felt an un- 
niual resignation to hia will: I felt myself in his hand. 
And if at last 1 thovld be held up a spectacle to creft- 
lion, as a DWitumant of long-Huff«riog on his part, 
and then be sent to bell, I would wish to bring glory 
to hie name while on earth. 

" 13th. — Brother S baring lell the people at 

Rahway, O how I longed to be with them for a sea- 
son ! Bat 1 cannot. I nasi them and myself upon the 
Lord, and ha bntowed a rich blessing upon me. I 
sank into insignificance, while God was eialjed above 
all." 

While thus breathing out his afiectionate soul in be* 
half of the laroba of the flock at Rahway, Mr. Tayki 
addressed to them the following commmucUion : 



:., Google 



MUtm BRUmU TATLOB. SB8 

"Nasiau-HtiU, Junt, 18S5. 
** To the band of young converts tn Raktoay. 

•Belond, 

"My baring secD some of you when dead in tres- 
passes and in SIDE, and afterwards when awaken- 
ed, anxious, and rejoicing, I presume will he a suffi- 
cient apology for this epistle. But besides this, I might 
assure you that the love of Christ constiaineth me. 
The Christian affeciion and solicitude 1 feel towards 
you all draw me; and my regard for youi best inter- 
ests calls forth a line from my pen. 

"Addressing an epislle to yirung converts, the 
apostle said among other things — ' As ye have there- 
fore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him ; 
rooted and huilt up in him, and established in the faith, 
as ve have been laugbt, abounding therein with thanks- 
)(ivings.' Col. 2 : C, 7. Let me ask : How did you re- 
ceive the Lord Jesus Christ? In impenitence, unbe- 
lief, and rebellion i or in contrition, fnith, and submis- 
sion? Was ii in pride, love of the world, sensuality, 
anger, malice, oi envy 1 Or in humility, lorsaking 
iLe world, a crucifying the flesh with ila all'eciiuos and 
lusts 1 Wus it with a deienninaiiun to live in sin, 
and so dishonor God 7 or with the fixed, unalterable 
determination to wage war wiih sin, to overcome sin, 
and to honor God by forsaking ever// ein 7 Methinks 
f hear one and auulber say, ' You have touched a point 
in my experience. Tkua It was I received Christ 
Jesus (he Lord.' What a combination of appcll.ition 
and oiGce is wound up in the name of the Son of Gud 1 
Christ — anointed, sent and set apart to execute hi> 
office as mediator; Jettu — Savior; Lord — theproprt*- 
25* 



tot Md nilw of alL When yoa receirvd him, dii fO« 
take Chiist Jesus the Lord in all his offices? Then 
walk ye .in him. Here, as in a journey, before we 
proceed we must get in the way. 

"'Rooted and built np in dim.' In this we see the 
necessity of being con^rmnJ Christiana. Atreeshoald 
take deep root, for two reasons: that it may outstaad 
every storm, and that it may reaeive ttw more nourish- 
ment. A hoQse tmilt on a sindy foundation is in • 
dangler of boob falling. The hope not founded on the 
Rock Christ Jesus the Lord, will be soon swept 

" ' And established in the hith.' Are there babes in 
Christ? so are there young and old men in Christ As 
one is born, not always to remain a babe, bot to grow 
np to manhood, so babes in Christ should grow up into 
Christ to the stature of perfect men. Once the wide- 
spread oak was shut up in the aeom ; afterwards it 
shot above the earth ; now it attracts the notice of the 
eye. 

" ' In the taith as ye have been taoght' Besides the 
experience of others, you bare the witness within 
yourselves to testify to the doctrines of the Bible. As 
high as the Bible, and no higher, are we to sei onr 
standard of believing. With the Bible in our hand, 
and Qod's teachmg, we may come at the truth as it 
is in Jesus. 

"'Abounding therein with thanksgiving.' That 
diere is such a thing as being deficient, nay empty, in 
teligious experience, look ai professors of religion here 
and there. Do you find them all ' full of faith and of 
the Holy Ghost ?' Do you find a family altar in every 
house where religion is professed; Do you behold !•• 



JAMU ■■>n»W VATLOB. 38( 

ililiHi indmd, in wbom there is no goile, in all wlio 
go Kround the conunanioa-table, and have theii names 
in llie cburek book? Judge jt of the walk aad cod- 
veraation of many who beer the ChrUtian name, and 
•ak, ' Shall I too b« a defliient, empty, funnel, luke- 
wann diaciplel' Ab, my frieodi, I hope better things 
of you. I hope tiod, angels, and saints in heaven, and 
the church on earth, will witness in you a walk ac- 
, cording to godliness ; a Grmnasi and stability of eba* 
lacier worthy of such a hope, such a profession, such 
obligations as yours. And then you will abound too 
in thanksgiving that your eyes were open to see, yoar 
ears nnstopped to hear, and your heart broken to feel 
the joys of sins forgiven. 

"Having just entered upon the race, you bare it to 
run, ' run with patience.' Having to Ggbt, ' put on the 
ithoie armor of God;' for the world, the flesh, and 
the devil are arrayed against you. Are you discour- 
aged I Does your soul draw back at the distance ? at 
the context? Why art tbou east down 1 Satan would 
bare you so. The world, who are looking at and 
wacchiug you with an eagle's eye, would have you 
draw back, or fall back from youi steadfasiness. But 
' gire DO place to the devil.' Come out from the world 
and say, ' In the name of the Lord, 1 will destroy them 
all :' for, through Christ strengibeDing him, what can- 
not the Christian do? And does not the assurance 
sound from the word, ' My grace is sufficient for thee ?' 

"You recollect tbe season of our<lasi interview. I 
think 1 shall neret forget it. It was apparently a hea- 
reuly place in Christ Jesus. Aud have you found the 
' God of love and peace ' with you ? I doubt not that- 
you hare, if you have been of 'one nind' to seekn 



396 KEHom or 

U^ attainment in the dirine lifr, * adding to yoKP 
faiih virtTte,' and ha*e kept all the Christian graces in 
exercise. And if yon Btill 'grov in grace and in tke 
knovUdge of our Lord and Savior Je»ut Christ,' 
you will abonod more and more in the consolation b of 
the Gospel. Par the sake of Christ, then— for the sake 
of the church, which is his bodf, and which he has 
purchaaed with his own blood, and for which he in- 
tercedes — for the sake of your pastor, who prays fof 
your prosperity — and for the sake of those who hare 
labored among you — and for your own sakes, 1 pray- 
yoa to be uncommon Cbristians ; that is, be emtn«nt- 
/y holy— self-denying—croag-bearitig— Bible — e very- 
day CkrtBtian*. 

"Youmo!/ walk in Christ, be 'rooted and built vp 
in him.' You may 'exercise yourselves unto godli- 
ness, and be perfect, of one mind, live in peace, be of 
good comfoit, and have the Qod of lore and peace with 
you,' It is that to which every one of you may attain. 
It is — O yes, il is your high privilege — yes, it is yoor 
duty to attain unio it ; and moreover, it is for your in- 
terest ; for when are you the happiest, when worldly 
or spiritual, when earthly or heavenly-minded? Shall 
I repeat what you have so often assented to as duty, 
and in the performance of which your souls have been 
BO much blessed 7 I mean, shall 1 say, live to God In 
secret — eiamioe your hope — try your experience? 
Leave these duties unperformed for a day or a week, 
and see where you would be found. Rather, would I 
say, do not try the experiment; for il has undermined 
many hopes, nay, is one strong evidence of a bad hope } 
viz. the neglect of duty, and this neglect unattendod 
with remorse and renewed submission to God. 



JAMM amutnKV tatlob. 837 

"Sbalt I repeat, thai the cot^ of Cbristran aflec- 
tion bind me to yon 1 The remerabrance of jrou tins 
associated with it some of my sweetest moments : and 
I hare rejoiced in the thought that an eleroity is to 
come, in which I shall have the opportunity of seeing 
you, and rejoicing with you. Until then, if we con- 
Terse no more on earth, we will hope to meet around 
our Father's board, and sing ' Hallelujah for ever and 

" I presume you continue to meet for social prayer 
and praise as usual. May you be knil together more 
and more— may your hearts be united to fear, to Iotc, 
and serve the Lord. Not only for yourselves must you 
feel interested, but for those with whom you are asso- 
ciated. Your affectionate but infirm pastor, whom you 
cherish with new emotions, calls for your prayers; 
your pious friends— your companions whom you left 
behind, to take their pleasure in the world — your fathers 
and mothers- yourchildren — your brothers and sisters, 
who are left while you have been taken. O! how 
much have you to do; andwhatyou would do for God, 
for yourselves, for your pious and for your ungodly 
friends, must be done quickly, for ' the tiTne i« thoH.' 
Soon, you will go hence — soon, they will be here no 
more. Who of us would see a friend or relative of 
ours go down under the wrath of Qodl Ahl when 
the sound ^farewell ' shall echo at the bar of God 
— when an impenitent child shall take a last linger- 
, ing look of a pious saved parent, and sigh 'farewell' 
' — when parents shall sink from the view of pious 
children — when brothers and sistera shall part to 
meet no more, may we stand spotless, and without 



their blood luii(mg about us. Finally, let oar 10112 
ever be, 

■ I'll trjr to prove futhful, 
'Till ire all airivs ■( boDU. 



This address to young converts suggests some 
thoughts which are worthy of the practical regard, not 
only of those who are just commeociiig the Christian 
life, but of ministers and older Christians. 

No one, who has his senses so exercised as to be 
capable of judging in the case, can be blind to the 
melancholy truth, that the cause of the Redeemer has 
suffered sadly from the want of that deep toned con- 
sistent piety which is attainable by every one who has 
been born from abore. The opinion has indeed pre- 
vailed to a great extent, and is still entertained by 
many, that the freshness and fervor of the first lave of 
yoDog Christiana must of necessity pass away, and 
give place to darkness, and uncertainly, and coldness. 
Most disastrous have been the effects of this opinion 
Upon the growth in holiness and usefulness of the 
church; and instead of shining brighter and brighter 
to the perfect day, her light has been often obscured, 
her hopes enfeebled, and her influence neulralii'.ed- 
Instead of a. vigocoua, healthful action, her conduct 
has been dtful, and her very life an alternation of 
Bpasm and collapse ; at one time, all zeal and devuted- 
aesa, and again chilling all around with indifference. 

Now it is perfectly manifest that neither the apos- 



JAME8 BOAUtCRD TATLOR. 299 

tin DOT their Master eTcr counienanced oi encourageit 
such a life in his followers. "Nevertheless," said our 
Lord to the church of Ephesus, " 1 have tomtwhat 
agaiDst thee, because thou hast left thy first love. Re- 
member therefOTe from whence IhoD art falleo, aud re- 
pent, and do the first worki : or else I will come unto 
thee quickly, aod remoTe thy candlestick out of his 
place, except thou repent." In this passage we have 
>et before us the evil and the remedy. If a declension 
in the fervor of piety and the strength of faith — if leav- 
ing their first love, by Christians, must be repented of^ 
theA is such conduct offensive to God, prejudicial to 
his cause, and injurious to the souls of men. Every 
sin is offensive to God — but this sin necessarily pre- 
judices his cause with sinners, and consequently in- 
jures their souls ; and the only remedy is repentance. 
But every Christian has a security against this evil, 
in the abundant grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, which, 
•ccording to divine promise, may be attained through 
faith, and watchfulness, and prayer. Let every Chris- 
tian, therefore, come boldly to the throne of grace, that 
he may obtain mercy and find grace to help in the time 
of need. 

Until the church shall unlearn the lesson so often 
taught by good, but mistaken fathers and mothers in 
Israel, that the excitement attended upon conversion 
inu«f be succeeded by depression and doubt — until mi- 
nisters and members of the church practically learn that 
their power of doing good is in proportion to their holi-' 
ii«sa — there is no reason to expect the universal tri- 
umph of the cause of truth and righteousness. It is 
impossible that the wise and benevolent King of Zion 
Khould ever subdue the world to himself through thn 



ctMiperation of ■ people ao in^wfectly MiDctifisd as a 
the presenl geoeislion of GhrislianE ; nor does ii seem 
■t all coDBiBtent with His infinite fitness to govern, to 
imprcsi the present chancier of the church, io which 
there is such a mixture of pride, ftnd gelfishness, and 
worldliucBs, and the spirit of caatentloo, upon this 
earth's entire population. How important then the lo- 
structioDs given bf Mr. Taylor to young converts I 
How necessarr ibat they grow up from their very 
. birth " unto the measure of the stature of the fulineis 
ot Christ." 
In the same strain and the same spirit is the fullow- 

ing extract of a letter to a young lady in T— , to 

whom Mr. Taylor sQsiained the endeared relation of 
apirilaal father : 

"Junt n,is& 
" As you may conclude, I was glad to hear of your 
jwosperity. As yon are pleased to recognize in mt 
the instrument, under God, of awakidg you from cai^ 
nal security, and of leading you to the Lamb of C!od, 
you rightly judge that I feet something of the solici- 
tude attendant upon such a relation. And not only for 
you, but for others scattered Up and down, near and 
remote. When the husbandman cultivates his field, In 
is more or less aniious until his expeelions are re- 
alized. 

"I need not tell you that I have rejoiced over the 
lambs of the flock of Jesus, the good Shepherd. Amd 
perhaps I should not tell yon that I have wept in se- 
cret places, for fear that some might turn aside — some 
who have expressed a hope, and so wctind the cans* 
of Christ Yes, my hHtrt has bled in the inner chasa- 



JUm WAIMBBP TATUML 201 

bn>, my ioul bu Bfoniied for the prosperity of tboM 
wbom 1 luive seen ODce dead in tieipauet and lint, 
kud afierwnrdB awakened and hopefutly bora again. 
Mjr heart's desire and prayei to Ood fot them is, that 
they all might be holy, karniUtf, and vitdefiltd. U 
ludineat Btamped on youi heart 1 l» holinem to th» 
Lord, as the grand characteristic of your thoughts, 
words, and aclioDs, carried ont and made to ttand 
forth in oU the relatian$ of life 1 Ate you as harmless 
ai a dove 7 Are you unspotted ' from the world V 

"May you be like a tree plajited by the river's side 
—be rooted in Christ — rooted, thai you may both draw 
□ourishment from, and stand firm in Christ Jesus." 

Diary, "June 19.— Another standard-bearer in Zion 
hath ftillen— Summerfield is no more. Bath fallen ? 
it no morel But he hath ascended to his Father, and 
Uvea in the Paradbe of Qod. I have read once and 
•gain two letters of his addressed to my friend Mr. 
A. They are fraught with Christian love. The 
thought that ibe hand that wrote them is now entomb- 
ed in the grave, and the spirit that dictated ibem now 
ranges the sweet fields above, was melting to my soul. 
Well: for the Lord hath done all things well, and now 
reigns. He hatb joined those vrho have gone before. 
What interviews may he have already had with Wes- 
ley, and Whitefield, and Fletcher, and Spencer, and 
Martyn, and the innumerable company ! And shall 1 
join the heavenly band? I think 1 never before bad 
tfuch humiliating views of myself as for weeks past, 
while the Lord has been favoring me with the com- 
munications of his lore. And if, afler all, I should 



place for me would be to be raised to some conapko- 
ons point in the midst of ibe adoring tbtong, aa an 
everlasting spectacle of auperabtmnding grace." 

Ton Minister of ibe Gospel. 

" Nauau BaU, Jiiiy 13. 1S2Sl 
- BnHhiT bdoisd, 

"Your letiec, which I have read again and again, 
came to hand aboiit a week after its date, and it re- 
fresh ed me- 

" Indeed I hare sympathized with you, and I still 
could weep with you under your various trials. Bnl 
our sympathizing High Priest, who batti gone info the 
heavens, can better be touched with a feeling of your 
infirmities, having been tempted in all points as we are. 
Was Peter's wife's mother sick of a fever 1 Peter's 
friend was there to heal. Was the house at Bethany 
afflicted 1 Tbe friend of Lazarus, ofMary, and Martha, 
was there to weep with the latter, and over the tomb 
of the former. I need not tell my dear brother that 
Jesus is virtaally present, and that in him all fullness 
dwells. Yes, he is an attendant upon yonr compa- 
nion — he watches over her for good — cherishes her 
spiritual health, and is thus maturing her to the sta- 
ture of one perfect in Christ Jesus. The Vine Dres- 
ser holds the pruning knife, and with consummate 
skill severs one eiuberaot branch after another, till 
the tree may appear well nigh shorn of its beauty. 
Soon, the roots being imbedded in a soil watered by 
the river of God, branches more fresh and green will 
put forth; and if permitted to remain in the garden be- 
low, it will flourish, bud, blossom, and bear the choic- 
est frnit ; if transplanted to the garden above, it will 



JAMBS HUINEBD TAYLOR. 303 



bloom and bear fruit for ever. And shall ire compluo 
that he removes a plant fiom a puorer (o a ricber soil 
— from the shade to ihe Buoshiae 1 

" Think it not strange, mj broilier, ivhen all that 
ore r.orobined agaiast you level iheir force against 
your honest iateutions to (<u the work of an evangelist; 
for remember the case of our Elder Brotker, who 
went about doing good. Even Peter assumed tlie of- 
fice of dictator, aod began lo rebuke him, saying, ' Be 
it far from ctiee, Lord.' Is it not sufficient that the 
servant (J'oSmk) be as his master 1— Remember loo the 
great Apostle Paul, when with one accord they be- 
sought him not to go up to Jerusalem- ' Then Paul 
answered, what mean ye to weep audio break my 
heait ? for I am ready not to be bound only, but al- 
to to die at Jerugalem for Ike name of the Lord Jt' 
tui.' Paul would not be persuaded r neither let roy 
brother be persuaded, until convinced by Him who 
hath put him into the ministry. And let him count it 
all joy to saffer for Christ's sake. Only get on ' the 
whole armor,' and then, though a host encamp against 
you, in the Lord you will do valiantly. 

"If you do not enjoy the light of God's countenance, 
then must you be in double agony. 1 would that you 
were filled all the day long with faith and with the 
Holy Ghost. I need not suggest it — but so I find it — 
to come to a solemn pause, and get near lo the Lord, 
■erves as a thousand arguments against the world, 
the flesh, and the devil. May you eKperience more 
and yet more of the lore of God. In carrying you and 
your interests to God, I have at times enjoyed liberty 
and nearness of access. 

" I am reading, with interest, Edwards on the Afie^ 



SM MEHon or 

tioR«, Rpeak ragalarly once a week in the African 
churcli, and meet on Monday eTening the young can- 
vena. I think I take bd increased interest in reading 
the Bible. The world and its honors dwindle into 
the flhade more and more. May I ever cherish the dis- 
position, God being my keeper, to spend my all in 
lurning sinner* to the Shepherd and Bishop of souls. 

A Christian salatation to Mrs. . As always, yours, 

"James B- Tati.ob " 



"Naunt HaU, Stf^. 1, 1825. 
■Dxrlf kaloTod BrMkw, 

" I am sorry on your account, that to much darkness 
pervades your soul. You need to walk in the light, 
for many reasons— for your own comfort, for the com- 
fort of others, forihe glory of God, and for the edifica- 
tion of the body of Christ, which is the church. 

" I have testified to yon verbally, and by letter, con- 
ecTning some of the blessings God has vouchsafed to 
me. Of all the blessings in the house of my pilgrim- 
age, one experienced last evening was perhaps the 
greatest. 1 will not attempt, with pen and ink, to de- 
scribe it. Help me, my loving brother, help me to 
praise the Lord." 

■'Se^. 33,1836. 
"James to his dearly beloved and afflicted brother, 
tiittie did I eipeut to receive the intelligence I did this 
moruiog of your illness. Think it not strange, my 
dear brother, that you are sick; 'for whom the Lord 
loveib, be cbasteaeth.' Try to receive this visitation, 
u among your 'all things;' sttd give thanka, 'for tbia 



JAMBS aBAIHEBD TA.TLOR. 305 

*p die will of Qod, m Christ Jesaa, coDcetning you.' 
Perhaps my brothet is ool so mach alanned sboul his 
body, as he is soliciloua that his affliciion may be sanc- 
tified. Truly ihis should concern us most; for let 
what will befall the outer mau, if (he inner man be re- 
newed day by day, we shall grow strong for eternity 
whither we constantiy tend. Are you tossed and not 
comforted 1 Do you spend wearisome days and ledi- 
oua nights 1 I have been weeping and wrestling in 
prayer for you. While looking upward for myself, I 
remembered you ; for how could i forget one to whom, 
ander God, 1 am so much indebted, and to whom I 
bear a weight of lorel 1 ibougbl of asking for your 
health, your life; for I saw beside you, your E., and 
around you, your children ; 1 saw you an elder in an 
infant church, and exerting, as I hoped, a happy iuflu- 
ence along the path of life ; yet for all this I could on- 
ly say, 'The will of the Lord be done,' My weeping 
and wrestling for you, my dear brother, was according 
to the will of God, that yon might be holy and with- 
out blame before him in lore; that if your soul was 
beclouded, the Sun of righteousness might arise upon 
you; that our Captain would drive back the enemy, 
and give you the victory ; for this was all I could ask 
for myself. I saw, moreover, that though your life 
appeared in many respects to be needful, yet for you, 
as well as myself, another life was in reserve, to en- 
ter upon which we must die. Is there a mansion for 
us in the skies, and shall we not enter in 1 Is it the 
Father's pood pleasure to give us the kit^gdom, and 
shall we not possess it? To me earth is no way de-, 
aitable but to live for God. And let me tell you, that 
of late I hare thought myself near ray resting-place. 
26* 



t06 UMOIt OP 

I Iwn been breuf bt into bo clou « Allow^p «iA 
God, thai I knew not but I was brtathing out vaj soul, 
to fly away. Y«s, aDd it ia ibe eameit, theforetagU 
of f lory which the Lord has given me, that lifts me 
' on hif h. 

" The Lord is, 1 diink, preparing me either to be 
more useful, or to take me to hearen. His will, Bot 
mine, be done. 

"Jtmaybe that my dear brother rests under the 
■miles of our heavenly Father. Let ns iben cling 
cicse to the hope that is within ua, stand firm at our 
station, endure with patience, fight valiantly. For this 
we must prepare in the inner chamber; with God in 
secret the harness is generally put on, and for the 
roost part with weeping and contrition. May onr 
hearts be bniiaed and healed, so that we shall be 
'without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing.' 

"Should you be apprehensire that yon shall lean 
us soon, let my brother do the work he would do. Be 
faithful to me— be faithful la E.— be faithful to your 
family, to your minister, to all. 

"Let your house be set in complete order. &eA 
for a clear, uodoubting eridence of your acceptance* 
Biop not short of meetneta for glory and gloriGed so* 
cieiy. 'Without holiness no man sbal! see the Lord.' 
The Tery God of peace sanctify you wholly. And I 
pray God your whole soul, and body, and spirit may 
be preserved blameless unto the coming of the Lord 
Jesus. Faithful is he who has called you ; who also 
will do it. Only seek him with your whole heart. 

" Holiness captivates my soul. It is (At* that gives 
the character of God its glory, in my view. It is tkit 
that makes the character of angels and disembodied 



jAma nuinu tatioi. SOT 

■pitita ktrely in contemplatioD. It i< tAU (bat maket 
bearen desirable. And it is this that illumea my lou), 
and allies it to the moii half on earth, itfjr en/ is, 
Lord, give me wisdom and holiness. And let this be 
the burden of your prayer for me — that I may be wise 
to win souls, and holy to enter heaven. 

" Let me comfort myself, saith Edwards, that it is 
the very nature of afflictions to moke the heart better; 
and if I am made belter by tbem, what need I be con- 
cerned how grierous they may seem for the present 7" 



CHAPTER VL 

Last Year fn College. 

To a Ladyin r«eble health. 

"Orf. 26, 1825, 

" Acknowledging the receipt of your epistle, which 
came to hand a few days since, I am constrained to 
comply with your request, ' write to me.' With the 
other, which was, ' pray for me,' I ba?e just complied, 
with tears and strong cries. 

" Blessed be the Beloved that he has proved him- 
self your elder brother — a friend always near. How 
relieving — O, how unburtfentng- to the soul, is a gush 
of tears — sneet tears of love and gratitude! they have 
jnst flowed from my weeping eyes. 

"I am glad that your spirit was refreshed by the 
coming of Christian friends ; and for their concern for 
both you and me Let us not think it strange, if, when 



308 MBHoia OF 

we see the impge of Christ reflected more brightly ib 
the walk knd conversaiion of some of his disciples 
than others, we are templed to chide ourselves for uo« 
loving all equally. It is indeed wrilten — 'Bfthii 
' shall ail men know that ye are my disciples, if ye hare 
lore one towards another;' and 'we know that ws 
have passed from death to life, because we love the 
brethren.' But the question is, Who is my brother? 
Is it one who has been baptized? goes to the commu' 
ttion-tablel talks n&oict religion? Our Savior tell? 
us — 'Whosoever shall do the will of my Father which 
is in heavenj the tame is my Irrotker.' 

"Instead of adding one pain to your already accu- 
mulated sufferings, I would relieve yon of all — ex- 
change your weakness for strength— your confinement 
for the pleasant fields. Bui, I apprehend, the days of 
my sister, if not already gone by, are soon to be num- 
bered. This I know does not alarm you. You are 
conversant with the dying hour in anticipation. 

" I am sealed where, by a turn of the head, I hare 
a beautiful prospect. I can overlook a village once 
the scene of labors both interesting and pniGtable. 
There was a revival there three years ago last spring 
the fruits still appear. It reminds me of the latter day, 
when all shall know the Lord. The Gelds and trees 
that meet my eye cause me to sing, 

• 3iTHt Gsldi be;oad the ■nclling flood, 
Stand dreu'd ia living erecn.' 

"And the river that flows by, lifts the thoughts to 
the 'pure river of the water of life, clear as crystal, 
proceeding out of the throne of God and the Lamb' 
The grazing sheep and their fold speak, in associa- 
tion, of the good Shepherd, his flock and fold abov«. 



JAHIB BRAIKEBB TAYLOR. SO0 

" The sun bu sank beoeath the horizon to illumiDe 
anodier hemisphere. Gre loDgoar«un shHll go down: 
may it set to rise reaplendent in a better, brighter 
world. ' Tbe^ that be viae shall shine as the sun ; 
and they that turn many to righCeotumesg, as the stars 
for ever and ever.' How happy Aw lot who takes bis -' 
departure to meet the souls whom, under God, be has 
sent to heaven! O, there is meaning beyond expres- 
sion in what my soul hath Tell in this view! — Fray, 
■till pray, thai a great company of sinners, teileemed 
from among men, may at last praise God for my in- 
Elru mentality. May you be among the iei»e that win 

" The blowing of the wind reminds me of the sailor- 
boy, perhaps, far off at sea, becalmed, or wafted by the 
breeze, or tossed by the tempest ; now lie mounts up 
to heaven, then goes down again to ibe depths. Let 
our sails be wide spread to catch every breeze ofhea- 
Ten ; nor need we take in when the galus of grace blow 
upon them. As one watches (he pole-star to prove 
Ills course correct, so let us look to Jesus, the author 
and Gnisher of our faith. Thus we shall run clear- 
make our voyage — eater the haven fully laden — cast 
anchor, and lie safely moored for ever. 

" I thank God for his goodness in permitting an ae- 
qnaintnnce between souls so congenial, in this the 
house of our pilgrimage. Onr communion has been 
holy ; he it perpetuated above. 1 think 1 was enabled 
to acquiesce in the viill of God. I could, and in a de- 
gree unknown before, bless him for making us mutual 
blessings. That you had been made a blessing to me, 
did not seem so strange ; hut that 1 should hare been 
made a blmaing lo you, teems strange indeed. Tim 



310 HEHOIlt OP 

Lord knowelh llie mean view 1 have of atjeelt. If 
alivt, (for 1 know not but I was thinking of one in 
lieaven,) 1 iirrestled tai heaven's blessing lo descend 
and Hbide with you ; and I was blessed in pleading for 
ujy dear sister, to whom, as never before, did I feel a 
binding of soul in Christian fellowship. 

"From this siination, eo pleasant, I could descry a 
scenery more captirating than anj seen by mortal eye. 
Through faith, I look a view of the house not made 
with hands, and anticipated the day when I should at 
least hear you sing, and see you bow before the throne. 
Yes, my sister, if I should be at a distance, do you 
strive to get near the throne. 

"You recollect I mentioned one whose soul seema 
full of love. O for a host of self-denying, cross-bear- 
ing, humble, Bible sons and daoghters of the Lord 
Almighty. 

" It rains — may a shower of grace come to you. 
May the Holy Ghost descend in his influences upon yon 
like drops of dew. May you be as a well-watered gar- 
den, producing abundantly the fruits of righteousness. 

"I was asked to-night, by a minister, 'What is sav- 
ing faiih V I answered him in holy language : ' It is 
that faith which workelh by love, purifieth the heart, 
and overcometh the world.' How esemplified is this 
faiib in some Christians ! Alas, that they ate so rare. 
Let these characteristics of the devoted servant of God. 
and all the lineaments of the dear Redeemer, be msQ- 
ifested in us. If there should be but one on earth, 
ought you not to be the one, who should have the 
vihole mind of Christ ? Then would be seen in your 
every relation of life, what proves the reality, beaaty, 
and excellency of the religion you profess.'- 



JAMI9 UAUrEEO TAYLOR. 311 

The following letter, addreaseil principally to the 
wife of a beloved brother when she was expected to 
die, is so full of piety, and faith, and love, that no one 
t»a tead it, with a serious mind, without admiring the 
writer, OT rather the grace of Qod in him. 

'■AW. 17, 1835l 
" Your letter, dear brother, came this morning, with 
intelligence which I did not at alt expect. Shall I tell 
you the train of thought it excited 7 — That you would be 
companionless — your children motherless — that R.'s 
happy spirit, like an uncaged bird, would ily away, 

" Were you, my dear brother, were you, as some are, 
I wanld not wiiEe as I do. 'But ye, who were some 
time darkness, are now light io the Lord.' And I 
write this for your comfort. And if your dear wife 
and my dear sister be alive, and you think it for her 
comfort, read it to her, as perhaps the last epistle of 
James to her, just going into eternity. 

" I will address it to ker. Sister R., dear sister, 
foigive all my aofaithfulness to you, and once more 
pray that 1 may be blessed with holineaa and wiadom. 
Little did I think of your being ihejirat of our house- 
hold that would probably be called away. Little did 
I think that you would be the^r«t to enjoy the privi- 
lege of entering heaven. 

"It is taken.for granted that your soill is prepared 
for its exit. This is what each one must be concern' 
«d about for himself; for as yon know, as individual*, 
we stand accountable to God for our conduct here ; aa 
individuals we must die, and aa individuals we must 
be judged. 

"Persuaded of your acceptance, through Christ, 



lis mamoa op 

•land, »ami_firmly. Tbrowing ^0°'^^'^ '''''^ the wma 
of Jesui, wait, wait patieotly. Leaning on the bosom 
of Jesas, fear no hann ; for he bath laid, ' If I go swaf , 
I will come again and receirc yoy unto myself.' 

"When I remember that Clod has an econmnr ol 
grace, ma well as of nature — that the kiugdoni ofgrace 
is goTemed by a hoi; King, himself the Lawgirer, 
1 am consoled ; for certain I am thai he will act so as to 
constrain all his lubjecis to see thai hf hath, done alt 
thingt well. Hence, my sister, should he call you 
away, I cannot but acquiesce, and say, ' The Lord 
reignelh.' Howerer much you are beloved on earth, 
you would go where you would be loved much more — 
enjoy a holy society in a holy place, and be employed 
in rendering a perfect service to your God and mine. 
Hence — however much / love you, aod were il the will 
of God, I would detain you bere long— I would be the 
first to sing, though with streaming eyes, 
■ Th Gaiah'd, tha coaOict it pMt, 

Tba heavcii-boni apirit i* Bed, 
Her with li aecompliali'd at taat, 

And sow ibe'i ■otomb'd with the dead: 
The montbi of affliotioD arc o'er, 

Tbe ds;i and the Di|hl* ofdiatreii; 
WeMehcriDanguiahDoiDora; 

Sbt'i gained her happy releaae.' 
" Should I hear of your death, I would look up utd 
thank God, that now, instead of earth, paradise is yours. 
1 would think of you as & happy spirit that bad enter- 
ed * through the gate into the city.' Having overcone, 
and being seated with Christ on his throne, you would, 
as a spirit, commune with God — commune with an- 
gels who are ministering spirits — commnne with saints 
who have gone np through great tribulation, and who 



JA1II9 bbuubbd tatlok. 313 

are the spirits of the just madf perfect. Think, to(^ 
of some of your friends who have died in the failb— 
of those who follow after, but above all of Jesus, whom 
t/ou shall see as be is. 

"When on the Mount Zion above, whether you 
shall look down on things below or not, think of James, 
and praise ihe name of ihe Lord for the hlessioga I 
have received — the earnest of the heavenly rest. What 
Itie employments of the saints are, you will know mare 
particularly 'when on Zion you stand.' OftAi«you 
may be as certain as you are certain thai you are a 
child of God — you shall behold a wonderful sight. 
'Father,' said Jesus, 'I will that they whom thou hast 
given nte, be with me where I am, that they may be- 
hold my glory.' 

" To comfort you and your afflicted husband, re- 
member the laws of the kingdom : ' Thy statutes have 
been my song- in the house of my pilgrimase.' How 
often was this the case with David in his affliction. 
One law of the kingdom ia, that the subjects of Zion's 
King must enter heaven — but he, even our God and 
King, hath reserved to himself the right of ordering 
for his subjects. Would we be at our own disposal 7 
Wefeelsafestinhis hand. Then as it is appointed to 
men once to die, who can rightly designate the time 
tind circumstances? God, who sees the end from the 
beginning ; or we, who know not what a day may bring 
forth 7 Be comforted ; let not your heart be troubled. 
I hope to have a mansion too. Then, whether you or 
I be called Qrst, seeing that the will of God is done, 
what should we be concerned about but a full prepa- 
ration for heaven 7 

"If you recover, we will be thankful. Ifyoudia, 

27 J- B. Twtot- 



314 KWDII Ol 

may f ou be calmly disroUsed, or go with a Bhont) as 
it is appoiated. Ai the eatrance is ministeredf U it 
HOC all onr. whether we die calmly or eiultinglyl In 
(Am, as other things, let the will of the Lord be done. 
I am glad that yoa can give up your family ; if in the 
hands of the Lord, they are safe. And sorely they 
aie at kia disposal, as we are ouraelves. 

"Finally, my sister— my sister, with whom I bare 
sang, with whom I have prayed and wept— fa re well— 
we love one another till death — dying, I will not for- 
get thee — I will remember all your sisterly affection — 
your kind hospitality; and when my work shall be 
done, 1 will hope to meet you at the right hand of God 
— Ad affectionate adieu. If you hare a dying message 
for me, leave it with J- 

" Brother, in conclusion, I think all I can say on this 
occasion, is, the will of the Lord be done. The nave 
may yet roll back upon you great things which you 
have not known. This may be the vehicle in which 
shall be conveyed the greatest blessings : only trust in 
God. 'Be stilt, and know that I am God,' saith Je- 
hovah. He hath been with you ; and although clouds 
and darkness are round about him, yet justice and 
judgment are the habitation of his throne. There- 
fore be not faithless, but believing. Look for a happy 
Usue out of all your troubles. 

"Your sympathising brother, 

"James." 
., E., aed A., iheu at 



" Tiasnai Ball, Dtc. 3. IfflB. 
" You have doubtless knOwn the course of sister E.'b 



JAMEB BRAmERD TATLOS. 3U 

illness. On ifae Wednesday previous to my leftring 
Princeton ftr New- York, brother J. wrote, 'Probably 
before thia reaches you our dear R. will commence the 
song of angels.' I answered ibis letter, and addressed 
one to her, which was read to her, and she was melt- 
ed to tears. 'O,' said she, '1 love James; tell him 
from me, that now I can go with him into heaven : not 
until this affliction could 1 see as he saw, but now 1 
can rise' with him to the top of Pisgab.' I say not 
these things to exalt myself, but to magnify the grace 
of God. 

"Her room appeared to be filled with (he glory of 
God, and her soul to be lighted up with the brightness 
of his coming. She was at/i*H liberty. ' If the Son 
shall make you free, you shall be free indeed.' She 
could say in a higher sense than before, ' I waited pa- 
tiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me and heard 
my cry. He brought me up also out of a horrible pit, 
out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock, and 
established my goings; and he hath put a new song 
into my mouth, even praise to my God.' 

"Before this she had very composedly taken leave 
of all. Her husband had received her dying message, 
and apparently heard her sigh the last adieu. Her 
children listened to her dying counsel ; on the verge 
of eternity she spoke to all, and they were melted to 

1 "Wednesday night there was a favorable change. 

' And it was when man had given her up — when she 
had rejoiced in the prospect of being in eternity in an 
horn — when the shroud and the coffin were full in view, . 
that God interposed. He spake, and it was done. 



'Bad fiom tha bordcri ortha fm* 
At thy eamiDuid «be'« ecme ; 
, Nor did ibe urge a apecdier flight 
To her eelcaliol home.' 
"You will concluiie that 1 enjoyed a pleasant sea- 
ion with her, in our converse, and in soogs of praise 
and prayer. Indeed it was a 'green pasture,' where 
were fed not only those who were around her more 
iininediBtely, but other abeep of the same fold went 
in and out and found pasture. Upon this green spot 
— green, because of the divine inSuence in the show- 
ers of grace and the shining of the 'Sun of righteous' 
ness' — upon this green spot there was herbage, of 
which the pastor also partook and was refreshed. The 
circle io which ihey moved was leaderly affected, and 
seeiDed awake to set their house in order. To brother 
J. it has betn a glorious visitation. With his coropa- 
nioD, he seemed neither above nor below the rcill of 
God. To mother it has been, as she expressed it, in 
all her grief a happy season. To our father it has 
proved a time of refreshing. To me it has been the 
occasion of setting my affections on things above yet 
more than ever. Has not this visitation been fraught 
with mercies to you — each of you 7 That it may prove 
yet more the n:teaDS of good to us individually, let us 
each lay it to heart ; I mean her cxjiericnce. She 
wondered that she had not come into such a blessing 
bt/ore. 

" In her case we have tlie encouragement to ask and 
e^ipect great blessings. To ibis is superadded, 'i;reat 
and precious promises.' Let one full of import he re- 
cited: 'Callunlome, and 1 will answer, end show thee 
gieat and^uighty ihbgs, which thou bast not koown.' 



U)B. 3 IT 

AfiaraUwehRre kuowD, theie are atill 'great and 
mightf things.' After all that w« gee, still the pro- 
mise is good. If ' great aod might7 things ' be not in 
the expefieoce of each, on vhom shall the blame rest 1 
Let us seek not low attainments, but great and mighty 
uprisings towards heaven. 

" From R.'s faithfatness in sicknesa let us team the 
important lesson of being faithful in htalth. And in 
all we do, let us ask, how will thU appear on my dy- 
ing bedl Thas may we be led to act, notwithariew 
to man's judgment, but in accordance with the will of 
God. 

" If our sister be restored, still it remains for some 
one of our ntimber to lead the way to the bar of Qod. 
You know that a part of my grare-clothea were once 
made. How soon the winding-sheet may be my tit- 
tiie ai yowi, who can telH But sure the funeral knell 
may soon tell our departure. Hon solemn is that 
sound : ' Earth to earth, ashes to ashes, dust to dust 1' 

" Let us, io minding our duty, keep where our sis- 
ter would keep — near to God in gecret, near to Qod in 
all our intercourse with others ; for, holding conTerse 
with him, we shall be iransformed into his likeness — 
the more like God, the more holy — the more holy, the 
more happy, and the better fitted for a heaven ivbose 
glory is holineM. Then, living or dying, all will be 

' I'm glad that I wai bom to die.' 

" Do you each see your way clear ? ts it lighted up 
with glory as you pass along ? or are you walking ia 
darkness ^ Then yon mutt stumbie^you must halt. 
O, it cannot be oUierwiae. And if it be thus, I be- 



ai8 miioH w 

■eech 70a with a brother's Ion, and as though ibef 

were my dying words, remove the slumbling-blocks. 
Find out, bring to ligbt, and slay every enemy. Har- 
bor not one — DO, nol one disloyal subject. Let Jesui 
be Kiog, had lei hini reign without a riral. O, how 
many, for ijie indulging of on« siu, hare prevented 
cODviction and coDversion ; and for want of ihese, bow 
ninny iiave sunk to belt! And tell me of a darker 
sign io a. professor, tbanonennof any kind indulged. 
Should not that be enough to lead Lim to question his 
being iu a gracious stale? My brother — my sister^ 
witness ray determination; God being my helper, I 
will love and scree him. It is my choice. Be ye al- 
so more than ever determined. As a family, and as 
individuals, let us live to God. Give 10 ibe vain ih« 
vanities of time. Give to the worlding its 'fleeting 
show.' Let llie lovers of pleasure grasp at a pbanlom. 
Be it ours to seek and possess the chief good; lay up 
treasure iu the heavens, and teach for the prize. Then, 
as a family and as individuals, we shall answei the 
end of out being— live in tlie fear and love of God, 
die eiulting, and wing our way to the paradise abovs. 
There, if not below, I will wail to meet you. 
" With a brother's love, 



"DHrRrolhsr, 

"Your letter has come 
forth more graierul emotjc 
your having more sensibly 
Indeed, I praise the God 
lore to my brother in this 



.C.H.sIc 



JUnS BKAIVEBD TITLOB. 319 

vnit joa yet more copiously. May yoD hare goqicl- 



" or late I have rejoiced Ibnt there is an etemiy — 
a glorious eternity. Separated now, (here we sball 
mingle, aad with saints and anfels join. How tlien 
should we act on earih ! 0, had disembodied spirits 
to act over anoihcr life, hQw active would they be I 
Broiher, wba^ would the saiM wbo died rich, now do 
with his money were he here ? Would the thousands 
that hare been scattered to the wiods by prodigal heirs 
be again put into their hands? or would tbey be sa- 
credly disposed o( for God t How much belter, ' in 
that day,' to be found among those who have been 
more solicitous in furnish the church with able miais- 
ters of the New TestameDt, than to adorn afier-gene- 
rations with vanity! And who dare say, llMt by do- 
ing more for Ood and less fi» heirs, souls would not 
have been SKved 1" 

In the following from Mr. Taylor's diary, bis com- 
tnnnion with God, and resignation to ihe dirisewill, 
ehine conspicuously, and are worthy of ibe iraiiaiioii 
of all that come after him. 

" Dec. 30, 1825.— Had, at evening derotion, an nn- 
common blessing, such in kind and degree as perhaps 
I never had before. 1 sang, 

' H^l nvenigo love, that fint begui.' 

'-Being led in examine whether I could acquiesce 
in ihe will of OihI, I asked, (but it seemed as if He 
put the question,) ' Could you, were God la icy, <^ 



tut ttom f our paiBuit, could you rallniiiiUh the intnu> 
try T My teply wu, Loid, thoa knowest this loaches 
ID the tenderttl point— yet I could yield Rt thy bid- 
ding—go to Ihe plough, or to the most servile employ- 
ment. To me it •eemed th«t my will was ioAo% re- 
Mjlved into the will of God. It was a holy talk with 
heiTcn, and beyond expression sweet Gratitude \a^ 
expressible filled my heart, and strutted for ultei- 
ance. I fell before the Lord in my accustomed knwl- 
ing-place, and attempted a thank-offering. 

"Had an opportunity to talk faithfully to a candi- 
date for the ministry. I told him, that, with my pre- 
sent Tiews, it would ne'er do for me to live and act as 
most ministers do. O what an account must sleeping 
■watchmen give! And how will ministers appear, if 
at last they should cry out, Lost — lost for ever 1 Lord 
give me holiness and wisdom. I will hope to lay out 
myself for God. 1 would rather lay me down and die 
than live to dishonor thee." 

Diary, " January 1, 1835— Sabhath evening. — Haie 
just risen from my kneel ing-place, where I thanked 
the Lord, at the remembrance of his mercies- for food 
and raiment— for health— for the use of all my senses 
—for the privilege of living alone— for literary advan- 
tages, books, and instructors. And the visits of his 
love the past year have been frequent- my record 
speaks of some. I have not recorded all, nor all my 
aberrations. My record is on high. The Lord know- 
eth. Clothed in the Redeemer's righteousness, it h 
enoug-ft. 

" 1 thanked the Lord for my parents— that they havs 
been spared— my brothers and sisters too. Althongb 



•ii^HB hu entered oiu borders and threatened the 
femoval of two of our number, they boih live. I thank- 
ed the Lord for benefactors, praying friends, and cot- 
r«apon dents. 

"My prayer was, and is repeated— Lord, blesa me 
tbia year also. Show me 'great and mighty things 
tJiat I know not' Bless me not only, but make me a 
blesstog to my brethren in the college— make me a 
blessing to the college — to the town— to my relations 
and friends. Bless the church — the sons of Leri — the 
candidates for the minislry — scatter light among the 
nations of the earth. Great things have been witness- 
ed dming the past year. This has been an indescrib 
ably happy new year's day to roe. 

" While the brethren were at prayer in my room this 
morning, (as usual on Sunday morning,) a letter was 
left on my desk, of which the following is a copy : 

'Sir,— Yon are (iifpeelsd d— d (IroDfij of haviag infbrmtd 
tbc fueully of tbe niisdaineaiiora o( icTerol of tbe •tudenti. 
Tha evidanCB ogninat you, thuDgh circumitimtial, is of the 
atroDgeH kind. Vou will for the future be strictly irnlched, 
and therafore it nill be prudent far jou (o viiic your bro/hert, 
the tulora, oa aeldom oa poiaible ; far if detected, yoDr puoiib- 
moDt i) iucTitable. Do not treat thii with levitj. ifjoudo 
JOB Bnut enffer the ei 



"I was a little surprised at such a letter; but the 
charity that ' beareth all things ' was io exercise. My 
soul yearned for the unknown individoal who wrote 
the letier. I longed, wiili vieeping tyee and groans 
Vfkich could not be uttered, to see him a rtluming 
prodigal. My heart broke loo fur the college. I'he 
exercise was more earnest than ever before for those 



3k HBHon OP 

aroiinil me, jret my will was absorbed in the wiilof 
God — I saw thai it beloDged lo him to work aalration. 
My soul WBi lifted up with ila longings for a blessii^ 
on the preaching lo-day, and with streaming eyes I 
brose, at the ringing of tha betl, and hastened to beu 
the word. Shall we not see better days 1 

' 1 wrote on the aforesaid letter, 'Greater is he thu 
ia for me, than all they that are against me.' 'Hegireth 
his angels charge concerning thee, test at any time 
thou dash thy foot against a stone.' 1 add, ' Who shall 
harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good? 
The Lord is on our side.' 

"A report is in circulation that an individail h«d 
itaid he t^hould consider himself bound to report to the 
faculty the bad conduct of students. Though 1 am 
not the person who said this, if it was ever said, pro- 
bably the suspicion has fallen on me. Amea. They 
meant it for evil; God meant it for good. A great 
blessing has come to me through an emissary oi 
Satan. — O how would my arms of love opeiL lo him, 
if he would come to Christ. O for the descent of the 
Holy Ghost. 

" Wrote my usual new year's letter to our family." 

" Naumi Halt, Jaancay 1, 183& 
"As usual, I suppose my parents, brothers, andsii* 
ters will be eipeciing a new year's letter. Th«f 
sball not be disappointed — A happy new year to yoa 
nil — to me it has happily begun. 

'' To us, collectively and indiridnaliy, the year 189G 
his been frsughi with good. Prosperity has been with* 
in onr borders. Called, indeed, to talk of judgmenU, 
we have jung- of mercies. All, bat perhaps none mow 



IUIE9 BHA1MEBD TtTLOB. 32S 

tkui Jimea, are laid under renewed ohlig&tioiu to lore 
and seiTe the Lord. 

" RecoHniing the goodness of God to me, 1 find tbai 
It reaches to the clouds. But 'when on Zion we 
stand,' we hope to talk of all bis gooduesi. You have 
bad my testimony already of some of those manifeata- 
tioDS I hare enjoyed. Suffice it for the present to say, 

'The more thy glory ■trikes iduib eyes, 
The tower I gball lie : 
Tbnt while 1 tmi, my loul diall ri>a 
Immaunrdjly high.' 

" I thiutk oar Qod that he hcLS continued our parents 
trith us another year — our parents, always helo red by 
na all. They have fostered us — they hare trained us 
op — they have wept for us — they hare prayed for us 
— tbey lore us. May their declining sun shine yet 
fair, and set in splendor. Methinks 1 hear my parents 
say, we will praise the Lord; yes, we will praise ib« 
Iiord for all his goodness to us and ours. If we listen 
to your testimony, shall we not hear you witness to 
the visits of out heavenly Faiherl yes, you each 
know what it is to bold fellowship with the Father, 
and with his Son Jesus Christ. You know what it is 
to hold converse with God in secret ; and doubtless the 
daily desire of your hearts is, ' Evennore give us this 
bread ;' nor do I doubt that your daily prayer goes up 
for our advance in the way of holiness. 

« Shall brother E. and sister M. see this 1 A liap- 
py new year to them. I need not repeat here, what 
you often converse on together. Every minister, and 
•rery minister's wife, mugt think of souls under their 
owe — souls to be trained for heaven, who are already 
in the way, and souls yet in their sins. 



"Brother F., how do yon lire incollegf 7 Idonot 
hear from you. Axe you getting much knowledge 
upon your knea? 'Aod they shall all be taught of 
God.' Take the promise that I have taken. 'Call 
unto me, and I will answer.' Live so in college, that 
when you graduate, you may stand beside your bro- 
ther, and with him tell the world that there is no place 
wore eligible for adrancemeat in. holiness than col- 
lege. O, let us 'die daily' lo the world, and hare our 
aouls so imbued with that knowledge which does not 
come from books, thai, Moses like, others may see 
that we have been with God. Then, as before Moses, 
sinners will tremble before us. O for a holy tinctum. 

" In the commencement of this new year, let us all 
be solemn. With many it is a day of mirth. Let na 
think on our latter end. We shall find it profitable 
10 do it frequently. Is once • week too often 7 For 
one, I believe I try to do it daily. I go to the grsTe- 
yard for this : I sit on the torob-sionee and read, ' Here 
lies,' and think on my shroud and coffin — the tolling 
t)ell— (he funeral procession— the open grave— the fall- 
ing earth — 1 love to die in imagination. There ia 
nothing mote interesting to me ibao death scenes. I 
know not indeed that my parents shall annronad my 
dying bed; nor that my brother or sisters shall watcb 
my parting breath. 1 am not wortby of (heir kind of* 
fices ; I may die, a stranger in a strange tand. Bui 
what of (his 7 To lie beside my foihers' sepulchres 
would indeed he gra(erul ; but one point of the earth 
is as near to heaven as another ; and, although we may 
Doi rise from the same burying-place, the same iraoi- 
pet shall awaken us, and we shall arise to the tame 
bvaven. Let us try to bring death very near, and tut 



tkMtB BMIHUD TATLOS. 3SS 

nvcral reaiima : 1. That we may fix our ^Ik mora 
finnly on the doctrines of the Bible : the doctrines of 
men will not stand in a d^ieg hour. 2. That our 
worldly pursuita may be lightly regulated. 3. That 
we may seek more earnestly full preparation. 4. 
That when afflicted we may the better sustain it. 5. 
That we may forgive and act towards all as becometh 
the dying. Redeem the time, and so be ever ready 
and waiting for the coming of the Son of man. 

" To conclude. Let us, in entering upon any busi- 
ness, inquire whether it be lawful. Let all worldly at- 
tachments and pursuits bang loosely about us. Let 
oar houses be set in complete order. Let us begin 
notkitig of which we have not uell coaaidered the 
end. When yuu shall have read this, I wish each of 
fos Ui go asida and pray for 

"Jameb." 



Disry. January 3. — "Am truly blessed of God. Be- 
fise the commencement of service at the usual Tues- 
day evening meeting, I sat mosing and invoking a 
blessing. The Lord came apparently with his servant 
—as he prayed, my soul seemed io gain new vigor — 
and while we suag. But as he spoke, a heavenly in- 
flnence dropped— distilled— poured into my soul. The 
Holy GhoBtseemedtocome down— and IfeliAof with 
bidlowed fire. It wa3 an increase upon the blessing 
of last Sabbath— for it was a struggle for souls. The 
■object was, 'God tries the patience of his children.' 
I felt that mine had been tried, and lunged for his 
coming. HUaddiesa l.«ing finished, I prayed. It wai 
still a solemn time, and the divine influence seemed 
to increaie— while this was die burden of our prayers : 

28 J. B. Taylor. 



Balint— for ooraelves, and comernmt and Aolituu 
for the impeniient. 

" Spent B couple of hours in his toom with the preica- 
er nod brother J., where I gained new vigor, exul 
latioD, and titumph, and some practical knowledge. 
Received > leiEet which made my soul leap for joy. 
How thankful I ought to be for the addition of this sc- 
qaaintaQce during the last year. It will doubtless be 
consummated in heaven. The Lord blesses us, and 
makes us a blessing to each other." 

To Rev. Mr. H ,of S 

" Nanau im, Jamtarf Ift, 1826. 
'Tam]rnTiimd,B}'iut«aed Friaiid,ukd thBCtBTehiaUalxHUB; 

" I need not tell yon how often I have perused those 
two letters received from my venerated father in the 
Oospel, nor say that they are among the most valued 
of my letters received. Think then how much I have 
desired a third and a fourth. Almost a year has elaps- 
ed since the date of the last. My affection for you all 
will not allow me to suppose that 1 shall intrude by 
once more breaking in npon a leisure half hour ttf 
yours. 

"If not too late, a happy new year to you, and yonr 
dear family. How gladly would I spend this evening 
with, you, in recounting the mercies of the last year. 
To you it has been full of loving-kindness — your fa- 
mily circle has been unbroken — your happy mansicm 
has been screened from 'the pestilence that walketh in 
darkness, and the destruction that wasleth at noon- 
day.' While others have been called to follow thait 
inmates to the narrow house, you all live. 

" Believing that you ttill take as deep interest is 



JAUES BRUMBRB TATLOR. 327 

your yoong Triend as when you wrote, ' My family, 
with maoy pleasant recollections, unite with me in the 
best wishes and prayers for your beet welfare and 
highest usefutuets,' I need not apologize for (peaking 
a little of myself; for to me the year 1825 has heen 
signalized with many blessings. ' Ten tbouiand 
thousand precioDs gifts my daily thanks employ.' Al- 
most uninterrupted health — local privileges, heaven 
nigh — special baptisnu of the Holy Ghost, producing 
quietnett and eonfidtnce, in which for the most part 
has been my strength. 

' Throagh all eteniit; to th** 
A grateTol *oiig 111 raiM ; 
Bat, O atamitf '• too tbort 
To attar alllby pruic' 

"1 might specify particular blessings, but it would 
extend beyond the bounds of a letter. With me, now 
as you read, give thanks to Him whose mercy endur- 
eth for ever. 

" One of the richest blessings during the past year, 
came in the application of this promise : ' Call upon 
me, and I will answer, and show thee great and migh- 
ty things which thou knowest not.' 0, it was flo- 
riaua, glorious beyond description. At some time pre- 
Tioue, perhaps two weeks, I opened Clarice on the Pro- 
mises. This, among others, I read, I treasured it up 
in memory— 1 believed it — I took God at his word. 
I plead it before him. When applied, it was great and 
mighty in a degree of which I knew nothing before. 
I knew not but the hour of my departure had come. 
It seemed as if my sool was breathing itself out of the 
body. 



SB uiMon or 

" During the past year my call to preach the Qospd 
ha« been made so MHisfactorUy plain that there is not 
the shadow erf's doubt on my miod. 'Wo ia'me if I 
preach not the Gospel.' Like other rich blessings, it 
came with gtvana vhieh could nut be uttered. O for 
a letting into our souls the pewerrul, aTailini;, tn- 
vTDught prayer. What strength does it give iIm Chris- 
iian ! How it prepares for an attack from the worM, 
the Aeih, or the devil ! What a staff in his walks of 
usefulness I 

"You are friendly to a candidate's exercising his 
gifts in public. TomeiCappearstobeauM^enitalpart 
of bis preparatory iraioiDg. Its advantages you have 
long considered. To coiroboraie my asseriion, I conld 
mention the case of a clergymBQ now occnpying an 
important station as a pastor. In bis preparatory 
coarse he was shut up in the city of a close stu- 
dent. Soon after being licensed to preach, he wirs or- 
dained over the flock he now feeds. He wrote aad 
read his sermons. In the pulpit he was orthodox, pi- 
ons, learned; bat in the lecturc'room I was told he 
could not proceed. To this kind of training I hsTe 
devoted some time in the town, as well as in college^ 

"As a proof of Paul's aposlleship, he pointed to his 
success. To the Corinthians he said, 'The seal of 
mine apostleship are ye, in the Lord.' Shall I tell 
yauf It is with diffidence, lest you should think me 
forward and vain. But I will not glory of myself. It 
is a chain in God?i providence; the hook was fasten- 
ed upon a very minute circamstance — one link waa 
added to another. Oae sinner was converted, and an- 
other, and so on to the eighth. Seven have since joiit 
ed the church. Was I not happy in witnessiDg tbor 



IAMB* IIUOtEBD TATLOE. 3S0 

profnaioD, tncl in litting dovn with them at tba tabl« 
of our Lord 1 Perhaps, last tpriog, I labored, beiidca 
mj studies, as much as some who are more fully ia the 
vineyard. It was a teasou full of interest. From 
week to week I now try to act, in my degree, the pan 
of an under-sbepherd towards those lambs. May you, 
my dear sir, see ihem in paradise. 

" The scenes witnessed at Rahway, last spring va- 
eation, form a pleasing association with the year 1B25. 
There, as you may have known, I spent most of five 
weeks. O what a time, when to a room full of young 
converls I said, ' Finally, brethren, farewelL' Tim* 
glides smoothly— swiniy ; studies pleasant for the most 
part. The New Testament in the original, for (he study 
of which 1 have the best critical helps, I read with plea- 
sure, and 1 hope with profit ; this I do daily ; 1 long to 
be ' mighty in the Scriptures.' True, a minister may 
be this, and yet without grace^may be like the sign 
of an inn. For as the one points out a resting-place 
for the wayfaring man, and yet itself stands without, 
so a graceless minister may point out the resting-place 
and give some good enteriaiumeut for the pilgrim, and 
yet bimseli be blasted with the storms of an eternal 
night. O ! how many, like the bells of their churches, 
may have called for others to enter, and may have suc- 
ceeded, and yet hare not entered tbemaelves into the 
ark ! It was a saying of Hilary, Saactiore* aunt atirea 
pfebi« quam, eorda aacerdotwmj which may be freely 
rendered, * How many holy soands are in the ears of 
the people, that never affected the hearts of the priests.' 

" Let the burden of your united prayer for dm be, 
that I may be holy and leiie. Holy, to enter heaveof 
aiid wisc^ to win louls. I have not said the half I. 



mold, xiw in ib« roanon uitcndsd ; but yen h*n dw 
cfliiuon> of k heart onrflowiug with its beat feelinga ; 
fai I owe you a leeigAt of lore. When 1 think of Ihal 
■topping- place, (here are aaaociated all your cordial 
receptions, from my 'first enleriDg in unto you' — aU 
your more than hotpilable eniertBinments — all your 
afivctioaale adieus, to one nnworihy to come under 
your roof. FarewelL I long lo see you aU. ' Happy 
•eaaoDS we hare aeen.' But adieu. 

"Jambs B. Tatlob." 

Diary. " Feb. 3. — A month baa elapsed lisce I wrote 
in my journal. I tometimes fear I am partial in not 
catering minutely into all my exercises. Bat I only 
record special viaitatian» of God ; and hope, in theii 
review from lime to lime, I may be able afresh to re 
alize ' the good band of the Lord, which has been 
upon me for good.' 

" About noon to-day I went to seek a nearer view ol 
bim whom my soul loveib, by readily the Tract, ' A 
choice drop of honey from the Rock Christ ; or a word 
of advice to all saints and sinners.' After dining, I 
mused and read again. I longed for the coming of the 
Beloved — 1 cast myself before the Lord in my blessed 
kneel ing-place, and felt that I owed God more than 
ten thousand talents, and bad not one— no, wit one to 
pay : poor— poor indeed. With a clear view of the 
demerit of sin, I conld point to Jesus and say, titer* 
u my only plea. It was enough, for long- sinca hath 
the Father said, ' la him am 1 well pleased.' The in> 
describable hreakinga td my heart in laying hold oi 
God, are known lo the Qivar. It wu a aweel— melt 
In( season. Sin never, perhaps, appealed ao odieua; 



LDL SSI 

it was in 1BJ riew the great evil ! and m^oDly groBo- 
iogs, which at limes could hardly be uttered, were for 
wisdom and holiness. My every load was taken off— 
I smiled under the light of my Father's countenaoce, 
and glory, glory as a stream, weal out in retnm for so 
great a blessing. It had come from God, and now it 
was goiofc back to God. Yet on my knees, my soul 
was again melted iu riew of the goodneta of God. 
To-nigbt attended my meeting in town, which was 

" Had ■ most precious season before the Lord whils 
reading the Tract, ' The Church Safe.' The strongest 
desire excited was, that God would glorify kimielf 
through my instrumentality. Spent part of the even- 
ing in visiting a sick frieud, whose soul seemed re- 
freshed. Upon my leaving her she said, ' Yon have 
been my best physician to-day.' I hardly ever saw so 
visible a change in any one as in her during my visit 
Another proof that they that wait upon the Lord shall 
renew their strength." 

To Mr. D. and fsmily. 

" Fdmuvn/X 
" So far as I catt see, tM» appears to be the order in 
which blessings sometimes come upon me. The Lord 
gives me to see my meanness, uoworthjuess, sothing- 
ness, and ill deeert, until brought into (he deepest hn- 
■niliation. Then opens Christ's beauty, worth, ftill- 
ness, and his raising the sinner as high as his aioa 
would sink him low. Then, with streaming eyes, bro- 
ken heart, groBDi unutterable, the soul Umga for the 
coming in ot God— pants for the overjloviing ol lh» 
«o<^ng stream- has an uttclum from the Holy On*— 



■a mhbttrdened vihoUy—fiUed with the Spirit, lAxmi 
fruit abounds in lore, and peace, and joy. Such a visit 
of love I experienced yesterday. Sometimes while mti- 
nng the fir« haros — the Father smilea — and comma- 
nioo is sweet. Thus, for the most part, my soul is kept 
in ' quietness and confidence.' to be partakers of Ui 
holiness. 

" 7th. — I proposed to a few fellow-stDdents, and 
woold propose to the wtiole Christian world, that they 
would each, in some sort, comply with the declarD— 
tion of the Psalmist, ' that prayer shall also be made 
coiUimtaUy for him ;' at twelve o'clock each day, say 
fhnn the heart, ' Thy kingdom come.' 

"This morning did that for which I felt condemn- 
ed. It was when off my guard. I raised my cry to the 
Lord, and trust he beard me. Learned anew the lesson, 
' Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation.' No 
one was injured by my sin. Lord, cleanse than me 
from secret laults. 

"At evening devotion had a blessed refreshing. 
Sang, 

■ThoanDlySaTersigB of mj heart.' 

Looking at the watchmen on Zion'^ walls, my heart 
bledfor bleeding Zion. Considered Jesus as the grand 
Architect— u fully equal to (he great work ; and felt 
persuaded that the tenyple would be comtjleted, how- 
ever unfaithful and unskillful the underworkmen might 
be. My heart broke with desire for the bringing in <^ 
a more deooted ministry. I saw that he could purify 
the present ministry, and make them all holy, labors 
«us men— not men-pleasers. 
"In looking at myself, I felt indescribably mean in 



lUUa BtUtHBRD TATLOB. 333 

m; onn eyes, and cried out, Oh, my ignonineel and 
Hw that it must be of the Lord if ever I preach the 
Qoipel. Wiih gtreamiiig eyei I nwe lo fall ia my 
knee ling-place, repeating, 

' La» M thy fMl mjr Mai wddU li< ; 

Hera n&tjr dwcUi and pciea diTiM , 
Bun let ma lire beuealb tbina eye, 
for lif^ ctanuU life, i* this*.' 

I bowed wilh gioaninga which could not be utfeied, 
and lose praising the Lord. 

" llth. — Night before taat I got away from God by 
ainning against him. Alas ! how aggravated my tin, 
after such orerpowering visits of love ! Surely 1 ought 
never mote to have offemled him. Since iben, hut 
more particularly to-day, liU noon, I fell wounded to 
the quick. Being enabled at noon, while reading a 
tract, to arraign myself more closely at the bar of con- 
science, I plead guilty, fell at (he feet of sovereign 
mercy, and God waa abundantly gracious to a rebel- 
lious child. He rettored my tend. He delivered me 
out of all my distresses. 

" At evening devotion, after reading, kneeled where 
the heaven B have soofkenopeneJovermeandleidown 
love, abundant, rich and free. I felt faligued with the 
labors of the day, end expected soon to rise. 1 was led 
to supplicate for my father's house. I asked for the 
little ones, and for my nephews and nieces, that ihey 
might be Henry Martyns Had Harriet Newells. Then 
with desire inexpressible I longed to he a miationary 
In the midst of weeping and groaning I saw that t 
wu mean and ignoiant ; but that Jesui was a com- 



3M MEUOiB or 

plete nutter-ltaildeT. My ciy was to be made fit far 
the very atalion upon the scaffold around his temple I 
should occupy. 1 saw clearlf thai all (hiogs are possi- 
ble with God — that he could carry me through ihe 
work e»eo of an apostle. Well, he knoweih what is 
iert^-and that is best for me — sick or well — prosperi- 
ty or adrersity — rest or labor — earlh or hearea. Amen 
and uneo. 

"It was pleasing to offer up my soul and body, my 
time, talents, influence, possessions, all that I am or 
hope to be. I felt that the Lord accepted the pittance 
I bad togiye, which I also felt was his before. 1 was 
greatly blessed, and walking my room, praised him as 
■he rock of my salvation. This room will stand « 
witDess lo my prayers, those unanswered are lodged 
abore. It will also stand a witness to my follies in 
departing from the living God. But tbey are all for- 
given. The- praise beloDgeth unto God." 

On the 2Dth February Mr. Taylor wrote lo a Chris- 
tian brother who also bad the ministry in view. The 
letter contains some passages that ought to be pre- 
served. 

" I have just come in from visiting a sick Christian ; 
she is happy — sick and happy. Brother, in our minis- 
terial sphere, should we ever be permitted to walk in 
it, I think no higher ofBce of kindness or badge of 
aonship will be afforded us, than to visit the widow 
and fatherless in iheir affliction. This is, indeed, reli- 
gion, pure and undefiled before God. Hence it is im- 
portant that we have our memories stored with hynaa 
saitable for such o 



LOB. 336. 

"Iq my meditations this rveaing 1 ihoughl of Mo- 
ses. He had well nigh eotered Canaan ; but, for his 
sin, he was only permitted from Pisgah'a top to Tiew 
the promised land. O how it wrung tears from my 
eyes to think it possible, that for past sins, or ihrotigh 
sins that I might commit, I should be debarred enieriog 
tipon the holy miniatry. I know I do not deserve this 
honor. I could sigh forth a prayer— Lord, whether I 
preach the Gospel or not, purify the soas of Leri, and 
sanctify candidates for their work. 

" Perhaps 1 never had more confidence in God, ■> 
to the carrying od of his work in the world. I have 
not 8 doubt Jesus will rngn. And my aool has been 
exceeding glad. 'Every knee shall bow, and every 
tongue shall confess.' " 

Diary, March 9.—" On the 2(1 and 5th was refruh- 
iDgly visited by the kind returns of the Spirit, whom I 
had sieved away. But it was only through groanings 
vhicb could not be uttered. This w&s only a fore- 
taste of another love-feast which I enjoyed soon afleri 
when my bouI waa melted into tenderness, captiva- 
ted with holiness, and longed for greater likeness to 
Christ. My views and experience seemed to coincide 
with Edwards', when he said, ' the heaven I desire is 
■ heaven of holiness.' This waa only the precursor of 
another and richer blessing at evening devotion. I 
have yet with the Lord an unanswered petition then 
preferred. I left it with him. 1 believed the Lord 
could bless me wonderfully. I believed all thing* 
were jioasible with him; and I believed he would 
Uessme. lamwaiting for the fulfillment of the expec- 
tation raised within me, I trust, by the Holy Ghost. 



" The world wtnes— ■ vkole (nrrender ii growinf 
in iroportiDce. Lord, did not I make that sarreDder 
to-daf 1 Keep me — O keep me. Have I sought ths 
honart of this inililution — or of the literary society 
with which I am cODoecied ? Has not my desire pre- 
Tailed for the honor that cometh from abore 1 Shall I 
not hare to ascribe much to the diatinguiahiog ip^ce 
of God, for his keeping and blessing me in this col- 
legel May my arobiiioa be to tbxr, love and sgr*b 
God ; let others take up with hueki, give me Christ ; 
the smiles of my Father, the presence of my Com- 
forter. Amen — my loud and repealed amen, 

"I9th, Sabbath.— In last evening's devotions had 
nearness of access to God in remembering my beloved 
parents, brothers and sisters. Pelt particularly for 
brother F. (now in Yale College) and myself, as can- 
didates for the holy ministry. 1 could weep before the 
Lord for a baptism of holy fire to rest on us both. To- 
gether we have watched our Father's flock, together 
may we be faithful under-shepherds over the flock of 
God. I love my brother — I trust God loves him. Onr 
hearts are Knited. 

" Remembered those among whom 1 bare been la- 
boring from time lo time, What interesting groups of 
young converts have I seen. I think I have felt some- 
what as Paul did, when he said, ' Now we live, if ye 
(land fast in the Lord.' Alas ! how soon are the 
lambs torn in pieces ! how alert should the shepherd be. 
" Sabbath morning. — My soul has melted down at 
the presence of Jesus! A prttture of love rested on 
me, and praise, praise, praise in a stream went up from 
my inmost soul ! This mystery, ' Christ in you, the 
hope of glory,' has never appeared so wonderful. Het- 



lAHEB BIUniBSD TATLOIk 337 

vtn tppeared truly desirable. Yet I deaired to live, if 
I miglit, to bring many souls to glory. I should love 
naucb to send thither many a band of youog converts. 
* I desired it mucli, even if at a distance I should only 
'' be a looker-on. My love to God'a children was great- 
ly increased ; and my desire for a clean heart was tn- 
letue. It was given, and my eyes ran down with tears 

" 24tb. — ' Come uolo me, all ye that labor and are 
beary laden, and 1 will give you rest ' — selected as 
the theme for my meeting this eTenin^. Having 
thought of it, it was applied eteeetty to my own soul 
Bt evening devotion. I was not burdened nor weary ; 
but my rest was increased. 

" ] have been thinking to-day opon our ships of wat 
Bs spheres of future labor. I have thought of them 
before, but to-day with some desire, if God will, to 
engage as a. chaplain. ' A man's heart deviseib his 
way, but the Lord direeteth his steps.' May 1 be a 
good man ; for the steps of a good man are ordered 
by the Lord. 

"26ih. — From the testimony of a brother who at- 
leaded the party last evening, it seems that, as usual, 
lightness prevailed. I was invited ; but attended my 
party, my usual society meeting. Enough, enough 
have 1 had of fashionable tea-jiartiea to prove that, 
to me at least, they are unprofitable. This brother told 
me that he felt the worse for attending. Q,uery, Is it 
right to expend money for the dissipation of the mind 1 
to say nothing of the deleterious effects that such variety 
ofviands, generally taken to satiety, have upon the cor- 
poreal system, especially on persons of sedentary ha- 
bits. I was glad of so good an apology as my meeting. 

29 i.B. T>;lar. 



3S8 HEIIOIR QT 

" 30lh. — Memorable, memorable day ! It has been 
a da;^ of days to me. Id it mvck lias been-unspeaka- 
ble and fall of glory. On my knees 1 recorded my re- 
•olaiion nerermote » boast saye in the cross of Cbriit. 
While before the Lord, I have been much affected 
with the Tiew of his overwAefming- greatness, and of 
my owD infinite — infinite lUtlenest. No wonder that 
the beloved disciple became as a dead man. No won* 
der that Moses feared and quaked. But ii is indescriba- 
ble. I have felt so infiniiely unworthy, that I could not 
look up ; yet my hope in God is raised on high. God's 
greatness, connected with his amazing love and con 
deacension, affected me much. I indeed felt constrained 

" The love of Jesus, his life, sufferings and death 
and the opposition to him, as manifested by the int 
penitent, affected me much. The holy influences of 
the Spirit of grace, and the remembrance of ever hav- 
ing grieved him, affected me much. 

" To depart and be with Christ I felt to be dexiTobU. 
Though so undeserving— unworthy even to be a door- 
keeper in the bouse of my God here, yet I could anti- 
cipate the day when be would lake his exile home. 

" Heaven was regarded as a holy place. I was glad 
in the prospect of holy society — God, angels, and 
saints. The thought of dying to knoto more, was plea- 
sant. But at evening devotion my will was absorbed 
in the will of God. ' I give my mortal interests up, and 
make my God my all.' Praise belongeth unto God. 
Let all things praise him. Praise the Lord, O my souL 

" April 2.— Sabbath —' If ye ihenj being evil, know 
how to give good gifts unto your children, how much 
more shall your Father who is in heaven, giv« the 



Hol^ Spirit lo them that ask him.' This scriptare was 
gracioustf applied to me at eTening devoiioD, upoii 
which 1 reeeitred an increase of the Spirit's ioflueo- 
cet. I belie7ed, and according to my faith so it was. 

" 9tb. — Sabbath erening. — The last Lord's day in 
college thb session, and to be remembered as amon 
the most precious; Reriewiog this session, I have 
much to remember, and more than I can record of the 
goodness of God to me. Scientific pursuits have led 
me into an acquaiolance with subjects before unknown 
tome. Lord, sanctify this knowledge. 

" The stady of the New Testament in the Greek 
has opened to my mind many things before hid from 
me. Yet, deeper would I dig into this rich, exhaust- 
less mine ; for the deeper, the more lucid and bnlllant 
the precious gem of truth appears. Lord, sanctify me 
through thy truth : thy word is truth. My weekly ex- 
ercises with the people among whom 1 have gone la- 
boring;, with the view of stirring op any gift I may pos- 
sess, and of edifying my little congregation, has been 
of service to me. Lord, all that was smisa forgive ; 
own what was thine, and may fruit appear at the last 
day. To my brethren in college, loo, in our weekly 
assembly, I have not failed to be plain, pointed, and I 
hopeafTecIionate. 

" To the institution as abody,! hare done but little. 
If it was my duty, I have not done it. I bare not gone 
from room to room and ' warned every man night and 
day with tears.' Only to a few hare I been personal 
in my interviews. Shall these dear souls be lost 
through my miscarriage towards theml In view of 
this subject, and some others, this day 

'* Setolved, that I will, the Lord being my helper, 



think, tpeak, and act as an tndmdHal : for aa aodi 
I must live — as such I most die, stand before God, b« 
judged, be damned or sared for ever and erei. I bare 
been waiting for others to go forward. I must act aa il 
Iwere the only one to act, and wait do longer. 

"The days of darkness hare been few, and onl; 
when I slipped back from Qod. He has not withdrawn 
from me; but I hare most ungratefully and basely 
withdrawn from him. As the earth rolls and inrolTea 
itself in darkness, so by my turning from the Sun ol 
rig:hleousnesa have I been involved in darknesa ; nor 
till turned back again, did I walk in the light, as be is 
in the light; yet, though, like Peter, 1 fell, the Lord 
tamed and looked on me again, and, like Peter, O how 
bitterly I wept. I do not remember that 1 once came 
back but with tears and groans which could not be ut- 
tered. When away, as a father pilielh his children, 
so the Lord pitied me. A father's pity to his wayward 
child is often manifested by the lifted rod ; so my hea- 
venly Father hath ever used the discipline of the co- 
venant, and followed me till 1 again fell the Spirit ot 
his Son uttering in my inmost soul, 'Abba, Father.' 

" The days of peace have been multiplied, seasona 
of holy unction have been vouchsafed, powerfully con- 
straining cords of love have bound me closer to the 
bosom of my Lord. Clearer, more elevating, and at 
the same time soul-humbling manifestations of Jesus 
hare been enjoyed. In a word, my heavenly Father has 
smiled most graciously ; Jesus has showed to me bis 
life, bis labors, his sufferings and death, his exaltation 
and intercession, and his love and care for me. The 
Comforter has dwelt in me as his temple, and I hare 
sweetly contemplated saints and angels as my future 



LOR. 341 

eomiMiaiaiis, and hnrcD as my home. With tncreot- 
itig detire 1 long to entei ihe field, to lay out mjr 
ilrength for God. 

"Not knowing wluti the Lord has for me to do, 1 
un kept from what, perhaps, would be at pleasant tu 
me u to another, and at which some have been led 
10 wonder. Some may thioli me stoically indifTeient 
lo the connubial state — but I fear to act prematurely. 
It is this which restrains me from taking any steps in 
that matter. When it is clearly one's duty to seek 
•nch B connectioD, wilt not a prudent wife come from 
the Lord 7 Sometimes I think of this, and wish that 
minittert would see well to it, that they obtain in their 
companions an increase of power lo help on their work. 

" The blessings attending our happy household in- 
crease. May we ever stand fast, and always abound 
in the work of the Lord. I hope to see them soon. 
May I go in the fullness of the blessing of Ihe Gospel 
of peace, be blessed and made a great blessing (o them, 
and to all with whom 1 may associate. 

" This has been a day of the renewal of my cove- 
nant. Once more 1 have had the most honorable seat 
on earth, a place at the Lord's table. It was a precious 
waiting upon God. I again took the oath of allegiance, 
■bowed forth the Lord's death, remembered him, and 
gave thanks. 

"May 18, 1826.— Since writing the above, haro 
visited my father's house. Reluming, I have now en- 
tered upon my last session in college. Already hath 
it been signalized with a most gracious visitation ; Ihe 
college opened this day at noon— at evening devotioa , 
the Holy Spirit was vouchsafed. My heart's desire 
wu, that this session might be more glorious than my 



btfoTC ; mf prajN, that no blot might attach to m« ; I 
gave my interests up to my faithful Keeper. 

"27ih. Sabbath. — The paat week has been a gloii- 
oas one to me, with the exception of nearly a day, 
when I wandered from God in doingwbat I ought not 
10 hare done. The fruits of the Spirit, so far as they 
have been produced in my soul, have been love, joy, 
peace, lailh, and gentleness." 

" This last trait in James Taylor's character," says 
m friend, " was particularly obserTsble. He did erwy 
thing with gentleness. It was this which rendered his 
leproofs so inofiensiTe and efleclual in his intercourse 
with his friends and with strangers. This chaimcter- 
iatic, added lo a familiarity and playfulness peculiar- 
ly his own, rendered him the farorite of the childres 
of the families in which he visited, for whom he al^ 
ways manifested an affectionate regard, and whom he 
would attempt to interest and benefit by relating some 
story from the Bible, or some striking incident in (he 
history of some child be had read of, or had known. 
His geuileness appeared in all bis rooTemenls; he 
would eren miae the latch of the door noiselessly. 
And on entering a house of prayer, or any place of r»> 
Ugioui worship, be walked as lightly as on tiptoe. He 
made this a principle of action, and reodered it, as he 
desired, a habit j and would remark, when spealting 
of conducting religious worship, that this habit waa 
most desirable in the minister, a^ rendering tha [4acc 
of meeting more impressiTe end solemn." 

''My seasons of prayer in the erening," continnn 
hia journal, "have been times of fecial blessing, ia- 



liMSa BSAIltKBD TAVLOIt. 8<8 

desoribtble, sometime* .^fUo/flory. Mf heart broke 
wilh the longings it bad to live to and for God— re- 
joiced that ChrUt wm in me the hope of glory. 

" Before retirins to rest last night, as usual knell be- 
side my bed. My lenewed petition was that 1 might 
possess, in as high a degree as poitible in this world, 
the life of God in my soul. In the night, while aslee|>, 
I thought myself in company with S and an- 
other person. I aroae and spoke. The Spirit of God 
seemed to come upon me in an unusual manner, and 
powerfully attended my words. The whole bouse ' 
leemed to be filled wilh the Holy Ghost. I was over- 
powered, and sweetly swooned away. I put no inter- 
pretation upon this dream. My prayer has been, my pe- 
tition now 19, Lord, go with me to my meeting ; clothe 
me with power ; gire efficacy to thy word, and let sio- 
nere be awakened and converted unto thee, while 1 ad- 
dress them from — ' Sirs, what shall I do to be saredT 
When t awoke from the forementioned dream, I trent- 
bled ; I felt as if God had been near, and so near that 
I feared. I eadearored to throw myself on his kind 
arms, and to wait his coming, when and bow he should 
please. Even if 1 should lose my life imder his mani- 
festations, I would trust him. 

"1 have been much blessed in reading Bellamy's 
eliaracterislies of love to God. Was greatly refreshed 
before I went to the people this afternoon. Now I te- 
Ure to real after a Sabbath day richly franght with di- 
nne blessings. O to hold fast whereunto 1 have at- 
tained. I renew my petition, Lord, accomplish thy 
will in me, and make roe all that thou woutdst have 
nie to be in this world. I desired to-day to Be wholly 
dereted to Ike Lord. 



"Hay 31st. — Hcud from, and wrote to brother F 
mt Tala college." 

Tke letter written to that brother, himteir also pre 
paring for the minUtry, is ai follow* : 

"Ntimt-EiJt, Jt^ 31, ISS6L 

" Ere this yon are in New-Haven, To-day yoe 
commence your »e«iion. Begin it with God. Con- 
' linne it walking with God. Then, whether you end 
it or not, you will be found with .>um. Thus I cont- 
menced the session upon which I have entered. And if 
I had time, I might testify to the lorlng-kindness of 
the Lord. Suffice it to say, his manifestations bar* 
been overwhelming. Praise him on my behalf. 

" I think the world recedes yet more and more, at 
God cornea in and abides. One thing with me is par- 
amount, and to this one thing 1 voald endeavor M 
bend all my powers, that is, to preach ChrUt, to team 
of him, and teach others, so as to arrive safe at heaven 
myself, and be the means of guiding others there. 

"Brother, let us feel, let ns ask God to impresfi tn- 
delibly on our hearts the solemn truth that w« are 
identified with this generation, and bound to serve it. 
Soon, say in thirty years, where will these millions of 
■ouls be 1 We are a part of them. What power, un- 
der God, have we over tbemi Whatever it is, let us ' 
pDt it all in requisition on the side approved of God. 

" Try to enjoy more of God in your own sodL 
Think not that you can do this and cling to ihewoiM 
at aU. Superfluities must be abandoned; and when 
God potin salvation into the aonl, every tuperfluttj 



IAMBI UUIKKBD TAVLOH. 315 

will appeal to be of no wotlb. Let us give \xp alt for 
a whole Chriat in us, living aod reigning thete—living 
and reigning. O my brother, 1 heard a godly man 
tay last eveaiug in an addreaa, ' 1 believe that not one 
half of the profesiora of religion will ever cross tbe 
thresbolU of heaven.' Let us also beware lest a 
promise being left ua of entering in, we should come 
short of iL The blessing of the Eternal rest on j/ou 
and me. Jjuics-" 

Diary. "June 4. — Sabbath.— The past week has 
not been so signalized as the preceding by successive 
visitations. Last eveniitg had a peculiar season be- 
fore the Lord. I had desired of God to give me a deep 
tense of the turpitude of tin. The process through 
which I received it was more varied and belter felt 
than can be described— but it came ; and never did 1 
have so clear and pungent, yet not distretsing but 
loathing view of sin. It was proportioned to the dis- 
coveries 1 had of the infinite holiness of God. 

" Such a. season of sweet submission of my will to 

the will of God was given, that I wept, and cried, 

glory — glory— glory. This was as spontaneous as my 

breath. I was brought to see and feel my utter kelp- 

lettnet* as never before, and throw myself on God, 

vho graciously received me and afforded me the com- 

nnications of his love. But my nothingness I Infi- 

'» is stamped upon the amazing contrarieties. God 

nfinitely holy. One sin of mine is deserving in- 

S damnation; and 1 should hare it, were it not 

*\ infinite merit in Jesus Christ, for whose sake 

"ifinite God stoops infinitely, and takes up an in- 

'*^, unworthy, self-condemning wretch — O whers 



3*8 Hulou or 

■hall I find an epithet 1 — dreg, (rom a loadisanw, h<»ii- 
ble pit, to BD infinitely exalted statiiin. ' If sons, then 
^iii— bein of Ood and joint heirs with Christ.' 
glory infinite be unto the infinite God. And whnt do 1 
profit him 1 O wondei of wondera I ' Wheie can a 
erealure bide?' 

"June 11 — Sabbath.— Dniing the past week a union 
hu been formed among the brethren to pray for the 
outpouring of the Holy Spirit upon us and [be college. 

" On the 7th, in the evening, had such a view of sin 
■s to make me look at the least aberratiim as enough 
to induce me to cry, Lord, come over the mountains 
of my iniquities 1 1 had an application of Paul's words, 
with a consciousness that I had nought— no not a par- 
ticle, whereof to glory ; so that I was enabled, with 
an uncommon sinking and emptying of self, to put the 
crown on the head of Christ. These were the words: 
' Ood forbid that I should glory save in the cross of 
Christ,' £c. 

"Warm to-day, and 1 hare felt ranch lassitude. 
May duties be omitted because the weather ia hot 7 Is 
this an excuse t 

" 18 ih— Sabbath.— Brother came in th« even-/ 

ing to tell me of an experience he had this forenoon/ 

He remarked that the enjoy 

would not gire for all he had 

t bare heard him express in 

his narrative now, perhaps h 

gion till to-day. He seems 

him to say notliing of it tu ai 

proof that it was a work o 

stances might occur daily. 

hopes here, than wait tilt the 



Lot. 347 

" Lord, establish thon me in holineis ud righteous- 
Bess all the days of my life. M7 CDJoyroent dnrinf 
the last week has been peace flowing as a river. 1 
hope I am growing in knowledge Tor personal edifica- 
tion and future usefulness. My present plan* multi- 
plies aubjectt to preach upon, and may prove an armo- 
ry whence to draw weapons for taj warfare, which is 
sot carnal, but to be carried on with the tword of the 
Spirit. 

"The Bible — in eontempUiing its truth, 1 was ex- 
cited to cry out, 'Blessed BiUe! blessed Bible! 
blessed Bible 1' It so much engrosses my leisure tims 
that other books are neglected. O to be mighty in the 
Scriptures 1 Here 1 compare ' spiritual things with 
Rpiritual.' 

" Had a right feeling for one who has manifested a 
bad spirit towards me. My soul yearned for his con- 
version. for the coming down of the Holy Ghost i 
Boon I shall be gone from this institution. As I lay 
down the other night, had solemn thoughts of dying, 
and sweet prospects of going from this to a higher 
sphere. The thought of dying lo know more of God 
and of bis works — perhaps in other systems — has oc- 
cupied my mind much lately. Surely I would not live 
here always — to die, / beliene, is fain;— to be with 
Christ is best. 

" June 21.— The consideration that I had been three 
years almost in college, without conversing with my 
rellow-siudents, was heart-breaking. To go forward 
seemed to be too heavy a cross. What \ be pointed 

" Making nolFi on the Scriptare*, in bis dnily rendiog. Of 
tbeie ikeletnni be bns left bundrcds. from wbieh ba Died to 
spook eitemporsueoBilir. 



U8 imtoix or 

mt t Be Mibjeet to iheir ri dieote and reproacb ! Do this 
allaUme! The struggle was great, bal it came to this: 
Retolved, in the preseoce of God end by his help, to 
begin and do iDy duty in college, in conversiog with 
my compaDiona in study, i repeated ihe resolution, 
and snerwarda felt much relief. O that some would 
come over and help. Bat if not a aoul cones to my 
help, I am to see and converse with the students of 
this college, if they will allow it, cost what it will. 
My character is not worth a cent, nor my influence ; 
nor my acquirements, aside from the service of God — 
O for help. While at prayers, my burden left me in 
consideration of this truth : ' If any man will be my 
disciple, let him deni/ himself and take up hie crott 
and follow me.' The thought of having my name cast 
out as eiiil for ChrisC» sake, sent sweet exultation 
into my soul. While there, I determined to invite a 
class-mate into my room and talk with him. It came 
in the way, but my heart well nigh failed me. But I 
addressed him— he followed me, and I pray God, who 
witnessed the interview, to raise in power to his own 
glory what was sown in weakness. 

"July 2.— Snbbaih.— The past week has been one of 
crosses. The cross which I have laid hold on with so 
much difficulty, I have on 1yd tagged since. With twen- 
ty impenitent companions, I have attempted to speak 
in reference to eternal things. The mouths of most 
were stopped. They listened and assented to the truth. 

" 1 never had such views of some passages of Scrip- 
ture : ' Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and 
persecute you, and say all manner of evil against yon 
falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad; 
for great is your reward in heaven j for so persecuted 



JAHU SaUMBBD TAYLOR. 349 

ifaejr the prophets which were before 70B.' ' Who shell 
harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good' 'It 
is sufficient that the serrant be a» his Mastei, and the 
disciple as his Lord.' ' If they have persecuted me, they 
xoiU also persecute yon.' ' Consider him that endured 
suchconlTodielion of sinners agaiast himself, lest ye be 
weary and faint in your minds.' ' Ye hare not yet re- 
sisted unto blood.' ' No weapon formed agaiast thee 
shall prosper.' 

" The long-sufiering patience of Qod towards sin- 
ners, daring, Ood-hating sinners, such as I once was, 
wears a new aspect. If I hate their ways — if 1 am 
pained at their wickedness, how mnst infijute purity 
look upon them ! Surely it can make no compromise 
with sin. The least sin is infinitely hateful in God's 
sight ; and the day is coming when his enemies must 
fee! it so in their dreadful punishment. 

" The honor and cause of Qod were never more dear 
10 me. Last evening's devotions were peculiarly melt- 
ing. I never had such a burning desire and such ear- 
nest irresttings for sinners in this college. I wept sore, 
and left the cause of God and the honor of his great 
name suspended upon his righteous sovereignty, 
where I also wish to hang. It was a time of swaet 
relief. I gained the liberty which I needed. 

"Id view of my late attempts here, I find much to 
hnmble me. I asked the Lord to cast a veil of pardon 
ovflr my best deeds— Aut .' indeed, I could see no good- 
ness in them ; but I saw that he can reach down his 
■overeign arm and pluck these sinners as brands from 
the burning. Had a refreshing season in the meeting 
with the brethren, as usual, on Saturday night. In 
prayer for the Hdy Ghost to be poured out as a tove- 
an J.B.T.7i«- 



rtigit gUt, I wu melted and stopped, and repeated As 
try, Lord Jesua, come quicklf . 

" Nineo'cloct, evening. — I have felt, aod to this hour 
feel, thai the glory b eclipsed. During sermon this A. 
M., I listened with interest. In one part of the appli- 
cation, power seemed to attend the word ; and I earn- 
estly prayed that it might go to the hearts of sinners 
present The desire was so intense, that it seemed to 
partake of the spirit of Moses at the rock. I felt that 
it did not lie with meekness on the aonereignty of 
God. A hardness came into my soul — I lamented, 1 
bewailed it. It a now there. O ! sin, what hast thou 
done 1 enough to sink my soul to hell. Sin, the least 
tin presses heavily on me. I see that ii is an infinite 
evil ; and thai those who enter heaven sin no moT& 
This makes heaven in my view chiefly desirable. ' The 
heaven that 1 desire, is a heaven of holiness.' Bat 
what of this 1 What if 1 had beeo as holy as an angel % 
One sin resting on roe is a load too heavy to be borne; 
and here it beclouds every object, and cools every ser- 
vice. Lo, I feelit— and will God forgive me? Will 
he take away my stony heart 1 Will he give me a heart 
of flesh 7 O ! how il dries up my spirits ! I offer no ex- 
cnse; for there is none for sin. But I did not intend 
to interfere with the sovereignty of God. If in any 
thing, I think in this my soul has rejoiced. And if 1 
perish, let God reign. If 1 be dashed like a potter's 
vessel, let God reign, and reign for ever. I will bear 
the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned 
against hiinj until he plead my cause, and execute 
judgment for me : be will bring me forth to light, and 
I shall behold his righteousness. For if we sin, we 
have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the 



3UU» BRAIHERD TATLOB. 351 

tighteous, -who is the propitwiioD for oor sins, lod his 
Mood cleanscth fiom all «iii. This one ihiag I desire, 
and wilt still seek fttier, to be holy and wise." 

We regret lo «ay that the foregoing extracts termi- 
nate Mr. Taylor'a diary, with the exception of a aniaU 
fragment in the year 1828, which shall be noticed in 
its place. It is plain, indeed, that this valuable exercise 
had been followed through the intervening time, but 
the record was probably destroyed by himself, bh ii 
was not found among his papers. We r^ret this the 
more, because, as he advanced in his course, he be- 
came more and more occupied, so that his letters, as 
&r as they have been recovered, are not so numerous, 
and for the most part written in haste. Still, however, 
materials sufficient are in band to enable us to form a 
complete estimate of Mr. Taylor's character, and lo 
hold him up as affording a most instructive example 
to Christians, students, candidates for the ministr)-, 
and ministers of the Gospel. • 

To his brother F., Mr. Taylor wrote on the 8th of 
Aognsl, and referring to the misconduct of some mem- 
bers of college, says, 

" How happy, my dear brother, that heaven has 
placed a barrier between vs and such excesses. Let 
ns be humble and thankful. Let us consecrate those 
powers to God which others prostitute in the service 
of sin and Satan." 

To another of his brothers, an elder in one of tb« 
ekarcbes in New-Tork, he wrote about the same time, 
Bsfollowa; 



361 MmoiB or 

" That the liiUe ZtoA, oa whose walls you haw 
your plac«, gather aircDgtb, is gooi news. May tbti 
tree planted in so rick a aoil, Blr^ deep iii roots ud 
shoot wide its braoches. fitossoms, it seems, have al- 
ready ripened into fraiL May succcseitc spring sea- 
sons come round, and no blight appear. May the heart 
of your belored pastor, and the hearts of the office- 
bearers, and of the little Bock, all rejoice together ia 
the iDgatberiDg of not a little fruit. ' In the morobg 
sow thy seed, and in the eTening withhold not thy 
hand.' And may your inquiry, both early and late, at 
his temple, meet with r*spoiises to encourage and ani- 
tnate you all to do mucJk for Zioa. ' O Zion, that 
bringest good tidings !' What else is worth living for 1 
Dear brother, may our aeasibilities be most tender for 
Zion— bleeding Zion— Zion, against which the wicked 
are arrayed ; but whose cause God, angels, and saints 
hare espoused, and will never desert. How strong our 
consolation ! for when we leod our aid to tbia caute, 
we are sure that it will prosper. Hath the Lord said 
it, and shall he not do it? Those whose hearts have 
been enla^d to embark in this cause, but who now, 
from reverses in business, must curtail their coatribu- 
tions, will not repine that bo much has been safely 
lodged. Will not the Lord recompense them a htm- 
dredfold? 

" When any fail, it is an affliction ; but how much 
greater the affliction when the beaeTolent &il ! True, 
God can open new fountains and multiply atreams, 
when some are dried up: and, before Zion's cause 
shall fail for want ctf funds, will he not unbek the 
earth'i coffers and bring forth millitna to her aid? 
We need not fear; though the friends of Qoi afwp 



JIMES BBAIIIEKD TAYLOR. 3S3 

fewsi Bt present than bis eneinies, yet fais reionicei 
ere infinite. 

" Brother, do you not think it more noble (u act and 
labor against oppoting influence, than it would be if 
tbe multitude fell in with the benevolence of the day 7 
1 think a brighter crown awaits snch noble daring ef- 
forts as the apostles, and martyrs, and reformers, and 
some since their day, have made, than even the efforts 
of those who may live in the millennium : and simply 
for this reason ; because the cross will be less heavy 
to bear when alt take part with heaven. May out ef- 
forts be made with a single eye. The less conspicuous 
here, the more renowned hereafter. Christ was little 
known, and less honored. ' His name, bowever, shall 
be great among the heathen,' and his right to teign 
shall be duty acknowledged : for to him ' every knee 
shall bow, and every tongue confess.' 

" Could I gain access to (he benevolent ones around 
you, who already do so much, 1 would lament with 
them that so much wealth lies dormant in their city, 
when it might be employed for the eternal interests 
of men. I could tell some who hold their pennies so 
close, what I overheard (he other day : — ' 1 wish I bad 
twenty dollars to help my brother tliiough the next 
term in college.' This was said by one who bad atrug- 
gled long and hard for his own education. This men, 
10^, bids'fair to blett mankind; and his brother has 
lately professed conveision, and has the ministry in 
view." 

At tbe commencement, in Septemlier of this year, 
be took his degree of A. B. in Nassan-Hall, and left 



...Googk- 



ibe pUu with the view of eonn«ciiii( biiBsetf with 
the Theological Seminar; at New-Haven. 



CHAPTER VII. 

Al lA* TitelegUa! Snumary. 

Oa Mr. Tayloi't arriral at New-York from Prince' 
toD, he wa> aitaeked aereiely with pain, which pro- 
bably laid the foundation of that disease which cai- 
lied him to an early grare; or rathei was the cun- 
mencemeDt of the disease itself, from which he seems 
never to have perfectly recovered. To a friend i> 
Piioceton, and to his parents, he wrote about the mid 
die of October, giving some accouDt of hii illness. 

" Since I left Princeton, with short intervals, 1 have 
hid pain tipon pein ; have been bled and blistered on 
each side ; relief, however, has been only temporary. 
At times the anguish has been almost overpowering. 
Indeed it has been a sore trial ; yet many a time in my 
distress I have exclaimed. This is not Getbsemane — 
this is not the cross— this is not hell. Grace, I think, 
has triumphed in the midst of suffering. And I doubt 
not of the final good result of this affliction ; ' light, 
and but for a moment f — light, and bat for a moment, 
in comparison with what it might be, and with what 
I deserve. How long I may yet be confined I know 
not, I need not know. It is enough that God knows 



JAMES BVAIHBRV TATLOB. WV 

wkat is bett, and that is be$t for me. My dastrc u W 
be located at New-UaveD, by a week from next W^- 
BMiiay- Thither I expect to go and Tcmam for the 
pNsenl- There is no fever attending my complaint; 
it appears to be b ibeumatic Rfieeiion." 

To his Farenb. 

" The Lord kDoweth the lod thai he hath laid upon 
me. His grace hath borne me up under its weight, so 
that I hare rejoiced in iriUititioa. In the midst of 
judgment great have been the mercies I have received. 
I hare not words to express my obligations to God fw 
the rich manifestations of his love — when writhing id 
anguish of body 1 hare thrown myself on his kind arm, 
•Jid be hath sustained me. 1 think in the midst of it 
all he has kepi me, measurably, in a childlike spirit, 
for my greatest concern has been to acquiesce perfefii- 
ly in the will of God. 

'' This too has solaced me. The suffering time of 
the Christian will be orer— it will come to an end ; 
and this too— the pain of this day, this hour, this nio- 
ment is never to be felt a second time. So much of 
the cnp has been drunk, and the cup that my Father 
hath given me shall I not drink it? 

" The views vouchsafed, both of the past and future, 
have been enlarged. I never saw myself to have been 
so unprofitable a servant. By grace, through faith, the 
prospect of laboring, suffering, or dying, seemed oU 
one; only let God's wilt be done." 

The only remaining msmorial of this year is a lat- 
ter written late in the month of Dscember, givinf u 



366 HEiioiii or 

aeeouDt of his arrival at New-Haren — hia leceptioa 
into (he theological seminary, and of the goodaess of 
Ood manifested ia his ptoridence and in his graciout' 
commDiuceiioDs. Of his health he says, though ex- 
posed to cold and the effects of fatigue, " My cough 
and cold hare well nigh disappeared — I think I am. 
every way better." 

During the lemainder of his life, Mr. Taylor devoted 
himself less than hitherto to conespondence with hii 
friends, a change which he attributes to a losa of i»- 
lish for this sort of excTcise, and the fact that more of 
his time was occupied m writing, as he pursued hii 
preparatory course. Another reason may be found — 
which perhaps did nol attract hia attention — in the irk- 
Eomeness of a writing posture to one whose chest had 
begun to be affected by an incurable disease. 

From the letters which have come into our hands 
we shall present the reader with such extracts aq may 
throw light on his character, or, in our judgment af- 
ford matter of instruction and of religious excitement 
to Christians, and to candidates for the ministry — or 
may serve to illustrate the power of grace in bringing 
the whole being into conformity to God. 

The first is addressed to a pious family, near Prince- 
ton, with which Mr. Taylor had moch Christian in- 
tercourse during his college life, and at whose house 
he frequently held meetings for religious exercises. 

" Ntte-Banen, Ftbmary 11, 1837. ■ 
" Tu Iha dtw Famtty Out dirdi in Ikt Vilh^ . 

^ Of my locatioD in this place you may not Iwn 



JAMES BBAINEBO TAVIMB. 36T 

been iaformeil. 1 address you with the teslimoDy thu 
tiie good hBDd of Qod hat been ufou me for good. 

" Of my illness in New-York you were probably ap- 
prised. Detaioed as I was, 1 doubl not but the JjorA 
taw ic that sickness a link in the chain or my prepa- 
ration for the holy ministry not animportant. The re- 
mains of the attack I feel about me almost daily. 80, 
yon see, I have a daily memento of my mortality as I 
«m traveling to the grave. At this recital I conjec- 
ture that your sympathies are all awake; and I be- 
liere your OTerflowing kind feelings would not be slfiw 
in devising Bometbing for my relief— give me your 
prayers, — I trust you do. Your fireside 1 How gladly 
would I spend a season in that family circle. Thi- 
ther my wilting feet have tended ; but not so of^en as 
I desired. That you welcomed me ever, I owe you 
my kindest regards. The interviews enjoyed, if not 
on earth, I trust will be renewed in heaven. You too 
hare been visited with Gickneas. You doubtless will 
reply, 

■What nbu-kiing worda are ttaaMf 
'Their iwectoea* who can tdit 
'futime, and id •temity, 
"Titmtili«ng}iteim$ietll.' 

Looking upon our cup as from a father's hand, takes 
away its biiterness, and the cup of consolation over- 

" When ill, dear L came in and knell beside 

my bed. I could not but mark one of his eapreisions. 
He thanked God that I had had a trial of my graaes. 
Truly it is a matter of thankfulness that our faith, and 
jiatience, and resignation are trieii. Othetwise, how 
should we know that we poseessed them. If a man 



posiMs a«oiD, the genaineness of which he doubts, B 
test applied will salisfy biiD. So when ooe passes 
through the furnace which out heavenlr Father pre- 
pares for the trial of bis children, though it he heated 
seven fold, if he be a true Christian he endures the 
trial. When one is so tried, he finds that it is one 
thing to lalk of patience and resignation, and quite 
another to exercise them. If we consider a moment, 
we may see how important it is tliat the waf to hea- 
veh lies through much tribulation. When the termi- 
nating hour of the Christian arrives, his trials tenni- 
nate. If he exercise no patience in this world, he could 
never exercise it at all ; for what is there in heaven tO' 
call this grace into exercise 1 But the Lord knowi 
what is but, and thai is best for me. This was ray 
long day and night when racked with pain. 

" I hope you are all abiding under the shadow of the 
Almighty — rejoicing in the light of Qod's countenance 
—sweetly visited with the presence of Jesus — and 
filed with the Holy Ghost, 

' Children oT the hBavenl; King, 
Ai ;b joamer, iWSBtlj ling; 
Sing jour Savior'a worthy proin, 
Gloiioni in bi* warkt and way*. 
Ye ore travcUinf home to God, 
In the way the fnthan trod ; 
They are happy now— and ye 
Soon their bappine*) (hall lee.' 

" May yon follow on to know the Lord — follow hard 
after him— have the intercourse between heaven and 
your Bouls open and free— hold fellowship with the 
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. Thus jroa. 
will advance in an onward and upward coarse. May 



JAME8 BUinCBD TAYLOR 3CS 

Ihe blesBing of God rest upon you all, througL lire— 
at death, may an entrance be Bdminisieied unlo you 
obumtonfiy into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord 
and SavioT Jeaus Christ In the best of bonds, 

"James B. Tayi-ob." 

To the Rev. Mr. L. Mr. Taylor wrote, on bearing 
Ihal he had been bleeding at the lungs. 

" NetB mvm, Marck 17, lffl7. 
'M,d«r,™ryd«arL. 

" I will not, for 1 cannot tell you how often Ihe ex- 
preuion, ' dear L,' has escaped my lips to-day. In^ 
deed since last ereoing, when I beard that you were 
it) and bad bled at Ihe lungs, I have been cast down 
on your account, on my own, and on account of the 
church. And now, in pari to roll off the burden that 
rests on my heart, 1 address you. It is a burden that 
would gladly find its way through my eyes ; bat my 
eyes refuse to weep. 

" When I had written the above, I said I will go and 
pray. 1 did : and now resume my pen. O my brother, 
what a resort is the throne of grace ! It is (here we 
find broken hearts. There we obtain a right spirit. 
Tbence we come refreshed, having cast our burdens 
on the Lord. 



"I told the Lord that I was afflicted on your ac- 
connt, on my own, and on account of the church. 1 
asked him, if it were possible, to bring you out of this 
furnace as gold, and in full health; to live long, and 



under him, to be the metits o( ftopting kaaTen. Bat 
aborc all, 1 pleaded for your loal's best iatereita, and 
a*lrad for the belt blesuogt to rest upon you. I thanked 
Ihe Lotd for one I hired » dearly, for Christ's sake— 
I thanked him for our Bcquaintauce and fellowship. 
Think of the assemblage of associatioas rising in my 
mind — seaBcms togeAer at Fiinceton—seaeoDS in New- 
York — Hearen bless you — I un alTected at iheir re- 
membrance. They are green spota in this wilderness. 
1 thanked God for the proqiect of meeting you in hea- 
ven. Meeting you in beaTco ! Here my heart broke. 
WhM, / meet yon in hearen I I be admitted to so ho- 
ly a phce ! Is it possible ! 1 exclakned, with mell- 
isg heart and streaming eyes, can it be that I, who am 
to unlit, shall ever enter a holy hcaren ! Thank the 
Lord foe the tin/ring I fett — yet how far short were 
iBj views of thai rf«pJA whieh I desnre. It seemed 
that if an anchor were fostened to my neck, and I 
wne rank into the deepest bell, I should not bare hidf 
my desert ; for how often, how aggravatedty, bow 
Img hare I sinned ! Heaven may forgive me ; but I 
can never, no never, foi^ive myself. 

"Brother L., in view of the prospect, I cry out, 
What shall I do I I do Imly feel that I am undone as 
to preaching the Goepei, unless God do great things 
for me. To-day I have desired to lay me down nd 
die, rather than live to dishonor God and his cause: 
and unless he keep me I shalL My experience tells 
me I shall : for alas! how often have i dishonored 
him already, and have thus lost bis smiles ! How of- 
ten wounded my Savior, and thereby feh ibe absque 
0* the Beloved— grieved the Spirit, and thtis lost iKf 
Oomforter 1 O ! ia there in heaven or eanh » gnam 



S61 

it of grace ? or one that is more m aiimer ? 
No W0Ti!s can express the sin, for wbich 1 deserve an 
eieeetting and erernal weight of damnation. Well, 
brother, however ill-deserving, 1 hope I have a gar- 
ment in which 1 shall be accepted at the marriage 
sopper. For this you have prayed — still pray, and 
pray till your voice falters in death, that I may wear 
the garment, aad keep it unspotted. Then, whether 
you precede me or not, we shall both hope to eater and 
Bit down at a table spread with heavenly food. O ! 
how rich the feast prepared for the followers of the 
Lamb ! 1 would not keep back one saint from glory — 
not even my mother — nor thee, my brother L. No: 
if the good and great Shepherd will take one of his un- 
der-shepherds from an imperfect to a perfect service, 
I will say, amen, and hope to follow in due tini«. 
Brother, do you think that you are soon to exchange 
worlds? Think you that you have turned aside to 
die 7 If so, may yon be gathered as a shock of corn 
in its season, fuUy ripe." 

" IVrv-Havtn, A*i«l, 1897, 
-JIy«md«uMiitli«, 

" I hoped before Ihii to receive intelligence from 
home respecting your illness ; but not a word ; 1 there- 
fore presume you are no worse. 

'lamgtadthatl went home; for I trust I was permit- 
ted to add a little to your comfort in kneeling beside 
you and supplicating for mercy and grace in your behalf. 
Had I not believed that you consulted my progress in 
etndy, 1 should have remained longer; but you would 
tatberthat both be denied the pleasure of each others 
■ociety, than that I should be retarded in my course. 
31 j.B.rnTiH'- 



303 HutotB or 

"Abore all, I rejoiced ia your consolation that 
■boQnded. And my eomfoTt hu been, whea 1 have re- 
membered my dear mother, ihat the Lord lifted ibe 
light uf bis countenance upon you, and caused you to 
rejoice in that ligbt. Hail you not the bope of eternnl 
life, what gloom would spread around yoa ! With 
this hope, the pathway to the tomb is illuitiioated, and 
each Euccessive step is one more towards a world of 
brightueas and blessed fruition. Yes, there is some- 
thing beyond lime worth dying to possess. Heaven — 
the society of God — angels and saints — the eternity of 
ever iaereasing joy. Sin will be no more. Friends, 
who are the children of God, will not be separated — 
(hey will have one home, one service, one intereEt, 
and they will surround the sa.iae throne. How happy 
our friends who have gone thither ! How happy ihey 
who are on their journey, when tbey shall join those 
who have gone before ! 

"May my denr mother, in this time of trial, find her 
faith increased — her bopes stronger — ber prospects 
brightened, and ber pace quickened. 

^' We hope— for we pray— that our mother may yet 
be spared to us. But were I to be called to die— to be 
with Christ, let none keep me back- However trying 
it would be, I hope for sustaining grace, if called to 
bury my mother, and to live in the prospect of meeting 
ber— my father— and some, if not all of the family, >I 
the rigbi hand of tbe Judge. 

"Intbis sickness still keep your mind stayed on 
God; lean on the arm of the Lixd — commune with 
Jesus— and may you be filled with the Spirit. 

' Your SOD, with iocreued aflection. 



JAHSa BBA^^EBD TITUIB. 383 

In a letter bearing date April 2, 1827, Mr. Taylor 
wrote to hb brother, ipforniing him of the cominence- 
ment of a reriral of religion in Yale College ; in con- 
lequeoce of which, he says, "as a class, we hare 
given np our instructor for the present session." 

At the same time Mr. Taylor was inrited by the 
pastor of the church in Bridgeport, and subsequently 
ia Trumbull, where a work of grace was in progress, 
lo go OTer and help them. From these places he 
wrote several letters to his friends, giving an account 
of the work, and of the success of his labors: from 
which it appears, though the tniih is told with much 
modesty, thai the Lord honored his young servant 
with a success which, together with his piety and the 
acceptance he met from the people, gave high promise 
of usefulness. To his mother be wrote; "The min- 
isters where I am laboring, license rae verbally, so 
(hnt I preach as really as they do.» They send me in- 
to the pulpit, &c. This is of (Aet'r seeking, not mine." 

To a brother whom he greatly loved, who, it would 
seem, had questioned the propriety oflhe course be was 
pursuing, Mr. Taylor replied in the following letlerl 

" Tnimbull, Mif 3, ISn, 
• Hy Bnr dear Bratbrn. 

" Your fraternal epistle reached me last evening, af- 
ter the fatiguing labors of another day. Did you know 
how it refreshed me to hear from yon, perhaps you 
would write oftener. 

" Of all people in the world, I have the least reaioa 
to doubt the tender regard and timely solicitude of my 
biotbers. Too much has been manifested on your 
pjTt, lo leave me in donbi as to your best feelings. I 



am fullr pfmiaded that your most cordial desires an 
enlUted fur my welfare ; and oAen with weeping hare 
I thanked out common Father that I have lelaliona 
and friends so valuable as you, and as you have hath 
proved yourselves to be to the unworthiest. Even 
now, Epouianeous tears fill my eyes, and my soul 
breaihCB the prayer. May heaven hlesa you both, and 
all yours, now and for ever. 

"All the 'power' thai belongs to me 'ecclesiasti- 
cally,' is that of a lay member, for I am simply a mem- 
ber of (he Cedar-street church. As such, it becomes 
me, in common with my brethren, to ' do good to all.' 
What greater good than that of winning their souls to 
Christ? To attempt thig,ia the duty of the vieakttt, 
at Tcell at the mott gigantic servant of Jesus. 

" That I have a call of God, besides, to preach the 
Gospel, I have no more doubt than of my existeoce. 
This I count a biasing, one I did not enjoy when I 
began to prepare tor this work. But since I received 
it, it has been peculiarly satisfactory ; and what all do 
not have the happiness to possess. It did not become 
mine, but through strong cries, and many tears, and 
wrestlings, when I was in college. In grateful re- 
membrance of that season, my pen has stopped, to 
weep— and thank the Lord. It is a blessing of bis im- 
partmg. Not to me, but to Him be the praise. It it 
9 blessing of great worth to any one who attempts to 
preach the Gospel, to feel that he has a eommiatian 
'from. God. I now feel as I have felt: 'Woiame,il 
I preach not the Gospel.' 

' The power that I now exercise, if I exercise any, 
ia this, simply this, and no more than this, ' Speaking 
the truth to my neighbor.' Zech. 8 ; 16. This I d« 



JAMES BIUIHBRD TATLOK. SOS 

'pablicly, and from house to house,' by night and by 
day, as I have opportuniiy. What I do, is dooe aodet 
the sanction and wish of the K^alarly ordained pasiois 
of these churches ; and, if I mistake not, from the ex- 
pressions of some, in accordance with the ardent 
wishes of the churches themselves. If this be wrong, 
let a man prove it so, and 1 will cease to do wrong. 
What matters it whether I take my stand in a pulpit 
or on a stump in the fields ? If in the church, why 
under the pulpit rather than in it 7 If the question be 
decided by conreoience, both for the audience and the 
■peaker, the pulpit is the place. To me this seems to 
be straining at a gnat and swallowiitg a camel. Knock 
down the pulpit and raise a platform ; to me it makes 
no difference where I stand ; but I like to see the peo- 
ple, and the bearers generally like to see the spe^ei. 

"It is known that lama student of theology. The 
minister, in the church, and when present at other 
meetings, alwayt pronounces the benediction. When 
absent, 1 close the meeting with a short prayer. ' I am 
not ashamed.' Why should I be? God approves— 
sinners are awakened and converted — meetings are 
crowded— houses are opened to receive me— the work 
of Ood is advancing — the harvest whitens. Says tht 
mioister, with affection and emphasiB— ' We love you, 
and wtsA you here' — praying forme, and on willing 
that I should leave him. 

" When the cry is all around, Help, help, help, shall 
I close ray mouth because a man may make a distinc- 
itoD between a pulpit and something else, when no 
mch distinction is made by iheBiblel Never— were I 
to die to-day, I feel that I ought not to hold my peace; 
nod a* I know of no statute that forbids my naming a 



laxt to ipnk from, and aa I find ihia ihe moat oaiT» 
nient for my aelf, and every way acceptable to thosa 
who hear ma 1 preaume I shall not be censured for 
this. 

" The quFslioD is, What U right 7 not what this ot 
that man aays, without alledging his proof. Shall I 
hold mf peace 7 Kj labors have been bo great for 
some time past, you need oot be surprised if I turn 
*side and rest awhile. I sball be glad once mare to 
fall iDlo your embraces, and to be refreshed in your 



"May yoQ increase more and more in this world's 
goods, but especially be rich towards God. Through 
your muoificence I abound, and am now, as I always 
hare been, your obliged and a&ctionate brother,' 

"J. B. T." 

• To Ihe «aD& 

" New-Bavtn, Jhh*, 1887. 

"Mj dear BnMkVt 

" AAer I left you m New-Tork, I returned to Tmm- 
bull, and foond Ihe slate of things increasingly inter- 
esting. 1 spent the last Sabbath there : between thirty 
and forty attended the inquiry meeting. A solemnity 
rests on the minds of many : indeed the whole pariah 
seem awed. To what it will come I know not — as 
many as twenty hare expressed hope. The chunk 
are siDgnlarly alire, and seem much united. 

" I am here ; and the principal work before me for 
the summer is the study of the Scriptures, iriiich I 
lore. 

"1 hope you enjoy neamesi of access to God day 



IAMBS BKAIRBBD TATLOR. SST 

bf day. Thii afternoon my sonl was ezceediDgly n- 
Grethed. Mayyoars b« doubly so— aay,aluui<ilKdroU. 
" Yovit aflectioaaie Jaius." 

The reader will Tecollect with what agoniziDg eaiif 
estneis, and persevering importanity, Mt. Taylor pray- ' 
ed foT the conversion of his friend L. P. both while '' 
at Lawrenceville and at Princetan, as noted in odt ex- 
tracts from bis diary. That he did not pray in vain, 
will be seen from the following letter, dated 

" ytm-Otttn, Jiau 29, 1837. 
■ Mj dair, dnr Brulwr, 

" Is it — is it true 1 The intelligence of this mom* 
ing, let me assnre you, gladdened ray heart. The 
mingled emotions of my soul sent me weeping to my 
knee ling-place, with thanksgiving on your behalf, and 
to pray again for the friends I always loved, but who 
now in our Lord Jesus Christ are dearly beloved. 

"The language of my heart has been, since I saw 
Mr. B., O that I could see you, were it but for half an 
hour; for I would listen to you, and peradvenlure tell 
you how, in days gone by, 1 have felt, and wept, and 
prayed for you: for none, as for my dear friend P— , 
have I ever and so often agonized in secret places. 
The thought of spending a happy eternity nt Qod'a 
right hand with you, well nigh broke my heart tkit 
morning; now my soul rejoices in the prospect. 

" Having tasted that the I^ord is gracious, and felt 
■olicitude for those whom you have left in their aiia, 
yon will now interpret what perhaps you might, at oita 
lime, have thought ifUrtuive in me, as flowing from 
benevolence, oveiQowing benevolence, fur your best 



368 Mmoii or 

ioteresta. Indeed It was so; and not unftcqocntly was 
mr toul iweetir visited when in prayer to Ood for m; 
friend P . Thus yon hare waj whole heart. 

"By a note from Mr. B. I learn that at the lost com- 
mvnion thirty-eight were added to the church. Hap- 
py dayi for L. ! Did 1 know the names or the indi- 
vidnais, I might recognize not a Tew old acqaaintancea. 

"Comparing 'the fruits of ihc Spirit, lore, joy, 
peace,' &c. with the joys of former days, do you not 
exclaim, in amazemeui. Where have I been eo long? 
And while you feast on the provisions of the Lord's 
bouse, does not your bouI cry out, Evermore give me 
ibis bread ? To them who grieve Dot the Holy Spirit, 
be is rich and ever new in bis roanife stations. From 
the height of one attainment we rise to another, till, 
instead of ' from grace to grace,' it shall be from glory 
to glory. 

"Since I had the pleasure of seeing yon, as yon 
have probably beard, I have, in the view of others, been 
over the grave's month. Prom my attack last fall I 
am well nigh recovered. To me the visitation was of 
no little importance. I thank our heavenly Father for 
It. It was from a Father's hand. Though racked with 
pain of body, my soul enjoyed the presence of God. 

" Shall I tell you that more than ever I feel the im- 
pottance of being wholly devoted to Qod? Well may 
every Christian, and especially every minister, lay 
himself out for God, as a co-worker nilh him. Each 
in his own sphere may do something. Happy (he man 
who gathers but one sheaf I ' They that turn many to 
righteousnesi shall shine as the stars for ever and 
ever.' But I need not urge yon to action. Doobtlasj 
you hava been up and doing with yonr might. Doubi- 



JAKES BSJUKERD TAYLOK. 389 

1«M JIM are daiir wmlking with Ood, uid find the 
blessednesi of it in secret, in the family, in the social 
circle, ia the house and ordinaDces of God, ia youi 
valks of usefulness and deeds of well-doing. I bid 
you, with all my heart 1 bid you, Qod speed 

" Ijet me tell you that Qod puts honot upon my at< 
tempts in his aeirice. Suffice it to say, he gives what 
I think I am most athirst for — souls. Lately I have 
been in two rerivals. 

" Often, when iit L -, my fellowship was with 

the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ — often 
when in Princeton. Associated with those places are 
not a few of the greenest spots in my wilderness. 
Here, too, in New-Haven, Heaven deigns to refresh 
me with gracious rains. Pray that the fmit may be 
unto everlasting life. 

" How often have 1 contemplated your fireside as 
one of the happiest. Has it, now, what shall be both 
'grace and glory' to it? I doubt not your willing feet 
bring you to the domestic altar with youi morning and 
evening sacrifice. On that altar may a prayer now 
and then be offered for one, even for me, who would 
be holy and wt<e — holy, to please God, and wise, to 
win souls. 

"In the best of bonds, yours truly, 

' " James B. Tatloh." 

As evidence of Mr. Taylor's devotedness to the 
cause of his Master, his readiness to labor in that 
cause, the estimation in which his labors were held 
by the people, and of his own continued spirituality, 
we give the following brief extracts from letters wiil> 
tM the last of July and 1st August, IS27. 



370 HSMoni or 

" With pretty good bodily health, I am blessed with 
what above all things we value, the renewed visits ol 
3ur Father's love, the presence of Jesus, and the in- 
eumiDg of the Holy Spirit. For a season past, ntf ea- 
jof meat in divine things has been uncommon. 

"Somehow 1 am drawn in to tabor, besides mf 
(Indies. On Friday erenings I meet a company, fo 
whom I try to speak the truth with all plainoess. This 
meeting is made np of the higher circle of youn; la- 
dies of New-Hnven. This is not of ray own, but of 
the seeking of others. On Satarday evenings I some- 
times address an audience. On Sabbath, at two 
o'clock, I meet a Bible class; about one hundred and 
thirty present last Sabbath. By means of the latter, 
1 feel that 1 am profiting; for 1 devote some time to 
preparation. This is the little that I am doing. 

" I may tell you with safety that God puts honor 
upon my endeavors to do good. Sinners are convert- 
ed, and saints quickened, in some few instances. Thus 
here, as in other places where I have been located in 
my preparatory studies, 1 hope to have a hand whom 

In most of Mr. Taylor's letters written after bis at- 
tack in New-York, tliere is reference toa slight indis- 
position — a Theumalic affection — the remains of bis 
disease, &•. We now present the reader with one 
which shows the progress of his malady, and which 
gave the painful presage that his career of light would 
be shod. 

"J^tiB-Havtn, Ottebtr^, 1837. 
■ Mr d«r Brothar, 

"By a letter to H , you will see that 1 was proa 



JAHU BBAIHGBD TAYLOII. 371 

pered in m; joarney. Haring airivad u New-HaveD, 
and Gtled my room for business, I was just ready lo 
eater upon my work, when tkat happened whence I ap- 
piehended serious consequences. The resalt, howerer, 
IS such, that, did I nol Tear an exaggerated report migbc 
leacli you, I would not trouble you. Reaching my 
room, after dinner, on Friday, 1 cougbed a little, wbicji ' 
was succeeded by Uie discbarge of some blood ; after- 
wards, a spontaneous flow of perhaps a table-spoonful. 

"Neither at the time, nor since, have I felt any ill 
consequence ; so tbat, judging from my feelings and 

from the opinion of Dr. I , it is thought that the 

blood came from the throat, not from the lungs, as 1 
apprehended at &tit. 

"These are the facts: and the occurrence demands 
improvement, and calls for my grateful acknowledg- 
ments, lis first effect was to break my heart. This 
I needed. And as the purposes of God relate toallac- 
tual evei^ts, so it was his purpose that this should oc- 
cur. And 1 have looked upon it as a blessing; for it 
brought in its train a course of things that has made 
my soul happy It has effected a desirable change in 
my feelings — 1 see that 1 may not be of so much im 
portance in Qod's system of means as I may hare 
thought. 

"It has led roe to conclude, that if God has laid, or 
intends to lay me aside, it is for one of these three rea- 
sons: that I should not stand In the way of others; or 
that I should not run ahead too far; or that He has 
other work for me to do in another and higher sphere 
(rf* action. 

"This providence will probably shut me out from 
ihoM doors which I might have entered to labor, and 



373 HEKoiB or 

•0 aOurd me a more quiet fteision to beeume acquaint 
ed with theology— a matter of do small importance. 
It is, at least, a ready excuse to give for non-compli- 
aoce with raised eipeccation at my return, and lepeav 
ed appIicatioDE to enter the field again. 

"It has benefited others. Much of the kiod feel- 
iogpofdear friends has been enlisted in my behalf— 
and some have been led to see ihatwe know not what 
a day may bring forth. It may be that thia is an evil 
which is incidental to ihe highest possible good to ma, 
and the good to be accomplished ihroogh me. There- 
fore let us receive it at the hand of the Lord as a kind 
memento. I look upon it as a love-token from his hand. 
True, I may have brought it on myself by improdence, 
but I am not sensible of any such cause. 

" Whaterer be the result, I am in good spirits. No 
way depressed, but greatly raised. No where do I tie 
so sweetly as in the haod of Ood. I am looking for 
more of the presence of (he Lord ; and hope to tire the 
life of obedience. Liring or dying, the prospect ia 
pleasant, farewell. 

"J. B. Taylor. 

" P. 3. By far more did I feel for my friends than 
for myself; for I feared they would not acquiesce. 
Let us wait and see if, in all, we shall not have occa- 
sion to say, He hath done alt things welV 

" Nete-Hmve*, Ab«>m6<r S, I8ST. 

"My dwr, nr; d«r BniUHr, 

"1 delay not to answer your letter receired thia 
morning ; for I feel that your past care of me, and pre^ 
sent solicitude, should b« met with correspondijig ex- 
pressions on my part 



lAHES RajUKBRB TATLOB. 373 

"S1d« I wroie yon, I have felt no iocoiiTeDience 
from my bleeding, unless ii be a little soreness of the 
throaL I do not apprehend, nor is it apprehended by 
others, that the blood came from my lungs. But, as 
It is wdl to know the worst, bleeding at ihe throat 
tendt to produce bleeding at the lungs. It often fol* 
lows in ita train, unless proper precaution be used. 
80 it was with one who once lived in New-HaTen, 
but who is not. Dr. Taylor mentioned his case to 
me, with the caution, 'Take care.' 

" My dear brother, my heart, as you know, has been 
in the work of the ministry. I need notlellyouhow 
it has bled in view of turning aside. But I think I 
have said at the footstool. Lord, thou badest me go 
forvard; if ihou say return, amen and amen. 1 have 
been happy in the varied view I have taken of the 
case, and yet I hope to live and labor in the vine- 
yard. To realize this hope, I see, or seem to see, that 
it becomes roe to 'take cate.' You need not appre- 
aend my engaging in meetings. I liave not enlisted, 
nor da I purpose to enlist in public labor of any kind. 
But I would remain in quiet, patient waiting, so as, 
if possible, to recover ^{f^. It doth not become me 
to commit suicide ; of this I feel no danger. Inclina- 
tion would bid me onvard, but 1 think 1 shall hold 
the reins with a steady hand. 

"My dearest interests, my dear brother, are identi- 
fied with Christ's. As it is the purpose of God to sub- 
due rebels to himself, so I would be loyal, and enlist 
ray all to subdue others— and so would you. Well, 
as becomes wise and good men, may we act our part* 
below; ihm rising, it will be to move in a higher 
32 



374 HuioiR «r 

■|ib«re, and live among the angali. Happy, glotiotu 
chaDge !— Last eventDg I bad a nio>t sTeet, filial ap- 
proach to our heavenly Father. 

"I wish you and my other friends to nnderstaiid 
that I am not cast down ; far, far from it : and why 
■bouldlbe? 

" DO ! as I told you, ' it is a love-token from Him 
who, as a father, pitietk his children.' Let, ihen, your 
thaDk-offering arise that it is do worse. May you be 
greatly comforted with that comfort wherewith 1 am 
comforted. An affectioDate adieu. 

"James." 

" ?liw-Ibvtit, Alvrnakrll, 1837, 
"Mr d(u Biatliar J. ud Sum B. 

"1 doubt DOt you now and then mention my name, 
as you conrerse around your fireside. Gladly would 
I interchange words with you, and tell you how hap- 
py I am. Surely lam blesied of God. You know my 
late trial — the sweetneiiB resulting is beyond descrip- 

" You know that leaving business, I commenced 
preparation to preach the Gospel. My prospect of en- 
tering the ministry, as the time approached, has bright- 
ened, with longing of soul for the work. Often, in 
your hearing, have I hailed the coming day. The is- 
sue of my late bleeding may determine my future env- 
ploy — nay, my stay in this world.. O, my dear bro- 
ther and sister, it is sweet to lie pattive in the hand 
of God, and know no will but his. But my heart is 
full. To this state of feeling I hare eoiae only 
through tears and lying low at mercy's door: and now, 
when I think of the dear, dear object of co-working 



lAMsa 'bkajresd tatlor. 373 

with God in preaching the Gtospel, my soul flndft rea- 
dy way to my eyes. Musi I — must 1 give it up? O 
my Father, roy Father! must I go back? Itdoeanot 
siot ray spirits— far from it ; but it breaks my heart 
— 7tear3 run down my eyes. It swells my soui to un- 
utterable language, till I lie and ^oan before Ood. 

' Indeed 1 am not worthy to look up — how mucli 
less worthy to be put into the roiuistry ! Well — for he 
that doeth all things well, knows what is betl, and 
that is best for me. 

'■ Heaven never appeared more desirable — I have 
longed to see the King in his beauty — never did I gain 
so near access to God. Dying seems like going to roy 
Father's house. And I could gladly bid adieu to the 
wotid— to those I tenderly love, lo parents, brothers 
and sisters, to you, for my aniicipaied home with 
ChtUt* whom having not seen, I love — but 1 would 
willingly live and labor yet for threescore years and 
ten, nor count the time long ; for I have longed — 
longed to enter heaven, after having, under God, been 
the means of sending multitudes thither. 

'* The cup which has been put into my hands I 
would drink ; yet my heart's prayer has been, ' If it be 
possible, let this cup pass.' I have felt this evening, 
that if God would but speak the word, his servant 
should be healed. This, however, may not be best : 
surely, then, you and I should willingly say, ' The 
Lord reignelh.' 

" To contemplate this hand that moves to address 
you, stiffened in death — to view this 'mud-walled col- 
lage,' already shaken and tottering, fallen to the 
ground — is sweet — for should I not sleep aweetly? O 
yes, and my active spirit, which now clings to Jeans, 



would be adoriag, aeiiTe and wondering among the 
spiriis of (he just made perfect. 

" Dear, dear btulher and sister, it is but a little way 
from ibis to yonder mEiDsiona. We each expect to find 
a welcome resting-place. How sweet the earnest! 
Only a little while, and we shall be there. 

" Aflectionately, James. 

" P. S. Since K. left, I have not noticed any blood, 
Bare this morning, when a little ttreak was eipecto- 
rated. I should not mention this, but you would know 
the true state of the case. Rbeumatisra makes me an 
old man." 

It will not be uninteresting to introduce here some 
of the conrersatioB of Mr. Taylor at this time, illus- 
tratire of bis feelings in view of the incident to which 
we have alluded. It was noted down by a friend who 
was a resident in the same family at the time, and his 
frequent companion. 

" When first attacked with bleeding," writes his 
friend, " he called me into his room and remarked, 
'You see, my dear brother, to what God is calling mc. 
I am not frightened : my mind is perfectly composed 
and happy. I hare desired to live and preach the Gos- 
pel, but the will of the Lord be done. 1 believe that 
God bas in reserve a better portion for his people, in 
heaven, than in Ihi-i world. Tliis is a good world — I 
have no reason lo complain of tkia world — I am not 
tired of it-^I am happy lo continue here, so long as it 
is the pleasure of my heavenly Father (hat I should. 
I cannot say, so far as my individual interest is con- 
cerned, that I have any i^tiice whether to live or to 



UME9 BtAlIfEBS TATLOS. 37T 

di*. If God has no more for nie to do in this world, I 
should be happy lo di« here, and go from this room to 
tn; home in heaven.' . 

" Here we both paused in silence for some minutes, 
when the recollection of his friends came over his 
mind, and he added, * But, O my dear friends '—here 
his tears burst forth profusely ; and he wept in silence 
for some time, and then coniinned, ' My dear parents, 
brothers, and friends bare been so kind to me, and 
.bave so much nniicipaied my becoming a minister of 
the Gospel, thnt my heart is pained, deeply pained at 
the tbooghi of their expeciaiioos being: disappointed : 
but this is good for me, it is jusi what I needed.' 

" After a short silence he said, ' My dear brother, I 
now em sensible that I sinned in indulging that re- 
pining thought : I now feel perfectly resigned to tbe 
whole will of God. I am happy — perfectly happy.' 

" The next morning he said, ' My soul melted down 
before Qod last night, when I continued to ask him to 
let me live and preach the Gospel— but I cheerfully 
submitted all to him. O, brother, God has made such 
discoveries to my soul as I never expected or dared 
to hope for in this world. It is wonderful ! wonderful I 
my body can hardly eonlain this immortal being that 
struggles within I I am willing to live my threescore 
years and ten. I wish for it ouly that 1 may preach 
the Gospel ; but I shall be happy to finish my work, 
and mount away to Jesus !' 

" Nov. 14th, ereniDg.— He said, ' This has been > 
wonderful daj to me. This morning I bled a little— 
juit enongh to remind me of my condition— 1 am 
thankful tor it, for God has by it made this day aa 
It of heaven to my soul.' 



S7e tuMoiB or 

" Nor. 16l— ' Afflictions,' said biolber Tayin tti 
mgrning, ' are good, becauM tbey come laden with a 
rifb blessing. I wish all the woild to experience tba 
same that I do — not my pains, bat tbe blessings which 
attend them : erery pain through which 1 pass, 1 thiak 
that now 1 have taken one portion more of tbe cup— I 
shall nerer hare that paiu again, but tbe blessing 
which it brought to me will endure for ever. Aftat 
all,' said he, ' what are my painsl They are not Oetb- 
semane — they are not the cross.' He iheo lepeatad 
the hymn : 

' O what STB an my talTetingi ban,* Iw. 

" Again, * 1 nerer before expenenced such a fallneu 
of grace. It seems as thoogh my immortal spirit could 
not reside in this tabernacle — as though I mtist fly 
away to Christ. Yet my life is a history of sins and 
mercies. Ne?er before have 1 felt myself to be so 
guilty a sinner. I deserve to have a miilst<me Astened 
to my neck, and to be anchored in the depths of bell.' 

" Again, in the morning, after much pain and Ian- 
guar during the nigbt, he said, ' 1 am well, and calm, 
and happy — it was a happy night— every few HW' 
ments my soul awaked to hold sweet commnnitm with 
hearen. Let this clay peritb, if Ood will — my soul it 
happy in Him, and all will redound to bis glory, wha- 
ther I lire or die." 

•■ Ktw-Otvm, JVst. as, 1837. 

•DHtttMlMrK , 

" Ywur letter reached me in due tune, and upon its 
eontenta I hare beeit pondering. After consideiiiig 
my case, it aaemt to me that I ought U tauuan kam 



JtMEB BEUNEBD TAYLOR. 379 

Wlutt liltle applicaiion I nuke is a necessary relaxt' 
Hon to my mind ; anil it is with this satisfying consi- 
derolioD, thai it is in connection with my course. Be- 
sides wiitipg dissertations, I fiod that I can investi- 
gate the subjects in theolc^y, and so teep along with 
tli« proressoi. Every thing on the part of my landlady 
is done to make me well, and kiad'frienda evince their 
good feelings. Were I away, 1 think 1 should be un- 
happy, as I do not see that it would be duty to leafa 
at present. 

" Rbeumatism, or some other irm, yet troubles ma 
m my sides, and disturbing my sleep, tends to debili- 
tate my system. Twice since I wrote, a liltle streak of 
blood has appeared when I expectorated. My th/oat 
and laagi/eel in their usual vigor. 

" My soui leaas on God, and sweetly reposes in his 
will. With a weight of love to sister E. whose kind 
hand I remember as often extended to alleviate my 
paia; I am afieciioikately yooia, JAMEa." 

"Sea-Havm, Nm. i», 1837. 
'Il7dwlIn.W , 

'" Yon saw me ia anguish of body — yoa heard mt 
tdl how happy I was in Ood. As on earth I have 
thanked our heavenly Father for that cup, so in hea- 
ven the visitation will be more clearly expounded. You 
have beard of my late li^ht affliction. It would be 
too long a story to tell of all th; attendant blessings— 
but consolation has ahounded. 

" The renewal of my old attack of rhramatism has 
been a little painful to the body ; but O ihe uaspaak- 
able and full glory that has come along with it Toa 
•up is (weet, sweet, sweet beyond eipresaioD. Seliwra 



380 Htxoiii or 

me when I u^ it, I think it worth worlds'-Day, worlds 
weigh DOthin; to it, Tot worlds without Christ irould 
be nothinj; worth. With the pain, I bare Christ. 

" I think I can kdopt the langnage of eome one, I 
know not of whom; ' Though I sm aometimes full of 
pains, yet I am at pll limes full of patience. 1 ol^en 
m>Dm under a sense of my corruption, but never mnr- 
mur under my affliction.' And why should I mur- 
mur? This would be to oppose the medicine thai 
htaU my soul. The Lord never afflicts us to kvrt us, 
but to htal us. While in this wildemett, the Lord 
would have our souls a rraitful paradise. The hns- 
baodman knows his choice trees of righteousness, and 
when he comes with his pmniug-knife, it is not lo ctU 
doxon the tree, but to lop off superfluous branches. 

" That this my poor cottage shakes, is a kind pre- 
monition of its fall. Let it fall, responds my inmost 
Mul ; for who would not resign such an earthly taber- 
nacle, for a house not made with bands? Never did 
the thought of having a glorious body so overpower 
me as this evening. And think you, my dear si&ler, 
I shall prize a glorious body the less for having had 
one so frail ? More of this when we shnit have beard 
the archangel's trump, assembled at Christ's right 
hand, and been made like him ; ' for we shall see him 

" I am inclined to think— though I am id a strait tw- 
twirt two, having a great desire to depart, yet loDging 
to live to subserve the dear interests of onr dearest 
Lord Jesus — 1 am inclined to think that God is dm 
about now to take down this soperstmclute. He may 
be renewing the foundation. 

"I think 1 have learned a little about glorying la 



J AMU ™'""T" TAYUW. 381 

infirmities, r^oieinft in tribulations, tsd pocMBsing 
the soul in palience. Sweet lessons — leaaoni to be 
learned only in a certain school. In this school, bd 
apt scholar, having a skillful teacher, may become a 
wonderful proficient. The wiser, the better ne ought 
la be — then the holier, consequently the hsppiec. 
Well, I am happy— I lean on my Beloved, and call 

" It has been mo$t fwett to lie in the bands of God. 
I have longed to drink every drop of the cup that my 
Father puts into my hand. Not one pain leas ; for He 
knows what is bett, and that is best for me. 

"Could I tell you I would, but the blessing that 1 
have received ibis day from God is above description. 
Kindest regards to Mr. W. From yourself and from 
him I should be glad to hear again and again. Tbe 
death of Mr. S. I saw meotiooed in the paper. Re- 
member me to the family, and fell them that God 
often removes outward mercies from us. ia mercy 



" Ntw-Havn, Dec 99, 1627 
~D«iK.uilE. 

" Ere this year closes, anticipating the commence- 
ment of tbe ensuing one, I wish you a happy, thrice 
bappy new year. 

"Tome, tbe year, nearly gone, has been fraught 
with good, good beyond the years before : for we call 
both that good which is good in itself, and that also 
which is the means of good. True, few have been 
(he days and nights in which this frail body has rest- 



38S loHoiB OP 

ed quiettjr. Nevertheless, id this school of snSeliog 
1 have beeD taught lessons which, whether I lire on 
earth or in heaven, will make me wiser. 

"When other reruges have failed, I have not failed 
to find one sou I -reviving. Never, perhaps, have I 
gained nearer access to God, held sweeter communion 
with him, enjoyed s more glorioua hope, anticipated 
a release from earth with calmer delight, than when 
pain has been exerting; its underminiog inBuence. 

" It would be repealing the story, to tell you I have 
been happy. You will understand me, when you re- 
member those seasons of purest delight, in which 
your souls, with a child-like disposition, have fallen 
into the hands of our heavenly Father, and tweeily 
said, 'Thy will be done.'" 

To his Parents. 

" This morning I arose, and felt the ill effects of an 
anodyne. But thU was gain. More fit to sleep Ihas 
to be awake, 1 threw myself on the bed. Having Bang 
a Sabbath morning hymn, the last lines reached my 
heart — I will repeat them : 



"I was athirsi for 'new life.' and O that I could 
tell you: — God, viewed as the Holy One, melted, sub- 
dued, comforted, and liappified my inmost powers. In- 
deed I felt that never before did 1 gain so much 'new 
hfe ' in so short a time. As you may suppose, I did not 
sleep. No, 1 was awake to commune still with God. 
Jesus seemed to say, ' Will you yet aubaerve my cause 



lUtEB ■KlIHUD TAYLOB. 383 

«n mih, aod preach my Oosp«1 1' Wilh injr soul Ie«it> 
ing on bint, 1 replied, 'Lord, tbou boowesi.' Truly, 
my dear pueots, as ■ herald oftbe ctoas, I would run 
with delight. Be assured ihaC the desire of preaching 
WM never more ardeol, for never more than ol late 
have I felt my interests identified with the cause of 
our dear Lord Jesua. And while bars have seemingly 
been rising, and at least ihreateoing lo fence me out 
of the vineyard, I have bad my love lo my anticipated 
labor tried. Well, tlie prospect brighteDs ; and ere an- 
other year goes by, I hope you will receive me lo your 
embraces, as one who officially bears the tidings of 
gieatjoy. Should the Master order otherwise, I hope 
my willing feet would run at his command. Were I 
even to leave the earth, the thought is pleasant eveij 
way, uve that I long to stay and win souls lo Christ. 
Be it as it may,* of this I feet persuaded, that God is 
doing me good, either to serve him the better here or 
at his right hand. Therefore be comforted. 1 rejoice 
in tay being, in my endless being loo. We shall live 
till oar appointed time ; then with angels, and with 
■ainta in glory, renew the song of praise to Him that 
■itteth on the throne, and to the Lamb. 

"May you be comforted with the same comfort 
wherewith I am comforted. 

" Your affectionate and obliged bod, 

"Jambb." 

The beginning of the year 1838 finds Mr. Taylor 
still at New-Haven, pursuing his favorite object ; and 
though in declining health, yet most ardently desirous 
to enter upon the great business of life, in winning 
MoU to Christ, and makiog delightful advances in 



•fMhlnalitf . Th« following tettera and extracts ahett 
inprMiivrly Ibe workings of a >oal uncommonly iitt* 
batd wi(h divine grace. 

" Nem-Oivtn, An. 9, 1896. 

-pHrBnUiKB , 

" Aa many happy returns of the seuon to you n 
our heavenly Father sees best. 

'' To tell you that these are happy days to me, would 
only be testifying to the great goo4n«ss of God. Could 
1 describe the view, whence was so much self-toaihing, 
■omuch contrition, brokennessof heart, and melting of 
soul— could I tell the nearness that 1 gained this eren* 
ing to Ood, in view of hia paternal relation to one of his 
' little ones ' — nearness to Christ, as brother, friend — 
and the sweetness of the comfort that flowed into my 
soul, as my soul flowed down at the presence of God— > 
I would speak it ell forth. But it was ' unspeakabt* 
and full of glory.' The name of Jesus was as ointmeut 
poured forth. A holy unction descended and rested 
upon me. There was eye-salve in it, by which the vi- 
sions of B glorious heaven gathered brightness. Tnt* 
ly, my brother, such visits are much to be prized; and 
though our guests are unseen, tbey are not unloved 
nor uofelt. We hail ihe light of their approach, and 
run to catch the first glimpse, till the Sun of righteous- 
ness comes upon our souls with full splendor. How 
vivifyingl Howsoul-salisfyiog! 'Tis now the world 
wanes and dwindles into its real insignificance. 

" O that Zion would arise and shine in her beautl- 
fnl attire! And why does she not T Not surely b^ 
muse her King is unwilling that she should be thm 
sdomed. Till his Locks are wet with the dew, he hw 



JAUBI BBtlNERO TATUHt. 385 

wtit«d, and he is waiting still. I trust ibat brother D. 
hiu loDg since clad himself with the white robe, and 
■till wears his garments unspotted from ihe world. 

" Seasons in which we are thus refreshed, are renew- 
ing seasons. Both bodilf and spiriiual vigor come 
from the presence of the Lord. If it be so on »rtb, , 
what will it be when we see the King in his beauty T 
O, mj brother, to me heaven never appeared more de- 
sirable than it has since I saw you ; yet with strong 
desire have I wept lo stay and preach the Gospel of our 
bleased Lord Jesus, for 1 see there is a wide difference 
in eniering heaven with and without company. Let 
bim know, that he that converleth a dinner from the 
error of his ways, saveth a soul from death, and hideth 
a multitude of sins. ' They that be wise shall shina 
as the sun, and they that turn many to righieousness, an 
the stars for ever and ever.' How much better to find 
in heaven a band of converts sent thither through one's . 
instromentalily, than lo anive alone. 

" The pain of body that I have undergone since I 
■aw you has not been little j yet none too much, for it 
has been sweet discipline. 'The cup that my Father 
hath given roe, shall I not drink itT' 

" Through Ood's goodness I am much relieved, and 
only feel the inconvenience of debility. By and by 
we hope to wear glorious bodies. When the saints 
■halt put them on, may we recognize each other as 
brands plucked out of the fire. 

"Fraternally yours, James B. TiTum." 

••UiddltH<iddam,Jim.Vl,l9Se. 

llHiTBroUtTK — ^ 

"I hare been at home a ahort time. I find myself 



nS MEHOtB or 

■1) ioTslid yet. But of ill lesions, those lewBed ia 
ihe school of affliciion I deem the most salulair. 
Would one learn (he art of being patient 1 How can 
he know it unless hs be tried 7 

"Yeats ago, I used to inqoire, where are my trials? 
They have come. Some port, ^i leasi, of the hitler, 
bitter-ticeet cup, has been drunfc. The rest is in our 
Father's hand. Is not this enoitghT Last night, pain 
— «tree( pain, as I called it — had a happy effect on ■ca.j 
•Dul. The thought of leaving the earth and ming- 
ling with the holy shore, was joy within, which bodi- 
ly pain forbade me to otter— but I found my wonted 
resting-place, and calmly reposed on him whom my 
6oul tovelh, till 1 fell asleep. How sweet— bow soui- 
refreshing, when the heart can say, 'Father, not my 
will, but thine be done.' May you be a hundred-fold 
comforted with the same consolation. 

" Yours truly, James," 

P'rom Middle Haddam, whence ihe foregoing Doie 
was written, Mr. Taylor returned to New-H«ven, but 
his health coniinuing to decline, he was soon sum- 
moned to New-York, to prepare for a tonr, or a Toyage 
to the southern states, with the hope — in hii case, alas 1 
vain hope — of staying the ravages of disease, and re- 
co7ering that health which he so earnestly desind, 
that he might preach the Gospel. 

How he was exercised in view of the proposed ex- ' 
eursion may be learned from the following extracts of 
a letter written at Stamford, while on his way to New- 
York, in obedience to the call to lay aside for a sea- 
son his work of preparation, and seek the r 
of his health. 



:., Google 



MHU UUIHERD TATLOB. 987' 

" Stamford, Jan. 30, 1938. 
■DauW , 

" Say you, why on your way to New-Yorki It i> 
Dot a project of my own; but kiod friends Lave issued 
the command, not of authority, but of love, and bid me 
pack up and be on my way : thus far I hare complied. 

"My dear Brother — at first, my heart rather revolt- 
ed at the idea of going; but before 1 had finislied the 
letter, 1 could not say aught why 1 should remain. 
Nay more, I felt that 1 should do violence to my own 
feelings, and the feeliags of others, not to go. How 
diflerent from what I felt two months ago. Then it 
seemed impossible to go away. You remember the 
reasoa. It was a bterning desire to live and preach 
the Gospel ; and I wished to remain and prepare for it. 
Since then, however, that intense longing has subsid- 
ed, and given place to a calmness that has caused my 
>oul sweetly to 7-e<(— not so solicitous to live and 
preach the Gospel, as that Christ, as Lord of the Vine- 
yard, should dispose of me as the execution of hii 

"Thus you see how sweetly I hare been fitted to 
leave all: indeed I go as cheerfully as I would into 
the pulpit. I feel all that calmness and composure 
which result from a conscioi 
God. Therefore rejoice wit 
and be happy in the though 
the present — Put aside ! I e 
this turning me aside is to to 
—To my account!— I hope I 

"Who can say that my ; 
fields of labor which otbe: 
inviting 7 Who can say thai a link is not to be made 



oat of Ihu ebugf oT ciruimataDcei not the leait im- 
poTtant— nay, a wwivel in the chain of my prepuatitm, 
and one without which the chaia would twist and 
break 1 

" May 1 not fail to make this a profitable tour ! Pray 
for me now an you read, and ever, that I may, by every 
orcrturning, be more and more moulded into the image 
of our dear Lord Jeaus. 

" I now go out, not knowing the result. I go, per- 
haps to recover my health : this ia my primary abject 
I go, perhaps to die. Well ; I have the sweel pros- 
pect of yet mingling' with the holy in heaven. Never, 
never have I had happier days than since I saw yon. 
1 verily believe I hare been on Mount Clear, and 
■pied out the Canaan that we love. 

"Yours, in the best bonds. 

"Jab. B. Tatlok." 



CHAPTER VIII. 



Viiiii at U« &inlk—SUIliutt-~Dtatk—Cmttha(mt. 

After some detention in New-York, Mr. Taylor set 
sail for Charleston on the 7th March, and arrived on 
the ISih, without any occurrence of note, but, as he 
thought, with evident mitigation of his disease. After 
sojourning some time at Charleston, and enjoying the 
cordial hospitalities of that warm-hearted people, h« 
proceeded to Savannah in Georgia, thence to Augosla. 



JAMB9 BKAHtEIlS TATLOB. 389 

to Colambia, to Fayetteville, Petersburg, Richmond, 
and 10 back to New-York. The kind attentions and 
expressions of inteiesl wbicK he received from maajr 
persons during this tour, were often spoken of by him 
in Inngoage of ackoowledgmeot to them and grati- t 
tude to Qod. From these several places he wrote 
Dumerous letters to his friends, filled chiefly with de- 
scriplions of places, and observalions on men and mau- 
ners, which prove, that, though ia search of health as 
his primary object, he had a heart still to mingle with 
the friends of Jesus, and to love his Master's imag« 
tinder whatever clime or color it might appear; that 
he felt for the interests of the Redeemer's kingdom, 
Trithout regard to localities, and that he was a shrewd 
(^server of mankind. 

From a few of these communications extracts wilt 
be given, as far as they exhibit the eiergise of his faith 
and piety, and show the fatal progress of his disease, 
and (he spirit with which he hore the waning ofhope, 
U to recovery. 

At Savannah Mr. Taylor was advised to make an 
excursion for a few days into the country; and ac* 
cordingly, having received letters of inlroduciion to a 
few of the planters In Liberty county, he found hi* 
way to the residence of a gentleman with whom he 
spent two days, and of whom he thus writes: "Mr. 
is a single man, of about my age, which, you 
know, to-morrow, (15th April,) will be 27. Though 
not a professor of religion, yet he tabes a stand.indi- 
cative of heartfelt piety. Every night he meets his 
negroes collected for worship; sings, reads, expoundi 
the Bible, and prays. His sister, a lady of known 
^ety, meets the little folks in the afternoon, and in- 



•tnieU and prays witb them : praise-worAit prac- 
tice /" — and for tlui reason we UaDsferthe account of 
their coDdoct to our page*. 

"At CoI.'L.'b 1 had a time of refreshing from tha 
presence of the Lord : having retired fatigued and wilh 
some pain in my side, I thought on health: our sym- 
pathizing High Priest was near to bless. The thought 
of him was halm to tay spirit. I was fully persuaded 
that if he spoke the word, bis servant should be healed. 
To live and recover 1 saw to be in some respects de- 
sirable, yet, rather than carry about a uaele»* tenemeuC, 
I felt it desirable to depart : yes, though 1 seemed to 
lore my friends more than ever, 1 fell that I eoold give 
yoa all up, and die, even among strangers. My aonl 
experienced joys that elevated me ; and then I could 
•o sweetly fall into the hands of God, and meltingly 
say, my Father— my Savior." 

" ^ojnufa, AprU 18, IS3& 

" The evening before 1 left Savannah for this place 
I dropped a leCIer into the posl-office, saying, amon^ 
other things, that I was about to set my face home- 
waid. We lefi Savannah on Thursday A. M. and 
reached Ihia to-day. Mr. K.'s* horse preceded my 
foT, and thus we both came in'my gig. With a little 
more practice, I Ibtak, ' upon a pinch,' I could demand 

SSper month as a stage-driver; but 1 feel like 

any thing else than a single light thought. 

" Were I to describe my feelings, I should repre- 
•rnt myself as pensive or disheartened. I do not eoa^ 

■ A (lUcnr tcav«Uufi» hudth, whe Mdltd with Hr. T. flroaiN. r 



JMBB MAIHMB TATLOB. ,3U 

plain : of all men, I have moit reaaoa to be ihankfol. 
I would Dot complain — no, never. But, my deai bro- 
ther, 1 feel that I am not gaining much : the week or 
lea days past, the old pain has returned to my side. 
Whatsoever be the result, I hope in all things I shall 
be kept from sinning. Whether my days be few or' 
many, nothing seems more abhorrent to my feelings' ' 
than to be situated where I shall be a biu^len. But, to 
By me and others, this may be my lot. But desist — 
it is not good to borrow trouble. Yours affectionately, 

"JjMSB." 

From Augusta Mr. Taylor wrote again, April !i<^ 
when he says: 

" How pleasant to feed in green pastures while trs- 
veling through the wilderness. To-day the Good 
Shepherd hath given me a rich repast. My soul has 
gained strength from feeding on angels' food— if at»- 
gela featt on the manifestations of Ood to ihem. 
Singiof; one of the songs of Zion, my heart began tp 
melt, find sweetly flowed down into tenderness and 
love. To call God my Father, was sweet beyond ex- 
pression ; Christ, as my elder Brother, Friend, She|^ 
herd, Lord— my all, captivated all my powers, and I 
eried with a broken heart— 

'Thou lorelf loarce of tma delight, 
Whom I, aniacD, sdorB, 
Uimil thy beantics to my sigkt, 
That 1 may Iot* thae n*r*.' 

f bov uml-humbling ! how aonl-elevatisig I bofr 
Ml of consolation! to have iha manifestations of Jf- 



•ui ts iher are not made to the world. Perimp* ne- 
vtt with more confidence could 1 ask for the Holy 
Spirit Blessed HQOintiogs! wiih thrs blessing we 
climb the 'delectable mountiiinB,' tiaud on Monnt 
Clear,' and look avray to the fair lend. How fair and 
desirable il appeared to me this ereninf ! More desir- 
able than the land of mjr fathers! O the prospect of 
meeting the holy, when I shall have answered the 
end of my being in this world. My prospect bright- 
ens as Qod shows bis beauties to my soal; and 1 
long for the time to arrive when I shall become ■ dis- 
embodied spirit. I wish to behold the glory which 
Christ wishes his disciples to see. 'Father, I wilt 
that they whom ihoa hast given me be with me where 
I am, that (hey may behold my glory.' Much is com- 
prised ill that word, glort. Well, it will not be long 
before the disclosure will bf. made. 

"Whenever lam so peculiarly blessed, then my 
longings are to preach the Gospel. There is an in- 
tensity of feeling that finds no expression but in groana. 
Still I lie in the hands of Ood, and if 1 mistake noL 
acquiesce in his will; and I feel fnlly persuaded that 
my protracted trials will issue in my good, whether I 
live or die. Through your prayers I may yet be re- 
stored and given to the church, to which, tmder God, 
long since and repeatedly I have surrendered myseK 

"24th.— Il may disappoint you, as I have been dis- 
appointed; but you would know my case /»%. I had 
hoped that I should not have a return of bleeding. 
For two or three days (vevious to night before last, I 
had a stricture across my lungs, and they fell as though 
they were tied up. Then I had a turn of Ueeding, 
pretty much ai when at Naw-Haven. Last nigkl 



JAUEt UAmSXD TAYLOR. Vfi 

thenwaaanotber discharge of about the same Bmoanl, 
and this nioraiag another. I feel do ioconveDieDce 
from it, but am rel'eved. I have not loom to say much 
of the kindness that is shown me. You would be 
^loful to wiiaess the attealions that ace paid to the 
GtKinger in his eute. And I am happy. This mom- 
iog my spirit has been sweetly refreshed. Be not con- 
cerned about me. 

'■ Cnlumha, Jlfoy 3, 1633. 
"For a week, I think, before I left Augusta, and 
since, there has been no blood from my throat or 
lungs. Afier all, think not too much of my recovery; 
I d(i not, except that I wish to live to preach the Gos- 
peL O how i hare longed to put in the sickle here ! 
Last Sunday evening a crowded house of young peo- 
ple waited to hear the truth. Think not that it injur- 
ed me; for 1 waabelter after it: it seemed to untie my 
Inngs. As I delivered my message, I longed to fol- 
low it up. But no ; whether I live or die, the Lord be 
magnified." 

From Colnmbia Mr. Taylor pursued his course 
northward, nntit reaching Louisbarff, N. C. as a OirU- 
tian traveler, he stopped to keep holy day, and thence 
sent the following interesting letter: 

"jHiiyis, isaa 

" Though worn out with the journey of the day, you 
will allow me to pour a little from the fullness of my 
heart. I am in a anug harbor, with the prospect ol 
enjoying the approaching Sabbath, by keeping holy 
day here. I need the day both for body and mind ; ta 



394 MOiom OF 

natw taj physical strength for the journey, and to 
pat on anew the armor of righteousness. 

"My former letters bear testimony lo repeated sen- 
■003 in which I bare been refreshed. Last night one 
occurred, and O bow timely! I wel my couch with 
tears, sweet tears, from a hroken, submissive heart. 
My dear brother, yoa know what a tolicitude I have 
fell to preach the Gospel; and but for preparation for 
this, how willing I was to relinquish all, upon your 
visit lo New-Haven." [This refers to his brother's 
desire that he should travel for his health.] " O, it 
was a burning of soul, that would take no denial. 
You know, from my teslimooy, how I yielded the de- 
cision into God's bands, to dispose of me as pleased 
him. In this 1 have retted. Last night it seemed 
pretty clear to iny mind what would be the result. I 
looked not for the blessedness of standing upon the 
beautiful walls of Zion, as a watchman to sound the 
alarm. The evidence was, that the trumpet had fail- 
ed. The fact stares me in the face. If I attempt to 
converse, to sing, to pray aloud, the once— tuned in- 
strument is discordant: shortness of breath is trouble- 
some. If I attempt to walk up a hill, it eseites the 
lun^ BO much that respiration is difficult; and even 
tlitowiug myself upon the bed produces breathing 
enough for one that has run a race. My lungs are ve- 
ry senailive. Now all thia was not the case when I 
left you, nor when I set out upon my journey from the 
south. A blessing came in connection with the hold 
which the ministry bad upon tny heart, and with the 
interrogatory, Will yon give it npl Dear brother, 
think my whole soul responded — and I hardly know 
how— 'Yes, yes, thy will be done; and there wu a 



JAMES BBAIHEKD TAVLOB. 395 

stiying upon God, and r solid, indescnbftble comfort 
nrilhiD. Thus you see how one thing afler another i« 
lopping off. -And indeed, more than ever, I thought it 
became nie to set my house iu order; aod I longed to 
live more like Christ, and tu exhibit more of his cha- 
racter. The prospect was pleasant eren of pulling 
aside protpeclive labors and of eoiering into rest. If 
it should soon take place, will not my brother, my dear 
brother, whom 1 seem lo love more than ever, give me 
up? Yes, like a Christian ; and so will others whom 
1 love. As ever, yours, J&meb." 

Early in the mondi of June Mr. Taylor arrived at 
. hb brother's in New-York, whence he sent a number 
of letters to his friends. Having previously announc- 
ed to bis parents his arrival, on the 25th of June he 
' wrote them u fallows : 

" Ifem-Yiirt, Jiuu 35, 1838. 

"1 doubt not my beloved friends on the kill would 
. rather see my person than my letters. It is indeed 
great self-denial on my port not to gratify them. But 
as it is considered on the whole best for me to tarry 
here yet a little, I will again let you know of my 
u flairs. 

"My letter written from Louisburg you have pro* 
bably seen. In that, I think it was, 1 mentioned the 
fact that I had relinquished the hope of preaching. 
That conquest was a crown. Last night I obtained 
another: 'Blessed is the man that endureth tempta- 
tion, (trial,) for when he is tried, he shall receive the 
crown of life.' The trial ihat assailed me was a pain 
in my left breast, which to me appeared to be a new 
iudication of my mortality. It was welcomed with 



380 MEMOtm or 

Juy. I yielded sweet assent. My heart was melted 
into tenderness, and my whole soul felt a preferenet, 
ii it were God's will, to depart. I desired to be Kone. 
I lonf^d lo see my bearenly Father, whose matchless 
goodness had plucked me as a brand from the burning. 
I longed to be with Christ. To see him to whom I 
am indebted for the much he has done for me. I long- 
ed for the society of angels and saints, and thought of 
some whom [ sbotild see among the glorified. 

" The goodness of God, as exhibited in my conTei' 
sion, and the present comfort of soul in the midst of 
my protracted trials, was overwhelming. Thus my 
dear, dear pareols, see that the Lord leareth me not. 
Sorely be is with me; aad for his presence my pil' 
low is oden wet with (ears of joy. Should 1 recover, 
I shall look upon the varied dealings of Gkid with roa 
as happily preparatory to my future nsefulness. 

"With love to you all, JiMEa." 

After rematning some weeks in New-York, for the 
Kake chiefly of medical advice and attendance, Mr. 
Taylor repaired to his father's house, whence he wrote 
to his brother E several letters showing the flat- 
tering nature of his disease, and exhibiting something 
of his character. 

" JtfidtUt Haddm, My 27, I8S8. 

"MrdnrBnMlKr, 

" Conversation engrosses bnt little of my time. My 
food is light— digestion good. 1 ride more or less on 
horseback or in my gig. During each day, spend 
some time in studying metaphysics, philoso^y, and 
theology. 



MHES BBAINERO TATLOI. 39T 

"FTom the fact that I am able to do more, and 
with greater facility, I persuade myself that I gather 
ntreogth ; I think I cough less. Blisters repeatedly ap- 
plied have kept me not h little soie. However, it is 
(food philosophy to endure a smatlpr, to root out x 
greater evil. Yesterday I felt sick of being sick, not 
so muth on my own account, as on account of thos« 
ao benevolently affecti'oned towards me. I hope it did 
not rise to a complaint of Providence. But the idea 
of so much and continued expenditure of the time, and 
money, and feelings of others on my behalf, and with 
so little, if any amendment, sadly alTected me. The 
proof, too, that I have of its all flowing from a fullness 
of overflowing kindness on their part, only tended to 
make me feel more ; for a soul that feels undeserving 
and dependent, cannot hut appreciate such favors, 
and is glad to unburden itself by expressing a corres- 
ponding gratitude. 

" This morning I felt strong enough to preach. I 
am encouraged, and live with the hope of one day tri- 
umphing over debility and disease, and standing forth 
a well man, to subserve ihe cause of God on earth. 
The hill looks well, and is improving. The trees grow 
flnely. Are you and yours coming up? We shall bo 
glad to see you, and will do all we can to make you 
happy. Love to E. and the children. 

" Yours, as ever, Jsmes B. Taylor." 

■■ atiddU Httddxm, Aug. A, 189B. 
"DarBniher, 

" 1 think myselfgaining in strength and flesh, thongh 
liRle of either; enough, however, for encouragement. 
1 have been reviewing my course, so that I am well 

34 ■ J.B.TiTlor. 



398 HBifoiB or 

nigb prepmd to be examined for license. Two of my 
clus were examined and licensed week Iwfore last. 
The Asaociacion meeii again on the laat Taesdaf of 
ihi& monlh to license the remainder. This being tme 
thing that 1 wish to get out of the way, and being pre- 
pared for it, I have thought it best to be licensed also. 
My lermon I wrote, for the most part, when at the 
South. I presume yonr sentiments on this point will 
accord with mine. Among other reasons, theae hare 
weighed somenhat on my mind, amid the DBcnIainty 
of my recovery go as to be able to preach. 

'' Should I be able to perform the duties of a aaTal 
cheplahi, and a sea voyage be recommended, I should 
gladly enter such a sphere of labor for the sake of 
doing good and defrayiog expenses. Should I become a 
lesidentof a West India island, as has been suggested, 
if found to agree with my constitntion, 1 bad better go 
commissioned to preach than otherwise. Shontd I go 
South to spend the winter, it would aot be a disadvau' 
tage 10 go as a preacher. Should I remain nt home, 
a burden would be off my mind. Bo far, I ben. as I 
can aee, I cannot but couclude that it is my duty to b« 
examined and licensed with my class. 

"Yours tiuly, J. B. Taylor." 

" Middlt Ha4iam, Stpt. 9, 1838, 

" I am here at anchor ; no head wmd but blows some 
one good. I hope to ride out the storm patiently, and 
especially amidst so many comforts. Often the sky, 
long lowering, clears away ; and hope, as if on widgt, 
places me where I have longed to be, in the vineyard. 
I read, the other day. 



JANEa BSAINERD TAVLOB. 399 

' T!i« yooth, 

*Wbo in Ihs gloving morn of vigoroai lUV, 

'High tcKching afur great religioDi dscdf. 
' Wui luddeal; cut aS tF>tt> nil hi' bopea 
' Tn laauj bloom, and nnaccompUah^d left 
' Hii wither'd oimi — law cTerln'tiog dayi 
'Befiirs him dairnuig rile, invliieh toachicTe 
'AU glorioui thlDgi.' 

" As I read I wept. O, my dear brother, ii ii taril 
work, but it is good work. But I am gaining, tad 
ought to be thankful. A course of suffering may be 
the necessary ineaiis to prepare for a sphere of high 
action either in this or in the other world. Think not 
that 1 complain: no, 1 think I would not for the uni- 
verse take my course into my own hands. Why not 
gire a call on the Hilll We all should be so glad 
to see you. 

"Your much obliged, J. B. T*ylok." 

In accordance with Mr. Taylor's riews on tbe sub- 
ject of being licensed, he attended the Middlesex Con- 
fiociation, which met in East Haddam, Oct. 8, 1S2S; 
read his trial sermon, on the leit, John, 12 : 26, '■ If 
anyman serve me, himwill my Father honor," — was 
examined with respect to his own religious experi- 
ence, his knowledge of Christian theolo^, and his 
ability 10 teach and defend the trutha of the Gospel — 
all which were approved, and be was licensed to 
preach as a candidate for the Gospel ministry. 

But his health being unequal to the labor of execut' 
log this long-desired commission, it was resolved by 
Mr. Taylor's friends, but with his own hearty concui- 
icnce, that he should spend the winter at the U=ioD 
Theological Seminary in Prince Edward count;, Vii- 



gioii, ID the familf of tbe Rer. John Holt Rice, D. P. 
then Ptofeaioi of Chriatian Theology in thai Inslitu- 
lion. To Ibia retreat Mr. Taylor was iariled by the 
affectionate kindness of Dr. Rice, and by the miM and 
healthful climate of ihat part of Virginia. Before set- 
ting out on this journey, he addressed leitera to sere* 
rai of his friends, from which some extracts will now 
be gi»en. 

To his friend L. P. he commenced a tetter at Mid- 
dle Haddam on the 1st of October, and concluded it 
in New- York, after leaving his father's bouse for the 
last time. 

" MiMU Haddan, Oct 1, 19SS. 
'HrnckloredlHeDd, 

"Ton will be glad to hear from me, though still 'in 
bonds.' The chain thai bound me when at your house 
in June, though not so heavy, still holds me. Whe- 
ther I shall burst it ere I become a disembodied spirit 
is known only to Him who bas thus far upheld my 
goitigs. This is to let you know that I consider my- 
self convalescent, though about my lungs there are in- 
dications no way flBltering. Also, that I purpose to 
leave my paternal roof for another of my loved homes 
in New-York. Should circumstances permit, I may 
Tisit New-Jeisey. 1 do not make too much of seeing 
you, for I may be disappointed ; yet how gladly would 
we be comforters one of another. 

" The grave does not seem so near as it did when 
you saw me so prostrated ; but still 1 may be standing 
on its brink." , 

••JVea-Yerk, Ocl. 3L 

" The abore, as you perceive, I wrote nearly a 
mootb aince. Hitber 1 hare come to aojourn but three 



JAHH BBAIMMD TAVLOB. 4<H 

ixfa more. On Monday I eipMt to >et lul, net to 
your dwelling, but to a haren appointed by friendi and 
physicians. I set sail foi Petersburg, Virginia ; thence 
I go to Prince Edward county lo vinter, unteii in 
meTcy I should be taken to a clime more desirable. 

"I have detained this with the hope that io person 
I should see yon. For this purpose I had designed to 
pass through Princeton and Lawrencerille. But as 
my health does not warrant the fatigues of journey ing, 
and the excitement of seeing dear friends, I am de- 
nied th« pleasure. It is self-denial. PeradTenture I 
may retuu in the spring, better able to enjoy the so- 
ciety of those 1 loTe. If not, the land of dear delights 
is before me. Do you ask how I am in my protracted 
■ afflictions? The Lord doeth all things well. Swe«l 
thoughts of Jesus melt my soul. Communion with 
beayen is sonl-elerating and soul- transforming. In « 
word, I am a happy, though a sick and dying man. 
The Lord most gently and mercifully han^s me down 
the hill of life, while the descent seems very shon. 
O, It will be sweet to take the last step, and walk in- 
to eternity. To me the grave wears choice attire— 
Paiitdise more choice. I wish, and often with long- 
ing, to see Jesus as he is, to mingle with the holy 
ahoTe — to sing the song of the shining ones. O think 
not that I am gloomy or depressed; far, far, very far 
from it Think of me as risited from above, and roll- 
ed along in a chariot all paved with love— think of 
me as one who ' loves you — think of me and pray for 
me as one feeble, shattered, tottering, and almost fall- 
tBf— falling into the arms of our Beloved. 
"If my last— my most affectionate adieu, 

"JiMEhB. T*TL0B." 



HI HIMOIK OP 

RcTennce bma mlraady bera nukde to > frac»«Bl of 
t diary kepi for a short time during the latter part of 
thie year. From thia record we shall novr pieseni a 
ftw extracts ; 

"Oct. 9, P. M. — Left roy paternal roof on my way 
t« B southern etime. Our tears flowed at the sound 
farewe)l,^-dear, kind, afTecIionate kiodred. 

" lOlh. — Reached New-Haven, and one of ray loved 
homes — again enjoyed the social and friendly inter- 
course of kindred spirits. Our christian commiiniim 
was doubly'sweet. I enjoyed refreshings— especially in 
SuBday evening exercises, in vhieh all were melted. 

" 13th. — Lett New-Haven, and again met those I 
lore in New-YoA, again occupied a loTed habitation, 
■nd again received the kind offices and sympathias of 
dear K. and B. Met Mrs. Palmer and Mary, who 
embark to-morrow for Charleston : they t;rge me to 
accompany tbem. I lie moored, and wait with sweet 
patience the decision of physicians and friends. May 
Ood direct. 

" Last night, though restless and wakeful, I was 
greatly blessed. My enjoyment ofGod, in the night sea- 
son, filledme with sweet peace and strong cosfidenca. I 
think I know and have fell for a season past, especial- 
ly last night, the 'strait' in which Paul was. I wa- 
tered my pillow with sweet tears— 1 longed to By 
Bway to Jesus — I longed to stay and labor in his cansfr 
lean ncithersay letmedie, norletmelive. MyheatI 
cries out for Ood lo lead ud dispose of roy all. I an 
in his hands, and he will guide me even unto death. 

" ]8lh.— I am now waiting the amval of medical 



lAHCS MAIRBKD TATLOR. 403 

nMn,ta«xtmuieMidproiiouBce)iponmycaM. Sboald 
tbey say thkC I am not in a coafinned coasumptioD, 
oral kust on the conGnea of it, I ahall be disappoutted- 

" Yasterday, P. M. and eveniBf, I enjoyed sweet 
metlitig;! of son) in riew of the many mercies sur- 
Toundiag me. Surely, if on my my to an early giare, 
I am going down most comfortably— my dear friends 
load me with benefits. 

" It is aweei to look beyond lime. 1 think I must 
regard my laboring days as gone by, and perhaps 1 
sball soon enter upon my long reittng day. 

" It has made my heart ache to think that I shoald 
b« put aside so soon, but grace has proved snfliclent: 
i am sweetly patient. The Father smiles upon his 
child, A sympathizing Jesus is with me. Comfort 
and joy from the Holy Ghoat pervade ray sout. 

" RetrospecliTely, it appears (hat God has designed 
to |>crfe<;t me through tufferingt — pain of body and 
disappotDtroent as to the ministry. Well, 1 un a wit- 
MBS to the wise dealings of the viae One. God knows 
what is bttt, and that is best for me. He bath led me, 
ma he leads one to holiness, to happiness, to heaven. 
Amen. 

" 10th.— The physicians came. The result of tbeit 
examination was uoeipected. So far as they could 
discover, they thought me sound, except an affection 
of the mucous tnembrane, which they would endeavor 
to relieve. So it seems I may yet recover and live to 
preach the Gospel ; still nncertainty hongs over the 
restoration of my debilitated and overdone system. 

"From the eiaroination it was discovered that the 
cause of ray painful days and nights, for two years and 
more, was a spinal affection : which disease commenc- 



ed, contiancd, and I hope tenninated, without bripf 
found out before. 

"2Sih.— Yeaterday had mttt thaaghta of Jesna. 
The tbouKht of beeomiog a ptuf spirit refreahed my 

" Last night, aitcr I had retiicd, a precious love to- 
ken was handed down lo the uowonbiegt. The Lord 
remerobereth that 1 am but dost; 1 am of a feeble 
fiame. Often I find it a laborioua task to repeat even 
the four lines I learned in mr earlieat infancr — ' Now 
J Uy me down to sleep,' ice. Oreatly fati^ing to 
repeat the Lord's prayer. How mercifully the Lord 
aceommodaies himself to this weakness. The other 
night I had but just lain down and thought of the 
sweel pleasures which religion affords, when my soul 
WBi filled with peace ; so, at times during the day, in 
my lonely boars as I sit and while away the time, 
unable to study or read. Last night I was refreshed 
with an nnction from the Holy One. 

■' 1 thought of meeiing one who asked me whether I 
bad any solicitude now to preach the Gospel. My an- 
■wer was, no. ladded, the days of my solicitude are 
gone by. Then 1 remembered seasons of anxiety, 
deep, nay, burning anxiety, that 1 had had to do the 
work of a minister of Jesns Christ. Mine eyes ran 
down with tears, with the sweet consciousness of an 
honest appeal to God, who had ever marked out my 
way. The seasons bare not been few in which I have 
groaned for the work, and for due preparation for iL 
The thought of relinquishing this object was plea- 
sing, if so the will of God be. Nay, I was rather desi- 
ions of leaTing all behind and going to Jesua. I thinb 
I sec enough worth dying for. 



LOR. 405 

" Zdtb.— Of the seven iods of my fathei's house, I 
Btn apparently farthest on my journey to the grave. 
To-day I wept at the thought of soon leaving my dear 
friends far behind. 1 shall leave ibem more an inva- 
lid than when I went south last spring— it grieves me 
not to thiak of biddlag them adieu, even if it prove a 
last farewell. I love them now — when glorified, how 
much more. Peace and heaven's choicest blessings 
attend them. It is sweet to think of falling into the 
bands of Jesus. It is delightful to confide in Crod as a 
Father who has suited his dealings to the frailties of 
his little one — I wept in his presence as I remember- 
ed my disobedience. How great his grace and mercy ! 
There is forgiveness with God. It was delightfully 
pleasant to contemplate the Holy Spirit as Comforter ; 
I longed to see of the things of Christ yet more and 
more brightly. Roll on, ye wheels of time, and bring 
me, a welcomed saint, to the dwelling-place of Jesus, 
my best beloved." 

On the 4th November Mr. Taylor, as announced in 
his letters, embarked for Petersburg, (Virginia,) on 
his way to Prince Edward, and arrived on the 9lh. 
Whence, on the 15lh, he wrote to his brother at New- 
Haven : 



" Having entered on the study of your profession, 
Riake conscience of studying to approve yourtelfwtio 
God. To please God — to be blessed and made a 
blessing, thus to live and be happy — should be our 
first, constant, and last aim. If I sought for one thing 



406 MEMOIB W 

more than another in my prepuatOTfcoiiree, «cad^ 
mic*l, coIleK>*te, ind theologiol, it was to be ngnallf 
AROINTED of God, for tbc greni, ibe good, the moat deu- 
rabte, the highest work of man. I am happy in this con* 
Bciouineaa. With little probability of ever doing- this 
work, 1 am greatly glad that I sought this holy une- 
lion and I can testify that 1 fonnd it. All along I waa 
anointed ; and I most afiectionauly and urgently pre- 
sent this as pre-eminetit in importance. Alt else will 
go on well enough — rather let all else suffer, than 
forego the refre*king» of tke Holy Ghost, 

"It is very pleasant for me to think thai God can 
glorify himself and let me be an invalid. My confi- 
dence in God to endow me great, has much increas- 
ed of late. Think of me then, not as desponding 
under hii debarring me from the vineyard, but as quite 
contented and happy — as ratlger willing to be sick, be- 
lieving it to be his will. Think of me as handed down 
very kindly, tenderly, and mercifully, though rapidly, 
on my way to the grave. Heaven appears rery desi- 

"Ever truly and affectionately, James." 

The beginning of 1S29 finds Mr. Taylor located m 
his last home on earth. Having spent a few days in 
Petersburg and Richmond, enjoying the hospitalities 
of Christian friends, whose privilege it was to enter- 
lain this devoted disciple, he proceeded to bis destined 
resting-place in the Union Theological Seminary, 
whither Dr. Rice had invited him to come and speni 
the winter. 

After his aiTivsl in Virginia, Mr. Taylor wrot* 



JAHES BBAIKBU) TATLOB. 40T 

fltveral letierB, wkicb speak of place* and their aspect { 
of Cbristiaa frfeuds and their kindness ; and of his 
gratitude to Ood aod to them ; of the goodness of God, 
and of his own love and confidence, and acquiescence 
in ihe divine will ; aod of the alleinations of hope 
and deapondencf, as he felt belter or worse under ihe 
changes incident to one who is contending with the 
most flattering and fatal disease. But though borne 
down with bis malady, and often oppressed with a 
sense of weakness almost intolerable, be lost no op~ 
porttinity of endeavoring to relieve the anxiety of his 
relatifes and friends, and of expressing his strong 
affection for them. . Nor did he cease to feel, aod by 
all the means in his power to labor for that caose which 
to him was dearer than life. As an evidence of the 
interest he continued to feel in the advancement of 
Christ's kingdom, and as an appeal which may reach 
some heart, and yet bring a failhful laborer into the 
service ofthe church, we give the following extract of 
a letter wriuen 4th January, 1829. 

" Unable as I am to labor, and seeing the great hat- 
vest-field and the fewness of the laborers, I am so 
interested that I cannot but urge men to go into the 
harvest. I know not what may be your decision now 
as to this object ; but these thoughts suggest them- 
selves to me : la it not in the power of my friend to 
do much in advancing the kingdom of Jesus Christ, 
by preaching the Gospel? Would not bis father, 
from a consideration of the fewness of ministers, and 
the great and pressing call for them, say, * Go, my 
son, and be a minister of Jesus Christ. I will con- 
sent to deny myself, for the sake of Him who left 



408 HEHCHii or 

heaven to die on Ilie cross,' How can you think ol 
•Inigging out your life in that secluiled spot on a fanu, 
wbeD you may f[o out ioio the world and be so much 
more utefat. You are young— none too old to com' 
mence. In a few years you may be prepared, and then 
you may live many years lo preach ihe Gospel. As 
to means for your support, you need not be troubled : 
only make up your mind, and the way will be opened. 
"I present this subject to you lo think of. Think 
of it alone. Go over the ground again and again, and 
see if it be not your duty lo enter u|)on this work. 
Write to me about it. Tell me the difiicuiliea, if there 
be any, iu the way. I shall be glad to hear of your 
■pirituat welfare." 

To a much esteemed Christian brother Mr. Taylor 
wrote on the 15tb January, 1S29. 

" Pnioa Tieol. Sim. Printe EAwari, F«. 
" Dear Drotlier B , 

" Yoor love-letter of tha 1st inst. reached me a few 
days since. I was glad to break its seal, and find it 
was from a friend and brother beloved- 

" It has become ao much of a task for roe to write, 
that I roust now put off my correspondents with a few 

■ " By the letters I have written, you have heard of 
ray condition. The peace of God, which passeth all 
understanding, keeps my heart, through Christ Jesus. 
Since I saw you I have not been a stranger to sweet 



I. whose fruit is lasting peace. On mY bfr 
half you will rejoice. 



JAHE8 BIUINEBB TITLOR. 409 

"lamglad of jtourjof andpeaceinbelMviDg. May 
Uiey iDCKase more and more. 

"The Seminary is flourishiog. Much has alteaJjr 
been done by ii for the good of this land. Very much 
more remaiDS to be done. 

"My debility will be my excuse for brevity, I shall 
be glad to hear fiom you again and again. 

" Yours truly, Jameb B. Tatlor," 

On the iame date he wrote to his brother K. 

" In my sbsence heretofore, as now, I have often 
Ihotight myself the happiest of men. So be comfort- 
ed, my dear brother, and ever think of me as taken up 
by our heavenly Father, as a little one, and continu- 
ally and greatly blessed. On Saturday, my !>oul was 
melted under a sense of our heavenly Father's pre- 
sence. Sitting alone my uplifted desire waa uttered — 
Father, give me the Holy Spirit. An tinction from 
the Holy One greatly refreshed my soul. I bad been 
Nying, Lord, how long 7 in reference to my protracted 
trials. My whole sou! yielded, and said, Even so 
Jong as the Lord will ; but tbou wilt give nie thy Spi- 
rit, I hardly know when my confidence gathered 
strength so fast in God, that he would make me hap- 
py. With unusual sweetness I adopted the langaago 
of Jesus, ' Father, glorify thyself.' O, I felt happy 
that he would be glorified. My confidence in the gift 
of the Holy Ghost was greatly strengthened. 

" After such anointings the soul rests in calm, sweet, 
heavenly peace. 

' Nnt a wove of tronbl« rolli 
' Across my peHCeful breast, 

" With increased affection, James." 

35 J- B. T^riM 



To aooUwT brother Mi. T&r'oi w^ote on the 30th: 

"Those If Iters that I have writteacost me labor, as 
erery elTort does. And surely I know I would Dot 
write again but to gratify my rriends. Though di- 
rected to ooe, they were meaut to give in formation to 
all. I am sorry that my brother thinks me depressed, 
when it is uot so ; far from it ; peace rules in ray heart ; 
sweet refreshings come from above, and bappify me 
from lime to time. Think of me then as happy, 
Tery happy." 

To another friend, on the 25th : 

"I hope you are alt well, t love to think of my 
friends as eojoyiug health ; it gives me high plea- 
flure ; yet higher to hoow that they are abiding in 
Chriit, and walking as he walked. 

" You have often heard my testimoDy to the rich 
grace of Qod. It now abounds unto me. His risita 
of love are followed with aweel peace. This helps 
me much to bear my weakness, which I find karder 
■•Bork than formerly. 

' Think of me as one blessed of Ood, and happy, 
though an invalid. 

" I have done no preaching, nor shall I do any but 
parlor preaching. 

" Let me be refreshed by a letter from you. Through 
letters I now obtain almost all my foreign pleasure. 

"This is written out of much weakness. And I 
should treat you as I should my other friends — not 
write a line but to gratify you, for it is a great physi- 
cal task. Glad am I always at the last word. 
« Farewell, as ever, yours, Jab. B. Tatlm." 



JAHE9 BRAINEBD TATU)B. 411 

To his brother K. he wrole, Feb. 11 : 

"For some lime past I have been gradiully grow- 
ing feeble. 1 am mueti more so than on my arrival. 
For a few days 1 seemed to have a coldneBs approxi' 
mating to chit), succeeded by fever. These changes 
enfeebled me much. My appetiie has failed consider' 
ably. Though furnished with many varieties, I relish 
little. I am glad at every day's exit: and though 
weaker and more helpless,* 1 hope to be returned to 
you with gladness, in much patience and full submis- 
sion to the will of our heavenly Father. 

"1 am wearied already in this little doing. AfTeC' 
tionately yours, "James." 

"By my amanuensis, Mrs. R. I thought to tell you 
at greater length ; but, like all glorious manifestations 
of God to the soul, ibis beggars description. How- 
ever, let me say, that to-day I have had sweet ihoughti 
of going to another world. Gladly, while slone and 
resting iu my easy-chair, would I have bade earth fHre- 
well, and winged my way to the paradise of God. 
The Lord said, Nay. I yet stay, and would patiently 
wait until my change come. I fiod it easier to dictate 
than to write with mine own hand. 

We hare now given to our readers the last letter 
which Mr. Taylor was able to write wiih his own 
band. Nor have we any thing dictated by himself to 
his friends, with the exception of two short epistles, 
Grom which we present a few brief extracts : 

a the opiDiaD of bis 



41Z UEHOIR OF 

- CMm nco. Sax., fYi. 19, 1B». 
■ Dcu bnxter K. 

" Since m; letter, which was a week ago, 1 have 
ooDtinued to fail. My nights are restless — cough in- 
creased — exieraal things losing their interest — faitb 
gathers strength. 

" I have often thought, though so weak, if the wea- 
ther were snitable, of setting out for the north to spend 
mf last days among the friends 1 love. It has occur- 
red to me as it nerer did before, that though grievous, 
It gires parents pleasure to have their children, when 
dying, with thein. Brothers, and sisters too, would 
rather than olhernise stand round the dying hed at 
one of their number. 1 should love to add all the com- 
fort in my power to those who have so often comfort^ 

"To me it is apparent I shall not survive the 
coraiag few months; for, on the whole, my case ii 
more critical ifaan it ever has been before. The phy- 
sicians begin to deal in may beU. I have told you the 
simple aiory of my feelings, that you may judge whe- 
ther it be best that 1 attempt to come to you. 

" 20th. — This day I have been more feeble than yes- 
terday, and the thought has naturally arisen, that this 
room may prove the place of my exit to another world. 
Believe thai I am mercifully and most kindly handed 
■long down the hill of life, and I liope the last step 
will be to the glory of God. 

" Unlesa I should gain some strenglh, this will be 
the last letter that I shall ever dictate. But you will 
hear of me through roy kind friends, who are ever res- 
dy to be my helpers. 

" With increased aflection and love to you all, 



JAME9 BRAIRfiBD TAYLOR. 413 

" Umen Thie. Stm. Mitrct 3, 1899. 
"DHrCbriniiB Fri«id, 

"Od my sick, and probably my dying bed, I fre- 
quently tliiok of you. Your letter, which gave me 
pleasure, came to hand io due time : answering it, in- 
stead of employing my own hand, I am under the ne- 
cessity of writing by the hand of another. 

" For weeks past 1 have been sinking rapiilly — I am 
now almost helpless and worn out, and unless there 
be a change soon, this ' mud- wall'd cottage' will pre- 
sently fall to the ground. I mention this to show dear 

brother D , that if he ever see me in the flesh, it 

most be very soon. 

" One of my brothers is on the way to me, to be a 
comfort with my other friends, in these days of de- 
cline. You may rejoice with me, in that I rejoice in 
the Lord always. The prospect of changing worlds 
ift pleasant. The home of the Holy is ioviiiog. 
"Farewell. With much love, 

"J. B. Taylor." 

The last piece of writing which Mr. Taylor left in 
his own hand, purports to be his will, and-bears date 
the Iflt March, 16S0, from which we extract the fol- 
lowing sentence : 

"On my bed of sickness, Prince Edward. Symp- 
tom* of disease all tending to announce my departure. 
I wish to say now that 1 am peaceful. The prospect. 
of changing worlds is pleasant." 

Among the numerons letters, expreittng the gnui- 
tnde of those who bad been blessed through his la- 



il4 HEHOii or 

bora, tnJ the lova and srinptdif of Chrittian frivntU, 
there » one from the lale ReT. Matihiu Braea, pas- 
tor orthe Presbrterian churcli io Bleecker-gtreet, New- 
York, which breathes a spirit so sweet, that the reatar 
cannot fail to be pleased with its insertion. 

" JVew Y»rk, Mmnk 34, 1899. 

** The picture or yon, mj dear brother, baa baea ri- 
Tidljr present to the littk company of your friends here, 
and we ha*e thought of ouiaelvea lingering lihe foa 
on the threshold of eternity. Ah ! it is all the thresh- 
old of eternity — and to belieiers it is eren now eter- 
nal life. This is the record, thai Ood hath gtven to lu 
eternal life ; and this life is in his Son. He that be- 
liereth the Son hath life. 

" We hare endeavored to pray for yon. Yop hnt 
some tender-bearted friends in our little church be* 
sides your dear relations, and are to them, while yon 
breathe here, an object of ceaseless sympathy, and 
while they breathe, of hope and love. 

" While I haf e been standing where you once stood, 
to pray and preach to my little charge, yoar image has 
been before my mind, and 1 thank God and take cou- 
nge for the support you hare as yet had ; for yonr ca- 
lamities are nearly orerpast, while ours are yet to be- 
gin. May the chief Shepherd, who gare his life for 
yours, fill you eren now with joy nnspeakable. 

"In this season of calamity to ns, I know not bow 
to write to you, who ate ko soon perhaps to know the 
certainty of the things in which tha Spirit of Christ 
has iuBtnictcd yon. You hare a holy anointing for all 
that you are to accompliBh. If I were near enough, I 
I should rather sit at yoni feat and hear, or only loA 



LOR. 415 

OB. I eanitot uy a. wnrd to you — rather, dear brother, 
1 ironld askaparting prayer for me. I know that the 
tbaoght of our lo7e is pleataot lo you amODg earthly 
thii^, if the bright view of the Redeemer does not 
bedim all that is created. I ihali always cherish the 
feeling of lore lo you, knowii^ that it will belter pre- 
pare me to fini»h my work, and to lueet the Son of 
Man, who hath power an eartk to forgive nn$. Here 
is oui coDBOlatioa — tins like icarlet and crimson may 
be forgiven — ereo we may walk in white ! 

"Until my hope of your surriring this severe dis- 
pensation is abtolntely destroyedby the arrival of your 
great change, I look for someihiog encouraging, as 
your days are prolonged ; but we hope faintly. Into 
the care of our Lord and Sarior Jesus Christ we 
cheerfully commit yon. He lores you more than we 
can. 01 that I conld commit myself to him with 
like ardor of confidence, That neither life nor death 
shall separate from his lore. 

" If you care to spend a momeut's thought about any 
thing in the world, beliere that a few persons here, as 
well as elsewhere, lore you with apeculiar and lirely 
affection, who would gladly kneel beside your bed and 
endeavor to alleriaie your bodily sufferings, and who' 
sympathize with the other bosoms which hare yielded 
you such sweet repose in Virginia. Shall we not lore 
even our Savior more, that so many are created 
anew in his image to love one another 1 May we lite 
to love one another where they never die any more. 

"With B faithful affection, and a remembrance of 
you never to cease, your unwMthy brother in the hope 
oftheOoqwI, 

HM BatJiN." 



416 MBMOU or 

As (he reidei hu already anticipited, Mr. Tayloi 
gradually, and from tbia Cime rapidly declined, until 
hit feeble body failed, and he went peacefnlly to his 
Kst. On the S9th of March, 1^9, in the SBth yearol 
his age, at half past six o'clock, on the cTcoing of the 
holy Sabbub, be left the worid in full agsuraoce of a 
blessed immortality. But we caonot give a better ac- 
count of the closing scene, than in the language of 
those whose privilege it was to see how this good 
raan died. 

" We have just witneseed the departure of a Chris- 
tiaa, of an eminent Christian, from this world of tri&t 
to that of everlasting rast— the Sabbath which is eter- 
nal in the heavens. 

"For a considerable time during his sickness, hit 
debility was so great that he required unremitted at- 
tention day and night; yet (hey to whose lot it fell to 
nurse him in his last houra, so far from being wearied 
out by the labor, considered it a privilege to be oeai 
him. And their testimony is, that his coDversstion 
gave them more enbrged ideas (han they ever had be- 
fore of Christian eiperieace, and a more distinct con- 
ception of the power and preciousness of religious irulb. 

" From the lime he came among us to the last mo- 
ment of his life, his failh did not fail, nor even falter, 
nordidacloud iotercept bis view of heaven. It would 
require a volume to record his various expressions of 
love, joy, aad triumph — and all the same, whether he 
had hopes of recovery, oi fell that he soon must die. 
The full exercise of reason was granted to him until 
the last. And when death came, although as fully 
sensible of il as any who attended him, yet his spirft 



IUHKB BRAIHBRB TAYLOB. 417 

was u calm as a ' sominer eTening,' Bod he remarked 
that he ' had eodeavored to lire in Bach a way, that 
when he came to die, he should have nothing to do 
but to die.' Abont fire minutes before his death he 
■aid : ' Farewell to you all, and farewell to this earth.' 
Then, after s shortttrae, addressing a beloved friend 
wbo was supporting him, hevaid withgreat emphasis: 
' Strive ! ttrive !' His friend asked him, ' Strire to do 
what?' 'Taeitter into the kingdom of heaven.' These 
were his last words. His ruling- passion was strong 
m deaib : to the rery last moment he wished to preach 
the Gospel. A^er mtering this solemn exhortation, he 
drew a long breath — another and another — and then, 
without a struggle or a groan, his breast gradually 
sunk, and he gently fell asleep in Jesus ; and took an 
upward flight ' if ever soul ascended.' " 

Reader, may we die the death of the righteous, and 
may otir last end be like his. Do you reply, Amen 1 
Then let us strire — strire to enter into the kingdom 
of heaven; "for many, I say unto you, shall seek to 
enter in, and shall not be able." 

It may gratify the reader to see the letters which 
give a history of the closing scene. To these shall be 
added extracts from several communications to those 
who collected the materials of which thi» little work 
is composed. In these communication a there ts suf> 
ficieot proof that the religious public is indebted for 
this compilation, not so much to the partiality of ad- 
miring relations, as to a just estimate of Mr. Taylor'a 
christian character, and to a desire 10 do good, and to 
magnify the grace of Ood. 

„...„, Cooglc 



4 IS MEMOis or 

The fint letter is from Dr. John Holt Rice to the 
eldest brother of the (ubject of tbi* memoir. 

" Union Stmbmry, Marti S9, I89B. 
- Hy bilaiad Pritsd ud BnUtr U 

" It deroWes on me to perform « mournful ofi&ce. 1 
faiTe e brother nhom I educated for the ministry, mod 
I feel towards him as I do not towards any other hu- 
man being, a sort of DunglingofpareDtaland fraternal 
affection; and 1 know you will feel, when I tell yon 
that dear James is gone. 

"His sufierings for some time past hare been very 
severe — not so much from pain as from excessive de- 
bility ; (his was so great, ibat, as you may have seen 
from my former communicalions, the wonder was be 
did not die sooner. 

" Apart from natural feelings of sorrow for the loss 
of one so beloved, and grief that the chureh should be 
bereaved of so precious a young minister, there is no. 
thing in the case of your dear brother but cause of joy 
and thanksgiving. During his whole sickness, sod 
amidst all the changes produced by disease in his spi- 
rits, he never bad the shadow of a doubt in regard to 
bis acceptance ; his faith never failed, nor did his love 
grow cold. In the midst of alibis sickness the adversa- 
ry was most mercifully restrained, and he enjoyed 
the presence of his redeeming Lord. His afiectionate 
heart, too, retained all its kindness, and he enjoyed to 
the last the sympathetic attentions of those who mi- 
nistered to his waats. Dear man 1 he won our lore 
most entirely. 

" He was graciously permitted to exercise his rea- 
son to the very last, and showed what was the bent 



JAMES raUHEBD TAYLOR. 419 

of bia mind by bis dying speech : Strive I ttrive I la 
enter into ihe kingdom of beaven. 

"How myBlerioua ihia event! Since it has appeared 
to me ioevitable tbat one ho prepared for the minis- 
try, trad so desirous to be useful as our dear brother 
was, should die, the thought baa often occurred to me 
that there are eerrices for very holy and devoied 
men in a higher sphere, to which they are called, and 
where (hey do incomparably more for the glory of the 
divine Redeemer, and are more useful than they could 
possibly be on earth: and while we are wondering 
that tbey should becntt^ and disappointail our hopes 
of their usefulness, tbey probably do more in a day, in 
beaven, than tbey could do in a lifetime in this world. 
The Master bad use for our brother above, and called 
for bim. We would hare kept him here. I confess I 
never hare seen a young man whom I so much wished 
should live. 

" But why should be come here, far from home, to 
die? On his passage to heaven, Qod sent him by this 
place, that it might be seen here wbst a young minis- 
ter ought to be, and bow a Christian can suffer and 
die. And perhaps you have thus been permitted to do 
more for us than could be done with money. 

" Dearbroiher 1 I sympathize with you and your af- 
flicted relations. May the Lord Jesus Christ be with 
yotiT spirit. 

"Must affectionately yonis, Jobn H. Ricb." 

The following letter is from Mrs. Rice to Mr. Tay- 
Ibr'a mother: 

" Vnim T^ee. Stm. AprU 3, 1S0B. 
** If I can in the least degree alleviate the sorrow of 



CM MCKon or 

tht deu inotlwr or mjr belored friend, mnt glidly will 
1 do it ; kod your afflicted son,* who does us die fk 
Tor of reroaining awhile with us; thinks a letter from 
roe would be soma comfort to yon. If minf tiikg my 
heart with yours, and feeling all a mother's bereave 
meat could lessen the weigfatof yourgrief, then woald 
it indeed be lightened. 

" 1 regret exceedingly that I did not erery day set 
down all that was interesting in relation to my dear 
kt^tpif $tifferer. But ronch, I trust, is engraved on 
my memory and on my heart, never to be forgotten o( 
neglected. 1 hsTe indeed been most highly privileged, 
and am sincerely tfaaokfnl to oar Heavenly Father for 
sending to my care so precious a child of hi*. He 
seemed friMn the first to ctHne as a blessing to me, and 
to raise my idea of holy living and of Christian enjoy* 
ments. He ever seemed happy, joyful, triumphant, 
until disease wore down his animal spirits. But his 
faith, hope, peace, never for a moment failed, hot con- 
tinued perfect to the last. 1 inquired shortly before he 
left us, the state of his mind, when he replied : ' Per- 
fect peace ; but too weak to think or talk.' When he 
found he must die from you, he wept much, and griev- 
ed at the thought of your sorrow. 'Dear father) dear 
mother t what would I not do to comfort you,' he 
would ol^en say ; 'but my Heavenly Fether is plea- 
sed to have it so, and I love to please him.' He did 
indeed delight more in the love of Ciod, and in doing 
his will, ihsn any one I have ever seen. He spoke of 
his removal as if going on a foreign miiHoR. He 
loved to serve his Lord wherever he appointed him, 
and hoped to be engaged in the delightM work foe 

• A brDlhet of Ike daceucd, who mi with Uk wKen ht UsA 



JAMEB BUUMERB TATLOB. ffit 

sv«r, H« often spoke of rest for bis poor bodf ; but 
bJB hftppy spirit looged to serve and please his Hoa- 
venif Father perfectly. He often spoke of seeiogyou 
all sooD, and of welcoming you to a better world, 
never more to part. He in not, my dear madam, lost 
even to us : if we live as he did, we shall again enjoy 
sweet intercourse with him. His words, 'My friend 
for ttemity,' hove made a deep impression upon my 
heart. O ! that his mantle may rest on me and on 
ibis seminary. 

"My grandmottier lost a daughter in the state of 
Kentucky. To some it was matter of surprise that 
nhe bore the beMarement so calmly and cbeerfully. 
She remarked, 'Heaven is notns far from me as Ken- 
tucky. I shall soon join her. She had much to suf- 
fer in this world ; now she is perfectly happy; and 
why should I grieve V 

"My grandmother never expected to see her child 
again had she lived, bat you and your dear so^ did ex- 
pect to meet again on earth, and he eojoyed much the 
thought of introducing us to each other. But his joys 
are now far above mortal conception. O had we bnt 
a glimpse of his glory, we should adore and praise 
the Lord, and not repine. He did not finish hh 
course among strangers, thongh far from home. Many 
saw, admired, and loved him, and to me he was in- 
expressibly dear — I may say i>, for I know he still 
exists, (glorious and happy. You ere the blessed mo- 
ther of a son safe in heaven. We rejoice that on his 
way there he called at the Seminary, and gave anew 
impulse to holiness of life among us. He had a ledi- 
otK, exhausting time of sufiering, and I felt, for weeks, 
as if going through the dark valley with him. But 

36 X B. Tvlof. 



133 HUKm OP 

Ibe light or Ood's eoanteDtiice erer shone to gtdde 
mod Nsuin him. 8ach a lorelf spirit is nrely known 
on nrlh i and now he is gone to a more genial clime. 
He who never errs bu ordered alL 

"Yours, very atfectionatelr. A. 8. R." 

Of the letters received hjr Ht. Taylot's relations, 
white collecting the materials for this memoir, we io- 
sert the following from the Bev. Frederic W. Hotcli- 

" Stfiroek, JVoy B, 1829. 
■DMtOtr, 

" Yours of the S4th ultimo, enclosing a letter from 
Dr. Rice, on the death of your brother, my very dear 
friend in Christ, is now before me, moting on the 
deep feelings of my heart, and awakening some of the 
tenderest recoUeclions of my life. I had seen the oU' 
tuary notice, and the just and very appropriate remarks 
on his Christian character and peaceftil departure; 
and after a short indulgence to the affectionate re- 
membrance, while dwelling on the dear name, we re- 
sorted to his letters to hold converse with that sainted 
spirit, 'who being dead yet speakelh.' These letters 
will, according to your request, be transmitted by the 
first friendly conveyance we can find. You will per- 
ceive they are a little sullied by the hands of many 
readers, hut they will not be the less appreciated be- 
cause much used and often read. 

"Our first interview with your brother was in my 
house, presentJDg rae a letter of introduction from ■ 
reverend friend in the vicinity. There is a feature, a 
voice, a language, in a deep feeling Christian, which 
we sometimes think is too evident to be mistaktm 



liiME9 .BBAINEBD TATLOB. &S 

Them wai a letigioua sympathy (hen penrading our 
hearts, which nas ardently reciprocated on hia part. 
We felt as if we had fnund a dear christiao brother, 
and our hearts burned within us, and we never ior ■ 
moment in our future acquainiaiice bad reason to 
think or feel differently. It was a season of deep 
feeling among my people, and in my family too, when 
our interconrse commenced ; and in a very short time 
he seemed as a son and abrolher in the best bondaj 
and thus we ever esteemed him. Frequently he visit- 
ed us, and always he labored, and prayed, and exhor^ 
ed among my people while with us, and will never 
' be foi^ottea as one all devoted to the cause of lifting 
up souls to heaven. To bow many he may have been 
s Bweet savor of life I know not ; but I do believe hi* 
heavenly example, ardent prayers, and impressive 
conversation, were blessed to the conversion of some 
very near to me ; and who will one day, I believe, 
meet him in heaven, and hail him as Christ's chosen 
instrument of their eternal good. 

" To spend and to be spent in the service of Christ 
and for the salvation of souls was his all in all. Of- 
ten would he say, ' None but Christ : all for Christ.' 

"He died as he lived, in the triumphs of that faith 
which could say, 'Lord, when, where, and how thou 
will,' 'Thy holy will, and thy whole will be done.' 
We lose the benefit of his life, but let us not lose the 
beoeSl of his death. His name is embalmed in the 
memory of many surviving friends; and while the re- 
membrance ie precious, may we learn to be followers 
of htm who through faith and patience inherits th« 
promises. 



:., Google 



4M uMoti or 

"With sympathjr ud nciprocated prayen, yoni 
fiknd and lervmt, 

" Fbiwehic W. Hotobxrs." 

Another mioister of Cbiist, in forwardiag some Id- 
lers which he liad received from Mr. Taylor, said: "I 
aoi rejoiced that ;ou tbiak of collecting his remaina. 
It must do good — it cannot be otherwise." A third 
wiitei : "lam much pleased that a Memoir of James 
is to be written. I think' it will be instrumental of 
great good. I never was acquainted with one of wboar 
piety I had a more exalted opinion." A fourth saya: 
" Your excellent brother came to my house when there 
wai a powerful religious excitement among my peo- 
ple, and spent two week* in animating professed 
Christians lo greater efforts, and more humble and 
^ fervent prayer that they might grow in grace, and 
make greater attainments in the knowledge of our 
LordJesugChrist;andinl>boringfor the convertioa 
of sinners. I have no doubt he will find some among 
my people who will be his joy and crown of rejoicing 
throughout eternity : and I am happy in the belief that 
some of my church will wear a brighter crown of 
glory. than ihey would have done, if your brother bad 
never came among them. 1 will only add, that we all 
lored and esteemed him as a faithful brother in Christ" 
Another pious and devoted friend, who was long 
and intimately acquainted with the departed saint, 
wrote: "I would beg leave to observe, that I think 
the lives of but few, if faithfully recorded, are calcu- 
lated, on the whole, to do much good to the religions 
world ; though they may have some valuaUe trails, 
and it may be very gratifyiag to their surviving 



lAUEB BBAIREKD TATLOB. 435 

friends, yet tbe multiplication of auch works has a tea- 
dency 10 weaken tbe force of those that are truly ex- 
eelleuL I would not therefore encourage tbe public* ' 
tion of the memoirs of any departed friend, unless his 
life had been very uncommon and calculated to ele- 
vate the standard of piety and usefulness. That of 
our dear departed friend, I think, teat exactly of 
lAu kind." 

We do not desire to multiply these tesliraonies to a 
wearisome leagcb, and shell therefore conclude with 
short extracts from three others, from the most respect- 
able sources. The first is a letter from a man who 
had enjoyed Mr. Taylor's society often, end hia friend> 
ship for several years, and had as ample opportu- 
nity to know him thoroughly as most of those who 
hare given their testimony concerning him : 

"It will give my wife and myself sincere pleasure 
to contribute, in any way we can, towards tbe intend- 
ed Memoir, to render it as fnll and interesting as it 
should be. 

" To place bis character before the reader in all its 
variety of excellence, we thiuk, will be no easy mat- 
ter. To have any thing like a just impression of him. 
as be really was in life, would require that intimate 
knowledge of him which we were privileged to enjoy. 
We can say that we never met with such sweetnesa 
of disposition, such a noble contempt of earthly things, 
such heaveoly-mindedneas, such entire devotion of 
Ibe whole being to his God and Savior, such earnest 
desire to promote his Msster's cause, in bringing all 
within tbe sphere of his inflnence to the knowledg* 
of the truth; and, united with all thii, ft f<»m and 



4K HEMon or 

nuuuwa at meb pcealiac loTclineu Bad gimc«, mi a 
bMuty and eomisieacy of ehuacter, Mich u, to out 
miad, mode him ■ mora perfect model thaa we had 
«Ter koovD. 

" We believ* there are ihoae here, as well as in " 
every place where he aojoumed on earth, that feel they 
are under obligationa to him which can never cease 
lo bind ihem-" 

The second is from a clergyman, in which we find 
this passage; " James B. Taylor labored with me fi»e 
or six wmki, during a revival in T , in which be- 
tween twenty and thirty souls were hopefully convert- 
ed. During that time 1 was led to observe the man- 
ner and spirit of his conversation with young people 
on religious subjects. Mow winning and aflectionate ! 
He could speak of the fearful looking for of judgment 
and fiery indignation, without creating any antipathy 
to himself. Sinners were won by his sweet voice 
and chrittian courteiy whilst they trembled for their 
■ouls and felt the necessity of repentance. His words 
Were all for bis divine Master. I never knew him 
trifle ; he allowed himself indeed no relaxation whilst 
here. He labored till he was obliged, tbrongh fatigue' 
and weakness, to desist; and then his only wish was 
to recruit, that he might reoew bis efforts in the ser- 
vice of his Redeemer. Could ministers be found as 
unremittiDg and ardent as he was, few, where the Gos- 
pel is preached, would be left without convictions at 
least, if not hopefully converted, through saeh instre- 
mentaliiy." 

The last is from the Rev. Dr. Miller, of the Theo- 
logical Seminary at Princeton. " I do hope," saya 
Dr. M. "that the Memorio/ of this beloved and a- 



JXXES BRAINBRD TAVLOR. 4S7 

ceUent youth which you propose to hare erected, will 
be long a useful moDameut for ciodiilaieg for the holy 
minisiry. If his heavenly spirit should be held forth 
as it ought to be, it cannot fait to benefit the sons of 
the church, who are looking forward to that sacred 
office. 

" I have a growing conviction that we need oothisg 
ID our rising ministry more than deep scriptural spiri- 
tuality. If we had larger measures of that ardent 
thirst for the eternal welfare of our fellow-men, a 
more inextiaguishable desire to win souls to Christ, 
such as our demoted brother had, it would be a pledge 
of brighter days for our American Zion." 



CONCLUSION. 

In bringing to a close this worlc, valuable to the 
compiler at least, it may be useful briefly to surrey 
the character of Mr. Taylor in the relations whick 
he sustained, and in the several siiuaiions in which ht 
was placed by the providence of God, that the force 
of his example may be concentrated, and its impm- 
sioDS received by those who may sustain the like re- 
lations and be in pursuit of the same objects. 

1. Then let him be contemplated as sChbibtiaii, 
and in this contemplation let it be recollected, that 
very early after his conversion he adopted the resolu- 
tion to become an uncommon Christian. 

This resolution, deliberately formed, and with full 
persuasion of its practicability, seems to have b«u 
acted OD with remarliahle consistency and perMT«> 



4S8 MBHou or 

uea BDd with that deciiion of cbaneter, irilhoal 
which DothiDg of monieDt can ever be accomplished. 
And in order to its fulSUmeiit, he beiook himself to the 
Bible wiih the docility of a liitle child, and with 
■trong eoD&deoce in the faiihfulneaa of God. Belier- 
tn|; thai " the life of God in the soul of man " has its 
infaac)' and its growth to maturity ; and that what- 
ever attainment! may have been made, the promises of 
God and the fuUneM of grace that is in Christ Jesus 
warrant the expectation of still higher attainments,— 
iii. Taylor, with the most commendable diligence, 
used the means by which alooe such expectations can 
be realized. ^V'ith constancy he searched the Scrip- 
tores— not for sobjects of speculatioo- not as a mere 
intellectual exercise — but with a strong desire to as- 
certain what affections ought to be cherished, and 
what duties performed. In the Bible, as in a mirror, 
he loolced at himself; and in the light of the Bible lie 
contemplated every object that claimed his atieotion ' 
or solicited his affections. He was indeed a Bible 
Christian. Perhaps do one ever more implicitly sub- 
jected his whole being to the inspired word. 

Regarding the promises as sure, be desired and 
•ought with irrepressible ardor those dirin* communis 
cations which the Lord Jesus vouchsafes to his fol- 
lowers in measures proportioned to the strength of 
their faith, the fervor of their prayers, and their faith- 
fulness in dutjr. He believed it to be the privilege of 
the saints to live in the light of the divine coonie' 
nance. And whenever, through inadvertence, or the 
tiaiog of sinful thoughts, or the movement of irr^v 
Ur desires, or the neglect of duty, a cloud came over 
hie aoDl, he ceased not to bumble himself, to mourn 



JAUBS mAINERD TATLOB. 439 

m secfM places, to wreatle, and even agonize in 
prater, until the joy of God's saJTation was restored 
and the comforls of tbe Holy Gbost were again aflbrd- 
«d. And wheo in UDintetrupted communion with 
God, he did not, «s is loo often the case, rest satisfied, 
but his neart still panted for more grace, more light, 
and faith, and love — more of every thing that might 
elevate his piety and ioctease his moral power. Nor 
did Mr. Taylor's religion expend itself in the raptures 
of devotion or in the delights of heavenly conlempla- 
tioD. Its sweet saror was manifested in all the rela- 
tions he sustained. 

Perhaps few persons have ever discovered more of 
filial piety or fraternal love. And while these affec- 
tions Sowed out in all his correspond e ace, and in all 
his intercourse with his family, and in all respects 
were tempered and sweetened by his religion, yet, ve- 
neration tor his parents and respect for the senior menir 
ben of the household never for a moment restrained 
him from urging upon them the paramount claims of 
his Master, but always in a manner most earnest, ten- 
der, and respectful. 

Not did he content himself wiih efforts to augment 
ihc piety of those to whom he was bound by tbe ties 
of nature. In all bis intercourse with the saints, and 
in bis voluminous correspondence with Christian 
friends, his constant aim was, either by testifying fit 
the grace of Ood to himself, or by direct exhortations 
to stimulate them also to become uncommon Chris- 
tians. " Set yonr standard high," was his frequent 
charge — " There remains yet very much land to b« 
poaHised." 

The abiding conviction upon Mr. Taylor's mind, 



(and cerUiolr it accorded with truth,) was, tbat 
ChriitiSD* generallj lire far below iheir privileges. 
And to this cause he attributed much of theii ineffi- 
cieucy in promoting the iuterestB of the Redeemer's 
kiuKdom. 

It is iudeed a lamentation, and shall be for a lamen- 
tatioD, that the church is paralyzed for the want of 
thai rigor of life, which is within the reach of all in 
whom the principle of vitality has been implanted by 
the Holy Ghost. This evil Mr. Taylor saw and feltj 
and while he resolTcd ibsi, by the grace of €h>d, it 
should not exist in his own case, against it be talked 
and wrote, prayed and uvvt ; and not without some 
ancouraging success. 

His Christian character was a beautiful whole — not 
indeed absolutely perfect — to this he made no preten- 
tions — yet as near the rati proportions in which it is 
drawn in the word of God as can almost ever be 
found in this imperfect state. And in this respect hia 
example is most worthy of imilntion. 

It is indeed melancholy to obserra bow frequently 
the fair form of ChristiBoity appears in an aspect so 
forbiddiog as rather to repel than allure the multitude, 
who have no knowledge of her but what they derira 
from the spirit, couTersalion, and conduct of her pro- 
fessed friends. As exhibiied by some, she appears in 
the form of a cold and heartless orthodoxy, with a 
head filled with notions which hare no influence in 
Tefiniog the affections or regulating the practice. In 
others, with an eye of fire and a tongue sharpened 
with bitter words, ready to denounce all who are not 
actuated by the same burning zeal — a zeal unmitigB' 
led by the meekness of heavenly wisdom. In othen 



J1HE9 BUi;(I!BII TATLOB. 431 

again, the oppeara all deformed with passion — all 
ecstasy in the religious assembi}' — all lendernest in 
the hour of excitement— but in the world, morose, 
sensoriotts, proud, selfish, and dogmatical. 

Sach was sol the religion of James B. Taylor. 
His faith worked by lore, purified the hearl, and 
overcame the world. His was the wisdom that comei 
from abore — first pure, then peaceable, gentlt, and 
easy to be entreated ; full of mercy and good fruits, 
without partiality and without hypocrisy ; and ever 
brooght forth the fruits of the Spirit — love, joy, peace, 
king-sufietinfc, gentleness, goodness, Rdelity. meek- 
ness, temperance. 

But there were some traits in this lovely character 
which ought to be noticed, with more distinctness, 
not only because of their beauty, but because there is 
a deplorable detictency in most of those who bear the 
name of Christ, and in some measure possess the 
mind (hat was in him. Tliese were epiriluality and 
fatmility : the latter resulting, as it always does in 
man sanctified but in part, from the former. "His 
epiritualily," says Dr. M., in a letter from which an 
extract has been already made, "was so uniform, that 
we had only, as it were, one face, and that of intense 
brightness, to behold." Spirituality is the habit cX a 
soul illuminated by the truth, and sanctified, througii 
that truth, by the Spirit of God. Sucban one employe 
his thoughts and exercises his a&eciions with facility 
and with lively interest on spiritual objects. He sets 
the Lord always before him, apprehends the law of 
God in its cognizance of the inner man, and feels and 
acts under a sense of its obligations. Jesus Christ ia 
present by the Spirit with his heart, is teen in his 



43S Hwou OP 

fc«iity, u submitted to m hia ftOlkoriiy, and ia al«w 
traitcd for MlTfttion, and leml >■ " ib« chiefeal amoiig 
icn ibowaind." 

No one can r«ad the letlerK and jonmal of Jamca B. 
Tajrlof, and not perceive tbal apirittnJ things ware 
tlie Teiy element of hia aoul } — of them be ibought^ 
and wrote, and talked ; and, in all aituatioaa, he aeted 
in reference to them and tinder their mfluence. 

One afiect «f ihia gracioaa habit of mind was liu> 
mility, without which there can be no genuine religion. 
Jcaua Chiiat waa meek and lowlf in heart, and no one 
can hare learned of him withunt imbibing some 
measure of thia excellent grace. WithontittheMmaf 
be udor in religiaa) and then will be seen, acted out. 
if not heard, the cry, " Gome, aee my Mai for the Lord 
of hosts." And in this day of eicitemcnt, when ere- 
ry thing must be dane with strong feeling and vigor- 
ou« action, it is paisfnl to obserTe bow much, thai 
commenda itself to the spirit of the age, ia either sadly 
deficient, or wholly destitute of the brightest glory of 
the religioii of a sinner saved by grace. 

He ia an huable man who forma a just estimate of 
his own character, as he weighs himself in ibe ba- 
lance of the sanetnary, and feels aright the force of 
Itis own judgment of himself. He compares himself, 
not with those around him, whom he may think at aee 
to be leaa perfect than himself, but with the law of God, 
and with the holy example of Jesus, which is the 
law practically exhibited for the imitation of hia fbl' 

That James B. Taylor was distinguished by his hu- 
mility cannot be questioned. Living as be did, erery 
day, in the presence of God, realised and felt ; and 



fAHEB BBAtNEBD TAYLOR. 433 

loidcing ftt himMlf kabituallj, in the light of God's 
Irath and holiness, he saw, as in a polished mirror, the 
defects in bis own character, and took cheerfully hia 
place in the dust. At those seasons when be enjoyed 
most of the divine presence, and the brightest maoi' 
festations of the glory of God, we alwaya find him 
taking the lowest place, and like Job, saying, "1 have 
heard of ihee by the hearing of the ear ; but now mine 
eye seeth thee: wherefore I abhor myself, and re- 
pent in dust and ashes." But not only did bis huijiility 
show itself in his communion with Ood, but io his 
intercourse with men. He was ever teady to render 
honor to whom honor is due, so that when those of 
age and experience would interpose to temper bis ar- 
dor and to regulate his course, he woald respectfully 
aad meekly hear, and seriously consider ; and if their 
(K>unsel commended itself to his understanding and 
his conscience, he would cheerfully yield, and that too, 
when compliance was tasked with the most painful 
self-denial : and if, in the impetuosity of his feelings, 
he had taken his course, he would, on conviction of 
his mistake, promptly retrace his steps with iugenuoos 
confession of his error. Nor did be, as far as appears, 
ever treat any one with that contempt or even disre- 
spect which is the offspring of pride. His sense of 
propriety and his humility seemed ever to restrain him 
from rudely denouncing those whose zeal and deroied* 
uess were apparently less than his own. 

Very nearly allied to humility is gentleneta ; a Chris- 
tian grace, an ornament, which gives softness and 
loveliness to all the rest. In this our dear Christian- 
brother GO excelled, that none feared htm, none were 
repelled from him, and be found easy access to the 

37 i. B. Tiylw. 



434 UEHOIB OF 

brarU f Ten of ihote who irould otherwise avoid hia 
corapaoy from hatred lo his faolineai. 

The itteniire reader has doubtless already obierred 
lliat the liteat meana by which Mr. Taylor made such- 
distinguished attaioments in piety, were ibe Bible, ma 
i>uliced before, and the throne of grace. ■ He was re- 
markably a man of prayer. In secret devotiorks he 
had his Gcwaecrated place aod his fixed time ; nor 
would he allow any thing to interfere with this arrange- 
ment. Andashedid himself, so he exhorted others to 
do; "Hare a fixed place and time for derotion." 

2. Let Ds contemplate this eminent saint in bis 
coNnocTAS&BTDDENTiandiDlbLB, perhaps, as mucb 83 
in any other respect, he has left an instructive example. 

Too often (he complaint has been made — and often- 
er the effect has been seen and lamented — that an aca- 
demical collegiate life has damped the ardor of piety, 
or greatly diminished its power. Indeed the impres- 
sion has been deep and disastrous, (bat this is the 
necessary effect of t^ course of study in our public 
literary institntions. Such have been the facts, as to 
create a prejudice in manypious minds against a col- 
lege education. The incorrectness of this impression, 
capable, a priori, of being proved, has been practically 
demonstrated by the Ckriatian studetU whose coarse 
we are reviewing. 

Mr. Tnylor, aware of the existence and of the bad 
pfTects of this notion, entered upon his course of studies 
wiih his resolution fixed and his rules adopted; b; a 
strict adherence to which he was effectually secured 
■gainst the influence of that etprit du corp», and thosa 
unholy associations, which have so often and so sadly 
impaired the strength of piety in those who bad gone 
before bin). 



J1ME9 BBUHESV TAVLOR. 43S 

Upon eDteriag college, he reiolTed to perfonn bis 
duties in the following: order: 

1. Take cure oftba muI. 

S. Take care of tbe bodf. 

3. Taks care of bi* itadiei. 
By obsenriDgthia order — gifiDg to reading the Bible 
*Dd prefer a due portion of lime, and always seeking 
until be eDJoyed communion with heaven, be ever kept 
olive the Bame of love ; so that, at tbe close of his col' 
legiate course of studies, he said to a friend, "I have, 
while in college, enjoyed ranch of the presence of God. 
The years I have spent in Nassau Hall will long be 
remembered as sweet seasons of communion with the 
Holy Qhost, aiid of special manifestations of the love 
of God." 

And as to the second rule, his conduct was wise 
and exemplarf . Too of^en, young men, ardent in their 
thirst for knowledge, or in haste to gel into (he field 
of action, or oppressed with the languor consequent 
upon menial labor and sedentary life, bo neglect that 
regular exercise which is essential to health, thai they 
come out unfit for service, or go down to an early 

On this interesting topic it is obvious to remark, that 
man is a compound being — that he is made up of an 
animal, intellectual, and moral nature, neither of which 
can he neglected with impunity. In all these respects 
food and exercise must be supplied regularly, and in 
(proper kind and measure, or a weak and sickly hnbit 
will be induced, destructive both of happiness and 
V "''ulness. 

\'.'itb ihis natural constitaiion, and the sure con- 
sequences of neglecting it full in view, is il not utter- 



If astoUBhing (hat in safewof ourliterary iostitDtions 
provisioa is made for that physical education so essen- 
tial to the wellbeing of the animal nature 1 And is 
it not more surprising ttill, that men professing to be 
philosophers should endearot to exclude from our 
schools that moral training — that religious culture, 
without which do man will erer act well his part in 
those relations for which education is designed to pre- 
pare him ? 

It is true, that, in the inscrutable providence of God 
Mr. Taylor's health began to fail just afler the com- 
pletion of his college education, so that be was not 
permitted to enjoy the high satisfaction which he so 
ardently desired in preaching the Gospel. But still ii 
is worthy to be remembered, that to ibe end of the 
course he enjoyed good health. Nor did bis studies 
suffer at all by a rigid adherence to his rules. 

3. But as a CA!fniniTB for the hinibtrv, his conduct, 
though not pretended to be perfect, is above all praise. 

For religion's sake ; for the sake of the holy name by 
which he was called ; for the joy of the Lord which 
was his streaf^lh; he sought for and made great atlain- 
mcDis in the divine life : but never did he seem to lose 
sight of the influence which his piety would have upon 
his ministerial character and usefulness. To be very 
"holy aud wise "wasthe burden of his prayers. Holy 
and wise, that be might win souls to Jesus Christ, in 
all his ways please the Lord, and be fully prepared foi 
the purity and blessedness of heaven. 

No one could more fully recognize the dependence of 
man upon the grace of God thai, did Mr. Taylor. In hia 
inrayers, letters, diary, and conversation, be acknow- 
ledged tbo necessity of the Spiiit's influences. Ha 



lAMEi BRAIHERD TAYLOR. 437 

not only beli«Ted, but gloried in the doctrine of divine 
sovereignty; yet he never once entertained the perni' 
ciousDOiiontbitt these truths could either excuse inac- 
lirity, or lessen responsibility, or diminish the impor- 
tauce of employing means adapted to the end to ba 
accomplished in the Gospel economy. God has indeed 
' most wisely Gted the means to the end, both in the 
kingdom of nature and that of grace, leaving in both 
ample scope for the exercise of all the skill and dili- 
gence that man can use to bring to pass his benevo- 
lent and gracious purposes. 

Under the cherished impression of this divine ar- 
rangement, Mr. Taylor seemed constantly to live — 
and, with the conviction that holiness in the ministry 
afforded the best ground of hope, under God, of suc- 
aeaa, he with all earoestness, and perseverance, and 
self-denial, sought to become, and did become, emi- 
nently holy. Would to God that all who hear the 
sacred office were like-minded — that all who aspire to 
this office could be persuaded to walk as James B. 
Taylor walked, with God. 

Next to personal holiness, Mr. Taylor desired to be 
" mighty intheScriptureg," not only that he might be 
sanctified through the truth, hut that he might draw 
thence things new and old, giving to every one a por- 
tion suited to bis condition. "O to be mighty in the 
Scriptures," was his frequent petition at the throne of 
grace. And to this end he submitted himself to the 
usual course of mental discipline. He desired not liii^- 
ntry fame, nor the honor that comes from men. It 
was the Bible he was to expound— its doctrines he 
was to preach—its precepts to^ inculcate— the nbole 
eoimsel of God, as therein revealed, he was to de- 
37» 



438 MBMOU OP 

claie. And ihenfore, to « rig^t nodersUDding of the 
Bible b« rMolntelv detennmed to devote all his atuin- 
□mhu. And although, in the ardor of hit zeal lo 
«Dter apOD the great work for which he longed to ear- 
nestly, be warered tot a little season, as to the neces- 
sity of all that culture which in most cases is wisely 
required ) yet, having corrected this error of judgment, 
DO man more deeply felt the importance of full " pre- 
paration." Fnr this be both Idwred industriously and 
prayed moat earnestly. 

In addition to Mr. Taylor's persevering and suc- 
cessful efforts (0 increase in piety and in knowledge 
of tbe word of God, he deserves lo be remembered and 
imitated in bia inlereour»e vUh hU fellow-men. Al- 
ways aSable Bjid obliging — noted for a deportment, 
tbe result of enlarged and active benevolence ; exceed- 
ingly social 'ta his feelings, and polite and graceful in 
his manners ; yet he eouscientiousty avoided an intima- 
cy with those whose society neither promised benefit, 
nor afforded opporluniiies of usefulness ; but with the 
saints, the excellent of the earth, was his delight ; and 
tbe more spiritual any one appeared to be, the more did 
he seek and enjoy communion with him. And here 
it mattered nothing with Mr. Taylor what was the 
condition or the color of the saint. Id every one who 
showed the heart of a true disciple he recognized a bro- 
ther or sister, and rejoiced to be an instrument in minis- 
tering to the edification and consolation of all those 
who loved the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. To this 
end he visited the sick — conversed with professors — 
wrote letters — held meetings for exhortation and pmy< 
er, and osed all the means be eonid employ to build 
up tbe kingdom of Christ in the hearts of his stibieett. 



i&HES BBAINEBD TAVLOB. 439 

And wlul« Mr. Tay]or thus labored and prayed to 
priHiiote growth in grace in the church, the burden of 
bis prayers and labors was for the converiion oj 
touU. He bad coasecrated himself lo the service ol 
the Lord, the glory of his name, and the advance- 
ment of his cause. And not only in his intercourse 
and correspondence with bis fellow-men did he endea- 
vor to strengthen the interests of piety ia those who 
were under its infiuence, but by all meaDS, if possible, 
to gain some from the ranks of the enemy. Actuated 
by this zeal for ihe divine glory, and compassion ioi 
perishiog sinners, he sought and seized every opportu- 
nity to beseech men, in Christ's stead, to be recon- 
ciled to God. This he did in his private intercourse — 
in the family circle; and, with the sanction of pastors 
and other mioisiers, in many churches, and with un- 
common acceptance and success. So that while pursu- 
ing his studies, he was made the instrument of bring- 
ing, perhaps, more persons to the icnowledge of the 
truth, as it is in Jesus, than others have done in the min- 
istrations of many years. During his sickness many 
letters came lo him, expressive of the most devoted 
attachment, and reminding him of the blessing which 
had, in several places, attended his labors of love. 
His object was not wealth nor fame, but souls — soulsj 
his constant cry was, "Give me souls!" 

There is one further particular which, it has occur- 
red to us, may be introduced with some advantage to 
^tudentsof theology. Many of Mr. Taylor's correspon- 
dents were young females — and in his labors he must 
often have come in contact with persons of this de- 
(cription calculated to awaken tender 
all his letters, and in all his diary, there is 



440 HBMOiB or 

tkal he erer ^ptoachsd ihu utangling, and often em- 
bamMiog alliance, wkicli so often impedes the pn>- 
greM of Btndents, and too fiequenlly presses aa an in- 
eubua upon all their after-life and labors. 

On the cootrarf, we find in his dlarf a passage 
already quoted, which ihall here be cited again : " Not 
knowing what the Loid baa for me to do, I am kept 
from what, perhaps, would be as pleasant to me as 10 
another; and at which some have been led to wonder. 
Some may think me Gloically indifferent to the con- 
nubial state : but thit restrains me from taking any 
steps in thai matter — f fear to act premalurejjf. When 
il is clearly one's duty to seek such a connection, will 
not a prudent wife come from the Lord 1 I wish 
that ffiinul«ra would see well to it, that 1 hey obtain in 
their companions an increase ofpower to help on with 
their work." 

The importance of the marriage relation, as a source 
of happiness or misery, is perfectly obvious. But this 
matter, as it bears upon the character and usefulness of 
a minister of the Gospel, is beyond all computation. 
None who has not had experience, or made observa- 
tion on this subject, can tell how much a mioisler'B 
atanding may be affected, how much his work may be 
promoted or hindered, by the character and deportment 
of hie wife. 

How incMfsidente 1 how unwise the conduct of 
many young men, and young ministers perhaps yet 
porsuiug their preparatory studies, who hare no home 
nor field of labor — oflen no patrimony ; who " know 
sot what it)e Lord has for them to do f who hare not 
finished their theological course. Let those wiut 
aspire to this high calling learn wisdom from the folly 



LOR. 441 

of many of their brethren who have gone before them, 
and " fear to act prematurely." 

We close by quoting from the obituary notice pub- 
lished soon after bie decease, — what, in substance, has 
been said before : 

" Mr, Taylor was a youikg maa admirably Gtted la 
be useful in the ministry. To a tine person, a pleasant 
countenance, expressive of the benevolence of bis soul, 
A sweet, yet powerful voice, and a cultivated mind, 
he added piety, humility, zeal, and devotedness lo his 
profession, sucb as are rarety ever observed united in 
one individual. 

" How mysterious ! that in the present urgent wants 
of the church, one so gifted and qualified should be 
cut dowD just after be became ready to enter the pul- 
pit. But perhaps he was called for to perform higher 
services for his Master in the church triumphant than 
can he rendered by mortal man in this militant state. 
And we shall see hereafter, that all things ill regard 
to him were ordered well by that Lord and Savior 
to whom he had consecrated himself in soul, body 
and spirit, for time and etetaitf." Amen. 



:.,C,OOglC 



:., Google 



:., Google 



:., Google 



:., Google 



:., Google 



:.C,oo3lc 



,_^„ 



:., Google 



