
Stom t^e feifirari? of 

profeBBor TTiffidtn (gliffer (pa;rfon, ©.©., &&.® 

^eeenfeb 6l? (gtre. ^arton 

to f 5e fetfirart? of 

(Princeton C^eofogicaf ^eminarg 

BX 7260 .E6 C52 1851 

Clark, Rufus Wheelwright, I 

1813-1886. 
Memoir of the Rev. John E. 




^ 4 



Digitized by tine Internet Arciiive 

in 2009 with funding from 

Princeton Tlieological Seminary Library 



littp://www.arcliive.org/details/memoirofrevjolineOOclar 




"Z-T-^-i..^^ (5 . (on^ 



^Zx^U'v -Co^, 



MEMOIR/v*' 

MAR 1 1 1912 



'iLoem «^ 



^■ 



REV. JOHN E, EMERSON 



FIRST PASTOR OF THE A\TIITEFIEI.D CHrRCH, 

KEWBURYPORT, MASS. 



BY REV. EUFUS W. CLARK, 

EAST BOSTON, JI A S S . 
A.B1UDGED BY THE AUTHOR, 



PUBLISHED BY THE 

AINIERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 N A S S A U - S T R E E T , N E W - Y O R K . 



Entered according to Act of Conpjess, in the year 1851 , ty E-Ufus W. 
Clakk, in the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of Mas- 
sachusetts. 

Right of publishing transferred to the American Trnct Soriety 



CONTENTS 



Introduction. 5 

CHAPTER 1. 
Infancy and childhood, 7 

CHAPTER II. 
From his professing religion, to entering college, . . 40 

CHAPTER III. 
Residence at Amherst college, ' ... 62 

CHAPTER IV. 
Residence at Conway, Mass., 97 

CHAPTER V. 
Connection with Princeton Theological seuiinary, . . 147 

CHAPTER VI. 
Settlement over the Whitefield church in Newhuryport, 19J 

CHAPTER VII. 
Closing scenes of his life, 234 



INTRODUCTION. 



This memoir has been abridged with the 
desire of rendering it more acceptable to the 
general reader, and with the hope that its use- 
fulness may be increased. 

Mankind are influenced more by example 
than precept ; a life has more power than a 
principle. Men, before adopting a truth or 
system, desire to see its workings upon char- 
acter, as well as listen to arguments in its 
favor. It is well, therefore, that a new living 
testimony to the practical power of Christi- 
anity should be perpetuated. Who, compara- 
tively speaking, would have heard of James B. 
Taylor, Harlan Page, James Brainerd, and 
others that might be mentioned, had not their 
memoirs been published to the world ? These 
holy men died in order to live. They, most of 
them, died young, in order that their influence 
might possess immortal youth. Their death 
was the signal that attracted public attention 



6 INTRODUCTION. 

to their memory, and never at any former 
period was their influence greater than it is 
now. While they hved, a few minds were 
benefited by their example, instructions, and 
prayers. Now, thousands throughout Chris- 
tendom feel the hallowed influence of their 
piety. Multitudes, as they read of the re- 
ligious exercises, emotions, conflicts, and vic- 
tories of these heroes in the Christian warfare, 
have their own faith strengthened, their hopes 
quickened, and their desires for usefulness 
kindle with new and fresh ardor. They obtain 
at their hands weapons, with which to fight 
the battle of life, with which to contend 
against the triple forces of "the world, the 
flesh, and the devil." They learn from them 
the way of access to the mercy-seat ; learn the 
value of the diligent study of God's w^ord ; 
learn the benefits of religious meditation, and 
thorough self-examination ; learn, what we 
most need to know, how to die — how to leave 
these familiar scenes with composure, and 
enter ypon the mysterious future life with 
" songs and everlasting joy." 



M E M O I R 



REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 



CHAPTER I. 

INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD. 
1823-1836. 

John Edwards Emerson was born in New- 
buryport, Mass., September 27, 1823. He 
was the son of Mr. Charles L. and Mrs. Rhoda 
P. Emerson, and grandson of the Rev. John 
Emerson, who for more than fifty years was 
an able and devoted minister of the gospel in 
Conway, Mass. The ancestry of Mr. Emerson 
is distinguished for a larsre number of faithful 
ministers. Joseph Emerson, who came from 
England, was a clergyman in Mendon, Mass., 



8 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

and removed to Concord, where he died in 
1680. His grandson, Joseph Emerson, was 
settled in Maiden in 1721, and died in 1767, 
aged 67. Three of his sons were ministers: 
Joseph of Pepperell, William of Concord, and 
John of Conway. 

The subject of this memoir, at a very early 
age, manifested a high degree of conscientious- 
ness. His pious parents and friends treasure 
in their memory many striking and pleasing 
incidents illustrative of his sensitiveness under 
the least deviation from rectitude and truth. 
Whenever he did any thing that he thought 
was wrong, he could not rest until he had 
hastened to his parents and obtained their for- 
giveness. 

One day, having read in his Bible the pas- 
sage, " Confess your faults one to another," he 
went to his mother, and with much feeling 
referred to what he had been reading, and said 
that he had taken something from the closet 
without permission, and wished to confess the 
wrong as the Holy Bible required. 

Every Sabbath noon the children were accus- 
tomed to repeat the ten commandments, and 



INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD. 9 

after each one they were asked whether during 
the preceding week they had been guilty of its 
violation ; a plan eminently calculated to im- 
plant right principles in their young hearts. 
One evening after the eighth commandment 
had been repeated, John remarked that the day 
before, he had picked up a cent in an adjoining 
yard ; and thinking that it might belong to one 
of the neighbors, he did not feel it to be right 
to retain it, and proposed to take it to them 
the next day, and very cheerfully did so. This 
hour on the Sabbath, between one and two 
o'clock, was peculiarly precious to John through 
life. It was at this time especially that his 
mother sought to make deep religious impres- 
sions upon the minds of her children, and lead 
them to repent of the sins they had committed 
during the previous week. Even when John 
was absent from home, he would spend the 
hour in prayer and meditation. 

When very young, ^he was in the habit of 
praying in secret ; and from the commence- 
ment, his prayers made with his mother or 
other associates were remarkable for their ap- 
propriateness and fervency. 



10 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

Among his childish propensities was a fond- 
ness for imitating the preacher, and going 
through with the services of public worship. 
He would even carry the matter so far as to 
appear to exchange pulpits with the neighbor- 
ing ministers ; and so perfectly did he imitate 
the voice, manner, and gestures of each, that 
it was at once apparent with whom he was 
exchanging. 

This disposition of his mind to imitate, which, 
however, seldom degenerated into mimicry, he 
early restrained ; and from a child was re- 
markable for his profound reverence for every 
thing pertaining to religion. 

He was alwavs more or less thousfhtful and 
serious ; but on the last ►*^abbath in December, 
1833, he passed through a crisis in his feelings 
that decided his religious character for this 
life, and his hopes for eternity. The previous 
Saturday evening a more than usual serious- 
ness was apparent in hi:^ countenance and de- 
portment. The Spirit of God was evidently 
striving with him, and he felt that he must 
make a full and entire consecration of himself 
to Christ. 



INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD. 11 

On Sabbath morning he came home from 
church bathed in tears. He asked his mother 
to accompany him up stairs, saying that he 
was a great sinner. She urged him to go to 
God with his desires and troubles. Referring 
to his meditations, he said, '' But Mary kept 
all these things, and pondered them in her 
heart." He then fell upon his knees, and 
poured out his soul in supplication before God. 
His mother stood near, perfectly astonished at 
his fervency, and the appropriateness, beauty, 
and force of his language. He prayed as one 
who had long had access to the mercy-seat — 
one who was acquainted with the workings 
and treachery of the human heart, and who 
felt his entire dependence upon God for strength 
and hope. After dinner he communicated his 
feelings more fully to both his parents ; and 
they, with parental affection and Christian ear- 
nestness, directed him to "the Lamb of God, 
which taketh away the sin of the world." 
Again they had a season of prayer together, 
and the spirit of the young disciple was com- 
forted and refreshed. 

A few days after this, an inquiry-meeting 



12 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

was appointed to be held in the church at the 
close of a public religious service. All who 
desired to converse with the minister on the 
subject of their salvation were invited to re- 
main. John accepted the invitation and tar- 
ried. While sitting in his seat, he observed 
some boys in the gallery pointing at him and 
laughing. The blood rushed to his cheeks, and 
feeling keenly the ridicule, he took his hat in 
his hand to leave the house ; but just as he 
was rising to go, these lines flashed into his 
mind : 

"Ashamed of Jesus, that dear friend, 
On whom my hopes of heaven depend!" 

In an instant he was ready to reply, 

" No ; when I blush, be this my shame — 
That I no more revere his name." 

Immediately he resumed his seat, laid aside 
his hat, and resolved that, Grod helping him, 
he would strive, in spite of every obstacle, to 
obtain salvation. 

In conversation with the minister, he stated 
his views and wishes, and was urged to exer- 
cise sincere repentance for sin, and rely solely 



INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD. 13 

upon the merits and sufferings of Christ for 
pardon and acceptance. 

A pious friend residing in the family relates 
the following touching incident : 

" In February, 1834, when John slept in the 
trundle-bed in my room, very early in the morn- 
ing I heard him weeping, and caught now and 
then a whisper ; at first I took no notice of it. 
He continued weeping for some time ; I then 
said, ' John, what is the matter V He did not 
answer me, but wept more bitterly. I went 
to him and said, ' What ails you, John ; are you 
sick?' He then with great sobbing said, 'I 
am such a great sinner, I am afraid Grod will 
not forgive my sins.' I said a little to him 
about Christ. His heart seemed to be broken, 
and his face was wet with tears. I told him he 

might go into aunt L 's room, and she would 

talk with him. He went, and found her en- 
gaged, so that she could say but little to him. 
He then came to me and said, ' No one cares 
about my soul.' I told him to go to his room, and 
tell the Saviour all about it ; he would care for 
him. He went and staid until breakfast was 
ready, when he came to the table, ate but little, 



14 ' REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

and appeared very solemn, and seemed in a 
very subdued state." 

In March, being then ten years old, lie wrote 
to his brother William the following letter, giv- 
ing an account of his feelings and hopeful con- 
version. 

" Newburyporx, March 22, 1834. 

" Dear Brother — I have long wanted to 
write, to tell you my feelings. The last time 
that you were at home from Andover, on Satur- 
day evening, a dark and stormy night, mother 
was conversing with us on the subject of relig- 
ion. She said that probably a great many per- 
sons before the next Saturday night would be 
sealed for heaven or hell. Those words made a 
deep impression upon my mind, and I hope will 
never be effaced. The next day I felt very much 
what a sinner I was. I read the second chap- 
ter of Proverbs, which gave some comfort to 
my mind : I hope that you will read it. 

" I kept on with my hope in Christ, till one 
Sabbath morning I received such light, peace, 
and comfort, that I came down from my cham- 
ber and asked mother to go up with me. She 
did so, and we read and prayed, and had a 



INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD. 15 

most delightful season. I went to the Sabbath- 
school afterwards, and communicated my feel- 
ings to my teacher : he was delighted. I then 
went to meeting, and heard a sermon from this 
text, ' Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out 
of it are the issues of life.' It was just what I 
w^anted. I went home rejoicing in my Saviour. 

"After the meeting in the afternoon an in- 
quiry-meeting was appointed, and a great many 
persons stopped. I was one of them. Dr. Skin- 
ner addressed us, and showed us our duty, that 
Christ requires us to deny ourselves, take up 
the cross, and follow him. 

" For the last two or three days I have had 
light and comfort poured into my soul. I feel 
as though I could trust in the Lord at all times. 
0, WilUam, I do earnestly hope that you and 
Charles will be brought to see the error of your 
ways, and now ' turn unto the Lord, who will 
have mercy upon you, and to our God, who 
will abundantly pardon.' I do hope that your 
feet will be taken out of the horrible pit and 
miry clay, and planted upon the rock Christ 
Jesus. I know how many temptations and 
snares you are exposed to, but you must pray 



16 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

to God to keep you from them, and from the 
great adversary of souls. 

" I have a chamber where, morning, noon, 
and evening, I retire to read the Scriptures, 
pray, and meditate, and sometimes sing. I 
have many a time had sweet communion with 
God, and many a time have had to weep and 
mourn over my folly and sins. But I trust 
that I shall not have to mourn much more, for 
I hope to live very near to Grod. We have no 
minister yet at our church ; but we have meet- 
ings almost all the time, and I attend them, 
and find them a great deal more interesting 
than I did before I felt as I do now on the sub- 
ject of religion. The Sabbath is more precious 
to me now, and I can treasure up a great deal 
more of the sermon than I used to. Some- 
times I feel as if I could see G-od right before 
me while I am praying ; but I find that when 
I sin, I do not get such nearness to him. 

'' Mother, Samuel, and I, have an hour every 
Sunday between the ringing of the bells in the 
afternoon, and we have very pleasant seasons 
together. Samuel, we hope, is thinking on the 
subject of rehgion. He has attended a great 



INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD. 17 

many of the meetings. He told mother to-day, 
that what made him want to pray was this sen- 
tence : ' Praying will make us leave oft' sinning, 
and sinning will make us leave off praying.' 
He wants you to learn it. He prays for you 
every day most sincerely, and I hope his pray- 
ers for you will be answered. 

'' We have now a great revival in this town; 
many souls have been converted. 

'' I hope you will write me a very long letter 
in return for this, and I hope to hear that you 
have turned to God. Pray for me, and the Lord 
be w^ith you and bless you for ever and ever. 
"Your affectionate brother, 

'^J. E. EMERSON." 

In such simple and pious language did our 
little convert relate what the Lord had done 
for his soul. His allusions to his seasons of 
prayer are peculiarly touching, and indeed, 
prayer was his meat and drink. 

On one occasion he was praying aloud as 
was his custom, and a friend in an adjoining 
room overheard him. After listening for a few 
moments, she was so affected by his earnest- 
ness and childlike confidence in God, that she 

Emerson. ^ 



18 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

burst into tears. Such a prayer she never 
heard before from infant lips. 

When he felt the burden of sin, or had any 
thing upon his mind that troubled him, he 
went to the throne of grace, and there obtained 
relief and comfort. This privilege was not a 
mere form, but a blessed reality. He felt that 
there was power and efficacy in prayer; and 
he loved to bend the knee before his heavenly 
Father, and abide in the light of his divine 
countenance. He had each day three seasons 
of prayer, and as he entered his little sanctuary 
he would repeat the following lines : 

"By morning light I '11 seek his face, 
At noon repeat my cry ; 
The night shall hear me ask his grace, 
Nor will he long deny." 

After he commenced attending school, he 
would hasten home to his quiet retreat, and 
enjoy a little season of communion with Grod. 

Feeling a strong desire to be useful to others, 
he voluntarily established a prayer-meeting 
among his school-mates ; and he led their de- 
votions with all the propriety and solemnity of 
one who had enjoyed a long Christian experi- 



INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD. 19 

ence. Often, too, he might be seen earnestly 
conversing with them upon the importance of 
loving G-od, obeying their parents, speaking 
the truth, and avoiding every sin. 

His interest in the public services of the 
sanctuary was manifested at a very early age. 
He loved to go with his parents to the house 
of God ; and his remarks upon the sermon and 
other exercises on returning home, showed that 
he had listened with attention, and with unu- 
sual discrimination for one of his years. 

The views he entertained of ministerial ex- 
cellence were high ; and he took great delight 
in the society of ministers. When listening to 
their conversation or prayers, and especially 
when they conversed with him, he seemed to 
be perfectly happy. 

The Sabbath was a very precious day to 
John. Its morning light he hailed with grati- 
tude and pleasure. Early might his voice be 
heard ascending to his Father in heaven, for 
the divine blessing upon his own soul, upon his 
parents, and upon the exercises of the day. 
Its hours were never wearisome, its duties 
never irksome, even to his youthful spirit. 



20 - REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

There seemed, indeed, every day to be a Sab- 
bath abiding in his soul, with its peaceful hal- 
lowed influences ; and the privileges and sacred 
associations of the day appeared to be more 
congenial to his feehngs, than the employments 
of the week. 

We would by no means present the charac- 
ter of this youth as faultless. We would use 
no false colorings in delineating his traits and 
virtues. We simply give the impressions that 
we have received from many witnesses. All 
testify to his purity, loveliness of disposition, 
and tender regard for sacred things. 

His fondness for reading was manifested at 
an early age. The books that specially inter- 
ested him, were the lives of persons eminent 
for their piety. The memoir of Nathan Dick- 
erman, of Mary Lothrop, of Harriet Newell, 
and works of a similar character, he read over 
and over again. He longed to be imbued with 
their devotional spirit, and to mould his char- 
acter after the patterns here presented. 

The Bible, however, was John's greatest 
treasure. He did not simply read it. He 
studied it. He prayed over it. He could say, 



OFANCY AND CHILDHOOD. 21 

" Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a 
light unto my path." He stored his memory 
with its most precious and forcible passages; 
and this enabled him during his life to make 
on all occasions p-ppropriate and striking quota- 
tions from the Scriptures. He often appeared 
to think in Bible language, and mould his 
ideas in Bible imagery. The beautiful figures 
scattered throughout the Psalms of David, the 
sublime language of the prophets, the simple 
instructions of the Saviour, delighted his youth- 
ful imagination. He w^as particularly fond of 
the Proverbs of Solomon ; and the second chap- 
ter he w^as in the habit of calling his chapter, 
as he had read it over, I think I may say hun- 
dreds of times. He referred to this chapter on 
his death-bed, and remarked that it had always 
been his guide. The words of the wise man 
seemed ever to ring in his ear, " If thou criest 
after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for 
understanding ; if thou seekest her as silver, 
and searchest for her as for hid treasures ; then 
shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord, and 
find the knowledge of G-od." 

When Mr. Emerson was between ten and 



22 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

twelve years of age, he read entirely through 
Scott's Bible, with the notes and practical re- 
marks. It was his custom to read a chapter 
or two each day aloud, with the notes. Thus 
he furnished his mind with a fund of biblical 
knowledge that he found of great service in 
after-life. He also acquired by this exercisa 
no small degree of mental discipline, and cul- 
tivated a taste for the study of other and more 
critical commentaries upon the Scriptures. The 
completion of this undertaking within so short 
a period, is proof of the energy as well as the 
devotional character of his mind. But few at 
his age would have manifested such persever- 
ance, or have devoted so much time to such an 
exercise. While other lads were ens^ao'cd in 
their sports, he was in his little sanctuary 
bending over the sacred volume, and prepar- 
ing, though unconsciously, for an early sum- 
mons to the temple above. 

His parents, besides doing all in their power 
to develope and strengthen these religious ten- 
dencies, were also careful to shield their son 
from the evil influence of improper companions. 
For such society John, too, had a positive aver- 



INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD. 23 

sion. The wicked lano^uasre and censurable 
conduct of such boys sent a chill through his 
heart, and he avoided them as much as pos- 
sible. In so doing, he certainly acted most 
wisely; for of all the pernicious influences to 
which children are exposed, I know of none 
more destructive than that wdiich flows from 
bad associates. In vast multitudes of instances 
the faithful instructions of parents, the warn- 
ings of friends, the good effects of early relig- 
ious culture, are lost in this vortex of iniquity. 
While the Christian parent at home is doing 
all in his power to promote the growth of right 
principles and fortify the mind against the 
power of temptation, the child is often learn- 
ing that abroad which will blast and scathe 
his character, and eventually defeat all the 
efforts that are made to train him to habits of 
virtue and holiness. Many of the young who, 
on leaving home for our large cities, fall vic- 
tims to dissipation, carry with them the seeds 
of vice sown by the hand of improper associ- 
ates. While they remain under the parental 
roof, they are subject to restraints that prevent 
these secret sins from ripening into open trans- 



24 REV. JOHN E. EMEE.SON. 

gression. But these restraints removed, and 
the youth left free to act for himself, then the 
poison begins to work — then its ruinous effects 
are experienced ; and in the contest between 
the hallowed influences of home and these 
awakened evil tendencies of the heart, the 
youth is fortunate if he escapes absolute de- 
struction. 

This, however, is not the place to discuss so 
grave and important a subject ; yet we cannot 
but remark that Mr. Emerson was greatly in- 
debted for his purity of mind, integrity of char- 
acter, and strict conscientiousness, to his free- 
dom from these baneful influences. He uni- 
formly sought the society of the good, the vir- 
tuous, and the wise. He delighted in the com- 
pany of those older than himself, and was fond 
of mingling with those visitors who were emi- 
nent for their piety and were ready to converse 
on religious subjects. The fair little boy, with 
his intelligent blue eye, his thoughtful brow, 
his pensive countenance, his respectful de- 
meanor, might be seen often sitting for hours, 
and drinking in the words that fell from those 
who spoke of Christ and conversed upon the 



INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD. 25 

doctrines and blessings of true religion. Under 
such influences was he nurtured, and by such 
means was he protected from the evils of per- 
nicious companions. 

When between ten and eleven years of age, 
John was prostrated by sickness. His dili- 
gence in his studies, and constant attendance 
upon religious meetings, exhausted his strength 
and weakened his constitution, which was nat- 
urally feeble. His religious impressions at 
this time were becoming very deep ; and the 
glow of a heavenly fervor was pervading more 
fully his soul. He knew not but he should 
die ; yet his spirit was full of rapturoijs de- 
light. He felt that he could rely upon God, 
that Jesus was his friend, that heaven was his 
home. Much of his time was spent in fervent 
prayer, and in listening to the reading of the 
Bible and other religious books. Several hymns 
which he had committed to memory, he re- 
peated often, and with much apparent emo- 
tion. The following beautiful stanzas of the 
hymn commencing, " Ye angels who stand 
round the throne," afforded him very great 
delisfht. 



26 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

'•Oh, when will the period appear, 

When I shall unite in your song ? 
I 'm weary of lingering here, 

And I to your Saviour belong. 
I 'm fettered and chained up in clay; 

I struggle and pant to be free ; 
I long to be soaring away. 

My God and my Saviour to see. 

" I want to put on my attire. 

Washed white in the blood of the Lamb ; 
I want to be one of your choir. 

And tune my sweet harp to his name — 
I want — Oh, I want to be there. 

Where sorrow and sin bid adieu — 
Your joy and your friendship to share. 

To wonder and worship with you." 

Tlie last stanza he repeated with deep emo- 
tion. 

On recovering his health, he felt more than 
ever the importance of making an entire conse- 
cration of himself to Christ. His feelings at 
this time are expressed in the following letter, 
which he wrote to his friend, Mr. S. N. Tenny 
of Boston, July 5, 1884: 

" Dear Sir — Your kind letter of June 12, I 
received and read with much pleasure. You 
were certainly very kind to take such an in- 



INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD. 27 

terest in me, as to write such a long letter. 
You say that you hope my health is improv- 
ing. I can with pleasure assure you that it 
has entirely recovered, and I can truly say, 
' What shall I render to the Lord for all his 
benefits ?' I hope that I shall remember his 
goodness with gratitude, and live nearer to him 
than 1 did before. I hope that you will pray 
for me, that I may have that tenderness of con- 
science and humble heart that you spoke of in 
your letter. 

" Our little praying circle of boys still con- 
tinues to meet, and nearly all feel interested 
in the great and important subject of religion. 
This afternoon we had a meeting, and though 
there were but three present, we yet had a 
good time ; for the Lord has promised that 
where two or three are met together in his 
name, he will be in the midst of them. Oh, 
Mr. Tenny, do pray for us that we may continue 
steadfast — that we may not go back to the 
beggarly elements of this sinful world, but be 
enabled to ' press toward the mark for the prize 
of the hisjh callinsr of God in Christ Jesus.' 
What an awful thing it would be, after seek- 



28 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

ing Christ, to turn back again to sin and folly 
and unbelief. Do pray for me, also, that I 
may not be left to go back to the world, and 
that I may be kept from the great adversary 
of souls. Please to pray also for my dear young 
companions, who, I fear, have no interest in 
Christ, that they may be brought to love the 
Saviour, and repent before it is for ever too 
late. Remember especially those who have no 
dear parents to pray for them as I have. 

" I hope that the dear children under your 
care in the Sabbath-school will profit much by 
your instructions, and that you will have the 
pleasure, if God spares your life, of seeing 
them grow up and doing good for Christ. I 
will try to remember them and you in my 

prayers 

" Your affectionate voung friend, 

"J. E. E.-' 

At this time John commenced keeping a 
journal, thinking that by daily recording his 
feelings he might better watch oyer his heart 
and life. The following are selections from the 
first few pages : 

" Sabbath-day, July 13, 1834. I have re- 



INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD. 29 

solved to write a little in this book, as often as 
I can, respecting my feelings. For two or three 
days past I have been in a pleasant frame of 
mind. I have felt more like obeying my par- 
ents, conforming to the wishes of my friends — 
more like serving God, and praying, and read- 
ing the Bible and good books. The sermons I 
heard to-day were very excellent, and I trust 
that they will do me good. 

" Monday. I make it a practice to perform 
my closet duties at some stated time ; at seven 
o'clock in the morning, twelve at noon, and 
seven at night. As the length of the days alters, 
I alter the times for prayer. 

" Sabbath-day, August 17. This has been 
to me a blessed day. I think that I have felt 
the preciousness of heaven more than I ever 
did before. Oh, the bliss of that bright world 
where saints and angels dwell ! My heavenly 
Father has permitted me to go up to his house 
twice to-day, and listen to two sermons, which 
I trust will be blessed to me, and to all others. 

" Monday. My feelings to-day are not as 
they were yesterday; yet I hope that I may 
have more of those feelings. As I grow in 



30 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

years, I hope to grow more and more in the 
knowledge of my Lord and Saviour, and to 
love and serve Grod better than I have in years 
past. 

"Wednesday. Oh, that I had more of the 
spirit of Jesus — that mild and forgiving spirit 
that he constantly exercised. I feel that I am a 
great sinner ; I offend the very God who made 
us, and who is so good to all his creatures. 

" Friday. I have taken an earlier time for 
my closet duties this morning. I will try and 
see if I cannot follow in my blessed Master's 
steps ; for he arose before daylight, and agonized 
in prayer. 

" Saturday, iluousT 23. The blessed Sab- 
bath is drawing near. Delightful day. May 
I be prepared for its duties, and enjoy its sa- 
cred privileges. What have I done the past 
week ? Oh, I fall far, far short of my duty. 
Oh, may I wake up, and realize where I am, and 
what I am doing, and whom I am serving." 

" March 16, 1835. It is a long time since 
I have written in my journal, but I now feel 
in the right frame of mind to write, and tell of 
the love of Jesus, which is burning in mv soul. 



INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD. 31 

During tlie past winter, I have not felt as Christ 
requires his followers to feel. I have been in- 
different and cold in religion. My heart has 
been like the rivers and lakes, bound up with 
impenetrable ice. But now that spring has 
come, and the sun shines brightly, I trust that 
my spirit will be warmed, and I hope that 
every changing season will find me more en- 
gaged in loving and serving God. 

"Sabbath, March 29. Through the abun- 
dant goodness of G-od, we are permitted to see 
another Sabbath. But what have we done for 
God the past week? I think that I have had 
more than usual delight in prayer and in reading 
the Scriptures. My sins continue to trouble 
me, but I pray to God for forgiveness, and for 
strength to resist temptation. Have been read- 
ing that beautiful Psalm, ' The Lord is my 
shepherd, I shall not want.' Oh, that it might 
make a deeper impression on my mind ; that I 
might indeed lie down in green pastures, and 
beside the still waters of salvation. 

" Thursday, April, 1885. This is Fast-day, 
appointed by the state as a day in which to 
repent of sin and humble ourselves before God. 



32 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

How have we improved it ? I fear that many 
have been neglecting the day, and playing, 
rather than confessing their sins. 'Behold,' 
says Grod, 'ye fast for strife and debate, and to 
smite with the fist of wickedness. Is it such 
a fast that I have chosen — a day for a man to 
afflict his soul? Is it to bow down his head as 
a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes 
under him? Is not this the fast that I have 
chosen ; to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo 
the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go 
free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not 
to deal thy bread to the hungry ?' Now, have 
we obeyed these injunctions? Has this fast 
been an acceptable one to the Lord ? I fear 
that too many of us have failed to examine 
our hearts, failed to repent of sin, and pray as 
we ought for God's blessing upon our guilty 
nation. 

"Sabbath, April 12. Through the tender 
mercies of Grod we have been permitted again 
to go up to his house, and some of his children 
have had the privilege of sitting . around the 
communion-table, and commemorating the dy- 
ing love of Christ. Oh that I may soon be one 



IKFANCY AND CHILDHOOD. 33 

of their number, and enjoy the rich benefits of 
meeting my Saviour at his own table. I long 
for sanctification, for a vital union to Christ. 

'' I also feel anxious to be useful, to do some- 
thing for the honor of my Master, to labor in 
his vineyard, and to live more entirely for his- 
glory than I have ever done before. 

Under date of April 9, 1835, he wrote to his 
friend Mr. T of Boston : 

*' Dear Sir-- Your letter, dated Feb. 17, I 
received, and was very much gratified that 
you had not forgotten me. At your request, I 
will try to give you some account of my feel- 
ings the past winter. I do not think I have 
felt as much engaged in the subject of religion 
as I did a year ago. But for a week or two 
past, I have had my feelings somewhat revived. 
I have felt more like loving God, more like 
praying, and more like serving him, than I have 
ever before. I have had, along back, many 
fears of death. I feared I was such a sinner 
that God Avould not accept me ; but now I feel 
these doubts in a measure removed. I hope 
you will pray for me, that I may hate every 



34 P.EY. JOHN E. EilERSON. 

sin, and grow in every Christian grace ; that I 
may have strength to speak to my young com- 
panions on the subject of religion, and set he- 
fore them a good example. I have hitherto 
had too many fears about speaking to them on 
4:his all-important subject. I fear that most or 
all of those of my young companions who met 
to pray when you were here, have gone back 
again to the world. They do not appear to wish 
to say any thing upon the subject. I hope you 
will pray for me, that I may be kept from deny- 
ing Christ, or following a multitude to do evil. 
*' I was glad to hear that so many of your 
Sabbath scholars have an interest in the Sav- 
iour. I hope they may be enabled to keep on 
in the Christian course ; and may they, and I, 
and all children, be at last found on the right 
hand of G-od. I am glad that you have had 
such joyful news about your little brother. I 
hope that he may grow up to be a minister of the 
gospel, and be the means, under God, of saving 
many souls. My health, which was poor when I 
was in Boston, has been very good this winter. 
I have been able to attend school and meetings 
most of the time. We have no minister yet, 



INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD. 35 

but have had some excellent preaching. I lately 
heard a sermon on justification by faith, which 
I liked very much. Pray for us. 

' ' Yours, with affection, 

"J. E. E." 

When John had reached the age of twelve 
years, he thought it was his duty to make a 
public profession of his faith in Christ. He 
heard one Sabbath a discourse upon this sub- 
ject, which made a deep impression upon his 
mind. He felt that the command of the Sav- 
iour, "This do, in remembrance of me," was 
addressed to him, and that he must obey it. 
Accordingly, he sought the advice of his Chris- 
tian friends, and made the matter a subject of 
frequent and fervent prayer. His friends, think- 
ing that he was too young to make a public 
profession, did not encourage it. They advised 
him to wait until he was older, and had ac- 
quired more experience in the Christian life. 
But he thought otherwise. Though modest 
and retiring in his disposition, and inclined to 
pay great deference to the opinions of his par- 
ents, and Sabbath-school teacher, and others, 
yet he was impressed that it was his duty to 



36 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

acknowledge Clirist before men ; and trusting 
in God, he resolved to present himself as a can- 
didate for admission to the church. 

In an interview that he had with his pastor, 
the Rev. Mr. Stearns, the following statement 
and inquiry was presented to him : " John, you 
have occasion to thank God that almost all 
your near friends are Christians ; they have 
longed to see you one, and nothing could de- 
light them more than to learn that you have 
determined to follow^ Christ. But suppose the 
case reversed: suppose your friends were all 
enemies of religion, and even your father and 
mother were disposed to deride you for becom- 
ing a Christian, do you think you would still 
adhere to the same determination?" He hung 
his head, and remained silent. It was very 
evident that a conflict w^as going on in his 
young bosom, for the probe had been inserted 
just where his heart was most sensitive. At 
length he said, timidly, "I don't know; I think 
Christ would keep me." " Yes, he would keep 
you," was the reply, " and he will keep you in 
all trials, if you continue to trust in him." 

Soon after this interview, an afternoon was 



INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD. 37 

appointed for the examination of candidates for 
admission to the church. When the time ar- 
rived, a little boy dressed in a short brown 
jacket ^Yith a white collar turned over it, might 
be seen wending his way alone to the vestry of 
the Federal-street church. With a modest yet 
firm step he goes from his little sanctuary, 
where he has sought divine direction and 
strength, to be examined for admission to the 
church of Christ. Though no friend is with 
him, angel messengers from the courts above 
attend him. The great Shepherd, who gently 
carries the lambs in his bosom, watches over 
him. The omniscient Being, who knows how 
short w411 be his career here, directs his foot- 
steps, and inclines him thus early to seek a 
union with his visible church. 

Reaching the room, the fair youth enters and 
takes his seat. A slight indication of embar- 
rassment appears in his countenance ; but the 
cloud soon passes away. The officers of the 
church look upon the lad w^ith some misgiv- 
ings. Bat on listening to his account of his 
religious experience and hopes, their doubts 
quickly vanish. "While they wish to act Vvith 



38 E.EV. JOHN E. E.MERSON. 

discretion, they cannot take the responsibiUty 
of refusing the young applicant admission to 
Christ's fold. Accordingly, it was decided to 
receive him, and on the Friday evening follow- 
ing, February 12, 1836, he made a public pro- 
fession of his faith in Christ; and on the fol- 
lowing Sabbath, being then twelve years old, 
partook for the first time of the emblems of the 
Saviour's broken body and shed blood. At the 
same age at which his ]\[aster was found " in 
the temple, in the midst of the doctors, both 
hearing them, and asking them questions," this 
young disciple was found entering his service 
and putting on the armor for the great battle 
of life. This Sabbath was a precious one to 
our young Christian. He thus refers to it in a 
letter written a few days afterwards : 

" That Sabbath was a delightful day to my 
soul. I feel as if God was very near to me. 
After the benediction was pronounced, and I 
remained in the pew to commune with the 
people of God, I tjould say from the heart, 

" 'Why was I made to hear thy voice 
And enter while there 's room, 
When thousands make a wretched choice, 
And rather starve than come ? 



INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD. 39 

" ' 'T was the same love that spread the feast. 
That sweetly forced us in ; 
Else we had still refused to taste, 
And perished in our sin.' " 

John now felt that he had obtained that 
peace " which passeth all understanding." His 
spirit was at rest. He had long looked forward 
to the time when he should be received into 
the fold of Christ, and his interests be identified 
with those of the Redeemer's kingdom. In his 
letters written at this period, he refers to the 
duties and privileges connected with his church- 
membership. " Now," he says, " when the 
church-meeting is mentioned, I feel that I can 
go with the people of God and unite my prayers 
with theirs for the prosperity of Zion." Yes, 
child of the covenant, heir of the promises ; and 
God only knows, eternity only can reveal, the 
power and blessed effects of those prayers. 



40 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 



CHAPTER II. 

FROM THE TIME OF HIS PROFESSING RELIG- 
ION TO HIS ENTERING COLLEGE. 

1836-1840. 

Mr. Emerson had now buckled on his armor 
for the Christian warfare, and his extreme 
youthj the gentleness of his spirit, and the 
trials peeuhar to one in his circumstances, ren- 
der his career from this point one of peculiar 
interest. His conversion hore the most deci- 
sive marks of being genuine and thorough. 
His heart was sincere, his motives pure, and 
his faith strong. He had before him a high 
standard of piety, which he daily struggled to 
reach. He longed for holiness. He could say, 
"As the hart panteth after the water-brooks, 
so panteth my soul after thee, God. My 
soul thirsteth for God, for the living God." 

His desires for usefulness were intense. He 
labored and prayed for the salvation of his rel- 
atives and companions as one who realized the 



HIS YOUTH. 41 

infinite value of the soul. In going to and 
from school, he availed himself of opportunities 
to converse with others upon religious subjects. 
His life, also, was a constant recommendation 
of the value and excellence of the Christian 
religion. So perfectly consistent was his de- 
portment, so kind was he to all, and so free 
from a vindictive or revengeful spirit, that his 
school-mates often remarked, although they 
had little confidence in the pretensions of many 
others, they " had no doubt that John Emer- 
son was a Christian." 

But our young hero had his trials, and se- 
vere ones too. He was constantly exposed to 
the ridicule and opposition of thoughtless and 
vicious boys ; and the bitterness of such as- 
saults, to a tender and sensitive spirit, can only 
be fully known by experience. In mature age, 
the ability to endure such opposition increases 
to such an extent as to enable one to regard 
with indifference many sources of irritation and 
pain. Then the character is formed, the habits 
fixed, and the purposes have acquired a stead- 
fastness which is not easily shaken. But here 
is a lad just entering upon life. His character 



42 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

is in the process of formation. His faculties 
are just opening, under the influences of men- 
tal and moral culture. His position is pecul- 
iar. He sits at his desk in the school-room, 
stands in the recitation class, and appears upon 
the play-ground, the only professor of religion 
in the group. His words, his conduct, his 
spirit, are watched more narrowly than those 
of an adult Christian. Even his intimate and 
beloved associates, in their thoughtless gayety, 
find it difficult to restrain their boyish jests at 
the expense of his Christian profession. Yet 
the youthful warrior bears it all calmly, pa- 
tiently. Though his sufferings were often keen, 
and his heart was ready to burst with inward 
grief — though the tear of intense emotion would 
start in his eye, yet he would guard his tongue, 
and suppress, as far as possible, his feelings. 
Hurrying from school, he sought his chamber, 
and there poured out his complaints and sup- 
plications before God. Here his feelings were 
soothed, his armor was brightened, and his 
arm nerved for renewed conflicts. 

In a letter to a friend, he thus alludes to this 
subject : 



HIS YOUTH. 43 

'' Now, dear sir, I will tell you a little about 
my trials. Trials ? I should rather say, joys ; 
for they strengthen me in the Christian course. 
They make my belief in Grod's word stronger ; 
for you know it says, ' If they have persecuted 
me, they will persecute you also.' My com- 
panions do deride me, but I try to look to God 
for direction and strength. I desire myself to 
do good to their souls. I feel as though I had 
a great work to do, and I want to be about it. 
I have been reading lately the life of Harlan 
Page. Oh, how much good he did. I think 
that the Saviour has called me into his vine- 
yard to labor, and my question now is, ' Lord, 
what wilt thou have me to do V Pray, my 
dear friend, for me, that I may not be an un- 
profitable servant. Pray also that my young 
companions may be brought into Christ's fold, 
and that God's Spirit may be poured down, and 
the whole town become converted. 

" One of the boys in the class with me in 
the Sabbath-school, came to me the other night, 
and said that what the teacher had said to him 
had not been lost upon him. He felt that he 
was a sinner, and must repent and believe in 



44 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

Christ. I was rejoiced to hear him say so. I 
tried to direct him to the Saviour, and urged 
him not to grieve away the Holy Spirit. I 
hope that he will thus early be brought into 
the fold. Do pray for him, and for all my 
young companions." 

On one occasion, some rude boys stopped 
John in the street, and pressing him into a 
corner, declared that he should not go home 
until he had prayed in their presence. This 
rudeness he bore with Christian fortitude, al- 
though he felt it keenly. Had he followed the 
promptings of the natural heart, he would have 
resented it. But rather tlian retaliate an 
injury, he was ready to confer a favor upon 
those who had wronged him. He obeyed liter- 
ally the command, " Bless them that curse 
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray 
for them that despitefully use you and perse- 
cute you." 

Several times he was ridiculed for going 
to the communion, and was asked very ir- 
reverent questions respecting the bread and 
wine. 

Here the writer must take occasion to re- 



HIS YOUTH. 45 

mark, that of all sins, there are few in his 
view more heinous, than that of making sport 
of a person's religious feelings, and endeavor- 
ing to impede or destroy the spiritual growth 
of a young convert. To hinder a soul that is 
strus^linof to escane the snares of the adver- 
sary, that is striving to overcome its depraved 
inclinations, that is earnestly seeking the light 
of God's truth, and is anxious to avoid the 
retribution of despair, is one of the darkest 
sins. The difficulties, the doubts, the harass- 
ing fears that at best beset the young disciple, 
are enough without the sneers of ungodly 
companions. If any in our highly favored 
communities are by their waywardness, scep- 
ticism, or profligacy, bent upon the ruin of 
their own souls, I pray God that they may 
not be so destitute of all moral sensibility, so 
lost to the dictates of a common humanity, as 
to labor to drag others with them to per- 
dition. 

Had not our young hero received a large 
measure of divine grace, had not the shield of 
his heavenly Father been over him, and holy 
angels encamped round about him, he could 



46 REV. JOHN E. EHERSON. 

not, at so tender an age and with so little ex- 
perience, have withstood their persecution. But 
his fortitude never failed him, his Christian pa- 
tience never forsook him. After passing one 
day through a very trying scene, he simply, on 
reaching home, made this mild remark, " I do 
not think that men would treat each other so, 
for they have more politeness than hoys." 

Some of John's school-mates sympathized 
with him in these trials. One, a lad older 
than himself, addressed to him the following 
note on the suhject : 

'' "Dear Friend — The insulting language 
which your class-mates use towards you, it is 
prohahle will soon cease ; I mean, that I will 

do all in my power to prevent it. With J , 

who is a vile fellow, I can have no influence. 
"Where I can assist you, I will. Bear it as 
well as you possibly can, and endeavor not to 
regard it at all. If they think it vexes you, 
they will continue it longer. Be of good cour- 
age. Although I do not think it wise for one 
so young to join the church, that is, for my 
own part, yet when I can restrain the abuse 



HIS YOUTH. 47 

heaped upon you, I ^yiil with pleasure. For 
surely in tliis free country each should be 
allowed to worship God as he pleases, and 
even monarchs cannot repress the thoughts of 
their subjects. 

'' Yours, etc., 

"W. F. T. 
"Monday mormng, February, 1836.".' 

To this John sent, the next day, the folio w- 
ing reply ; 

*'My dear Friend — Your kind letter I re- 
ceived, and read alone, as you requested. I 
thank you for the Icindness shown to me. I 
do not intend to mind what they say at all. I 
think they will soon get over it. My motive 
for joining the church was this. Perhaps you 
know that I have been thinking on the subject 
of religion for some time past ; and I thought 
it was my duty, if I was a Christian, to do all 
the Saviour commanded ; and this was one of 
his commands, ' This do, in remembrance of 
me.' I thought that it was my duty to obey 
it, and now you see how they revile me for it. 
But I will look to God for strength. I think 



48 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

it was very kind in you to feel for me, and my 
prayer for you is, that you may soon be brought 
into Christ's fold and be the means of doing 
much good. 

^' Yours, in sincerity, 

"JOHN E. EMERSON." 

Mr. E merson was prepared for college in the 
excellent classical Hiorh-school of his native 
town. Here he made very commendable pro- 
fieiency in Latin and Greek, and in other 
studies. Having in view, from his childhood, 
the gospel ministry, he prosecuted his studies 
with great diligence, being anxious to be thor- 
oughly qualified for his great work. His teach- 
ers testify to his diligence, obedience, and strictly 
consistent conduct during his connection with 
the school. 

While prosecuting his studies with diligence, 
John was also punctual in his attendance upon 
religious meetinsfs. On the occasion of the 
annual church fast, he attended a meeting at 
which it was the custom for the church-mem- 
bers to pray in the order in which they sat. 
He had never been called upon to pray in pub- 
lic, and he was greatly perplexed to know what 



HIS YOUTH. 49 

lie ought to do. His modesty inclined him to 
retain his seat and not attempt to lead the de- 
votions of the assembly, and yet he did not 
wish to shrink from his duty in the case. As 
his turn to pray was drawing near, and he 
was revolving what he should do, he suddenly 
thought of the children of Israel, as they were 
about to pass the river Jordan on entering the 
promised land. He remembered that the wa- 
ters did not divide until their feet touched the 
edge of the stream ; and he felt confident that 
the same G-od who opened a passage for them, 
after they had moved forward in obedience to 
his command, would give him strength at the 
moment when the duty should devolve upon 
him. Nor was his confidence misplaced. He 
arose and offered a simple, fervent prayer, which 
was listened to with breathless attention. It 
was evident to all that this was no unusual 
exercise to him. He pleaded as one who had 
influence at the throne of grace, one who had 
faith in the efficacy of prayer. 

His time was so much occupied that he could 
not write with much regularity in his journal. 
We make the following extracts : 



50 HEV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

^' Sabbath, May 8. I have "been thinking 
this morning, what I could do for the advance- 
ment of Christ's cause in the world ; and one 
w^ay in which I thought that I might he useful 
was hy setting a holy example, hy not counte- 
nancing any sin, and hy appearing cheerful 
without heing too light or gay. I will make 
a heginning to-day, and will go to G-od for 
strength, and will ask his hlessing upon the 
effort. 

" Tuesday. Tried to talk with my playmate 

J. S , and to lead him to the Lamh of Grod 

that taketh away the sin of the world. I hope 
he is a child of God. Have written a letter 

to-day to W. and J. P , who helong to our 

Sahhath-school class, and who expect to leave 
town soon. I hope that they may get good 
from it. 

" Saturday. Have heen reading to-day the 
life of Harlan Page. "What a pious, devoted 
man he was. that I might be as useful, 
that I might do something to advance the king- 
dom of Christ. J 

^' FRmAY, May 27, 1836. Through the good- ' 
ness of my heavenly Father, I am brought here 



HIS rOUTH. 51 

again, after an absence of a week. My mind, 
while I have been gone, has been too much 
taken up with the vanities of the workl, and I 
fear my prayers have been too cold and too 
short. The objects that I have seen have dis- 
tracted my attention and led me away from 
heavenly things. May Grod forgive me, and 
may I live henceforth more to his glory. 

" Saturday, June 4. I feel as if I could say 
in sincerity, 

' Come, Holy Spirit, heavenly dove. 
With all thy quickening powers.' 

*' I long to have my heart warmed — long to 
be quickened in the divine life. I am too liable 
to wander and grow cold, and forget the great 
work to which my God calls me." 

At the beginning of the year 183&5 Mr. Emer- 
son prayed earnestly for a revival of religion. 
It occasioned him the deepest sorrow to see his 
companions and friends living in sin and ex- 
posed to the wrath of God. In February there 
were tokens of the divine presence, and ere long 
the Spirit of God was poured out, and souls 
were converted. In April, John wrote to a friend 
as follows : 



52 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

"Newburyport, April C, 1838. 

" Dear Friend — It being some time since I 
have written to you, I thought I would take 
up my pen to address you a few hnes. There 
has been a gracious outpouring of the Spirit in 
this town, and sinners have been converted, 
and God's people have been awakened. I feel 
that my own soul has been quickened; for I 
had, previous to that time, been cold and dead, 
and had got far away from God. But I trust 
the Spirit of the Lord has awakened me anew 
to my duty, and that I have a desire to labor 
in his vineyard and to do more for him than I 
have done before. Pray for me, my dear sir, 
that God would keep me in his way, and en- 
able me to do his will. The work has been 
principally confined to the young, especially to 
young men from the age of sixteen to twenty. 
They appear very much engaged. I wish you 
could look into our meetings here, in the morn- 
ing at half-past five, and see the young men 
conduct them. I think you would feel your 
own soul quickened. There is quite a waking 
up among the boys, for at a meeting last even- 
ing, at our house, there were eighteen or nine- 



HIS YOUTH. 53 

teen present. Your brother, Mr. John T , 

was present and spoke with ns a few evenings 
ago. I should Uke it very much if you could 
be here and meet with us. Pray for us and 
for this whole town, that the Lord would carry 
on his work. 

"April 7. I have now returned from our 
morning meeting. It has been very interest- 
ing. They pray without being called on, and 
the Spirit of the Lord is evidently present among 
us. There are about one hundred who attend 
now, and there is also another meeting in an- 
other part of the town. Mr. Johnson from 
Boston was present with us this morning, and 
gave us some account of the state of religion 
there, which was very interesting. It was our 
union meeting of churches last evening. There 
was also a meeting especially for children. It 
was judged that about one hundred and fifty 
children were present. It was stated at the 
church-meeting last evening, that about two 
months ago it was thought the Spirit had 
begun to work, because two were interested. 
The next month there were nearly one hun- 
dred inquirers, and last night they spoke of 



54 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

twenty that had hopefully experienced relig- 
ion." 

In May, 1838, John resumed his journal as 
follows : 

*' May 2. I am now reading a book on the 
hidden life of a Christian. It is a delightful 
work, holiness seems to breathe through it. 
How much I need an increase of holiness, and 
the quickening influences of the Holy Spirit. 
Oh that I might receive a fresh baptism from 
on high. 

'' May 3. I have received the news to-day 
of the death of a young lady in town, about 
seventeen years of age. She was sick but a 
short time, and was deprived of her reason pre- 
vious to her departure. But I trust she has 
gone to that land where ' the wicked cease 
from troubling, and the weary be at rest.' 
that this event ijiight solemnize our minds, and 
lead us all to be ready for the coming of the 
Son of man. 

" May 6. Another Sabbath has dawned. 
May it be indeed a sweet sabbath of rest to 
my soul. May all distracting cares be left 
behind, while I go up to worship in God's 



HIS YOUTH. 55 

holy temple ; and may it be a sweet prelude to 
that eternal sabbath of rest beyond the skies. 

" During the past week a terrible accident 
has happened — the blowing up of a steamboat, 
by which over one hundred persons, almost 
without a moment's warning, were hurried 
into eternity. How it becomes us to watch 
and be ready for the summons to depart. We 
know not how soon we shall be called to ren- 
der up our final account. 

" This afternoon a sermon was preached on 
the occasion of the death of the young lady 
mentioned on the third. It was very solemn and 
impressive. The minister spoke to the younger 
members of the church to which she belonged, 
and asked them if they were faithful and pre- 
pared to meet God in peace. I pray that I 
may be enabled to look into my own heart, and 
see how I stand with my God. ' Search me, 
God, and know my heart; try me, and know 
my thoughts ; and see if there be any wicked 
way in me, and lead me in the way ever- 
lasting.' 

" May 7. Began yesterday, ' The Christian 
Father's Present to his Children,' by Mr. James, 



56 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

and ' Young Christian,' by Abbot ; both of them 
very good books. May I be enabled to profit 
much by them. 

"May 12. Have been reading a chapter in 
* Father's Present,' etc., on decision in rehgion, 
and I think I need more of it. I think I am 
more afraid of the scoffs and sneers of the world 
than I ought to be. Lord, give me decision 
and strength to say No to wickedness. 

" May 13. Another blessed Sabbath has 
dawned upon us. I have attended meeting 
this forenoon, and heard a discourse on Psalm 
19:13, 'Cleanse thou me from secret faults.' 
The minister attempted to show some of our 
secret faults. He said, ' Supposing an angel 
from heaven should come in and write on the 
wall the thoughts of all present, how ashamed 
we should be.' , I think all are guilty in this, 
and that wx all have a great many impure and 
wicked thoughts, which we w^ould not let even 
our most bosom friends know ; still they are 
all known to a holy God. His eye is ever 
upon us all. This afternoon heard a very sol- 
emn discourse on the character of the traitor 
Judas. It was a powerful appeal to our church. 



HIS YOUTH. 57 

The minister said, ' There are Judases now, 
and probably there are some here.' that we 
might be enabled to look into our own hearts, 
and ask, ' Lord, is it I ? Is it I V 

''May 16. I have set apart this day as a 
day of special prayer to G-od for an increase of 
holiness, and for more of the influences of the 
Holy Spirit, which I greatly need. that I 
might be enabled to ask in faith. On this day 
also the mothers hold their monthly meeting to 
pray for their children. 

"May 20. It is again the sw^eet and peaceful 
Sabbath. that it might be a foretaste of 
the eternal sabbath of rest. We love these 
earthly Sabbaths, but what a sabbath shall 
we keep when we shall rest above. Yet how 
little do we think of it, and how engrossed are 
our minds in the world. Lord, take off our 
affections from earth. 

" May 27. Another Sabbath has returned. 
Have I done any thing for God the past week ? 
Have I done any thing to save souls ? Have I 
advanced any in holiness ? I fear I have done 
very little. Lord, waken this stupid heart 
to feel more and love more. 



58 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

" September 27. To-day completes my fif- 
teenth year — fifteen years old! my soul, 
look back upon the past and see how it has 
been spent. How little have I done for the 
cause of Christ. How little have I done in 
any good thing. Therefore, for my own good, 
as well as for the cause of Christ, 

^^ Resolved 1. To rise early in the morning. 

"2. To have my time of prayer before break- 
fast as often as I can. 

" 3. To strive to set a holy example at school, 
and before the world. 

"4. To attend as regularly as I can on the 
monthly and week-day meetings of our church. 

"5. To read, more than I have done, the 
lives of good and holy men. 

"6. To feel and pray more fervently for the 
conversion of impenitent sinners. 

" 7. To be more kind and obliging to my 
younger brother. 

''8. To read and study ancient history 
more. 

''9. To cultivate more love for study. 

" 10. To have my time of evening prayer as 
soon as possible after supper. 



HIS YOUTH. 59 

*' 11. To try to do the things about house 
more cheerfully. 

'' 12. To talk more on the subject of re- 
ligion. 

" 13. To strive to do more for God's glory. 

'' 14. To try in God's strength to keep these 
resolutions, so that if I am permitted to live 
to see my sixteenth birthday, it may find me 
more engaged for God and his cause than this 
birthday has." 

Mr. Emerson was now fast ripening as a 
Christian. We have looked at his trials, and 
witnessed their effects upon his life and char- 
acter. We should not overlook the advan- 
tages he enjoyed for spiritual culture. He was 
blessed with devotedly pious parents, who did 
all in their power to encourage and strengthen 
him in the divine life. Though he had severe 
trials abroad, yet in his pleasant home he found 
the fruits of the Spirit, love, joy, peace. 

A friend who resided in the family, and to 
whom John was ardently attached, took the 
deepest interest in his welfare. Her prayers, 
counsels, and sympathies, he valued very high- 



60 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

ly. "When he was quite young she was in the 
hahit, as well as his parents, of retiring with 
him for social prayer, and these seasons were 
very refreshing to him. He referred to them 
in conversation with his mother on his dying- 
bed, and said, ''Did we not have sweet com- 
munion together with God ?" 

The religious community hy which Mr. 
Emerson was surrounded, was of a character 
eminently calculated to deepen and strengthen 
his piety. Through the influence of maternal 
associations, female prayer-meetings, and other 
religious privileges. Christian mothers strove 
to qualify themselves to discharge faithfully 
their duties to their children. Under a deep 
sense of their responsibility, they sought divine 
direction, took counsel one of another, and 
labored to train up their offspring in ''the 
nurture and admonition of the Lord." As 
the fruits of their toil, large numbers of their 
children have been brought into the church, 
and have occupied and still occupy posts of 
usefulness. The churches, too, have been long 
distinguished for their vigorous piety, sound 
doctrine, and wide-spread influence. Nor can 



HIS YOUTH. 61 

we fail to observe in these features the salutary 
effects of an able and devoted ministry, con- 
tinued through a long series of years. 

Under the influence of such piety was the 
character of young Emerson moulded. Such 
were the genial influences that nourished his 
faith, stimulated his hopes, and strengthened 
him for the duties and conflicts of life. 



62 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 



CHAPTER III. 

RESIDENCE AT AMHERST COLLEaE. 
1840-1811. 

In September, 1840, Mr. Emerson left his 
pleasant home to become a member of Am- 
herst college. Possessing such filial affection, 
and depending so much upon his Christian 
friends for counsel, encouragement, and relig- 
ious communion, it was hard to sunder even 
for a few months the ties that bound him so 
close to them. In bidding them farewell, his 
hearty grasp indicated the depth of his love, 
and the moistened eye and tremulous voice 
showed the conflicting emotions that were agi- 
tating his young heart. He was aware that 
new trials and untried dangers awaited him, 
and while on his journey he ofTered up his 
silent petitions to God to give him strength to 
discharge the duties and meet the perils that 
w^ere before him. 

Having passed a satisfactory examination, 
he was admitted a member of Amherst college, 



AT AMHERST COLLEaE. 63 

September 23, 1840, being seventeen years of 
age. His letters and journal indicate his ear- 
nest desire to prosecute his studies with dili- 
gence, and improve to the utmost his time and 
advantages. Above all, his great desire was to 
make progress in the divine life, and be of 
service in the cause of his divine Master. From 
his letters we make the following extracts. 

^' I make it a point to keep close to my room, 
visit very little, and try to perform faithfully 
every college duty. I have the consciousness 
of having tried to do well in mathematics, even 
if I have not been successful. I have been 
but once absent from an exercise, and was 
then unavoidably detained. Above all, I try 
not to forget my duty to God, and the glory 
that is due to his name for having, as I trust, 
snatched me from the horrible pit when ' my 
steps had well-nigh slipped ;' and I feel at 
times as if he did reveal himself to me as a 
prayer-hearing God. 

"Have just returned from our usual Sunday 
noon exercise of prayer. I think of you now 
as assembled in that consecrated spot where 



64 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

we used to meet and pour out our united sup- 
plications to our common God and Father. 
Doubtless you have been praying for me, who 
am far away from home. How sweet to think 
that we can pray to the same covenant-keep- 
ins: Grod for blessinsfs on each other. Shall we 
meet again in that consecrated spot ? is a ques- 
tion of deep and thrilling interest. God in his 
infinite mercy grant we may; but if not, 
that we may all, by his grace, be prepared to 
join that innumerable company, that blood- 
bought throng, ' the general assembly and 
church of the first-born,' whose names are 
written in heaven. 

^'I feel animated to-day with joy to see a 
different state of things among some of the 
Christians in college. I record it with joy and 
trembling : joy, because it seems like an indi- 
cation of the outpouring of the Spirit ; trem- 
bling, for fear it may prove like the morning 
cloud and early dew, which soon passeth away. 
Several prayer-meetings have been established, 
and some of the brethren seem, to manifest a 
deep anxiety for the salvation of souls. Pray 
for us, that the Spirit may not pass us by; that 



AT AMHERST CULLEG-E. 65 

now, ^yllile there exists a tender state of feeling, 
the windows of heaven may he opened and a 
Messing descend. Pray much for me, that I 
may not have mere animal excitement, hut a 
haptism of the Holy Ghost ; that I may ever 
rememher my high and holy calling, and keep 
near to G-od. for more of the Spirit, for 
more conformity to him. There is need of 
watchfulness and prayer, lest I he entrapped 
in the wiles and snares of the enemy of souls. 
Pray unceasingly that I may be kept from the 
temptations of a college life." 

Mr. Emerson was exceedingly attached to 
his Sahhath-school teacher, Mr. Charles Morse, 
and wrote to him frequently in the most affec- 
tionate manner. The following was addressed 
to him after a severe sickness : 

'' The Lord has been laying his rod heavily 
upon you ; hut doubtless you are ever ready 
to say, * Let him do what ssemeth him good.' 
I have sympathized with you, my dear brother, 
in your pains and sufferings, and gladly, 
how gladly, would I have flown to your bed- 
side to minister to your wants, and if possible 

Emerson. 5 



66 HEV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

to soothe your pains ; but that privilege was 
denied me, and I could only bear you on my 
heart in supplication at the throne of grace. 
G-od has been better to me than my fears, and 
has raised you up, I trust, to be an instrument 
of great and extensive usefulness in the world. 
To me you have been, as it were, a spiritual 
father. Your kind admonitions, counsels, warn- 
ings, and anxiety for my welfare, can never be 
cfTaced from my memory. Your unwearied 
efforts for my good, your desires for my growth 
in grace, your tender and watchful solicitude 
lest I should go astray, your affectionate fare- 
well the night before I left for college, cannot 
soon be forgotten, and will endear you to me 
by a thousand ties. 

'' I suppose you will be interested to know 
something of the state of my feelings during 
the past winter. I cannot say that I have been 
visited with any special manifestations of the 
divine Spirit, but still I have at times an in- 
ward longing to be made more and more like 
my Redeemer. I have to lament over my own 
sin and folly and departure from Christ. 
how cold have I been in his service ; how little 



AT A^IHERST COLLEaE. 67 

have I done for him. At times I hardly know 
whether I am a child of his or not. 

' If I love, why am I thus ? 
Why this cold and lifeless frame ?' 

^' I can truly say, ' 0, that I were as in 
months past ;' for I do believe, my dear Chris- 
tian brother, that I have seen times in years 
gone by when I drew very near to God, and 
held sweet communion with him in prayer and 
praise. I trust those happy days, those ' golden 
hours,' have not for ever fled. Pray for me, 
that I may not halt in the ' race that is set be- 
fore me.' I trust you are dwelling near the 
throne, and drinking deeply at the fountain- 
head. Write to me, my dear brother, some of 
your own experience. It would be very grati- 
fying to me at all times to receive counsel and 
direction from you in the Christian course. We 
have been much together, and you well know 
how to advise." 

While ]\tr. Emerson was prosecuting with 
faithfulness his studies, and gaining every day 
the confidence of his teachers and the affection 
of his class-mates, his soul burned with long- 



68 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

ings for a revival of religion. In January, 
1841, he wrote thus to his mother: 

"Dear Mother — I have just returned from 
our usual Thursday evening lecture. We had 
a minister here to preach, who I believe is 
from Deerfield. Chum and I have just been 
speaking about the prospects of a revival here 
at this time. He says, Mrs. F. remarked that 
the revivals which have occurred here have 
taken place during this term; and something 
rather singular occurred to-night. Two of the 
most hardened students, apparently, in college, 
came in to the lecture this evening. For w^hat 
purpose I cannot tell. May it not possibly be 
an indication for good? May it not be that 
God is about to pour out his Spirit on Amherst 
college? 0, continue to pray for us. That 
you do pray for us, I do not doubt; but con- 
tinue, continue to pray. 

" The last Thursday in February will doubt- 
less be an interesting season to you this year, 
if you are spared to see it. 0, that Amherst 
college might be especially remembered. I 
wish I felt more for it myself. But, alas, T 



AT AMHERST COLLEaE. 69 

feel that I must begin at home. I find that 
my own garden needs culture before I can un- 
dertake for others. How far have I lived from 
duty and God. How unholy an example have 
I set. I feel that I need to be awakened. 
Christians here need a revival as well as sin- 
ners. There seems to be a kind of lethargic 
stupor among them upon the great and all- 
important subject of religion. They do not 
seem to be engaged in carrying forward the 
cause of the blessed Redeemer. But what 
wonders w^ould a revival work upon the hearts 
of all. May each one be enabled to say, with 
the psalmist David, ' Search me, God, and 
know my heart ; try me, and know my thoughts ; 
and see if there be any wicked way in me, and 
lead me in the way everlasting.' " 

*' Sunday-noon. AVe have had a very solemn 
and impressive discourse this forenoon from 
President Humphrey, on the parable of the un- 
profitable fig-tree. The house was quite still,- 
and the audience seemed to be attentive. that 
it might prove to be a day of conversion to God 
to many sonls. He spoke very solemnly, also, 
to professors of religion. ' Three years have I 



70 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

come and sought fruit on tliis my vine. Cut 
it down. "Why cumbereth it the ground V 
May we all hear the warning voice, and be en- 
abled this year to bring forth much fruit to 
the honor of our Redeemer's name. 

'' I think I have great reason to bless my 
heavenly Father for the many distinguishing 
mercies he has shown towards me, in placing 
me in this seminary of learning, in continuing 
me here a term, in permitting me to see my 
friends in peace and safety, and returning me 
to this place again in health. How many mer- 
cies have I to thank the Lord for. Truly, my 
cup overfloweth with blessings. Yet how cold 
and stupid I remain. Do pray that I may be 
quickened in duty, that I may have more faith, 
more of the influence of the Holy Spirit ; that 
I may live nearer to Christ, be less conformed 
to the fashion of this world ; and that I may be 
enabled to do some good, even in this place, 
<ind advance in useful knowledge and in the 
path to the heavenly Canaan. I have reason 
to regret that since I came into Christ's vis- 
ible church I have done so little for him who 
hath done so much for me; that I have set 



AT AMHERST COLLEGE. 71 

SO unlioly an example and lived so unprofit- 
ably." 

During his second year in college, his pray- 
ers and those of God's people were answered 
by a precious outpouring of the Holy Spirit. 
An account of the work and the state of Mr. 
Emerson's feelings may be gathered from the 
following letters : 

"I was very much surprised and delighted 
last Saturday evening, at receiving a large folio 
sheet filled with interesting intelligence from 
home. I hardly knew how to begin to read it, 
I was so overjoyed. I ran into the next room 
the first thing, to show the letter and to have 
my friends rejoice with me. The contents 
were of the most pleasing kind. To hear that 
you were having an outpouring of the Spirit 
was truly refresliing. ]\Iy own soul seemed to 
be revived. Before I received your letter, I 
trust that I had a fresh visitation of the Spirit 
from on high. Dr. Humphrey appointed a 
meeting that evening, a general meeting, and 
invited such as had accounts of revivals from 
other places to rise and state them. ]\Iany 



72 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

rose. I felt as if it was my duty to rise and 
speak, but it was a great cross. There was 
an impenitent person in the room, before whom 
I felt as if I dared not speak. Conscience 
whispered that this was the cross, and I must 
not go round it; and almost before I was 
aware, I was upon my feet, giving an account 
of the revival in ]N"ewburyport. I felt that I 
had done my duty, and it gave me a new im- 
pulse to go forward in my Christian course. 

" During this week I have been in a differ- 
ent state of mind. Communion in the closet 
and religious duty have been sweet, and I think 
I have found a near access to my heavenly 
Father; and now what I want is firm faith, 
and gi'ace to persevere even unto the end. 
There is no thin sj to me like takinsr a decided 
stand in religion. I have thoroughly proved 
that. I have found it so, in my refusal to 
attend that convivial entertainment last term, 
which I told you of when at home. That was 
the touchstone with those students to try the 
firmness of my principles ; and now they shun 
me, and do not dare to invite me to partake of 
their festivities. Every new cross I take up, 



AT AMHERST COLLEGE. 73 

every self-denial I make for my Lord and Mas- 
ter, gives me a new impulse, a new spur in 
my Christian course. I think I am now striv- 
ing daily to guard against my easily besetting 
sins; and though I fall into them heedlessly 
now and then, I try not to be discouraged, but 
make a new trial, and look to heaven for 
strength and support." 

''May 9, 1842. The students having most 
of them gone home, of course we cannot expect 
any thing of particular interest in college at 
present. Having been left alone some of the 
time, I have been able to devote a part of it to 
reflection and religious meditation. I carried 
myself back to-day in imagination to the times 
when I first felt that I had an interest in the 
atoning blood of Christ, and when I was led to 
make a profession of my faith in Christ, and 
compared them with my present state of feel- 
ing, and I could not but exclaim, 'Where is 
the blessedness I knew when first I saw the 
Lord V I believe, dear mother, if ever I had 
true love for the Saviour, it was then; if ever 
I did any thing from a true desire of fulfdling 
all the will of God, it was when I entered into 



74 EEV. JOHN E. EilERSON. 

a solemn public ens^asfement with him to be 
for ever his. Those were days when I felt 
genuine love to God burning in my heart, and 
when I believed I could truly say, ' I am my 
Lord's, and he is mine ;' when 'I sat under his 
shadow with great delight, and his fruit was 
sweet to my taste; when he brought me into 
his banqueting-house, and his banner over me 
was love.' 

'^ Though now, I trust, I have an interest in 
the atoning blood of the Redeemer, and have 
been washed and sanctified, yet I do not have 
those holy exercises of mind, those sweet fore- 
tastes of heaven, those clear evidences of eternal 
salvation, which I formerly had ; that strict 
conscientious uprightness I am also wanting 
in, which I formerly possessed. I thank you 
heartily for the good and wholesome advice 
which you gave me in your last letter. 0, 
that I may indeed be ' an uncommon Chris- 
tian,' a ' living witness' for God. Though we, 
as yet, have no revival here, we are still wait- 
ing for the blessing. You have heard of the 
very powerful revival of religion in Williams 
college. The feeling was so great that some 



AT A]krHERST COLLEaE. 75 

of the exercises were suspended. When shall 
we witness such an outpouring of the Spirit 
here ?" 

In June, the shower which had been so long 
anticipated descended. 

"Amherst College, June 16, 1842. 

*' Dear Mother — In view of the existing 
state of things in this institution, I can no 
longer refrain from addressing you a letter, in 
order that your soul as well as mine may be 
refreshed by the glorious tidings. The Lord 
in deed and in truth is pouring out his Spirit 
upon our beloved college. A cheering revival 
of religion is in progress. After long years of 
drought and spiritual death. Almighty God, in 
his boundless and infinite mercy, has seen fit 
to refresh this part of his thirsty Zion with a 
shower of divine grace. 'IN'ot unto us, Lord, 
not unto us, but unto thy name give glory.' 
I attempted in a' former letter to give you a 
brief account of its commencement, and of the 
then increasinof interest amonof us. I will now 
give you some particulars with regard to its 
further progress, and its wonderful and soul- 
cheering eflects. And 0, my beloved mother, 



76 HEV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

if the only fruit of this blessed revival has been 
the return of your own wandering, sinful, prod- 
igal son to his Father and his God, would there 
not be joy among the angels in heaven, and 
joy, praise, and thanksgiving in at least one 
heart on earth on this account? 

But God, in his infinite loving-kindness, has 
not stopped here. He has brought back, as 
we humbly trust, most of his erring, back- 
sliding children in this institution to himself. 
The 'new song' has been put into the mouths 
of many of those who but a short time since 
were the bitterest enemies of the cross of Christ, 
and whose tongues were fdled with curses and 
revilings. He has also stopped the mouths 
of those who were the opposers of revivals of 
religion in our colleges, on account of their 
occurring so periodically — such revivals having 
usually taken place in the spring term, in the 
months of March and April — by granting us a 
gracious outpouring of his Holy Spirit in the 
summer term, an unusual and unexpected time, 
and a time when all were busily engaged, the 
seniors in preparing for commencement, and 
the other classes for our regular summer exhi- 



AT AMHERST COLLEaE. 77 

bition. He has talien not only those who were 
not thus engaged, but some of those who were 
most busily employed, and made them trophies 
of divine grace. 

" There has been no very particular excite- 
ment, no remarkably unusual stir, no suspen- 
sion of studies or omission of college exercises. 
Though we have meetings every day and even- 
ing, filled to overflowing, and the most pro- 
found attention paid to the preaching of the 
word, and many, as we have reason to hope, 
are thereby convicted of their sins and guilt 
and led to seek refuge in the ark of safety, yet 
it is for the most part in the private room and 
in the closet that we hear the stifled sobs of 
the convicted, and the fervent thanksgivings 
of the redeemed. One by one they are led to 
seek for pardon and salvation by means of ' the 
great atonement,' and week by week do we 
hear fresh accessions to the ranks of the Re- 
deemer's chosen ones. 

" Two weeks ago to-morrow the Christians 
in this institution held a day of fasting and 
prayer. It was not noised abroad. It was not 
publicly announced from the pulpit, but each 



78 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

Christian came by individual invitation into a 
meeting the night before, and we were there 
earnestly exhorted to humble ourselves before 
God on the coming day, and to entreat him to 
continue the influences of his Spirit among us. 
Private prayer and humiliation in the closet 
were chiefly recommended. We, however, met 
from the hour of twelve till two in my room, 
for the purpose of social prayer. The room 
was filled, and the Spirit of God was shed 
down upon us. We met also at five o'clock in 
another room, and invited in the impenitent. 
It was a solemn time. 

" The next day occurred the celebration of 
the Lord's supper, and it was a precious sea- 
son to many souls. It was during this and the 
succeedino^ week that God besran to make 
more signal displays of his love and mercy. 
Before this, quite a number in the Freshman 
class had been anxiously inquiring the way of 
salvation, and some few had indulged a trem- 
bling hope. But the work now began to spread 
into the other classes. The members of our 
own class met frequently to pray for our im- 
penitent brethren. There were three, however. 



AT a:\ihee.st college. 79 

in the class, who were so hardened in iniquity, 
that thousfh we committed them to oar Grod in 
prayer, still it seemed as if we could not have 
faith that they would be brought into the king- 
dom. But 0, how weak and vain is man. 
The first member of our class that was brought 
under conviction was one of these three. His 
attention was arrested by a sermon that was 
preached on Sabbath evening. The next case 
of conversion in our class was another of these 
three, and it was a most striking and wonder- 
ful conversion. Its subject was a most hard- 
ened rebel, one whose mouth had been ' filled 
with cursing and bitterness,' one who drank to 
intoxication, and, in fact, one who was con- 
sidered as being sunk as low in every species 
of vice and profanity as any person in college. 
He had been so vile, that not a person had 
even dared to ask him into a rehgious meeting. 
And it was from this fact, that he, by the 
powerful aid of the Spirit of God, was led to 
look upon his lost and ruined condition as a 
sinner, and to cry to God for mercy. He was 
sitting in his room alone a week ago to-night ; 
and as he sat, he began to think of the revival 



80 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

which was in progress in college, and why it 
was, that when every other memher of the 
class had heen conversed with on the subject 
of religion, and urged to immediate repentance, 
he had been passed by. This led him to re- 
flect on his past course ; and as he reflected, 
the truth was powerfully set home to his heart. 
The following day he strove, by plunging into 
vice, to drive away his impressions, but could 
not succeed. On Sunday he went in deep dis- 
tress to Prof. T., and told him of his situation. 
All day Monday he was under deep conviction, 
and Monday evening he was led to give him- 
self wholly up into the hands of his Redeemer. 
*' But I cannot enumerate individual cases. 
They are too many and too striking. All the 
Junior class except three are indulging hope 
in Christ, and one of those three is under deep 
conviction. The Lord is doing indeed a mighty 
work. Our most open opposers have been 
brought to bow to the Saviour. In one entry, 
where they boasted that a prayer-meeting 
could not be held, all but four are indulging 
hope. One of those, a most hardened wretch 
heretofore, is under deep impressions, and an- 



AT AMHERST COLLEGE. 81 

other is out of town. I have only room to add, 
pray, pray abundantly for us. We want to 
see all in this college brought in." 

"Amherst, July 15, 1842. 

" Dear Mother — If your absent son was 
conversing with you face to face, would not 
your two first interrogatories be, ' Is your 
health good V and, ' Are you yet continuing 
strong in the Lord ?' To the first I w^ould 
say, ' Yes,' and to the second I would reply — 
humbly, I hope — ' I trust I am.' My dear 
mother, the only evidence that I get of a 
change in my feelings is, that from day to day 
I find a nearness to Grod and a devotion to his 
cause, which I have not felt in weeks and 
months past. And though I am still carnal, 
though I have still within me an ' evil heart of 
unbelief,' which prompts me to neglect duty 
and to go into the by-paths of sin and folly, yet 
I trust I am in a manner enabled to resist 
temptation, and to come off victorious over 
so7ne of my adversaries. I find that it must 
be by constant prayer, constant watching, con- 
stant effort, by living near to God and keeping 
eternal things in view, that I can continue in 



82 HEV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

this frame of mind and pursue a Christian 
course. When I am led away into temptation, 
as I sometimes am, I do not feel as I did be- 
fore like giving up all for lost and returning 
again to my former courses ; but I find I am 
enabled to go to God with some degree of peni- 
tence for my sin, and in my closet mourn over 
it, and there seek strength and guidance for 
the future. But 0, we shall never be freed 
from this load of guilt and sin which is weigh- 
ing us down, till we rest in heaven. 

"I try from day to day to think of death, 
and of the manner in which I should wish to 
live, did I know that death was at the door. 
But I find that ' in many things I offend, and 
in all I come short.' I find every now and 
then some sin unthought of before, which I 
have been committins^ — some avenue of c^uilt 
into which I have been straying, though it was 
unheeded by me before. Thus I perceive that 
I can never lay my armor down on earth, but 
niust continue to ' fio:ht the orood fisrlit.' Per- 
haps this has been my fault heretofore. I have 
been striving after perfection, and when I 
found that I did not reach it, have felt like 



AT AMHERST OOLLEaE. 83 

giving up the contest and dropping my armor. 
But perfection cannot be attained in this life, 
and we must fight if we would reign. An in- 
creasinsr love for the closet I feel as if I now 
possessed. When I can get alone by myself 
and pour out my soul in prayer to G-od, and feel 
the influences of the Holy Spirit resting upon 
me, I believe it is one of the sweetest seasons 
I enjoy on earth. You know that I date my 
first decline in relisrion from a nesrlect of those 

a a 

seasons. God grant that it may never be so 
again. I may not feel the neglect at first. I 
think I did not then. But it does have a 
silent influence, and its dreadful effects will 
sooner or later be felt through the whole 
Christian system ; for, 

'Prayer is the Cliristiau's vital breath, 
Tlie Christian's native air.' 

I am striving to conform my lif® more and 
more to the pattern which my Lord and Mas- 
ter has set me, and to be a ' burning and a 
shining light.' 

" My Bible, I think, I relish much more 
than formerly. I am now reading it in course ; 
began with Romans and have got to Hebrews. 



84 HEV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

Some of Paul's charges to Timothy, to Chris- 
tians, to backsliders, etc., I find very usefal to 
mys3lf at this time. An increasing taste for 
' good books,' also, I think I possess. I am in 
the habit of reading every day one sermon of 
that devoted and pious man, W. B. Homer. 
Have you read his memoir ? If not, I think 
you and Eliza would be greatly interested in 
it. I hope to read to you some in it when I 
get home. 

"I have nothing particularly new to write 
concerning the religious interest in college. I 
believe there have no new conversions taken 
place since I wrote you last. Though the in- 
terest manifested is not so deep as it vv^as a few 
weeks since, yet there is still a good attend- 
ance upon our meetings and much of the spirit 
of prayer. We have a prayer-meeting every 
day, either at half-past one or five P. M., which 
is generally well attended. Preaching three or 
four evenings in a week. Those who have in- 
dulged hope all continue to appear well. This 
is very cheering. I long to see you, that I 
may tell you more particularly about them 
than I can on paper. I long to be at some of 



AT AMHERST COLLEGE. 65 

your evening meetings. Is there a good at- 
tendance ? Do the Monday evening church 
prayer-meetings continue? I wish old Mrs. 
Beck's prophetic revival might occur while I 
am at home. I think I anticipate more re- 
ligious enjoyment this vacation, than I have at 
any other. Our Sunday noon prayer-meetings 
in the chamber, I think much of. I pray for 
you at such seasons individually, and I pray 
for the church. 

" Sometimes I think, dear mother, that my 
course for a few months past is to be blessed 
to both of us. Perhaps you were thinking too 
much of my being such a Christian as J. B. 
Taylor was, while in college, and God has dis- 
appointed you. Perhaps I placed too much 
confidence in self, and he has humbled me in 
this manner. I hope I shall be enabled to 
make any sacrifice for Christ. But I know I 
have sin in me still, and I, above all others, 
need to keep close to God if I would abstain 
from it. 0, do all of you pray for me that I 
may be kept from falling into sin." 

Journal letter for his mother. 

^' OcToi^RR 2, 1842. A calm and pleasant 



66 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

Sabbath. A sacred da}' of rest. Sweet fore- 
taste of the eternal sabbath in the upper 
sanctaary. All nature seems to harmonize with 
the quiet stillness of this day of rest. I had a 
peculiarly interesting season of prayer this 
noon for my beloved parents and friends ; I 
prayed for each one in particular. I thought 
of my dear mother, kneeling alone perhaps in 
the room where we, her children, have so often 
at noon of the holy Sabbath knelt with her ; 
and now they are both, in the providence of 
Grod, removed from her for a season. As I 
thought, I felt my heart drawn out in prayer 
for her, and for the dear younger brother who 
has just gone from under the paternal roof. I 
prayed that he might never forget the pious 
counsels he has had instilled into his youthful 
mind, and that he might be kept from the 
temptations of that great city whither he has 
gone. It was to me a hallowed hour. for 
many more such. 

" October 4. A most interesting monthly 
concert of prayer was held last evening in col- 
lege, and very fully attended. The claims of 
a dying world were urged upon us with pe- 



AT AMHERST COLLEaE. 87 

cuiiar force, and interesting statements were 
read. Professor H., in speaking of deciding 
upon what was our duty with regard to going 
out as foreign missionaries, remarked, that the 
question ought not to be with us, ' Shall I go V 
for that is our Saviour's express command to 
every one of his professed disciples : ' Go ye 
into all the world ;' but, ' Shall I remain at 
home V ' Are there reasons sufficient to justify 
my staying at home to preach the gospel V If 
not, then he thought it was plainly our duty to 
go. He believed it was proper for a student to 
make up his mind in college, on this subject, 
and become early imbued with a missionary 
spirit ; ' for do we not find,' said he, ' that 
those persons who have made the greatest 
advancement in science, literature, and the arts, 
turned their attention early to these subjects V 
So should it be in the missionary cause. 

" Lord, teach me my duty. I have begun 
to read the Missionary Herald. I became in- 
terested in the September number. Last Sab- 
bath I read part of the October number aloud 
to a friend in college, and we mean to continue 
the plan of reading regularly if we can. 



88 REY. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

"Sabbath-noon, October 9. I have just 
risen from my knees, where I have heen pray- 
ing for the clear church of which I am a mem- 
ber, whose members, I doubt not, are at this 
moment sitting at the table of their Lord and 
Master, to commemorate his dying love. I 
have prayed for a descent of the Holy Grhost 
upon them, and I trust that the season will 
prove indeed 'a feast of fat things' to their 
souls. 

" October 11. I have had my mind much 
occupied for a day or two by having some ex- 
ercises to prepare for college. I find that such 
things are apt to take off* my attention from 
higher and spiritual duties. for more devot- 
edness to G-od, and more engagedness in his 
service. I want more of that spirit which will 
enable me at all times to keep near to God, 
and inspire me with more devotedness to his 
cause. 

" October 13. The return of our Thursday 
evening lecture puts me in mind of the good 
old Wednesday evening meetings at home. 
how have I enjoyed those meetings, though 
sometimes they have seemed so tedious. Some 



AT AMHERST COLLEGE. 89 

of the happiest hours of my Ufe have heen 
spent in that old out-of-the-\yay chapel, and I 
could not even now see it torn down to give 
place to a new one without deep feelings of 
sorrow. We hardly ever prize our privileges 
while they are in our possession. AYhen they 
are gone we look back upon them, and reflect 
how we might have been benefited by them." 
Mr. Emerson sometimes received special vis- 
itations of divine grace, as in the following 
instance : 

"Amherst, Feb. 10, 1843. 

'' You will want to know something, dear 
mother, with regard to my religious feelings, 
and I have long been wanting to write you 
concerning them. I believe I mentioned to 
you in a former letter something about the 
state of my mind the Sabbath after I returned. 
That was indeed a day of visitation to my soul 
from on hisfh. As I was sittins^ in church on 
that day, in a most unaccountable and sur- 
prising manner I seemed to have poured upon 
me the influences of God's Holy Spirit. I 
looked upon things in the light of eternity, and 
the realities of immortality seemed pressing on 



90 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

my view. I was led to look in a different light 
on my duty, and felt that it was high time I 
should be awake, and be up and doing. I re- 
solved to live nearer to God, to give up my 
easily besetting sins, and examii]>e myself to 
see whether I was in the faith. Those impres- 
sions, I trust, have not left me. I think I may 
say in truth, Grod has met me by the influ- 
ences of his Holy Spirit, and I have had a 
revival in my soul. 

" Since then, my Bible has been to me a de- 
light, and my prayers a joy and comfort. I 
have found it sweet to meditate on God and 
heaven and divine things. I have been ena- 
bled to look forward with some degree of calm- 
ness to the time when I shall have to leave 
all things below, and be here no more for ever. 
This precious season was sudden and unex- 
pected. No particular sermon, or prayer, or 
remark, arrested my attention. It seemed to 
be the Spirit of God whispering in my ear, and 
urging upon me anew my duty. 

" You spoke in your letter about my birth- 
day. I remembered it, and offered up fervent 
prayer on that day for future strength. I trust 



AT AMHERST COLLEaE. 91 

I am enabled to make some advances in holi- 
ness, and in the divine life. I have felt of late 
more of a spirit of prayer, and a stronger de- 
termination to press on in my Christian course. 
I hegin now to realize more than ever the 
responsibilities which will come upon me when 
I leave colles^e. I look forward to them at 
times with some anxiety, but I place my trust 
in God. He can give help in every time of 
need. I hope to be able to get much discipline 
of mind this year, and to be prepared to be a 
successful teacher when I leave college." 

Again, in June, 1843, God graciously visited 
the college, and souls were converted. Indeed, 
as we shall see, revivals of religion seemed to 
attend our beloved brother to the very close of 
his career. 

"Amherst, June 24, 1S43. 

" Dear Mother — Though you have received 
a letter from me this week, and may not be 
expecting one so soon again, yet I feel desirous 
of writing to you, because I am persuaded you 
will be anxious to know how the work of the 
Lord is progressing among us, and because I 



92 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

am assured that a line, however often, from 
your dear, and, I trust, humbled son, will not 
come amiss. I am rejoiced to be able to inform 
you that the Lord is still continuing his good 
work, and the Spirit, by his convicting and con- 
verting influences, is still manifestly among 
us. Though the past week has not been so 
signally marked with displays of divine grace 
as the week before, yet we trust that three 
have been born into the kingdom of our God 
since the week commenced, two from the Fresh- 
man class and one from ours. 

" Last Saturday the professors of religion in 
college had a day of fasting and prayer. Much 
fervent supplication was offered up. I devoted 
the forenoon to prayer, perusing the Scriptures, 
and meditation. I took different subjects, and 
made them one by one the burden of my pray- 
ers, retiring to my closet at intervals daring 
the forenoon. Our class met in an adjoining- 
room, at one o'clock, to pray for spiritual bless- 
ings to descend upon us. At five P. M. we 
had a general meeting for all the members of 
college in the rhetorical-room. My own mind 
had been, during the day, in rather a gloomy, 



AT AMHERST COLLEaE. 93 

desponding, and doubting frame ; "but between 
the hours of eight and nine in the evening, as 
I was alone in my room pouring out my soul 
in prayer to Almighty God, light broke in upon 
me, and I felt a nearness of access to Grod 
which I had not experienced during the day. 
I trust I felt my heart going out in love to my 
Saviour and my God. 0, what a power there 
is in secret prayer. 

'' Sunday morning was a time long to be 
remembered in this institution. In our morn- 
ing meeting, some of those who had lately in- 
dulged hope in Christ rose and led in prayer. 
It was truly affecting to hear from the lips of 
one who had only a few da.ys before been curs- 
ing and blaspheming his Maker, thanksgiving 
and praise for his deliverance from the thral- 
dom of sin and iniquity. Those who have 
been the most haughty, the most profane and 
wicked, and the most opposed to this good 
work, have been made to bow at the feet of 
Jesus. Some of those who were from the most 
respectable, wealthy, and influential families, 
and who would have considered it a lasting 
disgrace to be seen in a meeting of any kind, 



94 REV. JOHN E. EJIEUSOx^. 

except when obliged to go Ly the faculty, are 
now seen sitting: hke little children at the feet 
of JesLis, and humbly supplicating at the throne 
of his grace. One of the most pleasing and 
delightful features of this revival has been the 
unity and harmony of spirit which has pervaded 
the hearts of Christians. Where before there 
was wrangling, bitterness, and contention, all 
now is peace and love. 

''You will be desirous to know, dear mother, 
the state of my own feelings at this most inter- 
esting time ; but I hardly dare express them. 
I trust I am ' strong in the Lord, and in the 
power of his might.' If I know my own heart, 
I am fully determined to live for Clod. But 
0, if I am deceived with regard to my hope, 
what a dreadful thing it will be. I strivi3 to 
examine myself daily at the bar of conscience, 
and by the word of God, to see whether I am 
living aright. I often ask myself the question, 
If I am this night called away, can I say sin- 
cerely, ' I know in whom I have believed V 
One great evidence that I get of my change of 
heart, is an increased love for my closet duties, 
and for the ordinances and worship of God's 



AT AMHERST COLLEGE. 95 

house. I feel as if the things that once I loved, 
now I hate, and those I hated, now I love. I 
tremhle lest I should again be left of God. I 
feel that I need to keep very close to my Sav- 
iour. I do not ask you to pray for me, my 
dear mother, for I know that abundant, fer- 
vent prayer goes forth from your lips, that Al- 
mighty God would bless and keep your absent 
son from the paths of vice and folly, and enable 
him to lead a holy life." 

Mr. Emerson, in other letters, alludes to his 
studies, and gives sometimes a detailed account 
of the branches to \vhich he devoted his atten- 
tion. It was his constant aim to discharge 
faithfully every duty. His influence among 
the students was of the happiest character. 
His diligence, his kindness and courtesy, and 
above all, his ardent piety, made a salutary 
impression upon those around him. His at- 
tachments to his class-mates continued through 
life, as his correspondence abundantly shows. 

He graduated with honor, August 8, 1844. 
The last scenes of college life deeply impressed 
his mind. He was anxious to return to his 
pleasant home, and yet it was painful to part 



96 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

with his class-mates, and especially with those 
with whom he had taken sweet spiritual com- 
munion. But the changes incident to human 
life he felt that he must submit to. His sad- 
ness, however, was mingled with devout thank- 
fulness to God, for having carried him safely 
through his college course, and conducted him 
so far towards the great object of his heart's 
desire, the gospel ministry. 



RESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 97 



CHAPTER IV. 

RESIDENCE IN CONWAY, MASS. 
1844-1846. 

Mr. Emerson's father having been unsuc- 
cessful in business, his son was desirous of 
earning something towards his o\vn support. 
Accordingly, in September, 1844, he went to 
Conway, Mass., the place of liis grandfather's 
ministerial labors, and there took charge of a 
school. 

His qualifications for teaching were of a 
very high order, and he entered upon his new 
duties with ardent desires to mould the char- 
acter, as well as promote the intellectual de- 
velopment of his pupils. He carried with him 
to Conway his devotional spirit, his habits of 
self-contemplation and secret prayer, and his 
deep interest in the salvation of souls. The 
Spirit of God seemed to attend him and to 
direct his steps. In his school, in the families 
with whom he boarded, in the church, and in 

EmeKon- 7 



98 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

the community, he labored to exert a strong 
religious influence. 

After being at Conway a short time, he 
wrote to his parents as follows : 

"September 15, 1844. 

" Mr. Harris has preached at home all day. 
I think I shall enjoy his preaching very much. 
Our intermission is only an hour and a quarter 
at noon, and I do not know but I shall have to 
observe our season of prayer after meeting in 
the afternoon. There is so much going in and 
out here, in the intermission, that I cannot very 
well be retired. I trust the season will con- 
tinue to be one of great interest and profit to 
us both. I have consented for the present to 
supply any vacancy of a teacher which may 
occur from Sabbath to Sabbath, and shall not 
take a regular class just yet. Mr. Harris 
wishes me to take charge of a Sunday evening 
meeting, but I don't feel spiritual life enough 
to do it. J wish I was more engaged. I know 
I need to be. Do, my dear parents, pray 
that I may have a quickening from on high. 
I do not feel as if 1 was at all qualified for 
the great work of the ministry. I have none 



RESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 99 

of those feelings wliicli were manifested by 
J. B. Taylor, Homer, and others. If I do not 
feel as if I could speak in a prayer-meeting 
here, what shall I do when called upon to 
address the great congregation? The Lord 
grant me his Spirit. 

" My first ^veek in Conway has closed. How 
many weeks I shall spend here, Grod only knows. 
I feel as if I had made a beginning, and could 
go on for this term. I think I can say I do 
like Conway. Every thing conspires to make 
it pleasant. It is a favorable time of year, and 
fine weather, and I feel as if my name gave 
me a license to become acquainted with any- 
body. People seem disposed to be familiar, 
and invite me freely to come and see them. I 
hope to be able not only to make myself con- 
tented here, but also to do good, and grow in 
knowledge and grace." 

" October 1, 1844. 

"My school is still flourishing; every Wed- 
nesday afternoon we have an exercise in com- 
position and declamation. My evenings are 
spent in reading, writing, and visiting. I was 
glad to receive your letter on the morning of 



100 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

Fast-day, and to know that you also had been 
looking forward to the day with feelings of in- 
terest. It proved a good day to me. I gave 
up my school in the afternoon and attended 
meeting. It was the fullest church meeting I 
have attended since I have heen in Conway. 
There was a spirit of freedom, and I thought 
the power of the Holy Grhost was present. In 
the evening I attended our usual Thursday 
evening prayer-meeting. 

" I must tell you a little about our religious 
state. We begin to have the hearing ear among 
us. The number in the district where I am 
now boarding, that attend meeting on Sabbath 
evening, varies from sixty to seventy-five, and 
I am permitted to speak to them every week 
of things pertaining to the Saviour's kingdom. 
"We have had some solemn meetings, great 
attention, and considerable weeping, but as yet 
no signs of genuine repentance. One encour- 
aging fact I will mention. A professor in this 
neighborhood, who has for a long time been 
indifferent to the things of religion, has re- 
ceived a sudden and powerful refreshing and 
come out decidedly for the cause again. He 



RESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 101 

now assists his brethren by his prayers and ex- 
hortations. Other symptoms of vitality have 
begun to appear in members of the church, in 
different parts of the town. In view of this 
state of things, I proposed to three of the 
brethren to set apart Monday evening for spe- 
cial prayer for this village in which we are 
laboring. The plan met their views, and we 
held our first meeting a fortnight ago last Mon- 
day eve. Mr. H met with us, and we had 

a comforting season. At our second meeting, 
we agreed to devote a few minutes at nine 
o'clock every evening in our closets, to pray for 
the same object ; also to converse personally 
with some impenitent sinner. 

Every fortnight, Mr. C and I go into a 

neighboring district on Saturday evening, to 
help the brethren in sustaining a prayer-meeting 
which was commenced this fall. The attend- 
ance thus far has been very encouraging. "\Ye 
are looking for a revival with some hope and 
great fear. If we could only get clear of self, 
and feel that G-od alone must be glorified, and 
precious souls saved from the second death, we 
should have more encouragement. But this 



102 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

one thing, I believe, we are fully determined 
to do — to pray that we may serve and glorify 
God, and in this we are united as touching one 
thing. I set apart Saturday, the 27th, for 
prayer, meditation, reading the Scriptures, and 
reviewing niy journal; had a cheering day. I 
found a record which I made on the day I was 
eleven years old, which affected me very much. 
I hope I gave myself away anew to the Lord 
on that day." 

Mr. Emerson took a very deep personal in- 
terest in the happiness and welfare of all his 
pupils, entering cordially into their joys and 
sorrows. This is touching! y illustrated by the 
following incident : 

"To night is one of those times in which I 
feel peculiarly like writing, and such times 
have been more frequent since I returned from 
home than ever before. I have been trans- 
ported back to-day to the time when I was ten 
years old, and have been passing through, in 
imagination, some of the scenes that I then 
passed through, and have exclaimed, '0 that 
I felt and lived and prayed as in months past.' 

" The cause of these feelings is this : I have 



EESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 103 

attended, this afternoon, the funeral of the fa- 
ther of one of my best scholars. He was one 
of our most respectable and wealthy citizens, 
and only the last winter represented the town 
in the legislature at Boston. He died of con- 
sumption, aged forty-two, leaving four children, 
three of them under twelve years of age. Their 
own mother died about four years since, a 
pious, lovely woman. They deeply mourned 
her loss. Her eldest son, now just past fifteen, 
was very affectionate, kind, and attentive to 
her. Her death made a deep impression on 
his mind, and soon after that event he indulged 
a hope of saltation ; and at the age of twelve 
united wdth tie church. He has proved him- 
self, I think, a Christian indeed. I learn from 
a gentleman who lived next door to him, that 
he always used to overhear him, morning and 
evening, at his private devotions, in w^hich he 
w^as very purctual. He has attended my 
school ever since I have been in Conway, and 
has been in my Sabbath-school class. I think 
he has the most amiable disposition of any boy 
I ever :net with. He is fitting for college, and 
is almost, if not quite, the best scholar I have 



104 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

had in my school. I never loved a scholar as 
I have loved him. He is so manly, so mature, 
so conscientious, so strictly upright, that you 
could not help loving him with all your heart. 
So punctual has he been in his attendance, 
that, until a few days ago, when his father 
was taken v/orse, he rarely failed of being pres- 
ent in his seat. Ail my sympathies have been 
enlisted in his behalf, during the last fortnight. 
His father went out until that time. Then he 
became deranged, and remained so, except at 
intervals, until his death. 

" The little fellow loved his fatlier dearly. I 
well recollect one morning, after I had made 
mention of him in my morniiig prayer at 
school, that he cried as if his heart would 
break, and it was a long time "before the vio- 
lence of his feelings could be repressed. And 
never shall I forget the morning of his father's 
death. His friends had promised to send for 
him, if there was a change ; and just after 
school had commenced on Thursday, the other 
boys saw his younger brother coming at full 
speed down the hill. The color quickly for- 
sook his cheek, for he knew too wdl his 



RESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 105 

errand, ' He 's dying,' said the little messenger, 
and I turned to call my pupil out. But I 
found I could not speak, and I beckoned him 
to the door. AVith a face wet wdth tears, he 
looked up to me and said, ' Shall I take my 
satchel ?' I could not help noticing, and being 
struck with the question. So faithful had he 
always been to take home his books for study, 
that even in that dread hour he hardly knew 
w^hether it would be duty to leave them. ' No,' 
I exclaimed, as I hastily took them from him, 
and bade him hurry home. His father breathed 
his last just as he reached the door. 

' ' It would have melted your heart could 
you have seen him stand to-day, in the pres- 
ence of the vast crowd assembled at the fu- 
neral, and drop his scalding tears thick and 
fast upon the face of that beloved father, now 
cold in death. After the funeral, I went to 
the house to invite him to take a walk. ' This 
seems a gloomy world to-night,' said the poor 
boy. I felt almost unable to reply to any thing 
he said, for though young in years he w^as 
truly old in sorrow. AVe conversed together 
on death and eternity, and it was a solemn 



106 • REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

hour. So like my own experience did liis con- 
version seem, that I was, as I said at the be- 
ginning of this letter, transported back to the 
time when I was ten or twelve years of age. 
I have often spoken of late to large audiences, 
in the conference-room, but never have I 
spoken w4th such heartfelt emotion as I did 
when I addressed that audience of only one, 
seated on an old board in a retired place 
whither we had strayed. I hope I shall be 
enabled to do him much good. I must ask 
your pardon for having filled so much of my 
letter with this account ; but my heart is full 
of it, and I could write nothing else now." 
It is interestinsf to notice that whatever 

o 

topic Mr. Emerson may commence writing 
upon, we are certain, very soon, to find him 
floating on the stream of his religious feel- 
ings. It is also a significant fact, that wher- 
ever he was, he witnessed the descent of the 
showers of divine grace around him. 

After excusing himself for not writing be- 
fore, he says, 

"November 7, 1845. Just before my cold 
came on, I had agreed to deliver the annual 



RESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 107 

address before the Conway Agricultural As- 
sociation. I did it reluctantly ; at first posi- 
tively refusing: but on being more earnestly 
solicited, I consented. Immediately after I had 
consented to do this, the Lord commenced rain- 
ing down righteousness upon us. I verily be- 
lieve we are on the eve, if not in the begin- 
ning, of a glorious revival of religion. As soon 
as these indications of good commenced, I felt 
as if I must be in the work ; and the very week 
in which I wrote a large part of my address, I 
not only was in school every day, but also 
attended a meeting every evening' during the 
week, riding one evening three or four miles 
to attend one. * * * 

" You will be anxious to hear more about 
the interest in religion. It has commenced in 
this village, and the first case of awakening 
was in the house next to the one where I 
board. I think I have already written you 
about the increased attendance on our meet- 
ings, and the new spirit of prayer which had 
been stirred up among some of the brethren. 
This has been continually increasing ; and a 
few Sabbaths ao[o there was a minister in town 



108 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

from Arkansas. In the evening he came up 
and preached a most powerful sermon in the 
school-house in this district, and the truth took 
deep root. The next day one of the girls who 
w^orks in the factory came to him to inquire 
the way of eternal life. 

" Last Saturday evening I attended a most 
solemn meeting. The voices of new-born souls 
were heard, testifying of G-od's goodness and 
giving praise to his name. The meeting was 
solemn as the grave, the silence broken only 
by the outbursting and irrepressible tears and 
sobs of those present. There is also a very 
interesting state of things in the church. At 
the preparatory lecture, a week ago, after 
preaching a most excellent and appropriate 
sermon, Mr. H. was so much affected that it 
was with difficulty he got through his last 
prayer. The church were melted. When we 
came together yesterday, some feared that the 
interest was somewhat dinlinished on account 
of the meeting the evening before. But no ; 
the feeling had increased. The church were 
again melted into brokenness of heart, and we 
felt that it was good to be there." 



RESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 109 

He relates the following incident as having 
occurred on his journey to Conway : 

"I was very much interested in a young 
man that I found boarding in Mr. B.'s family. 
They said he was a very good young man, but 
rather 'green;' 'verdant' they called it. I 
soon found, however, that his greenness con- 
sisted in his readiness to speak at any time on 
the subject of religion. A Universalist com- 
menced a discussion with him during the even- 
ing, and for two hours the young man de- 
fended the religion of Christ like a good sol- 
dier. It was triumphant, unanswerable. I 
slept with him that night. Without knowing 
that I was a professor of religion, or that I 
cared for any of these things, he took down his 
Bible and announced his intention of reading. 
I of course assented. He read a passage and 
commented on it, and then offered a short and 
fervent prayer to the throne of grace. We lay 
awake till near twelve o'clock, conversing on 
religion, and I found that he took a deep in- 
terest in the welfare of P. and L. He has 
offered L. a seat free in Park-street church, if 
he will attend regularly." 



no REV. JOHN E. EMERSO.\. 

In December, the revival reached his school, 
and the desire of his heart was gratified in the 
conversion of some of his pupils. 

'' My school has opened very prosperously, 
numbering twenty-nine scliolars, and I am 
expecting another soon. But best of all, the 
Lord has poured out his Spirit upon us. I 
have ten young ladies, and, if I can judge cor- 
rectly, all but one are interested in the subject 
of religion. Three are professors, three have 
lately indulged hope, and three appear anxious, 
and are beginning to attend the inquiry-meet- 
ing. C. H., of whom I wrote you in my last 
letter, attends my school, and appears well. 
P. B. is quite engaged, and is, I think, doing 
good. He took home one of his companions to 
spend the night with him, a short time since, 
and conversed with him on the subject of re- 
ligion. He found his mind quite tender. 
Things appear different in school. Instead of 
trifling and vanity, I now hear such words as, 
'meeting,' 'inquiry-meeting,' 'eternal things.' 
On the whole, I think I may safely say we are 
enjoying a precious revival of religion. The 
work seems to be principally in the centre of 



RESIDENCE AT CONWAY. Ill 

the town. The evening meetings are very 
fully attended. Although there was quite a 
storm last Thursday, a number came two or 
three miles to attend the evening conference. 
Extra prayer-meetings are established, and 
well attended. The work is very silent, un- 
usually so. On this account I hope it will 
prove lasting and genuine. Some young men 
in town appear to be serious, and it is hoped 
that they will soon come out on the Lord's 
side. Mr. H. is constantly engaged, and active. 
I have not called on him yet, but hope to have 
a talk with him soon. I of course cannot be 
unmoved amid such a state of things, but I feel 
my insufficiency. Every day convinces me 
that, if I am a Christian, I am not where I 
should be. I trust I have some lono^insfs to be 
more like Christ, and something of an earnest 
desire to continue in his love. I feel sick of 
this living by impulses. I want ' to abide 
under the shadow of the Almighty.' I have 
again commenced a course of self-examina- 
tion, and hope, by the grace of God, to be 
enabled to prosecute it. I have endeavored 
to give more time to secret prayer, and 



112 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

have commenced the readmg of Isaiah, with 
Scott." 

The revival continued into January, 1846. 
He writes again as follows : 

" It would have given you joy to witness 
such scenes as we have been passing through 
in this place for several weeks. The Spirit has 
been poured out, not like a 'rushing mighty 
wind,' but like the soft dews and gentle rain, 
fertilizing and making glad our Zion. I had 
prayed for a blessing, and thought I had faith 
for my school as a grain of mustard-seed ; but 
when the blessing came, I am not sure but I 
was as much astonished as the witch of En- 
dor was, when Samuel himself actually ap- 
peared. Seven of my scholars give pleasing 
evidence of a change of heart, and three or 
four more attend the inquiry-meeting, but I 
cannot say that they are feeling deeply. I do 
not know of any conversions since the one I 
last mentioned, but Mr. H. tells me that two 
or three times, when he thought the interest 
had subsided, it seemed to revive and increase. 
[ hope it will prove so again. 

"Our meetings are full and solemn. Many 



RESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 113 

are interested who do not profess to be in- 
quirers, and much fervent prayer has been 
offered for them. The desire seems to be that 
the work may go on unto perfection. "With 
me God has been deahng in an unusual man- 
ner. I sing of mercy, and not of judgment. I 
have not felt that peculiar, intense excitement, 
which I am apt to feel on such occasions ; but 
in some way — may I not attribute it to the 
Spirit ? — have felt at morning, noon, and even- 
ing, a gentle drawing towards Christ. I have 
sinned every day, and many a dark cloud has 
appeared in my spiritual sky in consequence. 
But I have not felt so much cast down, that I 
could not look to the Lord and implore aid for 
another effort at resistance ; and by his help I 
have gained some victories. 

" I resolved when I came back to commence 
a careful study of the prophetical part of the 
Bible, with Scott, as I am in more ignorance 
of this portion than any other. In doing this, 
I think I have been blessed. I generally read 
two chapters a day, and as I could not w^ell do 
this if I read the practical observations, I have 
chosen to omit them in o^oins: over it this time. 



114 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

I suppose you would tell me that this is the 
very marrow of the reading ; but my object is 
to get an understanding of the prophecies be- 
fore entering the seminary, and must substi- 
tute other religious reading for this portion of 
Scott. I think, upon reflection, you would fall 
in with this plan. My closet devotions, though 
not of that rapturous kind that I have now and 
then enjoyed, have been continued feasts. I 
have felt a stronger faith in casting myself on 
God, in committing all my ways to him, and 
in believing that he will w^ork out that which 
is good. 

'' I have made the path of duty in regard to 
teaching another year a special subject of 
prayer, and have prayed that if God wishes 
me to commence my preparation for the min- 
istry next fall, he would make the way so 
plain that I cannot mistake it. I trust I shall 
experience no disappointment if the decision is 
to teach, but I desire to be about the great 
work to which I have devoted my life. I 
think I should now differ from some of the 
views which 1 expressed to you when at home, 
though I do not yet dare to say so. Some 



RESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 115 

habits of mine cling so close to me, that to 
tear them off is like taking away a part of my 
very self. Still, I am beginning to see the 
necessity of effecting a great w^ork in these 
particulars, and I am making a veiy feeble 
beginning. I think I set a somewhat higher 
value on time than I did in 1845. I am try- 
ing to search my heart, and to distinguish 
animal feeling from true zeal, and a romantic 
piety from a sincere steady walk with God. 
Pray for me ; for Satan desireth me, and my 
weak faith may fail. I am praying that all 
your doubts may be removed, and that you 
may come into perfect liberty." 

In his journal while at Conway, his topics 
are the same as those in his letters — the state 
of relisfion in his own heart and in the com- 
munity around him. 

"April 13. I sometimes feel that I have no 
love for souls ; I pray for dying sinners, I talk 
to them, but Oh, I do not have that love for 
them which many waters cannot quench nor 
floods drown. Last night and to-day wrote 
No. 6 of my loose papers.* I sometimes try 

* Short addresses for social prayer-meethigs. 



116 REV. JOHN E. l':.\LEliSUx\. 

this plan, as I am but little used to speaking 
ex tempore. I hope that the paper may be 
blessed when I shall make use of it. 

" June 10. Returned last Saturday from a 
visit of six weeks to my dear native home. I 
have enjoyed the society of beloved friends 
much, but ' have let my Grod, my Saviour, 
go.' I have neglected prayer and the Holy 
Bible, and have permitted my heart to go out 
after its own sinful vanities. Thus it is with 
me ; in the daytime the drought consumes 
me, and by night the frost. 0, when shall I 
be like Him after whom, I trust, my weary 
soul pants ? 

" September 2. I have set apart this day 
as a day of special humiliation and prayer 
before the face of Almighty God, on account 
of my grievous backslidings and fearful wan- 
derings from him during the past summer. I 
have indeed cast off fear and restrained prayer 
before him. So low have I sunk, that for a 
long season I have neglected secret devotion; 
and that too while I was urging its necessity 
upon others, and in the belief of those around 
me who are the disciples of Jesus, practising it 



RESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 117 

steadily myself. the blackness of the human 
heart. the depth of my depravity. "Will 
the Lord be favorable any more ? I will seek 
him yet again. I have read the ninth chapter 
of Daniel, and have looked away in prayer to 
Daniel's Grod. My first prayer has recounted 
God's mercies to me from infancy to the pres- 
ent moment; has spread out before him the 
long dark catalogue of my sins, and has im- 
plored his forgiving mercy through Christ. I 
have sought for the special manifestation of 
his face and favor to-day. I have also reviewed 
my journal, and find something written just 
ten years ago to-day. Would that I felt the 
love of God burning in my heart as I trust I 
did about that time. My second prayer was 
for strength to run with new vigor and alacrity 
the Christian race ; that I might to-day give 
myself unreservedly to the Lord. And I hum- 
bly hope I did once more give myself away, in 
sincerity, in a new and everlasting covenant 
never to be broken, to Father, Son, and Holy 
Spirit. My third prayer was, that I might 
have grace given me to continue in well-doing, 
that I might not be deceived in regard to my 



118 REV. JOHN E. EMEESON. 

hope, that I might bo delivered from spiritual 
pride, and might be enabled to get the victory 
over those temptations which have heretofore 
hindered me in my journey heavenward. My 
fourth prayer was, that I might be enabled to 
live and act like a Christian, in the village in 
which I dwell ; might do good in my school, 
and might be a lasting benefit to the members 
of my Sabbath-school class ; also, that my labors 
in the conference-meeting might be blessed. 
My fifth petition was, a review of the petitions 
offered during the day, and a renewed com- 
mittal of myself to Jehovah. God grant that 
it may not be in vain that this day has been 
set apart, but may his good Spirit rest upon 
and dwell with me now, henceforth, and ever- 
more. Amen. 

"Saturday, September 27, 1845. Another 
mile-stone in the journey of life has been 
reached. I am twenty-two years old. Eleven 
years ago to-day I w^rote in my journal, ' I am 
eleven years old.' God only knows whether 
eleven years hence the hand that now pens 
these lines shall be mouldering in the grave, or 
whether it will be able to write, ' I am thirty- 



RESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 119 

three years old.' The uncertainty that attends 
it makes me solemn ; would that it might keep 
me solemn. I have set apart the day as a day 
of special prayer, and my only purpose for the 
coming year is, I luill go on in the strength 
of the Lord God. 

" December 21. The Lord has been pour- 
ing out his Spirit upon this place during the 
last two months, and in a still manner has, we 
trust, called about twenty souls from darkness 
to light. Among the number are several of my 
scholars, who seem to give good evidence of a 
change of heart. But 0, how insensible am I 
to the goodness of God ! 

'Yet I mourn iny stubborn will, 
Find my sin a grief and thrall.' 

"January 1, 1846. 'Thus far the Lord 
hath led me on;' and here would I make men- 
tion of his goodness, and with the new year 
resolve in the strength of God, and record my 
determination to live for him. What scenes 
await me during this year, God only knows. 
This much I know, that during the past year I 
have not attained unto perfection. But I be- 
lieve I have a closer walk with God, and have 



120 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

an assurance in my own soul that I am his. I 
am convinced that there is such a thing as 
walking with God day by day. I am tired of 
this fitful religion, this spasmodic piety. I am 
determined to entreat God every day to let me 
live with him and for him. The ye^r which 
has just closed has been a year of unbroken 
mercies. Every day has found me in the pos- 
session of life, health, food, raiment, friends, 
and innumerable mercies. Every Sabbath has 
found me in the house of God; and above aJ, 
the close of the year has found me in the midst 
of a precious revival of religion, and my school 
is sharing largely in the blessing. 0, have I 
not reason to be thankful? Have I not abun- 
dant occasion to say, ' I will go on in the 
strength of the Lord?' 0, my heavenly Fa- 
ther, I desire to begin the new year in thy ser- 
vice, and whether I live to complete all its 
months and wrecks and days on earth, or whether 
during its fleeting course I am summoned by 
thee to an unending state of existence, may I 
still be found in the glorious employment of 
loving and serving thee. 

"Sabbath, January 18. Have been very 



RESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 121 

dull and lifeless in tlie sanctuary; Ijut this 
evening have enjoyed a delightful season of 
prayer, committing myself to that God whose 
I am, and whom I believe I desire to serve. 
Satan, for a day, has had the advantage; but, 
by the grace of God, his reign shall be short, 
and 

' A feeble saint shall win the day, 
Though death and hell obstruct the way.' 

God has worked wonders in my school. Seven 
or eight are indulging a hope, and appear to 
give good evidence of a change of heart. To 
the Lord be all the glory, and may the work 
be carried on by him. 

" January 25. Last night went out wdth 
some of my Christian brethren about four miles, 
to attend a prayer- meeting at the house of a 
good mother in Israel, now ninety -two years of 
age. Had a delightful season with the old pil- 
grim, and felt that I was standing by one who 
would soon stand near the throne of God. The 
snow was deep and the road much obstructed, 
but the Lord made a way for us, and we felt 
his love burning in our hearts. To-day (Sab- 
bath) was feeble in mind in the sanctuary, but 



122 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

at our evening conference had unusual freedom, 
though I hesitated about going, for I felt as if 
I could not say a word. I hope I shall not 
mistrust my God again. Was much comforted 
when I returned from meeting in opening the 
Bible, and accidentally casting my eye on Jere- 
miah 1 : 4-9. 

" February 4. My heart was cheered to-day 
by a proposal from one of my scholars, to have 
those who had lately become interested in the 
subject of rehgion hold a meeting for prayer 
during the intermission at noon. They held 
one after the exercises this afternoon. The 
Lord grant that they may be long continued. 
Have enjoyed a blessed season this evening in 
closet devotion, and think I have felt in some 
measure that there is nothing worth living for 
but Christ, and nothing true but heaven. 
that I might always feel thus. 

" February 7. Finished this evening a fresh 
perusal of the life of Harlan Page. how 
much he was permitted to do for God. And 
why may not I do as much? I almost shud- 
der as I ask myself the question, and contrast 
my sinful life with his humble walk with 



RESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 123 

God, and my poor selfish efforts with his self- 
denying, sin-renouncing, God-glorifying labors. 
"Why should I not lead such a life, and attain to 
such a communion with God? 0, my blessed 
Saviour, it is not because thou dost not draw 
me by the tender cords of thy love, but because 
I will not run after thee. 

"February 15. Have been reading to-night 
the life of Mrs. Judson. One remark of hers 
particularly struck me. ^ I have always found 
that full employment of time, and much retire- 
ment from company of every description, is the 
grand secret of living near to God.' 

" February 22. The week just past has 
been one of great excitement, and I have min- 
gled much with the world. I have proved the 
converse of the remark made by Mrs. Judson, 
wdiich I penned one week ago, to be true ; that 
little employment of time, and frequent min- 
gling with company of every description, is not 
the way to live near to God. I long to be so 
devoted to the service of God, that minoflino: 

' DO 

with the Avorld when I must, will not have such 
a tendency to make me forgetful of prayer and 
other religious duties. Lord, while I am 



12i EEV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

in the world, keep me from the evil of the 
world." 

Mr. Emerson found it improving to his own 
mind, as well as beneficial to others, to write 
his thoughts in the form of short addresses,, 
which he presented in substance in the social 
prayer-meetings. It was difficult for him to 
speak extempore, and yet he had a strong de- 
sire to do his part towards rendering the social 
meeting interesting and profitable. 

Several of these " loose papers," as he termed 
them, are preserved, from which we select the 
following : 

"THE PATH OF THE JUST AS THE SHINING- 
LIGHT. 

" ' The path of the just is as the shining 
light, that shineth more and more unto the 
perfect day.' I have been struck with the 
many points of resemblance between the true 
Christian and the ' shining light,' and will no- 
tice some of them. The Xl^hristian and the 
shining light may be compared together in the 
beginning of their course. The rising of the 
one has been preceded by a night of darkness 



EESIDENCE AT CuNWAY. 125 

and gloom. But, anon, a faint streak is dis- 
cerned in the eastern horizon ; it is the har- 
binger of approaching day. And lo, the morn- 
ing Cometh. The bright ' king of day ' makes 
his appearance over the eastern hills, gladden- 
ing the face of the earth and drinking up the 
dew which has collected during the darkness. 
So is it with the Christian. His conversion 
succeeds a long dark night of sin. But the 
' Sun of righteousness ' rises in his heart, chases 
away that darkness, drinks up the tears «f 
penitence which have begun to fall, and im- 
parts joy and gladness. 

" The Christian and the shining light may 
be compared together in their progress. The 
sun does not stay on the eastern hills, but 
mounts up, and tip, and tip the blue pathway 
of the sky. So the light, joy, peace, and love 
which the Christian experiences at the begin- 
ning of his course, are but a foretaste of what 
he shall enjoy hereafter. The little rills of 
peace and comfort which now trickle into his 
soul, shall increase until they swell to a deep, 
broad river. His light ' shineth more and more 
unto the perfect day.' 



126 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

"The Christian and the shining Hght may 
he compared together in the joy which each 
imparts at its approach. Animate and inani- 
mate nature rejoices at the approach of the 
sun. The birds herald his coming. The fields 
and woods delight to bathe themselves in sun- 
shine ; the beasts show signs of gladness, and 
man goeth forth to his labor, and exclaims, 
'0 Lord, how manifold are thy w^orks; in wis- 
dom hast thou made them all ; the earth is 
full of thy goodness.' So is it at the approach 
of the truly good man. Prattling childhood 
runs out to meet him and receive his benedic- 
tion. Vigorous manhood suspends its labor to 
do him reverence as he passes, and old age tot- 
ters up to ask his blessing and receive his cheer- 
ing smile. 

" Again, the Christian and the shining light 
may be compared in their diflusive benevolence. 
The sun shines with equal warmth upon the 
' gold-clad emperor of the palace, and the rag- 
clad beggar of the ditch.' It sheds a flood of 
glory into the spacious banqueting-hall, whose 
inmates are ' clothed in purple and fine linen, 
and fare sumptuously every day,' and darts a 



RESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 127 

Learn of light into the dark, under-ground 
hovel, \Yhere hollow-eyed want and gaunt fam- 
ine reign triumphant. Here goes out a sower 
with a full seed-basket, scattering abroad its 
contents with a lavish hand ; and th«re comes 
the poor man, casting in here and there of his 
small portion ; and the same sun shines upon it 
with its warming and vivifying beams, causing 
it to spring up and grow, and in due time they 
both shout the abundant harvest home. Now 
take the devoted Christian. He has a look of 
love, a smile of joy, and a tear of sympathy for 
all. Are any rejoicing in the abundant good- 
ness of God, manifested towards them? He 
rejoices also. Are any bowed down by deep 
and severe affliction? In all their afflictions 
he is afflicted. Are any drawing near to ' the 
dark valley of the shadow of death V He hast- 
ens to the bedside of the sufferer, holds out the 
consolations afforded by the gospel, whispers 
w^ords of Christian kindness into the ears of the 
mourning friends, wipes the cold death-damp 
from the brow of the sufferer, closes the glazed 
eye, and hands the departing spirit gently over 
to the angels who have come to bear it home. 



128 RE V. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

" Once more, the Christian and the shining 
light may be compared together in their depar- 
ture. We have a sure hehef that we shall see 
them again. Suppose it were announced to- 
night that the glorious sun would set for the 
last time, and we should behold his bright disk 
no more for ever; how should we assemble 
on all these hills to watch his decline, and run 
from peak to peak to catch his last lingering 
rays; and when the latest one had faded into 
darkness, with what bursting sorrow should 
we grope our way to our homes in the dark- 
ness, never more to be cheered by the blessed 
lifi^ht and warmth which had heretofore been 
to us almost as life itself. But far otherwise 
is the case. Even if we see the sun go down 
behind the darkened west, we expect to see it 
reappear on the coming day, clothed in new 
beauty, ' rejoicing like a strong man to run a 
race.' How inconsolable, too, would be our 
grief, if, when standing in 'the chamber where 
the good man meets his fate,' we should feel 
that he was about to pass away for ever from 
our sis^ht. Bat we mourn not as those that 
have no hope. We are assured that our brother 



r:esidence at cokway. 129 

shall live again. ^Ye know that he is only 
putting off this corruptible, in order that he 
may put on incorruption. We know that there 
is a natural body that waxeth old and vanish- 
eth away ; while we know, also, that there is a 
spiritual body that never fadeth. ' They come 
not up,' says one who went down in the fresh- 
ness of life's morning to the dampness of the 
tomb, ' they come not up in the great day, rusty 
and time-worn, from their tabernacles of clay, 
or congealed and dripping from their cold, dark 
bed in the ocean. Blessed be G-od, there is a 
spiritual body.' As the sun in his going down 
gives a sure pledge of his glorious return, so 
the righteous, in his death, gives promise that 
he shall live again." 

"aROWTH IN aRACE. 

"We are commanded to 'grow in grace, 
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ.' How few of us there are who 
give the command any attention ; how many 
who do not bestow on it a passing thought. 
Are we not too apt to feel that we ' have 
already attained, or are already perfect,' 



130 REV. JOHN E. E^IERSOxN'. 

when we come out and publicly profess our- 
selves on the Lord's side ; and are we not 
satisfied if we thenceforward keep ourselves 
from the reproach of the world, and avoid 
bringing dishonor on our profession ? But is 
this growing in grace? Is this advancing in 
the divine life ? Let us apply the test else- 
where. Would you call the product of that 
field valuable, in which the seed planted should 
spring up far enough to show that it had been 
planted ; and then, uninfluenced alike by the 
genial sunbeam and the refreshing shower, 
cease to grow ? Would you deem that tree 
valuable, which, though it blossomed year 
after year, never brought forth fruit to perfec- 
tion ? Would you deem that man wise in 
worldly matters, who, when he might be con- 
stantly adding to his wealth, should consent to 
live possessed of barely enough to keep him 
from starvation ? Would a parent send his son, 
day after day, and week after week, to school, 
if he found that he was making no progress in 
knowledge ? no. You call your harvest valu- 
able, only when there has appeared, 'first the 
blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the 



RESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 131 

ear.' You call only that tree good which, 
after the glory of its blossoming is over, daily 
continues to show its enlarged fruit, until it is 
weighed to the earth with its goodly burden. 
You call that man worldly-wise, who leaves 
no measure untried, nor stone unturned, to add 
to the wealth he already possesses. You re- 
tain your child at school, that he may increase 
in knowledge, and become better fitted for ths 
active duties of life. But how much the re- 
verse of this is the Christian life. How many 
do no more than blossom here. A very few, 
praised be God, grow in grace, become ripe, 
and bear mellow fruit, that is constantly ready 
to be plucked by the owner of the vineyard. 
But the great majority of the church blossom, 
yet bring forth no fruit. Yon see them every 
two months at the communion-table ; and 
here they may be said to blossom, for here 
they show to the world their profession. Bat 
they go away and return only to blossom again. 
Or if they do bear some fruit, so knotty and 
deformed is its appearance, so sour and crab- 
bed to the taste, that it is not worth the pluck- 
ing ; and then it clings so to the tree on which 



132 HEV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

it grew, and to the stem which supports it, 
that it would seem far better to let it perish in 
its deformity, than to attempt to gather it in 
with the good fruit. 

" My brethren, in the figure which I have 
used, I have too nearly described my owm case. 
Have I not described yours ? And if so, is it 
right that we should be in such a condition ? 
Since in matters of the lowest importance we 
deem the law of progress to be essential, why 
should it not apply also to matters of infinite 
moment ? If, then, our condition is such as I 
have described, ought we not to be awake to 
it ? Could we occupy a fixed position, our 
condition might be less dangerous ; but it is a 
fearful thought that this cannot be. If we are 
not growing in grace, then we are retrograd- 
ing ; for Christ says, ' He that is not with me 
is against me,' and it cannot be that we are 
with Christ unless we are constantly growing 
like him. If, now, we are convinced of the 
importance of growing in grace, the question 
comes. How shall w^e ? Surely not by inac- 
tivity, for we have just seen that inactivity 
works out no good, but only destruction. Can 



RESIDENCE AT CONAVAY. 133 

we grow in grace by resolving to grow in 
grace ? What would you think of an army 
of men that came to batter down the walls of 
a city, and should spend their whole time in 
making huge engines to break down the ram- 
parts, and yet never advance to make use of 
them ? Yet this is just the case with some 
Christians. They spend all their time in 
making resolutions, and most powerful resolu- 
tions they make ; enough, if only put in exe- 
cution, to make great havoc with their sins, 
and push themselves far onward in the Chris- 
tian course. But they make no use of them, 
they only treasure them up ; and I very much 
fear, that at the Judgment some will have 
nothinsr to offer but a storehouse of <?ood reso- 
lutions laid up while on earth, any one of 
which, if put to its proper use, might have 
been of signal service to them in their journey 
•^venward. The growing Christian does not 
cop to make many resolutions. He breaks 
down a great deal of the wall with very small 
engines, and for the simple reason that he 
ke.jps constantly at work. My brethren, we 
have no time to spend in sharpening our weap- 



134 REV. JOHTT E. EMERSON. 

ons. They must be kept in order by con- 
stant use. AYc cannot always stop to polish 
our arrows, and make them ready upon the 
string. We must often twang the bow, and 
shoot at a venture. It may be that some one 
of the King's enemies will be smitten. Up, 
then, and be doing. Depending on the prom- 
ised strength of Jehovah, the most feeble need 
not fear." 

"THE RAINBOW ROUND THE THRONE. 

" In the glowing description given by John, 
of the view which he was permitted to take 
of the glories of the upper world, he makes 
use of this expression : ' There was a rain- 
bow round about the throne.' AYhy, we may 
be permitted to ask, should the rainbow be 
choicn above all other things to mark the 
place where the 'Ancient of days' sits en- 
throned ? What peculiar significance in the 
rainbow ? Has it a deep meaning which noth- 
ing else possesses? Docs it contain a lan- 
guage that will make the throne eloquent when 
all besi-les is dumb? Why not have a sun, all 
radiant with celestial light ? Why not have a 



EESIDEXCE AT CONWAY. 135 

moon, girt about with the silvery-shining, 
' traihng garments of the night V "Why not 
have one of those bright, beautiful stars, ' first 
in night's diadem V \Yill none of these an- 
swer ? No, says John, ' There was a rain- 
bow round about the throne.' Do you recol- 
lect the account recorded in the Scriptures, of 
the time when God poured out the floods of 
his wrath upon a guilty w^orld, and swept off 
all its inhabitants, save the chosen eight, who, 
seated in the ark which they had built by 
divine command, rose as high towards heaven 
as the haters of G-od sunk beneath his frown ? 
And do you remember, when the w^aters had 
subsided and the ark rested on mount Ararat, 
that the Almighty stood by Noah as he stepped 
forth on dry land, and lifting his finger tow- 
ards tlie retreating clouds on wdiich the sun 
had again broke forth, said, ' Behold my bow ! 
I have set it in the cloud ; it shall be for a 
token of a covenant between me and thee V 
Here, then, is its deep significance made mani- 
fest ; here its hidden mystery declared. In 
this consists its wondrous fitness for the place 
it occupies ; it is a token of the covenant be- 



136 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

tween G-od and man. Bright token. Who 
does not love to gaze upon it? Who has not 
seen, on some fair summer's morn, the dark 
clouds rearing their caps in the western hori- 
zon, and heard the muttering of the distant 
thunder, and noted the gleam of the lightning, 
and watched the dense masses as they rolled 
up in awful majesty, obscuring the light of the 
sun and shrouding the earth in funereal gloom ? 
And when the tempest swept by in its wrath, 
threatening to repeat the desolation of the old 
world, have you not remembered the token of 
the covenant, and felt sure that that bright 
token would soon be hung out in heaven ? And 
was it not so ? When the storm had gone over 
your head, did you not see, spanning its dark 
brow, the bright, the beautiful, the seven-col- 
ored bow of promise ? Was there not a rainbow 
round about the cloud ? And is it not a fitting 
emblem for Jehovah to throw around his throne ? 
Shall we not do well to gaze upon it and study 
its meaning and read its language ? Especially 
would the Christian do well to take heed to it ; 
for it is to him a token of a Father's care, a Fa- 
ther's love, a Father's undying remembrance. 



RESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 137 

"Doubtinsf Christian, it has a lano-naoe for 
thee. Are you sometimes almost led to believe 
that the promises of God will fail of their ful- 
filment, and that he has forgotten to be gra- 
cious ? Behold that bow. It is a token of his 
unfailing love, and assures you that though a 
woman may forget her first-born, yet he cannot 
be forgetful or unmindful of thee. Tempted 
Christian, have the allurements of an insnarins^ 
world and the temptations of the great adver- 
sary at times almost obtained the victory? 
Remember the token. The evil one shall not 
gain the advantage, for the Lord knoweth how 
to deliver those that are tempted. 

"Afflicted Christian, have all the waves and 
the billows of the Almighty gone over you, 
and have you been compelled, in the bitterness 
of blasted hopes, to exclaim, ' Lover and friend 
hast thou put far from me, and mine acquaint- 
ance into darkness V can you not see woven 
into the bright colors that compose that bow 
the glorious promise of your Lord, ' When thou 
passest through the waters, I will be with thee, 
and through the floods, they shall not overflow 
thee V 



138 r.EV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

*' Dying Christian, we have no need to tell 
you that there is a rainbow round about the 
throne. How gorgeous its colors and distinct 
its outline, as you draw near the pearly gates 
of the celestial city. But when you have ar- 
rived there, behold, it ' melts away into the 
light of heaven.' For what need of the token, 
when He who gave it has made himself to 
stand in its place, and has taken you to be for 
ever in his blissful presence." 

"HE IS JOINED TOHIS IDOLS; LET HIM ALONE. 

'* There are doubtless many persons who have 
sinned away their day of grace, and against 
whom that terrible edict has gone forth, 'He 
is joined to his idols ; let him alone.' There 
is a point beyond which the long-suffering pa- 
tience of God will not go ; there is a time when 
his mercy is clean gone for ever, and when he 
will be favorable no more. The Spirit of God 
strives long, but will not strive always, with 
men. The promises and threatenings of the 
word of God may for many years address them- 
selves to the conscience, but there is a time 
when they will ' neither melt nor move.' There 



RESIDENCE AT CON\YAY. 139 

is such a thing as being given up of God, left 
to hardness of heart and blindness of mind, 
never more to be visited by the Spirit, never 
more to have any concern for the never-dying 
soul ; sinking into that deep, unconscious sleep, 
from which it is impossible to be aroused, until 
the ' worm that never dies and the fire that 
never is quenched' have begun to prey upon 
the soul. In what awful language does the 
Scripture clothe itself, when spealving upon this 
point : ' Because I have called and ye refused ; 
I have stretched out my hand, and no man re- 
garded ; but ye have set at naught all ray coun- 
sel, and would none of my reproof; I also will 
laugh at your calamity ; I will mock when your 
fear cometh.' This state of mind is induced 
by continually resisting the strivings of God's 
Spirit; by lulling the voice of conscience; by 
running into temptation; by efforts to put to 
sleep the convictions attendant upon the faith- 
ful ministrations of the sanctuary ; by restrain- 
ing prayer ; by putting off to a more convenient 
season the thoughts of death, the judgment, 
and etarnity. It is not a state of mind peculiar 
to those who dwell in the darkness of heathen- 



140 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

ism, or to those who have been nourished in 
the midst of crime and infidelity. If it is pe- 
culiar to any, it is to those who have been 
bronght up under the sound of gospel truth, 
who have Jived in the full blaze of gospel fight, 
who have had fine upon line, counsel upon 
counsel, warning upon warning, and that Sab- 
bath after Sabbath, year after year. But all 
have been disregarded, or put off to that fatal 
period, to-morrow. And now the man has 
been given over to destruction, and in refer- 
ence to him it may be truly said, ' There re- 
maineth no more sacrifice for sin.' 0, if there 
is one of God's creatures upon whom it is 
heart-rending to look, surely it is that person 
who has sinned away his day of probation ; 
who is permitted to continue a little longer on 
the earth, and yet dead — a corpse among living 
men. How it would surprise us to see one of 
those forms which we have lately deposited in 
yonder graveyard, suddenly start up, endowed 
with the power of motion alone, and going forth 
anions: us. How friorhtful to know that the 
principle of life would never enter it again, 
and yet it is walking by our side in the street, 



EESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 141 

sitting down at our tables, and touching with 
its skeleton hand, but not tasting the food we 
have prepared, and lying down by our side at 
night. How terrible to see the flesh dropping 
daily from its bones, and to know that it would 
never be clothed anew, and that no breath of 
the Lord would ever breathe upon it again. 
But just such is the condition of the person we 
are describing. The silver cord that bound the 
soul to a Redeemer's love has been loosed, the 
golden bowl of salvation has been broken, and 
yet by a mysterious providence he is permitted 
to stand a little lonsjer a monument of the 
divine displeasure, a cumberer of the ground, 
a tree riven with the red thunderbolt, waiting 
only to be cut down and burnt with devouring 
fire. Nothing now will, or can affect him. 
So often has he been pierced by the sword of 
the Spirit, that there is left no place where a 
wound can be inflicted : you may preach to 
him the most alarming discourse, and it will 
not move him ; you may set before him the 
glorious hopes and promises of the gospel, or 
you may array the awful threatenings and 
denunciations of the Almighty before him, and 



142 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

he will be unaflfected. The pestilence that 
walketh in darkness, and the destruction that 
wasteth at noonday, have no terrors for him. 
A thousand may fall at his side, and ten thou- 
sand at his right hand, but no tear of peni- 
tence moistens his eye. The thunders of Sinai 
peal over his head, but he hears them not; the 
lightnings of divine wrath flash full in his face, 
but he sees them not; the smoke of the bot- 
tomless pit rolls up, and wreathes its thick 
volumes around him, but he heeds it not; he 
waits only for death to come and assign him 
his portion in a world of despair." 

"FAST, FOR THE DESCENT OF THE SPIRIT. 

" One of the most interesting and fervent 
prayers which is recorded in the word of God, 
is that put up by Habakkuk the prophet. ' 
Lord,' he says, 'revive thy work in the midst 
of the years, in the midst of the years make 
known ; in wrath, remember mercy.' AVho 
that has ever read this prayer can doubt that 
it was offered up with ' strong crying and 
tears,' with a deep sense of the need of the 
blessing which was sought, with a strong 



E-ESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 143 

feeling of dependence, "svith humble boldness, 
and with an earnest expectation of a speedy 
answer ? How appropriately might the prophet 
offer up his prayer if he were present with us 
to-day, and how agonizing his supplication 
W'Ould be, could he look abroad on the desola- 
tions of our Zion. But he sleeps with his 
fathers, and wdio is there to stand up for him, 
and using his language to cry with his faith, 
' Lord, revive thy work V 

" Let us consider some of the reasons why 
this prayer is so peculiarly applicable to us on 
the present occasion, and why the earnest ex- 
pression of the prophet should be used at this 
time by every member of this church. First, 
on account of the apathy manifested by most 
professing Christians in the cause of Christ. 
We may not have committed outbreaking sins; 
we may not have run riot, like others, and 
been guilty of all manner of excess ; on the 
contrary, we may have seemed to our fellow- 
disciples to be ' growing in grace,' and to the 
impenitent to be consistent, devoted men. But 
let us come closer home than this. "What say 
our consciences in regard to some known, well- 



144 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

beloved sin ? Has it been indulged when no 
eye saw us, no ear heard us, and no lips ap- 
proached us ? Ah, is not the name of our 
sins legion, and have we not occasion to say, 
as they rise up before us, ' I do remember my 
faults this day V What say our closets ? 0, 
could the walls of that neglected spot speak 
out, would they not cry against us ? "Would 
they not exclaim, in regard to day after day, 
and perhaps of week after week. Deserted, 
deserted? Would they not bear witness to 
lukewarm petitions, to longings after earthly 
good, to an earnest desire to depart, and be 
not with Christ, but with the world? What 
says our seat in the social prayer-meeting? 
Vacant, vacant ; or, if there, spell-bound, 
tongue-tied, ashamed to say a word for our 
Master, for fear, perhaps, that we had not a 
gift to speak, or for some other equally friv- 
olous reason. What say our impenitent neigh- 
bors and friends ? One says of a professor, 
' He seems to be confident that he has found a 
pearl of great price, but he never invited me 
to share it with him. I hear him tell at times 
of the danger of continuing in sin, but he 



RESIDENCE AT CONWAY. 145 

never warned me to flee from that danger.' 
Do not these things testify to our shame, and 
is there not abundant need, in view of them, 
to put up the prayer, ' Lord, revive thy 
work V 

" This prayer is needed, because few come 
up to Zion's solemn feasts. Every day is 
diminishing the numbers in the ranks of the 
sacramental host of G-od's elect, and none are 
found to fill their places. The standard-bear- 
ers in Zion's army begm to faint, and no one 
is ready to relieve them. What means the 
astounding fact, that the deaths and dismis- 
sions in the Congregational churches in this 
state, have exceeded by several hundreds the 
additions to them, during the past year ? 0, 
is not this fact a loud call upon us to put up 
the united prayer, ^ Lord, revive thy w^ork ?' 

" "We need to offer this petition, because 
precious souls are daily going down to eternal 
death. Those with whom we take counsel 
from day to day, with whom we walk and 
converse, and are on terms of the closest in- 
timacy, are among the number of those whose 
* steps take hold on hell.' And without the 

Emerson. 1 



146 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

converting influences of God's Holy Spirit, they 
must for ever perish. Can we see and know 
this, and yet remain unaffected ? Can we 
delay another hour crying out, with the ear- 
nestness of one who will take no denial, ' 
Lord, revive thy work V 

" Once more, we need to offer up this 
prayer, because ' now is our salvation nearer 
than when we believed.' Brethren, every day 
is carrying us onward towards our heavenly 
home. Do we realize this ? Do we believe 
that the 'beatific vision' shall soon break in 
upon us ; that the songs of the redeemed shall 
soon strike upon our ears; that we shall, ere 
long, be of that white-robed company that 
* follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth V 
And have we done all that we could wish to do 
before that time arrives ? Then call mightily 
upon God. Like the voice of a trumpet, wax- 
ing louder and louder, put up the earnest, be- 
lieving prayer, ' Lord, revive thy work.' " 



EESIDENCE AT PRINCETON. 147 



CHAPTER Y. 

CONNECTION WITH PRINCETON THEOLOOI- 
CAL SEMINARY. 

1846-1819. 

The time had now arrived for Mr. Emer- 
son to enter upon the last stage of his discipU- 
nary course, preparatory to the w^ork of the 
ministry. His views respecting the impor- 
tance of a thorough preparation of mind and 
heart for this sacred profession, were clear and 
correct. Especially at the present day, when 
so much is required of the minister of the gos- 
pel in the various departments of philanthropic 
effort, Christian benevolence, and literary and 
scientific research, he felt that it was only by 
great diligence and labor that he could be 
qualified for so responsible a station. 

Those who imagine that the life of a theo- 
logical student is one of indolence or ease, or 
that there is any inherent power in a seminary 
to fit him for his profession, independent of 
personal toil, are greatly mistaken. The sci- 
ence of theology itself is sufficient to tax the 



148 REV. JOIIX E. EilEESON. 

stuvdent's powers to their utmost, and well 
may he exclaim, as he looks over the field of 
theological truth, "AVho is sufficient for these 
things ?" But there are many other branches 
which he should not neglect. He must be in 
some des^ree familiar with the literature of the 
day. He must keep up with the progress of 
scientific discovery. He must be able to meet 
the most subtle forms of scepticism, and be 
supplied with weapons with which to defend 
" the failli once delivered to the saints." 

Mr. Emerson entered Princeton Theological 
Seminary August 27, 1846. On the following 
day he gave his friends his first impressions of 
his new residence. 

"Dear PareiXts — Having been duly admit- 
ted a member of the Theological seminary in 
this place, having obtained a room, and consid- 
ering myself settled for at least nine months, 
I sit down to fulfil my promise of writing you 
the full particulars of my journey, arrival, and 
reception among this people." 

After giving a minute account of his journey, 
and his efforts to obtain a room, he adds, 

" Not knowing who the family were, I felt 



RESIDENCE AT PRINCETON. 149 

a little anxiety, the first night, about security ; 
but when I heard a psalm read in the other 
room, and the voice of prayer, I felt quite 
secure, and thought of the lines, 

' Prayer can force a passage througli 
Iron bars and brazen gates.' 

From the \Yindows of my room I can see dis- 
tinctly the buildings of Princeton college, or 
Nassau Hall as it is generally called, five in 
number, and all beautiful buildings. They 
are about half a mile from the seminary. The 
seminary building is a fine one of stone, and 
the picture of it, with the large yard in front, 
is a good representation. The library building, 
in front of the seminary, is very beautiful. It 
is purely of the G-othic order, with large stained 
windows, variegated marble floor, large apart- 
ments for books, and every thing in beautiful 
proportion. There are many fine residences in 
Princeton, with extensive and beautiful flower- 
gardens in front, and abundance of shrubbery. 
I was agreeably disappointed in the town. 

" There is a feeling of kindness among the 
students here which is very gratifying. It is 
not like college, where all seek their own. 



150 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

There are no class distinctions; all sit together, 
and walk and talk together, and you feel that 
every one is your friend. There are none of 
Paul, Apollos, or Cephas, but all seem to be 
of Christ. All are pious. They feel friendly 
towards the professors, who are just what they 
profess to be, and apparently just what they 
ought to be. They love the students, and the 
students honor them, and it is indeed a lovely 
seminary. Our class will number, I suppose, 
about fifty. 

" Sabbath, August 30. This is my first 
Sabbath in Princeton, and it has been a beau- 
tiful day. You will want to know something 
of the order of exercises. At nine o^clock in 
the morning the students meet for prayer by 
colleges ; that is, the graduates of a college 
meet as such, to pray for their own college. 

As Mr. T was not here, we of Amherst 

did not meet to-day, but probably shall here- 
after. I think there are but four here from 
Amherst, and three of us have but just come. 
At eleven o'clock wo assemble in the chapel 
for public worship. Dr. Alexander, senior, 
preached this morning a very able discourse. 



^RESIDENCE AT PRINCETON. 151 

It is the custom in all this region to have 
preaching morning and evening, and none in 
the afternoon. The ►Sabbath-school is usually 
held at that time. In place of preaching, we 
have at the seminary a very delightful exer- 
cise. All the students meet in a room called 
the 'Oratory,' at half-past three, with the pro- 
fessors, and hold familiar conversation on some 
topic given out on the previous Sabbath. All 
are invited to take part in it. The students 
first speak, and then the professors give their 
views. The topic to-day v/as, ' The proper 
feelings to be cherished by students on com- 
mencing a new session of study.' Those who 
speak remain seated, as if in a room convers- 
ing together. It was very pleasant to listen 
to the paternal counsel of the professors, and 
to notice the deep interest they seemed to take 
in our welfare. We are all candidates for the 
gospel ministry, and as such^they addressed us. 
" How different is this from college. There 
are none disorderly here, no disturbance, all 
have one aim and one end in view, and that a 
holy one. The topic for next Sunday is, ' Self- 
knowledge ; its importance and the means of 



152 E.EV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

attaining it.' In the evening the students at- 
tend church, if they choose, at Dr. Rice's. I 
shall go this evening. You perceive hy the 
arrangement of our meetings, that I have am- 
ple time to meet you at noon at a tlirone of 
grace. I took one o'clock to-day. This is most 
convenient, as it comes soon after dinner. I 
shall try always to improve it. It would gratify 

me much if our friends Mr. and Mrs. M 

could also join us at that hour. You know I 
need special prayer now. To-day, wdien my 
imagination went rapidly over the long distance 
that intervenes between us, and I thought of 
the dear parents and friends whom I love so 
much, and wlio love me so much, I longed to 
he with you. But I knew that duty and God 
were here, and here I hope to feel willing to 
stay my appointed time." 

Soon after becoming settled, he made the 
following records in his journal : 

"Princeton, N. J., Aug. 30, iS46. 

"In the good providence of God I. am now 
a member of the Theological seminary here, 
and this is my first Sabbath in this place. I 
desire to record God's goodness to-day in so 



RESIDENCE AT PRIKCETON. 153 

signally preparing the way for me to come 
here, and raising up so many friends for me. 
In the expectation of spending three years in 
this place, if God should spare my hfe, and 
looking back with regret on my misspent time 
and opportunities in college, I desire before 
God to-day to make the two following resolu- 
tions, which I pray God Almighty to enable me 
to keep. Resolved, 

"1. Never to neglect, while connected with 
this mstitution, the duty of reading the Scrip- 
tures, and of secret prayer morning and even- 
ing. 

" 2. Not to neglect one regular recitation or 
lecture when it is in my power to attend. 

" Sabbath, SeptExMber 13. I have now been 
here three Sabbaths, and God has been pleased 
to bless me with continued health and strength, 
and enabled me to commence with zeal the 
studies of this institution. Thus far also I 
have been enabled to keep the resolutions which 
I made at the commencement of my course, 
and the Lord being my helper, I design still to 
keep them. I have been permitted to-day to 
go to the table of the Lord, and renew my 



154 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

covenant witli him to be for ever and entirely 
his. I desire to make record of the deed. I 
give myself to the Lord : I desire to be only 
his. Lord, make me what thou wouldst 
have me to be, and prepare me especially for 
the great and solemn work of the gospel min- 
istry, to which I have devoted my life. 

" Sabbath, September 27, 1846. Again has 
returned the anniversary of that day which I 
desire always to keep as a day of devout thanks- 
giving to God for his past mercies, of unfeigned 
sorrow for sin, and humble supplication for 
mercies in time to come. It is the anniversary 
of my birthday. I am now twenty -three years 
old. As I make this record from year to year, 
I know not that I shall ever be spared to make 
it again. But God yet keeps riie in being, and 
shows forth his mercy towards me, though a 
rebel against him. 1 have just heard of the 
death of one of my class-mates in Amherst 
college, who graduated in 1844 Avith much 
honor. I think he is the first of that class wlio 
has been called away since we left that insti- 
tution. Why was not I the one taken? 
Lord, thou only knowest. 



RESIDENCE AT PRINCETON. 155 

" I have this morning reviewed my journal, 
and find reason to bless God that he has en- 
abled me to write in such a manner that I can 
trace the most important events of my life from 
the time I was ten years old until now. And 
I hope" to continue this record, that it may give 
me occasion, in time to come, to sing of mercy, 
and review the waymarks of my course until 
time with me shall be no more. The past has 
been a year of mercies. My friends have been 
spared, and my own health continued. God I 
believe has clearly pointed out the path which 
has led me to this seminary; and now, just as 
I commence my twenty-fourth year, and about 
six years from the time of entering college, I 
am permitted to enter upon a course of theo- 
logical study. I desire renewedly to conse- 
crate myself to the Father, Son, and Holy 
Ghost, to express once more my firm and hearty 
belief in the religion of Jesus Christ as set forth 
in the holy Scriptures, to renew the resolutions 
which I made at the opening of the present 
session of study, and to implore divine assist- 
ance and the guiding and illuminating influ- 
ences of the Holy Spirit in time to come. 



156 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

" Lord, make thy face to shine on thine 
un\Yorthy servant, and prepare him to do and 
suffer all thy w^ill here and glorify thee here- 
after." 

To his Parents. 

"September 29, 1846. 

" I wish you could hear some of our preach- 
ing. Last Sunday we had a very able sermon 

from Professor A on the argument for the 

Scriptures from prophecy. I thought it unan- 
swerable. I used to fear that when I came to 
the Theological seminary, I should have m^y 
faith very much tried in regard to some doc- 
trines of the Bible that I had received in child- 
hood without proof, such as the divinity of 
Christ, etc. But I find that the very reverse 
of this is thus far true. The proofs in favor of 
our holy religion, and the doctrines of the gos- 
pel, as I received them in the closet and Sab- 
bath-school in childhood, multiply upon me 
every day. And when I sec our excellent and 
learned professors of one mind, men of prayer, 
and meekly sitting at the feet of Jesus, I can- 
not but feel that there is a power in the doc- 
trines of the cross that can be found nowhere 



RESIDENCE AT PRINCETON. 157 

else.. My opinion now is, that you should in- 
struct a child in the doctrines of the gospel, 
and let him take them on trust until he is able 
to examine them for himself. There is no fear 
of the result. 

"It is very pleasant to hear, as I do, the 
voice of prayer morning and evening ascending 
on all sides of me. I feel as if I was doubly 
guarded from evil. I generally rise about half- 
past five, and spend the time before prayers 
and breakfast in devotional exercises and read- 
ing in my G-reek Testament. After breakfast 
I walk a mile or two, and also after supper. 
In the evening I am in the habit of reading in 
the Old Testament, and meditating upon its 
great truths. I am now again reading Paley's 
Evidences of Christianity. I am reading also 
Dr. Chalmers' works in course, and: some of 
Stephens' Travels again. I write out in sep- 
arate books four courses of lectures, and read 
on subjects connected with them. We have a 
great deal of writing to do. Every thing goes 
on prosperously. I have had a peculiar visita- 
tion of the Spirit, in some respects remarkable 
and differing from what I ever had before. I 



158 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

think I never have had snch strength imparted 
to me from above as now. My times of prayer 
are seasons of great delight, especially on K^ab- 
bath noon. I have prayed with new zeal for 
Samuel, and intend to write to him on the 
subject of his soul's salvation this very week. 
I wish I could have a long, long talk with you. 
How much I would say. But I think of you 
often, and pray for you at least twice every 
day." 

In October he continued his journal. 

"October 11. I find it profitable to devote 
the first portion of my time in the morning to 
prayer, praise, and reading the sacred Scrip- 
tures. This is due to my Creator, as being 
the time generally when the mind is most 
vigorous and active; and moreover, it is the 
most fitting time in which to return thanks to 
Him who has watched about my pillow and 
shielded me from harm. The second portion 
of my time I think proper to devote to exercise, 
in order^that I may enter with vigor and suc- 
cess upon the studies in which I am engaged, 
that if I have granted me ^ saua mens,^^ I may 

* A sound mind. 



RESIDENCE AT PRIXCETON. 159 

have it ' in sano corpore^^ The third portion 
I devote to study, reading, attendance on reci- 
tations, lectures, etc. By the blessing of G od, 
I am now making some progress in the Hebrew 
language ; commenced translating yesterday 
the first chapter of G-enesis. I am also attend- 
ing four courses of lectures weekly, and writing 
notes on them. I read the New Testament in 
Greek in the morning, and at evening the Old 
Testament in English, in connection with the 
course of lectures on biblical history. 

" October 20. Last evening had a delight- 
ful interview vrith Dr. Scudder, missionary 
from India. He came into the Oratory and 
attended prayers, after w^hich he took each of 
the students by the hand, and presented them 
with a little book he had just published, enti- 
tled 'The Redeemer's last Command.' It was 
an affecting meeting, and God grant it maybe 
productive of much good. 

"October 25. Read to-day the little book 
referred to above with deep interest, and trust 
that I shall not be unmindful of its appeal. I 
hope that my desire is neither to waver or 

* In a sound body. 



160 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

shrink from the call of duty as to my future 
situation. I have determined to-day to pray 
more earnestly for those before whom, in time 
past, I have set an unholy example, that they 
may all become devoted Christians, and be 
more consistent in their conduct. 

" November 22. I set apart yesterday as a 
day of fasting and prayer, that I might be de- 
livered from the dominion of my spiritual foes. 
God has been very gracious to me in giving 
me strength to resist them for a few weeks ; 
but constant and renewed application will d6 
me no harm, nor displease my heavenly Father. 

'' December 12. Grod continues to speak in 
thunder-tones, admonishing me of the short- 
ness and uncertainty of life. Since I came to 
Princeton I have heard of the death of at least 
eight with whom I was once acquainted. One 
was a young man who was a class-mate with 
me during our four years' college course; an- 
other, a college friend mentioned under date of 
October 18th ; two young ladies in Conway, 
one of whom was a pupil of mine during the 
last term that I kept school there, and \^'ho 
seemed at one time to have serious impressions, 



RESIDENCE AT PRINCETON. IGl 

which afterwards wore off; the old 'mother in 
Israel,' mentioned mider date of January 25, 
and three young men of about my own age, 
who were formerly school-mates of mine. One 
died far from friends, of rapid consumption, in 
Calcutta ; another, a midshipman, was drowned 
in the G-ulf of Mexico. The third, a noble 
youth, perished in that fearful gale which 
wrecked the steamboat Atlantic in Long Island 
Sound, on her way from Boston to New York, 
the particulars of which are still fresh in our 
recollections, and the thought of the horrors of 
which still sends an electric thrill through my 
veins. Early their work has been accom- 
plished, and they have passed into eternity. 
Lord, who shall go next? Is it I? Is it I? 
0, if it is, may I be found of thee in peace. 
May it be gain for me to die, and may I die in 
thine own time, and in thine own way. But 
when the hour comes, then. Lord Jesus, receive 
my spirit. 

" December 27. The last Sabbath in the 
year has come, and I am not in hell where I de- 
serve to be, nor in heaven where I hope, finally, 
through the mercy of Grod, to be; but I am 

Emerson. 1 I 



162 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

yet on earth, in health and strength, and in 
the possession of all my faculties. I love to 
note time as it flies ; to seize such occasions as 
the present to make mention of his loving- 
"kindnesses to me, who hath loved me with an 
everlasting love, and to implore his favor in 
time to come. 

' I love to think on mercies past, 
And future good implore.' 

Had any one told me on the last Sabbath of 
last year, that to-day I should have stood within 
the walls of this seminary of learning, I should 
have been much surprised ; but by God's help 
here I am. I made it at one time, during the 
first part of the year, a special subject of prayer 
that God would give me direction as to pur- 
suing my theological course this year. I prayed 
that if he designed to have me go on immedi- 
ately he would make it known to me, and show 
me by unmistakable signs what he would have 
me do. Others prayed for me, and God heard 
those prayers. I here record it for my future 
encouragement in seeking divine guidance — 
God heard those prayers. 

"About the first of June many of my friends 



RESIDENCE AT PRINCETON. 163 

felt an uncommon interest to have me come to 
this seminary. But I had no money to carry 
me through. Would the Lord ' make windows 
in heaven?' Yes, if need be. Behold, just at 
the expected moment, the Lord raises up one 
who lends me sufficient for my purpose. Many 
remarkable minor providences were connected 
with this affair. Can I doubt that the Lord's 
hand was in it ? To doubt would be, I believe, 
an awful sin against G-od. I have a praying 
mother and praying friends, and the Lord has 
inclined my heart to prayer, and prayer is not 
in vain. I record it again, prayer is not in 
vain. What now doth the Lord require of me, 
but to keep his commandments and to love 
him with all my heart? Lord, I stand pledged 
to thy service for another year. Many times, 
during the past year, hast thou called me to 
note the death of those with whom I once asso- 
ciated. Shall any one mark mine down during 
the coming year ? Or shall I be spared ? If so, 
may it be to glorify thee, to grow in grace, to 
do good, to ripen for heaven and eternal glory. 
let thy guiding hand be with me in time to 
come, as it has been in time past. 



■164 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

* Guide me, thou great Jehovah, 

Pilgrim through this barren land : 
I am weak, but thou art mighty; 
Hold me with thy powerful hand. 

Bread of heaven, 
Feed me till I want no more.' " 

''April, 1847. It will require much study 
for me to prepare to feed acceptably a flock of 
God, of which I may have the oversight. The 
nearer I approach the ministry, the more I 
shrink from it. I once thought no man led an 
easier life than a minister. Aside from the 
awful responsibility of the sacred office, I now 
feel that a minister's labors are of no small ac- 
count. While the Bible is a rich fund from 
which all may derive unlimited benefit, people 
will not long be satisfied with the barren gen- 
eralities of unsanctified expounders of it. I 
believe it is only the deeply spiritual man who 
can look into its ' hidden mysteries,' and only 
the s:rowino^ Christian minister who can con- 
tinually bring forth out of this treasure-house 
* things new and old.' If such men as Ed- 
wards, Whitefield, and Payson could exclaim, 
' Who is sufficient for these things ?' what 
must we, candidates for the same office, say. 






RESIDENCE AT PRINCETON, 165 

whose gifts, faith, and knowledge, when com- 
pared with theirs, are ' less than the least.' I 
know, however, that despondency is the oppo- 
site extreme to spiritual pride, and I know 
also that God raiseth up men of low degree. 
Asahel Nettleton was a man not distins^uished 
for his intellectual or scientific attainments, 
and yet of what a glorious host is he the 
spiritual leader. 

"T is not a cause of small import 
The pastor's care demands, 
But what might fill aai angel's heart, 
And filled a Saviour's hands.' 

" I rejoice to learn, by your last, that there 
are so many indications for good in Newbury- 
port. I trust that they will not, as hereto- 
fore, prove like the ' early dew that vanisheth 
away.' I. should rejoice to come home and 
find you in the midst of a revival. I went out 
yesterday afternoon and spoke at a school- 
house in Mapleton parish, in Kingston, a town 
adjoining this. The walk was about three 
miles. Mr. R. goes out every Sabbath after- 
noon, and teaches a Bible class at three o'clock, 
and speaks to a small congregation at four. 



166 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

He invited me to go out with him and speak. 
The congregation was not quite as large as 
usual, on account of the day being cold and 
very windy. We took tea in a pleasant fam- 
ily, and returned before dark. 

" January 10, 1847. I think I have derived 
comfort and spiritual nourishment to-day at 
the sacramental table. I feel as if I had met 
my G-od and Saviour, and as if I had touched 
the golden sceptre which he extended to me ; 
as if I had preferred my petition, and received 
an answer of peace. Last evening, as I looked 
back on a week in which I had committed 
many and grievous sins, and as I looked for- 
ward to the celebration of the sacred supper, I 
hope my heart melted in penitence. I felt in 
an unusual degree the freeness and fulness 
there is in Christ, and my own vileness and 
helplessness. that I may always feel thus. 
Lord, I make a new surrender of myself to 
thee. Take me, bless me, save me in thy 
everlasting kingdom." 

''August 29. Through the abounding good- 
ness of my God, I am brought to behold the 
first Sabbath of my second year in Princeton 



RESIDENCE AT PRINCETON. 167 

Theological seminary. My heavenly Father 
is kind, very kind to me, and abundant in 
long-suffernig. I tremble to-day as I review 
the record I made on the first Sabbath of last 
year, and think how far I have come short. I 
tremble as I look forward to a new year, and 
think of its temptations and its dangers. I 
hope that I feel in some measure convinced that 
my strength is perfect weakness, and I trust 
that my desire is to lean only on the Lord 
Jesus for guidance and a blessing. 

" To thee, G-od, I renewedly dedicate my- 
self, and all that I am and have. 

" Upon thee, Saviour, and upon thy pre- 
cious atonement, I cast myself. 

" Gruide me, Holy Spirit, and let me be 
led by thee, that I may become one of the 
*sons of God.' 

" I was permitted to return home in May, 
and enjoy many weeks in the pleasant so- 
ciety of my well-beloved parents and friends. 
Through the goodness of my heavenly Father, I 
am now in health permitted to commence the 
duties of a new session. May the Lord watch 
over those dear friends, wliile we are absent 



168 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

one from the other. May my own life and 
health be spared, that I may meet them again, 
and rejoice with them in the goodness of our 
common God and Father. 

" September 12. Have been permitted to- 
day to go to the table of the Lord, and renew 
my covenant with him. may I be for ever 
the Lord's. Have been exceedingly refreshed 
to-day, in reading anew a part of the life of 
that eminent man of God, Rev. Jeremiah Hal- 
look. Lord, I pray to have much of his 
devotedness in thy service. 

" September 17. 

Teed me. Lord, -with needful food; 
I ask not wealth or fame j 
Eut give me eyes to view thy works, 
A heart to praise thy name. 

' Oh, may my days obscurely pass, 

Without remorse or care ; 
And let me for my parting hour 
From day to day prepare.' " 

" September 19. Finished reading to-day, 
for the second time, the Life of Rev. J. Hal- 
lock. I think it, in many respects, the most 
spiritual memoir I ever read. O for some of 



RESIDENCE AT PRINCETON. 169 

his faith and piety. for his unshaken hope. 

for a home with him where Christ is. 

" September 27. I am this day twenty-four 
years old. Another year of unbroken mercy 
and heavenly favor. 'Bless the Lord, my 
soul.' Another year of indulgence in many 
sins, and scarcely any growth in grace. Be 
humhled, my soul, in the dust on account of 
it. Must it always be thus, Lord ? Must 
every year be a record of spiritual leanness and 
barrenness ? Am I never more to grow in 
grace ? 0, it cannot, it must not be. I think 

1 do desire to be holier and more heavenly. 
Why, then, am I not so ? ' Search me, 
Lord, and know my heart ; try me, and know 
my thoughts ; and see if there be any wicked 
way in me, and lead me in the way everlast- 
ing.' I feel conscious, I think, to-night, that 
I am a guilty sinner, deserving God's everlast- 
ing wrath and curse. If saved from the guilt of 
sin, it must be only by the precious blood and 
righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ. To 
that precious fountain I fly. ' Create in me a 
clean heart, God.' Make me wholly thine, 
and thus prepare me to be the means of direct- 



170 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

ing others to the Saviour. To thee I commit 
myself, Lord, and all I am and have — my 
life, health, reason, parents, brothers, sisters, 
friends, my body and soul. Thou hast done 
great things for me in years past. let a 
greater work, even the quickening of my soul, 
be done for me this year. 

" To Grod only wise be glory, through Jesus 
Christ for ever. Amen." 

"Princeton, (Sabbath, 2 o'clock,) Sept. 5, 1847. 

" Ever dear MoTHER^At this consecrated 
hour I feel as if I must say a few words to 
you. I have just risen from my knees, where 
I have been endeavoring to pray fervently for 
my father and you, for myself, and for all the 
beloved members of our family. It is, my 
dear mother, a season peculiarly sweet. At 
this hour, ever since I can remember, have 
you led your beloved children to the throne of 
grace, and committed them to Him who hath 
said, ' I will be a God to thee and thy seed 
after thee.' The instructions you have given 
us at this hour will not be lost ; ' in due season 
you shall reap.' Every prayer you have ofiered 
is remembered by our faithful God ; every tear 



RESIDENCE AT PRINCETON. 171 

you have shed is in his bottle ; your heart shall 
be made glad. Oh, I seem to-day to feel it and 
know it. If I am cast out, our beloved Samuel 
will be brought in. But 0, we must, ive must 
all walk the shining streets of the new Jeru- 
salem to2f ether." 

"Sabbath-noon, September 12, 1847. 

" My dear Mother — Again, at this hallowed 
hour, I sit down to hold converse with my dear- 
est earthly friend. I do not deem it a profana- 
tion of the day thus to write, because I want 
to say to you just the things I would if I were 
present with you ; and, now we are separated, 
this is our only means of communication. I 
love to have letters from you written at this 
hour. They seem to be of a more sacred char- 
acter. I received your kind letter yesterday, 
and was, I trust, truly thankful that you had 
been brought safe home again, and were seated 
by your little desk to write to me. God was 
indeed kind to us during our long journey, both 
in sparing our lives and giving us such pleasant 
weather. I think we could not have selected 
out of the whole summer, five more favorable 
weeks than those in which we were absent. 



172 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

" I agree with you that traveUing is not the 
way to grow in grace. I presume you can say, 
now that you have returned to our dear home 
and your quiet Bethel, It is good for me to be 
here. I have often wished since my return 
that I was at least as near to you as Boston or 
Andover, where I could run in and see you 
sometimes ; but then I have thought how 
plainly the path seemed marked out for me to 
come here, and in what ways of mercy Grod 
has dealt with me since I have been here : and 
shall I now run away, and that too without a 
sufficient cause ? No. This, I think, would 
be to tempt G-od. Perhaps we are so situated, 
that we may love and think of each other 
more, and pray more for each other ; and since 
I am such a dumb Zacharias about talking 
with you on spiritual tilings when we are to- 
gether, we may, by writing, stir up each other's 
minds in holy and divine things. 

"I bemn to feel as if God had commenced 

o 

a new work in my soul, and had given me 
some new views of the awful responsibility 
and sacredness of the gospel ministry. I have 
been led often since my return to. ask my- 



RESIDENCE AT PRINCETON. 173 

self the question, "Why I have commenced 
preparing for the ministry ? Is it because 
you wanted me to be a minister, or because 
I thought I could make the most of myself 
in that office, or was it without having any 
very definite end in view ? If any or aU 
these were my motives, how unworthy am 
I of that great work. But I trust that these 
have not been my governing motives, though 
I fear that they have had too much influence. 
I pray God that they may not be the motives 
with which I shall eventually enter the office. 
I pray that nothing short of the one and all- 
absorbing desire to save precious souls, and 
thereby glorify G-od, may prompt me to become 
a minister. For this I desire to have you pray, 
and for this I mean to pray myself. 

" I thank you for your good advice, and I 
think God has set forth some of my defects 
this summer more plainly to my own mind, 
and I trust he will give me strength to over- 
come them. There is a restlessness under re- 
proof, and a severity in my manner when I am 
reproved, of which I am too often guilty. This 
I must try to overcome. Moreover, I am too 



174 E.EV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

listless, and have too little self-confidence, and 
altogether too little of a self-denying spirit. 
These things I know as well as you; and to 
will to get rid of them is present with me, but 
how to perform I know not. Prayer only, I 
believe, will efFect it. To this refuge, then, let 
me flee continually. 

"We have been privileged to-day with an- 
other season of communion at the table of our 
Lord. My heart was cold and my affections 
not in lively exercise; still, I trust I did in 
some measure enjoy G-od in his house." 

" October 31. I can hardly refrain from 
saying to you a few words on paper every 
Sabbath-noon, as you seem so peculiarly near 
to me. I love to think of you always, but 
especially on this blessed day, and at our hour 
of prayer. ^ I have prayed for thee ' to-day, 
my beloved mother, ' that thy faith fail not.' 
I have remembered your request made in your 
last letter, and what you said about the near- 
ness of eternity and your feelings in view of it. 
If I felt better prepared myself for its solemn 
realities, perhaps I could aflford you some 
more encouragement. Still, dear mother, un- 



RESIDENCE AT PRINCETOK. 175 

worthy as we are, and many and aggravated 
as are our sins, Christ has died for us. Here 
is our only hope. The importance of this 
blessed truth presses upon my attention more 
and more every day. We can do nothing, ab- 
solutely nothings without it. In vain do we 
wash ourselves with snow-water and make 
ourselves ever so clean ; without Christ we are 
plunged in the ditch, and our own clothes are 
made to abhor us. It is in vain that we look 
.for comfort in animal excitement, and frames 
of mind, and religious feelings ; these are all 
worthless. If we are without Christ, we are 
of all men most miserable." 

Mr. Emerson was licensed to preach the 
gospel on Wednesday, April 26, 1848, and on 
the next Sabbath, April 30, preached his first 
sermon in his native city. Before him were 
his nearest relatives and friends, the compan- 
ions of his childhood, and many who had 
watched with deep interest his career, and the 
growth of piety in his soul. They now heard 
from his lips that gospel which was so precious 
to him, those sacred truths which he ardently 



176 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

loved, and which had become incorporated into 
the very essence of his being. And they felt 
that *' a man of Grod" was addressing them — 
that a messenger duly commissioned of heaven, 
clothed with ministerial authority by the great 
Head of the church, fitted for his work by the 
Holy Ghost, was addressing them. As they 
listened to his message, they could exclaim, 
with sincerity and earnestness, " How beau- 
tiful upon the mountains are the feet of him 
that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth 
peace ; that bringeth good tidings of good ; 
that publisheth salvation." His prayers, his 
discourse, his manner, earnestness, devotion, 
all showed that here was no false teacher, no 
mere formal declaimer of gospel truth ; but an 
earnest messenger, to whom the ministry of 
Christ was a solemn reality, to whom the ser- 
vice of Grod was a delight, and one who felt 
the value of immortal souls. 

But he had not preached long before he was 
reminded of his own frailty, and the uncer- 
tainty of all earthly hopes. In September he 
made the following record in his journal : 

" Friday, September 1, 1848. After hav- 



KESIUENOE AT PB.1NCEI0N. 177 

ing been permitted, in the good providence of 
G-od, to preach something more than thirty 
times, I was seized, on the first Sabbath in 
August, with a slight attack of raising blood, 
which was followed, during the week, by other 
attacks. These laid me aside from labor for 
two Sabbaths, but I preached half the day on 
the third Sabbath after I was taken. I am 
now in comfortable health again, and trust, if 
the Lord will, that I shall not have another 
attack of the disease, but be raised up to glo- 
rify him in the ministry of reconciliation. 0, 
that this 'light affliction' may work out for 
me ' a far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory.' Have read with interest, recently, 
the Memoir of W. G. Crocker, missionary to 
Africa." 

Mr. Emerson, after preaching as opportu- 
nities offered, with very great acceptance, re- 
turned to Princeton in December, to continue 
his preparation for his great work. On becom- 
ing settled, he resumes his journal : 

" December 17. Yesterday, through God's 
mercy, I again reached Princeton, and this is 

Emerson. 1 ^ 



178 UEV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

the first Sabbath in my third year in this sem- 
inary. Though detained at home much beyond 
the time of the commencement of the session, 
I have abundant reason to bless Him who has 
returned me under circumstances of mercy ; 
and to his kind care and watchful providence 
would I once again commit myself. The Lord 
watch between me and my friends while ab- 
sent ; and if I am spared to finish my course, 
may he direct me where to go, and aid me in 
endeavoring to build up his kingdom; and to 
his name shall be the praise. 

"December 26. Finished, to-night. Dr. 
Spring's ' Power of the Pulpit.' 0, how great 
a work is that committed to a minister. How 
delightful ; how interesting ; how laborious ; 
how responsible ; how solemn ; how fearful : 
G-od's ambassador, set ' to watch for souls 
as one that must give account.' What mo- 
tives, drawn from three worlds, are there to 
induce him to be faithful. What guilt will 
rest upon him, if found unfaithful. I pray 
that the perusal of this interesting book may 
serve to deepen my sense of the responsibility 
of the work in which I am engaged, and lead 



RESIDENCE AT TRINCETON. 179 

me to earnest endeavors in winning lost men 
to Him who has died that they might have 
life. 

'' January 14, 1849. The table of the Lord 
has been spread to-day, and his children have 
gathered about it. 0, what will be our joy, if, 
when the ransomed of the Lord return, we 
shall be found meet for the table that shall be 
spread in heaven. Grant me, my heavenly 
Father, so to live that I shall then be a par- 
taker, with thy redeemed ones, of the manna 
and wine which thou dost give them. Have 
just observed my usual Sabbath-noon season 
of prayer for my dear parents, the members 
of our families, and other friends. This season 
my dear mother has observed with her children 
as far back as my recollection extends. Praise 
to Grod for pious parents, who have, in truth, 
brought me up ' in the nurture and admonition 
of the Lord.' 

" January 17. Finished reading to-day that 
wonderful book, ' Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress.' 
This book, I think, ought to be often read by 
every Christian. 

" January 23. This day has been set apart 



180 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

by the members of this seminary, as a day of 
fasting. humiUation, and prayer. The state of 
rehgion is low, and the love of the brethren 
has waxed cold. Yet God seems to be giving 
many of his children to-day a spirit of prayer 
and supplication, of penitence and humility. 
Who knoweth if he will not grant us a blessing? 
I think I have had a quickening of the Spirit 
recently, and have enjoyed more of the light 
of God's countenance. But sin often draws a 
veil, and hides me from him whom, I humbly 
hope, my soul loveth. for grace to-day to 
forsake sin, and henceforth to cleave unto hoh- 
ness. I am soon, if God spares my life, to go 
forth as an ' ambassador ' in his name. 
Lord, work mightily in me, that I may preach 
to others what I have myself experienced. 

"February 4. This Sabbath has been one 
of the few which are a holy ' rest ' unto my 
soul. I hope I have in some measure enjoyed 
God to-day, and been able to get near him in 
prayer. How sweet such days; and besides 
these, ' there remaineth a rest to the people of 
God.' 

" February 11. This is communion-day at 



RESIDENCE AT PRINCETON. 181 

the dear church with which I am connected in 
Newburyport. Thirteen years ago I was per- 
mitted to sit down for the first time at the 
table of our Lord with that beloved church. 
What an unworthy member have I been. I 
trust that I say this feeUngly ; for when G-od 
at times discovers to me the depravity of my 
own heart, as I think he has been recently 
doing, I find it to be a very sink of iniquity. 
0, none but Clod knows what a sinner I am. 
I feel to-day, that were it not for the rich mercy 
of God in Jesus Christ, I should be entirely 
undone. I have nothing to plead on my own 
behalf. I am nothing, and can do nothing. I 
flee to the fountain of thy blood, thou incar- 
nate God. Wash me ; make me clean. Thou 
knowest that I would be thine. If saved at 
all, it must be wholly by thy blood and right- 
eousness. Make me to do thy will on earth, 
and then take me to thyself in heaven to praise 
thee for ever. 

"Tuesday, March 13. I have set apart this 
day as a day of special fasting, humiliation, 
and prayer, mingled with thanksgiving for past 
mercies. As I am so soon to go forth as a 



182 REV. JOHN E, EMERSON. 

minister of Jesus Christ, I feel that I have 
great need for prayer, fervent, constant prayer. 
I would this day seek the special presence and 
blessing of the Father," Son, and Holy G-host. 
Think upon me, my Grod, this day for good. 
I have endeavored, in my morning devotions, 
to look for a blessing on the exercises of the 
day. 

" Half-past ten, A. M. I have endeavored 
to offer a prayer of thanksgiving for past and 
present mercies. I have tried to thank God 
for early religious training and instruction — 
for God's grace, manifested in hlessing the 
pious conversation of my mother to my awak- 
ening and, I hope, turning to G-od — for blessing 
to my special attention the second chapter of 
the book of Proverbs, which I have since called 
' my chapter' — for the joy in God I often found 
even at that tender age (ten years old) in pri- 
vate devotion, in the reading of the Scriptures, 
in perusing religious books, and in assemblies 
for prayer and Christian conference. I have 
thanked him for having my attention called by 
a sermon of my pastor to the importance of 
making a public profession of religion — for being 



RESIDENCE AT PRINCETON. 183 

permitted, after deliberation and advice with 
friends, to present myself as a candidate for 
admission to the church — for being accepted 
and propounded— for the opportunities of com- 
munion so frequently enjoyed — for strength to 
withstand evil companions — for preparation for 
college — for answers to prayer in being pro- 
vided with a pious, discreet room-mate — for 
deliverance from evil companions and from 
backsliding, while connected with college — for 
being permitted to graduate with honor, in 
presence of my friends — for success in teach- 
ing, and for a revival of religion in my school — 
for an opportunity, specially in answer to pray- 
er, to come to the Theological seminary — for a 
license to preach the everlasting gospel — for so 
many opportunities of proclaiming it — for the 
numerous manifestations of kindness by many 
friends — for deliverance from threatening sick- 
ness, and renewed health — for the Saviour, the 
Bible, the Sabbath, the way of salvation, and 
the hope of eternal life. These mercies I find 
to be * more than the hairs of my head,' and 
* as the sands of the sea innumerable.' I have 
noted down some of them as themes for grati- 



184 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

tude and praise on other occasions, in connec- 
tion with mercies yet in store. 

" Twelve, M. Endeavored to confess my 
sins before G-od, and to seek forgiveness for 
Christ's sake. But how can I begin to recount 
the black and fearful catalogue ? Original and 
actual sin — sins of omission and commission — 
sins against a most holy G-od — sins against 
my parents, my friends, companions, Chris- 
tians, the church, the impenitent — against 
myself. 0, they run parallel only with God's 
large and free mercies. Forgive these sins, 
my heavenly Father, and impute not my ini- 
quities unto me, but pardon me through the 
righteousness of thy dear Son. 

" Half-past one, P. M. Have brought before 
God, in prayer, my particular sins, from which 
I desire to be delivered, and which have long 
had control over me, namely, sloth, an evil tem- 
per, the indulgence of vain and wicked thoughts, 
and my ' easily besetting sins.' These have 
taken fast hold upon me, and by some of them 
I have already been so far brought into cap- 
tivity, that I know not that I shall be free 
again. But ' T can do all things through Christ, 



RESIDENCE AT PRINCETON. 185 

which strengtheneth me.' for strength, this 
day, to hurst these more than iron fetters, and 
shake off these heavy yokes. 

" Half-past three, P. M. Have tried to com- 
mit myself to God for the remainder of my 
term of study in this institution ; praying that 
I may be enabled in thought, speech, and be- 
havior to glorify him who hath hitherto helped 
me, relying on him alone for strength, and 
never feeling that I am sufficient of myself to 
keep myself. Lord, keep me ever mindful 
that all my sufficiency is of thee." 

In the midst of our rejoicings over the near 
completion of our beloved brother's studies, we 
are saddened by the indications that his jour- 
nal and letters give of the insidious workings 
of disease upon his system. 

In February, after giving a minute account 
of the state of his health, he writes, 

" I trust I have been more blessed than 
usual with the light of Grod's countenance and 
the visits of his love. I try to feel that I am 
wholly in his hands. I pray earnestly that I 
may live to preach the gospel, but hope to be 



186 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

ready to say also, ' to die is gain.' I feel daily 
that I am a poor lost sinner, wholly dependent 
on the atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ for 
salvation. This feeling I deshe to keep in 
lively exercise. 

" To-day is the day of prayer for colleges. 
Our students meet by colleges at nine o'clock, 
and at eleven o'clock the professors meet us in 
a general meeting. I shall hope to have an 
account in your next of the observance of the 
day with you. I was interested in the account 
of the church fast, and should have been glad 
to have been with you on that day. I hope 
the dispensations of Grod's providence among 
you will be improved and blessed. 

" Half-past two, P. M. Our meeting at 
eleven was quite interesting. The different 
colleges from which we came were called in 
alphabetical order, and reports of the state of 
religion presented from most of them. I hope 
the meetings have not been given up this year 
in Newbury port. I feel rejoiced that you have 
been so free from colds this winter as to be 
able to attend most of the meetings, and visit 
those who are sick. 



RESIDENCE AT PRINCETON. 187 

** March 9. I am very grateful to you all 
for your kind remembrances of me, and only 
regret that I cannot make my own communi- 
cations as interesting for you. You will be 
pleased to learn, that through divine ^ goodness 
I am better than I was when I wrote you last. 
I took another cold ; but it did not go to my 
lungs, and is now passing off. I have not yet 
as much vigor as I could desire ; but as I do 
not have the labor of preaching this winter, 
hope to return in better health than when I 
went away. 

" I have not been wholly idle since I re- 
turned ; for, besides attending all the regular 
exercises but one, I have been through with 
one entire course of theology, one course of 
history, and have written about fifty letters, 
besides performing quite an amount of miscel- 
laneous reading, and reviewing a large part 
of my studies for the two past years, in prepa- 
ration for examination. 

" When I think of myself as just ready to 
go forth into the great harvest-field, I almost 
shrink. But I feel confident that the Lord 
has bid me come thus far, and I cannot go 



188 E.EV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

back. If he designs to put me into the min- 
istry, earth and hell cannot hinder ; hut if he 
is about to cut me off in the midst of my days, 
he is a wise and just Being ; and ' though he 
slay me, yet will I trust in him.' I have been 
enabled to indulge a stronger confidence in 
God this winter, I think, than for some time 
before. I feel the need of abundant prayer. It 
would give me great pleasure if my intimate 
friends, such as Mrs. M., Mrs. J., and others, 
would, with yourself, devote an afternoon to 
special united prayer for me, in reference to 
my soon entering on the ministerial work. It 
would encourage me greatly if you would. 
The Sabbath-noon hour has been one of un- 
usual interest to me this winter. I intended 
before now to suggest a passage of scripture to 
be read in concert. Suppose we read through 
the epistles of Paul to Timothy and Titus ?" 

The following was addressed to a friend in 
Newburyport : 

" I am glad you felt so free to speak of the 
subject of religion. It is truly a great thing 
to be a consistent Christ inn. My greatest 



RESIDENCE AT PRINCETON. 189 

sorrow is, that I have not lived more as a pro- 
fessor of our holy religion should live. Noth- 
ing can give us more comfort when we come 
to die, than the thought that we are Christ's, 
and that we have spent our lives in trying to 
advance the interests of his kinsrdom. If we 
would die peacefully, we must live consist- 
ently. Let us then see to it that we grow in 
grace daily, and live self-denying, holy lives. 
What if we do give up some sensual gratifica- 
tions, and are thus looked upon with contempt 
by the world. What have we in prospect? 
Heaven and an eternity of bliss. And when 
our work is done, and well done, then, with a 
hope full of immortality, may we be admitted 
to the society of those whom you say you so 
much desire to see — Paul and Moses, and many 
more ' of whom the world was not, worthy.' 
Who knows but that we may be permitted to 
converse on this very sentence together some- 
time during the ages of eternity ? I love to 
think that we shall know each other in an- 
other world, and talk over what has interested 
us here. Take courage, then, my friend ; re- 
sist every temptation ; persevere in every good 



190 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

work ; pray often and fervently ; be consistent ; 
let your light shine ; and God he with you and 
hless you. Write me without fail very soon. 
Give my love to my parents, and tell them I 
am as well as when I wrote. 

'' Truly yours, J. E. E." 

JOURNAL. 

"Again I have lifted up my soul to God 
for a preparation for the great work of the 
gospel ministry. I have prayed, that, if con- 
sistent with his will, my life may he pro- 
longed and health granted me for the work ; 
that my field of labor may be pointed out, and 
that I may be willing to go just where God 
shall send me ; that I may be prepared for the 
great work by a baptism of the Spirit, by 
prayer, by the study of divine truth, and by 
deep inward experience of the power of the 
truth in my own soul, so that I may preach to 
others that which I do know, and that which 
I have felt ; so that I may be ' a workman 
that needeth not to be ashamed.' 

"I trust that this has not been a lost day, 
but beneficial in many respects to my soul. 



RESIDENCE AT PRINCETON. 191 

God grant that the prayers which I have of- 
fered before him to-day may he returned with 
gracious and abundant answers of peace. The 
following scriptures I have read to-day, I trust 
not without profit : 2 Chron. 34 : 1-8, 29-33 ; 
Psalms 143, 51, 71 ; Ezra 9, 10 : 1-17 ; Dan. 
9 ; Ezek. 3 ; Psalm 121. 

"April 26, 1849. One year ago to-day I 
was licensed to preach the gospel. I would ever 
keep the day in remembrance. Often have I 
been permitted to speak in God's name in his 
holy house ; but 0, how little have I really 
done for his glory. How much have I preached 
for my own interest, and forgotten that my 
business was to preach Christ and win lost 
men to Jesus. that God would mercifully 
forgive the sins, imperfections, and short-com- 
ings of the past year, and give me grace to labor 
for him and his glory during the year to come. 

"May 13, 1849. Through God's goodness 
I have reached the last Sabbath of my stay in 
this seminary. How long the time seemed in 
prospect as I penned my record on the first 
Sabbath in my course here. How short are 
the years in the retrospect. It is with deep 



192 UEV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

humiliation that I recur now to the resolutions 
I made on that first Sahhath, and compare my 
course with them. I am ashamed to note my 
many and fearful delinquencies. Grod, for- 
give these my sins, for the sake of thy dear 
Son. I am about to go forth as a herald of 
salvation. Grod, send me not forth alone, 
but go thou with me. Help me to preach 
Christ alone. And give me souls for my hire. 
I have to-day fed on the body and blood of 
Christ. May I remember the covenant into 
which I have anew entered, and may I have 
strength given me from on high to determine to 
be wholly the Lord's. 

" May 15, 1849, ten o'clock, P. M. Another 
solemn point in my life has been reached. I 
am now a graduate of Princeton Theological 
seminary, having received my diploma with 
my class-mates about an hour since from the 
hand of the President of the Board of Directors. 

'' Now we are to go forth under the com- 
mission of our ascended Lord. Divine Teacher, 
go with us ; direct us to fields of labor ; give 
us success ; may we win many to thee ; and 
reunite us in heaven with a great multi- 



RESIDENCE AT PRINCETOX. 193 

tude saved by the power of the Spirit of God, 
through the instrumentahty of our preaching." 

Mr. Emerson now bade farewell to the semi- 
nary, and returned again to his beloved home, 
carrying with him the following kind testi- 
monial to his piety and scholarship, from the 
venerable and learned Dr. Miller. The com- 
munication was addressed to his pastor : 

"This letter will be delivered to you by our 
highly respected and beloved pupil, Mr. Emer- 
son, whose health has again become delicate. 

" The more we have become acquainted 
with this amiable and highly promising youth, 
the more we have become attached to him, and 
the higher we have estimated the prospects of 
his usefulness. He was late in coming to the 
seminary this session, but we have all cordially 
rejoiced that he did come. He appeared ex- 
ceedingly well before; but, recently, better 
than ever. His diligent attention to study; 
his improvement by study; his remarkably 
amiable temper ; his highly promising talents ; 
and the uncommon excellence of all his public 
performances, have endeared him to us in an 

Emerson. 1 3 



194 T^EY. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

uncommon degree. AVe do cherish the hope 
that he is preparing to be a great blessing to 
the church of God. 

" AVe have some sohcitude about the health 
of Mr. Emerson. He has an impression that 
a cold eastern climate will be more favorable 
to him than a warm southern one. I confess 
my impressions are somewhat different ; and 
though I certainly could wish that he might 
remain an ornament and a blessing to his na- 
tive state, yet I cannot resist the conclusion 
that he would be more likely, with his delicate 
pulmonary system, to enjoy vigorous health in 
South Carolina or G-eorgia, than in Massachu- 
setts. I trust he will be divinely and merci- 
fully directed. We shall all follow him with 
our esteem, our affections, and our prayers. 

*' I am, reverend and dear brother, yours in 
Christian bonds, 

"SAMUEL MILLER." 



ORDINATION AND SETTLEMENT. 195 



CHAPTER YI. 

HIS ORDINATION AND SETTLEMENT. 

After leaving the seminary, Mr. Emerson 
preached in several vacant pulpits in the vicin- 
ity of Newburyport. His labors for several 
Sabbaths at Byfield were greatly blessed. The 
church was quickened and revived under his 
ministrations, and his preaching was blessed 
to the salvation of souls. Several persons, 
when examined for admission to the church, 
stated that their first serious impressions were 
received under the preaching of Mr. Emerson. 

In September, 1849, he was invited to preach 
in the Market-hall in Newburyport, by a small 
society which had recently been formed. 

During the summer, several devoted and 
zealous Christians of the town felt that some 
means should be adopted to bring under the 
direct influence of the gospel those who were 
not in the habit of attending public worship 
on the Sabbath; and hence the origin of this 
enterprise at the hall, which was at first en- 



196 UEV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

tered upon as an experiment. The churches 
of the town were generally well filled, and were 
supplied with able, efficient, and devoted pas- 
tors, and yet a large class of the population, 
and many strangers who had been drawn to 
the place by its manufacturing establishments, 
were living in the neglect of Christian privi- 
leges. To meet the wants of these persons, 
and to extend the interests of the Redeemer's 
kingdom throughout the town, the public wor- 
ship of God was established in the Market- 
hall, a commodious building, very conven- 
iently situated for this purpose. Those who 
projected and carried forward the enterprise, 
were judicious, zealous, and energetic men, 
well qualified for the noble work in which they 
were engaged. They were fully aware that it 
was no ordinary task to gather a new religious 
society and establish it upon a firm and per- 
manent basis. They were conscious that to 
embark in the enterprise would make large 
draughts upon their time and their liberality, 
as well as add to their cares and responsibil- 
ities. Yet they did not shrink from the work, 
but went forward looking to G-od for success. 



ORDINATION AND SETTLEMENT. 197 

The first Sabbath that Mr. Emerson preached 
to them, about ninety persons were present. 
Very soon the audiences increased, and after a 
few Sabbaths a strons^ desire was felt to retain 
Mr. Emerson's services. His preaching and 
labors awakened a very general interest through- 
out the community, and especially among the 
young. They came in crowds to hear him, 
and went away either under strong convictions 
of sin, or impressed with the reality and im- 
portance of religion. 

A call from the people was soon extended to 
him, and they were prepared to proceed at once 
to or2;anize a church. 

The question of duty presented to Mr. Emer- 
son was one which it was very difficult for him 
to decide. His health was precarious, and his 
disposition and mental habits fitted him to take 
charge of a society already well established, 
rather than to perform the labor of laying a 
new foundation, and meet the discouragements 
incident to such a work. But his feelings had 
already become strongly enlisted in this infant 
society, and the aflfections of its members were 
very soon entwined around him. This, too, 



198 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

was his native town, the residence of his par- 
ents and dearest friends ; and the unanimity 
and earnestness with which the call was ex- 
tended, strongly mfluenced his mind. The fact 
that here were the scenes of his childhood, a 
circumstance which ordinarily might be re- 
garded as unfavorable to extensive usefulness, 
in this case was a reason why he should accept 
the invitation which he had received; for that 
childhood, as we have seen, was distinguished, 
for its purity and piety. The little boy of ten 
years of age was a "preacher of righteous- 
ness," an epistle " known and read of all men." 
The foundations for his usefulness were already 
laid. His infant prayers, his Christian deport- 
ment, his earnest counsels to his school-mates, 
were all remembered. He had no prejudices 
to live down, no enemies to reconcile, no youth- 
ful indiscretions to contend against. The invi- 
tation to settle was made the subject of fre- 
quent and fervent prayer; and after seeking 
divine direction, and asking counsel of his 
friends, he decided to accept the call. 

Under the preaching of Mr. Emerson in Mar- 
ket-hall, the audience increased to between 



OEDINATIOIT AND SETTLEilENT. 199 

five and six hundred persons ; oftentimes sev- 
eral would leave, unable to obtain seats. 

In October, 1849, the society was formed 
under the name of the Whitefield* Congrega- 
tional Society ; and on January 1, 1850, twenty- 
two persons were organized into a church of 
Christ; and the same day Mr. Emerson was 
solemnly ordained and installed as their pastor. 
At an early hour the church was densely 
crowded, and throughout the exercises a deep 
solemnity pervaded the audience. The new 
congregation, as well as the new pastor, had 
awakened a great interest in a large portion of 
the community, and this circumstance, in con- 
nection with the pastor's youth, ardent piety, 
and eminent qualifications for the work of the 
ministry, drew together a vast audience. Mr. 
Emerson felt very deeply the new responsibil- 
ities and solemn duties that were imposed upon 
him. The long- cherished desire of his heart, to 
be a minister of Christ, was now realized. The 
solemn charge to be a faithful, earnest minister 

^ The remains of the eminent and gifted Whitefield are 
deposited under the pulpit of the Federal-street church, in 
Newburyport. 



200 REV. JOHN E. E-AIERSON. 

of tliG gospel, he now received. The right 
hand of fellowship was cordially and affection- 
ately extended to him, amidst the warm sym- 
pathy of his hrethren, the ardent love of his 
people, and the respect of the community. 

How long he would he permitted to hold the 
sacred office to which he had heen inducted, 
God only knew. As I looked upon his frail 
form and pale countenance, I could not hut 
have my fears that the time might not be far 
distant, when we should be summoned to the 
same pulpit to perform other services for our be- 
loved brother. But my prayer to God was, that 
he might long be spared, and that he might be 
the instrument of gathering a great multitude 
of immortal bein2:s into the fold of Christ. 

On returning home after the ordination, Mr. 
Emerson made the following short entry in his 
journal : 

" January 1, 1850. I have this evening been 
solemnly ordained as pastor of a church and 
people. Lord, who is suiHcient for these 
things ? hold thou me up, and I shall be safe. 
Help me, my God, to live and to act as a 
minister of the gospel." 



OEDINATION AND SETTLEMENT. 201 

On the first Sabbath after his ordination, 
he preached to a very large and attentive 
audience, and the day was one of great interest 
and solemnity to his church. Much prayer 
was offered to God, that he v/ould strengthen 
his young servant, and bless his efforts to win 
souls to Christ. 

About this time Mr. Emerson held an inter- 
esting correspondence with a young friend, who 
was awakened and hopefully converted under 
his preaching; thus showing that in the midst 
of his ministerial duties he did not neglect op- 
portunities of doing good to individuals. Let- 
ters to this friend contain frequent allusions to 
the public labors and responsibilities he had 
just assumed. 

" My dear Friend — I hope that this day, 
like those which have preceded it, finds you in 
the possession and enjoyment of the Christian's 
hope, and that you can say with all your 
heart, 

'What sinners value, I resign ; 
Lord, 'tis enough that thou art mine.' 

Let me advise you, as one who is deeply in- 
terested in your spiritual progress, 



202 REV. JOHX E. EMERSON. 

" First, never be ashamed of being called 
a Christian. Always be found on the side of 
God. Let the world take knowledge of you 
that you walk with Jesus. 

" Second, be very particular and punctual 
about your times for secret prayer. 

' Prayer is the Christian's vital breath, 
The Christian's native air.' 

Let nothing tempt you to put by your regular 
season for morning and evening devotion. 

" Be an active Christian. Do all the good 
you can while you live. Seek opportunities to 
talk with your impenitent friends. 

' Tell to sinners round, 
What a dear Saviour you have found.' 

'' I know you will be a cheerful Christian. 
I love your cheerfulness ; you need not repress 
that. 



' Religion never was designed 
To make our pleasures less.' 

'' Come and see me as often as you can 
spare a moment. Your visits are always wel- 
come. I never tire of seeing you or talking 
with you. Do not let Satan tempt you with 



ORDINATION AND SETTLEMENT. 203 

doubts. Look to Jesus. Be faithful unto 
death, and Grod \yill give you a crown of life. 
Write me soon. 

" Your friend, sincerely and affectionately, 

"J. E. E." 

"I feel very grateful to you for your visit 
last evening. It did me good to see and con- 
verse with you. Especially am I thankful that 
we were permitted to bow the knee together 
before our Father who is in heaven. 0, my 
friend John, it gives me unspeakable delight to 
have you, whom I regard so highly, numbered 
among the followers of Jesus. ' Follow on to 
know the Lord.' ' Keep thy heart with all 
diligence.' Live near to Jesus. * Pray without 
ceasing.' My own mind has been much solem- 
nized to-day by the subject on which I have 
been writing. 0, how swiftly our time passes. 
But what of this, if we are prepared for eter- 
nity ? 

" Do not fail to let me hear from you on 
Monday. ' I do not care how soon' you come 
and see me, or let me hear from you. 
" Truly your friend, 

"J. E. E." 



204 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

"Newburyport, Saturday, P.M., Jan. 5, 1850. 

" This has been to me a busy, exciting, and 
solemn week. I feel fatigued and rather low-spir- 
ited. It is now between three and four o'clock, 
and I have had my pen in hand almost ever 
since breakfast, not getting through as usual at 
two o'clock. But I could not refrain from writ- 
ing once more to express my interest in you. 

" G-od bless you, my dear friend, and cause 
you to grow in grace every day. May he make 
you eminently useful, and prolong your life in 
his service. 

" January 12. I love to converse with you 
on religious subjects, and answer the questions 
which you put to me. May you know more and 
more of the Bible, and may your eyes be opened 
to behold wondrous things out of God's law. 

" Rest assured of my earnest, sincere, and 
growing friendship. May we be friends in 
heaven." 

The day after his officiating for the first time 
at a wedding, he w^rites, 

" Dear J. — I was gratified at your desire to 
attend the ceremony. You may think of it in 
after-years. If you and I should live to grow 



ORDINATION AND SETTLEMENT. 205 

old, never let us forsret that in the same room 
we first had that deeply interesting conversa- 
tion concerning your precious soul. John, 
I reflect with more pleasure on the conversa- 
tion of that evening, than I should on a score of 
weddings. 

" If I am taken away before you are, come 
and stand once in a while by the grave of him 
who loves you as a friend and a Christian 
brother. 

" We have added one more to the landmarks 
which we may look back on as we travel on 
in life to2:ether. We will not fors^et the first 
religious conversation, the first prayer, and the 
first marriage ceremony. 

"May the God of heaven grant you bless- 
ings more abundant than I can wish for you. 
May we meet in that world where ' they neither 
marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as 
the angels of God.' 

'• Truly your friend, 

"J. E. EMERSON." 
"Sunday-eve, Tj^ P. M., February 17. 

" John, John, John, I am worn out, dis- 
couraged, almost sick. I have labored hard, 



206 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

and it seems as if I had almost spent my 
strength for naught. To you, the Sabbath is a 
refreshing day, a day of rest. To me, it is a 
day of anxiety, toil, and fatigue. I do not 
know when I have felt so worn out as I have 
to-day. 0, how I wish I could hear singing 
after my labors on the Sabbath; but every 
harp is hung upon the willows in this house. 
Alas, we cannot sing. I am almost inclined to 
learn. 

" I want to have you tell me in your next 
letter something about your spiritual exercises. 
Does the Bible still seem like a new book? 
Do you still maintain and enjoy constant secret 
prayer? I fear we have not talked as much 
about religion lately as we ought to. I long 
to have another evening when wx can pray 
together, and talk about God, heaven, the soul, 
and eternity. 

" Ever yours, "J. E. E." 

"February 12, 1S50. 

" My dear Friend John — I have been look- 
ing back with much interest upon the time of 
our acquaintance, and especially upon our inter- 
views the first of the present winter. The 



ORDINATION AND SETTLEMENT. 207 

evening of the third of Decemher is memorable 
on more accomits than one ; and we have made 
it still more memorable since, by the intimacy 
of our friendship. 

" G-od has led you along, I trust, by his 
most holy Spirit, and made you a partaker of 
his rich grace in Jesus Christ. What thanks 
are due from you to him, who has delivered 
you from everlasting death. 

''I have been for some time anticipating 
the day when you would have brought before 
your mind the question on which we conversed 
last evening, namely, the propriety of your 
asking admission to the church; and you must 
not, you will not suppose, that I had felt 
wholly indifferent as to the particular church 
with which you should connect yourself. I 
should have been possessed of less than com- 
mon sensibility, if I had felt no degree of in- 
terest in the matter. A¥e had talked together 
freely from the outset of your Christian course. 
You had poured your joys and sorrows into my 
ear, and I had told you freely all my feelings. 
It was a question, however, that I thought you 
ought to decide wholly for yourself; and you 



208 REV. JOHN E. E^IERSON. 

will bear me \Yitness that I have not attempted 
to influence you. Of this one thing, however, 
you may rest assured, wherever you go my 
prayers will follow you, and my love and friend- 
ship remain with you." 

"My dear Friend John — I have a special 
request to make of you for to-morrow morning. 
I wish you to remember me in prayer at a 
quarter before nine in the morning. You know 
it is an important and solemn day with me, 
and I need much prayer. I will remember 
you at the same time. "VVe will feel that we 
are praying for each other. I want you to 
pray that I may be assisted and blessed in the 
exercises of the day, and I will remember you 
in relation to the matter concerninsf which I 

a 

spoke last evening." 

Mr. Emerson had now entered fully upon 
his pastoral and pulpit labors, and every day 
he was gaining the confidence and affection of 
his people. They loved him with a devotion 
which is seldom felt towards a pastor, and their 
love was most cordially reciprocated. In the 
ties that united them, there was far more than 



OE-DINATION AND SETTLEMENT. 209 

usual tenderness and strength. It was the 
constant desire of the pastor to feed his people 
with the bread of life ; to lead them into green 
pastures, and recline with them beside the 
still waters of salvation. He felt a deep per- 
sonal interest in every member of the flock. 
The sick he was ready to visit, and for the 
afflicted he had a heart full of sympathy. He 
rejoiced with those that rejoiced, and wept with 
those that wept. 

From several letters that he addressed to 
the bereaved, I select the following to a young 
father who had lost a child ; it shows the ten- 
derness and warmth of his heart. 

"Newburyport, March 27, 1850. 

" My dear Friend — Most deeply have I sym- 
pathized with you in your recent severe afflic- 
tion. I have shed no public tears, but in the 
silence of my own retirement have I mourned 
over your loss, and prayed that you might be 
supported. This is the first cup of sorrow 
which you have been called to drink. This is 
the .first practical lesson you have learned in 
regard to earth's sorrows. The tender bud 
which God had put into your hands has with- 

Emerson. 1 4 



210 REV. JOHN E. EJIERSON. 

ered away. You were looking with an interest 
which none but a parent can feel, for it to open 
its little leaves and delight you wuth its fra- 
grance. But ' the Lord gave, and the Lord 
hath taken away/ 

^'And now it only remains that we who 
have professed ourselves friends in the time of 
your joy and sunshine, should prove the sin- 
cerity of our friendship hy our sympathy in 
the time of your darkness and aflliction; and 
that you should give us an example of Christian 
submission, in accordance with the principles 
of the holy religion which you have professed. 

" How willingly w^ould the friends who stood 
about your lovely dying infant, have made any 
sacrifice to snatch the child from death. But 
0, how powerless Ave find ourselves to be in 
such an hour. Agonized as our hearts w^ere 
to hear his groans and witness his sufTerings, 
not one of us all, nor all of us united, had the 
ability to lessen one pang or repress one groan : 
I felt then as I feel now, How great is God ; 
how less than nothing, in comparison with him, 
is the creature man. 

" I feel smitten, my dear friend, as well as 



ORDINATION AND SETTLEMENT. 211 

yourself; for I loved the infant not only on 
account of my high regard for the parents, hut 
because I considered him a boy of uncommon 
promise, and I Avas watching with great interest 
for his development of mind and body. But 
he is s^one. That little coffin-lid has closed 
upon the fondest expectations and the most 
cherished hopes. The beautiful and smiling 
countenance has bestowed its last smile of 
recognition upon the father that idolized the 
child, and upon the mother that doted upon it. 
No more kisses shall fall from those lips, and 
the arms of the cherub which once folded so 
lovingly about the neck of its parents, are rest- 
hig for ever on its own motionless bosom. 0, 
how unsparing is death ; how cruel is the 
grave ! 

" But blessed be God for the lively hopes 
that triumph over this sorrow, death, and cor- 
ruption. Blessed be He who has brought to 
light eternal life. By his death and resurrec- 
tion, you have the assurance that while the 
mortal body of your lovely child sleeps in yon- 
der graveyard, his little redeemed immortal 
spirit lives in everlasting glory. ' Of such is 



212 REV. JOHN E. EJIERSON. 

the kingdom of heaven.' Many years may roll 
over yonr head, and you may be called to lay 
away other loved friends in the tomb ; your 
own time to depart may be late in life ; but if 
faithful unto death, you shall see your infant 
boy again. Who knows but that as you step 
behind the veil which separates things tem- 
poral from things eternal, the angelic voice of 
your first-born may give you the welcome to 
eternal bliss? 

" I trust I have said nothing, my dear riend, 
to harrow up your feelings; I desire to com- 
raend you and your beloved partner to God. 
Let us all give heed to what God is saying to 
us in this time of his rebuke. Let us be better 
for jiaving been afflicted. Let us have our 
conversation in heaven more than ever before. 
Let us, as ' strangers and pilgrims,' live by 
faith on the Son of God ; and may we have 
part, at last, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, 
in the kingdom of heaven, and join in praising 
our Redeemer with the ' millions of infant souls' 
that ' compose the family above.' Such is the 

prayer of your sincere and constant friend, 

"J. E. E." 



ORDINATION AND SETTLEMENT. 213 

In the spiritual progress of the church, the 
pastor felt a strong interest. He labored and 
prayed that every member might be entirely 
consecrated to God ; and he had the happiness 
of feeling that he was surrounded by those 
who would cooperate with him in all his plans 
for doing good. 

But he was specially anxious for the con- 
version of the impenitent. Their condition 
weighed as a heavy burden upon his spirit. 
Nor was it long before he received indications 
of the divine favor. The same heavenly Dove 
that hovered over him in childhood, while in 
college, and in the seminary, continued to abide 
with him in his new held of labor. The same 
bright cloud guided him by day, the same pil- 
lar of fire by night. He seemed to carry about 
with him a revival of religion in his heart. 
His warm and ardent piety impressed all with 
wdiom he came in contact ; streams of religious 
influence flowed forth from his conversation, 
his prayers, his remarks in the social prayer- 
meeting, and his preaching. Even before his 
ordination, there were evidences of the presence 
of the Holy Spirit in his congregation. At 



214 REV. JOHN E. EMEHSOK. 

first a few were found to be under conviction 
of sin, and soon many were anxiously inquir- 
ing what tlicy must do to be saved. Mr. Em- 
erson soon discovered the interest which was 
awakened, and appointed meetings for rehgious 
conversation. Several persons who attended 
these meetings, have kindly given expression 
to their impressions of the revival, and of the 
scenes in which their pastor's fidelity and zeal 
were strikingly conspicuous. 

One writes, " Never shall I forget the kind, 
the tender, the encouraging words which fell 
from our pastor's lips, while attending the 
meetings for inquiry. It seemed as if he 
wished to take each and every one of those 
precious souls, and lead them at once to that 
Saviour whom they sought. At the first meet- 
ing, as w^ell as those that followed, the Spirit's 
influence was manifested in a w^onderful man- 
ner. It appeared as though G-od had touched 
his servant's lips with a coal from off his altar ; 
so touching were his appeals, so applicable 
his remarks to each individual present, so much 
interest manifested in the eternal welfare of 
others. None but those present at those sea- 



ORDINATION AND SETTLEMENT. 215 

sons can fully realize his worth. After con- 
versing with each person by remarks suited to 
their situation, encouraging those that were 
hoping yet trembling, and urging the inquirer to 
decide immediately for Christ, he would make 
a few general remarks, and then offer fervent 
prayer, committing them each to Grod. His 
efforts were blessed, by the aid of the Holy 
Spirit, to the conversion of many souls, whom, 
we trust, he will welcome to that heavenly 
world to which he has gone. 

" Ever anxious to do good, he appointed 
meetings for the study of Bunyan's Pilgrim's 
Progress, which were very interesting and in- 
structive. But he w^as soon deprived of the 
pleasure of attending these meetings, as the 
strong hand of disease was laid heavily upon 
him, and he was obliged, though very reluc- 
tantly, to relinquish them." 

Another writes, " During the revival of 1850, 
I attended the inquiry-meetings held by Rev. 
Mr. Emerson, and I always found them inter- 
esting and profitable. He seemed to forget 
hims3ir in the solicitude he felt for others, lest 
some might quench the Holy Spirit. While 



216 REV. JOHN E. EMERSOK. 

he strove to impress upon the mind of the sin- 
ner the truth that he had a part to act in the 
salvation of his soul, yet he never for a mo- 
ment gave him reason to think that his own 
good works would save him, but ever ascribed 
all to the sovereign grace of God. In his con- 
versation with the inquirer, he made the path 
of duty so plain that no one could mistake the 
way. With him, Christ was all and in all. It 
was, he said, simply ' Believe on the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and thou shalt be saved.' I think that 
all that attended those meetings can testify to 
his faithfulness. For some time after the inquir- 
ers had indulged a hope, he had weekly meet- 
ings for the purpose of conversing with them ; 
and he would advise, encourage, and warn them 
in a most affectionate manner, ever urging 
them to be active and consistent Christians." 

Another says, " Such appeals, such melting 
invitations as fell from his lips at that time, 
cannot be described. He was truly baptized 
wdth the Holy Ghost, and every one who be- 
held his beaming countenance, and heard the 
heavenly words he uttered, took knowledge of 
him that ' he had been with Jesus.' " 



ORDINATION AND SETTLEilENT. 217 

Another, who a few months previous came 
to Newbnryport a stranger, who had been 
awakened by his ministry, and soon after his 
death pubUcly professed faith in Christ, says, 
" I called to see him two days before he ex- 
pired, but he was so feeble and low that I was 
told that I could not see him. I went away 
deeply grieved with the thought that probably I 
should never see him again, and that he would 
never talk with me. The next day a message 
came to me, that if I would go directly down to 
the house, I could see him. I hastened down ; 
and on entering the room he recognized me, took 
me very affectionately by the hand, and said 
he was glad to see me. Being told that if he 
did not feel stronsf enousrh he had better not 
converse with me, he roused up and addressed 
me as one who had risen from the grave — his 
countenance, manner, and voice were so full 
of earnestness and deep heavenly feelings. He 
expressed regret that he had not seen and 
talked with me before ; said he had felt a 
strong interest in my spiritual welfare, and had 
desired to tell me about the glorious rel igion of 
Jesus Christ. ' 0, sir,' said he, ' this is a 



218 r.EV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

solemn and honest hour to me — at this hour 
men will deal honestly with themselves. Will 
yon not, my young friend, take Christ as your 
portion ? Will you not give your heart to 
God ? He will more than make up to you 
the loss of your dear parents. He has promised 
to be 'a Father to the fatherless,' and he will 
guide you safe through life, and give you at 
last a home in heaven, if you will but put your 
trust in him.' He then entreated me in the 
most earnest and persuasive manner to em- 
brace Christ, and to serve him faithfully. I as- 
sured him that I would try to do so. ' Oh,' said 
he, ' pray, pray, pray much. Pray to God, and 
he will hear you. ' Seek him while he may be 
found." I gave him my word that I would. 
He again took my hand, and I looked for the 
last time upon his heavenly countenance." 

So strong was his desire for the salvation of 
souls, and so deeply and fully did he enter into 
the revival, that he was often deprived of sleep. 
Yet, though exhausted and w^asted by disease, 
he did not relax his efforts. His increased 
paleness seemed to give increased force to his 



ORDINATIOX AND SETTLEMENT. 219 

\Yords, while his faihng strength led him to 
give himself to the work of his Master with 
redoubled energy. Among those who attended 
the inquiry-meetings, were several interesting 
and promising young men, who became hope- 
fally converted. 

So great was the work, that Mr. Emerson 
was obliged to call upon his Christian brethren 
for assistance, and they can all bear testimony 
to his faithfulness. Some were astonished at 
his skill and wisdom in meetins^ the several 
cases that were brought before him. So in- 
tense was the feeling at times, that many 
present were bathed in tears ; and though the 
weather was often inclement, yet it neither 
lessened the number present, nor the interest 
of the meetings. As the result of the revival, 
twenty-nine persons became hopefully con- 
verted, and made a public profession of their 
faith in Christ. 

On one Sabbath, Mr. Emerson preached from 
the text, " Escape for thy life, look not behind 
thee." The sermon was blessed to the awnk- 
ening of six persons in the congregation. He 
preached the same discourse in another pulpit, 



220 HEV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

and under its influence several others were 
induced to make their escape to the mount of 
re fa 2^0. 

Another states that his manner Avas so win- 
ning, and his words so full of tenderness and 
love, that even strangers were very soon af- 
fected by them. Sometimes he would rise to 
speak when the hearts of those around him 
were almost crushed under the weight of sin 
and guilt ; and before he had closed, his sooth- 
ing words would seem to calm their agitation 
and remove their burdens. At other times he 
would rise when all was cold and no apparent 
interest was felt, and before he had concluded 
many would be ready to exclaim, " What must 
I do to be saved ?" 

On one occasion when the terrors of the law 
had been forcibly exhibited by another, and 
the hearts of many were filled with pain and 
deep anxiety, he rose, and in an attitude and 
with an expression of countenance that indi- 
cated strong feeling, he exclaimed, " Shiloh 
has come ; yes, Shiloh has come, and he is 
read}/ to accept any who will go to him. Oh, 
sinner, flee for protection into his arms. Flee 



ORDINATION AND SETTLEMENT. 221 

now ; for now is the accepted time. ' Be wise 
to-day, 'tis madness to defer.'" 

As Mr. Emerson saw the work advancing, he 
rejoiced greatly. His most ardent desires were 
now gratified, and though his strength was 
wasting away, his joy was every day increasing. 

Besides his interest in inquirers and young- 
converts, he felt very solicitous for the pros- 
perity of the Sahhath-school. This he regarded 
as the nursury of the church ; and he delighted 
to converse with the scholars, and encourage 
their teachers. One day he remarked to a 
friend, " The Sabbath-school is like a beauti- 
ful garden, in which I can walk and be re- 
freshed after the labors of the day." 

The communion-seasons with his beloved 
people he enjoyed very highly. He anticipated 
them with great interest, and endeavored to 
prepare his own heart and the hearts of his 
church for the solemn meeting with the Sav- 
iour at his own table. He refers to these 
seasons in his journal, in which, however, his 
engagements and ill health allowed him to 
make but few entries. The following are 
among the last that he made : 



222 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

'' Septeisiber 27. One more anniversary 
has dawned upon me. I am twenty-seven 
years old to-day. I cannot say, as in former 
years, that I have enjoyed uninterrupted health 
during the year, for much of the time I have 
been sick. I find that the seeds of mortahty 
are as thickly sown in me as in others. I 
know not but God may have appointed an 
early death for me ; but I rejoice that my 
times are in his hand, and that the number of 
my days is with him. During the year he has 
been pleased to make me a minister of the 
everlasting gospel, and to bless me with an 
interesting revival of religion among my church 
and people. Praised be his name for these 
things. 0, for grace to live this year near to 
God. 

" December 1. Administered the commun- 
ion to my beloved church for the sixth time. 
It is just seventeen years since I trust I found 
peace in believing. 

" December 31. Finished the reading of 
the Bible, which I commenced September 27, 
1848. To the best of my knowledge, I have 
read it every word aloudP 



OTLDIKATION AND SETTLEMENT. 223 

On the first Sabbath in January, 1851, Mr. 
Emerson felt a very strong desire to preach to 
his people ; but the state of his health would 
not permit it. He therefore made to them the 
following remarks : 

"It is well known to most of you, ray hear- 
ers, that the anniversary of our organization 
as a church, and of my own ordination, oc- 
curred on the first day of the present year. 
One year ago to-day, I preached to you my 
first sermons as a settled pastor. I then looked 
forward with fond anticipations to the recur- 
rence of this anniversary, as a day when we 
should together recount the joys and sorrows 
of the past, and look forward hopefully to the 
future. But to my great sorrow of heart, I 
find myself baffled in the first attempt. It 
would have been extremely gratifying to my 
own feelings, had I been able to preach to-day. 
I had even selected my text, and formed the 
plan of a sermon, but I found myself unequal 
to the task of its execution. A few facts, which 
I thought might be of interest to you, and which 
I had intended to embody in a discourse, I have 
noted down. 



224 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

*' Up to the first of June I was able to min- 
ister regularly on the Sabbath. Since that 
time my public services have been in a great 
measure suspended. But I have endeavored 
to do what I could during the week. I find, 
on reference to my record, that I have made, 
during the year, four hundred and thirty-five 
pastoral calls. I have probably received as 
many again, so that during the year I have 
attended to more than twelve hundred calls on 
matters pertaining to the great duties for which 
you called me to labor among you. The church 
which one year ago to-day numbered twenty 
individuals, now numbers eighty-nine. The 
congregation which at the beginning of the 
year was fluctuating and uncertain, has now 
become fixed in its character ; and so far as I 
can judge, we have an afternoon attendance 
generally of from four hundred and fifty to five 
hundred persons. On every Sabbath of the 
year the doors of this house have been thrown 
open, and the word of life dispensed. There 
have been one hundred and fourteen sermons 
preached here the past year. 

" For myself I can truly say, that notwith- 



ORDINATION ANI> SETTLEMENT. 225 

standing my affliction, the past has been one 
of the happiest years of my Hfe. The lines have 
fallen unto me in pleasant places, and I have 
a goodjy heritage. The increasing affection of 
a beloved people to their pastor, their untiring 
spirit of kindness, their many words of encour- 
age mxcnt, their almost innumerable gifts, de- 
mand of me this pubho return of my warm 
and most heartfelt thanks. From the little 
girl who begged of her mother that she might 
have something to send to her minister, up to 
those ladies who furnished the warm winter 
garments — to each and to all, I present a pas- 
tor's warmest thanks. Nor do I count these 
alone gifts. For every pressure of the hand of 
friendship, for every tender inquiry after my 
health, for every prayer offered in my behalf, I 
thank you all. Grod bless you, my dear people, 
and make this new year happy to you through 
all its course. When I shall be permitted to 
preach to you again, God only knows. May 
he in infinite mercy speed the day. 

" But of one thing be assured : whether 
the warm gales of the next summer blow on 
my invigorated frame and more healthy cheek, 

EmerBOn. 1 



226 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

or whether they wave the gi'ass over my new- 
made grave, be assured that the interests ol 
this church and people shall be ever near my 
heart. And while a breath or a pulse remains, 
will I seek her peace and prosperity. Be 
assured, that 

' For her my tears shall fall, 
For her my prayers ascend ; 
To her my cares and toils be given, 
Till toils and cares shall end.' " 

"When the speaker took his seat, apparently 
exhausted by this effort, the deepest emotion 
was manifested by the whole audience. His 
allusion to his own grave touched and melted 
every heart. All felt, that as this was his first, 
so it was, in all human probability, his last an- 
niversary with his people. They felt that the 
fair form now before them must soon moulder 
in the cold grave ; that the eye that beamed 
upon them with so much affection, must soon 
be closed ; that the lips that had told them of 
Jesus and of heaven, must soon be sealed in 
death. They thought of the long, long silence 
in the grave of that voice, the sweet tones of 
which were now so clear and distinct. The 



OHDINATION AND SETTLEMENT. 227 

remembrance, too, of their pastor's instructions, 
entreaties, appeals, faithful, untiring lahors, 
and the crowd of interesting associations that 
rushed into the mind, overpowered the assem- 
bly. There were hearts there whose emotions 
language cannot describe — hearts from which 
the impressions of that hour will never, never 
fade away. 

Mr. Emerson continued, although so feeble, 
to attend public worship, and occasionally he 
read a hymn or offered a short prayer. He 
w^as anxious to devote his little remaining 
strength to G-od. It was my privilege to spend 
a Sabbath with him about this time, and in all 
the exercises of the day, and in every thing 
pertaining to the congregation, he took the live- 
liest interest. In the afternoon the impenitent 
were particularly addressed ; and on his way 
home he expressed a very earnest desire that the 
discourse misjht be blessed to their salvation. 

About the middle of January he said to a 
friend, " I feel that a crisis in my case is near 
at hand. I have a desire that the church 
should hold a day of fasting and prayer on 
account of my health. I w^ant to try the power 



228 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

of prayer, and shall not feel that every means 
has been used till this is tried. It has been a 
great struggle to my mind to give up preach- 
ing. When I think that five hundred precious 
souls are expecting to hear the gospel from my, 
lips, that a dear church is looking up to me for 
counsel, I feel that it requires more prayer yet 
to bring my mind to a right state." 

At another time he said, " I begin to feel 
willing to leave the matter with Grod, though 
my prayer daily is, ' Lord, spare me yet a little 
longer, that I may preach Christ again to my 
dear people.' I have felt a greater desire than 
ever, since my illness, to preach Christ once 
more." 

The day of fasting and prayer was appoint- 
ed ; and when it arrived, Mr. Emerson made 
the following entry, which is the last in his 
journal : 

" January 29, 1851. This day has been 
set apart by the members of my church, as a 
day of fasting and prayer for the recovery of 
their pastor's health. I have not preached for 
eleven Sabbaths, on account of ill health ; and 
indeed have preached but very little since last 



ORDINATION AND SETTLEMENT. 229 

June. God lias laid his hand heavily upon 
me. I am troubled with cough, loss of strength 
and appetite, etc. What Grod is intending to 
do with me I know not, hut I think I desire 
to lie passive in his hands, and know no will 
hut his. If I am to ho raised up, the blessing 
of Grod alone can do it. that G-od would 
help my church to offer up this day the prayer 
of faith which ' shall save the sick.' " 

On this occasion he addressed to the members 
of his church the following communication : 

" Dear Christian Friends — I have been 
looking forward to this day with the deepest 
anxiety and interest. For many months, as 
you well know, God has laid the hand of afflic- 
tion upon me. I have been deprived of the 
pleasure of performing the more active duties 
of the ministry among you. My strength also 
has failed me, and ' I am like a broken vessel.' 
In all these difflculties you, my dear people, 
have deeply sympathized, and have felt your- 
selves afflicted also. 

'* Could your kindness and s}^mpathy have 
restored me, I should now have health and 
vigor. But the hand of God yet presses heav- 



230 REY. JOHN E. EMEE.SON. 

ily upon me, and from him alone deliverance 
must be sought. While I am aware that for a 
long time much prayer has been offered up in 
my behalf, both in public and in private, I have 
still felt strongly desirous that a day should be 
appointed, when the prayers of this church 
should go up unitedly to the throne of grace. 
My heart was deeply moved at the favorable 
reception with which my proposal met. I have 
again and again entreated the Lord to be with 
you on this day, and give you the spirit of fer- 
vent, prevailing prayer. 

" It would be impossible for me to go over 
the instances recorded in the Bible, of the an- 
swers given to fervent prayer. Read, if you 
please, at your meetings to-day, the thirty- 
eighth chapter of Isaiah. Why may we not 
expect a like answer, if we offer up the prayer 
of faith? Remember too, my dear friends, that 
we have committed ourselves before the world. 
Many listened when notice was given that you 
were going to try the power of prayer in behalf 
of a sick pastor. Will you not entreat the Most 
High to convince them that he does hear and 
answer prayer? 



ORDINATION AND SETTLEMENT. 231 

" But I do not ask you to pray uncondition- 
ally for my life. I desire to live longer only if it 
is Grod's will. If I am spared, pray for me that 
I may be more useful, may set a holier ex- 
ample, may be a better Christian and a better 
minister. If, after all our prayers and efforts, 
Grod should indicate his design of taking me 
away from earth, pray for me that I may have 
heartfelt resignation to the divine will, a well- 
grounded hope, the clear assurance of faith, an 
easy departure, and that I may be able, on a 
dying bed, to testify to the power of our holy 
religion. 

'^ My prayers will mingle with yours to-day, 
brethren and friends ; this day will not soon 
be forgotten ; its results take hold on eternity. 
that God would manifest himself to us to- 
day, as he has never done before. 

" While I live, you and your interests will 
be ever near my heart. AVith my earnest prayer 
for God's blessing upon you, I remain, 
" Your sincere friend, 

"And affectionate pastor, 

"JOHN E. EMERSON." 

This was indeed a solemn day to this afflicted 



232 REV. JOHN E. Ei[ERSON. 

people. They listened to this short address 
from their pastor with flowing tears, and fer- 
vent were their supplications that he might be 
spared to them. Yet they could not but feel 
that the time w^as not far distant when they 
must separate. The evidences of disease were 
too apparent to leave now any room for hope. 

Towards the latter part of February, Mr. 
Emerson felt almost too feeble to attend public 
worship. The last Sabbath that he was out 
was March 2. The Saturday previous, feeling 
very weak, he prayed earnestly that God would 
give him strength to attend upon the exercises 
of the sanctuary. On Sabbath morning he 
asked his mother to pray for him. They had 
an affecting season together, and he walked to 
church, leaning, as it w^ere, on the arm of his 
blessed Saviour. In attempting to offer prayer, 
his voice faltered, his strength failed, and he 
sunk back into his chair. His prayer remained 
before his audience like a beautiful, yet broken 
column — a column which, though abruptly 
sundered, yet pointed towards heaven. On 
returning home, he threw himself upon the sofa 
and burst into tears. He felt that his last 



ORDINATION AND SETTLEMENT. 233 

public service had been performed. The "sil- 
ver cord" was now loosened; the ''golden 
bowl" was broken. He remarked to his par- 
ents that he had looked upon his beloved flock 
for the last time, and had bade them farewell. 
In alluding to his prayer he said, " 0, those dear 
young men, I did long to make one more effort 
to do them good. I did want to offer one more 
public petition in their behalf." 



234 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 



CHAPTER YIT. 

THE CLOSING SCENES OF HIS LIFE. 

Mr. Emerson was now obliged to spend 
much of his time at home, and friends who 
were with him have kindly furnished the fol- 
lowing facts and incidents connected with the 
closinsf scenes of his life. 

*' About three weeks before he took his cham- 
ber, at his request a few friends spent the 
evening alone with him in his study. He 
spoke freely of his views in regard to his sick- 
ness — that he trusted he was resigned to the will 
of Grod, though he had a strong desire to live, 
that he might preach the gospel. ' I have been 
to G-od again and again with the petition, that 
if this desire was wrong he would take it away.' 
He asked if a strong desire to live was incon- 
sistent with true submission. 

" During the conversation he remarked, 
' When I awake in the night I ask myself, 
Am I ready to go now, if God should call ? I 
think I am. I feel that I have cast myself 



CLOSINa SCENES. 235 

upon Christ, and trust in him alone for salva- 
tion ; and what more can a poor sinner do ? I 
wish to he stripped of every thing else, and he 
wrapped all around with the rohe of Christ's 
righteousness. Could I he permitted to preach 
again, I would preach Christ more, pray Christ 
more, sing Christ more. 0, how I long to 
take my sermons, and hreathe into them the 
spirit and feelings I now have.' 

"At another time he said, 'I have heen re- 
viewing my past life to-day, and I feel that I 
am a great sinner; hut I tell you what I am 
going to do. I am going to put all my sins in 
one hundle, and carry them to Jesus.' The 
next morning, on going into his room, he ex- 
claimed, ' I have done it ; I have carried all 
my sins to Christ, and he has forgiven and 
accepted me.' 

" On another occasion he remarked, ' I have 
heen reviewing God's dealings with me as it 
regards my illness; how wisely and gently he 
has dealt with me. Had I known, at the com- 
mencement of my illness, what was to he the 
result, I could not have home it. When it 
hecame evident that I must cease my active 



236 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

labors, I felt at first as if it could not be — I 
must preach. But Grod said, Stop. Then I 
felt 1 can visit my people, I can attend the 
meetings for conference and prayer. But Grod 
soon said to me. You must give up these. 
Still I could meet with my people on the Sab- 
bath, and occasionally read a hymn or offer 
prayer. But God has now said to me, You 
must give up this also; and he has enabled 
me to say, Not my will, but thine be done. I 
trust I am now willing to live or die, just as 
God pleases. He has been with me thus far, 
and I know he will be with me to the end; 
he will give me grace for the dying hour; I 
can trust him, for he is faithful.' 

" March 8, spent the afternoon with Mr. 
Emerson. Soon after my entering his room, 
he said, with much emotion, ' how many 
are my mercies ! I am pressed down and 
overwhelmed with them; what can I do to 
evince my gratitude ? What a mercy that I 
am here. What should I do, were I from 
home, and among strangers ? Can we doubt 
that the hand of God is in our church enter- 
prise? I do not think it was ambition that 



CLOSING- SCENES. 237 

induced me to settle here. I was willing to 
preach to a small number ; and it was with 
the desire and hope that I might be useful, that • 
I settled here.' The remark being made, that 
Grod had in a wonderful manner blessed his 
efforts, and that he had been permitted, during 
his short ministry, to see more of the fruits of 
his labors than some ministers have durinsj a 
long life ; and that it must be gratifying to 
know there are those who bless Grod that he 
has been instrumental in plucking them as 
brands from the burning; he replied, 'I bless 
Grod if he has made me in any degree useful. 
I needed this affliction, to show me that God 
did not need me as an instrument.' 

*' On another occasion he said, ' It seems 
evident now what the will of God is. I have 
given up my church and people. Satan some- 
times tells me my submission is forced ; but I 
do not believe it. I gave them up just as 
soon as I felt it was Grod's will that I should 
do so.' At another time he remarked, ' I have 
taken this dear church, and carried it and 
placed it in the hands of the great Head of the 
church, and I Imow he will take care of it.' 



238 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

" On another occasion, the conversation 
turned upon the joys of heaven. He remarked, 
' How strange that those who believe heaven 
such a dehghtful place, should be so reluctant 
to enter there. It is but little indeed that we 
can know of heaven. The Bible, in speaking 
of its joys, uses figures drawn from earthly 
things, golden streets, pearly gates, etc, ; but 
it is enough for me that we shall glorify God ; 
that to me is the bliss of heaven.' ' In my 
anticipations of heaven, it has always been a 
delightful thought that those friends in whose 
society I have spent so many happy hours 
here, will be with me there.' 

" At another time : ' I love to think of meet- 
ing friends in heaven, but I do not want them 
put first — the Saviour, the Saviour first. 0, 
it is a delightful thought, that perhaps I may 
be employed as a ministering spirit to those I 
loved. Who knows ? Who knows ? I am go- 
ing to heaven a little in advance, and there I 
shall meet and with open arms welcome my 
friends and the members of my church, as 
they one after another are admitted to the 
mansions of the blessed. God grant that not 



CLOSma SCENES. 239 

one of this little band shall be missing.' At 
another time, as one wiped his brow, he ex- 
claimed, ' (3rod, G-od himself shall wipe away 
all tears from their eyes.' 

" On one occasion, reference being made to 
his past life, and to the incidents connected 
with his early years, so unlike childhood in 
general, he instantly checked any further re- 
mark of the kind by saying, ' I place no reli- 
ance on any thing of this kind ; I have not a 
shadow of hope on that account ; my only hope 
is in the atoning sacrifice and righteousness of 
Christ.' A remark made by some who called 
to inquire after him, that they almost envied 
those who had the privilege of watching around 
his bed, being repeated in his hearing, he said 
with much emotion, ' Oh, I am sorry any one 
should make a remark like that ; I am nothing 
but a poor sinner.' 

" The next day he remarked, ' The doctrines 
that I have loved, and the gospel I have 
preached, are now my only support. The last 
sermon I wrote was from the text, ' Believe 
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be 
saved :' and I find that this is all that I can do. 



240 TIEV. JOHN E. EMEPx-SON. 

Simple faith in Christ is all tliat can sustain in 
an hour like this. I cast myself entirely on 
Christ. 0, how many times I have done this, 
this winter. I feel that I am a great sinner ; 
but the blood of Christ can cleanse us from 
all sin. These two passages have afforded me 
great consolation : ' Laid in Zion for a founda- 
tion,' and, ' Him that cometh unto me, I will 
in no wise cast out.' ' 

'' At another time, after some remarks upon 
the foundation of his hopes, he asked with 
great emphasis, ' If I have come to Christ, and 
cast myself upon him, what then ?' It was re- 
plied, ' AVhy, he has received you ; for he has 
declared, Him that cometh unto me, I will 
in no wise cast out.' ' Well, and what then ?' 
' He has promised, when he has begun a good 
work, he will carry it on to perfection.' ' And 
what then ?' ' He will be with you in life, go 
v^^ith you even through the valley of the shad- 
ow of death, and land you safe on Canaan's 
side.'- With increasing earnestness and energy 
he again repeated the question, ' And what 
then ?' It was replied, ' I can go no further ; 
for inspiration has declared, ' Eye hath not 



CLU^SING SCENES. 241 

seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into 
the heart of man, the things which God hath 
prepared for them that love him.' ' On his re- 
plying in the negative to the question, ' Do you 
suffer much pain ?' it was remarked, ' Your 
heavenly Father deals very gently with you.' 
He immediately replied, 'Yes; had I known 
all this last summer, I could not have endured 
it. But God has very gently and kindly bro- 
ken to me my situation.' " 

On Sabbath morning, March 9, he had two 
ill-turns, and was thought to be dying. He 
conversed, however, about death with great 
composure ; said, if it was God's will, he was 
ready to go now. '' I feel that I have given 
myself to Christ, and that he has accepted nle, 
and it makes but little difference wliich of us 
goes first. The separation will be short. We 
shall soon meet to part no more." 

" My people would not have invited me to 
become their minister, if they had supposed 
that in little more than a year I should receive 
another call, and one that I must accept. But 
God will provide for them a shepherd." 

Emerson. 1 6 



242 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

During the day, he conversed much on the 
subject of religion, and frequently offered 
prayer. He prayed for himself, that he might 
be prepared for the scenes that were before 
him; for his parents, that God would support 
them under their afflictions, and enable them 
to submit to his will ; for all his dear relatives 
and friends ; for the church of Christ, and for 
those who were living without hope and with- 
out God in the world. 

He saw that day three impenitent young 
men, members of his society, and conversed 
with them with great earnestness and faithful- 
ness. He entreated them to attend now to the 
matter of their souls' salvation. '' What should 
I now do," said he, " without an interest in 
Christ ? I beseech you to be prepared for such 
an hour as this ; for it surely will come." 

Through Monday and Tuesday he continued 
about in the same state, seeing a large num- 
ber of people, and conversing with them upon 
the interests of eternity. He was exceedingly 
appropriate in adapting his remarks to the dif- 
ferent cases that came before him. 

On Tuesday evening he was very much ex- 



CLOSINa SCENES. 243 

hausted from seeing so many persons, and ex- 
erting himself to do them good. There were 
fears that he would not revive ; but after a 
few hours he appeared more comfortable, al- 
though he was much weaker than before. 
During the night he rested but little, and con- 
versed on heavenly things. 

The next day he asked for one of his ser- 
mons that he had recently preached. On look- 
ing at it he remarked, " I will rest at this hour 
upon what is therein written. I have endeav- 
ored to preach the simple truths of the gospel, 
and upon these I now rely for hope and com- 
fort." 

The conversation turned upon the covenant 
of redemption, and he discoursed upon it with 
much animation and interest. He remarked 
that he desired to hold Christ forth, and to put 
himself in the background — that Christ was 
all in all, and himself but a worm in the 
dust. 

Frequently, in the course of his sickness, he 
would exclaim, " I long to glorify G-od." At 
times he would cry out in an impassioned 
manner, and with his soul glowing with un- 



244 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

speakaWe rapture, ''0, to glorify God! 0, to 
glorify G-od!" 

One day his mother said to him, that it 
'must afford him great consolation to have been 
the instrument of establishing the Whitefield 
church, and to think that his^ name would be 
handed down to posterity as its first pastor. 

'^ My name^'' said he, raising himself in his 
bed, and with a countenance beaming with 
animation, 

" ' My name is printed on His breast, 

His book of life contains my name ; 
I 'd rather have it there impressed, 
' Than in the bright records of fame. 

' When the last fire bm-ns all things here, 

Those letters shall securely stand ; 
And in the Lamb's fair book appear, 
Writ by th' eternal Father's hand.' " 

At another time, when he was speaking of 
death, he was asked if he had any fears. He 
replied, " No, not exactly fears, but 

' The pains, the groans, the dying strife, 
Fright our approaching souls away.' " 

.Then, after a moment's pause, he added, 

" While He affords his aid, 
I '11 never yield to fear; 
Though I should walk through death's dark shade, 
My Shepherd 's with me there." 



CLOSiJs^a SCENES. 245 

These lines were very precious to him, and 
he often repeated them. Sometimes he seemed 
to be longing to go, and would say, '• I hope I 
shall not be impatient, but be willing to wait. 
God's time is the best time. 

'Oh, if my Lord would come and meet, 
My soul would stretch her wings in haste, 
Fly fearless through death's iron gate, 
Nor feel the terrors as she passed.' " 

He had some darkness and temptations, and 
was sometimes afraid that his submission was 
forced. He would say, "I kept up as long as 
I could ; was that wrong ? Yet I desire to be 
swallowed up in the divine w411. I roll myself 
on God ; I leave all v/ith him ; I am a poor 
lost sinner, and God has this last winter made 
me feel it. 0, what should I do without a 
Saviour ? This is an honest hour ; I have tried 
to do something for Christ ; I love my church 
and people, but God has made me willing to 
give them up." 

About a week before his death he had a 
severe conflict with the adversary, and the 
Saviour hid his face from him. It was in the 
night. He had been lying still for some time 



246 HEV. JOHN E. EMERSON, 

with his eyes closed, when he turned his face 
towards his watcher and said, " I am in great 
trouble ; I fear I have not heen sincere ; I have 
not lived to the glory of Grod." Thinking he 
had been dreaming and was not quite awake, 
he was requested to look around the room, and 
was asked, "Do you know where you are?" 
After a moment's pause, he said, with great 
emphasis, "Oh, I am out of hell. What a 
great sinner I am!" The bed shook with his 
agitation. It was said to him, "Jesus died to 
save sinners, and his blood cleanseth from all 
sin. Turn the eye of your faith to Christ." 
His favorite passage was repeated : " Him that 
Cometh unto me I will in no wise cast out." 
He remarked, " I fear that I have not been 
sincere in my preaching, nor in my prayers. 
I have preached myself, and not Christ, and 
now I am going to die. "What shall I do? 0, 
what shall I do?" Many promises from the 
word of God were repeated to him, but he 
could not take hold of them. He was told 
that this was a temptation from Satan ; that 
Grod was permitting it for the trial of his faith ; 
perhaps to see if he could trust his Saviour in 



CLOSINa SCENES. 247 

the dark. " But lie seemed to refuse all conso- 
lation. He suddenly broke out in prayer, and 
such confessions of sin, such loathing of self, 
and prostration of soul before Grod, and such a 
resting of all on the Lord Jesus Christ, few- 
have ever v^itnessed. He was reminded of his 
early impressions, when he suffered ridicule 
for his religion. He replied, '' I think I was 
sincere then, but I have not lived for the glory 
of God." Hi^ soul refused to be comforted. 

It was said to him, " One thing you can do." 
"With great earnestness he asked, " "What is 
it?" ""Why, you can let all that is past go, 
and begin now for the first time." This seemed 
to give him new light. He was reminded of 
the mercy of the Saviour to the thief on the 
cross. " I am going to begin anew," he said; 
''yes, I will leave all, and throw myself on 
Christ." 

He tried to pray, but he was so exhausted 
that he could say but a few words. . With a 
most imploring look, he said, ''Do pray." It 
was a solemn moment. He and his friends 
tried to make a new consecration of them- 
selves to God. He seemed a little more calm, 



248 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

and said, "What ^YOL^ld my people think if 
they were here ? I have been urging them 
to trust in Christ, and now their minister 
cannot trust him." Bunyan's Pilgrim was 
referred to, when he got into Doubting castle, 
and lay there for some time ; but the key of 
promise opened every door, even the iron gate. 
He replied, "0, how good that is." Many 
promises were repeated, and he seemed to be 
meditating upon them. His attendant gave 
him something to take, and tried to persuade 
him to go to sleep and get a little rest. He 
lay still some time, and then looked up, and 
with a placid countenance said, " I can trust 
Him now ; I think that he has received me ; I 
roll myself upon him." The remainder of the 
night he was calm. The Saviour had lifted 
the light of his countenance upon him, and he 
was filled with peace and joy. He repeated 
the words, 

" In spite of all my foes, 

Thou dost my table spread j 
My cup with blessings overflows, 
And joy exalts my head." 

His friend retired to rest about four o'clock 



CLOSINa SCENES. 249 

in the morning. After resting a few hours, 
she went into his chamber. He turned his 
eyes towards the door, and as soon as he saw 
her, he said, with a sweet smile, " Peace, peace, 
sweet peace!" " I think," says she, " I never 
saw his countenance, through his sickness, 
beam with so much glory as on that morning. 
I could think of nothing but his face, like unto 
the face of an angel. He appeared to be swal- 
lowed up in God; heavenly things filled his 
soul. He said that he felt the glow of heaven 
through his whole system. It needs more than 
a human tongue to describe his appearance. 
In the course of the day he alluded to the 
temptation of the night before, and said, ' I am 
glad mother was not here. Say nothing about 
it to her, because it will distress her.' " 

He conversed on the doctrine of the Trinity, 
and spoke much of Grod's covenant; wished 
that those around would give him their views 
of the covenant of grace ; and then he ex- 
pressed his own thoughts upon it. He spoke 
of the wonderful love of God in the covenant 
of redemption, and desired to examine anew 
these great subjects. 



250 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

The next day he remarked that he should 
like to have a few friends cluster around his 
bed, and talk about heaven. Mr. and Mrs. 
Morse, who were below stairs, were called up. 
After they came in, he said, " Here is dear 
father, and mother, and cousin, and friends, 
looking so happy. I thought I should like to 
talk about heaven. 0, what pure worship 
there is in the upper sanctuary. There they 
serve G-od without sin." He conversed as 
long as he had strength ; then the hymn was 
read, 

"Thine earthly Sabbaths, Lord, we love " 

He entered into it fully, and seemed to have 
caught the spirit of the heavenly world. 

One lady who w'atched with him one night, 
said that she would not have missed of the 
privilege on any account. His conversation 
and prayers were a rich treat to her soul, and 
she felt strengthened, elevated, and blest by 
the interview. 

One afternoon a friend was sitting near him 
and heard him say, very faintly, "I want to 
go home ;" she replied, '' You are at home now." 
He then said, "I am sick." ''Yes," she re- 



CLOSING- SCENES. 251 

plied, "you are sick here in your own room, 
among your own friends." He looked up, and 
in the words of Scripture said, "And the inhah- 
itant shall not say, I am sick." 

On Saturday, March 15, he was attacked 
with severe spasms. On recovering, as soon 
as the power of utterance was restored, he 
said, with great emphasis, "On the Rock, on 
the Rock ; peace, peace like a river." On ad- 
dressing his mother with the question, "Are you 
supported ?" and receiving an affirmative reply, 
he said, "Christ is my support;" repeating, 
with energy, 

" The soul that on Jesus has leaned for repose, 
He will not, he cannot desert to his foes ; 
That soul, though all hell should endeavor to shake, 
He'll never, no never, no never forsake." 

Adding, "He has loved me, he has saved me, 
he has carried me almost through." After a 
few moments he repeated the lines, 

" Jesus, to thy dear faithful hand 
My naked soul I trust, 
And my flesh waits for thy command 
To drop into the dust." 

After resting a few moments, he commenced 
the hymn, 

" Why should wo start and fear to die ?" 



252 REV. JOHN E. EilERSON. 

repeating the whole with remarkable distinct- 
ness and emphasis. At the close of the verse, 

"Jesus can make a dying bed 
Feel soft as downy pillows are," 

he raised his eyes to heaven, and with an ex- 
pression almost heavenly added, " Yes, yes, 
yes." The remark being made by one who 
loved him with almost parental affection, 
'' Dear pastor, our hearts bleed, but not for 
you — you are a happy man;" he replied, "It 
is God who has done it ; it is God, it is God 
who has placed me here." 

Sabbath morning, March 16, after lying 
for some time apparently too feeble to con- 
verse, he suddenly engaged in earnest suppli- 
cation. He first alluded to its being the Sab- 
bath; then prayed most fervently for those 
assembled for public worship — for those who 
proclaimed the messages of salvation ; then for 
the church, that they might be quickened in 
duty — for the impenitent, that God would 
make bare his arm for their salvation ; and 
finally for himself, that the Saviour would still 
be near — that underneath him might be laid 
the everlasting arms — and that, if it was God's 



CLUSINa SCENES. 253 

will, lie might have a quiet and easy dismis- 
sal. At the close of these petitions, which 
were offered in a whisper, he seemed suddenly 
to he indued with new strength. He hegan 
to converse, and continued with little inter- 
mission for more than two hours. 

He first remarked, "It is the Sahbath. 
What a blessed Sabbath they spend in the 
sanctuary above, where they v/orship without 
sin." It was asked, " Vfould you like to join 
them?" He replied, '^ yes, I long to wor- 
ship Grod without sin ; I would glorify God. I 
do believe I have desired heaven, that I might 
glorify Grod." Again he remarked, " G-od 
gives me strength to speak a few words more 
to some of my people. Let us cluster around 
here, and spend the day in praise. I want to 
praise him, I v/ill praise him ; ' Bless the Lord, 
my soul.' " On his mother's coming into 
the room, he requested her to take a seat near 
him ; and affectionately taking her hand and 
kissing it, said, '' Precious, precious mother ; 
have we not had sweet communion together? 
Oh, I love to think of those hours of prayer. I 
am glad we have had them" — referring to 



254 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

ihe season of devotion they had from his child- 
hood enjoyed on Sahbath noon. He then, with 
a power and pathos which language in vain 
attempts to portray, went over some incidents 
connected with his Christian experience. 

" At ten years of age, I trust I gave my heart 
to the Lord ; and at twelve, openly professed 
my faith in him. If ever I enjoyed communion 
with God, it was during these first two years 
of my Christian life. I well remember, that 
during my school-hours I used to look for- 
ward with great delight to those seasons of 
devotion, which I always observed three times 
a day. Ever since then I have endeavored, 
though in a poor and feeble way, to serve the 
Lord. When I wandered, I seemed to see the 
Father and Son in consultation, and heard 
them say, ' This our child has wandered ; we 
must bring him back, if it is by chastisement ; 
but the stripes shall be few, we will lay the 
rod very gently upon him ;' and Oh, how 
gently it was. I did hope G-od would spare 
me to labor longer in his vineyard, that I 
might glorify him in being the instrument of 
saving souls. But he has ordered it otherwise, 



CLOSING SCENES. 255 

and his will he done. I trust I shall glorify 
him in heaven. There has been a great deal 
of speculation about heaven and its joys, but 
I think we can know but little about it ; 
it is enough for me that I shall glorify Grod 
there." 

Shortly after he expressed a wish to con- 
verse further with two young men, companions 
of his childhood, who had called on the evening 
previous. One of them had come from a dis- 
tance, that he might see his friend once more. 
He took them both affectionately by the hand, 
expressed the deep interest he felt in their wel- 
fare, and urged them, by the love they bore 
him, and by the most weighty considerations 
drawn from the solemnities of a dying hour, to 
attend immediately to the concerns of their 
souls. On the remark being made by one of 
these young friends, that " he had come from 
Providence, with the hope that this scene 
might be blest to him;" he replied, "I am 
glad to hear you say that. I wish you could 
say, you had resolved to begin now to serve 
God." He expressed many thanks for their 
tokens of affection ; said he had ever loved 



266 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

them, and longed for their salvation. "Bat," 
said he, " I have not been as faithful person- 
ally with you as I should have been. Forgive 
me for this." It was said, in reply, " You 
have nothing to reproach yourself for, on that 
account. Had we listened to your counsel, we 
should have been happier men than we now 
are." It was remarked by another young 
friend who was present during this interview, 
and to whom he addressed a similar remark, 
" Your life has been a constant reproof; it has 
always condemned us." During the day he 
conversed with several other young men be- 
longing to his congregation, some of whom had 
formerly been inquirers, and all of whom were 
particularly and solemnly addressed, as the 
case of each one seemed to demand. 

March 17, afternoon. To one who had taken 
a seat near his bedside, he looked up with 
one of his sweetest smiles, and said, " Here 
are father, mother, cousin, and all my dear 
friends." His father replied, ''Here are your 
best friends." He answered, " Yes, and I love 
you all ; but God calls, and I wait his bidding 
to go. And where he is, there shall I be also." 



CLOSINa SCENES. 257 

After lying silent for a few moments, he said 
in a kind of soliloquy, " Grod supporting, Christ 
sustaining, heaven expecting ; these are high 
joys, but they are not heaven — they are not 
heaven. I shall be satisfied when I awake in 
thy likeness. 

' glorious hour, blest abode ; 
I shall be near and like my God.' " 

After a few moments he exclaimed, " Billions 
upon billions, billions upon billions, and heaven 
still I" His mother replied, in those beautiful 
lines of Watts, 

" There we shall see His face, 

And never, never sin ; 
There, from the rivers of his grace, 

Drink endless pleasures in." 

As soon as she closed, he replied, 

"Yes, and before we rise 
To that immortal state," etc. 

It was said to him, "You have found G-od 
faithful." " Oh, yes," he quickly answered, 
" faithful to his promises." At another time 
he remarked, " G-od has fulfilled his promises 
to the very letter." During the afternoon, he 
remarked to his mother, " How wonderful it is 
that you are thus supported, and can sit by the 
17 



268 r.EY. JUKN K. EAIERSOX. 

bed of your dying son and be so calm." A 
little while after he said, '• I hope you will 
never distrust God again. Will you not from 
henceforth trust him ? Oh, I want to praise 
him ; had I voice and strength, I would sound 
his praise from shore to shore." 

Tuesday, March 18, he repeated with great 
emphasis, the whole of the hymn, 

"Lord, at thy temple we appear.*' 

In repeating the words, 

" Jesurf, tlie vision of thy face," 

and the verse following, his countenance as- 
sumed an expression almost unearthly. It 
seemed indeed as if his face shone with a glory 
reflected from the heavenly world, with which 
he held such blissful communion. Just after 
repeating this hymn, he looked upon each of 
those who were present, and with a beautiful 
smile, said, '' It is pleasant to be with dear 
friends, but it is better to be with Jesus. I 
shall soon be with Jesus. Where Jesus leads, 
I shall go ; the Saviour of the world is my 
Saviour." Then he repeated the hymn, 

" How sweet the name of Jesus sounds 
In a believer's ear," 



CLOSlNa SCENES. 259 

A day or two afterwards, after a season of 
severe suffering, he said, '' Pray for me, that I 
may not be impatient, but be wiUing to wait 
the Lord's time." On asking the hour, and 
being told, he remarked, " How slowly the 
hours move ! Why are his chariot wheels so 
lono- in comini^: •" 

Sabbath, March 23, he said but little dur- 
ing the day. He expressed to his attending 
physician his unshaken rehance upon Christ; 
repeated those lines, 

'' Blest Jesus, every smile of thine 
Shall sweet endearment bring." 

Towards night it was evident he was entering 
the dark valley, and for a short season the light 
of his Father's countenance was withdrawn. 
His agony, during these few moments, seemed 
to bear some resemblance to His who exclaimed, 
"My Grod! my God! why hast thou forsaken 
me?" He threw his arms upward, raised his 
eyes heavenward, and with an indescribable 
earnestness exclaimed, " Saviour, I will come 
to thee ; I have come to thee ; / do noiu come 
to thee.'''' Turning to those around, he ex- 
claimed, ''Repeat to me some of the promises." 



260 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

Several were repeated, among which were the 
following: "Him that cometh unto me I will 
in no wise cast out ;" "In a little wrath I hid 
my face from thee for a moment; but with 
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, 
saith the Lord thy Redeemer." " Does he say 
that? does he say that?" he asked with deep 
emotion; "then I will trust him." Instantly 
the darkness was dispelled, the Sun of right- 
eousness arose upon his soul never more to set, 
and quiet as an infant he reposed on the bosom 
of his Redeemer. On his mother's coming in, 
he remarked, "The Saviour hid his face from 
me for a moment, but it is all over now : he 
has come. I am, as it were, embosomed in 
God ; he is within, above, below, and around 
me." 

Shortly after, he expressed a wish to see the 
deacons and some of the brethren of the church. 
Several were sent for. He then asked to have 
the hymn read, commencing, 

. " I would not live ahvay, I ask not to stay." 

It was read and sung in his chamber, and ap- 
peared to soothe and comfort him. In a mo- 



CLOSINa SCENES. 261 

ment afterwards his soul was filled with joy. 
Heavenly pleasures seemed to roll over him, 
and pervade the whole man. "Oh," he ex- 
claimed, " peace, peace, sweet peace, the peace 
of Grod that passeth all understanding ! It flows 
like a river, calm, bright, reflecting the tem- 
ples and palaces of the celestial city." One 
who had lately joined the church he took by 
the hand, and said to him, "Do be a faithful, 
praying Christian ; consecrate your all to the 
blessed Saviour." 

To another who had long been a church- 
member he said, " Sir, I trust that you will 
speak often of that religion which you profess. 
0, set not your heart on earthly riches; they 
are the merest bubbles. To glorify G-od is the 
great end of your being." He then remarked, 
" How gently I have been let down to the 
grave, giving up gradually one thing after 
another. I thought at first that they could 
not do without me at the Wednesday evening 
meeting; but I find they can. They have 
good meetings now. It takes the presence of 
God to make a good meeting. Where he is 
with his smiles and love, there, there is life and 



262 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

peace. I often used to think, when a boy, 
that I should like to die of consumption, that 
I might have time to arrange every thing, and 
be prepared for the solemn event. I hope that 
I shall have my reason to the last. When I 
am found to be dying, call together the family 
and friends, that I may bid them an affectionate 
farewell." 

The remark was made to him, " Perhaps 
you may recover even now." "Oh no," said 
he ; " and I don't know that I desire to get 
well." "But," replied a friend, "if God has 
a work for you to do here, should you not be 
willing to live?" "Yes, yes," he said; "but 
then I should be so disappointed, as I have got 
so near to heaven now. I want to see my 
heavenly Father, and the Saviour, and the 
brisfht anofels; and I shall be so delio^hted to 
welcome you all to heaven." 

For several hours he coughed without cessa- 
tion, and it was feared that he would strangle. 
Once, after a very severe attack, he uttered a 
groan, which was the only one that was heard 
during his sickness. When he revived so as 
to be able to speak, he cried to God for grace 



CLOSINO SCENES. 263 

to enable him to "bear \Yitli comnnsnre all tliat 
might be laid upon him. " Oh, send me relief," 
he exclaimed ; " nevertheless, not my will, but 
thine be done.*' 

In the afternoon deacon Thurston called, 
and after a little conversation, Mr. Emerson 
said to him, "I want to deliver to you the 
church books, and perhaps now is as good a 
time as any." On these being handed to him, 
Mr. Emerson remarked, " I think that you will 
find every thing correct. I have made all the 
entries myself, and have endeavored to insert 
every thing in its proper place." His habits 
of order were indeed remarkable through life ; 
and they continued with him to his dying hour. 

He now felt that his work on earth was 
done, and that he must wait for the summons 
to depart. He repeated the beautiful stanza, 

" So shall my minutes smoothly run, 
While here I wait my Father's will; 
My rising and my setting snn 

E-oll gently up and down iho hill." 

Some flowers were sent in to him. He took 
them in his hand, and looking upon them said, 
*' These are the last flowers that I shall see on 



264 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

earth, and they are sent to adorn my pathway 
to the tomb. Oh, that I may soon enter the 
celestial paradise, where flowers never fade, 
where all is freshness and purity and love. 
But I am so unworthy of the meanest place in 
heaven. Lord, cleanse me from all guilt; 
sanctify me, that I may be a flower to wave and 
bloom for ever amid the breezes of heaven. 

Some persons came into the room after a 
prayer-meeting, and asked him if he would 
like to hear about it. He replied, ''Yes, I 
should. It does sinners good to hear about 
prayer." He was informed that some inquirers 
had tarried for religious conversation. " I am 
glad of it," said he ; "I wish I had strength 
to talk with them and lead them to Jesus." 

He desired to pray, when two friends stood 
by his side, and holding up his hands, he prayed 
in the most fervent and touching manner. His 
countenance w^as radiant with heavenly glory ; 
no words can describe his appearance. Several 
persons who saw him have assured me that 
no language could portray this and similar 
scenes. They seemed to be communing with 
a departed spirit, while with him. With clasped 



CLOSING SCENES. 265 

hands and uplifted eyes and a most heavenly 
countenance, he pleaded with Grod — pleaded as 
one who was directly before the throne, and in 
the presence of the divine Majesty 

He conversed about his burial with perfect 
composure. It was his request that his late 
beloved pastor, the Rev. J. F. Stearns, D. D., 
should preach his funeral-sermon, and that the 
writer should offer the prayer. Fearing that 
he might die on Saturday evening, he particu- 
larly requested that no work that could possi- 
bly be avoided, should be done on the following 
Sabbath. He wished that the family might 
spend the day in prayer and religious worship. 

On being asked where he wished to be buried, 
he replied, ''Oh, my dear people will find a 
resting-place for me; I should like to lie where 
my mother can rest by my side." He then 
repeated the hymn, commencing, 

"Jesus, full of all compassion." 

When he reached the last stanza, he raised his 
voice, with great emphasis, and said, 

" Saved ! — the deed shall spread new glory 
Through the .shining realms above: 
Angels sing the pleasing story, 
All enraptured with thy love." 



2G6 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

He now rallied all his energies, and exerted 
his remaining strength to give those around 
his dying admonition and counsel. As some 
were about to leave, he said, "Do not go yet, 
I have a little more to say." It was remarked, 
" You are so weak, perhaps you had better not 
attempt to speak any more." He rephed, " I 
must ; there wdll never be such an opportunity 
again. I feared the cloud which came over 
my mind a short time since might cause your 
faith to waver. But it was only for a moment. 
I cast myself on Christ; he has received me. 
Though all my church should forsake him, I 
would still cleave to him. Dear brethren, do 
not let your faith be shaken ; trust in the Lord ; 
he will be with you." 

The last prayer that he offered was a fervent 
petition for the members of his beloved flock. 
He pleaded that G-od would abundantly bless 
them — would watch over them — would permit 
him to meet them all in that bright world 
where there will be no more parting — no more 
pain, sorrow, or death. 

k^oon after, he w^as asked if he would not 
try to sleep, as he must feel fatigued. He 



CLOSING SCENES. 267 

signified his assent, folded his arms upon his 
breast, and closed his eyes for ever on earthly 
scenes. His breath grew shorter and shorter, 
until ten minutes before one o'clock, on the 
morning of Tuesday, March 25, 1851, when 
without a struggle he sweetly breathed out his 
soul, which was borne by angels to mansions 
in the skies. 

He had often, during his sickness, prayed 
that he might lean his head on Jesus' breast, 

'•And breathe his life out sweetly there." 

His heavenly Father heard and answered his 
prayer. 

His funeral services were performed in the 
Federal-street church, in Newburyport, on 
Thursday. The morning opened bright and 
beautiful, and preparations were made for the 
performance of the last solemn rite to the re- 
mains of our young brother. Between one 
and tv>'0 o'clock, the people from every part of 
the town were seen flocking to the church. 
At the hour appointed for the services, two 
o'clock, the church was so densely filled that 
it was impossible to gain access to the pulpit. 



268 REV. JOHN E. EMERSON. 

except through the entrance in ihe rear. When 
I reached the pulpit, and looked over the vast 
multitude of mourners, I was overcome by the 
impressive scene before me. The walls of the 
church, the organ, and galleries, were all hung 
in deep mourning. Every spot where one 
could stand was occupied, and very many 
persons were outside, unable to get within the 
doors. Among the audience were a very large 
number of clergymen, many of whom had 
come in from the neighboring towns. In the 
aisle in front of the pulpit rested the corpse, 
robed in white, with a beautiful bouquet of 
white flowers upon the breast, and another 
upon the coffin. The countenance of the de- 
parted was placid and sweet, even in death. 
Here he quietly rested in the venerable and 
time-hallowed church, the walls of which had 
echoed the voice of a Whitefield, a Murray, a 
Dana, a Williams, and a host of other eminent 
preachers of righteousness — a church in which 
he had made a public profession of his faith in 
Christ — in which he had been ordained for the 
holy work of the ministry. Upon the services 
of a sanctuary which had in times past so 



CLOSING- SCENES. 269 

often delighted and nourished his soul, he is 
now an unconscious attendant. The swell of 
the organ reaches not his ear; the vast crowd 
around him he sees not. heeds not. He is 
worshipping in another temple, gazing upon 
other scenes, listening to other music. He has 
left the church militant and joined the church 
triumphant. He has "come unto mount Sion, 
and unto the city of the living Grod, the heav- 
enly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable com- 
pany of angels, to the general assembly and 
church of the first-born, which are w^ritten in 
heaven, and to G-od the judge of all." 

The exercises of the occasion, throughout, 
were solemn and impressive. When allusion 
was made to the departed, the sympathies of 
the audience were at once manifested, and 
many eyes were suffused with tears. xA.t the 
close, an invitation was given for those who 
desired to look upon the corpse, to pass up 
the centre aisle, and retire from the house 
through the side aisles. For more than half 
an hour there was a constant stream of peo- 
ple, who availed themselves of the opportunity 
to look upon the remains, and drop the last 



270 KEV. JOHN E. E.MERSON. 

tear of affection over the beloved pastor and 
friend. 

The procession that followed him to the grave 
was the longest ever witnessed in the town. 
Besides his own relatives and parishioners, 
many others joined to pay to him their last 
tribute of respect. 

At the cemetery the scene was deeply affect- 
ing. The crowd gathered around the new- 
made grave, that was open to receive the young 
pastor. The trees were just putting on their 
spring attire, and the earth was clothing itself 
in its robe of green. A few flowers were start- 
ing up, emblematic of the immortal spring 
which had already burst upon the ransomed 
soul of the departed. 

As soon as all in the procession had reached 
the grave, the following dirge was sung by the 
choir of the Whitefield congregation : 

'•Go to the grave in all thy glorious prime, 
In full activity of zeal and power : 
A Christian cannot die before his time ; • 

The Lord's appointment is the servant's hour. 

'•Go to the grave, at noon from labor cease ; 

Hest on thy sheaves, thy harvest task is done ! 
Come from the heat of battle, and in peace, 
Soldier, go home ; with thee the fight is won ! 



CLOSIIsCr SCENES. 271 

" Go to the grave, for there thy Saviour lay 
In death's embraces, ere he rose on high; 
iVnd all the ransomed, by that narrow way, 
Pass to eternal life beyond the sky. 

'• Go to the grave ; now take thy seat above ; 
Be thy pure spirit present with the Lord, 
Where thou for faith and hope hast perfect love, 
And open vision for the written word." 

As the assembly retired to their homes, many 
breathed the silent prayer, "Let me die the 
death of the righteous, and let my last end be 
like his." 



My dear reader, shall he welcome you to 
that bright world whither he has gone ? Could 
he leave for a season the mansions of the new 
Jerusalem, and wing his way back to earth 
and sit by your side, would he not entreat you 
to be prepared for eternity? AVould he not, 
with streaming eyes, and with a heart beating 
with intense anxiety — would he not, in accents 
of melting tenderness, plead with you to love 
the Saviour? If you are already entertaining 
a hope of heaven, would he not say to you, 
" Strive, strive to enter in at the strait gate ;" 
" Ptun with patience the race set before you, 



272 REV. JOHN E. EilERSON. 

looking unto Jesus," looking unto Jesus ? If 
you are still in impenitence, would he not tell 
you of the thrills of joy that run through the 
shining ranks of the angels of G-od, when one 
sinner repents ? If indeed he could utter one 
wish respecting this memoir, would it not be, 
that God the Father, and God the Son, and 
God the Holy Ghost might bless it to your 
conversion and final salvation ? 



