of Pr/,;^ 
FEB 15 1869 




BX 5207 .H46 W544 
Williams, John Bickerton, 

1792-1855. 
Memoir of the Rev. Matthew 

Hftnrv. thft f.ommentatnr . an 



V 



MEMOIR 



OF THE / 

REV. MATTHEW HENRY, 

THE COMMENTATOR; 



IMMEDIATE DESCENDANT OF THE ENGLISH PURITANS. 



ABBIDaSD AND CONDENSED FROM THE LIFB 



BY J. B. WILLIAMS, ESQ., P.S. A, 



The righteous shall ho in everlasting remembrance — Psalm 113 ■ 8- 



PUBLISHED BY THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU-STREET, NEW YORK. 



This edition of the Life of the Rev. Matthew Henry- 
has been abridged and rewritten from the work of John 
B. Williams, LL. D., of Shrewsbury, England. No new 
matter has been introduced ; nor has any sentiment been 
altered. But the language has been frequently changed 
and transposed. Much of Dr. Williams' book, of a local 
character, has been altogether omitted ; other parts have 
been condensed ; and portions of tliat which formed the 
appendix of the original work, have been incorporated in 
fitting places in this volume. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 

Mr. Henry's Birth — Education — Alarming sickness — 
Memorial of mercies — Self-examination, and evi- 
dences of true grace — Inclination to the Ministry, 
and habits — Removal to Mr. Dooiittle's Academy — 
His return to Broad Oak, 9 



CHAPTER II. 

Study of the law at Gray's Inn — Habits — Correspond- 
ence — Trial of the Rev. Richard Baxter — Visit to Mr. 
Baxter in prison — Conespondence, . . . .21 



CHAPTER III. 

His return to Broad Oak — His Preaching — Visits Ches- 
ter — Invitations to the Ministerial Office there — Self- 
examination before Ordination — His Ordination, . . 38 



CHAPTER IV. 

His settlement at Chester — Marriage to Miss Hardware — 
Death of Mrs. Henry — Marriage to Miss Warburton — 
Family afflictions, and reflections upon them, . . 59 



6 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER V. 

Death of Mr. Warburton — Death of Philip Henry — Re- 
flections on the event — Further bereavements, and 
Letter occasioned by them — Death of his daughter 
Ann — Devout exercises on his Birthday and the close 
of the year — Attention to the orphan cliildren of Mrs. 
Radford, 70 



CHAPTER VI. 

Devout commencement of the year — Self-dedication — 
Birthday memorials — Reflections and resolutions at the 
close and commencement of the year. . . .88 



CHAPTER VH. 

Journey to London — Hears John Howe — Mr. Henry's 
general health good — Sudden seizure and sickness — 
Anniversary reflections — Death of Mr. Henrj^s mother 
— Anniversary reflections, ..... 106 



CHAPTER VHL 

Invitations to remove to London — An invitation from 
Hackney renewed — His determination to leave Ches- 
ter — His reasons for this determination — Birthday me- 
morial, 119 



CHAPTER IX. 

Some account of the manner in which Mr. Henry dis- 
charged the duties of the ministry at Chester, . . 129 



CHAPTER X. 



Exhortations delivered by Mr. Henry to ministers, at 
their ordination to the sacred office, . . . .150 



CONTENTS. 



7 




CHAPTER XI. 



Commencement of his labors at Hackney — His indefati- 
gable exertions — Anniversary reflections — Attention 
to the young — His patronage of charity-schools — His 
declining health — Visits Chester — Is laid aside by sick- 
ness — Relapses again — Birthday memorial — Devout 
commencement of the last year of his life — Journey to 
Chester — His last Sabbaths on earth — Sets out for 
London — Sickness on the road — His death — Funeral 
— Funeral sermons, 164 



CHAPTER XII. 

His domestic habits — Parental tenderness — Family wor- 
ship — His friendships — His diligence and improvement 
of time — His Christian love — Hatred of censoriousness 
— His candor and moderation — His prudence and be- 
nevolence — His humility, and dependence on divine 
assistance — His submission under trials — His piety to- 
wards God and devotional habits, the basis of his char- 
acter and attainments — His views of the Sabbath, and 
counsels concerning its sanctification, . . . 177 



CHAPTER XIII. 

His commencement of the Exposition — List of its contin- 
uators — Remarks made in his diary during the progress 
of commenting — Opinions of worthy divines concern- 
ing the Commentary — Mr. Henry's superlative attach- 
ment to the Bible, 208 



REV. 



MEMOIR 

OF THE 

MATTHEW HENRY. 



CHAPTER I. 

Mr. Henry's Birth — Education — Alarming Sickness — Memo- 
rial of Mercies — Self-examination, and Evidences of True 
Grace — Inclination to the Ministry, and habits — Removal 
to Mr. Doolittle's Academy — His Return to Broad Oak. 

Matthew Henry was the second son of the Rev. 
Phihp Henry, and was born October 18, 1662, at 
Broad Oak, in the township of Iscoyd, FHntshire, 
North Wales. His birth was in the year of the cel- 
ebrated Act of Conformity, which ejected his father, 
and two thousand other servants of Christ, from the 
Gospel ministry. 

During infancy his health was delicate ; and his 
life was threatened by a disease which had already 
removed his brother John to heaven. But God, 
who had a great work for him to do, spared the 
tender grape for the blessing which was in it ; for 
he afterwards became a great blessing to his family, 
t© the church, and to the world. 



10 MEMOIR OF THE 

At a very early period his mind displayed the 
vigor and acuteness for which through life it was 
remarkable. It is credibly stated that, at the early 
age of three years, he could read the Bible with dis- 
tinctness. His grammatical studies were superin- 
tended by Mr. Turner, a gentleman who resided at 
the time at Broad Oak. The efforts of the scholar 
kept pace with his privileges ; and childish things 
being put away early, the usual temptations to 
sloth, negligence, and frivolity, were voluntarily and 
happily escaped. His tender mother was often 
afraid lest he should apply himself too closely to 
his studies, and used sometimes to call him out of 
his room, and advise him to take a walk in the 
fields, lest his health might suffer by inordinate 
confinement and application. 

There can be no doubt that the facilities afforded 
at Broad Oak for the attainment of literature, were 
appropriate and valuable ; yet those for the acqui- 
sition of the far more important knowledge of relig- 
ious truth, were not less so. There were the morn- 
ing and evening expositions of holy Scripture at 
family worship, the unceasing prayers of eminently 
devout parents, and the abundant instructions which 
were associated with a consistent and holy example. 

Some extracts from a letter written by Matthew, 
when only nine years old, to his father, who was 
then in London, will illustrate this period; and 
whether viewed as a development of progress in 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



11 



learning, or as evincing the effects of a godly edu- 
cation, or as being probably the first specimen of 
his epistolary style, the selections will be alike in- 
teresting. He says, " Every day since you went, I 
have done my lesson, aside of Latin, or Latin verses, 
and two verses in the Greek Testament. I hope I 
have done all well, and so I will continue till you 
come." In reference to tidings which had been 
communicated in the letter respecting one of his 
relatives, he adds — and the resemblance to his sub- 
sequent style of writing will not pass unnoticed by 
those who are acquainted with that style — " By this 
providence we may see that sin is the worst of evils, 
for sickness came with sin. Christ is the chief good ; 
therefore, let us love him. Sin is the worst of evils ; 
therefore, let us hate that with a perfect hatred." 
This was, indeed, remarkable language for a child 
only nine years old. 

But the expectations indulged were soon after- 
wards checked. A lingering fever attacked the 
interesting youth when about ten years of age ; and 
such was the extreme violence of the attack, as for 
some time to excite daily apprehension of his death. 
In this trial, the faith of the parents triumphed over 
the agitations of natural tenderness. They trusted 
in the Lord, and invoked his holy name. During 
this time, the afflicted father, acting upon the coun- 
sel which he gave to others, that weeping must not 
hinder sowing, fulfilled the usual duties of his min- 



12 



MEMOIR OF THE 



istry; and when hope was almost extinct, he left 
home to preach at a distance. Nor was his return 
cheered by more favorable appearances. In this 
period of affliction, the widow of the Rev. Zecliariah 
Thomas was on a visit at Broad Oak, and proved a 
comforter in sorrow. ^ To her, Mr. Henry remarked, 
that while absent, he had most solemnly and delib- 
erately resigned his dear child to the will of God. 
The good old gentlewoman replied, " And I believe, 
sir, in that place and time, God gave him back to 
you again." And so it turned out. Recovery 
speedily followed: and Mrs. Savage, one of Mat- 
thew's sisters, who heard the conversation, remarked 
many years afterwards, that, though at the time she 
was only eight years old, and could think but as a 
child, she was much impressed with it ; and behev- 
ing that her brother's life was marvellously pro- 
longed, he became additionally endeared to her. 
To detail the state of the sufferer's own mind dur- 
ing the progress of the disease is rendered impossi- 
ble by the absence of materials. But, from subse- 
quent events, it is not too much to infer, that the 
affliction contributed to produce susceptibility of 
impression, and resembled what the Scriptures 
beautifully term, " breaking up the fallow-ground." 

Matthew Henry was early the subject of divine 
grace. His translation from the kingdom of dark- 
ness to the kingdom of God's dear Son, will appear 
most interesting in his own accouat of it. A manu- 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



18 



script dated October 18, 16 75, satisfactorily fur- 
nishes such an account. In the form of a " Cata- 
logue of Mercies," it details, at some length, the 
progress of religion in his soul, together with the 
evidences upon which he formed a belief of its gen- 
uineness. He commences with praise for such mer- 
cies as were " spiritual " for the Lord Jesus 
Christ, his incarnation, life, death, resurrection, as- 
cension, and intercession ; for grace, pardon, peace ; 
for the word, the means of grace ; for prayer ; for 
good instructions ; for good received at any time 
under the word ; for any succor and help from 
God under temptation ; for brokenness of heart ; for 
any enlightening." He adds, " I think it was three 
years ago that I began to be convinced, hearing a 
sermon by my father on Psalm 51:17,* The sacri- 
fices of God are a broken spirit ; a broken and a 
contrite heart, 0 God, thou wilt not despise.' I 
think it was that that melted me ; afterwards I be- 
gan to inquire after Christ. 

" December 7, 1673. On a Sabbath morning, I 
heard a sermon that had in it the marks of true 
grace. I tried myself by them, and told my father 
my evidences. He liked them, and said, if those 
evidences were true, as I think they were, I had 
true grace. Yet after this, for two or three days, I 
was under great fear of hell, till the Lord comforted 
me. I having been engaged in serious examination, 
what hope I have that when I die, and leave this 



14 



MEiMOIR OF THE 



earthly tabernacle, I shall be received into heaven, 
I have found several marks that I am a child of 
God. His ministers say, 

" 1. There is true conversion where there have 
been covenant transactions between God and the 
soul. And I found that there have been such be- 
tween God and my soul, and I hope in truth and 
righteousness. If I never did this before, I do it 
now ; for I take God in Christ to be mine. I give 
up myself to be his in the bond of an everlasting 
covenant never to be forgotten. But hath it been 
in truth ? As far as I know my own heart, I do it 
in truth and sincerity. I did it December 7, and 
September 5, and October 13, and many other 
times. I do it every day. 

" 2. Where there hath been true repentance for 
sin ; and grief, and shame, and sorrow for it, as to 
what is past ; with all the ingredients of it, as con- 
fession, aggravation, self-judging, self-condemning, 
etc. And I have found this in me, though not in 
such measure as I could desire. I have been 
heartily sorry for what is past. I judge myself 
before the Lord, blushing for shame that I should 
aver affront him as I have done ; and ministers have 
assured me, that having repented of sin, and be- 
lieved on Christ, I am to believe that I am par- 
doned. Now I have done this, and I do really 
believe I am forgiven for Christ's sake. This is 
grounded on several Scriptures: Proverbs 28: 13; 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



15 



Isaiah 1:18; 55 : 7 ; Matthew 5:4; Acts 2 : 37, 
38 ; 3:19; 1 John, 1 : 9. And many other Scrip- 
tures there are where God doth expressly call peo- 
ple to return and repent. But hath this sorrow 
been true? As far as I know my own heart, it 
hath been true. But I sin often. I lament and 
bewail it before the Lord, and I endeavor, by the 
grace of God, to do so no more. 

"3. Where there is true love of God. For to 
love the Lord our God with all our soul, and with 
all our strength, is better than whole burnt- ofiferings 
and sacrifices. Now, as far as I know my own 
heart, I love God in sincerity. But is that love 
indeed sincere? As far as I can judge, it is so; 
for, 

"(1.) I love the people of God; all the Lord's 
people shall be my people. 

" (2.) I love the word of God. I esteem it above 
all. A find mv heart so inclined. I desire it as the 
food of my soul. I greatly delight in it, both in 
reading and hearing it ; and my soul can witness 
subjection to it in some measure. I think I love 
the word of God for the purity of it. I love the 
ministers and messengers of the word. I am often 
reading it. I rejoice in the good success of it. All 
which were given as marks of true love to the word, 
in a sermon I lately heard on Psalm 119 : 140. 
* Thy word is very pure ; therefore thy servant lov- 
eth it.' " 



16 



MEMOIR OF THE 



From ibis interesting document it is manifest, that 
before he had attained his eleventh year, he was 
led into that vital and essential part of true wisdom, 
which consists in knowledge of himself and the state 
of his own soul. In after-life he used to remark. 
There begins to be some hope of people when 
they are concerned about their souls ; about spiritual 
provision, spiritual health, spiritual trading and hus- 
bandry ; about sowing to the Spirit." 

Younor Henry attended with uncommon diliorence 
upon his father's ministry ; and he was often so 
moved by it, as to hasten to his closet when the 
exercise was over, to weep, and make supplication 
that the thincjs which he had heard mic;ht not es- 
cape him. Sometimes his fears lest good impres- 
sions should be effaced, rose so high, as to render 
it difficult to prevail upon him to appear at dinner. 
On one occasion, especially, after a sermon illus- 
trating the nature and growth of true grace, as 
compared in Scripture to a grain of mustard- seed, 
which, though insignificant in appearance, would in 
time produce great things, his concern to possess a 
principle so efiBcient and precious, was intense. And, 
in a walk with his father, being unable any longer 
to restrain them, he communicated his anxieties. 
Of the conversation which ensued, nothing remains : 
but the "young disciple" afterwards told one of 
his sisters, with delightful exultation, that he hoped 
he had received the blessed grain of true grace ; 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



17 



and though at present it was very small, yet that it 
would come to something in time. 

Could such a man as Philip Henry have any 
greater joy than to hear his son, his only son, thus 
early inquiring the way to Zion? And how un- 
speakable was the privilege of the son, to possess 
in his father a scribe so well instructed in the doc- 
trine of the kingdom of heaven ; so signally " apt 
to teach ;"-and so read}'', at all times, to encourage 
the timid, but sincere inquirer, in the ways of God ! 
It is to be lamented that diffidence or shame so 
often hinders young converts from communicating 
the exercises of their minds to Christians and min- 
isters. By such back\y^ardness they expose them- 
selves to a variety of temptations and sorrows which 
they would otherwise escape, as well as unnecessa- 
rily deprive those who are filled with zeal for the 
Lord of hosts, of exquisite pleasure derived from 
the knowledge of their conversion. There is joy 
both in heaven and earth over one sinner that re- 
penteth. 

Philip Henry, like most of the puritans and non- 
conformists, was distingruished for a reverential ob- 
servance of the Lord's day. That holy habit had 
been formed by him in early life ; it was strength- 
ened by subsequent convictions; and experience 
imparted to it confirmation and maturity. On re- 
covering from an illness, he once remarked, " It is 
comfortable to reflect upon an affliction borne pa- 

MaUhew Henry. 2 



18 



MEMOIR OF THE 



tiently ; an enemy forgiven heartily ; and a Sabbath 
sanctified uprightly." 

That his children might be impressed the more 
deeply with like sentiments, and especially in order 
to the better sanctification of the day of holy rest, 
they were expected to spend an hour together, every 
Saturday afternoon, in devotional exercises. On 
these occasions, Matthew presided, and gave inti- 
mations of his subsequent delight in God's service 
too distinct and impressive to be either overlooked 
or forgotten. On such occasions, if he thought his 
sisters improperly curtailed their prayers, he would 
gently expostulate with them ; telling them that 
"it was impossible, in so short a time, to include all 
the cases and persons they had to recommend to 
God." And his admonitions were kindly received. 
In riper years, those holy women acknowledged, to 
the divine glory, how much they were influenced 
and encouraged by their brother's example and re- 
marks. 

From his childhood, Matthew Henry had an in- 
clination to the work of the ministry. This he dis- 
covered by the remarkable eagerness with which he 
read the Bible ; by a peculiar attachment to minis- 
ters ; and by the manifest pleasure which he took 
in writing and repeating sermons. He loved also 
to imitate preaching ; which, considering his years, 
he managed with great propriety, gravity, and 
judgment. 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



19 



When very young he coveted the society of those 
who " feared the Lord, and thought upon his name." 
He frequently met them, in their assemblies for con- 
ference and prayer, praying with them, and repeat- 
ing sermons. Occasionally, also, he explained the 
chapters read, enlarging upon them very much to 
the benefit and comfort of the auditors. By these 
efforts, surprise was naturally excited ; and one per- 
son expressed fear lest he should be too forward, 
and fall a victim to pride. This apprehension was 
expressed to his judicious father. ''Let him go 
on," was the answer; "he fears God, and designs 
well, and I hope God will keep him and bless him." 

The privileges enjoyed at Broad Oak were pecu- 
liarly fitted to prepare young Henry for the sacred 
office. His father, in addition to being an admired 
preacher, had amassed rich treasures of polite and 
useful learning : from this store he was always will- 
ing to communicate ; and so felicitous was he in the 
work of instruction, as to be seldom equalled, and 
perhaps never surpassed. Having himself derived 
much advantage from being a. student of Christ 
Church College, Oxford, he was led, during many 
years, to entertain a kindness for the universities, 
and to recommend his friends who intended their 
sons for scholars, to send them thither. But long 
experience altered his mind, and when he deter- 
mined, on account of his own pressing engagements, 
to send his son from home, in order to avoid the 



ao 



MEMOIR OF THE 



numerous temptations presented to young men in 
the national seats of learning, he placed him in the 
family, and under the tuition of the Rev. Thomas 
Doolittle, a faithful minister of the Gospel, who 
then lived at Islington, one of the suburbs of London. 

Young Mr. Henry's removal to Islington took 
place in the year 1680. These were times of trial 
for the pious non-conformists. Persecution soon 
drove Mr. Doolittle from Islington. He removed to 
Battersea, and his pupils were scattered among pri- 
vate families at Clapham. But Mr. Henry, instead 
of accompanying them, returned, it is believed, to 
Broad Oak. But whether he returned immediately 
to his father's or not, it is certain that when his 
studies were resumed at home, they were pursued, 
as at Islington, with unwearied diligence. At Broad 
Oak, that house of God and prayer, to which so 
many good people often used to resort, such exem- 
plary piety as that which young Mr. Henry dis- 
played, attracted notice ; and he, like the son of 
Elkanah, was in favor both with the Lord, and 
also with men." Mr. Tong, his friend and earliest 
biographer, remarks, that " those who knew him, 
coveted his company, and were delighted with it." 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



21 



CHAPTER II. 

Study of the law at Gray's Inn — Habits — Correspondence — 
Trial of the Rev. Richard Baxter — Visit to Mr. Baxter in 
prison — Correspondence . 

After Matthew Henry left Islington, he became a 
frequent and welcome visitor at Boreatton, in Shrop- 
shire, the seat of Rowland Hunt, Esq., one of his 
father's most particular and endeared friends. Mr. 
Hunt was no stranger, therefore, either to his at- 
tainments, or to his designs in reference to the min- 
istry. That gentleman, however, advised his return 
to London, that the study of the law might be added 
to his other accomplishments ; a practice which in 
the sixteenth centur}' had much prevailed both in 
England and on the continent of Europe. This 
friend's advice was approved both by the father and 
the son ; and towards the end of April, 1685, Mr. 
Henry, then in his twenty-third year, journeyed a 
second time to London ; and in Holborn Court, 
Gray's Inn, commenced a new course of studies, 
and one apparently opposite to those in which he 
had been previously engaged. 

In these new circumstances he became acquainted 
with several gentlemen, members of the same inn, 
who were exemplary for industry, religion, and virtue. 
The names of Mr. Turner of Canterbury, Mr. Ed- 
ward Harley, Mr. Dunch, Mr. Birch, and Mr. Ed- 
ward and Mr. Gilbert Horsman, were often men- 



2^ 



MEMOIR OF THE 



tioned by him with respect and honor. Many years 
afterwards, when he had an opportunity of renew- 
ing his acquaintance with his old friend, Mr. Ser- 
geant Birch, his diary does not fail to express the 
gratification which he experienced in his society. 

In the " house of the lawe " Mr. Henry's diligence 
was constant and exemplary ; and had he addicted 
himself exclusively to this study, he would probably 
have risen to distinction as a lawyer. Although not 
fully enamored of the science of law, his application 
to it was such as to rouse the fears of several friends 
and relatives, lest the result should be unfavorable 
to his early resolutions. The alarm, however, was 
needless : he remained true to his original purpose ; 
and the "office of a bishop" was still earnestly de- 
sired, and steadily kept in view ; though, occasion- 
ally, the discouragements of the times, in consequence 
of persecution, made him a little doubtful. But the 
better to effect his ruling design, he judiciously va- 
ried his pursuits ; consecrating a portion of time to 
theological reading ; promoting, among his particular 
friends, social prayer and religious conference, and 
occasionally expounding to them the Scriptures. If 
he did not say to his friends, as Cardinal Ximenes did, 
that he would willingly exchange all legal learning for 
the explanation of a single passage of holy writ, he 
acted as though this were his judgment. 

While resident at Gray's Inn, an affectionate and 
frequent correspondence was maintained with his 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



28 



father, and occasionally with his sisters. The vrhole 
series presents a collection of facts alike curious and 
interesting. Before any further allusion, however, 
is made to that collection, the reader may advan- 
tageously peruse one entire letter, addressed to Mr. 
Henry, soon after he left home, by his father. It 
exhibits a beautiful specimen of wise and apostolic 
counsel. 

"May 30, 1685. 

"Son Matthew — We are glad to hear of your 
health and cheerfulness ; which God in mercy con- 
tinue ! If you take meals at a public-house daily, 
you must double your watch, lest it put you upon 
inconvenience. My caution not to overstudy your- 
self was occasioned by what you wrote, that you 
had read Littleton so often over, and had begun Coke 
upon "him, which I thought could not well be, es- 
pecially during the first month, which affords most 
diversions, without overtasking yourself : my mean- 
ing was, that you should apportion your time wisely, 
according to present circumstances ; part to reading, 
the morning especially, and part to acquaint your- 
self with persons, and places, and affairs, which 
you have hitherto much wanted opportunity to ac- 
quaint yourself with ; having some ground of hope 
that you will improve by it, letting go the chaff and 
refuse, and retaining that which may do you good 
hereafter; for this present time you are to look upon 
as your gathering time, and to be as busy as the 



34 



MEMOIR OF THE 



ant in summer, the factor in the fair or market, the 
industrious merchant when in the Indies. You pro- 
posed to lay hold on opportunities for hearing ser- 
mons ; not Latin ones only. I hope you perform, 
and also reflect after, and pen the heads at home, 
which both engages present attention and lays up 
for time to come. It is the talk and wonder of 
many of our friends what we mean by this sudden 
change of your course and way; but I hope, through 
God's goodness and mercy, they will shortly see it 
was for good. 

"With yours I received one from dear Mr. Steel, 
who would be glad to see you often, as I know my 
worthy friend Mr. Lawrence would also ; but their 
circumstances prevent their coming to you ; there- 
fore you must go to them, not to be burdensome, 
but like a bee to the flowers, to gather from t^iem. 

" Just now, this morning, your sisters Katharine 
and Ann are gone towards Salop, to be there awhile. 
It is a change with us to want three of you at once ; 
but hoping it w411 be for your improvement and 
theirs, we are well satisfied in the will of God or- 
dering it so. Ere long there will be greater part- 
ings : how soon we know not ; but if we may be 
with you together for ever, and wuth the Lord, that 
will be happiness indeed. 

*' Be careful, my dear child, in the main matter. 
Keep yourself always in the love of God ; let noth- 
ing come, however not abide, between you and his 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



25 



favor, for in that is life. Rejoice in the great auc- 
tion, and make the pearl of price sure, and the field 
too in which it is. Farewell. Much love is to you 
from all here, and particularly from 

" Your loving father, 

" P. H." 

The following beautiful improvement of one of the 
most ordinary occurrences of life, is characteristic 
of the nature of Mr. Henry's mind, which seemed, 
as it were, ever ready to turn every thing to some 
spiritual advantage. Even now, when the facilities 
of the post-office are so much increased, both in 
expedition and certainty, compared with what they 
were in his day, the subject is seldom so well im- 
proved. In a letter dated July 5, 1685, he says, 

" It pleaseth me sometimes to think what a ready, 
speedy way of intercourse there is between me and 
home, though at such a distance ; that a letter can 
come from your hands to mine, through the hands 
of so many who are strangers to us both, in the 
space of sixty hours. But as ready as this way is, 
blessed be God, we have a readier way to send to 
heaven at all hours ; and can convey our letters 
thither, and receive gracious answers thence, in less 
time than so. That the throne of grace is always 
open, to which we have (how sweet a word it is) 
' liberty of speech,' when we are with him, and 
more than so, even 'access with confidence.' Eph. 



26 



MEMOIR OF THE 



3:12. We are introduced by the Spirit, as am- 
bassadors conducted to the prince by the master of 
the ceremonies. Esther had access to Ahasuerus, 
but not access with confidence, far from it, when 
she said, I will go in, and ' if I perish, I perish.* 
But we have access with confidence, through the 
*new and living Way ' laid open for us to the Father 
by the blood of his Son, who ever lives to make in- 
tercession, in the virtue and value of his satisfaction. 
And if this be not a sufficient ground for that con- 
fidence, what is ?" 

It was in the month of May this year (1685) that 
the infamous trial of Mr. Baxter was acted before 
the scurrilous Judge Jeffreys, at Guildhall ; and in 
daring violation of law and reason, the venerable 
non conformist was sentenced by that "unjust 
judge " to pay five hundred marks, to lie in prison 
till they were paid, and to be bound to his good be- 
havior for seven years. Whether Mr. Henry wit- 
nessed the public obloquy of his father's ancient 
and beloved friend, does not appear ; but the follow- 
ing letter details a visit to the imprisoned saint. It 
is one of those pictures of days that are past, which, 
if rightly viewed, may produce lasting and beneficial 
effects : emotions of sacred sorrow for the iniquity 
of persecution, and animating praise that the demon 
in these happy days of tranquillity is restrained, 
though not destroyed. Holiness, how much soever 
it may annoy, or even irritate, by its splendor, has, 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



27 



through the favor of the Most High, the fullest 
liberty to shine. 

*^ 17th November, 1685. 

"Honored Sir — On Saturday last I was with 
good Mr. Lawrence, who sends affectionate respects 
to you. He, and some others of them, walk the 
streets with freedom. 

" I went into Southwark to Mr. Baxter. I was 
to wait upon him once before, and then he was busy. 
I found him in pretty comfortable circumstances, 
though a prisoner, in a private house near the pris- 
on, attended on by his own man and maid. My good 
friend Mr. Samuel Lawrence went with me. He is 
in as good health as any one can expect ; and, me- 
thinks, looks better, and speaks heartier, than when 
I saw him last. The token you sent he would by 
no means be persuaded to accept, and was almost 
angry when I pressed it, from one outed* as well 
as himself. He said he did not use to receive ; and 
I understand since, his need is not great. 

" We sat with him about an hour. I was very 
glad to find that he so much approved of my present 
circumstances. He said he knew not why young 
men might not improve by such a course, as well as 
by traveling abroad. He inquired for his Shrop- 
shire friends, and observed, that of those gentlemen 
who were with him at Wem, he hears of none whose 



* Ejected by the Act of Uniformity. 



28 



MEMOIR OF THE 



sons tread in their father's steps but Colonel Hunt's. 
He inquired about Mr. Macworth's, and Mr. Lloyd 
of Aston's children. He gave us some good counsel 
to prepare for trials, and said the best preparation 
for them was a life of faith, and a constant course 
of self-denial. He thought it harder constantly to 
deny temptations to sensual lusts and pleasures, 
than to resist one single temptation to deny Christ 
for fear of suffering ; the former requiring such con- 
stant watchfulness : however, after the former, the 
latter will be the easier. He said we who are young 
are apt to count upon great things, but we must not 
look for it ; and much more to this purpose. He 
said he thought dying by sickness usually much 
more painful and dreadful than dying a violent 
death ; especially, considering the extraordinary 
supports which those have who suffer for righteous- 
ness' sake. He sends you his respects. Good Mr. 
Tallents also I saw that night, and sat with him 
awhile. Your most dutiful son, 

" Matt. Henry." 

The following note to him from his excellent 
mother, containing holy counsel, and exhibiting pa- 
rental anxiety, admirably evinces that enviable union 
of tenderness and wisdom for which she was dis- 
tinguished. 

"Dear Child — It is much my comfort and re- 
joicing to hear so often from you; and, although I 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



29 



have little to send you but love and my blessing, 
your father being absent, I write a line or two to 
you to mind you to keep in with God, as I hope 
you do, by solemn, secret, daily prayer ; watching 
therein with perseverance ; not forgetting what ^ou 
have been taught, and the covenant engagements, 
renewed again and again, that you lie under, to walk 
circumspectly in your whole conversation ; watching 
against youthful lusts, evil company, sins, and snares 
from the world and the devil. 

" Your affectionate mother, 

" Katharine H," 

Of the excellent spirit which was found in Mr. 
Henry even at this early age, the following extract 
from a letter to his father is a pleasing demonstration. 
Referring to his father's letters to him, he says, 

" None hath been a messenq-er of evil tidiness, for 
which let the name of God have all the glory ; and 
let us still be prepared for evil tidings, not knowing 
what a day may bring forth. If we can make sure 
uninterrupted peace and tranquillity in the other 
world, we have no great reason to complain of the 
interruptions of this world. It is the lower region 
of the air that is liable to variety of weathers, while 
the upper region enjoys a constant calm. And are 
we moving thitherwards ? And do we hope to be 
there shortly, where all tears are wiped away from 
the eyes, and all sorrow eternallyl)anished from the 
heart ? And shall w^e perplex ourselves about the 



30 



MEMOIR OP THE 



little, little trifles of this vain, empty world, the 
things whereof are vanity in the having, and vexa- 
tion of spirit in the losing, nor ever will, or can, 
afford that content and satisfaction which men ex- 
pect and count upon, in the enjoyment of them ; 
and which too few seek where it is to be had." 

All his letters from Gray's Inn discover to great 
advantage his filial attentions ; they convey a pleas- 
ant impression of his observation and prudence ; 
they demonstrate his zeal for the acquisition of use- 
ful knowledge ; and they exhibit, in the most unex- 
ceptionable manner, his mental acuteness, his per- 
sonal piety, and the consecration of every successive 
acquirement to the Redeemer's honor. They were 
worthy of Philip Henry's son, and must have often- 
times proved an occasion of rejoicing and praise 
before the throne of God. It is easy, in imagina- 
tion, to behold the venerable parents perusing, week 
after week, those epistles of grace, and minghng, 
with, overflowing tenderness, their mutual gratula- 
tions, that their beloved child, though at so great a 
distance from them, was walking in the truth. 

It would be anticipating a future division of the 
present work, to delineate, in this early stage of it, 
Mr. Henry's character and conduct as a friend. 
Yet the order which has been adopted seems here 
to require the introduction of a letter addressed by 
him to one whom he regarded in that sacred char- 
acter. This individual was Mr. George lUidge of 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



31 



Nantwich, whose heart the Lord having opened 
when very young, and who, enjoying few rehgious 
advantages at home, attended the ministry at Broad 
Oak. His seriousness and zeal secured him a wel- 
come, and his excellent conduct commanded un- 
feigned respect. It is not known when the acquaint- 
ance between the two youths commenced, but it 
was turned to a good account ; and became the 
means of eliciting dispositions the most strictly vir- 
tuous and useful. The grave and mature counsels 
contained in the letter, are far beyond the years of 
the writer of them. 

"Gray's Inn, March 1, 1686. 

" Dear Friend — I think I remember, when I last 
saw )'ou I partly promised to write to you, which 
I doubt I should either have forgotten, or have 
deferred the performance of, had 'I not been lately 
reminded of it in a letter from one of my sisters. 
And now I have put my pen to paper to perform 
my promise, what shall I write ? News we have 
little, or none considerable; and you know I was 
never a good newsmonger ; and to fill a letter with 
idle, impertinent compliments, is very useless, and 
Avill pass but ill in the accounts another day ; for 
sure, if idle words must be accounted for, idle let- 
tors will not be left out of the reckoning. What if 
I should, therefore, having no other business at 
present, give you a few serious lines, which may, 
perhaps, be of some spiritual advantage to your 



32 



MEMOIR OF THE 



soul. I have been lately thinking of some great 
Scripture truths, or principles, the firm, practical 
belief of which would be of great use to a Christian, 
and have a mighty influence upon the right order- 
ing of his conversation ; and they are some such as 
these : 

"1, That 'all things are naked and open unto 
him with whom we have to do.' Heb. 4: 13. A 
firm belief of God's all-seeing eye always upon us, 
wherever we are, and whatever we are doing, would 
be a mighty awe-band upon the spirit, to keep it 
serious and watchful. Dare I omit such a known 
duty, or commit such a known sin, while I am under 
the eye of a just and holy God, who hates sin, and 
cannot endure to look on iniquity ? It was a sig- 
nificant name which Hagar gave to the well where 
God appeared unto her, Gen. 16 : 14, *Beer-lahai- 
roi,' the well of him that lives and sees me ; for she 
said, V. 13, 'Thou God seest me.' This would be 
a very seasonable thought, Avhen we are entering 
either into duty, or into temptation, to lift up our 
heart in these words, ' Thou God seest me ;' and 
therefore, let duty be carefully done, and sin care- 
fully avoided, considering that he who sees all now, 
will tell all shortly before angels and men, in the 
day 'when the secrets of all hearts shall be made 
manifest.' Luke 12:2. 

" 2. That our adversary the devil, ' as a roaring 
lion, goes about continually, seeking whom he may 



REV. MATTHEW HEXRY. 



33 



devour.' 1 Peter, 5 : 8. We do not see him, and 
therefore we are apt to be secure ; but certainly it 
is so, and therefore we should never be off our 
watch. "What folly is it for us to be slumbering 
and sleeping, while such a cruel, crafty enemy is 
waking and watching, and ready to do us a mis- 
chief I You know, when Saul slept, he lost his 
spear and his cruise of water. Many a Chiistian 
has lost his strength and comfort by sleeping. 

" 3. That * the grace of God, which bringeth sal- 
vation, teacheth us to deny ungodliness and worldly 
lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godlily.* 
Titus 2:11, 12. That the Gospel, as it is a Gospel 
of grace, requires a holy conversation. Christ died 
to save his people />o//i their sins, not in their sins. 
The Gospel hath its commands, as well as its prom- 
ises and privileges, and therefore there is such a 
thing as a gospel-becoming conversation, Phil. 1:27, 
living up to gospel love as well as gospel light. 

" 4. That * Jesus Christ died to deliver us from 
this present evil world.' Gal. 1 : 4. We are apt 
to think Christ died to deliver us only from hell, 
and if that be done we are well enough. Xo ; Christ 
died to deliver us from this world. So, if our hearts 
are glued to present things, and our affections tixed 
upon them, we do db-ectly thwart the great design 
of our Lord Jesus Christ in coming to save us. 

"5. That ' we are not under the law, but under 
grace.' Romans 6 : 14. This is a mighty encour- 

Matthew Henry. ^ 



84 



MEMOIR OF THE 



agement to us to abound in all manner of gospel 
obedience, to consider that we are not under the 
law that required personal, perfect obedience, and 
pronounced a curse for the least failure, but under 
the covenant of grace, which accepts the willing 
mind, and makes sincerity our perfection. What a 
sweet word is grace ! What a savor doth it leave 
upon the lips ! And to be under grace, under the 
sweet and easy rule of grace, how comfortable is it ! 

" 6. That the soul is the man, and that condition 
of life is best for us that is best for our souls. It 
fares with the man as it fares with his soul. He is 
the truly healthful man whose soul prospers and is in 
health. He is the truly rich man, not who is rich in 
houses, land, and money, but who is rich in faith, and 
an heir of the kingdom. Those are our best friends 
that are friends to our souls, and those are our worst 
enemies that are enemies to our souls ; for the soul 
is the man, and if the soul be lost, all is lost. 

Y. That 'we have here no continuing city.' 
Heb. 13 : 14. That we are in this world as in an 
inn, and must be gone shortly. Why should we, 
then, conform ourselves to this world, or cumber 
ourselves with it ? Should we not, then, sit loose 
to it, as we do to an inn ? And what if we have 
but ill accommodation ; it is but an inn, it will be 
better at home. If our lodging here he hard and 
cold, it is no great matter ; our lodging in our 
Father's house will be soft and warm enough. 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



35 



8. That ' every man, at his best estate, is alto- 
gether vanity.' Psahn 39 : 5. We ourselves are 
so, and therefore we must not dote on any tem- 
poral enjoyments. We carry our lives, as well as 
our other comforts, in our hands, and know not how 
soon they may slip through our fingers. Every one 
is vanity, therefore cease from man, from fearing 
him, and from trusting in him. 

*' 9. That * God shall bring every work into judg- 
ment, with every secret thing, whether it be good 
or evil.' Eccles. 12 : 14. That every man must 
shortly give an account to God. The serious 
thou(?hts of this would eno^aore us to do nothinor 
now, which will not pass well in our accounts then. 

"10. That 'the wages of sin is death; but the 
gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our 
Lord.' Romans 6 : 23. Heaven and hell are great 
things, indeed, and should be much upon our hearts, 
and improved by us as a spur of constraint to put 
us upon duty, and a bridle of restraint to keep us 
from sin. We should labor to see reality and weight 
in invisible things, and live as those that must be 
somewhere for ever ; to see hell the wages and due 
desert of sin, and heaven the free gift of God through 
Jesus Christ. 

" Many other such truths might be mentioned, 
which those who are acquainted with the Scriptures, 
and with their own hearts, need not be directed to. 
It would be of use to a Christian, to take some one 



36 



MEMOIR OF THE 



such truth into his mind in the morning, and upon 
occasion in the day, to be thinking frequently of it, 
and to say, ' This is the truth of the day ; this is to 
be an answer to this day's temptations ; this is to 
be a spur to this day's duties ; and this is to be the 
subject of this day's meditation, and of this day's 
discourse, as we have opportunity.' I am apt to 
think such a course would be very beneficial. Here- 
by a good stock of truths might be treasured up 
as^ainst a time of need, and we mio^ht be able to 
bring forth things new and old for the benefit of 
others. For certainly it is our duty, as we have 
ability and opportunity, to help our friends and 
neighbors in their spiritual necessities, to strengthen 
the weak, confirm the wavering, direct the doubting, 
and comfort the feeble-minded, to say to them that 
are of a fearful heart. Be strong. 

" Discourse to this purpose, how profitable would 
it be, both to ourselves and others ; and how much 
better it would pass in our account another day, 
than a great deal of that vain, impertinent talk, 
which fills up the time of too many professors when 
they come together. And I fear it is a fault more 
acknowledged than amended. 

" I remember to have read, that when the famous 
Bishop Usher and Dr. Preston, w^io were intimate 
friends, ^vere talking together, after much discourse 
of learning and other things, the bishop would say, 
' Come, doctor, one word of Christ now before we 



HEV. MATTHEW HEXRV. 



37 



part.' Christians, who owe their all to Christ, 
should be often tcilking of him. And surely those 
that know the worth of souls cannot but be con- 
cerned for their ignorant, careless neighbors ; which 
concernedness should put us upon doing all we can 
to help them out of that condition. And if there 
be any that are asking the way to Zion, with their 
faces thitherwards, pray tell them the way. Tell 
them, 

" 1. There is but one gate into this way, and that 
is the strait gate of sound conversion. 

"2. Tell them that the way is narrow, that there 
is not elbow-room for their lusts ; let them know 
the worst of it ; and that those who would be 
good soldiers of Christ must endure hardness. 

"3. Tell them, notwithstanding this, it is a way 
of pleasantness ; it gives spiritual, though it prohib- 
its sensual pleasures. 

" 4. Tell them there is life eternal at the end, 
and let them be assured that one hour of joy in 
heaven will make them amends for an age of trouble 
upon earth. One sheaf of that harvest will be rec- 
ompense enough for a seedness of tears. Psalm 
126 : 5, 6. 

" I am at present somewhat indisposed, and have 
written confusedly, and therefore I would have you 
keep it to yourself. I hope you will not forget me 
at the throne of grace, for I have need of your 
prayers. Give my aflfectionate respects to your 



38 



MEMOIR OF THE 



wife, and mother, and sister ; to Mrs. Elizabeth 
Wilson, who, I take for granted, is with you ; to 
Mr. Hopkins, ray aunt Burroughs, and Richard Gill, 
and all the rest of my very good friends, if with 
you, as if particularly named. I have nothing more 
to add, but to commend you all to God, and to the 
word of his grace, which is able to build you up, 
and to give you an inheritance among all them that 
are sanctified. I am, your real friend, 

" Matthew Henry." 



CHAPTER III. 

His Return to Broad Oak — His Preaching — Visits Chester — 
Invitations to the Ministerial Office there — Self-examina- 
tion before Ordination — His Ordination. 

In the month of June, 1686, Mr. Henry returned 
to Broad Oak. It was soon apparent that his law 
studies had nowise diverted him from his original 
design. The study of the Scriptures was as inter- 
esting to him as ever ; and his desire to make known 
the mystery of the Gospel, instead of being weak- 
ened, had increased : it was more intense and more 
enlightened. 

Being invited by his friend Mr. George Illidge 
to Nantwich, he preached there several evenings to 
a considerable audience, and with encouraging sue- 



REV. MATTHEW HEXRY. 



39 



cess. On the last of those occasions his subject was 
Job 37 : 22, " With God is terrible majesty." Mr. 
Illidge observed a notoriously wicked man present. 
With a \'iew to ascertain the effects of his attend- 
ance, he called upon him the next morning. The 
man and his wife were in tears. The convictions 
of sin, and sense of danger, in the mind of the hus- 
band, seemed to be pungent and salutary ; and his 
apprehensions of the majesty and wrath of God 
were awfully vivid : the wife wept from sympathy. 
Mr. Illidge offered up supplications on their behalf, 
communicated suitable encouragement, and pressed 
an earnest warning against wicked company. The 
man taught his wife to read, practised family wor- 
ship, often accompanied Mr. Illidge to Broad Oak, 
and was admitted to the church. In appearance, 
the change was universal and entire; religious joy 
was sometimes avowed ; and, for several years, he 
seemed to "run well."' His wife, in the judgment 
of charity, died in the faith of the Gospel ; but he, 
alas, after a time, being '"hindered," was guilty of 
very sad defection, and quitted the narrow way, it is 
feared, for ever. In such a connection as this, how 
consummate appears the wisdom of the apostolic 
counsel, " Let him that thinketh he standeth, take 
heed lest he fall I" And how necessaiy are self- 
examination, holy watching, and unceasing prayer. 

It is natural to suppose, that the encouragement 
which attended Mr, Henry's fii-st efforts, increased 



40 



MEMOIR OF THE 



his satisfaction in the decision which he had made 
for the ministry. Having been on a visit at Ches- 
ter, and being invited by some friends there to 
preach to them, he comphed ; and two or^ three 
successive evenings, at the houses of fnends, "he 
received all that came ; preaching the kingdom of 
God, and teaching the things which concern the 
Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence ; no man for- 
bidding him." These services tended to produce a 
most favorable impression upon the minds of the 
hearers in reference to Mr, Henry's ministerial quali- 
fications ; and the present circumstances of the non- 
conformists in that city occasioned earaest desires 
that he might become their pastor. By the death 
of two valuable ministers, Mr. Cook and Mr. Hall, 
a loss had been sustained which their survivor, Mr. 
Harvey, an aged divine, was unable to repair. 
About this time government granted more liberty 
and enlargement to dissenters than they had been 
wont to enjoy. Encouraged, therefore, by this 
event of Providence, after having advised with his 
father, he returned a favorable answer to the invi- 
tation which he received from Chester to settle 
there, provided Mr. Harvey would give his consent 
to it ; so delicate were his sentiments, and so scru- 
pulous was his conscience, in this important move- 
ment. In a personal interview with this aged divine, 
Mr. Henry assured him that if he did not consent to 
his settlement in the city, he would return, and de- 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



41 



sired him to express himself freely. Mr. Harvey at 
once satisfied him of his good-will, and pleasantly 
added, " There is work enough for us both." This 
incident reads valuable lessons to both young and 
aged ministers. 

The business of ordination was next attended to 
with exemplary deliberation and seriousness. Not 
only did he avail himself of the counsel of his friends, 
particularly the Rev. Messrs. F. Tallents and James 
Owen, but for more permanent advantage, he sketch- 
ed a discourse on 1 Timothy, 4 : 15, " Give thyself 

j wholly to them," in which he stated the nature and 
several parts of the ministerial work, and what it is 
for a man to give himself wholly to them — to be 
wholly m them, as the original Greek signifies. He 
likewise composed a paper which he designated 

I " Serious Self-examination before Ordination." This 
paper is so general in its nature, and presents so 
complete and unusual a combination of vigilance 
and wisdom, as to justify its insertion in these 
pages, notwithstanding its length. It is as fol- 
lows : 

" That it is very requisite for a man to examine 
himself seriously at such a time, will readily be 
granted by those who consider the nature of the 
ordinance, and of that work into which it is a solemn 
entrance. 

" ' Search me, 0 God, and know my heart ; try me, 
and know my thoughts ; and see if there be any 



42 



MEMOIR OF THE 



wicked way in me, and lead me in the way ever- 
lasting.' 

** It is worth while for a man at such a time de- 
liberately to ask himself, and having asked, consci- 
entiously to answer, the six following questions : 

''Q. I. What am I? 

" This is a needful question, because, in ordina- 
tion I give up myself to God in a peculiar manner ; 
and will God accept the torn, and the blind, and 
the lame ? Surely, no. The sacrifice must be 
searched before it was offered, that it might be 
sure to fit its end. Now, though the truth of grace 
be not perhaps necessary to the esse of a minister," 
(to being a minister,) " for Judas himself was an apos- 
tle, yet it is necessary to the hene esse," (to being a 
good minister.) "A man cannot be a good minister 
without it. And therefore come, my soul, let us 
inquire what am I ? And let the inquiry be strict 
and serious, for a mistake here is fatal. 

" 1. Have I ever been inwardly convinced of the 
lost and undone condition in which I was born ; that 
I was by nature a child of wrath, even as others? 
Did I ever see myself wallowing in my blood, in a 
forlorn, outcast, helpless state, lost and ruined for 
ever without Christ ? 

" 2. Was I ever deeply humbled before the Lord 
for the original sin that I was born in, and the num- 
berless actual transgressions in heart and life that I 
have been guilty of ? Hath sin been bitter to my 



REV. MATTHEW HEXRY. 



43 



soul, hath my heart been broken for it, and hath 
my sorrow been of the right kind ? Hath the sight 
of a broken Saviour broken my heart ? 

"3. Have I sincerely closed with the Lord Jesus 
Christ, by a true and lively faith, taken hira to be 
mine, and resigned up myself to him to be his ? 
Have I accepted of Christ upon gospel terms, to 
be my Prince to rule, and Saviour to save me ? 
Have I renounced all others, and resolved to cleave 
to the Lord Jesus Christ, let what will come ? Is 
Christ precious to me ; is he dearer to me than any 
thinor in the world besides ? Could I be freelv will- 
ing to part with all for Christ, and count every thing 
but loss that I may win Chiist ? 

" 4. Have I a real hatred of every sin, in myself 
as well as in others ? Have I no beloved lust which 
I would spare, no darling corruption which I would 
have to remain unmortified ? Does sin appear sin 
in my eyes ; and can I say with David that ' I hate 
every false way ?' Are the remainders of indwelling 
corruption a burden to me ? Do I long to be rid 
of sin ? Are my resolutions sincere, and my en- 
deavors serious, against sin, and all appearance of 
it, and that because it is against God ? 

" Have I a real love to holiness ? Do I press 
after it, and earnestly desire to be more holy, using 
holy ordinances for this end, that I may be made 
thereby more and more holy ? Am I fond of holy 
ordinances and holy people, and that because they 



44 



MEMOIR OF THE 



are holy ? Have I a real value for holiness wher- 
ever I see it ? Do I delight in God's holy word, 
and that because it is holy ? Do I call the holy 
Sabbath a delight, and that because it is holy ? Do 
I love the brethren because they are holy, and love 
them the better the more hol}^ they are ? Do I long 
to be made perfect in holiness in that other world ? 

To these weighty questions, my poor soul — 
though compassed about with manifold weaknesses, 
wants, and corruptions — doth, as in the presence 
of God, the searcher of hearts, give a comfortable 
answer ; and if these be the signs and characters of 
true grace, I trust my heart doth not deceive me, 
when it tells me I have some sparks of it, though 
swimming in a sea of corruption. But ' who am I, 
0 Lord God, and w^hat is my house, that thou hast 
brought me hitherto ? xVnd yet, as if this had been 
but a small thing, thou hast spoken concerning thy 
servant for a great while yet to come. And is this 
the manner of man, 0 Lord God?' 
" Q. IL What have I done ? 

This is also a needful question, that, searching 
and examining what hath been amiss, I may repent 
of it, and make even reckonings in the blood of 
Christ, that I may not come loaded with old guilt 
to put on a new character, especially such a char- 
acter as this. Aaron and his sons must offer a sin- 
offering to make atonement before they were con- 
secrated. Leviticus 8 : 34. For he that comes near 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



45 



to God under the guilt of sin unrepented of, comes 
at his peril, and the nearer the more dangerous. 

''And therefore, 0 my soul, what have I done ? 
My soul cannot but answer, I have sinned, I have 
perverted that which is right, and it hath not profit- 
ed me. And in a serious reflection I cannot but 
observe, 

" 1. What a great deal of precious time I have 
trifled away and misspent in folly and vanity, and 
things that do not profit. Tinije is a precious talent 
which my Master hath intrusted me with, and yet 
how long hath it been buried, and how much hath 
it run to waste ! 

" 2. How many precious opportunities, which are 
the cream of time, have I lost, and not improved 
through my own carelessness ; golden seasons of 
grace which I have enjoyed, but have let them slip, 
and been little bettered by them ; Sabbaths, ser- 
mons, sacraments that have come and gone, and left 
me as they found me. My fruit hath not been an- 
swerable to the soil I have been planted in. How 
often have I been ignorant under enlightening means ; 
hard and cold under softening and warming ordi- 
nances ; trifling and careless when I have been 
dealing with God about the concerns of my soijl 
and eternity. 

"3. How often have I broken my covenants with 
God, my engagements, promises, and resolutions of 
new and better obedience ; resolved against this and 



46 



MEMOIR OF THE 



that sin, and yet fallen into it again ; many a time 
returning to folly, after God hath spoken peace to 
me, and after I have spoken promises to God. Pres- 
ently after a sacrament, how have I returned to 
former vanity, folly, sensuality, frothiness ; to former 
pride, passion, and worldliness : so soon have I for- 
got the vows of God ! 

"4. How unprofitable have I been in my converse 
with others ; how few have been the better for me ; 
how many the worse for me ; how little good have 
I done ; how little light have I cast in the sphere 
"wherein God hath placed me ; how little have I 
been concerned for the souls of others ; and how 
little useful have I been to them ! How vain and 
light have I been many times in my words and car- 
riage, going down the stream of folly with others, 
when my seriousness might have stemmed the tide ! 
How seldom hath my speech been with grace, and 
how often with corruption ; not seasoned with salt ! 

" 5. In the general, how forgetful have I been of 
God and his word, and myself and my duty, and of 
the great concerns of my soul and eternity ; living 
too much as if I had no God to serve, and no soul 
to save 1 

" I might mention many particular miscarriages 
which I have been guilty of in heart and life, and 
which are known to God and my own heart ; and 
yet, after all, * Who can understand his errors ? 
Cleanse thou me, 0 God, from secret sins ; have 



REV. MATTHFVV HENRY. 



47 



mercy upon me, 0 God, according to thy loving- 
kindness ; and according to the multitude of thy 
tender mercies blot out all my transgressions, for 
the sake of the Lord my righteousness.' 

** Q. III. From what principles do I act in this 
undertaking ? 

" This is also a very material inquiry in every ac- 
tion, to ask whence it comes, especially in so great 
a turn of life as this. 

'•'I. I hope I can say that it is of faith ; and I 
am concerned it should be so, for * whatsoever is not 
of faith is sin.' It is good for every man that he be 
fully persuaded in his own mind. Xow, 

" (1.) I am fully persuaded that Jesus Christ, as 
King of the church, hath appointed and established 
the office of the ministry, to continue in a constant 
succession to the end of time, for the edification of 
the church, and has promised to be with his minis- 
ters always, to the end of the world. So that the 
office of the ministry is no human invention, but a 
divine institution. 

*' (2.) I am fully persuaded that no man ought 
to thrusi himself upon the work of the ministry, 
without a clear call from God to it. Not that we 
are to expect such extraordinary calls as the apostles 
had, but the ordinary call, by the mediation of min- 
isters, who, as such, are authorized by Christ to try 
the abilities of those who offer themselves to the 
ministry ; and if they find them fit, then to set them 



48 



MEMOIR OF THE 



apart to that work, in a solemn manner, by the im- 
position of hands, with fasting and prayer ; and that 
* the laying on of the hands of the presbytery ' is 
the regular way of ordination, and most agreeable 
to Scripture. 

(3.) I bless God that I am pretty well satisfied 
with the clearness of my call to the work, though I 
cannot but be sensible of great weakness and insuf- 
ficiency for these things ; yet I find that what abil- 
ities God has been pleased to give me, (and let him 
have all the glory,) do evidently look towards this 
work ; so that if I be in any measure qualified for 
any service, it is for this. I find also my own in- 
clination strongly bent towards it, and that I have 
been much excited and encouraged to it by divers, 
both ministers and others, able, skilful, and faithful, 
fit to judge, by whom my purposes have been much 
confirmed. All which goes a great wa}'- towards 
the clearing of my call ; and the earnest invitation I 
have lately had to stated work in a particular place, 
doth much help to clear my call to the work in 
general. 

" 2. I hope I can say, I act herein from a princi- 
ple of true zeal for the glory of God ; that this 
gi-eat thing I do, as I should do every thing, to the 
glory of God, that my light may shine, that Christ's 
kingdom may be advanced, the power of godliness 
kept up, the word of life held forth ; by all which 
God is glorified. The desire of my soul is, that 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



4^ 



* whether I live I may live to the Lord, or whether 
I die I may die to the Lord, and that living and 
dying I may be the Lord's.' 

"3, I hope I can say, that I act herein from a 
principle of real love to precious souls, for the good 
of which I would gladly spend and be spent. Me- 
thinks I love the precious souls of men so well, that 
I would fain be an instrument of convincing the un- 
convinced, converting the unconverted, and building 
up saints in holiness and comfort. I hope I know 
so much of the worth of souls, that I should think 
it a greater happiness to gain one soul to the Lord 
Jesus Christ, than to gain mountains of silver and 
gold to myself. 

*'Q. lY. What are the ends that I aim at in this 
great undertaking ? 

" It is a common saying, that the end specifies the 
action ; and therefore it is of great consequence to 
fix that right, that the eye may be single, for other- 
wise it is an evil eye. A by and base end will cer- 
tainly spoil the acceptableness of the best actions 
that can be performed. 

" Now, what is the mark I aim at in this great turn 
of my life ? Let conscience be faithfuj herein, and 
let the Searcher of hearts make me known to my- 
self. 

1. I think I can say with confidence, that I do 
not design to take up the ministry as a trade to live 
by, or to enrich myself by, out of the greediness of 

Matttew Henry. ^ 



MEMOIR OF THE 



filthy lucre. No ; I hope I aim at nothing but 
souls ; and if I gain those, though I should lose all 
my worldly comforts by it, I shall reckon myself to 
have made a good bargain. 

** 2. I think I can say with as much assurance, 
that my design is not to get myself a name amongst 
men, or to be talked of in the world, as one that 
makes somewhat of a figure, No ; that is a poor 
business. If I have but a good name with God, 
I think I have enough, though among men I 
be reviled, and have my name trampled upon as 
mire in the streets. I prefer the good word of 
my Master far before the good word of my fellow- 
servants. 

"3. I can appeal to God, that I have no design 
in the least to maintain a party or to keep up any 
schismatical faction ; my heart rises against the 
thoughts of it. I hate dividing principles and prac- 
tices, and whatever others are, I am for peace and 
healing ; and if my blood would be sufficient bal- 
sam, I would gladly part with the last drop of it, 
for the closing up of the bleeding wounds of differ- 
ences that are amongst true Christians. Peace is 
such a precious jewel, that I would give any thing 
for it but truth. Those who are hot and bitter in 
their contendings for or against little things, and 
zealous in keeping up names of division and main- 
taining parties, are of a spirit which I understand 
not. Let not my soul come into their secret. 



REV. MATTHEW HEXRY 



51 



*' My ends, then, are according to my principles, 
and I humbly appeal to God concerning the integ- 
rity of my heart in them, 

" (1.) That I deliberately place the glory of God 
as my highest and ultimate end, and if I can be but 
any way instrumental to promote that, I shall gain 
my end and ha\ie my desire. I do not design to 
preach myself, but, as a faithful friend of the bride- 
groom, to preach Christ Jesus my Lord, as the stand- 
ard-bearer among ten thousands. And if I can 
but bring people to know, and love, and honor Christ, 
I have what I design. 

" (2.) That in order to the glory of God, I do 
sincerely aim at the good of precious souls. God is 
glorified when souls are benefited, and gladly would 
I be instrumental in that blessed work. I would not 
be a barren tree in a vineyard, cumbering the ground ; 
but by God's help I would do some good in the world, 
and I know no greater good I can be capable of 
than doing good to souls. I desire to be an instru- 
ment in God's hand of softening hard hearts, quick- 
ening dead hearts, humbling proud hearts, comfort- 
ing sorrowful hearts ; and if I may be enabled to 
do this, I have what I would have. If God denies 
me this, and suflfers me to labor in vain, though I 
should get hundreds a year by my labor, it would 
be the constant grief and trouble of my soul ; and 
if I do not gain souls, I shall enjoy all my other 
gains with very httle satisfaction. Though even in 



52 



MEMOIR OF THE 



that case it would be some comfort, that the reward 
is not according to the success, but according to the 
faithfulness. But I seriously profess it, if I could 
foresee that my ministry would be wholly unprofita- 
ble, and that I should be no instrument of good to 
souls, though in other respects I might get enough 
by it, I would rather beg my bre^d from door to 
door, than undertake this great work. 
" Q. V. What do I want ? 

*' And what special things am I now to desire of 
God, the God of all grace ? When I know whither 
to go for supplies, I am concerned to inquire what 
my necessities are? The requests I have to put to 
God are such as these : ' 

"1. That he would fix, and confirm, and establish 
my heart in my dedication of myself to the work of 
the ministry. My carnal heart is sometimes ready to 
suggest to me, that I had better take some other way 
of living that would be less toilsome and perilous, 
and more pleasant and gainful ; and the devil joins 
issue with my heart, and sets before me the profits 
and preferments I might possibly have in another 
way, and the trouble and reproach I am like to meet 
with in this way. Now, O that my God would re- 
strain the tempter, and satisfy me in my choice, and 
furnish me with suitable considerations with which 
to answer such suggestions ; and in order thereunto, 
give me believing views of eternity, having delib- 
erately devoted myself to the work of the Lord, 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



S3 



keep it always in the imagination of the thoughts of 
my heart, and estabUsh my way before him. 

" 2. That he would in a special manner be present 
"with me in the ordinance of dedication, filling my 
heart with such an experimental sense of the ex- 
cellency of Christ, and the comforts of the Holy 
Ghost, that I may have cause to remember it, by a 
good token, as long as I live ; that he would man- 
ifest himself to me, mark me for himself, and leave 
some sign behind him in my soul, that may make it 
evident God was there of a truth ; that he would give 
me a comfortable earnest of the success of my minis- 
try, by a signal owning of me in my entrance upon it. 

"3. That he would fit and qualify me for this 
great work to which he is calling me. When Saul 
was anointed king, 'God gave Am another heart' — 
a heart fit for kingship. I would fain have another 
heart, a heart fit for ministerial work, filled with 
ministerial gifts and graces. 

"(1.) Ministerial gifts: every good gift comes 
from above, and therefore I look upwards for gifts 
of knowledge in the mysteries of religion ; gifts of 
utterance to explain and apply myself to others, and 
to speak the word with boldness. I have also need 
of prudence and discretion to order the affairs of 
my ministry. 

" (2.) Ministerial graces : faith, love to God and 
souls, zeal for God's glory and souls' good ; pa- 
tience to do, to suffer, and to wait ; an inward sense 



54 



MEMOIR OF THE 



of the weight of the things I speak of. Two graces 
I do more especially beg of God : 

" Sincerity. That I may be really as good as I 
seem to be ; that inward impressions may always be 
answerable to outward expressions in all my minis- 
trations ; that my eye may be single, my heart up- 
right, and my ends fixed ; that I may not cast the 
least glance at any low, by, base end. 

''Humility. That God would hide pride from 
me, and clothe me with humility, that I may see 
that I have nothing, except my sins, but what I 
have received ; that I may never please myself with 
the praises of men, but hand up all the praise to 
God ; that the least workings of pride and conceit- 
edness may be checked in me. 

*' 4. That God would open a door of opportunity 
to me, and make my way plain before me, that the 
call I have to my work may be clear and satisfying, 
and that God would bless and succeed my endeavors 
for the good of souls. 

" Q. VI. What are my purposes and resolutions 
for the future ? 

" This is also a requisite inquiry, when I am to 
put on a new character, and one so honorable. What 
shall I do that I may * walk worthy of the vocation 
wherewith I am called?' 

" 1. I purpose and resolve, by the grace of God, 
that I TV ill have no more to do with the unfruitful 
works of darkness, seeing it will not only be my duty 



REV. MATTHEW HEXRY. 



as a Christian, but my office as a minister, to reprove 
them rather. 'Pride, passion, worldhness, wanton- 
ness, vanity, are things the man of God must flee.' 
1 Tim., 6:11. What have I to do any more with 
idols ? What have I to do any more with sin ? By 
the grace of God it shall not have dominion over 
me. The ministerial character will add a great ag- 
gravation to every sin ; and therefore, 0 my soul, 
^tand in awe, and sin not. 

" 2. I purpose and resolve that, by the grace of 
God, I will abound more than ever in all manner of 
gospel obedience ; that I will strive to be more hum- 
ble, serious, and watchful, and self-denying, and 
live more above the world, and the things of it ; 
that I will pray with more life, and read the Scrip- 
tures with more care, and not be slothful in busi- 
ness, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord ; that 
I will abound in good discourse, as I have ability 
and opportunity, with prudence ; endeavoring as 
much as I can to 'adorn the doctrine of God my 
Saviour in all things.* 

"3. In particular, I resolve in the strength, spirit, 
and grace of Jesus Christ my Lord, to consider well 
and perform my ordination vows ; to hold fast the 
form of sound words which I have heard and re- 
ceived, in 'faith and love which is in Christ Jesus;' 
and never to let go any truth, whatever it cost me ; 
ever owning the Scriptures as the only rule of faith 
and practice. 



5a 



MEMOIR OF THE 



** That I will wholly give up myself to the work, 
and employ all my talents in the service of God and 
souls, with seriousness and seduhty : that I will not 
only preach, but to the utmost of my power defend, 
the truths of God against all opposers, and do all I 
can to convince or silence gainsayers. 

" That I will endeavor to maintain not only truth, 
but peace and unity in the church of God ; that I 
will patiently bear, and thankfully accept, the ad- 
monitions of my brethren, and esteem such smitings 
as an excellent oil that shall not break my head. 

" That if ever God shall call me to the charge of 
a family, I will walk before my house in a perfect 
way, with an upright heart, not doubting but that 
then God will come unto me ; my house shall be a 
Bethel ; wherever I have a tent, God shall have an 
altar ; and Joshua's resolution shall be mine : * What- 
ever others do, I and my house will serve the Lord.* 

" That if ever God calls me to the charge of a 
flock, I resolve, by his grace, with all possible dili- 
gence to lay out myself for the spiritual good of 
those over whom God shall set me; and that in 
conversation I will endeavor to be an example to 
the flock, going before them in the way to heaven ; 
and will improve all the interest I have, and all the 
authority I may have, for the honor of God, the 
good of souls, and the edifying of the mystical body 
of Christ. 

*' Whatever opposition I may meet with in my 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



57 



work, by the grace of God I will not be terrified 
with it, nor frightened by the winds and clouds from 
sowing and reaping; but, in the strength of my God, 
go on in the midst of discouragements : and if God 
shall call me to sufferings, which I promise to expect 
and count upon, I will, by the grace of God, sutler 
cheerfully and courageously for the truths and ways 
of Christ; 'choosing rather, with Moses, to suffer 
affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the 
pleasures of sin, which are but for a season ;' and I 
will esteem not only the crown of Christ, but the 
reproach of Christ, greater riches than the treasures 
of Egypt, having respect to the recompense of re- 
ward. 

"This is the substance of what I promise in the 
strength of the Spirit in the grace of Christ; and 
having sworn by his strength I will perform it, that 
I will keep his righteous judgments, and the Lord 
keep it always in the imagination of the thoughts of 
my heart, and establish my way before him." 

Under the deep and solemn impression of these 
scriptural views of himself, and God, and duty, and 
of these holy resolutions, made in the strength of 
divine grace, Mr. Henry applied to those leading 
Presbyterian divines in London to whom he was 
best known, for the rite of ordination; and, on the 
9th of May, 1687, after due examination and the 
performance of the usual exercises, together with a 



58 



MEMOIR OF THE 



full confession of his faith, he was solemnly, but 
privately, ordained, by imposition of hands, with 
fasting and prayer. He was ordained privately, on 
account of the ecclesiastical commotions of the times. 
And the same reasons prevented him from receiving 
the usual certificate. His ordainers signed only the 
following brief memorial. Mr. Tong remarks, that 
some of them were very aged and very cautious." 
The memorial was, 

*' We, whose names are subscribed, are well as- 
sured that Mr. Matthew Henry is an ordained min- 
ister of the Gospel. 

" Sic testor, 

" W. WICKENS. 
"FRAN. TALLENTS. 
" EDW. LAW^RENCE. 
"NATH. VINCENT. 
"JAMES OWEN. 
"RICH. STEELE. 

" May 9th, 1687." 

Thus sanctioned, Mr. Henry returned to the coun- 
try, determined, in dependence upon divine aid, to 
"serve God with his spirit in the Gospel of his 
Son." 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY, 



59 



CHAPTER IV. 

B\s settlement at Chester — Marriage to Miss Hardware — 
Death of Mrs. Henry — Marriage to Miss Warburton — 
Family afflictions, and reflections upon them. 

On the 1st of June, 1687, Mr. Henry accompanied 
a deputation, who had waited upon him from Ches- 
ter, to his future dweUing-place ; and on the follow- 
ing day commenced a career of sacred usefulness in 
that city by preaching the usual Thursday lecture. 
His text was, 1 Cor. 2:2, "I determined not to 
know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and 
him crucified." Mr. Tong was present, a witness 
of the joy and thankfulness of the people. "It 
may be truly said," he remarked, "that they re- 
ceived their new minister as an angel of God." 

Besides much agreeable society which Mr. Henry 
found at Chester, his settlement was rendered still 
more pleasing to himself, by the marriage, not long 
afterwards, of three of his sisters, to Mr. Radford, 
Mr. Hulton, and Dr. Tylston, all excellent and pious 
men, who were constant attendants on his ministry. 

But that which rendered Chester still more agree- 
able to him, was an introduction to the Hardware 
family at Moldsworth. The son, Mr. John Hard- 
ware, had married a daughter of Mr. Hunt of Bo- 
reatton ; and he had an only sister, dwelling with 
her parents, of whose estimable qualities Mr. Henry, 



60 



MEMOIR OF THE 



when in London, had heard enough to excite his cu- 
riosity and attention : his character, also, had been 
favorably represented at Boreatton in her hearing, 
and she knew his sisters. So far, therefore, they 
were mutually prepossessed in each other's favor; 
nor had their personal acquaintance continued long 
before Mr. Henry disclosed anxieties, which, being 
known, were not ungraciously received. 

Of Miss Hardware's parents, little is now known ; 
but that little is abundantly honorable to their 
memory. Her father was a serious Christian, very 
conscientious, remarkable for temperance, and love 
to the duty of prayer, and an old puritan. Her 
mother was eminent for wisdom and grace. She 
walked with God, and looked well to the ways of 
her household. 

Mr. Hardware, and Mr. John Hardware, the father 
and brother, readily accepted Mr. Henry's propo- 
sals ; but Mrs. Hardware felt a considerable degree 
of hesitation. She viewed her daughter as her only 
one, and as the expectant of a considerable worldly 
portion ; she contemplated her other recommenda- 
tions, both personal and acquired ; several gentle- 
men, too, of much larger estate than Mr. Henry, 
had made advances which had been declined ; on 
which account she feared the reproach of negli- 
gence, or of having made a sacrifice to the interests 
of a party. No one could esteem Mr. Henry more 
highly than she did ; she valued him as a minister 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



61 



and a friend; but she thought it a duty to make 
better provision for her child. She knew that the 
ministry, especially of the non- conformists, was de- 
spised, and liberty very precarious. In the event 
of persecution, she was apprehensive lest her daugh- 
ter, who had been tenderly brought up, and every- 
where treated with respect and honor, might be 
deficient in the exercise of faith and patience ; and, 
if she were not to stoop to the cross, a great addi- 
tion would be made to Mr. Henry's troubles, at a 
time when comfort would be most needtd. 

All these scruples, were, however, at length hap- 
pily removed ; and the youthful couple were mar- 
ried in the month of August, 1687. The marriage 
brought to remembrance the fact that a hke event 
had once been desired by Mr. Hardware in reference 
to Mr. Henry's mother ; and the circumstance ren- 
dered the recent alhance additionally observable 
and interesting, 

Mr. and Mrs. Hardware now removed to Chester, 
and Mr. and Mrs. Henry boarded with them. A 
favorable opportunity Avas thus furnished of judging 
how well their daughter had been bestowed ; and 
when they thus additionally beheld Mr. Henry's 
pious and pleasant deportment, his excellent tem- 
per, and great diligence and prudence, they were 
far from repenting what had taken place. Mrs. 
Hardware, indeed, severely reflected upon herself, 
for having opposed the marriage. She was now 



m 



MEMOIR OF THE 



sensible of the advantages she and her husband en- 
joyed, in their declining years, from the expositions, 
and sermons, and prayers, of their son-in law. She 
admired the goodness of God in overruling her owji 
inclinations, and choosing for her daughter and her- 
self an inheritance in ail respects so superior to 
what she would have selected had her own will 
prevailed. She expressed her conviction, that the 
objections which have been narrated arose from 
covetousness and pride, although, at the time, she 
herself was not aware of it. So industrious is the 
great enemy of souls with good people continually, 
and when they least suspect it. 

But the union, propitious as in all respects it ap- 
peared, was destined, like every sublunary joy, to 
be of short duration. A short time before Mrs. 
Henry was permitted to know the felicity of mater- 
nal affection, she was attacked by the small-pox, 
which proved fatal. She died in the hope of a 
blessed immortality, on the 14th of February, 1689, 
aged twenty-five years. 

Mrs. Hardware, though overwhelmed with sorrow, 
seemed to bear the affliction with more composure 
than Mr. Henry. An eye-witness told Mr. Tong, 
that when she saw her beloved child a corpse, she 
was enabled to check her grief, and almost imme- 
diately, with devout and patriarchal submission, to 
say, " It is the Lord. I have done ; I have done. 
I will not repine." She even attempted the conso- 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



tion of others, and upbraiding herself for not having 
more freely consented to the nuptials, added, " God, 
who knew how long my child had to Uve, brought 
her into Mr. Henry's family to prepare her for 
heaven." 

Between Mr. Tong and the bereaved husband, 
the interview was peculiarly affecting. As soon as 
tears would permit utterance, Mr. Henry's first 
words were, " I know nothing that could support 
me under such a loss as this, but the good hope 
that she is gone to heaven, and that, in a little time, 
I shall follow her thither." Mr. Lawrence preached 
at her funeral from Phil. 1 : 21, "To die is gain." 
It was no small alleviation of Mr. Henry's grief, 
that the life of his "first-born" was spared. A 
visit, also, from his excellent father, contributed 
much to his comfort in this time of need. 

Mr. Henry continued to reside with the parents 
of his lamented wife ; and, notwithstanding the 
depth of his grief, was enabled to persevere in the 
entire discharge of his ministerial duties. At length, 
through the kind interference of his mother-in-law, 
his loss was repaired. Mrs. Hardware not only ad- 
, vised a second marriage, but recommended one of 
III her own relatives, Mary, a daughter of Robert War- 
burton, Esq., of Grange, in the county of Chester. 
The testimony borne, by this recommendation, to 
Mr. Henry's conjugal character, is highly honorable ; 
and it is due to the lady who became his second 



64 



MEMOIR OF THE 



wife, to remark, tLat its value derives no small in- 
crease from the respectability and virtues of herself 
and her ancestors. 

On this, as on the former occasion, the predilec- 
tion for the "seed of the righteous," which Mr. 
Henry had been taught to cherish, was strongly 
marked. Miss Warburton's grandfather, Peter War- 
burton, Esq., was chief-justice of Chester, of honor- 
able descent, and distinguished learning and piety ; 
and her father, Robert Warburton, Esq., who, in 
consequence of the death of two elder brothers in 
infancy, inherited the estate, possessed also the 
like precious faith. Much attached to retirement, 
especially in his latter days, he spent the greater 
part of his time in reading and prayer. The Bible, 
and Baxter's Saints' Everlasting Rest, lay daily be- 
fore him on his parlor table. His house was a 
sanctuary to the silenced ministers, and to those 
who adhered to them. The cause of non- conformity 
was fully approved by him, and he never deserted 
it. Miss Warburton's mother was also a very strict 
and serious Christian. 

The marriage was solemnized July 8, 1690, at 
Grange. Mr. and Mrs. Philip Henry were present, 
rejoicing in their acquaintance with so worthy a 
family, and their relation to it. After the lapse of 
a few days, they accompanied their son and daugh- 
ter to Chester ; and having left them there in com- 
fort, returned to their habitation at Broad Oak, 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



65 



blessing God who had thus mercifully filled up the 
former breach, and restored to their son the honor 
and comforts of matrimony. Mr. and Mrs. Hard- 
ware, having seen Mr. Henry again settled accord- 
ing to their desire, retired from Chester to their 
OAvn estate at Bromborough Court, in Wirral. 

Ere one year had elapsed, the happiness of Mr. 
Henry in his second marriage was interrupted by the 
sickness of an infant daughter, born April 12, 1691. 
Three days before the child's death, he wrote, 
** I desire to leave her in the arms of Him who 
gave her to me. The will of the Lord be done. I 
have said, if the Lord will spare her, I will endeavor 
to bring her up for him. I am now sitting by her, 
thinking of the mischievous nature of original sin, by 
which death reigns over poor infants." 

The following passage, penned July 19, 1692, 
the day on which the little one expired, needs no 
comment to make it intelligible. Christian parents, 
especially if they have been bereaved, will fully un- 
derstand it ; and every reader may behold, as in a 
glass, the resource and duty of the believer, when 
bowed down with sorrow. " In the morning I had 
the child in my arms, endeavoring solemnly to give 
her up to God, and to bring my heart to his will ; 
and presently there seemed some reviving. But 
while I was writing this, I was suddenly called out 
of my study. I went for the doctor, and brought 
him with me ; but, as soon as we came in, the sweet 

Matthew Hearf. ^ 



66 



MEMOIR OF THE 



babe quietly departed, between the mother's arms 
and mine, Avithout any struggle, for nature was 
spent by its long illness ; and now my house is a 
house of mourning." 

" She was a pretty, forward child, and very ap- 
prehensive ; she began to go and talk, and observe 
things very prettily. I had set my affection much 
-upon her. I am afraid too much ; God is wise, and 
righteous, and faithful. Even this, also, is not only 
consistent with, but flowing from covenant love. 
It is this day five years since I was first married. 
God has been teaching me to sing of mercy and of 
judgment. Lord, make me more perfect at my les- 
son, and show me wherefore thou contendest w^ith 
me. Lord, wean me from this world by it. Blessed 
be God for the covenant of grace with me and mine ; 
it is well ordered in all things, and sure. 0 that I 
could learn now to comfort others with the same 
comforts with which, I trust, I am comforted of 
God ! This goes near, but, 0 Lord, I submit. My 
dear wife is much distressed. The Lord sustain 
her. I would endeavor to comfort her. We are 
now preparing for a decent interment of my poor 
babe. Many friends come to see us. I am much 
refreshed with 2 Kings, 4 : 26 : ' Is it well with thee? 
Is it well with thy husband ? Is it well with the child ? 
And she said, It is well.' When I part with so 
dear a child, yet I have no reason to say otherwise 
but that it is well with us, and well with the child ; 



REV. .MATTHEW HENRY. 



67 



for all is well that God doeth. He performetli the 
thing that he appointed for me, and his appoint- 
ment of this providence is in pursuance of his ap- 
pointment of me to glory, to make me meet for it." 

One extract more will record the funeral. " I 
have been this day doing a work I never did before, 
burying a child ; a sad day's work ; but my good 
friend Mr. Lawrence preached very seasonably and 
excellently, at the lecture in the afternoon, from 
Psalm 39 : 9 : *I was dumb; I opened not my 
mouth, because thou didst it.' My friends testified 
their kindness by their presence. There is now a 
pretty little garment laid up in the wardrobe of the 
grave, to be worn again at the resurrection. Blessed 
be God for the hope of this." 

In due time it pleased the Father of mercies to 
heal the breach, by again making Mrs. Henry a joy- 
ful mother ; but in less than three weeks this child 
also died, after a day's sickness. Mr. Henry re- 
ceived this stroke, sudden and afl'ecting as it was, 
with primitive meekness and resignation. In refer- 
ence to it, he wrote, ''The Lord is righteous; he 
takes and gives, and gives and takes again. I desire 
to submit : but, 0 Lord, show me Avherefore thou 
contendest with me." 

On the following Sabbath, he endeavored pub- 
licly to improve the bereavement. In the morning 
he expounded the 38th chapter of Job, where God 
BO largely asserts his sovereignty, and challenges all 



68 



MEMOIR OF THE 



who presume to arraign the wisdom and equity of 
his proceedings. "Was it fit," Mr. Henry inquired, 
" that Job should quarrel with God as to his par- 
ticular providences to him, when he was so unac- 
quainted with the methods of his providence in gen- 
eral ?" He then preached from Romans 5 : 14 : 
*' Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam to Moses, 
even over them that had not sinned after the simili- 
tude of Adam's transgression, who is the figure of 
him that was to come." After ably illustrating the 
dominion of death, especially in reference to infants, 
who, though not guilty of actual sin, are the sub- 
jects of his kingdom, he thus addressed such as 
were, or had been, called to lose their little ones : 
*' Resign, and give up your dying children to God. 
They cannot do it. You must do it for them. 
Father, into thy hands I commit my child's spirit. 
They are his by right ; and his by )^our consent. 
You should restore them when he calls for them, 
and do it freely. I know it is hard, but it must be 
done. Let their death bring your sin to remem- 
brance. Did you not sin in an inordinate desire of 
children ? Perhaps, in discontent, or pov^erty, you 
have thought them too many. It may be you were 
overfond of them, or too indulgent. My pride, my 
passion, my covetousness, these slew my child. 
Learn to bear it patiently. Do not murmur. If 
I am bereaved of my children, said the patriarch, 
I am bereaved ; not, I am undone. The Shu- 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



69 



namite said, It is well, for all is well tliat God 
doeth." 

In the review which Mr. Henry penned on the 
termination of this year, he evidently had the scenes 
through which he had passed full in view. Yet it 
is worthy of notice how entire is the absence of 
either complaint or repining. There is, indeed, an 
expression of sorrow ; but it arose from the tender- 
ness of a contrite spirit ; it stands associated with 
Liratitude ; and was influenced, and rendered even 
-:icred, by the aspirations of evangelical hope. "I 
am now come,'" he says, "to the close of another 
vear, which has begun and ended with a Sabbath. 
I have received many mercies the year that is past. 
I have been brought low, and helped. My dear 
wife is spared. I am yet in the land of the living, 
though many have been taken away. But how 
little have I done for God. What will become of 
me, I know not. I find little growth. If any thing 
hath at any time afifected me this year, it hath been 
some sweet desires of the glory which is to be re- 
vealed. I have often thought of it as that which 
Avould help me in my present duty." 



70 



MEMOIR OF THE 



CHAPTER V. 

Death of Mr. Warburton — Death of Philip Henry — Reflec- 
tions on the event — Further bereavements, and Letter oc- 
casioned by them — Death of his daughter Ann — Devout 
exercises on his Birthday and the close of the year — At- 
tention to the orphan children of Mrs. Radford. 

For a few years, the candle of the Lord shone 
upon Mr. Henry almost without interruption, and, 
comparatively, he enjoyed rest. But even in sea- 
sons of rejoicing, he had learned to remember the 
days of darkness." And there can be no question 
that the sanctified mercies, which, from his papers, he 
seems to have experienced, had a salutary influence 
upon the trials through which he was soon to pass. 
Sometimes he expatiated upon the goodness of God 
in affording to his people extraordinary consolations, 
that they might be the better fitted to endure afflic- 
tion when it might be sent; observing that ''those 
who were to be witnesses of Christ's agony, were 
the witnesses of his transfiguration." 

The return of the chastening hand of God upon 
him, may be assigned to April, 1696. On the 14th 
of that month, his father-in-law, Mr. Warburton, 
was taken, in a good old age, to his final home. 
There was every thing in the event to mitigate 
grief; surprise had been prevented by long expec- 
tation, and by the pressure of complicated infirmi- 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



71 



ties ; and death, beyond all doubt, was " gain " to 
him. Still, notwithstanding every alleviation, the 
stroke was deeply felt. 

But this was only preparatory to another afflic- 
tive dispensation. His own father, in the enjoyment 
of ordinary health, and active usefulness, and far 
from being advanced in years, was shortly after- 
wards suddenly arrested by sickness, and, in a few 
hours, translated to heaven. The day was, mdeed, 
a day of grief, and of the deepest sorrow. No rep- 
resentation can equal his OAvn account of the melan- 
choly event. 

"June 23, 1696. This afternoon, about three 
o'clock, my father's servant came for the doctor, 
with the tidings that my dear father was taken sud- 
denly ill. I had then some of my friends about me, 
and they were cheerful with me, but this struck a 
damp upon all. I had first thought not to have 
gone till the next day, it being somewhat late, and 
very wet ; and had written half a letter to my dear 
mother, but I could not help going ; and I am glad 

1 did go, for I have often thought of that, 2 Kings, 

2 : 10, *If thou see me when I am taken up from 
thee,' etc. The doctor and I came to Broad Oak 
about eight o'clock, and found him in great extrem- 
ity of pain : nature, through his great and unwearied 
labors, unable to bear up, and sinking under the 
load. As soon as he saw me, he said, * 0 son, you 
are welcome to a dying father ; I am now ready to 



72 



MEMOIR OF THE 



be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. 
The Lord bless you, and grant that you may do 
worthily in your generation, and be more service- 
able to the church of God than I have been.' Such 
was his great humihty to the last. And when I 
replied, ' 0, sir, pray for me that I may but tread 
in your steps,' he answered, * Yea, follow peace and 
holiness, and let them say what they will.' More 
he would have said, to bear his dying testimony to 
the way in which he had walked, but nature was 
spent, and he had not strength to express it. A 
little after midnight, my mother holding his hands 
as he sat in bed, and I holding the pillow to his 
back, he very quietly, and without any struggling, 
groan, or rattling, breathed out his dear soul into 
the hands of the Lord Jesus Christ, whom he had 
faithfully served. 

" And now, what is this that God hath done unto 
us ? The thing itself, and the suddenness of it, are 
very affecting ; but the wormwood and the gall in 
it is, that it looks like a token of God's displeasure 
to us who survive. The Lord calls my sins to re- 
membrance this day, that I have not profited by 
him while he was with us as I should have done. 
Our family worship this morning was very melan- 
choly; the place was Allon-hachuth, the oak of 
weeping ; the little children were greatly affected, 
and among the neighbors was heard nothing but 
lamentation and mourning; my dear mother cast 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



73 



down, but not in despair. I, for my part, am full 
of confusion, and like a man astonished." 

On Friday following, the corpse being yet un- 
buried, the time appointed for keeping a public fast 
arrived. Prevented by the solemn occurrence from 
observing it at Chester, Mr. Henry improved it at 
Broad Oak. His own memorandum is as uncom- 
mon as it is instructive, and demonstrates not only 
an astonishing degree of self-command, but also a 
devotedness to the glory of God which is truly ad- 
mirable. 

" June 26, 1696. This day is appointed a public 
fast ; my place is now vacant ; it did not use to be 
so, but God will have it so now. I had thought 
not to have done any thing at Broad Oak, and had 
given notice accordingly ; but I see the people come 
in, and are greatly aflfected that their minister should 
be taken away from them, just before a fast which 
he had given notice of on the Lord's day, both 
morning and evening, and had earnestly pressed 
them to the due observation of it. I remember I 
had often heard my father say, * weeping must not 
hinder sowing I therefore thought it my duty to 
spend two or three hours in the meeting-place, put- 
ting the people in mind that we had kept too many 
fasts with dry eyes, under melting ordinances, but 
God had caused us to keep this fast with wet eyes, 
under a melting providence. I preached from 2 
Kings, 13 : 20 : 'Elisha died, and the bands of the 



74 



MEMOIR OF THE 



Moabites invaded the land.' The removal of public 
useful instruments is a sad presage of public dread- 
ful judgments." 

Mr. Henry's diary furnishes a continuation of the 
affecting narrative. 

"June 27. The day of my father's funeral; 
melancholy work. O that by this providence I 
might contract an habitual gravity, seriousness, and 
thoughtfulness of death and eternity. Our friends 
most affectionately sympathize with us, and do him 
honor at his death. How has this providence made 
Broad Oak, like a wilderness, desolate and solitary ; 
and the poor people, as sheep without a shepherd." 

"July 1. I returned late to Chester, and found 
the children well. The next day I studied, and 
preached the lecture from 2 Peter, 1 : 13, 14 : ' Yea, 
I think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, 
to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance ; 
knowing that shortly I must put off this my taber- 
nacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath showed 
me.' 0 that it might be preached to my own 
heart, and written there ; that in consideration of 
my being to depart hence shortly, I may double my 
diligence. 

" And now I have had time to reflect on this sad 
providence. What shall I say to these things ? 

''1. I bless God that ever I had such a father, 
whose temper was so very happy, and his gifts and 
graces so very bright ; one that recommended relig- 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



75 



ion, and the power of godliness, by a cheerful and 
endearing conversation ; that had himself, and taught 
others, the art of obliging. I bless God that I had 
him so loner, that he was not removed from me when 
I was a child ; that I have not been left to mj^self, 
to be a grief and heaviness to him ; nothing made 
me differ from the worst, but the free grace of God ; 
to that grace be the glory of all the benefit that my 
father was to me, and the comfort I was to him. 

"2. I have a great deal of reason to be humbled, 
and ashamed, that I have profited and improved no 
more by my relation to so good a man ; that I have 
not better transcribed that fair copy of humility, 
meekness, candor, and zealous piety. 0 that the 
remembrance of him may have a greater influence 
upon me than the personal converse had ! 

" 3. Death comes nearer and nearer to me. ' Lord, 
make me to know mine end, and teach me to num- 
ber my days.' In January last, death came into our 
classis, and removed good Mr. Kinaston of Knuts- 
ford ; in February, death came into the Friary," that 
part of the city where Mr. Henry resided, " and 
took away Mrs. Cook ; in March, death came into 
my house, and carried away my cousin Aldersey ; 
in April, it came into our family, in the death of my 
father Warburton ; at the end of May, I said with 
thankfulness, Here is a month past in which I have 
not buried one friend ; but June has brought it 
nearest of all, and speaks very loud to me to be 



76 



3IEM0IR OF THE 



ready to go after. The Lord prepare me for a dying 
hour, that will come certainly, and may come sud- 
denly ; that when it comes I may have nothing to 
do hut to die. 

" 4. The great honor and respect paid to his 
memory, and the good name he has left behind 
him, should encourage me to faithfulness and use- 
fulness. The Scripture is fulfilled : * Them that honor 
me, I will honor,' and ' Before honor is humility.' 

** 5. This should bring me nearer to God, and 
make me live more upon him, who is the fountain 
of living waters. My dear father was a counsellor 
to me, but Christ is the wonderful counsellor. He 
was an intercessor for me, but Christ is an interces- 
sor that lives for ever, and is, therefore, able to save 
to the uttermost. Xor are the prayers that he has 
put up for me and mine lost, but I trust we shall 
be reaping the fruit of them now he is gone. I 
have had much comfort in hearing God speak to 
me by this Scripture : * Wilt thou not from this time 
cry unto me, My Father, thou art the guide of my 
youth ?' Jer. 3 : 4. My dear father wrote to me 
lately upon the death of my father Warburton, 
* Your fathers, where are they ? One gone, and 
the other going ; but you have a good Father in 
heaven, that lives for ever.' Abba, Father, the 
Lord teach me to cry so, and to come into the 
holiest as to my Father's house ; and let these things 
be written upon my heart. Amen, Amen." 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



77 



On the next sacramental occasion he again at- 
tempted, with great seriousness and dehberation, to 
improve the event ; being desirous, as he expressed 
it, to bring the ordinance home to the providence, 
and to have a particular reference to it in the cove- 
nant which he w^as to renew with God at his table. 
His views may be gathered from his own words : 

"1. I would, in this ordinance of the Lord's sup- 
per, very particularly eye God as a father, as my 
Father. My father who is gone, was to me a faith- 
ful reprover, teacher, and counsellor. I desire, 
therefore, at this time, more expressly than ever, to 
take the Spirit of God to be my reprover, teacher, 
and counsellor. I was often refreshed in visitinof 
my father, and conversing with him ; I would, by 
the grace of God, have more fellowship with the 
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, whom I 
may be free with. 

"2. There are some things I would more partic- 
ularly engage myself to, upon this providence ; the 
Lord direct, confirm, and ratify good resolutions. 
I will now labor and endeavor, in the strencrth of 
the grace of Christ, and the Lord give me a suffi- 
ciency of his grace, 

"■(1.) To be more grave and serious; partly as 
the fruit of this sad and solemn providence, which 
should not only affect me for the present, but alter 
me for the future, and make me habitually more 
serious ; partly because, my father being now re- 



78 



MEMOIR OF THE 



moved, I have almost lost the epithet of a young 
man, which uses to pass for some excuse. It is 
time to lay aside vanity. 

"(2.) To be more meek and humble, courteous 
and candid ; because these were the graces that my 
dear father was eminent for, and God owned him 
in them, and men honored him for them. I am 
sensible of too much hastiness of spirit. I would 
learn to be of a cool, mild spirit. 

" (3.) To be more diligent and industrious in im- 
proving my time, for I see it is hastening off apace ; 
and I desire to have it filled up, because I see I 
must shortly put off this my tabernacle, and there 
is no working in the grave." 

The work of the day being over, he goes on to 
remark, "1 have been full of distractions, which 
have much discouraged me ; yet I had some com- 
munion with God in this day's work, beyond what 
I expected, though not what I earnestly desired. 
I have solemnly renewed my covenants with the 
Lord at his table, and particularly those above- 
written. The Lord give me his grace, that having 
made these vows, I may make them good." 

Honorable as the preceding extracts unquestion- 
ably are to the memory of one of the most illus- 
trious men whose name has been perpetuated in the 
churches, it is difficult to say whether they do not 
shed equal lustre upon the bereaved and heavenly- 
minded writer. Where shall we find the indications 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



79 



of a deeper or more chastened sorrow, or the tokens 
of more lowly resignation, or the aspirations of more 
sacred desires, or the evidences of more pure and 
elevated piety ? 

The following memoranda, written at subsequent 
periods, and more remote from the bitter scene, 
discover a similar spirit, and breathe a fragrance 
no less celestial. 

"October 18, 1C96. This day completes the 
thirty-fourth year of my age. I have endeavored 
this morning to get my heart affected with the sin 
in which I was born, and with the sins of my life 
hitherto ; and with the mercy of my birth, and the 
mercies of my life hitherto. The Lord enable me 
to live a life of repentance, and a life of thankful- 
ness." 

"December 31, 1696. This year is at an end. 
On the first day of it, I preached from Proverbs 
27 : 1, 'Boast not thyself of to-morrow; for thou 
knowest not what a day may bring forth/ My 
fathers, where are they ? And where am I ? Hast- 
ing after them. I have lost much time this year ; 
but if, through grace, I have got any good, it is a 
greater indifferency to the things of this world. 
The Lord increase it." 

During the following year, Mr. Henry was called 
to experience further bereavements. In the month 
of August three of his sisters were successively 
seized with alarming illness. One of them, Mrs; 



80 



MEMOIR OF THE 



Tj^lston, recovered ; but tlie other two, Mrs. Rad- 
ford and Mrs. Hulton, both exemplary Christians, 
entered into rest. On this occasion he wrote, " I 
find it hard to submit. Let the grace of Christ be 
sufficient for me. I have said it, and I do not un- 
say it — Lord, thy will be done." 

On the death of Mrs. Hulton, which occurred 
about three weeks later than Mrs. Radford's, he ad- 
dressed to another sister the following admirable 
letter. The advice which it contains to Christian 
mourners can never be out of season ; and the train 
of thought is as felicitous as the testimony to the 
deceased is honorable and exciting. 

" For Mrs. Savage, at Wrenbury Wood. 

" Chester, September 8, 1697. 

My dear Sister — I find it very easy to say a 
great deal to aggravate our loss ; and losers think 
they may have leave to speak. I can say that I 
have lost, not only a sister, but a true friend ; one 
of my * helpers in Christ Jesus ;' and one that was 
to me * as my own soul.' To lose such an one, in 
the midst of her days, at such a time as this, when 
so many decline, what shall I say to it ? I endeavor 
to silence myself with this, that the Lord hath done 
it, who gives not account of any of his matters, and 
in whose hands we and all our comforts are, * as the 
clay in the hand of the potter.' 

" But there is something more for us to satisfy 
ourselves with. The cloud has a bright side as well 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



81 



a dark one. If we look upon this providence as 
sent to call a dear friend home to heaven, and to 
help us onward in our way thither, the thing hath 
quite another aspect. Are we not born from heav- 
en, and bound to heaven ? Is not that our home, 
our country ? And are our relations any the less 
ours for being removed thither? And how long 
do we expect to stay behind ? We knew not the 
other day that it was so little a while and we 
should not see her ; and alas, now it is but a little 
while, and we shall see her, because Ave ' go to the 
Father.' 

" There is matter for praise and thanksgiving, 
even in this sad provideiKje : that we had such a 
relation — that we had her so long, and had so 
much comfort in her — that she shone so illustriously 
in gifts and graces — that she was enabled to finish 
well, and had, as she said, ' hope in her death 
she blessed God for the Scriptures, which were her 
cordial, and did not seem to be under any cloud as 
to her comforts — that she hath left a good name 
behind her : she dies as much lamented, as, I think, 
any woman in Chester since I knew it; for 'hei' 
hands and lips fed many ' — that she hath left chil- 
dren behind her, who we hope may live to glorify 
God in this world: — and that we do not 'sorrow as 
those who have no hope.' I shall want her con- 
verse, and you her correspondence ; but let us both 
converse and correspond the more with Jesus Christ; 

Matthew Henry. ^ 



82 



MEMOIR OF THE 



and that will help us to make up the want ; nay, 
that will be 'far better.' 

" Good Mr. Lawrence hath helped us well to im- 
prove the providence. The Lord help us with grace 
sufficient. A letter from our Friend in heaven is 
better than one from the best friend we have on earth. 
The Lord perfect what concerns you. Let us learn 
to sing both of mercy and judgment; and to sing 
unto God of both, till we come to sing of mercy 
only in the world of everlasting mercy. Our dear 
love to you and the children. I rest, 

Your affectionate brother, 

"M. H." 

On the arrival of another birthday anniversary, 
Mr. Henry marked it by reflections as appropriate 
and sensible as those which have already been no- • 
ticed. These reflections, though brief, are \ery com- 
prehensive. 

"October 18, 1697. Through the good hand of 
my God upon me, I have finished my thirty-fifth 
year—one- half of the age of man : as if now in the 
zenith, it is high noon with me ; but my sun may 
*go down at noon.' I was aff'ected this morning, 
when alone, in thinking ivkat I was born ! A ra- 
tional creature, a helpless creature, and a sinful 
creature. Where I was born ! In the church of 
God ; in a land of light ; in a house of prayer. 
What I was born for ! To glorify God my Maker, 
and prepare to get to heaven." 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



83 



The commencement of the next year was marked 
with equal seriousness. 

"January 1, 1698. My family is now in peace 
and health, through the goodness of God ; but I 
know not what a day, much less a year, may bring 
forth. I have begged to be ready for the trials and 
afflictions of the year, and for death, if it comes ; 
thinking this day what a mercy it is to be born in a 
land where God is known, and not where he is an 
unknown God. I begin the year with a solemn, re- 
newed dedication of myself, my whole self, to God 
in Christ, as my God, and Father, and portion. Let 
this be the axis and centre of every year's revolu- 
tion. Amen. 0 Lord, so be it." 

During this year Mr. Henry visited London for 
the first time since his settlement in Chester. The 
same tender regard for the glory of his Master, 
which has been so uniformly conspicuous, marked 
both the commencement and the prosecution of his 
journey. Before his departure, his friends were con- 
vened to implore a blessing on the undertaking ; 
and his praise abounded, that he was not " forced 
from home, nor going to follow a roving fancy, nor 
to seek his fortune." During his stay in the me- 
tropolis, he preached almost daily, with great ac- 
ceptance and favor. When he returned home, he 
carried with him the praises and admiration of his 
fellow- men and of his fellow- Christians. But nei- 
ther the attentions which he received, nor the pop- 



84 



MEMOIR OF THE 



ularity with which his services were marked, pro- 
duced any imdue exaltation. On the contrary, they 
seem to have increased his sense of unmerited good- 
ness, and to have filled him with penitence and as- 
tonishment. Under the date of October 18, 1698, 
he writes, " I have now weathered about thirty-six 
years. So long have I cumbered the ground, and 
yet I am spared ; others, much more useful, have 
never attained this age. I admire the patience of 
God, and I wonder at my own folly, that being up- 
on the brink of an awful, eternal state, I am so little 
affected with it. The Lord teach me with a strong 
hand." 

Soon afterwards another afflictive event occurred, 
which made an impression upon both Mr. and Mrs. 
Henry unusually deep, and which, on account of 
the ample scope which it furnished and secured for 
the renewed exercise of those principles which have 
already been so prommently exhibited, deserves more 
than mere registration. Their little daughter Ann, 
being attacked by the measles, sunk almost imme- 
diately into the arms of death. The surprise of her 
agitated parents in this bereavement was the greater, 
because, as Mr. Henry observed, though many chil- 
dren in Chester had the disease at the same time, 
yet he knew of none that died by it but his own 
child. " God in mere}'," was the beautiful and ap- 
propriate supplication of Mrs. Savage, " support 
and comfort the tender mother, that she may be a 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



85 



pattern of patience and quiet submission ; foras- 
much as it is fit the Master of the garden should 
pluck off which flower he pleases." 

Nor were the sentiments of Mr. Henry less beau- 
tiful, less appropriate, or less instructive. " My de- 
sire," he said, "is to be sensible of the affliction, 
and yet patient under it. It is a rod, a smarting 
rod. God calls my sin to remembrance ; the cold- 
ness of my love to himself ; my abuse of spiritual 
comforts. It is a rod in the hand of my Father. 
I desire in it to see a father's authority, who may 
do what he will, and a father's love, who will do 
what is best. We resigned the soul of the child to 
Him who gave it ; and, if the little ones have their 
angels, doubted not of their ministration in death, 
we have hope, through grace, that it is well with 
the child. Little children in heaven we look upon 
as the Via Lactea, the individuals scarce discernable, 
but altogether beautifying the heavens. We spent 
the day in sorrow for our affliction, our friends sym- 
pathizing with us ; one day committing the immortal 
soul to God ; this day committing the dust to the 
dust of the earth, as it was. I am ' in deaths oft.* 
Lord, teach me how to 'die daily.' I endeavored, 
when the child was put into the grave, to act faith 
upon the doctrine of the resurrection, believing in 
him who quickeneth the dead." 

Having completed his thirty-seventh year, Mr. 
Henry inserted the following remarks in his diary : 



86 



MEMOIR OF THE 



" October 18, 1699. I desire to be affected with 
God's goodness to me in my birth. I bless God 
that I have no cause to curse the day wherein I was 
bom, but having obtained help of God, I continue 
to this day. I desire to be thankful to God, that he 
has not left me to live an idle life ; but I have rea- 
son to lament my sins, and my sinful thoughts, by 
which I have lost much time. I have reason to ac- 
knowledge God's goodness to me, in giving me so 
great a degree of bodily health and strength above 
many of my brethren. I find not any sensible de- 
cay or prejudice by my work ; but I know that * my 
soul is continually in my hand,' and I am not sure 
to live another year." 

At the close of the year he also writes : 

"December 31, 1699. I asked by earnest and 
importunate supplication, 

" 1. For mercy and grace for my own soul ; that 
while I preach to others, I myself may not be cast 
away ; that my con-uptions may be mortified, and 
the interest of Christ preserved and advanced with- 
in me. I would wrestle with God for his Spirit to 
cleanse and sanctify me. 

" 2. For strength and success in my ministerial 
work, direction in the choice of subjects, and the 
guidance and assistance of the Spirit in studying 
sermons, to secure me from error and mistake, to 
lead me into all truth, and to furnish me with ac- 
ceptable words ; to be in me a Spirit of supplica- 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



87 



tion. And that the blessing of God may accompany 
all my endeavors. 0 that I may be instrumental 
to win souls to Christ, and to build them up ; that 
I may not labor in vain, but that God would give 
the increase. It is still my heart's desire to be more 
ready and more mighty in the Scriptures. 

" 3. For the staying of God's controversies with 
me and my family ; that God would make no fur- 
ther breaches. But this with submission to his 
blessed will. 

" 4. For the sanctifying of the breaches which 
have been made, that the impression of the provi- 
dences of the year may not wear off or be forgot- 
ten ; but that I may see ' my soul to be in my hand 
continually.' 

5. For the beheaded families, the widows and 
fatherless," etc. 

Mr. Henry did not, however, satisfy himself with 
praying for the fatherless. He espoused the cause 
of his sister Radford's orphan children, three daugh- 
ters and one son, who were left quite unprovided 
for. The situation in which he was thus placed 
was new to him, and involved duties which inter- 
fered in a measure with his ministerial work ; but it 
gave occasion for a further display of his varied and 
eminent virtues. Nor should it be omitted, that 
Mis. Henry heartily concurred in his kind designs, 
and aided their advancement ; and, amidst numerous 
and increasing avocations, treated the children with 



88. 



MEMOIR OF THE 



a kindness and assiduity truly maternal. Some of 
them remained in the family for several years : they 
all profited by instruction ; and acknowledged with 
gratitude the tender and affectionate attention of 
both their uncle and aunt. ''He that hath pity 
upon the poor, lendeth unto the Lord ; and that 
which he hath given, will he pay him again." As 
Christian parents know not what their own children 
may need, when they themselves are taken from 
them, so according to their ability should they com- 
miserate the orphan children of others; and Jeho- 
vah's promise herein secures, in one way or another, 
a rich reward. 



CHAPTER VI. 

Devout commencement of the year — Self-dedication — Birth- 
day memorials — Reflections and resolutions at the close and 
commencement of the year. 

There is often a great degree of uniformity in the 
life of a man of Mr. Henry's pursuits and character. 
Whilst the wicked are like the troubled sea, which 
cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt, the 
godly man, the pious, devoted pastor, frequently 
pursues the even tenor of his way, with but few 
incidents occurring to interest the spectator of his 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



89 



course. This was especially the case with the sub- 
ject of this memoir at the commencement, and for 
a few years following the commencement of the 
eighteenth century. The present chapter will there- 
fore be devoted to a few continuous extracts from 
his diary, which tend eminently to show that if 
there were few striking external circumstances oc- 
curring during this period, the mind and heart of 
the man of God were ripening for further usefulness 
on earth and higher glory in heaven. 

" This new-year's day," probably January 1, 1700, 
** I have solemnly renewed the resignation and sur- 
render of my whole self to God, as my God, de- 
liberately, and upon good considerations. I have 
renounced the world and the flesh, as knowing they 
cannot make me happy ; and have devoted my whole 
self to the blessed Spirit, to be enlightened, and 
sanctified, and so recommended to the Son, as qual- 
ified for an interest in his mediation, according to 
the tenor of the Gospel. I likewise devote myself, 
through the Spirit, to the Lord Jesus Christ, as my 
Advocate with the Father, relying upon Christ's 
righteousness alone ; for, without him, I am less 
than nothing, worse than nothing. I likewise de- 
vote myself, through the Lord Jesus Christ, to God 
the Father, as my chief good and highest end ; as 
the author of my being, to whom I am obliged in 
duty ; and the felicity of my being, to whom I am 
obhged in interest. 0 Lord, truly I am thy servant ; 



90 



MEMOIR OF THE 



may I ever be free in thy service, and never desire 
to be free from it. Nail my ear to thy door-posts, 
and let me serve thee for ever." 

" 1701, January 1. I solemnly renew the dedi- 
cation of myself unto God, thankfully acknowledg- 
ing and admiring his patience and forbearance to- 
wards me, that he has continued such a dry and 
barren tree as I am in his vineyard for so many 
years, and continued to me the gifts of his bounty 
and grace ; and particularly acknowledging the last 
year to have been a year of much mercy, especially 
in the encouragement given to my ministry ; — 

Lamenting and bewailing my great unfruitful- 
ness, and that I have governed my thoughts, appe- 
tites, passions, and words, no better ; that I have 
husbanded my time and opportunities no better; 
and improved so little in knowledge and grace, and 
done so little to the honor of my great Creator and 
Redeemer ; — 

But being also more and more confirmed in my 
belief of the being and attributes of God, of the 
mediation of the Lord Jesus Christ between God 
and man, and of the reality and weight of invisible 
things, and being more and more satisfied that this 
is the true grace of God wherein I stand, and more 
fully resolved, in the strength of God, to stand 
in it ; — 

" I do solemnly resign and give up my whole self 
to God in Jesus Christ. I commit my soul and all 



REV. MATTHEU' HENRY. 



91 



the concerns of my spiritual state to the grace of 
God, and to the word of his grace, subjecting my- 
self to the conduct and government of the blessed 
Spirit, and to his influences and operations, which I 
earnestly desire and depend upon for the mortifying 
of my corruptions, the strengthening of my graces, 
the furnishing of me for every good word and work, 
and the ripening of me for heaven. 

" I commit my body, and all the concerns of my 
outward condition, to the providence of God, to be 
ordered and disposed by the wisdom and will of my 
heavenly Father. Xot knowing the things which 
may befall me tliis year, I refer myself to God. 
Whether it shall be my dying year or no, I know 
not ; but it is my earnest expectation and hope, that 
the Lord Jesus Christ shall be magnified in my body, 
whether it be by life or death, by health or sickness, 
by plenty or poverty, by liberty or restraint, by 
preaching or silence, by comfort or sorrow. Wel- 
come, welcome the will of God, whatever it be. The 
Lord give me grace to stand complete in it." 

" October 18, 1701. This day, through the good 
hand of my God upon me, I have finished the thirty- 
ninth year of my pilgrimage, and ha^-ing obtained 
help of God, I continue hitherto, knowing whom I 
have trusted, and trusting whom I have known. The 
greatest comfort of my life has been, that God haS 
been pleased to use me for his service, and my great- 
est grief, that I have been so little serviceable to him. 



92 



MEMOIR OF THE 



I have thought much this day, what a great variety 
of cross events I am liable to while in the body, and 
how uncertain what may befall me in the next year 
of my life, pain, or sickness, broken bones, loss in 
my estate, death of dear relations, reproach, divisions 
in the congregation, public restraints and troubles ; 
my fortieth year may be as Israel's was, the last of 
my sojourning in this wilderness. The worst of evils 
would be sin and scandal. The Lord keep me from 
that, and fit me for any other." 

" December 31, lYOl. Believing prayer to be an 
instituted way of communion with God, and fetching 
in mercy and grace from him, I have comfort in it 
daily ; my daily prayers are the sweetest of my daily 
comforts. Having of late had my body feasted 
above the ordinary meals, I desire this day to have 
my soul fed more plentifully with the duty of prayer, 
and thus to close the year, which, Janus-like, looks 
both ways. 1 have not had this year such remark- 
able afflictions as some other years. The greatest 
has been the death of my dear and honorable friend. 
Madam Hunt of Boreatton. But my errands to the 
throne of grace to-day are, 

*' 1. By way of lamentation and humiliation. 

" I have reason to lament greatly the strength of 
my own corruptions and weakness of my graces. 
By reason of the former, I am as smoking flax ; by 
reason of the latter, as a bruised reed. I am still 
full of vain thoughts, and empty of good thoughts. 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



93 



Many of my secret prayers are wretchedly disfigured 
and spoiled by a multitude of distractions and di- 
ver^ions of mind ; the flesh and the things of the 
flesh still minded, to the prejudice of the Spirit, and 
the neglect of the things of the Spirit. 

I have lost a great deal of precious time, and 
not filled it up, or else I might have gone farther 
forwai'd in my notes on the evangelist John.* Sins 
easily beset me, and I do not the things that I would. 

" I have very much reason to bewail my manifold 
defects in my ministerial work, my coldness in prayer, 
that I speak not of the things of God with more 
clearness and concern. 0, how many, hovr great, 
are the iniquities of my holy things ! 

" I bewail the little success of my ministry, and 
the miscarriages of some this year, for hereby my 
God v/ill humble me. Grief also, great grief for the 
sill of : some of the young whom I have cate- 
chized and taken pains with, are no comfort to mo. 
Lord, show me Avherefore thou contendest with me. 
The low condition of the church of God ouo-ht 

o 

* This was written several years before Mr. Henry's Expo- 
sition upon the New, or even the Old Testament appeared. 
In the following extract from the preface to the first volume 
of that great work, the allusion is satisfactorily explained. 
" It has long been my practice, what little time I had to spare 
in my study from my constant preparations for the pulpit, to 
spend in drawing up expositions upon some parts of the New 
Testament, not so much for my ov/n use, as purely for my 
own entertainment, because I knew not how to employ my 
thoughts and time more to my satisfaction." 



94 



MEMOIR OF THE 



to be greatly lamented ; the Protestant interest small, 
very small ; a decay of piety ; attempts for reforma- 
tion ineffectual. Help, Lord ! 

"2. By way of prayer and supplication. I have 
many errands at the throne of grace this day. 

''The pardon of sin, victory over my corrup- 
tions and temptations, mortifying my lusts, which go 
not forth but by prayer and fasting. In reference 
to sin, I desire I may be enabled to act faith upon 
Rom. 6 : 14, 'Sin shall not have dominion over 
you ; for ye are not under the law, but under grace 
and Ezek. 36:25-27, 'Thenv.ill I sprinkle clean 
water upon you, and ye shall be clean ; from all 
your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse 
you : a new heart also will I give you, and a new 
spirit will I put within you,' etc. 

"The increase of my ministerial gifts, a sound 
judgment, a clear expression, a door of utterance, 
readiness in the Scriptures ; in reference to which, I 
desire I may be helped to act faith upon Exod. 4:12, 
' Go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee 
what thou shalt say;' and John 14 : 26, 'He shall 
teach you all things.' 

"The success of my ministerial labors, that sin- 
ners may be converted, saints built up, and the con- 
gregation flourish ; in reference to this, I desire to 
act faith on Matt. 28 : 20, ' Lo, I am with you' al- 
ways;' and Isa. 55: 10, 11, 'As the rain cometh 
down,' etc. 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



95 



The blessing of God upon my wife and children ; 
that God will give his grace to my dear little ones, 
and drive out the foolishness bound up in their 
hearts ; in reference to which I desire to act faith 
on Isa. 44 : 3, * I will pour out my Spirit upon thy 
seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring.' 

My other dear relations I would recommend to 
God's protection and blessing in prayer ; my friends, 
acquaintance, brethren in the ministry, in London, 
in Dubhn, in Cheshire, and Lancashire particularly; 
and the congregation at Broad Oak, and their min- 
ister, some members of parliament, and other gen- 
tlemen of my acquaintance." 

"January 1, 1702. The covenant of grace being 
a new covenant, because ever new, and often to be 
renewed, I have, this new-year's day, early in the 
morning, while it is yet dark, solemnly renewed it 
upon my knees : and be it a memorandum indeed, 
ever remembered, and never forgotten. 

Humbly acknowledging my dependence upon 
God, as my Creator and the Author of my being ; 
my obligations in duty to him as my sovereign 
Lord and Ruler, and my engagements in gratitude 
to him as my Protector and Benefactor ; and mention- 
ing, with thankfulness, the many mercies of my life 
hitherto, and particularly those of the year past; 
during which I have found myself the care of a very 
kind Providence, which has made the steps of my 
pilgrimage comfortable ; which has preserved to me 



96 



MEMOIR OF TIIH 



the use of my reason and understanding, limbs and 
senses ; hath continued my hberty and opportunity 
to exercise niy ministry ; hath provided plentifully 
for me and my family, and loaded me daily with his 
benefits. For all which I praise his name, and for 
the mediation of Jesus Christ; to which I owe all. 

" Acknowledging, also, and lamenting the remain- 
ing strength of my corruptions, and my bent to 
backslide from the living God, taking to myself the 
shame of my many defects and folhes, notwithstand- 
ing ray frequent renewing of my covenant with God, 
and flying to Christ for righteousness, pardon, and 
peace. 

" I once more bind my soul with a bond to be the 
Lord's wholly, and only, and for ever his. Into thy 
hands, 0 God, I commit my spirit, to be ruled, 
cleansed, and sanctified throughout, qualified for thy 
service in this world, and for the fruition of thee in 
the other. My body I present unto thee a living 
sacrifice, holy and acceptable, for it is my reasonable 
service. My ministry I devote to thy honor, and 
the continuance and success of it I submit to thy 
Tvilh All my worldly comforts I lay at thy feet, to 
be disposed of as thou pleasest. My life itself is 
thine ; 0 God of my hfe, 'my times are in thy hand.* 
"Whatever may be the events of this year, let divine 
grace be sufficient for me, to enable me to accommo- 
date myself to the will of God in them ; and then 
nothing can come amiss. If God will be with me, 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



97 



and keep me in the way that I go, throughout the 
remaining part of my pilgrimage in the world where 
I am but a stranger, and will give me bread to eat 
and raiment to put on, and a heart to love him, and 
serve him, and live to him, so that I may come at 
last to my heavenly Father's house in peace, then 
shall the Lord be my God, my Lord and my God 
for ever. Amen. Hallelujah. 

" Matthew Hexry." 

*' October 18, 1702. This day I have completed 
the fortieth year of my life ; of life did I say ? Rath- 
er, indeed, of my inactivity and folly, but of the 
tender mercy, kindness, and forbearance of God 
towards me. To Christ my Mediator I joyfully ac- 
knowledge myself a debtor for the supports, and 
aids, and comforts of life ; and to that same Christ 
I wholly trust, that I shall receive from* my God, 
wonderfully propitiated, the forgiveness of my sins, 
grace for seasonable help, and preservation even 
imto eternal hfe." 

"December 31, 1*702. 1. As to myself and 
family, the days of another year are numbered and 
finished — a year not made particularly remarkable 
by any great change in my circumstances ; no new 
thing created, but 

" (1.) The usual matter of complaint against my- 
self ; folly is still found, yea, bound up, in my heart; 
though I hope, through grace, coiTuption is dying, 
yet not without some struggles, and much opposition 

Matthaw Hezuy. ' 



98 



MEMOIR OF THE 



from a naughty heart. I desire to lament my un- 
skilfulness and unreadiness in Scripture, my dulness 
in holy duties, particularly in secret. I wish I had 
prayed more for the success of my ministry, but 
sometimes I have thought I should pray more for 
grace, to make me faithful myself, that I may be 
accepted of God, though not of men ; but, perhaps, 
I should pray more for the prosperity of the work 
of God, even in my hand, though most unworthy ; 
vain thoughts, crowds of them, are matter of com- 
plaint daily ; never was corrupt soil more fruitful in 
weeds. 

" (2.) The usual matter of thanksgiving to God. 
I have had great measure of health, few of my 
brethren so much. I note it, because, perhaps, the 
ensuing year may bring sickness or death with it. I 
have not ailed any thing considerable, and sometimes 
the highest degree of health is the next degree to 
sickness. I have not so many sensible memoranda 
of my frailty as those have that are often ailing. 
The Lord grant I may, by the power of grace, be 
kept more mindful of it. 

" Ever since brother Radford died, which is now 
three years ago, death has made no breach among 
my relations. Since I set out in the world, I never 
was so long without the death of children, or others 
near and dear to me. My children are very health- 
ful, and have had no ill accident. My dear wife, 
though often mdisposed, yet, blessed be God, under 



REV, MATTHEW HENRY. 



99 



no languishing disease ; and my dear mother still 
continued in usefulness. 

" As to my ministry, that which has been most 
discouraging this year is, that few young persons 
have come into communion, I think fewer than any 
other year. 

" As to my estate, I have lived comfortably upon 
it with what I have received here, but while in these 
circumstances, I cannot expect to lay by much ; per- 
haps troubles may come which may sweep away all. 
I have some comfort, that I hope I do some good 
with what I have, and spend none of it ill. 

"2. As to the public, the death of the king [Will- 
iam III.] this year has made a great change in the 
face of things, though not yet such a change as 
many feared. Our successes abroad, both by sea 
and land, have been very great, which magnifies the 
present government, and that we have reason to re- 
joice in. The discontented in the last reign are now 
pleased. I wish they may ever be so. The high- 
church are very high, both against the low and dis- 
senters. Now, Lord, behold their threatenings. We 
are alarmed to think of sufferings, and we need such 
alarms. 

" I have heartily wished that the bigotry of some 
violent conformists on the one side, and of some dis- 
senters on the other, might drive the sober, mode- 
rate, and peaceful on both sides nearer together, and 
prepare things for a coalescence when God's time is 



100 



MEMOIR OF THE 



come ; which I earnestly pray for, and which, per- 
haps, might be effected if they could disentangle 
themselves as much from the high- church as I think 
we are from the high- dissenters, or I wish we were. 

''IVOS, January 1. 'Looking for the blessed 
hope.' This new-year's day I have in much weak- 
ness, and compassed about with many infirmities, 
upon my knees, made a fresh surrender of myself, 
my whole self, all I am, all I have, all I can do, to 
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, my Creator, 
Owner, Ruler, and Benefactor ; all my affections to 
be ruled by the divine grace, and all my affairs to 
be overruled by the divine Providence, so that I 
may not come short of glorifying God in this world, 
and being glorified with him in a better. 

" Confirming and ratifying all former resignations 
of myself to God, and lamenting all the want of 
conformity of my heart and life therewith, and de- 
pending upon the merit of the Redeemer to make 
this and all my other services acceptable, and the 
grace of the Sanctifier to enable me to make good 
these engagements, I again bind my soul with a 
bond to the Lord, and commit myself entirely to him ; 
particularly as to the events of this year which I 
am now entering upon, not knowing the things that 
may abide me in it. 

" If this year should be a year of continued health 
and comfort, I commit myself to the grace of God, 
to be preserved from carnal security, and to be 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



101 



enabled in a day of prosperity to serve God Tvith 

joy- 

" If my opportunities, as a minister, should be 
this year continued, I commit my studies, and min- 
isterial labors at home ar.d abroad, to the blessing of 
God ; having afresh consecrated them all to his ser- 
vice and honor, earnestly desiring mercy of the Lord 
to be faithful and successful. 

If I should be this year at any time tried with 
doubts concerning my duty, I commit myself to the 
divine conduct, with an unbiassed desire, praying to 
know what God will have me to do, with a fixed 
resolution by his grace to follow his direction in the 
integrity of my heart. 

If I should this year be afflicted in my body, 
family, name, or estate, I commit my all to the di- 
^ ine disposal. The will of the Lord be done, only 
begging that the grace of God may go along with 
the providence of God in all my afflictions, to enable 
me both to bear them well, and to use them well. 

" If this year I should be disturbed or molested 
in the exercise of my ministry, if I should be si- 
lenced, or otherwise suffer for well-doing,* I commit 

* These, and similar references to the troubles, dangers, and 
persecutions to which good men were exposed in the times in 
which 'Sir. Henry lived, cannot be read without mingled emo- 
tions of commiseration for the sufferers, and gratitude to God 
fjr casting our lot who live in the nineteenth century upon 
other times, when civil and religious liberty are better under- 
stood and more generally diffused and enjoyed. " The lines 



102 



MEMOIR OF THE 



the keeping of my soul to God as a faithful Creator, 
depending upon him to guide me in my call to suf- 
fer, and to make that clear, and to preserve me from 
perplexing snares ; depending upon him to support 
and comfort me under my sufiFerings, and to bring 
glory to himself out of them ; and then, welcome 
his whole will. 

** If this year should be my dying year, as perhaps 
it may be, I commit my spirit into the hands of my 
Redeemer, to be washed with his blood, and pre- 
sented in his arms with exceeding joy. My wife 
and children I commit to him, to be owned, blessed, 
and preserved by him when I am gone. * In thee, 
O Lord, have I put my trust, let me never be 
ashamed.' " 

"October 18, 1703. To-day is completed the 
forty-first year of my wandering in this wilderness. 
Very many of my days have slipped by fruitlessly 
and unprofitably. And, what ought to make me 
ashamed, all truly peaceful, and full of divine be- 
nignity, and ever to be recorded with gratitude to 
God. What remains I know not : a few days, per- 
haps, and full of trouble ; but the will of the Lord 
be done. To me to live is Christ ; so shall it al- 
ways be, and eternally ; and to die, gain." 

"December 31, 1703." [After reciting, as on 
some former occasions, his sins and mercies, and 

have fallen to us in pleasant places." What obligations do 
our privileges involve I 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



103 



observing that even under the Gospel there must be 
a remembrance of sins every year, he proceeds,] 
" Not such a remembrance as speaks any deficiency 
in the sacrifice, as that under the law did, but such 
as speaks deficiency in my daily repentance, which 
ought therefore to be renewed, and the imperfection 
of the work of sanctification." 

" Unfixedness of thought, a wretched desultori- 
ness. Some speak of time well spent in thinking ; 
but I find, unless in speaking, reading, or writing, 
my thinking doth not turn to much account. 
Though I have had comfort in some broken good 
thoughts, yet I can seldom fix my heart to a chain 
of them. 0 that the thought of my heart may be 
forgiven. 

" I have oft bewailed my barrenness in good dis- 
course, and unskilfulness in beginning it, and cold- 
ness of concern for the souls of others ; and in re- 
flection on this year, I find it has not been much 
better. I bless God I love good discourse, and 
would promote it, but I want zeal. The Lord pity 
me. 

" I have great reason to be thankful for continued 
health, for comfort in my soul, not made a terror to 
rnyself. I have oft thought this year what a mercy 
it is to be kept out of the horrible pit and miry 
clay. 

** I have had much satisfaction this year in my 
non-conformity, especially by reading Mr. Hoadley's 



104 



MEMOIR OF THE 



books, in which I see a manifest spirit of Christianity 
unhappily leavened by the spirit of conformity." 

"January 1, 1704. AcknoAvledging my con- 
tinued dependence upon God as my Creator, Pre- 
server, and chief good ; and my continued obhga- 
tions to him in duty as my Lord and Ruler ; and in 
interest, as my Benefactor and Protector ; believing 
that he is, and that he is the rewarder of them that 
diligently seek him — 

" Relying upon the merit, mediation, and ever- 
lasting righteousness of my dear Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ, who loved me and gave himself for 
me, as my w^ay to the Father, and the spotless robe 
wherein alone I can appear before him — 

" And submitting my soul to the operation and 
influences of the blessed Spirit of grace, without 
which I am nothing, and can do nothing — 

"Thankfully owning God's goodness to me the 
last year, in lengthening out my life, health, com- 
fort in soul, peace, plenty, settlement, relations, lib- 
erty, and opportunity, and admiring his patience, 
forbearance, long- suffering, in sparing me in his 
vineyard, who deserved to have been cut down and 
cast into the fire as a barren tree — 

" Lamenting my foolishness, the foolishness which 
is still bound up in my heart, and that w^hich still 
breaks forth in my life ; and particularly that my 
improvements in grace and usefulness last year did 
not answer the covenants which began it — 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



105 



" Because of all this, I make a sure covenant, and 
write it. 

" In the strength of the grace of Jesus Christ, on 
which alone I depend to work all my works in me 
and for me, I covenant for this new year, and for 
my whole life, to walk closely with God in all holy 
conversation, to keep my heart with all diligence ; 
and to thee, 0 my God, I commit the keeping of it. 
To take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my 
tongue ; and do thou set a watch, 0 Lord, before 
the door of my lips. I covenant to redeem my 
time, and to thee, 0 God, do I consecrate this year, 
and all the hours of it. The Lord enable me to fill 
it up with good according as the duty of every day 
requires. I bind myself to follow the spirit of God 
in all my affections, and the providence of God in 
all my affairs, whatever God shall appoint me to 
this year ; to health or sickness, to plenty or loss, 
to evil report or good report, to liberty or restraint, 
to the house of mourning or the house of rejoicing, 
to life or death. Behold, here I am, let him do 
with me as seemeth good in his eyes. Only, what- 
ever the providence of God allots for me, let the 
grace of God be sufficient for me, to enable me to 
accommodate myself to it ; and then welcome the 
will of God." 



106 



MEMOIR OF THE 



CHAPTER VII. 

Journey to London — Hears John Howe — Mr. Henry's general 
health good — Sudden seizure and sickness — Anniversary 
reflections — Death of Mr. Henry's mother — Anniversary 
reflections. 

In the early part of the year 1704, Mr. Henry, 
accompanied by Mrs. Henry, again visited the me- 
tropolis. The particular occasion of the journey 
does not appear. One remark, however, made by 
him on leaving Northampton, may be properly cited 
as indicative of the spirit in which he travelled ; the 
same spirit, indeed, which gave consistency and ele- 
vation to his whole character, both at home and 
abroad. The remark was this : 

" It is easy to leave an inn; why should it not be 
easy to leave this world, which is but an inn, to go 
to our house, our Father's house ? The troubles 
of travelling exercise our patience and submission to 
God's will. By submission in lesser things, we 
learn it in greater. But they also give us to expe- 
rience the goodness of God in our preservation, and 
encourage us to hope in that goodness in our jour- 
ney for heaven." 

The record of a sermon, which he heard preached 
on Sabbath morning, the day after his arrival in 
London, by the celebrated John Howe, is worthy 
of attention ; it is perfectly characteristic of both 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



107 



the parties ; it is, moreover, fraught with universal 
instruction ; and as embraced, may prove a balm 
of heahng and refreshment to such as move heavily 
along the narrow way, under a prevailing sense of 
their own unworthiness. 

" The text," says Mr. Henry, " was Jude 21 ; and 
I must never forget what he said in the close of the 
sermon. * I would deal for your souls,' said the 
preacher, * as for my own ; and for myself, I declare 
before you all, I depend purely upon the mercy of 
our Lord Jesus Christ for eternal life.' " 

In due time, he found himself again in the midst 
of his beloved charge in Chester. Up to this period, 
Mr. Henry's health had continued good. But, 
henceforward, the inroads made upon his frame by 
disease were frequent and alarming. 

On Lord's day, August 27, 1*704, while reading 
the Scriptures during the morning service, he sud- 
denly fainted ; but, recovering speedily, he pro- 
ceeded in his beloved work. Had he taken rest the 
subsequent effects would probably have been pre- 
vented. But, unskilled in the art of self-sparing, 
and impelled by holy zeal, instead of relaxing as 
he ought to have done, the next day he fulfilled an 
appointment to preach at Nantwich, and the day 
following, another at Haslington. The latter was a 
funeral sermon for an aged and faithful minister, 
pursuant to the desire of the deceased, and preached 
to a large congregation. These engagements, by 



108 



MEMOIR OF THE 



the excitement they produced, added much to his 
exhaustion. 

On his return home the consequences were dis- 
tinctly visible, and indisposition so much increased 
as to confine him altogether to the house. Not 
having for fifteen years been detained from public 
worship on the Sabbath, he felt the imprisonment 
very sensibly ; but still not so as to overlook exist- 
ing mercies. His fever continued more than three 
weeks ; but he was able, during the whole time, 
with but one exception, as he himself expressed it, 
both "to light the lamps, and to burn the incense 
that is, daily to expound the Scriptures and pray in 
his family, morning and evening. On the recovery 
of his health, he did not wait for the Sabbath in 
order to resume his appearance in the sanctuary ; 
but, being able, preferred appearing there on the 
lecture day ; thus evincing his zeal and devotion. 

I was willincr " said he, "to cro thither first, where 
I most desire to be. I would take the first oppor- 
tunity of paying my vows." 

The order of the history requires that further 
extracts from Mr. Henry's diary should be here in- 
serted ; which, it is presumed, the pious reader will 
not regret. 

"1Y05. January 1. Not renouncing, but repeat- 
ing and ratifying all my former covenants with God, 
and lamenting that I have not lived up more closely 
to them, I do, in the beginning of this new year, 



REV, MATTHEW HENRY. 



109 



solemnly make a fresli surrender of myself, my whole 
self, body, soul, and spirit, to God the Father, Son, 
and Holy Ghost ; my Creator, Redeemer, and Sanc- 
tifier ; covenanting and promising, not in any strength 
of my own, for I am very weak, but in the strength 
of the grace of Jesus Christ, that I will endeavor 
this year to stand complete in all the will of God. 

" I know this is the will of God, even my sancti- 
fication. Lord, grant that this yetr I may be more 
holy, and walk more closely than ever in all holy 
conversation. I earnestly desire to be filled with 
holy thoughts, to be carried out in holy affections, 
determined by holy aims and intentions, and gov- 
erned in all my words and actions by holy princi- 
ples. 0 that a golden thread of holiness may run 
through the whole web of this year. 

" I know it is the will of God that I should be 
useful, and by his grace I will be so. Lord, thou 
knowest it is the top of my ambition in this world 
to do good, and to be serviceable to the honor of 
Christ, and the welfare of precious souls. I would 
fain do good in the pulpit, and good with my pen ; 
and, which I earnestly desire to abound more in, to 
do good by my common converse. 0 that the door 
of my opportunities may be still open, and that, my 
heart may be enlarged with holy zeal and activity 
for God this year ; and that I may be thoroughly 
furnished with knowledge, wisdom, and grace, for 
every good word and work. 



110 



MEMOIR OF THE 



" If it be the will of God that this year should be 
a year of affliction to me, a year of sickness, or re- 
proach, or loss ; if my family should be visited, if 
my hberties should be cut short, if public troubles 
should arise, if any calamity should befall me which 
I am least apprehensive of now, I earnestly desire 
to submit to the divine disposal. Welcome the holy 
will of God. Let me have God's favor, and the 
assurances of thdt, and by his grace nothing shall 
come amiss to me. 

If it be the will of God that I should finish my 
course this year, let me be found of Christ in peace, 
and, by the grace of God, death shall be welcome 
to me. My wife and children and relations, my 
congregation which is very dear to me, my minis- 
try, myself, and my all, I commit to God, whose I 
am, and whom I desire to serve. Let me be the 
Lord's only, wholly, and for ever. Amen. The 
Lord say Amen to it. 

October 18, 1705. I have this day completed 
the forty- third year of my useless life. By the 
grace of God I live ; I hope in his mercy, and I 
pant for his glory. May the small remnant of my 
time be a season of repentance for the sins, and of 
gratitude for the mercies, of the former part of my 
life. May God be my sun and shield, and may I 
be his servant, and a subject of his kingdom, even 
unto the end, and for ever. Amen and amen." 

''December 31, 1705, We bring our years to 



REV. MATTHEW HEXRY, 



111 



an end, like a laHe that is told. Lord, teach us to 
number our days. 

In the review of the year I find, 
"1. That I have as much reason as ever to be 
thankful to God. It has been a year of much mercy. 
My life has been continued to the end of it, though 
many of my brethren in the ministry have been re- 
moved in the midst of their days, who, had they 
lived, would have done God more service than I 
can, particularly my dear brother Mr. Chorlton. I 
have had a good measure of health for my ministry 
and study ; no returns or remains of my last year's 
illness. 

*' God has this year brought my children through 

the small-pox, and borne up my dear wife under 
great weakness. 

My mother, also, though brought low, has been 
helped. 

My door of opportunity continues open at home 
and abroad ; and I am willing to hope some good is 
done. 

" That which is especially remarkable as the mer- 
cy of this year, is the happy posture of our pubhc 
affairs, particularly at home. After a mighty strug- 
gle, moderate counsels have prevailed. God has 
wonderfully inclined the queen's heart [Queen 
Anne] to such counsels, and useth her as an in- 
strument of great good to the land, that the excel- 
lency of the power may be of God. Patrons of our 



112 



MEMOIR OF THE 



liberty have been strangely raised up among those 
who have no kindness for us, or our way. The 
intemperate acts of bigots have proved to make 
mightily against themselves ; there are many adver- 
saries, and yet the door continues open. Great en- 
deavors used to render us contemptible, odious, 
dangerous, and what not, and yet we live and go 
on, and the young are coming in, and some hopeful 
cases. 0 that the power of godliness, holiness, 
seriousness, and heavenly-mindedness, might pre- 
vail more among us, and then we should have a 
very hopeful prospect. And who can tell but iuG.- 
nite wisdom may yet find out a way for compre- 
hending us, though the present temper of our neigh- 
bors rather sets it at a greater distance than ever. 

"2. I have reason to make the old complaint of 
dulness and weakness, and coldness of affection for 
divine things. The Lord strengthen the things 
which remain. 

"Care about my children, providing something 
for them, has been often in my head ; and, perhaps, 
more than it should be. Lord, I cast the care upon 
thee, who hast provided well for me ; the Lord care 
for them, and teach me my duty, and then with 
him I leave the event." 

"January 1, 1*705-6. It is of the Lord's mercy 
that I am not consumed. By night, on my bed, I 
endeavored to seek him whom my soul loveth; and 
now I begin this new year, 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



113 



" 1. Earnestly praying for the graces of the year, 
with a humble subjection of soul to the blessed 
Spirit of God, that I may, some way or other, emi- 
nently honor and glorify God this year ; that I may 
live this year to some purpose ; to better purpose 
than I did the last. 0 that no temptation may so 
overtake me this year as to overcome me. To the 
conduct of divine grace, which is, I know, sufficient 
for me, I here solemnly resign myself, my thoughts, 
my affections, my will, and all the intents of my 
heart, to be directed into the right way, and kept 
and quickened in it. Let me this year receive grace 
for grace. 

" 2. Patiently waiting for the events of the year, 
with a humble submission to the holy will of God. 
I know not what the year shall bring forth ; but I 
know it shall brinar forth nothing: amiss to me, if 
God be my God in covenant : if it bring forth death, 
that, I hope, shall quite finish sin and free me from 
it — Lord, let thy servant depart in peace, according 
to thy word. I commit my family to my heavenly 
Father; to God, even my own God, my father's 
God, my children's God. 0 pour out thy Spirit 
upon my seed ; thy blessing, that blessing, that 
blessing of blessings, upon my off'spring, that they 
may be praising God on earth when I am praising 
him in heaven. Amen, amen." 

" January 1, 1707. My own act and deed, 
through the grace of God, I have made it many a 

Matthew Henry. 8 



114 



MEMOIR OF THE 



time, and now I make it the first act of this new 
year, to resign myself afresh unto the Lord, not only 
for the year ensuing, but for my whole life, and for 
ever. 

"1. To thee, 0 God, I give up myself, to be used 
and employed for thee. I desire to live no longer 
than I may do thee some service. Make what use 
of me thou pleasest, only let me obtain mercy of 
the Lord, to be found diligent, humble, and faith- 
ful. 0 that the work of this year may be better 
done than that of the last, and my time more filled 
up ; and that I may never grow weary of well- 
doing. 

"2. To thee, 0 God, I give up myself, to be dis- 
posed of by thee as thou pleasest. I know not 
what the year may bring forth to me, or to my fam- 
ily. But welcome the holy will of God ; and God, 
by his grace, make me ready for it. If it be the 
last year of my life, my dying year, may I but fin- 
ish my course with joy; and farewell this world. 
Whatever aflflictions may this year befall me, I de- 
sire none of them may move me from God and my 
duty." 

Since the death of Mr. Henry's father, the afflic- 
tions which had befallen him had been mitigated by 
the preservation and general convalescence of his 
widowed mother. She had shared his trials ; eased 
the burden of affliction by bearing a part of it ; and, 
by the brilliancy of her Christian character, had 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



115 



eminently adorned the Gospel, and encouraged her 
son in "the work of the Lord." 

But now, declining health and advanced years 
intimated that a separation between parent and 
child was not far distant. And, at length, on the 
morning of Sabbath, May 25, 1707, he received the 
melancholy tidings of her departure. 

In reference to this event, there is a short notice 
in the diary of her sorrowing son, which the reader 
will be pleased to have perpetuated. He says, " I 
find with the profits and rents of this current year, 
that there will be Uttle more than to discharge my 
dear mother's funeral and legacies ; but no debts at 
all. She hved with comfort ; bore her testimony to 
the goodness of God's providence, which she had 
experienced all her days ; did not increase what 
she had ; nor coveted to lay up ; but did good with 
it, and left a blessing behind her." 

The anniversary reflections are thus continued in 
his diary : 

1707, October 18. To borrow Caleb's words, 
Joshua 14 : 10, the Lord has kept me alive these 
forty-five years. So long I have lived, and lived 
under the divine protection ; a wasting candle kept 
burning. But to how little purpose have I lived ! 
Thus long I have cumbered the ground. 0 that I 
may yet bear fruit." 

" 1707, December 31. As to the year past, I 
have as much reason as ever to lament my barren- 



116 



MEMOIR OF THE 



ness and unfniitfulness, tliat I have not made a 
better proficiency in knowledge and grace. I find 
myself growing into years ; being now turned forty- 
five. 1 begin to feel my journey in my bones, and 
I desire to be thereby loosened from the world, and 
from the body. The death of my dear and honored 
mother this year, has been a sore breach upon my 
comfort ; for she was my skilful, faithful counsellor ; 
and it is an intimation to me that now, in the order 
of nature, I must go next. My estate is somewhat 
increased : the Lord enlarge my heart to do good 
with it; but as goods are increased, they are in- 
creased that eat them. My children are growing 
up, and that reminds me that I am going down. 
As to my ministry here, Mr. Mainwaring's leaving 
me, and his wife, has been very much my discour- 
agement. But Providence so ordered it that Mr. 
Harvey's congregation are generally come in to us, 
or else we begin to dwindle, so that I should have 
gone on very heavily." 

"January 1, 1Y07-8, early. Christ is a Chris- 
tian's all ; and he is my all. 

" Unto thee, 0 blessed Jesus, my only Saviour 
and Redeemer, do I make a fresh surrender of my 
whole self this morning, body, soul, and spirit ; to 
me to live is Christ, particularly this ensuing year. 

" All my time, strength, and service, I devote to 
the honor of the Lord Jesus ; my studies, and all 
my ministerial labors, and even my common actions. 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



117 



It is my earnest expectation and hope, and I desire 
it may be my constant aim and endeavor, that Jesus 
Christ may be magnified in my body. 

" In every thing wherein I have to do with God, 
my entire dependence is upon Jesus Christ for 
strength and righteousness ; and whatever I do in 
word or deed, I desire to do all in his name, to make 
him my Alpha and Omega. The anointed of the 
Lord is the breath of my nostrils ; through his hand 
I desire to receive all my comforts. I have all by 
him, and I would use all for him. 

*' If this should prove a year of affliction, a sor- 
rowful year upon my account, I will draw all my 
supports and comforts from the Lord Jesus, and 
stay myself upon his everlasting consolations, and 
the good hope I have in him through grace. 

" And if this should be my dying year, my times 
are in the hand of the Lord Jesus ; and with a hum- 
ble reliance upon his mediation, I would venture 
into another world, looking for the blessed hope. 
Dying as well as living, Jesus Christ will, I trust, be 
orain and advantas:e to me. 

Good Lord, keep this always in the imagination 
of the thought of my heart, and establish my way 
before thee." 

" October 18, ITOS. To-day I have finished the 
forty-sixth year of my life. My infancy, however, 
was useless ; my childhood and youth were not di- 
rected to proper objects ; and even in my maturer 



118 



MEMOIR OF THE 



age, how many months and days have I spent to 
little purpose ! So that I have lived scarcely one- 
tenth part of my time. Forgive, 0 Lord, my idle- 
ness and sloth. For me to live, may it be Christ." 

** January 1, 1708-9. The inscribing of a double 
year, eight and nine, puts me in mind to look back 
upon the year past, which I have reason to do with 
thankfulness for the many mercies with which God 
has crowned it ; and with sorrow and shame for the 
many sins with which I have blotted it : and to look 
forward to the year now beginning, which I have 
endeavored to begin with God. 

"My outward concerns, as to my health and 
safety, the prosperity of my affairs, provision for 
my family, the continuance of my life and the lives 
of my relations and friends, comfort in my children 
and congregation, I have committed, and do com- 
mit to the conduct and disposal of God's gracious 
providence, which I depend upon to order every 
thing for good to me. Here I am, let the Lord do 
with me and mine as seemeth good unto him. That 
Providence, I trust, will so order every event as 
that nothing shall be an invincible temptation to me 
to draw me from God and duty in any instance. 

"The affairs of my soul, and all the concerns of 
the spiritual and divine life, I commit to the special 
grace of God, which I trust shall be sufficient for 
me, to enable me to keep a good conscience ; to do 
my duty well as a master of a family, and as a min- 



REV. xMATTHEW HENRY. 



119 



ister ; to persevere to the end ; and to finish well. 
Lord, do not leave me, nor forsake me ; I will seek 
thy precepts. 0, forsake me not utterly. The 
Lord ' preserve me to his heavenly kingdom.' Amen. 
Amen." 



CHAPTER VIII. 

Invitations to remove to London — An invitation from Hack- 
ney renewed — His determination to leave Chester — His 
reasons for this determination — Birthday memorial. 

Ever after Mr. Henry's visit to London in the 
year 1698, he seems to have been an object of de- 
sire by almost every church, whose pastor, if at all 
renowned, was either removed to any other charge, 
or laid aside by death. And some of the efforts 
made to obtain his services were imcommonly bold 
and persevering. 

On the death of the eloquent and learned Dr. 
Bates, at Hackney, one of the suburbs of the me- 
tropolis, he was solicited to accept the pastorate of 
the bereaved church and congregation; and, the 
better to insure success, the communication was 
made to him through his beloved friend, the Rev. 
John Shower, pastor of a church at the Old Jewry. 
It failed, however, of success. It is not necessary 
to particularize other similar invitations both from 



120 



MEMOIR OF THE 



London and important places in the country. Dr 
Bates was succeeded by the Rev. Robert Bilho. 
Upon the death of Mr. BiUio, which occurred in 
May, IVIO, the sohcitations of the congregation to 
Mr. Henry were renewed with increased importu- 
nity. Two visits were subsequently made by him 
to the destitute church, and, after long- continued 
and serious thought, not to say the most distress- 
ing varieties of mental conflict, he determined to 
leave Chester. The history and reasons of a deter- 
mination so opposite to every former decision, may 
be stated somewhat at length, and may happily be 
stated in his own words, written whilst in London, 
on one of the two visits before mentioned. 

"About midsummer, 1710, I had a letter from 
the congregation at Hackney, signifying to me that 
they had unanimously chosen me to be their minis- 
ter, in the room of Mr. Billio, who was lately de- 
ceased of the small-pox ; and to desire that I would 
accept of their invitation ; in prosecution of which, 
they told me I should find them as the importunate 
widow, that would have no nay. I several times 
denied them ; at length they wrote to me that some 
of them would come down hither ; to prevent which, 
I being not unwilling to take a London journey in 
the interval between my third and fourth volume," 
of the Exposition, " I wrote them word I would 
come up to them, and did so in the middle of July ; 
but was down again before the first Lord's day in 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



121 



August ; then I laid myself open to the temptation, 
by increasing my acquaintance in the city. 

They followed me after I came down, with let- 
ters to me, and to the congregation ; in October I 
wrote to them, that if they would stay for me till 
next spring — which I was in hopes they would not 
do — I would come up, and make a longer stay for 
mutual trial ; they wrote to me they would wait till 
then. 

'*In May, 1711, I went to them, and stayed till 
the end of July, and before I parted with them, 
signified to them my acceptance of their invitation, 
and my purpose to come to them, God willing, the 
following spring. The ministers there had many 
of them given it under their hands, that they thought 
it advisable, and for greater good, and a more 
extensive usefulness, that I should remove to Hack- 
ney. 

"However, I was determined to deny them at 
Hackney, and had denied them, but that Mr. Gun- 
ston, Mr. Smith, and some others, came to me from 
London, and begged of me, for the sake of the pub- 
lic, that I would not deny them; which was the 
thing that turned the scales. I never had been, till 
this journey, so much as one first Lord's day of the 
month out of Chester, since I came to it twenty-four 
years ago. 

" By this determination I brought on myself more 
grief, and care, and concern, than I could have 



122 



MEMOIR OF THE 



imagined, and have many a time wished it undone 
again ; but having opened my mouth, I could not 
go back. I did with the utmost impartiahty, if I 
know any thing of myself, beg of God to incline my 
heart that way which should be most for his glory ; 
and I trust I have a good conscience, willing to be 
found in the way of my duty. Wherein I have 
done amiss, the Lord forgive me for Jesus' sake, 
and make this change concerning the congregation 
to work for good to it. 

" Having this morning — as often, very often be- 
fore — begged of God to give me wisdom, sincerity, 
and humility, and to direct my thoughts and coun- 
sels, now this important affair must at last be de- 
termined, I think it meet, having before set down 
the reasons for my continuing at Chester, now to 
set down the reasons which may induce me to 
accept of this invitation to Hackney, that it may 
be a satisfaction to me afterwards to review upon 
what grounds I went, and may be a testimony for 
me that I did not do it rashly. 

I am abundantly satisfied that it is lawful 
for ministers to remove, and in many cases highly 
expedient, and necessary to the edifying of the 
church ; and this not only for the avoiding of evil, 
as in the case of persecution, which can be a reason 
no longer than while the persecution lasts, or of the 
uncomfortable disposition of the people, but for the 
attaining of a greater good, and the putting of a 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



123 



minister into a larger sphere of usefulness ; this has 
always been my judgment according to the word of 
God, and I have practised accordingly, in being 
often active in the removal of other ministers, which 
I have afterwards had satisfaction in. And this has 
been the judgment of the congregation at Chester, 
between whom and their ministers there have never 
been those solemn mutual engagements that have 
been between some other ministers and their con- 
gregations, nor any bond but that of love. 

"2. My invitation to Hackney is not only unan- 
imous, but very pressing and importunate, and the 
people here, in waiting so long for my determina- 
tion, and in the great affection and respect they 
have showed to my ministry since I came among 
them, have given the most satisfying proof of the 
sincerity and zeal of their invitation ; and upon many 
weeks' trial I do not perceive any thing in the con- 
gregation that is discouraging, but every thing that 
promiseth to make a minister's life both comfortable 
and useful. 

" 3. There seems to be something of an intima- 
tion of Providence in the many calls I have had in 
this way before, and particularly to this place upon 
the death of Dr. Bates, though I never, either di- 
rectly or indirectly, sought them, but, on the con- 
trary, did what I could to prevent them, and this 
particularly. 

"4. There is manifestly a much wider door of 



124 



MEMOIR OF THE 



opportunity to do good, opened to me here at Lon- 
don, than at Chester, in respect to the frequency 
and variety of week-day occasions of preaching, and 
the great numbers of the auditors ; the prospect I 
have of improving these opportunities, and of doing 
good to souls thereby, is, I confess, the main induce- 
ment to me to think of removing hither ; and what 
I have seen while I have been here now, has very 
much encouraged my expectations of that kind. 

5. In drawing up and publishing my Exposi- 
tions, and many other of my endeavors for the 
public service, I foresee it will be a great conven- 
ience to me to be near the press, and to have the 
inspection of it, and also to have books at hand that 
I may have occasion for in the prosecution of my 
studies, and learned men to converse with for my 
own improvement in knowledge, and to consult 
with upon any difficulty that may occur. 

"6.1 have followed Providence in this affair, and 
to the conduct of that, I have, if I know my own 
heart, in sincerity referred myself, hoping and pray- 
ing, both myself, and my friends for me, that God 
would guide me with his eye, and lead me in a plain 
path. When I was purposing to send a final denial. 
Providence so ordered it that the very post before, 
I had a letter subscribed by divers of the London 
ministers, persuading me to accept that call ; where- 
upon I wrote to them that I would come to them 
six months upon trial, thinking that they would not 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 125 

have consented to be kept so long in suspense, but 
it proved that they did ; and so I have been drawn 
step by step to this resolution, and though I have 
industriously sought, I have not found any thing on 
this side to break the treaty. 

" 7. I have asked the advice of ministers upon a 
fair representation of the case, which I drew up ; 
and many, upon consideration of it, have given it 
under their hands that they think it advisable for 
me to remove, and none of them have advised me 
to the contrary, but have told me I am myself the 
most proper judge of it. Many private Christians 
also in London, and some that seem to me to be the 
most judicious and public-spirited, have by letters, 
when I was in Chester, and by word of mouth here, 
persuaded me to accept of this call, as judging that, 
by the blessing of God, I might be useful here to 
such a degree as to balance the inconveniency of 
my leaving Chester ; nay, that even here, I might, 
in many respects, be serviceable to the country. 

" 8. I have some reason to hope that my poor 
endeavors in the ministry may, by the blessing of 
God, be more useful now to those to whom they are 
new, than to those who have been so long used to 
them, and so constantly ; with whom also I trust 
another hand may do more good, as mine did, by 
the grace of God, in the first seven years of my 
being there. And I have known many congrega- 
tions from whom ministers have removed, and those 



126 



MEMOIR OF THE 



to whom it caused the greatest uneasiness and dis- 
content for the present, which yet have afterwards 
been so well settled beyond their own expectations 
under other ministers, that they have flourished even 
more than ever they had done before. 

*' 9. Though the people at Chester are a most 
loving people, and many of them have had, and 
have, an exceeding value for me and my ministry, 
yet I have not been without my discouragements 
there, and those such as have tempted me to think 
that my work in that place has been in a great meas- 
ure done ; many that have been catechized with us, 
and many that have been long communicants with 
us, have left us, and very few have been added 
to us. 

** 10. Whereas I have been thought to have been 
useful in the country by my preaching, as God has 
enabled me in many places about, I have now reason 
to think, that though I should continue at Chester, 
I should be quite taken off from that part of my 
work, having found as I came up, and once before, 
that riding long journeys and preaching brought an 
illness upon me which I was never till the last win- 
ter visited with, so that my service would be wholly 
confined within the walls of Chester ; whereas here, 
by divine assistance, I might do a great deal of work 
of that kind without that toil and peril. 

"11. The congregation at Chester, though it can- 
not be expected they should consent to part with a 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



127 



minister they have so long had a satisfaction in, yet 
they have been pleased, under their hands, to leave 
it to my own conscience and affection. Now, as to 
my own conscience, upon a long and serious consid- 
eration of the matter — and if I know my own heart 
an impartial one — and after many prayers to God 
for direction, I am fully satisfied that I may lawfully 
remove, and that there is a prospect of my being 
more useful if I do remove, and therefore it is expe- 
dient that I should ; and as to my affections, though 
they are very strong towards Chester, yet I think 
they ought to be overruled by my judgment." 

Another anniversary of his birthday now arrived, 
but the record makes no allusion to the situation in 
which he had placed himself. His mind seems to 
have been absorbed by the flight of time, and the 
nearer approach of eternity. 

''October 18, I have now finished my 

seventh climacteric year, in which I have first felt 
the pain of the gravel and the stone, by which it is 
easy for me to discern that death is working in my 
body ; for this disease is death begun ; perhaps in a 
little time it will be death itself. I now enter upon 
the jubilee of my life, my fiftieth year; the term of 
hfe approaches ; may I be better fitted for eternal 
life." 

The preceding exercises of mind, in reference to 
his removal from Chester, after a ministry there of 
nearly a quarter of a century, show most conclu- 



128 



MEMOIR OF THE 



sively the integrity of Mr. Henry's mind, and his 
trembhng solicitude to be found in the way of duty. 
In his first entrance upon the work of the ministry, 
he dreaded the thought of running before he was 
sent ; and now, in the affair of his removal, he felt 
it to be a weighty and important step, to be deter- 
mined only by plain intimations of Providence, and 
after much anxious deliberation and feryent prayer. 
Both churches and ministers of the present day, 
may learn valuable lessons of prudence and piety 
from this part of the commentator's history. 

Notwithstanding the clearness of the case, in his 
call to remove, and the length of time which he 
took to make up his mind on the important step of 
leaving one field of labor and entering upon another, 
yet it appears his mind was ill at ease, from the 
godly fear that he might possibly have taken a 
wrong step. When he reached his new abode, he 
vented the anguish of his mind in sighs like these, 
" Lord, am I in the way ? I look back with sorrow 
for leaving Chester ; I look forward with fear ; but 
unto thee I look up." 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



129 



CHAPTER IX. 

Some account of the manner in which Mr. Henry discharged 
the duties of the ministry at Chester. 

Mr, Henry's history having been traced to the 
important period when he left Chester, the present 
chapter will be devoted to a review of his ministe- 
rial course during his abode in that city. Much 
instruction may be thus derived from an exhibition 
of his exemplary conduct, and of the truly Christian 
spirit which he uniformly displayed. By taking 
such a review it will be sufficiently apparent why it 
was that so much earnest desire prevailed in other 
churches, and among not a few of his more distin- 
guished brethren, to secure his services in a wider 
and more invitin(y field of labor than that which he 

o 

had occupied. 

On the Sabbath, Mr. Henry met hi§ congregation 
at nine o'clock, and commenced the services by sing- 
ing the 100th Psalm. Praise was succeeded, for a 
few minutes, by prayer ; he then read and expounded 
part of the Old Testament, proceeding regularly 
from the book of Genesis, After singing another 
psalm, about half an hour was devoted to interces- 
sion ; the sermon followed, and usually occupied 
about an hour ; he again prayed, and after singing, 
commonly the 11 7th Psalm, the benediction was 

Matthaw Heary. ^ 



130 



MEMOIR OF TIIi: 



pronounced. The same order was observed in the 
afternoon, only he then expounded, with the same 
regularity, a part of the New Testament, and, at 
the close of the worship, sung either the 134th, or 
some part of the 136th Psalm. 

In Mr. Henry's day, the church had not yet been 
blessed with the sweet, devotional, poetic effusions 
of Dr. Watts, whose "psalms and hymns and spirit- 
ual songs" have eminently "made glad the city of 
our God ;" and have given rise to numerous other 
similar productions. To supply the deficiency which 
was then felt, Mr. Henry made some attempts to 
compile and arrange a small collection of psalms 
and sacred hymns in verse, as may be seen by a 
reference to his Miscellaneous Works. 

In the exercise of praise he greatly delighted ; 
for it was beautifully suited to his lively and thank- 
ful temper. When young, he had heard his excel- 
lent father say, that " Our praying-days should be 
praising-days ; that whatever the cup is, we should 
take notice of the mixtures and he never forgot it. 
He sometimes devoutly observed, that " A life of 
praise and a life of usefulness is a true angelical 
life." 

In the exercise of public and social prayer, Mr. 
Henry was almost unrivalled. In his addresses to 
the throne of grace, there was no pompous finery ; 
no abstruse and complex elaboration ; no disgusting 
familiarity ; no personal reproofs or compliments ; 



REV. MATTHEW HENRV. 



131 



no vain repetitions ; no preaching. When he pro- 
fessed to pray, he prayed ; and his style was rever- 
ent, humble, simple, and devout. By impressive 
comprehensiveness, by the happiest adaptation of 
his petitions to circumstances, and by peculiar fer- 
vency of manner, he successfully interested and stim- 
ulated his fellow-worshippers. His habits evinced 
the truth of his recorded experience, that " warm 
devotions contribute much to communion with God.'* 
With regard to devotion, he sometimes said, "We 
should be in it as the angels, who are seraphim — 
burners ;" and his own example beautified and con- 
firmed the observation. 

In supplication for mercy, Mr. Henry was very 
earnest and particular — pleading the name, and suf- 
ferings, and mediation of the Lord Jesus Christ, for 
pardon and peace. He was large and full in pray- 
ing for grace, and used to mention the particular 
graces of the Holy Spirit, as faith, love, hope, pa- 
tience, zeal, delight in God ; earnestly begging that 
these might be truly wrought in all, and might be 
preserved, exercised, increased, and evidenced to 
the divine glory. 

Some Christians are unfavorable to the use of the 
Lord's prayer. They imagine it to have been taught 
the disciples as members of the Jewish church, and 
adapted only to the time of waiting for Messiah's 
kingdom. Others advocate its adoption in secret 
only, founding their opinion upon the command, 



132 



MEMOIR OF THE 



**When thou prayest, enter into thy closet." But 
Mr. Henr}^ like his venerable progenitor, approved 
and used it, as a proper form, as well in public as 
in private. Yet by so doing he incurred censure. 
**I wrote," he says, "to Mr. Farrington, why he 
should not be offended at my using the Lord's 
prayer." Even men of sense and piety, in zeal for 
a particular opinion, may be lamentably deficient in 
Christian charity. 

In Mr. Henry's public services on the Sabbath, 
the ancient and invaluable custom of expounding 
the holy Scripture was uniformly practised ; and 
during his residence at Chester, he explained to his 
congregation more than once, the whole of the sa- 
cred oracles. By this means his people were re- 
markable for their scriptural knowledge. 

It contributed to Mr. Henry's ministerial profi- 
ciency, that the thoughts which he cherished of the 
great work to which he was devoted, were just and 
elevated ; and therefore, in some degree at least, pro- 
portioned to its magnitude. It was never, through 
his instrumentality, degraded by any unhallowed 
associations, either of worldly emolument or mere 
external respectability, still less of ease and sloth. 
Keeping the design of the institution continually in 
view, he magnified his office ; and steadily seeking 
the edification and increase of the church of Christ, 
he earnestly and perseveringly coveted the best gifts. 
When reviewing a sacramental opportunity, he says, 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



13? 



*' I endeavored to wrestle this day with God in se- 
cret and at his table for two things, (and 0 that I 
might prevail !) the heart of the upright, and the 
tonorue of the learned." And on another occasion, 
he said, " I would excel in my work." 

The sincerity of these, his recorded desires, was 
happily demonstrated by unremitting preparation for 
the pulpit. To that leading object every other was 
subordinate. All he read, and all he saw, as well 
as the things which he heard, were regarded by him 
with more or less attention, as they bore upon that. 
Nothing crude or undigested found its way, through 
his instrumentality, into the solemn assembly. 

Upon the Scriptures he bestowed his chief and 
profoundest attention. He studied his sermons with 
vast diligence and care, and wrote them at consid- 
erable length. Some advices, yet extant, addressed 
to ministers, well exemplify this part of his charac- 
ter ; and, by the absence of any mention of writing, 
they show a happy freedom from dogmatism and 
intrusiveness, as to his own particular modes. He 
wisely judged that matters of mere convenience or 
taste are best left to the discretion and habits of 
mankind. If sermons were well studied, he did not 
consider it important whether the process was car- 
ried on with a pen or without one ; in the closet, or 
garden, or fields, or elsewhere. 

He would say to ministers, " Take heed of grow- 
ing remiss in your work. Take pains while you live. 



134 



MEMOIR OF THE 



Think not that, after a while, you may relax and gc 
over your old stock. The Scriptures still aflford new 
things, to those who search them. Continue search- 
ing. How can you expect God's blessing, or your 
people's observance, if you are careless ? Be stu- 
dious not to offer that which costs nothing. Take 
pains, that you may find out acceptable words. Let 
all your performances smell of the lamp. This will 
engage the attention of your people. Feed the 
church of God which is among you. Feed the ig- 
norant with knowledge, the careless with admonition, 
the wanderinor with direction, and the mourninor with 
comfort." 

Xo odd or affected tones, or any violent and un- 
seemly agitations, cast over Mr. Henry's pulpit efforts 
the least deteriorating shade. Like Bishop Earle's 
" Grave Divine," he beat upon his text, not upon the 
cushion. In addition to a fascinating manner, his ex- 
cursive and vigorous imagination furnished such a fund 
of ingenious biblical illustration, as to place divine 
truth in a vivid and striking light, and himself upon 
the pinnacle of popularity. In his younger years 
the veheraency of his affections, both in prayer and 
preaching, was such as frequently melted himself 
and his auditors into tears. On one occasion he 
said, " You think we are too earnest with you to 
leave your sins and accept of Christ ; but when you 
come to die you will see the meaning of it. We see 
death at vour backs." 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



135 



In subsequent years, if Mr. Henry became more 
temperate, he did not either chill or freeze. His 
feelings and earnestness were, perhaps, better regu- 
lated, but they were not destroyed. In his diary 
for September 10, 1699, when in his thirty-eighth 
year, he thus writes: "I preached of God the chief 
good, from Psal. 73 : 25, ' Whom have I in heaven 
but thee ? and there is none upon earth that I de- 
sire beside thee.' I had some enlargement of af- 
fections, and I find some prejudice to my bodily 
strength by my overearnestness, but I cannot help 
it ; for I believe the things I speak to be true and 
great, and I would be in my work as one in earnest.'* 
And this fervent manner of preaching he sustained 
to the end of life. 

He was also remarkable for variety in his minis- 
trations. Loving to give Scripture its full latitude, 
he took a wide range, and studiously presented re- 
ligious truth in its connections and its tendencies. 
He ever listened to the "voice which speaketh from 
heaven " — whether addressed by the visible creation, 
the beauties of natural scenery, the discoveries of 
science, the thunders and lightnings of Mount Sinai, 
or that overwhelming exhibition of mercy which 
proclaims to apostate and perishing transgressors the 
"redemption that is in Christ Jesus" — and thus his 
views became large and comprehensive. 

It was the practice of many " ancient worthies,'* 
after having chosen a subject for the pulpit, to pur- 



136 



MEMOIR OF THE 



sue it, week after week, from the same text. But 
Mr. Henry preferred emplo}'ing different texts for 
the discussion of even the same general truth ; an 
improvement well adapted to reheve both preachers 
and hearers from that wearisomeness which is in- 
separable from continued iteration. 

And, as no other theme can excite devotional 
ardor so powerfully as a vivid impression of this one 
grand truth, that Christ was " delivered for our of- 
fences, and was raised again for our justification," it 
can be no matter of surprise that to ^Ir. Henry it 
was most pleasant to be preaching Christ, and that 
when he was so engaged, to borrow his own phrase, 
he was "most in his element." Well did he ob- 
serve, when expatiating upon the subject, that, al- 
though ** the Scriptures are the circumference of 
faith, the rounds of which it walks, and every point 
of which compass it toucheth, yet the centre of it is 
Christ. That is the polar star on which it resteth.'" 

Next to the pattern exhibited at Broad Oak, 
probably nothing served more to increase his at- 
tachment to this style of preaching, or more con- 
duced to his distinction and usefulness in the church, 
than his intimacy with the Rev. Francis Tailents. 
The name of Mr. Tailents has already been men- 
tioned ; it is well known ; and of him it is not too 
much to affirm, that he was equally eminent for his 
learning, his wisdom, his moderation, and his piety. 
To the youthful prophets around him he was a father. 



REV, MATTHEW HENRY. 



137 



Though far advanced in years, he cultivated their 
friendship, accurately observed their public per- 
formances, discovered a lively interest in their re- 
spectabiHty and success, and, mingling with counsels 
and rebukes the most affectionate kindness, he se- 
cured their attention and esteem. 

The nature and effects of that intercourse are well 
evinced in the two following letters, which were 
both addressed to Mr. Tallents by Mr. Henry. It 
is not easy to decide upon which party they confer 
most honor. 

" July 21, 1694. 

" Dear and honored Sir — I am greatly obliged 
to you, not only for your very quickening words 
when I was with you, but for your very quickening 
lines which you sent after me. I reckon, Avhen I 
come to Salop, it is, as the old Puritans went to 
Dedham,"^ to fetch fire. I desire to bless my God 
for any influences of grace and comfort which I have 
often experienced through you, and I am ashamed 
that the impressions thereof have been no more 
strong and lasting. I thank you for the hint you 
give me to speak more of the doctrine of God's 
election, and free grace, which I shall endeavor to 
observe. It refresheth me to think that there are 
any of those whom I am called to speak to in God's 
name, whom I trust the Lord hath ' loved with an 
* Dedham was the residence of the celebrated Rev. John 
Rogers, the ancestor of some of the earliest Puritan fathers 
of America. 



138 



MEMOIR OF THE 



everlasting love ;' and though there are so many 
"who do not believe our report, yet there are some to 
whom 'the arm of the Lord' shall be more and 
more 'revealed.' By an eflfectual choice he hath 
wonderfully and graciously secured the glory of his 
Son ; the happiness of a remnant of his creatures ; 
and, in subordination to these, the comfort of his 
poor ministers. In my Master's work I am but of 
yesterday, yet I find that there is not now that en- 
couraging success which there was at the first open- 
ing of the present door of opportunity, which makes 
me ready to ask sometimes, ' Is the Lord among us, 
or is he not ?' But surely he is, and in more ways 
than one is doing his own work. I have read with 
satisfaction what you direct me to in Turretine, and 
return you many thanks for your hint in that mat- 
ter. I beg your prayers for me, that the Lord, when 
I preach, will lead me into the mystery of the riches 
of free grace for conviction and direction. I en- 
deavor to do it as a means by which free grace 
usually works its own work ; but I desire to wind 
up all in the glory of God : * not unto us, 0 Lord, 
not unto us, but to thy name be the glory.' I 
beg the continuance of your prayers, and when you 
can spare a httle time, a line or two from you will 
be verv much a refreshment to your most affection- 
ate and obedient 

" Son in the Lord, 

" Matthew HE>Tiy." 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



139 



"Broad Oak, Oct. 29, 1G95. 

"Bear and honored Sir — I desire to be thank- 
ful to God for your love to me, and your kind let- 
ters. Yours, which I met with here at Broad Oak, 
hath in it very quickening and refreshing memoran- 
da of our dear Lord Jesus Christ, whom we should 
think more of, and live more upon, did we remember 
that he is the head of our religion. I have found 
comfort and satisfaction in preaching some sermons 
lately, though in much weakness, concerning the 
mediation of Jesus Christ, *the new and living Way,' 
through which we * enter into the holiest,' and heav- 
en is made familiar to us. I desire that when you 
put up a petition for me, it may be this — that I may 
be a true minister of Jesus Christ ; not only ap- 
pointed by him, but affected with his love ; acquaint- 
ed with the mystery of it ; and an instrument to 
bring others acquainted with it, etc., etc. * I rest 
your obedient son in the common faith. 

" Mat. Henry." 

In the prosecution of his ministry, Mr. Henry 
made no attempt to conceal or palliate the guilt and 
extent of human depravity ; nor to disprove or ex- 
plain away the necessity of divine influence in saving 
sinners ; but, on the contrary, he labored to confirm 
those fundamental truths, and to lay open the se- 
crets of the heart, in order that his hearers might 
be convinced of sin, of righteousness, and of judg- 



140 



MEMOIR OF THE 



ment. He then invariably conducted them to Cal- 
vary. There he delighted to linger, urging them 
individually to behold the Lamb of God. And so 
unanswerably did he press the obligations of sinners 
to believe, as to leave all who remained obstinate 
and impenitent without excuse. " I do not stand 
here," he would say, " to mock you with an uncer- 
tainty, or to trifle with you about an indifferent 
thing ; but in the name of Christ, my Master, to 
make a serious offer to you of life and salvation, 
upon the terms of faith and repentance." 

And upon his brethren in the ministry he urged 
the pursuit of a similar course. ** Let Jesus Christ," 
said he, be all in all. Study Christ : preach 
Christ : live Christ." Both by his advice and ex- 
ample he recommended that uniform regard to sim- 
plicity and plainness of speech, which constitutes 
one of the main excellencies of a public instructor. 
He would say to his ministerial brethren, "Let your 
performances be plain and scriptural. Choose for 
your pulpit subjects the plainest and most needful 
truths, and endeavor to make them plainer. Be 
serious in the delivery. Affect not fine words, but 
words which the Holy Ghost teaches ; that is, sound 
speech which cannot be condemned. Enticing words 
of man's wisdom debase your matter. Gold needs 
not to be painted. Scripture expressions are what 
people are used to, and will remember. Consider 
the lambs of the flock. You must take them along 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



141 



with you. Do not overdrive them, by being over- 
long, or overfine." 

Some divines have been designated " fugitive," 
because they run away from their text; but Mr. 
Henry adhered, with admirable closeness, to the^ 
passage which he professed to explain ; yet neither 
pressing into its service foreign or irrelevant truths, 
and still less far-fetched inventions, nor evading any 
topic to which he was naturally led. Although, 
after years of ministerial service, he could say to his 
assembled congregation, "That which I have mainly 
insisted upon is turning to God, and walking with 
God;" still, in connection with this solemn appeal, 
he could also affirm, that he had not shunned to de- 
clare unto them the whole counsel of God. Wher- 
ever his text directed him, in that path he walked, 
unshackled by human authority, and fearless of con- 
sequences. 

When urging his hearers to the performance of 
Christian duties, he endeavored to furnish the neces- 
sary rules and directions in the express words of 
Scripture. But important truths he often illustrated 
by scriptural allusions. An instance will be given 
in his own language. After exposing the nature 
and evils of carnal security, he thus pointed out its 
danger. "We are in danger by it of having our 
hair cut ; that is, of losing our strength, as Samson 
when he slept upon Delilah's lap. Security is weak- 
ening ; it Aveakens our resistance of temptation, and 



142 



MEMOIR OF THE 



our performance of duty. We are in danger by it 
of having tares sown in our hearts, as they were in 
the cornfield while men slept. Corruptions prevail 
and get head while w^e are secure, and off our 
^atch. We are in danger by it of being robbed of 
our spear and cruse of water, as Saul w^as when he 
slept. When secure we lose our defence, and our 
comfort, and so He exposed and disquieted. We 
are in danger by it of being nailed to the earth, as 
Sisera was when he slept in Jael's tent : of minding 
earthly things ; of having head and heart fixed to 
this world. The rich fool was thus nailed to the 
earth, and he counted upon goods laid up for many 
years. We can never reach heaven while we are 
fastened to the earth. We are in danger by it of 
being given up to sleep, as the disciples were in the 
garden. ' Sleep on now.' It is a dismal thing to 
be let alone in carnal security. We are in danger 
of sinking into destruction. Jonah was, when he 
slept in the storm. Security has slain its ten thou- 
sands, who have gone sleeping to hell. And w^hat 
is hell, but to lie for ever under the power of that 
soul-sinking Avord, ' Depart from me,' with a gulf 
fixed to cut off all access ?" 

To render his pulpit addresses the more appro- 
priate, he was frequent in pastoral visits, and took a 
lively interest in the circumstances of his flock. At 
an ordination he thus commended the same course 
to others: "Be famihar with your people; not high, 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



143 



or strange. Converse with them for their good. 
Acquaint yourselves with tlie state of their souls ; 
their temptations, their infiniiities. You will then 
know the better how to preach to them. Your 
flock being volunteers, you may be the more en- 
couraged in dealing with them, and en'courage them 
to ask you questions about their souls." 

In Mr. Henry's spiritual vision nothing appeared 
to have been either diseased or distorted. He did 
not merely assert doctrines with oracular authority, 
but proved them by well-selected and convincing 
arguments ; whilst the duties of genuine Christians 
were unanswerably enforced, and their privileges 
and enjoyments illustrated with singular ingenuity 
and the most captivating eloquence. In every part 
of the system of revealed truth, he saw the pleas- 
ing combination of infinite wisdom with the most 
unsullied purity. ''Some truths," said he, "are 
plain and easy ; others are more deep and mysteri- 
ous ; but all are designed to fructify the holy land, 
and to ' make glad the city of God.' It is but a 
half Christianity that rests in the acts of devotion ; 
it is not an entire Christianity that is not honest as 
well as godly. Without this, the profession of re- 
ligion will be looked upon as a pretence ; a seeming 
religion, which is vain." "Take heed," he would 
say, " of affecting novelties in religion, lest you fall 
into vanities, or worse. Ask for the old way ; keep 
to the faith once dehvered to the saints ; keep to 



144 



MEMOIR OF THE 



the proportion of faith. Take heed to your doc- 
trine — that it jostle not out God's grace, nor man's 
duty ; but take both together." 

Governed by principles like these, his sermons 
were uniformly practical. The morals which he 
tauorht, beincT* founded, like those of the New Testa- 
ment, upon the doctrines which are according to 
godliness, ever left the purest ethics of heathenism 
and the most admired dissertations of a fashionable 
theology at an immeasurable distance. He said, 
*' The very life and soul of religion consists in a con- 
scientious regard to Jesus Christ : that Christianizeth 
morality, and turns moral virtue into evangelical 
holiness." Instead, therefore, of deahng in useless 
generalization, his sermons were fashioned after in- 
spired models, and aboimded in close and pungent 
address, directed at once to the understanding and 
the conscience of every hearer. When advising 
others, on one occasion, to discriminate in their 
preaching, that they might neither strengthen the 
hands of the wicked, nor make the hearts of the 
righteous sad, he said, " It is a reigning sign of hy- 
pocrisy, when the heart cannot endure a searching 
ministry ; when the ministry of the prophets tor- 
ments," alluding to Rev. 11 : 10. 

From an earnest desire to be useful in saving souls, 
Mr. Henry was induced, at times, to adopt a style 
of address which was calculated to alarm. Like his 
venerable father, he could look at his hearers, and 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



145 



without the fear of contradiction could say, I love 
to be the messenger of good tidings ; my temper 
and spirit is to encourage poor sinners to come, and 
repent." Nevertheless, as a faithful watchman, he 
felt it his duty to warn men of their danger. "We 
have no other way," said he, of delivering our 
souls, ^but by telling * the wicked man ' that he shall 
surely die ; that is, be eternally miserable in the 
world to come. Nor is this legal preaching ; for 
Christ so preached very often. The Scriptures 
which speak of hell are to be mostly found in the 
New Testament. * He that believeth not, shall be 
damned,' is part of the Gospel which we are com- 
missioned to preach." 

But Mr. Henry's fidelity to the impenitent did not 
induce him to shght the claims of believers. On 
the contrary, he delighted to minister to their com- 
fort. To them he unfolded the "precious prom- 
ises," and exhibited the glorious " recompense of 
reward." He reminded them that ** spiritual life is 
eternal life begun ; that present light and love are 
the beginnings of eternal light and love ; that the 
citizenship of the saints is now in heaven ; that al- 
though as yet grace be like the smoking flax, yet 
there is a spark, and it will shortly blow up into a 
flame." "Duty and comfort," he sometimes re- 
marked, "go abreast; neither are to be neglected. 
Many are willing to separate them. They love, with 
Ephraim, to tread out the corn ; but not, with Ju- 

Matthew Henry. 1 ^ 



146 



MEMOIR OF THE 



dah, to plough, and, with Jacob, to break the clods. 
They love to hear of comforts, those are smooth 
things ; but not to hear of duty. What, however, 
God has joined, let us not think to separate. Those 
•who would reap in glory, must sow in duty. Justi- 
fication is to be tried by sanctification. They are 
evermore concomitants." 

Mr. Henry considered the improvement of provi- 
dential occurrences, whether merciful or afflictive, 
whether general or local; as essential to making 
*' full proof of his ministry." He therefore fre- 
quently preached sermons of a miscellaneous char- 
acter, adapted to the young, the seasons of the 
year, and the various exercises of mourning and 
joy, which, to a vigilant pastor, present some of the 
finest opportunities of efl:ective ministration. He 
observed, " The command to be * instant in season 
and out of season,' is charged with great solemnity. 
And is it not in season when persons are in affliction ? 
An interpreter will then be one of a thousand." 

The redeeming of time, especially for religious 
exercises, formed a distinguished feature of ancient 
non-conformity; and most of the non-conformist min- 
isters turned this to good account. Amongst the rest, 
Mr. Henry maintained a weekly lecture on Thursday, 
which was attended, usually, by no inconsiderable 
part of his congregation. It is the will of God," 
he said, ** that we should be diligent in our business 
all the days of the week, according as the duty of 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



147 



every day requires ; but it is a corrupt and profane 
inference, that therefore we are not, on those days, 
to pray in our families, or hear sermons. In the 
six days we must do all our work. And is not serv- 
ing God, and working out our salvation, part of our 
business ? Have we not souls to work for, as well 
as bodies ? As God must have his day out of every 
week, so he must have his hour out of every day. 
There is, as we may see in the 145th Psalm, a song 
not only for the Sabbath-day, but for every day. 
We should spend as much for our souls in the week- 
days, as for our bodies on the Sabbath." 

The attention paid by Mr. Henry to the rising 
generation was exemplary, constant, and attractive. 
For his own excitement, and also for the guidance 
Qf others, he not imfrequently observed, that Peter 
was charged to feed the lambs, as well as the sheep. 
In addition to sermons often expressly preached to 
the young, the work of catechizing was indefatigably 
performed every Saturday afternoon. The exercise 
commenced and ended with prayer. It usually oc- 
cupied more than an horn*, and was attended not 
only by the catechumens, but by others also, who, 
fondly anticipating the holy rest of the Sabbath on 
the morrow, esteemed the service a suitable prep- 
aration for the sacred duties of the sanctuary. When 
any of those yomig persons of whom he had enter- 
tained hope grew vain and careless, he deeply la- 
mented their state ; and ceased not to pray to God 



148 



RIEMOIR OF THE 



that he would recover them out of the snare of the 
devil, before their hearts were hardened through the 
deceitfulness of sin. But in this labor of love for 
the young, it was Mr. Henry's happiness and honor 
to be remarkably successful, as well as persevering. 

His attention to discipline in the church combined 
spiritual wisdom with holy zeal, and was equally 
remote from precipitation and supineness. Without 
trespassing either upon faithfulness or tenderness, 
he could adopt the apostle's spirit-stirring appeal : 
Who is weak, and I am not weak ? Who is of- 
fended, and I burn not ?" When evil reports con- 
cerning any of his flock needed attention, he inquired 
diligently into the facts ; he weighed every com- 
plaint and every plea ; and if the statement was 
proved, reproof was fully administered, but with tli# 
utmost affection. His object was not to indulge any 
angry feeling, but to reclaim the offender. Such he 
invariably endeavored to restore "in the spirit of 
meekness," according to the apostolic exhortation. 

The sick and afflicted were special objects of his 
attention, whatever might be their external circum- 
stances or their ecclesiastical connections, provided 
that in this last particular he should not be intrench- 
ing upon the duty of any other minister, for he never 
attempted to build upon another man's foundation. 
Nothing short of invincible necessity prevented his 
attendance whenever his services were called for. 
Nor did he wait for applications to be made for those 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY 



149 



senices. By inquiring among his friends, he sought 
out the afflicted ; and when his prayers in the con- 
gregation were anonymously desired, he would pub- 
licly request the writers to furnish their names, not 
only that he might remember them in prayer more 
appropriately, but that he might know how to render 
them other service also. In his diary he is almost 
daily to be traced, when at home, to the chambers 
of the sick and distressed, the Sabbath not except- 
ed ; sometimes he visited four or five in a day ; the 
names are commonly recorded, and brief mention is 
made both of their state and frame of mind. The 
event was not overlooked. If they recovered, he 
not only blessed God on their behalf, but, by apt 
exhortations, reminded them of the vows and reso- 
lutions which they had made, and urged to the per- 
formance of them. 

Thus faithfully did this devoted servant of Christ 
labor in the ancient city of Chester, for nearly a 
quarter of a century. Nor were his labors confined 
Avithin the walls of the city. He frequently visited 
the surrounding villages and the more distant towns 
of the county, and indeed often extended his labors 
to the counties of Lancashire, Stafifordshire, and 
portions of the principality of Wales. Like all other 
ministers of the same glorious Gospel which he 
preached, he had many discouragements in his work ; 
but, generally, he was privileged to behold the work 
of the Lord prospering. 



150 



MEMOIR OF THE 



As he' was frequently called upon to assist at the 
solemnity of ordaining his younger brethren to the 
work and office of the ministry, the next chapter 
will be devoted to the record of some of the coun- 
sels which, on those occasions, he offered to those 
who were invested through his instrumentality with 
the sacred office. 



CHAPTER X. 

Exhortations delivered by Mr. Henry to ministers at their 
ordination to the sacred office. 

The ordination of a minister is a solemn and mo- 
mentous affair. Mr. Henry felt it to be such, both 
in his own case and that of others. The following 
gleanings from exhortations which he delivered at 
different times on such occasions, will serve increas- 
ingly to illustrate his own habits of pastoral vigil- 
ance and labor. They will display, also, with ad- 
ditional clearness, the exalted pleasure which he 
felt in the good work. And while they may serve 
to lead some candidates for the sacred office to pause 
before they assume its responsibilities, they may, at 
the same time, encourage others to put their hand 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



151 



to the gospel plough ; and edif}^ and delight all who 
in sincerity and in truth love the Lord Jesus Christ, 
the sole Head of the Church. 

**We must not," said he, "be forward to put 
forth ourselves in the exercise of spiritual gifts. 
Pride often appears in this under a pretence of a 
desire to be useful. If the motive be correct, it is 
good ; but humihty will wait for a call." 

" The charge we have now to give unto you who 
are sworn on the grand inquest between our Sove- 
reign Lord, the King of kings, and his church on 
earth, is not a light thing, for it is your life. You 
are intrusted with the ' charge of the sanctuary.* 
Keep the charge, though you be called, as those of 
old, to war a warfare in it. 

*' It is a divine charge. We have not the cutting 
out of your work. We are only to tell you what it 
is. Your charge you receive from the hand that 
gives you your commission, and puts you into the 
ministry, even Christ, whose ministers and stewards 
you are. ^e. commanded the twelve, and the cir- 
cumstance is noticed, both by Matthew and Luke ; 
the one in his Gospel, and the other in the Acts of 
the Apostles. From him you are to expect the 
blessing, and strength to fulfil your trust. 

** It is a charge solemn enough to strike the light- 
est mind with awe. See with what solemnity Paul, 
again and again, addressed Timothy, though a man 
of a serious spirit. 1 Tim. 5 : 21 ; 1 Tim. 6:13; 2 



152 



MEMOIR OF THE 



Tim. 4 : 1, 2. God's eye is upon you, and the eye 
of Christ, and the holy angels ; therefore it is that 
you receive the charge in public, and before the 
church. 

" It is a charge that requires for the fulfilling of 
it the whole man — ' all that is within you.' If a 
man had ten souls, the ministry is work enough for 
them all. Therefore the charge of the sanctuary 
was committed to men in the prime of their time, 
between the ages of twenty-five and fifty. 

It is a charge for life ; while God gives you 
ability and opportunity. You are laying your hand 
to a ' plough,' from which there is no looking back. 
It is a charge from which you must not think of 
being discharged till your life end. In case of sick- 
ness or restraint, ' God will have mercy and not sac- 
rifice.' 

" It is a charge upon which you will, in the great 
day, be called to an account. Ministers must be 
judged. Your oflSce, if you profane the holy things 
of God, will not excuse you. Remember Nadab 
and Abihu ; the day after they were consecrated, 
they were consumed. 

"You must faithfully explain and apply the ora- 
cles of God. You have a Gospel to preach, not to 
make. You must faithfully administer the ordinances 
of Christ. You must maintain the truths of the 
Gospel. You must preside in religious assemblies. 
You must witness against sin. You must separate 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



153 



between the precious and the vWe. You must com- 
fort afflicted consciences. You must intercede for 
the church and people of God. You must transmit 
that which is committed to you to the rising gen- 
eration. 

" In particular, we give you charge conceiTiing 
the CARE OF TOUR SOULS. ' Take heed' to thyself, 
to save thyself in the first place. 

" Make sure your own interest in Christ, and a 
work of grace in your hearts. See that the good 
work be wrouo-ht and ocoinor on there. Raise your 
applications from thence, that you may speak feel- 
ingly and experimentally. Such a thing affected me. 
Press those methods you yourselves have found the 
benefit of. Be not as Noah's workmen, who built 
an ark for others, and perished themselves ; or as 
mercurial posts, which direct others, but themselves 
stand still. Your work will be a task and a burden 
to you, if you do not relish divine things ; and in 
that case you cannot expect God's blessing. 

"Keep up communion with God, both in secret 
and in public. Be affected yourselves with what 
you speak to others. God gives his prophets leave 
to be free with him. Use your freedom. Let us 
not be strangers to "our Master. It is our privilege 
that we are often called to prayer. Let us, like the 
apostle Paul, keep a conscience void of offence. How 
else can we expect God's presence, and strength, 
and blessing ? We profess to be tender, and we 



154 



MEMOIR OF THE 



condescend, in some things, to justify that tender- 
ness. Let it be so in every thing. If we walk not 
in God's counsels, how can we expect to profit his 
people ? Take heed of sin. You spoil your min- 
istry if you suffer that worm to be at the root. Set 
your eye upon God's eye, and believe that his is 
upon yours. 

"Keep np an intimacy with your own hearts. Be 
much in communing with them. Keep your own 
vineyards ; else how can you keep others' ? Make 
that clear to yourselves, which you would make clear 
to others ; and be affected with that yourselves with 
which you would affect others. Look well to your 
principles and aims ; let your eye be single. Take 
heed of pride ; it will spoil all. There is no greater 
ornament to a young minister than humility. Say, 
with the psalmist, * I will go in the strength of the 
Lord God. I will make mention of thy righteous- 
ness, even of thine only.' 

"Take heed of spiritual pride. This is spoken 
of, in an address to Timothy, as the temptation of 
young ministers. Think not that you have already 
attained ; but forget the things that are behind. 
Magnify your office, but do not magnify yourselves. 
It is not outward honor that we must aim at. Let 
evil report help to lay us low, and let not good re- 
port help to lift us up. Boasting is for ever excluded. 
* For who maketh thee to differ from another? And 
what hast thou that thou didst not receive? Nov/, if 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



155 



thou didst receive it, why dost thou gloiy, as if thou 
hadst not received it?' Pray much against this sin; 
pray for ' grace sufficient.' 

" We give you charge concerning the course of 
YOUR CONVERSATION. If your Uves do not corre- 
spond with your preaching, you pull down with one 
hand what you build up with the other. See to it 
that, in your conversation, you preserve the credit 
of your ministry. We charge you with this, because 
the glory and honor of God is concerned in it, which 
will suffer if you miscarry. ' Thou which teachest 
another, teachest thou not thyself ? Thou that 
teachest a man should not steal, dost thou steal? 
Thou that sayest a man should not commit adultery, 
dost thou commit adultery ? Thou that abhorrest 
idols, dost thou commit sacrilege ? Thou that makest 
thy boast of the law, through the breaking of the 
law dishonorest thou God ?' 

" Keep at a distance from all evil, all appearance 
of it. Many eyes are upon you. Let your con- 
versation be grave, sober, pure. Ministers should 
be mortified men. Cherish not desires after worldly 
riches and delights ; but * follow after righteousness, 
godliness, faith, patience, meekness. Flee also youth- 
ful lusts.' 

" Take heed of the indulgence of the flesh. Paul 
reminds himself of it. * I keep my body under, and 
bring it into subjection ; lest by any means when I 
have preached to others, I myself should be a cast- 



156 



MEMOIR OF THE 



away.' Take it not ill that I remind you of it. 
Prophets are spiritual men ; but ' the prophet is a 
fool, and the spiritual man is mad,' if he submit to, 
the dominion of carnal lusts. Be sober in the use 
of creature comforts. That liberty which may be 
decent in another, may be culpable in a minister. 
He that ruleth not himself, how shall he rule the 
church ? 

" Take heed of worldliness. The love of money 
is a root of more evil in a minister than in any other 
person. Regard not your stuff if the heavenly Ca- 
naan be yours. Let them that know no better take 
their portion in these things ; but you may not. 

" Promote the ends of your ministry. Preach in 
your lives. Use good discourse. It will be ex- 
pected from you, and better taken than from others. 
Be examples to believers, in word, in conversation, 
in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. Let it be 
seen that you believe what you report of the evil 
of sin. Men will do as you do sooner than as you 
say. Make your converse edifying, that every com- 
pany you come into may be the better for you. 
Your profession is an honor to you ; be not you a 
disgrace to it. 

" * Be wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.' 
These two must go together. Act with prudence ; 
not 'fleshly wisdom,' but that which is by the grace 
of God. It will be your prudence to meddle as 
little as may be in secular affairs ; not to entangle 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



157 



yourselves in the affairs of this life. ' Who made 
me a judge or divider ?' Also take heed of what 
you say to other people. There is a time when the 
prudent shall keep silence. With this, innocency, 
a dovelike spirit without gall, will well become you. 
If others are any way injurious, do not meditate 
revenge ; for this is not dovelike. Your business is 
to do good to all ; therefore, your care must be to 
do hurt to none. 

" Give no offence in any thing, that the ministry 
be not blamed : get and keep a good name : avoid 
every appearance of evil. The most circumspect 
cannot escape censure, but you should put to silence 
the ignorance of foolish men. Let it never be said of 
us, that we are proud and haughty, that we are vain 
and frothy, that we are covetous or worldly. Deny 
yourselves in many things which otherwise are law- 
ful, that you may save the credit of your ministry. 
If that be blamed, we are blamed who have set you 
apart to it. You have many eyes upon you, and 
some that watch for your halting, therefore walk 
accurately. 

" Show yourselves patterns of good works. Christ 
began to do and to teach ; and so must you. Your 
voice is Jacob's ; let your hand be his also. You 
would have others to be serious and humble : be 
you so. You must put others in mind, as directed, 
to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey 
magistrates, to be ready to every good work; to be 



158 



MEMOIR OF THE 



no brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness unto 
all men. Set them an example, then ; let no man 
despise your youth. Though you are young in age, 
you are elders in office : it becomes you, therefore, 
to be serious and grave. If any variance happens, 
be patterns of peace-making, yielding to others, and 
bearing with them. Be examples of peaceableness. 
You will hardly reconcile those to Christ whom you 
cannot reconcile to yourselves. Win all by love and 
meekness. 

" We give you charge concerning the welfare 
OF THE CHURCH IN GENERAL. You are the messen- 
gers of the churches, as well as the glory of Christ. 
Be serviceable to the church. Take all occasions 
for the pulpit. Make it appear that your work is a 
delight, and not a drudgery. Instruct and exhort 
in personal converse ; never reckon it out of season. 
Fail not to visit the~sick. Be instant in visiting those 
also who are in health. Wherever you come, leave 
a good word behind you. 

"You are watchmen upon the walls. * Ye that 
make mention of the Lord, keep not silence, and give 
him no rest, till he establish, and till he make Jeru- 
salem a praise in the earth.' Be intercessors for the 
church. Prophets of old prayed for the public peace. 
Stand in the gap, as did Moses — who should, if you 
do not ? Acquaint yourselves with the state of the 
churches, that you may be particular herein. See- 
ing you are not obliged to forms, you have the more 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



159 



need to furnish yourselves for every good word and 
work. Let not that liberty be turned into licentious- 
ness. Improve in your praying gifts ; offer not any 
thing unbecoming the seriousness of that ordinance. 
Use Scripture expressions. They are most unex- 
ceptionable, and most agreeable to those who are 
serious. Pray for the spirit of prayer. 

" We are in Christ's kingdom, appointed to be 
conservators of the peace. Charge the peace then 
in Christ's name. Condemn not those who differ 
from you. Be not censorious. Widen not your 
differences. Judge charitably of all. Praise that 
^which is good ; and make the best of what you dis- 
like. Let us be offensive to none, but obliging to 
all. Let not the Gospel of peace be 'preached con- 
tentiously. 

*' We charge you concerning the welfare of 

THOSE CONGREGATIONS WHICH ARE PARTICULARLY 

COMMITTED TO YOU. They must, in a special man- 
ner, be your care. You are their choice ; you are 
not thrust upon them ; and therefore you have, in 
some respects, a greater advantage in dealing with 
them. * Take heed to all the flock over which the 
Holy Ghost hath made you overseers : to feed the 
church of God, which he hath purchased with his 
own blood.' Feed the flock of God. You must do 
this in your familiar applications ; and especially 
when they apply to you. Be familiar with them, 
not shy and haughty. Show yourselves glad of an 



160 



MEMOIR OF THE 



occasion to talk with them about their souls. Be so 
well furnished that you need not fear betraying a 
weak side. Be so humble as not to think it a dis- 
paragement to converse with the meanest saint, but 
rather a disparagement to be in company with the 
haughtiest sinner. And be faithful to them. Tell 
them with meekness of their faults. 

*'We charge you by way of comfort and en- 
couragement. You must expect to meet with dif- 
ficulties — from the oppositions of Satan, from the 
frowns of the world. You must expect reproach 
and contempt. It is our present trial. You may 
be tempted to think all this had been prevented if 
you had been of some other employment. You see 
little success of your ministry, and that is a discour- 
agement. You labor in vain, and are ready to faint. 
But the greatest discouragement is from within; 
our own weakness. We do not (say you) profit 
ourselves ; we fear we shall not hold out. Be not 
discouraged. Let your weakness and infirmities 
humble you, but not dishearten you; for God's 
grace is sufficient. When you are weak in yom*- 
sclves, if sensible of your weakness, and relying on 
Christ, you shall find yourselves strong. Encourage 
yourselves to use means for your improvement. 
God's blessing can do wonders by weak endeavors. 

" Be not discouraged by the reproaches and in- 
juries you may meet with. You set out with the 
wind in your faces, and, perhaps, may hear of hard 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



161 



things said of you ; but let none of these things 
move you. You are not to stand or fall by mens 
judgment: approve yourselves to God, and you 
may be easy. The smiles of our Father will balance 
the anger of our mother's children ; and his * well 
done,' all their unkind censures. Nor be discouraged 
by the little success of your ministry. It is the 
case that we are disappointed as to many, and as to 
some whom we have taken pains with, of whom we 
have said, These ' shall comfort us concerning our 
work, and the toil of our hands.' But our recom- 
pense will be according to our faithfulness, not our 
success. 'Though Israel be not gathered, yet,' said 
Isaiah, * shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, 
and my God shall be my strength.' It may be it 
is our own fault. * If,' said the Lord by Jeremiah, 
* if they had stood in my counsel, and had caused 
my people to hear my words, then they should 
have turned them from their evil way, and from the 
evil of their doings.' Remember, you are employed 
in work in which God is working with you. We 
serve a Master who, if we be faithful to him, makes 
the best of us, and is not 'extreme to mark' what 
we do amiss. You have many encouraging exam- 
ples before you. Great will be your reward in 
heaven, if you are faithful. The souls you win, the 
sufferings you bear, will be your crown. 

There are, however, several other things to en- 
courage us. The goodness of our work. We are 

Matthew Henry. ^ ^ 



162 



MEMOIR OF THE 



despised ; but our work is not despicable. It is work 
for Christ and the souls of men. It is a work that 
■will be successful, though we see not, and feel not, 
the success we desire. Can we ever employ our- 
selves better than in that which is the proper busi- 
ness of our office ? 

" Consider the kindness of our Master. He ac- 
cepts of our sincere endeavors. He has promised 
to own us, to be with us to the end of the world ; 
to be with each rising generation. 

" Remember the promise of the Spirit to help our 
infirmities ; to assist us in our work, and to make it 
successful. The promise of the Spirit relates espe- 
cially to ministers. See John's Gospel, chapters 
14 and 16. Believe the experience of your pred- 
ecessors ; they have found God all-sufficient to 
them. We do not repent laying our hand to this 
plough. 

" And then, there is the prospect of the recom- 
pense. Bear contempt. If you be faithful, there 
is honor before you ; yea, the best preferment. Let 
us keep heaven in our eye. Be encouraged in the 
difficulties of your work: heaven will make amends 
for all. If your encouragement be but small in 
success, the recompense of the reward is certain. 

" Let us then keep doing. You have constant 
work, either to fish, or to mend your nets: like 
housekeepers, either to bring into your treasuries, 
or to bring out. Fill up your time. Ministers* 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



163 



time especially, should be precious. Gather as you 
spend. Let us love our studies. * Give attendance 
to readino".' 

o 

" Let me say something to quicken you ; and this 
give me leave to transfer to myself, for I need it. 
Let me consider that the things I am employed 
about are of vast importance : dealing for an eternal 
God with immortal souls, about their everlasting 
state. My Master's eye is always upon me ; my 
time is very precious, and ray day hastening to a 
period. I have a great opportunity of doing good 
if I be faithful, of serving Christ, of being a worker 
too-ether with God, of savinof souls from death. I 
must shortly give account, either with joy or grief, 
according as I am, or am not faithful. 

** Be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. 
See that you have true grace yourselves, and then 
that you be stronger and stronger. Let all your 
strength be in the grace of Christ. Derive from 
him daily ; depend always upon him. Walk up and 
down in his name. Without this, * the youths will 
be faint and be weary.' When you study or preach, 
go in the strength of Christ. 

" And hold fast till Christ comes. This was all 
the burden laid upon the presbyters of Thyatira. 
Christ comes to own you, and crown you. Perse- 
vere to the end, that you lose not that crown. I 
hope you are satisfied in what you have done here 
to-day. Do not undo it again, but hold it fast." 



164 



MEMOIR OF THE 



What minister of religion, who desires to be ap- 
proved of his Redeemer and Lord, whether he be a 
tyro or a veteran in the work, may not be instructed 
and benefited by the appropriate, weighty counsels 
contained in this chapter ? 



CHAPTER XI. 

Commencement of his labors at Hackney — His indefatigable 
exertions — Anniversary reflections — Attention to the young 
— His patronage of charity-schools — His declining health — 
Visits Chester — Is laid aside by sickness — Relapses again — 
Birthday memorial— Devout commencement of the last year 
of his life — Journey to Chester — His last Sabbaths on earth 
— Sets out for London — Sickness on the road — His death — 
Funeral — Funeral sermons. 

The pastoral engagements of Mr. Henry at Hack- 
ney were commenced on Lord's day, May 18, 1712. 
In the morning he expounded the first chapter of 
Genesis, and in the afternoon the first chapter of 
Matthew, thus beginning the world, or rather the 
ministerial office, as it were, anew. He preached 
to an encouraging auditory from Acts 16:9, "Come 
over into Macedonia, and help us ;" but his mind 
was unhappy and depressed. " 0 that good may 
be done," is the aspiration written at the time ; to 



REV. 3IATTHEW HENRY. 



165 



which he adds, " I am sad in spirit, lamenting my 
departure from my friends at Chester ; but if they 
are well provided for, and the work of God go on 
among them, I shall be easy, whatever discourage- 
ments I meet with." 

The same course of zealous and active exertion 
which has been already described, was pursued in 
his new sphere of labor, both within and beyond the 
bounds of his own congregation. But while the 
number and responsibilities of Mr. Henry's engage- 
ments were increased, those habits of personal piety 
and self- dedication which have been so fully exhib- 
ited were still continued, and continued in the same 
spirit of scriptural and elevated devotion. This will 
be clearly seen by a few further extracts from his 
journal. 

"October 18, 1712. To-day I have filled up, 
or rather the Lord has filled up unto me, the fiftieth 
year of my life, and I now enter on old age — with 
so many years has the divine forbearance indulged 
me, who, by reason of my sins, am heir to death — 
nor has God only given life, but he has enriched it 
with all good things pertaining both to life and god- 
liness : for ever blessed be his name. But what 
have I done more than others for the glory of God, 
and the good of the church ? I have, indeed, lived 
an idle, slothful, inactive, and useless life. Have 
mercy on me, O Lord, and let what remains of my 
life be entirely devoted to my Redeemer ; and when 



\ 



166 MEiMOIR OF THE 

no more shall remain, let this life be sweetly changed 
for the life everlasting." 

January 1, 1713, he writes, "Firmly believing 
that my times are in God's hand, I here submit my- 
self, and all my affairs, for the ensuing year, to the 
wise and gracious disposal of the divine Providence ; 
whether God appoint for me health or sickness, 
peace or trouble, comforts or crosses, life or death, 
his holy will be done. 

" Believing that my heart is in God's hand, this 
precious soul of mine I commit to the conduct of the 
divine grace, and submit to the influences and oper- 
ations of the blessed Spirit, to be wrought up to a 
conformity to the will of God in every thing. I 
depend upon God to give me a wise and understand- 
ing heart for all the services I may be called out 
unto, and from him I hope to obtain mercy to be 
found faithful. 

"The sphere of my usefulness is much enlarged. 
O that my heart may be proportionably enlarged ; 
and as the day is, so let the wisdom, and strength, 
and grace be. Temptations to spiritual pride are 
many. 0 that the grace of God may be sufficient 
for me, to keep me humble, very humble ; to keep 
up in me always a humble sense of my own un wor- 
thiness, weakness, and many follies and infirmities ; 
and a humble dependence upon the Lord Jesus 
Christ, as all in all, both for righteousness and 
strength." 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



1G7 



At Hackney, as at Chester, the young shared 
largely in Mr. Henry's attention. Catechizing had 
never been wholly omitted in and about London, 
but he was instrumental in a more general revival 
of it. Besides attending to that duty at Hackney 
on Saturdays, which he commenced performing al- 
most immediately after his settlement there, he un- 
dertook a catechetical lecture in London, at the 
meeting-house which once belonged to his honored 
preceptor, Mr. Doolittle. And that lecture was not 
only well attended, but some young persons were 
known to Mr. Tong, who, going only as spectators, 
ascribed their first religious impressions to the in- 
structions then received. 

" His papers abound with proofs of the intense 
interest which he took, both in their temporal and 
spiritual welfare. Nor was his care for them con- 
fined to the families of the opulent ; it extended 
equally to the children of the poor. One of his 
minutes in his journal is the following : "January 
1, 1*712-13, I went early to Gravel-lane, in South- 
wark, Mr. Marriot's meeting-place, where there has 
been a charity-school for twenty-five years ; the only 
one among the dissenters ; there I preached an an- 
niversary sermon on Proverbs 3:9,* Honor the 
Lord with thy substance.' A collection was made 
amounting to about £35." 

But whilst employed in indefatigable labors, the 
time of his departure drew near. He was about to 



168 



MEMOIR OF THE 



receive the reward of the faithful servant, whom his 
Lord when he coraeth finds " watching " and work- 
ing. His motion in hohness and service was the 
swifter as he came nearer to the centre of his rest." 
He did not long survive his removal to Hackney ; 
but his descent to the grave, though at last sudden, 
w^as gradual. His frame had been severely tried by 
the attacks which have been already noticed ; and 
during the last two years of his life, their frequency 
and violence increased. They visibly indicated a 
yielding constitution, and so attracted his own no- 
tice, as to occasion frequent allusion to the probable 
issue ; but with enviable composure, if not delight. 

Before he left Chester, he engaged, while able, 
to visit that city annually, for a few Sabbaths. This 
arrangement, suggested by the congregation at 
Hackney, the better to secure his acceptance of 
their invitation, was most scrupulously observed. 
His own account will best furnish the detail, and is 
too interesting to be omitted. 

"July 20, 1713. I am now set out in the coach 
for Chester, to visit my friends in the country, as I 
proposed and promised when I came hither, aiming 
at God's glory, and the edification of souls. 

On the 23rd we came to Whitchurch ; many of 
my friends met me there, to my great reviving. In 
the afternoon I went and preached at Broad Oak, 
from Romans 1:11, 'For I long to see you, that I 
may impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the end 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



1.39 



ye may be established.' The next day I went to 
Chester, where my friends received me with much 
aftection and respect, so that I could not but say it 
was worth the while to come. On the Lord's day 
I preached from 1 Tim. 6 : 12, 'Lay hold on eternal 
life.' It was very pleasant to me to preach in the 
old place, where I have often met with God and 
been owned by him. On Wednesday we kept a 
congregational fast ; the next Lord's day I preached, 
and administered the Lord's supper to my beloved 
flock ; a great congregation. On Monday I went to 
Middle wich, preached a lecture there from Matthew 
24 : 12, ' Iniquity abounds.' The next day to Kniits- 
ford, to a meeting of ministers. I preached from 
Col. 2:8,' Though absent in the flesh, yet present 
in the spirit:' about the spiritual communion of 
saints. 

" On Lord's day, August 9, I preached at Ches- 
ter, from Titus 2 : 13, 'Looking for the blessed 
hope.' I took an affectionate farewell of many of 
my friends, and prayed with many of them ; the 
next day set out from Chester, with much ado, for 
Nantwich, where Mr. Motterehed is well settled. I 
preached from Joshua 1 : 5, 6, 'As I was with 
Moses, I will be with thee ; be strong and of a good 
courage.' From thence that night to Wrenbury 
Wood, and preached there from John 1 : 48 ; and 
from thence to Danford, and preached at Whit- 
church, from 1 Peter, 5:10, and took my leave of 



170 



MEMOIR OF THE 



my dear friends there. I went into the coach alone ; 
came to London the loth, and found my tabernacle 
in peace." 

Shortly after his return home, symptoms of dia- 
betes manifested themselves, and he was laid aside 
for one Sabbath. "A melancholy day," he writes, 
"yet not without some sweet communion with God. 
It is just upon me for an inordinate desire to be at 
my study and work again." Still feeling the effects 
of the shock, he says, soon after, " I cannot now 
rise so early, nor stick so close to my study, as I 
could before my last illness. The Lord perfect 
strength in me." 

During the following month his already shattered 
system sustained another violent nephritical attack. 
It was the Sabbath when he was seized with it ; but 
he officiated as usual, and toiled incessantly during 
the ensuing week. On Tuesday he went to London 
to his catechizing. On Wednesday he delivered 
the lecture at Hackney, and attended the funeral 
of his neighbor, Mr. Ironmonger, who was buried 
at Stepney. On Thursday evening he preached at 
Spitalfields. On Friday he joined in a fast, and 
gave the sermon at Mr. Fleming's, at Founder's 
hall. On Saturday he found himself well. 

Another birthday anniversary having amved, it 
was noticed in the following tender and expressive 
terms. "October 18, 1713. The fifty-first year of 
mv life has this dav closed. In the course of it 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



171 



many of my friends have reached their goal. I am 
yet ahve, but in the midst of death. May my soul 
be fitted for the heavenly life, and then — the will 
of the Lord be done." 

The interval of convalescence "was short. In ref- 
erence to his frequent attacks of sickness about this 
time, he affectingly noticed the alternations of ease 
and pain. In any circumstances such notices would 
be valuable ; but they are rendered doubly so, from 
the speedy and sudden termination of his earthly 
pilgrimage. 

"Lord's day, Dec. 13. This morning, a little 
after midnight, I was seized with a fit of the stone ; 
but, blessed be God, the pain in about an hour 
went off : though fatigued with it, yet the poor body 
was fitted in some measure to serve the Lord. I 
went to London, and preached the morning lecture 
at Mr. Robinson's, from John 20 : 1, ' The first day 
of the week, early, while it was yet dark.' I preached 
at Hackney, from Romans 2 : 8, 9. 

''Thursday, Dec. 17. I went to my study early 
in the morning ; but before seven o'clock, I was 
seized with a fit of the stone, which held me all day 
pained and sick. I lay much on the bed. I had 
comfort in lifting up my heart to God, and pleading 
his promises, and encouraged myself in him. About 
nine o'clock in the evening 1 had much ease, but was 
weak. 

" Friday, Dec. 18. I am very well to-day, though 



172 



MEMOIR OF THE 



very ill yesterday. How is this life counter- changed ! 
Yet I am but girding on the harness. The Lord 
prepare me for the next fit, and for the last." 

It was an observation of Mr. Henry's, that " The 
more we have of the foretastes of heaven; the less 
evil we shall see in death ; which," said he, " is not 
a bar, but a bridge, in our way to glory." And 
now, standing upon the threshold of another year, 
and as if conscious that it was to be his last, he 
looked the king of terrors steadily in the face ; and 
through faith in Him who hath overcome death, and 
opened the kingdom of heaven to all behevers, he 
triumphed. 

"January 1, 1*714. Reflecting with thankful- 
ness upon the many mercies of the past year ; a 
good measure of health ; health in my family ; en- 
couragement in my ministry, both in the congrega- 
tion here,* and at London ; the comforts of my jour- 
ney to Chester ; the happy settlement of the con- 
gregation there ; the continuance of the public tran- 
quillity ; and, I trust, through grace, some sweet 
communion with God in his ordinances, and some 
progress heavenwards, and my work pleasant to 
me : 

"Reflecting with sorrow and shame upon my 
manifold defects, and short-comings in holy duties ; 
and at other times invrard impressions not always 

* Hackney is one of the suburbs of London, a few miles 
from the centre of the city. 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY 



173 



answering to outward expressions ; having begged 
for pardon in the blood of Christ : 

" I this morning renewed the dedication of my- 
self to God ; my own self, my whole self, body, soul, 
and spirit. Father, I give thee my heart ; use me 
for thy glory this year ; employ me in thy ser\-ice ; 
fit me for thy will. If it should be a year of sick- 
ness and pain ; if a year of family affliction ; if a year 
of public trouble ; if of silencing and sufi"ering, bonds 
and banishment ;* if it be my dying year, welcorae 
the holy will of God : if a year of continued health, 
peace, and liberty. Lord, I desire to be busy in the 
improvement of it, both in study and preaching, in 
an entire dependence upon divine grace, without 
which I am nothing, and can do nothing." 

On this new-year's day, the last of his life, he 
preached a sennon to young people, from Proverbs 
23 : 26, My son, give me thy heart." To the 
record of this in his diary, the following devout 
aspiration was added : " Lord, take my heart, and 
mate it such as it should be." 

On Monday, the 31st of May, Mr. Hemy set out 
on his annual journey to visit his friends at Ches- 

* How little can those of the present generation, either in 
England or America, enter into the feelings of our Puritan 
forefathers, who labored and straggled for the happy rehgious 
liberty which we now enjoy — sitting "under our own vine 
and fig-tree ;" and none daring to make us afraid I " Xot 
unto us, not unto us, O Lord, but to thy name" do we give the 
" glory." 



174 



MEMOIR OF THE 



ter and the surrounding country. His labors were 
abundant. He visited Wrexham, Knutsford, and 
Chowbent; testifying everywhere "the Gospel of 
the grace of God." A remark which he made dur- 
ing this visit, shows more satisfaction than he had 
before felt, in his removal to Hackney. It was this : 
" I am here [at Chester] among my old friends, yet 
I find my new ones lie very near my heart, among 
whom God has now cut out my work." 

It is worthy of remark, that the two last Sab- 
baths which Mr. Henry spent on earth, were em- 
ployed in the immediate and public contemplation 
of that sabbatism of rest, upon which he was so 
soon to enter. On one of those days he preached 
from Hebrews 4 : 9, "There remaineth, therefore, a 
rest for the people of God ;" and on the other, from 
the first verse of the same chapter, " Let us there- 
fore fear, lest a promise being left us of entering 
unto his rest, any of you should seem to come short 
of it." 

The day following the delivery of the last of these 
discourses, Mr. Henry commenced his journey on 
his return towards Hackney. He was observed to 
be heavy and sleepy, but his uniform answer to in- 
quiries was, " Well." It was, however, remarked by 
a medical friend before he left Chester, that they 
should never see him again. 

Passing by Dudden he drank a glass of the min- 
eral waters. Before he reached Tarporley, his horse 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



175 



threw him ; but he denied that the fall occasioned 
him any inconvenience. All invitations to tariy 
there he resisted, and loould proceed to Nantwich, 
where he had engaged to preach. His text was 
Jer. 31 : 18 : "I have surely heard Ephraim be- 
moaning himself thus : Thou hast chastised me, and 
I was chastised as a bullock unaccustomed to the 
yoke ; turn thou me, and I shall be turned ; for 
thou art the Lord my God." The absence of his 
usual liveliness was universally noticed. 

His old and intimate friend Mr. Illidge, who was 
with him, had been desired by Sir Thomas Delves 
and his lady, to invite him to Doddington, a house 
famed for piety. He accepted the invitation, and 
the steward waited to conduct him thither. But 
he soon became unable to go on, and at the resi- 
dence of the Rev. Joseph Mottershed, he was obliged 
to retire to bed. He requested his friends to pray 
for him ; "for now," said he, "I cannot pray for 
myself." He spoke of the excellency of spiritual 
comforts in a time of need, and blessed God for the 
enjoyment of them. To Mr. Illidge, who was accus- 
tomed to notice the sayings of dying men, he had 
remarked in London the preceding month, that this 
was his : " A life spent in the service of God, and 
communion with him, is the most comfortable life 
any one can live in this world." 

The next morning, Tuesday, June 22, about five 
o'clock, he was seized with apoplexy; and, after 



176 



MEMOIR OF THE 



lying three hours speechless, with his eyes fixed, 
*'he fell asleep." Thus was the faithful servant 
released from all further labor on earth, and admit- 
ted to the plenitude of a gracious reward in heaven. 

In vain our fancy strives to paint 

The moment after death, 
The glories that surround the saint, 

When he resigns his breath. 

One gentle sigh his fetters breaks ; 

We scarce can say, " He's gone," 
Before the willing spirit takes 

Her station near the throne. 

Faith strives, but all its efforts fail 
To trace her heavenward flight ; 

No eye can pierce within the veil 
Which hides that world of light. 

Thus much — and this is all — we know. 

They are supremely blest ; 
Have done with sin, and care, and woe, 

And with their Saviour rest. 

On harps of gold his name they praise, 

His presence always view ; 
And if we here their footsteps trace. 

There we shall praise him too. 

The body was interred in Trinity church, Chester. 
On the day of the funeral, and on the following 
Sabbath morning, Mr. Withington, the assistant 
minister, improved the event in the meeting-house 
where Mr. Henry had so long held forth the word 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



177 



of life ; and on the afternoon of the Sabbath, Mr. 
Gardner, the pastor, preached from 2 Kings, 2:12, 
" My father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and 
the horsemen thereof." 

The news of Mr. Henrj^'s death, on reaching the 
metropolis, awakened inexpressible sorrow. The 
voice of lamentation was heard from different pulpits 
in every direction. Two sermons were addressed to 
the Hackney congregation upon the occasion of the 
pastor's death ; one by the Rev. Dr. D. Williams, and 
the other by the Rev. Mr. Tong. These sermons, 
which were both published, were admirably calcu- 
lated to perfume the name of the deceased, to con- 
sole surviving mourners, to gratify descendants, 
and to instruct and edify the church. 



CHAPTER XII. 

His domestic habits — Parental tenderness — Family worship — 
His friendships — His diligence and improvement of time — 
His Christian love — Hatred of censoriousness — His candor 
and moderation — His prudence and benevolence — His hu- 
mility, and dependence on divine assistance — His submission 
under trials — His piety towards God and devotional habits, 
the basis of his character and attainments — His views of the 
Sabbath, and counsels concerning its sanctification. 

The present chapter will be employed in briefly 
delineating Mr. Henry's private character and his 

Matthsw H*mcy. I 2 



178 



MEMOIR OF THE 



Christian virtues. In every sense of the phrase, he 
was a domestic man ; studiously contributing to ti e 
happiness of his household. Instead of going abroad 
for enjoyment, he sought and found it in his own 
habitation. When recording a journey to a distance 
to preach, he says, " In the evening I came to Ches- 
ter late, and through much rain ; but it was home." 

His diary everywhere abounds with evidences of 
paternal tenderness. The following passage, occa- 
sioned by an unfavorable appearance of the measles 
in one of his children, in which a contest between 
devout submission and natural affection is very ap- 
parent, may serve as a specimen. " I desire to 
give him (Philip) up to my heavenly Father, yet 
praying. Father, spare mv son, my only son, whom 
Hove." 

His whole conduct towards his offspring was 
marked by kindness. The advice which he gave to 
others, he acted upon himself. To parents he used 
to say, " Do all you can to make your children love 
home." "Continued chiding and finding fault," he 
abhorred. "Remember," he would say, "that chil- 
dren are but children. If parents would not correct 
them except in a praying frame, when they can ' lift 
their hands without wrath,' it would neither provoke 
God nor them." 

His care and anxiety for the spiritual interests of 
his children were uniformly conspicuous. He beheld 
them with deep and serious attention ; sometimes 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



179 



observing, that it is an awful consideration that when 
a child is born he will outlive all the ages of time. 

In the education of his own children, he copied 
the example which had been exhibited at Broad 
Oak ; an example in which it would be difficult to 
determine whether the wisdom of the discipline, or 
the sanctity of the instruction, most predominated. 
Mr. Henry also reverently imitated the constancy 
I and punctuality of his father in attending to domes- 
tic worship. Whatever happened, and whoever was 
under his roof, he assembled his family, both in the 
morning and evening, as early as circumstances 
would admit ; often saying, he should be " ashamed 
I to put God off with drowsy devotions," 

In conducting family worship, he was compre- 
hensive ; equally avoiding tediousness and haste. 
' The exercise commenced by a few words of invoca- 
tion, in which aid and acceptance were implored. 
Then, in the morning, a portion of the Old Testa- 
ment Scnpture, in regular course, was read ; and, 
in the evening, with like regularity, a portion of the 
I Xew. Unless the chapter was short, it was divided 
{ into sections, of which a brief and edifying explana- 
tion was given. 

After the exposition some part of a psalm was 
, sung : every one had a book ; and so neither the 
5 sense nor the melody was interrupted by reading 
• line by line. " How the houses of the good old 
Protestants were perfumed with this mcense daily, 

I 



180 



MEMOIR OF THE 



especially on Lord's days, we," says Mr. Henry, 
" have heard with our ears, and our fathers have 
told us." And he did what he could to perpetuate 
this pleasant state of things. 

Prayer succeeded singing. The whole service 
was usually comprehended within the space oi" half 
an hour, or a little more. 

When prayer was over, his children received his 
blessing, which he pronounced with great serious- 
ness, solemnity, and affection. 

On the Sabbath the same order was observed at 
family worship as on the ordinary days of the week ; 
his public engagements not being allowed to inter- 
fere either with the observance itself, or with his 
own personal attention to it. 

In the choice of his associates, and indeed in all 
his intercourse with society, Mr. Henry manifested 
the caution which had been instilled into him from 
infancy, and which he habitually recommended to 
others. " Those who profess religion, profess friend- 
ship to God : and is it not," he would say, "a con- 
tradiction to that profession, for us to make those 
our bosom-friends whom he ' beholds afar off?' To 
the evil-doers, we must say. Depart, Not as if it 
were unlawful to have ordinary commerce with the 
worst of men. Then must we needs ' go out of the 
world.' We cannot but have dealings with them ; 
we must pay civil respects to them ; but we must 
not choose and court them for our acquaintance. 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



181 



Especially, take heed of choosing and courting such 
into near and standing relations. He that goes near 
the fire, is in danger ; but he who takes fire into his 
bosom, and goes upon hot coals, is a madman." 
His rule as to friendship and acquaintance was, 
" few and good." 

Mr. Henry was a steady, sympathizing, and active 
friend. He used to set apart some time to pray for 
his relations and friends by name. He also paid 
them frequent visits. He addressed them by kind 
letters ; and he took pleasure, as opportunity served, 
in their company at his own house, where he enter- 
tained them with cheerfulness. It was in such cir- 
cumstances that he observed, " God gives us leave 
to be cheerful ; we have cause to be so ; and are 
commanded to be so." 

Yet he was an enemy to trifling and levity ; and 
never, for a moment, confounded happiness with 
those propensities. " True joy," said he, " is a se- 
rious thing ; and that joy which will not consist 
with seriousness, doth not become a man, much less 
a Christian. Christ appeared to dislike the joy of 
his disciples, even in the success of their ministry, 
when they seemed to be transported with it. In 
heaven there is joy, but no vain mirth." 

In the afflictions of his friends, he was literally 
afflicted. He incessantly displayed sympathy and 
kindness to his friends in life ; and when death ren- 
dered intercourse impossible, his unafifected sorrow. 



\ 



182 MEMOIR OF THE 

and his readiness to serve needy survivors, gave to 
his sincerity the fullest demonstration. 

Mr. Henry was eminent for diligence, and for the 
improvement of time. It is said of the Waldenses 
and Albigenses, that they are always working, learn- 
ing, or teaching — a testimony peculiarly applicable 
to the subject of this memoir. 

In one year he preached two hundred and eleven 
times, besides his expositions and family devotions. 
In some years he probably preached even oftener 
than this. He frequently preached seven times in 
the course of a week. 

He possessed, in fact, the very spirit of the illus- 
trious confessors who have been just named, and of 
their rivals, the early Puritans and non-conformists, 
his own forefathers in the sacred office ; emulating 
not only their inflexible courage and their untiring 
perseverance, but also their early rising and their 
incessant toil. "Value your souls," was a remark 
he sometimes made, "and you will value your time. 
Whatever you do, take heed of idleness. That is 
the devil's anvil, on which he hammers out many 
temptations." 

In advising others, he would say, "Do not lose 
the morning." And he practised as well as taught. 
Like his divine Master, he often rose "a great while 
before day." He was usually in his study at five, 
and sometimes at four o'clock. Here he remained 
till seven or eight. After family worship and break- 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



183 



fast, he returned till noon ; and oftentimes, again, 
after dinner, till four in the afternoon. He then vis- 
ited the sick, or his friends, and attended to other 
business. In the evening, after his family were dis- 
missed, and before he yielded himself to sleep, he 
again retired to his study. Concerning sleep he 
remarked, that it " is God's gift to those he loves ; 
nature requires it ; grace gives thanks for it ; but 
those who love it more than their business, when 
they should love it only in order to their business, 
expose themselves to a great deal of sin." 

In his diary he often complains of precious hours 
lost in the company of those whom he loved ; he often 
laments that friends are the thieves of time ; and, 
on one occasion, when noticing even gratifying inter- 
course with some of his brethren and others whom 
he highly esteemed, he says, " I would not, for any 
thing, live such a life for a few days together. I am 
always best when alone. No place is like my own 
study : no company like good books, especially the 
book of God." "When I lose time at home," he 
said, " I wish I was abroad preaching ; when time 
abroad is not filled up as it should be, I wish myself 
at home studying. God, by his grace, help me to 
Jill up time — to be busy while working-time lasts." 

Mr. Henry cultivated Christian love. He accus- 
tomed himself to contemplate true believers, not- 
withstanding a difference of views about lesser 
things, as having access through Christ, by one 



184 



MEMOIR OF THE 



Spirit, unto the Father." " There''' he would say, 
*'is the centre of the saints' unity — 'one in us,'" 
alluding to John 17:21; "not one in the pope, or a 
general council, but one in God and Christ." 

Alluding to the prospect of an interview with a 
friend as yet personally unknown, he thus beautifully 
expressed the habitual temper of his mind : This is 
not the world we are to be together in ; but there is 
such a world before us,, where we ' shall be together 
for ever, and with the Lord.' To the general assem- 
bly of the church of the first-born, which are written 
in heaven, we are already come in faith and hope ; by 
virtue of which we meet daily at the same throne of 
grace, and have comfort in a spiritual communion 
with ' all that in every place call on the name of Jesus 
Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours.' This is an 
earnest of that blissful state in which we shall be 
with all the saints, none but saints, and saints ' made 
perfect ;' where Luther and Calvin are both of a 
mind. God keep us 'looking for that blessed 
hope.' " 

He regarded all believers as ''saints;" and al- 
though, in compliance with custom, or in accommo- 
dation to current prejudices, he often prefixed the 
epithet "saint" before the name of an evangelist or 
an apostle, yet he preferred its disuse. 

For the reputation of others, especially of God's 
faithful servants, he uniformly observed a particular 
tenderness. Indeed, he had been trained to this 



REV. xMATTHEW HENRY. 



185 



from his infancy. His excellent father was famous 
for a steady opposition to " evil-speaking ;" and 
\seems to have taken pains to infuse into all around 
him the same spirit. He (Philip Henry) would tell 
his children of a gentleman whose custom it was, 
when he came into the company of such of the un- 
godly as were likely to utter reproaches against the 
- Puritans, to inform them beforehand, " Sirs, I desire 
you to take notice, I am one of those you call Puri- 
tans ; and therefore, if you like my company, and 
mean I should stay with you, pray forbear talking 
evil of them, for I cannot away with it." And the 
good man noticed, with evident satisfaction, how 
much sin was thus prevented. 

And the son did honor to his progenitor in this, 
as well as in many other respects. He was sparing 
of his words in reference to character, candid towards 
his absent brethren, and as deaf as an adder to whis- 
perers and tattlers. Sometimes he would indignant- 
ly remark, " How many are there who go about as 
talebearers ; in one place to pick up slanders, or to 
dig for them, and then scatter them in another. Look 
upon such," he would add, 'f as incendiaries. Avoid 
them as you would those who should attempt to set 
fire to your clothes." 

Unless he felt imperatively called to other duties, 
Mr. Henry uniformly contented himself with deduc- 
ing from the misconduct of others an incitement to 
prayer and circumspection. After noticing a circum- 



186 



MEMOIR OF THE 



stance in reference to one of his ministerial brethren 
which occasioned him grief and surprise, he merely 
says, " The Lord give us wisdom, and watchfulness, 
and resolution. It is dangerous to begin sinful fa- 
miliarities." 

Christian candor was a virtue which contributed, 
in no small degree, to adorn Mr. Henry's character. 
He records it as an occasion of comfort to himself, 
that he felt able truly to say, that he was far from 
lessening any man's excellences, either with regard 
to intellectual or moral qualities, on account of his 
differing from him. And he nobly advised others to 
delight in the holy generosity of speaking well of 
those who might differ from them. Yet he was not 
indifferent about error ; nor did he ever hesitate, upon 
proper occasions, to make an open avowal of his 
sentiments ; always avoiding bitterness, indeed, but 
speaking unequivocally, and without fear. 

The esteem which he cherished for all pious con- 
formists, was very cordial and very exemplary. He 
loved them as brethren in Christ Jesus. He would 
sometimes say, " I hate to see religion and the church 
monopolized ; as if Christ took his measures from 
our little fancies and opinions. Those I call Chris- 
tians, not who are of this or that party, but who 
call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord ; those, 
whatever dividing name they are known by, who 
live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this world. 
The question, by and by, will not be, in what place 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



187 



or what posture we worshipped God, but, did we 
worship in the Spirit." The attachment which he 
cherished for the principles of non-conformity, re- 
sulting, as it did, from the most careful examination 
and decided conviction, invested his candor with 
the most lovely charms. "Grace be with all them 
who love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity," was 
one of the influential mottos of his life and conduct. 

And the moderation which was conspicuous in 
Mr. Henry's character, was not confined to strictly 
religious principles; it extended itself equally to 
those daily habits of life, of a moral kind, in reference 
to which many persons, in other respects wise and 
eminent, have lamentably failed. Speaking of in- 
temperance, he observed, that it was by eating we 
all fell. He said, " Nothing is more contrary to the 
profession of a Christian, than the life of an epicure." 
x\nd he advised all to " take heed of the beginnings 
of intemperance." " When in danger, try whether 
you have learned the first lesson in Christ's school — 
to deny yourselves." Adverting to the fact, that 
there are those who are " mighty to drink wine," 
he remarked, that "it is rather the commendation 
of a barrel than of a man, to be able to contain much 
liquor." In short, he preached and recommended, 
both on this subject and generally, a spirit of holy 
watchfulness — a duty, the neglect of which, he said, 
" renders a Christian like a city without gates and 
bars." 



188 



MEMOIR OF THE 



The same principle also discovered itself in him 
in reference to worldly possessions and acquirements. 
Even lawful comforts were used by him with indif- 
ference, as one whose affections were " set on things 
above." He observed, "We see present things ; but 
we must not look at them. Herein, surely, consists 
the very life and power of religion," 

With regard to money, useful and valuable as it 
unquestionably is in its proper place, he remarked, 
with a view to check the love of it, that it " has no 
currency in the other world. The great day," he 
said, " will burn up all those things upon which men 
now set their hearts." 

It grieved him to see professed Christians living 
as though their happiness were bound up in the 
creature. W^hen viewing the worldliness of the 
church, he said, " Many people think that there is 
no harm in spending upon themselves, if they can 
afford it ; little considering how greatly the precious 
soul is hereby wronged." And he advised all such 
persons to " lay out no more in the repairs of their 
cottage than will be allowed in their accounts," al- 
luding to the final judgment. 

Whenever he perceived any " angry at those who 
stood in their light," or, in other words, envious and 
jealous, he thought it a sign that the things which 
''are seen and temporal" were most looked at. And 
" will you," he inquired, "who are hoping for treas- 
ure in heaven, pant after the dust of the earth ?" 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



189 



An incident occurred after Mr. Henry's removal 
to Hackney, wbicli places the view which has been 
given of this part of his character in an interesting 
hght ; and the record having been written by him- 
self at the time, prevents misconception, and renders 
a doubt of its truth impossible. It is taken from his 
diary and original manuscript, and is as follows. 

" March 8, 1713. Lord's day. In the evening I 
went to London. I preached Mr. Rosewell's even- 
ing lecture. Psalm 89 : 15 : "The joyful sound." 
As I came home, I was robbed. The thieves took 
from me about ten or eleven shillings. My remarks 
upon it were, 1. What reason have I to be thankful 
to God, who have travelled so much, and yet was 
never robbed before. 2. What a deal of evil the 
love of money is the root of, that four men would 
venture their lives and souls for about half a crown 
apiece. 3. See the jwwer of Sfttan in the children 
of disobedience. 4. See the vanity of worldly 
wealth ; how soon we may be stripped of it. How 
loose, therefore, should we sit to it." 

From his moderation in reference to the ''life that 
now is," it would be wrong to infer that he was 
negligent of his temporal affairs, or that he encour- 
aged others either in indolence or neglect. The rule 
by which he was regulated himself, and which he 
recommended to others, was this — not to be idle, or 
careless, or prodigal, but graciously indifferent; in 
allusion to Matt. 6 : 25-34. 



190 



BIEMOIR OF THE 



In early life, he embraced it as a maxim, that the 
prudent Christian will be a prosperous Christian;" 
and therefore he diligently applied himself to the 
cultivation of the habit of prudence, and endeavored 
habitually to guide his affairs with discretion. His 
caution, indeed, often subjected him to reproach ; 
but he had the satisfaction by it, of being kept out 
of diflBculties, and preserved from the necessity of 
making humiliating concessions. Every eye within 
the circle of his acquaintance looked to him for 
direction and counsel. His advice was given with 
familiarity and minuteness ; and, in addition to that 
sound instruction to which his great sagacity and 
long experience contributed, he usually quoted some 
appropriate portion of Scripture to bear upon the 
subject. 

When Christians were afflicted or perplexed, he 
was far from encourauin^ them in the induljjence of 
gloomy apprehensions, but studiously pointed out 
the evil of such a course, and allured their attention 
heavenward. In such circumstances he would say, 
** Let not one affliction drown the sense of a thousand 
mercies. Our great duty is, to trust in God, to com- 
mit our v^'ay to him ; and when our fears take us off 
from that, so that we cannot find in our hearts to let 
him dispose of us, they are sinful. Prevailing fears 
are briars and thorns, which choke many a good 
duty." 

He never failed to remind his friends, that God 



REV. MATTHEW HEXRV. 



191 



has promised to direct the steps of those who ia 
"all their ways acknowledge him:" and therefore he 
iiniforraly and pressingly commended attendance at 
the throne of grace, especially in seasons of distress. 
Sometimes he expressed the pleasure which those 
visits afforded him, in which his friends requested 
him to pray with them. And however agreeable 
the company which he met on such occasions might 
be, or however excellent the entertainment, if a sep- 
aration took place without united prayer, he felt both 
uncomfortable and disappointed. Such an occur- 
rence, on one occasion, is recorded by him very 
mournfully. Most of his particular fiiends loved 
prayer ; for they had been trained to the enriching 
practice. If any drew near to an hour of sorrow ; 
if any journey was in prospect ; if any affair of con- 
sequence was to be managed ; if any child was to be 
apprenticed, or otherwise to be disposed of, it was 
usual with them to commit all to God, not only in 
their closets and famihes, but also with their minis- 
ters. In this good old way " Mr. Henry found, 
and encouraged them ; nor did any circumstances of 
meanness or poverty prevent his personal concur- 
' >^nce. " How sweet a thing it is," he would say, 

to pi"ay, minding a particular errand." 
Mr. Henry endeavored to enforce, both upon him- 
- ;lf and others, such sentiments as were calculated 

J promote a charitable disposition. "We lose," 
suid he, "what we save. Withholding that which 



193 



MEMOIR OF THE 



is meet tends to spiritual poverty — the worst of all 
husbandry. It is like grudging seed to the ground." 
As occasion served, he plainly pointed out the great 
evil of covetousness. Sometimes he urged upon all 
around him their exposure to that sin, and advised 
them to suspect themselves guilty of it. " We are 
born," said he, with the world in our hearts." 
Perceiving that many think themselves not covet- 
ous because they are content with what they have," 
he added, in allusion to the parable, " so was that 
fool." 

In the exercise of benevolence, Mr. Henry remem- 
bered the example of Him who " maketh his sun to 
rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on 
the just and on the unjust." Like the children of 
the Highest, therefore, he was " kind to the unthank- 
ful and to the evil." After lending seven guineas to 
obtain a discharge for the son of a poor friend who 
had enlisted, he observed that many reasons offered 
themselves why he should have abandoned him ; 
**but," he adds — and it is a fine development of 
genuine Christianity — " the mercy of God to me, a 
provoking, backsliding sinner, answered them all. 
God doth not cut men off, though, by their iniquity, 
they have sold themselves." 

Humility was a characteristic of Mr. Henry's 
mind. " I am come to the close of another year," 
he remarked at the end of 1691, "but my works 
have not been filled up ; there are many empty 



rev; MATTHEW HENRV. 



193 



spaces in my time, and in my duties mucli amiss ; 
little done, little gained for my soul, though much 
mercy received, yet my talents have not been traded 
with aright. It is the blood of Christ that must set 
all straight between me and my God. There I rest 
my precious soul." 

On one occasion, when advising others on this 
subject, he thus expressed his own sentiments and 
the teachings of the word of God : " Run up all 
the streams to the fountain. Every crown must be 
cast before the throne, and every song sung to that 
humble tune — ' Not unto us, 0 Lord, not unto us, 
but unto tliy name give glory, for thy mercy and for 
thy truth's sake.' God plants the trees of right- 
eousness, that he may be glorified." 

*'Doth it," he would inquire, "become us to be 
proud, when our Master was so humble ?" " Read 
the lives of the eminent saints who are gone, and 
see how far you come short of their gifts, and graces, 
and performances, and usefulness ; and you will 
rather blush than be proud." 

After a season of communion with the Lord at his 
table, his earnest desires were thus recorded : "I 
begged and promised, with the cup of blessing — 
humility, humility. The Lord keep it in the imag- 
ination of the thought of my heart." 

For the movements of pride he made no allow- 
ances. He viewed haughtiness as transgression 
against both the law and the Gospel. " The design 

Matthew Henry. 



194 



MEMOIR OF THE 



of each of those," he said, "is to humble us: the 
former, by convincing us of sin ; the latter, by 
making us entirely beholden to Jesus Christ for life 
and happiness." And he endeavored personally to 
cultivate in himself what he constantly recommend- 
ed to others. This is seen by the manner in which 
he marked and bewailed faults and infirmities in 
himself which others could not perceive ; and this, 
not publicly, in ostentation, but in the retirement of 
the closet, for purposes the most devout and im- 
proving. The reader is furnished with a few in- 
stances. 

After forming a catalogue of his library, he writes, 
" I am not so much ashamed that I have so few books, 
and so little choice, as that I have not profited more 
by those I have." 

"I have reason to lament my slothfulness, my 
distractions in prayer, and the coldness of my zeal 
for God." 

" 0 what reason have I to mourn over my dul- 
ness and deadness, and that I am not more affected 
myself with those things of God with which I desire 
to affect others." 

" I studied for to-morrow in much weakness. I 
am compassed about with infirmity." 

" A trifling world and a trifling heart, are my great 
grievances." 

Sentiments like these not only evince the depth, 
and reality, and genuineness of his humility, but 



REV. MATTHEW HExNRV. 



195 



they read to others important lessons of instruction. 
If he deplored so many evils, and those from which, 
in the sight of his fellow- Christians, he appeared 
most free, what must be the condition of multitudes 
who arrogate the very excellences themselves, with 
no better pretensions than are furnished by their 
own deluded fancy ; having, at the utmost, to boast 
of the appearance only ? 

Mr. Henry's general deportment exhibited the 
same lowly, yet elevating principles. He walked 
humbly before God and man ; and the more so, in 
proportion to the smiles and caresses which he re- 
ceived. It was a maxim with him, which he recom- 
mended to the attention of others, " When the wind 
of applause blows fresh and strong, then steer with 
a steady hand." 

Writing to a "dear and honored friend," who had 
addressed a letter of encouragement to him respect- 
ing his exposition of the Scriptures, he says, The 
opinion of one of your judgment, learning, and piety, 
as it is a temptation to pride, (against which I desire 
your prayers, that I may have grace always to stand 
upon my guard,) so it is improvable, also, as a spur 
to industry ; and as such I desire to make use of it. 
I hope you will assist me in giving thanks to God 
for his assistance hitherto. Sure I have nothing to 
boast of. What have I that I have not received ? 
I am unworthy to be thus employed. Continue your 
prayers for me, that I may be carried on in it in a 



196 



MEMOIR OF THE 



humble dependence upon divine grace. Every page, 
sir, is a child of prayer, and still must be so, or it 
will miscarry." 

After a journey, in which mercy had surrounded 
him, he writes, " I have not been exercised with the 
reproaches of enemies, but with a more difficult 
temptation from my friends — undeserved respects. 
The Lord carry me safe through evil report and 
good report." And another time, in similar cir- 
cumstances of respectful attention, he adds, "I 
am ashamed to think how unworthy I am of it." 

It is worthy of remark, that Mr. Henry's humble- 
ness of mind was intimately associated with an abid- 
ing perception of his necessity of divine influence, 
both to help and prosper him. " I have as much 
need," he wrote, of the grace of God to furnish 
me with a heart to my work, as with a head for it ; 
to continue my dehght in it, as much as to give me 
ability for it." 

Again he wrote, "From God is my fruit found; 
nor can I bring forth the fruit, unless I abide in 
Christ. Therefore, whatever opportunities I may 
have of doing or getting good, I depend upon his 
grace to enable me to improve them, and to do the 
work of the year in the year. I depend upon that 
grace to enable me to go on with my present ser- 
vices, both in my study and in my ministerial work ; 
and if I should be called out to any duties or suflfer- 
ings unforeseen, I depend upon the grace of God 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



197 



to strengthen me for tliem, and, in every thing, to 
guide my way." 

Contemplating persons whom he could not but 
regard as " dead in trespasses and sins," and for 
whose conversion he longed, he said, " I know the 
great difficulty lies in conviction ; and Eloi, my God, 
is he who must do it. It is * the Spirit of truth' 
who must convince." 

Mr. Henry inculcated and cultivated a spirit of 
patient submission under trials. He remarked, that 
" affliction is the discipline of God's school, whereby 
his children are trained up in the way in which they 
should go. And it is necessary : as needful as 
weeding is to a garden, as pruning to the vine, as 
physic to the body." " Do not expect," he would 
say, " to find it all carpet-way to heaven." He ob- 
served, nevertheless, that " though the weather may 
be foul, and the ways dirty, home is not far off ; and 
all is quiet and well there." 

Enumerating the advantages of affliction, he men- 
tioned penitence, patience, thankfulness, a thought- 
ful frame of mind, watchfulness against sin, weaning 
from the world, activity in faith, affection in prayer, 
a spirit of compliance with God's word, compassion 
to our brethren, love to Jesus Christ, and longing 
for heaven. How can we help loving Christ," 
said he, " when we find his ffrace working in us ; 
his comforts delighting our souls ; his blood a heal- 
ing balm, a reviving cordial ! And as to heaven, we 



198 



MEMOIR OF THE 



have crosses in our way that vre may tcisk for it. 
Stormy weather makes the harbor desirable." 

He compared murmuring to squeezing wormwood 
into the bitter cup. 

In his estimate of afflictions he took a wide range ; 
and noticed sometimes the condition of the Psalmist, 
as fully descriptive of the circumstances of the peo- 
ple of God in general. They are " plagued and 
chastened " — not lightly touched, but plagued — with 
strokes sharp and heavy. And he observed, that 
the word chasten had reference to offences, to faults 
committed, which consideration should silence all 
complaints. 

He recommended afflicted persons to search ear- 
nestly after the procuring cause, for " the particular 
sin, the Achan that troubles the camp, the Jonah 
that raises the storm. See," he said, "if the afflic- 
tion have not the inscription of the crime over it ; 
and if you cannot find out the particular sin, do as 
Herod did by the infants — destroy all. This will 
answer the end." 

To guard against improper inferences from an 
afflicted condition, particularly in cases where indi- 
gence was associated with affliction, he would ob- 
serve, citing Eccles. 9:1, 2, that "divine love is 
not to be inferred from adversity any more than 
from prosperity. A man may live a miserable life 
in this world, and yet live a much more miserable 
one in the other. Those who have nothing else to 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



199 



sliow for their hope of heaven but their afflictions, 
deceive themselves. God needs not raake any man 
happy in the other world, to make him amends for 
wrong done to him in this." Nevertheless, he re- 
marked, " Afflictions are good tokens ; signs that 
God has not left us ; that his Spirit has not done 
striving with us ; and, when sanctified, they are 
tokens of God's love." 

Mr. Henry was no stranger himself to the truth 
of an observation once made by his revered father, 
when recovering from sickness : namely, this, " Six 
things are a salve for every sore — Christ, a good 
conscience, the promises, patience, prayer, and 
heaven in foretaste." 

At a time when Mr. Henry was seized with vio- 
lent pain, which " presently grew extreme, and con- 
tinued all the afternoon without the least intermis- 
sion or remission," he writes — and it excellently 
shows the habitual composure of his spirit under 
sorrow — " I bless God I had much inward comfort, 
calling upon him, and applying the promises ; and 
he supported me. My friends visited me, and sym- 
pathized with me, for which I bless God. But the 
ffi-eat support is, that Christ bore our sicknesses ; so 
that there is no sting in them. 0 that tribulation 
might work patience." 

In sufferings of another kind, also, he manifested 
the same happy state of mind. When maligned 
and reproached, he aspired, with intense solicitude. 



200 



MEMOIR OF THE 



after meekness and patience ; and instead of render- 
ing evil for evil, requited it with good ; ever seeking 
to improve such occurrences for his own advance- 
ment in Christian virtue. How pleasant it is," he 
would say, "to have the bird in the bosom sing 
sweet." 

Mr. Henry's piety towards God, and his devo- 
tional habits, formed the basis of his exalted char- 
acter, and of his eminent attainments. He pre- 
scribed rules alike for his own guidance and for the 
instruction of others, which are well worthy of study 
and attention. They are as follows : 

" 1. We should mind that first and most, which 
is most needful. It is not needful that we be rich 
and great in the world, but it is needful that we 
should have the favor of God, an interest in Christ, 
and a new nature. 

2. We should serve and please him by whom 
we live, and without whom we cannot subsist. Of 
two evils, the least is to be chosen ; we should, 
therefore, choose affliction rather than iniquity. 

"3. Great pains are well bestowed where great 
gains are expected. And do we not look for a king- 
dom which cannot be moved ? When we grow dull, 
and slothful, and indifferent, think — Do I work now 
as one that is working for heaven ? Is this running, 
striving, wrestling ? 

"4. It is good to be sure in matters of conse- 
quence ; great things should not be left at uncer- 



REV. MATTHEW HEXRY. 



201 



tainties. And when our precious souls are at stake, 
should we not make sure work ? build upon a rock ? 

" 5. We should provide most carefully for that 
state which is to be of the longest continuance. We 
know and believe we must be someiohere for ever ; 
and reason teaches us to lay up in store for the 
*time to come.' We all profess to believe the 'life 
everlasting,' but do we indeed believe it? There is 
more of practical atheism, deism, infidelity, and 
sadduceeism, among us than we are aware of. 

" 6. We should be concerned to do that at the 
present time, which must be done sometime, or we 
are undone to all eternity." 

To the practice of prayer Mr. Henry unceasingly 
addicted himself ; and he thanked God for the 
frequent occasions he had for the exercise of this 
sweet and precious duty." "I love prayer," said 
he. " It is that which buckles on all the Christian's 
armor." On this topic he said, " 0 that in it I 
might be inward with God. What incomes of 
grace, and peace, and glory, yea, and outward 
good things, as far as they are indeed good for us, 
have we by our access to God in Christ. Such have 
a companion ready in all their solitudes ; a counsel- 
lor in all their doubts ; a comforter in all their sor- 
rows ; a supply in all their wants ; a support under 
all their burdens ; a shelter in all their dangers ; 
strength for all their performances ; and salvation 
insured by a sweet and undeceiving earnest. What 



202 



MEMOIR OF THE 



is heaven but an everlasting access to God ? And 
present access to him is a pledge of it." 

In Mr. Henry's case, no journey was undertaken, 
nor any subject or course of sermons entered upon ; 
no book committed to the press, nor any trouble 
apprehended, or felt, without a particular applica- 
tion to the mercy-seat for direction, assistance, and 
success. It was his joy that the throne of grace 
is always open. " I would not," said he — and he 
was in distressing circumstances when the remark 
was made — " I would not bring the cares of my 
family into the mount of communion with God, to 
distract me there ; yet I have leave to bring them 
to present them before the Lord, and to leave them 
with him ; and with him I have left them." In a 
letter to one of his friends, he said, *' If there be 
any comfort in this troublesome world, it is in com- 
munion with God by the word and prayer. There 
we may have sweet foretastes of the pleasures of 
the everlasting rest." 

When speaking of closet- prayer, he advised that 
care be taken against indulging in any vain-glorious 
humor. " Shut the door," said he, lest the wind 
of hypocrisy blow in at it." And he gave it as 
his settled and deliberate judgment, that if secret 
prayer be either neglected or negligently performed, 
the power of godliness will wither and decline. 

Mr. Henry abounded in holy meditation. And 
his estimate of the influence of that duty upon the 



FEV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



203 



Christian life is evident from the earnestness with 
which he pressed Christians to its performance. 
*'Take a walk," was his counsel, ''every day, by- 
faith and meditation, to mount Calvary. There is 
nothing like it." 

Adopting, as an axiom, the saying of his excel- 
lent father, that " all who would go to heaven when 
they die, must begin their heaven while they live," 
he recommended frequent contemplation upon that 
inconceivable state. "Dwell upon it," he would 
say, " in your thoughts ; set time apart to do so. 
Look at the things which are not seen. All we do 
we should do with a design for heaven : pray, and 
hear, and talk, and walk, and live, and all for eter- 
nal life. Christians are heirs of salvation. And 
how doth a young heir please himself with the 
thoughts of his inheritance." Sometimes he pro- 
posed such incfuiries as these : " When are you 
accustomed to think upon the heavenly happiness ? 
What room has it in your thoughts ? What walks 
do you take into the holy city ? 0 get a scripture- 
map of the New Jerusalem, and study it well." 

A distinguishing feature of Mr. Henry's charac- 
ter, and one which essentially promoted its spiritual 
maturity, was the habit which he indulged of making 
a wise observation of the conduct of Providence. 
It was his opinion that much of the life of relig- 
ion " lies in holy adorings of God, "which," said 
he, " must be excited, and cherished, and furnished 



204 



MEMOIR OF 1 HE 



wilh matter, by our remarks upon his pro\-idence — 
for strengthening our faith — for our direction in 
prayer — for our instruction in the ordering of our 
conversations." 

He sometimes noticed the " abundant sweetness " 
it imparts to " any mercy, to see it growing upon 
the root of a promise." And he observed, that " the 
good things of the sjiints are not dispensed out of 
the basket of common providence, but out of the 
ark of the covenant." By this habit of mind, he 
was led, in all circumstances, to cherish hope ; a 
duty much pressed in Scripture. "It is reckoned," 
said he, "among a growing Christian's comforts, 
Rom. 5:1, 4, and it hath no less a place among 
a growing Christian's graces." 

And hence his adnce to all believers was, "Hope 
in God. Trust him as to all your outward concerns. 
Live a life of dependence upon him ; upon his wis- 
dom, power, goodness, and promise. Take but the 
exhortations of one psalm : it is the 37th. Be satis- 
fied that really all is well, and shortly it will appear 
well which he doeth. Be careful, principally, about 
dutyT "Shall I," he inquires, "trust God with 
my soul, and shall I not trust him with every thing 
else ? Shall I trust him for a heaven hereafter, and 
shall I not trust him for pro^-ision in the way to it ?" 

Mr. Henry honored the holy Sabbath. He styled 
it not only " a day of rest, but a day of work ; the 
work which they do who enter into the everlasting 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



205 



rest." And his advice as to the performance of its 
social and pubHc duties was in full accordance. 
" Keep close," he said, " to the God of grace. Or- 
dinances are the golden pipes by which the oil of 
grace is conveyed. That holy oil keeps the lamp of 
hope burning ; therefore David desires to dwell in 
the house of the Lord all the days of his life. Let 
sanctuary privileges make you long to be within the 
veil." 

Commemorating the twentieth anniversary of his 
second marriage, he noticed that he and Mrs. Henry 
had enjoyed together a thousand Sabbaths ; and he 
testified that they were the most comfortable of their 
days. 

He uniformly maintained that the design of the 
Sabbath is " holiness ; a distinction between that 
which is common and that which is sacred ; that it 
is a divine institution, and not a human invention ; 
that it is God's time, and not our own ; that the 
whole day is holy to the Lord, and not church-time 
only ; that God is jealous concerning his Sabbaths ; 
and that care to sanctify them is a part of the char- 
acter of a good Christian." 

" Prepare for the Sabbath before it comes. Re- 
member it. We read in the Gospel of the prepara- 
tion — that is, the day before the Sabbath. 

"See that nothing be done on the Lord's day 
which might as well have been done the day before. 
God is gracious in his allowances ; let us not abuse 



206 



MEMOIR OF THE 



our liberty. You cannot expect things should fall 
as it were to be desired they should, unless you 
contrive them. Review the six days' work as God 
did. You will find all very bad. Renew repent- 
ance. * I w^ill wash my hands in innocency ; so will 
I compass thine altar, 0 Lord.' 

" Begin the day with good thoughts ; w^ake with 
God ; bid the Sabbath welcome ; go forth to meet 
it ; think of Christ's resurrection ; think of his wak- 
ing earli/ in the morning. 

" Set God before you in all your Sabbath work. 
Do it as unto the Lord. See his eye upon you, and 
let your eye be upon him. It is the Sabbath of the 
Lord your God ; from him you are to hear ; to him 
you are to speak ; it is he with whom you have to 
do every day, especially this day. 

" Fill up Sabbath time with duty. Be good hus- 
bands of it. Redeem it — lose no part of it — it is 
all precious. Instruct your families in the things 
of God. You would not starve their bodies, do not 
starve their souls. Pray with them. Let them not 
be doing your work when they should be doing- 
God's, further than necessity requires. By mild and 
gentle reproofs restrain them as much as possible 
from that which is evil. Let there be a manifest 
difference between that day and other days in your 
houses. Go from one duty to another as a bee from 
flower to flower. Remember the nature of the work, 
the necessity and excellency of it. Sabbaths come 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



au7 



but seldom ; therefore be busy. Let all that is 
within you be at work, like all hands on a harvest- 
day ; attend to secret, family, and public ordinances. 
Be more mild than on other days. Show that you 
have laid by the world. Keep it holy by employ- 
ing it in holy work, or else you keep the Sabbath no 
better than the brutes for they rest. Holy work is 
to be done every day, but on this day it must^ be 
the work of the day. 

" Do common actions on that day after a godly 
sort. Feed the body that it may be fit to serve the 
soul. Take care it be not w?zfitted. Eat and drink 
as those who must pray again. Works of necessity 
must be done with a Sabbath frame of heart. Pray 
against that which may take you off from your Sab- 
bath work. Remember Christ allows us to do ffood 
on the Sabbath-day. 

" Be much in praise. Rejoice in the resurrection 
of Christ. Sing psalms. 

Carry the Sabbath with you into the week. 
Let it relish with all your converse. You have 
many thoughts of the world on Sabbath-days, have 
as many thoughts of God on week-days. 

Every Sabbath-day think much of heaven. 
Have it in your mind — have it in your eye. That is 
the general assembly. Get ready for it." 



208 



MEMOIR OF THE 



CHAPTER XIII. 

His commencement of the Exposition — List of its continua- 
tors — Remarks made in his diary during the progress of 
commenting — Opinions of worthy divines concerning the 
Commentary — Mr. Henry's superlative attachment to the 
Bible. 

Mr. Henry was a voluminous writer, A large 
quarto volume, containing his miscellaneous works, 
forms a noble monument of his piety and industry. 
But the great work to which his studies and pur- 
suits had, for many years, been chiefly directed, and 
that upon which his fame chiefly rests, is " An Ex- 
position of the Old and New Testament: wherein 
each chapter is summed up in its contents ; the 
sacred text inserted at large in distinct paragraphs ; 
each paragraph reduced to its proper heads ; the 
sense given, and largely illustrated ; with practical 
remarks and observations," This work was begun 
in the latter part of the year 1704, The following 
is his own brief account of the commencement of 
this work, from Mr. Henry's diary, 

November 12, 1704, This night, after many 
thoughts of heart, and many prayers concerning it, 
I began my Notes on the Old Testament. It is not 
likely I should live to finish it, or if I should, that 
it should be of pubhc service, for I am not par ne- 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



209 



gotio, [equal to the undertaking ;] yet in the strength 
of God, and I hopfe with a single eye to his glory, 
I set about it, that I may endeavor something, and 
spend my time to some good purpose ; and let the 
Lord make what use he pleaseth of me. I go about 
it with fear and trembling, lest I exercise myself in 
things too high for me, etc. The Lord help me to 
set about it with great humility." 

The good man's remark, that he might not live to 
finish the great work which he thus piously com- 
menced, proved, ultimately, to be but too prophetic. 
Dr. Watts, in his copy of the Exposition, upon a 
blank leaf at the beginning of the last volume, 
wrote the following statement : 

" The Reverend Mr. Matthew Henry, before his 
death, had made some small preparations for this 
last volume. The epistle to the Romans, indeed, was 
explained so largely by his own hand, that it needed 
only the labor of epitomizing. Some parts of the 
other epistles were done, but very imperfectly, by 
himself ; and a few other hints had been taken in 
shorthand from his public and private expositions 
on some of the epistles. 

" By these assistances, the ministers whose names 
are here written, have endeavored to complete this 
work in the style and method of the author : viz. 



Romans, .... Mr. [afterwards Dr.] John Evans. 
1 Corinthians, . Mr. Simon Browne. 

14 



Matthew Henry. 



210 



MEMOIR OF THE 



2 Corinthians, . 
Galatians, . 
Ephesians, . . 
Philippians, 
Colossians, . . 

1 Thessalonians, 

2 Thessalonians, 

1 Timothy, 

2 Timothy, . 
Titus, . . 
Philemon, 
Hebrews, . 
James, . . 

1 Peter, . 

2 Peter, . , 
1, 2, and 3 John, 
Jude, . . . 
Revelations, 



Mr. Daniel Mayo. 
Mr. Joshua Bayes. 
Mr. Samuel Rosewell. 

Mr. [afterwards Dr.] William Harris. 
^ Mr. Daniel Mayo. 
I Mr. Benjamin Andrews Atkinson. 

Mr. Jeremiah Smith. 

Mr. William Tong. 
Mr. William Wright. 
Mr. Zech. Merrill. 
Mr. Joseph Hill. 

Mr. John Reynolds, of Shrewsbury. 

Mr. John Billingsley. 
Mr. William Toner." 



This list is preserved here, as well to show to 
posterity to whom they are indebted for the por- 
tions of Henry's Bible which he himself did not live 
to finish, as to give the reader a clearer idea than 
he would perhaps be disposed otherwise to enter- 
tain of the vast labor which Mr. Henry himself 
performed, in producing in the course of ten years 
the five volumes which he lived to complete, besides 
discharging, at the same time, the ordinary duties 
of a Christian pastor. 

A few extracts from his diary, respecting the prog- 
ress of the work, can scarcely fail to interest every 
reader of these pages. 



REV. MATTHEW HEMlY. 



211 



"July 19, 1705. Through the good hand of my 
God upon me, I have finished Genesis. The Lord 
still go on with me. 

"September 14. Studied in Exodus 21. I am 
now come to the less pleasant part of the Mosaic 
writings ; but thanks be to God, all Scripture is 
profitable. 

"XovEMBER 30. Leviticus 16. 0 that I may- 
find Christ in the Old Testament, and may be led 
into the mystery of godliness. God was manifested 
by degrees. 

"December 31. I have pleasure in my study ; 
for which I praise my God. Having obtained help 
from him, I go on with much comfort to myself in 
my Xotes on the Pentateuch. Whether ever they 
will be of use to any other, and be accepted, He 
only knows who knows the hearts of all the children 
of men. 

"August 18, 1*706. I almost finished Deuterono- 
my 34, It is about a year and nine months since 
I began with Genesis. Blessed be God who has 
helped me. I have written it with a great deal of 
pleasure, but ray thoughts of publishing have been 
with fear and trembling. 

"August 20. I finished the review of Deuter- 
onomy, and thanked God for his assistance; ashamed 
of my own defects and follies. The Lord grant 
they may not be a prejudice to my design, which is, 
to contribute something as a servant to that great 



212 



MEMOIR OF THE 



divine intention — to magnify the law, and make it 
honorable, 

September 9. Read eighteen or twenty sheets 
on Genesis, to mark the errata. I have reason to 
be ashamed of my own errata. 

" September 23. Studied in the preface. 

" September 24. Went on with the preface, in 
which I desired that every word should be a true 
copy of my heart. 

"September 27. Studied, preparing to begin 
Joshua in the strength of God. 

"November 12. This evening I received the 
last of the sheets on the Pentateuch, and in them 
the epistle of Mr. Shower and Mr. Tong, which I 
knew not of, nor ever mentioned, or thought of, till 
I heard from Mr. Parkhurst [the printer] that they 
had prefixed it. 

"November 21. This evening I received a par- 
cel of the Exposition of the Pentateuch. I desire 
to bless God that has given me to see it finished. I 
had comfort from that promise, Thou shalt find favor 
and good understanding in the sight of God and man. 

" December 31. I, who am unworthy to be em- 
ployed for God at all, have been enabled, by his 
free grace, to finish and publish this year the Ex- 
position of the Pentateuch, with some hope of its 
being serviceable to the church of God. The glory 
of which I desire to give entirely to God. I have 
nothing in it to boast of. 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



213 



"August 21, 1V07. Finished 2 Samuel. Blessed 
be God, who has carried me on thus far, and makes 
my work my delight. 

"September 10. Finished the reading over of 
my Exposition to the end of 2 Samuel. I have cause 
to be ashamed of my own defects, and thankful for 
the grace of God : the more we do for God, the 
more we are indebted to him ; for of thine own, 
Lord, have we given thee. 

"September 11. I sent up, this day, my Expo- 
sition to the end of 2 Samuel, in sixty-eight sheets ; 
having first offered it to God and to his service, and 
prayed over it, and every leaf in it, as an answer to 
prayer. 

"November 17. 2 Kings 11, to v. 16. I find 
that just here Peter Martyn was in his learned Ex- 
positions when he fell sick and died. Lord, my 
times are in thy hand. 

"June 1, 1708. After earnest prayers to God 
for his presence, I this morning began the third vol- 
ume of Expositions : did the argument of the book 
of Job. 

"January 25, 1709. Psalms 26 and 27. A let- 
ter from one Mr. Samuel Bere, unknown, dated from 
Exeter, owning good got by my Exposition, and 
encouraging me to proceed, for which I praise my 
God. It is an encouragement to me to continue 
here," alluding to his invitations to London; "for 
what reason have I to think that I should be more 



214 



MEMOIR OF THE 



useful than I am, -when God has been pleased to 
make me so much more useful than I am worthy 
to be? 

" December 2*7. Finished the review of Proverbs. 
The Lord write in my heart all these lessons of 
wisdom. 

"December 31, 17X0. And now, through the 
good hand of my God upon me, I am brought to the 
end of another year. It has been a year of much 
mercy : the coming out of the third volume, and the 
Method for Prayer, for which I desire to bless God, 
and give him all the glory of both ; for what am I ? 
I have reason to be ashamed of myself that I have 
not done my work better. 

"January 1, 1711. What work I have to do 
for thee, O God, this year, I depend upon tliy grace 
thoroughly to furnish me for it, and to work all my 
works in me, particularly to assist me in the great 
work of my Expositions, that I may write nothing 
that is frivolous, or foreign, or foolish, or flat, that 
may give just offence, or lead any into mistakes ; 
but that all may be clear, and pertinent, and affect- 
ing ; that I may find out genuine expositions, useful 
observations, profitable matter, and acceptable words, 
if it shall please God to spare me to go on with it. 

"January 6. Finished Isaiah, through God's 
goodness. 0 that I might retain the tincture of it. 

" September 29. Ezekiel 21. The excellent Cal- 
vin died at the end of his expounding Ezekiel 20. 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



215 



"May 3, 1712. Malacbi 4. Through the good 
hand of God, I have this day finished the Exposition 
of the Old Testament. Blessed be God. 

"December 12, 1713. Began Acts, having first 
made an errand to the throne of grace for assistance. 

"April 17, 1714. Finished Acts, and with it 
the fifth volume. Blessed be God that has helped 
me, and spared me. All praise be to God." 

Surely, no one now in possession of Mr. Henry's 
valuable commentary can fail to have his estimation 
of it increased from the knowledge of the fact which 
the preceding extracts from his diary demonstrate; 
namely, that it was a work preceded, accompanied, 
followed, and pervaded with prayer. And is it not 
reasonable to hope, that many now destitute of this 
great work, will speedily obtain it, and avail them- 
selves of its wise and holy instructions ? 

It would be easy to adduce numerous approving 
testimonies to the " Exposition," were not the ne- 
cessity to do so superseded by the high estimate in 
which it is so universally held. ^ 

Mr. Tong remarked, that "As long as the Bible 
continues in England, Mr. Henry's admirable ' Ex- 
positions ' will be prized by all serious Christians. 
In them his clear head, his warm heart, his life, his 
eoul appears. While seriously perusing those excel- 
lent books, besides many others which he published, 
rou will seem to yourselves to have Mr. Henry still 
tvith you." 



216 



MEMOIR OF THE 



Another writer, Mr. Buraham, says, ''Mr. Henry's 
admirable commentary on the Scriptures, which hath 
been blessed to the instruction and edification of 
hundreds of ministers, and thousands of Christians, 
for more than a century, still maintains its reputa- 
tion, above most, if not all other commentaries." 

" I could wish," says Dr. Watts, " young minis- 
ters in the country might be allowed by their peo- 
ple to read a part of Mr. Henry's Exposition of the 
Bible, or repeat a sermon from some good author, 
one part of the Lord's day." 

Dr. Doddridge observed, that "Mr. Henry is, 
perhaps, the only commentator, so large, that de- 
serves to be entirely and attentively read through. 
The remarkable passages should be marked. There 
is much to be learned in a speculative, and still more 
in a practical way." 

The good, but eccentric Mr. Ryland of Northamp- 
ton, was of opinion, that "it is impossible for a per- 
son of piety and taste to read the Exposition of Mr. 
Henry, without wishing to be shut out from all the 
world to read it through without one moment's in- 
terruption." 

The venerable and Rev. W. Romaine, in a prefa- 
tory recommendation to a folio edition, published in 
1761, asserted that "there is no comment upon the 
Bible, either ancient or modern, in all respects equal 
to Mr. Henry's." 

" Our young preachers," said the late revered 



REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



217 



Dr. Edward Williams, "would do well to read with 
devotion and care those parts of Mr. Matthew Hen- 
ry's practical and incomparable Exposition which 
relate to the subject they would preach upon." 

Other competent judges have observed, with equal 
enthusiasm and accuracy, that *' the learned leisure 
of the universities, or the sanctioned names of dig- 
nitaries, may have produced works which rank high- 
er in the esteem of scholars ; but Matthew Henry- 
stands without a rival as an expositor of Scripture, 
for the edification of the church of God." 

Nor is it feeble praise that the apostolic White- 
field, whose labors and virtues inspired even the pen 
of Cowper, was trained, as a Christian and a preach- 
er, by Mr. Henry's commentary ; that he literally 
studied it on his knees ; read it through four times ; 
and to the close of life spoke of its author with pro- 
found veneration ; ever calling him the great Mr. 
Henry. 

The lustre of Mr. Henry's qualifications as a min- 
ister and author was preeminently derived from his 
superlative attachment to the Bible. We will close 
these pages with a few of his own remarks in which 
this attachment is conspicuous. 

"Let us," he said, "acquaint ourselves with the 
sweetness that is in the word of God ; and let it be 
sweet to us. Get a new nature, spiritual senses ex- 
ercised. Let the objects of faith be real. 0 taste 
that the Lord is gracious. Learn to draw sweetness 



218 



MEMOIR OF REV. MATTHEW HENRY. 



from a promise. Let us value the written word as 
the ark of the testament. Many reckon their Bibles 
only according to the price they cost them ; as if 
the ark was worth no more than the gold with which 
it was overlaid. Let us lay up our Bibles as our 
treasure ; as the Israelites did the ark in the Holy 
of hohes. Let us lay them up in our hearts. Wher- 
ever we go, let us take the word of God with us. 
The Israelites, in their march through the wilderness, 
acted thus with the ark. Let it dwell in us 'richly.' 
Follow it. * When ye see the ark of the covenant 
of the Lord your God, and the priests the Levites 
bearing it, then shall ye remove from your place, 
and go after it.' Call the Bible your glory, and 
dread its removal. Phinehas' wife, when the ark 
was taken, named her child Ichabod — the glory is 
departed. Part with all rather than your Bibles. 
Suffer not the spiritual Philistines to rob you. Upon 
all occasions consult those lively oracles ; and, as 
Moses received from over the ark his orders and 
instructions, so take your measures by the written 
word. Be governed by it. Covet, as David did 
the ark, to have it near you." 



PUBLICATIONS 

OF THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 



These works are not exceeded in high evangelical charac- 
ter, spiritual power, and practical worth, by any spiritual col- 
lection in any language. They have been carefully selected 
for the great body of intelligent readers throughout the coun- 
try, and the most watchful parent may supply them to his fam- 
ily or to others, not only with safety to their best and eternal 
interests, but with hope of the richest spiritual blessings. 



D'Aubigse's History of the Re- 
formation. A new translation, 
revised l>v the author, in four vol- 
umes l2mo with portraits. Price 
SI T.5 e.xtra cloth. 

Baxtkr's Saints' Everlasting 
Rest, 12mo, in large type ; also 
18mo. 

Busyan's Pilgrim's Progress, 
r2ino, in large type, and l8mo. Both 
editions neatly illustrated. 

Jay's Morning Exercises. 

Mason's r«piRiTCAL Treascry, for 
every day in the year. Terse, pithy, 
and evangelical. 

Flavel's Fountain of Life, or Re- 
demption procidvd. 

Fl.*.vel's Method of Grace, or Re- 
demption applied to the Souls of 
Men. 

Bishop Hall's Scripture Histo- 
ry, or Contemplations on the His-| 
torical Passages of the Old and New 
Testaments. 

Bishop Hopkins on the Ten Com- 
mandments. Two standard works 
of the times of Baxter. 

President Edwards' Thocqhts 
ON Revivals. 

Venn's Complete Duty of Man. | 

Owen on Forgiveness, or Psalm 
cxxx. I 

Gregory's (OuNTHcg, LL.D.) Ev-| 

IDKNCE8 OF ChRISTIASITY. I 



Paley's Natural Theology. 
Dr. Spring's Bible not of Man, 
or the .Argument for the Divine 
Origin of the Scriptures drawn 
from the Scriptures themselves. 
Nelson's Cause and Cure of In- 
fidelity. 
Memoir of Mrs. Isabella Gra- 
ha.m. a new and standard edi- 
tion. 

Me.moir of Mrs. Sarah L Hunt- 
ington Smith. 
Sacred Songs for Family and 
Social Worship. Hymns and 
Tunes— with a separate edition in 
patent notes. Also, the Hymns 
separately. 
Doddridge's Rise and Progress 

OF Religion in the Soul. 
Edwards' History of Redemp- 
tion. 

I VoLu.ME ON Infidelity, comprising 
five standard treatises : Soame Jen- 
yns on the Internal Evidence ; Les- 
lie's Method with Deists ; Little- 
ton's Conversion of Paul ; Watson's 
Reply to Gibbon and Paine. 
Pike s Persuasives to Early Pi- 
ety. 

I Pike's Guide to Youno Disciples. 
j Anecdotes for the Family and 
I THE Social Circle. , 

|U.N1VER9ALI3M not OF GoD. 

iDibblk'9 Thocohts on Missions. 



2 



ELEGANT PRACTICAL WORKS. 



Wilbkrforce's Practical View. 
Hannah Mork's Practical Piety. 
Jamks' Anxious Inquirer. 
Jay's Christian (Contemplated. 
Elijah the Tishbite. 
Nevins' Practical Thoughts. 
Melvill's Bible Thoughts, se- 
lected by late Rev. Dr. Milnor. 



Harris' Mammon. 
Gurney's Love to God. 
Foster's Appeal to the Youno- 
Abbott's Young Christian. 
Abbott's Mother at Home. 
Abbott's Child at Home. 
James' Young Man from Home. 



CHRISTIAN MEMOIRS. 



Rev. Claudius Buchanan, LL.D., 
including his Christian Researches 
in Asia. 

Rev. John Newton. 

Rev. Henry Martyn. 

Rev. David Bhainerd. 

Rev. Edward Payson, D. D. 

Harriet L. Winslow, Missionary 
in India. 

James Braimerd Taylor. 



Harlan Page. 

Normand Smith. 

Richard Baxter. 

Archbishop Leiqhton. 

Matthew Henry. 

Rev. C. F. Schwartz, Missionary 

to India. 
Rev. Samuel Pearck. 
Rev. Sami'el Kilpin. 
Hannah Hobbie. 



OTHER SPIRITUAL WORKS. 



Edwards on the Affections. 
Baxter's Call to the Uncon- 
verted. 

Alleine's Alarm to the Uncon- 
verted. 
Flavel's Touchstone. 
Flavel on Keeping the Heart. 
Helffenstein's Self-Deception. 
Pike's Rkliq. and Eternal Life. 



Sherman's Guide to an Acquaint- 
ance with God. 

Baxter's Dying Thoughts. 

Matthew Henry on Meekness. 

Andrew Fuller's Backslider. 

Scudder's Redeemer's Last Com- 
mand. 

Scudder's Appeal to Mothers. 
Burder's Sermons to the Aued« 



MISCELLANEOUS WORKS. 



Bogue's Evidences of < 'HRIst'y. 
Keith's Evidence of Prophecy. 
Morison's Counsels to Young 
Men. 

The Reformation in Europe. 
Nevins' Thoughts on Popery. 
Spirit of Popery, [with 12 engs.] 



The Colporteur and Roman Ca- 
tholic. 

Mason on Self-Knowledge. 

Beecher on Intemperance. 

Raising of Lazarus from th« 
Dead. 

Hymns for Social Worship. 



POCKET MANUALS. 



Clarke's Scripture Promises. 
The Book of Psalms. 
The Book of Proverbs. 
Daily Scripture Expositor. 
Gems of Sacred Poetry. 
Bean and Venn's Advice to 
if. Married Couple. 
Reasons of Repose. 
Daily Food for Christians. 



Heavenly Manna. 

Cecil and Flavel's Gift for 

Mourners. 
Daily Texts. 

Diary, [Daily Texts interleaved.] 
Crumbs from thb AL^-STer's Ta- 
ble. 

Milk for Babes. 
Devz-Drops. 



BOOKS FOR THE YOUNG. 



3 



MANY OF THEM BEAUTIFULLY ILLUSTRATED WITH ENGRAVINGS. 



Galladdkt's Script. Biography, 

7 vols., from Adam to David. 
Galladdkt's Youth's Boos or 

Natural Thkology. 
Child's Book on Repentance. 
Peep of Day. 
I-iNE UPON Line. 
Precept upon Precept. 
Amelia, THE Pastor's Daughter. 
Trees, Fruits, and Flowers of 

the Bible, [9 cuts.] 
Elizabeth Bales. By John Angell 

James. 
Emily Maria. 

Newton's Letters to an Adopt- 
ed Daughter. 
Child's Book on the Sabbath. 
Nathan W. Dickerman. 
Mary Lothrop. 
John Mooney Mead. 



I Henry Obookiah. 

Caroline Hyde. 

Gallaudet's Life of Josiah. 
I The Dairyman's Daughter, etc. 

Charles L. Winslow. 

Withered Branch Revived. 

Peet's Scripture Lessons. 

Child's Book of Bible Stories. 
j Children of the Bible. 
I Amos Armfield, or the Leather- 
I covered Bible. 

.The Child's Hymn-Book. Select- 
ed by Miss Caulkins. 
Scripture Animals, [16 cuts.] 
.Letters to Little Childrin, 

I [13 cuts.] 

[Pictorial Tract Primer. 

I Watts' Divine and Moral Songs. 

I With Dumerons similai works. 



ALSO— 



Dr. Edwards* Sabbath Manual, | In German— 31 vols 
Parts 1, 2, 3, and 4. In French— 12 volu 

Dr. Edwahds' Temperance Man- | In Welsh 

UAL. 



various sizes, 
mes. 

Pilgrim's Progress and 
Baxter's Saints' ilest and Call. 



Also, upwards of 1,000 Tracts and Children's Tracts, separate, bound, or 
tn packets, adapted for convenient sale by merchants and traders, many of 
them with beautiful engravings — in English, German, French, Spanish, Por- 
tognese, Italian, Dutch, Danish, Swedish, and Welsh. 



It is the design of the Society to issue all its publications in good type, 
for the poor as well as the rich ; and to sell them, as nearly as may be, at 
cost, that the Society may neither sustain loss nor make a profit by all its 
sales. 



Date Due 





> 







































































































































J 



















