Young Men's 


Christian 


Association, 


Saint Paul 


., Minn. 


No. 




This book not 


to be taken 


9 

from the 


room. 



Library of Congress. 



UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. 



ow.BVj 7J.S 



9—404 



s£*rt 




a. 





Oi c 



7 




ISAlEILABf IPA©H 




Here, a, child. I sinned and si 
Here. Lhe Saviour diso-faeyeq 
Herelfeli Lis cha.sfning rod; 
Heiel trust, returned Lo God. 

Imprompta 



MEMOIR 



HAKLAN PAGE 



THE POWER OF PRAYER 



PERSONAL EFFORT 

FOR 

THE SOULS OF INDIVIDUALS. 
e , c . ^ 

BY WILLIAM A. HALLOCK, 

CORRESPONDING SECRETARY OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 



PUBLISHED BY THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU-STREET. 



2 






Entered according to the Act of Congress, in the year 1835, by "Will- 
iam A. Hallock, in the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the 
Southern District of New York. 

Right of publishing transferred to the American Tract Society. 



S. IS | 



1 



* V 



CONTENTS, 



CHAPTER I. 
INTRODUCTORY. 

Importance of personal effort and prayer for individuals — 
Christian influence not brought into contact with men — 
A principle of the divine economy — Inculcated by Christ 
and the apostles, and by examples of eminent Christians — 
Object of this memoir, 9 

CHAPTER II. 

FIVE YEARS' RESIDENCE IN HIS NATIVE PLACE 
FROM THE TIME OF HIS CONVERSION. 

His birth — Marriage — Conversion — Appeal to a hardened sin- 
ner — Severe illness — Letters to an awakened sinner — Her 
conversion— Directions for Christian duty — Letter to one 
in affliction — Various efforts — Reflections on a Sabbath — 
Letter to a young man — Resolutions to be active — Evi- 
dences of good — Conversion of the young man above ad- 
dressed — Letter to an impenitent acquaintance — Warning 
to a young lady against enticing company — Laments his 
deadness in religion — Letter to an impenitent relative — 
Letter from an awakened sinner— His reply — New resolu- 
tion to be faithful — Several awakened — Solemn appeal to 
the impenitent printed as cards — -Letter to a late pupil — 
Letter from one awakened, and reply — Letter to a cousin 
in the state of New York— His conversion, .... 15 



4 CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER, III. 

RESIDENCE OF TWO MONTHS IN BOSTON, AND 
NEARLY THREE YEARS IN COVENTRY. 

Letters from Boston — Visits churches and Sabbath-schools 
there — Church music — Rev. Levi Parsons — Monthly con- 
cert — Death-bed of a Universalist — Settlement of a pastor 
in Coventry — Laments his want of spirituality — Interest- 
ing visit in a revival of religion — Work of grace in Coven- 
try — Letter to one persisting in sin — To an esteemed friend 
not pious — To a young lady — Motives to early piety — Let- 
ter to a young convert — Extensive revivals — Letter to a 
young lady, and reply- — Letter to a relative — Letter to an 
"almost Christian," 58 

CHAPTER IV. 

RESIDENCE OF TWO MONTHS IN JEWETT CITY, 
AND EIGHTEEN MONTHS IN COVENTRY. 

Journey to Jewett City — Efforts in a family and factory on 
the way — Visit to a school-house— Sense of responsibility- 
Commences a prayer-meeting on Wednesday evenings and 
on Sabbath mornings at sunrise — Visit to a sick man- 
Efforts for thoughtless youth — Monthly concert — Questions 
his motives — Sabbath-school gathered — Prayer-meeting of 
Teachers — Increase of Sabbath-school — Several seriously 
impressed— Conversions — Letter to a gentleman — Books 
lent — Summary view of his usefulness in Jewett City — 
Compelled by ill health to return to Coventry — Unable to 
converse, but writes to one resisting the Spirit — Narra- 
tive of conversation with a young lady on dancing, etc. — 
Her conversion — Letter to a young lady on professing 
Christ — To a young lady on the death of a friend — To a 
young gentleman — A desperate effort for one who still de- 
layed repentance — Outpouring of the Spirit — His abundant 
labors — Testimonies to his fidelity, 85 



CONTENTS. 5 

CHAPTER V. 

HIS NARRATIVE OF THOMAS HAMITAH PATOO, A 
NATIVE OF THE MARQUESAS ISLANDS, HOPE- 
FULLY BROUGHT TO CHRIST IN COVENTRY. 

Thomas steals away from his father, and embarks in an 
American ship — Is found in Boston by a benevolent indi- 
vidual, and placed in Coventry — Becomes anxious for his 
soul — His conversion, as narrated by himself — His anxiety 
for the impenitent — Urgent entreaties to a delaying sinner, 
and to one now in the ministry — Mr. Page accompanies him 
to the Foreign Mission school in Cornwall — His letter to 
Mr. Page— Death, . ." 115 

CHAPTER VI. 
CLOSE OF HIS LABORS IN COVENTRY. 

Severe sickness — Engages in engraving — Letter describing 
the Missionary Museum at Andover — To a young lady — 
To one who had given up her hope — Testimony of his 
pastor and other individuals — Gratifying results — Faithful 
efforts being by some perverted no valid objection, . 128 

CHAPTER VII. 

FROM TEE TIME OF HIS CONNECTION WITH THE 
AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY TO THE REVIVAL OF 
1831, EMBRACING THE PERIOD OF THE SIGNAL 
DISPLAYS OF DIVINE GRACE IN THE TRACT AND 
BIBLE HOUSES. 

Constant pressure of duty — Superintends a large Sabbath- 
school of boys — Conversions in his Sabbath-school and in 
the congregation — Interesting work of grace in the Tract 
and Bible houses — Boldness of infidelity — Exertions for 
supplying the destitute of the city — Concern for the salva- 
tion of his children — Conversion of a friend residing in his 



6 CONTENTS. 

family- — Anonymous note to a skilful player on the piano — 
Consecrated as an officer of the church — Request for the 
services of his former pastor — Ardent hopes for our coun- 
try — Letter of thanks from a teacher of his Sabbath-school, 
then in college — Letter to his sister — To afflicted relatives — 
Communication for London — History of the revival in 
Tract and Bible houses — Letter from a fellow-laborer — 
Cheering results — Conversions — Letter to a bereaved broth- 
er — Encouragement to a missionary — Commencement of 
systematic Christian effort connected with Tract distribu- 
tion — Its usefulness — Brief and severe illness — Son and 
daughter unite with the church, 142 

CHAPTER VIII. 

FROM THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE REVIVAL OF 
1831, TO HIS LAST SICKNESS; EMBRACING RE- 
SULTS OF HIS SABBATH-SCHOOL, HIS SUPERIN- 
TENDENCE OF CHRISTIAN EFFORT CONNECTED 
WITH TRACT DISTRIBUTION, AND THE TRANS- 
FER OF HIS LABORS TO A NEW CHURCH. 

Wonderful effusions of the Holy Spirit — Encouragement to 
praying parents — Usefulness of a letter to a friend in Bos- 
ton — His burning zeal and incessant efforts — Failure of 
health — Resigns superintendence of Sabbath-school — Most 
gratifying results — Visits Coventry — Sketch of his father's 
house — Counsel to his son on entering an academy — In- 
structs a female Bible-class — Superintends Christian effort 
connected with Tract distribution in Fourteenth ward — 
Means to secure direct efforts for the salvation of individ- 
uals — Success of his own efforts in a district — Labors during 
the prevalence of cholera— Communication to a meeting of 
his Tract distributers^ — -To the female Bible class — Letter to 
his parents — To his son— Tract distributers' day of fast- 
ing— -Interesting family scene— ^Transfer to a new church — 
Closes his connection with Tract distribution in Fourteenth 



CONTENTS, 7 

ward — Results — Testimony of the pastor of the church he 
left — Superintends a new Sabbath-school — Decline of 
health — Letters to his son and daughter — Testimony of 
the preacher at the new church — Last item of business, 172 

CHAPTER IX. 

PROMINENT CHARACTERISTICS OF HIS EFFORTS 
FOR THE SALVATION OF MEN. 

It was the burden of his heart — List of names — Efforts unre- 
mitted — Waking in tears — Object not to be happy, but 
useful — Felt necessity to all of being "born again" — An- 
ecdote of a young merchant — Labored for individuals — Fol- 
lowed up impressions made — Clear sense of obligation — 
Appeal to a Christian who watched with him — A farewell 
message — Labored to bring men to a decision, illustrated 
by two anecdotes and a letter — Expected success from 
God in answer to prayer — Prayed much — Character of his 
prayers — Effect on himself — Obtained premium for tract on 
prayer — Acknowledged perfect obligation and perfect de- 
pendence — Uniform, and unwearied — Spirituality of relig- 
ion not to be excluded from social meetings — Fruitfulness 
in expedients for doing good — As the father of a family — 
Letter from his son — Paragraphs for religious papers — 
Albums — Temperance cause — Young men directed to the 
ministry — Did not live to accumulate property — Anec- 
dote — Skill in selecting tracts — All the efficiency of God — 
Great blessing on his labors — Testimony on his death-bed — 
Powerful influence of such a life for the conversion of the 
world, 204 

CHAPTER X. 
TRIUMPHS OF GRACE ON HIS DYING BED. 
His certainty of his departure for many weeks — Clear state of 
mind — Reception of the announcement that he must die — 



I CONTENTS. 

Seeks continual presence of Christ— Not obtained for some 
days — New view of his love — How obtained — Love of the 
brethren, and of souls — Affecting conversation with the 
author — Gratitude for mercies — Sense of unworthiness — 
Commits his family to God — No more concern about his 
burial — Messages to his parents and friends in Coventry — 
Longs to depart — Ascribes all his usefulness to divine 
grace — Deep sense of sin — Delightful anticipation of heav- 
en — Ptelishes only what is spiritual — Portions of the Bible 
and hymns — Urges Christians to duty — Longs for a spirit 
of love in the churches — Utterance in disturbed sleep — 
Visit of a fellow-laborer — Influence of sacred music in the 
chamber of death — Instrumental music — Tenderness of 
spirit — Gratitude to his physician — Exhorts his companion 
to trust in God — Anecdotes illustrating his dread of sin 
and sense of unworthiness — Arrival of his son- — Prayers — 
Dying messages to his family — Commits them and him- 
self to God — Subscription for his family — Anecdote — His 
grave — Hymns "Rock of Ages," and "My faith looks up 
to Thee," ' 220 



MEMOIR 



HARLAN PAGE. 



CHAPTER I. 



INTRODUCTORY. 



Faithful Christian biography has at once its 
sanction and its model in the word of God ; and 
in our own times, its excellent practical influence 
is confirmed in the history of many eminent indi- 
viduals. Most of these, by their superior talents, 
education, or commanding spheres of action, pre- 
sent an example which the community in general 
may indeed admire, but which few, comparatively, 
can hope to imitate. 

The present unpretending memoir exhibits the 
fidelity and success of a humble Christian, whose 
opportunities and powers were scarcely superior 



10 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

to those of thousands ; and is chiefly designed to 
illustrate a single point — the power of prayer 

AND PERSONAL EFFORT FOR THE SOULS OF INDI- 
VIDUALS. 

It is obvious to all, that the kingdom of Christ 
can be extended in our world only by the accession 
of individuals. His blood avails not to the salva- 
tion of men in the mass; but to those who indi- 
vidually repent of sin, and accept of his mercy. 
The Holy Spirit strives with men and sanctifies 
them only as individuals. It is as individuals that 
the inhabitants of our world must be raised to 
heaven, or sink to hell. Yet to how great an ex- 
tent are the prayers and contributions of Christians 
made indefinitely for the conversion of the world 
as a whole, while the salvation of no one indi- 
vidual is the object of their personal and persever- 
ing endeavors. How great a portion of that " light 
of the world," which the church is commanded to 
reflect, is so " hid," that no one individual sees it 
and feels its influence ; how great a portion of the 
<; salt of the earth," by which men are to be puri- 
fied and saved, is so kept in the mass, as to be 
brought INTO CONTACT with none ! 

The truth evidently is, that personal efforts for 
the souls of individuals — the lip and thoughts and 
heart of a living man, brought into contact with 
the lip and thoughts and heart of a living man — 



INTRODUCTORY. H 

is a grand institution of God for the conversion of 
the world ; and we must expect success, not in 
neglecting, but in coinciding with the divine econ- 
omy. It was when " they that feared the Lord 
spake often one to another" that his book of remem- 
brance was written. His command is, " As every 
man hath received the gift, even so minister the 
same one to another" Not only " the Spirit and 
the Bride," but " he that heareth" must " say, 
Come." Christians are exhorted to '• shine as lights 
in the world, holding forth the word of life;" and 
the blessed encouragement is given, " He which 
converteth the sinner from the error of his way, 
shall save a soul from death, and hide a multitude 
of sins." The parable of Nathan illustrates this 
principle with inimitable force and beauty : " Thou 
art the man," humbled the king in the dust before 
God. 

The same principle is exemplified in the success 
off the personal efforts of the pious mother ; of the 
skilful Sabbath-school and Bible- class instructor; 
and of faithful pastoral visitation: in all which 
divine truth is happily pressed upon the heart of 
the individual. It has also an irresistible confir- 
mation in the fact, that wherever the Holy Spirit 
is largely poured out, the ministers and members 
of the church abound in faithful conversation and 
prayer with each other, and with the impenitent. 



12 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

Much of the "preaching" of the New Testa- 
ment was unquestionably of this sort. To such 
labor were the apostles sent out by our Saviour, 
who sanctioned his instructions by his own divine 
example. 

Paul, with all his crushing public responsibili- 
ties, could testify to the Ephesian elders, that he 
had labored among them both "publicly and from 
house to house ;" and appeal to them as witnesses 
of his own fidelity, in the memorable and most 
emphatic words, " Remember, that, by the space 

OF THREE YEARS, I CEASED NOT TO WARN EVERY 
ONE, NIGHT AND DAY, WITH TEARS." 

By such labor preeminently have 'pagans and 
men far from God, in all circumstances and periods 
of time, been brought to attend on the public means 
of grace, and join themselves to his people. 

Of the signal outpouring of the Holy Spirit 
among the natives of Ceylon, in connection with 
the American mission, the Hev. Mr. "VYinslow 
states, that " there were few cases of permanent 
conviction, in which religious impressions were not 
cherished by much patient labor of the mission- 
aries or their assistants, in conversing and praying 
with individuals alone. It was this repeated and 
personal application of truth, which principally 
took effect." 

This class of efforts was a grand means of the 



INTRODUCTORY. 13 

unparalleled success of the ministry of Baxter at 
Kidderminster. 

" If I had true love to souls," said Henry Mar- 
tyn, when contemplating a foreign mission, " I 
should long and labor for those around one, and 
afterwards for the conversion of the heathen ;" and 
often did he "redeem time from study, from recre- 
ation, and from the intercourse of friends, that he 
might enter the abodes of misery, to arouse the 
unthinking slumber er, or administer consolation to 
the dejected penitent." 

" Our views," said James Brainerd Taylor, 
when a student in college, must "not be confined 
to the end of our preparatory course. There are 
many opportunities noiv of doing good. The call 
from many a loivly cottage is, ' Come over and help 
tis. 9 " Again: "Resolved, that I will, the Lord 
being my helper, think, speak, and act as an indi- 
vidual; for as such I must live, as such I must 
die, stand before God, and be damned or saved for 
ever and ever. I have been waiting for others ; I 
must act as if I were the only one to act, and wait 
no longer." 

If adding another example of the steadfastness 
of aim, self-denying perseverance, skill, and suc- 
cess with which a humble Christian discharged 
the same duty — connected, through the grace of 
God, with a most blessed and triumphant death — 



14 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

shall have any influence in encouraging other 
Christians thus to labor for God and the souls of 
men, the publication of this little work will not be 
in vain. 

It is proper the reader should be informed that 
there does not appear the slightest indication that 
the subject of this sketch anticipated the publica- 
tion of any memorial of himself. Of many of the 
most interesting scenes of his life he left no record 
whatever, except incidentally in hasty letters to 
his friends — evidently so intent on securing the 
results as to forget the record of them, or so con- 
stantly occupied as to have no time to prepare it. 
Almost all his communications here inserted have 
been abridged and condensed, with slight changes 
in the phraseology, while the sentiment is scrupu- 
lously retained. 



HIS CONVERSION. J£ 



CHAPTER II. 

FIVE YEARS RESIDENCE IN HIS NATIVE PLACE 
FROM THE TIME OF HIS CONVERSION. 

Harlan Page was born in Coventry, in the 
county of Tolland, Connecticut, July 28, 1791. 
He was the only son of pious parents ; always sus- 
tained a good moral character ; was taught by his 
father the trade of a house-joiner, and received a 
good common education. 

In May, 1813, he married Miss Mary Kings- 
bury, who was to be the helper of his spiritual 
course till his death, though at the time of their 
marriage neither of them were pious. The ear- 
liest letter written by him, which has come to 
hand, is the following, addressed to Rev. E. T. 
W., who was then his minister. 

" Sabbath morning, Oct. 17, 1813. 
" Rev. and dear Sir — Your prayers, I trust, 
have been heard. My dear companion hopes she 
has accepted of the Saviour, and devoted herself 
and her all to him. But I am yet in the gall of 
bitterness, in opposition to God — my anguish last 
night was almost insupportable. I could see my 
Saviour nailed to the cross, bleeding and dying for 



16 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

sinners. I could see him with open arms, saying, 
' Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest.' I could pray, 
but this only increased my pain. I fear the Holy 
Spirit will leave me to hardness of heart and 
blindness of mind. do remember me in your 
prayers, for the prayer of faith availeth much. 
" Your affectionate and distressed friend, 

"HARLAN PAGKE." 

His distress for his sins was such at this period 
that he frequently left his work to retire and pray ; 
and as he rode to and from a neighboring town 
where he was engaged in business, he often felt 
constrained to stop and go into the grove to plead 
for mercy. He soon engaged in instructing a school, 
where, after dismissing his pupils, he often remained 
for meditation and prayer. He was thus engaged 
in solitude one evening, when his sense of his lost 
condition as a sinner became so intense that he 
felt that he could not again leave the throne of 
grace till the controversy with his Maker was 
closed. There, in the darkness of midnight, and 
under the guidance, none can doubt, of the Holy 
Spirit, he consecrated himself to his Redeemer : 
not merely in the confidence of pardon and accept- 
ance, but with the determination to live and labor 
to promote his glory in the salvation of the perish- 



HIS CONVERSION. 17 

ing. "When I first obtained a hope," he said on 
his dying bed, " I felt that I must labor for souls. 
I prayed, year after year, that God ivould make 
me the means of saving souls." 

On Sabbath, March 6, 1814, he and his com- 
panion, with twenty others, publicly professed 
their faith in Christ, and joined the visible 
church. 

Only three days after this we find the date of an 
interesting and faithful letter, addressed to a rela- 
tive who had long been hardening himself in sin 
and resisting the strivings of the Holy Spirit. He 
seems to suppose his friend to be perverting the 
doctrine of his dependence upon God, as an excuse 
for wilfully continuing in sin. He first quotes the 
objection as it is strongly stated by Baxter in his 
Call to the Unconverted, together with the whole 
of Baxter's reply. He then presses the same con- 
siderations in his own language, supporting them 
by numerous* commands and promises from the 
Bible, and adds, 

" Were you in a boat just above an awful cata- 
ract, already feeling the force of the impetuous 
current, would you not endeavor to reach the 
shore ? Would you say, * I can do nothing : God 
must save me without my own exertions, if I am 
saved at all V Why then will you not strive to 



18 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

escape a more terrible destruction — the eternal, 
inconceivable horrors of a lost soul ? 

" You allow that a change of heart is necessary ; 
and will not be offended with my plainness. Could 
I but see you earnestly engaged for your salvation, 
how would my heart beat for joy; how would I 
give thanks to the eternal God. 

"Dear sir, do consider and picture to yourself 
the dying hour. Then you must see your danger. 
"Will you then say that, when in health, you could 
not attend to the salvation of the soul ? Will you 
not rather exclaim, ' that I had a few days more 
to live, that I might prepare to die V 

" Do not say you cannot pray. Do you believe 
in the joys of heaven and the torments of despair ; 
and will you not so much as ask God to grant you 
the one, and save you from the other ? Turning 
away from God and heaven, I am sure your own 
reason must convict you of madness and awful 
presumption. Your affectionate friend, 

"H. PAGE/ 1 

In the summer of this year God saw fit to dis- 
cipline his servant by a very severe, protracted, 
and painful illness, by which he was brought to 
hold intimate converse with death, and taught to 
sympathize with the suffering. His sickness is 
thus described in a letter to an aunt, dated, Cov- 
entry, October 18, 1814. 



SEVERE SICKNESS. 19 

" About the 20th of May I was attacked with 
fever, which continued two or three weeks ; and 
left me with an affection of the liver, attended 
with severe pain, which baffled the skill of physi- 
cians. It continued for eleven weeks, when a 
swelling began to rise on my back, which was 
exceedingly painful, and was at length opened by 
Dr. W., who was obliged to make a deep and long 
incision in the live flesh. I have been chiefly con- 
fined to my bed for seventeen weeks." 

To another friend he writes, " Expe?'ience, more 
than observation, I find, teaches our need of divine 
support in affliction. With it we can endure the 
most piercing pain, and rejoice with thankfulness; 
and even in the immediate prospect of death, no 
terror alarms. The spirit, in a near view of eter- 
nal glory, forgets the pain, and longs to soar on 
high." 

The grand lesson which he felt that this sick- 
ness taught him was, that he must devote the life 
God had preserved more faithfully to him, in labors 
for the salvation of all to whom he had access. 

His next letter which has come to hand was 
addressed to a pious female relative in spiritual 
darkness, and was designed to aid her in self- 
examination. He inquires whether she had neg- 
lected prayer, indulged in any known sin, been 
remiss in efforts for the spiritual welfare of those 



20 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

around her, or in any known duty ; and entreats 
her to return to her heavenly Father, and conse- 
crate herself anew to him, assured that his grace 
should he sufficient for her. 

The next is to a young lady who had been under 
serious impressions while a member of his school, 
urging her not to delay repentance, but come with 
all her heart and embrace the Saviour. 

The next to a young friend who had professed 
Christ, but was exposed to temptations from thought- 
less companions. 

The next, bearing date September 3, 1815, is 
addressed to one who was a playmate of his child- 
hood, but of whose conversion, at M., New York, he 
had heard, requesting a particular account of his 
religious exercises, and especially that he would 
address a letter to his former acquaintance in Cov- 
entry, who continued out of Christ, and remember 
them in his prayers. 

" Since you were here," he says, "we have been 
visited with the gracious outpouring of the Spirit, 
and nearly fifty have been added to the church ; 
but alas, there are yet many promising youth who 
neglect offered mercy ; and who, if sovereign grace 
do not interpose, must sink into unending woe. I 
doubt not you feel how great is their danger, and 
long for their salvation. Do write to them ; it 
may be God will make you the instrument of sal- 



LETTER TO A YOUNG LADY. 21 

vation to their souls. They respect you, and should 
you address them, they may listen to your warn- 
ings and come to Christ. Do also pray for us and 
them. God is everywhere present, and will hear 
the prayer of faith." 

Two days after, we find a letter addressed to E. 
L., a young lady for whose salvation he had labored 
during her residence of a few days in his family, 
and who was under the strivings of the Holy 
Spirit. 

" The language of Jehovah is, ' The soul that 
sinneth, it shall die.' There is not one of Adam's 
lost race who has not forfeited eternal life by his 
sins. But there is one refuge, and one alone. Jesus 
Christ can save us ; and he is ready to receive every 
returning sinner, and make him an heir of eternal 
joy. Sleep not, E., take no rest day nor night, till 
you have obtained peace with God. The billows 
of his wrath roll just beneath the steps of all the 
unconverted. Delay not a moment. No future time 
can be more favorable. Call upon God without 
ceasing ; and if you perish, perish pleading for mer- 
cy. Let nothing divert your attention. If you grieve 
the Holy Spirit, his gracious influences may never 
return ; and you — 0, overwhelming thought ! — 
must sink where hope can never come, where 
mercy never gains admission. A few Christian 
friends are praying for you daily. Nothing but 



22 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

love impels me to write. Will you inform me what 
progress you are making, and what are your un- 
shaken resolutions ? 

" With affection and esteem, 

"H. PAGE." 
To the same. 
"Monday Evening, Sept. 11, 1815. 
" Friend E . . . . — Are you yet without hope ? 
Gloomy and dejected, do you yet go mourning with- 
out one ray of heavenly grace ? If so, your situa- 
tion is trying ; but I trust you would not for worlds 
return to your former state of thoughtlessness. You 
say you desire more pungent and heart-piercing 
convictions — to be awakened from your dangerous 
stupidity. Call upon God to place your sins before 
you ; to humble you in the dust for them ; and to 
show mercy to a guilty, repenting, returning prodi- 
gal. All you have to do is to cast yourself unreserv- 
edly, with all your sins, upon the mercy of Christ ; 
to be deeply humbled for them ; and with faith in 
the Redeemer's blood, take him as your only hope 
and portion. Never can you make yourself more 
acceptable to him. He only can clothe you with 
his own righteousness. He is ready to receive you. 
Go then, dear friend, in the best manner you are 
able, and cast yourself into his arms with all your 
guilt, 



HAPPY RESULTS. 23 

"'There is a mercy-seat 
Sprinkled with blood, where Jesus answers prayer j 
There humbly cast yourself beneath his feet, 
For never needy sinner perished there.' 

" Beware of every sin. Cling not to your thought- 
less companions. If you will serve God, you must 
expect the neglect and reproaches of some of them. 
But who are they ? Are they the truly wise ? Are 
they truly happy ? Are they safe ? Alas, they are 
on the brink of perdition. 

" Faint not while you have life. Fear not ene- 
mies. Fight the warfare of faith, and you shall 
win the glorious inheritance of the hlessed. 
" With affectionate regard, your friend, 

"H. PAG-E." 

The result of these faithful efforts, through the 
divine blessing, maybe gathered from the following 
extract of a letter to a Christian friend, dated, 

"Monday, sunset, Oct. 30, IS 15. 
u I have joyful news to tell you — news which has 
made heaven glad. Our friend E. appears to be 
enjoying as much happiness as mortals are allowed 
this side of eternity. c 0,' says she," in a letter she 
had just written him, with an overflowing heart, 
" ' the height and depth of the love of Christ. How 
precious does this dear Saviour now appear to me. 
Tongue can never express, nor heart conceive, which 



24 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

has not experienced the same, the sweet peace and 
joy I have found in him.' " 

In a subsequent letter to Mr. Page, she says, 
" Your first epistle found me in the gall of bitter- 
ness ; and but for your friendly advice, I fear I 
should now have been pursuing the vanities of the 
world. The Saviour was pleased to make you the 
happy instrument of showing me my sins, and 
bringing me to partake of his love." 

His own views of Christian duty at this time 
may be gathered from the following extract of a 
letter addressed to this young convert, November 
16, 1815. 

"Let us, E., cast our eyes around on the poor, 
thoughtless, dying impenitent. How should Ave 
supplicate the throne of grace in their behalf. 
But this is not all. We must tell them of their 
danger, and point them to a bleeding Saviour. 

" An excuse is made by many Christians, which 
I conceive will not bear the scrutiny of the judg- 
ment-day : they say they have not the talents for 
addressing the impenitent and conversing with 
them on the subject of religion. But are the sim- 
ple truths of the gospel so dark that only the 
learned can understand them ? Are the words, 
• He that believeth shall be saved, but he that be- 
lieveth not shall be damned,' so obscure that we 



BEREAVEMENT IMPROVED. 25 

cannot properly impress them upon others ? Is 
the road to perdition so plainly described in the 
Bible, and can we raise no warning voice to the 
throngs who travel it ? Are the happiness of the 
righteous and the everlasting torments of the 
impenitent so clearly described, and can we see 
friends around us crowding their way to despair, 
with our lips closed in perpetual silence ? The 
truth is, our faith in eternal realities is weak, and 
our sense of duty faint, while we thus neglect the 
salvation of our fellow-beings. Let us awake to 
duty ; and while we have a tongue or pen, devote 
them to the service of the Most High, not in our 
own strength, but with strong faith and confidence 
in him." 

Two days after, we find him attempting to lead 
the mind of a young lady to improve the death of 
a beloved father to her own spiritual good. 

u The recent afflictive event and an earnest de- 
sire for your eternal salvation constitute all the 
apology I need offer for now addressing you. But 
what shall I say ? "Whom am I addressing ? a 
humble follower of the blessed Jesus, or one who 
has no interest in him? If the former, how happy 
are you. If the latter, how awful, how tremen- 
dous are the divine denunciations against you, 
unless you renounce the world and accept of offered 



26 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

mercy. Of late you have abundantly needed some 
kind hand to support you. 

" Were your beloved father to speak to you from 
another world, how impressive would be his lan- 
guage. "Would he say, ' Sleep on ; forget a dying 
hour ; regard not the threatenings of Jehovah ; let 
this world be your portion ?' No ; he would rather 
say, ' Neglect not the calls of mercy. Sleep not 
upon the brink of perdition. Awake ; arise ; pre- 
pare to meet your God. Delay not ; for the day 
of the Lord is at hand.' While on the bed of death, 
he uttered, in broken accents, the words, ' Repent, 
repent.' May this providence lead you faithfully 
to examine your heart, and see if you are prepared 
to follow him. God's design in this affliction is, 
doubtless, that you may come to him as the only 
source of real consolation ; that you may be hum- 
ble and prayerful, and better fitted to be useful in 
life and happy in heaven. May you all have di- 
vine support. Accept these lines as an expression 
of affection and sympathy, and an earnest desire 
that they may be instrumental of some good to 
your immortal soul. 

" With esteem, your friend, 

U H. PAG-E." 

Four days after, we find a full letter addressed 
to a Christian friend, on the duty of faithful 



FAITHFUL LETTERS. ■ 27 

self-examination, with a scriptural view of the 
more palpable and decisive tests of Christian 
character. 

Early in December he commenced a letter to his 
Christian brother at M., New York, which shows 
the deep interest he then felt in the spiritual wel- 
fare of many individuals, as well as of the church 
generally. He complains of his own languid affec- 
tions ; states that there were then no revivals of 
religion in all the eastern portion of the state ; that 
Christians generally seemed to have become lan- 
guid and formal, and the impenitent to be "un- 
concerned, while the wrath of heaven is impend- 
ing over them." 

" R.," he says, " when in conversation, pleads, 
as do many others, the ungodly lives of professors 
of religion. He i rather thinks that if he lives a 
moral life and prays in secret, he is on the road to 
heaven as well as many who make so much ado 
about religion.' 

"As to Mrs. , I am not now particularly 

acquainted with the state of her mind. She is 
very reserved in conversation on the subject of 
religion, as are many others of the unconverted, 
and even many who profess to be the disciples of 
Christ. How criminal is our neglect to improve 
every proper opportunity in conversing on the most 
important of all subjects. 



28 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

"L. S. read your letter, but seems not deeply 
affected with his lost condition as a sinner. His 
wife, in the late revival, almost ventured to in- 
dulge a hope ; but she is now more reserved on 
religious subjects." 

This gentleman used to complain of the visits 
of his wife at the house of Mr. Page, as he said 
she always returned " in such a fever about her 
soul ;" but both ere long had a new song put into 
their mouths. 

"A. P," proceeds the letter, "gives his assent 
to the truths of religion ; but argues, that if he 
attends on the public means of grace, he commits 
more sin than if he stays at home ; and asks how 
he can pray, when he has not the least inclination 
to the duty. 

" I feel greatly condemned for not making more 
faithful efforts for the salvation of these dear 
friends. 

"E.," above alluded to, " has lately been brought 
to experience the boundless love of the Saviour, and 
her happiness in him seems to be almost without 
alloy. At our next communion she expects pub- 
licly to devote herself to him. 

" Since I commenced this letter we have estab- 
lished a weekly prayer-meeting. The first meet- 
ing was remarkably well attended. A few indi- 
viduals seem to be aroused, and the prospect seems 



SWEARER REPROVED. 29 

a little more favorable. I beg your prayers for us 
as a people, and for 

" Your unworthy and affectionate brother, 

"H. PAGE." 

The following is an anonymous note, in which 
he inclosed an appropriate tract to a young man, 
by whose profaneness he had been recently pained, 
on meeting him at a public store. 

" Accept the inclosed from one who earnestly 
desires your best good ; arid may I beg the favor 
that you will read it with candor, and weigh well 
the sentiments it contains. I have seen you only 
once ; but then had reason to fear that you have 
not seriously considered the sin of taking the name 
of that God in vain, in whose hand is your life, 
and who alone can save you from eternal woe. 
My sense of your danger was such that I could not 
refrain from addressing you, and entreating you to 
turn to God and live. 

" Affectionately, your 

"FELLOW-TRAVELLER TO ETERNITY." 

Under date of June 9, 1816, he writes as fol- 
lows : " Though detained, in the providence of 
God, from his house this day, my heart is still 
there. I anticipate with pleasure and joy the 
visitation of the Spirit of grace among this people. 
I almost imagine I now see the tear of the guilty 



30 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

penitent, and hear the language of the heart, in 
broken accents, ' W hat must I do to be saved V 
Are not God's children engaged ? Are not their 
united prayers now ascending, an acceptable sac- 
rifice, to an almighty Saviour ? 

" God, hear our united cry for mercy on per- 
ishing sinners. Help us to abase ourselves before 
thee, and in faith plead for the outpouring of the 
Spirit to awaken thy children, and convict and 
convert the impenitent. May our assembly be 
clothed in sackcloth for our sins, sighs break from 
broken hearts, and hundreds be new clothed with 
the spotless robe of our Saviour's righteousness. 
Encourage the heart of our minister by shaking 
these dry bones, and raising up multitudes as 
champions for the truth as it is in Jesus. Let thy 
power be made known in all the churches, and 
spread thy blessing abroad in the earth, till the 
reign of our exalted God and King shall be uni- 
versal." 

To E. L., the young lady addressed Sept. 11, 1815. 

"Coventry, June 15, 18] 6. 
" Yesterday I attended a prayer-meeting at a 
school-house in T. As I entered, the very sight of 
the people thrilled through my soul. More than 
two hundred were assembled in deep solemnity. 
Some, slain by the law, seemed to say in agony of 



DESIRES TO BE HUMBLE. 31 

soul, ' I must die, and lie down in eternal sorrow. 
I am at enmity with God. Woe is me ; I perish. 
Lord God, have mercy, have mercy.' The work is 
apparently progressing. Rev. Mr. N. informed me 
that between sixty and seventy have hopefully 
been born again, and that about an equal number 
are under conviction of sin. What a glorious dis- 
play of divine grace and mercy. 

" I rejoice that you have tokens of the divine 
favor in A. When reading your letter, sensations 
not to be described arose in my breast ; and a re- 
newed resolution to devote myself more entirely 
to God was, I trust, the happy effect. But yet of 
one thing 1 stand in fear — that, should God see 
fit to make me the instrument of good to any soul, 
I shall not give him all the glory. O for that 
humility which God approves, and ivhich makes 
man useful to man. Much do I need it. May 
God help me to obtain it. 

" There are two or three instances of conviction 
among us — I hope, as happy preludes to a general 
outpouring of the Spirit. 

" I shall write a few lines to S., at your request. 
You have opportunities of conversing with him. 
DorCt let them slip. Warn him to flee from the 
wrath to come, and fly to Jesus for safety. 
" Yours sincerely, 

«H. PAGE." 



32 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

To the young man alluded to in the last para- 
graph, he wrote the same day as follows : 

" Dear Sir — Understanding that you have been 
(ed to discover the necessity of religion, I have pre- 
sumed, though unacquainted with you, to write 
you a few lines. You are sensible that there is a 
God ; that by his holy law the soul that sins must 
die ; and that all men have broken this law, and 
are exposed to his just indignation through the 
countless ages of eternity. 0, sir — for you will 
suffer me to speak freely — are you of this number ? 
Do you stand on the borders of eternal woe, ' where 
their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched V 
But stop — the contemplation strikes horror into the 
soul. Let us view the enrapturing scene of re- 
deeming love. Souls that have sinned are not 
altogether hopeless. "When all were condemned 
by sin, then it was that the Lord Jesus gave him- 
self an offering, bore our sins, and suffered the in- 
expressible agonies of death, that we poor guilty 
rebels might have life. This blessed Saviour is 
ready to receive you. My young friend, ' all things 
are ready.' Cast yourself, just as you are, on him 
for pardon, sanctifi cation, and salvation. Delay not. 
While you delay you aggravate your guilt. Call 
on God day and night ; search the Scriptures ; and 
let not your reluctant heart prove your ruin for 



DESIRES TO BE FAITHFUL. 33 

ever. Death may be near. Resolve, if you per- 
ish, to perish pleading for mercy. I entreat you, 
delay not ; but this moment go to Christ and ' take 
the water of life freely.' 

" With sincere regard, your friend, 

"H. PAGE." 

On the following day he wrote to C, a young 
female friend with whom he had long been inti- 
mate, a letter full of moving and earnest entreaty 
to attend to the concerns of her soul ; and request- 
ed her to communicate it to a female acquaintance, 
and converse freely with her on the great subject 
it brought before them. 

In a memorandum of the same date he expresses 
some concern in respect to his health, which he had 
not entirely recovered since his severe illness, and 
as to the means of supporting his family ; but re- 
signs all to the will of G-od. 

" That my life is not to be a long one," he adds, 
" some monitor within seems frequently to tell me, 
which I hope may incite me to greater diligence 
in duty, and continual preparation for eternity. 
Lord, do thou direct me in the right way. Be my 
guide in every concern of life. Let me not do any 
thing from false motives. Keep me constantly hum- 
ble and constantly engaged for the good of all souls 
around me. Grant that my companion and myself 
may zealously cooperate in every good work, never 

Page. 3 



34 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

distrust thy providence, and be guided where we 
may he shining lights and he useful. Should our 
dear hahe he left fatherless or motherless, do thou 
provide for it ; preserve his life ; renew his heart ; 
and make him the means of salvation to many 

souls through Emmanuel's name. 

£! H. PAGE." 

The following memorandum, dated July 4, con- 
tains an intimation that God was blessing his ef- 
forts, and that he ascribed to him all the glory. 

" Shall I ever have cause to regret addressing 
some of my fellow-men by letter on the concerns of 
eternity? Will not the blessing God has seen fit 
to grant on some of my endeavors, prevent all 
regret in this or the future world ? Shall not the 
conversion of souls, of which I have just had intel- 
ligence, stimulate me to more active endeavors to 
be useful to man, and to honor my divine Master ? 
To him belongs all the glory. God forbid that I 
should take any of it to myself. What am I ? a 
vile reptile of the earth, just crawling on the brink 
of the grave." 

To E. L. 

"Coventry, July 8, 1816. 
" Persevere, Eliza, in the good work. Use all 
your influence. Warn those around you with dis- 
cretion and prudence, and your crown of rejoicing 
shall receive additional lustre in the great day of 
the Lord. 



LETTER TO A CONVERT. 35 

" You ask, ' "What are your prospects ?' We don't 
yet despair. Some Christians are uncommonly 
engaged, and some youth are serious. F. W. ap- 
pears to be under deep conviction. G. and her 
sister I. are anxiously inquiring what they must 
do to be saved." 

July 8, having heard glad tidings from S., the 
young man whom he addressed June 15, he wrote 
him as follows : 

" Monday, P. M., July, 1816. 

" Dear Sir — In imagination I cordially take 
you by the hand, and call you brother. Happy 
are you if the allurements of the world have lost 
their charms ; and Christ, as you hope, has made 
you an heir of glory. You have entered on a war- 
fare ; and though the enemy may not now be in 
full view, you will need to be clad with the whole 
armor of God to resist his wiles. 

" Go on and rejoice. Do much for the cause of 
Christ. Be diligent in duty, and neglect not to 
warn your companions in sin. Be prudent, dis- 
creet ; guard against temptation ; be affectionate 
to your companions ; let your example be upright, 
always trusting in God for assistance in every 
thing you do. I wish to write more, but cannot 
add now. 

" With sincere affection, your friend, 

«H. PA&E." 



36 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

How must his heart have been cheered by re- 
ceiving the following reply from this young friend, 
whose face, when he first addressed him, he had 
never seen. 

" Dear Sir — The name of brother, by which you 
were pleased to call me, endeared you to my heart, 
though I feel unworthy to be called by that name. 
0, sir, what a deplorable condition was I in. I 
was fighting against God and sporting with eter- 
nal realities ; and should have remained so till 
death, had not almighty love snatched me from 
the pit of destruction. wondrous love indeed 
manifested to my soul. I think I am now enabled 
to view by faith the ' Lamb of God, who taketh 
away the sin of the world.' The Sabbath after I 
saw you, the load of guilt was, I trust, removed 
from my heart, and before I was aware I was 
praising God. why did Jesus snatch me thus 
from everlasting burnings ? 

""Twas the same love that spread. the feast, 
That sweetly forced me in ; 
Else I had still refused to taste, 
And perished in my sin.' 

" may I be enabled to do something for God — 
something for that dear Redeemer who bled and 
groaned and died on Calvary for one so guilty as I. 

" 0, sir, you cannot imagine how much I desire 
to see you. Will you not still continue to write 



LETTER OF A CONVERT. 37 

me ? Your letters were the means of awakening 
one to the concerns of my soul. When I first heard 
them read, horror seized my mind ; I was brought 
to see myself a guilty sinner, justly condemned by 
the holy law of God. E. L., after conversing sol- 
emnly with me one evening, read several of your let- 
ters. I shall never forget the impression they made 
upon my mind, and also upon the minds of my two 
brothers; for God was pleased to awaken us all at 
this time. 0, dear sir, may God reward you for 
your love to immortal souls. Do ivrite to all the 
dear youth in Coventry. Tell them from me, there 
is nothing but religion worth living for. Tell them 
the storm of divine wrath is impending over them. 
Entreat them to fly to Jesus for safety, lest they 
hear his awful sentence, ' Depart, ye cursed, into 
everlasting fire.' 

" Your affectionate, though unworthy friend, 

" S. H." 

The following was addressed to an impenitent 
acquaintance, who frequently came very secretly 
to converse with Mr. Page : 

To S. L. 

u Dear Sir — Though I have had no particular 
conversation with you for some time, I still ear- 
nestly desire to know the state of your mind. Have 
you yet no evidence that your peace is made with 



38 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

God, and are you still treasuring up wrath against 
the day of wrath ? If so, let me beseech you, fly 
this moment and take refuge in the Saviour. His 
ransom is sufficient for every returning prodigal. 

"Do you wait to make yourself righteous ? It is 
a visionary idea. In your own righteousness you 
can never proceed a step towards heaven. In vain 
will you wait in any way short of casting yourself 
unreservedly on the free grace and mercy of Christ. 
When you resolve in your own strength to live with- 
out sin, do you find you make any advances tow- 
ards a pure and holy life ? Are you not daily en- 
snared with temptations and easily besetting sins? 

"Labor to view sin in all its deformity in the 
sight of God, and to get a thorough knowledge of 
your own heart. Repent of your sins. Head the 
Scriptures. Be constant and fervent in prayer, 
remembering for your encouragement, that ' the 
kingdom of heaven sufFereth violence, and the vio- 
lent take it by force.' Remember, that while out 
of Christ, every moment is big with danger. Death 
is near. Eternity is near. Let me entreat you, lay 
hold on eternal life before it be for ever too late. 

" With ardent desires for your salvation, 

" Your affectionate friend, 

"H. PAG-E." 

U N. B. A few lines in return would be very 
gratifying." 



CONVERSIONS. 39 

" July 28, 1816. This day completes one-fourth 
of a century of my life. More than twenty-two 
years have I lived in sin ; less than three have I 
devoted, in any feeble measure, to the service of 
Christ. More than one-third of ' threescore years 
and ten' is already elapsed, and probably more 
than one-half of my life is spent. The grave must 
soon open for my body, and my soul be in eternity. 
May God make me faithful till death; and then, 
through boundless grace, receive me to glory." 

To his friend at M., New York, he says, August 
26, " Several towns in this vicinity have begun to 
experience refreshings from the presence of the 
Lord ; and two young persons among us have 
lately been brought to rejoice in sovereign mercy, 
witnessing for God that we are not entirely for- 
saken. One is a daughter of Mr. H. "W. The 
other, I know you will be rejoiced to hear, is Mrs. 
Z. B., who, within a few days, has a new song in 
her mouth, even praise to our God. 

" I am told you have commenced study for the 
ministry. Is it so ? It is a great work on which 
to enter to ' watch for souls ;' but God's grace will 
aid all sincere endeavors to glorify him and save 
lost man. "We expect to see you here this fall. 
" Your friend and brother, «h. PAG-E." 

"P. S. "When you visit Coventry, I wish you to 
bring some of your favorite church music" 



40 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

To Mr. Page sacred music was through life a 
source of much religious enjoyment, and a constant 
auxiliary in family and social worship. 

Having written a faithful letter to an estimable 
young female connection, endeavoring to induce 
her to separate herself from ungodly associates, he 
received a reply, inquiring what, in existing cir- 
cumstances, she should do. His answer is as fol- 
lows : 

"Saturday Evening, March 8, 1817. 

" Dear Friend — As to the company at 's I 

did not complain of your conduct there, but feared 
the consequences of frequenting such company. 
May I ask, Was God in all your thoughts? Did 
you speak a word for Christ? Did you obey the 
precept, ' Be not conformed to this world V 

" You ask, ' Must I not associate with any young 
people of my age V I answer, do it just so far as 
you can and act the part of a decided Christian, or 
do good to souls. But when you find yourself over- 
come by temptation ; indifferent to those follies 
and sins which once would have shocked you ; 
violating your former resolutions and with no evi- 
dence of benefit to your associates, wisdom and 
duty doubtless unite in deciding that you should 
break away from them without delay. A Chris- 
tian must have uncommon grace in exercise, not 
to be injured by such company. And besides, it 



DANGEROUS ASSOCIATES. 41 

brings great reproach on religion. The world are 
keen-eyed to see the faults of Christians, and at 
once judge that if they join in such amusements, 
their profession is but hypocrisy. 

" You have attended one such place of amuse- 
ment ; and can you reflect on it now with pleas- 
ure ? Was it profitable to your .soul ? Suppose 
all the members of this church should join in a 
sleigh-ride, and tarry at a public-house till mid- 
night, partaking of the intoxicating bowl, and mak- 
ing merry with those around them ; what would 
be said of religion ? And why more improper for 
the whole than for one ? 

" I ask you again to consider that you are young, 
and may be drawn aside unawares. In a time of 
such declension as the present, ive are all in danger. 
Consider how you would have viewed these things 
when you first felt the love of Christ in your heart. 
" As ever, your friend, 

"H. PAG-E." 

June 18, we find him thus writing bitter things 

against himself: 

" Sabbath, P. M., 5 o'clock. 

" Long have I neglected to record my religious 
exercises ; and long have I lived, a formal profes- 
sor of religion. I have forgotten my Saviour, wan- 
dered from his sheepfold, and grown unconcerned 
about my danger. While I write, I fear I have 



42 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

no true penitence. All is cold indifference and 
dead formality. The word of God is not to me a 
delight as it once was ; its beauties are hid, and 
its promises and threatenings glided over unheeded 
and unapplied. I fear and believe this Sabbath 
has been improved by me to no spiritual advan- 
tage. Thus pass away my days beclouded with 
sin, without engagedness in Zion's cause, with- 
out gratitude to my Saviour, or obedience to his 
precepts. 

" thou blessed Jesus, I have forgotten thy 
love — have strayed from thee. I desire to humble 
myself with true repentance before thee. Help 
me to return from my backsliding ; quicken me in 
duty ; show me my ingratitude and my sins. May 
I fear to offend thee, and live henceforward to thy 
glory." 

August 17, he thus addressed an impenitent fe- 
male relative : 

" Dear Sister— I think much of you, and long 
to see you in the ark of safety. Have you reason 
to hope that your sins are pardoned through a 
Saviour's blood ? If not, consider your danger. 
0, Emeline, if you have not chosen God for your 
portion, you are every moment exposed to the tor- 
ments of eternal despair. Should death now call 
you, you must sink ' where their worm dieth not, 



CORRESPONDENCE. 43 

and the fire is not quenched.' Think, dear friend, 
of the sufferings of our ascended Lord. Think of 
his agony in the garden — how his head was pierced 
with thorns — how he was reviled by the multi- 
tude — how he was led to Calvary, and suspended, 
with nails driven through his hands and his feet, 
in agony, till he yielded up the ghost ; and all this, 
dear sister, for such sinners as you and me. 

" Shall we — will you despise this love and these 
sufferings ? Death is coming apace. 0, delay not 
a moment to make preparation. Christ is ready 
to pardon every returning penitent — he is ready to 
receive and pardon you. Go then, as a weary and 
heavy-laden sinner, implore his mercy, give your- 
self into his arms, and be happy for ever. 

" Please to write your feelings. You need not 

fear to tell them to your affectionate friend, who 

earnestly, longs for your happiness in this world 

and the world to come. 

"H. PAaE." 

Communications under date of January 30, 1818, 
mention that the pastor of the church had been dis- 
missed, leaving them without a spiritual guide ; but 
state that the female members of the church were 
praying, and that two individuals were under deep 
convictions for sin. 

The next communication is addressed to a pious 
friend, endeavoring to impart consolation under the 



44 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

partial loss of health, and accompanied by fifty- 
tracts for distribution. 

The next is to an impenitent acquaintance, who 
in sickness had been alarmed for his spiritual state, 
begging him to listen to this call from God, and 
portraying the infinite hazard of returning again to 
sin and folly. 

The next is an awakening appeal to a young 
lady ; and its influence may be inferred from the 
following reply, which is given as an example of 
the state of mind of some of the individuals whose 
eternal welfare pressed upon our brother's heart. 

To Mr. H. Page. 

"Coventry, March 14, 1818. 
" Dear Friend — Am I one of the happy num- 
ber who can find rest in Jesus' arms ? No. This 
blessing is too great for such a wretch as I. I can 
have no rest. My way is dark, and leads to hell ; 
I know I deserve hell. Can there be any mercy 
in Christ for such a sinner as I am ? 0, my sins, 
my sins ! How many thousands and thousands of 
times have I sinned against that just and holy God. 
I have been crucifying the Saviour afresh, and still 
go on adding sin to sin. What an awful condition 
I am in. If I stay here, I shall perish. If I go 
back to the vanities of the world, I shall certainly 
perish. Now, what shall I do ? 



A DESPAIRING INQUIRER. 45 

" You say I must go to Christ ; but I cannot go 
to him. What shall I do to go to him ? I must do 
something before I can go to him. I cannot go to 
him with such a wicked heart, and such a hard 
one. ' A broken and contrite heart he will not de- 
spise f but my heart is hard as a stone, and I can- 
not do any thing to better it ; for the more I do, 
the worse I am. I would, but can't repent. Though 
I endeavor oft, this stony heart can never relent 
till Jesus makes it soft. I feel stupid, dead, and 
cold. I cannot see half enough of myself ; I want 
to see the very worst of my heart. The Bible tells 
me if I will confess my sins and forsake them, I 
shall find mercy ; but I do not as I ought, for I can 
do nothing without a higher power than mine. 

" Please to write again, and believe me your 

poor sinful and perishing friend, 

"A. W." 

To this letter he wrote the following answer: 

To Miss A. W. 

"Coventry, March 21, 1818. 
" True, as you say, you are in an awful condition. 
Christ calls you by his Spirit to come to him as a 
weary and heavy-laden sinner, that he may give 
you rest ; but your own heart opposes him, and 
Satan would lead you to despair. Thus the great 
conflict bows you down, and you are ready to die. 
" You say your heart is so hard that you cannot 



46 lilFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

go to Christ. 0, go to him, and he will break it. 
Go to him with all your pollution ; for you will 
attempt in vain to make your heart better by your 
own exertions. Cry to Jesus to break this heart of 
stone and give you a heart of flesh. Pour out your 
whole soul to him. Take all your burden of sins 
and leave them at his cross. His blood shall 
cleanse them all away. Every thing that keeps 
you back from Christ is a sin that needs to be re- 
pented of. 

" You say you cannot repent. Can you not hate 
sin, which has caused you so much sorrow — loathe, 
abhor it, and turn from it ? I beseech you, grieve 
not the Spirit by finding fault with God. The guilt 
and the sin are all your own. How long has God 
spared you while rejecting the offers of his mercy. 
Those offers still press upon your heart. If you 
continue to reject them, it is at the peril of your 
soul. Accept them, I entreat you. There is no 
other way whereby you can be saved. 

" Your sincere friend, 

"H. PAG-E." 

On May 13, 1818, we find the following memo- 
randum, embracing a resolution the spirit of which 
appears habitually to have influenced his mind, 
and doubtless constituted, under God, the main- 
spring of his fidelity and the ground of his success. 

" I have lately had sweet communion with some 



A RESOLUTION. 47 

of my fellow-Christians, while we each related our 
particular feelings and exercises. What a happy 
result would follow, were we always at every oppor- 
tunity to make religion our theme ; and not merely 
talk of it in general, but come home to our own 
souls, and unbosom our feelings to each other — our 
doubts and joys and fears and woes. I have lately 
formed a resolution, which I pray God to assist me 
to perform. 

" Resolved, whenever 'possible, to address ray 
brethren and sisters on the concerns of 'eternity r , and 
endeavor to stir up both them and myself to dili- 
gence and engagedness in the great icork of saving 
soids. 

" Happy news, that any of the dear pupils of my 
school the last winter are brought to see themselves 
andone sinners. The Lord grant that the time may 
be near, when this may be true of every dear youth 
and child among us. May none turn back, but 
all resolve to find salvation, or perish pleading for 
mercy." 

To Rev. E. T. W., his late Pastor. 

"Coventry, June 16, 1818. 
" Respected and dear Sir — Can you believe 
that God is in the midst of us ? Praised be his 
name, that his mercy is not clean gone for ever. 
Some of our youth appear to be under the strivings 
of the Spirit. I have converse dt with five whose 



48 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

tears bore witness that they were not wholly uncon- 
cerned. God only knows what will be the result ; 
but it is fully impressed on my mind, that, could I 
see Christians generally earnest at the throne of 
grace and engaged in the work, we should witness 
a precious ingathering of souls. Do pray for us, 
that the cloud which seems to be hovering over us 
may not pass away till it shall pour down a re- 
freshing shower upon this people. 

" A few months since, I almost felt that I had 
no more opportunity for usefulness here ; but now 
/ see a wide field open before me even in the midst 
of us. Every day presents its calls to be at work 
for the Lord. 

" for a watchman to stand on these walls ; to 
repair their breaches, and to guide- the inquiring 
sinner to Christ, and the humble penitent in the 
way of peace." 

At the same date he writes to another, " I have 
undertaken rather a hard task, but trust the Lord 
will in due time accomplish it. It is to endeavor 
to stir up my brethren and sisters in the church to 
be earnest for a revival of religion. I find in all an 
acknowledged neglect of duty; and in some it is 
mourned over apparently with a godly sorrow. I 
do hope for better times. I have felt an assurance 
that God was about to visit us in mercy." 



RELIGIOUS CARDS. 49 

It was probably not far from this time that he 
prepared the following cards, and had them printed 
in a cheap form for distribution. 

"REMEMBER, FELLOW-MORTAL, YOU ARE BOUND 
TO ETERNITY. 

" Death will soon overtake you. Heaven and 
hell are before you. Awake, if you would escape 
the torments of despair. Awake, and make your 
peace with God." 

"MORTAL, CONSIDER. 

" You are on the borders of eternity. Heaven 
with all its glories, or hell with all its horrors, is 
before you. If you are yet unreconciled to G-od, I 
entreat you this day to repent and believe on the 
Lord Jesus Christ — to-morrow you may be writh- 
ing in the torments of the damned. Haste, haste 
to Him, and he will have mercy upon you, and 
save your soul from eternal death." 

"PRISONER OF HOPE, 

" Behold, He who has the keys of death and hell 
proclaims liberty to the captives, and the opening 
of the prison-doors to them that are bound. Listen 
to the sweet notes of deliverance. Shake off the 
galling chains of sin by repentance and faith in 
the Lord Jesus Christ, and lay hold on the hope 

Page. 4 



50 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

set before you. Escape, escape, while the door of 
mercy is open — escape, before you are thrust into 
the inner prison of everlasting despair." 

"TO-DAY, 

1 If you will hear the voice of God, fellow- 
sinner, harden not your heart. This night, should 
you lie down careless in sin, you may awake in an 
eternal hell. Escape for your life. Delay not. 
* Now is the accepted time : behold, now is the 
day of salvation." 

"FELLOW-CHRISTIAN, 

" Is it not high time to awake out of sleep ? 
How many of your acquaintance and dear friends 
are on the broad road to death ? Can you bear to 
see them hastening down to hell, and not cry unto 
God to have mercy on them, and pluck them as 
brands from the burning ? 0, my friend, the time 
is short. What we do must be done quickly. 
Death stands at the door ; and how dreadful our 
surprise, if, when he enters, we be found sleeping." 

To Miss C. R.j one of his late pupils 

" Sabbath, July 5, 1818. 
" How is it now with your immortal soul ? Are' 
you yet at enmity with God ? I have long wished 
for an opportunity to make these inquiries, and en- 
treat you to flee from the wrath to come ; but since 



LETTER OF WARNING. 51 

our school closed, this has been denied me. And 
now, in view of your awful danger, and in love to 
your soul, permit me once more to press upon you 
the necessity of speedy repentance. 

" 0, Caroline, while out of Christ, how dreadful 
is your condition. No ray of hope remains for you, 
if you live and die in this state ; but you must for 
ever lie down in the torments of the damned — for 
ever dwell with devouring fire. 

" Will you go on neglecting this precious season, 
when the Holy Spirit is striving among us? Can 
you rest secure, while your acquaintance and friends 
are anxiously inquiring what they must do to be 
saved ? 0, my friend, consider how brief is your 
life. Death lies in ambush ; suddenly the fatal 
dart may be hurled ; and if Christ is not yours, 
your soul will be lost. 

" This may be the Spirit's last call. If you now 
reject him, he may return to you no more for ever. 
Will you not take up in earnest the great subject 
of the salvation of your own soul, feel your guilt 
and your danger, and fly to the arms of the blessed 
Saviour? 'Now is the accepted time ; now is the 
day of salvation.' Rest not one moment till you 
have secured the pearl of great price. Sleep not 
in sin, lest you awake in an eternal hell, where 
' the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for 
ever and ever.' 0, Caroline, repent now, and 



52 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be 
saved. 

" With earnest prayers for you, your friend, 

"H. PAG-E." 

To Miss E. H. R. 

"Friday, P. M., July 24, 1818. 

" My dear Friend — At your request, I with 
pleasure improve a few moments in writing on the 
concerns of the soul. I have trembled, and still 
tremble for you and others. Can it be possible — 
Eliza, can it be possible that any, whose attention 
has been awakened, are becoming insensible of their 
danger ? Can any be so unwise as not to cherish 
the influences of the Spirit while he calls them to 
repent and fly to that Refuge, out of which God 
has declared himself ' a consuming fire V Can any 
be discouraged, while the joys of heaven and the 
woes of the damned are at stake ? 

" Remember, for your consolation, that ' the king- 
dom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent 
take it by force.' Go then to the throne of grace, 
and resolve with Jacob of old, ' I will not let thee 
go, except thou bless me.' Every delay is fraught 
with imminent danger. Every moment you neg- 
lect coming to Christ, your sins are increasing. 
"Will you not now cease your opposition, and this 
night go and throw yourself unreservedly on the 
mercy of Christ? Mercy calls. Mercy entreats. 



TO AN INQUIRER. 53 

Eliza, go now to Christ, and let mercy save you. 
Do not depend on what you do. It will be alto- 
gether in vain. Your best services need pardon 
through atoning blood. Put on the white robe of 
Christ's righteousness, and you shall be happy. I 
entreat you, my dear friend, press on — press on. 
" In great haste, your affectionate friend, 

"H. PAGE." 

To S. K. 

* "Coventry, August 7, 1818. 
" Can you yet calmly submit yourself to Christ? 
Have you been to him with all your pollution upon 
you, crying, l Here am I, a poor undone sinner, 
wholly unworthy of thy favor, justly condemned to 
eternal death ; take me as I am ; Lord, save me, 
or I perish V Can you now by faith embrace him 
as your Saviour ? Is it your earnest desire to do 
all in your power to advance his cause and glory ? 
Can you renounce every worldly object for Christ? 
If so, happy are you. But if not, your case is 
dreadful indeed. Faithfully examine yourself by 
the word of God, and rest not one moment till you 
have evidence that you have chosen that good 
part which can never be taken from you. Be faith- 
ful, be faithful unto death. Let nothing turn 
you from seeking and serving the Lord. 
" Your affectionate friend, 

"H. PAGE." 



54 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

The following is one of the requests for his coun- 
sel and prayers which he frequently received : 

"Mr. Page — I need your kind instructions now 
more than ever. I feel willing to renounce every 
worldly object for Christ. what is this world ? 
Time is short ; eternity is long. I know what I 
must do, but I find a dreadfully stubborn heart. 
Do advise me. How shall I get to Christ ? I 
seek for happiness, but find none. I fear my com- 
panions are growing indifferent about their future 
state. S. gets no relief. Do remember us in your 

prayers. 

"E. H. R." 

The following was our brother's reply to this 
affecting letter : 

"Friday, P. M., Sept. 12, 1818. 

"Friend E. — Do you really 'feel willing to re- 
nounce every worldly object for Christ ?' If this is 
so, you can unreservedly give up all confidence in 
your own doings or righteousness, all love of sin ; 
and Christ has indeed found the chief place in your 
heart. But beware of a false hope ; you had bet- 
ter spend all your days in despondence, than find 
at last that you were self-deceived. 

" You speak of a stubborn heart. Ah, E., I know 
what you mean. This heart has felt that dread- 
ful opposition to our dear Redeemer, who gave 
himself to be crucified that we might live. How 



TO A COUSIN. 55 

ungrateful ! How astonishing, that such love should 
be requited thus ! My friend, how can you help 
loving Him who has done so much for you ? How 
can you help giving your heart to Him who invites 
you in such sweet accents of mercy ? 

" You ask, ' How shall I go to Christ V Go just 
as you are, with no delay to make yourself better. 
Go, humble, penitent, believing. Go to him as 
your only refuge, for you have found all others 
fail, and be assured he will receive you. You 
will go. It seems to me you cannot help it. My 
poor prayers are poured out to God for you. 
" With sincere affection, 

"H. PAG-E." 

To a cousin in P., New York, he wrote respect- 
ing their friends and the state of religion, mention- 
ing that the church had observed a day of fasting 
and prayer for the outpouring of the Spirit ; and 
then proceeds in endeavors to do good to the per- 
son addressed, to his family, and those around him. 

''You have not yet, it seems, taken hold of the 
promises of the gospel — not yet laid down the 
weapons of your rebellion. But will you not sub- 
mit to Christ ? consider his agony in the garden 
and on the cross ; and for whom was all this ? It 
was, dear sir, for you, if you will not reject his 
bleeding love— for you, his sweat was as it were 



56 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

blood — for you, he was scourged and buffeted — for 
you, he was nailed to the cross — for you, he was 
forsaken of God — for you, he yielded up the ghost. 

" Now, can you say you will not accept the sal- 
vation purchased by such sufferings? "Will you 
disregard the invitations and entreaties of this 
bleeding Saviour, and go on crucifying him afresh? 
0, you will not, you cannot despise and reject such 
love — you will not be guilty of such black ingrati- 
tude. 

" If you have not already done it, I beseech you 
go now to Jesus as a heavy-laden sinner ; go as a 
self-condemned criminal ; offer yourself to him a 
living sacrifice, and find rest to your soul. 

" Does your companion, my dear cousin, know 
by sweet experience how precious is the Saviour's 
love ? She has been brought to the borders of the 
grave. Was it indeed dark ; or did the Son of 
God enlighten the prospect, and stand as her con- 
ductor to eternal glory ? My dear cousin, let it not 
be in vain that you are spared. Be wise for eter- 
nity. Make the Saviour your friend and portion. 

" Will Christians around you make this world 
their god, and do nothing for the salvation of per- 
ishing sinners ? How is it possible that any who 
have tasted the love of God can rest, while on 
every side sinners are thoughtlessly going down 
to hell ? Christians in P. must awake. Tbeii 



TO A COUSIN. 57 

work is great, and their time is short. While they 
are sleeping in neglect of effectual fervent prayer, 
they are, by their neglect, peopling the world of 
perdition. But though Christians sleep, sinners 
have no excuse. They know their Master's will, 
and do it not. 

" How is it with Joseph and Daniel ? Are they 
yet in the ark of safety ? Tell them the floods of 
divine wrath are fast accumulating, and unless 
they repent, they must likewise perish. 
" Your affectionate friend and cousin, 

"H. PAG-E." 

In replying to this letter some months after, his 
cousin says, "When your letter was received, it was 
a dagger to my soul ; but now, my dear cousin, I 
think I knoiv something by experience of the excel- 
lency of religion, and the peace there is in casting 
all my burdens on Him who cares for us. Within 
a few weeks I have taken real satisfaction in read- 
ing that kind letter. I thank you for it. Do now 
write me again." 



58 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 



CHAPTER III. 

RESIDENCE OF TWO MONTHS IN BOSTON, AND 
NEARLY THREE YEARS IN COVENTRY. 

The shock which the constitution of Mr. Page 
received in his severe illness in 1814, partially dis- 
abled him from pursuing the more laborious me- 
chanical employments; and in October, 1818, he 
visited Boston, and spent a few weeks in writing 
up the books of a mercantile house, hoping to see 
some opening in which he might engage in en- 
graving to which he seems to have had a native 
predilection, or in teaching. His letters to his 
family serve to show how his Christian character 
was developed in the new circumstances in which 
he was then placed in the heart of a bustling city. 

To Mrs. Page. 
"Boston, Saturday Evening, Oct. 17, 1818. 
" I have had occasion to sympathize this even- 
ing with my hostess, a widow whose only son has 
this day sailed for Brazil. A few days since he 
said to his mother, < There is my Bible, I must take 
that.' I gave him a few tracts, with which he was 
much gratified. His mother has scarcely tasted 
food to-day. Her life has been a series of troubles ; 
but I fear it has not all brought her to Christ. I 



AT BOSTON. 59 

also gave a few tracts to the captain of a vessel 
sailing for Africa, who thinks them very useful 
among seamen. 

" You can have no idea of the wickedness which 
prevails here. Though much is doing for the cause 
of Zion, thousands in Boston live like the heathen, 
profaning and blaspheming the name of God. Yfhen 
I look around and see so many souls hastening to 
destruction, I am led to inquire, Is there no help? 
Will not Christians awake ? and will not the Lord 
come down with his mighty power and shake the 
multitude of evil-doers ? 

" Last Sabbath morning heard Rev. Mr. D., 
from ' Let me die the death of the righteous,' etc. 
His object was to prove that impenitent sinners do 
not really wish the pure joys and employments of 
heaven, which he did most clearly. Dined with 
Mr. D. H., and then accompanied him to the Sab- 
bath-school; and it was a most interesting and 
animating spectacle. This was the first Sabbath- 
school established in Boston, and contains about 
seventy or seventy-five scholars. It was opened 
with prayer by the superintendent, and then the 
recitations began. Three of the scholars recited 
Scripture to me, two of whom had committed to 
memory about one hundred and twenty verses 
each, since the last Sabbath. I took the oppor- 
tunity to speak to them on the concerns of their 



60 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

souls, directing my conversation to one at first, but 
trie others immediately crowded up as if eager to 
hear. The school is closed with singing, when the 
scholars accompany their instructors to church. To- 
morrow I expect to visit the school again, mid 
learn more of the methods of proceeding." 

After describing various meetings which he at- 
tended during the week, he thus proceeds : 

" Is there no more prospect of an awakening in 
Coventry? -Will sinners — can they continue to 
rush headlong to ruin? Will the church still 
sleep ? How astonishing. Shall we who love 
Christ be unconcerned for our fellow-beings who 
are hastening to despair? I wish to see S. and 
E.," to whom he had written as above, "to tell 
them again to repent and believe in Jesus. 

" Sabbath Evening. This morning I attended 
Rev. Mr. Paul's meeting, and heard a colored 
preacher from the words, ' If any man sin, we 
have an Advocate,' etc. Thence again to the Sab- 
bath-school, where I found the male and female 
schools assembled in one room. Upwards of two 
hundred children were present, and many of their 
parents who had been invited to attend. After 
prayer, animating addresses were delivered to the 
parents and children. Some of the parents were 
in tears. 



AT BOSTON. 61 

" In the afternoon, heard a very solemn discourse 
from the words, ' What must I do to be saved V 
The singing was excellent. You know English 
and other scientific music is condemned as being 
too slow and wanting life. This may be true as 
it is sometimes performed ; but as sung here, it is 
full of spirit. The words are spoken distinctly, 
and there is far more animation and expression 
than we usually hear. 

" I meet with some trials here, which I hope will 
be for my good. Two Universalist ministers are 
dragging many, I fear, with themselves down to 
hell. Do let us, my dear wife, be doing. Life 
will soon close ; and the condemnation of being 
found unprofitable servants. Do not delay to 
write. 

" With many prayers for yourself and the babes, 

U H. PAGE." 
To the same . 
''Boston, Sabbath Evening, Nov. 1, 1818. 

" Last Sabbath morning I heard the Rev. Dr. 
Worcester, of Salem ; and in the afternoon, Hev. 
Mr. J., at the Seamen's church. In the evening 
attended a prayer-meeting consisting chiefly of 
sailors, and at the close conversed freely with sev- 
eral, who begged me to come again. 

" During the day I met a sailor on the wharf 
who told me he had been a prisoner at Newfound- 



62 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

land, and was put upon trial ; but nothing was 
found against him, and he was liberated. I told 
him we must meet another and more solemn trial 
in the day of judgment, when, without an interest 
in Christ, we must be condemned eternally. He 
was silent. I entreated him to think of these 
things, and be prepared ; for they were near at 
hand. 

" This morning and afternoon I have heard the 
Rev. Levi Parsons, who is going on a mission to 
Jerusalem. He appears much engaged for the sal- 
vation of souls, and preaches faithfully the terrors 
of the Lord. "What an interesting field is this for 
the man of God. May the smiles of heaven attend 
him and his companion in labors, who are to be 
ordained the present week. May they be made 
instruments of renewing the pure worship of that 
Saviour who there suffered for man's redemption. 

" Monday Evening, nine o'clock. Just returned 
from the monthly concert, and have been richly 
entertained. Mr. Evarts communicated a great 
deal of interesting intelligence, chiefly respecting 
the missions among the Cherokees and Choctaws. 
Your heart would have been made joyful in hear- 
ing it. Many very encouraging and interesting 
incidents were mentioned. At the close, a contri- 
bution was taken up for the mission at Jerusa- 
lem." 



AT BOSTON. 63 

To the same. 

"Boston, Nov. 7, 1818. 

"When I read your remark, that God has evi- 
dently a controversy with the church in Cov- 
entry, my tears involuntarily flowed. 0, how 
dreadful, that a church should hinder the salva- 
tion of souls. And those dear ones who have 
long been inquiring — how affecting to consider 
that so few, even of professed Christians, seem 
truly anxious for their salvation. And can this 
be so ? Alas, what reason have we to think 
otherwise ? 

"I have just passed through a most affecting 
scene. On last Sabbath evening I went alone to 
the house where I had attended a prayer-meeting 
a week previous ; but found there was no meet- 
ing, and that, under the same roof, a man was 
very sick. His wife, who is pious, appeared grate- 
ful for my call, gave me an account of their cir- 
cumstances, and informed me that her husband 
had been a professed Universalist ; but of late she 
thought his confidence in that error was shaken, 
though he would frequently argue the subject with 
her and others, even on his sick, and she feared, 
his dying bed. She informed him I was present, 
and asked if he wished prayer. He said he did. 
I told him I would comply — remarking that, as he 
seemed near to death, he must probably soon meet 



64 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

the eternal God, and asking if he felt prepared. He 
intimated that he did. 

" ' Do you think you have experienced that 
change of heart which is spoken of in the word of 
God as essential to salvation ?' 

" ' Have I repented of my sins,' said he to him- 
self, ' and believed on the Lord Jesus Christ ?' 

" ' Do you love Christ ?' said I. ' Is he the one 
altogether lovely?' 

" ' Yes, he is lovely to me. I hope to be saved 
by him.' 

" ' Do you believe all will be saved by Christ ?' 

" ' Yes, I think so.' 

" ' What do you think of the passage, These shall 
go away into everlasting punishment ?' 

61 l I cannot tell what it means.' 

" ' We read also, The wicked shall be turned 
into hell, and all the nations that forget God.' 

" ' Then,' said he, ' I must go there.' 

" He seemed somewhat exhausted, and I was 
about to close my interview, when he again asked 
me to pray with him. 

" ' What petition shall I offer?' said I. ' Shall I' 
ask that your heart may be changed ?' 

" ' Yes,' said he, ' and that I may be purified.' 

" Neighbors in the house were called in, and 
prayer was made in his behalf, amidst sobs and 
tears. His wife begged me to call again, which I 



AT COVENTRY. 65 

did, with Mr. D., a young clergyman. He was 
evidently declining, but gave us no more satisfac- 
tion respecting his state. 

" After we left him, he had much conversation 
with the Rev. Mr. J., and expressed his convic- 
tion of his ruin by sin, his renunciation of all the 
former grounds of his hope, his reliance solely 
upon Christ, and his peace and joy in him. He 
died the following day. His wife had long prayed 
earnestly for his conversion ; and at last, when 
she had almost given him up as lost, had the 
satisfaction of seeing him give such evidence as 
he could in his last hours, that he fell asleep in 
Jesus." 

His next letter is dated at Coventry, Feb. 13, 
1819, and expresses his joy, that on the 10th of the 
following month, the Rev. G. A. Calhoun was to 
be ordained as pastor. 

" Saturday Evening. This day I have endeavored 
to observe as a day of humiliation, fasting, and 
prayer for the outpouring of the Spirit. I find so 
much in me that is unhumbled, that I have reason 
to fear the day has been spent in vain. Several 
now appear anxious for their souls. God grant 
that they may be brought to bow submissive at 
the feet of Jesus, and that the hearts of Christians 
may be prepared for the special presence of God 

Pnge, 5 



66 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

among us. what shall be done in this stubborn, 
unyielding frame of mind?" 

Within the progress of a few weeks, his heart 
was cheered and refreshed by a visit, with his be- 
loved pastor, to a church some miles distant, which 
w T as enjoying a precious revival of religion. 

" As I entered the sanctuary," he says, "joy 
beamed in the countenances of numbers, while 
others seemed borne down v/ith a heavy load. 
Solemn silence reigned, interrupted only by occa- 
sional sighs and tears. Every eye was fixed, and 
every ear listening as to a message from the Lord. 
When the service closed, several remained to con- 
verse on the subject of their salvation. 

" They dispersed for a little time, and at sunset 
the youth were seen assembling in groups, till the 
room was filled with near two hundred immortal 
beings. All was silent as the house of death. The 
most profound attention evinced that the Lord was 
there. When the exercises were closed, and the 
blessing pronounced, not one moved to leave the 
house. All stood, and seemed to say, ' We cannot 
go. Tell us more of Christ, and how to gain an 
interest in his atoning blood.' 

" After a few moments, the minister who had 
addressed them began to converse with an indi- 
vidual near him ; but all seemed eager to press 



APPEAL TO YOUTH. 67 

forward, that they might hear for their own bene- 
fit. None appeared indifferent. Solemnity, sor- 
row, or joy was depicted in every countenance. 
The audience were seated, and nearly all in the 
house were addressed individually in reference to 
their own personal salvation. None wished to 
avoid being questioned, or being warned that un- 
less they repented of their sins and fled to Christ 
by a living faith, they must be lost." 

This account Mr. Page embodied in an anony- 
mous paper sent in with others to be read in the 
"Biblical School" in Coventry, in which a large 
number of youth united for the study of the Bible, 
and mutual intellectual, moral, and religious im- 
provement. 

" Our minister," he adds, " has seen among an- 
other people anxious souls flocking to Christ. What 
must have been his reflections, surrounded by such 
a crowd of inquirers, as he turned his thoughts to 
his own flock — his church cold and languid— the 
youth thoughtless and gay, pressing on their way 
to eternal despair. How must his heart have sunk 
within him ! 

"And shall he find no inquiring souls here? 
Shall his heart never be gladdened by hearing the 
earnest inquiry, ' What must we do to be saved V 
Shall we suffer him to go mourning all the day 
over so many hurrying to perdition ? Shall we 



68 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

suffer ourselves to be lulled in security, and thus 
"be eternally ruined ? 0, it is time, it is high time 
to awake." 

Having received a fresh supply of tracts, he 
immediately enclosed two of them to impenitent 
friends in notes, of which the following is one : 

To L. S. 

"June 22, 1819. 
" Dear Brother — Will you and your companion 
oblige me so much as to give the enclosed an at- 
tentive perusal before you go to rest this night ? I 
have just received it, and feel peculiarly anxious 
that you should prayerfully consider the all-impor- 
tant subject it presents. 

" With earnest solicitude for your eternal wel- 
fare, I am your brother, 

"H. PAGE." 

The season of God's mercy was indeed at hand. 
On the 20th of June he thus wrote to Mrs. W. : 

" My dear Friend— I have delayed till I can do 
it no longer. I know the joy you will feel at the 
repentance of sinners in Coventry. When I wrote 
you last, all was gloomy, except the prospect that 
God was about to place over us a spiritual guide. 
He has been indefatigable. For a time, all ap- 
plauded, but none seemed to be moved. 

" A meeting of the church was called, when all 



REVIVAL IN COVENTRY. 69 

the male members were questioned with regard to 
their feelings. All confessed criminal coldness and 
want of spiritual life. The question was then put^ 
* Are we not called to make some special exertions, 
that the work of G od may be revived ?' This was 
acknowledged, and it was agreed to hold prayer- 
meetings in different neighborhoods. 

" Two weeks after, another meeting was called, 
which • all who felt anxious for a revival of relig- 
ion were invited to attend.' This led to self-exam- 
ination. * Shall I go ?' was the language of many. 
1 1 cannot say I am one of those invited, but I dare 
not stay away.' Members of the church and others 
attended, and the meeting was full. The time 
was spent in exhortation and prayer, and some 
signs of life appeared. 

" The next week a similar meeting was held, 
when all who desired it were conversed with indi- 
vidually, and it appeared that some were inquiring. 
A w r ork of grace was then progressing in B., and 
had now entered our borders. 

u A few of the church appear to be engaged. 
They found that they had wandered far, very far 
from God. Conversation-meetings for inquirers are 
held w r eekly. Mr. and Mrs. G. are now rejoicing 
in the Lord. Mrs. B,., Miss M. W., and Miss J. 
are indulging a hope. The progress of the work 
has seemed to be exactly in accordance with the 



70 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE 

spirituality, the prayers and exertions of Christians. 
Sometimes the prospect looks dark, but at others 
more encouraging. It is the Lord's work, and he 
alone can carry it on. The hopes of many profes- 
sors of religion are shaken. Our minister has re- 
peatedly told us, that if we cannot be engaged in 
such a time as this, we had better conclude that 
we are not Christians. 

" Yesterday, Rev. Mr. N. preached twice in 
different neighborhoods. I could say a great deal, 
but must not add. 

"With. Christian affection, your friend, 

"H. PAG-E." 

Under date of July 9, in a hasty note to a friend, 
he says, " We have such a season here as we never 
had before : the Lord is doing wonders, and we 
hope and believe he is about to do a work still 
greater. Could you see the change wrought in 
S." — referred to December, 1815, and June, 1819 — 
u you would be delighted He seems indeed like 
one new-born, through the energies of the Holy 
Ghost." 

Mr. Page always regarded a season of the out- 
pouring of the Holy Spirit as the harvest-time of 
souls ; and it is hard to say whether his holy joy 
in God, his amazing sense of responsibility, his im- 
portunate prayers, or incessant efforts, most abound- 



SOLEMN APPEAL. 71 

ed. He seems to have been so intently engaged 
in promoting the work, that he made only a few 
brief notices of what was passing, with his pen. 
Among these is a list of seventy-nine individuals 
who in that revival obtained hope in Christ, sixty- 
six of whom were added to the church. 

On the 9th of August he thus addressed a young 
woman whose case he seems to have considered 
almost hopeless : 

" An affectionate regard for your immortal in- 
terests has induced me to write a few lines, though 
I know not that they will be welcome or beneficial. 
While others have been accepting Christ, I have 
anxiously hoped to hear the same of you. Shall 
no Christian's heart be cheered by such intelli- 
gence ? Shall neither man nor God hear from 
your lips, ' my sins, my sins, I fear they will ruin 
my soul for ever V Shall no prayer, ' God be mer- 
ciful to me a sinner,' break from your heart ? 

" I know you would not dare make light of the 
influences of the Holy Spirit ; and is there not evi- 
dence sufficient to convince the most obstinate that 
the Lord is indeed among us ? Who then will be 
on the Lord's side ? Will you not come as a humble 
penitent, and cast yourself at his feet ? Will you 
not now, by faith in Christ, become a friend of God, 
and an heir of glory? 



72 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

" May I not hope that you are now determined 
to break your league with sin and the enemy of 
souls, before the impending storm of God's wrath 
shall fall upon you, when the only answer to your 
despairing cry shall be, for ever, for ever, for 
ever ? do not let a deceitful heart beguile you. 
You have a soul at stake worth millions of worlds, 
and which must live eternally in the joys of heaven 
or the agonies of hell. On no other subject should 
I address you ; but on the momentous concerns of 
the soul you will not feel that I need apologize for 
the performance of duty. 

" With esteem, your friend, 

"H. PAGE." 

In a letter, September 20, he says, " It is un- 
certain whether I go to Boston this fall. I cannot 
have this interesting field of exertion and scene of 
icondersP 

A subsequent letter, chiefly occupied with state- 
ments respecting the revival, contains the follow- 
ing paragraph : 

" In the midst of mercy, God has recently re- 
minded us, by a most afflictive providence, that 
youth is with many the only time for securing the 
salvation of the soul. 0. P., aged twenty-two, 
about two weeks since was called into eternity. 
But he died in faith, as we trust. He was hope- 



TIMELY COUNSEL. 73 

fully converted the summer past, just in time to 
escape the wrath to come" 

In reply to a communication from S. L., express- 
ing renewed anxiety for himself as a sinner, and 
requesting Mr. Page's prayers and counsel, he thus 
writes : 

"Coventry, Dec. 11, 1819. 

u My dear Sir — It is with peculiar satisfaction 
that I improve the opportunity you have given me 
to address you on the momentous interests of your 
own soul. You have frankly disclosed your feel- 
ings, and I am unusually anxious that you should 
cast your burdens on the Lord, and give him your 
whole heart. You are now at an awful crisis. 
Your eternal all may depend on the course you 
take. The Lord has taught you by his Spirit, that 
you are a wretched, perishing sinner. You feel 
that you have no preparation for heaven, and see 
nothing before you but eternal woe. my friend, 
there is a refuge. The Lord Jesus invites in melt- 
ing strains, ' Look to me, and live. Come unto 
me, and find rest.' go to him noiv, as you value 
your precious, immortal soul. 

" But you ask, ' How shall I go to him with this 
hard, impenitent heart?' Christ, my friend, is 
ready to soften and sanctify it by his own blood. 
Go to him just as you are — poor, needy, empty, 
wretched — only go to Him. His grace is free. It 



74 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

will be his joy now to receive you. And will you 
not go ? make now one determined effort in the 
strength of God. Break through all opposition 
from within and from without. Cast yourself at the 
feet of Jesus, and cry, £ Lord, save me, or I perish.' 

" Your dear friend went to Christ, and is now, 
we trust, in heaven. Follow his example in lov- 
ing the Saviour, and you may follow him to glory. 
Death to him was welcome, so it may be to you. 
There was a fulness in Christ for him, so there is 
for you. The blessed fountain is set open, and ivho- 
soever will may ' take of the water of life freely.' 

" May I not indulge the hope and expectation, 
that before you shall lay down this sheet, you 
will have made the successful resolve, and fled for 
refuge to the ark of safety ; and that when next 
we meet, you will tell me what glorious things 
God has done for your soul? my friend, God 
has said his Spirit shall not always strive. I fear, 
should you delay a little longer, he will depart 
from you, never to return. 

" With earnest prayer for you, 

"Your affectionate friend, 

"H. PAG-E." 

To Miss J. A. L. 
"Coventry, Friday Evening, Dec. 24, 1819. 
" I am very anxious to know how you are now. 
Are you yet rejoicing in hope ; or have you turned 



MOTIVES TO PIETY. 75 

again to the follies of this flattering and deceitful 
world? my friend, I long to hear from you. I 
long to hear that you have chosen that good part 
which shall never be taken away. Have you for- 
gotten our last interview? Have you performed 
the sacred promise to give yourself and your all 
to Christ ? Have you submitted to his will, and 
determined to die a beggar at his feet ? Do write 
me immediately. I wait, impatient to hear. Re- 
sist temptation. Quench not the Spirit. Pray 
without ceasing. Repent and believe in the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and you shall be saved. 

" I am now keeping school ; some encouraging 
'prospects among my scholars. Friends feel anxious 
for you. I can assure you, you have many fervent 
petitions ascending from the heart to God in your 
behalf. 

" With much affection, your friend and cousin, 

"H. PAGKE." 

Of his efforts for the eternal welfare of the pupils 
of his school, a Christian friend says, in a letter 
written since his death, "A number of ladies who, 
when in youth, attended this school, still feel under 
great obligations to him and to God for his faithful 
and untiring efforts for their salvation, and attrib- 
ute their conversion under God to his instrumen- 
tality" 

So much was his mind engrossed with the sub- 



76 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE, 

ject of the salvation of the young, that in January 
he prepared an article, in which were clustered 
some of the motives to early piety ; which, in the 
hope that it would meet the eye of those under 
his care, and others, he sent for insertion in the 
Guardian, a small and useful monthly periodical. 
We retain enough of the article to show what place 
this subject held in the mind and heart of the 
writer. 

" My dear young Friend — While I see so many 
youth hastening unprepared to eternity, I cannot 
forbear calling to you to stop for a moment, and 
consider what affecting motives urge you to make 
your peace with God. 

" Your Christian friends earnestly desire your 
salvation. They see your danger. They know that 
unless your heart is renewed by the Holy Spirit, 
your soul must be lost. They plead with you. They 
weep and pray for you night and day. They long 
to rejoice over you as a new-born heir of heaven. 

" The angels of God desire your salvation. Yes, 
their golden harps are tuned to raise a louder song 
of joy over every one who will repent. Will you 
not be the first to cause the arches of heaven to 
reecho, that another wanderer has returned ? Shall 
angels long for your salvation, and you be uncon- 
cerned about it yourself? But more, 



MOTIVES TO PIETY. 77 

" Christ himself desires your salvation. For this 
he became ' a man of sorrows and acquainted with 
grief.' For this he endured the agony of the gar- 
den and the cross. He calls you by his word, by 
his providence, and by his Spirit. He declares 
that he ' is not willing that any should perish, but 
that all should come to repentance.' And shall 
he call in vain? Is it nothing to you, that he 
shed his precious blood, and bore the wrath of 
Jehovah for perishing sinners ? heart of ada- 
mant, that will not melt in view of such conde- 
scension, suffering, and love ! vile ingratitude, 
that can behold unmoved ' the Son of God in tears,' 
offering himself for man's redemption. 

" Consider also the glories of heaven. There is 
the throne of God and of the Lamb. There, the 
pure river of the water of life for ever flows. There, 
saints and angels offer their unceasing praises. 
There, your departed Christian friends mingle their 
voices with the heavenly choir. There, all unite 
in shouting, ' Alleluia, Alleluia, for the Lord God 
omnipotent reigneth.' ' Blessing and honor and 
glory and power be unto Him that sitteth on the 
throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.' 
There every humble penitent at last arrives. There 
is the consummation of all his happiness. 

" Think too of the misery of hell. 0, the horrors 
of despair. What pencil can paint, or what pen 



78 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

describe them ? Weeping and wailing and gnash- 
ing of teeth constitute the horrid discord of the 
abodes of the damned. There the stings of a 
guilty conscience, that worm that never dies ; 
heart-rending reflections on murdered time ; the 
view of saints in glory afar off; the surrounding 
gloom of the infernal pit ; unavailing lamentations 
and despair, all conspire to render their misery 
complete. 0, who can dwell with devouring fire? 
Who can inhabit everlasting burnings ? 

" Consider the worth of the soul. Its value can 
be measured only by eternity. When millions of 
millions of ages shall have rolled away, your soul 
will still be active, and its capacity to suffer or 
enjoy for ever increasing. 

"Death is rapidly approaching. Perhaps this 
night you will close your eyes to wake in eternity. 
Thousands have been thus surprised. How many 
of your companions are gone, never to return. 
Their state is fixed. They are now enduring the 
wrath of God, or singing his praises in the para- 
dise above. Whoever you are, you may be assured 
that death is nigh to you. To him you must yield, 
willing or unwilling ; and eternal woe must be 
your doom, unless you haste to Christ, the only 
refuge from the impending storm. 

" The day of judgment is at hand. Soon the 
loud trump of the archangel will awake the sleep- 



MOTIVES TO PIETY. 79 

ing dead ; and you among them will come forth to 
1 the resurrection of life,' or ' the resurrection of 
damnation.' Then the Saviour whom you have 
loved or despised will appear in the clouds of 
heaven, to give to every one ' according as his 
work shall be.' Before him you must stand with 
assembled millions, while he bids you depart, or 
welcomes you to a seat at his right hand. 

" Other motives might be urged, but if these 
will not awaken you to a sense of your danger, 
others would be unavailing. Now you have a day 
of grace. Now the saints are praying for you ; 
the angels of God wait to rejoice over you ; the 
Lord Jesus Christ, by his word and by his Spirit, 
is entreating you to come ; the glories of heaven 
are offered you ; the miseries of hell are unveiled 
to your view ; while the worth of your soul, the 
rapid approach of death and judgment urge you to 
make haste — to escape for your life from the de- 
struction that awaits you. 0, my young friend, as 
you value your eternal well-being, I beseech you 
awake from this slumber. Arise and go to Jesus. 
Go to him a humble beggar ; go penitent and be- 
lieving. None such were ever sent empty away. 
While you tarry, your sins are accumulating, your 
danger is increasing. Delay a little longer, and 
your soul, your precious immortal soul is lost for 
ever." 



80 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

To Miss J. A. L. 
"Coventry, after school, Friday, March 10, 1820. 
" Your letter gave me peculiar pleasure, as it 
contained expressions of a hope that you have 
passed from death unto life. Yet when we con- 
sider the deceitfulness of the heart, and the temp- 
tations of the adversary, it "becomes us to rejoice 
with trembling. Is Christ indeed precious to you ? 
0, happy soul. Happy even in the midst of ad- 
versity — happy in life, happy in death, and happy 
for ever. I long to know more particularly what 
is your state, and what have been your exercises, 
both before and since your conversion. Let me 
entreat you to be faithful to your own soul and to 
God. Seek also the eternal welfare of your com- 
panions. You know not how much you may yet 
do, which God shall make the means of saving 

souls. 

" Your friend, 

"H. PAGE." 

"Wednesday Evening, April 4. This day has 
been observed as a day of fasting, humiliation, and 
prayer, and has been a solemn and interesting sea- 
son. Several clergymen of the vicinity were with 
us, having commenced visiting the churches in 
succession. Each minister present prayed, and 
addressed the crowded assembly; and the mem- 
bers of the church expressed, by rising, their sol- 



CORRESPONDENCE. 81 

emn determination to be faithful and live more in 
accordance with their profession. It is supposed 
that about half of the towns in this state are noiv 
visited with a special outpouring of the Holy Spirit. 
We cannot hut hope that God will also appear for 
us in mercy, though I do not know of one serious 
inquirer. God grant that his own people may 
arise to duty, the impenitent be alarmed, and that 
there may be a rich ingathering of souls." 

On the 16th he addressed a young friend, to 
whom, it appears, he had agreed to write, first on 
the subject of education and mental improvement, 
and then on " ' the one thing needful] without 
which all other acquisitions are vain " — requesting 
in return " a free expression of opinions and feel- 
ing on -both subjects" In the reply, the former 
subject seems to be wholly overlooked. 

" The deep interest Avhich you have manifested 
for my immortal soul," says the writer, "I can 
never, no, never forget. I have thought much on 
the contents of your letter. I am deeply sensible 
that religion alone is worth living for. You will 
probably say, 'Then why not embrace it?' I can 
only reply, that it is owing entirely to the wicked- 
ness of my heart, which has long been pursuing the 
pleasures of the world. If I perish, I know I have 
nothing to plead in excuse for rejecting the offers 

Page. 6 



82 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

of mercy. I feel in need of your advice, and beg 

you not to forget me when interceding at the throne 

of grace. 

" Yours respectfully, 

U C. H. H." 

On the 16th April he commenced a correspond- 
ence with A. K.j a beloved relative now in the 
ministry, for their mutual benefit in reference both 
to the present and a future life. In this letter he 
says, 

"You complain of insensibility to the great con- 
cerns of eternity ; and, my friend, you are not alone 
in this. I know of no better way to be delivered 
from it, than to go forward in every knoivn duty, 
relying on the aids of the Holy Spirit. It appears 
that this is the best means of promoting a revival 
of religion in our own hearts, and of being useful 
to others. Let us, dear brother, be more active. 
How many of our acquaintance, over whom we 
may perhaps have influence, have we left without 
faithfully performing our duty to their souls. "We 
know that without religion they are lost. Let us 
then act accordingly." 

One expression in the above clearly implies, that 
faithful as he had been, there were present before 
his mind, not the many he had warned, but the 
great number remaining, for whose salvation he 
had individually done nothing effectual. 



CORRESPONDENCE. 83 

The following attempt to reach the heart of a 
young man whom he highly esteemed, but who was 
only almost persuaded to be a Christian, affords 
another illustration of the manner in which he car- 
ried out his desires and purposes to do good. 

To Mr. C. P. 

"Coventry, Friday Evening. April 20, 1821. 

" My dear. Friend — I think I feel more and 
more interested in your welfare, and anxious that 
you may be useful, especially in promoting the sal- 
vation of men. But without the hope that you are 
yourself interested in the Saviour's love, how can 
you labor for the salvation of others ? Were your 
tongue unloosed, and your heart warm with love 
to God and souls, how might you take your com- 
panions by the hand and entreat them, in Christ's 
stead, to be reconciled to God. How would you 
retire to your closet and agonize in prayer in their 
behalf. Whenever you looked upon them, how 
would your heart swell within you, from a sense of 
their danger. How would you weep in secret 
places over their impenitence and dreadful indif- 
ference to eternal things. 

"But, alas, for this you are not prepared. No 
one has ever heard you entreating sinners to flee 
from the wrath to come — no humble prayer has 
ever ascended from your heart to God in their be- 



84 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

half. My friend, if you or I ever do any thing for 
God, it must be done soon. ' What I say unto you, 
I say unto all, Watch; for in such an hour as ye 
think not, the Son of man cometh.' How should 
I rejoice to take you by the hand as a dear brother 
in the Lord, and to see you far more faithful in the 
service of Christ than ever I have been. How- 
happy might we be in mutual efforts here, and 
with what joy unite for ever in the songs of praise 
to redeeming love. 

" That this joy may be ours, through penitence 
for sin, and faith in atoning blood, is the prayer of 

your affectionate friend, 

"H. PAGE." 



AT JEWETT CITY 85 



CHAPTER IV. 

RESIDENCE OF TWO MONTHS IN JEWETT CITY, 
AND EIGHTEEN MONTHS IN COVENTRY. 

Mr. Page now spent some weeks in mechanical 
labors in Jewett City, a manufacturing village 
which had recently sprung up thirty miles dis- 
tant ; lodging with a pious relative who there re- 
sided. His letters to his family, with a brief journal 
during his absence, show the state of his heart, and 
his efforts to be useful. 

"Friday, May 18, 1821. Left home for Jewett 
City. Spent the night at brother TVs in Lebanon. 
Have had a lo?ig season of spiritual darkness, but 
this evening think I enjoyed more of the light of 
God's countenance." 

" Saturday, May 19. Determined to endeavor to 
do my duty to all the members of brother T^s family. 
Felt a peculiar earnestness in family prayer for 
those who were without God. Went to the factory 
and conversed with each person employed in it on 
the state of their souls. Found in them a general 
reluctance to come to a determination to attend 
immediately to the one thing needful. Two or 
three appeared somewhat affected in view of their 
state. How important, that in conversing with 



86 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

the impenitent, we endeavor to bring the truth 
home plainly to their hearts. God grant that this 
interview may not be in vain." 

It was on this or another occasion, that as he 
was passing a school-house in L., he called, pre- 
sented some tracts to the teacher for her scholars, 
and addressed a few words to her on the subject 
of her own salvation ; and to this brief interview 
she now ascribes her conversion to God. 

On the same day he arrived at Jewett City; 
and the following letter on the evening of the suc- 
ceeding day, shows how soon he found something 
here to do for Christ. 

To Mrs. Page. 
"Jewett City, Sabbath Evening, 10 o'clock. 
" Thus far the Lord has sustained me. I arrived 
here in safety last evening. This morning heard 
Rev. Mr. W., from Rev. 7:10, showing that the 
salvation of the sinner should all be ascribed to 
God. In the afternoon attended a funeral, where 
Mr. W. solemnly addressed a large concourse. This 
evening have visited at the boarding-house, where 
are about forty boarders. Found some there who 
seemed to love the cause of Christ. I remarked 
to Mrs. P., that I thought we ought to have 
prayer-meetings in the neighborhood. She gave 
her assent, and soon proposed that we should 
commence them this evening, and that the boarders 



AT JEWETT CITY. 87 

be called in. Expecting I should be requested to 
lead, gave me a little heart-fluttering; but I think 
I had some earnestness in the performance of the 
duty. 

" Many connected with the factory spend the 
Sabbath in idleness or amusement. I feel that I 
have here much to do ; and 0, for judgment, pru- 
dence, humility, and love to God and souls, to en- 
able me to perform it. I feel more and more the 
need of divine aid, and of the prayers of others. 
I think my situation here will in many respects be 
trying. I shall need the whole armor of God. My 
religious privileges will be less than they have 
been ; but it seems there is a door opening that I 
may be useful. Pray for me, my dear wife, and 
engage all you can to do the same. Give the little 
ones a kiss from papa. Stay yourself on God. He 
knows what is for your good. 

" With the tenderest affection, 

"H. PAG-E." 

"Monday, May 21. Proposed to one of the work- 
men that we hold stated prayer-meetings for a 
revival of religion in the factory. Think we shall 
succeed," 

"Wednesday Evening, May 22. Had a meeting 
of the workmen and boarders at Captain P.'s. It 
was agreed to hold a weekly prayer-meeting on 
Wednesday evenings. Feel considerable anxiety for 



88 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

a revival of religion in the factory. There appears 
here a dreadful indifference to divine things. 
Lord, make the stubborn tremble, and make those 
whom I daily see living in sin, the trophies of thy 
grace. 

" Saturday Evening, May 25. To-day I have heard 
good news from Coventry — the conversions of P. P. 
and J. P. For a moment I could hardly be rec- 
onciled to be away from them ; but the persua- 
sion that God has more for me to do here than 
there, calms my anxieties and stimulates me to 
act. To God I would commit my dear family. 
May he preserve them to-night, and give them 
and me a pleasant Sabbath. To-day had some 
conversation with a Universalist. Agreed with a 
Christian friend to make him a subject of special 
prayer." 

To Mrs. Page. 
"Jewett City, Wednesday Evening, May 30. 

" I received yours on Saturday, which gave me 
the pleasing intelligence that P. P. and J. P. think 
they have found the Saviour. I hope, by this time, 
the work has become general. It seems more and 
more that it was necessary for me to come away. 
Perhaps I ivas the Achan that prevented the bless- 
ing. It appears that God will have me remain 
here at present. 

" On Wednesday evenings we have a prayer- 



AT JEWETT CITY. 89 

meeting of those connected with the factory ; and 
a few who love the throne of grace have agreed to 
establish a prayer-meeting on Sabbath mornings at 
sunrise. Christians here are of various religious 
denominations, and seem to have been discouraged. 
I think there are some appearances now of quicken- 
ing. There appears so wide a door here for Chris- 
tian effort, that I scarcely know where to begin. 
Several of the workmen will probably unite and 
take the Missionary Herald, that it may be read at 
the Wednesday-evening meetings ; but the relig- 
ious state of the people generally is lamentable. 
By many the Sabbath is shamefully profaned, and 
the enemies of Christ seem to triumph. I need 
your prayers, and the prayers of friends, for ivisd&ni, 
grace, and humility. 

" Affectionately yours, 

"H. PAOE." 

The following memorandum shows briefly how 
he spent the next Sabbath. 

"Sabbath Evening, June 3. This morning at- 
tended a prayer-meeting at sunrise. Seven were 
present. Had a pleasant meeting. They thought 
they had felt for a few days a greater anxiety for 
a revival of religion. 

" After breakfast visited Mr. F., a sick man who 
has worked with us. Yesterday his case was 
thought to be dangerous, but to-day he is more 



90 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

comfortable. Conversed with him on the state of 
his soul ; found him without hope, and feeling un- 
prepared for his change. He had been considerably- 
alarmed, but did not seem to have a clear sense of 
his awful guilt in the sight of God. I read to him 
a tract, prayed with him, and endeavored to per- 
suade him of the necessity of immediate repent- 
ance. 

" At the door, met a man and conversed with 
him; he said he thought some on the subject of 
religion, and knew he was a sinner. I urged him 
not to delay the great work of making his peace 
with God. 

" Near a neighboring house saw four young men, 
who appeared very thoughtless; went to them, 
and told them I had a short message which I wish- 
ed them to hear and consider. After getting their 
attention, I told them it was, ' Prepare to meet thy 
God.' 

"Walked to P., and heard Rev. Mr. W. Ad- 
dressed the prayer-meeting in the evening, and felt 
some freedom. Called again on the sick man: he 
said he had thought much of what I said to him in 
the morning. 

" On my way, met one of the young men whom 
I accosted this morning ; took him by the hand, 
and asked if he had thought of what I then said to 
him. He said he had many times during the day. 



AT JEWETT CITY. 91 

Addressed him and a group of lads around him, 
warning them that they must awake to a sense of 
their danger, or perish. 

" Agreed upon appointing a monthly concert for 
prayer to-morrow evening in the school-house." 

" Monday Evening. Just returned from monthly 
concert. About forty were present. To me it was 

a pleasing meeting. Walked home with Mr. . 

He appeared considerably enlivened." 

"Wednesday Evening. Attended meeting at 
the boarding-house. How much do I need pardon- 
ing and sanctifying grace." 

. To Mrs. Page. 
" Jewett City, Saturday, P. M., June 9. 

11 1 sent yesterday to Boston for the Missionary 
Herald ; and esquire M. gives me the reading of 
the Recorder. So you see I shall not be desti- 
tute of religious intelligence. If I had a supply 
of tracts, I could dispose of them here to good ad- 
vantage. 

" I lose one quarter of a day this P. M., to write 
and get some rest preparatory to the Sabbath, as I 
have found myself dull at meeting." 

He proceeds to relate particularly the events of 
the preceding Sabbath, and continues the letter 
on Sabbath evening. 



92 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

" Thirteen were present at the prayer-meeting 
this morning. I enjoyed it much. The sermon 
at P., in the afternoon, was on the duties of 'parents, 
and uncommonly interesting. 

" A TJniversalist preached to-day at the church 
here. So you see the enemy had the field. I think 
a faithful minister stationed here might do incal- 
culable good. It is indeed missionary ground. 

" As to my own spiritual state, I can hardly tell 
you what it is, I find so much impurity of motive. 
I hope you have many new converts around you, 
and many engaged Christians. How is my own 
dear sister ? Is she yet a Christian ? Tell the 
dear children that papa thinks of them, and prays 
for them. I hope you will make up in duties to 
them what has been wanting in me. Do not neg- 
lect their souls, as I have too much done. 

"H. PAGE." 

"Monday, June 11. Called on Mr. F., who is 
worse. He thought he had experienced a change 
within a few days ; but I could obtain no satis- 
factory evidence. Endeavored to deal faithfully 
with him, and show him the danger of a false 
hope. 

" Tuesday Evening. Attended a prayer-meeting 
one and a half miles distant. About twenty pres- 
ent. I often inquire what reason I have to hope I 
am a Christian. I find so much selfishness in my 



AT JEWETT CITY. 93 

motives to action, that I sometimes fear true love 
to Christ is wanting." 

" Sabbath Evening, June 17. Twenty-one pres- 
ent at the prayer-meeting at sunrise. Heard Rev. 
Mr. W. morning and afternoon. Attended a prayer- 
meeting in the intermission. At five o'clock, at- 
tended the Sabbath-school here ; forty-two chil- 
dren present. This evening, prayer-meeting at 
the school-house. Within three days have felt 
uncommonly anxious for the salvation of souls ; 
but the impenitent all around me seem yet to be 
thoughtless. Satan appears to be making un- 
usual efforts. May the Lord guide me in duty. 
Have I not come to this place with his glory in 
vieiv ? Shall I not be the means of benefiting 
some souls? 

" Friday Evening, June 22. This evening, a 
prayer-meeting for Sabbath-school teachers ; about 
twenty attended. The meeting at the boarding- 
house, on Wednesday evening, was more solemn 
than usual. Find that some were deeply inter- 
ested. 

"Wednesday Evening, June 27. To-day, paid 
what is called ' entrance ' to the workshop, by giv- 
ing tracts to the workmen. They generally ap- 
peared pleased. Held a conversation of some length 
with a gentleman of considerable education. He 
argued on many religious subjects, and contends 



94 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

that man is not strictly a free agent. May God 
open his eyes and heart." 

"Sabbath, July 1. About thirty at the morn- 
ing prayer-meeting. Attended church and joined 
in commemorating the Lord's death at P. At five 
P. M. attended Sabbath-school, containing now up- 
wards of eighty scholars, who are very regular and 
attentive. Yet, with all these privileges, my spir- 
itual discernment is so dim, my affections so cold, 
that I must conclude I have but little real desire 
to ' glorify God in my body and spirit, which are 
his.'" 

" Wednesday Evening. Prayer-meeting solemn. 
More of the boarders attended than usual. One of 
the workmen appears to be somewhat thoughtful. 
Felt peculiar anxiety for the conversion of sinners. 

"Tuesday, July 10. Last evening Captain P. 
called at my lodgings, bringing a young man seri- 
ously impressed. Found him deplorably ignorant. 
He was considerably affected, but did not seem to 
have a sense of sin. May God convince him, and 
bring him to the truth. Have just received intel- 
ligence of the death of the Rev. Dr. Worcester. 

" Saturday, July 14. S. H. is hoping that he 
has been born again ; and another, I think, gives 
evidence of a change. How mutch cause have I 
for humiliation, that God should use such an un- 
worthy instrument in the conversion of sinners. 



AT JEWETT CITY. 95 

And when he has in so many instances blessed my 
feeble efforts, how guilty that I am not more ear- 
nest in exertions for the good of souls. , 
" This afternoon learned that Mr. L. is indulg- 
ing a hope. Blessed news, that one of the work- 
men has been brought home to Christ." 

Encouraged by these indications, he addressed 
the following letter to a gentleman of much re 
spectability, with whom he had a friendly inter 
view. 

M Sabbath Evening, 15th. July. 

" Dear Sir — Our partial acquaintance and othei 
circumstances have led me to feel a peculiar inter- 
est in your eternal welfare. In our recent inter- 
view, I learned that you have been often affec- 
tionately reminded of the necessity of an imme- 
diate attention to the concerns of eternity, but 
yet that you are living without hope, and with 
your affections still supremely placed on earthly 
good. 

" My feelings were not a little excited while in 
the house of God to-day, in contemplating the final 
separation of those who are connected by the dear- 
est earthly ties — one to descend to the gloom of 
everlasting despair, the other to rise to immortal 
life and glory. I knew that you had had a relig- 
ious education ; that a thousand prayers of pious 



96 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

friends had been offered in your behalf; and that 
a devoted wife was pouring out her intercessions to 
God, that you may not be separated in the future 
world. 

4 '"Why, sir, this insensibility to eternal realities? 
Why this parleying with sin ; this forgetfulness of 
God ; this aversion to a holy life, and to the Sa- 
viour of sinners ? I cannot believe that your en- 
lightened understanding will allow you to barter 
your soul for the trifles of earth. 

" Men act in view of motives. Permit me to 
ask, do you not find them sufficient to induce a 
compliance with the simple and reasonable requi- 
sitions of the gospel of Christ ? How long, sir, 
will you withhold the best affections of your heart 
from him who is ' the Chief among ten thousand, 
and altogether lovely ?' How long will you put 
far away the evil day, and slumber on the verge 
of ruin ? How long will you, dear sir, reject the 
Redeemer of mankind and his offers of eternal life ? 
God grant that your heart may answer, ' Not a 
moment.' Allow me the freedom of affectionately 
entreating you immediately to escape from the 
threatened doom of the impenitent, by casting 
yourself as a vile rebel on the mercy of Him who 
alone is able to save. 

" With affection and respect, sincerely yours, 

"H. PAGE." 



AT JEWETT CITY. 97 

"Thursday, July 19. Felt an unusual desire 
this day for a revival of religion. Have conversed 
with L. He appears very well. H. K. appears 
very solemn." 

On the same day he thus wrote to Mrs. Page : 

" I have received yours. Is Coventry indeed in 
so deplorable a condition ? Where is the zeal of 
Christians? Is there no God? no heaven? no 
hell ? Are there no souls on the way to death ? 
I hoped to hear that you were enjoying a fresh 
anointing of the Holy Spirit. The Lord Jesus is 
just such a stay as you now and always need. Your 
companion you will find, sooner or later, to be only 
a broken reed; but Christ is a safe refuge. 

" We have some favorable tokens for good here. 
One man, Mr. L., has obtained a hope, and is now 
quite active. A young woman appears to-day to 
be under convictions, and others I think are more 
solemn. As much as I desire to be with my own 
family, / should not dare to leave this place at 
this time. I hope that God has sent me here to 
be a means of advancing his cause. I felt yester- 
day a peculiar anxiety for sinners, and think I 
was enabled to maintain, in a degree, a praying 
spirit. 

" In all your trials, you will find it sweet casting 
yourself into the arms of Christ. He is ready to 

p«s». 7 



98 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

grant consolation to his children. Only put your 
confidence in Him, and be active and faithful in 
his service. 

"Yours with sincere affection, 

"H. PAG-E." 

" Sabbath, July 22. At the prayer-meeting 
this morning, learned that H. K. had found peace 
in believing. In the evening had a long conversa- 
tion with the family of Mr. . Found one of 

his daughters strongly attached to dancing, and in 
the pursuit of vanity waiting for God to do his work 
in her heart. Endeavored to take away her ex- 
cuses, and convince her that the guilt is all her 
own. May the Holy Spirit set home truth to her 
heart. 

" July 28 . This day completes thirty years of my 
life. How ought I to begin this new year for God ! 

" August 2. Compelled by pain in my breast 
to leave work in the shop; painted a landscape 
view of the factory. Attended a meeting to devise 
means for obtaining a faithful minister to be settled 
and devote his labors constantly in the village. 

"August 4. Health more feeble, and obliged to 
resort to medicine. In addition to my bodily in- 
firmities, I find great languor in my spiritual affec- 
tions. for a more ardent desire to be instru- 
mental in promoting the glory of God. May I not, 
blessed Jesus, leave myself with thee ? Wilt thou 



AT JEWETT CITY. 99 

not guide me and lead me back to thy fold, and 
make me faithful the short time I have to continue 
on earth? Thou knowest my weakness, my insta- 
bility, my dim vision of eternal things, and my in- 
gratitude. Pardon my wanderings, revive my lan- 
guid affections, and fit me for all thy pleasure." 

Here closes the little journal he kept of his brief 
stay in Jewett City ; and we regret to say he has 
left behind him nothing further in the shape of a 
journal. Had he continued to make and preserve 
even such hasty notices of his efforts from day to 
day, and the blessing that followed them, it is only 
known to God how extensively the record of them 
might have been blessed in inciting others to duty. 

On the last page of the journal we have a memo- 
randum of " Books out" including Baxter's Call 
and a few works of kindred character, the loaning 
of which, as he judged them adapted to the state 
of particular individuals, was one of his accustomed 
means of usefulness. 

From another memorandum it appears, that 
while he was performing the labors of love above 
recounted, he worked fifty-seven days, at seventy- 
five cents a day. Here was a mechanic perform- 
ing his daily task on hire, establishing and sus- 
taining a religious meeting at the boarding-house 
on Wednesday evenings, a meeting of the people 

LofC. 



100 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

of God for prayer on Sabbath mornings at sun- 
rise, and though he went about three miles to 
attend public worship, throwing his efforts into a 
Sabbath-school at 5 P. M., and instructing a class ; 
devoting Sabbath evenings to meetings and family 
visitation ; conversing with the sick, the careless, 
the anxious, and those indulging a hope ; distrib- 
uting tracts ; endeavoring to awaken an interest 
in the benevolent operations of the day ; keeping 
a brief diary ; abounding in prayer ; and adopting, 
with others, incipient measures, which proved 
successful, for the formation of a church, and the 
settlement of an evangelical pastor. Many a pro- 
fessed Christian, as he goes out on a journey, or to 
tarry among strangers, " leaves his religion behind 
him." Not so our brother: "I hope," was his 
language, "that God has sent me here to advance 
his cause" 

The friend with whom he lodged says, " Religion 
was always first in his mind. If he entered a 
family, after the usual salutations, this subject was 
immediately introduced. In promoting the Sab- 
bath-schools, he would go out into the highways, 
and wherever he found those of suitable age, how- 
ever far from God they might seem, would gain 
their attention, and, if possible, bring them in. 
Six or eight wild boys from twelve to seventeen 
years old were thus induced to attend, were led 



AT COVENTRY. 101 

to see tlieir ruin by sin, and brought hopefully 
to Christ. Some of them became teachers in the 
school. One of them, a little before the death of 
Mr. Page, expressed an earnest desire to see him ; 
and said that but for his efforts he must have been, 
to all human view, an eternal outcast. The meet- 
ings in the boarding-house were continued about 
a year after he left us, and the saving influences 
of the Holy Spirit descended upon them." The 
gentleman whom he addressed by letter, July 15, 
publicly professed Christ, and frequently spoke of 
Mr. Page's faithful efforts for his salvation. A 
daughter of one of the families he visited, lamented 
on her death-bed that she had not heeded his ad- 
monitions. " Oh," said she, " that I could see that 
Mr. Page. that I had regarded his warnings !" 
At the close of the evening he often spent much 
time in his chamber before retiring to rest, some- 
times till a late hour, doubtless wrestling with 
God in prayer for the individuals with whom during 
the day he had been conversing. 

"We now return with our brother to his peaceful 
home, where his health for several weeks contin- 
ued feeble, and forbade his returning to labor at 
Jewett City as he had intended. But it appears, 
that though in " much debility of body," and for 
a time " unable to converse much," he did not re- 



102 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

linquish the one prime object of his life. On the 
18th of August he thus wrote to C. H. H., a 
young lady who had been for some time anxious 
for her soul. 

" According to your own confession, your case is 
deplorable indeed. Convinced of the necessity of 
religion, and of the vanity of all earthly pursuits, 
you still choose the way to death. But stop ; is 

C a in the way to death ? can it be possible 

that she has lived three months sensible of her 
danger, and knowing her duty, without casting 
herself, a guilty rebel, at the foot of the cross ? 
remember, the Saviour will not always call. 
Continuing to reject him, the day of your calamity 
is at hand. The eternal sorrows that shall come 
upon you make haste. Think again of his melting 
invitations : ' Look unto me, and be ye saved.' 
' Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the wa- 
ters.' Slighting such calls, and abusing such priv- 
ileges as you enjoy, must you not deserve and 
receive an aggravated doom ? If these were the 
last words I could ever speak to you, I would say, 
Haste, throw yourself immediately on the mercy of 
God in Christ. Unless you do this, you can never 
enter heaven ; and unless you do it soon, it is more 
than probable the lamentation will be yours, ' The 
harvest is past, the summer is ended, and I am not 
saved!'" 



AT COVENTRY. 2Q3 

On the 23d of August he wrote an affectionate 
letter to friends in Jewett City, expressing his 
regret that he was unable to return ; encouraging 
them to persevere in duty, and enclosing a solemn 
appeal to his Sabbath-school class. 

September 5th, he transmitted, for publication in 
the Guardian, a sketch of the interview held with 
a young lady, July 22; his object being " to con- 
vince her that there was no obstacle on the 'part of 
God to her coming to him, and that the guilt of 
her continued impenitence rested ivholly and alone 
on herself. 

" ' I acknowledge,' she said, ' that I do love the 
pleasures of this world ; and that dancing, which 
is my favorite amusement, is one of the last things 
I could give up.' 

" 'Are you prepared then,' I asked,' to risk your 
eternal all, for a short season of this world's enjoy- 
ment ? When so much has been done for your sal- 
vation, will you still hazard the tremendous conse- 
quences of being ' a lover of pleasure more than a 
lover of God?' 

" ' However that may be,' said she, ' I shall con- 
tinue in my present course till the Spirit of God 
leads me to think and feel differently. Should I 
die now, I know I must be lost ; but I can see no 
way to prevent it. I do not desire to be miser- 
able ; I wish to go to heaven as well as others ; 



104 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

but what can I do ? The 'prayer of the wicked is 
' abomination to the Lord ;' and if I am to be 
saved, when God sees fit to change my heart he 
will do it.' 

"'True,' said I, "the sacrifice of the wicked is 
abomination to the Lord,' he neither accepts nor 
requires it. He requires the prayer of ' a broken 
and contrite spirit ;' and you can render no valid 
excuse for not going to him this day, and even this 
moment, with a spirit contrite and broken for sin. 
Every moral exercise of your heart, and every act 
of your life, that are not consistent with supreme 
love to God, are also an abomination in his sight. 
And besides all this, your impenitence and your 
neglect of religion is your oivn choice; for this you 
are guilty ; and for this, if persisted in, you will be 
justly condemned. If you cannot plead this excuse 
at the bar of God, never, I beseech you, make it 
again on earth. ' 

" After endeavoring in vain to obtain a promise 
that she would do so much for her salvation, as 
for a short season each day to call to mind and 
confess her sins individually to God, I left her, hop- 
ing that the interview would be the means at least 
of exciting some serious reflections. 

" I think we see in this example that impenitent 
sinners have ?to desire to become the folloivers of 
Christ, They wish to escape misery, and to be 



AT COVENTRY. 105 

happy, but are unwilling humbly to accept of 
Christ ; and refuse to engage, for his sake, in self- 
denying duty. They also impliedly, if not con- 
fessedly, cast the blame of their impenitence on 
God. 

" Let every Christian, while so many are thus 
excusing and deluding themselves, be faithful in 
unveiling to them the real state of their hearts, 
and showing them their guilt and danger. Let 
him warn them no longer to reply against God ; 
show them that their excuses arise from hatred to 
him and his perfect law, and from their own dis- 
position to justify themselves. And let him add 
to this frequent and fervent prayer that their eyes 
may be opened, and that they may cast themselves 
on the mercy of God in Christ. 

"To persons of the character of the young lady 
above described, I would say, in the language of 
the apostle, that at the bar of judgment ' every 
mouth will be stopped, and all the world become 
guilty before God.' At that dread tribunal you 
can plead no palliation for your impenitent life. 
You must stand confounded, while you acknow- 
ledge the justice of the sentence that fixes your 
doom in eternal woe. Be deceived no longer. 
Your immortal soul is at stake. Awake now to 
your danger, while you are in a land of hope. Ac- 
knowledge yourself a vile and guilty rebel; and 



106 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

remember, that you must rep&nt and believe in 
Christ, or you can never be admitted to the abodes 
of the blessed." 

There stands appended to a copy of this article 
the following note, dated 1829, in the handwriting 
of Mr. Page : 

" The young lady above described received im- 
pressions from this article which resulted in her 
hopeful conversion to God. She has since died, 
trusting in the merits of Christ." 

To Miss J. B. 

"Coventry, September 2a, 1821. 

" I hear you have not yet professed Christ before 
men. If you hope that you are a child of God, I 
think you would receive much spiritual benefit, 
and be instrumental of more good to others, by 
publicly joining yourself to his people. 

" The field is open to all who are willing to labor 
in it ; and the present is a day when none can 
excuse themselves for being inactive. Every hum- 
ble, well-directed effort for Zion's cause, God seems 
ready to own and bless. This is also an age and 
country in which females may do much to advance 
the Redeemer's kingdom. 

" And now, Miss J., can you not do more than 
you have done ? Is there no Christian female 



AT COVENTRY. 107 

whom you can encourage ; no impenitent sinner 
whom you can warn of his danger ; no young 
friend whom you might hope to hring to the know- 
ledge of the truth ? Do be faithful to the youth 
around you. Pray for them, and labor with them, 
that they receive not the doom of the rejecters of 
Christ. 

" Your friend, 

"H. PAGE." 

To Miss P. A. 
''Coventry, Monday Evening, Oct. 8, 1821. 

" My dear Friend — This afternoon we have 
committed to the dust the body of one of your inti- 
mate acquaintances, D. H. "Why was it not my- 
self? Why was it not my friend P.? We are 
still in the land of the living, and God grant that 
the remainder of our days may be spent in the ser- 
vice of Christ. 

'- Wliat are your feelings, my friend, as you re- 
vert to those seasons ichen the Holy Spirit spoke 
to your conscience, and brought you in some degree 
to feel your wretched condition ? Are all serious 
impressions banished from your mind ? Are the 
divine influences withdrawn for ever ? Is my 
friend, who was once trembling in view of her 
state as a sinner, now thoughtlessly pursuing her 
course to the world of woe ? I can hardly bear 
the thought. An immortal being, blessed with 



108 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

a religious education — a child of many prayers, 
labors, and tears, continuing to reject the offers 
of life, and refuse the gracious calls of a bleeding 
Saviour ! 

" May I not indulge the hope, that ere this you 
are a child of God ; an active laborer in his vine- 
yard ; and prepared for the rest that ' remains for 
the people of God V If not, let me affectionately 
urge you now to aivake, to delay the work of re- 
pentance no longer, and to suffer the enemy of 
souls to gain no further advantage, lest it prove 
your eternal ruin. 

" Do not remain careless because others are so. 
Be an active friend of Christ yourself, and labor to 
bring them to be so too. 

" I have been but little acquainted with the 
religious state of the youth among us the sum- 
mer past, having been for some time absent ; and 
for the last two months my health has been so 
much impaired that I have had opportunity to 
converse with but few. But there is reason to 
fear that many are gliding down to the gates of 
death. 

" This may be the last time that I shall ever 
address you on this subject ; but when we meet at 
the bar of God, may it appear that these lines and 
our opportunities of conversation have not been in 
vain. Will you not write and tell me the state of 



AT COVENTRY. 109 

your mind ? I did intend to see you again before 
you left Coventry, but was disappointed. 

" Your affectionate friend, 

"H. PAGE." 

On the 15th of March, 1822, he writes to H. D., 
a young relative, on business; and that part of the 
letter being finished, proceeds to express his regret 
that their personal interview when his friend was 
at Coventry was so short, and his hope that cor- 
respondence may be an acceptable and useful sub- 
stitute. " A thousand topics of interest," he says, 
" present themselves ; but all others sink into in- 
significance compared with eternal realities. 

" And now, dear cousin, permit me to speak to 
you particularly on your own spiritual state. From 
your conversation I w r as led to conclude that you 
did not consider yourself as having experienced that 
change 'from death unto life' which the Scriptures 
represent as indispensable to salvation. * Without 
holiness no man shall see the Lord.' Destitute of 
supreme love to God, our state is indeed deplo- 
rable. While we are purposing at some future 
time to give him our hearts, an unexpected and 
unwelcome messenger cuts short our hopes for 
ever. 

" I can assure you, my friend, that no period of 
life will ever be so favorable for your accepting the 
offers of mercy as the present. God has said, ' I 



110 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

love them that love me, and they that seek me 
early shall find me.' I would affectionately urge 
yon, by all that is solemn in heaven, on earth, and 
in the world of despair, in a dying bed, and in the 
day of judgment, to delay the work of preparation 
for death no longer. Hasten, and flee to Christ as 
a ruined sinner. Days and months fly swiftly; all 
opportunity to make your peace with God will soon 
be over ; and the soul once lost, is lost for ever. 
"Do write me, and fully express your feelings. 
"Your affectionate cousin, «h. PAG-E." 

The following is an illustration of a final and 
almost desperate effort to reach the heart of one 
whose case seemed nearly hopeless. 

To Miss N. R. 

" The remark has often been made, that 'it will 
do no good to converse with N. R. on her state as 
a sinner; and you have probably yourself been 
brought to the same conclusion. 

"I take my pen to say a few words more to you, 
trembling lest it should only be the means of hard- 
ening you in sin. All motives from this world 
would lead me at once to desist. But when I look 
to a dying hour, and a little beyond, into an un- 
changing eternity, I feel irresistibly impelled once 
more to expostulate with a perishing fellow-sinner. 
I beg you to receive it in kindness, and as probably 



AT COVENTRY. Ill 

the last lines or words addressed to you personally, 
which you will ever read or hear from me while 
you continue professedly the enemy of God. 

" And now, what shall I say? "Will you accom- 
pany me to that silent room ? Here lies a young lady 
wasted hy disease, and just on the confines of eter- 
nity. Approach her — the paleness of death is on her 
cheek. Take her by the hand — why start at its icy 
coldness ? it is but kindred dust. Listen to her tale. 
'Alas, my friend, I am dying — I am dying. My 
day of grace is over. My sands are almost run. In 
a few moments I shall be enveloped in devouring 
fire. I have lived in sin, rejected Christ ; and now 
he hides his face from me, and there is no remedy. 
0, how have Christians plead with me to make God 
my portion ; but I would not listen. I accused God 
of injustice, quarrelled with that sovereign love that 
would have wooed my heart ; resisted the Holy 
Spirit that was teaching me my lost condition and 
pressing me to accept of Christ. He called, but I 
refused ; and now he is withdrawn from me fo.r 
ever. 0, my friend, take warning from me. While 
you have the offers of mercy, flee to Christ. Make 
haste. Delay not a moment, lest you mingle your 
cries with me in the bottomless pit.' 

"Can you look at this melancholy picture and 
not apply it to yourself? Death is even now at 
the door. There is no time to parley with Satan 



112 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

or your own heart. Heaven must be gained soon, 
or not at all. Christ now stands at the door and 
knocks. Oh, N., say not again, depart. 

" That you may bid Him a cordial welcome, is 
the earnest prayer of your affectionate friend, 

"E PAGE." 

Early in the autumn of 1822, commenced an- 
other precious revival of religion, which continued 
for several months, as the result of which, he says, 
in a letter to his cousin H. D., near the close of 
winter, "About one hundred have obtained a hope. 
Some of the most amiable have found their hearts 
violently opposed to God ; have even represented 
themselves as * devils incarnate ;' and found peace 
only in confessing all their awful guilt, and cast- 
ing themselves alone on the merits and mercy of 
Christ." In a subsequent letter to Mrs. A. A,, a 
distant friend, he gives the names of twenty-five of 
her acquaintances who had united with the church. 

This is all the notice he has left of ivhat he did, 
or felt — of his prayers, or labors, or success, or 
thanksgivings, during this blessed harvest of souls, 
a season in which he rejoiced, as fraught with the 
choicest of all blessings conferred by a gracious 
God this side of heaven. A friend, who knew him 
well, states that in this revival he manifested a 
deeper interest, and put forth more glowing and 
unceasing efforts than ever before. Religious meet- 



AT COVENTRY. 113 

ings were held almost daily, and sometimes at differ- 
ent hours of the same day ; and usually he attended 
them all. Personal conversation with individuals, 
the careless, the inquiring, and the young convert, 
was, in connection with prayer, the prominent 
means of his usefulness ; and for this, as oppor- 
tunity offered and duty seemed to call, he did not 
hesitate, at any and all times, to leave his business. 
Though he had little of this world's goods, it was 
generally true that he " owed no man any thing;" 
the necessary wants of his family were supplied ; 
he felt that while the influences of the Holy Spirit 
were descending the opportunity must be improved 
to pluck the golden fruit, and that whether he ob- 
tained a little more or a little less of this world's 
goods was nothing compared with the salvation of 
a soul. If any would censure his course, let the 
decision be deferred till the judgment-day. And 
that he may not then be found almost alone — 
with a little band, who supremely devoted them- 
selves while in this world, first to glorify God in 
the salvation of souls around them, and after that 
to make provision for the present life. 

In reference to Mr. Page's efforts at this season, 
the individual to whom his last moving appeal 
above quoted was addressed, relates the following 
incidents : " I had long been awakened, but deter- 
mined to let no one know it ; and made every effort 

Page. ' 8 



114 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

to escape Mr. Page. At length, near the close of 
November, I attended a little meeting where I be- 
lieve all were indulging a hope except my brother 
and myself. After conversing with my brother 
he came to me, and wished me to tell him the 
state of my mind. I at first said that I was in de- 
spair, but from the manner of his reply perceived 
that he did not give full credit to my assertion. 
This roused my resentment, and I at once deter- 
mined not to speak again while he remained in the 
room. He pressed me to decide that I would with- 
out delay give my heart to Christ, but I was so 
angry that I would not even answer him. This 
conversation brought the malignity of my heart 
more clearly to my own view than I had ever seen 
it before. I could never have imagined myself to 
indulge such malice as I then felt towards him, and 
my misery was that I could assign no other reason 
for it but his faithfulness. Soon, as I trust, God 
was pleased to subdue my enmity, and my hatred 
to Mr. Page was at 07ice changed to love, for I saw 
in him the image of my blessed Redeemer" 

A little phrase incidentally dropped by his pas- 
tor, as from his window he saw him approaching 
in company with another., has a significant import : 
" There comes Mr. Page ivith another lamb." See- 
ing him come in that season of mercy, such a result 
was readily anticipated. 



SKETCH OF T. H. PATOO. 115 



CHAPTER Y. 

HIS NARRATIVE OF THOMAS HAMITAH PATOO, A 
NATIVE OF THE MARQUESAS ISLANDS, HOPE- 
FULLY BROUGHT TO CHRIST IN COVENTRY. 

Though Mr. Page left no written memorial of 
his efforts, or the state of his mind during the work 
of grace just alluded to, the deficiency is at least 
partially supplied in the interesting memoir of 
Thomas Hamitah Patoo, which he originally pre- 
pared. He had often agitated the question wheth- 
er, even at his age, and with a rising family around 
him, it was not his duty to go and labor in some 
humble station among the heathen ; and when 
Patoo was located near him, he felt that Provi- 
dence had brought a heathen to his oivn door, and 
that he must omit no efforts for his salvation. 

Patoo had reached the age of about fourteen, 
when, attracted by ships which occasionally touched 
at his native islands', he resolved to visit America ; 
and to secure his purpose, jumped on board a ship 
with her sails spread, just in time to see his afflicted 
father reluctantly wave his handkerchief as a sig- 
nal of farewell. He arrived at Boston, and after a 
varied life of two or three years, and many suffer- 
ings occasioned by his own folly, was taken under 



116 £IFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

the charge of Mr. D. H., a benevolent gentleman, 
who, in May 1822, placed him in a pious family 
in Coventry, commending him to " the prayers and 
Christian kindness of the pastor and the whole 
church." 

" At a prayer -meeting at sunrise, in the autumn 
of 1822," says the narrative, " it was observed that 
Thomas was much affected and wept bitterly. He 
was made a subject of special prayer, and his con- 
versation at the close of the meeting evidently 
showed that he was under the strivings of the 
Holy Spirit." These impressions were deepened 
by the clear exhibition of truth at successive meet- 
ings, and its faithful personal application to him- 
self in private conversation. His distress was such 
one day, that he left home in the rain, first to find 
his Christian friend, and then to visit his pastor to 
obtain some relief. Truth presented took hold of 
his mind, but he rebelled against God, murmured 
at the conversion of a young acquaintance, and 
returned to spend a sleepless night in view of his 
hopeless condition. On the day following, his anx- 
iety continued unabated ; his distress was such that 
he could not attend to the business assigned him ; 
most of the day was spent in agonizing prayer ; 
till at length the Saviour appeared for him, his 
burdened conscience was relieved, and he found 
peace in believing. His own narrative of the way 



SKETCH OF T. H. PATOO. 117 

in which he was led, expressed in his broken idiom, 
is a delightful exemplification of the power and 
excellency of true religion. 

" Question. Thomas, what was the state of your 
mind after the commencement of the revival in 
Coventry ? 

" Answer. Christians talk to me a great deal 
about my bad heart. Me think my heart good 
enough. 

" Q,. Did you then endeavor to pray? 

" A. Mrs. T. teach me to say Lord's prayer. I 
think me got no mother, no father, no sister, no 
brother here ; and Mrs. T. good to me, so I do as 
she tell me. Then I kneel down before I go to 
bed and say prayer. 

" Q,. Did you occasionally omit this duty? 

" A. Sometimes. Then deacon T. say you must 
say your prayers, Thomas, every night. Then me 
go pray, mad. 

" Q,. Had you any different feelings at the morn- 
ing prayer-meeting, at which you wept ? 

"A. Then me feel heavy ; feel afraid to die ; 
feel sorry for my sin. Me try to pray, ' Our Fa- 
ther.' Me go home, think what minister say, then 
I pray. Next day forget it all — then feel light. 

" &. When you went to the inquiry-meetings 
how did you feel ? 

" A. I feel good some ; then I feel heavy again. 



11.8 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

When minister say all about poor sinner, then I 
feel sorry. 

" Qi. What were your feelings at the meeting 
for inquiry on Sabbath evening ? 

" A. Heart feel hard. Somebody tell me J. B. 
got a new heart. I feel angry. 

" Q,. How did you spend the Tuesday following? 

11 A. Me want to see minister. I set out — go part 
way, feel so bad can go no further ; then kneel 
down by a great rock and pray. Me say, Lord, 
have mercy on poor Thomas, poor heathen ; give 
him new heart — take away old heart — give him 
new heart now. Then I go on. Go in minister's 
barn — 'fraid to go in house — then I pray again. 
Then look round and say, God make this hay, this 
grain, all these things — why can't God make me 
new heart ? Me wipe tears off my cheeks, but they 
come again. Then go in house. Mrs. C. say, What 
the matter, Thomas ; you hurt you ? I so 'shamed, 
me say, it rains out doors. Want to have her 
think it rain on my face. 

" Q,. What did you say to the minister ? 

" A. Me say, me got that bad heart yet. 

" Q/. Did you feel glad when told that J. B. had 
a new heart ? 

" A. No, sir ; me feel bad — me feel very heavy — 
me want to come first, before any body get in. 
When me go away, hope me come to be like J. B. 



SKETCH OF T. H. PATOO. 119 

H Q,. How did you feel that night and the day 
following ? 

" A. That night me feel heavy — heavy all over. 
Eyes all tears — could no sleep. Next day, feel so 
all time. Afternoon go work in barn with W. ; 
could no work. Feel me want to pray. Tell W. 
we kneel down. Then me say, Lord, have mer- 
cy on poor Thomas, poor W. ; give us new hearts. 
Then me think about Jesus Christ, and about Chris- 
tian folks. Me never feel so before. Heavy all 
gone. Then me love to pray, and say, Our Fa- 
ther, and thank great God he give J. B. a new 
heart. Then me think me feel to love Christ ; 
me go up on hay to find him — pray to him. Then 
me think Christ everywhere. Then come down. 

" Q,. What were your feelings during the meet- 
ing in the evening ? 

" A. Me want to shake hands with the minister, 
then feel to love all Christians. 

" Q,. How do you think you know a Christian 
from an impenitent sinner ? 

" A. Christian shake hand hard — -his hand feel 
warm — sinner no shake hand. 

" &. What do you mean by a new heart ? 

" A. A heart that feel to love good thought. 

" &. How do you know your heart to be soft now ? 

" A. Why, me no feel mad to any body ; if man 
strike me, no want to strike him back again, 



120 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

" After his conversion, his advancement in divine 
knowledge was rapid. The Holy Spirit seemed to 
teach him to understand the truths of God, and as 
far as understood, they evidently produced the 
fruits of holiness." 

He had a great desire to unite with the church 
at the approaching communion, and when the pas- 
tor informed him, that at the suggestion of his dis- 
tant friend, it was thought best that his admission 
be deferred, he replied with great feeling, " If, sir, 
you think best, then me wait ; but may be me die 
soon — then me never own Christ before men." 

He adorned the Christian character, loved the 
Bible, prayed much, especially for his own rela- 
tives and countrymen, for the heathen, and the 
impenitent in Christian lands ; and, like the friend 
who made him the object of his Christian love and 
more than paternal regard, and wrote his history, 
he put forth his most ardent efforts to bring shiners 
to Christ. The statements in the two following 
communications are full of import, and have an 
impressive bearing on the immediate object of this 
work. The first is from a young lady who had 
long been convicted of sin, and was still cherishing 
a rebellious heart. 

" After our friend Thomas indulged a hope, I 
endeavored," she says, *'to avoid him as much as 
possible; but one day, after conversing with my 



SKETCH OF T. H. PATOO. 121 

sister, and expressing much joy because she had 
got a new heart, he turned to me and said, 'N., 
why you no give up that bad heart ? Why you 
no come with C. and be a Christian ? Me want 
you be a Christian too !' In order to evade what 
he said, and prevent his saying more, I replied, 
1 Thomas, why did you never speak to me about 
these things before? Perhaps, had you been as 
faithful in talking to me as you have been to my 
sister, I too should have had a new heart.' With 
an expression of deep regret, he replied, ' N., 
me very sorry me no talk to you before. Me 
pray for you before, and noiv me talk to you.' 
After this, he embraced every opportunity of affec- 
tionately urging upon me immediate submission 
to Christ. 

" In the height of the revival, when a number 
of Christian friends were spending the day at our 
house, feeling no disposition to be with them, I 
retired to another room, and there stayed meditat- 
ing on my hopeless condition. It was not long 
before some one rapped at the door, and who was 
it but Thomas. He immediately began in the 
most feeling manner, to entreat me to submit to 
Christ without delay. ' Christ ready to receive 
you — all the good Christians want you to come — 
angel in heaven ready to rejoice over you ; why 
you no come V After conversing in this manner 



122 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

for some minutes, he was silent. At length, look- 
ing at me most expressively, he said, ' Me sorry me 
no talk to you before. Me pray for you ; me want 
to pray ivith you.' TVe knelt, and Thomas poured 
forth the feelings of his heart in language like this : 
1 mercy, Father, have mercy on us sinners. Have 
mercy on this friend. Pray this friend may now 
give up that bad heart to Christ, and not go to 
hell,' etc. It was the burden of his prayer, that I 
might then submit to Christ. I will leave others 
to judge what were my feelings, to have this hea- 
then, who had but just learned there was a God, 
on his knees pleading for mercy on me a stubborn 
sinner, hardened under the meridian light of the 
gospel." 

The other communication to which we have re- 
ferred is from one now a minister of the gospel, and 
was made to Mr. Page a few months previous to 
his death : 

" The first time I saw Thomas after he thought 
he had been born again, was on Sabbath, Decem- 
ber 8, 1822. I was then groaning under convic-, 
tions of sin — I felt myself lost. It seemed that 
there was but a step between me and hell. I 
longed to converse with some one, but I was too 
proud to tell any one how I felt. 

"Thus situated, Thomas approached me, and 
began to question me about my spiritual condition. 



SKETCH OF T. H. PATOO. 123 

I told him I felt that there was no hope for me : 
I had sinned against so much light, and so many 
strivings of the Spirit. 

" He proceeded to urge me to immediate sub- 
mission. ' Why you no give up that bad heart ? 
It will do you no good to keep it. It will destroy 
you for ever. Give it up noiv to Christ. Christ 
ready to give you a new, a good heart. Me hope 
me have given my bad heart to him. Me hope 
me have a new one. 0, sir, do give up your bad 
heart.' 

<; I told him I wished I could, but it was so hard 
I could not : something was in the way, I did not 
know what. 

** This excuse did not satisfy him. It only led 
him to press home with more earnestness the 
duty of immediately giving up my bad heart to 
Christ. 

" I felt so distressed, I begged him to pray for 
me. This was the first time in my life that I ever 
had made such a request, and the very asking him 
to pray for me deepened my impressions. It came 
to my mind immediately, ' What, must you, a gos- 
pel-hardened rebel, call in to your help the prayers 
of a poor Marquesan, who has but just been con- 
verted from the worship of idols ? He has just 
now heard of Christ, and received him as his Sav- 
iour ; you have heard of him for years, and have 



124 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

been slighting his salvation, despising his offers of 
mercy, trampling on his blood, and grieving his 
Spirit.' These reflections were like daggers to my 
soul. 

" Thomas promised to pray for me, but left me 
saying, ' O, sir, give up that bad heart now.' This 
sentence was the most powerful sermon I ever 
heard ; it contained the eloquence of the Spirit ; 
and coming in the way it did, with an expression 
of the most tender pity and concern, left an im- 
pression on my mind which, I trust, will never -be 
effaced. I have always considered his earnest 
exhortation to me at that time, as the principal 
means in the hand of God of my conversion?' 

In March, 1823, Mr. Page accompanied Patoo to 
the foreign mission school, then in operation in Corn- 
wall, Connecticut, where he hoped to become quali- 
fied to return as a messenger of Christ to his native 
islands. On the 30th of March he thus wrote to 
Mr. Page : 

"My dear Christian Friend — I have received 
your very kind letter, and am now happy to answei 
it. One of my brothers writes for me, because I 
can't write well enough yet. I tell him what to 
write, so the word be some like Thomas. I very 
glad the great G-od in heaven make the Coventry 
people pray for poor heathen where there is no 



SKETCH OF T. H. PATOO. 125 

Saviour. I think they pray for me too, that I be 
prepared to tell the heathen all about the great 
God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ. I rejoice a 
great deal to hear about sinner come to Christ 
and get a new heart. I hope the good work con- 
tinue always among you, so I rejoice always. The 
people here have no revival — no pray enough. I 
sorry; I hope we pray enough by and by. We 
have good many meetings, but no feel. 

u I hope I go home by and by, and have sinner 
come to God in my country. Yes, my dear Mr. 
Page, / go, if I live to be ready. We have some 
scholars no love the Saviour. I tell them they 
must be born again or go to hell. I talk to some 
sinner all about they no come to Christ. I tell 
them I come away from heathen land, and find a 
good Saviour : they been here so long, and no come 
to Christ. You must pray a great deal for poor 
sinners in Cornwall school. May be we have a 
revival here. 

"I must close now. I think I pray every day 
for you and all my friends. The great God bless 
you and make you do good while you live ; and 
when you and I die, may we meet and shake hand 
in heaven, and stay always with our Saviour and 
all who love him. 

61 Your true friend, 

"PATOO." 



126 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

This promising youth, in the mysterious provi- 
dence of God, was called, on the 9th of June fol- 
lowing, to join the lamented Henry Obookiah in 
a better world. As he stood with Mr. Page over 
Obookiah's grave, in Cornwall, three months be- 
fore, he said, with great solemnity, "May be, I lie 
here too." He remained steadfast, and in sickness 
and death gave delightful evidence of divine sup- 
port. Further particulars may be learned from the 
memoir, which is published by the American Tract 
Society. 

In the journey to Cornwall with Patoo, Mr. Page 
passed a Sabbath in Torringford with the venerable 
father of Samuel J. Mills, whose name is so dear 
to all the friends of missions. He attended the 
religious meetings of the congregation ; and feel- 
ing a deep interest that the work of God should be 
revived among them, he, on returning to Coventry, 
engaged Christians to pray for them, and wrote to 
the family of Mr. Mills an affectionate letter. 

In their reply, they say, "We hope we shall 
ever have reason for gratitude that Providence 
directed your steps here, and gave you an opportu- 
nity to address this people. There seemed to be a 
general impression that day, that God was about to 
visit us again. Christians began to feel that they 
must sleep no longer, and that something must be 



MISSION-ROOM, ANDOVER. 127 

done. The next Sabbath evening, though the 
weather was very unfavorable, five of the breth- 
ren called unexpectedly to spend a little season in 
prayer, and we have not, for many months, wit- 
nessed so much solemnity. Last evening we had 
twice the number, and evidently increasing fervor, 
and one instance of awakening was reported. 

" We mention these circumstances that you may 
know our state, as you manifested a deep interest 
in our spiritual welfare ; and to engage a renewed 
interest in your prayers." 



128 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 



CHAPTER VI. 

CLOSE OF HIS LABORS IN COVENTRY. 

In the summer of 1823 he had another violent 
attack of fever, with a renewed inflammation of 
the liver, by which he was brought, as he and 
those around him supposed, to the last moments 
of life. " He was calm," says one who watched 
at his bedside, "but did not receive such measures 
of grace as were imparted to him when God's time 
had come for him to die." Thus did his heavenly 
Father see fit again to discipline him for further 
usefulness. 

On regaining essentially his health, he was in- 
duced to direct his attention chiefly to the business 
of engraving, which led to his being employed for 
a time by the American Tract Society, then exist- 
ing at Boston, the business of which was chiefly 
conducted at Andover. "We find him, on the 17th 
July, 1824, in the museum of the " Society of In- 
quiry respecting Missions, in the Theological Semi- 
nary at Andover," writing a description of some of 
the interesting objects before him, for the benefit 
of the Sabbath- school he had left in Coventry. 



MISSION-ROOM, ANDOVER. 129 

To the Members of the First Sabbath-school Class. 
" Missionary Room, Theol. Sem., Andover. 

" My dear Friends — With no less than six gods 
of the heathen before me, I am now seated to re- 
deem my pledge of a letter. One of these gods is 
from the Sandwich Islands, and was worshipped 
by Tamahamaha, the king; and though larger, is 
similar to the one in New Haven, a picture of 
which you have seen. 

" The remainder are Hindoo gods. One from 
Bengal is in the form of a man, about twelve inches 
high, painted white, with tinsel around the shoul- 
ders, waist, wrists, and ancles, having the appear- 
ance of gold and silver, with red and green colors 
intermingled. Its hair resembles the fibres of the 
black ostrich feather, and on its head is a small 
cap. It would, in short, make a beautiful doll*; 
yet this is none other than the famous god Vishnu, 
which human beings like ourselves worship. 

" The next is Krishnu the god of music, a favor- 
ite god of the Indian women. It is about ten inches 
in height, perfectly black, and with its arms in the 
position of playing on an instrument. 

" The other three are brass, five or six inches 
high, representing the god Vishnu in different in- 
carnations. The head and body are like a man 
with four arms, while the lower part of one termi- 
nates in a fish, and of another in a tortoise. In such 



130 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

odious forms the Hindoos believe their gods de- 
scended to the earth. How is it possible that the 
mind of man can be so debased as to pay homage 
to such horrid objects ? 

" I now turn with pleasure to the ollas, or palm 
leaves, on which are written the gospels of Matthew 
and Mark in Cingalese, presented by our mission- 
aries in Ceylon. The leaves are about fourteen 
inches long and two wide, straight and smooth, 
written very handsomely on both sides, in per- 
fectly straight lines. Perhaps these two gospels 
fill one hundred and fifty of the leaves, which are 
connected by strings passing through them, so that 
they can be opened and read, or folded very com- 
pactly together in a small bundle. Another is 
'Devout meditations in Tamul,' written on the olla 
by a native convert of Swartz, and is used as a 
school-book on the Malabar coast. It was pre- 
sented by Christian David, from whom we have 
had many interesting communications. 

" I next look at the earnings which were given 
by Catharine Brown to aid the Palestine mission, 
and were redeemed by some ladies and placed 
here ; valued at sixteen dollars. Happy would it 
be, should many of our females cast their useless 
ornaments into the treasury of the Lord. By this 
means alone, many now enveloped in pagan dark- 
ness might be brought to rejoice in the light and 



MISSION-ROOM, AND0VER. 131 

salvation of our God. Catharine ivorked ivhile it 
was day, and is now gone to her rest. 

" I here see also a twig from a tree over the 
grave of Harriet Newell. Though her precious 
dust there moulders in a pagan land, she will never 
regret — no, never — her sacrifices for a perishing 
world. 

" While sitting here, I cannot but reflect on the^ 
deplorable condition of those who have not the 
gospel. Contrast our situation with theirs, and it 
seems a paradise. Let us do all in our power, that 
the news of a Saviour may be soon extended to 
every corner of the globe. 

" I left you, my friends, with regret. I hope you 
are all making advances in holiness, as well as in 
divine knowledge. Live not, my friends, as do 
others. Be eminently devoted to God. Let the 
lukewarm Christian be reproved when he beholds 
your life, and the impenitent sinner plainly discern 
the difference between ' him that serveth God and 
him that serveth him not.' Then will your life be 
happy, and at death you shall enter into the joy of 
your Lord. 

" A work of grace seems to be silently in prog- 
ress in this place, and a powerful revival has re- 
cently commenced in Salem. Pray for me. 
" Your affectionate friend, 

"H. PAOE." 



132 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

To a young lady of a family in which he some 
weeks resided, he wrote the following awakening 
note : 

"Sabbath Evening, September 19, 1824. 

" My friend M. lives, I fear, alas, without hope, 
and without God in the world. No title to a heav- 
enly inheritance ; no Saviour to cheer her in sor- 
row ; none on whom to lean when nature is dis- 
solving ; none to welcome her to the abodes of the 
blessed ! 

" Is such the deplorable state of the friend I am 
addressing? Ah, M., your prospects are gloomy 
indeed. A few more days of delay, and your pro- 
bation is closed ; hope dies ; and a long eternity will 
echo and reecho, Wrath to come — wrath to come. 

" The less feeling you may have on this subject, 
the more alarming your condition. Up, then, M., 
and flee for life. There is not a moment to be 
lost. While you wait, your sins are increasing ; 
the Saviour is rejected; the Holy Spirit resisted; 
and there is reason to fear he will leave you for 
ever. Now, what is your decision ? What course, 
M., will you take ? Now salvation is offered. The 
door of mercy is open, after so many years spent in 
sin. Come, I entreat you, as a penitent prodigal, 
and cast yourself on the mercy of an injured and 
bleeding Saviour. 

" Your friend and well-wisher, «h. PAGE." 



AT COVENTRY. 133 

The following is the last letter which has come 
to hand, written previous to his leaving Coventry : 

To c. B. 

"Coventry, Friday, P. M., Nov. 26, 1824. 

"As I take my pen, I call to mind that once you 
indulged the hope that you were a friend of God, 
and even contemplated uniting with the visible 
church. What, C, is now the state of your soul? 

" Am I then addressing an impenitent sinner ? 
If so, what shall I say? The exhortations you 
received while under the strivings of the Spirit, 
can hardly have ceased ringing in your ears. The 
threatenings of Jehovah and a long catalogue of 
sins still lie against you. An opening eternity and 
a judgment-day are just before you — and here you 
live on the forbearance of God, with no Saviour to 
befriend you, and no Holy Spirit to console you ; 
and all your life, through fear of death, subject to 
bondage. Your case, my friend, is deplorable in- 
deed ; and in view of it, what will you do ? Will 
you still give no listening ear to the tender expos- 
tulations of a dying Saviour ? Will you continue 
to grieve that holy Comforter by whose influence 
alone you can be saved? Will you not stop, C, 
and make the interests of your soul the first object 
of your life ? Wait not for another revival of re- 
ligion. Before it shall arrive the monument of 



134 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

death may tell the passing stranger, 'Here lies 

C. B.' Now is your best, perhaps your only time. 

Let me affectionately urge you, by all the motives 

which can be drawn from heaven, earth, and hell, 

to escape for your life. After waiting so long, 

Christ is still willing to receive you as a humble 

penitent trusting in his mercy, and in no other 

character can you ever be saved. Methinks while 

you read you will come to the resolution, that let 

others do what they will, you 'will serve the 

Lord.' Do you resolve thus ? God and yourself 

only know. 

" Affectionately yours, 

"H. PAG-E." 

Mr. Page's connection with the Tract Society at 
Boston, led to his appointment as Depositary of the 
American Tract Society, formed at New York in 
the spring of 1825. A few items of his history 
previous to his leaving his native place, remain yet 
to be gathered. 

" During the eight years that he passed under 
my ministry," says his respected pastor, " he ex- 
hibited much decision of religious character, and 
much zeal and activity in the cause of Christ. 
Uncontrollable providences only could keep him 
from the house of God, where he performed a 
prominent part in his praises, and in the instruc- 



LABORS AT COVENTRY. 135 

tion of the Sabbath-school. Very few sermons 
were preached on the Sabbath or on weekdays 
which he did not hear, and the plans of which he 
did not preserve in writing. In seasons of the 
special outpouring of the Holy Spirit, he was one 
of the first to ' hear a sound of going in the tops of 
the mulberry-trees,' and to bestir himself. He 
was in the conference and prayer-meetings, and 
his voice was heard in earnest supplication for the 
conversion of sinners. 

" He would converse faithfully with the careless, 
and search out and report to the pastor those who 
were seriously impressed. In the examination of 
candidates for admission to the church, not itnfre- 
quent references were made to his conversation as a 
means of awakening their attention ; and there is 
evidence that he contributed an important instru- 
mentality in the conversion of many sinners. In 
seasons of spiritual declension, he did not feel that 
direct efforts for the conversion of men might be 
omitted ; and though few attended the prayer-meet- 
ings, he was sure to be one. If a little company 
united in concert prayer, or private prayer, he was 
among them. For a long period, three or four breth- 
ren, of whom he was one, devoted one evening in 
each week to prayer in the meeting-house, where, 
in secret, and without light for the natural eye, 
they supplicated the descent of the Spirit. Neither 



136 iilFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

the members of the church nor the pastor knew of 
the meeting, till, at the approach of winter, it was 
transferred to his study ; they received a large 
accession to their number, were cheered with the 
special presence of the Comforter, and it proved the 
commencement of an interesting revival of religion 

" In seasons of stupidity, brother Page found in- 
dividuals in whose spiritual welfare he manifested 
much interest by conversing and praying with 
them ; and his labors in this respect were not in 
vain in the Lord. From the time of his conver- 
sion so long as a resident here, he was ardent, 
active, and untiring; this characterizes the man; 
and his efforts were principally directed to one 
object, the conversion of 'sinners ." 

A valuable friend, Mr. D. W., who was very 
intimate with Mr. Page, says, that at the close of 
religious meetings, his mind v/ould often become 
intensely fixed upon the conversion of some impeni- 
tent individual. He would address the individual 
with great solemnity, urging an immediate compli- 
ance with the terms of the gospel ; and as his friend 
accompanied him homewards, such was sometimes 
the pressure upon his heart, that they would seek 
a retired spot, and there, even in the depth of 
winter, kneel and plead with God for the person's 
salvation. His anxiety for individuals was fre- 
quently such that he could not rest, but would 



LABORS AT COVENTRY. 137 

leave his business to seek an interview with them, 
or address them by letter or pray for them. Many 
of these efforts were so retired that his wife came 
to the knowledge of them only as he alluded to 
them in their private supplications to God. 

" At social interviews," says the same friend, 
" when a number of relatives met, and God and 
the value of the soul seemed to be forgotten, he 
would sometimes beckon to me, and we would go 
out, seek a place of retirement, and join in prayer 
for some perishing sinner ; and then return to the 
company under the hallowed influence of such an 
exercise." 

Captain T., a few days after his death, with 
tears fast flowing down his cheeks, bore witness to 
his fidelity to souls ; and added, " But for the efforts 
of Mr. Page and a dear Christian friend of his, my 
soul, to all human view, must have been lost." 

Rev. M. B. says, "I was attending Mr. Page's 
school when he became a Christian, and never 
shall I forget how he talked to us with tears, and 
prayed with us. It was then that my mind was 
first seriously impressed" 

Mr. D. N. says, Mr. Page's faithful conversation, 
as they were on the way to a prayer-meeting, was 
the means of tearing from him a false hope, and 
bringing him at length, as he trusts, to the saving 
knowledge of Christ. 



138 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

Another estimable friend, Mr. C. T., says, "His 
Christian character was unusually even, and unu- 
sually elevated. He deeply sympathized with those 
in affliction and trials, and was ever ready to 
minister to their necessities, and contribute to 
their comfort. But his great object was to benefit 
the sotd, to bring the impenitent to Christ, and to 
awaken and quicken the people of God. I have 
often heard persons in relating their religious ex- 
ercises say, ' Mr. Page's conversation first led me 
to think seriously of my soul and eternity.' 

" There was an interesting little meeting," al- 
luded to above by the pastor, " of which I think 
he was the mover, in which a few brethren, re- 
siding four or five miles apart, united in secret for 
prayer, and which was continued for about two 
years. They conversed, they wept, they prayed. 
He encouraged them to persevere, occasionally 
selected particular individuals as subjects of unit- 
ed prayer, and sometimes would earnestly inquire, 
' Is there any thing whereby we cannot be agreed 
in this thing ? Is there any unkind feeling among 
us ? What is it that hinders the blessing V And 
this course was pursued till God appeared in the 
salvation of sinners. 

" Many, very many with whom he conversed 
and prayed were impressed at different times, little 
being known of his efforts for them till their hope- 



LEAVING COVENTRY 139 

ful conversion. His anxiety for them was often 
very great. He was distressed for them. From 
time to time he would say to a Christian brother, 
4 Pray for such a one ;' and it seemed that he could 
not give over till they were brought to repentance, 
and sometimes almost that he must sink unless 
they were converted. 

" He loved those who reflected the image of 
Christ, and to pray and weep and rejoice with 
them. I have just met a brother who said, ' Were 
I to recall former scenes, I could tell many times 
when I have kneeled down alone with brother 
Page to pray.' " 

One consideration that satisfied his mind of the 
propriety of changing his sphere of effort was, that 
he could think of no young person ivithin the bounds 
of the congregation — and the young he ever con- 
sidered as, under God, the hope of the church — 
whom he had not seriously addressed, either person- 
ally or by letter, on the subject of their salvation. 
Many of them had already united with the church, 
while others had become apparently insensible to 
the motives of the gospel. 

We have taken some pains to ascertain the sub- 
sequent history of the several individuals to whom 
the moving appeals inserted or referred to above 
were addressed, and the initials of many of whom 



140 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

are given; and though, four or five have continued 
still far from God, and two or three who appeared 
to run well for a time have faltered in their course, 
and the subsequent history of several is unknown, 
yet upwards of thirty are recognized who have 
either hopefully died in Christ, or still live adorn- 
ing their profession of faith in him. 

A reference has also been made to lists of schol- 
ars belonging to the two schools in Coventry taught 
by Mr. Page, one for five and the other for two 
winters, being one hundred and ninety-five in all, 
the history of seventy of whom is unknown, and of 
the remaining one hundred and twenty-five, eighty- 
four are thought to have given evidence of piety, 
and six are preachers of the gospel. 

It is probable that his efforts for individuals were 
the means of increasing the obduracy of some, and 
of exciting in others a degree of personal hostility. 
The danger of both these results he seriously con- 
sidered, and scrupulously endeavored to direct all 
his efforts with that kindness and discretion which 
should give no just occasion for either. But he 
came to the deliberate conclusion, that if he would 
be truly faithful, such results could not be wholly 
avoided ; and made up his mind to do what the 
claims of God and of perishing souls required, leav- 
ing the results with him. 

To withhold the truths of the gospel because 



LEAVING COVENTRY. 141 

they may be perverted, would be to stop the mouth 
of every minister, and prevent the circulation of 
the pure word of God itself. " We," says the great 
apostle to the Gentiles, " are a sweet savor of 
Christ in them that are saved, and in them that 
perish. To the one we are the savor of death unto 
death, and to the other a savor of life unto life." 
Such is the effect of the gospel in every form in 
which it can be presented, though by " an angel 
from heaven ;" and in the mind of Him who com- 
manded it to be " preached to every creature," it 
constitutes no objection and no excuse for neglect 
of duty in any one, from the preacher addressing 
the great congregation, to the Bible and Tract 
distributer, the Sabbath-school teacher, and the 
humblest Christian who speaks a word to one of 
his fellow-men for Christ and eternity. 



142 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 



CHAPTER VII. 

FROM THE TIME OF HIS CONNECTION WITH THE 
AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY TO THE REVIVAL 
OF 1831— EMBRACING THE PERIOD OF THE SIG- 
NAL DISPLAYS OF DIVINE GRACE IN THE TRACT 
AND BIBLE HOUSES. 

We now follow our brother into a new sphere 
of action — a plain and humble Christian, a stranger 
in a large city full of display and dissipation and 
crime, and with his hands full of responsible labor 
for a public institution. 

Being appointed Agent of the General Depos- 
itory of the American Tract Society, formed at 
New York in 1825, he arrived in that city October 
1 Oth of that year. He had a few months before been 
spending some time in Norwich, Conn., in drawing 
and engraving, and was strongly inclined to com- 
ply with a request to locate himself there ; but he 
felt that the opening for usefulness in connection 
with the American Tract Society was such that 
he " could not conscientiously decline it." He had 
visited the city, and the responsibilities involved 
with the question whether his family could live on 
the compensation proposed caused him to pass a 



NEW FIELD OF LABOR. 143 

sleepless night, till the text, " Trust in the Lord 
and do good, so shalt thou divell in the land, and 
verily thou shalt be fed" resolved his doubts, and 
he determined to follow the indications of Provi- 
dence and commit his way to him. 

The pressure of duty of which he speaks in the 
following letter rested upon him henceforward till 
his death, rendering his future correspondence 
comparatively brief, and confined to the points of 
practical interest which had at the moment the 
strongest hold on his mind. 

"New York, July 11, 1826. 

" Honored and dear Parents — I can write only 
a few hasty lines. My time is all so occupied that 
I can devote very little to friends, far less than I 
could desire, even to my dear father and mother. 

" Cousin H. P. left us last week for Troy, on her 
way to Vermont. She is an interesting girl. Since 
she came here, I think there has been a material 
change in her character. She once thought that 
she lived in the enjoyment of religion, but grieved 
the Spirit, and for a long time neglected prayer. 
I think now there are many favorable indications 
in her case. 

" I have lately taken the superintendence of a 
branch Sunday-school, connected with the Central 



144 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

church in Broome-street ; the old school to retain 
one hundred and fifty scholars, and mine to be in- 
creased till they are equal, and then add to both. 
"We have two large and commodious rooms, and 
hope both schools, if we can get teachers, will soon 
embrace five hundred scholars. I don't know but I 
am taking too much upon me, but the request was 
so urgent that I could not deny it. With divine 
influence, it is a great field for usefulness. 

" I heard that a Wednesday evening prayer- 
meeting was attended in Coventry, and that but 
three male members were present besides Rev. Mr. 
C. Alas, how fallen! Is he not almost discour- 
aged ? Shall there be no ' Aarons and Hurs ' to 
hold up his hands ? 

" Your affectionate son, 

"H. PAGE." 

Just before leaving his family, the young lady 
above alluded to wrote him a letter, expressing 
her sense of the dangerous condition in which she 
had been living, and her need of divine grace and 
strength to keep her from falling, and adds the 
grateful acknowledgment, 

" I feel, cousin H., that you have been an instru- 
ment in the hand of God of awakening me, and 
directing me to a throne of mercy ; and could I 
approach it in an acceptable manner, I know you 
would be amply rewarded for all the anxiety you 



AT NEW YORK. 145 

liave felt on my account. I beg of you still to pray 
the Lord to have mercy upon me, to give me a 
sense of sin, to guard me against temptation, and 
to forgive and receive me." 

From Troy she again wrote hirn a full letter, 
describing her religious feelings, thanking him for 
his fidelity, and asking his prayers ; and soon pro- 
ceeded on her way to Vermont ; but before arriv- 
ing at the place of her destination, she was called 
to her eternal state. 

On the 15th September, one of the officers of the 
church in Coventry wrote him, bewailing the 
prevalent declension in religion. " The vacancy 
caused by your removal," he adds, " is not filled. 
Many who used to lead in our prayer-meetings are 
removed ; others have retired, and the efficient, 
energetic members of the church are greatly dimin- 
ished ; yet I hope there are some who are mourn- 
ing over the desolations of Zion." 

In a letter from Mr. Page to his parents, Decem- 
ber 15, he gives the following items : 

" Last evening we had the male and female chil- 
dren of our two Sabbath-schools arranged in the 
church, each side of the middle aisle, filling the 
slips from the pulpit to the door ; one hundred and 
thirty-four boys and nearly as many girls, with forty 

Page. 10 



146 LIFE OF HARLAN'PAGE. 

teachers, were present. Hev. Mr. J. addressed 
them, and commanded the strictest attention. 

" We have at this time a great press of busi- 
ness . Within a little more than a week I have 
sent off, for different parts of our country, not far 
from 1,700,000 pages of tracts. Should each tract 
be accompanied by the divine blessing in sancti- 
fying and saving a soul, what an amount of good 
would be effected !" 

We cannot but feel grateful for a few such let- 
ters as the following, addressed to his beloved 
parents ; detailing with childlike simplicity, as a 
means of rendering them content that he should 
be absent from them, some of the indications that 
God was blessing his efforts. 

"Sabbath Evening, 10 o'clock, March 11, 1827. 

" My dear Parents — Expecting an opportunity 
to send to-morrow, I improve a few moments to 
speak of the goodness of God to us, and of some 
interesting things which have recently occurred. 

" O. R. K. arrived on Thursday. I hoped to hear 
by him of a powerful revival of religion in Coven- 
try, and that many of my acquaintance were sub- 
jects of it ; but I am disappointed. What can be 
the cause ? Why is not the church awake ? Is 
any darling sin of more value than immortal souls ? 
I will however give thanks, that some have been 



TRACT AND BIBLE HOUSES. 147 

born into the kingdom of Christ. Remember me 
with much affection to them all. 

" Besides a press of labor at the depository, I have 
my hands full of business more directly connected 
with the welfare of souls. 

" In the Sabbath-school under my charge are 
about twenty teachers, one half of whom were, not 
long since, without hope. Six of that number, 
promising young men, now give evidence of piety, 
and the remainder, I think, are unusually serious. 
One of the little boys I found to-day to be distressed 
for his sins, though the scholars in general are very 
careless. The school to-day consisted of one hun- 
dred and sixty-two boys. In the female school 
there have also been some conversions. 

11 A teachers 1 r prayer-meetingY&& been held week- 
ly for both schools, and has been very solemn and 
interesting. At the last meeting about thirty were 
present. In sustaining this, considerable respon- 
sibility rests upon me. 

" In the congregation too, a wide field for effort 
is open, and there are very few efficient male 
members of the church. About fifteen attended 
the last inquiry-meeting ; a number were deeply 
affected. There have been several instances of 
conversion besides those mentioned above. 

' ' In the Tract and Bible houses we have lately 
had a season of uncommon interest. A work of 



148 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

grace commenced a few weeks since among the 
young women employed in the two houses in fold- 
ing and stitching Bibles and Tracts, as the fruits of 
which we now number about sixteen hopeful con- 
versions. It has been a most interesting and won- 
derful display of God's power and grace. On one 
day seven of them hope that they were brought 
from nature's darkness into the light and liberty of 
the gospel. That was one of the most interesting 
days of my life. Twice or thrice I was sent for to 
pray with them, and to take the hand of those who 
had just been brought to bow at the Saviour's feet, 
while with tears streaming from their eyes, they 
expressed the hope that they had surrendered 
themselves entirely to Him. Two of these had 
thought that I talked too severely, and discouraged 
them ; they now wished to thank me for the very 
efforts in their behalf, of which they had before 
complained. To see those who were brought to 
hope in Christ clinging around their former com- 
panions in sin, and with tears beseeching them to 
come at once to the Saviour they had found so 
precious, was enough to move a heart of stone. I 
could say much more ; but this must suffice. It 
was indeed the wonderful power of God. This 
week we design to have a general meeting for all 
employed in both houses, male and female, and 
hope God has still greater blessings in store. The 



AN INTERESTING DAY. 149 

meetings have hitherto been sustained chiefly by 
those connected with the societies, and an active 
Christian who resides near. 

" I say these things that you may see that I 
have a field in which I may labor to good advan- 
tage ; whether I enter it with all my heart is an- 
other question. 

" My love to my dear sister. 

" Your affectionate son, 

"H. PAGE." 

We well remember the day above alluded to. 
A glow of heavenly ardor burned in our brother's 
countenance ; and when attempting to pursue his 
accustomed business, his mind seemed scarcely to 
know how his hands were employed. His inmost 
spirit seemed on fire with love to souls, and joy 
and exultation in the triumphs of divine grace. 
"Never before," said he, "have I so sensibly felt 
the presence of the Spirit, or the force of those 
words, ' Stand still, and see the salvation of the 
Lord.' " 

In a letter to his parents, August 21, 1827, he 
expresses great alarm at the pi'evalence of iniquity 
and infidelity in the city, and mentions that a club 
of infidels regularly assembled on Sabbath evening, 
in a spacious room, where their principles were 
inculcated in every alluring and deceptive form 
upon the minds of hundreds. 



150 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

" Pray for us," he proceeds. " Were it not that 
the Lord of hosts is jealous for his own glory, we 
should have nothing to expect hut to see the wicked 
triumph. When will God's people put on the har- 
ness ? 

" I have "been exerting myself to have a numher 
of theological students engaged among the poor and 
destitute of the city during their vacations. The 
Central church will employ one or two. It is be- 
lieved that not far from 100,000 inhabitants of this 
city attend on no regular religious instruction. I 
ask again, pray for us. We need now forty mis- 
sionaries with the zeal of Paul, to proclaim God's 
truth to these perishing multitudes. But no per- 
severing energetic means are yet adopted to obtain 
any. v 

The facts concerning the infidel meetings above 
referred to, Mr. Page at this time carefully col- 
lected and published in the religious papers, as an 
incitement to Christians generally to redouble their 
exertions. 

One of the four individuals who so long met in con- 
cert for private prayer at Coventry, writes to Mr. 
Page, August 25, that he had just attended a prayer- 
meeting at his father's, where his children were 
present on a visit, and adds, " While pleading for 
them, my heart was very much enlarged ; I seemed 



LETTER TO COVENTRY, 151 

to climb up near to my heavenly Father ; and call- 
ing to mind the many, how many precious sea- 
sons I had spent in retirement with you and my 
two other friends, in pouring out our supplications 
•especially for our children, I seemed to * travail in 
birth' for them, till Christ should 'be formed in 
them ' the hope of glory." 

To this letter he replied as follows : 

" Thursday Evening, New York, Sept. 13. 

" My dear Brother — Your very kind and fra- 
ternal letter almost overwhelmed us. You know, 
my dear brother, the tender chords of a parent's 
heart, and the thrilling sensations produced when 
they are made to vibrate by the efforts and prayers 
of Christian friends, who feel for the salvation of 
our children. As you described the scene at my 
father's, and showed me my dear brethren pleading 
for the souls of my children, I could only weep with 
gratitude, that some supplications had arisen for 
them from those who stood near the mercy-seat. 
You will, I trust, remember them still. You are 
not forgotten in some of our little praying circles. 

u I was pained at your description of the prayer- 
meeting, where no male member of the church but 
yourself was present. That wretched sentiment, 
which releases Christians from moral obligation 
during harvest-time, you know I could never away 
with. Give my love to all the little circle; and 



152 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

though we meet not again here, may we meet in 

heaven. 

" Your affectionate friend and brother, 

"EL PAG-E." 

Under date of November 4, 1827, we have a- 
letter from Mr. J. EL, then at Mobile, which pre- 
sents another example of the fidelity of Mr. Page 
to the members of his own household. Mrs. H. was 
residing in the family of Mr. Page, and had writ- 
ten to her husband of his fidelity in warning, in- 
structing, and praying for her, and of the joy and 
peace she then had in believing in Jesus. Mr. 
Page had also written him to confirm the joyful 
tidings. The deep emotions of the husband arc 
poured out in a full sheet. 

" It is impossible," he says, "to express the emo- 
tions awakened by your truly affectionate letter. My 
heart is so full that I scarcely know how to thank 
you for all your goodness to me, and above all for 
what you. have done for my companion. 0, my 
dear sir, what must be your happiness to have been 
the instrument in the hands of the Holy Spirit in 
bringing peace to the soul of our beloved A. Her 
whole mind seems bent upon one theme — the love 
of Christ.' 

The following is another evidence of the various 
methods he adopted to awaken the attention of 
individuals to the concerns of eternity. 



TO A LADY. 153 

LINES RECEIVED BY A LADY UNCOMMONLY SKIL- 
FUL ON THE HARP AND THE PIANO. 

" Permit a stranger to express the delight with 
which, in the stillness of the evening, he has paused 
to listen to those notes which have been so sweetly, 
so plaintively, or so wildly obedient to the skill of 
your fingers and the emotions of your soul. Par- 
don me if I express some of the reflections awakened 
in my own mind. 

" ' Alas,' thought I, 4 those fingers which pro- 
duce such thrilling emotions will soon be motion- 
less in death. Those keys will no more tremble 
at their touch ; those notes will be hushed to 
silence ; and the steps of the stranger be no more 
arrested except by a plaintive dirge from some 
friend of her who sleeps in death. "What then 
will be her state ? Is her heart now prepared to 
sing the song which none but the redeemed can 
sing? Are her sins forgiven ? Is Christ, the bleed- 
ing Lamb, her chief beloved ? This to me is all 
unknown.' 

" That you may be one of the performers in that 
grand chorus, which ascribes ' blessing and honor 
and power to Him that sitteth upon the throne, 
and to the Lamb for ever and ever,' is the earnest 
prayer of an affectionate friend, who will probably 
be personally unknown to you until the judgment 
of the great day." 



154 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

To Ms parents he writes, December 5, " The 
Lord is again doing wonders in the Bible and Tract 
houses. The work of grace seemed to commence 
anew about three weeks since, and more than 
tiventy have recently indulged the hope that they 
have been born of God. We have indeed passed 
through interesting scenes during this period. Last 
Thursday was observed by a number of us as a day 
of fasting and prayer. There has been one instance 
of hopeful conversion to-day." 

An estimable and pious young lady, Miss B., has 
informed the writer, that on becoming acquainted 
with Mr. Page, in 1827, he soon inquired if she 
was " a professor of religion ;" and' again, if she 
"had an interest in Christ;" if she u thought it 
desirable ;" if she "had sought to obtain it;" if she 
" had renounced the world, and resolved to live for 
the glory of God ;" could she " give him the reason 
why she had not." The impressions made on her 
mind by repeated conversations were such, that she 
could not rest till she found rest in Christ. " This 
result," she says, " I cannot but view as in answer 
to fervent prayer, and in fulfilment of the promise, 
' Them that honor me, I will honor.' His life was a 
living epistle. Often, to this day, has the solemn 
question, 'Are you a professor of religion?' warned 
me of danger, and summoned me to duty." 



TO HIS PARENTS. 155 

"New York, February 8, 1S28. 

" My dear Parents — We have felt much anxiety- 
respecting my father's health, fearing that God may- 
take him from us, and that it may be soon. 

" I know, my dear father, that I have done many- 
things which have tried your feelings, and that 
some of them have been inconsistent with filial 
duty and Christian character. These I would beg 
you to forgive; and while you continue here, cease 
not to remember me before the throne of grace, 
where we often attempt to present the wants of 
our dear parents, both for time and eternity. 

" I am now placed in circumstances more solemn 
than ever before, having been consecrated as an offi- 
cer in the church with which I am connected, by 
prayer and the laying on of hands ; and if I do not 
have help from God, instead of advancing, I shall 
only hinder his cause. The work of grace in our 
congregation is gradually progressing. Thirty-five 
were present at the last inquiry-meeting, and sev- 
eral have recently indulged hope, some of whom 
are teachers in my school. 

"Last evening we had a meeting, which all in 
the Bible and Tract houses, male and female, were 
invited to attend. It was very full and solemn. 
The day was observed by the females in the two 
houses as a day of prayer, and of special thanks- 
giving to God for what he has done for them the 



156 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

past year; it being just one year from last evening 
that the first prayer-meeting was attended with 
them. 

" Do write immediately. 

" Your affectionate son, «h. PAG-E." 

At this time, his pastor being ill, and there being 
an urgent call for ministerial labor, it was proposed 
to request Rev. Mr. C. to leave his charge in Cov- 
entry, and labor a few weeks in the city. In en- 
deavoring to induce the church with which he had 
formerly been connected to yield to his request, Mr. 
Page thus wrote, February 28 : 

" I do believe, that could the good people of 
Coventry come here and see for themselves the 
great want of such labor as Mr. C. could bestow — 
could they see the thousands here going down to 
the grave and to perdition without instruction, and 
so many as there are among us solemnly affected 
in view of their sins, I am sure they would be will- 
ing to make any sacrifice that the great work of 
salvation may not be retarded. There is another 
world than this. Pastor and people cannot he for 
ever together on earth — death will sunder the stron- 
gest ties ; and in heaven how must it enhance the 
joys of the blessed, that by means of their willing 
sacrifices here, multitudes have been prepared to 
unite with them in -songs for redeeming grace. I 



BRIGHT ANTICIPATIONS. 157 

hope the dear brethren will look at the subject 
with enlarged views, and pray over it, and be pre- 
pared to say, 'The will of the Lord be done.'" 

The following extract from a letter to his friend 
A. K., dated April 8, shows his ardent aspirations 
and hopes for the rapid extension of Christ's king- 
dom : 

" What, my dear brother, is the Lord about to 
do for our country and the world? What mean 
the interesting movements of the last half-year ? 
When I look at them and view the hand of God 
in them my heart warms, and I anticipate with 
astonishment the still more wonderful operations of 
his hand. This is indeed an eventful day. Every 
enterprise for Zion prospers. W r hat would once 
have occupied an age, is now performed as in a 
day. I rejoice, my dear brother, that you have 
girded on the harness, and placed yourself in the 
ranks of those who may lead numbers on to conflict 
and to victory. Be not dismayed. Even one on- 
set, if you never have strength to make another, 
may put to flight, in this day of God's power, an 
army of his enemies." 

The following day he was cheered by a letter 
from E. F. H., who, while a teacher in his Sab- 
bath-school, had been the subject of his deep anx- 
iety and faithful labors for his salvation, had ob- 



158 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

tained hope, united with the church, and was then 
a memher of Middlebury college, pursuing a course 
preparatory to the gospel ministry. 

" Blessed, thrice blessed," he says, " was that 
hour, when the Lord directed my steps to the Sab- 
bath-school, where I formed a friendship with one 
which I hope will continue to all eternity. Yes, 
dear brother, it was your kind voice that was the 
instrument, in the hand of God, of arresting a 
thoughtless wretch and leading him to the Saviour. 
Henceforth you need never fear to converse with 
the impenitent, even with the careless worldling. 
I would address myself to you as my spiritual father, 
and still seek from you that advice and direction 
which you will not refuse to give." 

"New York, April 18, 1828. 
" My dear Sister — I suppose you are occupied 
with the cares and concerns of your family and of 
this unsatisfying world, but let me ask, What are 
your prospects of a better state hereafter ? Will 
any future season be more favorable to secure that 
good part which shall never be taken from you ? 
my sister, what will you do should death arrive 
before your sins are forgiven ? No parent, or hus- 
band, or brother can then help you. Prayer will 
cease to be availing. The Saviour himself will be 
against you. All hope must retire for ever. 



TO HIS SISTER. 159 

" Are you clinging to an old hope which gives 
you composure, while you have no present evidence 
that your peace is made with God ? If so, aban- 
don it. Such a hope is often a prelude to a more 
awful, because unexpected doom. 

" Your children are rising around you, and they 
need a godly mother to pray with them and guide 
them to the Friend of sinners, and they may be 
for ever lost for want of such a guide. Ah, could 
you see them standing at the bar of Christ uncon- 
verted, through an affectionate mother's neglect of 
their souls, how would the scene rend your heart 
with anguish. 

" But I ivill hope better things. I will hope 
that they shall have a pious mother, and that 
speedily. May I not ? What will you reply ? 
God grant you may answer, 'Yes. From this hour 
I surrender myself to Christ. I will be his devoted 
follower. I will do all in my power for the salva- 
tion of my children, and for others, until my dying 
day ; and leave my soul with God, to dispose of 
me and all events according to his holy pleasure.' 
I have time to say no more. 

" Your affectionate brother, 

"H. PAGE." 

On the death of the father of Mrs. Page, Mr. Page 
wrote a letter of consolation to the surviving sis- 
ters, in which he says, 



160 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

a And now, my dear sisters, let us who remain 
awake to duty. A dying world is perishing around 
us ; lost sinners are daily entering the world of woe ; 
and have we done all we can to prevent it ? Have 
w r e done all we can for our impenitent relatives 
and friends ? Have we prayed for them and la- 
bored with them, as our consciences tell us we 
might have done ? If there is one impenitent indi- 
vidual within the circle of our influence, whom 
we have not done all we can to bring to Christ, 
let no time be lost, let us do our duty to that soul. 
Let us in all respects live and act as dying sinners 
who have to render to God a strict account of our 
stewardship. Thus doing, we may hope this solemn 
dispensation will be sanctified to us and others. " 

May 24th he wrote a kind and filial letter to his 
parents, expressing his ardent desire to be with 
them, and " smooth their way down the decline of 
life ;" tendering them temporal aid as they might 
need, and endeavoring to strengthen their faith ; 
to which he adds, 

" I should like to tell you of several interesting 
incidents of the present week, but have no time. 
Give thanks to God that such a worm is used for 
the benefit of any soul." 

His pastor having visited Europe for his health, 
Mr. Page, June 14, transmitted to him a narrative 
of what God had done for those employed in the 



SIGNAL SUCCESS. 161 

Tract and Bible houses, hoping that it might be 
used as an incitement to efforts for those similarly 
employed for the kindred institutions in London. 

In this communication he states that more than 
one hundred young women were then employed in 
the Tract and Bible houses, and that of these God 
had brought " between fifty and sixty hopefully into 
his kingdom. One of them was convicted by means 
of the truths which caught her eye while folding 
the tract, ' Day of Judgment.' " " Many sheets of 
the word of God and Tracts," he says, " as they 
have been folded and stitched, have been moist- 
ened with the tears of the convicted sinner and the 
broken-hearted penitent, and thence gone out on 
errands of mercy to a perishing world. Every day 
at twelve o'clock, the females of each of the two 
houses devole a part of their recess, in their retired 
rooms, to prayer and praise ; and on every Thurs- 
day evening we have a general meeting for prayer 
and conference, conducted by three or four breth- 
ren, the binder and printer of the two Societies 
cordially taking part in the same." 

A few days after this he states that the seam- 
stresses employed by Mrs. J., residing not far dis- 
tant, had also joined in the meetings of the Tract 
and Bible houses ; that he had personally conversed 
with several of them, and ih&t five of them had 
obtained hope in Christ. 

P»Kt. 1 1 



162 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

At this time lie was cheered with a letter from 
his endeared fellow-laborer in the Societies' houses, 
Mr. J. H. T. 5 who was then in the country, con- 
taining messages for their mutual charge ; exhort- 
ing those who were indulging a hope to examine 
well its foundation, and warning those who re- 
mained impenitent to " be timely wise." 

" Religion," he says, " is a personal thing, and 
let others do what they will, as for us, my dear 
brother, may we put on the whole armor of God 
and go forward. Although absent in body, I do 
not forget our friends in the Societies' houses. God 
has done much, yet there remaineth more to be 
accomplished, and we, as coworkers, have much 
land yet to possess. May He who has hitherto 
helped us still be our guide and stay, and then, if 
our faith fail not, we have nothing to fear. Tell 
our dear sisters in Christ to persevere like good 
soldiers of the cross, counting nothing too dear to 
part with for him. Tell anxious souls to make 
haste and escape for their lives ; submitting them- 
selves to Christ, and owning him as their rightful 
Sovereign and Lord. Say to careless sinners, ' How 
can ye escape, if ye neglect so great salvation V 
' Turn ye, turn ye ; why will ye die V " 

Having a desire to learn, as far as practicable, 
what are the lasting results of these efforts among 



SIGNAL SUCCESS. 163 

the females of the Societies' houses, a list of fifty- 
nine who obtained hope in Christ while the efforts 
above referred to continued, has been placed in the 
hands of the writer, one of whom soon died, and 
all the remaining fifty-eight have connected them- 
selves with evangelical churches : namely, thirteen 
with Protestant Episcopal churches, fourteen with 
Baptist churches, twenty-two with Presbyterian, 
five with Reformed Dutch, and four with Meth- 
odist churches. Five of these were among the 
seven mentioned March 11, 1827, as having ob- 
tained hope in one day ; and thirty-six gave by 
request each one a written narrative of her own 
religious exercises. 

It is an interesting fact, that though Mr. Page 
knew that those for whom he here labored were 
connected with different religious denominations, he 
neither knew nor wished to know to which most of 
the individuals respectively belonged. 

To Mrs. Page, then in Coventry. 
" Sabbath Evening, near ten, June 30, 1828 
" We have had a precious season to-day. The 
great Master of the feast has indeed been present 
with us at his table. Twenty-six, I think, united 
with the church from the world. Among them 
were five of the teachers of my Sabbath-school, 
and one who had been a teacher, with four or five 
scholars of the female school. 



164 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

" I have learned this evening, that Miss J., who 
has heen a thoughtless girl, and was this morning 
at church in great distress, has come out rejoicing; 
which is heart-rending to some of the family who 
are left. They were at our meeting this evening, 
borne down with a sense of sin ; and as I spoke to 
one of them, she sohbed aloud. God has heen in 
our meeting to-night. An awful solemnity has 
pervaded it. Brother D. and I held an inquiry- 
meeting for Sabbath scholars, at a quarter before 
seven. More than twenty were present, and some 
of them deeply affected. A. M. seems to feel in 
some degree her deplorable condition, and says her 
mind has been impressed ever since, 1 spoke to her 
a Sabbath or two since. God grant that she may 
flee to Christ. 

" In passing out of church this P. M., I remark- 
ed to Mr. M.. that I observed he was separated 
from his wife at the communion-season. He could 
hardly reply. I begged him, for his wife's sake, 
and for his own soul's sake, to seek an interest in 
Christ. He grasped my hand, and could hardly 
let me go. Miss C. appears to be wide awake in 
religion — a changed creature indeed. 

" My dear companion, let the fire be kindled in 
your own heart, if it is not already kindled there ; 
for we have a rising family all in their sins, and 
let us plead that they may not be passed by. 



SABBATH-SCHOOLS. 165 

" I yesterday visited the sick-bed of Mrs. C. It 
is sweet and refreshing to see one who feels that 
she may be on the borders of the grave, so calm, 
so united to her Saviour, and so sweetly reposing 
in his arms. 

" This same Comforter may be yours. He is 
alike ready to pour his consolations into the soul of 
all who will confide in him, and be his willing and 
obedient servants. You say there is something 
wrong in your heart : prostrate yourself at the foot 
of the cross, and let the bleeding love of a dying 
Saviour subdue and purify it. There only can its 
errors be corrected. 

" Your affectionate husband, 

"H. PAGE." 

July 15th, he writes to an intimate friend, " I 
cannot but bless God that in his providence he 
has placed me in this city, where there is so much 
opportunity, and so urgent a call to labor for souls. 
I assure you, I am never in ivant of something to 
do directly for this object. I dare not enlarge my 
sphere of effort. I am already attempting so much 
that it is but poorly done. 

" The Sabbath-schools are a most interesting field 
for Christian exertion. I have there, as it were, a 
family circle where we all feel at home. The im- 
portance of this department of effort daily increases 
in my view. When once we have the confidence 



166 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

of teachers and scholars, our influence with them 
is almost unbounded. God has done great things 
for us — how great, eternity only can disclose." 

To Mr. D. W., a friend in deep affliction. 

"New York, July 31, 1S28. 

" My dear Brother — Your heart has heen made 
to bleed ; but the wound, deep as it is, has been 
inflicted by a kind Father. He knew, my dear 
brother, what you needed ; and though it is most 
distressing, it still evinces his covenant faithful- 
ness. Your beloved companion and our sister has 
only passed over Jordan a little before us, and 
waits on the other shore a brief season, when all 
her friends whom Jesus loves shall be with her. 

" I know not by experience the pains you feel, 
but I know there is a Saviour, ' touched with the 
feeling of our infirmity,' who can and will give con- 
solation to all who stay themselves on him. Let 
us, dear brother, feel that we have no abiding city 
here. If our 'light afflictions ' wean us from the 
world, and make us more obedient and faithful and 
humble, we may have confidence that they shall 
' work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory.' 

" The Lord, in tender mercy, is among us by 
his Spirit, and I trust a work is commencing 
which shall shake, in due time, this whole city. 



TO HIS PARENTS. 167 

How blessed to labor in the service of such a Mas- 
ter as ours, and how animating to see sinners com- 
ing home to God. 

" I hope that you will have evidence that your 
trials are sanctified by your greater activity in our 
Lord's service. Don't let any with whom you may 
have influence, go down to perdition without your 
faithful and persevering efforts to save them. 

" My love to your dear children. Tell them 
they must be born again, or they and their dear 
mother will be separated for ever. 

" Your affectionate a,nd sympathizing brother, 

«H. PAGE." 

" Saturday Evening, New York, Jan. 3, 1829. 

"My dear Father and Mother — I often think 
of you in this excessively cold weather, and hope 
you are not left to suffer. 

" What is the church doing in Coventry ? Are 
they acting in full view of the approaching day of 
account ? If they were, I think we should oftener 
hear of the conversion of sinners there. When 
will the church awake, and make religion their 
business? This great concern must not be crowded 
into an obscure corner, and the world permitted to 
occupy the whole ground. No ; religion is a busi- 
ness for eternity ; and he that does not make it the 
principal thing, must suffer immense loss, and will 
perhaps ruin his soul for ever. 



168 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

" Prospects with us are still encouraging. One 

hundred and, eight have united with our church 

the past year; seventy-six of them by profession. 

A special interest is now awakened for heads of 

families ', whom we hope to see bowing to the 

sceptre of Immanuel. 

" Your affectionate son, 

"H. PA&E." 

To A. K., who had just entered on the ministry 
in Ohio, he wrote, January 8th, 

"I trust, that when this reaches you, you will be 
publishing the messages of our ascended Saviour 
to lost men. 'Lo, I am with you always/ is a 
blessed promise. I cannot but feel that our mis- 
sionaries at the West, if they are faithful, will 
gather fruit, precious and abundant. The fields 
are white, and it appears to me that God is about 
to do wonders for that portion of our land. The 
thousands of prayers which have entered into the 
ears of the Lord of sabaolh must be answered. 
He will make his truth powerful and effectual. I 
think you have been sent out at a most important 
period of our history — that it is truly the day of 
enterprise for enlightening our destitute millions ; 
and that salvation is soon to be the song of multi- 
tudes who have long lived in sin." 

A letter dated Columbus, Ohio, February 3, from 
F. E. R., a young gentleman who had been teacher 



TRACT VISITATION. 169 

in his Sabbath- school, says, " The emotions which 
swell my bosom as I attempt to address you are 
such as I cannot describe. My heart is filled with 
gratitude to God that he once placed me under 
your particular care, and that there I ivas led to 
embrace Christ as my friend and portion." 

In a letter to his parents, March 6, he says, 
" We have now commenced presenting a Tract 
monthly to all the families of the city in which 
they are cordially received. The Tract for March 
is on the Sabbath, and that for April on Intemper- 
ance. This I think will prove one of the most in- 
teresting enterprises in which Christians of our city 
have ever been engaged. It will bring them to 
see and feel the moral wants of our neglected pop- 
ulation, and the Lord, I trust, will prosper it." 

" The Spirit of God is again moving among the 
young women in the Bible house. Two are under 
pungent convictions who have been peculiarly 
hardened." 

June 23d, he says, " "We have had an inquiry- 
meeting this evening, which I attended alone ; 
eight present, and some cases of deep conviction. 
There is now unusual solemnity among the boys in 
my Sabbath-school. God grant it may not be like 
* the morning cloud and early dew.' " 

To his parents he wrote, February 17, 1830, 
mentioning an illness of about ten days, " For six 



170 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

hours," he says, "I was in agonizing pain ; and 
obtained relief only by the most powerful medical 
assistance. I am confident these are chastisements 
I need, though I fear they have not produced the 
desirable effect, I have been neglecting duty, and 
become cold in m,y religious services and affections. 
that I might live as expecting to end my pilgrim- 
age and render up my final account to God." 

To a friend in deep affliction he writes, Septem- 
ber 14, "You are not left alone. The Lord Jesus 
Christ has said, 'I will never leave thee, nor for- 
sake thee.' Though all earthly friends should fail 
and die, that blessed promise, ' I will never leave 
thee] is better than all." 

On Sabbath, October 10, he had the satisfaction 
of seeing his eldest son, with whom, in his deep 
anxiety and distress for his sins, both father and 
mother had some months before spent the greater 
part of one whole night in prayer, publicly conse- 
crating himself to the service of Christ by uniting 
with his visible church. 

The following letter shows that such a pleasure 
was soon renewed. 

''New York, December 14, 1830. 

" My dear Parents — I have now the satisfaction 
to inform you that E., our only daitghter, has pub- 
licly professed her faith in Christ, and I hope she 



TO HIS PARENTS. 171 

may be a humble follower of him through evil re- 
port and through good report, and be an honor to 
the Christian name. If she has really become a 
child of God, how infinitely better than all the 
blessings that earth can yield. Sixteen others united 
with the church last Sabbath by profession. 

" My love and thanks to friends and neighbors 
for their kindness during my father's sickness. We 
are all of us, parents and children, nearing our 
long home ; and soon, if we are the real followers 
of Christ, we shall be at rest. Let us all prepare, 
and look, and wait for it, that the hour of our 
transfer come not unawares. 

" Your affectionate son, 

"H. PAGE." 



172 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

FROM THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE REVIVAL OF 
1S31 TO HIS LAST SICKNE SS — EMBRACING RE- 
SULTS OF HIS SABBATH-SCHOOL, HIS SUPERIN- 
TENDENCE OF CHRISTIAN EFFORT CONNECTED 
WITH TRACT DISTRIBUTION, AND THE TRANS- 
FER OF HIS LABORS TO A NEW CHURCH. 

To Rev. A. K., Ohio. 

"New York, January 24, 1831. 
u My dear Brother, — The Lord appears now to 
be coming down on all parts of this great city, to 
arouse his children and to awaken sinners. Thou- 
sands of Christians here are, I think, praying as 
they never prayed before. Public general meet- 
ings commenced yesterday afternoon, and are to be 
continued through the week. Conversions are oc- 
curring in all parts of the city. Churches and 
ministers of different denominations are beginning 
to awake. Meetings for inquiry were held in sev- 
eral churches on Monday evening, and were very 
encouraging. Stout-hearted men are brought to 
bow, as well as youth and children. "We tremble 
lest by our unfaithfulness or other sins we shall 
impede the work and grieve the Spirit of God. 
Churches are daily crowded to overflowing, and a 
most fixed and solemn attention is given to the 
dispensation of the truth. 

"Your affectionate brother, «H. PAGE." 



TO HIS PARENTS. 173 

" New York, Tuesday, February 1, 1831. 

" My dear Parents — Though brother S. will 
tell you much from us, yet I cannot forego the 
privilege of giving you some notice, with my own 
hand, of what God is doing here. His children 
are awaking; many are giving up their former 
hope ; thousands I think are wrestling for the gen- 
eral descent of the Holy Spirit. Prayer-meetings 
at daybreak are held in various parts of the city, 
where Christians seem to agonize for the blessing. 
Ministers are seeing eye to eye. Meetings are 
crowded and awfully solemn. They were held 
daily last week, and they commence again to-day. 
Sinners are awakened, and many have been con- 
verted. I have heard from several inquiry-meet- 
ings held last evening. They were full, and there 
were a number of cases of hopeful conversion. 
The severe storm did not prevent attendance. We 
are expecting, my dear parents, that God is about 
in a signal manner to shake this whole city, and 
to him shall be all the glory. 

" One year ago, had we been told of what we 
even now see, we should have said, ' If God should 
open the windows of heaven, can such a thing be V 
Two of the teachers of my Sabbath-school, broth- 
ers, were hopefully converted the past week, and 
several of the scholars are deeply impressed. 

"A. case occurred last week of special encourage- 



174 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

merit to praying parents. At the close of the after- 
noon exercises, a meeting for religious inquirers 
was held in the lecture-room, and a few professors 
who lived at a distance stayed in the church till the 
evening service. Among them were two mothers, 
who though strangers to each other, agreed to go 
to a retired pew, and spend the season in prayer. 
As the question arose what they should pray for, 
one said, 'I have a daughter who has no hope.' 
The other replied, ' So have I an only daughter, 
and she is now in the inquiry-meeting, and we will 
pray for them.' They kneeled, and while they 
were still praying one of the daughters came, 
found her mother, and as soon as she could do it 
without interrupting her, took her by the hand, 
saying, ' 0, my mother, I hope I have found Christ 
to be precious.' They all knelt again in prayer, 
and offered their united thanksgiving to God. The 
other daughter was hopefully converted on the 
following day.^ 

" Several very interesting cases have occurred, 
but I cannot communicate them now. We expect 
God will do great things among us this week. 

" Do beg my dear friends at Coventry to let all 
their energies be awake, for we trust the kingdom 

* A note dated March 7, says, : ' Both of these daughters 
were yesterday, as I have understood, to be united to the two 
churches of which their parents are members." 



REVIVAL OF 1831. 175 

of heaven is at hand. Let them ' prepare the 
way ' of the Lord, that no stumbling-blocks hinder 
the conversion of sinners. My love to all who 
love the Lord Jesus. 

" Your affectionate son, 

U H. PAG-E." 

Mr. A. R., then agent of the American Tract 
Society at Boston, acknowledges a letter from Mr. 
Page, dated February 28, of which he says, 

" The facts it contained, showing the efficacy of 
prayer and the power of divine grace manifested in 
the conversion of so many in one family, are truly 
striking and exceedingly encouraging to Christians. 
I read the letter in our church on Sabbath even- 
ing. This evening Rev. Mr. G.'s church will hear 
the same ; and I intend to have extracts read in 
all our churches. That letter, I ardently believe, 
will be instrumental of good among us." 

In a letter, dated Sabbath evening, April 3, he 
says, " This day has been one of unusual interest 
in our church. Our pastor was never more direct 
and earnest in his appeals. He seemed to have 
aid from on high. Text in the morning, ' Go thy 
way for this time.' His object was to show that 
sinners feel that God has devolved on them the 
responsibility of choosing whether they will accept 
of Christ. Afternoon, ' Their feet shall slide in due 
time.' The assembly was solemn, and the appeal 



176 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE/ 

urgent and powerful. This evening, the meeting 
has also been crowded and very solemn." 

It is truly a painful fact, that this is all that 
remains from the brother's pen, of his labors, pray- 
ers, and success, during by far the most signal 
revival of religion ever enjoyed in New York; and 
as the fruits of which, there was an accession to 
evangelical churches of about tivo thousand souls. 
His whole soul was on fire from week to week. 
Besides the routine of his official duties, he attend- 
ed the prayer-meetings at daybreak ; visited many 
individuals at intervals during the day, introduc- 
ing at once the subject of religion, making a short 
prayer with them, and giving them the instruction 
he thought best adapted to their state ; almost 
every evening he was in a religious meeting, and 
generally expending all the powers of his mind 
and heart for the eternal welfare of some individu- 
als he there met ; the spiritual welfare of his own 
children and household, and of more than two 
hundred teachers and scholars in his Sabbath- 
school, pressed upon his heart ; and the full meas- 
ure of his powers was employed, that, while the 
Holy Spirit was descending, not a sheaf of the 
spiritual harvest should be lost. His mind and his 
movements were rapid. The chain of communi- 
cation from his own to others' hearts was bright. 



FAILURE OF HEALTH. 177 

His feelings were thrown out into a prayer-meet- 
ing or a Sabbath-school, or in visiting families or 
individuals, almost instantaneously, as soon as his 
lips were opened ; he accomplished very much in 
the space of a. day; and in the ardor of his efforts, 
while having a spirit of prayer, and seeing the 
displays of divine grace, it was impossible for 
him coolly to sit down and calculate whether his 
strength of body could long endure the continual 
drafts made upon it. A few days hence might be 
the season for relaxing his endeavors; but now 
was the season of effort, and that now was, with 
him, almost perpetual. 

As the warm season approached, and brought with 
it accumulated labors for the society he served, he 
found that his incessant effort had exceeded his 
bodily strength, and occasioned a renewed inaction 
of the liver, accompanied by a slight bleeding at 
the lungs, which nothing but repose could restore, 
and which for several weeks confined him chiefly 
to his room. 

In this state of health, he felt compelled, on May 
14th, to tender his resignation as superintendent of 
the Sabbath-school, to the duties of which station 
he had consecrated his vigorous and persevering 
efforts for nearly five years, and with the most 
encouraging success. 

Among the means of usefulness in this sphere, 

?*£& 1 2 



178 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

he had formed a Sabbath-school Temperance So- 
ciety, though he had no knowledge that such an 
experiment had then been made ; and he had at 
length the pleasure to have enrolled the names of 
thirty -tivo teachers, and one hundred and eighty male 
pupils, as subscribers to the temperance pledge. 

Finding that many of the boys were profane, 
he also made assiduous endeavors to correct that 
evil ; frequently calling on all to give testimony 
by rising, whether they had sworn during the 
week, and using all possible means to induce them 
to reverence the name of God. His report on this 
subject states, that whereas three-fourths of the 
boys had formerly been profane, he. had reason to 
believe that only a few hardened individuals per- 
sisted in the sin. 

The sins of lying and of Sabbath-breaking among 
them, he also labored perseveringly to correct ; and 
frequently held meetings of such as were serious, 
at his own house, for conversation and prayer. Es- 
pecially did the religious welfare of the teachers, 
many of whom, in the earlier part of his connection 
with the school, were not pious, engage his ardent 
endeavors ; and during the period that he acted as 
superintendent, thirty-tivo male teachers hopefully 
embraced Christ and united with the church, nine 
of whom have entered on a course preparatory 
to the ministry. Another teacher, Mr. It. 0. D., 



VISITS COVENTRY. 179 

whose heart was knit with his in this labor of love, 
became a preacher of the gospel, and consecrated 
himself to the work of a missionary in India. 

Though devoting his efforts more immediately as 
superintendent of the large male Sabbath-school, 
the female school was- also under his general su- 
pervision. In a communication to the female teach- 
ers at the time of his resignation, he says, "I would 
gratefully acknowledge the loving-kindness of our 
God, in permitting me to be associated so long with 
such a band of Christ's friends ; and allowing me 
to witness the hopeful turning to him oi from fifty 
to sixty or more teacher s % connected with our two 
schools, and several of the scholars, all of whom I 
hope to meet at last in the great assembly of the 
redeemed in heaven." 

As soon as he so far regained his health that 
he could leave the city, he repaired to Coventry, 
where he spent several weeks of rest from every 
effort beyond the degree of exercise on horseback 
and otherwise, which was essential to his most 
rapid restoration. 

During this season of relaxation, he amused him- 
self by drawing sketches of various scenes in the 
place of his nativity, among which he did not omit 
the humble dwelling where he had spent near 
thirty-four years of his life, and where, at the period 
of his death, his aged parents still resided. The 



180 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

sketch is a fac-similc of the house, the joiner's shop, 
and the surrounding objects. After his return to 
New York, at the request of one who had often 
attended the meetings in the societies' houses, he 
copied it into her album ; and as the claims of 
poetry were alike unheeded by both, he threw un- 
derneath it the following lines : 

"Here, a child, I sinned and strayed; 
Here, the Saviour disobeyed; 
Here, I felt his chast'ning rod; 
Here, I trust, returned to God." 

In reference to his illness, he wrote to Mrs. Page, 
" We have great occasion to speak of the goodness 
of God to us. We have hardly as yet been called 
to 'run with the footmen.' Let us see to it, that 
we secure a divine helper to sustain us when called 
to • contend with horses,' and meet the ' swellings 
of Jordan.' " 

A letter to a relative, October 11, contains the 
following passage : 

" Has M. indeed done all lie can do? Let him 
then fall at the feet of Jesus, and tell Him so. Let 
him tell him that he would love him, that he 
would submit to him, that he would be sorry for 
his sins, that he would be an obedient child ; but 
he cannot. 0, how unwilling the sinner is to con- 
fess all the guilt which the word of God imputes 



TO HIS SON. 181 

to him, and to acknowledge himself justly con- 
demned." 

In December, his eldest son, who had for five 
years been associated with him in labors for the 
Tract Society, having expressed a desire to study 
with a view to the ministry, he placed him in the 
academy at Andover, Massachusetts ; accompany- 
ing his farewell with the following paternal coun- 
sel : 

"New York, December, 1831. 

" My dear Son — As you have now entered on 
a very important period of life, and are about to be 
separated from home, you will gratefully receive a 
few hints from your affectionate father. 

u Let it be your first object — for without this, all 
other acquirements will be in vain — to be a hum- 
ble, holy, consistent Christian, till death shall sep- 
arate you from all earthly scenes and responsibil- 
ities. 

" By uniform kindness and propriety of deport- 
ment, endeavor to merit the love and respect of 
all. Never indulge a spirit of retaliation. Yield 
a cheerful obedience to the requisitions of your in- 
structors ; join no combination for resisting author- 
ity ; and mingle with no companions whose repu- 
tation you would not wish to share. 

" Be careful of your health, if you would ac 
complish any thing of moment for yourself or the 



182 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

world ; govern your appetite ; have regular hours 
for sleep and exercise. Do not place too much 
confidence in a vigorous constitution ; it will not 
long be trifled with with impunity. 

" The Bible should be your daily text-book ; and 
according to the request of your mother, endeavor 
also to read every day a portion of Baxter's Saints' 
Rest, or some kindred author, and to form your 
life by such models. If your studies will permit, 
always have some useful book in a regular course 
of reading. 

"In your religious duties, as in every thing else, 
system will be necessary. Let nothing prevent 
your holding communion with God, on your knees 
in your closet, at least twice every day. Meditate 
there, as well as read and pray. Daily prayer 
with your room-mate should be maintained, if 
agreeable to him ; but let not this be made a sub- 
stitute for closet prayer. Unite yourself with a 
select circle for social prayer and the cultivation 
of devotional feelings, and take part in the exer- 
cises when requested. In hearing preaching, guard 
against a spirit of criticism. Let the Sabbath be 
to you a holy day. Remember it as God would 
have you. 

"Keep constantly in mind, that the object of 
your education is to prepare you to do the greatest 
possible good ; and try to be useful every day. 






TRACT VISITATION. 183 

Think much of Christ, and commit your all to him. 
Go on, my son ; aim to be eminently holy and 
eminently useful ; and may the Holy Spirit guide 
and cheer and bless you. 

" Make confidants of your parents. None will 
sympathize with you like them. They will soon 
sleep in the dust. While they live, give them the 
consolation to believe that your heart is set on 
being and doing good ; and should you survive 
them, act and feel as you know they would have 
desired, and as God will approve. And when we 
all meet at the great day, may they and the uni- 
verse see that you have not lived in vain. 

"Your affectionate FATHER." 

Having resigned the superintendence of the Sab- 
bath-school, he labored, as he regained his health, 
to promote its interests by visiting to obtain schol- 
ars ; and about the beginning of the year 1832, 
commenced instructing a female Bible-class ?; and 
also yielded to earnest solicitations by assuming the 
superintendence of the system of Christian effort in 
connection ivith tract distribution in the Fourteenth 
ward, containing not far from three thousand fam- 
ilies, in which work he had the cooperation of 
thirty-six male and female tract visitors. 

They had not long pursued this enterprise, when 
he clearly saw, that as little more was done than 



184 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

to present a tract monthly to each family, there 
was no such direct, faithful, pe?so?ial, and perse- 
vering effort and ivrestling prayer for particular 
individuals, as duty to God and the souls of men 
demanded. At the meeting of his fellow-lahorers 
in January, he therefore laid the subject solemnly 
and earnestly before them, depicting the spiritual 
wants of the ward, and the condition of hundreds 
of families who absented themselves from the stated 
means of grace, and who, unless reached by their 
efforts, would probably never have the offers of 
salvation pressed on their attention. He urged 
their obligations to God and the souls of the per- 
ishing ; and then inquired of each distributer, 
whether there were not in his district some one or 
more individuals for whom he felt that there was 
special encouragement to labor, and to whose sal- 
vation he would direct his own devoted efforts and 
prayers, till he should have evidence of conversion 
or that the door of useful access was closed. It 
was made a subject of prayer and heart-searching 
with each distributer, till one fixed his mind on one 
individual, another on two, and another on three 
or more ; and by the thirty-six distributers eighty- 
eight individuals were thus selected as special sub- 
jects of their prayers and affectionate endeavors for 
their salvation. 

This gave them, as will be readily conceived, a 



VISIT TO A FAMILY. 1S5 

new impulse in their work. They saw a distinct 
object before them, important as eternity, and yet 
one in which they could do nothing without the 
marvellous displays of divine grace. They went 
to the throne of mercy. They went to the subjects 
of their affectionate solicitude, and their mouths 
were filled with arguments. Access was easy. 
The Spirit of God seemed to have gone before 
them, and to go with them. 

His duties as superintendent did not prevent him 
from taking a portion of this work regularly upon 
himself. An instance of the encouragement he 
met is recorded in the following letter. 

To Mrs. Page. 

"New York, June 21, 1832. 
" Last evening I closed up our efforts in the tract 
distribution for this month, and gave in my report. 
A few hours before the meeting, I found that a 
district of seventy-eight families had not been 
supplied ; and to complete the distribution for the 
ward, undertook to supply it myself. I found sev- 
eral whose minds were very tender, and on whom 
the truth seemed to make a deep impression. A 
young man and his ivife listened with fixed and 
trembling attention, as I conversed with them on 
the subject of their own personal salvation. Two 
pious females residing in the house soon joined the 



186 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

little circle, and we all knelt and endeavored to 
commit their case to Him who is able and willing 
to save. It was a solemn season, and our divine 
Redeemer seemed to manifest his special presence. 

" This morning I called on them again. I found 
both of them apparently trusting in the Saviour. 
They hoped they had surrendered themselves to 
him on the preceding evening. They had opened 
to each other freely the feelings of their hearts ; 
and had that morning erected the family altar, and 
were now determined to live together as fellow- 
heirs of the grace of life. 

" The husband of the woman who was thought 
last month to give evidence of conversion, is now 
also rejoicing with her, and they appear to be 
walking together in wisdom's paths. 

u Your very affectionate husband, 

"H. PAGE." 

During the prevalence of cholera in the city, 
in the summer of 1832, which at one period re- 
moved more than one hundred souls daily to eter- 
nity, we find Mr. Page not merely confiding him- 
self and family to the care of Providence, but 
laboring to improve the tenderness and concern 
existing in many, for their eternal good. 

" An unusual solemnity and readiness for relig- 
ious conversation," he says, "has prevailed; and 
not a few, while the pestilence has been raging 



TO TRACT LABORERS. 187 

Liaund them, have been deeply affected in view of 
their condition as sinners. Most Christians who 
have remained in the city, have exhibited a de- 
lightful trust in Christ as their all-sufficient refuge. 
Frequent occasions have offered, and been im- 
proved, for faithful conversation and prayer with 
those who were not accustomed to pray ; and I 
cannot but hope that the efforts of this season will 
result in the salvation of some precious souls. The 
tract on Cholera has been distributed throughout 
the city, and almost universally received with 
thankfulness." 

A memorandum bearing date February 7, 1833, 
contains the names oi fifty -nine individuals ob- 
tained by Mr. Page from the square in which he 
lived, as subscribers to the temperance pledge. 

An illness of some weeks occasioned the two 
following communications : 

To the Tract Missionaries of the Fourteenth Ward. 
"New York, February 18, 1833. 

"My dear Friends and Fellow-laborers — For 
several weeks unforeseen providences have pre- 
vented my cooperating with you as fully as I had 
intended, and I much regret that I am unable to 
meet you this evening. As I have not the satis- 
faction of seeing you all at our regular meetings, I 
lo&A determined to visit you at your own places of 



188 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

abode, that we might quicken and encourage each 
other, and unite in. imploring the blessing of God 
on our great and responsible work, but hitherto the 
Lord has prevented me. 

" Now, my dear friends, as you value the im- 
mortal soul, and the favor of our divine Leader, 
I would urge upon every one of you to enter on 
your duties with new zeal, new hopes, and new 
confidence in God. Endeavor to fix in your mind 
what it is to live for ever in heaven or in hell. 
How many who are living in utter neglect of God, 
and are reached by no other means of grace, must 
be left to perish if you are not faithful to them. 
How many, if you do your duty, may you meet at 
last on mount Zion, who shall bless God for ever 
that you found them when lost and wandering from 
him. 

" Fix it in your mind that you must not be sat- 
isfied, unless through your agency sinners are 
brought to repentance ; nor rest till you see each 
of your districts as a well-watered garden, and the 
reviving and saving influences of God's Spirit oper- 
ating in every family. I know that in some dis- 
tricts there are many things discouraging, but you 
must adopt the language of Paul, ' I can do all 
things through Christ which strengthened me.' 

" I do not think it Christian wisdom to expend 
all our strength on the darkest part of our respective 



TO HIS BIBLE-CLASS. 189 

fields ; there is soil which we may cultivate with 
the fairest prospect of success, and while each of 
us has so large a field let us labor principally ivhere 
there is the greatest encouragement, and there be 
faithful and persevering. 

" As all our strength comes from God, I would 
propose that in our morning and evening devotions 
every day for one week, we pray in concert for the 
outpouring of the Spirit on the families of the Four- 
teenth ward, and I wish you would express your 
determination on this subject by a vote at your 
meeting. 

" The Lord be with you, my dear friends, in all 
your labors, and give you many souls as your hire. 
Remember your superintendent, that he may be 
fitted for his work, have bodily strength, and be 
endued with wisdom from above. 

" Your affectionate fellow-laborer, 

"H. PAG-E." 

" Sabbath, March 8, 1833. 

" To the Female Bible-class — My dear friends, 
this is the fourth Sabbath that, in the providence 
of God, I have been deprived of the privilege of 
meeting you ; but I have not forgotten you, and I 
trust you remember some of those things to which 
your attention was called while I was with you. 

" In looking over my list of members, I find that 
ten of your number, as far as I know, are still in 



190 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

the dark way to eternal death, having none of the 
hopes and consolations of the gospel, and no title 
to the kingdom of heaven. 

" The object of this note is especially to urge 
you, in view of the alarming progress you have 
already made in sin, and of the dreadful end of all 
the ungodly, this day deliberately to make up your 
minds that henceforth you 'will serve the Lord.' 
Be blind and deaf to all the attractions, frowns, or 
reproaches of a gay and deceitful world, and reso- 
lutely set your faces towards heaven. 

" My friends, you must not deny me — me, did I 
say ? you must not deny Christ, who came ' to 
seek and to save' such lost sinners , as you and I. 
He entreats you, he bids you forsake all and follow 
him. 

"Here, my friends, though I cannot speak to you 
face to face, are the feelings of my heart. When 
we next meet, whether in this or another world, 
let me rejoice with you as having chosen that good 
part which shall never be taken from you. 
" Your affectionate friend, 

"H. PAGKE." 

"New York, March 13, 1S33. 

" My dear Parents — I am pained to hear by 

Mr. G. that you are so feeble, and that life seems 

so fast wasting away. As I may not have another 

opportunity of addressing you both this side of the 



TO HIS PARENTS. 191 

grave, I would inquire how the dark valley appears 
as you approach it? 

11 How does my dear mother feel under the dis- 
tressing pains of her disease ? Can she patiently 
and submissively say, ' It is the Lord ; let him do 
what seemeth him good?' Is she comforted with 
the reflection that he ' doth not afflict willingly, 
nor grieve the children of men?' Can she lean on 
that almighty arm which sustains all God's chil- 
dren in the last conflict ? Many, while enduring 
intense suffering of body, and about to take their 
departure, have found that 

c Jesus can make a dying bed 
Feel soft as downy pillows are.' 

In his hands, my dear mother, I leave you ; and 
though I may not again speak to you face to face 
here, I hope that after a little while we shall meet 
where pain and sorrow and sin are known no more 
for ever. 

" And now, my dear father, as flesh and heart 
fail, I trust God is * the strength of your heart,' 
and that your hope in him, through Christ, is 
steadfast. I know that to the impenitent sinner 
the near approach of death and eternity is an un- 
welcome theme, but not so to the saint. It is his 
delight to think and speak about home — that home 
which Christ has gone to prepare ; and thougn you 
and my dear mother may have almost finished youi 



192 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

journey here, I hope neither of you regret that its 
end is so near ; but that you can wait calmly and 
patiently till your change come, and then commit 
yourselves to Him who will safely bear you through 
the billows of death. 

"It is trying to me that I cannot be with you, 
but at present it is impracticable. I have been 
for some weeks confined at home by impaired 
health. The Lord has been gently correcting us. 
C. has had a violent attack of fever, and sister P. 
has left us, we trust, for a better world. But I feel 
assured that God has sent these chastisements in 
mercy, and hope they will bring us all nearer to 
him. The family send love, and may we all meet 
at last in the kingdom of our Redeemer. 
" Your affectionate son, 

"HARLAN PAGE." 

"New York, March 18, 1333. 

" My dear Son — I have been able to be at the 
Tract house but two days since early in February. 
My complaint commenced with chills, fever, and 
cough, occasioned by a congested state of the liver ; 
but by copious bleeding and other remedies the 
cough is removed, and I am now nearly restored. 

" I beseech you, my dear son, to remember, that 
you live in a day when all God's children must 
harness themselves for the great work of the Lord. 
Let no delusive claims of earth gain a hold upon 



CORRESPONDENCE. 193 

your affections. Go continually, as a humble, 
penitent sinner to Christ, and live for God and 
eternity. 

" The state of things in our church is more than 
commonly interesting. Nearly fifty attended the 
inquiry-meeting last evening. 

" Your affectionate father, 

"H. PAOE." 

May 30th, he says, " W. F. departed this life yes- 
terday, and his brother G. is almost gone. Their 
tender-hearted father said to me, that he had rather 
bury them both in a day, and have all his antici- 
pations of their speedily entering the ministry cut 
off, than to see one of them twenty-four years of 
age in health but impenitent." 

During the latter part of the spring, and the 
season of anniversaries, he was constantly pressed 
with business at the Depository, and early in the 
summer made a short visit to his parents for the 
last time. 

August 9th he says, " I do hope that some spir- 
itual life may be restored to the Christians of our 
church and city. I think there are some faint 
indications of pulsation with a few, though hardly 
perceptible. Sometimes I think I have evidence 
of the presence of God ; but alas, it is so indistinct 
that I hardly dare believe it to be true." 

Again, he says, " We have had an interesting 

Pag. 13 



194 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

church prayer-meeting this evening spent in con- 
versing with the members. We have sadly de- 
clined, and some are beginning to feel it. 

" I am now so pressed with business on all sides, 
that I can hardly find time to write even a few 
lines." 

In December, he says, " Those engaged in tract 
labors throughout the city, have just observed a day 
of fasting and prayer. The meetings were full and 
solemn, morning and afternoon; and in the even- 
ing a sermon was preached from, ' Ye are the salt 
of the earth,' showing that every Christian should 
make his influence individually and directly felt 
for the salvation of those around him. We have 
commenced meetings again in the bindery of the 
Bible house. On Friday evening about eighty were 
present, and a deep solemnity was apparent." 

"SatuPvDay Evening, January 25, 1834. 

" My deae. Parents — The Lord has in great 
kindness thus far preserved our health the present 
winter, for which I know we are not sufficiently 
thankful. There is an uncommon interest in relig- 
ion in several of the churches, in some of which it 
is hoped from thirty to sixty have been converted 
to God. 

" Monday Morning, Jan. 27. Since the above 
date, we have passed through scenes which will 
never be effaced from my memory. On Saturday 



AFFECTING SCENE. 195 

evening, C. and A.," (a niece,) " returned from meet- 
ing about nine. Nothing was said, and all were 
seated, when A. broke the silence by sobbing in 
great distress for her soul. The Holy Spirit had 
set her sins in order before her, and she was troub- 
led. We all felt that this invisible and blessed 
Agent was present ; and only C. could restrain his 
tears. I asked the sobbing child what was the 
cause of her distress. She replied that she was a 
great sinner against God. I endeavored to present 
Christ clearly to her mind as the Saviour of sin- 
ners, and show her her duty to humble herself at 
his feet, and yield herself without delay wholly to 
him. We all knelt and committed her case to 
God with strong crying and tears. It was hard to 
cease pleading till we had evidence that she had 
surrendered herself to Christ. But there seemed a 
reluctance to yield up all for him. After further 
conversation and prayer, Mrs. Page and myself re- 
tired to our chamber, where we again plead for 
her and the other children before God, and com- 
mitted ourselves to rest. 

" About one o'clock, A. came to our bedside, 
saying, ' I hope I have given my heart to Christ. 
I have been a very naughty girl. Do forgive me. 
I will love you now, and try to do as you wish to 
have me.' 

"On Sabbath morning, W.," (a nephew,) "was 



196 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

alarmed in view of his sins. "When he came from 
church at noon, he was overwhelmed. The family- 
were all in tears. We all fell on our knees and 
spent an hour in prayer, W. still sobbing and beg- 
ging for mercy. • 

" These scenes affected C. The most solemn 
attention to the concerns of their souls was mani- 
fested by him and W. at the meetings in the after- 
noon and evening, and during the remainder of the 
day ; and now both are hoping in Christ, and seem 
resolved to serve him alone. I hope for them with 
trembling. Time will determine whether the work 
is genuine. God grant that they may not be de- 
ceived. It will be wonderful grace, indeed, if these 
three children, from eleven to twelve years old, 
have all been born again ; but it is such grace as 
God in Christ can bestow. My dear parents, pray 
that the work of grace in them and in all of us, 
may be such as shall stand the test of the final 
day. 

" Your affectionate son, 

«H. PAGE." 

About this time an urgent application was made 
to him to unite in forming and sustaining the " Brain- 
erd church " in a very destitute part of the city — 
afterwards located in Rivington-street, and then 
in the Second avenue. He felt the force of the 
request; for he had well considered the moral 



BRAINERD CHURCH. 197 

desolations of the city, and prayed and wept over 
them. To his mind no duty was clearer or more 
important, than that members of the older churches, 
filled to a great extent with professors of religion, 
should separate, as fields of usefulness open, and go 
out to form new circles of religious influence. And 
if it was the duty of some, and others did not enlist 
in the enterprise, why should he not go himself? 
True, his health was already enfeebled, and the 
additional labor might crush him ; but he was not 
accustomed to spare himself, and made the sacri- 
fice, as he believed, at the call of duty. 

This transfer of his field of labor made it neces- 
sary that he should resign the superintendence of 
the tract distribution in the Fourteenth ward, which 
he did on the 12th of February ; " having felt," as 
he said, "more and more fully convinced of the com- 
pleteness of the plan of the tract mission, if but 
faithfully carried out by praying, self-denying, and 
devoted Christians ." 

In a scrap which he seems to have prepared as 
a memorandum for an address to tract distributers 
or missionaries, perhaps on their day of fasting 
and prayer in December, 1833, the following facts 
appear : 

From March, 1829, to January, 1832, only four 
cases of conversion were reported from the Four- 
teenth ward, three of which were by a blessing on 



198 LIFE OF HAltLAN PAGE. 

the reading of tracts. Little more was done than 
to present them from door to door; spiritual life 
was wanting ; and the laborers were becoming dis- 
heartened. 

Of the eighty-eight individuals for whose salva- 
tion the distributers, in January, 1832, resolved 
steadfastly to pray and labor, more than thirty 
were reported in February, as at least in some de- 
gree anxious for their souls, and three of the num- 
ber as rejoicing in God; in March, four; in April, 
six; in May, three; in June, six; and tivelve in the 
subsequent months ; making in all thirty-four hope- 
ful conversions from that ward within the year 1832. 
Of this number three or four were awakened by 
reading the tracts, and others apparently by means 
of the prayers and exhortations of the distributers. 
Many of the poor and afflicted people of God, for- 
saken by the world, had been found and comforted ; 
some backsliders reclaimed ; and the gospel mes- 
sage delivered to numbers who continued to disre- 
gard it. Many interesting instances of the blessing 
of God on these efforts are alluded to in the memo- 
randum ; and it is stated, that almost all of them 
are the cases of individuals who were scarcely 
reached by any other means of grace. 

The separation from the church with which he 
had been for eight years so happily and usefully 
connected, was indeed trying ; but he went to the 



SINGLENESS OF PURPOSE. 199 

new field of labor with the prayers and kindest 
wishes and sympathies of his brethren. 

" All the time he was with us," says the pastor, 
" he was a man of kind and peaceful spirit ; always 
grieved a.t dissension in the churches, and laboring 
to promote a spirit of love. 

" He was always prompt in action. "What he 
undertook we knew would be done, and well done ; 
and he was ready to any work to which the great 
Master called him — not shrinking from self-denial, 
nor asking to be excused. In our meetings of re- 
ligious inquiry, he was a safe and faithful laborer. 
Often would he seem to fix his heart intensely on 
the salvation of some individual ; and as he saw 
the prospect of good, would labor with him till the 
hour was gone, and then accompany him to his 
home, still toiling to remove obstacles from the 
mind and bring him to accept of Christ. 

" Many souls here owe their salvation, under God, 
to his faithful and persevering labors, in the prayer- 
meeting, in the Sabbath-school, in the Bible-class, 
and especially to his personal conversation and guid- 
ance in the Christian course. His eye was single. 
He had one definite object before him: it was not 
fame, or family, or ease, or pleasure — but to honor 
Christ in the salvation of men. This singleness of 
purpose made him skilful and prompt in adopting 
means, and was the grand secret of his success. 



200 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

" He left us to go to a new and unbroken field, 
where the toil of gathering a church was all to be 
borne anew ; but he felt that he was consecrated 
not to one particular church, but to Christ; and 
must go, and that cheerfully, at his bidding. With 
four such Aarons and Hurs to hold up his hands 
and cooperate with him, any faithful and qualified 
minister would be strong, under the blessing of 
God, for building up a new church." 

As a means of furthering the new enterprise, 
Mr. Page again assumed the responsibilities of su- 
perintendent of the Sabbath- school ; and put forth 
his devoted energies to bring the gospel, by all 
practicable means, to bear effectually on the sur- 
rounding population, old and young. His labors for 
the Tract Society were undiminished ; and it was 
scarcely to be expected that the constant pressure 
of his varied and ceaseless efforts, and the exhaust- 
ing excitement of mind continually connected with 
them, should not bring back that derangement of 
the vital organs from which he had repeatedly 
suffered. Under date of March 25, he thus writes 
to his parents : 

" These tabernacles of clay are wearing down, 
and will soon be demolished. How little should 
we depend upon them. If we are God's children, 
we have in prospect a more glorious body, where 



FAILURE OF HEALTH. 201 

all is filled with the fulness of God. Let us look 
much to it, and patiently wait for it." 

His strength was sustained till the results of the 
year in his department were prepared for the An- 
nual Report, and the immediate pressure of the 
anniversary season had subsided, when he found 
himself exhausted, was obliged to remit his exer- 
tions, and at the advice of his physician, spent 
several days at Saratoga springs, but with no 
improvement to his health. He returned to the 
city, and gradually declined till about the first of 
August, when it became apparent to himself and 
others, that his earthly labors, except from his dying 
bed, were closed. 

A brief letter to his son, June 4, concludes with 
these words : 

" Now I have done. Let no good resolutions 
be forgotten or neglected. Remember, remember 
duty — God — Christ — judgment — heaven — hell. 
" Your affectionate father, 

"H. PAGE." 

To his daughter he wrote from Troy, June 23, 
on his return from the springs, " I trust I had some 
special consolation last evening, in committing 
myself, my family, and all our concerns into the 
hands of that Redeemer whose long-suffering and 
mercy are without measure. He is doing with us 
what is infinitely best ; and we should not desire 



202 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

him to change his mode of discipline in any of its 
details." 

Two days later, he writes, " I have for some time 
been depressed in body and spirit, have felt many 
anxieties and solicitudes, and had but little com- 
munion with God. I think, however, that within 
a few days I have had a satisfaction in resigning 
all my concerns to the disposal of Him, who, I am 
confident, will pursue the best possible course of 
discipline, though often demanding strong faith, 
when the reasons of his dispensations are so en- 
tirely concealed. In order to be ripened for heav- 
en, I need a great deal of purification by the Holy 
Spirit. 

Of his labors in connection with the " Brainerd 
church," the young clergyman who commenced 
ministerial labors there, says, " His influence, while 
the Lord continued him with us, was excellent. 
He was alivays engaged — ahvays spiritual. His 
zeal seemed to suffer no declension ; it savored of 
the closet, of self-communion, of heaven. " He had 
a wonderful tact in conducting our prayer-meetings 
and making them interesting — always diversified, 
and yet always solemn. His remarks, though 
simple, were never commonplace. The point and 
spirit of them appeared to have been premeditated, 
and they were generally well adapted to the char- 
acter and condition of those present. In superin- 



LAST BUSINESS ITEM. 203 

tending the Sabbath-school, he would in a remark- 
able degree fix the attention of the children. He 
had also a happy talent for addressing strangers 
on the subject of personal religion; and after our 
meetings would almost always single out some in- 
dividual, and engage in close personal conversation. 
Several persons were in this way brought under 
conviction of sin, and some will have reason to 
bless God to eternity for his persevering faithful- 
ness. His loss we feel deeply. He loved those 
with whom he had here been laboring, and prayed 
for us on his dying bed. Our members were very 
much attached to him, and constantly and fer- 
vently prayed that his life might be spared, could 
it be consistent with the divine will." 

The last item of business to which he gave the 
least attention, was to look at the annexed sketch 
of one of the scenes of the labors of David Brain- 
erd. He had visited the spot, and drawn the 
sketch, and Dr. A., having engraved it on wood, 
called to present it, and see if it had his approba- 
tion. 

"I will look at it ; but I have done with every 
thing here." 

" You can cast your eye upon it now, and look 
at it again, perhaps, when you are stronger." 

" No ; I shall never look at it again. My work 
here is all done" 



204 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 



CHAPTER IX. 

PROMINENT CHARACTERISTICS OF HIS EFFORTS 
FOR THE SALVATION OF MEN. 

It may not be unimportant to bring together 
some of the characteristics of his efforts to honor 
Christ in the salvation of individuals, . as illus- 
trated in the preceding history. 

It was the burden of his heart, and the purpose 
of his life. When engaged in his usual business, 
the religious welfare of persons with whose state 
he had become acquainted, was generally pressing 
on his mind ; and it is. now known, that for several 
years before he died, he almost always had by him 
a memorandum of the names and residence of afeiv 
individuals with whom he was to converse. On 
these he would call, as he went to and from his 
office, or religious meetings ; and if no names were 
on this list, he felt that he was doing little good. 
He also uniformly had in his hat more or less 
awakening tracts, that he might present as he 
should judge them adapted to the state of those 
he met. Not unfrequently he would seize a few 
moments from his usual occupation, to go out and 
address some individual ; and when the business 
of the day was closed, he hastened to some meet- 



CHARACTER OF HIS EFFORTS. 205 

ing or other religious engagement for the evening. 
It is believed that an entire month has frequently 
elapsed, during which he did not sit down for an 
hour, even in the bosom of his own family, to relax 
his mind or rest. Every evidence of good accom- 
plished gave him new joy, and every opening for 
usefulness added a new impulse to his efforts. He 
felt that, under God, the eternal joy or woe of im- 
mortal souls depended on his fidelity. Each even- 
ing and each hour brought its duties which he felt 
could not be neglected or postponed. The present 
duty was still before him; and though " faint," 
he was still "pursuing." His labors on the Sab- 
bath were not less exhausting than on other 
days ; and he doubtless thus failed of obtaining 
that " compensation for toil " which the animal 
constitution requires, and which is essential to a 
long life. 

When urged, at the close of a day of fatigue, to 
spare himself and spend the evening at home, he 
would say, " Don't attempt to persuade me away 
from duty. I have motive enough within myself 
to tempt me to enjoy repose with my family, but 
that will not save souls." A little previous to his 
last sickness, as he returned from church coughing, 
he was asked if he had not spoken too much in 
the Sabbath-school. " Perhaps I have," he replied ; 
" but how could I help it, when all eyes were 



206 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

fixed, and the children seemed to devour every 
word I said?" 

It was not uncommon, at different periods of his 
life, for him in sleep to imagine himself addressing 
the impenitent ; and to wake in a high state of 
excitement and in tears, occasioned by the deep 
sympathy he felt for their perishing condition. It 
is also known, that when he saw no manifestations 
of the outpouring of the Holy Spirit, he would be, 
at times, in deep distress — would wrestle more 
abundantly in prayer, renew his efforts to arouse 
Christians to duty and awaken the impenitent ; and 
more or less conversions were almost always the 
result. 

In short, it was not the great object of his spir- 
itual life himself to be hapjiy in religion, but rather 
by persevering labors and holy self-denial, like the 
apostle who testified that he died daily, to glorify 
God in winning souls to him. He ardently desired 
to devote the whole undivided efforts of his life to 
this work ; and nothing but the duty of providing 
for the support of his family prevented it. 

He had the most clear view of the necessity to 
every man of being bom again. As soon as an 
individual came into his presence it seemed to be 
the first question of his mind, " Is this a friend or 
an enemy of God ?" The next thing was, if im- 
penitent, to do something for his conversion ; or if 



CHARACTER OF HIS EFFORTS. 207 

a Christian, to encourage him in duty. Whatever 
else he saw in an individual, he felt that it availed 
him nothing unless he had received Christ to his 
heart by a living faith. This he felt and urged to 
be the sinner's first, great, and only duty in which 
he could be acceptable to God. This was exem- 
plified at a meeting of his Sabbath-school teachers, 
when he called on each to know whether he 
thought he had a well-grounded hope in Christ or 
not, and recorded their several replies. Among 
them was an amiable young merchant, A. E., whom 
he highly respected, and who seemed not far from 
the kingdom of God. 

" Have you a hope ?" he tenderly inquired. 

" No, sir," was the reply. 

" Then I 'm to put down your name as having 
no hope ?" 

" Yes, sir.' 1 

"Well, I write down your name as having no 
hope." 

The young man pondered on this decision and 
record of his spiritual state, was troubled, and soon 
came to our brother, saying, "I told you to put me 
down as having no hope, but I can't say that." 
He is now a member of the church, and a decided 
supporter of all her institutions. 

He brought his efforts to bear upon individuals, 
and followed up impressions made. All the tri- 



208 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

umphs of the gospel he knew consist in the con- 
version and sanctiiication of individuals, and he 
was not satisfied with merely praying and contrib- 
uting for the salvation of the world as a whole, 
or having a general impression made on the minds 
of a congregation. His intense desire was that 
individuals should be turned from sin to God. Not 
unfrequently he would observe in the congregation 
a person unknown to him, who seemed to give 
solemn attention to divine truth, ascertain who he 
was, and seek a personal interview ; and in all 
cases, if he left an individual to-day in an inter- 
esting state of mind, he would endeavor to see him 
again to-morrow, and follow up the impression at 
brief intervals till there was no longer encourage- 
ment, or he had evidence of true conversion. 

He had a clear sense of obligation, both in the 
sinner to believe in Christ, and in the Christian to 
devote all his powers to God. He felt, and labored 
to make others feel, that if any one neglected duty 
the guilt was all his own ; that God was ever ready 
to receive the returning prodigal ; and that if any 
withheld their hearts, or aught they possessed from 
him, in the day of judgment they would be speech- 
less. This sense of obligation he urged with un- 
abating fervor. His heart was intent that it should 
he, felt, and immediately carried out in an entire 
consecration to God. 



CHARACTER OF HIS EFFORTS. 209 

" Brother," said he to a lovely Christian who 
watched with him, " when you meet impenitent 
sinners, don't merely say calmly, ' Friend, you are 
in danger ;' but approach them with a holy vio- 
lence, and labor to 'pull them out of the fire.' 
They are going to perdition. There is a heaven 
and a hell." 

As a brother from Boston to whom several of 
his letters were addressed, had called for a few 
moments in his last illness, and was about taking 
leave, he asked the dying man if he had any par- 
ticular thought on his mind to express as he bade 
him farewell. "Ah, I can say nothing," he replied, 
" but what has been repeated over and over ; but 
could I raise my voice to reach a congregation of 
sinners, I would tell them, ' their feet shall slide in 
due time' — they ' shall slide ' — there is no escape 
but by believing in Christ." 

He not only endeavored to alarm impenitent 
men, but to bring them to a decision, that they will 
be the Lord's. 

While in his native town, he was absent one 
evening till so late an hour that his wife remon- 
strated with him for unreasonably tasking his own 
health, and separating himself from home. "I 
have spent this time," said he, " in trying to per- 
suade your poor impenitent brother to give his 
heart to Christ." That impenitent brother was 

Page. 14 



210 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

soon brought to accept of mercy, pursued a course 
of theological study, and is now serving God in the 
ministry. 

On another occasion, while residing in the city 
of New York, he had gone to a religious meeting 
and returned late in the evening, when he was 
reminded of the danger that his protracted efforts 
might be more than he could ultimately sustain. 
"I have been standing this hour," was his reply, 
" at the corner of the street, laboring with Mr. 
E. F. H.," one of the teachers of his Sabbath- 
school, " and trying to persuade him to submit to 
God." "Within a few hours the young man found 
peace ; he soon resumed his studies which he had 
been pursuing for other ends, and he became a 
devoted minister of Christ, first at the West, and 
then in one of our principal Atlantic cities. A 
letter from this young clergyman, received as these 
sheets were going to press, thus confirms this brief 
statement. 

" The name of brother Page will ever be associ- 
ated in my mind with all that is worthy of imita- 
tion in the Christian character. By the persuasions 
of an acquaintance, I was induced to engage as 
teacher in his Sabbath-school, and though I was 
thc?n destitute of faith, he welcomed me and won 
my confidence and love. Very soon he began to 
address me with the utmost apparent tenderness 



CHARACTER OF HIS EFFORTS. 211 

and anxiety in reference to my own salvation. His 
words sunk deep into my heart. They were strange 
words, for though I had lived among professors of 
religion, he was the first ivho for nine or ten years 
had taken me by the hand and kindly asked, 'Are 
you a Christian V ' Do you intend to be a Chris- 
tian V ' Why not now V Each succeeding Sabbath 
brought him to me with anxious inquiries after my 
soul's health. On the third or fourth Sabbath he 
gave me the tract, ' Way to be Saved,' which deep- 
ened my impressions. At his request, I also at- 
tended a teacher's prayer-meeting conducted by 
him, where my soul was bowed down and groaned 
under the load of my guilt. At the close of the 
meeting Mr. Page took my arm as we proceeded 
on our way to our respective homes, and urged 
upon me the duty and privilege of an immediate 
surrender of my heart to Christ. As we were 
about to part he held my hand, and at the corner 
of the street, in a wintry night, stood pleading with 
me to repent of sin and submit to God. I returned 
to my home, and for the first time in many years 
bowed my knees in my chamber before God, and 
entered into a solemn covenant to serve him hence- 
forth in and through the gospel of his Son. God 
was pleased, I trust, by his Holy Spirit, to seal my 
vows. If I have since had any Christian joy, or 
done any thing to advance the cause of Christ, it 



212 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

is to be attributed to the divine blessing on the 
faithfulness of brother Page." 

He expected success from God through the bless- 
ing of the Holy Spirit in answer to prayer. He 
felt that humble, self-denying effort, made in God's 
strength, he ivoidd own and bless, but that for this 
he would be " inquired of" by his people. He 
loved prayer. Besides prayers at social meetings 
with the families and individuals he visited, and 
on special occasions frequently recurring, he regu- 
larly not only conducted family worship accompa- 
nied by singing, but every morning and evening 
prayed with his companion as they retired and 
rose, and also poured out his heart /to God alone in 
the closet. For the latter duty, when in his native 
place, he often retired to a consecrated spot in a 
grove near his father's house. If one of the house- 
hold were about to take a journey, the family 
assembled and commended each other to God, 
which was frequently done on other occasions of 
special interest. 

His prayers were usually short and fervent, and 
confined mainly to those topics which pressed with 
special force upon his mind. At all times, prayer 
seemed to be a privilege, and the throne of grace 
a resting-place and a solace to his heart. There 
is no doubt that it was by continual and fervent 
prayer, that he imbibed that glowing sense of eter- 



CHARACTER OF HIS EFFORTS. 213 

nal things, that love to souls and that heavenly 
unction which were at once the spring of his 
fidelity, and, under God, the ground of his suc- 
cess. 

So anxious was he that there should he more 
prayer in the churches, and such were his hopes 
that if the duty were properly presented, it would 
be felt and practised, that he united with a brother 
whose means were as limited as his own, in paying 
fifty dollars as a premium for a tract on prayer — 
himself drawing out minutely various hints to guide 
those who might write ; and it was by this means 
that the excellent tract, No. 271, on the obliga- 
tions, nature, benefits, and occasions of prayer, was 
procured. 

In his mind there was no jarring conflict between 
perfect obligation on the part of man, and perfect 
dependence in his relations to God. He knew both 
were revealed, momentous, eternal truths ; and left 
all embarrassing questions of their consistency to be 
settled by God himself. It was enough to hear 
God speak and to obey. He prayed as if all the 
efficiency and praise were God's, and labored as if 
duty were all his own. His sense of dependence 
threw him on his knees, and his sense of duty sum- 
moned him to effort ; and prayer and effort, and 
effort and prayer were the business of his life. 
Blessed day to the church, when this endless source 



214 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

of contention and controversy shall thus be settled 
in every Christian's heart. 

He was uniform and unicearied. I know not 
who has made or heard the charge of inconsistency 
in his Christian character. Those who knew him 
best, best knew how supreme in his heart was the 
business of glorifying God in the salvation of men. 
I have well considered the assertion when I say, 
that during nine years in which we were associ- 
ated in labors, I do not know that I ever passed an 
interview with him long enough to have any inter- 
change of thought and feeling, in which I did not 
receive from him an impulse heavenward — an im- 
pulse onward in duty to God and the souls of men. 
No assembly, even of professed Christians, from 
which the spirituality of religion teas excluded, 
whether met for social enjoyment or in furtherance 
of some benevolent design, received his counte- 
nance ; nor was he satisfied with what too justly 
seemed the strange anomaly of excluding Christ 
from the hours of social intercourse, and then, as 
it were atoning for the sin, by closing the interview 
with prayer. 

The only remaining particular which it seems 
important now to mention, is his fruitfulness in 

DEVISING EXPEDIENTS FOR DOING GOOD. Of this point 

the history of his life is but an exemplification. 
As the father of a family, he labored for the 



CHARACTER OF HIS EFFORTS. 215 

spiritual welfare of all his household, especially 
for the early conversion of his children. Of thir- 
teen individuals who resided in his family at dif- 
ferent times in the city of New York, twelve be- 
came deeply anxious for their salvation. One of 
these was a Roman-catholic, whose attention to 
family worship was forbidden by her priest ; one 
who was hopefully reclaimed from her backsliding, 
has since died ; and six others gave, and so far as 
known still give, evidence of saving conversion to 
God. Of his fidelity to his children, the testimony 
contained in the following expression of filial grat- 
itude from his son, in transmitting by request the 
letters he had received from his father, will be 
excused. 

" In reviewing the letters I received from my 
father," he says, " I see everywhere an expression 
of the tenderest solicitude both for my temporal 
and eternal welfare ; and Oh, for some of that ardent 
desire for the salvation of souls to bear me forward 
in duty, which impelled him onward, till he ceas- 
ed his toils on earth and entered on his rest in 
heaven. 

" I cannot refrain from bearing testimony to my 
father's fidelity to my own soul. Well do I remem- 
ber his endeavors in my early childhood to lead me 
to the Saviour — his prayers, his entreaties, and 
the anxiety with which he followed me year after 



216 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

year, while under the paternal roof and when 
away, till he could speak to me no more. His kind 
voice I shall no longer hear. His affectionate smile 
of approval, or tears shed over my waywardness, I 
shall no more see. His kind intercourse with the 
members of his family we shall no more share. 
He will no more call us around the hallowed family 
altar, and lead us in the hymn of praise and in pour- 
ing out the soul to God. He is in a more endeared, 
a happier and holier sphere, enjoying the smiles 
and presence of his God and Redeemer. Pray for 
me that I may have grace to follow his example 
as he followed Christ, and at last to unite in his 
songs." 

The above pages have sufficiently shown in what 
varied forms he rendered himself useful, as the 
teacher of a day-school, and in the relations he sus- 
tained to the Sabbath-school cause, and to the tract 
cause ; in Bible classes and in religious meetings ; 
to families and to individuals. The variety of 
efforts he made with his pen is equally striking. 
Not only did he address moving appeals to indi- 
viduals, but if a thought occurred which he judged 
to be of general interest, he embodied it in a few 
paragraphs and sent it for insertion in some relig- 
ious paper; and even if he inserted a scrap in an 
album, he improved the opportunity to direct the 
reader's mind to Christ, - 



CHARACTER OF HIS EFFORTS. 217 

In the temperance cause he enlisted with a whole 
heart as early as 1823; rejecting all that could 
intoxicate, as also tobacco in all its forms, and 
throwing an influence in a thousand ways to ex- 
tend the temperance reformation. 

Many pious young men were by him sought out 
and directed towards the ministry. 

To the cause of missio?is, both in our own and 
pagan lands, he was steadfastly devoted. He not 
only turned his eye away from the accumulation 
of property as the object of his life, but felt the 
duty and claimed the blessedness to his own soul, 
of imparting for the cause of Christ a portion of 
what he had. On his dying bed, he mentioned to 
Mrs. Page, that five dollars, which before his sick- 
ness he had subscribed to a benevolent object, re- 
mained unpaid. " We have consecrated it to God," 
said he, " and I had rather it would be paid. You 
had better pay it, and trust him." 

His familiarity with the character and religious 
bearing of all the Tract Society's publications, and 
with the general state and wants of the commu- 
nity, rendered him skilful in selecting publications 
appropriate to the different fields and circumstances 
for which they were designed ; and also in giving 
an impulse and a wise direction to the feelings and 
efforts of Christians who were continually calling 
in the transaction of business. 



218 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

And in all, it abundantly appears that he felt 
that the efficiency was alone with God ; and 
mingled continual prayer for the gift of gifts, the 
accompanying influences of the Holy Spirit. 

Is it wonderful that God should bless his ef- 
forts ? That in each church with which he stood 
connected, individuals, when relating their religious 
experience, should be heard referring to his faithful 
endeavors as the means of bringing them to Christ ? 
That a revenue of souls should have been gathered 
from the place of his nativity ; that thirty-two teach- 
ers were brought publicly to profess Christ, from one 
of his Sabbath-schools, and that nine of them have 
set their faces towards the ministry ? That thirty- 
four should hopefully have been gathered by him 
and his fellow-laborers from one ward of the city ; 
and that fifty-eight, in connection with his efforts 
and those of a few endeared associates, have been 
brought to join themselves to the people of God, 
from the Tract and Bible houses? That individu- 
als should come to his dying bed, and thank him 
with tears for his fidelity to their own souls? Is 
it wonderful, that in speaking to her who was soon 
to be his widow, of his early departure, and look- 
ing back on his work on earth as ended, he should, 
with the solemnity of eternity on his countenance, 
say, " I know it is all of God's grace, and nothing 
that I have done ; but I think I have had evidence 



CHARACTER OF HIS EFFORTS. 219 

that more than one hundred souls have heen con- 
verted to God through my own direct and personal 
instrumentality ?" 

Look at the influence of such a Christian life on 
a large scale. Suppose every Christian labored, I 
do not say with such talents, but with such a heart 
to the ivork. Suppose there were ten such Chris- 
tians in every evangelical church throughout our 
land, and that God should equally bless their la- 
bors. How would they rouse their fellow-Christians 
to duty. How would they search the highways and 
hedges, and by God's grace compel the ungodly to 
come in. How- would they instruct the rising age. 
How would they hold up the hands of faithful 
ministers. How would the Holy Spirit be shed 
down in answer to their prayers. How would their 
influence penetrate through every vein of this great 
community ; and how soon would living piety here 
pour its influence on every benighted land* Such 
a light as would then shine could not be hid. It 
would illumine the world, and Christ would come 
and possess the nations. 



220 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 



CHAPTER X. 

TRIUMPHS OF GRACE ON HIS DYING BED. 

It remains only to linger a little while with our 
brother in the chamber of death. "We do not look 
to his dying bed for evidence of his good estate. 
This we had in. his life. Nor have we to record 
what occurred in the hurry and excitement and 
delirium of dying. He was let down to the grave 
by a gradual process of four months ; and contrary 
to almost all example, gave up all expectation of 
living many weeks before he left us, and while in 
the full and perfect exercise of his mental powers. 

It cannot be said that death had to him no ter- 
rors. This enemy did not come and steal him away 
unawares ; nor were the powers of his mind blunt- 
ed by disease or medicine. The king of terrors 
presented himself as if he would challenge divine 
grace to gain a victory. He showed him useful- 
ness closed, a dependent widow and children, ago- 
nizing bodily pain, and his soul about to appear 
before God. 

His disease was in the vital organs, and a con- 
tinual cough gave alarming evidence that it was 
seating itself upon the lungs. About six weeks 
previous to his death, Dr. M. W., one of the skil- 



HIS DYING BED. 221 

ful and pious physicians who gave him their gra- 
tuitous counsel and aid, made a careful examina- 
tion with the stethoscope ; and as a faithful friend, 
informed him that his lungs were ulcerated, and 
he must die. " He received the announcement," 
says the physician, " calmly; as a man who felt 
that it is a solemn thing to exchange worlds, bat 
that he had a home in heaven." 

To a heart so spiritually alive, the scene before 
him was unutterably solemn and momentous. He 
wished clear evidence of his union to Christ, that 
should leave no question of his interest in him ; 
and to have a constant and lively sense of his im- 
mediate presence. Nothing short of this could meet 
the urgency of his case ; and this, for some days, 
he did not attain. 

" About six weeks before his death," says a kind 
brother who called on him with a Christian friend, 
"we found him in much mental distress. He said 
he had been endeavoring to examine his past life, 
but it was all a blank. ' Oh,' said he, ' I have done 
nothing for Christ. What an unprofitable life have 
I lived. How can one be a Christian who has done 
no more to prevent his acquaintance, and even his 
own household, from going down to hell V We re- 
peated to him a number of scripture promises. He 
said they were precious promises, but he could not 
appropriate them to himself. 



222 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

"A few days after," says the same brother, "we 
called on him again ; and found that the desire of 
his heart was granted. Christ was with him ; and 
his emphatic language was, ' It seems as if I never 
knew before what it was to love him.' He ap- 
peared to feel that he had obtained a new view of 
the love of Christ, which he was anxious to com- 
municate for our benefit. ' I have been following 
him,' he said, ' all along as the evangelists record 
his history — how he healed the sick, how he fed 
the hungry, cast out devils, comforted the sor- 
rowful, and at last died for 'poor sinners ' — when 
his weeping prevented utterance. ' Oh, who can 
help loving such a blessed Saviour?' 

" ' I think I have evidence of love to Christ,' he 
soon added, 'from another source ; I love his people. 
0, how my heart goes out towards all the dear 
brethren w T ho love Christ, and are trying to save 
poor sinners from hell. Brother A., and brother 

B., and brother ; that the Lord will make 

them more faithful and more useful. Do, breth- 
ren,' said he to us, ' be faithful to souls. It will 
be time enough to rest by and by.' " 

Again he said, " Should I go into a meeting and 
see a Christian with his eyes filled with tears, and 
his heart glowing with love to souls, pleading with 
sinners to come to Christ and live, should not I 
love him ? And when Christ comes and weeps 



HIS DYING BED. 223 

over poor sinners, and says, ' Jerusalem, Jerusa- 
lem, how often would I have gathered thy children 
together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under 
her wings, and ye would not,' shall not I love him ? 
I know I love that Christian brother that would 
feel so; and don't I love Christ? I do love him. 
I do love him." 

The cloud returned no more till his spirit took 
its upward flight. 

The writer having been sometime absent from the 
city, sat by his bedside alone, expecting it might be 
the last interview with him on earth, when the fol- 
lowing conversation, almost word for word, occurred. 

" I have thought a great deal of you in my ab- 
sence, brother Page ; and when I come here and 
find you so low, it is very affecting. How wonder- 
fully God is dealing with us. He has seen fit to 
take away both of my children ; you are sinking ; 
and your son, by falling from an upper window, 
has very narrowly escaped death." 

" Yes," he replied, in slow, feeble, and tender 
tones, " God mingles mercies with afflictions. I 
want to thank him for preserving Cyrus' life. It 
is a great mercy." 

" It is wonderful," I added, " that God often 
cuts down those who seem most needed. Brother 
Hunter is gone ; Evarts and Cornelius are gone. 
He makes great breaches on the church." 



224 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

" 0, brother H.," said he, as if he could not bear 
the allusion to himself as having been specially- 
useful, " I am nothing ; and have done nothing. 
I 'm nothing but a poor sinner. I 'm a blank, and 
less than a blank. I hang on the mere merits of 
Christ." 

" Has it not been a great trial to give up your 
wife and children, and all your work here ?" 

" It has been a trial to give them up, but not 
my great trial. I wanted a clear sense of the 
presence of Christ in my heart. For some time 1 
could not get a clear view of him ; and it was not 
till I followed him all along from the manger to 
the cross, that I seemed to get a clear view of him 
as just the Saviour I need, and bring him home to 
my heart. I 've given all up here. My work here 
is all clone — it 's all done. What I want now is a 
sense of the presence of Christ ; and I think he is 
with me, and sustains me." 

" I rejoice that it is so ; and may his grace carry 
you through. I want before you die to thank you, 
brother Page, for your uniform kindness during the 
nine years we have been laboring together; and 
especially for the help you have given me in the 
spiritual life." 

" 0, brother H., don't thank me. I've done 
nothing, and been nothing but a poor miserable 
sinner. I don't want any thanks." 



HIS DYING BED. 225 

" I have always felt," I added, " that you have 
essentially aided me in the Christian course." 

" Ah, I 've often felt wrong-, and done wrong. I 
want you, brother H., to forgive all you have seen 
amiss." 

" I have nothing to forgive. I wish rather to 
confess my faults to you." 

" 0, don't speak of it, brother H., I 've come short 
in every thing" — bursting into a flood of tears. 

The scene was full of instruction. I could scarce- 
ly avoid the impression that I was conversing with 
his spirit already sanctified for heaven. To see 
one who had lived such a life thus abasing him- 
self; to see him shudder at the intimation that he 
had been specially useful ; to hear him say, amid 
the solemnities of dying, u I am nothing, and have 
done nothing ; I'ma blank, and less than a blank ; 
I have done wrong and felt wrong, and cast my soul 
alone on the blood and righteousness of Christ," 
opened a new view of heaven, and made me feel, 
that whoever arrives at that blessed abode, what- 
ever his life has been, however much he has labored 
for Christ and the souls of men, will there pros- 
trate HIMSELF LOWER THAN THE DUST, AND GIVE TO 

God all, all the glory, for ever and ever. 

u You must feel some anxiety for your wife and 
children. I will endeavor to do what I can for 
them." 

Page. 15 



226 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

u I don't want any promises. G od will take care 
of them." 

" I have hoped that it will be in the hearts oi 
friends around us to contribute something for them." 

" It can't be expected that any thing like what 
would support them could be raised. But I give 
all that up" 

" I understand you have expressed a desire that, 
your body be removed to Coventry. If so, I hope 
I may accompany it." 

" Ah, I've no concern about this poor body. All 
will be done right about it." 

About this time a friend from his native place 
visited him, and asking if he had any message for 
his parents and friends, he said, " Yes : 

" Tell my aged parents not to despond because 
God has taken me first, for he will be their stay 
and support, and soon we shall meet where parting 
will be no more. 

" Tell that it will be hard dying without 

an interest in Christ. 

" Tell sister L., I expect soon to meet her in 
heaven. 

" Tell my former pastor, that I remember with 
gratitude the instructions received from his lips." 

On the following Sabbath, as the writer called 
on him, he said, " I wanted to have gone home 
to-day; but they are trying to keep me here. My 



HIS DYING BED. 227 

work here is all done, and I want to be with 
Christ." 

11 Do you not look back now with peculiar pleas- 
ure on your direct personal efforts for the good of 
souls ?" 

" I look upon personal conversation and prayer 
with individuals as among my most successful en- 
deavors, and hope I have done some good. But it 
is not me. It is all of grace in Christ. There's 
nothing in me but sin. I'm nothing — nothing — 
less than nothing. Brother H., I have been a great 
sinner." 

" Is it the sins of your heart that trouble you 
chiefly ?" 

" Not particularly. I Ve been a great sinner in 
my childhood — and youth — and all my life — the 
chief sinners. But 'it is a faithful saying, and 
worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came 
into the world to save sinners.'" 

" Do you feel that it is your choice now to go?" 

"Yes, if it is God's will." 

" Should he please to restore you, would you 
not be willing to remain here and labor a little 
longer ?" 

" yes, I think so, if it was his will. But my 
work on earth is all done. I want now to go and 
be with Christ. Prophets and apostles and mar- 
tyrs are there, and many pious friends are there ; 



228 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

I feel that I should like to meet them. Christ will 
he there, and we shall he like him, and see him as 
he is ; that will he enough." 

" Is it not wonderful that Christians do not live 
in a nearer view of death?" 

" yes ; I 'm a wonder to myself. I didn't feel 
how short this life is." 

Some time previous to this conversation he had 
adjusted all his earthly concerns, reviewed his will, 
arranged his papers, given advice respecting his 
family and his burial, and thenceforward he seemed 
to feel that his work here was " all done," and to 
welcome nothing that did not immediately pertain 
to the exchange of worlds. The daily paper had 
for w r eeks been put aside as having " nothing of 
Christ in it," though not without expressing his 
belief that ere long the daily papers shall carry 
to their readers messages of salvation ; and when 
his family were reading to him from religious pa- 
pers he would sometimes stop them, saying, " Is 
there any thing there for a dying man ? If so, 
read it." 

He relished nothing but what was eminently 
spiritual, and regretted that he had not treasured 
more of the Bible in his memory. The twenty- 
third Psalm and the last chapter of Revelation 
were very precious to him. At one time he said, 
" Do read me a spiritual hymn, or something from 



HIS DYING BED. 229 

the Bible : I 'm starving." Again, as a clergy- 
man came in, he said, " Do look out some hymns 
that express a great deal of heaven. Many of the 
hymns seem tame. They are pretty poetry, but 
do not present the joys of redemption and the glory 
of Christ. When T have a clear view of Christ my 
fears vanish, and I can trust myself wholly in his 
hands." 

It was remarked by those most familiar at his 
bedside, that not one impenitent acquaintance vis- 
ited him whom he did not seem to have warned. 
The tenor of his language to them was, " I have 
said all I can say. I can now add nothing new. 
My work here is all done." 

Finding that his life was continued longer than 
he expected, he said, " I thought my work was done, 
but I find it is not. I must strive to urge Christians 
and sinners to duty from this dying bed." 

As two brethren of the church from which he 
had recently separated himself came in, he said, 
" You will allow me to speak freely as a dying 
man. Are the dear brethren of the church awake ? 
Are they laboring for souls ? If I were to be raised 
up from this dying bed, would you not feel that I 
ought to be faithful ? And is the duty less yours 
than it would be mine ?" 

More than once he said, " The millennium will 
never come until Christians are more awake to 



230 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

duty." And again, " for a holy ministry ; a 
ministry devoted to the salvation of souls ! I can't 
bear to have so much time ivasted in controversy. 
If all would devote themselves to the salvation 
of souls, how many might be saved from eternal 
burnings." 

The principal of a large female school coming in, 
he entreated her to be faithful to the souls of her 
pupils, and urged the momentous consequences 
should they be converted to God. She was much 
affected, and begged him to pray for her, when he 
immediately offered a short appropriate prayer for 
her and all committed to her charge. 

He observed that the number of the impenitent 
who visited him was comparatively small ; and 
when one with whom he had conversed retired, he 
said, " how the impenitent dread a dying bed." 

As a Christian friend, on seeing his strength so 
reduced, expressed his regret that he left the 
church with which he had been so long connected 
for the new enterprise, he said, " There were mo- 
tives pressing upon me that I could not resist. I 
felt that one at least of the officers of that church 
ought to go ; and hard as it was to tear myself 
away from the dear brethren, I do not regret it. 
There are some praying souls there, and I feel that 
God will bless their efforts for that destitute part 
of the city." 



HIS DYING BED. 231 

His utterance in disturbed sleep continually indi- 
cated what the burden of his life had been. Gen- 
erally it was prayer, or an appeal to Christians or 
the impenitent. 

" No more pain — no more sm," was once his 
unconscious utterance. "Lord, reveal thyself to 
us. Show us thy glory." 

At another time he exclaimed with great ear- 
nestness, "Dear brethren, where are you? where 
are you? Are you in the light of God's counte- 
nance ? Are you in the light of the Sun of right- 
eousness V* 

Again, as if he were addressing the impenitent, 
" ' Now is the accepted time ; now is the day of 
salvation.' why will you not turn and give your 
hearts to God? Why will you go down to hell?" 

Again he said, with melting tenderness, as if 
some effort of his had been unavailing, "Poor 
girl! she has rejected her Saviour, and her soul 
must be lost." 

The visit of J« H. T., his fellow-laborer in the 
Tract and Bible houses, was peculiarly gratifying. 
He greeted him on being so near home ; they con- 
versed on the dealings of the Lord with them and 
the glories of eternity, and bade one another fare- 
well for a little while, till they should meet again 
never to separate. 

Again he said, "A death-bed is a precious place, 



232 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

when we have the presence of Christ — then to 
wake to a glorious immortality. God does not 
send one unnecessary affliction." 

Again, " I feel as if I had got half-way home. I 
cannot bear to stop. It would be a pity to have 
the flesh return on these limbs again." 

Perhaps sacred music was never a source of 
more spiritual benefit or enjoyment in the chamber 
of sickness and death. For some years he led the 
devotions of the sanctuary, and in his earlier days 
was accustomed to play on the bass-viol and the 
flute. In his latter years, he made singing strictly 
a devotional exercise — a point the practical bear- 
ing of which on the Christian life cannot be too 
much urged. He used it as such at social meet- 
ings, and uniformly made it a part of family wor- 
ship. Providence kindly so ordered it that Mr. F., 
a Christian brother accustomed to lead choirs in 
the city, resided near, who to his love of music 
joined a tender sympathy with the sick and dying. 
At the request of Mr. Page, he sung a few appro- 
priate selections ; and finding they were as a pre- 
cious balm to his heart, tendered his services to 
come in daily and as often as he desired. The 
impression made upon the mind of the dying man 
was so strong, that he would anticipate his return 
with great interest. "I expect Mr. F. soon," he 
would say to his family, " and I want ycu all to be 



HIS DYING BED. 233 

here." When he arrived he would inquire for each 
absent member, unwilling that the singing should 
commence till all were present, and then anxious 
that all should join in the praises of the Most High. 
After singing one day, he said, " How sweet ; and 
if the music of earth is so sweet, what must be 
the music of heaven, where all the heavenly hosts 
unite their voices — ten thousand upon ten thou- 
sand?" 

The beautiful hymns, " Rock of ages," and, " My 
faith looks up to thee," as set to music in the 
" Spiritual Songs," took precedence of all others. 
The music of the first was composed by Mr. Hast- 
ings of New York, and of the other by Mr. L. Ma- 
son of Boston, who have consented to their inser- 
tion at the close of the volume, as it may be 
gratifying to some readers, and perhaps be the 
means of adding consolation to some other depart- 
ing friend. 

The hymn beginning, " How sweet the name of 
Jesus sounds," as set to music in the same work, 
was also peculiarly precious to him, and one that 
he often repeated. At one time he asked for the 
reading of the hymn, " When languor and disease 
invade," etc., and as the fifth verse was read, said 
with emphasis, "Yes, 

u Sweet to lie passive in his hands, 
And know no will but his," 



234 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

On one occasion, as they were singing from the 

seventeenth Psalm, beginning with the words, 

" What sinners value I resign," 

" he repeated the verses," says one who was present, 

" with a tone and animation more than earthly : 

" Lord, 't is enough that thou art mine : 
I shall behold thy blissful face, 
And stand complete in righteousness." 

" As he repeated the fifth verse, with inexpres- 
sible ardor and solemnity, we felt almost that we 
were already transported to those blissful regions : 

" GLORIOUS HOUR ! BLEST ABODE ! 

I shall be near — and like — my God." 

" I wonder," he said, " that singing is not more 
used around the bed of the sick. It seems to me 
admirably adapted to cheer and comfort them." 

He expressed an earnest desire that all his fam- 
ily should learn to sing. " Then," said he, " you 
can have a little heaven here below." 

Again he said, "0 how can the churches be so 
indifferent to the praises of the sanctuary — the 
very employment of heaven ! how can Christians 
sing so little in their families : it is the beginning 
of heaven ; it is heaven on earth." 

As he was apparently slumbering, his infant son 
struck the strings of a bass-viol that stood in the 
room : " My little son," said he, "is that you ? Do 
that again. Papa loves to hear that." 



HIS DYING BED. 235 

On hearing an organ as it passed in the street he 
said, " That sounds sweet. I am becoming very fond 
of instrumental music : I suppose there will be a 
good deal of it from the golden harps of heaven." 

At one time, with much effort, he sung the line, 
"Rise, my soul, and stretch thy wings j' 7 
but not having strength to proceed, stopped, saying, 
"0 when shall I go home? How long must I be 
burdened with this body? The Lord knows how 
much suffering I need to prepare me for his king- 
dom." 

In all his sickness he exhibited surprising ten- 
derness of spirit. He could not bear the thought 
that there were any Christians who did not love 
one another, and who were not engaged in the 
service of Christ. If he had manifested the least 
impatience, he would pray God to forgive him, 
beg his wife to forgive him, and often express his 
gratitude for the kindness he received in the most 
affecting manner. Frequently he wept in view of 
the long-continued and gratuitous attentions of his 
stated physician, Dr. J. C. B. As he had been 
ministering to his necessities one day, and had led 
in prayer and retired, he said with tears, " How 
good to have some one to carry you up into heav- 
en;" adding, after a pause, " When I think of his 
prolonged and unwearied kindness to us, my heart 
swells with emotions which I cannot utter." 



236 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

He was continually endeavoring to relieve the 
sorrows of those around him. "When he saw her 
weeping who was soon to be a widow, he sum- 
moned his utmost efforts, and urged his most ardent 
supplications to God, that she might have divine 
consolation ; and when he found that she had 
yielded the point, and given him and herself and 
her children and her all to God, to be disposed 
of according to his pleasure, he expressed great 
joy and gratitude. " God will take care of you," 
said he ; " I am sure of it. Only trust in God, 
and he will provide for you. His promises to the 
widow and the fatherless are precious. The Bible 
is full of them." 

His tender dread of sin continued to the last. A 
dear Christian friend says he regards the night he 
watched with him as one of the most privileged 
seasons of his life. They had many short and 
delightful interviews. Towards morning he said 
very seriously, "Have you seen any thing, brother, 
in which you think I have sinned to-night ?" 
" Nothing in particular," was the reply. " Twice," 
added the faithful, affectionate brother, " you spoke 
of the pain occasioned by your labored respiration, 
and perhaps expressed a little impatience." He 
immediately lifted up his tearful eye to God, and 
offered an earnest prayer that he might be purified 
from all sin. 



HIS DYING BED. 237 

After violent coughing, he said, " My children, 
you see this is suffering. It is for sm." 

At another time he said, " The Bible speaks of 
perfection. I feel no perfection. I am all sin. 
Christ is perfect, and his blood cleanseth from all 
sin." 

Again he said, " Sometimes I so earnestly desire 
to depart, that I feel as though I could not wait ; 
but I want you to persuade me not to feel so. I 
fear it is wrong." 

Equally undiminished was his se?zse of his un- 
worthiness. As one, now a brother in the church, 
had wept at his bedside, and thanked him for his 
faithful efforts in arresting him in his downward 
course of sin, he said, " I know not what to do with 
such scenes — there 's a great deal too much ascribed 
to man." 

His eldest son having been absent, he expressed 
a great desire to see him before he died ; and when 
he arrived, clasped him for many minutes in his 
withered arms, and bestowed upon him a father's 
richest counsels and blessing. This had been, for 
some time, the only remaining earthly favor he had 
to request. He wished to have all his children 
once more together, and to give them his dying 
counsels. 

A few days before he died, after a paroxysm of 
coughing, he said, " I was in hopes to depart ; but 



238 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

I must wait a little longer. How long probably 
before another nicer will fill 1 when shall I 
awake in thy likeness?" 

Again he repeated the words, " Home, home !" 
and prayed, " for a free and full discharge. Lord 
Jesus, come quickly. "Why wait thy chariot wheels 
so long ? I dedicate myself to thee. may I 
have the victory. come quickly. Come, Lord 
Jesus, come quickly." 

A little before his death, as all his family were 
around him, after % short prayer in weakness and 
want of breath that rendered utterance scarcely 
possible, he addressed a word to each. "I want 
you all," said he, "to be a bundle of love. " 

To Mrs. Page : " Though a thousand miles 
apart, you may be serving God here — and I in 
heaven." 

To his eldest son : " I want you should be a holy 
man — an active, living Christian." 

To his daughter : " Stand fast. Be steadfast in 
the faith. Wander not from God. Be wholly his." 

To a younger son : " be a Christian indeed, 
my son." 

To the infant : " Love God. Learn what he is — 
what heaven is." 

To a niece : " I have been committing all my 
family to God. Love God. Pray to him daily." 

Then he prayed, " I thank thee for suffering. I 



HIS DYING BED. 239 

deserve it. How much I deserved death, eternal 
death ! Deliver me from a long series of sufferings, 
if consistent ; but I submit. Let me not complain 
nor dictate. Remember thy handmaiden. Re- 
member her in her trials. Thou knowest the sup- 
ports she needs — grant them fully. May she be 
willing to commit me to thy hands. Bless this 
daughter and all these children, and all their con- 
cerns. I COMMIT MYSELF TO THEE, JeSUS, SaVIOUR 
OF SINNERS. THE INFINITE LOVE OF CHRIST ! I 
MAY STOP MY MOUTH, AND LIE IN THE DUST." 

This is the legacy he left to a lonely widow, and 
four fatherless children. 

This, his testimony to the matchless grace of God, 
abounding, through Christ, to one who had no mer- 
its of his own. 

This, his moving persuasive to every child of God 
to abound in duty. 

This, his voice of warning and entreaty to rebel 
sinners, saying, " Be ye reconciled to God." 

The mercy and kindness of a covenant God, to 
whom he committed his family with such implicit 
trust, claims here to be recorded in the fact, that 
soon after his death, a few Christian friends assem- 
bled and commenced a subscription for the benefit 
of the widow and children, w T hich was raised to 



240 LIFE OF HARLAN PAGE. 

$2,000. As the subject was mentioned to a pious 
mechanic, he said, with the tear standing in his 
eye, " I want to give something. Here are ten 
dollars. But for Mr. Page, I should probably have 
sunk into a miserable eternity." He was asked to 
relate the circumstances, and thus replied : 

"On New-Year's day, 1827 or 8, which was 
Monday, I reflected that I had never attended a 
monthly concert of prayer in this city, and deter- 
mined that for once I would go. I went early, 
found only the sexton in the room, and sat down. 
Soon there came in a plain man, who spoke very 
pleasantly to the sexton, and then coming and sit- 
ting by my side, after a kind salutation, said, ' I 
trust you love the Saviour?' -The question in- 
stantly rilled my eyes with tears, I had been 
preached to at arms' length, all my days in Neiv 
Hampshire ; but this ivas the first time in my life 
that ever a Christian thus kindly and directly prut 
such a question to my heart. We conversed con- 
siderably together, in the course of which, at his 
request, I gave him my name and residence. The 
next day he came into my shop, and brought me 
the tract, ' Way to be Saved,' which he thought I 
should like to read. He called again and again. 
I became interested in him, and the next Sabbath 
joined his Sabbath-school ; was brought, as I hope, 
to Christ, and soon united with the church." 



HIS EPITAPH. 241 

The body of Mr. Page, according to a suggestion 
above, was interred in Coventry, his native place ; 
and over his grave a marble slab bears the follow- 
ing epitaph : 

Jn fttmorg 

OF 

HARLAN PAGE, 

FOR NINE YEARS DEPOSITARY 

OF 

THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

WHO DIED AT NEW YORK, 
SEPTEMBER 28, 1884, 

IN THE TRIUMPH OF FAITH, 

AGED 43. 

"He ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears." 



212 



LIFE OF HARLAN TAGE. 



BOCK OF AGES. 



By permission. 



Air and 2d Treble. 



5E33E 



53 



:« 



3: 



Pg 



—9 £ ^ 

Rock of a - - ges, cleft for me, Let me 
Be of sin the per - feet cure ; Save me, 



££3§ 



fee 



j£ 



:CfzzC=fffzzt: 



_p ^_ 



- »• 


" h 


1 1". fc 








' r . * - 


1 


d ' d 


£. 


# . 


1 1 * 


« 


H ®. *! 


1 1 & 1 


»• S 




i 1 1 


■ !*• 




i r & 


J 


CD ^ & 




1 u 

i hide my - - sel 
Lord, and mat 


f. - . r 

[ in thee ; Let the wa - 
e me pure. 

a*> a • a a • 


- ter and the 


or p p 


r 


r r 


r 


r 


r 


till 


f-3 ! U 


1 1 


1 


1 ^ ^ 


1* 


P ** £ 


1 * 


*» !* 


■ 


1 





.— ] - 


n 


1? 










1 




( H 


1 




<©. 


• 




H 


-J 




°i «. 


r ■ 1 • 1 — -j 


f 


1 ! 1 


L- 






#■ 


l 


1 


CD 


d* 












CD 




\ blood, 

I 


From 


thy 


1 

wound 


t 

1* 

■ ed 

m 


side 


that 

• 


flowed. 

1 D. c. 


1 


r 


c 


f 


r 


p 


p 






a 


1 


2 


1 


1 




1 


cj 


1 




& 


£ _ 


1 


** 


W 


V 




a 


u 





Should my tears for ever flow ; While I draw this fleeting breath, 
Should my zeal no languor know, "When mine eyelids close in death, 
This for sin could not atone ; "When I rise to worlds unknown, 

Thou must save, and thou alone. And behold thee on thy throne, 
In my hand no price I bring ; Rock of ages, cleft for me, 
Simply to thy cross I cling. Let me hide myself in thee. 



SACRED MUSIC. 

OLIVET. 



213 



1 


! 


! 


] 


1y permissiou. 


f V *> I'd 




i 


| - 


I A ~ ' ~m ' " ' 


::£• • ^_ 


i ^ 


*• flJ 


ftfl ^ *> cd S jJ 


. £_ is § 


; — i i ^ 


-p. s <s 


\ \}0 $ J, c -' • • 




— ^ ^ — r 


i r " s 


1 ^ i k s r r 

| My faith looks up to thee, Thou Lamb of Calva - ry ; 


f3y u <> O «» 


» CD \ 


VS.- ff ^ I 1 




[£frP— P-f 


tf> 1 1 


~r r i — rP r r 




■ ; ^ i " 



rig 



J p»- 



pj&t* 



Saviour di - vine ! Now hear me while I pray ; Take all my 



m 



:gr 



£ 



0'-- 



-:-- 



a 



guilt away : let me from this day Be whol - ly thine. 



PS 



May thy rich grace impart 
Strength to my fainting heart, 

My zeal inspire : 
As thou hast died for me, 
may my love to thee, 
Pure, warm, and changeless be- 

A living fire. 

"While life's dark maze I tread, 
And griefs around me spread, 
Be thou my guide ; 



Bid darkness turn to day, 
"Wipe sorrow's tears away, 
Nor let me ever stray 
From thee aside. 

- When ends life's transient dream, 
When death's cold sullen stream 

Shall o'er me roll, 
Blest Saviour, then in love 
Fear and distrust remove ; 
hear me safe above — 

A ransomed soul. 



PUBLICATIONS 



AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY. 



These works are not exceeded in high evangelical charac- 
ter, spiritual power, and practical worth by any similar col- 
lection in any language. They have been carefully selected 
for the great body of intelligent readers throughout the coun- 
try, and the most watchful parent may supply them to his 
family or to others, not only with safety to their best and eter- 
nal interests, but with hope of the richest spiritual blessings. 



D' Aubigne's History of the Reforma- 
tion. A new translation, revised 
"by the author, in four volumes 
12mo, with portraits. Price $1 75, 
extra cloth. 

Family Testament with Notes. 

Baxter's Saints' Everlasting Rest, 
12mo, in large type ; also l8mo. 

Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, 12mo, 
in large type, and 18mo. Both 
editions neatly illustrated. 

Memoir of Jas. Milnor, D. D. 

Mason's Spiritual Treasury, for every 
day in the year. Terse, pithy, and 
evangelical. 

Flavel's Fountain of Life, or Re- 
demption Provided. 

Flavel's Method of Grace, or Re- 
demption applied to the Souls of 
Men. 

Flavel's Knocking at the Door; a 
tender, practical appeal. 

Bishop Hall's Scripture History, or 
Contemplations on the Historical 
Passages of the Old and New Tes- 
taments. 

Alleine's Heaven Opened. 

Bishop Hopkins on the Ten Com- 
mandments. Three standard works 
of the times of Baxter. 

President Edwards' Thoughts on Re- 
vivals. 

Venn's Complete Duty of Man. 



Owen on Forgiveness, or Psalm 130. 

Gregory's (Olinthus, LL.D.) Evi- 
dences of Christianity. 

Riches of Bunyan. 

Paley's Natural Theology, and Horaa 
Paulinas. 

Baxter's Reformed Pastor. 

Baxter's Treatise on Conversion. 

Dr. Spring's Bible Not of Man, or 
the Argument for the Divine Ori- 
gin of the Scriptures drawn from 
the Scriptures themselves. 

Nelson's Cause and Cure of Infi- 
delity. 

Memoir of Summerfield. 

Memoir of Mrs. Isabella Graham 
A new and standard edition. 

Memoir of Mrs. Sarah L. Huntington 
Smith. 

Sacred Songs for Family and Social 
Worship. Hymns and Tunes — 
with a separate edition in patent 
notes. Also, the Hymns separately. 

Elegant Narratives, Select Tracts, 
illustrated. 

Willison's Afflicted Man's Com- 
panion. 

Doddridge's Rise and Progress of Re- 
ligion in the Soul. 

Edwards' History of Redemption. 

Volume on Infidelity, comprising 
five standard treatises : Soame 
Jenyns on the Internal Evidence ; 



Leslie's Method with Deists • Iwt- 
tleton's Conversion of Pa&2 , Wat- 
son's Reply to Gibbon a*id Paine. 

Pike's Persuasives to E«uiy Piety. 

Pike's Guide to Young Disciples. 

Anecdotes for the Family and the 
Social Circle. 



Universalism Not of God. 
Dibble's Thoughts on Missions. 
The Bible True. 
Songs of Zion. 

Considerations for Young Men. 
Who are the Happy ? 
Letters on Universalism. 



ELEGANT PRACTICAL WORKS. 



Wilberforce's Practical View. 
Hannah More's Practical Piety. 
James' Anxious Inquirer. 
Elijah the Tishbite. 
Nevins' Practical Thoughts. 
Melvill's Bible Thoughts, selected 
by the late Rev Dr. Milnor. 



Harris' Mammon. 
Gurney's Love to God. 
Foster's Appeal to the Young. 
Abbott's Young Christian. 
Abbott's Mother at Home. 
Abbott's Child at Home. 
James' Young Man from Home 



CHRISTIAN MEMOIRS. 



Rev. Claudius Buchanan, LL.D., in- 
cluding his Christian Researches 
in Asia. 

Rev. John Newton. 

Rev. Henry Martyn. 

Rev. David Brainerd. 

Rev. Edward Payson, D. D. 

Harriet L. Winslow, Missionary in 
India. 

OTHER SPIRITUAL WORKS. 



James Brainerd Taylor. 
Harlan Page. 
Normand Smith. 
Richard Baxter. 
Archbishop Leighton. 
Matthew Henry. 
Rev. Samuel Pearce. 
Rev. Samuel Kilpin. 



Edwards on the Affections. 
Baxter's Call to the Unconverted. 
Alleine's Alarm to the Unconverted. 
Flavel's Touchstone. 
Flavel on Keeping the Heart. 
Helffenstein's Self-Deception. 
Sherman's Guide to an Acqaint- 
ance with God. 



MISCELLANEOUS WORKS. 



Pike's Religion and Eternal Life. 
Baxter's Dying Thoughts. 
Matthew Henry on Meekness. 
Andrew Fuller's Backslider. 
Scudder's Redeemer's Last Com- 
mand. 
Scudder's Appeal to Mothers. 
Burder's Sermons to the Aged. 



Bogue's Evidences of Christianity. 
Keith's Evidence of Prophecy. 
Morison's Counsels to Young Men. 
The Reformation in Europe. 
Nevins' Thoughts on Popery. 
Spirit of Popery, [12 engravings.] 
The Colporteur and Roman-catholic, 



Clarke's Scripture Promises. 

The Book of Psalms. 

The Book of Proverbs. 

Daily Scripture Expositor. 

Ten Commandments Explained. 

Bean and Venn's Advice to a Married 

Couple. 
Hymns for Infant Minds. 
Reasons of Repose. 
Daily Food for Christians. 



Mason on Self-Knowledge . 
Sherman's Guide to an Acquaint- 
ance with God. 
Divine Law of Beneficence. 
Zaccheus, or Scriptural Plan of Be- 
nevolence. 
Hymns for Social Worship. 
POCKET MANUALS. 

Chaplet of Flowers. 

Heavenly Manna. 

Cecil and Flavel's Gift for Mourn- 



ers. 
Daily Texts. 

Diary, [Daily Texts interleaved.] 
Crumbs from the Master's Table. 
Milk for Babes. 

Provision for Passing over Jordan. 
Dew-Drops. 



BOOKS FOR THE YOUNG. 

MANY OF THEM BEAUTIFULLY ILLUSTRATED "WITH ENGRAVINGS. 



Gallaudet's Scripture Biography, 7 

volumes, from Adam to David. 
Gallaudet's Youth's Book of Natural 

Theology. 
Peep of Day. 
Line upon Line.- 
Precept upon Precept. 
Hannah More's Repository Tracts. 
Mary Lundie Duncan. 
Charlotte Elizabeth. 
Martha T. Sharp. 
Fletcher's Lectures. 
John D. Lockwood. 
Memoir of Caroline E. Smelt. 
Gallaudet's Child's Book on the 

Soul. 
Anzonetta R. Peters. 
The Night of Toil. 
Advice to a Young Christian. 
Madam Rumpff and Duchess de 

Broglie. 
Scudder's Tales about the Heathen. 
Amelia, the Pastor's Daughter. 



Trees, Fruits, and Flowers of the 
Bible, [9 cuts.] 

Jessie Little. 

Isabel. 

Walker's Faith Explained. 

Walker's Repentance Explained. 

Margaret and Henrietta. 

Bartimeus. 

Children invited to Christ. 

The Dairyman's Daughter, etc. 

Peet's Scripture Lessons. 

Child's Book of Bible Stories. 

Children of the Bible. 

Amos Armfleld, or the Leather-cov- 
ered Bible. 

The Child's Hymn-Book. Selected 
by Miss Caulkins. 

Scripture Animals, [16 cuts.] 

Letters to Little Children, [13 cuts.] 

Great Truths in Simple Words. 

Pictorial Tract Primer. 

Watt's Divine and Moral Songs. 

With numerous similar works. 



ALSO, 



Dr. Edwards' Sabbath Manual, Parts 
1, 2, 3, and 4. 

Dr. Edwards' Temperance Manual. 

In German — 56 vols., various sizes, 
including Barth's Church History, 
Life of M. Boos, Rules of Life, 
Lord's Day, Fabricius, Honey- 
Drop, Christ Knocking at the 
Door, and two volumes and pack- 
ets of Books for Children, recently 
published. 

In French — Sixteen volumes. 

In Spanish — D'Aubigne's History of 
the Reformation. Vol. I., Bogue's 



Authenticity of the New Testa- 
ment, Pilgrim's Progress, Illus- 
trated Tract Primer, Primitive Ca- 
tholicism, Andrew Dunn, Sabbath 
Manual, Part 1, Kirwan's Letters, 
Evangelical Hymns, Temperance 
Manual, and Manual for Children. 

In Welsh — Pilgrim's Progress, Bax- 
ter's Saints' Rest and Call, Anx- 
ious Inquirer, History of Redemp- 
tion. 

In Danish — Doddridge's Rise and 
Progress, Baxter's Saints' Rest 
and Call. 



Also, upwards of 1,000 Tracts and Children's Tracts, separate, bound, 
or in packets, adapted for convenient sale by merchants and traders, many 
of them with beautiful engravings — in English, German, French, Spanish, 
Portuguese, Italian, Dutch, Danish, Swedish, and Welsh. 



O 2 " It is the design of the Society to issue all its publications in good 
type, for the poor as well as the rich ; and to sell them, as nearly as may 
be, at cost, that the Society may neither sustain loss nor make a profit by 
all its sales. 



FEB 8 1901 



