^1^ 



4; *' 



-^ ^r.\; 



:»^":y/;^^ 






J9m^^^%<K^^ 




* t % r4' 




llS^o SAMnLfHIL IP]lAm(DIi. 



f 



2ffi SS Sffi ^ S 2S 



REV. SAMUEL PEARCE, A. 31, 

WHO WAS UNITED ^TTTl CAREY AND OTHERS IN E3TA8USHIN0 
MISSIONS IN INDIA, 1793. 



BY REV. ANDREW FULLER. 



WITB ADDITIONS PROM HIS CORRESPONDENCB vViiB 
DR. CAREY, *c. 

BY BIS SON, REV. W. H. PEARCE, 

MISSIONARY AT CALCUTTA. 



' To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain."— Phii.. 1 : 21. 
That life ia long which answers life's great end."— YoONC 



PUBLISHED BY THB 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

IW NASSAU-STREET, NEW-YORK. 



D. Fansbaw, Priaur. 



3 

The hite venerable Dr. Ryland said of the subject of this 
memoir, " He possessed such an assemblage of lovely graces 
and acceptable qualifications as are seldom found united, 
even in truly Christian ministers. He had the firmest at- 
tachment to evangelical truth, and the most constant regard 
to practical godliness ; he united remarkable soimdness of 
judgment with uncommon warmth of affection. I never 
saw. at least in one of his years, such active, ardent zeal, 
conjoined with such gentleness, modesty, and deep humility , 
so much of the little child, and so much of the Evangelist— 
I can scarcely forbear saying of the Apostle of Jesus 
Christ." " One thing I will say, which I could say of very 
few others, though I have known many of the excellent of 
the earth,— that I never saw or heard of any thing respect- 
ing him which grieved me, imless it was his inattention to 
his health ; — and that I believe was owing to a mistaken 
idea of his constitution." 

In the funeral discourse preached by Rev. Mr. Fuller, he 
says, " There are but few characters in this imperfect state 
that will bear an impartial scrutiny ; and which do not re- 
quire, if exhibited to advantage, that a number of their 
words and deeds should be overlooked, or thrown, as by a 
painter, into the shade. But I solemnly declare that were I 
disposed to say all I know of our deceased friend, both bad 
and good, I should be utterly at a loss on one side, nor have 
I any fear of speaking too much on the other ; but rather 
am persuaded that it is not in my power to do him justice. 
He was, doubtless, a sinful and imperfect creature before 
God ; but he was also a singular instance of the holy and 
happy efficacy of divine grace, whose imperfections were as 
few, and whose excellences as many, as I have ever wit- 
nessed in a mortal man. Some, who knew but little of him, 
may think this too strong, I only say, they that knew him 
best will be the least disposed to think so." 



I 



CONTENTS. 



Preface, 

Chap. 1.— His parentage — conversion— call to the min- 
istry—and settlement at Birmingham, 7 

Chap. 2. — His deep interest in missions to the heathen — 
his laborious exertions in promoting them — and his 
offering himself to become a missionary, 47 

Chap. 3. — His religious exercises and labors, from the 
time of his relinquishing the idea of going abroad 
to the commencement of his last illness, 116 

Chap. 4.— An account of his last illness, and the holy 
and happy exercises of his mind under it, 175 

Chap. 5.— General outlines of his character, 239 

Concluding reflections, 283 



MEMOIR, &c. 



CHAPTER I. 



Parentage of Mr. Pear ce— His Conversion^ Call to the 
Ministry — And Seltlcmcnt at Birmingham. 

Mr. Samuel Pearce was born at PJymouth, 
England, July 20, 176G. His father was a respec- 
table silversmith, and many years a deacon of the 
Baptist church. 

When a child, he lived with his grandfather, who 
was very fond of him, and endeavored to impress 
his mind with the principles of religion. At about 
eight or nine years of age he came home to his 
father, with a view of learning his business. As he 
advanced in life, his evil propensities, as he said, 
began to ripen ; and, forming connections with se- 
veral vicious school-fellows, he became more and 
more corrupted. So greatly was his heart at this 
time set in him to do evil, that had it not been for 
the restraining goodness of God, which somehow, 
he knew not how, preserved him in most instances 
from carrying his wicked inclinations into practice, 
he supposed he should have been utterly ruined. 



8 MEMOIR OF 

At times he was under strong convictions, which 
rendered him miserable ; but at other times they 
subsided, and then he would return with eagerness 
to his sinful pursuits. When about fifteen years 
old, he was sent by his father to inquire after the 
welfare of a person in the neighborhood, in dying 
circumstances, who (though before his departure he 
was in a happy state of mind) at that time was sink- 
ing into deep despair. While in the room of the 
dying man, he heard him cry out, with inexpressible 
agony of spirit, " I am damned for ever ! !" These 
awful words pierced his soul, and he felt a resolution 
at the time to serve the Lord ; but the impression 
soon wore off, and he again returned to folly. 

When about sixteen years of age, it pleased God 
effectually to turn him to himself A sermon deli- 
vered by Mr. Birt, who was then co-pastor with Mr, 
Gibbs, of the Baptist church at Plymouth, w^as the 
first means of impressing his heart with a sense of 
his lost condition, and of directing him to the gospel 
remedy. The change in him appears to have been 
sudden, but effectual ; and, though his vicious pro- 
pensities were bitter to his recollection, yet, be- 
ing now sensibly subdued, he was furnished with 
so much the clearer evidence that the work was of 
God. " I believe (he says) few conversons were 
more joyful. The change produced in my views, 
feelings, and conduct, was so evident to myself, that 
J could no more doubt of its beinir from God, than 



6AMUEL PEARCE, " 

of my existence. I had the witness in myself, and 
was filled with peace and joy unspeakable." ^ ^ 

His feelings being naturally strong, and receiving 
a new direction, he entered into religion with all his 
heart ; but, not having known the devices of Satan, 
his soul was injured by its own ardor, and he was 
thrown into great perplexity. Having read Dod- 
dridge's Rise a7id Progress of Rehgionin the bout, 
he determined formally to dedicate himself to the 
Lord in the manner recommended in the seventeemh 
chapter of that work. The form of a covenant, as 
there drawn up, he also adopted as his ovvn; and 
that he might bind himself in the most solemn 
and afiecting manner, signed it ivith his blood . 
But afterwards, failing in his engagements, he was 
■ plunn-ed into great distress, and almost into despair. 
On a° review of his covenant, he seemed to accuse 
himself of a pharisaical reliance upon the strength 
of his own resolutions ; and therefore, taking the 
paper to the top of his father's house, he tore it into 
small pieces, and threw it from him, to be scattered 
by the wind. He did not, however, consider his 
obligation to be the Lord's as hereby nullified ; bat, 
feeling more suspicion of himself, he depended solely 
upon the blood of the cross. 

Soon after his first awakening, he wrote the fol- 
lowing letter to Rev. Mr. Birt, his pastor : 



10 MEMOIR OF 

" Plymouth^, October 27, 1782. 
•• 3Iy very dear Mr. Birt, 

" Were I to make the least delay in answering 
your very affectionate letter, I should deem myself 
culpable of the greatest ingratitude. You almost 
commence your kind letter with mentioning that my 
tears at parting with you demanded 5^0 ur fervent 
prayers. But do, my dear sir, consider that sepa- 
rating from an earthly parent, the author of animal 
life, must, where a filial affection subsists, be an af- 
fecting scene. How much more moving must it be 
to part with a father in Christ Jesus ! To part with 
one whom the Almighty has made the happy means 
of raising from a state of death in trespasses and sins, 
to that of life in a dear dying Redeemer ! 

" O, sir, such was the case when I parted with my 
ever dear Mr. Birt. Did this require your fervent 
prayers? Has this caused you to remember me 
when prostrate at a footstool of mercy ? Let me be- 
seech you, my dear sir, still to continue it ; and, 
whenever you bow the suppliant knee at a throne 
of grace, not to fail beseechin^: the Author of mercy 
to extend his mercy to an object so unworthy. O ! 
beg of him, that, since he has begun a good work in 
me, he would carry it on. As he has enabled me to 
put my hand to the gospel plough, may I never look 
back : but may he grant me grace and strength to 
hold on, and hold out to the end ; to conquer every 
foe; to be continually pressing forward toward the 



SAMUEL PEARCE, II 

mark and prize of my high calling in Christ Jesus ; 
and, in the end, to come off more than conqueror 
through him who, I trust, has loved me and given 
himself for me. O ! beg of him that he will ever 
keep me from possessing a lukewarm, a Laodicean 
spirit ! May my affections to the crucified Savior be 
continually on a flame ! 

" I am ' prone to wander ;' yes, ' I feel it ; prone 
to leave the God I love.' O that my affections may 
be more and more united to him ! My dear sir, pray 
for me. Use your interest at a throne of grace on 
my behalf; and as God has promised to be a God 
hearing and answering prayer, I doubt not but it 
will meet with a gracious reception, and perhaps 
with a gracious answer too. O, sir ! let me once 
more entreat you never to forget me whilst offering 
up prayers to your God. Religion, you may well 
say, is worthy the choice of all : it makes a beggar 
superior to a king ; whilst, destitute of it, a king is 
inferior to a beggar. What — oh ! what — can equal 
the felicity, the enjoyments of a Christian 7 Nothing, 
surely, on this transitory globe ! Nothing this ^vo^ld 
calls good or great can be put in competition with 
it, — with the joyous feeling of him who has the un- 
speakable happiness of experiencing himself inte- 
rested in a dear Redeemer. 

" Surely, no tongue can express, no heart can con- 
ceive, what God has prepared for those who love 
him ! O how thankful ought those to be whom he 



12 MEMOIR OF * 

has called by divine grace to the knowledge of him- 
self! What an unspeakable mercy is it that he has 
distinguished me in such a peculiar manner (give 
me leave to use your own words) as to be taken 
into his service, adopted into his family, made an 
heir of God, a joint heir with Jesus Christ ! What 
now is required of me? What am I now required 
to do ? When I reflect on this, how short do I find 
I come in my duty ! How backward am I to it ! 
How unwilling to perform it ! Even when I would 
do good, evil is present with me. 

' What shall I do with this my heart 1 

' Where shall I bring my sin 1 
* O Lamb of God, who bore my smart, 

' 'Tis thou must make me clean.' 

" I have no righteousness of my own, no merits 
of mine to bring ; the best of my performances come 
infinitely short of the holy law of God. On Jesus 
alone I must depend for salvation. Here I rest. 
Hence I draw all my hope. Jesus Christ has died, 
and Jesus shall not die in vain. The Redeemer's 
blood cleanses from all sin, Happy, thrice happy, 
they who have washed and made their robes white 
in the blood of the Lamb ! May it be the blessed 
experience of my dear friend and myself. 

" I thank you, sir, for your kind admonitions. I 
hope the God of all grace will enable me to abide 
by them. Tribulations, trials, and temptations, I am 



I 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 13 

sensible, are the lot of all God's children here below : 
but I am equally certain that as long as we rely upon 
our God, and confide in him only, he that has given 
us a sure -word of promise, whereby he has caused 
us to hope, will with them all work out a way for 
our escape, that we may be able to bear them. 

" And now, that it may be our joint happiness, my 
dear sir, to be kept in a holy, happy fellowship with 
our God ; that we maybe often brought to Pisgah's 
summit, and behold the promised Canaan ; that we 
may often, whilst there, anticipate the pleasures of 
the heavenly world ; and, when we have passed the 
floods of Jordan, meet around the throne above, there 
to chant eternal lays to Him that sitteth upon the 
throne, and to the Lamb, for ever, is, dear sir, the 
constant prayer of him who is, and wishes ever to 
remain, 

" Your affectionate friend, Samuel Pearce." 

On July 20, 1783, the day he was seventeen years 
old, he was baptized, and became a member of the 
Baptist church at Plymouth, the ministers and mem- 
bers of which, in a few years, perceived in him ta- 
lents for public work. Being solicited by both his 
pastors, he exercised as a probationer ; and, receiving 
a unanimous call from the church, entered on the 
work of the ministry in November, 1786. In August, 
the year following, he went to the Academy at Bristol, 
then under the super intendance of Dr. Caleb Erans. 



14 MEMOIR OF 

Mr. Birt, when Pastor of the Baptist church, in 
the Square, Plymouth Dock, in a letter to the com- 
piler of these memoirs, thus speaks of him : " Though 
he was, so far as I know, the very first fruits of my 
ministry, on my coming hither, and though our 
friendship and affection for each other were great 
and constant, yet previously to his going to Bristol 
I had but few opportunities of conversing with him, 
or of making particular observations respecting him. 
All who best knew him, however, will remember, 
and must tenderly speak of his loving deportment ; 
and those w^ho attended the conferences with him, 
soon received the most impressive intimations of his 
future eminence, as a minister of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

" Very few have entered upon, and gone through 
their religious profession, with more exalted piety^ 
or warmer zeal ; and as few have exceeded him in 
the possession and display of that charity which 
* suffereth long, and is kind, that envieth not, that 
vaunteth not itself, and is not puffed up, that doth 
not behave itself unseemly, that seeketh not her own, 
is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil, that beareth 
all things, believeth all things, endureth all things.' 
But why should I say this to you ? You knew him 
yourself" 

While at the academy he was much distinguished 
by the amiableness of his spirit and behavior. It 
is sometimes observable, that where the talents of a 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 15 

young man are admired by his friends, and his early 
efTorts flattered by crowded auditories, effects have 
been produced which have proved fatal to his future 
respectability and usefulness. But this was not the 
case with Mr. Pearce. Notwithstanding the popu- 
larity which even at that early period attended his 
ministerial exercises, his tutors have more than 
once remarked that he never appeared to them to be 
in the least elated, or to have neglected his proper 
studies : but was uniformly the serious, industrious, 
docile, modest, and unassuming young man. 

In July, 1789, he came to the church in Cannon 
street, Birmingham, to whom he was recommended 
by Rev. Robert Hall, at that time one of his tutors. 
After preaching to them awhile on probation, he 
w^as chosen to be their pastor, and was ordained 
August 18, 1790. 

About two months after his ordination, he wrote 
to his friend, Mr. Summers, of London. Whether 
the sentiments contained in that letter arose from 
the recollection of his late solemn engagement, is 
uncertain ; but they were certainly ver}^ appropriate 
to the occasion. Requesting his friend to pray for 
him, he says, " Paul speaks of blessings received 
through the prayers of his fellow-christians : no 
wonder, therefore, he so often solicits their continu- 
ance. But, if it be well to be interested in the pray- 
ers of fellow-christians, how much more to believe 
the great High Priest of our profession, .Tesus the 



16 MEMOIR OF 

Son of God, is gone into the holy of holies, with our 
names on his breast-plate, ever to plead in the pre- 
sence of God for us — for us ! O transporting 
thought ! Who can doubt of the success of such 
an intercessor ? 

" I have of late had my mind very pleasantly, and 
I hope profitably, exercised on this subject, more 
than ever, and find increasing pleasure, from a well 
grounded faith in the divinity of my incarnate Ad- 
vocate. I see the glory of his office, arising from 
the infinite extent of his knowledge, power, and love, 
as well as from the efficacy of his atoning sacrifice. 

" I do not wonder at those men who deny the 
priestly office of Christ, when they have refused him 
the honors cf Deity. I rejoice that he who pleads 
for us knoiDS our ivanis individually, as well as 
the necessities of the whole church collectively. 
Through his intercession alone I expect my sins to 
be pardoned, my services accepted, and my soul 
preserved, guided, and comforted ; and, with confi- 
dence in his intercession, I cannot doubt but I shall 
enjoy all. O how sweet it is, my dear friend, to 
exercise a lively faith in a living Savior ! May you 
and I do this daily. Thus for us to live will be 
Christ, and to die gain : living or dying, we shall 
be the Lord's." 

The following letters to his friend Mr. Staughton, 
exhibit the same spirit of piety and self-dedication : 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 17 

" Birmingham, June 4, 1791. 
" I received yours, my dear brother, just before I 
left Birmingham, on Wednesday last ; it did me 
good, and gave me pleasure. I rejoice in your joy ; 
I thank God for the assistance he grants you in pub- 
lic work. O, let all the strength and power you 
have, be devoted as the Divine will may seem fit ; 
let it all be employed to exalt the Savior : aim at 
that, and that only, my dear brother, in all your ser- 
mons. It v/ill give us more pleasure, another day, 
that He was exalted by us, than that we exalted our- 
selves. Would to God we could live more on Him 
personally ! we should then speak with more plea- 
sure of him publicly. ' It is pleasant speaking of 
God when we walk with him.' May your experi- 
ence and mine confirm it. 

" Your very affectionate brother, S. P." 

" Plymouth Dock, July ^9, 1791. 
" My dour Friend, 

One of the students, Mr. Rowland, is now dan- 
gerously ill at Plymouth Dock, of a fever, which is 
very prevalent here ; and he lodges in a house where 
another student from the same country (Wales) died 
not long since. Lord, what is man ! O, my brother, 
let us improve diligently the moments we possess ; 
let us watch for souls ; let us spend ourselves in its 
service for them. I preached thrice yesterday, not 
without pleasure ; God grant it m-ay be vrith profit. 
2* 



18 MEMOIR OF 

How is it with your soul ? How do you find closet 
duties ? 1 have had some precious seasons at a throne 
of grace since I reached Plymouth ; I could say it 
was good, very good, to draw nigh to God. I am 
more and more convinced that our private devotion, 
or want of devotion, will materially affect the tenor 
of our deportment. God help us to give him our 
hearts ; no fear, then, but he will have our services 
too. I wish you much of the divine presence; still 
pray for your unworthy brother, and still help him 
to praise, 

" I am, yours affectionately, S. P." 

A similar spirit of ardent devotedness to the work 
of his divine Master, and of affectionate interest in 
the welfare of his friends, is displayed in the follow- 
ing letters to his friend Mr. Summers. 

" Birmingham, Feb. 3, 1791. 

"' Friendship and ceremony seldom coalesce ; — 
the ardor of aflection and the chilling punctilios of 
formality cannot be united. Possessed of the former, 
averse to the latter, my kind friend receives a line 
from me, although my last is still unanswered. The 
occasion of my writing is a source of joy inexpressi- 
ble to myself — a joy in which I know you will par- 
ticipate. Your amiable friend, Miss PI. permitted 
me to call her my own y*:Sterd.ay. One dv/elling 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 19 

now contains us both, and Paul's Square contains 
that dwelling-. 

" Thus far the good hand of my God has been with 
me ; and I would hope, that not without his smiles, 
I have pursued the path which at length has led me 
to the felicity I now enjoy in the society of the most 
amiable of women ; -without them, I am still sensi- 
ble, all created good is valueless, is vanity and vexa- 
tion of spirit. 

" Kow pleasing, my dear friend, to a pious mind, 
is the reflection that all our goings are in his hands 
whose love inclines him to every thing that is kind 
— Avhose purity connects with his conduct every 
thing that is good — whose wisdom infallibly adopts 
the best means, and whose power cannot fail to ac- 
complish all his will. AVith his blessing, our felici- 
ty cannot fail of being accomplished — without it, it 
can never be attained. May it be our happiness to 
possess an interest in 3'our prayers, that this all 
gracious, wise, and good Being, may continue still 
to bless, and cause that our nnion to each other 
may be a means of leading us more to communion 
with him. 

*' Besides this, I have, my dear friend, more mer- 
cies to be thankful for than I could enumerate on a 
quire of paper. Religion still flourishes among us, 
beneath the auspices of the Sun of Righteousness. 
Our congregations are quite as numerous as when 
you were at Birmingham ; and we have had several 



20 MEMOIR OF 

pleasing additions since that period to our church. 
About eight weeks since, I baptized nine persons ; 
last Sabbath 1 administered the same ordinance to 
eight more : and an equal or superior number ap- 
pear in the way to join us soon. May this accession 
to our numbers be an increase to our joy. * * 

" " S. P." 

" Birmingham, September 30, 1791. 
"My very dear friend, 

" . . . . The riots in Birmingham occasioned 
our stay in Bristol to be prolonged to a fortnight, 
so that we had not above three weeks to spend at 
Plymouth, from whence I purposed writing to you. 
This inch of time was wholly engrossed in making 
Mrs. P. witness the beauties of the West, and in in- 
troducing her to my numerous acquaintance in De- 
vonshire. 

" On our return we found our habitation had 
been quite emptied of furniture, and, though we 
found the goods replaced, yet my books and papers 
were so deranged that to this hour they are not all 
restored to order again. 

" It is now Saturday evening ; I have finished 
my usual preparations for the morrow. I have an 
hour to spare, and that hour I devote to intercourse 
^^^th a friend I much esteem. 

" I anticipate with some degree of holy pleasure 
the work of the approaching day. I have for my 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 21 

evening's discourse the best subject in all the Bible. 
Eph. 1 : 7. — Redemption ! how welcome to the cap- 
tive ! Forgiveness! how delightful to the guilty! 
Grace ! how pleasing to the heart of a saved sinner ! 
O my dear friend, how much do we lose of Gospel 
blessings for want of realizing our personal connec- 
tion with them I hence it is that we are no more 
humble, thankful, watchful, prayerful, joyful. Wo 
view the glories of the Gospel at a distance, and for 
want of that faith which is the 'substance of things 
hoped for, and evidence of things not seen,' think 
too lightly of ihem. O Lord increase our faith ! 

" There are two things we should be always 
doing. First v,-e should identify the promises and 
things promised, satisfy ourselves respecting the cer- 
tain existence of them — that they are not shadows, 
but substances — not fancies, but realities. This would 
have a commanding influence upon our meditations, 
desires, and praj-ers. Then, secondly, realize our 
interests m them, saying, ' These things are so, there 
is a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory 
— there are enjoyments reserved in the heavenly 
world surpassing all human thought — and these 
joys, these glories, this inheritance is miae ;' then, 
how would our hearts be where our treasure is ! 
how pure would be our affections! how burden- 
some would sin be ! how precious would Christ be I 
how much prized would Sabbaths and ordinances 
be! how dear would the Scriptures be! — In short, 



22 MEMOIR OF 

death itself would be welcome, for the soul would 
long to depart and be with Christ, which is far 
better. 

" I wish to be very thankful that I have had some 
rich experience of divine things since my return, 
both in the closet and in the pulpit ; at some sea- 
sons I could have said, ' O that I had wings like a 
dove, that I might fly away and be at rest.' The 
twentieth hymn in Dr. Watts' s second book has 
been the most experimental piece of poetry I ever 
read ; when I say this, you need not be told that I 
am not upon the mount always ; alas ! no ; but 
then why should I complain ? my Lord knows best 
when to take me thither, and hov/ long to keep me 
there ; yet I know that if I had not an evil heart of 
unbelief I should not thus depart from the living 
and the true God. I hope you enjoy much of hea- 
ven on earth. O it is good to draw nigh to God. 

" 'Tis heaven to rest in his embrace, 
" And no where else but there." 

" May we know more and more experimentally 
the blessing of the beloved disciple. John, 21 : 20. 

"S. P." 

" Birmingham, October Q, 1792. 
'• My very dear Frioud, 

" ' Our law judgeth not a man before it heareth 
him' — let me beseech you to listen candidly to my 
defence, and then pronounce judgment on my silence 



SAMUEL PCAKCE 23 

• 

as your wisdom directs. First, 1 have been out 
three considerable journeys since I returned from 
Wales, and all on my Master's business: into Ox- 
fordshire, Shropshire, Leicestershire, and twice into 
Northamptonshire. This necessarily occasioned my 
being more busily employed on my return. But, 
secondly, my hands have been unusually full lately 
at home, partly from the prevalence of Antinomian 
poison among- many professors in our town and con- 
gregation, and partly from greater success than or- 
dinar}' attending my jyoor labors for my dear JMaster. 
Several have been under great awakenings: ten have 
lately joined us; yesterday I was rejoiced to hear 
that nineteen inquiring souls met at the house of one 
of our members ; one besides has been with me this 
morning, and I expect two more to-night. My dear 
brother, it is pleasant to write to you under the en- 
dearing idea of Christian friendship ; but 3'ou will, 
I know, forgive me when I say it is sweeter .still to 
listen to the lispings of so many babes in grace, who 
are just beginning to say, ' AbKa, Father,' and to re- 
gard them as ' children whom the Lord hath given 
uie,' — poor unworthy me ! Ohow I should rejoice 
to contemplate you in a similar, or more prosperous 
situation. You sometimes sit with your dear Mrs. S. 
by your side, and your little family around you ; and, 
as you look, you love and are delighted. ' These 
children of mine (you say) w'ill support my old age, 
and administer comiort when the springs of life be- 



24 MEMOIR OF 

gin to decline.' Blessed be God, I can sometimes 
contemplate my children in the faith, and say, ' Ye 
are my hope and my joy, and shall be my crown of 
rejoicing in the day of the Lord Jesus.' Amen, so 
be it. 

" 'Never was the sentiment of the text and sermxon 
which you have transcribed from my MS. more ex- 
emplified since God deigned to put gospel treasure 
into the brittle contemptible vessels of human nature, 
than it is in Cannon-street ; surely the excellency of 
the power is not of man, but of God. 

" O when will the time, the longed-for time arrive, 
when the Messiah's ensign shall be lifted high, and 
Jews and Gentiles, Pagans and Mahomedans, Afri- 
cans and Indians, be gathered unto it? 

' Fly abroad, thou mighty gospel, 

' Win and conquer, never cease; 

' Spread from eastern coast to western, 

' Multiply and still increase : 

* Hasten, Lord, this glorious day.' 

" One journey I made to Northamptonshire was 
with a view to assist in seiling 071 foot a missiori to 
the unconverted heathen. It has long engaged the 
unusual concern of many ministers in our connection 
about the centre of the kingdom. Brother Carey, of 
Leicester, published on the subject ; and last Wed- 
nesday evening we drew out a sketch of an institu- 
tion for so great a design. May He, whose glory I 
trust we have in view, direct all future deliberations. 



8AMUEL PEARCE. 25 

and make the embryo effort ripen and succeed, till 
future ages prove that the plan begun at Kettering, 
October 3, 1790, comprehended in its consequences 
the salvation of the world. ' Soon,' my brother, ' soon 
(it is said) Ethiopia shall stretch forth her hands unto 
God.' May we, like our divine Master, not fail nor 
be discouraged, until the gospel be established in the 
earth, and the waiting isles have received the law of 
him who is the approaching 'desire of all nations!' 

" O that our little selves were more lost and swal- 
lowed up in the general interests of mankind, and 
the honors of our illustrious Lord ! Never did I feel 
iryself a more contemptible reptile than Vv'hen preach- 
ing last night from Prov. 19: 21. The immutability 
of the divine counsels, and the omnipotence of the 
divine arm, exhibit a striking contrast with the limit- 
ed power of mutable man. Well may we stand on 
the shore, and, gazing on the ocean of divine perfec- 
tions, exclaim, ' O the depths,' &c. Great God, ' I 
am a worm, and no man ; ' I am but an atom com- 
posed of the meanest matter, and in myself unquali- 
fied for the meanest service ; but, in thy hand, ' a 
straw shall thresh a mountain,' and a ' barley cake 
put a host of thine enemies to flight.' Work, Lord, 
as thou wilt ; send by whom thou wilt ; for, when 
•thou dost work, who shall let it?' 

" We take a part in the pleasure which you must 
feel in reflecting on the gracious interposition of the 
Lord on behalf of Mrs. S. Who is a God like ours ? 
3 



26 MEMOIR OF 

O, what praising, living- Ciiristians should we be if 
"we lived as our obligations to sovereign mercy teach 
us ; dead to the world — alive to God — far from gloom 
— full of joy ! Heaven would be begun below : and, 
like saints in apostolic ages, we should be ' praising 
God, and in favor with all his people.' Well ! the 
tiresome days of sad complaint are rolling fast away ; 
many are already gone ; ere this reaches you, an- 
other will have been numbered with those beyond the 
flood ; soon the night of death will come — a short 
night, but it will usher in n day, O how permanent ! 
an eternal day ! which shall be succeeded by night 
no more! Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. 

" I have lately been much reconciled to death ! 
first, from a persuasion that the Lord can accomplish 
all his purposes of grace as well without the use of 
so poor a worm as with him ; and, secondly, from a 
comparison of this sinful state with that sinless world, 
O, my brother, it is sin, cursed sin, that turns man 
to a devil, and earth to hell. It is holiness, perfect 
holiness, which forms the heaven of God, of angels, 
and of the spirits of just men made perfect ; and I can 
say this is the heaven I want. O, if the kingdom of 
glory contained a million of blessings, and God were 
to bid me choose, my heart would reply, ' Lord ! 
give me the blessing of perfect conformity to thee, 
and then bestow the rest on angels: I'll envy not 
their portion, having enough in possessing thy 
image, and in thy image thee. S. P." 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 27 

The lady with whom he mentions his connection 
in marriage, was Miss. Sarah Hopkins, daughter of 
Mr. Joshua Hopkins, of Alcester ; and the connec- 
tion appears to have been all along a source of great 
enjoyment to him. The following lines, addressed 
to Mrs. Pearce when he was on a journey, the year 
after their marriage, seem to be no more than a com- 
mon letter ; yet the}'' show, not only the tenderness 
of his affection, but his heavenly-mindedness, his gen- 
tle manner of persuading, and how every argument 
was fetched from religion and every incident improv- 
ed for introducing it. 

" Chipping Nortan, August 15, 1792. 

•* I believe, on retrospection, that I have hitherto 
rather anticipated the proposed time of my return 
than delayed the interview with my dear Sarah for 
an hour. But what shall I say, my love, now, to 
reconcile you to my procrastinating my return for 
several days more 1 Why, I will say, it appears I 
am called of God ; and I trust the piety of both of us 
will submit and say, ' Thy will be done.' 

" You have no doubt perused Mr. Ryland's letter 
to me, wherein I find he solicits an exchange. The 
reason he assigns is so obviously important, that a 
much greater sacrifice than we are called to make 
should not be withheld to acccomplish it. I there- 
fore propose, God willing, to spend the next Lord's 
day at Northampton. I thought of taking tea with 



23 MEMOIR OF 

you this evening : that would have been highly grati- 
fying to us both ; but it must be our meat and drink 
to do and submit to the will of our heavenly Father. 
All is good that comes from him, and all is done 
right which is done in obedience to him. O, to be 
perfectly resigned to his disposal — how good is it ! 
May you, my dearest Sarah, and myself, daily prove 
the sweetness of this pious frame of soul ; then all 
our duties will be sweet, all our trials will be light, 
all our pleasures will be pure, and all our hopes 
sanctified. 

" This evening I hope to be at Northampton. Let 
your prayers assist my efforts on the ensuing Sab- 
bath. You Avill, 1 trust, find in Mr. R. a ship richly 
laden with spiritual treasures. O for more supplies 
from the exhaustless mines of grace ! S. P." 

The exemplary diligence with which he pursued 
the duties of his pastoral office, about this time, will 
be evident from the following letter to Mr. Staughton. 

" Birmingham, March 30, 1792. 
"My dear Brother, 

" A violent head-ache prevents my attending our 
prayer-meeting this evening ; but, as I am a letter in 
your debt, I will endeavor to repay you, notwith- 
standing my complaint ; you must expect me to be 
brief. If I fill the sheet it must be deemed a work 
of supererogation. 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 29 

" You have, probabl}-, heard of the late transaction 
of our church ; we were under the disagreeable ne- 
cessity of separating two of our members. It was 
done publicly, with much solemnity, on Lord's day ; 
the members seemed much affected ; we appointed 
the following day to be set apart for fasting and 
prayer ; we met at nine, and continued confessing 
and supplicating till half past one. I believe the 
Lord was with us, both to notice and approve. We 
began the next day a prayer-meeting at live o'clock 
in the morning, to be continued every day without 
intermission, except Lord's day ; then, as usual, to 
be at seven. Beyond my expectations, we have had 
between ihirty and fifty persons present most morn- 
ings since. I have found it to my advantage to at- 
tend regularly ; the effects have been already seen ; 
the young people have been amazingly revived; 
they meet four or five times for prayer every Lord's 
day, besides the public opportunities. In preaching, 
I have enjoyed more of the substantial assistance of 
divine grace than usual ; several persons, in dark- 
ness of soul, have been brought into the marvelous 
light of divine comfort; the hearers have been 
quickened ; ten persons have applied for admission 
to the church in a less number of days, which, with 
one before, make eleven candidates ; seven of them, 
I believe, were called in Cannon-street ; among them 
the youth of sixteen, concerning Avhom I wrote you 
last. Next Lord's day week, April 8th, I shall bap- 



30 MEMOIR OF 

tize some of them ; we have not time to receive the 
experience of all ; the rest must wait another month ; 
who can tell but God may bring more to join them, 
who are yet in obscurity ? I know of some who in- 
deed appear ♦ inquiring the way to Zion, with their 
faces thither-ward.' 

" We are next to divide the whole church into 
district meetings, similar to that of brother Eld's, 
with which you sometimes attended ; I am in hopes 
it will wonderfully conduce to promote the union 
and affection of the body. 

" In addition to all this, each member is numbered 
in the church book, &c. ; cards with his or her name, 
and the corresponding number, thus ^.^'g. are de- 
livered to every individual, who is to put one on the 
poor's plate at each ordinance; the deacons and 
ministers afterwards compare the numbers and 
names, and whoever is found wanting is to be waited 
upon in the course of the ensuing week, to inquire 
the cause of absence. Thus shall we come at a 
pretty general knowledge of the state of the church 
at large ; may we have wisdom to guide us as an- 
gels of God. 

" I am, my dear friend, 

" Yours, very affectionately, S. P." 

The soul of Mr. Pearce was formed for friendship ; 
it was natural therefore to suppose that, while en- 
gaging in the pursuit of his studies at the academy, 



SAMUEL PEARCB. 31 

he would contract religious intimacies with some of 
his brethren ; and it is worthy of notice, that the 
grand cement of his friendship was kindred piety. 
In the following letters, addressed to his friend Mr. 
Steadman, the reader will perceive the justness of 
this remark, as well as the encouraging prospects 
w^hich soon attended his labors at Birmingham. 

" May 9, 1792. 
" My very dear Brother, 

" You live so remote that I can hear nothing of 
your prosperity at Broughton. I hope you are set- 
tled with a comfortable people, and that you enjoy 
much of your Master's presence, both in the study 
and in the pulpit. For my part, I have nothing to 
lament, but an insensible, ungrateful heart, and that 
is sufficient cause for lamentation. This, only this, 
bows me down ; and under this pressure I am ready 
to adopt the words I preached from last evening — 
* Ok that I had wings like a dove : for then would I 
jiy away, and he at rest P 

" As a people, we are generally united : I believe 
more so than most churches of the same dimen- 
sions. Our number of members is about two hun- 
dred and ninety-five, between forty and fifty of whom 
have joined us since I saw you, and most of them I 
have the happiness of considering as my children in 
the faith. There is still a crying out amongst us 
after salvation ; and still, through much grace, it is 



32 MEMOIR OF 

my happiness to point them to the Lamb of God, 
who taketh away the sins of the world. 

" In preaching, I have often peculiar liberty ; at 
other times I am barren. I suppose my experience 
is like that of most of my brethren ; but 1 am not 
weary of my work. I hope still that I am willing 
to spend and be spent, so that I may win souls to 
Christ, and finish my course with joy. But I want 
more heart religion ; I want a more habitual sense 
of the divine presence; I want to walk with God as 
Enoch walked. There is nothing that grieves me 
so much, or brings so much darkness on my soul, 
as my little spirituality and frequent wanderings in 
secret prayer. I cannot neglect the duty ; but it is 
seldom that I enjoy it. 

' Ye that love the Lord indeed, 
* Tell me, is it so with you V 

" When I come to the house of God, I pray and 
preach with freedom. Then I think the presence 
of the people seems to weigh more with me than the 
presence of God, and deem myself a hypocrite, al- 
most ready to leave my pulpit for some more pious 
preacher. But the Lord does own the word ; and 
again I say, if I go to hell myself, I will do whai I 
can to keep others from going thither ; and so, in 
the strength of the Lord, I will. 

" An observation once made to me helps to sup- 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 33 

port me above water : • If you did not plough in 
your closet, you would not reap in the pulpit.' And 
again I think, the Lord dwelleth in Zion, and loveth 
it more than the dwellings of Jacob. S. P." 

" February 1, 1793. 

" The pleasure which your friendly epistle gave 
me rises beyond expression ; and it is one of the first 
wishes of my heart ever to live in your valued friend- 
ship. Accept this, and my former letters, my dear 
"brother, as sufficient evidences of my ardent wishes 
to preserve, by correspondence, that mutual remem- 
brance of each other, which on my part will ever 
be pleasurable, and on yours, I hope, never painful. 

" But ah, how soon may we be rendered incapable 
of such an intercourse ! When I left Bristol, I left 
it with regret. I was sorry to leave my studies to 
embark, inexperienced as I am, on the tempestuous 
ocean of public life, where the high blowing winds, 
and rude noisy billows, must, more or less, inevitably 
annoy the trembling voyager. Nor did it make a 
small addition to my pain that I was to part with so 
many of my dear companions, with whom I had 
spent so many happy hours, either in furnishing or 
unburthening the mind. I need not say, amongst 
the first of these, I considered Josiah Evans.* But 

* The -following extract from the account of this excellent 
young man, drawn up by Mr. Pearce, who had been his 
fellow student at Bristol, for Dr. Rippon's Register, will 



34 MEMOIR or 

ah, my friend, we shall see his face 
Through divine grace I hope we shall go to him ; 
but he will not return to us. ' He wasted away, he 
gave up the ghost, and w^here is he V I was pre- 
pared for the news, because I expected it. The last 
time I heard directly from him was by a very seri- 
ous and affectionate letter, which I received, I think, 

serve at once as a specimen of that endearing intimacy 
which Mr. P. and his associate cultivated, and as a model 
of that friendship which Christians, and especially students 
for the gospel ministry, should ever seek to enjoy. 

'' Mr. Evans had one essential qualification for friendship, 
which was faiihfiihiess. I believe he never discerned any 
thing in my temper or conduct which he thought would be 
injurious to my proficiency as a student, or to my spirituality 
as a Christian, (after our intimacy commenced,) but he 
watched the first opportunity of laying it before me, with 
the reasons of his disapprobation. On some of those occa- 
sions he would give his friendly admonitions and counsels 
with such aflfectionate eloquence, that the result has been 
our retiring together with tears, lamenting oui mutual im- 
perfections before God, and beseeching wisdom and grace 
from above, to adorn our profession, and in every step to 
pursue something worthyof our being and character. Some 
of the moments we thus spent, I believe, were marked with 
as true humiliation of heart as ever we knew : for, as Ave 
did not conceal the various states of our minds from each 
other, we had no occasion to restrain our feelings, and guard 
our expressions, in these exercises ; on the contrary, we felt 
as much freedom as though we had been apart, and realized 
the presence of none but our Maker. 

•' A world, for such a friend-^ to lose is gain J " 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 35 

last September. To it 1 replied ; but received no 
answer. I conjectured — I feared ; and now my con- 
jectures and fears are all realized. Dear departed 
youth ! thy memory will ever be grateful to this 
affectionate breast. May thy amiable qualities live 
again in thy surviving friend, that to the latest period 
of his life he may thank God for the friendship of 
Josiah Evans ! 

" I preached last night from Rev. 21:6; ' / icitl 
give unto him that is athirsi of the fountain of the 
icaier of life freely.'' I took occasion to expound 
the former part of the chapter, and found therein 
pleasure inexpressible ; especially when speaking 
from the first verse — ' and there icas no more sea.^ 
The first idea that presented itself to me was this — 
there shall be no bar to intercourse. . Whether the 
thought be just or not, I leave with you and my 
hearers to determine ; but I found happy liberty in 
illustrating it. What is it that separates one nation 
and one part of the globe from another ? Is it not 
the sea ? Are not Christians, though all of one 
family, the common Father of which is God, separa- 
ted by this sea, or that river, or the other stream 
below ? Yes, but they are one family still. There 
shall be none of these obstructions to communion, 
of these bars to intercourse ; nothing to divide their 
affections or disunite their praise for ever. Forgive 
mv freedom. I am writing to a friend, to a brother. 

"S. P." 



36 MEMOIR OF 

There are few, if any, thinking men but who at 
some seasons have had their minds perplexed with 
regard to religious principles, even those which are 
of the greatest importance. In the end, however, 
where the heart is right, such exercises commonly 
issue in a more decided attachment to the truth. 
Thus it was with Mr. Pearce. In another part of 
the above letter, he thus writes to his friend : 

*• I have, since I saw you, been much perplexed 
about some doctrinal points, both Arminian and So- 
cinian, I believe through reading very attentively, 
but without sufficient dependence on the Spirit of 
truth, several controversies on those subjects ; par- 
ticularly the writings of Whitby, Priestly, and 
others. Indeed, had the state of mind I was in, about 
ten weeks since, continued, I should have been inca- 
pable of preaching with comfort at all. But in the 
mount of the Lord will he be seen. Just as I 
thought of giving up, he who hath the hearts of all 
men in his hand, and turneth them as the rivers of 
water are turned, was pleased, by a merciful, though 
afflicting providence, to set me at a happy liberty. 

" I was violently seized with a disorder very rife 
here, and which has carried off many. One Sab- 
bath evening I felt such alarming symptoms that I 
did not expect to see Monday morning. In these 
circumstances I realized the feelings of a dying man. 
My mind had been so accustomed to reflect on virtue 



I 



SAMtJEL PEARCE. 37 

and moral goodness, that the first thing I attempted 
was a survey of my own conduct; my diligence 
and faithfulness in the ministry, my unspotted life, 
&c. But, ah ! vain props these for dying men to rest 
on ! Such heart-sins, such corruptions, such evil 
propensities, recurred to my mind, that, if ever 1 
knew the moment when I felt my own rightousness 
to be as loathsome and filthy rags, it was then. And 
where should I, where could I, where did I flee, 
but to Him whose glory and grace I had been of 
late degrading, at least in my thoughts ? Yes, there 
I saw peace for guilty consciences was to be alone 
obtained through an almighty Savior. And O ! 
wonderful to tell, I again came to him ; nor was I 
sent away without the blessing. I found him full of 
compassion, ready to receive the most ungrateful of 
men. 

* O, to grace how great a debtor, 

* Daily I'm constrained to be !' 

Thus, my dear brother, was the snare broken, and 
thus I escaped, 

' A debtor to mercy alone, 
' Of covenant mercy I sing.' 

" Join with me in praising Him who remembered 
me in my low estate, because his mercy endureth 
for ever. Yet this is among the ' all things.'' I 
have found that it has made me more spiritual in 
preaching. I h^re prized the Gospel more than 
4 



38 MEMOIR OF 

ever, and hope it will be the means of guarding m& 
against future temptations. 

" Your brother, with ardent affection, m the dear 
Lord Jesus, S. P." 

From his first coming to Birmingham, his meek- 
ness and patience were put to the trial by the Anti- 
nomian spirit which infected many individuals, both 
in and out of his congregation. It is well known 
with what affection it was his practice to beseech 
sinners to be reconciled to God, and to exhort Chris- 
tians to the exerci ie of practical godliness : but these 
were things whica they could not endure. Sooth- 
ing doctrine was all they desired. Therefore it was 
that his ministry kvas traduced by them as Arminian, 
and treated with neglect and contempt. But, like 
his divine Master, he bore the contradiction of sin- 
ners against himself, and this while he had the 
strongest satisfaction that, in those very things to 
which they objected, he was pleasing God. And 
though he plainly perceived the pernicious influence 
of their principles upon their own minds, as well as 
the minds of others, yet he treated them with great 
gentleness and long forbearance : and, when it be- 
came necessary to exclude such of this description 
as were in communion with him, it was with the 
greatest reluctance that he came into that measure, 
and not without having first tried all other means 
in vain. He was not apt to deal in harsh language ; 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 39 

yet, m one of his letters about that tiine, he speaks of 
the principles and spirit of these people as a " cursed 
leaven." 

Among- his numerous religious friendships, he 
seems to have formed one for the special purpose of 
spiritual improvement. This was with Mr. Sum- 
mers, of London, who often accompanied him in his 
journeys ; to whom, therefore, it might be expected 
he Avould open his heart without reserve. Here, it 
is true, we sometimes see him, like his brethren, 
groaning under darkness, want of spirituality, and 
the remains of in-dwelling sin ; but frequently rising 
above all, as into his native element, and pouring 
forth his ardent soul in expressions of joy and praise. 

On August 19, 1793, he writes thus; 

" My dear Brother, 

" When I take my pen to pursue my correspon- 
dence with 1/ou, I have no concern but to communi- 
cate something which may answer the same end we 
propose in our annual journeys ; namely, lending 
some assistance in the important object of getting 
and keeping nearer to God. This, I am persuaded, 
is the mark at which we should be continually aim- 
ing, nor rest satisfied until we attain that to which 
we aspire. I am really ashamed of myself, Avhen, on 
the one hand, I review the time that has elapsed since 
T first assumed the Christian name, with the oppor- 
mnitie^i of improvement in godlinesss which have 



40 MEMOIR O? 

crowded on my moments since that period ; and 
when, on the other, I feel the little advance I have 
made. More light to be sure, I have ; but light loith- 
oiit heat leaves the Christian half dissatisfied. Yes- 
terday I preached on the duty of engagedness in 
God's service, from Jer. 30 : 21 ; ' Who is this that 
engaged his heart to approach unto me ? saith the 
Lord,'' (a text for which I am indebted to our last 
journey.) While urging the necessity of heart re- 
ligion, including sincerity and ardor, I found myself 
much assisted by reflecting on the ardor which our 
dear Redeemer discovered in the cause of sinners. 
Ah ! I could not help saying, if our Savior had mea- 
sured his intenseness in his engagements for us by 
our fervency in fulfilling our engagements to him, 
we should have been now farther from hope than w^e 
are from perfection. 

' Dear Lord, the ardor of thy love 
' Reproves my cold returns.' 

" Two things are causes of daily astonishment to 
me ; the readiness of Christ to come from heaven to 
earth for me ; and my backwardness to rise from 
earth to heaven with him. But, O how animating 
the prospect ! A time approaches when we shall rise 
to sink no more — ' to be for ever with the Lord.' 
To be with the Lord for a week, for a day, for an 
hour, how sweetly must the moments pass ! But to 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 41 

be for ever with the Lord : that enstamps salvation 
with perfection ; that gives an energy to our hopes, 
and a dignity to our joy, so as to render it unspeak- 
n.ble and full of glory. I have had a few realizing 
moments since we parted, and the effect has been, I 
trust, a broken heart O, my brother, it is desirable 
to have a broken heart, were it only for the sake of 
the pleasure it feels in being helped and healed by 
Jesus ! Heart-affecting views of the cursed effects of 
sin, are highly salutary to a Christian's growth in 
humility, confidence, and gratitude. At once how- 
abasing and exalting is the comparison of our loath- 
some hearts with that of the lovely Savior ! In Him 
we see all that can charm an angel's heart ; in our- 
selves all that can gratify a devil's. And yet we may 
rest perfectly assured that these nests of iniquity 
shall, ere long, be transformed into the temples of 
God ; and these sighs of sorrow be exchanged for 
songs of praise. 

" Last Lord's day I spent the most profitable Sab- 
bath to myself that I ever remember since I have 
been in the ministry ; and to this hour I feel the 
sweet solemnities of that day delightfully protracted. 
Ah, my brother, were it not for past experience, I 
should say, 

' My heart presumes I cannot lose 
* The relish all my days.' 

But now I rejoice with tremblings ; desiring- to ' hold 
4* 



42 MEMOIR OF 

fast what I have, that no man take my crown.' Yet 
fearing that I shall find how 

— • Ere one fleeting hour is past, 
' The flatt'ring world employs 

• Some sensual bait to seize my taste, 
' And to pollute my joys.' 

•' Yours, in our dear Savior, S. P." 

In April, 1794, dropping a few lines to the com- 
piler of these Memoirs, on a Lord's day evening, he 
thus concludes : " We have had a good day. I find, 
as a dear friend once said. It is pleasant speaking- 
for God when we walk with him. O for much of 
Enoch's spirit ! The Head of the Church grant it 
to my dear brother, and his friend, 

S. P." 

A few months hefore this, writing to Mr. Staugh- 
ton, he says : " I rejoice, m^r dear brother, in the 
delightful prospect of usefulness whicii appears to be 
opening upon you. May the Day-spring from on 
high still continue to enlighten you, and by you the 
benighted souls of your dear fellow-men around 
you. O that we may preach him plainly, faithfully, 
constantly, practically ; and he hath said that his 
word shall not return void. We may, as ministers, 
adopt the evangelical lines of that popular hymn, 
and with reference to the subject of our preach- 
ing, say, 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 43 

' None but Jesus, none but Jesus, 
* Can do helpless sinners good.' " 

In a letter to Mr. Summers, June 24, 1794, he 
thus writes : " We, my friend, have entered on a 
correspondence of heart with heart, and must not 
lose sig-ht of that avowed object." I thank you sin- 
cerely for continuing the remembrance of so un- 
worthy a creature in your intercourse with heaven ; 
and I thank that sacred Spirit whose quickening in- 
fluences you say you enjoy in the exercise. Yes, 
my brother, I have reaped the fruits of your sup- 
plications. I have been indulged with some seasons 
of unusual joy, tranquil as solitude, and solid as the 
rock on which our hopes are built. In public exer- 
cises peculiar assistance has been afforded; espe- 
cially in these three things : the exaltation of the 
Redeemer's glory; the detection of the crooked 
ways, false refuges, and self delusions of the human 
heart ; and the stirring up of the saints to press on- 
ward, making God's cause their own, and consider- 
ing themselves as living, not for themselves, but for 
him alone. 

" Nor hath the word been without its effect : above 
fifty have been added to our church this year, most 
of whom I rejoice in as the seals of my ministry in 
the Lord. Indeed, I am surrounded with goodness ; 
and scarcely a day passes over my head, but I say, 
* Were it not for an ungrateful heart, I should be 
the happiest man alive ; and, that excepted, I neither 



44 



MEMOIR OF 



expect nor wish to be happier in this world. My 
wife, my children, and myself, are uninterruptedly 
healthy ; my friends kind ; my soul at rest ; and my 
labors successful. Who should be content and 
thankful if I should not ? O, my brother, help me 
to praise ! S. P." 

In a letter to Mrs. Pearce from Plymouth, Sep- 
tember 2, 1794, the dark side of the cloud seems to- 
wards him : " I have felt much barrenness as to 
spiritual things since I have been here, compared 
with my usual frame at home ; and it is a poor ex- 
change, to enjoy the creature at the expense of 
the Creator's presence ! A few seasons of spiri- 
tuality I have enjoyed ; but my heart, my incon- 
stant heart, is too prone to rove from its proper 
centre. Pray for me, my dear, my dearest friend: 
I do for you daily. O v/restle for me, that I may 
have more of Enoch's spirit ! I am fully persuaded 
that a Christian is no longer really happy, and in- 
wardly satisfied, than while he walks with God ; 
and I would this moment rejoice to abandon every 
pleasure here for a closer walk Avith him. I 
cannot, amidst all the round of social pleasure, 
amidst the most inviting scenes of nature, feel that 
peace with God which passeth understanding. My 
thirst for preaching Christ, I fear, abates ; and a de- 
testable vanity for the reputation of a good 'preacher, 
as the world terms it, has already cost me many con- 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 45 

flicts. Daily I feel convinced of the propriety of a 
remark which my friend Summers made on his 
journey to Wales — that it is easier for a Christian 
to walk habitually near to God, than to be irregular 
in our walk with him. But I want resolution ; I 
want a contempt for the world ; I want more hea- 
venly-mindedness ; I want more humility ; I want 
much, very much of that which God alone can be- 
stow. Lord help the weakest lamb in all thy flock ! 

"I preached this evening from Cant. 2: 3. — '/ 
saA down under his shadow icith great delight, and 
his fruit teas siceet to my taste.'' But how little love 
for my Savior did I feel ! With w^hat little affection 
and zeal did I speak ! I am praised by some ; I am 
followed by many : I am respected by most of my 
acquaintance ; but all this is nothing, yea, less than 
nothing, compared with -possessing this testimony, 
that I please God. O thou friend of sinners ! humble 
me by repentance, and melt me down with love. 

" To-morrow morning I set off for Launceston. 
I write to-night, lest my stay in Cornwall might 
make my delay appear tedious to the dear and de- 
serving object of my most undissembled love. O, 
my Sarah ! had I as much proof that I love Jesus 
Christ, as I have of my love to you, I should prize 
it more than rubies. As often as you can find an 
hour for correspondence, think of your more than 
ever affectionate S. P." 



46 MEMOIR OF 

On the same subject, and the same occasion, about 
three weeks afterwards, he wrote to Mr. Summers. 
His dissatisfaction with himself, while spending his 
time in visits, and his satisfaction when engaged in 
his proper work, are well worthy of attention. " I 
was pretty much engaged in preaching, (says he,) 
and often felt enlarged in public work ; but in pri- 
vate my almost daily cry was, ' My leanness, my 
leanness !' Indeed it was a barren visit, as to the 
inward exercises of grace. Noav and then I felt a 
brokenness of spirit, and a panting after God ; but 
in general my mind was in a dissipated state. After 
so long an absence from so large an acquaintance, I 
was always crowded with company, some of whom, 
though amiable, were very gay. Their politeness 
and cheerfulness, joined with a high degree of in- 
dulgence, were too fascinating for my volatile mind. 
I admired, and was too much conformed to their spi- 
rit. I did indeed often struggle with myself, and 
watched for occasions of dropping some improving 
hint ; but, either through want of opportunity or of 
fortitude, the hint seldom produced a long conversa- 
tion, or a permanent effect. New visits, or excur- 
sions, were every day proposed, and my heart was 
continually divided between painful recollection and 
flattering hopes. One lesson, indeed, I have tho- 
roughly learned — that real, solid satisfaction is to be 
found in nothing but God. May I have grace to 
Improve it throughout my future life. 



SAMUEL PEARCK. 47 

'* The last week I have known more of the power 
of inward religion than all the four which I have 
spent from home. I devoted the week to my Lord's 
service entirely, and I found, in keeping his com- 
mandments, great reward. S. P." 

In another to Mr. Summers, Nov. 10, 1794, he 
says : " I suppose I shall visit London in the spring ; 
prepare my way by communion with God and man. 
I hope your soul prospers. I have enjoyed more of 
God within this month, than ever since the day of 
my espousals with him. O, my brother, help me to 
praise ! I cannot say that I am quite so exalted in 
my frame to-day ; yet still I acknowledge — what I 
have lived upon for weeks — that, were there no being 
or thing in the universe besides God and me, I should 
be at no loss for happiness, O ! 



'Tis heaven to rest in his embrace, 
And nowhere else but there.' 



S. P." 



CHAPTER 11. 



Sis deep interest in Missions to the Heathen — his laborious ex- 
ertions in promoting them — and his offering himself to become 
a Missionary. 

Mr. Pearce was uniformly the spiritual and ac- 
tive servant of Christ ; but neither his spirituality nor 



48 MEMOIR OF 

his activity would have appeared in the manner they 
have, but for his engagements in the introduction of 
the gospel among the heathen. 

It was not long after his settlement at Birmingham 
that he became acquainted with Mr. Carey, in whom 
he found a soul nearly akin to his own. When the 
brethren in the counties of Northampton and Leices- 
ter formed themselves into a Missionary Society at 
Kettering, in October, 1792, he was there, and enter- 
ed into the business with all his heart. On his re- 
turn to Birmingham, he communicated the subject 
to his congregation with so much effect, that in ad- 
dition to the small sum of 131. 2s. 6d. with which 
the subscription was begun, 701. were collected, and 
transmitted to the treasurer ; and the leading mem- 
bers of the church formed themselves into an Assist- 
ant Society. Early in the following spring, when it 
was resolved that our brethren Thomas and Carey 
should go on a mission to the Hindoos, and a con- 
siderable sum of money was wanted for the purpose, 
he labored with increasing ardor in various parts of 
the kingdom; and, when the object was accomplished, 
he rejoiced in all his labor, smiling in every com- 
pany, and blessing God. 

During his labors and journeys, on this important 
object, he wrote several letters to his friends, an ex- 
tract or two from which will discover the state of his 
mind at this period, as well as the encouragements 
that he met with in his work at home. 



SASIUiiL PKARCE. 49 

(To Mr. Stead man."> 

'^ Birming/utm, February 8, 1T93. 
" My very dear Brother, 

*' Union of sentiment often creates friendship among 
carnal men, and similarity of feeling never fails to 
produce affection among pious men, as far as that 
similarity is known. I have loved you ever since I 
knew you. We saw, we felt alike, in the interesting 
concerns of personal religion. We formed a recipro- 
cal attachment. We expressed it by words. We 
agreed to do so by correspondence ; and we have not 
altogether been wanting to our engagements. But 
our correspondence has been interrupted, not, I be= 
lieve, through any diminution of regard on either 
side ; I am persuaded not on mine. I rather con- 
demn myself as the first aggressor : but I excuse, 
while I condemn, and so would you, did you know 
half the concerns which devolve upon me in my pre- 
sent situation. Birmingham is a central place ; the 
inhabitants are numerous ; our members are between 
300 and 400. The word preached has lately been 
remarkably blessed. In less than fi\^ months I bap- 
tized nearly forty persons, almost all newly awaken- 
ed. Next Lord's day week I expect to add to their 
number. These persons came to my house, to pro- 
pose the most important of all inquiries — ' What 
must we do to be saved V I have been thus engaged 
some weeks, during the greatest part of most days. 
5 



50 MEMOIR or 

This, with four sermons a week, will account for my 
neglect. But your letter, received this evening, calls 
forth every latent affection of my heart for you. 
We are, my dear brother, not only united in the 
common object of pursuit — sahatio7i ; and not only 
rest our hopes on the same foundation — Jesus Christ ; 
but we feel alike respecting the poor heathen. O 
how Christianity expands the mind ! What tender- 
ness for our poor fellow-sinners ! What sympathy 
for their moral misery ! What desires to do them 
everlasting good does it provoke ! How satisfying 
to our judgments is this evidence of grace! How 
gratifying to our present taste are these benevolent 
breathings ! O how I love that man whose soul is 
deeply affected with the importance of the precious 
gospel to idolatrous heathen ! Excellently, my dear 
brother, you observe, that great as its blessings are 
in the estimation of a sinner called in a Christian 
country, inexpressibly greater must they shine on the 
newly illuminated mind of a converted pagan. 

" We shall be glad of all your assistance in a pe- 
cuniary Avay, as the expense will be heavy. Dear 
brother Carey has paid us a visit of love this week. 
He preached excellently to-night. I expect brother 
Thomas next week, or the week after. I wish you 
would meet him here. I have a house at your com- 
mand, and a heart greatly attached to you. 

" S. P." 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 61 

♦ (To Mr, Fuller.) 

" Febnuiry 23, 1793. 

" I am willing to go any where, and do any thing 
in my power ; but I hope no plan will be suffered 
to interfere with the affecting — hoped for — dreaded 
day, March 13, (the day of our brethren Carey and 
Thomas's solemn designation at Leicester.) O how 
the anticipation of it at once rejoices and afflicts me ! 
Our hearts need steeling to part with our much-loved 
brethren, who are about to venture their all for the 
name of the Lord Jesus. I feel my soul melting 
within me when I read the twentieth chapter of Acts, 
and especially verses 36-38. But why grieve ? We 
shall see them again. O yes ; them and the children 
whom the Lord will give them; — we and the chil- 
dren whom the Lord hath given us. We shall meet 
again, not to weep and pray, but to smile and praise. 

"S. P." 

From the day of the departure of the Missionaries, 
no one was more importunate in prayer than Mr. 
Pearce ; and, on the news of their safe arrival, no 
one w^as more filled with joy and thankfulness. The 
following extracts of letters to them will exhibit the 
interest he felt in their welfare as well as in the 
prosperity of the church of Christ at large. 

(To Mr. Thomas and Mr. Carey.) 

*' Kettering, May 26, 1794. 
♦•My dear Brethren, 

" Where you no>v are, where this may find you, 



52 



MEMOIR or 



or whether it will ever reach you, 1 know not ; but 
be your present sojourning where it may, whether 
at Tranquebar, Calcutta, Malda, or elsewhere, I feel 
the most affectionate attachment to your persons, and 
the highest degree of concern for your prosperity. 
Nor am I singular ; the message you took to the 
Christian brethren in Hindostan I may now convey 
to yourselves, and say, ' Thousands of prayers have 
been, and still are, offered unto God on your behalf 
A more convincing proof of our regard we cannot 
give you ; nor, I am persuaded, do you desire. O 
my dear, dear brethren, our separate prayers will be 
exchanged ere long for united praises, whilst our 
hearts glow with an ardor of gratitude and joy now 
unknown. What a motive is this to ' our always 
abounding in the w^ork of the Lord !' Our reward 
will be great ; our time both for working and suflTer- 
ing is but short ; but the importance of the object we 
all pursue is infinite. 

You, brethren, are called to the most arduous part 
of this important service ; but I doubt not you find 
in Asia, what we do in Europe, that ' God is faithful 
who hath called you to partnership (y.oimviet) with 
his son Jesus Christ,' and gives you strength equal 
to your day. I long to hear of and from you, and 
with anxious expectation wait for some accounts 
from India. 

" Many things have transpired since you left us, 
which I should have taken a pleasure in communi- 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 53 

eating, had you no other medium of intelligence ; but 
brother Fuller has rendered this needless, by the de- 
tail of occurrences which he is prepared to give you ; 
and nothing is so tedious as a twice-told tale. A few 
articles, however, he may have omitted; or, if twice 
told, may be of importance enough to forbid disgust. 

" Our Mission Society has been the means of pro- 
voking other Christians to love and good works. 
An association is formed by the Independent Breth- 
ren in Warwickshire, for the propagation of the 
Gospel in that county, and if possible among the 
heathen too. It goes on with spirit, and promises 
success. I preached a sermon for them about a fort- 
night ago from Gal. 5:13, ' By love serve one an- 
other f and put my people's generosity again to the 
test. It gave me pleasure to find that at the doors 
£\\. Is. 3d. were contributed by them. I hope it 
will be a means of uniting us more firmly in the 
common cause. Another association was formed De- 
cember 1 1, 1793, at Kidderminster, of seven churches 
in Worcestershire, for the purpose of promoting 
evangelical truth and union. 

" The resolutions both of the Warwickshire and 
Worcestershire Associations are in print. To the 
former is added a large extract from brother Carey's 
account of the state of the world, &c. Were I at 
home, I would send you a copy of both these publi- 
cations, not doubting but you would derive consi- 
derable pleasure from a perusal : but I am now at 



54 MEMOIR OF 

Kettering, and preached yesterday for brother Fuller, 
who is in London, — a successful pleader for the 
heathen, and the Society formed for their spiritual 
advantage. I will desire him to procure them for 
you in London, if possible, and hope he will succeed. 

" We have had a considerable work of God to re- 
joice in at Cannon-street the last winter : many have 
been converted unto him, and professed his name. 
Nor are other churches without occasion for praise ; 
eight have been added at Arnsby ; twelve I baptized 
at Leicester ; and seven more I hear are about to 
join the dear people in Harvey Lane (Leicester) 
soon. A young man from our church at Birming- 
ham has been preaching to them for above six 
months. He is generally approved. The congrega- 
tion is upon the increase, and the prospect is at pre- 
sent very encouraging. The sermon I preached on 
the morning of baptism, at the request of the church, 
is now in the press; but I fear will not be out time 
enough to admit the sending a few copies with this 
letter. 

" At Walgrave there are nearly twenty young 
people under hopeful concern. Some have been ad- 
ded at Northampton since brother Ryland has re- 
moved to Bristol, where he was formally settled the 
week before last : he is to spend some time with his 
friends at College Lane after the association ; and I 
hear that seven candidates are waiting to receive 
baptism by his hands. At Chenies too, and at Earl's 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 55 

Barton, (where Mr. Shrewsbury was ordamed over 
a congregation last Thursday,) and other places, the 
dear Redeemer's cause appears to be considerably 
advancing. What reason we have to praise the 
Lord, and give thanks to his holy name ! 

" I forget whether Guilsborough meeting-house 
was destroyed by some incendiaries before you sailed 
or not ; be that as it may, a very good house, capa- 
ble of containing 600 people, was opened last Wed- 
nesday fortnight ; brother Sutcliff and I preached ; I, 
from ' The icrath of man shall praise thee f he 
from ' Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord ; O Lord, I 
beseech thee, send now prosperity^ It was a solemn 
and delightful day. Brother Blundell preached at 
night from Judges, 5:31; and I again, to above 
two hundred people, the next morning at five o'clock. 
I recollect nothing more but what brother Fuller 
has written for your information already, and have 
therefore only to add the strongest assurances of my 
fraternal regard, and desire of hearing from you 
<50on. Do give my love to brethren Ram Ram and 
Parbotee. It Avould give me great pleasure if you 
would prevail on the former (by profession a scribe) 
to write me ; but I must get you to English it be- 
fore it is sent off I confess there is something of 
fancy in the request ; but I think more of brotherly 
love. The idea of an epistle from a pious Hindoo 
will be peculiarly gratifying ; and perhaps a means 
of serving the good cause, by opening the heart, as 



5b MEMOIR OF 



well as convincing the judgments of some whose 
assistance in this good work may be solicited. Adieu, 
my dear brethren, pray for me, and do not forget me 
when an opportunity offers for sending to England. 
" I am, most affectionately, yours in the dear Re- 
deemer, " S. P." 

(To Mr. Thomas und Mr. Carey.) 

'' Birniing/ui7n, July 24, 179i. 
" My very dear Brethren, 

" It has rejoiced all our hearts to hear that you 
arrived safe in India, although the information would 
have afforded double joy had it been conveyed by 
letters from yourselves. All we knew for certainty, 
till yesterday, was that the Princess Maria had 
passed the Downs on her return to Denmark. Long 
we waited, and many letters of inquiry passed be- 
tween brethren Ryland, Fuller, &c. the substance 
of which was, Have you heard from India ? All an- 
swered, No- ! At last I got Mr. Potts, who does bu- 
siness with the captain, to write to him about you. 
Yesterday I received the joyful news that he ' landed 
you all in perfect good health.' I sat up all night to 
copy his letter for the satisfaction of various in- 
terested brethren ; and now 1 have but five minutes 
left to write to you. What shall I say, dear brethren ? 
We love you in the bowels of Christ, and we ar- 
dently pray for you every day. Our closets, our fa- 
milies, our stated and occasional meetings, always 



SAHIJEL PEARCE. 57 

witness our supplications for your peace, health, 
prudence, fortitude, perseverance and success. Not 
knowing where you were, brother Fuller, who was 
in London collecting this year, sent £ 50 worth of 
goods for your use at a venture. We only want to 
know your necessities in order to supply them : but 
why have you not written at least to one of us ? 
Perhaps you have before now : but the first three 
homeward bound East Indiamen this season have 
been captured by the French. Do write by more 
ships than one, and tell us all about your work and 
reward. The cause of Christ in England has not 
experienced much alteration since you left it. In 
some churches the sun of righteousness shines ; in 
others, a wintry gloom prevails. Leicester church 
is, without exception, the most prosperous in the 
whole association. Seventeen have been lately ad- 
ded. At Birmingham I have baptized about sixty 
in the last twelve months. 

" I can only say, my wife joins in the most affec- 
tionate regards to both of you and yours. Do my 
dear, dear brethren, write very soon to 

" Your affectionate, though unworthy brother, 

"S. P." 

(To Mr. Carey.) 

" Birmingham, August 9, 1794. 
" My vory dear Brother, 

*' It was but a day or two after I had written my 



58 MEMOIR OF 

last letters that I had the inexpressible joy of re- 
ceiving yours, dated Bay of Bengal, and Calcutta, 
That moment more than compensated for all the 
anxieties which my affection for you, and concern 
for the prosperity of the good cause in which you 
have embarked, had created. Yes, the harvest al- 
ready begins to be gathered in ; and though, in some 
respects, I, with my brethren here, went forth weep- 
ing, now I bear my sheaves, rejoicing in the pros- 
pect of a still larger crop. 

" I need not acquaint you that, last Monday the 
Committee, with other warm friends to the mission, 
met at Guilsborough. Brother Fuller's letter will 
render all that information mere tautology. The 
account you gave us inspired us with new vigor, 
and greatly strengthened our hands in the Lord. 
We read, and wept, and praised, and prayed. O, 
who but the Christian feels such pleasures as are 
connected with friendship for our dear Lord Jesus 
Christ? Were there no hereafter, my dying breath 
should praise him for giving me a heart decidedly 
for him and his glorious cause on earth. May my 
whole life be spent for Him ! O, I feel, indeed I 
feel, that nothing is worth living for but his glory, 
and the good of his church. I hope I feel a daily 
conviction that I am a mere atom in creation — less 
than nothing, and vanity : yet, with all my conscious 
meanness and un worthiness,! cannot help feeling my- 
self dignified in my relation to the Son of God j and 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 59 

the highest ambition of my heart is to do something 
for him while I live. There is no part of my life 
which I reflect on with, so much pleasure as that 
which has been spent in behalf of the Society under 
whose patronage you are ; and thrice hajpjpy should 
I be, loere the path of duty plain, if I could person- 
ally share the toils and pleasures of the mission with 
you. At times I indulge a hope that my Lord will 
put me in a similar station ; but then again, I think, 
he well knows I am inadequate to a task so ardu- 
ous. Well, 'tis his to appoint — mine to acquiesce, 
submit, and obey. I trust, whenever, or wherever 
he.callsi I shall have grace immediately to say, 
• Speak, Lord, for thy servant heareth.' It is our 
mercy, my brother, that he chooses our inheritance 
for us : he knows best our fitness for the various 
posts in his spiritual kingdom; and so that we are 
but where he would have us, and doing what he 
bids us, we may rejoice in the common hope that 
he will at last say to us all, ' Well done.' 

:" Last Lord's day I read a part of your letter from 
the pulpit. It would have done you good had you 
seen the effects. It made the lame to leap as a hart, 
and caused the tongue of the dumb to sing ! The 
following evening, being the monthly prayer-meet- 
mg, a crowd of Christians came to testify their joy 
and gratitude ; and you may assure yourselves that 
you have the prayers of the Israel of God. Next 
Monday morning I purpose leaving Birmingham, 



60 MEMOIR OF 

for live or six weeks, on a journey to my friends in 
Devonshire. It is now long past the hour of mid* 
night, and to-morrow, or rather this day, is our or- 
dinance day. I mention this to account for my not 
writing you two or three sheets of paper, as 1 should 
rejoice to do had I time. 

*' Few occurrences have taken place in the circle 
of our acquaintance since my last. At Sutton, in the 
Elms, a young man from Bristol was ordained a 
few days ago. Brother Ryland gave the charge — 
Brother Fuller addressed the people— I spoke at 
night. It was a good day. The young man from 
our church is to be ordained over your dear friends 
at Leicester, on the 21st of September. He has 
been, and is likely to be useful there : twenty-five 
persons, I think, have been baptized within the last 
five months, and more are on the way. At Birming- 
ham the Lord has not forsaken us. I inclose two 
copies of the sermon I preached at Leicester — one 
for yourself, the other for Mr. Thomas. Had I more 
time, (for it was not till this evening that I had notice 
of your goods going so soon,) I would have made 
up a larger packet. The Society have voted you a 
Polyglot Bible and Malay Testament, both of which 
brother Fuller has procured. Do write often ; and 
be as particular as to your progress as your conve- 
nience will admit; especially give us such things 
respecting the natives, their customs, shasters, and 
attention to the Gospel, as are likely to interest Euro- 



I 



SAMUEL PEARCE, 61 

peans. A few extracts of this kind from your letters 
Avill go a wonderful way in procuring support to 
the Society, and greatly .facilitate our applications 
for the public benevolence. One well attested fact 
goes further than a hundred speculations, however 
pious ar^ promising. My, and my dear Mrs. P's. 
affectionate wishes attend all your family. I hope 
you will tell the Society all your wants. No exer- 
tions on our part shall be wanting to make your 
situation comfortable. I rejoice that you and Mr. 
T. love one another. The God of love and peace 
be with you always. 

" I am, my dear brother, with the most unfeigned 
respect and affection, your unworthy brother, in our 
dear Lord Jesus, S. P " 

Hitherto we had witnessed his zeal in promoting 
this important undertaking at home i but this did not 
satisfy him. In October, 1794, we were given to 
understand that he had for some time had it in seri- 
ous contemplation to go himself, and to cast in his 
lot with his brethren in India. When his designs 
were first discovered, his friends and connections 
were much concerned, and endeavored to persuade 
him that he was already in a sphere of usefulness 
to^ important to be relinquished. But his answer 
was, that they were too interested in the affair to be 
competent judges. And nothing would satisfy hini 
short of his making a formal offer of his services to 
G 



62 MEMOin OF 

the Committee ] nor could he be happy for them to 
decide upon it without their appointing a day of 
solemn prayer for the purpose; and, when assembled, 
hearing an account of the principal exercises of his 
mind upon the subject, with the reasons which in- 
duced him to make the proposal, as well as the 
reasons aliedged by his connections against it. 

On October 4, 1794, he wrote to an intimate 
friend, of whom he entertained a hope that he might 
accompany him, as follows : 

»' Last Wednesday I rode to Northampton, where 
a minister's meeting was held on the following day. 
We talked much about the mission. We read some 
fresh and very encouraging accounts. We lamented 
that we could not obtain any suitable persons to send 
out to the assistance of our brethren. Now, what 
do you think was said at this meeting? My dear 
brother, do not be surprised that all present united 
in opinion that in all our connection there was no 
man known to us so suitable as pm, provided you 
were disposed for it, and things could be brought to 
bear. I thought it right to mention this circum- 
stance ; and one thing more I cannot refrain from 
saying, that, were it manifestly the will of God, I 
should call that the happiest hour of my life wjiich 
witnessed our both embarking with our families on 
board one ship, as helpers of the servants of Jesus 
Christ already in Hindostan. Yes ; I could unre- 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 63 

luctantly 'eave Europe and all its contents, for tho 
pleasures and perils of this glorious service. Often 
my heart, in the sincerest ardors, thus breathes forth 
its desires unto God, — ' Here am I, send me.' But 
I am ignorant whether you from experience can 
realise my feelings. Perhaps you have friendship 
enough for i:yj to lay open your meditations on this 
subject in your next. If you have had half the exer- 
cises that I have, it would be a relief to your labor- 
ing mind : or, if you think I have made too free 
Avith you, reprove me, and I will love you still. O 
if I could find a heart that had been tortured and ra- 
vished like my own in this respect, I should form a 
new kmd of alliance, and feel a friendship of a novel 
species. With eagerness should I communicate all 
the vicissitudes of my sensations, and with eagerness 
listen to a recital of kindred feelings. With impa- 
tience I should seek, and with gratitude receive di- 
rection and support ; and, I hope, feel a new occa- 
sion of thankfulness when 1 bow my knee to the 
Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort. 
Whence is it that I thus write to you, as I have ne- 
ver written to any one before ? Is there a fellowship 
of the spirit ; or is it the confidence that I have in 
your friendship that thus directs ray pen ? Tell me, 

dear ! Tell me how you felt, and how you 

still feel, on this interesting subject, and do not long 
delay the gratification to your very affectionate friend 
and brother, S. P." 



64 MEjioin or 

About this time he wrote to Mr. Carey the follow- 
ing letter, which is full of his usual zeal and self- 
dedication. 

" Birmingham^ October 24, 1794. 
•My dear, dear Brother, 

" Never did I take pen in hand with such a 
combination of interesting feelings before. Love 
for your person, respect for your character, joy at 
your prospects, gratitude for your communications, 
desire for your success, and, withal, a hope that we 
shall yet meet in the flesh, so variously affect me, 
that I can searceiy compose myself to write at all. 

" Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Je- 
sus Christ, who inclined your heart to undertake his 
cause among the heathen — acause which European 
Christians may blush that they have neglected so 
long. But I hope the day is dawning when we 
shall all feel and sing as angels — ' Peace on earth, 
and good will to men." We have indeed been seek- 
ing every man his own things, not the things of 
others. Ah, cursed self ! how have Christians been 
bowing down to thy altar, forgetful that true philan- 
thropy is a leading feature of that religion which 
they profess, and of the character of him whose 
name they bear. We talk of morals, whilst our ne- 
glect of the duties of the second table too plainly de- 
monstrate that we have imbibed but a small portion 
of the spirit of the first. We abide the greatest part 



SAMUEL PEARCE. C5 

of our lives beneath the power of the common le- 
thargy ; and if perchance a desire ever rises in our 
bosom for the good of others, we congratulate our- 
selves on our superior love for mankind, and dose, 
and dose again, whilst millions of immortal souls, as 
precious as our own, drop into hell without an effort 
for their salvation. Ah, whither is the apostolic spi- 
rit fled from the churches ? Unlike the translated 
prophet who bequeathed a double portion of his spi- 
rit to his successor, the apostle of the Gentiles and 
his contemporaries seem to have taken all their he- 
roism, affection, zeal, greatness of design, and com- 
prehension of effort, with them to the skies, whilst 
^ve exist to gaze at what we scarce hope ever to ob- 
tain. But why? Where is the Lord God of Eli- 
jah? Where is the Lord God of Paul? Still he is 
near unto us, ready to animate with equal ardor the 
bosom of every faithful soldier who is willing to obey 
the injunctions of his Lord. You, my brother, have 
caught the falling mantle; but we in Europe are 
ready to ask ' hast thou not a blessing for us also V 
Shall we not share the pains and pleasures, the con- 
flicts and the conquests of our distant brethren ? Who 
denies us the privilege? What forbids our standing 
in the same rank with them, and enjoying the ho- 
nor of the foremost in the charge of Immanuel's 
troops upon the infernal powers among the heathen ? 
Brother, I long to stand by your side, and partici- 
pate in all the vicissitudes of the attack — an attack 
6* 



C6 MEMOIR OF 

which nothing but cowardice can make unsuccess- 
ful. Yes, the Captain of our salvation marches at 
our head. Sometimes he may withdraw his pre- 
sence (but not his power) to try our prowess with 
our spiritual arms and celestial armor. O, what can- 
not a lively faith do for the Christian soldier ! It 
will bring the Deliverer from the skies ; it will ar- 
ray him as with a vesture dipped in blood ; it will 
place him in the front of the battle, and put a new- 
song into our mouths — ' These made war with the 
Lamb ; but the Lamb shall overcome them.' Yes, 
he shall — the victory is sure before we enter the 
field : the crown is already prepared to adorn our 
brows, even that crown of glory which fadeth not 
away, and already we have resolved Avhat to do with 
it, — we will lay it at the conqueror's feet, and say, 
' Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name 
give glory,' while all heaven unites in the chorus, 
* Worthy the Lamb.' 

" Whither hath the subject of the conversion of the 
heathen world led me? Forgive the style, so much 
more like that of a declaimer than a correspondent ; 
but I feel the immense magnitude of my subject, and 
(as a brother minister in an inclosed pamphlet says) 
' I must write what I feel.' I will try to be more 
composed whilst I unbosom myself (at 15,000 miles 
distance) to one whom I so dearly love in the bowels 
of Christ Jesus. 

" Neither of us has forgot a conversation a little 



SATHUEL PEARCE. 67 

before you left us, on the exercises of my mind re- 
specting an effort for the spread of the Gospel in 
foreign lands, which for ten years now have more 
or less attended me. I cannot forget your predic- 
tion, with which the conversation ended, — ' well, you 
will come after us.' From that time to the present, 
the desire has been increasing with scarcely any in- 
termission, except when spiritual things have been 
at a low ebb with me ; but for several w^eeks past I 
have been too full to contain, and I resolved to come 
to a point either about going or staying. For this 
purpose, I first attentively considered my situation 
in every relation at home, and the duty of ministers 
arising from the general commission of our. Lord, 
together w^ith the disproportion of means to the mul- 
titude of mankind; and I concluded that it was my 
duty to join hands with you in your great and lauda- 
ble undertaking. I expected opposition from many 
quarters ; I thought I would take every prudent step 
to know the mind of God ; and therefore, secondly, 
determined, after setting apart a certain day in every 
week, for some weeks, on purpose to pray, with fast- 
ing, to God, for his direction, and examining the 
matter on every side, I w^ould(if the same views re- 
mained or were confirmed) lay the case before the 
Society, and leave it with them to decide, resolving 
in the strength of God to abide by their judgment. 
The time I proposed to wait is now nearly expired, 
I have met with heart-breaking trials of a domestic 



68 MEMOIR OF 

nature since I made known my inclination ; but I 
thank God I faint not, and every day more fully con- 
vinces me that I ought to go. Now, as I mean to 
adhere to my plan, I have not yet acquainted the 
Society with my views. There is a meeting at Road, 
on the 12th of November, 1794. That opportunity 
I intend to embrace, God willing, and then, whether 
my Master will count me worthy of so high a call- 
ing, or whether his providence may check my teme- 
rity, will be determined. I wdsh I had time to delay 
sending this letter till that period is past ; but the 
ships sail in a few days, and I was unwilling that 
you should be unacquainted with the state of my 
mind. I have reason to be thankful that, notwith- 
standing I have been severely tried from quarters 
the most afflictive, yet I never enjoyed so much of 
God since I have been in the ministry ] where no 
friend would or could sympathise with me, I have 
found him ever nigh ; and yesterday my wife told 
me that, on mature deliberation, she approved of the 
plan I have adopted, and was much more comfort- 
able in her mind than ever before since she had 
known my wishes, and was willing to leave it to the 
judgment of the ministers as I proposed, hoping that 
she should see in it the hand of God. O help me to 
praise ! It is a relief inexpressible. If I come, I am 
.not without hopes of a companion in the good work. 

"Brother , (a man of tbe first-rate piety, deep hu- 

jiulity, great zeal, and good sense,) and I correspond 



SAMUKL PEARCE. DV 

oa it ; and he says nothing but a fear that he is not 
qualified keeps him from deciding. I think his judg- 
ment will be governed here by the opinion of the 
Society; and I had the pleasure of conveying to him, 
in their name, their opinions, that in all our connec- 
tion, there was not a man so suitable as himself. 
Besides him, a brother who is not in the ministry, 
and his wife, have offered to accompany me if I go ; 
a pair the most suitable that I can conceive of — poor 
people. Affection for my wife inclines the good 
woman to the voyage, and zeal and affection operate 
on her husband. I could not but think it a kind pro- 
vidence, that the same afternoon on "vvhich my wife 
had been objecting, on account of her being incapable 
to do the work of a nurse and servant too, that same 
afternoon these good people offered their services ; 
they are both my own children in the faith, of five 
years standing ; active, simple, faithful, hospitable 
people, and are willing to be in the steerage rather 
than not go. If we all come, it will be no small ad- 
dition to your church, or rather the church of the 
dear Lord Jesus in Asia. 

" I have had Halhed's grammar about a fortnight ; 
and have made myself master of most of the charac- 
ters, the rules for the formation of nouns, and part 
of the chapter on pronouns : but I fear I shall be 
able to do but little to purpose, for want of a tutor to 
teach me the pronunciation. Of one character in 
the Sanscrit pronouns I can find no account any 



70 MEMOIR OF 

where : you will tell me readily when we meet ; 
but I must leave it for the present. O how happy 
shall I be to sound the name of my dear Lord Jesus 
in the Bengalee tongue, on the plains of Hindostan ! 
Give my love to dear Ram Boshoo ; tell him I long 
to take him by the hand, and call him brother. I 
suppose ere now he has felt the constraints of divine 
love overcoming the fears of man, and that he has 
become an avowed disciple of the lowly and lovely 
Jesus. The Lord be with you when you partake 
together of the memorials of the Redeemer's sorrows. 
I want much to hear from you about Parbotee ; so 
do all our friends. Perhaps some interesting account 
is now on the way for Europe. The Lord send us 
good news from a far country. In my next, I hope 
I shall be able with propriety to ask you withall to 
' prepare me a lodging.' If I come next year, and 
any ship goes before me, by that you shall knov/ all 
particulars. 

" It is late on Saturday evening. I propose preach- 
ing to-morrow from 1 Cor. 13: 13. The compre- 
hension of Christian love as to its objects — the sweet- 
ness, universality, and energy of its operations — with 
the permanency of its nature — have occurred as il- 
lustrative of its superiority to every other grace. 
The afternoon subject I think will be on 2 Cor. 3 : 
8, including, among other things, the extent of the 
gospel dispensation. It comprehends gentiles as 
well as Jews, and Hindoos as well as Englishmen, 



SAMUEL PEARCS. 71 

I have not fixed on a subject for the evening yet 
Adieu, my dear, dear brother ; the God of love, peace, 
and glory, be with you, and with 

" Your unworthy, but affectionate brother in 
Christ Jesus, S. P." 

About the same period he wrote the following let- 
ter, which, besides exhibiting evidences of the piety 
and zeal which animated his own breast, illustrates 
the happy talent he possessed of exhorting and per- 
suading others to their duty in regard to the heathen. 
For many years after this letter was written, Ame- 
rican Christians did little for this object — they are 
now happily awakening to their duty, and appear 
taking the foremost place in the army of the Lamb. 

(To sir. Rogers, of Philadelphia.) 

" Birmingham, Oct. 27, 1794. 
" My very dear Friend, 

" It is certainly as impossible for Christians to 
maintain a pious intercourse without love, as for the 
magnetic needle to point any where but to the pole. 
Suffer me, then, if I address you in a less distant 
form than heretofore. I think of you with no less 
respect, nor of myself, I hope, with less humility, 
though I approach you with this unwonted familia- 
rity. The difference arising from conscious inferi- 
ority, is not inconsistent, I presume, with the unre- 
strained effusions of Christian love. 

" In situation, in publicity of character, in mental 



72 MfiMoift or 

vigor, in age, in literary acquirements, in a thousand * 
things, we may differ ; but still we are 07ie in Christ 
Jesus, that dear centre of union to holy angels and 
holy men, to perfect saints above and imperfect saints 
below. Allow me, then, in the exercise of that god- 
like grace, which has the precedence even to that 
fait/i which is unto salvation, and that hope which 
fastens upon immortality, to throw the arms of my 
affection across the Atlantic, and embrace you as a 
beloved brother in the Lord. Yes, you will allow 
it ; you will not disdain my youth, nor want of name ; 
you will regard me as participating of his paternal 
regards of whom the whole family in heaven and 
earth is named ; you will give me the right hand of 
fellowship, and say, ' Affection without rudeness de- 
serves no censure.' 

"There is something in a similarity of circum- 
stances which gives both tenderness and energy to 
our affectionate sensations. When I read the very 
affecting account of the late trial of your faith and 
patience, I felt as if affliction can strengthen the bonds 
of affection. I felt a fellowship with you unknown 
before. Mine was indeed but a taste compared with 
yours : your heavenly Father saw fit that you should 
drink the cup even to the dregs ; but his wisdom and 
his love have an equal share in his conduct towards 
his people. During the few days my dearest friend 
lay senseless, on what we all expected would be the 
bed of death, I found his sovereignty silenced all my 



SAMrtL rEARC£> 73 

tomplainls, and his love sweetened all my sorrows. 
No doubt, you also have found strength equal to your 
day : and you daily see enough in God to compen- 
sate for the loss of every less good. It is thither I 
am obliged to fiy for all substantial comfort ; and, 
blessed be Jehovah, there I daily find it! Were 
there no being in the universe besides Jehovah and 
myself, I see enough in him to ravish and satisfy my 
Boul. Well did the pious Psalmist say, ' Whom havo 
1 in iieaven but thee : and there is none upon earth 
that I desire besides thee !' Lord, help us ever to 
say so too ! 

" Most sincerely do I thank you for your friendly 
epistle of June 18. Your account of Mr. M.'s con- 
version Vt'armed my heart, and the hearts of manv 
others to whom 1 read it. What a trophy of Imma- 
nuel's grace! But are we less so? The gradual 
rising of the sun is no less an effort of the divine 
energy, than the eccentric movements of the blazing 
comet ; the latter may produce more surprise in the 
minds of a gazing crov/d, but not more admiration 
m the heart of the devout philosopher. By whatever 
methods we become Christians, all, all must acknov/- 
ledge, that 'by the grace of God we are what we are.' 
O that like him who first made that acknowledg- 
ment, your friend may be assisted to spend himself 
in successfully preaching that faith which once he 
'destroyed ! 

•* I know not how to make adequate acknowledg* 
7 



74 MEMOIR OF 

ments for your introducing" me to Mr. Jones, whose 
valuable correspondence 1 shall hope to retain. I 
love the man who tenderly feels for the souls of the 
poor heathen. What a reflection is it on the philan- 
thropy of every Christian country, that no more pains 
have been taken to carry the light of eternal life to 
those nations that sit in darkness and in the shadow 
of death ! What a lapse of time since the Reforma- 
tion ! but how have its wasting years been improved 
to this important end ? We and our fathers have 
thought, and spoken, and wTitten, and heard, and 
read about Christian benevolence; we have investi- 
gated its nature, admired its beauty, contended for 
its importance-to the Christian character, whilst, like 
the unapproved servant, though we knew our Mas- 
ter's w411, we did it not. Almost the whole Christian 
world have partaken of the common lethargy ; and 
if here and there a few have thought about the state 
of pagan nations, and felt a faint desire for their sal- 
vation, or at most mentioned ' the ingathering of the 
Jews and the fullness of the Gentiles as a thing of 
course in their prayers, they have felt a self-compla- 
cency on account of their superior zeal ; comparing 
their feelings, not with the greatness of the subject, 
but with those of their yet more lethargic neighbors. 
They have satisfied themselves without any positive 
exertions, and lam down dozing, dozing at their ease, 
whilst thousands of immortal souls, as precious as 
their own, have been daily dropping into helU with- 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 75 

out an effort made for their salvation ! But I liope 
the time is come when we shall, every man, look no 
longer at his own things only, but the things of 
others. Zion already travails in birth, and soon she 
shall bring forth her children. Already heaven is 
besieged with earnest supplications : ' they who make 
mention of the Lord keep no longer silence, and will 
give him no rest until he make Jerusalem a praise 
in the earth.' S. P." 

About a month preceding the decision of the com- 
mittee, with regard to the propriety of his going, he 
drew up a narrative of his experience respecting it ; 
resolving at the same time, as intimated above in his 
letter to Mr. Carey, to set apart one day in every 
week for secret fasting and prayer to God for direc- 
tion ; and to keep a diary of the exercises of his 
mind during the month. 

When the Committee were assembled at North- 
ampton, according to his desire, he presented to them 
the narrative, which was as follows : 

''October 8, 1794. 
" Having had some peculiar exercises of mind 
relative to my personally attempting to labor for 
the dear Redeemer amongst the heathen, and being 
at a loss to know what is the will of the Lord in this 
matter respecting me, I have thought that I might 
gain some satisfaction by adopting these two resolu- 



76 MEMOIR or 

tions ; First, that I will, as in the presence of God, 
faithfully endeavor to recollect the various workings 
of my mind on this subject, from the first period of 
my feeling any desire of this nature until now, and 
commit them to writing ; together with what con- 
siderations do now, on the one b'lnd, impel me to 
the work, and, on the other hand, wnat prevents me 
from immediately resolving to enter upon it. Se- 
condly, that I will from this day keep a regular 
journal, wdth special relation to this matter. 

" This account and journal will, 1 hope, furnish 
me with much assistance in forming a future opi- 
nion of the path of duty ; as well as hc.p imy friends, 
v.'hom I may hereafter think proper to consult, to 
give me suitable advice in the business. Lord help 
me ! 

" It is very common for young converts to feel 
strong desires for the conversion of others. Theses 
desires immediately followed the evidences of my 
own religion; and I remember well they were par- 
ticularly fixed upon the poor heathen. I believe^ 
the first week that I knew the grace of God in truth, 
I put up many fervent cries to heaven in their be- 
half; and at the same time felt an earnest desire ti» 
be employed in promoting their salvation. It waa 
not long after, that the first settlers sailed for Botany 
Bay. I longed to go witii them, although in com- 
pany with the convicts, in hopes of making known 
the blessings of the great salvation in New-Zealand. 



SAMU£L PEARCE. 77 

I actually had thought of making an effort to go out 
unknown to my friends ; but, ignorant how to pro- 
ceed, I abandoned my purpose. Nevertheless, I 
could not help talking about it ; and at one time a 
report was circulated that I was really going, and a 
neighboring minister very seriously conversed with 
me on the subject. 

" While I was at the Bristol Academy, the desiro 
remained ; but not with such energy as at first, except 
on one or two occasions. Being sent by my tutor to 
preach two Sabbaths at Coleford, I felt particular 
sweetness in devoting the evenings of the week to 
going from house to house among the colliers who 
dwell in the forest of Deane, adjoining the town, 
conversing and praying with them, and preaching 
to them. In these exercises I found the most solid 
satisfaction that I have ever known in discharging 
the duties of my calling. In a poor hut, with a stone 
to stand upon, and a three-legged stool for my desk, 
surrounded with thirty or forty of the smutty neigh- 
bors, I have felt such an unction from above, that my 
whole auditory have been melted into tears, whilst 
directed to ' the Lamb of God which taketh away 
the sin of the world;' and I, weeping among them, 
could scarcely speak, or they hear, for interrupting 
sighs and sobs. Many a time did I then think, thus 
it was with the apostles of our Lord, when the}'- 
went from house to house among the poor heathen. 
In work like this I could live and die. Indeed, haa 



78 MEMOIR OF 

I at that time been at liberty to settle, I should have 
preferred that situation to any in the kingdom, with 
which I was then acquainted. 

" But the Lord placed me in a situation very dif- 
ferent. He brought me to Birmingham ; and here, 
amongst the novelties, cares, and duties of my station, 
I do not remember any wish for foreign service till, 
atler a residence of some months, I heard Dr. Coke 
preach at one of Mr. Wesley's chapeb, from Psalm 
68: 31, 'Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands 
unto God.' Then it was that, in Mr. Home's phrase, 
' I felt a passion for missions.' Then I felt an inte- 
rest in the state of the heathen world far more deep 
and permanent than before, and seriously thought 
hoAV I could best promote their obtaining the know- 
ledge of the crucified Jesus. 

" As no way at that time was open, I cannot say 
that I thought of taking a part of the good work 
among the heathen abroad ; but resolved that I woukl 
render them all the assistance I could at home. My 
mind was employed during the residue of that week 
in meditating on Psalm 67 : 3, ' Glorious things are 
spoken of thee, O city of God ;' and the next Sabbath 
morning I spoke from those words, on the promised 
iacrease of the church of God. I had observed that 
G\r monthly meetings for prayer had been better 
at 3nded than the other prayer meetings, from the 
tin. 3 that I first knew the people in Cannon street; 
but I thought a more general attention to them was 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 79 

desirable. I therefore preached on the Sabbath day 
evening preceding the next monthly prayer meeting, 
from Mat. 6 : 10. : ' Thy kingdom come ;' and urged 
with ardor and affection a universal union of the 
serious part of the congregation in this exercise. It 
rejoiced me to see three times as many the next 
night as usual ; and for some time after that I had 
nearly equal cause for joy. 

" As to my own part, I continued to preach much 
upon the promises of God respecting the conversion 
of the heathen nations ; and by so doing, and always 
communicating to my people every piece of informa- 
tion I could obtain respecting the present state of 
missions, they soon imbibed the same spirit; and 
from that time to this, they have discovered so much 
concern for the more extensive spread of the gospel, 
that at our monthly prayer meetings, both stated and 
occasional, I should be as much surprised at the 
case of the heathen being omitted in any prayer, as 
at any omission of the name and merits of Jesus. 

" Indeed, it has been a frequent means of enkind 
ling my languid devotion in my private, domestic, 
and public engagements in prayer. When I have 
been barren in petitioning for myself, and other 
things, often have I been sweetly enlarged v>hen I 
came to notice the situation of those who were pe- 
rishing for lack of knowledge. 

" Thus I went on praying and preaching, and 
conversing on the subject, till the time of brother 



80 MEMOIR OF 

Carey's ordination at Leicester, May 24, 1791. On 
the evening of that day, he read to the ministers a 
great part of his manuscript, since published, entitled 
' An hiquiry into the Obligations of Christians to 
use Means for the Conversion of the Heathen.^ This 
added fresh fuel to my zeal. But to pray and preach 
on the subject was all I could then think of doing. 
But when I heard of a proposed meeting at Kette- 
ring, October 2, 1792, for the express purpose of 
considering our duty in regard to the heathen, I 
could not resist my inclination for going; although 
at that time I was not much acquainted with 
the ministers of the Northamptonshire Association. 
There I got my judgment informed, and my heart 
increasingly interested. I returned home, resolved 
to lay myself out in the cause. The public steps I 
have taken are too well known to need repeating; 
but my mind became now inclined to go among the 
heathen myself Yet a consideration of my connec- 
tion with the dear people of God in Birmingham, 
restrained my desires, and kept me from naming ray 
wishes to any body, (as I remember,) except to 
brother Carey. With him I was pretty free. We 
had an interesting conversation about it just be- 
fore he left Europe. I shall never forget the manner 
of his saying, ' Well, you will come after us.' My 
heart said amen ! and my eagerness for the work 
increased ; though I never talked freely about it» 
except to my wife, and we then both thought that my 



SAMUEL I'EAKCE. 81 

relation to the church in Cannon-street, and useful- 
ness there, forbad any such attempt. . However, I 
have made it a constant matter of prayer, often beg- 
ging of God, as I did when first I was disposed for 
the work of the ministry, either that he would take 
away the desire, or open a door for its fulfillment; 
and the result has uniformly been, that the more 
spiritual I have been in the frame of ray mind, tho 
more love I have felt for God, and the more commu- 
nion I have enjoyed with him, so much the more 
disposed have I been to eng-ag-e as a missionary 
among the heathen. 

" Until the accounts came of our brethren's en- 
trance on the work in India, my connections in Eu- 
rope pretty nearly balanced m.y desire for going 
abroad ; and, though I felt quite devoted to the Lord's 
will and work, yet I thought the scale rather pre- 
ponderated on the side of my abiding in my present 
situation. But since our brethren's letters have in- 
formed us that there are such prospects of usefulness 
in Hindostan, and that preachers are a thousand times 
more wanted than people to preach to, my heart has 
been more deeply affected than ever with their con- 
dition ; and my desires for a participation of the toils 
and pleasures, crosses and comforts, of which they 
are the subjects, are advanced to an anxiety which 
nothing can remove, and time seems to increase. 

" It has pleased God also lately to teach me, more 
than ever, that himself is the fountain of happi- 



82 MEMOIR OF 

ness ; that likeness to him, friendship for him, and 
communion with him, form the basis of all true en- 
joyment ; and that this can be attained as well in an 
eastern jungle, amongst Hindoos and Moors, as in 
the most polished part of Europe. The very disjpo- 
sition which, blessed be my dear Redeemer ! he has 
given me, to be any thing, do any thing, or endure 
any thing, so that his name might be glorified, — I 
say, the disposition itself is heaven begun below ! I 
do daily feel a panting after more devotedness to his 
service, and I can never think of my suffering Lord 
without dissolving into love, — love which constrains 
me to glorify him with my body and spirit, which 
are his. 

" I do often represent to myself all the possible 
hardships of a mission, arising from my own heart, 
the nature of the country, domestic connections, dis- 
appointment of my hopes, &c. And then I set over 
against them all, these two thoughts — ' I am God's 
servant, and God is my friend.' In this I anticipate 
happiness in the midst of suffering, light in darkness, 
and life in death. Yea, I do not count my life dear 
unto myself, so that I may win some poor heathen 
unto Christ ; and I am willing to be offered as a sa- 
crifice on the service of the faith of the Gospel. 

"Mr. Home justly observes, 'That, in order to 
justify a man's undertaking the work of a mission- 
ary, he should be qualified for it, disposed heartily 
to enter upon it, and free from such ties as exclude 



SAMtEL PEARCE. 83 

an engagement.' As to the first, others must judge 
for me ; but they must not be men who have an in- 
terest in keeping me at home. I shall rejoice in op- 
portunities of attaining to an acquaintance with the 
ideas of judicious and impartial men in this matter, 
and with them I must leave it. A willingness to em- 
bark in this cause I do possess ; and I can hardly 
persuade myself that God has for ten years inclined 
my heart to this work, without having any thing for 
me to do in it. But the third thing requires more 
consideration, and here alone I hesitate." 

He then goes on to state all the objections from 
this quarter, with his answers to them ; leaving it 
with his brethren to decide, when they had heard 
the whole. 

The committee, after the most serious and mature 
deliberation, though they were fully satisfied as to 
brother Pearce's qualifications, and greatly approved 
of his spirit, yet were unanimously of opinion that 
he ought not to go ; and that not merely on account 
of his connections at home, which might have been 
pleaded in the case of brother Carey, but on account 
of the mission itself, which required his assistance 
in the station which he already occupied. 

In this opinion brother Carey himself, with sin- 
gular disinterestedness of mind, afterwards concur- 
red, and wrote to brother Pearce to the same effect. 

On receiving the opinion of the committee, he im- 
mediately wrote to Mrs. Pearce as follows; 



84 MEMOIR OV 

" NorlkamptoTi, Sov. l3, 1734 
■' My dear Sarah. 

*' I am disappointed, but not dismayed. I ever 
wish to make my Savior's will my own. I am more 
satisfied than ever I expected I should be with a ne- 
,^ative upon my earnest desires, because the busi- 
ness has been so conducted that I think (if by any 
means such an issue could be ensured) the mind of 
Christ has been obtained. My dear brethren here 
have treated. the affair with as much seriousness and 
affection as I could possibly desire, and I think more 
than so insignificant a worm could expect. After we 
had spent the former part of this day in fasting and 
prayer, with conversation on the subject till nearly 
two o'clock, brothers Potts, King, and I, retired. We- 
prayed while the committee consuhed. The case 
seemed difficult, and 1 suppose they were nearly two 
hours in deciding it. At last, time forced them to a 
point; and their answer I enclose for \'our satisfac- 
tion. Pray take care of it; it will serve for me to 
refer to when my mind may labor beneath a burden 
of guilt another day. 

*' I am, my dear Sarah's own S. P." 

With reference to the same subject, he soon after 
wrote to his dear friend Mr. Carey as follows • 

" Blrmhghavi, March 27, 1795. 
** My v«ry dear Brother, 

" Instead of a letter, you perhaps expected to have 



SA>tUEL fKARCR. 85 

seen the writer; and, had the will of God been so, 
he would by this time have been on liis way to Mud- 
Tiabatty ; but ' it is not in man that walketh to direct 
his steps.' Full of hope and expectation as I was, 
when I wrote you last, that I should be honored 
with a mission to the poor heathen, and be an in- 
strument of establishing the empire of my dear Lord 
in India, I must submit now to ' stand still, and see 
the salvation of God.' Judging from the energy of 
my feelings, together with their long continuance 
and gffowing strength, I scarcely entertained a doubt 
but I should this year go to assist you in your evan- 
gelical undertaking, and under those circumstances 
I wrote to you. It was not long after, that some ot" 
our church, guessing from the strain of my preach- 
ing the state of my mind, questioned me upon the 
subject, and I frankly told them all my heart. On 
this, various meetings of consultation v/ere held, and 
I suffered much, but fainted not ; and, during th«t 
struggle, I felt, for the first time, the plenary import 
of that phrase, ' The world is cruciiied unto me, pnd 
I unto the world.' No domestic attachment, nor flat- 
tering prospects of reputation nor wealth, which, in 
unworthier moments have had too much ascendency 
over me, had now any influence. Love to Christ, 
and love to sinners — heathen sinners — reigned tri' 
umphant in my soul ; and I trust I did then feel what 
it was to be wholly devoted to God. 

" At length, a full church-meeting was called, and 
8 



86 KEMoin OF 

I was requested to be present. I went accordingly; 
and, having stated my views and feelings, I told 
them that though I should be glad of their opinion, 
yet I should not think myself bound to abide by their 
decision ; because their affection for me would in- 
cline them to partiality in their judgment. I then 
withdrew. 

•' The issue of the meeting was unfavorable to my 
going; and, as I had expressed my design of finally 
submitting to the opinion of a meeting of disinterest- 
ed ministers, the church appointed two of the dea- 
cons to represent them at this meeting, whenever it 
should be. In the mean time, I laid the case before 
three or four of our brethren, whose piety and expe- 
rience I thought best enabled them to judge. I was 
both disappointed and grieved to find them all decid- 
edly against me. The following is an extract from 
one beloved brother and father in the ministry. 

" ' I really think you must not leave England. 
The heathen will get more by you here than they 
will abroad; and surely your post must not be given 
up. Who is there in your neighborhood to make a 
stand against false religion, my dear brother ? I 
bless God for your zeal, but surely I think it will 
hurt the cause in various ways if you go. Churches 
will be afraid of the consequences of encouraging 
missions, if the most important stands at home are 
deserted by those that God has greatly prospered in 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 87 

them. You know brother Fullers infirmity.* If 
you run away we shall want a man too of activity, 
to keep alive the attention of the public to the cause, 
and give a great argument to them that are averse 
to it. I am pleased with the measures you propose 
to follow for determining the point, and trust God 
will direct you.' 

"I copy out this, just as 1 received it, that you 
ma)^ better enter into my situation. The week after 
this we had a very solemn day of fasting and prayer, 
on the business at Northampton. Some brethren of 
the Society, and some who were not, attended. Breth- 
ren Ryland and Sutcliff were not able to be present ; 
but their opinions, and those of some of the London 
ministers were known. On th!s occasion I read a 
narrative of my feelings for some time past, together 
with the views and motives which induced me to de- 
sire employment among the heathen, and such an- 
swers to objections arising from my connection in 
the family, the church, and the mission Society, as 
appeared to me satisfactory and full. I shall ever 
love my dear brethren the more, for the tenderness 
with which they treated me, and the solemn prayer 
they repeatedly put up to God for me. At last, I 
withdrew for them to decide : and whilst I was apart 
from them, and engaged in prayer for divine direc- 

* Referring to a paral3'tic affection in his face, which 
came upon him in 1793, the effects of which were not re- 
moved in less than four or five years. 



88 Mi::.: OIK of 

tion, 1 feit all anxit-ty forsake rne, and an entire re- 
signation of will to the will of God, be it what it 
^vould, together with a satisfaction that so much 
praying breath would not be lost ; but that He who 
hath promised to be found of all that seek him, would 
assuredly direct the hearts of my brethren to that 
which was most pleasing to himself, and most suita- 
ble to the interests of his kingdom in the world. Be- 
tween two and three hours were they deliberating, 
after which time a paper was put into m}' hands, of 
which the following is a copy : 

" ' The brethren at this meeting are fully satisfied 
of the fitness of brother P's qualifications, and 
greatly approve of the disinterestedness of his mo- 
tives, and the ardor of his mind. But another mis- 
sionary not having been requested, and not being in 
our view immediately necessary, and brother P. oc 
cupying already a post very important to the pros- 
perity of the mission itself, we are unanimously of 
opinion that, for the present, he should continue in 
the situation which he now occupies.' 

" To this I was enabled cheerfully to reply, ' the 
will of the Lord be done ;' and, receiving this answer 
as the voice of God, I have for the most part been 
easy since, though not without occasional pantings 
of spirit after the publishing of the Gospel to pagans. 

•• What particularly weighed with me was an ap- 



SAMUEL Fi:ARCE. 



89 



prehension of the necessity of the hinguage being 
known to more evangelical men than two, lest, in 
case they should die, or be by any means laid aside, 
the work should materially suffer through the 
long chasm occasioned by their seeking out proper 
successors, the time occupied by the voyage, and, 
after ail, their inability to speak to the natives 
in the Bengalee tongue. It appeared to me highly 
important that provision should be made for such 
an event, which at some time must take place; 
and 1 conceived that numerous advantages would 
arise from the mission being kept up by men who 
had been on the s;pot, were known to the natives, and 
already in the habit of instructing them in the way 
of righteousness. The preference of such persons to 
stran'gers was obvious ; and, as no one olfered him- 
self for the work, I thought it my duty to propose 
myself for the undertaking : whether the Lord will 
ever honor me so far, I know not ; but the state of 
my mind still inclines me to say daily, ' here am I, 
Lord, send me.' 

" At present, however, I am better satisfied m stay- 
in^, because the Lord has raised up some others for 
the'work. We have all been diligently employed 
in inquiring after proper persons to assist you, but 
in vain, till a few days since, when two of the stu- 
dents at Bristohboth warm-hearted for Christ, offered 
themselves to brother Ryland, as willing to embark 
in the glorious undertaking. He has communicated 



90 MEMOIR OF 

their wishes to brother Fuller and me, &c. 1 sup- 
pose they will formally propose themselves to the 
Society at the next committee meeting. I wish we 
could have your mind on the business, for our direc- 
tion ; but we must guess at it, and act accordingly. 

" I think I said in my last, that I had taken some 
pains, or rather pleasure, with the Bengalee lan- 
guage ; but having no vocabulary, or dictionary, or 
book to read in the language, I was obliged to lay it 
aside. Could you furnish me with any helps, I 
should be very thankful; for I have not yet relin- 
quished my hopes of telling the Hindoos how Jesus 
Christ came into the world to save sinners ; or, if 
not, our brethren wish me to learn the language, as 
they say it is possible that, when you have translated 
the Bible, it may be found most convenient to print 
it in England ; to do which, it is necessary to have 
the press under the inspection of some pious person 
who knows the language. This has its weight, 
though it just strikes me that probably it would be 
better (if types were procured) to look out for some 
good man who understands printing, and send him 
over to you, that the work may go on beneath your 
own care. This was done at Malabar, by the Da- 
nish mission ; but no doubt you. will give the Society 
your free opinion on this matter when the transla- 
tion is in a good degree of forwardness. 

" And now, my dear brother, how shall I express 
the joy I f«el at the great goodness of our God unto 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 91 

you in a strangle land. Your letters were read at a 
committee meeting, the 18th instant, at Guilsbo- 
rough. We glorified God on your behalf, and ear- 
nestly prayed that the same mercy and goodness 
might still attend you ; at the same time affectionately 
commending you to the grace of his Holy Spirit, 
that he might prevent your secular concerns from 
diminishing that pious ardor with which your spirit 
glows for the advancement of the kingdom of Christ 
among men. How securely may Ave leave you in 
his hands ! Yes, my dear brother, we do rejoice 
that, though oceans divide us from each other, Ave 
are equally beneath his protection who filleth all in 
all. Daily in our closets and in our families do we 
remember you before God : and, in the sanctuary, 
the tribes of God's spiritual Israel wrestle hard for 
you Sabbath after Sabbath. Nor shall we pray in 
vain — God, even our own God, will bless you; his 
promise is on your side, and through him you shall 
do valiantly; never wnll he forsake his servants, nor 
leave them unassisted in their work ; but your ' con- 
fidence is strong ;' I rejoice that it is so, for ' this is 
the victory that overcometh the world, even our 
faith ;' and he who hath been the author of that faith 
will, I doubt not, be the finisher of it too. 

"The Periodical Accounts, No. I, have been of 
great help to the funds of the Society. We sent a 
copy to every church of our denomination : brother 
Fuller and I have had bandjiome collections after 



92 MEMOIR OF 

preaching upon the subject ; and, from other places, 
unvisited, we have received many tokens of benevo- 
lence. I know it will give you pleasure to know 
that on Christmas- day, after preaching at Leicester 
on the subject, we received about thirty guineas to- 
wards the mission. 

" We are thinking now about Africa. It will be 
the subject of our consideration next meeting ; and I 
will take care that you shall have the earliest ac- 
count of the result by the latter ships. 

" Anxiously do we wait for your journal. Extracts 
from it will be put in No. II. You can hardly ima- 
gine how the public are interested in those ac- 
counts ; and I hope that, now you see the nature of 
the plan, you will furnish the Society with such in- 
formation, from time to time, as may preserve the 
respectability and celebrity of the work. But I must 
close ; my time is quite exhausted, and I really have 
not enough left to read over what I have written in 
such haste, unless I omit a letter to brother T. Ex- 
cuse blunders. Accept my warmest love, in which 
Mrs. P., brother King, and others (whose name is 
legion) join with your very, very affectionate, though 
unworthy brother, S. P." 

" P. S. Pray favor me with a long letter by the 
first conveyance, and any helps towards the Benga- 
lee language which you can send me. Adieu. 

" With this I shall send an octavo volume on the 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 93 

Moravian Missions. I am compiling a piece which 
I desire may deserve to be called, The History and 
Present State of Protestant Christian Missions." 

The decision of the committee, though it rendered 
him much more reconciled to abide in his native 
country than he could have been without it, yet did 
not in the least abate his zeal for the object. As he 
could not promote it abroad, he seemed resolved to 
lay himself out more for it at home. In March, 
1795, after a dangerous illness, he says, in a letter 
to Mr. Fuller, — " Through mercy I am almost in a 
state of convalescence. May my spared life be wholly 
devoted to the service of my dear Redeemer ! I do 
not care where I am, whether in England or in In- 
dia, so that I am employed as he would have me : 
but surely we need pray hard that God would send 
some more help to Hindostan. S. P." 

In January 1796, when he was first informed by 
the secretary of a young man (Mr. Fountain) being 
desirous of going, of the character that Avas given 
of him by our friend Mr. Savage, of London ; and of 
a committee meeting being in contemplation, he 
wrote thus in answer : " Your letter, just arrived, 
put, I was going to say, another soul into my little 
body ; at least it has added new life to the soul 1 
have. I cannot be contented whh the thought of 
being absent from your proposed meeting. No, no ; 
I must be there, (for my own sake I mean,) and try 



94 MEMOIR OF 

to sing with you ' O'er the gloomy hills of darkness.' 

"S. P." 

In August, the same year, having received a let- 
ter from India, be v.Tote to Mr. Fuller as follows : 
" Brother Carey speaks in such a manner of the ef- 
fects of the Gospel in his neighborhood, as in my 
view promises a fair illustration of our Lord's para- 
ble, when he compared the kingdom of heaven to a 
little leaven, hid in three measures of meal, which 
insinuated itself so effectually as to leaven the lump 
at last. Blessed be God, the leaven is already in the 
meal. The fermentation is begun ; and my hopes 
were never half so strong as they are now, that the 
whole shall be effectually leavened. O that I 

WERE THERE TO WITNESS THE DELIGHTFUL 

process! But whither am I running? .... I 

LONG TO WRITE YOU FROM HiNDOSTAN ! 

"S. P." 

On receiving other letters from India, in Januar\r, 
1797, he thus writes: "Perhaps you are now re- 
joicing in spirit with me over fresh intelligence from 
Bengal. This moment have I concluded reading 
two letters from brother Thomas : one to the Socie- 
ty, and the other to myself. He speaks of others 
from brother Carey. I hope they are already in 
your possession. If this correspondence has pro- 
duced the same effects on your heart as brother 
Thomas's has on mine, you are filled with gladness 



SAMUEt PEARCE. 95 

and hope. I am grieved that I cannot convey them 
to you immediately. I long to witness the pleasure 
their contents will impart to all whose hearts are 
with us. O that I were accounted Avorthy of the 
Lord to preach the Gospel to the Booteas !" 

Being detained from one of our missionary meet- 
ings, by preparing the periodical accounts for the 
press, he soon after wrote as follows : — " We shall 
now get out No. IV very soon. I hope it will go 
to the press in a very few days. Did you notice that 
the very day on which we invited all our friends to 
a day of prayer on behalf of the mission, (Dec. 28, 
1796,) was the same in which brother Carey sent 
his best and most interesting accounts to the Society? 
1 hope you had solemn and sweet seasons at North- 
am.pton. On many accounts I should have rejoiced 
to have been with you ; yet I am satisfied that on 
the whole I was doing best at home. S. P." 

It has been already observed that, for a month 
preceding the decision of the committee, he resolved 
to devote one day in every week to secret prayer and 
fasting, and to keep a diary of the exercises of his 
mind during the whole of that period. This diary, 
which extends from October 8 to Nov. 7, 1794, was 
not shown to the committee at the time ; but merely 
the preceding narrative. Since his death a few of 
them have perused it ; and have been almost read}*- 
to think that, if they had seen it before, they would 



&6 MEMoin 01" 

not have dared to oppose his going. But the I^rd 
hath taken him to himself! Jt no longer remains a 
question now, whether he shall labor in England or 
in India. A few passages, however, from this tran- 
script of his heart, while contemplating a great and 
disinterested undertaking, will furnish a better idea 
of his character than could be given by any other 
hand ; and with these we shall close the present 
chapter. 

" Oct. 8, 1794. — Had some remarkable freedom 
and affection this morning, both in family and secret 
prayer. With many tears I dedicated myself, body 
and soul, to the service of Jesus ; and earnestly im- 
plored full satisfaction respecting the path of duty. 
I feel a growing deadness to all earthly comforts ; 
and derive my happiness immediately from God 
himself. IVIay I still endure, as Moses did, by seeing 
Him who is invisible. 

*' Oct. 10. — Enjoyed much freedom to-day in the 
family. While noticing in prayer the state of the 
millions of heathen who know not God, I felt the 
aggregate value of their immortal souls with pecu- 
liar energy. 

"Afterwards was much struck, whilst, on my 
knees before God in secret, I read the fourth chapter 
of Micah. The ninth verse I fancied was very ap- 
plicable to the church in Cannon-street ; but what 
reason is there for such a cry about so insignificant 
a worm as I am? The third chapter of Habakkuk» 



SAMUEL PtARCE, 97 

too, well expresses that mixture of solemnity and 
confidence with which I contemplate the work of the 
mission. 

" Whilst at the prayer-meeting to-night, I learned 
more of the meaning of some passages of Scripture 
than ever before. Suitable frames of soul are like 
good lights, in which a painting appears to its full 
advantage, I had often meditated on Phil. 3 : 7, 8, 
and Gal. 6: 14; but never felt crucifixion to the 
world, and disesteem for all that it contains, as at that 
lime. All prospects of pecuniary independence, and 
growing reputation, with which in unworthier mo- 
ments I had amused myself, were now chased from 
my mind; and the desire of living wholly to Christ 
swallowed up every other thought. Frowns and 
smiles, fullness and want, honor and reproach, were 
now equally indifferent ; and, when 1 concluded the 
meeting, my whole soul felt, as it were, going after 
the lost sheep of Christ among the heathen. 

" I do feel a growing satisfaction in the proposal 
of spending my whole life in something nobler than 
the locality of this island will admit. I long to raise 
my Master's banner in climes where the sound of 
his fame has but scarcely reached. He has said, 
for my encouragement, that all nations shall flow 
unto it. 

" The conduct and success of Stach, Boonish, and 
other Moravian missionaries in Greenland, both con- 
found and stimulate me. O Lord, forgive my past 



08 MEMOIR OF 

iiidoieriCe in thy service, and help me to redeem the 
residue of my days for exertions more worthy a 
friend of mankind and a servant of God. 

"Oct. 13. — Being taken up with visiters the for- 
mer part of the day, I spent the after part in appli- 
cation to the Bengalee language, and found the diffi- 
culties I had apprehended vanish as fast as I encoun- 
tered them. I read and prayed, prayed and read, and 
made no small advances. Blessed be God ! 

Oct. 15. — There are in Birmingham 50,000 in* 
habitants ; and, exclusive of the vicinity, ten minis- 
ters who preach the fundamental truths of the Gos* 
pel. In Hindostan there are twice as many millions 
of inhabitants, and not so many Gospel preachers. 
Now, Jesus Christ has commanded his ministers to 
go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every 
creature. Why should we be so disproportionate in 
our labors? Peculiar circumstances must not be 
urged against positive commands ; I am therefore 
bound, if others do not go, to make the means more 
proportionate to the multitude. 

" To-night, reading some letters from brother 
Carey, in which he speaks of his wife's illness when 
she first came into the country, I endeavored to re- 
alize myself, not only with a sick, but a dead wife. 
The thought was like a cold dagger to my heart at 
first ; but, on recollection, I considered the same God 
ruled in India as in Europe ; and that he could either 
preserve her, or support me, as well there as here. 



SAMUEL PEARCE. ^^ 

My business is only to be where he would have me. 
Other things I leave to him. O Lord, though with 
timidity, yet I hope not without satisfaction, I look 
every possible evil in the face, and say, 'Thy will 
be done !' 

"Oct. 17. — This is the first day I have set apart for 
extraordinary devotion in relation to my present e.N- 
ercise of mind Rose earlier than usual, and began 
the day in prayer, that God would be with me m 
every part of it, and grant the end I have in view 
may be clearly ascertained— the knowledge of his 

will. 

" Considering the importance of the work before 
me, 1 began at the foundation of all religion, and re- 
viewed the grounds on which I stood— the being of 
a God ; the relation of mankind to him ; with the 
divine inspiration of the Scriptures; and the review 
afforded me great satisfaction.* I also compared the 
different religions which claimed divine origin, and 
found little difficulty in determining which had most 
internal evidence of its divinity. I attentively read, 
and seriously considered Dr. Doddridge's three ex- 

♦ There i? a wide difference between admiuing these prin- 
ciples in theory, and making use of them. David might have 
worn Saul's accoutrements at a parade; but, in meetmg 
Goliath, he must go forth in an armor that had been tried. 
A mariner may sit in his cabin at his ease, while the ship is 
in harbor ; but, ere he undertakes a voyage he must examine 
its soundness, and whether it will endure the storms which 
may overtake him. 



100 MEMOIR OF 

ceilenl sermons on the Evidences of the Christian Re- 
ligion, wliich was followed by such conviction that 
1 had hardly patience to conclude the book before I 
fell on my knees before God, to bless him for such 
a religion, established on such a basis ; and I have 
received more solid satisfaction this day upon the 
subject than ever I did before. 

" I also considered, since the Gospel is true, since 
Christ is head of the church, and his will is the law 
of all his followers, what are the obligations of his 
servants in respect of the enlargement of his king- 
dom. I here referred to our Lord's commission, 
which I could not but consider as universal in its 
object, and permanent in its obligations. I read bro- 
ther Carey's remarks upon it ; and, as the command 
has never been repealed ; as there are millions of 
beings in the world on whom the command may bo 
exercised ; as I can produce no counter-revelation : 
and as I lie under no natural impossibilities of per- 
forming it ; I concluded that I, as a servant of Christ, 
was bound by this law. 

" I took the narrative of my experience, and state- 
ment of my view^s on this subject, in my hand, and, 
bowing down before God, I earnestly besought an 
impartial and enlightened spirit. I then perused 
that paper ; and can now say that I have (allowing 
for my own fallibility) not one doubt upon the subject. 
I therefore resolved to close this solemn season with 
reading a portion of both Testaments, and earnest 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 101 

prayer to God for my family, my people, the heathen 
world, the society, and particularly for the success 
of our dear brethren Thomas and Carej^ and his 
blessing, presence, and grace, to be ever my guide 
and glory. 

" Accordingly, I read the forty-ninth chapter of 
Isaiah ; and with Avhat sweetness ! I never read a 
chapter in private with such feelings since I have 
been in the ministry. The 8th, 9th, 10th, 20th, and 
21st verses, I thought remarkably suitable. 

" Read also part of the epistle to the Ephesians, 

and the first chapter to the Philippians. O, that for 

me to live may be Christ alone ! Blessed be my dear 

> Savior: in prayer I have had such fellowship with 

i him as would warm me in Greenland, comfort me 

I in New Zealand, and rejoice me in the valley of the 

shadow of death ! 

" Oct. 18. — I dreamed that I saw one of the Chris- 
tian Hindoos. O how I loved him ! I long to rea- 
lize my dream. How pleasant will it be to sit do". n 
at the Lord's table with our swarthy brethren, and 
hear Jesus preached in their language ! Surely then 
will come to pass the saying that is written, ' In 
Christ there is neither Jew nor Greek. Barbarian, 
Scythian, bond nor free — all are one in him.' 

" Have been happy to-day in completing the ma- 
nuscript of Periodical Accounts, No. 1. Anything 
relative to the salvation of the heathen brings a cer- 
tain pleasure with it. I find I cannot pray, nor con- 
9* 



102 



MEMOIR OF 



verse, nor read, nor study, nor preach with satisfac- 
tion, without reference to this subject, 

" Oct. 20. — Was a little discouraged on reading 
Mr. Zeigenbald's conference with the Malabarians, 
till I recollected, what ought to be ever present to 
my mind, in brother Carey's words — ' The work 
is God's.' 

" In the evening I found some difficulty with the 
language ; but, considering how merchants and cap- 
tains overcome this difficulty for the sake of wealth, 
I sat confounded before the Lord, that I should ever 
have indulged such a thought ; and looking up to 
him, I set about it with cheerfulness, and found that 
I was making a sensible advance, although I can 
never apply till eleven o'clock at nighty on account 
of my other duties.* 

"Preached from 2 Kings, 4: 26; * It is well.' 
Was much enlarged both in thought and expression. 
While speaking of the satisfaction enjoyed by a tru- 

* Night studies, often continued till f.vo or three o'clock 
in the morning, it is to be feared, were the first occasion of 
impairing Mr. Pearce's health, and brought on that train of 
nervous sensations with which he was afterwards afflicted. 
Though not much accustomed to converse on the subject, he 
once acknowledged to a brother in the ministry, that owing 
to his enervated state, he sometimes dreaded the approach of 
public services to such a degree that he would rather have 
submitted to stripes than engage in them ; and that while in 
the piilpit, he was frequently distressed with the apprehen- 
sion of falling over it. 



'ii 



SA.'.IUEL PEARCE. 103 

\y pious mind, when it feels itself, in all circum- 
stances and times, in the hand of a good God, I fell 
that, were the universe destroyed, and I the only 
being in it besides God, he is fully adequate to mv 
complete happiness ; and had I been in an African 
wood, surrounded with venomous serpents, devour- 
ing beasts, and savage men, in such a frame, I should 
be the subject of perfect peace and exalted joy. Yes, 

my God, thou hast taught me, that thou aloxk 
art worthy of my confidence ; and, with this senti- 

1 ment fixed in my heart, I am free from all solici- 

j tude about my temporal prospects or concerns. If 

I thy presence be enjoyed, poverty shall be riches ; 

1 darkness, light ; affliction, prosperity ; reproach, my 

I honor ; and fatigue, my rest : and thou hast said, 

, * My presence shall go with thee.' Enough, Lord ; 

1 ask for nothing, nothing more. 

But how sad the proofs of our depravity ; and how 
! insecure the best frames we enjoy ! Returning home, 
; a wicked expression from a person who passed mo 
J caught my ear, and recurred so often to my thoughts, 
6 for some minutes, as to bring guilt upon my mind, 
i and overwhelm me with shame before God. But I 
J appealed to God for my hatred of all such things, 
i secretly confessed the sin of my heart, and again 
1- ventured to the mercy-seat. On such occasions, how 
H precious a mediator is to the soul ! 

" Oct. 22. I did not in the former part of the day 
1 feel my wonted ardor for the work of a missionary ; 



104 MEMOIR OF "^ 

but rather an inclination to consult flesh and blood, 
and look at the worst side of things. I did so : but, 
when on my knees before God in prayer about it, I 
first considered that my judgment was still equally 
satisfied, and my conscience so convinced that I 
durst not relinquish the work for a thousand worlds ! 
And then I thought that this dull frame had not 
been without its use, as I was now fully convinced 
that my desire to go did not arise from any fluctua- 
tion of inconstant passions, but the settled convictions 
of my judgment. I therefore renewed my vows unto 
the Lord, that, let Vv'iiat difficulties soever be in the 
Avay, I would (provided the society approved) sur- 
mount them all. I felt a kind of unutterable satis- 
faction of mind in my resolution of leaving the de- 
cision in the hands of my brethren. May God 
rightly dispose their hearts ! I have no doubt but 
he will. 

" Oct. 23. — Have found a little time to apply to 
the Bengalee language. How pleasant is it to work 
for God ! Love transforms thorns to roses, and 
makes pain itself a pleasure. I never sat down to 
any study with such peculiar and continued satis- 
faction. The thought of exalting the Redeemer in 
this language is a spur to my application paramount 
to every discouragement for want of a living tutor. 
I have passed this day with an abiding satisfaction 
respecting my present views. 

" Oct. 24. — for the enlightening, enlivening, 



8AMULL PEAKCE. 105 

and sanctifying presence of God :o-day ! It is the 
second of those days of extraordinary devotion 
which I have set apart for seeking God in relation 
to the mission. How shall 1 spend it ? I will de- 
vote the morning to prayer, reading, and meditation ; 
and the afternoon to visiting the wretched, and re- 
lieving the needy. May God accept my services, 
guide me by his counsel, and employ me for his 
praise ! 

" Having besought the Lord that he would not 
suffer me to deceive myself in so important a mat- 
ter as that which I had now retired to consider, and 
exercised some confidence that he would be the re- 
warder of those who diligently seek him, I read the 
1 19th Psalm at the conclusion of my prayer, and f^lt 
and wondered at the congruity of so many of the 
verses to the breathings of my own heart. Often 
with holy admiration I paused, and read, and 
thought, and prayed over the verse again ; espe- 
cially verses 20,*3l, 59, 60, 112, 145, 146. ' Mij 
soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto thy 
judgments at all times. I have stuck to thy testimo- 
nies. O Lord, put me not to sho.me.'' 

" Most of the morning I spent in seriously read- 
ing Mr. Home's Letters on Missions, having first 
begged of the Lord to make the perusal profitable 
to my instruction in the path of dut^^ To the inter- 
rogation, ' AVhich of you will forsake all, deny him- 
self, take up his cross, and, if God pleases, die for 



106 MEMOIR OF 

"his religion?' I replied, spontaneously, Blessed be 
God I am willing ! Lord help me to accomplish it ! 

" Closed this season with reading the 61st and 
C2d chapters of Isaiah, and prayer for the church 
of God at large, my own congregation, the heathen, 
the Society, brethren Thomas and Carey, all mis- 
sionaries whom God has sent, of every denomina- 
tion, my own case, my wife and family, and for assis- 
tance in my work. 

" The after part of this day has been gloomy in- 
deed. All the painful circumstances which can at- 
tend my going have met upon m.y heart, and formed 
a load almost insupportable. A number of things 
%vhich have been some time accumulating have 
united their pressure, and made me groan, being 
burthened. Whilst at a prayer meeting I looked 
round on my Christian friends, and said to myself, 
a feAv months more, and probably I shall leave you 
all ! But in the deepest of my gloom I resolved, 
though faint, yet to pursue : not doubting but my 
Lord would give me strength equal to the day. 

" I had scarcely formed this resolution before it 
occurred, my Lord and Master was a man of sor- 
rows. Oppressed, and covered with blood, he cried, 
• If it he possible, let this cup pass from me.'' Yet in 
the depth of his agonies he added, ' Thy will be done.^ 
This thought was to me what the sight of the cross 
was to Banyan's pilgrim ; I lost my burden — spent 
the remainder of the meeting in sweet communion 
with God. 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 107 

" But, on coming homo, tlie sight of Mrs. P. re- 
placed my load. She had for some time been much 
discouraged at the thoughts of going. I therefore 
felt reluctant to say any thing on this subject, think- 
ing it would be )inpleasant to her; but, though I 
strove to conceal it, an involuntary sigh betrayed 
my uneasiness. She kindly inquired the cause. I 
avoided at first an explanation, till she, guessing tho 
reason, said to this effect : ' 1 hope you will be no 
more uneasy on my account. For the last tu'o or 
three days 1 have been more comfortable than ever 
in the thought of going. I have considered the steps 
you are pursuing to know the mind of God, and 1 
think you cannot take more proper ones. When you 
consult the ministers, you should represent your ob- 
stacles as strongly as your inducements ; and then, 
if they advise your going, though the parting from 
my friends will be almost insupportable, yet I wiil 

( make myself as happy as I can, and God can make 

I me happy any where.' 

"Should this little diary fall into the hands of a 
man having the soul of a missionary, circumstanced 
as I am, he will be the only man capable of sharing 
my peace, my joy, my gratitude, my rapture of soul. 
Thus at evening-tide it is light; thus God brings his 

•people through fire and through water into a Aveakhv 
place ; thus those who ask, do receive, and their joy 
is full. ' O, love the Lord ye his saints ; there is no 

-want to them that fear him !' 



108 jvtEMom 0/ 

" Oct. 26. — Had much enlargement this mornm^, 
whilst speaking on the nature, extent, and influence 
of divine love ; what designs it formed ; with what 
energy it acted ; with what perseverance it pursued its 
object : what obstacles it surmounted ; what difficul- 
ties it conquered: and what sweetness it imparted 
under the heaviest loads and severest trials. Almost 
through the day I enjoyed a very desirable frame ; 
and, on coming home, my wife and I had some con- 
versation on the subject of my going. She said, 
though in general the thought was painful, yet there 
were some seasons when she had no preference, but 
felt herself disposed to go or stay, as the Lord should 
direct. 

" This day uTOte to brother Fuller, briefly stating 
my desires, requesting his advice, and proposing a 
meeting of the committee on the business. I feel 
great satisfaction arising from leaving the matter to 
the determination of my honored brethren, and to 
God through them. 

" Oct. 27. — To-day I sent a packet to our brethren 
in India. I could not forbear relating to brother 
Carey all my feelings, views, p,nd expectations ; but 
saying also, that I should be entirely governed by the 
opinion of the Society. 

" Oct. 28. — Still panting to preach Jesus among 
my fellow sinners, to whom he is yet unknown- 
Wrote to Dr. Rogers, of Philadelphia, to-day, upon 
the subject, with freedom and warmth, a'nd inquired 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 109 

W-helher, whilst the people of the United States were 
forming societies to encourage arts, liberty, and em- 
igration, there could not a few be found among them 
who would form a society for the transmission of 
the word of life to the benighted heathens ; or, in case 
that could not be, whether they might not strengthen 
our hands in Europe, by some benevolent proof of 
concurring with us in a design' of w^hich they speak 
with such approbation ? With this I send Home's 
Letters, I will follow both with my prayers ; and 
who can tell ? 

" Oct. 29. — Looked over the code of Hindoo laws 
to-day. How much is there to admire in it, founded 
on the principles of justice ! The most salutary regu- 
lations are adiopted in many circumstances. But 
what a pity that so much excellence should be de- 
based by laws to establish or countenance idolatry, 
magic, prostitution, prayers for the dead, false wit- 
nessing, theft, and suicide ! How perfect is the mo- 
rality of the Gospel of Jesus : and how desirable that 
they should embrace it ! Ought not means to be 
used ? Can we assist them too soon ? There is 
reason to think that their Shasters were penned 
about the beginning of the KoUe Jogue, which must 
be soon after the deluge ; and are not 4000 years 
long enough for 100,000,000 of men to be under the 
empire of the devil ? 

*' Oct. 31. — I am encouraged to enter upon t bis- 
day (which I set apart for supplicating God) by a 
10 



110 MEMOIR or 

recollection of his promises to those who seek hitn. 
If the sacred word be true, the servants of God can 
never seek his face in vain ; and, as I am conscious 
of my sincerity and earnest desire only to know his 
pleasure that I may perform it, I find a degree of 
confidence that I shall realize the fulfillment of the 
word on which he causeth me to hope. 

" Began the day with solemn prayer for the assis 
tance of the Holy Spirit in my present exercise, so 
that I might enjoy the spirit and power of prayer* 
and have my personal religion improved, as well as 
my public steps directed. In this duty I found a 
little quickening. 

'*I then read over the narrative of my experience 
and my journal. I find my views are still the same ; 
but my heart is much more established than when 
I began to write. 

" Was much struck in readiiig Paul's words in 2 
Cor. 1:17, when, after speaking of his purpose to 
travel for the preaching the Gospel, he saith, ' Did I 
then use lightness when I was thus minded ? Or the 
things that I purpose, do I purpose according to the 
ilesh, that with me there should be yea, yea, and 
nay, nay ?' The piety of the apostle in not purposing 
after the flesh, the seriousness of the spirit with 
which he formed his designs, and his steadfast ad- 
herence to them, were in my view worthy of the 
highest admiration and strictest imitation. 

^' Thinking that I might get'some assitance from 



SAMUEL PEARCE. Ill 

David Brainercl's experience, I read his life up to 
'.he time of his being appointed a missionary among 
ihc Indians. The exaked devotion of that dear man 
almost made me question mine. Yet at some seasons 
he speaks of sinking as well as rising. His singular 
piety excepted, his feelings, prayers, desires, com- 
forts, hopes, and sorrows, are my own: and, if I 
could follow him in nothing else, I kneAv I had been 
enabled to say this with him — ' I felt exceedingly 
calm, and quite resigned to God respecting my future 
improvement (or station) when and where he pleased. 
My faith lifted me abo\-e the world, and removed all 
those mountains which I could not look over of late. 
I thought I wanted not the favor of man to lean upon; 
for I knew God's favor was infinitely better, and 
that it was no matter where, or when, or how, Christ 
should send me, nor with what trials he should still 
exercise me, if I might be prepared for his work 
and will.' 

"Read the second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth 
chapters of the Second Epistle to the Corinthians. 
Felt a kind of placidity, but not much joy. On be- 
ginning the concluding prayer I had no strength to 
wrestle, nor power with God at all. I seemed as one 
desolate and forsaken. I prayed for myself, the So- 
ciety, the missionaries, the converted Hindoos, the 
church in Cannon-street, my family, and ministry ; 
but all was dullness, and I feared I had offended the 
Lord. I felt but little zeal for the mission, and was 



112 ME3I0IR OF 

about to conclude with a lamentation over the hard- 
ness of my heart .... Avhen on a sudden it pleased 
God to smite the rock with the rod of his Spirit, and 
immediately the waters began to flow ! O what a 
heavenly, glorious, melting power was it ! My eyes, 
almost closed with weeping, hardly suffer me to 
write. I feel it over again. O what a view of the 
love of a crucified Redeemer did I enjoy ! The at- 
tractions of his cross, how powerful ! I was as a 
giant refreshed with new wine, as to my animation ; 
like Mary at the Master's feet, weeping for tender- 
ness of soul ; like a little child, for submission to my 
heavenly Father's will ; and like Paul, for a victory 
over all self-love, creature-love, and fear of man, 
w^hen these things stand in the way of my duty. 
The interest that Christ took in the redemption of 
the heathen, the situation of our brethren in Bengal, 
the worth of the soul, and the plain command of 
Jesus Christ, together with an irresistible drawing 
of soul, which far exceeded any thing I ever felt be- 
fore, and is impossible to be described or conceived 
of by those who have never experienced it, — all 
compelled me to vow that I would, by his leave, serve 
him among the heathen. The Bible lying open be- 
fore me, (upon my knees,) many passages caught my 
eye, and confirmed the purposes of my heart. If 
ever in my life I knew any thing of the influences 
of the Holy Spirit, I did at this time. I was swal- 
lowed up in God. Hunger, fullness, cold, heat, 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 113 

■ riends, and enemies, all seemed nothing before God. 
1 was in a new world. All was delightful ; for Christ 
was aU and in all. Many times I concluded prayer, 
but, when rising from my knees, communion with 
God was so desirable, that I was sweetly drawn to 
it again and again, till my animal strength was al- 
most exhausted. Then I thought it would be plea- 
sure to burn for God ! 

" And now, w^hile I write, such a heavenly sweet- 
ness fills my soul, that no exterior circumstance can 
remove it ; and I do uniformly feel, that the more I 
am thus, the more I pant for the service of my bless- 
ed Jesus among the heathen. Yes, my dear, my 
dying Lord, I am thine, thy servant ; and, if I ne- 
glect the service of so good a master, I may well 
expect a guilty conscience in life, and a death awful 
as that of Judas or Spira ! 

" This evening I had a meeting with my friends, 
who almost unanimously opposed my going. Re- 
turned much dejected. Received a letter from brother 
Fuller, which, though he says he has many objec- 
tions to my going, yet is so affectionately expressed 
as to yield me a gratification. 

" Nov. 3. — This evening received a letter from 
brother Ryland, containing many objections; but 
contradiction itself is pleasant when it is the voice 
of judgment mingled with affection. I wish to re- 
member that I may be mistaken, though I cannot 
say I am at present convinced that it is so, I am 



114 MEMOIR OF 

happy to find that brother Ryland approves of my 
referring it to the committee. I have much confi- 
dence in the judgment of my brethren, and hope I 
shall be perfectly satisfied with their advice. I do 
think, however, that, if they knew how earnestly I 
pant for the work, it would be impossible for them 
to withhold their ready acquiescence. O Lord, thou 
knowest my sincerity; and that if I go not to the 
work, it Avill not be owing to any reluctance on my 
part ! If I stay in England, I fear I shall be a poor 
useless drone ; or, if a sense of duty prompt me to 
activity, I doubt whether I shall ever know inward 
peace and joy again. O Lord, I am, thou knowest 
I am, oppressed ; undertake for me ! 

" Nov. 5. — At times to-day I have been reconciled 
to the thought of staying, if my brethren should so 
advise ; but at other times I seem to think I could 
not. I look at brother Carey's portrait as it hangs 
in my study. I love him in the bowels of Jesus 
'Christ, and long to join his labors. Every look calls 
up a hundred thoughts, all of which inflame my de- 
sires to be a fellow-laborer with him in the work of 
the Lord. One thing, however, I have resolved upon; 
that, the Lord helping me, if I cannot go abroad, I 
will do all I can to serve the mission at home. 

" Nov. 7. — This is the last day of peculiar devo- 
tion before the deciding meeting. May I have 
strength to wrestle with God to-day, for his wisdom 
to preside in the committee, and by faith to leave the 
issue to their determination. 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 115 

*• I iliil not enjoy much enlargement in prayer to- 
w.iv. My mind seems at present incapable of those 
sensations of joy with which I have lately been much 
iiululoed, through its strugglings in relation to my 
-olng^'or staying: yet I have been enabled to com- 
i,iil the issue into the hands of God, as he may di- 
rect my brethren, hoping that their advice will be 
agreeable to his will."' 

The result of the committee-meeting has already 
been related ; together with the state of his mind, as 
far as can be collected from his letters, for sometime 
after it. The termination of these tender and inte- 
resting exercises, and of all his other labors, in so 
speedy a removal from the present scene of action, 
may teach us not to draw any certain conclusion as 
to the designs of God concerning our future labors 
from the ardor or sincerity of our feelings. He may 
take it well that it was in our hearts to build him a 
house, though he should for wise reasons have de- 
termined not to gratify us. Let it suffice that, in 
matters of everlasting moment, he has engaged 
to perfect that which concerns us. In this he has 
condescended to bind himself, as by an oath, for our 
consolation. Here, therefore, we may safely consi- 
der our spiritual desires as indicative of his designs : 
but it is otherwise, in various instances, with regard 
to present duty. 



116 MEMOIR OF 



CHAPTER III. 



His exercises anil labors, from the time of his giving up the idea 
of going abroad, to the comviencement of his last illness. 

Had the multiplied labors of ibis excellent man 
permitted him to keep a regular diary, we may see 
by the foregoing specimen of a single month what a 
rich store of truly Christian experience would have 
pervaded these memoirs. We should then have 
been belter able to trace the gradual openings of his 
holy mind, and the springs of that extraordinary 
unction of spirit, and energy of action, by which his 
life was distinguished. As it is, we can only collect 
the gleanings of the harvest, partly from memory, 
and partly from letters communicated by his friends. 

This chapter will include a period of about four 
years, during which he went twice to London to col- 
lect for the Baptist mission, and once he visited Dub- 
lin, at the invitation of the Evangelical Society in 
that city. 

There appears, throughout the general tenor of 
his life, a singular submissiveness to the will of God ; 
and, what is worthy of notice, this disposition was 
generally most conspicuous when his own will was 
most counteracted. The justness of this remark is 
sufficiently apparent from his letter above to Mrs. 
Pearce, Nov. 13, 1794, after the decision of the com- 



SAMUKL PEARCE. 117 

inittee ; and the same spirit was carried into the com- 
mon concerns of life. Thus, about a month after- 
wards, when his dear Louisa was ill of a fever, he 
thus writes from Northampton to Mrs. Pearce : — 

''Northampton, Dec. 13, 1794. 

•'My dcarSara]!. 

I am just brought on the wings of celestial mer- 
,cy safe to my Sabbath's station. I am well ; and 
my dear friends here seem healthy and happy ; but I 
feel for you. I long to know how our dear Louisa's 
pulse beats: I fear still feverish. We must not, 
however, suffer ourselves to be infected wnth a men- 
tal fever on this account. Is she ill ? It is right. 
Is she very ill .... dying? It is still right. Is 
she gone to join the heavenly choristers ? It is all 
i right, notwithstanding our repinings .... Repin- 
ings ! No ; we will not repine. It is best she should 
\go. It is best for her: this we must allow. It is 
best for us. Do we expect it ? O what poor, un- 
grateful, short-sighted worms are we ! Let us sub- 
mit, my dear Sarah, till we come to heaven : if we 
do not then see that it is best, let us then complain. 
But why do I attempt to console ? Perhaps an in- 
dulgent providence has ere now dissipated your 
fears ; or, if that same kind providence has removed 
our babe, you have consolation enough in Him who 
suffered more than we ; and more than enough to 
quiet all our passions, in that astonishing conside- 



118 MEMOIR OF 

ration, — ' God so loved the world, that he spared not 
his own Son.' Did God cheerfully give the holy 
child Jesus for us ; and shall we refuse our child to 
Him ? He gave his Son to suffer ; he takes our 
children to enjoy. Yes ; to enjoy himself. 

" Yours, with the tenderest regard, S. P." 

In June, 1795, he attended the association at Ket- 
tering, partly on account of some missionary busi- 
ness there to be transacted. That was a season of 
great joy to many, especially the last forenoon pre- 
vious to parting. From thence he wrote to Mrs. 
Pearce as follows : — 

" My dear Sarah, 

" From a pew in the house of God at Kettering ; 
with my cup of joy running over, I address you by | 
the hands of brother Simmons. Had it pleased di- 
vine providence to have permitted your accompany- 
ing me, my pleasures would have no small addition ; 
because I should have hoped that you would have 
been filled with similar consolation, and have re- 
ceived equal edification by the precious means of 
grace on which I have attended. Indeed, I never 
remember to have enjoyed a public meeting to such 
a high degree since I have been in the habit of at- 
tending upon them. O that I may return to you, 
and the church of God, in the fullness of the bless- 
ing of the Gospel af Christ ! I hope, my beloved, 
that you are not without the enjoyment of the sweet 



i 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 119 

ficss and the supports of the blessed Gospel. O that 
jou may get and keep near to God, and in Him find 
nfinitely more than you can possibly lose by your 
lusband's absence ! 

"Mr. Hail preached last evening from 1 Pet. 1 : 8. 
V most evangelical and experimental season I I 
vas charmed and warmed. O that Jesus may go 
m to reveal himself to him as altogether lovely? I 
m unable to write more now. To-day I set off for 
Northampton, and preach there to-night. The Lord 
'less you. S. P." 

i The following letters, written to Mr. Carey, will 
exhibit the deep interest he continued to feel in the 
[lappiness, of his brethren in India, and in the success 
hf their blessed undertaking. The first was written 
trom London, where he was engaged in soliciting 
ontributions for the Mission. 

'' London, August 27, 1795. 
My very dear Brother, 

" Banisiied as you are from my eyes, I love you 
oo well to be unmindful of your concerns, or unin* 
erested in your best welfare. Our affectionate and 
trust pious intercourse, before you left England, to- 
ether with the letters I have received and seen 
rom you since your arrival in India, have uniform- 
y heightened that esteem which begun with our 
irst acquaintance on the day of your ordination at 
jcicester. Hence I can suffer no opportunity of 
;orrespGnding with you to pass unnoticed ; and as 



12d MEMOIR OF 

my dear friend Mr. Savage tells me that he ex^eftts 
a vessel will sail for Bengal in a few days, I at- 
tempt to give you some pleasure by writing a 
friendly epistle. 

'* I am here raising subscriptions for our Society the 
the third yeav. The times, indeed, are unfavorable to 
application, and 1 do not fail to meet with beggars' 
fare ; yet on the whole I must not complain. I have 
been three days at work, and have received thirty 
four guineas : whether I shall continue to succeed 
as well, 1 know not : my spirits often flag, but 1 
would hope and do the best. 

" Perhaps you have heard that the late Mr. Trin- 
der, of Northampton, left about £ 400 to the Society, 
besides which 1 suppose we have £ 300 or ig400 
more in hand ; so that we only want suitable per- 
sons to send, in order to extend our endeavors for, 
the conversion of the heathen. 

" In former letters we told you that we had re- 
solved on an African mission, and that two pious, 
and apparently suitable young men, had offered 
their services for the work of the Lord in that 
benighted and miserable part of the world. I am 
happy now in being able to add, that ahhough there 
Avas some difficulty at first in securing them a pas*, 
sage, it is at length obtained. Brother Fuller cam 
to London, and met with some of the directors of thi 
Sierra Leone Company, who have agreed to allov 
them a passage in their ships, and to leave them 



SAMCEL PEARCE. 121 

I, full liberty as to the conducting of the mission when 

1 they arrive in Africa. 

' "On Wednesday, the 16th of September next, we 
propose to have a parting meeting at Birmingham. 
Brother Ryland is to address the missionaries ; the 
other parts of the service are not yet arranged. 
Early in October the vessels will sail, and with 
them six pious families of Wesleyan Methodists, 
Vv-ho are to settle for one year at Free Town. They 
mean to proceed up the Foulah country ; and having 
prepared suitable receptacles for their families, on 
the commencement of the second year they are to 
be removed also ; when, by the practice of agricul* 

[ ture and the useful arts, together with frequent con- 
versation on religious subjects, and a cheerful yet 
guarded behavior, they hope to civilize and chris- 
tianize the negro inhabitants. The better to pro- 
mote their pious designs, it is proposed to send with 
them one or more missionaries, whose only work it 
will be to preach to the colony and evangelize the 
heathen. 

" The plan strikes me as well calculated to an- 
swer its end. I remember reading of a similar plan 
formed by one John Oxenbridge, an ejected minis- 
ter in the reign of Charles II. who went to South 
America on purpose to explore the country, and on 
his return published a book, recommending the go- 
ing out of a colony for the purpose of spreading the 
Gospel there ; but the time Avas not then come : both 
11 



122 MEMOIR OF 

wise and foolish virgins then slumbered and ^lept 
I trust that the frierds of Christ are now recovering 
from their stupor. A general concern discovers it- 
self in almost all denominations. The Independent 
brethren, in connexion v/ith Calvinistic Methodists 
and Churchmen, are about attempting a mission to 
the South Sea Islands, where they propose to send 
a large body of -nissionaries, if they can procure 
them. The Lord prosper the work of their hands ! 
•' Your affecticnate brother, S. P." 

" P. S. I have another minute to spare, and affec* 
lion bids me to spend it in your company. 1 have 
heard, since I wrote the above, that the plan of 
the Wesleyan Colony in the Foulah country has 
been somewhat ahered, and that Dr. C. will accom- 
pany them. 

" Mr. La Trobe has furnished me with the last 
two numbers of the Brethren's Periodical Accounts : 
I enclose them for your gratification. You will re- 
joice to find that the Hottentots are seeking after I 
Jesus, and be encouraged to continue your labors of] 
love among the poor Hindoos. Be not discouraged, 
rny dear brother, if you do not succeed immediately. 
You know the brethren labored nearly six years 
without effect in Greenland ; but they persevered, 
and now a tenth part of the inhabitants of that coun- jj 
try are professors of the faith of Christ. But when ' 
I consider by what means they achieved so great a 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 123 

xvork — by the simple preachinc^ of the cross of 
Christ, and an exhibition of the love of his heart, I 
am constrained to say. ' No; by might, nor by pow- 
er, but by thy Spirit, Lord of Hosts.' I have late- 
ly ^een struck with a remark which applies to their 
labors and success. Facts nterest more than specu- 
lations or abstract positions, however just. Talk to 
a child about any abstract subject, and it requires 
pains to secure his attent.on ; but tell him a story^ 
and he is all ear. So I shDuld suppose an affection- 
ate relation of the story of Jesus Christ, and his 
death and sufferings, would be the most likely way 
of engaging the heart of a heathen: but I, who am 
15,000 miles from ;he seat of your labors, am al- 
most ashamed to givs my thoughts on a subject with 
which you must be so much better acquainted. 
Forgive my freedom, and again believe me, 

" Most affectionately yours, in our dear Lord Jesus, 

"S. P." 

" Birmingham , Jan. 6, 1796 

•« My dearly beloved Brother, 

" To neglect any oppcrtunity of renewing the ex- 
pressions of my warm Lttachment, would give me 
pain, especially after kn:)wing how long you were 
in India before you received any communications 
from your friends in Europe. Long before now I 
hope you are convinced that your disappointment 
was not owing to any wait of regard ©r attention in 



124 MEUOIR OF 

your brethren here. I have often pleased myself 
with an idea of the scene when the delayed corres- 
spondence poured in upon you too fast almost even 
for your keenest appetite to devour, and the abun- 
dance of packets at once annihilated all your suspi- 
cions of our want of friendship. 

" I would now have written a long letter, but 
have been so much employed this last month in pre- 
prring cur Periodical A.ccounts, No. 2, for the 
press ; correcting the proofs, and sending them off to 
the different churches in the kingdom, that I almost 
fear being too late for this conveyance, as I must 
first send to Olney, that it may be enclosed in bro- 
ther Sutcliff 's parcel to }ou. He, brother Fuller, 
and I suppose brother Ryknd, will write, and pro- 
bably give you all the intelligence that the state of 
the churches afford. My next, I hope, will be longer. 

" What pleasure must it give you to hear of the 
great things God has done for Leicester ! I was 
there last Christmas day, and preached for the Mis- 
sion at Mr. Worthington's rfieeting. The congrega- 
tion was very large, and many went away, not being 
able to get in. £ 36 were (ollected, and apparently 
given with the heart. I thnk I told you that above 
j£30 were raised in Leicester the last year. Thus 
the seed you sowed, durhg your residence there, 
now springs up to the glojy of God. 

" Thaitk you, my dear )rother, for your kind let- 
ter of January 18, 1795. It was as cold water to a 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 125 

thirsty soul. Do not fail to refresh me as often as 
j'ou have leisure, and pray be particular in your 
communications respecting the work of God. A 
large portion of zeal now discovers itself among 
Christians of every name. I shall desire brother 
SutcliiT to enclose a copy of the Missionary Socie- 
ty's Sermons. I was in London when they were 
preached, attending our brethren, who soon after 
sailed for Africa. It was a Pentecost. The breth- 
ren who compose that society, stated publicly that 
our zeal kindled theirs : ' we lighted our torch at 
yours, and it was God who first touched your heart 
with fire from his holy altar.' To him be all the 
praise ! 

" I am, my dear, dear brother, aflfectionately yours, 

"S. P." 

In July, 1795, Mr. P. received a pressing invita- 
tion from the General Evangelical Society at Dub- 
lin to pay them a visit, and to assist in diffusing the 
Gospel of the grace of God in that kingdom. 

A little before this journey, it occurred to Dr. 
Ryland that an itinerating mission into Cornwall 
might be of use to the cause of true religion, and 
that two acceptable ministers might be induced to 
undertake it ; and that, if executed during the vaca- 
tion at the Bristol Academy, two of the students 
might supply their place. He communicated his 
thoughts to Mr. Pearce, who wrote thus in answer: 
11* 



126 MEMOIR OP 

" May 30, 1796. 

"My very dear Brother, 

I thank you a thousand times for your last letter. 
Blessed be God, who hath put it into your heart to 
propose such a plan for increasing- the boundaries 
of Zion ! I have read your letter to our wisest 
friends here, and they heard it with great joy. The 
plan, the place, the mode, the persons, — all, all meet 
our most affectionate wishes. How did such a 
scheme never enter our minds before ? Alas, we 
have nothing in our hearts that is worth having, 
save what God puts there. Do write to me when 
at Dublin, and tell me whether it be resolved on, 
when they set out, &c. I hope, ere long, to hear 
that as many disciples are employed in Great Bri- 
tain as the Savior employed in Judea. When he 
gives the word, great will be the company of the 
preachers. 

" O my dear brother, let us go on still praying, 
contriving, laboring, defending, until ' the little lea- 
ven leaven the whole lump, and the small stone 
from the mountain fill the whole earth.' 

•' What pleasures do those lose who have no in- 
terest in God's gracious and holy cause! How 
thankful should we be that we are not strangers to 
the joy which the friends of Zion feel, when the 
Lord turneth again Zion's captivity ! 

" I am, beyond expression, your affectionate brotheir 
in Christ. S. P." 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 127 

On May 31 he set off for Dublin, and " the Lord 
prospered his way," so that he arrived at the time 
appointed ; and from every account it appears that 
he was not only sent in the fullness of the blessing- 
of the Gospel of peace, but that the Lord himself 
went with him. His preaching was not only high- 
ly acceptable to every class of hearers, but the word 
came from him with power ; and there is abundant 
reason to believe that many will, through eternity, 
praise God for sending his message to them by this 
dear ambassador of Christ. 

He was earnestly solicited by the Evangelical 
Society to renew his visit to that kingdom, in 1798. 
Ready to embrace every call of duty, he had signi- 
fied his compliance, and the time w^as fixed; but 
the breaking out of the rebellion prevented him 
from realizing his intention. This was a painful 
disappointment to many, who wished once more to 
see his face, and to hear the glad tidings of salva- 
tion from his lips. 

The following letter was witten to Mrs. Pearce, 
from Dublin, when he had been there a little more 
than a week: — 

" Dublin, June 31, 179G. 
•'My dear Sarah, 

" I long to know how you do, and j^ow will be as 
much concerned to know how I go on, at this dis- 
tance from you. I hasten to satisfy your inquiries. 

•' I am in perfect health ; am delightfully disap- 



128 MEMOIR OF 

pointed with the place and its inhabitants. I am 
very thankful that I came over. I have found much 
more religion here already than I expected to meet 
with during the whole of ray stay. The prospect 
of usefulness is flattering. I have already many 
more friends (I hope Christian friends) than I can 
gratify by visits. Many doors are open for preach- 
ing the Gospel in the city ; and my country excur- 
sions will probably be few. Thus much for out- 
line. 

" But you will like to know how I spend my 
time, &c. Well then: I am at the house of a Mr. 
Hutton, late high sheriff for the city, a gentleman 
of opulence, respectability, and evangelical piety. 
He is by profession a Calvinistic Presbyterian, an 
elder of Dr. M'Dovval's church; has a most amia- 
ble wife, and four children. I am very thankful for 
being placed here during my stay. I am quite at 
home — I mean as to ease and familiarity ; for, as to 
style of living, I neither do, nor desire to equal it. 
Yet, in my present situation, it is convenient. It 
would, however, be sickening and dull, had I not a 
God to go to, to converse with, to enjoy, and to call 
my own. Oh ! it is this, it is this, my dearest 
Sarah, which gives a point to every enjoyment, and 
sweetens all the cup of life. 

•' The Lord's day after I wrote to you last, I 
preached for Dr. M'Dowal in the morning, at hah 
past eleven ; heard a Mr. Kilburne at five ; and 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 129 

preached again at Plunket-street at seven. On 
Tuesday evening I preached at a hospital ; and on 
Thursday evening at Plunket-street again. Yester- 
day, for the Baptists, in the morning; Dr. M'Dowal 
at five ; and at Plunket-street at seven. 

*' The hours of worship will appear singular to 
you: they depend on the usual meal times. We 
breakfast at ten ; dine between four and five, some- 
times between five and six ; take tea from seven to 
nine ; and sup from ten to twelve. 

I thank God that I possess an abiding determina- 
tion to aim at the consciences of the people in every 
discourse. I have borne the most positive testimony 
against the prevailing evils of professors here : as 
sensuality, gaiety, vain amusements, neglect of the 
sabbath, &c. ; and last night told an immense crowd 
of professors, of the first rank, ' that if they made 
custom and fashion their plea, they were awfully 
deluding their souls ; for it had always been the 
fashion to insult God, to dissipate time, and to pur- 
sue the broad road to hell : but it would not lessen 
their torments there, that the way to damnation was 
the fashion.' 

" I feared my faithfulness would have given them 
ofience; but, I am pursuaded it was the way to 
please the Lord ; and those who I expected would 
be enemies are not only at peace with me, but even 
renounce their sensual indulgences to attend on my 
ministry. 1 do assuredly believe that God has sent 



130 MEMOIR OF 

me hither for good. The five o'clock meetings are 
miserably attended in general. In a house that will 
hold fifteen hundred or two thousand people, you 
Avill hardly see above fifty ! Yesterday morning- I 
preached on the subject of public worship, from 
Psalm 5 : 7, and seriously warned them against pre- 
ferring their bellies to God, and their own houses 
to his. I was delighted and surprised at the five 
o'clock meeting, to see the place nearly full. Sure- 
ly this is the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous in 
my eyes. Never, never did I more feel how weak 
I am in myself — a mere nothing ; and how strong 
I am in the omnipotence of God. I feel a superio- 
rity to all fear, and possess a concious dignity in 
being the ambassador of Christ. O help me to 
praise ! for it is he alone who teacheth my hands to 
war, and my fingers to fight : and still pray for me ; 
for, if he withdraw for a moment, I become as 
weak and unprofitable as the briers of the wilder- 
ness. 

" You cannot think how much I am supported 
by the assurance that I have left a praying people 
at Birmingham ; and I believe that, in answer to 
their prayers, I have hitherto been wonderfully as- 
sisted in the public w-ork, as well as enjoyed much 
in private devotion. 

*' I have formed a most pleasing acquaintance 
with several serious young men in the University 
here, and with two of the fellows of the college, 



BAMUEl PEARCE. 131 

most pious gentlemen indeed, who have undergone 
a world of reproach for Christ and his Gospel, and 
have been forbidden to preach in the churches by 
the Archbishop : but God raised another house for 
them here, where they preach with much success, 
and ha\-e begun a meeting in the college which 
promises fresh prosperity to the cause of Jesus. 

"S. P." 

The following particulars, in addition to ths 
above, are taken partly from some notes in his own 
hand-writing, and partly from the account given by 
his friend Mr. Summers, who accompanied him 
during the latter part of his visits. 

At his first arrival, the congregations were but 
thinly attended, and the Baptist congregation in 
particular, amongst whom he delivered several dis- 
courses. It much affected him to see the whole city 
given to sensuality and worldly conformity ; and 
especially to find those of his own denomination 
amongst the lowest and least affected with their con- 
dition. But the longer he continued, the more the 
congregations increased, and every opportunity be- 
came increasingly interesting, both to him and them. 
His faithful remonstrances, and eamest recommen- 
dations of prayer-meetings to his Baptist friends, 
though at first apparently ill received, were Avell ta- 
ken in the end ; and he had the happiness to see in 
ihem some hopeful appearances of a return of God, 



132 MEMOIR 0? 

On June 20 he wrote to his friend Mr. Summers 
as follows : — 

" My dear Friend. 

If you mean to abide by my opinion, 1 say, come 
to, Dublin, and come directly, I have been most 
delightfully disappointed. 1 expected darkness, and 
behold light ; sorrow, and I have had cause for 
abundant joy. I thank God that I came hither, and 
hope that many, as well as myself, will have cause 
to praise him. Never have I been more deeply 
taught my own nothingness ; never has the power 
of God more evidently rested upon me. The har« 
vest here is great, in deed; and the Lord of the har- 
vest has enabled me to labor in it with delight. 

' I praise him for all that is past ; 
* I trust him for all that's to come.* 

" The Lord has of late been doing great things 
for Dublin. Several of the young men in the college 
have been awakened ; and two of the fellows are 
sweet evangelical preachers. One of them is of a 
spirit serene as the summer's evening, and sweet as 
the breath of May. I am already intimate with 
them, and have spent several mornings in college 
with various students who bid fair to be faithful 
watchmen on Jerusalem's walls. But I hope you 
will come, and then you will see for yourself If 
not, I will give you some pleasant details when we 
meet in England. S. P." 



SA.MUEL PtARCt;. 133 

Mr. Summers complied with this invitation. Of 
the last seven or eight days of Mr. Pearce's continu- 
ance at Dublin, he thus writes ; 

■■' Monday, July 4. — At three in the afternoon I 
went with my friend Mr. Summers to Mr. K.'s« 
Spent a very agreeable day. Miss A. K. remarked 
two wonders in Dublin — a praying society compos- 
ed of students at college, and another of lawyers- 
The family were called together ; I read and ex' 
pounded the twelfth chapter of Isaiah, and prayed. 
At seven we went to a prayer-meeting at Plunket- 
street ; there was a very large attendance. Mr. R. 
and Mr. S. prayed; and I spoke from Rom. 10 : 12, 
^13 : ' There is no difference between the Jew and 
;the Greek : for the same Lord over all is rich unto 
jail who call upon him. For whosoever shall call 
iUpon the name of the Lord shall be saved.' Many 
seemed affected. After I had closed the opportuni- 
ty, I told them some of my own experience, and re- 
quested that, if any present wished for conversation 
hey would come to me, either that evening, or on 
Thursday evening, in the vestry. Five persons 
tame in. One had been long impressed with reli- 
gion, but could never summon courage enough td 
)pen her heart before. Another, a Miss W. attri- 
>uted her first impressions, under God, to my min- 
stry ; and told me that her father had regularly at- 
3nded of late, and that her m.other was so much 
larmed as to be almost in despair. Poor girl ! she 
12 



I3i MtSlClR Of 

seemed truly in earnest about her own soul, and as 
much concerned for her parents. The next had 
possessed a serious concern for some time, and of 
late had been much revived. One young lady, a 
Miss H. stayed in the meetingf-house, exceeding-ly 
affected indeed. Mr. K. spoke to her. She said 
she would speak to me on Thursday. 

" Tuesday, 5. — Went to Lexlip. At seven preach- 
ed^tb a large- and aflected auditory. 

" Wednesday, 6.— Mr. H. and myself went to 
Mrs. M'G. to inquire about the young lady who 
was Bo^ much aifected at the meeting. Mrs. M'G. 
said^her mother and sister were pious; that she had 
been very giddy ; but that last Lord's day she was 
seriously awakened to a sense of sin ; had express- 
ed her delight in religion, and fled for refuge to the 
blood of Jesus. Her sister was introduced to me, a 
sweetly pious lady. I agreed to wait for an inter- 
view with the young lady at Mr. H.'s in Eccles- 
street, to-morrow. 

" Thursdaj^ 7. — Miss H., her sister, and Mrs. 
M'G. came to Eccles-street. A most delightful in- 
terview. Seldom have I seen such proficiency in 
so short a time. That day a week, at Plunkel- 
street, she received h&r first serious impressions • 
her concern deepened at Mass-lane, on Lord's day 
morning ; more so in th« evening at Plunket-street ; 
but most of all on Monday night. I exhorted thent 
to begin a prayer and experience-meeting ; and they 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 135 

agreed. Blessed he God I this strengthens my 
hands greatly. At seven o'clock, preached at Plun- 
ket-street, from Jer. i : 4, 5 : ' Going and weeping — 
they shall ask their way to Zion with their fiaces 
thitherward.' A full house and an impressive sea- 
son. Tarried after the public services were ended, 
to converse on religion. The most pleasing case 
was that of a young man of Mr. D.'s. 

" Saturday, 9. — Went with my friend Mr. S. to 
call on Miss H. Found her at her mother's. We 
lirst passed the door. She ran out after us ; seemed 
happy, but agitated. Ran, and called her mother. 
Soon we saw the door of the parlor open, and a ma- 
jestic lady appeared; who, as she entered the room, 
thus accosted me : ' Who art thou, O blessed of the 
Lord ! Welcome to the widow's house ! Accept 
the widow's thanks for coming after the child whom 
thou hast begotten in the gospel !' I was too much 
overcome to do more than take the aged saint by 
the hand. A solemn silence ensued for a minute or 
two ; when the old lady, recovering, expressed the 
fullness of her satisfaction respecting the reality of 
the change effected in her daughter, and her grati- 
tude for the great refreshment of her OAvn soul, by 
means of my poor labors. She said she had known 
the Lord during forty years, being called vmder the 
ministry of John Fisher, in the open air, when on 
a visit to an officer, who was her brother-in-lav.-. 
She told us much of her experience, and promised 



136 MEiMOIR OF 

to encourage the prayer-meeting which I proposed 
to be held in her house every Lord's-day evening. 
They are to begin to-morrow, after preaching. It 
was a pleasant meeting: and we returned with 
pleasure to Eccles-street. After we rose up to come 
away, the old lady affectionately said, ' May the 
good-will of Him who dwelt in the bush attend you 
wherever you go, for ever and ever !' " 

The young lady, some months after, wrote to Mr. 
S. and says, amongst other things, " I have great 
reason to be thankful for the many blessings the 
Lord has been pleased to bestow upon me, and ia 
particular for his sending Mr. Pearce to this city ; 
and that through his means I have been convinced 
of sin. I am happy to inform you that, through 
grace, I am enabled to walk in the narrow path. 
The Lord has taken away all desire for worldly 
company ; all my desires, now, are to attend on the 
means of grace. Blessed be his name ! I often find 
him present in them. My mother and I often re- 
member the happy time we spent in your company 
at our house. She often speaks of it with great 
pleasure, and blesses the Lord for the change 
which grace has wrought in me." 

"Lord's-day, 10. — (the last Sabbath.) — Preached 
in the morning at Mary's Abbey, from Job, 33 : 
27, 28 : ' He looketh upon men, and if any say, I 
have sinned, and perverted that which was right, 
and it profited me not, he will deliver his soul from 



SAMUEL PEAKCE. 137 

going into the pit, and his life shall see the light.' 
A happy season. In the afternoon, having dined 
with Mr. W. he took me to Swift's Alley, the Bap- 
tist place of worship, where I gave an exhortation 
on brotherly love, and administered the Lord's sup- 
per. At Mr. W.'s motion, the church requested me 
to look out a suitable minister for them. In the 
evening I preached at Plunket-street, from 2 Timo- 
thy, 1 : 18 : ' The Lord grant unto him that he may 
find mercy of the Lord in that day !' A very solemn 
season." 

"Monday, 11. — Met the dear christian friends, 
for the last time, at a prayer-meeting in Plunket- 
street. The Lord was there ! Several friends spent 
the evening with us afterwards at Mr. H.'s." 

" Tuesday, 12. — Went on board at four. Arriv- 
ed at Liverpool on Thursday, and safely at home on 
Friday, July 15, 1796. Blessed be the Preserver 
of men, the Savior of sinners, and the help of his 
servants, for evermore. Amen, amen!" 

Some time after, writing to his friend who ac- 
companied him, he says — " I have received several 
letters from Dublin ; two from Master B. one from 
Miss H. one from M. three or four from our 
Baptist friends, and some from others whom I can- 
not recollect. Mr. K. lately called on me, in his 
way from Bath to Holyhead. We talked of you, 
and of our Lord, and did not part till we had pre- 
sented ourselves before the throne." 
15* 



138 MEMOIR OF 

During his labors in Dublin he was strongly 
solicited to settle in a very flattering situation at the 
Black Rock, the residence of some of the most gen- 
teel families in the neighborhood; and a very 
liberal salary was offered him.* On his positively 
declining it, mention was made of only six months 
in the year. When that was declined, three months 
were proposed ; and, when he was about to answer 
this in the negative, the party refused to receive his 
answer, desiring him to take time to consider of h. 
He did so, and, though he entertained a very grate- 
ful sense of the kindness and generosity expressed 
in the proposal, yet, after the maturest deliberation, 
he thought it his duty to decline it. Mr. Pearce's 
modesty prevented his talking on such a subject ; but 
it was known at the time by his friend who accompa- 
nied him, and, since his death, has been frequently 
mentioned as an instance of his disinterested spirit. 

His friends at Birmingham were ready to think 
it hard that he should be so willing to leave them, to 
go on a mission among the heathen ; but they could 
not well complain, and much less think ill of him, 
when they saw that such a willingness was more 

* One lady of affluence engaged herself to contribute suf- 
ficient for the handsome support of Mr. Pearce and family, 
if he would reside in the neighborhood of Dublin ; but he 
declined, telling her that he had found three things at 
Birmingham which determined him not to leave it — health, 
love, and usefulness. 



SA.MUEL PEARCE. 139 

than could be effected by the most flattering prospects 
of a worldly nature, accompanied too with promis- 
ing appearances of religious usefulness. 

About a month after his return from Dublin, Mr. 
Pearce addressed a letter to Mr. Carey, in which he 
gives some farther account of Ireland, as well as 
of some other interesting matters. 

" Birmingham, Aug. 12, 179fi. 

" O, my dear brother, did you but know with what 
feelings I resume my pen, freely to correspond with 
you, after receiving your very affectionate letter to 
myself, and perusing tbat which you sent by the 
same conveyance to the society, I am sure you would 
persuade yourself that I have no common friendship 
for you, and that your regards are at least returned 
with equal ardor. 

" I fear {I had almost said) that I shall never see 
your face in the flesh ; but if any thing can add to 
the joy which the presence of Christ, and confor- 
mity, perfect conformity to him, will afford in hea- 
ven, surely the certain prospect of meeting with my 
dear brother Carey there, is one of the greate.st. 
Thrice happy should I be, if the providence of God 
would open a way for my partaking of your labors, 
your sufllerings, and your pleasures, on this side the 
eternal world : but all my brethren here are of opi- 
nion that I shall be more useful at home than abroad ; 
and T, though reluctantly, submit. Yet I am truly 



140 MEMOIR OF 

with you in spirit. My heart is at Mudnabatty ; and 
at times I even hope to find my body there : but with 
the Lord I leave it. He knows my wishes, my mo- 
tives, my regret. He knows all my soul ; and, de- 
praved as it is, I feel an inexpressible satisfaction 
that he does knov/ it. However, it is a humbling 
thought to me, that he sees I am unfit for such a sta- 
tion, and unworthy of such an honor as to bear his 
name among the heathen. But I must be thankful 
still that, though he appoints me not to a post in fo- 
reign service, he will allow me to stand sentinel at 
home. In this situation may I have grace to be faith- 
ful unto death I 

" With pleasure approaching to rapture, I read 
the last accounts you sent us. I never expected im- 
mediate success ; the prospect is truly greater than 
my most sanguine hopes. ' The kingdom of heaven 
IS like to a little leaven hid in three measures of 
meal, till the whole was leavened.' .Blessed be God ! 
the leaven is in the meal, and its influence is already- 
discoverable. A great God is doing great things by 
you. Go on, my dearest brother, go on ; God will 
do greater things than these. Jesus is worthy of a 
world of praise : and shall Hindostan not praise him ? 
Surely he shall see of the travail of his soul there; 
and the sower and the reaper shall rejoice together. 
Already the empire of darkness totters, and soon it 
shall doubtless fall. Blessed be the laborers in this 
important work ; and blessed be He who giveth them 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 141 

hearts and strength to labor, and promises that they 
shall not labor in vain ! 

" Do not fear the want of monej''. God is for us, 
and the silver and the gold are his ; and so are the 
hearts of those who possess the most of it. I will 
travel from the Land's End to the Orkneys, but we 
will get money enough for all the demands of the 
mission. I have never had a fear on that head : a 
little exertion will do wonders ; and past experience 
justifies every confidence. Men we only want ; and 
God shall find them for us in due time. 

" Is brother Fountain arrived ? We hope he will 
be an acceptable remittance, and, viva voce, compen- 
sate for the lack of epistolary communications. 

" I rejoice in contemplating a church of our Lord 
Jesus Christ in Bengal. Why do not the Hindoo con- 
verts join it? Lord help their unbelief ! But perhaps 
the drop is now withheld, that you may by and by 
have the shower, and lift up your eyes and say, 
* These, whence came they ? They fly as clouds, or as 
doves to their windows.' For three years we read of 
few baptized by the first disciples of our Lord ; but, 
on the fourth, 3000 and 5000 openly avowed him. 
The Lord send you such another Pentecost ! 

" I intended to write my dear brother a long letter. 
It will prove my desire to gratify him, if it do no 
more. I wish that I knew in what communications 
your other correspondents will be most deficient; 
then I would try to supply their om.issions. 



142 MEJioirv OF 

" As to myself, I have nothing good to say. i 
think I am the most vile, ungralefui servant that ever 
Jesus Christ employed in his church. At some times 
i question whether I ever knew the grace frf God 
in truth ; and, at others, I hesitate on the most im- 
portant points of Christian faith. 1 have lately had 
peculiar struggles of this kind with my own heart, 
and have often half concluded to speak no more in 
ihe name of the Lord. When I ain preparing for 
the pulpit, I fear I am going to avow fables for facl.^, 
and doctrines of men for the truths of God. In con- 
versation I am obliged to be silent, lest my tongue 
should belie my heart. In prayer I know not what 
to say, and at times think prayer altogether useless. 
Yet I cannot wholly surrender my hope, or my pro- 
fession. Three things I find, above all others, tend 
to my preservation :-7-^First, a recollection of a time 
when, at once, I was brought to abandon the practice 
of sins which the fear of damnation could never 
bring me to relinquish before : surely, I say, this 
must be the finger of God, according to the Scripture 
doctrine of regeneration ; — Secondly, I feel such a 
consciousness of guilt, that nothing but the Gospel 
scheme can satisfy my mind respecting the hope of 
salvation ; — Thirdly, I see that what true devotion 
does appear in the world, seems only to be found 
among those to whom Christ is precious. 

"But I frequently find a backwardness to secret 
prayer, and much deadness in it : and it puzzles me 



SAjri'EL PEARCE. 143 

to see how this can be consistent with a life of grace. 
However, I resolve that, let what will become of 
me, I will do all I can for God -while I live, and 
leave the rest to him : and this I usually experienco 
>he best way to be at peace. 

•' I believe that, if I were more fully given up to 
God, I should be more free from these distressing- 
workings of mind ; and then I long to be a mis- 
sionary, w-here I should have temptations to nothing 
hut to abound in the work of the Lord, and lay my- 
self entirely out for him. In such a situation, I 
think, pride would have but little food, and faith 
more occasion for exercise ; so that the spiritual 
life and inward religion Avould thrive better than 
they do now. 

" At times, indeed, I do feel, I trust, genuine con- 
trition, and sincerely lament my short-comings be- 
fore God. O the sweets that accompany true re- 
pentance ! Yes, I love to be abased before God. 
' There it is I find my blessing.' May the Lord 
daily and hourly bring me low, and keep me so ! 

"As to my public work, I find, whilst engaged 
in it, little cause to complain for want either of mat- 
ter or -words. My labors are acceptable, and not al- 
together unprofitable, to the hearers : but what is 
this to me, if my ov^Ti soul starve whilst others are 
fed by me? O, my brother, I need your prayers; 
and feel a great satisfaction in the hope that you do 
not forget me. O that I m5>y be kept faithful unto 



144 MEMOIR OV 

death ! Indeed, in the midst of my striiggiini;?, a 
gleam of hope that I shall at last awake in the like- 
ness of God, affords me greater joy than words can 
express. To be with Christ is far better than to 
continue sinning here ; but, if the Lord has any 
thing to do by me, his will be done. 

" I have never so fully opened my case to any 
one before. Your freedom on similar topics encou- 
rages me to make my complaint to you, and I thinks 
if you were near me, I should feel great relief in re- 
vealing to you all my heart. But I shall fatigue 
you with my moanings; so I will have done on 
this subject. 

" It is not long since I returned from a kind of mis- 
sion to Ireland. A society is established in Dublin, 
for the purpose of inviting, from England, ministers 
of various denominations, to assist in promoting the 
interests of the kingdom of Christ there. Some of 
our Baptist brethren had been there before me ; as 
Rippon, Langdon, Francis, and Birt; and I think 
the plan is calculated for usefulness. 

" The inhabitants of Dublin seem to be chiefly com- 
posed of tw^o classes ; the one assumes the appear- 
ance of opulence, the other exhibits marks of the 
most abject poverty ; and, as there are in Ireland no 
parishes which provide for the poor, many die 
every year for want of the common necessaries of life. 

" Most of the rich are by profession Protestants. 
The poor are nearly all Papists, and strongly pre- 



SAMUEL PEAltCE. 145 

judiced ag;ainst the reformed religion. Their igno- 
rance and superstition are scarcely inferior to your 
miserable Hindoos. On mid-summer day I had an 
affecting proof of the latter. On the public road, 
about a mile from Dublin, is a well, which was once 
included in the precincts of a priory dedicated to 
St. John of Jerusalem. This well is in high repute 
for curing a number of bodily complaints, and its 
virtues are said to be the most efficacious on the 
saint's own day. So, from twelve o'clock at night, 
for twenty-four hours, it becomes the rendezvous for 
all the lame, blind, and otherwise diseased people, 
within a circuit of twenty miles. Here they brought 
old and young, and applied the holy icater, both in- 
ternally and externally ; some by pouring, some by 
immersion, and all by drinking ; whilst, for the good 
of those who could not attend in person, their friends 
filled bottles with the efficacious water, to use at 
home. Several I saw on their knees before the well, 
at their devotions, who w^ere not unfrequently inter- 
rupted with a glass of whiskey ! With this they 
were supplied by a number of dealers in that arti- 
cle, who kept standings all round the well. 

" Near to the spot wms a church-yard, w^here great 
numbers kneeled upon the tombs of their deceased 
relatives, and appeared earnestly engaged in praying 
for the repose of their souls. 

" It was truly a lamentable sight. My heart ached 
at their delusions ; whilst I felt gratitude, 1 hope un* 
13 



146 MEMOIR OF 

feigned, for an acquaintance with the ' water of life, 
of which if a man drink, he shall live for ever !' 

" There are few or none of the middle class to con- 
nect the rich and the poor, so that favorable access 
to them is far more difficult than to the lower orders 
of the people in England ; and their priests hold 
them in such bondage, that, if a catholic servant only 
attend on family worship in a protestant house, pen- 
ance must be performed for the oflence. S. P." 

It has been already stated that Mr. Pearce " form- 
ed a pleasing acquaintance with several serious 
young gentlemen of the University of Dublin." The 
following letter Avas addressed to one of them, the 
Rev. Mr. Matthias, a few months after his return: 

" Dear brother Mattliias, 

" I have been employed this whole day in writing 
letters to Dublin ; and it is the first day I have 
been able to redeem for that purpose. I will not 
consume a page in apology ; let it suffice to say 
that necessity, not disinclination, has detained from 
my Irish friends those proofs of my gratitude and 
esteem which, in other circumstances, I ought to 
have presented three months ago. I thought this 
morning of answering all their demands before I 
slept; but I have written so many sheets, and all 
full, that I find my eyes and my fingers both fail ; 
and I believe this must close my intercourse with 



BAMUEL PEARCE. 147 

Dublin this day. When I shall be able to com- 
plete my purpose I do not know. To form friend- 
ships with good men is pleasant ; but to maintain all 
that communion which friendship expects, is in some 
cases very difficult. Happy should I be, could I 
meet my Irish friends in propria persona, instead of 
sitting in solitude, and maintaining, by the tedious 
medium of the pen, this distant intercourse. But 
the Lord he shall choose our inheritance for us. 
Were all the planets of our system embodied, and 
placed in close association, the light would be great- 
er and the object grander: but, then, usefulness and 
systematic beauty consist in their dispersion : and 
what are we, my dear brother, but so many satellites 
to Jesus, the great Sun of the Christian system? 
Some, indeed, like burning Mercuries, keep nearer 
the luminary, and receive more of its light and heat ; 
whilst others, like the ringed planet, or the Georgium 
Sidus, preserve a greater distance, and reflect a 
greater portion of his light; yet if, amidst all this 
diversity, they belong to the system, two things may 
be affirmed of all : — all keep true to one centre, and 
borrow whatever light they have from one source. 
True it is, that the further they are from the sun, the 
longer are they in performing their revolutions ; and 
is not this exemplified in us ? The closer we keen 
to Jesus, the more brilliant are our graces, the more 
cheerful and active are our lives : but alas, we are 
all comets ; we ail move in eccentric orbits ; at one 



148 MEMOIR OF 

time glowing beneath the ray divine, at another con- 
gealing and freezing into icicles. ' Oh, what a mi- 
racle to man is man !' 

" Little did I think, when I began this letter, that 
I should thus have indulged myself in allegory : 
but true friendship, I believe, always dictates extem- 
pore ; and my friends must never expect from me a 
studied epistle. They can meet with better thoughts 
than I can furnish them with in any bookseller's 
shop. It is not the dish, however well it may be 
cooked, that gives the relish, but the sweet sauce of 
friendship ; and this I think sometimes makes even 
nonsense palatable. 

" But 1 have some questions to put to you. How 
are my college friends ? How is their health? But 
chiefly, how are the interests of religion among you: 
are there any praying students added to your num- 
ber? Do all those you thought well of continue tc 
justify their profession ? You know what it is that 
interests me. Pray tell me all, whether it makes mo 
weep or rejoice. 

" I hope Mr. H 's ministry was blessed in 

Dublin. Do you know any instances of it? We 
must sow in hope, and I trust that we shall all ga- 
ther fruit to eternal life, even where the buddings 
have never appeared to us in this world. How is it 
with your own soul ? I thank God I never, 1 think, 
rejoiced habitually so much in him as I have doners 
of late. ' God is love.' That makes me happy. I 



SAMUEL PEARCE. [id 

rejoice that God reigns; that he reigns overall; 
over me ; over my crosses, my com/brls, my family, 
my friends, my senses, my mental powers, my de- 
signs, my words, my preaching, my conduct; that 
he is God over all, blessed for ever. I am willing 
to live, yet I long to die, to be freed from all error 
and all sin. I have nothing else to trouble me; no 
other cross to carry. The sun shines without, all 
day long; but I am sensible of internal darkness. 
Well, through grace, it shall be all light by and bv. 
Yes, you and I shall be angels of light ; all Mercu- 
ries then ; all near the sun ; always in motion; al- 
ways glowing with zeal and flaming with love. O 
for the new heavens and the new earth, wherein 
dwelleth righteousness!" 

A while after this, he thus writes to his friend 
Mr. Summers: 

" Dci3mbcr, 1793. 

" I rejoice that you have been supported under, 
and brought through your late trials. I do not won- 
der at it, for it is no more than God has promised ; 
and though we may well wonder that he promises 
any thing, yet his performance is no just ground of 
surprise : and, when we find ourselves so employed, 
we had better turn our wonder to our own unbelief 
that for one moment suspected God would not be as 
good as his word, 

" I have been lately more than ever delighted with 
the thought that God has engaged to do any thin^ 
13* 



150 MEMOIR OF 

for such -wonns as we. I never studied the Deistical 
controversy so much, nor ever rejoiced in revelation 
more. Alas ! what should we know, if God had not 
condescended to teach us ? Paul very justly remarks, 
that no one knoweth any thing- of God but the Spirit 
of God, and he to whom the Spirit revealeth him. 
Now the Spirit hath revealed God in the Bible; but 
to an unbeliever the Bible is a sealed book. He can 
know nothing- from a book that he looks upon as an 
imposture, and yet there is no other book in which 
God is revealed ; so that to reject the Bible is to im- 
merse ourselves in darkness, and, whilst professing 
to be wise, actually to become fools : whereas, no 
sooner do we believe what the Spirit saith, than God 
IS revealed to us, and ' in his light do we see light.' 

"S. P." 

In April, 1797, Mr. Pearce attended a meeting of 
ministers at Arnsby. A person present has recorded 
that, " upon this occasion, he was previously expect- 
ed to preach ; but, as he did not arrive till the service 
was ready to commence, one of the brethren was 
engaged to supply his place. On the appearance of 
INIr. Pearce, however, the minister entreated to be 
excused; v.'hen he was thus addressed by that ami- 
able man : ' My dear brother, I am fatigued with my 
journey, and unfit to preach: you complain of many- 
fears besetting you, and know not that I am as timid 
and nervous as yourself: ofiv'^ntimes, and especially 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 151 

since rny nervous complaint, I have suffered to an 
agony in the prospect of such an exercise ; but, on 
the principle of benevolence, to save you from those 
painful feelings, I will endeavor to encounter my own 
and comply with your request.' " Of the sermon he 
then preached, notes were taken from his lips at the 
time, by the friend referred to ; and though, as the 
writer remarks, they are "extremely inadequate to 
convey a just idea of the discourse," since Mr. 
Pearce's impassioned enlargements on his principal 
ideas formed the peculiar excellence of his pulpit 
exercises, yet as excellent in themselves, and happily 
illustrating the text, it is conceived they will be found 
acceptable to the pious reader. 

Rev, 7 : 9 ; "I beheld, and lo, a great multitude, 
which no man can number, of all nations, and kin- 
dred, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, 
and before the Lamb." 

Life is a journey ; Christians are travelers: but 
the world to which we are going is to us unknown. 
Those who have gone thither have not returned to 

give us any information about it The doctrine 

which Christ has left behind him, however, supplies 
us with all the information that is necessary to our 
happiness. Here life and immortality are brought 
to light. From his doctrine we learn what heaven 
is, and what its employments are. In general, we 
know that heaven is a place of society : when La- 
zarus died, he was carried to Abraham's bosom. 



152 MEMOIR 0? 

And, from the passag-e before us, we learn that it is 
a very large and blessed society. 

I. Inquire, Of whom the society of hlaven 

WILL CONSIST. 

1. Jesus the Mediator Tie is the sun that 

enlightens that world .... He who shed his blood 
for your salvation .... He whom your souls adore, 
and desire to see, and to enjoy . ..." 1 go to prepare 
a place, for you : I will come a^ain, and receive you 
unto myself: that where I am, there ye may be also.'' 
" Father, I will that they also whom thou hast given 
me, be with me where I am ; that they may behold 
my glory, which thou hast given me." We shall 
" stand before the throne, and before the Lamb." 

2. The angels of God shall form a part of this 
society. They even now hold an uninterrupted in- 
tercourse with the church of God on earth ; are con- 
tinually " ascending and descending on the Son of 
man;" — are "sent forth to minister for those who 
shall be heirs of salvation ;" — and at length shall 
lead us to the throne of God and the Lamb, and wo 
shall dwell among them. 

3. This society will comprehend all good men, — 
"a o-reat multitude which no man can number, of 
all nations, and kindred, and people, and tongues." 

. . . There are three things which prevent the full 
society of good men on earth: — 1. We are sepa- 
rated bv distance of lime. We have heard of Abel 
.... of Enoch, who " walked with God," .... of 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 153 

Abraham .... of Paul, and others eminent for piety ; 
but we have never seen them. Could we but see 
and converse with these good men, they would teach 
us to walk with God too ... . Well, there we shall 
see them ; there also, Jesus and his disciples ! — 2. 
Here we are separated by distance of place. Some 
good men live in Europe ; a (ew in Africa ; some in 
America ; and Asia at least contains one good man,* 

with whom we have taken sweet counsel, 

but we shall see his face no more ! Well, we 

shall meet again in glory, and part no more. — 3. 
Good men are separated by difference of sentiment. 
Here they are divided into various classes, and dis- 
tinguished by several peculiarities; and, as truth is 
the bond of union, we necessarily feel most attached 
to those whose principles and dispositions are most 
congenial with our own. But there shall be no dis- 
sensions One blaze of light shall illuminate 

every heart ! 

H. Inquire, Wherein will consist the 

BLESSEHNESS OF THIS HEAVENLY SOCIETY. 

1. There they shall be ail holy. One reason why 
we do not rejoice more in the society of the godly 
here is, that we have so much sin amongst us, while 
the world around us is lying in wickedness. Very 
often, like Lot, our souls are "vexed with the filthy 

♦ The preacher here made a most pathetic allusion to Mr. 
Carey. 



154 MEMOIR OF 

conversation of the wicked ;" and, with the Psalmist, 
we are ready to say, " Wo unto us, that we sojourn 
in Mesech, and dwell in the tents of Kedar !" .... 
Here, a good man feels his pleasure abated by the 
reflection that, perhaps, his nearest relations are ftir- 
thest off from the kingdom of heaven, and his house 
is not so with God .... But none of these things 
are found in heaven : there we shall never behold 
sinners, nor be grieved with their conduct any more : 
"there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that 
defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination or 
maketh a lie; but they who are written in the 
Lamb's book of life." 

2. Not only all shall be holy, but they shall be 
eminently so. When we meet with good men, we 
rejoice in their society, and feel a oneness of heart 
with them : but alas ! we soon discover so many 
defects ; in some a little pride, in others a little 
covetousness .... like the spots in the sun, which, 
though they do not obscure its rays, yet become a 
blemish. But there every subject shall be as righ- 
teous as his Lord, and every disciple as holy as his 
Master. 

3. There they shall be completely happy, as well 
as holy. Many of our sorrows in this world arise 
from sympathy ; and religion not only allows, but 
teaches us " to weep with those that weep ; to bear 
each other's burdens, and so fulfill the law of 
Christ." We have some happiness in our religious 



BAMUEL PEARCE. 155 

friends : but often have to say, • Lord, he whom 
thou lovest is sick.' Here, a dear friend is called to 
( lament the loss of an affectionate wife, a faithful 
\ husband, an only child, or a tender parent .... there, 
; a beloved friend is involved in some worldly dif- 
ficulties or temptations. These diminish the happi. 
Hess of society .... But, in heaven, the tears shall 
be wiped from all faces, sorrow and sighing shall 
I flee away, and each shall be as happy as his capa- 
city will admit. 

4. Perfect union in our religious sentiments, af- 
fections, and worship, will form an essential part of 
the felicity of heaven. The want of such an agree- 
ment diminishes the aggregate of social happiness 

; and evil passions both produce and are produced by 

'it In the exercise of public worship we feel 

I our minds elevated and dignified; our hearts are 

more enlarged than in private duties : the latter may 

, be more profitable, but the former are more jov- 

I ful Here, however, our pleasures are abated 

by the limitation of our society ; there, the society 
Avill be abundantly large, consisting of "a great 
multitude which no man can number;" and they 
shall be " all of one heart and of one soul." 

5. This society shall be blessed with permanence 
and perpetuity. Fellowship with Christian brethren 
on earth is sweet, and, while engaged in acts of so- 
cial worship, Ave feel the endearing bands sweetly 
^rawn around us ; but soon we are called to part. 



156 MEMOIR OF 

and parting divides our joy Our social plea- 
sures are often damped by the necessity of exclusion 
from the church, — by the death of valuable friends 
.... But there shall be no exclusion from that so- 
ciety ; no more death; "neither shall the' inhabi- 
tants say any more, 1 am sick." 

From hence we may learn, 1. What must be 
our qualifications for heaven. John, 3:5. 2. To 
be reconciled to bereaving providences, and to our 
own death : such as die in the Lord are gone to this 
blessed society. 3. To endeavor to render our in- 
tercourse with Christians on earth more like that 
ebove. 

A few extracts will noAv be given from letters 
which he addressed to his friends in 1797 and 1798, 

To Dr. Ryland. 

"March, 1797. 
" During the last three weeks I have at times 
been ill with colds, &c. Am better now. and lave 
been all along assisted in going through my public 
duties. Let us continue to pray for each other till 
death makes it a needless service. How uncertain 
is life, and what a blessing is death to a saint ! I 
seem lately to feel a kind of affection for death. Me- 
thinks, if it were visible, I could embrace it. ' Wel- 
come herald, that bids the prisoner be free ; that an- 
nounces the dawn of everlasting day ; that bids the 
redeemed come to Zion with everlasting joy, to be 



BAMUEL PEARCE. 157 

beyond the reach of an erroneous judgment and a 
depraved heart.' To believe, to feel, to speak, to act 
exactly as God will have me ; to be wholly absorb- 
ed and taken up with him; this, nothing short of 
this, can make my bliss complete. But all this is 
mine. O the height, the depth, the length, the 
breadth of redeeming love ! It conquers my heart, 
and constrains me to yield myself a living sacrifice, 
acceptable to God, through Jesus Christ. My dear 
brother, we have had many happy meetings on 
earth ; the best is in reserve. 

' No heart upon earth can conceive 

• The bliss that in heaven they share ; 
'Then who this dark world would not leave, 

• And cheerfully die to be there? 

" Ohow full of love, and joy, and praise, shall we 
be when that happy state is ours I Well, yet a little 
while, and he that shall come will come. Even so, 
come, Lord Jesus ! My dear brother, forgive the 
hasty effusions of a heart that loves you in the bow- 
els of Jesus, and is always happy in testifying itself 
to be 

*' AfTectionately yours, S. P." 



To Mr. Cave. On the falling away of some who had promised fair 
in religion. 

"1797. 
" I thank you, my dear brother, for the confidence 
you repose ia me, the affection you have for me, and 
U 



158 MEMOIR OF 

the freedom with which you write to me. Assure 
yourself that I sincerely sympathize in the cutting 
events which you have lately experienced. Trying 
indeed ! Your heart must bleed. Yet, be not dis- 
couraged in your work. The more Satan opposes 
Christ, the more let us oppose him. He comes with 
great violence, because his time is short. His king- 
dom is on the decline, his strong holds are besieged, 
and he knows they must soon be taken. Whilst it 
lasts, he is making desperate sallies on the armies of 
the Lamb. It is no great wonder that he fights and 
wounds a raw recruit now and then, who strays 
from the camp, and, thoughtless of the danger, keeps 
not close by the Captain's tent. I hope our glorious 
Leader will heal the wounded and rescue the cap- 
tive. He is sure to make reprisals. Christ will 
have ten to one. You \Yill yet see his arm miade 
bare. He shall go forth like a man of war. The 
prisoners shall be redeemed, and the old tyrant shall 
be cast into the bottomless pit. Be of good cheer, 
my fellow soldier. The cause is not ours, but God's. 
Let us endure hardness, and still fight the good 
fight of faith. At last we shall come off conquerors, 
through him who hath loved us. 

" I hope you have somx causes for joy as well as 
grief I tru?t, though one, or two, or three fall, the 
tens and the twenties stand their ground. O do what 
you can to cheer them under the common trial. Let 
them not see a faint heart in you- Fight manfully 



SAMUEL PEARCBL 159 

Still. Tell them to watch the more ; to pray the hard- 
er ; to walk the closer with God. So out of the eater 
shall come forth meat, and sweetness out of the 
strong. S. P." 

To 3Ir. Bates and Mrs. Barnes, who had been burnt out of their 
rcsiJeucc. 

" The many expressions of Christian friendship 
which I received from you and your affectionate fa- 
milies, during my late visit to London, will often ex- 
cite grateful recollections in future, as they have al- 
most daily since I parted from j'ou ; and, though I do 
not write this avowedly as a mere letter of acknow- 
ledgment, yet I wish it to assure you that I am not 
forgetful of my friends, nor unthankful for their kind- 
ness. May all the favor you show to the servants of 
our common Lord, for his sake, be amply recom- 
pensed in present peace and future felicity, when 
the promise of him who cannot lie shall be fulfilled : 
* A cup of cold water given to a disciple, in the name 
of a disciple, shall not lose its reward.' 

" But whilst you, my dear friends, live ' in hope 
of the glory' that remains 'to be revealed,' I am 
persuaded that you e.\pect all as the fruit of sove- 
reign mercy, which first forms us to the mind of 
Christ, then accepts, and then rewards. Truly,^ if 
sinners be rewarded, it must be 'of grace, and not 
of debt.' Yet it is a msrcy of unspeakable magni- 
tude, that grace should establish a connection, be* 



160 MEMOIR OF 

tween obedience and enjoyment, such a connection 
as at once insures joy to the believer and glory to 
Christ. 

"0 that our thoughts, our affections, our desires, 
may be much in heaven ! Here, you have been 
taught, is ' no continuing city,' no certain place of 
abode ; and, though you have been taught it awfully 
in flames, yet, if you learn it eflectually, the terror 
of the means will be conquered by the excellency 
and glory of the consequences. Yes, ray friends, 
' in heaven we have a better and enduring substance : 
the apartments there are more spacious ; the society 
more sweet ; the enjoyments more perfect ; and all 
to last for ever. AVell may Christians ' rejoice in 
hope of the glory of God !' ". 

To Mr. Carey. 

" Blrminghzm, Sept. 8, 1797. 
" My very dear Brother, 

" It might be wrong to compare the pleasure 
which any of your letters from India to Europe 
give, with that which between the same friends 
is derived from European letters to India. Your 
want of Christian society may make Christian 
correspondence sweeter than we, who are sur- 
rounded with affectionate brethren in the Lord, can 
conceive; otherwise I should have referred you to 
your own feelings when you hear from us, for an 
idea of the pleasure I derive from your brotherly 
epistles, ladeed, my dear brother, neither distance 



8AMUEL PEARCE. IGl 

nor absence abates the ardent attachment my sout 
bears to yours ; on the contrary, I feel ii g^row year 
by year, and I sometimes derive greater joy in the 
prospect of heaven itself, from the expectation of 
meeting with my beloved Carey there. 1 can hardly 
refrain from repeating, what I have so often told you 
before, that I long to meet you on earth, and to join 
you in youriabors of love among the poor dear hea- 
then: yes, would my Lord bid me so, 1 should with 
transport obey the summons, and take a joyful fare- 
well of the land that bare me, though it were for 
ever; but I must confess that the path of duty ap- 
pears to me clearer than before to be at home, at least 
for the present : not that I think my connections in 
England a sufficient argument, but that I am some- 
what necessary to the mission itself, and shall be as 
long as money is wanted and our number of active 
friends does not increase. Brother Fuller and my- 
self have the whole of the collecting business on 
our hands ; and, though there are many others about 
us who exceed me in grace and gifts, yet their other 
engagements forbid, or their peculiar turn of mind 
disqualifies them for that kind of service. I wish, 
however, to be thankful, if our dear Lord will but 
employ me as a foot in the body. I consider myself 
as united to the hands, and eyes, and mouth, and 
heart, and all ; and, when the body rejoices, I have 
my share of gladness with the other members. 
•'At this moment I rejoice, though it be with 
14* 



162 MEMOIR OF 

trembling. Your communications respecting Sook- 
nmn, and Yardee, and Doorgotteea, and the other 
whose name you forgot, more than repay every pain- 
ful step; but do they hold on their way? O, my 
brother, be not discouraged if you cannot say they 
do ; nor will we be discouraged, should future letters 
terminate our pleasing hope respecting them. If 
they are not effectually called, God will call others, 
and yet set up his empire and make his name glo- 
rious in Hindoostan. Should they still appear to be 
really the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus, tell 
them there is one in Birmingham who loves them 
in the Lowels of Jesus Christ — a poor sinner, by 
nature as bad as they, but who, like them, is looking 
for the mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal 
life ; tell them he remembers them by name in prayer 
to their Father and his Father, to their God and his 
God ; tell them he hopes to meet them in glory, and 
to join them eternally, singing to the Lamb that was 
slain for both, glory in the highest. 

" 1 am glad that at last you have received most of 
my letters, and 1 hope, should any considerable time 
elapse in future without your hearing from English 
friends, you will set it down to the account of a pre- 
carious conveyance, and not to our neglect of you : 
like th? comforts of the holy man of Uz, they may 
be delayed for a season, to crowd upon you in greater 
abundance in the end. 

" 1 have considerably affected my spirits by night- 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 163 

reading on mission history during the last winter, 
so that I had hardly fortitude enough to enter my 
own pulpit, or sometimes to engage in family prayer ; 
but through mercy I am much recovered, having 
been more regular in going to bed, and taking more 
exercise by day, although I am still incapable of 
close thinking or much writing, without pain in my 
head, followed with an almost stupefaction for a time. 

" Our church is in very favorable circumstances. 
I have baptized several lately, and many more are 
in a very hopeful state. We are at present strangers 
to all discord ; we live in peace and much affection. 
God grant it may abide and abound ! 

" A society has lately been formed in London for 
preaching to the Jews : very few attended ; but a 
Jew of some consequence lately told one of the sup- 
porters of that lecture that it had occasioned some 
consideration — that the men of influence deterred 
the poorer sort from attending ; ' but (said he) I 
would have you print some small tracts upon the 
subject — we may read when we durst not hear.' 
Hence we fondly hope the ice is broken : I rejoice 
in every step that is taking : it will do good to Chris- 
tians, if not to the posterity of Abraham. 

" I think in one of your letters you hint a suspi- 
cion that ' the ten tribes yet exist in India.' Have 
you pursued the inquiry ? What is the result ? 

" I have had with me this afternoon a blind v>'0- 
man from the workhouse, the eyes of whose mind 



164 MEMOIR OF 

the Lord appears to have truly enlightened. She re- 
minds me of brother Thomas's blind Brahmin. O 
that he ma}' be enabled to behold the Lamb of God, 
and see the glory of God in him ! 

"May my dear brother enjoy much of God in his 
own soul, and see his power and his glory displayed 
in Hindoostan m.ore than he ever did in a British 
sanctuary. 

" I am. dear brother, 

" more than 1 can express, 

"your affectionate brother, 

"S. P." 

To Dr. Ryland. 

" November 17, 1797. 
" I feel much for you in relation both to the du- 
ties and trials of your present situation ; at the same 
time I bless God who fixed you in it, because I am 
persuaded it will be for his glory in the churches of 
Christ. And, though none but those whose hands 
are full of religious concerns can guess at your dif- 
ficulties, yet our blessed Redeemer knows them all. 
O, my brother, you are travailing for him who re- 
deemed you by his blood, who sympathizes with 
you, and who will graciously crown you at last. 
Small as my trials are, 1 would turn smith, and 
work at the anvil and the forge, rather than bear 
them for any other master than Christ. Yet. were 
they ten thousand times as many as they are, the 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 165 

thought of their being for him, I trust, would 
sweeten them all. 

" I have reason to be very thankful for much 
pleasure of late, both as a Christian and a minister. 
I have never felt so deeply my need of a divine 
Redeemer, and seldom possessed such solid confi- 
dence that he is mine. I want more and more to 
become a little child ; to dwindle into nothing in my 
own esteem — to renounce my own wisdom, power, 
and goodness, and simply look to and live upon 
Jesus for all. I am ashamed that I have so much 
pride, so much self-will. O ! my Savior, make me 
'meek and lowly in heart:' in this alone I find 
* rest to my soul.' 

" I could say much of what Immanuel has done for 
my soul ; but I fear lest even this should savor of 
vanity. When shall I be like my Lord ? O wel- 
; come death, when I have nothing more to do for 
' Christ. To hifh, till then, may I live every day and 
I every hour. Rather may I be annihilated than not 
! live to him ! 

- " You will rejoice \vith me to hear that we have 
a pleasing prospect as a church. Several very hope- 
t ful, and some very valuable characters are about to 
join us. Lord, carry on thy work ! S. P." 

A few weeks after, he writes to Dr. Carey: 
" A spirit for village preaching prevails much in 
England and Scotland. I have pleasing prospects 



166 MEMOIR OF 

of settled congregations in two neighboring villages, 
to the first of which I went but little more than 
twelve months since. On Lord's day above thirty 
of our members go in turn and pray, exhort, read I 
sermons, &c. which the Lord has greatly blessed." 

To Mrs. Poarce, on the dangerous illness of one of t!ie chiliirea. 

" Portsmouth^ January 29, 1798. 

" Ignorant of the circumstances of our dear child, 
how shall I address myself to her dearer mother ! 
With a fluttering heart and a trembling hand, I, in 
this uncertainty, resume my pen. One consideration 
tranquillizes my mind — I and mine are in the hands 
of God, the wise, the good, the indulgent Parent of 
mankind ! Whatever he does is best. I am pre- 
pared for all his will, and hope that I shall never 
have a feeling v/hose language is not ' Thy will be 
done.' % 

" I am most kindly entertained here by Mr. and 
Mrs. Shoveller; and, except my dear Sarah's pre- 
sence, feel myself at home. They have had greater 
trials than we can at present know. They have at- 
tended seven children to the gloomy tomb: they 
have been supported beneath their loss by Him who 
hath said, 'as thy day, so shall thy strength be.' 
Mrs. S. tells me she 'blessed God for all.' May I 
my dear Sarah be enabled to do the same, whatever 
the result may prove. To-morrow I expect another 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 167 

letter from you ; yet lest you should too much feel 
my absence, I will not delay forwarding this a sin- 
gle post. O that it may prove in some degree a 
messenger of consolation ! 

" Yesterday I preached three times ; God was 
very good. I received your letter before the first 
service: you may be assured that I bore you on my 
heart in the presence of my Lord and j'ours ; nor 
shall I pray in vain : He ^Aill either restore the child 
or support you under the loss of it. I dare not pray 
with importunity for any earthly good: for 'who 
knoweth what is good for a man in this life, all the 
days of his vain life which he spendeth as a sha- 
dow?' But strength to bear the loss of earthly com- 
forts he has promised ; for that I importune : and 
that I doubt not will be granted. 

" In a house, directly opposite to the window be- 
fore which I now write, a wife, a mother, is just de- 
parted! Why am I not a bereaved husband ? Why 
are not my children motherless? When we com- 
pare our condition with our wishes, we often com- 
plain : but, if we compare it with that of many around 
us, our complaints will be exchanged for gratitude 
and praise, S. P." 

To Mr. Carey. 

PortSTTwuth, Feb. 5, 1798. 
*' I am here, my dear brother, on the same errand 
which took you from Europe to India, seeking the 



168 MEJfOlR OF 

salvation of the heathen : but how differentlj' am I 
situated from my dear friends in Bengal ! They are 
laboring in the midst of idolatrous strangers : 1 am 
reposing in the bosom of Christian I'riendship. Bless- 
ed be God, we shall find one resting place at last;; 
and soon shall we be reposing there. O how short 
the space which in this world we can employ for : 
God! Surely whatever our hands find to do, wej; 
should do with all our might. 

" I am stimulated to new exertions at home by 
my dear brother's activity abroad. I bless God who 
inspired you with such a zeal in such a cause, and 
who still adds fuel to the precious flame. Long 
may your heart be preserved, glowing with the same 
ardor for Immanuel's honor and the salvation of 
poor heathens ! 

" The people here are very liberal to the mission. 
I have been here a little more than a week, and 
have already raised £78. Could I stay through 
this week, 1 suppose it would be made XlOO; but 
my dear wife writes me that our eldest child (just 
six years old) is dying in a fever, so that I must re- 
turn as soon as I. can. The Lord support the mother 
and myself! \ 

" Had I time, I would write to brethren Thomas 
and Fountain also. I have written them both twice 
lately. You will give my warmest Christian love 
to them, and to all that love our Lord Jesus in Ben- 
gal Your frequent correspondence will always re- 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 160 

joice the heart of your friends, among- whom assure 
yourself none is more heartily yours in our dear 
Jesus than S. P." 

To R. Bowycr, Esq. 

'•' February 14, 1798. 

" Not a day has hurried by since I parted with 
my dear friends in Pall Mall, but they have been in 
my affectionate remembrance; but, not being able 
to speak with any satisfaction respecting our dear 
child, I have withheld myself from imparting new 
anxieties to bosoms already alive to painful sensi- 
bility. 

" At length, however, a gracious God puts it in 
my power to say that there is hope. After languish- 
ing between life and death for many days, she now 
seems to amend. We flatter ourselves that she has 
passed the crisis, and will yet be restored to our 
arms ; but parental fears forbid too strong a confi- 
dence. It may be that our most merciful God saw 
that the shock of a sudden removal would be too 
strong for the tender feelings of a mother, and so, 
by degrees, prepares for the stroke which must fall 
at last. However, she is in the best hand's, and we 
are, I hope, preparing for submission to whatever 
may be the blessed will of God. 

" I was brought home in safety, and feel myself 
in much better health in consequence of my jour- 
ney. O that it may be all consecrated to mv Re- 
deemer's praise ! 

15 



170 MEMOIR or 

" Happy should I be if I could oftener enjoy your 
friendly society; but we must wait for the full ac- 
complishment of our social wishes till we come to 
that better world for which divine grace is preparing 
ns. There our best, our brightest hopes, and there 
our warmest afiections must be fotmd. Could we 
have all we want belou% we should be reluctant to 
ascend when Jesus calls us home. No, this is not 
our rest ; it is polluted with sin, and dashed with 
sorrow: but, though our pains in themselves are 
evil, yet our God turns the curse into a blessing, and 
makes all that we meet with accomplish our good. 

" What better can I wish my friends, than the 
humble place of Mary, or the happy rest of John ? 
Faith can enjoy them both, till actually we fall at 
the Savior's feet, and lean upon his bosom, when we 
see him as lie is. 

* O the delights, the heavenly joys, 

' The glories of the place, 

• Where Jesus sheds the brightest beams 

* Of his o'erflowing grace ! ' " 

To Mr- Carey 

" Birmingham, Sept. 26, 1198. 
"My dear Brother, 

" It is impossible formetogiveyou a just idea of the 
effect your last affectionate letter produced on my 
feelings. What regret did I feel that, for so long a 
time, you had received nothing from me : though the 



SAMUEL PEARCB. 171 

recollection that, whatever had become of my letters, 
I had neither forgotten nor neglected you, somewhat 
relieved me. I hope long ere now you have had 
abundant proof of this; and I am really mistaken if 
I have not been your most voluminous correspondent. 
" But how kind it was in you to give me credit 
for the continuance of my friendship, even when the 
expected evidences of it were wanting ! This I 
deeply feel, and for this I most affectionately thank 
you, as well as for all those glowing expressions of 
Christian attachment which overwhelmed my heart, 
and drowned me, and many more who heard them, 
in a flood of tears. O could I be indulged v.'ith the 
enjoyment of your society once more in the flesh, to 
renew all the sweet intercourse we have had together 
at Leicester, at Northampton, at Kettering, at Wal- 
grave, at Birmingham, at London, &c. and to give 
full vent to all those strong emotions which have 
been now nearly six j^ears kindling and strengthen- 
ing whilst seas and continents have separated us ! 
Methinks a greater gratification my heart has never 
conceived ; and, might I be allowed the choice, IN- 
DIA should be the spot, — there would I hasten on 
the wings of the wind, and, whilst I gratified my in- 
clination, perpetuate my joy, till He, whose love to 
us is the sole cause of our love to each other, should 
call one of us from the stage of action, and leave the 
other for a little longer season, to finish the work 
that was given him to do. 



172 MEMOIR OF 

" But how wild my wishes run ! Am I not fixed 
in ray present station by the Lord Jesus, who has 
fixed you in yours ? Has he not, by his servants at 
least, forbidden my removal ? Does he not prosper 
me where I am, and honor me with opportunities 
of doing something for his cause among the heathen, 
although I am not, like you, called to visit and im- 
mediately instruct them ? Is not the period of con- 
tinuance here extremely short ? and, when I leave 
this world, will it not be in the sure and certain hope 
of meeting my dear brother in glory *? I confess 
these considerations ought to satisfy me, and I hope 
they have their influence. 

* Obedient to my Head, 

* Where he appoints I'd go ; 
' And still in Jesus' footsteps tread, 

'And do his work below.' 

•' I have still reason to rejoice in the Lord's good- 
ness to us at Birmingham. We have had some 
pleasing additions lately, and next ordinance daj'' we 
expect from eight to twelve more. Through great 
mercy we have long enjoyed perfect peace, but we 
longed after closer union than on the usual plan it 
was possible for a church of nearly 400 members 
to expect. We therefore agreed to adopt two new 
measures, and, if we judge of the issue by the be- 
ginning, they seem to promise the fulfillment of our 
wishes. 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 173 

"First, instead of a public lecture after the ordi- 
nance, we have a church-meeting for the following 
purposes : 

" 1. Let every brother be called upon in his turn 
to pray,^ — four or five might engage on an evening; 
but let none exceed four or five minutes. 

" 2. Let the minister, and every other member who 
has, during the last month, received any intelli- 
gence respecting the state of religion in our own 
town, in the kingdom, in Europe, in the world, com- 
municate it : and for this purpose let our brethren 
who travel on business, or otherwise, make a point 
of inquiring into the state of religion in the places 
through which they pass, and make a report on 
their return, whilst others enlarge their correspon- 
dence as they have opportunity. 

" 3. Let every brother be at liberty to give exhor- 
tations to the church on any practical subject. 

" 4. Should these exercises, on any evening, not 
occupy the whole of the allotted time, let there be 
some profitable question always on the table, for 
friendly and serious discussion. 

"Secondly, we have agreed to divide the whole 
church into districts often families in each, selected 
according to the nearness of their residence. A bro- 
ther in each district to visit every member in his 
district for one month; then let the visiter give his 
roll to the next brother on the list, and so on month- 
ly ; and at the end of each month let all the visitors 
15* 



174 MEMOIR OF 

meet and report to the deacons and the minister the 
state of all and each member in the church ; whilst 
a committee is formed to maintain a regular corres- 
pondence with every member whom Providence has 
called to another place of residence. 

" The first of these plans we put in practice about 
six months ago ; and we found it very profitable. 
But the novelty excited suspicion that we met for 
political discussion, and we thought it prudent to 
decline. However, we have now resumed our 
meeting, admitting strangers into the gallery. It 
has had a blessed effect in promoting our acquaint- 
ance and union, and I ardently hope will increase 
in its advantages. 

" My dearest brother, we deeply sympathize with 
you in all your afflictions ; and if I say but little on 
your trials, assure yourself it is not because I am 
insensible to their weight, but because I fear to 
probe your wounded heart, lest it should unnecessa- 
rily make it bleed afresh. If my poor prayers may 
aught avail, they are not, nor shall be wanting on 
your behalf May He who was himself "a man of 
sorrows, tempted in all points like as we are," suc- 
cor, comfort, and, if it is his blessed will, deliver 
you. Yet who knoweth what is good for a man, all 
his vain life, which he passeth as a shadow ? — No 
doubt there is a need-be that we should endure hea- 
viness through these selfsame afflictions. I have 
lately been much led to realize the existing, actual, 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 175 

universal government of God ; and I feel myself con- 
strained to subdue every wish but for holiness, and 
to check every complaint but for the evils of my 
heart. Yes, my brother, surrounded with troubles — 
personal, domestic, religious, or civil — we will stil] 
shout ' Hallelujah, for the Lord God Omnipotent 
reigneth.' 

" Most afTectionately yours in Jesus, S. P." 



CHAPTER IV. 



An account of Ms last illness, and the holy and happy exer- 
cises of his mind under it. 



Early in October, 1798, Mr. Pearce attended at 

the Kettering minister's meeting, and preached from 

Psalm 90 : 16, 17 ; " Let thy work appear unto thy 

\ servants, and thy glory unto their children. And 

I let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us : and 

I establish thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, 

the work of our hands establish thou it." He was 

, observed to be singularly solemn and affectionate in 

that discourse. If he had known it to be the hr'i 

■ time that he should address his brethren in that 

part of the country, he could scarcely have felt or 



176 MEMOIR OF 

F.poken in a more interesting- manner. It was a 
discourse full of instruction, full of a holy unction, 
and that seemed to breathe an apostolical ardor. On. 
his return he preached at xMarket Harborough ; and 
riding home the next day, in company with his 
friend Mr. Summers, of Lojidon, they were overta- 
ken with rain. Mr. Pearce was wet through his 
clothes, and towards evening complained of a chili- 
ness. A slight hoarseness followed. He preached 
several times after this, which brought on an infla- 
mation, and issued in a consumption. It is probable 
that, if his constitution had not been previously im- 
paired, such effects might not have followed in this 
instance. Ilis own ideas on this subject are ex- 
pressed in a letter to Dr. Ryland, dated December 4, 
1798; and in another to Mr. King, dated from 
Bristol, on his way to Plymouth, March 30, 1709. 
In the former he says: 

"Ever since my Christmas jo'.irney last year to 
Sheepshead, Nottingham, and Leicester, on the mis- 
sion business, I have found my constitution greatly 
debilitated, in consequence of a cold caught after the 
unusual exertions which circumstances then de- 
manded : so that, from a frame that could endure 
any weather, I have since been too tender to encoun- 
ter a single shower vrithout danger; and the duties 
of the Lord's day, which, as far as bodily strength 
nent, I could perform with little fatigue, have since 
frequently overcome me. But the severe cold I 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 177 

caught m my return from the last Kettering minis- 
ters' meeting has affected me so much that I have 
sometimes concluded I must give up preaching en- 
tirely; for though my head and spirits are better 
than for two years past, yet I am so very weak that 
I cannot pray in my family without frequent pauses 
for breath, and in the pulpit it is a labor and agony 
which must be felt to be conceived of I have, how- 
ever, made shift to preach sometimes thrice, hut 
mostly only twice on a Lord's-day, till the last, 
when the morning sermon only, though I delivered 
it with great pleasure of mind, and with as much 
caution, as to my voice, as possible, yet cost me so 
much labor as threw me into a fever till the next 
day, and prevented my sleeping all night." 

In the letter to Mr. King he thus writes : 
"Should my life be spared, I, and my family, and 
all my connections will stand indebted, under God, 
to you. Unsuspecting of danger myself, I believe I 
should have gone on with my exertions till the 
grave had received me. Your attention sent Mr. B. 
(the apothecary) to me, and then I first learned, what 
I have since been increasingly convinced of, that I 
was rapidly destroying the vital principle. And the 
kind interest you have taken in my welfare ever 
since, has often drawn the grateful tear from my 
eye. May the God of heaven and earth reward your 
kindness to his unworthy servant, and save you 
from all the evils from which your distinguished 
friendship would have saved me ! S. P/* 



178 MEMOIR OF 

Such were liis ideas. Flis labors were certainly 
abundant — perhaps too great for his constitution ; 
but it is probable that nothing was more injurious 
to his health than a frequent exposure to night air, 
and an inattention to the necessity of changing damp 
clothes. 

Hitherto we ha\-e seen in Mr. Pearce the active, 
assiduous, and laborious servant of Jesus Christ; 
but now we see him laid aside from his work, wast- 
ing away by slow degrees, patiently enduring the 
v/ill of God, and cheerfully waiting for his dissolu- 
tion. And, as here is but little to narrate, I shall 
content myself with copying his letters, or extracts 
from them, to his friends, in the order of time in 
v.'hich they Avere written, only now and then drop- 
ping a few hints, 'to furnish the reader with the oc- 
casions of some of them. 

To Dr. Rylaiid. 

" Birmlnghavi, Oct. 8, 1798. 
" O, my dear brother, your letter of the 5th, which 
I received this morning, has made me thankful for 
all my pulpit agonies, as they enable me to weep 
with a weeping brother. They have been of use to 
me in other respects, particularly in teaching me 
the importance of attaining and maintaining that 
spirituality and pious ardor in which I have found 
the most effectual relief; so, that on the whole, I 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 170 

must try to ' glory in tribulations also :' I trust I oft- 
en c^n when the conflict is past; but to glory in 
them, especially in mental distress — hie labor, hoc 
opus est — this is the labor, this the work. 

"But how often has it been found that when min- 
isters have felt themselves most embarrassed, the 
most effectual good has been done to the people. O 
for hearts entirely resigned to the will of God ! 

" How happy should I be, could I always enjcy 
the sympathies of a brother who is tried in thesa 
points, as I of late have been. S. P." 

To Mr. Fuller. 

'' Birming/uivi, Oct. 29, 1798. 

" I caught a violent cold in returning from our 
last committee-meeting, from which I have not yet 
recovered. A little thing now affects my constitu- 
tion, which I once judged would be weather and 
labor-proof for at least thirty years, if I lived so 
Jong. I thank God that I am not debilitated by 
iniquity. I have lately met with an occurrence 
^yhich occasioned me much pain and perplexity .... 
. . . . Trials soften our hearts, and make us more 
fully prize the dear few, into whose faithful and 
sympathizing bosoms we can with confidence pour 
our sorrows. I think I should bless God for my 
afflictions, if they produced no other fruit than these, 
the tenderness they inspire, and the friendships thev 
capacitate us to enjoy. Pray, my dear brother, for 

** Yours, afiectionately, S. P." 



180 MEMOIR Of 

To a young man (Mr. Matthew Griffiths) who 
had applied to him for advice how he should best 
im.prove his time previously to his going to the 
Bristol academy : 

" Birmingham^ Nov, 13, 1798. 
" My dear M. 

" I can only confess my regret at not replying to 
yours at a much earlier period, and assure you that 
the delay has been accidental, and not designed. I 
feel the importance of your request for advice, I 
was sensible it deserved some consideration before it 
was answered. 1 v/as full of business at the mo- 
ment. I put it by, and it AVas forgotten : and now it 
is too late. The time of your going to Bristol draws 
nigh. If, instead of an opinion respecting the best 
way of occupying your time before you go, you 
•^vill accept a little counsel during your continuance 
there, I should be happy at any time to contribute such 
a mite as my experience and observation have put it 
in my power. 

" At present, the following rules appear of so 
much moment, that, were I to resume a place in any 
literary establishment, I would religiously adopt 
them as the standard of my conduct : 

" 1. I would cultivate a spirit of habitual devo- 
tion. Warm piety connected with my studies, and 
especially at my entrance upon them, would not on- 
ly assist me in forming a judgment on their respec- 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 181 

lire imponance, and secure the blessing oi God up- 
on them, but Avould so cement the religious feeling 
with the literary pursuit as might abide with me for 
life. The habit of uniting these being once formed, 
would, I hope, be never lost ; and I am sure that, 
without this, I shall both pursue trivial and unwor- 
thy objects, and those that are worthy I shall pur. 
sue for a wrong end. 

" 2. I would determine on a uniform submission 
: to the instructions of my preceptor, and study those 
I things which would give him pleasure. If he be 
; not wiser than I am, for what purpose do I come 
I under his care ? I accepted the pecuniary help of 
the society on condition of conforming to- its will ; 
and it is the society's will that my tutor should go- 
vern me. My example will have influence; let me 
not, by a single act of disobedience, or by a word that 
implicates dissatisfaction, sow the seeds of discord 
in the bosom of my companions. 

" 3. I would pray and strive for the power of self- 
government ; to form no plan, to utter not a word, to 
take no step under the mere influence of passion. 
Let my judgment be often asked, and let me alwaj's 
give it time to answer. Let me always guard 
against a light or trifling spirit, and particularly as 
I shall be among a number of youths whose years 
will incline them all to the same frailty. 

" 4. I would in all my weekly and daily pursuits 
observe the strictest order. Always let me act by a 
16 



182 MEMOIR or 

plan. Let every hour have its proper pursuit ; froM 
which let nothing, but a settled conviction that I can 
employ it to better advantage, ever cause me to de- 
viate. Let me have a fixed time for prayer, medita* 
tion, reading, languages, correspondence, recreation, 
sleep, &c. 

*' 5. I would not only assign to every hour its 
proper pursuit, but what I did I would try to do 
with all my might. The hours at such a place are 
precious beyond conception, till the student enters on 
life's busy scenes. Let me set the best of my class 
ever before me, and strive to be better than they. In 
humility and diligence, let me aim to be the first. 

" 6. I would particularly avoid a versatile habit- 
In all things I would persevere. Without this, I 
may be a gaudy butterfly, but never, like the bee, 
will my hive bear examining. Whatever I take in 
hand, let me first be sure I understand it, then duly 
consider it, and, if it be good, let me adopt it and 
use it. 

" To these, my dear brother, let me add three or 
four things more minute, but which, I am persuad- 
ed, will help you much. Guard against a large ac- 
quaintance while you are a student. Bristol friend- 
ship, while you sustain that character, will prove a 
vile thief, and rob you of many an invaluable hour. 
Get two or three of the students, whose piety you 
most approve, to meet, for one hour in a week, for 
experimental conversation and mutual prayer. I 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 183 

found this highly beneficial ; though, strange to tell, 
by some we were persecuted for our practice! — 
Keep a diary. Once a week at farthest call your- 
self to an account as to what advances you have 
made in your different studies — in divinity, history, 
languages, natural philosophy, style, arrangement ; 
and, amidst all, do not forget to inquire, am I more 
fit to serve and to enjoy God than I was last week ? 

" S. P." 

On Dec. 2, 1798, he delivered his last Sermon. 
The subject was taken from Dan. 10 : 19 ; " O man, 
greatly beloved, fear not! peace be unto thee; be 
strong, yea, be strong. And when he had spoken 
unto me, I was strengthened, and said, Let my lord 
speak ; for thou hast strengthened me." " Amongst 
all the Old Testament saints," said he, in his intro- 
duction to that discourse, " there is not one whose 
virtues were more, and whose imperfections were 
fewer, than those of Daniel. By the history given 
of him in this book, which yet seems not to be com- 
plete, he appears to have excelled among the excel- 
lent." Doubtless, no one was farther from his 
thoughts than himself; several of his friends, howe- 
ver, could not help applying it to him, and that with 
a painful apprehension of what followed soon after. 



184 



MEMOIR OF 



To Mr. Cave, Leicester. 



'■'Birmingham, Dec. 4, 1798. 

*' Blessed be God, my ruind is calm ; 

and, though my body be weakness itself, ray spirits 
are good, and I can write as well as ever, though I 
can hardly speak two sentences without a pause. 
All is well, brother ! all is well, for time and eter- 
nity. My soul rejoices in the everlasting covenant, 
ordered in all things and sure. Peace from our dear 
Lord Jesus be with your spirit, as it is (yea, more 
also) with 

" Your affectionate brother, S. P." 

To Dr. Rylar.d. 

" Birmingham^ Lcrd's-da7j evening, Dec. 9, 1798. 
« My dear Brotlicr, 

After a Sabbath — such a one I never knew before 
— spent in an entire seclusion from the house and or- 
dinances of my God, I seek Christian converse with 
you in a way in which I am yet permitted to have 
intercourse with my brethren. The day after I 
wTote to you last, my medical attendant laid me un- 
der the strictest injunctions not to speak again in 
public for one month at least. He says that my 
stomach is become so irritable, through repeated 
inflammations, that conversation, unless managed 
with great caution, would be dangerous ; — that he 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 185 

does not think my present condition alarming, pro- 
vided I take rest ; but, without that, he intimated my 
life was in great danger. He forbids my exposing 
myself to the evening air on any account, and go- 
ing out of doors, or to the door, unless when the air 
is dry and clear ; so that I am, during the weather 
we now have in Birmingham, (very foggy,) a com- 
plete prisoner: and the repeated cautions from my 
dear and affectionate friends, whose solicitude, I 
conceive, far exceeds the danger, compel me to a 
rigid observance of the doctor's rules. 

°"This morning brother Pope took my place; 
and in the afternoon Mr. Brewer (who has disco- 
vered uncommon tenderness and respect for me and 
the people since he knew my state) preached a ve- 
ry affectionate sermon from 1 Sam. 3: 18 — ' It is 
the Lord, let him do what seemeth him good.' By 
what I hear, his sympathizing observations, in rela- 
tion to the event which occasioned his being then in 
my pulpit, drew more tears from the people's eyes 
than a dozen such poor creatures as their pastor 
could deserve. But I have, blessed be God, long 
had the satisfaction of finding myself embosomed in 

friendship the friendship of the people of 

my charge : though I lament their love should oc- 
casion them a pang .... but thus it is ... . our 
Heavenly Father sees that, for our mixed charac- 
ters, a mixed state is best. 

" I anticipated a day of gloom ; but I had unex- 
16* 



186 MEMOIR OF 

pected reason to rejoice that the shadow of death 
was turned into the joy of the morning ; and though 
I said, with perhaps before unequalled feeling, 
' How amiable are thy tabernacles !' yet I found 
the God of Zion does not neglect the dwellings of 
Jacob. My poor wife was much affected at so novel 
a thing as leaving me behind her, and so it was a 
dewy morning ; but the Sun of Righteousness soon 
arose, and shed such ineffable delight throughout 
my soul, that 1 could say, ' It is good to be here.' 
Motive to resignation and gratitude also crowded 
upon motive, till my judgment was convinced that I 
ought to rejoice in the Lord exceedingly, and so my 
whole soul took its fill of joy. May 1, if it be my 
Savior's will, feel as happy when I come to die ! 
When my poor Sarah lay at the point of death for 
some days after the birth of her first child, toward 
the close of them I enjoyed such support, and felt 
my will so entirely bowed down to that of C4od, that 
I said in my heart, ' I shall never fear another 
trial .... He that sustained me amidst this flame, 
will defend me from every spark !' And this confi- 
dence I long enjoyed. But that was nearly six 
years ago, and I had almost forgotten the land of 
the Hermonites and the hill Mizar. But the Lord 
has prepared me to receive a fresh display of his 
fatherly care, and his (shall I call it?) punctilious 
veracity. If I should be raised up again, I shall be 
able to preach on the faithfulness of God more ex- 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 187 

perimentally than ever. Perhaps some trial is com- 
ing on, and I am to be instrumental in preparing^ 
them for it ; or if not, if I am to depart hence to be 
no more seen, I know the Lord can carry on his 
work as well without me as with me. He who re- 
deemed the sheep with his blood, will nev^er suffer 
them to perish for want of a shepherd, especially 
since he himself is the Chief Shepherd of souls. 
But my family! Ah, there I find my faith but still 
imperfect. However, I do not think the Lord will 
ever take me away till he helps me to leave my fa- 
therless children in his hands and trust my widow 
also vrith him. ' His love in times past,' and I may 
add in times present too, ' forbids me to think he 
will leave me, at last, in trouble to sink.' Whilst 
my weakness was gaining ground, I used to ask 
m.yself how I could bear to be laid by. I have 
dreamed that this was the case ; and, both awake 
and asleep, I felt as though it Avere an evil that could 
not be borne: — but now I find the Lord can fit the 
back to the burden ; and, though I think I love the 
thought of serving Christ at this moment better than 

ever, yet he has made me willing to be 

.nothing, if he please to have it so : and now my 
■happy heart ' could sing itself away to everlasting 
[bliss.' 

" O what a mercy that I have not brought on 
my affliction by serving the devil ! What a mercy 
■hat I have so many dear sympathizing friends I 



188 MEMOIR OF 

What a mercy that I have so much dear aomestic 
comfort ! What a mercy that I am in no violent 
bodily pain ! What a mercy that I can read and 
write without doing myself an injury ! What a 
mercy that my animal spirits have, all the time this 
has been coming on, (ever since the last Kettering" 
meeting of ministers,) been vigorous — free from de- 
jection ! And, which I reckon among the greatest 
of this day's privileges, what a mercy that I have 
been able to employ myself for Christ and his dear 
cause to-day ; as I have been almost wholly occu- 
pied in the concerns of the (I hope) reviving church 
at Bromsgrove, and the infant church at Cradley ! 
O, my dear brother, it is all mercy ; is it not ? O 
help me then in his praise, for he is good, for his 
mercy endureth for ever. 

" Ought I to apologize for this experimental chat 
with you, who have concerns to transact of so much 
more importance than any that are confined to an 
individual ? Forgive me if I have intruded too 
much on your time — but do not forget to praise, on 
my behalf, a faithful God. I shall now leave room 
against I have some business to write about — till 
then, adieu — but let us not forget that this God is 
our God for ever and ever, and will be our guide 
even until death. Amen — amen. We shall soon 
meet in heaven. S. P." 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 189 

To R. Bowycr, Esvi. 

" .... I have overdone myself in preachingf. I 
am now ordered to lie by, and not even to converse 
without great care ; nor, indeed, till to-day, have I 
for some time been able to utter a sentence without 
a painful effort. Blessed be God ! I have been 
filled all through my affliction with peace and joy 
in believing; and at one time, when I thought I 
was entering the valley of death, the prospect be- 
yond Vv'as so full of glorv, that, but for the sorrow it 
would have occasioned to some who would be left 
behind, I should have longed that moment to have 
mounted the skies. O, my friend, what a mercy I 
am not receiving the wages of sin ; that my health 
has not been impaired by vice ; but that, on the con- 
trar}^ I am bearing in my body the marks of the 
Lord Jesus ! To hini be all the praise ! Truly, I 
have proved that God is faithful ; and most cheer- 
fully would I take double the affliction for one half 
of the joy and sweetness which have attended it. 

"S. P." 

To a 3Iiui8ter. 
■• Deer Mr. W. 

" Be so good as to accept the inclosed sermon.* 
Though I publish, I can no longer preach. My 
Master has no need of me just now, or he would not 

* The last but one he ever preached, entitled * Motives to 
Gratitude.' It was delivered on the day of National Thanks- 
givins;, and printed at the request of his own congregation. 



190 MEMOIR Of 

silence me ; but 1 am in good hands ; and in the 
midst of my imprisonment can shout, with joy un- 
speakable, ' Hallelujah, for the Lord God reigneth.' 
So wise, so just, so good is he in whose hands my 
breath is, and whose are all my ways, that I am per- 
fectly satisfied with all his blessed will ; nor would 
I have it otherwise, were an alteration in my power, 
so long as my Father sees it best to continue the hea- 
venly discipline. During my affliction I have tasted 
much of the sweetness of the promises, and my soul 
has been fed as with marrow and fatness. I have 
sometimes hesitated in encouraging my people to rely 
on the fullness of the promises in all cases, because I 
feared that if the Lord should lay me by as a broken 
vessel, my revolting heart would be dissatisfied and 
complain ; but, verily, now I know that God can 
render submission as happy as exertion, and call 
forth the passive graces to as good purpose, for the 
joy of his people and the glory of his grace, as the 
more active ones. 

"'O sweet affliction! sweet affliction!' I could 
not but frequently exclaim, when my health was at 
the lowest ebb, and at the moment when I thought 
I should never see my dear people again, till I met 
them on the hill of Zion. Yes, where my Lord 
Jesus is, there are, there must be, peace, and joy, and 
confidence ; and whether it be in the sanctuary of 
praise, or on the bed of languishing, ' 'tis heaven to 
see his smiling face :' he can make a dying bed feel 






SAMUEL PEARCE. 191 

* soft as downy pillows are.' I would not have been 

•without this trial for the Indies ; it has taught me 

more of my Bible and my God than seven years' 

mere study could have done. ' O trust in the Lord, 

\ ye his saints, for there is no want to them that fear 

i him.' 

|, •' I consider now, though I am young, that my 
\ best days are over; but I cannot describe to you 
j what a solid satisfaction I feel in reflecting that my 
j best days have not been devoted to the work of the 
I devil, but to the service of my blessed Jesus. O 
what a mercy that he called me in early life, and so 
saved me from those distressing recollections which 
must attend the solitary and afflicting hours of those 
who are permitted to waste their prime in the prac- 
tice of sin and forgetfulness of God. 

* He shall have all the praise, for he 

' Hath loved, and lived, and died for me.' 

" Affectionately yours, S. P." 

To Mr- Bates amd Mre. Barnes, MinoridS. 

" Birmingham, Dec. 14, 1798. 

" I could tell you much of the Lord's 

goodness during my affliction. Truly, 'his left 
; hand hath been under my head, and his right em- 
' braced me.' And w^hen I was at the worst especial- 
ly, and expected ere long to have done with time, 
even then, such holy joy, such ineffable sweetness 



192 MEMOIR OF 

filled my soul, tliat I would not have exchanged 
that situation for any besides heaven itself. 

" O, my dear friends, let us live to Christ, and 
lay ourselves wholly out for him whilst we live; 
and then, when health and life forsake us, he will 
be the strength of our heart and our portion for 
ever. S. P." 

About this time the congregation at Cannon" 
street was supplied for several months by Mr. 
Ward, Avho afterwards went as a missionary to 
India. Here that amiable young man became in- 
timately acquainted with Mr. Pearce, and conceived 
a most affectionate esteem for him. In a letter to a 
friend, dated January "5, 1799, he v.-rites as fol- 
lows : 

" I am happy in the company of dear brother 
Pearce. I have seen more of God in him, than in 
any other person I ever knew. O how happy 
should I be to live and die with him !* When well, 

* How ^sincerely that affectionate esteem was returned, is 
evident by the following extract of a letter from Mr. Pearce 
to Mr. Carey, dated March, 1799 : 

"In Cannon-street we have been remarkably happy. 
Peace has been enjoyed \rithoiu interruption, and the leav- 
en has appeared to be diffusing itself, though -by unequal de- 
grees, throughout the mass of the congregation. The Lord 
has been very gracious to us sinre I hare been unable to 
preach, in inclining the heart of dear brother Ward to sp .ud 
that time in Birmingham which he had otherwise spent at 
Ewood Hall. He has been here ten weeks, and I suppose will 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 193 

he preaches three times on a Lord's daj^ and two 
or three times a week besides. He instructs the 
young people in the principles of religion, natural 
philosophy, astronomy, &c. They have a benevo- 
lent society, from the funds of which they distribute 
i£40 or j£50 a year to the poor of the congregation. 
They have a sick society, for visiting the afflicted in 
general ; a book society at chapel ; a Lord's-day 
school, at which more than 200 children are in- 
structed. Add to this, missionary business, visiting 
the people, an extensive correspondence, two vol- 
umes of mission history preparing for the press, 
&c. and then you will see something of the soul of 
Pearce. He is every where venerated, though but 
a young man ; and all his kind, tender, gentle af- 

'stay till near the time of his embarking for India. I indeed re- 
joice in the prospect of your having so amiable an addition 
to your number. I feel a pang at every thought of parting 
with him. and would much rather, v/ere such the will of 
the Lord, go with him than stay behind. Hi:s labors here 
have been generally acceptable, and in some instances, I 
rust, useful both to saints and sinners. He loves village 
reaching, and the villagers are particularly attached to 
him ; they send from the respective neighborhoods where 
he has preached, and beg that he will come once more be- 
fore he leaves the country ; and it has given me heartfelt 
pleasure that not in one instance have I discovered the 
smallest backwardness in him to these primitive labors. 
When he goes, I know not where we shall look for a suc- 
cessor.'' ^ 

17 



194 MEMOIR OF 

fections make him as a little child at the feet of his 
Savior. W. W." 

In February he rode to the opening of a Baptist 
meeting-house at Bedworth, but did not engage in 
any of the services. Here several of his brethren 
saw him for the last time. Soon afterwards, writing 
to the compiler of these Memoirs, he says — " The 
Lord's day after I came home, I tried to speak a 
little after sermon. It inflamed my lungs afresh, 
produced phlegm, coughing, and spitting of blood. 
Perhaps I may never preach more. AVell, the 
Lord's will be done. I thank him that he ever took 
me into his service ; and now, if he see fit to give 
me a discharge, I submit." 

During the above meeting a word was dropped 
by one of his brethren, which he took as a reflec- 
tion, though nothing was farther from the intention 
of the speaker. It wrought upon his mind ; and in 
a few days after he wrote as follows : " Do you 

remember what passed at B ? Had I not been 

accustomed to receive plain, friendly remarks from 
you, I should have thought you meant to insinuate 
a reproof If you did, tell me plainly. If you did 
not, it is all at an end. You will not take my 
naming it unkind, although I should be mistaken, 
since affectionate explanations are necessary, when 
suspicions arise, to the preservation of friendship ; 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 195 

and I need not say that I hold the preservation of 
your friendship in no small account. S. P." 

The above is copied, not only to set forth the 
spirit and conduct of Mr. Pearce in a case wherein 
he felt himself aggrieved, but to show in hov/ easy 
and amiable a manner thousands of mistakes might 
be rectified, and differences prevented, by a frank 
and timely explanation, 

To a Friend. (Occasioned by an instance of hopeful conversion.) 

" Birmingham, March 4, 1799. 
"My dear Friend, 

" Thanks be to God ! thanks to you, thanks to 
\ your family, my dear friend, for restoring one who 

I had been given up for lost ! Is it true that , 

though dead, is alive again ; though lost, is found ? 
O that the happy change may prove as sincere and 
permanent as it is truly pleasing ! May divine 
goodness help you to fix those salutary convictions, 
and render them immutable to the day of death ! 

•' I am sure the whole family vv'ill feel a new sen- 
sation at the mention of now. Even we, who 

loved it well before, nov/ think of it with an energy 
; of joy, and regard it as we should a tomb, from 
whence a corrupting body had revivified to become 
an important blessing to all its connections. 

" We are not without affliction ; bat we have so 
much to be thankful for, that it would be criminal 
to complain. Complain ! not whilst every dispen- 



196 



MEMOIR OF 



sation is mixed with paternal love, and comes with 
a Father's benediction. S. P." 



To Mr. Cornfield, Northampton. 

" Birmingham, March 4, 1799. 

" I could wish my sympathies to be as extensi 
as human — I was going to say (and why not?) as 
animal misery. The very limited comprehension 
of the human intelligence forbids this indeed, and, 
whilst I am attempting to participate as far as the 
news of affliction reaches me, I find the same events 
do not often produce equal feelings. We measure 
our sympathies, not by the causes of sorrow, but by 
the sensibilities of the sorrowful : hence I abound 
in feeling on your account. The situation of your 
family must have given distress to a man of any 
character ; but in you it must have produced ago- 
nies. I know the tenderness of your heart : your 
feelings are delicately strong. You must feel much 
or nothing; and he that knows you, and does not 
feel much when you feel, must be a brute. 

" May the fountain of mercy supply you with the 
cheering stream ! May your sorrow be turned into 

joy! 

" I am sure that I ought to value more than ever 
your friendship for me. You have remembered me, 
not merely in my affliction, but in your own. Our 
friendship, our benevolence must never be com- 
pared with that of Jesus ; but it is truly delightful 



J 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 



197 



to see the disciple treading, though at a humble dis- 
tance, in the footsteps of a Master who, amidst the 
tortures of crucifixion, exercised forgiveness to his 
murderers, and the tenderness of filial piety to a dis- 
consolate mother! When we realize the scene, 
how much do our imaginations embrace — the per- 
sons—the circumstances— the words — ' Woman, be- 
hold thv son ! John, behold thy mother !' 

" S. P." 

By the above letter the reader will perceive that, 
while deeply afflicted himself, he felt in the tender- 
est manner for the afflictions of others. 

In the month of March Mr. Pearce wrote several 
letters to Mr. Carey, from which the following are 
extracts;' They furnish additional proofs of the hap- 
py state of his mind, the warmth of his love to the 
brethren, and his enlarged desires for the salvation 
of souls. 

" On my return from the last Kettering mission 
meeting I took a violent cold, Avhich being neglect- 
ed, grew worse; and, thinking that pulpit sweats 
would efTect a cure, I remitted none of my labors 
either at home or among the villagers ; on the con- 
trary, after walking several miles, I sometimes 
preached an extra sermon. This was imprudent: 
my lungs became inflamed, and at length were so 
exceedingly irritable that I could not even converse 
in private for two minutes without pain and danger. 
The doctor ordered me to keen myself undisturbed 
17* 



4 

198 MEMOIR OF 

and unemployed ; saying that if it were the end of 
March instead of November, he could give me bet- 
ter hope of recovery, for he thought that either a 
warmer climate or a warmer season was absolutely 
necessary. Do you think, my dear brother, that, 
when the doctor mentioned a warmer climate, I was 
without thoughts of Mudnabatty ? Ah! thought 
I, had the society sent me there when I so earnest- 
ly entreated them, I had not now been shut out 
from all service for God and enjoyment of his peo- 
ple for want of a warmer climate. For some time a 
discharge of blood, a pain in my side, a loss of appe- 
tite, soreness in my breast, and an irregular pulse, 
led me to apprehend that death was fast approaching. 
Sweet were the thoughts of dying ; and, although I 
could not but regret that I should leave this world 
without having made one effort for the salvation of 
' the sinners of the Gentiles,' personally among them, 
yet that I had, indirectly at least, endeavored the ac- 
complishment of that most desirable object, was a 
matter of inexpressible satisfaction and delight. I 
greatly accused myself of inactivity in the Redeem- 
er's cause. I saw that my zeal had been tardy, un- 
equal, and perhaps often ineffectual for want of 
being more ardent and persevering. Yet the 
thought that the Lord had ever employed me. that I ' 
had not been quite idle, that some good had been 
done, some portions of divine truth propagated, some 
daring sinners reclaimed, some broken hearts bound 



sA:iir!i:L pkarce, • 199 

up and comforted, some additions made to the church 
of the Lord Jesus Christ, and some improvement in 
knowledge, devotion, and virtue among his people — 
these were occasions of grateful delight ; so that, 
with all my numberless infirmities and crimes, I was 
enabled to say, I have not lived nor run iu vain. 
These considerations, joined to the opening pros- 
pects of celestial blessings, constrained me to ex- 
claim, ' O it is good to be here !' 

•' We rejoice in all your joy, and especially I am 
delighted wdth what you say respecting the light of 
Christianity extending where your personal labors 
had never reached. ' Fly abroad, thou blessed 
Gospel !' 

" Thus indeed may the Lord be preparing his 
way among the Indian heathen, and after the out- 
ward light may come the inward life. Even so, 
Lord Jesus ! 

" I received your letter to the dear departed 
Swartz, and the reply of Gericke, with vast satis- 
faction, not so much for the news contained, but for 
its authenticity. I have been more or less conver- 
sant with the German accounts every week for 
above twelve months past. Mr. Grant lent them to 
xne; they begin where Niecamp's Latin quarto 
leaves off) and, as I don't read the German 
language myself, I have gotten, as oft as I could, a 
young gentleman of the towni to come for one or two 
hours in the day and read them to me in English, 



200 



ME:\IOiR OF 



whilst I write down whatever strikes me as memo- 
rable. The tediousness of the writers, and the irregu- 
larity of my translator, has long detained me on 
this part of my Mission History, a work to which, 
I think I told you before, I have for some years de- 
voted my leisure hours ; though my nervous com- 
plaint the last two years, my late atiiiction, and my 
constant run of pastoral duties and, extensive corres- 
pondence, leave a mind, naturally indolent, too plaus- 
ible an excuse for reposing when it ought to be at 
work, and hence I proceed by slow degrees. 

" With regard to the admission of the Hindoos, 
&c. to baptism and the Lord's supper, with the per- 
mission given them to retain their former distinc- 
tions of caste, as it seems our Danish brethren do, 
I greatly hesitate, unless these distinctions are re- 
garded and acknowledged as perfectly civil, and 
having nothing religious in them; because, 1. It 
would be an acknowledgment of a false religion, 
and so having fellowship with idols. 2. All reli- 
gious distmctions, even those which the divinely in- 
stituted economy of Moses formed, are expressly 
said to be abolished in the equalizing religion of 
Jesus Christ, in whom there is neither Greek nor 
Jew, &c. If it be said that the Jews were tolerated 
in a separate worship from the Gentiles for a time, 
it may be replied that there appears no toleration 
of the Gentiles in willfully declining communion 
with the Jews. The Jews were not wrong in their 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 201 

idea of the divine authority of a separate worship ; 
iheir only mistake was concerning the prolonging 
that separation beyond the time when it ought to 
have ceased. The Jews also, though they preserved 
a distinction in their worship at the first, neverthe- 
less worshiped the true God. But if there be any 
religious acknowledgment in the preservation of 
caste, &c. it is an idolatrous one. Adieu, my dear 
brethren : love to brethren Thomas and Fountain. 

" You will find in the Evangelical Magazine 
some modern information, respecting Languedoc and 
its vicinity, that gives occasion for Christian plea- 
sure. I contemplate a mission to France, when the 
way to visit it shall be opened, with pleasurable 
hopes. I have been endeavoring for some years to 
get five of our ministers to agree that they will apply 
themselves to the French language with this ex- 
press object in view; then we might spend two 
months annually in that country, and at least satisfy 
ourselves that Christianity was not lost in France 
for want of a fair experiment in its favor : and who 
can tell what God might do ? 

" The mass of the people in Ireland, as you 
know, are Catholics; ignorant — bigoted — cruel. 
The Lord has a few there, however, who weep over 
the state of the land. I have received a very affec- 
tionate and pressing invitation to visit that country 
again this year, but my health forbids, else I should 
rejoice among Irish sinners again to publish the 



202 MEMOIR OF 

unsearchable riches of Christ. I have also been 
pleased with another letter from Rahue, in which a 
gentleman presses me to procure an itinerant to 
settle in that country, engaging to bear his expenses, 
to board him, to find him a horse for his journey, 
and to add twenty-five guineas per annum for his 
private use. O Lord ! how do we want laborers 
in thy harvest ! Would to God I could find a suit- 
able man ! but our congregations increase so rapid- 
ly in England, that we cannot get ministers enough 
for them. Yet I hope the Lord will provide for 
that benighted island. The civil state of that coun- 
try, indeed, rather discourages present efforts : all 
about Connaught they seem up in arms, expecting 
another visit from France ; and it is positively re- 
ported that there is a powerful armament nov/ fit- 
ting out at Brest on purpose for another descent 
upon Ireland. Should they succeed, England may 
begin to tremble: but our hope is in God, who, let 
what may come upon us as Britons, hath promised 
that all shall work for good to us as Christians. 
Should any awful convulsions produce general in- 
fidelity in Europe, hov/ delightful is the thought 
that the Lord is gathering a church in Asia ! Who 
can tell, but that as the evangelic stream flowed from 
the Asiatic fountain through countries barbarous and 
uncuhivated, whose inhabitants, having adopted the 
Christian theory, associated therewith their former 
savao-G manners, and thus polluted the immaculate} 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 203 

waters ; so from Asia the same pure stream shall 
again meander through the nations, whose manners 
having- been rendered gentle and kind by the expe- 
rience of many cruel ages, and by the operation of 
wise, humane, and salutary laws at length establish- 
ed, shall no longer tinge this sacred stream Avith 
blood, nor render it corrupt by any other vicious 
association, so that it shall bring on its bosom the 
ardors of devotion, to perfect the already cultivated 
virtue of the European world. 

" Ah ! this is what we v/ant. A Catholic may 
be devout ; a deist may be victorious ; but, in him 
who is a genuine disciple of Jesus, virtue gives the 
ornament to devotion, and devotion imparts dignity 
to virtue. And the above scene ahvays opens on 
my view when I apply my perspective to future 
ages. Enough for a volume is here, and it is well 
my paper is nearly filled, or I should tire you with 
an essay on the beautiful union of love to C4od with 
love to man, or devotion and virtue. 

" Ever, ever yours, S. P." 

He was now setting out for Plymouth ; and after 
observing, in a letter to Mr. Fuller, dated March 23, 
1799, the great danger he was supposed to be in, 
with a respect to a consumption, he adds — " But 
thanks be to God, who giveth my heart the victory, 
* let my poor body be consumed or preserved. In 



204 MEMOIR OF 

the thought of leaving-, I feel a momentary gloom ; 
but in the thought of going, a heavenly triumph. 

' O to grace how great a debtor !' 

" Praise God with me and for me, my dear bro- 
ther; and let us not mind dying any more than 
sleeping. No, no ; let every Christian sing the loud- 
est as he gets the nearest to the presence of his God. 

"Eternally yours, in Him who hath washed us 
both in his blood, S. P." 

To Mr. Medley, London. 

"March 23, 17D9. 
'' My affliction has been rendered sweet by the 
supports and smiles of Him whom I have served in 
the Gospel of his Son. He hath delivered, he doth 
deliver, and I trust that he will yet deliver. Living 
or dying, all is well for ever. O what shall I ren- 
der to the Lord ?" 

It seems that, in order to avoid wounding Mrs. 
P.'s feelings, he deferred the settlement of his affairs 
till he arrived at Bristol ; from whence he wrote to 
his friend Mr. King, requesting him to become an 
executor. On his receiving a favorable answer, he 
renliedas follows: 

''Bristol, April 6, 1799. 

" Your letter, just received, affected me too much 
with feelings of sympathy and gratitude to remain 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 205 

unanswered a single post. Most heartily do I thank 
you for accepting a service which friendship alone 
can render agreeable in the most simple cases. 
Should that service demand your activities at an 
tarly period, may no unforeseen occurrence increase 
the necessary care. But may the Father of the 
fatherless and Judge of the widows send you a re- 
compense into your own bosom, equal to all that 
friendship to which, under God, I have been so 
much indebted in life, and, reposing on whose bo- 
som, even death itself loses a part of its gloom. In 
you, my children will find another father— in you, 
my wife another husband. Your tenderness will 
sympathize with the one, under the most distressing 
sensibilities ; and your prudent counsels be a guide 
to the others, through the unknown mazes of in- 
experienced youth. Enough blessed God ! 

my soul prostrates, and adores thee for such a 
friend. g p jj 

To Mr. Fuller. 

'' Plymouth, AprillS, rm. 
*' The last time that I wrote to you was at the 
close of a letter sent to you by brother Ryland. I 
(lid not like that postscript form, it looked so card- 
like as to make me fear that you would deem it un- 
brotherly. After all, perhaps, you thought nothing 

'about it ; and my anxieties might arise only frorn 
my weakness, which seems to be constantly in- 
creasing my sensibilities. If ever I felt love in its 

1 18 



206 MEMOIR OF 

tenderness for my friends, it has been since my af' 
fliction. This, in great measure, is no more thail 
the love of ' publicans and harlots, who love those 
that love them.' I never conceived myself, by a 
hundred degrees, so interested in the regards of my 
friends as this season of affliction has manifested I 
was ; and therefore, so far from claiming any ' re- 
ward ' for loving them in return, I should account 
myself a monster of ingratitude were it otherwise. 
Yet there is something in affliction itself which, by 
increasing the delicacy of our feelings, and detach- 
ing our thoughts from the usual round of objects 
which present themselves to the mind when in a 
state of health, may be easily conceived to make us 
susceptible of stronger and more permanent impres" 
sions of an affectionate nature. 

" I heard at Bristol that you and your friends had 
remembered me in your prayers at Kettering. 
Whether the Lord whom we serve may see fit to 
answer your petitions on my account or not, may 
they at least be returned into your own bosoms ! 

" For the sake of others, I should be happy, could 
I assure you that my health was improving. As 
to myself, I thank God that I am not without a 
desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is far 
better. I find that neither in sickness nor in health 
can I be so much as I wish like him whom I love. 
• To die is gain.' O to gain that state, those feel- 
ings, that character, which perfectly accord with the 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 207 

mmd of Christ, and are attended with the full per- 
suasion of his complete and everlasting approbation ! 
I Avant no heaven but this ; and, to gain this, most 
gladly would I this moment expire. But if to abide 
jn the flesh be more needful for an individual of 
my fellow-men — Lord, let thy will be done ; only 
let Christ be magnified by me, whether in life or 
death ! 

" The weather has been so wet and Avindv^ since 
I have been at Plymouth, that I could not reason- 
ably expect to be m.uch better; and I cannot say 
that I am much worse. All the future is uncertain. 
Professional men encourage me ; but frequent re- 
turns appear, and occasional discharges of blood 
check my expectations. If I speak but for two 
miinutes, my breast feels as sore as though it were 
scraped with a rough-edged razor : so that I am 
mute all the day long, and have actually learned to 
converse with my sister by means of our fingers. 

'' I thank you for yours of April 4th, which I did 
not receive till the 12th, the day that I arrived at 
Plymouth. On the 16th, a copy of yours to bro- 
ther Ryland came to hand, to Avhich I should have 
replied yesterday, but had not leisure. I am happy 
and thankful for your success. May the Lord him- 
self pilot the Criterion safely to Calcutta river! 

" Unless the Lord work a miracle for me, I am 
sure that I shall not be able to attend the OIney 
meeting. It is to my feelings a severe anticipation ; 



208 MEMOIR OF 

but how can I be a Christian and not submit to 
God? S. P." 

To Mr. Ward. 

" Plymouth, April 22, 1799. 

'* Most affectionately do I thank you for your let- 
ter, so full of information and of friendship. To 
our common Friend, who is gone into heaven, 
where he ever sitteth at the right hand of God for 
us, 1 commend you. Whether I die or live, God 
will take care of you till he has ripened you for the 
common salvation. Then shall I meet my dear 
brother Ward again ; and who can tell how much 
more interesting our intercourse in heaven will be 
made by the scenes that most distress our poor 
spirits here ? O, had I none to live for, I had 
rather die than live, that I may be at once like Him 
whom I love. But, while he insures me grace, 
why should I regret the delay of glory? No: I 
will wait his will, who performeth all things for 
me. 

" My dear brother, had I strength, I should re- 
joice to acquaint you with the wrestlings and the 
victories, the hopes and the fears, the pleasures and 
the pangs, which I have lately experienced. But I 
must forbear. All I can now say is, that God has 
done me much good by all, and made me very 
thankful for all he has done. 

" Alas ! I shall see you no more. I cannot be 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 209 

at OIney on the 7th of May. The journey would 
be my death. But the Lord whom you serve will 
be with you then, and for ever. My love to all the 
dear assembled saints, who will give you their bene- 
dictions at that solemn season. 

" Ever yours, &c. S. P." 

To Mr. King. 

" Plymouth, April 23, 1799. 
" My dear Friend and Brother, 

" I have the satisfaction to inform you that at 
length my complaint appears to be removed, and 
that I am by degrees returning to my usual diet, 
by which, with divine blessing, I hope to be again 
strengthened for the discharge of the duties and 
the enjoyment of the pleasures which await me 
among the dear people of my charge. 

" I am indeed informed, by a medical attendant 
here, that I shall never be equal to the labors of 
my past years, and that my return to moderate ef- 
forts must be made by slow degrees. As the path 
of dut\r, I desire to submit ; but, after so long a sus- 
pension from serving the Redeemer in his church, 
my soul pants for usefulness more extensive than 
ever, and I long to become an apostle to the world. 
I do not think I ever prized the ministerial work so 
much as I now do. Two questions have been long 
before me. The first, shall I live or die ? The 
second, if 1 live, how will my life be spent ? With 
18* 



210 MEMOIR OF 

regard to the former, my heart answered, ' It is no 
matter — all is well : for my own sake, I need not 
be taught that it is best to be with Christ ; but, for 
the sake of others, it may be best to abide in the 
body. I am in the Lord's hands, let him do by me 
as seemeth him best for me and mine, and for his 
cause and honor in the world !. But, as to the 
second question, I could hardly reconcile myself to 
the thought of living, unless it were to promote the 
interests of my Lord; and, if my disorder should so 
far weaken me as to render me incapable of the 
ministry, nothing then appeared before me but gloom 
and darkness. However, 1 will hope in the Lord ; 
and, though he hath chastened me sorely, yet, since 
he has not given me over unto death, sparing mercy 
will be followed with strength, that I may show 
forth his praise in the land of the living, 

" I am still exceedingly weak, more so than at 
any period before I left home, except the first week 
of my lying by; but I am getting strength, though 
slowly. It is impossible at present to fix any time 
for my return. It grieves me that the patience of 
the dear people should be so long tried ; but the 
trial is as great on my part as it can be on theirs, 
and we must pity and pray for one another. It is 
now a task for me to write at all, or this should 
have been longer. S. P." 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 211 

To Dr. Ryland 

" PhjrimUh, April 24, 1799. 
" Very Dear Brother, 

" My health is in much the same state as when I 
wrote last, excepting that my muscular' strength ra- 
ther increases, and my powers of speaking seem 
less and less every week. I have, for the most 
part, spoken only in whispers for several days 
past ; and even these seem too much for my irri- 
table lungs. My father asked me a question to-day ; 
he did not understand me when I whispered, so 
I was obliged to utter one word, and one word only, 
a little louder, and that brought a soreness which 
I expect to feel till bed-time. 

" I am still looking out for fine weather ; all here 
is cold and rainy. We have had but two or three 
fair and vrarm days since I have been here ; then I 
felt better. I am perfectly at a loss even to guess 
what the Lord means to do with me ; but I desire 
to commit my ways to him, and be at peace. I am 
going to-day about five miles into the country, (to 
Tamerton,) where I shall await the will of God 
concerning me. 

" I knew not of any committee-meeting of our 
society to be held respecting Mr. Marshman and his 
wife. I have therefore sent no vote : and, indeed, it 
is my happiness that I have full confidence in my 
brethren at this important crisis, since close think- 
ing or much writing always increases my fever, and 
promotes my complaint. 



212 MEMOIR OF 

" My dear brother, I hope you will correspond 
much with Kettering. I used to be a medium ; but 
God has put me out of the way. I could weep 
that I can serve him no more ; and yet T fear some 
would be tears of pride. O for perfect likeness to 
my humble Lord ! S. P." 

To Mr. King. 

"Tamerton, May 2, 1799. 

" Give my love to all the dear people at 

Cannon-street. O pray that He who afflicts would 
give me patience to endure. Indeed, the state of 
suspense in which I have been kept so long, re- 
quires much of it ; and I often exclaim, ere 1 am 
aware, ' Oh, my dear people ! Oh, my dear family ! 
when shall I be restored to you again ?' The Lord 
forgive all the sin of my desires ! At times I feel a 
sweet and perfect calm, and wish ever to live under 
the influence of a belief in the goodness of God, and 
of all his plans and all his works. S. P." 

The reader has seen how much he regretted be- 
ing absent from the solemn designation of the mis- 
sionaries at Olney. He, however, addressed the 
following lines to Mr. Fuller, which were read at 
the close of that meeting, to the dissolving of nearly 
the whole assembly in tears : 

" Tamerton, May 2, 1799. 
" , O that the Lord, who is unconfined by 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 213 

place cr condition, may copiously pour out upon 
you all the rich effusions of his Holy Spirit on the 
approaching day ! My most hearty love to each 
missionary who may then encircle the throne of 
grace. Happy men ! Happy women ! You are 
going to be fellow-laborers with Christ himself! 
I congratulate — I almost envy you ; yet I love you, 
and can scarcely now forbear dropping a tear of 
love as each of your names passes across my mind. 
O what promises are yours ; and what a reward ! 
Surely heaven is filled with double joy, and re- 
sounds with unusual acclamations at the arrival 
of each missionary there. O be faithful, my dear 
brethren, my dear sisters — be faithful unto death, 
and all this joy is yours ! Long as I live, my ima- 
gination will be hovering over you in Bengal ; and 
should I die, if separate spirits be allowed a visit to 
the world they have left, methinks mine would soon 
be at Mubnabatty, watching your labors, your con- 
flicts, and your pleasures, whilst you are ' always 
abounding in the work of the Lord.' S. P." 

To Dr. Ryland. 

« Plymouth, May 14, 1799. 
«' My Dear Brolhcr, 

" Yours of the 1 1th instant I have just received, and 
thank you for your continued concern for your 
poor unworthy brother. 

" I have suffered much in my health since I 
wrote to you last, by the increase of my feverish 



214 MEMOIR OF 

complaint, which filled me with heat and horror all 
night, and in the day sometimes almost suffocated ! 
me with the violence of its paroxysms. I am ex- 
tremely weak ; and now that warm weather which 
I came into Devon to seek, I dread as much as the j 
cold, because it excites the fever. I am happy how- 
ever in the Lord. I have not a wish to live or die, but 
as he pleases. I truly enjoy the Gospel of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and would not be without his divine 
atonement, whereon to rest my soul, for ten thousand 
worlds. I feel quite weaned from earth, and all 
things in it. Death has lost his sting, the grave its 
horrors : and the attractions of heaven, I had almost 
said, are sometimes violent. 

' O, to grace how great a debtor !' 

" But I am wearied. May all grace abound to* 
wards my dear brother, and his affectionate 

S. P." 

To Mr. Pope. 

" Plymouth, May 24, 1799 
" I cannot write much — this I believe is the only 
letter I have written (except to my wife) since I 
wrote to you last. My complaint has issued in a 
confirmed slow nervous fever, \vhich has wasted 
my spirits and strength, and taken a great part of 
the little flesh I had when in health away from me. 
The symptoms have been very threatening, and I 
have repeatedly thought that, let the physician do 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 215 

what he will, he cannot keep me long from those 
heavenly joys for which, blessed be God, I have 
lately been much longing; and, were it not for my 
dear people and family, I should have earnestly 
praved for leave to depart, and to be with Christ, 
'xhich is so much better than to abide in this vain, 
suffering, sinning world. 

" The doctors, however, now pronounce my case 
very hopeful — say there is little or no danger — but 
that all these complaints require a great deal of time 
to get rid of I still feel myself on precarious ground, 
but quite resigned to the v/ill of Him who, unworthy 
Qs I am, continues daily to ' fill my soul with joy and 
peace in believing.' Yes, my dear friend ! now my 
soul feels the value of a free, full, and everlasting 
salvation : and, what is more, I do enjoy that salva- 
tion while I rest all my hope on the Son of God in 
human nature dying on the cross for me. To me, 
now, health or siclcness, pain or ease, life or death, 
are things indifferent. I feel so happy in being in 
the hands of infinite love, that, when the severest 
strokes are laid upon me, I receive them with plea- 
sure, because they come from my heavenly Father's 
hands ! • O, to grace how great a debtor !' &c. 

S. P." 

To the Church ia Cannon-street. 

" Plymouth, May 31, 1790. 
*' To the dear people of my charge, the flock of 



216 MEMOIR OF 

Christ assembling in Cannon-street, Birmniglittni/ 
their afflicted but affectionate pastor presents his 
love in Christ Jesus, the great Shepherd of the 
sheep. 

" My dearest, dearest friends and brethren, 

" Separated as I have been a long time from you, 
and during that time of separation having suffered 
much both in body and mind, yet my heart has still 
been with you, participating in your sorrows, unit- 
ing in your prayers, and rejoicing with you in the 
hope of that glory to which divine faithfulness has 
engaged to bring us, and for which our heavenly 
Father, by all his providences, and by every opera- 
tion of his Holy Spirit, is daily preparing us. 

" Never, my dear brethren, did I so much rejoice 
in our being made ' partakers of the heavenly call- 
ing, as during my late afflictions. The sweet 
thought of glory, where I shall meet my dear Lord 
Jesus with all his redeemed ones, perfectly freed 
from ail that sin which now burdens us, and makes 
us groan from day to day— this transports my soul, 
whilst out of weakness I am made strong, and ali 
times am enabled to glory even in my bodily infix 
mities, that the power of Christ, in supporting when 
flesh and heart fail, may the more evidently resi 
upon me. O, my dear brethren and sisters, let me 
as one alive almost from the dead, let me exhort yoii 
to stand fast in that blessed Gospel which for ten 
years I have now preached among you — the Gospel 



i 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 217 

of the grace of God ; the Gospel of free, full, ever- 
lasting salvation, founded on the sufferings and 
death of God manifest in the flesh. Look much at 
this all-amazing scene 

I Behold : a God descends and dies 
* To save my soul from gaping hell V 

and then say whether any poor broken-hearted 
smner need be afraid to venture his hopes of salva- 
tion on such a sacrifice; especially since He who 
IS thus ' mighty to save ' hath said,' that ' whosoever 
Cometh to him he will in no wise cast out.' You 
beloved, who have found the peace-speakmg virtue 
of this blood of atonement, must not be satisfied with 
Avhat you have already known or enjoyed. The 
only way to be constantly happy and constantly pre- 
pared for the most awful changes which we must 
all experience, is to be constantly looking and coming 
to a dymg Savior; renouncing all our oun worthF- 
ness ; cleaving to the loving Jesus as our all in all • 
giving up every thing, hou'ever valuable to our 
worldiy interests, that clashes with our fidelity to 
t^hrist; beggmg that of his fullness we may receive 
•grace upon grace,' whilst our faith actually relies 
ion his power and iliithfulness for the full accom- 
p ishmenl of every promise in his word that we 
piead with him: and guarding against every thinn- 
iiat might for a moment bring distance and dark- 
ies.- between your souls and your precious Lord 
19 



218 ME3I0IR Of 

If you thus live, (and O that you may daily receiva! 
fresh life from Christ so to do !) 'the peace of God 
will keep your hearts and minds,' and you will be 
filled with 'joy unspeakable and full of glory.' 

" As a church, you cannot conceive what pleasure 
I have enjoyed in hearing that you are in peace ; 
that you attend prayer-meetings; that you seem toi 
be stirred up of late for the honor and prosperity 
of religion. Go on in these good ways, my beloved, 
friends, and assuredly the God of peace will be with 
you. Yea, if, after all, I should be taken entirely! 
from you, yet God will surely visit you, and never; 
leave you nor forsake you. 

" As to my heahh, I seem on the whole to be still 
mending, though but very slowly. The fever trou- 
bles me often, both by day and night ; but my 
strength increases. I long to see your faces in the 
flesh; yea, when I thought myse.f near the gates 
of the grave, I wished, if it were the Lord's will, to 
depart among those whom I so much loved. But I 
am in good hands ; and all must be right. 

" I thank both you and the congregation most ; 
affectionately for all the kindness you have shownJ 
respecting me and my family, during my absence.! 
The Lord return it a thousand fold! My love to|| 
every one, both old and young, rich and poor, as 
though named. The Lord bless to your edification 
the occasional ministry which you enjoy. I hope | 
you regularly attend upon it, and keep together, as i 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 219 

' the horses in Pharaoh's chariot.' I pray much for 
you : pray, still pray for your very affectionate, 
though unworthy pastor, S. P." 

In a postscript to Mr. King he says, " I have 
made an effort to write this letter: my affections 
AvouM lake no denial ; but it has brought on the 
fever." 

Towards the latter end of May, when I\Ir. Ward 
and his companions were just ready to set sail, a 
consultation concerning Mr. Pearce was held on 
board the Criterion, in which all the missionaries 
and some of the members of the Baptist Missionary 
Society were present. It was w^ell known that he 
had for several years been engaged in preparing 
materials for a History of Missions, to be comprised 
in two volumes octavo ; and, as the sending of the 
Gospel among the heathen had so deeply occupied 
his heart, considerable expectations had been formed 
by religious people of his producing an interesting 
w^ork on the subject. The question now was, Could 
not this performance be finished by other hands, and 
the profits of it be appropriated to the benefit of Mr. 
Pearce's family ? It was admitted by all that this 
■work would, partly from its own merits, and partly 
from the great interest which the author justly pos- 
sessed in the public esteem, be very productive; and 
that it would be a delicate and proper method of 
enabling the religious public, by subscribing libe- 
rally to it, to afford substantial assistance to the 



220 ME3I0IR OF 

family of this excellent man. The result Avas, that 
one of the members of the Society addressed a letter 
to Mr. Pearce's relations at Plymouth, requesting 
them to consult him, as he should be able to bear it, 
respecting the state of his manuscripts, and to in- 
quire whether they were in a condition to admit of 
being finished by another hand : desiring them also 
to assure him, for his present relief concerning his 
dear family, that, whatever the hand of friendship 
could effect on their behalf, should be accomplished. 
The answer, though it left no manner of hope as to 
the accomplishment of the object, yet is so expres- 
sive of the reigning dispositions of the writer's heart, 
as an afTtctionate husband, a tender father, a grate- 
ful friend, and a sincere Christian, that it cannot be 
uninteresting to the reader : 

" Tamerton, June 24, 1799. 

'• To use the common introduction of ' dear bro- 
ther' would fall far short of my feelings towards a 
friend whose uniform conduct has ever laid so great 
a claim to my affection and gratitude, but whose re- 
cent kindness — kindness in adversity — kindness to 
my wife — kindness to my children — kindness that 
would go far to 'smooth the bed of death,' has over- 
whelmed my whole soul in tender thankfulness, and 
engaged my everlasting esteem. I know not how 
to begin 'Thought is poor, and poor expres- 
sion.' The only thing that lay heavy on my heart, 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 221 

when in the nearest prospect of eternity, was the 
future situation of my family. I had but a compar- 
atively small portion to leave behind me, and yet 
that little was all that an amiable woman, delicately 
brought up, and, through mercy, for the most part 
comfortably provided for since she entered on do- 
mestic life — with five babes to feed, clothe, and edu- 
cate — had to subsist on. Ah, what a prospect ! 
Hard and long I strove to realize the promises made 
to the widow and the fatherless ; but these alone I 
could not fully rest on and enjoy. For my own 
part, God was indeed very gracious. I was will- 
ing, I hope, to linger in suffering, if I might there- 
by most glorify him, and death was an angel whom 
I longed to come and emlraceme, 'cold' as his em- 
braces are. But how could I leave those Avho are 
dearest to ray heart in the midst of a world in which 
almost thousands now professed friendship for me, 
and, on my account, for mire ; who yet, after my de- 
cease, would, Avith few excejitions, soon forget my wi- 
dow and my children amon^rthe crowds of the needy 
and distressed? It vras at this m.oment of painful 
sensibility that your heart meditated a plan to re- 
move my anxieties— a plan, too, that would involve 
much personal labor before it could be accomplish- 
ed. ' Blessed be God who put it into thy heart, and 
blessed be thou.' May the blessing of the widow 
and the fatherless rest on you and yours for ever. 
Amen and amen ! 

19* 



*ZZ'^ MEMOIR OF 

" You will regret, perhaps, that I have taken up 
£0 much room respecting yourself; but I have 
scarcely gratified the shadow of my wishes. Ex- 
cuse, then, on the one hand, that I have said so much ; 
and accept, on the other, what remains unexpressed. 

" My affections and desires are among my dear 
people at Birmingham; and, unless I find my 
strength increase here, I purpose to set out for that 
place in the course of a fortnight, or at most a 
month. 1'he journey, performed by short stages, 
may do me good ; if not, I expect, when the winter 
comes, to sleep in peace ; and it will delight my soul 
to see them once more before I die. Besides, I 
have many little arrangements to make among my 
books and papers, to prevent confusion after my 
decease. Indeed, till I get home, I cannot fully 
answer your kind letter ; but I fear that my materi- 
als consist so much in references which none but 
myself would understand, that a second person could 
not take it up and prosecute ir. I am still equally 
indebted to you for a proposal so generous, so labo- 
rious. 

"Rejoice with me that the blessed Gospel still 
'bears my spirits up.' I am become familiar with 
the thoughts of dying. 1 have taken my leave often 
of the world ; and, thanks be to God, I do it always 
with tranquillity, and often with rapture. Oh, Avhat 
o-race, what o-race it was that ever called mc to be a 
Christian ! What would have been my present 
feelings, if I were going to meet God with all the 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 223 

filth and load of my sin about me ! But God in my 
nature his put my sin away, and taught me to love 
him, and long for his appearing. O, my dear bro- 
ther, how consonant is everlasting praise with such 
a great salvation ! S. P." 

After this, another letter was addressed to Mr. 
Pearce by Mr. Fuller, informing him more particu- 
larly that the above proposal did not originate with 
an individual, but with several of the brethren, who 
dearly loved him, and had consulted on the business ; 
and that it was no more than an act of justice to one 
who had spent his life in serving the public ; also 
requesting him to give directions by which his man- 
uscripts might be found and examined, lest he 
should be taken away before his arrival at Birming- 
ham. To this he ansivered as follows: 

" Plymouth, July 6, 1799 
•• I need not repeat the growing sense I have of 
your kindness, and yet I know not how to forbear. 

" I cannot direct Mr. K to all my papers, as 

many of them are in books from which I was mak- 
ing extracts ; and, if I could, I am persuaded that 
they are in a state too confused, incorrect, and un- 
finished, to suffer you or any other friend to realize 
your kind intentions. 

" I have possessed a tenacious memorv. I have 
begun one part of the history ; read the necessary 



224 MEMOIR OF 

books ; reflected ; arranged ; written, perhaps, the 
introduction ; and then, trusting to my recollection, 
with the revisal of the books as I should want them 
have employed myself in getting materials for an- 
other part, &c. Thus, till my illness, the volumes 
existed in my head, my books were at hand, and I 
was on the eve of writing them out, when it pleased 
God to make me pause ; and, as close thinking has 
been strongly forbidden me, I dare say that, were I 
again restored to health, I should find it necessary to 
go over much of my former reading to refresh my 
memory. 

" It is now Saturday. On Monday next we pro- 
pose setting out on our return. May the Lord pros- 
per our way ! Accept the sincere afiection and the 
ten thousand thanks of 

" Your brother in the Lord. S. P." 

As the manuscripts were found to be in such a 
etate that no person, except the author himself, 
could finish them, the design was necessarily drop- 
ped. The public mind, however, was deeply im- 
pressed with Mr. Pearce's worth ; and that which 
the friendship of a few could not effect, has since 
been amply accomplished by the liberal exertions of 
many. 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 223 

To Dr. Ryland. 

" Birmingham, July 20, 1799 
" My very dear Brother, 

" Your friendly anxieties on my behalf demand 
the earliest satisfaction. We had a pleasant ride to 
Newport on the afternoon we left you, and the next 
day, without much fatigue, reached Tewkesbury ; 
but the road was so rough, from Tewkesbury to 
Evesham, that it wearied and injured me more than 
all the joking we had before put together. How- 
ever, we reached Alcester on Wednesday evening, 
stopped there a day to rest, and last night (Friday) 
•were brought safely hither, blessed be God ! 

" I find myself getting weaker and weaker, and so 

my Lord instructs me in his pleasure to remove me 

soon. You say well, my dear brother, that at such 

a prospect I ' cannot complain.' No, blessed be His 

dear name who shed his blood for me, he helps me 

to rejoice at times with joy unspeakable. Now I 

see the value of the religion of the cross. It is a 

[religion for a dying sinner, ft is all the most guil- 

|ty, the most wretched can desire. Yes, I taste its 

sweetness, and enjoy its fullness, with all the gloom 

of a dying bed before me. And far rather would I 

be the poor emaciated and emaciating creature that 

I am, than be an emperor, with every earthly good 

: about him — but without a God I 



226 MEMOIR or 

•' I was delighted the other day, in re-perusing- 
the Pilgrim's Progress, to observe that, when Chris- 
tian came to the top of the hill Difficulty, he was 
put to sleep in a chamber called Peace, ' Why how, 
good is the Lord of the way to me !' said I. I have 
not reached the summit of the hill yet, but, notwith- 
standing, he puts me to sleep in the chamber of Peace 

every night True, it is o'ten a chamber of pain ; 

but, let pain be as formidable as it may, it has never 
yet been able to expel that peace which the great 
Guardian of Israel has appointed to keep my heart 
and mind through Christ Jesus. 

" I have been laboring lately to exercise most 
love to God when I have been suffering most severe- 
ly; — but what shall I say? Alas! too often the 
sense of pain absorbs every other thought. Yet 
there have been seasonjs when I have been affected 
with such a delightful sense of the loveliness of God I 
as to ravish my soul and give predominance to the 
sacred passion. It was never till to-day that I got : 
any personal instruction from our Lord's telling 
Peter by what death he should glorify God. O 
what a satisfying thought it is, that God appoints 
those means of dissolution whereby he gets most glo-i 
ry to himself! It was the very thing 1 needed ; for,j 
of all the ways of dying, that which I most dreaded! 
w^as by a consumption, in which it is now highly 
probable my disorder will issue. But, O my dear 
Lord, if by this death I can most glorify thee, I pre* 



SAMUEL peaucs. 227^ 

fer it to all others ; and thank thee that by this 
means thou art hastening my fuller enjoyment of 
the6 in a purer world. 

"A sinless state ! ' Oh, 'tis a heaven worth dying 
for !' I cannot realize any thing" about heaven but 
the presence of Christ and his people, and a perfect 
deliverance from sin — and I want no more — I am 
sick of sinning — soon I shall be beyond its power. 

*0 glorious hour! O bleet abode ! 
' I shall be near, and like my God !' 

" I only thought of filling one side — and nov.- have 
not left room to thank you and dear Mrs. Ryland 
for the minute, affectionate, and constant attentions 
you paid us in Bristol. May the Lord reward you ! 
Our hearty love to all around, till, we meet in 
heaven. 

*' Eternally yours in Christ. S. P." 

To Mr. Birt. 

" Birmingham, July 2G, 1799 

"It is not with common feelings that I begin a 
letter to you. Your name brings so many interest- 
ing circumstances of my life before me, in which 
your friendship has been so uniformly and eminent- 
ly displayed, that now, amidst the imbecilities of 
sickness and the serious prospect of another v/orld, 
my heart is overwhelmed with gratitude, whilst it 



223 MEMOIR 0? 

glows with affection — an affection which eternity 
shall not annihilate, but improve. 

" I feel an undisturbed tranquillity of soul, and 
am cheerfully waiting the will of God. My voice is 
gone, so that I cannot whisper without pain ; and of 
this circumstance I am at times most ready to com* 
plain. For, to see my dear and amiable Sarah look 
at me, and then at the children, and at length bathe 
her face in tears, without my being able to say one 

kind word of comfort — Oh ! ! Yet the 1/ "d 

supports me under this also ; and I trust v/ill sup- 
port me to the end. S. P." 

To Mr. Rock. 

''July 28, 1799. 

" I am now, to all appearance, 

within a few steps of eternity. In Christ 1 am safe. 
In him I am happy, I trust we shall meet in 
heaven. S. P." 

To Dr. Ryland. 

" Birmi7igham, Lord's-day evening, Aug. 4, 179D. 
•' My very «lear Brother. 

Still, I trust, hastening to the land • where there 
shall be no more curse,' I take this opportunity of 
talking a little with you on the road ; for v/e are fel-i 
low travelers, and a little conversation by the way / 
will not lose me the privilege of getting first to the 
end of my journey. 



SAMUEL TEARCE. 229 

" It is seventeen years, within about a week, since 
I first actually set out on my pilgrimage; and, 
when I review the many dangers to which during 
that time I have been exposed, I am filled with con- 
viction that I have all along been the care of om- 
nipotent love. Ah, how many Pliables, and Timo- 
rouses, and Talkatives have I seen, while my quiv- 
ering heart said, 'Alas! I shall soon follow these 
sons of apostacy, prove a disgrace to religion, and 
have my portion with hypocrites at last.' 

*' These fears may have had their uses — may have 
made mc more cautious, more distrustful of myself, 
and kept me more dependent on the Lord. 

•' With what intricacy to our view, and yet with 
what actual skill and goodness, does the Lord draw 
his plans and mark out our path ! Here we vv'on- 
der and complain. Soon we shall all agree that it 
was a right path to the city of habitation ; and what 
we now most deeply regret shall become the sub- 
ject of our warmest praises. 

" I am afraid to come back again to life. Oh, 
hov/ many dangers await me! — Perhaps I may be 
overcome of some fleshly lust — perhaps I may get 
proud and indolent, and be more of the priest than 
of the evangelist — surely I rejoice in feeling my out- 
A\ard man decay, and having the sentence of death 
in myself O what prospects are before me in the 
blessed v/orld whither I am going ! To be holy as 
God is holy — to have nothing but holiness in my 
i 20 



-230 MEMOIR or 

nature — to be assured, without a doubt, and eternal- 
ly to carry about this assurance with me, that the 
pure God looks on me with constant complacency, 
for ever blesses me, and says, as at the first creation — 
' it is very good.' lam happy now in hoping in 
the divine purposes towards me; but I know, and 
the thought is my constant burden, that the Being I 
love best always sees something in me which he in- 
finitely hates. ' Oh, wretched, wretched man that I 
am ! The thought even now makes me weep : and 
who can help it, that seriously reflects he never 
comes to God to pray or praise, but he brings what 
his God detests along with him, carries it with him | 
wherever he goes, and can never get rid of it as 
long as he lives ! Come, my dear brother, will you 
not share my joy and help my praise, that soon 1 
shall leave this body of sin and death behind, to en- 
ter on the perfection of my spiritual nature, and pa- 
tiently to wait till this natural body shall become a 
spiritual body, and so be a fit vehicle for my im- 
mortal and happy spirit. 

But 1 must forbear — I have been very unv,'ell all 
day i but this evening God has kindly given me a res- 
pite — my fever is low and my spirits are cheerful, so 
I have indulged myself in unbosoming my feelings 
to my dear friend. S. P." 



SAMUEL FEARCE. 231 

To R. Bowjcr, Ksq. on receiving from him a print of Mr. SchwartZi 
the Missionary on the Malabar coast. 

" Birmingham, Aug. IC, 179D. 
" On three accounts was your last parcel highly 
acceptable. It represented a man whom I have long 
been in the habit of loving and revering; and 
whose character and labors I intended, if the Lord 
had not laid his hand upon me by my present illness, 
to have presented to the public in Europe, as he 
himself presented them to the millions of Asia. 
The execution, bearing so strong a likeness to the 
original, heightened its value. And then the hand 
from whence it came, and the friendship it was in- 
tended to express, adds to its worth. S. P." 

To Mr. Fuller. 

" Birmingham, Aug. 19, 1790. 

•' The doctor has been making me worse and 
weaker for three weeks. In the middle of the last 
week he spoke confidently of my recovery; but 
to-day he has seen fit to alter his plans ; and, if I do 
not find a speedy alteration for the better, I must 
have done with all physicians but Him ' who healeth 
the broken in heart.' 

" For some time after I came home, I was led to 
believe my case to be consumptive: and then, think- 
ing myself of a certainty near the kingdom of hea- 
ven, I rejoiced hourly in the delightful prospect^ 



232 MEMOIR OF 

" Since then I have heen told that I am not in a 
dangerous way; and, though I give very little cre- 
dit to such assertions in this case, yet I have found 
my mind so taken up with earth again, that I seem 
as though I had another soul. My spiritual plea- 
sures are greatly interrupted, and some of the most 
plaintive parts of the most plaintive Psalms seem the 
only true language of my heart. Yet, ' Thy will be 
done,' I trust, prevails ; and if it be the Lord's will 
that I linger long, and suffer much, O let him give 
me the patience of hope; and still, his will be done. 
I can write no more. This is a whole day's work ; 
for it is only after tea that for a few minutes I can sit 
up and attend to any thing. S. P." 

From the latter end of August, and ail through 
the month of September to the 10th of October, the 
day on which he died, he seems to have been unable 
to write. He did not, however, lose the exercise of 
his mental powers ; and, though in the last of the 
above letters he complains of darkness, it appears that 
he soon recovered that peace and joy in God by which 
his affliction and even his life were distinguished. 

A little before he died he was visited by Mr. Med- 
ley, of London, with whom he had been particularly 
intimate on his first coming to Birmingham. ]\Ir. 
Pearce was much affected at the sight of his friend, 
and continued silently weeping for nearly ten min- 
utes, holding and pr«siag his hand. After this he 



SAMUEL PEARCE. ^ 233 

spoke, or rather whispered, as follows : — " This sick 
bed is a Bethel to me: it is none other than the 
house of God, and the gate of heaven. I can 
scarcely express the pleasures that I have enjoyed 
in this affliction. The nearer I draw to my dis- 
solution, the happier 1 am. It scarcely can be call- 
ed an affliction, it is so counterbalanced with joy. 
You have lost your pious father : tell me how it 
was." Here Mr. Medley informed him of parti- 
culars. He wept much at the recital, and especially 

at hearing of his last words " Home, Home !'' 

.... Mr. Medley telling him of some temptations 
lie had lately met with, he charged him to keep 
near to God. " Keep close to God (said lie) and 
nothing will hurt you." 

In a paper addressed to Mrs. P. containing his 
last wishes as to the disposal of his property, and 
written apparently when his lungs were too much 
afTected to allow him to speak, he writes thus : 

" Forgive me, my dearest Sarah, if I have in the 
smallest degree been ' severe.' I saw that your 
tender heart was overwhelmed. I could not see it 
without anguish. I realized your prospects, and 
did not wonder that you felt as a creature ; but I 
feared you did not make use of your privilege as a 
Christian. 

" I long to lead your mind for comfort to an im- 
mortal source ; to a God who is both able and will- 
ing to do far more abundantly for you than you can 
20*' 



234 MEMOIR OF 

ask or think. You are able to think on and ask 
for much. You can think of being supported under 
the trial which is now before you, but God can do 
more ; he can make you happy under it, and thank- 
ful for it. The second year of our marriage it 
seemed as though you were to be taken from me. 
O how my heart was torn at the prospect ! and 
yet, in the midst of it, the Lord was pleased so to 
calm my mind and reconcile me to his blessed will, 
that I had not a wish for your life, if he saw fit to 
take it ! He can, and he will, I trust, do the same 
by you. Only cast your burden upon him, and he 
hath said, ' I will sustain thee.' " 

The following memoranda were taken down oc- 
casionally by Mrs. Pearce, within four or five weeks 
of Mr. Pearce's death. 

He once said, " 1 have been in darkness two or 
three days, crying, when wilt thou comfort me? 
But last night the mist was taken from me, and the 
Lord shone in upon my soul. O that I could 
speak ! I would tell a world to trust a faithful God. 
Sweet affliction now ; but it worketh glory, glory." 

Mrs. P. having told him the various exercises of 
her mind, he replied, " O trust the Lord ; if he lifts up 
the light of his countenance upon you, as he has 
done upon me this day, all your mountains will be- 
come mole-hills. My dear Sarah, I feel your situ- 
ation, 1 feel your sorrows; but he who takes care 
of sparrows will care for you and my dear children." 



8AMUEL PEARCE. 235 

When scorching with burning fever, he said, 
*• Hot and happy." One Lord's-day morning, he 
said, " Cheer up, my dear; think how much will be 
said to-day of the faithfulness of God. Though we 
are called to separate, he will never separate from 
you. I wish I could tell the world what a good 
and gracious God he is. Never need they who 
trust in him be afraid of trials. He has promised 
to give strength for the day; that is his promise, 
and he will not deceive. O what a lovely God ! 
and he is my God and yours, my dear Sarah, for 
ever and ever. He will never leave you nor for- 
sake you — no never ! 1 have been thinking that 
this and that medicine will do me good, but what 
have I to do with it ? It is in my Jesus' hands ; 
he will do it all, and there I leave it ; and my heart 
is as happy as it can be. What a mercy is it I have 
a good bed to lie upon ; you, my dear Sarah, to 
wait upon me; and friends to pray for me! O 
what a good God he is ! How thankful should I 
be for all my pains! I want for nothing: all my 
wishes are anticipated. 1 have felt the force of 
those words of David — ' Unless thy law (my gra- 
cious God) had been my delight, I should have 
perished in mine affliction.' Though I am too weak 
to read it or hear it, I can think upon it — and O 
how good it is ! I am in the best hands I could be 
in — in the hands of my dear Lord and Savior, and 
he will do all things well. Yes, yes, he cannot do 
wrong." 



236 MEMOIR OF 

One morning Mrs. P. asked him how he felt. 
" Very ill, but unspeakably happy in the Lord, and 
my dear Lord Jesus." Once, beholding her griev- 
ing, he said, •• O my dear Sarah, do not be so 
anxious ; but leave m,e entirely in the hands of 
Jesus, and think, if you were as wise as he, you 
would do the same by me. If he take me I shall 
not be lost ; I shall only go a little before ; we shall 
meet again, never to part." 

After a violent fit of coughing he said, " It is all 
well. O what a good God is he ! It is done by 
him, and it must be well. If I ever recover, I shall 
pity the sick more than ever ; and if I do not, I shall 
go to sing delivering love ; so you see it will be all 
well. O for more patience ! Well, my God is the 
God of patience, and he will give me all I need. I 
rejoice it is in my Jesus' hands to communicate, 
and it cannot be in better. It is ray God Who gives 
rae patience to bear all his will." 

When, after a restless night, Mrs. P. asked him 
what she should do for him — " You can do nothing 
but pray for me, that I may have patience to bear 
all ray Lord's will." After taking a medicine he 
said, " If it be the Lord's will to bless it, for your 

sake, and for the sake of the dear children 

but the Lord's will be done. I fear I sin, I dis- 
honor God by impatience ; but I would not for a 
txhousand worlds sin in a thought if I could avoid it." 
Mrs. P. reolied, she trusted the Lord would still 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 237 

keep him ; seeing he had brought him thus far, he 
would not desert him at last. " No, no, (he said,) I 
hope he will not. ' As a father pitieth his children, 
so the Lord pitieth them that fear him.' Why do I 
complain? My dear Jesus's sufferings were much 
sorer and more bitter than mine; and did he thus 
suffer, and shall I repine ? No : I will cheerfully 
suffer my Father's will." 

One morning, after being asked how he felt, he 
replied, " I have but one severe pain about me ; 
what a mercy ! O how good a God to afford some 
intervals amidst so much pain ! He is altogether 
good. Jesus lives, my dear, and that must be our 
consolation." After taking a medicine which ope- 
rated very powerfully, he said, " This will make 
me so much lower : well, let it be. Multiply my 
pains, thou good God ; so thou art but glorified, I 
care not what I suffer : all is right." 

Being asked how he felt after a restless night, he 
replied, " I have so much weakness and pain I have 
not had much enjoyment : but I have a full persua- 
sion that the Lord is doing all things well. If it 
were not for strong confidence in a lovely God, I 
must sink; but all is well. O blessed God, I 
■would not love thee less. O support a sinking 
worm! O what a mercy to be assured that all 
things are working together for good !" 

Mrs. P. saying. If we must part, I trust the sepa- 
ratioa will not be for ever — " O no, (h« replied,) we 



238 MEMOIR OF 

sorrow not as those who have no hope." She said, 
Then you can leave me and your dear children 
with resignation, can you ? He answered, " IVIy 
heart was pierced through with many sorrows before 
I could give you and the dear children up; but the 
Lord has heard me say, Thy will be done; and I 
now can say, blessed be his dear name, I have hone 
of my own." 

His last day, Oct, 10, was very happy. Mrs. P. 
repeated this verse, 

' Since all that I meet shall work for my good, 
' The bitter is sweet, the med'eine is food ; 
* Though painful at present, 'twill cease before long, 
' And then, how pleasant the conqueror's song 1" 

He repeated, with an inexpressible smile, the last 
line, " The conqueror's song." 

He said once, " O my dear ! what shall I do ? 
But why do I complain ? He makes all my bed in 
my sickness." She then repeated those lines, 

* Jesus can make a dying bed, 
' Feel soft as downy pillows are.' 

" Yes, (he replied,) he can, he does, I feel it." 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 239 

CHAPTER V. 
General Qullines of his Character. 

To develope the character of any person, it is 
necessary to determine wiiat was his governing 
principle. If this can be clearly ascertained, we 
shall easily account for the lenor of his conduct. 

The governing principle ii: Mr. Pearce, beyond 
all doubt, was holy love. 

To mention this is sufficient to prove it to all Avho 
knew him. His friends have often compared him 
to tha^ disciple whom Jesus loved. His religion 
was that of the heart. Almost every thing he saw, 
or read, or studied, was converted to the feeding of 
his divine flame. Every subject that passed through 
his hands seemed to have been cast into this mould. 
Things that to a speculative mind would have fur- 
nished matter only for curiosity, to him afforded 
materials for devotion. His sermons were gene- 
rally the effusions of his heart, and invariably aimed 
at the hearts of his hearers. 

For the justness of the above remarks I might 
ippeal, not only to the letters which he addressed to 
his friends, but to those which his friends addressed 
to him. It is worthy of notice how much we are 
influenced in our correspondence by the turn of 
mind of the person we address. If we write to a 
ium.orous character, we shall generally nnd that 



i 



241 ME5I0IR or 

what xre write, perhaps without bein^ conscious of 
it, will be interspersed with pleasantries; or, if to 
one of a very serious cast, our letters will be more 
serious than usual. On this principle it has been 
thought we may form some judgment of our own 
spirit by the spirit in which our friends address us. 
These remarks will apply with singular propriety 
to the correspondence of Mr. Pearce. In looking^ 
oyer the first volume of Periodical Accounts of the 
Baptist Mission, the reader will easily perceive 
that the most afTectionate letters from the mission- 
aries are those which are addressed to him. 

It is not enough to say of his affectionate spirit 
that it formed a prominent feature in his character; 
it was rather the life-b'ood that animated the whole 
system. He seemed, as one of his friends observed, 
to be baptized in it. It was holy love that gave the 
tone to his general deportment ; as a son, a subject, 
a neighbor, a Christian, a minister, a pastor, a friend, 
a husband, and a father, he was manifestly governed 
by this principle ; and this it was that produced in 
him that lovely unilormity of character which con- 
stitutes the true beauty of holiness. 

By the grace of God he was what he was ; and 
to the honor of grace, and not for the glory of a sin- 
ful worm, be it recorded. Like all other men, he 
was the subject of a depraved nature. He felt it 
and lamented it, and longed to depart that he might 
be freed from it: but certainly we have seldom seea 



SAMUEL PEARCE. ' 241 

a character, taking him altogether, *' whose excel- 
lences were so many and so uniform, and whose 
imperfections were so few." We have seen men 
rise high in contemplation, who have abounded but 
little in action — we have seen zeal mingled with 
bitterness, and candor degenerate into indifference ; 
experimental religion mixed with a large portion of 
enthusiasm ; and what is called rational religion 
void of every thing that interests the heart of man — 
we have seen splendid talents tarnished with insuffera- 
ble pride ; seriousness with melancholy ; cheerfulness 
with levity ; and great attainments in religion with 
uncharitable censoriousness towards men of low de- 
gree; but we have not seen these things in our bro- 
ther Pearce. 

There have been few men in whom has been 
united a greater portion of the contemplative and the 
active ; holy zeal and genuine candor ; spirituality 
and rationality : talents that attracted almost univer- 
sal applause ; and yet the most unaffected modesty ; 
faithfulness in bearing testimony against evil, with 
the tenderest compassion to the soul of the evil doer; 
fortitude that would encounter any difficulty in the 
way of duty, without any thing boisterous, noisy, or 
overbearing ; deep seriousness, with habitual cheer- 
fulness ; and a constant aim to promote the highest 
degree of piety in himself and others, with a readi- 
ne^js to hope the best of the lowest; not breakinrr 
the bruised reed, nor quenching the smokm^r flax. 
21 



242 MEMOIR OF 

He loved the divine character as revealed in the 
Scriptures. — To adore God, to contemplate liis glo- 
rious perfections, to enjoy his favor, and to submit 
to his disposal, were Jiis highest delight. " I feU 
(says he, when contemplating the hardships of a 
missionary life) that weie the universe destroyed, 
and 1 trie only being in it besides God, he is fully 
adequate to tny complete happiness ; and had I been 
in an African wood, surrounded with venomous 
serpents, devouring beasts, savage men : in such a 
frame I should be the subject of perfect peace and 
exalted joy. Yes, O my God ! thou hast taught 
me that thou alone art worthy of confidence: and 
with this sentiment fixed in my heart, I am freed 
from all solicitude about my temporal concerns. If 
thy presence be enjoyed, poverty shall be riches ; 
darkness, light; affliction, prosperity: reproach, my 
honor; and fatigue, my rest." 

He loved the Gospel. The truths which he be- 
lieved and taught dwelt richly in him, in all wisdom 
and spiritual understanding. The reader will re- 
collect how he went over the great principles of 
Christianity, examining the grounds on which he 
rested, in the first of those days which he devoted to 
solemn fasting and prayer in reference to his be- 
coming a missionary ; and with what ardent afit^c- 
tion he set his seal anew to every part of divine 
truth as he v/ent along. 

If salvation had been of works, fev/ men, accord- 



SAML'EL PEARCE. 213 

ing to our wny of estimating: chanicters, had a 
fairer claim ; but, as he hiinself iins related, he could 
not liieei the king- of terrors in this armor. So far 
was he from placing any dependence on his own 
works, that the more he did for God, the less he 
thought of it in such a way. " All the satisfaction I 
wish for here, (says he,) is to be doing my heavenly 
Father's will. I hope I have fjund it my meat and 
drink to do his work; and can set to my seal that 
the purest pleasures of hum.an life spring from tho 
humble obedience of faith. It is a good saying, 
' We cannot do too much for God, nor trust in what 
we do too little.' I find a growing conviction of the 
necessity of a free salvation. The more I do for 
God, the less I think of it ; and am progressively 
ashamed that I do no more." 

Christ crucified was his darling theme, from first 
to last.* This was the subject on which he 
dwelt at the outset of his ministry among the Cole- 

* Mr. P. being one week-day evening in London, and not 
engaged ro preach, a>ked his friend Mr. S. where he couUl 
hear a good sermon. Mr. S. mentioned fvo places. " Well," 
said Mr. P. "tell me the character of the preacher?, that I 
may choose." '-Mr. D." said his frienil, " exhibits the ora- 
tor, and is much admired for his eloquence." "Well," 
said Mr. P. "and what is the other ?' "Why, I hardly 
know what to say of Mr. C; hs always throws himself in 
the backgroand. and yoa see his Master only." "That's 
the man for me then," said the amiable Pearce : " let us go 
and hear him." 



244 MEMOIR OF 

ford colliers, when " he could scarcely speak for 
weeping, nor they hear for interrupting sighs and 
sobs." This was the burden of the song when ad- 
dressing the more polished and crowded audiences 
at Birmingham, London, and Dublin ; this was the 
grand motive exhibited in sermons for the promo- 
tion of public charities; and this was the rock on 
which he rested all his hopes in the prospect of 
death. It is true, as we have seen, he was shaken 
for a time by the writings of a Whitby, and of a 
Priestley ; but this transient hesitation, by the over- 
ruling grace of God, tended only to establish him 
more firmly in the end. " Blessed be his dear 
name (says he, under his last affliction) Avho shed his 
blood for me. He helps me to rejoice at times with 
joy unspeakable. Now I see the value of the re- 
ligion of the cross. It is a religion for a dying sin- 
ner. It is all the most guilty and the most wretch- 
ed can desire. Yes, I taste its sweetness and enjoy 
its fullness, whh all the gloom of a dying bed be- 
fore me ; and far rather would I be the poor ema- 
ciated and emaciating creature that I am, than be an 
emperor, with every earthly good about him, but 
without a God." 

Notwithstanding this, however, there were those 
in Birmingham, and other places, who would not 
allow that he preached the Gospel. And if by the 
Gospel were meant the doctrine taught by Mr. 
Huntington, Mr. Bradford, and others who followed 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 245 

hard after ihcm, it must be granted he did not. If 
the fill and depravity of man operate to destroy his 
accouiitableness to his Creator: if his inability to 
obey the law, or comply with the Gospel, be of such 
a nature as to excuse him in the neglect of either; 
or, if not, yet if Christ's coming under the law frees 
believers from all obligations to obey its precepts; 
if Gospel invitations are addressed only to the re- 
generate; if the illuminating influences of the Holy 
Spirit consist in revealing to us the secret purposes 
of God concerning us, or impressing us with the 
idea that we are the favorites of heaven ; if be- 
lieving such impressions be Christian faith, and 
doubting of their validity unbelief; if there be no 
such thing as progressive sanctification, or any 
sanctification inherent, except that of the iilinnination 
before described ; if wicked men are not obliged to 
do any thing beyond what they can find in their 
hearts to do, nor good men to be holy beyond what they 
actually are : and if these things constitute the Gospel, 
Mr. Pearce certainly did not preach it. Butif m"an, 
v.'h:Uever be his depravity, be necessarily a free 
agent, and accountable for all his dispositions and 
actions ; if Gospel invitations be addressed to men, 
not as elect nor as non-elect, but as sinners exposed 
to the righteous displeasure of God; if Christ's 
obedience and death rather increase than diminish 
our ob igations to love God and one another; if 
faith in Christ be a falling in with God's way of 

01* 



246 MEMOIR OF 

salvation, and unbelief a falling out with it; if 
sanctification be a progressive work, and so essen- 
tial a branch of our salvation as that without it no 
man shall see the Lord : if the Holy Spirit instruct 
us in nothing by his illuminating influences but 
what was already revealed in the Scriptures, and 
which we should have perceived, but that we loved 
darkness rather than light ; and if he incline us to no" 
thing but what was antecedently right, or to such a 
spirit as every intelligent creature ought at all times 
to possess — then Mr. Pearce did preach the Gospel ; 
and that which his accusers call by this name is 
another Gospel, and not the Gospel of Christ. 

Moreover, if the doctrine taught by Mr, Pearce 
be not the Gospel of Christ, and that which is taught 
by the above writers and their adherents be, it may 
be expected that the effects produced will in some 
degree correspond with this representation. And is 
it evident to all men who are acquainted with both, 
and who judge impartially, that the doctrine taught 
by Mr. Pearce is productive of hatred, variance, 
emulations, wrath, strife, railings, evil surmisings, 
and perverse disputings ; that it renders those who 
embrace it lovers of their ownselves, covetous, boast- 
ers, proud, false accusers, fierce despisers of those 
that are good; while that of his adversaries pro- 
motes love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,, 
goodness, faith, meekness, and temperance? .... 

" WHY EVEN OF YOURSELVES JUDGE YE NOT 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 247 

WHAT IS RIGHT ? ... YE SHALL KNOW THEM BY 
THEIR FRUITS." 

Mr. Pearce's ideas of preaching human obliga- 
tion may be seen in the following extract from a 
letter addressed to a young minister, who was sent 
out of the church of which he was pastor : — " You 
request my thoughts how a minister should preach 
human obligation. I would reply, do it extensively, 
do it constantly; but withal do it affectionately and 
evangelically. I think, considering the general cha- 
racter of our hearers and the state of their mental 
improvement, it would be time lost to argue much 
from the data of natural religion. The best way is, 
perhaps, to express duties in Scripture language, 
and enforce them by evangelical motives ; as the 
example of Christ — the end of his sufferings and 
death — the consciousness of his approbation — the 
assistance he has promised — the influence of a holy 
conversation on God's people, and on the people of 
the world — the small returns we at best can make for 
the love of Jesus — and the hope of eternal holiness. 
These form a body of arguments which the most 
simple may understand, and the most dull may feel. 
Yet I would not neglect on some occasions to show 
the obligations of man to love his Creator — the rea- 
sonableness of the divine law — and the natural ten- 
dency of its commands to promote our own comfort, 
the good of society, and the glory of God. These 
will serve to illuminate : but, after all, it is the Gospel 



243 MEMOIR OF 

of the grace of God that will most efTectually ani- 
mate and impel to action." 

Mr. Pearce's affection to the doctrine of the cross 
"vvas not merely, nor principally, on account of its 
being- a system which secured his own safety. Had 
this been the case, he might, like others whose reli- 
gion originates and terminates in self-love, have been 
delighted u'ith the idea of the grnce of the Son ; but 
it would have been at the expense of all complacency 
in the righteous government of the Father. He 
might have admired something which he accounted 
the Gospel, as saving him from misery ; but he could 
have discerned no loveliness in the divine law, as 
being holy, just, and good, nor in the mediation of 
Christ, as doing honor to it. That which in his view 
constituted tiie glory cf the Gospel was, that God is 
therein revealed as the just God and the Savior- 
just, and the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus. 

He teas a lover of good men. He was never more 
in his element than when joining with them in spi- 
ritual conversation, prayer, and praise. His heart 
was tenderly attached to the people of his charge; 
and it was one of the bitterest ingredients in his cup, 
during his long affliction, to be cut off from their so- 
ciety. When in the neighborhood of Plymouth, he 
thus writes to Mr. King, one of the deacons : " Give 
my love to all the dear people. O pray that He who 
afflicts would give me patience to endure. Indeed, 
the state of suspense in which I have been kept so 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 2'iO 

long re(]ulres much of it ; and I often exclaim, ere 
I am aware, O my dear people ! O my dear family ! 
when shall I return to you agam?" He was a dis- 
senter and a Baptist from conscientious principles ; 
yet he embraced with brotherly affection great num- 
bers of godly men, whose sentiments differed from 
his own, both in and out of the establishment. His 
spirit was truly catholic : he loved all who loved our 
Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. " Let us pray (said 
he in a letter to a friend) for the peace of Jerusalem : 
they shall prosper who love — not this part or the 
other, but who love her — that is, the whole body of 
Christ/'* 

He bare good will to all mankind. — It was from 
this principle that he so ardently desired to go and 
preach the Gospel among the heathen. And even 
under his long affliction, when at tmies he enter- 
tained hopes of recovery, he would say — " My soul 
pants for usefulness more extensive than ever: I 

♦ The following anecdote will illustrate the tender respect 
with which he uniformly treated the feelings of those from 
whom he conscientiously differed in sentiment or practice. 

He one day heard that Mr. Cecil was in Birmiiigham, and 
had preached two Wednesday evenings at St. Mary's Cha- 
pel. Mr. P. arranged his time to hear him one evening; but 
an unexpected occurrence detained him so late that, when 
he came to the chapel, the prayers were nearly concluded. 
He remarks that, in these circumstances, he thought it best 
not to enter, lest, being a public character, his doing so should 
be construed into a designed contempt for the church service. 



259 MEMOIR OF 

long to become an aposlle to the world !"' The errors 
and the sins of men wrought much in liim in a way 
of pity. He knew that they were culpable in the 
sight of God : but he knew also that he himself was 
a sinner and felt that they Avere entitled to his com- 
passion, His zeal for the divinity and atonement of 
his Savior never appeared to operate in a way of un- 
christian bitterness against those who rejected these 
important doctrines ; and, though he was shamefully 
traduced, by professors of another description, as a 
mere legal preacher, and his ministry held up as af- 
fording no food for the souls of believers ; and, 
though he could not but feel the injury of such mis- 
representations, yet he does not appear to have che- 
rished unchristian resentment, but would at any 
time have laid himself out for the good of his worst 
enemies. It was his constant endeavor to promote 
as good an understanding between the different con- 
gregations in the town as the nature of their differ- 
ent religious sentiments would admit. The cruel 
bitterness of many people against Dr. Priestley and 
his friends, at and after the Birmingham riots, was 
affecting to his mind. Such methods of opposing 
error he abhorred. His regard to mankind made 
him lament the consequences of war ; but while he 
wished and prayed for peace to the nations, and es- 
pecially to his native country, he had no idea of tur- 
bulently contending for it. Though friendly to civil 
and religious liberty, he stood aloof from the fire oi* 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 251 

political contenllon. In an excellent circular letter 
to the churches of the Midland Association in 1794, 
he thus expresses himself; " Have as little as pos- 
sible to flo with the world. IMeddle not with politi- 
cal controversies. An inordinate pursuit of these, 
we are sorry to observe, has been a cankerworni at 
the root of vital piety, and caused the love of many, 
formerly zealous professors, to wax cold.. The Lord 
reigneth ; it is our place to rejoice in his govern- 
ment, and quietly wait for the salvation of God. 
The establishment of his kingdom will be the uhi- 
mate end of all those national commotions which 
terrify the earth. The wrath of man shall praise 
him ; and the remainder of wrath he will restrain." 
From this time, more than ever, he turned his whole 
attention to the promoting of the kingdom of Christ ; 
cherishing and recommending a spirit of content- 
ment and gratUude for the civil and religious ad- 
vantages that we enjoyed. Such were the sentiments 
inculcated in the last sermon that he printed, and 
the last one that he preached. His dear young 
friends who went to India will never forget how 
earnestly he charged them by letter, when confined 
vA Plymouth, to conduct themselves in all civil mat- 
ters as peaceable and obedient subjects to the govern- 
ment under which they lived, in vrhatever country 
it might be their lot to reside. 

It u-<.s love that tempered faithfulness with so 
lari,e a portion of tender concern fur the good of 



252 KEMOIR OF 

those whose conduct he teas obliged to censure. H« 
could not bear them that were evil, but would set 
himself against them with the greatest firmness ; yet 
it was easy to discover the pain of mind with which 
this necessary part of duty was discharged. It ia 
Avell remembered how he conducted himself towards 
certain preachers in the neighborhood, who, wan- 
dering from place to place, corrupted and embroiled 
the churches; whose conduct he knev\^ to be as dis- 
honorable as their prmciples were loose and unscrip- 
tural : and, Avhen requested to recite particulars in 
his own defence, his fear and tenderness for charac- 
ter, his modest reluctance to accuse persons older 
than himself, and his deep concern that men en- 
gaged in the Christian ministry should render such 
accusations necessary, were each conspicuous, and 
proved to all present that ihe work of an accuser was 
to him a strange work. 

It was love that expanded his heart, and prompt- 
ed him to labor, in season and out of season, for the 
salvation of sinners. This was the spring of that 
constant stream of activity by which his life was 
distinguished. His conscience would not suffer him 
to decline w^hat appeared to be right. " I dare not 
refuse (he would say) lest I should shrink from duty. 
Unjustifiable ease is w^orse than the most difiicuil 
labors to which duty calls." To persons who never 
entered into his views or feelings, some parts of his 
conduct, especially those which relate to his desire 



6AMLEL PEARCE. 253 

of quitting his country that he might preach the 
Gospel to the heathen, will appear extravagant ; but 
no man could with greater propriety have adopted 
the language of the Apostle, "Whether we be beside 
ourselves, it is to God ; or whether we be sober, it 
is for your cause ; for the love of Christ constrain- 
eth us." 

He was frequently told that his exercises were too 
great for his strength ; but such Avas the ardor of 
his mind — "he could not die in a better work." 
When he went up into the pulpit to deliver his last ser- 
mon, he thought he should not have been able to get 
through ; but, when he got a little warm, he felt re- 
lieved, and forgot his indisposition, preaching with 
as much fervor and freedom as when in perfect 
health. While he was laid aside he could not for- 
bear hoping that he should some time resume his 
delightful work ; and, knowing the strength of his 
feelings to be such that it would be unsafe to trust 
himself, he proposed for a time to write his discour- 
ses, that his mind might not be at liberty to overdo 
his debilitated frame. 

All his co-unsels, cautions, and reproofs appear to 
have been the effect of love. It was a rule, dictated 
by his tieart .no less than by his judgment, to dis- 
courage all evil-speaking : nor would he approve 
of just censure, unless some good and necessary end 
v/ere to be answered by it. Two of his distant friends 
being at his house together, one of them, during the 
22 



254 MEMOIR OF 

absence of the other, suggested something to his dis- 
advantage. He put a stop to the conversation by an- 
swering, " He is here, take him aside, and tell him 
of it by himself: you may do him good." 

If he perceived any of his acquaintance bewilder- 
ed in fruitless speculations, he would in an affec- 
tionate manner endeavor to draw off their attention 
from these mazes of confusion to the simple doctrine 
of the cross. A specimen of this kind of treatment 
will be seen in the letter No. 1, towards the close of 
this chapter. 

He was affectionate to all, but especially towards 
the rising generation. The youth of his own con- 
gregation, of London and Dublin, long remembered 
his melting discourses which were particularly ad- 
dressed to them. He took much delight in speak- 
ing to the children, and would adapt himself to their 
capacities, and expostulate with them on the things 
which belong to their everlasting peace. While at 
Plymouth, he wrote thus to one of his friends : — 
" Oh how should I rejoice, were there a speedy 
prospect of my returning to my great and little con- 
gregations !" Nor was it by preaching only that he 
sought their eternal welfare : several of his letters 
are addressed to young persons. See No. ii. iii. 
and iv. towards the close of this chapter. 

With what joy did he congratulate one of his 
most intimate friends, on hearing that three of the 
younger branches of his family had apparently 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 255 

been brought to take the Redeemer's yoke upon 
them! "Thanks, thanks, thanks be to God," said 
he, " for the enrapturing prospects before you as a 
father, as a Christian father especially. What, three 
of a family ! and these three at once ! O the 
heights, and depths, and lengths, and breadths of 
this unfathomable grace! My soul feels joy un- 
speakable at the blessed news. Three immortal 
souls secured for eternal life I Three rational spirits 
preparing to grace Immanuel's triumphs and sing 
his praise! Three examples of virtue and good- 
ness, exhibiting the genuine influence of the true 
religion of Jesus before the world! Perhaps three 
mothers training up to lead three future families 
in the way to heaven. O what a train of bless- 
ings do I see in this event ! Most sincerely do I 
participate with my dear friend in his pleasures 
and in his gratitude." 

Towards the close of life, writing to the same 
friend, he thus concludes his letter : " Present our 

love to dear Mrs. and the family, especially 

those; whose hearts are engaged to seek the Lord 
and his goodness. O tell them they will find him 
good all their lives, supremely good on dying beds, 
but best of all in glory." 

In his visits to the sick he was singularly useful. 
His sympathetic conversation, affectionate prayers, 
and endearing manner of recommending to them a 
compassionate Savior, frequently operated as a 



256 MEMOIR OF 

cordial to their troubled hearts. A young man of 
his congregation was dangerously ill : his father, 
living at a distance, was anxious to hear froni him ; 
and Mr. Pearce, in a letter to the minister on whose 
preaching the father attended, wrote as follows : 

" I feel for the anxiety of Mr. V , and am hap- 

j)y in being at this time a Barnabas to him. I was 
not seriously alarmed for his son till last Tuesday, 
when I expected, from every symptom and the lan- 
guage of his physician, that he was nigh unto death. 
But, to our astonishment and joy, a surprising 
change has since taken place. I saw him yesterday 
apparently in a fair way for recovery. His mind 
for the first part of his illness was sometimes joyful, 
and almost constantly calm ; but, when at the worst, 
suspicions crowded his mind ; he feared that he had 
been a hypocrite. I talked, and prayed, and wept 
with him. One scene was very affecting : both he 
and his wife appeared like persons newly awak- 
ened. They never felt so strongly the importance 
of religion before. He conversed about the tender- 
ness of Jesus to broken-hearted sinners ; and, whilst 
we spoke, it seemed as though he came and began 
to heal the wound. It did me good, and I trust was 
not unavailing to them. They have since been for 
the most part happy ; and a very pleasant interview 
I had with them on the past day." 

Every man must have his seasons of relaxation. 
In his earlier years Mr. P. would take strong 



SAML'EI PEIRCE. 257 

bodil}' exercise. Afterwards he occasicn&lly em- 
ployed himself with the microscope, in the stuiy of 
natural history, and in making a few philosophical 
experiments. " We will amuse ourselves with 
philosophy, (said he to a philosophical friend,) but 
Jesus shall be our teacher." In all these exercises 
he seems never to have lost sight of God ; but would 
be discovering something in his works that fur- 
nished matter for praise and admiration. His 
mind did not appear to have been unfitted, but rather 
assisted, by such pursuits, for the discharge of the 
more spiritual exercises into which he would fall, 
at a proper season, as into his native element. If 
in company v/iih his friends, and the conversation 
turned upon the works of nature, or art, or any other 
subject of science, he would cheerfully take a part 
in it ; and when occasion required, by some easy 
and pleasant transition direct it into another chan- 
nel. An ingenious friend once showed him a model 
of a machine which he thought of constructing, and 
by which he hoped to be able to produce a perpetual 
motion. Mr. Pearce, having patiently inspected it, 
discovered where the operation would stop, and 
pointed it out. His friend was convinced, and felt, 
as may be supposed, rather unpleasant at this disap- 
pointment. He consoled him; and, a prayer meet- 
ing being at hand, said to this effect, " We may learn 
from hence our own insufficiency, and the glory of 
that Being who is wonderful in counsel and ex- 
22* 



2-33 JIKMUIH OF 

celleiit ill working : let us go and worship him." 
His mind and gentle disposition, not apt to take 
or give offence, often won upon persons in matters 
wherein at first they have shown themselves averse. 
When collecting for the Baptist Mission, a gentle- 
man who had no knowledge of him, or of the conduc- 
tors of that undertaking, made some objections, on 
the ground that the Baptists had little or nothing to 
say to the unconverted. This objection Mr. Pearce 
attempted to remove, by alledging that the parties 
concerned in this business were entirely of another 
mind. " I am glad to hear it, (said the gentleman,) 
but 1 have my fears." " Then pray, sir, (said Mr, 
Pearce,) do not give till you are satisfied." " Wh\% 
I assure you, (replied the other,) I think the Metho- 
dists more likely to succeed than you ; and should feel 
more pleasure in giving them ten guineas, than you 
one." "If you give them twenty guineas, sir, (said 
Mr. Pearce,) we shall rejoice in their success ; and if 
you give us one, I hope it will not be misapplied." 
The gentleman smiled, and gave him four. 

His figure, to a superficial observer, would, at 
first sight, convey nothing very interesting ; but, on 
close inspection, his countenance would be acknow- 
ledged to be a faithful index to his soul. Calm, 
placid, and, when in the pulpit especially, full of 
animation ; his appearance was not a little expressive 
of the interest he felt in the eternal welfare of his au- 
dience ; his eyes beaming benignity, and speaking, in 



SAMUEL PEARCE, 259 

the most impressive language, his willingness to im- 
part, not only the Gospel of God, but his own soul also. 

His imagination was vivid, and his judgment 
clear. He relishe<l the elegancies of science, and 
felt alive to the most delicate and refined sentiments ; 
yet these were things on account of which he does 
not appear to have valued himself They were 
rather his amusements than his employment. 

His address was easy and insinuating: his 
voice pleasant, but sometimes overstrained in the 
course of his sermon ; his language chaste, flowing, 
and inclining to the florid ; this last, hov/ever, abated 
as his judgment ripened. His delivery was rather 
slow than rapid : his attitude graceful ; and his 
countenance, in almost all his discourses, approach- 
ing to an affectionate smile. He never appears, 
however, to have studied what are called the graces 
of pulpit action ; and, whatever he had read con- 
cerning them, it was manifest that he thought no- 
thing of them, or of any other of the ornaments of 
speech, at the time. Both his action and language 
were the genuine expressions of an ardent mind, af- 
fected, and sometimes deeply, with his subject. Be- 
ing rather below the common stature, and disre- 
garding, or rather, I might say, disapproving every 
thing pompous in his appearance, upon some occa- 
sions persons were prejudiced to his disadvan- 
tage : but the song of the nightingale is not the less 
melodious for his not appearing in a gaudy plum* 



260 MEMOIR OF 

age. His manner of preparing for the pulpit may 
be seen in a letter addressed to Mr. Cave,, of Lei- 
cester, who was sent out of his church, and which 
may be of use to others in a similar situation. See 
No. V. towards the close of this chapter. 

His ministry was highly acceptable to persons of 
education : but he appears to have been most in his 
element when preaching to the poor. The feelings 
which he himself expresses, when instructing the 
colliers, appear to have continued with him through 
life. It was his delight to carry the glad tidings of 
salvation into the vill?.ges, wherever he could find 
access and opportunity. And, as he sought the 
good of the souls of the poor, so he both labored and 
suffered to relieve their temporal wants: living 
himself in a style of frugality and self-denial, that 
he might have whereof to give to them that needed. 

Finally, he possessed a large 'portion of real hap- 
piness. There are few characters whose enjoy- 
ments, both natural and spiritual, have risen to so 
great a height. He dwelt in love: and he that 
dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him. 
Such a life must needs be happy. If his religion had 
originated and terminated in self-love, as some con- 
tend the whole of religion does, his joys had been not 
only of a different nature, but far less extensive than 
they were. His interest was bound up with that of 
his Lord and Savior. Its afflictions were his af- 
liictions, and its joys his joy. The grand object of 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 261 

his desire was to see the good of God's chosen, to 
rejoice in the gladness of his nation, and to glory 
with his inheritance. " What pleasures do those lose 
(said he) who have no interest in God's gracious 
and holy cause." 

If an object of joy presented itself to his mind, he 
would delight in multiplying it by its probable or 
possible consequences. Thus it was, as we have 
seen, in his congratulating his friend on the conver- 
sion of three of his children ; and thus it was, when 
speaking of a people who had divided into two con- 
gregations, not from discord, but from an increase of 
numbers, and who generously united in erecting a 
new and additional place of w^orship. " These libe- 
ral souls are subscribing (said he) in order to sup- 
port a religion ^vhich, as far as it truly prevails, will 
render others as liberal as themselves." 

His heart was so much formed for social enjoy- 
ment, that he seems to have contemplated the hea- 
venly state under this idea with peculiar advantage. 
This was the leading theme of a discourse from Rev. 
7 : 9, which, as before mentioned, he delivered at a 
meeting of ministers at Arnsby, April 18, 1797, and 
of which his brethren retained a lively remembrance. 
On this pleasing subject he dwells also in a letter to 
his dear friend Birt : " I had much pleasure, a few 
days since, in meditating on the affectionate language 
of our Lord to his sorrowful disciples — I go to pre- 
pare a place for you. What a plenitude of consola- 



262 MEMOIR OF 

tion do these words contain ! what a sweet view of 
heaven as a place of society ! It is one place for us 
all ; that place where his glorified body is, there all 
his followers shall assemble to part no more. Where 
he is, there we shall be also. O blessed anticipation ! 
There shall be Abel and all the martyrs ; Abraham, 
and all the patriarchs; Isaiah, and all the prophets; 
Paul, and all the apostles ; Gabriel, and all the an- 
gels; and, above all, Jesus, and all his ransomed 
people. O, to be amongst the number ! My dear bro- 
ther, let us be strong in the liOrd. Let us realize 
the bliss before us. Let our faith bring heaven it- 
self near, and feast and live upon the scene. O what 
a commanding influence would it have upon our 
thoughts, passions, comforts, sorrows, words, minis- 
try, prayers, praises, and conduct ! What manner of 
persons should we be in all holy conversation and 
godliness I" 

In many persons the pleasures imparted by reli- 
gion are counteracted by a gloomy constitution : but 
it was not so in him. In his disposition they met 
with a friendly soil. Cheerfulness was as natural to 
him as breathing; and this spirit, sanctified by the 
grace of God, gave a tincture to all his thoughts, 
conversation, and preaching. He was seldom heard 
without tears : but they were frequently tears of 
pleasure. No levity, no attempts at wit, no aiming 
to excite the risibility of an audience, ever disgraced 
his sermons. Religion to him was habitual serious- 



SAMUEL FEARCE. 263 

ness, mingled with sacred pleasure, frequently rising 
into sublime delight, and occasionally overflowing 
with transporting joy. 



LETTERS 



REFERRED TO IN THIS CHAPTER. 

No. 1. 

To a young man whoso mind was bewildered with fruitlesa Fpeealation* 

" The conversation we had on our way to , 

so far interested me in your religious feelings, that 
I find it impossible to satisfy my mind till 1 have ex- 
pressed my ardent wishes for the happy termination 
of your late exercises, and contributed my mite to 
the promotion of your joy in the Lord. A disposi- 
tion more or less given to ' scepticism,' I believe, is 
common to our nature, in proportion as opposite S3rs- 
tems and jarring opinions, each supported by a plau- 
sibility of argument, are presented to our minds ; and 
with some qualification I admit Robinson's remark, 
•that he who never doubted, never believed.' While 
examining the grounds of persuasion, it is right for 
the mind to hesitate. Opinions ought not to be pre- 
judged any more than criminals. Every objection 
ought to have its weight ; and the more numerous 



264 MEMOIR 0? 

and forcible objections are, the more cause shall wo 
finally have for the triumph, ' Magna est Veritas et 
prevalebit ;' [Truth is great and will prevail ;] but 
there are two or three considerations which have no 
small weight with me in relation to religious contro- 
versies. 

** The first is, the importance of truth. It would be 
endless to write on truth in general. I confine my 
views to what I deem the leading truth in the New 
Testament— the atonement made on behalf of sin- 
ners by the Son of God ; the doctrine of the Cross ; 
Jesus Christ, and him crucified. It surely cannot 
be a matter of small concern, whether the Creator of 
all things, out of mere love to rebellious men, ex* 
changed a throne for a cross, and thereby reconciled 
a ruined world to God. If this be not true, how can 
we respect the Bible as an inspired book, which so 
plainly attributes our salvation to the grace of God, 
through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus ? 
And if we discard the Bibb, what can we do with 
prophecies, miracles, and all the power of evidence, 
on which, as on adamantine pillars, its authority 
abides ? Surely the infidel has more to reject than 
the believer to embrace. That book then which we 
receive, not as the v/ord of man, but as the word of 
God — not as the religion of our ancestors, but on .the 
invincible conviction which attends an impartial in- 
vestigation of its evidences — that book reveals a truth 
of the highest importance to man, consonant to the 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 265 

Opinions of the earliest ages and the most enlightened 
nations, perfectly consistent with the Jewish econo- 
my as to its spirit and design, altogether adapted to 
unite the equitable and merciful perfections of the 
Deity in the sinner's salvation ; and, above all things, 
calculated to beget the most established peace, to in- 
spire with the liveliest hope, and to engage the heart 
and life in habitual devotedness to the interests of 
morality and piety. Such a doctrine I cannot but 
venerate ; and to the author of such a doctrine my 
whole soul labors to exhaust itself in praise. 

• O the sweet wonders of the cross, 

• Where God rny Savior lov'd and died V 

" Forgive, my friend, forgive the transport of a 
Eoul compelled to feel where it attempts only to 
explore. I cannot on this subject control my pas- 
sions by the laws of logic. God forbid that I should 
glory save in the cross of Christ Jesus my Lord. 

" Secondly, I consider man as a depraved creature 
— so depraved that his judgment is as dark as his 
appetites are sensual; wholly dependent on God. 
therefore, for religious light as well as true devotion, 
yet such a dupe to pride as to reject every thing 
which the narrow limits of his comprehension can- 
not embrace, and such a slave to his passions as to 
admit no law but self-interest for his government. 
With these views of human nature, I am persuaded 
we ought to suspect our own decisions, whenever 
23 



266 MEMOIR OF 

they oppose truths too sublime for our understand- 
ings, or too pure for our lusts. To err on this side, 
indeed, ' is human ;' wherefore the vrise man saith, 
' He that trusteih to his own heart is a fool' Should 
therefore the evidence be only equal on the side of 
the Gospel of Christ, I should think, with this allow- 
ance, we should do well to admit it. 

" Thirdly, if the Gospel of Christ be true, it should 
be heartily embraced. We should yield ourselves 
to its influence without reserve. We must come to 
a point, and resolve to be ejther Infidels or Chris- 
tians. To know the power of the sun, we should 
expose ourselves to its rays : to know the sweetness 
of honey, we must bring it to our palates. Specula- 
tion will not do in either of these cases ; much less 
will it in matters of religion. My son, saith God, 
give me thine heart ! 

" Fourthly, a humble admission of the light we 
already have, is the most effectual way to a full con- 
viction of the truth of the doctrine of Christ. ' If any 
man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine 
whether it be of God.' If we honor God as far as we 
know his will, he will honor us with farther discove- 
ries of it. ' Thus shall we kno^v, if we follow on to 
know the Lord ;' thus, thus shall you, my dear friend, 
become assured that there is salvation in no other 
name than that of Jesus Christ ; and thus, from an in- 
ward experience of the quickening influences of his 
Holy Spirit, you w^ill join the admirino- church, ci^d 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 267 

say of Jesus, ' This is my beloved, this is my friend ; 
he is the chiefest among ten thousand, he is altogether 
lovely.' Yes, I yet hope, I expect, to see you re- 
joicing in Christ Jesus, and appearing as a living 
witness that he is faithful who hath said, ' Seek and 
ye shall find; ask, and receive, that your joy may 
be full.' S. P." 

In another letter to the same correspondent, after 
congratulating himself that he had discovered such 
a mode of killing noxious insects as should put them 
to the least pain, and which was characteristic of 
the tenderness of his heart, he proceeds as follows : 
" But enough of nature. How is my brother as a 
Christian ? We have had some interesting moments 
in conversation on the methods of grace, that grace 
whose influence reaches to the day of adversity and 
the hour of death; seasons when of every thing else 
it may be said, miserable comforters are ye all ! My 
dear friend, we will amuse ourselves with philo- 
soph}', but Christ shall be our teacher; Christ shall 
be our glory ; Christ sliall be our portion. O that 
we may be enabled 'to comprehend the heights, and 
depths, and lengths, and breadths, and to know the 
love of Christ, which passeth knowledge I' 

" Affectionately yours, S, P." 



268 MEMOIR or 



No. ir 

To a young gentleman of bis acquaintance, who was then stuJylng phy- 
sic at Edinburijh, 

" Did my dear friend P know with what sin- 
cere affection and serious concern I almost daily 
think of him, he would need no other evidence of 
the effect which his last visit and his subsequent 
letters have produced. Indeed, there is not a young 
man in the world, in earlier life than myself, for 
whose universal prosperity I am so deeply interest- 
ed. Many circumstances I can trace, on a review 
of the past fourteen years, which have contributed to 
beget and augment affection and esteem ; and I can 
assure you that every interview and every letter still 
tend to consolidate my regard. 

" Happy should I be, if my ability to serve you 
at this important crisis of human life were equal to 
your wishes of my own. Your situation demands 
all the aids which the wisdom and prudence of your 
friends can afford, that you may be directed not only 
to the most worthy objects of pursuit, but also to the 
most effectual means of obtaining them. In your 
professional character it is impossible for me to give 
you any assistance. If any general observations I 
can make should prove at all useful, I shall be richly 
rewarded for the time I employ in their communi- 
cation. 

" I thank you sincerely for the freedom where- 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 260 

with you have disclosed the peculiarities of your 
situation, and the views and resolutions wherewith 
they have inspired you. I can recommend nothing 
better, my dear friend, than a determined adherence 
to the purposes you have already formed respecting 
the intimacies you contract and the associates you 
choose. In such a place as Edinburgh, it may be 
supposed, no description of persons will be wanting. 
Some so notoriously vicious that their atrocity of 
character will have no small tendency to confirm 
your morals, from the odious contrast which their 
practices present to your view. Against these, there- 
fore, I need not caution you. You will flee from 
them as so many serpents, in \vhose breath is venom 
and destruction. More danger may be apprehended 
from those mixed characters who blend the profes- 
sion of philosophical refinement with the secret in- 
dulgence of those sensual gratifications which at 
once exhaust the pocket, destroy the health, and de- 
base the character. 

" That morality is friendly to individual happiness 
and to social order, no man, who respects his own 
conscience or character, Avill have the effrontery to 
deny. Its avenues cannot, therefore, be too sacredly 
guarded, nor those principles which support a vir- 
tuous practice be too seriously maintained. But mo- 
rality derives, it is true, its best, its only support 
from the principles of religion. ' The fear of the 
Lord (said the wise man) is to hate evil.' He, there- 
23* 



270 MEMOIR OP 

fore, who endeavors to Aveaken the sanctions of reli- 
gion, to induce a sceptical habit, to detach my 
thoughts from an ever-present God, and my hopes 
from a futurity of holy enjoyment, is a worse enemy 
than the man who meets me with the pistol and the 
dagger. Should my dear friend then fail into the 
company of those whose friendship cannot be pur- 
chased but by the sacrifice of revelation, I hope he 
will ever think such a price too great for the good 
opinion of men who blaspheme piety and dishonor 
God. Deism is, indeed, the fashion of the day ; and, 
to be in the mode, you must quit the good old path 
of devotion, as too antiquated for any but monks and 
hermits ; so as you laugh at religion, that is enough 
to secure to you the company and the applause of 
the sons of politeness. O that God may be a luck- 
ier and a shield to defend you from their assaults ! 
Let but their private morals be inquired into, and, if 
they may have a hearing, I dare engage they will 
not bear a favorable testimony to the good tendency 
of scepticism; and it may be regarded as an indis- 
putable axiom, that what is unfriendly to virtue, is 
unfriendly to man. 

" Were I to argue a posteriori in favor of truth, 
1 should contend that those principles must be true, 
which (first) corresponded with general observation 
— (secondly) tended to general happiness — (thirdly) 
preserved a uniform connection between cause and 
effect, evil and remedy, in all situations. 



SAMUEL PEARCE, 271 

" I would then apply these data to the princi- 
ples held on the one side by the deists, and on the 
other by the believers in revelation. In the appli- 
cation of the first, I would refer to the state of 
human nature. The deist contends for its purity 
and powers. Revelation declares its depravity and 
weakness. I compare these opposite declarations 
with the facts that fall under constant observation. 
Do I not see that there is a larger portion of vice in 
the world than of virtue ; that no man needs solicita- 
tion to evil, but every man a guard against it ; and 
that thousands bewail their subjection to lusts which 
they have not power to subdue, Avhilst they live in 
moral slavery, and cannot burst the chain ? Which 
principle then shall I admit ? Will observation coun- 
tenance the deistical? I am convinced to the contrary ; 
and muit say, I cannot be a deist without becoming a 
fool ; and, to exalt my reason, I must deny my senses. 

" I take the second datum, and inquire which 
tends most to general happiness? To secure hap- 
piness, three things are necessary: — object, means, 
and motives. The question is — which points out 
the true source of happiness ; which directs to the 
best means of attaining it; and which furnishes me 
with the most powerful motives to induce my pur- 
suit of it ? If I take a deist for my tutor, he tells 
me that fame is the object; universal accommoda- 
tion of manners to interest the means; and self-love 
the spring of action. Sordid teacher I From him I 



272 MEMOIR OF 

turn to Jesus, [lis better voice informs me that the 
source of felicity is the friendship of my God ; that 
love to my Maker and love to man, expressed in all 
the noble and amiable effusions of devotion and be- 
nevolence, are the means ; and that the glory of 
God and the happiness of the universe must be 
my motives. Blessed Instructor ! thy dictates ap- 
prove themselves to every illuminated conscience, to 
every pious heart ! Do they not, my dear P— — , 
approve themselves to yours? 

" But I will not tire your patience by pursuing 
these remarks. Liule did I think of such amplifi- 
cation when I first took up my pen. O that I may 
have the joy of finding that these (at least well 
meant) endeavors to establish your piety have not 
been ungraciously received, nor wholly unprofitable 
to your mind ! I am encouraged to these effusions 
of friendship by that amiable self distrust which your 
letter expresses ; a temper not only becoming the 
earlier stages of life, but graceful in all its advancing 
periods. 

" Unspeakable satisfaction does it afford me to 
find that you are conscious of the necessity of ' first ' 
seeking assistance from heaven. Retain, my dear 
friend, this honorable, this equitable sentiment. ' In 
all thy ways acknowledge God, and he shall direct 
thy paths.' 

" I hope you will still be cautious in your intima- 
cies. You will irain more by a half hour's inter- 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 273 

course with God than the friendship of the whole 
college can impart. Too much acquaintance would 
he followed with a waste of that precious time, on 
the present improvement of which your future use- 
fulness and respectability in your profession depend. 
Like the bee, you may do best by sipping the 
sweets of every flower ; but, remember, the sweetest 
blossom is not the hive. 

" Yours very affectionately, S. P." 



No. III. 

To ft young lady at school, a daughter of one of the mcmbersof his church. 

" I cannot deny myself the pleasure which this 
opportunity affords me of expressing the concern I 
feel for your happiness, arising from the sincerest 
friendship — a friendship which the many amiable 
qualities you possess, together with the innumerable 
opportunities I have had of seeing them displayed, 
have taught me to form and perpetuate. 

" It affords me inexpressible pleasure to hear that 
you are so happy in your present situation — a situa- 
tion in which I rejoice to see you placed, because it 
is not merely calculated to embellish the manners, 
but to profit the soul. I hope that my dear Ann, 
amidst the various pursuits of an ornamental or sci- 
entific nature which she may adopt, will not omit 
that first, that great concern, the dedication of her 
heart to God. To this, my dear girl, every thing 



274 MEMOIR OF 

invites you that is worthy of your attention. The 
dignity of a rational and immortal soul, the condition 
of human nature, the gracious truths and promises 
of God, the sweetness and usefulness of religion, the 
comfort it yields in affliction, the security it affords 
in temptation, the support it gives in death, and the 
prospects it opens of life everlasting ; all these con- 
siderations, backed with the uncertainty of life, the 
solemnity of judgment, the terrors of hell, and the 
calls of conscience and of God — all demand your 
heart for the blessed Jehovah. This, and nothing 
short of this, is true religion. You have often 
heard, and often written on religion : it is time you 
should feel it now. O what a blessedness Avill at- 
tend your hearty surrender of yourself to the God 
and Father of men ! Methinks I see all the angels 
of God rejoicing at the sight, all the saints in heaven 
partaking of their joy ; Jesus himself, who died for 
sinners, gazing on you with delight ; your own 
heart filled with peace and joy in believing; and a 
thousand streams of goodness flowing from your 
renovated soul to refresh the aged saint, and to en- 
courage your fellow-youth to seek first the kingdom 
of heaven, and press on to God. But O, should I 
be mistaken ! Alas, alas — I cannot bear the thought, 
O thou Savior of sinners and God of love, take 
captive the heart of my dear young friend, and make 
her truly willing to be wholly thine ! 

" If you can find freedom, do oblige me with a 



SAML'EL PEARCE. 275 

letter on the state of relig-ion in your own soul, and 
be assured of every sympathy or advice that I am 
capable of feeling or giving. S. P." 

No. IV. 

T6 a young gentlcmao in Dublin, writtco soon after Mr. P.'s feturn 
from that city. 

•'Dear Master R. 

" Your letter of the 21st of July gave me no small 
degree of pleasure, and should have been answered 
long before now, had not my numerous engage- 
ments at home compelled me to suspend my corres- 
pondence abroad. Except one letter, which I sent 
to Dublin to inform rny friends of my safe return, 
this is the first day in which I have found time to 
v/rite to Ireland since I left it. You will not, there- 
fore, think me forgetful of you, or unconcerned about 
\'Our prosperity: believe me, from the first conver- 
sation I had with you to the present moment, I have 
felt no small degree of solicitude for your eternal 
interests. Happy, indeed, shall I be to find that 
you continue anxious to secure them ; for what 
are all the honors, the pleasures, or the wealth of 
this world, when compared with the spiritual and 
abiding blessings of religion 7 Could we insure all 
that is esteemed by men, and en'py it uninterruptedly 
for a thousand ages, yet, when those ages have 
passed, how miserable should we be without religion ! 



276 MEMOIR or 

But life is short, and the pleasures of it are embit- 
tered by many crosses and trials, so that our earthly 
comforts yield but little good, 'nor yield that little 
long.' It is, therefore, most blessed advice that our 
Savior gives, John, 6 : 27 : ' Labor not for the 
bread which perisheth, but for that bread which en- 
dureth to everlasting life,' &c. Observe, my dear 
young friend, what our Savior teaches you in these 
■words. 

" 1. That religion is to the soul what bread is to 
the body : it feeds, nourishes, and strengthens the 
mind. 2. This heavenly bread affords abiding 
comfort and support : it ' endures to everlasting 
life.' 3. The enjoyment of this sacred food deserves 
our most earnest pursuit. 'Labor' for it. Let your 
whole heart and soul be in this great business of re- 
ligion. If it be not sought and secured, how tremen- 
dous the consequences ! the soul is lost — lost -lost 
for ever ! O seek, therefore, my dear youth, ' seek 
the Lord while he may be found, call upon him 
while he is near,' draw nigh to him, and he will 
draw nigh to you. 4. It must be received, not as 
the reward of any good thing in you, or for any 
good thing to be done by you : ' The Son of man 
will give it to you.' Yes, were we to have nothing 
but what we deserve, our best portion would be hell ; 
but, ' of his mercy he saves us, according to his own 
purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ 
before the world began.' 2 Tim. 1 : 9, From the 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 277 

mercy of Christ you must receive every thing. 
Here you must apply for pardon. Here you must 
come for wisdom. Here you must receive strength 
and comfort. ' All is in Christ, who of God is made 
unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctifica- 
tion, and redemption.' 1 Cor. 1 : 30. 

No. V. 

To a young Minister, on preparation for the PulpiL 
*' My dear Brotber, 

" Your first letter gave me much pleasure. I hoped 
you would learn some useful lesson from the first 
Sabbath's disappointment. Every thing is good that 
leads us to depend more simply on the Lord. Could 
I choose my frames, I would say respecting industry 
in preparation for public work, as is frequently said 
respecting Christian obedience, I would apply as 
closely as though I expected no help from the Lord, 
whilst I would depend upon the Lord for assistance 
as though I had never made any preparation at all 
*' Your last has occasioned me some pain on your 
account, because it informs me that you have been 
• exceedingly tried in the pulpit :' but I receive satis- 
faction again from considering that the gloom of- 
midnight precedes the rising day, not only in the 
natural world, but frequently also in the Christian 
minister's experience. Do not be discouraged, my 
dear brother ; those whose labors God has been 
24 



273 MEMOIR OF 

pleased most eminently to bless, have generally had 
their days of prosperity ushered in with clouds and 
storms. You are in the sieve ; but the sieve is in' 
our Savior's hands ; and he will not suffer any thing 
but the chaff' to fall through, let him winnow us as 
often as he may. 

•' You ask direction of me, my dear brother, I am 
too inexperienced myself to be capable of directing 
others ; yet, if the little time I have been employed 
for God has furnished me with any thing worthy of 
communication, it will be imparted to no one with 
more readiness than to you, 

" I should advise you, when you have been dis- 
tressed by hesitation, to reflect whether it arose from 
an inability to recollect your .ideas, or to obtain words 
suited to convey them. If the former, I think these 
two directions may be serviceable : First, endeavor 
to think in a train. Let one idea depend upon ano- 
ther in your discourses, as one link does upon ano- 
ther in a chain. For this end I have found it neces- 
sary to arrange my subjects in the order of time. 
Thus, for instance — if speaking of the promises, 1 
would begin with those whi^h were suited to the 
earliest inquiries of a convinced soul, as pardon, as- 
sistance in prayer, wisdom, &c. ; then go to those 
parts of Christian experience which are usually sub- 
sequent to the former, as promises of support in af- 
flictions, deliverance from temptations, and persever- 
ance in grace ; closing with a review of those which 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 279 

speak of support in death, and final glory. Then all 
the varieties of description respecting the glory of 
heaven will follow in natural order ; as the enlarge- 
ment of the understanding, purification of the affec- 
tions, intc-course with saints, angels, and even Christ 
himself, which will be eternal. Thus beginning 
with the lowest marks of grace, and ascending step 
by step, you arrive at last to the fruition of faith. 
This mode is most natural and most pleasing to the 
hearers, as well as assisting to the preacher ; for one 
idea gives birth to another, and he can hardly help 
going forward regularly and easily. 

" Secondly, labor to render your ideas transparent 
to yourself Never offer to introduce a thought 
which you cannot see through before you enter the 
pulpit. You have read in Claude, that the best pre- 
parative to preach from a subject is to understand it : 
and I think Bishop Burnet says, no man properly 
understands any thing who cannot at any time re- 
present it to others. 

If your hesitation proceeds from a want of words, 
I should advise you — (1.) To read good and easy 
authors; Dr. Watts especially. (2.) To write a 
great part of your sermons, and for a while get at 
least the leading ideas of every head of discourse by 
heart, enlarging only at the close of every thought. 
(3.) Sometimes, as in the end of sermons, or when 
you preach in villages, start off in preaching beyond 
all you have premeditated. Fasten on some leading 



2S0 MEMOIR OF 

ideas ; as, the solemnity of death, the awfulncss of 
judgment, the necessity of a change of heart, the 
willingness of Christ to save, &c. Never mind how 
far you ramble from the point, so that you do not 
lose sight of it ; and, if your heart be any way warm, 
you will find some expressions then fall from your 
lips which your imagination could not produce in an 
age of studious application. (4.) Divest yourself of 
all fear. If you should break the rules of grammar, 
or put in or leave out a word, and recollect at the 
end of the sentence the impropriety ; unless it makes 
nonsense, or bad divinity, never try to mend it, but 
let it pass. If so, perhaps only a few would notice 
it; but, if you stammer in trying to mend it, you 
w\\\ expose yourself to all the congregation. 

'• In addition to all I have said, you know where 
to look, and from whom to seek that wisdom and 
strength which only God can give. To him I re- 
commend you, my dear brother, assuring you of my 
real esteem for you, and requesting you will not iliil 
to pray for the least of saints, but 

" Yours affectionately, S. P." 



CONCLUDING REFLECTIONS. 

The great ends of Christian biography are in- 
struction and example. By faithfully describing the 
lives of men eminent for godliness, we not only cm- 



SAMUEL PEARCE 281 

balm their memory, but furnish ourselves with fresh 
materials and motives for a holy life. It is abun- 
dantly more impressive to view the religion of Jesus 
as operating in a living character, than to contemplate 
it abstractedly. For this reason, we may suppose, 
the Lord the Spirit has condescended to exhibit first 
and principally the life of Christ; and, after his, that 
of many of his eminent followers. And for this rea- 
son he, by his holy influences, still furnishes the 
church with now and then a singular example of 
godliness, which it is our duty to notice and record. 
There can be no reasonable doubt that the life of 
Mr. Pearce ought to be considered as one of these 
examples. May that same Divine Spirit who had 
manifestly so great a hand in forming his character, 
teach us to derive from it both instruction and edifi- 
cation ! 

1. In him we may see the holy effi^cacy, and, by 
consequence, the truth of the Christian religioji. It 
was long since asked, " Who is he that overcometh 
the world, but he who believeth that Jesus is the Son 
of God ?" This question contained a challenge to 
men of all religions who were then upon the earth. 
Idolatry had a gr^^at diversity of species, every nation 
worshiping its own gods, and in modes peculiar to 
itself: philosophers also were divided into numerous 
sects, each flattering itself that it had found the truth : 
even the Jews had their divisions; their Pharisees, 
Sadducees, and Essenes; but, great as many of them 
24* 



283 MEMOIR or 

were m deeds of divers kinds, an apostle could look 
ihem all in the face and ask, Who is he that over- 
cometh the world ? The same question might be 
safely asked in every succeeding age. The various 
kinds of religions that still prevail ; the Pagan, Ma- 
hometan, Jewish, Papal, or Protestant, may form the 
exteriors of man according to their respective models : 
but where is the man amongst them, save the true 
believer in Jesus, that overcometh the world 7 Men 
may cease from particular evils, and assume a very 
different character ; may lay aside their drunkenness, 
blasphemies, or debaucheries, and take up with a 
kind of monkish austerity, and yet all amount to no- 
thing more than an exchange of vices. The lusts of 
the flesh will on many occasions give place to those 
of the mind ; but to overcome the world is another 
thing. By embracing the doctrine of the cross, to 
feel not merely a dread of the consequences of sin, 
but a holy abhorrence of its nature, and, by convers- 
ing with invisible realities, to become regardless of 
the best and fearless of the worst that this Avorld has 
to dispense, — this is the effect of genuine Christian- 
ity, and this is a standing proof of its divine original. 
Let the most inveterate enemy of revelation have 
witnessed the disinterested benevolence of a Paul, a 
Peter, or a John, and, whether he would own it or 
not, his conscience m.ust have borne testimony that 
this is true religion. The same may be said of Sa- 
muel Pearce ; whether the doctrine he preached 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 283 

found a place in the hearts of his hearers or not, his 
spirit and life approved themselves to their con- 
sciences. 

2. In him we see how much may he done for God 
in a little time. If his death had been foreknown by 
his friends, some mig^ht have hesitated whether it 
was worth while for him to engage in the work of 
the ministry for so short a period: yet, if we take a 
view of his labors, perhaps there are few lives pro- 
ductive of a greater portion of good. That life is not 
always the longest which is spun out to the greatest 
extent of days. The best of all lives amounted but 
to thirty-tliree years ; and the most important works 
pertaining to that were wrought in the last three. 
There is undoubtedly a way of rendering a short 
life a long one, and a long life a short one, by filling 
or not filling it vvith proper materials. That time 
which is squandered away in sloth, or trifling pur- 
suits, forms a kind of blank in human life : in look- 
ing it over there is nothing for the mind to rest upon ; 
and a whole life so spent, whatever number of years it 
rnay contain, must appear, upon reflection, short and 
vacant, in comparison of one filled up with valuable 
acquisitions and holy actions. It is like the space 
between us and the sun, which, though immensely 
greater than that which is traversed in a profitable 
journey, yet, being all empty space, the mind goes 
over it in much less time, and without any satisfac- 
tion. If " that life be long which answers life's great 



284 MEMOIR OF 

end," Mr. Pearce may assuredly be said to have come 
to his grave in a good old age. And might we not 
all do much more than we do, if our hearts were 
more in our work ? Where this is wanting, or ope- 
rates but in a small degree, difficulties are magnified 
into impossibilities ; a lion is in the way of extra- 
ordinary exertion ; or, if we be induced to engage in 
something of this kind, it will be at the expense of 
a uniform attention to ordinary duties. But some 
will ask, How are our hearts to be in our work ? 
Mr. Pearce's heart was habitually in his ; and that 
which kept alive the sacred flame in him appears to 
have been, — the constant habit of conversing with 
divine truth, and walking with God in private. 

3. In him we see, in clear and strong colors, to 
what a degree of solid peace and joy true religion 
will raise us, even in the present world. A little re- 
ligion, it has been justly said, will make us miser- 
able : but a great deal will make us happy. The 
one will do little more than keep the conscience alive, 
while our numerous defects and inconsistencies are 
perpetually furnishing it with materials to scourge 
us ; the other keeps the heart alive, and leads us to 
drink deep at the fountain of joy. Hence it is, in a 
great degree, that so much of the spirit of bondage, 
and so little of the spirit of adoption, prevails among 
Christians. Religious enjoyments with us are rather 
occasional than habitual ! or, if in some instances it 
be otherwise, we are ready to suspect that it is sup- 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 285 

ported in part by the strange fire of enthusiasm, and 
not by the pure flame of scriptural devotion. But, 
in Mr. Pearce, we saw a devotion ardent, steady, 
pure, and persevering ; kindled, as we may say, at 
the ahar of God ; like the fire of the temple, it went 
not out by night nor by day. He seemed to have 
learnt that heavenly art, so conspicuous among the 
primitive Christians, of converting every thing he 
met into materials for love, and joy, and praise. 
Hence he "labored (as he expresses it) to exercise* 
most love to God when suffering most severely ;" 
and hence he so affectingly encountered the billows 
that overwhelmed his feeble frame, crying, 

•' Sweet affliction, vweel affl.iction, 
•' Singing as I wade to heaven." 

The constant happiness that he enjoyed in God 
was apparent in the effects of his sermons upon 
others. Whatever we feel ourselves, Vv^e shall ordi- 
narily communicate to our hearers ; and it has been 
already noticed, that one of the most distinguishing 
properties of his discourses was, that they inspired 
the serious mind with the liveliest sensations of hap- 
piness. They descended upon the audience, not in- 
deed like a transporting flood, but like a shower of 
dew, gently insinuating itself into the heart, insensi- 
bly dissipating its gloom, and gradually drawing 
forth the graces of faith, hope, love, and joy : while 
the countenance was brightened almost into a smile, 



286 MEMOIR OP 

tears of pleasure would rise, and glisten, and fall 
from the admiring eye. 

What a practical confutation did his life afford of 
the slander so generally cast upon the religion of 
Jesus, that it fills the mind with gloom and misery ! 
No ; leaving futurity out of the question, the whole 
world of unbelievers might be challenged to produce 
a character from among them who possessed half 
his enjoyments. 

4. From his example we are furnished with the 
greatest encouragement, while pursuing the path of 
duty, to place, our trust in God. The situation in 
which he left his family, we have seen ali'eady, was 
not owing to an indifference to their interests, or an 
improvident disposition, or the want of opportunity 
to have provided for them ; but to a steady and de- 
termined obedience to what he accounted the will of 
God. He felt deeply for them, and we all felt with 
him, and longed to be able to assure him, before his 
departure, that they would be amply provided for : 
but, owing to circumstances which have already been 
mentioned, this was more than Ave could do. This 
was a point in which he was called to die in faith : 
and indeed so he did. He appears to have had no 
idea of that flood of kindness which, immediately 
after his decease, flowed from the religious public : 
but he believed in God, and cheerfully left all with 
him. '• O that I could speak, (said he to Mrs. Pearce 
a little before his death,) I would tell the world to 



SAMUEL PEARCE. 28^ 

trust a faithful God. Sweet affliction : now it work- 
eih glory, glory !" And when she told him the 
workings of her mind, he answered, " O trust the 
Lord ! If he lift up the light of his countenance 
upon you, as he has done upon me this day, all your 
mountains will become mole-hills. I feel your situa- 
tion ; I feel your sorrows : but He Avho takes care 
of sparrows will care for you and my dear children." 

The liberal contributions which have since been 
made, though they do not warrant ministers in ge- 
neral to expect the same, and much less to neglect 
providing for their own families on such a presump- 
tion ; yet they must needs be considered as a singu- 
lar encouragement, when we are satisfied that we 
are in the path of duty, to be inordinately " careful 
for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and sup- 
plication, with thanksgiving, to let our requests be 
made known unto God." 

5. In him we see that the way to true excellence 
is not to affect eccentricity, nor to aspire after the 
performance of a few splendid actions ; but to fill up 
our lives tcith a sober, modest, sincere, affectionate, 
assiduous, and uniform conduct. Real greatness at- 
taches to character; and character arises from a 
course of action. The solid reputation of a merchant 
arises not from his having made his fortune by a few 
successful adventures ; but from a course of wise 
economy and honorable industry, which, gradually 
accumulating, advances by pence to shillings, and by 



288 MEMOIR OF SAMUKL PEARCE. 

shillings to pounds. The most excellent philoso* 
phers are not those who have dealt chiefly in splen- 
did speculation, and looked down upon the ordinary 
concerns of men as things beneath their notice ; but 
those who have felt their interests united with the 
interests of mankind, and bent their principal atten- 
tion to things of real and public utility. It is much 
the same in religion. We do not esteem a man for 
one, or two, or three good deeds, any farther than a.'j 
these deeds are indications of the real state of his 
mind. We do not estimate the character of Christ 
himself so much from his having givcm sight to the 
blind, or restored Lazarus from the grave, as from 
his going about continually doing good. 

These single attempts at great things are frequent- 
ly the efforts of a vain mind, which pants for fam.c, 
and has not patience to wait for it, nor discernment 
to know the way in which it is obtained. One pur- 
sues the shade, and it flies from him ; while another 
turns his back upon it, and it follows him. The 6ne 
aims to climb the rock, but falls ere he reaches the 
summit ; the other, in pursuit of a difTerent object, 
ere he is aware, possesses it ; seeking the approba- 
tion of his God, he finds with it that of his fellow 
Christians. 



THE END. 



