Google 



This is a digital copy of a book lhal w;ls preserved for general ions on library shelves before il was carefully scanned by Google as pari of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one thai was never subject 

to copy right or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often dillicull lo discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher lo a library and linally lo you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud lo partner with libraries lo digili/e public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order lo keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial panics, including placing Icchnical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make n on -commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request thai you use these files for 
personal, non -commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort lo Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each lile is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use. remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 

countries. Whether a book is slill in copyright varies from country lo country, and we can'l offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull lexl of 1 1 us book on I lie web 
al |_-.:. :.-.-:: / / books . qooqle . com/| 



SG53 



h. 



|EU§D$TANF©RDj« 
i UNIVERSITY 

— a ^~ 

— =^Lr|4BRARV- 



<*W-^ 



MEMOIR 



OF 



MRS. SARAH L. HUNTINGTON SMITH, 



LATE OF THB 



AMERICAN MISSION IN SYRIA. 






By EDWARD W. HOOKER, D. D. :.... 

« „ • 

""■— — "■— — — — — — — ^ 

f • ■ 

V 

••••• - 

THIfiD EDITION. •..-• m ~~ 

• • • v - - - 

• • • * 

• #••• * 

• !<■••» * — — — < 

■ ♦ - • : 

-*- - - 

«• w 

. - - 

----- " " „ 
- -■* - 
PUBLISHED BY THB • «.-••» 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, - * 5 -. -- 

100 NASSAU iTREET, HEW-YOML 



•A. . 



Entered according to Act of Congress, jn the year 1845, 

By T. R. Marvin, 
In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of Massachusetts. 



*■» 



Right of publishing transferred to the American Tract Society. 



'»■ .. -«. 



• • • i 



l *«*» •• • ••••• 

■»**• ••. •• 

• ••••• •••*• 

• *• ••. • • • 

, .V, ' 

• • • • • 



:- :•••••. 



» »• 



•• • 



fcWv » „ 



' • 



PREFACE. 



In preparing a new edition of the following Memoir, 
the compiler has availed himself of the suggestions of 
reviewers and readers, for its improvement in some 
points. 

It being his plan to devote the first five chapters to 
the delineation of Mrs. Smith's character, in some of 
its prominent and most interesting features, rather 
than to give a history, in the order of time ; dates 
of years were omitted, in tho«e chapters, to avoid 
giving perplexity to the reader. In the narrative of her 
missionary life, which commenced with her engage- 
ment in the Mohegan enterprise, the order of time is 
observed, and dates are given in full. 

In relation to the ancestry of Mrs. Smith, all the 
information is given in the present edition, which is 
well authenticated. Her supposed descent from the 
venerable John Robinson, of Leyden, is not ascertained 
with certainty. It has been traced no farther back 
than to William Robinson, who was in Dorchester, 
near Boston, in 1641, and whose relation to the ven- 
erable Puritan. is' still matter of tradition. 

Some additions have been made from the correspon- 
dence of Mrs. Smith ; partly from letters not received 
till after the publication of the first edition. A few ■ 
passages have been added from the original history of 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER XV. 

Thoughts on the world as a portion — Close occupation of time — A 
Moslem wedding— Views of her employment — Of a heavenly inher- 
itance — Interest in American friends — Engagement in apian for reli- 
gious visits, ............... 299 

CHAPTER XVI. 

Letter to the members of the Young Ladies' Academy, Norwich— Views 
of the effects of the mission — Climate — Importance of respectability of 
appearance in missionaries — Good Friday — Translation of an Arabic 
grammar— Spring and its' productions — Impediments to missionary , 
labors •^—Religious conversation — Health — School — Letter to Mrs. 
Temple, . ,.»• 303 

CHAPTER XVII. 

Failure of Mrs. Smith's health— Departure from Beyroot— Shipwreck — 
Arrival at Smyrna — Continued decline of health— Removal to Boojah 
— Last days — Death — Funeral, ~ ••••••• 320 



CHAPTER XVIII. 
Concluding Remarks, .........* »••.. ••..••••••••••» 360 



t 



X:'- ' 

i. 



MEMOIR. 



CHAPTER I. 

PARENTAGE AND ANCESTRY DEVELOPMENT OP YOUTHFUL 

CHARACTER RELIGIOUS .IMPRESSIONS EFFORTS IN SAB- 
BATH SCHOOL, AND VIEWS RESPECTING WANT OF PIETY 
IN TEACHERS HER CONVERSION. 

Sarah Lanman Huntington was born in Norwich, Con- 
necticut, June 18, 1802. Her father was JabezTrlon ting- 
ton, Esq. Her paternal grandfather was General Jedidiah 
Huntington, of New London ; favorably known as an officer 
in the American army in the war of the Revolution ; but 
better known, in later periods of his life, as devoted to 
works of pious benevolence, particularly as one of the 
early members of the American Board of Commissioners 
for Foreign Missions. 

It was a source of satisfaction to the subject of this 
Memoir, particularly after her entrance upon missionary 
engagements, that an ancestor whom she so much loved 
and revered, was in his lifetime a member of that Board, in- 
the service of which she was to go forth to the missionary 
work. Writing of him a few months before her decease, 
she remarked, " He Was far before his age in his liberal 
views of benevolei* (efforts. I shall never forget the interest 
with which' I stbod by his monument, in New London, just 
before my departure from America. I felt that his spirit 
^approved of the consecration I had made." Her paternal 

grandmother, Mrs. Faith Huntington, was daughter of the 
9 I* ,V 






10 MEMOIR OF 

Hon. Jonathan Trumbull, who was governor of the State 
of Connecticut in the time of the American Revolution ; a 
sister of the second governor of the same name, and also 
of Colonel John Trumbull, the eminent American painter. 
She was a woman of serious and devout piety. 

Her maternal grandfather was Peter L an man, Esq., of 
Norwich, a man of religious character; among whose an- 
cestors, in the county of Plymouth, Massachusetts, were 
several individuals of eminent piety. Her maternal grand- 
mother, the late Mrs. Sarah Lanman, whose name she bore, 
was a woman of strong mind and ardent piety; and proba- 
bly accomplished much for the formation of the character 
of this grand-daughter. 

Excellence of character is not secured by "birth or 
blood." It is yet due to the subject of this Memoir to say, 
that, through both the Trumbulls and the Lanmans, she was 
of true Puritan stock. Among her maternal ancestors was 
the Rev.^Joseph Coit, of Plainfield, Conn., who used, with 
much simplicity, to pray that his descendants " might be the 
children of God as long as the grass should grow and the 
brooks run." Among her ancient relatives in the same 
connection, was a devout maiden aunt ; of whom General 
iThomas, when leaving his family, on military duty, in the 
time of the French war in Canada, remarked, that he 
/" would willingly give Miss Lanman her board for her 
prayers." The Rev. Joshua Huntington, of the Old South 
Church, Boston, was a half-brother of her father. While 
residing in Boston, in attendance upon school, she felt the 
benefit of his influence, and that*of his wife, Mrs. Susan 
Huntington — whose biography is before the Christian 
world extensively. Her mother was a woman of decided 
Christian character. She died at the age of thirty-six, when 
Sarah was only seven. She is remembered to have conse- 
crated this daughter to God, with peculiar confidence of her 
acceptance in that solemn act. 

It is the object of this chapter to give a brief sketch 
of Miss Huntington's early years, including the period at 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 11 

Which her conversion to God took place ; and (o show what 
were some of the early developments of her character, in 
those traits in which she subsequently shone so brightly. 
Not that the natural elements of human character are of ! 
themselves the foundation of Christian usefulness ; but thati 
these are to be valued when sanctified by grace, consecrated 
to God, and diligently employed for the divine service and/ 
glory, and for the good of a lost world. 

Being of a delicate constitution when a child, there was 
some difficulty in training and governing her. A fond 
nurse, sometimes, by injudicious kindness, did much to 
counteract the corrections of her parents. Under these in- 
fluences, a character was formed of a nervous and some- 
what peculiar temperament; affectionate and sensible to 
favors, fearful of pain and suffering; yet venturesome to an 
extreme, and decided and tenacious in opinions. These 
traits gave occasion to friends to say, that she promised to 
make either a very good or a very bad person. -"Phey were 
rendered especially prominent by a protracted sickness 
when she was about six years old, which confined her to a 
cot, by the fireside; and also by the death of her mother, 
which event deprived her of the benefit of maternal influ- 
ence for a time. Her quick sensibilities were at this age 
often tortured by the extreme severity of a school-mistress-, 
under whose instruction she was placed. So deep was the 
impression made by the harshness and frequent punishments 
of this teacher, that when, in riper years, she visited her on 
her death-bed, in the alms-house, she actually found herself 
shrinking before one of those expressions of countenance at 
•which she had so often trembled in her childish days at 
school. A playful allusion to this teacher is found in one 
of her letters to a brother in the latter years of her life ; in 
which she speaks of " what our quondam school-ma'am used 
to say, and which required the utmost stretch of infant faith 
to credit — 'If I did not love you, I should not whip you.' " 

She was the subject of very early smugglings of a sinral 
heart against the claims of the law of God. Once,, when she 



13 MEMOIR OF 

was placed in an apartment alone, as a punishment for 
improper conduct, and told that God was displeased with 
her, in an ebullition of excited feeling, as she afterwards 
confessed, she stamped with her foot upon the floor, and 
exclaimed, "I hate God." Afterwards, when under con- 
viction of her sins, immediately previous to her conversion, 
she feared that this outbreaking of her natural heart could 
not be forgiven. 

But with these things in childhood, showing that she was 
a subject of that native depravity in which all the human race 
are " guilty before God," she exhibited, as she was advancing 
in the years of youth, many of the virtues which are useful 
and lovely; and probably went as far in those excellences 
of natural character on which many endeavor to build their 
hope of salvation, as almost any unconverted persons do ; 
carrying with her, however, the clear and often disturbing 
conviction, that the best virtues which she practised were 
not holiness, nor any evidence of fitness for heaven. 

She was exceedingly attached to her friends. Her father 
was almost her idol. The affection for her mother, who 
was so early removed by death, she transferred, with exem- 
plary tenderness, to her step-mother; and it is believed the 
instances are rare in which the parties are uniformly happier 
in each other, in that relation, than were Mrs. Huntington 
and this daughter. Her warmth and tenderness of affection 
as a sister were also peculiar and exemplary. Her child- 
hood and youth were marked with great delicacy of mind 
and manners ; diligence, promptitude, and efficiency in her 
undertakings ; love of system and fondness for study, im- 
provement, and the acquirement of useful knowledge, joined # 
with a great desire to answer the wishes and expectations 
of her friends. Dutifulness and respect for her parents and 
grandparents; reverence for her superiors generally; readi- 
ness to receive advice or admonition ; a just appreciation of 
the good influence of others, and a spirit of cautiousness 
respecting whatever might be injurious to her own charac- 
ter, were also prominent traits in her habits. Disinter- 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 13 

estedness and self-denial for the benefit of others were 
conspicuous. Long before she became a subject of divine 
grace, she took an interest in various objects of benevolence, 
particularly Sabbath schools; and exhibited that spirit of 
enterprise, patience, and perseverance, in aiding the efforts 
of others, which constituted so prominent an excellence in 
her character in the later years of her life. Self-govern- 
ment ; economy in the use of her time and pocket money ; 
tastefulness in dress, without extravagance; and a careful 
and conscientious consideration of her father's resources, 
also were observable in her early habits. These traits are 
not mentioned because they arc not found in many other 
young persons, but because they appeared in her in an 
uncommon degree. 

Although she entered with zest into the amusements of 
her young friends, yet she preferred those relaxations of 
the mind which were rational, intellectual, and useful. 
While in Boston at school, she writes to her mother, " I 

have not yet been to the theatre ; but Mrs. wishes me 

to go once ; and she says she shall take me very soon ; but 
I should not care if I did not go at all." She afterwards 
went once, and wrote to her friends that she had no desire 

to go again. In another letter she says, " Miss called 

to see me, and invited me there on Tf hursday to a social 
cotillion party ; but I declined, and told her I should prefer 
visiting them some afternoon when they expected no 
company. Their party probably turned out quite a ball." 
Such a preference of an unpretending and quiet visit, 
instead of the gayety and amusements of a fashionable and 
splendid party, and this in a young miss of sixteen, not 
pious, and therefore liable to yield to such a temptation, 
indicated a soundness of judgment, and good sense, not 
often surpassed at such an age. 

She had a cast of mind, though not gay and frivolous, yet 
capable of that playfulness, which under proper regulation 
is very pleasant in the intercourse of near friends. Her 
early letters, when at school particularly, were eal\K^&fc?L 



14 MEMOIR OF 

with some flashes of wit But she seems to have been 
aware that wit is rather a dangerous talent, and to have 
repressed, rather than cultivated it, as she grew up to 
womanhood. This trait in her mind occasionally disclosed 
itself, in subsequent life; yet the instance is not recollected 
by the writer, in which she indulged in the play of wit at 
the expense of the feelings of others. She used it, when at 
all, to enliven the intercourse of friendship, not to sport 
with the feelings, or interrupt the happiness of those 
around her. 

She was most assiduously and conscientiously attentive 
!o the proprieties of her sex, and of social life; and it is 
believed that few young ladies pass through the period of 
youth, having said or done fewer careless or indiscreet 
things. 

In these and other traits of character disclosed in her 
early years, there was much to make her lovely in the 
different relations of life, and to give promise of usefulness, 
ability to exert influence, to command respect, and even to 
shine in any circle of society. 

With all, however, which made her to be esteemed and 
respected by her friends and acquaintances, she was con- 
scious that she had not the religion of Christ dwelling in her 
heart. Her early letters contain passages showing that she 
was sometimes thoughtful of God, and of the interests of her 
own soul, and of eternity. Expressions of just and sound 
specul alive views of divine truth, and of the nature of 
religion, often appeared in her letters to her friends. But 
they were accompanied with expressions of her sense of 
unfitness to speak or write on such subjects; of her 
consciousness that as yet she had "no hope," and was 
11 without God in the world." 

She did not believe that in social virtues or intellectual 
endowments there was any thing on which she could rest 
for acceptance with God and hope of heaven. She had 
many pious friends, and doubtless was the subject of their 
solicitude and earnest prayer?, that one having such traits 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 15 

of character might not fail of the salvation of the gospel. 
But, much as she loved them, and earnestly as they desired 
to welcome her to the enjoyment of the Christian hope, 
she seems never to have attempted to persuade herself, or 
to have allowed others to persuade her, that she was a 
Christian. And facts, indicating the natural aversion of 
the heart to religious things, justify the remark, that long 
did she shine in the virtues of social and domestic life, and 
exhibit uncommonly fine traits of. character, before she 
learned to bow, as a sinner, at " the cross of our Lord Jesus 
Christ." 

No specially serious impressions were made upon her 
mind until she was twelve years old. At the Thanksgiving 
of that year, her parents went to New London to visit her 
grandfather ; and left her to entertain a party of her young 
friends. One of them — it being the evening of the usual 
weekly prayer-meeting — left the company when the hour 
of the meeting arrived, in order to attend it. After she 
was gone, it was remarked, " Maria is serious ; " at which 
Sarah exclaimed, " Well ! no one will say of me that Jam 
serious." She even had such a dislike to that meeting, as a 
stated exercise, that she once secreted herself, to avoid 
attending it with her parents. But in the spring succeeding 
the time above mentioned, a beloved female friend — now, we 
trust, a saint in heaven, — and to whom, more than to any 
one else, she attributed the permanency of her religious 
impressions, and her ultimate conversion, — being with her 
one evening, as the full moon was rising, their attention was 
attracted towards it. They conversed upon its beauty, and 
upon its being the work of God ; and as they indulged 
in youthful scntimentalism, her heart was softened. Her 
friend, perceiving it, seized the favorable moment, which she 
had probably been seeking, and invited her to attend 
the conference meeting. To this she consented, with the 
utmost willingness. 

Her pastor, the Rev. Alfred Mitchell, held stated re- 
ligious meetings, at this time, for the benefit of the young. 



16 MEMOIR OF 

These she attended, with varying effect; sometimes con- 
eider ably interested, and sometimes not at all. But though 
the instructions given were excellent, her feelings were not 
brought to a crisis. Among her associates was the pious 
friend before mentioned, (who left the Thanksgiving party for 
the prayer-meeting,) and whose society she closely culti- 
vated. With her, at this time, she was led to carry on a 
frequent correspondence on religious subjects. But neither 
did this lead to a decisive result. 

In her fourteenth year, a number of young ladies, under 
the direction of a member of the church, commenced a 
Sabbath school. In this she took a class. She gave much 
attention to it, and her mind was deeply interested. And 
though neither she nor any of the original teachers were 
pious, she was in after life much gratified by a call from 
a young female, who informed her, that, while in her class 
at that time, she received, from what she said, impressions 
that were the means of her conversion. In this same 
Sabbath school she had a class, when called to leave her 
native country for the missionary service. 

Here it may be proper to advert to her sentiments and 
feelings relative to her peculiar position, as a teacher in a 
Sabbath school, without personal religion. It appears that, 
at a particular time, after the enlargement of the school, 
and when reflecting with much solicitude on this subject, 
she offered to her associates in the work her resignation 
of her place as a teacher. This drew from one of them 
a tender and earnest expostulation with, her, in a note, from 
which the following extract is made : — 

" You gave early and freely your talents to the cause of 
the Redeemer, externally; wherefore should the heart be 
withheld T He who claims it is ' altogether lovely.' If, 
instead of retiring from the little circle whose exertions 
have been combined in his cause, you should, this after- 
noon, in the sanctuary, — where such offerings are accepted, 
— freely yield and sweetly consecrate your all to his service, 
the moment will be reviewed with grateful delight, through 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 13 

estedness and self-denial for the benefit of others were 
conspicuous. Long before she became a subject of divine 
grace, she took an interest in various objects of benevolence, 
particularly Sabbath schools; and exhibited that spirit of 
enterprise, patience, and perseverance, in aiding the efforts 
of others, which constituted so prominent an excellence in 
her character in the later years of her life. Self-govern- 
ment ; economy in the use of her time and pocket money ; 
tastefulness in dress, without extravagance; and a careful 
and conscientious consideration of her father's resources, 
also were observable in her early habits. These traits are 
not mentioned because they are not found in many other 
young persons, but because they appeared in her in an 
uncommon degree. 

Although she entered with zest into the amusements of 
her young friends, yet she preferred those relaxations of 
the mind which were rational, intellectual, and useful. 
While in Boston at school, she writes to her mother, " I 

have not yet been to the theatre ; but Mrs. wishes me 

to go once ; and she says she shall take me very soon ; but 
I should not care if I did not go at all." She afterwards 
went once, and wrote to her friends that she had no desire 

to go again. In another letter she says, " Miss called 

to see me, and invited me there on Tf hursday to a social 
cotillion party; but I declined, and told her I should prefer 
visiting them some afternoon when they expected no 
company. Their party probably turned out quite a ball." 
Such a preference of an unpretending and quiet visit, 
instead of the gayety and amusements of a fashionable and 
splendid party, and this in a young miss of sixteen, not 
pious, and therefore liable to yield to such a temptation, 
indicated a soundness of judgment, and good sense, not 
often surpassed at such an age. 

She had a cast of mind, though not gay and frivolous, yet 
capable of that playfulness, which under proper regulation 
is very pleasant in the intercourse of near friends. Her 
early letters, when at school particularly, were enlivened 



14 MEMOIR OF 

with some flashes of wit But she seems to have been 
aware that wit is rather a dangerous talent, and to have 
repressed, rather than cultivated it, as she grew up to 
womanhood. This trait in her mind occasionally disclosed 
itself, in subsequent life; yet the instance is not recollected 
by the writer, in which she indulged in the play of wit at 
the expense of the feelings of others. She used it, when at 
all, to enliven the intercourse of friendship, not to sport 
with the feelings, or interrupt the happiness of those 
around her. 

She was most assiduously and conscientiously attentive 
!o the proprieties of her sex, and of social life; and it is 
believed that few young ladies pass through the period of 
youth, having said or done fewer careless or indiscreet 
things. 

In these and other traits of character disclosed in her 
early years, there was much to make her lovely in the 
different relations of life, and to give promise of usefulness, 
ability to ex^rt influence, to command respect, and even to 
shine in any circle of society. 

With all, however, which made her to be esteemed and 
respected by her friends and acquaintances, she was con- 
scious that she had not the religion of Christ dwelling in her 
heart. Her early letters contain passages showing that she 
was sometimes thoughtful of God, and of the interests of her 
own soul, and of eternity. Expressions of just and sound 
speculative views of divine truth, and of the nature of 
religion, often appeared in her letters to her friends. But 
thoy were accompanied with expressions of her sense of 
unfitness to speak or write on such subjects; of her 
consciousness that as yet she had "no hope,'' and was 
" without God in the world." 

She did not believe that in social virtues or intellectual 
endowments there was any thing on which she could rest 
for acceptance with God and hope of heaven. She had 
many pious friends, and doubtless was the subject of their 
solicitude and earnest prayer?, that one having such traits 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 15 

of character might not fail of the salvation of the gospel. 
But, much as she loved them, and earnestly as they desired 
to welcome her to the enjoyment of the Christian hope, 
she seems never to have attempted to persuade herself, or 
to have allowed others to persuade her, that she was a 
Christian. And facts, indicating the natural aversion of 
the heart to religious things, justify the remark, that long 
did she shine in the virtues of social and domestic life, and 
exhibit uncommonly fine traits of. character, before she 
learned to bow, as a sinner, at " the cross of our Lord Jesus 
Christ." 

No specially serious impressions were made upon her 
mind until she was twelve years old. At the Thanksgiviug 
of that year, her parents went to New London to visit her 
grandfather ; and left her to entertain a party of her young 
friends. One of them — it being the evening of the usual 
weekly prayer-meeting — left the company when the hour 
of the meeting arrived, in order to attend it. After she 
was gone, it was remarked, " Maria is serious ; " at which 
Sarah exclaimed, " Well ! no one will say of me that Jam 
serious." She even had such a dislike to that meeting, as a 
stated exercise, that she once secreted herself, to avoid 
attending it with her parents. But in the spring succeeding 
the time above mentioned, a beloved female friend — now, we 
trust, a saint in heaven, — and to whom, more than to any 
one else, she attributed the permanency of her religious 
impressions, and her ultimate conversion, — being with her 
one evening, as the full moon was rising, their attention was 
attracted towards it. They conversed upon its beauty, and 
upon its being the work of God ; and as they indulged 
in youthful scntimcntalism, her heart was softened. Her 
friend, perceiving it, seized the favorable moment, which she 
had probably been seeking, and invited her to attend 
the conference meeting. To this she consented, with the 
utmost willingness. 

Her pastor, the Rev. Alfred Mitchell, held stated re- 
ligious meetings, at this time, for the benefit of the young. 



]6 MEMOIR OF 

These she attended, with varying effect; sometimes con- 
siderably interested, and sometimes not at all. But though 
the instructions given were excellent, her feelings were not 
brought to a crisis. Among her associates was the pious 
friend before mentioned, (who left the Thanksgiving party for 
the prayer-meeting,) and whose society she closely culti- 
vated. With her, at this time, she was led to carry on a 
frequent correspondence on religious subjects. But neither 
did this lead to a decisive result. 

In her fourteenth year, a number of young ladies, under 
the direction of a member of the church, commenced a 
Sabbath school. In this she took a class. She gave much 
attention to it, and her mind was deeply interested. And 
though neither she nor any of the original teachers were 
pious, she was in after life much gratified by a call from 
a young female, who informed her, that, while in her class 
at that time, she received, from what she said, impressions 
that were the means of her conversion. In this same 
Sabbath school she had a class, when called to leave her 
native country for the missionary service. 

Here it may be proper to advert to her sentiments and 
feelings relative to her peculiar position, as a teacher in a 
Sabbath school, without personal religion. It appears that, 
at a particular time, after the enlargement of the school, 
and when reflecting with much solicitude on this subject, 
she offered to her associates in the work her resignation 
of her place as a teacher. This drew from one of them 
a tender and earnest expostulation with, her, in a note, from 
which the following extract is made : — 

" You gave early and freely your talents to the cause of 
the Redeemer, externally ; wherefore should the heart be 
withheld T He who claims it is ' altogether lovely.' If, 
instead of retiring from the little circle whose exertions 
have been combined in his cause, you should, this after- 
noon, in the sanctuary, — where such offerings are accepted, 
— freely yield and sweetly consecrate your all to his service, 
the moment will be reviewed with grateful delight, through 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 17 

the ages of futurity. O come, dear Sarah, and decide ; 
' come with us, to our Immanuel, and he will do us good.' 
Even this afternoon, let the report be circulated in heaven, 
that another is escaped from the snare of the fowler ; is add- 
ed to the trophies of the cross ; become assimilated in spirit 
to their happier community, and prepared to do much good 
here, and to receive its bright rewards hereafter." 

To this appeal she replied, in a note which seems to 
have been first penciled upon the blank pages of her 
friend's paper, and of which all that can be deciphered is 
the following : — 

" Accept, my dear Miss M c Curdy, my sincere gratitude 
for your kind advice. And oh! that I could tell you I 
had followed it. But no ; another Sabbath is closing, which 
is another witness of the goodness of God, to my own 
condemnation. But with regard to my remaining longer a 
teacher in the Sabbath school — let me assure you my 
determination respecting it, which I communicated to you 
this morning, is not a hasty one. I have long felt very un- 
suitable for this office, and have reflected much. Do not 
think I leave it because the task has become unpleasant 
to me, — far from £ But I consider it of the utmost 
importance, that where religious instruction is given, it 
should be given by those who have experienced religion 
in their own hearts ; who have been sanctified by divine 
grace ; and who, feeling the true value of their own souls, 
can pray and labor earnestly for the salvation of others. 

" I think the school would be more prosperous and more 
respectable, if all the teachers were professors of religion. 
If I leave it, one, and I doubt not the only Achan, will be 
removed. If it should please God ever to renew my heart, 
I may be more fit to be intrusted with the care of little 
immortals. But, till then, do not urge my continuance, 
any longer, a curse to this noble and heavenly institution/' 

These notes being without date, the time of the occur- 
rence to which they relate is uncertain. It is believed, 
however, to have been when several persons of her own age 



16 MEMOIR OF 

These she attended, with varying effect; sometimes con- 
sider ably interested, and sometimes not at all. But though 
the instructions given were excellent, her feelings were not 
brought to a crisis. Among her associates was the pious 
friend before mentioned, (who left the Thanksgiving party for 
the prayer-meeting,) and whose society she closely culti- 
vated. With her, at this time, she was led to carry on a 
frequent correspondence on religious subjects. But neither 
did this lead to a decisive result. 

In her fourteenth year, a number of young ladies, under 
the direction of a member of the church, commenced a 
Sabbath school. In this she took a class. She gave much 
attention to it, and her mind was deeply interested. And 
though neither she nor any of the original teachers were 
pious, she was in after life much gratified by a call from 
a young female, who informed her, that, while in her class 
at that time, she received, from what she said, impressions 
that were the means of her conversion. In this same 
Sabbath school she had a class, when called to leave her 
native country for the missionary service. 

Here it may be proper to advert to her sentiments and 
feelings relative to her peculiar position, as a teacher in a 
Sabbath school, without personal religion. It appears that, 
at a particular time, after the enlargement of the school, 
and when reflecting with much solicitude on this subject, 
she offered to her associates in the work her resignation 
of her place as a teacher. This drew from one of them 
a tender and earnest expostulation with, her, in a note, from 
which the following extract is made : — 

" You gave early and freely your talents to the cause of 
the Redeemer, externally ; wherefore should the heart be 
withheld T He who claims it is ' altogether lovely.' If, 
instead of retiring from the little circle whose exertions 
have been combined in his cause, you should, this after- 
noon, in the sanctuary, — where such offerings are accepted, 
— freely yield and sweetly consecrate your all to his service, 
the moment will be reviewed with grateful delight, through 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 17 

the ages of futurity. O come, dear Sarah, and decide ; 
' come with us, to our Immanuel, and he will do us good. 9 
Even this afternoon, let the report be circulated in heaven, 
that another is escaped from the snare of the fowler ; is add- 
ed to the trophies of the cross ; become assimilated in spirit 
to their happier community, and prepared to do much good 
here, and to receive its bright rewards hereafter." 

To this appeal she replied, in a note which seems to 
have been first penciled upon the blank pages of her 
friend's paper, and of which all that can be deciphered is 
the following : — 

" Accept, my dear Miss M c Curdy, my sincere gratitude 
for your kind advice. And oh! that I could tell you I 
had followed it. But no ; another Sabbath is closing, which 
is another witness of the goodness of God, to my own 
condemnation. But with regard to my remaining longer a 
teacher in the Sabbath school — let me assure you my 
determination respecting it, which I communicated to you 
this morning, is not a hasty one. I have long felt very un- 
suitable for this office, and have reflected much. Do not 
think I leave it because the task has become unpleasant 
to me, — far from jL But I consider it of the utmost 
importance, that where religious instruction is given, it 
should be given by those who have experienced religion 
in their own hearts ; who have been sanctified by divine 
grace ; and who, feeling the true value of their own souls, 
can pray and labor earnestly for the salvation of others. 

" I think the school would be more prosperous and more 
respectable, if all the teachers were professors of religion. 
If I leave it, one, and I doubt not the only Achan, will be 
removed. If it should please God ever to renew my heart, 
I may be more fit to be intrusted with the care of little 
immortals. But, till then, do not urge my continuance, 
any longer, a curse to this noble and heavenly institution." 

These notes being without date, the time of the occur- 
rence to which they relate is uncertain. It is believed, 
however, to have been when several persons of her own age 



18 MEMOIR OF 

were in a state of deep anxiety on the subject of religion. 
The genera] state of the church, at the time, being one 
of declension, the solicitude of these inquirers did not 
result in a saving change. 

It was at the age of fifteen that she went to a boarding- 
school in Boston, where she remained a year. Here she 
had no deeply serious impressions ; and sometimes felt even 
a reluctance to visit at her uncle Huntington's, (where she 
spent her Sabbaths, and with whose family she attended 
church at the Old South,) because she was liable to hear 
more religious conversation than was agreeable. She was 
much absorbed in her studies, with some degree of ambi- 
tion; and for success in them she used to pray. 

After returning to her father's house, her life was a worldly 
one, spent much in company. At the age of eighteen, in 
July, a young relative, an intimate friend of her sister, 
sickened and died. Sarah was at that time on a visit 
abroad ; and her sister, in a letter, informing her of the 
event, addressed a few words to her conscience. Though 
very few, they were "as a nail fastened in a sure place." 
On returning, after a few days, she found that this death had 
made much impression among the Mnng. Meetings were 
held, to pray that it might be sanctifiea to them. These she 
attended ; but found great occasion for complaint against 
herself, that she had so little sensibility, though she doubtless 
had much. 

The following note to the Christian friend who addressed 
to her the one already quoted, seems to have been written 
about this time : — 

" In what words shall I express to you, my dear Miss 
M c Curdy, my sincere thanks for the affectionate and ex- 
cellent advice which you have given me? And be assured 
I receive it with pleasure, as coming from one whom I 
consider as belonging to the fold of the dear Redeemer. 
And can I hesitate to place confidence in the friend I so 
highly esteem? Oh! could your kind prayers and wishes 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 19 

be answered, I might hope to join with you, and the dear 
saints who have gone before you, in those blessed mansions, 
singing praises to redeeming love. How delightful and en- 
viable is the character you at first described! but how awful, 
and I fear too applicable to me, is the latter ! Ah ! I must 
have resolved in my own strength ; for why should I, at this 
time, be in this stupid state, if I had rested upon the Saviour 1 
The idea at times rises in my mind, that it is wrong for me 
to attempt to pray ; that it is mockery to pray without the 
Spirit ; for surely my prayers would be answered if I prayed 
aright. But what would be my feelings to abandon this 
duty! Oh! I never can! 

4 Perhaps he will admit my plea, 
Perhaps will hear my prayer > 
But if I perish I will pray, 
And perish only there/ 

And now, what shall I say ? Of what avail is the detail of 
unrepented sinsT I can only tell you that I am still ' in the 
gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.' O, my dear 
friend, may I indulge the hope that I shall have an interest 
in your prayers? Dp pray that I may see my situation iu 
its true light, and that I may be enabled to clasp my Saviour 
in the arms of a strong and lively faith, relying upon him 
alone for salvation. 

" It is needless to request of you to keep this answer an 
entire secret. Perhaps you know from experience how dis- 
agreeable it is to have such things in any measure public. 
Be assured, my much respected friend, that you have not in 
the least degree offended me. Nothing could have given 
me more pleasure than the testimony I have received of 
your friendship and good wishes ; and I doubt not but each 
of the teachers has the same feelings which I have. Re- 
questing you to tell me of my faults, without any hesitation, 
I subscribe myself your truly affectionate but unworthy 
friend." 



20 MEMOIR OF 

Special meetings were at this time held by her pastor ; but 
she did not attend them, lest, by declaring herself an inqui- 
rer, she should raise the expectations of her friends only to 
disappoint them, as she had done in her former seriousness. 
The safety and propriety of this decision admits of question ; 
although it was natural for an unconverted person to make 
such a one. In returning one evening, however, from a 
prayer-meeting, an intimate friend took occasion to speak 
to her, plainly, of her spiritual state. She then wept, and 
opened the feelings of her heart. This was on Tuesday 
evening. Wednesday passed without any thing special, 
except that, at a sewing-circle, she chose the more serious 
part of the company ; and, entering into conversation re- 
specting submission to God, she advanced the sentiment that 
if the sinner could be made to understand how to submit, 
he would do it. The next morning, she awoke with a deep 
impression that it would be her last day of grace ; that God 
would cut her off or harden her heart, or in some way put 
an end to her probation. In the evening, she attended the 
regular Thursday conference, and, before leaving home, knelt 
down and earnestly prayed that it might be the evening of 
her submission to the Saviour. It was so. Before the meet- 
ing closed, while the assembly was at prayer, she gave up 
her heart to God. She did it in the full exercise of her 
understanding, and felt then, and afterwards, that it was 
peculiarly a rational act. This was on the 10th of August, 
1820. 

Much joy followed, and the night was spent with her 
sister, in wakefulness, conversing upon the wonderful grace 
of God. But in the morning she arose under a cloud. 
Her sister took her to her pastor ; but she found no relief. 
On reaching home, she retired by herself; and then had 
such views of her heart as she never had before. She felt 
that she was a sinner against God, and loved to sin, and she 
abhorred herself for it. It was an hour of intense convic- 
tion of her sinfulness. Overwhelmed with it, she went again 
to her Saviour, and then found permanent relief. 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 21 

Writing to an intimate friend, soon after this, and giving 
some account of the work of divine grace which had been 
experienced in Norwich, she says, " And can you believe, 
my dear Mary, that God, in his infinite mercy, has been 
pleased to snatch me as a brand from the burning, and that 
I am to join this precious company of converts, and before 
him, angel*; and men, covenant to be his forever ? It was 
on Thursday evening that I hope I was enabled to cast my 
load of sin— a heavy load — at the feet of Jesus, and submit 
to his sceptre. Oh ! it was a glorious liberty I experienced ; 
and I could only say, * Adore, and praise, and wonder !"• v 



* » 






* 
* 






CHAPTER II. 

NORWICH — FEMALE FRIENDS, AND EEFORTS FOR THEIR 

SPIRITUAL GOOD ILLUSTRATIONS OF HER CHARACTER 

AND INTERCOURSE AS A SISTER — EFFORTS FOR THE 
SPIRITUAL GOOD OF HER BROTHERS — DEATH OF HER 
YOUNGEST BROTHER. 

In reading the biography of an eminent and useful Chris- 
tian, we naturally wish to know something of the place of 
his birth and residence; the circle of society in which he 
moved; the kind of influences under which his character 
was formed ; and the esteem in which he was held by those 
who knew him best. A beautiful flower may grow in a 
wilderness, or on some fertile spot in a desert. But we 
look in the garden most advantageously situated, and where 
is employed an assiduous and judicious cultivation, for the 
flower which shall be most rich and beautiful. With the 
name of Norwich pleasant associations have perhaps be- 
come formed in the minds of some American Christians, 
as the birthplace of Harriet Winslow ; and it may not lose 
any thing now, by the fact that there also the subject of 
this Memoir was born, educated, and fitted for high service 
for Christ and a seat in heaven. 

Norwich, the early home of Miss Huntington, is one. 
of the most pleasant towns in New England. It embraces 
much wild and beautiful scenery, of both land and water ; 
always strikes pleasantly the eye of the traveller; and has 
been a place of some resort by strangers of taste and 
intelligence. There are not many valleys in New England 
sweeter than that at the head of the Thames; nor which 

S2 



MEMOIR OF MRS. .SMITH. 23 

would be more reluctantly left by a resident having a soul 
to love scenes rendered pleasant by creative power and 
mercy. And a missionary, forsaking it for the uncertainties 
of a foreign residence, gives one evidence of willingness 
to forsake all things for Christ. 

Of the society of Norwich it is some commendation 

to say, that a lady of Miss Huntington's intelligence and 

cultivation of mind and manners, loved it, and spent her 

years happily in its circles, and contributed to render it 

desirable. She spent her time principally at home; although 

the number of her friends abroad, their attachment to her, 

their estimate of her society, and their desire for it, made her 

visits ta be often solicited. At Hartford, New Haven, New 

York, and at other places, the residences of her relatives, 

■ , she was sure of a hearty and happy reception ; oftener than 

;..&;.. she felt that, as a daughter, she could be absent from her 

■*'■ '■' father's house. 

The delight with which she returned from visiting some 
of her choicest friends, she testifies in the following extract : 
— " Through the blessings of a kind Providence, my dear 
sister, I am at last seated in my beloved home, with every 
thing to call forth the gratitude of my heart towards that 
• Being who delighteth in mercy. Whether it be that my 
own happy feelings have radiated every object, or that a 
peculiar brightness does really encircle them, I know not ; 
but certain it is, that I never returned home under pleas* 
anter surrounding circumstances." 

Amidst the society of friends whom she visited, Miss 
Huntington was unwilling merely to enjoy herself; but seems 
to have been solicitous lest her time should pass without 
benefit to those around her. She thus writes to one of 
her friends while in New York : — "I fear my winter has 
not been very profitably Spent ; and hare just been saying 
the same to aunt Faith, and telling her that- 1 do not think 
I have done any thing for the benefit or happiness of any 
one." Far otherwise, however, was the sentiment of her 



04 MEMOIR OF 

friends. Her jealousy of herself, doubtless, operated to 
secure a good measure of fidelity in endeavors to be useful. 

The friendship of young ladies for each other is inter- 
esting and lovely, especially when it is sanctified and 
strengthened by religious principle. The delicacy and 
fervency which mark such attachments, and the intercourse 
growing out of them ; the mutual confidence ; the sympathy 
in each other's joys and sorrows ; the liveliness with which 
they enter into each other's prospects in life ; and, if Chris- 
tians, the refining of these feelings which arises from their 
hearts being fixed upon the same Saviour, from their rejoi- 
cing in the same hope, and anticipating the same bliss, 
holiness, and glory in heaven; — such friendships, in this 
cold world, aid our conceptions respecting the love, and 
harmony, and purity which pervade the society of heaven. 
True, these same lovely female associates live in a world of 
sin ; and they partake in the sinfulness of human character 
while without religion, and of the imperfections of other 
Christians after conversion. But such friendships rebuke 
the things unamiable, unrefined, and selfish, which so often 
introduce alloy into the happiness of society, depress the 
standard of Christian feeling, and perplex the path of many 
towards heaven. 

One of Miss Huntington's earliest friendships, of this 
class, was with a cousin, near her own age, several years 
since deceased, to whom she owed much for her endeavors 
to promote her spiritual good. No letters have been pre- 
served which throw light upon this intimacy. She prepared, 
for the gratification of the relatives of this friend, a memoir 
of her life, not designed for publication, but exhibiting 
favorably both the character of the deceased, and her own 
ability as a writer of a memoir. 

During one of her visits in New York, soon after her 
religious change, Miss Huntington was much in the society 
of one for whom she formed a strong attachment, and who 
seems to have entered into her views on the great interests 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 25 

of eternity and the soul. A few extracts from her letters to 

this female friend will show how she loved her, and followed 
/her in her thoughts arid with her prayers, when distance 
'v separated them. Here, also, it should be remarked, " they 

were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in death they 

were not [long] divided." 

"New York, Aran. 11. 
" You can hardly imagine, my dear Mary, the disappoint- 
ment I experienced, when I returned on Monday morning, 
to find you had left us. It was so unexpected to me, that 
for a few moments I could not reconcile myself to it. It 
was my wish, before we parted, to have united once more- 
at the throne of grace. The thought often rushes upon my 
mind, that we shall never meet again on this side eternity ; 
that we shall never kneel again together before the mercy- 
seat of our heavenly Father. But I will not indulge the 
thought : we may see each other here ; but, if not here, I 
humbly hope we shall behold each other face to face, in a 
better, happier world, and unite in celebrating the praises 
of that Being who watched over us while together, and 
blessed us while separated." 

At a subsequent date, she thus writes to this friend^ : — 
" You express the hope that I find much enjoyment }n the 
path of holiness; but oh ! my dear Mary, I have more cause 
for lamentation than yourself. I have found, since my re- 
turn, that my heart has wandered from God ; that I have 
grown cold in his service, and provoked him to hide his 
face from me. May we not attribute our coldness to our six 
months' residence in that busy city? I found such a life 
greatly prejudicial to my growth in grace ; and sometimes, 
when dwelling upon my owa. backslidings, I regret that 1 
ever left home. But it was for the best, and perhaps was 
to show me that I have no strength in myself." 

Writing to this friend some time after, from the house of 

2 



26 MEMOIR OF 

the relative in New York, where they had visited, she say*, 
— "lean hardly realize that nearlj two years have elapsed 
since you were seated with me on this very spot, where we 
have enjoyed many hours of social converse. While I am 
writing to you, a feeling of melancholy passes over me ; and 
yet, I ask myself, Why is it? My dear friend is at home, 
surrounded by friends, and as happy, for aught that I know, 
as this world can make her ; and I have ten thousand bless- 
ings to call forth my gratitude. , But thus it is ; the recol- 
lection of past interesting scenes always excites in me a 
degree of sadness. I have taken much pleasure in visiting 
those places which were interesting to us when you were 
here; especially Wall Street Church, and our favorite re- 
sort, the Session Room." 

To another of her friends, who had removed to a dis- 
tance of several hundred miles, she thus writes : — "I thank 
you for the hasty note which I received before you left, 
and affectionately reciprocate* every kind expression. I 
followed you in imagination to the close of your journey, 
and thought of you on the first Sabbath. I reflected 
with seriousness, that one more scene of this changing 
world had closed. How rapidly events follow each other ! 
Surely, I never realized so forcibly as now, that I am 
living for eternity. And is it so, my beloved Sarah, that 
the days of our youthful friendship are gone, never to be 
recalled 1 We will not think of the past, but look forward 
to brighter scenes above. 

* All are friends in heaven ; all 
Faithful friends ; and many friendship*, 
In the days of time begun, 
Are lasting there and growing still.' " 

Miss Huntington's fidelity in seeking the conversion of 
her friends to God, is illustrated in the following passages 
from letters to young ladies of her circle of relations and 
friends. Writing, foon after her own change of religious 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 27 

feelings, she says, " My thoughts very soon recurred to my 
dear Mary ; and I imagined her in the midst of the same 
privileges and blessings. I had heard that there was a work 
of grace in Ithaca, and could not but hope that my friend 
had been made a subject. Is this the case? Have you 
'tasted and seen that the Lord is gracious'? Have you 
found the world vanity, and religion a reality? I cannot 
bear to think, for a moment, that you have let so precious 
a season pass unimproved. But perhaps it is not over. 
Possibly the Spirit is still with you ; and oh, if it be ! — and 
if it be not, let me entreat you to seek a share in the 
blessing. I fondly imagined that the same Spirit, at the 
same time, was sent to us both, and that we should be 
prepared to spend eternity together. How did it increase 
the bitterness of my soul, that I did not begin earlier to 
glorify my God ! The past years of my life appear to me 
all lost — lost forever! Believe me, dear friend, we do not.: 
begin to live until we live for God. Ohf how irrational 
is man ! how deserving the most severe punishment ! Can 
we sufficiently admire the astonishing mercy of Him who 
bears so long with us? Surely he is 'the God of pa- 
tience ! ' " 

She seemed anxious lest she herself had hindered the 
conversion of this young friend, by want of Christian fidel- 
ity, and to have sought, by a frank acknowledgment of 
negligence in one particular duty, to take up the stumbling- 
block out of her way. " How has my conscience reproofed 
me for neglecting to speak to you of the love of this Saviour, 
when we were together ! I have had bitter reflections that 
so much of my time was spent in trifling conversation, when 
I knew not but our next meeting would be before the throne 
of jadgment. I have endeatored to seek the pardon of my 
God for these sins; and now do I ask, sincerely, your for- 
giveness, for sins committed against your soul. It was an 
erroneous idea of friendship which kept me silent upon 
such an important subject ; and it should humble me in the 
dust." 



23 MEMOIR OF 

Writing to another friend, she says, "I was much 
disappointed at the contents of your letter. My dear Su- 
sannah, how can you withhold your heart from the blessed 
Saviour? Is there nothing lovely in his character? -You ^ 
love excellence in your fellow-creatures: — Jesus is the 
fountain of all excellence. In him is all you can desire. 
>., Why, then, withstand his kind calls and entreaties? I am 
at a loss what to say to you. You know all. Your under- 
standing is convinced of your duty. How can you be so 
ungrateful as to live at enmity with God ? Oh ! that single 
name, God, expresses every thing. I do think it is sweet to 
me. Consider, my dear friend, ' with whom you have to 
do;' that you are trifling with the "' High and Lofty One 
who inhabiteth eternity ! ' You cannot always do this. Now 
he sits on a throne of mercy, and kindly calls upon you, like 
a tender father, to be reconciled to him. Erelong you will 
♦* behold him on a throne of judgment. You will then see 
the justice of Jehovah in casting you off forever. Excuse 
my freedom ; but these are solemn truths, and must one 
day be realized. Will no arguments move you? Oh! I 
can only commend you to the sovereign grace of Almighty 
God." 

A heart so affectionate towards those beyond the circle of 
her father's family, it might be expected, would have most 
ardent and tender attachments to those more nearly related. 
Miss Huntington had an only sister, to whom, after her mar- 
riage and removal to a distant part of the State, she thus 
writes — "When I think of the painful separation I am 
called to endure, the idea that you are happy lessens the 
evil. But, my dear sister, you can hardly imagine what the 
state of my feelings has been since you left us. I felt for a 
little while as if I could not live; the loneliness of my situ- 
ation pressed upon me witR all its force. Every apartment 
reechoed the painful tale that^ou were gone; and this feeling 
came home to my heart with a heavy load, respecting our 
past enjoyments together — 'they were, but they will be no 
more I ' Words would fail me to express all the bitter feel* 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 29 

ings of my heart. But I endeavored to drown them in care, 
and to lessen them in the faithful discharge of duty. I have 
in a great measure succeeded, and have learnt to look upon 
thecwhole with brighter and calmer feelings. It is my wish 
to supply your place, so far as I am able ; but I have not 
the power to fill it." 

" Oh that I had more of the presence of the Spirit of God,^ 
and I should be less cast down with temporal trials. When 
we surround the family altar on Sabbath mornings, 1 delight 
to unite in the petitions of our dear father for you ; and 
could you witness the affection and fervor with which he 
commends you, and the spiritual interests of your flock, to 
$ur heavenly Father, it would gladden your hearts. You 
are not forgotten at other seasons ; but then, particularly, 
we feel as if communion were sweet" 

But there was another relation in which her affections 
were developed in a manner and degree not surpassed in 
any of the intimacies or relationships already described. 
Miss Huntington had three brothers, whom she loved with 
most exemplary tenderness, and in whose temporal, but 
especially spiritual good, she felt an habitual and intense in- 
terest. How they would prosper in the things of this life, 
but, much more, how they should^ live here so as to glorify 
God, and arrive at heaven, were subjects on which she 
frequently disclosed her anxiety to them and t»:-her Chris- 
tian relatives. It may serve to illustrate her Christian 
character, and to quicken others in the duties of the same 
relation, to present a few extracts relating to this point. 
Truly, there is no relation, in which a young lady can be 
contemplated, more interesting than that of ^an affectionate, 
judicious, solicitous, and prayerful sister. 

Of her eldest brother, she thus writes: — "I feel de- 
pressed this morning, not particularly about myself, but 
about our dear Jed id i ah. I long to have him interested in 
the covenant of grace. Do let us be more earnest than 
ever for this blessing ; and let us pray that our faith may 






4M) MEMOIR OF 

not fail." At another time, she says, — "I wrote to him 
on new year's day, upon the subject of religion. He re- 
ceived it kindly, but made no reply." 

The following are extracts from the letter mentioned : — 
" I cannot refrain, my beloved brother, on this interesting 
anniversary, from expressing, by letter, my deep anxiety for 
your salvation* The subject has ever lain near my heart ; 
but of late I have felt unusually solicitous that you should 
improve the present season of comparative leisure and quiet, 
in securing your eternal happiness ; fearing that your ' ac- 
cepted time' will pass away, and your eternity prove q, 
miserable one. I hope, dear brother, that this effort will 
not displease you. If I were sure that it would, still, my 
feelings and my duty would urge me to the step. For we 
shall meet on that last great day, when I must bear the 
scrutiny of my Judge in regard to my own efforts for the 
salvation of those who are dear to me. And could you 
realize, as I now do, the transitory nature of all sublunary 
things, and the weighty interests which hang upon our fleet- 
ing moments, were I in a state of impenitence towards God, 
your love for me would dictate some exertion for my poor 
soul. But I will make no further apology. I doubt not that 
you will accept this expression of my affection with the same 
feelings with which it is offered." 

After expressing her confidence that he* had no disbelief 
in the doctrines of the Bible, and yet her fear that he was 
quieting himself in the notion of a blameless inability 
to do his duty, and warning him against that delusion, she 
writes — "It is useless and sinful to spend our time 
in speculations upon ' man's free agency and God's sove- 
reignty.' Our duty as sinners is very plain, so that none 
need err respecting it. We are responsible to God, and 
must be righteously condemned if we refuse to obey the 
plain injunction, 'Give me thine heart.' Oh! how un- 
grateful to postpone this duty — even if we intend to do 
it — until the last hour, when we can please ourselves no 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 31 

longer! Would that my every breath, from early infancy,' 
had been consecrated to my highest, dearest Friend, to 
whom I owe every thing, and can pay nolhing. 

" The past has been, with me, a happy year ; for I have 
set more lightly by the world, and I have with unusual 
tranquillity rested upon God. I can testify that the ways of 
Wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths peace. 
Often, when you have returned from jour daily toils, weary ' 
and depressed, I have longed to have them sweetened by the 
comforts of religion. You have found that earthly pursuits 
do leave an aching void ; but religious hopes fill the whole 
spirit. 

"I have prayed for you every day, since I first knew the^ ~. 
way to the throne of grace. Precious privilege! it is yet 
mine, and I will use it still more faithfully. Yes, dear ; --. 
brother, your own apartment shall witness a fervent prayer 
for you each day, while health continues. And will you 
not pray for yourself, and give yourself to God ? Our years 
are Hying, and we shall soon be beyond the grave. I make 
this appeal to you with the judgment seat in view. I 
already see you and myself standing there together; our 
dear parents too, and each member of our family ; our 
duties to each other set before us, and their performance or , ; 

neglect placed to our account. Shall we be deterred from 
duty by an earthly frown ? My God ! I fear thee more than 
an assembled world of reproaching fellow-mortals. Let me 
have but thine approbation, and I care for little else. 

" Dear, affectionate brother, good night. Do not throw 
this aside as unworthy of your attention. Though worth- 
less in itself, it speaks of that eternity to which you are 
hastening. Let the subject interest you ; and be assured' 
that the heart which dictates it loves you. *^. 

Your Sister.' ' 

Her twefr brothers younger than herself, and over whose 
childhood and youth she watched with much anxiety, are 
more frequently mentioned in her letters to her Christian 



v * 



32 MEMOIR OF 

friends; and her correspondence with them after they 
left the family home, shows the heart of a Christian sister. 
Writing of them, she says, — "I hope you and your 
husband will pray for our dear brothers at home, who are 
just at the age to be influenced by evil companions. I am . 
often made very anxious lest they should become indifferent - 
to moral restraint. I often weep in secret for them, and 
sometimes think I suffer a mother's anxiety, in degree, if 
not in kind. This is one of my trials, and one which you, 
dear sister, did not experience. I strive not to be unduly 
anxious, but I do earnestly desire their conversion. Peter 
seems to be ambitious to make the best use of his advan- 
tages, and I hope his collegiate course will be honorable; 
but the temptations in Yale are great. Yet we must leave 
^ajl with God, being ' careful for nothing/ Oh for such 
\ a spirit ! When I think of the revival here, five years since, 
I wonder that I did not wrestle more earnestly with God 
for the extension of his grace. But the season is past ; — 
I will not say never to return, for I trust it will." 

Miss Huntington's second brother, after having assisted 
.his father in business till the age of twenty-one, removed 
to New York. Her letters give evidence of the new and 
increased interest with which she followed him into the 
scenes of mercantile life in the § city; and with what assiduity 
she sought to influence him to habits of life, honorable, safe, 
and promotive of his own happiness ; but especially to lead 
him to the thoughts and duties becoming one having higher 
than temporal interests to secure. The following seems to 
have been written not long after his leaving the paternal 
roof : — 

» 

"I need not tell you, my beloved brother, that your 
affectionate letter was truly gratifying to your sister. I 
thank you for it, and for the freedom with which you 
expressed the feelings of your heart. My own is ever open 
to receive all your joys and sorrows ; and could I alleviate 
the latter, I should greatly rejoice. I can easily sympathize 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 33 

with you in those moments of retirement, when the excite- 
ment of a busy day has passed away. The imagination, 
always liveliest at evening, wings its flight, and bears away 
too frequently the more sober judgment. Often, when I 
■ -have been fatigued, a cloud has seemed to envelop every 
• object ; and through the gloomy vista of future years, not 
a ray of light was discernible. But I have been enabled 
to gain the ascendency over such feelings, and to exercise 
a more cheerful dependence upon Him who feeds the 
ravens, and to whom all things are subservient. You were 
always active, my dear brother, but you have never before 
experienced the unceasing crowd of business; you are 
separated from all your dear ones, and surrounded -Jy 
strangers ; besides which, your mind is naturally inclined 
a little to romantic sentiment; and the leisure which yojl 
have had for reading and reflection, has carried you ratfcer 
above the common level. From these causes, I can easily 
appreciate all the feelings which you manifest. These "in- 
tellectual features, my dear Edward, while they show them- 
selves in the midst of the routine of sober duty, render a 
character more interesting; but if permitted to assume 
the control, and to lead one from rational and necessary 
employments to a romantic and visionary course, they de- 
stroy all harmony of character, and generally bring their 
subject to unlooked-for misfortunes. As Divine Providence 
has furnished your present situation, is it not best to make 
a wise use of it? I think of you a great deal; and were 
it not that I am borne along rapidly by a multiplicity of 
cares, my tender solicitude for you, and the recollection 
of past enjoyments, would induce a morbid sensibility. 
Your letters always excite me so much as to make me 'play 
the infant.' And though, apparently, I have no ability to 
assist you, I am permitted every day to have audience with 
the 'King of kings/ in your behalf; — this privilege no 
earthly arm can take from me ; and though shorn of every 
temporal blessing, this will remain with me to the end 

of life." 

2* 



■ * 



7 



«i t MEMOIR OP 

All her solicitude respecting this beloved brother, how- 
ever, for " the life that now is/' was immeasurably surpassed 
by that which she felt respecting his interests for eternity. 
The following, written some time afterward, on learning 
that his mind was exercised on religious subjects, shows 
the intenseness of her solicitude respecting him : — 

"Tuesday Eve. 
" My dear Edward : — My expectation was wrought up to 
a great height this morning, previous to the arrival of your 
letter; and when I read it, my heart seemed as if it would 
burst. This was but for a few moments, however, when I 
was enabled to cast you upon an all-sufficient Saviour, and 
there leave you. I can do nothing else, nor any of your 
Christian friends. I think your situation extremely critical ; 
for should the Holy Spirit depart, you would be surprised 
* to find how indifferent you would become, and how this 
miserable world would once more assume its reign over 
you. The Spirit has been striving with you. Read John 
xvi. 7, 8, 9. I felt nothing but the hardness of my heart 
and unbelief; and it was this hard, unbelieving heart that I 
carried to Jesus. He came to ' the sick/ and not to ' the 
whole.' I would recommend to you, my dear brother, to 
say nothing more to any one upon the subject of your 
feelings, but go to God, who alone can help you ; and read 
nothing but the Bible. Mr. Temple, who addressed us this 
P. M., says, ' the Spirit may be talked away.' It does relieve 
us to converse; yet we should seek no relief in this case 
but at the cross. You are still in ' slippery places.' Haste 
away, my brother; oh haste! You gain nothing while 
you delay ; you lose ground. Do not prescribe any par- 
ticular course to God, or expect any precise method. 
Scarcely two cases agree precisely. Go in earnest prayer 
to God ; ' look on him whom you have pierced, and mourn ; ' 
and when we next hear, tell us that you will join our happy 
company." # 






JARS. SARAH L. SMITH. - 36 

In another letter, soon after, she says,— "I do not 
know, my dear brother, that I can say any thing to you that 
you do not already know; but I fear that you are not fully 
aware that the fault is wholly your own, if you are yet 
unreconciled to God. He created you for his service, and, 
from the first dawn of moral intelligence, has demanded 
your every affection and your constant obedience. Every 
day and hour he has been waiting for your heart ; and think 
you that he is now unwilling that you should turn from 
your revolt and obey his will ? The controversy is just 
this — and it is the same which overthrew the happiness 
of the first apostate, and which, in its very nature, makes 
every being miserable — God chooses to reign in your 
heart, and your rebellious will says, ' No, I cannot give up 
the dominion. 1 ' It is this which is the source and the end 
of all sin — the creature at variance with his Creator ; the 
sinner having an offered redemption,' yet trampling upon 
the atoning blood of the Son of God! Awful apostasy!''' 
more aggravated than that of Adam ; he accepted the pro- 
pitiation offered. Only be willing to submit your will to 
God, in Christ, and the work is done. The way is very 
narrow; therefore all self-dependence must be cast away, 
and you must receive the kingdom of heaven ' as a little 
child. 1 The deepest convictions will make you no better ; 
not one step is taken while the will is unsubdued. — You 
say that yeu shall not return to the world. It matters little v 
in regard to the final event, what idol you have besides God, 
so long as you do not love. him supremely, and do every 
thing from this principle of love. The purest morality 
helps you none. My dear brother, be not an alien from 
Qod, an ' alien from your mother's children.' Sarah is well 
and lovely. Your letters cast a shade over her counte- 
nance, while they tell of continued resistance to the offered 
mercy of her glorious Redeemer." - 

Miss Huntington had the sweet satisfaction; at length, of 
seeing this brother rejoicing in the Christian hope, and 



3 



fc 



* 36 MEMOIR OF 

uniting with the church of Christ. She thus writes to 
him in relation to his making a profession of religion : — 
" You need not be told, my dear Edward, how much I have 
thought of you, particularly in relation to the solemn act 
of public consecration to God. May you be a 'living 
epistle ' of Christ, ' known and read of all men.' " 

The youngest brother of Miss Huntington seems to have 
been the subject of her most intense and protracted interest. 
Not that she loved him more than the others, for there does 
not appear to have been any thing of favoritism in her mind. 
But, it being the design of her father to educate him for one 
of the learned professions, and his early indications of talent 
giving hope of his future usefulness, her afFection for him, 
and her feelings as a Christian, led her ardently to desire 
that he might " preach the unsearchable riches of Christ." 
With what earnestness she prayed, and endeavored to 
engage others to pray, for his conversion; with what so- 
licitude she sought to win him to Christ, and to aid him 
in his Christian course-; with what kindness she watched 
over him in long and distressing sickness, and in the hour 
of death, — will appear in the following passages from her 
correspondence : — 

"1 am jjlad to hear that you have some regulations 
established for the improvement of your time ; but their 
importance and efficacy will only be manifested by the 
faithful practice of them. The talents which a kind God 
has given you will be worse than lost, if you permit 
them to run wild. They will require your steady and faith- 
ful improvement. Our dear father regards your future 
character and reputation with peculiar interest. As his 
prospects for the possession of wealth are so much darkened, 
I hope that in his children he will find constant enjoyment. 
But this must depend upon our individual exertion. 

" To tell you, my beloved Peter, how much I feel in 
regard to your own reputation, and the honor of your 
friends, — and, most of all, the character which you are 



,* 






MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. * 37 

forming for eternity, — would be impossible. Suffice it to 
Bay, a large portion of my heart is occupied by you and 
your future prospects." 

The kind regard with which she watched him in his 
college relations and pursuits, is indicated in the extract 
subjoined : — " I should like very well to know what impres- 
sion my brother is making upon the Faculty of Yale. He 
does not require any repetition of our wishes respecting 
him." 

The following letter, accompanying one received from 
him, was written on hearing of a revival in Yale College, 
*nd of his awakening to religious inquiry ; and indicates 
that his spiritual condition was the absorbing subject of 
her thoughts. 

"These few lines, my dear sister, we received from 
Peter yesterday; and I cannot omit sending them to you, 
that you may be quickened in prayer for him. It is now 
a day of salvation with him ; and oh ! shall we be cold and 
unfaithful? I knew there was a revival in college, and 
have prayed earnestly that P. might share in if;" but when 
this letter came, my feelings and desires were almost too 
intense for utterance. He speaks the language of an 
awakened sinner. The complaint of such a one is usually 
of hardness of heart. 

*' I feel that I am unworthy of such a favor as the conver- 
sion of a brother ; but God can glorify himself; and I hope 
it is my most earnest desire that his name might be glorified. 
I have devoted this day to humiliation and prayer. My 
faith is weak — very weak. I never felt my own impotence 
more than at present. I know that, in this revival, some will 
be taken, and others left ; and it may suit the purposes of 
Jehovah to leave our dear brother. His ways are not our 
ways, and I desire to be submissive ; but we are justified in 
seeking his grace for our friends." 



38 MEMOIR OF 

ToJfcim she also writes, as follows: — "To give you 
any adequate idea of the sensations produced by your letter, 
my dear brother, is impossible. Indeed, you will never 
realize them unless you are brought to experience 'fear 
and trembling/ with earnest desires for a near relative, to 
whom ' the day of salvation ' has arrived, and which, if mis- 
improved, will add to his condemnation. 

" I hardly dare write, lest I should weaken any impres- 
sion which the Spirit may have produced in your mind. 
What shall I say to you? 'Agree with thine adversary 
quickly, while thou art in the way with him.' Wait not, 
my dear brother, for deeper convictions; your heart can be 
softened only at the foot of the cross. An impenitent sin- 
ner is a hardened sinner ; and true penitence carries the 
soul immediately to Jesus, where pardoning love is secured. 
There will the ' exceeding sinfulness of sin ' be discovered 
and there may you mourn and hate it. Believe me, dear 
Peter, there is no salvation in convictions. You say that 
you are determined to find an interest in the Saviour. Go 
to him, then, immediately. Submit your hardened and 
rebellious heart to his disposal and government. There is 
peace no where else; there is safety in no other resort. 
Repent and believe now, and tne work is done. 

" I waited for such a sense of my sins as should make 
me a worthy object of God's mercy ; but I waited in vain. 
On one evening I was brought to feel that tears and distress 
could not avail, and that vmy duty was to ' believe' I cast 
myself on the compassion of the Saviour, as a poor, blind, 
hardened, helpless wret6h ; and that moment found joy and 
peace in believing. 

" I tremble while I think that some will be taken, and 
others left. Your room-mate is taken ; be not you left. I 
rejoice that you have pious friends around you. But friends 
can do nothing for you. The cause is between God and 
your own soul. We have prayed for vou, especially since 
we heard of the revival in college. 



9 * * 

MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. !*> 39 

" Dear brother, should this season pass away; tjbd leave 
you unconverted, I should almost despair. You would be 
less susceptible of future impressions, and your hard heart 
would be harder still." 



He became hopefully a subject of divine grace; and 
during his next visit at home, in. college * vacation, Miss 
Huntington writes to her sister respecting him — "It is 
with unusual joy and gratitude that I would inform you, 
that Peter gives evidence of a change of heart. I cannot 
say but that I still rejoice with trembling, and cease not to 
pray for him; — but I never witnessed so striking a change 
in any individual ; and it is noticed by all. If he remain 
steadfast, I have . no doubt he will be a minister of the 
gospel. Pray that he may not be deceivedj or grow careless 
in the ways of the Lord." 

Miss Huntington, thus enjoying the satisfaction of hope 
for this brother, devoted herself with all the assiduity of a 
Christian sister, to the promotion of his growth in grace. 

" I hope you have had a pleasant Sabbath, and found 
nearness of access to the throne of grace.: My beloved 
brother, as you value your best interests, do not permit the 
arch enemy to prevail, in regard to your closet duties. He 
aims first at these, for he well knows that here declension 
always commences. Do you ever omit your regular meals? 
or if you do, does not lassitude ensue ? How much more 
do our. souls require the spiritual food derived from that 
source to which prayer gives us access! I can scarcely 
express the solicitude I feel for you in this respect. 

' Satan trembles when he sees 
The weakest saint upon his knees.' 

" Oh ! keep fast hold of the sceptre, and you will assuredly 
thrive. Faithfulness here cannot be followed by unfaith- 
fulness in other duties, for God will bestow the assistance 



'1 



40 MEMOIR OF 

which we implore. Immediately after making a profession 
of religion, I left home fpf New York, and had a week's 
passage. During this time, ray private duties 'Were much 
interrupted, and I felt the effect of it upon my spiritual 
state, until about one year since. In this last year, the 
dealings of Providence have, I humbly hope, restored my 
soul. — Had I not joined the church when I did, I fear the 
duty would have been neglected, perhaps for life. The 
privileges of a visible standing in the church, impose obli- 
gations which do not operate so powerfully out of it. Our 
father mentioned • his conversation with you respecting 
• your making a profession. If a certainty of your having 
passed from death unto life could be granted, I should 
wish you not to hesitate a moment ; but as a trial of your 
faith is necessary, perhaps it is well to defer it for a season. 
Love to Christ and your own soul, demands a vigorous and 
watchful devotion to his service until the duty be made 
plain. It is always easy to depart from God, but more 
especially so when no open profession has been made; 
therefore, in postponing this act for a littie while, do not 
permit sloth or presumption to destroy and darken your 
evidences. You will excuse me, dear brother, for offering 
such advice in your present circumstances. It is dictated 
by love; and perhaps the experience of seven years may 
enable me to give you a few hints, which you will receive 
in kindness." 

She renews her advice on the subject of secret prayer 
in the following extract : — " Do not allow yourself to be 
hurried when you go to converse with God ; feel that time 
thus spent is the most profitable portion of each day ; and 
be es constant in the evening, before nature is exhausted, 
as you are in the morning. First try ' to find Christ there/ 
and then let all your petitions be the simple expression of. 
your wants, and not the repetition of familiar phrases. 
Expect the assistance of the Spirit, and wait, as it were, 
for his inditings. I have found much profit from this 






MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 41 

course, and from the reflection that as ' my times are in 
God's hands/ if I am faithful to. this duty, he will prosper 
my other labors. 

" Do not, I entreat you, take for your standard any 
Christian that ever lived; but go to the pure oracles of 
truth for guidance. Ask yourself continually, * How would 
my divine -plaster conduct under these circumstances ? ' " 

Respecting some seasons of prayer, with this brother, 
while he was at home in vacation, she thus writes: — " You 
cannot, more than myself, desire to be again engaged in 
my chamber as formerly. Those were to me delightful 
moments, and, I may truly say, furnished me more heartfelt 
enjoyment than I ever before experienced. I told mamma, 
at the close of your first day's visit at home, that it had 
been the happiest day of my life. Oh! if we are both 
God's children, we may anticipate an eternity of happiness 
similar to that ; though far more pure, and transcending our 
highest conceptions. Let us be faithful. There is no 
true elevation of character without the control of Christian 
principle. To live a holy life is never easy, or, I should 
say, is never attainable by the indolent; though some cir- 
cumstances are more favor abje than others. College life 
must be a tempting one ; but it may prove as the refiner's 
fire and fuller's soap, through the grace of Him who giveth 
us ' strength equal to our day,' when we seek it. 

" My dear brother, what is the present bent of your spirit- 
ual mind ? If your closet be a pleasant resort, I need not 
inquire further, for it is the avenue to Christian faithfulness 
and joy. If we are fellow-travellers on the road to heaven, 
it is important that we should occasionally exchange a 
word of recognition and inquiry." 

Miss Huntington delighted to cherish hope, on the basis 
of good evidence, for those who indulged hope for them- 
selves. And yet her solicitude that they should have the 
hope which "maketh not ashamed," kept her awake to 



■> 



■*_ 



42 MEMOIR OF 

whatever were their dangers of self-deception and of ruin. 
And when she feared, or " stood in. doubt " of her dearest 
friends, as to their spiritual condition, she was most tenderly 
and solemnly faithful in her endeavors to lead them to 
self-examination and careful testing of their evidences. 
The following, with some other extracts, illustrates these 
remarks : — 

$ " Wednesday Morning. 

u Dearest Brother : — Your last letters led us to fear 
that your religious hopes have become darkened. * * . * 
* * I will write freely, for I am your sister in the flesh, 
and we are members of the same body. You will receive 
what I say in tenderness, I am confident. Oh! you can 
form no adequate conception of the agonized feelings into 
which J was thrown last evening, on your account. The 
view which I had of the holiness of God's character, of 
the evil of sin, and the obligations which we are under to 
serve our Creator, even were reward and punishment out 
of the question ; the possibility that your heart was still 
alienated from him, and the dishonor which such a fact 
would cast upon religion; and my own insubmissiveness 
under it ; — all conspired to render me, for an hour, the most 
wretched being imaginable. My anguish of body and mind 
was unequalled by any thing I ever before endured. 

"I do not believe that you have yielded to the grosser 
temptations to which you have been exposed ; but I fear that 
the commendations, which have been bestowed upon you, 
have become a snare, imperceptibly leading you to be too 
much engrossed by worldly pursuits ; curtailing your seasons 
of retirement, and producing self-exaltation and desire of 
human praise, which are incompatible with the meekness of 
the gospel. Alas ! what is the applauding breath of mortals, 
that we should sacrifice for it our eternal concerns ! Satan 
is a subtle foe ; for by leading to the abuse of lawful pur- 
suits, his artful policy most frequently insnares our mind. 
He well knows, by his own history, and the snares which he 



* _ 



- « • 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH 43 

has so successfully laid for others, that the native haughti- 
ness of our hearts is the principle by which he can most 
effectually drag us down to his own inevitable doom. You 
are now at the most critical point of your life. This fallen 
and murderous foe stands on one side, striving to delude you 
by the false glare of worldly honor and popularity ; cherish- 
ing the pride of your heart, and striving to make you in all 
respects like himself, that you may be the companion of his 
misery. — On the other hand stands the gracious Saviour, jf 
who has paid the price of your redemption from the galling 
chains of sin and Satan ; presenting to you the simplicity 
of his gospel, which can purify the affections, elevate the soul, 
give true dignity to the understanding, make the subjects of 
it ' kings and priests' before the throne of God, where the 
happy intelligences become more and more like Him who 
is the source of all wisdom, knowledge, purity, and felicity. 
4 Choose you this day whom ye will serve,' — there is no 
neutral spot ; it must be God or Mammon. And what have 
you professed solemnly before many witnesses 1 What lan- 
guage is conveyed to you through the symbols of your Sa- 
viour's love? What would be the effects of your apostasy ? 
" Beloved brother, what more shall I say T Perhaps you 
will be surprised at the strain of my remarks ; but be not 
offended. I have written very plainly, yet with feelings of 
tenderness which I cannot express. I beg you to write me 
immediately. I shall wait anxiously for a ' reply. Write 
ingenuously. I believe that you love me; and I love you 
jtoo much for my own comfort. The last was, with me, a 
happy year ; a year of spiritual gladness. My hopes respect- 
ing you, contributed not a little to my joy. This year opens 
upon me with less tranquillity ; perhaps I am to be made 
acquainted with my own heart. If so, it will be a profitable 
period. The arrows of the Almighty are dipped in love, 
and they will make my heavenly rest more sweet. ' The 
will of the Lord be done.' " 

Letters subsequent to these indicate relief to the anxious 



41 MEMOIR OF 

feelings of Miss Huntington. Through divine goodness, and 
in answer to prayer, she was permitted to rejoice in seeing 
his soul restored, and found much comfort and satisfaction 
in him ; and more especially in anticipating his entrance on 
the work of the gospel ministry. 

"Monday Eve. 
" Your good letter, my beloved brother, afforded me 
heartfelt pleasure. The expression, 'I have, with the as- 
sistance of God, determined to devote, myself to the Gospel 
Ministry/ preceded as it was by earnest desires after holi- 
ness, was indeed like music to my soul. You have been 
borne upon my feeble prayers, with more energy and con- 
stancy, than any other dear ones, from the peculiar temp- 
tations of your constitution and circumstances. Since I 
began to pray for you, it has been my earnest petition that 
you might be an ambassador for Christ ; until you requested 
that I would not ask any thing definitely for you. The last 
time, however, that I approached the throne of grace, previ- 
ous to the arrival of your letter, I did once more, in submis- 
sion*, supplicate that you might preach the gospel. Dear 
brother, it is a ' good work ; ' and for a young man, in these 
days, the best and most important. May God abundantly 
prepare you to become ' a workman that needeth not to be 
ashamed.' " 

Miss Huntington's correspondence with this brother was 
rich in various counsels, adapted to his case, like those from 
which we have already quoted. Among the subjects were 
the following : — Engagement in Sabbath school instruction, 
as a means of usefulness to others and to himself — The 
dangers of entrance into the circles of the gay and thought- 
less — Religious reading — The importance of decision of 
Christian character — The habit of lively faith in Christ as 
promoting growth in grace — Activity and efficiency in the 
service of Christ — Commitment of his way to God in 
faith — Prayer for. unconverted relatives — Christian in- 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 45 



* ■* 



fluence upon others — Spiritual trials, as leading to self-ac- 
quaintance and reliance on the Saviour. 

For the purpose of obtaining the means to prosecute his 
professional studies, and also for the benefit to be derived 
to his own character, he went to Natchez, Mississippi, to 
engage in the labors of a private tutor in a family. The 
interest with which Miss Huntington followed him to that 
part of the country, appears in the next extracts from her 
correspondence. 

" I had two or three seasons of weeping after the arrival 
of your letter to Edward, for which I blamed myself. Yet 
no one but an all-seeing God can know how, for a year or 
two past, your interests have been interwoven with the 
fibres of my heart. I do not think that our own dear 
mother, whose death was your life, could feel more deeply 
for you than I do. But I will leave this strain, and en- 
deavor to anticipate the time, when, if we tire both faithful, 
no sorrow will mingle itself with our joy, and no anxiety 
disturb the calmness and fervor of our love. 

" I enjoy the hour appropriated to our concert on Sat- 
urday evening, exceedingly ; more so, I think, than any 
other. 

" I am far from undervaluing literary attainments, yet fully 
believe that a high standard of holy living is the most 
eminent means of usefulness. God thus vindicates the 
wisdom which cometh from above. How little we think 
of those years which were passed in acknowledged aliena- 
tion of heart from our Maker ! " 

" Every cloudless evening in which I am called out, my 
eye turns towards the * North Star.' It was a sweet reflec- 
tion to me, that you took the pains to look for it while you 
were penning your letter. Often notice it, my beloved 
brother, and whenever you do, send a petition to the throne 
of the Eternal, for our mutual steadfastness in the path of 
wisdom ; and I will do the same. YTeifciXo «& towo^Hi^ 



46 MEMOIR OF 

no .occupation, I should dwell with you in imagination too 
intensely; and it is doubtless best that constant employ- 
ment should interfere with the reveries of a naturally roving 
mind." 

" Christmas Evening. 

" I delight to dwell upon the thought that you and I, dear 
brother, may take sweet counsel together m a heaven of 
purity and love. Washed and sanctified, perhaps we may 
be united in performing embassies of love for our adorable 
Redeemer." 

" What a privilege is prayer ! . I would not be deprived 
of it for worlds ; and how could I ever esteem it lightly, or, 
use it unfaithfully ! Within a few days, more particularly, I 
have taken great delight in conversing with God, and re- 
alizing his constant presence. The world seems nothing 
worth, except as a field of service and sacrifice for Him. 
Oh ! my brother, let us be faithful during our little span. It 
is but a short period that we shall have for labor. Will you 
not resolve with me to be wholly for Christ? I feel willing 
to give you up to the good of the people where you are, if 
it be consistent with the purposes of God. You will require 
the qualifications of a Missionary to labor there, and if you 
possess any of the spirit, do encourage it. It is greatly 
wanting. Fields are white to the harvest, but where are 
the reapers ? I trust we shall see you, and hear you preach, 
yet ; and I pray that you may win many souls to the truth, 
and gain for yourself a glorious crown. 

" It is delightful to think of the Millennium ; but still 
more of Heaven, where hearts and voices will praise Him 
in sweet harmony. Then, my brother, we will join our 
voices in melodious strains, and bless our Redeemer, not 
only for what we have ourselves received, but for what 
he hath done for those we love, in bringing them all into 
his blessed family." 

" We have sympathized tenderly in your trials, and of 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 47 

late I have been scarcely able to speak of you without 
tears: The dreary visions of a cold grave in Mississippi 
have haunted my mind. Would that the next letter we 
receive might contain the cheering intelligence that you 
are just embarking for the North. Why should you linger ? 
Your health and the urgency of your friends here, furnish 
a sufficient reason to your employers there. When I think 
of the spiritual benefit resulting from your trials, I rejoice 
in them." 

The hopes of Miss Huntington that she might see this 
brother a minister of the gospel, in the design of Providence 
w.ere not to be answered. In consequence, remotely, of an 
injury which he received previous to his departure for Mis- 
sissippi, his health failed, so that he was compelled to relin- 
quish his professional studies. His disease assumed such a 
character as to shut him up at home — his father's house — 
where his sister devoted herself exclusively to the care of 
him, for his few remaining days. Death at length finished 
the disappointment of her expectations of his entrance on the 
ministry of the gospel on earth ; while she and her friends 
rejoiced in the hope that he was only transferred to higher 
and holier services " in the presence of God." The follow-,, 
ing extracts from a' letter to her sister show the family as 
they were watching around his dying bed, and entering , 
upon the days of mourning ; and the affectionate Christian 
sister watching the last moments of the brother whose 
preparation for heaven she had so long and so anxiously 
aided. 

" My dear Sister : — I have been intending to make some 
record of our dear brother's illness and death, which should 
be more particular than any thing which you have received. 
As I was with him almost constantly from the time wo 
visited yon t until he left us for a mansion in his heavenly 
Father's bouse, it will afford me melancholy satisfaction to 



48 MEMOIR OF 

retrace those days of solicitude, now, as we hope, so joyfully 
terminated to the released spirit. 

" The week before Thanksgiving he suffered much from 
the cutting of a tooth ; and all the pain which had been in 
his back seemed concentrated in his face. For several days 
he could not open his mouth sufficiently to receive his ac- 
customed food. The return of brother Edward and his 
wife he enjoyed; and shared with us in the usual pleasures 
of the festive board. For several succeeding days he fur- 
nished no small portion of our mutual domestic joys. lie 
soon, however, began to complain of intense pain in his 
(brehead. He once remarked to brother Edward that he 
felt almost discouraged — that he grew weaker and weaker. 
To save us anxiety, he seldom spoke of his sufferings. One 
day he said \o me, 'I believe I shall not tell mother any 
more of my bad feelings ; it seems to trouble her so much.' 

" He said to me one night, as he retired to bed, ' I shall be 
deranged, if this headache continues much longer ; ' and 
the next morning he said that ' all night every thing seemed 
to him to be French. 1 He had been reading Scott's Life 
of Napoleon. During that week, his nights were wretched. 
We slept with the doors of our apartments open, and I could 
hear him sigh upon his bed. One morning at two o'clock, 
he called to me and said he had not slept any. I arose and 
gave him some oil of valerian, and some water directly from 
the well ; and he became composed. 

" Company and noise at length became so oppressive *o 
him, that on Friday morning I prepared my own room feu' 
his reception ; and about eleven o'clock invited him into it. 
As he entered it, and went directly to bed, he said very 
sweetly, ' It looks pleasant here.' During the first day, he 
said to me, l Sister, you need not give up your bed at night ; 
I can sleep in my own room.' I told him that I loved to have 
him there ; and that I should stay with him most of the time/ 
He replied, ' I wish you would ; I love to have you stay with 
me better than any one else.' From that time every word 
spoken seemed burdensome to him, and he would turn his 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 49 

head from the speaker. From his first retiring to my room, 
he was averse to taking any food. I said to him, one morn- 
ing, in a playful manner, ' You must eat something, brother ; 
and I am going to make you mind, to-day, or else I shall 
whip you.' He replied, in the same humor, ' If you will 
not whip me very hard, I'll take that. 1 ^ 

" Tuesday morning, the truth gradually forced itself upon 
me that he had not entire control of his mind. Feeling as if 
my heart would burst, about the middle of the forenoon, I 
came down stairs, and told S. and M . that I believed Peter 
would never recover. They thought his aberration of reason 
might arise from the opiate he had taken. But, alas! the 
hand of death was upon him. That night, after two 
o'clock, papa watched with him. He called me before six 
in the morning, saying that Peter was much distressed ; and 
he wanted my company. Peter had been for some hours 
crying, ' Oh ! papa ! Oh ! father ! ' until our dear parent could 
endure it no longer. During that day, he lifted his head 
from his pillow every other minute, and would look upon us 
with the most piteous expression. Edward returned that 
morning, but dear Peter had no look of recognition for 
him. 

" On Thursday, he was quiet and cheerful ; and as I sat 
by him, I felt that even if he must die, eventually, I should 
rejoice to have him remain with us many weeks as. he then 
was ; it was such a pleasure to administer to him. It was 
indeed a pleasant sick-room; and our physicians, Drs. 
Hooker and Eaton, were so united and confiding, bound 
together as they were by Christian ties, that it was a pleas- 
ure to have them with us. That morning, when Dr. 
Hooker had been attending upon him, he appeared so 
rational, that the doctor proposed to me to ga and speak 
to him on the subject of death. I did so, asking him 
several questions, which he answered in the affirmative. 
To one — 'Do you love the Saviour?' — he answered, very 
emphatically, * Yes.' At eight o'clock that evening, he said 
to Edward, with a tone of voice «a& w\\eKte&&&£& <& \sasA 

3 



■* 



50 MEMOIR OF 

which I shall not soon forget, 'How soon shall I die? 1 
Edward said to him, 'Do you wish to di#?' After a mo- 
ment's pause, he replied, with his characteristic caution, C I 
do not know what it is to die.' He then turned to brother 
Jedidiah, and said, ' I wish you would pray with me ; ' and 
drew his head forward to the end of the pillow to listen. It 
was to me a most melting scene — the heads of those three 
precious brothers together, in united supplication for one 
whose spirit was so soon to be in the presence of its Maker. 
I cannot express to you, my sister, the emotions of that hour. 
Our parents were not there, and there was no one but me to 
drink in the full tenderness of the scene, with all its affect- 
ing associations. Often since have I dwelt upon it, in 
silence ; and ' its remembrance even eternity cannot erase 
from my heart ! 

" Thursday night he had his senses ; answered Mr. Coit's 
questions with clearness and satisfaction, and appeared in a 
happy frame. Friday he was muck the same. . For the first 
• ime, the physicians gave us some little encouragement that 
he might recover. I was slow in admitting any hope to my 
breast : when it did find place there, its ejection only opened 
the wound again, to bleed with all its freshness. This 
was the case on Saturday morning, when our dear brother 
seemed quite comfortable. I felt encouraged ; although the 
thought occurred to me, that it might be only a revival 
which was the precursor of death. We discovered that his 
breathing was faint, his pulse weak, and his flesh cold. 
There was a visible alteration in him from that time, though 
we did not entirely give him up. He was still patient and 
lovely as ever. 

" I did not mention, that on Thursday or Friday morning, 
as I was sitting alone with him, I took up Jiis Bible, to read, 
, hoping he would notice it. He significantly looked at me, 
then at the Bible, and nodded his head, as much 90 to say 
that he understood my intention. Once, too, when I had 
been washing his hands and face, I smiled upon him affec- 
tionately, while a faint smile played on his pallid features, in 



A- . 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 51 

return. ■ He almost invariably returned my kisses, as he had 
been used to do in health. Sabbath morning he was more 
feeble. His eyes rolled in their sockets ; and he seemed 
unconscious of surrounding objects; though he answered 
mamma's questions intelligibly. One of them was, ' Do you 
feel that your soul is washed in the atoning blood of Jesus ? ' 
to which he replied in the affirmative. I told him it was 
Sabbath ; that papa had been to church, and put up a note 
for him, and that Mr. Dickinson had prayed very affection- 
ately for him. He replied that he knew it was Sabbath; 
and to the communication respecting the note, answered, 
with a grateful tone of voice, * Did he ? ' ' But in a moment 
his mind wandered. In the afternoon, it became necessary 
to give him powerful medicine; and I trembled for the 
result, knowing that some change must ensue. We all felt 
that the night would be a critical one, as his pulse was 
increased to a hundred and twenty-eight. Between eight 
and nine o'clock in the.,$vening, his clothes and bed were 
changed; and although he endeavored to help himself, 
nature was almost exhausted, and her work nearly done. A 
little before midnight, I visited his silent couch ; and there 
he lay upon his unruffled pillow, bearing lie. impress of the 
king of terrors, whose victory was not yet accomplished. 
What a moment was that to my afflicted soul ! By the use 
of -wine and other means, he was "aroused from that lethargic 
state; and when I saw him again, about two o'clock, his 
eyes were open and full of expression; his arms thrown 
out of the bed; and his attitude that of independence; 
while reason was dethroned, and all his remarks incoherent. 
He appeared exceedingly interesting. When we were 
convinced that he would continue till morning, we all lay 
down, except papa, who sat up the remainder o£ the night, 
with Dr. Hooker. It was then that he repeated the Lord's 
prayer m impressively, even to the 'Amen.' The excite- 
ment I have mentioned had given place to a more composed 
frame. ' '' - i 

" At about six o'clock, I took my seat a&am b^j !»& «Afc, 



** 



52 MEMOIR OF 

and occasionally administered a little broth. He could say 
nothing intelligibly; but the whisperings of his lips were 
incessant,, which had not been the case before. I could 
distinguish only the words ' may 1/ and ' Amen/ indicating 
that he was in prayer. Marianne and I staid with him during 
family prayer, when he received, a spoonful of broth, from 
his own silver cup, which he used in childhood; but he 
could not swallow it. . We troubled him no more with earthly 
aliment. The soul was fast preparing to leave its tabernacle 
below, to dwell where the Lamb himself should feed him. 
After prayers, till assembled in the chamber ; breakfast was 
forgotten ; and the morning was. spent in witnessing the 
ravages of death upon that loved form; until a quarter 
before eleven, when the spirit was released. His struggles 
were severe, though the physicians thought he was insen- 
sible to pain. At one time, his whole frame quivered, every 
fibre being affected in a way that I never beheld before. 
The room was filled with sympathizing relatives and friends, 
our dear minister, and the two physicians. Mamma ex- 
pressed a wish that some of the promises of the gospel might 
be repeated ; and her request was kindly regarded by Mr. 
Dickinson, who also prayed. After which papa made a 
most affecting prayer, alluding to the circumstances of his 
birth, and commending his dying child to God, and giving 
up all his children once more to Him. He then made 
another prayer for you, especially. It was an impressive 
scene to all present, and very touching. For a few 
moments after 'that languishing head was at rest/ I felt 
somewhat like David, who arose *nd washed himself, and 
his countenance was no more sad. I rejoiced for him. The 
physicians, with our kind neighbor, Mr. Ripley, performed 
the last sad offices to the precious one; after which his 
lifeless form was very dear to us, until it was consigned 
to its narrow house. Our first mournful pleasure in the 
morning, and the last at night, was to visit the lovely 
remains, which now seemed almost like an angel's dwelling. 
Our hearts were knit together by uncommon ties. We 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 53 

had no cares or preparation to distract our minds; $nd 
during the whole of that week, we could sit down together 
and talk of the sainted spirit who had gone to mingle its 
celestial sympathies with its angel mother and its blessed 
Saviour." 

Writing in another letter to her sister, of the conflict 
through which she passed, on the night previous to her 
brother's death, and of the happy feelings which followed, 
she says — - 

" As midnight advanced, the certainty of the event grew 
more inevitable, and my anguish seemed to keep pace 
with the approaching crisis. Mamma, and Sarah, and Ma- 
rianne had lain down, brothers were in the room with the 
doctors, while father -and I were alone in the parlor. I 
leaned upon his shoulder, and gave vent to sorrows which 
were unfelt before, and. poignant in the extreme. It seemed 
as if my heart would dissolve, while unutterable thoughts 
pressed home upon my soul. The conflict was severe ; and 
though I acknowledged God's perfect right to inflict such 
evils, I could not bring myself to meet them. Death, with 
all its terrific accompaniments, seemed tfcfcn^ in reality, to be 
* the wages of sin.' My awn sins were not, at that time, 
particularly oppressive ; but sin in general, I felt, at that 
hour, to be the fruitful source of death ; and that it was 
the severest penalty, of a limited nature, which an infinitely 
wise and just Being could inflict. I thought that in the 
course of my life I had experienced a little of almost every 
variety of evil, or at least that I knew something of its 
nature; but this night I found an evil pressing upon my 
inmost soul, altogether different from any thing I had ever 
known before. Of course I needed new support. . My 
cherished brother was dying in my apartment, and I could 
do nothing to help him. The sovereignty of Jehovah, whose 
hand none could stay, and whose purposes none had a right 
to question, arose before me with a majesty never before 



54 MEMOIR OF 

perceived. Father prevailed upon me to lie down upon the 
sofa, while he also took a little rest. Early in the morning 
1 while it was yet dark/ I took my accustomed seat, for the 
last time, to administer to him who was on the confines of 
eternity. 

* * * " After having been that night, as if at the foot of 
that mount which none might touch ; when the struggle was 
over, and the sweet remains were arrayed for the tomb, 
gentler accents spoke to my heart ; and I felt that I had 
come 'to Mount Zion,' 'to an innumerable company of 
angels, to the spirits of just men made perfect/ and es- 
pecially ' to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant. 1 ' I am 
the resurrection and the life/ were words which now were 
clothed in a more glorious meaning. 

" I do earnestly desire, my dear sister, to make this event 
profitable ; and hope J can already say, ' It is good for me 
that I have been afflicted. 1 It appears a more solemn thing 
to live, and a more solemn thing to die. The domestic rela- 
tion has assumed a new sacredness in my view, as bearing the 
impress of Heaven's own beautiful plan ; and I pray that I 
may henceforth give it a prominent place in my system of 
duties. It is a symbol of the union of the upper world, 
I shall never again say it is selfish to desire the temporal 
and eternal happiness of those whom we love, or to mourn 
their loss. It is the great Parent of the Universe who 
has thus bound us in circles of friendship. And perhaps 
one of his designs in so doing is, that when these are 
broken, our wounded souls may know the preciousness of 
those consolations which are furnished for the afflicted." 

Said the Chaldean king, of One whom he saw walking 
in the midst of the furnace with the three faithful men, " and 
the form of the fourth is like the Son of God ! " Truly, it 
is worth while to pass through such scenes, and to bear 
such chastening of " the Almighty;" if, amidst all, the 
chastened one can feel that God is there ; good, even to 
)ook upon the " clouds and darkness " which are " round 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 55 

about Him/' if the soul can rest so sweetly in that which 
is also written, "justice and judgment are the habitation 
of his throne." 

It was indeed a mysterious providence which disappointed 
the hope of seeing that brother, so beloved and cherished, 
a minister of Christ. But here was one of the instrumen- 
talities by which her Lord was preparing her for the mis- 
sionary service. And good as it would have been for the 
brother to preach " the unsearchable riches of Christ," in his 
native land ; better even than this, was it, that by his death 
the heavenly spirited sister should have her preparation 
completed to, make known the dying love of Christ to the 
benighted daughters of Arabia. 



1 

1 



) 






CHAPTER III. 

RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE VIEWS OF CHRISTIAN DUTY AND 

HABITS T>F LIFE SENTIMENTS ON MISCELLANEOUS 

SUBJECTS. 

The loss of the private journals of the subject of this 
Memoir, at the time of her shipwreck, on her passage from 
Beyroot to Smyrna, has probably deprived us of much which 
would be interesting, as recording her Christian experience. 
Her correspondence, however, previous to the time of her 
decision upon going on a mission to Syria, contains many 
passages — the free disclosures of her heart to some of her 
friends — in which, may be seen the depth and strength 
of her feelings as an experimental Christian, and the prep- 
aration she was making for future usefulness. A few 
selections of this character will constitute the present 
chapter, together with some of her thoughts on miscel- 
laneous subjects. 

Trust in God. — "Every future day of my life I desire 
' to leave cheerfully in the hands of God, ajid to be entirely 
V resigned, should he see fit to frustrate all my expectations, 
I feel peculiarly, this evening, the precariousness of all 
things earthly, and the danger of placing too much depend- 
ence upon them. But I do not think that we are forbidden 
to indulge pleasant hopes of the future." 
1 "Do not be. impatient and distrustful respecting the 
future. God will provide. Sometimes I resolve only to 
ask for wisdom to-day, and leave the morrow entirely. If 
I live to see another day, and in the possession of my 



MEMOIR OF MRS. SMITH. 57 

faculties, I will again present myself as a suppliant. God 
is not a hard master." 

Anxiety for the future. — "We are restless* beings, ever 
reaching forward ; and if we have any steps to take, cannot 
hut feel solicitude respecting them. Yet the Christian has 
a delightful resort in every emergency, and no good thing 
which God has promised, shall fail those who ' walk up- 
rightly.' There, is the point. Promises are conditional; 
jmd if we fulfil our part, they will never fail?' 

Religious enjoyment. — "You inquire, my dear sister, 
respecting my religious feelings. I have had considerable 
enjoyment arising from the reflection, that I have entered 
the service of the best of beings, and that I shall be 
permitted to glorify Him. Life has appeared to me 
short, uncertain, and insignificant; and* heaven worth any 
sacrifice." 

"I expected to be very unhappy after you left, and I 
never restrained my feelings so much, under any circum- 
stances. But all the remainder of that week, I enjoyed 
my religious exercises beyond any thing I have experienced 
before, since my first joys. Prayer and the word of God 
were my delight; and I rejoiced to consider myself as 
engaged in the service of God. I stiH feel very differently 
from what I have done for some time past ; though the peace 
of mind to which absence from company and the quiet of 
my own room have contributed, has been, in some degree, 
interrupted by the distractions of the world and its cares." 

Satisfaction in employment. — "I am happy and cheerful 
in the attempted discharge of duty ; and have no time to 
cultivate morbid sensibility. And at night, when I lay my 
weary head upon the pillow of repose, my rest is rendered * 
doubly sweet by a busy day." 

Retirement — "I anticipate much oteaaMxe fcw&^\sk.\s* 

3* 



58 MEMOIR' OF 

you next winter.' I am sick of dissipation, tired of idle 
words. ' When shall I fly away and be at rest 1 ' " 

Being of God. — "I was this morning contemplating 
the being of God. For a moment I felt bewildered with 
the incomprehensibility of the subject, and all finite things 
appeared unworthy of a thought. But I soon felt that these 
were more suited to the strength of our minds than the 
Secret things which belong to God only ; and I felt that I 
ought to be grateful to Him, that my attention was divided 
between things real and spiritual ; or rather things earthly 
and heavenly. We could not bear an uninterrupted med- 
itation on these great subjects ; we should soon be in 's 

case. Our minds are prone to speculate, and sometimes 

unprofitably. ,, 

■* 

Contentment. — "I have thought, to-day, of the text, 
' Godliness with contentment is great gain.' It does not 
say riches, or honor, or pleasure with contentment, but 
' godliness. 1 Let us live for God's^ glory, rise above trifles 
as far as possible, (and all things merely worldly are trifles,) 
and exercise strong faith. 'Rejoice in the Lord, O ye 
righteous; and again I say, Rejoice. 5 



y >> 



Habits of thought respecting Christ. — "I am sensible that 
I do not regard Christ as much as I ought ; and I wish you 
would pray for me, that he may be more clearly revealed to 
my soul." 

Conflict. — "I go on as usual, struggling against sin 
and perplexities, endeavoring to fix my thoughts, as Moses 
did, ' upon the recompense of the reward ; ' reward ( of grace, 
not of debt/ " 

* 

Spiritual darlcness. — To her sister, following a visit, she 
writes — "Added to the grief of our separation, I experi- 
enced the continuance of the hiding of my Saviour's counte- 



\ 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 59 

nance. At the close of your visit, and for a few days after, 
I could not get near to God in prayer. Sins of childhood 
and youth rose like mountains before me. I feel brighter 
now." 

Consciousness of rectitude. — In reference to a subject of 
some perplexity, she thus writes : — "I have proceeded, if I 
know my own heart, in the fear of God, with constant 
prayer, in reference to every step. Acquitted by God and 
my own conscience, it is useless for me to be disturbed by 
' the opinions of others. Suffice it to say, I am now happier 
than *I had been for many months previous. My friends 
seem very dear, God very merciful, and heaven delight- 
fully pure and happy. My mind is unclouded with distrust 
or discontent. I feel that the trials I have suffered were 
disciplinary, and I hope salutary; that the command to* 
' seek first the kingdom of God,' with the annexed promise, 
comprises all our duty, and all our pleasure." 

Means of happiness. — - " All our years would be happier, 
if we could make the service of God continually our su- 
preme delight, our meat and our drink. Trials we must 
have, for our Master had them." 

Self indulgence. — " At our preparatory lecture, last even- 
ing, I was much struck with the 27th hymn — 






' Cold mountains and the midnight air 
Witnessed the fervor of thy prayer j 
The desert thy temptation knew, 
Thy conflict and thy victory too.' 

" Shame upon the Christian who would prefer his own 
ease to the honor and service of his Saviour. And yet this 
is too much the case with us all. My earnest petition is, 
* Deliver me from self'" 

Depression of spirits, — "I ho\>fc ^o>\ 'wflX \i*, 0&sss$n&- 



(50 MEMOIR OF 

• What does depression effect ? Nothing but sorrow ; it cannot 

alter our condition. . Every situation has its trials. Do not 

think too much about' the past. I cannot bear it. I am 

obli^fed to forget the past in present occupation. If our 

*" anxiety remedied any thing, it would be wise to indulge it ; 

r 

but as it operates contrariwise, it seems the part of good 
--sense and Christian fortitude to rise above it. I know it is 
easy to comment upon this subject, but I do it for my own 
benefit partly, and hope to practise accordingly." 

" Last night I awoke, and lay thinking upon the dark side 
of every thing; but this morning I feel better. It is sinful 
to indulge in such feelings. I think we ought to pray for 
a cheerful spirit. Confinement and solitude are extremely 
injurious to mind and body. Activity and social enjoyment 
are imperative duties. It is necessary also, ' to go out of our- 
selves ; ' for me it is absolutely so. I hope you will try 
not to think too much. Keep your mind cheerful. Look 
"^ upon your mercies. It is God's will that you should do so. 
He will provide for the future.' ' 

" Your letter gave me both pleasure and pain. I beg you 
will not, as Mr. Cecil says, ' permit your feelings to take 
away half of your life.' I know that I am not the person 
to recommend fortitude, and the usual prosing in regard to 
its exercise I would avoid. But we know that anxiety does 
not lessen the evil of any thing. When I live near to God, 
it seems like being in a father's house and under his con- 
stant care and provision, and there I feel no anxiety. I 
am not called to take thought for food and raiment; my 
Father knoweth that I have need of all these things." 

" If I had not been in an unusually happy frame when 
your last came, I should have been much depressed by 
your allusion to the dark side of the picture, in regard to 
our country, as it often fills me with apprehension. Since 
then, I have had some desponding hours, which I was ex- 
pecting would follow my season of enjoyment. But I am 
beginning to revive again. I suppose that it is wisely 
permitted that some should fix their eyes upon the diffi- 



V 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 61 

culties to be overcome, in making ' the paths straight/ and 
others be cheered with the bright scenes which will event- 
ually be realized ; or rather that we should, individually, 
participate in Z ion's hopes and fears, pursuing our pilgrim 
path in alternate ' strength and weakness, joy and wo.' " 

Influence of thankfulness and cheerfulness, — "When is 
your Thanksgiving 1 Do you recollect that our ancestors, • 
after appointing a number of Fasts, in the midst of their 
perplexities, resolved that they would appoint a day of 
Thanksgiving, to acknowledge their mercies, as well as 
deplore their misfortunes, and it seemed to be accepted? 
Do, my dear sister, strive to keep from despondency, and 
enjoy, with your husband and children, the domestic bless- 
ings which surround you. It may prove a permanent injury 
to. your children, if the sunshine of a mother's face, which 
often furnishes such delightful associations, is clouded by 
depressed feelings. Once, since my return home, when an 
unconscious shade passed over my face, Elizabeth came 
to me and scrutinized my countenance with much intense- 
ness. I was led to feel that children notice the expression 
very readily ; their own is moulded by that of others with 
whom they associate constantly." 

Spirit of adoption. — "I have thought much, within a few 
days, of the relation which exists between God, as a Father, 
and his children. While we live near him, we dwell in our 
Father's house; are nourished and supplied by a tender 
Parent, whose hand we can view in all our concerns. This 
is a delightful part of my experience, to feel that I am acting 
for God, and that he is employing and supplying me, — 
privileges purchased by a Saviour's blood, and manifested 
by the Holy Ghost." 

" When I look upon God as a tender Father, I can cheer- 
fully trust all to him, without one anxious doubt. Time 
seems short, and of no moment, comparatively ; and I know 

r ■ 



/ 



f,2 MEMOIR OF 

that God loves me and mine better than I do, and will 
better dispose of our concerns." 

Gfowth in grace. — "I think one preventive to our growth 
in grace, arises from our esteeming it a burden to take up 
the cross of Christ. But it is a privilege that he permits us 
to approach him in any way. What greater obligations can 
be imposed on us to insure our faithfulness, than to have 
been created and redeemed by the Being who claims our 
service ! Oh ! let us pray for a subdued heart." 

Frame of mind in prayer. — "I was gratified, this morn- 
ing, to. find my heart and my supplications first drawn forth 
towards the kingdom of God, while personal interests 
seemed secondary in my view. To God's grace be all the 
glory." 

Benefits of spiritual trials. — " Any event which draws 
the children of God to himself, is auspicious. Afflictions 
should not be termed mysterious. As sinners, we should 
expect them, and regard them as the principal means which 
God uses to discipline the soul and make it meet for heaven. 
We cannot make progress without them. They are an evi- 
dence that mercy hovers over us." 

Review of Christian acquaintanceship. — To an esteemed 
Christian friend, she writes — "I can assure you I often 
retrace the scenes of our past intercourse, which, from their 
transient nature, seem almost like a dream of the morning. 
But I trust their record is on high, and that Aheir moral in- 
fluence was for our benefit. While participating in your 
prayers and in your conversation, I felt the strong tie of 
Christian sympathy ; and our intercourse having been exclu- 
sively of a spiritual nature, the seal of Heaven seems to have 
impressed it ; testifying that it is destined to a more delight- 
ful renewal in the courts above. Blessed thought ! " . 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 63 

Deceitfutness of the heart. — "You apeak of the deceit- 
fulness of the heart. I think much of it, and am constantly 
afraid that I should not endure the test. But our strength 
-must always be in Christ. The more we exalt him, the 
more vigorous will be our Christian course." 

Communion with God. — - " The communion of saints is 
precious. But how much more so, communion with God ! 
Here we are assured, that whenever our thoughts dwell 
upon him, his own are fixed on us. His perfections ever' 
afford a subject of unmingled pleasure, for our contempla- 
tion, frhope that you have had much of his presence the 
last year ; for then I may know that happiness has been your ^ 
portion. I have of late enjoyed much of the presence of 
God, and find my sweetest satisfaction in communion with 
him. There is on earth nothing that appears attractive. It 
is not a melancholy sensation, for I can see God in all 
things, however minute ; and they seem tending to his glory. 
I do not think that any event, however limited its influence 
may appear, fails to accomplish ^ome purpose for the glory 
of God. In reading the Bible, we see that the most casual 
circumstances were thus overruled. Could we preserve a 
constant and vivid sense of this truth, we should realize the 
solemnity of our situation. Our worldly-mindedness would 
be checked, and we should be less anxious for the future." 

Permanence of things spiritual and heavenly. — "What 
( changes are wrought in the views, feelings, and sometimes in 
( the character, by the lapse of years ! Were my hopes cen- 
tred here, methinks I should be the victim of melancholy 
retrospections. But thanks to my Almighty Friend, I have 
entered a path, the footsteps of which become more sure, 
and the prospects more animating, every hour I live. Yes, 
that faith which grasps immortality, is continually becoming 
a more absorbing reality; and earth, with its trifling toys 
and airy bubbles, seems scarce worth a thought. Oh ! the 
1 power of that grace which can transform qux tastfto^rc^^Rr 



'N 



64 MEMOIR OF 

graded, worthless nature, for the participation of the pleas- 
ures which flow at * God's right hand.' It is the knowledge 
of a crucified Saviour, conveyed to the benighted and dis- 
eased soul by the Holy Spirit, which enkindles that flame of 
happiness, destined to interminable and augmenting bright- 
ness. It has no origin in fallen man, but comes directly * 
from the Source of all." 

Anxiety respecting public interests, — "Do you not 
tremble for our country ? My heart sickens with appre- 
hension. A crisis seems to be approaching ; and statesmen 
as well as Christians seem to fear. The whole eacXh seems 
to ' reel to and fro like a drunken man.' Personal interests \ 
seem to dwindle to insignificance in the contrast. I never 
perused newspapers with such eagerness as I do now ; and I 
find matter enough for prayer ; and oh ! for a wrestling 
spirit ! " 

Heaven. — "I am trying to learn that earthly hopes and 
dependences have no permanence; and whenever I part 
with Christian friends, I console myself with the anticipation 
of time and opportunity in heaven." 

" I am overwhelmed with cares and burdens, because I 
am pleased to undertake considerable. But the burdens 
and cares of this life will make heaven sweet. There, dear 
sister, we shall unite, without separation. Let us live for 
this end, and be happy." 

"I do love to think of heaven. I seem to feel a spirit 
within me that says, there is unmingled happiness in store 
for the immortal mind. Oh ! how soon, if faithful, shall 
we find ourselves upon those happy shores, disembodied, 
disenthralled, and holding converse with Christ, with angels, 
with our departed ones ! " 

Fleeting nature of earthly things. — " While I write, 
the balmy air breathes upon me through the window which 
overlooks the garden, and B. is mowing the grass in the 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 65 

• 

adjoining lane. ' In the morning it flour isheth and groweth 
up, in the evening it is cut down and withereth.' How 
true of life ! Events long anticipated follow in quick suc- 
cession, and in the retrospect appear so trifling, as to excite 
our astonishment that we regarded them as so important. 
Some one has said that the reason of our disappointment 
in future worldly good, is, that our hearts are greater than 
the world, and cannot be filled with it; bat that God is 
greater than our hearts, and has prepared joys, which, as 
they are incomprehensible, will never disappoint. I only 
wish that thoughts of rest in heaven might so affect me as 
to lead me to overlook all earthly trial and suffering." 

A thought in Broadway. — " New York seems pleasant 
to me, and quite like home. In Broadway it seems as if 
people were hurrying to eternity, as fast as possible. Each 
one seems intent upon something, nobody can tell what, 
as though it were the last day of existence. And I hurry 
on, in the same apparently selfish manner." 

Occupation. — "I was delighted to hear of your Sabbath 
evening efforts. Life seems worth just nothing, without 
some such occupation. What once appeared to me the 
acme of felicity, in anticipation, seems now like straws, 
scarce worth a thought," 

Effect of a revival. — "A revival is a discriminating 
season. It shows who are for the Lord. It has been a 
profitable season to me; I hope a re-conversion. Never did 
sin appear so heinous, and Christ so essential and precious. 
Yet, although sins, general and particular, have humbled 
me to the dust, I go not mourning — I have a complete 
Saviour, and I can lift up my head with joy." 

s 

\ * 

Holiness in the church. — "I ant every day more im- 
pressed with the conviction that holiness in the church 
will do more for its prosperity than any thing else. We 



66 MEMOIR OF 

• 

look around and expect to see converts multiplied; but 
our own hearts must first be purified and our deportment 
rectified." 

Faith. — " Let us cultivate, faith ; it is the grace which 
the present state of the church requires. Have you seen 
some remarks of Dr. Griffin upon ' the prayer of faith ' ? 
the substance of which is this — that believing prayer rests 
upon the general readiness of God to answer ; while that 
presumptive expectation of particular blessings, is nothing 
but hope resting upon the prayer of faith whiph we suppose 
ourselves to have offered. The first confides in the word 
of God, the last in our own efforts. I was pleased with 
them." 

Love. — " Religion shines purer and brighter in the 
exercise of love, than in highly wrought experiences." 

A critical case. — " You would think from 's 

conversation that she is a lively Christian. There is no 
point of religious experience or interest upon which she is 
not eloquent. And yet she loves the world dearly." 

Expenditures of Christian benevolence. — " I am more 
than ever confirmed in my opinion that the amount which 
Christians bestow in charity should not be prescribed. Dr. 
Alexander, in his missionary sermon, says, ' Let every one 
follow the promptings of his own benevolent feelings, and 
" as he purposeth in his heart, so let him give ; for the Lord 
loveth a cheerful giver." The temple of God was reared 
of old by free-will offerings, and the spiritual temple must 
now rise in the same way. They will be blessed indeed, to 
whom shall be granted such love to Christ and such benevo- 
lence to men that they will cheerfully offer, not merely a 
part, but the whole ofVhat they possess, for the furtherance 
of the Redeemer's kingdom.' Doubtless many disapproved 
of the poor widow's bestowing her whole living, and we 



r 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 67 

know that Mary's costly sacrifice elicited blame. Surely, 
unless a new spirit pervade the church, benevolent opera- 
tions must cease, for many of them are greatly involved." 

Selfishness. — "It is useful to go abroad occasionally; 
but if we fix our thoughts, habitually, upon the interests 
of Christ's kingdom, which are occupying the heavenly 
world, we cannot be 'selfish;' and for myself, I do not 
wish to be in any place where these are not the predom- 
inant subjects. Did you ever notice particularly, that in 
the Lord's prayer, the petitions relative to his kingdom 
are placed before our own individual wants? Would it 
riot be profitable to follow this arrangement' in our closet 
duties, and thus in our prayers ' seek first the kingdom of 
God ' ? and possibly it might have an effect to weaken our 
attachment to v the things of the world, and to our private 
interests." 

Denial of self . — " It is a mistaken idea that self-denial 
for Christ can be practised without inconvenience, and 
without a consciousness, in the very act, that self-love is 
mortified. Yet I believe the difficulties of self-denial are 
more in anticipation, than in reality; or rather that they 
are diminished, as we advance in the path ; like the staff 
which was presented to the 'pilgrim Good Intent,' when 
ascending the hill, the thorns of which, as soon as he had 
courage to grasp it, crushed beneath his hand. When 
once the Christian will permit the honor of God and the 
salvation of souls to take that place in his heart which his 
own interests have occupied, he will not be obliged to ask 
the question so frequently, ' How much shall I do for thee, 
my Saviour ? ' You will think this a favorite subject with 
me ; and I acknowledge it is, because the money now c so 
necessarily' employed for temporal good, is wanted to 
furnish the bread of life and robes of righteousness to 
immortal souls." 



68 MEMOIR OF 

Simplicity and plainness. — "It appears tome that now 
is the most favorable time for the church to fix the principle 
of simplicity and plainness, because the prevailing fashion 
in dress and furniture rather favors it. Our most genteel 
'adies now dress as the Methodists have been wont to do ; 
and I cannot but observe that God's children can now do 
for the fashion, what they could not .be prevailed upon 
formerly to do for Christ. In throwing off the trammels of 
Satan, we must not wait till the whole church will consent 
to join us ; nor even until we can be perfectly consistent 
In our most solemn moments, whtn eternal things seem most 
real, we must decide the question of duty, and then make a 
gradual, but sure inroad upon the dominion of pride. If 
Christians would deliberately weigh the motives which bind 
them to the imperfect standard of past years, they would 
find them to have no basis in the primitive Church of our 
Saviour. And although I would not encourage violent 
measures; yet, if we are upon the confines of a new era, 
when moral and intellectual influence is to supersede that 
which is sensual, great and striking changes will be 
witnessed." 

Doubts. — "I cannot say that, for several years, I have 
had any serious religious doubts, because my mind has 
been almost continually fixed upon the prosperity of Christ's 
kingdom. Still I am distrustful of my heart, and I might 
be placed in circumstances which would call forth unex- 
pected evidences of an unsanctified nature." 

Dress. — "I do not approve of prescribing retrench- 
ments. It must be a free-will offering. The Tract on 
Dress was written by Mrs. , of New York, an ec- 
centric woman. There is danger of an envious temper 
mingling with other feelings. My own views have been 
drawn from a source which leads me to hope they are the 
fruit of the Spirit. It is a sense of eternal realities which 
has stamped vanity and vexation upon all these trifles ; and 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 09 

upon them seems written in letters of blood, ' The price of 
souls/ " 

Troubles. — "I have been thinking that every body has 
something to .give trouble, either great or small — some 
source of anxiety — so that we may as well be satisfied, 
and reflect, 'if it were not this, it would be something 
else/ We are apt, too, to imagine that our evil is the ' 
most peculiar and trying. Now, it seems to me that no 
one has exactly the kind of solicitude which I feel for the 
poor Mohegans; because, if present efforts fail, they will 
not be there^ to experience benefit from any future ones. 
Yet many would doubtless exclaim, 'Dear me! if I had 
nothing more than poor Indians to trouble me, I should 
be happy/ I know that if they did not weigh upon my 
mind as they do, I should be heart-sick about . I be- 
lieve Miss Hannah More or Mrs. Sherwood says, we have 
only to choose between evils, in this life. Trouble we 
must have, but we may sometimes take our choice of it" 

Dangers of the church. — "I have lately thought much 
of the present dangers of the church. The accession of 
numbers is calculated to induce security; and its activity, 
pride. Unless the standard of self-denial be raised, those 
who flock into it, from the ranks of the wealthy and the 
young, will cause the separating wall to be demolished. 
Let the days of Constantine be remembered. This is the 
first experiment which the church, as a body, ever made 
for the conversion of the world; and it would not be 
strange if self-exaltation should make it necessary to purify 
and humble her through the fire* I only mention these 
reflections as occasion for prayer, not of discouragement. 
I wish that some minister would preach upon the present 
dangers of the church. Daniel, 4th chapter, 28 — 37 verses, 
would be a good text." 

Ministerial deportment. — " A minister, if he preserves 



70 MEMOIR OF 

his dignity, can hardly be too accessible. Sympathetic 
benevolence is the very essence of piety, and is all-power- 
ful in its influence. Who can withstand mercy and gen- 
tleness 1 " 

Writings of Jane Taylor. — "I agree fully with Mrs. C. 
in regard to Jane Taylor's writings. She is so natural 
and simple. Have you seen ' Display/ a tale by her, which 
is truly experimental ? She does not give, like Mrs. Sher- 
wood, such importance to personal beauty, in her heroines. 
All Mr*. Sherwood's are conspicuous for that, while Miss 
Taylor attaches but little importance to it, and seldom gives 
a novelist's description of beauty. As young people attach 
so much value to it, to the "neglect of other graces, I have 
admired the manner in which Miss Taylor treats the subject. 
Still I am a great admirer of Mrs. Sherwood." 

i 

Quiet usefulness. — "A well-regulated mind will never 
form plans which require the agitation of hurry in their 
execution. I am anxious to fill up life with usefulness, 
that God may be honored, and my fellow-creatures not be 
the worse for my existence; and by curtailing my own 
wants, in the pursuance of a systematic plan, I try to avoid 
that bustling course which is so uncomfortable to surround- 
ing persons, and distracting to one's self. I know of no 
better preparation for life or for death. From the midst 
of usefulness, I wish to be called to the reward which is 
' of grace, not of debt.' " 

Spiritual trial. — "When certain cords of my wayward 
heart are touched, I cannot easily check their vibrations; 
and no one is aware how much I have suffered from their 
continuance, in many a secret hour. But it was all right, 
my dear sister, that I should suffer when you left. I knew 
that my heart had wandered from the Creator to the 
creature, and I might have expected that my punishment 
would be found in the very instrument in which I rested." 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 71 

Gossip. — "Out winter has passed in an even tenor, 
with but few family incidents to relate. I have lately 
increased my aversion to what may be called epistolary 
gossip ; for there are those residing here, who transport 
the most trivial circumstances, which are reechoed from 
distant places to Ourselves. But I know that you have no 
relish for such entertainments." 

Sideboard ornaments. — "I have taken pains to adorn 
the sideboard with flowers — ornaments which the God of 
nature has provided to our hands, without expense or 
anxiety. I believe you will not think me visionary when 
I say that, in the Millennium, his works will be admired 
more' than those of art — nor call it very improperly odd, 
if I try to turn -our thoughts from the last, to the contempla- 
tion of his glorious works." 

Expensive churches. —-"I have been for some time 
decidedly of the opinion, that while Christ's last command 
remains unfulfilled, splendid churches are not an acceptable 
offering to him. The temple of Solomon has probably been 
a criterion, while it seems to have been forgotten that its 
magnificence was typical." 

Activity in duly as an antidote to affliction. — "I very 

much fear, my dear , that you are exhausting the 

energies of your immortal soul in the retrospection of 
past sorrows and enjoyments. You will forgive my plain- 
ness, but I cannot forbear urging you to change the current 
of your thoughts, and seek, from the exercise of disinterested 
benevolence, that enjoyment which has been denied from 
other sources. I believe that I can in no way evince the 
sincerity of my affection so strongly, as by striving to with- 
draw you from the contemplation of the past, and to lead 
you to resolve upon the cheerful, persevering, and soul- 
exalting service of Him, who has a perfect right to dispose 



72 MEMOIR OF 

of all your concerns. Do not tempt him to take from you 
still other, and, it may be, dearer blessings than you have 
already forfeited. Our lot is not cast beneath the enervating 
influence of Italian skies, or the luxurious gales of Eastern 
climes; but we are freeborn American women; formed 
for higher pursuits and nobler purposes — for the exercise 
of mental energy, vigor in action, and elevation of soul. 
Far be it from me to despise or lightly speak of the gentle 
graces and yielding affections of our sex; but I do feel 
that no woman in this favored land need pine and die for 
want of objects to interest and absorb the faculties of her 
soul. The precepts of our holy religion, drawn out in 
the daily practice of life, can make a heaven below ; and 
how numerous are the streams of mercy, which we can 
augment, if we but throw our whole hearts into the service 
of Him, whose love surpasses all that earth has to bestow ! 
It is ungrateful, it is unsafe, to brood over the sorrows and 
disappointments of life, clinging to broken reeds and broken 
cisterns — while the mind is left to lose its vigor, and be- 
come unfit for the plain, important, and every day duties 

of life. Think, ^ how brief is our temporal existence, 

and how short the season of service and of trial, to be 
rewarded by an eternity of perfect bliss ! Is our Saviour a 
hard Master, when he assures us that the greater our afflic- 
tions here, if sanctified, the more intense will be our joy 
hereafter? Oh! look into the Bible, and become imbued 
with its spirit, and you will be ashamed of the selfishness 
which concentrates your affections upon any thing merely 
earthly. Do not be displeased, my dear friend ; it is because 
I love you — love your soul as an imperishable existence, 
destined to a far more exalted sphere than this niche of time, 
that I write thus plainly." 

Writing for the public. — " In regard to writing for the 
public, — I feel indisposed to it^at present. I have come to 
the conclusion, that the world is so full of writers, my pen 



MRS. SARAH L, SMITH. 73 

is not needed. Perhaps my field is to labor and pray with 
my ' hands under mjr wings/ Ezekiel i. 6." # 

Influence of commerce on morals, — " The remarks which 
I made to you respecting commerce, I would not make to 
every one ; for I consider it very important that Christians 
should not expose themselves to the imputation of an un- 
sound judgment, from those who have no reflection; yet 
my opinion, however erroneous, still favors my own argu- 
ment. Uncle Trumbull, who dined with us on Saturday, 
says that the Parisian trade is a curse to our country, 
converting the costume of our ladies into the attire of 

profligates. He spoke very respectfully of Mr. — , 

but said that he was doing injury by his business. This 
is the opinion of a man of the world, and evidently given 
without acrimony." 

Excitement. — " The old-fashioned quietude of domestic 
life, in this region at least, seems much interrupted by the 
bustle and excitement of the present day. Do you not 
think that it is injurious to the character to live upon 
excitement? I think, if I had any superintendence of 
girls, I should strive to have it avoided in their education. 
It produces an artificial stimulus, which, sooner or later, 
must end in reaction, leaving the character tame and spirit- 
less. Fixed principles of action, having their foundation 
in truth, will animate the soul sufficiently, an4 give perma- 
nent cheerfulness, instead of being lost by effervescence. 
Excitement, however, -is the order of the day, and I do 
not consider myself free from its injurious influence." 

Affectionate manners in ministers. — "How much min- 
isters! and religious teachers gain by a tender style! I 

* Notwithstanding this modest conclusion, Miss Huntington wrote 
a considerable number of interesting and valuable pieces, for the col- 
umns of different religious journals. 

4 



74 f MEMOIR OF 

hope, dear brother, you will never withhold the pungent 
doctrines of the gospel; but I do hope you will cultivate 
that affectionate solemnity which accomplishes much more 
than harshness. A minister preaches by his looks, his 
attitudes, and his tones, put of the pulpit and in it, as well 
as by what he says. Oh ! I do long to see love the promi- 
nent, all-pervading characteristic of every Christian." 

Obligations of the children of God. — "There is no 
stopping-place for the churches; and we should rejoice, in 
this. How indolent we are, how ungrateful, that we are 
not willing to serve our Master during a short life, when we 
hope to enjoy him forever I I was thinking, this morning, 
that I have commenced an eternal existence, to be consum- 
mated in heaven, and that every moment of life has an 
influence upon that existence beyond the vail. Oh for a 
constant sense of duty and obligation. These fluctuating 
natures bring us into bondage." 

Pure and undefiled religion. — " I have recently thought 
much of the words : — ' Puje and undefiled religion, before 
God and the Father, is this, to visit the fatherless and 
widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted 
from the world. 1 In the more public, benevolent labors, 
there is room for much that may mar the purity of religion ; 
and though we should give alL our goods to feed those who 
are temporally and spiritually destitute, it would not satisfy 
our Maker, or our own consciences, in that ' honest hour/ 
except the humble and gentle virtues predominate. In 
looking back upon my own life, and observing, also, the 
minuter shades of character in others, who have much zeal, 
I see a great deal which cannot be called ' pure and unde- 
filed ; ' which is not charity in its legitimate sense. I know 
there are many who err in withholding themselves from active 
effort ; and I would not for worlds throw an obstacle in their 
way, to keep them back from duty. But I think those who 
are constitutionally, and from principle too, inclined to go 



MRS. SARAH JU SMITH. 75 

forward in public acts, should be careful to maintain a close 
walk with God, since nothing can be a substitute for this. 
* These things we should do, and not leave the other un- 
done. 1 These thoughts have dwelt upon my mind with so 
much force, in reference to myself particularly, that I was 
constrained to inscribe them here, although you may per- 
haps say, they are not very new. They are old, indeed, as 
the word of God." * 

'.Family self-complacency. — " If the numerous ' Hunting- 
tons ' are useful in their generation, it is of little conse- 
quence whether they are conspicuous. The applause of the 
world is but a breath, and valueless on many accounts. In 
the first place^ the standard is very imperfect; adulation, 
also, is often insincere, and our vanity attaches even more 
to what is said than was meant." 

Delight in the scenes of spring. — "You doubtless par- 
take with us in the peculiar beauties of nature at this season. 
Every tree, capable of blossoming, is robed in luxuriant 
dress, and bespeaks the boundless benevolence of our God. 
What heart can fail to respond to the voice of nature?" 

Christian disinterestedness, contrasted with the spirit of 
the world. — "I find that my wants are few, and the world 
appears very trifling. ' A hoarding spirit ' you cannot 
detest, my dear brother, more than myself; and I have 
reason to believe, that it is the farthest possible from my 
nature. I am naturally profuse, and I never coveted wealth. 
But I find that I can do for Christ, and for our dear father, 
what no other motives could induce. When I think of 
my perishing fellow-men — and that is almost every mo- 
ment — I consider no sacrifice too great to save them. I 
feel willing * to be sacrificed to the world, and to have the 
world sacrificed to me. 7 To ' think of things lovely, honest, 
(or beautiful,) and of good report/ is perfectly consistent 
with entire simplicity of character and habits. If we take 






76 MEMOIR OF 

ihe whole of our Saviour's doctrine, we shall find that much 
greater separation from the world, and distinctness of prac- 
tice, are requisite in his disciples. The shades of difference 
between them and the world are too faint, too blended, to 
hasten the millennial day. Against our trifling gratifica- 
tions, and multiplied personal wants, pride, vanity, and love 
of things tejnporal, we must throw into the scale the ever- 
lasting destiny of numerous immortal souls ; and if we can 
contemplate the balance unmoved, we have strong reason 
to doubt the reality of our love to God." 

On the day of annual fast and prayer for colleges. — 
(February, 1832.*) " I have been meditating on the prob- 
able aspect which the several colleges of our country pre- 
sent, this evening. I have imagined myself passing from 
room to room among the hundreds who are congregated 
within their walls, or listening to the secret breathings of 
some fervent spirit for his unregenerate room-mate. I have 
imagined, too, that these pious intercessors, feeling them- 
selves sustained by the united efforts of individuals and 
churches, throughout the land, redouble their earnest entrea- 
ties, and in the exercise of invigorated faith, already behold 
the fulfilment of their wishes. Yet my imagination stops not 
here. In some of these institutions, I see a few, who but yes- 
terday, perhaps, were reckless of the future, now exhibiting an 
uneasiness which they can scarcely define, yet indicating that 
the Spirit of God, this day invoked, has touched their hearts. 
I have indulged the thought, too, that possibly there will be, 
upon an average, one conversion at least, to every individual 
who has cheerfully and conscientiously devoted this day to 
its appropriate duties. Precious reward ! 

" In addition to the prominent subjects of prayer — the 
immediate descent of the Holy Spirit. — three important con- 
siderations have dwelt upon my mind, as affording ground 



* An extract from an article which Miss H. .wrote for the ( Religious 
Messenger.' 



%■■.-. 



A 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 77 



for humiliation and fasting. The first of these is, the neglect 
of the Bible as a Class book, in the majority of our colleges. 
The second, is the misimprovement of those superior advan- 
tages by many who enjoy them, while others are panting to 
possess them ; — and the third, the diversity of theological 
opinions which diyide and weaken the strength of the true 
Israel of God. * • • Above all, let us not forget to im- 
plore the teaching and peaceful influences of the Spirit, to 
enable those who control these institutions to see eye to eye, 
in reference to the truth which is communicated through the 
volume of inspiration. There certainly must be one simple 
meaning conveyed by unerring Wisdom in his revelation to 
fallen man. That meaning he will disclose, if it be sought 
with an upright mind. In consequence of such diversity of 
sentiment, infidelity finds a ready apology in the minds of 
unregenerate youth, forgetting, as they do, that to his own 
master, every intelligent being must stand or fall. Christian 
brethren and sisters ! with the close of this day, our respon- 
sibilities towards the objects of our devotion do not terminate, 
but are greatly heightened. Let us receive a fresh impulse 
from the return of this anniversary, and, at least one day in 
each week, carry to our closets the varied and extensive 
wants of our literary institutions." 



'M 



i. 



r 



CHAPTER IV. 

JOURNEYS DECEASE OF FRIENDS SYMPATHY WITH 

MOURNERS. 

Miss Huntington's journeys were confined principally to 
such as were necessary in visiting her relatives and acquaint- 
ance; were therefore generally short, and furnished few in- 
cidents " which would he of special interest in a memoir. 
A few will be noticed in the present chapter, as showing how 
she was accustomed to mingle in general society. Some- 
thing is also to be learned of the taste and mental habits, by 
observing how an individual appears abroad, and in inter- 
course with intelligent and respectable strangers. And of 
the strength of religious character, there is probably no 
surer evidence than this, that it " cannot be hid," even 
amidst the companies and throngs into which the Christian 
•is thrown, while travelling. 

The following are brief passages relative to a journey into 
Massachusetts, in which she visijted Andover, at one of those 
anniversary seasons, when so many distinguished Christians 
are customarily assembled. In the course of this journey, 
i.lso, she visited Boston, and the house where she spent 
some of her " school-girl days." 

" We passed Stafford Springs, and stopped a moment at 
the boarding-house. My thoughts flew back to the time 
when my beloved mother, with fond solicitude, ^carried me 
to those waters. I was but three years old at the last visit ; 
and I sorrowed to think how much of that pride of heart 
stjH remained with me, which, at that tender age, subjected 
me to the appellation of ' Madame Buonaparte/ from a lady 
whom I saw there." 

78 ' 



-.% 



MEMOIR OF MRS. SMITH. 79 

"AlgpOVXH. — 

" The moon is shedding her mild and peaceful beams 
upon me as I write. How delightfully Andover Hill appears 
at this moment! I imagine you and your sweet babes, 
calmly reposing upon your pillows. May guardian angels 
attend you, for ' so he giveth his beloved sleep. 1 Good 
night, dear sister. When the toils and solicitudes of life 
are over, may we be prepared to meet in those • sweet 
fields beyond the swelling flood,' which ' stand dressed in 
living green. 3 



i »j 



"The events of Anniversary week 1 were too interesting 
to affect me indifferently; and the intervals of ease with 
which I was favored, enabled me to appreciate the oppor- 
tunities afforded me for an acquaintance with many persons 
of whom I have often heard." 

"Norwich* Not. 7. 

" My visit in Boston forcibly impressed me with the. 
mutability of . N earthly things, — what changes nine years 
have produced ! The voice of strangers resounded in the 
apartments once occupied by those whom we loved and 
honored. I said, ' Where are they 1 ' and Echo answered, 
« Where are they ? ' The laughing and joyous school-mate 
had become the woman and the mother. Time is a feithfui 
laborer, and a monitor to the most thoughtless. To the 
Christian, however, its flight is cheering. > 

* 'Twill waft us sooner o'er 
This lift's tempestuous sea.' 

"I was absent six weeks, and met a most hearty wel- 
come. Father is unwilling to spare me for any thing but 
to go and see you. My late visit furnishes me matter for 
'much pleasant and solid reflection. I rejoice that I was 
permitted to make it. Have you seen ail account of Dr. 
Payson's last moments, with the letter which he wrote to 
his sister? Oh! that his death may be sanctified to th* 



*i- 



SO MEMOIR -OF 

church. His ' last end ' might be that of every Christian, 
if preceded by such a life. My thoughts never dwelt so 
much upon any similar event. The church is one ; may her 
strength and beauty be enhanced, rather than diminished, by 
this pruning of her branches." 

A sketch of a journey which she took with her second 
brother into Maine, and thence to the White Mountains of 
New Hampshire, is given in the subjoined letter, 

"Nobwich, July 26. 

" My dear. Sister : — After we had given you the last look 
of affectionate adieu, and turned from your peaceful dwell- 
ing, my .heart and eyes overflowed with tender emotions, 
and for some minutes' we pursued our way-in silence. I 
told Edward I could not talk immediately, and whenever my 
imagination pictured the little "group at Wiscasset, I felt a 
weight at my iieart. We reached Brunswick just before 
one, and proceeded to President Allen's. We dined, visited 
the colleges, took tea, and left at seven, with a very pleasant 
impression of Brunswick. We reached Portland about 
eleven, passed a comfortable night, and found ourselves in 
the stage at five the next morning, with a party from Boston. 
We became exceedingly attached to them; they were our 
companions eight days. Having occupied the stage-coaches 
almost exclusively for so long a time — ascended Mounts 
Washington and Holyoke together- — and formed a majority 
at the social board three times a day for more than a week 
— our intercourse bore the character of endeared friendship, 
and we could not intrench ourselves in indifference. I 
cannot but indulge the belief that our journey is to result 
in the salvation of some soul. 

"I early discovered to them my own religious views, and 
had free conversations with some of the company. 

"The first night after leaving Portland was spent at 
Conway. The next day our ride was one "of intense in- 
terest. I rode upon the outside of the stage-coach, which 



MRS. SAKAH L. SMITH. 81 

is much practised by ladies on that magnificent route. For 
a longtime before we reached' them, the mountains of New 
Hampshire appeared in the blue distance, to our admiring 
gaze ; but when we were actually among them, it was truly 
a scene of peculiar interest. The drivers, who are familiar 
with every object, instead of hurrying us along, gave us 
every opportunity to view the scenery; and we rode or 
walked, just as it suited us. At the Willey House we all 
left the coach, and examined the melancholy spot, rendered 
desolate by the direct agency of Heaven. The affecting 
events connected with it were deeply impressed upon my 
imagination, by" viewing the interior of the desolated man- 
sion, and the course of the destructive avalanches, which 
swept a family into eternity. Again, we walked through the 
celebrated Notch. 

" The scenery of the White Hills, my dear sister, sur- 
passes description : to be Realized, it must be seen. You 
may try to imagine the effect produced by wending one's 
way around lofty ridges, which appear impassable before 
you reach them, until you find yourself within an amphi- 
theatre of mountains, more bold and towering than any you 
ever saw. 

"But few ladies have ever reached the summit of the 
highest land in North America, east of the Rocky Moun- 
tains. Yet, as I remarked to one of the gentlemen, I had 
not resolved to attempt it from ambitious motives. I 
wished to see the wonderful works of God, and I should 
undertake it, looking to Him for support and protection. 
The, top of the mountain is nine and a half miles from 
Crawford's, five of which are accomplished by riding, and 
the remainder on foot. We set out, half of the party in 
a wagon, and the other on horses. I was the only female 
equestrian. When we dismounted, we- were each furnished 
with a long palmer-staff; and with our two guides, father and 
son, making twelve in all, we commenced our ascent in 
Indian file, presenting a scene for an artist's pencil. But 
oh, the toilsomeness of the ascent ! I thought I had exerted 

4* 



82 MEMOIR OF 

myself before ; but every former effort dwindled to a point, 
in comparison. We crossed the Amonoosuck seven times, 
which rises from the Lake of the Clouds, high upon the 
range, and empties into the Connecticut. The Saco rises 
within a few yards of the same, and empties into the 
Atlantic. This we crossed twenty times, before reaching 
the mountains. Our guide frequently regaled us with water 
fresh from the fountain; and after reaching a recess in the 
rocks, called 'the kitchen,' we took our lunch. The 
wind began to blow violently, and a portion of our party 
concluded to remain behind, with one of the guides. I 
exchanged my hat for a calash, with one of the ladies, 
and proceeded. Our path now. lay over shelving, pre- 
cipitous, and broken rocks, which appeared to form an 
almost perpendicular ascent, and the summit seemed to 
My from our approach. At length we completed the 
arduous attempt, and we found ourselves surrounded by 
'a sea of mountains/ — an illimitable extent of undulating 
surface, with no definiteness of prospect, but mountain- 
billows of mountains. I could have staid there many 
days ; but there is no shelter ; the wind blew violently, and 
the clouds soon threatened to envelop us. I remained but 
five minutes, while others, who reached the summit sooner, 
were there fifteen. The grandeur of the view surpasses 
description. I had not time to collect my thoughts, but I 
felt like a pygmy. We returned to Crawford's in just 
twelve hours from our departure; more than eleven of 
which were spent in climbing. Before we left Crawford's, 
his two little girls repeated to me a hymn, which I had 
given them to learn. We dined the next day at Haverhill, 
and spent the Sabbath at Hanover. President Allen had 
furnished us with letters of introduction, of which we made 
no use until after Sabbath, when we called at Dr. Muzzy's. 
— I had anticipated an unpleasant Sabbath; but from some 
cause, every one in the house seemed to be under restraint. 
There was no loud talking or jesting. Edward and I de- 
termined to set an example, and spent most of the time in 



ht 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 83 

our rooms. We went to meeting all day, and so did each 
of the party. We had received an addition to our number 
of a% wealthy Episcopal family from New York, who were 
polite, serious, affable people, and with our Unitarian 
friends, heard two K sermons from Mr. Page, on the day of 
grace being past; and on the sovereignty of God; bona fide 
Calvinism. 

" Dr. M. called in the morning, and we took a hasty 
view of the colleges. My associations with the Mohegans 
rendered it doubly interesting. With old Dr. Wheelock, 
and Earl Dartmouth, whose portraits adorn the walls, I felt 
a strong sympathy > because they loved the Indians. 

" Monday noon found us at Brattleborough ; and Tuesday 
noon, at Northampton; and the afternoon, on the summit 
of Mt. Holyoke. Here, after a trifling effort, we spent an 
hour or 'two most delightfully ; and the view, — oh ! it is 
exquisite ; more beautiful than Mt. Washington. In a clear 
atmospfiere, thirty steeples may be counted. I can describe 
it in no way so forcibly, as by a family of villages, with 
the beautiful Connecticut sweeping gracefully among them. 
I do not believe the whole earth presents a lovelier scene. 
# # # # * # 

" The hour of parting came. All our life and buoyancy 
were fled. We had been silent for nearly an hour. Our 
Boston party were to leave for home at 2 o'clock the next 
morning. My heart was full, and I was obliged, to retire, 
and give vent to my feelings. I awoke when they left, and 
heard the last rumbling of the carriage wheels as they died 
upon my ear. We should probably meet no more until 
the last great day! This intercourse of entire strangers 
for eight successive days, had not been in vain ! It was a 
link^in the chain of events, that eternity would disclose in 
its relations. 

" Northampton is a delightful spot. Amherst and Hadley 
we could only see at a distance. The New York party 



. *V- 



84 MEMOIR OF 

accompanied us to Springfield, where we visited the Ar- 
mory, on Wednesday afternoon." 

The following letter to one of the ladies of the party in 
the excursion to the White Mountains, gives her account of 
the conclusion of the journey; and exhibits the strength 
and liveliness of Miss Huntington's interest, as a Christian, 
in the spiritual welfare of her travelling acquaintances. It 
also shows how entirely practicable it is, to unite the utmost 
fidelity in presenting religious truth and duty, with the most 
perfect delicacy and propriety. 

" Norwich, Sept. 7. 

"My dear Mrs. A.: — You will perhaps be surprised to 
reeeive aietter from me, as I made no promise to that ef- 
fect when we parted ; but I am very desirous to hear from 
you, and begin to fear I shall not have this pleasure, unless 
I bring you in debt. After my return home, I accidentally 
heard t>f you at Saratoga, by some Norwich friends who 
were there, but did not see you. From this circumstance, 
I have been led to fear that your son was more unwell, 
making it necessary for you to set out immediately upon 
another journey. Will you not permit me to hear from 
you very soon, with particulars of your recent tour, of 
your son's health, and of all which you think I should be 
gratified to know. By a letter from Mr. W. to brother, 
written the day after his arrival in Boston, we were in- 
* formed of your progress after our separation at Northamp- 
ton. I awoke at 2 o'clock, and heard the familiar sounds 
which accompany the departure of passengers ; and was 
just forming the resolution that I would rise, wrap myself 
in a cloak, and seat myself at our parlor window, that, 
unobserved, I might witness your exit ; when I heard the 
rumbling of the carriage, as it moved from the door. The 
darkness and solitude of night did not diminish the des- 
olate feeling which stole over me, as the last sounds of 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 85 

the stage-coach died upon my ear, and I thought we should 
never all meet on earth. The next morning all things 
looked cheerless and forsaken, and we were not sorry to 
hear the signal for our own departure, which took place 
at 10 o'clock. 

" We reached Springfield at noon, where, to our regret, 
we learned that no stage left for Norwich until Friday. 
We visited the Armory that afternoon, and the next morn- 
ing took an extra for 'Home, sweet Home' — to me the 
dearest spot on earth ! My father's house possesses a charm 
with which my imagination could never invest any other 
place. You may easily believe we found a most cordial 
welcome ; particularly from my mother, of whose loss of 
sight you heard me speak. After we became settled in 
the quiet of home-born pleasures, and I began to reflect 
seriously upon the events of our mountain excursion, I felt 
assured that an overruling Providence had exerted some 
special agency in them. It could not be a mere accident, 
that we were drawn together for so many days, once entire 
strangers, but now endeared friends. For myself, possessed 
of naturally strong affections, I may say that I shall ever 
retain a lively recollection of those interesting scenes; 
and that among the friends of my fleeting years, those of 
White Mountain memory will hold an important place. 
Eternity, will develop all the features of that interesting jour- 
ney, and their influence upon the future destiny of each. 

"I am aware, my dear madam, that our views upon an 
important subject are dissimilar ; and perhaps you will deem 
it strange that I touch upon it; yet I cannot hesitate, for 
my principles and feelings always impel me to remind my 
friends — those whom I especially love — that we are fel- 
low-travellers to a region of more intense interest than any 
earthly spot can boast. How often, during our rides, did I 
cherish the ardent wish, that we might all be prepared to 
meet, where separation is unknown ! And excuse me if I 
add, that the prayer has unceasingly risen, that the same 
Almighty Saviour, upon whom all my hopes rest, may be 



£6 MEMOIR OF 

this chosen portion^of each of my companions: If it is idola- 
try * to exalt to the throne of my heart this great ' High Priest 
of my profession/ yet I fear not to appear with these prin- 
ciples before the tribunal of Jehovah. Since God has ap- 
parently owned the efforts of that portion of professing 
Christians who maintain these views, is it not safe, my 
dear friend, to make it a subject of earnest prayer, that, 
if the natural character be so utterly destitute of merit as to 
require a divine expiation for sin, we may be enabled fully 
to believe in , so essential a truth ? This religion is one 
eminently calculated, in its very nature, to produce a peace 
of mind wholly independent of earthly joys. Yea, it be- 
comes more vigorous, as sublunary pleasures' disappoint, 
and lose their influence. When the idols of this world 
are snatched from our hearts, they become more purified for 
the residence of Immanuel, through the ' Comforter ' which 
he promised at his ascension. 

" I will not apologize, my dear madam, for this intro- 
duction of a subject which holds the first place in my 
thoughts ; for the recollection of your amiable deportment 
forbids me to cherish the apprehension, that you will be 
displeased. 

" One word I must indulge myself in adding, to my 
young friend B. — a hope that he will join that immense 
company of youthful soldiers, who are how enlisting under 
the banner of the Great Captain. In casting my eye over 
a Boston paper, I noticed his name among the recipients 
of prizes at the High School, which, but for our journey 
together, would have been overlooked or unheeded. 

" And now I mugt say adieu ! with the request that I may 
soon hear from you — a favor to which I think I may lay 
claim. Your excellent husband I shall always remember ; 
to whom, with your son, present my kind regards ; also to 



* * If by some it be accounted idolatry,* is the meaning of Miss 
Huntington, doubtless. 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 87 

any 'of our friends whom you may see. Accept the as- 
surance of the respect and love of yours, &c." 

The decease of one of the party, nearly at the date of 
the preceding letter, is thus noticed, in writing to her 
sister : — • » 

" Norwich/ Sept. 19. 

" Mr. P., one of our associates at Mt. Washington, of 
whom I wrote, is no more ! He died, with fever a week or 
two since. I cannot realize it. He was only twenty-four 
years of age ; and his wife twenty-two. I had just written 
to them on the subject of religion, which letter did not 
reach Ithem till after his death. The prominent idea upon 
which I insisted was the shortness of time!" 

In a - letter written at one point of another journey, ap- 
pears her loVe for beautiful and sublime scenery. 

" Bennington, Vt., Oct. 22. 
" I have enjoyed my visit very much. The mountain 
breezes are very salubrious. The beauty of the scenery 
exceeds any thing of the kind which I ever saw. The 
autumn tints of the foliage are much richer and more 
variegated than with us; and as the lofty mountains are 
covered to the summit, they present the appearance of im- 
mense flower gardens ; rendered more striking by dark 
spots of evergreen alternately presenting themselves. One 
of the highest of these mountains, called Mount Anthony, 
rises not far from Mr. H.'s residence, containing a marble 
quarry, and a cave of some celebrity, the interior of which 
I should visit at a more favorable season. We have thought 
a great deal of C, pur old domestic, who was taken prisoner 
here, in the revolutionary war. s He was among the party 
of Hessians who were bought by the British for ' six pound 
ten.' We have seen and handled Col. Baum's sword, which 
was taken from his wounded person at 'the battle of Ben- 
nington/ and of which C. had so much to relate." 



$8 MEMOIR OF 

Of an excursion to New York she thus writes : — 

"March 21. 
" Notwithstanding a strong head-wind, there was scarce 
any sickness on board the boat. I spent most of the day 
on deck, inhaling the free sea-breeze. Our passengers 

were agreeable. Among them was Mrs. , mourning 

for the loss of the infant whose birth was so splendidly 
commemorated. She is a pretty woman, simple in her 
manners ; but, alas ! that relief from sorrow should be sought 
in the perusal of a novel ! As we sat around the stove at 
midnight, in the ladies' cabin, I had a favorable opportunity 
to say a few words in behalf of the rationality of true 
religion ; and especially of its support in trial." 

In connection with the foregoing extract, as indicating 
her views of the true sources of consolation in affliction, 
and her habits of thought respecting the bereavements of 
Providence ; it may be proper to add a few extracts from 
Miss Huntington's letters on the death of friends. 

On hearing, during her absence from home, of the death 
of that most intimate of her friends, whom, as has been 
already remarked, she regarded as having been the instru 
ment of her conversion, she thus writes : — "By letters from 
home last evening, my dear cousin, the intelligence of your 
recent affliction reached me. I am left alone to-day, and 
my thoughts refuse every subject of contemplation, but what 
relates to my dear Eliza and her lovely infant. To relieve 
my feelings, I have taken my pen ; and I presume no apology 
is necessary for this expression of my sympathy for you. I 
imagine you sitting lonely and disconsolate, no less grieved, 
than if the dear child had been your own. How your heart 
must bleed ! I could weep with you. While your thoughts 
are fixed on earth, all things present must appear dark and 
cheerless. But if you raise the eye of faith to a purer 
scene, how lovely is the prospect! Behold the angelic 
mother, striking anew her harp of praise, while she hails 



V 

* 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 80 

her sweet offspring ' born again above.' Their melodious 
voices unite in the song of redeeming love. 

"If we contrast the heavenly state of these dear departed 
ones with their earthly career, even had they been spared 
for the highest temporal happiness, we must rejoice in their 
release. The mother, contending with the depravity of her 
own heart, would often have mourned over the alienation 
of her child from God ; and like others, struggling with sin 
and disappointment, would have found life at best but a 
weary pilgrimage. The dear infant, too, must have followed 
the same beaten path, and discovered that all is vanity. 
True, we should be cheered by their existence; our path 
might be brightened by their presence ; but 'tis only selfish- 
ness that would have retained them here, or would recall 
them now. Whenever I think of Eliza with natural feelings 
only, I experience deep regret that God has taken her ; but 
I strive to check such thoughts, and to rejoice for her. 

" I think of you, and pray for you, and I hope that you 
find in your trial a peaceful resting-place in God. It is in 
affliction that the Christian may most glorify his Saviour 
before the world. Perhaps at this time you may be the 
means of impressing upon some individual the importance 
and reality of true faith. 

" I could easily fill my paper, but your Bible will furnish 
you more profitable reading. To that and the riches of 
God's grace I commend you." 

Of another, who, not many months before heir decease, 
had entered upon the Christian life, she writes — "I heard 
from Chester respecting Fayette's death. I rejoice to hear 
of her peaceful exit, and delight to anticipate a meeting in 
heaven. I have desired so much to become a disembodied 
spirit, and my thoughts have dwelt so much upon the invisi- 
ble world, of late, that I cannot but rejoice for those who 
forsake their clay. But now I wish to live for the sake of 
others." 



90 MEMOIR OF 

Shortly after the decease of her grandmother, Mrs. Sar-al* 
Lanman, she thus writes : — "Grandmamma's sickness and 
death made demands upon my time, which were cheerfully 
met, as I esteem it an honor, to have contributed any por- 
tion of labor to the comfort and. memory of one so highly 
honored of God. It was a privilege to be with her the last 
day of her life, and to behold her peaceful exit. She used 
often in health to express muih solicitude respecting the 
externals of her death ; and in this respect, as well as in 
more important things, God was very gracious. She died 
while lying in a natural posture upon her side, and closed 
her own eyes; softly breathing her last, like an infant. 
Her remains, too, were lovely ; and the sweet smile upon 
her features seemed an earnest of her angelic rest in heaven. 
She was a shining light. May we be enabled to honor her 
memory by a regard to those principles which were the 
ornament of her life." 

The subjoined extracts relate to the decease and .charac- 
ter of the Rev. Alfred Mitchell, her much esteemed pastor : 
— " Your friend and brother, and our beloved minister, 
has gone to the world of spirits, to join the Master whom 
he has served so faithfully. While I write it, I can hardly 
believe what my pen records. And yet it is really so. 
About 5 P. M., yesterday, the conflict ceased ; and I trust he 
has found a joyful welcome in the regions of blessedness. 

" I have felt very tenderly at the departure of my spiritual 
father. I have grown up under his ministry, and have often 
fed upon the truth which he has delivered. I shall rejoice 
to meet him in heaven. My last interview with him was 
very endearing and gratifying." 

She partook deeply in the sensation felt throughout the 
churches of New England, at the death of the Rev. Mr. 
Cornelius. 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 91 

"NohwicH, Feb. 14. 
" Before this arrives, you will probably hear of the sudden 
death of our dear Mr. Cornelius ; an event which occasions 
'» many tender recollections — casts a shade over many 
feasant associations — and more than all, makes a wide 
breach in the church of Christ. Dear Mrs. Cornelius, how 
does she support it ! * 

* One there is, above all others, 
Well deserves the name of Friend,' 

and he can, and will, I trust, sustain her. 'Cease ye. from 
man, whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is he to be 
accounted of? ' It is sweet to realize, that God is an infi- 
nitely wise and benevolent Sovereign; and although he 
gives no account of his designs to us, faith assures us of 
the perfection of his government. Why do we ever dis- 
trust that love which has clothed divinity in humanity, and 
furnished us a perpetual High Priest in heaven? There 
stands our Representative, the Surety for our everlasting 
welfare ; and as long as He there remains, we know, for a 
certainty, that all things will work together for good, to his 
adopted ones." 

She subsequently visited Mrs. Cornelius in New York, 
and thus describes her feelings : — " My visit was one 
of tender interest, and it has left a pensive impression upon 
my mind. There is something sublime and heavenly in the 
sorrow of an enlightened but chastened Christian. In con- 
versing with such a one you seem to have stepped out of 
the usual ferment of human scenes, to hold communion 
with elevated and invisible realities." " As we passed 
through the hall to the street door, I said, 'Your house 
is a pleasant one.' She replied, 'It is a sacred spot to me. 
Here I have witnessed precious scenes, — my husband 
ripened fast for heaven during the few months we were 
here together.' I went to see her three times. She told 
me much that was interesting of her deai Vvuakm^ -ss\\ 



v-' 



92 MEMOIR OF MRS. SMITH. 

permitted me to peruse some letters respecting him from 
Boston and Hartford. I went around the house with her, 
and saw his study, desk, books, &c., just as he left them. 
It was like communing with the invisible world." 

In a note to a mother, recently deprived of a beloved 
child by death, she thus writes : — 



s 



"Nbw York, April 18. 
"Dear Mrs. Williams : — Since hearing of the deep 
affliction with which you have been visited, my sympathy 
has been frequently excited towards you, and I feel, con- 
strained to express the same with my pen. I know, from 
sad, yet sweet experience, that it is some alleviation of our 
grief to find that our sorrows are shared by. others, although 
the only true and permanent consolation can be derived 
from Christ Jesus. I trust we both can testify how precious 
his friendship is at such an, hour of anguish. Never, till 
the departure of my dear brother, did I know how to feel 
for the afflicted. Now I can enter into the sanctuary of 
their grief, and my heart seems to vibrate in unison with 
every chord of theirs. I know that the tie which binds a 
mother to her child is peculiar, and can be realized only by 
those who sustain this relation ; — yet the kind of maternal 
watchfulness which I had been called to exercise towards 
that brother, greatly increased the strength of my regard, 
and added to the poignancy of my sorrow." 

Thus did Miss Huntington improve the departures of those 
whom she knew or loved, for the quickening of her own 
spirit, and in sending forward her thoughts, aided her own 
preparation to enter upon the scenes of eternity. 



CHAPTER V. 

INTEREST IN REVIVALS OP RELIGION **- IN BENEVOLENT 
OPERATIONS IN THE CONVERSION OF DISTANT RELA- 
TIVES AND ACQUAINTANCES. 

Miss Huntington, after her conversion, was solicitous 
for the prosperity of religion in her native place, and with 
the enlargement of heart which marks the devoted Christian, 
she rejoiced in revivals of religion wherever they occurreo 1 . 
Her anxiety respecting its prosperity in Norwich was 
frequent, when there was not a revival in actual progress. 
When such seasons did occur, they were to her times of 
intense interest — of lively anxiety — but also of solemn and 
elevated joy. To her sister, who visited Norwich after an 
extraordinary descent of the Holy Spirit, she said, "How 
trifling these ornamented parlors and drawing-rooms have 
appeared to me of late ! " It should not be represented that 
after Miss Huntington's entrance upon a religious life, she 
was entirely free from the temptations of the world. In com- 
mon with others she experienced seasons of declension. But 
she felt, in an uncommon degree, the effect of the extra- 
ordinary effusion of the Holy Spirit enjoyed by the church 
in 1831 ; and ever after that period she seemed to have 
received a new and powerful impulse in- the divine life. 
She prayed much for the blessings of the Spirit on those 
around her ; encouraged others to do the same ; watched for 
answers to prayer, and for the first evidences of divine 
influence on the hearts of Christians and the unconverted ; 
interested herself in the cases of the thoughtless and care- 
less, as well as of awakened and converted persons ; and 
entered into the "joy of the angels of God in heaven, over 

93 



94 MEMOIR OF 

one sinner that repented," with a liveliness of gratitude 
rarely surpassed. Her letters to her friends abounded in 
details of the interesting scenes and events passing; and 
indicated that she was a rich sharer in the spiritual benefit 
of such seasons. 

The same devoted piety which inclined her to pray for 
the influences of the Holy Spirit in revivals of religion, 
also led her to take a steady and fervent interest in the 
advancement of the kingdom of Christ every where. The 
seasons of concert in prayer among Christians, for mis- 
sions, Sabbath schools, revivals in colleges, and other spe- 
cific objects, on which ia late years Christians have been 
44 agreed together," always received- her careful observance. 
In promoting all the great systems of Christian benevolence 
in operation for spreading the gospel in our dark and ruined 
world, she bore an active, and often a leading part with 
her Christian friends. No one entered with more liveliness 
into the spirit of the anniversaries of the various benevolent 
associations, or felt higher satisfaction at the evidences of 
their increasing prosperity. She also engaged with others 
in efforts for the spiritual good of places in the region of 
Norwich, destitute of religious privileges, and was active 
among her Christian associates in raising the means for 
furnishing the destitute. She was for some time engaged 
with several of her friends in a "Charity Warehouse," 
where were sold various articles, and to which she devoted 
some of the products of her skill in painting and drawing. 
The profits of this were devoted to some of the benevolent 
objects of the day. Respecting this enterprise, she had 
afterwards, however, some scruples. She said to a friend 
that she had given up the Warehouse, in which were sold 
sweetmeats, &,c, for she could not consistently teach her 
Sabbath scholars self-denial, while she was instrumental in 
furnishing temptations to self-indulgence. She also was 
concerned, with ladies of the church to which she belonged, 
in fitting up a "Missionary R$om," where they used to 
meet for prayer and labors of benevolence. There was a 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 95 

ceaseless, untiring spirit of love to souls and to the kingdom 
of her Lord and Redeemer, in her heart, united with 
ingenuity in devising, and enterprise in executing benevo- 
lent plans, which seemed to bear her onward from day to 
day and from year to year; making efforts herself, and 
endeavoring to enlist the hearts and the hands of her friends 
around her. Her spirit is well illustrated in the following 
sentences in one- of her letters: — "What a blessed work, 
to be the messenger of glad tidings to a guilty world ! I 
have more than once, of late, wished myself a young 
minister. The triumphs of divine grace, and the presages 
of millennial glory, sometimes induce such overpowering im- 
pulses in my soul, that I want to burst the confines of my 
sex, and go forth a, pubiic ambassador for Christ. To 
check such feelings, which should not be deliberately 
indulged, requires an effort." 

She deeply felt whatever embarrassed, or was liable to 
bring into reproach the efforts of Christian benevolence, as 
her remarks on an agent indicate : — " Mr. C. pleased us, but 
he was injudicious, Monday evening,- in pronouncing a wo 
upon those whose motives in giving were not purely Chris- 
tian. Mr. G. had just spoken in favor of the object ; and 
as usual with him, acknowledged his deficiency, in one 
particular ; and though Mr. C. meant well, his denunciation 
was ill-timed and prejudicial to his object. If I had time 
and room, I would explain more fully. ' Be ye wise as ser- 
pents, and harmless as doves.' I have thought much, of late, 
upon the importance of the exhibition of tenderness and 
affection, by Christians and ministers. If we can draw the 
hearts of people towards us, we increase our influence. 
'God is love.' Severity and harshness are carnal weapons. 
A recollection of our own native obstinacy and rebellion, is 
calculated to make us merciful to others." 

Miss Huntington entered with much spirit into the con- 
dition and necessities of the Greeks, as appears from the 






96 MEMOIR OF 

following account of efforts in Norwich on their behalf: — 
" Should my letter be, in any respect, a la Grec, you must 
not be surprised ; for * know you hereby/ that for the past 
week, my fingers have been almost constantly employed in 
the service of Peloponnesian damsels. The new Masonic 
Hall has presented a scene upon which you would have liked 
to take a peep, and would probably have done so, had you 
been here. One hundred and fifty females were collected 
on one day, and groups of various numbers and appearance 
have presented themselves there on other days. The work 
is now nearly completed, and a gdnerous donation will be 
made from Norwich." 

The sentiments of the following paragraph, in relation 
to charity funds, will probably 'be appreciated as just : — 
" Do you not think that it is more consistent with the spirit 
■.\* ^ of the gospel to trust, from year to year, in Him who has 
all in his hands ? Is it not conforming to worldly princi- 
ples, to accumulate large funds? I do not assert, but only 
propose a query. When we speak to people respecting the 
embarrassments of the society, they reply, ' Why do they not 
use the money which they have ? And when that is gone, 
we will furnish more/ And these are not opposers, but 
hearty friends. There is no doubt that a spirit of benevo- 
lence will increase ; and as Christians become more separate 
# from the world, every succeeding year will furnish sufficient 

for its exigences." 

One great object in the arrangement of her expenditures 
seemed to be to appropriate the greatest amount of her 
income to the advancement of the kingdom- of Christ. She 
was frugal and simple in her apparel, with an eye to greater 
ability to give liberally, and was generous in her donations. 
The little income which she received from a small legacy, 
was, at times, if not invariably, devoted to religious chari- 
ties; and some silver plate, 'which came to her from the 
estate of her grandfather Huntington, was devoted to such 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 97 

objects, la these and other ways, was nurtured that 
Strength of moral feeling and self-government, which en- 
abled her to forsake many of the dearest earthly objects, 
that she might carry the knowledge of her Saviour to the 
degraded daughters of Syria. 

One of her plans to obtain means for doing good, appears 
in the following extract from a letter to her sister : — "I 
intend, when you are located again, to seek some opening, 
where, if I do not go to the West, I may obtain a small 
school, and give every dollar to the cause of benevolence. 
I must do something. Mary brought ' a costly offering' to 
the Saviour's feet, in token of her gratitude. I long to 
show my love and gratitude ; and I see not how I can be 
exempted from labor, with health, youthful vigor, and 
freedom from domestic ties. Pray for me, that God will 
open a door of usefulness. We are trying to excite to 
some systematic effort, for our destitute regions." 

i 

The subjoined statement is derived from the superin- 
tendent of the Sabbath school connected with the First 
Congregational church in Norwich. 

" Miss Huntington was always a teacher in the school, 
when in town, (except about eight months,) till she engaged 
in the Mohegan enterprise. Then her absence was felt and 
lamented by all ; her advice and efficiency, were of such 
essential service to the -school. Having accomplished her 
object at Mohegan, in providing the Indians with a teacher 
for both the Sabbath and the week, she came the next 
Lord's day into the Sabbath school again, and expressed 
a willingness to take a class, if there were one for her. 
She had been in the room but a few minutes, when the 
superintendent received a note signed by five young ladies, 
expressing a wish to join the school, if they could have a 
teacher. He considered the occurrence providential, and 
proposed to her to take them as her class. She shrunk 
from it, at first, through a feeling of incompetency; but 
" ■ 5 



98 MEMOIR OF 

the next day accepted the proposal. The class soon in- 
creased to a dozen. Not one of them, at the beginning, 
was a professor of religion. She met them every Wednes- 
day for personal conversation" and prayer. All were at 
-length, one after another, converted, except one. To this 
one, on the eve of her marriage, she testified her affection 
in a parting note." 

"Sabbath Eve, March 11. 

" I was not aware, my dear Sarah, until to-day, that the 
important event you are anticipating was so near at hand. 
I must now, I suppose, relinquish the enjoyment of your 
presence and aid, in my pleasant class of Bible learners. I 
resign you to other duties, cares, and pleasures. I cannot, 
however, do this without tender emotions. Your deport- 
ment has been such as to win my regard, while 1 have been 
deeply solicitous for your immortal welfare. 

" For your friend I have a high respect ; and I anticipate 
for you mutual and substantial happiness so far as human 
means can operate. 

" And is it so that our intercourse has thus ceased for- 
ever? It has not been accidental; you, I believe, were. a 
principal agent in the formation of the class. Its interests 
are linked with eternity. Our ranks are at length broken, 
and other changes will probably follow. Life, with all that 
belongs to it, will soon be gone. Dear Sarah, do not' any 
longer remain upon neutral ground; the Saviour is worthy 
of all your heart, and heaven worth the greatest sacrifice 
you can make. 

" Accept the warm expression of my love and best wishes 
for you and yours. Our class meet at Mrs. Chester's next 
Sabbath evening, at my request. Should you be able to 
attend, it would afford pleasure to all, and give particular 
satisfaction to your true friend." 

A letter to one who had been a scholar in her Sabbath 
school class, residing in another State, shows the interest 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. , 99 

she felt in all who had been under her instruction : — " We 
miss you exceedingly in our little group, as each of the dear 
girls will testify. I love you all ; and I am unable to ex- 
press how ardently I desire'to see you, without a single 
exception, safe within the enclosure of 'the Good Shep- 
herd ' ! Not the form of one ever glides before me, nor her 
image enters my mind, without strong solicitude that God 
would sanctify you in early life for his service, and that you 
may be the happy instruments of hastening the millennial 
day. That you, my dear Mary, have been ' sealed to the 
day of redemption/ gives abundant joy to my heart ; and my 
only wish for you now is, that you may not be satisfied with 
low attainments of Christian character; that you take no 
earthly being for a standard, but that Jesus Christ may be 
your pattern in all things. What a precious visit was yours 
in Norwich! Surely, your parents have rejoiced that they 
consented to your stay. My respects await them. Every 
unpleasant feeling, but that of grief at your departure, 
seemed banished from my mind when you left; at the 
reflection that you were going to a home, where every thing 
would favor your spiritual improvement — not only within, 
but without the paternal home. Much devotedness will be . 
expected from you under such circumstances," 

The superintendent- also states that the mind of Miss Hunt- 
ington was ever studious and inventive on the subject of 
plans for the improvement of their system of instruction. 
This was the fact to such an extent, that when suggestions 
on the subject appeared in the Sabbath School Journal, he 
found them almost uniformly anticipated by some which 
she had made, and on which they had already acted. 

The superintendent, on one occasion, received a letter, 
in the hand-writing of Miss Huntington, though without 
any signature ; and which so obviously bears the impress 
of her mind and heart, and so well illustrates the character 
of the devoted and solicitous teacher, that it will be here 
inserted. 



100 MEMOIR OF 

• 

" Will you, my,dear sir, esteem it becoming in a teacher of 
your Sabbath school to express a few reflections which 1 
trust the Spirit of God has suggested ? (for I do assure you, 
sir, I have had deep searchings of heart relative to our 
school, since the trying event of last Sabbath.) The mis- 
conduct of our scholars, upon that occasion, led to these 
reflections ; and you will perhaps be surprised when I tell 
you, that during the exercises at the Falls, my own feelings 
were principally of a painful nature. My heart ached, 
' while I looked around upon our school, and considered 
that among the numbers, who for nearly ten years, winter 
and summer, had been the subjects of our instruction, I 
could not recollect a solitary instance of conversion. I 
know that several upon their death-beds have given some 
faint evidence to their friends that they had profited by 
their privileges. And I recollect also, with pleasure, that 
one adult hopefully became a subject of grace, through our 
instrumentality. But my own memory furnishes no instance 
of a child belonging to our school who has brought forth 
the fruits of the Spirit by a holy conversation. On the 
contrary, some, who, from age and other circumstances, 
have passed away from under our instruction, have openly 
disgraced themselves and us, by vicious courses ; and others, 
who have been brought to the verge of the grave by vio- 
lent sickness, have manifested no anxiety on account of 
sin, but resumed their usual places in the school as in- 
different as ever. My dear sir, what is the difficulty 1 
Is there not a serious defect somewhere ? These are ques- 
tions which I have put to myself since last Sabbath ; and 
permit me to tell you how I have answered them. 

" In the first place, the want of discipline is a prevailing 
and deadly evil among us. In the third number, voL2d, 
of the Sunday School Magazine, a teacher, after delineating 
the different traits of character which his class exhibit, and 
mentioning their characteristic thoughtlessness as children, 
remarks — 'But how cheering! No sooner does the bell 
ring for attention, the teacher look or speak, or the super- 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 101 

intendent appear, than all in a moment is silence and order. 
Those little whims, those evil desires, which just before had 
occupied them, are fled, and they are quickly supplanted fry 
a few words of salutary and timety advice. Thus by a hap- 
py arrangement of every thing connected with the govern- 
ment and utility of the school, each pupil is trained in the 
ways of heavenly wisdom, " whose paths are pleasantness 
and peace." ' That such a description cannot apply to us, 
the experience and observation of every teacher will tes- 
tify. I have been extremely mortified by the repeated re- 
mark among our friends and supporters, ' Your school is 
very disorderly.' 

" Another fault is a want of seriousness on our part. 
Our deportment does not partake sufficiently of the sa- 
cred ness of holy time, and the solemnity of our duties. 
If scholars witness any distraction, or listlessness, or lightness 
in the manners of their teachers, they catch the infection 
and practise it doubly themselves. 

*' Another evil, which I beg leave to mention, is a defect in 
our mode of instruction. M c DowelPs Questions, so generally 
used among us, every teacher must" have found, give the 
learner but a very superficial acquaintance with the word 
of God. They are confined to the historical parts of the 
Bible ; and even among these, some of the most interesting 
and instructive portions are passed over; and from Job to 
Malachi the whole is omitted, excepting Daniel and Jonah. 

" There is great reason to fear that we are deficient in 
prayer and faith, and in a serious and thorough preparation 
of heart and mind, for the weekly duties of our responsible 
station. If these be wanting, every other exertion must 
inevitably fail. 

" May I propose, sir, in >iew of all these considerations, 
a day of fasting, humiliation, and prayer, to be privately 
observed by the teachers? This is what we have never 
done ; but what might be done with propriety ; and I think 
is even demanded by the unfruitfulness of this garden of 
the Lord. 



102 MEMOIR OF 

" Will you permit me, sir, to suggest several improvements, 
which I think would greatly advance the interests of our 
school ? In the first place, let us be much more attentive 
to the outward government of our respective classes, and 
the school generally. Let us convince our pupils that as 
' order is Heaven's first law,' so also is it ours, and must 
be regarded. Let us also be more exclusively devoted to 
them, and by an increase of seriousness, show them that 
we are acting for eternity. 

" I would propose, also, that we abolish those long lessons 
pf question and answer ; the recital of which occupies so 
much time, as almost to preclude practical instruction. 
Let each of us furnish ourselves (from the Bible) with a 
system of doctrines and duties, simplified or enlarged ac- 
cording to the capacities of our scholars ; and give to each 
scholar, who is able to do it, one subject every week to 
examine and prove by Scripture, requiring him to commit 
the proofs to memory, and recite them to us; while we 
in the mean time study the subject ourselves, with prayer 
and faith, and be prepared to explain and enforce them. 
Those who are too young to examine for themselves may have 
the proofs pointed out to them ; which they can learn as 
well as the others, and be instructed in them by us. We 
have many fine minds and ready scholars under our care, 
who should be taught to think and examine for themselves. 
Every Sabbath scholar should be well acquainted with 
the leading doctrines and all the precepts of the gospel. 
This course of instruction, I believe, will effect it, with 
God's blessing, and by his grace may be the means of 
turning them from sin unto holiness. We must not palliate 
the faults of our scholars too much, on the ground of the 
general thoughtlessness of early youth, and our own mis- 
conduct at their age. We did not possess the advantages 
of Sabbath school instruction, and we have a right to ex- 
pect that Sabbath scholars will be better than any others, 
better than even ourselves; as the husbandman looks for a 
richer crop, from the soil which he has most highly cultivated 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 103 

And in this age, when so much is doing for the moral im- 
provement of our race, we should expect to see depravity 
less predominant, among those who have been planted in 
the house of God, and are nurtured by his fostering hand. 

" I would willingly hope that the evils I deplore are con- 
fined to myself and my own class, humbling as the fact would 
be to me. But I have witnessed the same in other classes ;. 
and the school at large is suffering for want of more vig- 
orous measures. 

" As a fellow-laborer in this school, I have thus far ven- 
tured to express my sentiments. I trust they will not be 
considered the effect of arrogance ; for I apply them all 
doubly to myself; feeling that I am tiie most unworthy and 
unfaithful of our number. Our work is great, and our ac- 
count will be solemn. May we prove ourselves faithful stew- 
ards, and partakers of the heavenly inheritance. 

" N. B. Since writing the above, I have thought of the 
Assembly's Catechism, as a system of instruction prepared 
to our hand ; of which we may give one question each 
week to our scholars, for examination. In conversing with 
them upon it, we may be able to elucidate it occasionally 
by stories, or facts, which have come to our knowledge, 
after the plan of the ' Sherwood Stories/ which the 
teachers have probably seen." 

Miss Huntington felt a lively interest in the conversion of 
her relatives and acquaintances. This was manifested in 
various ways ; especially by making them the subject of her 
prayers, and endeavoring to enlist her Christian friends in 
the same object; proposing to them the consecration of 
stated seasons for this purpose. Scattered through her let- 
ters are found various passages which show her conscious- 
ness of the necessity of prayer, and the solicitude with which 
she watched for encouragements to the duty. A few ex- 
tracts, from among many, illustrate these remarks. " Mary 
and I have set apart four o'clock every afternoon to pray for 



104 MEMOIR OF 

uncle B. We want to get courage to mention it to aunt 
Faith, that she may observe the same season." 

Writing to one of a very dear family, she says, "I do 
not know that a single day has passed, since my return, that 
I have not commended each one of you to God." 

She writes to an aunt — "I was much rejoiced to hear 
of the happy change in your son. We have great en- 
couragement for prayer ; and spiritual blessings are the best 
which can be bestowed. Sister and myself have for several 
years remembered the descendants of our honored grand- 
lather Huntington, in concert, on Tuesday evenings; and it 
is peculiarly pleasant to us to be encouraged in the duty, by 
instances of conversion in any branch of the family. It is a 
privilege to be permitted to present the various cases of each 
family before the mercy seat. Would it be agreeable to you, 
my dear aunt, to join the concert ; and to mention it to 
aunt Richards, when you see her, and to your son? In 
grandmamma Lanman's family we have a similar concert on 

Thursdays. It is indeed a day of blessings to the 

church, and if ' sinners cannot now sin at so cheap a rate 
as formerly/ surely professing Christians have much greater 
responsibilities. Let us bless God that they are waking 
from their slumbers, and ere long the church will * put on 
her beautiful garments.' " 

Respecting the children of her uncle, the Rev. Joshua 
Huntington, she thus writes : — " Mr. Wisner sent for Sarah, 
that during Joshua's vacation the children might be together 
again ; and we were desirous to have her go. Oh ! that the 
Spirit which is hovering over several of the churches in 
Boston, might meet them upon that spot where we trust the 
prayer of faith was offered, for them." 

"I am glad you pray for J., and M., and G. Since the 
revival commenced, I have witnessed answers to prayers of- 
fered years since. Can it be that we shall all meet, a family 
in heaven?" 

"Will you pray for uncle T. on Tuesday cjvenings? 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 105 

Have we not encouragement in our concert ? Nine grand- 
children, and a daughter with her husband, of our honored 
grandfather, have become pious, within the last year ! A. 
and H. R. join the church about this time. Cousin M. and 
J. leave next week, — the latter I believe thinks much of 
serious things ; and brother J. requested me to pray particu- 
larly for the former, as he thought her impressed on Thurs- 
day evening by a sermon of Dr. Payson, from the text, 
' To-day, if ye will hear his voice/ &c. I think a great deal 
of your children, and intended to have asked Mr. H. if they 
manifest any susceptibility on religious subjects. I want to 
hear them sing ' Hosanna,' in- infancy." 

"I should have mentioned in my last, that uncle 
Thomas's oldest daughter is a subject of the revival in 
Brooklyn — all grandpapa's female descendants of any matu- 
rity of age are now pious." 



5* 



CHAPTER VI. 

COMMENCEMENT AND PROGRESS OF HER INTEREST IN 

MISSIONS EFFORTS AMONG THE MOHEGAN INDIANS 

LETTER TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR. 

TH»K)bject of the present chapter is to give some extracts 
from the correspondence of Miss Huntington, which show 
the commencement and progress of missionary tendencies 
in her mind. To go back and see her first thoughts on the 
missionary service ; and to follow her through successive 
years, to the time when divine Providence opened the door 
for her entrance upon it, indicates how great a change may 
take place on the subject, even in the mind of a Christian. 

Writing to her sister, January 21, 1823, she says, "Mr. 
Maxwell took some pains to convince me that I ought to be 
a missionary; but I told him I never had thought that my 
calling." 

The subject, in the course of this year, was before the 
mind of a much esteemed cousin, and some interchange of 
views was passing among the relatives of the circle. She 
writes, September 10 — "Grandmamma Lanman says she 
thinks that cousin Mary might be as useful at home, as on 
missionary ground ; and mamma does not appear pleased with 
her plan. I asked grandmamma why it should not be con- 
sistent for our friends to make sacrifices for the church, as . 
well as for others." 

October 3, 1824. — " Mr Gridley, an agent of the 
American Board, preached here last Sabbath, and is to re- 
turn in the course of a week or two, to establish associations 
among us. He intends to go to Palestine, and I think him 
well adapted to the situation. How missions increase in 



MEMOIR OF MRS. SMITH. 107 

importance ! It seems to me that all classes and ages should 
be excited to some effort for them. Children might do much 
by devoting an hour or two in a week to employments for 
their aid. I intend that Sarah Ann shall learn to do some- 
thing in reference to the great object. ,, 

August 29, 1S26. — "I have thought much, recently, 
upon the subject of missions. I never felt it a duty to go 
myself to the heathen. But I do feel that I ought to make 
every exertion with my hands (my all) in their behalf. 
How much >ve might do by devoting an hour every day to 
some employment for them ! " — " We have not mqney, but 
we have time and strength, the talents which God has seen 
fit to bestow upon us, and for which we must account. 
The cry is, ' More funds, and more shall be accomplished.' 
I hope God will enable me to fulfil the resolutions which I 
have recently made, respecting these duties. I shall be no 
less guilty than the possessor of thousands of gold and 
silver. It requires a stronger effort for the covetous man to 
bestow his wealth, than for the naturally active to put forth 
his strength and redeem his time." 

February 28, 1827. — "I have become a subscriber to 
the Missionary Herald, the last two numbers of which are 
very interesting. Do you not think the missionary cause 
is constantly gaining ground t What a privilege to be 
.engaged in it ! " 

August 27, 1827. — "At a recent Bible class, Mr. 
Mitchell remarked upon the costly sacrifice which Mary 
offered to our Saviour, in gratitude for the restoration of 
her brother Lazarus, as an example to those whom God has 
blessed in the conversion of their friends. It went to my 
heart. I am deficient in gratitude and devotedness. ,, This 
followed the conversion of, one of her younger brothers. 

September 8, 182Q. — "I read, some time since, with 
much feeling, ' Missionary Paper, No. 9/* and have re- 

* Published by the A. B. C. F. M. — title, "Somethi-j >rs been 
done during the last forty years," a tract of thrilling tatetc . 



108 MEMOIR OF 

perused it of late. I also read extracts from it at our 
Missionary Association. Have you seen the tract entitled 
' True Believer Bountiful' ? It is a sermon by Mr. Clark, 
one' or two sections of which are introduced into the 
Missionary Paper, No. & I think the plan proposed in 
the Missionary Herald, which I have just received, is the 
best which has appeared, for the arrangement of annual 
meetings and collections." v 

November 1, P. M. — " I have put on my hat and habit 
to attend the Monthly Concert, but the rain makes me 
doubtful about my duty. If three or four only could meet, 
it would be pleasant to add even a little, to the cloud of 

incense which is rising every hour of the twenty-four. 

Evening. I have returned from the Ladies' Meeting, where 
nine assembled; and I hope we were not wholly destitute 
of the spirit of the occasion. In the ' Recorder ' a series of 
pieces is published adapted to the monthly concert. The 
last, entitled ' The Alternative/ is calculated to arouse a 
new set of feelings, in regard to the duty of Christians." 

December 15, 1829, after being permitted to see the 
conversion of her second brother, she says, " I feel now as 
if I should rejoice to be a missionary to the heathen. We 
owe a thank-offering. Our dear father has appeared very 
happy in looking upon us all." 

January 15, 1830. — "I regret to hear what you say of a 
deficiency of missionaries. I have thought, lately, that if 
individuals from what are called c the first families/ of 
both sexes, were to consecrate themselves to the work, it 
would give a new impulse to the cause. Suppose, for in- 
stance, a young lady or gentleman, from the midst of our 
pleasant circle, in Norwich, should go to the heathen ; 
would not our monthly concerts have a deeper interest? 
If one who meets with us at the missionary room were to 
be transplanted to labor among pagan females, would not 
our hearts be inflamed with new zeal and self-denial ? 
Could not every place furnish and support one missionary 1 
Oh I the hundreds that are sinking into misery while I 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 109 

* ^^^ 

write. Are we not in danger of fixing our eyes upon the 
future prospects of the church, rather than upon the souls 
who are perishmg every passing hour? It appears to me 
there is no time to be lost in consulting with pride, under 
the specious names of ' respectability, and suitable conform- 
ity.' It is with the present generation of heathen, our 
brothers and sisters and neighbors, whose cries ring in 
our ears, that we have to do. And certainly in regard to 
our own country, there is not a moment to spare, if 'pre- 
vention is better than cure.' Let the world, who certainly 
are the majority, spend their energies in holding up a little 
longer, the inventions which must one day be overthrown ; 
but let not Christians sell the souls of their fellow-men at 
so cheap a rate. Sacrifices must be sacrifices ; they require 
a struggle with selfishness, of course. We must expect to 
feel them, and suffer for them. Have you not seen persons 
profess to keep a Fast, and because they felt hungry, go and 
eat something? Christians must learn to attach a new 
meaning to such passages as these : ' My kingdom is not of 
this world.* ' Be not conformed to this world.' ' A pecu- 
liar people, zealous of good works.' " 

At a time when she spent her Sabbaths in teaching a 
x Sabbath school among the Mohegan Indians, to which she ' 
walked six miles, she writes, September 11, 1831, — "It 
is astonishing what an effect is produced upon my interest 
in society here, by an absence from ou^ church every Sab- 
bath. I scarcely know who are in town, or how the con- 
gregation look. Yet it is a self-denial which ought to be 
practised for the good of others. The missionaries give up 
every thing. I should like to go to the Washington Islands, 
mentioned by Mr. Stewart, where no Christian has been. 
But my path seems plainly marked out; and I wish, dear 
brother, you would pray that I may have grace to sub- 
ordinate every duty to those filial ones which are now so 
important." 

In October of this year, (1831,) it appears her mind 
had made such progress on the subject of mSsstaroa, ^aX 



HO MEMOIR OF 

she came to the conclusion expressed in the following ex- 
tract: — "Our annual meeting of the Foreign Missionary 
Society was very interesting. I then made the resolution, 
that whenever my daar parents want me no longer, if 
unfettered as I am now, I shall devote myself personally 
to a mission among the heathen. So you may consider 
me henceforth a missionary in heart; and when circum- 
stances favor, must be ready to resign me, nnless God 
should put insurmountable obstacles in my . way." 

But it was not in reading missionary intelligence and 
reflection upon it, only, that Miss Huntington was cher- 
ishing the spirit of missions. As early as the year 1827, 
she had become interested in the condition and necessities 
of a remnant t>f the Mohegan Indians, living six miles from 
Norwich. In 1830, we find her concerned in the circula- 
tion of a subscription to build a church for them; and with 
a circle of Christian females, among whom she met for 
prayer each week, making the case of the Western tribes, 
threatened with dispersion, a subject of special prayer. 
In the summer of 1830, writing to one of her friends, she 
says, " Will you pray for a Sabbath school in Mohegan, of 
which Miss Breed and myself have the sole care, and to 
which we devote our Sabbaths ? " In September following, 
it appears from a letter to the same friend, that she was 
earnestly desirous to have a place of worship, and a 
preacher, provided for them ; and asking prayers ' for the 
success of the object, she says, " It is a great weight upon 
my mind, and I never sympathized so feelingly with the 
missionaries abroad, as now." 

Under date of October 25, 1830, she addressed a letter 
to Jeremiah Evarts, Esq., Corresponding Secretary of the 
American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, 
giving a brief review of the condition of the remnant of 
this tribe of Indians. She thus concludes her appeal in 
their behalf: — 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. ]]1 

" After such protracted neglect of their best interests, 
the Indians seem surprised at a renewal of effort, on the 
part of/ the whites ; and can hardly believe that it is not 
dictated by some selfish principle, or destined soon to 
evaporate. They will speak, however, of the ' good meet- 
ings ' and 'beautiful singing' which they had among them 
many years ago. 

"Our Sabbath school is held in a house occupied by 
the relatives of Rev. Samson Occum. His sister, Lucy 
Tantiquigeon, died last winter at the age of ninety-eight. 
Her children, grand-children, great-grand-children, and 
great-great-grand-children now dwell there, in one habita- 
tion. Her memory is precious to her descendants ; and her 
children, two of them at least, give evidence of piety. The 
Lord will bless these Indians, I fully believe, if suitable 
measures are taken by the agents of his will. Much inter- 
esting matter might be collected respecting the tribe. The 
history of Mr. Occum is identified with that of Dartmouth 
College, and some of his manuscripts are still accessible. 

"If consistent with your engagements, respected sir, 
may I hope soon to hear from you ? If your communica- 
tion should be in the form of counsel, it would gratify me 
much, as I presume you are no stranger to that intense 
interest in an object, which occupies one's waking and 
sleeping hours. I am the more solicitous respecting this, 
because I feel that now is the critical time for action ; as 
the present efforts are laboriously sustained, in especial 
reference to more efficient ones. If these fail, and the 
existing interest subside, I fear the set time to favor this 
interesting people will have passed away, and their blood 
fo.rever rest in our skirts. 

" We shall wait, sir, until the receipt of your letter, 
before making any systematic arrangement to obtain funds 
for the support of a missionary ; assuring you, however, 
that not an iota of the burden of that shall rest upon 
your Society. * 

"I might have mentioned, in speaking of Mr. Occum^ 



112 MEMOIR OF 

that a volume of hymns, composed by him, is extant in 
some part of New England, as well as a few sermons — 
and also his picture, taken in England ; where he preached 
before the- king. 

" Jn regard to the Society of which you are the organ, 
permit me to say, sir, that it possesses a charm in my own 
estimation, altogether paramount to every other institution ; 
and I can, therefore, with the utmost sincerity, present to 
you my earnest wishes for its success, and the assurance of 
my labors and prayers to the extent of my ability." 

November 2. — "You inquire respecting my plans for 
Mohegan. Miss Raymond of Montville and I have engaged 
to keep a weekly school for the Indian children, this winter, 
taking weeks alternately. We meet there, on horseback, 
to-day, to reconnoitre the ground ; and expect to commence 
on Monday after Thanksgiving. I have written to Mr. 
Evarts on the condition of the Indians, and our plans ; and 
we hope that like those in the State of New York, they 
will be taken under the patronage of the American Board, 
if the funds are furnished by Connecticut. You know all 
the Indians are regarded by that body as a foreign nation. 
The corner stone of the church is to be laid soon. I feel 
my interest for them increase every hour." 

Nov. 3. — "My tour among the Indians, yesterday, was 
interesting. It was necessary to take a guide; and you 
would have been quite amused at the picture which 1 pre- 
sented — a little Indian girl behind me upon the horse, and 
half a dozen other children following on foot, talking as 
fast as their tongues would go. I was perfectly delighted 
with my situation, which was as romantic as real life can 
be, to say nothing of my reflections. The Indians have a 
fine spot of 2,700 acres ; and if suitably trained, might 
become a respectable, happy community. May the Holy 
Spirit bless them, as he has done the degraded Sandwich 
Islanders!" 

In her letters to her Christian friends, she often requested 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 113 

a special employment of their prayers for the success of the 
enterprise. 

The progress of her own endeavors, and those of- her 
associate, in this labor of Jove, will be learned from sin 
extract of a letter of December 4, 1830, written at Mohegan, 
to her former teacher and friend, Mrs. L. H. Sigourney, as 
follows: — "You will perhaps be surprised, that as a Sab- 
bath school teacher only, my letter is dated: from thid spot. 
I must therefore inform you that Mohegan is to be my 
home, every alternate week, through the winter. I had 
expected to spend the whole of the season here, and made 
arrangements to that effect ; but the increased weakness of 
my mother's eyes, rendered it inconsistent for me to do it, 
without subjecting myself to the reproof contained in Mat- 
thew xv. 5, 6. My present assistant in the Sabbath school 
is a lady of Montville, whose residence is five miles from this. 
We have established a weekly school, the labors of which 
we mutually share. To-day completes the first week's 
effort, with sixteen scholars, and four or five more afe ex- 
pected. We occupy a pleasant room at Fort Hill farm, upon 
the southern declivity of the eminence chosen for the 
church. I should like exceedingly to have a visit from 
you, my dear madam, this moment, at my solitary but not 
gloomy fireside. It is Because I am confident that you take 
a heartfelt interest in this remnant of Indians, that I write 
thus freely. 

" The inquiry' has been made of me — ' Do they seem 
grateful for these attentions?' My answer is this — 'We 
are but discharging, in some inadequate measure, our debt 
of gratitude to them ; the obligation is on our part.' So 
oppressed have I recently been, with my own criminal 
neglect of them, that I can feel no self-complacency in 
my feeble efforts. 

" The strong natural propensity of the Indians to the use 
of ardent spirit,* is the most discouraging circumstance 
respecting them — yet, many of t^ose who are addicted to 
it, can and do abstain ; "and at this da^ fctvj <A Yks^*\j«w&& 



J 14 MEMOIR OF 

through the cloud. Inebriates are not now esteemed hope- 
less. I have had free conversations with a few on the 
subject, who seem, for the time being, disposed to reform. 
As far as I can judge, they possess acute minds. May I 
hope for your constant prayers, especially in reference to 
this vice, and for the descent of the Holy Spirit ? " 

Assigning to one of her brothers a reason for her engage- 
ment in this difficult and self-denying work, she remarks — 
" One especial inducement to my plan arises from my sense 
, of God's mercy to my brothers. I have virtually promised 
a thank-offering, and ( I am straitened ' till I find some way 
of presenting it. When seeking your conversion, I resolved 
that if God heard me and renewed the hearts of my brothers, 
I would devote myself wholly to him. When others have 
almost reproved me for self-denial, I have longed to tell 
them the secret impulse. But my own heart has accused 
me of broken vows, while others have said I was ' going too 
far/ Each Christian knows what passes between his soul 
and God, with which ' the stranger intermeddleth not.' " 

The details of her labors, and method of spending her 
time, may be gathered from a letter, commenced Dec. 12, 
and journalized under several subsequent dates. 
\ " Seated in my little missionary apartment, which serves 
for parlor, bed-room, kitchen, school-room, and chapel, I 
have composed myself to the sweet employment of answer- 
ing your good and long fetter. I have a school of eighteen 
or twenty, including four adults; — ofie man, two married 
women, and a ' squassise.' * They come at half past nine, 
and stay until four, haying half an hour's intermission ; and 
we carry on arithmetic, millinery, tailoring, &»c, besides the 
ordinary avocations of a school. All these, with the gov- 
ernment of untutored, untamed beings, nearly exhaust my 
powers, during the day ; and at evening I have work to fit, 
and ' my profession ' to study.— -But I am quite satisfied. I 

* Unmarried Indian female. 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 115 

came here for their benefit, and not to please myself. Our 
Sabbath school is nearly twice as large, embracing whites, 
and is kept up four hours of the Sabbath, besides an inter- 
mission. I leave home Sunday morning, and return the next 
Sunday evening, and Miss Raymond does the same, so we 
are both here on the Sabbath. From my windows I see 
New London Point, and Groton Monument. My circum- 
stances and duties are altogether new, and I sometimes 
think myself in a dream. Will you pray for God's Spirit 
to visit our school and this vicinity ? ; 

"I should like to ask Mr. if the Saviour had any 

regard to his ' station,' when he left his throne for a 
dwelling among our wretched race? Our rank is that of 
Christians, if we would follow him. The more I contem- 
plate his character, the more I am confirmed m my views 
on the subject of self-denial. If a soul outweighs in value 
the whole world, are the petty distinctions of life, which are 
fostered by the same spirit that produced the rebellion in 
heaven, to be put in competition with it? All that eleva- 
tion of character which is the result of Christian principles 
operating upon the mind and heart, ought to be cultivated 
in honor of Him, who is the source of all excellence. 
Every other preeminence over our fellow-beings, my prin- 
ciples, to say nothing of my practice, condemn. 

" Ten o'clock approaches, which is my hour for retiring. 
(I rise at five.) The c school ma'am ' begins to be weary. 
Once more, good night. I hope ' Orion's bands,' and ' the 
sweet influences of Pleiades,' are as bright and beautiful at 
Wiscasset, as they are this evening in Mohegan." 

17th. " I have just now returned from a visit to see a 
sick child and a dying man. The latter is a victim of 
intemperance. As he lay upon his bed, pale and emaciated, 
I felt a strong conviction that the Indians are really Israel- 
ites ; so strikingly did the entire character of his face re- 
semble that of the Jews, and especially the lineaments of 
our Saviour, as exhibited by painters — who have probably 
followed the national cast, of countenance. I do u<& *^ 



115 MEMOIR OF 

much of my belief; but often when I am giving instruction 
to the children from God's word, the unbidden thought 
rushes upon me with force, that their progenitors were his 
peculiar people. Three of my scholars returned with me, 
voluntarily, as it was dusk — two boys and a girl — -ages 
seven, eight, and nine.- The new moon and stars were just 
appearing, and our conversation was interesting and ele- 
vated. The Indians have acute minds. Moral and in- 
tellectual culture is all they want." ""- 

That Miss Huntington was endearing herself to those 
whose good she was seeking, in her missionary residence, 
besides the Indians', appears from the following extract : — 

• 

"Tuesday Evening. 
" Dear Mother : — On my arrival here, I found all my ex- 
pectations realized. Mr. and Mrs. Dolbeare were impatient- 
ly waiting for me, and a happier couple, or happier counte- 
nances, I never beheld. The former had selected a hymn to 
show me, as expressive of his feelings — it is the 373d of the 
Village Hymns, which Sarah will read to you. I found also 
several pious females and young converts from Montville, 
with Miss Raymond, and we held a little prayer-meeting in 
our room. The meetings in the evening and on Sabbath 
were very solemn. My duties here are delightful; and I 
should love to spend my life in seeking after those who 
• are lost.' " 

"Mohegan, Jan. 20, 1831. 

" I thank you, dear sister, for your timely caution respect 
ing pride. I said to a friend, the other day, that God takes 
care of that. If he calls his children to any service for him, 
he knows how to keep them low. I have had many trials in 
this undertaking. Not in my humble accommodations — 
these are nothing, they are voluntary — but in the indiffer- 
ence, coldness, and unkind remarks of some Christian 
friends. I have had much to remind me of the Saviour's 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. H7 

declaration respecting ' a prophet in his own country.' By 
some I have been sustained and encouraged, and have had 
the happiness to see others endeavoring to make amends for 
their past unfriendliness to the effort. But my constant 
occupation and fatigue, (the labor, which was to have been 
divided, devolving upon me,) and consciousness of great in- 
ability, have left me little time to indulge in self-complacency 
— and should I even be called to more self-denying service, 
if I am. a reaj child of God, I cannot but think I should have 
the evidence which St. Paul enjoyed of his renewed nature, 
a fqrgetfulness of past attainments, and. a pressing towards 
future ones. You know we are all baptized into one Spirit. 

There is one thing, however, which occasionally gives 

me some uneasiness — the fear that were I compelled to 
pursue a cQurse r which I could voluntarily adopt, my deceit- 
ful heart would rebel — ' God knoweth ! ' I trust my health 
will not suffer materially; though every energy, physical and 
mental, is requisite. When the weather permits, I walk, 
morning and evening, and I sit very little in school. 

" I detected my own heart, a few evenings since, rather 
unexpectedly. I had had sotne religious conversation with 
nearly every member of this family but the married daughter, 
who is about your age. I knew she respected the subject, 
but I rather shrunk from a personal application of it to her. 
She came into my room to spend an hour in the evening ; 
and though the opportunity was favorable, I thought if I only 
performed my duty before the winter closed, it would be 
sufficient. But just before she was leaving, I made a direct 
appeal to her own case, and found her very tender — she 
wept much, and seemed disposed to prolong the conversa- 
tion, and remarked-that she had often wondered that Chris- 
tians were so backward in their duty. The next morning 
she appeared solemn, and still more so since. In reflecting 
upon the subject, I saw my inconsistency. I did not con- 
sider that delay, on my part, would endanger her soul, but I 
was only devising a course to satisfy my own conscience. Is 
not this the reason why religious conversation is oCtevL las^- 



113 MEMOIR OF 

less, because it is introduced in a languid manner, merely as 
zduty?" 

Not satisfied with laboring for the present supply "of the* 
spiritual wants of the Mohegans, Miss Huntington con- 
ceived the plan of seeking aid from the Legislature of 
Connecticut, and also from the Government of the United 
States. ,A petition to the former was drawn by her, and 
with accompanying signatures, was presented at the session 
in May, 1831. The object of the petition was to obtain the 
aid of the State, both to give them Christian instruction and 
a school. The application, failed, however. In prosecution 
of the object on which her heart was so earnestly set, she 
addressed a letter to the Hon. Lewis Cass, then Secretary 
of War, to which department of the general government 
belongs the superintendence of Indian affairs. , 

•'Norwich, Dec. 8, 1831. 
" Honored Sir : — A short time previous to the change 
in the department which you have the honor to occupy, a 
letter was addressed to the Secretary of War, by Joseph 
Williams, Esq., president of a benevolent association, in 
behalf of the Mohegan Indians residing in this vicinity. 
A second communication was forwarded during the vacan- 
cy in that department, to neither of which has any reply 
been made. It now becomes my duty, and pleasure, hon- 
ored sir, to present a new appeal to one, who, I am confi- 
dent, will attach no impropriety to the liberty which I take. 
I am the more encouraged in the pursuance of my deter- 
mination, from the fact, that my own sex are sometimes 
successful in the cause of humanity, while others are 
* turned empty away.' Should the inquiry arise, upon 
what ground I assume this prerogative, I would answer, 
that I prefer no claim, but a friendship for the Indians, — a 
friendship created and deepened by an intercourse with 
the remnant of Mohegans, during every pleasant Sabbath, 
for the last year and a half, and in the gratuitous labor of 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. * 119 

a Week day school through one season. It gives me pleas- 
ure to recollect, while thus trespassing upon one in your 
public station, my former familarity with your name as asso- 
ciated with, my cousin, Mr. L an man, of Michigan, and that 
my honored cousin, Mr. Huntington, will do me the favor 
to become the bearer of this. To him I would refer you for 
any inquiries which you may please to make. 

" It is possible, sir, that you in ay have perused the com- 
munications sent by Mr. Williams, yet it will be proper 
for me to mention a few facts respecting the Mohegan 
tribe. There are more than one hundred of them re- 
maining; a third of whom are children. Some scattering 
families are to return to the reservation in the spring, 
which you .probably know lies near the river Thames, 
between Norwich and New London.. "In past years this 
remnant of a once powerful and invariably peaceful race 
has been grossly neglected, and of course they became 
rnuch degraded. The benevolent of this vicinity have now 
built for them a small chapel, which will accommodate the 
white population also, with whom they are mixed, and for 
the last year have supported the gospel and a school among 
them. Sufficient encouragement has attended this experi- 
ment to induce farther effort, and in consequence of this 
we are constrained to solicit aid from the fund appro- 
priated to the moral and intellectual improvement of the 
Indians. 

" Should the influence which is now exerted over them 
result in the increase of their numbers, and the policy of our 
government require that they, with other remnants^should 
remove beyond the Mississippi, their improvement would 
present no obstacle to this, nor would they be more unlit 
for a removal. You may perhaps think me visionary in 
my expectations respecting so feeble a people ; but some of 
the families are large and increasing, and it is the usual 
effect of moral elevation to make ' a little one become a 
thousand.' You will perceive, honored sir, that I do not 
indulge the thought of your heing of the tvwmXret > ^\xa >a\^ 



120 MEMOIR OF 

to see the aborigines of our country become extinct, 
through neglect. Far be stick a wish from a noble breast! 

" Among the children of the Mohegang, there, are many 
whose intelligent minds and susceptible hearts give promise 
of future improvement, as a reward of effort in their behalf; 
while a diminution of intemperance, and the progross of 
moral reformation among some of the adults; render our hopes 
more cheering. May we not hope, sir, that in the midst 
of numerous -official and important duties, you will yet 
regard this call of. benevolence, and permit these poor Mo- 
hegans to share in the benefits of 7 that fund, over which 
you have the control ? I will guaranty a faithful and con- 
scientious appropriation of whatever your wisdom shall 
dictate, as proper for us to receive. 

" Although this appeal is presented by a' feeble hand, yet it 
is one to whom has been assigned the principal duties of 
this nature, in reference to those for whom it is made. If 
my labors should prove in any measure successful, it will 
not be the first time that the weakest instrument has been 
chosen for the accomplishment of important purposes. 

" Presuming, honored sir, that you will asjt no apology 
for this intrusion upon your time and attention, I would 
beg the favor of an early reply to my communication ; as 
some immediate arrangements are depending upon its suc- 
cess; and subscribe myself, 

" With sincere respect, 

" Your obedient servant, 

" Sarah L. Huntington. 

" Hon. Lewis Cass, 

" Secretary of War, Washington." 

She also addressed a letter to her kinsman, Hon. Jahez 
W. Huntington, then a representative in Congress, from 
Connecticut, requesting such aid as it might be in his power 
to afford. The result of this effort was successful, in ob- 
taining an appropriation of five hundred dollars towards 
erecting buildings, and four hundred dollars for the support 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 121 

of a teacher. The first sum was employed in Jbuilding a 
house for the teacher, qp& the latter has been annually 
received and appropriated for h£ft support. The church was 
built wholly with funds obtained in Norwich, through the 
exertions of Miss Huntington and her first coadjutor in this 
enterprise. 

Not aldne for this little remnant of a single Indian tribe, 
did Miss H. cherish a benevolent interest, but also for other 
tribes, especially those which were liable to suffer injustice 
at the hands of our country, as the following sentiments 
attest, addressed to one who had been a missionary to one 
of the South Western tribes : — "I have thought much of 
the Choctaws, just^setting out upon their march. May the 
God of Israel go with them! I now go and return to 
Mohegan on foot, upon the Sabbath ; and in my fatigue, try 
to think of the great privations of other missionaries, and 
of our imprisoned brethren.* I do believe that an almighty 
power will arise for this peculiar people, and confound their 
enemies. If it should be found that the aborigines of this 
country are the lost tribes of Israel, how appropriate the 
predictions respecting them, particularly Ezekiel, 92th chap- 
ter, and Amos, 9th !'" 

The following letter, addressed to Mrs. L. H. Sigourney, 
furnishes the continuance of the history of Miss Hunting- 
ton's efforts on behalf of the Indians, and her farther views 
respecting them : — 

«* Norwich, April 4, 1831. 

" Dear Madam : — In consequence of various and pressiiig 
duties, arising from my desultory and changing life the past 
winter, I have permitted your kind and soothing letter to re- 
main long unanswered — not because I did not prize it 
highly and receive it gratefully. It was truly a cordial to 
my feelings, and I thank you sincerely for it and the little 
books. The one by Mr. Gallaudet is already in the hands 

* Rev. Mr. Worcester and his associate, then in titt Georgia peni- 
tentiary. 

6 






122 MEMOIR OF 

of an adult learner, who knew not that there was a Saviour, 
until I had the privilege of telling it to her ; and who has 
for some time practised at least a temporary reformation, 
and manifested considerable tenderness of conscience. I 
have indeed found no deficiency of intellect among the 
Indian children, and among those adults only who have 
been debased by circumstances. My week-day duties at 
Mohegan have ceased; but my Sabbaths are spent with 
them, and will be so through the summer. The Sabbath 
school increases in numbers and interest, and we are so 
happy as to obtain three pious teachers upon the ground, 
which with two others and a superintendent, from Norwich, 
will give it some importance. One of the Mohegan teacli- 
ers is a lovely girl, of recent spiritual birth, belonging to a 
family of ten children, from whom we at first experienced 
opposition, ridicule, and actual persecution — now five of 
them are attached to the school. In the family at Fort 
Hill, where we resided, three conversions have occurred. 
At that place, regular religious services are sustained, Sab- 
bath afternoons and Wednesday evenings. There is an 
increasing attention to the means of grace in the neighbor- 
hood, among whites and Indians, and tokens of mercy here 
and there among the former ; while a powerful revival has 
existed in those parts of Montville which have been longer 
cultivated. The meeting-house is to be raised this week, and 
the week-day school resumed by a hired teacher, next week. 
" These circumstances bring me to that part of your letter 
in which you make a proposition. I would not venture to 
dissent entirely from your maturer judgment; still I have 
been led to think, that as the number of the Mohegans 
is so small, and their property sufficient to support them 
virtuously, and especially as the means of grace and advan- 
tages of education are to be furnished them by the benevo- 
lence of others, it is desirable that they should be kept 
together, and become an object for permanent efforts to 
ameliorate their condition, upon their own territory. I feel 
likewise some repugnance to their being servants to those 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 123 

who have treated them so cruelly. I fully concur with 
you in the opinion that they require motives to perse- 
verance in goodness. Of this I have had abundant testi- 
mony in my intercourse with them ; it has led me to make 
continued exertion for their benefit, and this fact is urging 
their friends here to the determination, that a missionary 
must speedily be obtained to occupy the house. 

" You will perceive that, whether intentionally or not, 
I have deferred a reply to your letter until I could answer 
your kind question, ' What can I do to serve you?' The 
meeting-house will probably be dedicated in the course of 
a few weeks ; and if your ready pen will furnish us a hymn 
for the occasion, it will be truly gratifying. 

" When we first became acquainted with our interesting 
charge, they could not raise a note in singing; now, no 
book is so attractive to them as a hymn book ; they readily 
catch the air of a tune. We have formed also a temperance 
society. In our peregrinations upon Mohegan ground, we 
found a very defaced picture of Mr. Occum, in clerical 
robes, taken while he was in England. I brought it home and 
placed it in the care of Col. John Trumbull, who has ob- 
tained from Miss Murray, a benevolent lady in New York, 
two hundred and fifty lithographic prints of the same, which 
are to be sold for the benefit of the tribe. It lis necessarily 
a rough sketch, from so imperfect a copy, but is neverthe- 
less of some value to the virtuoso and the philanthropist. 
I am waiting for an opportunity to send one as a present to 
yourself, and one to Mr. and Mrs. Wadsworth, also a little 
package for sale in Hartford, if you will take the trouble of 
them. The subscription to the church is not quite com- 
pleted, and considerable remains to be done in regard to a 
missionary and school. It is hoped our legislature will aid. 

" I trust we have your constant prayers, for without the 
blessing of God our efforts are fruitless. 

"At our anticipated Sabbath school celebration, next 
week, we expect to have the procession augmented by our 
Mohegan branch. 



124 MEMOIR OF 

" My parents and friends kindly reciprocate your affec- 
tionate remembrance. The chain of affection to which 
you allude, resembles almost all others of an earthly nature. 
They are most conspicuous for their broken links ; but there 
is consolation in the thought, that every link which is of 
real value, will be reunited in a holier sphere, forming one 
long, bright, immortal chain, binding us to the thrdne of the 
Eternal. This reflection cheers me, as I become daily 
more impressed with the inconstancy of sublunary joys. 11 

To the friend who had been her first coadjutor in this 
enterprise, Mrs. President Allen, but who was providentially 
removed to a distant part of the country, she writes — 

44 Norwich, Aug. 13, 1831. 

" I must tell you what abundant cause we have for grat- 
itude in reference to our mission, (I must still include you.) 
It is just one year since we commenced our labors, in that 
kitchen, under embarrassments which your memory will 
readily recall. Now, they have a chapel, a stated ministry, 
and the means for its support ! One hundred dollars have 
been appropriated by the Domestic Missionary Society 
towards aiding them ; which, with other contributions, en- 
able us to answer the very moderate demands of Mr. W., 
who, with his wife, is highly calculated to be useful there. 

" Now, my dear friend, why should we not come before 
God with confidence, and implore that gift, which, of all 
others, he is most pleased to bestow? tlte Holy Spirit; 
without which every other blessing will become a curse. It 
is especially needed in this case, for the unfriendly whites 
are continually exciting the Indians to suspicion — instil- 
ling into their minds the idea that our efforts are only a 
speculation, and that all the expense is derived from their 
own pittance. On my return, I found that these surmises 
had gained influence, and diminished the congregation ; 
but appearances are more favorable now. For so limited 
a field, it is an extremely difficult one to occupy. Untiring 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 195 

labors, I have no doubt, will, eventually, be crowned with 
success. Surely we have reason to take courage from 
what God has already done for them. ' Do pray much for 
the Holy Spirit." 

Miss Huntington, with the countenance of several of her 
Christian friends — among whom was the lady addressed in 
the last letter — had also a plan for the benefit of a remnant 
of the Pequod tribe of Indians. 

From the extracts which follow, it appears that she had 
the satisfaction of seeing an advance of the importance of 
the Mohegan enterprise in the minds of others. — "Your 
interesting communication was particularly acceptable, and 
I thank you for commencing the correspondence. In the 
little interview which we enjoyed, I felt a peculiar sympathy 
with you, which has been heightened by bearing you upon 
my heart, as I have since done, before God. You cannot 
tell how much satisfaction it gives me to reflect, that in that 
spot, where once I could scarcely find one who would feel 
with me for the poor Indians, there are now those who love 
to devise plans for the benefit of that once degraded com- 
munity. Your plan I highly approve, and shall rejoice to 
aid in its accomplishment; and I thjpk it will be well to 
have it put in operation without any delay. 

" I have just been perusing, in my closet, the 6th chapter 
of Galatians, to the 9th verse of which I would refer you 
and all who labor at Mohegan. Should your plan succeed, 
I will try to visit you some day when you are assembled. 
In accomplishing objects of this kind, I have usually found 
them to succeed better if I undertake them with an expecta- 
tion of success in my own mind, and an apparent courage in 
the view of others. Earnestness and confidence go a great 
way in gaining the cooperation of friends ; and when exer- 
cised in dependence upon God, and gentleness towards our 
fellow-beings, is perfectly right. Excuse my liberty in 
giving advice. I know you were sincere in asking it, and I 
should do wrong in withholding it. I beg your earnest 



126 MEMOIR OF MHS. SMITH. 

prayers that we may be directed in selecting a child from the 
-Pequods. He will be an interesting object to us, as we hope 
the Lord will convert and sanctify him as a chosen vessel. 
Let us pray that we may be so evidently guided in our 
choice, that the Spirit may whisper to us, ' Arise and anoint 
him, for this is he.' And like David, who was taken from 
the sheep-cote, may he prove a blessing to his nation." 

It is proper here to remark that Miss Huntington's 
interest in this object knew no decrease, in the midst of 
her foreign missionary labors. Writing from Syria, to 
her first associate in labors among the Mohegans, she says 
— "Miss Williams and I often talk of Mohegan; and we 
have received many interesting letters from Mr. Gleason. 
I shall not forget the scenes in old Lucy's kitchen, and 
beneath the hay-stack, in which you and I mingled. I trust 
we shall talk of them in heaven." 

It may gratify the reader to know the present state of 
this little mission. The following extract of a letter re- 
cently received from Rev. Anson Gleason, the pastor and 
teacher stationed at Mohegan, answers inquiry on this point. 
After giving an account of the organization of the church, 
he observes — " Since then, from time to time, others have 
been hopefully converted and united to our little fold ; till 
upwards of forty have been enrolled — thirteen of whom are 
natives, three males and ten females. One native female 
has been excommunicated ; two have departed this life in 
peace ; two white sisters have also died. • • • Our 
members generally are spiritual and active, both natives and 
whites, and live in much harmony and good feeling. Thus, 
dear brother, you see that the precious seed your sister 
sowed in tears, here on this hard soil, has come up and 
yielded a glorious harvest. The little school she left is very 
prosperous. There are now twenty native children who 
attend school, and are making good progress in useful 
studies. One little Indian girl is making rapid progress in 
the Latin Reader." 



CHAPTER VII. 

CORRESPONDENCE WITH HER FATHER AND FRIENDS RE- 
SPECTING THE FOREIGN MISSION SERVICE ENGAGEMENT 

TO MR. SMITH -«— MARRIAGE EMBARKATION. 

The time had now arrived, in which Miss Huntington 
was to have the gratification of her long-cherished wishes 
to serve her divine Lord, and promote the salvation of a 
dying world, by engaging in the foreign mission service. 
It appeared the design of Providence, that through the 
Rev. Eli Smith, of the American Mission at Bey root, 
Syria, should be brought before her mind the subject of 
entering upon that good work, as the wife of a missionary. 
As it is instructive and interesting to see the movements of 
the mind and heart of a Christian like Miss Huntington, 
in contemplating such an important step, extracts will be 
given from her correspondence with her father and other 
friends on the subject. 

"March, 1833. 

" My honored and beloved Father : — I have taken my 
pen to address you on a subject which could not at present 
be discussed, intpersonal conversation, either by yon or me, 
with sufficient composure. It is one so momentous in its 
nature, that I almost tremble while I write ; and I would 
most tenderly and respectfully request you to suspend your 
judgment, and strive to control the strong affections of your 
heart, until you have deliberately and prayerfully considered 
the whole matter. 

•« You know, my dear father, that I have long regarded 
the missionary cause with deep interest; but how deen^ 



128 MEMOIR OF 

no being bu the God of missions, has known. My sin- 
cerity is now put to the test; and the question is to be 
decided, whether I will forsake home and country, to dwell 
as a laborer in that land which was the • cradle of 
Christianity ' — is contiguous to the scene of our Saviour's 
sufferings — and where he promised peculiar blessings upon 
those who should be made partakers of the same. I have 
not now to decide upon the single question, Am I willing 
to became a Missionary ? That has been long settled in my 
own mind. But it involves another — Will I go in the way 
which Providence now seems to point out ? This last de- 
pends upon the course which my feelings shall take towards 
the individual who has presented the inquiry, — in case your 
approbation be obtained. 

"I could cover many pages in recording the circum- 
stances which have contributed to inspire me with what 
I hope is a missionary spirit ; but can only glance at the 
most prominent, to convince you, that at the age of thirty, 
and after twelve years' training in the school of Christ, my 
resolution is not hastily formed. 

"From the first year of my Christian life, I began to 
feel the importance of sacrifices, to promote the cause of 
missions, on the part of those who remain at home. 
Supposing myself unqualified, by education and habits, 
for active service abroad, the continually deepening views 
which I received were confined to labors at home; until 
the time that Rev. Mr. Temple addressed our auxiliary, 
more than three years since ; when they assumed a definite 
form. Never shall I forget the impression made upon me 
by his appeals ! I seemed pressed down with such a weight 
of obligation, and sense of past delinquency, that I almost 
wished the dust might cover me, and oblivion throw its veil 
over my unpardonable indifference. It was an epoch in 
my Christian course. I consecrated myself anew to my 
Saviour's cause, and I hope was accepted in so doing. 

" It was not long after this that the Valley of the Mis- 
sissippi became an object of interest; and to this field, I 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 129 

devoted myself in heart, by regulating my expenses and 
habits, in view of a residence there for two years as a 
teacher. These arrangements were providentially diverted 
from their original design, and were brought into requisi- 
tion at Mohegan, where were reflected in miniature, some 
of the lights and shades of more extended missionary 
operations. 

" But there is still another period to which I look back 
with feelings of intense and sacred interest. — The desires 
which I had cherished were like a smothered flame in my 
breast, which every missionary meeting, and every monthly 
concert, seemed to rekindle and cause to rise higher and 
higher. Often have I returned from the concert of prayer 
completely exhausted with the exercises of my soul, and 
burning with desire, to lay myself upon the altar of sacri- 
fice, as the only assurance that I was doing all which I 
could do, for that cause which brought the Saviour from 
his throne. — The period to which I refer was the last mis- 
sionary meeting but one, which was held at Dr. Strong's 
church ; when with perfect calmness I made, and after 
reaching home, recorded, a solemn resolution, to this 
effect; — that whenever my parents could spare me, if J 
were as much at liberty as then, I would devote myself to 
the work of a foreign missionary, and hold myself ready 
to go forth in such capacity as Providence should point 
out. From that time, until recently, I have felt almost 
assured that I should find my grave in a distant land. 
During my illness last summer, my hopes received a 
check ; and fearing that my constitution was injured, I 
almost relinquished the expectations which I had indulged. 
I was cast into the valley of humiliation, too, where I felt 
that God regarded me as he did his servant David, when 
he accepted the desire which prompted him to build a 
temple to his honor ; but chose another thus to perpetuate 
his glory. The sudden death of my brother had a tendency 
to deepen my humility — if, through grace, I may give it 
that appellation — and this winter I have had svicAv vkw^aMjs 

6* 



130 MJ5MQIR or 

as I never knew before. I have sought to concentrate Mj 
feelings and desires within the narrow but not unimportant 
circle of home engagements. 

" In retracing my past views, which led me to ask for an 
assimilation of soul with prophets, apostles, and martyrs, I 
feared that the incense had been touched with unhallowed 
fire. I determined to devote myself exclusively to the 
performance of filial and other relative duties, and 'in 
honor to prefer ' all others to myself; and this I wished to 
do, without arrogating to myself any merit, as though it 
were a condescension. I have felt myself under a cloud, 
but I have not lost my anchor ; and my whole spirit was 
more like that of a little child, than any thing which I had 
before experienced. I was willing to relinquish the cher- 
ished object of my heart, the missionary cause, and to be 
and to do, whatever God required, small as it might appear. 

" In this attitude the important question now in agitation 
found me — better prepared I think, to decide judiciously, 
than in those days of greater excitement to which I have 
alluded. Now a field seems opened before me, more de- 
sirable than any other upon a foreign soil, with a fellow- 
laborer whose previous knowledge of the station, and other 
qualifications, give him a high rank in this department. 
But I dare not, and shall not indulge my prepossessions in 
his favor, except I have not merely your consent, but your 
cheerful approval. This has already been bestowed by my 
dear mother, and other near friends, without any solicitation 
on my part. 

" And now, my dear father, to you, who are the earthly 
idol of my heart, is submitted the sole responsibility of de- 
ciding this interesting question, interwoven with the concerns 
of eternity. Were I invited to unite my destiny with a mer- 
chant, whose business called us to the shores of the Medi- 
terranean, I think you would not hesitate to resign me, and 
would feel that you and my mother would be kindly provided 
with every attention. Will not He, who has required, as a 
teat of discipleship, that all should be willing to forsake 



BIRS. 6A&AH L. SMITH. 231 

father, and mother, and children for him, be true to his own 
promise? Although it has been my delight to contribute to 
your* and mamma's happiness, (and I had anticipated with 
great satisfaction, the privilege of smoothing your declining 
paths,) yet in the ordinary course of nature, a few years, at 
best, would terminate these duties. If I leave you for a 
home in a foreign clime, I know that I shall suffer, intensely 
and perhaps often, with an aching heart and yearnings of the 
tenderest affection towards you. Yet I feel impelled to ven- 
ture upon these and other trials, if I may go with your bless* 
ing. I want, my dear father, that you should enjoy the sat- 
isfaction of giving me up, as it were, voluntarily, to this 
work, in the spirit with which you renewed the dedication 
of all your children to God, in that hour when the soul of 
one was hovering near the gate of heaven. I have thought 
constantly of that act, within a few days, and said to myself, 
' Will my dear father stand the test which was involved in that 
committal ? ' Will it not afford you consolation, though it 
be associated with sorrow, to reflect that you have one child 
safely lodged in the tabernacle on high, and another in the 
outer court of that tabernacle — which missionary ground 
seems to resemble ? I shall wait your answer with intense 
interest. Should you surrender me to the Saviour, and to 
that work which I covet, I should like to add a few lines to 
this, and forward it to New York and Vermont. 

"May that blessing which maketh . rich, and addeth no 
sorrow thereto, be yours, kindest and best of parents ! If I 
leave you, the blessing will be yours in a double sense ; if I 
stay, I may not be able to shield you from the stings of 
sorrow, should God see fit to send them." 

"My dear Brothers and Sisters: — Our beloved father, 
with his accustomed tenderness and prudence, has taken the 
foregoing letter into serious and deliberate consideration; 
and he requests that each one of his children will first give 
an individual and unbiased opinion, before the result of his 
own decision is known. As I cannot enjoy the privilege of 



132 MEMOIR OF 

personal intercourse with you, at present, I must add some- 
thing which you will wish to know respecting this case. 

" In the first place, I must speak of the friend who has 
presented this subject to us. It is the Rev. Eli Smith, who 
has been a missionary in western Asia for six or seven years; 
and since his return, last year, has published the travels of 
Mr. Dwight and himself in Armenia. 

" In addition to what I have said to our dear father, I will 
mention other reasons, which lead me to the conclusion, that 
this matter bears the impress of the finger of God. In re- 
tracing my life from childhood to the present time, I see 
much which appears like a measure of training for this pur- 
pose, so far as human influences operate ; although the work 
appears so solemn and important, that it seems to me little 
short of entire holiness is sufficient for it ; and that God's 
abounding grace can alone suffice. You know I have 
always cultivated a spirit of enterprise, which mamma's in- 
fluence has tended to increase ; and her disregard of those 
trifling things which many women esteem so highly, has 
insensibly led me to. value the stronger points of character 
more. That I have been preserved from forming any con- 
nections involving me in the ordinary circumstances of life, 
and that these have appeared tome so insipid — or perhaps 
I had better say unsatisfying — does not seem to me an 
accident merely. 

"In years that are past, when my dear brothers were 
strangers to God, and I used to agonize before Him in their 
behalf, I pledged myself, in case of their conversion, to bring 
' an offering very costly ' and lay it at my Saviour's feet, as 
an expression of my gratitude ; and often, since my prayers 
were heard, have I inquired of myself, * Where is it? ' That 
touching scene in the dying chamber of our dear Peter, 
when those three brothers' heads were together bent before 
their God, seems now like a token, from heaven itself, to 
remind me of my promise. 

" These thoughts, and many others which I cannot now 
relate, might seem like the stirrings of an ardent tempera- 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 133 

ment, wrought up to a state of enthusiasm by some sudden 
event, were it not that they have been dwelt upon, and re- 
corded too, before this time, for my own private benefit. 

" In going to a foreign land, I should not be neglecting 
benevolent labors at home ; for these are now reduced to so 
much system, that each one knows his place, and there are 
many idle hands which could well be spared or act as sub- 
stitutes. I have been hedged up of late, and my circle of 
duties continually narrowing, until my field is circumscribed 
by the walls of my father's house. And even here my labors 
are more limited and less important than might be supposed. 
The social character of our inhabitants, with our numerous 
circle of relatives, very happily tends to occupy a large 
proportion of our dear mother's sympathies and to obviate 
her privations. Their kind attentions are so generously 
bestowed, that days have sometimes passed, in which I have 
not had five minutes' conversation with her; and slje has 
noticed, as well as I, how almost invariably I have been in- 
terrupted, whenever I have taken a book to read aloud. 
That my presence contributes greatly to the happiness 
of my dear parents, their affection, which becomes every 
day more endeariqg and precious, will not allow me to 
deny ; and yet I do feel, that should they ' not grudgingly 
or of necessity,' but with cheerfulness, surrender me to 
Christ, he will make all grace 'to abound' towards them; 
and that they will never for a moment regret the sacrifice. 
I can see also a way in, which every attention will be fur- 
nished them. 

" Do not think that I have not seriously contemplated the 
darker shades in the picture of a missionary life ; though I 
acknowledge that the train of my thoughts is more in ac- 
cordance with the following sentiments, contained in an 
address by Mr. Smith on the trials of the missionary, (and 
who could enter upon the work without such preposses- 
sions ?) than with the forbidding features. He says, ' Your 
satisfaction will be unalloyed and ennobling, in feeling that 
you have thrown yourself into a position perfectly congruous 



134 MEMOIR OF 

to all your true relations to time and eternity ; by selecting 
an employment that sinks to their deserved rank of trifles, 
the affairs of the body and of time, by neglecting them ; and 
exalts to their proper magnitude, the affairs of the soul and 
of eternity, by looking to them for its objects and its pleas- 
ures/ Yet I do not forget, that the life of a missionary is 
usually short; and that even before I reach the field of labor, 
I may find a watery grave. Should I arrive there, my pre- 
vailing impression is, that I shall live but a few years, and 
that those few may accomplish but little for the benefit of 
those immediately around me. But if only a ' cup-bearer ' 
to him who seeks my aid, by helping him to work success- 
fully, I shall not go in vain. And if our church, in sur- 
rendering for the first time one of her children to this 
blessed cause; and our Sabbath school, and particularly 
my circle of friends, should feel themselves more identified 
with the cause of missions, by my means, the sacrifice would 
be worth making. The more I have to give up, the more 
valuable will be .the offering which I am permitted to make. 

"Hitherto I have looked at the work with an ardent 
desire to be permitted the privilege of engaging in it; 
now, while it seems as desirable as ever, the leadings of 
Providence and the coincidences which accompany the 
present event, lead me to feel that God not only permits, 
but is calling me to leave all and follow him. And when 
I wonder at his condescension in choosing so feeble an 
agent, whose insignificance and depravity deserved nothing 
but his contempt and wrath, I am consoled with the as- 
surance, that if in Christ Jesus I am worthy to inherit a 
crown of immortal glory ; through the same infinite love, I 
may be permitted to sympathize in his labors and his suf- 
ferings here. 

" May God graciously lift upon us all the favor of his 
countenance, and be a light to our feet at this critical 
period ! " 

On receiving replies to the foregoing, she again writes — 



HRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 135 

"March 14, 1833. 

" My ever dear Father : — After having perused the letter 
of my brothers and sisters, before God, and having implored 
the aid of the Spirit in the guidance of my pen, I have 
seated myself to ask for your decision in this case, in 
which my feelings are now more tenderly and deeply in- 
terested, than when I addressed you nearly a fortnight 
since. You will readily perceive, from the perusal of the 
communication just received, that one object which our 
friends had in view, was to present the other side of the 
subject in such a light, as to bring my sincerity to the test, 
and to check all dangerous enthusiasm. For this I thank 
them. 

" After assuring you, my dear father, that no change 
whatever is produced in my mind by the letter, I will pro- 
ceed to review its- contents from the beginning, for your 
satisfaction, theirs, and my own. 

• * * * . # • 

"And now, my dear father, I have nothing to add to 
the inducements which I have already laid before you. 
Since the commencement of this important subject, I have 
indulged no impatience nor distrust. - My feelings towards 
yourself and towards my heavenly Parent, have been in- 
creasingly consoling to me, as furnishing testimony that 
my hopes in his grace are not" fallacious. In quietness 
and in confidence is my strength, 'and my foot standeth 
in an even place.' The. prospect of heaven seems bright 
and cheering, ana* I feel that we shall all soon sit there 
together. Then, and not till then, will you and my other 
deej. friends appreciate fully all the motives and the prov- 
icfelitet whkh seem to my mind to be urging me into the 
path, which possesses so many attractions in my eyes; 

• The path in which the Saviour trod, 
The path to glory and to God.' " 

Miss Huntington had the satisfaction, soon after writing 
'the foregoing letter, of receiving the consent of her ft&fcx 



136 MEMOIR OF 

to the proposals which had been under consideration. 
She then, with great earnestness, began her preparations 
to go forth to that work upon which her mind and heart 
had been so long and intently fixed. In pursuance of this 
object she visited her relatives in New York and Philadel- 
phia. A few extracts from her letters written at this time, 
will show her frame of mind and the state of her heart, in 
anticipation of what was before her. 

« New Yor*, March 28, 1833. 
" My beloved Parents : — From brother Edward yon have 
heard of my safe arrival here. Our 'passage was unusually 
calm and pleasant. Our cabin, through the night, was as 
quiet as a private apartment at home. The voice of our 
pilot broke upon the stillness of the night, and my thoughts 
immediately traced an analogy between him and our blessed 
Saviour, who, in his untiring love and watchfulness, ' never 
slumbereth nor sleepeth. 1 I thought I could add another 
stanza to that most beautiful hymn of Watts, commencing 
thus : — 

' Join all the glorious names, 
Of wisdom, love, and power, 
That ever mortals knew, 
That angels ever bore, 
All are too mean to speak his worth, 
Too mean to set my Saviour forth.' 

"I am going to see uncle Trumbull, to consult with 
him about taking some lessons in perspective, according to 
Mr. Smiths suggestion. I think of you, my dear parents, 
only as happy in the presence of Him, 'whose loving 
kindness is better than life.' That you will continue to 
enjoy his smiles, and that these will make your last days 
your best days, is the prayer and expectation of your 
grateful child." 

"New York, April 1, 1833. 

" I thank you, my dear brother, for your affectionate 
note. I have thought much of late upon the privilege en- 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITHi 137 

joyed by those who are the offspring of the righteous. 
Dr. Griffin once remarked, in a sermon, that in this country, 
there is many an unbroken chain of pious ancestry, reach- 
ing from its first settlement down to the present time. 
May we not find our own family forming one of the 
links, which will extend into the eternal world? How 
high then are our obligations!" 

-^ "Philadelphia, April- 11, 1833. 

" My dear Parents : — From this city of brotherly love, 
I feel disposed to address you, although my letter may not 
be completed until after my return to New York. I left 
the Jatter place on Tuesday morning at half past six. I 
took c6usin Sarah by surprise; though a cordial welcome 
from her and her kind husband was bestowed upon me. 
His country seat is a charming one, and were the weather 
a little warmer I should put my slight knowledge of per- 
spective to the trial. Vessels of all sizes are to be seen 
every hour, passing up and down the Schuylkill, which 
forms the western boundary of the estate. The brilliancy 
of the verdure of the surrounding fields and graceful slopes, 
surpasses any thing which I have ever seen. Having spent 
the last fortnight amid the brick walls and dust of New 
York, the opening of spring seems like a sudden transition ; 
for the apricot trees are here in full blossom. The air is 
bland, and the songsters of the grove seem more melodious 
than usual. 

" I have made a short but satisfactory visit to West's 
painting of ' Christ healing the Sick ; ' and gazed with 
intense interest and sympathy, upon the bronze statue of 
William Penn, whose left hand holds the treaty which he 
made with the Indians, and which makes his memory so 
precious to me. We spent a half hour among the exotics 
of a distinguished florist, where I saw the most brilliant 
display of hyacinths that I ever met, of every shade and 
exceedingly double. The gardener loaded us with them. 
I only regret that I cannot convey them to Norwich, that 



138 MEMOIR OF 

their fragrance might greet the senses of my dear mother, 
as they do mine at this moment. I would not have failed 
of making this visit, and shall remember it with especial 
pleasure, when far away." 

■ 

"New York, April 16, 1833. 

"I led Philadelphia on Saturday. I formed an ac- 
quaintance with an interesting Quakeress, on board the 
boat, who appeared like a pious la^J. When I parted 
with her, I took her hand and remarked, that looped we 
should* meet in a better world. She replied with dbjbacter- 
istic composure and simplicity, but with bewitching ' gentle- 
ness, * I hope so : I am pleased with thy countenance.' 
It was my first acquaintance with one of this sect, and 
I think it will give me satisfaction, when I have passed 
the ' river of death/ to recollect that with Christian af- 
fection I have shaken hands with a 'Friend.' 

" Last Sabbath was the communion in the Bowery church, 
where, side by side with dear Edward, we commemorated 
the love of that Saviour to whose work we are conse- 
crated. I rejoice, dear father, that you have his presence. 
He will not leave you comfortless, but will come unto you, 
more graciously than ever. I trust I shall be with you on 
Saturday. Notwithstanding my enjoyment here, and else- 
where, I shall rejoice more than all, to be once more with 
you, in my quiet home. My love awaits each one of you." 

"Norwich, April 23, 1833. 
! 

"Your gratifying letter, my dear sister, reached me in 

New York and was peculiarly acceptable. I thank you 

for resigning me so cheerfully. Our dear father is in just 

that state of mind, respecting my departure, which I wished 

and expected him to acquire, I* his letters to roe while 

I was absent, he expressed unusual confidence in God, and 

enjoyment of his presence; and the day of my return, 

which was Saturday last, he very frankly acknowledged, 

in my presence, that his feelings had been wrong, but 

were now wholly changed. 



MRS. SARAH L. 8MITH. 139 

'- It is of the first importance that we . all preserve a 
quiet spirit. I have been so unusually composed, since this 
event, that I dread more than any thing, a ruffled, excited 
state of feeling. 

" I had a pleasant visit in New York and Philadelphia ; 
though rejoiced to return, where I can walk more by faith, 
which it is very difficult to do in a tumultuous city. I hope 
we shall all be enabled to preserve our spirituality of mind ; 
which. is practicable, if we keep other things in their sub- 
ordiai£& place. If any may take advantage of the precept, 
* TwVy ifr thought for the morrow/ we may do so, who are 
in the ranks of our Saviour, avowedly, and, I hope, sincerely. 
' For your Father knoweth that ye have need of all these 
things/ is a precious promise." 
* "May. 

" What a lovely spring this is ! All nature seems joyous, 
animate and inanimate. This little plain looks like a para- 
dise, and I sometimes sing, with pleasure, rather than 
pain, Eve's lamentation, * 

* Must I leave thee, Paradise ! 
Thus leave thee, native soil, 
These happy walks and shades ? ' 

Yes, with joy I leave thee, that souls, whose value out- 
weighs a world's delights, may become heirs of the ' sweet 
fields beyond the swelling flood. 1. It is a little after sunrise 
now, and I have had a precious season in my closet, where 
my mind seemed to expand with the. truth of God. How 
soon we shall know him in eternity ! Let us quicken our- 
selves in the race set before us." 

The powerful competition, which the missionary cause 
held in Miss Huntinftfcjff* affections, with her home and all 
its pleasant circumstafet^l, may be learned from two or three 
sentences in one of her fetters, written a few months before 
she left her country. "To make and receive visits, ex- 
change friendly . salutations, attend to cwli ^*^^», «^ 



]40 MEMOIR OF 

tivate a garden, read good and entertaining books, and even 
attend religious meetings for one's own enjoyment ; all this 
does not satisfy me. J want to be where every arrangement 
will have unreserved and constant reference to eternity. 
On missionary ground I expect to find new and unlooked 
for trials and hinderances ; still it is my choice to be there. 
And so far from looking upon it as a difficult task to 
sacrifice my home and country, I feel as if I should ' flee 
as a bird to her mountain. 1 " 

To those who knew the pleasant local circumstances of 
Miss Huntington's residence ; the circle of society in which 
she moved; the high place she had in the respect, confi- 
dence and affection of her numerous acquaintances; the 
interest with which they gathered around her, and bestowed 
their testimonials of regard, as the time approached when 
they were to " see her face no more," — to those who knew 
these things, her willingness to leave all, is explained only 
by the fact, that she so loved her. God and Saviour, and 
desired his glory in the publication of his gospel to the ends 
of the earth, that she "accounted not her life decor unto 
herself." 

" Norwich, Juke 21, 1833. 

"lam grateful to my dear friends for their kind interest, 
and their solicitude for my future happiness. But they must 
all be cautious, and I too, of dwelling much upon those 
features in the case which are calculated to encourage too 
much sensibility. You recollect the reply of our Saviour to 
Peter, when he said, ' Be it far from thee, Lord.' The work 
before us, is, as Mr. Smith expresses it, one of inconceivable 
magnitude ; and whatever has a tendency to weaken courage, 
must be regarded as our Saviour did the rebuke of his 
warm-hearted disciple, as a temptation to be resisted. 
How precious is the thought that he who said, c Lo, I am 
with you alway,' was a human, as well as a divine Being ! 

" I think, dear sister, that some of the views which are 
entertained respecting missionary relinquishments and pri- 
vations are a little imaginary. If we attempt to sum up the 



MRS. BARAH L. SMITH. 141 

amount of real happiness enjoyed by those who remain at 
home, including all the anxieties and perplexities attendant 
upon almost every hour, what will be the result? Cast u> 
the balance against those of the missionary, which are of a 
different nature perhaps, are we sure that the latter would 
preponderate ? It is the testimony of all missionaries I have 
noticed, that their trials are not of the kind, which fill the 
anticipations of their friends. I am unwilling that my 
friends should cultivate in themselves, or in me, the feeling 
that I am too valuable for the sacrifice. 

"Your prayers I prize. I ask their continuance, that 
my work may assume such an appearance in my eyes, as to 
outweigh every minor consideration, and that the great 
realities of eternity may fill all our souls. 11 

" Norwich, July 5, 1833. 

" As soon as you had led the door yesterday, dear brother 
and sister, I retired to your vacant room, and there my heart 
seemed strengthened with the same hope which I felt would 
strengthen me in death. I felt that it was enduring as 
eternity. Glorious hope! what can a feeble human being 
do without it? Eternal things never seemed so real to me 
as they now do. Our circumstances as a family, for many 
years, have been of a teaching nature; and we should be 
dull indeed, had we learnt nothing. Although we have had 
trials, they are such as we would hardly exchange for 
those of most others ; and our blessings certainly we would 
not relinquish for those which are only temporal. Let us be 
grateful and cheerful, and, as a wise man of Persia said, 
' speak of our trials with a smile.' 

" When you pray for me, ask that I may have more and 
more love for souls and for the honor of God. This is the 
only feeling which can sustain a missionary ; and bear away 
the spirit from selfishness." 

" July 8, 1833. 

* " Mr. Dickinson preached yesterday morning from the 
words, 'Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth ;* 






142 MEMOIR OF 

and in the afternoon from Malachi iii. 8. I have seldom 
had much enjoyment at the communion table, because I 
hate usually been too exclusive and personal in my desires, 
looking for some especial token of the Saviour's love for me. 
I trust that yesterday I was enabled to throw off those 
shackles; and that hereafter, as then, it will be a season 
in which I shall feel my obligations to a dying world, and 
make some new surrender to my Master. I felt yesterday 
that the church is in no immediate danger of apathy from 
having nothing to do. It will require a great effort for her 
to ' arise and shake herself from the dust,' and ' put on her 
beautiful garments/ and be ' comely as Jerusalem/ A few 
have already commenced the reformation, and ministers 
must lead the van ; and all of us who feel interested must 
work hard, and pray much, and prepare to encounter ob- 
stacles. But let us go forward ; for the Lord is on our side. 
' Be wise as serpents and harmless as doves.' " 

Soon after her marriage, which took place on the 21st 
of July, Mrs. Smith with her husband left Norwich to make 
several final visits to relatives and friends; of which the fol- 
lowing extracts furnish a brief account. 

" Bennington, Vt., Aug. 10, 1833. 

"My dear Parents: — I am very happy to be able to 
address you once more from this spot. Our visit at North- 
ford was exceedingly pleasant and satisfactory, and the time 
passed almost unconsciously. I was gratified to see so 
many of Mr. Smith's numerous relatives, which, with my 
own, would make a congregation of no inconsiderable size ; 
and with thanksgiving I may add, their united prayers would 
form a cloud of incense not to be found in every circle of 
similar number. May I not be unmindful of the privilege 
of having so many praying friends! On the Sabbath my 
husband preached a farewell discourse, and took leave of 
many of his friends. I could not refrain from mingling 
my tears with theirs upon the interesting occasion. Mon- 



X .: * 

MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 143 

day rooming we bade a final adieu, the sorrows of which 
were somewhat alleviated by the possibility of -tineeting 
again, before our embarkation. It threw around our aged 
parents a dignity which angels might admire, to see them 
thus relinquish the object of their fond regard, to the cause 
which angels love, and angels serve. May the richest 
blessings of God's grace rest upon them, and upon you, 
my dear parents, who make the same cheerful surrender. 

" Here we expect to remain until Wednesday next. You 
will naturally imagine that dear Peter has been brought 
to mind, and that many tender associations are connected 
with him. There stands the rocking-chair which he occu- 
pied, and when I lie down upon the bed, I can almost 
imagine that I hear his steps in the adjoining chamber. 
But while that precious form moulders in the grave, the 
released spirit is in far higher and holier society above, 
from whence I would not recall him, if I could. 

( There entertain him, all ye saints above, 
In solemn troops and sweet societies 
That sing, and singing in your glory move, 
And wipe the tears forever from his ares. ' " 

After having visited her only sister, for the last time, 
and bade her " farewell," on her return home she wrote 

as follows : — 

" Norwich, Aug. 20, 1833. 

" My very dear Sister : — Were not the prayers of our 
kind husbands answered, in reference to our parting? 
During family devotions, I felt as if I should dissolve in 
tears, and yet we separated with calmness. I long to 
know how you felt after we left. Many times during the 
day I closed my eyes, and said to myself, ' Can it be that 
I shall behold those loved faces no more, until we meet in 
eternity?' While I write, the thought makes my heart 
sink, but I must not indulge it. 

( Away, it is done, I will breathe not a sigh, 
Bat a mule shall spring up o'er the tear that would tta.' 



144 MEMOIR OF 

"The recollection of our visit to you is delightful. 
Indeed, the whole journey furnished as much unalloyed 
pleasure as earth often bestows. Our ride to Pittsfield was 
pleasant, where we arrived some time before dark. The 
next morning we set out early, and called first in Canaan, at 
the house of Deacon Whiting, the father of one of the mis- 
sionaries at Beyroot, where yre had a precious visit, and met 
together at the throne of grace. On Friday we went to 
Northampton. Next morning Mr. Todd accompanied us to 
the grave of Brainerd. At 10 o'clock we left for Hartford, 
which we reached between eight and nine in the evening. 
Mr. and Mrs. Wads worth were expecting us, and received 
us very cordially. Out visit to them was as delightful as 
the most solicitous kindness could make it. Mr. Smith 
preached in each of the churches his farewell. When we 

left the next morning, Mr. put into my hands a check 

upon the Merchants' Bank of New York, for $100, charging 
me to use it for our own comfort. He requested us to let 
them know when we were to sari, saying, * Though we are 
old folks, perhaps we shall have the courage to be with you ; ' 
and when he bade us adieu, he was so overcome, that he had 
to go into the dining-room and recover himself, before he 
could wait upon us to the stage-coach. Such kindness we 
shall not soon forget; and will you pray that those feelings 
of personal interest may be transferred to the cause to which 
we are devoted? We return from our journey, laden with 
the rich experience of God's goodness. Our friends in Nor- 
wich are very kind and attentive." 

On the morning of the 29th of August, 1833, came that 
hour which, more than all, may be expected to try the soul 
of a missionary ; especially a daughter of such tender and 
strong affections — the hour of bidding farewell to her father 
and her mother. The following letter, written the next day, 
best describes her feelings on that occasion. It is delightful 
still to see, how " the love of Christ constraineth " the de- 
voted missionary, and with what sacred steadfastness it en- 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 145 

ables him to move on in the path of duty, even though it be 
in a sundering of the tenderest tie* known on this side of 
heaven. In such an hour, how impressively is illustrated 
that promise of the Lord Jesus, " My grace is sufficient for 
thee, for my strength is mad« perfect in weakness" ! 

" Provtomtce, Aug. 3D, 1833. 

* • p * » 9 9 

u My dear Father : — Yatfvday was to me a most painful 
season. For the first timifrii^my life, I strove to drive your 
image from my thoughts; foYso long as it was present there, 
in the last attitude' in which I beheld you, waving your 
adieu, my tears flowed irresistibly. Yet I would not return 
to you. ft is a good toork which T have undertaken, and I 
feel happy in the thought that you would not recall me from 
it. Still nothing but the hopes of the gospel sustain me. 
Earth cannot furnish a motive sufficiently powerful to justify 
such a sacrifice. Yesterdays these hopes were less operative 
— but this morning, I seem to feel an answer to the prayers 
which, as I hope, are offered for me ; and probably my reno- 
vated strength of body invigorates my mind. Tell all our 
dear friends to pray for our spiritual advancement, more than 
for any thing else. We have now begun our work, and 
need your prayers. The effects of these we shall feel con- 
tinually; and our friends can in no way render us so happy, 
as in the kind office of suppliants at the mercy seat." 

To her brother, who was a resident at her father's house, 
and from whom she had parted forever, in this life, she 
wrote as follows : — ■ * 

u Boston, Aug. 31. 
" My dear Brother : — After leaving you all on Thursday, 
1 felt for a little while as if you were dead ; but since 
writing to you so freely, I have entirely lost this sad im- 
pression, and I can now, with some slight exceptions, 
think of you with my usual cheerfulness. In consequence 
of the delay of sailing, we do not feel hurried, and I doubt 

7 



]46 MEMOIR OF 

* 

not all things will be kindly ordered, as they have been thus 
far. I have learned from past experience, that when I place 
my own concerns secondary to higher duties, God prospers 
them; but as sure as I give them the first place, they 
perplex me. This explains the sentiment inculcated by 
our Saviour, ' Seek first the kingdom of God — and all 
ether things shall be added.* 

" Sabbath evening. — I attended the Old South this 
morning, where Dr. Skinner is supplying the pulpit for a 
few weeks. It was the communion season, and my thoughts 
were peculiarly interesting. When there fifteen years ago, 
I was not a guest at the Lord's table, but an alien from 
him. 1 ' 

" September 4. 
" Although exceedingly anxious, my beloved father, to 
hear from home, I dreaded the effect of your letters upon my 
feelings ; and when I read yours, with Faith's, and especially 
Edward's, I realized all I had anticipated, and more, of 
an overflowing of natural affection. Had not my husband 
been present, I should have given unrestrained indulgence 
to my sensibilities, and perhaps made myself sick. But I 
trust both my Saviour, and my husband, are willing that I 
should love such dear ones as I have left behind, and weep 
at the remembrance of them. Oh ! how gracious was our 
Redeemer, in assuming the nature of man ! It is a comfort 
to me to think that his soul, more perfect in refined and 
tender emotions than any earthly being, was susceptible 
of acute suffering. Yet his principles never swerved ; and 
so long as feeling is not indulged to the prejudice of duty, 
it is not indulged to a sinful excess. God forbid that I — a 
woman — should ever become a stoic! Let no one ask 
or expect it of a missionary, as an essential qualification. 
God often calls to his work those who possess the warmest 
affections, that his grace may be more triumphant ; and 
brother Hooker says, that * those who love Christ best, love 
also their friends most.' I do not intend, in my letters, to 
throw a gloss over any thing ; but shall tell you of all that 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 147 

occurs ; so that you may rely upon my integrity and can- 
dor, and not imagine that I am suffering what I wish to 
conceal. And yet I do not mean to complain." 

The letters of Mrs. Smith which were written from this 
time to that of her embarkation, exhibit evidence of the 
intensity of her attachment to her friends and her country ; 
and that her trials were severe, in parting with them for 
life. But they likewise show the source from whence she 
derived her comfort and strength ; the predominance of 
her love to Christ and the work to which she had eonse* 
crated herself; and that she advanced, with firm step, Ml 
the path which she had entered. From these letters, the 
limits of the present chapter will admit the insertion of 
only the following passages : — 

" I hope, my dear cousin, that you do not forget to pray 
for me, as you would for yourself under similar circum- 
stances. I need much more grace than I possess. Pray 
that I may be a good wife, an efficient associate, a kind 
friend — that I may have bodily vigor, mental capacity for 
acquainting myself with the languages of the country to 
which I am going — and above all, a warm heart and an 
overcoming faith. 

" In leaving forever this favored land, with home and 
affectionate friends, my mind involuntarily forms an esti- 
mate of its real value, similar, I think, to the views which 
I shall have upon a dying bed. The result of my reflec- 
tions is this. Every thing really valuable here, rises in my 
estimation ; while a multitude of things deemed quite es- 
sential, sink to insignificance. O that Christians so richly 
blessed would consent to throw off the shackles of the 
worldling, and give all their energy to the salvation of 
their fellow-beings ! The time must come when this will 
be the case. God forbid that his judgments should be 
necessary to accomplish it." 



* - 



148 MEMOIR OF 

" " Boston, Sept. 14, 1833 

" My thoughts have dwelt too much, dear brother and 
sister, upon those whom I have left. The separation from 
home and beloved ones, was far more trying than I antici- 
pated. I wept nearly all the first day, at the remembrance 
of that little group which surrounded the stage-coach, 
upon whom I had looked for the last time. The imnge 
of our dear father, waving his final adieu, rose continually 
before me, and my heart was dissolved in tenderness. To 
part with him was more painful than to separate from all 
my other friends. But I need not describe to you my 
emotions ; you know them all, dear sister. 

" My faith, I trust, is not weakened. Yet I pity a mis- 
sionary who loves not his work, or whose dependence is any 
where but in God. Nothing but reliance upon Christ, and 
the courage derived in answer to prayer, can furnish any 
adequate support. Pray for us, dear friends, continually; 
thus it is in your power to make us happy. I seem to 
realize in my own soul, that my friends are remembering 
me. In the family of Mr. Hubbard, we have been welcome 
and happy. I had not much opportunity to converse with 
the dear friends at Andover, as it was the Sabbath. Through 
the papers, you will hear of the meeting in the evening. 
We were urged to stay to the anniversary ; but we rather 
dreaded fatigue and excitement. I felt a great deal at part- 
ing with our friends there; they were associated with so 
many tender recollections. But I suppressed my emotions 
till my head seemed bound with cords, and my heart felt as 
if it would burst. We had a little season of social prayer 
on Monday morning. We still expect to sail on Wednesday. 
Occasionally my heart sinks, at the thought of taking a last 
look at the shores of my native land, and I know not how I 
shall sustain it. My only hope is in God. Do not fear that 
the attentions which I receive elate or injure me. If ever I 
felt myself 'less than the least of all,' it is now. Dear 
brother and sister, thanks for all your kindness. To you, 
Mary, Faith, Elizabeth, and Cornelius, I must now say, 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 149 

farewell. My heart and my prayers are with you. I love 
you too well for my comfort. I ban sympathize with Mar- 
tyn more than I expected. But if God gives me work to do 
for him, I shall be happy. Let all missionaries count the 
cost. I rejoice in the little preparation which I have had 
for the mission. Once more, farewell ! I go cheerfully. 
God bless you!" 

Her farewell letter to her father follows. 

" Boston, Sept. 17, 1833. 
"And now, my dear father, I take my pen for the last 
time, and address myself to you. Nature struggles hard, 
and I stop to wipe the tears which gather fast, and intercept 
the traces of my pen. But I must not indulge myself in 
saying what is in my heart. God only knows those deep, 
deep fountains of feeling which he has created there. Your 
letters, and brother's, have been all received, and were more 
valuable than gold. They will often be read on our voyage. 
• * * * I have urged Dr. and Mrs. Wisner to go and 
see you. The former, particularly, has strong hold of my 
heart ; I hope you will become acquainted with him. 

• * * # # • 

" And now, must I -say — adieu ? 






' Friends, connections, happy* country, ? \ 
Can I — can I say farewell ?* 

" Dear father and mother, sisters and brothers, I forsake 
you for Christ. You all love Him ; and your claim to me 
you joyfully relinquish. v To him I commend you ; at his feet 
I leave you, and there, this morning, have I cast myself 
with this plea, ' Lord, be merciful to me a sinner.' As 
such I hope to be borne through the labors and trials of 
life, and to the gate of heaven. There we meet to part 
no more. Till then — Farewell" 



150 MEMOIR OF 

"Saturday, 1 o'clock, P. M. 

" My dear Mother : — We are now just upon the wing, 
and expect to sail this afternoon. Mr. Perkins has been 
brought from Andover, and though unable to sit up all 
the time, the physician thinks he can go on board the 
ship with perfect safety. We esteem it a remarkable inter- 
position of Providence, that we should have been detained 
on Wednesday. For in addition to the mutual enjoyment 
of each other's society, it is thought important that Mr. P. 
should be with Mr. Smith, to gain information of the country 
to which he is going. I hope you will unite your grateful 
acknowledgments with ours, to the gracious Disposer of all 
things. Mr. Smith has just come in, and says they are nil 
ready, and we go at half past three, ' if the Lord will.' He 
sends a great deal of love to you all. Cousin Sarah wrll fill 
this sheet after we are gone. In parting from these kind 
friends, we feel as if we were going from home. The Lord 
bless and reward them a hundred fold ! 

" Dearest mother, this is one of my last acts, writing to 
you. May God be with you and my beloved father, brother, 
and all. I am well to-day, and go with cheerfulness. Our 
long detention makes us anxious to be gone. Another fare- 
well from your most affectionate daughter, 

Sarah." 

In accordance with the intimation in the extract just 
quoted, the following account of the embarkation was com- 
municated to Mrs. Huntington : — 

" Saturday, 5£ o'clock, P. M. 
" I have just returned, dear cousin; from the vessel in 
which your daughter sailed ; and I thought it would be 
gratifying to you, to know how she appeared at the last. 
We went on board a few minutes before four o'clock. At 
four, religious exercises were commenced by singing the 
533d hymn of Church Psalmody, ' Roll on, thou mighty 



%» 



MRS. ~SARAH L. SMITH. 151 

ocean;' the tune, 'Missionary Hymn.' Dr., Jenks then 
made an appropriate prayer ; not only for the missionaries, 
but their near friends. We then sang the Doxology in long 
metre ; after which, friends were requested to go on shore. 
At half past four, the vessel left the wharf; while those on 
shore sang, ' From Greenland's icy mountains.' Through- 
out the whole, cousin Sarah was perfectly calm and com- 
posed. A stranger would have supposed she was leaving 
home only for a short time. When I took leave of her, she 
sent a message to Mrs. Hubbard, and appeared perfectly 
calm. She remarked to Mr. Hubbard that she had been 
wonderfully supported through the day. Mr. Smith seemed 
quite overcome at parting with friends." 

Mr. and Mrs. Smith embarked, at Boston, for Malta, on 
the 21st of September, 1833, in the brig George, Captain 
Hallet. By the pilot boat, on 4ts return, Mrs. Smith ad- 
dressed a note to the family with whom her time had been 
spent in Boston, from which we extract the following : — 

" Brio George, 5 o'clock. 

" Dear Friends : — The pilot has just informed us that he 
returns in an hour, and will take letters for us. I can only • 
say, we are all well and happy ; and very busy, as we are- 
just ' going to house-keeping.' I have been duly appointed 
•scribe pro tern., not because I am more talented thaa my 
companions, but more idle just now ; though I mean la be 
very industrious, and every thing else that is good. 

" I stood upon deck till I saw the waving of the last hand- 
kerchief, and Mr. Eckard's white hat, as he stood alone upon 
the shrouds. You, dear Mr. and Mrs. Hubbard, I looked 
upon with a daughters heart ; you seemed to be representa- 
tives of my parents. Thanks for every expression of love 
from the members of your family. 

" From first stepping on board, my heart has been stayed 
up with the Scripture which I repeated this morning — ' For 



152 MEMOIR OF MRS. SMITH. 

I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life ; nor angels, nor 
principalities, nor powers; nor things present, nor things 
to come; nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, 
shall be able to separate us from- the love of God which 
is in Christ Jesus our Lord.' * * * God's kingdom 
seems more glorious than any thing else; thanks to his 
grace. * * * Adieu, dear, dear friends. My heart 
feels what I cannot express." 



CHAPTER VIII. 

VOYAGE TO MALTA SHIP'S COMPANY AND EFFORTS FOR 

THEIR GOOD ALEXANDRIA ARRIYAL AT BEYROOT. 

The company of missionaries to which Mrs. Smith was 
attached, landed at Malta on the 14th of November, after 
a prosperous voyage of fifty-four days; Mr. and Mrs. 
Smith sailed shortly for Alexandria, where they arrived 
on the 25th of December. From thence, on the 15th of 
January, they embarked for Beyroot, their destined station, 
which they reached, on the 28th. Mrs. Smith kept a 
journal during these voyages, in which are recorded many 
interesting incidents. The scenes of the mighty ocean, 
sometimes peaceful and beautiful, and sometimes stormy 
and terrible, were new to her. She saw every thing with 
the eye of taste, and of one. who adored and delighted to 
acknowledge God in all the works of his hands, and to 
praise him for his power, wisdom, and goodness. " 
" As it is the object of the remainder of this volume to 
delineate the character of Mrs. Smith as a missionary, 
rather than to give a history of her travels — selections 
with reference to this, will be given, fronv Ijer journals and 
letters to her friends. 



Atlantic Ocean, lat. 39° 9', Ion. 41° 26', > 

October 4, 1833. 5 

" My beloved Father : — I little thought that we should 
be in the middle of the ocean before I should have courage 
to take my pen. But up to this very day, if I had kept a 
journal, I could have recorded nothing but sick, sick, sick. 
Oh, this sea-sickness ! what language can I use to describe 
153 7* 



154 MEMOIR OF 

it ! For the present I will dismiss it, and tell of my agreea- 
ble surprise on opening my writing-desk this afternoon, 
for the first time — for incidents are rare upon this wide 
waste of waters. I had forgotten the items which were 
deposited in my desk, and the first object which met my 
eye was the profile of my dear father, and on searching I 
found that of my own mother, and then those which are 
so striking of Edward and Peter: My eye must have 
kindled with affection, for my heart glowed with pleasure, 
and it was unmingled, cheerful pleasure. I found, also, 
several very nice pens, all prepared by Edward for writing ; 
and my husband having filled my inkstand, I herewith com- 
mence that correspondence, which is to be our only solace 
in our separation. 

" October 5. — While in Boston, I had a great deal of 
despondency of mind and physical depression ; but after so 
many detentions, was anxious to sail. And when the day 
actually arrived, I summoned all the courage of which I was 
capable, aided, I fully believe, by the grace of God. The 
8th of Romans furnished me the spiritual strength which 
I needed, and I strove to turn away my thoughts from every 
personal consideration, and occupy them with God's glorious 
plans. 

"As I was taking dinner to-day, a sweet little land bird, 
which had been hovering around the deck, perched in the 
window. Its size was that of a robin, its plumage black 
and white. But it had not the calm and buoyant look of 
the sweet songsters among my native hills. It seemed 
wearied and ruffled, like some solitary wanderer. It was 
five hundred miles from its home, the Western Islands. 

" October 14. — I have been reading again this morning 
your letters received in Boston, and over them shed many tears 
of fond affection and gratitude. Your image is continually 
with me, and every night my imagination visits you. — For 
two Sabbaths we have been able to have religious exercises 
on deck, at four o'clock, P. M., and it is truly affecting to see 
these immortals, listening to that word which will either be 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 155 

the savor of life or of death ; and which, if disregarded, will 
justify God in their condemnation before the universe. It 
ia a sublime and overwhelming thought, that whether suc- 
cessful or not in their labors, Christians are thus honoring 
the Divine Being in his dispensations of grace. 

" We number fifteen souls on board this ship ; two only of 
whom, beside the captain, mates, and ourselves, are Ameri- 
cans ; which renders it an unpromising field of labor. 

"October 15. — We have made the Western or Azore 
Islands, which were associated, not only with the geography 
of my early days, but with the feeble prayers of later years. 
As a portion of the Islands of the Western hemisphere, it 
has been my pleasure to remember them once a week in my 
closet at home, hundreds of miles distant from them. And 
here they lie stretched before me, inhabited only by ignorant 
and superstitious Portuguese, to whom you may suppose I 
now feel not wholly indifferent. 

" On the 26th, we first beheld, to our great joy, the 
African coast; and on that day we passed through the 
Straits of Gibraltar. You can hardly imagine the nature 
of our feelings, when we found ourselves safely across the 
stormy Atlantic, and within the shores of the Mediter- 
ranean. 

"The navigation of the Mediterranean possesses one 
advantage over the ocean ; its surface soon regains smooth- 
ness after being disturbed ; though, like the Atlantic, ' the 
waves thereof mount up to heaven, and g6 down again to the 
depths, putting us at our wits' end.' How exact the descrip- 
tion in the 107th Psalm, of a life at sea, none but the 
experienced therein can imagine. I have read it over and 
over with admiration, since we embarked. 

" I enjoyed much in the face of nature after we passed 
the Straits ; and if my imagination does not deceive me, 
these Mediterranean skies have beauties peculiar to them- 
selves. I will endeavor to give you some faint description 
of a sunrise scene which I beheld while standing alone upon 
the bow of the ship! as she plunged through the foaming 



156 MEMOIR OF 

waves. — A few dense but ragged clouds stretched along the 
eastern horizon, but not so closely as to obscure that first 
silver tinge of the water, only beheld in a sunrise at sea, and 
which suddenly strikes the eye, let it be watching ever so 
intently for the first beam of the glorious orb. As it rose 
on that morning, it presented the appearance of blocks of 
effulgent gold, varying their outline each moment, till at 
length one half of it appeared as if resting upon a pedestal, 
beside which lay a fragment of its glory in the form of a 
perfect square. The whole hemisphere seemed, as it were to 
smile as its monarch ascended ; and as I cast my eye towards 
the west, floating clouds of the most delicate vermilion hue, 
contrasted beautifully with the brilliant azure of the sky. I 
turned first one way and then another, and knew not where 
to fix my admiring gaze. Add to this an horizon of sixty 
miles in extent, within which our ship was a lonely traveller, 
upon a waste of waters, and you may form some little 
conception of my feelings, as I involuntarily and audibly 
exclaimed, 

* These are thy glorious works, Parent of good, 
Almighty Father .' 

" November 12, 8 o'clock, A. M. In quarantine. — A 
new morning dawns upon me, and has afforded a beautiful 
sunrise. My imagination enters your bed-room, my dear 
parents, where the old clock, whose pendulum is not yet 
' discontented/ will soon strike one, two, three.- Perhaps, 
in your dreams, you are receiving a visit from your absent 
daughter ; if so, I hope it is of a cheering nature, as the 
reality would justify. For I do not feel myself to be very 
distant from you — not as much as I feared. ' We change 
our sky but not our minds.' I seem to have anticipated 
losing my identity, after reaching these foreign shores ; but 
it is not so, and I hope you think of me as you think of your 
children in Bennington and New York. My husband and 
myself took our usual walk on deck just as the sun was 
rising. 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 157 

" The moral influence which, as missionaries, we have 
exerted over those with whom we have sailed, I know will 
have a prominent place in your minds ; and I wish we could 
inform you that God has given them all to our prayers and 
labors. But this we cannot say, even of one. And yet we 
hope that we have done a little good, which the last day 
may disclose. Had we been more faithful, we might perhaps 
have accomplished more. 

"Our captain came from Provincetown, on Cape Cod, 
which * grows ' (as the Southerners say) little except 
sailors and fishermen, children, and fish. He is not yet 
twenty-six years of age, is about the size of brother E., 
and his pleasant expression and agreeable manners hare 
often reminded me of him. He has been invariably kind 
and considerate towards us; and we entertain a sincere 
regard for him. The indiscretions of some religionists 
have prejudiced him against the truth; and when we first 
came on board he declared himself an infidel. In view of 
the circumstances which had effected his belief, we thought 
best to act cautiously, and without neglecting favorable op- 
portunities for conversation on religious topics, we have 
sought to have our conduct such that we might be ' living 
epistles, known and read ' continually. We have lent him 
our books, which he has read with pleasure; particularly 
Tyerman and Bennett's Voyages. We think there has been 
a gradual softening of his prejudices, an almost entire re- 
linquishment of profane language, and that his mind is in 
some degree prepared for the operatiops of the Holy Spirit. 
I have had one long and interesting conversation with him ; 
and we intend to unite in presenting him with a handsome 
reference Bible. 

" The mate, a little man about twenty-three years of age, 
has been a source of anxiety and trial to us, for his open 
disregard of all serious things, and his unceasing profane- 
ness. We have no complaint to make of his deportment 
towards us as individuals. But the name of our blessed 
God and Saviour we have been compelled \o \*aw \»&\^o^ 



158 MEMOIR OF 

the greatest irreverence. Last week we concluded that it 
was best to show our disapprobation by avoiding all notice 
of him. The gentlemen had previously expostulated with 
him. He appears to have noticed our reserve, and sought 
to win our regard by offering fruit, &c. For several days 
we have scarce heard a profane expression from him. 

" The second mate is near the same age with the chief 
mate ; an obliging, amusing fellow, whose songs and im- 
promptus, as he takes the lead of the men in their labors, 
greatly inspirit them in their chorus of 'ho cheerily.' 
I knew not, before, the importance of music among sailors, 
to enliven and beguile them, as they pull the ropes. Thus 
the efforts which are exhausting their energies, and bringing 
on premature old age, are, at times, mere pastime with them. 
This mate has aided us in our singing upon the Sabbath, 
and, but for the influence of the first mate, I think would 
yield to the truth. Since the first two Sabbaths, each one 
has been calm ; and our religious exercises on deck, at 4 
o'clock, have been uninterrupted ; except the last, when a sud- 
den squall prevented Mr. Perkins' from completing his ad- 
dress. The sailors have been attentive and respectful." 

" You must not think, from what I wrote in the intervals 
of sickness, that I have suffered unusual hardships. Far 
from it. Our accommodations have been unusually good. 
Our cabin and berths are more airy and commodious than 
missionaries generally find. We have been abundantly 
supplied with various and wholesome articles of food, and 
good water. The captain has freely offered us a share of 
all his delicacies, and we have endeavored to reciprocate 
his attentions. To the sailors we have once a week sent 
a basket of gingerbread and apples; sometimes accompanied 
with a tract for each. This is virtually, though not profess- 
edly, a temperance ship. We have not seen a drop of 
spirit on board. A little brandy has twice been used for 
medicine. 

" The Sabbath is a day which sailors claim for themselves; 
which, J suppose, is employed as in this ship — usually for 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 159 

washing, sewing, &c. This fact should have an influence 
upon the prayers of Christians. 

" I would that every missionary could know, before leaving » 
his native land, that the despondency produced by sea-sick- 
ness is but as a momentary dream. I felt, at one time, that 
I would hardly cross the ocean again, even to reyisit my 
beloved home. Yet its effects are so soon forgotten, that 
even now I am not greatly dreading our next voyage. 

" November 15. We have been this afternoon to take 
leave of our friends of the Brig George, which was an 
event of deep interest to us. All on board exhibited feel- 
ings of kind regard. It is a little singular that an American 
crew, with its officers, amounting to eleven souls only, should 
speak seven languages ; viz. the Finnish, Danish, Swedish, 
German, French, Italian, and English. We found all these 
persons destitute of the word of God, except one of the 
Danes; who had a German Testament. We leave them 
provided with Bibles, each one in his own tongue, except 
the Finlander, who, happily, can read a little English. I 
think we cannot for a moment doubt, that at least one of 
the Bibles will save one soul; and one soul outweighs a 
world. The copy which is presented to the captain is a 
large octavo, with references, from the British and Foreign 
Bible Society ; a very handsome book.. We each inscribed 
our names in it ; and it was accompanied with a note from 
Mr. Smith's pen, expressive of our gratitude for his kind 
attentions, and our wish that we might have a happy meet- 
ing in a better world. With them all I had a few serious 
words, particularly with the first mate, on the subject of 
profaneness. He received my reproof kindly, and acknowl- 
edged that his conscience also frequently reproved him. 
My own feelings quite overcame me, while bidding adieu to 
those immortal beings, with whom, for eight weeks, we had 
associated ; and to the flag of our happy, happy land. It 
will be long ere we sail under her banner . again, J And 
alas ! long ere we see again a land so blessed. . *J ' 

"Oh! how it makes the Ctafi&tai'ftta'ut w3»\ft\*3as^ 



160 MEMOIR OF 

these poor Maltese. In Malta and Gozo, there are 123,000 
inhabitants, most of them poor, ignorant, degraded beings, 
such as you never beheld. Some of the most miserable of 
our Indians will give you an idea of them, if you except 
drunkenness ; which is, however, gaining upon them here. 
Add to this an incessant jargon, which, with their 4 cries/ 
resembles more the inarticulate sounds of brutes than of 
human beings. But it is more especially affecting to know, 
that they are subject to the dominion of a tyrannical priest- 
hood, who may be found at every corner. Yesterday, while 
I was out, a procession was just entering St. Paul's church, 
on their return from the administration of the Viaticum to 
the dying, when numbers, old and young, through the streets 
dropped upon their knees. Like Jeremiah I can say, * Oh 
that my head were waters ! ' 

" Mr. Temple says he shall leave Malta, and the house in 
which he has lived ten years, endeared to him also as the 
scene of afflictions, with almost as much tender feeling as in 
forsaking his country. The house is a large, airy building, 
containing a chapel which serves also as a dining-room, and 
the printing establishment. It is all of stone, within and 
without, excepting the doors and window shutters. We 
have for our use three small contiguous rooms, where are 
our baskets, trunks, &c. Upon these we turn a great iron 
key, every time we leave our apartments. As I pass to and 
from them, over these stone steps and floors, with a rusty 
key in my hand, and ascend by ti private stairway to the 
terraced roof, in the gray of the morning, I sometimes 
imagine myself the secluded inmate of some ruined castle ; 
more especially when, from the promenade, I overlook these 
ancient towers and battlements, founded in the chivalrous 
days of the knights of old. 

" But you will be more desirous to hear of your daughter's 
health, than of the romance of her associations. I am happy 
to say, that I am much better than I have been for months 
before. The air and food of these regions seem favorable to 
me thus far." 



\ 

\ 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 151 

"Malta, Nov. 17. 

" Dear Mrs.- Trumbull : — It would have given me great 
pleasure to have seen you and Mr. Trumbull before our de- 
parture. Yet such demands had already been made upon 
my tenderest sensibilities, that I almost dreaded, at the last, 
a repetition of parting scenes; and congratulated myself that 
my dearest friends were none of them present when we em- 
barked. I am now quite relieved from those painful 
emotions ; having left them, with my sea-sickness, in the 
stormy Atlantic. My present composed and cheerful feel- 
ings seem to compare with the easy motion of a vessel before 
the wind, upon a smooth sea. I regard myself and my be- 
loved friends as only in GocPs world, and composing one 
family ; and all we have to do, is to serve him faithfully as 
affectionate children ; and soon we shall be in our Father's 
house on high. 

" My whole heart thanks you and other kind friends, for 
the praying circle which you formed. Be pleased to tell 
them so from me, with my warmest Christian love. Pray 
that we may be like our divine Master. — In approaching 
the harbor of Valetta, we sailed along the northern side of 
the island, directly by ' St. Paul's bay/ ' the place where 
two seas met.' The Saturday evening that we lay in quaran- 
tine, in selecting a portion of Scripture for investigation, ac- 
cording to our usual practice, we chose the 27th of Acts ; and 
when we came to the 26th verse, ('Howbeit we must be 
cast upon a certain island,') all involuntarily paused. As 
Mr. Smith has remarked, the Bible possesses more interest 
in these regions, and a livelier meaning." 

"Malta, Nov. 18. 
" My dear Brother and Sister : — I think I never prized 
your love and your prayers as I now do, though I have 
ceased to indulge those painful emotions which followed our 
separation. I am happy and well as I ever have been, and 
perhaps more so. The novelty of every thing which I 
behold in this ancient spot, inteita\& m* *n^fe&Y&^\ ^.^^ 



103 MEMOIR OF 

same time my heart bleeds for its desolations. The Church 
Missionary, London, and Wesleyan Societies, all have their 
missionaries here, yet no access is obtained to the natives, if 
we except one school under the care of the Methodists. 
There are many hundreds of priests and monks, who are 
always to be seen moving through the streets, their counte- 
nances bearing none of the marks of pure, domestic joy.* 
They appear even more dissatisfied than ever, as their in- 
fluence is diminishing. It is to be hoped that another gener- 
ation will be permitted to think for themselves, unshackled 
by Romanism." 

" Malta, Nov. 19. 

u My dear Brother : — I thought and spoke of you many 
times while at sea, with tender commiseration, of the hard- 
ships you must have endured in voyages which you took. 
I made one descent into the forecastle, and was quite 
willing to emerge from it Yet when I saw the sailors sur- 
rounding their beef and bread upon the deck, I thought 
them happy. The despotic authority exercised at sea is 
often alluded to with disapprobation ; but I am inclined to 
think that in the present state of mankind it is necessary. 
So much is at stake, that prompt obedience is all important, 
and can only be secured by a severe penalty. A sleepy 
watch or an unfaithful helmsman might cause the destruc- 
tion of all on board. I always regard the man at the helm 
with feelings amounting to sublimity. His iixed, silent at- 
tention, with his eye now upon the compass, and now raised 
towards the swelling canvass, reminds me of Him whose un- 
erring wisdom and faithfulness are guiding through her 
orbit, the planet on which we rest. 

" Yesterday we received a call from Mr. and Mrs. 
Brownell, missionaries of the Wesleyan Society, who 
superintend a school of Maltese boys and girls. A few 
of the natives have begged for Testaments. They are 
an interesting people. They /resemble our Indians ; and 
the children in the streets, who are numerous indeed, re- 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 103 

mind me of my little flock at Mohegan, and call forth my 
sympathy, from association. Some of the most respectable 
youths of both sexes, are quite graceful and attractive. 
The females have a peculiarly becoming dress, the most 
conspicuous of which is a black silk mantle,, thrown over 
the head and reaching half way down the person. The 
streets are filled with vagrants, and you cannot knock at 
a door, without being assailed by some one asking your 
charity for himself or for the souls in purgatory ; or go 
into a shop, without having one or more at your elbow, ask- 
ing to be employed in carrying home whatever you may 
buy. It is painful to the feelings to appear so regardless 
of them as is absolutely necessary. The city is so com- 
pact, being- only a mile in length, you would soon be rec- 
ognized and very likely be followed by a mob whenever 
you appeared, if you should allow your sympathies to be 
called forth by their entreaties. Yesterday I passed along 
the principal market place, through which I could scarcely 
make my way ; all were crying at once their several com- 
modities, and filling the street completely. The tongue of 
the Maltese is his weapon, both offensive and defensive, ac- 
companied by various gesticulations. He seldom resorts 
to blows. The manners of the people are civil even to 
servility." 

"November 25. — Yesterday morning, (Sabbath,) about 
ten o'clock, two detachments of soldiers passed the house, 
accompanied by bands of music, returning from the Chapel 
service — which is by a chaplain who preaches five sermons 
every Lord's day, to the several regiments of the garrison. 
The melody of the performance, which would have been 
fine on any other day, was almost destroyed by association. 
Had the seed of the gospel heen dispensed in its simpli- 
city, the birds of the air must have devoured it. 

" This morning we rose between 4 and 5, and attended 
Mass in the church of St. Dominic, who was the author 
of the Inquisition. I had witnessed the same in our own 



164 MEMOIR OF 

country ; but there I regarded it as only an error that was 
in an incipient state. Here this absurd religion, with few 
exceptions, is the religion of all; and as I entered the 
dimly-lighted spot, and remained there nearly an hour, a 
succession of varied feelings pervaded my mind. The 
first, was a rnsh of excited sensibility, causing my eyes to 
overflow; the next, of indignation towards the priests at 
the several altars, whose mummeries were purchased with 
the money of people kneeling promiscuously upon the cold 
stone floor, with nothing to support their persons, and who 
were chanting their prayers in the Latin tongue. Directly 
behind us, one old man was repeating his paters and aves 
with the Rosary. But the last and strongest feeling which 
I had, was that of compassion ; and as I passed a row of 
kneeling women, wrapped in their black mantles, I could 
hardly refrain from stretching forth my hands to them, as 
I mentally exclaimed, ' Precious sisters ! let me lead you 
to my Saviour, who is all sufficient, not only to save but to 
purify.' But alas ! it is not for me to break their chains. 
Yet I can and did once, if no more, plead earnestly to 
God for them. How did my whole soul most gratefully 
rejoice before the mercy seat, that I had from infancy been 
taught to know the one Mediator! Dear friends! this 
subject has not been too highly colored in the representa- 
tions of those who have returned to tell our happy country- 
men the sad tale of abominations in Satan's own seat. 
The eyes affect the heart, and no descriptions can make 
you feel as you would do, were you to be in the midst 
of them. God forbid that dear America should become 
a victim too! Could her favored ehildren realize how 
small a portion of the work of evangelizing the nations 
has been done, and that the great adversary is still the 
god of this world, they would indulge in no feelings of 
self-complacency, or of mutual congratulation at the ' great 
things ' now in progress. There is encouragement enough 
to animate them in going forward, but it must be in * the 
patience of hope.' 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 165 

" December 7. — About 4 o'clock this afternoon, Mr. and 
Mrs. Temple, Mr. and Mrs. Hallock, and Bishop Car abet, 
with their families, bade a final adieu to Malta. It has been 
a day of bustle and of interest. Just before they left, I 
stepped in to bid Mrs. Carabet and the family good bye. 
The bishop was in the cellar, arranging something, and I 
went down to see him. I said to him, ' God bless you ; may 
we meet in heaven/ He lifted up his hands and eyes, and 
said, ' Jesus Christ!' He can speak but a few r words of 
English, and this expression was very precious. After this, 
they came over to Mr. T.'s, and we knelt together in our 
apartment, while Mr. Smith made a parting prayer. Then 
all left for the ship, but myself. I locked the doors, and 
remained alone in that large and desolate house until my 
husband came back. I was never happier; yet I thought 
of you all, as my footsteps reverberated among those lonely 
walls, 4,000 milps from my home. The door was surrounded 
with beggars, who were rapping incessantly ; but I heeded 
them not." 

"Malta, Nov. 29. 

" I often think, my dear cousin, how your heart would 
be affected by what I see and hear in this dark but inter- 
esting portion of the world. Could we hold spiritual in- 
tercourse, how would I each day convey to your quiet 
chamber some affecting tale from this land of death, 
which would give energy to the prayers which you delight 
to offer before the mercy seat ! You can form no adequate 
conception of the difference which exists between our own 
country and this. The natural dissimilarity is as great as 
possible ; but the moral still more so. When Mr. Temple 
landed upon the shores of America, four years ago, he 
thought he had reached the land of integrity and upright- 
ness. 

"Dec. 2. — Mr. Temple says be retains more vivid and 
delightful impressions of his visit to Norwich, than of any 



1Q5 MEMOIR OF 

place in America. I have not failed to inform him how 
much influence he had in making me a missionary; and 
have thought it quite singular that I should, in the outset 
of my missionary life, be thrown so directly and intimately 
into the bosom of his family, and should find my husband 
regarded so much like a brother by them. How little, did I 
foresee this, when borne down by the truths of Mr. Temple's 
appeals, four years ago! How affecting it is to trace the 
leadings of Providence ! 

" A few days since, I visited the House of Refuge. It 
is a flourishing institution, embracing 250 girls, all of whom 
looked cheerful and well, as they were industriously em- 
ployed in every variety of work. I was delighted with 
every thing I saw, till I entered the chapel, where I unex- 
pectedly beheld at one end, pictures, crucifixes, confes- 
sionals, and all the apparatus of. Romanism. My heart 
sickened at the sight ; for if this error retain its influence 
over men, eternity, with its dread realities, must dissipate all 
that is fair and beautiful on earth. It is not uncharitable 
to assert, that the religion of these countries is bad. It is 
most justly described in the 5th verse of the 17th chapter 
of Revelation. Those few expressive words portray the 
whole system. The benevolence of the gospel which 
mourns over the woes of a deluded people, leads us to 
anticipate the fulfilment of the denunciation contained in 
the 10th verse of the next chapter — 'Alas! alas! that 
great city Babylon, that mighty city ! for in one hour is thy 
judgment come.' The preparatory steps, however, will be 
long and tedious. The work which missions have to ac- 
complish in these countries, is far more formidable than 
among pagans ; therefore the church at home must not be 
disappointed if but little success attends our labors for a 
long time. Yet let her keep hold of the unfailing assurance 
alluded to above — ' in one hour is thy judgment come. , 

" December 4. — One of the most interesting places 
which I have visited in Malta, is the palace of the Gov- 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. J67 

ernor. After viewing the tapestry room, the hangings of 
which are exquisitely wrought, we entered the armory, the 
walls of which are covered with the rusty armor of the 
ancient Knights, who formerly inhabited the island — suits 
of which were brought from Rhodes. Some stand erect, 
at various distances from each other, through the centre 
of the apartment. It required no wayward imagination, 
amid Such a scene, to carry one back to the days of the 
crusades, and to converse with the dead of past ages, who 
seemed as it were to surround us. As I looked upon those 
semblances of human beings, the questions arose involun- 
tarily in my mind — ' What were the thoughts which found 
a receptacle in the head that was pressed by that helmet? ' 
' What were the feelings that fluttered in the heart which 
beat beneath that breastplate ? * ' Where is the immortal 
spirit of him whose weapon fell powerless against that im- 
penetrable shield ? ' Religion and martial glory were the 
exciting causes of their prowess. All this has passed away 
as a dream of the morning ; and somewhere in the invisible 
world, the beings who animated these panoplies are now in 
existence. My heart said, ' Where ! ' and the walls seemed 
to echo, * Where?' Tlw^jreligion is a sad inheritance to 
these islanders ; their milirjvy genius has given them renown 
in the fortification of this isolated rock ; but, forbidden by 
the rules of their order the pure delights of domestic joy, 
no posterity exists to speak with filial admiration of their 
ancient glory. Inanimate bulwarks and mute images of 
stone, are all that remain of the far-famed ' Knights of 
Malta ! ' Alas ! though Satan may bestow upon his subjects 
* the kingdoms of this world and all the glory of them/ it is 
but a poor reward. 

" Dec. 8, Sabbath. — Pray for us, my dear parents, that 
our obedience and love may flow together in honor of Him 
who has called us to a service for which we feel inadequate. 
We desire to be more holy and devoted to our great work. 
We are entirely happy in our calling, and would not ex- 
change it for any other. We ask for nothing but hearts 



108 MEMOIR OF 

warm with that benevolence which sustained our blessed 
Master in these regions, where 

' He labored, and languished, and bled.' 

"May God bless you, this night, ray honored parents. 
If. is 9 o'clock here, and I leave you for my bed. You are 
probably now listening to an afternoon discourse ; though 
perhaps the snow and cold keep dear mother at home. 

" Dec. 10th. — Mr. Schlienz, who superintends a mission 
press here, has been showing us some first lessons in draw- 
ing ; and Mr. Smith has just remarked, that I had better 
inform my friends at home, that a knowledge of this art is 
an important qualification for a missionary. To this I may 
add, that missionaries coming to the Mediterranean, need 
not lay aside any personal accomplishments or graces with 
the expectation of their being useless here. It is far other- 
wise. Externals have an important place in the regard of 
the inhabitants of these countries, and hospitality and 
politeness are very essential. The sincerity of plain 
American manners, falls far short of the suavity demanded 
by the habits of the East. I feel quite deficient in Malta ; 
and in Turkey I must multiply my salams still more.' , 

"Alexandria, Dec. 26. 

" My dear Parents : — Having reached the territory of 
Mohammed Ali, I seat myself to give you a recital of our 
adventures since I closed my journal at Malta. After the 
first twenty-four hours, every vestige of sea-sickness left 
me, and returned not again during the passage, though we 
were exposed to incessant tossing. The fatigue and anxiety 
of our embarkation, together with a cold, threw my husband 
into a fever. I then became nurse in my turn. Our ser- 
vant Ahmed proved an invaluable auxiliary to us. Without 
him we should have suffered for necessary attentions. He 
was devoted to our interests, and fought his way, with 
determined perseverance and dignity, through all the abuse 
which the Maltese ever bestow upon a Mohammedan. He 



V 

MRS, SARAH L. SMITH. 109 

is a tall, erect Arab, with eyes deeply set, which shoot forth 
the most penetrating glances in a direct line. He wears 
the loose Turkish trousers ; and a red cap, surmounted 
with a long, rich* blue silk tassel, in fashion like' one upon 
the head of a figure in my picture . of Anthony and Cleo- 
patra, which now, as formerly, is the Egyptian -official Cap. 
A sliding door in our state-room, which opened upon the 
' companion-way,' sufficiently ' to admit air, and sometimes 
our food, obliged us to see and hear almost every thing 
which took place between the servant? and the steward. 
We were often not a little amused with what transpired 
behind the scenes. We furnished Ahmed with a fowel, 
upon which to wipe our utensils; while the others, relying 
upon the accommodations of a Maltese Vessel, were put to- 
such extremities, as to use our servant's shawl and stockings 
for a like purpose. This superior appendage of a brown 
towel; made him quite an object of envy, and they tried . to 
beg it from him. 

"I studied a little Arabic and Italian, and read aloud 
almost every day, though sometimes the toot of a person, 
on deck, or a rope, resting upon our sky-light, would cause 
me to slop in the middle of a sentence; and wait patiently 
for the return of the light. A fine wind bore us rapidly 
forward,, and in six days We saw the -coast of Egypt. It 
was towards evening that "land was discovered, and as the 
harbor of Alexandria, in consequence of shoals of rocks, 
is difficult to navigate,- the captain beat off to sea that night, 
with the prospect of a safe entrance in the morning, while 
' we were all animated with the same expectation. ' But sad 
to relate, we had gone beyond our destined haven, and had 
how a head wind to carry us thither. This was Thursday, 
and for the six following days, we did nothing but get a 
sight of land towards evening, just in time to beat off fegain 
at night 1 We felt ourselves to be in a trying situation. 
And it seemed as if * patience would have her "perfect work.' 
In consequence of the situation of our berth, whenever they 
tacked ship, ure were obliged to change the position pf our 

8 ■ ■ 



\ 



170 MEMOIR OF 

heads from one end to the other, and the last night we did 
this five time*. We summoned <dl our resolution, however, 
and I believe -were not left to murmur against Providence, 
as we felt assured that our times were in the hand of our 
heavenly Father, who had thus far fulfilled all* our desires. 
Yet we thought 'it proper* to have an especial season of 
prayer for deliverance from our present perplexities, as we 
knew that our bnly hope was in God. A storm might over- 
take us, or our food might fail, and the captain was 
ignorant, timid, and unprincipled. It was on the 24th, the 
day previous to our release, that we called* mightily upon 
God, for his gracious interposition. 

.- " On Christmas morning, the air was serene and mild, 
the bright rays of a genial sun illumined the blue waters 
of the Mediterranean, and after a pleasant sail of a few 
hours, the outlines of the coast again met our eye ; while 
the ^shipping of the port, and ' Ponopey's pillar' rising 
directly above, terminated the long disquietude of ' hope 
deferred.' At one o'elock we cast anchor in the harbor 
of Alexandria ; and in an hour or two after, I stood upon 
the shore of this ancient land, where Moses dwelt for 
many years, and where the infant Saviour found a tem- 
porary abode. 

"Dec. 27. — You are not aware how constantly I bear 
you in mind, wherever I am, and whatever I behold, as my 

* Winged thoughts that flit to you, 
A thousand in an hour,' 

will testify. Particularly when I find any thing that is grati- 
fying to a virtuoso, does dear mother's antiquarian and 
classical spirit hover around me ; and I cannot help wish- 
ing that she was with me, or at least that I could sit 
down with her in the evening, and recount to her listen- 
ing ear my adventures. 

" This day, Friday, is the Sabbath of the Mohammedan. 
Under our sleeping apartment, is a bazar of the Bedaween 
Arabs. This morning at day-break, just as the cry of 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. ' ffl 

the Muezzins was heard from the minarets of the several 
mosques, calling the devotees of the Prophet to the wor- 
ship of Allah— which is repeated five times each day — 
the voice of one near us met our ears; which continued 
for nearly an hour, and probably proceeded from a Beda- 
wy. While I pitied the poor deluded votary, I felt reproved 
by his self-denying fervor. I remarked to- Mr. Smith, that 
when we look at the triumphs of this false religion, we 
cannot fail of being forcibly impressed with the influence 
which only one individual may acquire over his fellow* 
beings. Had .the missionary but half the zeal for God, 
which Mohammed exhibited for himself, with the aid of 
the Holy Spirit what might he* not accomplish? 

"We went to the spot where Parsons was buried, over 
which a marble slab,- with an inscription, had been placed 
by our missionaries, when Mr. Smith was here seven years 
ago. No vestige remains of it, however. They conducted 
ns to an enclosure, with the pretence of showing us his 
tomb ; but it was not there.- The Superior, who had been 
in the convent four years, could tell us nothing of it; and 
we were obliged to leave, with the melancholy impression 
that his remains had met the fate of many others, whose 
bodies were left to repose among them. It seems that 
until lately the Protestants in Alexandria have had no 
place of burial, and the monks have found it for their 
interest to disinter the dead, and after throwing the relics 
aside into a charnel-house, -dispose of the same spot to 
new purchasers. How different* t}ie treatment which Abra- 
ham received from the children of Heth ! 

" Dec. 30. — Alas ! my spirit sighs for the quiet of a 
Christian Sabbath. Pray for us, that in the midst of such 
unfavorable circumstances, we may not ourselves lose the 
impression of its sanctity. This is not an idle fear, when 
we reflect upon the moral as well as natural pliability of 
the constitution of man. I love to think of your privileges 
and enjoyments, on these holy days; and I pray that you 
may improve them f as you would do, could you behold mine. 



172 MEMOIR OF 

" What a blessing, my dear parents, is the throne of grace 
to us, in our separation! Sometimes I realize it more 
than at others.. This morning I felt as if distance were 
annihilated; and in commending you to God for the day, 
when it should dawn upon you, six hours and a half after, 
I almost imagined myself among you. I have great reason 
to be grateful that I am so well and cheerful in this remote 
iand. Although you are ever in my thoughts, I have non* 
of those painful longings which depress the spirits. I 
enjoy every thing, food, air, exercise, sleep, reading, 
writing, &c. 

"Evening. — Mr. Smith and I took a walk at sunset, 
the air being mild, and the clouds brilliant. The foliage 
of the distant grove of palm trees gave surpassing beauty to 
the scene. Unlike other trees, when viewed from a dis- 
tance, their outline is distinct but graceful. Pompey's 
pillar, in its simple beauty, rose behind these elegant 
clusters. We stood upon a slight elevation, just as the 
sun dipped his last lines below the 'horizon; when a dis- 
charge of small guns, from the fleet in the harbor, was 
heard, followed by the evening tattoo. Immediately we 
perceived the flags of the minarets hoisted, and from a 
small door on the south side towards Mecca, which opens 
into a gallery near the top, appeared the criers, whose voices 
we distinctly heard, as they resounded through the soft air 
of an Egyptian evening. The wh61e scene was impressive, 
yet affecting-; while the contrast which was presented by 
the works of creation, and the moral darkness around us, 
brought forcibly to our minds those lines of Heber — 

' Though every prospect pleases, 
And only man is vile/ 

"As we stood gazing upon the objects before us, we 
spoke of you, and thought you would like to know where 
we were closing this eventful year. We talked of its inter- 
esting features, alluding to the fact that one year ago we 
had never met. 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 173 

"•Jan. 1, 1834. — In the afternoon we went to the Greek 
convent. Mr. Bird had requested that some inquiries 
should he macje there, preparatory to the erection of a slab 
to the memory of Parsons, whose remains and monument, 
I have told you, had been removed. A part of us remained 
in the garden, while Mr. Gliddon and Mr. Smith, with a 
Greek merchant for a dragoman, (interpreter,) had an 
^■interview with the Superior; who says he must apply to 
the Patriarch at Cairo, before any thing can be -done. *5* 
Should his ashes remain undiscovered by man, angels will 
watch over them ; and with sublimer feelings, we may apply 
to him the lines, originally descriptive of an event widely 
different in its character, — 

* We carved not a line, we raised not a stone, 
But we left him alone in his glory.* 

" Our yisit to . Alexandria has been one of much interest 
and pleasure. The weather has been favorable ; the streets, 
which are usually muddy at this season, have been dry, and 
we have found kind and attentive friends. I felt at home 
immediately, at Mr. Gl id don's. When describing the char- 
acteristics of these countries, I have thought, my dear 
parents, that you might suppose I was drawing a dark 
picture; too dark, perhaps. My husband says, that to 
avoid r such an impression being made by his sermons in 
America, he modified lome of his details in preparing them 
for the press. But having returned to these scenes of 
wretchedness, he thinks he ought to have placed them in 
a stronger light. What else but evil can be told of the 
undisputed dominions of the enemy of God ! How forcible 
is the language of that declaration of Scripture, in its appli- 
cation to this people — * They are all gone out of the way ; 
there is none that doeth good — no, not one/ 

" We have made some efforts in the cause of temperance, 
by conversation and the distribution of publications among 
the English. May its influence be more widely felt in our 
mother country,, and her dependencies. Will you pray for 



174 MEMOIR OF 

such a result, as her sons and daughters are scattered over 
the whole world ? Although we have found many very kind 
friends in these countries, but three only have been Ameri- 
cans ; Mr. and Mrs. Temple, and Mr. Hallock. My regard 
for England has increased by my intercourse with her 
children. Though many Of their habits and feelings are 
different from ours, yet, when cast together among a people 
of strange language, there are feelings of sympathy existing 
between us, showing that we have had one origin. i 

"Jan. 5. — This morning Mr. Smith preached in the 
English chapel to a congregation not exceeding fifteen. 
Upon returning to our lodgings, we"read together a delight- 
ful sermon of Dr. Chalmers, and sung a hymn. In the 
afternoon we studied together the 2d chapter of Isaiah. 
Before dark we stepped into Mr. Gliddon's, agreeably to 
their request, for devotional exercises ; and after a cup of 
tea, we had prayer and singing, accompanied by a familiar 
exposition of the 4th chapter of Acts, by Mr. Smith. Pre- 
vious to this, I gave Mrs. G. and her daughter some 
account of the revival of religion in Norwich, four or five 
years since. Scenes like that are entirely unknown to most 
English people. To-morrow evening, we go there again 
to hold the monthly concert, which has never been estab- 
lished in Alexandria. 

"I have been reading, in the Missionary Herald for 
September, an article entitled * Reforms effected by the 
Pasha of Egypt/ which gives quite too flattering an exhi- 
bition of his character and plans. His own aggrandizement, 
and not the welfare of his subjects, is the pivot upon which 
all his efforts turn. I have not heard § word in his favor 
since I came into Egypt. It is true he exercises a more 
liberal policy in reference to other nations, than is usual 
among Moslems; but he contrives to make all his plans 
so subordinate to his personal ambition, that no real benefit 
accrues to his people. He is not a rigid Mohammedan, 
though far removed from the religion of the Bible. That 
wise Ruler of mankind, who has all events under his control, 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 175 

may, and doubtless will, bring light out of darkness, even 
here ; but * his path is in the deep waters,' and his counsels 
are as jet hidden from our view. When next you kneel at 
the family altar, dear father, will you pray for Egypt ? 

" How precious is the word of God to us in this moral 
desert, on these Mediterranean shores! It is like the 
stream which followed the Israelites in their wanderings 
through the wilderness. With you, it spreads abroad, as 
a wide ocean, bearing all upon its bosom. May the abun- 
dant supply with which you are favored, have no effect to 
lessen its value in your eyes, or lead you to be unmindful. 
of those who are thirsting for its refreshment. At this 
hour, which is half past nine with us, thousands of my 
countrymen are enjoying the privileges of the sanctuary. 
Would that I possessed the assurance that not a heart 
forgets the perishing millions in the Eastern world, whose 
Sabbaths are any thing but scenes of peace and joy. You, 
and the dear church of whiph I am still a member, are 
without doubt «soon to surround the sacramental board. I 
can bring vividly before my imagination the appearance of 
that precious flock, among whom I have so often sat, and 
where now, ' had I the wings of a dove,' I would soon be 
found. Yet I would surely fly back .again, to bear to 
this land of famine some of the crumbs which fall from 
your table. 

" How necessary is it that missionaries should each daj 
ask for the benevolence of Christ Jesus, when they are so 
exposed to encounter objects which excite their disgust! 
To this end I ask yoxir prayers." 



" Alexandria, Jaw. 4, 1834. 
" Dear Brother and Sister : — Since our affecting farewell 
interview on board the brig George, you have scarcely been 
from my mind a single day ; and I have taken great satisfac- 
tion in commending you and your children, and the inter- 
esting flock in your house, to our covenant God. The 



176 MEMOIR OF 

paternal regard which you have cherished for my husband , 
from his early youth, gives you a twofold claim to my 
affection and gratitude, to say nothing of that sympathy 
towards me, which has excited in my own breast the con- 
fidence of a sister toward you. Wherever you reside, I 
trust God is your tabernacle ; and that light and peace are 
in all your paths. Your children will not be permitted to 
forget us, while they are tenderly remembered by their 
uncle and aunt, far away beyond the wide ocean. 

" 'Egyptian darkness/ not natural, but spiritual, broods 
over this land ; and we are ready to exclaim, ( How long, 
O Lord, how long?' Nothing but hard, self-denying labor, 
on the part of -evangelized nations, will overthrow the 
kingdom of Satan as it now exists in the world. Feeble 
prayers, and trifling efforts, will do nothing effectual. The 
struggle will be long and arduous; and who among our 
favored countrymen stand ready to encounter it, both at 
home and at the out-posts, and to die in the warfare; leav- 
ing others, who may come after them, to enjcjy the triumphs 
of victory ? Such as are ready to work for God as they 
work for themselves, and such only, are worthy to enter 
the lists. 

" Our classical associations have been gratified by our 
visit to this land, once the seat of science and art ; the 
relics of whose grandeur tell us what it has been. As we 
expect to live under the same government, it has been well 
for us to visit the dominions of the Pasha." 

To a young lady of the family of the Consul at Alexan- 
dria, in which Mr. and Mrs. Smith had been kindly enter- 
tained, during their visit to that city, she addressed a part- 
ing note. 

u Alexandria, Jan. 10, 1834. 
"Dear Miss Gliddon : — In requesting your acceptance 
of a small copy of the New Testament, as a little memento 
of my regard, permit me to express my gratitude for your 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 177 

kind attentions, and my interest for your future happiness, 
not only here, but in a world far more worthy of your 
regard. 

"It would have given me pleasure to have learned 
from yourself, whether the high destiny of an immorta* 1 
being is the supreme object of your pursuit, had circum- 
stances favored so confidential an interview. With the 
impression, however, that notwithstanding a uniform re- 
spect for sacred things which you ever discover, you have 
not fully formed the decision so essential to your safety and 
happiness, will you allow me, at parting, to leave with you a 
word of affectionate advice 1 

" Having just passed through those years of interest and 
temptation upon which you have more recently entered, I 
can readily appreciate the views which at such a period 
animate the breast, and will venture to inform you of that 
which my own experience has taught me. It is the alluring 
appearance of worldly enjoyment that withdraws the heart 
from its Maker ;' and let me assure you, my dear friend, that 
it is not worth our efforts. I have tried its value, and can 
testify that it can never fill an immortal mind, or satisfy an 
ardent soul. ' I knew nothing of happiness until I found it in 
a unison of my own with the Eternal Mind ; and this was 
the result of a free, unreserved, and rational surrender of 
my whole heart to that Saviour whose atonement claimed 
my earliest love and most untiring service. 

" To this gracious Master, dear Miss Gliddon, permit me 
to direct your eye, and to urge you, without any longer 
delay, to devote ' the dew of your youth.' Let the surren- 
der be immediate and complete, though it may require an 
effort. A ' pearl ' so valuable as that which Jehovah offers, is 
not unworthy the energies of our entire being, and nothing 
but an earnest effort will secure it. Wait for nothing more 
on the part of God ; he waits for you. The present is a 
golden period. 

" I pray that you may give, not the mere siftings of life to 
Him who deserves more than you can bestow, but, with 

8* 



178 MEMOIR OF 

generous purpose, devote the best of all you possess to a 
service which death cannot interrupt. 

" With the highest sense of obligation for the attentions 
bestowed by your family, I remain very sincerely yours." 

"Beyroot, Fjkb. 5. 

" Dear Mrs. Temple : — It gives me the highest pleasure 
to be permitted the privilege of addressing you from this 
spot, so full of interest, after our wanderings over the great 
and wide sea. From Mr. Smith's letter to your excellent 
husband, you learned respecting our safe arrival at Alexan- 
dria; and that, after making the coast of Egypt in seven 
days, we were, through the negligence and ignorance of our 
captain, beating about upon the sea seven days more, before 
the land-marks of our desired haven were sufficiently defined 
to attract him thither ! The time which we spent in Alex- 
andria, furnished us leisure for writing, and for satisfactory 
intercourse with the kind family of our Consul. Our hearts 
melted in view of the miserable condition of the oppressed 
subjects of Mohammed Ali, among whom some faithful 
missionaries, besides those already employed there, ought 
to be located. 

" On the 15th of January we sailed for Beyroot, in an Aus- 
trian trabacolo. On the 20th we planted our feet upon these 
sacred shores, and soon forgot all the troubles of the way, 
which had mingled with the mercies of eighteen weeks — 
the interval that had elapsed since we left our native Iand.' , 

To one of the family at Alexandria, where they had been 
entertained, she gives a short account of their voyage. 

* 

" Our accommodations on board the Porno, so far as space 
and neatness were concerned, quite exceeded those of the 
Grande Bretagne. Our renowned captain was very obliging 
and sober x until we came within sight of Cyprus, when he 
availed himself of a storm to put into port ; and there he 
kept us six days. He spent the time on shore, himself, 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 179 

wholly given up to his cups, which explained, to our satis- 
faction, the strong attachment to the shore, for which he is 
so remarkable. Day after day, as we remained shut up in 
that little tossing trabacolo, he deluded us with the promise 
of returning and putting out to sea ; but the jolly-boat con- 
tinued to appear without him ; till it seemed as if • patience ' 
would ' have her perfect work ' with us. On one day only 
we went on shore, to get a little exercise by walking through 
nhe muddy streets of Larnica. 

" The morning of the second Monday after leaving you, 
was bright and beauRful ; and while yet seventy miles from 
Syria, the outline of Mount Lebanon was perceptible, even 
before the far famed Venus-isle had faded from our sight. 
As we approached our destined shore, the glory of Lebanon, 
in all its magnificence, and the beauty of this interesting 
city, more than compensated for all our perplexities." 



A 



CHAPTER IX. 

ENTRANCE ON MISSIONARY LABORS — INTEREST IN THE 

ESTABLISHMENT OF A SCHOOL HABITS AND MANNERS 

OF THE INHABITANTS EXPERIENCE ON MISSIONARY 

.GROUND MONTHLY CONCERT ^JDIES ILLUSTRA- 
TIONS OF SCRIPTURE. 

We now find Mrs. Smith in her appointed field of mis- 
sionary service, and entering, with all her heart, into the 
interesting scenes and circumstances of that land which she 
had so much desired to see. As she has been, so she will 
continue to be found the best historian of her own course 
of life and labors. In this capacity she will appear, com- 
mencing with the first letter to her parents, after arriving at 
her station. 

" Beyroot, Feb. 5, 1834. 

" After so long a time, my dear parents, I am permitted 
to address you from this interesting land, around which, I 
doubt not, your thoughts have already hovered, while you 
have imagined it to be the dwelling-place of your children. 
On the 28th of January, a day of uncommon beauty, we 
approached our destined home. I can hardly convey to 
you the feelings which pervaded my breast, as I looked 
upon it. The bird's-eye view of Beyroot, at the foot of 
that far famed Lebanon, which is truly a ' goodly moun- 
tain/ riveted every affection of my heart, while its beauties 
commanded my attention. Mr. Smith had left undescribed 
its natural features, leaving me to form my own impressions ; 
and he remarked that even to himself it appeared more 
lovely than he before imagined. 

130 



MEMOIR OF MRS. SMITH. 181 

" It occupies the northern side of a cape, called the 
' Cape of Beyroot.' The city itself, which is enclosed by 
a wall, is small, and not particularly attractive or repulsive; 
but the environs, where the missionary house stands, and 
which occupies an extent of country several times larger 
than the city, present an enchanting prospect, even at this 
season of the year. The ground rises gently towards the 
south, and is covered with an uninterrupted _succession of 
gardens, separated by hedge-rows of the cactus, or prickly 
pear, and filled with mulberry trees, trained to a low growth. 
These are how stripped of their verdure ; but the sycamore, 
the kharoob, and here and there a palm and cypress, diver- 
sify the landscape, while innumerable almond trees, in full 
blossom, enliven the scene, and place its beauties beyond 
description. The houses, which are of a bright yellow, 
tinged with brown, and unique in their appearance, are 
scattered at equal distances over the gardens ; and are per- 
haps as contiguous to each other as yours and Mr. C.'s. 
Some of the terraces of the houses are surmounted with 
low pointed columns, designed for the frame-work of an 
awning ; which give them a picturesque aspect, when 
viewed at a distance. Mount Lebanon, in all its grandeur, 
stretches from north to south ; while the snowy ridges of 
its lofty eminences, and the numerous villages which occupy 
its declivities, give additional interest to the ever-varying 
appearance of its. scenery. Among these villages, the one 
in which Asaad Shidiak lived and suffered, is distinctly 
perceptible from -the neighboring terrace of an Armenian 
friend, Yacob Aga. It seems as if my eye would never 
tire in admiring the scene which is spread out before me.* 
I can truly say, that Beyroot pleases me more than any spot 
which I ever saw, my own dear native town not excepted. 
' There are no vicissitudes * for the eternal beauties of 
nature/ said Madame de Genlis, when she revisited Ver- 
sailles, after those revolutions which had overthrown palaces, 
marble columns, and statues of bronze. So have I often 
thought, since I came into Syria, which still retains those 



182 MEMOIR OF 

characteristics of ' the promised land/ that rendered it so 
attractive to the Israelites.. 

" We were most cordially welcomed by our friends, who 
seem quite happy and devoted to their work. This brings 
me to the moral aspect of the mission, which, though 
mentioned last, is not, I trust, last in my heart. I think I 
may say it is encouraging, much more so than either of us 
expected. We feel that a wide door of usefulness is open- 
ing before us, which will demand all our energies, and 
even more. 

" The Arabs are extremely free and social in their habits. 
The trials of missionaries here, and perhaps in most Eastern 
countries, are of a different character from those which are 
imagined by friends at home. They are not so much per- 
sonal privations as moral perplexities, arising from the 
ignorance and deceit of a population destitute of that civil 
and religious freedom, furnished only by the diffusion of 
God's word. If our operations assume a more decided 
cast, we know not but we shall yet have the c persecutions ' 
which are promised among the blessings of ' a hundred 
fold/ to those who forsake home and country for Christ. 
If, as his servants, we should be thus identified with our 
Lord, may we have grace to endure this fellowship with 
his sufferings. 

" The language of the country furnishes the most for- 
midable difficulty to surmount. Mr. Smith says that Mr. 
Bird has become so familiar with it as to have as great a 
choice of expressions as in speaking our own language. He 
reads the Scriptures once a week to a congregation of beg- 
gars, in his yard, after which he distributes bread to them. 
When I saw him in the midst of about sixty, the morning 
after our arrival, my thoughts immediately reverted to the 
Saviour's ministrations. You can hardly imagine, though 
you have often been informed of it, with what increased 
interest the Scriptures may be perused in this country, 
where they were written. I seem, in consequence of the 
unchanged habits of these people, to enter directly into the 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 183 

circumstances which are described in holy writ.-* The 
best hours of every morning I devote to the Arabic, and 
the first hours of every evening to Italian. I have already, 
through necessity, attempted to stammer in both of these ; 
and in the French likewise, with Mrs. Chasseaud, the wife 
of our Consul. 

" I continue to be happy in my new situation, and most 
cheerfully adopt this country as my own, and hope to make 
my grave here. My dear husband, for the first day or two, 
was surrounded with old friends among the natives, who 
welcomed his return with great joy. He feels as if he had 
returned home. 

" February 6. — It is a most lovely morning, and we are 
all occupied- in preparing letters for America. My window 
looks directly upon Lebanon; and the summit of Jebel 
Sunneen, its loftiest peak, 10,000 feet in height, is covered 
with a brilliant mantle of snow. Would that you could 
share with me the glorious prospect. But though we may t 
not mingle the expressions of our admiration here, ' there 
is a land of pure delight/ where erelong we hope to be 
reunited. Objects and interests more bright and conducive 
to our happiness, will there unite our tastes and feelings, 
and we will therefore think most of our heavenly home. 

" April 2. *— On the 27th of March I had the privilege 
and enjoyment of receiving letters from my beloved country, 
among which were Nos. 1 and 2 from my dear father. 
These last, like diamonds among jewels, were selected and 
read first. I will not attempt to inform you how much I 
enjoyed m the reception of these tokens of affection, or 
how grateful I felt to my kind friends from whom they 
came. That page, my dear mother, from yourself, was not 
the least valued, I assure you. It was so characteristic, it 
brought you directly before me, and I had a more vivid 
impression of your affection than I have before had since 
we parted. I have thought of you a great deal, perhaps 
more than you have imagined. 



184 MEMOIR OF 

" Not only the important moral and political features of 
this Eastern country are associated with the expansiveness 
of your mind, but every landscape and every flower bring 
you to remembrance. Especially when studying the 
Arabic, your fondness for etymology is continually before 
me;' and I think how much pleasure you would derive 
from a language, every word of which can be traced to its 
root. You have my constant prayers*, and those of my 
husband, and I doubt not that we and our work have yours. 
I rejoice in your comfortable health, and in the kindness 
of your friends, and. in all your family blessings. I am still 
with you in my dreams, and some of them are quite irrele- 
vant to the calling of a missionary. 

"I thank dear father for his precious letters, and am most 
happy to hear that his health improves, and that he enjoys 
the light of God's countenance. In this I am not disap- 
pointed. In His house he will find that which is ' better 
than sons and daughters.' Please to give my love to the 
kind friends who meet with you for prayer, and tell them 
that I thank them most warmly for their remembrance of 
me. If there be a class of persons on earth who need the 
prayers of all, it is that of missionaries. When hearing 
Mr. Smith's farewell sermon, I thought that I felt the force 
of his arguments, but now I know them to be true. Pray 
most of all that we may abound in love towards those who 
are around us. They are ignorant, deceitful, ungrateful, 
and unwholesome; and unless the Holy Spirit constantly 
excites us to the exercise of the most disinterested benevo- 
lence, we are in danger of despising them, and of exulting 
in our own superiority. Familiarity with their wretched- 
ness, also has a tendency to diminish that warmth of 
sympathy with which we have been accustomed to regard 
those who are destitute of the gospel. I often think, when 
I am surrounded by these degraded women, ' Here are 
the very persons over whom my heart so yearned, when I 
was far away in my native land.' 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 195 

" As I was walking, before breakfast, upon the terrace 
of Mr. Bird's house, I saw a group of females who had 
just returned from worshipping amid 

the pomp that charms the eye, 



And rites adorned with gold.' 

There is almost a, moral certainty that after these, my 
sisters, have stepped beyond the boundaries of time, not 
a ray of comfort will ever beam upon them, through the 
endless duration of their existence. So overwhelming was 
the impression of that moment, that I felt I could not live 
long, should it continue. My husband joined me in my 
walk just then, and we talked over these affecting truths; 
and felt, as I hope we shall continue to do, that our very 
existence should be identified with them.. But to feel 
and to act in view of these solemn truths, requires even 
greater efforts here than with you. 1 used to think that 
by a sort of magical influence, the heart would be kept 
right on missionary ground ; but I find it requires all my 
diligence. 

" The most cheering intelligence which my letters con- 
tained, was the account of revivals in Andover and Ben- 
nington, and some indefinite allusion to the prospect of the 
same in Connecticut. I am more than ever convinced, 
that upon America depends, at present, through God, the 
prosperity of missions. Since coming to the Mediterranean, 
Mr. Smith and myself have been led to think, that an en- 
listment for life, as a general thing, is essential to the 
permanence of this great enterprise. If I anticipated 
returning in seven years, I should be thinking more about 
that event, I fear, than I ought. Now I try to realize that 
this is my home for life; that here are all my interests. 
[ do not wish to feel that I am a foreigner, but a denizen ; 
and I hope to live, if it please God, to a good old age 
among this people. 

"Evening. — I have a favorite walk near this, on the 
sand which is washed upon the coast. * Beyroot, you know, 



186 MEMOIR OF 

is a cape, and of course much exposed to the wind from 
the sea; and I sometimes fear that as the sand from the 
ocean gains gradually upon the gardens, it will eventually 
make them a desert. You may imagine that this would 
not furnish a very pleasant promenade ; but it is so solid 
as to bear me upon its surface at this season of the year. 
It is diversified also with a variety of flowers and sweet 
scented herbs. I found to-day some most brilliant red 
flowers, in form like a double tulip, and about half as 
large; together with yellow and purple lupines. 'They are 
now in a tumbler beside me. I wandered quite down to 
the sea-side, perhaps a mile from the house, where I found 
natural caverns and artificial excavations; while the surf 
rose probably thirty feet in the air. 

"Although this land has greatly degenerated since the 
days of that king who was a man after God's own heart ; 
yet in some fine mornings, when all nature has seemed to 
be smiling beneath the genial influence of this Eastern sky, 
I could more than ever before unite with him in exclaim- 
ing, 'Praise ye the Lord from the heavens; praise him 
in the heights ; mountains and all hills ; fruitful trees and 
all cedars; beasts and all cattle; creeping things and 
flying fowl/ 

" Our school continues to prosper, and I love the children 
exceedingly. Do pray that God will bless this incipient 
step to enlighten the females of this country. You cannot 
conceive of their deplorable ignorance. I feel it more 
and more every day. Their energies are expended in 
* outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and gold and pearls 
and costly array ; ' literally so. I close with one request, 
that you will pray for a revival of religion in Beyroot. 
It is now the centre of operations, and if the wide field 
around us is to be cultivated, this spot must send forth 
the laborers." 

Mrs. Smith was desirous of enlisting the interest and 
efforts of some one of her female friends in America, in 



MRS: SARAH L. SMITH. J 87 

the instruction of native children at Beyroot. She had 
found a kindred spirit before leaving this country, in one 
who succeeded her in labors for the benefit of the Mohe- 
gans. To this friend she addressed a letter, a few months 
after her arrival at Beyroot, proposing that she should come 
and join her in this enterprise ; and presenting an earnest 
yet affectionate argument for her engagement in the mis- 
sionary service. 

Mrs. Smith had the satisfaction, a few months before 
her final departure from Beyroot, of welcoming her friend, 
as an associate in the delightful employment of teaching a 
school of Arabian girls. 

Of the habits and manners of the native inhabitants of 
Beyroot, Mrs. Smith was observant, as one who was ac- 
customed to study the condition of society; and amidst 
deep spiritual darkness, to note whatever was in the least 
degree pleasant or favorable. 

" The inhabitants are exceedingly social in their habits, 
and courteous in their manners ; they seldom fail to greet 
you in the street and elsewhere, with a smile and a com- 
pliment. They have a great taste for flowers, which are 
abundant. I am seldom without a nosegay, which has 
been presented by a friend, scholar, or servant ; composed 
of carnations, geraniums, roses, &c. The manners of all 
are unusually graceful, and you will perhaps be surprised 
when I say, that in consequence of their regard to etiquette, 
this spot is quite a school of politeness." 

In a letter to her sister, devoted to various topics, not 
belonging in her journal, some passages occur which will be 
in place at this stage of her history. 

" You will wish to know in regard to my spirits. 1 
am happy to say they have been very good; and .with 
the exception of one deplorably sea-sick day upon the At- 
lantic, I have experienced none of those heart-rending 



188 MEMOIR OF 

feelings respecting what I had left, which I expected. 
With the exception of that time, I have never for a mo- 
ment wished myself in my native land. 

( Pleased 1 leave thee ; 
Native land, farewell, farewell- ' 

" In regard to external appearance, I pay much the same 
attention to it as at home, both during the week and or 
the Sabbath. In Beyroot we have some English society, 
and the etiquette of life must necessarily be preserved. 
Indeed, those questions which I supposed would be forever 
put to rest when I became a missionary, are even more 
essential than ever; and temptations to pride and aris- 
tocracy are increased. What degree of conformity to 
style, and how much time may be conscientiously devoted 
to household cares, on the part of missionaries, are ques- 
tions that require to be prayerfully considered by us ; also 
how far we may indulge ourselves in the comforts and 
accommodations of life; for many are within our reach. 

"The distinction between masters and servants here, 
resembles that which exists in all old countries, more 
than it does in America. The latter acknowledge the 
name, and readily take the place, of menials; though a 
kind of courtesy, even towards them, is demanded by the 
genius of the people ; and if encouraged, they are very 
free in conversation. Their number can be multiplied with 
comparatively trifling expense, and as much cleansing of 
house and clothes obtained as is wished ; but all this must 
be superintended, and much precious time consumed there- 
by ; so that I have determined to keep as small an establish- 
ment as possible. 

" My trials here are not such as I anticipated, or probably 
such as you imagined. I will endeavor to give you some 
idea of their nature, though you cannot perhaps fully appre- 
ciate, them without experience; at least some of them. In 
the first place, there is a taking to pieces, if I may so speak, 
of a)) former Ambits and associations, and modes of action ; 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 189 

and the constructing of new, which shall be adapted to the 
circumstances of a people totally diverse from those with 
whom we have been educated. This demolition and re- 
construction, gives one an opportunity to study his own 
character and attainments, and to know, in some measure, 
how much more he has been indebted to factitious circum- 
stances than he had imagined; and it is not a little calcu- 
lated to produce humility and self-distrust. 

" The difficulties and embarrassments of a new language, 
are by no means small. The mortification of not under- 
standing, and of not being understood and appreciated in 
conversation, is a new trial ; and after the desultory habits 
attendant upon a departure from one's country and voyages 
by sea, it requires severe discipline to bring the mind to 
study and close application. This unavoidable irregularity 
operates unfavorably upon the spiritual feelings; interrupts 
communion with the soul and with its Author; and renders 
it necessary to 'keep the heart will jail diligence.' 

" There is nothing here to keep alive the religious sensi- 
bilities in the way of excitement; but every surrounding^ 
circumstance has an opposite tendency. Particularly diffi- 
cult is it for one who knows not the language, to preserve a " # 
devoted zeal, as there are no opportunities for putting it 
forth in action ; and while he daily sees multitudes who are * 
perishing, he is in danger of heeding it not, because he has 
no power to help them. Moreover, the people are so social * 
and free, that unless a check is given them, every moment 
of valuable time would be sacrificed. And this cannot be 
done without appearing, not only to them, but to one's self, 
deficient in that benevolence which swelled the breast in our 
native land, and drew our feet hither. 

"As a circle of missionaries, we are harmonious and 
happy ; but to preserve this, it is necessary to be watchful 
and courteous; and not make prominent one's own con- 
cerns. Here too is nothing to excite, because there is a 
sameness in all our circumstances ; and perhaps it is more 
difficult to exert an influence in a small circle, where all are 



190 MEMOIR OF 

ministers and ministers' wives. Mr. Smith says, that har- 
mony has always characterized this mission ; and I pray that 
it always may. 

" Another thing which I might have mentioned in con- 
nection with our benevolent feelings, or rather the inter- 
ruption of them ; if the people were cleanly in their habits, 
it would be more pleasant to have them about our persons. 
I often think of the Saviour, surrounded as he was by a 
multitude of the lower classes — and you knpw his disciples 
sometimes objected to«this. Mr. Bird says, 'No doubt they 
were just such dirty beings as we see all the time. 1 In 
character and in taste, the females are like children ; would 
that I could say, in comparative innocence also. 

" I have suffered some alternations of feeling in my re- 
ligious hopes since I left America ; which I believe is not 
unusual with missionaries, before they have acquired the 
language of the people to whom they go. I can enter feel- 
ingly into St. Paul's opinion of himself, thus expressed, 
though I have scarcely any of his zeal, ' I am not meet to 
be called an apostle.' So sacred appears my calling, that 
I feel wholly unfit to sustain it ; and I have not those clear 
views of the Saviour's love that I wish. Perhaps when I am 
able to speak of him to others, a livelier flame will be kin- 
dled in my own breast. Pray much for me, dear sister." 

A deep sense of personal responsibility is exhibited in the 
following extract: — 

" This is the day of the Monthly Concert, and according 
to the custom of this mission, a Fast also with us. It was a 
solemn season. Dr. Dodge remarked, that in addition to 
the guilt of the church as a body, for which we should 
humble ourselves before God, our individual guilt called 
for the deepest abasement. ' If,' said he, ' we had been 
faithful servants of Christ from early childhood, how many 
souls we might have aided in introducing into the kingdom 
of heaven. We had each of us been more or less associated 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 191 

with schools, academies, and colleges; and how many of 
our companions were now living in rebellion against their 
Maker, or had already commenced their long lamentation 
of wo, in the world of darkness, that might have been saved 
through our efforts.' It was an overwhelming consideration 
to us all ; and each heart feelingly, and with tears, responded 
to the suggestion, that personal guilt, in reference to the 
souls of men, rendered fasting an appropriate accompani- 
ment to the duties of this interesting day. Since the meet- 
ing closed, in the solitude of retirement, I have wept bitterly 
at the remembrance of my own sins ; and in the light of 
the truth which emanates from the pages of inspiration, my 
heart seems now to be harder than the nether millstone. 
Oh ! how we shall view this subject in eternity, "•when 
worldly snares and associations cease their blinding in- 
fluence ! 

" Some parts of your letter affected me powerfully. The 
scenes to which you allude of 1829 — when so many of the 
descendants of our venerated grand-parent were found sit- 
ting at the fountain of salvation, from which he derived all* 
his support — are indelibly imprinted upon my memory ; 
but I knew not, until your letter informed me, that I was 
in any measure instrumental in leading you to the foot of 
the cross. Let all the glory be ascribed to Him who there 
bled for you. I beg you will not regard me, as missionaries 
are often regarded, too holy to need your prayers. Believe 
me, dear Hannah, I never required them so much, and 
never, never felt my own deficiencies as I now do; and 
were it not for the feeble hold which my soul takes on a 
Saviour's mercy, I should sink down into despair and wo. 
Forget not this, at least on Tuesday evenings." 

" Beyroot, Mat 20. 

" Our warm weather has commenced earlier than usual 

here, and we have now your July heat. I bear it very well 

as yet The abundant and brilliant foliage of this spot is a 

constant source of admiration to me. The lilac tree, or 



192 MEMOIR OF 

pride of India, is now in blossom, also the pomegranate. 
The latter mamma once had, but it was little more than a 
shrub. Here they are of the size of peach trees, and their 
bright scarlet blossoms form a beautiful contrast with the 
rich green of the leaves. The kharoob tree and luxuriant 
grape vines, besides many other verdant productions, add 
beauty to the scene. The cactus is now in blossom, its 
flower a bright yellow. This latter lines every path, form- 
ing an arch and a pleasant shade, under which I pass every 
afternoon, as my donkey bears me to school. 

"May 21. — It is ten months to-day, since my marriage ; 
and the period has flown by with incredible swiftness. We 
commemorate the event, on every returning month, by a 
concert of prayer with Mr. and Mrs. Perkins, (who were mar- 
ried on the same day, and were our fellow-passengers across 
the Atlantic,) in behalf of the officers and crew of the brinr 
George. 

" May 22. — If you wish to know with what we are most 
occupied, it is Arabic. If you ask, ' What beside? ' like the 
Indian in another case, I can say, A little more Arabic ; and 
' What else ? ' A little more Arabic. With Mrs. Bird's chil- . 
dren, it is like their mother tongue; particularly with the 
youngest, who is about five years of age. She speaks it 
more readily than the English. 

" May 28. — While it requires but a short time to enable 
one to transact ordinary business 'in this language, it is long 
before such a knowledge can be obtained as to make re- 
ligious conversation intelligible and profitable. For this I 
am exceedingly anxious, as I long to use my feeble talents 
in urging sinners to flee to the ark of safety ; and I wish 
you would make it your constant prayer, that I may live 
to accomplish something in this way. In prayers that are 
offered for missionaries, I think the obstacles arising from 
the confusion of tongues, have been overlooked. 

" This is the birth day of the king of England, and the 
flag of every Consul is waving in the breeze ; among which 
the stars and stripes of our own happy country appear con- 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 193 

spicuous, and upon which I love to look. Every Sabbath 
they are to be seen likewise. 

" June 11. — Mr. Smith and I have just taken a walk ' by 
a well of water, at the time of the evening, even the time 
that women go out to draw water/ where we found a group 
of ' damsels/ doubtless exhibiting the same appearance as 
those who performed the same offices thousands of years 
ago. We stopped and conversed with them a little, and 
they offered us drink from the ' pitcher/ or jar. I have seen 
in Syria some very beautiful women, whose noble features 
and richness of complexion have led me to imagine how 
Sarah, Rebecca, and Rachel looked. I have often, in my 
letters, alluded to the satisfaction which the Scriptures 
afford me ' in the unchangeable East/ as this country has 
been proverbially styled. Imagine with what peculiar feel- 
ings you would peruse them, if such localities as the banks 
of the Shetucket, the Falls, the Pine-tree, were mentioned, as 
the scenes of events which they described ; or if the habits 
of the people, which are familiar to you, illustrated their 
truths. I was reading, a few mornings since, with exquisite 
satisfaction, the excursion of Abraham's servant to obtain 
a wife for Isaac. The well, the damsels, the jewels, the 
camels, the provender, the act of Rebecca in vailing herself; 
all have a reality, and I can think just how they appeared. 

"June 20. — From the -public prints and other sources, 
you will doubtless hear of the present disturbances in Syria, 
and I fear you will suffer anxiety respecting us ; but let not 
your hearts fail. ' As the mountains are round about Jeru- 
salem, so the Lord is round about his people.' Moreover, 
Beyroot is a more quiet place than others in the country ; 
and even should the commotions reach us, we are favorably 
situated for securing a refuge either in Mount Lebanon, or 
on the sea. 

"June 30. — I feel somewhat thoughtful, this afternoon, 
in consequence of having heard of the ready consent of the 
friends of a little girl, that I should take her, as I proposed, 

9 



194 MEMOIR OF MRS. SMITH. 

and educate her. I am anxious to do it, and yet my experi- 
ence and observation in reference to such a course, and my 
knowledge of the sinful heart of a child, lead me to think 
I am undertaking a great thing. I feel, too, that my ex- 
ample and my instruction will control her eternal destiny. 
May I hare your unceasing prayers, that I may possess 
wisdom and patience, gentleness and decision, and never 
take a wrong step in reference to her." 



CHAPTER X. 

BHAMDOON MOUNTAINEERS — DEATH OF MRS. THOMSON 

VISIT OF THE UNITED STATES* SHIP DELAWARE AT 

BEYROOT JOURNEY TO SUNNEEN AND BAALBEK. 

The intenseness of the heat during the summer, at Bey- 
root, renders it expedient for foreigners to remove for a fevr 
weeks to the country among the mountains. Mr. and Mrs. 
Smith took up their residence, in the month of August, at 
Bhamdoon. She carried her love to Christ and to precious, 
souls into the scenes of her temporary residence, and also in 
her journeys ; and devoted her thoughts and efforts to the 
great objects for which she had " left alL" 

" Mount Lebanon, July 15. — The warm weather had 
become so enervating in Beyroot, that Mr. S. and myself 
concluded to remove immediately to the mountains, where 
on Friday last we literally pitched our tent; and in this 
patriarchal dwelling I am now writing. 

" This unusual heat is passing away, and the air is as 
elastic as that of the White* Mountains, and the water as 
bright and refreshing. Indeed we are nearly as high , as, 
Mount Washington, and die sea is spread outbefore us^tfl^ 
an immense extent ; the sun sets in the water beyond the 
island of Cyprus, the outline of which we see, though it is 
more than a hundred miles distant. 

" What an analogy exists between the moral and natural 
features of an unevangelized nation ! As we passed over 
Mount Lebanon, I told my husband that it required, strong 
faith to believe that it would ever become a fruitful field. 
July 16. — ■ We have taken som* \ta«&ft3& ^w^sa m\ 



195 



196 x MEMOIR OF 

rides around these mountains. There are but few shade 
trees in this village, but the grape vine is abundantly culti- 
vated. It runs on the ground, upon the declivities of the 
mountains, and is now loaded with fruit, half grown, while 
' watchmen ' are to be seen, scattered singly over the vineyards, 
to prevent depredations. All the varieties of high mountain 
scenery are found here; irregular and bold summits, deep 
ravines, &c. The horizon, which the sea bounds, is so 
extensive, that the sun appears to set high up in the sky, 
and the sea and sky are almost blended. In the morning 
the clouds are to be seen resting upon it, like a mantle of 
snow, far below us, presenting a most singular appearance 
Our tent occupies the site of an old threshing-floor, and 
around it are several others, where men are now at work. 

" July 17. — I have just been interrupted by a visit from 
a woman and her little boy, and presented with some 
raisins. In return I offered them food also. She is poor, 
and asked me to visit her ; on my promising to do so, she 
kissed my hand. After I thought she had been here long 
enough, I told her that I wanted to write, and bade her ' go 
in peace,' which she did very cheerfully. I had asked her 
a few questions of a religious nature ; but it is of little use 
for me, at present, to attempt any serious conversation, as 
I can go no farther than to inquire if they love God and 
Jesus Christ, and if they think about them, to all which 
they answer most confidently in the affirmative. I long to 
talk more with them on these *great truths, but many months 
must first elapse. Pray for me, my beloved parents, that 
when I have the ability, I may also have the heart, to do 
this people good. I sometimes fear that I shall find my 
heart treacherous, for now I am able to pray for them, and 
this duty I do not perform as faithfully as the case demands. 

"Jerusalem, that still devoted city, we hear is almost 
in ruins. How striking is the providence of God towards 
these countries, once the cradle of Christianity, and towards 
his peculiar people, to whom belonged the adoption, and 
the covenant, and the promises, and the glory ! An im- 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 197 

mense debt of sin seems still resting upon them, and they 
are receiving * double ' vengeance. Alas, the poor Jews ! 
In the late tumult, Mrs. Thomson says, they have suffered 
peculiarly. % :■ 

" August 5. — Since our visit to these Druzes, Mr. Smith 
has had several applications for the Scriptures. These 
' mountain tops ' will yet 

* Shout to each other, 
And distant mountains catch the flying joy.' 

" This imagery of Cowper, with that of Jeremiah xxxi. 6, u 
where ' the watchmen of Mount Ephraim ' are mentioned, 
was strikingly illustrated this morning, as I was taking an 
early ramble among the peaks of Lebanon. The vintage 
being near, the watchers are stationed upon the summits to 
guard the vines, which are growing luxuriantly in every 
direction. Upon a distant eminence I beheld the solitary 
figure of a man, whose voice met my ear; while from 
another summit I heard a cry, but saw no form. When 
they see any person trespassing upon another's vineyard, 
they shout in this manner." 

After having given in her journal some description of 
the Druzes, residing around Bhamdoon, she writes — 

"August 6. — The longer I remain at Bhamdoon, the 
more I feel interested in the' mountaineers. Could faithful, 
consistent missionaries occupy these villages of the moun- 
tains, I doubt not that the united efforts of their preaching 
and example would be followed with a rich blessing, even 
in the overthrow of false religion and the introduction of 
the true." 

Mrs. Smith entered with deep feelings into the reverses 
of the missions at Jerusalem. Among them was the death 
of Mrs. Thomson ; of whose excellence of character she 
thus speaks : — 



196 MEMOIR OF 

"August 11. — Mrs. Thomson was a dear and valuable 
woman to us all, and we feel that our mission has indeed 
sustained a loss. She possessed a cultivated mind, a warm 
heart, and an animated manner. Her sensibilities were 
perhaps too lively for this climate; since nothing is more 
injurious here than excitement of feeling. Our departed 
friend won the affection of all.. Our servant remarked, 
when he heard of her death, ' There is no one like her in 
Beyroot.' The propriety and fervor of her devotional exer- 
cises added greatly to the interest of our female meetings ; 
and she was ever animated in devising means of usefulness, 
and in sharing the labors of the mission as far as her 
precarious health would permit. Her heart, as well as that 
of her husband, was much set upon the Jerusalem branch 
of our mission ; and as she had from her own funds 
furnished a liberal supply of books and school apparatus, 
she had formed strong expectations of doing good there 
in her favorite occupation. You will learn from other 
sources the trials which Mr. Thomson has experienced 
in his separation from his family, during the commotions in 
Judea and Jerusalem. God seems to be having a contro- 
versy with that spot, and calling us to look and consider, 
and admire his justice. Some might say that our dear 
sister had sacrificed her life for nought; but I trust that from 
her heavenly abode she looks down, with lively satisfac- 
tion, upon the last two years of her life on earth, in which 
her own preparation for eternal happiness has been more 
effectually advanced than it could have been in any other 
circumstances ; and she regrets not that her mortal part 
rests on Mount Zion. I consider the discipline of char 
acter to which a missionary is subjected in the trial of a 
final separation from his country, and in the subsequent 
events, as worth all the sacrifice which it involves; even 
though death be the immediate consequence, and not one 
dark mind enlightened through his influence. How little 
Mr. Thomson anticipated such a termination of his plans ! 
Concerning the welfare of the Holy City, we cannot but 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 199 

exclaim once more, ' How long, O Lord, how long ? ' I 
know not but the answer will be found, in the spirit of it, 
in the 11th and 12th of the sixth of Isaiah. At least it 
appears to me, that God is calling his people to look 
intently, and notice his reasons for thus avenging the 
iniquity of that chosen land. 

" August 15. — Evening. — Since family prayers, at 
which a number were present, Mr. Smith was saying, 
that he wished some one more worthy and capable than, 
himself were among the people, to dispense the bread of life 
to them, for he felt that the field was whitening. I re- 
minded him of Moses and of Paul, who felt, almost to dis- 
couragement, their own weakness. He is preparing his 
journal, which he kept during our visit in Egypt, and his 
journey in the Haur&n, to send to the Missionary Rooms, 
and he requires undisturbed leisure for this. 

" Sabbath, August 16. — A few days since, I called upon 
a very pretty woman who lives in a part of this house, and has 
been to prayers several times. Among other things she 
asked me ' why in prayer we leaned forward and closed our 
eyes.' This must have impressed her strongly ; as I 
recollected that she had before asked me the same ques- 
tion, when she called upon me, and which, from my imper- 
fect knowledge of the language, I did not then understand. 
I replied, that it was to enable us to withdraw our thoughts 
from surrounding objects, and think of the great Being to 
whom we were speaking, and that this was our custom even 
in our closet duties. She seemed to approve of the practice 
and the motive. Her little girl, named Saadeh, comes here 
every day to be instructed. I told her the story of the 
creation and the fall, and a day or two after requested her 
to repeat it to me, which she did with great readiness and 
propriety ; in better Arabic, of course, than mine. Mr. 
Smith has now an audience of half-a-dozen before the door, 
and one of them is reading the Scriptures -aloud. It is ft 
great favor that so many of the men and boys can read. 

" Alas, our poor sisters ! the curse rests emphatically 



200 MEMOIR OF 

upon them. Among the Druze princesses, some, perhaps 
the majority, furnish an exception, and can read. Their 
sect is favorable to learning. Not so with the Maronites. 
I have one scholar from these last; but when I have asked 
the others who have been here if they wished to read, they 
have replied most absolutely in the negative; saying that 
it was for boys, and not for them. I have heard several 
women acknowledge that they knew no more than the 
donkeys." 

On the occasion of some new arrangements in the Jerusa- 
lem mission, Mrs. Smith thus expresses herself: — "These 
constant changes, connected as they are with the eternal 
welfare of souls and the honor of the Saviour's name, make 
me feel solemn. I look around upon my brethren and 
sisters, and my husband, and including myself, think we 
shall soon, yes, sooner than the same number in our own 
land, be in eternity; our work closed, our destiny sealed. 
Oh, that we may prove faithful to our short trust ! 

" August 23. — Yesterday I inquired of one of my scholars 
respecting the absence of two others, who are Maronites. 
She said their priest had told them it was * har&m/ or pro- 
hibited, for them to come, and had sent them a paper which 
informed them that he should not allow them to come to 
the church if they came here. I little imagined an ecclesi- 
astical dignitary would interfere with my half-dozen scholars. 
I regret it, because the two little girls were uncommonly 
bright and affectionate. One of them I discovered walking 
upon a neighboring terrace to-day ; and we exchanged salu- 
tations, by the usual mode of placing the hand upon the 
breast, while she looked wishfully towards me. Oh, what 
an account must they have to render, who thus take away 
the key of knowledge from those of whom they profess to be 
the spiritual guides ! You can imagine the difference there 
is between the feelings of the Maronites and Greeks toward 
us, when I tell you that the Greek priest sends his own daugh- 
ter, a pretty, rosy-cheeked girl, to be taught by me. 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 201 

" August 27. — A few days since, during my school hours, 
a woman called with an infant. I prepared some mLk and 
water for the latter. It did not drink much of it, and after 
they were gone, I offered the remainder of it to a child five 
or six years of age, who stood by. She declined it ; and 
my scholars told me it was ' haram.' ' What,' said I, 
' does such a little girl fast from milk 1 ' ' Yes/ said they ; 
* all of us.' I looked upon the youthful group with mingled 
feelings of amazement and pity, not unattended with admi- 
ration at their early self-denial and steadfastness. Surely, 
thought I, Satan has forestalled all that is valuable in human 
character, even in babes and sucklings ; but a wiser and 
more benevolent Being will yet perfect his praise by them." 

In the course of this month, Beyroot was visited by the 
United States' ship Delaware, Commodore Patterson. It 
was the first visit of an American ship-of-war to the coast of 
Syria, and was an interesting event to the inhabitants, 
and peculiarly to the American missionaries. Mrs. Smith 
entered into the spirit of the event and its attendant circum- 
stances, with all the interest of an American and an ardent 
lover of her country ; but still more as a Christian. 

" August 29. — The flag of our country is just hoisted, 
indicating that the ship is near; and my husband is pre- 
paring to join Mr. Chasseaud in his consular visit to her 
commander. — ■ — This is an interesting day to me, for it is 
the anniversary of my last departure from the paternal roof. 
Oh, what a day that was! May I never behold such 
another ! Its anguish was second only to that which rent 
my heart when the cold hand of death seized our dear 
Peter. But let me speak of the goodness of God to me since 
— the supports of his grace, and my present cheerfulness and 
comfort. I was reading in course, this morning, the 34th 
of Exodus, and was deeply affected with the 6th and 7^ 
verses. I wish you would look at them, and I think yo». 
will say with me, that God has ever procUvrc^ VlYKAd& \sv 

9* 



203 MEMOIR OF 

us ' the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and 
abundant in goodness and truth.' I cannot express my 
gratitude for the satisfaction which you have felt in giving 
me up ; and for the health and spiritual blessings you have 
received since my departure. 

"August 30. — I have just risen, my dear parents, from 
the perusal of a package of letters from home, and have no 
words to express to you all which I have felt while passing 
rapidly over the contents of each. My emotions were 
various, producing alternate tears and smiles. To hear 
of your temporal prosperity was a source of high satisfac- 
tion ; but to hear of such a shower of spiritual blessings 
excited in my breast — may I venture to say? — joy such as 
angels feel when similar intelligence reaches their heavenly 
abode. But I have only glanced at your letters, because 
I am in momentary expectation of a visit from the Com- 
modore of the Delaware and his family ; by the return of 
whose ship to Mahon, where a frigate direct for America 
awaits her arrival, I am to forward this package. When 
I peruse them at my leisure, I shall live over again all 
those scenes so kindly and minutely detailed. 

" September 2. — It is a great pleasure to me, my dear 
father, to know that my portrait affords you so much 
comfort. My object in sitting for it is obtained; that 
room has, I trust, been a Bethel to me. I loved it more 
than any place, for it has been the scene of much indi- 
vidual and social communion with God. Adieu, beloved 
parents. My heart clings to you with the tenderest affec- 
tion ; which I believe heaven will purify and perfect." 

Commodore Patterson and a portion of his family and 
suite visited Damascus. On the Sabbath after their re- 
turn, religious services were held on board his ship. 

" September 10. — On Sabbath morning we went on board 
the Delaware, at 10 o'clock, where Mr. Smith preached 
from the words, ' Strive to enter in at the strait gate.' 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 203 

It was a most interesting and attentive audience. The 
numerous crew, standing, formed two compact bodies each 
side of the speaker. Their clean and simple uniform, of 
white shirts and pantaloons, blue collars and cuffs, and a 
black handkerchief tied around the neck, and their fair 
complexions, contrasted strongly with the tawny skin and 
fantastic dress of those whom for a year we have been 
accustomed principally to see. Their instrumental and 
vocal music, in tones familiar to our ears, was not a little 
refreshing. The Arabs crowded on board, and I suppose 
that in and around were more than a thousand souls, I 
was much pleased with the sobriety and attention of a 
row of boys, who stood in front of the older sailors. They 
are a kind of apprentices on board, and the most of them 
from the House of Refage in New York. At present 
they have little to do except to attend school. Although 
my husband is no singer, I saw bis lips moving with those 
of the choir, for he could not resist it. The appearance 
of the ship upon this coast is a happy occurrence. The 
natives have expressed great admiration of her, and con- 
sequently respect for her nation. The Commodore and 
his family and suite have left a pleasant impression upon 
all our hearts. He says that he came to Beyroot for our 
sakes. Commodore Patterson is a plain, unceremonious, 
agreeable American ; Mrs. Patterson the same ; and the 
daughters dre. intelligent, affable, and polished.* I love the 
manners of my countrywomen. The ladies of no land 
that I have seen compare with them in that delicacy of 
feeling and refinement which are the ornament of a female. 
May they never be disposed to cast it from them. Mrs. P. 
sent me a few pounds of nice black tea, and a keg of 
crackers, before her departure. Their visit at Jerusalem 
seems to have been the means of saving the life of Mr. 
Nicolayson, whom they found sinking under a fever. 

• For an interesting history of one of these young ladies, who has 
since deceased, see Tract, No. 386, Amer. Tr. Soc. Series. 



204 MEMOIR OF 

Through the advice of -the surgeon of the ship, he was 
raised from the borders of the grave, and by a singular 
providence, Dr. Dodge met the surgeon in the road as 
the former was proceeding with Mr. Thomson to Jeru- 
salem, and obtained from him a knowledge of Mr. N.'s 
case, and the manner in which he had treated it, so that he 
was enabled to go forward and aid in his convalescence. 

" In Beyroot, one night I was awake during the sound of 
the midnight izan, (the cry of the muezzin in the mosque, 
calling the followers of Mohammed to prayer.) It was a 
long, monotonous, and dolorous shout ; and in the half-un- 
consciousness of broken slumbers, I did not recognize 
what it was; but it so went to my heart, that if it had not 
ceased, I should have burst into tears. Then there is the 
dull and dissonant vibration of the kettle drum, upon their 
festas, which sometimes does not intermit its grating 
sounds for successive days and nights. You know not, my 
dear parents, how you "would feel were you in the midst 
of a population where every sound that fell upon your ear, 
and every sight that met your eye, reminded you of Satan's 
despotic sway. When in my native land, the curling smoke, 
as it rose from the habitations at early morn, and the 
twinkling light which illuminated them at eve, excited pleas- 
ing associations; but here, alas ! it is not so. I cannot look 
upon the habitations around me, and think, ' that rising 
column of yonder abode is an emblem of peace and of 
prayer from a family altar; or that glimmering taper at- 
tracts towards it a chaste circle of happy faces, enjoying the 
rational pleasures of social life.' When I think of your 
spiritual blessings, which seem to be multiplying upon you, 
I feel that I am emphatically in a * dry and thirsty land, 
where there is no water.' It is this that forms the greatest 
trial and danger of missionaries, that they dwell where 
Satan's seat is. 

" Monday morning, while the sky was richly studded with 
stars, we rose to prepare for our return to the mountains. 
I love to gaze upon the spangled heavens, for it transports 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 205 

mc directly to the dear, home of my youth ; and the sweet 
influences of Pleiades and the bands of Orion are the 
same as when I looked upon them from my own quiet 
chamber. This morning, Jupiter, before he melted away 
into the light of heaven, rested like a brilliant gem upon 
the forehead of Taurus, furnishing a beautiful- appendage 
to the latter, as he reclined in dignity upon his ethereal 
couch. Who can contemplate the starry firmament without 
some elevation of his moral feelings towards their glorious 
Author, or without spending one thought upon his own 
immortal destiny? 

" Bhamdoon, Sept. 25. — Having recently returned from a 
journey of nine days to the top of Sunneen and the ruins 
of Baalbeck, I think you may be interested in an imperfect 
description, which is all that I can give, of the works of 
the great Creator, and his creature man. On Monday the 
15th inst. we left Bhamdoon for the highest peak of Leb- 
anon. It was a delightfal day, and we were all in fine 
spirits. Many villages of the mountains met our eyes, the 
names, of which we learned from our muleteers. Mr. Bird 
often stopped to take observations, as he is preparing maps 
of the country. We met a company of Gypsies, who sur- 
rounded my donkey to examine me, and who looked pre- 
cisely like our Indians. We passed also on that mornmg 
the ruins of a town upon one of the heights over which we 
rode. Our first resting-place about mid-day was at a village 
called Korneil, where we dismounted and walked some 
distance into a valley to see a coal mine, which was discov- 
ered some years ago ; and where fifty or sixty Arabs, under 
the superintendence of two Englishmen, are employed by 
the Pasha. The vein is about three feet in thickness. It 
is yet a matter of doubt whether it will repay the labor of 
working it, though the engineer seemed sanguine. Surely 
Englishmen are to be found every where. I little expected 
to find any in this obscure part of our journey. We ought 
to pray in reference to this very fact, for God can overrule 
it for good. I cannot tell you how pleasant, yet bant 



206 MEMOIR OF 

strange, are the sounds of my native tongue in this for* 
eign land. 

" This was the birth day of our dear Peter ; and I called 
to remembrance his appearance when I first beheld him a 
helpless infant. I could remember, too, the manner of our 
dear mother, her pale looks and gentle tones as she smiled 
at my greetings of him. It is one of the few scenes in 
which she appeared, that is indelibly imprinted upon my 
memory. j 

"Our ride on the 16th was diversified with grand 
and beautiful scenery ; frequently carrying us upon the 
borders of lofty eminences, overlooking deep valleys, in 
the bottom of which were scattered the long black tents 
of the Bedaween. About noon we reached a spot upon 
Sunneen, less than an hour from its highest peak, where 
we rested, while Mr. Bird went forward to see if it were 
practicable to attempt an excursion to the summit with 
our animals. After our tents were erected, Mr. B. and my 
husband proposed ascending the mountain, while I remained 
in the tent, and read the Missionary Herald. Just after 
sundown I stepped out of my tent, and going a few paces 
towards the west, upon the brink of a deep valley, one of 
the most sublime views met my eyes that I ever saw. A 
rich bed of superb white clouds, rolling together, and curl- 
ing their tops in the air, in the most fantastic forms, filled 
the valley, occasionally breaking from each other sufficiently 
to discover to me the grandeur of the depth below. Beyond 
them stretched the glorious sea, its outline nearly obscured 
by the blending of its waters with the brilliant tints of the 
western sky. As I stood alone, gazing upon this almost 
unearthly scene, the distant voices of the mountaineers, 
pursuing their occupations upon the declivities below, came 
up through this magnificent array of mountain drapery, and 
produced a most singular effect upon my senses. I almost 
imagined myself to be the inhabitant of another sphere, 
stooping down to discover the pursuits of an inferior world, 
whose occupants little imagined what glories were above 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 207 

them. But a brisk evening air hurried me back to my 
patriarchal habitation, and I was soon joined by my friends, 
who had enjoyed the same prospect from the top of Mount 
Lebanon. After prayers in Arabic, with the servants and 
muleteers, we separated each to his ' rural couch/ design- 
ing to set out upon our upward course an hour before light 
on the ensuing morning. 

" On the 17th we rose at half past three, and rode about 
half an hour up the mountain, when the path required me 
to join Mr. Smith and Mr. Bird on- foot. After much 
fatigue, which reminded me of my Mount Washington 
excursion, we reached what we supposed to be the highest 
peak, at day break, where, seating ourselves beneath the 
shelter of a rock, we breakfasted, that we might be in read- 
iness to behold the glories of the rising sun. We soon dis- 
covered, however, that there was still a higher summit, 
which would intercept the eastern horizon; and after 
watching the full moon till she sank in- the waters which 
bounded our western prospect, we sat out for the other peak. 
As usual among mountains, the distance deceived us, and 
what appeared but a few steps occupied so much time that 
Mr. B. arrived only in time to see the sun start suddenly 
from his hiding-place behind Anti Lebanon.' Mr. S. might 
have accomplished the same, but that he travelled slower on 
my account. Although I was deprived of this splendid 
sight, many interesting objects beside, sufficiently repaid 
me for my fatigue. On the west was the illimitable sea, 
with ranges of mountains varying in form and height. On 
the east, the nearest object was the beautiful valley of the 
Bukaa, separating Lebanon and Anti Lebanon, and prob- 
ably forty miles in extent. Its perfectly level and diversi- 
fied surface, with the Leontes winding through it, reminded 
me forcibly of the valley of the Connecticut, as it appears 
from Mount Holyoke. I think it must have been once the 
bed of a lake, from its peculiar appearance and its 
fertility, which is like that of the rich alluvial soil of 
the Connecticut. Its northern extremity is boraft&&& \s^ 



208 MEMOIR OF 

the territory of Hamath. The noble range of Anti Leb- 
anon was spread out before us in its whole extent, em- 
bracing Mount Hermon, called by the natives 'Gebel 
Sheikh/ (old mountain.) It is higher than Sunneen, and 
one little spot of snow glistened in the sun-beams near the 
top of its majestic front, as we beheld it on this cloudless 
morning. I am sure if king David had been with us, he 
would have tuned his harp to the praise of its Author, whose 
wonderful works he so loved to sing. The 'little hills' 
below sat in such distinct outline upon the level valley, as 
to seem almost as if they might ' skip like lambs.' The 
Hauran, the region which Mr. Smith and Dr. Dodge vis- 
ited last spring, was visible; but what interested me most, 
was a faint view of the mountains of Galilee, in the blue 
distance. I leaned upon a rock and gazed with silent but 
deep emotion upon the land which my Saviour had trod ; 
and my heart uttered the prayer, that the spirit which ani- 
mated his breast, when he there dwelt in his humanity, 
might henceforth continually possess mine. 

" This day, on which I attained the highest summit of 
Mt. Lebanon, was dear father's birth day, and recollections 
of him mingled themselves with the important events which 
gave interest to the period. At 2 o'clock, P. M., our 
tents were taken down, and we commenced our descent 
towards the valley of the Bukaa, and rested for the night at 
Ain Hazeer. The view of Anti Lebanon was most glorious, 
from our encampment, and I pitied those who could dwell 
there unmindful of its Maker. One lone woman from a 
neighboring khan came to see me, wearing a charm upon 
her neck, which was as usual a picture of the Virgin. I 
tried to say something to impress her with serious things. 

" 18th. — As the sun is very powerful in the Bukaa, we 
rose before 3 o'clock for our ride. Our donkeys seemed 
delighted with the level path before them, which was un- 
broken by a single irregularity. I enjoyed it beyond any 
thing I ever experienced of the kind before. We formed a 
large, and what you would call in America, a grotesque 



MRS. SARAH L SMITH. 209 

group. We met many genuine Bed a ween on foot and upon 
donkeys and mules, with their long blankets trailing upon 
the ground, adding to the unique appearance of their dark 
visages, and streaming locks, which were almost blended 
with the gray of the morning. Although I am daily be- 
coming familiar with the strange scenes of this country, 
yet some of them to this hour impress me with such ro- 
m antic sensations as I have formerly experienced when 
reading works of fiction. This was one ; but many of the 
associations were of a sacred character. The two noble 
ranges of Lebanon and Anti Lebanon bounded our pros- 
pect on either side, as we took an oblique course across 
the valley. The sun came forth from behind Anti Lebanon 
as a ' bridegroom cometh forth from his chamber.' Not 
long after his beams warmed the earth, we stopped near a 
stream of wafer and breakfasted, upon'- the green sward. 
As we pursued our journey, we met immense flocks of 
sheep, goats, and herds of cattle, and saw the black tentd 
of the Bedaween to whom they belonged ; who, though 
they differ in character and wealth from Abraham, probably 
exhibit his mode of life, after he went out from his kindred. 
With my American habits, I should surely say, were J 
obliged to resort to their habitations, ' Wo is me that I, 
dwell in the tents of Kedar.' Says the spouse in Solomon's 
Song, ' I am black like the tents of Kedar.' But the most 
precious passage of Scripture, which these illustrations 
brought to our minds, was the promise concerning the two 
eldest sons of Ishmael, the progenitors of these Mohamme- 
dans, found in Isaiah lx. 7. ' All the flocks of Kedar shall 
be gathered together unto thee ; they shall come up with 
acceptance on mine altar, and I will glorify the house of 
my glory.' 

"At 12 o'clock we reached the" celebrated ruins of Baal- 
bek or Heliopolis, the irregular outline of which had been 
for several hours in sight. As we were much fatigued and 
exhausted with the rays of a tropical sun, we did not now 
stop to admire what we intended to examine at out tevsax^ 

18 • 



310 MEMOIR OF 

We hastened beyond the walls of the city, to find an en- 
campment, the location of which was of more consequence, 
because it was Friday noon, and we were to remain there 
until Monday. 

" Baalbek is abundantly supplied with streams of water, 
which nourish the greatest profusion of trees and shrubs ; 
particularly the noble walnut, the fruit of which is like the 
large English walnut. At the ruins of an elegant fountain, 
which supplies one of these courses, we unloaded our ani- 
mals, hoping to be in quiet possession of the spot, after a 
few hours ; although numbers of men an4 boys were enjoy- 
ing the delicious shade, upon the brilliant carpet of nature. 
Several Mohammedans, in direct violation of our Saviour's 
precepts, were publicly engaged in their devotions. I 
walked by them to discover more minutely their peculiari- 
ties, and the nearer I approached the more earnest they 
became. I cannot give you a very correct idea of it. They 
were upon their knees, and sometimes held their heads 
erect, and with closed eyes muttered their orisons; then 
bent forward and touched their foreheads to the ground. 
It was all deeply affecting, and perfectly absurd. Finding 
that the Sabbath was to be * a feast to the Virgin/ and of 
.course that this spot would be the scene of the sports of her 
votaries, it became necessary to seek. for another retirement. 
After bathing our faces in the limpid stream which Mowed 
near us, and gathering raspberries from its banks, we dined 
upon the green grass, and the gentlemen separated, each to 
seek for another encampment. Before night we were 
quietly seated in our tents, beneath the rich shade of those 
very walnut-trees which my husband had visited in hi3 
journey to the Hauran. Saturday morning, early, we pro- 
ceeded to the ruins, and devoted the forenoon to their 
examination. And here I am tempted to lay aside my pen, 
since no description of mine can give you any adequate 
conception of those relics of past ages, whose foundations 
are supposed to have been in existence in the days of 
Solomon. As I gazed upon that part of the immense pile, 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 211 

I flirty believed the supposition, and those old, defaced, but 
yet undilapidated . stones, gave me much more satisfaction 
than all the Grecian taste and Roman and Saracenic magnifi- 
cence, which form so much of the interest and variety of 
its superstructure. Whoever selected the location for this 
splendid building, discovered true taste, as it stands at the 
foot of Anti Lebanon, overlooking a rich tract of level land, 
beautifully diversified with foliage and streams of water. 
You may give full scope to all the romance and poetry of 
your imagination, and picture to yourself fluted columns, 
cornices, entablatures, tritons, sea gods, fishes, beasts, and 
birds, in alto and bass relief, some in a state of preservation, 
and others defaced by the hand of time and the curiosity of 
travellers; with fragments of exquisite elegance scattered 
all around, debased by the 'treading of cattle,' who actually 
find pasture within the walls of this magnificent temple. 
The pile consists of four divisions, severally called by trav- 
ellers a palace, a portico, and two temples ; the smallest of 
the latter being the ' temple of the sun.' The palace is 410 
feet in length, and 383 in breadth, supported by arched pas- 
sages, dark and dreary. The larger temple is 309 feet in 
length and 202 in breadth. The smaller one Mr. Smith did 
not measure. In one part of the building is a perfect tower 
of Saracenic origin, entirely unique in its architectural 
character. The most imposing object is the remains of a 
colonnade which once surrounded the larger temple. Six 
Corinthian pillars, the top of whose capitals is 130 feet 
from the ground, now existing in a state of entire preserva- 
tion, made a powerful impression on my feelings. They 
fully answered all my ideas of ruined elegance. They 
seemed as it were to be invested with life ; so touchingly, so 
instructively did they speak of the unknown past, of which 
neither history nor tradition unfolds the tale. My eye lin- 
gered upon them to the last, untired and unsatisfied; till 
they faded from my view. In the afternoon we made the 
circuit of the city, and visited a quarry, from whence much 
of the Btone of which the building is composed was ^tofcrcfck^ 



212 MEMOIR OP 

taken. One entire stone, 60 feet long, 17 wide, and 13 
thick, still attached to the quarry, hewn, in solitary grandeur 
seemed to speak volumes respecting the unfinished labors of 
finite man. Baalbek is completely dilapidated. It is oc- 
cupied by a few Moslems and Christians, whose small habi- 
tations are constructed of the relics. There is, beside, a 
mosque patched up with marble slabs ; and a beautiful 
little marble temple, of Corinthian architecture, which has 
been used by the Greek church for a place of worship.- 
Thus Satan in various ways has kept possession of the spot ; 
though the idols of the temple have been cast down. Still 
those familiar lines of Watts were continually in my mind 
while there — 

( Those ruins shall be built again, 
And all that dust shall rise,' 

under another and more permanent dominion. 

" But I am protracting my journal of this tour to an im- 
moderate length ; and must hasten to an end, or I shall 
never reach one. The next day, the Sabbath, we passed in 
our tents ; having social worship in English, and reading, 
and conversation with the natives who came to gratify their 
curiosity by the sight of living wonders of the present age. 
A Moslem begged a Testament, which my husband gave to 
him, the first which he ever gave to a follower of the false 
prophet. With strange inconsistency a Catholic Christian 
endeavored to dissuade him from reading it ! Do you 
wonder that the devotees of Mohammed have hitherto con- 
tinued and multiplied, with such an influence around them ? 
Pray for the extension of that pure light, beneath which 
their delusion shall wither and perish. 

" On the 22d we rose immediately after midnight, to 
pursue our journey homewards. Nothing particularly inter- 
esting occurred, except that I witnessed the cultivation of 
cotton in the Bukaa, by females. The next day we reached 
Bhamdoon, having spent eight days, and taken twenty-five 
meals in our tents, and without having entered a single 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 213 

habitation, beside, (during our whole journey. With invig- 
orated health and grateful hearts we were happy to find 
ourselves at home again, in oQr rural mountain dwelling." 

In her distant field of labor, Mrs. Smith received, with 
lively satisfaction, intelligence of the prosperity #f religion 
among the Mohegan Indians. Writing to the missionary 
among them, she says — 

"I was as much astonished as were the apostles often in the 
weakness of their faith, to hear of the revival in Mohecran. 
When shall we learn that our God is ' faithful to his promises 
and faithful to his Son ' ? Remember me with Christian affec- 
tion to the dear converts, and to all the children of the school. 
May your cords still be lengthened. Pray do not take any 
thing for granted respecting my probable knowledge of affairs 
in your little parish, for my friends all say, ' You will learn 
from Mr. Gleason about Mohegan.' And now I will answer 
some of your questions. First, in respect to faith, hope, and 
charity, my experience of them is the same in kind, though 
I fear not in degree, as your own. I have been so whirled 
about for the last year, that I sometimes hardly know what 
my own feelings ar§. Of this, however, I am confident, that 
we and other missionaries have not been brought here for 
nothing ; and although we may see scarcely a ray of light 
beaming upon the long night of darkness that has obscured 
this spiritual firmament, others will. Nothing is lost in 
God's moral kingdom, though it may sometimes appear so; 
of course he is using us in some way. In one very im- 
portant respect you have the advantage of us in your labors. 
You can speak the language of the people whom you desire 
to benefit. To acquire this is my leading object at present. 
— What a long and tedious process it is for the world to get 
back to its rightful Lord ! How much angels must have to 
cause wonder and admiration, while they are employed in 
helping it forward ! They must often stop to love and wor- 
ship a Being so holy, benevolent, and wise *& vtasa ^*ax. 



214 MEMOIR OF 

Leader. It will not be long, dear brother, before you and I 
shall know more respecting this matter than we now do. 

"In the village upon the" mountains, where we are 
spending the hot season, we have much to interest our 
feelings. The Christians of the Greek church, who are 
the majority of the population, are really friendly towafds 
us, and we could not help loving them, even if we had 
not a spark of the Saviour's kindness in our breasts. They 
are industrious, cheerful, and independent, and I often 
think what a happy community they would form, with a 
religion stripped of useless ceremonies — a religion of the 
heart rather than of the fingers ; for one of the most dis- 
tinguishing marks of their sect is their manner of making 
the sign of the cross. Could the females of Syria be edu- 
cated and regenerated, the whole face of the country would: 
change ; even, as I said to an Arab a few days since, to the 
appearance of the houses and the roads. One of our little 
girls, whom I taught before going to the mountains, came 
to see me a day or two since, and talked incessantly about 
her love for the school, and the errors of the people here, 
saying that they ' cared not for Jesus Christ, but only for 
the Virgin Mary.' — I have not said a word about * old 
Lucy.' Peace to her memory ! she lias at length reached 
' home/ I trust. I read her obituary in the paper." 

" September 28. — You kindly inquire, my dear madam, 
whether I find the promise verified, ' Lo, I am with you 
alway. 1 Perhaps I cannot better answer the question than 
by telling you the reflections which I had this evening. 
Just before sun-down, my husband stepped out to attend 
prayers at the Greek church ; and as I closed the door for 
the purpose of securing a season for devotion during his 
absence, and turned back upon the solitude of our single 
apartment, my heart was filled with praise to God for all his 
gracious dealings with me during the past year. Expecting 
in a few days to leave Bhamdoon, I was led to adore the 
kind hand, that, in addition to all my other mercies, had 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 215 

furnished me so pleasant and comfortable a home in this 
obscure mountain village; where I have renewed my 
strength, and now have vigorous health to reengage in 
my labors at Beyroot. 

"Monday, October S. — This day, the season of the 
monthly concert, has for some time been appropriated to 
fasting and prayer at this station. While taking an early 
walk this morning, I met two girls with baskets of grapes 
upon their shoulders, who, as usual, invited me to partake 
of their contents. I declined, pleading as an excuse, that 
it was a fast with me, and they urged me no farther. It 
is not here as in America, where such an apology might 
be made the subject of ridicule among the unregenerate, 
On the contrary, the more peculiar are our habits and 
numerous our ceremonies, the more respect and influence 
we may acquire ; for to be without religion is considered 
a great disgrace. Many regard us as irreligious, because 
we are so simple in bur forms of worship and have so few 
appendages; and are often surprised when we tell them 
how many churches and priests exist in our native land. 
A servant woman of Mrs. Whiting, who has now lived long 
enough with her to love her and appreciate her principles, 
about a year and a half since remarked to some of the 
Arabs, that the people with whom she lived, did 'not lie, 
nor steal, nor quarrel, nor do any such things ; but, poor 
creatures,' said she, ' they have no religion.' In contrasting 
the spiritual blessings of my country with the more than 
useless ceremonies of this, I often think of these lines of 
the inimitable Watts — ' 

' Let strangers walk around 
The city where we dwell,' <fcc. 

" In some important respects, the morals of this people 
are better than those of our own land. But the great 
destroyer need not be strenuous on the point here, for he 
has the entire mass of the inhabitants sufficiently enchained 
by a corrupt religion for all his put^oaea \ *xA Y& \wscw* 



216 MEMOIR OF. MRS. SMITH. 

other temptations for those regions where. he can employ 
them, to blind the eyes of men against the clear light of 
truth. In this our mountain residence, my husband has 
had more than usual opportunity to give religious instruc- 
tion by means of conversation, distribution of the Scriptures, 
and evening prayers in Arabic, in our room. More or less 
of the villagers are always present upon the latter occasion. 
We feel assured that these ' mountain tops will yet shout 
to each other/ though we may not live to catch ' the flying 
joy' on earth. 

" I have rejoiced, dear Mrs. Farrar, in all the spiritual 
blessings of your own family, and in those of the church 
at large. In thinking of that garden of the Lord where 
my friends dwell, I sometimes compare our situation with 
that of our first parents who were driven out of paradise 
to till the earth, which they found covered with thorns 
and briers. Indeed, I think that had Isaiah seen, in vision, 
our happy land, with all her faults; contrasting it with 
this, as it is now, and probably was then, he would still 
have indulged in all the strains of prophetic rapture, which 
characterize his writings. I must now, through necessity, 
though unwillingly, leave you. A sheet of paper never 
seemed so insufficient for my purposes, as since I came to 
this country. A single one will not contain half I wish to 
communicate to those I love ; and yet I think it will contain 
as much as I ought to trouble them with." 



CHAPTER XI. 

i 

SCENERY SABBATH EVENING — ENGLISH " SERVICE TROU- 
BLES OF MOHAMMEDANS DEATH OF DR. DODGE — APPEAL 

TO AMERICAN CHRISTIANS ON PHYSICAL CULTURE 

INTERCOURSE WITH ENGLISH FRIENDS LETTER TO MRS. 

DODGE ON PREPARATION FOR THE MISSIONARY WORK 

FEMALE PRAYER MEETING NATIVE HABITS OF FASTING 

THOUGHTS ON AMERICAN CHARACTER ARAB VISITS 

LETTER TO MRS. WISNER ON THE DEATH OF HER HUS- 
BAND LETTER TO MRS. HALLOCK. 

Having returned from her summer residence in the 
mountains, and become again settled at Beyroot, Mrs. 
Smith resumed her journal addressed to her parents, as 
follows : — 

•■ - \ 

« Beyroot, Oct. ^9, 1834. 
" My ever dear Parents : — - 1 wish you could sit down 
with me in my pleasant room, this evening, where I have 
composed myself for a little epistolary converse with you. 
The full moon, rising in the east, is shining in its splendor 
over the lofty peak of Lebanon, while the waters of the 
Mediterranean, which wash its base, are sparkling in her 
beams, and on the north its dark waves are bounded only 
by the sky. The street in which we live is directly upon 
the shore ; a high castle, surmounted with a single turret, 
stands upon a rock, a few rods from the land ; the hum of 
human voices has ceased, and the silence of night is broken 
only by the roar of tjie surf, as the sea dashes upon the 
shore. . Three times have I risen from my seat to view 
and admire in solitude this charming &car&. ^N^ to^ 

10 ra 



... K- 



213 MEMOIR OF 

partially settled in our , new abode, but I hope we shall not 
indulge the thought that this is our rest. If we do, God 
will break up the delusion. 

" This is the evening of the Sabbath, and it will be 
more appropriate to recall the events of the day. Mr. 
Thompson preached at our Consul's, a most excellent ser- 
mon. My soul was refreshed, particularly in the singing, 
and I thought of the bliss of heaven. The Sabbath, my 
dear father, is the day in which I am in the habit of making 
you especially the subject. of my petitions; and often my 
heart is much drawn out in supplicating spiritual blessings 
for you, and I feel assured that such blessings will make 
you completely happy here and hereafter. Thus, through 
the merits of my Saviour, though far removed from you, I 
may be the means of making an impression upon your 
present and eternal happiness. 

"October 22. — Yesterday I went up to Mr. Bird's to 
consult about the plan of a school-house, now commenced 
for females. I can hardly believe that such a project is 
actually in progress, and I hail it as the dawn of a happy 
change in Syria. Two hundred dollars have been sub- 
scribed by friends in this vicinity, and I told Mr. B., that 
if necessary, I thought he might expend fifty more upon the 
building, as our Sabbath school in Norwich had pledged 
one hundred a year for female education in Syria. I cannot 
tell you how much satisfaction I take in appropriating my 
little effects to missionary purposes ; as I used at home 
often to wish that ' Holiness to the Lord ' might be inscribed 
on my little possessions. 

" October 27. — This morning the English service was 
held in the room now called our chapel, at our Consul's, 
and it promises to be a pleasant resort. I felt more as I 
used to feel in America, than since I bade farewell to those 

* Sacred scenes of peace and pleasure, 
Holy days and Sabbath bell.' 

Mrs. Chasseaud is much engaged in fitting it up, arranging 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH; 219 

vilh her own hands the covering of the desk, in which 
ihe exhibits the tact of her countrywomen. I cannot but 
think that these feeble beginnings for this land are like the 
little stone that was cut out of the mountain. 

"October 29. — Yesterday I again commenced the fe- 
male school with four scholars, which were increased to 
ten to-day, and the number will probably continue to aug- 
ment as before, from week to week. As I walked home 
about sunset this evening, I thought, ' Can it be that I am 
really a school-mistress, and the only one in all Syria?' 
and. 1 tripped along with a quick step amid Egyptians, 
Turks and Arabs, Moslems and Jews, to my pleasant and 
quiet •home, where I always find a number of kind friends 
to bid me welcome. Bear Mrs. Abbott said to me, as I 
seated myself with her; upon the side of her bed, before I 
took off my hat, * You don't know what a privilege, what a 
comfort it is to me to have you here.' My hours are now 
so systematically and fully appropriated that I can only 
steal short intervals for writing. 

-" November 9. — The number of English merchants is 
increasing here, and for the last week our minds have 
been much exercised respecting them; especially the im- 
portance of their being regular attendants upon our morn- 
ing service. If a foundation is now to be laid for a future 
community of English and Americans, as we cannot doubt, 
we are anxious that it should be a good one. If it be 
only fashionable for all who come to attend chapel, it will 
be a great point gained ; for there will be souls which may 
be the subjects of the operations of the Spirit. 

" Dear parents, I love you, and think of you constantly, 
yet am busy and happy. I sometimes indulge the thought 
that God has sent me to the females of Syria — to the 
little girls (of whom I have a favorite school) — for their 
good. They are the .burden of my prayer ; let them be of 
yours. 

"Jan. 5, 1835. — On Friday I distributed rewards to 
twenty-three little girU belonging to my school ^Vas.V^'ak 



£20 MEMOIR OF 

they are aH poor, consisted of clothing. The value of the 
presents was graduated by the number of tickets which 
each scholar could produce. My husband prayed and talked 
with them. It was a new scene for Syria. Our Sabbath 
school also increases. Eighteen were present last Sab- 
bath, and walked two and two from Tannoos' house to 
the Arabic service. I am in constant expectation of an 
4 excommunication ' upon my pupils, from the ecclesiastical 
authorities." 

Of Mrs. Smith's labors, at this time, the Rev. Mr. 
Thomson wrote, January 11th — "Mrs. Smith's female 
school prospers w6nderfully, but it is the altar of her own 
health ; and I fear that in the flame that goeth up 4owrfrd 
heaven from off that altar, she will soon ascend, as did 
Manoah's angel.* May the Lord prolong her valuable 
life. We can hardly spare her ; she is our only hope for a 
female school in Bey root at present. 11 

-" January 28. — It is a year to-day since our arrival at Bey- 
root — a year of mercies only. How grateful and obedient 
ought we to be ! I wish you would pray, my dear parents, 
that I may not be so dull a scholar as I feel myself to be, 
under all the kind discipline of a heavenly Master. When 
I reflect upon the multifarious lessons, which in the course 
of nearly thirty years I have been called to learn, I 
am ashamed and confounded at my ignorance — my slow 
advance in moral improvement. Every day that I live 1 
find less occasion for self-complacency. Litfle do those 
who are basking in the rays of a meridian sun, like that 
under which I lived in Norwich, and passing buoyantly 
, along with the stream, know how it would ' try their souls/ 
and try their characters, and their Christian hopes, to be 
transported to a dark, cold land, like this, where they would 
be obliged to struggle against the current. Yes, it is to 
me a solemn thought, that many, apparently hopeful fol- 
lowers of Christ, in America, would not sustain the change ; 

1 ■ ■ ■ ____ — __ . . ■. i ii i - ■. m 

• Judges xin. 19,20,21. 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 221 

for with all my self-love, I often fear that I shall be found 
wanting at the last. Could I convey to the minds of my 
friends the views which I have on this point, I should re- 
joice. In a few words 1 would say, ' Examine yourselves,' 
and discover, if possible, how much of your love, zeal, and 
activity, is the genuine fruit of the Spirit, and how much 
is the result of factitious circumstances. 

" Last Saturday was a day of much interest and excite- 
ment to us, leading us to feel the force of the assurance, 
that * as the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so is 
the Lord round about his people/ when they are planted 
amid an irregular, despotic, and dangerous government. 
We are here not only defended, but the defenders of the le- 
gitimate subjects of Mohammedan rule against their own 
rulers. An order was issued for the impressment of sol- 
diers for the Pasha, which does not extend to the nominal 
Christians, but only to the Moslems. In consequence of 
which, the houses of the English and Americans were 
nearly filled with refugees. Seven men slept in our court 
on Saturday night. Many Christians were also seized, but 
subsequently released, after satisfactory evidence that they 
were not Moslems. * 

"February 12. — Once more God, in his inscrutable 
wisdom, has entered our little band, in the removal of onq 
of our number ; by which our hearts are not only wound- 
ed, but our hopes of Jerusalem again blasted. Our be- 
loved brother Dodge, who, from the time that I knew him, 
has ever seemed to me ripening for heaven, has at length 
reached that • home for weary souls.' Sad to us, but 
not to him, is this event. The following lines, sung at 
brother Peter's funeral, and at our family devotions this 
morning, express my present feelings : — 

1 There faith lifts up the tearless eye, 
The heart with anguish riven ; 
It views the tempest passing by*, 
Sees evening shadows quickly fly, 
And all serene — in he^en. 1 



222 MEMOIR OF 

Yes ; * all serene in heaven.' He is there, I doubt not ; 
though we cannot see why he should be snatched away, 
after having spent two years of toil and perplexity in pre- 
paring for service in this dark land, with the language jutet 
beginning to be at his command; yet he knows and ap- 
preciates the whole. When I was an inmate of his family, 
I found that he uniformly rose very early; and from his 
increasing spiritual views and tender sensibilities, it was 
evident that he held much communion with God. His case 
confirms me in the long-cherished belief, that secret prayer 
is the key to holy living and a happy death. 

" We shall probably now make other arrangements ; and 
the question will arise, * Shall Jerusalem be abandoned 1 ' 
Death has interrupted every previous attempt, and to send 
missionaries thither seems but sending them to their graves ! 
We all feel that God has selected from our number, at this 
time, the very one who was best prepared for His presence ; 
of course the one qualified to live and do good. This 
makes us mourn, and every day we realize our loss more. 

" And now what can I say ; what can the missionaries 
of Syria say ; what can any of the laborers who are scat- 
tered over this desolate world say, to the mass of Christians 
crowded together in America, to induce them to feel and 
to act only for dying multitudes ? They do feel, apd they 
do act, comparatively ; but, my dear parents, it is the eyes 
that affect the heart ; and if we would believe fully, that a 
guilty world is under the wrath of God, we must go to 
those portions of the earth where Satan still reigns tri- 
umphant. I was deeply affected with the fact that the 
Washington Islands were abandoned as a missionary station, 
because of their scattered population. Under existing cir- 
cumstances probably this was necessary ; but ought cir- 
cumstances to exist in a church so large, so blessed, so 
competent as that of America, as unavoidably to doom to 
eternal destruction a thousand souls in one place, five 
hundred or even one hundred in another, to say nothing 
of the millions? I think of those groups in the Pacific ; of 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 223 

the Azores, of which we had a faint glimpse when cross- 
ing the Atlantic; of other inhabitants of mountains and 
valleys, upon which our eyes rested. I look abroad upon 
the countries around this sea, teeming with immortal souls, 
whose wasted existence will soon be swallowed up in the 
world of wo ; and then my eye turns to our own land, 
and I see the crowded conference-room, the Sabbath school, 
the ' great congregation,' not denying but enjoying them- 
selves, in the spacious churches where the truth is continually 
dropping its sacred dew. I see. the shelves and tables loaded 
with publications too numerous to be read, the social board 
covered with dainties. I think of the hours that are spent 
in cooking, in visits, in regulating the fold or fashion of 
an article of dress or furniture — - not by the devotees of 
folly, but by blood-bought disciples of Christ — and I think 
of the wasted years of my own probationary existence ; 
and in view of all this, my heart sinks within me, and I can 
only exclaim, in behalf of myself and others, * Guilty, guilty ! ' 
While you have more than enough of all that makes life dear 
and immortality to appear precious, here there exists native 
barrenness. 

" Excepting the three or four native converts, we know 
not one pious religious teacher, one judicious parent, one 
family circle regulated by the love of God, one tradesman 
influenced by the fear of God — no, not even one? Let 
me advise any, the humblest, the most uninftuential, whose 
heart may be touched with such facts, leading him to ex* 
claim, * What can J do?' to begin with some little thing, be 
it ever so small, by which he may save*, if not many, a few 
moments of precious time, which he may devote to the pur- 
pose of thinking and praying over this great matter. And 
if he be faithful in a little, he may have authority over much. 
The Holy Spirit will communicate new views, new energies, 
and a spark may kindle a great fire. 

" I write to Mrs. Ripley by this opportunity, and perhaps 
also to sister Faith. I wish I had strength to do more ; but 
my school and my studies draw upon my euergtak cArc&Kfe* 



224 MEMOIR OF 

ally, as well as occupy the best hours of every day. When 
I get an assistant from among the hundreds of well-qualified 
females in America, I will give more time to my correspond- 
ents there, God willing. 

" We had five young men at our Bible class last evening, 
English and Scotch. It is a little remarkable that these 
foreign adventurers should all of them have been, as it ap- 
pears, religiously educated. They are also more than, 
usually intelligent. We cannot but hope that God is laying 
a foundation here on which to build his kingdom in future 
generations." 

" Betroot, February 12. 

" My dear Sister : — This is Thursday, the day on which 
I bring you and your daughters in especial remembrance 
before God ; on Wednesday, I remember your dear husband 
and little Cornelius ; and often in connection with them the 
precious friends at Andover. 

" You speak of the importance and duty of physical 
culture. It is a subject upon which I reflected much in 
America, and have done so still more in this country. I 
think the individual who should devote his whole attention 
to it, for the benefit of missionaries, would be a blessing to 
the universe. 

" Many precautions are essential in this climate, beside 
those which relate to diet. Exposure to cold and dampness, 
and fatigue, must be avoided. Unbraced by the cold win- 
ters to which we have been accustomed, our northern con- 
stitutions are particularly susceptible to debility ; and if we 
lose our vigor of body, we cannot do with our ' might' what 
our hands find to do; for we have no might. 

"February 28. — I beli#re that I feel on Saturdays much 
like all 'school ma'am's/ a sort of freedom from care and a 
desire for relaxation ; yet I am certainly happier, surrounded 
by my twenty little Arab girls, than any where else ; though 
I have a pleasant home and a most beloved husband. 

" Our intercourse with our English friends becomes every 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 225 

week more pleasant and mutually confidential. It seems like 
an answer to prayer. We do not feel like relinquishing the 
Jerusalem mission, but would rather ' draw arguments from 
discouragements/ and ' take the kingdom of heaven by vio- 
lence ' for that city. One fact is encouraging, that no death 
has occurred in consequence of the climate, for it is superior 
to that of Beyroot. Their winters are cold and invigorating. 
" You inquire if missionaries are not in danger, of losing 
their regard for the sanctity of the Sabbath. They are so, 
and on this account we feel it to be important that we keep 
the day with uncommon strictness ; as the habit is calculated 
to make a deep impression upon the natives, so unlike their 
own. We get no dinner, though our servant is consequently 
idle all the morning, while we are at English service. With 
my husband and myself every moment is filled up as in 
America, the native Sabbath school being exclusively under 
our direction." ' 

The letter from which the following extracts are taken, 
was addressed to Mrs. Dodge, on the death of her husband : 
— "Need I spend a moment, my dear sister, to convince 
you that in your sorrows, I am afflicted, and that I have 
wept again and again over the memory of your and my 
beloved friend, and at the thought of your desolated heart? 
Though many tears had flowed, as one circumstance after 
another confirmed the sad story of your loss ; yet when I 
came to that part of your recital which alluded to the inter- 
ment on Mount Zion, and pictured to myself the unconscious 
curiosity depicted upon the familiar features of your bright 
little Mary, in the last mournful scene, it seemed as if my 
heart would burst. Sweet child.V God will surely be her 
Father. I esteemed and admired your excellent husband. 
His mind possessed certain delicate shades which were truly 
attractive ; not to mention his strong and increasing sensi- 
bility to those spiritual things which he knows and loves 
now with unclouded perceptions and emotions vxA\ns&. 
blessed home on high. My husband axv&\ \efta&\ ^nfcv ^gw&» 

10* 



226 MEMOIR OF 

satisfaction upon our intercourse with him ; we saw the 
growing spirituality of his feelings, and very often said to 
each other, that we had forebodings of his early removal. 
We saw, too, that his piety was the result of cherished com- 
munion with his God, and shall we not make him. here our 
exemplar 1 His short visit at Beyroot was a cordial to our 
hearts." 

« 

The following letter to a young Christian relative, whom 
Mrs. Smith hoped to welcome to a participation in her 
labors, is inserted for the sake of the suggestions it contains 
on preparation for the missionary work. "' j 

" Beyroot, Marcii 2. 

" Since you and I, my dear Mary, hope to be united in 
labors, at some future day, for the benefit of this people, it 
seems desirable that we should keep up a correspondence, 
which you have so pleasantly commenced by your sweet let- 
ter. I cannot tell you how much I was gratified, more than 
by any which I have received ; and I am constantly thinking 
of your promise to come and aid me, if the Lord will. This 
prospect, though distant a few years, gives a spring to my 
feelings whenever I dwell upon it ; and furnishes one of the 
strongest inducements to me to seek the preservation of my 
health, that I may live to aid you by my experience, and 
comfort you with my affection, when you forsake father and 
mother for Christ. I look upon this consecration of your- 
self to him as perfectly rational and consistent; and I hope 
that in laying out your energies to prepare for the station, 
you will feel that you are doing nothing more than is your 
duty to do. This will keep you from spiritual exaltation 
above those who are living for a less noble purpose; by 
leading you to think of the high standard which God has 
given us, rather than of the deficiencies of others. If he 
blesses you in this undertaking,. what sublimity will be at- 
tached to all your thoughts and pursuits ! Methinks angels 
mil be your joyful companions and advisers, delegated by 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 227 

your blessed Master. Perhaps too he will condescend to 
employ me in furnishing you with a few hints that may be 
profitable to you. In one letter, however, I will not at- 
tempt to say all that is in my mind ; but take up one or . two 
subjects only. 

." I need not dwell long, at present, upon the highest 
qualification requisite for a missionary, though I should love 
to occupy many pages with it. You will readily believe 
that no common degree of love to God and love to man, will 
suffice for a foundation, in forming yourself to become one. 
I will only remark, that this must be acquired by daily and 
prolonged communion with God. You must not only take a 
few minutes, at regular seasons, for prayer; but you must 
secure some of your most valuable hours; and so occupy 
yourself in them as to get near to God; and so as to bring 
eternal things near to jou, that you may throw your entire 
self into the work which engages his infinite mind ; and 
that every thing beside may dwindle to a point. Although I 
am very far from setting myself as a standard — on the con- 
trary, am continually lamenting my deficiencies — yet I can 
say, that if I have any heart for my work, I look back upon 
the hours of retirement and devotion which, before I knew 
my destination, were spent in my own chamber, in my 
father's house, and when the beautiful stars of the morning 
were my only light — as the means of obtaining this heart. 
I have also found great profit from whole days of private 
fasting and prayer. You will derive particular benefit from 
such seasons, having a known and definite object in view. 
If you pursue an undeviating course of secret devotion, with- 
out neglecting your active duties, your soul will gradually 
rise to higher and still higher perceptions of truth and per- 
sonal obligation ; and when you reach the land of darkness, 
where, within the loyal dominions of 'the prince of the 
power of the air,' even the regenerate have greater struggles 
wi&Uieir depraved natures ; past joys and motives will come 
*fe»pon your soul to refresh and strengthen you ; and 



/. 



22S MEMOIR OF 

like David, you will remember God « from the land of Jordan 
and of the Hermonites, and from the hill Mizar.' , 

" Presuming that all. your pursuits and studies will Jiave 
a decided and acknowledged reference to the missionary 
work, during the years preparatory to your departure for . 
Syria; I would mention that a knowledge of languages, 
and a facility in acquiring them, are the first requisites for 
your' undertaking. 1 do not wish to discourage you by too 
formidable a list of necessary acquirements ; but Mr. Smith 
and I both think that you should be able to speak the 
Italian readily, to read the French, and to be sufficiently 
familiar with Latin to use the Arabic and Latin diction- fc, 
ary — the only one which we have ; and if you can obtain 
from your father a little knowledge of the idiom of the 
Hebrew, it will aid you greatly in that of the Arabic, which 
it strongly resembles. With a knowledge of Italian, you 
can enjoy unembarrassed intercourse with most foreigners 
in the Mediterranean ; and at brother Edward's, in New 
York, you can get a native teacher. It is an easy, sweet 
language. The French is so similar, you will not find it 
difficult ; and if you take the Latin first, you will find the 
transition to both the others natural. The Hebrew is of 
less consequence than the other three, and may be omitted. 
To use De Sacy's grammar, you will need an acquaintance 
with the French. It is seldom that an individual obtains a 
perfect knowledge of several different languages, yet I think 
the study of one foreign tongue, gives a taste and facility 
for others ; and for a missionary, even a smattering in lan- 
guages is better than nothing. As for the Arabic, you need 
have nothing to do with it until you mingle with the Arabs ; 
though possibly I may send you a book, that you may gratify 
your curiosity by looking at the characters." 

"Beyroot, March 17. 
" My dear Mother : — I have two reasons for addressing 
myself to you especially, aside from my usual journal ; first 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 2£9 

to gratify yoa, and secondly that I may bring you in debt 
to me to,the amount of a whole sheet of paper, filled by your 
own dictation. Although you are mentioned in every letter 
from home, and I love to hear that ypu are well and happy, 
and that you love, and wQtep, and pray for me, still I have 
an earnest desire to recognize upon paper the features of 
your own mind ; that mind with which I have had so much 
converse and sympathy. It is a very pleasant circumstance 
to me, that notwithstanding I am so busily occupied with 
cares and interests around me, I am often with you in my 
dreams, and many times dear grandmother and brother 
Peter are mingling with us. Shall we not all be associates 
in heaven? 

J' We often think and talk of your Friday meeting, 
which is on purpose for us ; and I believe- your prayers have 
been, and will be yet more abundantly answered. On 
Saturday we commenced a native female prayer meeting, 
only one of whose/ attendants, (Mrs. W.,) gives satisfactory, 
evidence of a renewed nature ; yet we look for fruit here- 
after. If those females in America, who decline leading 
the devotions of a social circle, feel any thing of the reluct 
tance which I felt in attempting to pray in the native 
tongue, I pity more than I blame them; yet if they would 
oast themselves upon God, as I was enabled to do, I doubt 
not that similar > strength would be imparted. My first effort 
of the kind, in this difficult language, was with my little 
girl, and I pursue it regularly. Twice I have performed 
the duty in the school, and Mrs. W. and I stop a few 
minutes once a week,, to make the school and her irreli- 
gious friends the subjects of prayer. If I were not writing 
to you, dear mother, I should not mention these particu- 
lars ; but I know you will tenderly sympathize with me in 
an occurrence of this nature. Probably this is the first 
female prayer meeting ever held in the Arabic language. 
Will you not make it, at yours on Friday, an especial sub- 
ject of prayer % Pray that our stammering tongues may be 
more and more unloosed. 



230 MEMOIR OF 

" I wish, dear mother, you could visit my school, and 
possess the gift of tongues. I would not withdraw your 
interest from other objects, but I do wish you to pray a 
great deal for these little girls I sometimes feel that God 
has sent me here to make an impression upon the female 
character in Syria; yet I may be cut off speedily^ and my 
work cease. God forbid! Rather let me be like Swartz 
and Morrison, who have been permitted with bodily eyes to 
behold the fruits of their labors. 

" I think the habits of fasting among this people would 
strike you singularly. They are very troublesome, to say 
the least, in a family. Yet I am not solicitous about oveiw 
throwing a superstition so comparatively innocent as this, 
before the heart is convinced of the truth ; for I am of the 
opinion that it often induces a recklessness of moral obli- 
gation, unfavorable to purity. It is like having the soul 
••wept and garnished' for fouler spirits to be entertained 
therein. When I took my little girl, she was fasting from 
meat, butter, milk, and all animal substances, for forty days 
previous to Christmas. Now, she and our Maltese are 
keeping fifty days Lent before Easter — taking no food until 
after twelve o'clock, and then nothing of an animal nature. 
Saturdays and Sundays the little girl, who is a Greek, may 
eat in the morning ; and the servant boy, who is a Catholic, 
Sundays only. This practice leads the people to think very 
much about food, making them particular and difficult; for 
after such long fasts, they loathe simple food, and are often 
dissatisfied with what is given them. With my washer- 
woman \ have had frequent trouble. They are always, too, 
wishing a change of food. The people fish all night upon 
the sea, for ' bloodless fish/ as they are called, and often 
the reflection of the torches, attached to their boats, dances 
around the walls of our bed-room until morning dawns. It 
reminds me of the probable mode in which the disciples of 
our Saviour gained their subsistence. ' They toiled all 
night/ but not under such a guide as these people, who are 
thus duped to believe that this is religion, and will carry 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 231 

them to heaven. Alas ! alas ! Blessed Lord, may thy 
kingdom come speedily ! " 

\ " Betroot, March 19. 

" We feel anxious respecting our country, lest she be left 
to misrule and destruction. May God save her, for his own 
glory. In some respects my feelings and opinions have been 
changed since I left America. Looking at our national 
character at the distance of 5,000 miles, and mingling with 
foreigners, I feel myself forming a more impartial estimate 
than when I was borne along amid the excitement and self- 
complacency, to which my countrymen are certainly ex- 
posed. While I see much to admire and love, I also see 
faults that I wish might be corrected. That humorods 
poetical effusion of Halleck, describing the Connecticut 
character, is not inapplicable to the nation at large: — 

■ V 
* They have a natural talent for foreseeing ; 

And knowing all things.' 

* * # » # *» 

4 Would shake hands with a king upon his throne, 
And think it kindness to bis majesty/ 

" Now you must not think that I am becoming a traitor 
to my own dear native land. It is my love for it that makes 
me jealous of her reputation ; thrown as I am into circum- 
stances in which her merits are discussed, and where her 
peculiarities are exposed by the vfifious specimens of Ameri- 
can character that find their way to these shores. I have 
before remarked that I think our countrymen much better 
qualified for missionary labor and self-denial than the 
English, and I still think so; yet if we could prune away 
some of our excrescences, and at the same time retain that 
energy in action which characterizes us, we should hold 
a still higher place in ' the scale of being/ than we now do. 

" I never felt the importance of family order, and a due 
subordination of children und servants, as since I has^ 
resided here ; and have been led lo few \XvaX >&& >ntssN. *& 



232 MEMOIR OF 

this in America, more than any thing else, threatens to 
interfere with the permanence of our free institutions* 
Surely God never designed that the beautiful and orderly 
arrangement of his providence, which has divided mankind 
into families, should be interrupted. During the past 
winter, an American gentleman and his son have spent 
considerable time at Beyroot, after travelling in the Holy 
Land, and making some examinations for the purpose of 
disproving, the Mosaic history. They are from the south- 
western States, and one of our English friends remarked, 
that his own curiosity had been gratified at length by 
a specimen of some of our ( back- woodsmen. 1 His criti- 
cisms were not unkind at all towards our country ; but he 
remarked, incidentally, that there was a singular familiarity 
existing between this father and son ; the latter contradict- 
ing his father continually, and treating him with no respect 
whatever. 

"It is interesting to me to study the character of the 
English; that race from which we sprang, and to whom 
we ought to feel strongly attached. Between them and 
ourselves there are shades of difference ; some to our advan- 
tage, and some to our disadvantage. The manners of all 
those whom I have seen are in most respects as refined as 
those of the best classes in America. The above-mentioned 
countrymen of ours remarked to their English acquaintances 
at Beyroot, that at the South they did not feel much 
sympathy with New England residents; for they were too 
English in their character* The father said he did not visit 
with those of his mother country, whom he met in foreign 
lands, because he was ridiculed for eating with his knife, 
instead of his fork ! 

" May 18. — Yesterday, at the Sabbath school, Mr. Smith 
asked one of the little girls, ' who was the progenitor of 
the Jews?' and she replied, 'Satan.' By general consent, 
among the old and young, this afflicted race seem to be 
condemned to ignominy here, and irretrievable destruc- 
tion hereafter. 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 233 

" June 2. — A few days since, one of my , little Moslem 
scholars, whose father was once an extensive merchant here, 
came and invited me to make a call upon her mother. I 
took Raheel, and accompanied her to their house, which is 
in our neighborhood. I found it a charming spot, and very 
neatly kept. An aged relative sat near the door of the 
receiving-room r assorting and placing in a pile, some grape 
leaves, which are much used in this country in cooking 
rice. They mince fresh meat with the rice, and roll it up 
in the leaves and boil it. It is a nice dish, But the reason 
of my alluding to this, was to say that the woman was blind, 
and all her movements reminded me so forcibly of my dear 
mother, that I watched her with painful satisfaction. 

" It is quite a. formidable circumstance to receive and 
make Arab visits, so much ceremony is requisite. I gener-_ 
ally feel less at my ease in exchanging civilities with the 
natives, than 1 did in any circumstances in which I was 
placed in America. Sherbet and coffee must be furnished, 
and the whole attention given to them while they remain. 
Hospitality is regarded here as a religious act, I think, and 
reputation is greatly prized. They are less sincere, how- 
ever, than those whom they consider cold in their manner 
of treating strangers. There is no regularity or system in 
the arrangement of their time; of course, our New England 
habits are often encroached upon. Sometimes, when I am 
occupying an early hour in the few domestic car6s in which 
I allow myself, and when half-a-dozen Arab, females parade 
into the room, I am obliged to summon all my benevolence 
and recollection, to enable me. to perform the rites of hos- 
pitality with cheerfulness. ' For this cause was I sent/ are 
words which frequently come into my mind of late, when 
thus interrupted. I cannot yet converse as freely as I wish 
on any subject, especially that of religion. This too must 
be introduced with great judgment and caution ; so that I 
must at present content myself with accomplishing but little 
more than exciting con6dence and regard by an amiable 
Christian deportment, which is not unimportant in prcDariu^ 



234 MEMOIR OF 

the way for future efforts. I often think how dear mother, 
if she were here and knew the Arabic, would interest this 
people. 

" And is Dr. Wisner no longer upon the earth ? Surely 
there is a world, and work too, for the precious spirits who 
are so frequently snatched from our sphere. I cannot be 
sufficiently thankful that my own dear family circle remains 
unbroken. I never receive, a parcel from America, without 
lifting up my heart to God that I may be prepared for what- 
ever intelligence it may contain." 

"Beyroot, July 2. 

" My dear Mrs. Wisner : — When it has been in my heart 
to address a letter to you, which has often been the case 
since my removal to Syria, I little imagined that I was 
deferring it for an occasion like the present ; and that when 
1 took my pen to assure you of my love, I should be called 
to express also my sympathy in the sorest bereavement you 
could experience. Dear friend, you are not the only 
mourner in this afflictive event. We, who knew your hus- 
band, loved him and weep for him. Who could know and 
not love him ? He won my heart the first time I enjoyed 
your kind hospitality in Boston. That charming simplicity 
and warmth of heart which he possessed, was very attrac- 
tive, and he seemed so like a father and a brother to our 
little missionary circle when we were departing from 
America, that my attachment was greatly strengthened. 
May I never again be called to endure the agony and con- 
flict of feeling which I experienced at the close of the 
evening service in Park Street church, when this dear friend 
came to the pew where I sat, and gave me his parting 
blessing. His own soul seemed full of deep sympathy ; 
his words were few, and I could not speak. But for the 
supporting grace of God, my natural feelings would have 
wholly subdued me. 

" Your excellent husband, for his kindness to our de- 
parted relatives and to their orphan children, seemed to be 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 235 

identified with us ; and as I said farewell to him, those chords 
of feeling were touched which vibrated so painfully when I 
left my father's house. I have loved to think of him in this 
far distant land) and I have remembered, and repeated to 
my 'missionary associates very often, a remark which he 
made to us at our little meeting at Dr. Anderson's — 'That 
we should especially aim at the possession of a cheerful re- 
liance upon the atonement of Christ.' This, he said, would 
support us in our wprk more £han any thing else ! 

" When-we heard of the sudden departure of Dr. Wisner, 
I remarked to Mr. Smith, that it must be that God has a 
place for those who become lost to us in this world, where 
their services are immediately employed for his glory. Or 
perhaps he sees that the sanctifying influence of their re- 
moval will promote his kingdom more than their lives on 
earth. All felt that this good and gifted man was eminently 
qualified for his station. 

" It is my opinion that nothing is lost to the church by 
such an event, any more than was the case among the 
Israelites, when Elijah was taken up to heaven. Yet we 
mourn,, and not without reason, when beloved objects are 
snatched from our bosoms. Dear friend, how your heart 
has bled ! If I felt anguish such as no former event ever 
brought to my soul, when a precious brother was removed 
by a lingering illness, what must yon have suffered by the 
sudden rending of that tie which now I know to be stronger 
than any other ! But God has supported you, I am confident. 
He will support you to the end. You could never claim so 
many direct promises as in your present circumstances. If 
1 thy Maker is thine husband,' what have you to fear ? Soon 
we shall meet, I trust) where sorrow and sin will never draw 
another sigh from our. breasts. Please to accept, with my 
own, the affectionate sympathy of my husband." 

The feelings of Mrs. Smith as a mourner with one of the 
families of the mission at Smyrna, afflicted in the removal of 
a child, were tenderly expressed in the following e&VftsN.\ — 



236 MEMOIR OF MRS. SMITH. 

"Dear Mrs. Hallock : — You were very kind to give us 

so minute an account of the sickness of your little daughter. 

It was exceedingly touching, particularly as it came from 

a mother's pen ; and I think you have great consolation in 

the remembrance of her sweet deportment, and tender 

religious sensibilities. You may truly say of your precious 

one, 

( She died to sin, she died to care, 
But for a moment felt the rod ; 
Then, springing on the viewless air, 

Spread her light wings and soared to God. 

4 This the blest theme that cheers my voice, 

The grave is not my darling's prison ; 
The stone that covered half my joys 
Is rolled away, and she is risen/ 

I know much of the sorrows which death brings into an 
affectionate family circle, having, the year that I left my 
father's house, consigned to the tomb a beloved brother, who 
was preparing for the ministry. Such events break up and 
call forth those deep fountains of feeling in the human breast, 
the existence of which is scarcely realized by the unafflicted. 
I asked my dear father, who had before lost a lovely boy of 
two years, which trial was the greatest, that of parting with 
the infant, or the son of maturer years. * Oh ! the last/ said 
he, ' for the love which I bore the child, has gained twofold 
strength for the man. 9 Such doubtless would have been 
your experience. 

" Do you not often think of the dear circle at Malta, and 
the poor, ignorant beings that fill those streets? I doubt not 
your prayers mingle with ours for the long deferred blessing. 
Oh ! when shall we see the kingdom of Satan, around this 
sea, tottering to its foundation 1 May we all be faithful to 
our trust, and God will hasten it in his time." 



>*■' 



CHAPTER XII. 

JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM RETURN TO BEYROOT. 

In prosecuting the objects of the mission, Mr. Smith was 
called to visit Jerusalem. Mrs. Smith accompanied her 
husband. She prepared an account of their journey to and 
from Jerusalem ; and separate from this, a sketch of the 
scenes she witnessed in that interesting city. The latter 
never reached this country. Its loss occasions a chasm in 
the present chapter, much to be regretted ; especially as it 
was considered by her husband the most interesting of all 
her journals ; and there is but a single letter to supply its 
place. , 

To such readers of this volume as may be* already ac- 
quainted, through other channels, with scenes and places 
described in this chapter, it is believed there will be com- 
pensation in the characteristic descriptions she gives, and in 
the accompanying manifestations of her peculiar feelings as 
a Christian, visiting the scenes of a country of such sacred 
and surpassing interest. 

« Bethoot, May 14, 1835. 

" My dear Brother and Sister : — On the 1st day of April, 
at 2 o'clock, P. M., I turned my face to go up to Jerusalem. 
You will not doubt that I indulged some peculiar feelings as 
I went toward the Holy Land ; such as no former journey 
ever induced. I could hardly believe it a reality, though a 
sacred cheerfulness stole over me. When I was a little girl, 
I used to think of Jerusalem with great interest ; and after I 
had a new heart, though not the heart of a missionary, I 
thought that I could brave every imaginable evil for such a 
field of labor. Now, I was actually realizing the dreams. qC 



238 MEMOIR OF 

earlier days; and though the romance of childhood had 
passed away, my heart beat in unison with the occasion. 1 
only wanted some of my beloved ones in Ameriea to enjoy it 
with me. 

" The style of travelling in this country, together with the 
narrowness of the roads, which seldom allows two to ride 
abreast, interferes with social intercourse ; and conversation 
cannot be supported without considerable effort. We talked 
some, however, and thought more. 

"Our tents were pitched at night on the shore of the 
Mediterranean ; and while the gentlemen were employed in 
their erection, I walked down to the water, ' to meditate at 
eventide.' * That classical sea,' whose waters were then 
clear as crystal, cast its waves upon the smooth sands with 
calm dignity; while I gathered the pretty shells which they 
lodged at my feet. Not. a sound was heard, save the mur- 
muring of the sea, in this solitary place ; and as I looked over 
the wide, watery waste, my heart could not but soar to Him 
who sitteth alone upon the throne of the universe, and 
quietly respond to the voice of the peaceful waves. We 
partook of our evening meal with cheerfulness, and after 
uniting in prayer, retired to our couch. We had reason to 
regret our choice .of a location ; for the rain and the wind 
beat upon our habitation, and the pins which held it being 
driven into loose sand, it fell in the middle of the night. My 
husband was up nearly all night fastening down its sides, and 
securing me and our articles from injury. When morning 
dawned, however, no harm had befallen our persons or 
property. Under the shadow of the Almighty we were se- 
cure from the terror by night At half past 8, we left 
Khan Khuldeh, rode upon the shore of the Mediterranean, 
and reached Sidon in seven hours. It is surrounded by 
beautiful and well-watered gardens ; and as we rode out to 
our encampment beyond the city about sundown, the bril- 
liant verdure of the plain, bounded by low and luxuriant 
hills, transferred us in imagination to our dear New Eng- 
land. The next morning at sunrise we set out for Tyre. 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 239 

w 

" Whenever I saw our tent fall to the ground, my thoughts 
naturally reverted to the taking down of the tabernacle of 
the body at last. While waiting, I often had time to read 
portions of Scripture appropriate to the localities we visited ; 
to take notes also, and to converse with the women and 
children who came to ask charity and to gather up any 
thing which might be left.. We travelled on this day along 
* the coast of Tyre and Sidon,' from whence many came 
forth to witness and to be benefited by the miracles of our 
Saviour. We passed near the site of Sarepta. The scenery 
was exquisitely beautiful on the left; the country rising, 
gradually into hills of moderate height, whose declivities, 
even to their summit, were covered with grain, and inter- 
spersed with olive trees. ' These latter, in the distance, 
strikingly resemble the apple trees of America, and we felt 
almost as if we were travelling there. 

"After a ride of seven hours we found ourselves in Tyre, 
once 'the crowning city,' now most emphatically the abode 
of indigence. We went directly to the house of our con- 
sular agent, a respectable native, of the Greek Catholic 
church, who treated us very hospitably. It was Friday 
evening, and we staid in Tyre until Monday. 

" Of the luxury of retirement, the inhabitants of these 
countries know nothing, and no provision is made for it 
in the construction of their houses. One large room is 
furnished with cushions on each side, with a recess, before 
which a v curtain is drawn, containing the mattresses and 
coverings of their beds, which are drawn forth at night and 
spread over the room for sleeping. While arrangements 
for the night were going forward, I sat quietly by with my 
pencil, taking notes of the occurrences of the day. One of 
the ladies took a bit of a wax taper in her hand, and dropping 
upou her knees by my side, kindly held the light as long as 
I wished to write ; interrupting me occasionally with ques- 
tions about the object of this, that, and the other articles of 
dress, &c, which I readily answered. As I sat thus oc- 
cupied, and thus attended, 1 thought, ' Can it be tta*. \&s& S& 



240 MEMOIR OF 

the ancient Tyre 1 and am I actually here? ' I made some 
inquiries respecting the present condition of the place, of 
this kind jet simple-minded woman. Said I, ' Have you 
gardens, &c, here 1 ' ' No,' said she, ' there is nothing here 
but poor people, and nothing to look at but the sea ; ' and 
this remark was accompanied by that very significant ges- 
ture of the Arabs, by which they express utter destitution. 
It is by putting the thumb and forefinger together, and 
snapping the end of the upper teeth with the nail of the 
thumb, bringing it suddenly from the mouth. This female 
little imagined how strikingly she was testifying to the 
truth of prophecy respecting that * merchant of many isles.' 

" In the evening of Saturday, we were informed very po- 
litely, that the next day a family feast would occur to the 
honor of their patron saint We therefore removed all. our 
articles into the room which the gentlemen occupied, that 
we might enjoy a more quiet Sabbath, and give them an 
opportunity to receive their visitors without reserve. Mr. 
Smith mingled a little with them, while several companies 
of ladies came into the room where I sat, to see and be 
seen. I was as kind and sociable as I was able to be, en- 
deavoring to throw in, with my stammering tongue, a few 
profitable remarks. One woman remained and listened 
with apparent interest while I spoke of the downfall of 
Tyre, as affording us a lesson to avoid pride, which God 
so much abhors. Towards evening they all went to the ■ 
church to prayers, and we accompanied them. I was of 
course separated from my husband, and went to the women's 
apartment, which was situated like the gallery porch of our 
place of worship at Norwich, from whence, through lattice 
work, we looked down updn the mummery below. The 
female whom I mentioned as holding a light for me to 
write, on the evening of our arrival, exerted herself so much 
to furnish me a seat, of which the place was destitute, as to 
cause the perspiration to stand in drops upon her face. She 
first brought a little block, half a foot square, and then one 
somewhat larger. By such kind acts she greatly won upon 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 2U 

my affections, though at first I thought her rather forbidding. 
The women were not so much engaged in their devotions as 
to prevent idle conversation and silly question* respecting 
my dress. One of them asked me .why I did not make the 
sign of the cross. I simply replied that it was not my cus- 
tom, and I did not know how. ' Poor heathen 1 ' perhaps she 
thought. As we descended into the court below, the women, 
of which there were, to say the least, a hundred, arranged 
themselves in order to see the stranger. I was introduced 
to the wife of the English Consul, who urged me to go 
home with her; I declined her invitation upon the ground 
that I was not accustomed to use the Sabbath for visiting ; 
enlarging a little upon my principles. Those nearest me 
soon began to repeat my words to the others ; and it is not 
improbable that they reached the ear of every individual. 
But alas ! the deeply-rooted ignorance and prejudices of 
this people are not to be undermined by casual intercourse 
and slight efforts. They asked me if the service were not 
excellent. I told them, ' if offered with the heart, it was ; 
but if otherwise, it was worth nothing in the sight of God.' 
They little imagined what an exertion I had been making 
to restrain the emotions which the sight of it had occa- 
sioned. 1 
" Monday morning, at 6, we pursued our journey, after 
gratefully acknowledging the kindness which we had re- 
ceived. Our course was over the mountains of Galilee, 
and through that portion of the promised land which fell to 
the tribe of Asher. The scenery was rich and attractive ; 
but the land thinly inhabited, owing to an oppressive gov- 
ernment and a false religion. At this time/«6 weO as during 
the most of our journey, I could not but Jfciak wjbat a noble 
country this would be under the cult&ptiob of freehold 
proprietors. In this ride of nine hours/ \ \ ceonted thirty 
varieties of wild flowers, many of which I recognized as 
choice exotics in our American gardens. It seems as if 
nothing could spring up here without producing a blossom. 
An aqueduct, twelve miles long, suppoxted. Vj ^ *\&^as*sfe> 

11 



242 MEMOIR OF 

of fine arches, was on our route, and a very elegant country- 
seat of the Pasha arrested our attention, possessing all the 
features of an Oriental establishment. Many pilgrims of 
both sexes were on their way to the Holy City, one of whom 
attached himself to our company for several days. As he 
was walking by the side of my donkey, palmer-like, with 
staff in hand, I entered into conversation with him ; and 
learning that he came from the mountains near Hadet, the 
residence of Asaad Shidiak, I ventured to inquire what he 
thought of him ; whether he were not a good man, &c. 
Drawing still nearer to my side, and casting a sidelong 
glance towards my husband, as though he did not wish to 
be overheard, he replied in a low and hurried tone, ' He 
may have been a. good man, but I do not like his religion.' 
I must acknowledge that I was somewhat pleased with the 
frankness of this answer of the Maronite pilgrim. 

" The next morning we rode through Acre, the Accho of 
the Old Testament, and the Ptolemais of the New. This 
fortified city appears well in the distance, though not mag- 
nificent. It is compactly built, and a spot which has been 
much contested by the various rulers of this land. The 
Pasha keeps men constantly employed in repairing the dep- 
redations of the late war. We saw many poor old men in 
companies, carrying little barrows of earth, and chained 
like so many criminals. A large steam frigate lay in the 
harbor. 

"Our road beyond stretched around the head of the 
beautiful bay of Acre. Upon its shores was once caught a 
certain kind of fish, which is said to have produced the 
celebrated purple Tyrian dye. We forded the Kishon at 
its mouth, and breakfasted among the bulrushes upon its 
banks. A short ride then brought us to Haifa, a village 
opposite Acre, which furnishes a safer haven to winter in, 
and is much used for this purpose. Thence we pursued our 
course to the summit of Mount Carmel. From this spot 
the view of the plain of Acre was magnificent and beautiful. 
*; is about 1,500 feet above the sea; yet we found fossil 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 243 

shells there. The monastery is a large and commodious 
ouilding, not yet finished, but workmen were 'employed 
upon it. It is occupied by seven monks, from Malta, Italy, 
and Austria, and is altogether too fine a spot for them ; 
though they have a range of apartments for the accommo- 
dation of travellers, where Mr. Whiting and Dr. Dodge 
took lodgings, on their way to Jerusalem, with their fam- 
ilies. I fixed upon it for a theological seminary, to be es- 
tablished there some years hence ! but I did not tell the 
monks this. They treated us with coffee, and were very 
kind. After commencing our descent on the other side, we 
read aloud the history of Elijah and the prophets of Baal, 
whose contest occurred here ; and tried to imagine ourselves 
in the place of the good prophet, when, after seven times 
stretching his vision over the sea, which was spread out 
before us, his servant returned with the cheering intelli- 
gence, ' Behold, there ariseth a little cloud out of the sea, 
like a man's hand.' We now descended into the vale of 
Sharon, and at 5 o'clock pitched our tents among its 
beauteous flowers ; and as we plucked its rose, we thought 
of Him who said, ' I am the rose of Sharon, and the lily of 
the v alley .' 

" At 6, the next morning, we went on our way, and 
riding upon the sea-shore, our path was completely covered 
with shells. We breakfasted among the ruins of Cesarea, 
where not a solitary being now dwells. Here Peter first 
preached to the Gentiles, after his most interesting introduc- 
tion to Cornelius, whose residence it was, as well as of 
Philip the Evangelist. Here Paul made his noble defence 
before King Agrippa. Herod lavished his treasures upon 
it, and made it the most flourishing city of Syria. Now, it 
is all overgrown with grass and thorns. Under a ruined 
arch, we sat and sung two verses of a hymn. After 4, 
P. M., we encamped again in the vale of Sharon, and sung 
the hymn which Mrs. Sigourney composed for the Mohegan 
Sabbath School Society. It possessed peculiar appropri- 
ateness to the occasion. Next mottoiw^ xos^ ^X V> ^ss^ 



944 MEMOIR OF 

passed through the remainder of the vale of Sharon. Like 
the previous day, scarcely a habitation or a human being 
was to be seen, though the region would support many 
thousands. The land literally ' enjoys her Sabbaths.' 
Between 2 and 3, P. M., we reached Joppa, now called 
Y&fa, and were most cordially welcomed at Mr. Murad's, 
our Consul — a wealthy Armenian. 

" Yafa may be styled the seaport of the Holy City ; for 
all who visit Jerusalem by sea go thither. A writer re- 
marks, that 'its traditional history stretches far back into 
the twilight of time, even anterior to the deluge ; and that 
it is too old to have any antiquities, having outlived all that 
once rendered it interesting.' We know, however, that the 
timber of Solomon's temple was brought hither in floats ; 
that Jonah fled from hence by ship to Tarshish ; and that 
here Peter raised to life the benevolent Dorcas. Before 
leaving Y&fa, we visited the Armenian, Greek, and Latin 
churches, in the last of which was a tolerably good picture, 
representing Peter's dream ; and the church was dedicated 
to him. All the different sects of Christians regard the 
long fast of Lent ; and Moslems will only eat meat that has 
been killed by Moslems, or superintended by them ; so 
that heretics, like ourselves, must eat or throw away all 
that is furnished. Our muleteers, servants, and all whom 
we met, until after Easter, were fasting. 

" We turned aside a little from the main road to visit 
Lydda, now called Ludd. It is a most uninviting little village, 
though its appearance from a distance is quite picturesque, 
owing to the whitewashed domes of its houses, and the ver- 
dure and variety of its foliage in which they are interspersed. 
We spent an hour or two under the shade of its olive trees. 

"Ramleh is an ancient town, supposed to be the Arima- 
thea of the New Testament ; if so, the good man who gave 
our Saviour a decent burial, was from here. We were but 
a few hours from Jerusalem, and our hearts were too much 
attracted thither to be deeply interested in any thing which 
we might find at Ramleh; convents, churches, vaults, or 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH* 245 

the like. We left there early in the morning, and found 
ourselves at the gate of the Holy City, two or three boors 
after raid-day, on Saturday, the 11th of April, ten days 
from our departure from Beyroot. 

"On Wednesday, the loth, at 1 o'clock, P. M., being 
joined by Mr. Whiting and Mr. Nicolayson, we set out 
for Bethlehem, which is two hours from Jerusalem; and 
riding through the valley of Rephaim, stopped at the tomb 
of Rachel, which is probably the identical place of her 
burial, though the present small stone building, erected by 
Moslems over the spot, is of recent date. On reaching the 
birth-place of our Lord; the city of David, we went direct- 
ly to the convent which is said to cover 'the manger.' 
Would that, instead of descending into subterranean pas- 
sages to find the scene of this interesting event in a grotto, 
I had spent the hour on one of the neighboring hills, where, 
undisturbed by cowled heads and false tongues, I could 
have derived some satisfaction from my reflections upon 
the past. Indeed, I think it is time that Christian travellers 
should take a decided stand against these absurdities of 
priestcraft ; and neither give their time or money for the 
purpose of being aided around the places, which they 
cannot fail to regard with entire incredulity and disgust. 
In this underground apartment are two places, in the form 
of an ox crib, built of marble, iron, gold, &c, which the 
Virgin mother occupied at the time of her infant's birth ! 
The apartment, too, in which Jerome translated the Scrip- 
tures, is contiguous; also his grave, in the same suite of 
apartments. 

" The Greeks, Latins, and Armenians, have a share in the 
convent at Bethlehem ; and on the day we were there, many 
little boys and girls were collected at evening prayers, and 
were kneeling in files through the length of the apartment, 
frolicking rather than praying. The inhabitants, in number 
about three, hundred, are nearly all of them Christians. 
From Bethlehem, we rode a short distance, and pitched our 
tents at the pools of Solomon, neai \hfc \rp^t ^w^^ksr^^ 



246 MEMOIR OF 

386 feet long, and 231 broad. Their shape is an oblong 
square, and they are surrounded by plastered stones. The 
water falls from one to the other successively, and is con- 
veyed by an aqueduct to Jerusalem. These pools are 
worthy to have been the work of a king; being objects 
of interest for their magnificence, as well as for their 
utility. It was a cold, dark night, and the inhabitants of 
a neighboring castle, the only building near, warned us 
against robbers, and urged us to come within their walls. 
After tea, however, with genuine Yankee curiosity and 
fearlessness, we issued from our tents with lighted tapers ; 
and walking some distance, descended, one by one, into 
the bowels of the earth, to see the fountain which sup- 
plies the pools. The entrance is by a narrow, perpen- 
dicular descent, and it requires some effort to pass it. 
I left my bonnet with the guide, and with my husband's 
help, reached the spring below. It was worth the effort, 
for , there is a vaulted room, forty feet long, and nearly as 
broad, and another somewhat smaller covered with stone 
arches, and bearing the marks of great antiquity. At 7, 
A. M., we left and rode to Hebron ; reaching it in the 
course of the afternoon. As we approached this ancient 
town — called by the natives, Khaleel, which signifies friend, 
and is so named in allusion to Abraham's being the friend 
of God — our attention was unexpectedly arrested by the 
magnificent grape vines. We were probably in the valley 
of Eshcol. It had been a favorite project with us to pitch 
our tents, like Abraham, 'in the plain of Mamre which is 
before Hebron ; ' but the rain prevented, and we were 
compelled to resort to accommodations which were al- 
together more Turkish and uninviting than any which I 
had before seen. Being wrapped in a gentleman's cloak, 
and almost enveloped in an umbrella, which I purposely 
drew very closely upon my head, I passed incog, through the 
streets of Hebron, until our train stopped at the house of 
the Governor, to which we had been directed by a citizen 
of the place. We did not alight from our animals, until 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH, 247 

Mr. N., who had before visited Hebron, had obtained a 
hasty audience with his excellency, and an invitation to take 
lodgings in the seraia. It was an old and comfortless dwell- 
ing ; and after crossing a small court, we found ourselves in 
the august presence of the Governor, a genuine Turk, who 
was reclining upon his cushions in a corner of the room. 
He did not rise from his recumbent posture, nor condescend 
to notice me at all ; until seeing that I was an object of 
interest and care to my husband, he ordered a rug to be 
spread in a broad window-seat for my accommodation. 1 
gladly hastened towards it ; and there I sat, as still and as 
silent as any Turk could desire a woman to be, until after 
coffee had been served. The room looked as if it had not 
been cleaned for ages; and the spider had not only laid 
hold with her hands of this would-be palace, but had main- 
tained her ground through more than one regency, I am 
confident. Several handsome rugs and cushions were 
spread over the space which the Governor occupied ; and 
his own dress was of scarlet cloth, richly embroidered with 
silver and gold. He complained of a lame limb; and one 
end of his outer garment, which was a loose robe, was 
thrown carelessly across the disabled knee, glistening with 
the tinsel with which it was ornamented; while ever and 
anon his delicate and white hand, adorned with rings, was 
employed to keep it in its place. His turban was thrown 
back upon his head, exposing a handsome forehead and 
comely features; and his manners toward the gentlemen 
were not uncourteous. After half an hour's conversation 
with them, he retired, giving me a sal am as he passed. 
Truly happy was I to see him thus depart, and give me an 
opportunity to relax my muscles. I dislodged some of the 
cobwebs near me, and with the window-seat for my pillow, 
took a little rest. 

" We went to a mosque, which is built over the cave 
of MachpeJah, where lie probably the remains of Abraham, 
Sarah, and others; hoping to gain admittance to the tombs, 
but did not succeed. At the synagogue, we examined. <&& 



248 MEMOIR OF 

copy of the Law and Talmud, and row many Jews and 
Jewesses. One of the persons assembled was a youth, per- 
haps sixteen years of age, whose effeminate features, and 
hectic glow, and manner of attire, made us doubtful for a 
time whether he were a boy or a girl. He invited us into 
the house of his grandfather, who is the chief Rabbi, where 
also we saw the lad's father. It was affecting to behold this 
aged father, son, and grandson, the only male representa- 
tives of three generations. The old man was nearly blind, 
being over eighty years of age ; and the light of his dwelling 
was probably soon to be put out, in the removal of the con- 
sumptive boy from earth ; would that I could say to heaven. 
" Not far from Hebron, we found a very large ruin called 
Ramet el Khaleel. Breakfasted at a place called Seir, 
where is shown the tomb of Esau. From thence we went 
to a cave supposed by some to be that of Adullam. After 
descending half way down an immense ravine, we reached 
the cave. Near its entrance, which faces the deep valley, 
is a large, square stone, with another in the precipice above, 
overhanging it so closely, that we were obliged to creep 
upon our hands and knees over the first, to get at the mouth 
of the cave. I took off my shoes to render my way more 
safe, as the rock inclined towards the valley, and a misstep 
would have cost me my life. Two solitary natives were 
strolling near this usually sequestered spot, and expressed 
great surprise at our knowledge of the existence of the cave. 
It is probably one of the largest caves in Palestine, though 
the land abounds with them. Some are converted into 
dwelling-houses, and in others, the wretched inhabitants 
find refuge from the Pasha, to avoid impressment. No 
persecuted prophets are now found among the refugees ; 
though once they were driven thither, and heaven was 
thereby doubtless rendered more sweet to them. The as- 
cent from the cave was extremely tedious; and our ride 
home over the mountains, was cold and wearisome. We 
met some of the ' herdmen of Tekoa/ in the neighborhood 
of the cave ; none of them, I fear, resembling in character 



"J 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. * 249 

the prophet Anioa. We arrived at Jerusalem just before 
the gates were closed, on the third day. 

" The next week, on Wednesday, the 22d, we left again 
for Jericho, and the Dead Sea, our party a little varied, as 
we left Mr. Nicolayson behind, and were accompanied by 
Mrs. Whiting, Mrs. Dodge, and Mary. It was 10 o'clock 
when we left Jerusalem, and in an hour, or one and a half, 
we reached Bethany. It is now a miserable spot, where 
they show you the tomb of Lazarus; yet once it must, have 
furnished our Saviour a pleasant retirement from the tumult 
of the city. Our ride down to Jericho was over barren 
mountains and parched verdure, the entire distance. A part 
of the road was-"cut out of the white limestone rocks which 
abounded on the route, and it was probably the identical 
path in which the Good Samaritan overcame his national 
prejudices, and excelled in benevolence the Levite and the- 
Priest. At half past 5, we encamped near a small tribe** 1 
tary of the Jordan, a short distance from Jericho. While 
the tents were erecting, I wandered forth alone, and seating 
myself among the bushes which overhung the stream, took 
my Testament and enjoyed an uninterrupted season of re- 
tirement. I returned to the tents, where we took our meal, 
engaged in social prayer, read Joshua's approach to Jericho, 
sung * There is a land of pure delight/ and retired to rest, > 
the gentlemen occupying one tent, and the ladies the other. 
It was the first time that Mrs. Dodge had slept in a tent, 
since her husband's death; and when we were called tfie* 
next morning to prepare for our departure, she spoke ?ery 
distinctly, in her sleep, words which made me weep. ' Oh, 
don't ask me about my husband,' she said ; ' he left me a 
long time ago, and my heart is almost broken.' Mrs. Whi- 
ting said, ' Cannot you put your trust in God, Mrs. Dodge ? ' 
This roused her, and she awoke so calm, and answered so 
sweetly and gently, that I could not help loving and pitying 
her the more. 

" Deferring an examination of Jericho for the present, we 
set forth at 4, A. M., ft* the Dead Sea. Our first ob\e<x 

11* 



■j 



\.t 



j»_ 



250 MEMOIR OF 

was the Jordan. We breakfasted upon its banks, after a 
ride of two hours. It was indeed a sacred spot to us. This 
was the river whose retreating waves left a path for the ark 
of the Lord to pass safely forward, borne by his anointed 
priests ; and here was the water which bathed the person of 
the sinless Antitype ; when among Pharisees and Sadducees 
he presented himself before the Baptist, ' to fulfil all right- 
eousness.' The mountains of Moab, barren in the extreme, 
lay before us ; and behind us appeared the Mount of Temp- 
tation, where it is said our Saviour encountered the devil 
during his fast of forty days. Our ride to the Dead Sea was 
a peculiar one. All which I had imagined of the sterility 
of the region, was fully realized. It is indeed a perpetual 
and striking memento of the wrath of God against sin. The 
region presents an undulating surface of nearly uniform 
elevation, composed of a dingy, white soil ; hard, yet cracked 
and broken, like earth which is discharging its frost, while 
saline matter seems to have been deposited in spots over 
the whole surface. In returning, we passed along a range 
of low hills and valleys, where our guide found it difficult to 
lead the way. No trees, shrubs, or stones, diversified the 
scene, for some distance before we reached the desolate 
shore of the sea. There, nothing that has life is seen, 
though the general appearance of the lake itself did not at 
that time difFer from other similar bodies of water. It was 
clear and sparkling. Our first act was to taste it. And it 
was truly a nauseous draught ! It combined every imagina- 
ble unpleasant flavor — bitter, salt, and acrid. Of the specific 
gravity of the water, you have perhaps heard. We found it 
not exaggerated, as it bore up a large horse with Dr. W. 
upon his back. You will not understand that they were 
upon the surface of the water, but that they could not 
sink. The poor animal knew not what to make of his 
strange situation. 

" Jericho is scarcely worthy the name of a village, even. 
The houses are mostly huts, composed of mud, branches of 
trees, &c, open on one side, an^ inhabited apparently by 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 251 

nomads. Two men guided us to a fountain near by, doubt- 
less the one which Elisha healed by casting salt therein, so 
that the land should no more be barren. It would seem as 
if the reality of the miracle was verified, even at the present 
day; for I never witnessed such luxuriance in any spot. 
Every shrub was larger, higher, richer, of its kind, and 
though it was the 23d of April, they had reaped and gathered 
their barley harvest. I was quite delighted, and though I 
had been upon my donkey nearly twelve hours, and had not 
eaten since breakfast, my spirits were as buoyant as in the 
morning. At evening prayers, Mr. Smith read to the mu- 
leteers and servants the story of Lot. We rode to Jerusalem 
next day in seven hours." 

The letter to which reference has been made in the com- 
mencement of this chapter, was addressed to Mrs. L. II. 
Sigourney, from which is extracted the following : — 

*' Jerusalem, April 21. 

" A few days since, my dear madam, while wandering 
over some of the sacred places of this interesting city, we 
came to the fountain which furnishes the ' Pool of Siloam.' 
I said to my husband, 'I will write ta our friend, Mrs. 
Sigourney, before I leave Jerusalem/ and he plucked a tiny 
flower from that memorable spot, that I might enclose it to 
you. As we ascended from the Pool itself, which stands in 
the ' king's garden/ after bathing our hands and tasting its 
soft and limpid water, I thought how your poetic pen would 
gain additional inspiration from such a spot, and I almost 
wished that you were with us. In that garden Solomon 
built a house for Pharaoh's daughter, and its location and 
verdure, even now, indicate its former beauty and adapted- 
ness. . Yet nought remains of the splendor of the days of 
Solomon and of Herod the Great. The glory is departed. 

"This being the verdant season, it is the most favorable 
period for visiting Jerusalem. Zion and Olivet, the Vale 
of Cedron and the Garden of Gethsemane, appear ^tt&\k 



252 MEMOIR OF 

and beautiful, under the brilliant rays of the same glorious 
sun which once illumined them; the birds, too, sing sweetly 
as ever, and ' while marble columns and palaces have 
crumbled into dust, the simple flower of the field grows 
and multiplies forever.' You can readily believe, that 
while we derive no satisfaction from visiting the Church 
of the Holy Sepulchre, within whose glittering walls priestly 
policy and ingenuity have concentrated all the scenes of 
Calvary, we still enjoy much from those natural features 
of Jerusalem which can easily be identified. They are 
peculiarly striking. 

"I am not surprised at the tenacity with which the Jews 
attach themselves to their former capital ; or that in their 
ignorance of the spiritual nature of the Messiah's kingdom, 
they should still cherish expectations of future glory to their 
nation. The great adversary of God and man has brought 
them, as well as the various sects who occupy this country, 
to the same level of deep degradation and subservience to 
his rule. If you wish to know what mankind have lost in 
breaking away from their allegiance to the rightful Governor 
of the universe, come hither ; and if you would then wish to 
realize what Christ has done for their recovery, go back to 
America. The most trifling comforts which you have been 
accustomed to regard as accidental, will then appear to have 
been purchased by his love, as they really were. Personal 
cleanliness, the orderly arrangement of a house, to say 
nothing of matters of greater refinement and taste, would 
strike you as features of the kingdom of purity and love, in 
distinction from the kingdom of confusion and darkness 
which exists here. But I need not dwell on this subject 
for your information ; neither upon the interesting localities 
of this vicinity, as the recitals of those who have preceded 
me have doubtless made you familiar with them. . 

" Since arriving in Jerusalem we have made two excur- 
sions, each occupying about three days. The first v/as to 
Bethlehem and Hebron; the second to the Jordan and 
Dead Sea. Those very mountains and valleys reechoed the 



"•x :J 



■? MftS. SARAH L. SMITH. 253 

sweet sounds of David's harp, when he wandered over them 
with his father's sheep; and there he doubtless composed 
many of his choicest psalms of praise to the Author of so 
much beautiful scenery. 'In the same country,' too, did 
angelic voices sing higher praise to Him who also sent 
* peace on earth and good will to men.' We visited, it is 
true, the subterranean apartments of a convent, where are 
shown the stable and the manger in which the infant Jesus 
was laid; but I would recommend to the Christian who 
wishes to enjoy and profit by, a short tarry in this region, 
not to waste his time and energies in resorting to the places 
which are marked out by monkish tradition. The incredu- 
lity and disgust thus excited, tend rather to exhaust the mind, 
and to interfere with those simple and agreeable feelings 
which would naturally arise in the breast ; if not to take the 
place of them altogether." 

The letter of Mrs. Smith to her brother is here resumed, 
giving an account of her journey on her return from 
Jerusalem. 

" Our first day's ride frpm Jerusalem, of seven hours, 
possessed nothing peculiarly interesting; we encamped, as 
usual, near a fountain of water, not far from a village. 
Rose at half past 5 the next morning, and passed a large 
company of persons, handcuffed, and guarded by the 
Pasha's soldiers; they had just been seized for his army. 
I should think there were forty in all, from mere boys to 
old men; and a few wives and mothers followed in the 
rear, who said to our muleteers, (who were Christians,) 
' You are blessed! ' Only Mohammedans are seized. Chris- 
tians are not allowed to possess arms, and are regarded 
somewhat in the light of slaves, paying taxes only; and 
yet they go forth free and fearless, while the genuine sub- 
jects of Moslem power shrink away from observation. To- 
morrow we might have fifty servants at our door, if we 
would give them American protection. 



254 MEMOIR OF 

" Early in the afternoon we reached Sjchar, now called 
Nabloos. We rode perhaps half an hour through the 
beautiful valley which separates the mountains of Gerizim 
and Ebal, before we reached the city. These are noble 
heights, and so contiguous, that the blessing and the curse 
could have been heard by the tribes who were encamped 
in the plain below. Mount Gerizim is the most fertile ; and 
stretches along on the south, on the declivity of which lies 
the picturesque town of Sychar. ' Beer Yakob,' or Jacob's 
Well, is at the opening of the valley, some distance from the 
city. Nabloos, as it is now called, is a large and very 
flourishing place, embosomed in luxuriant gardens, and wa- 
tered by fine streams. It has been said to contain 10,000 
inhabitants, mostly Mohammedans. We visited the Samar- 
itans, and their synagogue. This ancient and curious 
race, of Cuthean descent, are now about one hundred in 
number. They are wealthy and independent, but their 
manners are gross and their physiognomy uninteresting. 
We first visited the family of the priest; and after some 
hesitation, I, though a woman, was permitted to accompany 
them to the synagogue, the door of which was locked 
within, while in our stockings we walked about upon the 
dusty mats which covered the small apartment. They 
showed us the Pentateuch in their native tongue, 3,400 
years old, as they pretend ; and the only part of the Scrip- 
tures which they regard as inspired. They openly declared 
to us that the prophets were all liars ; and in answer to my 
question, whether at this time there existed a friendship 
between them and the Jews, they replied very contemptu- 
ously in the negative. They are in expectation of the com- 
ing of the Messiah, who is to be a mere man, and to make 
Sychar the metropolis of his kingdom. As we left the 
synagogue, the priest anticipated Mr. Smith's intentions, 
by soliciting a present, and then complained of its being too 
little! In this city, Israel separated from Judah, and chose 
Rehoboam for their king. It is a place of much interest. 

" May 2. — We rose at 4, and after a ride of two or 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 255 

three hours, reached Samaria, the capital city of the revolted 
tribes. It is situated upon a mountain, and surrounded by 
mountains. Before breakfasting, we ascended with much 
fatigue from the valley below, to examine a ruined church, 
and a row of isolated columns ; the last of which are probably 
the remnants of the grandeur of Herod the Great, who held 
his court in this city, when the fascinating Salome, and her 
malicious mother, accomplished the death of that holy man, 
John Baptist.. The remains of the cathedral, now a mosque, 
commemorate the supposed place where he was beheaded ; 
into the vault of which we descended. In addition to 
other numerous mementoes of the wrath of God against 
sin, with which this land abounds, those ruined columns, 
standing amid trees and grass, and associated with the 
events which the old church brings to mind, furnish a 
striking lesson. Elijah and Elisha here wept and prayed. 
— After leaving Samaria, the aspect of the country was 
uncommonly beautiful and varied. It was the inheritance 
of Joseph ; and brought forcibly to our minds the blessing 
of the fond father in his last hours, when, as his sons were 
gathered around him, he dilated so feelingly upon the trials 
and temporal rewards of him who was separated from hii 
brethren — ' Even by the God of thy father who shall help 
thee, and by the Almighty who shall bless thee with bless- 
ings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth 
under/ &c. 

" The women of Palestine often attracted our attention, 
by the various modes in which they carried their burdens, 
and the alacrity with which they moved under the weight 
of them. This day we observed a novel sight of this de- 
scription — a woman tripping along with a good sized cradle 
upon her head, in which reposed a sleeping infant. 

" At 5 o'clock, Saturday, P. M., we reached Jeneen, a 
small village on the south side of the plain of Jezreel, or 
vale of Esdraelon, as it is sometimes called. Here we spent 
a quiet Sabbath, without the village. No one intruded 
upon our retirement. The door of our tent opened toward 



256 MEMOIR OF 

the magnificent- plain which stretches down to the bay of 
Acre. Mount Carmel lay in the blue distance. The next 
morning we commenced our ride over this beautiful vale, 
where flowers in rich profusion were scattered in our path, 
and three elegant gazelles were bounding amid the rich and 
waving grain. 

We arrived at Nazareth about noon. Its size and ap- 
pearance disappointed us, but my feelings on entering it 
were more pleasing than at any previous place. I looked 
around upon the general features of the surrounding country, 
and thought how familiar all had been to the Saviour's eye, 
from childhood to maturity. When his body was wearied 
with the labors attendant upon his employment as a me- 
chanic, and his pure and elevated mind was panting for 
more congenial intercourse than would be found in the 
haunts of men ; how often, doubtless, did he become re- 
freshed by wandering over those hills, and conversing with 
his Father and our Father ! We held the Monthly Concert 
in our tent, and it was a very agreeable one, as you may 
suppose. Although the church of the Annunciation was 
near our encampment, I did not visit it, for I was better 
satisfied with gazing at the unaltered objects of nature. 
Though not particularly striking, they furnished more prof- 
itable associations than the glittering interior of a church. 

" At 6 the next day we left Nazareth, and took our morn- 
ing meal at Cana. Of course we thought and talked of the 
wedding which once took place there. My present knowl- 
edge of the practices of this country, in regard to such feasts, 
enabled me better to understand and appreciate the circum- 
stances attending the miracle there wrought. The enter- 
tainment at a marriage usually continues for several days, 
and the quantity which will be required to furnish all the 
guests, cannot be ascertained at the commencement. These 
humble relatives of our Saviour probably had greater de- 
mands made upon their hospitality than they could meet ; 
and when new guests continued to present themselves, he 
condescended to supply their wants. I have no idea that 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 257 

he employed his miraculous power to encourage excess, 
neither does the Scripture narrative imply this. His object 
was to enable his family friends to pass cheerfully and re- 
spectably through an entertainment, which the ordinance of 
marriage justified them in making How lovely and en- 
tirely free from moroseness does his character appear ! 

"At 1, P. M., we reached Tiberias, having had, at inter- 
vals, as we passed over the mountains, several glances of 
the mild and lovely lake, upon whose bosom not an object 
presented itself. The little walled town of Tiberias, upon 
its western edge, looked like the little toy cities which chil- 
dren make of blocks of wood. Its form is quadrangular. 
It is the only inhabited spot of any consequence upon the 
shore of Gennesareth ; and but one solitary tree met oar 
eye without the walls. Beneath the shade of this we were 
glad to shelter ourselves from the burning rays of a meridian 
sun, until our tenls were thrown up. We then went out to 
the hot baths, which the Pasha has fitted up for his soldiers. 
These are a mile south of Tiberias. One very large tank 
receives the water from a spout which proceeds from a 
lion's mouth. The waters are considered highly medicinal 
by the natives. The next morning we rose very early, 
before the mild beams of the morning star had melted away 
into the light of heaven; the peaceful waters of the lake 
reflected its gentle rays, and seemed like a precious remem- 
brance of Him, who not only sailed, but walked upon its 
bosom. Here, too, he invested bis disciples with power to 
become fishers of men. The snowy ridges of Mount Hermon 
formed part of the scenery in the background, and presently 
the lord of day rose from behind the mountain range, and 
we entered the walls, equipped for our day's journey. A 
hasty* ride through its streets was sufficient for our purpose, 
for not half the enclosure is occupied. 

" This was the sixth of May, and we were now going 
towards Safed. We saw it before us during the whole day, 
its situation being uncommonly elevated. At 1, P. M., we 
reached the city* Safed is one of the four sacred etas* <& 



258 MEMOIR OF 

the Jews, and in any of these reside here now. Jerusalem, 
Bethlehem, and Hebron, are the three others. We went 
into the Jewish quarter, as my husband had some books for 
one of their physicians, from Mr. N. While he was making 
his call, I remained near the door, outside, and very soon I 
was surrounded by scores of Jewish women and girls, and a 
few men. A part of them had recently arrived from Poland, 
and could only speak the German language. Some of the 
little girls, having lived in Safed several years, could speak 
Arabic ; which enabled me to hold conversation with them. 
One in particular acted as my dragoman, interpreting my 
Arabic to her countrywomen, in German. The most of 
them Were knitting stockings in European style, which made 
me feel quite at home. I took off my gloves, and standing 
among a crowd in the street, knit a little upon the work of 
half-a-dozen different ones, which gratified them highly. 
I was much struck with the soft and intelligent expression 
of their hazel eyes, which were common to the whole group, 
both male and female. Their complexion is European ; 
and contrasted with the Eastern women, they are fair and 
attractive. 

" We accomplished a fatiguing ascent to a towering cas- 
tle, from whence we had a most extensive and magnificent 
prospect. Hermon, Tabor, the mountains of Gilead, and 
the Sea of Tiberias, form a prominent part of the beautiful 
scenery. The Jews come here in great numbers, to wait 
for the Messiah, and to keep a celebrated feast, at which the 
greatest indecencies and irregularities are practised. The 
feast is solemnized in a neighboring village in honor of a 
celebrated Rabbi, who wrote a cabalistic book, which they 
hold in higher veneration than the Bible. Jews from all 
parts of the world resort thither, bringing with them the 
most expensive garments, embroidered with gold and silver 
which they dip in oil, and having suspended them upon a 
pole, set fire to them; they then lie intoxicated three or 
four days. At the feast of Purim, too, which commemorates 
the deliverance of their nation, through the agency of Esther 



r 

* 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 259 

the queen, they oblige themselves to become so intoxicated 
as not to be able to distinguish between the phrases ' blessed 
be Mordecai, and cursed be Hainan.' Oh ! who can doubt 
the existence of one great enemy of God, who is ingenious 
in devising wickedness, beyond the capacities of mere man ? 

" At 6 the next morning, we- left Safed, and pitched our 
tents that afternoon near the waters of Merom, where there 
was no village. Nearly opposite to this spot, at the foot of 
Mount Herraon, we saw very indistinctly the ruins of a 
castle, which was near the Oesarea Philippi of the Scrip- 
tures, now called Banias. Dan is near the same spot, so 
that although we had not travelled from Dan to Beersheba, 
we had come nearly from Beersheba to Dan. We were 
near the source of the Jordan, which rises in Mount Her- 
mon. Here, at the waters of Merora, Joshua gained a great 
victory over the idolatrous nations of Canaan, though they 
came up against them ' as the sand upon the sea-shore in 
multitude, with horses and chariots very many.' 

" On the next day, between 1 and 2, we stopped near 
Merj Ayoon, or meadow of fountains, so called from the 
number of fountains in the neighborhood. At this village 
nearly the whole population sallied forth to look at us, and 
pleaded for our civility upon the ground that they were 
* all Christians/ which they reiterated again and again. 
Hitherto in our journey the inhabitants had been reserved, 
and the women apparently without much curiosity. But 
as we approached Mount Lebanon the scene was completely 
changed, so that we were like a caravan of wild beasts, to 
the villagers. Mr. Smith talked very plainly with the 
priests. 

" The next day we rose early, and after a ride over moun- 
tains and valleys, we descended into a deep, narrow glen, 
through which runs the Leontes, whose source is in the 
Bukaa, and divides Lebanon from Anti Lebanon. Crossing 
it by a bridge, we breakfasted upon its opposite bank. From 
the steep precipices which overhung our path, sprung forth 
the passion-flower and the most luxuriant dt&^^V\&KK&v. 



260 MEMOIR OF 

I think the latter roust be particularly indigenous to such 
spots, as from the wall of the court of Mr. Whiting's house 
in Jerusalem an elegant white one grows in the same man- 
ner. It takes a graceful turn from the walJ, and shoots up 
erect, apparently requiring np support. 

" You have doubtless noticed that our route home was 
not like the one which we pursued in going to Jerusalem. 
We went by the sea-shore, and returned over rugged moun- 
tain paths. We spent our Sabbath in a spot which 1 shall 
not soon forget. It was a large village, high in the moun- 
tains, called Jezeen, its inhabitants nearly all of them 
Christians. The place of our encampment was romantic 
and delightful in the extreme. Noble walnut trees, copious 
streams, magnificent precipices, all conspired to make the 
spot uncommonly attractive. But I was obliged to be shut 
up in my tent nearly all the time. During the sacred day 
appropriated to rest, the noise and confusion was like that 
of an annual parade upon 'the great plain* in Norwich. 
For myself I had severe struggles of feeling ; I wanted to 
pity these people, and do them good, but I was made so un- 
comfortable by their intrusions, that my sensibilities revolted 
from coming in contact with such a multitude. In an hour 
of social service which we secured to ourselves, I was com- 
forted by the hymns sung, and a sermon of the late Mr. 
Jenkins of Portland"; and the cloud which was thrown over 
my mind vanished. Mr. Smith had a favorable opportu- 
nity to sow some seed of ' the word ' there, I trust. We rose 
at 2 the next morning, and left the village before the in- 
habitants had risen. We passed the former residence of a 
wealthy prince, who, being regarded as rebellious by the 
Emeer, was deposed, his palace demolished, and his head 
cut off. The grounds were extensive and fertile, and the 
ruined palace large. At 1, P. M., we arrived at Der 
el-Komr, (Convent of the Moon,) a large village near the 
residence of the Emeer Besheer, the Prince of Mount Leba- 
non—professedly a Mohammedan, but really a Christian, 
according as the term is used here. His buildings and those 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 261 

of his son are handsome, situated upon the summit of high 
terraced hills. 

" We encamped beyond the town, on an elevated spot, 
where perfect stillness reigned, and not an individual in- 
truded upon us. After our noisy Sabbath at Jezeen, this 
jeemed like a calm after a storm. We now began to feel 
that we were getting home, for it was our last night on the 
road. We had the afternoon before us ; and I began to col- 
lect my thoughts, and make some new resolutions for the 
future, as we were anticipating a change of residence and a 
new family circle. We retired to rest early, and rose at 
midnight to complete our journey. The ride by moonlight, 
among the wild and rugged scenery through which we passed, 
was very interesting. Much of the way was so steep and 
stony, that the old muleteer of whom I have spoken, was 
obliged to lead my donkey till we came to a new road made 
by the Emeer, consisting of broad steps, winding over the 
mountains. W§ breakfasted near a khan, and dined in Bey- 
root, at the table of our kind friend, Mrs. Abbot, the 12th of 
May. We did exercise some gratitude to our kind Preserver, 
I trust ; for he had covered us with ( his wings/ and no harm 
had come nigh us by day or by night." 



«jf 






CHAPTER XIII. 

CORRESPONDENCE HEALTH TRIALS PAST VIEWS OP 

CHRISTIANS ON THE STATE OP THE WORLD LETTER 

TO MISS WILLIAMS RESPONSIBILITIES OF AMERICAN 

CHURCHES. 

It is doubtless proper that missionaries should be contem- 
plated, not only in their labors, cares, and trials, but also in 
their social character and enjoyments ; and in those pleasant 
local circumstances in which Divine Providence places 
them, conducive to their comfort and happiness. If there 
be any Christian in the wide world, to whom a pleasant res- 
idence, and the enjoyments of social life, and of a cultivated 
taste and intellect, are desirable and reasonable, it is the 
missionary. And the Christian at home, of generous sen- 
timents, will rejoice to know that the " laborer " whom his 
contributions are sustaining in a foreign land, finds some 
of the same temporal blessings which are bestowed upon 
himself; and will never take it up as a reproach against him, 
that he finds enjoyment in his field of service. 

Mrs. Smith carried into her missionary life and labors, all 
her taste, mental cultivation, and social habits ; and appeared 
in Syria much as when in America, amidst the pleasant cir- 
cumstances of home and her father's house. And one im- 
portant object of this Memoir will be answered, if it shall 
serve to convince any — who need the conviction — that it 
is possible for a serious, devoted, and useful missionary to be 
as happy as any other Christian. These remarks are made 
with reference to some portions of the present chapter j and 
also to passages which have appeared, or will appear, iu 
others. 

268 



MEMOIR OF MRS. SMITH. 263 

" Betroot, 3vvt 3, *835. 

"My ever-beloved Parents: — You mention the manner 
in which the contents of my letters are made known to 
my friends. It is certainly a very good one, if they da 
not contain much which would be esteemed trifling, ex- 

pt to the beloved family circle. Since I left America, I 
have never allowed myself to be flattered with the thought 
that others would have access to them. I have written as 
freely and simply as if I had been making a visit in Lebanon 
or New London, and I must continue to do the same, Long 
may the period be deferred, when any thing like restraint 
shall characterize our correspondence, or any diminution 
occur of that confiding affection which has been the earthly 
charm of my existence. 

" How good God has been all my life, in giving me so 
many to love me and to be loved by me ! To this I attribute 
the want of jealousy in my disposition, and indeed I some- 
times fear that I appropriate to myself more affection than is 
my portion ; certainly more than I deserve. I am reading 
your little book in course ; that is, taking up the portions 
of Scripture in order, on the Sabbath, as you read and heard 
them. Perhaos we may talk of them in our Father's house 
above. 

"July 16. — Although thus late in the season, through 
the goodness of God my health continues perfect ; and I am 
able to keep school every day, notwithstanding I am in a 
southern clime. I often think of the precious promises con- ' 
tained in the 121st Psalm, especially these words,- ' The 
Lord is thy keeper ; the Lord is thy shade upon thy right 
hand. The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon 
by night. The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil ; he shall 
preserve thy soul. The Lord shall preserve thy going out 
and thy coming in, from this time forth, and even forever 
more.' 

" My school interests me more and more every day, and I 
do not love to think of suspending it even for a few weeks, 
during the hot season. Day before yesterday ^ ^ ^^-&&e\ 



964 MEMOIR OF 

Jewish lady came with her two daughters to the school, and 
begged me to take the youngest as a scholar. The elder 
sister remained also ; her age I cannot tell, but she is a dis- 
creet, intelligent girl, ' in her teens.' Yesterday morning 
they came again, and the mother asked me to teach her 
eldest daughter Italian, and ornamental needlework. I re- 
plied that my cares in the school were at present as much as 
my strength would allow; that my husband was every day 
urging me to suspend the school for a season, but if ad- 
ditional laborers arrived from my country, as I expected, we 
would extend our operations. She answered politely ; and 
furthermore, requested that I would allow her little girl to go 
home before the religious exercises of the school, as ' their 
prayers were of a different kind.' I expressed no surprise 
or displeasure at this, but courteously assured her that it 
would be as she had desired. She then gave me her salams, 
and Vith her other daughter went towards the door, where 
they stopped and conversed several minutes. They then re- 
turned to me, and the Jewess said her elder daughter would 
like to learn Arabic, and to be taught and controlled like the 
other scholars; to which I consented, and they left me. 
Before prayers, I gave them liberty to go home. To-day 
they came, and behaved, as before, sweetly. I told them, 
when we were about to close the school, that they might 
leave. The larger one did not seem inclined to go, and 
said to her sister, ' Will you go or stay ? ' The latter, from 
childish feelings rather than religious prejudices, probably, 
preferred to go, and they left. I think I shall take great 
pleasure in instructing them, for my Saviour's sake. But 
how was I struck with the fact that Moslems, Catholics, and 
Greeks, could remain where He is acknowledged ; while 
that nation, whom with fraternal feelings He denominated 
' his own,' despise and reject him, and cannot endure the 
place where he is worshipped ! 

"Sabbath, July 19. — At our Sabbath school to-day, were 
twenty-eight scholars — twenty-one girls and seven boys. I 
began, some weeks since, to read and explain to my class the 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. v 26£ 

histories of the Old Testament, from the creation. To-day-, 
the lesson was the arrival of Jacob in Haran. The children 
" Beem delighted to find such 'sweet stories,' as they call them, 
in the Bible, and I think it incites them still morejn learn- 
ing to read, , The few who can now Tead a little, commit to 
memory , portions of John's Gospet, from one er two verses to 
forty and more;. 'Your Sabbath school will -excuse me if I 
make a comparison, on this, ground, in favor of our little 
schqol in Beytobt. In committing to memory, these evince 
more perseverance and more exactness, than those of the 
same age whom I had the pleasure to instruct in America. 

f< Jujy 31. — To-day I closed my schooj for the month of 
August, by the distribution of rewards to thirty little girts. 
The American and English Consuls, and a few Arab friends/ 
were present, and expressed much pleasure at the sight of so 
many youn# natives in their clean dress. The invitations 
to friends were unpremeditated, and no exhibition of work 
was made ; a few of the more advanced scholars read a little - 
in the New Testament. 

■ "If it were right arid practicable to obtain any temporal 
blessing by a wish, I would utter one on this anniversary of 
our wedding-day, which would bring you quickly here, my 
dear parents, in sj)ite of age, infirmities, and the broad 
Atlantic. How wefchouli-enjoy a visit from you in this our 
pleasant .house, where, in our affections and our c6mforts, we 
would' make you forget, for a little while, that ybu were on 
missionary ground ! Our house, which we have taken fo'r 
ten years, is large, airy, and commodious ; in which, though 
it is midsummer and a southern cjimate, we .enjoy health 
and are able to pursue all our occupation's. We have a fine 
breeze from the sea nearly all the time; and at night we 
sleep as quietly and soundly as two little hearty children, 
who are without responsibility and care. Yet we' have much 
of both these. . In addition to "the superintendence o£the 
press, my husband preaches every Sabbath in Arabic, and 
more than every other Sabbath in ' English, besides attend- 
ing the native Sabbath school. I attend cousta&xV^ >&fc W 

12 



2Q6 MEMOIR OF 

male school from 8 to 11, A. M. Yesterday I had twenty- 
eight -girls. 

" You would perhaps like spate description of our resi- 
dence. It belongs to one ' of the wealthiest and most re- 
spectable families in Beyropt ; is situated in the midst of 
gardens of mulberry trees, retired from the road, yet very 
accessible. It is built of stone, with a flat roof; and beside 
the rooms* of the press, has mpon the lower floor, a kitchen, 
store-room, lumber-room, servants' room, and bath ; all of -i 
which, surround a large covered court, opening upon a pretty 
little flower garden, between which and the court is "an awn- 
ing of grape vines, whose Luxuriant fruit is. beginning to "en- 
rich our social board. Upon the second story, which We 
occupy, are a large dining-room, a bed-room, study, room 
for Raheel, my little girl, and two rooms beside are now 
being built. These occupy the sides of a beautiful open 
court, where we can sit and gaze upon the illimitable sea 
which stretches out before us; and every evening we may 
see the sun sink behind its peaceful waters. The morning 
and evening skies here are brilliant beyond description. 
When ' bright aurora streaks the eastern sky,' before the sun 
shows his head above Mount Lebanon, we rise from our un- 
disturbed slumbers, and after a season of retirement, Mr. 
Smith works in the garden an hour, which greatly promotes 
his health and cheerfulness; and when he comes up at 7 
o'clock to prayers, he seldom fails to bring me a rose, jes- 
samine, or carnation pink, to add to the choice bouquet upon 
my work-table. The flower garden contains orange, lemon, 
and pomegranate trees in full bearing; and behind the house 
is a garden somewhat larger, containing apple, peach, plum, 
apricot, and mulberry trees. 

" My letter, some might say, is not a very missionary one; 
but ybu can read the intelligence of our operations in the 
Missionary Herald, while in that you learn nothing about 
our house, family aitfangernerits, &,c, and these are what 
friends wish to know. In reading my description of our 
situation, you must remember that this is the dry season of 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 267 

the year, and that next winter, when the porous walls admit 
the ram and damp, we shall perhaps sometimes think of your 
superior comforts. In -taking this house, we had in view 
accommodating the press, as well as' promoting our own 
health ; and we often speak of the overruling Providence 
which has furnished us with so pleasant a spot. Last year, 
you recollect, we lived in one room" at the mountains, where 
we were favored with nightly visits from jackals.*' ' 

» 

i. 

On 'the eighth of August, Mrs* Smith was gratified with 
intelligence of the arrivakat Smyrna of the friend she had 
invited to come and. assist in the schooh." She thus writes' 
to her : — . 



"My bejoved" Sister ; — 'It is but a very few' weeks since 
I Jearned the result of my appeal tp the Secretaries at the 
Rooms, and to • yourself; though I c6nfidentl y expected a 
favorable "result, I cannot tell why. I car/ scarcely realize 
that you are already among us/ "as it were, and I long to 
welcome you td my .heart, my home, 'and'. my labors. My 
own health is perfectly good at present; thanks to a kind 
Preserver. -On Saturday I closed my school for the month 
of August, in obedience to my husband. It was increasing 
every day in nurabeTs, and I would gladly have continued It; 
but the course, doubtless, was a prudent one. Last Sabbath 
we had at our Sabbath school, forty-six scholars, a fourth, 
of whom were Moslems. Could you<;ome with the gift of' k 
tongues, how much we' would do ! As it ;is, you can' aid me 
very much; for I felt, the last .few days of my school, 
that one head and a pair of hands were hardly sufficient for 
forty untutored Arabs. 

" I sappose you know that you" are coming among an ex- 
ceedingly social people. At all hours we are subject to 
visits, from persons of every rank and age. The Syrians, 
often remind pie of Solomon's remark, that 'the talk of the 
lips tendeth to penury;' But we have reason to love them, 
an,d do love them ; and I think aur influence *\&oa.% ^Bassa^ 



308 MEMOIR OF 

increasing. They think much of hospitality and courtesy, 
and, were it not that they attribute some of our deficiencies 
to ignorance of their language, our New England sincerity 
would appear like bluntness. 

"My husband and I" have, unitedly and individually re- 
membered you at the throne of grace. In this I have taken 
great pleasure. Having so recently passed through similar 
scenes, I felt thai I knew just what you wanted during the 
past few months; whether you were preparing to leave our 
country, or were already upon the restless ocean. On the 
Sabbath, especially, have my sympathies and prayers carried 
me to the very threshold of your heart. Dear friend, for jthe 
present, adieu. God grant us a happy meeting, erelong.'* ." 

"August 12. — There has been a seizure of Christian, 
youth to-day, for the manufactories at Acre; and great 
alarm has pervaded the. city. We were told this morning 
that thirty refugees were in and around our house. When 
such events occur, as has been the case frequently of late, 
mothers and sisters come to us to beg protection for sons and 
brothers. I thought much to-day of our happy land, where 
every one can sit unmolested ' under his own vine and fig 
tree.' I believe I have told you that our trials here are 
mostly of a moral nature, because there is little integrity 
either in servants, employers, or children ; whether they be 
native or foreign. In consequence of this, I sometimes feel, 
' Oh that I could fly away and be at rest ! ' But I have long 
been accustomed to a degree of watchfulness over the morals 
of those around me. in consequence of the solicitude which 
I used to feel for the.younger branches of our own family in 
America. 

" That which adds greatly to the trial <>f coming in con- 
tact with deceit and unfaithfulness here is, that falsehood and 
a smooth tongue are constantly employed to cover every act 
of deception. ( Ma fe ne ikzub, abadan? (it is not in me 
ever to utter a falsehood,) is in every mouth, of both old and 
young; if you utter a suspicion or reproof, their loquacity 



■« 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 1269 

will far outrun you- in the utterance of moral sentiments 
respecting the. guilt and shame of dishonesty. Oh ! hasten 
in the multiplying of laborers for this dark land; and let 
none imagine that they are doing more than they ought, or 
that they are even especially self-denying and meritorious, 
if they give their sons or their daughters, their brothers or 
their sisters, for the purpose of scattering the dense clouds 
of the moral atmosphere. I do not know what led my 
thoughts into this train ; but for several days I have been 
thinking, that, when Faith, for instance, was a young guS, 
and balls .and cotillion parties, and such irrational amuse- 
ments, occupied nearly all the time; when many patents 
were gratified with having their children admired for per- 
sonal, beauty and accomplishments, not a ray of spiritual 
light had then penetrated the darkness of this Mediterranean 
country. Every, soul' was enveloped therein, ^and not a 
solitary Christian raised a ringer to help them. Perhaps a 
conversation which I held with our beloved Christian brother 
Tannoos, led me to these reflections. He is nearly forty 
years of age, and was giving me some account of his reli- 
gious experience. He alluded to a friend of his childhood 
and youth, yet a Papist, with whom he used to have much in- 
tercourse; and my imagination carried me vividly baek to< 
those days, when these two boys, hand in hand, rambled upon 
Mount Lebanon ; and I thought, if Christians had only then 
commenced the performance of duty which for ages had 
been neglected, a generation of enlightened, educated, and 
perhaps pious people, would now be on the stage to bless 
our eyes, and to aid us in our toils. Oh ! let us leave this 
legacy to those who are to succeed us. 

" August 24. — In riding to-day, I went towards a quarry, 
where — as a fountain was near by, and it was 'the time 
that women go out to draw water ' — a company of young 
girls, bearing jars upon their shoulders, were standing upon 
the brow of a deep excavation, and talking of the dead. I 
stopped and made inquiries of them, and they told me that 
this morning- a man was at work below, when the ^x\!cw^t&> 



270 MEMOIR OF 

above came suddenly upon him, and he died, and they-buiied 
him immediately. I was a stranger to Ihem all, and was in 
haste; yet I could not forbear saying to them, ' Hear me a 
little — this is a lesson to us — we may be near our own 
death, and let us be prepared.' They answered, as usual, 
very piously, but doubtless without the slightest feeling. 
Oh, what a mournful thing is death, in this dark land Land 
yet^it apparently excites no solemnity. 

^August 25.-* On Saturday evening our market man 
came to me, for the purpose of my reckoning with him, as I 
do every day. I had repeatedly informed him that I did not 
like to occupy myself in this way on Saturday evening. I 
took occasion to mention the habit in which I had been ed- 
ucated, which was somewhat customary in our country, of 
suspending work on this evening. But said he, ' Signora, 
y oat- countrymen: work on board ship on the Sabbath ; for I 
saw. them on board the man-of-war, sewing and. doing all 
manner of work/ I then told him that Christians in name, 
and Christians in heart, with us, were widely different ; but 
I answered him with a sigh, for I thought-*- 'Oh! what a 
"blessing our country would be to the world, were all her 
sons consistent and uniform in their adherence to the com- 
mands of God!' 

'* Mr. Coster has finished the drawing of our house, which 
is entirely satisfactory. * I enclose an outline of the building, 
which I copied for the purpose of giving you a description 
of its internal localities. And now, my dear father, I am 
not going to give you the sketch outright, that is, without an 
equivalent. What do you think is my price? — It is your 
miniature, which I ask in return. You will not refuse met 
Mr. C. will not allow us to pay him any thing for his trouble. 
He is to commence to-morrow a sketch of Beyroot and its 
environs — of which he has promised us a copy." 

" Beyroot, August 20. 
"My dear Miss Williams: — I think of you every .day, 
and pray for you that you .may have patience, wisdom, and 






MRS. SARAH. L. SMITH. 271 

preparation for four work. The best preparation will be, a 
heart warmly attached to the Saviour, with a determination 
to lose yourself in his service and glory. Have you not 
thought that missionaries are in (Sanger of placing too high 
a value upon the sacrifice which they make, in consequence 
of the sympathy, and perhaps I may say, pity, .with which 
they are regarded by those whom they leave behind? I 
long to see the churches at home feel that they are only dis- 
charging an obligation to the Redeemer, when they send 
their best, their fairest, their most beloved to distant re- 
gions to declare his name. Would that the offering which 
my friends have made were ' without blemish ' and without 
spot.' 

"I can hardly imagine just hovf you have been employed 
in Smyrna, though I doubt not usefully* The time wU] not 
be lost to you, as you will have acquired some degree of. 
familiarity with Eastern manners and customs ; and learning, 
as you will, by the sight of the eyes, the great work to be 
done in transforming this land from the government of 
Satan to that of Christ, it will perhaps add steadiness and 
energy to your faith. While you will doubtless .exclaiia. 
mentally, ' Who is sufficient for these things 1 r you will rely 
more implicitly upon the arm of Omnipotence. Permit me 
to suggest a thought. Perhaps those who have been for two 
or three, or more years on missionary ground, from their 
contest with a foreign language, and the-paralyzing pf active 
efforts, in which they were absorbed at home, are in danger 
of suffering too great a reaction in their own feelings, and 
consequently of modifying those of new comers. Now, 1 
would recommend that every missionary, fresh from that 
garden of the Lord in which we were planted, should exer- 
cise a degree of independent Christian feeling when he is 
transferred to a foreign soil ; or rather that he should take no 
standard beside the word of God. There the balance is 
rightly preserved, and is applicable to every possible situation 
and circumstance. It is to do what we can with our might, 
and rest the consequences upon an almighty Agent. TVv^. 



'V* 



272 MEMOIR OF 

He is at work, and will one day renovate the whole face of 
this land, I have no more doubt, than that the voice of the 
natural heavens will continue to be heard wherever there is 
' speech or language/ and that their line will continue to go 
forth throughout the earth. 

" I have been so impatient to conquer the Arabic, that I 
have but just commenced the Italian. I was induced to take 
up the latter during my present vacation, from the fact that 
a young Jewess, who has recently entered the school, wishes 
to acquire it 

"Since writing the above, we learn that the vessel for 
Smyrna will be detained here for a few days. Missionaries 
must not allow their hearts to be made sick by hope deferred ; 
so I will fain make the best of our protracted separation. In 
God's own good time he will bring us together. We have 
made ' a little chamber upon the, wall,' and shall set for you 
there ' a bed, and a table, and a stool, and a candlestick/ 
that when you come to us you may 'turn in thither.' 2 
Kings iv. 10." 

*' August 21. — I cannot tell you how much like a par- 
adise America appears, as I view it from this land of dark- 
ness. And yet it seems to me as if its blessed inhabitants 
were dreaming, as it were, over a lost and guilty world. I 
know there are many who pray, and labor, and give, for its 
renovation ; but are there many whose sole object it is to 
live especially and steadily for this end ? I ask to be informed 
whether any great changes have taken place in two years, 
since I bade a last farewell to the shores of my native land. 
The subject magnifies in my estimation every day, and I see 
not that any parent can consistently set before Jiis child any 
object of pursuit but the diffusion of Christianity. The fact 
that God continues to bless the delinquent, and even to over- 
rule their delinquencies for the accomplishment of his pur- 
poses, is no evidence that they are pleasing to him. I have 
often seen great good grow out of my faults and sins, which 
apparently might not have occurred but for them ; yet con- 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 273 

science reproached me, and God's law condemned me. So 
the churches of America, and the large, refined, and de- 
lightful social circles which there exist, may be watered, 
blessed, and made happy; there may be prayer, praise," the 
sweet communion of saints, and the endearing enjoyments 
of domestic bliss; and yet God, who sees all the darkness of 
other lands, may be offended with his people — ministering 
angels may wonder at their selfishness; the eternal happiness 
of myriads may be sacrificed ; and a less brilliant crown be 
worn by themselves in heaven." 

"August 31. — l>o you not often feel oppressed, my dear 
Mrs. Temple, with the thought of what a dark and sinful 
land this is 1 After a precious Sabbath has passed, in which 
I have beheld its abuse and profanation, my heart sickens as 
I begin the labors of Monday morning. How slow is the 
progress of light I How many will have their eternal doom 
fixed, before these countries are evangelized ! And, then, 
how weak our faith, how cold our love, how lukewarm our 
zeal ! Sometimes I think it must be a new race of mission- 
aries who will have the honor of seeing great things here — 
such as can look away more entirely from things temporal, 
like the worthies of old. Let us pray much for each other." 



12* 



CHAPTER XIV. 

SUMMER RESIDENCE AT AALEIH PERSONAL ENDEAVORS FOR 

THE GOOD OP INDIVIDUALS DRUZES ■ — ALARMS AMONG 

THE NATIVES IBRAHIM PASHA CASE OP AN ENGLISH 

WOMAN —^SORROWS OF A MOHAMMEDAN WIFE ARRIVAL 

OF MISS WILLIAMS VIEWS OF MISSIONARY LIFE — MR. 

SMITH'S LABORS FURTHER HINTS ON MISSIONARY QUALP- 

FICATIPNS — FEELINGS RESPECTING HER PARENTS. 

Mrs. Smith spent three or four weeks of the warm 
season of 1835 with her husband at Aaleih, one of the 
villages on Mount Lebanon. Here she devoted herself, 
with increased diligence, to personal efforts for the spiritual 
benefit of those among whom she resided ; especially the 
Druzes. There was obviously a steady increase of her love 
for the missionary work; and she delighted to devise and 
execute plans by which its great objects might be promoted. 

" Aaleih, Sept. 8. 

" Our fast and concert, yesterday, were solemn and profit- 
able. In view of the absence of God's Spirit for several 
years, in which no conversions have taken place among us, 
we were led to examine into the obstacles which have been 
in^the way, both in our own hearts, and lives, and in our mode 
of operation ; and we desired to renew the dedication of our- 
selves to our work, and to seek with more earnestness that 
wisdom which cometh from above. I resolved this morning, 
that during our stay in this village, I would endeavor to 
rouse the conscience of at least one individual, every day. 
Consequently, after breakfast, I walked down a long, steep, 

S74 



MEMOIR OF MRS. SMITH, 275 

and storiy path, into the ' Christian quarter ' of the village, 
to make one or 4wo calls/ 1 

i 

Mrs. Smith availed herself of several opportunities for free 
conversation with females on the subject of religion, with 
whom she met in this excursion. On the supply of the 
spiritual wants of the people, she remarks — i 

" Could a missionary take up his permanent abode in any 
one of the villages of Mount Lebanon, and live and labor 
as he ought, I am confident that in a few years he would 
reap an abundant harvest. Oh, when will the churches be 
so liberal as to give a spiritual shepherd, to collect flocks 
now scattered upon the mountains 1 

" September 10. — Yesterday Mr. Smith was absent 
nearly all day upon a little missionary tour ; and this morning 
he left me again, <expecting to be absent two or three days. 
It is a self-denying duty, but it is duty ; and if a dozen men 
could come from our country with the gift of tongues, they 
could step directly into a field ' white unto the harvest.' After 
dinner I went into the Christian quarter to make some calls. 
As I was entering it, a family invited me in, pretending that 
they were Christians, when, as I afterwards learnt, they were 
Druzes. However, I had a plain, serious conversation with 
them. This evening I invited to prayers the woman in 
whose house we are, and her children. They are Druzes, 
but the most simple, inoffensive, diminutive little family you 
ever met. - 

" September 14. — Mr. S. returned on Saturday, at noon, 
after a fatiguing ride. He found some favorable opportuni- 
ties for religious conversation ; but he says that he thinks 
Satan employs filth and vermin to deter missionaries from 
seeking intercourse with his subjects. Missionaries who are 
stationary can enjoy cleanliness and comforts in their own 
habitations, however humble they may be ; but those who 
itinerate, ' without purse or scrip,' depending upon the ac- 
commodations which the country affords, have actual experi- 



£76 MEMOIR OF 

ence of the self-denial which our Saviour and his followers 
exercised. I can readily imagine what groups surrounded 
the benevolent Saviour in his wanderings; whom his 
disciples sometimes wished to drive from his presence, but 
never with his consent. 

"September 17. — This evening six Druzes were present 
at family prayers, one of them a woman whom I have had 
repeated opportunities to address on the subject of religion. 
I believe that she is solicitous respecting her eternal welfare. 
My dear parents, you cannot imagine what a spring it would 
give to our feelings, should only one Druze become a 
true convert to the Lord Jesus Christ. Think of it when 
you pray for us, and remember distinctly this ignorant, 
-benighted, and perhaps idolatrous sect. 

"September 18. — This morning I walked out before 
breakfast, and directed my steps towards the Christian quar- 
ter, for the purpose of conversing with some of the females. 
I first entered a Druze graveyard. A woman was upon a 
mulberry tree gathering leaves. Advancing towards her, I 
inquired respecting the dead who reposed near by. She 
asked me why I was walking alone. I told her that I loved 
to walk at an early hour, before my mind became occupied 
with care, and meditate upon God and his works. I sought 
to draw her mind towards eternal things, particularly appeal- 
ing to her maternal feelings, and the duties which that 
-relation involved. She was a Druze, and talked most 
fluently and piously ; perhaps a thought may have been 
lodged in her breast that she cannot thrust from her. Two 
reflections are suggested to my mind this evening : — one is, 
that perhaps there is a providence in my meeting with a 
Druze so frequently, when I am seeking a nominal Chris- 
tian ; the other, that pious language being so universal in 
this country, we must trust more to the influence of our ex- 
ample than our words, upon those around us. 

" Mr. and Mrs. Pease went to Korneil this morning, where 
is a coal mine, and where the wife of the head laborer, an 
English woman! is in the last stages of the consumption, but 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 277 

manifests no solicitude respecting her future state. We 
have had an especial female prayer-meeting for her, as she 
is without hope, going into eternity. 

"September 20. — Mr. Smith, has preached again this 
evening, and I think more were present than on the former 
occasion. The subject of the discourse was regeneration. 
The audience were quiet and attentive to this new and im- 
portant exhibition of truth. Since the brethren have no 
church here to strengthen them by their prayers, let your 
fervent supplications call down what we jnpst need — the in- 
fluences of the Holy Spirit. After meeting, I had a few 
words of conversation with Mrs. Dodge's servant, an old 
woman who has lived much with her. She told me that she 
felt as if her heart was changed, and I cannot but hope it 
may be so. 

" Since returning to our room, I have read a chapter in 
' Martha/ to Mr. Smith — the one containing a description 
of natural scenery, in which she became much absorbed on 
a certain evening ; and as the writer sat beside her, watching 
the emotions of her soul depicted in her countenance, she 
turned to him and exclaiiried, ' Brother ! ' That one word 
awakened in my breast such powerful and tender associa- 
tions as to choke my utterance, and I was obliged to stop, 
and wipe the falling tears before I could proceed. I had so 
much enjoyment with my own dear brothers, and received 
from them so much affection and kindness, that my recol- 
lections of the fraternal relation are exceedingly touching 
and unalloyed. 

" September 21. — It is two years to-day since we sailed 
from America. Iti prayer, my husband returned thanks for 
all our mercies, and especially that God had permitted us to 
enter upon a work that we love — a work that we prize 
above all others. My heart responded to the sentiment 
fully. May we see many such anniversaries together ; and 
be permitted to offer the same thanksgiving. 

" Will you pray that we may have wisdom to guide our 
affairs with discretion? Our establishment is large, and we 



278 MEMOIR OF 

must have persons to serve us ; but we Would not forget, in 
our intercourse with them, that they are among those whose 
eternal interest we came to seek." 

" Beyroot, September 27. — We reached our homes in 
safety, about mid-day, on Wednesday. 

"This morning, after our few Sabbath-day cares were 
disposed of, I went down to the kitchen on an errand ; 
as I reached the bottom of the stairs, I beheld on each side 
a row of Moslems, fourteen in all, seated in perfect silence, 
who had fled hither for refuge ; a report being in circulation 
that orders had again come for the seizure of soldiers. I 
uttered, in Arabic, an exclamation of surprise ; when they 
all smiled upon me, and gave me their salams. The fear 
proved to be groundless, as the Pasha had only ordered the 
soldiers already enlisted to depart suddenly, without knap- 
sacks, to a place on the borders of the Bukaa, where Ibrahim 
Pasha is at present. 

" As we went to chapel, we met a company of women, 
who were crying and shrieking at the departure of husbands, 
sons, and brothers. Cowper says, 

4 My eax is pained, 
My soul is sick, with every day's report 
Of wrong and outrage with which earth is filled/ 

But alas ! how would his tender soul have shuddered at the 
sight of this ! With more pathos, if possible, would he have 
exclaimed, 

' Oh, for a lodge in some vast wilderness ! ' 

" September 29. — Yesterday I commenced my school 
again, with twenty scholars; which for the first day was a 
good number. Mrs. Whiting has ten little Moslem girls in 
Jerusalem, and the promise of more. 

"October 5. — Monthly Concert and Fast. — Yesterday 
being our communion season, I was explaining to my little 
Druze girl the nature and object of the ordinance which 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 279 

■ j • 

she was about to witness for the first time; of which a 
Druze child is perhaps as ignorant as a heathen. Indeed 
the Druzes are supposed to be idolaters themselves; though 
perhaps few, except the initiated, know the fact, or actually 
worship images. I did not expect, in the first attempt, to 
give her very clear ideas respecting the mystery of the 
atonement ; but I repeated to her the words of our Saviour 
to his disciples, when he instituted the sacrament ; and as 
I employed the first person, her feelings became consider- 
ably interested, and with the utmost simplicity she exclaimed, 
• Selamatik,' that is, * Peace to you,' which is a universal 
compliment among the Arabs, if one is complaining of ill 
health or sorrow in his own person. I mention this to show 
you that we have to tfeach the very first principles, and to 
feed 'with milk, and not with meat. 1 Blessed be God, it is 
his office - 

* To pour fresh life in every part, 
And new create the whole.' 

"October 21. — We have dismissed our Maltese servant. 
He was in many respects useful, but he had begun to feel 
above his place; and being disposed to go with Mr. and 
Mrs. Bird, we cheerfully dismissed him. When about lo 
leave us, I told him that I had one thing only to say to him ; 
I wished to inform him why I had not placed more con- 
fidence in him — that from the first I had discovered that he 
had no regard for truth. He wept, and begged me to enter 
into particulars; but I declined. As he turned to go 
down the stairs, his usual erect form and firm step gave 
place to the cringing movement of the Maltese of the island, 
the first beings whom I saw on missionary ground. The 
recollection of the feelings which overcame me when I first 
beheld his pitiable and contemptible countrymen, rushed 
upon me, and I was obliged to struggle with my emotions. 

" About a fortnight since there was great fear among the 
mountaineers, and one family begged us to take their most 
valuable articles home for safe keeping. The woman took 



280 MEMOIR OF 

off the gold from her head, and made a bundle of her beat 
clothes; they also tied up a few articles of plate, and the 
man came with us and left them in our house. He pro- 
fessed to be a Protestant, though he gave no evidence of 
piety. Such circumstances show the confidence which is 
reposed in us. 

"I mentioned the refugee Druzes. Our house is sur- 
rounded bj the habitations of this sect. A few mornings 
since, we saw stretched upon the sands near us a murdered 
man; but no one could give any account of this deed of 
darkness, except that on the previous evening he was at a 
dram shop, in a state of intoxication. In consequence of 
this, several of the neighboring Druzes were seized and 
imprisoned, which caused others to flee to our house. 
Our room at evening prayers has been filled for several 
nights. One morning I had nine attendants, who sheltered 
themselves under the wing of me and my little donkey, on 
my way to school. 

"October 24. — For several days Ibrahim Pasha has 
been a near neighbor of ours, having come to Beyroot for 
a season, and taken up his residence at the house of a rich 
Moslem. Mr. Smith called upon him with our Consul. 
He says that he is a large, jolly, laughing, cunning man, 
with a very penetrating eye. He was principally occupied 
at the time in watching the movements of his courtiers, who 
were playing chess. 

" October 29. — I mentioned in my journal from Aaleih 
that the wife of an Englishman who works in the coal mines 
at Korneil was going to the grave, with a rapid consump- 
tion. A week or two since she was brought to the city. 
On Sunday, after service, I called to see her. Learning 
from her that she did not expect to recover, I asked how 
6he felt in view of exchanging worlds. ' Happy,' said she, 
' perfectly happy.' « May I inquire,' said I, ' what is the 
ground of your happiness?' 'I have always obeyed my 
Saviour's laws ; have been very attentive to the religious 
duties of the family, and of my church. I have never done 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 281 

harm to any one.' At this reply my heart shuddered. I 
said to myself, ( Poor woman, though born in a land of light, 
your hope of heaven, is not better than that of the deluded 
natives of this dark land.' I thought how innumerable are 
the ways which Satan has devised to keep mankind from 
resting on the only true, foundation. I almost burst into 
tears. I felt that I must be faithful, for her time was short. 
I remarked that ' I was religiously educated too, but there 
came a time when I realized that something was necessary 
which I had not experienced, and so it was with Paul.' 
I then preached to her Jesus Christ and his atonement, and 
pegged her to review the subject with great seriousness, in 
consideration of the solemn event immediately before her. 
Yesterday, while in school, Dr. Whitely came and begged 
me to go and see her again ; said that her end was rapidly 
approaching ; that she had related to him my conversation 
with her, telling .him that it affected her deeply ; and he 
thought she expressed sentiments more evangelical. At 
mid-day, therefore, when my school closed, I went to her. 
She was much changed, and could scarcely -articulate in- 
telligibly, yet was in perfect possession of her faculties. 
She told me that my remarks on Sunday gave her a great 
shock, and she now felt that her reliance was wholly on 
Jesus Christ, and disclaimed all personal merit. She felt 
no wish to recover, but was perfectly happy in the prospect 
of rest and holiness with her Saviour. God only knows her 
real state. Her case is left in , the usual uncertainty of 
death-bed experiences. 

41 Sabbath Evening, November 1. — To-day we have had 
our second storm, the first having occurred about ten days 
since. Both were violent and accompanied with thunder 
and lightning. My nerves are becoming accustomed to the 
tremendous peals and vivid flashes of a Mediterranean thun- 
der-storm. It is sublime, and at first terrifying, to watch 
the lightning's play over the deep blue sea ; and during the 
livelong night listen to the thunder's roar as it reverberates 
through the range of Mount Lebanon, 



283 MEMOIR OF 

"On Sabbath, dear father. I think of you more than 
usual. How are your Sabbaths ? Precious as ever, 1 trust ; 
and fitting you for one long, glorious Sabbath, which 1 
believe we shall spend together. I remember that when I 
lived under your smiles, you appeared to enjoy these days 
of rest exceedingly. I find it quite another thing to be the 
mistress of a family, from what it was to be a daughter in a 
father's house. The former station involves a thousand 
cares, of which in the other I had no knowledge. And in 
this land too, which furnishes no external aid, but on the 
contrary every thing to impede the progress of moral in- 
fluence, the spirits sometimes sink beneath the weight of 
responsibility. However, I love to think that the Saviour 
pleased not himself, even on the Sabbath : so should I re- 
joice to give the whole seven days to him and to my fellow- 
beings. 

"November 4. — This evening Mr. Smith has com- 
menced a weekly religious meeting, expressly for the 
Druzes, at which a number were present. I beg your 
prayers, especially in reference to it; for I believe that 
God has some chosen ones among this hitherto unprom- 
ising class. 

" This morning, very early, a little Mohammedan woman 
came, and bringing me a nosegay, sat beside me a moment, 
with more than usual dejection in her countenance ; — then 
suddenly rising and kissing my hand, she said, sorrowfully, 
with her face half veiled, ' Can you give me any medicine 
for my eye ? ' Supposing her to be afflicted with the ophthal- 
mia, the universal disease of the natives, I said, 'Does your 
eye pain you ? ' ' No/ said she, ' but for several years 
something has been growing upon it, and for one year I 
have not been able to see with that eye;' and she added, 
' Ahmed (that is, her husband) says, if I cannot see, he shall 
send me away from him.' Poor woman ! my heart ached 
for her, and I promised to consult Dr. Whitely in reference 
to her case. Such is the kindly nature of the religion of 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 283 

Mohammed ! How effectually it tends to overthrow the 
plan of Jehovah's government ! 

"November 9. — A company of Druzes were at prayers, 
as usual, to-night. Poor beings ! I really think that this 
portion of them, who are called ' SJcitt,' and are scarcely 
acknowledged by their own sect, are more ignorant and im- 
penetrable than the veriest heathen. 

" I have had a pleasant and prosperous day in my duties. 
It being the first of my keeping school since the new ar- 
rangement of our meals, I had no occasion to hurry in the 
morning *o have marketing done; and to give directions for 
dinner, and to hasten' from school to see that it was properly 
prepared.- 

" November 19. — -Mr. Smith has gone down to the Laz- 
aretto to bring Miss Williams to our house. I am alone 
and waiting to receive her. L have solemn and deep feel- 
ings- at the thought of her coming, and my heart goes forth 
towards her as to a sister. Will you pray that we may prove 
messengers of mercy to our degraded sisters here ? 

"November 27. —One week yesterday I had the pleasure 
of welcoming to my Syrian home the dear sister for whom I 
wrote, not without trembling, a year ago last May. She is 
well, cheerful, and quite happy in the little apartment 
appropriated to her. I almost envy her the quietness and 
freedom from care which she enjoys ,* and am reminded of 
those days when I could shut myself for hours together in 
my room in Norwich, and the family and the world go on 
just as well without me. Now, I nevter think of locking my. 
door except before light in the morning and again in the 
evening. I rise early, and thus have an opportunity to re- 
flect that I am hastening to eternity, and that my own soul 
must be fitted for it. But the remainder of the time it is 
all business, and absorbing, distracting care. I need not 
inform you how happy and grateful I am for the safe arrival 
of Miss Williams. Many thanks to ray dear friends for 
Iheir affectionate remembrance of me, and for the tokens of 
love received. But of the flowers, and the sweet ^Mitx^ 



284 MEMOIR OF 

accompanying them, what shall I say? A flood of tears 
was the reception given to them, and told me how my heart 
yet clings to 

4 The sweet remembrances of former years.' 

• • • • • 

4 To that loved scene, where peaceful years 
In calm retirement flew ; 
Where deep afflictions, trials, cares, 
Came but as angels, unawares.* 

"November 28. — Saturday. — To-day is the season 
when I especially remember you, my dear Sarah, at the 
throne of grace; and my prayer is, that you may be an 
eminently holy and devoted Christian, and amid all the 
attractions of your favored lot, may rise superior to earthly 
good and common attainments ; and in the circle in which 
you move, bear others onward and upward by your own 
elevated example. That sweet little Peter, how tender are 
my feelings towards him ! You say he uses ' some foreign 
language.' Perhaps it is Arabic ; if so, he will be qualified 
to come to Syria ! Some one has informed me, or I have 
dreamed it, that you have a little daughter. Give her a 
sweet kiss from me, and teach her to love an unknown 
aunt. Miss Williams — who has now for a week cheered 
our dwelling — was much gratified by her visit to you. She 
says that Edward's fraternal attentions reminded her of her 
own dear brother, who is next in age to herself. We can 
talk together with much sympathy of the tenderness of a 
brother's love. Say to aunt Faith, that I love and sym- 
pathize with and pray for her and hers. I often try to 
supplicate the grace of God in behalf of Jedediah and 
Joshua. Oh ! it is a great thing to be really a child of 
God — to have these depraved hearts changed ; — and I 
cannot but fear that many of the dear youth in America, 
were they removed from the influences and restraints that 
surround them, would be surprised to find how readily they 
would fall back to the world. I feel much on this subject 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 285 

since I have become expatriated, as it were. The conflicts 
and perplexities which a missionary experiences, are cal- 
culated to try his soul and show him of what spirit he is. 
I thought that I was farther advanced in sanctification than 
I have found myself to be ; and the effort necessary to main- 
tain a warfare against sin is increased fourfold. Give my 
kind regards to Mrs. Ewen ; * and will brother present her 
with five dollars from me, and charge the same to my ac- 
count ? ' Thine own and thy father's friend, forsake not.' " 

" Beyroot, Nov. 30. 
"My very dear Brother and Sister: — I know of none, 
except the members of my own family, who have a higher 
claim upon my affections and my time, than yourselves; 
and none that I remember with more unfeigned satisfaction. 
I love to think of you both, as the ever-watchful and paternal 
friends of my dear husband. I love to bring to mind the 
pleasant yet sorrowful hours which I passed under your 
roof; and to think of your dear children. Two years have 
doubtless made changes in the youthful trio ; and they have 
changed us, at least me. My home, my interests, my as- 
sociations, my language, have all become foreign ; and my 
lot (unless some great political convulsion takes place) is 
fixed, until I exchange my earthly abode for that beyond the 
grave. In looking back upon these two annual revolutions, 
I have much for which to be grateful, and great occasion 
for humiliation. While every important want has been sup- 
plied, and innumerable comforts and refinements added, 
which I never anticipated as a missionary ; I have scarcely 
passed one quiet American day since I parted from you. 
From the hour that I lost sight of my native shore, I have 
been fully aware that I had thrown myself into the wide and 
wicked world, and forever deprived myself of the moral 
repose and security which my once favored home had fur- 
nished. But I have never for a moment regretted the step 

# An aged woman who was her nurse in childhood. 



286 MEMOIR OF 

which I took. ' There remaineth a rest/ which, if permit- 
ted to partake of it, I shall enjoy more highly, for the labors 
and disquietudes, and the new and deeper views of spiritual 
truths which this expatriation has occasioned. I suppose 
you often desire to know what we are doing, and how we 
are living ; and what are our daily hopes and fears in regard 
to the one great object which has torn us from you. Your 
dear brother has his hands and heart full. The preparation 
of books for the press is an arduous and responsible task ; 
beside which, the entire Arabic preaching, the Sabbath 
school, and the English service every alternate Sabbath, 
rest upon him. Foreign and native visitors occupy many 
of his hours ; and he has just been telling me, that this day, 
now closed, has been completely broken by miscellaneous 
occupations, the consequence of repeated interruptions. 
He has, however, a most delightful study, in the most airy 
and conspicuous part of the house, looking forth upon the * 
waters of the azure sea, and the verdure of the variegated 
landscape which intervenes. 

" December 5. — Having risen, as usual, some time before 
dawn, I stepped out towards the front of the court, to glance 
at the prospect before me. The distant sea, forming a semi- 
circle around me, and sending to my ears its unbroken 
roar, powerfully associated my thoughts with the murmur of 
your falls, to which we so often listened in my dear native 
place. The snowy peak of Lebanon, rising magnificently in 
the east, was rendered more conspicuous by the rays of the 
full moon, descending to the horizon in the opposite west, 
while her beams, reflected by the sea beneath, gave a strong 
outline to the objects upon the intermediate shore, especially 
to two or three points which rose gracefully above. Two 
finely-formed clouds and the brilliant stars, completed the 
soft and charming scene. I thought of that other world, 
unmarred by sin, where the Author of so much beauty has 
prepared inconceivable glories for his redeemed people ; and 
my soul bounded at the thought. 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 287 

" December 8. — The return of our Monthly Concert and 
Fast is a precious day to us. I wonder that it never occurred 
to me while in America, that Christians might defer their 
special domestic labors on that day, and thus have time and 
strength, for themselves and their families, to attend the 
prayer-meetings. I now make this arrangement in my own 
family ; and, at 3, P. M., we all go to the mission house for 
prayer ; we take no food until evening. Mr. Smith and I 
secure as much of the day as possible for private devotion ; 
and always have a season of prayer together, in addition to 
our daily habit at other times. 1 ' 

In connection with some remarks on the duty of consult- 
ing for the spiritual good of hired persons, employed by pro- 
fessors of religion, she remarks — " How many of this class 
will be seen at the day of judgment, whose powers of body 
and of mind will have been worn out, and their souls ruined 
in serving their superiors 1 " 

" December 14. — On Saturday, our native female prayer- 
meeting consisted of twenty, besides two children ; fourteen 
were Arabs — more than were ever present before. We 
met in the girls' school-room, where we intend in future to 
assemble. We sung part of a psalm, as we have begun to 
teach music in our school. We find the children quite as 
capable of forming musical sounds as those in our own 
country ; but, alas ! we have no hymns or psalms adapted to 
their capacities. The Arabic cannot be simplified like the 
•English, without doing violence to Arab taste ; at least, such 
is the opinion now. What changes may be wrought in the 
language we cannot tell. Of this obstacle in the instruction 
of the young here, you have not perhaps thought. Ameri- 
can youth have extraordinary privileges. It is a painful 
thought to us, that children's literature, if I may so term it, 
is incompatible with the genius of this language; of course, 
infant school lessons must be bereft of many of their attrac- 
tions. Mr. Smith and Mr. Whiting have each superintended 



888 MEMOIR OF 

a translation of the first part of the ' Child's Book on the 
Soul ; ' the use of which must prove its adaptedness to Arab 
children. The result of this experiment has justified the 
expectation. 

"December 24. — In dating a note to Mrs. Dodge, in* 
viting her to meet our other friends here on Christmas day, 
I am reminded that this is the anniversary of our dear Peter's 
death. Dear brother ! I weep to think of thee, as the sweet 
little child whom I led to school ; as the buoyant boy, the 
college youth, and the gentle and dignified man. In the new. 
heavens and the new earth, I trust we shall unite our hearts 
and our hands, in the service and in the presence of our di- 
vine Redeemer." 

In a letter written by Mrs. Smith in the course of this 
month, she adds a few suggestions to those previously ad- 
dressed to her young relative,* on qualifications for the 
missionary service: — " In a former communication, I men- 
tioned some qualifications which would be requisite, should 
you come to Syria. I believe I did not add to these the im- 
portance of cultivating polished manners. In many respects, 
all the foreigners whom we find in these countries, exhibit 
the good breeding which is to be found in the best circles in 
America; and so far from becoming rusticated by a resi- 
dence in Eastern cities, our countrymen usually improve 
much in external deportment. Perhaps it might be thought 
an unnecessary suggestion ; but the plain, independent man- 
ners of some of our good republican citizens, would be offen- 
sive to foreign taste ; and were it not for the extraordinary < 
talent of assimilation which Americans possess, they would 
err oftener than they now do. 

"I think that the infant school system is admirably adapt- 
ed to the uninformed and undisciplined habits of this coun- 
try, and I hope you will familiarize yourself with it, to a great 
extent. 



See page 226. 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. £89 

" My remarks on the subject of languages, in my former 
letter, I hope will not be overlooked. If there were no other 
argument in their favor, the fact that a person who has 
studied one foreign language, more readily acquires another, 
is a sufficient inducement to an intended missionary, to 
make this branch of study prominent. It should stand first 
of all. Our countrywomen have hitherto done but very little 
towards removing the curse of Babel. This has arisen from 
their comparatively isolated situation. In these contiguous 
countries, the knowledge of several tongues is considered 
indispensable. I hope it will yet be esteemed so in America ; 

not as an accomplishment, but for the sake of usefulness." 

• 

Speaking of her own spiritual state at this time, she thus 
writes : — " My feelings and religious exercises in this 
country, are wholly free from excitement — very different 
from what they were in America. I cannot account for it, 
since my views of truth are greatly enlarged and strength- 
ened, and my confidence in our blessed gospel daily increas- 
ing. Sin also appears much more heinous in my eyes, and 
my own character far more despicable. I clasp the Bible to 
my heart with affection and admiration, and love to read its 
sacred pages. Prayer, too, I prize and enjoy ; but for want 
of that excitement of which I have spoken, it often seems to 
me destitute of fervor. The Saviour's offices and mediation 
are magnified in my estimation; and yet I do not enjoy that 
sensible communion with him, which I have before experi- 
enced. I sometimes think that the Holy Spirit cannot dwell 
in this wicked land ; but, 

* like a peaceful dove, 
Flies from the realms of noise and strife.'" 

" January 3, 1836. — This is the first Sabbath evening 
of the year ; and permit me, my dear parents, brothers, and 
sisters, to wish you a happy new year. I was going to say, 
that could I control your every hour, not a sorrow, however 
small, should disturb your serenity, but each uxuvvite *W£A> 

IS 



290 MEMOIR OF 

bear upon its wings peace and pleasure to your bosoms. 
Bat our heavenly Friend loves you more ardently, more 
wisely than I do ; and he is the chosen friend of you all — 
yes, all! To him I commit your destiny, and pray that in 
his favor you may have life and joy, whatever else may be 
bestowed or denied. 

" I often think, my dear parents, that not many years are 
before you, and I shudder at the thought that I may live to 
hear that you are no longer inhabitants of earth, and ask 
myself what will be my feelings then. I still think of you 
and pray for you as alive and happy. 

4 Yet prostrate at the mercy seat, 
Oft shall my lips your names repeat, 
Cherished with filial love.' " 

"Monday, January 4. — We love to think that this day 
will be regarded by many as a Fast for the conversion of the 
world, and that prayer will ascend for us. Oh that the 
church would indeed earnestly wrestle for souls. 

" My own sins rise in awful magnitude before me, to-day, 
and I feel wholly unfit to hold the sacred station of a mis- 
sionary. You know not, my dear parents, what unlooked- 
for conflicts and obstacles you would find, were you trans- 
ported to this region of darkness — this empire of Satan. 
Pray for me incessantly and fervently, for foes without and 
foes within obstruct my path to heaven, and I sometimes 
fear that I have never even entered it. 

" January 13. — My beloved Father : — Your long, good 
letter of July 27 to August 31, inclusive, came to hand a 
few days since, and refreshed my spirit. Oh ! my dear 
parent, my heart clings to you closer than ever. The longer 
we are separated, the more tenderly I think of you, and the 
more warmly I anticipate our meeting above. Your letter, 
however, together with what we heard from Smyrna, made 
me sorrowful, and I tremble for our country every hour. 
Should her sun set in darkness, sad would be the tale. 
' Tell it not in Gatb, publish it not in the streets of Askelon ; 



MRS. SARAH IT SMITH. 291 

lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters 
of the uncircumcised triumph.' It seems to me as if a bril- 
liant star, the centre of attraction to a thousand other orbs, 
were about to be blotted from the moral firmament. That 
which pains me most, and most excites my apprehensions, 
is the fact that Christians are becoming worldly arid con- 
tentious. Had you informed me that all the elements of 
wickedness were in commotion, but that the followers of 
Christ were humble, prayerful, self-denying, and devoted, I 
should fear nothing. But now I tremble ' for the ark of 
God ; ' and I feel that I must make mention of my country 
in every a^hoach to the mercy seat. We have been ' proud 
boasters/ ^garding ourselves as the favorites of Heaven. 
Oh that his Spirit might speedily go forth among his pro- 
fessed friends, exciting them to repentance and prayer, that 
his wrath may be turned away ! 

" I rejoice much that dear mother is well and happy, and 
confiding in God. She does not know the inexpressible 
tenderness I feel for her. I am often obliged to put her 
image away from my mind, and to cease talking about her, 
lest I dissolve in tears. When we meet in heaven, we shall 
both be young, and perfect in body and spirit; and then 
will be revived that sweet communion which we so enjoyed 
on earth. 

"January 30. — You express some solicitude, my dear 
father, respecting my health. It is certainly important, 
in this climate, and under our circumstances, to avoid ex- 
citement. I do not think that I am in danger from this 
source at present ; as I am almost uniformly calm and quiet, 
and, unlike my former temperament, am comparatively un- 
susceptible of strong excitement. I have seen and heard so 
many strange things since I came from my native land, that 
I am accustomed to them, and not much affected by them. 

" When I rise at 4, as this morning, I think of you as 
just retiring to rest. Perhaps the bell in Norwich was ring- 
ing for 9 o'clock, as I rose from my bed. I should love to 



292 MEMOIR Ofr MRS. SMTIH. 

hear it again ! In heaven I trust we shall together listen to 
sweeter sounds. 

"When I have reached, on Saturday, the close of the 
native female prayer-meeting, I feel as if I must ' take a long 
breath;' for my duties are arduous. 19 After mentioning 
the domestic labors she assigns to this day, she proceeds to 
speak of her religious occupations. " For the prayer-meeting 
I have also to make preparation, in reading, first by myself, 
and then either with Mr. Smith or a teacher, a portion of 
Scripture, and collecting my thoughts to lead devotions in a 
foreign tongue ; of the difficulties of which you can form no 
conception. The responsibility of this meeting falls prin- 
cipally upon me." - 



CHAPTER XV. 

THOUGHTS ON THE WORLD AS A PORTION CLOSE OCCUPA- 
TION OP TIME A MOSLEM WEDDING VIEWS OP HER 

EMPLOYMENT OP * HEAVENLY INHERITANCE INTER- 
EST IN AMERICAN FRIENDS ENGAGEMENT IN A PLAN FOR 

RELIGIOUS VISITS. 

As Mrs. Smith advanced in her labors, she evidently be- 
came increasingly interested in them. And there was an 
apparent growth in the fervor of her spiritual affections. 
These remarks will be found illustrated in the extracts 
which compose the present and succeeding chapter. 

" Beyroot, Jan. 4, 1836. 
" My dear Mrs. Tod : — This is a changing, wearisome 
state ; and the great cause of sorrow is, that we are ever 
aiming to find rest and enjoyment, which the Scriptures 
assure us are not the portion of God's people on earth. The 
rest 'remains;' and like repose to the weary, it will be 
more precious from the conflicts and perplexities of this life. 
Oh ! how unenviable is the lot of those who choose their 
happiness here ! I often think of the experience of a pious 
grandmother, which, at the age of eighty, she related to me 
with much animation. After her marriage, she became the 
subject of religious anxiety, which blunted the edge of every 
worldly enjoyment. Her husband was fond of seeing her 
handsomely dressed, and imported from England an elegant 
cloak, and hat to correspond, which was a most becoming 
winter suit. When she first looked at the articles, she said 
to herself, ' Such things of the world shall not be my por- 
tion ; I will not have them for my portion ; I will hax^ ^ 



294 MEMOIR OF 

better one.' She never wore the articles together, lest they . 

should excite the envy and jealousy of her contemporaries ; 

and she soon found that portion which she has left as an 

inheritance to her children, and children's children, to the 

latest generation. For even now, we feel that we receive 

answers to her prayers. — I rejoice that your little daughter 

has a praying mother. It is the richest inheritance which 

she could possess. 1 ' 

" Bsyroot, J ah. 20. 

" My ever dear Friend : — Although you have many cares 
in America, yet perhaps there is not such sacredness at- 
tached to every half hour, as here. When you think of 
writing a letter, you have not, like me, to inquire whether 
you are not encroaching upon some duty more important 
and pressing. Often should I delight to sit down and pour 
forth the warm affections of my heart to dear absent ones in 
my native land ; but an Arabic or an Italian lesson, a native 
visitor, or some household arrangement to enable me to leave 
my family for three or four hours each day, in school, calls 
me away. I wish also to help my husband, as his duties are 
still more urgent. I have just completed the writing of 
seventeen sheets for him. There are twelve persons daily 
employed under our roof, as translators, printers, servants, 
whose eyes are turned towards my husband and myself for 
superintendence. 

" I am much gratified to hear that you are endeavoring to 
benefit the poor Pequod Indians. I thought you would not 
leave them to perish before your eyes. May God own you 
and your dear husband herein ; and may you be richly blest 
and prospered in the effort. It is only by faith that we can 
labor for those who have long dwelt in ignorance and in- 
sensibility, whether in America or in Syria. 

"I wish that you could have been with us on Monday 
evening, when, for the first time, we attended a Moslem 
wedding. It is said there were a thousand persons in the 
procession. It was just at dark when we arrived at the house 
of the bridegroom ; who, under the escort of an immense 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 295 

number of torches and wax candles, was at that moment 
leaving the door of his dwelling, to go. to another house and 
receive his visitors. According to Mohammedan etiquette, 
the gentlemen who were with us proceeded to the latter 
place, while Miss Williams and I entered the former, to 
mingle in the bridal group of females. As we entered an 
open court, in the centre of which grew an orange tree, we 
were met by some women in attendance, who, taking our 
calashes and cloaks, tied them up in Miss W.'s white 
merino shawl, and disposed of them in a safe, if not clean 
place. They inquired if we would take off our shoes also ; 
but this we declined, saying, that as it was not our custom, 
we should expose our health. We then approached the up- 
per end of the court, where, in a semicircle, sat more than a 
dozen women in state, completely borne down with ' gold 
and pearls and costly array/ Our appearance presented a 
strong contrast to theirs ; for however deficient we may have 
been in ' the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit/ in out- 
ward appearance we were arrayed as women 'professing 
godliness.' The female »who occupied the central seat > 
beside a profusion of other ornaments, had upon her head 
two tassels of glass fibres, such as I have occasionally seen 
among curiosities in America, standing erect, and giving her 
a wild, Oriental appearance, quite imposing; while her 
features were commanding and beautiful. She had the dark, 
full eye of an Eastern beauty, with all her characteristic 
hauteur, not deigning to speak to us. Before her were 
several immense wax tapers, taller than our heads, and sup- 
ported by women of a lower rank, who sat upon the floor. 
A crowd of females were before her ; some sitting, others 
standing, and all chattering like so many magpies, only a 
great deal louder, ' and suiting the action to the word ; ' for* 
gestures, as well as words, are the language of this people. 
One of the women who sat upon the floor, had an exhaust- 
less store of nuts, raisins, &c., which she dealt out by hand- 
fuls to the guests. In a short time, a relative of the family, 
through whose influence we were invited to the wedding 



296 MEMOIR OF 

urged her way through the crowd, and taking a seat beside 
us, conversed with us politely for a few moments, and treated 
us with sherbet and coffee. 

" Presently one or two of the * singing women ' began 
their bridal song ; a shrill, monotonous cry, between a shriek- 
ing and singing, and which to me seems like the appropriate 
accompaniment of an event, which introduces the daughters 
of Eve to a new scene of trials, closely connected with 
eternity. They were notes which went to my heart ; pro- 
ducing melancholy rather than joyful associations. We 
were apprized that the bride was approaching, having just 
arrived at the house of the groom, from that of her father, 
where, from an early hour, she had been passing through 
various ceremonies, with which I am not acquainted. She 
came attended by women with torches, and ascended to a 
retired room above. 

" After the lapse of half an hour, perhaps, it was said, 
' Behold, the bridegroom cometh ; ' when all the group has- 
tened to throw on their vails, while the bride, accompanied 
by her maidens, with their torches, descended to meet the 
bridegroom. We witnessed the meeting of the bridal pair, 
which took place near the orange tree in the open court. 
She was supported by her attendants ; being incapacitated for 
guiding herself, as her eyes were closed, and her hands were 
held up before her, as in the attitude of supplication. When 
she met her intended husband, her vail, which was a piece 
of scarlet gauze embroidered with gold, was raised, and he 
gave her one look, and retired again to his guests. Her 
attendants then led her towards us, while we advanced and 
gave her the usual salutation, ' Mabaralceh ya aroos,' (May 
you be blest, O bride !) She was then conducted into an 
adjoining room, and seated upon cushions, while a friend 
made a place for us directly before her, giving us a fine 
opportunity to observe her whole appearance. 

" I cannot give you any just idea of her dress or attitude, 
except that she looked more like a pagan priestess than any 
other imaginable being. Her garments were of rich bro- 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. $97 

cade, and her ornaments beyond description* or enumeration. 
Her face was painted first with rouge, and then fantastically 
or ■ amen ted with patches of gold leaf, while her trimmed 
eyebrows and eyelashes were touched with black paint ; and 
curved lines of the same were drawn from her ear on 
each cheek toward the centre of her face. Her hands and 
feet were also stained in small dark checks. 

" But the most extraordinary thing of all was, that cus- 
tom required her to sit motionless, with closed eyes, and 
entirely speechless ; and this martyrdom, which commenced 
the morning of this day, was to be maintained until the next 
morning. Poor creature ! she looked as if she were in the 
extreme of misery. Here, again, nuts were distributed, in 
the same style as before, among the company. 

" The friend who had furnished us a seat before the bride, 
conducted us to the bridal chamber. It was a small room, 
containing on each side three rows of shelves, on which 
were spread out plates, cups, household utensils, etc., the 
father's gift to his daughter ; also all her dresses were sus- 
pended beneath them, and the bridal couch was furnished 
with silk embroidered appendages. We then descended to 
another apartment, in a distinct portion of the building; 
and seating ourselves informally upon cushions, with the 
wife of the Governor of Beyroot on one side and the bride- 
groom's mother upon the other, a small, low table was placed 
before us, and a large waiter filled with sweetmeats pre- 
sented for our refreshment, followed by coffee. I was not 
a little touched with the fact, that the mother of the bride- 
groom, yet a young woman, was totally blind ; and though 
the bustle of the scene prevented my making know%lo her 
the sympathy and tender associations which she excited in 
my mind, I expressed it silently, by passing into her hand 
the varieties of the entertainment, before partaking of them 
myself, and giving her a kiss and a blessing as we parted. 

" The ceremony of the marriage union, according to 
usage, took place by proxy, at the house of the judge of the 
city, several days previous 1 But this is not all ; — - the par- 

13* 



y 



<gg MEMOIR OF 

ties, after their espousal or engagement, which often ocean 
a year or more previous to marriage, do not see each other ! 
Thus you perceive that love, confidence, and sympathy, 
must be created after the knot is tied; for before, the 
parents are the principal actors in the scene. 

" After the above-mentioned repast, we left the company* 
The scene which I had witnessed forcibly reminded me of 
the last drama of this world; and I admired the wisdom 
which employed an illustration not only calculated to make 
a deep impression upon the present occasion, but by the 
frequent occurrence of such scenes, continually calling to 
mind, in this portion of the world, the force of our Lord's 
instructions and warnings." 

To one of her early friends, for whose spiritual benefit 
she had watched and prayed, she thus writes : — 

" Bstboot, Jab. 26. 

" My dear Mary : — In the act of dating my letter, I am 
reminded that it is two years to-day since I landed on the 
shores of Syria. It would interest me much to know where 
you are ; what you are doing ; how you feel ; whether your 
days pass quietly and peacefully, beneath the smiles of your 
reconciled Friend ; or whether new sorrows have been added 
to those which are past, weaning you still more from earth, 
and purifying you for the state of rest which remains. And 
your mother, how and where is she? and R. and S., and 
your brothers, and aunts? It is sometimes a painful thought 
to me, that there are many whom I knew and loved in the 
land of my birth, respecting whom I shall never hear another 
word, even if I should survive them, until I see their deaths 
in the public prints. 

" You would naturally inquire, whether your once ' fas- 
tidious 1 friend Sarah is happy in the marriage relation. I 
would answer, that, through the kindness of Providence, I 
am entirely so. I feel that God has been very good to me 
in this respect. We have a pleasant residence, from whence 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 

I often look forth upon the illimitable sea, towards the going 
down of the son ; and think, but with no regret, of the friends 
whom I have left beyond. It is a good work to which we 
have devoted our lives, and its importance magnifies in our 
estimation every day ; and we would not exchange it for 
the most eligible station which our country could furnish us. 
I know not how I should endure a North American winter 
now. In the spring and autumn, the weather is perfect, 
and often exhilarating in its genial influence. Not unfre- 
quently the nightingale greets us with her inimitable song, 
at mid-day. 

" Our greatest trials arise from the absence of God's Holy 
Spirit. Would he visit our hearts and those of our neigh- 
bors and friends, we should rejoice. Without this our 
planting and watering will be in vain. Pray for us ! Bey- 
root is continually increasing in importance. We have by 
no means gone out of the world, though we have come to 
the eastern extreme of the Mediterranean. We think that 
American trade will yet be established here." 

* 

y 

"Beyroot, Feb. 4. ,( 
" I have indulged many pleasing anticipations of wel- 
coming you in Syria, my dear brother, and do not yet re- 
linquish them. Still, there is a better country and a better 
house above ; and purer love and higher joy than all which 
earth can give. I never shall forget the feelings which I had 
the day you left Norwich for New York, after the death of 
our dear Peter, and a short time before I became acquainted 
with Mr. Smith. You were packing up those articles of 
family plate 'which father gave you. I said to myseljL'My 
treasure is in heaven ; ' and I have frequently looked back 
upon the feeling, as an evidence of my regeneration. I speak 
not this boastingly, but with tender and grateful recollections. 
Much as I love you, I have scarcely indulged a moment's 
uneasiness respecting you, though I am desirous of knowing 
particulars in regard to your commercial interests. 

11 Dear friends, write to me often, very often. I have. 



300 MEMOIR OF 

reason to be grateful for a comfortable degree of bodily vigor 
and mental composure. The weather is now becoming de- 
lightful. The mildness of spring is returning, ' the time of 
the singing of birds has come/ and my own physical powers 
seem to sympathize with nature around me. I am trying 
to get away from a legal state of mind, which drains the soul 
of all comfort. I have indulged it too much. Pray for me, 
that I may rest joyfully in Christ. May you, dear brother 

and sister, do the same." 

u Beyroot, Feb. 11. 

" It is an indisputable fact, my dear cousin, that ray in- 
terest in my friends has not diminished an iota since I left 
my native land. I wish to know every thing about them as 
much as ever. They too, doubtless, would like to look in 
upon me, and see how I am situated. Here I have the ad- 
vantage, for I can form some idea of almost any possible 
circumstances in America; but you must picture to your- 
selves strange and unknown scenes, and after all, perhaps, 
be forced to exclaim, ' Well, I can't tell how cousin Sarah 
Jires, or how her house looks, or any thing about her.' " 

The following extract from the same letter with the 
above, describes the indisposition in which commenced 
Mrs. Smith's final decline of health — the first step of her 
descent to the grave : — 

" I should prepare a longer and more particular letter for 
you, my dear cousin, were it not that I am suffering from a 
severe cold upon my lungs, in consequence of sitting within 
the cold, damp walls of our school-house. Our exposures 
of this kind, in the winter, are very great. I have had an 
incessant and somewhat painful cough for some days, but I 
think it is now breaking up. This urges me to make some 
early provision against a similar attack next winter, if I 
should live." 

" February 16. — We have recently entered into an 
agreement to visit certain families and individuals once a 



• 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 301 

month, something in the way that the Tract distributers in 
America do, for the purpose of personal religious conversa- 
tion ; and then to hold a meeting to report to each other 
our success. We have made a selection for ourselves, from 
among our friends and neighbors. Much wisdom and grace 
will be required to pursue our plan. It will not be like vis- 
iting the same number of persons in America. In the first 
place, we cannot talk to them in English ; and in the next, 
we must be very cautious of exciting their apprehensions and 
prejudices, thus defeating our object." 

" Beyroot, Feb. 25. 
" Mr. Nieolayson will inform you respecting our new 
plan of effort, and we beg that you will constantly remember 
it in your prayers. My field is the mothers of our female 
scholars, and I have already commenced calling upon them. 
My intention is to visit the whole, and become acquainted 
with them ; and then select as many individuals from among 
them as I can be faithful to, and such as present the most 
encouragement to effort. This thought, my dear sister, hall 
been upon my mind much of late — that, as it is so difficult 
to make truth intelligible to the minds of this people in the 
first endeavor, and as they are so unaccustomed to fix their 
attention on any subject of serious reflection, it would be 
better to bestow our energies upon a limited number, for 
whose benefit, we can repeat our efforts, giving ' line upon 
line, and precept upon precept/ rather than to scatter our 
influence over a wider field. This is particularly applicable 
to the women of this country. Perhaps one visit and one 
conversation may make an impression ; another may affect 
them slightly, but if not followed by a third, may be as the 
morning dew ; while twelve visits in a year may do some- 
thing for them. Perhaps it will be a long time before we 
shall see any fruit. Indeed, those who enter into our labors 
may gather it in our stead ; yet I am anxious that we should 
persevere until we die, though no apparent effect may be 
produced. You well know, from experience, how much. 



303 MEMOIR OF MRS. SMITH. 

missionaries need a degree of healthful excitement in their 
labors. As all our time and all our plans have one ob- 
ject, we engage in Christ's service as a matter of coarse. 
But if we can make especial efforts for the immediate con- 
version of one, two, or more souls, we shall always have 
something to enliven us. 

" I am deeply interested in the perusal of Mrs. Winslow's 
life. It brings my native place, familiar scenes and friends 
so vividly before me ; and her trials in breaking away from 
the endearing ties of home and country were so similar to 
my own ; that my sensibilities are too strongly excited by 
the book. On Saturday night I was quite exhausted by the 
powerful, yet almost unconscious hold which it took of my 
feelings." 



CHAPTER XVI. 

LETTER TO THE MEMBERS OF THE YOUNG LADIES* ACADEMY, 

NORWICH VIEWS OF THE EFFECTS OF THE MISSION — 

CLIMATE IMPORTANCE OF RESPECTABILITY OF APPEAR- 
ANCE IN MISSIONARIES GOOD FRIDAY TRANSLATION 

OF AN ARABIC GRAMMAR SPRING AND ITS PRODUCTIONS 

IMPEDIMENTS TO MISSIONARY LABORS RELIGIOUS 

CONVERSATION HEALTH SCHOOL LETTER TO MRS; 

TEMPLE 

For some time before leaving this country, Mrs. Smith 
had taken a deep interest in the Female Academy in Nor- 
wich ; and with a young lady, one of the teachers, was ac- 
customed to meet and pray for the influences of the Holy 
Spirit upon that institution. In some of her letters to her 
Christian friends she asked their prayers for it. She ad- 
dressed a letter to its members, dated February 26, 1836, 
which will be read with interest, as the affectionate and * 
earnest counsels of a devoted missionary to some of the 
daughters of her native land. 



« 



TO THE PUPILS OF THE FEMALE ACADEMY IN NORWICH. 



« 



My dear young friends : — With much pleasure, though 
not without diffidence, I attempt to comply with a request 
of your respected teachers, that I would address you on the 
great subject of missions. Could I enjoy the pleasure of a 
personal interview, I might communicate much that would 
be interesting ; and could adapt myself to your individual 
views and feelings much better than I can at the distance of 
5,000 miles, a stranger probably to nearly all of you. M\ 



304 MEMOIR OF 

heart is full on this topic, and I could cover many sheets in 
discussing it ; but perhaps it would be more tedious for you 
to read than for me to write. I must therefore compress 
my communication into as small a compass as possible, and 
give only outlines, for yourselves or your teachers to fill up. 
" Allow me first to indulge my imagination a little, and 
picture to myself the appearance of your Academy when, 
you are assembled for your daily exercises ; that I may draw 
a contrast between you and your youthful contemporaries in 
this and other unenlightened lands^ I see yon not only 
comfortably, but neatly dressed, and your persons indicating 
that suitable attention was paid to them before leaving home. 
You are abundantly supplied by your parents, or other kind 
friends, with books, paper, and every thing necessary for pur- 
suing your studies with success. When your teacher com- 
mences the morning devotions of the school, the instructions 
of God's word are familiar to every ear, and intelligible to the 
youngest pupil ; and prayer is regarded at least as a solemn 
exercise, demanding outward respect. Then observe the 
beautiful arrangement of your little company. Each one 
knows her place and duties. Kindness, gentleness, and re- 
spect, I trust, characterize your deportment towards your 
teachers and companions ; and intellectual cultivation, as 
well as amiable feeling, beam in every countenance. Each 
day advances you in some useful attainment, which enlarges 
your capacities, and helps to prepare you for future happi- 
ness and usefulness. When you return to your homes, you 
are greeted by kind friends, who encourage you in all your 
efforts to improve, and who have no higher ambition than to 
see you increasing in knowledge of every kind. The family 
circle is a scene of quiet, cheerful enjoyment, and kind 
affection ; while the wider circle of social intercourse adds 
grace and polish to every attainment. I could thus indulge 
my imagination to an almost indefinite extent, and dwell 
upon your exalted privileges of a religious nature; but I 
hasten to present the contrast, which is not before my 
imagination only, but before my eyes. — I will say nothing 



, MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 305 

of larger sections of the globe, but will confine myself to 
Syria, because I am here, and can speak from personal ob- 
servation of what exists. 

" My dear friends, will you send your thoughts to this, 
which is not a heathen, but an unevangelized country. I 
will not invite you to look at our little female* school of 
twenty or thirty, because these form but a drop among the 
thousands and thousands of youth throughout Syria; al- 
though I might draw a contrast even from this, not a little 
in your favor. But we will speak of the young Syrian 
females at large, m6ving in one unbroken line to the land 
of darkness and sorrow. Among them you will find many 
a fine form and beautiful face; but alas! the perfect work- 
manship of their Creator is rendered tame and insipid, for 
want of that mental and moral culture, which gives a 
peculiar charm to the human countenance. It is impossible 
for me to bring the females of this country before you in so 
vivid a manner, that you can form a correct idea of them — 
but select from among your acquaintances a young lady who 
is excessively weak, vain, and trifling ; who has no relish 
for any intellectual or moral improvement ; whose conversa- 
tion is altogether confined to dress, parties, balls, admiration, 
marriage; whose temper and faults have never been cor- 
rected by her parents, but who is following, unchecked, all 
the propensities of a fallen, corrupt nature. Perhaps you 
will not be able to find any such, though I have occasionally 
met with them in America. If you succeed, however, in 
bringing a person of this character to your mind, then place 
the thousands of girls, and the women too, of this land, 
once the land of patriarchs, prophets, and apostles, in her 
class. 

" These weak-minded Syrian females are not attentive to 
personal cleanliness ; neither have they a neat and tasteful 
style of dress. Their apparel is precisely such as the Apostle 
recommended that Christian females should avoid; while 
the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit is thrown wholly 
out of the account. They have no books, and no means of 



306 MEMOIR OF 

mora] or intellectual improvement. It is considered a dis- 
grace for a female to know how to read and write, and a 
serious obstacle to her marriage, which is the principal 
object of the parent's heart This abhorrence of learning 
in females, exists most strongly in the higher cl asses. 
Nearly every pupil in our school is very indigent. Of 
God's word they know and understand nothing, for a girl is 
taken to church perhaps but once a year, where nothing is 
seen among the women but talking and trifling ; of course, 
she attaches no solemnity to the worship of God. No sweet 
domestic circle of father, brother, mother, and sister, all 
capable of promoting mutual cheerfulness and improvament* 
greets her in her own house. I do not mean to imply, that 
there exists no family affection among them, for this tie is 
often very strong ; but it has no foundation in respect, and is 
not employed to promote elevation of character. The men sit 
and smoke their pipes in one apartment, while in another 
the women cluster upon the floor, and with loud and vocif- 
erous voices gossip with their neighbors. The very lan- 
guage of the females is of a lower order than that of the 
men ; which renders it almost impossible for them to com- 
prehend spiritual and abstract subjects, when first presented* 
to their minds. I know not how often, when I have at- 
tempted to converse with them, they have acknowledged 
that they did not understand me, or have interrupted me by 
alluding to some mode or article of dress, or something 
quite as foolish. 

" Thus you see, my young friends, how unhappy is the 
condition of the females of Syria, and how many laborers 
are wanted to cultivate this wide field. I have not told you 
a tenth part of the calamities of their condition ; how their 
fathers and brothers are oppressed by this unjust and des- 
potic government ; how they have learned to tremble at the 
falling of a leaf, and many other things which you may know 
from different sources. 

" If I knew the precise state of feeling which exists in 
your Academy, in reference to preparing yourselves for use- 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 307 

fulness, either in your own country, or in some foreign land, 
I should know better what appeals to make to you, and what 
counsel to bestow. I will imagine that there are two classes 
among you ; those who have seriously resolved to devote 
their days to the glory of God and the benefit of mankind — 

'and those who. have no fixed intentions of this kind, but are 
on the whole indifferent to the subject. To this last class 
permit me to say a few words. — Can you, young friends, be 
satisfied to devote your time and energies to personal grati- 
fication ; and leave so many interesting females to spend 4n 
eternity in unavailing regrets in the world of wo 1 Remem- 
ber that they are your contemporaries, and that you and they 
will stand side by side on the great day of final account. 
What overwhelming emotions will pervade your breasts, when 
you see them sink down to the pit of destruction ! You will 
remember that on earth you knew this would be their des- 
tiny, yet preferred your own gratification for a few useless 
years — and sacrificed the eternal happiness of these your 
sisters upon the altar of a weak and guilty self-love. Then 
you will have more than your own souls to account for. The 

m young females of Syria, of India, of every inhabited portion 
of the globe, who are upon the stage of life with you, will 
rise up, either to call you blessed, or to enhance your con- 
demnation. 

" But I turn from this painful theme to address those of 
your number whose minds are already in some measure fixed 
on this important subject, and who love to think that they 
may one day be permitted to enter the sphere of missionary 
labor, either at home or abroad. To you, my dear sisters, 
I would say, Avoid all romantic notions in reference to this 
subject, and all undue excitement. The real difficulties and 
labors of the undertaking will chase away all romance ; and 
it is better not to set out with it. Excitement is too much 
the element of our beloved country ; but it will go only a 
little way in the arduous work of moral reformation ; and it 
is not a principle which is sufficient to overthrow the deep- 
laid foundations of Satan's kingdom. Strength of charafit&x. k 



306 MEMOIR OF 

discipline of mind, steadiness of faith, patience, persever- 
ance, and self-denial, are the requisite qualifications. I 
need not remind you that ardent piety lies at the foundation 
of the whole. This you must cultivate upon the altar of de- 
votion in your closets. Commune with God there, respect- 
ing your feelings and purposes, more than any where else.* 
He will feed and cause them to grow and expand ; and in 
due time will furnish you with a sphere in which to exercise 
them. You need not wait to get upon missionary ground, 
before becoming an accepted missionary with God. Ere I 
left my father's house, I was convinced of the truth, and am 
now confirmed in it, that within the walls of her own dwell- 
ing, a young lady may cultivate and exhibit all the qualifica- 
tions of a devoted missionary. As a daughter, sister, friend, 
she may be so faithful, humble, obliging, and self-denying, 
and may acquire such self-control, that even should she die 
before entering upon a wider sphere, she would merit the 
commendation, ( She hath done what she could.' Therefore 
be not impatient and uneasy, while you are providentially 
detained, amid every-day duties, within a narrow circle ; but 
' whatever your hand findeth to do there, do it,' at the same 
time cherishing the determination to assume greater respon- 
sibilities, and more self-denial, whenever God shall give the 
opportunity. 

" Next to piety, the most important qualification for active 
usefulness, is habitual self-control. ( He that ruleth his own 
spirit, is greater than he that taketh a city.' Perhaps you 
are exposed to some trials of temper now ; but on mission- 
ary ground they will be increased a hundred fold, where 
every thing is crooked and wrong ; where ignorance, stupid- 
ity, insolence, and deceit, provoke the corresponding emo- 
tions of pride, impatience, contempt, imperiousness, and 
dislike. 

" Avoid all habits of particularity and daintiness, which 
will prevent your assimilating readily to new and unlooked- 
for circumstances in which you may be placed, prove a 
source of uneasiness to yourselves, and interfere with your 



* MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 309 

usefulness to others, fiearn the happy, yet difficult art of 
forgetting yoursolves, in all unimportant things. Much 
general knowledge and discipline of mind are essential in 
preparing you to do good to your fellow-beings; but if you 
choose a foreign, station, the first mental qualification neces- 
sary, is a taste for acquiring languages, and the knowledge 
of several. This accomplishment, and valuable qualification, 
has been too much overlooked by young ladies in America, 
and I hope to hear of a change in this respect. The great- 
est obstacle and most painful discouragement on missionary 
ground, arises from the want of language by which to ex- 
press the common sympathies of our nature, and to impart in- 
struction in a thousand nameless ways, aside from formal 
exhortation and preaching." 

Mrs. Smith here gives advice on the study of languages, 
similar to that contained in the letter inserted page 226; 
and which needs not be repeated. 

" I could say much more respecting the cultivation of 
your minds and hearts, and the formation of your characters 
for future usefulness, but your teachers are best able to do 
this. Suffice it to say, all your time and talents must be de- 
voted to the undertaking. And how much more ennobling 
are employments and motives like these, than the trifling 
occupations which pleasure and fashion demand, or even the 
comparatively innocent concerns which relate to one's per- 
son and comforts. Indeed, if your minds are fixed upon the 
one great object of existence, you will have little relish for 
meaner pursuits. God is furnishing American females their 
high privileges, with the intention of calling them forth into 
the wide fields of ignorance and error, which the world ex- 
hibits. I look over my country, and think of the hundreds 
and thousands of young ladies, intelligent, amiable, and 
capable, who are assembled in schools and academies there; 
and then turn my eye to Jerusalem, Hebron, Nazareth, 
Sychar, Damascus, Tyre, Sidon, Yafa, &c, and to the 



310 MEMOIR OF 

numerous villages of Mount Lebanon, and think, Why the 
inequality of condition and privileges ? Why can there not 
be stationed at every one of those morally desolate places, at 
least one missionary family, and one single female as a 
teacher ? Does not Jesus Christ, the good Shepherd, require 
it of his youthful friends in America ; that from love to him, 
gratitude for their own distinguished mercies, compassion 
for perishing souls, and the expectations of perfect rest and 
happiness in heaven, tbey should spread themselves over the 
wide world, and feed the sheep and the lambs scattered with- 
out a shepherd upon the mountains ? Yes ! he requires it, 
and angels will yet behold it ; — but shall we not see it in 
our day ? 

"You, my dear young friends, who belong to the Nor- 
wich Female Academy, are a prominent portion of those 
who are called upon to answer this question/' 

"February 29. — My dear Brother: — A steam packet 
arrived last evening from England, via Malta and Alex- 
andria; from the last port only forty-eight hours. It is the 
first of a line which is to visit Beyroot once a month. We 
begin to feel a great deal nearer to you than formerly. 
From French papers we have learned particulars of the 
dreadful fire in your city. We took a map of the city, and 
tried to discover if you were probably a sufferer, but we 
could not fix the location with sufficient accuracy to deter- 
mine. I long to hear all about you." 

"March 8. — We have now for our guest Mr. Eliot, a 
clergyman of the Established Church of England, on h'i3 
way to Jerusalem, and in feeble health. He says that re- 
ligion in England is advancing extensively. My affection 
for our mother country has increased since coming into in- 
tercourse with her sons and daughters in this Eastern world. 

" This has been our Fast and Concert. I have been as 
quiet as possible, having last night taken medicine for an 
uncomfortable cough. Nothing has moved or troubled me 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 3U 

this livelong day. I have enjoyed a season of especial 
prayer with Mr* Smith, and another with Miss Williams, 
according to our custom, besides the public service. 

"March 17. — On Monday we were cheered and ex- 
cited by the arrival of Mr. Hebard, bringing your kind de- 
spatches. How shall I sufficiently thank you all for these, 
and for your abounding love ; or my heavenly Friend for all 
his kindness to you, my beloved ones? I have received 
twenty-eight sheets. 

" You wish, dear father, to hear about my health. It has 
been excellent since my return from Jerusalem. In conse- 
quence of exposure within the damp walls of our new school- 
house, I have had a severe cold and cough, which continue. 
I was confined only a day or two, and have not been inter- 
rupted in my usual avocations. You know my lungs are 
not my weak part. If I eat a very little, of almost any kind 
of food, I am perfectly well and happy, if I at the same time 
avoid too much exertion. 

" In answer to your inquiries respecting the success of 
our labors, I would say, that with our press, schools, preach- 
ing, conversation, and other social intercourse, in which we 
are busy from morning till night, we feel that a broad foun- 
dation is being laid, upon which, at some future day, — God 
knows when, — a glorious superstructure will be raised. It 
is true we cannot tell you of conversions, or of any imme- 
diate and striking success ; and this pains us. But progress 
is making, and we look for fruit, even in our own day. 
Send us as many more as you can to help us. The field is 
wide. There need be no idlers here. While you supply us 
from time to time, let your faith be firm and constant, rely- 
ing on the promises of Jehovah ; and be but little affected 
by the sounds of ' Lo here, and lo there.' It is a long and 
trying work that the church has undertaken, and many will 
fall in thegcontest ; but the victory will be won at last. 

" I am pained to hear of sister's ill health. Knowing, as 
she does, her peculiar danger, she ought to be particularly 



312 MEMOIR OF 

careful to avoid excitement. The church is not resting 
upon her ; God can do without her, even. My missionary 
life, thus far, has been beneficially afrected by my last year's 
experience in America, when sister thought I was on the 
ground of 'little faith. 1 I used to think myself of con- 
siderable consequence in the service of Christ ; but during 
that year, I felt my own insignificance unusually ; and here, 
on missionary ground, with closed lips, I have been obliged 
to feel this more than ever. And if the discipline had not 
commenced before I came here, I might have sunk down 
into a state of morbid sensibility, from which I could not 
have risen. 

"I love this climate exceedingly. I told the new mis- 
sionaries in quarantine yesterday, that I could not present 
them with a better wish, than that they might be as happy 
in Syria as I had been. — By the way, Lamartine's work 
is too much that of a French poet, to be relied upon for 
accuracy. If the Maronites are to revive the true religion 
here, their hatred and opposition are part of the machinery 
with which God designs to bring about his purposes.' 1 

March 21. — After mentioning some articles of dress to 
be procured for her in America, she says — "You have 
doubtless perceived from my letters, that we have not come 
out of the world by coming to Bcyroot, but that we require 
as much as ever to be respectably dressed. In our chapel 
we are seldom without the presence of English travellers, 
and not unfrequently there are with us English noblemen. 
For two reasons, at least, I think our little company should 
appear respectable — first, for the honor of the missionary 
cause; and secondly, for our national dignity. For these 
reasons, I think that America should send forth her best to 
foreign lands. I never was so conscious of our national 
peculiarities as now, and cannot help being made a little 
nervous, occasionally, by certain Americanisms. Now you 
must not laugh at me, and say, 'O! sister is fastidious.' 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 313 

Were our countrymen to spend a few years abroad, they 
would not, so much as now, be inclined to say, ' We are 
the people, and wisdom will die with us. 1 " 

" April 1. — This is Good Friday, and we had a morning 
service in English. It was affecting, as we passed through 
the city, to see nearly all the flags half-mast high, and our 
own among the rest. The reflection was sublime and al- 
most overwhelming — 'It is to commemorate the death of 
the Son of God.' 

"I have commenced to-day translating a grammar in 
Arabic manuscript into English, for my own benefit, and 
for that of others, if I succeed. I become every day more 
interested in this delightful language ; and could spend my 
whole time with it agreeably. 

" My mind is much upon a female boarding-school ; and 
if I can get the promise of ten girls, we shall, God willing, 
remove the press from our house, and commence one in 
the fall. 

" April 20. — Sabbath. Yesterday we held a meeting to 
consult upon the best method of promoting a revival of re- 
ligion in our own hearts, and among those around; and 
to-day we have had the communion ; anticipating .the regu- 
lar season a week, for the purpose of having brother and 
sister Whiting with us. Their visit has proved one of great 
importance, as some subjects of deep interest came before 
the brethren. 

" April 26. — Our family now consists of thirteen ; and as 
the gentlemen kindly invited us to be present at their meet- 
ings for business, — where, as silent spectators, our minds 
become informed on many important subjects connected 
with the interests of our mission, — I have put aside many 
other duties for this privilege ; and have frequently seated 
myself with them at eight o'clock in the morning. We 
protract the vacation of our school until the termination of 
Mr. and Mrs. W.'s visit. »> 

" April 28. — I have just been down into our little garden. 

14 



314 MEMOIR OF 

Unfortunately the sparrows love its products as well as our- 
selves, and I fear they will share too largely with us for our 
oenefit." ' 

"I was affected, my dear cousin Sarah, to notice the 
death of your excellent father. How many souls he will 
meet in heaven, carried there through his instrumentality ! 
And your uncle R., too, has gone thither. Tho* that gen- 
eration are falling, ' like leaves in wintry weather. 1 I 
shrink from the anticipation of other breaches in that same 
circle, which, if I live, will still more tenderly affect me. 
The Lord grant that they may be long deferred. 

" We think that we can see some progress in knowledge 
of the truth, and have no doubt that we are carrying forward 
a system of means, which God will eventually bless, in the 
joyful establishment of his kingdom here. But it is a land 
of apostates from the true faith, and as such peculiarly 
cursed. Christians at home, as well as missionaries abroad, 
must possess patience and perseverance in this work of 
converting the world. They must go straight forward, con- 
fiding more in the promises of Jehovah, than in what they 
see and hear. They must be willing to work, faithfully, and 
let others reap the fruits. I hope to live here to be very old ; 
if so, I think that in thirty, or forty, or fifty years, I may be- 
hold some important changes for the better. I do not wish 
to plead for the exercise of too much indulgence towards 
myself and my fellow-laborers in the missionary service, but 
I think too much is expected from our individual influence. 
Suppose that the inhabitants of Norwich, for example, were 
all Mohammedans and Papists, and other corrupt Christian 
sects ; with how much courage would you and your husband 
establish yourselves among them, to do them good, especial- 
ly if printing the books, keeping the schools, preaching, and 
sundry other important duties, devolved wholly upon your- 
selves? Yet the proportion of laborers in the missionary 
field is by no means equal to one family in 7 or 8,000. You 
*ee how much we need your sympathies and your prayers." 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 315 

Mrs. Smith describes an interview which she had with a 
mother for the purpose of religious conversation. After 
speaking of the other females of the family, she remarks — 
" I was left alone with the mother, the thing which I desired. 
I turned to her, and began to tell her how much I felt 
for her soul ; and that I wished to talk with her of it ; that 
if we met before the judgment-seat, we should think it very 
strange that we had not in this world conversed upon some- 
thing else than clothes, food, our neighbors, &c. I said, 
'You have a wicked heart, like myself; ' and to convince 
her of the necessity of a change of heart, I related my own 
experience. She listened with attention and tears. I said 
to her, ' These truths which I tell you are not my words, but 
they are the Saviour's, found in his gospel, and I know them 
to be true, because I have read them there. If you could 
read, you would find the Scriptures full of truths of which 
you now know nothing.' Thus I went on for some time ; 
and after putting into her hands a piece of cloth to make 
her infant a dress, which she had sought of me some days 
before, I went up to look at her silk-worms. There, in my 
presence, she repeated to the other women all which I had 
said to her, with one variation. 

" This visit was one of a series, connected with a system 
of visiting which our mission circle have recently estab- 
lished. My sphere is an interesting one, promising pleasure 
and usefulness. But, alas! I cannot, as in America, g<> 
from house to house alone. Many of them are within the 
city walls, and thither I must go upon my donkey, attended 
by a man servant, and can make not more than one, or at 
most two calls in one excursion. There is no dropping in 
unobserved here, as with you. Our presence attracts all 
the neighborhood, and I have often had quite a congrega- 
tion, when I went to see one only." 

u Bevroot, Mat 1. 
" I am much impressed this evening, my dear parents, 
with the goodness of God, in permitting me to close axuL 



316 MEMOIR Ot 

forward to you one communication after another, and to 
commence new ones. By a vessel which sailed yesterday, 
I sent a journal of three sheets; together with letters to 
different individuals, aside from our family. Perhaps you 
sometimes imagine that I am so occupied, and so distant, 
that I am becoming weaned from my beloved home and 
friends. Far from it. On the contrary, the cord which 
binds me to you becomes stronger every day, and I love to 
have you say that you talk about us continually; In answer 
to your kind inquiries, dear father, in my last letter I men- 
tioned my health more particularly. Perhaps it will.be well 
for me oftener to allude to this in my journals, that I may 
keep you advised of any alterations that may occur. For a 
few days past, the heavy cold which I have had during the 
winter, seemed to return again in some measure. This 
morning I did not attend the English service, but kept my 
bed chiefly ; reserving my strength for the Sabbath school, 
whither I went and remained to the Arabic preaching. 
This evening I am much better. 

"On Friday, Mr. and Mrs. Whiting and Mr. Lanneau, 
left us for Jerusalem ; and on Saturday, Mr. Smith, Miss 
Williams, Mr. Hebard, our two little girls, Antonio a young 
translator, and myself, took a ride up the mountains, to a 
Maronite convent. On our way, about two hours from Bey- 
root, we stopped at Mansooreeyeh and looked into the house 
in which Mr. Smith, with Tannoos and his wife, spent a 
winter, and where Mr. Smith laid the foundation of his 
Tcnowledge of Arabic. It was the winter after my visit to 
Andover. I little imagined then, that my future husband was 
dwelling in an Arab hut on Mount Lebanon. I had some 
peculiar feelings in looking at it. It is a small, one-story 
stone building, in the form of a parallelogram, containing two 
rooms and a stable. It is now deserted, and we were obliged 
to remove the rubbish, that we might look in upon its mud- 
dy floors and rough walls. I sat down upon the terraced 
roof, and opened Pollok's "Course of Time," upon these 
lines, which I thought a singular coincidence : — 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. Zfl 

• The 'man of science to the shade retired, 
And laid his head upon his hand, in mood 
Of awful thoughtfulness ; and dived, and dived 
Again — deeper and deeper still.' 

" Many of us have envied my husband the results of that 
diving among Arabic roots, with a teacher who then had no 
knowledge of the grammar of the language. It was of incal- 
culable benefit to him, shut out as he also was from all use of 
the English language, and compelled to employ the Arabic. 

" To-day we commenced another term of our school, with 
twenty-six scholars. I am always most happy when I am 
thus occupied in teaching. Two native princesses from the 
mountains called this morning and occupied the time appro- 
priated to my Arabic and Italian lessons. They were digni- 
fied and rational, and visited and examined the press. They 
inquired respecting the comparative attractions of this coun- 
try and, our own. I then simply stated to them the principal 
and vital difference which exists, that the females in Amer- 
ica have similar advantages with the other sex, and that not 
the rich and great only, but, by the liberality of. these, the 
poor, may enjoy equal advantages for mental improvement. 
I love to inform the nobility here of this fact, as they are 
taught to read themselves, but pay no regard to the educa- 
tion of their inferiors. 

" Oh ! the time will come when knowledge shall be in- 
creased here, but ' how long, O Lord, thou knowest.' The 
wife of a persecuted Druze is very anxious to learn to read, 
and she comes to our house every day, when the school 
closes, to get instruction from Raheel. To-day the latter 
was visiting her parents, and Keffa, the daughter of the 
woman, gave her a lesson. It was affecting to see a little 
girl, six years of age, standing by her mother's knee in the 
office of a teacher. This female (the mother) we all love, 
her manners are so gentle, and her disposition so unobtru- 
sive. The whole family are under our influence, and I beg 
that you will make them especial subjects of prayer." 



318 memoir or 

"Betroot, Mat 6. 
"Dear Mrs. Temple: — I think thai missionaries mast 
unavoidably become very much matter-of-fact persons, and 
almost wholly absorbed in the daily round of care and labor, 
with little opportunity to choose their occupations. One 
duty after another forces itself in rapid succession upon our 
attention ; and we are obliged to conclude at length, like 
good Dr. Payson, ' the person who wants me, is the one I 
want.' If no other good results from this course of impera- 
tive duty, it has a tendency to interrupt self-complacency, 
since we are never as fond of being driven, as of walking at 
our leisure. But our Divine Master pleased not himself; 
and as we have voluntarily engaged in his service, we must 
stand by our post, and shrink from nothing. I rejoice that 
you have so promising a field of usefulness. It must make 
you quite happy. Our Beyroot school is an interesting one, 
increasingly so, though not large. When we shall have 
three or four female schools to superintend I know not. 
We feel the want of books exceedingly. The little girl 
whom I took more than a year since, and who advances 
steadily in intelligence and knowledge, has no book but the 
Bible to read — not one. I translate to her ' Mary Lothrop/ 
and the ' Child's Book on the Soul ; ' but giving oral instruc- 
tion is a slow process. I give lessons in geography and on 
the globe to our scholars ; but how much they must neces- 
sarily forget, for want of committing it to memory, from 
books in their hands! Never did I realize so fully the 
exalted privileges of our American youth! Then again, 
should our press get into successful operation, I despair of 
doing any thing in the way of infant schools, because the 
Arabic language cannot be simplified, at least under existing 
prejudices. If every hymn and little story must be dressed 
up in the august habiliments of the Koran, what child of 
three and six years old will be wiser and better for them ? 
How complete is the dominion of the great Adversary over 
this people! All the links in the chain must be separated, 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 319 

one by one. And what a long, I had almost said, tedious 
process ! Bat I forget that to each one will be assigned a 
few only of these links. We are doing a little, perhaps, in 
this work ; — if faithful, we shall rest in heaven, and others 
will come and take our places and our work/' 

The following passage was written by Mrs. Smith upon 
the blank leaves of a pocket Testament, given her before 
she left this country, and which she returned to the donor 
a few months previous to her death. It is without a date ; 
but was probably written subsequent to the failure of her 
health, and under premonitions that she was approaching 
the close of life. 

u When you presented me with this precious little booV, 
my dear brother, you probably did not expect to see it again* 
It has been my companion in all my wanderings since I left 
my native land. And now I return it to you, for the single 
reason, that it has made a visit to the Garden of Geth- 
semane. In that spot I seated myself, and in solitude pe- 
rused Matthew xxvi. 36—56, with peculiar feelings; and 
then I plucked the sprig which you will find herein. Take 
this little Testament to your communion table, and urge 
upon your church, once more, the parting command of theit 
suffering Saviour. 

" Sarah L. Smj*h." 



CHAPTER XVII. 

FAILURE OF MRS. SMITH'S HEALTH DEPARTURE FROM BET- 
ROOT SHIPWRECK ARRIVAL AT SMYRNA CONTINUED 

DECLINE OF HEALTH REMOVAL TO BOOJAH LAST DAYS 

DEATH FUNERAL. 

In consequence of the failure of the health of Mrs, 
Smith, her physician advised a voyage to Smyrna. For 
this purpose, and also for other reasons which will appear, 
she left Beyroot with her husband on the 11th of June. 
The history of this voyage will be given from her own 
journal, and that of Mr. Smith. 

" Smyrna, July 28, 1836. 
" My dear Parents : — A few days before the close of our 
disastrous voyage from Beyroot to Smyrna, of which Mr. 
Smith gave you a brief account soon after our arrival here, 
and while I was lying exhausted upon the deck of our 
vessel, my thoughts suddenly reverted to an object in your 
drawing-room, which had not before crossed my mind since 
I left the home of my childhood. It was the picture of the 
shipwrecked mariner, that filled my imagination, as he stood 
friendless and desolate before the door of a solitary cottage, 
pointing to the distant sea as the scene of his sufferings, at 
the same time soliciting the compassion of its benevolent 
inmates. I well remember, that in my youthful days, when 
I stood beside our visitors who were admiring the beauty of 
the execution, I almost invariably inquired, * Do you notice 
the tear upon the sailor boy's cheek?' I little imagined 
then, that the picture would ever be associated with any 
events in my own history. Now, however, I think that my 

320 



MEMOIR OF MRS; SMITH. 321 

dear father will look at it with new and tender interest ; and 
that my dear mother, with no less feeling, will recall it to 
her mind. But I hope it will be. with more of gratitude 
than sorrow, that their shipwrecked daughter lives to relate 
her own history. I will not, however, dwell on this subject 
at present, but return to Beyroot, that I may inform you of 
the process by which my health became so suddenly changed. 

" In the fall, soon after the rains commenced, the terrace 
of our newly-made female school-house was broken up, and 
its walls and floor soaked ; and I there caught a severe cold, 
which produced a tight and violent cough. I was confined 
to the house but a few days, however ; and though my cough 
continued through the whole winter, yet, presuming on the 
strength of my lungs, I felt no anxiety, and took no precau- 
tionary measures ; continuing all my labors as usual. As 
the spring advanced, I began to expectorate somewhat copi- 
ously ; my strength became suddenly exhausted, and my pulse 
rose to 110 per minute. Mr. Smith called in Dr. Whitely, 
who examined my lungs with the stethescope, and pronounced 
them diseased ; though in what way, and to what extent, he 
did not positively determine. He urged the necessity of 
immediately relinquishing all my employments, and giving 
myself up wholly to rest and relaxation. I complied with 
his advice, and found myself benefited. 

" As the state of the press rendered it desirable for Mr. 
Smith to visit Smyrna, and as it was thought a voyage would 
be of more service to me than any thing else, and would 
take me away from all my cares and responsibilities ; with 
aching hearts we commenced our preparations for a de- 
parture. The plague, in the mean time, had broken out 
in Beyroot, and suspended our missionary labors; and our 
friends had all gone to the mountains, except Miss Williams, 
whom the exhaustion of the season required to follow them 
immediately. The intensity of my feelings was enhanced 
by the possibility that the wants of the press would require 
us to extend our voyage to America. This also made it 
necessary that we should put our furniture in a state to be 



322 MEMOIR Oi* 

left one or two years, and likewise to pack up many more 
clothes and articles of convenience than we otherwise should 
have done. 

" An early opportunity offered for Smyrna, and the day 
was fixed for our sailing. The afternoon of our embarka- 
tion, which was Friday the 10th of June, a few of our 
native friends and neighbors, together with our servants, 
assembled to bid us adieu. Mr. Smith made a short ad- 
dress, and offered prayer in Arabic. It was a scene of 
sorrow and desolation, such as I cannot describe. As you 
are not familiar with the scenes presented in time of plague, 
where families and individuals put themselves in quarantine, 
you can ibrm little idea of the solemnity which was thus 
added to our parting interview. Our poor Druze neighbors, 
carefully avoiding contact with every object and with our- 
selves, walked one by one into our vacated parlor, and took 
the scats that were appointed for them. Every heart seemed 
ready to burst with grief, and we all wept together. An- 
tonio, our young translator and teacher, a most interesting 
youth, seemed inconsolable. He seized our hands and 
gave himself up to the violence of grief. 

"I had set my heart much upon taking Raheel with me. 
Parents, however, in Syria, have an especial aversion to part- 
ing with their children for foreign countries. One of my 
last acts, therefore, was to make a formal committal of her 
into the hands of my kind friend, Miss Williams. I had 
become so strongly attached to the little girl, and felt myself 
so much rewarded for all my efforts with her, that the cir- 
cumstances of this separation were perhaps more trying than 
any associated with our departure. 

" After so many months of pleasant intercourse and labor 
with my dear friend, Miss Williams, you need not be told 
of our mutual sorrow at parting.* Having wept and prayed 
together for the last time, I left her room, expecting to re- 

* Miss Williams was afterwards married to the Rev. Mr. Hcbard; 
and died at Beyroot on the 8th of February, 1840. 



MRS. SAHAH L. SMITH. $)8 

turn and bid her a final adieu. But this my feelings would 
not allow. I descended the stairs to depart, supposing-the 
last farewell was taken. I found, standing by my little don- 
key, our Mohammedan servant, who had often accompanied 
me in my rides ; and who, the moment he saw me, began to 
weep aloud, and express the deepest grief at our departure. 
This completely overcame me; so that on mounting my 
donkey to ride to the shore, I was so much exhausted as 
scarcely to be able to support myself. 

" On reaching the place, of embarkation, we sat down 
upon the solitary shore, with the friends who accompanied 
us, to await the arrival of the boat to convey us to the ves- 
sel. After considerable detention, the captain approached 
us, and informed us that two English travellers had just 
arrived ; and for their accommodation he wished to detain 
his vessel until the afternoon of the following day. For 
this purpose, he must send on shore sixteen poor Jews, who 
had taken passage, and, moreover, been waiting seven days 
for us. The captain left it with us, whether to go on board 
that afternoon, or to wait on shore until the morrow. But 
as it was Friday evening, and if we returned to our house, 
our friends could not go to the mountains until Monday, 
and more than all, as we dreaded another parting scene, wq 
went on board with our Druze servant. After tossing in 
the harbor for twenty-four hours, our fellow-passengers joined 
us, and we set sail. The travellers were, the Rev. Mr, 
Wynne, a clergyman of the Established Church of England, 
and Mr. Stobart, an evangelical member of the same church. 

M On the 15th of June, five days after we left Beyroot, we 
were sailing on the north side of the island of Cyprus, with 
a strong head wind. My feelings had become much de- 
pressed as I lay in my berth that afternoon, having been 
deprived so long of my usual religious privileges; and my 
husband came, and conversed and prayed with me. About 
nine o'clock, we retired to rest. Before closing his eyes, 
Mr. Smith had some unusual exercises of mind ; being led 
to question himself with more than customary earnestness as 



324 MEMOIR OF 

to his being prepared for a watery grave, if such should be 
oar lot that night ; and finding more than ordinary satisfac- 
tion in the reply his feelings suggested. About half an 
hoar after lying down, we were suddenly awaked by a crash, 
which we perceived was occasioned by the vessel's striking 
upon a ree£ Mr. Smith started from his bed and went upon 
deck without speaking. I was soon upon my feet, but re- 
mained below alone, and began to pray for our lives, and 
the lives of all on board. 

" In the mean time, crash after crash succeeded the first, 
some of them exceedingly terrific, threatening the entire and 
speedy destruction of the vessel. But amid the confusion 
on deck, I remained calmly upon my seat, with my little 
basket containing my combs and brushes in one hand, and 
a bag enclosing a few loose articles in the other. From 
the first moment of danger, my mind reverted to the long 
boat, and some desolate shore; while hope predominated 
that we should escape with our lives. Presently Mr. Smith 
appeared at the cabin door, and called me above. The 
tossing of the broken vessel upon the rocks interfered with 
the lowering of the boat, while a wave broke over the deck 
just as I reached it. I spoke not a word ; but as I turned 
towards the place where they were lowering the boat, sup- 
ported by my anxious husband, the mild rays of the evening 
star caught my eye, as it was just about to descend below 
the horizon; and it seemed like the star of hope. 

" I found myself the first in the boat, I know not how, and 
Mr. Smith followed. Our simple-hearted Druze servant was 
soon by our side ; and I was much affected by the smile of 
relief and satisfaction which played upon his countenance, 
as he exclaimed, 'My master! My mistress!' One after 
another of the passengers and sailors threw themselves into 
the boat, to the number of fourteen. One of them, a poor, 
dissipated, and sick young Englishman, whose presence on 
board had been a great annoyance, as he was dragged into 
the boat, first fell into the sea, and afterwards across my feet, 
and for some minutes lay upon them, pressing them into the 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 325 

water in the bottom of the boat. But every feeling of re- 
pugnance towards him had vanished; and when I learned 
that all were safe in the boat, my heart glowed with gratitude 
to <jlod, an4 unmingled kindness towards all my associates in 
affliction ; and I opened my lips for the first time to express 
it to my dear husband. Then it was that we saw the kind 
providence of God in preventing the embarkation of the 
sixteen Jews ; for had they been on board, certainly many 
lives must have been lost, as our. boat was barely sufficient 
to contain the present shipls company. The sailors plied 
their oars, and we turned our backs upon the wreck, left our 
property to its fate, and committed ourselves to the boister- 
ous waves. 

"As none of us knew how far we were from shore, we 
feared we might be tossed in our little boat the whole of the 
night ; even if we were preserved from the violence of the 
waves. Our inefficient captain had no control over his 
crew, and all were giving directions at once. At length Mr. 
Smith raised his voice, and commanded attention; saying 
that our danger Was greater now than when on board the 
wreck, unless order was preserved ; he directed them to 
the north star for their guidance, and soon we found our- 
selves near a low beach, upon which the waves were dashing 
furiously. But for his influence, we should have been land- 
ed immediately in the midst of the surf; and thoroughly wet, 
if not drowned. He, however, persuaded them to continue 
along the shore, in search of some quiet indentation ; and 
the wind having died away, we at length discovered a spot 
where there appeared to be no surf. Here, an hour after 
leaving the wreck, we landed safely. The passengers were 
all left on shore, while the crew, excepting the cook, re- 
turned to the ship, with the hope of securing a part of the 
property. 

" I said to the English youth before mentioned, ' My young 
friend, were you ever so near eternity before? ' He replied, 
• No.' I inquired, * Did you feel prepared to enter eternity so 
suddenly ? ' He replied again in the negative. ' Then/ said* 



326 MEMOIR OF 

I, ' you know not what a Christian's hope is worth, at such 
an hour ; and I entreat you to give the remainder of your 
days to preparation for death. 1 I had not strength to say 
more; neither could I perceive that my words made any very 
deep impression. 

" In the mean time, a place was prepared for me. A few 
sticks, which had been washed upon the beach, were set up 
by our servant, and a wet sailor's jacket thrown over them, 
to defend me from the wind. Beneath me were spread upon 
the damp sand, the bag which I had brought, a black shawl 
that was in it, and our servant's jacket ; all of them wet. 
Upon these I lay, with my cloak around me, and perhaps 
you will be surprised when I say, slept also. The gentlemen 
walked backwards and forwards near me ; and no other ob- 
ject was seen, except the poor, disabled cook, whose ringers 
had been sadly bruised, and nearly dissevered, at the time of 
the wreck, and who had thrown himself upon the sand at a 
distance from us. 

" About midnight the boat returned, filled with what had 
been taken from the wreck. This was soon deposited upon 
the shore ; and in the darkness of the night, each one began 
to search for his own property, while I lay quietly waiting 
for the result. It was found that each sailor had secured 
his own chest ; they had brought also the portmanteaus of 
our companions, and a bag of hard bread. For ourselves, 
they had brought Mr. Smith's travelling bag, which contained 
his old cloak, double-gown, boots and shoes; a little trunk 
of shaving apparatus, containing also his purse, which in the 
confusion of the wreck he had transferred to it from a large 
chest ; and our two mattresses. The mattresses were of no 
use that night, they were so thoroughly soaked. Of our 
eight chests, two writing-desks, and our provisions, they 
brought nothing. 

" As soon as the boat was unloaded, they returned to the 
wreck, and we still had strong hopes of recovering the re- 
mainder of our goods. But about daybreak they returned, 
bringing nothing, and informing us that the vessel had dis- 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 327 

appeared beneath the waves. As the boat neared the shore, 
I had lifted up my heart to God, that he would prepare me 
for whatever was the result. When it was made known, 1 
had not a word to say. I felt then, and I still feel, that it was 
a sacred deposit which God had made in the bottom of the 
ocean. Nor have I had a heart to wish the recall of a single 
article that was lost. And I hope that you will all cherish 
the same feelings with myself, as I believe my dear hus- 
band does. 

" You may perhaps like to be informed of the natureand 
extent of our losses. We had with us a number of very val- 
uable books and manuscripts ; not many of general literature, 
but mostly connected with our Arabic studies, and the his- 
tory and condition of Syria, which Mr. Smith had procured 
at considerable expense and effort. Our writing-desks, also, 
which were lost, contained journals of Mr. Smith's travels in 
Syria and the Holy Land ; three volumes of private journals 
of my own ; unfinished letters, and letters received from 
friends; all Mr. Smith's sermons, and a small sum of 
money; our medicine chest,silver articles, and my watch." 

Here Mrs. Smith states further particulars; from which it 
appears that her own and her husband's wardrobes, with the 
exception of a very few articles, which they were wearing — 
in short, that nearly all their effects brought from Beyroot 
were lost. She continues — 

" 1 could not but recognize the hand of God very re- 
markably, in my feeble state, in preserving to us our mat- 
tresses. Had it not been for them, I think that I could not 
have survived the voyage. — It is true I was sometimes 
obliged to resort to Jacob's pillow, and had nothing but a 
cloak to cover me; as our bedding had gone to the bottom. 
With the exception of the captain, the loss of every indi- 
vidual except ourselves, was comparatively trifling; and yet 
all of theni, during the remainder of the voyage, were 



328 MEMOIR OF 

obliged to find their resting-place either upon the hard earth 
or the boards of a ship. - 

" Our party had much conversation during the night re- 
specting the manner in which we should relieve ourselves 
from our present embarrassments. We knew not where we 
were, except that we were beneath the mountains of Cara- 
mania, in Asia Minor. If the sun should rise upon us in 
our unsheltered situation, we should be scorched by its 
burning rays. I was too feeble to walk fifteen minutes, had 
we known what direction to take. Our only food was a 
bag of sailors' bread; not like the bread of American 
sailors, but unpalatable and unwholesome ; yet we were all 
glad to make our breakfast of it. But God, who is ever 
rich in mercy, interposed wonderfully in our behalf. The 
dawn of day discovered to us, at a short distance from the 
shore, a small native craft, becalmed. You may imagine 
what were our sensations, especially as the approaching day 
showed us still more distinctly, the hopeless nature of our 
situation. We were on a sandy beach,* extending eight or 
ten miles into the sea, so low as to be entirely overflowed, 
when the water is raised by storms ; and without a single 
tree, or any thing else upon it, to afford us shelter from the 
heat. In our boat, which had but just returned from the 
last visit to the wreck, we immediately sent to ask succor 
from the vessel we had discovered. Soon we saw it ap- 
proaching us. It proved to be a lumber boat from Dami- 
etta, in Egypt, with a captain and crew of Egyptian Arabs. 
We all immediately went on board, and the captain, whose 
appearance was any thing but that of a courtier, passed me 
a few little fish, fried in oil ; which I ate with avidity ; 
though in my diseased state, I perhaps could scarcely have 
eaten more unsuitable food. 

" By noon the captain cast anchor in a deserted harbor, 
called Selefkeh, under pretence of watering ; and there re- 
mained, during that and the following day; though none 



* Called Lisan el-Kahbeh. 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 329 

but putrid water could' be obtained, and we had contracted 
with him, at a large price, to take us to xin inhabited place, 
not very distant, on the coast. On our way we had found 
our jolly-boat; into- which, at the time of the wreck, our 
Druze, supposing we were to leave in it, had thrown his 
own bundle of clothes, a copper wash-basin, and my foot- 
stool. On shore we wandered about in the hot sun, to find 
a place of shelter ; which we at length obtained under a 
large kharoob tree, where a strong wind closed our pores, 
and made us any thing but comfortable. There we cooked 
a dinner of rice and oil, which we had bought of the captain ; 
and passed that day. At night we returned to the vessel. 
It had no cabin, nor awning, nor shelter of any kind. Mr. 
Smith placed one mattress upon the lumber, for me to lie 
upon, and the other to shelter me from the wind. I dressed 
myself in my hood and vail, and he lay beside me upon the 
timbers. 

"The next morning, finding that the captain was still 
trifling with us, we went on shore again. 

"-We became at length somewhat hungry, and solicited 
of the captain some rice, and a vessel to cook it in. But as 
he was making all this delay for the purpose of obtaining a 
higher price for our passage, which we declined paying, he 
refused to furnish us; and we knew not but we should be 
literally left to starve. Just then, however, some of the 
sailors of our old crew, wha had been out in their boat, re- 
turned and informed us that two or -three other vessels were 
lying in a harbor two or three hours distant, from which 
we could probably obtain provisions. This softened our 
Egyptian captain immediately, since he found we were not 
so entirely in his power as he had imagined. And fearing 
he might lose the opportunity of taking us, he hastened 
to provide us with what- we had requested. We, however, 
had lost all confidence in him ; indeed we feared to be any 
longer in his power; for his dark visage indicated a capa- 
bility for almost any deed of darkness. As Mr. Smith was 
the only one of the passengers who could communicate 



330 MI^IOIR OF 

with the captains of the vessels which had been discovered, 
in their native tongues, it was proposed that he should visit 
them, to obtain relief. He left a little before sundown, com- 
mitting me to the kind care of our good friend Mr. Stobart. 

" Soon after his departure, we removed, for the night, 
from our tree to the shore. Here Mr. Stobart made my 
bed under the lee of a pile of timber. Our servant built a 
large fire to keep away wild beasts and musquetoes ; with 
which also he cooked us a supper of eggs, in the sailors' 
copper wash-basin, the only vessel we had now at our com- 
mand. The eggs had been bought that afternoon, by the 
sailors in their visit to the vessels. I leaned against the pile 
of timber, and ate one with my fingers, using some dirty salt, 
which had been pounded with a stone for our use. Then, 
almost smothering myself with my cloak, hood, and vail, I 
laid myself upon my couch. The mild beams of the stars, 
and placid surface of the water, composed me to sleep; 
though I was not without considerable anxiety for the fate 
of my husband, upon those unknown, barbarous shores. 
About half past ten, however, the sound of oars broke in 
upon the stillness of the scene*; and ere I was aware of 
it, he stepped upon the shore, and my heart bounded with 
gratitude. 

" He had become satisfied that an arrangement could be 
made with some one of the vessels, far better than to depend 
upon the Egyptian ; though, owing to the absence of one of 
the captains, no contract had been made ; and they were all 
Arab lumber vessels, which would evidently make the most 
of our distressed situation. Our sailors attached themselves 
to us, and immediately removed their baggage from the 
Egyptian boat to the shore. The captain, as soon as he had 
been paid for what he had furnished us, weighed anchor, 
and left the harbor. We were a little surprised at his haste, 
until our own captain informed us that he had left his com- 
pass on board ; which was probably a sufficient reason for 
his sudden departure. Mr. Smith, at a late hour, lay down 
supperless by my side, while the others arranged themselves 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 331 

at various distances around us, the sailors with the arms by 
their side which they had saved from the wreck. These, 
however, we needed not, for He who ' never slumbereth nor 
sleepeth ' watched over our little company ; and under his 
protection we enjoyed a few hours of undisturbed and re- 
freshing rest, giving us strength for tjie unknown scenes of 
another day. 

M On awaking in the morning, we found our situation 
sufficiently desolate. Not only our harbor, hut the whole 
coast, was without inhabitants, and villages were to be found 
only at the distance of several miles in the interior. Our 
first movement was to despatch the captain of the StafFetta 
Prusiana, the vessel we had lost, to make a contract with 
one of those which lay at a distance from us. We then 
made preparations for our breakfast, which consisted of 
boiled rice, cooked in our wash-basin. I partook of it with 
the company ; using, for a spoon, a piece of brown earthen 
ware, which my husband had picked up upon the shore. 

" The gentlemen went in search of a resting-place for 
the day, and soon returned, saying that they had found a 
habitation, to which they invited me. It was a ruined stone 
building, which Appeared to have been used for a stable, 
by the nomadic Turkmans, during the winter. We had 
the floor, which was earth, swept and covered with fresh 
branches. My bed was spread in the most comfortable 
part; and as, I entered, I can assure you k seemed * as the 
6hndow of a great rock in a weary land.' This was my 
birth-day ; and although in every respect the most sorrowful 
of any that I had passed, perhaps none ever found me with 
so many causes for gratitude. 

" Could I have had the society of our Christian com* 
pan ions only, in this spot, I should have been compara- 
tively happy. But God saw fit to try me in a variety of 
ways. That poor dissipated youth, whom I have mentioned, 
shared with us in all our arrangements. And thus, as he 
lay upon his bed of leaves in the same apartment, I was 
compelled to listen to his incoherent, wild, and sometime! 



332 MEMOIR OF 

wicked conversation, during two long days. He would re- 
peat the same story many times; and though he was not 
destitute of intelligence or taste, yet vice had ruined him 
mentally, morally, and physically. I soon discovered that 
direct religious conversation rather irritated than benefited 
him, and attempted to pursue another course for his good. 
During the absence of the gentlemen, I endeavored to 
soothe and encourage him. I talked to him of his mother 
and sisters, and recommended to him, for the recovery of 
his health, to give up his wanderings, and return to them. 
I know not that any thing was gained by this, except that 
it secured to myself, invariably, respectful treatment. 

" A few hours after we were located in our new accommo- 
dations, my comforts were a little increased, by the kindness 
of one of the sailors. He brought me a few lumps of sugar 
from his chest, which Mr. Smith, after scraping it with his 
knife, carefully wrapped in a paper for my particular use. 
A small white bowl, also, he brought me, which, with a 
wooden spoon, made by my husband, rendered me quite in- 
dependent. He furnished us likewise with a small spirit 
lamp, containing one or two tin cups. And as Mr. Stobart 
had saved from the wreck a small caddy of'tea, we were able 
to refresh ourselves with a cup of tea, using the yolk of an 
egg for milk ; while mine was rendered still more palatable 
by the sugar. At dusk our captain returned, and reported 
that no one of the three vessels he had visited would carry 
us to Rhodes for one hundred dollars ; and this being the 
limit of what we had authorized him to offer, he had con^ 
eluded no bargain. 

" Our habitation we did not find as comfortable at night 
as during the day, for the musquetoes poured in upon us, so 
that we were obliged to build a fire to smoke them out. 
Once in the ni£ht I awoke, suffering from the heat almost as 
much as if I were in an oven ; and found not only a smoke, 
but a large flame blazing up in the corner of the room. The 
poor sick youth, having a turn of ague, had thrown on the 
fire a large pine timber, while we were all asleep, and laid 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 333 

himself down near it, as a substitute for a bed and bedding, 
of which he had none since our shipwreck. We had it im- 
mediately extinguished, or we should all have been suf- 
focated. 

" The next morning, the Sabbath dawned upon us in this 
desolate spot ; and found us, in our distressed circumstances, 
little able to spend its sacred hours without interruption. 
We composed our minds for religious exercises. Gathering 
together a few stones for a pulpit, we spread over them my 
black shawl ; and the Rev. Mr. Wynne read the liturgy of the 
Church of England, and preached a written discourse. It 
was to me c a feast of fat things/ The prayers, the appro- 
priate selections from Scripture, the confessions of sin, all 
seemed sufited to my case. Never did I so realize the beauty 
of that formulary, and its value under such circumstances. 
And those walls never resounded such language before. Our 
sick friend lay stupid and indifferent during the religious 
services; but afterwards rose and opened his trunks for the 
first time since the wreck, and spent an hour or two in dry- 
ing his pictures and books. Alas! he little imagined that 
it was his last Sabbath on earth. 

" In the course of the day, as Mr. Smith was walking out- 
side of the building, an old woman and a little boy, with a 
donkey, passed by, the first inhabitants of the country we 
had seen. She informed him that they were from an en- 
campment of Turkmans, about an hour distant in the moun- 
tains that rose up behind us. This incident, instead of 
comforting us with the idea of the vicinity of human beings, 
alarmed us somewhat for our safety ; as these Turkmans are 
known to have a propensity for robbing, and our defenceless 
situation would now become known to them. On the ap- 
proach of night, we accordingly requested the sailors to bring 
their arms and lodge in our apartment. But as some of 
them had become intoxicated by their visit to the vessels, we 
were more annoyed by their noise, than defended by their 
arms. In the mean time the captain, who had gone to seek 
a passage for us in one of die Turkish vessels, returned, 



334 MEMOIR O* 

having concluded a bargain with one of the captains to take 
us as far as Castello Rosso. 

"The next morning we prepared ourselves for an early 
departure. As I passed out from our humble roof, my feel- 
ings were of a mingled nature. I had realized this morn- 
ing, more fully than before, that disease had taken hold of 
my constitution, and that probably my days were numbered* 
With our mattresses, and a large umbrella saved from the 
wreck, which Mr. Smith purchased of the captain, I was 
made very comfortable in the boat; and after rowing an 
hour or two, we reached the vessel. I was placed on board, 
while the rest of the company, with our goods, including 
even my little basket of combs, were carried to the shore 
to be examined by a custom-house officer, who had come 
from his village, three hours distant, professedly to aid us in 
our departure, but really to extort from us money. 

"I wrapped myself in my cloak, and sat down upon the 
deck. There being no one on board but a small cabin-boy, I 
be^ed of him a little bread and some water, which a hun- 
gry cat came to share with me. After an hour the party 
returned from the shore, having been obliged to give up 
their bargain with the owner of the ship I was in, and con- 
clude one with another. I had accordingly to make the 
painful effort of ascending another near by. Our new ship 
was now on her first voyage ; and of course was cleaner 
than most native crafl; and more free from vermin, except 
that we were annoyed, day and night, by fleas. Mr. Smith 
and I had the cabin (which was low and small, and without 
berths) entirely to ourselves, except that the cabin-boy often 
came in for stores. Cooking utensils could not be bought, 
and our vessel furnished only one copper kettle, one small 
frying-pan, one copper plate, two wooden bowls, and some 
eight or ten wooden spoons : these were to be used by the 
whole ship's company, now consisting of twenty-two souls. 

" The day was spent in negotiations with the custom- 
house officer, and the a<ja of a distant village, who refused 
to give our ship her papers, (she being under the national 



*■-:■ 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 335 

flag,) until they had made every effort to extort from us a,n 
exorbitant present; and had actually secured five dollars, to 
which they had no right. By sunset we were ready to sail ; 
but the wind then would not permit. And it was not until the 
approach of day, the following morning, the 21st of June, 
the sixth day after our wreck, that our anchor was raised 
and we put to sea. For me to remain in our confined cabin 
during the day was impossible. My mattress was spread 
upon the deck ; and there I lay regularly, from morning to 
night, often throwing myself upon it completely exhausted, 
after being almost dragged upon deck. A piece of sail was 
thrown over me for an awning, so torn as scarcely to defend 
me from the burning rays of the sun ; and the air I breathed 
was often filled with the smoke of the cooking apparatus; 
which for some of our large company was always in opera- 
tion. My situation at night was no better. My mattress 
was thrown upon the cabin-floor, where, having nothing 
against which to brace myself during the tossings of" the' 
ship, whose motion was very great, she being light in 
ballast, and we at the stern, the effort to keep in one 
position was exceedingly wearisome." 

Mr. Smith, continuing the account of their voyage, ob- 
serves — "The wind was high, and being contrary to the 
current, raised a cross and troublesome sea. The vessel was 
terribly tossed ; and being very slightly put together, threat- 
ened to founder at almost every plunge. Mrs. Smith, besides 
rolling to and fro, for want of something to support her 
against the motion, was writhing under violent sea-sickness; 
which, instead of allaying, served only to increase he* cough. 
She had some fears that she should not survive the night, 
and for a time I did not myself know what would be the 
end of her sufferings. 

" All this time the floor and partition of our cabin were 
so slight, that every noise reached us from the hold, where 
lay the siok young Englishman she has already mentioned. 
He was crying loudly, a good part of the night, I supposed 
from fright; while those about him were ende&voriag to 



336 MEMOIR OF 

comfort, him. Had I known what was really his case, and 
could have left Mrs. Smith, I should have gone to his assist- 
ance; for he had no one about hitn but ignorant Greek 
sailors. What was my surprise, on being told, in the morn- 
ing, that he was dead! Mrs. Smith had anticipated this, 
having distinguished, among his incoherent cries in the 
night, calls upon the Saviour for mercy ; and conceived a 
presentiment of the result. Such a death in the midst of us, 
shocked the most unfeeling heart; and I found even our 
ignorant, thoughtless sailors prepared to respond to exhorta- 
tions to prepare for eternity. The body being wrapped in a 
sail, the burial service of the Church of England was read 
over it, by the Rev. Mr. Wynne, and it was plunged into its 
watery grave." 

From the history of the remainder of their voyage to 
Rhodes, given by Mr. Smith, we forbear to make fuither 
extracts. Their nights were mostly spent at anchor ; their 
days in working their way as the winds favored. They 
suffered considerably from the difficulty of obtaining sup- 
plies of food, at the places along the coast. At Castello 
Rosso they took passage in a Greek vessel, in which they 
made much more rapid progress, and found in their captain 
a kind old man ; but were exceedingly discommoded by the 
uncleanliness of their accommodations. This was to such 
an extent the case, that Mrs. Smith could not spend a mo- 
ment in the cabin ; and therefore, with her husband, passed 
the night upon deck, although the air was cold. Mr. Smith 
remarks, " As I lay down by her side, in that exposed situa- 
tion, my anxious heart anticipated, as a certainty, all which 
has actually happened. And I even now think the mourn- 
ful result of her disease was at least hastened by the ex- 
posure of that and the following night." 

Arrived at Rhodes, we resume Mr. Smith's journal. — 
" Going on shore, I found a room in the suburb where 
the Consuls reside, and succeeded in removing Mrs. Smith 
thither. The walk, however, from the boat to the house, 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. • 337 

cost her all the strength she had remaining. Oar accommo- 
dations we considered comfortable, though our room was 
but small, and we had to sleep upon a table. 

" It soon appeared that my dear wife's symptoms had all 
become more threatening. Before leaving Bey root, so con- 
fident was she in the native strength of her lungs, that she 
could not persuade herself there was much cause for alarm. 
Her first very serious conviction of danger, as she has men 
tioned, was at our deserted harbor. Here she became still 
more alarmed, and much dispirited. Her pulse, which had 
diminished, the first days of our voyage, was now much 
increased in quickness; a distressing headache troubled 
her without intermission ; she complained much of a stop- 
page and pain in her ear ; and other symptoms of a fresh 
cold were apparent. The affection in her ear, now felt for 
the first time, never left her; and was often afterwards her 
most troublesome complaint. 

"The three or four days of our delay at Rhodes we im- 
proved to fit out ourselves more fully for the remainder of 
our voyage. 

" No better vessel offered here than the one which hard 
brought us from Castello Rosso, and we engaged her to take 
us on to Smyrna, our English friends still in company. By 
going on board and seeing the. cabin thoroughly washed, 
from top to bottom, and having a board knocked off to admit 
more air, I obtained her consent to go into it. She was too 
weak to walk to the shore, and I procured a chair fastened 
between two poles, and borne by two men, to carry her 
thither; taking her through the city, that 6he might have 
the satisfaction of seeing a place so famous in history, and 
now the cleanest city in Turkey. She reached the vessel 
somewhat refreshed by her ride, and we sailed again about 
noon, the 2d of July. 

" It is needless that I should detail all the particulars of 
the remainder of our voyage. An almost constant head 
wind, often violent, made it long; and to my beloved wife 
it was indescribably tedious and wearisome. In fact her 

15 



338 ' MEMOIR OF 

recollections, not only of this part, but of the whole voyage 
from Beyroot, were afterwards so unpleasant, I might say 
revolting, that she took pains to exclude it from her mind. 
And it was only by making it a point of duty, that she could 
bring herself to dictate her journal. She saw not one mo- 
ment of comfort, or of rest Her nights were disturbed by 
coughing, often attended with distress and vomiting, partly 
the effect of disease, and partly of sea-sickness, from which 
she was never entirely free. Her days were spent on deck, 
where I had a mattress spread for her under an awning ; for 
she could sit up but little. Here I was most of the time by 
her side ; her cough, howeveT, would allow her to converse 
but little, and the motion of the vessel so affected her head, 
that she could not bear much reading. Indeed what should 
I read to her ? The sea had swallowed up all our books, 
even to our Bibles' and psalm books. Happily Mr. Stobart 
had saved his prayer book, and from that I used daily to 
read to her a short portion of Scripture, always precious, and 
especially so now that we had so little of it. He had also a 
volume of short sermons by Mr. Jay, and with one of these 
we would refresh ourselves, when she was able to bear it." 

The following remarks of Mr. Smith — in another con- 
nection — will apply to her case during most of the voyage. 
" With every alleviation, you cannot well conceive how 
trying was her state. To do so, you must have been with 
her, having your heart borne down by anxiety, and laboring 
day and night, in our pinching circumstances, to relieve her 
sufferings. Or, rather, you must have taken her place, and 
actually suffered the languor of disease, and the weariness 
of perpetual motion, and the coarseness of our crowded 
company, and the filth every where apparent. Her long 
voyage of nearly thirty days after the shipwreck, deprived 
of suitable conveniences, was far more injurious to her than 
that event itself. I look back with wonder that she could 
endure it. And yet her patience and fortitude held out to 
the last; and feeble as she was, she contrived various ways to 
contribute to the comfort of others. Our English friends 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. * 339 

evidently felt that her society contributed much to relieve 
the tediousness of the voyage. ■ Her chief complaint was for 
want of opportunity for devotional exercises and the cultiva- 
tion of religious feelings ; which she ever found a desid- 
eratum at sea. 

" We reached Smyrna on the 13th of July, thirty-three 
days after our embarkation at Beyroot, and twenty-eight 
from the time of our shipwreck ; and we could then look 
back upon the evils of our tedious voyage as past! 

" Would that it had pleased God to pronounce our other 
evils past also. — Hitherto we had not known what portion 
of Mrs. Smith's complaints to attribute to disease, and what 
to the effect of the fatigue, exposure, and privations of such 
a voyage. It was natural for us to hope that when delivered 
from these unhappy circumstances, placed in the midst of 
friends, and surrounded by comforts, she would again revive. 
We had both of us by this time lost the expectation of her 
entire recovery ; but were neither of us whblly without the 
hope of her so recruiting^ as yet to continue her voyage 
home. 

" The day of our arrival, hope prevailed in her mind, lafr 
tended, no doubt, with considerable excitement at seeing her 
friends. But the next morning, on rising to dress herself, 
she found that she was weaker than at sea. In fact she could 
not accomplish it, and was obliged to return to her bed. It 
was a sad hour. She at once feared that she should never 
be any better, and was overcome by the thought. "A physi- 
cian was called in, the best the place afforded, and such a 
regimen pursued as her case seemed to demand. A few 
days made quite a visible improvement in her nervous sys- 
tem ; but not a single important alleviation., could be dis- 
covered in one of her pulmonary complaints. This was her 
state when I wrote to you my second letter. It was a 
sorrowful day. Most of it was spent by both of us in tears. 
Her love to you surpassed the love of a daughter, She almost 
adored you. It had been a favorite wish that she might live 
long enough to save you the pain of hearing of her death. 



340 MEMOIR OF 

Now she feared jour heart would break at the information 
she felt obliged to convey to you ; and it seemed as if her own 
would burst with the feelings it occasioned. But when once 
the letter was written and sent, she appeared to feel that the 
struggle was over. I believe she from that day gave you up; 
and I account for the fact that she afterwards spake of you 
less frequently than before, by supposing that she feared to 
trust her feelings, lest they should bring upon her again the 
same struggle. — But you know her heart too well to need 
that I should interpret it. It will gratify dear mother to 
know, that she afterwards told me she continued to dream 
of her; always, as she had invariably done, imagining her in 
the full enjoyment of her sight, and in perfect health. 

" Her feelings, when she came now to look at her course 
as inevitably tending downward to the grave, were far from 
being such as she wished. — The same trait of character, 
that made the thought of leaving you so painful, made also 
the anticipation of being taken from her other numerous 
friends, a source of the most sorrowful feelings. You know 
how ardent, and how many were the friendships she cher- 
ished. When she came to think of their all being rent 
asunder, she said, much as had been the pleasure she had 
derived from them, it were almost better to have no friends. 
But having given you up, the severest pang was over, and as 
she drew near eternity, other feelings threw a shade over 
these. — She did not love the world in a bad sense ; and yet 
it was evident that death was to a degree taking her un- 
awares ; and was occasioning her a most trying disappoint- 
ment. How long and how ardent had been her attachment 
to the cause of missions! And how unremittingly had she 
labored to qualify herself for the work ! And now, just as 
she had mastered the language, had her plans of operation 
marked out and successfully commenced, saw herself per- 
manently settled in a commodious residence, had obtained a 
valuable female friend to share in her labors, and was fondly 
expecting another in a beloved relative, — to be called away 
at such a time, she had not expected, and many tears did 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH 341 

she shed at giving up such bright anticipations and favorite 
plans, the subjects of so many prayers. — No one, perhaps, 
ever enjoyed more the buoyancy of health than she. And 
now, when she found the symptoms of disease fastening them- 
selves upon every part of her system, the thought that she 
was never more to have one healthful feeling, would some- 
times give her a pang of sorrow, and cause bitter tears to 
flow. Such thoughts, however, were soon dismissed, and 
apparently never more indulged. — In health she enjoyed 
more beautiful and delightful thoughts of heaven, than 
almost any person I have known. But in doing so, she had 
looked, not through, but over the grave, and the natural fear 
of death, which, as well as the dread of all bodily suffering, 
seems to have been in her unusually strong, was not over- 
come. When, therefore, she came to look at the dying 
pangs as near, her nature shrunk from the view with un- 
definable horror. It was the last of her painful feelings that 
was subdued, and I have no doubt it shed a deeper gloom 
over all the others, if it did not occasion some of them. 

" These were a few of the sorrowful sensations that 
crowded into her mind in these days of darkness. But I 
have not yet mentioned the worst, the most deeply seated of 
them. She that had been so bright an example of the in- 
fluence of ardent piety ; had enjoyed so many blessed 
seasons of communion with God, and been the means of 
giving to so many others the hope of heaven, was now left 
in spiritual darkness, almost ready to say that she was with- 
out faith and without hope. Day after day she prayed and 
longed for her Saviour's presence, but groped for him as in 
the night, and could not find him. She opened her heart to 
Mr. Temple and to myself, and we both endeavored by con- 
versation and prayer to comfort her, and lead her to Him 
whom she sought; but for a long time without success. 
How these clouds at length gradually passed away, the sequel 
will show. 

" Although she had given up the hope of arresting her 
disease, she still hoped, and so did we all, that she might yet 



342 MEMOIR OF 

rally sufficiently to live several months, and perhaps through 
the winter. But in Smyrna, though in the kindest of 
families, her situation was very unfavorable for this. The 
house was a good deal frequented, and consequently not 
quiet ; the streets were noisy, especially from carpenters and 
masons erecting a house near at hand ; the air was confined 
and warm; and myriads of musquetoes annoyed her at 
night, or obliged her to breathe air confined by a net. 

" At this time Mr. and Mrs. A dger removed to the coun- 
try, and very kindly invited us to take lodgings with them 
at Boojah. Accordingly on the 7th of August, I removed 
Mrs. Smith hither. A sedan chair was the only carriage to 
be had, and in that she arrived with comparatively little 
fatigue. This village is in a lovely, retired situation, about 
four or five miles from Smyrna. It is a favorite summer re- 
sort for the English families of the city. 

" Here Mrs. Smith's spirits, which had already begun to 
recruit, were very much improved. From this time she 
was generally cheerful. And so much did she feel herself 
revived, that her hopes of gaining yet a little strength before 
she should be called away, were a good deal encouraged. 
She could bear some reading, uniformly read daily a portion 
of Scripture herself, at times enjoyed more connected thought 
in prayer, dictated occasionally a page or two of her journal, 
and once wrote with her own hand a few letters and notes. 
She amused herself occasionally, also, in sewing; making 
with her own hand several little mementos for friends. But 
yet it was often evident that these labors were the result of 
efforts which it required all the resolution of her energetic 
mind to make. 

" At the time of our wreck, when I reminded her that her 
private journals were lost, she said she was glad of it, and 
her countenance indicated strongly the sincerity of her dec- 
laration. For she said she had feared use might be made 
of them which she did not wish. Upon reflecting, however, 
afterwards, that she had never allowed me to read them, she 
expressed some regret that they were gone. She would 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 34) 

have liked particularly to recover two parts; that which- re- 
lated to her conversion — and her records of the Mohegair 
mission. Of the latter she remarked, that no complete ac- 
count was to be found, and many interesting passage? must 
be lost. V . . 

** Her conversion, I induced her, on Sabbath afternoon, 
the 28th of August, briefly to relate. In a few days I com 
milted it to writing and submitted it for her correction; 
She smiled as she read over parts of it, saying, 'If any of my 
friends should see this, they would be amused that I knew 
myself so well.' * 

" On the 23th of August, being the Sabbath, and during 
the subsequent week, we had much copversation respecting 
the ground of her hope. She had not yet that full assure 
ance of faith which she wished. She was not favored wit^r 
the sensible presence of her Saviour that she desired. Her 
.difficulty seemed to lie in the want of some specific feeling of 
acceptance, which at such a time she had hoped would be 
given her jtfknd which would have been to her a source of 
joy such as she needed to cheer her while going^ down into* 
the dark valley. I suggested to her that she was probably- 
expecting too much, and was therefore dissatisfied with what 
she had, though God saw it to be enough for her. I asked 
if she did not love the Saviour, if his cause was not dear to 
her, and if she could think of separation from him without the 
greatest horror. On examination, all the specific evidence* 
of a gracious state appeared perfectly clear in her feelings; 
and in her speculative views not a single difficulty troubled 
her. And yet, in drawing the conclusion of her being ac- 
cepted, the actual consciousness of her acceptance was de^ 
fective. That she had had it in former years, she was satis- 
fied ; but it was a question of anxious interest, how far she 
might look to past experience for comfort. She remarked an 
apparent inconsistency in religious instructions on this point. 
In addressing men, she said, preachers were Very apt to warn: 

* This has- been embodied in chapter first. 



344 MEMOIR OF 

them against trusting to past experience ; but in speaking 
of departed Christians, they would invariably exhibit their 
life as an evidence of their piety. As to looking back upon 
her past feelings or conduct, for the purpose of building up a 
righteousness of her own, nothing could be farther from her 
thoughts, or more revolting to her feelings. But that she 
might refer to both, regarding them as so many instances 
of the grace of God to her ; not as what she had done, but 
as what Christ had done in her, and thus seek to find assur- 
ance of her gracious state, I endeavored fully to convince 
her. I suggested to her that to neglect all these past tokens 
of her acceptance, would be an act of ingratitude to God. 
1 " Another question she proposed at this season with some 
anxiety. She inquired how far she ought to call up the 
specific sins of her life in order to mourn over and repent of 
them. She had already done so to some extent. She had 
been back to her youth and childhood, and called up many 
sins, which had caused her heart to ache with grief and pen- 
itence. I dissuaded her from pursuing far such an attempt 
to recall particular transgressions, as calculated at the pres- 
ent time unnecessarily to distress her. God would be better 
pleased, I assured her, with her passing them over as for- 
given and blotted out, through his abounding mercy. She 
would not err by contenting herself with a more general re- 
pentance of her past life, feeling that it had been all imper- 
fection and sin, and abhorring herself on account of it; 
which, with a great deal of earnestness, she assured me, she 
most heartily did. 

" You will perceive, my dear parents, how honestly your 
beloved daughter dealt with herself as her last hour ap- 
proached ; how she examined the foundation of her hopes at 
every point, even until they trembled as if it were about to 
give way beneath them. That you may see how they finally 
settled down more firmly upon the Rock of Ages, I give you 
a journal, in which I began at this time, without her knowl- 
edge, to record the daily progress of her feelings and of her 
disease, for your special comfort and my own." 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 345 

"Sept. 4. — Sabbath. — On returning from morning ser- 
vice, I found Mrs. Smith in a happier state of mind than 
usual, indicating that she was .enjoying a Sabbath day's 
blessing. She told me that God had favored her with a 
season of more than common connectedness and satisfaction 
in prayer. Calling for Pilgrim's Progress, she began to read 
the description of Christian's passage over the river of death ; 
but soon stopped. After dinner, at her request, I commenced 
reading to her the remainder of the account ; but had hardly 
advanced a page, before she desired me to desist, saying that 
she could not bear it. Subsequently, she spoke with much 
emphasis of its being a great excellence in the Bible, that it 
contained so little that was exciting. She said it was chiefly 
plain instruction, intelligible to the simplest minds, and not 
too exciting for the weakest nerves. She felt that it was 
better adapted to her, in her present state, than any other 
book ; and she intended to confine her reading chiefly to it. 

" She requested me, at evening prayers, to express her 
thanks to God, that he had in some measure removed the 
clouds that had been resting upon her mind. She had 
prayed that morning, that the day might not pass without her 
receiving some token of divine favor. The attempt to read 
Pilgrim's Progress had been the occasion of her receiving 
it. It had convinced her, that had God given her those 
spiritual joys she had been desiring, with her excitable tem- 
perament and present weak frame, they would have at once 
overcome and sunk her into the grave. God knew better 
than she how her constitution needed to be dealt with ; and 
she was now prepared to be contented with such a degree 
of light as he saw fit to give her. 

" Sept. 6. — I inquired respecting the state of her mind. 
She replied, that she could best express it by saying that she 
felt submissive. She was certainly resigned to God's own 
pleasure respecting her. On the whole, her choice was to die. 
Yet her hope was hardly founded on any thing she now felt, 
but on the evidence she could gather from her past life and 
experience, and on the mercy of God. If any one thought this 

15* 



346 MEMOIR OF 

a wrong foundation, or that she was deceived, she wished to 
be informed. All expectation of living, she assured me, she 
Jbad entirely given up. She indulged not the most distant 
hope of it. And when she saw and recollected how much 
imperfection existed in the best, here, she felt that it would 
be a relief to get to heaven. 

" Sept. 7. — On awakening at an early hour In the morn- 
ing, she said, * How delightful it will be to reach heaven, 
where there will be none of these pains, and wearinesses, 
and imperfections ! ' 

" She spent the strength she had during the day in arran- 
ging her worldly matters, writing out directions to be at- 
tended to after her death, which she sealed and carefully 
deposited in her portfolio. The whole was done with per- 
fect composure, though with manifest intensity of feeling; 
and when it was finished, she evidently felt relieved by the 
consideration that she had closed up her concerns with the 
world. The scene was too much for me. Struggling to 
master her own feelings, she said, 'My dear husband, you 
would not call me back to the world?' I told her that I 
had sometimes felt as if I could not let her go. She replied, 
' All my other friends 1 have given up ; but with you I feel 
that the struggle is not yet past.' 

"Sept. 9. — At an early hour, she said to me, 'What 
long lines of ancestors have I to meet in heaven ! ' I remind- 
ed her, that in health she had been unusually fond of antici- 
pating meeting and recognizing her friends in heaven, and 
asked whether such continued to be her anticipations. She 
replied that they did ; that a large share of the pleasure she 
hoped for in heaven she expected from this source. It 
seemed to her absurd to imagine, that friends would not 
recognize and be interested in each other there. 

" Sept. 10. — On opening the Bible to read to her in the 
morning, I selected a chapter in Isaiah. She stopped me, 
and requested to hear something from the Gospels. She pre- 
ferred them, she said, because they contained the words of 
our Saviour. And if she was going to be with him, she 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 34? 

thought to prepare herself by thus becoming more acquainted 
with him, and having her heart more drawn towards him. 
Besides, his words were all simple, and it did not fatigue her 
weakened mind and body to understand them. 

" Sept. 13. — Mr. Moulton, a pious American friend, upon 
whom a consumption had recently fastened, being in the 
house, she expressed a desire to see him alone. Her object 
was to tell him what was thought of his case-; and to en- 
deavor, by suitable suggestions, to prepare his mind for the 
event apprehended. It gratified her to find him, to some 
extent, in a prepared state of mind. He afterwards re- 
marked, that she was the only person who had told him of 
his danger. 

" Mrs. Brewer also called, and Mrs. Smith conversed con- 
siderably with her on spirituality in prayer, and the means 
and necessity of the cultivation, by missionaries, Of a greater 
degree of holiness. 

" Sept. 14. — Her physician, who had been absent a week 
or two, called jn the evening. In giving his prescriptions, 
he expressed the hope that she would every day find herself 
getting better. In this he conformed to the universal 1 prac- 
tice in this part of the world, of endeavoring to conceal from 
the sick their danger; and in fact, in all his intercourse 
with her, he seemed incapable of bringing himself to act 
upon any other principle. Most persons here would be*, 
shocked at the idea of telling the sick there was no hope of 
their living, though they might be going very fast downward 
to the grave. Even the English of this village seem to en- 
tertain fully these ideas ; and the fact that Mrs. Smith was 
aware of her danger, and anticipated so calmly the result, 
riot merely interested, but surprised them; so that a deep 
and happy impression was produced thereby. On this oc- 
casion Mrs. Smith showed herself shocked at the kindly 
meant attempt of her physician at deception; and told him 
distinctly, that she had no hope nor wish to live. 

"Sept. 17. — Symptoms came on in the morning, indi- 
cating that the sands of life were fast running out With 



348 MEMOIR OF 

anxiety she asked whether I thought God would give her 
patience to the end ; and expressed a desire to know whether 
she had hitherto been otherwise than patient. * At the be- 
ginning,' said she, as I commended her patience, ' I had 
many more rebellious feelings than any one knew; but 
latterly they have all passed away/ 

" In the early part of the night, sleep being driven from 
me by anxiety, in consequence of her low state, I arose, and 
read, with great comfort, the history of our Saviour's death. 
On going to her, I reminded her how different was his situa- 
tion, with no one to stand by him, or to speak a kind word 
— and deprived of his Father's smiles — from hers, with 
some kind friend to watch over her constantly, and attend 
to all her wants. She said that my suggestions comforted 
her; but remarked, that her mind was weak, as she ought 
to have anticipated that it would become, with the advance 
of her disease. Though her mind was weak, it had nothing 
of the weakness of childhood or of idiocy. Her judgment 
remained unimpaired ; and her opinions, with the exception 
of two or three short periods of partial delirium, I continued 
to value, to the last, as when she was in health. Its weak- 
ness consisted in an inability to think much, or connectedly. 

" In the midst of her uneasiness to-night, she expressed the 
greatest satisfaction with every thing that was done for her. 
' Every pillow/ said she, as I composed her after coughing, 
' is placed right, every inch of it.' This disposition to be 
contented with the attentions that were paid her, and the 
services she received, was prominent from the first. It was 
a pleasure, every day, to wait upon her, she was always so 
satisfied and thankful for every thing. 

" About midnight she revived, and seemed more than 
usually disposed to converse; she had received, and read, 
in the course of the day, several letters from home, and had 
derived great pleasure from their contents. Now, in ref 
erence to some observations in one of her sister Faith's, she 
said it ought to be considered, that she wrote her journals 
that were sent home, for the eyes of many friends. Her pri- 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 349 

vate journal was a. more proper place for records of her states 
of mind and private experience. This would account for 
some apparent want of spirituality. 

" In reference to her present feelings, she expressed a 
wish to dwell, morejthan she had done, upon heaven; but 
complained that her diseased body drew most of her thoughts 
to itself, and thus her conversation was more than she de- 
sired about her pains, her food, her position, and the like. 
Of one thing she was certain ; she hated Satan and his king- 
dom. That she loved the kingdom of Christ she was not so 
certain; and was at times troubled lest it should be for God's 
glory to make her an example of his vengeance. Yet in 
Satan she had no complacency, and it had been her great 
object to aid in destroying his kingdom. She felt, too, that 
she cast herself upon the Lord Jesus Christ for help, for 
' what else/ said she, with emphasis, ' can I do?* But she 
had only her former usual feelings. I suggested to her, as 
I had done before, that,, jprobably, here was her mistake; 
she had expected, at such* a time, something new and extra- 
ordinary ; whereas, God saw fit to require that she should 
be satisfied with the ordinary experience of his grace. She 
replied, that she knew she had been Unreasonable. 

"Sept. 18. — Sabbath. — The latter part of the night, 
the beginning of which is described above, I lay down, at her 
request, to sleep near her. She awoke me, at seven o'clock, 
with a kiss, having made a great effort to lean forward for 
that purpose, and said, with a sweet smile which I shall 
never forget, and with all the animation her emaciated fea- 
tures could expres% ' My dear, I want to ask a great favor 
of you — that you will take, your breakfast with me this morn- 
ing. I will drink a cup of tea with you, and we will eat a 
meal together once more.' 

" The day was passed very comfortably, and she was much 
disposed to converse. The death she was brought to, she 
said, was just such a one as had often filled her imagination. 
Time was given her to put her worldly matters in order, and 
to give her friends previous information, that they might not 



350 MEMOIR OF 

be shocked by its suddenness. The remark being made, 
that if she had remained in the United States, she would 
perhaps now have been well, instead of dying with consump- 
tion ; she replied that she should not wish it. She would 
rather be lying here on her death-bed, on missionary ground, 
than to be in health at home. 

" Sept 19. — A distressing cough disturbed her slumber, 
and exhausted her strength, during the whole of the last 
night ; and she awoke this morning oppressed with stupor 
and extreme languor. 

" She had had a desire to write, or at least to dictate, a 
letter to her sister Faith, and had designed doing it to-day ; 
but finding herself very low, she only gave me a message for 
her, to be communicated in a letter from myself. In the 
afternoon, she was so feeble that we did not know but she 
would immediately expire. But after a while, reviving a 
little, she said to me, in a whisper,_that there were one or 
two things she had been intending to charge me with, re- 
specting her last hours. One was, that she wished to have 
a plenty of air admitted to the room. Another referred to 
the custom, sometimes practised by friends, of crowding 
around the bed and repeating texts of Scripture, and verses 
of hymns. She thought it must distract the departing spirit; 
and wished for nothing of the kind, but for order and still- 
ness. She desired her soul, at that solemn moment, ' to be 
left alone with God.' 

" Sept. 21. — I read to her the 5th chapter of 2d Corinthians. 
She listened with great attention, and seemed much inter- 
ested, but said nothing. Not long after, however, she in- 
formed me that it had comforted her more than she could 
express. It had removed all the remaining clouds from her 
mind. She wanted no more. She was going to be with her 
Saviour, and that was enough for her. Repeatedly during 
the day, she alluded to these thoughts ; and in the evening, 
Mr. Temple coming in, she repeated the same remark to 
him. ' No visions of angels/ said she, ' are given mc, and 
no excessive joy, but a settled quietness of mind. I believe 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 351 

all that is written in the word of God ; and upon the strength 
of this faith I am going into eternity.' This steady calmness 
of faith, especially in a person of her naturally ardent tem- 
perament, I considered a much more satisfactory state of 
mind, and more surely indicative of maturity for heaven, 
than a high excitement of feeling would have been. 

" Sept. 22. — In the afternoon, she said to me with much 
earnestness, ' When you write to my friends after- all is over, 
one thing I wish you would make prominent. It is, that I 
feel satisfied with the course I have taken, and that all has 
been ordered by God.' [Meaning in her becoming a mis- 
sionary.] 'I have no disposition to boast of my labors; but 
I feel that I have not left my friends and my country in vain. 
I never have regretted having done so, nor do I now. This 
is my dying testimony. 9 

" In the evening* I received the Missionary Herald, con- 
taining a portrait of Dr. Wisner. Thinking to surprise, and 
at the same time to gratify her, I took it, with a candle, and 
putting my hand over the name at the bottom, showed it to 
her. Though she had for two or three days required assist- 
ance to rise or turn herself, the moment her eyes, just then 
opened from sleep, caught it, she sprang forward, seized and 
kissed it, exclaiming, ' Dear man ! I shall soon be with him. 
He was the last person with whom I shook hands/ Said 
she, her voice faltering, * You ought not to have shown it to 
me to-night. It is too much for me.' She had before men- 
tioned it as a pleasing reflection, in her sickness, that she 
should soon be permitted to associate with Cornelius, Wis- 
ner, and their predecessors. - 

"On another day she said, 'What a wonderful passage 
is that, <4 We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of 
his bones." It has been in my mind all the morning.' 

" Sept. 23. — She was quiet the last night, but appeared 
more than ever exhausted this morning. Reviving" towards 
noon, she expressed a wish to see Dr. Wisner's portrait 
again. It produced the same delighted expression of counte- 
nance. She said, ' I cannot tell you how it affected me last 



352 MEMOIR OF 

evening. You know how much I loved him. Next to my 
parents, I have thought of no one more. I seemed, some- 
how, to be expecting to see him. Repeatedly, during the 
night, his image recurred to my mind, and it was as if I had 
seen an angel. I thought perhaps God had sent him to be 
nigh me, and comfort me ; and I imagined he might be the 
first to greet me in the world of spirits. I do not doubt that 
God ordered the circumstance to comfort me/ 

" Sept. 24. — I found her this morning weak, and waiting 
continually for her summons. She requested me, most 
earnestly and solemnly, to pray that the Saviour would give 
her his presence. Not long after, having revived again, she 
said, * I have come to a conclusion which satisfies me. It 
is, that when the Saviour calls, he will come.' Subsequently, 
as she was expressing a wish to have his presence in the 
dark valley, she checked .herself, saying, ' But ( have not 
entered it yet ; when I do, I shall find him.' 

" In the afternoon, she inquired if a shroud had been 
made for her, and being told that one was prepared, she 
soon said, ' I have now done with earth. 1 Not long after, 
she said, ' How strong is that expression of our Saviour, " I 
will come again, and receive you unto myself, that where I 
am, there ye may be also." ' I then read to her John xiv. 
1— 6; xvii. 24; 2 Cor. v. 1—10, and Rom. viii. 33, 34, 
with such remarks as I thought would assist her medi- 
tations. 

" Seeing me conversing with a friend who was going to 
town, she asked me if I did not find that conversation upon 
other topics distracted my thoughts. I told her that I had 
been inquiring where the English here buried their dead ; 
and had found that it was in the city. There her remains 
would probably lie, not far from the ashes of Polycarp, and 
other sainted members of that ancient apocalyptic church 
She only replied, ' All, sinners saved by grace.' 

"In the evening her fever came on with unusual violence, 
producing great excitement. All the energies of her mind 
seemed to be braced up to meet the king of terrors ; not that 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 353 

she feared the consequences of death, but her natun&dread 
of the mortal struggle was not yet gone. And there was, at 
times, a sublimity in her aspect, her manner, and her lan- 
guage, as she seemed to be gathering up her fortitude for 
the last great contest. 

" After a while, I observed her apparently absorbed, for 
some time, in private prayer. She then called me to her, and 
said, ' My dear, I fear I have been putting you in the place 
of God, and placing too much dependence upon you. It 
has occurred to me, that he will not show himself until I 
look to him alone. I have always intended, at the last, to 
have a season of giving you up. Now I have done it p$tid 
I feel as though God had accepted me, and would bless me. 
I still love you, however; you will not misunderstand me on 
that point.' She said to me, the next day, that she had been 
happier siqce she resigned me. 

"Sept. 25. — Sabbath.— She said to me, * This iff: the 
precious Sabbath.' * Yes/ said I, 'I was going to remind 
you of it.' ' Oh, 1 she replied, ' I have been thinking of fr all 
night.' After a while she added, ' This is a desirable day 
in which to die.' And again, ' How should 1 be disappoint- 
ed not to be called away to-day I * 

" She sent her love to her missionary friends in Smyrna, 
Cyprus, and Syria. Then turning to me, she said, ' Tell 
my friends, I would not for all the world lay my remains any 
where but here, on missionary ground.' After a good many 
remarks, showing the brightness of her views of spiritual 
things, some of which could be but indistinctly heard, she 
exclaimed, ' What a goodly company of ancestors shall I 
meet there ! Yes, and the holy angels, and the Son of God ! 
Oh, the Almighty God ! You know nothing of his glorious 
majesty. I cannot express it; but I wanted to speak of it, 
that you may think that yourselves are nothing. I have 
thought too much of myself. In this sickness I have thought 
it too important that my ease and wants should be consulted. 
We all think that we are of more importance than we are. 
Beware of pride.' Her mind seemed now, and at times 



354 MEMOIR OF 

subsequently, to be burdened with presentiments of inex- 
pressible grandeur, in anticipation of being ushered into the 
immediate presence of God. Hitherto, she had seen only 
'through a glass darkly;' now she was every moment ex- 
pecting the vail to be withdrawn, which would leave her 
' face to face ' before Him who dwelleth in light unapproach- 
able, and at whose majesty the highest angels tremble, and 
vail their faces. 

" We sung that beautiful hymn of Doddridge on the eter- 
nal Sabbath, commencing, 

4 Thine earthly Sabbaths, Lord, we love.' 

" To my surprise, her voice, which she had so long been 
unable to use for singing, was occasionally heard mingling 
with ours. Her face beamed with a smile of ecstasy ; and 
so intense was the feeling expressed in her whole aspect, 
that we stopped after the first verse, lest she should even ex- 
pire while drinking the cup of joy we had presented to her. 
But she said to us, * Go on ; * and, though all were bathed 
in tears, and hardly able to articulate, we proceeded. I was 
sitting with her hand in mine. * While singing the second 
verse, she pressed it, and turned to me at the same time 
such a heavenly smile as stopped my utterance. Before we 
reached the end, she raised both her hands above her head, 
and gave vent to her feelings in tears of pleasyre, and almost 
in shouting. — After prayer, she said, ' I have had a little 
glimpse of what I am going to see. It was but a glimpse, 
and perhaps it was imagination. But it seemed a glorious 
sight. Tell Mr. Sarkis, (an Armenian present, who, she 
knew, had read Pilgrim's Progress with particular inter- 
est,) I have had a slight view of something like what befell 
Christian after he had crossed the river of death.' — Durincr 
this deeply affecting scene, there were standing by, besides 
ourselves, three Greeks, an Arab, an Armenian, and a part 
of the time a Persian, while tears flowed freely from almost 
every eye. 

" Some time afterwards, as she was imagining she should 



MRS. SARAH L SMITH. 355 

die about the going down of the sun, I told her it w&s Mr. 
Temple's opinion, formed from the observation of many 
oases, that she would not die before she had lost her phys- 
ical dread of death. Christ had taken away the sting of 
death/ and he generally gave the world opportunity to ob- 
serve it in the dying experience of his followers. She re- 
plied, * That feeling Iras entirely gone. I have no more 
fear.' — In fact, after the religious exercises above men- 
tioned, she seemed to be in even an exhilarated state of 
mind. As I was giving her some food or medicine, she 
said to me, smiling, ' I have been pleasing myself by think- 
ing how I am going to drop all these things, — the tapioca, 
and the arrow-root, and the bread-tea, and this clothing. *" I 
am going to leave them all to you, and I shall be clear of 
them.' Afterward she said, 'I have been imagining how 
smiling all the faces in heaven will look-, if they are like 

-'s on the day of her conversion. You do not fcntow 

how I shall smile upon you, when you come there.' Again 
she said, ' I have had some most sublime conceptions to-day, 
of what I shall see when I enter the world of spirits.' 

" Sept. 26. — Early in the morning she seemed much re- 
vived. Her fever had subsided; and though weak, she 
was quiet, and disposed to sleep. A sweet expression of 
pleasure was on her face the whole day, and she often 
smiled so cheerfully as to make us all happy. It was re- 
ligious joy that cheered her. She said to me early in the 
day, ' Perfect happiness, what an idea 1 The perfection of 
bliss! It is worth waiting a day or two for.' — And again, 
*I thought a little while ago, that I was ushered into the 
presence of Almighty God, and saw the all-seeing eye!' — 
But there was none of the excitement of yesterday. She 
even had a more than natural, I may say, heavenly calm- 
ness. She proposed uniting with us in the holy commun- 
ion, which she had thought herself unable to bear before ; 
saying, she thought she should enjoy it, seeing that our 
Saviour had said, * Do this in remembrance of me.' Ac- 
cordingly, at four o'clock in the afternoon, we celebrated 



356 MEMOIR OF . 

that solemn ordinance in her room. Mr. Temple officiated, 
with great solemnity and appropriateness of remarks. Hers 
were almost the only dry eyes in the room ; not from want 
of enjoyment, for a heavenly expression of countenance 
showed what she afterwards said — that she enjoyed it 
highly. But it appeared, rather, that her nature bad^ since 
yesterday, undergone a change, and received already some 
of the peace and calmness of the glorified state. 

" Sept. 27. — She said to me, ' I have been thinking all 
night, that there is nothing at all melancholy in the death 
of a Christian, either to himself or to others. I feel very 
happy in the prospect of death.' 

" Sept. 28. — She requested me to pray that if God had 
any thing more for her to do, for which he was thus keep- 
ing her here, he would lead her to do it ; and this she again 
asked me to petition for, when I prayed with her at the 
close of the day. 

" Sept. 29. — The latter part of the night she began to be 
nervous, as on Saturday night and Sabbath, except that she 
was weaker. Yet her patience held out; only she once ex- 
claimed in the morning, 'O Lord, how long! * 

" Sept. 30. — It was about half past four when I entered 
the room. Her hand had a death-like coldness as I took 
it, and I perceived that her hour was come. After being 
raised as at other times, without expectorating, she also 
perceived the same ; and, falling back gently upon her 
pillow, said in a faltering whisper, * Lord Jesus, receive my 
spirit.' 

" The family soon assembled, including the servants, 
and our Armenian friend, already mentioned. It would 
have been a gratifying circumstance, had her last hours 
been passed in the midst of the nation to whose spiritual 
good she had devoted her life. As it was, our own ever- 
faithful and kind-hearted servant was the only Arab that 
witnessed her dying scene. He took his position by the 
side of her bed, and there stood until the last ; showing, by 
uninterrupted tears and suppressed sobbing, how thoroughly 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH, 357 

she had won his attachment. The rest of the company 
stood or sat at a little distance, while I sat by her side with 
her hand in mine. As soon as all were assembled, I asked 
her if 1 Mr. Adger should pray. With indistinctness she re- 
plied, 'Yes.' It was the last word she spoke. Convulsions 
had begun before he commenced, but she was quiet in a 
good degree while he prayed. We then remained silently 
watching her ; feeling that we had nothing more to do, but 
to pray in our hearts for her speedy relief from suffering. 

"Involuntary groans were occasionally uttered in her ■ 
convulsions. These, as we were listening to them with 
painful sympathy, once, to our surprise, melted away into 
musical notes; and for a moment our ears were charmed 
with the full, clear tones of the sweetest melody. No words 
were articulated, and she was evidently unconscious of every 
thing a*bout her. It seemed as if her soul was already join- 
ing in the songs of heaven, while it was yet so connected 
with the body as to command its unconscious sympathy. 
Not long after, she again opened her eyes in a state of con-/ 
sciousness. A smile of perfect happiness lighted up her. 
emaciated features. She looked deliberately around upon/ 
different" objects in the room, and then fixed upon me a look I 
of the tenderest affection. Bending over her, I touched 
her lips with mine, and she returned my token of love. 
It was her farewell. — ■ Her frequent prayers that the Saviour 
would meet her in the dark valley, have already been men- 
tioned. By her smile, she undoubtedly intended to assure 
us, that she had found him. Words she could not utter to 
express what she felt. Life continued to struggle with its 
last enemy, until twenty minutes before eight o'clock ; when 
her affectionate heart gradually ceased to beat, and her soul 
took its final departure to be forever with the Lord." 

" Mr Adger went early to town, to inform our friends of 
the sorrowful event, and to make arrangements for the fu- 
neral. The American Consul, on receiving the intelligence, 



358 MEMOIR OF 

raised his flag at half-mast ; and all the American vessels in 
the harbor, eight or ten in number, did the same. After 
Mr. A.'s return, a place for her b&rial was selected by us, 
and the funeral appointed for ten o'clock to-morrow. 

"Oct. 1. — The English of this village had appeared, 
from the first of our coming here, to feel much sympathy for 
Mrs. Smith. This was exhibited to-day in the numbers that 
were present at the funeral. Besides most of the American 
Missionaries from town, quite a congregation of residents 
assembled at Mr. Adger's. Mr. Temple addressed them in 
a most appropriate and impressive manner, and prayed. 
Out of respect for her, all the ladies present broke 
over the immemorial custom at Smyrna of not attending 
funerals, and joined the procession to the grave. There, 
at my request, the solemn funeral service of the Church of 
England was read by the Rev. Mr. Lewis, varied only by 
singing the following beautiful and appropriate hymn : — 

4 Unvail thy bosom, faithful tomb ; 

Take this new treasure to thy trust, 
And give these sacred relics room 
To slumber in the silent dust. 



' Nor pain, nor grief, nor anxious fear 
Invade thy bounds — no mortal woes 
Can reach the peaceful sleeper here, 
While angels watch the soft repose. 

* So Jesus slept — God's dying Son 

Passed through the grave, and blest the bed. 
Rest here, blest saint, till from his throne 
The morning break, and pierce the shade. 

' Break from his throne, illustrious morn ! 
Attend, O earth ! his sovereign word ; 
Restore thy trust — a glorious form 
Shall then arise to meet the Lord.' " 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 359 

The length of Mrs. Smith's missionary labors was less 
than two years and four months. Her age, at the time of 
her death, was thirty-four years. The village where she is 
interred is beautifully retired, and the spot a quiet one in 
which to rest, until the archangel's trumpet shall break 
the slumbers of the grave. A white marble slab covers' her 
remains, on which is the following inscription : — 

THE MONUMENT 

OF 

SARAH LANMAN SMITH, 

WIFE OF THE REV. ELI SMITH, 

WHO WAS BORN IN NORWICH, CON., U. S. A., 

June 18, 1802. 



TO BENEVOLENT EFFORTS 
FOR THE TOUTH AND THE IGNORANT OF HER NATIVE CITT J 

FOR THE NEGLECTED REMNANT 
OF ITS ABORIGINAL INHABITANTS; 

AND FOR THE 

BENIGHTED FEMALES OF SYRIA *, 

SHE DEVOTED ALL HER 

ARDENT, EXPANSIVE, AND UNTIRING ENERGIES, 

AS A SERVANT OF CHRIST, 

UNTIL, 

SINKING UNDER MISSIONARY LABORS AT BEYROOT, 

SUE WAS BROUGHT HITHER, 
AND DIED IN TRIUMPHANT FAITH, 

September 30, 1836, 
aged 34. 



CHAPTER XVIII 



CONCLUDING REMARKS. 



The closing chapter of this volume, from the pen of the 
Rev. Mr. Smith, is devoted to general remarks upon some 
traits of the missionary character and habits of the subject 
of this Memoir. 

Mrs. Smith entered upon her work with a high sense of 
its importance and responsibilities. Love to her Saviour, a 
lively faith in eternal things, and consequently a high esti- 
mate of the value of the soul, were her inducements to un- 
dertake it. These emotions were the mainspring of her un- 
tiring diligence in her work ; and sometimes operated so 
powerfully upon her mind, as, of themselves, almost to over- 
come her delicate frame. 

Entering thus upon her sphere of labor, she devoted her- 
self to missionary work as her leading business. Every 
thing was made secondary, and as far as possible, auxiliary 
to it. This principle pervaded and regulated all her do- 
mestic arrangements. To be a mere housekeeper and mis- 
tress of a missionary's family, and thus to spend her time in 
ordinary domestic occupations, she felt would be degrading 
to her calling. Her table she always furnished abundantly 
for those who composed her family. Suitable and becoming 
apparel she ever provided for herself and others. And no 
house need be kept in better order, or in more perfect neat- 
ness than hers. It was a model for imitation. But she was 
ever devising ways in which these objects might be accom- 
plished with the least expense of her time. This she ef- 
fected by observing system, and doing as much as possible 

360 



MEMOIR OF MRS. SMITH. 361 

by the hands of others. In her house, it may be said with 
truth, there was a place for every thing and every thing was 
kept in its place; there was a time for every thing, and 
every thing was done in its time. Articles for the table 
which required her time, and were not necessary to health, 
were dispensed with, and their place supplied by such as her 
domestics could prepare; though, owing to their ignorance, 
these were necessarily of the very plainest kind. Time was 
too precious for her to spend it in labors, the object of which 
was merely to gratify the appetite. In her estimation, the 
matter of food was a thing of minor importance, and she 
liked to have it occupy as little time and as little prom- 
inence as possible, in her domestic arrangements. For this 
object the regular meals of her family were reduced to two — 
breakfast, at seven in the morning, and dinner, at five in the 
evening. Thus the whole day was left unbroken for labor, 
and much time was saved. 

This subject deserved mention, both to show how she 
found time to accomplish what she did, and because mis- 
sionary ladies so frequently complain, that domestic occu- 
pations interfere with, and to a great extent hinder, the be- 
nevolent labors they would be glad to accomplish. Some 
have been almost ready to lay it down as a principle, that 
the wives of missionaries must expect to do little, if any 
thing, more than take care of their own families. ^ The 
adoption of such an expectation by ladies entering upon the 
missionary life, Mrs. Smith exceedingly deprecated. Her 
own labors were a practical demonstration, that a much 
higher standard of usefulness is within reach. 

It should be remarked, however, that her industry was of 
no ordinary kind. It can be said of her, with hardly any 
qualification, that during her missionary life, she never lost 
an hour. Her daily labors were begun early. It always, 
seemed to give her great pleasure to throw off sleep, and 
rise from her bed. The last winter she arose regularly at 
half past four. The duties of the closet demanded her first 
attention, and in these she usually spent an hour, or an hout 

16 



-> 



J02 MEMOIR OF 

and a half. It was this that made her love early rising. 
She found great relish in communion with God, when alone 
with him in the stillness of morning, before any one was 
moving in the house. Her devotions performed, she began 
the labors of the day. In these her energy was great. Noth- 
ing was shrunk from which ought to be done ; and what was 
begun, was never left unfinished. Her despatch was extraor- 
dinary. One could hardly tell when she accomplished all 
that she did. Whilst another would be talking, and think- 
ing of labor to be done, she would have it finished. 

The labors she carried forward were many. She had no 
children of her own, and was consequently relieved from many 
domestic duties,' which would otherwise have occupied much 
of her time, and diminished her labors as a missionary. Yet 
her family was not small. It consisted the last winter, most ot 
the time, of four, friends connected with the mission, two 
. boarding scholars, and three servants ; making, with herself 
and her husband, eleven individuals,, without reckoning occa- 
sional guests. These were all to be cared for, and still 
she spent three hours daily, for five days each week, in 
teaching school. She carried forward a system of visiting 
among the native females, for religious purposes. Every other 
day she studied and recited a lesson in a large native Arabic 
grammar, and on the alternate days translated a portion of a 
smaller one into English. She took lessons daily in Italian, 
and translated the weekly Sunday school lessons from the 
Union Questions into Arabic. She regularly attended a 
weekly conference meeting, and two female prayer meetings ; 
and kept up an extensive correspondence. Some arrivals 
would bring fifteen or twenty letters to be answered. And 
in addition to all, numerous native visitors made large en* 
croachments upon her time. 

Her perseverance in what she considered duty, was invin- 
cible. She was not glad of an excuse for neglecting it, with 
apparent consistency. Were it the duty of the hour to at- 
tend a meeting, all arrangements were made to give place to 
it; and she was rarely absent from her post. In her school, 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 30$ 

whatever were her domestic labois, whatever company de- 
manded her attentions — it might almost be said, whatever 
was her health — she was punctual at the hour. She might 
have suspended the school every ecclesiastical festival ; — <■ 
the customs of the country favored it ; the contrary was in 
fact almost regarded as heretical ; and had she served as a 
hireling, she would have done it. But she saw that such fre- 
quent interruptions injured the school ; and with the excep- 
tion of a few great festivals, when the scholars would not 
come, it was always open. 

She could never persuade herself to allow plans of per- 
sonal gratification and relaxation to interfere with her labors. 
She made several excursions, of deep interest to her culti- 
vated mind and rich imagination ; one of which led her to 
the very summit of Lebanon, and the ruins of Baalbek, and 
another to Jerusalem through the length and breadth of Pal- 
estine ; but none of these were made at the sacrifice of this 
principle. Much as she desired to visit the Holy City, such 
a gratification was no argument to her, nor would she allow 
herself to listen to the persuasions of her friends, so long as 
her school would be stopped thereby. She had been in fee- 
ble health during the winter, and the journey promised to 
recruit her ; but she could not make a doubtful experiment 
for her health, at the expense of interrupting her school. 
At length a beloved Christian sister, not then connected 
with the mission, but now a valued member of it, came for- 
ward and offered to take her place, so that none of her im- 
portant labors would be suspended. Then she saw her way 
clear, and set her face toward Jerusalem with a cheerful 
heart. 

Though so closely bound to her duties, she did not go to 
them as a slave. Her affections were the strong power 
within, that accelerated her movements. She succeeded 
remarkably in interesting her feelings in whatever duty 
requirecTlier to undertake. She did it with her whole heart. 
Her labor was her delight ; and she never was happier than 
when she was the most busy. This was exhibited in her 



964 MEMOIR OF 

cheerful, animated countenance daring the day, and the sat- 
isfaction she manifested often in finding she had no more 
strength remaining, when the hour armed for tier to seek 
restoration of it in sleep. 

These general observations upon Mrs. Smith's views and 
character, have been deemed important, as introductory to 
a more detailed view of her labors. 

On entering her station, she devoted herself exclusively to 
the natives. She might have found much to do for the ben- 
efit of the European population of Beyroot. Among the 
English and Americans alone, there were children enough 
to form a school ; whose parents were grieved to see them 
growing up without proper instruction, and were anxious 
to have them taught by some missionary friend. Surprise, 
indeed, was sometimes expressed, that she neglected them 
to devote her time to the Arabs. She did not, however, 
neglect them. She felt and prayed for them, and for all 
the inhabitants of Beyroot, and did what she could inci- 
dentally for their good. But it was to the natives she had 
devoted herself. To them she felt herself a debtor, and she 
would allow no other engagements to interfere with their 
claims, and divert her energies from them. 

Such views rendered a knowledge of the Arabic language 
necessary. Nor would a mere passing acquaintance with 
it suffice ; such as is picked up by most Franks in the coun- 
try, enabling her to express herself intelligibly on ordina- 
ry topics. Her object required that she should be able 
to converse freely and acceptably on religious subjects, and 
to lead in prayer, to the edification of natives. To this 
end a thorough acquaintance with the principles of the lan- 
guage, and a ready command of an extensive vocabulary of 
words* were necessary. Such a knowledge of that most 
difficult language, she deliberately set herself to acquire, 
and unremittingly and successfully did she pursue her aim. 

The alphabet she learned while on her voyage from 
Malta to Alexandria ; but before reaching Beyroot, she had 
acquired no appreciable knowledge of the language. With* 



s 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 365 

in four months after, she began the study of a native gram- 
mar entirely in Arabic; though for about half of that time 
she had had no instruction, except for an hour or two a 
day from a common Arab who knew nothing of grammar; 
and during nearly the whole of it was engaged in school 
every other week. In less than nine months, she was ready 
to commence praying in Arabic, with a little girl whom she 
then took into her family to educate. And in eleven months 
she conduced the devotional exercises at the commence- 
ment of the native female prayer meeting-. Her prayers, 
at these times and subsequently, were always extemporary. 
The grammar above mentioned, she read through, sur- 
mounting its numerous difficulties ; and the last winter of 
her life, she commenced translating another for the benefit 
4>f the sisters who might tread after her the bewildering and 
thorny mazes of the Arabic language. The many new and 
guttural sounds of the language, became familiar and nat- 
ural to her organs of utterance. She could converse ac- 
ceptably, and with readiness, upon* most topics; and some 
lime before leaving her station, she- could fairly master dif- 
ficulties which many a* foreigner, never surmounts ; and was 
prepared to use this indispensable instrument efficiently, in 
the great work of imparting a knowledges of salvation to the 
perishing females of Syria. 

Yet it was not because she had any peculiar taste for the 
study of language, that she was so successful. There was 
not, to the last, perhaps, one of her labors in which she en- 
gaged with less relish for it, in itself. She had also many 
obstacles to contend with. Her scfcool from the first took 
up much of her time, and consumed the best part of her 
strength. Her family, likewise, became large, and her inter- 
ruptions were exceedingly numerous. She could never get 
a teacher, who knew any thing of grammar,, except her hus- 
band; and little of his time was at her command. Per- 
plexed and baffted by the difficulties of Arabic, she would 
often weep, and almost in despair say, that she could never 
learn it. Had she been willing to. listen to an excuse for 



360 MEMOIR OF 

remaining ignorant of it, or for learning it slowly, she 
had enough at hand that were weighty. But she never har- 
bored a thought of living in the missionary field, without a 
thorough knowledge of the language of the people she 
wished to save. Principle urged her on. The study of 
Arabic was her duty. As such, it was one of the things 
never to be omitted ; and very rarely did she pass a day 
without getting a lesson. 

Mrs. Smith's missionary labors literally began at home. 
The efforts she made for the spiritual good of her own 
household, were not the least important of her benevolent 
exertions ; and they formed an integral part of her general 
plans of usefulness. 

She began her missionary life with two settled principles 
in regard to servants, viz : that they should be natives, and 
that she would have as few as possible. The first she 
deemed important, in order that whatever was attempted for 
their benefit, might form a component part of our system of 
missionary efforts for the natives generally ; that whatever 
success resulted from the attempt, might be set down entire 
to the amount of good actually effected in behalf of the na- 
tion ; and that whoever was thus benefited, might, through 
the numerous channels of family connections and friendships 
immediately around him, be in circumstances to* propagate 
and multiply the effects to an indefinite extent. The second 
principle she was partial to, as a matter of economy, which 
she ever studied most conscientiously ; because it accorded 
with that simplicity of life which it is so desirable mission- 
aries should maintain, while they have many temptations to 
swerve from it. 

These two principles somewhat interfered with each other 
in practice. With a foreigner, a Maltese who accompanied 
her and Mr. Smith from Alexandria, and whom faithfulness 
induced them to keep for a number of months, she was able 
fully to practise upon the second; for he was generally 
their only domestic. Upon dismissing him, the first prin- 
ciple was brought into practice. But of the natives, it was 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITI*. 367 

found necessary to have two in the place of one Maltese. 
They were taken fresh from the mountains, that they might 
be free from evil habits often contracted in Frank families,, 
and that she might have the training of them her?el£ An 
emancipated Abyssinian girl likewise, of Mohammedan pa- 
rentage, had previously been offered to her, and appearing to 
be fond of religious instruction, she was continued in the 
family chiefly as a charity. When Mr. and Mrs. Smith left 
Bey root, the girl, was ptit into a pious native family, and her 
board paid until the last day of December, when she died, 
after a lingering illness. Religious conversation, prayer, 
and the mere name of Jesus,, continued to give her pleasure, 
and soothe her ia her sufferings^ until the last; and the 
latest expressed wish of her heart was, that she might die 
and go to her departed mistress. Perhaps at the day of 
judgment, this poor, ignorant Moslem slave may appear 
clothed in the Redeemer's righteousness, as one of the 
many jewels in the crown of rejoicing of that kind friend 
who so faithfully instructed and prayed for her. 

Over these domestics she watched as one thai must give- 
an account. Orientals customs, in the seclusion they pre- 
scribe to the female sex, put a guard upon morals ; which,, 
though artificial, is of great practical effect in the absence 
of enlightened conscience; and it too often happens, that 
in Frank families, serious evils spring up among native- 
servants from the simple neglect of these salutary precautions,, 
which are called into existence by the wants of society. 
Mrs. Smith, possessing an acute sense of propriety, and a« 
quick apprehension of danger that kept her always on the- 
alert ; and governed by a tender conscience that rendered it- 
impossible for her to- be at ease when; any one for whom she- 
was responsible was exposed to temptation ; soon discovered! 
this principle, and determined to apply it in the government 
of her domestics. The precaution was first taken, at the 
expense of considerable trouble, to procure a man servant 
who was brother to her maid ; and then entrance to the apart- 
ments where the latter worked, was prohibited to oihes 



368 MEMOIR OF 

men. Instead of encouraging her women to go unvailed in 
the streets, as many a Frank would have done, she procured 
them rails, which she directed them to wear. This coarse 
she had the satisfaction of seeing not only attended by the 
results she wished, but also acquiring for her house that 
confidence of the natives which is withheld from many 
Frank families. 

Another important feature in her domestic management, 
tending to the good of those in her employ, was a constant 
care to keep them always provided with some species of 
labor. As she was never idle herself, she would allow none 
in her service to be unoccupied. She deemed the loss of 
their time, a sin for which she was accountable ; she knew 
that to keep them busy, was the most effectual way to keep 
them from sin ; and she felt that to give them habits of in- 
dustry, was performing for them a most important act of 
benevolence. She regarded it as much her duty, and made 
it as regular a part of her business, to see that they were 
provided with work as with food. That they should be 
trained to such habits of industry, was almost a miracle 
among Arab women. Yet in reality hardly an hour ever 
came, in which they did not find something already laid out 
for them to do. It is proper to mention this feature in her 
treatment of domestics, not only because it is so often neg- 
lected, to the great injury of servants and the impeding of 
the usefulness of employers, but because it shows how well 
proportioned and mature was her missionary character; in 
that, while attending to more important public labors, she 
suffered none of those less noticeable, yet essential duties to 
be overlooked. 

It was also with her a fundamental principle, that her ser- 
vants should learn to read. This she thought a matter of 
great consequence, in a country where hardly any of the fe- 
males have this knowledge. She would have turned away 
any who were unwilling to be taught; for she could not 
bear to have one in her service merely to supply her tem- 
poral wants, while no permanent good was received in re- 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 369 

torn, tter women were at first taught their letters at home. 
Afterwards she so arranged her household affairs, as to aP* 
low them to attend school alternately each a half of the day. 
The man servant also every day attended one of the mis- 
sionary schools for two or three hours. So that all the do- 
mestics of the family, were actually regular attendants at 
school. The experiment pleased her exceedingly. It con- 
tributed much to her happiness. The furnishing of her 
table with more nicely dressed articles of food, that would 
occupy the time thus spent by her servants, was not an 
object to be allowed, as an impediment to such an arrange- 
ment. She took pleasure in diminishing the amount of her 
house-work, that it might be accomplished. So pleased 
with it was she, as to be satisfied that it would be justifiable, 
where servants' wages are no more than hers received, to- 
increase their number, in order that they might be thus in- 
structed. 

Mrs. Smith never interfered with the attendance of her 
servants to the rites of their own religion. Their fasts they 
were allowed freely to keep ; and their church they attended 
on Sundays and festivals. But the religious rules of the 
family they were required also to regard. From profane- 
ness, and from Sabbath-breaking by work, or by visiting or 
receiving visits, they were strictly prohibited. And they* 
were expected to worship God daily with the family. One 
who declined thisr would not have been employed ; upon the 
principle that those ought to be selected for servants, who 
were most likely to receive religious benefit. For their 
sake, family prayers in the evening were always offered in 
Arabic ; an early hour being selected, that they might be 
more wakeful. 

On the Sabbath also, the servants had many privileges. 
In the morning, during the last winter, a native brother 
came, and exhorted and prayed with them in the house; 
enough of the neighbors being present to form a small con- 
gregation. In the afternoon, they always attended the Sab- 
bath school and Arabic service ; and in the e*«KLVc*^ -*&. 

16* 



370 MEMOIR OF 

family prayers, they were examined upon the sermon they 
had heard. But these public privileges Mrs. Smith did not 
regard as excusing her from more private duties to her 
female servants. Besides hearing them read, she always 
found time, notwithstanding her exhausting duties on the 
Sabbath, to spend a season with them in private. At this 
hour, two or three Druze women were often present. She 
read, conversed, and prayed with them. Variety was given 
to the exercise, by reading some interesting religious nar- 
rative; though for the want of books of this nature in 
Arabic, she was obliged to translate them orally into that 
language as she read along. In this way, she read through 
the Memoir of Mary Lothrop, during the last winter, much 
to their gratification. So persevering was she in this, as 
in every duty, that she was found engaged in it, the last Sab- 
bath she was at Beyroot, though so feeble as to be lying on 
her bed. It is believed that she had also stated times for 
praying with each one by herself. 

It will not be wondered at, that servants who had such a 
mistress, were so reluctant to part with her, and so over- 
come with grief, as they all were at her departure ; nor that 
her poor colored girl, in view of death, fondly cherished the 
desire of being again allowed to be with her, as a bright, 
cheerful ray from the dark prospect before her. 

Such were some of Mrs. Smith's domestic missionary 
labors. And those missionary sisters, who, by domestic 
cares or other causes, are prevented from engaging in the 
more public duties that demanded her principal energies, 
may be encouraged by seeing how much may be done of a 
missionary nature, even within their limited circle. They 
can give to a missionary's family a missionary shape and 
character. They can surround him with a missionary atmos- 
phere, which every one must breathe who comes within it. 
They can save many souls by their own instructions, with- 
out going beyond the bounds of their families. 

Very soon after her arrival at Beyroot, Mrs. Smith had a 
Axed desire to take a little Arab girl to be brought up in her 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 371 

amily. It originated from a variety of motives. The warm 
affections of her heart sought the constant presence of some 
such object of attachment The little girl's soul she hoped 
to save ; and she desired also to train, her up to be a helper 
in the great work of enlightening and saving others. It 
gratified her feelings of benevolence to bring home to the 
scene of her domestic labors, a subject upon which to exer- 
cise, them, that they might know no cessation ; for thereby, 
in her most domestic occupations, she was enabled to feel 
that she was still doing good to one of the natives, to whom 
she wished every hour of her life to be devoted. She hoped 
also, by thus creating continual occasion for the use of the 
Arabic language, to be able to learn it sooner. 

She at length selected fcom her school one of the most 
promising scholars, about eight years of age, and with the 
consent of her parents, adopted her. In Mrs. Smith's care, 
attentions, and gradually in her affections also, she took 
almost the rank of a daughter. But it was settled as a 
fundamental principle in her education, from the first, not to 
European ize her, and thereby unfit her to live contentedly 
and usefully among her countrymen, where she was to have 
her abode. She was therefore always dressed in the native 
costume, and took a rank in the family midway between a 
daughter and a servant. In addition to needle-work, she 
was taught to assist in most kinds of domestic labor ; and 
so thoroughly was she initiated into habits of industry, as 
never to sit down with nothing to do. 

Yet with the servants she was never allowed to associate. 
Kirs. Smith's hope of special benefit to the child from resi- 
ding in her family, was based very much upon the princi- 
ple of segregation; and she had the opinion firmly fixed, 
that unless every avenue by which contamination might be 
contracted were strictly guarded, all her labor would prob- 
ably be lost. She was watched, therefore, with a care that 
parental anxiety rarely gives rise to ; and had no access to 
the kitchen, except on an errand for a moment ; nor was she 
ever left alone in the house, with the servants ; and thau^Jv 



372 MEMOIR Or 

permitted to visit her parents regularly, she was allowed to 
spend the night at home hut once a year. In religion, her 
family was of the Greek church ; and in regard to ceremo- 
nial observances, Mrs. Smith allowed her to be governed 
very much by the wishes of her friends. The fasts she was 
allowed to observe, so far as they strenuously insisted ; yet 
not without being fully taught their futility in themselves to- 
ward aiding at all in the great matter of her soul's sal vat ion r 
nor without her parents being warned of the false ideas 
of religion they were likely to give her. In remonstrating 
with the little girl's mother on this subject, she is known to 
have most affectionately pressed upon her the extreme ab- 
surdity and sin of attaching such importance to fasts and fes- 
tivals, while Sabbath-breaking, lying, and profaneness were 
indulged with an undisturbed conscience; and to have sol- 
emnly warned her of the great danger she was in, of ruining 
her daughter's soul forever, by leading her into paths de- 
viating from the strait and narrow way of salvation. 

Mrs. Smith's object in taking her, at the outset, was re- 
ligious ; and this object she ever kept uppermost in training 
her. It has been already mentioned that' she knelt with her 
in prayer, the day of her entering the family, though Mrs. 
Smith had then been less than nine months studying her 
language. This practice was continued every day she was 
with her, and doubtless while it impressed the child, and 
called down the blessing of God upon both, it gave Mrs. 
Smith the ability she had to commence so early praying in 
her school, and in the female prayer meeting. 

Mrs. Smith's instruction of the little girl was daily and 
constant. In addition to the privileges she enjoyed in com- 
mon with the servants, which have been mentioned, her 
habit was to hear her read a portion of Scripture while 
dressing in the morning, thus accomplishing an object ever 
dear to her — the saving of time. She then questioned her 
upon what she had read, gave her other instruction, and led 
her to the throne of grace. Thus her pupil not only became 
an intelligent reader, but acquired a knowledge of the princi- 



MRS. SARAH I* SMITH. 373 

pies of religion, which would be considered good in an 
American child of her age. It was a pleasure to question 
her upon the Scripture read at family prayers, and upon the 
sermon she heard on Sunday; her answers- were so appro- 
priate. Her conscience becoming thus enlightened, she 
was sometimes much impressed by the truth. 

In a word, the expectations Mrs. Smith had formed in 
taking her were fully answered ; and she was often heard 
to say, that she had every day been amply repaid for the 
pains bestowed upon her. It will not he wondered at, that 
her affections became entwined very closely around so prom- 
ising a pupil, and that the attachment assumed much of the 
character of parental kindness. Mrs. Smith's sharpest trial, 
perhaps, at her departure from Beyroot, arose from leaving 
her behind ; and in her last days she made arrangements 
which she hoped would secure to her a small legacy. The 
sum she desired has since been appropriated for that pur- 
pose, and it is hoped will serve as an inducement for the 
little girl to remain in some of the missionary families, until 
the seed sown with so many prayers, shall spring up and 
bear fruit. 

The female school at Beyroot was commenced by Mrs. 
Thomson and Mrs. Dodge, in 1833. A few girls were 
previously found in some of the public schools supported by 
the mission. But these ladies wished to bring them more 
directly under missionary influence, and to confer upon 
them the benefit of a system of instruction adapted to, fe- 
males. A commencement was accordingly made, by giv- 
ing lessons to such little girls as could be irregularly as- 
sembled for an hour or two a day at the mission-house; 
such an informal beginning being not only all that the ladies 
had time to attempt, but being also considered desirable as 
less likely to excite jealousy and opposition. For the pro- 
ject was entered upon with much trembling and apprehen- 
sion. Not merely indifference to female education had to be 
encountered, but strong prejudice against it, existing in the 
public mind from time immemorial. The Oriental prejudice 



374 MEMOIR OF 

against innovations from any quarter, and especially from 
foreigners, threatened resistance. The seclusion of females 
within their own immediate circle of relationship, originally 
Oriental, but strengthened by Mohammedan influence, stood 
in the way. And, more than all, religious jealousy, look- 
ing upon the missionaries as dangerous heretics, and their 
influence as contamination, seemed to give unequivocal 
warning, that the attempt might be fruitless. The older 
missionaries, who could weigh the full force of all these 
obstacles, having felt them through so many years of op- 
position to many of their labors, were less sanguine of suc- 
cess, than the brethren and sisters who had newly arrived. 
But they were not aware of the hold they had gained upon 
the public confidence. The event proved, in this as in 
many other missionary attempts, that strong faith is a 
better principle to act upon in the propagation of the gospel, 
than cautious calculation. Even down to the present time, 
it is not known that a word of opposition has been uttered 
against the school, which was thus commenced. 

In this initiatory state Mrs. Smith found the school, on her 
arrival at Beyroot in January of 1834. Some six or eight 
girls assembled in the afternoon in Mrs. Thomson's room 
at the mission-house, and were taught sewing and the alpha- 
bet. One was far enough advanced to aid in teaching ; and 
knowing something of English, could act as interpreter. 
The widow of Gregory Wortabet also occasionally assisted. 
Mrs. Smith commenced her labors in the sewing department 
the second week after her arrival, and soon Mrs. Wortabet 
was engaged as a permanent helper. Mrs. Thomson re- 
moving to Jerusalem in the spring, the school devolved upon 
Mrs. Dodge and Mrs. Smith ; who took alternate, weeks in 
teaching it, until it was discontinued in June on account of 
the heat. In the fall, Mrs. Dodge also removed to Jerusa- 
lem, and then it was left wholly upon Mrs. Smith's hands. 
Thus it continued for more than a year. Soon after reach- 
ing Beyroot, Mrs. Smith saw that a promising field was 
open for female usefulness, and after much prayerful con- 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 3T5 

sideration, she determined to invite a female friend, Miss 
Rebecca W. Williams, to come from America, and help her. , 
Miss W. immediately complied with the invitation ; and 
with the resolution of deep Christian devotedness, left her 
friends and country, by the earliest opportunity, on this er- 
rand . of benevolence. The measure proved a happy one, 
and both ladies saw constantly increasing reason to rejoice 
that it had been taken.' Miss W. went into the school 
immediately on her arrival. But Mrs. Smith, preferring 
that the school, rather than herself, should he benefited 
thereby, determined that it should be open twice as many 
hours as before, and continued to give to it nearly as much 
time as she had done. 

The difficulty of appropriating to the school a Toom in 
the mission-house, caused it to suffer many inconveniences 
at the outset. A benevolent daughter of the American 
Consul at Alexandria, Mrs. Tod, then a resident at Beyroot, 
observing this, and desiring to contribute something toward 
the salvation of the Syrian women, opened a subscription for 
a school-house. Two hundred dollars were subscribed in 
Syria, at Alexandria, and Bagdad, for this purpose, and 
promptly paid. This sum enabled the mission to erect a 
substantial stone building, on the premises belonging to the 
Board ; which in the spring of 1835, was ready to be occu- 
pied, and furnished excellent accommodations for the school. 

Mrs. Smith had very little acquaintance with school teach- 
ing at home; none, in fact, except what she had acquired in 
Sabbath schools and in her charitable labors among the Mo- 
hegans. Nor had she a taste for it. She often humorously 
expressed to her husband her surprise at finding herself so 
thoroughly a school-mistress. It was because Providence 
directed her to this, as the way for her to do good, and be- 
cause she saw that otherwise it would not be done, that she 
engaged in it. Yet she did not enter upon it reluctantly, 
nor continue it as a task. In this, as in almost every case, 
what was her duty became her pleasure. Her heart entered 
fully into it. This was seen in the uneasiness it gave bet 



376 



MEMOIR OF 



to lose a day from school, and the great reluctance with 
which she closed it for a vacation. It has been mentioned 
that the first summer it was closed in June, on account of 
the heat. But then she had no sooner retired to the moun- 
tains, for a cooler climate, than she gathered a few little 
girls around her there, whom she taught regularly every 
day. The second summer she would not consent to close 
her school until August ; and then she wrote to a friend 
that she " did it in the spirit of obedience to her husband." 
She was strict in the preservation of order in every move- 
ment of the school. Another would perhaps have thought 
that such untutored Arab girls must needs be indulged, or 
they would conceive a disgust for the place of instruction,, 
and come no more. Hut she settled it as a principle, that 
order was essential to the well-being of a school, and was 
moreover one of the things, and that not the least, which 
the children needed to be taught. It was surprising to see 
how soon they learned to understand and regard it. This 
doubtless made them love school the better. A more or- 
derly collection of cheerful faces, is not often to be found 
in a school-house in a Christian land. The chief means 
employed for the preservation of order, was a black-board, 
for debt and credit marks ; and this was generally sufficient 
to secure the most perfect subordination. The employment 
of rewards was not adopted without due deliberation. Her 
opinion was, that among children so ignorant and untutored, 
and so unaccustomed to the restraints of a school ; who 
came with so little relish for study, and whose parents were 
so ignorant of the value of education ; it was necessary at 
the outset thus to address a principle, whose control they 
would all feel, and access to which was direct and easy. 
She never saw reason to change this opinion ; and the re- 
wards were so managed, that she could say upon her death- 
bed, that she could recollect no instance in which, to her 
knowledge, envy had been caused among the scholars by 
means of them. The rewards were regulated by the num- 
ber of credit marks, and were distributed two or three times 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 377 

a year, consisting chiefly of plain articles of dress. At 
these times, she had begun to have an examination. The 
last she held in company with Miss Williams, but a short * 
time before she was obliged to leave. The mothers of the 
children, and some other female friends, were present. The 
scholars, together, amounted to upwards of forty ; the room 
was well filled, presenting a scene % that would have de- 
lighted the heart of many a friend of missions. Classes 
were examined in reading, spelling, geography, first lessons 
in arithmetic, Scripture questions, the English language, 
and sacred music ; and- the whole was closed by a brief 
address from Mrs.. Dodge. The mothers then came forward, 
of their own accord, and in a gratifying manner expressed 
their thanks to the ladies for what they- had done for their 
daughters. 

Had Mrs. Smith been unable to connect her labors in 
this school directly with the great work of saving souls, she 
would have felt little interest in it. To this object she 
was wholly devoted. Any employment directly bearing upon 
it had a charm for her. Every thing aside from it, or from 
religion in some of its relations, was insipicL Only a Jew 
weeks after she began to take her turn in the school, and 
during the absence of her husband in the Hainan, she took 
a step which had an important bearing upon- its religious 
character. Her desire to have God formally acknowledged 
in it, induced her to request Mr. Bird to come in and close it 
with prayer. The first time he did so, the children, as they 
knelt down, were so amused at the novelty of the position, 
that all were overcome with laughter, which was continued 
through the exercise. So much did the thought grieve her, 
that they were so brutishly ignorant as to be thus affected by 
this solemn exercise, that her feelings rose beyond her con- 
trol, and she wept. They had even then begun to be much 
attached to her ; and perceiving, when they arose, how their 
conduct had affected her, they all of them, of their own ac- 
cord, came forward and expressed their sorrow for what 
they had done. From this time, prayer was rarely, if ever, 



378 MEMOIR Or 

omitted for a single day. Mrs. Wort a bet soon began to lead 
in the exercise, accompanying it with the reading of the 
Scriptures, and remarks. One of the missionary gentlemen, 
however, often conducted the closing exercises of the week, 
until Mrs. Smith was able herself to perform devotional 
duties in Arahjc. After that, she alternated with her as- 
sistant; and once a week it was their habit to stop after 
school, and unite in prayer for the blessing of God upon 
their labors. The religious instructions she gave, in general 
addresses to all and in private conversation with individual 
scholars, were varied and constant. Hardly a school in 
America, probably, has more religious instruction given in 
it, and that in a more direct form, than was received by this. 
And who were these children that listened to it ? Most of 
them were Arabs of the Greek church ; two were Jewesses ; 
some were Druzes; and at times there were eight or ten 
Moslems. All loved her with a sincere attachment; for 
such labors of love could not but win their hearts. On the 
return of her husband to Beyroot, after her decease, his 
mere presence in the school drew tears from many eyes, by 
the recollections it occasioned. 

May God yet cause the seed thus sown to take root and 
bear fruit ; that she may ere long welcome some of these 
dear children, the objects of so much effort, of so many 
warm affections, and of so many prayers, to join her in 
the labors and enjoyments that occupy her in heaven. 

The native Sabbath school at Beyroot originated with 
Mrs. Smith. In this department of instruction, her first 
public effort of benevolence was made in the land of her 
birth ; and in it she was still engaged, when called to adopt 
Syria for her field of labor. It might be expected that her 
interest in Sabbath schools would not be diminished, by this 
removal to a land where she must constantly see increased 
need for them. 

A Sabbath school for the English and American chil- 
dren at Beyroot, was in existence before her arrival. To 
this, after the return of her husband from the Hauran, in 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 37& 

the spring after their arrival, she proposed that a native 
class should be* added. He had little faith in the suc- 
cess of the project, hut urged by her entreaties, consented 
to attempt it. At first, two or three boys only came and 
recited to him. Soon a class was brought in from the fe- 
male school, then taught by Mrs. Dodge and herself. The 
succeeding winter, the Arab scholars, at her suggestion, 
again were separated from the others, and assembled at the 
house of a native brother. There were sometimes enough 
to give him and Mrs. Wortabet also a class. In the spring, 
the female school-house being finished, the school was re- 
moved thither ; and from that time, there continued to be 
regularly from twenty to thirty scholars, with usually five 
teachers. These teachers met every Friday evening, around 
her table, to study the lessons for the following Sabbath, 
and for prayer. Three of the teachers being natives, this 
meeting was not less important for the profit they derived 
from it, than from that which accrued to the scholars. In 
the instructions given, the Union Questions of the American 
Sunday School Union, were used as a guide ; and for this 
purpose the lesson of each Sabbath was translated during 
the week into Arabic. This labor, as has been already 
mentioned, Mrs. Smith began, the last winter,, to take, upon 
herself. 

- Most of the scholars were females*, and these chiefly from 
the school. The servants of the mission families, and some 
adult inquirers, used also to attend. Some strong induce- 
ment must have operated to bring children together for this 
object on the Sabbath. At home they were never told that 
it was their duty to attend ; but on the contrary, it was nat- 
ural for their parents to regard it with coldness or suspicion. 
They had, been accustomed to be permitted, on the Sabbath, 
to engage as fully as they desired in their recreations. This 
was an abridgment of their liberty, by confinement to 
studies for which they had naturally no relish, and for which 
they were likely to be ridiculed by their companions. The 
chief influence which led them to assemble under such cir* 



388 MEMOIR OF 

cumstances r it would be wrong not to ascribe to tbe blessing 
of God in .answer to prayer. But, doubtless, affection for 
their teachers had influence with some of these scholars, 
and attachment to the school, was not wanting as a motive. 
Rewards also were given, according to the number of marks 
each one received ; for the same reasons that justified their 
introduction into the day school. But here they always 
consisted of religious books. 

In this school the fullest evangelical instruction was given, 
and* in the plainest manner, both catechetically and by direct 
address. Thus to keep such a number of young persons, for 
an hour or two on the Sabbath, from merely the various 
ways of profaning holy time, in which they would otherwise 
have been engaged, was an object of no small importance. 
"How much more important was the object actually accom- 
plished, might have been estimated by one who should have 
gone into the school,, and witnessed the nature of the in- 
struction given,, and the eager attention with which it was 
received. He would have found Mrs. Smith seated on a 
low stool, with six or eight bright little girls half surround- 
ing her, and in their eagerness to catch her instructions 
bending forward till their heads- often formed a semicircle 
very near her own; while their lively faces,. and animated 
inquiries, showed the interest excited by the words that fell 
from her lips. The scene was edifying to- those who con- 
stantly witnessed it ; and she was often heard to affirm, that 
she never had a more interesting and improving class at 
home, than this which she here trained up of untutored Arab 
girls. The hour was always too short for what she had to 
siy ; and the superintendent generally had to interrupt her, 
when the time came to close the school with his customary, 
address. 

When the exercises were finished, each class followed its 
teacher to the Arabic preaching, at the mission-house. Here 
she sat with the female scholars, to mark their behavior; 
and on Monday morning, at the opening of the school, they 
were questioned by her upon the sermon delivered. Some. 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 381 

learned to give a very good abstract of what the preacher 
had said; and under such training, they became his most 
attentive and interesting hearers. 

The native female prayer meeting, at its commencement, 
was an untried experiment even at Beyroot, the oldest of 
American missions in the Mediterranean. Up to about this 
time, there had been little opportunity to establish one. 
Only one missionary lady on the ground was capable of 
conducting the exercise ; and there was but one native sis- 
ter to attend and aid. Serious obstacles stand in the way 
of such a meeting on missionary ground. The hinderances 
missionary ladies often meet with, in learning the language, 
are apt to delay for some time their acquiring a sufficient 
acquaintance with it for such purposes ; though they may in 
a short time know enough for common use. And then the 
strangeness of such a meeting among the natives, makes it 
appear to female diffidence a formidable undertaking. Yet 
these hinderances exist perhaps more in imagination than in 
reality ; and at the most, need have weight only at the com- 
mencement of a mission. For it is practice that so soon 
gives command of a new language for ordinary purposes ; 
and practice will as surely give command of it for the con- 
duct of religious exercises. And after such exercises have 
been once commenced at any mission, the strangeness of the 
thing passes away ; while the new sisters are both encour- 
aged by the example of those they find on the ground, and 
are helped soon to unite with them, by what they learn of 
the language from habitually hearing others use it in devo- 
tion. Much, very much, depends upon the sisters, as well 
as upon the brethren, at the outset of a mission. For if they 
take a high stand in such positively missionary labors, an 
elevated standard is permanently set up for those who come 
after, which they will naturally imitate; while if little is 
attempted, it is only now and then one of more than ordinary 
character, who, on entering the field subsequently, will ven- 
ture to go farther than her elders ; and thus years may see 
very little done in the female department. The native sis^ 



•J 



392 MEMOIR OF 

ters are not to be taken into account in this matter, for they 
will generally go no faster than they are led; and unless a 
missionary lady shows them the way, and goes before them 
herself, they will hardly ever take a single step. 

The desirableness of such a meeting as the one in ques- 
tion, was first suggested to Mrs. Smith by one of her dearest 
friends, who has already been mentioned as having taken 
the female school during her visit to Jerusalem. The 
modesty of this sister, equalled only by her benevolence, 
would allow her to give no encouragement of taking a part 
in it herself. But the proposal received the cordial appro- 
bation of the only missionary lady besides Mrs. Smith then 
on the ground ; and it was found that at least half a dozen 
Arab women would probably attend, at the beginning. To 
show Mrs. Smith that any labor connected with the Redeem- 
er's kingdom, within her sphere, was desirable and practi- 
cable, never failed to enlist her energies in its immediate 
execution. This plan presented especial claims, arising from 
the peculiar circumstances of those for whose benefit it was 
to be attempted. 

The Oriental seclusion of females renders them difficult 
of access to the ordinary means of grace used by a mission- 
ary gentleman ; their assembling even for religious purposes 
in the same apartment with the other sex being condemned 
by custom. They are also a neglected class, even among 
the native Christians, as regards the religious means enjoyed 
by their own countrymen; being crowded into a distinct 
part in their churches, where an intelligent hearing of 
the services is rendered difficult, both by their distance, 
and by the confusion often prevailing among themselves. 
At Bey root, so far is their gallery from the altar, in the 
Greek church,- that it is never expected they will understand 
any thing; and so great is the confusion they sometimes 
create, that at the last Easter, they were actually prohibited 
coming to some of the more important services, in order that 
the church might be quiet; while, by established custom, it 
is hardly allowable foi a female ever to attend church more 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 383 

than two or three times a year, until she is married. Being 
thus difficult of access to the influence of the missionary 
gentlemen, and neglected by their own countrymen, they 
present special claims, and constitute a field peculiarly open 
to the efforts of missionary ladies. 

Finding herself in such a field, Mrs. Smith needed no 
urging, to enter heartily into every practicable measure for 
its cultivation. - The first meeting was appointed at the 
house of a native friend, and it devolved upon Mrs. Smith to 
conduct its opening exercises. From that time, it was con- 
tinued regularly ; at first once a fortnight, but afterwards 
every week. All the missionary ladies who were in the field 
when it was commenced, including those who were then at 
Jerusalem, had an opportunity, in turn, to assist in the con- 
duct of it ; as well as two native sisters, one of whom aided 
from the beginning. Including some of the older scholars 
of the school, as many as twenty were at times present, 
though the number was often less. The experiment, though 
commenced with much trembling, was fully successful ; — and 
were those who attended, to give an account of its exercises, 
they would doubtless speak of many affecting appeals to the 
conscience and the heart to which they there listened ; and 
of many precious seasons of sweet communion with God 
which it afforded. May this, which was probably the first 
female prayer meeting held in Syria in modern times, be the 
forerunner of many more; until all the daughters of that 
ancient land shall learn to worship God in spirit and in 
truth ; as their ancestors were once taught by the blessed 
Redeemer in person. 

Early in the spring, before Mrs. Smith was removed from 
her labors, the little company of missionaries at Beyroot 
was awaked to inquire, with more than usual earnestness, 
why it was, that while the means of grace were so constantly 
used, so few conversions occurred. Some thought a succes- 
sion of special religious meetings would be attended with a 
blessing. Of these, a few were held among the missionaries 
themselves, with manifest benefit. And out of them grew a 



384 MEMOIR OF 

weekly evening conference in Arabic, held in rotation at the 
houses of native friends, which was soon attended by forty 
or fifty. Others still thought more needed to be -done in the 
way of personal religious conversation with individuals, ia 
order that the truth might thus be brought into direct con- 
tact with each one's own conscience ; and the proposition was 
either made or warmly seconded by Mrs. Smith, that some- 
thing of this kind should be attempted systematically. Ac- 
cordingly the circle of native acquaintances, who could be 
properly visited for, such an object, was surveyed, and a 
certain number assigned to each brother and sister. A 
meeting was also appointed on the last Monday in every 
month, for each to report what he had done, and for prayer 
in behalf of the effort. 

Mrs. Smith, as has already appeared in a former chapter, 
cbose for her parish the mothers of her scholars. She im- 
mediately commenced the labor; and though already de- 
bilitated by the first stages of the disease that terminated her 
life, she was able to state at the first monthly meeting, that 
they had all been visited. From some she made an inter- 
esting report ; her conversations, so new and so impressive, 
having evidently affected them ; and her visits manifestly 
tended to win the attachment of all. This was ever the ten- 
dency of her conversations of this nature ; for her affection- 
ate heart qualified her naturally for such a work, and long 
practice in faithful admonition, had given her unusual 
facility for doing it with propriety and without offence. She 
deeply felt the duty of thus personally calling the attention 
of her acquaintances to their eternal interests; and it is be- 
lieved few have been with her any length of time, without 
hearing something from her of this nature ; while still fewer 
can be found who have not been rather won than offended 
by her conversation. 

To one thoughtless Syrian female, she took occasion once, 
in such a conversation, to give an account of her own con- 
version. An impression was made by it, which, from that 
time, changed her whole deportment ; and the grace of God 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 385 

ere long brought out in her character many pleasing evi- 
dences of piety. This new sister Mrs. Smith had the satisfac- 
tion of finding ready to lead the devotions of others, at the 
last native female prayer meeting she was permitted to attend. 
And this, among many other things, gave her reason to feel, 
in leaving the country, that she had not dwelt there in vain. 

The preceding effort, had Mrs. Smith's life been spared, 
would probably have led her to another somewhat different. 
The poor around her presented a moqfr interesting field for 
labor. Maqy of them in Syria are reaf objects of charity. 
And while a little contribution goes a great way towards 
supplying their wants, if given in a proper manner, it will 
win for the donor their attachment, and also the applause of 
the community. Nothing there insures so high a character 
foT religion as charity ; and yet the poor are sadly neglected, 
and religious visiting of them is almost, if not entirely, .un- 
known ; so that a pious individual, entering the cellars and 
hotels of the needy, with a little charity in his hand, would 
find, while he afforded relief to their bodily necessities, that 
he had won a way for the provisions of the gospel to their 
hearts; at the same time, that instead of exciting jealousies, 
he had gained the good opinion and confidence of others. 
What a beautiful example of Christian benevolence would 
be exhibited by a missionary lady, who should thus devote 
herself to scattering temporal and spiritual consolations 
among the abodes of poverty and disease ! Could there be a 
more literal imitation of our blessed Saviour's example? It 
is a field entirely open for cultivation ; and would probably 
remain open, though all others should be shut. 

Such an effort of religious charity was often presented to 
Mrs. Smith's mind ; but her school had prevented her en- 
gaging in it systematically. It was her intention, however, 
to give up the school more entirely to Miss Williams, as 
the latter grew familiar with the language ; and to devote 
herself very much to labors of this nature. For such a 
work, she was strongly inclined. She had a taste for it. 
She loved the poor, and at any time', took more satisfaction 

17 



386 MEMOIR OP 

in visiting their hovels, than the mansions of the rich. It 
accorded with her ideas of a missionary's duty, to pay spe- 
cial attention to them. She experienced great delight from 
an incident of this kind, one of the first mornings after her 
arrival at Beyroot As her husband entered her room, she 
said to him, with an animated expression of countenance, 
" I have been for half an hour enjoying one of the most 
gratifying scenes I have yet witnessed upon missionary 
ground. That," said she, looking out of the window by 
which she was sitting, " that is missionary work," It was 
Mr. Bird sitting under a fig tree, in the yard of the mission- 
house, reading the gospel to some beggars to whom he had 
been distributing bread. 

She was habitually charitable to the poor who solicited 
her bounty, though she had not yet found time to search 
many of them out in their own dwellings. After moving to 
the house in the gardens in which she resided during the last 
year, it was some time before any beggars applied for char- 
ity. When they began to come, she expressed her pleasure 
that they had found their way ; and it is believed no one was 
ever, to her knowledge, turned away without some article of 
food, unless evidently not an object of charity. Nor was her 
generosity merely of an indiscriminate nature. She studied 
to accomplish other objects, besides supplying the wants of 
the persons aided. In several instances, poor children were 
clothed, that they might be able to attend school. And in 
other cases, some article of dress was given to poor persons, 
as an indirect way of securing their attendance upon the 
means of grace, by putting them under obligations to the 
missionaries. 

But it was the ignorance and moral degradation of the 
poor, which chiefly excited her compassion ; and she began, 
in connection with the system of religious visits, to take 
some steps, which, as already intimated, would doubtless 
have led her in time to systematic efforts for their spiritual 
benefit. In addition to the mothers of her scholars, she put 
upon her list of petsous to be visited, a number of her poor 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 387 

Druze neighbors. * Many of these, besides being needy, 
were also in the extreme of ignorance, having really no re- 
ligion of any kind, and living almost like the beasts that 
perish. Despised by Christians and Moslems, and disowned 
even by the Druzes, they are regarded as the offscouring of 
society ; and, as if in order that no sect might be disgraced 
by having its name applied to them, an epithet has been in- 
vented specially for them, and they are called Skitb But 
the very fact of their being disowned by others, makes them 
accessible to the missionaries ; and her heart became strong- 
ly set upon carrying the light of the gospel into their dark 
abodes, and darker minds* Even when informed by her 
physician, only a few days before she left, of the danger she 
was in, and that she must suspend all labor and excitement, 
and even keep as much as possible in a reclining posture ; 
she earnestly begged the privilege of occasionally*going with 
her Bible to the houses of these poor people, and instructing 
them in the salvation of the gospeL The physician, seeing 
the strength of her feelings, and fearing that to put too much 
restraint upon them would be worse than to allow of some 
bodily fatigue, yielded to her entreaties, and consented to 
her seeking, in this way, an outlet for the irrepressible emo- 
tions of benevolence that swelled her heart. It was this 
disposition, that finally, more than any thing else, decided 
the expediency of a voyage, which should at once remove 
her from the objects of her benevolent labors — the presence 
of which was like fuel to the flame, and threatened too soon 
to consume her delicate frame. How delightful to reflect 
that now her benevolence needs no such checks, and meets 
with none ! All its clogs have been dropped in the grave. 
In their stead, it has received angels' wings, themselves a 
flame of fire ; and the warmest aspirations of her heart meet 
with the perfect ability to accomplish their dearest, highest 
objects. 

Much more might be said of Mrs. Smith's missionary la- 
bors. But it is time to close this sketch, by one or two in- 
quiries to which it naturally leads. It was remarked in the 



886 



MEMOIR OF 






beginning, that she gave herself up exclusively to mission- 
ary work, and that her industry in it was uncommon. These 
remarks have been borne out by the brief account that has 
been given of her labors. But from what did such devoted- 
ness and such industry spring 1 Their seat was in her 
heart. They were planted there both by grace and by 
nature. 

Grace nourished in her heart a piety whose prominent 
features were essentially missionary. Her devotions, upon 
which it lived, were of a nature that brought eternity, with 
all the immortal interests of the soul, unusually nigh ; and 
constantly presented a great variety of objects to be em- 
balmed in her most devout affections. Prayer was emphat- 
ically her vital breath. It was the life of her soul. Her 
customary meals she diminished in number, and often 
omitted, but prayer never. When travelling, and when at 
home, it was equally indispensable. Often, when so situated 
that retirement could not well be obtained otherwise, did 
she rise while it was yet dark, and all others were asleep, 
that she might go alone to God. But this she did, not 
merely in such circumstances. She loved to do it. It was 
this feature in her devotions, that helped her to bring eter- 
nal things nigh to her. She removed as far from the world 
as she could, and in doing so she got very nigh to eternity. 
Upon her Sabbaths and her hours of prayer the world had 
no permission to intrude. 

The benevolent labors that occupied a part of each Lord's 
day, have already been mentioned. Having given so much 
of it to others, she felt that the remainder sacredly be- 
longed to her own soul ; and she would allow neither family 
cares nor visitors by any means to steal it from her. Mar- 
keting was always done, water brought, and food prepared, 
on the preceding day ; so that her servants were never seen 
abroad on business upon the Sabbath, nor were they any 
more unnecessarily employed at home. A dinner they were 
never called upon to cook. Equally thorough was she in 
excluding company. Had she not been, visitors would have 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 389 

crowded upon her from morning to night, for among the na- 
tives it is the principal visiting day. She might have rea- 
soned, that to admit them would give her opportunities for 
doing good. But such opportunities, she had abundantly 
during the week. For every day, business crowded upon 
her, and her house was frequented by visitors at all hours. 
Having settled the principle, that her Sabbaths should not 
be interrupted, it became a rule that knew no exceptions ; 
and whoever called, high or low, was refused admittance, ex- 
cept the two or three Druze women, who came for instruc- 
tion with the servants. And how precious were such Sab- 
baths ! So complete an arrest of the bustle and duties of 
the week, in the quiet retirement of her residence, made 
these like a sweet, foretaste of the calmness and rest of 
heaven. And such they were to her. She looked forward ■ 
to them with delight ; every moment of them was sweet and 
precious as they passed ; and they left her animated with new 
zeal and diligence for the benevolent labors of the week en- 
suing. They were like so many successive impulses, urging 
her on in her Christian race. And she might be observed 
commencing her duties on Monday, generally with increased 
animation ; as if impelled by some new motive, and often 
with some new plan of usefulness. 

Her seasons of devotion were as sacred from all intrusion 
as her Sabbaths. She made it an essential item in the ar- 
ranging of her house, to appropriate one room for an oratory. 
When this was secured, she richly enjoyed her hours of re- 
tirement. Her regularity in them, and her partiality to the 
quietness of the early morning, while the world was yet 
asleep, have been already mentioned. In her prayers she 
was explicit and particular even in little things. For she 
felt that He who cares for sparrows, directs and takes an 
interest in the least matters, and that nothing is too small to 
be referred to him. She put Him in the relation of a fa- 
miliar though exalted friend ; and her devotions were a rev- 
erential cultivation of intimacy with him. And in thus 

17* 



390 



MEMOIR OF 



i 

i 
i 

i 



drawing nigh to God, in the recesses of such retirement, she 
found heaven drawing nigh to her. It was in that field her 
rich imagination delighted to roam. Nothing gratified her 
so much, as to gather from Scripture some new or striking 
thought about that blessed world. And in no conversation 
was she so animated, as in such as had this for its subject. 
So great was her heavenly-mindedness, that the favorite sub- 
ject of her waking thoughts often occupied her also in sleep. 
Heavenly scenes were objects about which she frequently 
dreamed. 

With the spirituality of mind she thus cultivated, no bodi- 
ly indulgence was allowed to interfere. She delighted to 
" keep her body under, and to bring it into subjection." It 
was with her a principle to contract no habit of any kind, in 
regard to food, so strong that it could not with perfect ease 
be dispensed with ; for she would by no means consent to 
be, in any sense, a slave to bodily appetite. This it gave 
her pleasure to sacrifice to the interests of her mind. Food 
was to her a most insipid topic of conversation, which she 
avoided with care, even at table ; and to blunt her mind by 
indulgence in it, was what she was almost ignorant of by 
experience ; while those who did it, lost thereby much of 
her esteem. Her diet was almost wholly of vegetable food, 
and of that she ate but little ; for the reason that her 
thoughts were thus left more free, and her affections more 
lively. With those who esteemed fasting an inconvenience, 
or unprofitable, she felt no sympathy. She usually fasted 
the first Monday of every month, in connection with the 
monthly concert ; when she ate nothing until the day was 
closed. And at no time did she have more elasticity and 
cheerfulness of spirits, or enjoy herself more than on these 
occasions. 

Thus she lived above the world. And is it w T onderful, 
that with a mind so pure and spiritual, and a heart so fixed 
on heaven she should not hesitate, when her summons came, 
to leave the body and go to be forever with the Lord ? It is 



f/i 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 391 

believed she prayed for. recovery but once during the whole 
of her sickness. She was induced to do it then, by reading 
the 33d chapter of Job. 

But such habits of spirituality and heavenly-mindedness 
did not merely prepare her own soul for heaven. They gave 
her an overwhelming sense of the guilt and danger .of those 
who, devoting themselves altogether to the world, lose all sight 
of eternity. When she found herself surrounded by an entire 
community wholly of this character, her emotions became 
sometimes almost too strong for her constitution to sustain. 
Occasionally, when walking upon a terrace which overlooked 
the city of Beyroot, and reflecting that the thousands upon 
whose dwellings she gazed, would almost inevitably soon de- 
scend into a miserable eternity, did she express such exercises 
of soul, as could be experienced only by one to whose faith 
eternity was unvailed with the clearness of unclouded 
vision. 

It was a heart swelling with benevolence of such an or- 
igin, that impelled Mrs. Smith in her course of untiring 
labors. Yet she rested not satisfied with the interest in the 
eternal welfare of others, to which spirituality of so heavenly 
a cast naturally gives rise. She cultivated it by long and 
persevering practice. 

Her devotions were as little selfish as her life. Others 
had a large share in them. Her manner of observing the 
monthly concert of prayer for missions, has been already 
alluded to. She had also many private concerts of prayer 
with friends, for particular objects and particular persons, 
which her heart would by no means allow her to neglect. 
For a large circle of friends, she prayed individually ; re- 
membering some in rotation, and others at stated time* 
Were the list of individuals to be summed up who thus 
found a place weekly in her prayers, it would surprise many 
a cold-hearted Christian, who knows little of her attachment 
to the closet. Yet, instead of feeling it a burden, she always 
loved to increase the number. Thus she suffered those 
deep, heartfelt emotions, which the soul only knows when it 



393 MEMOIR OF 

is atone with God, to so away from herself; and benevo- 
lence found its way, and imparted its coloring to the very 
innermost sources of feeling in her heart. These emotions, 
too, thus sent abroad, entwined themselves around the ob- 
jects she prayed for, and drew them into a close and sacred 
union with herself. It was like a generalizing of her being, 
and to feet for others became so much a part of her nature, 
as largely to share the throne in her heart, with (he love of 
self naturally predominant there. 

The analysis of Mrs. Smith's character for benevolence, 
would be imperfect, without adding, that what grace thus 
cherished in her, was engrafted upon a stock unusually con- 
genial by nature to its growth. Her distinguishing char- 
acteristic, naturally, was warm and generous affection. She 
delighted to love; and her love was expansive. It sought 
to embrace a wide circle, and was ever seeking for 'new 
objects to rest upon. She would often discover something 
to interest her, in a character where others could discover 
nothing. And she would stilt feel and hope for a friend, 
and be devising ways to do him good, when alt others bad 
given him up. It might almost bs said, that nature did for 
her, what grace fail*to do for some. While yet in an uncon- 
verted stale, and quite a girl, she took a leading part in the 
establishment of one of the earliest Sabbath schools in New 
England ; and in after life she was once greeted as a Chris- 
tian sister, by one who traced bet conversion to instructions 
received from her at that time, as a member of her class. 

The generosity of her affections was such, that she de- 
lighted to forget herself, in giving pleasure to others; noth- 
ing was too good for her friends. The best and most grati- 
fying use she knew how to make of any thing she valued, 
was to give it away ; and this she was very sure soon to find 
some occasion to do. It was her way of laying it up. She 
enjoyed it more in the hands of her friends than in her own ; 
and she secured, besides, a place in their recollections. Shu 
was carefully and systematically economical in whatever she 
used in her family and in her labors. She h 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 393 

only one thing — the affections of her friends. They were a 
treasure she loved to secure and increase. 

The strength of her emotions was often the occasion of 
wonder and admiration to her friends. They were a great 
deep in her breast. Yet so thoroughly were they under her 
control, as to form no disproportioned excrescence or de- 
formity in her character. And as she felt strongly herself, 
she liked this trait in others. An intellectual character, 
even of the highest order, she could look upon with compar- 
ative indifference. But let her catch indications of strong 
affections, and her interest was secured. She seemed to feel 
a sympathy of soul with such a person. 

From such generous and strong emotions, directed and so 
highly cultivated by divine grace, did Mrs. Smith's devoted- 
ness and industry id the cause of benevolence spring. They 
were the irresistible, untiring, moving power, that urged her 
on in her labors of love. And oh ! what a soul of ardent, 
benevolent feeling swelled her breast 1 Her dearest friend, 
near as he was to her, never felt that he fully comprehended 
it. Its depths he could not fathom, and it was to him a 
constant object of admiration. Had her frame been as 
strong as her soul was great and ardent, she might have 
been still going on in her course. But her bodily strength 
was literally consumed by the flame which burned within her. 
Now, however, she is tied to no such clog, to hinder her in 
her heavenly course. For surely such a character was not 
brought to so high a degree of excellence, to be at once and 
forever extinguished by death. Can we doubt that she is 
transferred to scenes where her noble heart finds scope for 
its most expanded emotions ? And much as limited views, 
and personal attachment, may tempt her friends to feel that 
she was taken from earth too soon, her character almost 
authorizes us to say, that earth had her labors long after she 
was ripe for heaven. 



MONODY 



TO 



MRS. SARAH L. SMITH. 



So, —Asia hath thy dust, — thou, who wert born 
Amid my own wild hillocks, — where the voice 
Of falling waters, and of gentle gales, 
Mingle their music. How thy soft, dark eye, 
Thy graceful form, thy soul-illumined smile, 
Gleam out upon me, as I muse at eve 
'Mid the bright imagery of earliest years ! — 

Hear I the murmured echo of thy name, 
From yon, poor forest-race ? 'Tis meet for them 
To hoard thy memory, as a blessed star, 
For thou didst seek their lowly homes, and tell 
Their sad-browed children of a Saviour's love, 
And of that clime where no oppressor comes. — 
Cold Winter found thee there, and Summer's heat, 
With zeal unblenching. Though, perchance, the sneer 
Might curl some worldling's lip, 'twas not for thee 
To note its language, or to scorn the soul 
Of the neglected Indian, or to tread 
Upon the ashes of his buried kings, 
As on a loathsome weed. Thine own fair halls 
Lured thee in vain, until the hallowed church 
Reared its light dome among them, and the voice 
Of a devoted shepherd, day by day, 



MB* 

f 



MONODY TO MRS. SMITH. 

Called back these wanderers to the sheltering fold 
Of a Redeemer's righteousness. 



And then, 



Thy path was on the waters, — and thy hand 
Close clasped in his, who bore so fearless forth 
The glorious Gospel to those ancient climes 
Which, in the darkness and the shade of death, 
Benighted dwell. Strong ties detained thee here — 
Home, — father, — sightless mother, — sister dear, — 
Brothers, and tender friends, — a full array 
Of hope and bliss. Tet what were these to thee, 
Who on God's altar laid the thought of self? — 
What were such joys to thee, — if duty bade 
Their crucifixion ? 

Oh, Jerusalem ! — 
Jerusalem ! ->- Methinks I see thee there, 
Pondering the flinty path thy Saviour trod, 
And fervent kneeling where his prayer arose, 
All night on Olivet j — or with meek hand 
Plucking from pure Siloam's marge a "flower, 
Whose tender leaflets drink as fresh a dew 
As when unhumbled Judah wore the crown 
Of queenly beauty; — or with earnest eye 
Exploring where the shepherd-minstrel kept 
His father's sheep, before the cares that lodge 
Within the thorn- wreathed circlet of a king 
Had turned his temples gray ; — or with sweet smile 
Reposing wearied in thy simple tent, 
By turbid Jordan, and the bitter wave 
Of the Asphaltites — 

Back to thy place, 
Amid the Syrian rales, — to thy loved toils 
For the forsaken Druzes, — and the throng 
Of heathen babes, who on thine accents bang, 



»• 






396 MONODY TO MRS. SMITH. 

At on a mother's. Lo ! the time ■ short. 
Perils upon the waters wait for thee ; 
And then* another Jordan,-* from whose flood 
Is no return. But thou, with lip so pale, 
Didst take the song of triumph, and ge down 
Alone, and fearless, through its deptlis profound 
Snatches of heavenly harpings made thee glad, 
Even to thy latest gasp. — 

Therefore, the grief 
Born at thy grave, is not like other grief. — 
Tears mix with joy. — 

We praise our Qod for thee. 

L II. 8 




STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES 

STANFORD AUXILIARY LIBRARY 

STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004 

(650) 723-9201 

salcirc@aulmail.stonFord.edu 

All books are subject lo recall. 

DATE DUE 



HI 



