Google 



This is a digital copy of a book lhal w;ls preserved for general ions on library shelves before il was carefully scanned by Google as pari of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one thai was never subject 

to copy right or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often dillicull lo discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher lo a library and linally lo you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud lo partner with libraries lo digili/e public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order lo keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial panics, including placing Icchnical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make n on -commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request thai you use these files for 
personal, non -commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort lo Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each lile is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use. remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 

countries. Whether a book is slill in copyright varies from country lo country, and we can'l offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull lexl of 1 1 us book on I lie web 
al |_-.:. :.-.-:: / / books . qooqle . com/| 



JTifiUXt SI„ ai^AX*. 







S r l .-, \ 



• « . «. »I 1 „ 



V N T U A f* T « ! C J », I ; . 



I 



>. 



% - 







MEMOIR 



or 



JOHN MOONEY MEAD, 



WHO DIED AT 



EAST HARTFORD, CONN. APRIL 8, 1831, 



AGED 



4 YEARS, 11 MONTHS, AND 4 DAYS* 

/) 

•Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them fio% 
for of such ia the kingdom of God."— Lues, 18 : 16. 



PUBLISHED fiT TUB 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU-STREET, NEW-YORK. 



O. f Mtluw, IVinur. 



3^<< — k^,^ 



MAHVAffO COUE6E UMMIY 



Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1832, 
by Pcirce & Parker, in the Clerk's Office of the District 
Court of Massachusetts. 

Eight of publishing transferred to the American Tract Society. 



ti 



CONTENTS. 



Preface, - - . - . - - Fag* 5 

CHAPTER I. 

Early History and Traiti op Character— birth— early 
consecration to God — name — agreement of the pa- 
rents — regarded as immortal— rational— taught to 
obey — not deceived — nor frightened— nor hired — 
reverence for the Bible — public worship— presence 
of God — anecdotes — what does it mean ?— explana- 
tions— correctness of language — Sabbath school af- 
fection — self-denial — no stimulus from emulation- 
desire to do good — tenderness of feeling, 9 

CHAPTER II 

* 

Early Religious Character— early instruction— prayer 
— visit to Portland— interesting incidents— hopes to 
be a minister— christian discernment — anecdote- 
resurrection— Lord's Supper — love of preaching 
and of the Bible — rejoices in a revival— conversa- 
tion with an impenitent young lady— death of a 
neighboring child — " wicked to sell rum"*— prayer, 43 

CHAPTER HI. 
Last Sickress and Death — visit to a family— surprising 
fidelity to his playmates — interesting conversations 
— concern for his mother— anticipation of the judg- 
ment — trust in Christ— wishes to join.the company 
above — interesting conversations and incidents — 
death — lines occasioned by his father's grief— fune- 
ral— epitaph— lines to Mrs. Mead — appeal to chil- 
dren—Sabbath school hymn, 66 

APPENDIX. 
Life of Rev. Asa Mead, 107 



The following Memoir, with the exception of a 
few paragraphs, was written by Rev. Asa Mead, 
who survived his beloved child but a few months, 
at the request of a number of persons deeply inte- 
rested in the religious education of the young. Some 
of these persons were intimately acquainted with 
the subject of the memoir, and others had heard 
much of him, and received a favorable impression in 
regard to his character. The memoir, when prepar* 
ed, was also examined by several judicious persons j 
ministers of the Gospel and others, all of whom uni- 
ted in the request that it might be published. 

As those lvho first proposed this publication 

agreed in the opinion that a knowledge of the man* 

ner in which this child was treated, together with 

the results, would be profitable to both parents and 

children, and a benefit to the cause of education, to 

communicate this knowledge has been an object con* 

stantly in view. He is not therefore presented to 

•5 



6 PREFACE. 

the reader merely as a pious child. The character 
of his intellect, as well as of his heart, is described, 
and not only the kind of knowledge communicated, 
but the manner of communicating it, is shown. No 
douj>t the sanctification of the child should be the 
first and principal object of the parent's solicitude J 
but this is to be attained by the truth, and a know- 
ledge of the truth is essential to its effect. The in- 
tellect of the child therefore must be cultivated, in 
order to reach the heart. Should God grant his 
blessing in his usual manner, it wiL be found that 
the benefit will be proportioned to the clearness of 
the child's understanding of religious truth, and the 
happy associations connected with it The manner 
then of communicating truth and the objects associ- 
ated with it, are important matters for the considera- 
tion of those who have charge of the young. 

With such views, this memoir has been prepared 
for the .benefit of parents and teachers, as well as of 
children and pupils. How profitable to either it 
will be, future events must determine. Had the pa- 
rents of this child expected to be called so early to 
part with their son, they would have kept in writing 
ah account of what might be profitably made known; 
and no doubt a larger and more valuable narrative 
might have been the result. But being obliged to 



PREFACE. 



depend on memory, and unwilling to add another 
to the already too numerous fictitious narratives he- 
fore the public, they have given only what is dis* 
tinctly recollected, and commit the work, imperfect 
as it is, to tho blessing of God, hoping it may not be 
altogether useless. 

It is possible that some things are not stated pre- 
cisely as they occurred, but no intentional exaggera- 
tion is admitted ; and it is believed that the charac- 
ter of this child is not presented in a more favorable 
light than truth warrants. 

Should the prevalent impression, that it is impos- 
sible for a young child to give evidence of piety, be 
removed from the mind of any, and parents and 
teachers be encouraged to labor more for the early 
conversion of those committed to them, expecting 
success, then those who mourn the early exit of this 
lovely boy will rejoice that he has not lived or died 
in vain. 



SSSBSffi^XSl 



CHAPTER I. 

Early history, and traits of character. 

John Mo one y Mead, the subject of this memoir, 
was bom at Brunswick, in the state of Maine, May 
4th, 1826. His father was then pastor of the Con- 
gregational church in that town. Being their first 
born, his parents made him, from his birth, the sub- 
ject of earnest prayer, with strong confidence in God 
that he would sanctify him for himself. Their chief 
desire was that he might be early converted, and 
wholly employed in the love and service of God ; and 
especially that, should it please him, he might in 
due time become a preacher of the Gospel. But their 
prayers were generally petitions for his early con- 
version to Christ, and his *sa notification. 

In giving him a name, they wished to prepare to 
exert a happy influence, by keeping before his mind 
a happy example. They therefore selected that of a 
man who had been an early and most valued friend 
of his father, well known in New-Hampshire as a 



10 MEMOIR OP 

friend to the fatherless and widow; who then was 
on the borders of eternity, trusting he was about to 
enter the rest that remaineth for the people of God. 

They felt strongly the necessity of being prepared 
to discharge the duties of parents, in training «p an 
immortal being; and sought preparation by reading 
some of the best books on early education, by fre- 
quent conversations with each other, and by prayer 
for wisdom from above, often pleading the promise, 
" If any lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who 
giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and 
it shall be given him." 

A very considerable part of the value of the me- 
moir of such a child must consist in the addition it 
shall make to the stock of information on eaily edu- 
cation. The reader, whether a parent, child, or 
teacher, will therefore have patience to read a some- 
what particular and minute account of the measures 
adopted with this child, and their results. It is hoped 
it may not be time spent in vain. 

The first understanding of his parents with each 
other was, that every thing in regard to the manage- 
ment of their child should be matter of consultation 
and prayer ; that they would always act in concert, 
so as not to thwart each other ; and that they would 
pursue a uniform system, always keeping his food 
in view. 

They regarded him from the first as an immortal 
being, who would for ever feel the consequences of 



JOHN M. MB AD. 11 

*hat they should do in relation to him. In their 
conversations, it was early and often remarked, that 
he was acquiring knowledge, and forming habits 
for eternity. Nothing, therefore, that affected him, 
could be indifferent. Even what seemed to many 
but trifles, might be of immense importance to him. 
On this account they commenced, when • he was 
only a few months old, withholding from bim what- 
ever he cried for ; and when he was fretful, they did 
not pacify him by caresses, or by bestowing what he 
desired, but by directing his attention to something 
else. It was a common saying withthem, that pa- 
rents often hire their children to cry and be fret- 
ful. They give whatever the child demands in this 
way, and thus obtain present relief from his im- 
portunity, but teach him how to obtain, hereafter, 
whatever he may desire ; thus subjecting themselves 
to all his caprices, whenever he chooses to make 
himself and them unhappy by his fretfulness. Per- 
haps in no way are more children injured than in 
this. It teaches them to be selfish, and regardless of 
the feelings of others. It habituates them to obtain 
what they desire, in the most disagreeable way ; and 
for these habits they must be often chastised, and 
meet with many mortifications while young, to sub' 
due their disposition, or they are rendered disa- 
greeable and miserable for life. A little resolution, 
early practiced and persevered in, might have pre- 
vented these evils, and even saved the parents much 



12 ' MEMOIR OF 

trouble, as well as the child much sorrow. At least, 
so the 'parents of this child believed, and they have 
seen no cause to think that they were mistaken. 

The next result of regarding him as an immor- 
tal being was, that his parents began it a very early 
period to give him all the knowledge they could, es- 
pecially religious knowledge, believing it would abide 
with him eternally. They often remarked, that* they 
could not make their son rich, but they could give 
him that which would be a blessing to him when all 
riches should vanish away. They trusted him very 
little to the care of others ; and as soon as he could 
understand sufficiently, he was often placed in his 
little chair by the side of his mother, or on his fa* 
ther's knee, to hear stories repeated in the simplest 
language, or little hymns rehearsed, and then ex- 
plained, when he seemed not to understand them. 

Before he could talk plainly, he knew several of 
these hymns for children, and seemed to understand 
them. This was the case also with several texts of 
Scripture, often repeated to him j and he knew that 
Jesus loves to have little children pray to him, be- 
cause, when on earth, he took them up in his arms, 
and put his hands on them, and blessed them, and 
said, "Suffer little children to come unto me, and 
forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of 
heaven." 

The thought, " he is immortal" led his parents to 
consider it of great importance to cherish his bene- 



JOHN. ft. MEAD, 13 

volent affections. This they did by endeavoring 
always to exhibit these affections themselves in his 
presence, avoiding, as much as possible, even an tin* 
pleasant look or tone of voice ; treating him, and 
teaching him to treat others, with constant kindness, 
and guarding against all unnecessary occasions of 
irritation. They found him soon imitating their very 
looks and tones, and were convinced, that even these 
have more influence in forming the early character 
of children, than all the good precepts and counsels 
that can be given them, when not enforced by the 
example of the parents themselves. Every child has 
an eye $uick to discern, and imitates actions long 
before he understands rules, and forms habits of con* 
duct before he can perceive the advantage of obeying 
laws. 

Another thing agreed upon by his parents was, 
that they would treat their son as a rational being. 
They believed that a child can be reasoned with f 
and made to understand why he should do what he 
is required, or refrain from what he is forbidden to 
do, and this as soon as he understands the meaning 
of the words used. How early he will understand 
language, depends on words being always used in a 
proper manner in his hearing. They never there- 
fore talked to their son in the affected babyish man- 
ner common with 'some parents and others, who. 
when talking to a child, use language without mean- 
ing, or mispronounce words, as if the child could 

2 



14 MEMOIR OF 

better understand mere nonsense than correct expres* 
sions. All the words used when speaking to hira 
had as uniform a meaning as when speaking to 
adults. The most perceptible effect of this was, that 
from the first, his pronunciation was uncommonly 
distinct, and his language very correct, a circum- 
stance observed with surprise by many, till they 
learned the reason. 

Very early his parents began to tell him why they 
, required him to do what he was bidden, and he 
rarely hesitated a moment, whenever he understood 
the reason. Care was required, however, to prevent 
his demanding a reason, when prompt 'obedience 
was necessary. Once when about three years old, 
he asked his mother her reasons for doing something. 
She considered it trifling, fcnd not worth a reason, 
and answered, •* Because I choose, my son." He 
looked quite dissatisfied, and replied, " That is no 
reason at all." But generally this was easy done, 
by using at such times a tone of more decision and 
authority ; a practice, the meaning of which even a 
child will soon understand. 

He was early taught to subject his own will to that 
of his parents. This they endeavored to procure, 
as far as possible, by gentle means ; but if these failed, 
they applied the rod of chastisement. His father 
well recollects the first and only severe contest to 
subdue his will. It was when he was about four- 
teen months old. There is no need to give particu- 



JOHN K. MEAD. 1& 

lars. Suffice it to say, he understood what was re- 
quired of him, and refused to obey. Chastisement 
was inflicted with a very light rod, and at short in- 
tervals, till he obeyed. Then he immediately asked 
to be taken up, put his arms around his father's 
neck, put his little face up to his in the most affec- 
tionate manner, and seemed after this to love his 
father more than ever. 

The sight or mention of a rod was all, for months, 
that was necessary to produce instantaneous obedi- 
ence, it was found, however, that obedience was 
generally readiest, and most cheerful, when the com- 
mands were given in the mildest and most affection- 
ate manner, seeming rather to ask than to demand 
compliance. By pursuing this course, his parents 
endeavored to connect obedience with pleasure, and 
resorted to.severer methods only when milder means 
had failed. If in any instance they departed from 
this method, they soon saw reason to regret it, for he 
would adopt their tone and manner in making his 
own requests, and never seem to think it improper. 
This will probably be observed in nearly every child, 
and shows the importance of care in every thing re- 
garding them. 

From the first it was understood that John's pa- 
rents did not allow any one to deceive him on any 
account No false pretences were allowed, no pro- 
mises made to him without the intention of fulfilling 
them, and no threats which it was not intended to 



16 MEMOIR OF 

execute, if necessary. He always therefore expected 
just what had been promised, and on the very con* 
ditions, and at the time specified. If from forgetful- 
ness this was not done, he would remind the person 
of it, and perhaps say he told a falsehood. If his 
parents had failed, they did not hesitate to confess the 
fault, and tell him that they were sorry, and that they 
must ask God to forgive them, and do so no more. 
Sometimes he thought they failed because he did not 
understand them ; and then they explained their 
meaning, and showed him they had not failed! Thus 
they endeavored, by example, to inculcate a sacred 
regard to truth ; and in vain will parents hope to do 
it in any other way. The child will do as he knows 
they do, and how can they correct him for it ? 
• No one was allowed to frighten John with threats 
or tales of spirits, or imaginary dangers, nor give 
him a dread of being alone or in the dark ; and till 
he learned it from other children, he never appeared 
to dread darkness more than light, nor to know fear, 
where there was not real danger. He was accus- 
tomed, from less than a year old, to be put to bed at 
sunset, and never caused trouble during the night, 
on any account. When his usual time came he ex* 
pected to retire, and made no resistance or complaint. 
Before he was two years old, it was manifest he 
had a most ardent thirst for knowledge— a strong 
desire to be acquainted with every thing around him. 
This his parents determined to gratify, and therefore 



JOHN M. MEAD. 17 

explained whatever he wished to understand, and 
answered his numerous questions, as far as they 
could, and never discouraged his asking as many 
as he pleased. He was not put off with a frown, or 
reproved for his curiosity ; but they answered him 
pleasantly, when they could, and when they could 
not, they told him so. 

In the exercise of this curiosity, he learned, with 
very little encouragement, nearly all the letters of 
the alphabet; before he was two years old, by picking 
them out on a stove in the sitting room, and asking 
their names. Those not on the stove he learned with 
very little pains, so as to name them all readily, be- 
fore he was two years old. This same curiosity was 
still indulged, and grew in strength daily. He would 
employ his father or mother an hour at a time an- 
swering his questions, and never seem wearied 
while they could attend to him. These questions 
were rarely trifling, and generally manifested much 
thought, and some understanding of the subject. If 
an answer was not understood by him, that must be 
explained till he understood the whole, or thought 
he did, and then he appeared satisfied, and seldom 
asked the same question again. This trait of charac- 
ter is no doubt common, in a greater or less degree 
to all children, and needs but to be encouraged to 
secure a rapid advance in knowledge, and eminent 
attainments, at least by many. 

The parents of this child never adopted the prac* 

2* 



18 MEMOIR or 

tice of hiring him to. do what they wished, oy giving 
toys or luxuries. When he had been obedient, or had 
performed very well what he was directed, or had 
done a praiseworthy act without bidding, they often 
gave him a ride, or a present of something useful ; 
or, what he loved quite as well, told or read him a 
story from the Bible, or some other book, and in- 
formed him, it was told him because he had done 
well. At other times his reward was, being permit- 
ted to carry relief to those in want, or to help his 
father do something useful, in which he greatly de- 
lighted. 

As before remarked, his parents always consider- 
ed his religious instruction of the first importance, 
and made it the prominent object never to he neglect- 
ed. It was the custom, from about a year old, for one 
of them to pray with him when he went to bed at 
flight, as well as at other times ; and he was taught, 
as soon as he coulfl speak, to repeat the Lord's pray- 
er, and a short simple petition for a holy heart, and 
for blessings on his parents and other relations. 
They endeavored to convince him that this was of 
no use, unless he prayed m his heart ; and they ex- 
plained and illustrated what it is to pray in the heart, 
60 that he could understand it. Their instructions 
respecting prayer were often Repeated, and much 
pains were taken to show its importance, and to 
make it a pleasant employment thus to address God. 

He was always taught to consider iht Bible the 



JOHN M. MEAD. 19 

best of all books, a holy book, God's own book ; and 
the most interesting parts of its history were fre- 
quently repeated to him in simple language, and ho 
was told these were in the Bible, and he must learn 
to read them himself. Of these he was never tired, 
but would sit and listen to his mother, as long as she 
was able to go on ; and when she was fatigued, he 
would ask for another story. 

Before he was two years old, his father purchased 
him a hieroglyphic Bible, to which he at once be- 
came attached, and by often asking questions re- 
specting the meaning of its various emblems and 
pictures, he became familiar with most of the pas- 
sages of Scripture found in it, even before he could 
read. His attachment to this book never appeared to 
diminish, till he began to read in the Bible itself, and 
then he almost at once laid it aside. No doubt it 
greatly assisted him in understanding the Bible. 
He would often say, when he read one of these pas- 
sages, " This is in my hieroglyphic Bible." 

From two years old to three, his progress in learn- 
ing to read was slow. His mother could give but 
little attention, at that time, to his instruction ; # and 
his parents did not deem it expedient to urge him 
forward faster than he chose, lest his health might 

* It should be recollected that he was at this time very 
young. It is hoped that no parent will consider this a war- 
rant for allowing older children to be idle, merely because 
they seem unwilling to learn. 



20 MEMOIR OF 

be injured, or he become disgusted with reading; 
When he desired it, or was ready cheerfully to re- 
ceive it, if his mother had leisure, lie was instructed, 
and the object was kept before him, by telling him 
how he could thus learn to read stories fof himself. 
During this time his mind was active and inquisi* 
tive. His desire to know about every thing he saw 
grew stronger, and his numerous questions were 
answered, and objects worthy of his notice frequently 
pointed out to him. Before he was three years old, 
it was often observed that he spoke with remarkable 
distinctness, and used language and expressed ideas* 
common to children twice as old as himself, rather 
than of those of his own age. Even at this age he 
preferred the company and conversation of men and 
women, to that of children, and would often leave his 
play, to sit and listen, and ask them questions. 
Never was there any difficulty in keeping him still, 
if he could be acquiring knowledge. 

From two years old he constantly attended public 
worship on the Sabbath, if the weather permitted. 
He would generally, for the two first years, fall 
asleep in the course of the sermon, but gave little 
trouble. If he became uneasy and restless, or inclined 
to play, whisper to him, " God sees you, John," and 
he would immediately become still and attentive. 
It was not expected that he would understand what 
he heard at this early age, but his parents wished to 
give the habit ©f attending the worship of God all 



JOHN H. MEAD. 21 

the strength of early associations. They have never 
doubted the advantage of it, for his desire to enjoy 
this privilege increased to the last, so that nothing 
but sickness could induce him to stay from it, when 
permitted to go. 

This attachment to public worship was particu- 
larly strong the last few months of his life. In the 
coldest and most stormy Sabbaths of the winter, he 
insisted on attending, saying, he could go as well as 
his father — men went, and he must go. He often 
desired to attend the weekly female prayer-meeting 
with his mother ; and when there, was uniformly se- 
rious, attentive, and much interested. 

His father and mother often told him that God 
saw him, and noticed all he did and said, and even 
the feelings and thoughts he had ; and that he noticed 
them especially in time of worship. They told him 
that God requires us to worship him in spirit and 
truth, not merely with words and actions ; and if the 
heart is not engaged, all the forms of worship are 
useless and hypocritical. The result of these instruc- 
tions appeared in great seriousness of deportment in 
time of worship, as well as in a strong attachment to 
it in all its customary seasons. Even in his diver- 
sions, rarely was he known to trifle with the forms 
or customary language of devotion. 

Sometimes, if he had been disobedient towards the 
close of the day, his parents refused to hear him 
pray, or to pray with him, when he went to bed. 



22 memoir or 

Nothing grieved him like this. He would beg of 
them to pray for him, say he was sorry he had been 
naughty ; and if they refused, would weep and sob 
till ho fell asleep, apparently destitute of comfort. 
Sometimes he would be heard praying God to for- 
give him for being so naughty, and make him a 
good boy, and bless his father and mother, and other 
friends. 

A little incident, before he was three years old, 
will show something of his character then. His 
father was one day absent from dinner, and no gen- 
tleman was present When his mother, with some 
others, came to the table, he, without any thing being 
said, went to his father's place, stood up in the chair, 
and asked a blessing with strict propriety. When 
dinner was over, he gave thanks in like manner. 
This service he ever after claimed the right of per- 
forming when no gentleman was present ; and it is 
not known that he ever failed when at liberty to per- 
form it. His language on such occasions was mostly 
texts of Scripture aptly applied to the occasion ; more 
particularly was this the case the last year, and per- 
sons present have often remarked the force and 
propriety with which such a child could use the 
language of the Bible. His friends can give no 
other reason for his commencing this exercise, than 
that he had always seen it performed by men, and 
as no one was present, he considered it as devolving 
on him. He seldom attempted to imitate females. 



JOHN H. MEAD. 23 

but seemed to think that whatever his father or other 
men did, he must do. 

Soon after this his father was sick on a Sabbath, 
and unable to preach or attend meeting. Just before 
the time of going, John came to his mother and said, 
•* Mother, father is sick, must I preach to the people 
to-day ?" She asked, " What my son would you say 
to them ?" He replied, " I will tell them that • Jesus 
Christ is the way, the truth, and the life/ " The 
passage of Scripture containing this he had probably 
heard read in family worship, or repeated in his 
mother's familiar conversation with him on the way 
of salvation.. When he went that day to the meeting 
house, he passed hy the pew where he usually sat, 
and went to the pulpit stairs with an intention to go 
up, probably expecting to preach. 

Incidents like the above frequently occurred, and 
caused him to be regarded as an uncommon child, 
wherever he was known ; and a professional gentle- 
man in his native town, probably expressed the gene- 
ral opinion, by saying that " John had an old head." 
He will be remembered with lively interest for a 
long time in that place. 

When John was about three years old, his parents 
removed from Brunswick, and resided in Gorham, 
in the same state, about a year. For some months 
they were unable to give much personal attention to 
his instruction. He was sent to school ten weeks, 
which was all the time of his attendance, except 



24 MEMOIR OF 

what he devoted to the Sabbath School. Although 
he received much attention from the teacher, and 
was very happy with the children, he made no pro- 
gress in learning to read. Whether schools con* 
ducted on the common plan are ever of advantage to 
children .so young, is at least doubtful. Experience 
in regard to this child would go to establish the 
opinion, that half an hour a day, devoted by the 
mother to her child, is worth more than all the in- 
struction he can have at school. Of course this re- 
mark does not apply to infant schools. 

When John was about three years and a half old 
he began again to show a desire to learn to read, 
especially that he might read those stories which 
had been repealed to him from the Bible. 

His father was that year from home most of the 
time, and the encouragement offered to him was, that 
if when he should be four years old he could read 
a chapter, his father would bring him a Testament 
and would be much pleased with him. This was all 
the stimulus he needed, arid he applied himself so 
much to learning, that in two months he could read 
short verses, and hi four he read a chapter with con- 
siderable ease, and was very fond of doing it daily. 

From that time he generally read to his mother 
twice a day, either from a school-book for children, 
or from the Bible, which was his favorite book. As 
soon as he read fluently, the time devoted to it began 
to be ana of vigorous mental effort for both mother 



JOHN M. MEAD. 25 

and son : for he refused to pass over a verse, or even 
a word that he did not understand, till he had sought 
an explanation. His questions were tfery numerous, 
and indicated much thought and intelligence. " What 
is the meaning of that word ?" " What did he say 
sofor?" " What did he mean ¥' " Who did he say 
this to ¥' " What did they do it for V 1 Questions 
like these, suggested hy what he read, were almost 
incessant ; and if the explanation was not intelligible, 
that must be explained till he thought he under- 
stood it. 

Would parents encourage their children in asking « 
questions, and gratify them with kind intelligible 
answers, we have reason to believe their taste for 
acquiring knowledge would be greatly strengthened, 
and many a young Franklin, or Doddridge, or Ca- 
*ey, or Henry Martyn, would be seen early investi- 
gating the works of nature, and the intricacies of 
language, and the meaning of the word of God. And 
in what can a mother especially be more profitably 
or more pleasantly employed, than in feeding the 
immortal mind of her child with knowledge, and 
above all, with that truth which is designed to sane-, 
tify the soul ? The parents of this child now look 
back to no moments with such unmixed pleasure, 
as to those spent in encouraging and aiding him in 
obtaining a knowledge of truth. Their only regret is, 
that they did nott give more attention to it. But, alas ! 
tow many parents devolve this, as a disagreeable. 

3 



26 MEMOIR or 

task, entirely on paid instructors ; and never know, 
from month to month, whether their children are 
making progress or not, or whether they are direct- 
ed right or wrong. Do they know any thing of the 
intensity of a parent's love 1 Do they know the value 
of the treasure committed to them in their children's 
minds ? 

Would children, too, who are able to read, but 
modestly and respectfully ask of their parents and 
others an explanation of what they do not know, 
they would find many not only ready to assist them, 
Aut many that would love them and respect them 
much more for their rational curiosity; and they 
would be abundantly rewarded by a great increase 
of knowledge, and of happiness ; and would be pre- 
pared for greater respectability, usefulness, and hap- 
piness in life, and, with the blessing of divine grace, 
for a future world. * 

It required much patience and steady kindness to 
attend to John's lessons, and explain all that he asked, 
and not to check his curiosity, or disgust him with 
the exercise. Often an hour was spent in going over 
ten or fifteen verses. He would frequently say: 
" Tell me all you knoic about it ;" and if his parents 
told him they did not know any thing about it, he 
would say, "Well, tell me what you think" or, 
'• what you suppose" 

It is not designed to intimate that none of these 
questions were inappropriate, or that all were die- 



JOHN M. MEAD. 27 

tated by a desire to learn the sense of what he read; 
but the most -of them were quite appropriate, ana 
manifested a strong desire for information of every 
kind. 

This same thirst for knowledge was constantly 
manifest, and he rarely heard a conversation on a 
subject mentioned about which he had not stfme 
questions to propose, either at the time, or afterwards. 
His eagerness was sometimes so great as to cause 
him to be troublesome, by interrupting conversation ; 
inquiring what was meant, or mentioning something 
which the conversation had suggested, and asking 
information respecting it. He would desist at once, 
when told it was wrong ; but as soon as an oppor- 
tunity offered, he would generally pursue the subject. 

When h£ was a little more than four years old, 
his father returned from ah absence of several months, 
and brought him not only the Testament promised, 
but also, " Frank," in " Early Lessons," and some 
others of Miss Edgeworth's Works. His joy was 
very great. He immediately began to read in Frank 
One lesson a day. This opened a new field to his 
view, and gave new energy to his thirst for know- 
ledge. On the journey to East Hartford, when his 
parents removed there, he observed every thing that 
passed, and kept them busy explaining what he saw. 

He now wished to see and learn every thing, as 
Frank had done ; and in a £w' months, by frequent 
importunity, he had induced his father to take him 



28 * MEMOIR OF 

to the cabinet-maker's, wheelwright's, shoemaker** 
blacksmith's, and hatter's shops, and to the grist* 
mill, and the paper-mill. While there, he was con- 
stantly attentive to what was before him. He would 
look steadily for some time, and then question after 
question would follow, till he was satisfied. It was 
worth observing, that his questions generally related 
to the plainest and simplest processes. In regard to 
complicated machinery, or more difficult operations, 
he did not seem to understand enough to ask a ques- 
tion, and was satisfied with a very general descrip- 
tion. How fully he understood what was explained 
to him, can only be known by his giving, sometimes, 
afterwards, an intelligible account, and perhaps ask- 
ing questions about it which had not at first been 
thought of. • 

This habit of seeking an explanation of whatever 
he saw that interested him, he maintained every 
where. He once went into a neighbor's garden to 
see some grape-vine slips set out. He asked the boy 
a great many questions about ids work, till the boy 
probably became tired, and to one of his questions, 
" Why he dug so large a hole to put his slips in," 
answered, "for fun." John looked at him, and said, 
" My father says, any body that does any thing for 
fun, has lost his reason." Many things here named 
may be seen m other children, and they are men- 
tioned merely to remind others of the importance of 
keeping alive this desire for knowledge, and of di- 



JOHN M. MEAD. 29 

rating it to profitable subjects, rather than to let it 
grow wild, and die for want of proper sustenance; 
and leave the young mind dull and indifferent to 
knowledge, or to spend itself upon unprofitable sub- 
jects. No doubt the mind, as well as the body of the 
young, requires frequent but not long continued ex- 
ercise, and may be trained to almost any habits oc 
application. The mind of this child was often led, 
or rather directed, but never forced into any channel. 
The acquisition of knowledge tras to him a constant 
source of pleasure, and he seldom needed urging on 
that account. Till he became fatigued, 'he would go 
on of his own accord, and then his parents consider- 
ed it injurious to press him. 

One instance of his seeking information abroad 
may be mentioned, not as being very uncommon, but 
as showing his constant habit. At his solicitation, 
his father, a few weeks before his last sickness, took 
him to Hartford. Having some business at a .little 
distance, he left him for a short time with 'the owner 
of a store. This gentleman's kindness soon won his 
confidence, and when his father returned, he found 
his son questioning the gentleman about 'how the 
weight, that was hung to the door, shut it. This 
gentleman has repeatedly since mentioned his sur- 
prise at the discernment and the powers of so young 
a child. 

The correctness of his language has been men- 
tioned. It is impossible to do full justice to his un- 

3* 



SO MEMOIR OF 

derstanding in this respect, without protracting this 
memoir too much. One little anecdote, when he was 
between three and four years old, will show his dis- 
crimination. He had expected a ride in a wagon, 
but just as he was about to get in, it was thought 
prudent to ride a little way without him. The result 
was, the horse was frightened, and threw the person 
in the wagon out, and broke it to pieces. In speak- 
ing of it afterwards, it was said, " S broke the 

wagon." He instantly replied, " No, he did not ; the 
old horse broke the wagon." A few months before 
his death, when studying the fifth chapter of John's 
Gospel, he came to his father, and pointing to the 
20th verse, read : " Marvel not at this, for the hour 
is coming, in the which all that are in their graves 
shall hear his voice." " Father," said he, " what is 
that the there for ?" He was told it was the custom 
to write so, when the Bible was translated. He ob- 
served: " I shall not use it, when I recite." 

His father sometimes employed a leisure mo- 
ment when his son sat on his knee, in exercises of 
grammar, giving him wrong numbers, persons, gen- 
ders, ana 1 cases to correct, interspersing among them 
correct expressions. It was rare that he failed im- 
mediately to correct the wrong, or to retain the right. 
This he did solely by recollecting how he had heard 
language used, for he had never looked into a book 
on grammar. He had commenced the study of 
Arithmetic, and for a time made good progress ; but 



JOHIT M. MEAD. 31 

for a few months before his death he appeared to have 
lost his interest in it, and the book was laid aside. 
When about four he showed a great desire to learn 
Latin. After a few trials he gave it up, saying he 
did not understand it, but when he should be older 
he would learn that and Greek too. 

About this time he began to attend a Sabbath 
School. At first he recited a hymn as his lesson, 
but soon began to commit to memory two verses in 
the New Testament each morning. These were 
generally selected so as to include in the lesson for 
the week some interesting parable or narrative. *In 
this way, before he began to commit the Gospel in 
course, he recited many parts of Scripture, of which 
he was fond to the last. 

About four months before his death his father 
took the entire charge of this part of his instruction. 
He had gradually increased his daily lesson from 
two verses to four or five, and in a few weeks he 
went to seven or eight verses daily. These-he would 
often commit to memory in twenty minutes or half 
an hour. At other times it took him longer, accord- 
ing as he felt, or as the verses were long or short, 
plain, or difficult to be understood. 

He had committed in course nearly all the first 
fourteen chapters of John. The last verse he recited 
was the 28th of that chapter: " Ye have heard how 
I said unto you, I go away and come again unto 
you. If ye loved me ye would rejoice, because I said 



32 MEMOIR OF 

I go unto the Father, for the Father is greater than 
I." It was the day he was taken with his last sick- 
ness ; and before he had finished, a gentleman came 
into his father's study, and he went down and finished 
reciting: it to his mother. 

In his daily exercise he gave great evidence oi 
understanding the meaning of words. He would 
often, in reciting, give the meaning of a whole verse 
in different words from those in the text, and more 
frequently he used single words synonymous with 
those read. This was always permitted the first 
tirrfe of reciting, but after that he was requested to 
recite the very words of the writer. Strangers have 
often remarked that his language was that of a boy 
ten or twelve years old ; and few of even that age 
give such constant attention to the propriety and 
meaning of what they say. 

It may be desirable to give some account of the 
habitual disposition of this child, as it was remarked 
that particular attention was given by his parents to 
its formation, even from a very early period. 

Some persons may suppose, from what has been 
or will hereafter be said, that he must have been 
very still, sedate, and averse to play j but the very 
reverse was the case. Few children are uniformly 
so lively, active, and happy. He loved play, and was 
always active, when not seeking information. But 
never did he seem to take such delight in any sport 
as when he could induce his father to 'spend a few. 



JOHN M. MEAD. 33 

minutes in diverting him. Then he seemed perfectly 
happy, and his voice would be heard in laughter 
over the house. With children of his own age he 
generally took the lead, and would find them ample 
employment, but never wished to engage in the 
rough sports of older boys. He always preferred 
exercise that could be useful to some.body, to mere 
sport. 

It was from the first extremely rare to see his 
anger excited ; and when it was moved, a few minutes 
were sufficient to produce an entire calm. He never 
retained anger, or indulged in revenge, or seemed 
to remember an injury. The sun never went down 
on his wrath. If denied any thing on which he had 
set his heart, he seemed to feel keenly for a moment, 
but then returned to his former cheerfulness, as if 
nothing had happened ; and it was often remarked, 
that he accommodated himself to peculiar circum- 
stances with remarkable ease. 

His affection for those to whom he became attached, 
was strong and durable. His love of his parents 
and sisters seemed to know no bounds. He did not 
part with either of them for an hour without mani- 
festing it ; and when he met them again, it was with 
uniform pleasure. About the time they were ex- 
pected to return, he would watch continually, and 
run with eagerness to meet and kiss them. , His pa- 
rents were always his chosen friends and confidants ; 
and the expectation of pleasing them and making 



34 MEMOIR OF 

them happy, was the strongest inducement that could 
he used with him. When his father was absent, 
every letter his mother wrote he wished to dictate 
some message of love, and to make some mark that 
his father might see. At such times the greatest re- 
ward he could receive when he had conducted well, 
was for his mother to write how he had conducted • 
and nothing did he dread so much as that she should 
inform his father when he had done wrong, and thus 
make him unhappy. Once, when asked by his mo- 
ther what she should write his father about him, he 
.looked up, and with a most happy expression replied : 
44 Tell him all the goodness, but don't tell him the 
badness. 11 If he had offended or grieved his parents, 
he seemed very unhappy till he could become recon- 
ciled, and see them smile, when he manifested great 
joy. If either of them was unwell, he would sit be- 
side them and wish to know if he could do any thing 
for them, and if permitted would run eagerly to do 
it His affection for his sisters, as well as his parents, 
was manifested in a thousand indescribable ways 
every day, and seemed to run into and influence all 
his conduct. One very rainy morning it was told his 
mother that John and his sister had gone into the 
orchard. She went to call them, and saw John lead- 
ing his sister slowly towards the house. He had 
taken his cap from his own head, and put it on hers, 
and his apron he had pnt round her neck. He seemed 
very happy, and not in the least to mind the ram, 



JOHN X. MEADv 35 

which was falling on his own uncovered head His 
parents and friends were much pleased to see him so 
careful and attentive to his sister, and so unlike somo 
little boys, who love to tyranize over those who are 
younger and weaker than themselves. For the 
whole winter, he brought his sister in his arms, 
nearly every morning, from the hed to the fire, in 
another room, saying she must not get her feet cold 
on the floor, and this while his own were equally 
exposed. If he did any thing wrong when abroad, 
and was told that if he did so people would blame 
his father, he rarely ever repeated it. Would chil- 
dren be always as careful of.the happiness and repu- 
tation of their parents as this little boy was, they 
would be saved from many distressing feelings and 
many bitter reproaches; and the blessing of God 
would no doubt constantly attend them. Can there 
be a more lovely sight than a family dwelling to- 
gether in such unity, each constantly more anxious 
for the happiness of the others than^for his own ? 

At one time, in 1829, his mother, in writing to 
his father, then absent, says : " John wished me to 
write you, • That he wants you to come home ; and 
that he learns pretty well; sometimes lazy, and 
sometimes does not feel very well ; and that he 
prays for you, and mother, and sister, that we may 
all be prepared for heaven.' With regard to his 
prayers, I would observe, he is very particular and 
uniform. I sometimes fear lest a little pharisaical 



36 HEM01R or 

righteousness should mingle in his religious duties ; 
and at others, that his religion is only the power of 
education. At others, I hope and believe God is 
leading him by a way to perfect praise to himself 
from the mouth of a child." 

Among the most remarkable features of this child's 
character was his habit of self-denial. If any thing 
of which children are fond, such as cake, or sweet- 
meats, or raisins, or nuts, or the like, was given him 
abroad, he would often refuse to taste it till he had 
brought it home, and divided it with his sister ; and 
frequently he gave her the larger portion. Such 
little luxuries he often laid by for days, and theft 
gave a good part away, generally wishing ail about 
him to partake a little, as well as himself. His pa- 
rents had taken much pains to cultivate this disposi- 
tion, and it became a very prevalent motive in his 
daily conduct. He had never been taught to compare 
himself with other children, or allowed to suppose, 
that the attainments or the enjoyments of others could 
in any way diminish his own.* He therefore knew 
nothing of rivalship, or emulation. To know more 
than others, or to have more of any thing, or to be 
treated better, never seemed to be an object of desire, 
nor was he at all troubled at others being superior 
to him. But one instance of jealousy of this kind is 
recollected. His mother gave him and his sister, one 
day, each a piece of cake, and told her, that, as John 
was the oldest, he ought to have the largest piece. 



JOHN M. MEAD. 37 

Soon after, another piece was given to each, and the 
largestpiece to her. He immediately remonstrated, 
saying, with great earnestness, " I am the oldest, and 
the largest piece belongs to me." It was given him, 
when at once it appeared that he contended only for 
what he considered right, and not for rivalship,.for 
he immediately gave her a considerable part of his. 

The progress he made in knowledge was without 
any stimulus from emulation. He was never exhort- 
ed to do better than others, or led to believe he knew 
more than other children, or did better. To please 
his parents, and to obey God, were the motives pre- 
sented to urge him on, when he needed it, except 
now and then a trifling reward, generally not pro- 
mised, as an inducement to exertion. The way of 
knowledge was made pleasant to his view, and he 
eagerly pursued it, without thinking whether others 
were before or behind him. 

Can it be needful for any child to have his jea- 
lousy of others constantly cherished* and his selfish- 
ness fostered, to urge him to any commendable at- 
tainment % Will it ever make the heart better, for a 
child to be mortified by being told of his own infe- 
riority, or rendered vain by an idea that he is supe- 
rior to others whom he daily sees ? Is it not cherish- 
ing the very spirit of the fallen angels ? 

If others told John of his superiority, he was Hot 
pleased with it. His Sabbath school teacher once 
told him he got the best lesson of any boy in the 



38 MEMOIR or 

school. He came home, and. said, "Mother, Mr. P. 
says I get the best lesson of any boy in the school. 
Is it so ? An't he flattering me V 1 This was the 
manner in which he always received such expres- 
sions. 

His desire to be of some use to others, and his de- 
termination to do whatever he could for himself, were 
very early manifested, and being encouraged by his 
parents, became prominent traits in his character. 
At last he disliked having any thing done for him 
that he could do for himself, or thought he could. 
Tell him any thing he could do would be useful to 
any one, and he would do all in his power, and ap- 
pear extremely happy when he had succeeded. To 
help his parents gave him the utmost delight, and 
he rarely seemed to be too much fatigued to attempt 
it. When little more than three years old, he would 
do an errand in the neighborhood with perfect cor- 
rectness, and always return immediately. No per- 
suasion, or prospect of pleasure, could induce him 
to stay after his errand was done, unless he had per- 
mission. 

A single instance, selected from many, will show 
what were his habits in this respect. When about 
four years old, he was sent to several houses to in- 
vite company to tea. TJio families were named in a 
certain order, and the individuals to be invited in or- 
der. He went to the first family, and invited each 
individual, one after another, in the precise order in 



JOHN H. MEAD. 39 

which they had been named to him, although to do 
it he was under the necessity of going out to invite 
some, and then returning to invite some whom he 
had seen. Then he went to the other houses in or- 
der, and invited each individual named as before, all 
with perfect precision. At one of the houses he was 
requested to tarry, but replied, he must go to another 
house. This was the last in the order named. He 
went, and did his errand without going in. But 
while the door was open, he saw a bird in a cage, 
which he thought very pretty. Such a sight he had 
not been accustomed to, and he was invited, and even 
urged t<* go in and see it, but he replied, " My mother 
told me not to stop," and ran home as fast as he 
could. As soon as he had repeated the several an- 
swers to his message, he began to tell what a pretty 
bird he saw, seeming much interested. He was asked, 
" Did you stop to see it ?" " No," was his reply, 
" you told me to be quick. May I go back and see 
it, mother ?" No instance is recollected in which he 
failed to do an errand correctly, and return, as he 
was bid. If, when going or returning he was accosted 
by any one, he generally answered without stopping, 
and would hold no conversation to delay him. 

One day, when going or returning with some 
message, a boy much older than himself met him, 
and began to ask him some impertinent questions, 
and to make some rude remarks. John looked at 
him calmly, and said, " It is very improper for you 



40 MEMOIR OF 

to talk to me so/ 1 and went on ; nor could the boy 
induce him to tarry a moment, or utter another word. 

His quickness of reply often induced men, as well 
as boys, to ask him questions when they saw him in 
the street, for the sake of hearing his answer, that 
they might have it to repeat. Many of these sayings 
are current in the neighborhood, and often repeated. 
One will be given as a specimen. 

The last winter, he was going on an errand, and 
a man at work in his shop called to him across the 
street, " John, where are you going ?" without stop- 
ping, he replied, " I am going on a yeast voyage, 
and when I come back I'll give you a cal^" 

Children who will follow his example in these 
things will be a great blessing to their parents, and 
be very happy in doing good. There was no one 
of the commands repeated by John so often as the 
fifth. " Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy 
days may be long in the land which the Lord thy 
God giveth thee," was often heard from him. He 
obeyejd it in an uncommon degree, and if he had not 
long life on earth, there is the best reason to believe 
he enjoys a greater blessing in heaven. 

Ever after he was four years old, and often before, 
he went almost daily to the post-office, to carry or 
bring letters and papers, although a part of the time 
half a mile distant; and indeed did most of his pa- 
rents' errands in the neighborhood, with the utmost 
promptness and accuracy. 



JOHN M. MEAD. 41 

The feelings of this little boy were very tender, 
and so much excited when told of any one in distress, 
that his parents were obliged to avoid telling him, 
or reading to him the most affecting stories. When 
told of children who were destitute of food, he re- 
peatedly refused to eat, so much did he feel for them ; 
and when told of children who had lost their parents, 
and had no one to take care of them, he would weep 
and sob, and beg to know what became of them, and 
if they were good, and had God for their father ? 

From the time he was less than three years old, 
* he voluntarily abstained from the use of sugar and 
other luxuries, to obtain a few cents to contribute 
for, the relief of distress, or to send Bibles and the 
Gospel to the destitute. He was never urged to do 
this, but continued it more than two years steadily, 
although naturally very fond of these things. While 
a cent remained in his box he desired to give some- 
thing at every public contribution, but rarely did he 
wish to use any of his money to purchase toys or 
luxuries. When a poor person called at the house, 
he would give all he had, if the person seemed in 
want, or told of children destitute of the comforts of 
life. 

Some of the most pleasant visits he made, were 
at the house of a poor widow, when he was permit- 
ted to carry her milk or any other food ; and he would 
go through snow, or wet, or cold, for this purpose, 
when he would scarcely go out of doors to play. 
4* 



42 MKMOIR or 

To perform acts of this kind his parents never denied 
him the opportunity, wishing him early to learn 
that doing good was to be the business of his life. 

If he heard that a person was poor, the very next 
time he had an opportunity of being alone with that 
person, he would ask if they had things comfortable, 
and offer a supply, if Answered in the negative. So 
habitual was this with him, that his parents were 
obliged to avoid- mentioning such cases, lest by in- 
discretion he should hurt the person's feelings. So 
much alive were his sympathies to the sufferings of 
others, that it was often said he was hardly fit to 
live in the world, where sin and sorrow abound. 
The last time he performed an act of this kind, .was 
about a fortnight before his death. A woman called 
at the house, and told a story of distress in her family 
that touched his feelings. He looked as if desiring 
to give something, and his mother told him he 
might. His box was handed to him, and he took out 
two-thirds of all the money he had, and gave it, and 
seemed satisfied. Such acts he never mentioned even 
to his father, unless reminded of them, and never 
seemed to think of deserving credit by them. His 
delight was in doing them, not hearing of them. 

His sympathies were early excited in behalf of 
those destitute of the Gospel ; and he often declared, - 
that, when he should be a man like his father, ne 
would go and preach Jesus Christ to them. It is not 
known that this was ever told him, but at times it 



JOHN M. MEAD. 43 

teemed the most settled purpose of his mind, at others 
he spoke of preaching the Gospel to those about him. 

When told .they were going to settle another min- 
ister in Brunswick, and that his father was no longer 
minister of that people, he seemed to think it was an 
infringement of his rights, and said, " When I am a 
man, I shall go to B. and take my father's pulpit, 
and preach to that people myself." 

His feelings of kindness to all, affection for his 
friends, and patience under any suffering, increased 
by exercise, and very rapidly towards the close of 
his life on earth. Never was his improvement in 
every lovely trait of character, or in knowledge, so 
rapid as for a few months before his sickness. It 
was remarked, that the indescribable something, 
which gains the affections of every one, and secures 
by an eloquence that no one wishes to resist, what- 
ever it pleads for, was becoming more and more dis- 
cernable in him, and gaining attention every where, 
and exciting high expectation among all who knew 
him. 



CHAPTER TL 

Early Religious Character, 

But the most important part of his character, that 
which, it is believed, gave consistency, moral worth, 



44 MEMOIR OF 

/ 

and uncommon loveliness to the whole, remains to 
be mentioned. It is not doubted by any who had 
daily opportunities to observe him,, especially the 
last few months, that he was truly pious, and his 
parents believe he was so from very early life. At 
what time he was born again, they do not pretend to 
say or even to conjecture ; but they believe it was 
before he was two years old. At that age, from the 
nature of the case, evidences of piety must be uncer- 
tain ; but the steady growth of principles prevalent in 
later life* can be traced to even that early period. We 
should remember, that a child will not appear like 
an adult. However pious, he is still a child, and his 
piety will appear connected with all the playfulness 
and innocent actions of childhood, many of which 
would be altogether unbecoming a Christian of adult 
age. True religion is seen in the pure and benevo- 
lent spirit with which the appropriate actions and 
duties of each age and each situation are performed ; 
and conduct in every respect suitable to a pious adult, 
is as inappropriate to a pious child, as that of a child 
to such an adult. Is there not a very generally pre- 
vailing error on this subject, and much injury done 
by expecting too much from children who seem to 
have pious feelings ? Are they not often too readily 
given up, on seeing lightness and playfulness in 
them, instead of being held up and instructed, so as 
to lead them in the way of holiness ? Is not this , 
well worth the serious consideration of parents, Sab- 



JOHN M. MEAD. 45 

bath school teachers, and ministers % Does not this 
restraint imposed on the young, when they appear 
ready to attend to religion, often render it irksome, 
and thus repel them from it into the regions of error 
and sin % 

It has been observed, that John was a child of 
much prayer, and that his parents consecrated him 
to God with strong- desires for his early conversion 
and sanctification. They felt that they had bound 
themselves to educate him for God's service. In per- 
forming this duty, they endeavored to give him a 
knowledge of divine truth while very young. The 
fundamental doctrines of Christianity were taught 
him as soon as he could understand them, and ex- 
plained and illustrated in various ways, till he 
seemed to know what was meant, and to see the 
duties involved in these doctrines. He was told 
often, that God makes and supports every thing; 
that he is every where present, and knows all we 
do and think ; that he loves those who are good, and 
condemns the wicked ; that all are from the begin- 
ning sinful, and must repent, and become good before 
they can please God ; that we should always be sorry 
when we sin, and pray, for Christ's sake, to be for- 
given ; that we should believe all we find in the Bible, 
and love God on account of his goodness, and love 
men because he commands it ; that we should obey 
all his commands, and pray to him for all we need, 
and thank him for all we enjoy ; that Jesus Christ 



46 MEMOIR OF 

died to save sinners, and will give eternal life to all 
who come to God by him. These, with other im- 
portant truths, such as, that the soul will never die ; 
that we must all give account of our life at the day 
of judgment ; that the bodies of all will be raised, 
and the righteous will be eternally happy, and the 
wicked eternally miserable, were early taught him, 
so as to influence his daily practice. 

Very early he began to pray, first in a simple 
verse taught him, then to use the Lord's prayer j and 
as that is too comprehensive to be readily understood 
by such a child, he was taught to add a simple pe- 
tition for a holy heart, and that God would bless him 
•and keep him alive, and bless his father, and mo- 
ther, and other friends. He was told to ask God for 
whatever he might need ; and to remember he is al- 
ways present, and knows what we pray for, and 
whether we really desire him to give it us. 

The belief that God always saw him, seemed with 
him an operating principle. That God is every 
where, he once brought to view in the following 
manner : he was visiting from home, and was asked 
" if his mother was alone ;" he answered, " no, she 
is not alone, for God is with her." 

His parents endeavored to teach him what is 
meant by praying in the heart, somewhat in the 
following manner : " My son, if you are hungry, or 
if you wish very much to go with us when We ride, 
when you ask for something to eat, or 10 ride, you 



JOHN M. MEAD. 47 

feel earnest about it. This asking in earnest, is ask- 
ing in your heart. So if you ask any thing of God 
earnestly, you pray in your heart." Other qualities 
of real prayer were illustrated in the same manner, 
but with more full explanations. 

The winter before John was two years old, a fe- 
male prayer meeting was held weekly at his father's 
house, and he generally spent the time in the room 
with those who met, and knelt with them in prayer. 
He was soon observed attempting to pray in a cor- 
ner of the room by himself. Within a year he was 
known frequently to retire for prayer, and generally 
engaged in it of his own accord, when he lay down 
at night. This was continued with scarcely any 
interruption ever after. This might be considered 
merely an imitation of the practices of his parents, 
if it had not been continued, and connected with many 
other indications of piety, and attachment to religious 
duties. His attachment to public worship has al- 
ready been mentioned. It is not recollected that he 
was ever unwilling to attend a religious meeting, 
however much fatigued. Generally he counted it a 
very great privation, if prevented from attending. 

Family prayer he seemed to expect as much as 
his daily bread, and could hardly be made to believe 
any one would omit it. This appeared when he 
was between two and three years old, on one occa- 
sion perhaps worth* mentioning. His father was ab- 
sent one morning, and there being company, his 



48 memoir or 

mother did not conduct family worship. Soon after 
the usual time, passing through the room where he 
and a domestic were sitting, she saw they had each 
a hook, as was common. Knowing what they ex- 
pected, but unprepared to pray, she sat down and 
read in the Bible. John then knelt. She asked him, 
" Do you wish to pray, my son ¥' " Yes," was his 
answer. " You may say your prayer." He repeated 
the Lord's prayer, and continued on his knees. She 
asked, " Do you wish to pray ? — Mother feels that 
she cannot this morning." He repeated the Lord's 
prayer again, and continued still kneeling. Seeing 
they did not move, he turned to the girl and said, 
** Mary, kneel," then to his mother and said, " Mo- 
ther, kneel." She asked, " Do you wish me to pray, 
my son ?" He replied, " Yes." , She took him by 
the hand, and told him they would go to her cham- 
ber and pray. At this he seemed overjoyed. 

It will be readily supposed that this was not for- 
gotten. It taught his parents the importance- and 
necessity of entire regularity with such a child, and 
never to omit a duty, if they would have him regard 
it properly. 

Incidents of this kind were frequent ; it will be 
sufficient to mention one more. 

When he was about four years old, his mother 
carried him on a visit to a relative in Portland. The 
family consisted of an elderly gentleman and lady, 
the former not a professor of religion. The day after 



JOHN M. MEAD. 49 

they arrived was the Sabf>ath. There was no family 
prayer in the morning, and his mother had retired 
to her room, leaving him with the family. About 
the usual time of morning prayer he took a Bible, 
laid it in a chair, read a few verses, and knelt down 
and prayed. He asked, that the Lord Jesus would 
be with his people that day, and bless them, and give 
them repentance for sin, and faith in him. He 
prayed for several other things, expressing most of 
his petitions in Scripture language, and with the ut- 
most solemnity of manner. His mother came into 
the room just before he closed, andifound the aged 
couple in tears. The lady soon after informed her 
what he had prayed for, and said she never heard a 
prayer that affected her so much. She seemed almost 
sure that this child had been sent there for her hus- 
band's salvation ; but, it is feared, the impression on 
his mind was not enduring. The next morning the 
same duty was performed, while his mother was pre- 
sent, and her impression was, that his prayer was 
as appropriate as many heard in a social prayer 
meeting. 

A young woman who lived with his parents says, 
he never omitted asking a blessing and returning 
thanks at the table, whenTiis father and mother were 
absent ; and it is certain he was never told to perform 
any such thing. On such occasions his prayer con- 
sisted of a few well chosen expressions from the 
Bible, or allusions to Bible history. As a specimen, 

5 



50 MEMOIR OF 

the words of one such prater may be given. It was 
uttered a few months before his death, when he sat 
down to dinner with two females. " O Lord! bless 
us, and bless this food. Give us new hearts. And 
O Lord ! make us perfect and upright, as thy servant 
Job was." This last expression he had never heard 
at table, but he nad within a short time read the first . 
chapter of Job, and appeared much interested in it. 
This may likewise show something of his habit of 
remembering and applying what he read. 

At an early period in life he was accustomed, 
when told he had done wrong, to retire to a corner 
of the room, and sometimes to another room, and 
pray for pardon, and that God would make him a 
better boy. This was at first suggested to him, but 
became so common, that it was feared at one time 
he might regard it rather as a penance than a duty, 
and it was not encouraged on every occasion. Once, 
in particular, when for some offence he was denied 
the pleasure of walking in the garden with his mo- 
ther and sister, he was overheard in his room, pray- 
ing God to forgive him his sins, and keep him from 
sin, and give him a new heart, and mentioning his 
offence particularly. When he had offended in any 
matter of importance, one of his parents retired with 
him, and after admonition and prayer, and if abso- 
lutely necessary, a gentle chastisement, he was left 
alone, to repent and pray for pardon. He would 
spend some minutes alone, and then return to his 



JOHN M. MEAD 51 

parents humble, and seek a reconciliation, when he 
seemed very happy. 

The last time he was ever punished for a fault, 
his mother retired with him, and told him she must 
whip him, as she had threatened to do in case he 
should commit the fault, of which he had now been 
guilty. This he always dreaded very much, and 
now he begged, and promised, and wept, but his 
mother told him she must do it as she had declared. 
When he found he could not prevail, he suddenly 
stopped, and said, " Well, if you will whip me, kneel 
down and pray first." After prayer he submitted 
without the least complaint. His mother then de- 
termined that she would not again use the rod, ex- 
cept in some extreme case. 

Durjpg the last year or. two he was frequently 
heard in a room alone, praying for himself or some 
other person, and commonly continued several mi- 
nutes in the exercise, his prayer consisting mostly 
of such passages of Scripture as he had heard used 
in prayer, or had lately read, and which seemed to 
him appropriate ; and they were generally repeated 
one after the other in proper order, connected by his 
own words. From frequent exercise in this duty, 
he had become quite ready in the use of the appro- 
priate language of prayer, and seldom appeared at a 
loss for words. The same remarks will apply to the 
prayers whicn he* made with his sister, and when 
he was permitted to pray with either of his parents. 



52 MEMOIR OF 

One of the last times when he prayed with his mo- 
ther, he continued nearly five minutes in an appropri- 
ate manner, without any want of thoughts or words, 
with great apparent seriousness and feeling, and with 
entire confidence in the promises of God, which he 
recollected. 

Sometimes, when hearing him pray in this-man- 
ner, his mother has asked herself, can this be prayer, 
or what is it % This last time she asked him, " John, 
do you really mean as you pray? God knows 
whether you are sincere ; and if you are not, you are 
very wicked to use such solemn words." 

J. " I do mother — I pray from my heart." 

His mother could not help exclaiming, Lord, out* 
of the mouth of this babe, thou hast perfected praise 
to thyself. One expression he used was^that he 
might have faith, as a well of water in him, spring- 
ing up unto everlasting life. He repeated many tpxts 
from John, 5th chapter. 

It should not be understood, that there was never 
any thing in his prayers that would have been im- 
proper in those of a man, or that they were generally 
equal to those of a pious person of intelligence and 
riper years. They were the prayers of a child, but 
of one deeply impressed with gospel truth, and one 
commonly well acquainted with the language of 
Scripture and of prayer. 

From his father's station in th% ministry, no doubt 
he first received the impression that he should be a 



JOHN M. MEAD. 53 

preacher of the Gospel, and began early to hold 
meetings with his sister, and other small children, 
generally with great apparent seriousness. His dis- 
courses delivered from a chair, or some other eleva- 
ted stand, sometimes continued several minutes, and 
showed great retentiveness and promptness of me- 
mory, and a clear understanding of many parts of 
Scripture, and of what he had heard in public wor- 
ship. His parents did not discourage this practice, 
but took occasion from it to impress his mind more 
deeply with the awful solemnity of God's worship, 
and the importance of treating the Gospel with deep 
reverence, and likewise to correct any faults in his 
enunciation. His sentences were generally pro- 
nounced in a clear, natural, and forcible manner, 
with much animation, and showed much liveliness 
of fancy, and some good taste in the selection of lan- 
guage. 

The only song or light poetry he ever learned 
was rfohen Linden. The first verse was repeated to 
him, when from home. He came home much 
pleased, repeating • 

" On Linden when the sun was low, 

" All bloodless lay the untrodden snow," Ac 

A. book containing the poem was handed him, and 
he read it over till he could repeat the whole cor- 
rectly, and took much pains to teach it to his sister. 
This poem he would sometimes repeat, standing in 

5* 



54 MEMOIR 07 

the middle of the room, and raking or depressing 
the tones of his voice, and extending Ms arms, as 
he thought the scene represented, required. 

His impressions in regard to his being destined 
for a preacher were early and abiding. Before he 
was four years old, his mother asked him, at a time 
when she was writing to his father, what she should 
write as his word. He replied, "Tell my father 
his son is growing up to be a minister of the Gospel 
of Jesus Christ." On this subject nothing had been 
said to him for weeks. 

It may be proper here to give an instance of his 
discernment in regard to the conduct proper for 
Christians. When he was about four years old, his 
uncle, at tea one evening, was repeating some re- 
marks he had heard against the temperance refor- 
mation. John asked, h Why do you talk so, S?" 

His uncle asked, " How ?" 

J. "By talking such things." 

& " How should I talk, John ?" 

J. " About Jesus Christ, who died on the cross 
to save sinners. If you love Jesus, you will talk 
about him, I think you don't love Jesus." 

His uncle asked why he thought so. 

J. •• Because, if you loved him, you would talk 
about him ; and you don't talk about him, so you 
don't love him." 

At this time his mother thus wrote to his father, 
then absent : " This evening J. has been much affect 



JOHN M. MAD. 65 

ed by the account of Mr. Richmond's two children, 
who died, and asked with tears when he would die. 
On my answering that he must die sometime, but 
God only knew when ; he asked if he should go to 
that wicked place? He was much affected for so 
young a child. I know, that it is possible all this 
goodness may pass away, like the early dew, yet I 
cannot but hope, and sometimes feel assured, that the 
work of grace will be early in his heart." 

If his piety may be judged by the test which he 
applied to his uncle, there can be no doubt with re- 
gard to it, for scarcely did a few hours pass without 
his saying much about the Savior. He seemed con- 
stantly interested in his character, and this increased 
most rapidly for a few months before the close of 
his life. 

From an early time of life, it was manifest, that 
John thought much while silent, especially on reli- 
gious subjects, and prepared his questions with de- 
liberation, and determined to be satisfied before he 
left the subject. 

One trait in his mind was thought to be a little 
peculiar. Tell him any thing or read to him till he 
appeared to understand the subject perfectly, and 
then question him soon about it, and he would often 
seem to know little or nothing of what had been said 
or read to him. After several weeks, and sometimes 
months, he would mention the subject himself and 



56 MEMOIR OF 

tell what had been said, and then make his own re- 
marks. 

So much was this a trait of character, that the 
remark was often made in the family, when any par- 
ticular subject had been conversed on, " After John 
has w^ell digested it, he will bring it all out in order." 

When between three and four years old, his mind 
at one time seemed much employed in thinking of 
death and the grave. After being silent for some 
time, one day he asked how people got out of the 
grave. He was told the spirit is not there, and the 
body is but dust. Sometime after he suddenly asked : 

" Mother, what kind of body am I going to have 
when I rise from the dead ?" 

The fifteenth chapter of the first epistle to the 
Corinthians was read to him. But he was not con- 
tent without asking numerous questions, and having 
the whole cleared up. When he ceased, he was 
asked if he understood it. He answered " yes," and 
appeared satisfied on that point nearly ever after. 
His mother could not at once tell where he had re- 
ceived the idea of the resurrection, but soon recol- 
lected, that several months before, on the .death of a 
child in the neighborhood, she had told him some- 
thing of it. 

After he began to attend public worship on the 
Sabbath, he was rarely if ever absent, when the 
Lord's supper was administered. He was extremely 
attentive during that service, and at times appeared 



JOHN M. MEAD. 57 

in deep thought After this he asked much about 
this sacrament ; for several months before his death 
he was very desirous to partake of it, and repeatedly 
'spoke of his desire to his mother. She told him she 
feared he did not love the Lord Jesus Christ, and., 
was not prepared, but he insisted that he did. She 
then told him, that when he arrived at a suitable 
age, if he gave evidence of love to God, he should 
partake. He . repeatedly asked his father, when the 
people would eat the body, and drink the blood of 
Christ again. 

One instance, selected from many, may serve to 
show how he heard preaching. When about four 
years old he attended the religious anniversaries in 
Maine. In one of the sermons the name Jehovah 
was used. He was sitting by his mother's side, and 
looking at her, whispered, *• Who does he mean by 
Jehovah ?" She replied, " God." He asked, " Why 
don't he say God then?" During these meetings a 
gentleman called at the house where his parents 
stopped. ' John and a boy older than himself were 
playing in the yard. On going out he said to the , 
boy, " Henry, are you going to meeting ?" Henry 
replied with great indifference, •' No." John seemed 
surprised, and said, " What, not want to go to the 
house of God ' to hear his word and sing his praise.' " 
When attending meeting, he would often be seen 
looking round, as if inattentive to what was said, but 
sometime after, it would appear by his remarks, that 



68 MEMOIR OF 

he had. heard and understood the discourse, and re- 
membered much of what he scarcely seemed to heed. 
Some months before his death, he heard, at meet- 
ing, the hymn beginning, * 

" Life is the time to serve the Lord." 

It fixed his attention, and when he came home he 
requested to have it found for him, and read it till 
he could repeat the whole. Ever after, it was his 
favorite hymn, and he repeated, and tried to sing it 
on almost every occasion when he needed a hymn. 
A few other hymns he noticed in the same way, and 
committed to memory. The last was that beginning, 

" Come, Holy Spirit, Heavenly Dove." 

In this way too he learned many texts of Scripture, 
which he often repeated, telling where and from 
whom he had heard them. This was encouraged 
by his parents, as likely to induce him to be more 
attentive to preaching, and every duty of* devotion, 
and at the same time storing his mind with divine 
knowledge. 

When between three and four years old a stran- 
ger preached in Gorham. When he came home 
he was asked the text by one of the family who had 
not been at meeting, but with little expectation that 
a child so young would remember what had been 
said. He however spoke at once, " 0, it was about 



JOHN M. MEAD. 59 

the mountains round Jerusalem." He wished to 
have the place found for him, (Ps. 125,) and learnt 
the two verses containing the text before meeting in 
the afternoon, by hearing them repealed a few times. 
The Psalm containing these verses he committed to 
memory as soon as he could read, and it was ever 
after a favorite portion of the Bible. 

The parable of the prodigal son, the story of Ana- 
nias and Sapphira, the 12th chapter of Ecclesiastes, 
and the 3d of Matthew, were portions of Scripture 
which he early learned, and which never failed to 
interest and instruct him. 

When the family removed from Gorham to East 
Hartford, a boy, son of the minister of the former 
place, with whom John was well acquainted, was 
very sick, not expected to recover. For him he was 
very anxious, often prayed for him, and inquired if 
he would go to heaven when he died. The boy died 
a few months after, and when John heard of it, he 
was deeply affected, and asked many questions about 
his piety, and what had become of him ; whether he 
was happy in heaven or not. When told it was • 
hoped he had become a good pious boy before he 
died, he seemed satisfied, as if he considered this 
the only important consideration. After this he fre- 
quently took the newspaper containing the account 
of this boy's death, and conversed about him and 
two other boys who had before died in the same 
town, saying, that three of his companions were gone 



60 MEMOIR OF 

to eternity, and wishing to know if they were happy 
in heaven. 

In the month of February there was a conference 
of churches in. East Hartford, continuing a part of 
three days j and before the close, a revival of reli- 
gion was manifestly in progress. John took a most 
lively interest in this meeting, and although the cold 
was extreme, he attended steadily, forenoon and 
afternoon, appearing to listen with great intensity. 
Christians were much quickened, and no one more 
than this child. From that time his progress in re- 
ligion was very rapid, and scarcely any other sub- 
ject could fix his attention. His conversation with 
his parents became almost exclusively religious. 
He would often break off in the midst of his most 
interesting play, and begin to speak of some reli- 
gious truth, or some event interesting to the Chris- 
tian heart, and wished, more than ever, all the infor- 
mation he could obtain on the subject 

In the course of the meeting the Rev. Mr. M. 
made an address to parents, and related an anecdote 
'of a woman who had a sick child that begged her 
to pray for her. The mother replied that she could 
not. The child entreated, and could scarcely be 
consoled, when the mother refused. John's feelings 
were much excited, especially as he heard the child 
died without having any one to pray for her. He 
came home, and related to his mother, with many 
tears, what he had heard, and added, " O mother, I 



JOHN M. MEAD. 61 

wish I had heen there, I would have prayed for her." 
Soon after this, the young woman living with his 
parents appeared to be convicted of sin and in dis- 
tress. Conversing with his mother, John asked, 
" Why don't she repent, and believe on the Lord 
Jesus Christ ?" 

The next day, seeing her in tears, he asked her 
what was the matter. His mother hearing him, said, 
" She is anxious about her soul." " Well," he re- 
plied, "why don't she give herself up to Jesus 
Christ ? He died to save sinners." 

Her case continued to interest him much, and he 
frequently exhorted her to give up her heart imme- 
diately to the Savior. Once, when he asked her 
if she had done it, she replied, " No.". 

J •«• Well, why don't you V 1 She said, •• I can't, 
John." 

J. " You must pray." 

She asked, " Can't you pray for me ? " 

J. " The Bible says we must all pray for our- 
selves." 

But he did often pray for her, and once, when at 
prayer in a room by himself, he was heard praying, 
" O Lord bless that girl in this house named R. 
who is anxious about her soul, and give her a new 
heart, and, O Lord, make her holy, and prepare her 
for heaven." It may be here remarked, that he had 
adopted, contrary to the custom he had uniformly 
witnessed, the practice of praying for every indivi- 

6 



62 MEMOIR OF 

dual by name, probably as conveying, in his view, 
a clearer and more direct understanding of his 
meaning. 

Whenever his father returned from visiting the 
anxious, he was much interested to hear of those 
who hoped they had been born again ; and seemed 
much engaged every where, conversing much about 
the truths of the Gospel, heaven, and the state of the 
blessed there. The young woman living with his 
parents, says, that for some time, every morning 
when he came from his bed, he repeated the Sa- 
vior's words : " The hour is coming, in the which 
all that are in their graves shall hear his voice, and 
shall come forth, they that have done good to the re- 
surrection of life, and they that have done evil to the 
resurrection of damnation." This may show some- 
thing of the direction of his mind ; but it was im- 
possible for one that was not with him to know how 
much his thoughts ran on subjects of this kind, or 
how constant their influence was on his whole con- 
duct for weeks before his sickness. No one else 
could form a just conception of the expression of his 
animated countenance, while conversing on religion, 
or of the intensity of his application while he lis- 
tened to others, or know how frequently he alluded 
to these topics, or the earnest, though gentle, man- 
ner with which he urged others to perform their 
duty to God, and secure the salvation of their souls. 
To know how much influence the principles of reli- 



JOHN M. MEAD. 63 

i 

gion exerted on him, it was necessary to see him at 
his play, and to hear his conversation while in bed* 
and especially when he sat with his mother, when 
no other person was present. Then it would have 
been seen, that *' his conversation was in heaven," 
and that he was rapidly fitting for its blessed society, 
and its happy abodes and employments. 

He would often leave his play to ask his mother 
something about the Lord Jesus Christ, or heaven, 
or more frequently to tell her something he had 
thought about them. When she entered into con- 
versation with him, he would immediately leave his 
play, and talk to and question her, while she could 
attend to him. 

He was uniformly playful and active and often 
busy in inventing new schemes of amusement either 
for himself or sister ; and yet all this time religion 
was evidently the engrossing subject of his thoughts. 
His happy playfulness often led his mother to doubt 
the reality of his feelings ; but the remainder of his 
short life convinced her that a child may be a real 
believer, and yet retain the warmth of childish 
feelings. 

A few weeks before he was taken sick the only 
son of a neighbor died. He was a fine, amiable, in- 
telligent boy, about twelve years old, much doated 
on by his family, and beloved by all who knew him. 
John heard of his sickness and death, and when his 
father attended the funeral he was so anxious to go 



64 MEMOIR OF 

that he was permitted. In conversing with the 
mourners, his father remarked, among other things, 
the danger of parents making idols of their children ; 
that is, loving them more than God, especially when 
they are uncommonly amiable and intelligent ; and 
said, that God would, most likely, in mercy take 
away from his children whatever they loved more 
than him. 

This funeral made a very strong impression upon 
John's mind. He looked with great earnestness at 
the body, and seemed in deep thought for some time 
after he returned home, when he suddenly asked, 
" Father, do you make an idol of me ? Do you love 
me more than God V 1 

Many of his remarks, till his sickness, showed 
that he felt a lively interest in that boy's case. The 
same evening his mother conversed freely with him 
about death, and the necessary preparation for hea- 
ven. He seemed confident that he was prepared, 
and should go to heaven, when he should die ; and 
this because he knew he loved the Lord Jesus Christ. 
He asked many questions about the boy whose 
funeral he had attended, and seemed much to re 
gret that he could learn but little of his religious 
character. 

One incident, which came to the knowledge of his 
parents after his death, will show his fearlessness in 
what he esteemed his duty. The circumstances are 
here given, as reported to them. One day his mo- 



JOHN M. MEAD. 65 

ther sent him on some errand at a distance. Several 
boys were playing in the street, some of whom asked 
him where he was going, and he told them. Soon, 
one of them seeing him crossing the street in the 
direction of a store where a boy, perhaps ten years 
old, was attending, told him that was not the way to 
the place where he was going. He replied, " I know 
it, but I am going to tell that boy there not to sell 
rum, for it is wicked, and my father says it is." He 
went to the door, and said to the boy, " It is wicked 
for you to sell rum, my father says it is, and I say 
it is, and you had better be at school." This was 
entirely of his own motion, neither did he ever tell 
his parents what he had done. They heard it as 
coming from the boy who was reproved. His father 
recollects his asking, some time before, if it was 
wicked to sell rum, and that he answered, he thought 
it so. 

Some of his last prayers, previous to his sickness, 
were considered, at the time, remarkably solemn and 
appropriate, consisting mostly of passages of Scrip- 
ture, aptly applied. It is recollected that he prayed 
much for sanctification, and fitness for heaven ; fre- 
quently using the expressions, " Sanctify me through 
thy truth, thy word is truth," and " Give me a holy 
heart, and fit me for heaven." 

Might it not be well for older children, and even 
adults, to reflect on the example of this little boy, 
less than five years old, and inquire whether they 

6* 



66 MEMOIR OF 

are as well prepared for sickness and death, and to 
meet their God? Do the readers of this perform 
every duty as fearlessly, and seek as constantly to 
be united to Christ by a living faith, as he ? Are 
they as much engaged for the souls of others, and 
is their conversation as much in heaven ? Let each 
remember, that only they who have the . spirit of 
Christ, are his ; and only such as keep his command- 
ments will have a right to the tree of life, and will 
be received at last into the holy city. Let each, then, 
live in the constant performance of every duty, and 
so be prepared for his last end. 



CHAPTER III. 
Last Sickness and Death. 

It now only remains to give an account of the 
sickness and death of this dear boy. All his loveli- 
ness, and intelligence, and piety, and promises of 
usefulness in the world, could \iot shield him from 
this common lot of all the descendants of fallen man. 
In this war there is no discharge ; but the people of 
God, even if little children, will conquer death itself, 
through the blood of the Lamb and His sustain- 
ing grace. 



JOHN M. MEAD. 67 

March 2d, his sister was taken sick with the can* 
ker rash, (or scarlet fever.) John was extremely 
kind and attentive to her, often lying down with her, 
and condoling with her, and he even seemed desi- 
rous to have the disease, that he might hear her com- 
pany. For three days he imagined sometimes that 
he had it. On the fifth, while in the morning learn- 
ing his usual lesson in the Testament, he complained 
to his father that he was sick. He was told it was 
probably imagination, and was directed to £o on with 
his lesson. He obeyed, hut a few minutes after, 
looked up and said, " I am sick, father, certainly ;" 
at the same time smiling, 'but looking very pale. 
He was told to lie down, and soon the physician was 
called, who prescribed the usual medicines with ap- 
parent success, so that in a few days he was relieved, 
and, in ten, appeared quite well, except that he was 
feeble compared with what he was when in health. 
His father then went to New Haven, to attend a 
four days' meeting ; and John went, at his own de- 
sire, to visit a family of the congregation, and tarried 
several days. He came home on Sabbath morning, 
when the family came to meeting, and although he 
looked pale, he was so anxious to attend public wor- 
ship, from which sickness had kept him three Sab- 
baths, that he was permitted, and went all day. He 
was very attentive and solemn during worship, and 
repeated the text and another verse connected with 
it, when he came home. This was a somewhat 



\ 



68 MEMOIR OF 

common practice, although never imposed on him 
as a task. 

During this visit several things occurred that 
show the direction of his thoughts, and the nature of 
iiis feelings. He was observed to be more reserved 
in the presence of the adults of the family, but when 
only the younger children were present, he was 
talkative, and often introduced religious conver- 
sation. 

He conversed with some members of the family, 
however, familiarly about the meeting which had 
recently been held, and as if he had felt a deep inte- 
rest in it. It was then observed by them, that his 
mind was mostly occupied by religious subjects. 
He spoke of Mrs. Judson, and particularly of little 
Maria J. and how much she suffered, — that she was 
in a heathen land and her mother sick ; and her fa- 
ther was obliged to carry her out in the night to beg 
food for her. But added, she died and went to hea- 
ven j and in his view, that made up for all her toils 
and suffering. 

At one time, in particular, he was heard exhort- 
ing these children, in the most solemn and earnest 
manner, to repent, and prepare to meet their God. 
He repeated many of the most solemn warnings 
of God's word, and seemed so earnest, as if he 
would take no denial, but was bent on leading them 
to repentance. One of them asked him, " "What 
shall I do ? " He replied, " You must pray." She 



JOHN M. MEAD. 69 

said, " I do." He answered, " But you don't pray 
enough. A thousand times would not be enough 
for me." He had several such conversations with 
them during the visit. 

When about to leave the house, he said, " Now, 
H. and C. I shall be taken sick, and die, and you 
must remember what I have said to you. You must 
remember my dying words." It is not known how 
he came by that impression, but so his words prov- 
ed to these children. They never heard his voice 
again. Had his friends thought him in immediate 
danger of death, these, and other children, would 
have been invited to see him ; but he was gone be- 
fore the opportunity occurred, and they will meet 
him next in eternity. May it be a happy meeting 
in the kingdom of heaven. 

When he came home that morning, he said, " I 
shall never go to Mr. R.'s again." His mother ask- 
ed, "My son, what do you mean?" He then, no- 
ticing her surprise, and perhaps thinking she dis- 
approved of what he said, remarked, " I shall not go 
there for ten years." 

That evening he conversed on religion with his 
usual interest and intelligence. 

One circumstance will show that his mind was, 
at this time, much turned from the things of the 
world. Several times during the winter he had ask- 
ed his mother to make him a ball to play with, 
when the snow should be gone. That he thought 



70 MEMOIR OF 

much of having it, was evident, from his often try- 
ing to make one for himself. His mother told him 
when she could get a piece of leather she would 
make one for him. When he came home from this 
visit, he brought a ball neatly made and covered 
with green morocco. Soon after he came in, he 

said, " M I shall give you this ball." He was 

told it was the Sabbath and he had better not say 
any thing about his ball. He laid it away, but ear- 
ly Monday morning he presented it to his sister, 
saying, " I'll make you a present of that." He was 
asked why he gave it away, as he had wished for 
one so much, and it was a very pretty present. He 
replied, •• I shall not want it." A book containing 
handsome prints was given to him. His mother 
observing he was not inclined to play, took the book 
and read from it. The stories were calculated to ex- 
cite mirth; but he took little interest in them, though 
his sister laughed heartily. These things were no- 
ticed at the time, and his parents could not account 
for such a marked change in his conduct and feelings. 
The Lord was drawing him to himself, and fix- 
ing his thoughts and affections on heaven. 

Monday, his neck appeared swelled, and he com- 
plained of being unwell, saying he was sick in his 
legs, and lay down on the carpet, as if fatigued. 
Gentle medicines were administered, and an oint- 
ment applied to the neck, which reduced the swell- 
ing ; but Tuesday, he. grew worse, and the physician 



r 



JOHtf M. MEAD. 71 

was called. There were fears that he would have 
the lung fever, but medicine produced a good effect, 
and on Wednesday he appeared better, Thursday 
evening he was suddenly attacked with an excruci- 
ating pain in the left side. So severe was the pain, 
that he could with the utmost difficulty refrain from 
shrieking. A blister had, on Tuesday, been applied 
to his chest, and he was told it was to relieve pain, 
and although he suffered much from it, he now beg- 
ged his father to put oh another blister. The doctor 
came just at this time, and applied a blister, and ad- 
ministered medicine which gave relief from the pain. 
When sick before, he had been loath to take medi- 
cine, but now he took it with readiness, when told 
what it was for. That night he desired his father to 
take care of him, and appeared much pleased when 
told he would not leave him. He desired his father 
to pray, that he might be holy, and fit for heaven, 
and rested some in sleep. The next day he appear- 
ed better, and that and the next day talked much, 
seeming very animated, especially when speaking of 
religion. He was frequently requested not to talk so 
much, but soon forgot the caution, when his coun- 
tenance would assume a roost animated expression, 
his eyes sparkling, and his voice uttering, in the 
sweetest tones, the feelings of a heart full of his 
favorite subject. At one time, alluding to his con- 
versation with the children in his late visit, he said, 
" Mother, I spoke my words of death to.H. and C* 



72 MEMOIR OF 

She said : " Your words of death ! my son, what 

do you mean ?" 

He replied : " I mean my words of death. I told 
them, if they did not repent, and love the Lord 
Jesus Christ, they would not go to heaven. I told 
them they must love Jesus Christ, and if they did 
not, God would laugh at them, for he says : * I will 
laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear 
cometh, 1 " 

Here his countenance appeared lighted up with 
the most animating interest, and he used a strong 
emphasis, and brought down his hands with an em- 
phatic gesture. He continued : " I told them if they 
did not love Jesus Christ, they would go to hell, 
and God would say to them * Depart ye cursed into 
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his an- 
gels.' But I told them, if they did love the Lord 
Jesus Christ they would go to heaven, and he 
would say to them ; * Come, ye blessed of my Fa- 
ther, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the world.' " 

His mother asked him, " Did you really say so, 
John ¥' 

He answered : " Yes, was it right mother V 1 

She feared at the time th«t his disease had affect- 
ed his memory, and that he had only intended to 
say ikx*rimagjned he said it. This had early been 
thi^endency of his mind, and till within a year, he 
did not seent fully, in hiB narratives, to distinguish 



JOHN M. MEAD. 73 

between what was real, and what he had dreamed 
or imagined. But within a year he had become 
very particular in regard to truth, and so careful, 
that it was with difficulty his parents could induce 
him to promise any thing positively and uncondi- 
tionally, he seeming to fear he might fail in the ful- 
fillment, and be guilty of falsehood. He* would 
therefore say, when asked if he would do any thing 
at a future period, " I will endeavor to," or " I 
think I will." His mother did not know but by rea- 
son of his disease this caution might be forgotten, 
but on inquiry of the family where he was visiting, 
and of the children with whom he conversed, it was 
found that he had used this language, and much 
more of like import, and with great earnestness and 
solemnity, as though determined not to give over 
till he should lead those children to repentance. 
Will not the reader join with the writer in the earnest 
prayer, " God grant that his efforts may not be 
lost on those for whose salvation he appeared so earn- 
est, nor upon others who .may read this narrative?" 
Had his parents supposed John so near his end, 
they might have recorded many striking sayings ut- 
tered during these two days, and would have more 
frequently encouraged a full expression of his feel- 
ings on many occasions. But as his lungs were in- 
flamed, and his body growing weaker, they deemed 
it necessary to repress his disposition to talk, and as 
they hoped to see their son well again, they kept no 



74 MEMOIR OF 

notes of his conversation, and are obliged to depend 
on their memory, and that of a few friends who were 
with them, for what is here recorded. 

The same day he had been lying silent some time, 
when hcsaid, \* Mother, I shall want my father 
called to see, hk dear son die." 

She said, " I hope, my son, you are not going to 
die. We. hope God will spare you to us. How 
wretched we should be without our dear son." 

J. " Well, when I come to die, you will call my 
dear father out of the study, won't you ?" 

M. " Yes, my son, if we think you dying» your 
father will not leave you." He appeared satisfied. 

It is not pretended to account for his abiding im- 
pression that he should die. His parents and friends 
all expected him to recover, and no conversation is 
recollected that could have given him the impres- 
sion; but it is doubtful whether he ever, for more 
than a few minutes, thought it likely he was to be 
well again, or desired it, except now and then,, when 
encouraged by others. 

John's attachment to his father had ever been very 
strong from infancy, and was manifested on every oc- 
casion. Frequently, during a few months before his 
sickness, it seemed as if he could not find words to 
express his affection. If his father was from home 
he felt very lonely, and the moment he was seen re- 
turning, he would meet him and express the great- 
ett/joy at seeing himv* Whenever he sat down, John 



JOHN M. MEAD. 75 

would come round him, and as soon as an opportu- 
nity offered, climb into his. lap, and putting his face 
up to his, repeat in the most affectionate t tones : 
" Dear father ! My dear father /" This affection 
appeared to the last in his constant desire to have his 
father with him, and his willingness to take from his 
hand whatever he was requested. If he appeared 
uneasy or impatient, his father's presence would al- 
most always calm him ; and if unwilling to take a 
medicine, a few words of reasoning from him re- 
moved all objections. The greatest unwillingness 
was overcome by his father telling him he must go 
out of the room and leave him if he would not take 
the medicine, and even this was necessary but once. 
When his father could hold him up, he always 
seemed most happy. 

The day his sister was taken ill, all the family but 
his mother and children had gone to Hartford to at- 
tend a protracted meeting. After dinner his little 
sisters went to sleep. He lay down before the fire, 
and said nothing for some time. Suddenly he roused 
up, looking dejected and unhappy, and exclaimed, 
.*• Mother, if my father was dead, and you were a 
widow, how lonely we should be ! Do let me go and 
see Mr. H." meaning a near neighbor. He went, 
and staid till about the time when he expected his 
father home. He had doubtless been thinking what 
our situation would be, should his. father be always 
gone, as on that day ; and the bare thought of it made 



76 MEMOIR OF 

home appear gloomy, and filled him with anguish. 
Dear lovely boy ! He " who tempers the wind to 
the shorn lamb," took him to himself before that day 
of sorrow and loneliness had fallen on his mother. 
He was spared the anguish of seeing his mother a 
widow, and himself and sisters fatherless. 

The afternoon of the day of the last mentioned 
conversation, he said, " Mother, I shall be a young 
preacper. I shall have two kinds of sermons, one 
to the righteous, and one to the wicked, and when 
my father is taken away, I shall preach them to this 
people. I shall tell them to love the Lord Jesus 
Christ, or they won't go to heaven." He was re- 
quested not to say any more, but his mind seemed 
all the time in vigorous action, and it was difficult 
to keep him within the bounds of prudence. That 
night he appeared so much better, that at his request 
the family took tea in the room where he was, and 
he sat at the table with them. The physician then 
could see nothing in the way of a speedy recovery. 

The next day his disease took another unfavorable 
turn, but still the danger did not appear great. His 
parents did not, however, neglect to converse with 
him frequently respecting the necessity of being al- 
ways prepared to meet God. It never moved him 
in the least to tell him he might die, nor did he 
once manifest any unpleasant apprehensions at the 
thought, or the least unwillingness to meet death at 
any time. His father often proposed, when alone 



JOHN M. MEAD. 77 

with him, to pray, asking him what he should pray 
for. Several times he replied, " Pray that I may be 
holy," or, " Pray that I may have a good heart." 
When asked if he prayed for it in his heart, he al- 
ways replied, " Yes." 

It is not recollected that he ever was unwilling 
to hear the Bible read, or to unite in prayer, how- 
ever much he was suffering at the time, although it 
sometimes required great effort to avoid groaning, 
or to keep still during prayer. Repeatedly, while 
sick, he requested his mother to read the Bible to 
him, and to have one of his parents pray with him, 
and was always desirous to have family prayer in 
his room. This attachment to the Bible and to 
prayer had been steadily increasing for years, and 
now it seemed his delight to draw near to God, in 
whose service he hoped to live eternally. 

Would it not be well for young and old to keep 
in mind, while forming habits for life, and perhaps 
for eternity, that those much attached to prayer while 
in health, who have never neglected it in its proper 
seasons, have generally found their sweetest conso- 
lations in it on their sick and dying bed 1 How 
lovely such habits and attachments are in a sick 
child, no one can know but those who have watched 
such an one in his moments of pain and distress, 
and heard expressions of love to God, and resigna- 
tipn to his will, flowing from his lips. The comfort 
which the recollection of this affords to mourning 

7* 



78 MEMOIR OF 

< 

relatives, is known by those who, like the parents of 
this lovely boy, have seen their fondest earthly hopes 
cut off in the death of a pious praying child. It 
sweetens sorrow, it removes the dread of death, it 
enables them to bless God for taking the loved one 
from the pains, and temptations, and sins, and sor- 
rows of this world, to the blessed rest of heaven. 

Let affectionate children think of the feelings of 
their kind parents, should they be called to the grave 
early, and prepare to give them comfort in the hope 
of meeting them in heaven. Should this little book 
be the means of leading one soul to such a prepara- 
tion, this beloved child's death will not have been 
in vain. 

Let parents, too, think of this, when striving, by 
God's blessing, to form the character of iheir children 
for life, for death, for the judgment, and for eternity. 

The morning after the conversation above men- 
tioned, while his mother was sitting by his bed, 
John began to speak : " Mother, I feel as if I could 
stand there." 

M. " Where, my son ?" 

J. "There." 

M. " Stand where, my son t" 

J. " At the judgment seat of Christ." 

It appears that he had b,een thinking of it, and did 
not at first consider that she did not understand, as 
well as he, what he meant. She asked him, 

•' Who will be your surety there V % 



JOHN M. MSAD. 79 

The moment she used the word surety, she thought 
he would not understand its meaning, and was about 
to explain, but he replied, " God." 

M. " In whose righteousness do you expect to be 
accepted ?" 

J. •• Christ's." 

M. " Do you expect to be justified in Christ's 
righteousness, or to stand there because you have 
been a good boy V 1 

/. " I expect to be justified in Christ's righteous- 
ness." 

It should be here stated, that the words he used 
had been frequently explained to him, and he had 
heard them use4 and illustrated, till he seemed to 
fix a definite meaning to them. The evidences of a 
preparation to meet God were stated to him, and he 
as usual asked questions, but they are not particu- 
larly recollected. 

Either in this conversation, or another about the 
same time, he was asked why we might hope to be 
justified in Christ's righteousness. He replied, 

" Because he died to save sinners." 

M. " Why do yov, hope for this V 1 

J. " Because I am a sinner." 

He uniformly maintained, that he repented of his 
sins, and believed in Christ ; and his parents recol- 
lect, not the least reason to doubt his entire habitual 
confidence in all the declarations of God's word. 
He always appeared to act on the conviction of their 



80 MEMOIR 0F 

truth, as much as on the truth of what his father or 
mother said to him. Such unhesitating, unsuspect- 
ing confidence is rarely seen even in old Christians. 
He seems never to have learned to doubt them. 

Within a few months of his death, he had repeat- 
edly called his mother to his bed, after he retired at 
night, and requested her to tell him all she knew 
about the children in heaven, refering to the Sa- 
vior's words : " Suffer little children to come unto 
me, and forbid them not, for of such is the' kingdom 
of heaven." While sick, he again desired her to tell 
him all she knew about them, and particularly what 
they did in heaven. When she had finished, he said, 

" i wish to join that company of children 
around God's throne." 

His mother asked, " Are you willing to die, and 
leave your dear father and v mother to go and join 
them ?" 

He "replied with perfect calmness, " Yes." 

Other things were said, daily manifesting the same 
feelings, while he was every hour showing the live- 
liest attachment to his parents, and seemed unwilling 
to have them out of his sight. 

One day his father was sitting on the bed holding 
him up, as he often requested, when he said, " My 
son, we hope you will get well, but it may he God's 
will that you shall die. Are you willing V 1 

J. «• Yes." 

F. " Where will you be, my son, if you die ¥ 



JOHN M. MBAD. 81 

< 

J. " Where Ood pleases to put me" 

F. •• Are you willing that he should do with you 
as he may please 1" 

J. " Yes." 

F. " Do you often pray to God in your heart T" 

J. "Yes." 

His father could, at the time, discover no reason 
to doubt that he understood fully what he said, and 
felt as he expressed himself. Neither on mature 
reflection has he discovered the least evidence to the 
contrary, or any reason to doubt that this was the 
habitual state of his mind during his sickness. It 
should be kept in view, that every one about him, 
all this time, expected him to recover, and so ex- 
pressed themselves when they spoke to him. Will 
not many an old Christian feel reproved by the sub- 
mission of this babe in Christ % Should we doubt 
in the case of an adult, who uniformly used such 
language, and lived consistently with it, that he was 
prepared for a happy eternity ? Would it not con- • 
stitute the happiest reflection of pious mourners that, 
before death, the thoughts of the father, or mother, 
or dear companion, were in heaven, to which the 
soul looked with the utmost calmness, desiring to be 
with Christ and jthe saints around God's throne % 
And what reason can be given, why even little chil- 
dren should not cause the same joy by such conver- 
sation ? Why should not parents and children labor 
and pray that they may talk with God, like Samuel, 



82 MEMOIR OF 

and be consecrated to him from infancy, like Jere- 
miah ; and know by experience his truth and love 
from a very little child, like Timothy ? What can 
make them so lovely, so dutiful, so happy 1 What 
can so secure them against the temptations of life, or 
fit them so well for a sick and dying hour ? 

John had always, especially within a few months, 
been* very attentive to his father's concerns, and 
seemed determined to know all he could learn about 
them, and to help him all in his power. It was, for 
months, a common saying in the family when his 
father was absent, and they wished to know where 
he had gone, or what he had been doing, or when 
he would return, " Ask John, he knows all about it ;" 
and it was rare that he could not give the desired in- 
formation. He had told much before his sickness, of 
helping his father in the garden, when the time should 
come ; and when first taken sick, he requested him 
not to do all the planting before he should get well 
* to help him. But about the time of the last conver- 
sations mentioned, he appeared to lose all interest in 
this and every earthly concern. He never after in- 
troduced conversation about them, and if others did 
so, he would not continue it, but seemed perfectly 
indifferent to it. 

As many as three times, when his parents and 
the physician thought him getting better, the disease, 
without any assignable cause, suddenly put on a 
new and unexpected form, and became more violent 



JOHN M. MEAD. 83 

But as it seemed to yield to the operation of medi- 
cine, and his constitution had been good, and he 
complained but little, except when attacked anew, 
his parents expected his recovery till the last hour 
of his life. On this account they held fewer conver- 
sations with him towards the last, and kept no record 
of what he said, so as to preserve the order of time. 
He was feeble, and it caused him pain to talk much, 
and they hoped for better opportunities. like many 
others, they put death at a distance, and neglected 
to do what they now wish had been done ; but the 
opportunity is for ever gone. 

Several times, however, he commenced conversa- 
tion himself, always about religion, or heaven, or 
something connected with them, and his father or 
mother checked him. lest he should injure himself. 
What is recollected will now be given, without any 
certainty as to the order of time. 

At one time, as he was sitting on a chair, and his 
father standing by him, he looked up with a most 
affecting expression, and laboring for breath, said, 
" Father, I think God is carrying on a work." His 
father asked, " Where, my son ?" He replied, " In 
my heart." He seemed willing and desirous to con- 
verse, but as his lungs were then weak and inflamed, 
he was requested not to say more. ' i 

One day during the last week of his life, his mo- 
ther being about to pray with him, asked him what 



84 MEMOIR OF 

she should pray for ? He replied, " That I may bo 
recovered to health." 

Jf. M Should I not rather pray that God's will 
may be done V 1 

J. "Yes." 

M. " Are you willing I should pray that God's 
will may be done, that he may take you away, if fie 
pleases, or raise you up ?" 

J. " Pray that God's will may be done." 

Sometimes he was very nervous, and would ask 
those near him to go away, and leave him alone ; but 
if prayer was proposed, he always desired it, and 
never did he show any disrelish for this, or for hear- 
. ing the Scriptures. He often requested his parents to 
read the Bible to him, and they generally asked, 
where he would have them read. He generally re* 
ferred it to them, but once requested to have the first 
chapter of Job read, and once where it says, " Son 
give me thy heart." During the reading he was al- 
ways attentive, and if not too weak, or in great pain, 
had some questions to propose as to the meaning of 
the part read, or the character of the persons named. 
The character of Job he admired, but it puzzled him 
much to discover why such a good man should be 
so much afflicted. That wicked people should be 
punished, he admitted ; but then, why the good must 
suffer, was a mystery, as it is to many. When told, 
however, that God did it to make them better, and 



JOHN M. MEAD. 85 

prepare them for more happiness in heaven, he was 
satisfied. 

One day lying in bed, he groaned, and complained 
of pain. To divert his mind, his mother said to him, 

•* Think, my son, there is a man at Mrs. 's who 

is much more afflicted than you are. He cannot 
help himself at all." His father was in the room, 
and he said, " Father, you had better go and see 
him, and talk to him closely." His mother asked 
him, " Closely about what, my son ?" He replied, 
" You know." His parents had no doubt what he 
meant, for he frequently spoke of talking closely to 
persons about religion, and now he wished to use no 
more words than necessary, as he spoke with pain. 

Another time, when suffering much with a blister, 
and probably with internal pains, his mother re- 
marked, " Though you suffer much, my dear son, 
God does not willingly afflict or griejre the children 
of men." He asked, " Why don't he ?" He was 
told of the love and goodness of God, and that our 
sins are the cause of our suffering— rthat he suffered, 
because his parents from Adam had sinned, and he 
had sinned against God, who is so kind and merciful. 
He seemed to have discovered consolation in this 
truth, and complained very little ever after. 

His convictions of sin appear to have been, at 
times, very clear, and in a degree distressing, as ia 
probably the case with all Christians. Early in his 

8 



86 MEMOIR OF 

sickness he said, " Mother, I cannot help sometimes 
bursting into tears." 

M. " Bursting into tears ! For what, my son ?" 

J. 4< The same that did that Sabbath." 

(Referring to a person he had seen to weep in 
meeting.) 

M. " Well, what did weep for 1" 

J. " You know." 

M. " But I meant you to tell me what you think 
he did for." 

J. " Because he had lived in rebellion against 
God so long." 

How abiding this conviction was, no one can tell ; 
but he often appeared grieved and humbled, when 
his sins were mentioned, and frequently prayed for 
pardon, and a new and holy heart. It may not be 
improper here to mention, that his parents had never 
encouraged hihi to believe that he had been born 
again, fearing that it might have an ill tendency. 
They taught him the truths of the Bible, and gave 
him a sketch of the lives of eminent Christians, and 
left him to form his own opinion of himself. With- 
out her intention, he once got the idea that his mo- 
ther considered him a Christian, but it was not che- 
rished by any encouragement. Yet he scarcely ap- 4 
peared for months, if for* years, to entertain a doubt 
of his being a new-born person; always spoke as 
considering himself a Christian at heart, and acted 



JOHN M. MEAD. 87 

on that supposition, showing, that he considered 
pious people his companions and dearest friends. 

The last Sabbath of his life he appeared very ill 
in the morning, and his parents requested prayers 
in public, " That God would sanctify his soul, and 
either restore him to health, or take him to himself" 
At night he seemed better, and his mother told him 
" the people had been praying for him, and God had 
heard their prayers, and she hoped his life would be 
spared." He asked, " Why do you wish my life to 
be spared ?" She replied, " Because we should be 
so unhappy without our only son." He expressed 
no desire to recover. 

This week he was feeble, and sometimes nervous, 
and his parents discouraged his talking. Sometimes 
he seemed in deep study, and then would commence 
talking on some topic of religion, and continue till 
he was told he must not talk any more. Not unfre- 
quently he was stopped immediately before finishing 
a sentence. A few things are remembered. One 

day he said, " Mother, - and make 

very foolish prayers." 

M. " How so, my son ?" 

J. "Because they- do. I told them if they did 
not pray better, God would not hear them. I told 
them they must pray better, or they would not go to 
heaven." 

This week he twice, without any introduction, told 
his mother he thought he could stand before the 



88 MEMOIR OF 

judgment seat of Christ ; and when asked if it was 
because he had been, a good boy, or because he loved 
Christ, he replied, " Because I love Christ." 

Repeatedly, when requested to take medicine, and 
wishing to be excused, he was told he must take it, 
because the doctor was very kind to him, and wished 
him to get well. He asked, " What makes the 
doctor wish me to get well ?" 

One day this week, his father being alone with 
him, he said, "Father, I want to talk with the 
doctor." 

F. " About what, my son ?" 

J. " About Jesus Christ." 

The doctor had, by his constant attendance and 
kindness, won his affection, and he had heard that 
he was not a professor of religion. This was no 
doubt the occasion of his wish. 

But he never had an opportunity to do what he 
really desired. 

The day previous to that of his death he seemed 
relieved, and showed no symptoms of specific dis- 
ease, except a cough, and a leaning to the left side. 
His parents and the physician thought him better, 
although feeble. Each of his parents, when alone 
with him, prayed with him repeatedly. When his 
father asked what he should pray for, John replied, 
" Pray that I may be holy, and fit for heaven," 
When asked if he often prayed for it in his heart, he 
said, «• Yes." 



JOHN M. MEAD. 89 

Once when asked by his mother what she should 
pray for, he replied, " That this sickness may not 
be unto death." 

M. " Shall I pray for that, or that the will of God 
may be done V 

J. " That the will of God may be done »" 

This elliptical mode of speech he often used, es- 
pecially when it hurt him to speak. His language 
was always concise, and perspicuous, but more so 
when sick, than ever. 

This day he was told his father had bought some 
figs, and it was hoped they would strengthen him, 
so that he would get well. He asked, "Why do 
you wish me to get well V seeming to wonder that 
his parents could desire it, when he desired rather 
to depart and be with Christ. 

That evening he was very much distressed, but 
could specify no particular part where he suffered. 
When asked where he felt bad, he said, " All over." 
He frequently desired to have his pillow placed on 
different parts of the bed, but after a while said, there 
was no comfortable place in his bed. He could be 
still but for a moment, yet when his father proposed 
to pray with him, he at once became calm, and so 
continued till the close of prayer. 

The next morning he seemed better, and the phy- 
sician had hope of a speedy recovery, left him some 
bark, and directed more nourishing food than had 
been given him. He was at first loath to take the 

8* 



90 MEMOIR or 

bark, but his mother told him his father was making 
a strawberry bed in the garden, and that he might 
pick some for her, when they should grow. He 
took the bark, but said nothing. 

He was placed in a chair, at the window, to see 
a man at work in the garden, but appeared to have 
lost all interest in it. When spoken to about it, he 
made no reply, but looked at his mother in such a 
way that she thought, "He has done with this 
world; why should I trouble him ?" During the day 
he gained strength, and ate with a little more appe- 
tite, but said very little. It seemed to give him pain 
to talk. • 

In the afternoon his mother was holding him up 
on th« couch provided for him near the fire, when 
she said to him, " My son, we hope God will bless 
the means for your recovery, but you may die. Are 
you willing to die and leave your dear father and 
mother »" 

He replied, " Yes." 

M. " What makes you willingi" 

/> " I cannot tell you ;" meaning, probably, that 
it hurt him to talk, as he had previously said. 

M. " I wish you to tell me in your own words." 

J. "I cannot." 

M. "Is it because you think you have been a 
good boy, or because you love Christ t" 

Jl " Because I love Christ." 

At his request his mother read to him from the 



JOH* M. MSAD. 91 

Bible, and related the history of Joseph, which he 
always admired. 

As he sat on the couch, and could not converse, 
his father gave him two dollars to amuse him. His 
mother seeing him playing with them, asked him 
how many Bibles they would buy for those poor 
children who had none. He answered, " I do not 
know." Sometime after, he asked how many they 
would buy. Towards evening he showed them to. 
his- father, and said, " Father, may I own these !" 
distinguishing between have and own. Probably he 
thought of the Bibles, as he had often wept when 
told of the poor heathen children who have no one 
to tell them of the Savior, and spoke frequently of 
sending them the Bible, and repeatedly said, " When 
I am a man, like my father, I will go and preach Je- 
sus Christ to them." He had a Bible sent to him by 
Mr. R— , of Philadelphia, which he valued high- 
ly, both because it was sent to him by a good man, 
and because it contained the Gospel of Jesus Christ 

In the evening he seemed.stronger than he had 
been for some days, and sat up in a chair more than 
an hour. About eight o'clock his father came from 
the study, and found him sitting, but looking dis- 
tressed, and soon removed him to the couch and 
held his head. Before being removed he seemed 
distressed for breath, and frequently coughed with* 
out raisings seeming very weak at die lungs. 



92 MEMOIR OT 

His father asked him, " Can't you, my son, cough 
so as to raise !" He shook his head, meaning No- 
Soon he said, " O dear ! I wish I could cough 
so as to raise. 11 Then in a few minutes, " O dear ! 
I am a poor hoy. Ain't I a poor hoy, father?" 

His distress increased fast, and soon after being 
laid on the couch, he complained of being cold, and 
was wrapt in a warm covering. He wished to be 
removed, and when put on the couch again his fa- 
ther felt a cold sweat on his face, and observed, 
44 Now we must be sure an abscess is forming ;" this 
having been mentioned as the greatest danger, and 
a cold sweat the common sign of it Soon he asked 
again to be removed, and seemed in more distress. 
His mother removed him; he immediately sank 
down as if he had fainted. She cried, " O hus- 
band! he is going." His father ran round the 
couch, and laid him on it, and held his head on his 
own bosom, wiping the cold sweat from his face, and 
bathing his head in camphor. He seemed to revive 
a little, and asked to.be again removed, but was told 
to remain a minute. His parents perceived he was 
dying, and committed his soul to his faithful cove- 
nant God, to whom they had early dedicated him 
for life, death, and eternity. His father asked him, 
if he knew his father and mother. He looked at 
each, earnestly and affectionately, but said nothing. 
Soon he gasped twice, then breathed a few times # 
with difficulty, and his soul was gone. For a mi- 



JOHN M. MEAD. $3 

nute it was thought possible that Ije-had fainted, and 
efforts were made to resuscitate him, hut in vain ; 
his soul had been received by angels, and gone to 
join the company of children around God's throne. 
There he had wished to go : that he might be pre- 
pared for it, he had prayed thousands of times, and 
desired others to pray ; there all his inquiries will 
be answered by infinite wisdom, and his thirst for 
knowledge, and his ardent desires for sanctification 
will be completely satisfied. His trials are over, his 
sorrows ended ; the perils of the journey are all sur- 
mounted; he has reached his eternal home, and 
found ease from pain, rest from toil ; and all the 
powers of his active, vigorous mind are now em- 
ployed in looking into God's works, and the ways 
of truth, and serving him whom angels worship and 
saints delight to praise. 

In a few minutes his features were all composed, 
as when asleep, with that mildness and calm dignity 
for which he was ever admired by all who knew him. 

His parents nad not allowed him to be called beau- 
tiful, lest it should corrupt his mind and make him 
vain ; but as he lay before them lifeless, few that saw 
him, bjit exclaimed, How beautiful ! How lovely 
even in death I 

It was Friday, April 8th, 1831, about nine o'clock 
at night, when the soul was liberated from earth. 
The tempest was raging without, and thick darkness 
covered the land j but all was peace within, fit em- 



94 MEMOIR OF 

blem of the agitations of the expiring body, and the 
peace of the soul resting on the bosom of a Savior. 

Thus he lived his appointed time, and thus he 
died, aged four years, eleven months, and four days. 

After the body was placed in the coffin, all left the 
room but his father. He was overheard bemoaning 
himself in the language of David. •• ' My son, my 
son, would to God I had died for thee.* Oh, my be- 
loved son, thou wilt.no more come to me, but I shall 
go to thee ; and it may be soon." 

Lines by a Lady in E. H. on learning these expressions 
of grief by Mr. M . 

One look before we part. 

And it must be the last ; 
How does my grief-worn heart 

Keep lingering o'er the past ! 

When thou in all my way 

Wast like a beam of light, 
My joy throughout the da.y, 

And on my prayer at night 

My blighted hopes I mourn ; 

My earthly ties are riven \ • 
I could have suffering borne, 

My life I could have given ; 

To save thee from the dust; 
Yet I would not restore, 



JOHN M. MEAD. 95 

For go to thee I must, 
But thou to me no more. 

'Twas not in all my fears 
To class thee with the dea 

I never thought thy years 
So briefly could have fled. 

And now the grave will tear 

Forever from my view, 
This form in death so fair, 

In life so lovely too. 

One look and thou art gone ; 

what has earth beside ; 
My Son, my only Son, ! 

1 could for thee have died. 

The Sabbath came, and the numerous school as- 
sembled in the house of God ; the body was carried 
there, and lay near the place where he had delight- 
ed his teacher and his companions with promptness 
in reciting his lesson, and with his affection, and 
docility, while receiving instruction. The Rev. Dr. 
Hawes, of Hartford, who had been lately called to 
suffer a bereavement similar to that of the mourning 
parents, addressed the audience in a sermon not de- 
signed as a funeral discourse, nor to speak of the 
dead, but to call the living to a preparation for eter- 



96 MEMOIR OF 

nity. It is believed his words were not lost, as seea 
sown by the way-side. 

From the house of God the people repaired to 
the repository of the dead. There were seen no 
costly array of mourning apparel, and no useless fu- 
neral pomp. Six boys, three of whom had been 
John's class-mates in the Sabbath School, carried 
his body to the grave, and his parents and friends, 
and all the school followed ; and there was real sor- 
row ; for many knew him, and all who knew him, 
loved him. 

When they arrived at the grave, and the body had 
taken possession of its resting place, the bereaved 
father addressed the numerous assembly, saying : 
" My friends, when I came among you a few months 
ago, little did I think it was to lay my beloved son 
so soon in this earth, with your ancestors and friends. 
But the Lord knoweth best what should be, and to 
him I submit. He is my witness, that I have not 
shrunk from even this, could I see your salvation. 
Yes, my friends, he is my witness, that when I have 
been praying for the outpouring of his Spirit on you, 
the question has seemed to come to me plainly, almost 
as in words, 4 Are you willing, as a condition of 
your prayer being answered, to give up all ? Are 
you willing, if I please, to be laid aside from your 
labors % Can you consent to part with even that be- ' 
loved boy?' And I have answered, *Yes, Lord; 
send thy Spirit, and take what thou wilt.' He has 



JOHN M. MfeAD. W 

taken me at my word ; he has poured out his Spirit, 
and taken my son ; and if it can he the means of 
your salvation, I joyfully submit. O, prepare, young 
and old, to follow him, and join with me and say, 
4 The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away, 
blessed be the name of the Lotd.' ,,# * 

Many were the tears shed around the grave, and 
as the people retired, it is believed many went to 
pray that God might prepare them to go in peace, 
as the child had gone. 

Over the grave of this child has been erected a 
plain marble slab, with this inscription : — 

In Memory of 

JOHN M. 

Son of Rev. Asa and Mrs. Jane G. Mead, 

Born at Brunswick, 

In the State of Maine, May 4th, 1826. 

Died in the hope of a blessed immortality, April 8th, 

1831. 
LUKE 18: 16, 17. 

The wound made in his father's heart by this 
bereavement was deep, though he saw the hand 

* The speaker on this affecting occasion, the father who 
thus committed the remains of a beloved son to the dost, 
was himself called to resign his spirit to God on the 26th of 
October following, and his body now reposes by the side of 

9 



98* MEMOIR OF 

which inflicted the blow, and bowed under the rod; 
and though no murmuring or rebellious word was 
ever uttered, but the expression often, " that he lov- 
ed God better since the chastisement;" yet it was 
evident to all who had much intercourse with him, 
that his grief was great ; and that the world and 
earthly attachments appeared to him in their true 
light, since that night when his cherished expecta- 
tions were suddenly cut of£ and this darling son ex- 
pired in his arms. 

He often afterwards observed he had no wish left, 
but to serve his Savior and Redeemer, and to give 
to him every power, and affection, and faculty of his 
soul, and then to be received home. It was observa- 
ble, that his prayers, his preaching, and indeed his 
whole demeanor, partook of the savor of this afflic- 
tion. Death, and eternity, and heaven, were topics 
much dwelt on from this time. When the veil which 
hides the eternal world was lifted up, and this belov- 
ed child entered its blissful regions, he seemed to 
have caught a glimpse of its glories, and ever after 
to have " endured, as seeing him who is invisible." 
He had several times, during the summer, remarked, 
" Who knows, but one design of God in removing 

his sleeping babe. May that blessing which he so ardently 
sought at the sacrifice of his dearest comforts, and "which 
beyond doubt was his strongest desire in death, be abun- 
dantly conferred on his bereaved flock, and on their chil- 
dren, and children's children. 



JOHN M. MEAD. 99 

John was to prepare him to he my instructer in 
Christ ? Who knows hut I am soon to follow, and 
he has been taken a little while before that he might 
be fitted to be my ministering angel, to lead me to 
the knowledge and glories of my Savior ?" 

The following poetry, composed by a lady of 
East Hartford, will speak to the heart of each be- 
jeaved parent, while it shows the feelings cherished 
by all who knew this child. It was addressed to his 
mother a few days after the funeral. 

TO MRS. MEAD. 

He was a lovely boy ; 
Health spread its halo round him, and the smile 
Of animated joy was blended with 
A look of strong and brilliant intellect, 
That might not pass unnoticed. The stranger's 
Eye would fasten on a form so full of 
Interest — and friends would day by day drink 
In his winning graces ; yet in the minds 
Of all a monitory feeling dwelt, 
Which oft-times bodes the wreck of early hopes. 

He seemed not for this earth — so young, so ripe 
For heaven — yet there was still a trusting hope 
Deep rooted in thy breast, that he was sent 
To labor in the vineyard of his Lord. 



100 MgMOIB OF 

O hast thou not, fond mother, in the full 
Rapture of thy heart, oft cast a mental 
Eye into the future, and in one glance 
Beheld a life of deep devotedness — 
A herald of the cross— a strong man ann'd, 
Imbued with wisdom from on high — mighty 
In word and deed* — say, has he thus appeared 
To thy fond vision ? And then would come the 
Parting, O, from thee — from all — his childhood's 
Home — its altar — and the deep retirement 
Consecrate to God ; with this too would come 
The pledge and promise held to those whose love 
And faith could give up all, ev'n ail for Christ ; 
And thou wast far above the world. Perchance 
A different scene might be at times brought 
Up to view. But let a veil drop o'er it \ 
'Tis a mother's privilege to draw the picture 
As she lists— dipt in the warm affections 
Of the heart, the pencil takes its coloring : 
And O how strong and vivid are its hues. 

The hand of God was on him, and he fell, 
Ev'n in the spring time of his life, with all 
His blossoms gathered round him. The promised 
Fruit — where is it % Maturing in the sky 
Amid the light and warmth of uncreated Love. 

And dost thou weep? 'tis nature's hallowed 
Boon — in mercy giv'n to soothe the stricken 



JOHN M. MEAD. 101 

Soul. Thy tears may flow, and thou wilt find them 
Coursing down thy cheeks, when in thy lonely 
Hours no eye but his who seeth in secret, 
Marks thee. When summer twilight clothes the 

heaVns 
In beauty, and the uplifted stars seem 
Praising their Creator, thou wilt think on 
Thy belov'd. For then it was thy wont to 
Lead him from the world — to guide his spirit 
Heaven-ward — its centre and' its hope. 

He will 
Be still before thee — his playful movements 
Round the hearth will meet thee there, and his all 
Questioning tones will steal upon thine ear 
Amid the voices of the world, with a 
Subdued and holy sweetness that will sink 
Into thy heart. Yes, and the last, last look — 
Enough — here was a trial of thy faith, 
And thou didst prove in whom thou hast believM. 

C. S. 

And is not the dear child's lot a blessed one? He 
was, from the first, the subject of many prayers for 
the blessing of God upon him. He was the con- 
stant care of parents who had no greater delight, 
connected with this world, than to make him happy. 
His naturally lovely disposition was cherished to the 



102 M3)IOIR OF 

utmost, so that he was ever a most happy child. His 
mind was early cultivated with care, and fed with 
knowledge and divine truth, and kept constantly in 
happy exercise. He was the object of approbation 
and love to all who knew him ; and enjoyed uni- 
formly good health, and lively, cheerful spirits. But 
above all,, he early had the spirit of piety found in 
him, and after a short probation on earth, has been 
called from all trouble and sorrow, to mansions of 
everlasting bliss, to serve the God whom he loved 
and adored, for ever and ever. True, he left his be- 
loved parents, and numerous friends, and brilliant 
earthly prospects, when, to his young mind, all ap- 
peared fair before him. But his parents mourned 
not as those without hope. Their beloved child was 
only called a little before them, and all that he loved 
of God's people will soon be with him, never to part 
The best of earthly prospects, what are they? Soon 
clouded, and the fairest form withers, and the firmest 
health decays, and the most flattering views deceive ; 
but now he is beyond all disappointment, and fears 
no change. God is his teacher and father ; angels 
and the spirits of the blessed his companions, and 
heaven his home. What better could he ask % What 
more could his loving parents and friends desire for 
him % What more could God bestow ? 

Such were the views of his most affectionate friends 
—even of the tender father -and mother who loved 
him perhaps too much. They wished not to call 



JOHN M. MEAD. 103 

him back, but hoped so to live that they might meet 
him in heaven in God's own time. Thus death as- 
sumes a most cheerful aspect, disarmed of all its 
terrors. 

Reader, are you a child % See, from this example, 
that you are not too young to seek and find a Sa- 
vior. You are not younger than John, not too 
young to believe in Christ, and repent of your sins, 
and love God, and pray to him often in your heart, 
when alone, and when with" others. At two years 
old, his father and mother hoped John loved God. 
You are older than he, perhaps older than he was 
when he died. He felt he was a sinner, and la- 
mented it j and are not you a sinner ? He repented, 
and prayed for pardon; and can not you, even though 
a little child % You are not too young to die. Your 
prospects are no better than were his, your health 
no better, parents 7 desires for your life no greater 
than were the desires of his. Will you not, then, 
prepare to live to God, and to die when he may 
please, and to join the company of children around 
God's throne % If you will, repent now, pray now to 
be forgiven for Jesus sake, believe on him, and love 
God now j and while you live, he will keep you, 
and when you die, he will save you, and take you 
home to heaven. 

Parents, who may read this, are you doing your 
duty to your children ? They are not too young to 
dip. Your example may very early decide their 



104 MEMOIR OF 

eternal state. O, think them not too young to come 
to Jesus, nor too young to learn the way to heaven. 
Fill their young minds with heavenly truth, and 
show its happy influence upon yourselves, in your 
treatment of them, and your daily conduct before 
them. You may, like the parents of John, be called 
early to lay their bodies in the grave ; but how sweet 
will be the anticipation of meeting them in heaven, 
if you have led them to Jesus. In your prayers for 
them, and your instructions, are you laboring for 
their immediate conversion, or are you thinking not 
of this, but laboring that it may take place some 
years hence 1 Is not God as able to convert them im- 
mediately as he was this child ? — as able to do it at 
the very first dawning of truth on>their mind, as when 
they have sinned for years, and hardened their hearts 
against the truth % Imitate the Syrophenician woman, 
in your perseverance in prayer, and faith and effort ; 
and Christ will say to you, " Be it unto thee even as 
thou wilt." / 

You may not have your dear little ones many 
years, but you will have them long enough to do 
your duty to them. Do it now, do it daily, do it in 
faith and prayer, and patient persevering effort, and 
you may expect to secure for them an eternal 
blessing. 

Let not Sabbath School teachers despond, nor re- 
lax their efforts. Let them labor for the conversion 
of their pupils now, and believe God able and will •■ 



JOHN M MEAD. 10$ 

ing to grant the blessing immediately, and pray for 
it in faith. Let them cherish every favorable dispo- 
sition in the dear children of their care, but count 
nothing accomplished, till the soul is converted, and 
they see, from Sabbath to Sabbath, each child grow- 
ing in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Je- 
sus Christ. 



SABBATH SCHOOL HYMN. 

Composed on the death of John Mooney Mead, 

Loved one, where is now thy rest, * 
Sweetly on thy Savior's breast 1 
Dost thou now thy bliss begin, 
Freed from sorrow and from sin ? 

We are toiling here below, 
Where the troubled waters flow ; 
Thou hast reached the blissful sh re, 
And will toil and weep no more. 

If thy gentle spirit may 
For thy young companions pray, 
Teach us from thy realms above, 
How to prize a Savior's love. 

• 

We are destined thee to meet 
At our blessed Savior's feet ; 
• Or to dwell in endless wo, 
Where the wicked surely go. 



106 MEMOIR OF JOHN M. MEAD. 

• 

Thou indeed, hast gone before ; 
O, that we may sin no more ; 
Then, when time with us is past, 
We shall find thy heaven at last. 

Loved one, Oj where is thy rest, 
Sweetly on thy Savior's breast 1 
Thou hast now thy bliss begun, 
And a crown of glory won. 



APPENDIX. 



Brief nohce of the life of Rev. Asa Mead. 

God calls his ransomed out of the world unto 
himself, after a longer or shorter pilgrimage, as 
seems good in his own sight The reasons of his 
appointments are not disclosed to us, but they must 
be infinitely wise and good ; and his children cannot 
depart one hour too soon or too late, either for their 
own everlasting felicity, or the glory of his name, 
or the interests of his church below and his kingdom 
above. On some of these occasions, however, we 
may notice an impressive concurrence of circumstan- 
ces, which should sink deep into the hearts of sur- 
vivors, as a special admonition from his throne, to 
be also ready. It was to many a solemn lesson, that 
the writer of this memoir was summoned away in 
the vigor of life, in less than seven months from the 
decease of his son, and when the first edition of these 
sheets was just coming from the press. It is believed 
that the father, the educator and biographer of such 
a child, himself a devoted and beloved minister of 
Jesus Christ, will long be remembered in the 
churches, and that a brief notice of his life should 
be here recorded. 



108 BRIEF NOTICE OF 

The Rev. Asa Mead was born at Meredith, 
N. H. in 1792 j graduated at Dartmouth College in 
1818; and received his theological education at the 
Seminary in Andover. He was licensed in the sum- 
mer of 1820, and soon after performed a mission in 
Washington city and Georgetown, for supplying the 
destitute of those cities with the Bible. He was or- 
dained as pastor of the Congregational church in 
Brunswick, Me. in December, 1822, and was dis- 
missed at his own request in 1829. While unsettled, 
he performed an agency for the Temperance So- 
ciety in various parts of Maine ; and another at the 
South, under the direction of the American Peace 
Society. August 18, 1880, he was installed over 
a church in East Hartford, Conn. ; where he buried 
his son, and where, on the 26th of October, 1831, 
his own life was closed at the age of 39. 

The character of Mr. Mead owed much of its 
vigor and strength, unquestionably, to the circum- 
stances in which the providence of God placed him 
in early life. At the age of about thirteen he lost his 
father. The hopes of parental aid in obtaining an 
education, which he had begun to cherish, were thus 
blasted ; and his whole time and energy were re- 
quired upon the form, to assist his widowed mother 
in providing for several younger children. He for- 
tified his heart and nerved his youthful arm to the 
arduous task. Two objects were before him night 
and day ; to be a faithful helper to the widow, and 



KKV. ASA MEAD. 109 

protector to the orphans, and eventually to cultivate 
his mind for more efficient action on the theatre of 
life. He often improved the winter moon, hours be* 
fore day, to prepare wood lor the family, that he 
might secure every hou* of instruction at school ; a 
scanty pittance of privilege which he had but a few 
weeks in the year. This was the manner of his life 
till about the age of twenty, except that for one or 
two winters he taught a district school Then he 
commenced a course of preparation for college, un- 
aided we believe by the hand of chanty ; and, through 
difficulties by which most young men would have 
been entirely disheartened, prepared himself in less 
than two years to enter the Sophomore class. He 
then traveled on foot the distance of fifty miles, en* 
tered college an entire stranger to every person there, 
was admitted, and returned in the same manner. 
The same energy and perseverance carried him 
through all his preparatory studies ; and this early 
discipline mad* him, by the aid of a native vigor of 
mind, and a good constitution, one of the most per* 
severing and laborious ministers of his time. 
. At what time his soul was awakened to divine 
things, and his heart drawn to the Savior and his 
service, we are not informed. At the time of ear 
first aeqcntmitmoe with him he appeared to have 
given himself to mat service with all his characte- 
ristic ardor ; and till all that was mortal in him he- 
tame useless in death, bis purpose never seemea Id 

10 



110 BRIEF NOTICE OT 

waver for an hour, or his heart to fail. Beyond most 
men we ever knew, he meditated on the things of 
Christ's kingdom, and gave himself wholly to them. 
Whatsoever his hand found to do, he did it, and with 
all his might. He was, moreover, a daily witness for 
the fact, that he who has a mind to work in a good 
cause, is never at a loss for something to be done. 
It will appear at the last day that his labor was 
•' not in vain in the Lord." ■* His efforts were diver- 
sified,- having been put forth in two different and 
important locations as a pastor, on various extended 
agencies, and on many public occasions, where the 
people of God devised and executed plans of useful- 
ness. . In every situation and connection he was 
ready to every good work; and many have risen up 
nere to bless him as the instrument of their conver- 
sion to God, whom he 'will receive as a crown of 
rejoicing in the great day. * ■: - * > • 
- His efficiency in the service of his Lord was not 
entirely owing to his ardor and perseverance. He 
did not waste his strength in sudden, disjointed ef- 
forts ; but secured the results he desired by methodi- 
cal arrangement. A neighboring minister remarks, 
u How he met the demands of a populous and scat- 
tered congregation, visited so much, inspected the 
schools so frequently; attended so many minor meet- 
ings, prepared for the stated services of the Sabbath, 
andt still; dispensed so much; labor in other places, it 
would be difficult to tell, did we not know that bt 

v. ♦ 



KEY. A8A HEAD. Ill 

was a systematic man, as well as frugal of his time* 
He rose early, and usually wrote his sermons in the 
morning before breakfast. He almost uniformly wrote 
one sermon in a week, and did not suspend this 
habit even when traveling. His preparation for the 
Sabbath was finished ordinarily on Friday morning, 
and Saturday was with him a day of relaxation, or 
of the lighter kind of labor* He thought much of 
t redeeming the time. '- God had given him a mind 
of more than common powers of penetration and re- 
search ; and these he sacredly devoted to the great 
business of inquiring after and elucidating divine 
truth. Fearless and independent, duty was his object, 
irrespective of consequences; and the means by which 
the kingdom of Christ might be enlarged, the lead- 
ing theme of his public and private inquiries. His. 
influence was felt. Especially his efforts among the 
people of his charge in the cause of education, of 
temperance,' of- peace, of foreign and domestic mis- 
sions, of church discipline, and the general interests 
of religion, will not soon be forgotten." • - 

, " Mr. Mead's characteristics," nearly in the words 
of the same brother, " were independence, fearless- 
ness) zeal in the cause of truth and godliness, patience 
of research, and decision. He thought for himself" 
calling no man or sect his master. His inquisitive* 
ness did not lead him away into the wild regions of 
speculation. No man kept more closely by the ora- 
cles of God, interpreted by common sense and the 



)13 BHIKT NOTICE OF 

influence of prayer. His decision was not obstinacy; 
cither on the doctrines of his faith* or the conduct of 
ministerial and benevolent labors and duties. " Hia 
style of preaching was fervid, tender, plain, solemn, 
and faithful He sought not for ornament, and aimed 
at no othe»eloquence than that of thought and pious 
sensibility. His purpose was, to direct truth to the 
consciences of his hearers ; and this he did with a 
boldness and simplicity, a tenderness and ardor, 
which often interested where they failed to subdue. 1 ' 
He accustomed himself to biblical exposition, rather 
than dry metaphysical discussion; and though his 
sermons were strictly doctrinal, they were drawn 
directly from the fountain, and merited for him the 
appellation of a biblical preacher. " He had a testi- 
mony in the consciences of bis hearers, that he was 
a faithful minister" 

Mr* Mead was a man, and therefore a tinner. As 
a Christian he was not perfect, and carried sinful in* 
firmitiea to his dying bed. But he was conscious of 
his errors, and groaned, being burdened with a body 
of death. Grace, therefore, reigning through Christ, 
was his refuge and hope; and the help of the Al- 
mighty Sanctifier and Comforter brought him off 
more than conqueror, giving him the victory, through 
his Redeemer and Intercessor with the Father. 

The following extracts from the sermon preached 
at his funeral will show how this beloved servant 
of Christ closed his probation and his ministry, 



Rev. aba mead. 113 

when he was called to give an account of his stew- 
ardship. • 

** During his sickness, which was protracted 
through several weeks, with many ' alternations of 
hope and apprehension, he exhibited the unruffled 
calmness of a mind that was ' stayed on God.' He 
was not afraid to die ; nor was he without a premon- 
itory expectation that he was drawing near the close 
of his labors. 

"With these expectations he addressed himself 
with singular calmness to his approaching struggle 
with the last enemy, and seemed prepared to meet him 
without dismay. The God of battle was girding him 
for the conflict ; and while his reason was in exer- 
cise, no expression escaped him -that indicated a re- 
luctance to be gone, or an impatience of suffering. 
Even during the hours and days of mental aberration, 
all that he said disclosed a spirit at peace with God, 
and resting with confidence on the Rock of Ages. 
Once, when inquired of concerning the state of his 
mind, he answered with emphasis, * My trust is in 
God, my confidence in Mm is stronger than ever. 9 
He said and appeared to think but little about his 
own evidences ; and seemed satisfied in contempla- 
ting God as good ; frequently repeating, ' 6ood % good* 
God is good. 1 • 

" Early in his sickness, he dismissed the world 
from his mind, only once giving a simple and brief 
direction about one item of business, and once more 



1 14 WUIF NOTICE OP 

saying to his wife that she would find all his pecu- 
niary affairs intelligibly arranged. He then sted* 
fastly set his face to go up to the mount, at the call 
of God, and die. A week before his death, ho 
observed — * I have done with earth/ His ardent 
desire seemed to be, that he might be holy, and pos- 
sess a maturity for heaven. He prayed much for 
forgiveness, and to be entirely holy. The Sabbath 
but one before he died, he seemed to have very so- 
lemn conceptions of appearing before God in judg- 
ment, mentioned his sins separately, and prayed 
to be cleansed in the blood of Christ alone. To the 
inquiry, do you enjoy the sensible presence of the 
Savior? he answered, ' Not as I wish ; sometimes 
I do, but my unfaithfulness stares me in the face, 
and at times I doubt my own acceptance.' On what 
do you rest ? • The promises of God are my only 
resting place. I can take a firm hold on these pro- 
mises, and rest on Christ as having done all : 
though I am guilty, there is my only hope. 1 Are 
you willing God's will should be done 1 He smiled 
and answered, 'Yes.' Is Christ precious? He 
answered ' Yes 1' In the .midst of his paroxysms 
he was pleading with God for sinners. « Glory ! • 
he uttered several times: 'Jesus is precious;' and 
then appeared to be pleading with sinners. ' The 
wicked will go to hell ; the wicked frill go to helV 
he repeated frequently. Four days before bis death 
ho spent much time in prayer, as if apprehending 



KB?. ASA MAD. 116 

his time was short He commended his children to 
God, and seemed to be giving all his concerns into 
God' 3 hands. "Winning souls to Christ," was an 
expression which he uttered several times in prayer. 
During the three, last Mays he had very few lucid 
intervals, and those short; but they were characte* 
rized by the same sweet peace and confidence in the 
Savior, and plainly told that he was ripening for 
glory. Just before the struggling spirit was releas* 
ed, he was addressed several times in appropriate 
language from ^pripture. Though incapable of 
speaking, he attended, and seemed for a moment to 
seize the precious consolation. He was asked, 
44 Are you going home ?" He faintly smiled, and 
bowed his head in token of assent;— and thus he 
died!" 

Mr. Mead's course of labor on earth was short ; 
but he lived to serve his generation, and dying, left 
blessings behind him. Among others, the world 
will have no occasion to regret that he was the 
father of little John ; that he lived to tram him up 
so faithfully for Christ and heaven ; or that he was 
spared to give us so lucid an exposition of the prin- 
ciples* on which his education was conducted, and of 
their happy results. How could the father have 
buried his child in such joyful hope, or have gone' 
peacefully to his own rest, leaving his children be- 
hind him in this wicked world, if he had not beqp 
faithful to his infant charge day by day I Would not 



116 BftlKF NOTICE OF 

every parent thus send his children before him to 
die Savior's arms, or leave them safe in the Shep- 
herd's fold at his own decease ? Then let him read 
these memoirs, and learn how to " train them up in 
the nurture and admonition of the Lord" And 
surely the providences here narrated admonish him 
to " do with his might whatsoever his hand findeth 
to do." It is one of the brightest aspects of the pre- 
sent age, that the hearts of the fathers are turned to 
the children, and early conversions are multiplied; 
and no one can better serve his 'generation, or more 
effectually prepare the way of the Lord, than by 
teaching parents how they may secure for their off- 
spring the blessings of the covenant, and make them 
** a godly seed " in their infant days. 



MUSINGS AT THE FUNERAL OF MR. MEAD. 

There's mourning in this house— else why the 

pause! 
The congregated stillness that pervades 
This mass of beings. The eye in sorrow's 
Eloquence tells but too well — that judgment ♦ 
Has come over us in truth — the good man's 
Labors cease. 



*»V< ASA MB AD, U7, 

He was accounted faithful. 
The churches knew, and Wd, and gave him praise ; 
For with untiring apostolic zeal 
He watar'd and refresh' d them. His sacred 
Office was his joy — it seera'd the well-spring 
Of his life, and all its sources gushing 
Forth in holy fervor, bore him onward, 
Fitting him for heaven. 

And there his spirit 
Dwells— yet may the Christian mourn a " shepherd 
Slain." The church, a " Standard bearer fallen." 
And the lone widow, — " friend and lover gone :" 
Nor is this all — 'tis but of recent date, 
Even with the odors of the early flowers, 
That hand in hand with him she laid her boy, 
Her cherished one, beneath the clods, — and the 

green 
Sward of summer has not yet stealthily 
Crept over him. 0» what a wreck of love 
Has death made in thy heart Butf there is balm, 
For memory can jetouch the lines that mark'd 
Thy varied path — it has a thousand tongues 
To hold companionship— 'twill tell of him, 
Thy friend and guide; his early course — his strong 
Impassion' d love of the sublime — thrown o'er 
His native scenes by that creative power 
That woo'd his spirit upwards— from " nature 
On to nature's God," from earth-born wonders 



118 BRIEF NOTICE OF 

To mysterious grace— 'twill tell of toils, 
Privations— rscoffs of young associates 
To deter him from the all absorbing # 
Aim— on which his hopes were staid — yet he stood 
Firm, and God did give him conquest. 

'Twas short, 
But glorious to himself— among the blest 
Full many an one shall bear his signet, 
And he will marshal them around the throne 
Of the Most High— and give in heaven, as still 
He did on earth — to God alone the praise. 
But O the parting hour — how great the change 
To thee — the sharer of his pilgrimage — 
His best beloved — the same in weal or woe. 
Thine earthly house is truly desolate ; 
The echo of his footsteps comes not near 
Thy dwelling — nor through its empty chambers 
Gomes that voice whose soothings gave thee comfort 
In thy late hours of grief— but look beyond 
The grave— thy treasures and thy hopes are there 
In safety laid upon thy Savior's arm. 

C. & 



THE END. 



1 



1 



