Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



9 



^wcMti College tfbcavp 







BOUGHT FROM THE 

ANDREW Preston Peabody 
Fund 



k 



IPBQUEATHSD Br 

Carolin)i Eusns Peabody 

OF CAMBRIDGE 



xCSSh^ 



i 



■^n 



G 



THE MISSION AEY SISTERS: 



A BIEMORIAL OF 



MUa SERAPHINA IIAYNES EVERETT, 



▲HD 



MRS. HARRIET MARTHA HAMLIN, 



JJkTU MISSrOHABIKS OF TDB A. B. O. T. M. AT COlTSTAimVOPLB. 



BY 



*; '^""l <j^ r> 'W^ » w^ 



MRS. M. q[ benjamin. 



6 
r PVBLISnBD BT TUB 



AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

No. 38 COBNHILL, BOSTON. 



Ot Bo^Bj'S' 



'. ^sti 




)i<irvara Uolle^re Libranri 
From the Library of 
itev. A, P. PoHbad,1^* 
16 Got;. 1803* 



Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 180O, by 

THS AMKAlOAir TRACT BOOIKTY, 

In the Clerk's Ofllloo of tlio District Court of the District of Massacliusctts. 



Mated bf 

OBO. O. BAVO a ATKKY, S OOaXUIU., BOSTOV. 



PREFACE. 



The memoir of Mn. Everett was the work originallj intended 
and connnenced ; but afler this had been partly prepared, letters 
were received from several missionary friends in Constantinople! 
urging the writer to combine with it a memorial of Mrs. Hamlin. 
As these two ladies had been so closely associated in their inission- 
ary life and work, a biography of one would necessarily involve 
much of that of the other, and it was thought better io present 
them together, and from their united letters give a history of the 
Armenian Female Senunary in Constantinople through the years 
of their connection with it, than to make two separate vdumes. 

The writer is not without feaWi that the fiiends of both ladies 
may be somewhat disappointed in the present arrangement, and 
regret the omission of some interesting portions of their corre- 
spondence ; but she trusts they will consider the difHculty of com 
piling such a work in a way to meet the wishes of friends, and at 
the same time not be tedious to the general readcrl She has- 
felt often no little perplexity in selecting from the very full 'and 
rich materials in her hands ; and if the main object had been to 
prepare an entertaining book, much more of personal incident and 
local description might have been introduced, which have been lefb 
out to make room for fuller details of the missionary work. 

It is sometimes objected to memoirs, that they are partial, setting 
forth all the virtues of their subjects, and keeping out of sight all 
their defects. As '< there is no perfection here below," it is as- 
sumed that those good people whose lives are recorded for our imi- 
tation, must have had prominent fitults as well as great excel- 
lences. That they were imperfect is doubtless true of them as of 
others, and certainly none are more sensible of their imperfections 
than those who have made the highest attainments in the Christian 
life ; but that these remains of human infirmity necessarily con- 
tinue to manifest themselves in unamiable tempers, and in words 
and acts contrary to the pure and lovely spirit of the gospel, does 



iy PBBFAOB. 



not fi>Uow. If it does, what beoomei of the efficacy of God's grace 
on the heart ? The Bible, it is said, should be a model for biogra- 
phers. But does the Bible give us no examples of characters out- 
wardly blameless ? And if Joseph and Samuel and Daniel became 
what they were by the grace of Grod, under all the imperfections 
of the old dispensation, why should it be '* deemed a thing incred- 
ible " that such characters should be matured by the same rich and 
abounding grace under the gospel ? Why then, when reading the 
records of the life and experience of Christ's eminent servants, 
should we search carefully for the mention of their faults, and lay 
down the book with some such ungracious remaric as this : *' It is 
all Yory beautiful, though it is not the original, but only a flattered 
JUkeness, for no person was ever so perfect in this world." Why 
not rather magnify the grace of God, and be stimulated to follow 
more earnestly them who, " through faith and patience," have ac- 
quired such control over their inward corruptions, as for a long 
course of years, and under all the triab and temptations of this 
evil world, to maintain a deportment above reproach, and be con- 
spicuous in every thing that is '* amiable, and lovely, and of good 
report?" Many such there have been and are, in whom their 
nearest friends and most intimate associates can scarcely perceive 
a fiiult, while they themselves are humble, mourning in secret over 
their nn worthiness and many shortcomings, and ready even to 
acknowledge themselves, as did the great apostle, the chief of sin- 
ners, whose only hope is in the mercy of Christ And many more 
such there might be, if instead of settling it to be an attainment 
impossible, Christians would more generally keep before them the 
same perfect standard at which they aimed. Such were the two 
lovely missionary sisters whose characters and abundant labors in 
the Saviour's cause it has been attempted in the following pages to 
delineate; and it is hoped that through the record they have led 
of themselves in their familiar correspondence, some glimpses may 
be obtained of the workings of their inner life, and the way in 
which they were enabled to reach a piety so elevated, and to per- 
form so much in the service of their heavenly Master. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 
Mn. Evwett — Childhood — ConTenion and Early Christian Charaoter.il 

CHAPTER II. 
First School Daya at Andovor — Prospect of a Missionary Life 16 

CHAPTER III. 
Return to Andover — Marriage — Departure from Home 88 

CHAPTER IV. 

* Embarkation for Smyrna — Miss Loyell — Her Early Life and Missionary 
Feelings * 88 

CHAPTER V. 
Incidents of the Voyage •— Arriral at Smyrna — First Impressions ..... 44 

CHAPTER VI. ' 

Annual Meeting of the Mission — Visits to interesting Localities — Mission- 
ary Work at Constantinople .56 

CHAPTER VII. 

Return to Smyrna — Letters describing the Mode of Life, and Scenes and 
Incidents of Missionary Work, in Smyrna 68 



Yl OpNTBirrS. 

OHAPTEB YIII. 

1I]m Loyell*! first Six MonUu in Goiutaiitinople— Efforts and Trials in 
acquiring the Armenian — Oommencement of tlie Female Seminary. .79 

OHAPTSB IX. 

Mrs. E.'s Visit to the Sufferers firom the Fire— Letters from Miss Lovell 
— The Patriarch's Anathema — Its Effects in Constantinople and 
Smyrna « . . • » lOi 

OHAPTEB X. 

Miss LoYell*s Illness and subsequent Visit to Smyrna — Mr. and Mrs. Ever- 
ett remove to Constantinople — Interesting Particulars respecting the 
School and General Missionary Work 116 

OHAPTEB XI. 

Organization of the First Evangelical Church in Constantinople^— Ordi- 
nation of the First Pastor 126 

OHAPTEB XII. 

The First Members received into the New Church — Interesting Account 
of one of the Female Members — Disappointment in procuring a larger 
House for the Seminary — Bovival in the Two Somiuorios 186 

OHAPTEB XIII 

Sickness in the School — Persecution of the Armenian Teacher — Death 
of the Pastor Apsoghom .- 146 

OHAPTEB XIV. 

Birth of Mrs. Everett's First Child—- Ordination of Pastor Simon — Con- 
tinued Additions to the Church — Sickness and Death of one of the « 
Pupils in the Female Seminary 166 

OHAPTEB XV. 

Progress of the ^lisslonary Work — Additions to the Church —Increase 
of Pupils in the Female Seminary — Marriage of Two of the Pupils. 166 



OOKTBHTS. Vii 

CHAPTER XVI. 

Interesting Meeting on the First Monday In the Tear — The Sultan's Fir- 
man establishing the Rights of the Protestants — First Examination in 
the Female Seminary • 178 

OHAPTER XVII. 

Great Fire in Pera— Sickness and Death of little Marj Ererett— Bbrth of 
another Daughter — School recommenced — Interesting Incidents con- 
nected with the School 1 82 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

RerlTal in the Female Seminary— Admissions to the Clhmroh— Mrs. Everett 
visits Broosa — Death of Mr. Maynard and Mr. Parker 196 

CHAPTER XIX. 

Removal of the Female Seminary to Bebek — Description of the Seminary 
Honse and Grounds « < 208 

OHAPTER XX. 

Revival in the School — Death of Dr. Smith — Departure of Mr. and Mrs. 
GoodeO for America — Letters to them 214 

CHAPTER XXI. 

Miss Loveirs Marriage — Continued History of the School — Letter from 
an Armenian Lady 226 

CHAPTER XXII. 

Removal of the Seminary from Bebek to Hass Keuy — Description of the 
New Seminary Building — Interesting Letters — Commencement of 
War 240 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

Arrival of Dr. and Mrs. Goodell— Something about the War— Marriages 
among the Protestant Armenians — Interesting Incidents of the Mission- 
ary Work in Hass Keuy 268 



Yiii C0NTBNT8. 



s 



OHAPTSB XXIY. 

Mora aboBt the Hiaskmary Work ia Hom Keaj — Lettan from Dr. Ander- 
■on to Um Miasioii— locldento of the War— Mn. SymoU'i Last Lattan 

Qome aed 

CHAPTER XXV. 

Last Weeks of Mrs. Everett's Life — Last Notes— Particulars of her last 
Sickness and Death 886 

CHAPTER XXYI. 

Visit to the House of Mourning — The Funeral — TestJmoniala of 
Friends 2M 

CHAPTER XXVII. 
Brief Sketch of Mr. Everett — Extracts (h>m his last Sermon 808 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

Mrs. Hamlin — Letters to Friends — Her Children, and Scenes in Domestic 
Life— Her last Letters, and Sudden Death 808 



MEMOIR. 



CHAPTER I. 

IIn.]fiTerotl— Cblldhood— Convenloii tnd Sarlj Christitti Cbtraoter. 

Seraphika Hatnes Everett was born in Monson, 
Massachusetts, Dec. 29, 1823; bat as her parents re- 
moved to Southbridge in the same State before she was 
two years old, she always spoke of that as her native place. 
She was the child of godly parents, who endeavored to 
tnun up their family of fourteen children in the **nurture 
and admonition of the Lord.^ Her father, Deacon Henry 
Haynes, has for many years been a highly respected officer 
in the Congregational church of Southbridge. Of her 
mother, her children are the highest eulogium. Two of 
the fourteen died in infancy; and five others, after having 
acted well their part in life, and left behind them mem- 
ories fragrant with all womanly and Christian graces, have 
been called to join the blessed company above. Three 
lovely sisters preceded Mrs. Everett to the *• better coun- 
try," and two have since followed. 

Of this large household band, Seraphina was the 
seventh in age. She was an interesting child, and very 
early evinced a fondness for study, and great quickness in 
the acquisition of knowledge. Her father still dwells with 
pleasure on her early attainments, such as spelling in 
words of two syllables before she was three years old, and. 



12 THB MISSIOITABT 8IBTBB8. 

redting geography at four. Many rcminisoencos of her 
winning ways and anusual intelligence are treasured up 
in her childhood's home. 

When Seraphina was ten years old, she was invited to 
spend some time with a relative in a neighboring town. 
While there, her sweet &ce and attractive manners won 
the affection of a lady wlio had recently lost a daughter 
of the same age ; and she asked her to come and stay with 
her a while, and go to school at her expense. She re- 
mained with this lady quite happily for more than two 
years, and then returned to her father's house. When 
about fourteen she commenced teaching a small school, 
and continued with good success for several months, after 
which she again attended school in the adjoining village 
of Sturbridge. It was while she was at this school that 
she experienced her first permanent religious impressions. 
Some of the circumstances connected with this crisis in 
her life are as follows : — 

There was at the time a special religious interest in 
Southbridge, and her sister Mary was among the number 
of those who were rejoicing in the new experience of a 
Saviour's love. She wrote immediately to Seraphina, to 
• communicate to her the joyful tidings. On receiving this 
letter, the latter resolved to return homo that same ovou- 
ing, though to do so she must walk a considerable part of 
the way, and it was then quite late in the afternoon. She 
seemed to have brought her energetic spirit at once to the 
resolution that she would seek the Lord, and that no ob- 
stacles should prevent it. Though ever conscientious, and 
\''„ fi*equently the subject of deep religious impressions, she 
'^i^*' had for some time previous to this manifested no particu- 
lar interest in this subject, but was appai*ently all absorbed 
in her studies. It was Saturday evening when she re- 
tuined to her home, and greeted the sister whose letter 
had aroused such an earnest desire and purpose iu her 
soul to be numbered with the people of God. That even- 



BBLF-SXAMINATION. 18 

ing she attended a prayer meeting, and in joining with 
two of her sisters in prayer after the meeting, she, with 
affecting earnestness, sent up her petition for « mercy. 
The next Tuesday morning, when she returned to school, 
it was with a trembling but joyftil hope that she had be- 
come reconciled to Ood. From that period she dated the 
commencement of her Christian life. She was then 
fifteen. 

The two or three years which followed her conversion 
were spent by her in teaching and attending school alter- 
nately, and were divided between her own home and 
Sturbridge, where her eldest brother resided. No letters 
written during this period are. preserved* A paper, on 
which, copied in pencil, are some half-obliterated ^ Ques- 
tions for self-examination," from President Edwards, af- 
fords the only glimpse into her inner life at that time. 
There is no date to this, but just below is written, also in 
pencil, and in the same hand, which is quite unformed 
and juvenile, unlike her writing a year later — 

"Resolved, Saturday evening, Feb. 27, 1841, that I 
will not, the grace of God assisting me, hereafter be 
guilty of sleeping while in the sanctuary, or when ap- 
parently engaged in his worship." 

Seraphina's temperament was lively, and from allusions 
in her later letters, it may be inferred that this was, during 
the early part of her Christian life, a source of some 
trouble to her. She seems indeed, in her mature piety, 
to have judged rather severely of her Christian character 
at this time ; more severely than from the recollections of 
her friends it would seem she had reason to do. The 
sister who knew her most intimately, relates that she al- 
ways maintained the habit of secret devotion, and was 
ever ready to join in meetings for prayer, whether public 
or social. Her piety was always of a cheerful cast, par- 
taking doubtless of her buoyant temperament ; though 
the following anecdote shows that this habit of prayer had 

2 



14 T0B IflBSIONABT BIBTSB8. 

much to do with it When she was axtecn, she had the 
charge of a district school, in which were sixty or more 
pupils, A fiiond, who was surprised to see her so uni- 
formly cheerfhl with such a care, asked her how she 
could always look so pleasant and happy with such a 
school on her hands. ^ Oh I I could not, if I did not pray 
'every morning for strength and patience," was the reply. 
, It was doubtless this habitual communion with Qod 
which enabled her to grow so rapidly in grace, and to 
overcome every obstacle^ both in natural temperament and 
outward circumstances, which impeded her Christian race. 
Whatever may have been her difSculty from too great 
exuberance of spirits in her earlier years, nothing appar- 
ently remained of it after she assumed the duties and re- 
sponsibilities of a missionary's wife. A beautiful cheerful- 
ness only was retained, which added a charm to her man- 
ners and a sweet grace to her countenance ; and which 
showed itself frequently in her letters in playful allusions 
and lively sallies, and, chastened as it always was by earn- 
est piety, formed one of the chief attractions of her cor- 
respondence. 

Her home attachments were strong. Neither her fre- 
quent absences in early life, nor her later wide separation, 
seemed to have weakened in the least her affoction for 
each member of the family ch*cle. Of this both her ear- 
lier and later lettera give ample proof; and these letters 
also furnish pleasing testimony to the wise and kind pa- 
rental influence, and the sweet brotherly and sisterly love, 
which united in such strong ties that large family band. 

The following, one of her eai*liest letters preserved, was 
written while she was teaching in Charlton, a few miles 
from her home. One of the two sisters referred to had 
died the year previous, and the other had married and 
removed to Millbury. 

^ Charlton, June 8, 1842. You know I almost boasted 
of not crying all last summer; but just think of going 



UOMS ATTACnMBlTTS. 16 

home, and finding no Elcfinor and dear Mary^ who wns 
always there, — who would not cry? You, I know, will 
not blame me if I do. But I do not mean to complun, 
and my temperament is such that if I am unhappy it does 
not last long, and if wo are separated from our earthly 
friends, 

' One there 1b above aU others, 
WeU detorree the name of friend,' 

in whom we can confide, and with whom we can hold 
communion at all times, without distrust or disappoint- 
ment, if we are in the right fitune of mind, and cherish 
right feelings ; and this, you know, is every thing. My 
affections arc so much fixed upon this world, and tho 
things of it, and so swallowed up in sel^ that I some- 
times wonder how I dare approach the throne of grace, 
and address it with so much coldness and indifierence. I 
sometimes think that I have not even a desire that my 
will should be swallowed up in €k>d^s will, and I wish 
I could in sincerity say, — *Here, Lord, I give myself 
away.' Is it not strange that we, and professing Chris- 
tians everywhere, do not possess more of tho spirit of our 
Master, when he said, — *Wist ye not that I must be 
about my Father's business,' — living as we do in this day 
of light, and opportunities of doing good ? Shall we not 
be without excuse, if the world is no better for our having 
Uved m it?" 



CHAPTER II. 

lint School Dayi at Andoror— Proipeot of a Ifinioiiary Lift. 

Iir the autumn of 1842 Miss Haynes entered the Abbott 
t^emale Semmary m Andover as a pupil. There was at 
that time no boarding department in connection with this 
BchooL Some of the pupils from abroad boarded in pri- 
yate familiesi while others joined together in a common 
boarding-house, doing their own work, with a matron to 
superintend. Miss H. became a member of this latter 
establishment, and with her domestic employments be- 
sides her studies, which were rather severe, found full 
occupation for all her time and powers. But she had 
learned to be a good economist of time, and with all her 
duties, managed to get spare moments enough to write 
long and frequent letters to her dear home fiiends. There 
is a journal of a few leaves, commenced during her first 
term at Andover, and continued, with occasional entries, 
through the next two years. From this, and from the cor- 
respondence of this period, a few brief extracts ai'e pre- 
sented. 

To a sbter, under date of Nov. 14, 1842, she writes : 
^^Your letter was received rather unexpectedly, but if 
possible, the more gladly. Of my feelings on its reception 
you can judge, but if ever I had occasion to weep from 
mingled emotions of pain and pleasure, it was at that 
moment. Dear sister Eleanor's pale countenance has not, 
I can assure you, been out of my mind during any very 
long period, since hearing of her increased ill-health. 



BOMB ATTACnMBNTS — RB80LUTION8. 17 

• • • Whilo my heart was pained by the intelligence 
of her illness, I could not avoid weeping for joy at the 
news of L.'s conversion. It did seem to me yesterday as 
if I must be at home and spend the Sabbath with you, to 
hear from L.*s own mouth what Qod has done for her, 
and to hear also of many others, who, like her, are expe- 
riencing the joy of sins forgiven. You know better than 
I do what to tell L.; but do urge her from me to live 
near to her Saviour, and watch and pray that she may 
not be led into temptation. And dear sister, I wish you 
to offer the same prayer for me, knowing how easily I am 
led astray from my duty and my Qod." 

In the next letter, after inquiring about various mem- 
bers of the family, she says: ^I affect no ignorance. 
For a time after I came here, my imagination could pic- 
ture the situation of each of you, — and this was a great 
consolation ; but now it is all confused. How much do 
you suppose, dear mother, I thought of you all at the 
lime of otu* annual feast? Then I think I imagined you 
just as you were each hour in the day^ One was gone, 
for ever gone, from our family meetings here on earth, 
who one short year since enjoyed with us the happy gath- 
ering. She will not return to us, but may we all go and 
join her, a * whole family in heaven.' Dear Mary! It 
seems to me that oftener than ever I think of her, —* of 
the kind, cheerful letters she used to write ; and often 
when I look about me to imagine the situations of my 
brothers and sisters, I think of that little spot in the lone 
burial-ground, where her earthly remains lie." 

In her journal of Jan. 1, 1843, she writes: "Seek- 
ing the aid of him who is both able and willing to impart 
strength, I now resolve to act' more according to the 
promptings of my own conscience, seeking thus more 
fidthfully to perform my duties towards Ood and man. 
In particular I resolve not to say any thing to the iryury 
of another, and in this respect more faithfully to keep the 

2* 



18 THB MIS8I0NABT SISTERS. 

command, to do onto others as I would that they should 
do to me." 

Her next letter, written from Andover, Jan. 8, 1848, 
^ntains the first mention of her future husband. 

** And the Sabbath school I must mention, because we 
have such a dear, good teacher, Mr. Bverett, of the Theo- 
logical Seminary. He sometimes calls on us, and does 
not go without closing the interview with prayer. He is 
intending to go as a missionary to Persia, when his studies 
are completed, and is now studying the language with 
Mar Yohanan, who is learning our language of Mr. £. 
The Bishop finds our language difficult to acquire, and 
asks a great many strange questions. Mr. £. gave for 
one example, that he inquired what manhood meant. 
He said be knew what man meant, but what did hood 
mean?" 

In the spring of this year she returned home^ uncertain 
whether die should enjoy the privilege so earnestly de- 
sired, of resuming her studies in Andover. Shortly after 
a proposal was received, which decided some of her uncer- 
tainties, and opened a way for her to enter on a new 
sphere of usefulness, — a sphere for which she seemed 
eminently fitted by natural endowments and thorough 
cultivation, as well as elevated and earnest piety. Some 
of her feelings, in regard to these new prospects, are ex- 
pressed in a letter to an absent sister, written at the time. 

*'SonTHBBiDOB, May 27, 1846. 

'^We want you here now very much indeed^ (I am 
speaking for myself,) which I presume you would not 
doubt if you knew how many times I have said it during 
the last week ; and perhaps you would have wished the 
same when I tell you, that if you had been here you 
would have formed an acquaintance with the gentleman 
in whom you say you are so much interested. When I 
wrote to you last, I did not suppose that he would be here 



lOL BYBBBTT. 19 

before the Ist of June, and knew nothing to the contrary 
until a week ago last Monday, when I received a letter, 
stating that he would be in Sonthbridge Tuesday evening. 
My first impulse was to write immediately to yon, but 
M}U*ch said the end of the world had not come yet; 
and not knowing how long Mr. E. would be here, I thought 
it best not to write. I assure you, the opinion I had pre- 
viously formed of him was not changed. ... Do not say 
that I am under the influence of the Mind boy entirely, 
— will you? for the impression I first had of him when 
in Andovcr was, that he was entirely devoted to the cause 
of our heavenly Master, and I stiO think I never met 
with a person who felt more for the advancement of 
Christ's kingdom. How unworthy am I, dear sister, of 
the. regard of such a person, and how unfit to think even, 
of ever being engaged in a work which requires so much 
holiness and self-consecration, so much self-denial and 
devotion to the cause which I have professed to love, and 
yet neglected and dishonored. Do pray for me, dear sister^ 
that all my motives, actions, thoughts, and feelings may 
be right in the sight of him who looks at the heart, and 
knows all. I have prayed that I might not be permitted 
to act wrong in this matter, which it seems to me is of 
almost infinite importance ; but my heart is so deceitful 
and so little known to myself, that perhaps I have felt it 
but little. What a consolation to think that all our ways 
are in the hands of one who is able to guide them in 
mercy I " 

' She spent the next summer in teaching in Sturbridge, 
and in close application to reading and study during all 
the intervals she could obtain from her school duties. 

The following letter, and a few entries in her journal, 
furnish the only record of her Christian experience and 
her occupations duiing this summer, which she often after- 
wards referred to as one of the most pleasant portions 
of her life. 



20 THS MIBSIOHABT 8I8TSB8. 

<* You know bow doUghtfUl all natoro la^ robed in ber 
mantle of green, and the flowers 

* Byoij wbero about us are they glowliigi ' 

and tbe birds, catcbing tbe inspiration, swell tbeir notes 
of praise to tbe Ood of nature ; and we, bow can we resist 
tbe impulse we feel to join in tbe general eborus, and 
praise bim too I I enjoy myself very mucb. The great- 
est difficulty I have b that I can not accomplish half 
enough ; the days and weeks fly. Six are already gone 
since I came here ; whether any good has been done by 
my labors in my school, or not, they will not return." 

In ber journal, July 14, she writes : — 

^ Lest my attention and prayers should be too exdn- 
siyely devoted to one object, to the neglect of others 
equiJly impoitant, it may be well to conform to a system 
by which each day some particular department of the 
great work of tbe world's salvation shall claim my atten- 
tion. For the present I will adopt the following plan, 
seeking the Holy Spirit to guide me by his influences, that 
my soul may be filled with love to the whole human race, 
and that I may be exercised with a holy zeal for the 
interests of the cause of God in the world. 

^ Sunday, the church in our own land ; Monday, tbe 
cause of education ; Tuesday, the Bible cause ; Wednes^ 
day, foreign missions ; Thursday, home missions : Friday, 
seamen and temperance ; Saturday, the Sabbath and Sab- 
bath schools." 

July 21. ^ I have reason to thank the Lord that he 
condescends to meet me with a blessing when I seek to 
draw near to him in prayer. I do trust that I feel a will- 
ingness and a desire to do or suffer any thing which will 
be for bis glory." 

July 81. ^ This day I dose my school, and take per- 
haps a final leave of many of those with whom I have 
been associated. Have I done my duty to them? is a 



GL08B OF TBRM. 21 

qaestion which causes me anxiety. But regrets are now 
useless, and I pray God to bless what has been done in 
accordance with his will, and counteract any inlEluence that 
may have been exerted, of a contrary tendency. May I 
meet all these dear children in heaven I 

^ And I must bid &rewell to this my little room, where 
I have spent so many happy hours, — hours which I trust 
have not been wholly unprofitable; — where I have felt 
in some degree my unworthiness and sinfulness, and have 
been led to draw near to God, pleading his promises, until 
I humbly hope that in his infinite compassion he has 
drawn near to me. Now may his Spirit attend me to my 
home, and there restrain me that I wander not from him, 
but preserve me from the power of temptation, and help 
me to live devoted to his service.'* 



CHAPTER III. 

Betara to Andorer — Mmnrfaiga — Depftrton from Homo. 

In the earliest letter of the next year, we find Miss H. 
again at her beloved studies in Andoyer. 

AiTDOYSB, Jannaiy 18, 1844. 

DsAB SiSTBB : It is now the eyening of the holy Sab- 
bath. Clear and beautiM the day has been, fit emblem 
of the eternal rest which we hope to enjoy when the tem- 
pests of life have all subsided, and we enter upon a new, 
a heavenly existence, where no sinful thoughts will ever 
intrude, with nothing to divert from the celestial employ- 
ment, which will engage our whole souls. <^0 glorious 
hour! O blest abode I " 

Mr. Taylor has preached two excellent sermons to-day. 
He has been sick, and did not preach his new-year ser- 
mon until last Sabbath. It was very good ; from the text 
^Redeeming the time, because the days are evil." He 
showed us the importance of laboring for God now. 
In the afternoon was the oonmiunion service. In the 
evening, at^the Sabbath-school Ooncert, we were addressed 
by Mr,. Qfeen, Secretary of the American Board. He was 
in town during Saturday, spoke to the students in the 
evening, and has preached through the day at the chapel 
of the Theological Seminary. He is filled with the spuit 
of missions. It seems to be his life, his breath. I think 



MI8SIONABT ASPIRATIONS. 28 

he infuseu some of this feeling into the hearts of those 
who heard him. The work is to be done ; and why not 
labor now, as well as after millions on millions have 
passed from the shades of heathenism into eternal dark- 
ness in the world of woe. Why do we not arise in the 
strength of Christ, with Paul for our example, and in obe- 
dience to the same commands, stimulated by the same 
promises, and anticipating the same blessed reward, why 
do we not (zctf 

Filled with a holy zeal, he boldly preached the un- 
searchable riches of Christ in every direction where his 
name had not been named, enduring every peril to which 
a mortal can bo exposed, yet, nothing daunted, he presses 
on in his good fight until his course is finished and he 
goes to receive his crown of righteousness. Are our lives 
more valuable than Paul's, that we should not lay them 
down in this glorious work? 

You expect by this time to know the destination of 
your friends, if the Lord shall see fit to send us, who are 
so unworthy, to the heathen ; but it is not yet decided ; 
how soon it will be, I do not know. Tell fiither it is pos- 
sible we may go to China; if not, it is probable to India, 
which we most earnestly hope will be approved by him 
and all our dear friends, because wherever there is a work 
for us to do, there the Lord will send us, and there I trust 
we shall delight to go. 

Is it possible, dear sister, ere another short year has 
passed, tliat I shall have bidden a final adieu to those so 
dear to me? It may bo so, but it is only an earthly sep- 
aration, which is momentary. You would not detain us ; 
we would not stay ; but seeking to be clad with the whole 
gospel armor, go and carry the glad news of a Saviour's 
love to the perishing heathen. Oh, forget us not when 
daily you bow before the throne of Almighty grace, — 
then pray for VB 



24 THB IflSSIONABY SIBTBB8. 

The folloidng to hor parents, dated Andover, January 
28, 1844, beautifully exhibits the contending emotions 
which agitated her heart in view of circumstances which 
were beginning now to give greater definiteness to her 
prospect of a missionary life. 

Mt ybby DBAS Pabbxtts : It is Sabbath evening, and 
after having attended church twice, and spent some time in 
reading, meditation, and prayer, I yield to a strong desire 
to write to you, — to you, who in my early infancy dedi- 
cated me to God; who early instructed me, before closing 
my eyes in sleep, to say ** Our Father,** to one above ; and 
taught me all the truths of our religion as revealed in the 
word of God; who have watched over me from year to 
year, ministering most kindly to all my wants when with 
you, and never failing to remember me at the throne of 
grace, whether present or absent. Much more than all 
this received at your hands, calls for my deepest gratitude 
and affection ; which I fondly hope is not without a re- 
sponse, and a most hearty one, irom my inmost soul. 
Often, very often, when separated from you and the 
society o£ brothers and sisters, my thoughts revert to my 
own dear home, and the oirde of loved ones there ; and 
then how I long to join you, to mingle my petitions with 
yours at the hours of devotion, and my voice in songs of 
praise. Those happy days when so many of us were 
assembled under the paternal roo^ are passed. Two have 
firesides of their own to gladden and bless ; one is far 
away from his youthfril home ; one dear one is in heaven ; 
others away, though not far; one has a home in the sunny 
South ; and only three from the large band doily meet 
around our own domestic hearth. Yet, dear parents, you 
murmur not that you are denied the happiness you might 
receive if more were permitted to be with you to cheer 
your way down the declivity of life. You have sought 
to train them up for usefuhiess in the world, and you have 



MISSIONART ASPIRATIONS. 26 

the unspeakable pleasure of feeling that most of those 
whom Ood committed to yon, and whom you dedicated 
to him, have ratified the covenant ** by snmaming them- 
selves by the name of Israel ; " so that, wherever they are, 
you can feel that they are in the service and under the 
protection of IsraePs Ood. And one of your children seems 
called to labor in the cause of Gk>d on heathen ground, 
eveii your unworthy Seraphina; and more and more un- 
worthy do I seem as I am led to a nearer view of the 
work as a stem reality. 

Mr. Everett received a letter from Mr. Green, in behalf 
of the A. B. C. F. M., last week, stating that his papers 
had been laid before the Committee, and were accepted. 
No formal appointment was made, as they wished to con- 
fer with him further in regard to the field of labor, before 
his designation, when the two could be made together ; 
requesting to see him as soon as convenient. He went 
to Boston yesterday, expecting to return to-morrow. 
Then, it is probable, the portion of the Lord's vineyard in 
which we are destined to labor will be assigned; that 
dark comer of the earth where we may be the humble 
instraments of scattering light and knowledge will be 
pointed out. 

Oh, why am I called to contemplate this great and 
glorious employment, when there are so many in every 
respect far more worthy, and better fitted for the work I 
Often I fear that I may "run and not be sent;'* but my 
earnest prayer is, "Forbid it, Lord, and consecrate mo 
wholly to thee ; fit me to be an acceptable laborer for 
thee, and send me to the heathen. Let me tell of a 
Saviour's love to the benighted, and, by pointing to Cal-. 
vary, soothe some troubled spirit that had never heard 
the story of the Cross.'' And wherever the Lord may send 
me, there may I delight to go, even if it be to India's 
torrid clime. 

You, my dear parents, as well as myself, are aware that 

8 



26 THB MIB8I0HABY 8I8TSBS. 

one of 00 ardent a temperament as mine k in peculiar 
danger of yielding to the inflaence of wrong motives. It 
may be possible that a strong attachment to an earthly 
ftiend will have an andae inflaence; against this I pray, 
and trust that my petitions are not in vain, and ths^ the 
consecration to Gk>d of all my powers of body and mind, 
my highest love and best services, will be accepted. And 
as I endeavor daUy to renew it, will not you, my parents, 
join' me in my requests that I may have a purer heart, a 
more holy love, stronger &ith, and every other grace 
necessary to make me an acceptable offering on the altar 
of misedons? Tour petitions will avail much in my 
behalf 

Mr. Everett will write you soon, if his designation is 
made. Dear fiither, you will not shrink to send, with 
your blessing, those whom you love to India, if such seems 
to be the appointment of Providence. I dare not think 
that, ere the months of this year have passed, I may be 
called to bid a last fiurewell to my dear^ dear home and 
much4oved JHenda. But it is the XfOrd who says, ^As 
thy day is so shall thy strength be.'' 

Tour very affectionate daughter, 

SuBAPHIKA. 

It seemed quite probable for a time that Mr. Everett 
and Miss H. would be appointed to join a company of 
missionaries to sail in a few weeks for India, and their 
minds were somewhat agitated respecting it, as they both 
felt themselves unprepared to engage so soon in the work 
before them. Mr. E. needed yet a half year to finish his 
theological course, and Miss Haynes wished also to con- 
tinue another nx months at her studies. But she writes 
in a sweetly submissive spirit, willing to go or stay, as the 
Lord should direct, and to go where he should appoint. 
The following passage from one of these letters shows 
how entirely she had consecrated herself to the missionary 
work : — 



FJEBLINQS IN TIXW OF BBB LABOBfl. 27 

^I have been called to look at the near prospect of a 
home among degraded heathen, to a wide separation from 
you, my precious sister, from my dear parents, and all 
those to whom I am so closely and tenderly bound. Bat, 
by the grace of Ood, I have not felt the least shrinking, 
only as far as my unworthiness for the service . is con- 
cerned. This, with the excitement occasioned by the 
suddenness with which it seemed, for a few days past, 
that we must engage in the missionary work^ led me 
unguardedly to ma^e an expression in my last letter which 
has since troubled me, lest you should interpret it differ- 
ently from what I. intended. My head and heart do ache 
when I think of the thousands of poor starving heathen, 
perishing for want of the bread of life, and so few ready to 
break it to them ; but not when I think the blessed privi- 
lege may be mine, of denying myself a few of the 
pleasures and comforts of life, that I may hasten to them, 
and spend my days in seeking to lead to Calvary some of 
those benighted ones.^ 

A single entry in her journal during her last two terms 
at Andover describes so fully her missionary feelings that 
it is introduced entire. 

'^A year has quickly flown since I was called to decide 
the important question whether I would share the joys 
and sorrows, the toils and trials of a missionary life. To 
this cause of Ood I have sought to consecrate myself; but 
the Searcher of hearts only knows whether the consecra- 
tion is sincere. I trust I am his, to be used in whatever 
way will best honor his name ; but have I the devotedness 
to him necessary to make me an acceptable labored among 
the ignorant and degraded heathen ? 

**A year this subject has been almost constantly before* 
my mind, and yet how cold is my heart I Oflen indeed 
have I wept bitter tears wlien I have considered the 
darkness that pervades so many millions of souls, and 
longed to be the meanf of dispelling the cloud from even 



28 TBB MIBSIOKABT 

one of these on-darkened minds; of whispering pardon 
and peace to a soul just emerging from the thick shades 
of pagan idolatry; of pointing some self-tortured Hindoo 
to the cross of Christ, that he may hear the Saviour say, 
«Take my yoke upon you, which is easy, and my burden, 
which is light.' . 

<* What are all the sacrifices I may make in this work 
when I contemplate the scene on Calvary, where the Lord 
of glory bowed his head to purchase man's redemption? 
Or what the sufferings that may &11 to my lot, compared 
with those of a aatd lost for ever f 

: ^ Oh, why are my feelings so languid I My soul should 
irather bum with love for the perishing, so that my thanks- 
givings would daily be offered to God for the prospect he 
has given me of participating in the glorious work. 

f^ Within the last few weeks, the period for a time 
seemed: short that I might enjoy the blessings of a 
Christian land, of my own dear home, and the society of 
the loved ones wont to gather around that sacred spot. 
But the Lord made nie willing, and enabled me to rejoice 
even in the anticipation of flying to the heathen. Yet it 
was with much trembling lest I should run and not be 
sent, that I have been led to call earnestly upon him who 
hears the young ravens when they cry. 
. ^ Hat Qod's time had not come, and it is that for which 
we wait, earnestly seeking to be better prepared to go 
whenever he shall call; to be clad in the whole gospel 
^mior, ready for the trying conflict.'' 

After spending her spring vacation at home, she returned 
for her last tenp to Andover. In a letter written May 18, 
after speaking with lively interiBst of a work of the Holy 
Spirit then in progress at A., she describes a visit she had 
l^cently made to Boston, to be present at the departure 
of Messrs. Hoisington, Scudder, and Taylor, with their 
wives, the company with whom they had expected to sail 
for India. After attending the public religious exercises 



VmWB OF A MIS8I0NABT LIFB. 29 

of the evening previous, she went ^^on board the ship that 
was to bear them, perhaps for over, from the scenes and 
friends they loved,^ and adds, '^I trust it was by means 
of strength frt>m Ood that I was kept cabn, although my 
faith \I must confess it) had been severely tried in more 
quiet horn's, when my poor weak nature called loudly for 
sympathy ; then I felt how little was my confidence in 
God, how little my love for the poor heathen.^ 

To her mother, a little later, she writes : " The future 
is not dark ; it is the call of Ood which I seek to obey, 
and it is his voice that saysj ^ Lo I I am with you alway.' 
And is not this enough to dissipate all clouds of distrust 
and unbelief? Oh that it did work this in mo at all 
times I But a voice within sometimes tells me, < You are 
unworthy, you are not sent of Ood, and can not call the 
promise yours.' Perhaps it is so ; and then is it not pos- 
sible that these are temptations of our great adversary, 
designed to weaken my confidence in my heavenly 
Master? I do long to be entirely subnussive in his hands, 
to tnist him fully, confidently. I am weak, but he is 
almighty. My soul earnestly longs to be engaged in his 
work among the heathen, and I pray that I may go with 
my whole heart where he guides." .... 

To one of her sisters she writes, July 8 : " How good, 
how kind is my heavenly Father I I do pray that my 
life and health may be spared and grace ^ven me to labor 
long in his service. Why do we live for any thing short 
of this ? Why do we not count all else but loss, and feel 
that to win Christ ourselves, and lead others to him, is the 
only object worth living for? Yes; let us give all, it is 
not too much ; it is nothing. It may cost a few tears, 
some pangs of grief; but what are they compared with 
the redemption of souls ? " 

Shortly after the above was written, her last term at 
Andover closed, and she returned to spend a little time 
at homo before leaving it to return no more. 

8* 



80 THB lOBBIOlTABT aiBTBBS; '* 

It was finally decided by the Pradential Committee thi^t 
Mr. Eyerett should join the Armenian mission in Western 
Asia. Of the reasons for this change in their destination 
there is no mention in any of Miss Haynes's letters. The 
only allosion to it is found in the following to one of her 
brothers, dated Nov. 9 : — 

^The future is all uncertain. A long time we waited 
to know where the Lord would have us labor. He has 
now, in his own time, directed us to a most important and 
deeply interesting portion of his vineyard. Now the time 
when he wishes us to occupy this field is in his hand, and 
we hope to be ready whenever called for; ready to goj 
trusting in the arm of Heaven for strength and wisdom 
to fight the battles of the Lord amid the darkness of 
superstition. Oh for a more entire consecration to this 
glorious work, — more living fiiith, glowing zeal, and 
warmer level" . 

In September Miss Haynes made her first and last visit 
to Mr. Everett's paternal home in Halifax, Vermont. 
Some of the incidents of this little journey, and the family 
meeting, are pleasantly described by her in several letters, 
which we are compelled entirely to omit, excepting a 
single sentence in- a letter dated fi*om the ^' loved old 
home," of which she writes : — 

^'AU the family spent the Sabbath at home, save the 

brother at BaiTe, and the sister at Peru. S has told 

you how on Saturday after all had arrived, we visited the 
spot where the loved mother sleeps. It was a sad but 
precious time. My thoughts flew back to my own dear 
mother, and I thanked God that she still lives to bless mei 
by her precious counsels and prayers." 

The following to her sister Eleanor was written just on 
the eve of her marriage and departure from her childhood's 
home : — 

^ I did not think,, when I wrote you last, that you would 
hear tvom us again so soon : that so soon I should be called 



MABBIAOX — IiBTTBB TO HBB PABBNT8. 81 

hastily to pen my Icut qnstie to you from my own dear 
home ; probably the last m the land of my birth, my own 
loved America. 

** The Stamboul arrived on Wednesday last. Mr. Ever- 
ett reiBcived a letter froin Dr. Anderson this afternoon, 
stating that the day appointed for her to sail for Smyfna 
is the 20th of this month, and we are to be in Boston on 
the 17th* So you see we have but one week here. Oh 
that we might spend that chiefly in attending to onr 
spiritual interests, — in seeking entire consecration of soul 
and body to the great and holy work on which we aj:e 
about to enter ! Oh that worldly things might shrink into 
comparative insignificance, and Christ fill oar sools I Do, 
dear brother and sister, be much in prayer for us, that we 
maybe prepared by God's grace for every event that 
awaits us.'' 

< Miss Haynes's marriage to the Bey. Joel Sumner Ever^ 
ett took place Feb. 12, 18^5. Ifive days later she bade a 
final adieu to her beloved parents, and the home and its 
pleasant Surroundings so. dear to her heart. ; The follow<t 
ing brief extracts are some of her last wo)*ds firodi her 
native land : -— 

Boflioii, Feb. 80,1845. : 

. Mt dbab, vbby dbab Parents: Are you thinking 
of us to-day as embarking for our future home ? You 
should have been informed to the contrary, before this, 
that your tender sympathies might be spared the pain a 
, few. days longer of seeing us in imagination commit our- 
selves to a passage across the wide, treacherous sea. • • 
I need not tell you that you are scarcely at all absent 
from my thoughts, and have not been since I looked upon 
your faces, and heard your voices for the last time on 
earth. I have prayed, and do pray God to be with and 
comfort, cheer, and bless you abundantly, continually fill 
your souls with peace, and spare your lives long to bless 



82 TBB mSBIOKABY 8IBTBB8, 

your family and the world. Pray much for us, that the 
promises of our Saviour may bo yorified to us, that we may 
be prepared for eminent usefulness. 

Boston Habbob, Bark Stambonl, Feb. 25, 1845. 

My ysby dbab Pabbnts : I can not forbear writing 
a word to you this evening, since all b so calm and quiet 
here, and we have nothing to keep our thoughts from 
turning to those with whom from henceforth we can com- 
municate only in this way. 

I have bade adieu to you, dear father and mother, and 
all the dear friends to whom my heart has been wont so 
fondly to cling, and from whom, even now, I am departed 
only in body, and I am not unhappy; no, far from U. 
The Saviour, to whose service I have given myself is near 
me. He has sustained me amid the trying scenes of this 
day, and will not forsake me while I, at his bidding, ''go 
far hence." • . • • • • 

Our captain talks very well about missionaries who 
have sailed with him, and is very favorable toward religious 
exercises on board, — prayers in the cabin and preaching 
on the Sabbath. Mr. E. heard him forbid a man who 
took an oath, to do the like again on board the vessel. . • 

Xove, love to all, from Sumner and myself. 6^ o'clock, 
and here we are just losing sight of our native hills at the 
rate of six knots an hour. The vessel turns a little on 
one side. I do not mean to be sick. Pilot leaving. 
6ood-by. 

SBB▲PHI^^▲• 



CHAPTER IVi 

Emlwrkatioii fbr Smyrn* — MIm Loreli— Her Early Lift and IQsrioiiftrf 

Feelings. 

It was a small missionary company that embarked in 
The Stamboul, CaptKenrick, for Smyrna^ Feb. 25, 1845; 
Mr. and Mrs. Everett appointed to Smyrna, and Miss Har- * 
riet Martha Lovell (afterwards Mrs. Hamlen) to take 
charge of the proposed Female Seminary at Constanti- 
nople. But in earnest, whole-hearted consecration to the 
Saviotit's cause, and fitness in every respect for the mis- 
sionary work, these three were a host. 

While they are passing their first days at sea, making 
acquaintance with each other and with the new world 
around them, we may appropriately introduce to the 
reader Miss Lovell, whose future life and missionary 
labors in connection with Mrs. Everett's, will make up a 
large part of the following pages. 

The particulars that have been obtained of her early 
life are few, and in regard to dates and places, not very 
definite. Her father, Ovid Lovell, Esq., was a native of 
Charlestown, N. H., who married Miss Ilarriet Peming, 
only daugher of Benjamin Deming, Esq., of Danville, Vt., 
a very lovely and amiable lady. He had; three children, 
two sons and his daughter Martha. He subsequently re- 
moved to Rockingham, on the opposite side of the Con- 
necticut, where ho had the misfortune to lose his wife, 
and Martlia to bo deprived early in lifo of a motlior so 



84 THB MISSIONABY BISTBB8. 

well fitted to guide and educate her young mind. She 
found, however, an excellent home in the family of her 
maternal grandfather, and one who almost supplied to her 
the place of a mother, in Mrs. Deming, the second wife of 
her grandfather, a woman of uncommon piety. It is 
thought that to the influence of this good grandmother 
may be traced the foundation of Martha's lovely charac- 
ter, and especially her early and devoted attachment to 
the missionary cause, as that was a prominent character- 
istic of Mrs. Deming's piety. 

When Maltha was thirteen, her father was again mar- 
ried, and she found a home once more under the pateiiial 
roo^ in Palmyra, N. Y. The excellent lady who feith- 
fuUy and affectionately filled her own mother's place, and 
'whom she seems always to have regarded with a daugh- 
ter's love, writes of her: *^Whon I entered her father's 
family, I found her an amiable, conscientious child, lovely 
in all her intercourse with her parents and brothers, 
and always a gi*eat favorite with her young companions. 
She was remarkably affectionate and kind in her dispo- 
sition, and I can not remember ever hearing her speak an 
unkind or hasty word." 

But though so amiable, and evincing fi*om early child- 
hood an unusual reverence for sacred things, she did not 
give evidence of piety until two years later. When she 
was fifteen, the church in Palmyra, then under the pastoral 
care of the Bev. Mr. Shumway, was blessed with a revival, 
and she was among the first to partake of its blessings. 
The following year she united by a public profession of 
her &itb with the people of God. 

. But the morning of Martha's life, which had been so 
early clouded by a mother's death, was destined to be 
again and again overcast. She was blessed with a most 
tender and excellent father, whom she devotedly loved., 
A brother-in-law writes of him : '* He possessed a well- 
balanced mind, sterling integrity, kindness of disposition. 



XABLT UFB OF MISS LOYBLL. 86 

and an urbane deportment that made him beloved and 
respected. In the culture and training of his children he 
spared neither expense nor effort." This good father was 
taken away when she was just at an age to feel such a 
' loss most keenly. 

Another affliction which threw a deep shadow over her 
young spirit, was the loss of her brother Frank at sea. 
Very frequent and touching allusions to this event are 
found in her letters. To these early sorrows, which seem 
to have left so lasting an impression on her affectionate 
heart, may perhaps be ascribed, in part, the habitual seri- 
ousness of her countenance and manner, though her nat- 
ural temperament was reserved, and rather timid and 
retiring. 

After her father's death Miss Lovell spent some years 
with her eldest brother in .Wisconsin, and did not return 
to her mother in Palmyra until a year previous to the 
commencement of her missionary life. 

Miss Lovell's mind seems to have been led quite early 
to the missionary work, with a desire to engage in it per- 
sonally. Mr. R. O. Pardee, who was Superintendent of 
the Sabbath school with which she was connected for 
some years in Palmyra, and was also an intimate and 
valued friend of hers, writes of her : " The first feature of 
her character or actions which impressed me, was her con- 
stant attendance at the teachers' meeting, and her deep 
and unusual interest, shown in her very quiet way, in the 
tniths of Qod's word. Next, I noticed her increasing in- 
terest in the monthly concert of prayer for the conver- 
sion of the world. We often took sweet counsel together 
in regard to the great cause of missions at home and 
abroad, and her eye, I could see, delighted to roam over 
the whitening fields of the American Board. She sent to 
me for all my books on the missionary work, and particu- 
larly the Missionary Herald for many years previous." 

The result of all this thought and investigation was, 



86 THX MISSIONA&Y QISTBBS. • 

that 0be came to the calm, yet earnest conviction, that it 
was her duty to go herself to impart the knoyrledgo of 
Christ and salvation to the benighted of her own sex in 
some dark part of the world. While her mind was Btill 
a^tated on this important subject, she addressed the 
following letter to her former pastor, then settied in 
Kewark, N. J.: — 

Palmtiu, Sept. 13/1844. 

. Mt dbab Mb. Shtjmway:. The importance of my 
errand will, I trust, \)e a sufficient apology for thus 
addressing you. I have for many weeks been wishing the 
advice of some Christian fiiend pn a subject which lies 
near my heart, and I know of no one I can look to for 
counsel upon such a subject with more confidence than 
yourself. For several months, the subject of foreign mis- 
sions has dwelt much upon my mind, oqd I have scarcely 
at any time been released from other cares, but my mind 
has instantly reverted to it, and the. thought has forced 
itself upon me,— perhaps it.is my duty to devote myself 
to this cause. The thought of my small attainments, and 
pf my piety, which I fear is ^till les^, for a time checked 
this idea; but it is still ever returning. It would bo 
difficult for me to tell you all thp workings of my mind 
.on this subject. That God 8houl4 choose one so unworthy 
as I to engage in this great enterprise seems impossible, 
while X remember bow many thousands there are every 
way better qualified, of eminent piety, and greater love 
for souls i and then I remember that many of tiiese have 
strong ties to bind them to their homes and friends, wldle 
there are but few to 4^1;^ me here; one after another 
has been removed, and bHt very few remain. Then a 
remembrance /of my past religious course, of my many 
bockslidings, of the many wounds. I have brought upon 
my Saviour's cause;, and the fear lest I should in future be 
guilty of the some,:-::: .all %hm&, make ine to doubt. And 



IKQUIBINa FOlt DUTY, 87 

again I find myself asking, What will the world say ? I 
have never done my duty to those around me Aere, and 
will they not wonder at my presumption in thinking to 
teach otiiers ? I am deeply sensible of my past un^th- 
fulnesSy and I think nothing would give me greater pain 
than the idea of spending the remainder of my life, either 
here or elsewhere, so profitless, so unfinitful. When I 
review my past life, I am amazed at the long-suffering of 
Ood; and when I look around, and see how much there is 
to be done in the world before the earth shall be filled 
with the glory of Ood, and how indifferent the great tnass 
of professing Christians appear to be, I wonder that Gk>d 
does not come out in judgment against his people. 

And what can Zdo ? That there is great need of mis- 
sionary laborers of the right kind, we all know. If I had 
money, with my present feelings, I would pve it to send 
such. Can I do any good by going myself? If so, shall I hot 
say, " Here am I, Lord, — what wilt thou have me to do ? ^ 
Oh I lot me beg your prayers that I may be guided aright 
in a decision of this qttostion ; that if my heavenly Father 
sees that I shall only prove a dishonor to his -cause, and 
shall not glorify him, I may not be encouraged to think 
more of this; but if I can in any way by this act be 
the means of saving one soul, or promote his cause, that 
my duty may be made plain. 

This matter has been thus far communicated to no one 
except my mother. I have felt much diffidence in speak- 
ing of it but to Him who seeth in secret, I will say no 
more, only to ask your counsels and your prayers. 

Tliis letter shows, besides her earnest inquiry in regard 
to her own duty, and her deep interest in the missionary 
work, her humility^ and severity in judging herself 
While she thus accuses herself of Unfaithfulness and back- 
slicUngs, she was looked upon by her friends as a pattern 
of consistent and devoted piety. This trait of humility 

4 



88 THS MISSIONABT 8I8TBSS. 

was always a prominent one in her character. She Vaa 
ever ready, in lowliness of mind| to esteem others better 
than herself. 

' When Miss liovell dedded to offer herself as a mission- 
ary teacher to the American Board, it was with an unre- 
served consecration of herself to the Saviour's cause, and 
a willingness to go to any part of his wide vineyard which 
he might appoint. She replied to the question, — ^" Which 
of the stations of the Board would yon prefer ? " — ^" I Juwe 
no cJioiceP ^But surely you have a choice whether to 
go to the deadly clime of Africa, or some pleasanter field 
of labor, if the Lord will ? ** ""As the Lord will," she said ; 
^ I really have not turned my mind to any place in prefer- 
ence, but leave it all to the Board." 

On making her wishes known to the officers of the 
Board, she was told that they were just then looking for 
a lady to take charge of a proposed seminary for Armenian 
females in Constantinople, and were at that time in corre- 
spondence with two, one of whom would probably fill the 
post. She was, however, requested to give, in wnting, her 
viewi9 of' a missionary life, in compliance with which 
request, she addressed the following communication to 
Dr. Anderson : — 

PiXMYBA, Dec. 34, 1814, 

Dbab Sib: Your letter of the 18th to Mr. Fisher was 
handed to me this morning, and in compliance with your 
request I hasten to reply to it, and to endeavor to make 
you in some measure acquainted with my dcsii*cs and 
motives in relation to the work of missions. It would bo 
difficult to say what firat led my thoughts to this subject. 
From a child I have at times thought much of it ; but it 
was not until a few months since that I began senously 
to inquire what might be my duty. I had long felt a 
conviction that, as a professed disciple of Christ, I was not 
fulfilling his will whUe living for myself forgetful of the 



LBTTSB TO BET. BB. AirCBBSON. 89 

salvatioii of others ; that his service required A more entire 
(K)n8ecration of myself than I had ever made. I asked, 
** Lord, what wilt thou have me to do ? " Fields for use- 
fulness were not wanting on every hand, and while seek- 
ing for a suitable opportunity to engage in teaching at 
home, I was led almost imperceptibly to think more and 
more of the millions who are perishing in other lands for 
want of the bread of life. I thought too that while here 
every Christian may labor, but few are willing to leave all 
and go to the destitute in other lands. I had received 
many lessons in the school of affliction which had taught 
me that my home is not here, and there were not as many 
obstacles in the way of my going as in the case of many 
much better qualified. I thought of it much, and made it 
the subject of prayer long, before mentioning my wishes 
to any one, until I dared no longer keep silence. I felt 
that I could not enjoy the blessing of God, should I 
neglect what seemed so plainly my duty. I had no 
preference for any particular field of labor. My only wish 
was that in some humble way I might be made useful, 
and, if I could be more useful at home than abroad, that I 
might not be permitted to go. 

When the proposal of a station at Constantinople was 
made known to me, I was almost overwhelmed under a 
sense of my own incompetence and insufficiency for so 
responsible a place. I felt that as I had no experience in 
teaching, which might be requisite, I might perhaps be 
more useful in some humbler sphere. Still, as I had com- 
mitted the case entirely to God, I knew that if he designed 
I should go there, his grace could qualify me. J trust I 
have no wish to go where I could not be useful, or where 
by my own inefficiency I might embarrass the effi:>rts of 
others ; and it will be with trembling that I shall assume 
this responsibility, should it finally be so determined. 
That God may guide you in your counsels and decision is 
my most earnest prayer. 



40 TBM MISSIOHABT SISTBBS. 

Should it bo thought best that I ahould go to OonBtan- 
tboplo, perhaps you, sir, could inform mo what moans I 
should adopt, if any, pi*eparatory to going ; whether in the 
short time remaining any knowledge which I might gain 
further of the mode of teaching here in our best seminaries 
would be of service there.. This, and any other suggestion 
which you might make, would be most gratefully 
received. 

I presume it is not necessary to beg that your decision 
may be made known to me as speedily as possible, the 
time is so limited^ In the mean time I remain most 
respectAilly yours, 

H. M. LOVBLL, 

Bkv. Bufub Andbbson, D D., 
. Missionary House, Boston. 

Ycry soon after this letter was sent, she received intelli- 
gence of her appointment to Constantinople, with the re- 
quest to hold heraelf in readiness to sail in eight or ten weeks. 
Soon after her sending application to the Boai*d, she wrote 
to her brother in Wisconsin : ^ And now, my dear brother, 
I have that to conununicate which I foai* will hardly meet 
your full approbation, though I trust you will not oppose 
it. For a long time I have been satisfied that I was not 
answering the end of my existence in my present situation, 
and that I ought to endeavor to render myself useful in 
some way, by teaching or otherwise. It would be need- 
less, and I fear you would hardly understand me, were I 
to tell you aU that has led me at length to the determi- 
nation to be a missionary. Should I tell you that for 
months past I have scarcely had any other desire but to 
be thus engaged, — that the love of Ohiist constraining 
me, as I trust, I am willing to leave my home and Mends 
if I can be made the means of good to others, — you will 
not, I hope, accuse me of Quixotism or fanaticism. 

^ I have offered myself to the American Board, Should 



LBTTBB8 TO HBB BROTHXB. 41 

my senrices be accepted, it remains with them to direct 
my future destination. 

** Now let me beg of you to offer no opposition to this 
step, as it will only add to the pain of separation. I 
believe Providence has marked this course for me. I firmly 
believe it to be my duty, and trust that his presence will 
go with me. Do you remember I told you, my dear Fred, 
I sadly feared we should never meet again ? Oh! must it 
be so ? Never, never did I realize half the love I have 
for you, until since this decision has been made, of self> 
exile fi*om you. My brother, a separation for this life is 
painful, — but must this parting be a final one ? Shall we 
meet, after the short parting in this life, at the right hand 
of God ? Oh ! shall we both, with the sainted ones who 
are there, sit down with all the blood-washed throng 
above ? What can I say to you, my dear brother, to 
express half the love I have for you, and the anxiety of 
my heart that you may no longer live a stranger to Qod 
and true religion ? My heart can not rest satisfied till you 
and M. arc brought to the feet of Jesus, and till there 
is a prospect that your little one shall be given to God. 
For this I will not cease to pray ; and the hope and belief 
that this prayer will be answered, will cheer me when we 
shall be separated still farther. May God ever bless you ! " 

After receiving notice of her appointment by the Board, 
she wrote to the same brother, Jan. 6, 1845 : " Now that 
the sentence of self-banishment from home and friends 
has gone forth, no words can describe the mingled emo- 
tions which fill my heart, especially at the thought of 
never, never seeing your faces ag^n this side the grave. 
Not that for a moment I have ever regretted the decision, 
but oh, the thought that this parting may be for eternity I 
and how do thoughts of my own unfaithfulness, and appar- 
ent indifference to these things while with you, now dis- 
tress and humble me ! God knows I have ever felt a deep 
desire for your salvation ; but I have been too prone to 

4* 



42 THB laSSIOHABT SI8TBBS. 

suffer a foolbh and wicked reserve and diffidence to 
close my mouth when my heart was full. Could I but have 
the assurance that we should meet, an unbroken &mily, 
at the right hand of God, the parting but for this short 
life would be robbed of its sting.** 

When the time arrived for Miss Lovell to take leave of 
her friends and home, her pastor, the Rev. Mr. Fisher, 
kindly accompanied her to Boston, and remained with 
her until she had taken her last look at her native land. 
His society and kind attentions were a great comfort to 
her at this trying time. 

She thus mentions Mr. and Mrs. Everett, whom she 
now met for the first time : *^ I am very much pleased with 
them, have no doubt I shall love them much ; indeed, I do 
already. She has a sweet, pale face, and looks rather sad^ 
but she has just parted from a large circle of friends, and 
it is not strange she should look sad." 

The following is a part of her last letter from her native 
land : — 

Boston, Monday morning, Feb. 24, 1S45. 

Mt deabbst Mothbb: I can not close my packet 
of letters this morning, without adding one word more, 
as I have a moment's time before dinner. 

I am increasingly happy in the prospect before me. 
Trials and sorrows I expect, and I do not wish to be fr*ee 
from them. God will give me grace to bear them ; and 
he will give you grace and wisdom according to your need, 
if you do but look to him for them. It is my constant 
prayer that you may be abundantly blessed, that H. and 
C. may be very, very soon converted and made children 
of God. 

Will Clarissa be so kind as to ask Mr. Pardee what dis- 
position he has made of my Sabbath-school class, — who 
^is their teacher, etc. and give them, next Sabbath, my best 



PABTINa LBTTBB. 43 

love, and nn assurance of my remembrance every Sabbathi 
and my prayers that they may all become heirs of glory. 

Dear Henry, one word to you. My darling brother, 
you know not how your sister loves you ; but God loves 
you better, even, than I do ; and he is calling you to g^ve 
your heart to him. I saw a little boy six yeatis old, son of 
Sir. Champion, who died in Africa, who is anxiously wish- 
ing to be a man, that he may go and tell the poor 
Africans about the Saviour. He will not be called an 
American, because he was bom in Africa, and means to 
go there a missionary. It is my prayer that Gk)d by his 
grace Will give you a new heart to love and serve him, 
and make you a missionary. 

Oive my love, dear Clarissa, to all the girls, [mention- 
ing several by name,] and all I have not mentioned. 
God bless you all ! I am almost glad that none of you 
will be here, to-morrow. My serenity and peace would 
be disturbed. The parting with my dear pastor will be 
the trying moment. 

Farewell for a little! We shall soon hear from each 
other, and Mfaithfxd^ shall soon meet. 

Affectionately your daughter, 

Mabtha. 

This beloved pastor has also been called to his rest and 
reward, and was, perhaps, one of the first to meet and 
welcome her to the blissful shores of her celestial home, 
ns he was one of the last to bid her Godspeed as she 
sailed away from the shores of her earthly home, on her 
mission of love and mercy to a far-distant land. 



CHAPTER V. 

InoidMits of the Y oyage — Arrival at Smyrna — First Impreitloof . 

Wb left the little missionaiy company in The Stamboul, 
making acquaintance with each other, and with the novel- 
ties and wondera of their strange ^ life on the ocean 
waye." It required no long time for two persons like 
Mrs. Everett and Miss Lovell to become acquainted with 
and love each other. Their characters were in all respects 
congenial. Their hopes and aims for the advancement of 
the Savioui'^s kingdom and the welfare of their benighted 
Armenian sisters, were the same ; and there sprung up be- 
tween them, at once, an ardent friendship, resembling in 
devotion and constancy that which knit together in such 
strong bonds the souls of David and Jonathan. 

Both ladies kept a journal of their sea life for their home 
friends. Mrs. Everett's is very full, and describes minutely 
and graphically the sights and incidents of their voyage. 
Miss LovelPs records more of feeling and reflection than 
of incident. We are compelled to limit ourselves to a 
few brief extracts : — 

Mrs. E. writes, March 8. ^ Two weeks have passed 
since I bade farewell to you, my much loved father and 
mother, and my dear, doar home. These weeks have 
been busy, exciting, deeply trying, yet joy^. Christ 
has been near, and very precious to my soul. 

"The morning of the 27th brought us a snow-storm, 
with a heavy sea, and consequently a rolling, tumbling 
vessel, yet we were quite comfortable during the day, and 



A BTOBM AT BXA. 45 

took somo * light food. Mr. E. was on dock part of the 
time, and, with his aid, I crawled to the door, and for the 
first time saw the majesty of the ocean. The storm of 
snow and rain continued, with some wind, and the whole 
broad expanse of dark blue waters seemed wrought into 
a fury. The scene was fraught with awful grandeur. The 
sea truly ' mounted to tlio heavens, and went down again 
to the deep.' Now the crested wave would approach in 
silent majesty to the side of our frail bark, dash upon it a 
torrent of its briny waters, or perhaps only sprinkle us 
with the white foam and spray it bore on its bosom^ 
then retire slowly and suddenly, till it lost itself in the 
multitude hurrying on to take its place." • • • March 6. 
<*IIerc, if possible, more emphatically than on the land, we 
are constantly made sensible of the omnipresence of the 
Deity. The winds, the mountain waves, the whirling 
spray, and the deep abyss of waters beneath and around 
us, unite their voices, and as with ten thousand tongues, 
proclaim, ^ There is a Ood.' But the most precious mani- 
festations of his presence are made in our own souls. He 
is to us an ever-present friend. He has thus far protected 
and blessed us, and we will not for a moment remove our 
confidence from his almighty arm. Dear father and 
mother, I wish you knew how calm and happy I have 
been since my home has been on the roaring deep." • • • 

10. ^We are all as contented and happy as you 
could expect — perhaps wish us to be. We exercise as 
much as we can, with the constant danger of receiving 
thumps and bruises, and eat as much as we can, — at least, 
I do. We doze, talk, laugh, read, sing, think, and — how 
precious the privilege — jyray. Although languid feel- 
ings and wandering thoughts are by no means strangers 
to us here, still we have much to drive us near the throne 
of grace; and the peace and joy there afforded seem doubly 
precious to us." 

18. '' How rapidly are the days and weeks gliding by 1 



46 TBS MISSIOHABT 8I8TBB8. 

But mj sympathies for my dear friends at home, be as- 
sured) are no less real, or my affections less ardent, be- 
cause thousands of long, weary miles stretch themselves 
between us.** 

Miss Lovell writes, March 20 : ^ I am now writing on 
deck. Mrs. E. sits at a little distance reading aloud to her 
husband, — the sailors all around us, mending sails, Capt. 
Kenrick at work carpentering, and in fine spiiits in con- 
sequence of our rapid progress. I love to sit on deck 
and watch the movements of the sailors, — their prompt 
and cheorfiil obedience, with their ready * aye aye, sir ! ' 
and oh, how often do thoughts of my poor lost brother 
come up before me, and fill my eye with teai-s, and my 
heart with sadness I I see enough of the life of a sailor 
before the mast to convince me that the life of our dear 
brother Frank at sea, with liis previous habits and educa- 
tion, must have been a sad one ; and I doubt not that he 
often most bitterly lamented having left us. Oh, how 
mysterious the providence which thus removed him, just 
as he was returning to us I But what we know not now, 
we shall know hereafter.'' 

Mrs. Everett, — March 21. <' Our last day on the At- 
lantic, and a finer one we . could not have wished* The 
morning was delightAil, and of additional interest for us 
from the discovery of land, — the coast of Portugal, thirty 
or forty miles distant. The breeze has been quite cool 
to-day, but we have spent the most of the time on deck, 
watching the course of the vessel through the compai-a- 
Uvely quiet sea, and the .brilliant reflection of the sunHght 
upon Uie gently moving surface of the water. Besides, 
we have had the company of four or five sails, and about 
isunset a large number of vessels were in sight at once. The 
enjoyment of such a day as this amply compensates for 
the tiials we experienced during so many days. And such 
a dose/ After tea we went on deck, and saw land on 
either side, — Cape Tra^gar on the Spanish, and Cape 



An DOB an 8UN8BT. 47 

Spartel on the African coast. It appeared but a shade in 
the distance, but it was land. Then the sunset, — not a 
cloud was to be seen in the blue vault above, the sun 
had run his race, and for the last time we saw him sink 
beneath the dark waters of the Atlantic, leaving one of 
the richest, most perfectly beautiful skies I ever beheld. 
Half the circle of the horizon was most brilliantly lighted 
np by the rays of his departing glory. First, the deep 
orange rested upon the dark waters, which was mellowed 
into the full, clear yellow, and this gradually faded into the 
most delicate straw color, and finally lost itself in the pure 
blue above. Tou may think this was nothing remarkable, 
but it was beautiful, exquisitely beautiful. I lingered 
long, gazed and admired, admired and gazed. I had some 
thoughts of you all, at my own dear home, which I had 
left far in the west, where the sun was still high in the 
sky above it. But I did not long to be there. No, I be- 
lieve the language of my heart was, — 

Jemsalem, mj- glorious home, 
Hy Boul still pants for thee.' 

^Olorious city I no shades of darkness envelop thee, for 
there is no night there, neither need of the sim, for the 
Lamb is the light of it. Oh, may the Lord enable us aU 
to reach those heavenly fields, and walk the golden 
streets ! " 

Mrs. Everett, — March 22. **We were on deck at 4 
o'clock this morning, and saw, by the light of the pale, 
full moon, the shores of Africa and Europe, — Morocco 
and Spain. We could see only the dark, irregular outline 
on the clear sky, although not more than fifteen miles 
from one to the other. Soon the moon majestically sunk 
into its ocean bed, and the same glorious sun whose 
fadingradiance had delighted us so much last evening, rose 
in full splendor from his watery couch, and threw new 
life and beauty over the scene 5 and all the morning we 



48 THB 1CI86I0NABT 8I8TBB8. 

baye been feasting our oyos, and souls, too, by viewing on 
the one hand, hills jagged and broken, rising one aboye 
another, some through openings far in the distance, all of 
which, by their rocky, barren appearance, reminded us of 
barbarous Africa ; — on the other hand, two high, rocky 
hills; but this is not all. Towers and castles, gray 
and crumbling, are to be seen, and ruined fortifications, 
inteimingled with little white cottages; and these too, 
ai*e scattered oyer the undulating declivity to the shore, 
amid the now verdant fields, and vineyards clad in 
heavy foliage. And we have seen men, — not men as 
trees walkmg, but a whole line of soldiers parading on 
the beach. This is with the aid of a glass, for we are dis- 
tant two or three miles from the coast. But I can tell you 
nothing about it, nor of om* feelings on viewing it. I 
only wish you were here, but that should . be after a 
voyage across the Atlantic. 

March 25. <^ A lovely day, — the thermometer almost 
at summer heat. The mountains of Spain still in view. 
I must tell you that on Sabbath afternoon, about the 
time of your morning service, we had religious exercises 
on deck. The day was fine, with but a slight motion of 
the vessel, and Mr. £. stood beside the work-bench, over 
which the Captain's cloak was thrown, and preached his 
sermon on the Honderness of Jesus,' to a congregation 
of fifteen. Such a presentation seemed well adapted to 
the wants of these sons of Neptune, wanderers on the 
treacherous deep. May they all be inclined to accept 
Christ as their friend and Saviour. 

*( Our simple, but I trust sincere acts of devotion, were 
performed in sight of a land which has long been crushed 
beneath the cruel reign of the Man of Sin. The town of 
Malaga was in fall view, in the center of which the dome 
of an immense cathedral rises to the height of 270 feet. 
To this magnificent edifice multitudes of Rome's deluded 
votaries daily resort, and by means of holy water, confcs- 



THB MBDITBRRAKBAN. 49 

sional, masses, and prayers to saints, prepare themselves, — 
for what? Deluded mortals I The last great day will 
show for what." • • . 

« 

^ Unless detained here by a calm, we shall probably 
to-day bid adieu to the shores of Spain, with whose 
history is associated so much that is sad, dark, cruel, — 
the seat of the Inquisition, the theater of bloody wars 
and persecutions. But it is a sunny land of fruitful vine- 
yards, and sweet orange groves. Oh that it might soon 
be a truly Christian land ! " 

Miss Lovell, — March 29. *^I have not told you how 
attentive and polite Capt. Kenrick is to us. We like him 
and his officers much. The crew are very orderly; no 
profanity or drinking is allowed. Two sweet little land 
birds visited us this afternoon ; one flew into my win- 
dow, and sat there panting and weary with his long flight 
from the shores of Africa. He soon flew away, or at- 
tempted to do so, but fell exhausted into the water. His 
mate still sits aloft in the rigging, giving us occasionally a 
note like the canary bird. Last night we stood on deck 
a long time, watching the beautiful phosphorescence which 
lit up the waters. Wherever the surface of the sea was 
broken, showers of living sparkles seemed to fly in every 
direction. Mr. Everett took a rope, and with it struck the 
water, producing an appearance rivaling in beauty any 
artificial fireworks.** 

Under the same date Mrs. E. gives such a pretty pic- 
ture, that we can not refrain from introducing it: — 

^ May yon, dear parents, have as quiet, as lovely a Sat- 
urday evening as we have enjoyed. This has been a 
beautiful day, but the sunset and twilight were passing 
beautiful. Not a breath ruffled the gently swelling sur- 
face of the glassy sea, as it lay like one broad mirror, re- 
flecting the mellow light thrown upon it by a perfect sky. 
As the sun was hidden from our view beneath the blue 
waters, its glory lingered, shedding beauty on both sky 

2 



60 THS MISSIOHABT 8I8TBR8. 

mi sel^ and the stillness that reigned was the sacred, 
solemn stiUness of the twilight hour. We seemed not 
to dare, certainly we cared not to speak, and the silence 
was unbroken save by the twitter of a little wanderer 
from the green-wood that had taken refuge among our 
sails, and the plunge of a porpoise, as in sport it threw 
itself high in the air, and then sunk in its native element. 
But these drew not our thoughts from him who is their 
maker as well as ours. We remained gazing and musing 
until the bright stars were twinkling above our heads, and 
then Sumner and I came down to our little room, and in 
that sweet, still hour, united our hearts in a season of 
con^munion with our kind heavenly Father, calling on 
our souls and all within us to bless his name for all the 
goodness and mercy that crown our days. Wo prayed 
for you and our dear fUends, that the holy Sabbath, which 
is now approaching, may advance us all towards, our 
heavenly rest, our blissful reunion in the skies." 

Miss Lovell, — April 0. <*Last night was a night of 
incessant tossing and pitching. The wind commenced 
blowing in the evening, and increased to a gale, what the 
captain called a regular Levanter. • • • Early in the 
night I was awakened by the song of the sidlors above 
me. The chorus of ^cheerily hoi' was at firat very 
pleasing, till something in the air, or the voices, suddenly 
reminded me so forcibly of Frank as to open the fountain 
of tears at once, and for a moment it seemed as though 
my heart would break. It was but for a moment ; I was 
enabled to feel that it was God who had taken him, and 
could say, bis will be done. 

^Mrs. Everett is sick to-day, so that I have been 
obliged to go to the table without her. Charlotte Eliza- 
beth says, in one of her works, that there are two classes 
of people in the world, those who are seorsick and those 
who are not. She and I belong to the latter class." 

In a letter to her brother, dated April 14, Miss Lovell 
writes : — 



APPROACH TO SKYBNA. 61 

"We yesterday entered the Archipelago, and are now 
in sight of the shores of classic Greece. The islands which 
stud this sea so beautifully are around us on every side. 
A bright and clear sun is shining above us to-day, and the 
very air seems to breathe of joy and gladness. Yet this 
very fur is bearing me far, fkr away from all the scenes I 
love so well; far from you, my dear brother,— and this 
thought somewhat checks the delight I am inclined to 
feel in the prospect of reaching my journey's end.'' • 

The same date she writes in her journal: ** Passed to- 
day the islands of Milo, Siphanto, Pares, Serpho, and 
Thermia. The sun went down to-night behind the Gre- 
cian hills, bathing them in a flood of glory, and tinging 
the clouds around them with the most goi^ous tints 
imaginable. Altogether it was the most magnificent sun- 
set I ever beheld, and fully realized my conceptions df 
Italian and Grecian sunsets. The evening which followed 
was scarcely less beautiful, and I remained on deck till a 
late hour, and thought of home imd distant friends." 

Their pleasant voyage was now drawing to a dose. 
April 17, Mrs. Everett writes: — 

"This morning we found otirselves slowly proceeding 
up the Gulf of Smyrna, land, upon each side, appearing at a 
very short distance from us. Olive and cypress treel^ 
cover some of the hills, others are rocky and barren, and 
upon the sides of others still, and here and there all along 
the shore, are spots of the most delightful verdure. About 
noon we just discerned, in the smoky distance, at the 
base of a high hill, and close by the seanshore, the long- 
looked-and-wished-for Smyrna, our fiiture home. What 
my feelings are I can hardly tell you, only that there is a 
mingling of joy and sadness, of hope and trembling. I 
am sure we feel tnily grateful to our kind Preserver 
through the penis of our voyage, and an earnest desire for 
the continued guidance and grace of the satiie Almighty 
friend. 



62 TUB MI88IOKAHT 8I8TSBS. 

^ When I look on the strange land that lies before us, a 
yoice seems to sound in my ears, ^ What doest thoa here ? ' 
And when I see the magnitude and importance of the 
work to be done, mj soul cries as never before, 'Lord, 
who is sufficient for these things?' Our only strength 
and hope is in the might of him whom we have come to 
serve. May we be enabled to do something for the honor 
ofChristP 

But their hopes were not to be so soon realized. It 
was not until the morning of the 19th that they wore 
permitted to set foot in the dty, which for two days 
had tantalized their eyes with its near prospect. Miss 
L. bsljb; ^Mr. Van Lennep and Mr. Johnston came out 
in a caique to the vessel, and accompanied us to Mr. 
Adger's house, in the Frank quarter. They gave us a 
warm welcome, and made us feel at once as Uiough we 
had long known and loved them.'' 

Soon after their arrival in Smyrna, they visited Bouri 
nabat, a beautifid village seven or eight miles from the 
dty, where one of the missionary families was residing. 
Of the ride to this place she says ; — 

^The road to this village is delightful, passing through 
groves of olive and fig. These and the yineyards, the 
orange-trees covered with fruit and flowers, the burying- 
grounds, with their tall, dark cypresses, all remind me 
that I am in a strange land; but more than all, the 
thronging multitudes of bearded and turbaned Turks, 
Armenians and Jews, who crowd the narrow streets, 
many of them scarcely wide enough for three persons to 
walk or ride abreast, and the unknown tongues which 
salute my ear on every side, tell me that I am in a lapd 
of darkness and ignorance, and not in my own happy 
country.*^ 

But they did not allow the novel and interesting scenes 
around them to divert their minds, even for a few days, 
from the great object which had led them to this strange 



▲H ABlfBNIAN OHUBOH. 58 

land. They immediately obtained a teacher, and in one 
or two days after their arrival, commenced taking daily 
lessons in Armenian. Four days after their arrival, 
Miss Lovell writes : ^ I have learned the alphabet, which 
has thirty-eight letters, some of them extremely difficult 
to sound, and am now reading in words of two syllables.^' 

Mrs. Everett thus describes her first visit to an Arme- 
nian church : **In the afternoon of Thursday, Mrs. Adger 
took us to call upon Mrs. Johnston, and on our return we 
passed through some streets in the Armenian quarter of 
the town. Seeing a collection of people before the door 
of what seemed to be a chapel, we looked in and found it 
was a congregation of Armenian females, this being the 
last week of Lent. Oh that every Christian could for once 
look upon such a scene as was presented to us in this 
house of worship I The few feeble prayers and efforts 
now put foith in behalf of those who sit in darkness, 
would then be exchanged for fervent, importunate suppli- 
cations, and diligent, untiring effi)rts for their salvation. 

" The body of the church was filled with ladies neatly 
dressed in the Armenian costume, which is quite graceful, 
being, for the street, a sheet, or very large square piece of 
white cloth, one side of wliich is held together under the 
chin, after being thrown over the head, while the opposite 
side falls behind, extending to the bottom of the dress. 
Those women were all standing with their faces towards 
the altar where the services were performed. When we 
approached the door of the church, several priests with 
their long rich robes and flowing gray beards were stand- 
ing, with crosses in one hand and lighted wax candles in 
the other, over the Bible, from which they were chanting, 
in an unknown tongue, in a loud, incoherent manner ; after 
which, one read the Scriptures by the light of two large 
wax candles, held on each side of him by two boys dressed 
in white. At this time a large number of candles, arranged 
in a row behind the altar, were lighted. Oh, how spirit- 
• 5» 



54 THB MI88I0HAIIT 8I3TXB8. 

i^dljr dark I — and the light of the candles seemed only 
t^ render the darkness more awfully visible. Chanting 
followed, the books of the priests being held in napkins; 
then the ceremony of washing one another's feet A large 
chair was placed, in which one sat down and bared his 
foot) and another, kneeling before him, washed it in a pan 
of yrsiier placed for the purpose, and anointed it fix>m a 
cup carefhlly held in a napkin by a boy, who was also 
dre^4 ^ white like the others. Two others successiyely 
^ok their places in the chair, to whom the same service 
was performed, and who expressed their gratitu4e by kiss- 
ing ^e hand of {dm who had performed the cerepiony. 
Our hearts were pierced, and we turned away, praying 
that this darkness might soon be dbpelled." 



CHAPTER VI. 

Annuftl Meeting of the Mbelon — Tidte to interesting Localities — MisBionarj 

Work at Constantinople. 

TfiB annual meeting of the Annenian mission was to be 
held in Constantinople the last week in April. It was 
thought best for Mr. and Mrs. Everett to attend the 
meeting, as the knowledge of the missionary work they 
would thus gain at the outset of their missionary life 
would be very valuable to them. They accordingly left 
Smyrna, with Miss Lovell and the two missionaries going 
as delegates to the meeting, in the Austrian steamer, for 
.Constantinople, April 26. 

Of the incidents connected with this visit, the meeting, 
and the impressions produced on their minds by a first 
sight of the beauties and wonders of the great Turkish 
capital, Mrs. Everett must be the chronicler, as the letters 
written at that time by Miss Lovell have been irrecover- 
ably lost. From Mrs. E.'s veryfiill and graphic descrip- 
tions we make the following extracts : — 

"Fbra, Cokstantikoplb, April S9, 1845. 
" Our accommodations on board the steamer were very 
good, our company the best we could desire. When I 
say this, I refer to the company of the missionaries ; for 
such a crowd as surrounded us you can hardly imagine^ 
There were persons from no less than twelve different 
nations, with their characteristic languages, customs, and 
religions, if such their superstitious faith and worship 



r 

56 THX MISSIOHABY 8ISTBB8. 

could be caUed. It was a painful sight — the Jesuit priests 
with their strings of beads, and the Mussulman repeating 
what are to him unmeaning words, and prostrating him- 
self five times a day toward the tomb of the fiilse 
prophet 

^ We speedily and pleasantly passed through the waters, 
leaving the plains of Troy, Mount Ida, and the tomb of 
Achilles on our right hand, and on the loft the islands 
Tenedos, Imbros, Samothracia, and others. 

^Then came the passage through the Dardanelles, the 
shores of which were covered with delightM verdure, 
especially the little plains between and at the foot of high 
hills, rising a little back from the water. The castles on 
both the European and Asiatic sides, and the little villages 
here and there, made the scenery very fine. Oh if we 
could forget that ^man b vilel' This thought b con- 
tinually present, and we would not have it obliterated, or 
absent from our minds, until the glory of the Lord shall 
fill the earth, as the waters fill the sea. 

^On the second morning after leaving Smyrna, we 
looked upon the great city of Constantinople. The view 
of it from the sea b very beautiful, although we saw it at 
a great dbadvantage, — a heavy fog resting upon it. The 
situation of the city b the finest possible. Constantinople 
itself, with its vast domes and almost countless minarets 
towering towards the sky, b on the European side of the 
Bosphorus, and the left of the Golden Horn ; Pera on the 
right, (of the Golden Horn ;) and upon the Asiatic shore of 
the Bosphorus b Scutari, itself as large as Smyrna. Wo 
anchored in the Golden Horn, and soon our one hundred 
and fifty passengers were scattered here and there in 
the caiques that dotted the water, lyf r. Dwight came on 
board and took Mr. E., Miss Lovell, and myself, to his 
houiie, where we had a warm reception from Mrs. Dwight, 
and I seemed at once to be with an old friend. 

^Mr. D. took us out, the morning we arrived, to see a 



GBNBBAL MJUBTING OF THB IflSSION. 67 

little of the celebration of Easter. It is a three days' 
festival, succeeding a forty days' fast. Thousands of 
people wei*e gathered together, and, by feasting, music, 
and dancing, riding, swinging, and I know not what 
beside, were celebrating the resurrection of our Saviour. 

^ At one o'clock, Monday afternoon, the first session of 
the general meeting was held. Tou know the missionaries 
here, — Messrs. Dwight, Qoodell, Schauffler, Homes, and 
their families; the ladies, of course, do not attend the 
business meetings. From Bebek, the site of the seminary 
for young men, are Messrs. Hamlin and Wood ; — from 
Broosa, Mr. Schneider -and wife. Mr. Benjamin and bis 
family, recently fi'om Trebizond, were here; but have 
nnce taken a steamer for Smyrna, and from there are to 
sail for America, on account of the ill health of Mrs. B. 
Mrs. Bliss is here, from Trebizond ; and Dr. Smith, who 
calls himself a circulating missionary. He was sent to the 
mountain Nestorians, and now belongs to the Turkey 
mission ; he has no family, and has hitherto been fi*om one 
station to another, as his services were required. He is a 
preacher as well as physician, and so devoted to his work 
that he is willing to labor any where, and in any way, — 
seeming to covet self-denial. Monday evening all the 
mission families met socially at Mr. Homes's. It was a 
delightful visit, — all, all are so good. I wish I could tell 
you about all of them, so that you might love them too. 
Tuesday morning there was a prayer-meeting at Mr. 
Qoodell's. There we first met Mrs. Hamlin, from Bebek. 
She is a lovely woman. 

" Wednesday morning we — that is, Mr. Dwight, Miss 
Lovell, Mr. E., and myself — took a caique for Bebek, 
which is situated on the Bosphorus, six miles up. A 
description of the scenery on both shores of these straits 
I would gladly give, but its beauty passes my poWers of 
description. It is far more beautiful than any thing I ever 
before beheld. Hills rise on either hand, covered with 



58 TBS lOBfllOVABT 8ISTXB8. 

yeidore, in all the freshneaB of Bpring. Here, as every- 
where, the dark cypress contrasting with the brighter 
green around is very fine. There are villages and palaces 
near the water's edge, through the whole distance, from 
the Marmora almost to the very entrance of the Black Sea. 
The palace of the Sultan, in which he now resides, is 
direcUy on the shore, and our boatmen took us near, that 
we might have a good view of it; the gardens, in the 
rear of it, extending even to the top of the terraced hills, 
with a variety of ornamental trees, some of which are in 
ftdl bloom, make the scene most enchanting. 

^We reached Mr. Hamlin's, after our delightful sail, 
where the brethren of the mission held their session. 
Miss Lovell and I went directly to see Mrs. Wood and 
Mrcf, Benjamin, who was to leave for Smyrna in the after- 
noon. It was a sad hour, the last we spent with these 
dear friends. Mr. Benjamin spoke of it as one of the most 
trying in their lives. But it was good to hear the words 
of wisdom and comfort as they fell from the lips of the 
beloved patriarch, Mr. Goodell. He then commended all 
to God, and we separated, we hope to meet again here, if 
such be the will of Qod ; if not, in a world where sin, sor- 
row, sickness, and death are unknown.'* 

A large number of American and English travelers 
were at this time in Constantinople, and the newly-anived 
missionaries were invited to accompany them in a visit to 
the mosks, an invitation which they gladly accepted, as 
such a privilege was then obtained with much more diffi- 
culty than now. Describing the magnificent structure of 
St. Sophi^ with its verd-antique columns, spacious gal- 
leries, marble floors, and ivy-hung walls, Mrs. E. says: 
^^Is it impossible that again these massive walls and this 
spacious dome will look down upon the humble worship- 
ers of the living Qod, and resound with the praises of 
the great Jehovah ? All things are possible with God ; — 
let us continually beseech him to hasten the day when 
this thick darkness shall be dispelled by gospel light." 



PBOGBBSS OF TBUTB. 69 

After vifdting the mosks and the seraglioi they left 
the party, as the gentlemen wished to be at home for 
their session. ^In the evening we had at Mr. Dwight's 
a very interesting prayer meeting. So many good men 
together, — can you imagine how delightful it is ? Yes- 
terday morning we had a female prayer-meeting at Mt^ 
Schauffler's.*' 

Writing to her sister from Pera, Constantinople, May 
7, she says : — 

^I must tell you how our hearts are rejoiced and 
encouraged to see the progress of truth in this city. I 
mentioned perhaps in another letter, that it was found 
necessary to enlarge the chapel for the Armenian service. 
It is in this house, Mr. Dwight% and is now very commo- 
dious. The man whp did the work, and who had not 
long attended preaching, would receive no compensation 
for his labor. Mr. D. then thought to make him a present 
of a fine copy of the Pilgrim's Progress, but found that 
he had been to the repository and purchased every book 
the Mission had published. There is a great call among 
the Armenians for the Scriptures, and any thing closely 
connected with them. A concordance is longed for, and 
one is in preparation. A sermon is published monthly^ 
and three or four hundred copies are demanded for circu- 
lation among the different stations. To the last one was 
annexed the hymn, *Rock of Ages.' Some other hymns 
have also been translated into the Armenian, and they 
are much interested in learning to sing. , Mr. Dwight -is 
preparing a small work on the science of music, or a system 
of rules, for their instruction. Some of the missionaiies 
go over to the dty two or three times a week, and meet 
sometimes a large number of Americans in a khan, with 
whom they familiarly discuss the doctrines of the gospel, 
and the subject is one of common conversation in the 
coffee shops of the city. The Sabbaths we have spent 
here have been delightful. In the morning, at 9 o'clock, 



60 THB lOSSIONABY 8I8TBB8. 

Mr. Schauffler, as usual, preached in the German lan- 
guage, after which Mr. Adger preached to a congregation 
of about a hundred Armenian men^ who heard as for their 
lives ; with their eyes intently fixed on the preacher, they 
sat motionless. We then had a precious sacramental 
season. Quite a large company was assembled, consbt- 
ing of all the American missionaiies now here, and five 
or six Scotch missionaries. In the aftemoon there was 
preaching in Armenian, (it was our English service in the 
morning, sermon by Mr. Schneider,) which was followed 
by a seimon in Turkish, by Mr. Johnston, to the same 
copgregation. In the evening, Mr. Schauffler preached in 
English at Mr. Goodell's. 

^ There is not much open opposition to the truth here 
at present, but in Trebizond, Mr. BUss writes, the native 
brethren are suffering violent persecution ; they can not 
go into the street without meeting every kind of insult 
and abuse. It is a fiery trial to^ these young disciples. 
May the Lord give them strength to stand in this evil 
day, and soon deliver them fi:om their distresses. 

^ All the ladies, with the exception of one or two, are 
more or less feeble. It is the general opinion, I believe, 
among the missionaries, that if each could have a sister, 
aunt, or cousin with her, as b so common in America, to 
share her cares, labors, and trials, this premature breaking 
down of missionaries' wives might in a gi*eat measure be 
prevented. And now who has a better sister for this 
than I, in my dear M. ? " 

Mrs. Everett's journal contains interesting accounts of 
their visits to the city proper, the "Valley of Sweet 
Waters," and other places in its vicinity, with which the 
remainder of their stay was partly occupied. All these 
we must pass over. On the eve of their return to Smyr- 
na, she writes as follows to her parents : — 



LlBTTKR TO UKR PARENTS. 61 

Pbra, CoRStAKTiROPLB, May 22, 1845. 

My vert dear Father and Mother: You will 
see we have not Jret returned to Smyrna, but we expect 
to take a steamer for that place this evening, and as 
there is a possibility of our finding the Stamboul there, I 
can not refi-ain from writing you a short letter, that you 
may have the latest news from us. 
. Dear, dear parents, do you know it is three months 
to-day since we have heard one word of your welfare? 
I then looked upon your faces, and heard your voices 
probably for the last time before we shall meet in the 
^spirit land." I think of you more and more each day, 
and sometimes realize the vast distance that separates 
me from you and a band of much loved brothers and 
sisters, when my heart is ill prepared for such thoughts^ 
and it swells and throbs with involuntary grief; then 
tears are a sweet relief. • 

I have cause each day and hour to call upon my soul 
and all within me, to bless the Lord for calling me, so 
insignificant, so weak, to engage in such a glorious work 
as this among the Armenians, and for the prospect of use- 
fulness my dear husband has among them. It is through 
him that I expect to do any work in this field; would that 
I were more worthy to be a helpmeet to one of God's 
servants in his arduous labors! May the grace of God 
enable me to cheer him on his way, make happy his 
home, and by my prayers and feeble efforts, aid his use- 
fulness. I mentioned in my letter to M. the persecution 
at Trebizond. The fury of the enemies of the truth has 
since been more openly manifested. As the steamer for 
this place was about to leave there two weeks since, a man 
who has embraced the truth was seized in a coffee shop, 
and without the privilege of returning for a moment 
to his family, was hurried on board, and taken to this 
city. This was probably done by order of the Pasha of 
Trebizond. Here ho was put in confinement in a lunatic 





62 THB MISSIOKABY SI8TEBS. 

asylum. Some of the Armenian brethren havmg heard 
these fkcts, went to his prison, and found him with a 
heavy chain about his neck, fastened to the wall of his 
room* He was weak and pale. They went a day or two 
after to inquire for him, but did not find him. You may 
be sure our hearts were all sad, and much prayer was 
offered for the deliverance of this brother in bonds for 
the gospel's sake. And the Lord heard. Last Sabbath, 
to the gr^t surprise and joy of aU, T. entered the chapel 
at the hour of Mr. D wight's Armenian service. Measures 
had been taken by the missionaries and Armenian breth- 
ren, to influence the English embassador to act in his 
behalf On Friday night there was an extensive fire 
in the part of the city where he was confined, and the 
sufferers from it were temporarily placed in the hospital; 
and by this moans the hypocritical patriarch, by whose 
order T. had sufibred during eight days and nights, gave 
orders for his release, with the tardy acknowledgment 
that he was innocent in the whole matter. The same 
steamer that brought T. from Trebizond, brought also 
intelligence from Mr. BUss that his house had been 
stoned, and windows broken by a largo mob. 

Oan you imagine how much we think of and long to 
see you ? Ah I I know you can, for you, I dare say, are 
no less anxious to hear of our welfare. Mrs. D. said to 
me, thinking I was inclined to be sad, ^Live one day at 
a time." So let us ever trust in God, and go cheerfully 
on. Write me letters very often. It may prolong my 
days With the most ardent love. 

Your daughter, 

Seraphina. 



CHAPTER VII. 

Betom to 8m jrna— Letters deseribing the Mode of Lifb, tad Boenei and 
Incidents of Hisrionarj Work In Smyrna. 

Mb. and Mrs. Everett returned to their home, and prep- 
aration for their missionary work in Smyrna, — leaving 
Miss Lovell to commence her labors in Constantinople. 
The parting between these two friends, who had now 
been more than three months constantly together, was 
attended with much regret on both sides. It has been 
said that there are no circumstances more likely to bring 
out peculiarities of temperament and character, especially 
unamiable ones, than a long sea-voyage, taken in the way 
it usually is by missionaries. Thrown together in close, 
and sometimes very uncomfortable proximity, — shut out 
from all the rest of the world, and confined to each other's 
society for so many weary, sea-sick weeks, it would not 
be strange if persons thus meeting for the first time, 
entirely ignorant of each other's antecedents, and unac- 
quainted with each other's tastes, and habits, and pecu- 
liarities, should sometimes find it necessary to call into 
requisition their whole stock of Cliristian forbearance and 
charity to obey the "new commandment" to love one 
another. Our two friends had passed through this severe 
ordeal with their mutual esteem and affection greatly 
increased, as their most S6nfidential letters tiestify. Mrs. E. 
wrote to her parents just on the eve of parting with her 
friend, expressing her sorrow in the prospect of separation, 
and summing up her estimate of her virtues with this high 
eulogium, — « She is almost perfect^ And Miss L. writes 



64 THB laSSIONABT 818TXB8. 

to her mother not long after: ^Ilave I ever told you 
how much I love Mrs. Everett? She is a dear sister. I 
never formed a stronger attachment for any one than for 
her. Could our lot have been cast in the same city, I 
should have been quite happy." But their separation was 
not a very wide one, and they promised themselves the 
pleasure of a weekly correspondence, which the missionary 
letter-box* between the two cities would enable them to 
maintain without any additional expense. 

Mra. Everett's letters, which during this and the follow- 
ing year were very frequent and particular, funiish a com- 
plete history of her own and her husband's emplo3rments, 
as also of the missionaiy work in Smyrna, with its trials 
and encouragements ; while, at .the same time, they give 
graphic delineations of oriental life, and the corruptions 
of the oriental churches. Some extracts only can be 
given in these pages 

** BouBNABATi (near Smyrna,) June 12. 
''After we arrived in Smyrna we remained a few days 
in Mr. Adgor's family, and then came to this village, 
where we now are in a united and most happy family, 
composed of the Riggses, Adgoi*s, and Everotts. Mi*s. 
liiggs keeps house, and the rest of us board. The house 
we occupy is surrounded by a wall, twelve or fifteen foot 
high, with ivy creeping up its sides and hanging from the 
top. The yard is large, and filled with trees, — acacia, 
pomegranate, fig, orange, oleander, and mulberry, — and 
the myrtle borders a walk to a jessamine bower at the 
&rther end of the garden. But you must not think of 
vegetation here as in all the freshness of your opening 
summer. The earth is parched {0|4 cracked with dryness 
and heat; the grass is no longer green; the harvests are 
being gathered, and we shall have no rain before Septem- 

* By an arrangement wUh the Aastrian post-offloo department, the mission- 
aries in Smyrna and Constantinople bad the privilege of sending l>ack and 
fortli, once a week, a small tin box, containing their letters, proof-sheets, &c. 



BBSIDBNOB^ — ^DAILT BOUTINS. 66 

ber; so the trees are rather dusty, but green, and afford a 
refrcsliing shade ; some of them are still in bloom. 

<* Of our house I can not say much that is interesting. 
For three families, it is not very commodious ; but we are 
comfortable. We have two small rooms. The one in 
which we sleep and study has a common-sized window, 
stone floor, and high whitewashed walls. The other, of 
which we make a dressing land store room, has a window 
with two panes of glass near the ceiling, and a brick floor. 
In these rooms we have things of our own, so that we can 
look about us with more of a home feeling than we have 
been able to do for a long time. 

^ June 19. Just in the still twilight hour, last evening, 
my dear husband and myself having returned from bur 
daily walk, were resting upon a swing, suspended from 
one of the trees at the end of our garden, when we heard 
the voices of Mr. and Mrs. Adger eagerly shouting our 
names, as they rushed from the house, and almost con- 
tending between themselves, — and for what? The privi- 
lege of presenting owe first UUersfrom America. 

^ Shall I tell you, dear sister, how our days pass in this 
foreign land? I have described our situation here, in a 
former letter. We rise usually about five o'clock; at 
seven the prayer-bell rings, — and then comes breakfasts 
Two mornings in the week we have a Bible-class directly 
after breakfast; on other mornings we commence our 
study at eight o'clock, and devote ourselves for five 
hours, — until dinner, at one, — to our Armenian: and 
we do this with our whole hearts, — it is not a task. Our 
great anxiety is to have out* tongues loosed, and we are 
willing to toil for it. \^ >ead and translate a chapter in 
the Testament each day^ attend to the grammar with Mr. 
^igg^ ^nd Ai^ about to commence reading either Pil- 
grim's Progi-ess or Robinson Crusoe, in Armenian. We 

write with the Armenian character every day, and are 

6» 



66 THE HI8SIOKABT 6I8TXBS. ' 

continniilly using words and phrases. I could now repeat 
to you the Lord's Prayer, and should like to do so, that 
you might know the sound of the language we hope ere 
long to be familiar with. It b not a very pleasant one to 
the ear, on account of the multiplicity of consonants, and 
the frequent recurrence of gutturals; it b rather difficult 
to speak. 

^Our helps for getting the language, so &r as books 
are concerned, are poor, — no granmiar in the modem 
language, and the dictionary b for the ancient Armenian ; 
so we have to pick up a great deal, and it b rather up^iU 
work. Miss Lovell has not so good teachers as we, and 
has some dark hours. We are highly fitvored in thb 
respect; and to this, and excellent health, I attribute my 
uninterrupted courage. I pray that our seal may not 
abate, but continually increase, until we can speak the 
words of eternal life to the multitudes perishing around 
us.** 

From Smyrna, whither they had gone to spend a day, 
(June 27,) Mr. E. writes, noticing the following among 
other objects on the way : — 

^ In coming from Boumabat, very often in the fields 
we see wells. They are dug quite deep, and walled, as at 
homQ ; at the mouth b a stone curb, made by boring or 
chiseling a hole through the rock, as large as the well. 
These are frequently worn by the rope used in drawing, 
so much that the interior sur&ce of the stone seems 
fluted. Near by the well stands another rock, with its 
upper side excavated, leaving a laige basin for watering 
animals. 

^Another thing we notice by the way, b a small piece 
of ground, level and smooth, wnUpd around, and a laige 
stone, or something of the kind, set up within, or rather 
at its edge, showing in which direction Mecca lies. These 
places are arranged for the accommodation of Moham- 
medanS| wl^o may be on the way at the hour of prayer, 



FRUIT. — ORKAT FIRJB IK SMYRNA. 67 

and here they bow themselves towards the tomb of the 
false prophet. How grateful should we be, that our Ood 
is omnipresenti and that worship any where is acceptable 
to him, if from the heitrt. 

^Do you remember any thing in the Old Testament 
about gleaning f This morning we saw two poor black 
women gleaning a field of gi*ain, — going over the field 
and picking up, one by one, the heads of wheat left by 
the i*eapers. Gleaning is still an Eastern custom. 

" The gi'een figs are now very conspicuous among the 
heavy foliage of the tree ; and the olives, too, are getting 
their size. I loVe to look at the venerable olive-trees, 
their trunks broken and hollow with age, yet bearing an 
abundance of fi*uit, and exceedingly valuable. The 
olives themselves are much eaten, and the oil made from 
them is used in a variety of ways in cooking by the peo- 
ple of the country. They bum it also for lights." . . . 

July 4. Mrs. E. writes to her parents a description of 
a terrible fire which was then raging in Smyrna, and 
which, in its fearful progress, laid waste a large part of 
the city. She says : " You can not conceive of the con- 
fusion and distress. Almost the whole of the Armenian 
quarter is swept away. Of their nine hundred houBBB, 
only thirty-seven remain. Their church, which was very 
rich, and the seminary for females, are gone ; and thou- 
sands of their people are homeless, and without means of 
obtaining their bread." A day or two later she says: 
^It is estimated that between four and five thousand 
houses were consumed." In this time of distress, the 
missionaries exerted themselves to the utmost for the 
poor sufferers, and while trying to relieve their physical 
wants, embraced the opportunity thus offered to tell them 
of the Saviour who could relieve their greater spiritual 
need. 

In a letter written soon after to one of her sisters, Mrs« 
E. says: — 

"I will just tell you, M., how I spend an hour or two 



68 TBX lOSSIOVABT 8IBTXB8. 

in the afternoon. A mother, whose honse was homed hj 
the recent fire in SmymSi came hero this week and 
wished her litUe boy to be instructed, so I have com- 
menced teaching him his A, B, C, in Armenian. I can 
not, of couTBe, talk much to him, bat I hope in this way 
to learn to speak some, and also to do the little fellow 
some good. I might have had two little girls to teach 
also, if I had known enough of this language, which I 
hope soon to be able to use a little." 

To her parents she writes from Boumabat, Aug. 12 : 
^ Do you know, my dear parents, that this is the semi- 
annual anniversary of the wedding day of your children. 
Samuel and Seraphina? And a solemn day it was that 
witnessed the girding on of ^ that harness, which the min- 
istry of death alone unlooseth, but whose fearful power 
may stamp the sentence of eternity.' And increasingly 
solemn does it seem, as each day I am led to feel the great 
grace and wisdom, strength, holiness, and prayerfulness, 
necessary to enable me to discharge aright my duties, 
simply (is a Moife. How unequal am I to the responsibil- 
ities which rest upon me now, while comparatively free 
from the trials and cares of married life. This I feel more 
and more daily, as I seek to lose myself in a spirit and 
practice of selfHsacrifice; so much the more I discover the 
prevailing sin of my life, — sdJUhness. Oh for a. purer 
spirit, a holier heart, — more fitness for life and death I 
Let me tell you, dear fiither and mother, that your chil- 
dren in this distant land are well, contented, and increas- 
ing in happiness continually. While we bless our heav- 
enly Father, and you, that we have been permitted to 
unite our hearts and hands for life, — and that life to be 
spent in the glorious work of missions, — our daily prayer 
is, that the blessing of Heaven may rest upon our nnion, 
and our united labors in this land, and that you may 
never have cause to repent bidding Gk>dspeed, to a far- 
off and strange land, one of the objects of your love and 



CHARACTBB AND APPBARANCB OF THE TURKS. 69 

care. May the Lord hear the snpplications which you 
mingle with ours for our usefulness here." 

^' September 9. This month the Mohammedans have 
their fast Ramazan. They neither eat, drink, nor smoke, 
fi*om sunrise until sunset. The days at this season, you 
know, are long, and for those of the Turks who labor hard 
it is rather a sbvcro penance, and their tempers sometimes 
become so soured before the signal of the close of the day, 
(the filing of a cannon,) that it is almost dangerous to 
have any thing to do with them in the latter part of the 
day. One might be inclined to think, from this fasting, 
that the Turks are very pious ; but what are their notions 
in so doing ? The Koran commands it, their laws enforce 
it, and they dare not do otherwise. Poor, ignorant, 
deluded Turks! They dare lie^ and steals and murder. 
How fatally they are bound in the chains of error, bigotry, 
and sin ! 

^The dress and general appearance of the Turks are 
such as would lead one to suppose they possessed much 
gravity, sobriety, and dignity. Their heavy turban, long 
beard, and slow, dignified step, all give this impression. 
But so many things I have heard, things continually 
taking place, which show what great and glaring guilt 
they can incur, that I fear almost the sight of them." 

^ September 18. It is now just five months since our 
arrival in this land. Truly, the Lord has been very good 
to us. His mercies are infinite. Our lives and health are 
spared, while others have been called into eternity. In 
the last night one near to us was called to his home above. 
Oh, how good that we can feel that he has gone to the 
home of his heavenly Father I The person I speak of is 
Alfred Van Lennep, a brother of the missionary. One 
week ago to-day, from the midst of health and activity, 
he was laid prostrate on a sick-bed, and last night he 
peacefully left this world for a mansion above. He was a 
young man of great promise, devotedly pious, and quite 



70 THS laSSIONABT BIBTXJ^. 

talented. A mother, six brothers, and two sisters will 
deeply mourn his early removal." 

'' SmtbiiAi September 26. 

^This is a great religious holiday with the Greeks. 
It comes on Friday, so it is both fct^t and fecuti — how 
inconsistent! What would you have thought if you 
could have been set down in this city this afternoon? 
Everybody in the streets, or thronging the doors and 
windows of the houses, dressed in their richest and gayest 
attire I Such a noise I And this is not the worat of it ; 
wild, perhaps dissipated, Greeks going through the streets 
making the air ring with their awful singing, is something 
beyond my talent for description. This is the Fe(Mt of 
the Oro88^ and I shall describe the chief ceremony of the 
day from an account by Mr. Riggs : A multitude of people 
assemble near the seaside, at some appointed place, to 
witness the baptism of the Cross. A Turkish guard is 
present to preserve order. The people are kept back at 
a little distance, the priest stands near the shore with the 
cross in his hand, and aiTanged near him are some half 
dozen nearly naked men: the cross is thrown at some 
distance into the sea, and these practiced men dive for it, 
and honoi'cd, rewarded, and happy is he who hoax's out 
the baptized cross. Sometimes persons are drowned in 
this heathenish ceremony. This is religion! And the 
Greeks wonder why missionaries come to labor among 
them ? * Why not go,* they say, * to the heathen ? * ** 

There is much truth in the following remarks on the 
importance of missionaiies cultivating a cheerful spirit. 

^Do you know, Eleanor, that your sister Seraphina has 
a reputation for being very sedate and discreet ? Would 
you believe it? To tell you the truth, dear sister, I some- 
times fear that I shall not sustain that cheerfulness and 
sprightliness of feeUng which I think are necessary in a 



INCRBASBD RBLI0I0U8 INTBRB8T. 71 

country like this, where every thing has a downward 
tendency upon the character and feelings. Vivacity of 
disposition seems to be a most important ingredient in the 
character of a missionary, who is in such circumstances as 
to bo obliged to draw from his own resources in this 
respect, and if he has not a large fund, it will be too soon 
exhausted. Not in this respect alone, but in all, the 
.character of a missionary should have a high tone. Strong 
and well-established Christian principles are, however, the 
all-important thing ; and I often wish that mine had had 
two or three yeai*s more in the Christian land I have 
left, in which to become matured and more firmly 
established." 

There had hitherto been little encouragement in the 
missionary work in Smyrna ; but about this time a greater 
interest seemed to be awakened, and the hearts of the 
missionaries were cheered with new hopes. Mrs. E. thus 
writes, Oct. 12 : — 

** Smyrna, you already know, is a worldly, wicked oity ; 
and so little fruit has been seen from the many faithftil 
eiTorts put forth here, and the fervent prayers offered, that 
it has been almost given up by men as a hopeless field, — 
but, we trust, not of God. . . . This morning sixteen 
Armenians were present to hear the preaching of the 
gospel, and they listened with fixed attention, and ap- 
pai*cntly with intense interest, to a long sermon from 
Mr. Adgcr, It stirred up my soul to look upon them. 
After this service, a Bible class was proposed to the con- 
gregation, the plan for which had been made at the 
suggestion of one of the Armenians not pious, — and to 
this all but one or two remained, and appeared deeply 
interested. Sixteen is not, perhaps, a quarter of the 
number that attend preachmg at Constantinople ; but it is 
in Smyrna, this desert place. Five weeks ago no one 
would have thought of this. Then three or four of those 
employed by the station came to Mr. A.'s religious service. 



72 THB mSSIONABT SISTBB8. 

and he became almost disooaraged in preaching to bo few, 
and held a prayer-meeting with them instead. We know 
not the motive that leads these persons here, (the number 
has been increasing during the last month ;) perhaps it is 
worldly, perhaps merely curiosity, — the Searcher of hearts 
alone knows. Of this we are sure, if they come as sincere 
inquirers after the truth, it is all of the Lord, and on his 
almighty aim alone the work can depend if it ^is to go 
forward, not on the feebleness of man; but what a fearful 
responsibility rests upon those placed here as instruments 
by which the Great Master will carry on his own work. 
How carefully they need to walk, how prayerfully ! 

^'In the afternoon of to-day we firat had our Sabbath 
school, which is now struggling into existence. It is in 
the hands of Mr. Everett, and he is much interested for 
its success. Some children will be gathered in who 
otherwise would probably have no religious insti-uction, 
and those who come to the Sabbath school remain at the 
English service immediately following. This congi*egation 
is not large, but the promise of our Lord is sure to the few 
gathered together in his name. This evening the three 
families of the station met here for special conference and 
pmyer, with reference to the present encouraging appear- 
ances among us. Pi*ay for us, dear brother and sister, do 
pray much for us; and that the Spirit of the Lord may be 
poured out copiously upon this city.^ 

^ Tim6 seems more precious to me as each night tells 
that the hours of one more day are numbered with the 
past. Perhaps one reason for this feeling is that there 
seems so much to be done here ; and another, that people 
around us value time so little. They seem to know 
nothing of its worth. The ladies spend much time m 
walking leisurely through the streets ; but more, perhaps, 
in a way which requires less exertion and is a more agi*ee- 
able occupation, — it is gazing upon others as tl\ey pass 
by their doors or under their windows. All houses are 



TI8IT FROM AK ABMBKIAN LADT. 78 

constrnoted, if possible, so as to have windows overlooking 
the streets, even if the second story mast be placed a little 
(Mkew apon the first, to gain place for a small window 
at the comer, so that one can have a survey of the whole 
length of the street," 

" Smtbha, October 18, 1845. 

"My dbar Sister: It is Saturday evening, the hours 
of which always partake in my feelings of the holy day so 
soon to be ushered in. But a little weary as I am, and 
with the sound of Armenian ringing in my ears, I will 
have a little time of communing with my much-loved 
sister. 

" To-day completes our first half year on missionary 
ground. Oh, how quickly it has flown I and what have 
I done ? what report have these days and months borne 
to Heaven ? I have had a fine opportunity to test my 
acquisitions in the Armenian language to-day, by a visit 
from the wife of. Baron Harutdne. It is the first time 
she has visited me, and she spent the day, the whole 
responsibility of entertaining her devolving upon me. 
You can, perhaps, imagine me awkwardly stammering 
and laboring to communicate an idea, sometimes secretly 
rejoicing over a little success, then perhaps mortified, after 
listening with all my power of eyes and ears, at a failure 
to comprehend what some one had endeavored to beat 
into my willing but incapable brain. There is now here 
a book distributer, who knows no English, but is very 
social and full of zeal. He has visited us several times, 
and has been here two or three hours to-day ; he does not 
spare at all, but pours upon us a torrent of rather harsh 
and unintelligible sounds. I am Sure, if we were shut up 
to talk only with him, we should soon know how to speak 
some Armenian. 

" The result of the day has brought me to this conclusion, 
so far as progress in Armenian is concerned, — that I have 

7 



74 THB MIBSIONABT 8I8TXB8. 

^^yanced a litde, made a begiiinmg} and am enoonraged 
to go on, trusting in our great Master for all the strength 
needed for so great a work. 

^I am feeling more and more, each day, the precioosness 
of time. How much is to be done ; how much for one's 
own mind and soul, besides the great responsibility of 
laboring for the souls of others, — and this in such a posi- 
tion as I am placed in. The thought of it startles me, 
and I fed that f must be up and doing; labor in season 
and out of season, early and late, saying not only the 
hours, but all the little precious minutes which go to 
make up this short, fleeting life of ours. 

^ Still, I do not wish to feel that too great things are 
depending upon what one unworthy, inefficient person 
like me can do. All is, and must heyOf the Lord; we 
are bis tools, just the instruments by which, if he wills, 
he can work; so \ think, perhaps the way he will make 
use of me is not that to which I am looking^ and for 
which I am striying, which is, to be prepared to do 
something for the spiritual good of my sex among the 
people to whom we are sent. I do try to commit my way 
to the Lord, that he may direct my steps, and often seek 
grace and strength to keep my resolutions to be more 
calm and moderate in my coui*se ; and seek, more than 
any thing, to live toeU^ to haye my spiiit continually such 
as will be pleasing in the sight of that Holy Being who 
searches our hearts, and is fidly acquainted with their 
inmost recesses. ... 

*'Did you know that this was a land oiearthqudkeaf I 
did not until I came here. Others haye felt them slightly 
many times since we haye been hero ; but I noycr had 
the fearful sensation until last week, when we had tliree 
shocks that made this great house in which we ai*e tremble 
from its foundations to its top-stone. I never experienced 
any thing so fearful, so awful, showing forth so sensibly 
the omnipotence of our God. Scyenty or eighty years 



BABTHQUAKB8 — INTBRB8T IK 8MTBNA. 76 

ago Sm3rma was visited by an earthqaake which destroyed 
a considerable portion of the city, and I sometimes think 
that this more terrible judgment than fire may come upon 
this wicked city ere the people will repent and turn to 
God. There is a report that upon the island of Mitylene 
sixty or seventy houses were, last week, overthrown by 
the earthquake. Perhaps I should not have written things 
which might make you in any degree anxious for us. 
You need not be so. We are not, for we are in the hands 
of God ; and would not feel otherwise than to say, 

/ '' ' My times are in thy hands; 

My God, I wish them there.* * 

To another sister she writes, October 81 : — 

"We have a little hope for Smyrna. A few, ten or 
twelve, come to hear preaching, and the pious persons 
here seem to be anxious, more than heretofore, to awaken 
an interest in the minds of others. One of these pious men 
is Hadji A., very poor and ignorant, but devoted and zealous 
in the cause of Christ. I will tell you one or two things 
which will show you his spirit. At the time of our commun- 
ion-service, on the week of the annual meeting of the Board, 
all were in the country. Among the number was an Eng- 
lish clergyman, a stranger here, whom Mr. Adger met and 
took with him to his house. At the dinner-table^ Hadji 
inquired (in Annenian) of Mr. A. if the stranger had 
hiDard, and if his people knew of the great work the Lord 
had begun among the Armenians. Having a negative 
reply, he seemed greatly astonished, and said : * When 
you go home, will you not tell your people about it ? but 
first you must require a present froni them, (according to 
an eastern custom,) because it is such great and good 
news.' One of the other Armenians suggested that the 
present required should be the promise of their prayers, 
that not only a few, but the whole nation should be con- 
verted. The Englishman was much pleased. 



76 THB MISSIONABT 8|ST]BB8. 

^ Afterwarcis, the Bame man met Hadji in the street, and 
baying no language in common, they had no means of 
Bolatation except by a shake of the hand. Only poor 
Hadji, knowing a few words of English, selected Uie one 
most in accordance with his feelings, which was ' glory ;' 
and this, I trust, ^yill be the poor man's theme to nil eter- 
nity, and that of many of his nation, redeemed by the 
blood of Jesus from all this darkness and sin." 

Of the following playflil reply to a letter from one of 
Mr. Everett's brothers, there is no explanation, except 
what is contained in itself. 

*' You see I have taken a smcill sheet, and can write you 
only a short letter, because I have but litCle time. After 
all these diminutives, you surely can not expect much from 
your distant sister. 

" I beg pardon, dear brother, for not having acknowl- 
edged, ere this, your letter, in which I had so large a share, 
by way of hints, calculated to make me a better wife. You 
have my sincere thanks, and a promise to try to profit by 
them. They certainly were not written from a knowl- 
edge of my particular deficiencies, as you know little 
of me as a wife, unless you have been informed by a pri- 
vate letter from my husband, — neither am I willing to 
think you intended to portray any particular characteris- 
tics of your own wife ; for that would not bo the part of 
a husband, especially such a one as I suppose you to be. 

'< I can not attempt to respond now to the things men- 
tioned in your letter ; tnuch more^ do I shrink from reply- 
ing to you on this paper, by stating my views on the 
duties or deficiencies of husbands, except to refer to the 
very comprehensive and safe injunction from the inspired 
apostle, — ^JSusbandSy love your toives.^ " . . • , 

In the same letter she relates some further particulars 
respecting T., the persecuted Armenian from Trebizond, 
%vhose case she describes in one of her lettei*s from Con- 
stantinople. 



A 0A8X OF PXB6BCTTTI0K. 77 

" You heard about the case of persecution last spring, 
at the time wo were at Constantinople. A young man, 
on account of his evangelical principles, was seized at Tre- 
bizond and hurried on board a steamer, by which he was 
taken to Constantinople, where he was thrown into prison, 
and kept confined in chains eight days and nights. When 
he was released, he was forbidden to return to his family 
in Trebizond, and it is contrary to the laws for a man to 
remove his family from one city to another, except on cer- 
tain conditions. The Patriarch, wishing to appear as a 
friend to this young man, in order to win him back to the 
church, asked him if they could not manage together in 
some way, so that ho might take his family to Constanti- 
nople, proposing this and that thing, to which the young 
man replied: *That would be deception, and lean not 
do that.' The answer of the Patriarch was : * Christ de- 
ceived, and God can not carry on his government without 
sometimes practicing deception!' What blasphemous 
words to proceed from the lips of a religious teacher, or 
head of a church I" 

In illustration of her genial temperament, it may not be 
improper to present a playful correspondence in rhyme, 
which she exchanged with the Rev. Mr. H. of the Nesto- 
rian mission. Mr. H. who was passing the winter in 
Smjrma with his family, for the benefit of their, health, 
had undertaken to deliver a letter from Mrs. E. to a 
friend in Boumabat, but forgetting it, wrote the following 
apology. 

BouHNABAT, Wod. eve., Dec. 31, 1845. 

** Of all the hard efforts that duty demands, 
Which a firiend or a foe may require at our hands,— 

To do it and let oome the worst: — 
A fanlt to confess, 
And the wrong to redress, 

In mj hnmble opinion 's the first. 

7* 



78 THB inSSIONABT 8I8TXBS. 

*« Of All the tweet graces on eaith that reticle, 
The fairest, the nearest to beaTen allied, 

(Saint and sinner the saying receive,) 
Mow bit not so? — 
Dear sister, 70a know, 

'T is the grace that a fitnlt can foigive. 

" The letter yon wrote and entrusted to me, 
Wrapt np in a n^>1dn, I've kept, at yon lee^ 

(It should have been first on my docket:) 
How can yon believe it, 
And kindly receive it ? — 

Tve k^jjjt it a week in my pocket.'* 

Mrs. Everett's reply to Mr. H. : — 

*' For the injury done 

You make such a return. 
As leads me to hope, I confess it, 

If again there riiould be 

Such a wrong done to me. 
That you will in like manner redress it. 

''Ido not dare tiy 

To shape a reply 
To your frank, though uncalled-for confession; 

But your genius and skill, 

(As ever they will,) 
Have made a meet happy impression. 

'* That sweetest of graces, 

(And just are its praises,) 
Dear brother, I hope may appear, 

When I pardon you freely; 

And now will add merely, — 
I wish you a Happy New Tear. 

Smyrna, Jan. 1, 1846. 



•f 



CHAPTER VIII. 

HiM Lorell's first Six Months in Constantinople — EflTorts and Trials in 
acquiring the Armenian — Commencement of the Female Seminarj.- 

WiiniB Mrs. Everott was thus earnestly engaged in 
studying the language in Smyrna, and taking advantage 
of every opportunity to use her imperfect knowledge of it 
for the benefit of the people around her, Miss Lovell was 
no less diligently employed in the same efforts in Con- 
stantinople. She had found a delightful home in the 
family of Dr. Goodell, where she was received «es an elder 
daughter, and where she at once proved the truth of the 
promise to those who forsake father and mother, brothers 
and sisters, for the sake of Christ. There is scarcely 
a letter to her home friends, in which she does not speak 
in terms of the most affectionate gratitude of her happiness 
in this dear missionary family, and of the unvarying 
parental kindness of Dr. and Mrs. Qoodell. Indeed, her 
letters, as well as Mrs. Everett's, are full of the breathings 
of love towards every member of the missionary circle. 
In the most confidential communications of both, in which 
their thoughts and feelings seem to be laid open with the 
most entire unreserve, there occurs not one expression 
respecting any brother Or sister of the whole missionary 
circle, but of the most cordial esteem and love. And 
most warmly was the love, which they so freely gave, 
returned; so that it might be truly said of them, "None 
saw them but to love them." Wherever they went, they 
seemed to carry with them an atmosphere of love. 



80 'THB MI8SIONABT SI8TXB8. 

The first letter we find written by Miss L. from her 
missionary home is to Mrs. Everett, the commencement 
of tlie weekly notes which they exchanged almost uuin- 
termptedly during the year of their separation. 

'<Pbra, May 27, 1845. 

^My dbab Sbsaph: Your bit of a note was received 
yesterday, and though disappointed at not heaiing mora 
from you, yet I could not but consider the strawberries a 
valid excuse, and was happy to hear they were doing weU. 
I wish you could step into my sanctum thb eve, and see 
how pleasantly I am situated. I have got matters all 
arranged, my room in order, and yesterday commenced 
with Armaveni a systematic course of study. My table Is 
covered with books, dictionaries, etc. My copy in Arme- 
nian writing lies before me, with my first attempt at these 
new characters, and altogether my room has quite a literary 
appearance,* quite the air of a study. What are you going 
to read first ? I am about commencing Robinson Crusoe. 
But, oh ! when, v)hen shall I be able to use these sounds 
so as to make myself understood, and useful to others ? I 
feel, however, that my advantages in having Armaveni 
and Ermonia* with me will be very great. Do not 
forget to pray for us, that we may be blessed in our 
mutual intercourse, that I may be enabled to exert a 
happy influence over them. 

^My dear S. I need your prayers, for I am sometimes 
almost ready to Mnt in view of the responsibilities I have 
taken upon me. Still, I know I am not called to bear 
them alone. If God has called me here, if it was hia voice 
I heard, (and surely it was not like the voice of earthly 
friends,) I know he will not lay upon me any burden too 
heavy to bear. My greatest fear is that I may forget 
that in God b my only strength." 

•Two Armenian girls who luul l)een under miaelonary Imtmotion, and had 
aoqoired lome knowledge of English. 



DAILY BOUTmB. 81 

In a note added the next morning, she says : ^ With 
regard to oar concert, — Saturday morning I join with a 
friend in America in remembering oar brothers ; woald you 
like to join ? It is especially that they may be converted. 
I had thought of Wednesday morning for ourselves, for 
each other. Would that time, five, or half-past five, suit 
you? If not, mention any other day or hour." 

The materials furnished from her home correspondence 
during this and the following year are very scanty. She 
doubtless wrote much during these two yeai*s, and gave 
her friends in America all her first fresh impressions and 
experience of the strange world around her, and of niis- 
sionary life, and it is to be regretted that more of these 
letters could not be obtained. She writes to her mother, 
June 9 : ^' I rise at half past four usually, and retire at 
half past ten, — study from nine till twelve, then lunch, — 
study from one till three, then write Armenian a little 
while. The remainder of the day I spend in reading, 
writing, or walking. We dine at 5, p. m^ and Mr. G. 
usually insists upon my taking a long walk with him and 
the children after dinner. What will you say when I tell 
you that last Saturday I walked more than eight miles, 
and was not more fatigued than I have been in walking 
to Uncle William's ? So you see I do not want for 
exercise. I have not had a symptom of dyspepsia since I 
arrived here, and find my appetite quite equal to all the 
strange dishes I meet with here. On Wednesday after- 
noons we are to have a Idnd of sewing society, teaching 
the children needle-work, and listening to reading. On 
Saturday I do not study, but reserve it for writing letters, 
mending, etc. We have a Sabbath school at 9, a. m., of the 
missionary children, — Mrs. Hinsdale, who teaches the 

missionary school, being superintendent 

" The streets here at evening, particularly on Sundays, 
are a perfect Vanity Fair. Such a display of dress and 
fashion I have nowhere else seen. It is one of the greatest 



82 THB MISSIONABT SISTBBS. 

objections to this plaoe, that the missionary must neces-* 
saiily pay some attention to etiquette and form. What 
Mrs. Smith said, in her memoirs, of dress, applies with 
much greater force to those living in Constantinople. . . 

^ I loye the missionaiy cause better day by day, and 
may I but live to see a flourishing school established 
among this interesting people, and some of them brought 
into the fold of Christ, the desire of my heart will be 
gratified. We have three scholars engaged, besides the 
two now hera who are my teachers, as well as my scholara 
in Englbh. We met one of Uiose engaged, in the street, 
the other day, — a dai-k, black-eyed girl, about twelve 
years of age. She was dressed in the Armenian dress, 
full yellow tro wsers, and ^ gay-colored outside jacket. She 
caught hold of my hand, pressed it to her bosom and her 
forehead, and kissed it again and again. I do not know 
whether she knew I was to be her teacher. You can 
imagine how seriously I feel the responsibility of the situ- 
ation in which I am placed. God grant I may feel it 
more and more, and then it will diive me to him who 
alone can enable me to discharge it to his glory. Shall I 
live to see these girls the humble followers of Jesus ? 
Yery few of the Armenian girls are taught even to read, 
though they have good minds, and are glad to be instruct- 
ed. Armaveni I love very much. She says she loves the 
Americans, who are teaching her nation, and she prays 
Qod to bless them. She hopes the time will come when 
Armenian females, like the Americans, will all know how 
to roftd about the Saviour, and will all love him. Her 
nation, she says, however wealthy, are not happy hoi-e, 
and they have no promise of the life to come. Her heart 
is all engaged in the new school. 

"The great business of my life, at this time, b the mas- 
tery of this very difficult language, and I feel that it is my 
duty to deyote as much time as my health will permit to 
this. I have very little time for writing.'' 



LBABNINa ABMBNIAN. 88 

In the absence of letters to friends in America for 
the next two months, her weekly correspondence with 
Mrs. Everett must continue the history of her own life, 
and things about her in which she was interested. Her 
second letter to Mrs. E. commences with two lines in 
Armenian characters, which would hardly interest the 
uninitiated. 
4 " It is, I know,** she proceeds, " very rash m me thus 
to lay myself open to a comparison with you in this mat« 
ter of writing; but you know it is sometimes so much 
easier to express one's self in a foreign tongue, albeit it 
may savor of affectation ! I wish I could tell you of the 
rapid progress I am making in the language, which bids 
fair to bo the all-absorbing topic of interest for some 
months to come, at least ; but, alas ! if there is any royal, 
rosy, down-hill road to this attainment, I have not dis- 
covered it, and am plodding slowly along the old track, 
picking out one step after another. I trust, however^ I 
shall not be left entirely unaided in this matter. How 
happy are we that we need never enter upon any under- 
taking in our own strength, that no work is too trifling 
for the blessing and aid of God, if undertaken for his 
glory! I think you are highly favored with regard to 
teachers. Armaveni does very well, but she would do 
better if she understood English better; in translating 
she is sometimes at a loss. However, we get on pretty 
well 

** I teach Armaveni in geography, arithmetic, writing, 
and reading. How many hours in the day do you study ? 
Armaveni laughs at my letter." [Armenian words and 
phrases scattered all through it.] ^ She says I must tell 
you, * I will not next time write such a funny letter, but 
all Armenian.' I hope you won't think I was obliged to 
ask her how to express myself. 

" Mr. G. says I must give you his love in Armenian. 
Next time, perhaps, I will," 



84 THB MI86I0KABT 6I8TBB8. 

In her next, June 16, she giyes u brief description of 
the public ceremonies attending the marriage of one of 
the Sultan's sisters. 

^ Since I wrote you, the great wedding so much talked 
of has taken place, and I devoted two days to seeing what 
might be seen of the festivities. The first was the day of the 
dinner given to the Embassadors at Hyder Pasha, below 
Scutari. We succeeded in securing a good seat (Mr. Qoodell, 
Mrs. Hinsdale, the children, and myself) on an elevated 
platform, from which we could see all that passed. We 
saw the entrance of all the Embassadors, with their ladies, 
into the field in which were their tents. Soon after, the 
chief dignitaries of the empire arrived on the field, the 
bridegroom among them, (happy manl) and directly 
afterward the Sultan himself in a carriage and four. We 
saw rope-dancing, and all sorts of juggleiy, and a very fine 
balloon ascension, and heard some good music. The next 
day Mr. Dwight sent for me to go with them up the 
Bosphorus, to witness the escoiting of the bride to her 
palace and her lord. We went in the steamboat, which 
anchored just between the two palaces, the one from 
which she was to go, and the one to which she was going. 
There was a very long procession of boats, each with the 
Turkish flag. These preceded the two or three royal 
boats, in which were her highness, and her ladies and 
attendants. Two of these boats were careAilly covered, 
so that no vulgar eyes might catch even a glimpse of her 
royal person, and were rowed by twenty-four men. 

*' The procession moved up the Bosphorus on one side, 
and came down on the other, amid the firing of guns and 
the music of the band, and were received at the door of 
the palace by a number of black slaves. A passage was 
constructed firom the water's edge to the door, and 
covered with scarlet drapery. As she left the boat, these 
curtains were carefully drawn around the opening, and 
this was all we saw of her. But there was, of course, 



DBSPONDBNOY. 86 

little opportunity for any display compared with what 
there might have been by land. We went out, also, one 
or two evenings, to see the fireworks and the illuminations 
on the Bosphorus, which were very fine. And all this 
display was merely to escort a poor girl across the Bos- 
phorus, to a husband she had never seenl Let us be 
thankful we were not bom Sultanas.** 

The following, to the same, will show the reader some 
of the difficulties and discouragements attending the 
acquisition of a language like the Armenian, and some of 
the desponding feelings with which missionaries must 
contend in so arduous a work. It will also suggest the 
importance of the first fresh energies of the missionary 
being devoted to the accomplishment of a work so neces- 
sary and so difficult as the mastery of the language he is 
to use. 

"Tejul, Jane 23. 
^ I fear, niy dear sister S., I am doing a very aeffish act 
in writing you this afternoon, but my heart and eyes are 
full, and you know what a comfort it is to pour out one's 
heart to a sister^ and I have no one else to whom I can 
do this but to him who seeth in secret. I am sad and 
depressed in spirits to-day, — ungrateful as this may seem 
when I have just received another letter from Palmyra, 
telling me that all are well, and praying for unworthy me. 
Mother writes me that two monthly prayer-meetings have 
been formed since I left, which meet at our house, one of 
married and one of young ladies, to pray for the Turkey 
mission and for me. Ought I not to be encouraged to 
new faith and new zeal, instead of giving way to doubts 
and fears? Ermonia has arrived to-day, and the thought 
of this new responsibility thus coming upon me, and of 
my unfitness for the station of a guide and instructor, has 
afiTccted me as it has never before done. It has, I trust, 
however, driven me to the throne of grace, and I am 
assured none ever apply there in vain. You teU me, in 

8 



86 ' THE MISSIONARY SISTBB8. 

your .kind note just received, that you hope you are 
making some progress in the language, and as every thing 
in my present state of mind takes a wrong turn, I have 
been envying you your superior advantages for learning 
the gi*anmiar from such a teacher, and also from having 
others to study with you. I fear I am very stupid and 
dull. I certainly make very little, if any, progress in 
speaking. I do most sincerely hope you will never be 
visited with the same feelings of discouragement and 
doubt which I have felt to-day. I do feel that I am guilty 
of extreme selfishness in thus troubling you with my 
troubles ; but will it not induce you to pray for me, that 
my faith may be increased, that my weakness may be 
aided? I will write no more till I am in a better 
frame. 

''June 24. I am ashamed of what I wrote yesterday; 
but I will send it, that you may see that though 'happy 
as a queen,' queens have their troubles. Still, though the 
depression of yesterday has passed away, I fear that I am 
not making that progress in the language which I ought, 
and which is expected of me. Tell me just hxm much 
you can talk, will you ? . . . . 

"I spent last evening at Mr. Dwight's. How I do love 
them 1 Would that I had more of their spirit, or more 
of the spirit of Christ ! Oh, how important that we watch 
every inoment, — watch unto prayer ! How ready is the 
adversary to attack us when and where we least expect 
his approaches ! I think I feel daily more and more the 
value and importance of a spirit of prayer. How happy 
are we when at every interval of thought or employment, 
and in dU^ we find our hearts rising to God involuntarily. 
Oh that this may be more frequently our experience! 
Mr. Qoodell says I must give you much love from your 
parents here, and charge you that you take good care of 
your health, and be good children. 

*^ You ask what I am doing besides reading Armenian ? 



SYMPATHY OF MB8. BVBRBTT. 87 

I study the grammar, an ancient and modem and Turkish 
grammar, by picking out the modem ; but it is not, of 
course, very rapid work with me at present. I feel the 
want of a teacher who understands and can explain the 
grammar and philosophy of the language. I try to speak 
a little, but it is a very little ; I can not yet form sentences, 
and I almost fear I never shall, I also write a little 
nearly every day ; and as I have several lessons to hear 
from each of the young ladies, you may imagine I have 
not many unoccupied hours.'' 

To the above, Mrs. Everett responds : — 

^My dbar bistbr Martha: If I could have got 
access to your sanctum last Monday, what could I have 
done ? If nothing more, to comfort you, I would have 
thrown my arm around you, and mingled my tears with 
yours, remembering the kindness, so sisterlike, T have 
received in this strange land. And wodld we not have 
mingled our prayers, too, before the throne of our Father, 
unitedly pleading, as we have often done, for strength 
and grace for the perfonnance of every duty ? But * the 
darkest wave hath bright foam near it,' and was it not so in 
your case ? I hope not only that a solitary star is cheering 
your cloudy night, but that the clear morning sunlight is 
resting upon you I doubt not that in Armenian^ dear 
M., you are in many points, perhaps in all, beyond me ; I 
would unhesitatingly say all, if I would not seem to 
undervalue the instruction we received from Mr. Riggs ; 
and Baron Harutune may be better able to teach than 
your young ladies, as he has a better knowledge of 
English. But you have those with you constantly who 
converse in Armenian, and here your advantages are 
superior to ours. .... 

"As to the grammar of which you speak, I have not done 
8o great a thing as to attempt to study it; and am sorry 



88 THB MI86I0KABT 6I8TXB8. 

that yoQ feel obliged to do so, for it must be yery dis- 
couraging at this stage of your progress.** 

After some other encouraging suggestions, she says: 
^Now do no^have an anxious thought about study. You 
are ^neither stupid, nor dull,' and, I will venture to say, 
are adyancing rapidly in Armenian, although by the hardest 
way. Please write me more of the character. I think it 
will benefit us. Belieye me your eyer sympathizing sister, 

" Sbbaphika." 

In her next, Miss L. is able to say: ^Everything goes 
on quietly and pleasantly just now. I study every day 
except Saturday. Wednesday afternoon we are going to 
devote to needle-work, drawing, reading, etc., and, in short, 
we are going to commence a family sewing circle. I wish 
you could join us. Our female prayer-meeting we hold 
after dinner, at six o'clock, in my room, on Wednesdays, 
— and on Wednesday mornings I think our spirits meet, 
our prayers mingle before the throne of our common 
Father." 

In writing to Mrs. E. July 7, she takes in her turn the 
office of comforter. 

^ Am I mistaken, or were you not indulging a sad mood 
when you wrote ? I do not think you should look upon 
Smyrna as so unpromising a field ; I trust Qod has yet 
much people there, and that it will prove that you and 
your dear husband were raised up and sent for just this 
purpose, to call out and instruct such. While Qod is 
doing so much for this people, in such a wonderful manner 
causing the light to spring up here and there, surely it is 
no time to distrust him, or doubt his power and willingness 
to bless the faithful labors of his children for any portion 
of this people. Let us believe^ and let us pray. Yesterday 
we were once more permitted to gather around the table 
of our dying Lord. It was a good day. In spirit, I met 
the dear church in Palmyra at the feast of love, for it was 



COMMUNION SEASON — ABMSNIAN. 89 

also their communion season. In the afternoon, at the 
Turkish service, was an old man, ninety years old, who 
had never been there before. His grandson has long been 
an attendant, and, having much dispute on the subject of 
this new way at home, he, though an %f\fidelj determined 
to go and hear for himself. He came, heard Mr. Dwight, 
and stayed to hear Mr. Powers in Turkish. His attention 
was deeply engaged, so that several times he exclaimed 
aloud, ' That is true, that is true ! ' and, at length, ' I was 
Saul, but am changed to Paul!' Ood grant he may 
indeed become a Paul. It will probably not be the last 
time he will hear the gospel, though the first.'' 

"July 14. Tour description of the terrible fire in 
Smyrna is indeed a sad one, but W(3 will hope and pray 
that God may make it a great blessing to many of the 
sufferers. We will pray that it may be overruled to their 
good, and the furtherance of the gospel among them. I 
do not wonder you wish for the power to speak more than 
even I am now occasionally placed in circumstances 
when I think I would give the world if I could make 
myself understood. A. and E. have, during the two or 
three weeks past, had many friends to see them. They 
wished to see me, and I was obliged to sit and listen to 
their animated conversation, scarcely understanding a 
word, and without the power of replying a word to them. 
Is it not a trial ? How much more so when, as in your 
case, you hope you might be able to ofier them some 
comfort, to do them some good. 

" I went to Mr. D wight's last Wednesday morning, to 
hear him discourse to the Armenian females. Owing to 
some misunderstanding with regard to the time, but two 
came beside ourselves, — A., E., and myself. But Mr. D. 
very kindly commenced with only us, read and explained 
a chapter, and prayed. I was glad to find I could under- 
stand here and there a short sentence 

"Give my kindest regards to your* best of husbands.' 

8* 



90 torn MISSIOKABT 8I8TXB8. 

Can he almost preadi yet ? Do tell me, if you can, with 
uny kind of ease, fonn sentences in Armenian ; yet if you 
eoHf danU say sOj for I shall be quite discouraged.'' 

TO BXB BBOTHBB IN WI800H8IN. 

Jolj 1, 1846. 

^ I have now been here so long that all the strange sights 
and sounds that so bewildered me, haye become quite 
familiari and seem quite a matter of course, I no longer 
run to the window at every cry of the mnexzin^ calling to 
prayer from a neighboring minaret, and the thousand and 
one different cries in the streets, in almost as many differ- 
ent tongues, now pass unheeded. A noise in the street 
just called me to the window. I will try to describe to 
you what was passing, — which although occurring every 
day, I have not become accustomed to. It was a fUnend 
procession of an Armenian lady, and the noise I hoard 
was the chanting of the priests and little boys who led 
the procession. There were six or eight little boys, 
dressed in long green-satin robes, embroidered with gold 
and silver, carrying, one a large gilt cross, one a censer 
with burning incense, others laige wax tapers, and all 
chanting in a most unmolpdious voice. Next followed a 
number of priests, also in splendid robes, with largo, square 
black caps, and long crape veils thrown over them ; next 
came the body, carried by four men, not in a coffin, but 
in an open box, the whole figure being exposed to view. 
At the head and foot of the box were placed great 
wreaths of flowers, orange leaves, and tinsel ; sometimes 
these wreaths are hung frill of lemons. The corpse, except- 
ing the face, was covered with a gay-colored shawl, and 
over this a profusion of gold and flowers. After this fol- 
lowed a great crowd of men, but there was no sign by 
which you might distinguish the mourners. A few days 
since a funeral procession passed, which exceeded in splen- 
dor any I had before seen. It was that of a wealthy 



AN ABABA BIBB—- A WBBDING. 01 

Armenian lady,— -a yonng bride^ — and m they passed 
directly under my window, I could distinctly see her fiice. 
It was very beautiful, — she did not seem more than seven- 
teen. She was perfectly covered with flowers and gold 
ornaments. A cross lay upon her breast, and ^ splendid 
cashmere shawl was spread over her feet It seems very 
shocking to us to see a dead body thus decorated as if for 
a ballroom, and borne along thus exposed to every eye.'' 

In the same letter she describes an araba ride. ^I wish 
I could describe the vehicle in which we rode. It wad 
drawn by oxen, and without seats, but with cushions, and 
ns gay as red and blue paint could make it. They are fre- 
quently covered entirely with scarlet cloth. Over the 
oxen are fixed two long poles or rods, fastened to the tip 
of the horn and the end of the tail, forming a great boW 
over their backs, to which are attached a great number of 
scarlet tassels, and all ornamented with shells and bits of 
lookbg-glass." 

TO THB SAltB. 

Ang. 27. 

^ Last week I was invited to attend the marriage of one 
of the evangelicals, as they are called, — that is, one of the 
pious Armenians. Being on Sunday, and seven or eight 
miles distant, I did not go, but one of my pupils who waci 
there described the affidr to me. The lady wished much 
to be married d la Franks but her mother was too much 
' opposed to her marrying a Protestant, so she yielded in 
this matter, and was married in an Armenian dress,— red 
silk trowsefs, green silk astare or outside jacket, open at 
the sides, and dragging on the floor half a yard behind, 
with loose sleeves much longer than the arm; on her 
head the fez, and an innumerable quantity of gold coins, — 
her dowry ; the weight of which, woven in her long braids 
of hair, must have been very disagreeable. As soon as 



92 THX MISSIONABT 6I8TXB8. 

she was married, however, she laid aside her Armeman 
dress, and appeared in a white silk dress, white satin shoes, 
eto. — bU dla Frank. According to the strict Armenian 
way, the bride must sit three days after marriage, alone, — 
be seen by no person but the one who brings her food, 
and at the end of the third day, for the first time, she is 
seen by her husband, as when she is married she must 
wear a veiL 

^A day or two since I attended Mr. Dwight's Armenian 
service for the females. The bride and groom were pros- 
ent| and no one would have dreamed that they were other 
than English or Americans, except from their language. 
She is yery pretty and agreeable. The people of this 
country are very affiible and frank with strangers; they 
treat you at once as though they had known you for 
years. I have wished it were possible to throw aside my 
American reserve, and be as easy and fimiiliar as they. 
The females, especially, with their rich complexions, and 
full, dark eyes, are very interesting. I feel my desire 
daily strengthening to be able, by imparting instruction, 
to be useful to some of them.^ 

TO HEB ICOTHBB. 

"CONBTANTINOPLB, Aog. 2, 1845. 

« 

^Mt dbab Mothbb: When I sit down to write to 
you, so many recollections of your kindness to me, and of 
all the pleasant associations of home, come crowding upon 
my mind, that I am often forced to stop and collect my 
thoughts, and endeavor to forget home for awhile before 
I can proceed. I see you all bonding at morning and at 
night before the family altar, gathering around^ the table, 
and sometimes wishing that ' Martha was here to eat with 
us.' I hear Clarissa, just at evening, making the air melo- 
dious with the sweet sounds of her piano and guitar. 
Every bright moonlight evening, I imagine she is * bathing' 
in the moon's pure light, as Mr. P. would say. Each Sab- 



LBTTBB TO fiBB UOTtiiSB. 08 

bath I follow yon to the house of Gk>d, and Henry to the 
Sabbath school. I am with yon at yonr prayer-meetings 
and monthly concerts. In short, there is not a day bnt 
I think often of yon, and at night I dream of yon, and 
often also of my dear father and Frank as still with yon. 
But my thoughts of home are almost always pleasant 
ones. I think of you as happy, and under the watchful 
eye of him who never slumbers nor sleeps, and of myself 
as ere long to be united to you again, and am thankfhl 
that Ood has called kne to make this small sacrifice to his 
cause. 

"The summer is now more than half over, and as yet 
my health remains perfect. I am more free from headache 
than over in America, and am quite free from dyspepsia. 
Perhaps this is owing in a great measure to tny diet being 
more simple than formerly. But little meat is eaten here 
compared with America. Vegetables, fruits, and bready 
are the chief food. Bread is indeed, here, the staff of life, 
and miserable bread it is compared with yours, though I 
believe it is more healthy than American btelid; how- 
ever, I would gladly exchange the best meal I have eaten 
here for a slice of your sweet bread and butter, or one 
of your ginger nuts. Fruits are plenty, and very fine ; 
grapes and melons are now in market in abundance. 

" Of myself or of the school, I have nothing new to tell 
you. I am still studying, morning, noon, ^d nigfU^ I Was 
going to say, but this is not true. I do not allow hiysclf 
to study at all during the evening, for fear of injuring my 
eyes, as the Armenian characters are more difiicult to dis- 
tinguish than the English. We have five pupils engiiged, 
who are wiuting till we can get a house ; there is no doubt 
that there will be as many applicants as we can take. I 
am eagerly looking forward to the time when I shall be 
able to communicate instruction to them. I am not yet 
able to speak much Armenian, but can understand a little 
when I hear it spoken. 



94 THB lOBSIOKABT 8I8TSB8. 

^ Sabbath aftemooiii Aug. 8. I was interrapted yester- 
day in my letter, and resume my pen this afternoon to add 
a few lines. I have attended church and Sabbath school, 
and now sit in my room contrasting the mingled sounds 
which fall upon my ear, with the peace and quietness 
which reigns this holy day in Palmyra. Every imagina- 
ble kind of bunness is going on in the streets, and I 
always think there is more noise on this day than any 
other. Oh that every Christian in America could spend 
one Sabbath in this, or in some heathen land ! Surely 
they would pray as they have never before done ; surely 
they would feel constrained to labor and sacrifice more 
than they ever yet have done, for the spread of the gospel 
in these dark lands. We have abundant reason to bless 
God for the work which he has wrought here, and which 
is still going on,— that any^ that so many, have been led 
to forsake their errors and superstitions, and embrace the 
pure I'eligion of Christ. But what are these in compari- 
son with the thousands, the millions, in this empire, who 
do not know him, and who, in all probability, will die 
without knowing him. My heart aches when I think of 
these things, and painful as it is to witness so much sin 
and misery, I am thankful that Qod has brought me here, 
if he will only use me as an instrument of giving light to 
but one soul, or in any way of strengthening his cause 
here. Oh that I could induce some others to give them- 
selves to the missionary work ! ^ 

September 22, Miss Lovell writes to Mrs. Everett, 
^'in the midst of the confosion and noise of packing, 
pulling down, and tearing up," preparatory to moving the 
school and Mr. GoodelPs fiimiiy next day into a house 
adjoining the chapel house, then occupied by Mr. Dwight. 
A week later she writes : — 

^ I will tell you something of my whereabouts. The 
Armenian part of the establishment is confined to the 
third story. There ai*e four rooms and a hall : one of these 



PREPARATIONS FOR SCHOOL. 06 

will be a schoolroom this winter, the others sleeping- 
rooms. Mine is a front room, overlooking, as you know, 
the English garden, and with a pleasant view of the city, 
and I am much pleased with my quarters. The room next 
to mine is occupied by A. and E., and the hall will be the 
school dining-room. We have not quite as much room 
ns we could desire, but shall try to make it answer for the 
present I think we shall not take more than six girls 
this winter, though we have the names of seven applicants. 
You say, you sometimes almost wish you were united 
with me in this work. How many, many times, have I 

wished it might have been so 

^ This morning I enjoyed the precious privilege of sit- 
ting down to the table of our Saviour, and commemorating 
his death, with between twenty-five and thirty Armenians. 
There were three Armenian ladies, the wives of Barons 
Apisaghom and Mugerditch and Ammorvia. It was a 
sweet and refreshing season to me, and, I trust, to all. I was 
able to understand a good portion of the service, and it 
was a precious foretaste of that blessed day when all who 
love our Lord Jesus Christ will sit down together in his 
kingdom, and enjoy free and uninterrupted communion 
with him and with each other for ever. Oh for the coming 
of the time when not only thirty, but the whole of 
this nation shall unite in celebrating a Saviour's dying 
lovel'' 

TO THB SAMB. 

''October 6, 1845. 

^My dear Sister Seraphina: . . . You ask for 
more information about the school. It is not to be an 
entirely separate establishment. The scholars will eat 
and sleep and study up stairs ; but Mrs. Goodell is to be 
the mother of them all, and not poor, inefficient I. Quite 
enough of responsibility will, however, devolve upon me. 
Mr. and Mrs. G. have not yet been able to complete their 



96 THX MI98IQirABT 6I8TXB8. 

antiDgements so as to receive any; but when Soorpohoe 
comes we shall be ready for others. Mrs. Dwight and I 
have a )ialf hoar's conversation in Armenian each day, 
(but do not tell Mr. Adger this, else he will expect me to 
be able to converse with him,) and, if the truUi most be 
told, our conversation is nearly all upon one side. Dear 
Mrs. D. iS| however, very patient with me. 

Mr, Qoodell wishes me to give his love to you, and 
congratulate you, in his name, on having made sudi attain- 
ments in Eastern life as to have become fond of olives. 
This is, I suppose, partly by way of a side-thrust at me ; 
for, alas! to my shame be it said, I do not like them. 
Mr. G. each morning puts one on my plate, — sometimes 
it is eaten, sometimes not. 

TO THB SAHB. 

October 18, past 10 o'dock, p. m. 

Late as it is, I isan not retire without thanking you, 
my dear sister, for your cheerful and delightful note, as I 
fear I shall not have time to do so in the morning. We 
have been spending the evening veiy pleasantly in the 
company of Mr. and Mrs. Holladay, Mr. Schauffler, and 
the Dwights. Most sincerely do I hope that we shall not 
soon again be called upon to bid &rewell to returning 
miasionaries. The longer I live here, and the more I see 
of the wants of the people, of the thick darkness which 
covers the land, and the great need there is of faithful 
labor, the more sad does it seem that instead of the num- 
ber of laborers increasing, it should be diminishing, by 
their return home. God grant that the health of those 
who remain ms^y be precious in his sight. Ah 1 who will 
supply their places when they are gone ? But doubtless 
he whose cause it is will tske care of it; and oh, how 
happy should we be that the men and the means are all 
. in his hands, and that he loves the cause infinitely more 
than our weak minds can conceive. What but this 



ARRANOBMBNT8 FOB*80HOOL8. 07 

assurance could 8nppoi*t our faltering faith, when we look 
at the greatness of the work and the feebleness of the 
means ? 

You ask what you shall tell the brother-in-law, who 
wonders if I am not lonely, with no one to share my joys 
and sorrows. Tell him I have a beloved sister, who in 
this distant land has been friend, consoler, encourager, 
and S3mipathizer, and has almost made me forget that 
I had left far behind me all the friends of my early 
youth. 

When you see Capt. Kenrick, remember me most kindly 
to him. How I should like to go on board the Stamboul 
again. My compliments to "my admirer,** the kind 
steward ; and assure poor Aleck of my sympathy in his 
affliction, and of my earnest prayers for his spiritual wel- 
fare. Salute for me that precious little stat^-room in the 
Stamboul. I wonder if any echo of our pleasant songs is 
there yet. 

TO THB 8AMB* 

Octot)or20. 
We had expected to commence school to-day with at 
least Soorpohee and one or two others, but no one has 
arrived. They tell me, however, that it would be a 
very strange thing if they should come at the appointed 
time, so we await their time. Why do you not report 
yourself as to your progress in Armenian? When 
Mr. Adger comes I shall find out all about it., — how much 
you know, and how much you speak. At our female 
service last Friday Mr. Dwight had an audience of thirty 
persons, twenty of them females. Mr. Goodell says I 
must describe to my sister Seraph my little room and its 
accommodations, and I will do so that you may know 
how pleasantly I am situated. I have told you that it is 
a front room, small, but large enough for me. I have in it 
a bed, sofa, a nice bureau and bookcase, two or three 





98 THE MISSIONARY SISTICBS. 

chairs, carpet, table, and last, not least, a Boston rocking- 
chair, just fix)m America. With all these comforts my 
room is very pleasantly filled, and here Mrs. Dwight 
comes daily for half an hour for our Armenian chat, and 
here every Saturday evening we have our female prayer 
meeting, and here I hope to enjoy many sweet seasons of 
communion with God. Some time I hope to have the 
pleasure of welcoming you to a seat in my rocking- 
chair. 

The long-desired school at length had a beginning. 
October 27 she writes Mrs. Everett : — 

^ I sit down to answer your note with feelings such as 
I can not well describe. I am sitting in my achool^oom^ 
surrounded by seven Aiinenian girls, including A. and E. 
As I have not yet reduced them to order, there is a con- 
tinual buzzing of Armenian whispera in my ears. I am 
pleased with the appeamnce of all ; but, oh ! how am I 
to tQach them ? Now, indeed, I begin to feel the want 
of a tongue which they can understand. . My heart is so 
full of my new duties and cares that you must expect 
nothing else fi'om me to-day. Oh, would that you were 
.here, dearest sister, to assist me with your counsels, to 
cheer me with your smiles, and join your prayers with 
mine, for that divine direction without which I shall be 
utterly unable to do aught aright i 

^Tour prayers, I am sure, I have now. .... Thanks, 
dear S., a thousand thanks for your precious loan, your 
hxMbancPa miniature. Thanks to him for sparing it; but 
he might well do that, so long as he has the still more 
pracious original. Thank you, too, for the cologne. I will 
try to think I feel your hand bathing my forehead some- 
times, as you used to do on the Stamboul 

^ Oh ! if you knew in what a whii*l my poor head is, you 
would wonder that I can write at all. I have, and always 
had, too much of the spirit of Martha of old, ^careftil, and 



THB SCHOOL COMMBNCBD. 99 

troubled about many things.' I have not learned the 
happy art of casting bSI care upon Him who careth for me, • 
and I am wondering how all these new, and nnfohned^ 
and discordant materials, are to be brought into harmony 
and system, particularly since I can not speak with them. 
I must go to the throne of grace, and seek for wisdom 
and guidance there. 

"Mr. Dwight has just been in to read and pray with 
us, which he promises to do every evening. What a favor 
is it to me in my work, that I have such friends and asso- 
ciates to aid with their prayers and their counsels. Tou 
can not tell how raiicli I love them all, and how much I 
prize their counsels and their society, and how unworthy 
I feel of this and the thousand blessings God is bestowing 
upon me. 

" I have just had a long conversation with A. 1 feared 
she might feel that too much care was thrown upon her, 
and that her own studies were too much encroached upon ; 
but, instead of this, she seems delighted and grateful that 
she is able to do any thing in the school. It has, she says, 
ever been her most ardent prayer since she went to 
Mr. Dwight's, that she might be able to teach the girls of 
her nation, and she thanks God that he now gives her the 
opportunity." 

"November 11. 
"My pBARBST Mother: . I am now writing in the 
school-room of the 'Armenian Female Seminary.' A 
sounding title, you would say, probably, were you to see 
our little school; but we will not 'despise the day of small 
things ; ' on the contrary, you will, I am sure, thank God 
that he has permitted me to make this small beginning. 
I sit now at my table surrounded by eight Armenian girls, 
including two who have been with us before, all just now 
engaged in writing. I commenced, two weeks ngo, with 
six scholars. Two have come since, and we have had; 



100 THX mSSIOHABT SISTXB8. 

Itpplioations to receive seyeral others; but were unable to 
do so for want of room, and because it is thought that this 
number is as many as I can do justice to. The six who 
have now joined the school are between the ages of eleven 
and thirteen. Their names are Soorpohee, Aroosiak, 
Tachoohee, Senim, and two Mariams. The girls all board 
with us, and Mrs. Goodell has the general superintendence 
of their clothing, Ac. Amaveni assists in teaching. Only 
one of the new ones learns English. They learn reading, 
writing, and arithmetic. Wednesday afternoons I teach 
them sewing. We have prayers with them in the morn- 
ing, by Mr. Goodell, in Turkish, — in the evening, by 
Mr. Dwight, in Armenian. Each one commits a portion 
of Scripture to memory every morning, and we use the 
Bible as a reading-book. Sabbath morning they join our 
Sabbath school, instructed by Amaveni ; and in the after- 
noon I teach them the catechism, which has been trans- 
lated into Armenian. We also attend Mr. Dwight's 
Armenian service ; but sit in an adjoining room, with the 
door a little open, as custom will not admit of our sitting 
with the men at present I find my scholars much more 
tractable and 4ocile than I had anticipated. They have 
never been accustomed to the quiet and discipline of our 
schools, and I feared I should find it very difficult to 
reduce them to any thing like order, particularly as I 
speak so little of their language. 

^It would be impossible to tell you, my dear mother, 
what my feelings have been since the commencement of 
my little school. I am sure you will daily remember us 
at the throng of grace. It is our earnest prayer that all 
who come here may speedily be brought into the fold of 
Christ, and you can not imagine how mylieart longs to 
speak to them of the Saviour; but as yet I am tongue- 
tied, and can only look my love to them, and interest in 
them, and commend them to God in prayer. It is, I think, 



OPPOSITIOK TO THB TRUTH. 101 

one of the missionary's greatest trials during the first year, 
that he is nnable to apetxk. We have had several applica- 
tions to take other scholars, bat have been obliged to 
refuse them. One man wept when Mr. Ooodell told him 
we could not take his daughter. It is hard to be obliged 
to say no to them. 

"Five o'clock, Sabbath evening. The number of Ar- 
menian hearers continues, I think, to increase, notwith- 
standing the unceasing efforts which the enemies of the 
truth are making to oppose it They have lately taken a 
new track. Instead of condemning the reading of the 
gospel, as heretofore, the Patriarch has proposed that they 
should have it read at the patriarchate, occasionally mixing 
with it the writings of the Fathers. In this way he 
hopes to call off many from Mr. Dwight's meeting. To- 
day, we understand, they commenced their meetings. 
They have an infidel to expound the Bible to them. It 
was feared that ho might thus draw off some who were still 
strongly attached to their own church, under the specious 
pretext of hearing the gospel. But Ood will bnng all 
their plans to nought, and I believe most of them will see 
through his motives.'* 

Dec. 7, she thus commences one of her weekly notes to 
Mrs. Everett : — 

" Poor Mrs. Homes ! I can think of nothing but her, 
and her sorrow. I have just returned from the funeral of 
her sweet little Mary. You expressed the hope in your 
note that she is now well, and toeU she is, — far better, 
oh, how much happier, than when on earth, even with all 
that the love of the fondest parents could do for her. 
.... Oh that this sudden and solemn dispensation 
may be blessed to the children among us ; I long to see 
the children of the missionaries made partakcra of the 
great salvation." 

In the same note she relates some of the proceedings 
of the Patriarch's meetings : <* Yesterday at the meeting 

9* 



102 THS lOBSIOKABT SIBTXBa. 

pt the patriarchate^ Broosalie, their great chanipian, waa 
missinffi — fidrly driven off the field* Baron Stepan and 
Avedis, and another of Mr. Hamlin's scholars were there, 
and after some argument, they observed some one going 
in and out rather suspiciously, and soon Stepan went 
out. Fifteen or twenty persons of the * baser sort' were 
collected about the door to give them a drubbing. He 
escaped; but when afterwards the others left, one of 
them received a severe beating. Fit arguments these to 
repel the truth!" 

TO MSS. T. 

PALMTa^, December 11, IS45. • 
Mt yxbt dxab Fbisnd: • • • • , This evening a 
violent rain has detained me fit)m meeting, and I joyfully 
devote the tune to you. You, I suppose, are enjoying all 
the delights of a noithcm winter, at this time, perhaps, 
shivering over the stove, and listening to the merry jingle 
of the sleigh bells, (a sound unknown here,) while I am 
sitting in my room, with scarcely any fire, the rain pour- 
ing down in torrents upon the roo£ We have as yet had 
no really cold weather, and no snow. The last of De- 
cember, and in January, there are usually a few snow- 
Btorms, but it never falls to any great depth, or remains 
many dayti. • • . 

^I have now been long enough in Constantinople to 
feel quite at home. The narrow, crowded streets, the 
gloomy, dismal-looking houses, even the very tiles upon 
the roofi wear a fimiiliar look, and the turbaned Turk, 
with his long, flowing robes and beard, seems quite an 
old acquaintance. There is to me nothing inviting in 
Constantinople as a residence. It is true it is delightftilly 
situated, and the scenery of the Bosphoms is magnificent, 
but the city is dirty and irregular, although there are 
some splendid buil^gs. For one who is desirous of 
gayety, and very fond of society, in Pera there may be 



HAPPINESS nr LABOB. 108 

many attractions, as thero aro many Franks, and many 
&milies of wealth and rank, foreign ambassadors, &o. 

As for me, my society is confiiied, from choice, almost 
exclusively to our missionary circle, and to the few other 
Americans here ; with one or two English families I have 
some acquaintance. But kinder and more warm-hearted 
friends than I find in oar circle, I could not desire, and I 
have no inclination to seek for other friends. They have 
received me as a sister and daughter, and their kindness 
tends greatly to lessen the pain of separation fit)m 
the friends of my childhood. Even were it not so, I 
should, I think, be happy here, for I have the hope of 
being in some degree useful, of not living entirely in 
vain. I am happy in my employments ; I like to teach, 
and though I may do but little good, and may see no 
good resulting from what I do, yet I shall feel that the 
way is opened for somebody else to do good. It is some- 
thing to have such a school established. It will, in time, 
by the blessmg of Qod, be a blessing to the Armenians.'' 



CHAPTER IX. 

Mn. £.*• Yisit to the Snlforen fhmitbeVlra— Letters fttna Kin Lordl—TlM 
Pfttriareh** Analbema — lu Sflboti in Conrtantiaopte and Bmynuu 

Thb new year opened pleasantly on the two fiiends. 
Thoagh their hearts turned with fond recoUections to 
their native land, and all the pleasures connected with 
the reunions of the festive season in their loved home 
circles, they looked back with no longing to return. 
They felt every day more strongly the privilege of hav- 
ing been called to forsake all these for the sake of Christ, 
and every day they were becoming more interested in 
the work they had commenced, and in the people around 
them. In a few leaves of journal, with which Mrs. 
Everett commenced the year, is the following, under 
date of January 5, 1846. 

^The meetings we have enjoyed yesterday and to-day 
in our little circle have boon very precious. And although 
my mind has been led back to the first Sabbath and 
succeeding Monday of the year just closed, — which were 
^ spent in my own dear land, in the midst of its Christian 
privileges, — still I have enjoyed these sweet seasons of 
communion and prayer none the less, but the more, in the 
hope that I may see the darkness receding from this land 
before the bright appearance of the Lord, as he comes to 
build up Zion here.'' And again, a few days later, after 
lamenting her ^want of love and zeal, of watchfulness and 
prayerfulness," she writes : ^ O blessed Jesus ! how sweet 
is the hope that the mantle of thy love will be thrown 
oyer all these shortcomings in the last day ; but I would 



8UFFSBBB8 FBOM FIBB. lOS 

feel the duty of striving to live, feeling that every one of 
my sins pierces again thy sacred body.'' 

One of the first works of the new year in which Mrs. 
Everett engaged, was visiting the poor Armenian sufferers 
from the fire, to distribate among them money which ha^ 
been received fh)m America for their relief She writes 
to her sister January 16. 

^Three hmidred and sixty-eight dollars have been senty 
the greater part of which was collected in the vicinity of 
Boston ; and the request was made that the missionaries 
should attend personally to its distribution. This is the 
safest manner of distributing it, as the reli^on of these 
Oriental Christians does not manifisst itself particularly in 
their honesty, and much injustice has been done to the 
poor sufibrens, if we may credit reports, by their rulers, in 
whose hands moneys received have been placed. Some 
objections to our going among the people were made, and 
the advice to put the money into the hands of the rulers 
and priests given, but rejected. Last week, a visit was 
made to about a hundred shech^ in which Armenian fiimi- 
lies live. These dwellings are literally sheds, built of 
rough boards, very slightly, and all crowded into a small 
square, in rows, with a passage no more than four or five 
feet wide between them. Here are crowded together 
men, women, and children, the old and young, the sick 
and well, a family of six or eight persons in a room eight 
or ten feet square, and so barren of comforts your heart 
would ache to see them. . • . Just imagine the state 
of the children of so many families crowded into so small 
a space. They appear to have no care, but are dirty^ 
ragged, and left to run wild in idleness and ignorance. 
The boys are usually sent to school when old enough, 
but the girls are of far less consequence in the parents' 
estimation ; it is even considered a great nfiliction to have 
girls in a family. In a large proportion of these rooms, is 
an invalid, — an old, insane, foolish, or blind person, — 



106 TBS lOMIOVABT nSTXBfl. 

dependent on the fiimily for support. In one room, lives 
a widow, with foar children, and a deformed brother, 
whom she most support by the few cents she maj be 
able to earn daring the day. In another, wo fonnd a 
woman with a drunken husband and five children, — one 
a small in&nt. These children were more nearly naked 
than any I have seen in this country, where there is so 
much real poverty. Other coses I might describe, but, to 
understand it, you must yourself see, to some extent, the 
great destitution and distress of these poor people. In 
America, you know nothing of poverty ; I did not until I 
came here. And there is nothing to alleviate the distress 
of the poor sufferers ; the condition of their minds and 
souls is more pitiable than that of their bodies, — the 
comparison of which is as time to eternity. Oh, my dear 
sbter, do not cease to pray for this people." 

These details have been inserted at length, because 
they present a graphic picture of such scenes of destitu- 
tion as missionaries in those lands are often obliged to 
witness without the power of alleviating. Many causes, 
besides the desolating fires, which, in Constantinople 
especially, produce so much mbery, occasion to the poor 
people of those countries physical privations, which, ex- 
cept in one or two of our larger cities, perhaps, are 
unknown in our more favored country ; and many mis- 
' sionaries in the Levant have felt and said, like Mrs. 
Everett, ^We knew nothing of poverty till we came 
here." 

In the same letter firom which the above extracts are 
taken, Mrs. Everett speaks of a young Aimenian gui she 
was teaching. 

^The time I spend with T. gives me a great deal of 
pleasure. Tou can imagine how interesting it is to see 
truth reaching a mind to which so little light has pene- 
trated ; truths in regard to the existence of her own 
soul, its relations to Qod and Christ, and almost every 



CORKESPONDBNCB IK ARMXinAN. 107 

thing connected with revealed religion, seem new to her. 
She repeats at night a prayer in ancient Armenian, which 
is wholly unintelligible to her. I have tried to show her 
the sin and folly of doing this, and to aid her, or show 
her, that she might pray in words which she miderstands. 
I wrote a prayer, and have once used it with her, having 
previously committed it to memory. Ton can hardly 
conceive of the darkness which reigns in the minds of a 
large part of the people of this country." 

The missionary mail-box between Smyrna and Con- 
stantinople continued to be the bearer of weekly com- 
munications between Mrs. E. and Miss Lovell. Their 
correspondence was frequently in Armenian, and their 
full IcttciTS, written very neatly in its strange characters, 
show the zeal and success with which they were pursuing 
the attainment of that difficult language. 

Miss Lovell dismissed her school for two or three 
weeks' vacation at Christmas. January 21, she writes to 
Mrs. Everett. 

"Last Monday,! had again the privilege of communing 
with upwards of forty Armenians. But two females 
besides myself were present, but it was a most delightful 
meeting." A week later : " My girls have all returned 
except Armaveni, and seem highly delighted to be here 
again. The affection they manifest for ine is, I assure 
yoii, quite gratifying. If I can only turn it to their good, 
I shall be happy. I suppose you will hear from other 
sources of the terrible a7iathema which was yesterday 
pronoimced by the Patriarch against Priest Vartanes and 
all his adherents. He fled at daybreak last Friday 
morning to Mr. Dwight's for refuge from those who were 
seeking for him, and has been there since. He sat with 
us in the dining-room," (a room opening into the chapel,) 
" to hear the sermon yesterday, and told me he had been 
excommunicated. I said I was sorry. He replied that 
he rejoiced to be counted worthy to suffer for Christ" 



108 . THX UJBBIOJSABY ai8TXB& 

Of this same anathemai Mrs. Everett writes to her 
mster, February 1, that ^ it bad that day been pronounced 
in the Armenian church in Smyrna against Protestants, 
by order of the Patriarch at Constantinople.** Miss 
Lovell writes to Mrs. £verett| February 9 — 

** This day has been set apart by the brethren of this 
station as a day of &sting and prayer, in view of the per- 
secuted state of the Armenian brethren, and, as I have 
no school to-day, I have a little time fo give you before 
meeting this evening. Since meeting this morning, the 
schoolroom and my room have been thronged with Arme- 
nian visitors, and the last has just gone, and left me in 
quiet possession. We had this morning a prayer meeting 
of the missionaries and the Armenian brethren. There 
were also quite ^ number of females present The body 
of the chapel was filled with Armenians ; the seiTices 
were partly in English, and partly in Armenian. It was 
a good meeting, and I trust prayer was ofiered which 
God, our only help, will hear and answer. 

^I wish I could tell you the whole history of events 
for the last two or three weeks, and the many interesting 
cases of steadfastness and firmness under persecution 
which we every day hear o£ I regret to say that Ermonia 
went home last week in consequejice of the present 
troubles. She did not at all wish to go ; but her mother 
wished it. Iler sister, too, was sick, and sent word to her 
that she was the cause of her illness, because she persisted 
in staying here. So, it was at length decided that it 
would be well for her to go home a few weeks, and com- 
fort her mother till the storm shall pass over. I am, for 
some reasons, however, sorry that she went. To-day, the 
mother of another of the girls came to take her home. 
She stayed all day, saying that she could not go without 
her, as the priest would be there to-night to see if she . 
had brought her. Her brother (Baron Apsaghom) told 
her not to go, and at last Uie mother went without her. 



AKATHBHA OF THB PATRIABCH. 109 

I was afiboted at the feeling which A. manifested when 
she thought she must go. One beautiful bright-eyed girl 
was at meeting with her father, who wishes to enter the 
school. She is thirteen or fourteen years of age, and I 
was so much interested in her appearance that I could 
not refuse to take her. We have had three or four appli- 
cations to receive pupils since the commencement of this 
persecution. Poor people ! They Buffer greatly J but it 
is gratifying to see their firmness and apparent fiiith. 
That God will overrule it all for the furtherance of his 
cause, I have no doubt, but it is a time when it becomes 
us to be deeply humble, and to pray without ceasing.'* 

What the terrible anathema is, which is so justly the 
terror of all Oriental Christians, Miss Lovell relates more 
particularly in the following letter to her sister-in-law in 
Wisconsin. 

C0K8TANTXKOPLB, Feb. 16, 1S46. 

I am now writing in my little schoolroom, surrounded 
by my little flock of Armenian girls. My teacher is giv- 
ing them a lesson in ancient Armenian, and in the mean 
time I can give you a few moments. I am obliged to 
seize such moments for writing, as, with teaching and 
learning, my time is almost entirely taken up. I have 
now eight scholars, and soon expect two more. Two are 
at home in consequence of a bitter persecution now 
raging against the evangelical Armenians. Perhaps some 
particulars of this persecution may not be uninteresting 
to you. It is understood to be against the principles and 
policy of the Turkish government* to persecute on 
account of religious opinions. The Armenian Patriarch, 
however, having been accused of being a Protestant, has 
taken this means to wipe off the reproach, and prove that 
he is guiltless of such a crime. A few weeks since, a sen- 
tence of excommunication was published and read in all 
the churches against a priest who has long been a pious 

*Thifl must hftre reference merely to their ChristUui ialjeets. 

10 



HP . THB UlSSIQlfABT 9I8TXB8. 

jnWi and all bU adherentSi — all whq read the goapel an4 
atteod the preaching of the misaionariea. Since tl^eni 
the aentence haa been repeated against all the prominent 
evangelicala by name, and a terrible corse pronounced 
upon them, and upon all who shall have any interoourae 
with them, give bread or water, or in any way assiat 
tbeiki, or show them any kindness. Such is the dread of 
this ours^, that almost eyery one suspected of this sin haa 
been turned out of house and home. Every tie is forgot- 
ten. Children have driven their parents, and parents 
their children, from them, and wives have turned their 
husbands out of doors. There is great suffering and disr 
tress. The missionaries haye taken many of the homeless 
ones into their houses, and have also hired a house to 
accommodate them for awhile, after making a vain appeal 
to the great men of their own nation for protection and 
relief They are now awaiting the result of an appeal to 
the Turkish council ; should this prove unsuccessftU, they 
will send in a petition to the Sultan himself We hope 
and believe God will incline the hearts of these rulers to 
fiivor and relieve hia suffering people. Now, they are 
thrown out of business, spit upon, and stoned in the 
streets, and no one is permitted to enter their hoiises, or 
have any dealings with them. All have been commanded 
to remove their children from our schools, but only two 
of mine have yet been taken, though great efforts have 
been made to get them all. Those who left, went weep- 
ing bitterly, and promising to return after awhile. From 
the boys' seminary, at Bebek, more than half — seventeen 
or eighteen — have gone home, and the school is nearly 
broken up. 

On Smyrna, this fearful eurse seemed to fall with a 
still more blighting influence. In that city, scarcely any 
fruit of the gospel had been brought to perfection. Many 
hopes were felt by the missionaries at the commencement 



FBBfUBOtJTiOK. Ill 

of the year ; a larger number than ever before, littended 
the Sabbath preaching, and, at their own request, a Bible- 
class hod been formed ; but the good seed had not fouiid 
a good soil, as at Constantinople, and now, under this 
trial, those who had heard the word joyfully for a season, 
proved to be of that class who, in time of persecution, fall 
away. Mrs. Everett writes to one of her sisters, April 2. 
^Darkness seems to rest upon Smyrna. Were not our 
hopes fixed on God, we should cast them all away How, 
and give up in despair of seeing any brought from this 
slavery to the world, superstition, and sin, into the free- 
dom with which Christ makes free. All the Armenians 
of Smyrna seem agreed as to one thing, — that no tnan 
here shall serve the Lord. The pious Armenians are 
anathematized, but they are Cohstantinopolitans. The 
Patriarch's idolatrous paper was signed by all those who 
had attended the preaching of the gospel, and seemed 
hopeful, excepting one, who resisted long. He was turned 
out of his father's house, abused by his brother and all his 
friends ; he was in turn threatened and flattered by large 
promises, but he did not yield until a few days since, 
when all combined in such an onset on the poor young 
man as he had not power to resist ; he signed the Patri- 
arch's confession of faith, and Smyrna xjoas free fr(mi this 
new sect So exult these deluded people ; but is it so ? 
We can not and will not believe that the Spirit is clean 
gone. 

" * God moret in a mjwitriovM waj, 
His wonders to perform ; * 

and perhaps this is the way in which he intends to arouse 
both his children and the consciences of some around us, 
whom he designs to be the trophies of his free grace 
here." 

Speaking of the general corruption in Smyrna, and the 
wKy in which even religious offices were purchased with 



112 THB KI88IONABT 8I8TXBS. 

money, Mrs. Everett, in one of her letters, relates the 
following story, 

^ There is a Greek priest here, a very poor, illiterate 
man, who was for a long time a servant in the family of 
a missionary who was foimerly hera. Afterwards, he 
worked at various things, as he could find employment, 
and finally concluded that he would become a priest At 
the first application, he was told he must pay 2,000 pias- 
tres, but he at last succeeded in obtaining orders for 600 ; 
and this man is one of the best of the piiests. lie tries 
to preach the gospel." 

: Both ladies enjoyed highly their first winter in that 
fine Eastern climate. Miss Lovell writes fi*om Constanti- 
nople, in February. 

^We have had a delightful winter, and I can not but 
pity you poor shivering mortals in Wisconsin. To be 
sure, the streets are much of the time wretchedly muddy, 
and walking is any thing but pleasant ; but we can sit in 
our rooms with very little fire. There has been very 
little snow, and almost every morning I hear the birds 
singing in the English palace garden under niy window. « 
I wish I could send you some roses plucked from this 
garden in the middle of January. It is just the time 
when oranges and lemons are beginning to be very 
plenty, and I wish I could send you some in exchange for 
apples or good butter, two articles I miss very much." 

And Mrs. Everett writes about the same time from 
Smyrna : " The country is now in its glory, having none 
of the parched, barren appearance of last summer, but is 
as verdant as our May. Grain is coming forward finely ; 
the crops are harvested, I think, in June. I will put in 
some little flowers I found by the way-side in mid-winter; 
there are many in the fields. The finest thing we have 
seen is the almond-trees, now in full bloom, appearing, at 
a distance, like our peach, when first the blossoms open ; 
when faded, like the apple. Tou know we have ever- 



TUB CLIMATS — IGNORAKCB OF THS PSOPLB. 118 

greens, — the olive, cypress, citron, orange, lemon, — the 
myrtle also. The large gardens, just at the edge of the 
city, are now beautiful, having orange and lemon trees, 
with the ripe fruit contrasting finely with the dark-green 
leaves ; and many vegetables are now in their prime." 

Writing, March 2, to her eldest brother, of whose 
pleasant home in Sturbridge she always retained such 
delightful recollections, Mrs. £. says : — 

" Is spring opening with you ? How much enjoyment 
I have had in gazing at those hills, and listening to those 
birds from my window in the little cottage. But New 
England hilU and birds^ and friends^ too, are numbered 
among past joys ; yet not past ; my friends still live in my 
heart, and the loved scenes of my early days will remain 
as green spots in memory's record ; they will not fade. 
Spring I have been speaking of, and intended to tell you 
that we have had spring since last November. There 
has been much rain, and snow has fallen twice, but soon 
melted. . . . ' Every prospect pleases, and only man 
is vile.' Such a contrast as is exhibited between the 
physical aiid moral aspect of things about us is most 
painful. 

" Yesterday, I was made to feel more than ever before 
the perfect darkness which reigns in the minds of a large 
proportion of the people of this country. A pious Arme- 
nian, from ^ is here on a visit with his wife. This 

woman, although not from the lower class of people, is 
unable to read a syllable, and, as to religious knowledge, 
a child in America, four years old, knows far more. Her 
mind, as far as I could discover, is a perfect blank. All 
her thoughts seemed to begin and end in the adornment 
of her person with bracelets, rings, necklaces, <fec. She 
wishes to send her daughter, eleven years of age, to us 
for training and instruction, and we have partly consented 
to take her when we commence housekeeping," 

Lest the reader should receive the impression from the 
10* 



114 TBS lOBSIOVABT SI8TSB8. 

bright pictare« pven above that the shores of the Levant 
are an elyeiam of perpetual sunshine and flowers, we 
make the following extraot from one of Mrs. £verett'(9 
letters, which, though not so pleasing, is perhaps a more 
truthful description of a Levantine winter. 

^ You speak, dear £^ of coming to spend your winters 
with us. We give you a most cordial invitation to come 
and pass next winter in our anticipated house, which, I 
assure you, if it is what I expect, will be warm and sun- 
shinjr all the year. But I forewarn you not to expect the 
same comfort out of doors ; the summer is the time for a 
cloudless sky; the winter for damps, rains, and chills. 
The weather is not cold in general. One can go about 
the house and out, without that stifl^ freezing sensation 
our New England winters produce, and, when we have a 
number of pleasant days in succession, we think this is 
one of the finest climates in the world ; but, when rain 
falls for almost a fortnight incessantly, so that the air and 
every thing else is full of dampness, and the streets intol- 
erably muddy, we think with much favor of our clear, 
bracing climate, the merry ring of sleigh-bells, and more 
merry shouts of the coasters and skaters. But we put on 
thick boots, and manage, as often as possible, to hobble 
and slip over the rough, miry stones for exercise and fresh 
air." 



CHAPTER X. 

Itln Loreirs Illness, and subsequent Visit to Smyrna— Mr. and Mm. Ererett 
remove to Constantinople— Interesting PartienlAni respecting tlie School and 
General Missionary Work. 

The warm friendship existing between Mrs. Everett 
and Miss Lovell had led them always to wish that they 
might be associated together in their missionary life and 
Work ; and to this wish they frequently gave expression 
both in their letters to each other, dnd to other friends. 
Mrs. E., in her visit at Constantinople, had made on the 
minds of the missionaries of that station, a strong impres- 
sion of her peculiar qualifications for exerting a happy 
influence in the depiartment of female education, and 
many of them had expressed the desire to keep her at C, 
to be united with Miss L. in the charge of the Female 
Seminary; but, as Mr. E. had been designated by the 
Prudential Coinmittee to Smyrna, to fill what was con-^ 
sidered an important post there, no serious proposals of 
the kind were made. Providence, however^ brought about 
the accomplishment of these wishes in ik manner they 
could not have anticipated, and would not have chosen. 

In the latter part of February, Miss Lovell was attacked 
with a prevailing influenza, which settled on Iher lungs, 
and brought her very low. After weeks of suffering and 
great prostration, she began to recover, but bo slow was 
her improvement, that her friends became alarmed lest 
her naturally delicate constitution had been permanently 
affected, and they proposed, as soon dS the weather ahd 
her strength should allow, that she should visit Smyrna, 



116 THB 1U8SIONABT 8I8TSB8. 

and try the influence of its milder air, and visiting the mis- 
sionary fliends there. 

During the weeks she was unable to write, some one of 
the kind friends about her made a i-egular report to Mrs. 
Everett of her state, both of body and mind. Some of 
these notes are too interesting to be withheld. Mr. 
Goodell writes. 

Pbra, March 3, 1846. 

DsAB SiSTEB IN CiiBiST : Your faithful coiTOspondent 
appears decidedly better this morning; but she has been 
quite ill, — ^has had a hard cough and a very bad headache, 
and some symptoms of pleurisy. 

You will all remember us in your prayers, for we are 
brought very low. This is the hour of darkness.* But, 
"fnth him who hears the groaning of the piisoner, and 
iiees every tear, there is no darkness at all. All is plain, 
and all is easy of accomplishment. Two of the girls have 
been taken away by their parents, but their beds and 
books left as a pledge of their return when the indignar 
tion shall be past. In the mean time four new ones have 
come, so that we are more than full. May the Lord soon 
bring us all out into a wealthy place I Especially may he, 
in this time of rebuke and blasphemy, pour out bis Holy 
Spirit, and bring low many a proud heart and lofty look I 

March 17th, Mr. Goodell writes : ** I intend to send our 
beloved fnend to you as soon as she is able to go ; but she 
is weak, and I-feair will not be able to go for three weeks. 
She has been in great danger from puliponary symptoms. 
"^Ve have now twelve scholars in school. Only one is 
absent, and she is expected to return next week. Our 
school has been increased more than one third by tliis 
persecution. How wonderful 1 Love to all. Tell them 

** * The year of Jabilee Js ooine.' ** 

On the 24th, Mrs, Hinsdale, the teacher of the mission- 

* Ur G. Alludes here to the peneoution then nging. 



MI88 LOVXLL'B ILLNBS8. 117 

ary school, who finished her lovely Christian course a littld 
before Miss Lovell, writes to Mrs. Everett : — 

"I have the delightful pleasure of saying what you will, 
doubtless, hear from many others, that our dearly beloved 
Miss LovcU is in reality much better. She has seemed so 
like her former' self for the last three or four days, that it 
docs one^s heart good to look at her. • . . But I will take 
up your questions. ' Is she cast down ? ' In reply to this 
I have a few precious words that escaped her lips on her 
sick-bed. On stepping into her chamber, as I was wont 
to do afler school, almost the first words she uttered were, 
<0h, I have had such a precious season I I never before 
knew how sweet it was to lie passive in his hands, and 
know no will but his.' I have read passages of the Bible 
to her at different times, and prayed with her at her re- 
quest^ and she would oflen make remarks which showed 
her deep interest in the word of God. Mr. Ooodell, I 
should think, has been in the habit of reading the Bible 
and praying with her every morning. • . « 

^ Tou see that in my notes I have only time to tell you 
how Miss Lovcll is. Had I time I would tell you how we 
all love her, but you can judge by what you feel for her 
yourself. Her valuable life we know how in some d^;ree 
to appreciate.'' 

There is a little note in pencil from Miss Lovell to Mrs. 
Everett, which is without date, but was probably written 
about this time. 

** My dear, warm-hearted sister : I am going to write 
you just one line to show you I can write. I have had a 
very sweet illness. The Lord has been very gracious and 
merciful to me ; he has made all my bed in my sickness* 
I am now daily improving; yesterday sat up two hours, 
but am still very weak. They talk of taking me to Bebek 
on Friday, and, more than all, they talk of sending me to 
Smyrna. Perhaps I may go next week. Mr. Goodell will 
write. I can write no more. Love, love to dU^ and thanks 



118 THB MISSIOKABT SI8TBB8* 

for their STinpathy and prayers. Of the kindness of friends 
here I have no language to speaL May the Lord reward 
them I" 

The following note by Mr. Ooodell to Mrs. Everett, 
playfully introducing to her her long-loved missionary 
sister, gives also the names of the scholars in her school, 
and discloses the secret of the rich spiiitual blessings with i^ 
which that school has been visited from the beginning till ' 

now. 

"Fbra, April 6, 1S46. 

^Dear Sisteb IK Christ:! have much pleasure in 
introducing to your acquaintance, and recommending to 
your kind attention, a Miss Lovell from the western part 
of New York, who has been in my £miily nearly a year, 
and whose name I think I must have mentioned in some 
of our correspondence. You will see that she has five or 
six meals a day, and more if necessary; and that she does 
not speak more than one word for every ninety or a hun- 
dred ^ords that are spoken to her. Will you be her 
spokesman, or see that one be chosen, to answer for her 
all the numerous questions which may be asked in refer- 
ence to her health, happiness, and school ? In fact, she 
goes to Smyrna not to be t^^ed^up, but to be raised up, for 
the school; although she had put it in such excellent 
order, that it went on like clock-work for awhile, yet the 
wheels now be^n to need oiling, and other pails of the 
machine require attention. 

*' You will hear of the very interesting state of things 
at Oroomiah. Why may we not hope that our own 
schools may be visited in a similar manner with refresh- 
ings from on high ? Will you unite with us in praying 
for this object? I herewith give you the names of those 
in the Female Seminary in the order they entered, that 
you may begin next Thursday with the first on the list. 
And may our prayers for that one be united, fervent, and 
effectual* The next day we will pray for the second, and 



MISS loybll's school. 119 

80 on. Armaveni, aged twenty ; Ermonia, aged nineteen ; 
Sinem, aged eleven ; Sourpouyi, aged thirteen ; Mariam, 
aged twelve, of Pera; Takouhi^aged twelve (now absent); 
Aroosiah, aged thirteen ; Mariam, aged twelve, of Con- 
stantinople ; Teubraksy, aged eleven ; Mariam, aged six, 
from Hass Keuy ; Denruki, aged fourteen ; Takouhi, aged 
fourteen, daughter of Arakyal; Takouhi, aged fifteen, — 
she, with her mother, brothers and sisters, excommuni- 
'cated. Indeed almost every child in school is a daughter 
of the excommunicated. May they all belong to the 
church of the first bom I " 

Miss Lovoll writes to her mother, April 6. After 
giving the particulars of her illness, she says :— - 

"Through the great mercy of God every medicine 
seemed to have the desired effect. I fully expected to 
die, yet death had no terrors ; but t felt a sweet satisfac- 
tion in committing myself and my school into the hands 
of God, trusting that if he took me to himself he would 
raise up another better qualified to take my place. Of 
the kindness of the dear friends here during my illness, I 
know not in what language to speak.'' 
. In reference to the persecution she says: — 

" I intended to keep a full journal of all which occurred, 
to send to you, as there were many interesting events 
occurring each day which coul4 not fail to interest you. 
But I was almost immediately taken ill, so that I vfsa 
unable to do so. The most important events you will, in 
time, see in the Missionary HeraM. Four men were 
imprisoned, one or two banished, great numbers excom- 
municated and thrown out of emplo3rment, but their firm- 
ness and steadfastness has astonished even those who 
hoped the best of them. Mr. Hamlin's school was almost 
broken up, but is now filling up again. I lost three of 
mine for a time, but many new ones applied. I have now 
twelve. I wish I had time and strength to tell you mord 
of the persecution, which still continues, though with not 



120 THE MI8SI0NABT BIBTBBB. 

quite 80 much sovority as at first. The Armenian con- 
gregation is as large as over, and many who were never 
known before, are now discovered to be firm and con- 
sbtent Christians." 

Mrs. Everett, writing about this time to her sister, 
relates the following incident : — 

^To-day a man came from Beirut, with letters of recom- 
mendation from our brethren there, who has lately been 
expelled from a convent in Jerusalem. He is an Arme- 
nian from the region beyond Erzeroom. The gospel 
found its way to him there, — he was convinced of its 
truths, and afterwards went to reside at this convent. 
They wished to make him a deacon after he had been 
there about two yeai-s; but, on his refusing to receive 
orders on account of his evangelical sbntimcnts, he was 
expelled. While in iiio convent he translated the four gos- 
pels into the Kurdish language, for those of his nation who 
live in the region from which he came, and do not know 
Armenian, not even the priests who read the service in 
the church. The young man comes here wishing to print 
his translation. How steadily and surely the leaven of 
truth is working in the mass of error ! " 

Miss Lovell, writing from Smyrna, to a friend recently 
married, and speaking of one and another of her *< early 
friends and schoolmates ^ who were soon to be manied, 
says: — 

'<And soon I shall be left the Uast leaf on the tree.' I 
shall not mourn very bitterly, however, while I have so 
delightful an employment as I feel mine to be, and so 
dear a circle of fiiends as I find here. Delightful employ- 
ment t What would more than half the world think of 
the idea of delight in connection with six or seven hours' 
daily confinement in a small room, with a dozen or more 
poor Armenian gu*ls ! Yet jTfeel that my employment is 
delightful. Some of my girls are exceedhigly interesting; 
and when I go into my school-room, and witness the 



MRB. tlVRRETT AT C0N8TANTIN0PLB. 121 

sparkling of their beautiful black eyes, as they express 
their joy at seeing me, if I have been absent a few hours, 
I feel that it is better, far better, than drawing out a use- 
less life, even among loved friends at home." 

After four weeks spent very pleasantly with the mis- 
sionary friends in Smyrna, Miss Lovell returned with 
infprovod health to Constantinople. But though much 
better, she was not yet strong enough to take charge 
of the school without more assbtance, and the Constanti- 
nople station voted to invite Mr. and Mrs. Everett to 
spend the summer at Constantinople for the purpose of 
rendering such assistance, with which invitation they 
cheerfully complied, although they had just taken and 
furnished two or three rooms iH the country, and had 
commenced housekeeping for the summer. 

Mrs. Everett's first letter from Constantinople gives 
many interesting details respecting the school, and gen- 
eral progress of the missionary work in that city. 

" CoNBTAHTiNOPLS, May 25, 1846. 

" My very dear Parents : If you have not received 
my last letter by ship, you will be very much surprised 
to see this dated at Constantinople. ' It is not in man 
that walketh to direct his steps,' and we hope the Lord 
has been the guide of ours 

*< We found Miss Lovell suffering from a hoarse cold, and 
unable to go into her school. We arrived on Saturday 
morning; and on Monday I took her place in school, happy 
to bo able to do anything for the relief of my dear sister, 
and I need not say very happy to be in the midst of eleven 
Armenian girls, who, we hope, by the grace of God, may 
become enlightened pious women. There are thirteen 
belonging to the school ; one is absent from sipkness,-^ 
the other was removed at the commencement of the per- 
secution, and has not returned. These girls are all bright 
and interesting ; the school promises much. May the 

11 



122 THS laSSIONABT BISTERS. 

divine blessing rest npon it, and all our hopes be realized I 
Oh| do pray much that the Holy Spirit's influences may 
incline the heait of each of these girls to seek that wis- 
dom which Cometh from above. Two of them, and per- 
haps three, are pious. The eldest, A., is a lovely Christian. 
You will rejoice to know that these girls are very fond 
of reading their Testaments, and often seem much affected 
by what they read and hear. One was weeping a few 
days since as she had her Testament, and, on being urged 
to tell the cause of her tears, said she was reading about 
Christ's sufferings and death for her sins, and she wept 
that she was doing nothing for him. 

^Wednesday, p. m., the Armenian females have a 
prayer meeting. I went to the meeting last week. Six 
or eight were present besides those belonging to the 
school. One of the women told me that some of them 
had wished for such a meeting for a long time, but they 
lived at such long distances from each other that they 
could not meet together ; but the Lord had sent this per- 
secution, and thus brought them together, and they were 
very happy to meet and pray. Those present were from 
families occupying the houses hired for those who had 
been turned out of their houses. 

^It is good to be here, and see the large congregation 
of Armenians, eagerly listening to the words of life. The 
females no longer sit in an adjoining room, listening 
with the door ajar, but take their places in the back part 
of the chapel. The day before we arrived, Friday, there 
were thirty females present. On Friday, p. m. there was 
formerly a service for females alone, but, since the 
men have been deprived of business by the persecution, 
it has been a meeting for prayer, and all attend. You 
would l^ delighted to hear the singing in these Armenian 
meetings. All join, and with frill voices. The Armenians 
seem to have an uncommon taste for singing. The girls 
in the school sing already, and are quite independent. 



rjfiUBBOUTION ABATJBD. l28 

They sing * Mary at the Saviour's Tomb,' * Old Hundred,' 
* Illinois,' * Islington,' <fcc. 

" Those persons who have children in the school, come 
often to see them, especially the mothers and sisters, and 
often express the desire that they, too, might come and 
learn. On Friday, p. m. the girls sew, and their friends 
understand that they are at liberty to come in and visit 
after the meeting. Last Friday, about a dozen were here; 
one could understand only Turkish, and as she had 
come from a distance to the meeting, and heard only 
Armenian, she begged that Mr. Goodell would read and 
pray with her before she went away. 

" You will hear and thank Qod that he has brought 
deliverance to the poor persecuted Armenians. The mail 
who was the instrument in getting them expelled froni 
their shops and houses, is turned out of his office, and the 
greater part of them have returned to their business, and 
some to their houses. All this persecution has been only 
a means of advancing the truth, and establishing it in this 
land. The Patriarch has made himself very unpopulari 
and can not retain his place long. Ho thought to clog 
the chariot-wheels of salvation ; but his efforts have only 
tended to give them a tenfold impetus. But what can 
all the patriarchs, bishops, Satan, and all his hosts com- 
bined, do in a contest with Omnipotence? The stone 
that was cut out of the mountain shall fill the whole 
earth." 

In the same letter, Mrs. Everett communicates the 
pleasing intelligence, just received from Smyrna, that two 
young men -sVent every day to Mr. Adger for instruction 
in the Bible, and ten or twelve were at the service the 
previous Sabbath, — showing that light was beginning to 
shine out of the thick darkness that had seefiied for 
a while to settle over that city. She also speaks of glad 
tidings concerning the missionary work in Syria and 
Persia. 



124 TBS MI8SI0NABT SISTSBB. 

Of the annual meeting of the mission, Mrs. Everett 
writes in her next letter. . . • 

^ It wa9 a time of deep interest ; on several aceounts 
unosual ; one was, that never before were so many 
together from the varioos stations of the Turkey mis- 
sion; another, that so great progress in Christ's work 
there has not perhaps been in any previous year ; and the 
business was of the highest importance, and full of the 
deepest interest, — the preparation of a covenant and 
confession of fiuth, rules and order for the formation of 
an evangelical, a real New Testament church in Turkey. 
Century after century has passed, and these countries 
have Imown nothing of a spiritual religion. There is 
scarcely a foot of ^oil in the vicinity of this great city 
that is not in all probability mingled with the dust of 
those lyho have passed into eternity from the darkness 
of formalism, idolatry, or Mohammedanism. But blessed 
be our €k>d that light begins to shine I It is indeed but 
a beginning, a single ray, compared with the thick dark- 
ness that is spread far and wide ; but he who has sent a 
single ray, can and will pour such a flood upon this whole 
re^on as will scatter the deepest shades. Jesus «Aaff 
reign.** 



CHAPTERXI. 

Orguiintioii of the First EvABgelical Chnreh In Conttantiiiople — Ordination 
of the First Pastor —The First Baptism, ete. 

Tns history of themselves and the school, na well as of 
the interesting events transpiring around them for the 
next six months, must bo gathered almost entirely from 
Mrs. Everett's letters, as only two letters written by Miss 
Lovell during that time have been -obtained. The first 
of them was to her brother Frederic, dated 

" CoNSTANTiNOPLB, Juno 10, 1846. 

... "I lately received a letter from Medora, and 
since then how many changes may have taken place. 
Who can tell, if you are still living, that death has not 
entered your little family, — death, who, since I wrote 
you, has been very near me, so that I fancied I heard his 
call ? Yet, thanks to my kind Father in heaven, I still 
live, and have the promise of returning health. Soon 
after I wrote to Medora, I was attacked with an influenza 
and inflammation of the lungs. For a week or so, my 
life was in danger, and I had but little hope of recovery. 
I had, however, a good physician, with the kindest care 
and attention from all my good friends here, and, by the 
blessing of God, I am now nearly well. . . i 

"My scholars are all now in the next room, busily 
engaged in trying to learn English. Tliey are not taught 
English in school, but they are all so anxious to learn 
that I have given them leave to learn what they can in 
the evenings, when they have finished their other lessons. 

11* 



* * 



126 THB lOBSIOHABT SISTSBfl. 

^ Yesterday, I rode on horseback for the first time in 
this country. I rode to Bebek in the morning, and 
returned in the evening, enjoying it exceedingly. To-day, 
I rode again to Bebek, where the annual meeting of the 
inission is in session, and attended the examination of 
the Armenian Young Men's Seminary. The young men 
all leam English as well as Armenian, ancient and 
modem. They were examined in algebra and geometry, 
histoiy, d;c., and acquitted themselves admirably. I 
should like to invite you to a similar examination of my 
school one of these days, though I must confess they 
have not made much progress in mathematics or meta- 
physics ; yet the improvement they have made is by no 
means contemptible. 3ut it is bedtime, and I must lay 
by my unfinished letter till another day.** 

^ 18. I have a bouquet of beautiful fiowers before me, 
which came from the Sultan's garden, and fill the room 
with their fragrance. By the way, his majesty has been 
absent five or six weeks on a journey, and is expected to 
return next Tuesday. Most magnificent preparations are 
making to welcome his return. Poor man 1 He seldom 
leaves the city ; and, when he left it this time, he started 
in a royal steamboat, attended by his fleet. When he 
had proceeded a few miles, through /ear and sea-sickness, 
he ordered the boat to turn about, — out of compassion 
for his officers and suit, it was said, and performed the 
journey by land. 

" Pray, did you ever read a book on Greece, — * Lord 
Byi*on and His Last Days,' &c. — (I forget the title,) 
written by his lordship's attending physician? This same 
man. Dr. Millingen, was my physician, and has a great 
many interesting anecdotes to relate. He is also one of 
the Sultan's physicians, and spends one night a week at 
the palace." ... 



OBGANIZATIOK OF ▲ OBUBOH. 127 

From Mrs, Everett. 

" CONBTAHTIKOPLS, Jtllj i, 1846. 

^My dbab Sistbb Eleanob: • . . Let me tell 
yoa something about the organization of an evangelical 
church in the capital of the Turkish empire, — the seat 
of Mohammedism, superstition, and infidelity. It is won- 
derful. God has done it, and it is marvelous in our eyes. 
This very interesting and ever-memorable event took 
place yesterday, in the chapel in Mr. Dwight's house. 
You are aware' that there was quite a large number, of 
Armenians who have been considered fit subjects for 
receiving the sacrament, and secretly it has been admin- 
istered to them. The Patriarch has, as you also know, 
during the recent persecution, cut off by anathema all the 
' new sect,' or gospel-readers, from the Armenian church, 
and thus they were left free to form themselves into ah 
independent church. They requested the missionaries, 
some time since, to prepare for them some form of church 
organization, and it was dolie at the recent general meet- 
ing of the mission, and prcsehted at a meeting yesterday 
of those who had previously received the sacrament. ' Ail 
felt it to be a most solemn and interesting meeting; 
such a time as some of the brethren of the missioii had 
for years labored, prayed, and longed for, and such a day 
as we, who have but recently come, felt to be too much 
for us to be permitted to witness. 

^* The meeting was opened by prayer and reading of 
the Scriptures. The confession of faith, covenant, and 
church laws were read and explained. You must think 
of these persons as not having had, until recently, any 
real spiritual ideas, and no proper conception of a church 
free froM a yoke of bondage to the grossest superstitions. 
After a vdtl9 from the Armenians to accept what had 
been presented, all arose, and solemnly assented to the 
cofifession and covenant, which were again read. Their 
nameist were then recorded, and we looked ' unoii rfhd 



128 THX MIBBIONABT BI8TXB8. 

infiint eyongelioal church of the Armenians of Turkey,— 
a church of forty members, taking the New Testament 
as the groundwork of their faith, built on Jesus Christ as 
the chief comer-stone, and arising out of the corrupt, yes, 
long dead mass which has for so many centuries rested 
on the fkoe of this whole country. 

^ The new church then made unanimous choice of a 
pastor from among themselves, — > one who was set apart 
some months since as a preacher. A special exhortation 
to prayer for him was made, the deacons chosen, and the 
committee of the church, and all imanimously, and satis- 
factorily to the missionaries, and we hope also to the 
great Head of the Church. 

*^ Now, we have new arguments to plead before the 
Lord, that ho will come and water this vine of his own 
right hand's planting. Do join us. There are many 
other persons who are considered truly pious, and will 
very soon unite with these. They were not invited at 
this formation of the church, because it was considered a 
simpler way to unito only those who had been formally 
received into fi-atemities existing before, and let the 
church receive othci-s upon examination. The first child 
is to be baptized in the way of the Protestants to-morrow 
in the chapel. It is the first child of the now pastor, — 
Baron Apsoghom. He is to be ordained next Tuesday. 

^ 6. I was sent home from the dinner-table just now to 
take off my dress, and hang it on the terrace to air, and 
you would be almost fiightened to know the cause if you 
were near. Miss Lovell and I went out after school to 
see one of the little girls who is at home unwell. Seeing 
a younger brother of the girl lying asleep on the floor 
beside her bed, we asked if he was sicl:, and the reply 
was that he had the smallpox. This was said with per- 
fect unconcern, and when we expressed some alarm, and 
told with what dread we regarded it in our country, the 
friends smiled, saying, repeatedly, > No matter; no harm 



ORDINATION OF ▲ PASTOB. 129 

will come frdm it* We wete off as soon as possible. 
For me, there is no danger if the child has the disease, 
for I have just been yaccinated with effect. In this 
country, the smallpox is not feared at all, but the deeply- 
pitted faces we often meet show that sometimes it is not 
a slight thing here. 

^Peculiarly in this country, in the midst of life we are 
in death. Last week, our friends wrote from Smyrna 
that a fearful earthquake had visited that city. Mr. 
Adger wrote that in their house the lime fell in flakes 
from the walls of one room, things were thrown down, 
and in another room the wall of the house, which is of 
stone, was rent from top to bottom. Mrs. Johnston also 
wrote that the wall in their house was rent^ and several 
persons were killed in the city. 

*< On Tuesday, the 7th of July, Baron Apsoghom was 
solenmly set apart by prayer, and the laying on of hands, 
to the work of the gospel ministry over the newly formed 
church. He is a young man of good talents, and as good 
an education as the ecclesiastics of the Armenian church 
usually possess. He has attended the theological lectures 
of Mr. D wight in former years, understands well the doc- 
trines of the Bible, having had the instructions of the 
Great Teacher. His examination previous to ordination 
gave satisfaction and pleasure to those present. 

"Although the ordination was not intended to be 
public, the chapel, at an early hour, was crowded in every 
part. Mr. Homes read the order of exercises in Turkish ; 
Mr. Wood read the Scriptures in Armenian ; Mr. Homes 
offered the introductory prayer in. Turkish ; sermon by 
Mr. Dwight in Armenian, from 1 Tim. iii. 1, — the office 
of a bishop ; consecrating prayer by Mr. Goodell. All 
the missionaries present laid their hands upon the head 
of the pastor. Mr. Hamlin gave the choige ; address to 
the people by Mr. Goodell; hymn read by Mr. Van 
Lennep, and sung by all the congregation ; concluding 



180 THS lOSSIOirABT 8I8TXB8. 

prayer by Mr. Wood, and benediction by the pastor. A 
more solemn and interesting scene I never witnessed. 
The exercises were throughout most appropriate. All 
felt that it was none other than the house of Qod, 
and that the great Head of the Church seemed especially 
present. One of the Armenians said to Mr. Everett, *• I 
trembled and felt afraid ; ' and one said to me, ^ It was 
heaven, and I felt as though the angels were all around.' 
All seemed to find it difficult to express the great joy 
they felt in witnessing such a scene.'* 

"July 27, 1846. 

^My dbab Fatheb akd Motheb: . . . The pious 
Armenians continue to suffer much in various ways from 
the enemies of the truth, though the Patriarch begins to 
see that the gospel is not easily crushed, nor its followers 
in realltyi though in name, annihilated by the curses 
thundered against them fi*om his lips. He has been rather 
quiet for a few weeks, the bankers of the nation having 
expressed their disapprobation of his course. The 'result 
of it has been, as they said, to establish a new sect 
from their nation. Yesterday, however, he anathematized 
a widow and her son and daughter, — the latter a. mem- 
ber of the school, and all, we hope, the servants of Jesus 
Christ. 

^To show you the spirit of opposition to the gospel 
which reigns in this place, I will describe a scene which 
we witnessed yesterday, the Sabbath, in fi*ont of Messrs. 
Qoodell and Dwight's houses, which stand side by side. 
Mr. D.'s family are all absent, himself at Trcbizond, and 
the others at Bebek. The man-sei*vant, a pious Arme- 
nian, remains in the house. It was open as usual on 
Sabbath morning for the English service, during which 
some rude boys, passing, or coming on purpose, threw 
stones into the hall, through the door, one of which hit 
an old Armenian who had come early to the service. 
Calling out ^ Protestant I ' they ran. In the p. m., about 



PBTTY PBRSBCUTIONS. ' ISl 

the commencement of the Armenian service, qnite a 
company of these base boys came along in front of the 
house ; one would step up and knock at the door, and, as 
soon as the servant opened it, a dozen or more stones 
were hurled towards it; then all made their retreat as 
soon as possible. A little before sunset, as we were 
quietly reading, we heard a screaming below in front of 
the house, and, as we ran to the window, we saw Hohan« 
nes upon the doorstep of Mr. Dwight's house, firmly 
holding a dirty young urchin, who was struggling and 
screaming at the top of his lungs ; While another of the 
same stamp was making his way off as fast as his feet 
would take him, he, too, screaming with fright. Mr. 
Goodell went down, and found that the servant, being a 
little on the watch, saw the boys approaching the door, 
and took his place near it, so, when the boy was in the 
very act of knocking, he opened suddenly, and seized him 
fast. Mr. Goodell told Hohannes to keep the boy, and 
he would go and bring a cavass, (a Turkish police officer.) 
The young culprit continued his efforts to regain his 
Ubeiiy, screaming in his frenzy of fear and rage. Just at 
this moment, three officers came up the street on patrol, 
with swords at their sides, and one a whip in his hands. 
They inquired into the matter, took the boy by the arm, 
dispersed the crowd, and walked off. In a few moments, 
a woman came running up the street in a most frantic^ 
manner, asking the trouble, what the child had done, — 
knocking furiously at the door, thinking he was within. 
A cavass, who was near, tried to silence her, and send 
her home, but she seemed every moment to grow mord 
wild ; running this way and that, beating her breast, and 
fuiiously shaking her hands, she demanded the boy, say- 
ing, ^They shall not make him a Protestant I ' All was 
at length qnict. The bojr was early this morning released 
from his night's quarters, doubtless with some cautions ; 
having learned a lesson in life. 



182 THB mSBIOVABT 8I8TBB8. 

^2£|, iij door parents, I have a little time this morning 
to finish my. letter. Two Armenian girls came in as I 
was about to commence writing, members of the school, 
wishing me to fit a dress for one of them. My tact at 
dressmaking does not come amiss here, and Miss Lovell 
fortunately has the same, for there is plenty to be done 
in this line among twelve girls, who are not much accus- 
tomed to Frank dress. Two of the older girls already 
cut their own dresses; the others, who are old enough, 
sew them, and will learn to do the whole. They are not 
made dependent by coming to the school, but are put to 
do eveiy thmg for themselves, aside from washing their 
clothes and cooking their food. I do long to see them 
all seeking those things which relate to their eternal wel- 
fare. M., in one of her letters, supposes it is possible that 
Mr. Everett has commenced preaching, but you must not 
imagine that at present. To master a foreign tongue, is 
a work of years. Sumner has made very good progress ; 
can speak with some ease in conversation, and hopes, when 
we return to Smyrna, to be able to take the Bible-class. 
He says he will preach after throe yeai*8 fi'om tlie time he 
oomn^enced studying. I hope he may a little sooner, but 
three years would be considered soon, — only one or two 
have preached after so short a time. I am very grate- 
ful for the opportunity I have had to get a good founda- 
tion in the language. Such freedom from cares, and so 
good health I had not expected." 

To one of her younger sisters, Mrs. Everett writes. 

^I am sure the reason why we do not come nearer to 
the fulfillment of the injunction, * Rejoice always,' is, that 
we are not whole-hearted Christians. Surely, there is no 
lack of reasons why we should be joyfld in Gk>d. If our 
sins weigh like a heavy load on our hearts, there is a 
fountain ever flowing, which can' cleanse all away; if the 
burden of souls around us presses on our spirits, have we 
not a Friend who knows all, even that which we would 



FIB0T FUKBBAL AMONQ THB PBOTXSTANTS. 188 

shrink from revealing to the most ihtuHate earthly friend, 
and this Blessed One sympathizes in all, and is ever ready 
to soothe every sorrow and lighten every care." . « . 

The following extract describes the fiist burial that 
took place in the newly formed Protestant community. 

*<As this was the first instance, some difficulty was 
apprehended, as in some places such persons have been 
reused burial. Leave has to be obtained from the 
government. This was readily given yesterday, it having 
been requested in the name of the priest Apsoghom, — 
the new pastor. So he is acknowledged as the priest of 
the Protestants, (Armenians.) The procession formed at 
the house where the child died, the corpse being in a 
covered coffin, not exposed according to the custom of 
the country. Quite a large company followed, preceded 
by their pastor, and one of the deacons. When they 
arrived at the burial-ground belonging to Protestants, 
the coffin was placed on the ground, and the friends 
formed themselves in a circle around the open grave, 
while the minister opened his Testament, read a few 
verses, made appropriate remarks, offered prayer, then 
said, * Let the coffin be placed in the ground.' It was 
soon covered with earth, when he gave a hymn, which 
was sung by all, after which he pronounced the benedic- 
tion, and all withdrew. Every thing passed off to the 
entire satisfaction and great joy of the missionaries, some 
of whom were near the place. A crowd gathered around 
to witness the novel sight ; they were astonished at what 
they heard and saw, and remained perfectly quiet The 
Armenian brethren consider what has happened almost a 
miracle. They give praise to Qod, Excommunicated 
persons, if buried at all by their church, are treated with 
great indignity, perhaps thrown into the grave face down- 
wards.** 

<^Aug. 26. We are all quite impatient to have the school 
in vider quarters, so that some, who are anxiously wait- 

12 



184 THS XISBIOirABT.SIBTBBS. 

ing, may be admitted. One new scholar was taken laist 
week. She is fifteen years old, and can only read her 
letters, but, with the dosu*e she manifests to learn, in a 
month she will be reading the Testament. Another girl, 
about the same age, will probably be received soon ; more 
can not be until a larger house is taken. I loye these 
girls much, and they manifest much affection for me, so 
that it is a great pleasure to labor for them in any way. 
I never felt more that all the temporal knowledge they 
can acquire is of very little consequence compared with 
that wisdom which cometh from God only.'' 

In the same letter, she says they would probably not 
return to Smyrna in the autumn, as they had expected, 
and it was soon after decided that, as Mrs. Everett's ser- 
vices seemed so essential to the school, and there was also 
more than work enough to engage all Mr. Evei'ett's ener- 
gies there, they should remam permanently at ConsCanti* 
nople. 



CHAPTER XII. 

The First Hemb«ni reoeWed into the NewCharch—Xnterestiiig Aeeovnt of 
one of the Female Membert — DimppoiDtment in proearlng a larger Hovae 
for the Seminary — Beyi val in the Two Seminarief . 

Tnouon tho work of Gbd among the Armenians had 
hcen so signally prospered the last few months, and all 
the efforts of the Patriarch and his party to crush it 
seemed only to turn out for its furtherance, the enemies 
of the truth still showed their hitter hatred to it hy per- 
secuting its adherents in every way in their power. In 
Constantinople, families were compelled to leave their 
homes hy the enmity of their neighbors, or individuals 
were taken forcibly from their houses, and thrown into 
prison, through tho same malignant influence. In Trebi« 
zond, as well as at Nicomedia and Ada Bazaar, the pious 
Armenians suffered still more, being thrust into prison, 
where they were put in the stocks and half starved, 
refused burial for their dead, mobbed and insulted in the 
streets ; yet, notwithstanding all these sufferings for the 
truth's sake, they mostly remained firm, and evangelical 
churches were formed in all those places. The heads of 
the Armenian, Greek, and Catholic churches leagued to 
make common cause against what they felt to be their 
common foe ; but the truth alone was more mighty than 
this threefold cord, and was not to be destroyed. 

Mrs. Everett to one of her sisters. 

*' Sept. 10, Thursday, p. m. 

" The day particularly devoted to religious exercises by 
those assembled at the Annual Meeting of the Board,-— 



186 THB lOSSIONABT 8I8TBB8. 

the day for the administration of the sacrament. We 
b^ve observed the day, and we tmst our prayers, though 
offered in weakness, may mingle before the throne of God 
with the many supplications ascending from our own 
dear Americxm churches, and from Christian hearts at the 
vanous missionary stations in different parts of the world. 

« ( Though rander^ fltr, hj fldth we meet 
▲round one common morcx-aeat.' 

« o'clock, P. If. I haye not written you about an 
interesting season which we were permitted to enjoy last 
Sabbath. The occasion was the admission of the first 
membero into the newly formed church. The number 
admitted was ten, — sev^n males and three females. The 
latter seemed much affected, weeping all the time. I 
wish you knew one of these Armenian sisters, Z — ^n. She 
is veiy |ntei*esting in her personal appearance, bright, 
intelligent, an4 a warm-hearted Christian. In the female 
pi-ayer meetings, she takes her part with as much pro- 
priety as if she had been trained all her days in these 
things. Her remarks and prayers are strikingly appro- 
priate and fervent, and yet she is desu*ous of learning of 
any one who can help her in the divine life. As I have 
told you so much of this person in whom I am so muck 
interested, I will relate some incidents in her family his- 
tory. She is yoimg ; married about a year ; from a good 
family, according to the phraseology of the world. She 
was formerly a great favorite with her mother, who com- 
mitted every thing valuable in the house to her hands, 
and bestowed on her particular favors. She became 
en)ightene4 in the gospel, and received its truths. At 
once her position was changed in the fiimily. Every 
thing valuable was removed from under her hand, and 
she became the object of her mothei*'s displeasure. Since 
her maniage, she has been entirely separated from her 
motb^i*} Ifhp k^ i^ot been ^o pee her since the birth of 
her child, if at all before. 



AN ABMENIAir LADT. — THX BAMAZAK. 187 

^ One of her brothers is a deacon m the church ; one of 
her sisters wishes much to know and walk in the ^rath, 
and takes every opportunity to come and visit this sister, 
so as to attend meetings and be instructed, but it is 
usually without the knowledge of her husband, who is a 
bitter enemy of the gospel. When the persecution first 
commenced, ho labored, with some priests, all oiic night 
to get his wife to sign the Patriarch's confession of faith, 
till at last the poor womout woman took the pen and 
wrote, saying, * You all bear witness that I do this with 
my hand, and not with my heart.' Another sister has 
been just the reverse of Uiis, — a bitter opposer ; so bitter 
that she compelled her husband, a pious man, to leave 
his home ; fairly turned him out. This week, we have 
heard that Z — n ha^s gone to spend some time with this 
sister, and so Mr. Goodell says, * This raging woman has 
become a lamb.' God grant it may be so, and that our 
faith may be greatly strengthened to pray for aU who are 
fighting against him. 

"17. A week has passed since I have written a word in 
this letter. I have just returned from the weekly prayer 
meeting, — this time at Galata, at the house of the good 
Scotch missionary, Mr. Allan. The great fast of the 
Turks, Ramazan, is drawing to a close, and to-night they 
call candle-night, and have some very fine illuminations. 
The mosks present a splendid appearance, with their 
brilliantly lighted minarets, between some of which fanci- 
ful figures are suspended, and so covered with lights as 
to cause the figure to appear like one of burnished gold. 
Some vessels on the Bosphorus are also beautiflQly Ulu- 
minated." 

October 25, Mrs. E. writes . " The work of Christ is 
progressing continually ; the congregation of Armenians 
IB steadily increasing ; their chapel is already too small. 
An addition of ten has been made to the church since its 

12* 



188 TBB lOBBIOVABT 8I8TBB8. 

formatioiL An Annenian Sabbath school has been formed, 
and 18 quite well attended. In addition to the preaching 
service, every Fiiday p. il, and the regular monthly 
concert, another prayer meeting has been established on 
every third Monday in the month, by the Armenians, to 
pray particularly for their nation. The weekly female 
prayer meeting is attended by a very good number. 
Sometimes more than twenty are present. Another 
interesting fkct is, that several women, wives of the 
brethren, are greatly desiring to learn to read, and, a 
teacher having been' secured, they have actually com- 
menced. A school is also established for the children of 
evangelical Armenians. Our female seminary is outwardly 
in a prosperous condition. The first year, which com- 
menced with three or four pupils, is about closing with 
fourteen, and othei's are waiting to join as soon as the 
school is removed to a larger house. Do pray that all 
these dear girls may become truly wise." 

The following, from Miss Lovell to Mr. Pardee, shows 
some of the vexations to which missionaries are subject, 
in business transactions, in such a land as Turkey. 

" OONSTAirTINOPLB, NoV. 6, 1846. 

^ My pbab FniEND : After a week or two of unusual 
fatigue and concision, I sit down to devote the few 
leisure moments of Saturday evening to the remembrance 
of distant friends. There is no time when I so long for 
home as when I contrast the quiet, peaceful hours of 
Saturday evening, and of the holy Sabbath, in my native 
land, with the unceasing toil, and noise, and bustle which 
reign hero without intermission. Those precious hours 1 
I love to remember them ; and I love to think that, at 
such times, I am sometimes remembered when, after the 
toils of the day and the week are over, you bow before 
our common Father to implore the rich blessings of the 
Sabbath for yourselves and for the distant missionary. I 



THB TSSKBRfi BBFUSBD. 189 

said we had been in unocmal confusion. We have long 
been wishing to find a house with more ample accommo^ 
dotions for the school, as well as for a chapel for the new 
Aitnenian church. A few weeks ago, we heard of a large 
house which seemed to be just the one we were in search 
of, and measures were immediately taken to secure it. 
The contract was made and signed, our school dispersed, 
our furniture was packed, and we were ready to go. 
But, in this land of freedom, a tesker6^ or permission from 
government, must be obtained before a man can change 
his dwelling. The house is very near an Armenian 
Catholic church, and, perhaps through their means, the 
minister was informed that it was desired for a Protestant 
sdiool, and a teskerS was refused. The Grand Vizier told 
Mr. Carr, who went over to the Porte to remonstrate, 
that the American missionaries had of late given the 
government great trouble, and their request could not be 
granted ; and he advised them to remain quietly where 
they arc for the present So we were fain to follow his 
advice, making a virtue of necessity, and have just con- 
cluded the arrangement of our house once more. This is 
only a specimen of the thousand annoyances we are con- 
tinually subject to. I regret it very much, as we are 
unable to receive several pupils who vcty mtich wish to 
enter the school, and, as I have Mrs. Everett's assistance 
this winter, it pains me to refuse those who are so desir- 
ous to be instructed. But he, to whom We have desired 
to commit the management of all our concerns, for wise 
reasons, sees best that thus it should be. His will be 
done! 

" Sabbath evening. I have to-day been permitted the 
precious privilege of sitting down at the table of our 
crucified Redeemer to celebrate his dying love. : In the 
moiTiing, listened to an excellent sermon from the Rev« 
Mr, Allanj of the Scotch Free Church, on the.wordS) *K 
ye ihen be risen with Christ,'; <feo^ and at noon, iii an 



140 THS mSSIONABT 8I8TBBS. 

upper room, the commanion was administered by Mr. 
Sehauffler in a most solemn and impressive manner. In 
the afternoon, at the Armenian service, a great number 
were present, notwithstanding the rain^ and listened to 
an excellent sermon from Mr. Dwight, on the nature of 
true repentance. We were disturbed, however, by a 
number of young men, who came evidently with the pur- 
pose of creating a disturbance by talking and laughing, 
going out and coming in, Ao, When service was over, it 
was found that some who left before meeting was out, 
had stolen the shoes of many of the brethren, which were 
left in the hall below, for you must know the people of 
this country do not keep on their shoes which they wear 
in the street in the house, but leave them at the door. It 
is the first time we have been disturbed in this way. 
Persons have freqaently come to the chapel with the 
intention of making a disturbance, but have usually been 
awed into silence by the solemnity and stillness of the 
congregation. 

^In a letter which I wrote to Mr. Fisher not long since, 
I mentioned the death of one of the brethren, Hoosep, in 
consequence of a fright received from a wicked man who 
threatened to stab him. This same bad man, not long 
after, attended the funeral of Iloosep, not knowing whose 
it was, but only with the intention of disturbing the 
Protestant funeral. On his way home, it being the Sab- 
bath, influenced by curiosity, or some worse motive, he 
determined to go into the chapel, and hear what Mr. 
Dwight had to say. He went in, was convicted of sin, 
convinced of the truth of what ho heard, and that what 
he had all his life been taught by his priests was false. 
Whether he is now a tnce Christian or not, remains to be 
proved ; but he has since suffered persecution himself for 
having announced himself a Protestant. 

^Several Catholic (Armenian) vartabeds have lately 
confessed themselves wearied with the follies and vanities 



TBB KSW 8S0T* 141 

• 

of their church, and convmced that Protestantism id true; 
Indeed, there is little doubt that the Spirit of Qod is 
working upon the minds of great nmnbers of all classes, 
and only the fear of persecution prevents their openly 
avowing themselves Protestants. Last week, we were 
informed that the day of their freoddm is at hand. They 
will soon be openly acknowledged by the Porte as a dis- 
tinct sect with their own head. It is very interesting to 
hear the frequent testimony of the Turks to the godly 
walk of the *new sect' *Here is a people,* they frequently 
say, ' who do not lie, n*r steal, nor blaspheme.' As one 
rich Pasha said on board of ft steamer, in presenoe of 
many others, *I would trust my whole harem and house- 
hold with one of these Protestants, but I would not trust 
them to one of your bishops 01^ patriarchs.' May Gbd 
give them grace so to walk as not to bring reproach upon 
that blessed name by which they are called. Had I time^ 
I could tell you of most interesting circumstances occur- 
ring every day. I regret the want of time to keep a 
journal of them for the benefit of friends at home. 

<* My school still flourishes iti spite of efforts to oppose 
it It is a delightful employment I bless Gbd that he 
ever put it into my heart to ^ve myself to this work. 
Oh, how unworthy am I of such an hotior I JJay my 
weakness be made strong in his strength ! " i 4 . 

Their earnest desires and prayers for their dear charge 
were erelong answered, and the year, which had been 
one of so many blessings to the evangelical Armenians, 
closed with the special influences of the Holy Spirit on 
both the Seminaries. Of this gracious work, Mrs. Everett 
gives the following particulars in a letter to sister, dated 
December 25, 1846. 

"The first indicatibns of special thoughtfulness \ver6 
manifested thrcO weeks ago last Sabbath. The dervicos 
of the day were unusually soletnn. The sacrament waii 



142 THB XIAUOHABT 8I8TBB8. 

adminbtered, and eight received into the chorcfa. 
Towards' evening of that day, two of the giiis went to 
Miss Lovell's room, seeming to have something they 
wished to say, but hardly dared. At length, they said 
they wished to know what they could do to get new 
hearts; that they had for one or two weeks felt that they 
were great sinners, and had been praying to Ood, but 
that he did not hear their prayers at all. They were 
.directed to the ^ Lamb of Ood, who taketh away the sin 
of the world.' This circumstance led us to look about us, 
at once, to see if we were ready to receive the answer to 
our too feeble prayers, feeling rebuked for our coldness 
and want of fiuth. It soon became evident that the Lord 
was indeed with us. Others began earnestly to inquire 
what they must do to bo saved. Oreat solemnity per- 
vaded the whole school; it was frequently addressed with 
much earnestness, and all listened with the most intense 
interest as they were exhorted to seek the Lord while he 
was near. The voice of prayer was constantly ascending 
from hearts burdened with a sense of sin, and scarcely an 
eye was tearless. The week did not pass without results 
which we hope will be lasting as eternity, and how 
blessed I Three were hoping that Ood had shown them 
mercy, and washed their hearts in the blood of his dear 
Son. The Sabbath following this memorable week was 
solemn. The fact of manifestations of the Spirit's 
presence was mentioned in the chapel, and the Thursday 
succeeding appointed as a day of fasting and prayer. 
On Tuesday, the Armenian female prayer meeting was 
held at the usual time, but with unusual interest. All 
seemed to think that a new state of things existed, and 
some were so much aflTccted by it that they could not go 
to their homes after the meeting, but remained until a 
late hour in the evening engaged in religious conversa- 
tion and prayer. Thursday was one of the most solemn 
days I ever saw, and will long be remembered by many 



BSYIVAL IK THB SCHOOL. 148 

hearts. The most perfect quietness prevailed among the 
girls of the school; all were thoughtful, prayerful, and 
reading the word of God, a new book to some of their 
Spirit-taught souls. The exercises in the chapel, which 
was crowded to overflowing, were deeply solemn and 
interesting. Two or three others of the girls were now 
rejoicing in Christ. One, with a countenance beaming 
from the peace within, said, 'God showed me my sins, 
and my heart was filled with sorrow, but he has shown 
me my Saviour, too, and filled my soul with joy.* *Now,' 
she says, 'I pray continually for my companions, that 
they may repent and come to Christ.' And this feeling 
is very striking in all who hope for themselves, — a great 
anxiety for unconverted friends and relatives. 

** Friday morning, I called on the females of four or 
five families, and could not but bless God for permitting 
me, so unworthy, to be here to see and hear such proofs 
of his goodness and power. In every house, new interest 
and deep feeling seemed to prevail in regard to the most 
important of all subjects. Those who are members of 
the church, with teara expressed their earnest longings 
for their friends out of Christ. 

^ Many interesting particulars in regard to the scholars 
and others, I have not time to write. Six of the girls 
give good evidence that they have become new creatures 
in Christ, and two others express hope. Oh the thought, 
that any may allow Jesus to pass by without blessing 
them I 

"There are already evidences of the special presence 
of the Spirit in the Seminary at Bebek ; for a week or 
two, unusual solemnity has pervaded the school, two are 
hoping that they have recently been born again. To- 
morrow is set apart as a day of fasting and prayer at the 
school. • . . 

"Oh, my dear sister I do you not think that my heart, 
if at all warm with love for Christ, and the souls for 



144 TIUB MISaiOHABT SUTKBA. 

whom be died, moat rejoice to be in soenee like theee? I 
bope I have lomo gratitude that I have been permitted 
to make Buch progress in the Armenian language as to be 
able to speak with them at such times, however imper- 
fectlj, and unite in their prajers and praises. How many 
times have I said, ^Oh, I wish M. was here I ' and *How 
my mother's soul would rejoice in this I ' ^ 



CHAPTEU XIII. 

Sicknen In the School -^teraeeation of the Annenlan Teacher— Death of 

the Pastor Apeoghora. 

January 15, 1847, Mrs. Everett writes to her sister in 
Millbury, Masa 

^The school was dismissed on Monday for a fortnight's 
vacation. Wo felt sorry to have the girls dispersed just 
at this time, lest some of them might yield to the tempta- 
tions to which they will be exposed; but we can commend 
them to the same merciful One who has, as we trust, led 
nearly all of them into his own fold. Hc' sweet is the 
confidence that the Qood Shepherd carries the tender 
lambs in his bosom. The state of feeling remained to the 
last very interesting, and the girls seemed to feel, when 
they left, that they must be particularly watchful and 
prayerful. Oh, dear sister, can you imagine how happy I 
am to have been permitted to see this work of the Spirit 
in this little school? There are still three or four for 
whom we have no hope. Do join us in praying that not 
one may be left out of Christ, and that not one may rest 
on a false foundation. 

^ The general state of religious feeling in the Armenian 
congregation is interesting. Some of the members of the 
church are much revived, new persons arie coining to hear 
the truth, and, recently, preaching services have been 
established in Constantinople (proper) and Hass Eeuy. 

"You know the Protestants have already had their 
own baptisms and funerals. This week, what they sup- 
posed would be most difficult to accomplish has been 

18 



146 THB MIBBIONABT BI8TBBS. 

done. Permission has been obtained, and the first mar- 
riage taken plaoe among them." 
Lovell to Mrs. Thajer. 



" CovsTAimvoPLS, Feb. 10, 1847. 

^Tour kind and affectionate letter was received yester- 
day, • • • For all the news it contained,! thank you 
most sincerely. It is not often that my friends remember 
to tell me what is going on from day to day in my old 
home. I hope no one fancies that, because oceans ix>ll 
between me and the land of my birth, I have ceased to 
feel interested in what takes place there. That can never 
be. While I have breath, I am sure my heart will ever 
ding to America as the home of its best earthly affec- 
tions. • . . 

^I am obliged to leave my writing every few minutes 
to look after the nek, so you must not wonder if my 
letter should seem somewhat disconnected. A few weeks 
since, during our Chiistmas vacation, Mr. Goodell's chil- 
dren were all seized with the scarlet fever. Since the 
return of the ^rls, two of them have been attacked with 
it, and sent home, and now two more are sick, but not 
with the scarlet fever. Owing to this sickness, the school 
is again partially broken up. Our Armenian teacher, too, 
was seized last week, and put in prison, upon a false 
accusation. Another instance of the ceaseless efforts of 
the enemies of pure religion to persecute and distress its 
friends. This man had just opened his house in the city 
for Protestant preaching, which so exasperated the Patri- 
arch and his priests that they were glad to seize upon the 
first pretext that presented itself for punishing him. A 
priest visited his house, and severely threatened his wife, 
because she, though not a Protestant, had signed away 
her portion of the house, ^ving it into her husband's 
hands, that he might use it, as he wished, for a chapel. 
The Imsband, the next day, went to tlio ])ricst'8 house. 



RBJOICINO IN TIIR IIKVIVAL. 147 

and reproved him for thus threatening and frightening 
his wife. A charge was then made out, stating that 
Stepan, the teacher, had visited the priest's house, and 
severely beateji him^ a great crime among the Turks. 
For this he is in prison ; and as there is no one to swear 
that he did not beat the man, though every one knows ho 
did not, and many Armenians can be found who will, for 
a few piastres, swear they saw him beat him, I fear it will 
be difficult to procure his release. 

** You say you wish to know all about my school. You 
have heard of the interesting revival we have enjoyed. 
Our hearts have indeed been made glad in the work 
which Ood has wrought here. Surely, what I have been 
permitted to see, during the last few mc^nths, would have 
repaid me for years of separation from those I love. We 
hope that many of the girls have become true Christians. 
Oh that ail may become such ; and that thousands may 
have reason to bless Ood for the opening of this school I 
I wish to feel, and I wish my friends to feel, when they 
remember and pray for the school, that the primary 
object should bo the conversion of every one who enters 
it ; that every other thing should be secondary to this.'' 

Speaking in the same letter of two of the missionary 
children who were soon to leave for America, she 
says: — 

"77iw is one of the severest trials of missionary life, 
that parents must part with their children just when they 
arrive at an age to be a comfort and assistance to them, 
that they may get an education, for it is impossible here 
to give them an education which will fit them for future 
usefulness." 

Under the same date. Miss Lovell writes to another 
Palmyra friend, Mrs. Louisa P. Aldrich. 

"I find myself almost unconsciously looking forward, 
sometimes, to the pleasure of seeing my old friends onco 
more; of seeing my brotlier's tWo daughters; but such 



148 TBS MISSIOHART 8|8T«RS. 

thoagfats I quiddy check as a thing out of tho liiiiit 
of probabilities. I have choacq my lot, or, rather, I trust 
Qod has chosen it for met and I see no reason to regret. 
it| although it inTolves with it a separation iVoni those 
I hold most dear on earthf Tb^ last two year? have been 
happy, very happy years. My employment I ikHght IQ. 
The climate J like, my bealUi is now good, and kinder, 
warmer, more intelligent and refined frieiids than I have 
found in the missionaries J could not find the world over. 
They have received and welcomed me as a sister and 
daughter, and, in sickness and health, their kindness and 
affection have been unceasing. , . * 

^ Tou express an interest iii my school. I have fifteen 
scholars, as many as our limited room will accommodate. 
They are many of them interesting girls, and I already 
love them much. • • « All but two or tliroo of niy 
pupils express the hope that they arq Christians. That 
the change in some cases may prove not a genuine one, is 
possible, but we have seeii enough in several of them to 
fill our hearts with wopder and gratitude for what God 
has wrought. ' Wh'ei^ I remember how ignorant and 
unenlightened many of them wer^ little more than a year 
ago, and then look Yipon their faces i*adiaut with intelli- 
gence and love, when Christ and his cross are tho theme, 
I can only say, ^It is the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous 
in our eyes.' " 

Refemng to the imprisoiunept of the teacher, men- 
tioned above, she says : ^ When ynll the day come v/hen 
fhiedom and peace shall dawn upon poor Turkey ? By 
the way, though, let me give you, as one of the signs of 
the times, the fact that our enlightened Sultan has 
declared the abolition of the Canstatitinaple slave-market 
in a most philanthropic speech, made in person at the 
Porte the other day. liCt it be published in free 
America. • . • 

^ Fires are very frequent. There are continual alarms, 



THB TURKS SABBATH SERYICBS. 149 

and it is said to be the work of incendiaries. It is ssdd 
to be a common tbing here when there is any dissatisfiuv- 
tion with Uie government, when a change of o£Eicer8 is 
desired, to encourage these incendiaries, till the desired 
change is granted I A few years ago this occurred. All 
Pcra was destroyed by fire, and finally a notice was 
issued that there would be no more fires, and there toere 
no more. Some great officers were thrown out, and the 
people were satisfied I Happy country I But, do yon 
know, with all their faults, I like the Turks. I am learn- 
ing the Turkish language, and admire it exceedingly. I 
do trust the day is not far distant, though now, humanly 
speaking, it seems almost impossible, when the door will 
be opened for the gospel to be preached to the Turks.'' 

This desire, which seemed, so few years ago, to be so 
distant in its accomplishment. Miss Lovell lived to seiB in 
part fulfilled. She was permitted to rejoice in seeing 
Turks, openly professing themselves Christians, allowed 
to go at large in Constantinople, even within the waUs of 
the city proper ; and now the day seems near when the 
'Hruth, as it is in Jesus," shall permeate the whole 
Mohammedan population of Turkey, as it has the Arme- 
nian, and this strongest hold of the false prophet shall be 
shaken to its foundations. 

Two days later. Miss Lovell thus describes her Sab- 
baths in a letter to her mother. 

" My Sabbaths are generally very much occupied. At 
nine in the morning, we have an Armenian Sabbath 
school, which is now attended by a large number, both 
old and young. At eleven, we have the English service, 
the missionaries preaching in turn, aided by the mission- 
aries of the Scotch church occasionally, and we are always 
sure of having a good sermon. At twelve, we lunch ; at 
half past one, we go to the Turkish service, conducted 
by Mr. Goodell, of which I begin to understand a little. 
Immediately afler he closes, Mr. Dwight, or the pastor, 

13* 



160 TUK in9SIONARr SISTKRS. 

prooohcs in Annenuo till b^f poet throo. At fwr^ 1 
bear tho giris say a leasoa in ilio catockism, giving all tho 
i>efevenoo8 from Scripture, At five, lye dine; at eix^ even- 
ing prayers, and at half past ^^ven, aa English Bible 
class, attended by all the missionariea, and some few 
others. This has been cpntinued for many years. I 
believe they epnunenced th9 Bible, and we are now in 
the Psalips ; having finished Job since I have been here. 
Mr, Schanffler conducts it, and, by bia intimate knowl- 
edge of the original languages, makes it very interesting. 
Wliat a precious, wonderful book is tho Bible I The 
more I become acquainted with it, the more do I love, 
and admire, and wonder, and the more do I feel my 
ignorance. What a study will this book be to us through 
all eternity I I long to hear that Henry is studying and 
loving his Bible." • • • 

From Mrs. Everett to her mother, February 26. 

^Six Armenian visitors have interrupted my writing 
for a little time, -r- three of the good sisters, and three of 
the schoolgu'ls. I feel happy in ^uch interruptions, and 
should be glad to tell you something about their visit. 
The work of the Lord ia inaking progress, sure and con- 
stant The pious females have commenced a mother's 
prayer meeting. • • • I have not been in school those 
last days, not because I have not strength and heart for 
it, but because all my time is necessary for myself. It 
has been a great struggle for mo to yield my place in 
school, for I love it, and my dea^ sister, Miss Lovell, is 
not really equal to the cares and labors which fsJl upon 
her. My dear husband will probably relieye her by going 
into the school an hour in the day at least. • . ." 

Miss Lovell to her mother, February 28. 

^Day beforp yesterday, it waa two years since I left the 
shores of America. • • • These two years, Mr. Goodell 
last night remarked, have been two most eventful years 
to the Armenian mission, — years of trial and pcraecution. 



DTSTuunANra at a funrral. 151 

and of rolief and hope. Many have been severely tt*ief1, 
and have come forth as gold purified from the fnniace. 
God has prospered us in our undertaking of establishing 
a school, far, far beyond our expectations. We eay>ect€d 
pci-secution, and that many obstacles would be thrown in 
our way ; but the persecution only added to its numbers, 
and nothing has interrupted its prosperity but the sick- 
ness of several of the pupils at present ; and this, I trust 
may prove to be for their goo<1, for their growth in grace. 
^ I am now almost alone in teaching. Week before 
last, A. was sent for to attend the bed of her dying father, 
lie died a few days since, and she is, I hear, grieving 
bitterly, and will probably not return for a few weeks. 
Her father was not a Protestant, and had left his wife's 
house for the house of a daitghter, also not a Protestant^ 
that his business might not suffer. But, when he was 
taken sick, he removed, and died in his wife's house* 
When it was known that he was dead, a great crowd col- 
lected, determined, if he was buried by the ProtestantSi 
to make a great disturbance. As he was not himself 
a Protestant, however, it was thought best that his own 
people should bury him. But, a few days after, another 
opportunity occurred for the Patriarch's faithful followers 
to execute their designs. A child died, whose father is a 
Protestant Armenian, though his mother is not. The 
father sent for Baron Apsaghom, the pastor, to bury him. 
He, with some other of the brethren, was proceeding on 
horseback to the house, (it being over in the city,) when 
they saw a great multitude approaching them of the 
hostile party; but^ being on horseback, they escaped. 
Two of the brethren were, however, already at the house. 
These they seized and beat most unmercifhlly. One of 
the rioters was seized, and is in prison, and has given the 
names of several of his companions. In their haste to 
bury the child, the Patriarch sent two or three priests, 
who buried it without a license, which is an offense 



152 THX MISSIOHART 8I8TBB8. 

agaioHt Turkifih law, and thus the probability is, that, 
instead of greatly iojoring tlie IVotestantai as they 
desired, the thing will turn against themselves. Thos it 
has been in almost every instance. God has made ose of 
his enemies to advance his own caose, and has turned* 
their own weapons against them. 

^ March 5, Saturday evening. On my way to my 
room, I was stopped by two or three of the girls, with 
some question they had to ask, and found It diHicult to 
get away from them. One of the pleasantest things con- 
nected with my situation, is the affection with which they 
seem to regard me. K I go out for a day, or lialf a day, 
they gather around me, and seem as delighted at my 
return as though I hod been gone a month. They are 
very good girls, and I very seldom have occadon to 
reprove them. I do love them very much ; often when I 
go in to evening prayers, and look from one fiico to 
another, I feel my heart overflowing with love to each 
one of them, and with gratitude to God who directed my 
steps hither, and who has given me the lines in such 
pleasant places. And then the question comes. Can it be 
that one of these lambs shall finally be lost ? Oh, dear 
mother I do pray for me that I may he faithful to them ; 
that I may have grace to direct me in all my ways, and 
that I may be permitted the joy of seeing every one of my 
dear scholars sitting at the feet of Jesus. Some of them 
give delightful evidence that they are learning of him. 
One of them to-day said to me, ^ I can not tell how sv)eei 
the thought of Jesus b to me. When I am in meeting, 
the time seems so short, I wish they might continue 
much longer.' Dear girll Her course as a Christian, 
thus &r, has seemed very bright and happy. I trust she 
may be a blessing to many. 

*^One of the girls is in great distress to-day on account 
of the sickness of her brother, the pastor of the church. 
lie was taken ill a few days since, and has been deranged 



ARMBNIAK COSTUMB. 168 

for two or three days. It is brought on enturely, the 
physicians say, by mental application. His studies, and 
cares, and anxieties have been very great and pressing 
since he was placed over the new church. I trust, how- 
ever, God will spare him to labor long among them. 

^ lie is a man of a very devoted spirit, and calculated 
to be very useful to the people of his charge." 

The pastor's illness proved to be " unto death." To 
the great grief of his people, and of the missionaries, after 
a few days of suffering, he was called to " rest from his 
labors." His memory is still precious. 

March 14, Miss Lovcll wrote to her motlicr, with a few 
curiosities she was sending to her friends in Pahnym, 
among which were two dolls, dressed by the girls in the 
school. Miss L. writes some particulai*s about Oriental 
costume which may interest the curious in such matters. 

" One of the dolls is in the costume of an Armenian 
bride, as she is di-essed two days previous to the ceremony. 
She is then entirely enveloped in a thick veil, and carried 
to the church. Formerly, — and in some families it is now 
the case, — the bride was not for a year permitted to 
speak in the presence of her new father and mother with- 
out special permission. The long wax candle is borne 
before the bride when she goes to church. The other 
doll is dressed in the ordinary home dreas, covered by 
the ferqjee^ or mantle, and yashmak^ or veil, worn by all 
Turkish and Armenian females in the street. The ferajco 
is often of bright red, green, or blue, which gives a very 
brilliant appearance to a company of women. The veil 
is always white. The ferajee and yashmak you can take 
off, but, as you do so, observe carefully how they are put 
on, as the adjusting of the yashmak is one of the niceties 
of Turkish dress ; they spend a great deal of time before 
the glass in arranging the folds of the veil, and always 
carry a little mirror with them in case of need. The full 
trousera (sometimes made of bright calico, or in summer 



154 Tm MIBSIONART 8I8TBBS. 

of thin mudin) are called the Bhcdvar. The long trailing 
garment, which is tied op under the ferajee in the street, 
18 called the erUaree. You would find it hard to believe 
that any person should ever rig out in so many different 
pieces of finery as do the females of this land." 



CHAPTER XIV. 

Birih of Mn. Ereratt^s First Child— Ordinatioii of Putor Simon— Contiiiaed 
Additions to the Chnroh— Sicluiess and Death of one of the Papils In the 
Female Seminaiy. 

Tub Spring brought an important addition to Mrs. 
Everett's cares and joys in the birth of a little daughter, 
on the 11th of March. She gave expression to some of 
the overflowings of her grateful joy in the following 
letter • — 

•'March S7, 1847. 

**Mt vbby dbar Mothbu: My own precious little 
babe is sweetly sleeping on her pillow, and as I have 
suflicient strength to write you a few words, in some sort, 
I can not forbear, though what to say I hardly know, 
except to tell you how good is our Qod, — supremely good 
to us, to me, deserving only his chastening. * Oh, bless 
the Lord, my soul I Let all within me bless his holy 
name!' I often ask myself. Why all this mercy and 
goodness? and my thouglits turn to you, my dear parents, 
and brothers, and sisters, and I feel that it must be in 
answer to your prayers. I know that you are asking 
these blessings for your distant child. Is it not all of the 
free rich grace and mercy of God that we are so blessed ; 
and is he not in this way calling upon us to consecrate 
ourselves entirely to his service ? May his goodness not ^ 
lie * forgotten in unthankfulness, and without prdses 
die!" ... 

^ When I look upon tlio little one in my arms, I must 



156 TUS 1II8BIONABY 8I8TBB8. 

• 

dxclaim, * Who is sufficient for these things? But will 
not he who has placed her in oar hands give us all needed 
grace and strength ? If we feel our utter weakness and 
entire dependence, he surely will. In our dear, sweet 
Mary, we are very happy. A new founts is opened in 
our hearts, which, as yet, wells forth only joy and grati- 
tude. Do pray much for us, that, from the first, we may 
consider this little one as a lent treasure ; that she may 
be a link to bind us to God and heaven, and not attach 
our hearts more strongly to this uncertain world." • • • 
Miss Lovcll to Mr. R. G. Pardee. 

'* ComvtAWtiMOThm, April 7, 1847. 
K Mt deah FniEND : I wish I could transfer to paper 
the busy and cuiious scene I have just witnessed. It 
being the last of the three Easter holidays, I went out 
this moiiiing to recoil, if possible, the sensations willi 
which, two years ago, the day after my arrival at Con- 
stantinople, I witnessed the same sight. Perhaps I then 
described it to you, and, lest I may have done so, I will 
not now repeat it, only to say that several thousands, 
Greeks and Armenians, were assembled in what is known 
AS the ^ Grand Champ de Mort;' dancing, swinging, sing- 
ing, begging, cooking, and eating in the city of the dead, 
each one striving to the utmost of his power, apparently, 
to make himself as little like man, and ns much like a 
brute, as possible, and all in commemoration of the resur- 
rection of our blessed Saviour I Many of them were,' 
doubtless, dancing upon the very graves of their fathers,* 
brothers, and sisters I Troops of soldiers are continually 
parading the streets to preserve order among these 
Cfhriatiana. The whole city seems turned out of doors, 
ladies and children in their gayest apparel, and the 
stately, solemn Turk walks through the midst, smiling at 
their folly, no doubt, and with no high opinion of a reli- 
gion which produces such effects. 



OBDINATIOK OF CASTOR 8IH0N. 157 

'' Last Thursday, which was with the Armenians the 
beginning of their holy days, witnessed a most interesting 
scene in the little chapel of the despised and persecuted 
Protestant Annenians. It was the day set apart for the 
ordination of Simon, brother to the late lamented pastor, 
of whose death you have heard. It was an interesting 
and affecting scene, and the circumstance of his being so 
soon and suddenly called to take his brother's place, 
added to the solemnity of the occasion. On the Sabbath 
after, (Easter Sabbath,) he, assisted by Mr. Dwight, 
administered the communion, and four persons were 
received into the church. There have been additions to 
the church at every communion season, and the chapel 
will soon be too small to contain all the communi- 
cants. 

** We have now visiting us Dr. Glen, of the London 
Missionary Society, I believe, who, at the advanced age 
ofseventj/j is on his way to Persia, with his son, as mis- 
sionaries. The father has been a missionary many years, 
has translated the whole Bible into Persian, has been 
homo to attend to its publication, and is now on his 
return to put it in circulation. I could not but look upon 
it as an interesting sight, — this old man returning to the 
scene of his labors with his son, himself advanced in age, 
that with his own hands he may assist in scattering Uie 
word of God which he has translated, and thus, in some 
measure, reap the fruit of the labor of his life.'^ 

Miss Lovell wrote again to the same friend. May 15. 

"We feel very much the want of a larger house, and in 
a more airy situation. The scholars suffer much in health 
from being confined in such close quarters. Poor girls ! 
they can not, like the happy children in America, go out 
and enjoy a run over the green hills after the studies of 
the day are completed. Here there are no green fields to 
run over, and, if there were, no young girl can go out in 
the street without her mother, or some elderly friend or 

14 



158 TBB lOSSlOVABT 8I8TSB8. 

■cnrftni. Oh that acme rich man in AmerioHy somo John 
Jacob Aator, who wiahea to htj up ireaaoie in hearen, 
vonld send na a few thonaanda to build na audi a hoaacy 
and fomiah na auch gronnda aa we need I We often 
amoae oanelyea, aa we paaa aome of the Soltan'a empty 
paUiceai with th^ beantifhl gardenfli with anticipating 
the day when the Creacent ahall giro way to the Croaa^ 
and aome of these fine buildings shall be devoted to the 
Bedeemet'a service; when the name of Christian shall not 
be a by-word and reproadi in the land ; when the mosks 
shall be converted into Christian churches, and I and my 
flock be established in some one of these beautiful situa- 
tions. But though all this seems wild and improbable 
enough ; though, when we look at the strong hold which 
ignorance, and superstition, and error have taken in the 
land, those things seem impossiblo with man, yet fiiith 
bida ua hope, yea hdieve^ that the day will come when 
* holiness to the Lord ' shall be written upon every dwell- 
ing and every heart . . . 

^I bless Qod that we are permitted to see the good 
influence of thb school in other ways than merely upon 
those gathered under our roof. It is creating a de^re 
among the whole Protestant female community to read, 
and, stimulated by the example and encouragement of 
those who have learned, all, old and young, are lisping 
their a b c's. There is not a female in the church but 
can read. There are, among the congregation who occa- 
donally attend at the chapel, seven or eight grandimothera 
learning to read, that they may for themselves feed upon 
the word of Ood. Not long ago, a little girl, four years 
of age, came to see her sister in my school. At evening 
prayers, we observed that she held a Testament in her 
hand, and what was our surprise, when it came her turn, 
to see that she had not only found and kept her place, 
but could read in an audible and distinct manner, although 
she was hardly old enough to speak plain. What is more. 



MRS. BVBBBTT^S HOUSK. 159 

Uiis little girl is teaching her mother to read, who is to be 
received into the church at the next communion, at the 
same time with her daughter Marianu one of my scholars, 
eleven years old." 

Mrs. Everett was soon able to resume her duties in the 
school, which she did with undiminiRhed interest. In 
May, Mr. Dwight's family went to Bcbck for the summer, 
and Mr. and Mrs. Everett commenced housekeeping in 
the house they had left, known as the Mission Chapel 
House. Of this change, Mrs. Everett writes to one of her 
brothers. 

^^We now have a homo of our own, but not an 
American home. You know what kind of ideas a young 
enthusiast would have of a New England home ; shall I 
describe * the house we live in ? ' As you enter the door, 
you step upon a brick floor, with a kitchen on one side, 
(and such a one, constructed only for a cook's shop f) on 
the other, a room for wood or coal. Then, as you advance, 
you come upon a marble-paved court, with servants' 
room, magazine, &o. Then you begin to go up stairs, 
and these houses are almost all up stairs ; — on the first 
floor, is the chapel and four rooms ; then up again, and 
you would find a large schoolroom and five rooms more ; 
the attic completes the house. . . . Mr. GoodelFs 
house adjoins this. Now that Mr. Dwight's family has 
left, the schooh'oom is in here, and one sleeping room for 
the girls. Mr. Dwiglit has his study here ; Mr. Homes 
also. The English service is held in the chapel, and, 
besides a congregation of 160 or 200 Armenians on the 
Sabbath, they have meetings during the week. So you 
see what a public place it is." 

In another letter, she speaks of all her romantic ideas 
of housekeeping having taken flight before these realities, 
so different from what her imagination had pictured, 
though she was enjoying a great deal notwithstanding; 
very happy in her own little family, and in being able 



160 THB MIBBIONART 8IBTBRS. 

Still to do 80 muoh for the people in whose welfiiro her 
heart was so warmly enlisted. 

On the first Sabbath in Juno, seycnteen were roecived 
into the church ; among them, four of the pupils of their 
'school. Mrs. Everett, in reference to this, says : — 

^ Do you think it strange that our hearts were filled 
with emotions of the deepest gratitude to him who has, 
as we trust, called them to be lambs of his own fold ? 
Oh, may he ever lead, and guide, and keep them, and 
make them eminently holy, and entirely devoted to his 
service. These dear girls have been very consistent in 
their conduct since they were brought to receive Christ 
as their Saviour, Among those admitted, were the 
mother and sister of the late pastor, (and also of the 
present ;) the latter from the school, the former a fine, 
noble-looking woman, and quite intelligent. A year 
since, she was very indifferent to religion, but was ofVen 
at the service to hear her son preach, and spent some 
time at his house. She was most tender in her affection 
for Baron Apsoghom, and was deeply afflicted at his 
death, but surprised all by her calmness, and herself too. 
She said, *If this son had died some time ago, I should 
have been distracted, tearing my hair, beating myself Ac. 
But now I am quiet ; the Holy Spirit strengthens me.' " 

Mrs. Everett, under differen\dates, gives particulars of 
the mckness and deatli of one of the pupils in their school, 
the first of their precious charge removed to a better 
world. 

^ June 5. One of the dear girls belonging to our school 
is lying at the point of death. She has not been well for 
some months. About six weeks she has been confined to 
her room, and much of the time to her bed, having a 
cough, pain in her side, swelling of her lower limbs, and 
every appearance of consumption. She is an interesting 
girl, very affectionate, open, and kind in disposition, and 
has been very thoughtful in regard to her soul's concems. 



DBATIl OF A PVPlh. 161 

but w«as not among those most decidedly changed daring 
the last winter. Daring her illness, she has seemed 
strongly to hope and desire that she might recover, — 
speaking much about her dear school, and saying that, if 
her feet were only well, she would take her things in her 
hand, and join her companions. At the same time, she 
appeared sad and disinclined to reply when any thing 
was said to her about leaving this world. During the 
last week or two, her disease has rapidly advanced, her 
whole body being bloated even to her neck ; and dear 
Mariam has been obliged to give up all hope of living 
long here. She has wished much to have her teachers 
and school companions about her. Yesterday, she called 
for me many tinies in her distress, but I could not go to 
her. This morning, as soon as I could leave my babe, I 
went, and found her very weak, but she greeted me with 
a smile, and, in answer to my inquiry how she was, she 
said, *I am very joyful.' Through the day, yesterday, 
she suffered much pain, and seemed to realize that she 
could not long endure. In the night, she became easy, 
and her sorrow and mourning were changed to joy and 
praise. She said, * For two or three hours, I could not 
sleep for my joy.' * Jesus is my Saviour ; I am going to 
be with him.' * Praise to God!' * When will he come 
and take me.' When I asked her if she wished to remain 
longer in this world, she promptly replied, * No ! ' and to 
the question. Which do you prefer, to live or die? she 
replied, * I wish to die.' 

"June 10. This afternoon, I went out to see dear 
Mariam stretched upon her bed, the spirit struggling to 
be free from its house of clay for, we trust, a home where 
is no more pain, sorrow, sin, or death. It seemed as 
though the poor girl could not long continue to be a 
sufferer. I thought I should watch the departing spirit 
as it quitted its earthly tenement for a new, a celestial 
abq^e. But not so. For nearly twenty-four hours, she 

14* 



162 THS MISSIOVART 8I8TBIIS. 

baf lain nnooiucioiis to every thing, unless it be her own 
protracted sufferings. What scenes are just before this 
dying giri, and how long ere we sliall be called to stand 
before the great white throne ? Oh, may we have Jesus 
for our friend in that trying hour 1 " 

June 2d, Miss Lovell writes of a remarkable preserva- 
tion which the mission chapel and seminary had had 
from fire. 

^ My dearest mother, I sit down in the midst of dust 
and smoke, and with a trembling hand, to tell you that, 
through the great mercy of our heavenly Father, we have 
again been preserved fix>m falling a prey to another of 
those terrible fires which so often ravage this city. Last 
night, at 12 o'clock, we were aroused from our slumbers 
by the alarm of fire, and found, to our great terror, tliat 
all the buildings around us were illuminated by the flames 
of a raging fire very near us. We, of course, had no time 
to lose, but all set to work to tear up every thing in the 
two houses, and put them into the magazine. We worked 
till between five and six, when the fire abated, and we 
thought ourselves safe. Just as the fire was about extin- 
guished, the toind arose^ and just in the direction of our 
houses, and the burning cinders and great masses of fire 
fell around us thick and fast, but, by great exertions, we 
were saved. Had. the wind arisen half an hour sooner, 
no human power could have saved our chapel and semi- 
nary. Thus the Lord has again and again, and yet again 
appeared for us when, to all human appearance, there 
was no hope. It is now noon, and we have worked from 
six till now in getting the things back again into the 
house. Of course, all this moving in such haste is always 
accompanied with much loss and damage to furniture, 
clothing, ifec, but oh, what reason have we to be grateful 
that our houses are spared, our place of worship not 
broken up, and we, like thousands, left houseless and 
hon^cless. It is thought that 600 or 800 houses were 



ANKITBRSABT — DBATH OF MABT DWIGHT. 168 

burned. We hope we Bhall not be obliged to close 
school, though it will be many days before we shall get 
in order again. If we find we are not sick to-morrow, we 
shall continue." 

Mrs. Everett writes, July 1. 

^I have just come up from the chapel, where a meeting 
has been held in commemoration of the formation of the 
first evangelical church among the Armenians, it being 
one year to-day since that ever-memorable event took 
place. This moment, I hear them singing,— 

(( < Awake, iny soal, to JoyfVil lays ; ' 

and wish to run back and join the song. I left as Mr. 
GoodcU was speaking in Turkish, and the meeting nearly 
through. It has been a year of mercy to this little church, 
its original number having been more than doubled. The 
church has been afflicted by the death of a beloved pas- 
tor, but the Lord has not forsaken his people, although 
for a time they were cast down. ISl&y we see still greater 
things during the coming year f " 

A few days later, Mrs. Everett thus speaks of the death 
of a very lovely missionary child. 

" We" can hardly believe that we shall never more see 
the sweet face of dear Mary Dwight. She was universally 
beloved, and by her parents most tenderly so, but the 
arm of the Almighty and AU-merciful One is beneath 
them, and they are sustained. . . . She spoke once 
of dying ; said she wished to die and go to Christ, and 
at another, * Christ will receive me.' Is not the kingdom 
of heaven of stcchf Oh, these dear little ones I they get 
BO near to our hearts that we are in danger of forgetting 
that they are bom to die. As I look upon my own dear 
Mary now, I am forced to feel how frail the'tie that binds 
her to this world. Earlier even than the lovely one 
to-day laid in her lowly bed, this flower may be 

" * Tranflplantcd to those ererlastlng gardeni, 
• Where angels walk, and seraplis are the Wardens.* 



1C4 TUB MISSIONABT 8I8TSUS. 

By tliU dUpoiisation, how are we parents called upon to 
seek the early conversion of our children.^ 

That which the mother's fond love thus deprecated 
die was called to experience. The tie which bound her 
first sweet flower to her, proved indeed a fhul one, and 
of brief continuance, and the cherished little Mary 
Seraphina was the third of the liule Marys to take her 
place in the Pera burying-ground. But this is antici- 
pating. 



CHAPTER XV. 

Vrognta of the Mlmionaiy Work — Additions to the Charch— Inoretae of 
l*upitt in the Female Semiiiary— Harrlege of two of the rapili. 

TnouGn tho young mother's heart might sometimes 
indulgo a momentary foreboding as she looked on her 
first-born, and was reminded, by tho bereavements of 
others, of the uncertain tenure by which she held her 
own treasure, tho shadow was but a faint and quickly 
passing one. The little Mary was a healthy and happy 
babe, and Mrs. Everett's letters, for many months, are 
full of her, and of the joys and hopes die had called 
foiih. 

Mrs. Everett to Mrs. Fuller, Cambridge, Mass. 

" Ckmstantinople, J11I7 2^, 1S47. 

"My vert dear Friend Mart: About two years 
and a half have flown by since we parted, probably to 
meet no more until time is finished with us, and our 
eternity l>cgun. On those blest shores where we hope to 
meet, farewell is a sound unknown. But these years ; if 
we could meet, should we not have much to relate in 
regard to the way in which our God has led us ? 1 am 
happy tliat we are not entirely ignorant of what has 
occupied tho mind, heart, and time of each other during 
this j)eriod ; still, my histoiy for the past few months is 
yet to be told ; and if you were now to enter my room, I 
suppose, after giving you some sensible proofs of my 
aflection for yourself, I should lead you across the room 



166 THB laSSIOKABT 8I8TSB8. 

to a littlo orib| in which, under a charming lUUe quil^ 
deeps the sweetest, most precious little babe I ever saw. 
(Oh, forgive me f) We call this darling ours. Her name 
is Mary Seraphina, and she is now four and a half months 
old, • • • She has already thrown closely around our 
hearts tendrils, which, if severed, must leave them sorely 
bleeding. We try to remember that she is lent, and may 
at any time be rightfully claimed by him who has com- 
mitted her to our care. May she be indeed a lamb in the 
Saviour's fold ; his here and for ever I 

^ I think I wrote you about the circle of pious Arme- 
nian females, their prayer meetings, their desire to leam, 
&a Quite a large number have since united with the 
church, nearly thirty in all. Tou have learned with much 
interest, I am sure, of the precious and deeply interesting 
season in the girls' school last autumn and winter. Four 
who were subjects of the revival have already united 
with the church ; two others are propounded, and one 
dear girl has, as we trust, joined the church above. What 
a precious hope, that this fii*st one taken from our school 
has gone to that better world, where all is purity and 
joy, and she will live, leam, and praise for ever.'' 

Miss Lovell to Mrs. Thayer, Palmyra. 

" Bbbbk, August 23, 1847. 

^ My vbry dbar Fbibnd : It is the afternoon of the 
blessed Sabbath, and I presume you are just at this hour 
going up to the house of Qod to worship with the great 
congregation. All around you speaks of the quiet and 
stillness of an American Sabbath. I fancy I hear the 
sweet sound of the < church-going bolls,' and now the 
thrilling tones of the organ swell upon my delighted 
ear." 

After dwelling at some length upon the painful con- 
trast presented by the scenes around her, she adds: — 

^ But though all the outward influences are so unfavor- 



SCSNISIIT AT BSBSK. 167 

able to the enjoyment of this holy day, we can and do 
have pleasant and profitable Sabbaths in our own houses. 
We are pennitted to worship in our own chapel or 
houses unmolested, and, in the retirement of our own 
dwellings, we can meet and welcome the visits of the 
same Ood who makes glorious with hb presence the 
sanctuaries of Christian lands. • . . 

^Oh, this glorious hope, the rest that awaits the people 
of Qod I When will the glad hour come when we shall 
appear in his presence? For I sometimes feel that it will 
be a glad hour when this mortal shall put on immortality, 
this corruptible, incorruption ; when this body of sin and 
death shall be laid aside, and I shall be * like him,' for I 
* shall see him as he is.' • . • 

** I am now spending a week or two of my summer 
vacation with Mr. Goodell's family, at the house of one 
of our kind friends in Bebek. It is most delightfully 
situated, and I wish I could give you some idea of the 
enchanting prosi)ect spread out before my eyes at this 
moment. The wind has gone down, and the Bosphorus 
is smooth as glass. The shadow of every rope and sail 
maybe seen in the quiet waters; the setting sun is tinging 
the palaces and other buildings on the Asiatic side oppo- 
site us, the light and gracefitl caiques are darting swiftly 
over the waters, and the house where we are now staying 
is so situated upon the side of a hill, overlooking the 
village, the water, and the opposite side to a great dis- 
tance, that at one glance the eye can take in the whole 
beautiful scene. Upon almost every hill around us, is 
some beautiful kiosk, or private summer house of the 
Sultan; for he is a man of taste, and selects and beautifies 
every choice and lovely spot for himself.** 

From a long and interesting letter written by Miss 
Lovell to her mother, September 13 we make the follow- 
ing extract. 

^My dear mother, let us be more constant at this 



168 THS MISaiOlfABT 8I6TXBS. 

throne of grace ; let us at all times have a spirit of prayer. 
There is aach a thing as that the heart, in whatever pur- 
suit the body may be engaged, will bo continually drawn 
towards God, and is no sooner released from other cares, 
than it will immediately fly heavenward, because its 
home, its best affections, are there. Blessed indeed are 
they whose continued experience is the enjoyment of this 
state I Glimpses of it I have enjoyed for weeks past. 
Prayer has never been so delightful to mo, Uie thought 
of death and of heaven so sweet and desirable, as of late. 
Sometimes, indeed, I have felt a strong desire, if it might 
be the Lord's will, to depart and be with Christ, and yet, 
I pray that I may have no vnU InU his. If it be his will 
that I should live many years, may he give me grace to 
spend them faithfully in his service, to do much for him ; 
but oh I it will be a welcome summons that calls me to 
lay down this body of sin to go and serve him for ever, 
free from all impeifections. I have written so much 
about myself but you will forgive me; I want you to 
know how much I enjoy. I often wish we could enjoy 
one more month, or week, or even day together, and talk 
together of heavenly tilings, and recount all the mercies 
of our Father to us both. But the day is drawing nigh, 
how near we know not, when wo shall, I trust, meet with 
exceeding joy before our Father's throne. Oh I shall wo 
meet all those we love there f " . . . 

With such feelings, such habitual communion with God, 
can it be wondered that she was always meek, humble, 
self-denying, ^always abounding in the work of the Lord," 
and that her most intimate associates should be able to 
discern in her scarcely a fault ? 

Let us now return to Mrs. Everett, who, wliile Miss 
Lovell was spending the weeks of their summer vacation 
with the Goodells so pleasantly in Bebek, and the other 
missionary families were also in the country, was loft 
ivith her little family alone in the large chapel and school- 



D01UI8TI0 BNIOTMBMTS. 160 

house in Pcra. Though very tinlike in many points of 
natural character and temperament, these two lovely 
missionary sisters were one in spirit For them both, <*to 
live was Christ,** and they seemed always to cultivate 
that intimate communion with him which led them often 
to think with pleasure of the time when they should 
depart and be with him for ever. 

In writing to one of her sisters-in-law, the day after 
Miss Lovell had written the letter from which the above 
extract is taken, Mrs. Everett sa3rs:— - 

^The work in which we are engaged is oim, our Master 
is one^ and, if we are faithfiil in his service, we shall at 
lust have one home in those prepared mansions above. 
How glorious the prospect! We shall be 'near and like 
our God,' Our souls will then be purified, and our 
services also. Sin will not be mixed with all we do. 
Our hearts now so wavering, fiuth so weak, love so cold, 
will be established, purified, and flow forth pure and 
strong for ever.** 

Many pleasant glimpses wo get through Mrs. Everett's 
familiar letters to her home-circle, of her domestic enjoy- 
ments, and many details, given with all a young mother's 
admiring fondness, of the baby Mary, and her pretty 
ways, and all her parents' delight in her. They made 
firequent visits to their friends in the country, to recruit 
their strength, during those warm weeks of August and 
September. But, even with her young babe and her 
household careSj which left her little time for rest, Mrs. 
E. would not allow the weeks of vacation to pass without 
doing something with reference to the work she had so 
deeply at heart She wished much to be able to talk 
freely with the Greeks about her, servants and others, of 
the love of Jesus, and to point them to the Lamb of Gk>d; 
and, urged by this strong desire, she engaged a Greek 
teacher, and gave all the time she could, during these 
weeks of comparative leisure, to improving herself in this 

15 



ITQ TQB.lOBaiOVAIlT 8ISTBB8. 

llMiigHHg^ of which she had already considerable knowU 
edge. 

. Writing September l, she says :-^ 
* ^ We were at one of the villages on the Bosphoros last 
weel^ for an excursion, a little picnici and saw the first 
railroad in Turkey, a short way for carrying bricks from 
a kiln. The car is moved by men, a clumsy little thing, 
but runs quite easily on its iron way. Mr. and Mrs. 
Goodell, who have been in this country about a quarter 
of a century, had never seen a railroad. We helped them 
into the car, and Mr. Everett, taking the place of ^team^ 
gave them a ride. 

. f^And, moreover, there has been in Turkey an exhibi- 
tion of the wonderful power of the electro-magnetic tele- 
graph, first to a oompany of missionaries in Mr. Hamlin's 
study at Bebek, and then in the presence of the Sultan." 
On the night of the 16th of September, the mis- 
donary houses in Pera were again tliroatencd with 
destruction by a large fire in the near neighborhood, 
which was blown directly towards them by a violent 
wind. But this time, as before, the Lord graciously 
interposed, and the raging flames were stopped when 
withii^ a few doors of them. 

t In a letter written by Miss LovcU i>ear the close of the 
year, to Mr. Pardee, we have a concise history of the pro- 
gress of the school, together with some of the encouraging 
results they were already permitted to see of their unre- 
mitting efforts and urayerH for their beloved pupils. 

** pONBTAiTTiHpri'^i Pco. Qj 1847. 

^ iMx P9 AR FniSND AND BnoTiiBU : • • • Since I 
last w)*ote, we have beei^ able to increase our number of 
pupils tP twepty-tbree« The whole number who have 
l)eei^ connected with the school is twenty-six. Otie we 
belipye ifl with the redeemed above ; one left on account 
of Ul-hcAlthi and one was, two or three weeks since, mar- 



OBABAOTBB 01' TtlK PUHlS. ' l71 

lied to a pions young man, ft natiVe helper and colportef. 
She is one who gives good evidence of piety, and we 
' trust will prove a blessing, by her example and influence, 
to the females of Broosa, where her husband has gone to 
reside. In the course of four or five months, I shall also 
be called to part with my two assistant teachers^ the first 

who came to the school. A ^ yoii perhaps know by 

name. She has been to me a great assistance and a great 
comfort, and a great blessing to the school ; and nothing 
but the belief that it is the Lord^s will that she should go 
and carry the. same blessings to others^ reconciles me to 
the idea of parting with her. She will be married in 
three or four weeks to a native brother, who was to-day 
licensed to preach, and who will probably soon be 
ordmned over the infant church at Trebizond. Thus, 
you see, I am losing iny pupils one after ahothef*, btit I 
trust they are going to sow the good seed, to be fountains 
of sweet waters to this thirsty land. Help us to thank 
Gk)d that we are so soon permitted thus to eictend our 
influence. 

"Of the twenty-three now in the school, seven are 
quite young, and the care of them is proportionally great. 
Pray that God may, by hi^ Holy Spirit, early impress 
their young minds, land bring them to himself. We have 
frequent and encouraging evidences of the presence of 
the blessed Spirit with us. Two of the older girls, we 
hope, have, within two or three weeks past, found the 
Saviour, and two or three others, of whom we formerly 
had some doubts, give daily increasing evidence of a 
work of grace in their hearts. Of at least half of our 
number, we have a good hope that they are the lambs of 
the Saviour's flock. With all these encouragements, we 
are not without our trials. The wickedness of the heart 
sometimes shows itself, and, though always obedient to 
me in my presence, yet the force of evil habits is so 
strong in the case of one or two of the new-comers, that 



)72 TUB MIBSIOVABY S18TSB8. 

they 9xe a oontiniuil aonroe of anxiety to me. But graee 
diyine ean change the viloBt hearti and make it a temple 
fiir the Holy Spirit^ and I would not despair of any whom 
God may see fit to send to us.** 

At the doae of this letter, written a week later, Mifls 
L, fays ; ^ I enclose a copy of the paper given last week 
to Lord Cowley, by whidi the jProiestantM are (U length 
aekfiawledgedf and their fireedom, civil and religious, 
guaranteed to them. This great thing has been obtained 
by Lord Cowley's perseverance and fidelity to the Prot- 
estant interesta. The Armenian (Protestant) church 
observed last Thursday as a day of thanki^ving for this 
great mercy, and of prayer that they might hencefi>rth 
walk worthy of their high vocation, and adorn the doo- 
trme of Qod their Saviour, in all things." 

Mrs. Evefett, writing a similar account of the school, 
says, in reference to the two who were to be married : — 

^ The object for which we labor is accomplished when 
we see these dear girls going here and there as angels of 
light and mercy to their benighted sisters^ and, while we 
are sad at parting with them, we rejoice that we can feel 
confidence that they go to spread the glad tidings of sal- 
vation among their people who are in darkness." 



CHAPTER XVI. 

InterwUng Meeting on the First Hondtf In the Tear —Hie SoKlui'v 
eitabllehing the RIghte of the rrotesUuiti— FIttt K»>mlnetfon in the 
Female Semlnarjr. 

Tills fii-st letter of the new year^ written by MrsA 
Evet^tt, id do. ftiil of interest that, though long^ it id 
inserted almost entire* 

" Coil8TANTIilOPLB> JlUl. 6, 1848. 

^Father, mother, brothers, and sisters dear, I wish 
yoii all a happy neW year, and inay it be a year of rich 
bledisingd to each one of the Ibved circle* Grace, mercy, 
and peace, health, and happiness, abundantly be your 
portion! . * . • 

"You will be interested to hear of our meeting in 
concciii with you on the first Monday of the liew year, — 
a meeting long to bo remembered by all those present as 
one of the -richest foretastes of the happiness of the bright 
world above, the dai^n of heaven below. Arrangements 
had been previously made for a general communion, and^ 
ns one remarked in the courso of the exercises^ *Tho 
North gave up, and the South kept not back.* They 
came from the East and from the West, tod sat down 
"With Abraham, and with Isaacs, and with Jacob, not really 
by sense and sight, but surely by faith. There were 
assembled in our chapel English, Americans, Scotch^ 
Germans, Armenians, and Jews ; and every hian heard in 
his own tongue wherein ho was bom. The meeting wad 
opened with prayer by Mr. Goodell in Turkish ; hymiiS 

16* 



174 THB UlBBU>MAUr 8I8TXB8. 

were then read in Kngliahi Oemum, and Armenian, and 
aong at the same time by the whole assembly, to the 
tune of Old Hondred. llie Soriptures were then read 
in Torkish by Baron Harootun, the recently ordained 
pastor of the chorohes at Nicomedia and Ada Bazaar, 
Mr. Schanflier then made an address in (German. Mr« 
Allan, Scotch missionary to the Jews, followed in English, 
Mr. Dwig^t in Armenian; then the bread was distributed, 
and prayer offered in English by Mr. Wood, and the wine 
administered by Baron Simon, pastor of the Armenian 
church here; then a hymn was sung, as at the commence- 
ment of the services, in the three languages, to the tune 
of MartyUf Mr. Ooodell pronounced the benediction in 
his peculiarly impressive manner in Turkish, and all 
separated with, I venture to say, more earnest longings 
for that blessed place where * the assembly ne'er breaks 
up.' YfoB it not good to be there in the midst of such a 
company, eyery one of whose hearts had been touched by 
Jesus^ loye, all sitting at his feet, remembering his d^h 
in h|s own appointed way, and seeking to learn of him f 
One must look up after such a season as this, and say: — 

^ K)b, gloriow honMl oh, bleit tbodel 
IibaU b« neair and like m/ God.* 

^One part of the exercises I had almost forgotten to 
mention. Mr. Ooodell, in Turkish, brought to mind the 
state of things in Constantinople seventeen years ago, 
when he first came here, and there was not one, or afdy 
one, with whom he could have Christian communion, 
and now what a goodly company, from so many different 
nations, could sit down at the table of him who had 
redeemed them with his own precious blood, and adore 
the wonderful displays of God's power in this dark land 1 
Encouraged by the fiuthful promise^ of the Almighty, as 
well ^s by what our eyes see and our ears hear, what 
may we not expect in future years? There were present. 



RBCOONITION OV THV l»ROTB8¥AKT8« ItS 

on this occasion, about one hundred and fifty penionS) the 
majority Armenians. 

"You will be glad to hear of the temporal prosperity 
of these poor persecuted Armenians* The Sultan has 
issued a proclamation, in which they are recognized as a 
distinct sect, under the name of Protestants, — their 

affairs being placed in the hands of the Pasha, with 

whom they are to communicate through an agent chosen 
from among themselves. An order was also issued at 
the same time, to the governors and pashas in the regions 
where there are Protestants found, that their rights and. 
privileges in all respects be regarded and secured. Itave 
we not all occasion to praise our Qod, who has wrought 
such wonders in this dark land ? " 

After speaking of special encouragement at that time 
in the Jewish work, Mrs. E. continues. 

" Wb have been made glad also in our female seminary 
by indications of the Spirit's presence, so that, a few 
weeks since, at the request of some of the church inem- 
bers, a day of special prayer was observed, and we trust 
not in vain. The girls are now separated for a vacation 
of three weeks, but we trust they will not be left to 
wander from him to whose care we daily commend them. 
Since the school has increased in numbers, the majority 
are, we fear, out of Christ. Will you not remember them 
before Qod ? 

" Before dismissing the school, we had our first exami- 
nation, inviting only a few friends for want of room. All 
expressed much satisfaction with what they saw and 
heard, and really, I think you would, any of you, have 
been pleased to see the bright, intelligent faces of 
these girls, and hear their ready answers in the various 
studies to which they have attended. I must say that I 
feel, from day to dayj richly rewarded for all the time 
and strength I give to this dear school May it be blessed 



176 THii idteiOHABt sistkbs* 

more and more, and be made the meana of spreading 
light and knowledge and truth through all this land I ^ 

Wm Lovell's first letter of the now year la full of 
grateAd reoognition of all the kindness of the Lord. 
^It I were to attempt,'' she says, *^to speak of the Lord's 
mercies to me, and to number them, where should I 
b^;in, or where end ?^ As usual, she places among her 
chief causes of gratitude the sweet society and tender 
aflbction of her missionary friends. Speaking of the 
fiunily in which she enjoyed so delightful a home, she 
says: ^I often think that this house is like that of Obed- 
Edom, npon which the blessing of Ood rested while the 
aik remained within it ; for almost every one who enters 
here seems to receive a blessing.'' 

Though Mrs. Everett's time and thoughts were so 
much given to the people around her, she was able to 
spare from both for her dear home-circle; and her younger 
brothers and sisters received many letters from her, filled 
with excellent advice respecting their studies, reading, 
Ac, and earnest and affectionate entreaties to make reli- 
gion their first concern. Some of these are so valuable 
that we regret that want of space obliges us to omit 
them. • 

January 26, Miss Lovell writes just as school was about 
to recommence. ^ Last week I received an application 
to take one tnore^ so urgent that we could not refuse. 
These applications are frequent, and it is painful to refuse, 
especially when, as in this case, the friends are many of 
them opposed, and the probability is, that if she is not 
taken she will go back to the errors and falsehoods of her 
former belieC" 

Miss Lovell writes to her mother, March 10. 

*<My school goes on as usual, except that two have 
been obliged to go home on account of ill-health. Two 
or three weeks ago, one, who has been in school only a 
few weeks, begged i>ennission to go home, saying she 



%' 






pubsknts fboh thb bultak. 177 

would return in two days. She is an orphan, and lives 
with two risters, who are very much opposed to the 
gospel, and who burned her Testament and other good 
books, and, we have since heard, threatened violence to 
her if she came to the schooL She, however, in spite of 
their throats, escaped secretly fVom them by the help 
of another sister who is friendly, and came to us. Since 
she went home, we have heard nothing of her, and we 
have no doubt she is forcibly detained by her sisters. 
Her reason for going home was that their house, ico. 
were going to be sold, and it was necessary that all the 
children should be present. This, quite .likely, was a 
story invented by the sisters to get possession of her 
once i|iore. I feel for her much, for we had begun to 
hope that she was seeking and learning the way of salva- 
tion. We hope, however, that the Lord will open a way 
for her return. 

^We have had this term some indications of the 
presence of Gk>d's Spirit. One at least, perhaps more, will 
unite with the church at the next communion. Several 
are thoughtful and inquiring. The school was never 
pleasanter. ... 

^ I received, not long since, two letters from Mrs. L T., 
in the first of which she gives an account of her pleasant 
visit to you, of the village, the little cottage, Ao. Oh, 
how vividly did her letter bring home and the scenes of 
my childhood before me I Those little rooms, the trees 
and flowers, witnesses of so many a childish sport, the 
scene of so many happy hours I How like yesterday does 
it seem when I was there listening to a fistther's gentle 
and affectionate tones I How does my brothers' merry 
laugh still ring in my ear I 

^Yon remember my mentioning Dr. Millingen as one 
of the physicians of the Sultana Balida, (Queen Mother.) 
She has been very dangerously ill, and he spent several 
days at the palace. Upon her recovery according to 



.178 TBB iqSBlONA&T BI8TXI18." 

castonii alms if ore ordered to be diMtribnted to the poor, 
and to aU the schools in the city. Of coarse, even the ex- 
istence of our school is hardly known among the Turks. 
When they mentioned to Dr. M. that they were giving 
alms and presents to the schools, he told them they had 
omitted the two Protestant schools in Pera and Bebek.' 
Some one immediately took down the names and places 
in writing, and the next day an officer came with a bag 
of money, and distributed to each of the girls, both in my 
school and Mrs. Hinsdale's. So we are, thanks to Dr. 
M., at least acknowledged as on a par with other schools. 
Is it not a pleasant custom, this of the Turks, of giving 
alms to the poor as a token of gratitude for any great 
mercy received ? 

f^lfrs. Millingen showed us, a day or two since, the 
presents the doctor had received on this occasion,— * two 
gold snuff-boxes, and a coffee-cup richly ornamented with 
diamonds." 

In March, Mrs. Everett received the afflicting tidings 
of the death: of her eldest sister. She thus writes in 
reference to this. event, March 22. 

^ Mt vsry beab Sister M. : With what words shall 
I commence my letter to you ? My heait is full, over- 
burdened, and it ahnost refuses to give utterance to the 
grief whiph so oppresses it. You do not tremble to hear 
the cause. * For days and weeks and months your heart 
has been bleeding, while, idl unconscious of the sorrow 
which was preying on your sjnrit, and on all our dear 
family, I have been occupied, body and mind, with my 
accustomed avocations. 

^ But the sad, the distressing tidings have readied us. 
And it is indeed true that our dear, precious sister 
Eleanor has bidden adieu to the scenes of earth, and 
become an inhabitant of mansions in the skies. Oh ! I 
can hardly realize what my pen has traced. Is it so ? 
Yoi; were near ; you saw her waste away under di8ea3e ; 



DXATH OV 1IB8; BVXBXn's BI8TB&. 17d 

you watched by her side and administered to her wahts i 
you spoke words of comfort and hope to her sinking 
spiriti and, as it stmggled to be free from its tenement of 
day, you commended it to the Father of mercies ; then 
you closed those dear eyes from which the light of life 
had faded ; kissed the cold brow, and saw the precious 
remains of our beloved sister committed to the cold earth 
to await the coming of our Saviour on the resurrection 
mom. You can realize that her loved voice is hushed 
for ever to mortal ears ; that her tender eyes will hevor 
more rest on those who were her fellow-pilgrims here, 
nor her affectionate heart flow out, as it was wont, in 
deeds of love to all. • • • 

^' But I have been all this time indulging in nature's 
sorrow, instead of looking, with the eye of faith, above 
and beyond this vain, fleeting world. We feel the rod, 
but it is from a Father's hand. .He gave, and he has 
taken. He docs all things well." ... 

April 6, Miss Lovell writes to Mr. Pardee. 

''Our meetings are unusually full, and there are some 
cases of awakening in quarters of the city which have 
beeii regarded as less hopeful than many others. At the 
communion, last Sabbath, five persons were admitted to 
the church, one of them a member of my school, who we 
hope has lately been converted. Her brother was also 
received at the same time, and was perhaps converted 
through her instrumentality, though both thought them- 
selves Christians before she entered the school, and read 
the gospel ; yet they are now convinced that they knew 
nothing of the power of religion, — ^the great cha7ige 
spoken of in the gospel had never taken place in their 
hearts. Now all is new. That there. is indeed a great 
and blessed work of grace going on among this people, 
no one can doubt, — a work which it is a privilege to 
witness, and to be engaged in as a fellow-laborer with 



180 THX lOMIOVABT BI8TSB8. 

CSirist. Oh that our fiiith and seal were only equal to 
the enoooragements we havel" 

Speaking of aeveral of the miasionaries who wore in 
feeUe health, MIbb L. aays : **I look forward with tremb- 
ling to the day when theae pillars of the work here will 
be removed. Who will fill their places f Oh that wo 
ooold hear of a more and more active and widely difihsed 
missionary spirit in America I Is this not, ouffht it not 
to be, the great enterprise of the age, — of the Christian 
world?'' 

Hrs. Everett, May 18. 

^ Sabbath eve. I have laid aude my book, dearest 11, 
to tell you how happy I have been in teaching the little 
ones of our flock this evening. It is the first Sabbath of 
the term, and I have taken the small girls to instruct, 
while Hr. Everett gives the larger ones a lesson from the 
Assembly's Catechism. There were seven in the little 
company that surrounded me, and all listening with such 
eagerness that it was a feast to feed them. You would 
have been deeply interested to listen to their ques- 
tions and answers, and the expression of their ideas 
on the subjects before us. I was pleased and pained by 
the mingling of correct, intelligent ideas with the grossest 
ignorance and superstition. How unworthy I am to bo 
in such an interesting field of usefulness." 

About the same time, she wrote to her mother. 

^ Sumner has told you that we expect to spend the 
long vacation at the islands.^ For several reasons, we 
think this is important. Mary is getting her t^eth ; and 
for myself also, although the good accounts of my health 
are true, still, with the confinement of tlireo hours' teach- 
ing in addition to my family cares, I need a little change; 
and, in consideration of my having had colds coming 
upon me, and lingering so long, we shall go down occa- 
sionally before the middle of July, to stay from Friday 

*Tbe TrlocM* IhImkU, ia tko Soa of Marmora. 



TAOATIOK. 181 

evo until Monday morning, for tho sea air and baths. I 
sometimes feel that it is the part of wisdom to save 
strength for days to come, but we find it difficult always 
to do right in this respect." 



CHAPTER XVII- 

Gmti Flf« la r«rm—8ieluMM md OmUIi of Uttle Karj SreNtt— Birth of 
oHmt rMiigttfflr flphocil TUfKiMinmiffwl Tntirtfliin Ineidcals 
wttli tlM SebooL 

M168 LoYsix to Mn. Thayer, Palmyra. 

"CoMtTAVTUiOFLB, Juiie 8, 1848. 

^Ht ysBY DXAB Fbikhd : Your kind and truly wel- 
come letter of Feb. 18 waa received about two weeka 
aince, and gave me, I asaure you, great pleaanre. What 
indeed should we do without these precious letters? 
Tou know something of what it is to be in a foreign land, 
far from home, but you do not know what it is to be 
separated from aU the friends of your childhood, and that 
with no hope of again seeing their faces in tliis world, — 
and you can hardly know or realize the longing one has 
in such circumstances to hear from those friends, the fear 
that absence and the roll of years should rust, or perhaps 
sever, the chain of affection which once so closely bound 
fond hearts. 

^ June 8. I had written thus far several days ago, when 
I was interrupted, and obliged to lay aside my pen, which 
I have not found Ume to resume till now. ... I have 
no news to communicate to you in return for all the news 
contained in yours. My whole worlds with all its inter- 
ests, is in these days confined to my schooL I could tell 
you of each new scholar, — how many yesterday had per- 
fect leesone^ how many have left, and how many are wiish- 



FIBS m PBBA. 183 

ing to come, &c — but all this, though it might be newSf 
would not be yery interesting to you. But it will, I am 
sure, be interesting to you to know that from time to 
time one and another are giving evidence of a saving 
change,— arc coming out of darkness, such as you in 
America can scarcely conceive of, into the glorious light 
of the gospel. Last Sabbath, one of the former pupils of 
the school was received into the church, and we hope 
next communion three or four more will unite with them. 
I have seven or eight little girls, between the ages of 
seven and nine, whom I long to see becoming Christians 
also.** 

On the 17th of June, another dreadful fire occurred in 
Pcra. Mrs. Everett's description of it is so graphic, and 
pictures so vividly the terror, confusion, and labor, caused 
by those fearful conflagrations in a Turldsh city, diat, 
though long, we give it unabridged. 

" jBhB OF Pbotx, July, 184S. 

^ Mt dear DISTANT Fabbnts : I have at last found 
a few moments, while baby is sleeping, to sit down and 
commence a letter to you ; but the fatigue and excitement 
of the last week will not allow me to write an account of 
its scenes and changes with a very steady hand. 

^Another terrible conflagration has laid in ashes fifteen 
hundred or two thousand houses in the very heart of 
Pcra ; and although we as a family have only to speak of 
mercies, and an almost miraculous preservation from the 
raging flames, still, some of our circle have suffered 
deeply. Mr. Dwight, especially, has lost nearly all his 
house contained. He and his family are at this island, 
but as they were intending to return to their house in 
Pera soon, they brought only a few odds and ends with 
them, leaving there every thing valuable. Their kejrs 
were at our house. The day of the fire we went to 
Bebek ; as we returned, towards evening, we saw a smoke 



184 TlIB MISSIONART 8ISTSB8. 

rudng from Pera. Mr. Eyerett hastened our carriage, 
and people were just beginning to run to and fro as we 
entered the city. Sumner jumped from the carriage, 
and ran through the streets to learn the dtuation of Uie 
fire, and coming up soon, said it was just below Mr. 
Dwight's house; at the same moment we saw in the 
crowd our man-servant hurrying by with the keys. They 
were soon in the house; but, alas I no porters wore at 
hand to take the things ; a few were at length obtained, — 
but in the streets confusion was every moment becoming 
more confused. Mr. Gk>odell started from the house with 
three men loaded, for our magazine, but found it impossi- 
ble to keep them with him, and reached the house with 
only two, afraid to return lest he should be trodden under 
foot in the streets. The other man afterwards found his 
way to the house. Some other things were removed, and 
all perhaps might have been, could porters have been 
obtained. Sunmer several times started frt>m the house 
with things in his hands, and meeting persons whom he 
knew, disposed of them and returned, — and finally lefl 
with what he could carry, amid a shower of fire, having 
succeeded in saving a mere handful of what the house 
contained, — perhaps a fourth of Mr. D.'s valuable library, 
with his study table and its contents, his cloth suit, a few 
of Mrs. D.'s dresses, their carpets, and I do not know 
what few things beside. 

*^ Mr. Everett went on to Mr. Homes's house, a little 
&rther up in the same street, which contained his library 
and many mission books, but comparatively few of his 
household goods, the greater part being at Bebck. One 
part of the library was in boxes, in the hall near the door, 
and Mr. Everett offered a man two hundred piasters — 
about ten dollars — to take it away, but to no purpose. 
Those books were, however, saved, but nothing else was 
taken from the house. 

^Puring this time I was walking up and down our 



Ftnv IK rsnA. 186 

lionsc with litUc Mnry, in tho greatest anxiety about my 
dear husband, tvho I knew would put no bounds to his 
exertions till his strength was all exhausted ; at the same 
time trying to quiet the school-girls, who were at the 
highest pitch of fear and excitement They at once 
packed up all their clothes, and with their bonnets on 
their heads, they ran to and fro, watching the flames, 
some of them weeping, trembling, and almost distracted. 

<* Sumner made his appearance, and I was frightened. 
You would not have known him. Almost his first words 
were, *We shall have the work to do here,' — and tho 
flames were rushing on frightfully ; — but I had hope, and 
continued to have so much, that for two or three hours I 
did little but follow Mrs. GoodelPs example, and put in 
readiness to take with us each two or three changes of 
clothes, in case we must flee, and leave all the rest buried 
up in the magazine under a pile of ruins. Under our 
house is a large fire-proof magazine, lined with stone, and 
closed from the top by iron doors. This Sunmer made 
ready. 

<*The raging element came nearer and nearer, and we 
commenced in earnest taking down our things. Every 
article of clothing, every curtain, beds, crockery, books, 
ftc, A;c. Can you ima^e what a time ? Some Arme- 
nian brethren came to the rescue ; but the weight must be 
on ourselves. Then, besides our own, from the school- 
room and chapel, seats, books, maps, A;c. The girls were 
sent away about ten o'clock. Mrs. Qoodell with her chil- 
dren left at eleven. Strength and calmness were given 
me for the occasion, and I stayed by and worked until 
midnight, when we had disposed of nearly all that was in 
the house, excepting chnpel seats, school desks, &c. The 
flames were just upon Mr. Schaufller's house, one street 
from us. Still I prayed, and fiintly hoped that the Lord, 
as he had twice previously done, would deliver his own 
house of worship and a place for the school. 

16* 



186 nns utssioiSAur sistbbs. 

""Mr. Wood and Mr. Blui had oome from BetoA. 
Other frienda had come to our aanatanoe, and a penon 
being in readiness to take me awaj, I took up our 
predona babe, who had slept throng the whole, and left 
the honsei not expecting to enter it again. We were 
most kindly receired, with Mr. GoodelTs fiunflj, at the 
house of an English friend. After an hoar or two, the 
gentlemen joined us therCi and we tried to get a little 
rest for our weary bodies ; but exdtement did not allow 
much sleep. 

^ At the dawn of day, to our surprise and great joy, 
we learned that our houses were standing, and again we 
were called upon to praise the Lord for his wondeifnl 
goodness in sparing the house for prayer and school, and 
abodes fbr ourselves. It was Sabbath mornings and a 
mercy to us that it was a day of rest Notwithstanding 
the confusion in the house, the chapel was opened, and 
service held both in English and Armenian. 

^ We remained under the hospitable roof of our kind 
friends until Monday morning, then with grateful hearts 
returned to our home. Oh, what a. scene of desolation 
was spread before us I A vast bed ^ of smouldering ruins, 
— only naked chimneys standing to mark the recent 
abodes of thousands of now destitute people. It seems 
almost a miracle that our houses were saved. The own- 
ers came at the eleventh hour, and caused little engines 
to be worked from a terrace just back of the house, and 
thus it was saved, ours having caught once or twice on 
the roof. 

*^ These conflagrations are awfbl judgments. Oh that 
the people would learn righteousness! Thousands are 
reduced to want, and thousands who had set their hearts 
on houses, gold, and diamonds, saw them perish in an 
hour, and yet take no thought to lay up treasure in 
heaven, but give themselves more entirely to perishing 
vanities." 



DEATH 07 MARY BVBBBTT. 187 

Miss Lovcll, after giving a brief description of the same 
fire, writes. 

" Would you like to know how the fire was stopped ? 
It is said that in the course of the night the Sultan, 
learning that the fire was still burning, ordered three 
guns to be fired, (which is known to be a mark of his 
signal displeasure.) As soon as these guns were heard 
in the city, the Pasha understood it at once. The fire 
must go no farther. Men were immediately stationed in 
places most threatened, water poured upon them, and 
they commanded to let it go no farther, and it toae 
stopped. Happy for us that the Sultan waked tvhen he 
did ! « 

Mrs. Everett's letters during the summer make firequent 
mention of the illness of her babe ; but, as it seemed to 
proceed from teething, no special apprehension was felt 
by the parents until the latter part of August, when they 
took her back to their house in Pera, for the purpose of 
having medical aid nearer at hand. The little sufferer, 
however, lived but a few days after their return. The 
bereaved mother thus writes under this great sorrow. 

**My dbab, dbab Parents: How shall I write it I 
^ The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away ; blessed 
be the name of the Lord.' Our precious child, our dar- 
ling Mary, is in heayen. Yesterday (Sabbath) we com- 
mitted all that remained to us of this loved otae to the 
dust. The day preceding, September 2, her freed spirit 
took its flight to Jesus* arms, and this our first-bom child, 
on whom we had lavished untold love, is no longer with 
us, to be the delight of our eyes and the joy of our heaiis. 
Our house is left unto us desolate, our hearts are wrung 
with grief while we drink the bitter cup poured out for 
us ; but there is sweetness mingled in the cup. We have 
the most precious consolations, — they are abundant, 
divine. She was one of those little ones of whom Jesus 
himself said, < Suffer them to come unto me, for of etich 



188 THB MIBtlOVABT 8I8TXB8. 

is the kingdom of heaven ; ' and we can not doubt that 
this tittle one is one of the lambs folded in the anns of 
* Israel's gentle Shepherd.' Another hand is to heaven's 
harp-strings given, another sweet voice has joined the 
inf^t choir in that blessed world above. Can we wish 
our loved one back in this dark world of sin and sorrow? 
No; we will leave her there, where we hope soon to join 
her. We loved her here, oh I how tenderly, and I trust 
gratefully, striving to cherish the feeling that the treasure 
committed to us might at any time be called for by him 
who placed it in our hands. We acknowledged his right 
to it, and he has come and taken his own, and we have 
nothing to say. * I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, 
because thou didst it' *I know, O Lord, that thy judg- 
ments are right, and that in faithfulness thou hast afflicted 
me.' My soul needed chastening from the Lord. I have 
felt it, and sometimes trembled. God spoke loudly to us 
in removing our dear sister Eleanor, but I needed more 
stripes still, — again to feel the smarting rod. Oh, pray 
that this may be truly a sanctified affliction to our souls ; 
that we may be eternally profited ; that it may yield the 
peaceable fi*uits of righteousness, for which we shall bless 
God for ever." 

After some account of Utde Mary's illness, she con* 
tinues. 

^ She drooped like a lovely, fading flower, which no 
earthly power could save ; but 

'* * Not In anger, not In wrath, 
2%« rea(p«r oame that day , 
Twat an angel ylaitod the green earth. 
And took the flower away t ** 

^Oh, how her tittle form was wasted away 1 Nothing 
remained but the frame of our precious child, and for several 
days It seemed strange that her active tittle spirit could 
be holden of it, but it was bright to the very last, — until 
within an hour of its release." • • . 



BIHTU of a 8B00KD DAUOIITBR. 189 

Of her doar child's place of burial, she saySi in a later 
letter : — 

^ The remains of our predons child are placed by the 
side of dear Mary Dwight, to await the resurrection mom. 
The place where they lie is an open ground for general 
rendcKYOus on all occasions, nothing of sacredness being 
associated with it, except by the bereaved hearts of a few 
individuals. Not long since, from the Armenian part of 
the ground, stones were collected for building a church, 
having multiplied till they were lying one upon another. 
What a host will rise up here in the last great day 1 ^ 

About a fortnight after Mrs. Everett had committed 
the lifeless remains of her first-bom to the earth, her 
stricken heart was comforted by the gift of another little 
daughter. She writes in her journal a month after her 
birth : — 

^ O thou covenant-keeping Qod 1 make her entirely^ 
for ever thine. Write her name in the Lamb's book 
of life, and, whether she lives or dies, may she fh>m 
her infancy be a subject of renewing and sanctifjring 
grace, and may we, to whom thou hast committed this 
immortal being, never cease praying and laboring for her 
salvation until she is safe, — a lamb in Jesus' fold, relying 
wholly upon thee for grace and strength to fulfill our 
high trust." 

While Mrs. Everett had been passing through these 
varied experiences in her domestic life. Miss Lovell had 
resumed her accustomed duties with renewed health and 
interest after her long vacation. September 16, she 
writes to Mr. Pardee 

"We returned from the island where my last was 
dated, about three weeks ago, and opened school last 
week. We feel that we have the greatest reason for 
gratitude that, amid all the sickness that has prevailed 
for the last few months, none of our pupils have beeti 
called away. One of Mr. Hamlin's most promising and 



190 9HB MI88IOVAST 8I8TX88. 

{MOOS young men died of the didcra while we were at 
TroUf and another brother, a member of the choroh, also 
died aboat the aame time of the aame diaeaae ; peihaps I 
haye written you of this before. Since we letomed to 
the dty, death has again entered our circle, and snatched 
a darling lamb from the embrace of its parentSi we fondly^ 
belieye to join the fold above, little Mary Eyerett, then 
the only child of her fond parents, a sweet little giri of 
seyenteen months^ after seyeral weeks of mafSanng, was 
taken from ns two weeks ago to-day. • • • 

*^ Fires haye of late been so frequent as to keep us in a 
constant state of alann. Almost eyery night there is one. 
One took place in the dty proper a few weeks since, 
which, it is said, consumed two thirds of the wealth of 
Constantinople. I hardly oyer retire at night without 
foeUng how more than poBsiNe^ how probcMe it is, that I 
shall be awakened by the flames of our own dwelling. 
The terrible cry, ^Tan gun yarP (there is fire!) sends a 
chill and a feeling of dread oyer me, such as no other 
sound awakens; and well it may. When you look out 
upon one of these terrible conflagrations, consuming its 
hundreds of buildings, while it seems that no mortal 
power can stop its progress, and think of the thousands 
who will be houseless and homeless, and who have no 
comfort, no consolation, one may well tremble. We haye 
been most signally and proyidentially preserved, while the 
fires haye burned all around us. These fires have, of 
course, raised the rent of houses and the price of provi- 
sions enormously, and our friends who lost their houses 
in the late fire are unable to got houses in Poro, and will 
probably remain in Bobek this winter. We shall fool the 
want of their society much. There will be only our 
&mily, and Mr. Everett's, with Mrs. Hinsdale, in town. . . 

'^ I am at present teaching without any assistance, Mrs. 
Everett's health not allowing her to teach. My number 
will probably bo somewhat smaller than last winter. The 



DAT OF FASTING* 191 

tnutees of the school have decided that it is not ezpe^ 
dient to receive those under ten or eleven years of age] 
and as these little ones were a great responsibility to me 
while without assistance, and not old enough to reap the 
full benefits of the school, it was decided to send four or 
five of the youngest home. It is, I assure you, a soro 
trial to part with these little ones, to whom I have 
become strongly attached, but I hope when they are a 
little older they will all return. Two of the older ones 
have also left to be married. My present number is 
seventeeki. 

^ September 28. Yesterday Was observed in tlie school 
as a day of fasting and prayer. It is our custom always to 
observe such a day as soon as possible after the coin* 
mencement of each term, and we have always found them 
to be good and profitable days; strengthening to our own 
6ouls, and happy in their efibcts upon the minds of the 
girls. Yesterday, although I trust the Holy Spirit was 
with us, yet there was not that deep solemnity which wo 
have witnessed at former times. We need, oh, how 
greatly we need, the special and powerful influences of 
the Spirit I Many things seem to be against us as a 
church atid mission. So many of the missionaries arc in 
feeble health, the pastor is at present away, the absence 
of Mr. Dwight, which is a loss almost irreparable, and the 
cold state of the native church, — all lead us to fed that 
our help must be fix)m Qod. Will you not — I am sure 
you €?o-— pray for us, that we may experience a reviving 
from on high ? And let me Commend my school espe- 
cially to the prayers of the Sabbath school. Will not 
those of them who love to pray remember the Armenian 
seminaries, that we may again hear the inquiry, * What 
must I do to be saved?" and see these precious youth 
turning to Qod." 

It wns not long before Mrs. Everett was ngain able to 
resume her place in the school, from which hei' own pri- 



102 THS 1CI88IOVAST 8IBTKB8. 

rate joys and trials neyer long withdrew ber btoreat 
The following loiter makes ns pleasantly acquainted with 
some of their employmentSi and social as well as religions 
pleasures, at this time. 

" CovtTAvmiOPLB, Hot. 25, 1948. 

^ My dxab Sistbh M. : I am going to tell you how 
this day has been spent, that you may see how we pass 
all our Sabbaths for the present. At eight and a half 
o'clock, A. ic, is the Armenian Sabbath school, now con- 
fined almost entirely to the girls of the school ; so it is 
held in the sdioolroom. The girls repeat seven verses of 
Scripture to Mr. Everett and Miss Lovell ; then Mr. E. 
gives an exposition of the lesson, commendng and clos- 
ing with prayer. At nine o'clock, Mrs. Hinsdale attends 
to the Sabbath school in English, in which Mrs. Ooodcll 
now assists her. It consists of the missionary children, 
and a few others who attend the day schooL At ten and 
a hal^ is the English service in the chapel; preaching 
by the missionaries in turn ; and we have excellent ser- 
mons. At half past one, Mr. Goodell gives an exposition 
in Turkish, following which is a sermon in Armenian by 
one of the missionaries ; after this, the girls go to the 
schoolroom, and Baron Simon, the pastor, questions them 
upon the sermon. Dinner comes between four and five. 
After this, Mr. Goodell has prayers with the scholars, 
while the children of our families, either in our paiior or 
Mr. Goodell's, repeat hymns, sing one, and have prayers. 
This is beautiful. Then Sumner hears the older Aime- 
nian girls in the Assembly's Catechism, and I hear the 
younger ones repeat Scripture and hymns, and tell or 
translate some stoiy to them. At eight o'clock, Miss 
Lovell reads with them from the Old Testament. You 
will see that the intervals for reading are not long. I do 
not read half I wish to do, but, as you say, I try to 
improve the snatches of time hero and there." 



MONTnLT UBBTIKQS. l08 

"Dooomber 9. 

« Dearbst M. : We have had to-day one of our 
monthly meetings, and I must tell yon about it. Sinee 
our families are so scattered, it has been thought desirable 
that we meet as often as once a month; and the Saturday 
following the first Monday has been appointed. The 
meeting is to be held at the houses of the different fami- 
lies alternately. In the forenoon, the gentlemen have a 
meeting for business, and the ladies one at the same hour 
for prayer, while one of the gentlemen meets the chil- 
dren. After this, a half hour is devoted to sin^ng ; then 
dinner or lunch ; and in the afternoon a meeting for con- 
ference and prayer is held, and all return to their homes 
well pleased with the monthly meeting. To-day, Mrs. 
Qoodell and I (for wo join hands in almost every thing) 
set tables for thirty-two persons, which is the number 
belonging to all our families, esecluding three babies ; but 
the Bebekians did not turn out to a man, as we Feraites 
do, and there were some vacant seats. Our dinner is a 
picnic, each lady furnishing cold meat, bread and butter 
and cake, or something equivalent. Is not this a happy 
plan of getting together to keep up a social feeling, as 
well as to unite our prayers before the mercy-seat, seek- 
ing for ourselves and those around us a quickening in the 
spiritual life ? We feel it to be good. You must know, 
dear sister, that we kept Thanksgiving in concert with 
our dear friends in old Massachusetts. In this, we joined 
with our good neighbors, furnishing the table jointly. 
Besides our two families, we had Mr. Schneider, the papa 
of our dear Susan and Eliza, and Mr. and Mrs. Homes. 

^ It is time for me to lay down my pen, as I am in a 

cold room, and suffering from a cold. Dear Martha has 

been confined to her room, for a day or .two, by a very 

severe cold. It is unforttmato for her to have a cold and 

cough just as we are planning for an examination. Kee- 

die-work, plain and ornamental, is to be examined as well 

17 



im TUX MISSIONABT 818TBBS. 

as ftadies. We are lodng oar Bdiolars^ one after another, 
to become wives for some of our good young men. Wo 
r^;ret to liave any one leave before finishing her four yean^ 
oooTBe. But so it must be. A nice little girl of fourteen 
is soon to be married to the pastor of the church. She is 
a good giri, but all too young, according to our opinion.'* 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

Rerirml In tbe Female Bemlnarj— Admlnloiif to the Chnreh— Mn. Erereti 
Tisiti Brooia — Death of Mr. Hajnard and Mr. Parker. 

Mrs. Eybrbtt writes in her journal^ January 14, 1840. 

^ I am reBolved from this time to make new and perse- 
vering efforts to be prepared to lead the devotions of the 
Armenian girls in a more edif3ring manner than I am 
now able to do. Do thou, Lord, give the spirit^ without 
whioh the words of prayer are abomination before thee. 

« Oh for a deeper interest in the spiritual concerns of 
these dear girls ! May I not increase my desires for their 
salvation by seeking opportunities of personal religious 
conversation with them ? Is not the beginning of the 
year a good time to commence anew the performance of 
a duty in which, for months past, I have been sadly 
remiss?" 

Little of special interest occurred in the missionary 
work, or in the missionary families, during the winter. 
All went on quietly, with much outward prosperity, but 
with a lack of those reviving spiritual influences which 
tliey had previously enjoyed so richly. Early in the 
spring, they had the pleasure of welcoming a number of 
newly arrived missionaries, and helping them on their 
way to their various destinations, as also of receiving a 
visit from Mr. and Mrs. Schneider, on their way from 
their first missionary home in Broosa to Aintab. Writing 
while they were in Constantinople, Mre. Everett says : — 

^ Is not the removal of Mr. Schneider and family from 



190 TU8 HISSIOKART 8I3TBR3. 

their borne of fifteen years to an uncivilized city, leaving 
their daughters, aged twelve and fourteen years, behind,* 
an instance of Christian heroism ? They are devoted ser- 
vants of our Lord, and consider no sacrifice too groat if 
they may be the means of saving souls." 

In the same letter, March 6, she writes, 
y ^ The church here is at present apparently in a very 
good state. Mr. Ilohannes, who has recently returned 
from the United States, has been chosen co-pastor with 
Baron Simon, and will be ordained soon. There is now 
a regular preaching service at Hass Keuy, as well as in 
the city proper, here in Pera, and at Bebek. 

<*Onr school is very pleasant; not as large as last term." 

March 26, Mrs. Everett writes. 

'^ It is a comfort to know that, into the home of tho 
blest above, nothing entereth thcU d^fileth. This is one of 
my most cheering views of heaven, — there is no sin 
' there, neither in thought, nor word, nor deed; and, when 
we are groaning under this body of death, it is a pleasant 
thought that many who were dear, very dear to us here, 
have already entered those mansions, and have begun 
that life which is love, — love pure, perfect, eternal. I 
Imve of late thought much of our dear sister Eleanor. It 
is one year ago that the intelligence of her death reached 
us." 

The next day, she commences a letter to one of her 
sisters, with the delightful news that there were evidences 
.of the special presence of Ood's Spirit again in their 
school, the immediate cause of which visitation seemed to 
be the tidings just received of a powerful revival in the 
Oroomiah mission. After speaking of this, she proceeds. 

'^ IVfiss Lovell this moment came in to tell me that one 
of our dear pupils who was this morning borne down 

* Thete daughters were left In Conttantinople, to be under Mrs. Hinid«le*« 
Inetrnetlon, and roelde in the mlteion flunllieB. They were much In Mrs. 
Xverett*s fomUr. 



RBVIVAL 1:T tub SEMINARY. 197 

with 21 sense of her sinfulness, and pleading that the day 
might be spent in fasting and prayer, is now rejoicing in 
hope ; wishing all to join her in singing praises to God 
for his wonderful mercy to her soul, which was ready to 
be swallowed up and lost. We are going to commence 
school this afternoon witli a season of prayer and thanks- 
giving. Another, who for some days has been very 
deeply impressed with her need of a new heart, feels that 
her prayers are heard, and that she is accepted of God, 
through Jesus Christ She came to me yesterday, wish- 
ing to talk about her soul ; said that in a hope she had 
formerly indulged she had been deceived, and she trem- 
bled, but knew that God was ready to save her. This 
morning, after conversing with Miss Lovell, she led in 
prayer, in a manner truly astonishing. Several others are 
very serious, and the members of the church manifest a 
very subdued feeling. Oh that I might send this intelli- 
gence to you upon the lightning's wings, that you might 
even now unite your prayers with ours that we may not 
grieve away this Blessed One ! We need your prayers 
always. Pray for this native church, — it is in a heavy 
sleep ; for the Bebek Seminary, — our hope of preachers 
from it will be cut off unless the Lord in mercy revive his 
work in it.** 

To her brother, April 28. 

^ I must tell you that just at present we are rejoicing 
in concert with the heavenly hosts, over new-bom souls. 
You will have heard of the glorious revival in Oroomiah. 
When the news reached us that God was pouring out his 
Spirit there, we all felt that he was willing and able to 
bless us, and have found it even so. Although there has 
not been a general work of grace, we have had some 
precious mercy-drops in our school for Armenian girls, 
and in our own families. Six of the schoolgirls have 
found joy and peace in the Saviour, and appear to show 
as decided cases of conversion as we see in our own land. 



198 THE mSSIOKARY 8I8TBR8. 

** Ob, how it rojoioed our hearti to aeo thoso who had 
been careless and thoughtless, on their knees, with crying 
and tears seeking mercy, and afterwards with beaming 
countenances speaking of the love of Jesus. One saying, 
^ I have found my Father, and I want no more ; ' another, 
* Prayer is so sweet to me that I do not wish to leave the 
throne of grace to go this way or that ; ' * Satan continu- 
ally walks by our sides to turn us from the right way, but 
the Lord will deliver us,' Ao. Ao. 

** When we saw such a state of feeling among tho 
Armenian girls, we felt that those in our own &miliea 
who have been nursed in the lap of piety, children of the 
covenant, and the subjects of so many prayers, must not 
be left out ; and the Lord heard us. As there was more 
than usual interest among tho members of tho native 
church, it was thought best to have a series of meetings, 
which were held last week, and were very interesting. 

^A young man was ordained last week as co-pastor 
with Baron Simon, of the church here. Baron Hohannea 
is to be ordained next week over the church at Ada 
Bazar. There will then be five ordained native pastors, 
and three churches still remain without pastors. There 
is much to encourage our faith in the good reports we are 
constantly receiving from different parts of the interior. 
At Aintab and vicinity,- at Arabkir, Sivas, Ac, the Lord 
is doing a great work. . . . 

"Our days are flying swiftly by; we are now four 
years' old missionaries I I suppose if you were to see me, 
you would say I look < a little worse for the wear,' but I 
am your sister still, and love you and your dear wife, and 
wish to hear from you oftcner than once in a year. What 
a shame to send this hurried letter so far away, but if it 
only assures you that you are remembered and loved, it 
is enough. Sumner says, <A little love, if you please.' 
lie can not love little** 

In May,Mra. Everett visited the missionaries InBroosa. 



VISIT TO BBOOSA. 109 

This city, beautifully situated on a fertile plain at the foot 
of Mt. Olympus, near the northern coast of Asia Minor, is 
a place of considerable historic interest, having been the 
first capital of the Ottoman empire. Mrs. E. made this 
visit partly for health, and partly to take charge of an 
Armenian girl from the semuiary, who was going to reside 
in one of the missionary families there. Of the incidents 
of this litde joui-ney, she gives a sketch in a letter to her 
husband. Taking with her, besides the Armenian girl, 
her babe and Greek nurse, and accompanied by an Amer- 
ican fnend who had been some time with the missionaries 
in Constantinople, and was desirous of visiting Broosa, 
they proceeded to Qcmlik, the nearest port of Broosa, a 
pleasant steamer sail of six hours on the Marmora, at 
which place arrangements had been made for them to 
pass the night. 

The residue of the journey, they performed the next 
day, setting off at six o'clock in the morning, and reaching 
Mr. Ladd's, in Broosa, about five, r. m., having, says Mrs. 
E., "performed in the whole day the journey of six hours 
a la Turkj and three a la AinericanSy (not by steam.) Of 
the incidents of this visit, and the principal objects of in- 
terest in and about Broosa, she gives a graphic account 
in several letters from the 17th to the 80th of this month. 
These, for want of space, are omitted. 

One of the objects of curiosity seen in the mosk called 
Yuldurem, at Broosa, was ^ a huge copy of the Koran, 
two and a half or three feet square when the book is shut. 
It was the copy read by Bajazet, 500 years ago. It is 
written upon parchment, in letters more than a half inch 
in size, with the points and decorations put on with gilt 
and colors, and aU with the handP 

" In passing through these Turkish cities," says Mrs. E., 
in concluding her sketches of this excursion, '' one is led to 
cry in spirit. How long. Lord, how long shall the false 
Prophet bear sway over such a multitude of souls, daily, 



200 THS xissioarABT sistxus,. 

yearly hmrying in sach nnmben to the realities of that 
world for which they are all unprepared. But Jeaoa ahall 
reign, and these moska and churches will yet be conse- 
crated to the worship of Christ, the Saviour of the world. 
Lord, hasten the happy day I " 

June 26, Mrs. E. again writes of a fearful fire, firom 
which, for the '^ fifth time,^ the chapel and seminary 
houses in Pcra were in ^ unminent peril, yet preserved.'* 

August 4, Mrs. Everett writes. 

^ We have enjoyed to-day a precious season. We have 
welcomed to the church of Christ ^vd dear lambs, children 
of the mission fiunilies; the youngest is nine years of age, 
the eldest fourteen. 

^ I have told yon of a new organization of a mission 
church here. There was formerly a Mediterranean church, 
composed of members of all the stations. This station has 
withdrawn, as here a distinct church is needed. Mr. Qoodell 
^cts as pastor; Mr. Schauffler and Mr. Everett as deacons. 

<* To-morrow, five of our Armenian girls are to unite 
with the church. The dear lambs are dispersed. May 
the Lord keep them I Three of them are to be married, 
and will not return.** 

From the same, October 6. 

^My dsab Sistbb: Did I not long exceedingly to 
send, you all a message- of love by the post to-day, I 
should not take my pen even for an hour, as the day has 
been set apart to be observed by our school for fiisting 
and prayer, in accordance with our custom near the 
beginning of each term. Mr. Qoodell is now holding a 
meeting with the girls in Turkbh. Wo have many new 
scholars this term, and greatly need a visit from the Holy 
Spirit. Some of our older pupils having left, the majority 
of the present ones are, we fear, unconverted. 

^ How many, many things I have to say I You see I 
commenced this with the intention of making it a journal, 
but it has proved vain, my time for writing is so httlo, 



WBBRLT mbbungs. 201 

niul my correspondents many. Besides all on the other 
side of the ocean, I have correspondents in Oroomiah, 
Erzeroom, Trebizond, Broosa, Salonica, Smyrna^ and 
Aintab, and in some of these places two. 

<< Our family is now as last winter. Mrs. Hinsdale and 
Susan and Eliza S. have returned to us. We are very 
happy to receive them. 

"I have so often told you of our very pleasant connec- 
tion with Mr. Qoodell's family, that you can imagine how 
we live from day to day. There are no other persons to 
come into our meetings now, but we hold them regularly 
on Thursday evening, sing together Friday evening, hold 
monthly concerts, and take up a collection, have a weekly 
female prayer meeting, and two meetings with the schol- 
ars aside from Sabbath exercises. A part of almost every 
evening we spend together, while one reads aloud. Our 
walks we usually take together. Truly, the ^ lines have 
fallen to us in pleasant places.' May the Lord make us 
faithful stewards, determined to know nothing but Jesus 
Christ, and him crucified, and grant us his blessing, with- 
out which all our efforts will be vain. 

^But how uncertain is all before us, and how unneces- 
sary we are to the progress of Qod's will, we have been 
led to feel by a very mysterious and afflictive dispensation 
by which a dear missionary brother has been removed 
from the field of labor which he had hardly entered. Mr. 
Ma3mard, who came out so recently in company with Mr. 
Dodd, to labor among the Jews in Salonica, has been 
taken to a higher and holier sphere. 

"You will remember that a Mr. Parker, from Boston, a 
graduate of Andover, was my fellow-traveler to Broosa. 
He remained among us till sometime in August. He 
then went to Salonica, and, in company with Mr. May- 
nard, took a. few days' journey into the interior, after 
which he went to Athens, was attacked with the same 



202 TBB lOfiSlOVAST 8I8TKB8. 

fever, and died on tbe lame day with Mr. Maynard, at 
Dr. King's house. His passage was engaged for the 
United States. Have we not heard the voice of the Lord 
sayingi ^Beyealso ready?'* 



CHAPTER XIX. 

Bemoral of the Femmle Seminaiy to Bebek — Deser^tlon of the Bemliiftiy 

Home and Gronoda. 

From Mrs. Everett to her sister M . 

Jannarj 1, 1850. 

*^ Wb had an examination of the school a week ago last 
JFridayy and dismissed the dear girls for Christmas holi- 
days, — two weeks. The examination was not * got np,* 
but gave us a good deal of satisfaction and encourage- 
ment. The girls have been very quiet, well-behaved, and 
diligent, and made good progress in their studies. My 
Greek scholar, who only knew the al])habet when she 
entered the school, can read in the Testament, has com- 
mitted to memory Watts^s Catechism for Children, and 
finished Emerson's Arithmetic, (first part) She comes 
now to a little Greek service with her father. Her 
mother is a Catholic. 

*^ January 25. There has been a temperance meeting 
in the chapel to-day. The evangelical Armenians are 
generally on the right side. A Greek was present at the 
meeting, and joined the society, who has just been re- 
leased from prison. Ho was seized, about a week since, 
by order of the Greek Patriarch, whose intention was to 
banish him ; but efibrts immediately made for hid release^ 
by the Protestants, proved successful. He is not a mem- 
ber of the evangelical church, but he has for months past 
been enrolled with them civilly, and has been anathema* 
tized by the Greek church." 



2M TIUB mSBlOMABY SI8TXBS. 

MiiiB LovoU to Mr. Pardee. 

** CovsTAMTivopLB, Kaich 86, 18S0. 

*^We have viBiting ob a Hungarian lady, — one of the 
refugees, — the Countess Dembinski. She is staying a 
day or two with us, awaiting the arrival of her husband. 
These poor Hungarians I Our sympathies are kept con- 
stantly alive in their behal£ Qod grant Uicm a day of 
deliverance and freedom I 

^ Oar school is going on prosperously and pleasantly 
this term. We shall receive three or four new ones next 
week. I was told last week that I might immediately 
have /ariy if we could receive them. We have two 
Greek girls. There is now apparently quite a spirit of 
inquiry among the Qreeks, so that we have a regular 
service every Sabbath, attended often by twenty or more. 
Some appear really, and we hope savingly, interested in 
the truth. 

^We are still mourning the absence of the special 
influences of the Holy Spirit in our church and congrega- 
tion. New hearers are continually coming, our chapel is 
full, and we hear in all directions of new cases where 
persons are becoming enlightened, and convinced of the 
errors of their own church ; but alas I wo do not hear the 
inquiry, ^WfuU must toe do to be saved f* I trust you 
will remember and pray for us, for, unless the Holy Spirit 
be given, and the church revived, 'all will come to deso- 
lation.' 

<*Havo I ever mentioned to you the case of Priest 
Keoorh? You have read in the Herald of Priest Yer- 
tannes, who has long been a £uthful helper and sort of 
evangelist in this dty. Der Keoorh^ as he is called, was 
a friend of Yertannes, but has now come out from his 
church. He is a prominent priest among them, respected 
and beloved. He is fully convinced of the ciTora of his 
church, reads the gospel, meets with Simon, the pastor, 



PBiBfiT pjK>0]in. 206 

and prays with him, but alas I has never yet brought his 
mind to the point of breaking off and forsaking all for 
Christ. He cherishes the idea that he may remain in his 
chnrch, and one by one break off all its saperstitions 
practices, and so carry all the people with him. We hope 
he will be brought to see that this is a device of Satan to 
prevent his openly espousing the truth, and obeying the 
dictates of his conscience. He has a daughter whom he 
wishes to send to our school; whether he will have 
courage to do so, remuqs to be seen* Should hd do so, 
it will perhaps settle the matter at once, fui he will then 
be known to be a Protestant It is i^ n^ost interesting 
case, and we all watch it with niuph ii^teresti m^ sboold 
he come out openly and decidedly, he miist e^ert ft great 
influence, 

"We have three listers, who are coming to school liezt 
week, whose father, a man in good circumstances, has left 
liis fitmily entirely, taking with him all the money and 
valuables, silver and gold, in the house, Reaving them to 
find bread as best they can, because they are Protestants. 
But, as he has left them, the girls lu^e able to come to 
school, which they could not do before." 

Miss Lovell to Mrs, Thayer, May 8, 1850. 

" Tou ask if I shall not some time come homo. My 
friends here laughingly tell me that when I have been 
here ten years they will all vote for my going home \ And 
I think the feeling is now becoming more in fiiVor of 
missionaries revisiting their native lapd th^ii fontierly. 
Indeed, it is oftentimes, I think, of the greatest advantage 
both to the individual and to the cause generally. But, 
as for myself, I have no expectation that I shall ever see 
my native land again. When I bade it ftrewell, it Was, 
in my own mind, for ever^ and, while my health remains, 
my post is here. . . . But we truly know but little 
of what is the mind and will of Qod. < It is not in man 

18 



206 THB MUUnOHABT 8IBTBB8. 

that walketb to direct his stepa.' I dcdro to leave all 
my Ibtare in bis handfli who has thus far ordered all my 
oooFBe so kindly and meroifiilly ; only praying that while 
I live I may be employed in his service. 

^ My school is going on prosperously and pleasantly. 
l^e have had some intermption from iUness among the 
girisy bat they are now better. We are expecting to 
remove into the country in the course of a few months, 
when Mr. Gk>odell will relinquish his place to Mr. Everett, 
who will have charge of the school in fhture, — of the 
boarding department, I mean. I look forward with pain 
to the time when Mr. Gk>odell will no longer have any 
connection with the school His prayers and efforts 
have been, I am sure, greatly blessed. But I trust 
God will still be with us. Mr. and Mrs. Everett I love 
as brother and dster, Mr. and Mrs. Gtoodell as &ther and 
mother. • • 

^ We like our new minister, Mr. Marsh,* and bis family, 
exceedingly. Unhappily for us, they spend the summer 
in the country, so that we can not see them as much as 
we could wish. Have I told you that we had, not long 
ago^ a present of a piano from a lady in Massachusetts, 
Mrs. Buigess, of Dedham f A most acceptable present I 
assure you, though I find scarcely any time to play upon 
it.** 

With the first days of summer, Mrs. Everett's heart, 
was gladdened by the birth of a little son. In her first 
mention of this ^new treasure ** in a letter to her parents, 
she says : ^ Maj he live in the courts of the Lord for 
ever I We have, from the dawnings of his existence, 
sought to consecrate him to the Author of his life. 

The intention of removing the female seminary to the 
country was accomplished this summer. A very pleasant 

• Hon. Gtorgt P. Ifarthi United Stotet Hlnliter to Turkey. 



BU8INB88 DIFFICULTIB9. 207 

house in Bebck,* which seemed to be just the one for tho 
school, was secured, after the usual unpleasant prelimi- 
naries to such matters had been disposed of. The house 
had been occupied for some time by the families of 
Messrs. Wood and Homes, the former of which left about 
this time for tho United States, on account of the seyere 
and long protracted illness of Mrs. Wood. Miss Loirell 
thus represents the difficulties to be encountered in all 
business matters in Turkey. 

« July 8. We are to go into the house which Mr. Wood 
and Mr. Homes have occupied in Bebek. After much 
trouble and vexation, Mr. Everett yesterday succeeded in 
getting the contract signed for six years. You have no 
idea of the difficulties in accomplishing such a business in 
this country. In the first place, you must lay it down as 
a settled point that you will be cheated in some way, and 
then that the business will be drawn out and prolonged 
to the utmost possible limits, and then you will always 
foci a 8us}ncion that, after all, there is some crook or 
comer yon have not seen, some hole to creep out of; in 
short, no one here has any confidence in another, and this 
is the principle upon which business must be done. In a 
matter involving so much as the taking of so large a 
house for so long a time, Mr. Everett has felt a great deal 
of anxiety, but we hope the matter is now happily 
arranged. It is a delightfully situated house overlooking 
the Bosphorus, but it is not largiB enough to accommodate 
the number of pupils we wish to take, so another weari- 
some and difficult piece of work must be accomplished, — 
the building of an addition. This we calculate to have 
done by the be^nning of September, but I presume it 
'will not be done before two or three months later, and 



* nobck Is about six miles from the dty, on the Earopeaa side of the 
Bonphoruii doUghtfblly situated, the houses rising one abore another on the 
steep sides of a ravine, and eommandlng the most eharmtaig and Tirled 
prospects. It Is the scat of the Yoang Hen's Semlnarj. 



208 TBS MI88IONABT 8I8TBR8. 

thuB I fear our vaoation will be greatly prolonged. Oar 
school will deed with an examination next week, Friday." 

On the 10th of the same month, Miss Lovcll Mrritca : 
^Mtb. Everett has Just left as to take possession of oar 
neif house in Bebek, and thus oar pleasant fiunily, which 
tar more than foor years has dwelt together so pleasantly 
and happily, is broken up ; and next I must go. It is like 
tearing away heart-strings to leave this dear fiunllyi 
where, like a cherished daughter, I have so long shared 
^e love and prayers of those whose love and prayers are 
worth so much.'' 

In jEuiother lettert Miss Lovell again refers to her feel- 
ings in the prospect of leaving the house where her five 
years of missionary life had been mostly spent. 

** We have eiyoyed so much happiness and prosperity 
in this house that my heart's affections ding to it as to a 
loved home» It was the beg^noing of our little school ; it 
has been, I humbly trust, the birthplace of many souls. 
Here in my own little Iroom, how often have I listened to 
the inquiry^ ^ What mubt I do to be saved ? ' and bow 
ofteil I hate joined in the prayer of thanksgiving for 
mercy obt^ed and peace found I Every room and every 
doset seems hallowed and consecrated ground. Oh that 
the holy influence tnight I'omain to bless tlioso who shall 
dwell here after us I Much, however, as we have enjoyed 
io this house, a change seemed necessary. It is very 
desirable that we should have country air, and a place of 
exercise for the girls, hoih of which we shall have, with 
plenty of water, in the place we have taken. But we 
feel like saying, ^ If thy presence go not with us carry us 
not up I"* 

In the same letter, she writes, 

<^From the interior, we continue to hear cheering 
news. Aintab seems to be a favored spot, and I some- 
times almost long for iU>o bodies^ that one might labor 
there. 



MB. BYBBBTT'b NBW RB8IDBK0B. 209 

*^One Utile inddent I will telate, which shows the 
power of this work upon those interested. When Dr. 
Smith came on to the annual meeting, a poor man of 
Aintab came to him, and put into his hands 100 piastres, 
(all he possesses probably does not exceed four or five 

hundred piastres in value.) Give this to Mr. ^ of 

Constantinople, and tell him that ten or fifteen years ago 
I stole fi*om him an article worth forty or fifty piastres. 
I wish to make restitution for my great sin. This money 
will repay him, with interest." Does not this show the 
power of the goetpd as well as the power of canaeienoef 

A few days later, Mrs. Everett writes to her sister firom 
her new home. 

*^ How I wish I could describe to you the situation 
which we have come to occupy. It is really indescribably 
beautiful. The house is but a very short distance fix)m 
the shore of the Bosphorus, and, being in an elevated 
position, has a most charming prospect of the villages and 
palaces on both shores for some distance, the Heavehly 
Waters, so much resorted to on holidays and for excur- 
sions, on the opposite side, with high hills rising behind. 
A beautiful kiosh of the Sultan crowns the summit of the 
highest hill, which is directly in firont of us on the other 
shore. The house, we think, with -an addition now being 
made, will be very convenient. 

" We hope now to be ready for school the 1st of Sep- 
tember. I shrink from what is before us. The responsi- 
bility of this school is very great. 

^ September 1. It is the still hour of Sabbath evening, 
and oh, how refreshing it is to our weary spirits to pass 
the Sabbath here after five years in the noisy city, though 
here we are constantly reminded that we are Hot in our 
own Christian America. Here it is man^s day, not the 
Lord's day.** 

Of a missionary brother at one of the interior stations, 
18* 



210 TU MIMIOVABT 8I8TBB8. 

who had bem tery iQ, fram whom they had reoendy had 
a viBiC^ the writes. 

^ Mr. -^ — aaid that often, when he walked out in E. 
for exMToifl^ he tetomed home completely exhausted, 
unfit for any things from the ovelrpowering anxiety he felt 
for the Boula of periahing multttudea about liim. Be thou 
astonished, O n^ soul^ at thy deadneas. Oh for a new 
baptismi 

^ September 8. Our dear sister .Martha has oome, and 
we are making plans for the foture. May we be divinely 
directed^ and a desire for the salvation of the souls of our 
dear pupils guide all pur thoughts and acts I It rains 
to-day, so that we are prevented going to the little 
prayer meetings but Martha and I pleaded together the 
promise to * two or three.' Those doily seasons of prayer 
we had in her state-room on board the Stamboul are 
not foigotten, and I trust their influence on us has not 
iceased. 

^Our female prayer meeting is on Tuesday, at 4, p. m. 
Three of the ladies of the Scotch mission, who are here 
for the summer^ join us." 

In a letter written to the brothers and sisters of her 
husband, about this date, she says : — < 

^Our house here has been taken for six years, and is 
Just the place of places for oigr school, ^- so it seems to 
us, ^^ and we foel that a kind Providence has &vored us 
in obtaining it. The air is delightful, water abundant 
and good. There is a nice little garden, with a laige 
grape-vine covering the porch over the door which opens 
towards the Bosphorus. Then there is a large terrace 
Which will be a fine playground for the scholai-s ; higher 
up is ^Atf hiU^ which has some cultivated patches, a young 
vineyard, some fruit-trees, and a fine sitting-place under 
the shade of some pine-trees, commanding a view that 
your eyes would love to look upon. Have I given you 
my idea of our new home? Now, think of the cares and 



MTf^dtOT^AtlT tmAtS. 211 

dnticd thiit oome with it \ twenty 01^ inotd yotiAg girls to 
be clothed, fed, and instructed, &c.^ 

From the same, September 28, 1850. 

<<Ht dbab SisTBJEi M. : The inesd^nger this morning 
brought a packnge of letters, forwarded from Pera by the 
hand of our dear Mr. Dwight. t shouted, * Mh Dwight 
has come I ' and every part of the house seemed to echo 
the words, for they were 6aught up and repeated by the 
scholars, one after anothet, with the gretki^t delight. 
My letters, or It letter and note from youf dear hand| 
were most joyfully seized, but how my heart Dunk within 
mo as I glanced at the contentd. Oh I ^tt U tbett / * I 
prayed, Lord, help me to feel it in my inmost soul I Otxt 
t*ather can not do us an injury^ thotigh he cause Out 
loved ones to suffer, and our hearts to bleed* Until I 
hear ag^ from you, my hoped Will pi^vail that our deaf 
6ister Maria's health may be testoi^d. May hef soul find 
sweet peace in trusting in Jesus, and her hopes be cleat 
and bright t^B sh^ looks forward und Upward. I am so 
Surprised ^d overcome by the suddenness of these 
tidings, thitt I can bring nothing else to mind." 

^ October 4. Dear sister, we have just returned from 
a prayer meeting, held in the place of our tinging meet- 
ing, with teference to th6 dep^urd of Mr. Hamlin's 
family to-morrow. t)eaf Mrt. H* is very, very feeble. 
Ber ctoe is not considered hopelesil by the physicians^ 
and they have okxiered het immediate removal to thd 
Island of Rhodes. Vf^ have all been doing( What we 
could to assist in their hasty pl^parations. Mfty it please 
our heavenly Father to restore our deaf tfMerl Our 
station is Under the doud; Mr. Wood has gone; Mr. 
Hamlin will be absent for the winter at least; Mr. Goodell 
is going in the spring. 

^ Mrs. Dwight says mother felt ftniiety about me. tf 
she could come and make me a Visit, tixo would b6 re- 
lieved, t am sure. My face she would find paler and 



2Vi TBM UMBB10VAKT SIBTSSfl. 



thinner than it was onoe ; and, besides our two babes, we 
bare a huge hoosehold, but the children are well and 
good, the house very oosey and delightinl, and we have 
enough to eat, drink, and wear. Surely 'our cup runneth 



over.*** 



Miss Lovell to Mrs. Thayer. 

*'Bbbbx, Dec IS, 1850. 

^ Mt dxab Vsnasm : Having just bethought myself 
that to-morrow is post day, and that your kind letter of 
September 9 is unanswered, I hastily lay aside dress- 
miJdng, books, and every thing else, that I may thank 
you for that most welcome letter, and pave the way for 
another. But, my dear friend, would that you would not 
always toait for an answer before writing, but give me a 
glad surprise some fine evening by an unesq)ecied letter, a 
thing, by the way, I know very little about, as most of 
the letters I receive are watched for and expected, and 
longed for, many a weary day before they arrive. • . • 

^One part of your letter affected me to tears. It was 
that in which you so kindly chide me for saying that I 
have no home in America. My heart goes out in love 
and warmest thanks to dear Mrs. Rogers and you for 
your affectionate offer. Oh, how it would delight me 
once more to sit down with you, to walk those streets I 
so often see in dreams, and hear the voices whose tones 
are still fresh in my memory I But thU will probably 
never be. While my health remains good, I would not 
leave my loved employment here; should that frtil,! must 
then see what the Lord would have me do. Much as 
I love America, and dearly as I piize the friends I have 
left there, here I wish to spend my days, and here I hope 
to die, and rise in the morning of the resurrection in 
company with some of my beloved flock. I often wonder 
that I am not removed, and some more efficient and use- 
ful person placed here in my stead, and, whenever God 
shall see fit to remove me, I can only thank him that I 



YAOATfON. 218 

have 80 long been permitted to hnve a part in his work, 
while so many, eminently fitted for usefulness, are re- 
moved. . . . 

^'I have this week a vacation in school. Next Monday, 
we begin again with twenty-two pupils. We have appli- 
cations for more, and shall probably receive them soon. 
In the mean time, the care of these fills up all my time. 
So many of them are quite young that the care of their 
clothing is no small matter. We received a few days 
since a box fidl of useful articles, calico, cotton, &o^ firom 
a little society in Andover. It came quite opportunely, 
as winter is beginning, and many of the poor girls were 
in need of dothingt" • • • 



CHAPTER XX. 

Btflftl la tlM Sobool— Detib of Dr. 8iiiltli— DtpaitoM of Ur. and Mit. 

Oood<ll tor Amwrloa — Lettew to thin. 

Thb spedal influences of the Spirit of God, which had 
BO often blessed the school while it remained in Pera, 
were not long withheld from it in its new retreat. Mrs. 
Everett and Miss Lovell both ^ve substantially the same 
particulars of this new work of grace, under dates of 
February 8 and 4. The following is ML&s Lovelies, written 

to Mr. Pardee. 

« 

^ My last letter, you remarked, closed in what seemed 
to be a crisis of peculiar interest. It seemed to be such, 
and our hopes were indeed strong that the Lord was 
about to bless us ; but these appearances proved to bo 
but ' like the early dew,' and very soon those who were 
weeping and praying were again careless and thought- 
less. A season of coldness and carelessness succeeded, 
when the heavens seemed to be brass over us, and the 
earth iron under our feet ; nothing appeared to produce 
any impression upon any mind, until the death of Mrs. 
Hamlin, and her tiiumphant experience, came upon us 
with a voice too loud to pass unheeded. Soon after, the 
death of one much beloved by all the pupils, a former 
member of the school, who died very suddenly, but 
peacefully, and rejoicing in her Saviour, seemed to pro- 
duce a powerful effect upon all who knew her. A few 
days after the death of the last mentioned, was the day 



BBVIVAL IN SCHOOL. 216 

appointed for fasting and prayer in the school. It was 
likewise observed by all the missionary circle, and was a 
day of exceeding interest to us all. The Spirit of God 
seemed present in all our little meetings, and we could 
not but say, * Truly God was in this place, and we knew 
it not.' One dear child for whom we have felt much 
anxiety, and for whom many prayers have been offered, 
was enabled that day to rejoice in the hope of pardoned 
sin. For three others, we have the same good hope, and 
two or three who before were doubting, are now dear, 
and rejoicing in hope of eternal life. Pray for this little 
band of converts. But we can not feel that the work is 
finished. We would not feel satisfied while one remains 
unconverted. The younger portion of the girls seem 
quite thoughtful, and are continually coming to my room, 
in the hours when they are out of school, that I may talk 
and pray with them. There are some indications of 
interest in the other seminary, and we would fain believe 
that the day to favor Zion has come, that the clouds are 
gathering over us which will erelong burst in floods of 
mercy upon this thirsty land. 

" Our school now numbers but twenty-two. Two of 
our Greek girls were taken away by their mother, al- 
tiiough the father was very desirous that they should 
remain. We have still two interesting Greek girls, one 
of whom hopes she is a Christian, and die other is deeply 
interested in religious truth. I have two little Italian 
girls, also in the Greek dass, who come as day scholars. 
They are Catholics, and have attended the school of tho 
Sisters of Charity, but, their mother finding they learned 
nothing good there, took them away, and begged admit- 
tance for them into our school. One of our pupils from 
Nicomedia was taken away last week to be married. 
She is only fourteen years old, and she is the third of the 
same age who has been married within a year, all from 
Nicomedia, The people are not yet ready to give up 



216 Tnii ins0iONA|iY 9istsbs. 

thoir loQg-^oriitbed oostom of eftny marriagea. It ini 
liowovori t^ Borioua obstacle to tbo proapority of tho 
aohQol, aa almoat invariably aa aoon aa onq begina to get 
interoat^d in ber atudioa, mi givpa promiso of liecoming 
a &ne aqbolar, ab^ ia taken away. Still, we bope tbat, in 
tbe abort time tbat many remain, tboy do receive lessona 
wbicb will be of laating benefit to tbem, and make tbem 
blessings tp all around tbem* Twelve or fourteen bavo 
b^eu married from tbe aobool, and ] bope tbat (Ul of tbem 
are pious Obriatian womeu. 13ut I am most bappy wbei^ 
I tbink Qf tbe two pf pur flp^k wbo ara now scffe in 
beaveut I tbmk of tbem witb deligbt, aa ao mueb firuit 
reaped aiid safely bpnaadt and* were tbere no otber, I 
pould bl^sa Qpd tbat be sent na a<sros9 tbe wide waters 
/or this. But, blessed be bia name, thU la not till, Wa 
trust tbqrp wiU b9 a brigbt and preeioua band to Join 
tliemi pna alWr anptber» aa tba aummona may come wbicb 
calls tbem away,'' 

Mrs, Bver^tt writeai Marob 4 ; ^ Since my last letter, I 
do not know pf any new easea of special religious interest 
among tbe scholars. Tbose wbo bavP recently obtained 
bopp, appear ^^11 Wp long to aep otbera coming to 
Jeaua*'' 

Mi9a liPYPll to bar aister-in-law in Wisconsin. 

"BaBs^iApiiisJissi. 

*^ Spveral daya bave pasaed aiT^ce tbis letter was com- 
menced, but I will try thia morning tP bring it to a dose. 
I spent yesterday in sigbt^eeing, in pompany witb a part 
of Mr. Goo^ell'a family, awd a larga company of Amer- 
ican travelers, Wp viaitad tbp lioyal Mosks, St* Sophia, 
JbCf As I bavp, I prpsume, described all tbese before, I 
will not repeatt I will only mention tbe mausoleum pf 
tbe latp SMltan Mabmoud, wbicb I bavp not visited be- 
forp, {t ia a amall, cbaste, and beautiful building of white 
marble* opntainii^g the tPmbs of Mabmpud, apma pf bis 



TnB TOMB OF MAlfMOUD. 217 

wives and children, and two or three sisters. These 
tombs are very large, and are covered with velvet em- 
broidered with gold, add over this are thrown splendid 
Cashmere shawls. I counted on the tomb of Mahmond, 
which is the largest, thirteen of these expensive shawls 
folded and thrown over. Upon the turbaned head of the 
tomb, is a splendid diamond decoration. There were 
many objects of interest hanging around ; a large sheet 
covered with Arabic characters, — I presume from the 
Koran, — written by his own hand ; a beautifrilly embroi- 
dered praying-carpet from Mecca ; in a cabinet, the gir- 
dles which ho had worn in his lifetime, glittering and 
heavy with precious stoneii ; I saw in one, three emeralds 
nearly half as large as hens^ eggs. I brought home from 
the Seraglio Garden a bouquet of flowers, which are filling 
my room with fragrance, and which I wish I could send 
you. I may send you one or two pressed, as a memorial 
of the day and place. Have you lost your fondness for 
such trifles? We tued to preserve such memorials in 
days gone by. Perhaps the little * olive plants ' around 
your table take up now all your time and dioughts." 

The following from the same pen, though written at a 
later date, may be introduced in this connection. 

^I returned yesterday, August 28, from Buyukdere and 
Therapia, — the former the residence of Dr. Millingen. 
His house is pleasantly situated on the Bosphorus; a 
good walk brings one in full sight of the Black Sea, — a 
most magnificent prospect. I enjoyed a visit of three 
days there much ; they did every thing to make my visit 
pleasant, — showing me all the interesting spots in the 
neighborhood. 

"You may have heard of the great oak-tree under 
which Godfrey dc Bouillon encamped, with all his army, 
when just about to set ofi* for Jerusalem on a crusade. 
It is at Buyukdere, and is a splendid tree, consisting of 
seven trunks, all connected in one, and called tlio seven 

19 



218 THS 1CI88IOVABT SISTBBfl. 

broiherBi — the lai^gest tree I ey^ saw. I inclose you a 
leaf from it ; also a sprig of ivy from the ruins of an old 
Genoes9 oastlo ^t the opening of the Black Sea| on the 
Ablatio side. The rains are some 700 years old, and th^ 
view from them the finest imagii^able. Also a sprig of 
cypress from a Turkish cemetery on the top of the monur 
tain near the ruins^ There w^ saw an old dervish, born in 
Candahar, in A%hanistan, He has been in Cashmere, 
Lahore^ Oabul, and m^ny other places, and had many 
stories to tell. H9 lives entirely alone at the top of the 
mountain, practicing the rites of hi^ religion.'' 

It is pleasapt to see how i^&nfily th^ affection betweei^ 
pur two misaonary friendi^ continued to glow during all 
th^ years of their unrestrained and most intimate inter^ 
course, After they had been six years almost uninter- 
ruptedly together, MLs^ Lovell writes to one of |ier most 
intimate friends : *^ You ask if I love Mrs. Everett as 
well as ever. Indeed I do. She is a sweet and p^^dous 
sipter; no one can look upon her sweet £ice without 
loving her at once, and that love increases daily a^ you 
see her in every relation of life." 

Que of the prominent traits in lliifrcf. Everett's character 
was filial gratitude and affection. She d^lightQd to 
ascribe what she "v^as, under God, chiefly tp psircntal 
inflaence ; and the warmth of her love for tho9e who ha4 
9P faithfully guided her childhood and youth in the way^ 
of true Tfisdom, years and absence seemed never to abate. 
We tak^ n^ore pleasure in presenting hqr oxafnple in this 
respect, as filial piety can hardly be reckoned apopg the 
prominent virtues of our ago or country. The blessing 
which accompanied the example and instruction of Uioso 
parents, may also epcpui-ago other parents to similar 
faithfulness. She writes to her parents, April 8, 1851. 

<* It is with deep gratitude that we are permitted to 
hear of your Qonifortablp health in your declining years, 
and it always calls forth the prayer that yoi^ may be Igng 



TiLiAL AWE&ri6^. 219 

spared, if it please our Father in heaven, to bless your 
children by your prayers and counsels, and the world by 
your efforts for the advancement of Christ's kingdom. I 
often think that, next iifter my Saviour, I must strive, /br 
^okir sakeSj to Ibe a fsuthful laborer in the vineyard of the 
Lord, as it is, tinder Gk>d, in consequence of the consecra- 
tion which you made, Itnd the prayers you have offered, 
and the faithful instruction you have given, that one of 
your childreh is permitted to occupy such a sphere of 
tiscfnlncss. But your work is only begun in thus sending 
forth your weak, unworthy child. It will be worse than 
in vain, unless the Lord be with mo to teach, guide, 
istrengthen, and bless. Oh, I beseech you, my dear father 
and mother, never cease to remember your distant chil- 
dren before the mercy-seat, and may the blessing of many 
ready to j)erish be upon joiit heads, and in the Ikst day 
may many rise up and call you blessed I " 

Miss Lovell to Mr. Pardee, June 1. 

^ Since I last wrote you, there has been no new case 
of special interest in the school, but those who had then 
newly expressed a hope in Christ, continue to give in- 
creasing evidence of a saving change, and one other, for 
whom I have long felt much anxiety, begins to give evi- 
dence of at least an increasing interest in spiritual things, 
if not of actual conversion. We last week received two 
new scholars from Tokat, the first we have ever received 
from so great a dii^tance. They are interesting and 
promising girls, from one of the first families in that city, 
but, living So far in the interior, their manners and ap- 
pearance are very different from those of the girls brought 
up here. They will, I hope, if they go through their 
course here, be prepared to exert a great and good in- 
fluence when they return to Tokat, where, I believe, 
there is but one female who knows how to read, and that 
an atmt of these girls. 

^Our friends are now gathering in from the interior for 



220 THB MISSIONABT SISTERS. 

tho annual meeting. Mr. Schneider is here, and it would 
do your heart good to hear him relate tlie wonderful 
work of the Lord in Aintab. I wish I could toll you half 
the interesting news which comes in to us, from day to 
day, from different places in this dark land. Little spots 
of light and hope begin to be seen in every direction. 
Oh, may the full flood of noonday brightness soon cover 
tho land ! 

^I was yesterday counting the probable number of 
missionary children in Constantinople now under Prot- 
estant* and religious influence. When I came here, six 
years ago, there were not in all more than sixty, — a little 
more than thirty in .Mr. Hamlin's Seminary, and a little 
less in a Jewish missionary schooL Now there are more 
than three hundred. May we not hope much from theso 
three hundred children? Pray for these schools; and 
may their numbers be greatly increased, for, alas I there 
are thousands of children in this city who are growing up 
in almost Egyptian darkness.** 

Mrs. Everett, July 3. 

^ The general meeting of our mission has passed, and 
we ai*c able to take a long breath again. There were 
more than usual present. We had friends constantly 
with us five weeks, besides all incidental company^ Tho 
meeting was an unusually interesting and important one ; 
the sessions continued two we^ks. The reports from Uio 
different stations were exceedingly interesting, and the 
demand for more laborers in all parts of the field ex- 
tremely urgent. Oh for a new baptism upon us who aro 
here ! our day for labor is short. What a loud call to do 
with our might what our hands find to do, in the unex- 
pected removal of our good, devoted brother. Dr. Smith, 
of Aintab. The overwhelming intelligence of his decease 
reached us just in the midst of the meeting. He fell with 
his armor on ; a more devoted, active soldier of the cross 
never was in the field. At the meeting lost year, he was 



VISIT OF MS. AND MBS. OOODBLL TO AMERICA. 221 

our gncst, and we often remarked that he seemed to have 
lost a relish for all other topics of thought and conversa- 
tion except the all-absorbing theme of the advancement 
of Christ's kingdom in this land. 

^As more ladies were with us this year than nsoal, we 
had a meeting to compare notes, and devise ways and 
means for accomplishing more in our particular depart- 
ment of missionary labor. One plan was to have a circu- 
lar letter written by a sister from each station quarterly, 
detailing all of special interest that has transpired in her 
work, or her want of success in effort, her Encouragements 
and her trials. Mrs. Schauffler wrote the first as a report 
of our meeting." 

This plan of a circular among the ladies was not long 
kept up, owing partly to the many engagements and 
often feeble health of the missionary ladies, which pre- 
vented their doing many things that their warm interest 
m the missionary work would have otherwise led them 
to do. But a circular of that kind, started by Dr. Smith, 
of Aintab, was for several years maintained quite regular- 
ly by the male members of the different stations of the 
Armenian mission, the youngest member of the station 
being the one to write it. 

One subject of discussion brought up before the meet- 
ing of this year, was the removal of the scnool to the city 
again, or to some suburb where it would be in the midst 
of a large Armenian population. But, as this question 
was not settled until some time later, we tdll not enter 
into it here. 

The departure of Mr. and Mrs. Goodell for America in 
the spring of this year, left a large void in the missionary 
circle, and especially in the hearts of the two missionary 
sisters, who had so long lived with them under the same 
roo^ and had regarded them as father and mother in the 
land of their adoption. They left their three youngest 
children in Constantinople, the two boys in Mr. Van 
19* 



222 TUJfi IflSSIONARY &ISTKU8. 

Lcnncp'fl fiunily, and the daughter Emma in Miaa Loyell'a 
care, who performed fiiithfully a mother's part to her 
during her paronta* absence. With those dear friends, 
Mrs. Everett and Miss Lovell corresponded frequently 
during their separation. The following from Miss LoveU, 
with no date but the month, appears to have been written 
directly after their departure, and while they were still in 
Smyrna. 

^Mir DBAB Papa: IIow shall I address you? How 
commence a note to you ? I am not used to this way of 
speaking to yqu. I would gladly throw by pen and 
paper, and grasp your hand, and then I should be at no 
ioss for words. Time has been when I should have 
trembled at the idea of addressing a £miiliar note to 26r, 
Goodett/ but if I venture now upon the act, and even 
commence with the familiar title, * dear papa,' it is your 
indulgence and fatherly kindness which must bear the 
blame. I have been too long indulged the privilege, to 
readily relinquish it. I wonder what you are doing now^ 
Oh for a telegraph, or a carrier-pigeon, or a pair of wings; 
but| as none of these are at hand, I suppose I must con- 
tent myself with imagining. Of one thing I am sure, — 
you are not writing the commentary on your knees ; you 
are not taking little Ellen *upon it;' you are not climbing 
that steep hill under my guidance ; you are fu>t singing 
*I would not live always,' or *Oft in the stilly night,' with 
the piano; you are not taking your nap in the large easy- 
^ chair beside the stove in the next house ; * you are not — 
oh I I can think of a thousand things you are not doing 
— you are not here/ Yet perhaps you are here in spirit; 
perhaps you are even now in prayer for the school which 
you so loved, and perhaps, while reading this, you will 
send up one petition for her who is now writing, and for 
those for whose spiritual welfare she desires to spend all 
her days. Sure I am that you will not forget us. Though 

*lfr. OoodeU*! flunlly bad spent the previous winter in Bcbelc 



PKOORB8S OF tIGlIT. 228 

an occnn m.iy sepamte ns for a little season, yon will 
often pray for ns, and will, God willing, soon return to 
give lis again the benefit of your counsels and your 
experience." 

In another, written probably the next week, having no 
date but Thursday r. m., she says : — 

"I have caught myself several times this week involun- 
tarily listening for Papa Goodell's well-known step and 
voice at his usual time for visiting just after lunch, and 
once actually took my bonnet, and was just about to run 
over to your house, — alas ! pours no longer. . . . 

" How shall wo sing to-morrow evening without you ? 
You will think of us with our harps on the willows, will 
you not ? " 

Mrs. Everett writes, August 2. 

^In this city, light is being diffused, and we are expect- 
ing that erelong multitudes wiU come out from the dark- 
ness, and openly confess the truth. Mr. Dwight was 
saying last evening that he had received a message from 
the President of the great Armenian Council, through an 
Armenian, that this is the time for the Protestants to 
work ; that nearly half of their number are, in heart, on 
our side. Where now there is one missionary, we ought 
to have ten ; a chapel should be built in Pera, to give 
more character in appearance to the new sect, and it 
would soon bo thronged. The Patriarch recently put 
out a tract holding forth the principles and doctrines of 
the church, and Mr. Hamlin has written and published a 
most thorough and convincing reply, which is read very 
extensively, and will do great good. Mr. Hamlin might 
have access to Armenian families of distinction, and dis- 
cuss the great truths of the gospel, but he is confined 
with his school and motherless children." 

Mrs. Everett to Mr. and Mrs. Goodell, September 11. 

^ Our family is again large. Mrs. Hinsdale is still with 
us, but will go to Pera next month ; sister. Martha and 



224 TUB masiovAST ntrsss. 

Emma, as luraaL At pretenti wo hayo throe of the dear 
diiUrcn of Mr. Hamlin* Ho haa gone to Rhodea to 
lemoye to the Pera bnrjing-groand the remaina of hia 
almoat idolized wife. Henrietta and Susan, the two oldest, 
and sweet baby Mary, with her nurse, are with ua. Car- 
rie and Abby are at Mr. Schaoffler'a. Mr. H. will eome, 
if proq[>ered, after sixteen days more, and the dust of our 
dierished sister will be deposited by the side of Mrs. Van 
Lennep. How our bereaved brother is to go on with his 
duties, and the care of hia motheriess ones, we can not 
see. Probably he will permit Carrie and Abby to remain 
m some of our fiunilies, though unwillingly. 

^Vacation haa passed, and the scholars are again with 
na ; but not alL Two have been married ; one good girl 
to a Christian brother in Nicomedia ; making five of our 
scholars married there; and one sweet young girl haa 
gone to Broosa aa the wife of the new pastor, ordained 
there on the removal of Mr. Ladd here. Two other 
pioua scholars have left, and we feel weakened. Some 
little ones have come in, but the number does not yet 
exceed twenty. Miss Lovell was counting our married 
pupils a few days since. They are eighteen, and all but 
one or two hopefully pious. Ought we not to thank €k>d 
and take courage? Miss L. has, during the vacation, 
been copying the names of all the scholars from the oom- 
meBcement, one to a page, givbg or leaving space for a 
sketch of each one. She is also copying into the book 
all the annual reports of the school. After a few years, 
will it not be an interesting history, think you ? May 
dear Martha long be spared to the school P . . . 

The latter part of this year, Mrs. Everett was again 
called to mourn the death of a dear sister. She thus 
closes a letter written to another sister on this occasion. 

^Precious sister, which of us shall first greet you above, 
and join with you and the other sainted ones in your 
ascriptions of praise to our adorable Redeemer? Let na 



DBATH OF HBS. BVBRETT'S SISTER. 226 

bear tho cross faithfully, patiently, till the Master calls. 
Oh, then to be accepted in him, and receive a crown of 
life that fadeth not away ! * Let me die the death of the 
righteous.' 

''The many things I had to write, I am wholly unfit 
for to-night. Oh that we could mingle our tears. 'There's 
no weeping there.' " 

She was herself tho next of that household band called 
to join the family above. 



oil APT Ell XXI. 

IClM honiiVB ICftrriftftt — Continued HMorjof tbe Bebool— Letter from an 

Armenian Lady. 

Ths beginning of ft new year found Mn. Everett 
prostrated with a severe illness, firom which, however, she 
was beginning to recover, and several other members of 
the fiunily also ill. Writing to one of her sisters, January 
23, after relating all they had just passed through, she 
says: — 

>*Now, dear sister, have we not cause to sing of mercy? 
Oh I shall we not, do we not, consecrate ourselves, our 
children, our ally anew to the Lord, seeking from on high 
the grace and strength we shall daily and hourly need to 
enable us to perform our vows ? How I should love to 
sit down and talk with you, my dear, dear sister, and 
bow with you before the mercy-seat as in days gone by I 
But what changes, what scenes have I passed through 
since we parted I I sameiimea feel that I am no more 
the same being.** 

An event was now about to take place of great import- 
ance in the history of the school. The reader shall have 
the first intimation of it in the *^ whisper^ in which Mrs. 
Everett conveyed it to her sister across the Atlantia 

<<It is evening; dear EUie, Sumner, and papa are 
quietly sleeping; Emma has gone to her bed; sister 
Martha has gone to the singing meeting, and the scholars 
are at their evening studies ; and now, dear M., I shall 



HiBs loyxll's marbiagb. 227 

whisper to you something about this same sistel* Martha. 
Did you ever have a thought of the school without her 
as its head, it« center, its l\fe almost ? It was her * first 
love ' from its first existence ; she had nurtured it, and^ 
by the blessing of Gk>d, she has seen the seed bring forth 
much fruit. 

^ But she is going to give her place to another, and 
she, she is to take the place of our dear departed sister, 
Mrs. Hamlin, to be a mother to those dear children for 
whom all our hearts have ached; and how well fitted she 
is to take that position, I can not beg^n to tell you, nor, 
in fact, to tell you my feelings in this matter in any way. 
I believe it is of tihe Lord.'*' • • • 

Miss Lovell, writing to her mother in reference to the 
same subject, thus expresses some of her feelings. 

^ But Gk>d's thoughts ar^ not bur thoughts, and I, who 
but a few weeks since looked forward to nothing but 
living and dying at taj present post, now see the hand 
of God so plainly pointing me in another direction, that I 
have not a, shadow of a doubt ais to the line of duty* Yet 
duh/ seems hei;e a cold word^ where every feeling of my 
heart goes with it . • . 

^ Do you not wonder, dpdr mother, that I can consent 
to leave this much-loved school ?• And do you not won- 
der at my presumption in assttming such responsibilities ; 
in even thinking for a moment of occupying the place of 
one so lovely and beloved^ so gifted with every virtue ? 
Ah, mother, if you could know with, what feelings I have 
consented to do this, ybu woUld at least not accuse me 
of rashness and thoughtlessness^ but would^ aii I am sure 
you will, remember me unceasingly before the throne of 
grace, that I may have strength and XVisdom fix>m above 
to assist and guide me. 

«* With regard to this school, whore I hiive spent 
nearly seven years so happily, and from which I thought 
nothing but death could separate me, I loavd it^ though 



228 THB MUaiOVAKT SlflTXBS. 

with finJiny of the teademt regreti jet in the loll 
SMonuice that it is mj heayenlj Fathei^a will, and that 
he will proride £ar all its wanta, will oontinoe to make it 
the object of hh tender caie, will richly bleaa it as he has 
dcme in days past; yea, periu^ fiir more abundantly 
than he has done since it has been under my care. For 
this I shall ever pray." t 

The manriage was sdemnised the 18th of Hay. Mrs. 
Everett's description of it is the most minuto and 
gn^^iio. 

*^Mt i>sab Uothkb: • • • Dear Miss Loyell has 
left us. We had hoped she mig^t remain until the dose 
of this term, but our judgment ccnndded with the judg- 
ment and feeUngi of the parties concerned, and the mar- 
riage took place on the 18th instant ; and as a wedding 
in our house was such an unlooked-for event, and, withal, 
such a happy one, I must tell you all about it. 

"Considering the peculiar circumstances of Ifr. Hamlin, 
and that it was in the middle of our sdiool tenn, with 
sdioolin session, it was thought best to have a private 
wedding and there were only about dghfy^bfC present. 
These were our mission circle, with the £unilies of our 
embassy. Marshes, Browns, and Homeses. The missionary 
diildren numbered twenty-five, and the sdiolars twenty- 
five. The hall was hung with hoise-chestnut boughs, 
with the beantifid white cones, and the parlor adorned 
with vases of fiowera. | 

*^llie con^Mmy assembled in the parior, and at the 
appointed hour, two, p. ic, the bridal party entered, the 
bride in white muslin, with a wreath of white flowers 
around her hair. Miss Harris, who is going to Oroomiah, 
was bridesmaid, and Henry Schauffler groomsman. Upon 
their entering the room, our sdiolars came into the hall, 
and stood as they had been previously directed, the 
smallest in fix>nt, closing the entrance to the parlor with 



MIS8 LOVKLl's BtAUltlAGS. 229 

a phalanx of heads. All in the room instinctively rose 
upon their feet, and stood daring the very interesting 
and impressive service by Mr. Schauffler. Congratular 
tions followed ; first were the kisses from the five little 
daughters. Then the bride's loaf was brought in upon ft 
waiter. This, and another very large loaf of fruit cake 
beautifully frosted^ had been furnished by Mrs. Brown, 
wife of the Secretary and First Interpreter. 

"After the cake was passed, the hymn was sung, com- 
mencing, * When all thy mercies, O my God,* and then 
the party was invited into the hall, where the table had 
been previously prepared. 

" In our dining-room adjoining the hall, the scholars' 
table was set. After bating, the table was drawn one 
side, while the children marched in order to 

«*«Chlldpeii,go,'&o., 

which Mr. Van Lennep played on the piano. It was a 
beautiful sight, and, altogether, it was a beautiful wed- 
ding, — ail went well. When they were actually taking 
my sister away, my feelings quite overcame me ; but the 
guests had nearly all dispersed, and I soon recovered my- 
self, and went about to send home tumblers, plates, &c. 
l>ut the house to rights, and actually went up with our 
Bebek families to take tea with the bride, and was up the 
next morning about as bright as though t had not passed 
through the fatigue and excitement o^ such a wedding. 

"Many prayers accompany our dear sister to her new 
home ; a happy one it will be if her physical strength is 
equal to her new cares and responsibilities. Emma 
Goodell went with her, making six girls, — the eldest 
thirteen, the youngest still a babe, hardly two years old." 

Miss Lovell's removal from the seminary necessarily 
caused a greatly increased amount not only of care and 
responsibility, but of labor, to devolve on Mrs. Everett. 
She writes just after this event. 

20 



280 THB lOSSIOVABT 8I8TBB8. 

^ The school never WM 00 foil m now; twenty-dx is 
the number. Mrs. Uinsdale is with us this summer as a 
boarder, making a fiunily of more than thirty to superin- 
tend, with some teaching, the Benevolent Society of the 
school, little prayer meetings, Ao. Jbo. The constant 
watchfulness over all these young persons is the most 
wearing. The Armenian teacher is an excellent one ; the 
assistant pupil does very well Very seasonable help in 
the way of clothing has just come from a seminary in 
Bloomfield, N. J. Sumner does much for the school, 
but goes to the city three days in the week. My health 
never was better than now, and I hope in God, and take 
courage. 

^ June 18. It is four weeks to-day since the weddmg. 
The school has gone on well, beyond our expectations. 
Sumner relieves me of hearing classes whenever he can, 
and although my cores and duties are neither few nor 
small, and sometimes weigh heavily, still I am wonder- 
fully well, and I hope grateful for the opportunity and 
the strength to do something for our Master. 

^ Do not think of me as wearing out; my health never 
was better than now, but we do hope that some one may 
soon come to our aid. Pray, what have you and our dear 
parents thought about my having a sister by my side ? I 
have not continued to write about it, because I supposed 
before my letter to you on the subject should have 
reached you, a person might have been secured ; but 
Dr. Anderson says, in a letter received to-day, that no 
one is found. May the Lord guide 1 This is a blessed 
work. Oh that I might accomplish more I " 

Just before her marriage. Miss Lovell sent to Mr. 
Goodell, then in America, a translated copy of a letter 
imtten to her by Armaveni, her first pupil and assistant 
teacher, afterwards married to pastor Muggerdich, who, 
at thp time this letter was written, was settled over the 
little Protestant church jn Rodosto. It will be read with 



. ARMAVBNI^B LMTTBR. 281 

interest, as also the acconapanying postscript by Mi&s 
LovelL* 

"RoDOBTO, April 5, 1852. 

" Dear Sistbr in Christ : Toiir letter, full of love, 
sent by my brother, I received, for which I thank you 
very much. Although you wrote not having received 
the news of the death of my beloved child, it yet com- 
forted me exceedingly, and it is a great kindness to 
comfort the afflicted. 

^ The death of my child has been to me a most heavy 
affliction. I did not think that in all the wide world any 
thing could console me, but my heavenly Father has 
granted me consolation and patience, and given me light 
to discover in his word great joy, for he does not su£Eer 
his servant to be entirely destroyed. ' lie smites, and 
his hand heals.' Now I can plainly see that in love he 
has thus chastised me. He is too good and kind need- 
lessly to chastise his children. Truly, * whom the Lord 
lovethj he chasteneih, and scourgeth every sofi whom he 
receiveth ; ' and these light afflictions, which are but for a 
moment, are not worthy to be compared with the great 
blessings which we receive while under his chastening 
rod. 

" Oh, how good is our heavenly Father, who does not 
Bu£Eer us to follow the desires of onr hearts, but in love 
disciplines us, and uses all means to make us holy as he 
is holy, and to fit us to enter his eternal glory. 

^ I bless my Saviour that I have this consolation, that 
my beloved children, though belonging to a sinful race, 
through his mediation are received into the heavenly 
kingdom, and now enjoy its glory with innumerable 
saints, and standing before their Ood, they see his fade 
full of inexpressible glory, and bless and praise bis name. 

*M1b8 L. remarks In an aeeompanylnp^ letter to Mr. Goodcll, thai 
ArmavcnPs letter had lost much of the ewcctncss of its expression by being 
translated. 



282 TliK MUMIOHABT 018TKB0. 

(Hi, UeMod lu^ which tho Sayionr has giYCiiy thmt ^of 
gueh is the kingdom of heaven ! * Now heaven seems to 
me more desaraUe than ever, and the thought of dying 
sod leaving this worid is very sweet. 

^ I thank you and Hr. Everett that you allowed my 
hrolher* to leave tho adiool and ccmie to me in my 
aflUction, which was to me a great comfort. . . . 

** Abmavkni.'' 

*^ P. 8. Since copying the accompanying letter, I havo 
learned with great pleasure that in Nicomodia a I^roiesi' 
ani girU school is to be opened, with our Akabee for a 
teacher, and the prospect ct at least thirty girls to b^;in 
with, of conise a good proportion from the old-church 
Armenians, I fed more delighted at' this than I can 
express. Akabee is making a very good impression there, 
and will, I think, do admirably. This I n^ard as indeed 
good fruit from our school ; and I trust that your prayers 
win follow this offihoot of our beloved school I could 
write a great deal of the influence which those girls aro 
known to exert in NicomediOybut have not now the time. 
Did I ever write you of a letter which Armaveni Hanum 
wrote from Rodosto to one of tho females here, which 
acddentally fell into tlie hands of one of the old-church 
Armenians, who was so much delighted and astonished 
at it, that he caused it to be extensively' circulated among 
the rich bankers as an astonishing specimen of what an 
Armenian female could do ? Thus our modest, retiring 
Armaveni was permitted to preach the gospel to the 
proud Armenians I " 

Mrs. Everett, July 12. 

*^lfT i>XAR MoTUBs; • . . Ilave you thought at 
all about B[ate*s coming out hero ? I should have written 
with more confidence and earnestness about it, had I sup- 
posed so long a time would have passed before a teacher 
could bo found. At the last date no one was secured, 

Her l)roUier wu a tMclker In the girls' ecbool. 



FATIGUB — SCHOOL EXAMINATION. 288 

though Dr. Anderson and Mr. Qoodell had two or three 
in view. But we ai*e willing to leave all in the hands 
of him who is *too wise to err.' We closed school 
for the summer vacation, July 2. The examination, and 
the company it brought, nearly exhausted the little 
stoi*e of strength I had ; and I must say that a week and 
a half of comparative rest has not restored my courage, 
though my strength has been restored in a groat measure. 
Do not think I have been ill, — it has only been a wom-^ti 
feeling that I do not remember to have had before. My 
dear husband lias gone to Nicomedia and Ada Bazaar, on 
a missionary tour. Ho has been absent a week, and is 
expected to return to-morrow ; but if he comes he must 
go back on Saturday, to attend a council at Nicomedia. 

•* Mrs. Hinsdale is a great comfort to us by her com- 
pany morning and evening. She lunches at Mr. Ham- 
lin's, where her school is. Mrs. Hamlin gets on finely 
with her little family. We should be sad to leave this 
charming Bebck, but glad if the Lord opens a wider door 
of usefulness elsewhere. We have had some veiy inter- 
esting visits from Armenian friends lately; and our school 
was never more prosperous than at its close." 

The following extract from a note to a missionary sis- 
ter in Marsovan, will show more fully the ** labor and 
care " of an examination in such a school : — 

*^My labors had all along been quite equal to my 
strength, and when the last week came, with all the 
preparations for examination in the way of work, classes, 
&c. &c. and the friends (of the scholars) began to come 
in even two days beforehand, I was poorly prepared for 
the excitement, labor, and care of an examination-day^" 

A letter, without date, but written near the close of 
the vacation, to the same missionary sister, is in a more 
cheerful strain. 

**My dear Sisteb: It is too bad, really unsisteny, 
o delay so long writing to you ; but you will judge mo 
20* 



iSi TUB IflBBIONABT BIBTBU8. 

lightly, after tho doleful account I gave of myself in my 
last little note^ Tho vacation has nearly past, and it has 
boon spent ia a stmnge way for me, ]>rincip2dly m run- 
ning about, doing as little as possible either for myself or 
others. • But it has been with a good conscience, and I 
think with the divine blessing ; do not think me irrever- 
ent. My strength and courage have in a great measure 
been rastored, and I am looking forward to the reopening 
of our school with hope and real pleasure, feeling still 
most deeply how much vfo shall need help from above. 
Pray for us. 

^ A teacher for our 9chool has at length been found; 
Ifiss West, of Palmyra. She seems to be the right one. 
. p. . 3hall I tell you that the station have approved 
of sending for one of my sisters to come and live with 
me, in order to help in school, or more especially in tho 
i|U8i4onary work generally among the females f But how 
l^any things, may prevent tho accomplishment of tho 
pli^l If the Lord will. I hope tremblingly." 
. It was eight months from the; time of Miss Lovell'a 
marriage, before Mrs. Everett was permitted to greet tho 
teacher who was to fill her place, and with her one of her 
owp beloved sisters, — the one she had for years longed 
tQ baye associated with her in her missionaiy life. Thoso 
were months of great care, and exertion beyond her 
physical sti'ength. It was during this time that she first 
complained of weariness even to exhaustion, as in the 
letters above quoted; and though slie seemed to have 
recovered much of her elasticity during the long vaca- 
tion, and her letters after tho commencement of tho full 
term are uniformly cheerful, it is believed her constitu- 
tion never entirely regained its former vigor. 

From Mrs. Everett, Sept. 7. 

**My prbcious Sistbr: . . . Our school com- 
menced yesterday. The scholars were unusually punc- 
tual, — twenty the first day. Wo had the house all ready 



ahukdant labors. 285 

for them, and they seem as happy to return as we are to 
welcome them. Tliere will be several new scholars. Oh 
for the i>resenco of the Good Spirit ! Shall we not be 
visited ? We can not be denied. You will remember 
us, and Miss West, though not here, will be praying for 
us. My health is quite good, and the children quite well, 
and very happy. Dear Mrs. Hinsdale is to be with us to 
comfort and aid a part of the day.* Sumner says I shall 
not hear any classes except it be necessary with the 
Greek girls ; and surely, with the whole domestic cou" 
corns, clothing, and sewing, and religious exercises, I have 
enough. But I love it with all my heart, notwithstand* 
ing all the care and trial." 

**Nov. 9. My time is all filled up, — divided among at 
least thirti/ in our own household ; cold weather calls for 
inany stitches. School is going on very pleasantly, and 
we are not without encouragement. Some are thinking 
on their ways. One sweet girl has a heart glowing with 
love to her Saviour, newly found ; old things have passed 
away; all have become new. It is a privilege to labor 
for tliese dear girls, though an arduous and responsible 
work." 

Mrs. Everett goes on to speak of several deaths in the 
mission circle, — Mrs. Morgan of Salonica, and Mr. Sut- 
phen of Marsovan, both of whom were called away very 
early after entering the missionary field, and Judith Per- 
kins, a daughter of Ilov. Dr. Perkins, of Oroomiah. 

" Nov. 28. Several of the scholars seem thoughtful. 
A few evenings since one came to tell me how she wad 
distressed on account of her unfitness to die, -— unable to 
sleep ; others have wept over their sinfulness. Lord, in- 
crease our faith ! It is now nearly three months since 
our term commenced, and we are going to giv6 a recess 



Hn. Hinadftle wu not aoqniilnted wiUi the Amenian langoage, and 
ooold only assist by sitting in the school sometimes to maintain order, or In tli9 
sewing department. 



^6 



THX MIBBIONABT BISTBB8. 



of a few daya next week. I spoke of fatigae in the first 
of my letter. My health is good, very good; but I 
sometimes get tired, and who does not, even in more 
quiet life than mine ? We are going to observe Thanks- 
giving on Thursday 25th, (are you ?) and I have been 
making pies. All the members of our drele are to meet 
at Mr. Dwight's, in Orta Eeuy, (half-way between Bebek 
and Pera, on the Bosphorus,) and wo are to have religious 
services in the morning, and then tipienio dinner. There 
will be forty-five persons, great and small." 
To Mrs. Bliss, Marsovan : — 

"Bbbbk, I>ec9, 1853. 

M Mr DBAS SiSTXB : If my poor notes were of any 
value to my dear sisters who have less society and less 
variety in their isolated homes than we, I sliould feel 
more pained at my inability to tell them how often and 
affectionately they are remembered. As it is, J become 
the loser in not hearing more frequently from those in 
whom I feel a constant interest. You, my dear sister, 
can not doubt my earnest wish to have a more regular 
correspondence with you. You know I love you, and 
always wish to hear of you, your husband, and dear chil- 
dren, and the work the Lord has given you to do among 
those around you ; and we wish you, too, to tell us of 
our beloved sister, so sorely bereaved.* I am glad she is 
with you. . . . 

^ You ask about Preplan. I have rather avoided speak- 
ing to her of her future prospects, because she is so 
young, and I wish her thoughts to be as little distracted 
as possible while she remains in school. I know that she 
anticipates leaving us next summer, and I hope she has a 
sincere desire to do good wherever she may go. She is 
womanly, and appears devoted as a Christian. She is 
interested in the spiritual welfare of her companions; 

*Mn. Sutphen. 



RECOLLBCTIONS OF THB DBPARTBD. 287 

one with whom she is intimate hopes that she has recent- 
ly been bom again, and several in school are in an inter- 
esting state of mind." 

Mrs. Everett's affectionate heart cherished tenderly the 
memory of departed friends. She generally wrote to 
her parents on the anniversaries of her sisters' death. 
Dec. 12, of this year, she writes : < — 

" Eleven years ago, and on the evening of this holy 
day, the spirit of our dear sister, your precious daughter 
Mary, soared to the world of purity and blessedness 
above. All the scenes of those last days, and the final 
scene, have been very vividly in my mind to-day ; the 
patience and calmness of dear Mary, — her saying at 
noon to Mr. 0. that her faith increased as her strength 
failed, — her talking with father towards evening, express- 
ing the feeling of her great sinfulness, but her trust in an 
all-sufficient Saviour, — I have been telling it all to Suni- 
ner and Mrs. Hinsdale this evening, and I could not 
refrain from mingling nly remembrances and my tears, 
and prayers and praises with yours. 

" How you have been stricken I The anniversary of 
dear Susie's Agoing homo' has just passed; Eleanor's will 
soon come. But what cause for gratitude and praise that 
these loved ones lefl such bright evidence of a prepara- 
tion for the blest mansions above I I have many happy 
thoughts about them ; and I trust that you, my dear 
father and mother, are comforted, and can ryoice even, 
in their eternal gain." 

IlefeiTing to her sister whom she was expecting to 
assist her, she says : — 

"And have you indeed ^ven M. up at the call of 
her Master ? In this, too, may you find comfort and joy I 
It is a sacrifice which has cost you much; but it has 
been made for him who has a right to all wo are, and all 
we have, and whose service brings a rich reward. You, 
through your children, may scatter light in the paths of 



288 THX MIBSIONABT SIBTBB8. 

tboao who sit in darkness, and may many in tho last day 
rise up and eall you blessed ! 

^ My thoughts are often with you by day, and in my 
dreams I visit you. May the good Comforter ever gprant 
you his presence ! ^ 

^ Dec. 29. Mt dbab Sistsb E : A pile of pressing 
sewing lies by my side. I have been distracted all day 
with preparing work for a seamstress whom I employ a 
few dayS| — hearing Greek lessons, making ready sewing 
for our school sewing society, and sitting in the midst 
of the twenty-five girls for three hours, attending to their 
work, and above all this, having the ordinary duties of 
my fiunily of thirty-fiv^ persons. We have help in all 
our work; but my head gets very weary as well as my 
hands. 

^Is not this a poor beginning for a birthday letter, for 
I am twenty-nine years old tiiis 29tb day of Decemberi 
and I can say, ^ Surely goodness and mercy have followed 
me all the days of my life.' Shall I not make a new 
consecration of all my powers and my blessings to the 
Author of all? How much unfaithfulness I have to 
mourn overt I do hope, dearest sister, that you will 
accomplish far more for our Master than I have done, if 
you are spared ten years to labor on earth." 

Before closing this chapter, and the record of this year, 
we will look for a moment at Mrs. Hamlin in her new 
home, and new and most interesting duties. These first 
months of her married life, though very happy, were not 
unclouded. The youngest of the little group whom she 
had taken to her heait with almost a mother's love, the 
sweet babe who was the pet and joy of all, was taken 
from her fond care early in September. She writes with 
much tenderness of this event, and of her own disappoint- 
ment in not being permitted to train up this dear child, 
UiB she had fondly hoped to do. From the several inter- 



OBLiaATIONS OF MOTIUBBS. 280 

esting letters written during these months, we will make 
only one extract. 

" Bbbek, October 29, 1852. 

^ I should like to introduce to you in person my dear 
husband and our four daughters ; but I will not begin 
upon this theme. Suffice it to say that I can now fully 
understand and appreciate the sincerity and meaning of 
your warm congratulations, and that I do find our sweet 
girls a * great treasure.* The * responsibility * I am surely 
not unmindful of, and at times it has seemed almost 
crushing ; but I have taken refuge in the promise, * My 
grace is sufficient.' As I write, dear Louisa, my heart is 
Aill ; too full for pen and ink. Would that we could sit 
side by side for a few hours. You alluded to a subject in 
yours which has long been to me one of great interest, 
and now doubly so. It is, the duty of parents — yes, 
and their privilege^ *— to train up their children to fulfill 
the last command of our Saviour, *Qo ye into all the 
world,' &c. I am glad, dearest L., that you have felt it a 
privilege to consecrate yours *with the first sight of their 
infant faces' to this work. Be sure the consecration will 
be accepted, and you will be blessed in it, and, though 
God may choose his own way of glorifying his name in 
your beloved children, all will be well. But oh that all 
parents did but feel — especially all Christian mothers — 
the obligation resting upon them in this respect I It is 
my most earnest prayer that all our dear children may be 
called of Qod to this work. I would not wish them a 
happier work, a happier life, than that of the faithful 
missionary, though it may be a life of toil and self-denial." 



CHAPTER XXII. 

B«MTilof tba BoiilBarj from Bebek to lUn KeBy^Peteriptioii of tho 
Vew BwntnMj BaUdtoy -" latercatJng Lctton— CommeBooment of War. 

Wb will now leave Mn. Hamlin in the retirement of 
her new home, and follow the history of Mrs. Everetti in 
connection with that of the Seminary, daring the short 
remainder of her life. 

The question of removing the Female Seminary to 
another locality, which had been so long under discussion 
by the mission, had at length been dodded. In many 
respects, the house it occupied in Bebek possessed advan- 
tages that could hardly be looked for in any other posi- 
tion. It was quiet and retired, and in one of the most 
delightful and hoalthfhl situations on the Bosphorus. 
The building was also, in its internal arrangements, 
admirably adapted to the wants of such an institution, 
and, while comprising all the needed room, was more 
compact and convenient than houses in Constantinople 
are usually found. 

But, with all these advantages, it was thought, as the 
work among the Armenians advanced, and opportunities 
for intercourse with them were opening and extendhig 
continually, that the situation of the Seminary was too 
isolated. The Annenians, in Bebek and its immediate 
vicinity, were few, and though the friends of the pupils 
visited them from time to time, often remaining over 
night, or longer, it was not exerting exactiy the influence 
which it might do if in the midst of an Armenian popula- 



RBMOVAL FBOM BBBBK. 241 

lion. Although Mrs. Eyerett^s duties in the school were 
now such as to prevent her Tisiting to any extent among 
Armenian families, it was hoped that when the new 
teacher should arrive, and she should also have one of 
her sisters to relieve her in some measure in her family 
cares, she would be at liberty to visit more ; a work for 
which, by her winning manners and great reading in 
speaking the language, she was peculiarly fitted. It was 
therefore decided that, as soon as a suitable house could 
be obtained, the school should be removed to Hass Keuy, 
one of the large suburbs of Constantinople, lying on the 
Qolden Horn, where many of the most wealthy and 
influential Armenian fiunilies reude. 

It was very trying to Mrs. Everett to leave Bebek. 
The moving of such an establishment from Pera had 
been very laborious ; and all the changes and improve- 
ments they had found it necessary to make, and which 
they would probably find no less needed in any other 
house to which they might remove, made the labor 
appear still more formidable. They would leaver toO| 
the small but delightful missionary circle in that village^ 
to take up their residence quite distant fit>m all the mis- 
sionary families, and this, besides withdrawing them fit>m 
the Bodal intercourse they had eqoyed so highlyi would 
place them at a distance from the religious meetings 
which they so much valued for themselves and their 
children. But, as soon as they were convinced that 
such a removal would^ be for the promotion of the cause 
which they ** preferred above their chief joy,*^ they cheer- 
fully acquiesced. ' » 

It was not till after much negotiation and many delays, 
that they succeeded in obtaining a house in Hass Keuy. 
The unfriendly Armenians looked with jealoufsy on the 
proposed settiement of a missionary family and school 
right in the midst of them, and laid many obstacles in 
the way. But then* efforts proved in vain. The Lqr^ 

21 



'242 THB MxaboiifAXf bxstbjui. 

had a work for them to do ther^ and they at length 
•oooeeded, in FebmarjTi 1858^ ih iieoaiing a house very 
'well adapted to their Wants, though it lacked the oon- 
yeniende of arrangement Which had bo much lightened 
the labor 6t houaekeeping in their Bebek home. One 
who has lived only in the well-arranged houses of our 
own eduntrjry where every thing is plann^ on the labor- 
iatiiig principle^ titak hitidly form an idea of the weaii- 
heas ai keeping one of those Constantinople houses in 
'drdeir. No Aought 6l idonyenience or saving of work 
seems eVer to have enftered into the miiids 'of thehr 
iurdiiteetss but only l^e securing of as much space and 
firesh air aa possible $ and as 'l^e price of laboV is cheap, 
and 'ibejf iak aocustomidd to en^loy many i^rvants, the 
'naiiVe hottoek^pers do not feel the ineonvetilences of 
Iheir.largia rodni^ and the diitanc^ between them, as 
tnissioniury ladies do. 

Tbd latter part of ifafttiary, Wak W^t and Waa 
Hkyn^ iknived in Oonstantinople, to the gi^at joy an& 
ielief of Mrs. Everett, though, to they both bad a ku^ 
'ffuoffe to lefum before they could communicate with 
'kaf of the Ahiienians in the &mily or in the school, it 
^ust necessarily be iBome time before they could relieve 
^heor very eflbctuitlly in either department. 

On the 1.8th of iPebmary, Mris. Evei^ett welcomed 
*an6ther little daughter ib her hdme add heart, to whom 
^e naiiie of Susan Maria was given, and, as soon as the 
Another's ^^streiigth Waii sufficiently restored, they began to 
inake pfr^plu:iation8 for their removal, which Was effected 
about the 1st of April 

From Mrs. "E^eteitt. 

<' HiSs KiuT» Apdl 12/1868. 
' • ^ My ysliT 'PBiia I^A^eBH^TS t No longer from dear 
iBebek do *we addreali you. We have taken our pilgrim 
Istaff in hibid, and patoed over the hills to this village, 
Svh^e we hate, at the call of our Master, pitched our 



tent for a BcoRon. It is moro than a ifetck since we 1^ 
our happj home of three years. Sumner had moved the 
school funiiture pi*eTipusly, but still ^e had enough^ to 
do ; our friends frpm Mr. Sohauffler's and Mr. QamUn's 
caip^ an4 unwillingly helped us away. It wa^ hard to 
leave those dear friends and that charming spot, but we , 
were prepared for i( by two years of discussion, looking 
for houses, &a ; and ^hen the securing of a Ii^ouse in this 
village, in the midst of a very large Armenii^i population^ \ 
and the occupi^tion of it without any disturbance^ seemed 
to indicate the will of him whom we wish to serye;^ an§ 
we feel happy in following the indication ^f his proyi- 

dence. 

• 

<*Hass Keuy is on the Golden Horn, the harbor of fho 
dty. It is by land about sey^ milea from Bebek| an^ 
two or three from Fenu We are now within a half 
hour's row of the city, while before it was an hour and 
more by caique, a little less by steamer; so that Mr. 
Everett is nearer his woik at the book magazine. On the 
Sabbath, wo can attend English service at Pera, going by 
boat, with a walk of five minutes here, and fifteen there. 
You perhaps know that there is a distinct evangelipal 
Armenian church in this village, of from twelve to fifteen 
members ; the greater part of this large popplatioii are 
Armenians, many of whpo^ Bre intellectually convince^ 
of the truth, but are kept back, by fear of one another 
and their church, from confessing it. Many were favor- 
able to our coming among them with our school, and 
they are families of the higher class in society. Our 
landlord is an Armenian. He has an immense sum pf 
money due him from the Turkish government, and, be- 
cause ho has not succeeded in getting it, he is reduced to 
the necessity of renting a part of his large house, in 
which there are twenty-five or thirty rooms, and five 
large halls. We have two of these halls, with the rooms 
opening from one side of them. These rooms are hi^ 



244 TBB XISBIOVAXT BIBTSB8. 

and largOi — not very old, but ooyered (the floors) with 
straw mattbg, and ah, theflea$t they have fbll possession, 
and how we are to be rid of them I do not know ; and 
then their friends, called in this country board bogs; 
diey, however, are manageable ; we hope to exterminate 
them. 

^ We have, in addition to the rooms I haye mentioned, 
a small house, into which a passage was opened through 
the wall from one of our rooms. 

^ Now, can you imagine the distance from one front 
door, opening on one street, to the other on another 
street f Our kitchen and water are in the lower floor of 
the small house, while our family rooms are on the^upper 
floor of the large house. These have been chosen for 
health, as Hass Eeuy, during three months in the sum- 
mer, is excessively hot, being much exposed to the sun, 
and getting little o( the north wind. There are accom- 
modations in our house for he chapel, thirty boai-ding 
scholars, and a day school^ which is to be opened under 
our supervision, and taught by one of our former pupils. 

^ We are hard at work still in the fltting up which such 
a change involves \ we hope to get sufficiently in order to 
bring back our scholars next week. We shall have many 
visits from Armenian families, as well as from our little 
Protestant community. This will take time and strength, 
but we hope may not be in vain spiritually. * Who is 
suffident for these things f ' There is not a more exten- 
sive and hopeftd field of labor in all this vicinity than is 
before us. Under our own roo^ what a work, — what cai*e 
and responsibility I I often shrink back, and say, ^ Why 
am Zhere ? ' Oh, my own dear parents, when you think 
of your distant children, let it be with fervent supplica- 
tion for wisdom, grace, and strength, that we may each 
be found faithAil to our high trust. 

/^Dear M. is an unspeakable comfort. How should I 
have gone through with all the toil of the past weeks 



mSB HATNBS AND MISS WB8T. 245 

with a little infimt m my arras, and two ptiiers at my 
side, without ber ? She is very well, and making good 
progress in Armenian ; she goes on as fast as Miss West. 
She uses wor^s as fast as they are acquired, and that is 
the secret of Sjaocess. in q)ea]nng. I long to have these 
sisters actively employed in this most inviting work, and 
in fkct tbey are already, though a long time may elapse 
before they can take tl^eir turn in conducting our little 
meetings, or talk freely with those about us. 

^ The family of o^r landlord has two ladies. They are 
still of the old church, but will be friendly witl^ us, and 
we hope to do them good. They send us bouquets of 
flowers with salutations, and will visit us as jioon as we 
are in order. To such visitors sweetmeats must be given^ 
and to all Armenians coffee. 

^' Our house has a high situation, overlooking a large 
part of the village, a part of the city, some beautiful hills 
vnXh mosks and cypress grove?, and a part.o^ tiie Ooldei^ 
Bom. From our sleepmg-rQom, which is large and ha^ 
a stove, we look down .upo^ a beautiful garden. It is 
laid out most tastefiiUy with mosnc paved walks, .gras^ 
plats, flowers, and marble stftt^es, quite a fiunJber "ff}^ 
high pedestal?, surmounted by jfemajjlB figures eigh,t or iben 

feet high. It is owned by an A^nji^^^ ^^'i°^^'^» ^^'^ SP^ 
enormous wealth into his possession by hajv:^ig the whole 
.chaige of the Turkish .custom-house. Tyiicn l^s fi;au4 
was discovered, he was thrown into prison, where he l^as 
been lying for months ; in the nptean »t]^e, the <Turks are 
disposing of his property among themselvef ^y sales 
much below the value of the articles. The &U of this 
man has helped us <to come Intp Hass Keuy i^rithont 
formal opposition. . • . 

"Our Bebek friends could hardly be reconciled to our 
leaving there. But they and we — and will not you ? — 
pray that it may be for the glory of God. P^y that this 

21* 



246 THB MIBBIONABY SI8TXB8. 

bouae may be filled witb the presence of the Holy Spirit 
We held our first little prayer meeting last week." 

After the arrival of her sister, Mrs. Everett left much 
of the home correspondence to her, and as her letters 
contain almost the only record of the very interesting 
work among the Armenians of Hass Keny which Mr. and 
Mrs. Everett were permitted to accomplish during their 
brief sojourn there, we shall draw freely fi*om them. 

Miss Haynes to her parents. May 1. 

^The new chapel is fitted up in our house, and services 
were held there all day yesterday. In the morning, an 
exposition of Scripture ; in the afternoon, regular preach- 
ing, in Armenian of course. Aft;er service, monthly con- 
cert. I attended the preaching service, but could not 
understand enough to keep the thread of the discourse. 
The preacher, Baron Simon, has a good countenance, and 
his manner is unaffected and earnest. Seraphina said 
that his sermon yesterday afternoon was one of the most 
pungent, searching ones that she has heard from any one 
since she has been in Turkey. Mr. Everett saw some of 
the men weeping under it 1 Oh that it might arouse all 
who heard it to cry unto God with supplications and 
tears, ^ until the Spirit be poured from on high ; ' this was 
the text. The concert was very interesting. Some of 
the native helpers are turning their eyes to the waste 
places in the interior, willing to leave their kindred, and 
many comforts which they enjoy here, to go and preach 
the gospel to their countrymen who are pleading for the 
bread of life.'' 

She writes, May 14 : ^ We get tired sometimes, par- 
ticularly Seraphina. She does not spare herself in any 
thing, and often undertakes too much for her strength." 

Mrs. Everett to her brother in Indiana. 

"Majll, 1853. 

^ We are now in the midst of Armenians, and hope 
and pray that our removal may not be in vain. There 



nuttORS OP WAR. 247 

has been no open opposition to ns. but not many have 
yet ventured to visit us. • . . 

^ Our situation is good for Hass Keuy ; but the ur is 
not as good as that of the Bosphorus. • • • 

" The general meeting of our mission is to-day having its 
last session ; it has been one of the deepest interest. The 
field white for the harvest has been represented ; but the 
laborers are too few, — two missionaries have been taken 
from this city for other posts. We seem to be fixtures ; 
but how unworthy of our position ! Oh for more 
strength, more seal, faith, and love I How often do I 
sigh for more talent, while, alas I the one committed to 
me is sadly misimproved. I wish you were a missionary, 
March. 

** Now, just think, this work, so interesting, may be 
interrupted, — though we hope not. The rumor of war 
has no doubt reached you ; and perhaps you have been 
more alarmed than we, — who have seen the Russian 
commissioner indignantly turn his back upon the overtures 
of the Turkish government ; the Russian Embassy follow- 
ing suit ; the Turkish fleet made ready, and the crescent- 
formed batteries arranged at the mouth of the Black Sea; 
the troops reviewed, &o. Ac. Yesterday the report came 
to our ears that war was declared by the Czar, and the 
Russian fleet within forty miles of the Bosphorus. It 
was also said that a messenger had come to the Porte 
with an vUimatum^ and must have a decided answer in 
twenty-four hours. Greeks and Armenians are much 
alarmed ; they say that the Turks are arming themselves 
with knives, ^c. in their houses. What is before us, and 
poor Turkey, we know not ; but the Lord of Hosts is 
our refuge, and will be * a very present help in time of 
trouble.' Sumner has just come in, but brings nothing 
new about war. We rather expect that it will not come, 
as now the English fleet is on its way to assist the Turks, 
and the French fleet is at the Pinens,and Russia may 



248 TIIB IflBSIONAnT SI8TER8. 

draw back* Tbo Lord reigns ; tlio hearts of kings a^ in 
his hands. The Sultau has this week issued a finnan^ 
granting nevir privileges to all Christian subjects. The 
Protestants are noir on w equality with Greeks^ Arme^ 
niaps, and Catholics." 

The following letter from Ifrs. Everett, besides it^ own 
intrinsic excellence, e^ hibiti9 90 beau^uUy tl^e pri^ciploi 
which made her so Ipy^/fui n wifi^ythat ^p need no( 
apologize for introducing it eyen afnpng so much of Jooal 
and misalonAry interest. 

•* Uam Kmvj, Jnlj f, 1898. I 

^Hy psa]& Swt^w Jasoj; , . , fVpm something 
K, wrote I felt that if l ever addressed you as Li^cy 
Hayncsit must be soon, — perhaps I am even now too 
late ; bu( never mind, we are going to have a private 
talk. Oh, bow many times ^ayi^ I longed to fipeak to 
you, and more thaa ever ^ipoe 4^ar 1^. came, find we hav9 
talked about you j&q mT^ch- 

^You appear befpire my imagination, ^e young, girl- 
ish (th<n*gMe99^ I aUrnQBt ftaid) pr^tw^ ypu yrere eigh^ 
yoanj ago, And I pan ^caro^ly beliey§ ftat you tpo hay^ 
jftdded sudi a penod to ypiir epdateiipe; Po ypu shrink 
from the unknown future I Jt is ppt i^tjc^gp,.-^ iv^l) yo\ji 
may ; a p^ost solemn atep ypu a^ (aiding, rr-.a .^tep wj^ 
iuYolves jgll life's intercjtstUt |u^ H^hpsp cpn^equei^ces iviU 
;Str<etch .on from time to the i;f^ptest ftges pf eternity. 
Dearest sister, Are you jif^aniAg uppi^ .911 Almighty 9f^ ^ 
You have found a .dear w^tWy i^iflnd, .991.9 worthy of ypiy 
love, judging from aisU»r M/s msppmJ; pf himr -Qiye Wm 
your bofulMS affectiew in fuUi w\^9f^ tb9 mp^^fimp plw^ b^ 
been oonsecmted to your ^.od# Qh) how can ypu pnt^ 
uppA 9, r^aticm so fraught witjt^ holy ^:epppQij4bilit;y, witti- 
K>ut £r8t offering ypurself upon the altar of God, fmd 
receiving that prpp^^tion which can only be granted by 
him who is the epurcp imd fou^tam pf 9)1 wisdom and 
j5W5e? PoyovthtoktWei«JUOjitbe jN^eJip^rgeyojjtp 



A GOOD WIFB. 249 

give your heart to your Saviour? that it is the time to 
be merryy and that serious, solemn thoughts are inap- 
propriate? Oh, do not be so mistaken! This is ffie 
time to make a double consecration. ' As for me and 
my Tiousej we will serve the Lord.' Tou can not make 
a true offering of yourself upon the marriage altar, if 
it has not been purified by the grace of God ; but let 
the pure incense of a sanctified love bum there, and the 
heart is a treasure worth ffiving and aoorth receiving. 

" My dear sister, how many things I would say to you, 
— fi'om eaperiencey you know, I can speak. Tou are 
older than I was when I was married, and perhaps better 
prepared ; but I did not think half enough about being a 
good wife; perhaps I was too confident, thouglit qf 
course I should be a good wife • * • True, pure love, 
flowing from a pure heart, would be a source of pUro 
joy; but alas, what erring creatures are we I Make it 
your study to please your husband, Lucy ; never think 
that he will at any rate love you, and that it is his duty 
to cherish yon, now that he has chosen you as tho com- 
panion of his life, whether you are lovable or not. You 
have one to please, one to live for ; and the happiness of 
your husband and yourself is in your own power to a greikt 
extent. Set Hraps to catch sunbeams' all about your 
house ; and above all, let there be an altar upon which 
the sacrifice of sincere hearts shall daily rise to God, 

- * In this beginning of yonr joarnejr, negleet not the fkror of Heft?en| 
^ Let the'daj of hopes AilflUed be bleet hj manj prmyers.** 

From Mrs. Everett to her parents : — 

" Ha8S Kbut, Aug. 14. 
** Shall I give you a sketch of to-day ? Before break- 
fast I prepared the month's wash, assorting and counting 
clothes ; afterwards attended to the children and miscel- 
laneous house matters, with six guests ; received li note 
from our good Scotch friends in tho other part of Ilass 



260 THB mSSIOHART 8I8TSB8. 

Eeuyi that they would spend tlio oflpmoon with tui ; they 
ore miflaionari^ to the Jews, and most devoted ond Intel- 
ligont people. They came, — Mr. and Mrs. Thompson 
and their three children. In the middle of the day I 
stole away and visited two of our Protestant fiunilies, one 
of which buried a little child yesterday. 

^ While we were at our supper-table, Miss West, who 
has been at Bebek, came home, bringing Susie HainUn, 
The Thompsons have lef^ ; my three babes are sleeping 
near me, and I am trying t^o write, but my pen dpes not 
go smoothly, r . • 

l^It is our vacation. After the scholars left we had a 
spooesslon of guests, until we all ran away ^bout two 
-ff eeks since, find spent ten days at ouv dear Bebek« |( 
was a bi^iy but delightful time, ^here has been special 
hiterest in the seminary at B^bek,r-^thr^e or four hopeful 
conversions. You learn through the papers of the p^of- 
pect of war between Russia and Turkey. We sec all 
sorts of preparations, apd |iear all sorts of rumorsy-rrsome- 
times start at the sound of a cannon, -r-? but no war has 
yet come, nor probably will. The prospect yesterday 
and to-day is brighter than in six weeks past. We ought 
to have kept a journal of politics the last two months. 
It would run : — t 

H Change of ministry ; repairing war ships ; building 
new ones) reviei^ing troops; towing war ships to the 
entranpe. to the Black Seaj change of mii^istry twice in 
one day; poUeptiug (rpop^ in th^ interior; gr^at distress 
in families; outrages; unsafe to travel in the interior; 
soldiers sent to the frontier; forty thousand crying for 
bread and clamoring for war, — < Better to fight than sit 
stiil and starved they say; arrivals of steamships, Eng- 
lish and French ; the detention of an American fingate 
for our safety in case of need, <fec. <fec. 

^ The present state pf affiui-s seems to be this : — Two 



STATite OF rOLttlCAL AFFAIAS. 251 

days since a etcaniei' came int6 port, brifiging a treaty, iil 
which the five Eutopean powers agree in asking what 
liassia alone had demanded, — that is, a kind of protec- 
torate of the Christian subjects of th6 Ottoman govern- 
ment. To-day oir to-morfow there trad to be a great 
convocation for consultation. The Turks will probably 
dcceckj and so wo shall have peace, and the protection, 
(that is, native Christian sects,) not only of England, but 
France! Prussia! Austria! and Russia! The Lord is our 
refuge ; therefore will we not fear." 

From Miss Haynes, Sept. 4. 

" This is the day for the commencement of our Fall 
term. There are some dark clouds in our horizon. Mr. 
Dwight and Mr. Benjamin have come as a committee to 
talk with Baron H., our teacher, in reference to a change 
in his views and feelings, which he has recently declared 
without making known what they are. He says that he 
can not conduct a meeting, or devotions in school, as he 
has been in the habit of doing. It is feared that it will 
be necessary to discharge him entirely; and if so, it ynll 
probably be a difficult thing to supply his place. It is 
very trying and painful, as he has long been in the school, 
and a consistent member of the church ; though his sis- 
ter has often remarked, and Mr. E. the same, that there 
was a lack of spirituality about him. He is a licensed 
but not ordained preacher. How it will end we know 
not, and perhaps I ought not to have mentioned it in this 
stage of the affair. There seems to bo an unusual degree 
of interest among the members of the church generally. 
A week ago to-day a special prayer meeting was held at 
Pera, and we heard that one of our older school-girls was 
distressed about her soul. Our congregation is increasing 
in numbers. Yesterday more than fifty were present in 
the afternoon, including but two of the school. Serar 
phina attended all the services in the chapel, helped in 



252 THS MI88I0HABT 8I8TXB8. 

tbe care of the children, and heard the little Armenian 
girls redto their Scripture lesaona and hjrmna ; thisi too^ 
when she had been rick all the week, — (mercory at 84% 
8 p. M.) Yoo can not imagine how much she resembles 
her mother. She looks tired and worn to-day." 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

Arrivftl of Dr. tnd Xn. Gooddl— Sometlilnf tbont the War— •Mairisgei 
amoDf the Proteituift Armentant — Inttrnttog Ineldeiitf of the XiMkBuy 
Work In Him Keaj. 

In September they had the happiness to welcome Mr. 
and Mrs. Goodell back to their missionary home. Soon 
after their return it was decided that they should make 
Hass Keuy their residence; and Mr. and Mrs. Everett 
found themselves, to their great delight, again closely 
associated with the dear family with whom they had 
spent their first four years in Constantinople so happily^ 
Mrs. Everett communicates the following cheering news 
respecting the school to one of her sisters: — 

''September SS. 
<^Tou will rejoice to hear that a new song has been 
put in the mouths of several of the pupils. Ever rince 
the term commenced, there has been a good state of feel- 
ing manifested. One of the girls, during the vacation, 
had deep convictions of sin. Her feelings were deep 
and tender when she returned, and others soon joined 
her in seeking the Saviour; six think they have found 
him. One, a girl from Tokat, who was almost in despair 
for three or four days before she found comfort, came 
with a beaming fhce and siud, ^I have laid all my sins on 
Christ' That is the secret, dear Maria, is it not ? We 
must come directly to Christ, and lay our souls on him. 

** * Jost M I am, I come, I eoBM.* 
22 



254 TlUt lilSSIOHABT 8I8TXB8. 

^IIow can we praiBO tho Lord Bofficiently for such 
unspeakable blessings? It seems to me that we are 
indebted in great measure to the earnest pleading in 
our behalf of a good countryman of ours, — a Mr. 
Roberts, from the State of New York. He is a whole- 
souled Christian. He was a very worldly man, — was 
prostrated by the measles, — lay upon his back five 
years, — during which time he vowed to the Lord to 
serve him as faithfully .as he had 'done the world. As 
soon as be recovered he conunenced bis work, laboring 
for the county poor in his own State; then going west 
us a colporter ; then among the Ladians ; then to Panama 
to labpr for tl^e souls i^nd bodicf of the sick; ttien in 
CnUfornii^; Acq i^t ihe Fire Ppmts, New York. H^ 
at length formed the plan of distributing the Scripture* 
in Home, ^e earned passage mpney to England; when 
be htA remained there oometiiue, i^ fiiend gave him a pas*- 
page to Itsdy, His principle is to take no money except 
M presents* ^e lives in the most simple manner, and 
dre89es in coarsp doth, When be was driven out of 
Rome, he went^ to Malta, where h^ sold many Bibles to 
Italians ; and when the heat there became oppressive, a 
friei^d gave him a free passage to Consti^itinople. Hero 
be ^as sp)d Very mftny books, — on board vessels and 
ampng s^a^meii especially, 

^What the poor Turks are combg to, i^ a question for 
timie to decide; all events are under the control of Infi- 
nite Wisdom. There is now no help for it; war is 
inevitable. The Turks are mad for a fight, and the gov- 
ernment, nolens volmi^ must ^ubmit to tho will of the 
people. '0ood prepi^i-atipns hav^ been made, so say good 
judges. Who hsive been to ex^unine the fledt and the fbr- 
tificatlons op the ^0ntier» They ^e still collecting 
soldi.ep9. )!llr. Eve^tt bays two were taken from our 
vicinity yefiti^rday. What distress all over the country 
in the fSunilies of tboM taken qSI 



PROSPECT OF WAR. 255 

** In case of war, and it is virtually declared, we may 
remain undisturbed here in the city. The fighting will 
probably be in the provinces. We have no war ships in 
the harbor at present, but there are several of the French 
and English, and we could at any time find protection 
under the English flag. If the decision had been for 
peace, there would have beeii great disturbance here in 
Constantinople, arising from the dissatisfaction of the 
people,-;-^, e. the common people, — who have a hope 
that their condition will be bettered by a war. But it 
will probably be, — * change the place and keep the pain.' 

^My dear M— -> perhaps you are not pleased with all 
this talk about war ; neither do we like it, and w6 go 
about our work as though the foundation of Gk>d stood 
sure, as indeed it does. He is Lord over all 

^ Mr. Gk>odell has engaged a house very Hear us. Will 
it not be delightful to us to have them as associates 
agmu ? They say they must send for one of their daugh- 
ters to come and teach the children here. Mn G. and 
Mrs. O. too, tell us many things about America, -^cAan^e^ 
in even/ thing. They think girls in our country are very 
delicate. Mr. Ooodell is quite alarmed at the prospect 
of the race running out, and there is a surplus of young 
ladies in New England, so they are forming societies for 
sending them West, I am glad we get a small share at 
the East ; moi*e are needed. 

^ There are girls here, such as they are, but not enough 
good ones, — - not educated, cultivated, intelligent ones. 
Will it not surprise you to know that one of the native 
Armenian pastors has married a girl who could not read? 
* Tell it not in Gath.' His mother could not find one 
among our educated girls who suited her, and so she 
chose this one. It was a great risk ; but she has learned 
to read, and is well disposed to religious things. Ton 
know, among the Orientals, the mother finds a wife for 
her sons, and usually the brothers seek husbands for their 



256 TUS mSBIONARY 8I6TBR3. 

flktersi or engage them when they are sought. It is not 
the costom for a son to marry until the daughters are dis- 
posed o£ 

^One of our first scholars is married to a man in 
Broosa. The brother of her husband lost his wife, — she 
was an unenlightened woman ; he ia a pious man, and in 
seeking a second companion, resolved to take one who 
should be pious and educated, as well as good-looking. 
As the ];)rothers own a house together, and the bride 
would be a companion to our pupil, her mother was 
deeply interested to find one suited to her tastes and dis- 
position; but among our Protestant girls, those they 
wished, they could not get ofio, and they mu9t have 
somebody. 

**The person seeking a wife is in the city, and the 
mother of the brothei^s wife. They wished to go to 
Broosa next week, if they can finish their business. So 
the mother makes it known among the Armenians of the 
old church, that a wife is wanted for a young Protestant, 
one who will go to Broosa to live, attend Protestant ser- 
vice, <fec., and lo i eight or ten are offered. The selection 
is made, on the recommendation of fi'iends, of course, — 
a young girl of seventeen, for the widower with a cliild 
of four years. The moUier of the broUter's wife went to 
see the girl, was pleased, but thought a Protestant should 
see the peinson he was going to marry, and so arranged 
for their meeting. She told me the story last evening 
with great satisfaction, — ^I made her open her ovm 
mouthy and aay she was %oiUing to go!^ Another inno- 
vation upon Oriental custom. 

^ You see, dear Maria, what a large letter I have writ- 
ten to you. • . • 

^ May the presence of the blessed Comforter ever be 
with you, and if the world is sometimes dark, may the 
brightness of the future compensate for all. You must 
look above and beyond.'' 



TOKAT QinLS. 267 

From Miss Haynes. 

October 8. 

** Mr. Dwight came over and attended the Thursday 
evening meeting. Three persons came from the &mi]y 
of our landlord, who have never been present at a Prot- 
estant service before. Two others of the family have 
been in a few times. One Tuesday evening two of the 
family came in with a man who is one of the most intel- 
ligent and influential in the village. He has been to 
England, and speaks English. Mr. Everett had much 
religious conversation with them, and had family prayers 
before they left. The woman appeared much affected, 
weeping during the whole prayer. She is fifty years old, 
and probably never heard an extempore prayer before. 
Mr. Dwight spent the night, and the next morning went 
into the other part of the house with Mr. Everett, and 
again conversed a long time witii them and another 
partiaUy enlightened man who came in. 

. • • • « • 4 

^October 10. Soraphina has been to call on some 
Armenian families this afternoon. One woman fihe found 
in a very serious state of mind. Mr. Everett saw her oa 
Saturday evening, and rihe told him that she was io much 
troubled about her Bins that she could not sleep. She is 
the mother of the young man who united with the 
.church soon after we jcame here. Annah and Horopsima, 
our Tokat girls, spend their vacations there, and are much 
beloved by the family. About three weeks ago^ sister 
and I called there, and Sera{rfiina told her something of 
Horopsima's experience, — her great distress on account 
of her sins, which almost overpowered her for several 
days, and her exceeding joy after she had laid all her sins 
on Christ. The woman listened attentively but said lit- 
tle, although she told her son to bring the Testament for 
Seraphina to read. She read a portion, and remarked on 

22« 



258 THB XI88IOHART 8I8TKBS. 

it| and what was quite gratifying to oSi two young ladies 
were there on a viut, and heard it alL They seeme^l 
g^ad to meet ua, and I saw their eyes moisten while 
Sen^hina was talking to Horopaima. They hare never 
been to Protestant service. The woman has been many 
timesi and has heard enough to know her duty. We 
hope the Spirit of €k>d is now showing her what she 
ought to do, 

** There has been a very interesting conversion at Pera 
recently ; a man who has heard the gospel for four years. 
The Lord showed him his sins^ and he was in such agony 
that he could do nothing but cry for mercy. Then he 
saySy *€k>d gave me the Saviour.' Such cases show that 
the Lord has not entirely withdrawn his Spirit. Sera- 
phina said the other day^ after conversing wiUi one of tho 
girl% *I do not see how any one can doubt the reality of 
the new birth.' Six of these dear ones give evidence of a 
work of grace upon their hearts ; several others are quite 
seriouSi and seem to be seeking new hearts. It has been 
a great pleasure to me to be able to say even a few 
words to them, and to onderstand something of their 
feelings from their own lips. 

^ Eubrakse's sister, Mahkteki, who was one of the five 
who went to talk with Seraphina on our fast day, said to 
me, on Friday mommg, that she was happy ; Christ was 
near to her, and she was near to him ; that she loved to 
pray, Ae^ and, on the evening of the same day, she went 
to the door of the room where sister was talking with 
one or two of tho girls, and said, * Mayn't I come, too ? ' 
and, when sister asked her of her feelings, she was quite 
ready to give a reason for the hope that was in her, yet 
with meekness and fear. She is a very lovable girl, and 
now doubly so. A few days since, she come to Mr. 
Everett, and with tears asked him some questions about 
grieving the Holy Spirit, alluding to a sermon which he 
preached two weeks before. She asked several questions 



THAKKsaiyma. 260 

allowing that she was beconuog acquainted with the 
Christinn warfare. 

** With all our rejoicing, we are made very sad by the 
defection of Baron Hechadoor. I wrote mother about 
him, and now that we have learned his views more fully, 
oxvc worst fears are realized. He is not far from infidelity, 
though wo have a faint hope that he is not confirmed. 
He is capable of doing much harm, but the Lord can take 
care of his own truth, and vindicate his own cause. He 
is our trust. ^ Though wars should rise up against us, we 
will not fear.' " 

From Mrs. Everett 

** November 24. Thanksgivinff it has been with us, and 
we suppose with you, too, though oUr last papers give us 
no information on the subject. There was a plan made 
for all our American families to meet to-day at Mr. Ham- 
lin's for a sermon and picnic dinner, but the notice was 
too late, and the distance too great, and the weather too 
unsettled, for us in Hass Keuy to join, so we, the Ever- 
etts, went home to papa OoodclFs, taking our goose and 
pies along with us ; and we have had a very pleasant 
day. Afler tea, I came home and put my three weary 
chicks to bed. Mr. E. and Mr. Goodell came for the 
Thursday evening meeting. 

" How much have we experienced of the loving kind- 
ness of God during the past year in special blessings, — 
the arrival of our dear sister and a teacher, the precious 
loan of darling Susie coming to this village where our 
school has been so richly blessed, and so wide a door of 
usefulness has been opened to us. . ; . 

"You are doubtless looking with more than usual 
interest for tidings from us. Hostilities you knew had 
commenced. The Turkish forces crossed the Danube. 
Several battles have been fought, in which, from accounts, 
the Turks have done well. The last two days, the reports 



260 TH8 MI8SI0VABT SfflTBBS. 

•ay that there is im annisttce ; the king of Belgium U 
going to mediate. 

** You will be glad to hear that we have eneouragement 
in our miasionary work, especially here in Hass Keuy. 
The Sabbath services are well attended. Thursday 
evening, we have a meeting. Tuesday afternoon, sewing 
drde and meeting for the females. Saturday evening, 
school prayer meeting. Friday evening, singing. We 
have now not only a good number of Protestant fimiilies 
to visit, butt several families of tlie higher class of Arme« 
nians — bankers — are seeking intercom'se with us for 
the purpose of religious inquiry. Several evenings, we 
have been invited to their houses, and Mr. Everett has 
had opportunities of speaking fully and freely upon the 
most spiritual and practical points of Chiistian doctrine^ 
Several persons seem to be earnestly seeking the narrow 
way ; they have laid aside their fear to so great an extend 
as to go through the streets with us in the evening, hav- 
ing lanterns with two or three candles carried before ua. 
Oh for the Holy Spirit, to convince them of sin, and lea4 
them to Christ ! 

^ Our school is increasing in numoera. Wo have tliirty 
boarders ; six day-scholars. Miss West and Miilvina m*o 
making good progress in Armenian, and are Jiiucli beloved 
by all. I should love to have you come and see us as we 
are. How much we could tell you that we can never 
write. My moments for writing are verf/ few. My three 
children take so much of my time, — one about as much 
as another. To train them^ — * what a w.oi*k t " 

From Miss Haynes. 

^ November 15. Mr. Everett and SerapLina have gone 
to visit at the house of an Armenian whom we met last 
week in the other part of our house. The family of our 
landlord called, and went with them. The visit was 
planned beforehand, and Mr. E. invited for the sake of 
having a conversation about the gospel. There are some 



VISIT TO AN ASMBNIAN FAMILY. 261 

half dozen or more of the relatives and particnlar friends 
of our landlord, who are interested in the tmth, and wish 
to talk and inquire, but are not ready to declare them- 
selves Protestants. Nicodemus-like, they will come by 
night, plan these evening visits, and invite Mr. Everett 

** One evening last week, our landlord sent for Mr. E. 
and Seraphina, and I went too. We found five jpersons 
from other families, and four generations of that family, 
assembled. The old grandmother over ninety years old, 
her son, Ilohannes Agha, and hi^ wife, their eldest son, 
Gurel Aghfl, his wife and two youngest children, and the 
brother next in ago, Ilampartsoon Agha. These aro 
the members of the family whom we usually sec. The 
younger brothers, the ones who annoyed Mr. B. when 
ho was taking the house, do not make their appeal*^ 
ance; Mr. Everett sees them at time's, and says hd 
intends to go into their rooms, and make their acquaint- 
ance. We are treated very politely and ceremoniously, 
coffee and sweetmeats served in Turkish style. By the 
way, I have learned to drink the Turkish coffee, so 
that I can dispose of my little cup very easily, without 
milk, thick and black ! The little girl, three years old, 
went round and took the cups from the guests, and I 
can not describe the grace with which she did it. In 
the act of taking the cup, she took hold of the hand, 
and touched it to her lips, then released the hand, and 
retained the cup in her own. Thus early are these 
children trained in their manners. 

^* One of the guests was the finest Armenian lady I 
have seen. She had a handsome face, fair and fresh, also 
bright and intelligent in expression. In conversing with 
her, Seraphina found her more intelligent than any Ar- 
menian woman sho has before known. She reads the 
Bible and other books, which is very uncommon for ft 
wotnan who has not been instructed by the missionaries. 
The women of our landlord's family can not read a word. 



262 THB usanovAMY siSTXBa. 

Even Oorel Agfaa*8 wife, the bride, does not know her 
letters, although she owns diamonds and precioos stones 
to the yaloe of four or five hundred dollars, which she 
ha4 brushed up to wear to a wedding a few weeks ago, 
and expended forty or fifty dollars for new dresses tor 
wear on the occasion* But I have wandered fit>m my * 
main subject, — the visit. 

^Mr. Everett talked much with the men, and they 
asked questions, not in a caviling spirit, but as though 
they really wished to find out truth and duty. 

^ liSst evening Hampartsoom Agha came in, and by 
asking a question, brou^t forward the subject of the new 
birth, and continued in earnest consultation with Mr. E. 
and Baron Barkis, who happened to be here, until half past 
ten o'clock. Mr. E. preached to him fidthfolly the gos- 
pel way of salvation, while he sat with his eyes fixed upon 
him, almost breathless, at one pause saying, * It is a diffi<- 
cult thing,' — at another, < If one does not believe, he will 
be lost.' He seemed like the young man in the gospel, 
not fiir from the kingdom of heaven. Mr. E. says he will 
yet be brought in. It will be a great blessing to the fem« 
ily if he is, as he is the best educated, and most intelligent, 
r— amiable and obliging : he is their favorite. 

^Last evening Mr. Everatt and Seraphina came homo 
delighted with their visit. There were there eight men 
of high rank m the village, and about the same number 
of women. At first they talked of the news of the day, 
war, &c. The woman of the house said she did not wish 
to hear about the war. The other females being seated 
near her, she said, 'We will talk by ourselves, and let the 
men talk together.' But soon she perceived a change in 
the conversation. Mr. E. was answering some question 
on a religious subject. She instantly exclaimed, 'Ah, 
there is preaching, let us attend,' and she sat with her 
head stretched forward, to catch every word that Mr. 
Everett said about the gospel way of salvation. Ilampart- 



NATAL BATTLE AT fillTOFB. 268 

Boom vniB there ; and by asking qnestions and making re- 
marks, led Mr. E. to go over the same ground that he did 
with him on Tuesday evening. Three or four times in the 
course of the evening, they all laid down their pipes, and 
listened with the most serious attention, while Mr. E. 
preached to them repentance and faith in Christ, in the 
most plain and pointed manner. Scraphina said she could 
hardly refrain from weeping at the sight. She felt that 
the truth was really affecting the hearts of at least one or 
two of this interesting group. The woman of the house 
she has never seen before, and she was much pleased with 
her. She is anxious to come to the preaching service 
in the chapel. The matter was discussed among them in 
the course of the evening, and Beraphina encouraged 
them to come. One said, *Who attends? Are there 
many ? ' Another ssud, * "Well, how shall we go ? Shall 
we put on yashmak and Ferequ?' ^Tes,' sister said, 
* put on your yashmak, &a' Another woman wished to 
send three children to our school, and one to Mr. Ham- 
lin's, if they could be admitted;" 
From Mrs. Everett. 

'' Eabb KaUT, Dec. 13, 1858. 

"Mt daaa Sistbb K.: We have all of us mercies 
to sing oi^ — ^6 ar® ^ot in the midst of the horrors 
of war, though it has come near* A very disastrous 
naval battle was fought last week in the harbor of 
Sinope, on the Black Sea. You may get accurate in- 
formation of the battle, and may not, from the news- 
papers. If you should See a letter in the * Tronler,' 
from Constantinople, it would probably be from Mr. 
Dwight, &nd of course^ reliable. Steamers have been sent 
to Sinope, from the English and French fleets, and the 
report is like this: — 

*< *A part of the Turkish fleet, eleven ships, but none of 
the largest, were anchored in the bay of Sinope. Three 
Russian ships of war saw them there, and anchored out- 



2G4 TUS lUSSIOHABT 8I6TXB8. 

side, in the mean time, sending a small brig across the sea 
for the fleet Under the cover of the fog, the Russian 
fleet came on strong, — tliree three-deckers, and two two- 
deckers were placed in a line opposite the poor, helpless, 
devoted Turks, awaiting the dispersion of tlie fog. Who 
can imagine the dismay that fell npon those hopeless souls, 
as the curtain was lifted up I The Russians immediately 
gave a broadside, pouring, as some say, * red-hot shot ' 
directly into the Turkish sliips. Any other people would 
have cut their cables, and drifted ashore, that all might 
not be lo9t; so says an English officer. But the Turks 
are mad for a flght, and fought like tigers. The < Bear' 
had the advantage. Every one of the vessels (fiigates, 
corvettes, Ac.) was lost, and /our thausand men are 
ix^ifl^g} — some, perhaps 150, are taken prisoners, — some 
were drowned in attempting to swim on shore, but the 
greater part were hurled into eternity, either by the blow- 
ing up or sinking of the ships. The Turkish quarter of 
Sinope was nearly destroyed by flre. The people of the 
town fled, from fear, into the interior, and while they 
were absent, robbers came in from the mountains, and 
pillaged their homes. This is war I Oh, how awfhll 
How many widows and fatherless ones cry for food, and 
mourn their dead I ' 

^As Mr. Qoodell was going to Pera, on Saturday, as 
many as 150 women had assembled near the barracks, 
and were screaming and wringing their hands. 

^ The Russian ships remained a day or two at Sinope, 
for repairs, and then returned to their own port. 

^ Dee. 14. Melvina must have told you what encour- 
agement we have in our new field of labor. <How 
hardly shall a rich man enter into the kingdom. All 
things are possible with God.' Some of these Nicode- 
muses may still sit at the feet of Jesus, and permit others 
to come and listen to his blessed teachings. A few 
days since, two young ladies spoke to our assistant teach- 



VNRBHItTINO LABORS. 267 

in this way she accomplished much — more than can 
now be known — for the Redeemer's canse^ after their re-r 
moral to Hass Keny. She was seldom absent from a 
meeting, either English or Armenian, held at their statioui 
and she entered, with all her soul, into every prayer 
meeting held, either by the missionary or Armenian sis- 
ters, whenever she was where she could join them. Tet 
it was difficult, in seeing her, and in visiting her, to real- 
ize how much she was doing. She was always social, 
so happy to welcome her friends, so ready to return 
their visits, and her lovely countenance always wore an 
expression so cheerful and amiable, that one not inti- 
mately accjuainted with her, and with the missionary 
work in Constantinople, would hardly have suspected that 
a larger than usual share of care and responsibility was 
borne by her, but might rather have supposed that a less 
than ordinary amount had fallen to her lot. ^ 

Mrs. Everett to Mrs. Clark, Framingham, Mass. 

Hass Ebut, Jan. 16, 1854. 

''The books you sent, dear cousin, have given us very 
great pleasure. What interest hovers over < The Last 
Leaf The bereaved husband has done well in the delin- 
eation of a peculiar, but lovely character. 

^ Have you seen ' Light on the Dark River ' t We are 
reading it with tender interest. The subject of it was 
very dear to us. How many bright examples we have of 
true, fervent, living piety, and best of all, a perfect exam- 
ple in Christ, our Saviour, — but oh, we follow him 'afar 
ofl^' and so get little of the joy and peace a chad walk 
with him would secure. Cares distiract, the world allures, 
and our souls grovel in the dust. 

''Dear cousin, I was very weary last evening, having 
just returned from our dear Bebek, where we had spent a 
few days of our vacation. The last term of our school 
was one of unusual prosperity. Miss West is taking her 
place as teacher. . ' 



268 TAM lOBiholiriWT BISTIBIJS. 

In the oatMarW 6^ the* IM^d spirit upon our pupfli. 
i oouia (^ve you iiia^V iliiereatmg partioulani had I time; 
Wo iiiV6 ,!^^<^, io' ^UtocMi^ lis in our work in ihiii 
y^km, 1%e d6oi^ 6f Antiebiiin hooaet haV^ be«tt 
apined ioj tkr-VeVen ihctfb of tii6 richest and mofi arb- 
tooratio' &^ilieiy<^-an'd home persons haVe manifeited i 
rail intcftreei ik the tnith, as pressed upon tl^eir hearts and 
b6iisoieii6M hj ili. Sv^rott. We ftel mdst gi^tefbl that 
^\a steps were dii^soted io this place. 

*^Th^ prejudices, of Armenia^ seem io be softened. 
Bdine itfLji iidoU^ H ehOd died in a fiuiiily where the 
imraits «i^ 6otiTiiiced €ft the g^oi^l trnths, but still have 
& o6nhcfoftioii With M church; They bslled the priest to 
iuTfr the childybiit exciBptiohabl^ parts' of the' service were 
ondtiei The son, a ybuth of ileveiiteen, a ibember of 
Mr. Hamlin's SeminU^, forhi^fly; aCnd v^tf piousj preached 
a little hbtiiibn ftfter tfaey had pe^rmed theii- pak; f he 
child WM then carried to the grove, in a covered coffin, 
'0iAam can3kB and the cross preceding. Last Sabbath a 
Prdtestaiit child was buried in the Armenian burying* 
grbiind^ With the permissibn of the Church Session. . . . 

^ Our work is n6t at all interrupted by the very un- 
bettlod and uh6irtaiii stilte of this empire. We do not 
know what niiiy be iii store for ti% but can trust Infinite 
Wisdoin to direct in all things. Much as we wish to see 
yott ally.we do not iHsh to' go home." 

From Miss Haynelu 

^ It wks a matter of gretft wonder that the Protestants 
Could buirj theii: 4oad in peace, in the Armenian burying- 
ground. I saw the little band from my window, as they 
left the grave. A humber of boys and young men col- 
lected about the {>lace, and threw a few stones at the 
grave, but committed no other violence. We hear that '. 
they threaten t6 dig Up the body if another is buried 
there. The Armenian Christmas, and other great feast 



A BACK8LIDKR RBTURNINO. 269 

days, have just passed, and the ehurch hierarehies, in their 
zealous ^^ance over their people, have created quite a 
panic among them in reference to us, so there seems to be 
something of a reaction just at present They are more 
shy of us ; but it may not last long. The work will 
doubtless go forward, if we labor in faith. Mr. E. has 
had interesting evening visits, even during the past week. 
The young man of whom I wrote, who came to service, 
and was so much affected as to go home with Baron Bar- 
kis, continues in the good way, — conducts worship in the 
family in the presence of boarders and guests, and comes 
to the morning prayer meeting and prays there. He is a 
silk merchant, having a shop in the city, and, being a man 
of considerable learning and natural ability, and moreover 
bold to speak his mind, he can exert much influence 
among his associates. 

^Another thing that gives us joy, is Baron Hachadoor's 
return to the truth. He wishes to come to the commun- 
ion, and is ready to confess his great sin in fidling into 
such errors, — and does confess, in personal conversation, 
that he has been doing wrong, and that he found no 
peace when he was in that condition. He came to the 
morning prayer meeting on Monday. 

^ In looking back to the time of our coming here, I 
think we can see great progress. This morning meeting 
has increased from one or two, to six or eight, — and the 
Thursday evening meeting from six or eight (from with- 
out) to twenty and twenty-five.** 

From Mrs. Everett. 

''Karchao, 1854. 

^ My dbab Parents : You will pardon me if I com- 
mence my letter to you by giving an extract from one 
written by Dr. Anderson to this mission. 

^ 'It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confi- 
dence in princes.' Whatever comes, dear brethren, we 
pray you do nothing rashly. Stand at your posts till the 

28* 



270 Tus mssioHAttir sisiieBS. 



last moment If ^oa miitt flee, let it be to the hearait 
pf mli and only till yon oan return again. If yon oan not 
lal>br at EHserooih, or at Trebisond, yod oan, it may be, at 
Krzenyan. AhO^ki^r, DivHk^ Sivaa, Diarbeker, or a doien 
oiKer ifUeei. If driven . fit>iil 6iA dty br poet^ yon maf 
'Snd relnge i^ ktibther. We oad anstain ydn easier on A 
fuii aalary in ftiAby,6i ih iU beigliboilioi^ Uian on half 
Ifcke anih^ pr (iV'iUi IdU^ at home. W^ri you all broken up 
ibjt the tiine, yet» tf fo\i nobly ky Aegb to the k>ountry, 
while not Me td ent^r it. the n^irit of the chorohefl at 
home win be knstiidhldd; ^q imi eipiin gain activity and 
eneray. The ik>^er8 6^ i^A^M are atroggling^ it may 
^ in tii^ 'pMi hiiiifi, ib feboVer ground they have loet 
in iheae IMdi bf imt6d akbfaiationi, and io drive yoU 
all away. That, I itaike it, li the grand point at iaaae, and 
not the queations debated by the *Foar Powers.' 

» « Thinreibre, d^ bijBthren, hold your j^nnd at all 
harairds. dtdaid yonrseiyesi your wives, and yooi^ little 
cines by ail pro^ means, but don't be driven away. The 
heavenly intelligenoes are interested in the effect of these 
impendhig donflidts Of ^;teat natipioid, chiefly as they relate 
to you. Stand firdi it the strength of the Most High, 
and he will give ypti the victory. I neied not suggest to 
vbu hdw importJEbt io yoW infant churches, and to the 
R^orinatioh an<l th<d Protestant community ita Turkey it is, 
|h'at hot o!ne 6t y6ti (Uiow any sij^os of feu* or fiiintness. 
It is even more impdrtknt to them than to the churches 
at home. Nor is it unimportant to your breth^h at the 
Missionary House, and to your brel^ren of the Pruden- 
tial Coomiittee; ^Fpr no^ we live, if ye stand fast in 
the Lord,' iuad our grayer is, thiapt the Lord J^us will be 
with you in "(whatever storm he lUiay Ulo^ t6 bk^ak liipoh 
you^ and that he '"WtiL ptiake i^ Ihings conduce to yotir 
happiiieiGts, and \6 th'e iurthefanc6 of the work he has 
given you to do.' 
' ^n not thik n6blet Vorthy'of one who holds a high 



TREATY iV^tttt ^NdLANb AnU fhANCE. i2tl 

position under onr Qreat Captaih ? But you must not 
think because I haver written this, that inj of our number 
have been inclined to foini or flee, or that there has i>eeii 
any cause for such a course. Althotigh great preparatiotis 
for a great war are going fon^ard, istill there have beeA 
no disturbahoed here, ahd itndy be nohe^ unless th^ (^r^eU 
should make some demonstrations as partisans of Ru^ia^ 
which they ^ill by^ho ineaiii^ d»re to do^ as thejr would 
thus rub th^ risk of being ibiusacred en nuisa^ Thd 
Turks here had a great trial in Submitting to the recisnt 
requisitions c^f the English ahd tVehch. A spedal ootifef> 
tnce was Requested. Reschid l?ashd ^aii made Mihistei* 
Plenipotentiary for the business. At his palace the Sul-* 
Ibah met the English ahd Fr^iich embassadors, the head o^ 
the Moslem priesthood^ «fe6. The tdtitnatum was pr^ 
faented; that thby iign ft treaty gtiaranteeihg to the Christ 
tian subjectii t>f tub Ottoniah ^vemment right to givd 
evidence in cloiiH; agkih^t Tdrks^ -^ that they (the Christ 
tians) hold property in the same ihannei- as Turk% ^-^that 
ihd capitaiioh tax shotQd be r^moted, A<^. Thd Sultan 
imd his party remonstrated,-^ it Vad against their teli-^ 

^ The Embassadors gaie as k iotisequ^ce of refusal that 
in dghteen hours the l^nfelsiii Aebt wouid be in the BoS*- 
phoruB. The« was no eecap^^, th* Sultan gave aasetti, 
from wliich there was no appeal, as he is considered asuo- 
icessor of Mahomet. ^ Th6 pi&peir ii^aS signed, iuEte^ h whole 
night's conference, llie following day it #A8 flying oh 
the wings of steam towafd Ehghind, khd^dt even the 
Prime Minister knew It bi*ekth bf the maif. But all 
things have moved oh quietly sinc^ it iS knOiHi. 

^ Barracks are being priBpared for English troops -here, 
and the English ships here are to bring stone and lime 
for fdr^tyitig themselves in the Crimea, Is not this bold ? 
But th^y w91 doubtless Succeed in plating themselves 
oh the sUof^S cif thb Bte6k Sea. 



272 THS MISSIOlfABY BISTKJUI. 

Oh, but the horrors of war I — one shudders I 

^ Faoiine will undoubtedly accompany war, and then 
if disease should be added, how much distress, how many 
souls rushing into eternity t You must not be anxious 
about us, except so &r as to lead you to offer supplica- 
tion in our behalf to him who is our only refuge and 
hope. 

<*Our work continues interesting and promising. The 
school is full, — thirty-five boarders, — and many of them 
are large girls, and serious. They love prayer, and try to 
act as become followers of Jesus, but they need constant 
advice and instruction. Several small girls are in all re^ 
spects quite dependent upon us. We all have our hands, 
heads, and hearts fulL Our Aeckfo get weary, — alas for 
me t I do wish I possessed a quiet spirit. Imagine yourr 
self, dear mother, with your disposition to care for every- 
body and every thing, in my place, and you will under^r 
stand how difiicult it is always to be quiet, cheerful, kind, 
patient, and all that is ^ lovely, and of good report.* 

^ What should I do without our good, quiet, patient 
sbter M. in this house, with forty-five persons, my three 
little ones, and other missionary work I I venture to say 
we should not, could not have endured, — but the Lord 
provides. Miss West is doing nobly, but the educational 
department is enough for her. 

. • • ... 

^ We have had a visit from Rev.^Mr. Qranger, a Bap- 
list clergyman from Providence, R. I. He is returning 
from a visit to the missions in Burmah, <fcc. Last Sab- 
bath evening he gave an account of the work of the Lord 
there, in our chapel, and it was translated into Armenian. 

Mrs. Everett to Mrs. Fuller, Cambridgeport, Mass. 

Hjlss Eeut, April U, 1864. 

^< Surely, goodness and mercy have followed me all the 
days of my life ; ' but the last year has been peculiarly 



HtftM to UM. tiShtniL 2T8 

one of bleteing. I wrote yOu, <lid I ftot) that 01)6 of tny 
dear sUters itiight ^omd and join me in this foreign land, 
and it the good work of oar Master here ? And, in great 
goodness, she was brought hither, and is now sitting by 

* • # • • 4 • • 

^ Out house here id very cothmodiotifi), tod onr family very 
laige. Wd have thirty-five boarding scholars, and twelve 
day toholars. You can imagine, td 6omd extent, what a 
care ^ch k school, hods^ and &mily involve } but yon 
will not compare it iHth a boafdingnsKshool in Amerida. 
We have to attend It good deal td the dothing of 6ar 
girls. They do tarions kinds of needle-work, which we 
diiiposo of for their benefit I could write very much, but 
time fkils me. 

^ The blessing of Gk>d hAs been granted to uh most 
graciously. Yod, perhaps, have seen k notice of the 
revival in our fi^^hoOl^ which Mr. Everett copied from m^ 
notes. It was published in the Journal of Missions^ 
NOTir York Observer, An* 

^Three of the dear girls United with the chuhsh last 
Sabbath. Three others have been accepted, and we have 
hope that thre6 Or four more are the children of God. 

• ^ • 4 • 4 

^ Yon trill be pleased to know that our dear father, Mr. 
Gbodell^ ui oUr neighbor; it is so pleasant to hfive such 
associates; They come tod take supper with us one 
Evening in th^ "Ireek, tod one we go to them. We have 
our singing and prayer meetings together. We occasion- 
ally visit and receive visits fi'om our dear friends in Pera 
and Bebek. All are iii health and quietness at present, 
but what a fearful prospect is before this land and all 
Kuropel Witr^ and not merely the rumor of war, re^hes 
our ears, tn this city we do not expect to be distdrbed, 
though mnch excitement^ irregularities^ and distress, par- 
iicnl^l^ for food, are already experienced. The Greeks, 



274 TH9 lOSBIOHABT 8I8TBB8. 

who are not sabjeoU of the Turkish government, to the 
nomber of thirty or forty thousand, have been ordered to 
leave for their country. Houses and business must be 
given up, — servants, all, all must ^. 

^ Soldiers are collecting from all parts of the country. 
English and French ships of war are gathering here, and 
going to the Black Sea. The Russian army has crossed 
the Danube, and is remaining there for reinforcement ; 
and what a host they will present t A fearful struggle is 
coming on. The English think to enter the Crimea, and 
at the same time fighting has commenced in the Baltia 

** Oh, if we could *not &11 back on an Almighty arm that 
rules and governs all, would not our hearts £sdl with the 
heart-rending events transpiring around us, though the 
roar of battle should not reach our ears I If Russia should 
gain domination here, the progress of truth and light 
might be arrested, but we do not, can not l>elieve that 
Qod will permit such an event. The present seems to be 
a time for sowing the good seed broadcast. The British 
and Foreign Bible Society is sending out a large supply 
of the Scriptures, to be distributed among their own, and 
also foreign soldiers. 

^I must mention a most interesting prayer meeting 
^t was held this week in Pera, with reference to the pres- 
ent state of this country. There was a large attendance of 
the Protestant residents, Ameiican, English, Scotch, and 
an humble, confiding trust in the Kng of kings was man- 
ifested, while prayer was made for kings and rulers, the 
army, and ourselves.'* 

From the same. 

" Hass Ebut, Jono 1, 1854. 

^ Mr YSBT DBAB PiJtBNTS : The days and weeks will 
slip by, and leave my earnest purpose to write * home* all 
unfulfilled. Aht the truth is, your childish child has 
another home, and one that not only demands or calls 
forth her heart's strongest affections, but also requirea all 



GBNSBAli MBBTIlT(^ OF TUB kiSSIOK. 275 

her mental energy and physical strength. Who would 
have thonght that Providence ever would call me to act 
in such a sphere ? It is a comfort and support, when 
sometimes I am ready to faint^ that the All-Wise did 
ordain what has come to pass, and that he will still 
strengthen and bless even one so unworthy. 

** Miss West and Malvina are every day becoming more 
established in their respective departments, and we, who 
have been just able to beiu* up under our burden, feel it 
greatly lightened. Our life is any thing but a quiet one, 
— in ft sense we are public propertj, *No man liveth to 
himself* or ishould ; ioe could notj if wc tried. At the 
Bilme time we have personal comforts and ot\joymonts in- 
numerable. One tnore we long for, namely, tidings from 
home, from you and our dear brothers and sisters. Why 
are our hearts left to faint within us ? Two mohths you 
have been in your new home, and no word of remem- 
brance has come from thence to us. . . . 

** We are in the midst of General Meeting. There are 
from abroad, Messrs. Ladd and Morgan from Smyrna, 
Mr. Schneider from Aintab, Mr. Powers from Marsovan, 
and Mr. Bliss and family from TreWond ; the latter came 
some time since for health ; they have been bur guests 
for a few weeks. What a trial, to be feeble and Isud aside 
from one's work I I do pity them, as I do all suchj even 
those who have their faces set towards our own dear 
native land. iTou must pray that wo may not bo obliged 
to go home. 

^^ The meeting, thus far, has been a quiet one. The 
reports from the different stations were full of interest. 
Yesterday was held the semiannual meeting of the 
Auxiliary Bible Society. It was deeply interesting, — 
held in the largo saloon of the English Hotel. The au- 
dience was worthy of a Christian land, — highly refined 
and literary. Twenty or more clergymen sat in a large 
Semicircle in front of the assembly, — American. English- 



276 THM |fIA9.I0|rA»r 9IST9M* 

Scotch, Iiish, 4Kf> min^onarifBii oimpUda to embaiffy, imd 
ohapkua t9 (be lunp j* Mr. Speno^ our oiioi^ri )uui been 
electe4 ^PDwiden^ of tb^ ^pci^ty, and WQf in t^9 c)ii)ir» 
Mr. OoQ^eU ppei^ed tbe m^^9^ vitti fW^r j Wr, ^pei^ce 
xnad^ ^ finf8l\ed sp^iech ; ^e ^report Wfi« re^ ifn^ tbefi 
foUomted resoluflopii f^d |ipf|€K)l^e9. Mr. S(^^i4^.9P^I^ 
ino0^ effectively^ por^ying %h^ FPnderiVl thinj^ Qqd ham 
wrought by memu g{\^yfQr^ Bxidi Spirit i;^ Aintab and 
.Yic^i^ty. On^ pjf ^e f^a^^np Ut^rffdy pour^^ qnt W» 
Irish hearti fm^ Mr. jQ^offler spared, and bore |hi8 hfjar- 
ers with him, &r ftbove ^e ^furth* 4^d thep, hQW ^i^tejr- 
e9tii^g ! afi offceir in ifee pxmj^ in his ;^ ja<4^^t^ w»4 |p^- 
ing pn his sword, spp)ce frpiu jthp depths of jjufi pious spl^. 
The hours ^ew by, fu^d all ^i^p^9d eql4^Uy.unc9nsciQ1;l9 of 
.^tigue ^d heat. I h^ve inade ipy stor^ all too short 1^ 
convey ^y idea of thp inter^t pf th^ jaqe^n^. j^jiy itp 
fraits be plenteous I 

^ To-day the meeting of the Mi^9.9 Vf^ in pni* pfMrlo^ 
f^d the .ques^qn th^re deci^^d whiq^ w^ discussed jlast 
year, Mr. Yan Lennep*s going to Tokat. The^ gp ^ 
'9009 as they cap make prep^tipi^ hv^ P^ ^ Jihpm, 
md w© are yery poriy ^to h^ye if]^^v^ Jefty^ us. Jjh^ 
Pwight expects to rep^pv^ his feuui^y iutp (fep ^ty pw>P«> 
tp ft houfe that hlM ^^ boujght fpr a i^^iapf)!* 

**Our school is ipcr^^sip^ h^ nupb^iii l^pd Iptere^ 
The general mif^nouij^ workcpntinueis inl^riBstin^. Our 
phapel w^ jyi last .@.at)bath. What ^^e shall ^p b^ ^d 
by we thinkj but can not telL" i 

June 21, Mi^ Haynes writep : — 

^ Qne ^rl left the schppl )tp }>e married last week. A 
widower came on ^pm Brppsa, f^id chose this girl of fif- 
teen, and her mother gave her cpnsont and topk the girl 
hpme from school before the subject was lisped to her. 
Poor thing. I pitied her from the bpttpm of my heart* 
Her.cpuon^ went over to see her after she w^ infprqied 
of the ensagemeut; on their return I asked thein hpw 



KEW PUPILS. " '277 

ebe felt ; if she wished to go. They looked Very sad, and 
said, no, she did not wish it. The man is pioas, and I 
hope will be kind. The girl is large and womanly in her 
appearance, and very good-tempered, but I fear has not 
self-reliance enough to have the care of housekeeping. 

** The school will be filled up with new scholars, and 
consequently will be harder to manage. Ten have already 
been received from Armenian families, — that is, from 
families who have not become Protestant. Some of 
these come entirely uninstructed in reading, and even in 
the common rules of morality. It is therefore no small 
aff^ur to indoctrinate them into a regard for truth, hon- 
esty, unselfishness, Ac. The girl who has just left to be 
married is the one who said, when reproved for lying, 
that * she did not know that it was contrary to the rules 
of the school I ' 

" One, two, or three new scholars drop into the day 
school occasionally ; one seeing his neighbor hot afraid to 
bend, sa3rs he will send his, too. Seraphina called this 
week to see the woman who by her opposition kept her 
children so long from the school. She went in the even- 
ing with Mr. Everett, and thie woman kept herself in the 
other room until Seraphina took a light and went to find 
her. She was sitting in the midst of the beds of eight 
sleeping children spread out upon the floor. (They 
roll the beds up in the morning, and put them in closets.) 
She received Seraphina very pleasantly, and talked for 
some time about sending the little girls to school, &c^ 
the three little boys come regularly. She will send two 
girls if we will take them both as boarders. Seraphina 
consents to take the elder, but thinks the second still too 
young to come except as a day scholar. Seraphina told 
her if her children came and learned to read, and became 
interested in it, she would herself wish to learn, and 
would learn. She ezpredsed the greatest astonishment^ 

24 



278 TBM KuaoKAxr nBrmus. 

Mjring^ *Whatl J learn to readi' and laogfaed at the 
idea. 

^ Eevoaki the yoatb who preadied at the fiineral of hia 
little brother, haa been given up by hia &ther to the work 
of preaching the goapeL He haa been an interested at- 
tendant of the Monday morning prayer meeting from its 
oonunenoement . , * 

^ One woman who haa not been to onr servioe or oon- 
yeraed with a miarionary, aomehow obtained a translation 
of Doddridge'a * Iliae and Progreaa,* and read it. The 
priests were in the habit of calling frequently at the 
honse of this woman. One day, after she had been read- 
ing Doddridge and become much interested, she told the 
priest that he did no good by his visits; that he came 
and talked about the war a little, then always called for 
his hrandf/i and left. That was the way he always did. 
Then she produced her book, and told him to read that ; 
that would show him his' duty. The priest took the 
book, read a little, and laid it down, looking ashamed and 
condemned* Mr. S. learned this fact through the &mily 
of Partike, who has lately come over to our side. When 
I went to the female meeting last week, the woman of 
the house where it was held told me of an interesting 
conversation which she had with a Jew. He listened to 
her attentively, while she talked to him of salvation by 
Christ alone. She was quite delighted about it. She 
feels that there is encouragement to pray if there are but 
two or three to unite." 

Mrs. Everett to Mrs. Clark. 

" Uais KauT, Jaly 17, 1854. 
<*Mt DBAS Cousms . • • When distracted, weary, 
and wpm, I do sometimes long to be a child again, and, 
free as a bird, hie to the home nest. Desponding thoughts 
fmd feelings are quite unnatural tQ me ; but I actually 
cried this morning, and told Malvina I did wish I could 



HOUSBHOU) CARSfl. . 270 

go somewhere, and be taken care of a while ; pardon 
me, do. • • • 

^Strength, health, in an unusual measure have been 
given me, and precious opportunities to labor in our Mas- 
ter's vineyard, and I would call upon my soul and all that 
is within me to praise the Lord. The summer vacation 
of our school has conmienced, and our dear pupils are 
dispersed. 

^ The good work in this village has ptogreiteed much in 
the last year, but our desires are by no means filled. 
Lord, increase our faith I I should love to give you par- 
ticulars in regard to our labors here, but alas I my pen 
almost rtMtB in my desk, while my heart bums to com- 
mune with the distant loved ones. . . • 

^ Miss West is doing admirably as a teacher, and M. 
takes a good share in the care of the house and needle- 
work ; and still, if we could each double our capacity to 
do and bear, aU^ aXL would be most fully employed. My 
dear children are requiring more and more attention. 
Ellie is nearly aiz ; Sumner, four} and baby, Susie, seven- 
teen months. • • • 

" The sad tidings from the war reaches you through 
the public prints. Our work is not interrupted by it, nor 
our peace disturbed, save by mental excitement and sym- 
pathy. Our expenses are increased, as all provisions are 
very dear. The poor suffer ; our door is knocked at many 
times a day by those who take a piece of bread thank- 
fully. . . * 

** How I should love to see your dear children, and to 
show you mine. Oh I let us train them for heaven, and 
then we may meet*** 

To Mrs. Fuller, Oambridgeport 

" July 28. 
** Mt dear Friend Mart : If I toll you that niy 
dear husband has to-day returned from Broosa} after a 
week's absence, you will not anticipate a long letter from 



280 THS MISBIONABT 8I8TSH8. 

me thii eyening ; yet I fear to postpone it till to-morrow, 
le8t I fiul entirely. The ship by which this is to go 
leaves port the day after. 

^We are er^oying a vacation m our school, and 
although we follow our dear pupils to their homes with 
anziooa interest, still we rejoice in the short freedom from 
oare and labor which such a school brings upon us. Our 
examination would have interested even you, I am sure. 
They sang beautifully, and their recitations in geography, 
arithmetic, and English would have been intelligible to 
you, and the various specimens of needlework you would 
have appredated. Several of the pupils are not to re- 
turn to us ; but all hope they are the children of Qod, and 
we can commit them to him who is able to keep them 
from straying. 

^Mr. £. went to Broosa, hoping to be invigorated by 
a short respite fh>m his many duties, but he has suffered 
firom hoarseness and slight fever, though better now. My 
health is good, but the warm weather makes me a littie 
languid this summer, which is quite unusuaL . . . 

^ You should have been with us this p. m., as we 
visited a largo Armenian house. We walked in the ex- 
tensive garden, the lady of the house with us, in native 
costume. Then we went into the house, sat upon the 
divan covered with crimson and yellow damask, — par- 
took of sweetmeats and coffee in native style, — then 
went over the mansion, containing thirty rooms, beside 
large hails. We sat down again in a lower room, drank 
sherbet made from gooseberry syrup, — made our salaams, 
after much pleasant conversation, and left. The ladies in 
this house were married, one at eleven and one at twelve 
years of age. The young woman, or bride^ as they call 
her, though she has been married eighteen years, can 
read, and I am going to send her a Testament and a copy 
of Pilgrim's Progress." , , . 



INSTANCBS OF VtKTT. 281 

From MisB Haynes. 

" AagoBt 8. 

^ Yesterday p. u. I made some calls at the houses of 
some of our girls and other natives. The sick woman, in 
whose narrow room we held the little meeting last win- 
ter, is very feeble, and yesterday mortiing she thought 
herself dying. She said she was not only ready, but 
wished to go. She said that she prayed thus, — * O Lord, 
if it be thy will, take me now to thyself — to-day take 
me to thy heavenly kingdom, and to-day let me see thy 
glory. Yet, let thy will be done I ' Another woman, 
when I asked her how she did, exclaimed, * I am joyful, 
I am very joyful with Christ He is exceeding merciful 
to me, and I praise him for his goodness.^ I felt greatly 
refreshed to witness the spirituality of these simple- 
hearted people, as I do when I visit such here, and hear 
them express their gratitude and joy for the blessings of 
the gospel. It is a much greatier pleasure to me to go to 
a house where there is not ft chair or table, and only an 
apology for a sofa, but where Christ is the light of tho 
house, than to go to the most splendidly furnished house 
in the village where Christ is not loved and honored. 
One woman whom I visited not long since in company 
with Seraphina, made many inquiries about our Mends ; 
and when Seraphina told her of mother, and how hard it 
was for her to give us up, and yet how willingly she did 
it, she seemed to appreciate it all, but added, * If she only 
knew how much joy you give us every time we see your 
beloved faces, she would not be sorry that she gave you 
up.' We have on the whole great reason to bless God 
and take courage, — although the Holy Spirit is not 
poured out in as large measures as we could wish ; yet, 
one after another comes in, hears, is led to inquire, to 
search the Scriptures to see if these things are so, and 
finally to become a firm, intelligent believer in tho gos- 
pel. Our Sabbath school is attended by thirty or forty, 

24* 



fSi TqS HISSIONART 8I8TXB8. 

half of whom are men in Mr. Everett's daaa. B. Hacha- 
door has a olaaa of girls, and B. Hagop of women. There 
is also a class of little boys. This Sabbath school is a 
new thing for the congregation, and entirely separate 
from the seminary. It is held at noon on the same plan 
as our Sabbath schools in America. 

**The day-school b increasing. A man came to-day 
and applied for the admission of a boy twelve years old, 
from one of the most respectable families in the village. 
We rejoice over such, as it helps remove the barriers 
from the coming of the multitudes. Many of the poor 
are afraid of the priests, and can not come or send their 
children on that account. One woman, who has lately 
found her way to the chapel, and sent her little boys to 
school, has been visited by the piiests and threatened 
with the anathemas of the Patriarch, — and told that she 
would certainly go to hell, Ao, 

^She asked the priest if all these people — the Prot- 
estants — would go to hell. * Certainly,' he replied. 
^ Well,' she said, * if these people who preach the gospel, 
and read the Bible, and lead holy lives, are going to hell, 
I am willing to cast in my lot with theirs. I will go 
along with them.' ^And are you going to take these 
children to destruction too ? ' he asked. 

^ He also asked her what monthly reward she would 
get for coming here. She told him that she got none ; 
she would not have either the Armenians or Protestants 
think that her reason for coming. True, she was in debt 
and trouble, but she would sell her house, or any thing 
she had in her chests, to pay the debts ; but she would 
not be driven away from those people. She came her- 
self, and bogged a spelling-book, and took her first lesson 
in reading. She keeps her book constantly by her, and 
in a week could road three or four pages in the Tract 
Primer quite well. Her case is remarkable. She says, 
^ Oh I we have got cveiything to learn,' and it seems as 



MRS. EVRRSTT^S LAST LBTTBR IIOMB. 283 

though she wanted to drink in the knowledge in largo 
draughts." 
Mrs. Everett's last letter home. 

" September S8, 1854. 

"My very dear Parents: How often in imagination 
I visit you in your new home, it is impossible for mo to 
say ; but if our Master's business were not urgent here, 
such visits would be attended with earnest longings once 
more to see you face to face, that I might express in 
words the gratitude due to my dear father and mother. 

"It is long since we have heard directly from you. 
Mrs. I. G. Bliss, in a letter to her sister here, speaks of 
having taken tea with you, which she enjoyed very much. 

We want to hear particularly of dear M ^ of you all. 

Where is your amanuensis, sister K ? Dear mother 

must write. . . . 

" Our school is again in full operation. New scholars 
have taken the places of those who left, but the number 
of professedly pious ones has diminished. To-day is set 
apart for special prayer that the influences of the Holy 
Spirit may descend and abide with us. Oh ! if wo could 
be assured that your prayei*s mingled with our feeble 
petitions before the throne of Almighty grace, then would 
our faith be strengthened. Do pray for us always. 

"We need a double portion of wisdom, grace, and 
strength. You will be glad to know that we are all in 
health. Sumner has recently made a visit to Nicomedia 
and Bachjejak ; ho left us on Saturday, and returned on 
the next Thursday. He Ivent on an important errand, 
determined to know nothing but Christ and his cause. 
Our dear Susie was in a state to make us anxious, having 
a very severe cold. She has been delicate all summer, 
but is now constantly improving ; itnd we call upon our 
souls to bless the Lord that wo are spared the bitter cup 
that we feared was preparing for us. . . • 

" We have all been almost breathless folr the Ust few 



284 THB MISSIONART 8I8TXB8. 

days to get news from the war. The great onset apon 
Sebastopol was to be made, and that it would be a ter- 
rible struggle none doubted. The cholera had made 
great ravages among the English and French. Before 
embarking for the Crimea, they were disheartened, but 
their courage revived on the way, and they disembarked 
in fine spirits, without opposition, within twenty miles of 
SebastopoL Last Saturday morning a largo French 
steamer, with four flags flying, passed down the Bos- 
phorus. The salute was flred, and there was no thought 
but for the news^ — what tidings 1 Success^ of course ; 
but oh, how dearly purchased, and the work yet incom- 
plete I Still, great demonstrations were made. Quns and 
rockets poured forth until a late hour Saturday night. 
You win get a particular account of the battle by the 
papers, and I will only say that the heights back of the 
city were taken, but with a fearfUl slaughter. The Rus- 
sians, of course, had every advantage of position and 
numbers, and the only marvel is, that the allied army was 
not entirely destroyed. A Russian officer said, they ex- 
pected to fight men^ not demons ; but the French and 
English rushed on with the fury of devils incarnate. 
The loss of life on both sides was immense; eighteen 
hundred English, and fourteen or fifteen hundred French 
killed and wounded; — some of their bravest officers folL 
Steamers are brining down the wounded, and the hos- 
pitals here will be filled. We confidently expect to hear 
that the city is taken, but it will be a terrible struggle. 
Oh, how much blood spilled I how many will rush into 
eternity 1 how awful I How manyhoails are rent with 
grief by this destruction of human lifo ; but how much 
deeper the wail from the world of woe I If wo could not 
feel that the Lord reigns, and that all this is permitted, 
that the day m'ay hasten on when all shall feel and 
acknowledge his sway, we should despair. 
^ All b quietness here, save the cry of those who are 



MRS. bvbbbtt's last lbttbr noMB. 286 

distressed for the necessaries of life ; food of all kinds, 
and fuel, are nearly or quite double the usual price ; con- 
sequently there is great distress, and only a prospect that 
it will increase as the season advances. 

** Did M. in her last give you particulars in regard to 
our work ? Last Sabbath our chapel was filled. Sumner 
feels that it must be enlarged, — some partitions must be 
knocked away. A few da3rs since, Sumner was called to 
a house to meet some half-convinced Armenians, and 
spent two and a half hours in conversation on exclusively 
religious subjects. The truth is gmning ground in this 
village, and throughout the land. Mr. Dwight is fairly 
settled in the city proper ; Henry Otis made quite a stir 
this week by raising his little American flag on the prem- 
ises. Four or five cavasses came to inquire into the cause 
of such a demonstration, and gave some cautions. . • • 
Our families here are quite scattered. Three in Bebek, 
one alone in Pera, two in Hass Keuy, and one in the city 
proper. ... 

** My sheet is filling up, my lights are fading, the bell 
has rung for retiring, and I hear my husband at the door, 
returned from some Armenian visits. Here he comes, 
and says, * Will you tell them that I am alive ? It is a 
shame that I can not write them once in a year t ' He 
writes very few letters. His hands are full of work, and 
bis heart too. He is a genuine missionary. I do wish you 
could come and see us. We should be too happy to show 
you your grandchildren, and then your children — three. 
Are you not blessed; are not we/ Our blessings are 
numberless. Rest and unalloyed happiness we must not 
look for hero." 



CHAPTER XXV. 

LMt Weeks of Mn. S.*ft Uft— Lm( Notes— rftrUottlan of her last SiokiMss 

And Death. 

Iir approaching the dose of a life we haye followed 
with 80 much interest, we would &in linger around the 
last weeka and months, and gather up their few fi'agmen* 
tary records. Her last letters to American friends were 
in September, Her health was not good at that time, 
and had not been for some time p^revious. In addition 
to her usual cares, she had felt much anxiety during the 
summer for her youngest child, who was suffeiing from 
teet)iing; and tliis anxiety, with the weariness and con- 
finement attendant on the nursing of a sick child, had 
caused her to look pale and worn, and oflcner than usual 
sad. There are many little notes written by her during 
this period to Mrs. Hamlin, and another missionaiy sister, 
Mrs. Bliss, who was spending the summer in Constanti- 
nople with her family, for her own and her husband's 
health. These notes are full of her own kind heart, which 
always seemed more thoughtful of others' troubles than 
its own% To Mrs, Bliss, in Pera, she writes in the latter 
part of the spring: — 

^ My DBAS SiSTBB I I hopc none of you have been 
seriously affected by this chilly day, and that you are 
ready to try what country air and scenery, and donkey 
riding, and visiting with old friends, Ac, will do for you. 
Your apartment awaits you. Will you not come on 



KOTBS TO MISSIOKAST VttlSKDS. 287 

Wednesday, bag and hnggage? We will give you so 
warm a reception that you will not be disposed to shake 
for many a day.^ 

To the same sister, in Bebek : — 

^ Can not you spare one of your Bebek songsters to 
bear a message over the hills to your deserted abode ? 
We long to hear that you have been revived by the 
genial air and society of that quiet, charming village. It 
must have been a relief to you to get away from such a 
care-ruffled spirit as miue. I used to think I should al- 
ways be light-hearted. But really, how are you all ? 
Has the foe (intermittent fever) assaulted any of you ? 
Have you commenced sea-bathing ? We are very busy 
preparing for examination ; pardon this hasty line. Will 
you not join us in commending our little flock to the 
care of the Good Shepherd ? " 

The latter part of the summer she was thrown from a 
horse, and had a very narrow escape from serious ii\jury. 
She thus speaks of it in a note to Mrs. Bliss, then at one 
of the Prince's Islands : — 

** My dbab Sister : In one word I must relieve your 
kind anxiety for me. It was indeed a wonderful escape in 
great peril; but I received no injury, save the jar and the 
fright, from which I recovered in one day. A new con- 
secration of my unworthy life to my Master's service, is 
all the return I can make. How little we know whai is 
before us when we rise in the morning, or lie down at 
night. ^ My times are in thy hand.' 

"It would give us all very great pleasure to visit you 
in your island retreat ; but I fear my desire to do so will 
be disappointed. Tour invitation shall be extended. We 
are so sorry that you are in statu quo as it regards health. 
When will the cloud pass from above you ? " 

To Mrs. Hamlin, as the summer vacation ws&s closing, 
and the last school-term which she was to superintend 
was about to commence, she wrote : — 



288 Tius HisflioarABT bistkba. 

^ now soon our vacation haa passed I I most confess 
that I almost shrink from the care and toil before us. Oh, 
the responsibility tool Sometimes I wish to feel it 
more, sometimes less. Who is sufficient for these 
things?" 
. To Mrs, Bliss, a few days later: — 

^ You must have learned ere this to ^ walk by &ith,' 
and no doubt you find real peace in taking the hand of 
the Omniscient, and walking quietly on, despite the daric 
veil that is drawn before your own eyes. 
. ^School has commenced; not all the pupils are yet 
here, but a good number. Do ask a blessing for us, — a 
large blessings such as God is ready to grant. 
. . ^ Susie dear is gaining. How good God is to us I The 
rest of us are quite well. Mr. E. goes to Nicomedia Sat- 
urday. Love — much — to each of you. 

^ Ever your sbter, S. H. Evsrbtt." 

This was nearly the last of these little sisterly notes 
from her hand and heart. During the month of October, 
she had more than one attack of illness of a bilious char- 
acter, causing her friends considerable anxiety ; but she 
was most of the time about, caring for every thing in her 
large household as usual, until the sixth of November, 
when she gave birth to another daughter, her sixth child. 
After thb she regained her strength, though not rapidly, 
^ there were un&vorable symptoms about her from the 
first ; but she was hopeful, and at the end of a fortnight 
was able to leave her room. The following note to Mrs. 
Hamlin is probably the last she ever wrote : — 

« IIass Ksut, Nov. 27, 1S54. 

^ Mt vbbt bsab Sistxb : It was a great disappoint- 
ment not to see your &ce on Saturday, particulaily as wo 
can not hope for the privilege this week. How much 
could I tell you of God's goodness to unworthy me. 
Surely mth lavinff-Jsindness haa hs drawn me to make a 



81CKNB8S. 289 

new consecration of my whole self and all mine to hinL 
TheBe/aur little ones^ — will not the dear Jesus own them 
as his if we bring them in true confiding faith ? 

^ Baby is in the regular succession of model baiieSf — 
very little care, and contributes her full measure of joy. 
You should see Susie perform over her. She informs 
every body that we * in got a haby! 

^ This morning I got up before breakfksti (three weeks,) 
and I expect to take tea with the family in the study, 
Saturday I was drawn into the hall, and yesterday walked 
to sister's room. My progress has been steady, though a 
little slower than usual, owing to a troubled state of my 
stomach for some weeks previous to my confinement ; but 
I have had no fever and no relapse, and received no 
injury from seeing my friends. Oh I my dear sister, I am 
called upon to begin life anew. 

< Uft li rMl ; lift is MHMitl » 

How unprofitably has mine been spent thus far; taidt 
feel that I am growing old« What matter, if I am rip^ii- 
ing for heaven t 

^ Pardon this note (the first) written with ft trembling 
hand. We are so sorry you could not accept our invitdr- 
tion for the 80th. We shall imagine you all very happy, 
and we too shall hope to * be very thankful in a quiet 
way,' tell Mrs. Hinsdale, with love. Please give my 
warmest love and thanks to Mrs. Schauffler and Mnl 
Biggs, and assure them by this that I mean to write 
them. You have all been very kind* Adieu I 

« SsiUpfimA..'* 

On Thanksgiving day, three days after the above was 
written, she joined the little party, consisting of her own 
and Dr. Gtoodell's family, in her parlor, and sat with them 
at tabic, though a very sore mouth prevented her partak- 
ing of the dinner. The next day she was taken alarm- 
ingly illf and was brought so low that it was feared she 

25 



290 THs uustom Axr sistxbs. 

would hardly forviye throngfa the night But though, 
as iq)p6an from the above note^ all her hopes and plana 
had been for lifia, this sudden f^proach of death gave her 
no alarm, nor did she manifest the least unwillingness to 
meet his summons. On the contrary, she received it joy- 
fully, as i^ while to stay longer here was very pleasant, 
and strong and tender ties bound her to the woiid, she 
felt that to depart and be with Christ was far better. 
The only moment in which the shadow of a doubt 
i^peaied to cross her mind, was when repeating with her 
husband the hymn conmiendng— - 

she Stopped at the line — 

** Wbii If anr bmm thffliM Im toil oat.** 

^If—iff^iAi^ repeated,— ^ oh, there is no {/;— he will 
accept me, I hMAo he will ;" and turning to her husband 
she asked, ^ Do you not think he will receive me ?^ He 
replied — ^ Tes, he has promised, and he can not deny 
himself He will receive you through Christ," and fh>m 
that moment every doubt was set at rest for ever, and she 
longed to depart On being asked by her husband if she 
did not wish to live to train up her dear children for God, 
and to labor a little longer for him, she replied, ^Tes, if 
it is his will. Dear children 1 They are Christ's, aU of 
them. Tes, I shall meet them again. He will keep them 
and you ; you must train them for him.'' She then asked 
for them to be brought to her, embraced them, and com- 
mitted them and her husband once more to the Saviour. 
Describing this scene after she was taken from him, her 
husband says :/^ I was silent with wonder to see how she 
loved the dear Saviour, and could thus calmly, yes, tri- 
umphantly, yield to the sundering of the sweetest of con- 
jugal ties, and the deepest of maternal affections, because 
he called/* She sent messages of love to the scholars, 



. PABTIKO MBSSAOXS. . 29l 

and wished they should be told how h^r heart had yearned 
for their salvation, and how she had been almost over- 
whelmed at times with lon^gs for this, when praying 
for them in the meeting they had been accnstpmed to 
observe on Saturday ev^^nings, in concert with the 
Oroomiah and Beirut schools. ^ They mu8t love Christi" 
she said, with strong emphasis. 

She wished the Armenians to be told how much she 
loved them, and to the sisters in the church she sent the 
message, ^to be tohole Christians, wholly devoted to 
Christ." To. all friends in America, and to all her mis- 
sionary friends, forgetting none, she sent farewell mes- 
sages of love. 

During all that night her husband read to her portions 
of Scripture, as she was able to listen, and prayed with 
her many times. So she continued, seemingly wrapped 
up in the word of Ood and communion with him, until 
daybreak, when she said, ^I thought I should go before 
the morning." But she was not to go quite so soon. 
Her earthly work was not yet quite completed, and she 
was brought back from the borders of heaven, to remain 
a little longer with those who were hardly so ready to 
give her up as she was to go. For some days her state 
appeared critical, and then it was thought that the dan- 
ger was past, and that her precious life was to be spared 
to her family and to the missionary work. When she 
first saw that she was probably to come back to the cares 
of earth, she expressed some disappointment, but soon 
said to her husband, *' If it is the will of Ood I wish to 
labor with you longer for the Armenians, and train up 
our children for him," adding that if Ood should continue 
her life, she would strive to be more Chriitlike. For two 
weeks she gained strength, and with this new prospect of 
life, revived all her plans for doing good. 

On Friday, December 22, the school was to be dis- 
missed for the Christmas vacation, and she wished to see 



292 THB MIBSIOVABT BIBTXB8. 

and speak with all the aebolan before their departure. It 
was a pleasant day, and she was removed into the parlor, 
and reolined on the 8ofi^ while one by one the girls came 
in, and received each a few earnest words of coonsel and 
ezhortationi and an atfectionate fiurewell from the fiuthfiil 
teacher and loving friend, who had so often counseled 
and prayed for them, but who would never with her liv- 
ing voice address them again. She had gathered up, 
peihaps unconsciously, all her strength for this last duty 
to the dear school, to which she had for so many years 
given the best energies of her large heart, and loving, 
Christlike spirit That night she was seized with a 
violent chill, followed by a fearfril fever ; then came wan- 
dering of mind, succeeded by heavy stupor, until, on the 
morning of the 27th, she peacefully fell asleep in Jesus. 

During those four days she had a few intervals in which 
her mind appeared perfectly dear, and at such times she 
expressed a full consciousness of her situation, and the 
same readiness to leave the world that she had before 
done. Once, seeing her eldest child enter the room, she 
said, ** Ellen, do you know mamma is going home, — is 
going to die?" The evening before her death, she 
awoke from a long, heavy sleeep, exclaiming, ^ Bless the 
Lord! Why don't you bless the Lord?** Soon after 
she repeated, ^ Jesus I dear Jesus!" many times with 
peculiar emphasis and tenderness. Later in the night she 
requested those about her to sing, and Mrs. Hamlin and 
Mr. Everett commenced — 

** Jeraa, loyer of my soul,** 

vhile she joined in singing parts of the hymn. She 
wished to see her children once more, and when they 
were brought, she kissed them tenderly, and said she left 
them with perfect confidence in the hands of their heav- 
enly Father. She missed the little one, and asked for 
her, and seemed much affected as she embraced her. Dr. 



DRATfl O? Mllfl. ICYBRSTT. 293 

Qooclell said, "We will watch over and care for your 
dear children;" to which she replied, '^I have given 
them all to the Lord." She afterwards called all the 
Mends in the room by name, and said a kind word 
to each, and took a very affecting leave of her sister. 
** Christ has gone to prepare a place for me," she said. 
*^ He will come ; he has promised ; he is coming, and I 
will go." Those who were with hoi* felt that they had 
never been in a dying chamber which seemed more bright 
with the Saviour's presence. She slept a little, and on 
waking, recognised her husband once more, and gave him 
a last embrace. This was about midnight. She then 
sunk into a state of unconsciousness, in which she con- 
tinued until her spirit broke its earthly fetters, and soared 
upward into the unclouded light and blessedness of 
heaven. 

26« 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

Tiitt to the HooM of Mourning —The Funeral — TetUmontalc of Friend*. 

It was December 27^ 1854» that Mrs. Everett died. 
Early that morning a small company^ consisting of two 
genUemen and two ladies, might have been seen gliding 
in a caique over the blue waters of the Bosphorus and 
Golden Horn towards that house of deatli. It was one 
of those beautiful mornings which so often light up tliat 
brilliant region, making palace, and tower, and dome, and 
gilded spire glitter with a magic glory, and seeming to 
the fancy of the beholder to realize all the images it had 
ever conceived of oriental beauty and magnificence. 
But on this morning that little missionaiT^ company were 
not thinking of the visible splendors around them, though 
these might have insensibly assisted them to realize more 
vividly the gloiies of another city, even a heavenly, to 
which their minds were directed, and the blessedness of 
that dear sister, who, they thought, and said to each other, 
might be, even then, just entering its pearly gates. Yet 
they hoped to find her still lingering on these moital shores, 
and to catch one more glance of the eye, to receive one 
more pressure of the hand, and perhaps hear one more 
parting word firom her ere she should go over the *' nar- 
row stream," and vanish from earthly vision and com- 
munion. As they landed and walked towards the dwell- 
ing where she had so often greeted them with her sweet 
smile of welcome, they became more silent and sad, their 
fears prevailing over their hopes. When they ^drew 



VIRtT TO Tins IIOUSB OF MOURNINO. 296 

nigh and beheld the house," their eyes tnraed immedi- 
ately towards her apartment, and the opened window, 
letting in the light and air, and sounds of busy life, con- 
firmed their fears, and they looked at each other with an 
expression which said, '' It is all over I " Just at that 
moment Dr. Goodell opened the gate and came towards 
them, meeting them with the solemn words, ^8he i$ 
gone I '^^ In silent sorrow they all walked on together, 
and entering the house, passed through the empty hall, 
and up the deserted stairs, to the study, where the 
stricken family were sitting with the few friends who had 
come in to weep with them. But what a hallowed cham- 
ber was that I Christ's presence was there, as really, al- 
most as sensibly as with the mourning family in Bethany. 
The husband, from whom had just been taken the dearest 
object of his affections, looked as if he himself had been 
permitted to accompany her to her celestial home, and to 
look in at its gates unclosed, and see the golden streets 
and the crystal river, and catch glimpses of its blessed in- 
habitants, and snatches of the '' wondrous song they sing,^ 
and as if his thoughts were still of that glory, rather than 
of his own heavy bereavement. And truly, he was not 
himself far from its blissful possession. There in. that 
little mourning company were four who were not long 
to bo denied the full sight and enjoyment of those heav- 
enly scenes. The feet of one had come,' even then, al- 
most to the entrance of the holy city, though they knew 
it not. Just one month from that day Mr. Benjamin went 
to his rest and reward. Mr. Everett, Mrs. Hinsdale, and 
Mrs. Hamlin all followed before three years had elapsed. 
Sweet was the conversation in that little group',— blessed 
it was to be there. Before dispersing, .the Rev. Mr. 
Thompson, of the Scotch Mission, offered a prayer, and 
then those who had not looked on the loved form of the 
departed, went into the apartinent where it lay, — not a 
darkened chamber, but that one where they had seen the 



296 TUB UISSIO^ARY 81STKBS. 

opened window; and the bright morning lighti falling on 
the lovely featnreei revealed iheir placid expreadon, indi- 
cating the peaoefiilneaa with which the spirit had de- 
parted. 

The following letter to one of the Secretaries of the 
Board at Boston beautifnlly expresses the impression left 
on those whose privilege it was to be with her in her last 
honrs. 

OovtTAvrniOFUi, Deo. 87, ISftS. 

^Anhaiir in Aewen^whcU a glaH<m$ thought/^ And a 
beautifbl morning it is to go from earth to heaven, — a 
nloming without donds, — fit emblem of the dear sun- 
shine tbiit illumined the '^ privileged chamber," from 
whidi| at 9 o'clock this morning, our greatly beloved sis- 
ter Everett took her peaceful departure. We sung sweet 
hymns around her dying pillow, and at her departure we 
fdl tipon our knees to give thanks unto him ^who hath 
abolidied death." 

But the blow is a very heavy one to the bereaved &m- 
ily, to the Female Boarding School, to the little Protes- 
tant church and community here, and to all our families. 
And what else, or what better can we do, than ^ take 
up the body and bury it, and go and tell Jesusf " 

Your brother in Christ, W. €k>0DXix. 

The fimeral was attended the next day by a lai^ 
number of people; Americans, English, Scotch, Armeni- 
ans, and Greeks, and among them all were none who 
had not come as sincere mourners. Pr. Hamlin mad^ 
remarks, and offered prayer, in English. Dr. Pwight dii 
the same in Armenian, and at the grave. Dr. Schauffler 
enlarged with much feeling and beauty on the illus- 
tration of the resurrection made use of in 1 Cor. xv. 
87i 88. The remains of Mrs. Everett were interred 
in the Protestant cemetery in Pera, where also lie 
those of many other precious members of the mission 



TUB FtTNlSnAL. 297 

circle, — ihongb only for a short rest, as the ground h 
appropriated hj the government for other uses, and its 
dnmbering tenants must soon be transferred to another 
resting-place. But they '* sleep in Jesus," and no 
changes shall disturb their repose, till ^ the Lord himself 
shall descend from heaven,'' and shall call them forth 
from their graves, with the saints and martyrs who9|9 dust 
has so long mingled with that hallowed soil 

*' Asleep in Jesus i Far from thee 
Thy kindred and iheir graves may be, 
Bat thine is still a blessed sleep, 
From which none ever irake to weep.*' 

From the many letters written to the bereaved husband 
Imd other friends, testifying to Mrs. Everett's loveliness 
and usefulness as a missionary, and the high estimation 
in which she was held by all her missionary brethren 
and sisters, we can give only a few extracts. These 
are from the communications of three who knew her long- 
est and most intimately. 

From a letter written oy Dr. Goodell to her par- 
ents. 

*^ That was a bright day to us and to this mission, when 
she came to Constantinople. She brought with her all 
the vigor and freshness of youth, all the charms of a kind 
and benevolent heart, and all the fascinations of a culti- 
vated intellect and cultivated manners, united with great 
buoyancy of spirit, and an unusual degree of liveliness 
and loveliness; and all these she consecrated entirely and 
cheerfully to the blessed cause of Christ. Her voice was 
sweet, whether in conversation or in song ; sweet was 
her spirit, and sweet were all her ways. Her words were 
alw&3rs words of sympathy and encouragement. The law 
of God was in her heart, the law of kindness on her 
tongue, imd the love of Christ the great ruling motive of 
all her actions." 



ASLbt flpealdag of ber TWOBBom Ysibas^ I>r. Goodtill ays : 
^ Bat lier voik s doBC^ jnd «eir dome. She came Loe 
to toIl f m flbfi l*w«»^ ittcideutalhr 
to Mn. GiOfWIfl dung her bflt iDnesBj jmd 
herwTtmf l&itflkedi;^ woik, and at tarns fir be- 



Ibe iMt jBSi^ to be 
to be borne €B bj Iwpibwi »ot to be 
eoBtrcBed by ogfimgy uMibiilirm Soak for ^vrbaai 
were fienijii^ anMBid bei!^ jBid flbe 1^ el Ibe 
cf lui infintekyveL We 



9 



bee; ebe nant bsve Aoi^ « to 
be ^ssrorii^ aot iLe tbieffl Ibat be cf God. b^ 
tbatbeofnem.' 

^ Ob, bow p«ck« k dij saee, beloved 
ta.fiicadl AQ o» leeolleelkae of tbee are 
AljteBdec ^WbatbavewedoM,* ssylbeirfMilePkoi. 



t 

9 



God, Ibat be flboald eo eooa reoMnpe tbee fioM «? * 
FroB an obitaaij sotiee, bj llr. Dwig^ 
«Baides tbe care cf tbe boarA^ dppiitf 1 of a 
ocbool of beCweea lUitj and fcrtj ac aboi ai i ^ abe jAwajp 
fimtifiprted, to a greater or lea erteet, ia tbe 
of Ibe Annemaa rfifw; and fia-fsar jean 
two bona a daj to a dav of Greek ^bA^ 

tiw*«^ ■<»«r»»'ai liB-WiAaa t^ «<may m <1 i 7 rf—r» 

wldeb abe bad tdoea pui to ee^aire far 



alwaja pcgfcetiy eridf t to aD, bowever, Ibcs 
ber dbj/bdL wai eot Ibe a iif a rri di i i ci|ii ia e of ber piiyD^ 
^en- adraoeeBieBt m bamaa erMmeft^ bowcrcr 
Ibese maj be. Oomparbd wilb tbe keowledge of God, 
and leoonafiatkai and obefienoe to bnn, tbej weee aa 
'cbaff to the wheat/ ia her eidmatioii. She aevcr l*^ 



RBVtBW OF HBS. X.'S LABOBS. 209 

her native land, she never would have left it, merely to 
propagate human science. Every thing she planned or 
attempted had a direct bearing upon the spiritual and 
etemsd good of those for whom she had devoted her life. 
She labored assiduously to bring and keep before the 
minds of the pupils the great things of the eternal world ; 
exhorting them individually and collectively to give their 
hearts to God ; and whb can wonder that the blessing of 
Grod continually followed her labors, and the labors of 
those who were associated with her?" 

Speaking of the missionary work she performed in vis- 
iting among the Armenians, he says : — 

^'It is believed that hardly a native Protestant family 
can be found in all Constantinople and its environs which 
has not had the privilege of welcoming her within its 
doors, most of them many times ^ and all the families 
upon whom she called, felt that she had left a blessing 
behind her. 

" She was eminently a friend of the poor and needy, 
and was always planning to relieve their wants, chiefly 
by finding work for them to do. Even during her last 
illness, after her physician (an Englishman) had been 
prescribing for her one day, she made arrangements to 
procure, through him, some of the materials which had 
been provided for under-garments for the English troops 
in Scutari and the Crimea, in order that they might be 
made up by some of the poor sisters of the church. They 
were afterwards brought to her room, and she directed hi 
regard to the division of them among those who were to 
do the work. 

^ Mrs. Everett had acquired great fluency in the use of 
the Armenian language, and her uncommonly prepossess- 
ing appearance, her sweetness of tone and manner, and 
her wonderful facility in adapting herself to people of all 
classes, gained an easy access for her to all circles and to 
all hearts, while her intelligent and wellnstored mind, her 



298 TnS MISSIONARY SISTERS. 

After spooking of her various labors, Dr. Qoodell says : 

^Bat her work is done, and well done. She came hero 
on purpose to vroA^ (as she herself ineidcutally men- 
tioned to Mrs. Goodell during her last illness,) and we 
bear her witness that she did work, and at times &r be- 
yond her strength. She literally wore herself out. She 
seemed, during the last year, to be under an extraordinary 
excitement, and to be borne on by impukes not to be 
controlled by ordinary considerations. Souls for whom 
Christ died were perishing around her, and she felt all the 
oonstrainings of his infinite love. We must occasionally 
have grieved her tender spirit by our earnest entreaties 
that she would spare herself; and while * zeal for Gk>d's 
house was consuming her,' she must have thought us to 
be ^savoring not the things that be of God, but those 
that be of men.' 

^ Oh, how precious is thy name, beloved sister, daugh- 
ter, fiiend I All our recollections of thee are inexpres- 
sibly tender. * What have we done,' say the whole Prot- 
estant community, ' what sin have we committed against 
God, that he should so soon remove thee from us? " 

From an obituary notice, by Mr. Dmght. 

^ Besides the care of the boarding department of a 
school of between thirty and forty scholars, she alwayp 
participated, to a greater or less extent, in the instruction 
of the Armenian classes ; and for four years she devoted 
two hours a day to a class of Greek girls, carrying them 
through several branches of study in their own language, 
which she had taken pains to acquire for thb special 
puipose. 

^It was always perfectly evident to all, however, that 
her object was not the mental discipline of her pupils, nor 
their advancement in huihan science, however important 
these may be. Compared with the knowledge of GU>d, 
and reconciliation and obedience to him, they were as 
* chaff to the wheat,' in her estimation. 3he never left 



RBYIBW OF HBS. x/S CHABAOTSB. 801 

pitality she extended to all. I shall ever be thankful that 
I was permitted to be connected with her during the last 
two years, •^- to take my first lessons of one so deeply 
imbued with the missionary spirit. 

^What a glory was shed around her death-bed I 
Ncrer, while memory lasts, shall we forget those scenes. 
During her second convalescence of nearly two weeks, it 
was my privilege to spend some hours each night and 
morning in her room. Those were precious hours, and 
the words she then dropped sank deep into my heart. 
If I failed to bring with me the verse for the day when I 
came early in the morning to relieve the watchers, she 
would say, *What word hast thou for thy servant?* 
Would that I, or any one, could cause the last scene to 
pass before your mind's eye more vividly than words can 
do I Those partings with all her heart's treasures, calmly 
committing her little ones to the Oreat Shepherd's care, 
— the sweet recognition of her dear friends during her 
lucid intervals, and her calm resting on her Father's 
almighty arm, — the longings to be near and like him, 
and the strong faith which triumphed even in death, — 
these made that sick-room a holy place, < quite on the 
verge of heaven.' " 

Sleep peacefully, sister 1 

Thy work is all donej 
Thy conflict is ended, 

Thy bright crown is wonj 
Afar from earth's tnrmoil 

Now sweetly repose, 
On that fair cloadless shore 

Where lifb*s bright riTor flows. 

Sleep peaceAilly, sister! 

Onr tears can not come, 
Onr grief can not reach thee 

In thy blissful home ; 
Kot thy husband's deep anguish, 

Thy babe's helpless cry, 
Nor a sister's fond yearnings 

Can cause thee one sigli. 

26 



802 TBB MIBSIOVABT 8I8TXB8« 

0lMp pMOtAilIyi ilsltrl 

Tboiigh nwod U17 oold btor 
AnnenU't m4 d*Q^ton 

All weeping appear { 
Tbcmgh long be their watting 

Ao4 bitter, that thee^ 
Their k)Te4 gnide an4 tmdbu^ 

They no more may aee; ^ 

Yet peaioeAillj, sieteri 

Eiuoy thy repoeei 
No more need*st thoa wake 

At the foice of thefar woee. 
Ah! weU haet thou flntahed 

Thy mlMioa of lorei 
And prioeleai gema gained 

For thy bri|^t orown aboTi^ 

Sleep peaoeftUlj, tiater, 

Wifei mother, and iHend{ 
Oh, would thy bright mantlt 

On oa ml|^t deaoeiidl 
Ob, would we mi^^t Ibllow 

The path thou hast trod, 
Till like thee we find real 

In the boaom qT Qpdt 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

Brief Sketeh of Mr. XTeretl— IKxtrtols from his Last Bonnoii. 

Mrs. EysBAtT was gone ; but it Was difficult to think 
of her as dead. The home which her presence had made 
BO bright, did not seem, now that she was no longei* vis- 
ible there to the eye of sense, to be shrouded in the dark 
drapery of death. A life like hers leaves something of 
its brightness behind it, like the reflected light lingering 
in the west after the sun itself is shining on anothet 
hemisphere. She was missed everywhere; in the mis«> 
sionary circle, the school, the meetings, in all the scenes 
where she had for nine years moved with so much grace 
and sweetness ; most of all in her own home was her 
absence an ever-felt reality; yet so pleasant were all 
the memories of her, of her daily life, her countenance 
ever lighted up with gentleness and benevolence, her 
voice always so sweet, her sick-room so peacefttl, her last 
hours so triumphantly blessed, we could only think of 
her as living still more lovely than here, in another and 
more blessed '* apartment of our Father's house.'' And 
so her bereaved husband appeared always to think of hen 
While his desolate heart yearned for her society, and 
while he felt his own and his children's loss to be irrepa* 
rablo, his countenance yet shone at times with the neat 
Communion he enjoyed with God, and the vivid appre«> 
hensions of his dear wife's blessedness, and that which 
wiui in reserve for himself when the remainder of his now 



804 THB MIBSIOlfABT BIBTSBS. 

lonely pilgrimage sboold be traveled. He had always 
been a devoted Christian and fidthful missionary; but be 
seemed to all who knew him to grow rapidly in grace 
under this affliction, and to give himself with increased 
ardor to the work which remained for him to do. Ant 
anxious and tender father always, he redoubled his care - 
and prayers for the little ones whom he now regarded as 
a legacy committed to his special trust by their dying 
mother. But his toils, and cares, and sorrows, were not 
long to continue. In a little more than a year he was 
called to leave them all, and join hb beloved Seraphina 
in the rest and the bliss of the; upper world. 

Mr. Everett died of a malignant typhus, March 8, 1856. 
His disease was very rapid in its progress, seizing him 
while actively engaged in his work, and terminating in 
less than a week. But he was all ready, and his dying 
chamber, as that of his wife had been, was a scene of 
triumph over the last foe. With the same unfidter- 
ing trust, he left his four children in their heavenly 
Father's care, expressing the strong belief that he should 
see them all in heaven. The last words he was heard to 
utter were, ^ Fullness of hope t Fullness of joy t Full- 
ness of glory t " 

The last sermon he preached in English was in the 
mission chapel in Pera, die Sabbath before he was taken 
ill, from the words, 2 Tim. i. 10 : Who hath abolished 
decUhy and hath brought life and immortality to light 
through the gospel. The following passage, describing 
the Christian's death, seems almost a prophetic picture of 
his own. After representing the death-bed of one un- 
reconciled to God, he continues :-^ 

^ Now turn to the chamber where the good man meets 
the same messenger. No fear is in his heart. No dread 
of the approaching messenger disturbs the calm peace of 
his souL His language is, * I desire to depart ; I wish to 
go. To die will be gain.' No love of earth, nor the 



MR. BVSRBTT^S LAST 8BRH0K. 805 

dearest objects of earth, nor the closest ties that unite 
hearts here below ; not wife, nor children, nor fiiends, can 
tnm his thoughts from the glory abont to be revealed. 
^ Jesus has gone to prepare a place for me. He has come, 
and I will go.' Where is the fear of death ? where the 
dread of the grave? In their place there is triumph, 
there is fullness of joy ; there is the end of fSuth, eternal 
life realized. 

**And is not temporal death abolished also? The 
Christian does not fear him, but says to him with an 
assured countenance, * Come when thou wilt, O Death, I 
desire no delay. It is a long time since I settled my af- 
fairs, and have been waiting for thee. The principal part 
of myself is not here, my heart is already ravished into 
heaven, where Christ awaits me with open arms. There- 
fore, notwithstanding the fearful darkness that surrounds 
thee, and the designs thou hast to destroy me, I will fol- 
low thee as courageously and with as much joy as Peter 
did the angel of light who threw open before him the 
gates of his prison.' To a soul thus stayed on Christ, 
there remaineth only life and inmiortality of bliss, brought 
to light through the gospeL" 

We make one more extract; the whole sermon is rich 
in spiritual thought and feeUng. 

** In view of this subject, well might the aposUe, my 
beloved brethren, exclaim as in the context, * For Ood 
hath not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, of love, 
and of a sound mind.' How full of meaning were these 
words in the mind of the apostle in view of this glorious 
truth revealed in the text I And now you, you who are 
called according to his purpose, may see and rest assured 
that there remaineth nq more death. He 'hath abolished 
death, and brought life and immortality to light.' Breth- 
ren and sisters, keep in view the glorious triumph he hath 
won. Was it for himself or for you that he trod the 
winepress alone, in garments dyed in blood ? Do you 

26* 



806 TUK ICISBIONART SISTERS. 

find it difflottlt to realisei amid the oares aad sorrows and 
toils of this life, that there is no more death ? Oh, it is 
because you are not yet soffioiently acquainted with this 
great conqaeror of death I You are not familiar enough 
with his glorious character, with his infinite loye, with 
the power of his resurrection, with the sin-killing power 
of Us blood« * It is a fidthful saying, for if we be dead 
with him, we shall also live with him.' Tes, now we shall 
lire with him a life that is a sure foretaste and b^;inning 
of eternal life." 

Habk I afftln the toloe of wailing oomM firom Aiia't distent itrandl 
KysBBTT, the beloved end fkithftU, reete with the hriffit spirit ttend. 

Flirting in the ftnremoit oombet, eH hii fotpel emor on, 

JojrAUlx he heerd the •wmmone,— " Faithftil one, reoeiye thy crownl *' 

Weeping brethren gethfred nmnd him, — thoee he *d loved end toiled with 

lonSf— 
Tender bebee, twioe orphaned, elatped him, yet the Ohrlitian't heart wae 

ftrong. 

Friendi ao deer, yea, ohildren dearer, oonld not here hia heart detain; 
Faith aasored him he should meet them where is lUt no parting pain. 

Death's daric river could not daunt him, Ohrist*s sweet presence at hia 

side 
Brii^tened, with celestial £^017, all the darkly flowbig tide. 

Heaven, with aU its radiant prospects, rose before his raptured eyes. 
Sweet, fiuniliar voices called him to his mansion in the 



Ask we, weeping, why so eariy he should lay his mnor down? 

Why, while veterans still are toiling, hf should wear the victor's oitfwn? 

Jesus answers,-^** What thou know*st not now, hereafter thou shalt loiow' 
Patient wait; my wisdom, goodncM, soon eternity will show.** 

Fast they *re iUling, the true-hearted, valiant champions of the OroiS{ 
Who win, with a like devotion, hasten to repafar their kss? 

Mo( Armenia *s seeking only, but the Orient nations all, 
Waking ftom their ages* slumber, for the gospel earnest call. 



IfAHOlfHBDAN COKVBSIONS. 807 

E'en the haughty Moslem, easting pride and bigotry aside, 
Seeks, of the once hated Christian, knowledge of the Cmeified. 

Oh for Godlike pity, moving all who bear the Savioar*8 name ! 
Then should none — barbarian, Moslem — for the gospel plead In Tain. 



CHAPTER XXVIII, 

Mrf.BtaUla— Littanto Frkadf— Hm* Chlldmi, tad Beam fai DoRMilto 
LUb— Her LmI Lstten, tad Sadden Death. 

Ws will now return to Mrs. Hamlin, the sole sarvivor 
of the little company who had sailed together in the Stam- 
bool, in February, 1845. In order to complete the his- 
tory of her too brief earthly course, we must go back a 
little, to where we left her about the time of the removnl 
of the girls' seminary to Hass Keuy. Just before that 
event, and while Itbs. Everett was rejoicing over her 
fifth babe, the deep fountain of a mother's love was first 
unsealed in Mrs. Hamlin's heart, by the birth of a little 
daughter. Some of her feelings are thus expressed, in a 
letter to Mrs. Crane of Oroomiah, March 81, 1853. 

^ I have been wishing, for many days, to find time to 
congratulate you upon the happy event which / can now 
well believe has fiUed your heart with a joy such as you 
have never before experienced. A mother's joy over her 
first-bom, — what is there like it ? Is there any other 
joy like unto it ? any other emotion to be compared with 
those which filled your heart when the form of the pre- 
cious little immortal was first placed in your arms f when 
its voice first met your ear, and its eyes first opened upon 
its mother's fiice ? • • • Have you heard that a moth- 
er's joy is mine ? Our little Harriet Clara was bom four 
weeks ago this morning." 

To Mrs. Thayer, July 6, 1854. 

^ Oh, could I sit down by your side a moment, how 



MBS. ramlin's lbttbbs. 809 

quickly wonld the sti^ ansociable pen be thrown aside, 
and the busy tongue find ' sweet employ.' No hesitation 
in the choice of subjects would cause a moment's loss of 
time ; but past, present, and to come would be reviewed, 
with all the way by which the Lord has led, and is lead- 
ing us, and the ten thousand mercies with which our cup 
has been filled, mingled, it is true, with some bitter drops, 
but still overflowing with goodness and mercy. I should 
show you my precious little Clara, and you would smile 
at the mother's fondness, and remember your own lost 
darling, — lost, yet saved. Our little pet is now running 
alone, and of course, nmning into all sorts of mischief, 
requiring some one to be continually running after her. I 
should love to show you too, my four elder daughters, 
and I should tell you, or try to tell you, how much I love 
them, and how I wish I could be to them aU a mother 
should be. 

** July 10. On Saturday last, we had, in our parlor, a 
farewell meeting with our dear brother and sister. Van 
Lenncp. Forty persons were present, — all missionaries 
and their children. It was a deeply affecting season, 
especially so when Mr. H. reminded them that the last 
time we had thus assembled for a parting meeting, was in 
that same room, when we came together, to commend to 
the grace and mercy of a gracious Father, the beloved 
mistress of this house and her weeping family, as they 
were about to leave for Rhodes."* 

Mrs. Hamlin felt deeply the many vacancies made by 
death in the Armenian and neighboring missions, during 
the last four or five years of her life, and sympathized 
tenderly with all the bereaved ones. There are many 
sweet letters, written to missionary sisters in afiiiction, 
expressive of the tcndorest sjmipathy, and suggestive of 
sweet topics of consolation. She was esoecially affected 

• See ** Light on tho Dark Blver* or Memorials of Mn. H. A. L. Hamllii,*f 
page246. 



810 TUB MIBSIOKABY SISTBRS. 

bjr the iroquent yiiiUtioDi of death in her own moto 
immeduito circle, and none touched her ao nearly aa the 
removal of Mr, and Mrs. Everett, her earliest, and almoat 
her dearest companions in the missionary woric Some 
of her letters referring to the loss of these dear fiienday 
are so interesting that we insert them, though at the risk 
of involving a repetition of some of the ciroomstantial 
details. To Mrs. Crane, of Oroomiah, in whose repeated 
and severe afflictions she had manifested a sister's sympa- 
thy, she wrote, a few days after Mrs. Everett's death : — 

''Mt dbab Sistxb: We have heard of the new treas- 
ure which has been bestowed upon you, to gladden your 
bereaved heart, and lighten your desolate fireside, and I 
have wished, ever smce the intelligence reached us, to tell 
you how much I rejoice^in your joy, as I have wept in 
your sorrow* • • • You, dear aster, have, during, the 
year just closing, been privileged to become, if I may so 
speak, an object of the special attention of our heavenly 
Father. He has not left you to yourself but once and 
again has visited you, not in ufrcUh, but with the tokens <^ 
bis &therly love, with chastenings which, though for the 
present not joyous, but grievous, are still the undoubted 
evidences of his love, — and yet again has he visited 
you with his healing balm. • « . 

^ My letter will, perhaps, be the first to communicate 
to you the painful bereavement which we as a mission, 
and I as a iHend and missionary sister, have been called 
to sustain. Tou will weep with us when you learn that 
our dear sister Everett has ceased firom her labors on 
earth, has closed her sweet eyes upon the world, and left 
us, to join the redeemed femily above, to be with the 
^ dear Jesus ' she so much loved. Ah, yes ! she and your 
beloved husband have already met before the throne. I 
need not say her end was peace. It was my privilege to 
spend the last night of her life in her sick-room, and to be 
recognized by her with a sweet smile and a kiss, after it 



HB8. tiAllLIK^S LBTTXBS. 811 

was thought she bad ceased to recognize any one. She 
had, however, dfter this, several intervals of conscious- 
ness, when she spoke to her husband and sister, and Miss 
West, desired her children to be brought again, that she 
might kiss them, and often repeated the dear name of 
Jesus. Once she said : * He has gone to prepare a place 
for me, and why should I stay ? I wiB go,' repeating 
these words many times. . . . 

** We earnestly pray that this severe affiiction may be 
blessed and sanctified to us, as a mission, and especially 
to the school, where she has been such a blessing. And 
oh, how loudly does it speak tome/ Ten years wo have 
enjoyed together the sweetest intercourse, but her work 
is finished here, — * She has done what she could.' 

^ I have only a small space left to say how much and 
often we speak and think of you, and how much I wish to 
hear from you of your present situation, and plans for the 
future. I intend to write to Mrs. Rhea, to accompany 
thii^ May her life be an ever-increasingly happy and 
usefhl one. Permit me to wish you a happy new year. 
It will not, I trust, seem out of time, or unsuitable. May 
Ood so richly make up to you, by the communications of 
his grace, for what he has removed from you, thlit the 
ensuing year may indeed prove, in the smiles of his love, 
a very happy one I ^ 

To Mrs. Thayer, April 19, 1855. 

^ You have learned, perhaps, by the papers, of the sore 
bereavements which our mission has sufTered during the 
last few months. The year closed over us darkly, as we 
bore to their last resting-place the ashes of our beloved 
sister Everett. To me it was and is a great loss, — like 
that of a sister. In just a» month from the day of Mrs. 
Everett's death, Mr. Benjamin, a most beloved and nsefid 
missionary, was taken from us, and a few weeks after, 
their daughter Meta, by the same fever of which her 
fhthor died. Who will bo taken next? seems now to bo 



812 THB lOBBIONABT 8ISTXB8. 

the thought in the minds of alL Oh that these repeated 
admonitions may not be lost upon us, but lead us to be 
more watchful and more diligent in the service of our 
Master I 

^ Yon have heard, no doubt, also, of the earthquakes 
which have alarmed us, and laid in ruins the city of 
Broosa. The little Protestant community there are for 
the present dispersed, their new church, which was nearly 
completed, leveled to the ground, I believe, by the last 
earthquake. We have felt repeated shocks here, but 
none of them strong enough to do any injury, although 
they have given much alarm. 

^ Of the war you probably know as much, and learn it 
almost as soon, as we do. We have now in our neighbor- 
hood a large camp of French soldiers, preparing to go to 
the Crimea. Their neighborhood is anything but dosir* 
able, as they are continually disturbing the quiet of our 
little village, passing and repassing in search of wine 
shops. They have raised the price of everything so much 
too, that we almost dread a &mine, besides cutting off 
the supplies of water from Pera, for their own accommo- 
dation. We have calls continually from them for Bibles 
and tracts, although there are but few Protestants, and 
we hope that in this way some seed may be sown, which 
may eventually spring up. Our hitherto very hoaltliy 
village has been twice visited with the cholera. My hus- 
band is the village physician I and is called upon contin- 
ually for medicines and attention. He has, I believe, been 
the means of saving many lives, and their gratitude, in 
these days of trial, seems unbounded, though at other 
times too many are ready to revile him as a heretic. He 
keeps cholera medicine constantly on our hall table, and 
we are almost constantly making arrow-root, <fec., for the 
convalescent.'' 

Bbbbk, Juno 8, 1855. 

^ My pbab PnuDBNCB : J hod proceeded Viue far in 



AKmrAL HXBTIHO. 818 

my letter, when a pair of little pattering feet were heard 
in the hall, and a soft voice at the door cries, * Ope' e 
door, ope' e door, mamma ! ' and then, * Take me in mam- 
ma's lap,' and so ended mj writing for a while. Bnt now 
the little one is tired of mamma's lap, and has consented 
that I should take my pen again to write to ^Auntie.' 
Dear little pet I I wish you could see her. And I wish 
you could see (xU my pets, i&d that I could welcome you 
for a few weeks or months to our home and hearts. In the 
latter your place is secure and undisputed ; but it would 
be pleasant to show you your home in this far-off land. 

^I have been searching in vain for your last letter, 
received not long since. The date I have forgotten. I 
felt like answering it immediately upon its arrival, but 
having again a house full of company, I was obliged to 
postpone the pleasant employment till after the annual 
meeting, which has just closed its sessions, and most of 
our friends are dispersed. There was a larger number of 
delegates than usual, present,-— Aintab, Arabkir, Cesarea, 
Tokat, Marsooan, Trebizond, Salonica, and Smyrna, each 
sending one or more, with their families. The meeting 
continued more than two weeks, and some of the discus- 
sions and reports were thrillingly interesting. Mrs. Gk>od- 
ell remarked, in relation to the meeting, when the reports 
from some of the interior stations were read, and to the 
day when we all united in celebnettihg a Saviour's dying 
love, that none of the meetings of the Board in America 
had, to her, surpassed in interest the meetings of this year 
in Constantinople. These meetings were indeed saddened 
by thoughts of the painftd breaches made in our aicle 
since the last annual meeting. Pleasant voices, which 
then mingled with ours, are now silent iii the grave ; and 
active hands, ever ready to labor and inid in the blessed 
work of building up the Redeemer's kingdom, are now 
motionless and hidden from our sight. But these voices, 
though to mortal ears silent, are yet, in sweeter tones Ihan 

27 



9(4 THu imaiOHABT tmus. 

^ver berQ oa 9ar(!^ tiuiipg ft SAvioiu's prabe, and those 
bimda arc) f ^1) I^qsjt io the mrviQe of the Miister they bo 
loY^ lirhep (nL tliU WPrld, , t t Mr. Everett expeota to 
mQVQ to B^b^ ne^t W^l^ in order to aaaiat Mr. Hamlin in 
thi) Seininaiy, mid Mian Tf^t will be left alone with the 
C^r^ of th^ fen^Ue achooL I ttmk it ia quite too much for 
hPT tQ ^^4^rtake| but it ia her pwu wiab, and there aeenia 
tQ be 1^0 ^^lit tQ b^ iml>itiQa (in i^ jl^oodf aenae) and seal, 
H ^fifa Woat b09 juat aent ma a letter from hor aiater 
9^rabi ^noungipg h^r intention to come to b^r aid. She 
ia d^hted imd tb^nUWs aa well ahe may be. It is not 
mitpy i^iaaipnariea wbQ ^zyoy the privilege of a mother'a 
or 9^ mt^^tl <^4 W4 9<Hdety,* 

• 

!$ Mt PI^M 3iaT9B : AgW the hand of the Lord ia 
l^d ppoii n8| again our bearta are bleeding, while with 
t^arA4 <9yoa we look up, and ask why ia hia ohaatising 
b^d again thua laid iipon ua. But oh, what unutterable 
joy 14 to-day tbQ portion of our dear departed pother 
.f^^ a^ bo ^gwi meQta hia Seraphina, hia little onea, 
ypur dear hoabaudi and above aU> hia precious Saviour, 
wboi^ be §0 loved) and who enabled him to meet the last 
^q^finy fSK) oaUnly and peacefully I Yes, dear sister, our 
doar brother Everett left ua last evening at six o^dock for 
bl| hom^ abov^, after a abort illness of only seven days. 
Friday ey^ning of laat week he spent with us, qppar^rolf/ 
f^ W^U 9a i^fualf Saturday morning he did not feel quite 
wfiU, b^t weut Qver to Yi^ir Khan to the station meetmg. 
In tb^ ^v^ning aa tbey were returning in the steamer, he 
popiplained of aevere pain and suffering, and my husband 
fk^if tl^t he waa very ill. He told me afterward that it 
ftppe^^ed to hini then that the arrow of death had reached 
him. It 19 ft pleasant thought that the messenger found 
him pot alumbering, but laboring. He waa engaged dur- 
U^g tbfl wbQlQ ot tbQ twe on the steamer in religious con- 



Versation with an Anncnian whom he found on boafdi 
The next morning he w&s unable to leave hid bed, taiA 
never after arose. The physician gaV6 scarcely any hop^ 
at any time. Mr. Hamlin often said, * He id going Jttst 9A 
dear brothef Benjattiin weiit^ though more rapidly.' Hid 
peace And confidence were from the beginning uhWaVdi*-^ ' 
ing. He calmly committed his little children to thd .; 
Father of the fatherless. < They are Chtist'fi, — they* J 
have been given to him, and I have the firhiedt confi- 
dence that I shall meet them all in heaven.* Othet^ Will 
no doubt write you particulArd which t hftvd not iitA6 
to-day to do. We al-e indeed btottght low. Ah I Why U 
such a dry branch ad I spared, while duch ad bei ad hid 
beloved wife, ftnd yonr dciU* husband, kf^ takdnf Itt 
mercy to m^ I trust, that I miiy loiifn to hb inofe fkith^ 
ful, and awake to more diligence, ftnd btlrely bi t^ndei* 
niercy to them, that th^y may totef npon )resl. l^^y 
were my fellow-pddsengerd elev6n yi^ftrs agO| and hbir 
only t am left. It is a day of istohn iind wind and fein6#| 
the gloomiest tod severest we hav6 had thid yiM^ dd Ih&t 
to have the fhnerfd to-day deemed dlmddt btit df ih^ 
qu^eftion^" 

<*How like iBk dream does it idl s^m,** she Writed id 
another missionary sister, two months later, ^ the passing 
away in so short a time Of all that didAr family, '-^father 
and mothot in heaven^ and the orphan children now 
nearly arrived at theii- patents' home* All gone from 
among us, except th^ir ^t^r gr^tt ahd predoud mehioridd, 
and the blessed influence bf theit" ^mtnple knd Workd." 

Mrs. Hamlin was this sprii^g tslled to It sevel^ trial iii 
sending from her theilr tWO eldest daughters to finish their 
dchool education in thid country ; and in parting from ber 
husband, who accoinpanied his daughters for a shoH tisit 
to his native land. For these danghtdfs, ad {6t all the 
five towards whom she had assumed thd ^latioii ot 
mother, her afibctionate heart cherished Idniodt a mother's 



8(6 THB XI8B10NABY 8I8TKB8. 

tendorncfls, and it wbh with much solidtudei and many 
earnest prayers, that she had for a year been anticipating 
the time when they must go far distant from parental 
0are and gaidance. Her letters make frequent reference 
to this, and ocpanonally also to the yearnings which the 
prosp^ of her husband and children yisiling Ameiica, 
^yived in her own heart to see once more her native 
shores, and the dear friends of her childhood and youth, 
after an absence of eleven years. But here, as always, 
9he yielded cheerfully to the claims of duty, and pro- 
pared to remain behind, and take care of the four younger 
children. A little boy whom they called Alfred, had 
been added to the &nuly group, a ^ great pet,** as she 
writes, <* being the first son after six daughters.'' He was 
now a ^ &t, rosy, laughing babe ^ of eight months. As 
Mr. and Mrs. Clark were to take charge of the seminary 
during Mrs. Hamlin'9 absence, it was thought best that 
Mrp. |I. should remove to Hass Keuy, partly that slio 
might in }ier loneliness be near Dr. Goodell's family, 
where she always felt as a daughter, and partly that the 
older children might enjoy the benefits of the little school 
for missionary children there, taught by one of Dr. 
Qoodell's daughters. From this place she writes April 
27th. 

^I am writing this as you see, in my new hame^ — the 
first letter I have written from our new abode. We came 
herq last week, and are as yet all in confusion, but I hope, 
in a few days to get quietly settled, and enjoy two or 
three days of peaceftd rest, before my husband and daugh- 
ters leaye for their long journey. 

^ May 12. Days of busy excitement have passed, while 
I h&ye beep unable to find a moment's time for writing, 
and hardly for thought. But now our dear ones are gone^ 
and I am alone in a sense which I never realized before. 
Three days ago my husband and daughters staited upon 
their long journey, and should Providence favor them, 



HB. tIAMLIN'd VISIT tO AttStUOA. 817 

hnd oarry them in Safety, ihejr Will Dd m Atnericit by the 
last of June. They go by steam, visiting Paris, London^ 
Edinburgh, <kc., then by steam over the ocean. It was 
the wish of the Committee of the Board that my hus- 
band should visit these cities, and that his jouHiey and 
absence should be nti short M possible, — therefore he 
takes this Course. It will be an interesting journey to 
the girls, and ohe I should mu6h like to enjoy with them. 
Still mor^ Should I rejoice i6 be with theM oil their 
arrival in their father-land, to se^ thehi hftppily d6tii6Sti-< 
cated liomewherC) and enjoy with them the irefreshing 
society and communioh of i^kt Meriii. But h im^ 
t'rovidence seemd to havd directed otherwise, and I ttf 
cheerfully' to submit Btit you cliil hardly imaging hoW 
desolate our house aj)pears, hoW Ichg thd days li^ thottgb 
filled with business, sitid how 6very 6orner knd ev^r^ 
apartment se^ms to echd irith the Voi6es and footstepli df 
the departed dnes. . . . 

^ I have not written hiilf I Wi^h hhA ought to toy, biid 
indeed t never do. Btit I Ititt iiliVays hoping th^t A dAf 
of leisure will come Wheil t mdy (k>llect hiy thbugbts, imd 
for once write to I wotild like to do. t fttod yotl il tivinff 
tpistky and you intist qu^stioh hiiti, ilnd drkw from hisl 
all I would 6ay were t with him. Inttbdtic^ him to all 
Out* dear friehds, but do iiot detaiil him loiig." 

*^ You 6ee I imi kgsin in Bebek, biit hot in otir old, 
much-loved home. Mr. Clarkj -Who took Mr. Hainliii's 
place during his absence, 6till i^maiilSj knd i^^ have takeii 
a smaller house within Speaking distance. It x^fts thought 
best that my htisband should take the theological depart- 
ment in the seminary, leaving the Charge of the insti- 
tution to Mr. C, and thus giviiig Mr. H. timC and 
opportunity for more preaching and laboring iimbiig the 
people. Ho has just opened a new place of worship iii a 

27* 



818 TIIS IflBBIONAKY 8I8T8U8. 

hitherto ancaltivated part of the city, and has much to 
oiiooarago him, and lead him to hoi>e that a blessing will 
follow the undertaking. It takes him from home to a 
(listant part of the city every Sabbath, which in severe 
winter or stormy weadier is somewhat trying ; but we 
trust we shall see cause to rejoice in the sacrifice of a lit- 
tle comfort for the cause of Christ. I often fear that he 
is assuming too many cares and duties, but while so much 
is to b^ 4one, and the laborers are so few, one can hardly 
9top to measure strength. And well it is that our strength 
19 not in ourselves. I am not speaking of my%eif^ for I 
oftien feel unworthy the name of missionary laborer. . • . 
The missioi^ary work never seemed dearer to me, and 
perhaps was iiever n^ore encouraging than now. Oh 
i^%\ the Spirit might be poured out from on high upon the 
youth of our beloyed land, that they might in crowds be 
ready to consecrate themselves to the missionary work. 
There is much ground for encouragement, hope and faith 
in regard to the Mohammedans. Many, very many, are 
purchasing and reading the gospel, and already there are 
cases of hopeful conversion. How the matter will go on 
is known only to God. Whether others who come to a 
knowledge of the truth, will be suffered quietly to re- 
nounce Mohammed and confess Christ, remains to be 
seen. Qod reigns, and will bring his own cause off tri- 
umphant in the end, we know.'' 

^ March 13, 1867. Mary, are you going to give any or 
oJH of your children to the missionary work ? Come and 
$ee us, — come and see this land and the people about us, 
and see if your heart is not touched, and you are not 
^ready to consecrate off your loved ones to the blessed 
work of teaching these lost multitudes the way of life. 
Give them all my love, and tell little Sarah that *2Za^« 
gooHn^ which means they wish bread, — the h*e<id of life. 
|f she will come here I will teach her more Armenian, 
paid (she shall b^ a little missionary." 



rf ?"'T 



INCIDENTS OF Tlitt ANNUAL MBBTTNO. 819 

To Mrs. Crane, May 10. 

^You have doubtless heard of the wonderAil move- 
ment, silent, as yet, but deep, among the Mohammedans. 
You probably know that several have been baptized, atid 
many others are convinced of the truth. We are almost 
daily hearing of new and interesting cases. Since the 
commencement of Ramazan, we have heard of the im- 
prisonment of four for adherence to the gospel, and for 
breaking their fast. How they will endure persecution 
for the name of Christ remains to be seen, but one of 
them seems, I hear, to be a most interesting and decided 
case. 

*' Our little homo flock are all well. AUie is running 
about, and calling <papa I dear papa I' The Misses West 
are visiting me, as it is now their vacation. Their school, 
my * first love,* is very prosperous, — frequently visited 
with the gentle rain from on high. We ore greatly 
rejoiced to hear that you are enjoying ehoMoere upon yotir 
field, I have not seen any letters from Oroomiah, but 
have been told that the seminaries were enjoying a 
precious revival. Oh that we too might be visited I " 

The following letter describes some of the scenes of 
the last Annual Meeting in which she was to have a 
part: — 

"Bbbbk, May 80, 1857. 

" My very dbar Pbudsncb : Your two precious 
letters of Feb. 18, and April 18, lie before me, and I wish 
I could hope to send you any thing half so good in return* 
I have been in such a whirl of business for the last two 
or three weeks, that I fear I shall hardly be able to write 
a connected and readable letter. It is the season of the 
annual meeting of our mission, and every house is full of 
guests. Yesterday the meetings were held in Bcbek, and 
we determined, instead of entertaining our fnends at our 
different houses, to lunch all together in the large hall of 
the Seminary building. Farty-eix grown persons sat at 



'820 THB iasaiovAXT narmmM. 

a long taMe in the hall, while a merrj and happy little 
company of twenty-one children eat at a table in an 
adjoining room, feasting upon strawberries, Ac It was a 
delightful interview ; not alone the g^atheiing around the 
social board, but more especially the meetings for reli- 
gious intercourse and business which preceded and fol- 
lowed it. As our missionary field widens and whUens^ 
these annual meetings become seasons of deeper and 
deeper interest, from the great and important questions 
and measures which are coming up before the Mission* 
And never since its commencement has there been a time 
of more interest than the present. I wish you could be 
here once at such a time ; you would get a better idea of 
our work, its difficulties, its successes, its pleasures and 
trials, and above all of the magnitude of the work, than 
you could get in any other way. And you would have 
such an opportunity, too, of becoming acquainted with 
some of the choice spirits with whom it is our privil^^ 
to be associated, though not often meeting except on 
such occasions. I had the pleasure of entertaining, last 
week, Mrs. Yan Lennep and her fkmily, from Tokat« 
She is a precious sister. She and Mrs. Everett have al- 
ways been pecuUarly dear to me. While she was with 
me, her little boy, a very lovely child, was very ill, and aa 
soon as he recovered, my little Alfred was seized in the 
same way. For two or three days I was very anxious 
about him ; but God heard my pl*ayetB, and he recovered 
almost as rapidly as be became ill, and I now hear his 
happy little voice in another room, merry as ever. 

^ June 8. My lettet has been unavoidably neglected 
for many days. I have just returned from attending the 
closing meeting of the annual session at Pera. It was a 
most interesting and affecting season ; and I could not 
but wish that you, and other dear friends to whom I am 
indebted for letters, could have been present at this meet- 
ing, and listened to the recdiutulation briefly made, of all 



MRS. HAMLIN^S LAST LBTTBB8. . 821 

that has beeii done during the meeting, and of all that is 
to be done and hoped for during the year to come. 
Never before have I been so impressed with the magni- 
tude of the work, and the Uessedtiess of it Oh for 
more entire consecration to it, and greater usefulness 
in it I** 

Mrs. Hamlin was now rapidly finishing up her life's 
work. All unconsciously to herself and to those about 
her, she was fast approaching the end of her pilgrimage $ 
and as she drew near to that home of the blessed, into 
which ^ nothing entcrcth that defileth," she became more 
and more assimilated in spirit to its holy inhabitants. 
Iler husband and others remarked that during these last 
months she was *'more than ever spiritually minded." 
In the prospect of removing into a new house which Was 
preparing for them, she more than once said to her hus- 
band that they might never all occupy it together, and 
that they should have no desire for earthly rest, and 
pleasant circumstances hero, lest these should turn their 
hearts from heaven. A few more of the last written ex- 
pressions of her love and tender interest for her dear 
absent friends we may record. 

To Mrs. Schauffler, then in the United States, she 
wrote, Aug. 6, 1857 : — 

<' In the multitude of letters which will, I am sure, await 
your arrival in Boston, I can hardly hope to be able to give 
you any news^ and yet I can not consent to be found 
wanting among the multitude, though I should only 
repeat what others tell you. We received your notes 
from Marseilles two or three days since, and were glad to 
hear that you had been carried so far in safety. Our 
thoughts and prayers attend you from day to day, and 
we trust the Good Shepherd also attends you, and will 
make this journey and visit a great blessing to yourselves 
and to the cause of Clirist. . . . 



822 V'ns lassxovAET bistxbs. 

^ Yon will bear flrom oihen that the Freemans* are at 
last safe in Debeki and how they are diaposed o£ They 
willy I feaT) miai you yery mnch, for no one can be to 
them what you have been. Bat I tmat they will be hap- 
py and uaeftiL We will try to do for them what we can. 
Another time I will try to write something more worthy 
of so long a jonmey ; this will merely serve to tell yon 
how much we think of you, how much we miss yoa and 
long for yoor return, and that we will endeavor to do 
what we can for the dear boys you have left behmd. 
Yon will of course hear from others of the political agita- 
tion just now. The French and Prussian arms taken 
down, and the French ambassador on board a steamer 
prepared to leave in three days. Can it be that the Lord 
will again permit war to desolate all Europe. He reigns. 

^ Kindest love to Mr. Schauffler. How much we miss 
him at all times, but especially on the Sabbath, we can 
not express. My dear husband is, if possible, busier than 
ever* Last Sabbath he organized a small church of seven 
members at Balat. He desires love to you and yours. I 
feel more like asking you to pardon this very hasty and 
imperfect note, than to answer it ; but I do hope to hear 
from you. Love to aU American friends, (mentioning 
many by name.) Good night I 

^ Your aiToctionate sister, H. M. L. Hahlik.'' 

The following is her last letter to her mother. The 
brother of whom she speaks with such tender anxiety, 
and for whose spiritual welfhre she had for many years 
been deeply solicitous, did not long survive his sister; but 
he left, for the consolation of his widowed mother, the 
hope that he had gone to meet her in heaven. * 

Bbbek, Oct 5, 1857. 

Mt i>eab Mothbb : Miss West leaves here in a day 
or two for my own beloved home of former days. Tou 

• A family of oonyerted Tarki. 



LAST LBTTIBd TO lIBB IIOTHBB. 828 

will be surprised to see her^ but a nervous illness has so 
weakened her as to render her nnable to endure tehool 
labors and confinement, and her physician advises A visit 
home, I have stayed at home from meeting this evening, 
in order to hastily pen a few lines to you. From a letter 
which Maria received lately from Palmyra, I learn that 
you and Henry are in P., and he *^ quite low.** I have 
most anxiously awaited every mail, hoping and yet dread* 
ing, to receive a letter from you ; but none has reached 
me, and I am still indebted to second-hand letters for all 
the information I get of dear Henry's illness. I have not 
written to him, much as I have wished to do so, because 
I know so little of his feelings. I find it difficult to real- 
ize that he is a man, and I think of him as the beloved 
** little brother" I left twelve years ago. But I long 
to hear from you something of his state, — - his bodily and 
spiritual state. We remember him daily in our prayers. 
Even litUe Clara, every night, of her own accord, prays 
that God would ** please make dear uncle Henry well." 

Our hearts are full of anxiety also in regard to our dear 
Susan, who is in very feeble health. We have written for 
her to return home if possible this fall. . . . And now what 
can I say through you to my beloved brother ? Perhaps, 
before this reaches you, he may be beyond the reach of 
any message. But if not, oh tell him how his sister's 
heart yearns after him ; how she longs to hear that he is 
not without a cheerful hope in Christ, and a cheerfhl sub- 
mission to the will of God, whether it should be life or 
death, and that she longs to be able to cherish the joyful 
hope of meeting him in a better world, -^ and for this 
prays night and day. . 

My dear husband sends much love and earnest sympa- 
thy in your present care and Brndetyj perhaps your deep 
afiUction. God bless, and comfort, and sustain I 
Ever your afibctionato daughter, 

Mabtha. 



SU THS 1U88I0HABT BI8TXB8. 

To Ifias West she wrote the same eyening: — 

^Mt dsab Mabia ; I have heard that yoa are prob- 
ably to leave for Smyrna on Wednesday of thia week I 
la it poflsible that you are to go without coming again to 
Bebek ? To go to our home, and I not aee you again ? 
I would gladly go to Haas Keuy, but I fear it will bo 
impossible. Well, Gk>d go with you, carry you in safety, 
and grant you a happy meeting with all your dear friends I 
And then, after you have been refreshed and strength- 
ened, may you be brought back again to the work which 
will so much need your presence and oversight. We 
trust Gk>d will look after the school in your absence, and 
give to your sister all the strength and aid she will 
require ; but we shall all long for your return. And 
what shall I say, through you, to all the dear friends in 
Palmyra ? When I begin to think of them one by one, 
I know not where to stop. Give my love to them off. 
Tell your mother that ly that all thank her for giving 
up two daughters to this good work.'' 

After special messages to several very intimate friends, 
she says: — 

<< Tell them that, perhaps^ at some future day, if God 
spares us all, we may meet in that goodly land ; but if 
not, there is a better land ; and there, I trust, a joyftd 
meeting awaits us. 

^ Greetings to the dear church, of whom perhaps few 
now know me personally, and to any and all of my Sab- 
bath-school class you may meet, all now grown to be 
^omen and mothers. • • . ^ 

^Finally and again, may God be with you, and give 
you the Ugbt of his presence, and grant you restored 
health and a happy visit. Ever truly and affectionately 
your sister, Mabtha." 

Mrs. Crane, one of the missionary sisters in Oroomiah, 
with whom she had maintained a regular and frequent 
correspondence, was also on her way to America, and 



LBTTBB TO MRS. CRAKB. 825 

was to sail from Smyrna in the samd vessel with Miss 
West. To her Mrs. Hamlin wrote the following letter, 
to reach her in Smyrna : — 

" Bbbbk, Oct IS, 1857. 

^'Mt DBAS Sistbb: Our short interview, and sndden 
and harried parting of yesterday, were so nnlike what 
I had wished and hoped for, that I have felt qnite nnreo- 
oncUed to letting you go thus. I hoped, when I heard 
you were on your way hither, that I should enjoy a good 
visit with you, though it must bo a parting one ; that we 
should together have reviewed the past, and recounted 
anew the dealings of the Lord with us, and together have 
enjoyed once more the sweet privilege of bowing before 
our Father's throne. But as all these have been denied, I 
can not deny myself the pleasure of snatching a few mo- 
ments this evening, hoping that a line may still reach you 
in Smyrna. I want to thank you for all the good I think 
you have done me, by your sisterly affection, and precious 
letters. I need not ask you still to remember me, to pray 
for me and my children, and our work ; I know you will 
do so, and sometimes will, when you can find a leisure hour 
and strength, write to me as of old. Can you not see my 
dear mother ? She is now in Palmyra, with a sick, and 
perhaps dying brother, her only child, and * she a widow.* 
And will it not be possible for you to see our daughters ? 
. . . . " Our prayera will follow you through all your 
long voyage, and we earnestly pray that if it be the 
Lord's will, you may be greatly benefited by the journey, 
and yet live many years, — live to see your dear boy a 
minister of the gospel, a missionary, — live to see great 
and wonderful triumphs of the Redeemer's kingdom. I 
would write more, but can not. And now once more 
farewell/ The blessing of the Lord, his un&iling, gra- 
cious presence be with you on your voyage, and ever- 
more ? We shall soon meet,— r soon shall enjoy unbroken 

28 



826 TUS MISSIONARY SISTKBS. 

interooune with the loyed ones gone before, with eaoh 
other, and, better than all, with him who will be our 
•oul's delist, the brightness and g^ory of heayen,-F*if 
indeed one so unworthy, so full of sin and imperfection 
as I, may hope to reach that holy place. 

** Will you hand the enclosed note to sister Maiia, some 
pleasant morning after you have entered the Atlantic? 

'^Love to all your party, and to our dear friends in 
Smyrna. Farewell ! 

^ Your eyer loying sister, IL M. L. HAMUBr.** 

This is the note to be banded to Miss West**- ^sister 
Maria" — after entering the AUantio. On the enyelope 
is written : ^Atlantic Ocean, morning of the 17th of No- 
yember, 1857. Haye just passed through the straits. 
Eddie handed me this welcome letter." 

^Qood morning 1 Perhaps you will require that I should 
giye my name and wAer^am. You did not expect to 
meet a stranger so iar from terra Jirma; and indeed I aan 
no stranger. I flatter myself you haye guessed me out 
before this. I hope this morning's sun finds you cheerful 
and happy, and fcee from that enemy of all comfort, -^-^ 
seasickness. You haye turned the kut corner^ although 
II long journey still lies before yon. May the diyine hand 
bear you safely and happily oyer the groat sea, and fill 
your soul with gratitude and adoration. 

'^It is late in the eyening, — nearly eyery one has 
retired. The time I had deyoted to writing you a good 
long note has been taken up by Master Alfred, who 
seemed determined not to sleep when I most desired it. 
But I haye taken just enough paper to assure you of a 
sister's loye and sympathy, and also of her poor, unworthy 
prayers that you may be strengthened, and speedily 
brought back to the work so dear, I trust, to both our. 
hearts, 

^ We will try to do all we can to cheer your sister dur- 



8I0KKB88 AND DBATH. 827 

ing yotr long absence, and hope she will frequently find 
a home with us for a night or two. 

^ My dear husband joins with me in love to you and all 
your homeward-bound fellow-travelers. We shall long 
to hear good tidings frotn you as soon as may be after 
your arrival. Pardort this little hasty note, hardly worthy 
BO long a journey. It will be in vain, I suppose, to ask a 
reply immediate, as thei*e is no ocean post, no catrier- 
pigeon, no telegraph at yout cominand,-^ unless you can 
write your reply upon some passing clotd, or upon the 
moon's fair face. 

" Qood night, And good-by for d litUe. 

**£ver your affectionate sistet', MabthA*" 

She to whom this liote was addressed, little thoughti 
while perusing it, that the hand that traced it, and the 
warm, loving heart that bireathed through it, had been 
nearly two weeks still and cold in the grbve^ 

Mrs. Hamlih's death wiM preceded by few of the tisual 
antecedents of that solemn event. Not even a brief ill- 
ness Was given, to prepare herself And h^t friends for 
their long separation, and afford her an opportunity to 
leave her dying testimony to th6 power bf that fhith of 
which she had been so bright a living example. From 
an active participation in all the scenes and employments 
of this life, she was transfetred, almost in a moment^ to 
the scenes and employments of another and higher life. 
But so habituated wad she to the coQtemplation of that 
life, so heavenly in her feelings And aspiratioiis, it could 
hardly have sutprised her greatly to find herself so sud- 
denly ushered upon its scenes, and mingling in the joys 
of seraphs and redeemed ones around the tlirone of God. 

On Thursday, the 6th of November, she wds slightly 
unwell firom what appeared to be a Oold. That night she 
retired with a severe sick headache, such as she often 
suffered fronii and during the night obtained Utile testi 



828 THB MIBSIOVABT 6ISTXB8. 

owing to the pain and aickneasi accompanied with &int- 
ness. Between 5 and 6 o'clock in the morning she experi- 
enced a sudden loas of memory ; then followed a terrible 
oonvubion, to which aacceeded a state of lethargy. From 
this, bleeding aroused her only for a moment, when she 
tamed on her husband one last look of love, and then 
closed her eyes for ever on him and on all the scenea of 
earth. A sweet, placid expression gradually spread over 
her countenance, and at half past nine she quietly 
breathed her last, Friday morning, Nov. 6, 1857. 

.^We had no time ^veu us,** writes her bereaved 
husband, ^for fiurewells, for tokens of dying love to chil- 
dren and friends, no last messages, no cheering words of 
triumphant faith. But I have what is better than all 
these combined, the testimony of a life of singular purity, 
devotedness, and self-denial. Mr. Goodoll, in a consola- 
tory note, remarks : ^ Your beloved partner, who made 
your fiunUy so happy, and who has now gone to be with 
the happy for ever, was certainly one of the most fitnlt- 
less persons I ever knew.' To God be all the glory ! But 
the same thing which makes my consolation to abound, 
increases also my sense of bereavement and loss." 

To his daughters in America, Mr. Hamlin wi*ote : ^ For 
your dear mother herself we have no occasion to mouni. 
Among all the servants of Christ whom I know, I can 
not select one who I think had a more constant desire to 
serve him, to do his work, to receive his approbation, and 
to enjoy his presence and blessing in all the events of 
life, and in all its duties. His word, his kingdom, his 
cross, were precious to her. She was humble, devout, 
affectionate, self-denying; always seeking others' good 
rather than her own. Above all, she most eaniostly 
prayed that Qod would give her grace and wisdom to 
guide this dear family to him. Has any one ever seen a 
sign of her being to you, and Canie, and Abbie, and the 
little sainted Mary, a step-mother ? I can testify to the 



OBITUARY KOTICB BY DR. DWIOHT. 829 

depth and earnestness of her love^ and solicitude, Imd 
prayers for you all." 

Extract from an obituary notice of Mrs. Hamlini by 
Rev. Dr. Dwight. 

^ Mrs. Hamlin, then Miss Lovell, arrived at Constanti- 
nople, in the year 1845. She came expressly to take 
charge of a Female Boarding School, which had long 
been projected, but remained unopened for want of a 
suitable Superintendent. Testimonials of her moral 
worth, and of her general fitness to engage in such ft 
work, were furnished to the Prudential Committee of the 
American Board, by her pastor, and copies of these testi- 
monials reached Constantinople before she arrived. They 
were so strongly worded, that the missionaries were 
ready to ascribe them in part to the partiality of friend- 
ship, and we dared not hope that she would fully answer 
the description given ; but we can truly say she did 
answer it, and even exceed it. 

" The brother in whose family Miss Lovell resided dur- 
ing the first five years of the school, remarks of her, that 
during the whole of that period, in no word or action of 
hers, did he ever see any thing which he could have wished 
otherwise, so faultless was she in all her deportment. She 
was a person of delicate sensibilities, refined taste, and 
varied accomplishments, natural and acquired, which 
fitted her eminently for the place she occupied in this 
mission, and all that she possessed she cheeriTully laid at 
the Saviour's feet. 

^ Her influence on the school, and through the school 
on the whole Protestant community in Turkey, can 
scarcely be overestimated. "Within six years there were 
no less than four seasons of special religious awakening 
in the institution, during which there was the most strik- 
ing evidence of the presence of the Holy Spirit, working 
with groat power on the hearts of the pupils. . • . . 
We can all testify to the faithful earnestness with which 

28* 



880 TnX yi38|ONABT sistxrs* 

pur departed fiiend entered into these soeneB, and to the 
great practical wisdom and tact she ever manifested ii| 
dealing with individual oases. The fact is, she was con- 
stant and fervent in prayer, and the Lord was faithful to 
his promise, and gave her the help that she so much 
needed in her deeply responsible position. 

^After seven years of the most assiduous labor in that 
important sphere, she was called to assume other duties 
and responsibilities as the wife of our now afflicted brother, 
and the mother of his then motherless children ; and great 
indeed were the light, and joy, and gladness she brought 
into that desolate household. 

^The same unobtrusive seal, diligence, perseverance, 
and Christian fidthfulness that characterised her whole 
course in the Female Boarding School, she carried with 
her into the &mily, making a hearty, firm, and unfaltering 
consecration of herself not simply to her appropriate 
household duties, but to the &r higher and nobler work 
of the spiritual training of those intrusted to her care, 
Pistrustful of herself but keeping in view a high stand- 
ard of maternal duty, she was led to seek help from Qod ' 
in frequent and earnest prayer; nor did she seek in vain« 

^ She had deep conviction and experience of the power 
of prayer, and often did she solicit Christian fiiends to 
unite with her in praying for objects in which she was 
interested. The last request she ever made of some 
of her dearest friends was, that they would pray for 
one in whose salvation she felt a 6pecial interest. Only a 
few days before her departure, while speaking with her 
husband of their youngest child, she expressed, in the 
strongest manner, the one desire of her heart, that he 
might live to preach the gospel of Christ ; and remarked 
that she could truly say, < he was a child of many 
prayers? 

^ Of Mrs. Hamlin it may be said, with eminent truth, 
that she was always 'diligent in business, fervent in spirit^ 



OBITTTABT NOTICB BT DR. DWIQHT. 881' 

serving the Lord.' While she was eminently ft praying 
Christian, she was also a watchfnl Christian. She ever 
exercised a holy jealousy over her own heart, and was 
exceedingly afraid of the paralyzing influences of this 
world." . . . 

Referring to her sudden departure from this world, Dr. 
Dwight says : *< But none who knew her life will feel the 
need of last words from her to satisfy them that she is 
now a happy spirit, among the blessed around the throne 
of Qod. • • • And never will she regret having made 
the sacrifices she did, that she might lead the daughters 
of Armenia to receive the truth as it is in Jesus. Some 
of those who through her instrumentality were guided to 
the Saviour, and have since been gathered to his upper 
kingdom, we can not doubt, were ready, with rapturous 
joy, to welcome her coming there ; and we trust that 
many others will yet join the happy company, who will 
bless God for ever that he brought our beloved sister to 
this land." 

And she too iloops In Jesnii,— iho, the last 
Of the devoted three, who o*or the deep 
Together took their way; forsaking home 
And kindred for the lore of him who died 
For them. Faithful she toiled, nor counted dear 
Time, talents, —yea; her all^ if she might win, 
From her benighted sisters of the East, 
Some jewels for his crown; nor toUed in yain. 
For many a priceless gem shall sparkle there. 
By her meek counsels and her eaniest prayers 
Reclaimed Arom sin and death. But not alone 
Do sad Armenians daughters weep her loss, 
For one is there, — chief of the mourning train,— 
Who caOed her by the tender name of wife; 
And children*s woe, so passionate, thou^ brief, 
Breaks forth in piteous plaints tn her who ne*er 
With the warm promptings of a mother*s love 
Win soothe again their little grieft and pains. 
Ay, Terily to her has been fhlfilled 
The Saviour's promise of a hundred-fold. 
To those who for his sake shall leave thdr home 
And kindred, even in this present life*. 



ttS^ * THE M I88IONABT 8ISTKBS. 

Mbi flohan, moUiert, ool j hid ah* fimnd, 
Brothen and lUten, but a hH>P7 home 
Of wedded love. And now her work complete, 
Her miision all ftilfilled, and haTing well 
Performed each part, of teacher, sister, firiend. 
Mother, and wife, her Master wills that she 
Shall go up higher. All prepared was she. 
Though on her ear had rang no warning cry, — 
^ Behold the Bridegroom oomethl " 

Shall we saj 
She went too ioon? Too soon exchanged the paint, 
The weariness and sorrows of the way. 
For the sweet rest, the perfect bliss, of heaven? 
Oh, let us follow her in meekness, fiilth, 
And self-denying labors for onr Lord; 
That we, like her, may to the paths of peace 
Allnre some wandering souls, and leave, like her. 
The memory of a lifo filled up with deeds 
Of useAilness and love. 



For those who have read through the preceding pages, 
^ summary of character will hardly be necessary. Yet it 
may not be unprofitable to consider briefly some of the 
more prominent traits which made these two Missionary 
Sisters so lovely and useful. 

It has been remarked that in natural temperament they 
were quite dissimilai*, and the reader will doubtless have 
noticed something of this dissimilarity in their letters. 
Mrs. Everett was of an ardent, impulsive nature, and 
very lively and social ; Mrs. Hamlin seiious, quiet, and 
reserved. But the same grace modified both these tem- 
peraments, and from each wrought out beautiful and 
consistent Christian characters. If Mrs. Everett's liveli- 
ness ever led her into lightness, as she intimates in some 
of her letters that it did, in her early years, the love of 
Christ, dnd a deep sympathy with him in his yearnings 
for the salvation of perishing souls, chastened that liveli- 
ness into a steady cheerfulness, which helped much to 



8UHHABT OF cnARAOTBB. 888 



« 



keep up her energies, and enable her to meet, with such 
nnroffled sweetness, the varied and arduous duties of her 
missionary life. The same* love for Christ and lost sin- 
ners, diverted Mrs. Hamlin's mind from all morbid ten- 
dencies, if it ever had any, and by keeping constantly 
before her a great object to pray, and labor, and hope for, 
made her also a cheerful as well as earnest Christian. 

The reader may have noticed the coincidence in the 
time of their conversion. Both consecrated themselves 
to the Lord, and united with his people, at the age of fif- 
teen. And not only did they both commence their Chris- 
tian course early, but they commenced right. Their 
consecration to God was hearty and entire, and like Baul 
of Tarsus, their first question, and the question that 
seemed to be ever in their hearts was : " Lord, what wilt 
thou have me to do ? ** Yet they did not sit down in idle 
expectation of some great work being provided for them, 
but went at once to the performance of every duty, doing 
every thing, however small, " as unto the Lord." Mrs. 
Everett, in her school, sought constantly the spiritual 
good of her pupils, and both, earnestly and tenderly tried 
to persuade their unconverted brothers and sisters to 
come to Christ, and to bring all their Sabbath scholars 
into his fold. Their early letters, as well as the testimony 
of their friends, show that they were always prayerful, 
studious in the Scriptures, and active in doing good as 
they had opportunity. It is not strange that with this 
faithful discharge of duty, and earnest seeking after more 
knowledge and grace, they should have felt their hearts 
drawn towards the millions perishing for lack of knowl- 
edge in other lands, — that the "missionary spirit,'* as it 
is called, should have been early kindled in their souls. 
The missionary spirit, — why should this term be used in 
any peculiar sense ? What is the missionary spirit but 
the Cliristian spirit ? What but the love of Christ, con- 
straining the Christian to love all for whom he died, and 



884 TUH VISSIOHABY 8I8TKBS. 

to be willing to go wherever he shall load, and engage hi 
any aervioe he shall appoint ? And why is one Christiaa 
to possess this spirit more than another, or why should 
there be a class to be distingaished as possessing tho 
^missionary spirit?" These two young Christians 
thought of the love of Christy and of all he had suffered 
for them, till their hearts burned to do more for him, — 
to make greater sacrifices in i*ctum fo^ his infinite love. 
They thought of the condition of the greater part of the 
worid, and the general indifferance of Christians to the 
state of their benighted brethren and sbters, till they 
longed to go and tell some of them of the Saviour they 
so loved, — not because there were none to be guided to 
him in their own land, but that here there were enough 
to teach the ignorant and the sinful, while those distant 
ones were perishing for want of tho teacher to toll them 
of the Saviour. That this was the outgushing of their 
love to Christ and the souls for whom he died, and not a 
mere enthusiastic impulse or desire for novelty, is evident 
firom their entire willingnesisi to go to any part of the 
world. To India or China Mrs. Everett at first expected 
to be sent ; Mrs. Hamlin, when asked, said she would not 
raise a finger to decide the question as to where she 
should go ; and this entire willingness to be guided by 
the Lord, this singleness of devotion to his cause and his 
will, ^ves us one clue to the secret of their uncommon 
usefulness. 

There is another thing to be noticed, as showing how 
they accomplished so much, — their industry. It has 
been remarked by those who knew them most intimately, 
that they were never idle. Every little fragment of timo 
was carefhlly gathered up by them ; they seemed to keep 
oyer before them that they were to ^ do with their might 
what their hands found to do." And habits of system 
and order helped them to do all they did without hurry 
or conAision. 



RUMMAltV OF CHARACTER.. 835 

Yet one other trait which was prominent in both, 
should not be overlooked, — their feminine delicacy, and 
nice sense of propriety. Their zeal for Christ, and desire 
for the salvation of the perishing, never led them to over 
step the proper limits of their position. In their own 
sphere they exerted all their energies to do good, and 
point the lost sinner to the Cross ; but the sweet womanly 
vii*tucs of gentleness, meekness, and the most retiring 
modesty, were their crowning ornaments. And in nothing 
is their example more worthy of imitation than in the 
fidelity and grace with which they discharged every 
domestic duty. They had not *' so learned Christ " as to 
believe that in following him they were to neglect their 
first and knost sacred duties as wives and mothers, and' 
heads of households, and it was in all the relations of 
home that their deep and earnest piety shone most 
beautifully. 

Does the attainment of such elevation and symmetry 
of Christian character seem a difficult one? It is not 
easy; but it is worth striving for. Through faith and 
patience, through much prayer and watchfulness, those 
missionary sisters acquired it, and by the same '^ looking 
unto Jesus," the same persevering effort to overcome 
every obstacle, we, who have traced their earnest, unfal- 
tering progress, may follow in the same path, and find it, 
as they did, growing "brighter unto the perfect day.** 



This preservation photocopy 

was made and hand bound at BookLab, Inc. 

in compliance with copyright law. The paper, 

Weyerhaeuser Cougar Opaque Natural, 

meets the requirements of ANSI/NISO 

Z39.48-1992 (Permanence of Paper). 




Austin 1994 



3 2044 021 578 075 



THE tOmOWIR WHJ. U CHAKOeD 
AN OVERDUE FEE IF THIt BOOK IS 
HOT RCTURNCD TO THE LIBRARY ON 
on BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED 
BELOW. NON-RECEIPT OF OVERDUE 
MOTICEt DOES NOT EXEMPT THE 
BORROWER FROM OVERDUE FEES. 




CANCELLED 



