


\ 



I I'. 



\K 



\ / 



\ ^\ 



V 





THE LIBRARY 

OF 

THE UNIVERSITY 

OF CALIFORNIA 

LOS ANGELES 







/ / 



'7 



3IEM0IR 



OF 



MRS. HARRIET L. WIXSLOW, 



THIKTKK.V YK^Iia A MKMEER 01' THE 



AMERICAN MISSION IN CEYLON. 



BY REV. MIRON WINSLOW. 



PUBLISHED BY THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

160 NASSAU-STREET, NEW-YORK. 



D. Fauthuw, inntert 



Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1840, 
by Oliver R. ICinusbuky, in the Clerk'.s Office of the 
District Court of the Southern District of New-York. 

Riglit of publishing transferred to the American Tract Society. 



PREFACE 



The wishes of liis associates abroad, and 
of the friends of missions at home, induced 
tlie Compiler to attempt tl»e preparation of 
tliis memoir, tlioui^li it was undertaken 
amidst the distractions and multiplied en- 
gaijements of a visit to his native land, which 
the claims of the heathen forbade him to 
protract. 

The favor with which it has been received, 
especially as "introducing the reader into 
the daily trials and enjoyments, the hopes, 
labors, and disappointments of the mission- 
ary life," and bringing into view those parts 
of the picture not usually presented in pub- 
lished journals and reports, witli the peculiar 
light and shade given by the delicate touches 
of a female liand, has led to its careful revi- 
sion : those portions which seemed less im- 






COJ%*TJEJ\'TS, 



CHAPTER I.— Her Early Life.— 179G to 181G, 

Conversion — ^juvenile letters and journal — commu- 
nion with God — war with Great Britain — taste lor 
literature — Wadsworth's mountain— Society and 
School for the poor — death of a brother — letter 
and journal — ^journey in New England — ellbrts for 
the salvation of young friends — visit to the city of 
New-York. U 



CHAPTER, II. — CON.SECRATION TO THE Ml.SSlONARY 

Work— 181G to 1819. 

Examination of duty as to missions— opposition of 
friends — grounds of lier decision — ^joy in consecrat- 
ing herself — private meditations on the subject — 
short residence at Litchfield, Conn. — letters — Dr. 
Griffin — visit at New Haven — Mr. Cornelius — Dr. 
Worcester — benevolent endeavors — efforts for the 
spiritual benefit of individuals — ordination of Mr. 
Winslow — designation to Ceylon — marriage — visit 
to Andover and Vermont — farewell notes — embark- 
ation. G7 

CHAPTER III.— Voyage to Calcutta and Passage, 
THROUGH Trincomalie, Galle AxND Colombo, to Jaff- 
na— 1819 to 1820. 

Jmirnal and Revival at Sea — Ascent of the Hoogley — 
beautiful scenery — drowning of the gods — mission- 



4 PREFACE. 

portant being omitted or coiidensecl, and giv- 
ing place to new and valuable matter, which, 
tlirough the kindness of correspondents and 
friends, has since been obtained. 

In an Introduction by the Rev. James H. 
Evans to one of the two reprints of this 
work in England, from which it has also 
been translated into French, he notices the 
mass of missionary intelligence it comprises; 
the ease and simplicity of its style and narra- 
tive of occurring events ; the example it af- 
fords of early consecration, and patient, self- 
denying activity and perseverance in the ser- 
vice of Christ ; tlie illustration of the useful- 
ness, responsibility and encouragements of 
cliristian mothers, and especially the wives of 
missionaries ; the value to those abroad of 
mutual confidence, watchfulness, and fidelity ; 
the riches of Divine grace bestowed on the 
prayers and labors of faith and love ; and the 
exhibition it contains of the true principles of 
missionary effort, on the success of which 
depends, under God, the hopes of millions 



PREFACr. 5 

thronging the pathway to eternal perdition, 
every one of whose souls has a worth which 
no human thouglit can conceive. 

It was to deliver such, " drawn unto death 
and ready to be slain," that tlie efforts detail- 
ed in this volume were made, and the life, of 
which some account is given, was consecra- 
ted to their good. And if this imperfect me- 
morial, by one who, willing to pay a tribute of 
affection, feels himself also "a debtor" to the 
heathen, shall kindle a spark of missionary 
zeal in one youthful breast — or throw the 
least light on the path of any follower of the 
Lord Jesus to a foreign land — or excite in 
any heart a throb of pity for a dying world, 
or an emotion of sympathy with the suffering 
Saviour in the " travail of his soul," his 
labor will not have been " in vain in the 
Lord." 



!• 



COJ\*TEJ%'TS, 



CHAPTER I.— IIkr Early Life.— 179C to ISIG. 

Conversion — ^juvenile letters and journal — commu- 
nion with God — war wilii Great Britain — taste lor 
literature — Wadsworth's mountain — Society and 
School for the poor — death of a brother — letter 
and journal — ^journey in New England — ellbrts for 
the salvation of young friends — visit to the city of 
New-York. 1 1 

CHAPTER II. — CoNSKcuATio.v to the Missionary 
Work— IdlG to 1819. 

E.Kamination of duty as to missions — opposition of 
friends — grounds of her decision — ^joy in consecrat- 
ing herself — private meditations on the subject — 
.«bort residence at Litchfield, Conn. — letters — Dr. 
Griffin — visit at New Haven — Mr. Cornelius — Dr. 
Worcester — benevolent endeavors — eflbrts for the 
spiritual benelit of individuals — ordination of Mr. 
Winslow — designation to Ceylon — marriage — visit 
to Andover and Vermont — farewell notes — embark- 
ation. 07 

CHAPTER III. — Voyage to Calcutta and Passage, 

THROUGH TrINCOMALIE, GalLE AND CoLOMBO, TO JaFF- 

NA— 1819 to 1820. 

Journal and Revival at Sea — Ascent of the Hoogley — 
beautiful scenery— drowning of the gods— mission- 



CONTENTS. 

ary and other friends at Calcutta — passage to Trin- 
comalie — brief description of Ceylon — Fort Galle — 
a Boodhist temple — Colombo — friendship of Sir 

-arrival at Jatiha. 141 



CHAPTER IV.— First Year in Ceylok— to the 

GOYERN-.MENTAL RESTRICTIONS 1820 tO iS^l. 

Origin of the Ceylon mission — first missionaries — po- 
litical and religious notices of Jaffna — description of 
five mission stations — free and boarding-schools — 
death of Rev. Mr. Warren — first impressions of Mrs. 
"VV. — the language to be acquired early — the banian- 
tree — self-examination — houses of the Tamulians — 
happiness in the decision to enter on a mission — 
missionary trials — darkness and blindness of the 
heathen— cheering accessions to the boarding-school — 
violent prejudices — persecution of Supyen — Hindoo 
system of transmigration and fatalism — absurd me- 
thods of appeasing the gods — dishonesty — death of 
Mrs. Poor — governmental prohibition of a press, and 
of future additions to the mission. 



CHAPTER v.— Second and Third Years in Ceylon 
— OF THE Establishment of the Mission Seahnart 
and Female Central School — 1821 to 18-23, 

Progress of the mission — ^joy in God — Maternal Socie- 
ty — letter to Maternal Society, Portland, Maine — 
some girls obtained for the school — Mrs. Schrayder 
— letter to the Female Society for prayer — to a fe- 
male associate — privilege of prayer — four received 
to the ohurch — preaching at a school bungalow — 



CONTKNTS. M 

anniversary observed by the " Indus fraternity " — 
moetini^'s fur prayer — dealli of Rev. Mr. Richards — 
his early devotion to missions — prayers of native 
cliiklren — beii:g:ars — employment of a day — reliijious 

privileges — heathen children school for j^irls 

opened. 220 

CHAPTER VI.— FouKTH and Fifth Years in Cey- 
lon — E.MBRACING THE GENERAL REVIVAL OF ReLIGION 
IN 1S2-1. 

Mission Seminary — Female Central School — bnrial of 
the dead — car-festival at Nellore — Gciiernl licvlvnl 
al all the stations — \vrestling prayer — meeting of 
youth — meetings at the several stations — access to 
God — meeting of children of the boardmg-schools — 
the work revived — blessing of social prayer — new 
year rejections — cliaracter of the work — reception 
of forty-nine to the church. 283 

CHAPTER VII.— Sixth to Tenth Years in Ceylon- 
including Journey to Madras and Calcutta — 
1825 to 1S30. 

Failure of health — dangerous pa.«:sage to Madras and 
Calcutta — death of a daughter — brief description of 
Madras— letters to Miss Bird at Gorruckpore — Ro- 
man and Pagan ceremonies compared— communion 
with God — appeal to an early associate — diaries — 
admissions to the church — robbers — conversion of a 
schoolmaster — death of an infant son — conversion 
of sisters — sense of responsibility — Sunday-school 
at Oodooville — influence of the climate — sulforings 
of the natives — prayers of the churches, , 319 



10 CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER VIIT. — Qualifications of Missionaries- 
Revival OF 1831 — Governmental Restrictions Re- 
moved. 

Qualifications of missionaries — house and furniture — 
manners and customs — singular fishing-boat — letter 
to her sisters — to her parents — native marriages — 
female influence — revival of religion — sixty-one re- 
ceived to the church — fire at Manepy— death of her 
father — son sent to America — reasons for return of 
children — letters to her son — governmental restric- 
tions removed — conversion of a Court Moodeliar. 377 

CHAPTER IX. — Decease of her Son in Ajierica — 
Results of Labor — Sudden Death — Character. 

Arrival and death of her son in America — private re- 
flections on parting with him — letters — brief sketch 
of his life — cheering results of missionary labor — 
last letter to her mother — renewed dedication of her- 
self and family to God — sudden death — character — 
tribute to her memory — death of sisters, 436 



MEMOIR. 



CHAPTER I. 



Her £arly Life. 

Conversion— Juvenile' letters and journal — Communion 
with God — War with Great Britain — Taste for litera- 
ture — Wadsworth's mountain — Society and school for 
the poor — Death of a brother — Letter and journal — 
Journey in New England — Efforts for the salvation of 
young friends — Visit to the city of New-York. 

There is a charm in native simplicity, and a 
value in the record of facts in christian experi- 
ence and the missionary life. These, it is be- 
lieved, will be found combined in the following 
memoirs, and especially the correspondence, of 
one who wrote with no view to the public eye ; 
but whose active mind and glowing affections 
induced her, for the promotion of her own walk 
with God, and in frank and unreserved commu- 
nications with dear friends, to express the joys 
and sorrows of her heart, and delineate the va- 
ried &cenes throujrh which she was led. 



12 



3ii;s. ^VI^:SL0\^^ 



Harriet Wadswortii Latiirop was born at 
Norwich, Connecticut, April 9, 1796. She was 
the second child and the eldest daughter of 
Charles Latiirop, Esq. and Joanxa Leffiis'g- 
WELL. Her father was a graduate of Yale Col- 
lege. Her immediate ancestors were pious. Her 
maternal grandmother was a daughter of Mr. 
JosEFii CoiT, a devout and consistent christian ; 
her father's mother, Abigail Huntixgton, hap- 
pily exemplified the '' meek and quiet spirit" of 
the Gospel ; and her great-grandfather Lathrop 
lived a life of prayer, in which he often sought 
mercy for his children and children's children 
to the latest generation. 

In Harriet's early days she displayed unusual 
energy and perseverance, with sometimes an un- 
due inflexibility of purpose ; but she was under 
the care of a judicious mother, and influenced 
by the example of a mild and dutiful elder bro- 
ther. She had also amiable younger brothers and 
sisters, who, with a kind and excellent father, 
formed a domestic circle of much loveliness, 
adapted to cherish the best affections of the 
heart ; and an interesting circle of youthful as- 
sociates, some of whom have proved the bright- 
est ornaments of society, exerted a happy influ- 
ence in the formation of her character. 

In connection with her fidelitj^, and in answer 
to her prayers, spiritual blessings began to de- 



EARLV LIFE. 13 

scend upon her father's family before she left the 
country ; and while far hence toiling for the hea- 
then, God gave her the joy to learn that all its 
members had publicly professed Christ. Three of 
her sisters, Mrs. Charlotte H. Cherry, Mrs. Eliza- 
beth C. Hutchings, and Mrs. Harriet Joanna 
Perry, followed her to India, the bodies of the 
first and last of whom now rest with hers at 
Oodooville, in the island of Ceylon. 

The grace of God early appeared evidently to 
sanctify and seal the subject of this memoir for 
himself, some notice of which we happily have 
in a brief sketch found among her papers. 



'' In the summer of 1808, when I was 12 years 
of age, weekly evening meetings were commenc- 
ed by our pastor, which were held at the houses 
of the parishioners. Being a new thing, they at- 
tracted notice, and were generally well attended. 
Some special interest in religion was about the 
same time manifested among a {e\w middle-aged 
people, and some even among the youth. I first at- 
tended these meetings to accompany my mother, 
who often put into my hands such books as she 
thought might do me good. About this time she 
gave me Hawes' directions for obtaining the new 
birth. I examined them, and determined strictly 

WinsloH, 2 



14 MRS. WIXSLOW, 

to observe every thino^ which he recommends, yet 
seemed to gain nothing-. It then occurred to me 
that I could not make myself better, so I went to 
God ; and whenever I looked at my rule of duty, 
prayed that He would constrain me to observe it, 
and do all that was required. I daily meditated 
over this book, likewise reading the Bible, and 
retiring apart to pray. I was often deeply af- 
fected, and my numerous offences filled me with 
confusion. 

'' Our evening meetings became more interest- 
ing. I was not willingly absent from one. Some- 
times I prevailed on some of my young friends 
to go; but they seldom inclined to do so without 
their parents. The religious interest now in- 
creased among a few young ladies much older 
than myself, and they held a meeting by them- 
selves, which I was permitted to attend with a 
pious lady in our neighborhood. She sometimes 
conversed with me on our way, and often caused 
me to weep, though I know not that she drew any 
thing from me respecting the state of my mind. 
I had never spoken of it to any one, for indeed 
I scarcely knew myself what I felt. I saw my 
sins, and that they made my best friends un- 
happy; but I had not seen their true nature as 
offensive to a holy God. Yet I looked upon my 
companions as not standing in the same need 
of a new heart that I did, and therefore was 



EyVRLY LIFE. 15 

not so urgent to turn them from folly as I after- 
wards became. Although sometimes grieved at 
their unkind remarks, I was principally intent on 
attempting to make myself better. ^ 

" Sometime near the end of Autumn, at a meet- 
ing in the evening, the 55th chapter of Isaiah 
was the subject of remark, especially the first 
two verses, ' //o, every one that thirateth, come ye 
to the waters^'' &c. Here I was for the first time 
overwhelmed by a consideration of the goodness 
of God in offering salvation to lost sinners. I felt 
my need of such a Saviour as is provided in the 
Gospel. In this state of feeling I returned home, 
and could not any longer conceal my anxiety. 
My dear mother inquired why I was weeping. I 
replied that I was a great sinner, and that even- 
ing felt more than I ever did before, that I was 
wretched and must perish for ever. I said but 
little, and she left me after saying only a few 
words. My anxiety increased. I felt willing J 
thought to do any thing, to be any thing, if the 
Lord would receive me as his child. I seemed to 
expect some special revelation from Him of my 
adoption, and often prayed that some angel might 
come and give me the so-much-desired assurance. 
I did not find myself amended of my faults. I 
only saw and felt them more, and knew that God 
must interpose and change my heart entirely, or 
1 should continue to f^row worse and worse. 



16 MRS. AVIXSLOW. 

"According to the advice of Doddridge and 
Hawes, I privately dedicated myself to God in 
a written form, resolving to be his alone, and his 
for ever. I seemed to receive a blessing in this 
act, and was greatly encouraged to persevere, 
and not to cease striving until I obtained. It ap- 
peared to me an awful step that I had taken ; I 
had promised to be the Lord's ; to lead a new 
life ; to devote myself and my all exclusively to 
his service, and I dared not go back. Yet I knew 
not how to go forward. This carried me more 
frequently to the throne of grace. I had for some 
time observed three stated seasons of prayer 
each day ; now I set apart a fourth, and gene- 
rally nothing would prevent mj^ observing them 
all. It was a busy time. Our house was filled 
with company, and sometimes I could not find a 
retired spot except in the garret, which often 
witnessed my importunity with God. My parents, 
not then professedly pious, and knowing little of 
my feelings, said nothing, but carefully avoided 
doing any thing that might hinder the w^ork of 
God. No one spoke to me with any particularity, 
and I felt no freedom to speak to any one ; so 
that I had no counsellor, no guide, but the Bible 
and the Holy Spirit. 

" In the month of January, 1S09, I received a 
letter from a dear friend at New London, saying 
that she had become anxious for her soul, and 



EARLY LIFE. 17 

exhortinir me to think of another world. This 
greatly encouraged me. I had one companion, 
one dear friend with whom I might take sweet 
counsel. I lost no time in replying to her letter. 
My earnestness had before been increasing, and 
I now felt new strength. One Sabbath noon, in 
the early part of the month, I was engaged in 
prayer as usual, when suddenly I nearly lost all 
my encouragement, and I believe ceased speak- 
ing ; but soon recommenced, feeling thaj; I could 
do nothing else. I seemed then to have new con- 
fidence in God, and the language, 'All things 
whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye 
shall receive,' caused me to open my mouth wide, 
and I trust to plead with that faith which is never 
rejected. A sweet peace was shed abroad in my 
soul. I felt assured that the Lord had heard my 
cry, and had not despised my prayer. Never can 
I forget the feelings with which I afterwards 
joined the family circle, the happiest of the happy. 
I longed to open my mouth to declare what the 
Lord had done for me ; but I could only gaze on 
my parents, brothers, and sister, with new affec- 
tion, and retire to weep by myself and pray. I 
went in the afternoon to the house of God, where 
every thing was new, every thing seemed to bid 
me welcome, and to say, ' The Lord of Hosts is 
in the midst of us.' For a number of weeks I en 
joyed in silence this new world, into which I 
2* 



18 MRS. WINSLOW. 

seemed introduced, though my solicitude for my 
friends was very great. 

"In March our pastor called at the house, 
shortly after I had expressed a wish to my mo- 
ther to unite with the church, if I were not 
thought too young. He said but little. Knowing 
my previous fondness for dancing, he inquired 
if I could relinquish that amusement for the sake 
of my Saviour. I expressed myself willing to 
make aijy sacrifice if I might be numbered among 
God's children. My beloved parents now exa- 
mined anew their hope, and became convinced 
of their duty to profess their faith in Christ. Ac- 
cordingly on the 9th of April, 1809, [the day on 
which she was 13 years of age,] they, together 
with myself and a female domestic, were pro* 
pounded for admission to the church, and the 
third Sabbath following we sat down at the table 
of the Lord. It w^as a season never to be forgot- 
ten. I had taken a new stand, and the eyes of all 
were upon me. A child of my age never before 
was known, in that place, to come out from the 
world by a public profession of Christ ! I had 
many acquaintances and friends, young, gay, and 
attractive. I received many cautions from the 
wise and good ; but my connection with the 
world often made it necessary for me to reflect 
on the language of Christ, ^ Whosoever shaU be. 
ashamed of me, of him shall the Son of man be 



EARLY LIFE. 19 

ashamed when he cometli in his glory with the 
holy angels.' ]\Iy dear brother was a valuable 
counsellor, and he was always at my side, jea- 
lous for the honor of God as well as for my 
christian character. My course was generally un- 
interrupted, and I had muchreligiousenjoyment." 

The written dedication and covenant here men- 
tioned, was frequently afterwards renewed with 
great solemnity, and, as she thought, with profit. 
This renewal, indeed, constituted almost the 
closing act of her life, for only a few hours be- 
fore her death, and the last time she wrote her 
name, while unaware of standing so near the 
eternal world, she subscribed the same document, 
which, twenty-five years before, she had with 
many tears, and who can doubt in faith, present- 
ed to the Lord. 

It may not be easy, now that so many of the 
young are joining themselves to the followers of 
Christ, to estimate the degree of christian deci- 
sion required in thus separating herself from her 
associates, having no individual of her age to 
whom she could freely speak on the subject most 
dear to her heart. This may have been one cause 
of her love of retirement, and perhaps of the 
habit, which seems to have continued through 
life, of comparing herself with the standard of 



20 ' MRS. WINSLOW. 

the Bible, rather than with the experience of 
other christians. 

It is known that she early commenced a diary 
of her religious exercises, and that in the year 
following her admission to the church, she pre- 
pared, for the use of her mother, a short account 
of her experience and trials ; hut in a season of 
illness, near the close of 1813, she destroyed both. 

The following letters, obtained from those 
written by her during this interval, (for she pre- 
served no copy of her correspondence,) show the 
state of her mind, and her concern for the spiri- 
tual interests of her companions : 

TO A YOUNG FRIEND. 

"January 19, 1810. 
" It is true, my friend, that my feelings and de- 
sires are in a considerable degree changed since 
you were here, but should that diminish my affec- 
tion for one who has ever been so dear to me 1 
No, it should rather increase it ; and I assure you 
that it does. What inexpressible pleasure would 
it give me, could I be a humble instrument in the 
hands of God in bringing you to him. By many 
religion is thought to be gloomy, calculated only 
to make us unhappy. Ah, my friend, such people 
are entire strangers to it. I never knew what real 
happiness is, until I found by experience that 



EARLY LIFE. 01 

*" Wisdom's ways arc ways of pleasantucs.-^, and 
all her paths are peace' You have yourself wit- 
nessed what a blessed consolation religion is in 
the hour of death. I entreat you, my friend, se- 
riously to inquire how the matter stands between 
God and your soul. Do not say, I am yet too 
young, I may put oil' repentance a little longer. 
' IVow is the accepted time, now is the day of 
salvation.' " 

In October, 1810, we find her attending school 
at New Haven, and thus writing to her mother 
"bitter thiufrs" concerninrr herself: 

" You say justly, that it is owing to my short 
comings in duty, that I am sometimes cold and 
destitute of spiritual life. I do not doubt it. But 
it is not only sometimes^ but always, that I am ac- 
companied with clouds and thick darkness. You 
will say that I do not go often enough to the 
throne of grace. I know that very well. When 
I had time and place I neglected it, and now that 
I would perform my duty the opportunities are 
denied me — and is it not just X AVere it not for un- 
bounded mercj'-and love, I should not now be lift- 
ing up my eyes in the land of the living. I think 
I have been going the downward road a great 
while, instead of growing in grace daily ; and if 
my heart deceives me not, my earnest prayer is 



22 MUS. WINSLOW. 

for more grace. But, alas, 'my prayers' — what 
are they 1 Had they been offered in sincerity, I 
should ere this have received an answer of peace. 
" Do, mamma, remember me, that I may not 
bring reproach upon my parents, and the holy 
name I have professed ; but may rather so grow 
in grace as to be made a peculiar child of God. 
I am almost discouraged. You say I must ex- 
amine my heart. Whenever I attempt it, it is 
shut from me. It is all sin, that odious sin, which 
I pray God may not make him hide his face from 
me for ever. There is ' balm in Gilead,' and a 
' Physician there j' but he has gone from me. 

" Return, O holy Dove, return, 

" Sweet messenger of rest; 
" I hate the sins that made thee mourn, 

" And drove thee from my breast." 



TO A FEMALE ACQUAINTANCE. 

" New London, March, 1812. 
" I have just returned from the Alms-house, 
where I attended the funeral of a very aged wo- 
man. Her husband was lying upon a bed from 
which he has not risen for several years ; yet his 
countenance was the picture of resignation, and 
his whole deportment seemed to say, ' Thy will, 
O Lord, be done.' My dear friend, may we re- 
member that, young as we are, we too must die. 



EARLY LIIE. 23 

Dear N , do wc not conform too much to the 

world! How frequently do 1 think there is no 
excuse for me, and I will certainly try to grow 
wiser; but my resolutions too often prove mo- 
mentary, and without eflect on my life. 'O that 
my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain 
of tears,' that I might weep day and night for my 
sins. I have a book which I wish very much you 
to read; it is ' Wright and llawes.' Do read it, 
and consider it as addressed to yow." 

The occasion of the above date being at JVew 
London^ was that her father had been appointed 
clerk of the County Courts, the records of which 
were then kept there ; but their safetj% during 
the war with Great Britain, soon required them 
to be removed to Norwich, whither the family re- 
turned in the summer of 1S13. The assistance 
frequently claimed in transcribing, was probably 
one means of Harriet's acquiring a fair, legible 
hand, and writing with uncommon ease and ra- 
pidity, a talent which she not only employed 
with great advantage in the business of the mis- 
sion, but at all times felt at liberty to use for the 
enjoyment and spiritual benefit of herself and 
others. 

Near the close of 1S13 she recommenced her 
diary, which was continued almost daily until 
she left America. A few extracts will show the 



24r MRS. WINSLOW. 

progress of her mind and her religious ex- 
perience. 

^^ Js'ovemher 1 1, 1813. — There has been a storm 
this evening. The wind was high. It was a most 
welcome sound to my ears. Did I not feel for 
those who are exposed to the inconveniences of 
such weather, I could hail the days when all with- 
out is dreary and boisterous, as more favorable 
to my happiness than any other. Then it is that 
I have no society but that of my own heart and a 
gracious God. Then have I a more lively sense 
of m.y dependence on Him, of my nothingness 
before Kim, who is all in all." 

'^ March 11, 1814. — Yesterday morning 1 walk- 
ed with cousin L. We had some conversation on 
a subject dear to my heart. She is what I Avould 
be, and to believe it possible I shall ever be like 
her would be a great consolation. She has been 
tome a most useful friend. She has convinced 
me that were the love of God my ruling princi- 
ple I should not have suffered as I have done the 
past two months. Could I regulate my heart by 
the Divine will, I should not be so much disposed 
to hide myself from every eye ; but I feel con- 
tinued weakness, and am deficient in every good 
thing. Yet why do I indulge this gloominess. I 
will be up and doing. There is forgiveness with 
God, and v.ith him there is plenteous redemption. 



EARLY LIFE. 25 

He will not cast off any who come to him with 
humility, confessing their sins. To his throne of 
grace I will go, and if I perish it sliall be at his 
footstool." 

*' Thursday^ IG. — This day has passed but te- 
diously. At evening we had a large party in our 
small parlor. Instead of receiving company, I 
could most gladly have retired to my chamber, 
and given vent to feelings which almost over- 
powered me. I was, however, obliged to assume 
an appearance of gayety which but ill suited me." 

" Sunday^ April 3. — This morning Doctor S. 
j)reached from Job, 20 : 5, ' The triumphing of 
the wicked is short.' I cannot doubt my claim 
to the christian character, as revealed in the Bi- 
ble. I feci assured that * old things are passed 
away,' and that where was once darkness is now 
lio-ht in the Lord. I have confidence in God. I be- 
lieve his whole word. I rely solely on the Saviour 
of sinners for justilication, adoption, and sanctifi- 
cation. Still I am perplexed on every side. Re- 
maining corruption ciiuses me to cry aloud for 
help. I feel that I have gone astray, have wan- 
dered, and loved to wander. It grieves me. Oh 
my God, I ask of thee strength. I ask for that 
divine love which will make me count all things 
but loss that I may win Christ. I beseech thee 
let me not live for myself alone. Enable me to 
be useful to all around me." 

Wiusluw. 3 



25 



MRS. WINSLOW. 



The following extracts show that Miss L. did 
not confine her views to herself, though she had 
many internal conflicts. 

" 8th. — This day has been appointed by the 
Governor for fasting, humiliation, and prayer. I 
have humbled myself before thee. Oh thou Most 
High. I abhor myself, for I am vile ; my case, 
Oh blessed Father, is before thee. Thou know- 
est ail my desires. Thou knowest every wish of 
my heart. I feel assured that thou wilt not cast 
me off, when I entreat thy favor. My sins rise 
like a cloud, but I will hope in thy mercj'. Oh 
my soul, behold thy Saviour on the cross, dying 
for thy sins. See him rise from the dead, and as- 
cend to heaven ; calling upon thee to deny thy- 
self, to take up thy cross and follow him. And 
how canst thou be inactive 1 How canst thou 
again grieve him bj^ rebellion 1 Oh, dear Redeem- 
er, forgive me. Give me not up to hardness of 
heart and to unbelief. Eeprove me. Oh, humble 
me by afflictions if necessary, but sanctify them 
to me. Make me to feel thy chastening hand, if 
I otherwise shall not love and obey thee. For 
others I would also pray. Our country, Lord, 
is in a deplorable state. Thou canst save it from 
destruction. Oh spare us in love. May we yet 
be a peaceful and a happy nation. Bless the poor, 
the afflicted, the sick, and the destitute. Oh re-* 



EARLY LIFT. 'J7 

vive thy work in this part of the land. Cast not 
away from thee my dear, my beloved town. Thy 
judgments have been upon it in a peculiar but 
merited manner since this war ; but, Oh God, let 
it still be spared. 

*' 30. — Many times within a few of the last days 
I have exclaimed, ' thanks be to God who ^iveth 
us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.' 
I adore him for his most wonderful works. Had 
he not appeared for me, I should most surely 
have perished in despair. Now I rejoice that not 
a secret thought is concealed from him, because 
I am convinced that; knowing my weakness, he 
will give me strength. 

' In Him, not in an arm of flesh I trust, 

' In Him whose promise never yet has failed, 

' I place my confidence.' 

" To-morrow is appointed for the communion. 
Oh my God, give me, I beseech thee, a believing, 
humble heart, and grant the blessing of thy pre- 
sence in every soul which may partake of this 
feast. 

^\May 1. — This day I have enjoyed sensible 
communion with God. When first seated at the 
table, the belief that with all my selfishness I was 
numbered among the chosen of God, humbled me 
while it made me happy. The hope that I should 
meet around the throne of the Lamb all who M'cre 



28 MRS. WINSLOW. 

with me on this interesting occasion, and not 
these only, but absent friends, was bahn to my 
wounded spirit ; and though, but a few moments 
before, I was doubting my good estate, I could 
now rejoice in God my salvation, and wonder at 
his condescending love. I longed to have done 
with all sublunary things and be at rest. 

" June 6. — Intelligence has reached us, that on 
the 3 1st of March the allied armies entered Paris. 
The nations of Europe are now at peace. Oh my 
God, give me a thankful heart, and grant the best 
of blessings to those who are so signally deliver- 
ed from the horrors of war. May they learn war 
no more. May a similar blessing soon visit our 
unhappy country ; and may the consequence be 
a humbling of every rebellious heart. 

" Juhj 23, midnight. — The past day has been 

one of apprehension, of trial. My dear aunt J 

is very low. In consequence of being called to 
attend her immediately after rising this morning, 
1 omitted my morning devotions, and when re- 
minded of my omission in the course of the day, 
I still deferred going to God, which caused my 
heart bitter sorrow. 

" 30. — Aunt. J died between one and two 

o'clock. The preparation for her funeral devolved 
on me. I feel more as though a mother was to 
be interred than an aunt." 

"^/ J\\w Haven, August 10.— Last night Nor- 



EARLY LIFE. 29 

wich was in great consternation. The alarm sfuns 
were fired, and an express arrived from New 
London, stating that the surrender of Stonington 
Fort was demanded. This news gave universal 
alarm. I however left home this morning for 
New Haven. At Colchester met many soldiers 
with sad countenances, repairing to their place 
of rendezvous. It was a painful sight. At New 
Haven found friends well, and received a cordial 
welcome." 

The mind of Miss L. was early interested in 
the state of the heathen, as is shown by frequent 
references in her diary. 

" 21. — When I reflect on the multitudes of my 
fellow-creatures who are perishing for lack of 
vision, and that I am living at ease, without aid- 
ing in the promulgation of the Gospel, I am al- 
most ready to wish myself a man, that I might 
spend my life with the poor heathen. But I check 
the thought, and would not alter one plan of In- 
finite wisdom. I could, however, cheerfully en- 
dure pain and hardship for them, and for my dear 
Redeemer. Has he not given his life for multi- 
tudes now perishing, as well as for my soul 1 And 
Oh, how basely ungrateful and selfish in me, to 
sit down quietly in the care of self, without mak- 
ing any exertion for their salvation. But what 
3* 



30 MRS. WI^'SLOW. 

can I do ] A weak, ignorant female. One thini> 
only do I" see. My prayers may be accepted. 
Yes, I will plead with my heavenly Father, that 
he may be a Father to the poor benighted 
heathen." 

The following extract alludes to the lamented 
Eev. Dr. Payson : 

^\Monday, 22. — Spent this afternoon and even- 
ing at Mr. S.'s, with uncle and aunt L. Met Mr. 
and Mrs. Payson. If there ever was a good man 
on earth, Mr. Payson seems to me to be one. He 
appears truly humble, and much engaged in re- 
ligion ; and possesses much of the manner and 
countenance which I love to fancy belonged to 
St. Paul. In conversation this evening, he con- 
firmed me in an opinion which I have sometimes 
ventured to express, that all ought immediately 
to repent, and that we should neither pray with a 
wicked heart, nor omit prayer ; but pray with a 
holy heart." 

A letter to a dear friend with whom she conti- 
nued at times to correspond during her life, shows 
something of her early taste for polite literature. 
It should be remembered, that the remarks on 
the poetry of Lord Byron were made before his 
more exceptionable works were published. 



EARLY LIFE. 31 

"NEw-IlAvrv, Sept. 2, 1614. 
''Most welcome was a letter from my dear L. 
last week ; and let me request you never to think 
that a letter from you can prove an intrusion, 
even though I be much occupied by a sick room. 
I am pleased to learn that you are ' enthusiasti- 
cally fond of poetry.' In this we shall find a si- 
milarity in our characters. I have seen nothing 
7/cw, but the 'Feast of the Poets,' that pleased 
me very much. Lord Byron's productions you 
have undoubtedly seen. Do you agree with me 
in admiring them very muchi I was unwilling to 
be pleased with any thing that could proceed 
from a character like Lord Byron s ; but found 
it impossible to read without being delighted with 
almost every page. At the same time, I found 
much to condemn. Unchristian sentiments, con- 
veyed in such a garb of loveliness, have unques- 
tionably a very pernicious tendency J and much 
as I admire these books, I would gladly hear that 
there is not one copy remaining on the earth. 
Scott must please every lover of the muses. Of 
his poems, the ' Lady of the Lake ' is my favorite. 
A greater degree of sweetness and simplicity, 
I am sure, cannot be found in any work. And 
where is there a description more beautiful than 
he gives of Matilda in Rokeby 1 The poor old 
minstrel, too, interests my feelings very much. 
The lively pathos in the lines, 



32 MRS. WINSLOW. 

' Lives there a man with soul so dead, 
* Who never to himself hath said, 
' This is my own, my native land,' 

like almost every thing I meet with concerning 
home^ 'that dearest, sweetest spot,' I now recol- 
lect as one part which particularly interested me. 
Cowper and Young have always power to make 
me forget myself, and wholly absorbed in their 
delineation of the human character, especially 
where they contrast it with infinite purity. Of 
such writings I can never be weary. The more 
I read, the more excellent they appear. I like 
Thompson very much, and know not why I have 
read his ' Seasons ' but little. For amusement 
only there is nothing that I would sooner read 
than Shakspeare's plays. His witches have al- 
ways the power of bewitching me. Shall I go 
on to name the beauties of Campbell, Rogers, 
Goldsmith, Southey, Burns, &c. &c. No, I fear 
1 have already made myself tedious to you. I 
cannot, however, fail to notice ' Cumberland's 
Retrospection,' which I think admirable, consider- 
ing the advanced age of the writer. 

" I do not envy any their situation or their en- 
joyments, but if such a passion should find place 
in my heart, the object of it would be the leisure 
and the inclination to read all valuable and inter- 
esting books. Inclination I have. too much of 



EARLY LIFE. 33 

for my peace, wlille the opportunity is beyond 
my reach. 

"My friend, when fancying that some great 
enjoyments are withheld from us, arc we not apt 
to forget the numberless unmerited blessings 
which we daily receive, or to view them as things 
of course, which God in justice confers upon us 1 
Perhaps I ought not to judge of others by my 
own experience, but from some observation I 
infer that all of us are ungrateful for mercies en- 
joyed ; and that we have always something un- 
attained in view, which we fancy would promote 
our happiness. This is certainly the case with 
me. I am too much addicted to ' castle-building,' 
but it is not solely that I may increase my own 
happiness. I seek principally such changes as 
may promote my usefulness, and in these I should 
find my greatest happiness." 

The following letter to her mother shows how 
early her thoughts were turned to a missionary 
life, though not of course with any definiteness 
of object. To appreciate her feelings, we must 
bear in mind that Foreign Missions were then 
but little known or thought of in this land ; it 
being but four years after the organization of 
the earliest. Foreign Missionary Society in this 
country. 



34 MRS. WINSLOW. 

«'New Haven, Sept, 13, 1814. '■ 
'^ If the weather was good, I should probably 
be at this moment preparing myself to go and 
hear an oration, instead of writing to my dear 
mother. Were every privilege denied me, I might 
murmur ; but how can I now, when I am per- 
mitted to converse a few moments with my best 
friends. Truly, I have cause only for rejoicing. 
Even when sorely oppressed with a sense of my 
depravity, and the feeling that there is no good 
thing in me, that all my thoughts and actions are 
sinful, I have reason to rejoice ; for the Saviour 
of sinners has condescended to draw peculiarly 
near to me. My darkest hours are irradiated 
Avith the light of his countenance. I can hardly 
reconcile it to the justice of God, that so vile a 
being as I should be under such favorable cir- 
cumstances. I am almost ready to ask, Why was 
Harriet Newell taken from life, and a creature of 
so little worth as I am, continued here 1 Am I re 
served for similar usefulness 1 I will encourage 
such a hope. Think not by this that I desire to 
become the wife of a missionary. I desire to 
spend my life in the service of my Maker, and 
however inconsistent with such a wish much of 
my life may appear, it is my most ardent desire. 
Often my judgment leads me astray,'and often do 
I wander through thoughtlessness, but I am most 
thoroughly convinced that no service is so de- 



EARLV LIFE. 



35 



Ii'ghtful as that of my Saviour — that no privations, 
no toils, no sufferings, are too great for his chil- 
dren to endure for his sake." 

The following notice of an excursion to 
'' Wadsworth's Mountain," a few miles west of 
Hartford, the summer residence of Daniel Wads- 
worth, Esq. (after whose sister our young friend 
was named,) is inserted to show her early love 
for the beauties of nature. The excursion was 
made while she was on a visit to some friends in 
the neighborhood. 

'' September 26th. — After riding about seven 
miles, we found ourselves ascending the moun- 
tain through a forest, not of lofty pine, and tow- 
ering oak, but of low trees w^ith thick foliage, 
which seemed impervious to the sun. No variety 
of objects attracted our attention for two miles, 
when suddenly we found ourselves near a farm- 
house. It was built of wood, and in the gothic 
style. From this we proceeded to the mansion 
of Mr. W , which appeared the seat of ele- 
gance and repose. AVe were cordially welcomed 
by himself and lady. A few moments were al- 
lowed us to rest. After admiring the structure 
of the building, and the situation of the rooms, we 
sallied forth in quest of new scenes. The eldorly 
portion of our party took the direct road to the 



36 MRS. WINSLOW. 

tower, but the younger preferred a more circuit* 
ous route, so as to lose none of the beauties of 
the surrounding country. We proceeded to the 
top of a formidable hill. Below, as far as the eye 
could reach, was a varied landscape of meadows, 
fields, groves, hills, villages, and water prospects ; 
it was the most enchanting scene I ever beheld; 
but my astonishment when I ascended the tower, 
none but those who have been in the same place 
can well conceive. On the north. Mount Holyoke 
and Mount Tom (near Northampton) were visi- 
ble in the distance, while to the south-east the 
prospect was grand beyond the power of my fee- 
ble pen to describe. Hills, mountains, valleys, vil- 
lages, towns, and the winding river, all seemed 
confusedly blended together, ' the fragments of a 
slumbering Vv'orld.' At the south was Mount Car- 
mel. The distant view for fifty miles on each 
side of us w^as truly sublime ; but that directly a1 
our feet excited my most enthusiastic admira- 
tion. There vras a small lake, with a mountain a1 
each extremity ; the high tower on which we 
were standing being at the top of one, while the 
other, scarcely less lofty, was crowned with pri- 
mitive forest. On one side of the lake there was 
a delightful grove, and on the other, the w^alks 
and cultivated grounds around Mr. W 's ro- 
mantic mansion. After spending some time on 
the tower, we descended and wound our way 



EARLY LIFE. 37 

tlirough groves and enchanting scenery to the 
lake. We were taken in a boat to the opposite 
mountain, ascended it, and then returned to onr 
friends at the mansion, where we were prevailed 
on to stay to tea, and received other kind atten- 



It is evident from some succeeding passages, 
tiiat Miss Lathrop desired to be tiseful. By mark- 
ing her subsequent path, we shall learn /low those 
desires were carried into effect. The society to 
which she next alludes, and which she was in- 
strumental in forming, was established for the 
Relief of Poor Women a?Hl Childrcji. Under date 
of October 5, 1814, she writes : 

" This morning I made eleven calls on business 
for the Society. Some were on our poor pen- 
sioners. Returning home alone, I thought much 
on the degree of enjoyment of this class of peo- 
ple, compared with that of those who move in a 
different sphere. They appear to be much less 
favored than we are, but there is reason to be- 
lieve that some among them are more sincere 
christians than many among us. God has chosen 
the weak things of the world to confound tb.e 
things which are mighty. These peNple have dif- 
ferent comforts from ours, often nothing more 
than a subsistence for themselves and family for 

Wiiislow. ^ 



38 MRS. ^VI^■SL0W. 

ihe passing day, but they are happy in present 
gratification. Doubtless they have some trials of ' 
■which we know nothing. We, too, find perplexi- 
ties and troubles. Every heart knows its own 
bitterness, and a stranger intermeddleth not with 
its joys. 

" Odohp.r 6. — This afternoon I went to the so- 
ciety meeting. I found pleasure as usual in at- 
tempting to do good. Oh that I had a heart to 
improve every opportunity of usefulness to my 
fellow-creatures ; but self too much engrosses my 
thoughts, my time, and my labor. For self I sigh 
and toil, often reo-ardless of the sufFerinor multi- 
tude, and more frequently neglectful of the few 
who are in my own family, and who might be 
benefited by my exertions. 

'^ 12. — This morning friend N. Charles and my- 
self took a ride to Canterbury. The country 
would have appeared to me very fine a few 
weeks ago, but now I cannot view it without sad 
thoughts. The association of ideas leads me to 
think of my latter end, of my decay — not sudden, 
as from life to death — but a lingering decay of 
powers which constitute my chief source of en- 
joyment in life, and which, when I become old, 
will pass to second childishness. But that time 
may never arrive. I will not embitter my pre- 
sent joys by anticipations of my future help- 
lessness." 



EARLY LIFE. 39 

The following was written on commencing the 
instruction of a vohmtary school for the educafio?i 
of poor children : 

" 15. — I have been studying some parts of my 
character, and find more cause for humility than 
on a cursory view I could have believed. I pray 
that I may not rest day or night, until I am bet- 
ter versed in self-knowledge. 

" I am about to commence a school." j\Iay God 
make my motives pure, and prosper the work I 
have begun. Alas! do I not attempt this task more 
for appearance, than for the love of immortal 
souls \ This question, my soul, is of the great- 
est importance. I can never expect the divine 
blessing on my sinful actions, or on apparently 
good actions proceeding from bad motives. 
* Search me, God, and know my heart, try me, 
and know my thoughts, and sec if there be any 
wicked way in me, and lead me in the way ever- 
lasting.' 

" I ardently desire to devote my life to the ser- 
vice of my Maker ; to be constantly mindful of 
my responsibility ; to feel that I must live for 
others, and not for myself. Yesterday I renewed 
my solemn dedication of 'myself to the Lord, 
promising with his assistance to devote my time, 
the faculties of my mind, the members of my 
body, my talents, and my influence over others — 



40 MRS. WIXSLOW. 

all to the Maker and Giver of every power. O 
Heavenly Father, accept of me, and let me not 
again return to the vanities of life with the avid- 
ity which I have done heretofore. 

" J^ovemher 12. — No day of my school-keeping 
has been more interesting than this. Oh, that all 
who think their charities must be limited to a cer- 
tain few, and that institutions of this kind are 
productive of no good, would spend a few hours 
with these interesting little creatures, see their 
engagedness to excel in their various employ- 
ments, and witness their progress from one month 
to another. Sure I am they could not retain all 
their selfishness." 

Besides her efforts in the society and school 
formed for the benefit of the poor and suffering, 
she often ministered personally to their wants, 
especially in the care of the sick. 

While thus sacrificing herself for the good of 
others, she was called into the furnace of afflic- 
tion by tidings received from her beloved elder 
brother, then a member of the senior class of Yale 
College ; but it was to her as the " refiner's fire." 

'' jYov. 18, 1814.— This afternoon letters from 
New Haven state that Charles is no better, and 
he wishes to have mamma with him. Accordingly 
she left us this evening to go in the stage, in a 



EARLY LIFE. 41 

damp, dark night, and over bad roads ; but the 
same God who has supported us hitherto, will not 
now forsake us. Verily he is a friend in affliction. 

" 25. — Painful intelligence has arrived from 
Charles. He is very low, and we have reason to 
apprehend that the next account will be of his 
departure from this world of sorrow. Oh my 
God, wmU thou sanctify him wholly, and make 
happy his dying hour. 

" 26. — The day has been one of severe trial. 
Never was I so anxious for the arrival of letters. 
I went to school in a state of suspense. There, 
however, a letter \vas handed me, stating that 
our dear Charles is rather better. Oh my God, 
fill my heart with gratitude for this favor, and 
grant its continuance for Christ's sake. 

" 30. — And must it be] Am I no more to see 
the fond object of my love 1 Oh my God, suffer 
•me not to murmur. In all thy dealings thou art 
kind. And is my dear Charles first called to com- 
mence the ' travel of eternity V Oh, grant us 
support, and the sanctification of these trials to 
us all." 

The violent fever with which this promising 
youth had been attacked, raged till December 3, 
when he was called from his preparation for the 
ministry, to the rest above, at the age of twenty. 
The following extract indicates true resignation : 



42 MRS. WINSLOW. 

^^ December 6. — What can I render to the Lord 
for all his goodness'? Most severely has he afflict- 
ed us, but I trust it is in love. My dear parents 
returned yesterday in much better health than I 
had reason to expect, and are now tolerably com- 
fortable, and composed. Did I not feel resigned 
to this bereavement, their composure would sur- 
prise me. That Charles has made a happy ex- 
change, I have not the least doubt. For him I re- 
joice, rather than mourn. Yes, Oh my God, if 
thou wouldst grant his restoration to this family, 
to this fond, lacerated heart, in answer to its re- 
quests, it would be silent. I feel that he is taken 

from the evil to come. 1 have been called 

away to receive the condolence of a friend. These 
friends are very kind, they prove that they are in- 
deed our friends j but my selfish heart would seek 
loneliness, and indulge its feelings apart. I would 
summon piety to my aid, if a merciful God would 
grant me grace, and then return to the duties of 
the family with fortitude ; but now, the continual 
offers of sympathy but renew the anguish they 
are intended to allay." 

The friends of Job better understood the na- 
ture of affliction, when "they sat down with him 
upon the ground seven days and seven nights, 
and none spake a word unto him, for they saw 
that his grief was very great." 



EAKLY LIFE. 4-3 

We next find Miss Lathrop seeking to guide a 
beloved female associate, inquiring for the way 
of salvation. 

'* Norwich, December 24, 181 1. 

" After a delightful visit from , I im- 
prove a few moments in acknowledging the plea- 
sure which your letter afforded me. You say, 
^ Ma?itj a?id earnest have been my prayers that I 
might have an interest in the redemption of 

Christ.' What, my dearM , is required of us 

but a willing mind 1 Those who earnestly seek, 
have the promise of him who cannot err, that 
they shall obtain. Says our Saviour, * Blessed 
are they who do hunger and thirst after right- 
eousness, for they shall be filled.' ' Come unto 
me, all ye that labor and are hea\y laden, and I 
will give you rest.' ' Ask and it shall be given 
you, seek and ye shall find.' 

" But you may reply that ^ the sacrifice of the 
wicked is an abomination to the Lord.' Can it 
be that those are the wicked ones here mention- 
ed, in whom God has put a desire after holiness ? 
When one feels willing to take up the cross and 
follow Christ through evil and through good re- 
port — willing to sacrifice her dearest earthly en- 
joyments if he will take a seat in her heart, I 
think it cannot be that her offerings are unac- 
ceptable to a God of mercy. May I not hope that 



44 MRS. WINSLOW. 

such is the case with my friend 1 Then will I say, 
that though ^ clouds and darkness' are now about 
you, it will be for a season only ; for never did 
God say to us, ' Seek ye me in vain.' He is more 
ready to hear and bless us, than we to ask any 
good. But he requires of us a surrender of tht 
whole heart — there must be no reserve — an entire 
approbation of all his dealings, and earnest desires 
that we may be enabled to conform to them^ and 
not that they may be altered to suit our preseni 
gratification." 

Again w^e find her resuming her charitable ef 
forts, which it must be borne in mind, she was ther 
pursuing almost alone. Tract distribution, w^hicl: 
she employed with other means, w^as then in its 
very beginnings in this country. 

" 31. — I am almost discouraged with the little 
improvement which the children make in the 
school ; but if by ^ precept upon precept,' bj 
prayer, or by any other means, I may be permit- 
ted to do good to one of them, it will reward al 
my endeavors. I felt to-day more than usuallj 
engaged in my duties. After school, called or 

Mrs. I ; found her not well and three of hei 

V children sick. She did most truly claim my sym 
" pathy. I gave her a tract, hoping for the blessing 
of God on her perusal of it. 
" January 6, 1815. — I have this afternoon visit- 



EARLY LIFE. 4-5 

ed a poor sick negro woman, and derived more 
pleasure in contributing to her comfort, by read- 
ing in the Bible, than I could have found in the 
most splen(^id worldly entertainment. What can 
equal the pleasure of doing good \ Oh for a heart 
and the power to do good continually, to devote 
my whole life to the service of my ]\Iaker. 

" 27. — This day until three o'clock was spent 
in soliciting charity with my friend L., and in 
visiting the poor and sick. Could my days all 
pass thus, methinks ' the cares of this world, and 
the deceitfulness of riches' would not 'choke the 
word, and render it unfruitful.' God, I pray 
thee enlarge my sphere of usefulness. Give me 
power and desire to do good continually. This 
evening I spent at the reading meeting. Return- 
ed home, not very well either in body or mind ; 
but God is good. ' I will still praise Him, who is 
the health of my countenance and my God.' " 

On hearing of the proclamation of peace with 
Great Britain, she writes : 

'^ February G. — This afternoon most glorious 
news has reached us. And may we indeed be 
permitted to enjoy the blessings attending the 
restoration of peace to our suffering country. 
To God be all the glory ; 0, eternity shall tell the 
gratitude and joy which fill my heart. May I 



46 • MRS. WINSLOW. 

never forget this day. May I never cease to praise 
the Lord for his goodness, and may not one soul 
be unmindful of the source from whence flows 



A letter to her friend in H , shows that death 

was sometimes anticipated by her with desire. 

" Norwich, March 13th, 1815. 
" I am told that Miss H. is in town, and will re- 
turn to Hartford in a few days. I trust she will 
take a letter to Louisa. Your last was most wel- 
come. What can I say that will give you half as 
much pleasure 1 You ask the character of that 
dear friend who has been taken from me. Can a 
sister describe him impartially 1 He was all that 
my fond heart wished him. He was dear to me 
by every tie which mutual affection and entire 
confidence could form w^hile on earth. Now, my 
love to him is of a more exalted kind. Is the 
sweet belief that he is permited, 

' With unseen ministry of angel power 
' To watch the friends- he loved,' 

mere delusion 1 Be it so. I will cherish it as a 
precious solace. My friend, there are seasons of 
weakness when feeling triumphs over reason and 
religion. Such is the" present one with me. I 
have been most forcibly reminded of my loss to- 



EARLY LIFE. 47 

day in the death of Mr. W. Will you hclicve 
that, on first hearing the tolling of the bell, I com- 
plained, ' Why am not I permitted to join these 
kindred souls, to add another to the trophies of 
redeeming love, and behold the unveiled glories 
of Inimanuel V Not often do I ' chide the linger- 
ing moments,' but there are limes when my soul 
is distressed by this cumbrous load which chains 
it to earth, when it longs to fly away and be at 
rest. But I am ever quieted by the reflection that 
the appointments of Infinite Wisdom, though in- 
scrutable, are always right. Every thing that is 
in the power of highly valued friends to confer 
upon me, ' to tempt my tarriance here below,' I 
am permitted to enjoy j and truly my life is plea- 
sant. I have constant reason to be filled with 
gratitude for innumerable temporal blessings, and 
what is of greater value, a peace of mind ' which 
passeth all understanding.' Why then am I dis- 
satisfied 1 I am not ; but to be perfectly freed 
from sin, and to be arrayed in the spotless robe 
t of Christ's righteousness, is a privilege so glori- 
> ous, so transcendently superior to all the combin- 
I cd pleasures of earth, that I must languish for it. 
Were I not on every side so vulnerable, in all my 
duties so imperfect^ I would cling more to life. 

" What you say of jprayer exactl}' meets my 
feelings. IMost truly it is a glorious privilege ; 
and when our petitions are not limited to our- 



48 MRS. WINSLOW. 

selves, but we carry the case of every dear ob- 
ject to Him who knows their wants, and will be 
inquired of for the supply of them, we find it 
most consolatory. If any whom we love have 
never bent the knee or lifted the heart in sup- 
plication to their Maker, how sweet to plead for 
blessings on their heads ! On the whole, were 
we disposed to appreciate our trials and bless- 
ings justly, we should find the latter much to 
exceed the former 5 and what though disappoint- 
ment constitute a large proportion of our check- 
ered lives, this is not our home. We are but jour- 
neying to a better country, where all tears shall 
be wiped from every ej'^e." 

Again the ardor of her soul is expressed in 
her closet : 

^'.March 30. — Oh, my soul, shout for joy, tune 
thy harp to notes of praise, and live ever in the 
celebration of Jehovah's excellencies. For such 
sweet foretastes of eternal felicity I can never 
be enough thankful. Oh, sing aloud and tell of 
God's wondrous works to a sinful depraved de- 
scendant of the first transgressor. I could dwell 
ever on the mount, and thus find a heaven here 
below. Oh, my poor fellow-beings, how my heart 
yearns for your salvation. Why will you not hear 
and live '( Blessed Saviour, pour out thy Holy 



EARLY lifl:. 49 

spirit on all thy children this nifrht. Grant that, 
with all the energies of our souls, we may sup- 
plicate thy favor for poor lost men. Oh, save by 
thy mighty power. Magnify thyself on the earth. 
Remember those on whom the glorious light of 
the Gospel has never shone. May the heathen sing 
of thy mighty works. Oh, my Saviour, come 
near I pray thee, and bless all souls as thou dost 
mine. 

^^^pril 9. — (Her birth-day.) Again docs a re- 
volving year find me in the land of the living. 
Sad vicissitudes have marked its course ; but con- 
solation has so mingled Avith grief, that it has 
been one of the happiest years of my life. A 
year this day, two dear friends, now gone, were 
pilgrims here ; but though what are termed real 
calamities had not visited mc, I was then labor- 
injr under most distressinsf conflicts. God be 
praised that they no longer destroy mj' peace ; 
but I feel liable to something similar. Yes, my 
weak soul, thou art less than nothing to accom- 
plish thy purposes. I must trust implicitly in 
God, for he only can make me holy. 

'' I have commenced this interesting period 
with a resolution that I will set apart a season of 
the last evening of each week to pray for the out- 
pouring of the Spirit in this town. Have propos- 
ed the plan to several friends, who approve and 
will follow it. Thus may the consciousness that 

Wiiialow. 5 



50 MRS. WLNSLOW. 

friends are asking the same favor with ourselves, 
at the same time, animate and warm our hearts. 
Oh, heavenly Father, condescend, I beseech thee, 
to be glorified through us unworthy creatures. 
Hear the feeble voice of our supplications, and 
grant us more than we can ask or think. May 
this year be wholly dedicated to thee. If my life 
be continued, enable me to realize constantly that 
the vows of God are upon me. 

^^May 11. — I have made a visit to Mrs. K , 

who was with my dear departed brother in his 
last moments. It has revived many painful recol- 
lections. 

' And is he gone 1 how oft on sudden solitude 
* That fearful question will intrude.' 

Why am I so selfish % True, I am afflicted, but 
God is nov/ magnifying himself on the earth. 
For this let me rejoice, and forget my sufferings 
in the happiness of others. Gracious Saviour, 
continue thy glorious work, and let no false zeal, 
no semblance of Christianity where it does not 
exist, mar the beauty of thy cause. Move our 
hearts to pray continually, with increased faith, 
for the prosperity of Zion. 

" Monday 15. — This afternoon accompanied 

my grandmother Lathrop to visit aunt P . She 

is ,8:oing down to the grave as a shock of corn 
fully ripe, I have enjoyed the visit greatly. Re 



J 



EARLY LIFE. 51 

turned liome iilonc at twilight in a most pouccful, 
happv frame, thinking thus: Why am 1 not one 
of tl»e happiest creatures in existence 1 AVouhl 
I exchange situations with the rich and great ? 
Oh no, they may envy my joy. Why is it, Oh 
my God, that I, so weak, so frail, so altogether 
depraved and vile in the view of a holy God, am 
thus distinguished 1 

*' July 30. — I again tried to-day, as repeatedly 
before, to establish a female prcii/cr-meciingy but 
was unsuccessful — from an unexpected source 
was disappointed. I beseech thee, Lord, open 
to me some other door of usefulness. I feel that 
I could do anj'^ thing, frail and imperfect as I am, 
that would lead sinners to repent. Oh Lord, gra- 
ciously be pleased to hear the feeble voice of my 
supplications, and make me an humble instru- 
ment in thy hands of good to the souls of men. 

'' 31. — Gave a Tract to a poor woman, who, on 
reading the title, ' Sin and Danger of Neglecting 
the Saviour,' burst into tears ; and, as soon as 
she could speak, said, ' I see this every day.' She 
attempted to thank me, but could not. Oh that I 
may be made the means of good to her soul. 
She must soon go down to the grave. Save her. 
Oh God, from endless wo." 

The following note to the estimable female 
friend whom she addressed December 14-, gives 



52 MRS. WINSLOW. 

intimation that the Lord was raising up a coad- 1 
jutor in her labors of love, while the two suc- 
ceeding paragraphs, under a later date, intimate 
that she was not backward to summon to effort 
any available energies. 

" Believe me it is not idle curiosity which 
makes me long to know if you have not deter- 
mined that, let others do as they will, you will 
serve the Lord even in the ways of his appoint- 
ment. Although your letter to L expressed 

no expectation that you should accompany the 
young ladies in commemorating the death of 
Christ, it increased my hope that you would soon 
follow their example. I believe you are sensible 
that it is a great privilege as well as duty.'''' 

" August, 1815. 

'' You are among us a new heir of glory. Do 
not, I beseech you, when comparing yourself with 
those around you, rest satisfied with attaining a 
degree of sanctification equal to us. The word of 
God must be the only correct standard of faith 
and practice. I think it is unprofitable to compare 
our frame of mind with that of other christians ; 
the witness must be in ourselves if we are the 
children of God." 

" It has been proposed that all those professing 



EARLY LIFE. 53 

christians in N who feel the importance of 

having a shaking annong these dry bones, should, 
if possible, be engaged in prayer for this object 
at 12 o'clock each day. The idea that many voices 
are at the same time mingling upon the altar of 
Qod, we trust will give animation to holy desires, 
and fervency to divine love ; and, my friend, is 
there any thing to which our hands^ our voices, 
and our hearts should not be devoted that promi- 
ses any benefit to immortal souls \ 

'^ Poor is very sick. This dear sister 

needs your prayers very much, that her faith 
fail not. She is more severely tried than any can 
conceive who do not daily witness her sufferings. 
I need your prayers, that in all God's dispensa- 
tions I may subscribe a hearty amen, be fitted for 
his service, and be made faithful in it." 

We now accompany Miss L on an excur- 
sion made chiefly for the benefit of her health, 
in company with her mother. 

" Woodsworth's, Man'sfield. 

^^Odober 17. — I leave the conversation of my 
mother and friends to recall the occurrences of 
\ the day. Nothing worth recording occurred in 
our ride from Norwich to this place. Here we 
now are, after a comfortable repast, seated around 
the fire-side of a brother, in the best of bonds, 
5* 



6^ MRS. WIXSLOW. 

as by his conversation I venture to believe and 
feel. Truly, Christianity is lovely, whatever may 
be its outward garb. Oh that we could find it at 
every step. 

" There is some prospect of rain to-morrow. 
May we say with the good Shepherd, 'It will be 
such weather as pleases me.' Although T am sur- 
rounded with the beauties of nature, my thoughts 
have w^andered to the dear home which we have 
left ; but I am weak. • Assist me. Oh my God. I 
pray for strength of mind to resist every emotion 
which is incompatible with supreme love to thee. 
May I seek to glorify thee in every thing, and 
live only to serve thee. 

" Springfield. 

" 18. — We left Mansfield this morning at eight 
o'clock, and after a cheerful ride through forests 
of pine, &c. we proceeded on a good road to 
Coventry, Ellington, Enfield, and Springfield. 
Again have we been most kindly sustained by a 
good Providence, and permitted to welcome the 
* evening shades ' in circumstances of much com- 
fort. Oh that we may render unceasing thanks 
for such manifestations of love. 

" Northampton. 

" 19. — Here we arrived at sunset, after a ride 
of twenty-five miles. Our course was sometimes 



EARLY LIFE. 55 

on the banks of the Connecticut, sometimes on 
the sides of the mountains, and at others between 
lofty cliffs^ with ranges of mountains before u?, 
covered with thick foliage, in tlie inexpressibly- 
rich garb of the season ; the river being on the 
rijrlit hand, and the variegated forests on the left. 
The scene was delightful, and in some places even 
magnificent beyond description." 

The journey was continued through Pittsfield 
to Canaan, N. York. The closing record of it is, 

'^ 28. — Last evening, through the goodness of 
God, I was permitted to return to my beloved 
home, after a most delightful journey ; a!nd found 
friends here in good health. Although unattended, 
we have met with nothing to disturb us, but every 
thing has been pleasant. Oh that I were more 
grateful, more wholly devoted to Him, whose I 
have resolved to be in all things, and at all times." 

The following is an illustration of her careful 
notice of the anniversary of days on which 
events of especial interest to herself and friends 
occurred: 

"Norwich, December 4, 1815. 

" My dear M , This is to me a most solemn 

and interesting season — one year yesterday since 



56 MRS. WIXSLOW. 

my dear brother entered on the scenes of eternity. 
Last evening I spent with three of his class-mates, 
and for a moment could hardly check the rising 
murmur, Why is it thus % But immediately re- 
joiced that he is happily removed from this wil- 
derness of 100. It is easier to say that we are 
resigned to the dispensations of Providence, than 
at all times to feel perfectly so. Time has mel- 
lowed the poignancy of my grief ; but it has not 
lessened the estimation of mj'- lossj or made me 
feel less keenly at times, that / am left 'to linger 
longer here and grieve' — while my friend is en- 
joying the glories of Immanuel." 

In March, 1816, Miss Lathrop made a visit of 
some weeks to friends in the city of J\'ew-Yorkj 
and the subjects which engrossed her mind and 
heart, the impulses she obtained in the spiritual 
life, and the practical use she made of them, 
especially in the organization of t^e Sabbath- 
school in the place of her nativity, beautifully 
exemplify the maturity and excellence of her 
christian character. 

After describing the adventures of a voyage 
of two or three days by sloop ; " the majesty and 
benevolence of God " displayed in the sun rising 
from the bosom of the ocean — '^ Tracts having 
employed her fellow-passengers at evening until 
about nine o'clock, when singing was proposed 



EARLY LIFE. 57 

and all retired to rest," — and having received the 
kind hospitalities of valued friends, we find her, 
the next day after her arrival, addressing the fol- 
lowino- letter to a beloved female associate, on 
the subject of publicly professing her faitk in 
Christ : 



TO MISS i\r- 



" New-York, 11th March, 1810. 

" Dear M , Your letter has been much on 

my mind, but it has not been in my power to 
give you a reply until the present time. 

^' You know that ' christians have donbts and 
fears,' but imagine that ' they are never powerful 
enough to eclipse their former views.' I believe, 
my friend, that christians in darkness often ques- 
tion whether there has ever been vital piety in 
their hearts — whether they have not fancied 
themselves to be something when they were 
nothing, and thus deceived their own souls. 

'^ Again you say that you ' do not "grow in 
grace," are not enjoying the light of God's coun- 
tenance, and running with alacrity and zeal in 
the path of holiness.' Let me ask you, my friend, 
if God has given you no more humbling views 
of yourself — no more sense of sin — and no clear- 
er view of the infinite condescension of the bless- 
ed Jesus, and your obligations to devote all your 



58 MKS. WINSLOW. 

time and facultijes to his service 1 If this be the 
case, let me entreat you to watch and pray. If, 
on the contrary, by a more intimate acquaintance 
with your heart you find in it more depravity 
than you expected, and that it has more need of 
a Saviour, do not question his power or mercy 
to fulfil all his promises to those who ask of him 
the supply of their wants. 

'^ You appear to believe that I cannot invite 
* such a sinner' to the commmiion table. AYere 
you holy^ most assuredly I would not ; but the 
Scriptures invite sinners to come to the Gospel 
feast. There is food for the hungry — refreshing 
grace for the weary and heavy laden. Can our 
christian graces be increased, while we avoid 
the use of those means which are expressly de- 
signated by the Most High as necessary to our 
advancement in the divine life 1 

'' The inconsistencies of professing christians 
ought not to discourage you from obeying the 
command of Christ, if you are indeed one of the 
happy number to whom he has said, 'Do this in 
remembrance of me.' If God is your God — your 
supreme object of regard — while walking in the 
way of his appointment you may be sure of his 
assistance and support. With this portion, we 
should not fear, though all the earth should en- 
camp against us. We know that all ' principali- 
ties and powers ' cannot pluck God's dear chil- 



EARLY LIFE. 59 

drcn out of his hands, pr separate them from his 
constant care, without whicli the best saint on 
earth will not be a consistent christian. 

'' I am sensible that it is a ij;rcat thins; to be a 
christian, and would not for the world inlhiencc 
you to take a step which would endanger your 
soul's best interest ; but I would, if I have any 
influence, use it in exhorting you not to delay a 
thorough knowledge of yourself and the faithful 
discharge of every duty. It is in the path of duty 
that we may expect a blessing — out of it we 
have no right to rely on the mercy of Jehovah. 

" I will not say, forgive my freedom — you en- 
couraged me to do thus. To the goodness of 
God 1 commend you, WMth fervent prayer that 
you may be faithful ; that you may devote your 
time, your talents, and all that you possess, to 
Him whg claims them as your reasonable service. 

'' 3Iy friend, our time is short, we have much to 
do. Shall we who have hopefully obtained an in- 
terest in Christ rest satisfied with our present at- 
tainments, and indifTerent about the welfare of 
precious souls around us 1 Oh no, let us separate 
ourselves from the multitude who live to do evil; 
and by a consistent walk in our profession of faitli, 
manifest to all around us that we are christians 
in truth — thus being humble instruments of good. 
To this end let us pray for each other, as sisters 
meeting with the same temptations, subject to the 



60 MRS. WIXSLOW. 

same infirmities, and in constant need of the same 
renevjing grace. 

" I wish there may be a praying society in Nor- 
wich. L has the constitution which I wrote — 

not such as I could wisli, but as well as I could 
do. Use your influence to effect the object, and 
I am sure you will never regret it." 

In another note to the same, she says : 

^' You lament that your duties are so imperfecU 
ly performed. Alas, such may too truly be the 
language of all who have not stepped beyond the 
confines of earth. The best of mankind are ^ un- 
profitable servants ;' and I believe those who know 
their own hearts, will find in them so much rebel- 
lion and all kinds of depravity, that the subject of 
their greatest astonishment will be that such in- 
consistent creatures are permitted to have a place 
with the sons and daughters of the Most High. 

" We must not then put off the performance 
of duties until we can perform them with perfect 
love ; but if the Holy Spirit, witnessing with our 
spirits, declares our souls are regenerated, I think 
we may, in dependance on divine aid^not in the 
least on our own strength — go to the communion 
table, and sitting at the feet of Jesus, be trans- 
ported even to the gate of heaven. Come then, 
my friend, not because you are strong and rich 



EARLY LIFE. 61 

in faith, and zealous unto every good work ; but 
because you are weaky and have nothing in your- 
self. Come, with humble co7ifidcnce that he who 
bids you come, will not send you away without 
rich supplies of heavenly food. That you may 
be guided in this important step by the good Spirit 
of our God, prays your friend Harriet." 

TO HER PARENTS. 

"New-York, March 28, 1816. 

" You will rejoice to hear that N — F — has 
within two days obtained that confidence in God 
which she thought would never be her happi- 
ness — her tongue seems loosed, ready to declare 
what great things the Lord has done for her soul. 
She attends Dr. Romeyn's church, and considers 
his catechetical lecture yesterday as one great 
means of opening her eyes. These lectures have 
been greatly blessed. * 

" Rev. Mr. Spring and Rev. Mr. Whclpley have 
isimilar lectures ; and Mr. Spring saj's, the com- 
mencement of the revival in his church was at 
one of these lectures. There is now a great 
number of his congregation who are very serious, 
ibout sixty of whom have obtained hope, and are 
sxpecting to unite with the church. 

' The present state of religion in this city is 
irery animating. In several places where we have 

WklefloW. 6 



62 MRS. WINSLOAV. 

heard of revivals, their commencement has been 
apparently traced to prayer-meeli7igs;^ and days of 
fastings appointed on account of the declension 
of religion. 

'' It has been said to me that there is unusual 
attention to religion in JVorwich. Can this be 
true, and my friends not tell me of it '] If indeed 
the good Spirit is passing among you, my dear 
friends, do not suffer him to depart. Whether it 
be true or not, do wrestle at the throne of grace 

for a blessing. Brother D , I am not willing 

you should leave Norwich just at this time. Why 
may not you, or papa, call on Dr. S , and pro- 
pose a prayer-meeting for the members of the 
church on account of the declining state of reli- 
gion : or if it may be so, on account of the dawn- 
ing of a brighter day. United prayer is the means 
which God has more frequently been pleased to 
bless than any other. Do let me hear that you 
have met to pray ; and on the same evening let me 
suggest that it would be desirable to request the 
prayers of friends at a distance from you. I find 
it has been apparently of great influence here and 
elsewhere. 

" My dear sisters, why may not your Saturday 
evening exercises be repeated during the week 1 
You may set apart days or hours of prayer among 
a few individuals. Oh that you may cast off re- 
straint ; let your tongues be loosed, and glory in 



EARLY LIFE. 63 

the cross of Christ. This is a peculiarly privi* 
lofTcd day. Now you may be strengthened and 
encouraged by the prayers of christians in other 
places; for I believe that many bear Norwich on 
their hearts at the throne of grace. I will in- 
sure to you many prayers in this citj% if I may 
know a certain day, or evening, on which chris- 
tians are thus engaged in supplicating the bless- 
ing of heaven. Do not delay, but write me im- 
mediately on this subject." 

" Saturday evening. — my dear sisters, how 
gladly would I make one with you to-night. 1 
liave thought much of you ; that your hearts have 
been quickened by the good Spirit of God, that 
your prayers have ascended in faith, and have 
met with gracious acceptance. Would that we 
were wholly devoted. Do we ' sQek first the king- 
dom of God,' for ourselves and others ; or do we 
give to the world far the greater portion of our 
time and talents — leaving little for Him who hath 
redeemed us by his own most precious blood \ 
Should we not tremble for our acquittal at the 
judgment bar, when so unfaithful in this life ? Let 
not this consideration harden our hearts still 
more, but induce us to arise and shine in the 
glory of God." 



64f MRS. WIXSLOW. 

TO HER MOTHER. 

New-York, Sunday evening, March 15. 

*^Dear Mother, — This has been a most bless- 
ed daj^ In the morning I attended Dr. Mason's 
church. It was their commmiion. I felt that my 
soul needed something to rouse and reprove. Rev. 

Mr. L preached on the subject of saying 

'Peace, peace, when there is no peace.' He 
seemed a preacher sent from heaven. I was 
more refreshed, and I humbly hope, more benefit- 
ed, than by any preaching I have heard. 

" Wed?iesday. — I had never seen Mr. Elisha 
Coit, and being introduced yesterday afternoon, 
he asked if I had ever before visited the city — 
then, instead of the usual question, 'How are you 
pleased with it V he asked how I had been affect- 
ed by the religious privileges I had enjoyed. 
This is quite like the man, and will give an idea 
what was the subject of our conversation, and 
that I feasted upon a few moments' familiar chris- 
tian communion. 

" Thursday evening. — This evening I was at 
Mr. Spring's session-room — had a most interest- 
ing meeting. I never saw an audience apparently 
so much affected. The good work continues in 
this church ; new cases of seriousness are daily 
occurrinof." 



EARLY LIFE. 65 

Having mentioned her hope of derivinf^ nnuch 
benefit from the memoir of Jlrs. Isabella (jiaham, 
and entreated her parents and friends not to de- 
spond-as to the advancement of the work of God 
in Norwich, she gives an account of a meeting- 
of the Sunday-school Society, which she had at- 
tended ; mentions several examples of conversion 
reported; and states that 2,194- female children 
were under the care of the managers. "It is a 
most pleasing sight," she adds, '' to see a hundred 
or more children coming into each church on the 
Sabbath with their teachers — most of them being 
those who have usually spent the holy day in the 
streets, if not in flagrant immoralities." 

Having returned to her native town, she soon 
resolved on attempting what she could ; and with 
the aid principally of a dear relative and friend, 

(now Mrs. P , of New-York,) encountering 

discouragements and obstacles from the preju- 
dices even of good people, now difficult to be 
understood, succeeded in forming the first Sab- 
bath-school in Norwich. After going from house 
to house, pleading with children and their parents, 
they commenced their instructions with the num- 
ber of seven scholars ; and, as she at a later date 
familiarly wrote, " though the doors of the school- 
house were once barred against us, the number 
of pupils increased, and with them our interest 
6* 



66 MRS. WINSLOW. 

and our hopes — the final result being no less au- 
spicious for a few difhculties at the outset." 

Early in June, she also writes to a beloved un- 
cle, " Oh that I could give you joy by announc- 
ing a general revival here. We will, however, 
rejoice that a little number are about to " name 
themselves by the name of Israel." Five young 
ladies^ and one lad aged sixteen, were yesterday 
propounded for admission to our church. Four 
of them are recent subjects of divine grace. If 
the angels in heaven rejoice over one repenting 
sinner, surely that six are hopefully added to the 
kingdom of our God, is ground for abundant 
thanksgiving and praise. Grandma Lathrop says 
she has never known so many attend religious 
meetings in Norwich, as at the present time 
These appearances are favorable : could I see 
christians alive to the subject of religion, I would 
say they portend great blessings." 



IN NORwicir. G7 



CHAPTER II. 



Consecration to the Missionary Work. 

Examination of duty as to missions— opposition of friends — 
grounds of her decision — joy in consecrating herself — 
private meditations on the subject — short residence at 
Litchfield, Conn. — letters — Dr. Griffin — visit at New 
Haven — Mr. Cornelius — Dr. Worcester — benevolent en- 
deavors — efforts for the spiritual benefit of individuals- 
ordination of Mr. Winslow — designation to Ceylon — 
marriage — visit to Andover and Vermont — farewell 
notes — embarkation. 

The question of her personally engaging in a 
mission to the Heathen was now brought before 
the mind of Miss L , and received, as it claim- 
ed, her most serious and prayerful consideration. 

It is to be feared that, for want of such careful 
examination and prayer, some enter the path into 
which she was at length directed — no longer new 
and untrodden by American females — without 
sufficiently considering whither it leads, or the 
spirit of self-denial which it requires. Th§y go 
out, cheered perhaps by the smiles of friends, and 
encouraged by the approbation of all the churches, 
without reflecting that soon, amidst a people of 
strange speech, they will see these smiles only 



68 MRS. WINSLOW. 

in remembrance, and hear the voice of encou- 
ragement only in dying whispers across the 
ocean ; and that then, nothing but a thorough 
conviction of being in the path of duty, nothing 
but the approving smile of heaven can keep them 
from despondency. 

It is time that the romance of missions was 
done away. It has been of use, perhaps, in ex- 
citing attention to the subject ; but no attraction 
from its novelty, no impulse from its moral dig- 
nity, will bear up and carry forward any one, 
amidst long-continued labors of almost uniform 
sameness, which, though dignified as to their ob- 
ject, and their connection with the conversion of 
the world, are yet, in nearly all their details, 
most humble and forbidding. A young lady, who 
in this country may stand, perhaps, at the head of 
a large seminary, and take the lead in many bene- 
volent operations, should either chasten her ima- 
gination, or invigorate her principles, before she 
goes forth to teach a few heathen children, or to 
exert an uncertain, it may be an unacknowledged 
influence over a handful of degraded and dark- 
minded female idolaters. By not doing this, some 
have unexpectedly found the sphere of their use- 
fulness apparently contracted, rather than en- 
larged, by the sacrifices they have made ; and in 
want of the excitement occasioned by the pre- 
sence and the encouragement of fellow-christians, 



IN NORWICH. 69 

have been in danger of sinking into hopeless 
inactivity. 

There are encouragements enough to any sa- 
crifice — if what is done for Him who bought us 
with his own blood can be called a sacrifice — but, 
it must be from priJiciple^ and not mere impulse. 
Mere excitement will not answer. The mind 
must be kept steady ; and there must be a willing- 
ness to take the more humble part of breaking up 
the fallow ground and casting in the seed, in- 
stead of gathering in the harvest, as well as some 
clear-sightedness of faith, to see in small begin- 
nings germs of great and long increasing good. 
An ardent love for souls, and a deep sense of the 
constraining love of Christ, will support even a de- 
licate female under any privation, and enable her 
to " rejoice in tribulation also." 

TO HER MOTHER. 

" Sometimes I feel an absolute necessity for 
determining whether I can leave all that my heart 
holds most dear on earth, and encounter the toils 
and hardships of a missionary life ; but again I 
realize my insufficiency to decide a question of 
such importance. Indeed, I would not decide 
for myself. I cannot. I must trust solely to Him 
who has promised grace and strength. When I 
ask myself if I can endure a separation from 



70 MRS. WINSLOW. 

such friends as mine, my answer is uniformly, 
* We must be separated in a few days, and can I 
refuse to suffer a little for Him who has redeem- 
ed my soul by the sacrifice of Himself V Oh, dear 
mother, I need your prayers." 

TO A FRIEND. 

'* My heart is full this evening. Have heard a 
little too much this afternoon about my desire to 
be useful in the world, — and the first duties be- 
ing in my own country. Were it proper that I 
should follow altogether the opinion of friends, 
in a case of this importance, I would thank them 
for counsel ; but my own conviction of duty must 
determine me. 

"A letter from cousin F. to-night, asks what I 
am about, and w^iat are my feelings, and what my 
plans, and says, that although she ^ cannot go all 
along with them, she shall view them impartially.' 
I should be glad if those whose approbation I 
value would permit me to rest on this subject;' 
but friends in N. L. seem to have received an 
impression that I am going on a mission, and I 
fear, will never give their consent. But should 
that deter me 1 With the smiles of my heavenly 
Father, I must be happy though friends forsake 
me. Oh that I may justly estimate the blessings 
I have, and leave the rest to God." 



IN NORWICH. 71 

TO THE SAME. 

" On Tuesday I visited E. for the last time, 
ISlie seemed hardly to be this side of eternity ; 
and, although expressing a desire to die, mani- 
fested not the least evidence of love to God. I 
have rarely witnessed any thing which afTccted 
me so much. Her appearance was uncommonly 
interesting. I spoke to her, with a desire to as- 
certain on what she grounded her hopes of hap- 
piness after death ; but to no purpose. On leav- 
ing her, 1 engaged to sit up the next night, but 
Providence ordered otherwise. jMy mind was 
filled with intense anxiety, and even horror, in 
view of her spiritual state for the following 
twenty-four hours. I may be asked how then I 
can think of witnessing multitudes of precious 
souls perishing together, without the least hope 
of their salvation. Tt would excite anxiety in me, 
if I did not consider the peculiar circumstances 
which attended this case, and that, probably, I 
may never again witness one so calculated to 
overwhelm the mind. Often do I exclaim. Oh 
for more faith, more fervent love. I feel more 
and more, that few are so culpable as myself. 
Duties stand thick around me, I see them at 
every step, and. Oh, how neglected ! 

'' Evc7iina;. — Have just returned from a pvayer- 
mccting. 1 find myself more interested in ])ray- 



72 3IRS. WINSLOW. 

ers, which make particular mention of ihe poor 
heathen^ than others; and especially those which 
refer to the missionaries who have gone, and are 
yet to go. I feel a growing interest in this part 
of the human family. I sometimes indulge the 
belief that God is bringing me nearer to Himself, 
and that he keeps me more and more in depen- 
dence on his grace for every blessing of each 
day and hour." 

In reference to the opposition of friends to the 
missionary undertaking, mentioned in some of 
the above and of the following letters, it should 
be remembered that the subject was then new; 
and in justice to these friends it should also be 
stated, that they afterwards, almost without ex- 
ception, became favorable to the cause, and most 
of them its v.-arm supporters. The difficulties in 
the way of forming the little societies, which are 
noticed, seem now quite unaccountable. 

'=June 5, 181G. 
^' I yesterday sent Messrs. Hall and Newell's 
letters to cousin F. whom you know I esteem as 
one of my very first friends, with a particular re- 
quest that she would give me her opinion respect- 
ing them. Slie returned them the same day, ac- 
companied by a letter, but said not one word 
about them. She merely touched upon the sub- 
ject, by saying ^ she could have no influence with 



¥ 



IN NORWICH. 73 

me, and would not if she could, but would have 
me view fads with coolness.^ I iind myself cen- 
sured, pitied, and condemned. Eliza C. I miss 
very much. Her heart is ever open, sincere, 
afrcctionate ; and if my judgment seemed alto- 
gether erroneous, she would still feel for me and 
manifest herself my friend. L. not only ap- 
proves, but I think would go with me with all 
her heart. 

'' You will rejoice to hear, that after this 
length of time, a few of us females have conclud- 
ed to meet at Mrs. H.'s, next Monday afternoon, 
for prayer ; and intend to continue to meet once 
in two weeks. It will not be a general thing, 
because very few are willing to make the sacri- 
fice of feeling which is necessary. We are not, 
however, satisfied with doing no more to bring 
the church together, and have resolved on 
making an attempt to form a society of females, 
one object of which shall be to promote chris- 
tian acquaintance. They will meet once in two 
weeks, and spend the afternoon together in some 
kind of work, making articles which may meet a 
ready sale, and appropriate the money to some 
benevolent object j perhaps to the education of 
lieathen youth. A number seem already quite in- 
terested in the plan. We design not to give it 
much publicity, as societies of every kind en- 
counter opposition. 

Winslow. 7 



74 MRS. WI^•SLOV^^ 

*' How shall I tell you how happy I have been 
to-day. Seven of us met at M. H.'s this after- 
noon. We were enough in number to claim the 
promise, and I trust did so. We felt like sisters, 
and separated with the persuasion that it was 
good to be there. We have determined to meet 
once in two weeks, also every Saturday after- 
noon previous to the communion, and to have 
four days of fasting in course of the year. Next 
Monday we are to meet at Miss T.'s, to make 
gloves, &c. My plans being so fully realized, I 
know not how to be sufficiently grateful. We 
have made a little calculation by which it seems 
easy to raise $30. Do not fail to pray for us." 

" July 17th, ISIG. 

" The volumes and Tracts were duly received. 
Those respecting missions I shall read with great 
interest. I know of no little book which you 
could have made so acceptable to me as Mrs. 
Rowe's exercises. 

'' You would have been pleased to see father 
engaged, one forenoon, in reading some of 
Home's Letters to mother. They both seem 
much interested in them. Mother saj-s I must 
tell you that the note respecting missionaries 
being married was written by some Andover stu- 
dent, who wanted to take a wife with him, but 
feared Mr, Home might discourage her. Father 



IN NORWICH. 75 

says, ' You see, Harriet, what is Mr. H.'s decided 
opinion.' ' Yes, sir ; but I see, too, what mission- 
aries better qualified to judge say.' ' Ah, I have 
nothing to do with notes.' He often tells me that 
I shall, or shall not, want such and such things, 
wlien 1 have an ox to ride on ; all in a manner 
which implies that he does not think seriously 
of my ever leaving this country. 

" This week I have felt the magnitude of the 
object before me more than ever. It is the con- 
stant burden of my thoughts, and my prayers by 
day and by night." 

'• NomvicH, (Sabbath evening,) '2lsl July, 1816. 

'' How gladly would I make you a sharer of 
my enjoyments this day. JNIy scholars were 
never more interesting, and the woman of color 
has given satisfactory evidence that she has 
passed from death unto life. We have remarked 
her progress from Sabbath to Sabbath ; but this 
morning she came evidently in a different frame 
of feeling, and has indeed cheered our hearts 
with a recital of what God has done for her soul. 
Is not this ample compensation for all the diffi- 
culties we have encountered in establishing this 
school. Oh that she may be one of mani/j who 
shall bless God for bringing them into it. 

'* I must mention one of my class, as having 
given me much pleasure. She is eight years 



76 MRS. WINSLOW. 

old — was very ignorant of religious things when 
she came to my Saturday school, but improved 
considerably there. She has been, from the com- 
mencement of the Sunday-school, very attentive. 
Last Sabbath I proposed to the children to have 
each one read twelve verses in the Testament 
every day with much attention, and remember 
something of what they read to tell me when 
they came to school. Among others, this girl 
complied with my request. She came this morn- 
ing, and showed me the whole of Matthew and 
fourteen chapters of Mark. I questioned her from 
various parts of both, and she answered without 
hesitation to almost every question ; such as 
concerning the birth of our Saviour, the miracles 
wrought by him, his transfiguration, death, &:c. 
AV e now count about forty-seven children in the 
school. 

" Monday evening. — After meeting with our 
praying circle to-day, you will suppose that I had 
no inclination to meet a large party this evening. 
I was unwilling to go, but mother said she would 
hardly ever request me to visit for her again. 
She had a particular reason for wishing me to go 
now. Of course I went ; how insipid was every 
thing there. Nothing of consequence was said 
on the subject of religion, though a minister was 
of the company. The world has less and less 
charms for me. I wish to make religion the busi- 



IN NORWICH. 77 

ness of my life, and have nothing to do with the 
pomp of the world." 

To lier correspondent in Hartford she writes 
as follows : 

" Norwich, July 2^2(1, 1816. 
'' I long- to see you — never so much before. 
You speak of visiting me at my own house. Ah, 
my dear girl, do not wait for that period. It may 
never arrive ; certainly not for years to come j 
and then perhaps it will be where your feet can- 
not tread. A candidate for the ministry who has 
given himself to the Lord, saying, ' here am I, 
send me where thou wilt,' must wait the direc- 
tion of Providence. The last and most emphatic 
command of our Saviour after his resurrection 
was, ' Go ye into all the world and preach the 
Gospel to every creature ;' a command evidently 
extending to all his disciples, to the end of time, 
but which has been much neglected. Our own 
country, it is true, is in many parts in a state of 
darkness; but all men are brethren. We may 
extend our views to other countries, where still 
greater numbers have never heard of a Saviour. 
" ^ly ears are often assailed by reports that I 
am going on a mission to the East or AVest ; but 
I do not encoiirage them. There will be time 
hereafter to suner much from the world, and 



78 MRS. WINSLOW. 

something from dear friends^ who I know would 
strong!}'- oppose me. You will believe that my 
mind and heart are completely full. Indeed, it 
would be too much for me to sustain, were I not 
assured that if God has a work for me to do, 
with one of the dear messeng-ers of the cross, he 
will support me and qualifj?^ me for it. I dare not 
think or act for myself. God has not yet thrown 
light upon mj?- path. I wait for his good pleasure." 

The following letter is to a sister of the Rev. 
Samuel Nott, Jun. who was a member of the 
mission at Bombay, and returned on account of 
ill health : 

" NoRAvicH, August 19, 1816. 
'' My dear Deborah, — How gladly would I fly 
to you and your happy family this evening, to con- 
gratulate you on the arrival of your friends. I 
have been with you in imagination, almost every 
minute since the news reached me. I have look- 
ed forward to their return with peculiar interest. 
To hear them recount their toils, and the good- 
ness of God towards them, will I trust prove use- 
ful to me. I know not how I could endure a life 
of s?lf-denial and of hardship ; but in some fa- 
vored moments I am enabled to consider every 
thing under the sun as vanity which has not a 
tendency to promote the cause*of Christ j and 



i 



IN NORWICH. 79 

often say, ' could I serve God without sin, I would 
esteem the longest life too short to sufTer for Him, 
who has ransomed my soul hy the most igno- 
minious suffering and death.' [[ we are dissatis- 
fied Avith God's requirements to take up our cross 
daily and follow him, and long too much for the 
termination of our pilgrimage, that we 'may un- 
dress and be with God,' are we suitably affected 
with the reflection, that our Saviour left the 
realms of bliss for more than thirty years, and 
condescended to sufler for us infinitely more than 
we can suffer for him 1 Surely such love demands 
a life of praise. But, I did not mean to intrude 
such reflections upon you at this time — when I 
began, I thought of you more than of myself; 
and my heart was too full to sufler me to sleep 
until I had attempted to express my feelings. 

'' Tuesday morning. — My dear friend, I do not 
find the ardor of my feelings in the least abated 
since last night. VV'hen you are reminded that I 
indulge the expectation of being more decided on 
the subject of the mission to India, by the assis- 
tance of your sister, my impatience to see her 
will not surprise you. Our little interview at 
your house has often recurred to mind. It will 
ever be remembered with thankfulness. Very few 
of my friends enter into mv feelino-s on this oreat 
subject, or even tolerate them. AV^hen one does, 
I seem to consider it a particular indulgence. I 



80 MRS. WINSLOW. 

said something about avoiding the subject with 
my dear mother. Since my visit at your house, 
she has rejoiced my heart, by voluntarily express- 
ing her entire resignation and willingness that 
God should dispose of me in his oum way. I now 
enjoy free communication with her, and find her 
uniformlj^ calm and even cheerful. Let me beg 
your prayers, dear Deborah, that my motives may 
be simple and my eye single to the glory of God. 
The magnitude of the subject seems daily to in- 
crease. Within two weeks I have felt it more 
than ever, and nothing do I dread so much as that 
God should leave me to think or act for myself. 
I have cast myself upon an arm of love, and earnest- 
ly desire to have no will but that of my Saviour. 
Never did I so much need the prayers of chris- 
tians, never distrust my own judgment so much." 

" NoR^vICH, October 28, 1816. ■ 
"My Dear Friend, — I have put off writing as 
long as I could, in the hope of being more deci- 
ded on the subject of missions. But now I know 
not what to say. You will perhaps think that I 
have had time enough to determine respecting 
my feelings and duty. Although the subject has 
been much on my mind for months, more perhaps 
than any other, I have never thought there was a 
necessity for immediate decision, until about six 
weeks since, when it appeared to me important 



IN NORWICH. 81 

to ascertain Avhat were my fecliiifrs and opinions 
before knowing yours, lest [ should be too much 
influenced by you. From that time I have more 
earnestly engaged in the work of self-examina- 
tion. I iiave indeed 'been tried,' but on the 
whole thoutrht, just before the arrival of your let- 
ter, that I was quite ready to hear your decision, 
and my duty would be plain. It is, however, far 
otherwise ; I am much in the dark, and cannot 
feel established. Wiicn I shall, I know not \ but 
hope it may be soon. This state of suspense is 
very trying-. It is impossible to tell you what I 
have felt, and what I still feel and think. 

" The great objections which appear to m}'- go- 
ing to the East, are the opinion of my parents, 
and my own health. iMother has made repeated 
attempts to write a few linos to you, but is imme- 
diately overcome by the subject, and cannot effect 
it. I have promised to tell you whatever she wish- 
es to say. Her first concern, I believe, is for my 
health — she thinks that I cannot endure the pre- 
paration. Then the field at home is so extensive 
in which you might do so much good. Still she 
would not dure to influence you if she could. I 
said, ' If I go, it must be with the entire approba- 
tion of my parents.' Her reply was, that, view- 
ing my health as she does, she cannot now see it 
to be my duty ; but I might, if I thought best, at- 
tempt to prepare myself. 



82 MRS. WINSLOW. 

"At times my own judgment discourages the 
hope that I can ever be extensively useful. My 
heart may, by divine assistance, be qualified to 
feel, but my mind will, I am afraid, continue bar- 
ren and unfruitful. This would not make me 
what you need. You cannot wish me to be the 
companioji of your toils, without having it in my 
power to afford you assistance. It cannot be your 
duty^ and certainly not your interest^ to connect 
yourself with such an one. Nor can I, with any 
hope of happiness, put it in your power to do so. 
I do, however, sometimes think that as nothing 
great can be effected without encountering many 
difficulties, I ought not to be discouraged on ac- 
count of health until I have made a trial, unless 
the judgment of my parents should oppose it. I 
have confidence that my mother would be sup- 
ported by divine grace, if I were called to leave 
her ; but she would still suffer much. I need not 
tell you that few mothers have such solicitude 
and affection for their children. I believe that I 
am willing to meet any suffering where self only 
is affected, but it is hard to wound such a friend. 
You will find that I am indeed undecided, and I 
know of no new view of the subject that I can 
take to bring me to a decision. God must be my 
helper. ' I can only give myself to him.' 

" You requested an unreserved expression of 
my views on the subject. I suppose that this is 



IN- NOR men. 83 

right, but was at first inclined to regret the neces- 
sity of communicating them. 1 ought to wish 
not to influence you. It has been my constant 
endeavor not to do so ; but mamma and you have 
now convinced me that whatever has any bearing 
upon the great subject should be taken into con- 
sideration." 

TO A FEMALE ASSOCIATE. 

" Norwich, Nov, 4, ISIG, midnight. 

" To E methinks I could open my heart. 

Denied that privilege by the distance which se- 
parates us, I breathe out my full soul alone. And 
shall I complain! .My Saviour endured his Fa- 
ther's wrath, and trod the wine-press alone. But 
I am not alone — mj^ God seeth me, and truly he 
is my only refuge. Though clouds and darkness 
are still round about him, yet I am enabled to 
trust that he has not utterly forsaken me. You will 
perhaps say, that, as praying breath is never 
spent in vain, I cannot have been faithful or I 
should before this have discerned the path of 
duty — help me then, my dear girl. I know that 
I have done nothing well, that my purest offer- 
ings need the cleansing blood of Jesus; never- 
theless, if there be any thing of sincerity in me, 
I do say from the heart, * Here is thy servant, 
Lord, do with her what thou wilt.' Yet behold 



S4 T'lRS. VriNSLOW. 

me, on the one hand, with an ardent desire to 
devote my whole life to the service of Him who 
has done so much for me, and an opportunity be- 
fore me of being extensively useful ; and on the 
other, the opinion and advice of dear friends 
urging me to be convinced that duty calls me to 
remain here, and more than this, the tear of ma- 
ternal solicitude and affection stealing unbidden 
to the eye — and can you not conceive that my 
heart bleeds 1 Oh your prayers ! They may avail 
much. I derive strength thus to urge you by the 
consideration that you are interested in the great 
cause, and would not have a brother or sister 
dishonor it. 

'' Very few friends speak a word of encourage* 
ment. On the contrary, the hackneyed objection 
is offered, * we have so much to do at home,' not 
remembering that 'he that watereth, shall be 
watered also himself.' Has not this been exem- 
plified in the outpouring of the Holy Spirit in 
this country since a spirit of missions was first 
excited in it % and does not our own observation 
constantly affirm that 'the liberal soul shall be 
made fat 'V What was the conduct of the primi- 
tive christians when Christ commanded them to 
go forth and preach the Gospel, taking nothing 
with them, not even two coats apiece % Did they 
say, ' Lord, we would obey thee, but have dear 
friends at home v/ho would be grieved to part 



IS NORWICH. 85 

with us, and whom wc cannot leave : if thou 
wilt o-ive us a work to do in the midst of these 
privileges we will perform it cheerfully.' No, 
rather did they forsake all, take up their cross 
daily, deny themselves, and live only for God. 
And shall not we be grateful to be counted worthy 
to suffer for Christ 1 I believe my feelings have 
been long decided, though perhaps not uniformly 
the same ; it is now time that my duty was ; but 
God's time is best. I desire to wait patiently for 
its arrival." 

Notwithstanding the ardor and agitation of her 
mind, the following paper will show the cool de- 
liberation and sound judgment, as well as en- 
lightened, devoted piety, with which she examin- 
ed the important question before her, and some 
of the steps by which she was led to a most sa- 
•tisfactory result. It was dated and solemnly 
subscribed, " A orit'zcA, Kovemher 10, 1S16, Sah- 



''In examining this subject I have considered 
the disposition of my mind; my qualifications; 
the language of Divine Providence ; and the 
teachings of the Holy Spirit. 

" The disposition of my mind. — For four and 

Winslow. g 



86 MRS. WINSLOW. 

a half ijearSj my prevailing desire has been to 
spend my life in the service of Christ. During 
the early part of this period, my plans for future 
enjoyment always centered in giving up all for 
Christ, and spending my days in a pagan land. 
Such plans, however, appeared like idle dreams, 
to cheat life of some of its dull hours ; every 
thing within and without forbade the indulgence 
of such hopes. 

"The perusal of ^Buchanan's Researches'' first 
excited my warmest interest for the salvation of 
the heathen ; and w^hile I had not the least idea 
of ever going myself to the Eastern world, it 
was my earnest desire that many laborers might 
be sent to introduce the Gospel among its throng- 
ing millions. When I questioned myself if I 
should be walling^ to cro. were all obstacles re- 
moved, my uniform reply was. that no personal 
sacrifice w^as too great to make ; but these ob- 
stacles w^ould probably ever remain, and there- 
fore I must think only of duties in my owti coun- 
try. The memoirs of Mrs. Newell, while they 
exhibited the sufferings of a missionary in glow- 
ing colors, w^ere yet alluring, and my fancied 
scheme of happiness was more frequently re- 
sorted to, as a solace in my pilgrimage, though 
with no more prospect of being realized. No 
situation in my native land could I imagine so 
capable of affording me substantial happiness, 



IN NORWICH. 87 

but I desired to be useful somewhere ; and as I 
was in the hands of Him who had seemed to fix 
my destiny, I strove to feel, that, could I be en- 
tirely devoted here, I would ask no more. In 
this state of mind, tlie pleasures of the world 
gradually became insipid and unsatisfying. The 
early removal of my brother, when about to de- 
vote himself to ministering at the altar, awaken- 
ed anew the desire to consecrate all that God 
had given me to his service. In no other view 
did life appear desirable, for this only did I wish 
a continuance here. 

" When, at length, it did seem possible that I 
should be called to forsake friends and native 
land, my great object was to observe the leadings 
of Providence^ that I might not rush uncalled into 
so glorious a work. Having long believed that 
insuperable obstacles would prevent this happi- 
ness, I was the less animated by the possibility 
of their being removed. It was not, that being 
called to view the hardships attending a mis- 
sionary, with more prospect of realizing them, I 
was intimidated ; it was rather the difficulty of 
determi?iing duty^ which often checked my rov- 
ing mind. I strove to lay aside every personal in- 
terest, and to fix my desires where I could be 
most extensively useful. At times the magnitude 
of the work, my insufficiency, and the trials at- 
tending such a sacrifice of temporal comfort, 



88 MRS. WINSLOW. 

have caused me to shrink from what appeared 
too much for feeble nature to bear. In the main, 
however, I have desired to be grateful for being 
counted A^'orthy to suffer for Christ. 

" Qualifications. This subject has caused almost 
my only doubts. When I compare my love for 
immortal souls with that of our Divine Imma- 
nuel, and that of his early disciples, I am almost 
ready to say, If I were really called to a mission 
so much resembling that on which He sent them 
forth, I should possess more of their spirit. But 
I do feel somethings though in a far inferior de- 
gree ; and what power, save the Holy Spirit, has 
put the least degree of faith and love within me % 
I trust that God has implanted a holy principle in 
me — He will then add to it all needful grace — to 
Him be glory for ever. My mental qualifications 
are by no means adequate. In this I have support 
in the assurance that God's ' strength shall be 
perfected in weakness.' My health has been an 
objection of some magnitude ; but, after consult- 
ing my physician, and learning that the effect of 
the voyage and climate is, on every constitution, 
uncertain ; and after consulting Mr. Nott, who 
has been abroad, I am led to the conclusion that 
my state of health should not deter me. The in- 
ference from these and other considerations is, 
that if other objections are removed, qualifica- 
tions must not be an obstacle. 



IN NORWICH. 89 

" The leadings of Divine Providence. These 
appear in my being early weaned from the charms 
of this life — an ardent desire being awakened 
within me to renounce every temporal comfort 
for the service of Christ — in my having sent to 
me an unsought friend, who had a missionary 
spirit, at the very moment when I was about to 
believe that duty called me to other scenes; in 
causing my health to be better than it had been 
for several preceding years ; in giving me pa 
rents who do not oppose, and in constantly giv^- 
ing me increased desires to devote all my pow- 
ers to His service. These, united with many more 
indications that the Lord was leading me, which 
I cannot record, enable me confidently to. believe 
that the work is all His own, and to Him be all 
the glory. 

" Teachings of the Holy Spirit. By these I 
mean the impressions on my mind, which accom- 
panied the examination of duty, from time to 
time ; and these were manifestly towards this 
object: — when, in reading the sacred oracles, my 
heart was particularly warmed by contemplating 
the wide field of missionary labor, and the exam- 
ples of holy men of old, who willingly suffered 
any privations and hardships for the sake of be- 
ing embassadors of the Lord Jesus — when, in 
examining objections, they always dwindled to a 
point, if considered with the command of Christ, 
8* 



90 MRS. WINSLOW. 

' Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel 
to every creature ' — when the trials of this life 
served to excite a more ardent desire to be 
' counted worthy to suffer for Christ,' rather than 
to have anj?- effect to intimidate me — and when, 
in pouring out my soul on this subject to the Fa- 
ther of light, I realized more of that sweet peace 
in which ' my willing soul would stay ' — and, 
finally, in so drawing me to the throne of mercy, 
that I could not leave without a blessing ; and at 
length dissipating every doubt, and enabling me 
by the eye of faith to discover the finger of God 
pointing to the East, and with the affection of a 
Father, and the authority of a Sovereign, saying, 
* Come, follow me ' — ' this is the way, walk ye in 
it ;' and adding for my encouragement, ' I will 
never leave thee, nor forsake thee.' 

" In view of all these considerations, and many 
more, I do believe that God calls me to become 
a missionary ; and do, with this belief, resolve to 
consider myself as devoted to that service j and, 
as much as possible, to make all my exertions 
have an ultimate reference to it ; hoping that 
God will qualify me, and make me a faithful ser- 
vant for Christ's sake. Amen and amen. 

" H. W. Lathrop." 

The reader Avho sympathized with Miss L 



in the agitation of her mind, as expressed in com- 



IN NOBWICH. 91 

munications previous to the last, will be happy in 
the calm decision to which she thus arrived ; and 
will not be surprised that her next letter describes 
both a settled and joy/w/ conviction of duty. But 
our friend was a child of faith and of the Spirit. 
She believed that God could make the path of duty 
exceeding plain. In proportion as the darkness 
around her was orreat, she looked above for light ; 
and it broke upon her in the midst of obscurity, 
with a strength and clearness which forbade her 
ever seriously doubting, from that time, what 
was the will of God concerning her. It may be 
proper to add in reference to her health, that the 
fears of her friends were not realized, though it 
never was entirely firm. The compiler would also 
here say, that the subject of health, with the 
adaptation of constitution to the contemplated 
habits and climate, deserves, on the part of mis- 
sionaries of both sexes, a more careful conside 
ration than is generally given to it, and that the 
advice of judicious physicians, friendly to the 
object, should be sought and received with much 
deference. 

" Norwich, November 10, 181G. 

\ "Had I ten thousand tongues, methinks they 
could not all express the gratitude I feel for 
' light and comfort from above.' Oh * let us mag- 

\ nify the Lord, and exalt his name together.' For 



92 MRS. WINSLOW. 

many weeks ' I looked (and I thought earnestly) 
for light, but behold, obscurity ; for brightness, 
but I walked in darkness.' The last week, how- 
ever, God has been pleased to bring me, with 
more childlike dependence, to the foot of the 
cross, and there led me, step by step, until I have 
communed with him on his mercy-seat, with more 
delight, perhaps, than ever before. 

" The grand objections of health and friends 
seem now to have become, comparatively, of lit- 
tle consequence. For the first, I am assured that 
my prospect of enduring the voyage and climate 
is quite as good as Mrs. Nott's when she left 
America ; though the previous preparation might 
be a subject of concern, did I not believe that if 
God has a work for me to do in a heathen land, he 
will prepare me for it. The silent tear of paren- 
tal affection and solicitude would indeed over- 
power me, had I not confidence that He who thus 
afflicts, will support my beloved parents. Surely, 
if I can trust in this Almighty arm for my support 
in so great an undertaking, I cannot question but 
my God will be their God. And what though we 
are early separated, and that under peculiarly 
painful circumstances, our journey here is but 
short.- I feel an inexpressible pleasure in com- 
mending them to God, assured that they will be 
enabled to give up their child without regret, in 
the hope that she will do good to perishing souls. 



IN NORWICH. 93 

Let them be constantly remembered in your pray 
ers ; and, Oh, my friend, may we be henceforth 
faithful to our own souls, as well as the cause of 
Christ. It is possible that we may yet be in an 
error ; let us ' pray always, with all prayer and 
supplication, making known our requests unto 
God.' 

'' Tuesday^ 12th. — Why am I permitted to feel 
so fully satisfied with regard to duty 1 If I did 
lean to this side of llie question at all, I expect- 
ed it would be with little faith, faint hope, and a 
mind rendered almost incapable of action by so 
much doubt and anxiety ; but on the contrary, 
the transition from that unhappy state, to this of 
peace and joy, has seemed to invigorate all my 
faculties. I feel new strength, new ardor, and 
long to be even oow at work. You will, perhaps, 
think that the subject of qualifications is entirely 
forgotten ; far from it, my consolation and sup- 
port in this is the assurance that God will ' per- 
fect strength in weakness.' 

" Mrs. Nott spent an afternoon with us last 
week. I have seen her several times. The duties 
of a female missionary are great indeed ; but no 
matter how arduous, if God be my strength." 

" December 1. 

" You inquire what thinks of this subject 

now. I have of late, indeed always, avoided say- 



94 MRS. WINSLOW. 

ing any thing to her myself, because I have felt 
unable to support any opinion with such an op- 
ponent. One evening last week I accidentally 
found her in mother's room, and she immediate- 
ly forced me to sit down and enter into the sub- 
ject. The whole weight of words possible to be 
set in order before me, were brought forward 
with the peculiar power she possesses. I finally 
told her that her approbation, next to that of my 
parents, was to me most desirable. She replied, 
* Harriet, you will never have it, never, never ^ 
never ^ Among other things she asked if the opi- 
nion of three quarters of my most respected 
friends would not influence me. I said, if, admit- 
ting the principle that some must go, they would 
get all the information to be obtained on the sub- 
ject of missions, and decide that I ought not to 
go, it would have weight. She confessed herself 
ignorant, for she had never read a word on the 
subject. The next morning I sent over the Re- 
ports of the Prudential Committee since the se- 
cond year, and have engaged her to read Home, 
which is now with Dr. S. Do you ask if these 
things move me 1 I know not but I am obstinate 
or stupid ; but amidst all, my duty still seems 
plain. My health was never better, and I am im- 
patient to be now preparing for this great work. 
Although I say I am not materially affected by 
this opposition, you will not understand that it 



IN NORWICH. 95 

aoes not give me pain. It is trying, but God has 
hitherto granted me strength in proportion to 
iiiy wants. 

" December 6. — Grandmother last eveninof beor- 
i the favor of an arm to lean on in a ramble 
(lis afternoon. 

" We called on a hospitable family where is a 
, daughter lately married, whose husband has failed 
• in business. A mother and sisters have received 
, her with open arms, and are affording her every 
, temporal comfort. How different this from the 
; situation of a lonely and destitute female in a fo- 
' reign land ! But as heaven is high above the 
I earth, so is a heavenly better than an earthly 
i friend. 

I " The abode of a widow, in moderate circum- 

[ stances, but surrounded by all life's substantial 

f comforts, next arrested our steps. It was in a re- 

i tired and inviting spot, but there were here no 

praying hearts. 

j " Domestic felicity now at length spread forth 

I all its charms. In the midst of kindred and friends, 

' days, months, and years glide away sweetly. 

Every wish is anticipated. The full heart can 

ask no more. A husband and family being made 

bappy, the summit of duty and usefulness is 

thought to be reached. And could / live for this 

I only \ God forbid. While I have hands to work, 

and the heathen perish because the Gospel is not 



96 MRS. wirxSLow. 

sent to them, my hours and days shall be em- 
ployed for them. There is something forbidding 
to me in prosperity, as the world use the term ; 
it draws the heart from God." 

"Jamianj 19, 1817. 

'' Have had a delightful season this evening. 
The Lord has permitted me to come near to him, 
and to plead with uncommon earnestness. My 
wants multiplied, and I finally rejoiced to leave 
all Avith him, who needeth not to be told what is 
in man, and will not proportion his gifts to our 
scanty petition. 

'^ I must tell you that my friend Mrs. L , 

from N. L. has made me a visit. You may re 
member that she warmly opposed my contem- 
plated undertaking. She says that my letter ex- 
plaining my views of duty, &c. almost satisfied 
her that I was right, and now finding my health 
so much better than when she last saw me, her 
language is, ' Harriet, I will not make the least 
objection.' I rejoiced particularly in this, be- 
cause she is one with whom I ' have taken sweet 
counsel' since our earliest years. 

" You would help me to a grateful heart, could 
you witness my dear mother's conduct respect- 
ing this point of duty. It would seem that she 
made every objection so long as it could have 
any influence ; but now, considering me decided, 



J 



IN NORWICH. 97 

she is equally decided to present nothing which 
may increase my trial. Indeed she strives to help 
me in every way she can. I will almost say that 
she has caught the Hre of missionary ardor ; at 
any rate, I believe she evinces an uncommon 
share of cheerful resignation. In my own family 
I now hear no word of opposition. All will ra- 
ther lend a helping hand than put any obstacle 
in my way." 

The mind of Miss L was now settled as to 

her duty, should no unforeseen providence pre- 
vent, to leave home and country for a heathen 
land. She had resolved to do so. Her only re- 
, servation was, if the Lord will. She never took 
[up the question again to find reasons for going. 
\ Her only anxiety was, when any providence 
seemed adverse, to know if God was forbidding 
kher undertaking. On this point she held herself 
open to conviction. Again and again she said, '' I 
shrink from no sacrifices, no trials ; I only trem- 
ble lest I should rush uncalled into the service." 
There was no wavering, no indecision of mind. 
She had laid all on the altar, and only waited for 
the Lord to accept the offering. She looked upon 
a perishing world, and the question was what she 
could do, and where she could do most for its 
Irescue. She only inquired, " Lord, what wilt thou 
ihav.c mc to do V and when she heard a voice be- 

Winslow. 9 



98 MRS. T\^IXSLOT\'. 

hind her saying, ''this is the way;" conferring 
not with flesh and blood, she immediately en- 
deavored to walk in it. This is abundantly evi- 
dent from her journal and letters to the time of 
her embarkation. 

" January 16, 1817. — Have had much enjoy- 
ment of my Saviour this evening. Was at first 
very heartless, and it seemed for a long time that 
God would not permit me to come near his mer- 
cy-seat ; but I could not leave praying, or rather 
articulating unconnected broken petitions. At 
length the Lord showed me that there was mer- 
cy even for me, a vile w^orm. I could plead with 
Him as with a father who heareth the cries of 
his child. 

" 18. — Have been meditating on the glorious 
labors of a missionary. It seems too much, that 
while so many are so much more worthy of this 
honorable employment, and so much better quali- 
fied to be useful, my heavenly Father should per- 
mit me to hope for the privilege of going to the 
heathen. Christ will strengthen me. But Oh may 
my motives be pure. Gracious God, suffer me 
not to bring any reproach on thy cause. 

" 29. — Have been much engaged in contemplat- 
ing the work I so fondly anticipate. It has become 
a darling theme ; so much so, that the thought 
of being finally obliged to relinquish it, would be 



IN NORWICH. 99 

far more painful than that of leaving friends and 
! country for a life of trial and hardship. 
I " February 12. — My heart seems unusually en- 
I larged ; and I long to emhracc, in christian love, 
1 all the world. Have been more assisted in prayer 
I for perishing souls to-day than for a long time. 
I " 18. — The wind howls round my retreat. Snow 
\ beats upon my window, and no cheerful ray illu- 
\ mines the footsteps of the traveller. Thus dreary, 
j dark, and desolate is our way here below, until 
we see the light of heaven, which leads us up- 
ward. Such seasons are to me peculiarly sweet. 
I could, for my own sake, scarcely wish to see 
the earth again lighted up ; so much is the pros- 
pect now in unison with my present feelings. I 
have been thinking on the days of other years, 
until my soul is sad; but it is a precious sadness. 
Among my subjects of thankfulness to the Author 
of my existence, I consider this one, that He has 
given me a disposition to relish those scenes of 
nature wherein his majesty is displayed j and 
Itliat in these manifestations of his power I often 
lind exquisite enjoyment. 

" 21. — If the tear of gratitude glistening in the 
mournful eye can afford pure enjoyment, I found 

it this morning in visiting the dying Mrs. D . 

I think she evinces genuine repentance, and I 
must believe that she has obtained the pearl of 
great price. Poor old Miss C met me at the 

I 



100 MRS. WIKSLOW. 

door and held me by the arm till I should tell her 
if it was true that I was going to India. 

" To pity the weeping widow's wo is certainly 
my delight. And shall I not find these desolate 
ones in the sultry regions of Hindoostan 1 Now, 
alas, they know not the christian's God and Com- 
forter. May I not point them to Him, and finally 
watch their dying hour with the interest of a sis- 
ter in Christ? yes, I may yet sit at the feet of 
Jesus, with a now wretched Hindoo female. God 
of mercy, let me, I beseech thee, realize this 
fond hope of my heart ; and may I be qualified 
for extensive usefulness in that field. 

" 22. — This evening I have been looking into 
my heart. It was weary of earthly cares and 
earthly good. I looked abroad. The rapid glid- 
ing away of the great body of snow which has 
long covered the ground, reminded me how soon 
all worldly prospects will vanish. All I have on 
earth seemed held bj' a most uncertain tenure. 
* The wind passeth over us and we are gone.' 
In the world I saw nothing to allure me ; my 
whole soul was averse to seeing more. But when 
I turned my eyes above, the bright view was so 
enrapturing that I could scarcely think of being 
longer in the flesh. But I bless God that it is- not 
with me as in times past. I believe I do not cling 
to life for the pleasure it brings ; but if I may do 
something for the cause of my Saviour, I desire to 



IN NORWICH. 101 

see many days. Yes, a life of self-denial in a hea- 
then land will claim my most ardent gratitude. 
While ruminatinjT on the scenes of nature and the 
workmanship of God in the formation of my body 
and mind, I have desired to know whether the be- 
I niffhted Hindoos are susceptible of such feelings 
as I too often am. If they are, with their dark- 
|i ness respecting a hereafter, surely but few could 
|i endure existence. What peculiar cause have I 
I for gratitude to the God of all grace, that he has 
j granted me a balm for every wound. Will the 
I longest life be sufficient to repay this mighty 
debt 1 God of my life, sufler me never to be im- 
patient of my continuance here, but rather to 
desire a long life of entire devotedness to thy 
service. 

'\MarcIi 3. — Oh that I could never cease to 
magnify the Lord, and exalt his name. Hav^e been 
to the alhis-house. The poor inlirm old ladies 
i welcomed me with gratitude. One of them has 
long been anxious for her soul. For the last two 
weeks I have always remembered her in my 
1 prayers. I found her to-day for the first time re- 
ijoiciiig in hope. Another, a sister in the church, 
wlio has appeared to me very lukewarm, said 
tliat for three days she had experienced new feel- 
ings. For the same period I have felt an unusual 
interest in her case, and tried to pray for her. 
Have I indeed been assisted to plead for these 
9* 



102 MRS. WINSLOW. 

precious souls ] To God be all the glory. At first 
I feared to think that my prayers had been heard; 
but why should I not derive from this encourage- 
ment to ' pray without ceasing V " 

In the summer of 1817 she spent a few weeks 
in Litchfield, Conn, in the family of the Rev. Dr. 
Beecher, pursuing a course of reading that might 
promote her future usefulness. Her communica- 
tions to friends show how her heart clung to the 
objects of her beneficence at home and abroad, 
and her regret that there was then no Sabbath- 
school in Litchfield. 

TO TWO FEMALE ASSOCIATES. 

" Litchfield, Saturday evening, July 2, 1817- 

" Sisters M and E . How refreshing it 

would be to spend an hour with you this even- 
ing ; but I will be thankful for the privilege of 
writing. 

" My external privileges here are indeed great, 
but these alone will never keep us near to God. 
Great as mine are, I have less enjoyment in reli- 
gion than when at home. I believe it is owing to 
my mind being so much occupied with study, 
which is not calculated to excite devotional feel- 
ings, and not being engaged in those little exerci- 
ses of love to souls which I had at home. You 



IN LITCHFIELD. 103 

will understand me ; if not now, you will when 
deprived of the opportunity to visit the alms- 
house, Mrs. D., and such people. While in these 
occasional visits we give pleasure to our fellow- 
creatures, and I hope sometimes do good to their 
i souls, we are benefiting ourselves. I have been 
' this afternoon to see a saint, who though poor in 
earthly covering, has a treasure in heaven, and 
hope to visit her often. Shall have opportunity to 
tell you more about her if I do. Likewise hope 
to tell you of a visit to the alms-house here." 

TO THE SAME. 

" July 19. 
" I would excite your gratitude to the Giver 
of all good for his dealings with two dear souls in 
this family^ just brought from ' the horrible pit 
and miry clay.' Their mouths are filled with 
praise, and I trust their hearts with love. They 
have been greatly tried; their stout hearts re- 
sisted long, until they were almost in a state of 
despair. Two days were spent in distress that I 
have never known exceeded under similar cir- 
cumstances. He who remembered the ^ worm- 
wood and the gall ' could not fail to feel much 
for them, but it was useless to try to administer 
comfort. They had a more able Friend, who had 
been tempted, and will succor those who are 



104 MRS. WINSLOW. 

tempted. In his own time he appeared for them. 
They will, I trust, have ability to do good. They 
seem much concerned for their companions, talk 
with them, &c. 

" Mr. B. says, if God should pour out his Spirit, 
I shall have found here the best school 1 can have. 
Pray for me, my friend, cease not to remember 
me in some of your precious moments when you 
commune with God. All the return I can, I give. 
May the Saviour be your Advocate. He will 
prevail. 

" How stand Sabbath-school affairs 1 I am anx- 
ious to hear very particularly of themi, especially 
respecting I — . Sometimes I flatter myself that 
she manifests more and more concern. Again 
I fear that this is not the case. Does your 

number increase'? Has Mr. M joined you"? 

Do the ladies call 1 Tell me all. I want, too, to 
know about the other societies. When you see 
Mrs. D , do not fail to give her my love, like- 
wise to all the folks we visited at the alms-house. 
I think much of that place ; have enjoyed some 
precious seasons there which I would not ex- 
change for all that I have found in the splendid 
drawing-room. Do you attend any conferences 
there now 1 I want to ask about many things more, 
but you must write all that you know I want to 
hear. Think of the ' golden rule' when you write. 
I need your letters with other friends, to relax my 



IN LITCHFIELD. 105 

1 lid, and give me a little of that enjoyment which 
-found friends cannot convey." 

TO HER BROTHER IN OHIO. 

" Lm.nFiF.LD, July 23, 1817. 

" My Dear Brother, — Before this arrives, you 
will have been informed, by Norwich friends, of 
the smiles of Providence in placing me in a situa- 
ation so pleasant as Mr. Beecher's family. It is 
indeed more than I expected. Although I am 
not so many miles from home as you are, I feel 
my separation from our invaluable friends very^ 
very much. I too am among strangers. Oh my 
brother, my dear Daniel, w^e are wanderers and 
pilgrims. But we hasten to our rest. It is good 
to have no ahidiiis; place in such a world as this ; 
in which our Lord and Master had not where to 
lay his head. 

'' The missionaries, who have been so long wait- 
ing to go to the East, are at length ordered to sail 
in two or three months. This has brought the 
subject very near to me. God willing, I shall be 
among the next who go. When I take a view of 
life, and consider that our days are few, and that 
youth is emphatically the time to serve God, I 
wish the moment to arrive. But you know me 
too well, to think that I can be impatient to be 
removed from what my heart holds so dear. My 



106 MRS. "WINSLOW. 

dear brother, with one side of the picture before 
me, flesh and heart sink. Yet I fear nothing, ex- 
cept that the Lord should leave me to choose for 
myself; or that he has so left me. If you love 
me, jpray ofien^ pray daily ^ that this may never 
be the case." 

" Litchfield, August 19, 1817. 
" My dear Mother, — Surely it is something 
more than a simple emotion of joy that I feel to- 
night, after the receipt of so many precious let- 
ters ; all others of which were not so valuable as 
yours. Never before did you tell me, in so many 
words, that 3^ou .are satisfied in the decision which 
I have made ; although your conduct has impli- 
ed this, and gi^^'en me the sweet assurance that 
God is gradually preparing you cheerfully to bid 
me a long farewell. Formerly, every letter from 
home riveted me more strongly to our dear fami- 
ly, and made me feel that it would be a bitter trial 
to part with you. How different my sensations 
to-night ! I certainly do not love you less, but with 
the strength inspired by your composure, I could 
fly on wings of the Vv'ind, and think only of the 
happiness of being completely devoted to the 
service of Christ, with th2 entire approbation of 
my best friends. Oh, my dear mother, God has 
been with you in six troubles, and in seven. Yea, 
has he not always been at your right handl In 



IN LITCHFIELD. 107 

an hour of particular trial He will not, He can- 
not forsake you. 

" I think I do feel more and more tliat I am 
highly privileged, and that you may congratulate 
me, or rather thank God. My dear mother, I have 
strength in your prayers. God will give to those 
who ask, and the importunity of a mother will 
prevail. I want to be more humble, to feel more 
the worth of souls, to be more dead to the world, 
and alive in God." 

TO HER FAMILY FRIENDS. 

'* Litchfield, (Monday Evening,) Augnst 4, 1817. 
'* My Dear Friends, — I have fully realized this 
evening, that, although our bodies are more than 
seventy miles from each other, our souls have 
been near together. And not only ours, but those 
of the children of God, in every land, who have 
been surrounding the mercy-seat. Even once 
denrraded Hindoos have been lifting- their hearts 
to their Creator. And may I ever sit with them, 
to listen to the glad tidings of the Gospel, and 
may I unite with them in pouri'ng out my soul to 
God \ I must hope so. The Lord has great bless- 
ings in store for the heathen who now sit in 
darkness. He will call many laborers into the 
vineyard. The time is hastening — it is at hand. 
Oh let us strive to be amonof his instruments 



108 MRS. WI^-SLOW. 

to bring it on. When Dr. Buchanan was plead- 
ing in behalf of sending the Gospel to India, he 
said, ' Doubt no longer whether it can be estab- 
lished here — it is already established ; it has taken 
firm root, and all your powers cannot hinder it '" 

TO A FRIE.ND. 

,- " Litchfield, August 17, 1817. 

" I spent yesterday afternoon reading ' Ward's 
view of the Religion of the Hindoos.' It depriv- 
ed my mind and body of energy, and filled me 
v/ith horror. The enormities of these wretched 
creatures exceed all that I had imagined. How 
can it be that christians have slumbered so long, 
when there is such exceeding depravity in the 
world 1 Well may we bless God that we live at 
this auspicious era, instead of a century ago. Is 
it not strange that they who have experienced 
the efficacy of a Saviour's blood, can think the 
sufferings of a missionary life too great to be en- 
dured ] It must be from ignorance. They can- 
not know the state of the heathen, they cannot 
consider the w^orth of souls. It would seem that 
the stoutest heart must melt in reading the ac- 
counts of Ward. Happy are we, yea, thrice hap- 
py, if among the little number whom the Lord 
shall call to aid in the glorious work of evangel- 
izing the heathen. Methinks I do begin to real- 



IN NEW HAVEN. 109 

ize in some degree how great is our privilege. But 
still my heart is hard and strangely insensible." 

It would be well, if the christian sentiments ex- 
pressed in the quotation below, were really those 
of every pious parent ; and yet, if truly pious — 
if they have the spirit of Him who sent his only 
Son on a mission to earth — what others can be 
cherished 1 Have they given their children wholbj 
to the Lord, and do they still claim the disposal 
of them 1 May it not be said, ' Remember Ana- 
nias and SapphiraV The mother who cheerfully 
resigned this almost idolized daughter, felt as 
tenderly as any mother, yet she has been enabled 
to give up, besides her Harriet, three other be- 
loved daughters to the same blessed work, though 
she herself is left, in advancing age, a dependent 
and almost solitary widow. 

" Nkw IIavkx, September 3, 1817. 
From all my mother's letters, I think she is 
abundantly supported. Her last at L. overwhelm- 
ed me with emotions of joy and gratitude. I 
must transcribe a part. Speaking of a friend who 
came some distance to see her on my account, 
she writes, ^ I enjoyed her visit much, because 
she talked on subjects particularly interesting. 
My friends mistake my feelings, when they stu- 
diously avoid a subject so near my heart as is 

\Vi;iiloH-. 10 



110 MRS. WINSLOV/, 

your contemplated undertaking. I can think of it 
with composure, and speak of it with much satis- 
faction. She remarked that it was cause for gra- 
titude. I am, if I may so say, partially thankful, 
that is, thankful for the disposition which leads 
you thus to devote yourself. How earnestly have 
I desired, and how fervently prayed, that my 
children might be the subjects of grace, and in- 
struments of bringing souls to Christ ; and now 
can I claim to choose the place where^ and the 
nip'/mer how they shall serve this kind Master, 
'»vho has so often answered my petitions, even to 
have given me the very things I have asked of 
him % No, my child, I believe I am saved from 
this inconsistency. I believe I am willing to leave 
to infinite wisdom to direct in all things ; and as 
you are satisfied with regard to duty, I do not 
question about it.' Is not this change in our dear 
mother's feelings, and particularly her opinion of 
my duty, an indication that the hand of God has 
been in this thing % 

" I have been to the celebrated cave in ' West 
Rock.' Ascending the mountain, we called on the 
inhabitants of the cave. They are a man, his 
wife, and three children. In approaching it, we 
threaded our way through a narrow walk, walled 
on each side several rods, and then almost crept 
some feet into a dark, dismal place. There was 
no light except through the opening by which we 



IN NEW HAVEN. 1 1 1 

entered, and another which afforded a passage 
for the smoke. In one corner, on somethinjr 
wliicli seemed a bed of dirt and stone, with a few 
pieces of carpet for a coverinfr, lay a boy four 
years old, who had that day broken his leg, and 
an infant a few months old, who appeared scarce 
ly alive. It was much diseased — the mother had 
scarcely clothing enough to coyer her, and her 
countenance indicated the lowest grade of vice. 
Yet she was not a heathen. Two Bibles, a Testa- 
ment, and a hymn-book were there, all of which 
she professed to delight in reading. She acknow- 
ledged dependence and obligation, but not sin. I 
contrived to be left alone with her, and my feel- 
ings being much excited, I dealt plainly with her, 
and as I have been seldom able to do. She listen- 
ed — was solemn, and confessed she was a sinner. 
Indeed, when 1 asked her to look back on the 
sins of one day, she started with a sort of horror, 
and said, ' I can't ; they would more than fill this 
cave.' Her appearance, when alone with me, was 
entirely changed. People generally think there is 
scarcely a possibility of her reform, and so say 
but little to her. I never witnessed such a scene, 
never before saw human nature so degraded. 
This poor wretch had not even the external com- 
forts of Harriet Newell in a season of trial, for 
with her no human being heaved a commiserat- 
ing sigh at the period of nature's greatest an- 



112 MRS. WINSLOW. 

giiish, in a gloomy cave. Oh your heart would 
have bled. With all, this woman had the tender- 
ness of an affectionate mother. Her husband had 
received a blow on the head which almost killed 
him, and had gone to have it dressed. It was now 
sunset ; she was three miles from town, with the 
prospect of her child's death m the night ; no 
candle, and no wood to kindle a light. Who has 
made us to differ V 

In the following, allusion is made to a short 
tour performed by Mr. W. as an agent of the 
Missionary Board : 

" Norwich, November 2, 1817. 

"My dear friend will not be unmindful this 
evening, that it is just one year since his duty to 
become a missionary was first made plain; nor 
can I forget that it was a time of darkness and 
distress with me. Happily the clouds are scat- 
tered. I see nothing from outward circumstan- 
ces to discourage me, while you have already en- 
tered on your employment. Have we not every 
reason to sing of mercy, and to praise God 1 
Yes, even for the darkness and doubt which al- 
most sunk us to despondency before He was 
pleased to show the way in which He would have 
us to go. I cannot tell you how happy I am at 
your success in missionary labors. But it makes 



IN NORWICH. 113 

mc feel more than ever that I am doing nothing 
for CJ»rist. 

'^ In your wanderings my imagination has fol- 
lowed you in many pleasant rides, at the fire-side 
of some of the dear followers of the Saviour, 
and in the sacred desk. In all these, engaged for 
Christ and the heathen, I have thouglit you pecu- 
liarly happy. This has added not a little to my 
enjoyments, and I trust has brought mc with 
more life and fervor to the throne of grace. 

" I have been led to think more of our pros- 
pect, and the successive steps by which it has 
been placed before us, by the return of this sea- 
son. The autumn had always many attractions 
for me. I love it still, independently of those as- 
sociations which the occurretices of the last three 
years connect with it. The last season which I 
spent with my deceased brother, and the plea- 
santest of our lives, was just three years ago. 
Two years since another friend excited interest, 
and rendered the season particularly pleasant j 
and one year since I indulged the expectation of 
going to India. Now have I not reason to wel- 
come the * falling leaf and the decay of nature's 
charms 1 Perhaps I may not spend another such 
«eason in my native land." 



10* 



114" MRS. WINSLOW. 

TO A SISTER FROM H03IE. 

" Norwich, November 14, 1817. • 

'^ Dear Sister, — Your letter made me feel 
again, as I find mys6lf feeling, perhaps too often, 
that in leaving all my friends I make no tritiing 
sacrifice. Not, my sister, that I attach any merit 
to this. O no ; the most cursory view of my 
heart shows me very plainly that my hest servi- 
ces are but filthy rags. It is no merit ; but it will 
be a great mercy if I am permitted to live and 
labor in a heathen land. Yet although I feel this, 
and am in some measure thankful, T am some- 
times almost overwhelmed. The path does not 
appear unbroken by hills and mountains, nor 
would I have it. Difiiculties often humble me ; 
they bring me to the foot of the cross, which is 
indeed my highest exaltation. If it is the will of 
heaven to send me away, I shall be sustained. I 
fear nothing but going uncalled." 

« February 17, 1818. 
" I have just received a letter from Mr. Corne- 
lius, dated at New Orleans, Jan. 13. It seemed 
written in the spirit of a missionary. He had been 
there only two weeks, yet had * preached several 
times to large and attentive assemblies, and two 
or three souls were beginning to feel their need of 
Christ.' From the brethren at Chickamaugah he 



fN NORWICH. 115 

had just heard that three Indians had been hope- 
fully converted after he was there. He says, 
' When you go to the East, if that should be your 
destination, tell the brethren there that a star has 
arisen in the West.' He expects to leave New 
Orleans in JMarch for the Indian country, and to 
take some promising youths to be educated at the 
North. This letter has cheered my heart. I need- 
ed it, or something else, to rouse my slumbering 
spirit." 

'^ jlpril 2G. — I must call this a happy day 
Went early to school, where ]Mr. A. made us a 
visit. An increased number of scholars animated 
me a little. In the forenoon enjoyed being in 
God's house. At noon came home and offered 
my requests for brother L. Returned to school, 
where I prayed with the scholars, which seemed 
to give a zest to the remaining exercises. After 
meeting, attended to the adult school. Returned 

home and took tea. Taught C and E in 

the catechism, and read to them a sermon. Call- 
ed again on God, and went to eveninsr meetins:. 
Was there refreshed, and returned home wishing 
the Sabbath would last always. 

" .May 2'2. — Little did I foresee, when writing 
last in my diary, that instead of meeting my Sa- 
viour at his table at the time appointed, I should 
be prostrated on a bed of sickness. On Sabbath 



116 MRS. WINSLOW. 

morning, when alighting from the chaise to take 
charge of my scholars, I fell on the steps so as 
to fracture a limb and otherwise injure me seri- 
ouslJ^ I was, for a short time, in great distress, 
and thought myself dying, but had no particular 
alarm. Was removed, after fainting, and subse- 
quently conveyed home. Suffered much, and an- 
ticipated lasting injury. I may say, in all this af- 
fliction I have had the presence of my Saviour. 
I desired to glorify God by patience under suffer- 
ing, but did not succeed so effectually as I wish- 
ed. I had some dark moments, though in the 
midst of them I had support. I washed to know 
the design of God in afflicting me at this time so 
severely. Perhaps it is that I may realize more 
the value of my friends in seasons of sickness, 
and know better what I am about to relinquish. 
But I believe that at no time did they seem so in- 
dispensable to me as to prevent the desire of de- 
voting my life to the heathen, though by so doing 
I must part from them all. 

" July 26. — ^My feelings have been tried, and 
my faith put to a test, by the proposition of my 
friend to go to South America. He says he can 
do nothing without first know^ing my views. 
Sometimes he thinks he must go. His brethren 
incline to that opinion. He hesitates, not being 
satisfied what is the will of God. If he go on an 
exploring mission, I feel a deep persuasion that 



IN xoKwicir. 117 

we shall not meet again in this life. But ought I 
therefore to object! I think not. May God grant 
nic grace to say, as I ever have since first con- 
templating this subject, // it be the Lord's will — 
although I knew it would result in the death of 
my friend, I will oppose no obstacle." 

The reference in the last extract, the spirit of 
which cannot but be admired, is to a proposal of 
some friends of missions in New-York and the 
vicinity, for two of the missionary candidates, 
then at Andover, to go on an exploring tour to 
South America. It was subsequently undertaken 
by Kev. !\lessrs. Brigham and Parvin. 

" July, 1818. 
" Since my last we have had some precious 
seasons with Dr. Griffin. He attended a meeting 
at our house on Wednesday. The lower part of 
the house was filled, even crowded. On one of 
the warm days he said to me, ' How is your health 
aiTected by warm weather V I replied, ' I mean 
to find out this summer.' A day or two after, 
when the weather changed, he said, ' I thouo-ht 
much of you this morning, when I felt my sys- 
tem so braced by the cool air, and meant to tell 
you that if this summer should convince you that 
a warm climate is unfavorable^ you must yet go 
on a mission. There is no need of relinquish- 



118 MRS. WINSLOW. 

ing it J South America presents every varietj^ of 
climate.' " 

In September Miss L made a visit to New 

Haven, where she had the pleasure of meeting 
several friends of missions. It would be well if 
the remarks in her letter, on the neglect of the 
poor and ignorant around us, Vw^ere not still appli- 
cable in too many places. Christians in general 
feel too little personal responsibility on this sub- 
ject. It is easier to become impatient with igno- 
rance, and indignant at vice, than to remove the 
one or reform the other. The subject of this me- 
moir did not, in extending her views abroad, over- 
look duties to be performed at home ; or in at- 
tempting to embrace a world in the arms of her 
benevolence, suffer the minor charities of the fa- 
mily, the neighborhood, the country in which she 
lived, to be neglected. The spirit of that mis- 
sionary is to be suspected, who acts differently, 
and does not begin his operations at once where 
he is — endeavoring to w'iden the circles of his 
influence, like the widening waves, caused by the 
pebble thrown into the still lake, until they reach 
the most distant shores. 

" New Have.v, September 13, 1818. 

" Mr. Cornelius came to me this morning and 
said, ' Dr. Worcester did not knoAv who Harriet 



IN NEW IIAVEX. 119 

was until now. Ho will think more of you in fu- 
ture.' 1 had previously felt quite at ease before 
him, confident that he knew nothing about me. 
In our next interview he introduced the subject 
of missions. We took a walk toofcther, and I be- 
^an to fear liim. lie looks sharply and expects 
much of missionaries. 

'' I am surprised to find in this city so many 
ignorant people, who seem to have no means of 
instruction. The alms-house is a wretched place. 
It contains more than eighty souls, and but one 
of them gives evidence of piety. I have found 
two colored women, one of them in a dying state, 
who knew not what sin is. One of them told me 
she had heard something about Jesus Christ, but 
:ould not tell what. She had not, apparently, the 
least notion concerning his mission to this world, 
ind said she never prayed. When I asked if she 
vucw the Lord's prayer, in other words, ' Our 
Father,' she replied that she did not know, but 
kvould try to repeat it after me. 

*' The coming generation, we may hope, will 
lot be like their fathers. ]\Icans are using to 
store their minds in youth with the first princi- 
ples of the Gospel. But must the present ge?iera- 
io7i, who are so rapidly going into eternity, be 
•egardcd as in a hopeless state, because they 
vill not or cannot beaome members of Sabbath- 
3chools^ Surely there is great want of efficient 



120 



MRS. WIXSLOW. 



means to instruct poor souls. I am concerned. 
How can there be ease in Zion when such mul- 
titudes live and die in ignorance at her very 
gates." 

A few extracts annexed, will further show liov\' 
the true spirit of a missionary continued to be ex- 
emplified by Miss L among those to whom 

she could be useful athome^ though her mind and 
heart were so engrossed with the claims of mil- 
lions perishing abroad. To these objects of her 
care she still extended her solicitude long af- 
ter she arrived on foreign shores — addressing let- 
ters to the Sabbath-schools, and sending messa- 
ges to the inmates of the alms-house, and others 
to whom her faithful efforts for their good, her 
sympathy and her prayers had greatly endeared 
her. Happily in the latter years of her sojourn 
in this land, God had raised up from her ass(t- 
ciates an interestmg circle to co-operate in such 
labors, and join her in bearing the wants of sul- 
fering men, both at home and abroad, before his 
throne of mercy. 

To N F , one of this circle, who spent 

some time in New- York, she writes : 

" You do sometimes think of our poor native 
town. Oh yes, in some of your best moments I trust 
we have a remembrance. Have you heard that our 
hopes for precious souls have recently brighten- 



IN NORWICH. 121 

ed 1 A good work seems actually to have been be- 
gun in a distant part of the congreGfation ; but the 
hearts of many, sickened almost by hope deferred, 
can hardly believe that it is so. Yet distressed 
souls affirm the presence of the Spirit. I fear 
lest professed christians should hold themselves 
back from the proffered mercy. They do not 
seem awake, but there is power with God. His 
sovereignty will accomplish all his purposes. In 
this I have strength — here hangs all my hope for 
those who are out of Christ." 

Again she says : ' " The poor people at the alms- 
house still excite interest. Mrs. W seems 

stationary in her religious feelings, though she 
may make progress which I do not discover. 

Mrs. and Mrs. have expressed to Dr. 

S , a wish to join the church. Our Sunday- 
school prospers, if the occasional addition of a 
scholar and attention to the lessons is evidence. 
\Vc desire to see present fruit in the conversion 
Df souls ; but if I should never witness one such 
case, I should still have reason to bless God for 
he school. Good seed is sown, and in God's time 
t will be made to bring forth fruit. 

" I am sorry to say that I do not know particu- 

arly the state of 's mind. Her deportment 

) ainly declares that earthly treasures do not 
satisfy her, and that she seeks a better coun- 
ry. I am told that is inquiring. M is 

Wiublow. 1 1 



122 iMRS. WIxXSLOW. 

to make one of our number at the next com* 
munion. 

" Letters from D mention that the Lord 

has a care over that part of his vineyard where he 
resides. Their meeting on the Sabbath continues, 
and so crowded, that they contemplate building a 
larger room. Two souls are hopefully born again, 
and a number express concern for themselves. 

" You mention H . He has not yet come 

out boldlj'- on the Lord's side. My time is so en- 
grossed that I see but few friends." 

To Miss B T , another beloved female 

associate, she Avrites, stating that the sum of 
$30, which they were again collecting for mis- 
sions, was filled, and entreating her not to re- 
linquish their little missionary society after her 
departure. 

She again addresses the same friend in behalf 
of the circle of females who were accustomed to 
meet for prayer. 

" You have not prayed in vain. No, the Lord 
has heard your prayers. Are you not greatly en- 
couraged to persevere with increased ardor and 
faith 1 Yes, my sisters, take courage. There are 
still greater blessings in store for precious souls 
in Norwich. Never had you so little reason to 
faint, or be weary. God says, ' Open thy mouth 
wide and I will fill it.' O cast yourselves conti- 
nually at his feet. Keep there, and pour out your 



IN NORWICH. 123 

hearts before him. He waits to be gracious. In 
my absence I have enjoyed precious seasons, 
while bending with you before his throne of mer- 
cy. It seems particuhirly the province of females 
to pray. In this way they may be eminently 
useful.'' 

To Miss M H li , another member 

of the same endeared circle, she writes — at one 
time expressing the joy and refreshment she had 
gained in their meetings for prayer, and drawing 
encouragement from the consideration, that as 
God should pour out his Spirit their numbers 
would be increased ; then in reference to the next 
annual subscription to be raised ; then to the Sab- 
bath-school ; then to the monthly concert of 
prayer ; then to the church, having renewed their 
covenant ; then informing of two hopeful conver- 
sions, and requesting prayers for a young lady 
who had sought religious conversation with her ; 
then requesting prayer for herself, in reference 
to the missionary work ; then alluding to a pri- 
vate concert of prayer observed monthly by young 
ladies ; and then in reference to the appeal of Rev. 
Messrs. Hall and Newell, missionaries at Bombay, 
in behalf of six hundred millions of heathen, and 
asking what we do, and how far we deny our- 
selves for Christ and the perishing. 

To another female friend, who in deep afflic- 
tion had called herself a backslider, she A\Tites, 



124' I\IRS. WINSLOW. 

seeking to give spiritual encouragement : " If it 
be true that the best of christians are but partial- 
ly sanctified, that they continually carry about 
with them a body of sin, is it not desirable that 
they should know and feel this ? And is not their 
doing so an evidence that they are making pro- 
gress in the Divine life 1 If we did not see our 
deformity, how could we go forward — we should 
want that stimulus, which of all others has most 
efficacy, a sense of our helplessness ! That con- 
sciousness of remaining corruption which causes 
us to groan under its weight, and is sufficient to 
crush us, is directly opposed to a retrograde mo 
tion in the christian warfare — we cannot then go 
back. There is but one way — to press forward, 
through the grace of Christ, or die in the at- 
tempt." 

An estimable female friend of Miss L , who 

was then without hope in Christ, says, " From 
a number of notes which it was my privilege to 
•eceive from her, I enclose two, indicative of her 
untiring zeal for the salvation of souls at home 
as well as abroad, and thus far exhibiting the 
beautiful consistency of her christian character." 

" Norwich, (midnight,) Dec. 17, 1818. 

^' Dear , If you knew how frequently I 

have thought of you of late with affectionate con- 
cern, you would wonder that I have not before 



IN NORWICH. 125 

this sent you a note. I have one lying- by me 
^\llich has been written several months, but no 
<i|)portunity presenting to deliver it very soon, I 
cojicluded that it should be destroyed, and I 
\\ ould soon converse with you freely, as I wish- 
( <1. Every attempt to do this has been fruitless, 
•liid I now presume something on your kind- 
ness to excuse this intrusion. Need I offer any 
other apology than to express the simple fact 
that I long for your salvation. I have marked 
your deportment from time to time with much 
iiiterest, and have been happy to observe that 
you do think Christianity worth possessing, that 
you are almost, and I hope altogether persuaded 
io be a christian. The extent of your feelings I 
tlo not know, but think myself safe in concluding, 
lliat convinced of the immortality of the soul, 
you do not seek durable riches in this life, but are 
looking towards another, better world. The re- 
quisites to obtain an inheritance in heaven are 
(h»ubtless plain and familiar to you. A candid 
J mind cannot mistake them. It is a great thing to 
! be a christian — so to adorn the doctrine of the 
j Saviour, as by our example to win souls to him. 
f Well may every one exclaim, ' Who is sufficient 
for these things!" Sovereign grace can alone 
effect it. 

" I want to say to every inquirer after the 
; truth, turn your face from the lives of professing 
' 11* 



126 MRS. WINSLOW. 

christians — even the best are but partially sancti- 
fied — and look only at the example of Jesus of 
Nazareth. Regard his precepts, imitate him, and 
vou shall have abundant peace and joy in the 
iloly Ghost." 

" My dear , You have not at any time been 

long absent from my thoughts. I have loved to 
place you before me as dissatisfied with the charms 
of this world and seeking an interest in the Re- 
deemer. You find your heart ^ a medley of incon- 
sistencies.' Happy for you if you indeed see it and 
feel it too. Your remedy is in the God of heaven. 
This you know, but ' your desires are faint, are 
few ; indeed you almost question if any of them 
are sincere.' It is true that we are often and most 
easily deceived. But we need not be. We can 
know ourselves. Especially we may know if 
we really love and fear God, if we will be honest 
in our examination. 

"I v/ould, if possible, help you to a perfect 
acquaintance with yourself and to taking a de- 
cided stand on the Lord's side. It is ground of 
thankfulness, that you are not insensible to the 
danger of those who are without God and with- 
out hope in the world, but it should excite deep 
solicitude that you are not already established in 
the faith. There should be no wavering, no 
standing still, or turning back. The object in 



IN NORWICH. 127 

view must be pursued with unremitting diligence. 
The Lord is not slack concerning his promise. 
He waits to be gracious, but he requires that we 
faint not, pressing towards the mark. It should 
be always remembered that if we are not for 
God we are against him. 

"Dear friend, can I help you 1 I tremble at 
every thing like delay in this great work. Come 
now J all things are ready. To God I commend 
you. He demands our heart, our whole souls, 
and that this day^ lest it be for ever too late. In 
haste, but with much affection, your friend, 

"Harriet." 

To another esteemed female acquaintance she 
addressed the following tender and faithful appeal: 

"Dear , The interest that I have long felt 

for your best good I think warrants a plain and 
friendly communication before my departure 
from my native land. Indeed it would be oppos- 
ing the dictate of conscience as well as affection 
to withhold the testimony of my experience to 
the vanity and injury of worldly pleasures and 
' the sufficiency of Divine grace to ensure rational 
I and permanent enjoyment. I recollect a conver- 
sation with you at Mrs. 's. You considered 

I yourself happy. In the world you found much 
! to amuse and to fill you with enjoyment — you 



128 MRS. WINSLOW. 

sometimes thought of futurity, but it was not 
with dread — the employments of heaven were 
unlike those of earth, but your views on this 
subject were indefinite. This I believe was the 
substance of what was expressed ; but we were 
interrupted when 1 wished to say much more. 
No convenient time has since ofiered, and now, 

dear , you must forgive me if I offend, and 

rest assured always, that the salvation of your 
soul is an object which I most earnestly desire, 
and for which I would spare no effort. But I 
trust you will not blame me ; if you do, it will 
only increase my solicitude for your happiness. 

" Permit me to ask if you are still satisfied 
with the daily round of amusements which pre- 
sent themselves ; and if you are willing not only 
to spend life in this way, but even eternity ? If 
this is the case, I entreat you seriously to in- 
quire if you can thus indulge yourself from age 
to age % Is there not a limit to every earthly 
scene 1 And as this life is so small a part of our 
existence, is it not of the first importance to be 
prepared for enjoying another 1 

'^ Do not dream of heaven without a compliance 
with the terms of salvation. God is merciful, 
but he is likewise just, and ^ it is a fearful thing 
to fall into the hands of the living God.' Look, 

dear , into the Scriptures : ' Except a man be 

born again he cannot see the kingdom of God.' 



IN NORWICH. 129 

'He that believeth not, shall be damned.' 'Ex- 
cept ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.' I 
could refer you to every page in the sacred vo- 
' lume which condemns the impenitent,- but you 
I may know this. 

j " Whatever the world may say, Christianity 
, does conftT happiness in this life. There is not 
I a real christian on earth, nor ever was, even 
i though his lot be low, and he be stripped of every 

! earthly dependence, who would exchange his in- 
terest in the Saviour, his rags and his poverty, 
for the pleasures of the most happy^ the most 
distinguished of worldly men. Is not this fact 
a proof that religion is worth something — that it 
is worth every thing 1 If you would be happy in 
this life — be a christian ; if you would secure a 
place at the right hand of your Judge in the final 
day, fear and love him now. Trifle not with your 
immortal interest. If it was so valuable to the 
Son of God, that he could leave heaven for a re- 
sidence on our earth, accompanied by such un- 
•paralleled suflering, is it not worth your whole 
attention \ The Lord by his Spirit warns you of 
danger, that your soul is rushing to its final per- 
dition ; resist not his strivings ; be persuaded to 
to repent, believe and live. I shall often think of 
you with affectionate concern, and my first wish 
for you shall ever be, that you may seek and 
obtain that peace which belongs exclusively to 



130 MRS. WIXSLOW. 

christians. That the Lord may forgive and keep 
you evermore, is the prayer of your friend 

"Harriet." 

To her sister, who was on a visit at New Lon- 
don, she WTites: "I do sometimes realize that 
I shall not perhaps always be surrounded with 
earthly parents, brothers, and sisters. Well, if I 
have a heavenly Parent, and Hindoo brothers and 
sisters, there will be call for unceasing gratitude. 
Never forget me in your prayers. And here let 
me say that I know too well how visiting friends, 
as you are now doing, dissipates the mind. With- 
out stated seasons of retirement and communion 
with God, we cannot maintain a regular consis- 
tent christian walk. Such a w^alk is never more 
necessary for you than at the present time. Seek 
and find frequent opportunities to present your- 
self more immediately before God, and maintain 
a heavenly frame of mind. This will enable you 
in some measure to discharge your duties, which 
may be various. Let not one, however minute, 
be neglected. And, my dear sister, ever remem- 
ber that you are the Lord Jesus Christ's, and not 
your o^\^l. Let not trifles light as air engross 
that time and those affections which belong ex- 
clusively to God. Speak often of your Saviour. 
Let him never be wounded by your silence, 
through fear of a fellow-worm. And may God 



IN NORWICH. 131 

grant, in answer to your constant prayers and 
most earnest endeavors, that this visit shall re- 
dound to his glory in the best good of some im- 
morliil soul, and in your own advancement in 
the divine life/' 

In the autumn of this year, the designation of 

Mr. W , as also of Mr. Spaulding and Mr. 

iWooclward, was made for Ceylon. Their ordi- 
nation, with that of the lamented Fisk, took place, 
the fourth day of November, at Salem, Mass. ; 
jand was a most solemn and interesting occasion. 
|[n the evening, after the ordination, eleven brelh- 
\-e?i were assembled, who had dedicated them- 
Jeelvcs to foreign missions. Among these, besides 
'.he four then ordained, were Parsons, who soon 

ent with Fisk to Palestine, Temple and Goodell, 
who a year later joined the same mission, Bing- 
iiam, who went to the Sandwich Islands, and By- 
ngton, who went to the Indians of this country. 
These joined hands, and standing in a circle, 
;ang, '"When shall we all meet again." In a few 
months they were scattered to the four quarters 
)f the globe, and ere long two of them, whose feet 
lad stood on Blount Zion, rested from their la- 
l»ors. — Dear companions of my earlier and later 
jtudies, ardent cherishers of my little missionary 
pirit, sharers in some of my most precious sea- 
[ons of social devotion, may I at length sit down 



132 MRS. WINSLOW. 

with you on the ^^ heavenly hills^^'* and I ask no 
higher privilege than to tread in your steps here, 
however painful and weary! 

It was expected that the departure of the mis- 
sionaries would follow soon after their ordina- 
tion, but it was delayed for want of a passage. 

"Norwich, October 7, 1818. 
" My dear Uncle Writing, — It is now proba- 
ble that I shall be called to leave my native land 
sooner than was at first expected. The illness of 
Messrs. Richards and Warren, at Ceylon, induces 
the Board to propose to strengthen that mission 
immediately \ and we are designated to embark 
for that station as early as possible. This great 
work is now brought nearer to my mind than I 
could ever before regard it, and I trust it does 
not appear the less desirable. A long adieu to 
my kindred and friends will rend the heart. I 
feel already that it will j but at the same time the 
prospect of doing good to some poor heathen 
soul will fill it Avith joy ; with God for our por- 
tion, even the wilderness would not be solitary ; 
tossing on the tempestuous deep, we should fear 
nothing ; a stranger in the midst of a strange 
people, we might have society ; and above all, in 
preparing the way, in ever so small a degree, for 
the universal dominion of the Prince of Peace^ 
would be a constant feast to the soul. I am some- 



IN xN'ORwicn. 133 

times ready to inquire who is there who would 
not be a missionary if the Lord directed, or even 
permitted it. But when I look at homc^ I wonder 
indeed that such an one could ever think of at- 
tempting so much. It has seemed like presump- 
tion to suppose that I have been thus called. 
i\o\v the prospect seems more fixed, but I still' 
consider it a ' wonder of mercies.' 

" My dear mother is pfreatly supported in view 
of what is before me, and my family all bid me 
God speed. Should I be prevented seeing you, 
let me now say, comfort my parents when I am 
gone. I shall be but a few days sooner removed 
than I should if life were spent with them. It 
is only taking a different road to the same place 
of rest 5 yet nature speaks, and calls for the sym- 
pathy and aflection of remaining friends." 

^^ October 11. — This lias been a precious day. 
Truly, one day in God's house is better than a 
thousand elsewhere. Mr. W. preached. I thought 
the Lord was with him an.d with the hearers. 
Oh ! how different such a day spent in America, 
from one in heathen India. How do I look at this 
work now! — as I thought I should when brought 
so near \ I believe that I have the same support 
from God, and the same conflicts between con- 
tending and opposing feelings. 

" December 24. — My exercises have been pretty 

Wiiiilow. 13 



IS-i MRS. ■^VI^■£LOW. 

uniform since the final determination to embark 
soon. I have generally some faith, though at times 
great weakness constrains me to shrink from 
the prospect before me. Yesterday and to-day I 
have felt this. It seems too much opposed to 
every natural feeling. Yet when 1 ask myself 
what alternative I would prefer, I find invariably, 
that of all stations and employments, those of a 
missionary are to me the most desirable. I would 
not relinquish the hope of engaging in them, 
for any thing else which this life presents." 

In reference to her marriage, which took place 
at Norwich, January 11, 1819, there is the follow 
ing notice in her journal wdiile at Andover j to 
which place she went with her husband, on the 
way to visit his friends in Vermont ; and where 
they were detained a little by his Sketch of Mis- 
sions then in the press. 

" January 30. — The feelings which engrossed 
me previous to, and at the time of our marriage, 
cannot be described. I believe that I had some 
just view of what I was doing. I was cheerful, 
and I hope grateful ; at the same time when I 
considered how much meekness and patience a 
husband would need to bear with my infirmities, 
I could almost have said, ' Lord, save him from 
this trial.' 



AT AXDOV^ER. 133 

" This event, too, was to be connected willi a try- 
in^ separation. My dear parents and friends would 
soon see our faces no more. Ikit tiie thought 
that the Lord liad i^race in reserve for them com- 
forted me. We left home the third day after our 
marriage, and had a pleasant journey to Boston, 
where we visited some friends, and then came by 
Salem and Newburyport to this place. Friends 
were raised up to us of the Lord, and for his sake 
we were every where kindly received. Blessed 
be his name for ever. How much more should 
we love those friends who show us kindness for 
the Lord's sake, than though it were only for 
ourselves." 

"Andover, January 22d, 1819. 
" Dear Parents, Brother and Sister, — Your 
letter this morning deserves our most hearty 
thanks. To describe our emotions on perusing 
it is impossible. Why is it that we ever forget 
our obligations to Him who so constantly and so 
abundantly manifests his forbearance and lovo 
towards us 1 In your resignation — more than 
that — your cheerful acquiescence, we have fresh 
occasion for o ratitude, and are encourasfcd to sfo 
on our way rejoicing. Dear father says, the af- 
ternoon after our departure was ' a sorrowful 
one.' It was in a degree such to us, notwith 
standing we had much to make us comfortable. 
I trust it was not exclusively sorrowful either to 



136 ^ MRS. WIXSLOW. 

those at home or those by the way. I considered 
that it was not a last parting, at the same time it 
was partings and that, too, not under the most 
animating circumstances. But why talk of this ? 
AVe shall meet again, yes, in a few days, and we 
shall be as we have been ; and then, if we are 
the children of God, we shall meet never to part ! 
O that He would sanctify zcs all, make us useful 
in life, and finally take us to Himself. 

" Saturday. — This is the first morning the sun 
has shone since my arrival at A. Could my mother 
and friends see how comfortably I am situated 
this smiling day with kind friends, they would lift 
their hearts to God in thanksgiving, and call me 
insensible to His goodness if I indulged any 
gloomy feelings. I ought to be happy, as much 
as is consistent with carrying about this body of 
sin, and I am so if friends at home are. My en- 
joyment is still closely connected with theirs. 
But I feel that it is a privilege to be permitted 
to make any sacrifice for Him who freely gave 
his life for us." 

It would be pleasing to follow Mrs. Y\ in 

her notices of the journey through Massachusetts, 
New Hampshire, and Vermont, where she met, 
for the first and last time, many dear relatives, 
and had many affecting interviews with beloved 
christian friends, who never ceased to remember 



AT ANDOVER. 137 

her and licr mission witli deep interest. She re- 
turned to Norwicli near the end of Marcli, and 
soon after received the long wislied for informa- 
tion of a passage being engaged for India. The 
delay which had taken place, though trying in 
some respects, afforded the better opportunity 
for preparations to leave home^ which are often 
too much hurried ; but what was of vastly more 
consequence, it was the occasion of the valuable 
accession of Dr. and Mrs. Scwt/c/cr to the mission. 
Her feelings and those of her family, in view of 
her immediate departure, are expressed in a letter 
to her husband, who had proceeded to Boston. 

" Your letter from Boston was handed me this 
afternoon. I was overjoyed to hear of a ship to 
convey us to India. I can say with you, that 'no 
intelligence for a long time has animated me so 
much.' The family appeared to partake of my 
feelinsfs in some desfree. To us all I believe it 
was a relief from trying suspense, and consequent- 
ly was welcome. This evening it has been men- 
tioned at meeting, and fervent prayer w^as offered 
that we might be kept in all our way, and made 
instrumental of jrreat good. Our dear father first 
led in prayer, and it was worth more than I can 
name to hear him. All present must have been 
astonished, if they were ignorant of the efficacy 
of grace. I was comforted, I hope I was gratc- 
12* 



138 MRS. wI^'SLow. 

ful for such a father. Mr. G. and Mr. C. followed 
him and expressed all that I could wish. A let- 
ter from Daniel, at New-York, mentions his call- 
ing on Dr. and Mrs. Scudder, and finding them 
very interesting people." 

Among the notes which she addressed to friends 
just before leaving Norwich are the two following : 

" Thank you, dear M , for your kind invi- 
tation. You are thoughtful, kind, abundantly. 
What shall I say 1 Only may Heaven return you 
a hundred fold for every benevolent feeling to- 
ward me and mine." 

"You ask w^hat you will do without my sympa- 
thy — rather ask what I shall do when deprived 
of you all. My heart sometimes sinks at the pros- 
pect. I wish it otherwise. It ought to be so. 
But, dear cousins, I have much reason for grati- 
tude that I do feel so great a degree of happiness 
in this undertaking — that the sacrifices are made 
to appear so light, in comparison with the object 
in view. For this I feel daily that I am indebted, 
under God, to the prayers of friends." 

FAREWELL NOTE. 

" May you be blessed in this life with the rich- 
est communications of God's love, and may our 



I 



IN NORWICH. 139 

next interview be on the riirht liand of the throne 

of God! We do not, we cannot part to meet no 

more. Spirits know no confinement ; they may 

j range the workl, and from its utmost extremities 

' meet and mingle prayers. We shall thus meet. 

Yes, dear M , our acquaintance with each 

other is but just begun; it shall be perfected in 
eternity — a long, a blissful eternity. We pursue 
different roads to the same final rest — to our 
home. God grant us his Spirit that we may devote 
our whole lives to Him; be spiritual ; follow our 
Divine Lord, and finally have an abundant en- 
trance to his kingdom. Dear sisters, farewell ; 
we owe each other our fervent petitions day by 
day. Let us be faithful, and we shall find abun- 
dant reward in this and a better world. Again I 
say, farewell ! We have taken sweet counsel to- 
gether ; often walked to the house of God in 
company : 

* Our hopes^ our fears, our aims are one, 
' Our comforts and our cares.' 

" The God of peace bless you more and more. 

Amen and amen. 

"Harriet." 

Mrs. W. was accompanied to Boston by her 
mother. From that place she wrote as follows: 



140 MRS. WINSLOW 

« Boston, May 31, 1819. 
'' I improve a few minutes, while dear mother 
has gone out with Mrs. C. and Mr. W., to write 
to my beloved sister and other friends at home. 
You have probably received our letter sent last 
Thursday, and may think it a little doubtful 
whether you see mamma to-morrow. She has 
about determined on returning then, notwith- 
standing our sailing is deferred till a week from 
that time. You will readily believe that she has 
been a comfort to us on this visit. I trust she 
will have no reason to regret that she undertook 
it. Indeed some seasons we have enjoyed here 
would have been prized by any of you. All our 
visits have been closed by singing and prayer, 
and all our social interviews have been just such 
as the soul needs to quicken it when languishingi 
for want of spiritual communion and fellowship." 

At length the mission band, amidst the prayers 
and tears of many friends who '^ accompanied 
them to the ship," sailed from Boston, June 8, 
lSl9, in the brig Indus, Capt. Wills, bound to 
Calcutta. 



6EA JOCRNAL. Ml 



CHAPTER ITT 



Voyaj^c to Calcutta, and passa^^c fliroiigpU 
Trincoinalic, Oallc and Colombo, to 
Jaflfna. 

Journal and Revival at Sea — Ascent of the Hoogley — beau- 
tiful scenery — drowning: of the gods — missionary and 
oihcr friends at Calcutta — passage to Trincomalie — brief 
description of Ceylon — Fort Galle — a Boodhist temple — 
Colombo— fricnd^ihip of Sir Robert Brownrigg — arrival 
at Jaffna, 

It will be perceived that Mrs. Winslow, from 
tiie time of her separation from her parents and 
family circle till her deatii, was accustomed to 
brighten the chain of affection, by writing, un- 
der successive dates, a summary description of 
scenes through which she passed; transmitting 
the sheet as opportunity offered. These Idlers, 
having thus in many cases the aspect of a journal, 
constitute some of the richest materials for trace- 
ing a connected history of her life. 

The following highly interesting communica- 
tion to her parents, in which we accompany her 
on the voyage to Calcutta, amid signal displays 
of Divine mercy, is of the character just men- 
tioned. 



14-2 MRS. \^'I^'SL0W. 

" Brig Indus, at Sea, June 21, 1819. 

" My dear parents expect the same unreserved 
communication from their absent child Avhich 
they always allowed her when under the paternal 
roof. I feel that you have an irresistible claim to 
every thing in which I can gratify you without 
interfering with the more direct object of my life; 
and nothing within my power shall be wanting 
to compensate in some degree for the sacrifice 
you have made in giving me up to God and the 
heathen. To you, then, dear guardians of my life, 
I address w4iat I may be permitted to write from 
time to time, concerning whatever interests me, 
with the assurance that you will exercise alltha 
indulgence that you have hitherto done, and wi 
remember that I can write to you, and to m 
brothers and sisters, what I could not to any one 
else. You know my feelings on this subject, an 
my objections to having any publicity given to 
what I write. 

'' And is it true that all our future communica- 
tions must be by means of pen and paper 1 AVill 
3'ou no longer administer to the thousand wants 
of your child ; no more listen to her complain- 
ings and rejoicings with parental kindness 1 Have 
your labors of love for her ceased ; and shall she 
be deprived the privilege of alleviating j^our caresM 
in the decline ojf life, \vhen you will most needy 
her presence and attention 1 Shall she no longer; 



idl 






SEA JOURNAL. H3 

be an immediate partaker of your joys and sor- 
rows 1 Ah no. But we can still be helpers toge- 
ther of each other's joys, we can still bear each 
other's burdens. Though separated, we may meet 
and mingle prayers and tears on the same com- 
mon altar. You can still exercise the affectionate 
solicitude of parents, and I the love and gratitude 
of a child. The wide ocean will soon divide our 
bodies, but our spirits may meet and hold sweet 
communion. We will not then be cast down, but 
go on our respective ways rejoicing. 

" I could say much of parting scenes. Those 
I which most impressed my mind, and to which I 
[must always recur with indescribable emotions, 
are the farewell seasons with my parents. The last 
•sounds which fell on my ear from their lips still 
dwell in my soul. The other members of the fa- 
mily too ! — but I forbear. It is enough that I have 
I enjoyed you so long, that God permits me to 
leave you for his service. While I weep, I re- 
joice. To see you all, to be with you and to en- 
joy you as I have done (and surely no person ever 
found their home more pleasant,) I would not re- 
turn. I have entered on the work so long desired ; 
the object before me is worth a far greater sacri- 
fice than mine, and I would press towards it. 

'' We sailed from Boston, as we expected when 
mother left me, on the 8th instant. The weather 
was fine. 3Iany people collected on the wharf to 



M-i MKS. WINSLOW. 

witness our departure. A prayer was offered by 
Dr. Worcester, and a parting hymn, ' Blest be 
the tie that binds,' was sung by many. The spec- 
tators were solemn and apparently affected, and 
we, though our object was so desirable, could 
not bid adieu to our dear native land, our privi- 
leges there, and the friends so long bound to our 
hearts, without a struggle. There was, however, 
much quietude on every countenance. About ten 
o'clock the vessel moved from the wharf, and we 
bade a silent but affectionate farewell to one, to 
another, to all the assembled multitude. Dr. Wor- 
cester, Mr. Dwight, and some other friends, 
among whom was Mr. Winslow's brother Hub- 
bard, accompanied us six miles out. Our pilot 
left us early the following morning, and about 
11 o'clock we were out of sight of the American 
shores. Our captain and other officers were soon 
found agreeable and kind. Happy in each other, 
and happy in our prospect, we promised ourselves 
some enjoyment amidst the privations necessari- 
ly attending so long a voyage. 

" Our accommodations are as good as we could 
expect, and our spiritual privileges great. The 
brethren have had a meeting to make some ar- 
rangement for religious exercises and for intel- 
lectual improvement. It is agreed that there be 
public worship on Sabbath morning in the cabin, 
and in the afternoon on deck ; morning and even- 



SEA JOURNAL. M-5 

ing prayers daily, a public conference on Thurs* 
day evening, and a prayer-meeting the first ]\Ion- 
day in the month. In our rooms we are to have 
a missionary meeting every Friday afternoon, 
and a prayer-meeting on Saturday evening ; be- 
sides meetings at other times as circumstances 
may render expedient. Every afternoon we arc 
to meet' immediately after dinner for discussion 
on theological subjects. 

" The brethren have conversed and prayed 
with the seamen, and find them attentive. The 
sisters presented to each of them a Bible. Some 
I Tracts have been distributed, and we have the 
[satisfaction of knowing that they are read. It is 
U'cry common to see one reading aloud, while a 
[number surround him with eyes and ears open 
as though they would seize every word. Last 
evening Mr. W. and I V\alked on deck just at 
^ sunset, and observing five or six assembled to 
1ip;ir a Tract, wc stopped and listened till the 
'.( ;u]er ceased, after which Mr. W. conversed and 
prayed with ihem. It was a pleasant season, and 
uieli as I hope to enjoy many times. We have 
lad one missionary meeting and one prayer- 
meeting. Service in the cabin yesterdaj^ morn- 
ing was conducted by .Air. W. and on deck in 
the afternoon by Mr. Spaulding. The occasion 
was interesting. Aside from the charm of uovcl- 
WiDslow. 13 



116 MRS. WIXSLOW. 

ty, it was delightful to see such an audience on 
the great deep. 

" rJuly 23. — South of the equator thirty miles. 
i^Ty journal has been interrupted by sei^ere illness, 
of which i\Ir. W. will give you some account. 
My thoughts on a sick bed have very often tra- 
velled back to the friends I have left. Not one 
person of early and aflectionate interest has pro- 
bably escaped them. Awake and asleep, I have 
walked, rode, and held sweet converse with many 
whose faces I do not expect to see again in the 
flesh. Every day I have been with my dear fami- 
ly at the altar where God has permitted ns to 
unite our hearts, and to min2"le our thanks^ivinf^s 
and petitions. 

" 24. — A squall has just come up. I should like 
to have you see the confusion it occasions in 
taking in sail, &c. We run. up and look out to 
see the waves. They come rolling on as though 
they would ingulf our little bark; but in a short 
lime they are comparatively quiet, and leave it 
to ' walk the waters like a thing of life.' We can 
almost say that we have had an uninterrupted 
course of smooth and pleasant sailing, though 
one squall was so violent as to carry away our 
fore-top-mast, main-top-gallant-mast, and other 
spars, as the sailors call them. I have experienced 
nothing of that alarm and distress which severQ 
storms must occasion. 



SEA JOURNAL. 14-7 

" August 2. — This day is set apart by tlie 
brethren for fasting and prayer. I believe tliat 
the Holy Spirit has been in the midst of us ; that 
he has encouraged our hearts, and strengthened 
us for our great work. AVe have observed the 
monthly prayer-meeting with multitudes who 
love our Lord and Saviour. It was some hours 
before our friends in America; but we are not 
prevented from thinking of them again at the 
time we imagine they are presenting their re- 
quests for us and for the world. You know not, 
my dear parents, how much I depend on your 
prayers. You cannot forget us. It is a delightful 
thought, that morning and evening our dear fa- 
ther prays for his absent children at the domes- 
tic altar. Oh may we hereafter unite our hearts 
and voices in those mansions from which we shall 
go no more out for ever. May all our household 
be assembled there. In that happy place you will 
not have occasion to regret that God called one 
of your number to himself before he had strug- 
jrled hard and lonsf as^ainst the storms of this 
world ; that one other was permitted to labor 
among the destitute of our own country, and 
still another among the heathen for the welfare 
of precious souls — even though all this is just 
as they were qualified to contribute to your hap- 
piness in the decline of life. 

" 4'. — To-day we have had pleasant weather, 



148 MRS. -VVINSLOW. 

and are now going at the rate of nine miles an 
hour. I have been sitting awhile this evening on 
deck with Mr. W. enjoying the scene presented 
by the moon casting her silvery rays on the wa- 
ters, and a few scattering clouds, with here and 
there a star twinkling between them. I can give 
you no adequate conception of it. There are in- 
deed many appearances at sea which mock de- 
scription. The ' ocean on fire ' is peculiarly grand. 
You have stood by the sea, and admired the waves 
dashing in white foam against the shore. Now 
fancy that foam to be rolling, sparkling, burning 
embers ; or to be all ignited like a shower of fire 
in fireworks. The water seems to be liquid fire 
w^ierever it is touched by the ship, disturbed by 
the lish or any thing else, or broken by the wind. 
As you look at the crested waves rolling on to- 
wards the ship, you are almost ready to say, in a 
moment it must be in ablaze. But thousands and 
thousands, rushing forward w4th violence, dash 
harmless against the sides of the vessel. 

" D. — The brethren meet in the forecastle every 
evening, and hold a general prayer-meeting there 
every Wednesday evening. They have also reli- 
gious exercises on Sabbath morning before our 
service in the cabin. There is continued encou- 
ragement from the attention of the seamen. Two 
or three have manifested some concern for their 
souls. Four of them cannot read, but will proba- 
bly learn a little before we leave them. 



SEA JOURNAL. 149 

" 6. — I have been on deck this evening. Saw 
the moon slowly appear from behind a cloud near 
the horizon, and thought how often I have watch- 
ed her first appearance at the door of the ' red 
house,' with one and another whose faces I can 
see no more. We may, however, fix our eyes on 
the same orb ; we may gaze at the same heavens 
filled with the display of the wisdom and power 
of Jehovah ; and if we can all say, ' This awful 
God is ours,' it is enough. I am willing to leave 
you with such a Protector, such a Friend. 

" 7. — We have new occasion for rejoicing to- 
day. About 10 o'clock a vessel was discovered 
approaching us. When she had come within two 
miles of us, I went up to wait the result. You 
cannot at all conceive our emotions when we saw 
unfurled, as she approached, the flag of our be- 
loved country. Captain W. exclaimed, ' Ah, she's 
a yankee.' We found it was the Lady Adams, 
on a whaling voyage from Nantucket, twenty-two 
months out, and now bound home. We had just 
time to close the letters which were written. I 
have not mentioned our daily union of prayer for 
the seamen. This evening one of them was se- 
lected as a special subject of prayer for a week. 

'^ 8. — This morning a dolphin was caught about 
four feet long, in shape something like a salmon. 
Its appearance is very beautiful. In the wj»* 
is silvery, when caught and dyin.o- 
13* 



150 MRS. AVINSLOW. 

most of the colors of the rainbow, varying every 
moment. Cape pigeons have been flying about 
us for several days. One was caught to-day with 
a fish-hook and bait. They keep us company to 
pick up what is thrown out from the vessel. They 
resemble doves a little, but have longer wings 
and webbed feet. Their plumage is very soft, and 
under it is an uncommon share of dowm. The 
flesh is something like that of the robin, but hard- 
er and stronger. 

"9. — Captain "VV. just now called me to go on 
deck and look at what are called the Magellan 
clouds; seen only on this side of the equator. 
They are very distinct to-night, as the sky is 
clear. Two are white, and near the milky way, 
and one black, directly in that bright girdle. The 
first are probably collections of stars, the other 
a more vacant space in the heavens. They are 
apparently near the pole, as two of them revolve 
round the third. I have not felt the air so piercing 
before ; should call it cold at home, though we 
are not in so high a latitude as you, by eight or 
nine degrees. I am seated in my room with the 
door shut, and my old black silk coat and plaid 
cloak on. We have no fire, of course you will sup- 
pose we need the warmest clothing. 

" 14, Sabbcdh.—We delight to think and talk 
of our dear friends at home on this precious even- 
" ^'T, and would inquire how it is with you ; but, 



SEA JOURNAL. 151 

' the winds and waves tell all the same unvarying 
tale.' Could my voice reach you, or could I by 
my pen excite in your bosoms one more emotion 
ill behalf of those who go to the heathen, could 
i induce one more petition for them at the throne 
(.)f grace, how would I plead with you, my dear 
friends. You think of, and pray for us, but you 
tio not know the extent of our wants. We want 
jiiore faith^ more humility^ more ardent love for 
souls. I say u'e, because it is common to use the 
j)lural in such language, and it is perhaps true of 
us all, though I would place none of our little 
band on a level with myself. Yesterday afternoon 
at our meeting, there seemed an uncommon spirit 
of brotherly love, and we believe the presence of 
our Saviour. It was one of the pleasantest seasons 
of christian communion we have had on board. 

" 16. — This morning we w^ere called on deck 
by the sound of land^ hoa ! You can know little 
of our feelings. Nearly ten weeks the great 
waters had bounded our prospect. We were real- 
ly delighted, although the object before us was 
only a small island properly called Inaccessible. 
It is so high as to be visible fifty miles. Its cir- 
cumference is two leagues. A little distant, an- 
other and larger one presented a bold and majes- 
tic front. It reminded me of East Rock in New 
Haven, or seemed as that would appear if you 
could give it the same aspect at a distance as 



152 MRS. WINSLOW. 

when riding at its foot. This island resembled 
the other in its roughness, as the clouds over it 
cast a shade, admitting some rays of the sun here 
and there amidst surrounding darkness. Between 
these two islands were two others which resem- 
bled stacks of hay. As we were gazing at this 
interesting scene a very dark cloud arose. The 
waves literally gathered blackness, and a squall 
of wind and rain obliged us to retreat to our cabins. 
This has furnished some variety for to-day, and 
gives a little tone to our languid spirits. The 
weather, on the whole, is very favorable to our 
rapid progress towards the heathen. 

*' 18. — I could now tell my dear parents some- 
thing more of a sea-life than when I last wrote. 
We had then boisterous weather, but this week 
it has been trying. Last night I did not sleep at 
all, indeed for several nights have slept but little. 
Repeated squalls and strong wind have raised 
the sea so much as to keep our vessel tossing 
with violence. The motion is like the rocking of 
a cradle, when it is thrown far over each way so 
as to roll the child from side to side. Every thing 
loose is thrown about. Chairs and other articles 
of furniture are constantly travelling to and fro. 
There is no such thing as rest. I wish I could 
give you any just notion of the scene on deck 
this morning. The waves were what is called 
' mountain high.' I never saw any thing ?o grand, 



SEA JOURNAL. 153 

nnd said to Mr. W. that I would willingly suffer 
much at sea to witness such a display of the 
))Ower of Jehovah. 

" 2G. — The last week our progress has been 
\ fry rapid. Saturday night we had a gale which 
( 'apt. W. called severe. In the last fortnight we 
li;ive come the distance of America from Europe. 
We are not, however, impatient for the end of 
our voyage. 

" At this time, when we were almost despond- 
ing, we are made glad by the hope that one of 
the seamen is a subject of grace. Mr. S. has 
been in the habit of grivinfr two of them instruc- 
tion in navigation. On Monday when he went to 
the forecastle for this purpose, one of them said, 
' I must give up navigation for my Bible ; I find I 
liave neglected that too long.' He was convinced 
of his sin and danger while at the helm in the 
gale on Saturday night. Mr. W. after convers- 
ing with him last night, thought he appeared well. 
He has been a decided infidel. When he found 
that missionaries were to be on board, he curs- 
ed them and said, ' am I to be shut up with 
these creatures so long I I cannot even take a 
civil oath without being mauled at the elbow by 
all the holy brotherhood.' This man was the 
week before last selected as the special subject 01 
prayer. His name is Brown. There are several 
others of whom we hope good things. 



154« MRS. WINSLOW. 

" 28. — After a trying day from violent weath- 
er, this evening has been among the most precious 
of my missionary life. I have felt more than 
ever before that I can rest my eternal all on God, 
and fear nothing. Enjoyed our prayer-meeting 
very much. 

" 30. — Could my dear parents participate our* 
emotions this evening in behalf of the precious 
souls around us, how would they bless God that 
he called their children to the heathen. We do 
believe that fruit will abound to his glory. Mr. 
W. after some conversation with the youngest 
sailor, the only one whose prospect is something 
better than to be always before the mast, is almost 
ready to believe he is a christian. The last fort- 
night his views of sin and of the character of 
Jehovah have been more affecting, and he gives 
some evidence of a change of heart. 

'^ Two others are subjects of apparent convic- 
tion. The weather last night was more boisterous 
than before. We had a tremendous storm of 
lightning, rain, and hail, succeeded by an almost 
entire calm, which left our ship to be tossed on 
the waves with great violence. The principal 
danger to be apprehended in this voyage is from 
the calms which follow high winds in this region. 
The vessel then is in great danger of foundering. 
It is knocked about on the mountain-waves like 
an egg-shell. I cannot say that through all the 



SEA JOURNAL. 155 

Storms I have been unmoved. I have often trem- 
bled at the display of G od's power. In fe\C things 
is his power and our weakness more manifest 
than in a severe thunder storm at sea. You can 
liuve no adequate conception of the scene, and it so 
buHles all description that I will not attempt one. 

" September 3. — This is dear H. J.'s birth-day. 
When at Andover, Dr. Woods said to me, ' Your 
heart will often ache to see the little folks.' He 
was right ; j'et / vnuld rather see them in Ceylo?i 
than in America. Dear sisters, I desire most of 
all that you be good children, that you love God, 
be kind and afTectionate to each other and to all 
around you. 

" Our missionary meeting was this afternoon a 
refreshing season. Could you know our dear com- 
panions as we do, you would rejoice that we are 
so favored. You must know somethinfr more 

o 

about these meetings, as they are the pleasantest 
we have. The special object of them is to men- 
tion any deficiencies that we have observed in 
each other's conduct in course of the week, and 
to remark upon them with the freedom of brethren 
and sisters. Nothing has tended more to unite us 
as members of one body. 

'' 4. — This afternoon, after the theological dis- 
cussion, ^Ir. S. proposed that ]Mr. W. and I should 
remain with them to read the Bible. We enjoy- 
ed the season very much, and 1 could not but 



156 MRS. WINSLOW. 

think of many hours I have spent with the chil* 
dren of God in unprofitable conversation, when 
if they had been employed in reading the word of 
God I should be a better missionary. It has been 
well said that the degree of our piety may be 
measured by our attachment to this book. 

" 8. — The brethren have had an interesting 
time with the seamen. It was the general prayer 
meeting in the forecastle. The sisters met at the 
same time for prayer. Most of the seamen came 
together. The most abandoned was there, who 
said last evening when one of the brethren spoke 
particularly to the others and not to him, ' then 
you leave me to perish.' He has been more pro- 
fane for a few days, evidently attempting to hard- 
en himself in sin. One said to him, ^ I have been 
thinking much of you, and am afraid you are be- 
coming hardened.' ' So,' said he, 'you give me 
up for a lost sheep. I have done all I can to be a 
christian, and cannot. I am no worse than others.' 

" 11. — It was agreed this evening to set apart 
i\Ionday afternoon as a season of thanksgiving to 
God for the mercies with which he has accompa- 
nied us so far on our way towards the heathen ; 
particularly for his preservation of those who 
have been sick, and for his display of mercy to- 
wards Brown, the man mentioned as hopefully 
regenerated. ^ 

" Some albatrosses were caught to-day. From 



SEA JOURNAL. l.")? 

the extremity of oim wing- to tlic other they 
iTieasurcd six feet. The iirst mate told me that 
he had caught those that measured fifteen feet. 
I have secured some of the feathers to make 
fans for Charlotte and Elizaheth. 

" 1.3. — Our season of thanlcsgivinc]^ this after- 
noon was precious. The brethren tniked of the 
way by which God dir(K:ted them, till they were 
persuaded that He called them to the heathen. 
Occurrences altogetlier providential, but in them- 
selves trifling, led them step by step to the im- 
portant result. I too could say I knew not at the 
time what many things meant which are now in- 
telligible. The change in the state of missionary 
feeling in the seminary at Andover is great since 
they first inquired what was their duty. Then, 
almost four years ago, when Mr. S. and jMr. W. 
entered the Seminary, there was but one mission- 
ary there. At the close of the year there were 
three, at the close of the second year, six, and of 
the third, eleven. There were then no missiona- 
ries in the field except Judson, Hall, and Newell, 
as Mr. Nott was on his return. "What hath God 
wrought! How different are the circumstances 
under which we are now placed from what we 
could then expect. Bless the Lord, our souls, 
and forget not all his benefits ! 

" M'. — The general prayer-meeting in the fore- 
castle was well attended this evening. Browu 



Wiuilow. 



u 



158 r-iRs. wiA'SLow. 

appears to gain strength every day. The second 
mate said to Mr. W., I believe there is one good 
man on board, and that is Brown. They who 
are at all convinced of sin think much, and our 
hopes for them continue. Our meeting this 
evening has been pleasant. Our absent friends 
are never forgotten on these occasions. 

'^ 15. — Brown has hac^ a little difficulty — he 
says, 'I find it harder to get along than I thought 
I should. I have served Satan so long and so 
faithfully, that he is loth to give me up.' We are 
again gratified to have the testimony of the of- 
ficers to his correct deportment. The man who 
has been so profane said to one of the brethren 
yesterday, 'I am afraid that I am heading the 
Avrong way.' This \vas an acknowledgment that 
surprised us all. He likewise came on deck to 
the meeting last evening, when his watch was 
below. Another says, ' sin sticks pretty close, 
but T hope to get the weather-gage before long.' 

" 28. — Solemnity still rests on every counte- 
nance, and we believe the w^ork of God is ripen- 
ino-. The three officers are distressed for their 

c 

souls. 

" 29. — This morning we had a prayer-meeting 
in the cabin before breakfast. Appearances 
through the day much like those of yesterday. 
This evening we have been ' forward.' We found 
the seamen assembled, as it was the time for 



SEA JOUPcNAL. 1j9 

'lieir frencral prayer-meetino^. The concern in- 
creases. The ofliccrs and Captain Wills came: 
also the steward, couk, and cabin-boy. Only the 
man at the helm remained beliind. It was a new 
time. The Holy Spirit was present and seemed 
to shake every soul. The first ofllcer expresses 
some hope that the Lord has appeared for him. 
He, liowever, can only say, ' whereas 1 was blind, 
now I see.' The others are deeply distressed. 
After evening- worship in the cabin, wc had a 
nicetinir for thanksgiving. 

^^ October 1. — I have felt to-day as though I 
dare scarcely think or act. I would like to iiide 
myself where I could see what God is doing, 
and yet be in no danger of hindering the work. 
It is not merely a still small voice speaking to 
one and another, but a mighty rushing wind which 
fills all the place. Wc had a prayer-meeting be- 
fore breakfast, and our missionary-meeting this 
afternoon. They were precious. It seems as 
though every word spoken through the day was 
accompanied by the Spirit of God. The sea has 
been calm since the Sabbath, and the sun and sky 
emblematic of our spiritual state. Clouds have 
appeared above the horizon threatening violent 
wind and thunder ; but they have hung round for 
a time and sunk again behind the blue waters. 
The sun has remained bright, and never, I believe, 
did the Sun of Kio-htcousness so c:i^t his beams 



160 MRS. V.'INSLOW 

into a little world on the waste of waters. I 
would describe the scene presented this evening, 
but j^ou can never form an idea of it. We all 
went * forward.' Every seaman, and the whole 
ship's company, save one man at the helm, were 
present. The subject of remark was, ' Now is the 
accepted time.' There seemed a general feeling 
that the Lord was passing by, and whoever would 
might obtain forgiveness. The first and second 
mate, and clerk, were appealed to for their testi- 
mony that 'now is the accepted,' the best ^time,' 
and with melting hearts and eyes each said, ' I 
feel it.' Captain W. prayed and addressed the 
meeting with a solemnity and feeling which melt- 
ed us all. I never felt so much as though God 
was indeed present, as though angels were hover- 
ing over us to carry intelligence to the courts 
of heaven, of ' prodigals returned,' and ' heirs of 
glory born.' On retiring we stopped 'midships' 
to sing a hymn of thanksgiving. The clerk came 
up and joined in it. To our surprise we found 
him indulging a hope in Christ. After half an 
hour's conversation, we united in prayer that 
God would not suffer him to rest on any false 
foundation. The second mate then came up to 
be welcomed as a brother in Christ. His distress 
had been greater than that of any of the others. 
While we were conversing with him, the cabin 
boy came from below. He could not sleep, but 



SEA JOURNAL. IGI 

wanted to go to God. Anotlier prayer with sing- 
incf closed our interview. 

" While we were there, Brown had been pray- 
infr with the men ' forward.' Mr. W. and I re- 
mained a while on deck. Never did the moon 
shine more pleasantly. We thought we should 
like to write on it, '^ Revival at Sea^^ that you 
might participate our joy. Never was a ship's 
deck a more solemn and awful place. In our 
meeting Captain W. spoke to the seamen of the 
temptations they would find in Calcutta. He said, 
* Would you go with me to church, through the 
bazar, where three thousand seamen would ridi- 
cule you, and call you long-faced, praying fel- 
lows V All said, ' Yes.' To the question. Do you 
love God 1 one replied, ' Yes, in every shape that 
I can think of Him.' 

" 2. — One day like this is indeed worth a hun- 
dred lives of ' pleasurable sin.' The three officers, 
and one or two of the seamen, have a new song 
put into their mouths. It is a common remark 
now among the sailors, ' What a place ! never 
did I see such a forecastle.' The first mate has a 
pious mother, whose prayers are at length, we 
trust, answered. The second mate's mother 
hoped this would be the best voyage he ever 
made. He replied, ' I expect to hear some pray- 
ling, and have a little fun with the psalm-singers.' 
The clerk has pious parents. lie too made him- 
14* 



162 MRS. WINSLOW. 

self much amusement as to the missionaries. 
The first mate says, ' I feel more like a child 
than a man ; I go about the deck crying and laugh- 
ing.' The others say, ' If this is religion, it is 
happiness more than I ever knew before.' They 
are about among the seamen exhorting them to 
taste and see that the Lord is gracious. Poor 
Amy, the woman of color, thinks she was never 
a christian, and is deeply distressed. She spent 
the whole of last night in singing and praying. 
** 4. — It has been agreed to devote this day, 
which is the first Monday of the month, to thanks- 
giving for God's wonderful mercy towards us. 
At 3 o'clock we had a sermon by Mr. W. from 
the text, ' Give God the praise, we know that this 
man is a sinner.' Think you that such a scene 
was ever witnessed on the great deep 1 A whole 
ship's company assembled with a song of praise, 
and to unite with thousands in prayer for the , 
prosperity of Zion. I thought of an expression 
of one of the seamen last week, after the cap- 
tain's lirst most feeling address, ' A heart that 
won't feel now, must be as hard as that anchor.' 
In the evening there was another meeting with 
the seamen, when the origin and design of the 
monthly prayer-meeting were explained ; and 
they were exhorted to feel that they might do 
something to advance the kingdom of Christ. In 
this, however, the brethren were anticipated, for 



3EA JOURNAL. 163 

they had been talking together about how they 
should do good to their fellow-men. 

''There are some striking things to be marked 
in this revival. The hand of God was apparent 
in the manner of the earlier convictions. The 
first mate had lifted his harpoon to strike a fish 
on the Sabbath. It occurred to him, suddenly, 
that he was breaking the commandment of God, 
and his hand fell. He says, ' all the sins that 1 
ever committed came into my mind.' His life 
has been often preserved in a signal manner, in 
the midst of battle and in shipwreck ; and he 
called himself a barren fig-tree, which would have 
been cut down but for the interposition of Christ. 
Now, he seems to grow daily. The second mate 
was struck with conviction while at work in the 
rigging. One of the seamen was seized with 
alarm in a severe storm, and for the first time 
felt himself to be a sinner. The cook heard two 
seamen talking about the excellence of religion, 
and said, ^ let me alone now till I have done eat- 
ing,' but they continued, and he added, ' may God 
Almighty send down his Spirit and convert every 
body on board.' He had been awfully profane, 
and this was said with no meaning. The recol- 
lection of it followed him to bed, and occasioned 
great distress, till he found relief at the throne 
of grace. 

" 9. — We have continued occasion to bless the 



lS4f MRS. Tv'IXSLOW. 

Lord for his wonders here. Meetings and fre- 
quent conversations with the new converts are 
continued. A fresh breeze is carrying us swiftly 
towards Calcutta ; if it continues, three or four 
days will find us at the head of the bay. 

" 12. — Our habitation, dear friends, is a Bethel. 
Is it not in answer to your prayers with many 
other christian friends in America 1 Continue to 
pray much for us, and for other missionaries, and 
the heathen. Will you not induce others to pray 
more 1 Oh that every pious heart would awake 
to this subject ; that there might be continual 
wrestling in our churches, till nations are born 
in a day, and the world filled with the glory 
of God. 

" 14. — This morning Captain W. suggested 
that our prayer-meeting should have in view our 
preservation amidst the dangers which surround- 
ed us. We had seen neither sun nor sky for 
four days, and he could not determine where we 
were, especially as the wind and sea had driven 
us to and fro. The aspect of the heavens was 
very threatening, and the season of the year gave 
reason to expect bad weather. It was, besides, 
more and more evident that we were near some 
shore ; probably the western, to which we were 
fast driving, although repeated soundings found 
no bottom. The prayers accordingly hnd refer- 
ence to our situation, and it seemed thnt while 



AT CALCUTTA. 165 

we were speaking the Lord heard. The clouds 
were in a great measure scattered, the sun ap- 
peared, and at 12 o'clock it was found that we 
were nearly 100 miles farther northward on our 
course than the captain supposed ; and though 
there is no moon by which to ascertain the lon- 
jritude, he thinks we are likewise farther east. 

'' 18. At the mouth of the river Jlooirley. — 
AVe have been tossed about in every direction 
since my last dale. We now find that we came 
near being driven on the western shore, and once 
narrowly escaped a reef. I cannot give you par- 
ticulars. The course up to ihe pilot-ground is 
very blind, and the sand reefs extend far into the 
bay. The Lord interposed for us, and last night, 
when we had no prospect but to go out again to 
sea or be driven upon a reef, about 10 o'clock we 
came suddenly on three pilot brigs. At 1 o'clock 
a pilot was on board. We anchored for the night, 
and now at 7 o'clock a fair wind is carrying us 
rapidly toward the river." 

" CuxcTTA, October 24, 1819. 

"My dear Parents, — You will rejoice to 

hear that after a residence on the water of one 

hundred and thirty-three days^ \ve are in the 

I midst of friends, and on a heathen shore. jMy 

I emotions on seeing the natives were much as I 

! anticipated. Many of them came to us in boats 



166 MRS. WL\SLOW. 

to sell fruit, or to obtain fire that they might 
smoke; and two of their boats were attached to 
our vessel as tenders. The navigation of the 
river is so dangerous as to make this necessary. 
Vessels are sometimes lost by being driven on 
shore by the tide and current. 

" The dress of the natives, you have often 
been told, is only a piece of cloth around the 
waist. Some, however, have a cloth thrown over 
their shoulders, or wear something like a tunic. 
Their hair is generally very black and oily. It is 
cut in various ways, usually most of the head is 
shaved. We were, of course, a little shocked to 
see people so nearly naked ; but in a moment 
the recollection of their spiritual degradation 
filled our minds and hearts to the exclusion of 
every thought of their external appearance. 

" On Tuesday at two o'clock we were off Cal- 
cutta. The wind, which generally blows from 
the north-east at this season, w^as for two days 
from the southward, so that instead of being in 
the river two or three weeks, as we expected, 
we came up in less than forty-eight hours. We 
had much bustle and confusion to get our trunks 
in order to come on shore in so short a time, 
and scarcely indulged ourselves to look at the 
banks of the river, which are very pleasant. De- 
lightful country-seats, surrounded by the most 
beautiful scenery, on the very brink of the river^ 



AT CALCUTTA. 167 

with here and there a group of Hindoo cottages, 
presented a charming prospect to eyes that had 
seen nothing for many weeks but a waste of 
waters. 

" Soon after we were at anchor ^Iv. W. went 
with our good captain on shore to find a house 
which would accommodate us all, as he and we 
were alike unwilling to be separated. In their 
absence we were informed tliat the holy days of 
the natives closed that day. We soon saw on 
the shore directly opposite to us, great multi- 
tudes approaching the water with a horrid din 
of music, conveying their gods to throw them 
into the stream. AVe could discern nothing of 
their appearance but that they were the size of a 
common man, and about the waist were painted 
black. They were held over the water some mi- 
nutes, while the noise of various musical instru- 
ments continued, and then plunged in to float 
down with the current. Near to them was a bed- 
stead in the water, from which a sick person had 
been washed or taken off by the birds and fish. 
This ceremony of drowning their gods was ob- 
served hundreds of miles above us, by millions 
of these wretched beings at the same time. The 
idols came floating by us through the day. — 
Through the night we could see flre-works and 
hear music from the shore. Almost the first 
thing 1 beheld after I arose in the morning, was 



168 MRS. \vi:<sLow. 

a dead child floating by. "Within an hour three 
other bodies came down with crows upon them. 
Dead bodies are devoured by birds or fish soon 
after they are thrown into the river. The crows 
are particularly busy. They are not very large, 
but as they are not allowed to be killed, they are 
very numerous, and almost fill the air in flocks." 

The first land that presented itself was the 
island of Saugor, where it Avas painful to recol- 
lect that for ages mothers had assembled annual- 
ly to offer their infants in sacrifice, by throw 
ing them to the shark ; but cheering to know that 
the horrid practice had been for some time abol- 
ished by the British government; and to notice 
it with gratitude, as one of the tide-marks of eb- 
bing heathenism. 

Ascending the Hoogley, the scenery presented 
on each side of the river is very uniform, as the 
banks are low and the whole country is level j 
but it is pleasant, indeed almost enchanting, to 
those who for months have been at sea, especial- 
ly if they have never before visited a tropical 
climate. ^^ 'Tis the land of the sun." The bright- 
ness and transparency of the atmosphere, the luxu- 
riance and freshness of the vegetation, the en- 
tirely novel character of almost every tree, shrub, 
plant and flower, the mud or bamboo huts of the 
natives scattered along the banks of the rivers, 



AT CALCUTT.l. 169 

or under the shade of palm-trees, and contrast- 
ed here and there with some more respectable 
mansion of brick neatly stuc\;oed, or a stone 
temple lifting- its white dome amidst the green 
foliage of a cocoa-nut grove, or under the spread- 
ing banian, all attract and yet bewilder the fancy. 
The spectator linds himself in a new world ; and 
as he advances above Diamond harbor, where all 
the large P^ast-India-men lie ; having, on the one 
hand, the extensive botanic gardens of the East 
India Company ; on the other, splendid country 
seats, or garden houses ; and opening before him, 
Calcutta itself, the " city of palaces," with its 
fort of a thousand guns, its magnificent govern- 
ment-house, and forest of shipping — the whole 
view is at once so picturesque and so grand as to 
call forth the highest admiration. 

The (Irownins: of the fj^ods^ or throwing them 
into the embraces of the goddess Gunga, the 
river Ganges, is a very important ceremony 
among the Hindoos. In course of the holydays 
mentioned above, is the Doorga-poojah, or festival 
of the goddess Doorga. At this time every re- 
speciable native has nii image made of this god- 
dess, which represents a woman with ten arms. 
It is usually as large as life — made of clay baked, 
and beautifully painted, as well as elegantly dress- 
ed and adorned. After being consecrated by a 

WiiK^low. 15 



170 MRS. WINSLOAV. 

Brahmin, the goddess is supposed to come down 
and animate it. The idol is then placed in some 
convenient part of the house, and worshipped 
seven days, with offerings of incense, flowers, and 
food, attended by prostrations, feasting, music, and 
dancing ; and is then conveyed round the streets 
of the city in procession, with music, and thrown 
into the river, after being stripped of its dress 
and ornaments, which are given to Me Brahmins! 

" At eleven o'clock we came on shore to our 
own, or rather our captain's hired house, which 
Ave found very pleasant. A spacious dining-holl 
extends throuorh the house on the second storv 
having at one end two windows with blinds from 
near the ceiling to the floor. At the opposite 
end are two doors leading into a wide verandah 
or portico. On both sides of the hall are lodging 
and sitting-rooms. Around the house, and con- 
nected with it, are stores for goods, called go- 
downs, on the flat roofs of which we can take a 
pleasant walk just at evening. These houses are 
such as are occupied by merchants and other 
temporary residents in the place. 

"We had just time to see where we were 
when dinner was ready. It was pleasant to be 
once more seated at a table where we were not 
obliged to hold our plate and cup to keep them 
from rolling about. While engaged at our ac 



AT CALCUTTA. HI 

rpptable meiil, Mr. and .Airs. Lawson, of the Bnp- 
iist connection, and Dr. Jolms came in to see us. 
They received us as christian friends, and invited 
us to take up our residence with them, but we 
were too pleasantly situated together to remove. 
An invitation was likewise received from Dr. 
Carey for two of us to go to Serampore to his 
house, and also from an American gentleman. 
We did not expect to find ourselves thus sur- 
rounded by friends in this land of strangers. On 
xTiursday we breakfasted at Dr. Johns'. A con- 
veyance came for us at six o'clock. You will 
think this rather early at this season, but the peo- 
ple of Calcutta rise very early. The air is more 
pure and cool in the morning than at any other 
time. Dr. J. who is now a practising physician 
here, has a delightful residence on a pleasant 
street at a distance from the bustle of the chy. 
Around it are winding walks and shrubbery. 

'' 2G. — The desire to see the practices of the 
poor heathen, and to return the politeness of 
friends, makes every hour full of employment. 
We are receiving every proof of kindness from the 
missionaries of the established church, from Mr. 
Townley and others of the London Missionary 
Society, and from the Baptist brethren stationed 
here and at Serampore. The face of things is 
greatly changed since the first missionaries came 
from America to the East." 



172 MRS. WINSLOW. 

For some days Mrs. W. was seriously ill, but 
speedily recovered ; and on the eve of leaving 
Calcutta, we find the following cheerful expres- 
sions of gratitude to christian friends, and of in- 
terest ill those on whom so rich blessings had 
descended in the Indus. 

^^JVovember 8. — Our friends here have been very 
kind, especially Mr. and Mrs. Newton, who are 
from America. To other Americans, and some 
English friends, particularly the Rev. Mr. Thoma- 
son, one of the chaplains, and his lady, we are 
also much indebted. To Captain Wills we shall 
always feel that we owe more than we can ever 
repay. May God reward him. He feels much at 
the prospect of our leaving him so soon, and we 
shall find it very trying to part with him and the 
other officers and seamen. The officers give in- 
creasing evidence of being born again. At the 
recollection of what God has done, we are en- 
couraged to devote ourselves more entirely to 
our work. 

" Calcutta, Nov. 9, 1819. 

" Dear Mr. G , You will hear of our reach- 
ing Calcutta in health, and how the Lord smiled 
upon us while in the Indus. Your heart will re- 
joice, and you will lift it up in thanksgiving to 



AT CALCUTTA. 173 

the God of prrace. Is it not wonderful, that to us, 
even us, was so great privilege given 1 The re- 
collection of it fills us with wonder and admira- 
tion. And now, after being three weeks in port, 
where is every temptation, to see most of the 
ship's crew, and all the officers, content to remain 
in the vessel, except when there is religious wor- 
ship on shore, and collecting their companions 
from other vessels to attend meetings on board, is 
indeed enough to astonish all who witness it. 
Several of the crew, and the first mate and clerk, 
have been to this port before with our dear 
Captain Wills, but never could he get them to a 
place of religious worship. Now they have been 
with us to the house of God with as much appa- 
rent hungering and thirsting for the bread of life 
as any you are accustomed to see. The first Sab- 
bath after our arrival, all but those it was neces- 
sary should remain in the vessel came in the 
morning to our house, and went with us to Dr. 
Carey's chapel. It was a novel scene to all. They 
have ever since been regular attendants. The first 
convert. Brown, is a striking example of divine 
grace ; he does not hesitate to pray among his 
companions, and even when officers of other ves- 
sels are on board. You would be astonished, not- 
withstanding all you know of the power of grace, 
to hear his petitions, so full of meaning, yet so 
concise, so appropriate, and so spiritual. 
15* 



174« MRS. WINSLOW. 

" 1 could write long about these interesting 
objects, and I believe not be tedious to one who 
loves the soul, but must deny myself. God only 
knows if they will continue to run well. You will 
pray for them j you will induce others to pray 
for them." 

The subsequent life of the two mates, the 
captain's clerk, and at least two of the seamen, 
is believed to have given evidence of the reality 
af their conversion. The work was indeed glo- 
rious. A change of character in even a few of 
those who " go down to the sea in ships," and 
visit almost every heathen nation, and are thus 
the "epistles" of christian lands, "known and 
read of all men," is of great consequence in its 
influence on the conversion of the world. 

On the 10th of November passage was taken 
for Ceylon in the ship Dick, of London, bound to 
Trincomalie and Columbo. 

" jYovember 27. — We are in a large commodious 
ship, and have every thing, of a temporal nature, 
to make us comfortable. In the most important 
things we are favored beyond our expectations. 
The principal cabin being devoted to us, except 
at meals, we have family-prayers there together, 
and can at any time hold social meetings. On 
the first Sabbath after getting to sea, it was pro- 



PASSAGE TO JAFFNA. 175 

posed to the captain to have preaching on deck. 
He replied that it would please him. Accordingly 
the ship's company were assembled, and Mr. W. 
preached. All were very attentive. The seamen 
were early addressed privately, but there was no 
public meeting till Sabbath evening. They were 
nearly all present, and appeared to hear the \vord 
with gladness. All the officers regularly go for- 
ward to the meetings, which are continued every 
evening, and they appear ready to hear any thing 
on religious subjects. The first few days after 
we embarked we were much disturbed by the 
language used on board, so unlike that to which 
we had been accustomed on the Indus j but I 
have not now for many days heard an oath, and 
the brethren remark that there is a great change 
in that respect." 

The high lands near Trincomalie were in sight 
before dark on the 27th. The harbor is rather 
difficult of access, but when entered, is one of 
the finest in the world. It is the rendezvous of 
the British navy in the East, being the admiral's 
station. 

The island of Ceylon is by nature the fairest 
perhaps of the green isles of the tropics, con- 
cerning w^hich it may well be said without any 
uncommon poetic license, 



176 MRS. WINSLOW. 

" There every prospect please?, 
"And only man is vile." 

A great part of it, particularly in the interior, 
is still uncultivated. The conical hills, the high 
and abrupt mountains, the deep, dark valleys are 
covered with primitive forest, or thick jungle al- 
most impenetrable to the rays of the sun, and 
inhabited by elephants, buffaloes, leopards, bears, 
liyenas, deer, jackals, and monkeys. But the 
maritime parts are generally well cultivated, and 
present an inviting appearance, though in the 
flat country it has much sameness. At the south 
and west are the lofty and waving groves of 
cocoa-nut trees skirting and embroidering all the 
shore ; and at the north, particularly in Jaffna, 
those of the tall and erect palmyra with its tufted 
crown of fan-leaves always green, embosoming 
and covering almost the whole district w^ith its 
more than one hundred and fifty villages. The 
sight of such groves under a tropical sun is 
"like the shadow of a great rock in a weary 
land." Near the western coast you have the rich 
cinnamon gardens for miles in extent, and in the 
interior a great variety of noble forest trees lin- 
ing the sides of the mountains, sometimes to 
their very summit, six or seven thousand feet in 
height, apparently the more vigorous the farther 
they are out of the reach of the heat below, and 



PASSAGE TO JAFFNA. 177 

the more luxuriant in their greenness in propor- 
tion as they approach nearer to the sky. Their 
foliage being similar to that of promiscuous forest 
trees on the plains of temperate climates, but 
never all falling ofi' at once, and seldom fading, 
gives to the wliole scenery the aspect of per- 
petual spring. The island lies nearly bctweeJi 
(i and 10^ north latitude, and 80^ and 82^ east 
longitude, and is separated from the continent by 
a strait about 30 miles wide. 

The principal towns are Colombo on the west- 
ern side, Trincomalie and Batticaloe on the east- 
ern, Galle at the south, Kandy in the interior, and 
Jaflhapatam at the north. The circuit of the 
island by the most direct road is 763 miles, and 
the distance from Galle at the south, to Jaffna- 
patam at the north, is 294- — Colombo being 72 
miles from the former and 222 from the latter. 
From Colombo to Kandy is 72 miles, and thence 
to Trincomalie 116, but there is a route across 
this part of the island 22 miles nearer. The 
island is in shape much like a pear, the larger 
end being at the south. It contains 24',G64< square 
miles, and according to the census of 1831 had 
a population of 950,917, now much increased 
of whom 6,661' are whites, including, besides 
the English, who are not numerous, descendants 
of the Dutch and Portuguese. There are also a 
few thousand native Mussulmen, called Moormen. 



178 MRS. WINSLOW. 

The mass of the population is composed of the 
Cingalese of the interior and southern parts, and 
the Tamulians, who are mostly in the northern 
and eastern districts ; the former being- Boodhists, 
speaking Cingalese, the latter Brahminists or 
Hindoos, using the Tamul language. There are 
scattered over the island forty or fifty thousand 
native Roman Catholics, who have many churches. 
Their priests, including the vicar-general, who is 
changed once in three years, are at present seven- 
teen in number, and are most or all of them from 
the Portuguese settlement at Goa. There are 
many thousand nominal Protestants, especially 
among the Cingalese of the maritime parts ; but, 
except those connected with the mission stations, 
they differ very little from the heathen among 
whom they dwell. 

Mrs. W. after having described the scenery 
presented on approaching Trincomalie, of which 
she says, " the hills stretched along the coast 
much resemble those of our native country," and 
having given a view of the harbor, continues her 
journal. 

" December 3. — We had been at anchor but a 
few hours, when Captain H. returned from the 
shore with the Rev. Mr. Carver, a Wesleyan 
missionary. He met us with the kindness of a 
christian brother, and urged our goino- to his 



PASSAGE TO JAFFNA. 179 

house. The brethren went with him to make 
Isome arrangements about our proceeding to 
Jaffna. The}"- had no encouragement that a con- 
veyance could be procured direct from this 
place for us all, either b}^ sea or land. No native 
vessels coast that way during this monsoon, and 
it is impossible to procure bearers or palankeens 
enough for all to go by land. To-day we learn 
from the collector that arrangements may be 

fmade for some by this route, and the others 
must go round by Colombo. 

'' After dinner we walked out to the esplanade 
to view the eminence on which is the principal 
fort, and to look at the waves by moonlight Insh- 
iaig the sandj'- beach. We had just arrived in 
sight of the water when our fair lamp was co- 
vered by obtruding clouds, but it soon partially 
re-appeared and cast that kind of light and shade 
over the scene which inspires a pensive sadness. 
We wished to ascend the rock, but had not 
strength. On the brow of the precipice is a mo- 
nument erected to the memory of a Dutch lady 

; who threw herself from it into the sea below. 

I She went there to take a last look of a ship which 
was conveying away her husband and friends. 

I The ship in going round the rock was wrecked. 

I In a paroxysm of grief she threw herself into the 

same gulf which had swallowed up her friends. 

''•i. — Last cvcninir wc left Dr and jMrs. Scud* 



180 MRS. ■^VI^•SL0'U^ 

der on shore, expecting to see them again thia 
morning, but coming on board we found prepa- 
rations making for the ship to sail immediately- 
We were early outside the bay. There was much 
confusion on board, and very little sleep during 
the night, as we had, in addition to our own num- 
ber, several military officers with their families 
as passengers. It was pleasant to be on land 
yesterday, and I felt a little dread of the M-ater, 
but now am happy to be again on the dark blue 
wave. A fresh breeze is wafting us swiftly to 
our port." 

The next day the ship came to anchor at Gallc* 
The view as you approach this place, indeed all 
along the coast from Trincomalie, is varied and 
imposing. The hills and mountains are seen rising 
above the water in almost every shape, as cones, 
pyramids, and irregular piles of buildings, much 
like the fantastic forms sometimes assumed by 
heavy clouds in the west at sunset. Behind the 
fort of Galle is a very high hill or mountain 
called the hay-cock, and around are scattered 
peaks and bluifs of almost every variety of form. 
The fort or fortified town incloses a great num' 
ber of buildings, most of them low and in the 
Portuguese style. The streets are narrow, but 
hard and clean, and the widest of them lined 
with venerable shade trees, a little resembling in 



PASSAGE TO JAFJ-NA. l8l 

appearance low branching oaks. Among these is 
the bread-fruit tree. The whole shore is rocky, 
and the surf rises in most places very high when 
the wind is strong from the south. None but the 
native boats could ride in the swell at all. Their 
construction is curious. They are, like the Indian 
canoe, made of a large log hollowed out; but un- 
like that, the opening at the top is very narrow, 
and boards perhaps a foot in width are lashed to 
the edges all round to prevent the water from 
entering the boat. Being so high and narrow, it 
would immediately upset, were it not for an out- 
rigger made of a small log lying on the water 
parallel to the boat at the distance of two or 
three yards, and attached to it at each end by a 
bent pole curving upwards so as not to dip in the 
water. The boat cannot upset, and though almost 
buried in the swell or surf, it rides safely, and 
may carry a small sail. 

" December 7. Fort of Galle. — This morning 
the *Rev. Mr. M'Kenny, a Wesleyan missionary, 
came on board and kindly conveyed us to his 
house. He and his wife are agreeable, and ap- 
pear zealous for the cause of God among the 
heathen. We feel quite at home with them. He 
has under his care several flourishing schools. 
In some respects the prospect of bringing these 
poor idolaters to a knowledge of the truth is en- 

Wiaslow. 16 



182 MRS. WINSLOW. 

couraging, in others it is dark. Their confirmed 
habits and the evil example of most Europeans 
are the grand barriers ; and these are more for- 
midable than you can easily conceive. In looking 
round upon all this Eastern world, I should ask 
with despondency, ' Can these dry bones live V 
were it not for the promises of God. These are 
the life and strength of a missionary amidst his 
greatest discouragements. 

" 9. — This afternoon we visited a Boodhist 
temple situated on an eminence in the midst of 
cocoa-nut trees. It being twilight, an old man 
went before us with a torch. The moment I en- 
tered the building a sort of horror seized me, so 
that I approached with trembling the hideous 
figure called Boodhu. It is made of potter's 
earth baked and painted, and is eighteen cubits 
long and proportionably large. It is stretched on 
a platform. A variety of flowers lay around it, 
which had that day been brought as ofierings. A 
small stone imagfe of the same g-od stood before 
the one lying down, and at the feet was Vishnu 
with a blue face and a distended bloody mouth. 
On every side were paintings of different gods. 
In the outer room were representations of kings, 
and of important events in history. At the door 
were images of two giants and of two lions pla- 
ced as guards. Notwithstanding all the descrip- 
tions of these temples which I had read and 



PASSAHE TO JAFFNA. 1S3 

heard in America, I had no proper idea of one. 
Ileturning home we had a pleasant walk by a 
canal, on one bank of which were both rocks and 
shrubbery, and on the other mud cottages swarm- 
innr with children, who ran out in crowds to see 
us pass by. A part of the road lay by the sea- 
shore, where we had a fine view of the angry 
suro-e foaminfr amidst the rocks and saiid. 

D O 

" Sabbai/i, 12. — Where are the Sabbaths I once 
enjoyed 1 Their memory is still sweet. A part 
of to-day I have been refreshed. This morning- 
went with Mr. W. to a school. The building is 
on the top of a hill. Below we could see a small 
sheet of water near a white cottage, also wind- 
ing paths, cocoa-nut trees, and abundance of jun- 
gle near the side of the hill in the valley below. 
The prospect was charming. Mr. W. preached, 
through an interpreter, to about seventy boys, 
with their teachers and some of their parents. 
Previous to this, however, the interpreter read 
prnyers in Cingalese. The responses were re- 
peated by the boys with much animation. They 
likewise sang with spirit. Some of these little 
creatures scarcely moved their eyes from the 
speaker during the sermon. Their answers to 
questions put to them displayed a good degree 
of acquaintance with the Scriptures. Probably 
in most of the Sabbath-schools in America you 
would not lind children better informed on reli- 



184« MRS. WINSLOW. 

gious subjects. Some of them write and read 
very well. When we came away they all rose and 
bade us farewell. I have seen nothing in India 
that interested me so much." 

After having been hospitably entertained eight 
days at Galle, the party were summoned on board 
ship, and sailed for Colombo, where they arrived 
on the fifth day. In passing along the coast there 
was a fine view of Adam's Peak in the interior 
of the island, whose conical top rising boldly into 
the clouds, which often rest on the sides of the 
mountain, Avas now covered by them, and then ap- 
peared distinctly above them all, as a blue tent 
hanging in empty air. 

One of the most singular sights presented on 
approaching Colombo, is the great number of fish- 
ing boats. Sometimes not less than five hundred sail 
in a morning, stretch out to sea so far as to appear 
only like ducks' sitting on the water, or be entire- 
ly out of sight, though the weather is boisterous. 

Colombo is a fortified town, or a fort, a mile 
and a quarter in circumference, defended by three 
hundred heavy cannon ; inclosing several hun- 
dred houses, including a large custom-house, a 
church, and the king's house, or residence of the 
governor, v/ith wide and open streets On land- 
ing, all were most kindly invited to the house of 
the Rev. Mr. Chater, a Baptist missionary. The 



ASSAGE TO JAFFNA. 185 

season did not admit of their going immediately 
to the northern part of the island by sea ; but af- 
ter a little delay they proceeded by the inland 
navigation to Jaffna, in company with J. N. 
j\Iooyart, Esq. a warm friend of missions and 
a magistrate in that district. The brethren pre- 
viously waited upon the governor, Sir Robert 
Brownrigg, then about to leave the island, and 
obtained an official permit for the reinforcement to 
join the mi.^sioji. Their arrival in season for this 
was very providential, as the successor of Sir 
Robert would not, there is every reason to be- 
lieve, have granted their request. They had also 
opportunity to see something of the missionary 
work at Colombo, and to meet most of the mis- 
sionaries from different parts of the island. 

" Jajiuary IG, 1S20. — Mrs. S. and I went with 
one of the Wesleyan brethren to two of his schools 
this morning, and were much gratified by their ap- 
pearance. These brethren have about twelve 
schools in and around Colombo. They promise 
much good, but when I see missionaries, habitu- 
ated to the use of words beyond the comprehen- 
sion of the ignorant, attempting to instruct chil- 
dren, I am more and more convinced ih^i females 
also should be employed among the heathen. 

" Fel)riiary 1. — This is a great day ; the gover- 
nor embarked this afternoon. I went to the gov- 
16* 



186 MRS. WINSLOW. 

eminent house in the morning with Mr. W. Ma- 
ny people were assembled. Among them was a 
large school of orphan children who have been 
supported by Lady Brownrigg. When the gover- 
nor and his lady took leave of the people there 
was much emotion. Almost all wept. The poor 
children sobbed as though their hearts would 
break. It is to be feared they will not find another 
such friend as Lady B. Her ladyship, while 
her mind was so much engrossed, was kind 
enough to send an apology for not having called 
on us. Last week the governor had a levee. He 
then expressed to the brethren his approbatidn of 
our mission, and said many kind things of the 
missionaries. 

" The Wesleyan brethren have a conference 
here at this time, and the church missionaries are 
met on business of their mission. At our table 
to-day were fftcen missionaries. 

" Febrimry 4, Friday evening. — Left Colombo 
about C o'clock p. m. taking leave of our kind 
brother and sister Chater, after a season of prayer 
with them and some other missionary friends. 
We reached the place of embarkation in the even- 
ing. The scene was gloomy. Our passage was 
through a thick wood. In some places the river 
appeared scarcely wide enough to admit our boats. 
A fire on the banks only served to make visible 
the thick darkness around." 



PASSAGE TO JAFFNA. 187 

They proceeded through Negombo and Medu- 
pia, thence over a portage of nine miles into Chi- 
law h\ke, and through Andepan, Putlam, Calpen- 
teen, and Manar, upwards of 200 miles, amidst 
many inconveniences — sometimes finding a shel- 
ter in the frail rest-home* where the traveller is 
expected to furnish his own bed, and to cook his 
own rice and mrry* now amused by monkeys 

* There arc no inns in the country, and tlie " rest-houses " 
are mere sheds, or at best empty rooms, in which a travel- 
ler may rest, but he must furnish his own provisions, as well 
as bed, and most of the utensils for cooking. The cooking 
is, however, a very simple operation. An earthen pot, plac- 
ed on three stones, and a Utile fire kindled beneath, serves 
to boil his rice; and in another smaller vessel, also of brown 
earthen, his " curry" is prepared. This is the staple food 
of India, and is easily cooked, wlietiier you stop at a rest- 
house, or by the side of a road, or on the bank of a river. 
The curry is made of coriander, cardamon, and a variety 
of other aromatic seeds, ground up with tumeric (a yellow 
root) to powder, to Vvhich red peppers, onions, and garlic are 
added. This compound being mixed up with melted butter, 
or the milk squeezed from scraped cocoa-nut, is simmered 
with a little butcher's meat, fowl, fish, eggs, or vegetables 
cut up fine, and perhaps previously boiled. This forms a 
condiment of which a small quantity is eaten with the rice. 
At the rest-houses milk may often be procured, and some- 
limes <i^^^. Most of the natives have only one full meal a 
day, but then they eat an enormous quantity. Common la- 
borers will carry heavy burdens in the sun, from morning 
to night, without taking any nourishment in the meantime. 
They look very ihin ; but see them after they have eaten 
their rice, and you might think they had swallowed a 
pumpkin. 



188 MRS. WINSLOW. 

playing on the trees; then disturbed by an alli- 
gator ; and occasionally in fear of elephants and 
buffaloes, though sometimes making a repast on 
the milk of the latter — and on the 16th were ap- 
proaching Jaflhapatam, when Mrs. W. says, 

" I will not attempt to tell you what are my 
feelings at the thought of being within one night's 
journey of our future home. I confess that I have 
felt some degree of impatience to be there. The 
wandering life which I have led for more than a 
year has wearied me, and I could now be happy 
in the meanest place that I could call 7ny home. 
We have met with much kindness every where, 
but no where have we felt settled. My health, and 
that of all our company, has been uncommonly 
good during this journey ; for this we feel thank- 
ful to our gracious Benefactor. 

" 17, Thursday. — This morning at 7 o'clock 
we reached Jaffnapatam, and went immediately 
to Mr. Mooyart's empty house, he not having 
arrived, till we could get conveyances to our 
friends. "We had soon the pleasure of seeing Mr. 
Meigs, who came to conduct us to Batticotta, 
and accompanied him to the house of Mrs. Dri- 
berg, a pious widow, where we breakfasted and. 
dined. Saw there Mr. Knight, church missionary 
at Nellore. At evening, when about to leave for 
Batticotta, Mr. Poor also came in from Tillipally. 



IN CEYLON. I 89 

We rejoiced greatly to meet these dear brethren, 
whom we had learned to love for their works' 
sake, and with wliom we were to be so intimately 
associated." 



CHAPTER IV 



First year in Ceylon— lo ilie Oovern- 
niontal Hestrictions. 

Origin of the Ceylon mission — first missionaries — politi- 
cal and religious notices of Jaffna — description of five 
mission stations — free and boarding-schools — death of 
Rev. Mr. Warren — first impressions of Mrs. W. — the 
language to be acquired early — the banian-tree — self-ex- 
amination — houses of the Tamulians — happiness in the 
decision to enter on a mission — missionary trials — dark- 
ness and blindness of the heathen — cheering accessions 
to the boarding-school — violent prejudices — persecution 
of Supyen — Hindoo system of transmigration and fatal- 
ism — absurd methods of appeasing the gods — dishonesty — 
death of Mrs. Poor — governmental prohibition of a press, 
and of future additions lo the mission. 

The Rev. Samuel Xcwell, of the first mission 
sent out by the American Board of Commission- 
ers for Foreiofn Missions, having been, with his 
colleagues, forbidden by the government of the 



190 MRS. TVINSLOW. 

country to remain in Bengal, and having, at the 
Isle of France, buried his estimable companion, 
whose history has done so much to awaken an 
interest in the missionary cause, visited the island 
of Ceylon, which is a dependency of the crown, 
and not in possession of the East India Company. 
Being favorably received by Sir Robert Brown-, 
rigg, governor of the island, he visited the district 
of Jaffna with a view to establishing a mission 
there ; but at the request of Rev. Messrs. Hall and 
Nott, who, after a long struggle, had succeeded 
in establishing themselves at Bombay, Mr. New- 
ell re-united himself with their mission, at the 
same time recommending to the Board to estab- 
lish a mission in Ceylon. 

The second mission of that Board was accord- 
ingly established in this inviting field j the Rev. 
Messrs. Warren, Richards, Meigs, and Poor, (in 
company with Rev. Mr. Bardwell, who joined the 
mission at Bombay,) having arrived at Colombo 
in March, IS 16, whence they proceeded, under 
the countenance of the governor and Sir Alexan- 
der Johnstone, to Jaffna. 

The district of Jaffna, itself an island lying 
at the northern extremity of Ceylon, is about 
40 miles in length by 15 in breadth, with many 
islets near it ; forming a surface of 1,220 square 
miles, and having a population of about 170,000, 
of whom about 650, descendants of the Portu« 



IN CEYLON. 191 

guese and Dutch, arc reckoned as whites. The 
population arc cliiefly of the sect of Siva^ though 
some arc followers of Vishnu^ which two gods, 
with Brahma^ form the Hindoo triad. 

When, about three centuries since, the Por- 
tug-uese formed their trading establishments in 
Jaffna, they destroyed many of the heathen 
temples, built many chapels and churches, and 
induced or compelled many natives nominally to 
embrace the Romish faith ; and when the Dutch 
followed them in 165G, they attempted, in a man- 
ner somewhat similar, by governmental influence, 
to introduce the protestant religion. They did 
not allow the heathen temples to be rebuilt ; for- 
bade the public ceremonies of idolatry, and made 
the profession of Christianity a qualification for 
i\\ important offices ; while they repaired the 
churches built by the Portuguese, and erected 
others. But this soulless religion, gradually de- 
clining for 14<0 years, till 1796, when the English 
took possession of the island, had at that time 
nearly expired ; and as the natives were now al- 
lowed the free exercise of idolatry, they rebuilt 
their temples in great numbers ; and when the 
American mission was commenced, if we except 
I few native protcstants and descendants of Eu- 
ropeans in the town of JafTnapatam, where Chris- 
l-ian David, a native preacher, was laborin"-, and 
|.wo Wesleyan missionaries had been recently 



192 MRS. WINSLOW. 

stationed, the whole didrid was a wild waste 
of heathenism. 

Having obtained permission of the government, 
the first American missionaries took possession 
of the mouldering walls of the churches at Batti- 
cotta and Tillipally ; and on the arrival of the 
reinforcement, in like manner gained possession 
of the three churches at Panditeripo, Oodooville, 
and Manepy. The walls of the church at Batti- 
cotta were of stone, four feet thick, and 170 feet 
in length by 56 in width. 

These five stations lie within a circuit of about 
20 miles ; Batticotta being seven miles westward 
from Jaffnapatam. From Batticotta you pass 
northward four miles to Panditeripo ; thence five 
miles to Tillipally, which lies on the main road 
from Jaffnapatam to the sea at Kangy j thence on 
this road southwardly, through many populous 
villages, five miles to Oodooville, the church, 
which is of brick, standing three-fourths of a mile 
west of the main road ; thence tv/o miles south- 
west, to Manepy ; and thence westward four miles 
again to Batticotta. In making this circuit you 
pass over open fields for rice or dry grain ; or 
through villages of continuous gardens, where 
are the mango, plantain, orange, lime, and other 
similar fruit-trees, and towering groves of the 
palmyra, cocoa-nut, and other palm-trees — the low 
rice fields being, in the rainy season, covered 



IN CEYLON. 193 

with WLitcr, which is soon liidden by the wiivinj 
grain ; and tiic higher grounds, in tliat season, 
mantled with the greenest verdure, while in the 
dry season, except as cultivated by irrigation, 
they appear arid and burnt with the sun. IMessrs. 
Richards and Meigs were assigned to Batticolta, 
and Messrs. Warren and Poor to Tillipally. 

Besides attention to the necessary repairs, and 
preaching the Gospel, through an interpreter, un- 
til the language was acquired, '' publicly, and 
from house to house," the missionaries had suc- 
ceeded in establishing free-sc/iools* of boys in a 
number of villages, it being impossible, from the 
prejudices of the country, to induce girls to at- 
tend. In these schools native teachers were of 
necessity employed — but on the condition of their 
renouncing the badges of heathenism ; attending 



* In the small native schools, attended b)' the sons of the 
more respectable classes, and kept perhaps under the shade 
of a tree, or in the verandah of a small house, the children 
learn the letters of the alphabet by forming them in sand 
spread before them as they sit cross-legged on the floor, un- 
til they are able to name them from an oUa leaf on -which 
they arc written with an iron stile. Little attention is given 
to spelling, as all the letters have their own proper sound, 
and none are silent. They proceed to commit to memory the 
words of the elementary books and the dictionary, and then 
go back to analyze the lessons; separate the words, which 
are printed without spaces between them ; and in some de- 
gree to understand their meaning. 

Winelow. 17 



194> MRS. WIN SLOW. 

preaching, with the children, on the Sabbath; 
using christian books, and being at all times un- 
der the direction of the missionaries. At Batti- 
cotta and Tillipally about fifty boys and six or 
eight girls had also, with great difficulty, espe- 
cially from the prejudice of caste^ been induced 
to reside on the mission premises as hoarding 
scholars. Four young men, employed as inter- 
preters, had become hopefully pious, and some 
lads of the boarding-schools had manifested a se- 
rious conviction of the truth of Christianity. 

The mission, however, had been weakened by 
the illness of Rev. Mr. Warren and Eev. Mr. 
Richards, both of whom were compelled to spend 
some months at Colombo to avoid the rainy sea- 
son, and then to visit Cape Town, where Mr. 
Warren died, August 11, 1818. He was a native 
of Marlborough, Mass. ; a graduate of Middle- 
bury college 5 left the study of law for the theo- 
logical seminary ; became a devoted missionary, 
having opened, at Tillipally, a small hospital for 
the natives ; and departed in the calm assurance 
of faith, saying, " Is this death X — Yes, this is 
death. Give my love to them — tell them to be 
faithful unto death — farewell ! Come, Lord Jesus, 
come quickly." 

Such, in some of its more prominent aspects, 
was the state of the mission when joined by the 



IN CEYLON. 195 

reinforcement. The impressions of Mrs. W. on 
her arrival, she expresses in the following letter 
to her parents : 

"TiLUPAixY, February 19, 1820. 

"I am almost too liappy, my dear parents, in 
being on missionary ground. At all the other 
stations which we have visited I have been dis- 
appointed ; but here my anticipations have been 
more than realized. Yesterday, after a pleasant 
day at Batticotta, Ave all came to this place. 
Could the dear friends of missions in America 
witness what I have this day, they would not 
think their benevolence injudiciously exerted. 
Early this morning I went into the church to at- 
tend prayers with the children of the family and 
others. After prayers, the boys were arranged 
in the yard for us to see them all at once and 
hear their names. Among others were Porter, 
Dwight, Worcester, Woods, Stuart, and Putnam. 

" I then went with Mrs. Poor to the store-room, 
where she gave out supplies of food for forty- 
three children, and her own family, for the day. 
As it was Saturday, when all bathe, the children 
each received a lime, to squeeze and rub over 
their heads before bathing. A cook is devoted to 
the boys to provide rice and curry twice in the 
day, and congee^ rice gruel, once. There are eight 
girls, the two oldest Uake weeks' in preparing 



196 MRS. WIXSLOW. 

their food. This evening we went to see them at 
their meals. A long- mat is spread out, on which 
they all sit cross-legged, with a large plate, or 
plantain leaf, full of rice and curry before them. 
Before they begin to eat, all fall on their knees, 
and one of them asks a blessing. Every night 
they pray together before they go to bed, and 
have a prayer-meeting one evening every week 

'^ Some interesting circumstances attended the 
admission of a little boy about four years old. 
He appeared one morning in the dining-room, 
and Mrs. Poor inquired what he wanted. He re- 
plied, to get some ashes from the temple to rub 
on his forehead. He had wandered from home, 
and thought the church a temple, where he might 
get ashes to paint his forehead, according to their 
custom. He was received into the family, and it 
was afterwards found that he had no parents or 
near relatives living. A number of these boys 
give evidence of some concern for their souls, 
and one of them named Niles, they are almost 
ready to believe, is a decided christian. At this 
station one young man has been admitted to the 
church, and two at Batticotta. Another was a 
candidate, but his friends came and forced him 
awa}'. 

" 20. — ~\Ir. and Mrs. Mooyart came last night 
to spend the Sabbath with us. Mr. W. preached 
to about three hundred hearers, most of them 



IN CEVLON. 197 

children. Dr. S. took an interpreter and went 
out to spend the day in talking to the people 
wherever lie could find them. This afternoon Mr. 
lV)or and i\Ir. W. went to a small ^ rest house^ to 
address a mixed congregation. The sisters in 
the meantime met to pray for the presence of 
the Holy Spirit with them. It was pleasant once 
)nore to have this privilege. After tea, the chil- 
dren and servants all assembled in the dining- 
room, to repeat the lessons of the day and attend 
prayers. I must say, that for propriety of beha- 
vior, quickness of apprehension, and readiness to 
repeat their lessons, they are not at all behind 
children in America. Several of the oldest boys 
sometimes accompany the brethren as interpret- 
ers when they talk to the people." 

Reminded, by the children which she found 
around her, of her former charge, Mrs. W. now 
wrote to the Sunday-school in Norwich, giving 
them intelligence of what she had seen, and ani- 
mating them in the pursuit of sacred knowledge. 

''22. — Mr. W. and I came back last evening to 
Batticoita. The brethren have to-day had a meet- 
ing for consultation, and it is determined that we 
remain here, and .ATr. and Mrs. Spaulding at Tilli- 
pally, until the station at Oodooville can be pre- 
pared for us to live there together. 
17* 



198 . MRS. WINSLOW. 

" 28. — I continue to feel myself at home, and 
have, I trust, some gratitude to God for bringing 
me to this place. The language of these heathen 
now claims my attention. It is difficult of acqui- 
sition. The missionaries who have been here so 
long are not masters of it ; though they are able 
to preach in Tamul. It seems almost a mountain 
to me, but you know I have loved study, and I 
do not at all shrink from it. I only feel as though 
I could not wait so long before I begin to talk to 
this perishing people. 

" Yesterday was very pleasant. We had preach- 
ing in the house, the church here not being re- 
paired. Mr. W. preached in the forenoon ; in 
the afternoon he went out among the people ; 
and Mr. Meigs had the children together, to in- 
quire what they remembered of the sermon, and 
to talk with them. "This is the course every 
Sabbath. I was much gratified by their appear- 
ance. They repeated more of the sermon than 
I ever heard a class of children repeat at home. 
There are twenty-seven boys and two girls in 
this family." 

The acquisition of the native language should 
be X\\e first object in the labors of every foreign 
missionary. Without a knowledge of the verna- 
cular tongue, he can have little unrestrained 
intercourse with the people, little sympathy with 



IN CEYLOX. 199 

them, and but a partial access to their minds. 
Of course the good accomplished must be limited, 
and discouragement, if not even a relinquishment 
of the missionary work, may ensue. 

It may be stated also as a general truth, that 
it liie language is not obtained to some extent, 
or a good beginning made, in course of the first 



ar, it will never be obtained. All the strenort 



and zeal of a missionary fresh from a temperate 
climate, and warm from the bosom of the chris- 
tian church, and all the inspiration of novelty on 
his first arrival amonir the heathen, are nece 



issary 

to carry him through the difficulties of an Eastern 

dialect, so as to make it familiar to him in speak- 

! ing and writing. Nor is it less necessary for /he 

I wife of a missionary to begin well in this respect. 

Liable as she is to be interrupted by family cares, 

j it is the more important for her to make thorough 

[ work at once, in getting such an acquaintance 

' with the grammar and structure of the language 

I as may enable her to classify and retain the 

1 words she hears. Around such a nucleus a great 

; amount of knowledge will gather almost imper- 

! ceptibly, and a suflicicnt acquaintance with the 

common dialect, at least for common use, may 

be gained without much subsequent labor. 

It has been said that no one can live among 
the natives of a country without acquiring their 
tongue; but the fact is, that adults who continue 



200 MRS. WINSLOW. 

to speak Englis.h in their families, may live in 
India among the natives for years, and hear their 
conversation daily, without learning any except 
the most common words, if they do not study 
enough to call up their attention to what they 
hear. If they are obliged to understand what is 
said, as in case of having none around them who 
speak English — and it is very advantageous thus 
to shut themselves up to the language — they may 
learn a good deal without the use of books ; but 
some study will still be requisite to turn their 
knowledge to any account in communicating reli- 
gious instruction. In consideration of the greater 
ease with which a foreign language is acquired 
by those not much advanced in life, and especial- 
ly the pronunciation of almost any of the Eastern 
dialects, which is very difficult, missionaries 
should be sent out comparatively young. If going 
to a new station where much will depend on the 
maturity of their judgment, some of them at least 
may well be older ; but where they go to rein- 
force stations already formed, or in company 
with those who may be depended on for counsel, 
that they may get the language easilj^, and assimi- 
late readily to the climate, as well as have some 
years of expected life before them, they ought not 
to be much above tAventy-five years of age. 

''March 7.— Eeturned last niffht from Tilli- 



IN CEYLON'. 201 

pally, where I went on Saturday. The Sahhath 
Avas communion season, and all our band came 

, together, except Mrs. Meigs. We who have late- 
ly joined the mission were regularly received as 

I members of the church, and came with the other 
brethren and sisters to the table of our Lord un- 
der the most interesting circumstances. IMany 
of the poor heathen remained after the public 
services were concluded, to see what was to be 
done. One native convert sat with us, the others 
were absent." 

The subject of this memoir did not for a mo- 
ment consider licr spiritual interests safe because 
ishe was a missionary, nor neglect her closet on 
account of having many duties out of it to per- 
form. Her private diary through the whole course 
of her life in India affords abundant proof of her 
f effort to keep her " heart with all diligence." It 
I frequently records spiritual conflicts, and men- 
jj tions occasional seasons of darkness — for she 
I was always inclined to judge herself severely, 
j and to dwell, too much perhaps, on the unillumi- 
" natcd side of her own character — but more gene- 
' rally it speaks of great peace in believing, and 
\ of her once darkened soul being '' light in the 
Lord." 

" .^pril 9, 1820.— Twenty-four years have I 



202 MRS. WINSLOW. 

lived in sin. The first wish of my heart accom- 
plished, to be on heathen ground, I am no less a 
sinner. Eleven years since, I professed my faith 
in Christ, and I have not the fervor of my first 
love. Well may I tremble. The more I look into 
myself the more I am convinced that God is» 
pleased to try me in a peculiar manner. I would 
record my temptations, and some of my sins, but 
fear I should be unfaithful, and so injure more 
than benefit myself. Perhaps my conflicts were 
never more severe, but the power and goodness 
of God sustain me. Every outward thing might 
make me happy all the day long, but when I feel 
my spiritual bondage, I am in anguish. Oh that 
God would deliver me ; Oh for a view of his glory 
as I have seen it ; for that faith which enabled 
the apostle to glory in his infirmity, that Christ's 
own power might rest on him." 

'^ April 15. — Last Monday I accompanied Mr. 
W. to Oodooville^ to see the ruins of the old 
house and church which are to be repaired for us. 
The house was once the residence of a Francis- 
can friar. The walls only are standing, and they 
are much injured by time and the intruding ba- 
nian.* The country around is nearly all cultivat- 



* The banian-tree of India frequent]}' springs up on the 
top, or in the crevices of okl v.-alls, into which it protrudes 



IN CKYLON". '203 

;ed, and presents ii pleasant prospect of rice-fields 
iQnd palmyra nrroves, in the midst of which arc 
villan^es swarminiT with population. The house is 
'small, hut we expect to occupy it with Mr. aud 
,]\Irs. IS. until the funds of the mission will admit 
jof enlarging it, or building at another station. 

" You may think it time for me to introduce 
you to our present habitation, that you may fancy 
lyourselves visiting us occasionally. It is a long 
■ single-story house, with a verandah in front. 
There are out-houses in the rear, and a garden. 
The house has four front rooms and four narrow 
ones back. The one that we occupy is in front 
at the south end, and is sixteen feet square. 
There are placed most of our possessions, and 
'we still find abundant room to turn ourselves 
round. The floors are made of mortar. The 



its roots so as to tlirow them down. They must be cut out, 
or such walls are soon destroyed. One species of this tree 
has the singular property of sending pendant shoots from 
all its branches towards the earth. These may be seen sus- 
pended in bunches, as small cordage, or singly like larger 
or smaller ropes, many feet in length and of a uniform thick- 
ness. They swing in the air until grown so as to reach the 
ground, when they take root, increase in size, and stand as 
supporters and nourishers of the branches on which they 
before hung, and send down other shoots to increase the 
common stock. Thus the tree spreads itself, and some scores, 
of every dimension, eventually surround the original trunk, 
and cover perhaps an acre of ground. 



204 MKS. Yv'I^'sLo^v. 

walls are stone, plastered and whitewashed. The 
roof is after the fashion of barns in America, and 
covered with palmyra leaves. The rough dark 
colored timbers and leaves are seen from below, 
These roofs afford a harbor for insects and squir 
rels, and sometimes serpents, which occasionally 
fall from them. I think much less of my expo- 
sure to them than I did at first. There is but 
little danger, and they can do no injury not per- 
mitted by our heavenly. Father." 

The houses of the Tamulians in the country, 
except such as are mere huts, have usually a court 
in the centre, open to the sky. Narrow pent roofs 
supported by posts and covered with the large 
fan-shaped leaves of the palmyra, or the braid- 
ed leaves of the cocoa-nut, are thrown over eact 
of four low mud-walls, enclosing an area perhaps 
forty or fifty feet square. These roofs project or 
the outside, so as to form a verandah all round the 
building four or five feet wide ; and on the inside, 
another of perhaps twice that width, looking to- 
wards the open court in the centre, in the man- 
ner of a low gallery. The floors of these are 
of hard earth or brick, and raised two or three 
feet from the level of the ground. The outside 
verandah is used for sitting, working, and some- 
times sleeping ; while the inside may be divided 
into enclosed apartments, of which there is usual- 



IN CEYLON. 205 

ly one at least, where the most valuable articles 
and stores of the family may be locked up, but is 
most of.it left open, or separated only by tcmpo' 
rary partitions. It is the parlor, dining-roonj, 
ond bed-room of the family, comprising perhaps 
two or three generations, and many collateral 
branches. Here they sometimes form a social 
circle at evening around a smoking lamp, though 
such family scenes are not very common ; here 
they sit cross-legged on the floor, with their food 
pefore them on a leaf or brass plate, conveying 
it to their mouths with the right hand, without 
the use of knife, fork, or spoon, the husband ta- 
king his portion first and the wife eating after him j 
and here they sleep almost promiscuously, spread- 
ing a mat on the floor, and wrapping themselves in 
the clothing they wear through the day. This con- 
sists principally, among the men, of a strip of cloth 
two or three yards long wrapped round the loins, 
and occasionally another or a muslin shawl thrown 
over the shoulders ; and among the women, of a 
piece twice as long wrapped round the waist, with 
one end thrown over the bosom and shoulders to 
as mostly to cover them. The lower castes how- 
ever are not allovred to cover the upper part of 
the body. The men sometimes wear a shawl or 
handkerchief wrapped round the head, and san- 
dals on the feet. Both sexes wear jewels in their 
ears and rings on their fingers ; and the women 

Winelow. 1 8 



206 MRS. WINSLOW. 

wear a profusion of beads, bracelets, armlets, 
plates on their hair, clasps round their ancles, 
and ornaments on their toes. These are all of 
gold or silver, while the rings in their ears and 
on their fingers are frequently set with precious 
stones ; and the gold plates on the head and 
breast with pearls. These jewels constitute a 
great part of their property, especially that of the 
females, and as their fashions do not change, are 
handed down from generation to generation. 

" May 14. — I have been ill, but am now conva- 
lescing. When you hear of my want of health, 
you may imagine me disappointed in my plans of 
usefulness, and looking back to my father's house 
with regret. I am disappointed, and it is pecu- 
liarly trying to be an invalid where so much is to 
be done ; but I think that no disappointment will 
induce me to regret a step taken so deliberately, 
and with so much evidence that it was the will of 
God. I have not once felt it necessary to put the 
inquiry, ^ Am I in the path of dutyl' It has 
been uniformly plain since my first decision, and 
should I be unable to do any thing here, I can 
still rejoice that to me was given the privilege 
to come to the heathen. Malleappah, our inter- 
preter, and Amy, the colored woman who came 
with Dr. S. from America, have joined the church. 
There are some things encouraging among the 



IN CEYLON. 207 

people ; but a missionary would soon faint in this 
desert spot if he had not the sure word of God 
to support him. It is vain to attempt to describe 
the stupidity and ignorance of these heathens, 
and to show how they arc ' wedded to their idols.' 

" June 27. — I have spent a fortnight at Ncl- 
lore, near Jaffhapatam, in the family of the Kev. 
Mr. Knight, in the hope that a little change of 
air, and riding morning and evening, would be fa- 
vorable to my health. The cfi'ect was equal to 
our expectations. After my return, by the kind 
solicitation of Mr. and Mrs. Squance, Wesleyan 
missionaries at Point Pedro, about twenty miles 
distant, we were induced to make them a visit, 
and try the sea air. A fortnight was spent with 
them very pleasantly, Mr. W. pursuing the study 
of the language with Mr. S. who is a laborious 
missionary. We returned from Point Pedro on 
Friday — spent the night at Nellore, and stopped 
at Oodooville the next morning. 

" Finding that Mr. and Mrs. Spaulding had ta- 
ken up their abode here, and were somewhat set- 
tled, we concluded to stay over the Sabbath. 
The pleasure of being at our own station so ani- 
mated me that I almost forgot my bodily infirmi- 
ties, and thought I could cheerfully submit to al- 
most any inconvenience to remain here. After din- 
ner Mrs. S. and I made some windows, by weaving 
pnlmyra leaves, basket-fashion, across small cords 



208 MRS. WINSLOW. 

which Mr. S. and Mr. W. had extended from 
side to side of window-frames constructed by 
themselves. 

" For a few days the work at the station has 
been interrupted for want of ftmds^ and as the 
treasury is now nearly exhausted, we concluded 
to occupy the house without floors, doors, or win- 
dows, except of our own making. As there are no 
cellars in this country, a rough floor of earth is 
easily prepared. We shall be quite as comforta- 
ble as we expected to be when we left our native 
shores. Our congregation to-day consisted of 
about two hundred men and boys, and five women. 
We are much gratified to have any women attend 
public preaching, it is so contrary to custom. I 
may now hope to be at work. Employment, you 
well know, is my life, and idleness here, I can 
assure you, would be a sore trial. 

" Our dear brother and sister at this place are 
very happy ; Mr. S. says, ' I never was so happy 
before.' Dr. Scudder is repairing the old build- 
ings at Panditeripo, about five and a half miles 
from Oodooville, which he designs to occupy 
very soon. So many of us are here, that we think it 
a duty to extend ourselves as much as possible 
I hope that the christian public will enable some 
of us to go to the neighboring continent^ which 
presents a most interesting and extensive field 
for missionary operations. 



IN CEYLON. 209 

" July 8. — A good congregation assenibled to- 
day. Air. W. preaclied at home. Your hearts 
would have meUed to see these heathen hearing 
an account of the mission of our Lord to this 
world, with every mark of pagan indifTerence 
exhibited in their faces ; some trifling, others 
asleep, and only a small proportion giving any at- 
tention to truths on which their eternal all de- 
pends. Oh, it is trying beyond description. In- 
stead of being received by this people with open 
arms, as a messenger from God to lead them to 
his kingdom, the christian missionary is at once 
regarded with jealousy and scorn. The trials of 
a missionary in India are not so much bodily suf- 
ferings ; they are grief at beholding this wretched 
idolatry so entwined around the heart, and lead- 
ing such multitudes captive to Satan ; — they are 
disappointment, when, at the close of a day like 
this, he is obliged to inquire, ' Who hath believed 
our report C I\Iany say, ' give us every day 
enough to eat, and we will hear you preach.' 
They know no wants beyond those of the present 
moment. Eternity is to them an empty name. 
They who are so wicked that they cannot ap- 
pease their gods by offerings at the temples, or 
doing charitj'', or performing some ceremony or 
penance, have no worse prospect than to inhabit 
the body of some inferior animal after death. 
Hardness of heart, stupidity, indifference and at- 
18* 



210 MRS. WINSLOW. 

tachment to a religion which forbids the indulgence 
of no passion, however base, are indeed formida 
ble barriers to the success of a missionary. 

" OoDooviLLE, August 14, 1820. 

'' My dear Pare.nts, — How shall I tell you of 
the joy and grief which your letters, and those 
of other near friends, have occasioned. Mr. Gar- 
rett arrived last Thursday. We should have been 
very happy only in seeing Am, but our joy was 
greatly increased by hearing from so many w^ho 
are dear to us. To see the handwriting of my 
dear parents, after this long separation, filled me 
with too much emotion. I opened one letter after 
another, but could not read them. If I attempted 
it, I was obliged to lay them entirely aside, and 
take one from a more common friend, which 
would affect me less. I could scarcely believe, 
what I found to be the fact, that almost every 
other letter "was read before I got through wdth 
one page from my dear family. 

" 27. — Yesterday morning thirteen women came 
to our house with burdens on their heads. While 
they rested themselves in the verandah, Mrs. S 
and I went to speak to them of Christ. Their re- 
ception of us was not very encouraging, and they 
soon told us that they did not wish to know any 
thing about the Saviour. We tried to engage 
their attention, until we found every attempt 



;n cevlon. 211 

fruitless. They called to one another to go, and 
with a levity which deeply grieved us, went their 
way. This is a fair specimen of the manner in 
which we arc received by most of our sex. When 
they sometimes appear attentive, we may unex- 
pectedly find every opportunity embraced to turn 
aside their heads and laugii. 

"In the evening we went out into the neigh- 
borhood. The first two women whom we saw 
were respectable and of high caste. They were 
very civil, and engaged to come to our house this 
afternoon to hear something very interesting that 
we had to tell them. A man who stood by, said, 
' No, they must not go ; they have many rela- 
tions, and cannot go without them.' The next 
house that we visited was in a cluster of^huts, 
where quite a congregation of women assembled 
on hearing our voices. Several promised to at- 
tend meeting. Ten of them, with two others, 
came this afternoon, when no men were present. 
They were very attentive while \vc told them 
what induced us to leave our friends and come 
to live among them, and tried to convince them 
that the soul will not inhabit the body of some 
animal after death, but live for ever with God, or 
with wicked men and devils. One of them asked, 
' Shall v:c go to heaven or to hell V You may 
judge how deeply interested they felt in this 
question, when I tell you that we had scarcely 



212 MRS. WINSLOW. 

begun to reply before they became restless and 
went awiiy. This is more than we commonly have 
to encourage us. Few will listen attentively for 
the shortest time. They know nothing, and fear 
nothing. Their mental degradation is indescriba- 
ble, and they are contented with it. What then 
can we do 1 I do feel that the ignorance, the 
hardness, the careless ease of these stupid, deaf 
heathen, continually presented to view, consti- 
tutes our greatest missionary trial." 

" September 12. — I cannot fail to record," she 
says in her private journal, '' that the Lord has 
been most gracious to me. Last Sabbath I sat at 
the table of the Redeemer. Never had I such 
emotions when looking towards Calvary. There 
was some indistinctness in my views, but there 
was a fullness of sweet peace, of assurance, of 
joy in the presence of Christ, and in the holiness 
of ail around him. It seemed another place than 
this world. My wretched bondage to sin was for- 
gotten, or rather the thoughts of it were swal- 
lowed up by a sense of his presence and his glory, 
God was there, heaven was there. It was the at- 
mosphere of the redeemed. Blessed be God, the 
memory of it still refreshes me. 

" 22. — The last week I may well call the 
pleasantest of my missionary life on heathen 



IN CEYLON. 213 

ground. On Monday morning one of our daj'- 
scholars came with twelve hoys to live with us. 
Soon after a respectable man broujrht two of his 
sons, and gave them to ]\lr. W. and myself with 
much ceremony. He placed a hand of each in 
ours, and said, * They are no longer my children, 
but yours. You are their father and mother.' "We 
received ni7ic of the boys. The care of them de- 
volves on me, and I cannot tell you with how 
much pleasure I direct their studies, and attempt 
to give them religious instruction, besides sup- 
plyin^Tj- their daily wants. I could not but say to 
Mr. W. while we looked at them to-nijrht, seated 
on the floor, each with a plate of rice and curry 
before him, from which he was ready to help 
himself with his right hand instead of a spoon or 
knife as soon as a blessing should be asked, 
could our dear friends at home see these children, 
some of the best feelings of their hearts would 
be gratified. You will not wonder that they al- 
ready seem pecu-liarly near to me. I desire to feel 
more my responsibility." 

The cheerfulness with which these children 
were placed on the mission premises, is a strik- 
ing contrast to the prejudice at first exhibited. 
For a time, the boys were received on condition 
of their food being, cooked and eaten on the 
premises of a good caste heathen ; and when it 



214- MRS. WINSLOW. 

was required that they should eat within the mis- 
sion enclosure, they resisted for some days, but 
at length consented to return, on condition of 
having a well of water by themselves. They were 
told that there were three or four wells within 
the yard, either of which they could have. They 
must then clear one out. It was in the rainy 
season, and the springs high, so that when they 
had worked hard a whole day in drawing out the 
water, it was scarcely at all diminished. But they 
sagely concluded that they had drawn out as 
much water as there was at first in the well, and 
it was of course pure and suitable for their use. 
They remained contented, and gradually lost these 
absurd prejudices. 

As an illustration of ihe opposition of parents^ 
the case of Supyen may be mentioned, an intelli- 
gent Tamul lad of nineteen, whose father was 
wealthy, and connected with one of the temples 
near Jaffnapatam, but allowed his son to attend 
the school at Tillipally. Having there professed 
his belief in the Bible, his father was much 
alarmed; and when he next returned home, caus- 
ed him to be confined, and kept for a time with- 
out food. He then ordered him to perform cer- 
tain heathen ceremonies. Supyen refused, and 
when shut up in a dark room, made his escape, 
and fled to Tillipally ; where he told Mr. Poor 
what had befallen him. He took a Testament, 



IN CEYLON 215 

and pointing to the 10th of Matthew, from the 
3kh to the 39th verses, said with tears, '^ that 
rrry good.^^ His father hearing where he was, 
^('ut for him, and as he did not return immediately, 
<;nnc himself and took him away. They were 
no sooner out of sight, than his father stripped 
him of his good cloth, put on one so poor as to 
be disgraceful to him, placed a burden on his 
head, as though he was a slave, and beat him fre- 
quently with a slipper, which is very disgraceful 
among the Hindoos, until he reached home. 
Every art was then practised to make him re- 
nounce Christianity. His relations said the mis- 
sionaries had given him some medicine to make 
him a christian, and asked what it was 1 He re- 
plied, " the Gospel of Jesus Christ." A great 
variety of drugs were put into his food to turn 
him back to idolatry, and an idol feast being made 
by some of his young friends, he was ordered by 
his parents to make the customary offering to the 
idol. When the time came, he entered the little 
room where the idol was enthroned, pulled ofT 
its ornaments and kneeled down to pray to the 
true God. One of his companions looking through 
the curtain saw what was done, and told his father, 
who ptmished him severely, and sent him for a 
time to Kandy, in the interior. 

Afterwards his father changed his conduct, and 
lavished caresses upon him. He showed him 



216 MRS. WINSLOW. 

his various possessions, and told hirii he should 
have all, if he would give up the idea of being a 
christian, and if not, he should be an outcast for 
ever. Supyen chose banishment from his father's 
house, sajnng, "I do not need house or land if 1 
have an interest in heaven." He attempted to go 
lo Tillipaily, but was followed and taken back by 
force. They then tried to bring him under en- 
gagements to marry a heathen girl, but he would 
not consent. He even tore the contract when 
oilered him. In short, they put his feet in the 
stocks, beat him, caused him to be conveyed to 
the neighboring continent, and at length wearied 
him out, so that he signed a recantation of Chris- 
tianity. His father is since dead, and he for some 
years has seemed settled down in heathenism. 

" October 8. — Another Sabbath, with its privi- 
leges, even in this heathen land, calls for thank- 
fulness. I have not told you of our employments 
on this sacred day. Before breakfast we meet for 
social prayer, with our beloved brother and sister 
S. in concert with some friends who remember 
us on this day, at sunrise. After breakfast one of 
the brethren goes out and invites the people to 
attend preaching ; the other makes preparation 
for the service, and hears the scholars of the se- 
veral schools repeat their catechisms and por- 
tions of Scripture. The beggars come to the 



IN CEYLON. 217 

door, and Mrs. S. or I talk to them, and give 
thein something to supply their more pressing 
wants. The morning service is over about noon. 
At one o'clock is our daily union of prayer, in 
concert with all the missionaries in this district. 
At two the boys of our family, and our domes- 
tics, are called in to give some account of the 
sermon, to repeat their lessons, and to be in- 
structed in religion. AVe take dinner at three, 
after which the brethren go out about two miles, 
difierent ways, to preach again. Mrs. S. and I 
always design to be at liberty to see the women 
who may come at this time. Generally more or 
less are here. After they leave, and before our 
husbands return, when the sun is about setting, 
we spend a season in prayer together, for the 
blessing of God on the labors of the day, and 
especially on one of our boys, whom we have se- 
lected as a particular subject of prayer. After 
family prayers at evening, if not before, we feel 
that it has been a day of labor ; and yet we seem 
to have done very little. ]\Iuch less can be done 
in this warm climate, vv'ithout impairing health, 
than in America. 

" The women who came this afternoon were 
more ignorant than any I have seen. Their re- 
plies to some of our questions might surprise 
you. ' What kind of a being is God V ' We don't 
know.' ' Did you never hear any thing about 

Winslow **^ 



218 MRS. WINSLOW. 

• 

himl' 'No.' 'Who made you V 'We don't 
know.' ' How camQ this earth, and all things that 
you see around you 1' ' ^Ve don't know.' 'Do you 
go to the temples V ' Yes.' ' For what V ' To wor- 
ship.' 'To worship what V 'We don't know.' 'Did 
you ever see what you worship ; what is its shape V 

* We don't know, we never saw it.' ' In what man- 
ner do you worship V ' We hold up our hands.' 

* Do you ever pray at the temple V ' Sometimes 
when we want something.' ' Do you know that you 
will live again after your bodies are deadV ' We 
don't know.' 'Did you ever hear of heaven and 
hell V ' No.' ' What is sin V ' We don't know.' 

^^ JS^ovemher 5. — The ordinance of the Lord's 
supper was administered here to-day for the first 
time, and we were permitted to enjoy the privi- 
leges of a church at our own station. Mr. Poor 
was with us. I must tell you, my dear friends," 
that I seldom derived so much strength and ani- 
mation from this ordinance at home, as I have 
done here. The Lord Jesus seems to make up 
for the loss of friends and privileges by his own 
more sensible presence. 

" A small collection of women this morning 
gave me more pleasure than any I have before 
seen, because they listened with attention to what 
I said, and manifested no impatience to be going. 
One of them was quite talkative. It is common 
for one to speak in behalf of all. She seemed to 



IN CEYLON. 219 

have some notions, though very incorrect, about 
heaven. She said, 'It is a place of happiness, and 
the great God is there.' I inquired if people have 
sickness in heaven, if they arc ever hungry, and 
if they will be obliged to work for their living, 
and carry burdens. She replied, ' They are some- 
times hungry, they must work, they have pain 
and sickness, and I expect,' said she, * to carry 
my load there !' pointing to one she had just ta- 
ken from her head. ' How long do people who 
go to heaven remain V ' Some longer, and others 
for a shorter time.' ' Do they come back to the 
earth V ' Yes.' ' How do they come, and in 
what forml' 'They are born just as they were 
at first.' ' After the second birth what becomes 
of them 1' ' They live awhile and then go again 
to heaven or to hell, according to their works.' 
'And where do you all expect to go after death 1' 
' If our works are good, we shall go to heaven, 
if bad, to hell.' '"Well, are your works goodV 
' Yes.' ' Have you done nothing wrong V ' No, 
we have done nothing wrong.' I attempted in 
vain to show them the wickedness of the heart, 
and the insufficiency of all their sacrifices, bath- 
ing in the holy waters, and rubbing ashes on their 
bodies, to cleanse them from sin. How painful it 
is to see these poor creatures, on the borders of 
an awful eternity, disregarding our most solemn 
admonitions." 



220 MRS. \vI^'sLow. 

As implied above, the Hindoos all believe in 
the metempsychosis or transmigration of souls. 
They suppose that evil has come into the world 
in consequence of the union of spirit with matter, 
and is to be done away by suffering-, or acts of 
charity, or religious observances. The soul, as it 
passes from one body to another, is preparing for 
a re-union with the divine spirit of which it is a 
part, as a drop of water with the ocean. It is 
the same in man and in the lower animals. After 
having obtained a human birth it may be doomed 
to be born a brute, or to exist as a tree or plant. 
According to the character formed in any birth 
will be the condition of that next succeeding. 
Good and evil, both natural and moral, are en- 
tailed from one birth to another j and the fate of 
each one is written in his head when he is born. 
This is indicated by the sutures of the skull. 
This fate is unalterable, and excludes the idea 
of blame or praise. It is a sufficient excuse for 
any course of evil conduct to say, '' it is fate in 
my head — my forehead is bad." 

They speak of heaven and hell, but in a differ- 
ent sense from christians. Each corporeal god 
has his ov/n heaven, where he receives his wor- 
shippers, and grants them various sensual indul- 
gences for a longer or shorter period, according 
to their merit, after which they become subject 
again to the vicissicudes of mortal birth. Even 



IN CEYLO.V. 221 

the gods must descend to this, if they would be 
released from matter, and obtain Mookskum, or 
absorption in the divine essence. If any die with- 
out sufficient merit to obtain j\fooks/ium, or go 
to either of the heavens, or have another birth in 
this world, they must l)e sent to the Yuma-loka, 
or world of Yuma, the god of death, and tor- 
mented as in purgatory, until their sins are so far 
expiated as to allow of their being launched again 
on the sea of transmigration. They are allowed 
at first, perhaps, only an inferior birth, but gradu- 
ally may rise to inhabit a human form, and even- 
tually, like others, obtain absorption. This fa- 
talism and belief that all will end well, almost de- 
stroys their sense of accountability and fear of 
the consequences of sin ; and their apathy is in- 
creased by the ease with which sin is done away. 
The putting of a light in a temple, bathing in any 
of the holy waters, marking the forehead, breast, 
and arms with holy ashes, repeating the name of 
some god, though unintentionally, doing charity, 
or performing any of the various kinds of pe- 
nance, to say nothing of many other methods, 
will effectually atone for sin, and secure happiness 
after death.* Of course, to alarm their fears, or 

* Among the many examples of the efficacy of these ob- 
servances, as related in their books and generally believed, 
are such as the following : A rat was one night in a temple, 

19* 



222 MRS. WIXSLOW. 

awaken their consciences, is all but impossible. 
With them, emphatically, it is the work of the 
Spirit. The following letters will corroborate 
these views: 

" OoDOOViLLE, (Jaffna,) February 28, 1821. 
"My dear Maria, — Before this reaches Ame- 
rica you will probably have heard that Ave are 
happily settled at Oodooville. We commenced 
our labors here in July, with Mr. and Mrs. Spauld- 
ing, under pleasant circumstances. At first we 
had many visiters, and flattered ourselves that we 
could easily exert a good influence. But we had 

where the lamp before the idol had burned down so as to be 
dim. Being hungry, the rat went to the lamp for oil, and in 
attempting to get it, pulled up the wick so as to make it 
burn brightly. The god was so much pleased by the light 
being made before him, as to cause the rat to be born a king, 
to whom he gave the dominion of the three worlds — the 
sky, the earth, and the lower regions — for a thousand years. 
We add another, and leave the reader to judge of the 
effect which a belief in such methods of expiation must 
have on the whole population of a country : A wicked boy 
was in the habit of abusing his mother, and calling her 
"t'rtysee," which is bad woman. She said, do not say vaysce 
only, but vaysec-vah, which means " come here, you bad 
woman." He then continued to say " vaijsee-vak," " vaysee- 
vah," and in saying it, pronounced the name of Siva, that 
being in the vocative case See-vah. The god hearing his 
mame called, appeared and took the boy to KylasM, or the 
heaven of Siva. 



IN CEYLON. 223 

not learned the duplicity of this idolatrous people. 
As soon as they found that they could obtain 
neither r.ches nor greatness by listening to us, 
they ceased coming. We must now go to their 
houses to find them. After many perplexing cir 
cumstances, we have a school of nine promising 
boys, to some of whom we have given names 
which are familiar to you. These are my more 
particular charge. I provide food and clothing 
for them, and instruct them in English. They 
have a Tamul teacher. Their religious instruction 
is principally at morning and evening prayers, and 
on the Sabbath. 

" Tlie people are more degraded, more ignorant, 
more stupid, and yet more attached to their idols 
than you can imagine. It is like talking to the 
wind, to tell them of the true God or the Saviour 
of sinners. Their religion is suited to their cor- 
rupt inclinations, and they desire no other. Oh, 
could our friends at home, who know something 
of the worth of the soul, and yet think it unne- 
cessary to send the Gospel to the heathen, see 
this people living as though they had no souls; 
could they every night hear their yells and horrid 
music at some temple, while they are prostrating 
themselves before a huge car, on which is borne 
an idol of gold or brass, or perhaps three idols, 
a god with a wife on each side, or see hundreds 
at a time rollintr for hours in the dust after the 



224 I\IRS. WIXSLOW. 

car, witli hands and feet extended, until life is 
nearly extinct ; could they see these, with many 
other ceremonies, at the idol festivals, their eyes 
would certainly affect their hearts. 

'' The heathen around us are poor, but most of 
them get something to eat, and they seek little 
else, unless it be to sleep. If we talk to them of 
an hereafter, they say, ' We know nothing about 
it. That is not for us to think of. Our fathers 
worshipped idols, and so we worship them.' If 
we ask, ^ Would you hang yourselves if your fa- 
thers had done so V ' Yes.' ' If they had burnt 
their houses, would you burn yours 1' 'Yes.' 
' And because they have gone to a place of mise- 
ry, you wish to go there V ' Yes.' Heaven and 
hell are to most of them unmeaning sounds. 

" A friend said to me before I left home,AVe 
shall wish to know how you look, how j'ou eat, 
&c. We look, I believe, much as when we left 
home. We do not yet eat like the natives, but sit 
at a small table just large enough for two per- 
sons, and use such furniture as we should at 
iiome ; at least so far as we have it. I know not 
how much we may alter our habits in these 
things. In almost all respects you may expect us 
to deteriorate, for we are in a destructive atmos- 
phere. I sometimes think that I should feel very 
awkward, even now, to be in the society to which 
I was once accustomed. I assure you it is no 



IN CEVLON. 225 

small disadvantage to our mental progress, to 
have the stimulus of refined social intercourse 
taken away, and to be shut up mostly to a strange 
language, so barren of useful thought as is the 
Tamul. 

'' You wish to know if the heathen are what I 
expected to find them, and if my work is plea- 
sant. They are more wedded to their idols, more 
unwilling to hear of changing their religion, and 
more ignorant and stupid than I supposed. Their 
vices are what you would expect from people 
destitute of all restraint, except that of fear. Al- 
most every one will lie, cheat, and steal, every 
opportunity. An honest domestic is not to be ex- 
pected. We have no dependence upon them, and 
this adds greatly to the care of house-keeping. I 
Imve not as yet the pleasure of seeing the hea- 
then come to inquire what they shall do to be 
saved ; but it is pleasant to labor among them. 

" Miss Maria Leffixcwell." 

" OoDooviLLE, February 17, 1821. 
" My dear Brother D , I received your let- 
ter by Mr. Garrett, and read it with feelings which 
I cannot describe. How often have we wished that 
Providence might lead you to preach the Gospel, 
and sometimes almost said it must be so. There 
was never less reason to expect it than when we 
left home ; but circumstances appear to have 



226 MRS. WIXSLOW'. 

made your duty plain. If you carefully, and with 
much prayer, examined the subject, I am confi- 
dent that you -vvill always rejoice in your deter- 
mination. Whatever may be the difficulties and 
suiTerings connected with your work, the con- 
sciousness of doing the will of God cannot but 
support and comfort you. 

" I suppose you will expect to hear that we are 
doing something for the heathen. I hope we are ; 
but so little impression is made by preaching 
and conversation, that we are sometimes ready 
to say we labor in vain. All our encouragement 
is from the word of God. We have to contend 
not only with the carnal heart, but with a strong 
attachment to an alluring system of idolatry, and 
with an almost perfect and universal indifference 
to the future, joined, in most instances, to igno- 
rance and stupidity. We sometimes labor in vain 
for hours to impress upon the mind of a native 
the most simple truth. He cannot comprehend it. 
We must ' walk by faith.' Christians at home 
must help us to do so. 

" One year is gone since we landed in Jaffna. 
I look back upon the scenes through which I 
have passed, as I used to those at home : some 
sickness, some anxieties, and some enjoyment, 
with some attempts to serve God, have made up 
the variety. On the whole, I believe I never was 
more happy. We are united with the brother and 



sister at the station in the best bonds, and have 
mucii fellowship with them in spiritual things." 

On the 7th May, 1821, the mission sustained a 
severe loss in the death of Mrs. Poor ; but her 
end was joyful, even triumphant. It was a privi- 
lege to stand by her dying pillow and hear her 
say, " Even my beloved husband and children 
cease to be ties to bind me to earth. Every cord 
is now broken. This is a victory for which I 
scarcely dared to hope." And it was aflecting 
when, near the closing scene, the little circle at 
lier bed-side commenced sino^injr, 

"Jesus, with all ihy saints above," 

to hear her trembling voice unexpectedly burst 
forth, and while her countenance reflected " glory 
begun," rise higher and clearer in its thrilling 
tones, until it subdued that of her weeping friends, 
and was heard alone in the song of praise. Almost 
her last words, while hardly conscious of any 
thing, were, '' Glory be to God the Father — to 
God the Son— to God the Holy Ghost." 

Mr. Garrett^ whose arrival has been noticed, 
was sent out by the Board as a ininier for the 
mission ; but was not allowed by the government 
to remain on the island. The missionaries for- 
warded their petition that he might be permitted 



228 MRS. WINSLOW. 

to join the mission, and also a remonstrance 
against his being sent away, founded on the en- 
couragement given by the preceding governor to 
the establishment of the mission, with leave to 
have a press, as well as on the moral necessities 
of the natives. But the governor was so averse to 
any increase of the number of Americans on the 
island, that the order for his removal was enforc 
ed. Indeed, an injunction was subsequently ob 
tained from his Majesty's Secretary for the colo 
nies, against any future additions to the mission 
This was in force eleven years, until after the ar 
rival of Sir Robert Wilmot Horton as governor 
by whose kind representation to the home-gov 
ernment the injunction was removed. During 
this whole period, contrary to the expectation of 
such as looked for the extinction of the mission, 
none of the brethren previously in healthy were re' 
moved by death or permanently disabled by sickness. 



IN CEYLON. 229 

CHAPTER V. 



Second and Third years in Ceylon 

tlic establishment of the Mission ^ienii- 
nary and Female Central School. 

Progress of the mission — joy in God — Maternal Society — 
letter to Maternal Society, Portland, Maine — some girls 
obtained lor the school — Mrs, Schrayder — letter to the 
Female Society for prayer — to a female associate — privi- 
lege of prayer — four received to the church — preaching 
at a scliool bungalow — anniversary observed by the " In- 
dus fraternity " — meetings for prayer — death of Rev. Mr. 

' Richards — his early devotion to missions — prayers of na- 
tive children — beggars — employment of a day — religious 
privileges — heathen children — school for girls opened. 

The five stations of which the mission was for 
many years composed, were now occupied; 
though at Manepy only hungnloics of mud walls 
covered with leaves were then erected. The 
walls of the old dwelling-house having been en- 
tirely destroyed, a dwelling was after some time 
prepared by taking off a part of the old church. 
None of the churches, except that at Tillipally, 
which was only covered with leaves and had a 
floor of earth, were as yet repaired ; but at all the 
other stations large bungalows, consisting of a 
slight roof covered with leaves, supported by two 

Winslow. 20 



230 MRS. WINSLOW. 

rows of taller and two of shorter posts, with a 
hard floor of earth, and surrounded by a half wall 
of unburnt brick, were soon built for public wor- 
ship. The dilapidated houses at Oodooville and 
Panditeripo, as well as at Tillipally and Batticot- 
ta were gradually made conifortable dwelling- 
places. Boarding-schools^ containing in all eighty- 
seven children, were in successful operation at 
the different stations, except Manepy, where one 
was soon commenced, and native free-schools 
were taught in bungalows in most of the villages 
near each station : the whole number of these 
schools in 1821 being twenty-four, in which were 
one thousand one hundred arid forty -nine children. 

On the evening of May 15, 1821, Dr. Scudder, 
who had attended to the study of theology on his 
way to India, as well as after his arrival, and had 
for about a year been licensed to preach, was or- 
dained in the Wesleyan mission chapel in Jaffna- 
patam. A good audience was present. Mr. Cha- 
ter, a Baptist, and Mr. Roberts, a Wesleyan mis- 
sionary, assisted in the interesting services of 
the occasion. 

On the 22d April, the Sabbath before Mrs. Poor 
was taken ill, Kathaniel Xiles and Jordan Lodge^ 
two lads of the boarding school at Tillipallj'-, were 
received to the church. This was an interesting 
event, as they were Xhe first fruits of the mission 
from among the heathen; those previously admit- 



IN CEYLON. 231 

\ci\ haviiifr been educated either as Protestants or 
I'oinan Catholics. 

After the two following extracts, in which Mrs. 
\V. records the dealings of God with her own 
soul, she proceeds, in journal-letters to her friends, 
to notice such events connected with the mission 
lis she thought might be of interest. 

"June 3, 1821. — New light has broken in upon 
my soul. I think I can now understand the reason 
of God's dealings with me in leaving me so much 
to darkness and disquietude. I have felt greatly 
nied in being unable to employ myself more ac- 
tively for God, while I have not done all the good 
that was within my reach. Besides this, instead 
of flying to Christ, I have listened to the sugges- 
tions of the adversary, in doubt and unbelief. 

" 24?. — I have hesitated whether I ought to re- 
cord what the Lord has done for me during the 
last week. On Tuesday, throughout the day, I 
seemed to have new views of the character and 
works of God. In the morning, after reading the 
first part of Genesis, with Scott's notes on the 
creation of man in the image of his Maker, and 
Ills disastrous fall, the wonderful love of God in 
the plan of salvation filled my soul with adoring 
thoughts, and I hope with gratitude and love. I 
do not remember ever spending a day in such a 



232 MRS. WINSLOW. 

delightful frame. Compared with what is gene- 
rally the case with me, God was in all my thoughts. 
I found it good to he at the throne of grace, and 
I spent much time there. I entreated the Lord to 
show me if this was his own work, or if it was 
Satan transformed into an angel of light. How 
I longed to open my heart, and to say, ^ come, 
hear what the Lord has done for my soul.' I felt 
more love for all my brethren and sisters. At 
night I would have told my husband, but still 
feared that it was delusion. 

''July 29. — Have been out with Mrs. S. this 
afternoon, and felt, more than usual, the superiori- 
ty of the christian religion. A man of respecta- 
bility said, ' The god Scanda, to whom sacrifices 
were offered at a temple near us this morning, 
can see and hear, but cannot speak.' ' Of what is 
he made '?' ' Pure gold.' ' Who made you and all 
this people V 'Another god, the father of Scanda.' 
* Why then do you worship him; is not the greater 
god angry V ' No, for we worship them both.' 

" August 8. — Last Friday we had a most inte- 
resting day at Tillipally. George Koch, a young 
man of Dutch descent, who is studying medicine 
with Dr. Scudder, one of the boys belonging to 
the boarding-school, and a hired man of Mr 
Poor's, were received as members of the church 
All our little band were together, except Mr. and 



IN CEYLON. 233 

Mrs. S. The occasion was truly animatlntr. After 
the admission of these persons we sat down to 
tho table of the Lord, with seven native converts. 
The Sabbath after was likewise a good day. The 
new members appear already to be preachers of 
righteousness, and even others join them in 
speaking to many whom they meet concerning 
their souls. 

" 9. — Went out with Mrs. S. this evening, and 

found some women quite attentive. Others would 

not hear unless we would tell them how to get 

a living. We endeavored to persuade them that 

, our message was far more important than if we 

j could show them how to obtain food for their 

; bodies. The ruins of a temple, burnt a few 

nights ago, were near. Finding a woman stand- 

I ing by, we said, * Where do you expect to go after 

; death V ' If I frequent the temples, and worship 

the gods, I shall go to glory.' ' Was not your 

god burnt up the other night 1' ' Yes, but the 

} people can make another.' We tried to show her 

I the folly of worshipping gods made by men's 

; hands, and the necessity of worshipping the one 

liviniT and true God : but she insisted that she 

' '>iild not leave her religion. 

After our walk we enjoyed an hour in the 

1 verandah with our husbands, while the moon 

1 shone pleasantly around us, speaking of the 

' shortness of life, and especially of a missionary's 

20* 



234* MRS. WINSLOW. 

life in this Eastern world. In one, two, or three 
years it may be said of us, they are dead. This 
is an incitement to activity, for our work is very 
great, and seems scarcely yet begun. Our weekly 
meeting was pleasant ; our thoughts were carried 
to ' where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God.' 
I felt that to contemplate the happiness of heaven, 
though only through a glass darkly,' is a sweet 
consolation in this world of sorrow. 

'' 14". — To-day all the sisters met at Batticotta 
to enjoy a little season of christian fellowship, 
and to make arrangements for forming a maternal 
society. We resolved to hold a quarterly meeting 
for our own benefit and that of our children. I have 
not promised myself so much from any thing of 
the kind since I came to India. It has been a day 
long to be remembered. I trust it will be re- 
membered, even in eternity, with thanksgiving." 

The interesting association here mentioned, 
was evidently made a blessing. Nearly all the 
older children connected with it have become 
hopefully pious. The responsibility of mothers — 
the power they have of moulding the plastic 
minds of their little ones — the effect on their 
character of the very expression of countenance, 
the tone of voice, and the whole moral atmos- 
phere which a mother throws around her, with 
a silent but pervading influence, while the young 



IN CEYLON. 235 

and smiling infant is still in her arms — has pro- 
bably never been sufficiently appreciated j and 
laternal associations are adapted to bring this 
sponsibiiity to the mind and lay it on the heart 
of those to whom these treasures are committed. 
'I'liongh our Saviour said, " suffer little children 
ii^ come unto me, and forbid them not," there is 
reason to fear that they have not been carried to 
ilim in faith, while young. The soil of the hu- 
man heart should not be left unoccupied. The 
t iiemy will sow tares. As far as possible he 
; hould be anticipated. Good seed should be sown 
J 11 the spring-time of life: in early morning. It 
should be mingled carefully and prayerfully with 
f!ic first elements of moral character. The habils 
. the infant should be formed for holiness, and 
le child be actually educated and trained for 
heaven. With the blessing of God it may be 
clone ; in some instances it has been done ; it 
will be done more extensively. A new genera- 
lion, early commencing the divine life, and grow- 
"5 up to the stature of perfect ones in Christ 
.sus, shall yet arise to bless the world. 
Mrs. W. was the secretary of the Maternal As- 
iciation until her death. Soon after its forma- 
»n she addressed the following communication 
lo a similar society in Portland, Maine, almost 
the only one then existing, accompanied by a 
private letter to I\Irs. Payson, the secretary. 



236 MRS. WINSLOW. 

" OoDooviLLE, October 8, 1821. 

"Dear Friend and Sister, — In view of the ma* 
ny difficulties which are connected with the edu- 
cation of children in India, and the high respon- 
sibility of christian parents, the female members 
of our mission have been induced to associate 
themselves for mutual aid, in adopting the best 
methods for training up their children for useful- 
ness in the church of God ; and we feel anxious 
to maintain a correspondence with similar socie- 
ties, that we may be assisted and encouraged by 
them. We feel some embarrassment in proposing 
to be recognized by a society at home, because 
we are a little band, and at a great distance ; but 
we trust that our necessities will make our ex 
cuse, and that the advantages to be derived from 
an interest in your prayers, and from your cor- 
respondence, will form a plea in our favor which 
will not be rejected. 

" At the first meeting for consultation on the 
subject of forming a society, the Spirit of God 
appeared to be present. All were greatly refresh- 
ed and strengthened in the belief that much be- 
nefit would result to our own souls, as well as to 
those of our children. The season for special 
supplication, on Saturday evening, which has 
been observed a number of weeks, has likewise 
been peculiarly precious, so that we are enabled 
to say, * hitherto hath the Lord helped us.' 



IN CEYLON. 237 

" The society is but just formed, and is as yet 
confined to ourselves, with the exception of Mrs. 
Mooyart, a daughter of the late Dr. Johns, of Tran- 
quebar, who is an active and intelligent christian. 
We expect, however, that some ladies of the 
Wesleyan and Church i\Iissionary Societies will 
unite with us. The children of the present mem- 
bers are sixteen in number. Our first wish con- 
cerning them is that they may become children 
of God, and successful laborers in his service 
among the heathen. They are surrounded by 
temptations to which children in christian coun- 
tries are not exposed, and we know that they can 
be preserved only by the power of God. Allow 
us therefore to request the frequent and fervent 
prayers of every member of your society, that 
the great and good Shepherd may gather them 
as lambs in his arms, and carry them in his 
bosom." 

" My dear Mrs. Payson, — The slight acquaint- 
ance which I was permitted to have with you in 
New Haven might not warrant in. me the liberty 
of addressing you; but the object for which I 
write will I trust be a sufficient apology. 

'' As I am writing, you may expect to hear 
something concerning our missionary work. We 
are just now particularly encouraged by seeing 
females more ready to come out, and by having 



238 MRS. WINSLOW. 

more easy access to them at their own houses 
than before. Many who at first would run and 
hide themselves if a missionary was seen enter- 
ing the yard, now not only permit us to sit down 
with them there, but some of them attend preach- 
ing at our stations. More or less come out every 
Sabbath, and on some special occasions congre- 
gations of from thirty to forty have been col- 
lected. A few days since, a woman of much in- 
fluence, after listening to a plain and solemn ad- 
dress, said, ' What must I do, if I leave my reli- 
gion, to obtain forgiveness of God for all my 
sins.' To have a female show that she under- 
stands any thing said to her on these subjects, is 
encouraging. They are generally too talkative 
to listen, or if to please us they give any atten- 
tion, it is without trying to understand what we 
say. In the degraded condition of our sex here, 
we see much to call forth our commiseration, 
and much to turn from with abhorrence. We do 
believe, however, that the time is near when they 
will regard us as their friends, and, through the 
influences of the Holy Spirit, be induced to ^ come 
with us that we may do them good.' 

" The duty of visiting females at their own 
houses is so plain, that we cannot neglect it ; but 
it is not that pleasant employment which w^e ima- 
gined at a distance. To have our message treat- 
ed with derision by those whose eternal happi- 



IN CEYLON. 239 

iiess is at stake ; to hear them ridicule and blas- 
pheme the name of Christ, ascribing all the bless- 
ings purchased by his blood, to beings whose 
Jives were stained with every crime — and to see 
them worshipping lifeless images of wood, stone, 
iTokl, and silver, is too trying to be described. I 
l»clieve I may say, in relation to all our number, 
:is well as of mj-^self, we have but one source of 
pleasure in our efforts with them, and that is, the 
reflection that they are made in the name of Him 
who has designs of mercy towards this people, 
and will yet show them his glory, and turn their 
hearts to himself. 

'^ In obtaining female children to instruct, we 
liave much reason for thankfulness that of late 
we have had some success. ' Females have no 
custom to learn,' is the universal excuse, and ge- 
nerally it has more weight than all we can urge 
in favor of what would prepare them for useful- 
ness and happiness. We consider every female 
child added to our number as a great acquisition, 
on account of her subsequent influence, and of 
the strength of prejudice and custom against fe- 
iiiales being instructed. 

■' I cannot fail to speak of the great goodness 
of God in uniting all the members of our mission 
\ cry closely in the bonds of christian love ; and 
in giving us brethren and sisters of other denomi- 
nations who hold up our hands and encourage our 



24-0 MRS. WINSLOW. 

hearts. We have many seasons of precious inter- 
course, when I trust we know something of the 
communion of saints; particularly on the first 
]\Ionday in every month, when we spend the day 
together in united prayer and mutual exhortation. 
Do we not, on these days especiallj'-, unite with 
all who love the Lord Jesus, in praying that He 
will hasten his coming in his kingdom. Can it 
be that there is a christian who does not every 
day inquire, ' Lord, how long]' In times of des- 
pondency we are often cheered by thinking of 
the great numbers in our native land who we 
believe pray for us, and who desire, above every 
thing else, the conversion of the world." 

The mission family at Oodooville, which had 
been so happily united, was before this called to 
separate. Mr. and Mrs. Spaulding were removed 
in August to the station at Manepy, left vacant 
by the illness of ^Ir. Woodward. He had been 
obliged to take a voyage to Calcutta for his 
health ; and on his return was appointed to sup- 
ply the place of Mr. Eichards at Batticotta, who, 
with Mrs. R., had gone to Tillipally after the death 
of Mrs. Poor. These changes, though trying to 
those concerned, were necessary, to make the best 
disposal of the strength of the mission. Before Mr. 
S. left Oodooville, a large buiigalovj for a chapel 
was nearly finished \ and soon after, it was opened. 



IN CEYLON. 241 

'' September 23, 1821.— This has been an inte- 
resting day. Our new bungalow for preaching 
tvas dedicated. Mr. David preached on the oc- 
casion to about five hundred adults and children. 
Mr. Lambric, church missionary from Kandy, 
Mr. Knight, from Nellore, Mr. Layard, provincial 
judge of the district, and all our own brethren, 
with some of the sisters, were assembled. After 

I the public services in Tamul, we had religious 

I exercises among ourselves in English ; when we 
felt that the Holy Spirit was in the midst of us. 

j Oh that it may be the beginning of days to this 

I people. 

*' 2i. — I have long been trying to obtain girls 
to attend school. Was much encouraged to-day, 
because one came whom we have often tried in 
vain to get. There were before two day-scholars 
who have attended pretty constantly for several 
months, besides the little one in the family, who 
is the daughter of a domestic. So a commence- 
ment is made. 

'^ 25. — Went out this evening and saw a con- 
siderable number of men and women, who pro- 
mised to attend preaching to-morrow. Had a 
pleasant time at one place with a number of wo- 

iimen, until, as I was about leaving, a very boister- 

ijous woman came up and almost drove me away. 
''26. — None of the people who promised to 

jjcome were at meeting to-day ; but we had 

i! Wioilow. 21 



242 MRS. WINSLOW. 

Others, more than we expected, the weather being 
unfavorable. How animating the belief tliat this 
house shall be filled with humble worshippers. 
We see nothing to encourage this hope, but we 
believe that the purpose of God shall stand. All 
nations shall come and worship before him. I 
must tell you, my dear parents, for your comfort, 
and to magnify the grace of God, that I have some 
precious Sabbaths in this land of darkness. Not 
as once in the ' great congregation.' or in the so- 
cial circle for prayer, or in the little school which 
was so delightful, but in retirement, in what I trust 
is communion with God. I think I never in Ame- 
rica had such views of the character of God ; 
never felt so sensibly that he is good as well as 
great; nor admired so much his vast designs. 
For a considerable time after leaving home, al- 
though I had many seasons of great enjoyment, 
yet on account, perhaps, of sickness and various 
changes of situation, some clouds rested over me 
which my weak faith could not penetrate ; but of 
late I have been able to say that the Lord remem- 
bers his promise, ' Lo, I am with you alway,' in 
its fullest extent, except so far as immediate fruit 
of my labor is concerned, and in that he does 
not withhold his smiles. 0, my dear parents, 
brothers, and sisters, how much do those who 
have an interest in the blood of the covenant owe 
to their Redeemer. What are time, talents and 



IN CEYLON. Sis 

all that we can give 1 IIow much is committed 
to the care, tlie watchfuhiess, tlic prayers of 
christians. The weight of responsibility some- 
times overwhelms me." 

At tiiis time she addressed the following letter 
of encouragement to the female praying-circle 
which she so highly valued in her native town ; 
and also a kind communication to a female asso- 
ciate, whose salvation she greatly desired. 

" OoDOOviLLE, October 6, 1821. 

'^ My dear Miss T , In addressing you as 

a member of the 'Society for prayer' with which 
I was once associated, I wish to be considered as 
addressing all the circle. I have often thought of 
writing, but at this time feel constrained to say 
tliat I rejoice with you. A letter lately received 
from America mentions the stately goings of the 
Lord in Connecticut, and that JS'orwich has shared 
in the showers of divine grace. I almost imme- 
diately thought of our little band, and felt that 
God had condescended to regard our cries. 

''Now, my dear sisters, if the Lord has heard 
you in the thing which you greatly desired, will 
he not still listen to your requests, and does he 
not by this kindness call upon you to extend your 
desires^ to ' open your mouths wide, that they may 
be filled.' They who surround you are but a 
small proportion of the great family for whom 



244 JIRS. WINSLOW. 

you live. Most of j'our brethren and sisters of 
this family are in ^ darkness which may be felt.* 
In the season of refreshing which you have en- 
joyed it may seem to you that the day of promise 
dawns upon all nations, that the darkness is flee- 
ing away, and the true light shines ; but your 
eyes have not seen, and your ears have not heard 
the deplorable state of the heathen. I do not 
doubt that you pray for the salvation of all men, 
that the glory of the church is an object of ar- 
dent desire ; but I may ask without fear of of- 
fence, do you exert every power of body and 
soul in this great cause ? Is it your chief con- 
cern, disregarding selfish accommodations, and 
rising above a frowning world, to benefit those 
who are around you, and to see the salvation of 
God among all nations'? 

" I wish further to suggest that perhaps you 
cannot do more for the cause of Christ than to 
set apart stated and frequent seasons for special 
supplication in behalf of the heathen. It is not 
by the number or strength of missionaries that 
the great work is to be accomplished, but through 
the intercessions of the children of God the 
Holy Spirit must be given. This is a part of your 
appropriate work. Allow me to say, a greai part 
— a talent put into your hands, for which you 
must render an account. 

* Very affectionately, your Harriet." 



IN CEYLON. 245 

" My Dear , My soul is often in heaviness 

on account of those I have left, because I know 
that they who so long reject the truth, treasure 
up wrath against the day of wrath.' If the 
heathen be condemned before God, where will 
the enlightened unbeliever appear 1 

'^ From your first letter I infer that you are 
more established in your opinions and feelings, 
and may I not hope that you are decidedly on 
the Lord's side ; that you have grown in grace, 
and that each successive day brings you forward 
in the divine life 1 If this be the case, accept 
my congratulations, accept the affectionate sym- 
pathy of one who hopes she knows how to share 
your joys and sorrows ; of one who, having had 
some experience in the christian warfare before 
you, would admonish you to stand fast in the 
faith ; and if you would obtain the victory over 
the world and be a growing christian, keep near 
io your Redeemer. There is no spiritual life at a 
distance from the cross, no devotion but that 
which is kindled upon the altar. I would say, 
let no human example be the standard to which 
you strive to bring yourself ; keep the Lord Jesus 
Christ always in your eye, and feel that if you do 
not imitate him you come short of what God re- 
quires. You must dwell at the fountain ; that is 
an unfailing source ; yes, my friend, a source of 
joy unspeakable and full of glory. 
21* 



246 MRS. WINSLOW. 

"If I could sit down by you a few hours I 
would tell you of some of the snares into which 
I have fallen, and show you how in some in- 
stances God has chastened me for backsliding. 
I would tell you how necessary it is to avoid the 
occasions of sin, and in intercourse with the 
world to gird on the whole armor of Christ. I 
would entreat you not to dishonor your Saviour 
in the house of his friends, but cheerfully be con- 
formed to him in his humiliation and in his suf- 
ferings, that you may hereafter reign with him 
above. If you are devout, you will be persecut- 
ed ; if you reprove sin, you will be reviled ; but 
is it not enough that the disciple be as his Lordl 
I entreat you be not satisfied with barely secur- 
ing your own salvation ; seek to obtain an abun- 
dant entrance to the kingdom of heaven, and to 
bring many of your fellow-beings with you." 

TO HER PARENTS. 

" October 28. — Mrs. Schrayder, a pious woman 
of Dutch descent, from Jaffnapatam, came, by 
request, to spend the day with us, and address 
some women. More than thirty^ most of them 
respectable, were collected in our dining-room. 
Mrs. S. addressed them in a very interesting 
manner. She took her seat at one end of the 
room just behind a small table, on which lay a 
Tamul New Testament and a hymn-book. She 



IN CEYLON. 247 

was dressed in a neat but plain white short-gown, 
with a full calico petticoat. Her hair, grey with 
age, was carefully braided, and fastened up with 
a silver pin. Her form was tall and erect, and 
her countenance venerable and placid. Before 
her, upon mats spread on the floor, sat her female 
auditors in a half-circle, with their eyes fixed on 
her as she kindly told them why she had come, 
and bespoke their attention. She opened the 
hymn-book, sang a Tamul hymn, and then read a 
chapter from the Testament in an impressive 
manner ; commenting very fully upon it, and clos- 
ing with an address embracing the leading articles 
of the christian faith. Every eye was intent, 
and every ear was open. The eagerness with 
which her audience heard her was manifest by 
their bending forward, as though to catch her 
words. Her discourse was appropriate ; her 
manner tender ; her voice clear ; and in uttering 
some of the finely sonorous sounds of the Tamul 
language, it was highly musical. Her ^ speech 
dropped like the dew, and distilled like the rain.* 
It was the voice of instruction to the ignorant, of 
comfort to the unhappy. We were highly gratified. 
*' After our meeting I had some conversation 
with a man who has often promised to send his 
daughter to school. 'What wages will you give 
her V said he. ' It will be great wages if I give 
j instruction; but 1 will give more. If you will 



248 MRS. WIN3L0W. 

let her remain all the time, I will give a cloth 
and jacket, and her food.' ' No ! she shall not 
eat with your girls.' ' Is she better than they 1' 

* Yes.' ' Well, I see that you never intended to 
send her, and I have nothing more to say.' ' I 
you will send somebody home with her every 
daj', and give her fruit whenever she is hungrj', 
I will brino- her.' I did not believe he was in 

o 

earnest ; but this afternoon he brought the child, 
and im.mediately claimed the cloth and jacket. 

* No, I will wait awhile to see if she is a good 
girl, and deserves one j and whether she is not 
taken away in a few days.' He left her rather 
reluctantly, having designed, probably, to secure 
the clothes and then take her home again." 

Under the next date we again accompany Mrs. 
W. to her closet, and witness where she obtained 
her strength for the christian course. 

^^Movember 21. — This day has been a privileg- 
ed one. I have, I trust, prayed for the assistance 
of the Spirit in trying the state of my heart. I 
would be searched as with candles. Have looked 
at the evidence I find of sincere love to God, and 
of being under the influence of the Spirit from 
day to day. I do hope that I can say, ' I love the 
Lord because he hath heard my voice and my 
supplications.' I have gained so little victory 



IN CEYLON. 249 

over some besetting sins of late, that I have 
greatly feared my hopes were delusive. The grcit 
change which I experience is in having more dis- 
1 tinct views of God, of his holiness, majesty, and 
gracious designs ; in seeing him in all respects 
; so good, so full of every thing great and glorious, 
' that I can iind no language to express my feel- 
ings. I have more delight in prayer, as the means 
of quickening my affections, of guarding me from 
the assaults of the adversary, of bringing me. 
uearer to the blood of Christ when I have sinned, 
I of relieving my doubts, controlling my fears, sup- 
L porting my despondency, and making the word 
I more rich and precious. I cannot live without 
prayer. If it is omitted, I feel that I have lost my 
meat and my drink. In regard to others, I prizg 
the privilege of drawing near to God for them, 
I never had such delight in contemplating the 
promises and resting in them with sweet assur- 
ance. Sometimes I believe that even my eyes shall 
see their fulfillment. I can plead them before 
God, even with groaning, when language fails. I 
I cannot describe the feelings with which I think 
jof a dying world, and especially of the heathen 
perishing around me." 

^^ Kov ember 22. — Our congregation has been 
pretty good at the station to-day, and ]Mr. W. was 
imuch encouraged at Mallagum this morning, and 



250 MRS. WINSLOW. 

at Santillapoy this afternoon. As our number of 
female scholars is now increased to six, and it 
will be long before they can read, I have thought 
best to attempt giving them religious instruction, 
systematically, without books. Made an encou- 
raging commencement of this interesting exer- 
cise this afternoon, and almost felt as though I 
had again a Sabbath-school. 

"23. — Have been much animated this afternoon 
to find that a woman with whom I conversed last 
week remembered what I said. On seeing me 
to-day, she inquired what reason I had for saying 
it. I told her and some other women that God 
had promised to make all nations christians -, to 
bring them to renounce their idols, and love and 
serve him alone ; that he had lately done great 
things for some nations, and would yet show this 
people his pov\'er and glory ; so that if those who 
are older do not regard the message sent them, 
their children or children's children will. I con- 
tinued the subject, and think I had never before 
so much pleasure in talking to any of the women 
here. A number listened with much attention. 

" On first going to another house, I inquired of 
a woman why she did not come to hear Mrs. S 
last Friday as she promised to do. Her answer 
was, ' I was fasting, and could not go from home.* 
* Why do you fast V ' Because I was once sick, 
and made a vow to God, that if he would restore 



IN CEYLON. 251 

me, I would fast every Friday so long as I live.' 
' To what god did you make the vow V ' To 
Swamy.' * AVhere is Swamy V ' 1 did not see 
Swamy ; I went to the temple and worshipped 
the image there.' * Did the image know that you 
worshipped it, or did Swamy know that you wor- 
shipped the image V 'No.' ' Why not, then, wor- 
I ship an image any where else as well as in the 
[temple'?' ' Oh, we go to the temple to see the 
[pictures.' * ]f^ that is all, why are the people made 
to believe that God is there V ' The Brahmins do 
that because it brings them much profit.' 

" December 3. — My dear friends, I rejoice to 
trll you that since my last date we are encou- 
rn: c'd by the prospect of soon receiving four 
nicmbers to the church at Oodooville ; the wife 
^f our interpreter, the teacher of our boarding 
rliildren, whose name is Solomon, a hired man, 
n^imed James, and a hired woman. They have for 
so:nc time been convinced of the truth of chris- 
lii'.iity, but never until now have been made will- 
ing to bear the reproach, and perhaps entire de- 
, portion of their friends, for the sake of Christ. 
Up feel that the Holy Spirit is with us. 

" Within a few days the cholera has appeared 
It Oodooville. Many have died. All this day tum- 
I'.v/?, or drums, have been beating at a temple 
vithin a few rods of our house, on account of a 
sacrifice for a sick man who has been carried 



252 MRS. WINSLOW. 

there. Word is gone out, through all parts of the 
district where this disease is raging, that the god- 
dess who sends the cholera, and whose sport or 
play it is supposed to he, is angry because some 
people have applied to christians for relief. They 
are, therefore, afraid to apply to us, or do any 
thing for themselves. They go in succession to 
the grave, as the sheep in a flock follow one an- 
other down a precipice. Some have no friend left 
to lay them in their narrow house. 

^^ January 10, 1822. — Antache and her husband, 
who had the cholera, were so affected by our 
kindness to them in their sickness, and that of 
our interpreter in assisting to bury their mother, 
when they were deserted by all their friends, as 
to be very favorably affected towards Christianity. 
They are both apparently sincere inquirers, and 
of Antache in particular we have hope that the 
Holy Spirit has begun a good work in her heart. 
These make seven who have now for some time 
regularly attended an inquiry meeting once or 
twice a week." 

The reception to the church of four inquir- 
ers, April 21, 1822, was a most pleasing event. 
Eleven native communicants now joined with six 
members of the mission in commemorating the 
Lord's death. It was the first communion at 
which so many had been received to the church, 



IN CEYLON. 253 

and the first in which there hiid been an acces- 
sion, as in the case of Antachc, of one in no way- 
connected with the mission. It was the more in- 
tfiestlnnr, too, as the one thus received was a re- 
sjicctable woman, and the converts were all adults 
t'f i]^ood standing in society. This accession made 
th(.> number of natives added within a year, at all 
the stations, /owr^ee?i ; there having been five ad- 
ijiitted at Tillipally, about the time of ]\Irs. Poor's 
death, and subsequently, in December, at the 
.'-ainc station, two girls of the boarding-school 
and a hired man ; and at Panditeripo, at difTerent 
times, two lads of the boarding-school. 

Another interesting event, prior to this, was 
tlie licensing of ^hree native preachers ; Francis- 
ciis Malleappah, Gabriel Tissera, and Nicholas 
Paramander. They all passed a satisfactory ex- 
amination at Oodooville, November 5, 1821, and 
wore licensed to preach as candidates for a more 
full induction into the christian ministry. 

The {oWow'wi^ jotir7ial-lct I er presents a very in- 
esting sketch of the varied scenes in this por- 
liuu of ]\Irs. W.'s missionary life. 

" Oodooville, May "29, 1822. 
'' ]\Iy dear Parents, — I wrote you yesterday, 
and now promise myself to keep a record of 
events occurring, more regularly than I have done 
for some time past. 

WiBslow. -~ 



254? MRS. WINSLOW. 

"Another son of an Odigar came to-day, bring- 
ing a relative, a promising boy of good family, 
to live with us. This is ground of encouragement 
and thanks to God. It is a wonder that so many 
children are brought to us, when their parents 
see that all those already here profess to re- 
nounce the religion of their fathers. 

" June 2. — This morning two women who are 
not in the habit of coming to the house called at 
the door to see what they could, as many others 
do. Before I could say any thing to them they 
started to go. I urged their stopping ; but no, 
they must go and see a sick woman, and would 
then return to hear the preaching. I had heard 
such promises too often to give any credit to 
theirs, and therefore thought best to compel them 
by sending one of our girls with them. This ef- 
fected the object. They returned, but may never 
come again. By coming once they have heard 
of a Saviour for such sinners as they are, and oh 
that they may be made to feel their need of Him. 
We have reason to fear that we are to many ' a 
savor of death unto death.' The thought is aw- 
ful, but our duty plam. 

" In the afternoon I accompanied Mr. W. a 
short distance to a school bungalow, where he 
had an appointment to preach, and, to induce the 
women to come out, had engaged that I should 
be there. We went through a pleasant winding 



IN CEYLON. 255 

foot-path, on each side of which was a thick 
hedfre of ever-greens that opened into a plain. 
Ill the centre of the plain stands a large tree, very 
much resembling the largest elm before the house 
\M' occupied on the plain in Norwich. I was for- 
cibly reminded of the many hours I have spent 
ill building rooms and entertaining company be- 
tween the roots of that tree, and in later days 
liow many hours I have sat under its shade with 
iliose whose faces I must see no more on earth. 
We entered a little gate made of leaves, and 
found a number of men, women, and children 
assembled to receive the padre and his wife, and, 
from their appearance, I think, wondering at the 
unheard of custom of a female walking arm in 
arm with her husband. The ground floor of a 
small bungalow was covered with mats, and 
others spread around in front of it, but no one 
sitting on them till we had taken our seats and 
requested them to sit. The men were quite talk- 
ative ; had many questions to ask, and remarks to 
iiiake. One woman who had been very attentive 
to the preaching said, 'What do you tell us we 
jHust do to escape going to hell, and go to hea- 
\ en V Mr. W. explained the nature of sin, of 
which she professed entire ignorance, and the 
mcessity of regeneration. Had a person mani- 
tisted as much interest at home I should have 
linpcd well for her, but here we are continually 



256 MRS. WINSLO-V^^ 

deceived. Every thing of the kind, however, gives 
us some encouragement. 

" Monday evening, June 3. — The monthly 
prayer-meeting here to-day, and a sweet season 
I believe it has been to all. I think we have not 
before been more sensible of the presence of the 
Holy Spirit. I was greatly animated j it has been 
one of my happiest days. The subject of remark 
was introduced by examples from Scripture of 
that ^effectual, fervent prayer' which prevails 
with God. It seemed that God was speaking by 
his word, and deep solemnity settled upon every 
one. I think it has been a glorious day to Zion ; 
that her children have come near to the mercj^-seat, 
have wrestled and prevailed ; and that God will 
soon stretch forth his arm to rescue the nations. 

" 8. — This third anniversary of our farewell to 
the land of our fathers has been spent by all the ' In- 
dus fraternity ' at Manepy. We met before break- 
fast, and after family prayers the exercises of the 
day were commenced, first, after singing and 
prayer, by mentioning the friends each one has 
lost since leaving home, who we hope are ready 
to welcome us to a better world. We then men- 
tioned those who remain behind, and are still out 
of Christ, and fthose who are numbered among 
his children. This carried our feelings home to 
our kindred and friends, and interested us in each 
other's friends, so that we were in some measure 



IN CEYLON. 257 

prepared unitedly to plead withGodinbehalf of all 
as though they were our own. We then took a 
brief view of the goodness of God towards us 
since we left our native shores. We endeavored 
to recall the views with which we at first dedica- 
ted ourselves to the work of the mission, and to 
compare them with those we have had for a few 
months past, to see whether we have lost or 
jrained. The result was, that we feel less ardor 
than we sometimes did at home ; but that a 
knowledge of the true condition of the heathen 
has given us more deep and solemn feelings 
concerning them, so that on the whole we have 
reason for thanks and encouragement. For my- 
self I can say that I never felt such agony of soul 
on account of those under my care as w^ithin the 
last year. All of us could say that we were never 
happier in our work than at the present moment. 
Here we feel at home, and here we wish to re- 
main till our Father calls us to our final rest. 
After closing our meeting with prayer and sing- 
ing, we took some refreshment and spent the re- 
mainder of the time in telling each other freely 
if we had observed any thing in our deportment 
that might injure the cause, or any deficiency in 
our labors among the people, and in praying that 
every thing offensive to God may be removed, 
and that our lives may be more simple and devo- 
ted. It was a time of love j we all found it refresh- 
22* 



258 MKS. WINSLOW. 

ing, and it will, I trust, bring us forward in our work. 

" 13. — I went on Monday morning to Tillipally, 
and spent three days. The object of the visit 
was to benefit brother Eichard's health. He has 
been in such a state for a few weeks, that the 
company of friends from abroad is quite necessa- 
ry. I have been once before with Mr. W. but 
we cannot both leave the station for so long a 
time, as we thought it best for me to remain. 
Brother R. appeared each day to have more 
strength than on the preceding one, but we can- 
not expect that he will remain long with us. I 
have had a pleasant visit, notwithstanding some 
trying reflections which I always have when on 
the spot where our lamented sister Poor labored 
and died. Mr. W. has been to-day at Manepy 
to attend the Tamul meeting, and I have been 
alone. Studied a little besides attending to fami- 
ly affairs, and had a long conversation with a 
man from Batticotta. He was ignorant and 
wicked — insisted that there are many gods, that 
they live in the temples, and are worshipped by 
every body who knows the right way. I felt 
bold to declare the truth, and though he ask- 
ed why I, ' a woman, talked to him in this man- 
ner,' I could not refrain from w^arning him of 
his danger. 

" 18. — To-day the quarterly meeting of the 
Maternal Society was held at Manepy. We had 



IN CEYLON. 259 

n very pleasant time. I believe I have told you 
that our society engage to meet each other at the 
throne of grace every Saturday evening to pray 
for ourselves and children. We have some of us 
found these among our most precious seasons. 
I do not forget the circle of sisters who used 
lo meet on this evening. And where arc we all 1 
We have had fellowship together — have lived 
nnd loved, and soon shall meet, if wc are chil- 
dren of God, where our happiness will be perfect- 
ed. In that bright world we shall not mourn the 
absence of our Saviour, and long and wait for his 
return. There Ave shall have tongues to utter all 
that sanctified hearts can dictate of praise and 
adoration, and there these bodies shall never say 
' I am weary.' 

*' 24, jMonday. — I went on Saturday to Batti- 
cotta with sister Spaulding to spend the Sabbath, 
as it was communion. It was a refreshing time. 
I can still speak of the great goodness of God in 
making these seasons more precious to me than 
they used to be in America. They are not, it is 
true, attended with the emotions one must feel in 
sitting down with hundreds at the same table; 
but in regard to myself, it seems true that when 
I iiad more fellowship with saints I had less com- 
munion with God. 

'^ 28, Friday. — I believe I have told you that 
the Friday before the first Monday in the month 



260 MRS. wmsLow. 

is set apart as a season of fasting and prayer by 
all our number. Since Mr. W. and I have been 
alone we have found it pleasant occasionally to 
spend the day with our Manepy friends either 
here or there. Sister S. came up this morning, 
and Brother S. this afternoon. We have been 
permitted, I trust, to get near to God, and are 
strengthened. We have likewise had opportunity 
to speak for Christ to those who are ignorant, and 
it is numbered among our good days. 

" 29. — This morning one of the first women in 
an adjoining village came to bring back her run- 
away boy. He has been gone nearly a week, and 
we thought best not to oblige him to return. I 
was much pleased with an opportunity to con- 
verse with the woman, and particularly to see 
her so attentive to all I said. She promised to 
come to the bungalow once or twice every month, 
though she resides two miles distant. This morn- 
ing a little girl was brought to us to receive into 
our family. This is a wonderful circumstance, and 
we hardly know how to understand it. 

" July 1. — An interesting day at Manepy. The 
monthly prayer-meeting. We have for some 
months been in the habit of saying, after every 
meeting of the kind, * this is the best.' There has 
seemed a growth in the good feelings of the 
brethren who conduct the meetings, and we ne- 
ver fail of being refreshed. 



IN CEYLOX. 261 

*' Juhj 4. — This has been a jrreat day in Jaflha 
as well as in America — the first anniversary of a 
IJihle Society. The collector of the district is 
])resident, and tlie principal men officers of va- 
1 ions kinds. Some speeches were made, but you 
A\ ill not probably sec them over the waters. 

'■ 15. — I believe I have not mentioned that Mr. 
A\ . and I spend Monday evenings in social prayer, 
]( adini^, and conversation, on account of our 
( hildren and for the benefit of our own souls. 
They arc most valuable seasons. We have much 
anxiety for our children, and it is good to com- 
mend them to God. They arc both generally well, 
and as pleasant and promising as other children. 
1 could spend many pleasant hours with these 
dear ones, but if they are well I do not feel justi- 
iied in giving time to them which I can employ 
iu something more important. While so young, 
with a little of my care, they are comfortable in 
ilie hands of others. 1 therefore give them up al- 
most entirely. 

" August 3, Saturday. — Our dear Brother Rich- 
ards has, we trust, at length entered into that 
rest which he has so long and so ardently de- 
sired. This morning, at about eleven o'clock, he 
(|uietly fell asleep. He has been patient, and his 
rational and christian views, as he approached the 
oiernal world, were such that I could say con- 
corning him, more emphatically than of any in- 



262 MRS. WINSLOW. 

dividual I have known, ' Let my last end be like 
his.' " 

The death of Mr. Richards was an event long 
expected. He never recovered his strength, and 
only partially his voice, after his return from the 
Cape of Good Hope, though he was able to take 
charge of the schools, and to manage many of the 
temporal concerns of the stations with which he 
was connected. 

He frequently remarked that such were his 
views of the divine character, and so desirable 
did it appear to him to have God glorified, that he 
felt willing, if necessary, to have his sufferings 
continued and even increased. He said, " It is 
good to suffer. It gives me some faint idea of 
what the Saviour bore for me. Thanks, eternal 
thanks to that grace which snatched me from the 
jaws of the devourer. When I get home, how will 
I sing the praises of Him who has washed away 
all my sins — crown him. Oh, I'll crown him 
Lord of all." 

In speaking of his forgetfulness of mercies, he 
said with emphasis, '^ In heaven I shall never for- 
get, no never. There I shall remember all. There 
I shall sing ; there I shall sing glory to God. I 
have sometimes had as much joy in singing the 
praises of God here as my body could bear, yes, 
as much as it could bear. What will it be in 



IN CEYLON. 263 

heaven 1 * I now see througrh a glass darkly, but 
soon, very soon, /ace to face.'' " 

He was eminently a good man, A more hum- 
IjIc, mild, consistent and happy christian is sel- 
dom found. He had the spirit of Christ. At the 
ni^^e of thirteen he devoted himself to the Lord, 
;iiid while a student in Williams' College, in con- 
I'xtion with Mills, Hall, and others, he consecra- 
h'J himself to the missionary work. This little 
I ind in 1808, while the subject of missions was 
almost unknown in America, and little felt even 
ill England, used to retire to a consecrated spot 
under a hay-stack in a meadow, to fast and pray 
for divine direction ; and there they bound them- 
>'lves together by a written agreement, each to 
aitcmpt in his own person, and aid the others in 
attempting, a mission to the heathen. This com- 
pact was afterwards renewed at the Theological 
Seminary in Andover, and the band of brethren 
Avas gradually enlarged. In 1810, four of them 
laid a paper expressive of their views before the 
''•^neral Association of Massachusetts, which led 

t imately to the formation of the American Board 
of Commissioners for Foreign Missions. Mr. 
Juchards' name was at first on this paper, but was 
omitted when it was presented, because he had 
not finished his theological studies. As there 
;-eemed little prospect of aid from the churches 
in America, he resolved, should no other door 



264 MRS. WIN SLOW. 

open, to work his passage on board of some ves- 
sel to a heathen shore, and there support himself 
as he could while proclaiming the Gospel ; and 
in one of the last letters which he wrote to Ameri- 
ca he says, " / have never been sorry that I came 
to hidia. Had I ten thousand lives to give, they 
should all be sacrificed in this blessed cause." 
*' Blessed is that servant whom when his Lord 
cometh he shall find so doing." 

" October 21. — We were awaked this morning 
by the very pleasant voice of a person in prayer. 
I have seldom heard one more fervent. It ap- 
peared to be a lad whom we employ in the family. 
You would be surprised to hear how fluent our 
boys and girls often are in this exercise. Most 
of them seem to feel nothing of that timidity by 
which almost every one in christian countries is 
at first embarrassed ; and you would wonder, also, 
at the propriety, and correctness and feeling, with 
which they often pray. 

" 30. — Went to Manepy, and returned this even- 
ing by the light of a clear and full moon. I have 
seldom seen the face of nature more mild and 
pleasant. Certainly the evenings in this country 
are more delightful than they are in America ; 
the atmosphere is so transparent, the moon and 
stars so bright, and the earth so verdant. Besides 
we can expose ourselves to the evening air, at all 



I 



times, without injury, except in the rainy season, 
and for a sliort time after, when there are heavy 
dews. But in these sweet moonlight evenings 
the natives are flocking to tiieir idol temples, or 
to temporary play-houses, erected here and there 
in the villages, for the acting of dramas and come- 
dies J to which, and to card-playing, cock-fight- 
ing, and other kinds of gambling, they are much 
addicted. 

^* jYovcmbcr 1. — We liave had an unusually in- 
teresting season with the communicants this af- 
ternoon. They never appeared better ; at the 
same time they are not in all respects like new 
converts in America. Their want of social habits, 
which contribute so much to our enjoyment, de- 
prives them of many important aids in their chris- 
tian course, and inclines them to be suspicious of 
each other. We strive to bring them together 
more closely, and are gratified to observe a grow- 
ing mutual confidence and affection. It must, 
however, be long before they can know much of 
social intercourse. -Males and females are quite 
separated in all their ordinary transactions. Hus- 
band and wife must never eat together, and a 
man cannot even touch a woman's hand in public 
without disgrace. They sometimes remark upon 
our familiarity ; but are, I believe, convinced that 
it is not improper for us, though they liave not the 
least notion of it among themselves. 

Winslow. lio 



2G6 MRS. -WINSLOW. 

"7. — Since my last date we have had a joyful 
season. Saturday, the 2d instant, Mr. and Mrs. S. 
and Mrs. R. came to spend the Sabbath with us. 
In the evenins: we had a meetins: amonor ourselves, 
preparatory to the communion j on Sabbath morn- 
ing a prayer-meeting, and then a meeting of the 
church at the station, consisting of ourselves and 
five native members, to examine Katheraman, the 
husband of Antache, for communion. He was re- 
ceived. The congregation of men and women 
at the bungalow was large, and among them were 
nearly all the head men at Oodooville. Every cir- 
cumstauc-e seemed favorable and such as we could 
wish. I had previously a great desire to have 
many people present when this man should come 
forward, and was gratified ; but think I never feU 
more sensibly that all is vain without the influ- 
ences of the Holy Spirit. The communion sea- 
son was precious. On Monday was a prayer-meet- 
ing here. It was a happy day on account of its reli- 
gious privileges ; and rendered more so by the 
receipt of forty-seven letters from our dear na- 
tive land, containing many interesting accounts 
of the work of God there ; for which we united- 
ly praised him. 

*' J\^ovember 24. — AVe have lately had almost 
incessant rain. The poor natives suffer exceed- 
ingly in this weather in their health, and for want 
of food. All the common people lay by nothing 



IN CF.VLOX, 'iG7 

for the morrow, anil when there is a long storm, 
so tliat there is no market for a number of days, 
it is not easy to conceive the extent of their 
suflerings. It is sometimes diflicult to determine 
how much of our allowance should be appropriat- 
ed to supplying the temporal wants of this people. 
We profess to have come liither to do them good, 
and tiiey can conceive of no benefit so great as 
that of giving them food when tliey are hungry. 
On the Sabbath we have large numbers of hecrgnrs 
who attend preaching regularly, and then receive 
something in charity. Yesterday I gave each of 
them a measure of rice in addition to the com- 
mon gratuity, which quite overcame them. They 
were so full of thanks that I was obliged almost 
to drive them away. I am sure you never saw 
such miserable looking objects. Imagine, if you 
can, a colored man or woman who is a mere 
skeleton, having a wrinkled withered face, ex- 
pressive only of ignorance, vice, grief and po- 
verty, with loose dishevelled gray hair, which 
would seem to have been uncombed for years ; 
; a naked, withered body, tottering on a staff, and 
' only a strip of cloth round the middle, which for 
I dirt and tatters you might think had been worn 
^ from youth up, and you have some idea of the 
beggars around us. Their moral and spiritua. 
condition is not so easily described. I wish I 
could say that of the number who have long 



268 MRS. WIXSLOW. 

attended on the preaching of the word and heard 
much religious truth, I have hope of any that 
they are truly converted. No class of people ap- 
pear to me so hopeless. It seems as though they 
literally cannot feel or understand. At the same 
time I know that the Gospel is sent to the poor, 
and therefore there is encouragement to labor 
with them. 

^^ December 21. — We have had a good day. 
Our congregations for a long time have generally 
been large. This morning a number of leading 
men were present and attentive ; and the meet- 
ing for those who wish to learn more of Chris- 
tianity, which Mr. W. has held for some time 
past, immediately after service in the bungalow, 
was attended by a number for the first time. The 
wife of Solomon was present. She has been 
thoughtful and inquiring ever since her husband 
joined the church. One of her children died 
about four months since, and from that time she 
has appeared to be much more earnest in seeking 
the salvation of her soul. We have some hope 
that she is born ag^ain." 

The following, giving a history of the employ- 
ment of a day^ with other details, may serve to 
introduce the reader more fully to the interior of 
the mission, and throw some light on the charac- 
ter of the Hindoos. 



IN CEYLON. 269 

'^ I will tell you a little about my common round 
of duties, that you may be able to make some 
allowance for my letters. I am not, as you sup- 
pose, ^ wholly^ occupied with missionary work, 
although my time is mostly taken up in engage- 
ments connected with the mission. To begin 
with the time of rising in the morning. My rule 
is, to be up as long before breakfast as I have 
health to be profitably employed. Our breakfast 
hour is half-past seven, and I have not of late 
been often in bed after six. The first thing is a 
season of retirement, which I find more absolutely 
indispensable here than I used to do at home. 
After this, family prayers and a little attention to 
household matters occupy me till breakfast. 

" Some one must then usually be sent to mar- 
ket for vegetables for the boarding children, and 
perhaps something for the family. Every penny 
given for this purpose must be counted, the sum 
to be appropriated to each article specified, and 
the article particularly described. It must be as- 
certained that the hired man is at his post draw- 
, ing water or cutting wood; and the low-caste 
* woman must be attended to, for she is never 
I trusted a moment in the house without watching. 
, The native children have, by this time, attended 
\ prayers, and are ready to receive their directions 
about study. The domestics must be told what 
to do, for the best of them scarcely ever think 
23* 



270 P^RS. WINSLOW. 

of continiung even their customary employments 
without direction. When the market-man returns, 
I must go to the store-room. If he has bought 
rice, it must be measured, if vegetables, they must 
be counted. The children's cook and my own 
come to receive the allowance for the day. They 
must be carefully watched. If for a moment my 
eyes are turned from them, they wall perhaps 
heap their measure of salt, or of rice, so as 
to make much more than the proper quantity, 
or slip a lime or some curry seeds into their 
clothes. 

" When they are gone, some stores commonly 
want attention. The rice may be damp and re- 
quire to be spread in the sun. The curry seeds 
have insects in them and require drying. It may 
be the lohite anh* are getting on the shelves, or 



* These white ants are very troublesome. In many parts 
of Jaffna the ground seems almost filled with them. If any 
thing is laid on it which they can eat — and only something 
as hard as iron or stone wall long resist them — it is very 
soon attacked. They come up bringing a sort of mortar of 
dirt, wet with something moist from their bodies, with 
which they form a covered way as fast as they make their 
approaches to any point, to shelter them from the large 
black ants and their other enemies. They will carry such 
lines up a wall or a post to the top of a building, and ascend 
m sufficient numbers to destroy the whole in time, if not 
interfered with. They must be attended to, and brushed 
down every few days, where any wood-work is exposed. 



IN CEYLON. 271 

on the boxes and nnats, and eating them so that 
they will soon be destroyed. Sometimes I thus 
spend two hours of the morning in the store- 
room ; generally, however, half an hour is sufli- 
cient. I am but just seated in the house, perhaps, 
when the cook comes and says, ' there is no 
wood,' or ' no water.' A milk-man comes, or 
ironing-man, or washer-man, or some other wages- 
man, and wants a little money. Another is sick, 
and wants medicine. Just then a note comes in 
which must be answered. Work must be pre- 
pared for the girls ; and the boys must be called 
at half past eleven to recite their lessons. I am 
generally occupied with them until owe, at which 
time is our concert of prayer. 

" I sometimes find a few minutes before this to 
; bring my mind a little from its wanderings. After 
this is sleeping time for almost every body in 
India j but I believe not for most of our missiona- 
ries. I never sleep in the day, unless quite too 
I 

The lower floors, if of plank, would soon be destroyed. 

! They are, therefore, of brick or cement. If a trunk of 

I clothes, books, or any similar article, is placed on the floor 

* at night, it may in the morning be found full of these de- 

I predators ; which, unless disturbed, would go on quietly and 

devour all the contents inside, without giving any notice, by 

tlieir appearance outside, what they were doing. You would 

find at length only a shell crumbling under your hand, and 

almost filled with earth brought up by them as a covering 

and defence. 



272 MRS. WINSLOW. 

unwell to be up, or after a sleepless nig-ht. I often 
bathe at this time, write a letter, or talk with 
some native who may call. Occasionally a diffi- 
culty among the boarding children or the do- 
mestics is to be settled. One day in the week 
they all bathe and wash their mats. I must go to 
the store-room and give them limes and oil for 
their heads ; and perhaps when they are all ready, 
the well-rope breaks, or the water-basket is stolen, 
and others must be supplied. After they have 
bathed and oiled their heads, they must have 
clean cloths. Dinner then comes, but is soon dis- 
patched. If able to go out among the people, I 
now go, and return at evening. If not, I occupy 
myself in mending my husband's clothes, or in 
other household affairs. By evening I am gene- 
rally very much fatigued, and obliged to retire as 
early at least as eleven, but my WTiting, thinking, 
and reading must be principally at this time. 

" In relation to our evenings, I might say that 
Sabbath evening we have a meeting with the 
children and servants ; Monday evening a sea- 
son of social prayer for ourselves and our dear 
Charles ; Wednesday evening, with all the mis- 
- sionaries, we devote to prayer for a blessing on 
our work, in connection with the missionaries at 
Bombay ; and Saturday evening, from eight to^ 
7ii?ie, is a concert of prayer by the members of 
the Maternal Society, for our children. We have, 



I 



IN CEYLON. 273 

until the last two weeks, had a meeting for in- 
quirers one or two evenings in the week, whicli 
we now have on Tuesday afternoon, and some- 
times again on Friday. 

" In my employments for the day I might have 
mentioned, too, that one morning every week I 
am occupied an hour in giving my clothes to the 
washer-man, and in receiving the clean ones that 
he brings. Here, probably, my patience is tried. 

;\'ery likely he has torn the towels in two, so that 
he may count the right number, and keep one 

: himself. The sheets he has kept back for his wife 
or somebody to wear. The cloths of the boarding 
children have been lent for his friends to wear, 
or perhaps are still at home unwashed. One day 
in the week I must go through much the same 
course with an ironing-man. You can have no 
idea of the dishonesty of this people. They very 
generally, from the richest to the poorest, think 
it no disgrace, but rather creditable, to steal from 
Europeans — as we arc all considered — though it 
be the most trifling thing. If you leave a room 
for a few minutes with any thing in it that can 
be pilfered and sold, such as a spoon, a knife, a 
pair of scissors, or a piece of cloth, you must not 
expect to see it again if any idler is about. 

''You may perhaps think that these employ- 
ments are very dilTercnt from what you expected 
me to be engaged in. They arc not exactly what 



274 MRS. AYIXSLOW. 

1 anticipated, but are absolutely necessary in a 
missionary establishment like ours. A family of 
boarding children cannot be supported without all 
this attention to minute concerns ; and if a mis- 
sionary has no boarding children, and lives alone, 
without a wife, a good deal of his time must be 
occupied in providing for himself j he also must 
suffer much inconvenience from the negligence 
of his domestics, and his patrons much loss of 
property by their dishonesty. That females are 
needed in all missionary establishments in In- 
dia, no judicious person who ever saw them can 
question, and others have not the means of 
judging. 

" A female need not, however, imagine that all 
her talents must be wasted on petty things. Her 
husband is to find all his society in her. He is to 
be encouraged and strengthened by her praj^ers, 
sometimes aided by her counsels, and always re* 
lieved as much as possible from worldly cares, 
from the trials of temper ^and patience, which 
would hinder him in his appropriate work, by her 
considerate attention to all the family concerns. 
I could readily tell you what a missionary female 
should be, but a reflection on what I am so re- 
bukes me that I stop ; only adding, that, with 
this multiplicity of cares, there is time to do 
much for the female sex, which all find must be 
done almost exclusively by females." 



I.\ CEYLOX. 275 

The fullowiiig gives a view of ihc religious 
] ! ivilcgcs of the mission, wliicli few could prize 
more liighly than did the subject of this memoir. 
They were to her emphatically '' springs of water 
in a dry place." She always longed for commu- 
nion with God's peo])le, and to sec his glory as 
she had seen it '' in the sancluaryy 

** JMv DEAR L. — You inquire about our religious 
opportunities. Among the first are our monthly 
prayer-meetings, wlien we trust that we unite 
with the thousands of Israel in supplications for 
the world. We have also a quarterly meeting of 
the members of our mission, to unite in partaking 
of the Lord's supper, and to become more ac- 
iquaintcd with each other, that we may the better 
' bear one another's burdens, and so fulfill the law 
of Christ.' These arc peculiarly refreshing sea- 
sons. We have this ordinance administered also 
at some one of our stations ever}'- month. At all 
tlio stations are regular congregations every Sab- 
bath ; and though preaching is in Tamul, we are 
most of us able to understand it enough to gain 
some benefit. It is not like going ' with tlie multi- 
tude to the house of God with the voice of joy 
and praise, with a multitude that keep holy day,' 
but it is a privilege which calls for much gratitude. 

" Our religious meetings are more valuable to 
us, probably, because wc have little intercourse 



276 MRS. WI^•SL0•\V. 

with the world, and because they arc so rare in 
heathen countries. We have more social enjoy- 
ment than most missionaries, as we are near each 
other, and have very much one heart. We have 
had some reason to fear, that being situated so 
near together, with tempers and habits very dis- 
similar, we should be in danger of contentions, 
but I rejoice to say that it is far otherwise. We 
have some intercourse with Europeans, of whom 
there are a few in Jaffna, but only enough to make 
us retire with greater relish to our domestic 
quietude, and the still round of our humble, but 
we hope to some extent, successful labors. 

'^ You ask if I do not wonder that ^ among those 
who are privileged with a knowledge of Chris- 
tianity, so few count it worthy of their regard.' 
Not only so, but I wonder that so many of those 
who profess to regard it as their chief good, neg- 
lect its precepts in respect to seeking the salvation 
of sinners ; not merely that so few go to the hea- 
then, but that so few do what their hands find to 
do, whether at home or abroad. 

" Mrs. Laura E. Hyde." 

" OoDooviLLE, January 16, 1823. 

" My dear Mrs. C. — I should like to make you 
acquainted with my little family of heathen chil- 
dren, and some of the trials I have with them. 
These children are comforts in prospect. No^v 



1 IN CEYLON. 277 

i . 

they require so much patience, forbearance, and 
^ self-denial, that I sometimes think myself alto- 
[ gether inadequate to the proper management of 
' them. Indeed I feel more need of beinjT furnished 
, from above to discharge my duties towards these 
i children, than for almost any thing else. They 
' are hcnthcn children^ from the first moment of life 
\ accustomed to witness scenes of vice which 
scarcely ever enter the minds of children in chris- 
tian countries, and as soon as they can speak and 
go alone, to imitate the example of their parents, 
and often to obey their commands^ in lying, steal- 
ing, and swearing. It is impossible at once to 
make them feel that these things arc sinful, or in 
any way to break up their bad habits. It seems 
to be a part of their very nature to tell a lie if it 
will serve their purpose any better than the truth, 
and to lay their hands on any thing which they 
wish to possess. In these trials, however, we have 
the happiness of seeing that they fear and love 
us, and become more and more conformed to our 
precepts. We have, besides, a rational and sure 
prospect that it will eventually be better with 
these children than with their fathers. Some in 
the mission are already numbered among those 
|who are born of God. 
" Mrs. William Clcaveland." 

^'February 11. — In conversing with the girls 
;to-night, I reminded them of their obligations to 

Winslow. 24 



278 MRS. WINSLOVV. 

their patrons in America, and that nothing would 
repay them for their kindness but to have the 
children whom they support become children of 
God. They were deeply affected. Fanny Hall 
wept a great deal. I have not before known her 
so much overcome. The thought that her patrons, 
having no child of their own, had taken her, a 
poor heathen child, to be trained up for Christ, 
was quite too much. 

" Since my last date I have been variously oc- 
cupied. A part of Monday and Tuesday was very 
busy in copying the prospectus of a college, and 
sat up until one o'clock at night to finish it. Wed- 
nesday went to Manepy to the meeting of the 
Maternal Society. Mrs. Poor (late Miss Knight) 
w^as admitted as a member. We have increasing 
evidence that this small Society is one among the 
many means for the advancement of Christ's 
kingdom. On the Sabbath was communion at Ma- 
nepy, and a man from among the heathen, in no 
way connected w4th the mission, was received 
into the church. I am again, since my return, co- 
pying the prospectus. You may wonder at my 
doing what others might do as well. There are 
no others here to do it, and I find it necessary to 
assist Mr. W. in this way, as he has much writ- 
ing to do, and it wears upon his health. 

" 14. — On asking the girls this evening some 
questions about their souls, one of them misun- 



IN CEYLON. 279 

(lerstanding me, replied, 'I have prayed five 
times.' I have noticed an increasing disposition in 
them to pray alone, and once to-day I distinctly 
lieard this one praying earnestly for a long time. 
*' I have commenced a meeting of such women 
as wc can get out to our house, once a week, to 
li<;ir the Scriptures and unite in prayer. Have 
l(jng waited for our interpreter's wife to return 
from Colombo, that I might do this ; and now very 
much rejoice that a beginning is made. I cannot 
])ut hope that God will bless the reading of his 
word in this way. 

' 15. — Last night about twelve o'clock we 
were alarmed by voices in the street. Mr. W. 
ecing out, found a large number of people, who 
had brought a woman with a limb very badly bro- 
ken. She was from a neighboring village. The 
natives seldom attempt to do any thing with a 
broken bone. Indeed they know little or nothing 
of surgery, and have no means for dressing 
wounds. Mr. W. found what is called a com- 
pound fracture, or a bad flesh wound, in addition 
to the broken bone. He dressed the limb, and the 
w Oman will remain here until she is better, should 
she live, which is doubtful. I could not but feel very 
s(Misibly how much we might do for the relief of 
I Ms poor people, if we could devote more time to 
their bodily wants. They often suffer along time 
and then die from the effects of very slight wounds 



280 MRS. WINSLOW. ■ 

" I have never seen more to encourage the hope 
that the Holy Spirit is striving with some of our 
girls than this evening. I was sitting by the door 
just at sun-set, when Fanny came and stood by 
me, as the girls generally do at this hour, ex- 
pecting me to say something. I found her very 
tender. She wept almost immediately on my 
speaking to her, and more and more as I proceed- 
ed. When I had done, she left me, and instead of 
joining the other girls, retired to pray. I heard 
her voice in very fervent prayer, accompanied 
by much sobbing, for a long time. Soon after the 
other girls came in, and one of them said of her . 
own accord, ' I think of my sins all day, and 
Elizabeth too thinks a little about her soul.' This 
girl I have considered uncommonly thoughtless, 
though she is amiable and pleasant. 

" 22. — The native members of our church are 
beginning to hold quarterly meetings, and have 
had their first at Oodooville to-day. Malleappah 
preached in the morning, and in the afternoon 
they had a meeting for free conversation. I ask- 
ed James, our hired man, if he had a good day. 
He replied, in broken English, ^ It was very good. 
I never saw so good. My soul never feel so ; be- 
cause I could tell all I had in my heart — all I 
think.' "We have much comifort in seeing those 
immediately connected with us grow in grace. 
I told James, when the sick woman was brought, 



I 



IN CEYLON. 281 

that he must improve the opportunities he might 
have to talk and read to her and her friends ; for 
perhaps the Lord had sent her here that some of 
them might be saved. He replied, ' I think so, 
and I did talk to them last night. I waked up at 
four o'clock, and the woman was crying with 
pain ; then I told her what master said when he 
was dressing her leg, how that pain comes be- 
cause wc are sinners, and if she did not repent, 
she would have pain after she die too.' Then the 
man asked some questions, and we talked a long 
time. I mentioned some parts of Scripture suit- 
able for him to read. We have since repeatedly 
heard him reading and talking to them late in 
the evening, when all around were asleep. These 
native members are helpers, and they will, I trust, 
greatly promote the glory of God.'* 

"April 1, 1823. 
Dear Parents, Brother and Sister. — In most 
respects our affairs are much as they were when 
we last wrote. The word goes forth from time to 
time, and multitudes hear it j some of them with 
attention, and others with much contempt and de- 
rision. On the whole, there is manifest progress, 
though we do not see ' a nation born in a day.' 
No, dear friends, we must not only sow the seed, 
but wait for the early and latter rain. In our 
boarding-school at this station, are seventeen 
24* 



282 JIES. WINSLOW, 



boys and six girls, most of them too young to 
know, as yet, much of religion. Several schools 
for girls only have lately been established in the 
mission, which shows a great change in the feel- 
ings of the people. Heretofore they have strong- 
ly opposed every thing like learning in females. 
It was much more rare here to find a female who 
could read, than it would be to find a person in 
New England who cannot. I have lately com- 
menced a Sabbath-school of girls, and three have 
attended. This we consider an important step, and 
have no doubt that others will soon come. Mr. 
W. commences his school for boys next Sabbath. 
I am sure you would be delighted, could you 
come into our bungalow on the Sabbath, to see 
tivo hundred and forty boys from the heathen fami- 
lies, seated in regular rows on large mats, listen- 
ing to a christian sermon, and to hear them re- 
peat their catechism and Scripture lessons which 
they have learnt during the week. You would 
say, ' If the 2^arents of these children will not re- 
nounce their idols, surely their children will; and 
grow up a '^ generation to the praise of the living 
and true God." ' 
" Mr. Nathaniel Winslow, and R. Morton, Esq." 






MISSION SEMINARY. 283 



CHAPTER VI 



Fourth and Fiflli Years in Ceylon— em- 
bracingr the g:encral revival of religion 
in 1§24. 

Mission Seminary — Female Central School — burial of the 
dead — car-festival at Nellore — General Revival at all the 
stations — wrestling prayer — meeting of youth — meetings 
at the several stations — access to God — meeting of chil- 
dren of the boarding-schools — the work revived — blessing 
of social prayer — new year reflections — character of the 
work — reception of forty-nine to the church. 

The prospectus or plan of a College,* which 
has been mentioned, proposed the establishment, 
on a liberal scale, of a christian institution for 
the instruction of Tamul and other youth in the 
literature of the countrj^, and also in the English 
language and the elements of European science. 

The great object was to prepare catechists, 
schoolmasters, and other assistants in the mis- 
sionary work, especially native preachers^ without 
whom the progress of the Gospel among the 
millions of the East must be very slow. Foreign 
laborers are too few, supported at too great ex- 

♦ See Missionary Herald, 1824. 



284" MRS. WINSLOW. 

pense, and have too little knowledge of the cus' 
toms, language, and religion of the people, to give 
Christianity a dominant and pervading influence 
They are also but poorly able to bear the heat of 
the climate, and mingle, under all circumstances, 
with the population of the country. Native ener- 
gies of body and mind, and native feelings must 
be enlisted in the work. The extended provinces 
of Satan's empire must furnish materials to aid 
in their own subjection to Christ, as India has 
been subdued to a foreign power principally by 
native troops — but such is the indolence, and 
such the moral weakness of the natives, that they 
need much early discipline as w^ell as piety to 
give them generally any efficiency. Their own 
course of instruction forms in them no strength 
of character, and a thorough christian education, 
both mental and moral, is necessary to furnish 
them properly for the native ministry. 

It was also an object to qualify and employ 
translators and writers who should be able to 
transfer some of the treasures of European lite- ■ 
rature and science into the native languages, as 
well as enrich them from the stores of christian 
devotion in English, and it was designed to teach 
true science as a means of exploding false philo- 
sophy and superstition. As the whole fabric of 
idolatry rests on the same foundation with the 
most absurd systems of geography and astronomy, 



MISSION SEMINARY. 285 

and the most stupid fictions in natural science,* 
whicli could be overthrown at once by demon- 
^t ration and experiment, it was seen that to ex- 
tend true science would be to undermine this 
inrtress of Sarfan and prepare the way to build 
'ho temple of God on its ruins. 

* A single instance faay be given. They beh'eve that 
the earth is Jlal, having in the centre a mountain, around 
which the sun goes, causing the succession of day and 
night. Encircling the part on which we live, is a sea of 
salt water, and beyond this an annular continent surround- 
ed on the outside by a sea of milk. Then another similar 
continent and a sea of buttermilk; and thus seven conti- 
nents and seven seas in concentric circles — the first sea be- 
ing of salt water, the second of milk, the third of butter- 
milk or curds, iY^e fourth of ghee, or melted butter, the fifth 
of molasses, or sugar-cane juice, the sixth of honey, and 
the seventh of fresh water ; beyond which is a mountainous 
barrier, and then " outer darkness." In past ages there 
was a deluge, which swept almost every thing valuable into 
the sea of milk. To recover what was lost, and particularly 
the ambrosia — which is the food of the gods, and gives im- 
mortality — the gods and asooras (a species of demons) 
agreed to churn the sea. For this purpose they took mount 
Mandra for a churning-stick, and the great fiv^e-headed ser- 
pent called Vaysoukee for a rope, and winding the serpent 
round the mountain, they rolled it back and forth and agi- 
tated the sea so as to bring up the lost articles. When the 
ambrosia appeared, the gods were afraid the asooras would 
eat it and become immortal. To prevent this, Vishnu as- 
sumed the form of a most beautiful female, who taking the 
ambrosia in a golden pot, stood before the gods and asooras, 
offering them their choice of the ambrosia or herself The 



286 MRS. WINSLOW. 



These and other advantages connected with 
raising the standard of education in the country 
were proposed by the college ; the way for which 
had been prepared by the boarding-school estab- 
lishments. Indeed the state of these establish- 
ments was such as to make a higher institution 
necessary. There were more than one hundred 
lads at the five different stations of the mission, 
of whom many were so far advanced in their 
studies as to require more attention in carrying 
them forward to higher branches than could be 
given by each missionary. It was indispensable 
to have the more forward of them brought to- 
ofether under one teacher, and furnished with 
suitable apparatus and other helps. This was 

asocras being fascinated, left the ambrosia to the gods and 
began to quarrel with each other for the enchanting beauty. 
Some were slain. Two of them seeing the folly of the con- 
test, left the affray, and joining the gods in disguise, began 
with them to eat the ambrosia. They were soon discovered 
and informed against by the sun and moon, who are suppos- 
ed to be animated beings. Vishnu, who had again assumed 
his own form, immediately cut off their heads with the 
spoon with which he was lading the ambrosia. Their bodies 
perished, but as the ambrosia had descended as low as their 
necks, their heads could not die. They were immortal; 
and having ascended into the heavens, they remain there 
as two serpents. They are called Rahu and Keetu, and 
represent ihe moon's nodes. By occasionally attempting 
to swallow or devour the sun and moon — against whom 
they seem to bear a grudge — they occasion eclipses ! 



1 



FEMALE CENTRAL SCHOOL. 287 

accordingly done, and the school made the gcr/n 
of the intended college. 

It was commenced at Batticotta in 1823, under 
the care of Mr. Poor. Forty-eight lads were re- 
ceived the first year, who passed a satisfactory 
icxamination in the Tamul and English Testament, 
and the ground rules of Arithmetic. This school 
has gradually increased, until it has become, in a 
^ood measure, what was first designed, a college^ 
though known by the name of the Mission Semi' 
nary. The reason for this is, that the government 
linterposed obstacles to carrying the whole plan 
into eflect, after it had been approved by the 
Board, and funds had been conditionally pledged 
in America, and instructors engaged, for its suc- 
cessful commencement. 

Soon after commencing the Seminary for boys, 
;it was thought advisable to form also a Central 
School for Girls ; as it was inconvenient to have 
them at all the different stations of the mission, 
ind especially to have boys and girls at the same 
jtation. An establishment was accordingly made 
\X Oodooville. The boys there were removed to 
ther stations, and such of the girls at those sta- 
tions as were willing to remove, and were thought 
suitable to be received, were transferred to Oo- 
iooville. The school commenced with twenty- 
two girls, but was soon increased to twenty-nine^ 



288 BIKS. WINSLOW 

who were generally children of good promiise. 
In reference to this school, Mrs. W. writes in 

September, 

''It is agreed to have the Female Central 
School here. I feel that it is a great object; 
bat how can I undertake it while so unfaithful to 
my present charge 1 Yet I wish to do all I can; 
and perhaps this is in answer to the prayer, 
^Lord, what wilt thou have me to do 1' I have 
used this petition more frequently of late than 
formerly. If it is the will of God that the school 
should come here, may we be prepared by his 
Spirit to enter on the work with right hearts, 
feeling our helplessness and entire dependence 
on him. As little children, may we look to our 
Father for his direction and assistance in humi- 
lity and faith ; and may the beginnings of the 
school be marked with his especial blessing." 

The desire thus expressed led to faithful exer- 
tion and prayer, and the blessing was not with- 
held. All the girls who had passed through a re- 
gular course in the school, or were far advanced 
in it previous to Mrs. W.'s death, had then be- 
come hopefully pious, and were members of the 
church ; and what Avas very pleasing, no one of 
them, tii'e?ity-four in number, had dishonored her 
profession. 






IN CEVLON. 289 

■' Stpf ember 3, 1823. — Mr. W. has to-day visit- 
ed the temple at Nellore, it being the closing ce- 
remony there for this season. He saw about ten 
thousand people, and with lAIr. Knight and Mr. 
S. distributed hfteeii hundred Tracts. More than 
four hundred people rolled after the car. One of 
them, an old man from our neighborhood, who 
(lias heard much of the truth, died at the temple 
lin consequence of fatigue and fasting. He was 
brought home and buried near our door, after 
the common method of burial in this country.* 



, ^ All the more respectable people, and generally those 

iwho are able to afford il, bunt the dead willi many cererao- 

• lies. At a "de:id-house," as the place where the body lies 

; s called, there is often much mourninfr, but not always 

nuch real grief; and in the funeral processions to the 

(ra\'e, or to the place of burnin?, which are attended only 

jy men — the women remaining behind at the dead-house 

antil their return — there is generally the utmost levity and 

mconcern. Il is aftecting, however, to witness their mourn- 

ng, especially that of the women. Their funeral cry, 

Ivhich is a most dismal howl, is heard the moment a friend 

Is dead. This calls together other relations and friends. 

ifhe principal mourner receives them as they come. She is 

eated probably on the ground in the yard, with her hair 

lishevelled, lier clothes loose or torn, and her head covered 

vith ashes or dust. She sings a sort of dirge in a most 

laintive and piercing tone, describing, perhaps, the excel- 

encies of the deceased, or blaming him for dyiug, or ex- 

iQStulating with the gods for taking him away. As she 

hants and varies this at intervals, swinging her body 

■ack and forth, she tears her hair and beats her breast with 

I Winelow. 2o 



290 'birs. winslow. 

A small hole was dug, not long enough for the 
body without a coffin, and not deep enough to 
prevent it from being dug up by the dogs. It 
would make you shudder to see the unfeeling 
manner in which they treat their dead. About 
fifteen men stood around. Only one looked even 
sober, and that was the girls' schoolmaster at 
this station, who has been somewhat serious. 
He uttered an ejaculation of surprise and feeling, 
when, finding the grave too short, one man step- 
ped on the limbs, and another on the head of the 
corpse, to crowd it down. 

" I saw in the girls a few nights since a strik- 
ing contrast to this conduct ; and was comforted 
in the belief that if they gain nothing else by 
being with us, they will learn that it is an awful 
thing to die. Three of them were standing in the 
verandah just at twilight, and looking at the dis- 
tant smoke rising from the burninor of a dead 

D a 

both hands, bringing them up so violentl)- -u'ith the fists 
clenched, as almost to drive the breath from her body. Oc- 
casionally she throws herself prostrate in the dust. As one 
friend after another comes in, she rises to meet them, throws 
her arms around their necks, and utters her mournful 
howls, in which all the friends join in sad concert. They 
hang on each other's necks, forming sometimes a large circle, 
and raise their cries so as to be heard at a great distance. 
In the silence of the night these cries are peculiarly dis- 
mal, especially when you are awakened by them out of 
sleep. 



IN CEYLON. 291 

body. Betsey said, ^ Another soul is gone before 
God to-day.' ' Yes,' said Elizabetli, ' and where 
is it, in heaven or hell V One replied, ' We don't 
'know, but we think it is in hell!' ' Yes,' said an- 
other, ' and this is three since last night ; and 
perhaps one of us may be there before to-mor- 
row morning.' ' And many of this people too,' 
.*^aid E. ' for a great many die in a day.' They 
sighed, and said, 'AH this people are going to 
liell.' In this strain they continued their conver- 
sation for some time, without knowing that I 
joverheard them." 

: 

! The temple at Nellore, mentioned above, is de- 
voted to Scanda, the second son of Siva, and is 

|more frequented, perhaps, than any other in the 
district. There is a high wall of masonry enclos- 

iing an area of an acre or more, within which, be- 

'sides rooms built against the wall inside, for the 
residence of the brahmins and others connected 
with the temple, are various small buildings and 
domes for the idols. The principal one is, like 
most other Hindoo temples, in three parts. There 
is an open court in front, in which the people 
occasionally assemble to hear their puranas, or 
the mythological fables of their gods ; an inner 
court, enclosed on three sides and open in front, 
where is an altar for the offering of fruits and 
flowers, on which is the image of some god or 



292 MRS. WiNSLOW. 

animal j and a more secluded court, or sanc- 
tuary, where the idol is enshrined. This sanc- 
tuary is small and dark. It has no Avindow, and 
receives no light but through a narrow door. The 
roof is arched, and surmounted by a heavy 
cupola, ornamented with hideous and grotesque 
figures in sculpture. Here the idol sits in dark- 
ness. No one enters its sanctuary but the officia- 
ting brahmin or priest. In performing the daily 
worship, he takes a light in one hand and a bell 
in the other, and as he enters waves the light 
before the idol, that the people without may 
perhaps catch some glimpse of it, and prostrate 
themselves ; or raise their hands to their fore- 
heads with the palms joined. He then bathes the 
idol, anoints it, offers it food and incense, and 
throws over it garlands of sweet-scented flowers ; 
at the same time ringing the bell in his hand, 
that the people around may perform the neces- 
sary prostrations, or other acts of worship. 

On the festival days the idol is brought out 
in public procession for about twenty successive 
nights, and then the festival ends with what is 
called the tair^ or drawing the principal car by 
day. This is the grand ceremony ; but it is not 
so imposing as the processions by night ; for 
then there are innumerable flambeaus and torches, 
perhaps also fire-works, which produce a splen- 
did effect. Whether by night or day, at a given 



IN CEYLON. 293 

sirrnal the idol is brought out with the sound of 
I music and many ceremonies. It is crowned with 
; gold, wears a breast-plate of precious stones, and 
' is covered with the richest jewels. Being placed 
on a tiirone, and under a canopy loaded with 
,' garlands of flowers, it is elevated on a high car. 
This is of a pyramidal form, in galleries lessen- 
ing to the top, and is supported and borne along 
I on three or four pairs of heavy wheels. The 
whole car is covered with figures in sculpture 
.and painting, and adorned with the most gaudy 
wreaths, tassels, and drapery. Tiie lower galleries 
tare filled w^ith brahmins, and in the upper, around 
the god, are some to fan it, hold umbrellas over 
it, and to olfer it incense. There are strong 
cables attached to the car, by which the people, 
in immense numbers, draw it slowly round the 
precincts of the temple. On either side, as it 
proceeds, are banners, and flags, and ensigns dis- 
played all along the dense lines of people, while 
ill front are bands of music playing and numerous 
tcniple-girls dancing; and behind it hundreds of 
puor devotees rolling over and over in the dust, 
with their feet and hands extended, accomplish- 
in l^ in this way the whole circuit of the proces- 
. As the car stops occasionally, the ground 
nd it seems paved with their bodies lying 
:k)se to each other. They are nearly naked, and 
generally a profuse perspiration mingles with the 
25* 



siun 
>ehi 



294 MRS. WINSLOW. «l 

dust, so as to coat their skins with mud, while 
their eyes, mouth, and hair are almost filled with 
dirt. This sight is painful ; that of the dancing 
girls is offensive. They are among the handsom- 
est native females ; are very gaudily, and often 
richly dressed, with a great profusion of jewelry. 
Their dress is commonly a blue or scarlet silk 
robe, covering the body, and girt round them with 
a variety of bands of different colored silks and 
chains of gold. On their feet are a kind of 
greaves, surrounded at the ancle by small bells. 
Their dance is a stepping to the sound of music, 
so as to keep time by jingling and striking these 
bells together, attended with a swinging and in- 
decent motion of their bodies, and waving with 
their hands towards the idol. The whole pro- 
cession, which commonly occupies two or three 
hours, is very alluring and fascinating to those so 
much affected as the natives are by pomp and 
display. Attachment to these festivals is also 
interwoven with their earliest associations, as 
the child and even the infant is carried and 
made to hold up its little hands to the idol, and 
with its first accents to say, swamy, or god; 
and the older children of all classes flock to 
them as their principal holydays. They are 
scenes of great wickedness, especially of licen- 
tiousness ; and the whole system is most polluting 
and degrading. 



OUTPOURING OF THE SPIBIT. 295 

Wc now approach the period when God dis- 
iplayed his abounding mercy in visiting all the 
'stations by the special influences of the Holy Spi- 
Wit. The following extracts from the private diary 
|of Mrs. W. show how she humbled herself bc- 
ifore Him, and wrestled in prayer for the blessing: 

" August 27, 1823.— Yesterday morning I felt 
much cast down. I did not get relief, and after 
breakfast went to God. My mind was turned from 
myself to the heathen, by reading a hymn con- 
fcerning the coming of Christ's kingdom to all 
iiaations; and during prayer I seemed to feel a 
!new desire, or rather to ask with new earnest- 
:ncss for the abundaiii outpouring of the Spirit at 
|:his station, so that every heart should feel, and 
?very one coming to the house should say, ' How 
awful is this place !' The more I thought of it 
nd prayed for it, the more hopeful it appeared. 
[ could see no reason why it should not be so, 
md every reason why it should. 

" September 7. — I have to-day been with Jesus 
n his last interviews with his disciples, his agony 
in the garden and on the cross, and his appear- 
ince again after his resurrection ; scenes which 
aever before seemed so full of every thing en- 
20uraging, strengthening, and comforting. Oh 
Bvhat displays of love, of tenderness, of glorious 
majesty ! In view of all this I feel that, even for 



296 MRS. WINSLOW. 

me, there is a way of access to God in behalf of 
this poor people. If my prayers are heard for my 
self and my husband, surely I may have hope of 
their being heard for others. I hesitate to say 
there is a connection between my prayers and the 
blessings we receive ; but of this I am sure, that 
what I desire and ask is given in very many in- 
stances. Would that I had a heart to continue 
instant in prayer. Lord, take away my sloth, my 
unbelief, my hardness of heart, my distrust of 
thee ; and grant me humility, activity, tenderness 
of heart, and strong faith. Can I not say. Lord, 
thou knowest that I desire above every thing to 
be like my Redeemer ; to have his spirit, to be 
filled with his fullness, that I may glorify thee 
among this people 1 

" 20. — I have been feeble in body and feeble in 
spirit, but trust I have had some earnest desires 
and some delight in reading God's word. That is 
jto me more and more the Book of books. I re- 
lish very little besides on the Sabbath. What can 
men say like the language of Godl Oh that I 
loved and understood it more. 

^^ January 31, 1824. — Some weeks ago, as I was 
partly recovered from my sickness, and could 
command my time, I resolved to observe my old 
season of prayer at noon, and to pray for similar 
objects. The individual first selected was Betsey, 
partly because I thought her conversion would 



OUXrOURING OF THE SPIRIT. 297 

be a great blessing to tlie school, and partly be- 
cause she has repeatedly been serious. For a 
'few days I bore her on my lieart, but with more 
lor less variation of feeling. 

" On Charles' birth-day, January 12, we were 
;at Manepy. He told me, as I thought, a lie ; the 
first I ever knew him tell. From that time I re- 
'/nded him in a new light. I before knew that he 
WIS a sinner, but now it was a reality ; and the 
tliniight took complete possession of my soul. 
i'hat I had borne a child who was an enemy to 
■ '1^ a rebel, an heir of hell, was humbling, over- 
lining. I could not endure the reflection. Im- 
11 liately I resolved to give the Lord no rest, if 
ic \\ ould permit me to plead with him, until this 
^rand should be plucked from the burning. He 
nccame then my burden almost- to the exclusion 
,)f every thing. Betsey was almost forgotten, and 
'. thought I could neither eat nor sleep till the de- 
•jire of my heart was granted. We were called. 
iO Tillipally, and I earnestly hoped that his being 
vhere the Holy Spirit was operating on the hearts 
)f sinners would be blessed to his soul. My two 
rreat petitions were, that he might share in the 
nfluences of the Spirit, and that Mr. W. might 
|ie prepared to see a work at home. Here I can- 
lot help saying, what appears to me a just tribute 
f gratitude to God, that in nothing of late have 
thought my prayers were heard so evidently 



298 MRS. WINSLOW. 

as when I pray perseveringly for my husband." 

JOURNAL LETTER TO HER FRIENDS. 

^^ January 28, 1824-. — I cannot delay telling you 
what the Lord is doing among us. Last Monday 
a messenger came from Tillipally, saying that a 
number of the boys were under serious impres- 
sions, and that Mr. Woodward needed some as- 
sistance. Mr. W. immediately went there, and I 
accompanied him. We found the boys in meeting, 
and from their appearance, and that of others 
around, were at once impressed with the convic- 
tion that the Holy Spirit was indeed present. No- 
thing unusual had appeared until the day before, 
near the close of the morning sermon, when some 
special interest was manifested by a few. The 
afternoon service was more marked, and in the 
evening, at a special meeting, ten or twelve at- 
tended. We remained till Wednesday evening, 
and saw much to encourage the hope that a work 
of grace was commenced in a number of hearts. 
There were frequent meetings, and solemnity 
reigned around. 

" Yesterday, at this station, Mr. W. had scarce- 
ly begun his sermon when it was evident that the 
Holy Spirit was near. He had some overwhelm- 
ing views, which for a time rendered him unable 
to speak. Many of the congregation were affect- 
ed. It was a solemn place. All the exercises were 



OUTPOURING OF THE SPIRIT. 299 

impressive beyond any thing I have known here. 
It was manifest that the truth took eflect. The 
services at noon and in the afternoon were of a 
similar character; and this evening a number of 
the girls stopped after prayers to speak about 
their souls. Betsey, the most forward girl in 
school, and two or three others, appear very ten- 
der. We are greatly encouraged, and yet have 
\i degree of anxiety which cannot be described. 
I '' 31. — We have had repeated inquiry-meetings 
sduring the week, and from five to eight girls have 
|lttended. Mr. W. has to-day had a very interest- 
ling time with the schoolmasters. One who has 
jDcen a little anxious, is now convinced fully of 
;he truth. A hired man also appears serious. We 
'lear of nothing new at the other stations; but 
[»egin strongly to hope that the time is near when 
!ve shall see a great work. 

> " February 3. — The prayer-meeting yesterday 
vas at Batticotta. All came together with the 
lope, apparently, that it would be an uncommon 
lay; and it was so. The morning exercises were 
onducted as usual, but with more feeling; and 
n the afternoon the Holy Spirit came down with 
"Ower, such as probably none of us ever felt or 
/itnessed before, and filled all the house where 
/c were sitting. The brother who first led in 
rayer v/as so much overcome as to be unable to 
rocced. For some time he had scarcely strength 



300 MRS. WINSLOW. 

to rise from his knees. The afternoon was spent 
in prayer, interrupted only by singing, and oc- 
casionally reading or repeating a verse from the 
Bible. It was not common prayer, but wrestling 
with the angel of the covenant, with strong cry- 
ing and tears. Every thing was awfully solemn j 
such as language cannot describe. The worth of 
souls and the love of Christ pressed upon the 
conscience and the heart almost too strongly to 
be endured. We came home exceedingly ex- 
hausted. To-day the girls are more serious, and 
every thing around seems to say that God is here. 
Oh that we may stand aside while the Lord 
passes by, as Elijah did, when he wrapped his 
face in his mantle and stood in the entrance of the 
cave. I feel afraid to do or say any thing, lest I 
should in some way hinder the work. May God 
direct. 

'* 9. — Yesterday we were at Manepy. It was a 
most interesting day. A number of the serious 
boys from Tillipally, and all the girls from Oodoo- 
ville were there. The Lord's supper was admi- 
nistered. A native man was admitted to the commu- 
nion. In the afternoon there was a meeting of the 
youth, which was attended by the manifest in- 
fluences of the Spirit. One w^ho was sometime 
since awakened, rose and confessed his sin of 
backsliding, and with many tears admonished 
his companions not to grieve the blessed Spirit 



OUTPOURING OF THE SPIRIT. 301 

as he had done. A numher of others spoke of 
their feelings in an affecting manner. At the close, 
a lad of the seminary, who joined the church at 
Batticotta last Sabbath, prayed with an overflow- 
ing heart. In thanking God that Satan's king- 
dom is dcclinin"-, and the kinordom of Christ ad- 
vancing, he seemed to rise with his subject, until 
the room was full of solemnity. We had another 
meeting in the evening, and this morning it ap- 
pears that five or six hope they were yesterday 
born again. 

" 11. — Some of the brethren and sisters came to 
Oodooville for a prayer-meeting last evening. It 
was a time of wrestling prayer until two o'clock. 
The principal subject of intercession was the 
seminary at Batticotta. If our interviews may 
hereafter be like this, we shall indeed be most 
favored. 

*' 13. — Last evening there was another prayer- 
meeting here. Mr. Woodward and Mr. Knight 
came. It was again a precious time. The Lord 
has certainly given us a nev/ spirit in our ap- 
proaches to him ; and will, I believe, answer the 
prayers which he himself inspires, though w^e are 
utterly unworthy. We have just received a note 
from Dr. S. saying that a work is commenced at 
Panditeripo. Mr. W. has gone to his aid. There 
is progress at Oodooville. All the older girls, the 
woman who has the care of them, a hired man, 

Winslow, «'0 



302 



MRS. WIXSLOW. 



and several others are affected. We have scarce- 
ly hoped to see so much, and now it seems but 
the beginning of days. How ungrateful and un- 
believing we have been, but blessed be God that 
he can work by the weakest instruments. 

" 1-i. — Most animating accounts from Pandite- 
ripo. Dr. and Mrs. S. went the day before yester- 
day, at evening, to Batticotta. As they were step- 
ping into the gig. Amy, the colored woman, said, 
' Now, Lord, send douTi thy Spirit while thy ser- 
vant is absent.' The boys had a meeting, con- 
ducted by two of their number, who are mem- 
bers of the church. After it was over, and all 
were preparing to lie down on their mats, Amy 
said to one of them, ^ You must go out and taljj: 
to those boys again, for how do you know but 
they will die to-night.' He went to them, and 
some listened to the warning. They left their 
mats one after another and resorted to different 
places in the garden, under the cocoa-nut trees, 
to call upon God. Some were alone, and others 
in little companies, crying, ^ Come, Holy Spirit,* 
* Lord have mercy,' &c. Dr. and ?»Irs. S. re- 
turning home, heard them on entering the yard. 
He immediately rung the bell, and they came in 
with streaming eyes, confessing their guilt and 
danger. Mr. W. says that to-day many appear 
under deep conviction. 

" 17. — Last evening a prayer-meeting was held 



OUTPOURING OF THE SPIRIT. 303 

at Panditeripo, and another at Batticotta, in re- 
ference to the seminary. There was thus a union 
of prayer by all the mission until midnight. It 
was a time of deep solemnity — of feelings which 
cannot be uttered. The walls were compassed 
by prayer seven times. This morning all met at 
Panditeripo. The brethren who came from Batti- 
cotta are full of confidence that the Lord has at 
Jength appeared there. All but Mr. Woodward 
afterwards went to that station, and had a most so- 
lemn meeting with the members of the seminary. 

'' 18.-^We have had a meeting in our verandah 
this evening of some of the head-men and boys 
from Tillipally and Manepy. It Avas handsomely 
lighted up. Mr. and Mrs. Mooyart and the breth- 
ren, Knight, Spaulding, and Woodward, w^ere 
present. It was a most interesting season. Our 
friends stay over night, as to-morrow is our quar- 
terly meeting here. 

" 19. — Another great day. We have never sat 
down to the table of our Lord under such inte- 
resting circumstances. Mr. W. preached from 
the text, ' Bring ye all the tithes into the store- 
house,' (Sec. Oh that we may indeed do this, and 
prove the Lord therewith. It was a time of weep- 
ing for joy, and breaking of heart for sin. 

" 24. — We went yesterday afternoon to Nel- 
lore, and with Mr. and IMrs. S. accompanied Mr. 
K. to two evening meetings at the houses of 



304 BIRS. WIXSLOW. 

natives in Jaftnapatam. They were the first of the 
kind there, but full and solemn. 

" 25. — A meeting at Oodooville for all the 
schoolmasters and the more serious boys. The 
brethren, and some of the sisters, were here. 
About seventy adult natives were present, of 
whom thirty rose and testified their belief in 
Christianity. Sixty or seventy children did the 
same. It is not to be supposed that many have 
as yet much knowledge of their owti hearts. 

" March 12. — Evening before last we went to 
a school bungalow, about two miles distant, to 
attend a meeting vdth 3Ir. and ~Shs. S. and Dr. S. 
The bungalow was well filled, and the people 
gave good attention. It was cheering. Our 
humble chapel was surrounded by tall palmyras 
pointing to the bright skies, through which the 
moon was pursuing her majestic way among the 
stars. All around spoke of the glory of God ; 
and there was in some breasts, it may be hoped, 
a brighter scene than even that which met the 
eye from without. The next morning was spent 
at Panditeripo in prayer, and the afternoon and 
evening at Batticotta. There was a precious 
meeting with the lads in the Seminary. The 
Spirit of God seemed to come down anew. 

" 18. — This morning we went to Jaffna to take 
leave of Mr. and -\Irs. Mooyart, who are about 
removino: to the south of the island. AU the 



OUTPOURING OF THE SPIRIT. 305 

missionaries of the district were there, and we 
had a day of prayer long to be remembered. Mr. 
M. took his leave of us in a very affectionate 
manner, and with special thanksgiving to God 
for permitting him to depart with such high hopes 
for the wretched inhabitants of Jaffna. In the 
eveninof we attended an interestinof meetingr at the 
house of a native christian, and returned home." 

" March 20, Private Journal. — Last Sabbath I 
had unusual nearness to God, and a feeling 
that I could ask any thing I would, without fear 
of a denial. He appeared my friend^ to whom I 
could come very near, so as to talk face to face 
and order my cause before him. This feeling 
continues, and I would say with deep humility, 
that I never felt so much that it is a time to call 
upon God, to get near and to wait before him, 
and plead with him, as during the last week. It 
has been an unusual week; I have had some 
seasons which cannot be forgotten. I enjoy our 
social-meetings very much, but they are not to 
be compared with coming near to God in secret. 
To-day I have wrestled principally for the chil- 
dren here ; have felt as I never did previously for 
them ; have wondered that I have before felt so 
little. Perhaps God will now permit me to call, 
and not hear. It would be right, but still it is my 
privilege to pray." 

26* 



306 MRS. WINSLOW. 

" Marcn 28. — We have had a very solemn day 
at Batticotta. I went with Mr. W. and found the 
brethren all there, but none of the sisters from 
the other stations. In the morning the brethren 
had a meeting for prayer and counsel concerning 
the exercises of the day. Sister P. and myself 
at the same time had a season of prayer. All 
then assembled for a general meeting with the 
boys, who were afterwards divided into classes, 
that each brother might take some of them to 
separate rooms. All the forenoon they thus con- 
versed and prayed with them collectively and 
individually. In the meantime sister P. and my- 
self called in some females attached to the family. 
I had also a meeting with the children. In the 
afternoon there was a united meeting with the 
youth of the Seminary, which continued till dark. 
I have seldom felt so sensibly the force of the 
expression, * the Lord is in this place.' 

" 29. — We have new evidence that the Spirit 
is among us, by the opposition excited. Some 
who have heretofore been very civil, and have 
heard patiently, and some who have professed to 
be anxious about their souls, now take a decided 
stand on the side of the adversary. Betsey'a 
father forbids her embracing the christian reli- 
gion. He keeps a temple dedicated to a female 
devil, and is said to have devoted a sister of hers 
to its service. Probably he wants her for the. 



OUTPOURING OF THK SPIRIT. 307 

same object ; but I trust the Lord has better 
things in store for her. Her feelings are very- 
tender, and her concern for her friends is great. 

" 30. — To-day there was a meeting at Manepy 
of all the children of our boarding-schools. About 
ninety stood up to express their belief in Christ. 
Some who did not rise, however, give more evi- 
dence of a change of heart than some who did. 
It has been a solemn day, full of interest. What 
would the patrons of these children have felt, 
could they have witnessed it I What would many 
christian friends feel, could they be present with 
us in such seasons of rejoicing and trembling. 
They would no doubt find an abundant reward 
for all they have done for these children, and 
encouragement to do more, as well as to plead 
with God for the outpouring of the Spirit on all 
heathen nations. 

" May 21. — I may again record a precious day. 
Yesterday was our quarterly meeting at Manepy. 
The morning was spent much as usual. The af- 
ternoon was devoted to thanksqrivins:. Some of 
the more prominent objects for praise, connected 
with the present state of things, were, that God 
has so manifestly answered prayer, and that he 
has so carried on his work here as to leave no 
room for boasting — in fact, to pour contempt on 
human wisdom. A view was taken of the mag- 
nitude of the work, in its various bearings on 



308 MRS. WTXSLOTV. 

ourselves, on the heathen around, on future ge- 
nerations ; and the encouragement it may afford 
to missionaries in other parts of the world, and 
to the christian public. The subject grew and 
warmed our hearts. The second quarterly meet- 
ing of the schoolmasters is to be next week, and 
it was agreed to have special seasons of fasting 
and prayer for them. 

" June 9. — The anniversary of our leaving Ame- 
rica was observed yesterday at Panditeripo. We 
occupied the morning in contemplating the great 
goodness of God towards us, and in attempting 
to praise him. Never have we had so much cause 
for praise. Never have we assembled with so 
much love towards each other, and with such 
great mercies to recount. We are all alive after 
a five years' separation from our native country, 
and in as good health as on the day we sailed — 
have received nine children who are still spared 
to us, and above all, have seen the goings of God 
in our midst." 

For a time the special influences of the Spirit 
were less apparent j but before the close of the 
year there was renewed evidence that he was 
present of a truth. 

" A'^ovember 5. — The Lord has come near us 
again, and surprised us when we had almost 
ceased talking about another refreshing. Our 



OUTPOURING OF THE SPIRIT. 309 

monthly meeting before the last was unusually 
solemn ; the quarterly meeting, a fortnight after, 
still more so ; and last Monday, at Oodooville, 
the prayer-meeting was peculiarly marked. Some 
of the native members appear more awake, and 
on the minds of the brethren and sisters general- 
ly there is a deep conviction that the Lord is 
ready to pour us out a blessing. 

'' 13. — Appearances of a revival continue. We 
have this evening had a prayer-meeting here. 
Yesterday was communion at Mancpy. A pre- 
cious time, though I felt more for the people 
than for myself. All was still and solemn, and I 
believe that the Holy Spirit accompanied the 
word and ordinances. I have for some time had 
unusual delight in prayer ; but have thought too 
much of some hinderances to a work of grace. 
Have had a good season to-night, but felt too 
little my exceeding sinfulness. I have at all times 
too little feeling for the people. 

" 25. — I have been deterred from writing since 
the last date, through fear of saying more than I 
ought concerning what we now term a revival. 
It is so great a thing that our eyes should again 
see the stately goings of God in this way, that I 
know not how to speak of it. There is an un- 
usual seriousness at all our stations. The chil- 
dren who give evidence of conversion are much 
engaged. Some who were careless are awaken- 



310 MRS. WINSLOW. 

ed ; and we hope two or three are born agam. 
One of the first boys in the Seminary^ named 
Dwight, for whom, more than almost any other, 
prayer has been made without ceasing, is of the 
number. This school is, as it was before, the 
principal burden of our hearts. Nearly all in it 
now profess to be under some concern of mind. 
In the Female Central School eight or ten pro- 
fess to be again awakened, and by their prayers 
and tears manifest that they feel something. The 
older ones, who give evidence of a change of 
heart, every day call one or more of the others 
aside, and pray and converse with them j a means 
which has been blessed. 

*' December 8. — The goodness of God is still 
manifested among us. The members of the se- 
minary are all somewhat affected. A young man, 
superintendent of schools at Tillipally, and one 
schoolmaster, hope they are born again. Yester- 
day was our prayer-meeting at Jaffnapatam, and 
a very solemn day. In the evening we remained 
to attend a meeting in the Wesleyan chapel. 
The house was full of English, Dutch, Portu- 
guese, and Tamulians ; and addresses were made 
in English, Portuguese, and Tamul. We returned 
late by a fine moon. This morning the collector 
of the district and his lady came out to breakfast, 
and remained with us till twelve o'clock, con- 
versing freely on religious subjects. 



OUTPOURING OF THE SPIRIT. 311 

*' 11. — We had last evening another season of 
social prayer at Oodooville — a time of wrestling 
with the ancfel of the covenant. I think I never 
knew until lately the blessings of social prayer. 
We had the communion yesterday at Manepy — 
a good day. Two domestics there, who have long 
been exceedingly hardened, and during the pre- 
vious outpouring of the Spirit felt nothing, are 
bowed down under a sense of sin. It was very 
affecting to see the cook, an old Portuguese man, 
stand up, with more than thirty native children, 
to signify that he felt he was a great sinner, and 
hoped to give himself no rest until he found it in 
Jesus. You cannot understand the import of this 
without considering that ' Jesus Christ ' is here 
a despised name. The girls' schoolmaster at 
Oodooville is grandson of an Odigar, and of a 
high family. He has perhaps excited as much 
feeling in our hearts as any one. In the time of 
the last attention to religion he was awakened, 
but his friends were too strong for him. Now he 
is in great distress. 

" 16. — We have had a meeting of the school- 
masters at this station. It was a time of deep 
emotion and of triumph. To our surprise and 
great joy the girls' schoolmaster addressed them, 
and then led in prayer. His utterance was seve- 
ral times checked by weeping. 

^^ January 1, 1825. — I feel disposed this even- 



312 MRS. wI^-sLow. 

ing to wish you a ' happy new year,' and to tell 
you something of our enjoyments. We did not 
* dance out the old year,' but we prayed and sang 
praises to the Lord ; and blessed be his name for 
having given us such occasion. I hope you know 
that at the commencement of the last year we 
were blest with a revival of religion. We again 
witness the influences of the Spirit on many hearts, 
and are permitted to rejoice over several young 
men of talents and influence as apparently born 
again. Some others, particularly in the boarding- 
schools, are in a very encouraging state. Many 
are more or less affected. Several domestics who 
have seemed harder than the 'nether millstone,' 
are now very solemn. The young men, if they 
prove to be children of God, will be a great ac- 
quisition. Prayers have long been offered on 
their account, and much labor bestowed on them. 
We may and do hope that the Lord has gra- 
ciously answered prayer. 

" These visitations of the Spirit have, I believe, 
been marked with similar features to revivals at 
home. They were preceeded by a deep sense of 
deficiency in the missionaries, which led them to 
humble themselves before God ; and were ac- 
companied throughout v/ith a spirit of prayer; 
a pleading — a wrestling for souls — something I 
think of what our Saviour expressed when he 
said, * I have a baptism to be baptized with, and 



OUTPOURING OF THE SPIRIT. 313 

how am I straitened till it be accomplished.* 
Social prayer-meetings have been peculiarly blest. 
Even while we have been speaking, our prayers 
have seemed to be answered. In a number of in- 
stances the missionaries have set apart one hour 
in the day to unite in prayer for the same object, 
for five days in succession. On the sixth a part 
of the day has been spent in fasting and prayer, 
and on the seventh, all have met together for 
united supplication. One of these was in behalf 
of the young men whom I have mentioned. They 
were called together for a meeting by themselves 
on the seventh day, while several of the brethren 
and sisters were praying for them. After a very 
solemn meeting they were called in and address- 
ed with much feeling. The concern felt for them 
while the Spirit of God is so near, was mention- 
ed with weeping. They have all since seemed to 
tremble for their salvation ; and of some we hope 
that they have found peace in believing. 

"After looking back upon the past year, we 
closed it with overflowing hearts, and entered 
upon the new one with such expectations for the 
church as we never had before. What may we 
not look for in the year to come 1 How many 
precious souls will begin to live 1 How may the 
Saviour be honored, and the adversary confound- 
ed 1 Are we sufficiently thankful that we live in 
these glorious days 1 

Wiaslow. 27 



314« MRS. WIZnSLOW. 

" 14. — The candidates for admission to the 
church were examined to-day, and forty-one ac- 
cepted to be received next week. Who could 
have expected that we should ever see such a dayl 
I have many times of late been ready to inquire, 
is it so 1 or is it a dream, that I see such things 
among the heathen 1 Do you not rejoice more 
than you can express! How then must we feel, 
who see and know far more than you can, the in- 
difference and the wants of this poor people. 
Just now the cholera is raging in some parts of 
the district to a dreadful extent ; so that whole 
families are swept off in a few hours. In one 
house, where were twelve persons, only one child 
remained in a few days. It is an awful scourge. 
After it abated a little, the people made an idola- 
trous ceremony at great expense, as a token of 
gratitude to the gods ; but the epidemic imme- 
diately raged again with more violence than ever. 
Still they do not learn righteousness. On the 
contrary, they seem more than ever mad upon 
their idols. 

"23. — The great and joyful day is past. I 
thought we could not well feel more, while in 
these bodies of clay. Mr. W. wrote to D. and 
gave an account of the scene, the evening of the 
same day," as follows : 

" The large temporary building erected for the- 



OUTPOITRIXG OF THE SI'IKIT. 3l5 

occasion, was in a scattered grove of palm-trees, 
in the village of Santillepay, which is central to 
all our stations. It was about one hundred feet 
long and nearly seventy in width. At one end 
was placed a decent pulpit, brought from one of 
our stations, and towards the other the floor of 
earth was made a little ascending, to bring the 
audience into view, as they sat upon it on neat 
mats, with which the whole was spread. The top 
and sides of the building, which were covered 
with the braided leaves of the cocoa-nut tree, 
were lined with white cotton cloth, giving the 
whole a light and neat appearance. In front were 
two or three fine spreading trees, like large 
branching elms. On one side open rice fields 
were in sight, and on the other thick gardens 
filled with large fruit trees, shading the low mud- 
walled and leaf-covered houses of the natives. 
In the rear was a school bungalow, where many 
heathen children had been taught the first prin- 
ciples of Christianity, and the word of God had 
been often preached, and prayer frequently ofTer- 
ed ; but neither the place where the temporary 
church stood, nor the adjacent habitations, had 
ever resounded with the voice of prayer or praise. 
''In front of the pulpit was the communion 
table, before which, in the form of a half-moon, 
were the candidates, forty-one in number, and 
native members. Back of these, through the 



316 MRS. WINSLOW. 

centre of the building, were the head men and 
other more respectable natives, while the com- 
mon people occupied either side. In all, from 
twelve to fifteen hundred were present. There 
w^ould probably have been twice that number, but 
for the prevalence of the cholera in the village 
at the time, and a heavy fall of rain the preced- 
inor night. 

" The exercises were appropriate and well re- 
ceived. At the close of the sermon the candi 
dates — from a small girl of twelve, to a gray- 
headed man of seventy — presented themselves, 
publicly renounced idolatry, and consecrated 
themselves to the love and service of the one 
only living and true God. The old man, whose 
head was nearly as white as the cloth round his 
body, as he vowed to be the Lord's, seemed to 
say, ^Now lettest thou thy servant depart in 
peace.' This Andrew is a fisher. All these and 
the members of the church rose together, and 
entered into covenant with the Lord and with 
each other, to walk as christians. The affecting 
ordinance of the Lord's supper was administered 
to seventy native members and sixteen of our own 
number, including three brethren of other deno- 
minations. As the congregation were dispersing, 
we united in singing, ' Come, let us anew our 
journey pursue.' It has been indeed a day of 
joyful solemnity." 



OUTPOtmiNG OF THE SPIRIT. 3 17 

In regard to the subjects of this work, tliere 
Avas a previous preparation. The greater part of 
them were members of the boarding-schools, or 
schoolmasters, domestics, and other assistants, 
who liad been formed into Bible classes and di- 
ligently instructed. The remainder were such as 
lived in the vicinity of the stations, and had often 
attended preaching. There were few cases of 
permanent conviction where there was not some 
previous knowledge of the truth, and few in 
whi(;h religious impressions were not cherished 
by much patient labor of the missionaries or 
their assistants, in conversing and praying with 
the individuals alone. It was this repeated and 
•personal application of the truth to those able in 
some measure to comprehend it, which principally 
took efTect. At the same time the nearness of 
the stations to each other enabled the missiona- 
ries to give mutual aid in these and similar labors, 
and to make their public meetings more animat- 
ing and impressive. Their own souls also were 
quickened by their seasons of social devotion. 
Seldom perhaps has the promise to two or three 
met together been more strikingly fulfilled. The 
revival commenced after a special season of fast- 
ing and prayer, and its progress was marked by a 
spirit of fervent intercession, and sometimes a tra- 
vailing in birth for souls, of which the journal and 
letters of Mrs. W. give such delightful evidence. 
27* 



318 MRS. WINSLOW. 

" 23, Sahbafh. — On Friday evening some of out 
number met at OodooviJle for a thanksgiving sea- 
son, and it was a precious time. To-day has been 
full of interest. Mr. W. preached from the words, 
'I thank thee, Father, Lord of heaven and 
earth, that thou hast hid these things,' &c. A 
thanksgiving sermon. Some who, but a short 
time since, had no ears to hear, and no hearts to 
feel, and no minds to understand, were evidently 
fed by the word, and united in thanksgiving to 
God for his great mercy. After service, Mr. AV. 
proposed that those who, from a full sense of the 
importance of the subject, wished to be consider 
ed candidates for admission to the church six 
months hence, should come to the house and 
give in their names — and hereafter meet him 
once a week for instruction with reference to 
such an event. Twelve, besides girls of the 
school, gave in their names." 

A similar meeting to that in January was held 
at the same place in July, w^hen. eight were added 
to the church. Some, who gave pleasing evidence 
of being truly converted, were still kept back by 
their friends from making a profession of their 
faith in Christ. A young man who was then re- 
ceived, was obliged to leave his relations private- 
ly two or three days before the meeting, and go 
to one of the stations at a distance from them. 



JOURNEY TO CALCUTTA. 319 

They then waylaid him on the road to meeting, 
but he escaped them and readied the temporary 
chapel. A native constable was there to prevent 
disturbance, who protected him against his rela- 
tives, or they would have dragged him away 
even from the communion-table. 



CHAPTER VII 



Sixth to Tenth Years in Ceylon — includ- 
ing Journey to ITIadras and Calcutta. 

Failure of health — dangerous passage to Madras and Cal- 
cutta — death of a daughter — brief description of Madras 
— letters to Miss Bird at Gorruckpore — Roman and Pa- 
gan ceremonies compared — communion with God — ap- 
peal to an early associate — diaries — admissions to the 
church — robbers — conversion of a schoolmaster — death 
of an infant son-^-conversion of sisters — sense of re- 
sponsibility — Sunday-school at Oodooville — influence of 
the climate — sufferings of the natives — prayers of the 
churches. 

In the summer of 1825 the health of Mrs. W. 
was 60 much impaired that her life w^as seriously 
threatened. A change of air was tried for some 
weeks, by a removal to a small fort on a rock 



320 MRS. WINSLOW. 

surrounded by the sea, a few miles west of Batti- 
cotta. This proving insufficient, late in the sea- 
son a voyage was determined on. As the north- 
east monsoon was about to set in, during which 
the native boats do not venture along the coast, 
it was with difficulty that a dhonie* was engaged, 
and when engaged, it was dangerous to attempt 
the passage to Madras as proposed. A few par- 
ticulars of this passage were afterwards given by 
Mrs. W. in a letter to her friends. 

" On the 7th November we left our home, and 
went forth, not knowing the things which should 
befall us. I had not sat up at all for some days, 
and was unable to make any arrangements for 
our voyage. I was carried to Manepy, and there 
we parted from our two dear little ones. Harriet 
was delighted with being at M. and gave me the 
last kiss with a smiling face. Joanna I left on 
the floor with her toys. Charles accompanied us. 
Many people from Oodooville came to take leave, 
but I could only cast my eye around upon the 
circle without saying a word. The least indul- 
gence of my feelings would have overcome me. 

* The native boats, called dhonies, have no decks, and 
are very sharp both fore and aft. Over the greater part of 
the vessel is a roof of sticks and braided cocoa-nut leaves, 
to keep off the sun and rain ; under which, in what may be 
called the hold, the passengers, if any, must accommodate 
themselves. 



JOURNEY TO CALCUTTA. 321 

Do you ask what were my expectations, and how 
I feh 1 I did not expect to see again the faces of 
those whom I left ; but I believed I was going 
with the approbation and direction of God, and 
that I should have his presence and support in 
all that was before me. I was exceedingly borne 
down under a sense of my unfaithfulness to the 
people, and my ingratitude to my Saviour, in not 
Iiaving exhibited before them more of the purity 
of his blessed Gospel. 

" We were accompanied to Kaits, ten or twelve 
miles, by Mr. S. At the sea-shore where we were 
to take a boat for that place, we found the breth- 
ren M. and P. from Batticotta. Took leave of 
them, and went into the boat just after sunset. A 
cloud soon came up. It was dark, and threatened 
rain. The boatmen being ignorant of the chan- 
nel, soon got out of it into shoal water, and the 
boat run aground. The danger of my being in an 
open boat through the night, and probably in the 
rain, was so great, that Mr. S. and Mr. W. jump- 
ed into the water, and after much urging and 
bribing induced the boatmen to follow their ex- 
ample, and with great difficulty shoved the boat 
ofl"". Soon, however, it was again in the mud. 
After several attempts and working long in the 
water, they succeeded in getting under way, and 
we arrived at Kaits about midnight. I was much 
fatigued, but was put on a couch in the magis- 



322 MRS. WINSLOW. 

trate's verandah, and after a cup of tea ^Yhich his 
lady kindly provided, had a little rest. 

'' The next day there was no wind. I was very 
ill, and our prospect was dark. Not a ripple ap- 
peared on the surface of the water. The boat- 
men said they would not go after the 9th, as it 
would then be new moon and they expected the 
setting in of the monsoon with a storm. We felt 
that it was the last moment, and the necessity of 
our going was urgent. A light breeze sprung up 
the next morning about 7 o'clock. We were 
soon at sea. It carried us across the straits be- 
fore 5 o'clock, and to Negapatam by midnight. 
Here the boatmen anchored, and nothing would 
induce them to proceed any farther till daylight. 
As they have no compass, they are exceedingly 
careful to keep near the shore, and will not usual- 
ly sail in the night. We came on by short dis- 
tances, and should have done by much shorter, 
had not Mr. W. sat up with the men every night 
till 12 o'clock, and encouraged them to keep their 
sails spread till that time. Afterwards we lay at 
anchor, rolling with the waves in a very uncom- 
fortable manner, till morning. The weather was 
rainy. Heavy clouds were on all sides of us, with 
at times much lightning and thunder. The 
season was so far advanced that almost every 
thing was threatening. We however reached 
Madras safely on the fifth day, in the morning. 



JOURNEY TO CALCUTTA. 323 

I had gained a little at sea, though our situation 
was so uncomfortable. The surf being high, we 
had some difficulty in getting on shore, and the 
exertion occasioned my fainting as soon as I 
reached the custom-house. We proceeded to the 
Wesleyau mission-house, and were received most 
kindly by ^Icssrs. Carver and Hoole, and by Mr. 
and Mrs. Williamson. 

" Our first step was to consult a physician. 
Dr. L. visited me, and at once made himself so 
well acquainted with my case that I felt much 
confidence in him. He did not encourage any 
hope that I should soon be well ; and advised us 
to proceed to Calcutta, or try a land journey. 
We waited some days, and no passage by ship 
could be secured. The rains had fully commenc- 
ed. How then could we undertake a land jour- 
ney l There was however no alternative, and we 
made arrangements to go to Bangalore, two hun- 
dred miles distant, in palankeens. The rains con- 
tinued so violent that we were detained a few days. 
When they abated, we prepared to leave. Our pa- 
lankeens and bearers were at the door. Food for a 
day or two was cooked, and every thing packed. 
Suddenly a heavy rain came on, and we found it 
impossible to go that evening. The next morn- 
ing a note came in, saying that a ship was ap- 
proaching the town. This induced us to turn our 
faces again towards the sea. Some friends advised 



324? MRS. WINSLOW. 

us not to venture out, as storms and a long pas- 
sage were to be expected. We however sought, 
and believe found direction ; and, November 8th, 
embarked on the ' Sir Edward Paget.' We reach- 
ed Calcutta Sabbath morning, the 27th, the same 
day on which, as we afterwards learned, our dar- 
ling Harriet died at Jaffna. We did not go on 
shore till next morning." 

A residence in Calcutta for about three months 
of the cold season, when the climate is compara- 
tively fine, produced a good effect on the health 
of Mrs. W.-j and her husband improved the op- 
portunity to solicit funds for the Seminary at Bat- 
ticotta, as well as in other ways to promote the 
objects of the mission. In his applications for 
aid he was in a good degree successful, being 
favored with the countenance of Bishop Heber, 
Archdeacon Corrie, and the Rev. Mr. Thornason, 
names connected with those of Carey, Martj^n, 
and Buchanan, in the religious improvement of 
India ; and of some gentleman high in office in 
the government, as well as missionaries of differ- 
ent denominations. 

" Calcutta, January 18, 1826. 
" My beloved pARE^'Ts, — Mr. W. has written 
to you a number of times since we arrived at this 
place, and I have constantly intended to do so, 



AT CALCUTTA. 325 

but have been unable. Before this you will know 
of our having been called from our work to i\Ia- 
dras, and thence to this place, by my ill health ; 
and that a change of medical treatment, the 
voyage, and the cold air of Calcutta, have, by the 
blessing of God, produced a favorable change. 
A few lines sent last week by Mr. W. will have 
informed you, also, of the dealings of God with 
our mission since we left home. Our dear sister 
Woodward sweetly closed .her eyes upon the 
world on the 24'th November, We left her quite 
feeble. She became gradually more so, and at 
length sunk before her friends were aware of her 
danger. On the 27th of the same month our 
dear Harriet IMaria, and Jane Spaulding, were 
both cut down in the midst of health by the cho- 
lera. A day or two after, two native adult mem- 
bers of the church, and one candidate for admis- 
sion, died of the same dreadful disease. 

" Mr. Spaulding, in writing us, gives the parti- 
culars of Harriet's sickness, which lasted only 
nine hours, and then says, * The closing scene I 
need not describe. She fell asleep, we trust, in 
Jesus, at half past ten on Sabbath morning. Jane 
was attacked at half past one, and died at half 
past six, after just five hours' illness. Our dear 
Harriet and Jane both cut down in one day ! Oh, 
it was a shock v.hich seemed to break our hold 
on earth. Just as Jane left us, I read the 226th 

Winslow. 2S 



326 Bins. wixsLow. 

Select Hj-mn, ^ Ye mourning saints,' &:c. which 
expresses our feelings and consolations better 
than I can myself. The dear children were always 
kind and affectionate to their little sisters, and 
exceedingly attached to each other. In death 
they were not divided, and to us they are more 
lovely than ever. They used to pray for you all, 
and in many ways were great comforts to us. 
But they are gone. The Lord is as kind in taking 
as in giving, and as brother Richards said under 
a similar trial, thej' ' exactly fill the place which 
God from all eternity designed they should fill.' 
Is not this enough 1 We pity and mourn for dear 
sister H. We think it must be more trying to her, 
and to you to hear the sad intelligence alone, and 
in a strange land, than it would have been to see 
and knovv^ all as it passed ; and then after the 
scene had closed, to sit down with those whose 
hearts and whose souls could have flowed and 
felt with your own. We long more than ever to 
see you. Oh ! how it would fill a sad vacancy. 
" Now, my dear parents, what shall I say of our 
feelino-s when letters containinjr all this intelli- 

D O 

gence were brought us at oncel It was a stroke 
which I knew not at first how to bear; but the 
Lord soon comforted me. In regard to dear H. 
it is a wise and kind providence to her and to 
me — to her, because she is, I trust, where she 
often prayed to be, ' with God in heaven,' and to 



AT CALCUTTA. 327 

me, because I needed something to wean me from 
my cares and attachments, and to humble me be- 
fore God. I have lon^ felt myself exceedingly 
unfit either to live or to die. It is now my great 
desire that this affliction may be the means of pre- 
paring me for the whole will of God. You know 
wc have thouglit that Harriet had an uncommon 
sense of sin, and dread of offending God. She 
has often aflccted me so much by talking on this 
subject, that I have been obliged to get away 
from lier and give vent to m}'^ feelings in tears. 
But whether she is saved or lost, the will of the 
Lord is done. Let him be glorified." 

The return of ^Mrs. W. to Ceylon \vas by way 
of ^ladras. Her better health enabled her now 
to enjoy the prospect in approaching this place 
on a fine morning in April. The air was clear, 
the atmosphere perfectly transparent, and the 
bright sun gave full efiect to the grouping of the 
various objects presented in an Indian city. There 
were to be seen burning sands and green groves j 
low and dirty houses along narrow streets, and. 
splendid mansions surrounded by extensive and 
luxuriant gardens; the low domes of many dingy, 
heathen pagodas, and three or four tall white 
spires of christian churches. Fort St. George is 
an immense fortification, enclosing many large 
edifices, among which is a church. South o[ it is 



328 MKS. WINSLOW. 

the Nabob's palace, a large irregular pile, and 
also a little back from the water the Governor's 
residence and hall of audience, two spacious 
buildings with porticoes and marble-like colon- 
nades, surrounded by extensive pleasure-grounds. 
Northward of the fort is Black Town, inhabited 
principally by the native Hindoos, Armenians, 
and descendants of Europeans. The English 
usually reside in country-seats scattered in the 
midst of beautiful gardens, in all parts of the vici- 
nity. The town is walled on two sides ; the side 
next the sea is not walled, and the remaining one 
only in part, ending with a battery, which, with a 
fort, commands the open space. There are but 
few good houses wdthin the walls. On the beach, 
however, are long rows of high buildings with 
upper and lower verandahs^ which appear to good 
advantage from the water. These and other large 
buildings are stuccoed with white cement, which 
at Madras is made in such perfection as to have 
the smoothness and almost the durability of po- 
lished marble. It gives the smaller houses a neat, 
and the larger edifices a splendid appearance. 

This, as well as the general brightness of the 
scene, always strikes a stranger from a tempe- 
rate climate, as does also the dirty appearance of 
the almost naked and dark-colored natives who 
throno- the streets and the beach. Amonj^ these 
are, however, many in flowing robes of white 



JOURNEY TO CALCUTTA. 329 

muslin, with rich turbans on their heads. Some 
arc doobashes^ or interpreters, of whom several 
usually resort to a ship to ofler their services 
the moment it comes to anchor. One at least, if 
possible, attaches himself to each passenger, 
whose eyes and every motion he will watch, to 
meet or anticipate his wishes, as though born to 
wait upon him. Indeed, in landing, the services 
of some one are needed. The surf rises so high 
that the ship boats cannot pass it. Every thing 
is landed in surf -boats. These are wide and high, 
formed without timbers, of boards sewed toge- 
ther, and stopped with coh\ so as to yield to the 
waves and sand as they take the shore. As soon 
as the boatmen get into tlie surf with a passenger 
unacquainted w-ith the languai^^e, the man in the 
stern drops the oar with which h? was guiding 
the boat and begins to ask for presents. If then 
the passenger has no one with him who can speak 
the language, he must probably choose betv/een 
giving a dollar or two, or getting wet in the surf. 
"hen on shore, if he has no one to look after his 
'Tage, he will find himself surrounded by coo- 
/ ;, one of whom snatches a trunk, another a 
l.ox, and a third a cloak or umbrella, and there 
will be as many helping him as there are articles 
to be carried, and all perhaps going different 
ways. One may thus very soon find no desirable 
evidence that he is in a heathen country. 
28* 



330 MKS. WINSLOW. 

While at Calcutta Mrs. W. became acquaint- 
ed with Miss Bird, a pious English lady, who 
left her native country to devote herself and 
her property to the good of India. She was 
a niece of the celebrated Mr. Wilberforce, and a 
cousin of the two Bishops Sumner. For many 
years she resided at Gorruckpore, in one of the 
upper provinces, laboring principally with adult 
females and superintending a few schools for 
girls. Afterwards she took up her residence at 
Calcutta, continuing her exertions for the instruc- 
tion of ignorant females and preparing elemen- 
tary books for the use of the natives. In these 
labors her health failed. She was then urged by 
her friends to try the air of her native country. 
But she was unwilling to leave her work, and re- 
mained in it until called recently to her gracious 
reward. Two letters of Mrs. W. to this lady 
give valuable intelligence as to the mission in 
Ceylon, and contain important hints respecting 
the work of missions generally. 

" OoDOOviLLE, June 28, 1826. 
" My dear Miss Bird, — You have perhaps 
heard of our safe arrival at home, and may have 
expected to receive a letter from me. We left 
Calcutta w^ith mingled emotions of pain and 
pleasure ; pain at the thought that we should no 
more see the faces of those we left, and that we 



IN CEYLON. 331 

had done and received so little good, but plea- 
sure, and I trust gratitude, in view of the mer- 
cies experienced there, and in the hope of soon 
meeting our JafTna friends, and engaging in our 
delightful work among the heathen. We had a 
tedious and somewhat dangerous time, of seven 
days, in getting down the river ; but the weather 
after we got to sea was very mild, and our pas- 
sage, though long, was pleasant and conducive to 
my health. We arrived at Madras on the 1st 
April, and having spent two weeks there very 
pleasantly, except that I sufTercd from the exces- 
sive heat, embarked for Jaffna in a small brig. 
We had rough and threatening weather ; and the 
vessel being light, we were much tossed about and 
exceedingly uncomfortable, but after eleven days' 
beating against the monsoon, we reached JafTna, 
and were welcomed by our dear friends and asso- 
ciates with great joy. Our first visit was to 
Manepy, where we left two darling children 
seven months before. One of them was not. 
The other remained, but was unwell. My health 
seemed declining, and I thought that I had re- 
turned only to take a final leave of my friends, 
and of all earthly scenes. Mr. W. too, was quite 
ill. After visiting the different stations, and en- 
joying some seasons of prayer and thanksgiving 
with our brethren and sisters, we came to our 
own liomc — the spot, more than all others, dear 



332 MRS. WIXSLOW. 

to us, where our health has been improving. Our 
brethren and sisters were not alone in giving us 
a welcome. Many of the people around expressed 
much joy to see us once more. The members 
of the church, especially, evinced their feelings 
by many tears 5 and when I learnt how much 
they felt on our account when we were absent, 
and how much they prayed for us, I thought it 
might be in answer to their prayers that we were 
preserved in sickness and danger, and brought 
back to them in safetj'-. 

" Little has occurred in the mission since our 
return likely to interest one so far away. About 
three weeks since, a pleasant evening was spent 
at Batticotta in dedicating several small houses 
for prayer. The youth in the seminary have com- 
plained that they had not convenient places for 
religious retirement. Twelve low houses or 
rooms about eight feet square, were consequent- 
ly erected for their accommodation on one side 
of the academic grove, which is a grove of cocoa- 
nut trees, covering more than an acre, and hav- 
ing on the three sides the buildings of the Insli- 
tution. That the students might consider, these 
rooms as sacredlj'- appropriated to their proper 
object, the missionaries, with their wives, v»'ere, 
invited to spend an evening in religious exercises 
suitable to the occasion. Mats were spread for 
the company along the front of the neat white 



IN CEYLON. 333 

houses, between two rows of younfr cocoa-nut 
trees, whose broad-spreading and drooping leaves 
met and formed over our heads a most luxuriant 
and beautiful canopy, scarcely concealing the 
mild but bright moon-beams, that gave to night 
almost the cheerfulness of day. The enchanting 
beauty of the scenery, together with the reflec- 
tion that these houses were erected at the re- 
quest of youth, there seated with us, who were 
recently enveloped in heathen darkness, added 
not a little to the interest of the exercises; and 
liad no doubt some influence in prompting the 
earnest petition, that, in the great day, it may be 
said of many, * This and that man was born there.' 
" There are no special religious impressions 
manifest in our schools or among the people just 
now, but one poor old man daily comes bending 
upon his staff into our verandah to receive in- 
struction. His tall form and white locks would 
attract your attention, and his emaciated body 
induce the inquiry w^hether he wanted food or 
medicine. He was formerly an Odigar, or head 
man of a village. He can read understandingly 
the New Testament and Tracts. His relatives are 
dead, except a grandson about twelve years old, 
who accompanies him at all times. While tot- 
tering over the grave, the old man's eyes appear 
to be opened to see his danger, and he listens to 
instruction like one really hungering for the 



334^ MRS. WIXSLOW. 

bread of life. He is an afiecting object ; none 
can know how much so, who have never seen an 
aged heathen convinced of his long delusion, and 
lookiiio- to Jesus for forgiveness of sin, and for 
preparation of heart to die in peace. 

^' The death of Bishop Heber must have occa- 
sioned much mourning in your circle, fray how 
was Mrs. Heber supported under the heavy 
stroke 1 When will his loss be made up to the 
natives and christians of India! Some one told 
us that the Rev. Mr. Sumner, a relative of yours, 
and chaplain to his majesty, is a candidate for 
the place." 

" My dear Friend, — Your kind letter of Sep- 
tember 29th came to hand three weeks since. AVe 
were very glad to hear of your safe arrival at 
Gorruckpore, and that you had again entered on 
your interesting labors. The difficulties you ex- 
perience in prosecuting your work as you wish, 
are, I think, such as v\^e well understand in Jaffna. 
Nothing you can say of the ' deceit and unchas- 
tity' of the natives there, will be too much to 
apply here, and we have many trials even with 
those who are separated from the multitude, and 
of whom we hope well. Christianity, instead of 
effecting a greater change in those who are hope- 
fully converted, than it does in converts in a 
christian country, seems to effect less j and it is 



IN CEYLON. 335 

long before thcj' appear to see a beauty in holi- 
ness, so as to pant after it. Most of our members 
liave generally 'run well,' and they seem to grow 
in grace. A few have been under discipline for 
a lime, and then have been restored ; the disci- 
pline having been attended with much apparent 
benefit. There may be more chafTwith the wheat 
than we suppose, but the sifting-time will come. 

"I am happy to answer your inquiries concern- 
ing our girls^ school. This school, as you are 
nware, was commenced with girls from each of 
the different stations. An account of the manner 
in which we began to collect them herc^ will, I 
think, give you a correct view of the course pur- 
sued at the other places. 

" Soon after we came to Oodooville, two little 
girls were often seen about the house, and some- 
times looking in at a door or window. If we 
spoke to tlicm, they appeared alarmed, and ran 
away. After a while, as we noticed them a little, 
they became more familiar, ventured to stop and 
listen to us, then to sit down on the door-steps a 
few minutes, afterwards to receive a little fruit 
when offered ; and at length, by the promise of a 
jacket when they should be able to make one, 
they were induced to take a needle and learn to 
sew. They were much pleased, and every day 
came and sat in the door two or three hours. 
We then told them of the advantacres of beinsr 



336 MRS. WINSLOW. 

able to read, and persuaded them to try to learn. 
After about six months they felt quite at home, 
and were on the premises nearly the whole day. 
After this we spoke to their parents about allow- 
ing them to remain all the time. They however 
could not think of having their children ' lose 
caste ' by eating on our premises, and there was 
^no custom' for girls to be instructed. The father 
of one of them was the keeper of a devil's temple 
next door to us ; a very bad man. The mother 
was little better. 

"About this time we had a native woman in 
the family to take charge of my infant, and she 
requested to have her daughter, a girl about eight 
years of age, with her. Soon after a member of 
our church brought his sister, and another her 
daughter. Thus we had three who took their 
food on the mission premises ; but nothing could 
induce either of the parents of the two day- 
scholars to leave them with us, until these three 
had been nearly one year in the school. One 
night a hard storm prevented their going home. 
They staid with the girls, and one of them was 
persuaded to partake of their supper. The other 
would eat nothing. Some weeks after this the 
father of the girl who had eaten on the premises 
brought her to us and said, 'You have been like 
a father and mother to her, so you may now take 
her 5 but tell me what you will do for her j you 



IX CEYLON. 337 

must find her a husband.' We told Iiim that if 
«he continued a good girl we should take care 
of her, and he must not come in a few months 
and take her away. The man was evidently 
induced to give up the child by her own en- 
treaties. Aftcj this we had less difRculty in in- 
ducing others to come to us, or their parents to 
give them up. 

"An old Portuguese woman is with them night 
and day, to watch over them, and they are wholly 
excluded from intercourse with the other sex, ex- 
cept what is unavoidable with the domestics of 
the family. No stranger, male or female, is allow- 
ed to go to their bungalow^ and if friends come 
to see them, they meet in the verandah of the 
house. 

'' * How many assistants are employed for them, 
and for what are they training V Their washing 
is done by a man, and they have a girl to assist 
them in cooking. They have a Tamul teacher 
half the day, the other half is spent in sewing 
under my direction. We are training them up 
to be christian teachers, and wives for our native 
assistants. Three of those who are hopefully 
pious arc now teaching girls' schools, and they 
do much better with them than men. Four have 
married native assistants. The benefits visibln 
to the people are already such that we have now 
mamj ?nore girls brought to us than we can re- 

Winslow. *" 



338 URs. wirs'SLow. 

ceive, and we could obtain almost any number, 
though many still think that females are only the 
worse for any kind of learning. 

"'Do you allow them to visit their friends, 
&C.'?' They spend two days and one night at home 
every month ; and do not go at other times, ex- 
cept in case of sickness, death, or weddings. 
They marry as soon as marriageable, when they 
have an eligible offer; though, if it were not for 
the very loose habits of the people, we should 
prefer having them wait longer. 

"You inquire about the adult population, our 
labors among them, and hopes and expectations 
concerning them. We are surrounded exclusively 
by heathen and Roman Catholics. Our hopes do 
rest principally on the youth in our schools, but 
by no means, as Bishop Turner thought, exdu- 
sively. Our church consists of about one hundred 
and sixty-jive native members, of whom a majo- 
rity are over twenty, and several are over fifty 
years of age. Of all of these we have more or 
less satisfactory evidence that they are truly con- 
verted from sin to holiness, and that from being 
idolaters and the slaves of Satan they have be- 
come 'the sons and daughters of the Lord Al- 
mighty.' You will perceive, therefore, that our 
labors are by no means confined to children, and 
that we could not without great ingratitude limit 
our hopes to them. ' Bazar-preaching'' is practised 



♦ JN CEYLON. 339 

to some extent at the two principal market-places 
within our limits. The missionary near each has 
a stated season once or twice in the week, when 
he oroes to distribute Tracts and converse with the 
people. At both a bungalow is erected, in which 
those who choose can assemble and listen to re- 
gular instruction. 

" The native helpers at these stations also visit 
the bazars in the same way, but a method more 
practised and more successful is to visit the 
people at their own dwellings, and hold meetings 
for preaching at the school-bungalows^ and at 
private houses. A respectable man will invite 
his neighbors to come to his house to a meeting, 
telling them that the missionary is coming and he 
wishes to see them all. Thus fifty or more adults 
are frequently collected, who sit down quietly 
and listen to the Gospel. After preaching they 
are usually allowed to ask any questions they 
wish concerning what they have heard. On 
these occasions a few women also come and sit 
in some retired part of the house where they can 
liear without being seen. At some seasons, when 
the people are at leisure and there is moon-light, 
large congregations of adults will assemble in 
the evening at a school-bu7igaloii\ being invited 
by the master and native assistants. I have seen 
one or two hundred, including nearly all the prin- 
cipal men of a village, thus assembled at a com- 



340 3IRS. WlNSLOVr. 

mon evening-meeting ; and perhaps no opportu 
nities are more favorable for producing an im 
pression by the preaching of the word than thoso 
offered at such meetings. The experience of our 
missionaries is not much in favor of delates with 
the heathen. Preaching to them Jesus, and him 
crucified, seems the most direct way to affect 
their hearts. Debates, both private and public, 
have been held with the brahmins and Roman 
Catholics, but it is not considered desirable to 
have them frequent. Tracts are circulated ex- 
tensively, combating prejudice and error, and 
some are replied to both by the heathen and 
Romanists. These have done much to enlighten 
the dark minds of the people. Preaching on the 
Sabbath at our five churches, and in the distant 
school-bungalows, is another very important and 
perhaps the most encouraging method of making 
known the Gospel. In each of the,jchurches, on 
Sabbath mornings, from fifty to one hundred 
adults are usually present, and occasionally three 
or four times that number, besides three or four 
hundred children. More general meetings are 
also held of the whole mission with the native 
church members, children of the schools, school- 
masters and domestics. 

"In regard to there being no ' absolute promis- 
es that a blessing shall attend the Gospel wher- 
ever it is preached,' I think there are many plainly 



IN CEVLON. 341 

implied, if not plainly expressed, and am far from 
thinking- you altogether in the wrong, when you 
do not like to hear that text too often quoted, 
' one sovveth and another rcapeth.' We should 
however, no doubt, cheerfully acquiesce, if it be 
the divine will to give us no immediate and ap- 
parent success in our labors. Our work, if of the 
Lord, cannot be in vain. I have increasing de- 
lifrht in the belief that the word of God never re- 
turns to him void, that it does take effect, and 
will bring forth fruit to his praise and glory ; 
though, as to many, it will only increase their 
condemnation." 

The Koman Catholics, with whom some de- 
bates were held, and some discussions by means 
of Tracts, as mentioned in this letter, had their at- 
tention somewhat excited by a comparison of their 
dodrines and ceremonies with those of the heathen. 

Their use of images is similar to that of the 
heathen ; and the same reasons are urged for it ; 
that they represent beings who ought to be rever- 
enced, and that it is necessary -for the people, 
generally, to have some object to worship which 
may address itself to their senses. 

Placing lights before these images, or idols, is 
a practice alike of the Papists and Pagans. To 
keep a light burning in a temple is a great act of 
merit among the Hindoos. 
29* 



342 MRS. WINSLOW. 

The ofTering of incense and the sprinkling with 
holy ivater are the same in Catholic churches and 
heathen temples. 

The church festivals, when the images and the 
host are carried about in procession, are similar 
to the idol feasts^ when the idols are drawn on 
cars round the temple yards. 

The use of the rosary by the Romanists is the 
same with that of the suppah-viahly^ or prayer- 
garland of the Hindoos ; and the pater-nosters 
and ave-marias of the former are recited and re- 
iterated in the same manner as the mantras of the 
latter, an account being kept of the number of 
repetitions by means of the beads. 

The doctrine of penance^ insisted on so much 
in the papal church, is altogether a heathen doc- 
trine, and also that o( purgatory, and the necessity 
of ceremonies for the souls of the dead ; all which 
are seen among the Hindoos. 

The fast-days and feast-days, the ringing of 
bells, their idolatrous reverence for the priests, 
vdio are the keepers of their disciples' consciences, 
the repetition of prayers in a dead language — 
in the Latin by one and in Sanscrit by the other — 
and all the attention to outward show and parade, 
are the same among Roman and heathen idola- 
ters. The exposing of this relationship between 
the two forms of superstition caused no small 
stir among the Roman priests, and induced 



IN CEYLON 343 

them to prohibit or modify some of their public 
processions which were too obviously of hea- 
then origin. 

'' Xovembcr 19, 18*26. — Private Journal. — I will 
record for my future encouragement, and for the 
glory of God, that after seeking assistance of the 
Holy Spirit, I have tried myself by Baxter's rule, 
and feel peculiar delight in the conviction that I 
do ' take God for my chief good, and heartily ac- 
cept of Christ as my only Saviour and Lord.' — I 
have not previously, I think, seen these two evi- 
dences so clearly, nor ever before rested so sweet- 
ly on the Lord as all my salvation and all my 
desire. 

" Evening. — This has been a precious day. I 
have enjoyed communion with my God and Father. 
Had unusual desires in behalf of some individuals 
in church this afternoon. I think that the influ- 
ences of the Holy Spirit attended the word preach- 
ed. Some neglected duties came to my mind ; one 
of which is, not employing the piety of some na- 
tive converts around me in exhorting the heathen 
to turn to the Lord. 

" 27. — One year since our darling H was 

committed to the dust, and the same day we land- 
ed at Calcutta in pursuit of health, which I little 
expected to obtain. Our dear brother and sister, 
who were afflicted with us, have been to spend 



3M MRS. WINSLOW. 

the day here, in meditating on the past and look- 
ing forward to the future. Concerning the be- 
loved ones who are gone, the will of God is done. 
As to those who remain, what are our duties and 
what our oblig-ations to God who crave them % 
But for the constant effort necessary to control 
my feelings, I should have enjoyed the day very 
much. Yesterday was a solemn time. I think 
our Saviour was with us, and that his own word 
was accompanied by the influence of his Spirit. 
Oh how I long to get near to God. Is he my 
Father ? Endearing title ! I believe he is. I have 
of late had unusual delight in calling him my 
Father, my Redeemer, my Sanctifier. Lord, 
search me, and try me, and see if there be any 
wicked way in me, and lead me in the way ever- 
lasting." 

" OoDooviLLE, Feb. 3, 1827. 
" ^Iy dear E , I have been out this after- 
noon with Mr. Winslow to a school-buno-alow 
nearly three miles distant, where the people have 
not often heard the word of God. We left home 
at 3 o'clock. The sun was very powerful, and 
we rode some of the way through heavy sands. 
The people who had assembled came out into 
the road to meet us. We found more than 100 
boys seated around the sides of the bungalow, 
and mats spread in the centre for men. Not ex- 



IN CEYLON. 345 

pecting thai ' the lady ' would come, they had 
provided but one chair. Soon, however, a large 
mortar was brought, on which I\Ir. W. sat. The 
first class of boys then read while we waited for 
more people to come in, and receiving the appro- 
bation of the padre^ they were much delighted. 
Mr. W. addressed the people on the certainty of 
the resurrection and future judgment. They were 
very attentive, and begged that he would come 
again in a month, and stay longer. There is 
much benefit in preaching in this way ; many 
come to these bungalows who would not come 
to our churches, and they are much more atten- 
tive when seated quietlj'-, than when addressed 
in the bazars and roads, or even at their own 
homes. 

" On ^londay next we hope to meet you in the 
concert of prayer. And how, dear friend, is your 
heart affected by an increase of worldly cares % 

And, dear JMr , do you love to pray for the 

heathen, and for missionaries, and for the world, 
as much as you once did V 

At this time she addressed another solemn ap- 
peal to the female associate to whom she wrote 
May, 1818, who, it is gratifying to add, has since 
publicly consecrated herself to the service of 
Christ. 



34.-6 MES. WINSLOW. 

" OoDOOviLLE, Feb. 28, 1S27. 

" My dear , I have often felt a desire to 

write to you since I left America, but have been 
in doubt whether a letter would afford you any 
pleasure. Your very kind remembrance of me, 
expressed in a letter from my dear mother, has 
awakened new desires to write, and determined 
me to delay it no longer. 

" I have not any thing to tell you concerning 
the mission, or the state of the people and coun- 
try around us that is new or particularly inte- 
resting ; nor have I taken my pen with a view to 
describe my family circle, and tell you of many 
enjoyments that I have in this^a?' distant heathen 
land^ and that I never, for a moment, regret com- 
ing hither, but rejoice that I am permitted to do 
a little for the welfare of the miserable people 
among whom we dwell — no, my dear friend, not 
for any nor all these do I write ; but to tell you 
once more^ that I long to hear that you are as 
happy as the ' peace of God which passeth all 
understanding ' can make you ; to know that you 
have a portion with the people of God, and that 
your treasure is in heaven. If this is the case, 
do permit me to know it from your pen. 

" You have been afflicted since I saw you. I 
loved and respected your departed mother, and 
felt that her death was a loss to me — to you how 
much greater. Did you consider that by this be- 



L\ CEYLO.V. 34-7 

reavcment the Lord in great tenderness said to 
you, 'Daughter, give me thine heart;' and have 
you done so 1 Have you consecrated to him, with 
love and c^ratitude, the talents which he commit- 
ted to you that they might be employed for him 1 
If you have, accept my congratulations ; but if 

not, permit me to say, dear , ' To-day, if you 

will hear his voice, liarden not your heart!' 
* Without holiness no man shall sec the Lord.' 
You wish to be happy — you hope to be happy ; 
but — be not deceived. The lanffuafre of God is 
plain, ' Except ye be converted ye cannot see the 
kino^dom of God.' It is a small thing to lose the 
world with all its honors and pleasures ; but how 
immense the loss to be shut out of heaven — to be 
for ever excluded from the society of God and 
of all holy beings, and to have our portion with 
his enemies Be entreated to inquire with your- 
self whether it be not wise to look away from 
the few fleeting days which constitute the long- 
est life upon earth, to that life which will never 
end. Heaven and hell are set before you by Him 
who desires not the death of the sinner, but 
would have men every where to repent. Be en- 
treated to accept of mercy as it is freely offered ; 
to be hapi)y in this life, and happy for ever. 

Dear , forgive me if I grieve or offend you. 

If I did not love you more than the world love 
you, I could not write thus. To the sovereign 



MS MRS. WINSLOW. 

mercy of God I commend you, praying that you 
may not cast aside this my affectionate and earn* 
est entreat}^, without beseeching the Lord to give 
you repentance unto eternal life. 

'' Believe me your sincere friend, 

'' Harriet^' 

" OoDooviLLE, March 14, 1827. 

" My dear Father Winslow, — I am induced 
to address you at this time, by having read some 
letters which you wrote my dear husband when 
he concluded to leave his business and com- 
mence study. I admire the cheerful submission 
which you manifested in the disappointment of 
your plans for him, as also the plain and candid 
manner in which you placed before his mind the 
difficulties to be anticipated in the path which he 
was about entering. Could you knov/ how plain 
his way has been marked out before him, and 
how much enjoyment he has had in pursuing it, 
and especially the reason we have to hope that 
the blessing of God has rested on his labors 
among these poor deluded heathen, you would, I 
am sure, (as I believe you now do,) rejoice that 
he was brought to the decision to come out hither 
instead of remaining in the bosom of his friends 
and countrj^ 

" When I think of the severe trial you must 
have had in relinquishing your long-cherished 



IN CEYLON. 34-9 

expectations concerning him, so soon after the 
death of his beloved mother, I ahnost exclaim, 
can it be right thus to grieve a widowed parent — 
is it not unnatural, unchristian 1 I however fully 
believe it to be sometimes proper and necessary ,• 
and that such sacrilices on the part of the parent 
and child are followed by the special blessing of 
heaven! Can you not say, dear father, at this 
advanced period of life, and after so long expe- 
rience, that you never gave up any thing to your 
Saviour, not even the companion of your youth, 
the object of your earliest, tenderest love, or 
your children, the precious pledges of that love, 
but he awarded you a hundred fold \ How much 
pleasure I should have in hearing you relate some 
of your trials, and the consolations which you 
have experienced from your covenant Father. 
Has he not always been as kind as your fondest 
hopes \ Has he not wiped away your tears, healed 
your wounds, and enabled you always to speak 
of mercy more than judgment 1 Should I be so 
happy as to see you in a better world, I hope 1 
may know more of all this ; may be belter ac- 
quainted with one to whom I am indebted for the 
greatest temporal blessing of my life. 

" Sister C. could wish this dear brother ^ God 
speed' when she first heard of his plans. Her 
heart seemed full of joy at the thought that God 
had called him to preach the Gospel. Dear sister, 



350 MRS. WINSLOW. 

I am sure you have not since mourned on this 
account, even though it has removed him far 
from you. Does not the hope of meeting him at 
the last day, surrounded by souls redeemed from 
among these heathen by his instrumentality, more 
than compensate for all that any of you have suf- 
fered in the loss of his society here 1 At that 
great day how differently will all earthly things 
appear to us, from what they now do. How little 
shall we then think of our changes and sufferings 
in this world, when we find that they have pre- 
pared us for the pure and perfect enjoyments of 
heaven. 

" Mr. Nathaniel Winslow." 

TO HER PARENTS. 

" OoDooYiLLE, March 16, 1827. 
" I had this evening an interesting conversa- 
tion with Charles. It seemed a new thought to 
him that those who go to hell have never after 
an opportunity to repent ; and it was difficuh to 
convince him that they cannot put an end to their 
sufferings by killing themselves. He said, ' But 
if Jesus should come to them and call them, v/ould 
they not love him and go to him V Oh that I knew 
how to give him right thoughts in a right manner j 
and that God would send his Spirit upon him. 
It will indeed be strange if I see my children con- 
verted before I have ' travailed in birth' for them 



IN CEYLOX. 351 

many, many times. I cannot expect it, though I 
do hope, with some degree of confidence, that 
they will in the end be saved, and also that they 
may have the privilege of doing something for 
the cause of Christ on earth. I have never thought 
so much of the happiness which christian parents 
must feel in having their children all born of God, 
I as of late. And what joy it would give me to hear 
that you, my beloved parents, were thus made 
happy ; to hear that the three dear ones whom we 
fear are still ' without God in the world^'' had con- 
secrated themselves, their all, for time and eter- 
nity, to the Lord, who has a right to and demands 
their best service — the vigor of their days — and 
wiio oflers no encouragement that he will here- 
after receive what is now denied or withheld 
from him." 

How would her heart have rejoiced, could she 
have known that all the " three dear ones " for 
whom she here pleads, would so soon enter into 
her labors among the heathen. 

" ^pril 1, 1S27, Sabbath.— ?TW^ic Journal.— I 

have again sat at the table of the Lord. Oh how 

unworthy. Our lecture on Friday was pleasant. 

' This morning we had a season of social prayer, 

I which I enjoyed. Went to church in a quiet 

I frame of mind. Katheraman and the old woman 



352 MRS. WINSLOW. 

Seethavy publicly professed their faith. I was 
affected to see them, and particularly when 1 
stood up with the church to promise my part of 
the duty in watching over them. The thought 
of adding to my obligations, now so poorly per- 
formed, for a few moments overwhelmed me. 
Had some enjoyment at the table ; something like 
lying in the hands of God as a little child, help- 
less and hopeless unless he should condescend to 
make me his own. Retained much the same feel- 
ings afterward, but my body was exceedingly 
exhausted. 

" June 15. — Our little George commenced his 
immortal existence on the r2th of May. Goodness 
and mercy have followed me ever since. How 
great a debtor. I am feeble, and- have had ie\Y 
seasons of retirement, but in some have found it 
good to wait upon the Lord. With all my cold- 
ness and worldly-mindedness, what could I do 
without the privilege of going to the throne of 
grace. Have had a refreshing season this morn- 
ing in preparation for the duties of the Sabbath, 
when we hope to sit at the table of our Redeem- 
er. Oh that he would meet with us. I think I 
do long to live nearer to him, to be hidden with 
him. Have been trying to see if I have any right 
spirit, and think I can say, ' whom have I in hea- 
ven but Thee, and there is none upon earth that I 
desire besides Thee.' I think I do place my chief 



IN CEYLON. 353 

happiness in God, and that I would not liave any- 
other portion ; hut my life, Oh how unlike that 
of the blessed Jesus ! I have no other refuge than 
his blood, which can cleanse from all sin. Yes, 
precious thought, he * came not to call the 
righteous, but sinners to repentance.' He will 
save all who trust in him. May I trust in him 
alone for myself and my children. Especially do 
I desire to consecrate this dear child, by faith, to 
him. Oh my God, receive our little one ; receive 
him as thine own. Oh let him have no other por- 
tion in time or in eternity. 

" September 23. — There are some signs of new 
life amongst us. I think this has been a great 
day to some souls ; that some congregations have 
been visited by the saving influences of the Spirit. 
I have of late more prevailing desires to see the 
heathen converted, and more reluctance to secu- 
lar employments and thoughts in myself and 
others ; but I do not see my sins as I have done, or 
so pant after a pure heart and an unblameable 
life. Of late, too, it has seemed to me that I have 
not such an interest at the throne of grace as 
formerly. 

" October 20. — Some remarks made about dia- 
ries, that they are seldom written without the ex- 
pectation of other eyes seeing them besides those 
of the writer, accompanied by my own reflec- 
tions, have made me almost resolve to burn all 
30* 



Soif MRS. WINSLOW. 

that I have ever written, now while I am m 
health, lest sickness and death, by suddenly over 
taking me, should prevent it ; but I am deterred 
by the recollection that I once burned a journal 
of the kind, which I ever afterwards regretted ; 
and also that what I have written has often been 
useful to warn, quicken and encourage me, as 
well as to make me humble. I have sometimes 
tried to clothe my sins and sorrows in language, 
but have never succeeded so as to show me as I 
am ; and oh how thankful should I be that only 
a Divine eye can see my heart, especially that it 
is the eye of Him who pities and forgives." 

TO HER PARENTS. 

" October 20, 1827.— Yesterday, by urgent re- 
quest, we went to Jaffna, to be present at the for- 
mation of a \Yesleyan Missionary Society. There 
were present English, Dutch, Portuguese, Tamu- 
lians, and Americans, besides some grades and 
gradations of country and color not easily defin- 
ed or described. It is trying to leave our families 
and go out for a day several miles, and my prin- 
ciples as well as feelings would forbid it, if I did 
not see that it is useful, and even necessarj-. For 
a society like ours, composed of Episcopalians, 
Wesleyans, and Presbyterians, from different 
countries, to act in concert in our great work, 



IN CEYLON. 355 

there must be occasional intercourse, and we 
must be ready especially to assist each other's 
operations. 

'' This is a dark and stormy evening. ^Ir. W. 
is in his study — a room taken off from the end of 
the church. The rain falls plentifully in large 
drops upon the leaves and tiles of the house, 
sounding like small hail-stones. The clnldren 
are in bed, and I am just so much alone as I still 
love sometimes to be. I have not forgrotten with 
what feelings I used to enter my little closet, in 
the house under the hill, and shut the door to all 
the world on such an evening as this. I could 
then turn from the unsatisfying scenes of earth, 
and with deep feeling contemplate that heavenly 
city where is no tempest or darkness ; where all 
is serene ; ' for the glory of God doth lighten it, 
and the Lamb is the light thereof.' Then, as now, 
I felt that I was nof alone. I know not how many 
of my formerly much loved friends and com- 
panions may be hovering around me. Many of 
them certainly have no longer a body like my 
own, and if they know my heart, they may 
rejoice that with many of its feelings they can 
now have no sympathy. 

" February 19, 1828. — We were, at our last 
dates, anticipating a very pleasant season at our 
quarterly meeting in January. The number of 
candidates lor admission to the church was twen- 



356 MRS. WINSLOW. 

ty-five ; but of these only seventeen were pro- 
pounded. The remaining eight were kept back 
by sickness, the opposition of friends, and the 
opinion of the missionaries that they ought to 
have a longer trial. 

" The enemy was never before so fully on the 
watch, or so much alarmed, as now. Among the 
candidates were a number of whom the opposers 
could not say either that they were ' low-caste,' or 
dependent on us for support. We were disappoint- 
ed and grieved at the instability of some, but the 
Lord knoweth them that are his, and will eventually 
give them grace to stand against any opposition. 

" May 28. — Mr. W. left home on the 1st inst. 
for a missionary tour on the continent, in com- 
pany with Mr. Woodward, who is going to the 
Neilgherry Hills for his health, and I have been 
for four long weeks alone. When I last heard 
from him he had visited the missionary stations 
at Tanjore and Trichinopoly, also many heathen 
temples and villages, and found Tracts in so great 
demand that he had given away nearly all he had, 
and would return home sooner than he had at first 
intended. 

'^ To show you a little of the state of society 
here, in one respect, I will mention the trouble 
that thieves have occasioned me. Just before 
Mr. AV. left, some of our neighbors being afraid 
of thieves, requested to have their most valuable 



i 



IN CEYLON. .357 

articles deposited in two boxes in our go-down. 
As soon as he was gone, thieves began to come 
every night to their liouses, and throw stones at 
them to ascertain if the people were asleep. They 
Avere thus kept watching till they could bear it no 
longer, and complained to the magistrate. He or- 
dered all the suspected persons in the vicinity to 
be brought before him. There was no difficulty in 
doing this, because those who are engaged in 
robberies are well known to many of the people. 

" In this instance more than sixty were brought 
up ; of whom some are considered respectable, 
as a Maningar, and Odigar. They were reprimand- 
ed and charged to keep the peace, and not to 
disturb Me Jlmmah while her husband was absent. 

" Some of the accused said that I had entered 
tlie complaint because they had not become chris- 
tians when exhorted to do so by Mr. W. The 
disturbance has been so near us as to keep those 
in our yard in constant alarm ; especially as it was 
supposed that the object was to draw the domes- 
tics from the house, by a cry of thieves else- 
where, and then come and attack our premises. 

" I have felt little apprehension of them my- 
self, though 1 knew that they might with ease 
have stripped the house of every thing valuable. 
They sometimes come in such numbers to com- 
mit robberies that all e/Torts to resist them would 
be vain. The poor natives, though their most 



358 MRS. WINSLOW. 

valuable goods are stolen, seldom attempt any 
resistance, but sliding into a corner, are glad to 
escape without having their ears cut off for the 
jewels in them, or some other serious injury done 
to their persons. It is said that there has been 
much less thieving in this neighborhood since 
we came than before, and probably there would 
have been no disturbance now if Mr. W. had 
been at home. 

" June 25. — Two days after the last date Mr 
W. arrived. I had been quite anxious, as the 
weather w^as tempestuous. He had been six days 
in an open boat, when, with a favorable wind, he 
could have come in half a day. You will rejoice 
to hear that the schoolmaster, whom we have 
often mentioned with peculiar interest as serious 
and desirous to join the church, but kept back by 
persecution, has at length come forward and pro- 
fessed his faith in Christ. As it was believed that 
his relations would use force to keep him back, 
he was not propounded publicly, but only to the 
members of the church, and was received at Mane- 
py. On his return home his wife told him that 
he should not come into the house, and as he did 
so, she left it and went to that of her mother. A 
great number of the relatives collected together 
the next morning, and remained through the whole 
day, ridiculing him and expressing their indigna- 
tion. His mother has gone on a pilgrimage to 



IN CEYLON. 359 

the continent to niake oflerings atatemple there, 
to prevent her son from becoming a christian. 
She has for a long time been trj'ing to cheat liim 
out of his property, though her only son, and she 
a widow, by causing forged deeds to be made, 
because she found that she could not keep him in 
the shackles of heathenism. I think no one has 
joined us before, possessing talents, learning, and 
family influence so great as this man. He has 
long been Mr. W.'s assistant in Tamul, and is, I 
believe, considered the best qualified in the lan- 
guage of any in the mission. He has, however, 
too much diffidence and timidity. We can only 
plead with God, who knows how much we need 
such helpers, to make him a bold and successful 
champion of the faith — a burning and a shining 
light in the midst of darkness. In his own neigh- 
borhood and family is Satan's seat ; for his 
grandfather has a temple and is a prime mover 
in luiathenism." 

This " schoolmaster," then employed as a su- 
perintendent of schools and assistant in Tamul, 
continued steadfast in his profession. His grand- 
father had threatened him ; his mother had told 
him she could not live if he became a christian ; 
and his wife, to whom he was then recently mar- 
ried, had given sufficient assurance of her inten- 
tion to leave him, should he thus disgrace himself. 



360 MRS. WINSLOW. 

After he was received to the church, his mother 
returned from her pilgrimage, which had been 
performed to prevent this consummation. Her 
soul was filled with grief and anger when she 
found that her son had partaken of the Lord's 
supper with christians. She was resolved if pos- 
sible to prevent a recurrence of this calamity, 
and when the next season of communion arrived, 
called the family friends to aid in keeping him 
from attending. They svTrrounded him in the 
yard, but he insisted on going, until his mother 
threw herself in the gate-way and said, " My son, 
you shall not go out of this yard without tread- 
ing on the body of the mother that bore you." 
He yielded for the time, but on the next occasion 
v/ent away previous to the day of communion, 
and enjoyed the ordinance. His wife left him for 
a time, but afterwards returned, and the opposi- 
tion of his friends gradually abated. 

The custom of thieves to go in large compa- 
nies, as mentioned above, is very common. They 
sometimes enter a village with lights and fire a 
gun. The natives are too much alarmed to think 
of defending themselves, and the robbers take what 
they please, and go off unmolested. There is not 
usually sufhcient public virtue to bring them to jus- 
tice, even when their crimes are known to many* 
The head men, whose duty it is to detect the 
thieves, are often in league with them. A large 



IN CEYLON. 3G1 

robbery was committed in one of tiic villages near 
Oodoovillc. The police vcdan^ or native consta- 
ble, was ordered to make thorough search for the 
stolen goods. He made diligent and extensive 
search, but without anj"- success — and for good 
reason, as it was afterwards discovered that they 
were concealed in his own liouse. 

Few christians, perhaps, make great advances 
in piety without passing through trials. It usual- 
ly requires many heavy strokes to break us off 
from our too strong attachment to earth. It was 
under the mellowing influence of grief, as well as 
the exhilaration of joy, that the subject of this me- 
moir was prepared for heaven. The fruits of the 
Spirit were ripened by an alternation of rain and 
sunshine. At this time she was called to mourn the 
loss of a lovely babe at the age of fifteen months. 

^^ September 1^^ 1828. — We have been greatly 
afflicted in the removal of our darling George. 
He was a precious treasure, and we flattered our- 
selves that his sweet smile would cheer us many 
years, and that he would add one to the number 
of the heralds of the cross, to proclaim Christ to 
the heathen after our work should be done and 
our bodies be laid in the grave. But he has been 
taken from us, and his spirit is, we fully believe, 
engaged in a more glorious work above than it 



362 MRS. WIKSLOW. 

could be here below. I never followed a loved 
spirit to the heavenly world with such feelings of 
entire satisfaction that it was in a place more 
suited to it than any could be here, and I have 
since delighted to think of this precious one as 
freed from all earthly hinderances to a pure and 
perfect worship ' before the throne of God and 
the Lamb.' We have deeply felt this stroke j and 
I hope are benefited by it. We feel that it is 
from our Father, who has not only a right to his 
own, but who afHicts his children to bring them 
back from their wanderings, and to draw them 
nearer to himself." 

TO HER SISTER ELIZABETH, 

" OODOOVILLE, , 1828, 

"My dear E , I need not tell you that we 

greatly rejoice in the hope that you have become 
one of those whose ^ names are written in heaven.' 
Be not deceived. I am glad to see that you are 
not over-confident of your good estate. It well 
becomes such poor wretched sinners as we are 
to walk softly and to speak tremblingly ; yet 
whatever we are, the grace of God is the same j 
and if we have tasted it, we ought to magnify it, 
by our actions especially. I hope you will; I hope 
indeed that you have given yourself and your all 
to Him whose service you will delight in, an4 
whose name you will honor. 



IN CEYLOX. 363 

" I would advise you in many particulars, for 
I think young converts need advice ; but you 
have those near at hand much better able, those 
who, in a 20 years' professed service, have not so 
often and so grievously wandered from the foun- 
tain of all good, and been satisfied with forbidden 
streams. Listen to them, and especially seek 
constantly the guidance of the Saviour ; keep very 
near to him^ and let your first, your unceasinu; 
effort, be to drink deeply of his Spirit. He Avill 
tell you ' what to do for the heathen ' far better 
than I can ; and he will tell you what to do for 
those around you. Be a consistent christian where 
you are and in what you are, and you will be 
prepared for any work that may be in reserve 
for you. 

*' You would be gratified to see what we have 
at Oodooville to-day. Notice having been given, 
not generally, but to some extent, at all our sta- 
tions that girls would be received to the Female 
Boarding-school — thirty-seven were brought, and 
after we had selected 12, the remaining ones were 
urged upon us by every plea that their parents 
could use. In contrast with this, seven years ago 
we could not by any arguments induce more than 
three or four to live on our premises. My charge 
now consists of 38, and I assure you I feel it to 
be no light thing ; partly because I think I never 
did and never shall do my duty towards them. 



364« MRS. WINSLOW. 

How much my dear sister E. could help me, 
or either of my sisters ; but I can never invite 
you to come alone as some ladies come to the 
heathen." 

" OODOOVILLE, Jul}', 1828. 

"My dear Sister F , I have for some time 

thought of asking you if you continue to think 
of us on the hour appointed — on Saturday even- 
ing ; and since the Lord has so graciously grant- 
ed what we asked for in reference to our sisters, 
(though it may not be in answer to our prayef s,) 
may we not be encouraged to extend our sub- 
jects, and enlarge our requests. I have thought 

my own dear children, with D 's, may come up 

before you with much propriety, if you think so. 
I feel, dear sister, as though the one thing is so 
important for these dear ones, that I scarcely ask 
for them any thing else. I can, I hope, cheerfully 
leave every thing else concerning them. Oh that 
we may have a spirit of grace and supplication 
for them, and not forget continually to thank the 
Lord for what he has done for us and ours." 

^^ August 15. — This is an interesting, solemn 
anniversary, such an one as I hope you may not 
know. I have felt not as I wished, though I be- 
lieve no murmuring nor desire to recall the pre- 
cious child. Life is a blessing, and it is pleasant 
to hope that those to whom we have given birth 



IN CEYLON. 365 

may be useful in the world ; but there is much 
to comfort us when they are removed, as we hope, 
to a better world ; and if there were nothing 
else, the fact that the Lord has done his own 
pleasure with them is, I hope, enough to make 
me lay my hand upon my mouth. 

"As to the publishing of a part of my letter, I 
only hope it will do no hurt. I am more content 
with being harmless than I once was, for I find it 
easier to do injury^ and less easy to do much good 
than I once thought. But it would embarrass me 
too much in my familiar letters, to think it even 
possible that my name would find place in a 
public paper." 

^^ J\''ov. 23. — Private Journal. — We have twelve 
girls added to the school. I feel for them as I 
think I never did for any before ; I view them as 
more promising subjects to aid in the conversion 
of this people, and have more hope of doing 
something for them myself, though, alas, it may 
be very little. My own dear children I feel to 
be the Lord's. Ever since a short time after 
George's death I have had an assurance that has 
'greatly comforted me. Charles had hurt himself, 
and I feared lock-jaw for a week. It was a week 
of unusual pjayer. Before it closed I felt that I 
could say with confidence, he is the Lord^s ; and, 
oh blessed be God who has not turned away my 
31* 



366 BIES. WINSLOTV. 

prayer, nor his mercy from me, I have not yet 
lost this sweet confidence. I praise God for it, 
while I hope it may be made the means of in- 
creasing my fidelity in training up these precious 
ones for his service. For our poor domestics my 
cold heart sometimes mourns and weeps. 

^^ February 23, 1829. — Some pleasing prospects 
of a revivrl of religion among us have disap- 
peared. I fear it is said, He could not do'many 
mighty works there, because of their unbelief.' I 
trust, however, that God has been glorified in the 
conversion of some, and in convincing others of 
the truth. I do love still to pray that he will 
arise and plead his own cause. 

^^ March 29. — My sins are a heavjr burden ; no- 
thing is half so heavy. Yet, in one respect, I can 
praise the Lord that he has heard my voice and 
my supplications. What I mourned over for years 
after coming to Jaffiia, and even long before, has 
not, I believe, troubled me at all for two years 
past. Other things, however, cleave to me. Oh 
that I had grace to arise and say, * Through Christ, 
I can do all things.' I have had many comforts 
of late, and much peace of mind. My hopes for 
the heathen are not fully realized, but the Lord 
hath remembered me and mine in great mercy. 

^^ April 12. — This will probably be^ my last Sab- 
bath of health at present. Lord, I commit myself 
and my all to thee. Thou art my refuge and 



IN CEYLON. 367 

Strength, be thou my ' very present help in time 
of trouble.' Be the stay of my husband and chil- 
dren. If I have never again opportunity to say it, 
I would here testify some sense of gratitude for 
a husband who has been so much my comfort in 
this life of variety and change. If I am permitted 
to live, may I be far more useful to him than I 
have ever been ; and if I am taken away, wilt 
thou, Lord, be his support. Oh be better to him 
than his unworthy wife, and better than all earth- 
ly comforts. The dear children I have given to 
thee — whatever may befall them in this life, pre- 
pare them for a better ; living or dying, may they 
be only thine. Help me, gracious God, to leave 
my all with thee." 

" OonooviLLE, November 15, 1829. 
" My dear Sister F. — Our Sunday-school this 
morning was unusually pleasant. I have told you 
that there arc sometimes more than one hundred 
girls. These belong to my part of the school. 
They are divided into twelve classes, over each 
of which is one of the skirls of the boardino-- 
school. They meet in the verandah of the girls' 
bungalow. When the bell rings at 8 o'clock, I 
go out and give tickets for attendance to all pre- 
sent, and see that the teachers are in their places. 
At 9 o'clock I go again to hear their lessons^ 
and reward those who deserve it with another 



368 MRS. wiNSLOw. 

ticket. This morning, on going a second time, I 
fomid nearly all the teachers exhorting the girls 
to repent and believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Old Mareal, the low caste woman, who is a mem- 
ber of the church, was seated by one class, while 
the cfirls in it and the teachers were alike listen- 
ing to the exhortations of this poor and ignorant, 
but I hope sincere follower of the Saviour. As I 
passed on from one class to another nearly round 
the school, without venturing to interrupt what I 
thought was better for the time than their cate- 
chisms and other lessons, I thought, how would 
dear F. enjoy this scene. Oh for that Spirit which 
can save these souls, as well as those on whom 
the Gospel shines in all its splendor. Sometimes 
I am almost discouraged. Every thing connected 
with the school is such up-hill work, that I am 
ready to think nothing is done, and nothing can 
be done. 

" 23. — As I have begun to tell you about our 
Sunday-school, perhaps you will be interested to 
see another side of the picture. Yesterday I 
found, on going out the second time, that most 
of the classes were engaged as the week before 
— the teachers explaining the lessons and talking 
to the children. I joined myself to the first class^ 
which consists of five who are able to read well. 
They have committed to memory all the cate- 
chisms, a Scripture-history used in the schools, 



IN CEYLON. 369 

and some prayers. They have read nearly through 
the second Gospel, and of late have given sonic 
account of the sernnon heard the preceding Sah- 
bath. On asking them some questions, as I often 
do, but such as were a little new, I was surprised 
at their ignorance. Very simple (juestions, which 
1 should have thought they could answer at once, 
and which 1 am sure they have heard many times, 
they could not answer. It seemed as though 
words conveyed no ideas to their minds, and it 
is a fact, that they hear and repeat them many 
times without knowing what they mean. They 
do not think. 

" I never felt so deeply that there is a thick 
veil spread over their minds, which nothing but 
the Holy Spirit can remove. They are in gross 
darkness ; and not these little ones only, but 
children of a larger growth — all are in Egyptian 
darkness. Some part of what is committed to 
memory will no doubt be remembered, and by 
continued explanation a little truth will be under- 
stood; but the process is very slow. Does this 
look like the conversion of India in a day 1 
Would that those who report progress, and those 
who hear their reports, did not so often confound 
the preparatory work with the work itself. 

" The prospect for females is, it is true, much 
darker than that for the other sex. The preju- 
dices against their learning any thing are very 



370 MRS. WINSLOW. 

strong ; and after they are instructed, there are 
many hinderances to their exerting any but a fee- 
ble influence. Still I hope I can say, with sincere 
thankfulness to Him whose work it is, that some- 
thing has been done and is doing to prepare the 
way of the Lord. But what are human wisdom 
and human eflbrts without his life-giving Spirit 1 
If he breathe upon us, we shall be revived, and 
these dry bones will live and become an exceed- 
ing great army. Do not cease to offer your pray- 
ers for us, because we have been favored here- 
tofore, and have still many mercies. 

" Your affectionate 

" Harriet. 
'*Mrs. Fanny L. Hallock." 

" December 2, 1829. 
" My dear Susan, — As to my health, since our 
journey to Calcutta I have been most of the 
time able to perform the common duties of house- 
keeping, and take the necessary care of my 
children and of the boarding-school. But the 
best health in this country is very far from what 
it is in America. Those who call themselves well, 
can still bear but little fatigue compared with 
what they could there. Mr. W. could preach 
three times on the Sabbath at home with more 
ease than he can twice here. When he now 
preaches three times he is quite exhausted. As 



IN CEYLON. 371 

to myself, half an hour in Sunday-school in the 
morning-, attending church twice, instructing my 
own children, and hearing the lessons of the 
girls in the boarding-school, is all that I can ac- 
complish. AVe have, however, much to be thank- 
ful for in this respect. The climate of Jaflria we 
think more favorable to health than most parts 
of India where missionaries are, and, with occa- 
sional exceptions, we all enjoy it. I would add, 
that my own experience leads me to advise fe- 
males who are feeble, or who have not generally 
good healthy to remain at home, rather than to 
enter a missionary field ; or at least I would ad- 
vise missionaries to seek companions who have 
health. Do not understand me as discontented. 
Nothing tends more to make us satisfied with 
any circumstances than to feel assured that they 
are ordered by Providence, and of this, in regard 
to my life being spent here, I know not that I 
have a single doubt." 
" Mrs. Susan C. Kellogg." 

" OoDooviLLE, (Jaffna,) Dec. 9, 18'29. 
" j\Iy dear Aunt Leffingwell, — In the want 
of something new in our mission to write about, 
I thought of giving you a particular account of 
the prayer-meeting which was to be held on 
Monday last ; but instead of a meeting, we had 
a severe storm, and were not only confined at 



372 MRS. WIXSLOW. 

home, but almost driven out of our house by the 
ram. The poor natives suffered in various ways, 
as indeed they always do in storms of this kind. 
Those connected with our family came to us, one 
for a cloth, another for a piece of flannel, and all 
for food. With their utmost endeavors to protect 
their defenceless bodies, they were drenched 
with water like the trees of the garden. At such 
times the mud-walled cottages of the poor crea- 
tures, to which they and their cattle promiscuous- 
ly crowd for shelter, often fall down, the walls 
being soaked with water ; or the covering of 
leaves is blown off by the wind. Their cattle also 
die, and if the storm continues two or three days, 
they have nothing to eat. The habit of obtaining 
supplies day by day is so universal, that even the 
wealthy have nothing Maid by in store,' except 
grain not in a state of preparation for food. 
They have no wood, no fruit, and no vegetables, 
unless their own garden happens to furnish them. 
Perhaps all the members of a family huddle into 
a corner, and, sitting upon their heels, take their 
cloths from their waist, put them round theii 
shoulders, and wait for the storm to abate, till a 
sense of hunger prompts some of them to look 
about for food. The mother probably, (though in 
times of general distress the father is ready to. 
do something not ordinarily his employment,) 
putting a basket on her head for an umbrella^ 



LN CLVLON. 373 

creeps out to pick up a few slicks, if Jilic cuii 
iind them neiir, or breaks tliein off the hedge, to 
make a little fire and prepare any thing they 
may have to cat. 

" In sickness, also, this people feel the bitter- 
ness of poverty, ignorance, and heathenism. 
They have no comfur/s. It is not uncommon to 
see a man with a fever (for fevers are frequent 
and severe, though not often malignant,) stretched 
for weeks upon a mat on the ground-floor of a 
verandah, with a stone or board for his pillow, 
having no change of clothing, no savory drink to 
allay his distressing thirst, nothing to bathe his 
burning limbs, and almost no medicine, because 
liis purse does not allow him to pay the doctor, 
whose charges are in proportion to his preten- 
sions rather than his skill. If the poor man is 
Avilling to give his little all to attempt securing 
a few more days of uncertain and low enjoyment 
in this world, his wife's jewels, perhaps, must be 
pawned to pay for the doctor's attendance, and 
liis friends must make their daily offerings at the 
temple to appease the idol, who is angry at him 
for having failed, it may be, in performing some 
ceremony, or to induce the goddess, who sends 
disease as an amusement to herself, to withdraw 
her hand and cease her sport. If he recovers, 
some new offering, or some penance, or a pil- 
grimage in honor of this same senseless idol, is 



374 MRS. WLNSLOW. 

the only return of gratitude which his religion 
enjoins; and when he has performed it, he feels 
under no further obligation. How unlike this the 
sick-bed of a christian, in a place where there 
are numberless alleviations of suffering, and 
where the mind is stayed upon that God who 
does not afflict willingly, — upon that Saviour 
who pities and forgives, and has himself taken 
away the sting of death ! 

" There are times, my dear aunt, when the 
view of such scenes makes it easy to endure 
trials — easy to count not our lives dear to us, if 
souls may be converted to Christ ; but can you 
believe that in this corner of the world there are 
many hinderances to a cheerful consecration of 
every thing to this glorious service 1 Yes, I am 
sure you know enough of the human heart, and 
perhaps I should say of mine in particular, to be- 
lieve it is even so. We have a world here, though 
it is a very small one, and it has power to draw 
our hearts aside too much. We have had no re- 
vival of religion the last year, but there has been 
an addition to the church of eight or ten indivi- 
duals at our several stations. Many children 
have been instructed, — the Gospel has been 
preached to very many in various places, — • 
Tracts have been more generally distributed, and, 
I believe, much more extensively read, than in 
any previous year. I hope, also, that much prayej 



IN cnvLox. 375 

has been ofTercJ that darkness may flee awaj', 
hoth here and in christian lands, and tlic true 
light shine upon all people." 

" December 25. — This is a day of riotous mirth 
to many poor creatures in this district. The Ro- 
man catholics, and the native protestants at 
•hifinapatam, after some reliofious exercises, make 
it a season of continued dissipation from this 
time until the new year ; and practice excesses 
which I should be sorry to name. 

" Yesterday the native free schools connected 
with this station were examined. Mr. W. at- 
tended to their lessons in the church, while I 
redeemed the children's tickets and gave cloths 
to the girls. I am sure it would have given you, 
and any other of our friends, pleasure to see this 
group of yii'e hundred chWAT en. More than one 
hundred of them were girls^ who, by their regu- 
lar attendance and progress in learnino-j were 
most of them entitled to receive cloths. They 
made quite a*neat appearance after getting them, 
compared with what they did before, and were 
very liappy. We were both of us busily em- 
ployed for more than five hours, and I assure you 
it was an agreeable occupation. 

'* OoDOOviLT-K, January 9, IftSO, 
" Dear E , Good Mrs. Lanman has gone, 



376 MRS. WINSLOW. 

and how great her joy now, who can telH Who 
are now your leaders in all that is good 1 

" Mr. Winslow's theological class has done 
well, and my school better, perhaps, than any pre- 
ceding year. The schools generally prosper; 
many hear the Gospel, read Tracts, &c. but they 
do not ' come bending unto Jesus.' What hinder- 
eth I know not ; but the Holy Spirit is not given. 
Perhaps those who used to hold up our hands are 
dead, and none stand in their places. We certain- 
ly need what we have not, before we can see th6 
conversion of this people. A few inquire, and 
some make professions ; but what are they com- 
pared with the multitude. The girls in the board- 
ing school have been more awake of late ; and 
the members of the church seem to desire to do 
something for others. For a time they went out 
two afternoons in each week with my Ache, of 
whom you have heard, and read and conversed 
with such women as would hear them ; but of late 
they have told me of such treatment from some 
that I dare not send them, except occasionally. 

" I wish you would think more of the degraded 
condition of females here, and bear them on your 
heart more, and try to induce your friends to do 
so also. Prayer will, I believe, be the principal in- 
strument by which they will be brought into the 
family of Christ, and thus elevated above the 
dust. You cannot conceive how low they are, 



IN CEYLON. 377' 

and yet they have minds and hearts; they have 
souls which must live for ever. Oh how delight- 
ful if we could together, with one voice, plead in 
their behalf." 



CHAPTER VIII. 



C^iialificaUoiis of Missionaries— Revival 
of i§31— Oovcrunicotul Kestrictions re- 
moved. 

dualifications of missionaries — house and furniture — man- 
ners and customs — singular fishing-boat — letter to her 
sisters — to her parents — native marriages — female in- 
fluence — revival of religion — sixty-one received to the 
church — fire at Manepy— death of her father — son sent 
to America — reasons for return of children — letters to 
her son — governmental restrictions removed — conver- 
sion of a Court Moodeliar. 

The following suggestions in reference to mis- 
sionary qualifications^ with the annexed facts, 
throwing additional light on the manners and 
customs of the natives of India, and the circum- 
stances of a missionary among them, will be read, 
at least by some, with interest. 
32* 



378 MRS. ■\VINSLOW. 

" OoDooviLLE, January 13, 1830. 

"My dear Sister Elizabeth, — Very many 
thanks for your long kind letter, which we re- 
ceived a few weeks since. I can sympathize 
with you, from experience, in some of your dark- 
ness of mind ; and I rejoice that you are now so 
happily free from it. May your faith henceforth 
be strong and uniform, and then you will have 
sweet and uniform peace. It is said that you 
think much of missions. I should rejoice if you 
are qualified, which I trust you are, to have you 
' even as I am,' except these infirmities and sins. 
Perhaps you will not take it amiss if I attempt to 
tell you what T think a missionarif s wife should 
be. She should have sincere and humble piety — a 
good temper — common sense — a cultivated mi7id — 
a thorough knowledge of household economy — and 
affable manners. 

" By the first, I mean something more than such 
a degree of piety as secures the safety of the in- 
dividual. With clear and distinguishing views of 
what Christianity is, and what it requires, and witt 
a well-grounded hope of an interest in the Saviour, 
there should be a heart glowing with love to him, 
a lively and abiding sense of his fullness and suf- 
ficiency, of the excellence and truth of the pro- 
mises of his word, and deep views of the utter 
helplessness of sinners and their dependence on 
him. There should also exist a strong and impel- 



IN CEYLON. 379 

ling desire to do whatever tlie Lord requires ; a 
willingness to give up comforts and submit to pri- 
vations, to forsake ease and endure toil, to change 
the society of friends for that of enemies, to as- 
semble no more with the ' great congregation,' 
but seek the Lord in the wilderness, or in the de- 
sert, with one friend or with none ; in short, to 
make every sacrifice of personal ease and grati- 
fication for the one great object of making known 
a crucified Saviour to those who are perishing in 
ignorance and §in. If your hands would be soil- 
ed by performing acts of kindness and charity to 
the poor and wretched — if your mind would ne- 
cessarily be contaminated by intercourse with the 
moral depravitj'- and degradation of the heathen — ■ 
if your habits are such that you shrink from all 
acquaintance with what is uncourteous and un- 
polished — if you love refined society so much that 
you cannot cheerfully relinquish it — if the pursuit 
of literature is so charming that it cannot be aban- 
doned — if you cannot ' spend and be spent ' for 
others, and those, too, such as are degraded al- 
most to the level of the brutes — you would better 
not think of the missionary work. 

" By good temper, I mean not merely equanimity 
and mildness, but a readiness to please and be 
pleased, a desire to make others happy, and pa- 
tience and forbearance towards all, even those 
who are the least agireeable — a willingness to sub- 



380 MRS. wiysLOvr. 

mit one's own opinion to that of others, and cheer- 
fully to bear contradiction ; indeed, all that the 
apostle includes in his definition of charity in the 
thirteenth chapter of ist Corinthians. 

"By common sense, I mean that sense which 
enables a person to understand the common use 
of common things, the result of observation, of 
experience, and of sound judgment in the every- 
day affairs of common life : and be assured that, 
with all the learning to be acquired in ordinary cir- 
cumstances, without this qualification you would 
do but little good in the missionary service. 

" The cultivation of mind which is needful, may 
consist in a good acquaintance with grammar, 
arithmetic, geography, and history ; some fa- 
miliarity with polite literature, and a chaste and 
easy style of writing. Other acquirements, such 
as sotne knowledge of botany, chemistry, paint- 
ing and music, would also be very useful. It is 
indispensable that the wife of a missionary be 
able to keep all her family and other accounts. 
She should also be able and apt to teach — should 
have studied human nature in various situations, 
so as to have some acquaintance with men and man- 
ners, and especially should be able to make a cor- 
rect estimate of her own powers and attainments, 
and know how to make the best use of her time. 

" A thorough knowledge of household economy is 
almost a sine qua non in the qualifications of 



IN CEYLON. 381 

the wife of a poor man, as a missionary is of 
course supposed to be. It is necessary to her 
Dwn comfort in a heathen land, as well as to a 
proper provision for her household. All is confu- 
sion and waste if a woman at the head of a fami- 
y here is not familiar with every kind of family 
Dusiness. She must know how to provide for its 
various wants, and how to take care of what is 
Drovided. She must know how to cut^ and make^ 
md mejid every kind of garment, and be willing 
;o do it also. I do not say it is in every case ne- 
cessary for her to do this with her own hands, 
nit in many it will be important. 

'^ Kind and conciliating manners are very dcsira- 
jle, that she may be beloved by her bretliren and 
sisters, if she have any in the same field, and that 
she may win the heathen around her to embrace 
:he Gospel. This is of more importance than is 
often supposed. The heathen are governed by 
ippcarances, at least at first, and an unkind man- 
ner towards them shuts their ears and hardens 
their hearts. 

" Now, dear E. do not say, ' This is too much, 
[ can never think of engaging in the missionary 
work.' Does what I have said imply so much as 
ihe command, ' Be ye perfect, as your Father in 
heaven is perfect ;' and is it not true, that ' if any 
man lack wisdom, he may ask of God, who giveth 
liberally and upbraideth not V " 



382 MRS. WIXSLOW. j 

The hints contained in this letter, though brief,] 
are thought to be valuable. Too much cannot ' 
be said or felt on the importance of the first- 
named requisite for missionaries. Apostolic ho- 
liness is wanted to insure apostolic success. A 
cheerful temper, or a sunshine of the soul, is 
scarcely less important, and is at the same time 
very difficult to be maintained by the mistress of 
a family who has to manage perverse, unprinci- 
pled, and indolent domestics, who will try her 
patience, as of set purpose, in almost every con- 
ceivable way. Good common sense is desirable 
in all situations, but is less necessary to those 
who are surrounded by friends able to make up 
their deficiencies, or help them in emergencies, 
than those who have only themselves to depend 
on, and are surrounded by a people quick-sighted 
to detect any mistake in judgment or practice. 
The employment of a female missionary, if mar- 
ried, will centre very much in her family and 
the care of the temporal concerns of the station, 
that she may relieve her husband, and enable hinji 
with less interruption to pursue his appropriate*' 
work ; but she will also have opportunity for mak- 
ing known the Gospel, especially to those of hei 
own sex, and superintending female schools, oi 
perhaps making useful books for the natives. He| 
education should be practical and solid rathei 
than theoretical and showy, and whatever maj 



IS CEVLO.\. 3S3 

5e her situation, liabits of orreat industry, ccono- 
Tiy, and self-denial are of the utmost importance, 
t is well that they should be previously formed, 
md established by practice. However g^ood may 
)e the intentions of one brought up in indolence 
md self-indulo^ence, they cannot usually be de- 
fended on without previous trial. It is always 
?asier to design than to execute, to resolve than 
.0 fulfil our resolutions ; and this is especially 
he case where not a single act, requiring one 
Treat exertion of the will, is concerned, but a 
steady succession of self-denying duties. As 
Treat trials, which rouse the mind to special exr 
jrtions and special applications for aid to Him 
kvho is able to grant it, are more easily borne 
,han the unexpected annoyances of every day, so 
Treat sacrifices which are made once for all, are 
nore easy tlian those which require the ofTerer 
;o " die daily." 

The following short extract is on a subject 
connected with the preceding, and may be inte- 
•esting to some, as containing an opinion formed 
ifter long observation : 

" There used to be much said before we left 
iiome, about missionaries going to the heathen 
\ilone ; but I suppose the views of many are now 
liltered. From a remark or two recently dropped 
i:o some of us, it appears, however, that when 



384? MRS. WIA'SLOW. 

missionaries talk of sending their children home, 
the question returns, Would they not better have 
gone alone \ Now it is too late for this question 
to aiiect us ; but it may affect others, and I will, 
therefore, just say that we see more reasons why 
missionaries should take wives with them to In- 
dia, than we did before we came ourselves. If 
a few young men could come to missionary sta- 
tions already formed and in operation as ours 
are, and find a pleasant home, and have health to 
spend most of their time in itinerary labor among 
tlie natives, no doubt they would do much good. 
But it must be understood that they could thus 
perform but one part of the work. No boarding- 
schools nor sem.inaries for boys or girls could be 
conducted by them, and I suppose the number is 
very small of those who could be wholly devoted 
to this kind of v/ork, and retain their cheerful- 
ness of mind and health to prosecute it for any 
length of time, amidst the peculiar dilticulties and 
trials of a life in India. It does not depend alto- 
gether upon their wishes or resolutions. These, 
may be the best and the strongest. They may. 
enter upon the work with every right feeling,* 
but before man}^ months elapse their health be- 
gins to fail, their cheerfulness is gone, and they 
must have a change of scene, or attentions which 
natives cannot give them. Their brethren, and 
sisters are overwhelmed with cares and labors. 



IN CEYLON. 385 

and with every kindness which these can show, 
the invalid docs not in all respects find a home. 
Various wants are multiplied, the mind becomes 
diseased, and soon perhaps a valuable life is lost 
to the church. While, then, it may be well for 
some to make such a sacrifice of comfort or even 
of life, it cannot be required as a general thing, 
nor are those who do not make it to be con- 
sidered as of course less useful in their Master's 
service." 

The following description of her dwelling, fur- 
niture, and mode of living, was written to correct 
misapprehensions, by which some had excused 
themselves from contributing to the cause of 

missions. 

I '^ As to our houscj you have heard that there 
; are four rooms, all on the same floor, one of 
I which is a dining or sitting-room, having a 
I table in the middle, very plain, — generally twelve 
! chairs of jackwood, the cheapest and strong- 
est to be obtained here, with rattan bottoms, — 
two couches, with mattresses, covered with 
dark, strong chintz, — a small work-table, which I 
I brought from home, having on it an English and 
Tamul Bible, and some hymn-books, — two stands, 
on which are a pair of globes for the use of the 
school, — and two book-cases, containing our li- 
j brary, with a cupboard under each, containing 

Wiiiilow, «^3 



386 MRS. WIXSLOW. 

medicine and work for the school. Another is a 
bed-room, containing a bed brought from Boston, 
without curtains, and cov^ered by a coarse coun- 
terpane, — a bureau from Boston, with a large old 
looking-glass, a table, at which I now write, and 
two presses in which is our clothing, — a wash- 
stand, and a couch. In the children's room is a 
small table, two presses, a clothes' basket, and 
three small beds with grass mats, and very coarse 
muslin curtains to keep out musquetoes. In the 
remaininof room is a longf side-board full of 
drawers, where crockerj^, table-cloths and towels 
are kept, and two stands for jars, «Scc. In this 
room work is done as in a kitchen, except that 
there is no fire in it, and of course no cooking. 
The rooms are not very large, but high, as they 
reach to the roof. The walls are all white-wash- 
ed, and the floors are covered with mats. One 
object of this is to keep the floors, which are of 
cement, from wearing out, as it is expensive re- 
pairing them. I do not know that we have an ar- 
ticle of furniture not useful or needed, or which! 
is not as plain as could well be, except that if we 
did not occasionally need couches for a friend toJ 
sleep on, we could have them without mattresses. 
'' Our food is principally rice and curnj, thougl 
I use bread a good deal, as rice is too cold for 
me. What animal food we have is mostly fowls, 
which are poor, but we sometimes have kid, and 



IN CEYLO-X. 3S7 

tolerable mutton. We usually take coflee morn- 
ing and evening, with a coarse country sweeten- 
ing, called jaggery, inferior to molasses. We en- 
deavor to eat what is necessary to keep up our 
liealth, and instead of thinking that it should be 
i poorer, we regret sometimes that it is not better. 
" As to our dress, it is generally light and not 
expensive. Our children wear country cloths 
principally ; the girls, pantalettes and frocks, and 
the boys trowsers and jackets. They do not wear 
I under garments or stockings until eight or ten 
I years of age. They are when young dressed clean 
every day, and we are all obliged to change and 
, bathe frequently on account of the heat and dust. 
;Thc washerman keeps our clothes a week, and 
[they are then a day or more in being ironed. 
I You will, of course, see that we need a good 
;many changes. For my children's sake, and for 
ithe sake of the school under my care, as well as 
'for my own comfort, I hope to dress no less than 
il now do when at home ; and when I go out, no 
|less for the sake of those whom I meet. I have 
!no time to put extra-work on any thing, being 
jobliged to cut and prepare all my own and my 
jchildren's clothes, and some of j\[r. AV.'s. My 
bonnet, bought in Boston in 1S19, has served me 
'until this time as- my best. 

, '^ As to ' doing nothing,' I am certainly not 
Ijidle. All day I am driven, and at night am often 



388 MRS. WIN3L0W. 

obliged to leave my work half done, because I 
can sit up no longer. I would gladly do the work 
of a kitchen at home, to be exempt from the re- 
sponsibility, and even labor, of such an establish- 
ment as this. We have a cook, who does nothing 
out of the cook-house ; a low caste woman, who 
does what no one else would do, and a man and 
boy in and about the house. All these do less 
than one woman would do in America. We have 
sometimes two women to take care of the chil- 
dren, who together do about one-third of a good 
nurse's work with you. While I have these help- 
ers, I am teaching my children, writing for Mr. 
W. preparing little Tracts to be put into Tamul, 
or arranging lessons in geography or arithmetic 
for the girls to study. I must also give out daily 
every article of food for my own family and for 
the school, make all purchases, keep family and 
other accounts ; besides running twenty times a 
day to get something for the people as they come 
ill or hungry. All the work done in the school is 
also to be prepared and superintended. Now, I 
would not make you think that I do very much, 
but I wish, when you hear it said, ^ We will give 
no money to support missionaries who have so 
many domestics, and do nothing themselves,' 
you may be able to say, ' If they do not wash and 
bake, they do something else.' " 

In a warm climate, and among a people like 



IN CEYLON. 389 

the Hindoos, many things must of ncccssify be 
very difTerent from what is common in America. 
A missionary might do much for which he em- 
ploys a domestic, though not all — as for instance, 
lie cannot go daily two or three miles to a mar- 
ket frequented only by natives, or spend several 
liours each day in cutting up roots of grass for 
his horse or cow — but while doing the work of a 
domestic he must leave undone his missionary 
work, and defeat the object for which he left his 
native country. He may hire that done for one 
shilling, which, reckoning the value of his own 
time, it would cost him ten to do himself ! If a 
missionary is to " labor, working with his hands," 
to provide for his sustenance, he would better go 
where his labor may be more productive and less 
prejudicial to health than in India. It is an idle 
dream to talk of his going forth to that country 
** without purse and scrip ;" for he could not there 
support himself by manual labor ; and, though 
our Saviour sent out the apostles in this manner 
among their own countrymen, when they went 
in haste as his forerunners, he afterwards said to 
them, '^ He that hath a purse, let him take it." 
The time is coming, it may be hoped, when 
numbers, having a purse, will '' take it," and, like 
Paul, not " be chargeable to any ;" and if chris- 
'tians remaining at home desire the privilege of 
laiding in the conversion of the heathen, they will 
I 33* 



390 MRS. WINSLOW. 

feel that missionaries, generally, cannot preach 
" except they be sent," and will gladly send them 
forth at any necessary expense, furnished, not 
grudgingly, with every possible facility for their 
work. It is to be regarded as a favorable circum- 
stance rather than otherwise, that the system of 
modern missions in the establishment of schools, 
the extensive use of the press, the employment 
of native agents, and other expensive operations, 
calls for liberal contributions ; for this creates a 
community of interest, and a sympathy between 
those at home and those abroad, exciting them 
to earnest prayer for each other, while it opens 
one of those channels of benevolence whose run- 
ning waters prevent the accumulating wealth of 
the church from stagnation. 

The following extracts may give some addi- 
tional light as to the manners and customs of the 
natives : 

^^ The native christians do not change their 
dress on joining us, nor do we by any means 
wish it. It is altogether better for them than ours 
would be. You may be slow to believe, what is 
nevertheless true, that a female with a cloth round 
her waist and thrown over her shoulders, as she 
has when she attends meetings, appears quite as 
modestly dressed as ladies generally are in Ame- 
rica. She is entirely covered, except her feet and 



IN CEYLON. 391 

liands, and In such a nnanner that the wind may 
iihiiost take her off her feet without subjecting 
her person to observation 

" The children in our schools dress decently, 
as we think, though you might judge otherwise. 
Boys wear a cloth round the waist coming down 
nearly to their feet, the upper part of the body 
being left naked. Girls, unless very small, wear 
a cloth and jacket, which make them perfectly 
decent. This is only in our schools. Those living 
at home very seldom know what a jacket is, and 
women, except the higher castes, and those con- 
nected with us, or under our influence, seldom 
wear any thing above the waist. Children gene- 
rally wear nothing until they are five or six years 
old, except a string or a silver chain around their 
middle, to which is often attached a bell or two 
in front, making a ' tinkling as they go.' You 
may easily conceive, therefore, that their minds 
are soon filled with all manner of impure thoughts. 
It is often disgusting to see them, and distressing 
to know their habits from their earliest years. 
A door to sin is thus thrown open which no 
man can shut ; and nothing can do it but Al- 
mighty power." 

" You might have learnt something of the na- 
tive character, had you been here this morning. 
A Maniagarj who comes occasionally to borrow 
a dollar, and who, while owing it, generally at- 



392 MRS. WINSLOW. 

tends church, called to sell some straw. He k 
the only native who does not pay some respect 
to me. He seems to hold me in perfect contempt, 
because I am a female. I was at the table as he 
came in, and afterwards I entered the room se 
veral times. I noticed him, of course, but he re- 
garded me with liis usual dignified stiffness. 
After Mr. W. left, however, he followed me to 
my bed-room door, which the natives are not 
allowed to enter, and then scraped on the floor, 
and made other noises, to attract attention. 
When I looked up, he raised both his hands to 
his head with the palms joined, after the manner 
practised in idol-worship, and at the same time 
bowing nearly to the floor, begged I would give 
him a little sucrar. The hiorhest and orreatest will 

D O o 

bow down to the dust, and flatter with the tongue 
of a ready flatterer, for a slight favor, and often 
to obtain what they are abundantly able to pro- 
cure for themselves. 

'' The poor are frequently driven to beg for 
their living when they have health and could la- 
bor ; if sick, there are no alms-houses or hospi- 
tals to receive them. Women of good caste may 
usually make a sort of living by pounding rice, 
though the lower castes have not this opportu- 
nity, as any thing prepared by them, where wa- 
ter is used, may not be eaten by the higher castes. 
They buy in the bazar one morning, say twenty- 



IN CEYLON. 393 

:four quarts of paddy, that is rice in the husk, 
carry it home, and get from it, by nearly a day's 
labor, thirteen quarts of clean rice, which to- 
morrow they may sell for two or three cents 
more than they paid. With this they can furnish 
themselves, and sometimes their children, with 
food for the time. They provide only for the 
passing day, literally * taking no thought for the 
morrow.' Indeed this is remarkably the case in 
all their concerns. If a day-laborer, who receives 
his wages of about thirty cents a week, knows 
that after a month or two he shall be called upon 
for his yearly tax of the same sum, he never 
thinks of laying by a little every w^eek till he 
saves the amount needed, but spends all as he re- 
ceives it, and when the tax is called for he runs 
■about from place to place to borrow of his neigli- 
ibors, offering perhaps to pawn his wife's jewels. 
They not only are careless about laying up what 
I they earn, but are always wanting their wages in 
advance. They frequently borrow, and avoid pay- 
ing as long as possible, in hopes that the person 
to whom they are indebted will die, or lose the 
evidence of his claim, or in some way be unable 
to prosecute it, so that they shall escape the ne- 
cessity of making payment." 

" OoDoovn,LE, January 30, 1830. 
"i\lY DEAR Brother L. — I have returned tiiis 
evening from a visit at Tillipally, where you 



394 MRS. WINSLOW. 

know Mr. and Mrs. Spaulding reside. My health 
has been poor for some time, and we thought a 
few days' absence from the cares of home, and 
bathing in the sea would be beneficial. So it has 
proved, and I am again at home, much better 
than when I left. The sea is about two and a half 
miles from that station. Mrs. S. rode there with 
me, and bathed twice each day. We have seen, 
in a few minutes, a number of vessels built, rig- 
ged, manned, and launched into the sea ; and 
have also seen them brought into port, unrigged, 
and after being taken to pieces, laid up 'high 
and dry ' on the sand. All along the shore were 
timbers lying, which at first sight seemed to be 
old, rough, and good for nothing, but on further 
examination were found to be cut and prepared 
to lash together, two or more of them, in a few 
minutes. The first morning we went, a man was 
standing by some of these timbers. We request- 
ed him to go off a little distance, as we were 
wishing to bathe. He replied, ' I am going di- 
rectly to fish.' We despaired of getting rid of 
him, but to our surprise, with the help of a lad, 
he lashed four of the timbers together, took his 
sail, oars and fish-net, and was out of sight with- 
in half an hour. In his haste, however, he did 
not neglect a form of devotion used by the na- 
tive sailors when they set sail, and I could not 
but ask myself, ' Are all christians as careful to 



IN CEVLON. 395 

; commend themselves to the protection of God, 
when they commence any new undertaking-, as 
this poor man was to repeat the name of his 
senseless idol, and put up liis hands in adoration 
to one who can neither see nor save V 

"The Preparatory School is at Tillipallj', and I 
should like to introduce you to one hundred black 
boys almost naked, seated in a large school-room, 
some writing, some readino-, some cyphering, (S:c. 
You would soon see that though their skin is less 
fair, their minds are no less capable of improve- 
ment than those of white boys in America ; and 
the hope that they are preparing for usefulness 
in this life, and for eternal happiness in the life 
to come, would, I am sure, affect your heart." 

The ^^ fishing-croft ''"' here mentioned, is cer- 
tainly a curiosity. It is composed of mere logs, 
shaped a little like a canoe, and lashed together. 
As this, however, cannot sink, and is capable of 
being managed by an oar or sail, the natives ven- 
ture out on it in almost any weather, attaching 
themselves, if necessary, by a rope, so as not to 
be washed off". They thus carry the mail across 
the straits between Ceylon and the continent 
when other boats could not venture, and accom- 
* pany the surf-boats at Madras and other places to 
; pick up passengers if upset, and go olf to ships 
I when on the coast. 



396 MRS. Vv'INSLOTr. 

" March 15, 1830. 
"My dear S'.sters, — I have thought much of 
my dear younger sisters of late, and if I had op- 
portunity to tell them sometimes what I think; 
should it do them no good, it would at least show 
them how deeply concerned I am that they should 1 
he all that is estimable and usefuL Do, my be* ' 
loved sisters, strive to be thorough christians. 
Walk softly before God, and cautiously before i 
your fellow-men. I hope you look to heaven for I 
your motives and gracious reward, that you are 
crucified to the world and live with constant re- 
ference to eternity. I remember too well how it 
was with me at your agej and it is certain, how- 
ever unacceptable the truth may be, that young 
christians know but little of their own hearts, 
and but little of the world around them. They 
are tempted when they know it not, and they are 
led astray by what appears perfectly harmless. 
Hence the necessity of being humble, prayerful, 
teachable. Were I to live my life over again, how 
wauld I strive ' to live, and move, and have my 
being" in Him who is all- wise to direct, all-power- 
ful to preserve, and all-merciful to pity and for- 
give. How would I strive to live for others, and 
not for myself: to esteem my o^vn ease and com- 
fort of little consequence ; but the iniuence 
mi^ht exert on thos€ around me worth livino- for, 
even while enduring every form of crosses and 



IN CEYLON. 397 

trials. I would strive to consider myself of no 
importance, except as I fulfilled the purposes of 
my existence. 

"It is easy to be an * active christian ;' but to 
control the tongue, to brinir the temper into sub- 
jection, to fulfil all relative duties, even if they 
cross our plans, to esteem others better than our- 
«elvcs, and to live above the world, is hard work. 
It is easy to endure pain and fatigue, but how 
hard to ' subdue sin within us.' We shall not be- 
come eminent in piety by a miracle. It is a long, 
ji patient, and a persevcriiig- w(5rl(*. None arc ever 
Buccessfid without making it thebusiness of every 
liay as much as they do to live. I have lately 
Snore than ever derived assistance from Flavel 
imd Baxter. The biographies of Martyn and Scott 
lure also valuable : they instruct the heart. I am 
triad that you take a stand against the tempta- 
ions of the world ; but let all see that your re- 
jiigion makes you happy and consistent. They 
vill not wonder if you sometimes say in relation 
o their large parties, 'I am doing a great work 
ind cannot come down.' Love all for Christ's 
akc, and strive to do good to all. The christian 
leed not say to the world, ' I am better than you,' 
►ut should always say, ^ I am a follower of Christ 
—a pilgrim and a stranger, I must be consistent."* 
lay the Lord give you grace even in the small- 
st things to do his will." 

Winslow. <Jt 



398 MKS. AVIIsSLOW. 

^^ August 30, 1830. — Dearly beloved parents, 
are you still on the earth, still subject to its car'es 
and trials, or are you before the throne of the 
Eternal, arrayed in white robes, with palms in 
your hands 1 I should be glad to know where 
and how you are. But why"? I could do nothing, 
not even sit by your side and strive, by my at- 
tention to all your wants, to discharge a small 
part of my great debt to you. Sometimes it 
looks unnatural thus to be separated from father 
and mother ; but I fully believe you have received 
already a hundred fold for all the sacrifices you 
have made that your children might go to the 
gentiles. As to us, I am sure that not one thing 
has failed of all the good things which the Lord 
our God spake concerning us ! It will not be 
long that we shall feel a separation now so pain- 
ful. But oh! if I should not meet you in a better 
world! Many, many are my doubts — great is my 
unbelief, and great are my fears. It is not com-j 
ing to the heathen, it is not being called a chris- 
tian, that can enable one to say, *I know that myj 
Redeemer liveth.' Oh ! for an overcoming faith. 
I did not mean, however, to talk of myself, but 
of you ; for I have thought of you more than' 
usual to-day — and of the churches of our native 
land — the ' great congregation ' — the Sabbath- 
school, — the morning prayers, and the sacred 
stillness which rests on every thing where the 



IN CEVLON. 399 

Lord is honored by those who fear him and keep 
his commandments. 

^^ September 14-. — We have married one of 
our native children, or I might say two of them, 
since I last wrote — Mary Sweetzer and J. "W. 
Lawrence — the former from the female school, 
the latter from the Seminary, but now a catechist 
here. It was a pleasant occasion. Mary, how- 
ever, felt sadly at leaving her home and com- 
panions. Her tears for two weeks previous 
evinced that her heart was heavy ; and after all 
was over, except taking leave of us, she could 
hardly get away, though going only two and a 
half miles. They were married in the morning, 
in the church, by Mr. W. after the forms of the 
church of England." 

The marriage here noticed was one of several 
within a year or two of this time, in accordance 
with a leading object of the school, to furnish 
suitable partners for the native preachers and 
other assistants in the mission. It was consider- 
ed of great importance that they should marry 
educated and especially christian wives. If not, 
[they would probably form unscriptural connec- 
tions with the heathen, which would injure their 
usefulness and perhaps destroy their souls. This 
iias, indeed, been one of the greatest temptations 
of the native converts, and more have fallen in 



400 MRS. TVIXSLOW. 

this way than any other. It was, therefore, mat' 
ter of gratitude that previous to the decease of 
Mrs. W. no less than twelve well instructed 
young women from the school, who gave pleas- 
ing evidence of being "born again," were mar- 
ried to christian husbands. They were settled 
among idolaters, where they had opportunity, as 
christian wives and christian mothers, to exhibit 
a pleasing contrast with heathen families, and to 
show the loveliness of domestic virtue in the 
midst of abounding vice. One such example in 
a dark heathen neighborhood is like a star on the 
thick brow of night. 

" OoDooviLLE, (Jaffna,) Sept. 30, 1830. 
"My dear Friend, — We have been constantly 
hoping, and I wish I could add, expecting, to see a 
Avork of grace on some hearts around us ; but as 
3'et we have not this privilege to any extent. We 
have still many difficulties in the way of communi- , 
eating truth to the females. My principal hope isj 
from the Female Central School. When christian 
women are settled in the villages among the hea-, 
then, they will, we trust, prove that a little leaven 
leaveneth the whole lump. I have therefore been] 
particularly gratified, recently, by the marriage 
of one such to a young man of respectable attain- 
ments and christian character ; and in two others 
being now published, who will be married soon 



IN CEYLON. 401 

*' Perhaps I may interest you a little by telling 
you something of the proceedings from the time 
a young man proposes to marrj' one of these girls, 
or rather from the time he consents to do so, — 
for he is usually solicited by her friends, — until 
the event is consummated. Previous acquaintance 
of the parties, or personal attachment, is almost 
out of the question. The first object of the young 
man is to satisfy himself as to the family, caste, 
and dowry of the proposed bride. These being 
to his mind, a marriage contract is drawn up, in 
presence of certain government officers, specify- 
ing the amount of the dowry, which is, however, 
settled on the wife and her children, the husband 
having only the use of it. The parties are then 
published three successive Sabbaths, and their 
names, caste, &c. are entered in a registry. If 
Christians, the law requires that they be soon after 
married by a christian minister. In preparation 
for this interesting occasion, a profusion of cakes, 
made principally of rice-flour and boiled in oil, 
are provided, as also a variety of fruits. The 
parties then invite their friends. 

" At the wedding above alluded to, between 
fifty and sixty were present. The bride was 
dressed by her friends, and the groom by his, and 
without seeing each other, entered the church at 
difTerent times, and took their seats on separate 
mats, with one or two of their intimate friends 
34* 



402 MRS. WINSLOW. 

near them. They were married according to the 
usual forms, accompanied by a prayer and an ad- 
dress on the duties of husbands and wives. They 
then retired to different apartments, to partake 
of the refreshments provided. After a little time, 
the bridegroom came with a few select friends 
and tied on the bride's neck the farley (a small 
gold ornament designating married women) and 
threw a wedding cloth over her shoulders. AVe 
prevailed on them to take a piece of cake together, 
as a substitute for smoking, which is common 
among them, — the wife taking the cigar after the 
husband. After a little time they went to her 
mother's abode, about two miles, he walking with 
his friends and she with hers, and then took other 
refreshments before going to the house of his 
family, where they are to reside. On their near ap- 
proach to the latter his sister came to meet them, 
and put ear-rings into the bride's ears, — a mark of 
affection and respect very gratifying. They both 
wore their dress and ornaments several days, ex- 
changing visits with their friends, and then re- 
turned to their usual habits. We hope to see more 
simplicity and more conformity to our owm cus- 
toms on these occasions after awhile, but should 
be thankful that we have already been able to ef- 
fect a beneficial change in many respects, besides 
that of introducing a christian form of marriage 
instead of absurd and idolatrous ceremonies. 



IN CEYLON. 403 

AmonjT the heathen the parties are not even con- 
sulted : every thing is settled without their con- 
sent, and perhaps without their knowledge. Of 
course they know little of domestic happiness. 
"Mrs. Jank Trumbull." 

" OonooviLi.K, October 13, 1830. 

'' My dear Parents, — This has been an auspi- 
cious day for the female boarding-school. Eliza- 
beth Appleton and Louisa Hawes were married. 
A large number of spectators were present in the 
church, and more than one hundred men eat rice 
and curry on the premises. The girls felt sadly 
at leaving, so that we were almost obliged to 
force them away. I hope and believe they will do 
much good to their own sex around them. May 
they in some measure make up my deficiencies. 
I see no way for females to be instructed ex- 
tensively in Christianity but from the girls of this 
school. 

" Christian David once said to me, * The con- 
version of one woman is of more importance 
among the Tamul people than that of six men,' 
and he, you know, is a Tamul man, (a pupil of 
Swartz,) and has spent his life among them. It 
is matter of much thankfulness that nearly all in 
the school are hopefully pious or particularly se- 
rious ; but when they are away from the school, 
they are as lambs among wolves, and require 



404 MRS. WINSLOW. 

peculiar grace. I need not say, Pray for thenn. 

" 17. — Sabbaik. — Mr. W. preached at Manepy, 
and Mr. Woodward here. Charles told Mr. Wood- 
ward that he had a hope that he was a christian. 
I know not what to think of him. He is more 
ready of late to attend meetings, prays different- 
ly, and manifests much tenderness of conscience. 
He often weeps when christians weep, and talks 
as they talk ; but I fear he does not know the evil 
of his heart. 

" J\^ovember 16. — Your letters are received. We 
are greatly favored that you continue to write so 
fully, and that our younger sisters do their part so 
well. I cannot now more than thank you for their 
letters, and allude to E.'s prospect of engaging 
in the missionary work. It is no doubt too late 
to advise, and perhaps if not, it might be indiscreet; 
5'et I could almost wish she had not agitated the 
question these four years. She is in years too 
young, and if she should soon be engaged in such 
a work, I hope she will feel that this deficiency 
must be made up, so far as is possible, in increase 
of grace — in humility, and daily and hourly lean- 
ing with her whole soul on Christ. Dear E , 

my heart is more than full when I think of it ; 
go to Jesus — let him direct you altogether — lean 
not to your own understanding. Your friends 
can help you to know yourself — take their advice 
in what they do know, especially your parents 



IN CEYLON. 405 

nnd those who arc older tlian yourself; and after 
all, wait on the Lord as a little child blind and 
lielpless. If you go to the heathen, why should 
you not conic to your sister 1 There arc certain- 
ly reasons why it should be so ; but in this, too, I 
dare say but little." 

We now approach the period when the hearts 
of the missionaries were again cheered by the 
descent of the Holy Spirit. How ardently Mrs. 
W. desired, and with what joy she welcomed 
} this blessing, appears in the following communi- 
cations to her parents, the first of which was 
dated as c.irly as July. 

'' Mr. Spaulding is here. We have had a large 
congregation ; more than seventy men and wo- 
men, besides about forty beggars, the boarding- 
school, and about three hundred children from 
the out-schools. But, Oh! how they hear that 
word by which they are to be acquitted or con- 
demned. Shall we say that * the Lord's hand is 
shortened that it cannot save V or shall we say 
that he had no designs of mercy towards this 
people when he called us up hither 1« or shall we 
conclude that we have forsaken our post, and 
are not such as he can employ in his service 1 
Oh that he would show us what hindereth, and 
make us such as he would have us to be ; that 



406 MRS. WINSLOW. 

we could see his glory as we have seen it. When 
Avill it once be 1 

'^ A class of thirty lads are about to enter the 
seminary from the preparatory school, only one 
of whom is a member of the church. Where, then, 
are the patrons of these youths 1 Surely they do 
not hold up our hands as they once did, or this 
could not be. The Lord would hear their prayer 
if he cannot hear ours. 

"There is an advance in some things ; such as 
the writing and distributing of Tracts, which are 
extensively read; additional school-books, which 
have been much needed ; increased numbers of 
readers, catechists, &c. ; but almost no apparent 
progress in the influences of the Holy Spirit on 
the hearts of sinners. Cloud after cloud has ap- 
peared, and we have thought it spreading over 
the horizon, and almost seen the rain descend ; 
but alas ! each one has soon been scattered, and 
we must still plead, ' Oh that thou wouldst rend 
the heavens and come down!' 

" Is it still so with you, dear parents, brothers, 
and sisters 1 Are you still unrefreshed by the 
showers of grace which virater other parts of our 
favored cou!itryl But then it is not, as with us, 
midnight darkness around you. You cannot feel 
that you are in the midst of Satan's dominion, 
where he reigns over the head and heart of his 
subjects with almost undisturbed subtlety and 



, IN CEYLON. 407 

power. There is, however, a Rock to which our 
minds turn, on which we build all our hope, and 
from which we derive all our consolation. May 
we clinfj to it more and more." 

I 

j " OoDooviLLE, November, 1830. 

" My DEAR Parents, — During nearly the whole 
of this year we have been, I think, more strongly 
convinced than ever, that without the Spirit of 
God all is vain ; and we have been led more ear- 
nestly to seek his divine aid, with anxious desire 
to have every hinderance in ourselves removed. 
The prayer-meeting in October was very inte- 
resting. A number of our own children were 
present, and were particularly addressed. It Avas 
followed by a season of fasting and prayer at 
all our stations. The quarterly meeting, three 
weeks after, was also unusually solemn, and at 
the close of the sermon, and during the adminis- 
tration of the Lord's supper, there was evidence 
of the special presence of the Holy Spirit. Two 
of the brethren were induced from the appear- 
ance of things to go that evening to Batticotta, 
where they found much encouragement to labor 
in the seminary on Friday and Saturday. One of 
them remained over the Sabbath. On Monday 
Mr. W. went to Batticotta, and found many in 
the seminary awakened, and some under strong 
convictions. He spent the day with them. In the 



408 MRS. WINSLOW. 

evening there was a prayer-meeting with the 
mission families there. It was an occasion long 
to be remembered. The two oldest children of 
the mission, H. B. I\I. and M. A. P. resolved to 
give themselves to the Saviour, and there is rea- 
son to hope that they did so. The same day one 
of the native assistants came from Tillipally to 
Oodooville, and held several meetings with the 
church members, girls in the school, and domes- 
tics. Every thing evinced that the Lord was 
near. A work of grace was evidently begun in 
some hearts. Our native helpers, Goodrich and 
Niles, appeared quite awake, and many of the 
girls were aroused. 

" We were saying a few days before, that we 
never expected to see Goodrich feel much ; it 
seemed not his allotment. But could you hear 
him speak and pray now, you would be melted, 
and give thanks to God, with a full heart, for one 
such preacher to this benighted people. He is 
not, I trust, the only one from whom words now 
come with power to Christians and to the impe- 
nitent. The concert of prayer this month was a 
season of earnest supplication, and we have had 
some evening prayer-meetings of exceeding in- 
terest. 

" November 3. — Mr. W. had a meeting with the 
native helpers, girls, and domestics. Goodrich 
had spent the day at Batticotta. He !told what he 



LN CtVLON. 'W9 

had seen amongst his old companions in the 
seminary. Some, he said, wlio have been pos- 
sessed with evil spirits, are now sitting clothed 
and in their right mind ; some who have been 
exceedingly opposed to the truth, who have held 
meetings to ridicule the Bible and those who 
love it, and have committed sins too bad to be 
mentioned, are now with many tears crying to 
God for mercy. ^ No one who has not lived with 
them as I have,' he added, ' and known them 
thoroughly, can conceive the alteration.' He had 
also been at a meeting of the children of the 
missionaries, heard their sobs, and groans, and 
prayers. Mentioning this he turned to Charles, 
and addressed him with much feeling, and I 
hope with effect. Poor C. thought it new times 
to be exhorted thus by a native, and was quite 
overcome. I felt thankful, and that we had in- 
creased reason to hope that our children will be 
brouo^ht into the kintrdom of God. 

" 4th. — Fast-day. It rained violently, but was 
a very solemn season ; observed more or less by 
all on the premises. They are new times indeed, 
when every one readily leaves work and play, 
and resorts to the house of prayer. 

" Monday 8. — We have had a union prayer- 
meeting this evening of the church members at 
Manepy and Oodooville, with some inquirers 
from both stations j and such a time as we never 

Winslow, 35 



410 MRS. y:i:ssLO\v. 

saw before. There were about fifty adults pre- 
sent, besides the girls of the school. Addresses 
and confessions were made by sixteen or seven- 
teen men. Many wept 5 indeed I should think 
nearly all. We have never, perhaps, had more 
evidence of the presence of God, by his Spirit. 
Bailey, who teaches an English school here, was 
perhaps the most pathetic. He said that he had 
been a long time like one sinking in a great 
ocean, where the sharks on every hand were 
coming at him with open mouths trying to catch 
him, and each crying, he is mine, he is mine ; 
when a boat was let down from a ship for his 
deliverance 5 but instead of jumping into it, he 
had kicked it awaj'-, and remained struggling for 
life, till in great compassion the master of the 
ship had again let down the boat just in time to 
save him ! Now he hoped that he was safely in 
the boat, and he wanted all others to get in ; to 
quench not the Spirit, but accept of mercy while 
it was offered. He then begged leave to pray, 
and seemed to pour out his soul in thanksg^ivinjr 
and humble supplication to be kept by the mighty 
power of God. This description was the more 
moving, as it was known to be so accurate an 
account of his experience in resisting conviction 
of sin. 

" 9. — To-day an old gray-headed schoolmaster 
who was present last evening, and had never per- 



IN CEVLO.N. 4 11 

haps felt any concern for liis soul before, came 
and said that lie could get no rest last night on 
account of distress for his sins. Our domestics 
are all more or less aficcted, and we hope some 
of tlicm deeply. The church members are most 
of them awake. Now, at ten o'clock, singing is 
heard from Goodrich's bungalow and from the 
girls' rooms. The latter have been in meeting 
since seven o'clock. 

" 10. — A prayer-meeting here this evening, in 
reference to a public meeting to be held in Jaffna 
to-morrow. The woman who assists me in the 
care of the girls says she has been long asleep, 
but is now aroused. She has at times appear- 
ed well, and then again we have feared for her. 
On my inquiring if she thought the girls much 
altered, she said, ' Docs not Amma see that 
they are reading and praying all the time. There 
is no playing, as before.' 

" 12. — Yesterday the brethren had a very en- 
couraging day at Jaffna. To-day Mr. W. is at 
Batticotta, and Dr. Scudder has been here. He 
thinks there is much feeling in those around us. 
A note this morning from ^Ir. Spaulding says, 
* I never saw so much to encourage me.' 

'' 13. — A number of schoolmasters, girls, and 
others, think that they have made an entire sur- 
render of themselves and their all to the Saviour. 
We have had many meetings, public and private, 



412 MRS. WIXSLOW. 

and the voice of prayer has, I trust, been heard 
in heaven from old and young. He who hears the 
cry of the ravens will not reject the least sincere 
prayer of these little ones. Mr. W. returned this 
evening. He sees no cases of declension in the 
seminary. Every one is in some degree affected. 
Some who have been much opposed, some who have 
long halted, and others who have been like Lot's 
wife, are now apparently all of one mind. How won- 
derful the goodness of God ! Shall we ever dis- 
trust him again 1 Shall we ever say, ' His hand 
is shortened that it cannot save V 

" 14. — Our inquiry-meeting at noon was very 
full. A young man connected with some of the 
first families in the district, and who has been the 
subject of many prayers, and hopes, and fears, 
gave an account of his experience, which was 
very encouraging. He was at one time a candi- 
date for admission to the church, but turned back, 
through fear of his relatives. 

^^ 15. — An interesting meeting at Manepy, simi- 
lar to the one here last week. The young man 
mentioned above stated his feelings and hopes 
more particularly. He seems like one really born 
again. Among other things, he said that he had 
often wondered why the missionaries read the Bi- 
ble so much, and the same things over and over 
again ; but supposed that they were obliged to do 
so, as a form connected with their religion. Now, 



IN CEVLOX. 413 

however, he sees that the Bible is difTerent from 
all other books; that it is like food to the chris- 
tian; he loves it, and sees new beauties in it 
every day. 

"21. — To-day we had a large congregation of 
about twenty women and more than twice that 
number of men, with a church full of children. 
Mr. W. invited those who wished to unite with 
the church to come to his room after meetinir. 
About forty, nearly half of them boys from the 
English school, and girls from the boarding- 
school, accepted the invitation. 

'^ 22. — Another union prayer-meeting was held 
at Oodooville. No one has been more intcrestino-. 

D 

A church member, who had lately fallen into the 
sin of lying, made a voluntary confession in a 
most humble and aflecting manner ; and prayed to 
God for pardon, with many tears. Oh, what shall 
we say of the goodness and mercy of the Lord !" 

Mrs. W. was here prevented by ill health from 
continuing the narrative. In general this atten- 
tion to religion was similar to that of 1824-, though 
a larger proportion of the converts were adult 
heathen. It commenced in the seminary, and 
though there was no noise or fanaticism, the 
feeling of deep anxiety among the students was 
soon so great that study was for a few days nearly 
suspended. The study rooms and small "^^raycr 
35* 



414 MRS. WINSLOW. 

houses^'' were frequently seen lighted up until near 
midnight, and occupied by individuals or little 
companies engaged in prayer, reading the Scrip- 
tirres, and singing praises to God. A quarterly 
meeting of the schoolmasters, attended by about 
one hundred teachers and visiters of the schools 
in connection with the American and church 
missions, held at Batticotta, was one of much so- 
lemnity. The meeting was addressed by all the 
missionaries and some of the native assistants. 
Many were " convinced of sin, of righteousness, 
and of judgment." A very interesting meeting 
was also held at Oodooville of the more forward 
children in the schools. About eight hundred of 
both sexes were present, who were able, more or 
less, to read the Scriptures. Short and affecting 
addresses were made to them by the missiona- 
ries and christian teachers, and many of the chil- 
dren expressed a resolution to forsake idolatry 
and seek salvation in Christ. Evening meetings in 
the villages, especially in the school-bungalows, 
attended by large numbers of the villagers, and 
addressed by several speakers in succession, be- 
came common, and served to hold forth the " word 
of life" more steadily than most other means to 
the attention of the perishing idolaters. By the 
more free circulation of the Bible and religious 
Tracts, the continued operation of the schools, 
the better acquaintance of the missionaries with 



l.N CEYLO.\. 415 

the language and customs of the natives, and tlie 
increased number of their assistants, there was a, 
preparation for an extension of this work into the 
domains of heathenism g^reater than at any pre- 
vious time, and it was accordinn;ly more agirresfiivc. 
At the " quarterly communion^'' held at Oodoo- 
ville, April 21, (the missionaries and members at 
the several stations still constituting but one 
church,) //f/r/y-ybw?' natives made a public profes- 
sion of their faith. Most of them Avere from the 
seminary. There \vere two girls of the Female 
Central School, a few women, and seven school- 
masters. It was a most interesting occasion. A 
very large and attentive audience of natives, ma- 
ny of them the most respectable in the vicinity, 
witnessed the exercises. 

Three months later than this, at Batticotta, 
most of the remaining converts, twenty-seven in 
number, were received to communion. The two 
oldest children of the missionaries, who have been 
mentioned, were among them. One of these, Har- 
riet B. Meigs, a lovely young christian, died a 
few days after, rejoicing that she had been al- 
lowed to profess her faith in Christ before the 
heathen, and quietly yielding her spirit into the 
hands of that Saviour whom she had so recently 
found. 

In January, 1831, J\''iles and Goodrich were 



4<16 MRS. WIXSLOW. 

licensed as native preachers. After receiving a 
charge and public designation to their work, they 
went into the pulpit of the church at Tillipally, 
and Goodrich having read and expounded a por- 
tion of Scripture, Niles preached a very impres- 
sive sermon from the text, " Oh, Lord God, be- 
hold I cannot speak, for I am a child." He gave 
an account, with deep feeling, of the manner in 
which he had been taken up, when a poor boy, 
brought forward, supported and educated by the 
missionaries, and converted, as he hoped, by the 
Spirit of God, so as to be prepared to stand there 
as a preacher of the Gospel. Looking around the 
church, in which were some very large stone pil- 
lars, about to be removed on account of their ob- 
structing the view of the congregation, and their 
place to be supplied by wooden posts, he said, 
" The missionaries who are now among us, like 
these strong pillars, may be all taken away, and 
the church left to stand on us poor native preach- 
ers, who are only as wooden posts ; but if the 
Lord gives us grace, we will stand in our lot, 
come life or come death; and, trusting in him, I 
will not say, 'I am a child.' I can do all things 
through Christ, which strengtheneth me." He 
then turned round, and taking his native brother 
by the hand, addressed him in English, express- 
ing his fellowship, and calling upon him to make 
an entire consecration of himself to the Lord. 



IN CEVLON. 417 

They both wept. It was afTecting to see them 
then, and at other times, standing among their 
countrymen, with sometliing of tlie feeling which 
Paul had for his brethren, his " kindred accord- 
ing to the flesh," and saying, " Now then, we arc 
ambassadors for Christ, as though God did be- 
seech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, 
be ye reconciled unto God." 

On the 30th of April the mission sustained a 
serious loss by the burning of its buildings at Ma- 
nepy, including the church, house, study, and a 
large bungalow, with most of the eflects of the 
mission family. 

" OoDOoviLLE, June, 1S31. 
"And where are most of my early friends ; and 
perhaps viy dear father I Surely we need not 
wish to return to America, for if home is where 
' our friends and kindred dwell,' we must soon 
look for them above. 1 never calculate on long 
life, but now it seems only a step to where I hope 
I may eventually see all I have most loved on 
earth. Yes, all, what a privilege ! And ' shall we 
receive good at the hand of the Lord, and not 
evil V If we loved our Saviour as much as we 
ought for all the mercies we have through him, 
wiiat christians we should be." 

"July 21, 1831. 
"My dear afflicted iMotiiek, — I have now the 



418 MRS. T\'INSLO"U'. 

painful task of saying that your letters, contain- 
ing- the intelligence of dear father's death, have 
come to hand. And is he indeed gone % Gone to 
make one of that multitude who cast their crowns 
before Him who sitteth on the throne, saying, 
Holy, holy, holy. Lord God of hosts % Can it be 
that all his doubts, and fears, and cares have 
ceased for ever % Is my beloved mother a widow, 
and have we no father 1 I cannot realize that it 
is so, and yet it has been long expected. But 
what shall I say to you, my dear mother 1 How 
can I tell you, at this distance, how I feel, or 
help you to bear the heavy burden 1 It would be 
vain to attempt either, and I rejoice and give 
thanks that you are comforted and strengthened 
bj'- Him Avho alone is able to help you. You are 
very solitary. Oh ! how little can I conceive how 
difHcult it may often be for you to say, ' Thy will 
be done ;' but do, my beloved mother, be com- 
forted by thinking that it is in kindness to you 
that you are bereaved, not in judgment. Think 
of the joys of those who see Jesus as he is. 
Could you not, when our dear father lived, bear 
almost any pain cheerfully while you saw him 
exempt from it; and was it not your happiness 
to see him happy 1 How much more, then, may 
you now rejoice because his joy is full! 

" October 2. — We rejoice in the great news of 
revivals of religion in our own dear America ; but 



I 



I-N CtVLO.W 4iy 



what means so niucli controversy, even among 
the best of men. I hope it will do some good, 
\hough I am afraid not enough to balance the at- 
-endant evils. The arrival of a ship which may 
convey Charles to America is now daily expect- 
ed j and I do not sec a letter come in but my 
heart beats quickly till I have ascertained whence 
it came. Dear boy, he too feels his time to be 
with us is short. He told Mrs. S. (when making 
a little visit at Tillipally,) ' I do very well through 
the day, but when night comes I think of dear mo- 
ther.' May he have a better friend always at 
hand. This is, I can almost say, all my desire. 
He appears more serious and conscientious of 
Id^, expresses a strong wish to join the church ; 
but he needs to know himself better. I trust that 
when father and mother forsake him, then the 
Lord will take him up. 

*' JS^ovcmber 21. — We have observed this as a 
day of thanksgiving. A very pleasant time. In 
meeting with the church members, after explain- 
ing the object of the day and making some re- 
marks on our obligations to thankfulness, Mr. Vv'. 
gave the native members opportunity to speak. 
Among them was Niles, who, with feelings which 
sometimes prevented his utterance, related some 
of the special causes which he had found for gra- 
titude. He went back to one of the greatest mer- 
cies that he had experienced, when at fifteen 



420 MRS. AVIXSLOW. 

years of age, after the death of his father, he came 
to Mr. W. to ask employment, seeking, as he said, 
* a shell in which he had since found ^ pearl.'' In- 
stead of being left, as native boys usually are after 
the death of a father, having none to rule and guide 
them, to go in the broad road to destruction, a 
father was provided to guide his youthful steps, 
and to lead him to seek a better portion than any 
in this vain world. Here he spoke of some pecu- 
liar dangers to which he had been exposed, and 
seemed quite overwhelmed with a sense of the 
blessings he had experienced, in being ^ plucked 
as a brand from the burning.' You may recollect 
that he is Mr. W.'s assistant in Tamul, havincr 
more knowledge of the language and more Tarmil 
learning than any other one around us. 

^^ December 17. — Could j^ou look in upon us at 
this time, you would see and believe that we are 
really in earnest about sending our beloved Charles 
to America. We have looked for intelligence of 
the arrival of the ^ Star ' at Madras for two months 
past, and expected to have two months at least 
in which to prepare him and ourselves for his de- 
parture ; but instead of this, we heard five days 
ago that the vessel had reached Calcutta, (not 
having stopped at JMadras,) and that C. must be 
at the latter place on the 10th January. This 
makes it necessary for him to leave us a fortnight 
before that time. Mr. W* expected to accom- 



IN CEYLO.N. 421 

pany him and a son of Mr. Woodward, but Mr 
Spaulding will go in his place, as the mission wish 
Mr. W. to go to Colombo, to wait on the new Gov- 
ernor and confer with him about the restrictions 
on our mission. The dear boy is pleased with 
the prospect of going, as he has always been, but 
he says, * Mamma, when we talked about it, it 
was not certain, but now since it is certain, I feel 
diii'creutly.' Mother can say the same. I have 
no misgivings of judgment, but my feelings as a 
mother, none but a mother can know. It is un- 
natural for parents to send a child of his age from 
them, with little expectation of seeing him again ; 
and it was, perhaps, unnatural for us to leave our 
parents j but I have no more doubt of my duty in 
this case than 1 had in that, and I think that I thus 
give the strongest proof of love to my child. 

*' He has of late been unusually serious, and 
appeared to try to live as a christian j but he goes 
into the wide world at eleven years of age alone. 
Should he be qualified hy education and grace to 
return a missionary to this people, our highest 
wishes will be accomplished, and for this our 
prayer is to the God of heaven." 

It will be seen that the subject of this memoir 
felt most deeply the trial of thus parting with an 
only and first-born son 5 but the reasons which 
induced all the missionaries to consider such a 

^Vinslo\v. 36 



422 ?IRS. WI.NSLOW. 

course necessary, in regard to their children, 
were entirely satisfactory to her mind. Some of 
the principal are, 1, The children cannot be pro- 
perly educated in Ceylon. 2, The state of society 
endangers iheir moral and religious charadcr. 
3, They cannot be furnished with proper employ- 
ment to give them habits of early and thorough 
industry. 4, They are unable to earn the means 
of iheir subsistence^ and must be supported by 
their parents. 5, There are not opportunities for 
their forming suitable connections in marriage. 
6, They cannot, as a general thing, remain in 
the country with the prospect of usefulness and 
happiness. 

These reasons might be extended to show why 
the children of the missionaries in Ceylon, and 
in other places where circumstances are similar, 
cannot be kept with their parents and settled 
around them in the manner of a colony. Southern 
Asia is no place for northern people to colo?iize. 
They dwindle away under a tropical sun. Besides, 
there is no room for them ; the country is already 
full of inhabitants to whom they cannot assimi- 
late. They may, as foreign residents, carrying 
with them an established character, do much 
good; but their posterity, born and educated in 
the country, instead of aiding to elevate the na- 
tives, would, in all probability, gradually sink to 
their level. Some have already done so in a few 



I.\ CF.VLON. 423 

o-enerations ; and there are instances where they 
have sunk even below the Hindoos themselves. 

The children of the missionaries, if pious, 
might, some of them, be employed in the mis- 
sion ; but to be respected by the people there, 
and to have the confidence of the churches at 
liome, they need to be educated in the midst of 
those churches. They cannot be missionaries by 
hirfh, nor will they be worthy of the office unless 
'' called of God, as was Aaron." They are not, 
therefore, sent to America to be educated and 
return to their parents, except they do so as mis- 
sionary laborers — but to find a /lome ; to enjoy 
their birth-right as Americans, (of which the vo- 
luntary exile of their parents ouirht not to de- 
prive them,) and to remain in this happy land, 
which is " even as the garden of the Lord," un- 
til they are willing and joyful to leave it for the 
service of their Saviour in other climes. 

In reference to the third reason above men- 
tioned, Mrs. W. some two years previous, wrote 
as follows : 

^' If we ever send a dausfhter to America, I 
think it must be before her habits are formed for 
this country. I feel it to be a serious evil that 
our daughters can do so little work. Our domes- 
tics are men, from whom girls must be far re- 
moved. How then can they cook 1 And how can 



424« MRS. WINSLOW. 

they do many other things which they might if 
at home 1 I fear and dread indolence more than 
ahnost any thing in my daughters, and see scarce- 
ly any girls here industrious. The happiness of 
the natives consists in sitting perfectly idle, with- 
out employment for body or mind." 

^^ December 30. — Our dear Charles left us the 
day before yesterday, as we expected Avhen I 
Avrote ; and oh what a blank there is in our little 
family. I fear I do not feel as I ought, though I 
certainly would not call him back. His own feel- 
ings were a good deal tried, even so as to affect 
his health, and he went away unwell. We trust, 
however, that the sea air will soon restore him. 
You will find his mind and body very intimately 
connected, and I am sure will love him none the 
less for his strong attachments. I try to feel that 
we have given him to the Lord, and sent him 
au'ay in obedience to his will ; but yet the thought 
comes across me sometimes, that we have thrust 
him from us, and cast him, at the most suscep- 
tible age, upon the wide world ; and if I could 
not plead with some hope that my God will be 
Iiis God, I should sink." 

" OoDooviLLE, (Jaffna,) Jan. 3, 1832. 
"My dear Catherine, — You may be surprised 
to know that T write to send by our dear oldest 



IN CEYLON. 425 

child and only son, now on his way to Madras, 
to emhark for America in the ship ' Star,' of Phi- 
ladelphia. Perhaps you wonder how we can do 
so ; or are you enough acquainted with our situa- 
tion among this heathen people, to agree with 
us that we cannot do otherwise without incurring 
great guilt. We hope and pray that he may be 
qualified to return a missionary to the people 
•jmon? whom he was born. But if he be not 
pious he must seek his bread in the land of his 
fathers. 

"Will you not pray for him, that this our de- 
sire and his may be accomplished ] He speaks 
Tamul well, and has considerable acquaintance 
with the customs of the people, which would be 
a great advantage if he should return. The at- 
tachment towards him manifested by many na- 
tives on his departure, shows that he would be 
received by them as a teacher far more cordially 
than a stranger ; but oh, my friend, this separa- 
tion and anxiety concerning all the unoertainty 
of his life and character, has cost his mother 
what you can but little conceive of. My trust is 
in the living God." 

" OoDOOViLLE, December 28, 1831. 
'' ^Iy dear Sox Charles, — After you left us 
this morning, we were all sad enough for a time, 
but I hope were satisfied with your being gone, 
36* 



426 MRS. WINSLOW. 

believing as we do that it is for your best good. 
I heard a number of persons praying for you, 
some in English and some in Tamul, and have no 
doubt that many will continue to pray for you 
daily. I trust that you, in turn, will not forget to 
pray for these poor people as well as for all your 
friends here. You will be glad to know that I feel 
comforted and thankful for the pleasant manner 
in which you left us, and for the prospect you 
have of being before long in the happy land of 
your fathers. My dear child, I hope you are com- 
forted by the Spirit of God. Trust at all times in 
your Saviour. Cleave to him. Whatever else you 
do, never forsake or be ashamed of him. 

" I feel anxious about you at all times ; but 
when I go and pray, I feel better, for I know that 
God can take care of yon. You must not think 
too much of my being troubled at your absence. 
I can do any thing for your good, and am glad to 
suffer for your sake if necessary. 

" January 24. — We were glad indeed to receive 
the letters written on the 13th and 17th instant 
at Madras. Had been expecting them very anx 
iously. You are now, we trust, on the water, on 
your way to America. Your notes, my dear child- 
are very precious ; the more so because I see 
from them that you love to give your parents 
pleasure. Always be willing to take trouble and 
make sacrifices for this ; it will add to your own 



IN CEVLOX. 427 

happiness. I hope that you will live in the 
constant fear and love of God ; if you do you 
will be gentle and kind, and thus make friends 
wherever you go. I feel an inexpressible desire 
to have you give yourself wholly to Jesus, that 
he may keep you from that * roaring lion which 
goetli about seeking whom he may devour.' 
'' Your ever affectionate 

"MOTIIEK." 

" OoDOOviLLE, April 25, 1832. 
" Mv DEAR Son Charles, — I wrote you last 
week, and sent my letter to Colombo for Henry 
and William Scudder to carry to America. This 
morning I came from Panditeripo, where I have 
been to seeJVIrs. Scudder in. her trial in parting 
with her dear boys. It was very pleasant to talk 
about you, and to pray for you and them together. 
We feel that you will all be exposed to great temp- 
tations on board the ship and after you get home ; 
and that if you do not look to the Lord for his 
strength to keep you, you will fall into sin, grieve 
the Holy Spirit, and wound that blessed Saviour 
who has done so much that you may be saved 
from all sin and sorrow, and be made holy and 
happy with him. I am afraid, my dear boy, that 
you do not think enough of your own weakness; 
that you think you are strong, and can do this or 
that without any help. But you can do nothing, 



428 MRS. VriXSLO^V. 

not even think a right thought or speak a right 
word without help from God. And you must not 
forget that he is always ready to help those who 
look to him. None eve?' seek his face in vain. 

'' 28. — My beloved boj^, a mother's prayers fol- 
low you every day and every hour ; do not for- 
get or neglect to pray for yourself. ' Seek the 
Lord while he may be found ; call upon him while 
he is near.' Nothing would give me so much joy 
as to know that you are ' born again ;' no, not 
even to see your face, and once more to embrace 
you in my arms. I hope you will tell me every 
thing you can about yourself, after you get home, 
as well as while in the ship. Tell me what you 
do wrong, as well as what you try to do right, 
and then I can better pray for you tkat the Lord 
will pardon your sins and keep you from sin. 

" Alay 18. — Your papa is absent with Mr. 
Spaulding near Point Pedro, to preach and dis- 
tribute Tracts. I am very glad to have him able 
to go, though it leaves me very lonely ; I think so 
much more of you when he is gone. Not that I 
am sorry to have you go to America, for I be- 
lieve it is for your best good j and I always en- 
deavor not to regret what I have done, after hav- 
ing asked the Lord to direct me, and tried to do 
his will. But I have no more of those precious 
evenings when we sat down together at my ta- 
ble, and read and praj-ed together. The clock 



I\ CEYLON. 4'J^» 

Strikes twelve, and I must say good night. May 
angels guard my beloved boy. JMay the blessed 
Jesus wash his soul from all sin in his own blood, 
and may he be prepared to sleep the sleep of 
death, and awake to a glorious immortality be- 
yond the grave. 

■^ 21. — We have had a visit from Mr. and Mrs. 
Spaulding and the dear cliildren. Elizabeth has 
a new song put into iier mouth. She was for 
some days much distressed in thinking of her 
many sins, and that she had so often grieved the 
Holy Spirit. Now she hopes that her sins are 
pardoned, and that her name is written in the 
Lamb's book of life. She talks, and sings, and 
prays like one who loves the Saviour. 

''26. — Saturday evening. — My dear Charles 
will not, I trust, forget what used to be the em- 
ployments of this evening ; and although you 
cannot kneel by your mother's side and offer your 
prayers, j^ou may at a great distance pray to the 
same God, and find him as near as he was here ; 
and you may always be sure that she too is offer- 
ing her prayers for her dear son. When you are 
settled in school, or wherever you may be, I shall 
wish you to tell me when you can each day think 
of Oodooville, and be engaged in prayer for your 
dear friends here as well as for yourself; and I 
shall endeavor at the same time to pray for you. 
It is pleasant to have stated seasons of prayer 



430 MRS. WIXSLOW. 

for each other. I watch carefully the shrub which 
you put out a few days before you went away. 
It grows finely, and bears a beautiful flower. 

" I hope, mj" dear son, that you will give your 
beloved grandmother that place in your confi- 
dence which I used to hold, and go to her at all 
times with any thing you wish to communicate. 
She has had three sons, who always went to her 
with their joys and sorrov.'S as their best earthly 
friend, even before any of their school-fellows 
and companions. She will love you more if you 
do so, and it will be very useful to you." 

Early in 1832 Mr. W. visited Colombo, to seek 
an interview with Sir Robert Wilmot Horton, re- 
cently appointed governor of the island, and ob- 
tain permission to have the mission enlarged. 
The feeble health of a daughter induced Mrs. W. 
to accompany him. Finding that the governor 
w^as at J^'ewera Ellia^ in the interior of the island, 
Mr. W. followed him there ; Mrs. W. remaining 
at Colfa, six miles from Colombo, with Mr. and 
Mrs. Lambrick, of the Church Missionary Society. 
Passing through Kandy, where he was cordially 
welcomed by Mr. and Mrs. Browning, English 
missionaries, and ascending to an elevation sup- 
posed to be 6,000 feet above the level of the 
ocean, amid scenery inimitably beautiful and mag- 
nificent, the thermometer at sunrise being but 



-±.A 



A'^'-y and scciimig a retreat fortned for the faint- 
inpr missionary, " ^Tr. W. reached Newera Ellia, 
and liad a most gratifying" interview witli the 
Governor. On all the subjects brought before 
hiin his excellency manifested the greatest kind- 
ness; signified his intention of giving some pe 
cuniary assistance to the mission; and express- 
ed his regret that they had been so long em- 
barrassed by govcrmncntal restrictions. 

The object of the visit was thus happily secured ; 
calling forth the special thanksgivings of the mis- 

♦ Amonc^ ihe beautiful natural productions of the interior 
of the island, one of the most splendid is the talipot (conj- 
pka null racul'if era) or large fan-palm. The body of the 
tree is 60 or 70 feet in height, and slraii^ht as a ship's mast ; 
without a limb or leaf until you reach the top, where is 
an immense tuft of fan-leaves, so large that each one may 
cover eight or ten men. The stalk of these leaves clasps 
the body of the tree and inclines outwards, the long leaves 
bsnding over in a graceful curve. This vast crown of 
evergreen, surrounding such a shaft, is itself very grand; 
but when the tree is about fifty years old there rises from 
its centre a cone several feet in height, which gradually 
enlarges until at lengtli it bursts with a loud explosion 
and a vast conical flower, fifteen or twenty feet in height, 
and ten or twelve in brer.dth, stands exposed in almost 
incredible magnificence. It is yellow, and formed of num- 
berless blossoms, so arranged on a giant stem and innu- 
merable branches or tassels, as to appear over the elevated 
in ft of leaves as a gorgeous diadem on the head of this 
queen of the forest. The tree blossoms but once, and 
then dies. 



432 MRS. WI.NSLOW. 

sion to God, and giving ^Mrs. W. the opportunitv 
to write as follows to an esteemed female friend : 

" My dear Laura, — Your verj^ precious letter 
came to me just as we were leaving home to pay- 
cur respects to the governor and lady lately ar- 
rived. Mr. W.'s object was to request permission 
for more missionaries to join us, and mine to ob- 
tain health for our little H. Through mercy both 
were accomplished. 

" We now look forward with the hope of see- 
ing the faces of missionary friends from our be- 
loved native land. It is thirteen years since we 
were thus privileged ; and we had become so ac- 
customed to the thought that we must labor 
alone, that the expectation of its being otherwise 
excites strong emotions. We shall certainly be 
overjoyed, and I hope thankful. It will be pleas- 
ant if they are personally acquainted w^ith some 
of our dear friends, but above every thing else, 
I hope they Avill have the qualifications of good 
temper^ common sense^ and ardent pictij. 

"My school has been small of late, owing in 
part to some of the girls having been married ; but 
last week we made up all deficiencies by adding 
twenty-eight, making now fifty-three ; so that my 
hands are full. We are greatly favored in being 
permitted to regard all the older ones as chris- 
tians, and to see those who have married adorn 
their profession,though living among the heathen." 



IN CEYLO.W 4-33 

" OoDuovii.i.E, Jane 19, 1832. 

" My dear Mother, — Our iMaternal Associa- 
tion has met here to-day. It is an encouraging 
fact, that all the children over fourteen^ whoso 
character we know — for some are in England — 
are hopefully pious; and some of the younger 
ones have at times appeared very serious. There 
are fourteen members of the Society, and about 
sixty children connected with it. I think there 
is more than a hope in the minds of most of us, 
that not one of these dear ones will fail of eter- 
nal life. 

" July IJ. — The last three days have been de- 
voted to special services for the benefit of this 
benighted people. From six to half past seven in 
the morning was a prayer-meeting in Tamul, in 
the church ; from that hour until half past eight 
a prayer-meeting of the brethren and sisters, and 
such of their children as were present ; then 
breakfast. At half past nine a meeting with the 
larger children of the village schools, both girls 
and boys. At eleven, one with schoolmasters, 
and others who Avere disposed to come. At one 
o'clock another prayer-meeting by ourselves ; and 
at four two meetings — one with women and the 
girls of the school, and another with church 
members. In the eveninfr- a cfeneral meetini^ of 
all who desired to attend ; and many have been 
so disposed. 

Winslow. ^* 



^S^ MRS. WINSLOW. 

'' This evening, especially, the church was, I 
think, belter filled with respectable people than 
ever before. The court Moodeliar^ of Mallagum, 
has been out every evening, and appeared very 
attentive. There seem many advantages in ad- 
dressing the people in this way, which there are 
not when they are found at their houses, or in 
small circles. They see that the missionaries are 
in earnest when they leave home and make so 
much effort to address them; and they are obliged 
to be quiet, and to hear what is said, without one 
and another making remarks, or asking questions 
which divert the attention and excite ridicule, as 
is very common on other occasions. More than 
once I thought, how would friends at home re- 
joice to see so many heathen listening attentively 
to the word of life ; to hear the earnest, affec- 
tionate exhortations of the missionaries and their 
assistants, or the fervent prayers and addresses 
of such natives as know, in some degree, the 
worth of the soul ; to observe the effect of truth 
in the moistened eye and anxious countenance 
of many hearers ; and to join in the prayers of the 
brethren for wisdom and grace to perform their 
most solemn duties. It was a high privilege, for 
which I feel under renewed obligation to live 
for God. 

^^ ^^ugust 11. — We have had another interest- 
ing week ; special services being held at Batti- 



IN CEYLON. 435 

cotta. It was good thus to wait upon the Lord, 
with one accord, in one place. ]\iany attended 
tlie evening meetings who cpuld never before be 
induced to attend any place of christian wor- 
ship. The Moodeliar, of whom I spoke, has since 
openly, and before many friends and foes, avowed 
his full belief in Christianity j has visited Mr. W. 
to receive instruction, and has been furnished 
\vith the Bible and other books, which he spends 
much time in reading. His influence is such that 
his conversion would seem like that of a host. 
There is much inquiry at Oodooville and in the 
surrounding villages. Some say, ' Why, the Moo- 
deliar talks to us, even when about his business 
in court j he says Christianity is true ; he is go- 
ing to be a christian ; nobody now can doubt 
about these things.' His friends persecute him 
much, and he seems aware that he shall suffer 
greatly from them if he perseveres." 

The Moodeliar^ mentioned in this letter, was 
from the most influential family in the district, 
and is himself a man of great respectability. 
After much inquiry, and many struggles, he be- 
came a decided convert, and was received to the 
church. On account of the opposition of his nu- 
merous and powerful friends, who would proba- 
bly have used force to keep him back, his admis- 
sion was private 5 but as though the birds of the 



436 MRS. WINSLOY/ 

air told the matter, his wife heard of it almost 
as soon as he had returned home. Immediately 
she collected together almost every thing valua- 
ble which she could carry off, and left him. A 
young lad, a nephew, whom he had adopted, as 
he had no children, and to whom he had given 
most of his property, was taken away by his fa- 
ther. His servants left him. No respectable man 
would go near his house, or drink water from his 
well. He was deserted by all. But in the midst 
of many trials he strove to maintain his integ- 
rity, and was enabled to adorn his profession. 



CHAPTER IX 



Decease of Iier Son in America— results 
of labor— sudden death— character. 

Arrival and death of her son in America— private reflec- 
tions on parting with him — letters — brief sketch of his 
life — cheering results of missionary labor — last letter to 
her mother — renewed dedication of herself and family to 
God — sudden death — character — tribute to her memory — 
death of sisters. 

In the autumn of 1S32 the afflictive tidings 
were received of the death of that son who had 



so-n's death. 437 

been the object of so much solicitude and hope. 
A kind and consoling letter from one of the se- 
cretaries of the Board gave at once the intelli- 
gence of his arrival in America, and his early re- 
moval from the world. The previous solicitude 
of his mother concerning him, and how far she 
was prepared for this trial, may be in part under- 
stood by a few extracts from her private journal. 

''Jlpril 22, 1832.— Near the close of the last 
year we were called to prepare our beloved son 
to go to America. Many a heart-rending pang did 
I experience ; but I think I was graciously sup- 
ported by Him who can do all things, and does 
visit the sinful also with his consolations. This 
trial was long contemplated, but never, till it was 
very near, did I expect to live to see it. I think 
I could scarcely bear another such. Charles' feel- 
ings were much exercised. Never can I forget 
some seasons when we were together at the 
throne of grace. How did he plead that his pa- 
rents might be 'supported and comforted when 
he should be gone,' and ' that he might come back 
and preach to the poor heathen ;' but ' if we should 
not meet on earth, that we might meet in heaven.' 
Oh, my Father, who didst so support me that I 
could endure it all, I thank thee for these seasons ; 
I thank thee for my hope that this darling boy is 
one of the lambs of thy fold. 
37* 



438 MRS. AVINSLOW. 

" May 27. — The burden of my effusions at the 
last date, is my burden still. Many hours of grief 
and care have been allotted me ; but I hope that I 
can trust in the Lord to do all things well. To-day 
has been our communion — Mr. and Mrs. Wood- 
ward and the Manepy church members were here. 
I was much disappointed in being occupied with 
little H. who was quite ill this morning all the 
time before breakfast, and especially as I had 
reason to think that the other brethren and sisters 
were then praying for us ; but I found, as I have 
done before, that when there is from necessity a 
want of preparation, the Lord is pleased to show 
that the preparation of the heart is from him ; 
and that in the performance of duty we may safe- 
ly expect comfort and consolation. My season at 
the communion-table was precious. It was sweet 
to look upward to a crucified Saviour, and for- 
ward to a place at his right hand. I was peculiar- 
ly impressed with the boundless love of God. 
How delightful the theme ! Mr. W. met my mind 
and heart in all he said. I felt no embarrassment 
from a foreign language. Since I could not renew 
my private dedication in the morning, as I intend- 
ed, have done so this evening. May I nev^er for- 
iret my obligations. It has been a calm, a holy 
da}'. Praise the Lord, O my soul. 

" July 8, Sabbath. — I have been greatly con- 
cerned for a few days about our dear Charles, 



son's death. 439 

since reading- the account of sonne severe storms 
after his sailing. All my prayers for him are now, 
if alive ^ which I used scarcely to mention. I do 
feel that we gave him to our heavenly Father ac- 
cording to his will. That we did not send him 
forth without bidding ; and did not commit him to 
the winds nor to the waves, nor even to our dear 
country and friends, but to the Lord. 

'* December 16. — The Lord has come very near 
to us since I last wrote, and we have realized in 
part what was then so much dreaded. Dear 
Charles is no longer an inhabitant of earth ; but 
is, I trust, before the throne of God and the Lamb. 
The shock was what few can conceive. Oh, how 
we loved him. How our expectations were raised 
concerning his usefulness. But the Lord has not 
seen as we see. He has cut him down, and, I doubt 
not, for the best and wisest reasons. Perhaps no 
affliction has ever been more needed, and I hum- 
bly hope it has done us much good. It has drawn 
our thoughts and feelings upward, and made us, 
for the time at least, less earthly. It has made 
the Saviour more precious. Indeed, I think that 
new views of his character, and of my relation to 
him, have been given me." 

" OoDooviLLE, November 2, 1832. 
" My most beloved Mother, — I scarcely dare 
trust myself to commence a letter to you ; and 



440 MRS. WINSLOW. 

yet I feel that I must tell you, that we have re- 
ceived the mournful intelligence which has made 
our hearts bleed as they never did before. The 
boy who carried my last letter for you, and as I 
thought for Charles also, to the post-office, on the 
4th ult. returned with the heavy tidings. Oh, 
the anguish of my first feelings ! We had feared 
that the vessel might be lost, but that he should, 
so soon after reaching our friends, be taken away, 
I had not for a moment anticipated. Still the 
Lord is good, and all his dispensations are right ; 
and I know not that I would alter any of them if 
I could, severe as they may sometimes seem. 
Perhaps we loved our child too much, and were 
too much delighted in the thought that he might 
be qualified to return as a missionary to this peo- 
ple ; and make up, in some measure, the deficien- 
cies of his parents. He has, I trust, a purer ser- 
vice above, one more acceptable to his heavenly 
Father ; and for him I greatly rejoice.' 

" J\'ovemher 10. — I have written but a few lines 
since the intelligence reached us that our be- 
loved Charles had so early finished his course ; 
not, my dear mother, that I loved you or others 
less, or that I had nothing to say, but because it 
is not easy to clothe in language the heart's deep 
sorrow. I never felt the chastening hand of God 
so heavy upon me j though I trust I can say, ' It 



son's death. 44-1 

is good for me that I have been afflicted.' It was 
a seasonable warning. I am thankful that our 
heavenly Father thus graciously aroused me j that 
he did not leave me to be wholly engrossed by 
my dear earthly ones ; but reminded me that this 
is not my rest. My earnest desire and prayer is, 
that he will draw me to himself, and fix my wan- 
dering heart upon him who is ' the chiefest among 
ten thousand.' Had I chosen the form of disci- 
pline, it would have been diflerent; but doubtless 
this is best. May it accomplish all for which it 
was sent. It is consoling to think of one so dear 
as having escaped the pollutions of the world 
and joined the company of heaven. There, we 
hope, are Jive of our little ones. Surely we have 
reason to think of our treasures above. 

^^ December 10. — I hoped to fill a long letter to 
my dear mother, but have not been well, and have 
been writing to dear F. a few particulars about 
Charles. Shall begin another sheet, to be finished, 
I hope, about a month hence by Mr. W. when I 
may be unable to write. The more frequent con- 
templation of another world, occasioned by dear 
C.'s death, and I hope, also, some nearer ap- 
proaches than usual to Him who is altogether 
lovely, have made it seem an easier thing for 
me to die than has been common. I feel, how- 
ever, strong ties to life, and hope and trust it will 
please the Lord to spare me still. 



^4:2 MRS. WINSLOW. 

" The cholera prevails to an alarming extent in 
the district. Very many have been carried off by 
it, and the consternation of the people exceeds 
all that I have known among them before. It is 
a grievous scourge ; not only as cutting down 
so many in their sins, but as the fear of it ope- 
rates upon those who are spared, to keep them 
shut up at home. Many schools are scattered. 
The people will not attend preaching, and violent 
rains make it very difficult for the missionaries 
to go out amongst them to any extent. There 
are, however, nearly twenty candidates for ad- 
mission to the church at our next quarterly 
communion." 

Some passages from the sketch of her son to 
which she alludes above, and w^hich was publish- 
ed in a small memoir of him, may illustrate the 
character of Mrs. W. as a mother, and her influ- 
ence in forming the mind and habits of this pro- 
mising child, Avho died at his uncle's in New- 
York only three w^eeks after his arrival in Ame- 
rica, at the age of a little more than eleven years. 

" OoDooviLLE, November 23, 1832. 

" My dear Sister F , We learn that the 

^Star' w'ill touch at Madras next month, and as, 
just at this time, I feel that what I do must be 
done quickly, I commence a sheet, the first ob- 



443 

jcct of which shall be to give you some facts of 
our lamented Charles. 

" I think that a desire to please his parents, and 
add to tlieir comfort, more powerfully influenced 
him to duty than any other motive. AVhen he 
had done wrong, nothing would so soon fill his 
eyes with tears as to see us grieve. Our sorrows 
touched his heart as though they were his own, 
and when he had occasioned them, it was to him 
doubly trying. 

^^ His purify of viind was such as, in this pol- 
luted atmosphere, we could not too much prize. 

'' He was obedient — never, that I recollect, wil- 
fully disobeying his parents ; and his word was 
seldom, if ever, doubted. He was much impressed 
with the words, ' The eye that mocketh at his 
lather, and despiseth to obey his mother, the 
ravens of the valley shall pluck it out, and the 
young eagles shall eat it,' and he meditated on 
them with a kind of horror. He also knew that 
' liars shall have their part in the lake which 
burnetii with fire and brimstone.' 

" The poor beggars were objects of his great 
compassion. For two years or more he was in 
the constant habit of accompanying me to give 
them rice, &:c. and to spend some time in com- 
municating religious instruction. He often ex- 
horted them to repent. Indeed he seemed for 
some time particularly desirous to be useful 



444? r.iRS. wixsLow. 

to the heathen, and often admonished such as 
came to the house. One old woman (the mother 
of a schoolmaster) since his death has reminded 
me of a number of instances when, said she, I 
stood by that door or sat on the mat there, and 
he said, 'You must repent now, you are an old 
woman, and will die soon ; you must think of 
what Jesus Christ has said and done for you, and 
love him.' The girls in the school he often ad- 
monished and exhorted j one evening, in parti- 
cular, they will never forget: it was durino- the 
last revival of religion, when he was more deeply 
impressed than ever before, and thought that he 
had himself accepted the terms of salvation. We 
were absent. After seeing the little ones asleep, 
he proposed to have a meeting with the girls, it 
being the evening on v.'hich I usually held a 
meeting vdth them, and he was generally present. 
He prayed and exhorted them, as they afterwards 
said, with a seriousness and earnestness such as 
they had rarely witnessed. It was somewhat 
characteristic of him that he said nothing of it 
to us after our return, and we should not have 
known it but from others. 

'' He had, at quite an earh*- age, a good know- 
ledge of Scripture history. Long before he could 
read himself, I commenced reading to him the 
Old Testament, omitting some portions, and ex- 
plaining or simplifying the histor;^ so that he 



son's death. 44-5 

could understand it. His first reading for himself 
was to go on with wliat 1 liad begun, in connec- 
tion with studying Emerson's Scripture Cate- 
chism, — which, indeed, was scarcely a study, as 
he liad the facts in mind from his reading. The 
Bible was in this way his most pleasant reading- 
book ; and he had the principal historical facts 
in tlic Old and New Testament treasured in his 
mind when he had read but little else— *and any 
text of Scripture that, in reading or otherwise, 
had conveyed a distinct thought to his mind, was 
never forgotten, but often referred to and quoted 
in conversation. Indeed I never knew him to 
forget any thing that he had once disiindly under- 
stood. Committing to memory what he did not 
understand was a task, and was seldom required 
of him. His evenings were generally spent with 
me alone in reading and conversation, — when 
quite young till eight o'clock, and afterwards till 
nine and half-past nine, — and these are the sea- 
sons on which more than all others my memory 
delights to dwell, when he gladly turned aside 
from the common amusements of children, and 
especially of boys, to sit down in a retired room 
with his mother, open his mind to her instruction, 
and into her bosom pour all his heart. Here he 
confessed his sins and wept over them, and here 
I felt that I had an influence which no precepts 
nor threatenings could give me under other cir- 

Winslow. «5o 



446 MRS. WINSLOW. 

cumstances. He never seemed so happy as in 
evenings thus spent. 

" In his seasons of more than usual seriousness, 
which towards the close of the time of his stay 
with us were frequent, he seemed aware of the 
danger of their not being permanent, and with 
many tears used to pray that he might 'not be 
suffered to grieve the Holy Spirit.' It was his 
usual practice to pray alone in the morning, and 
with me in the evening, after our reading a por- 
tion of Scripture together. On Sabbath evenings 
he recited to his father, after which they had a 
season of prayer and religious conversation to- 
gether, and we have often remarked that his 
prayers were the language of a mature christian, 
sometimes very affecting to us, and seeming to 
proceed from. an overflowing heart. The burden 
of them was, that he might hate sin more and 
more, and be holy as Jesus was holy, and this 
w-ith the strongest expressions of sorrow for sin, 
and lon2;in(T to be freed from it, and washed clean 
in the Saviour's blood. 

' There is a fountain filled with blood,' &lc. 

was a favorite hymn, to which he often alluded 
in his prayers. . The first time he expressed a de- 
cided hope to me, was, I think, when he had been 
ill. I intimated my belief that he was better, but 
added, 'It may be that God will send a severer 



son's death. 447 

sickness upon you, to make you feel that you 
are in danger of death, and lead you to prepare 
for it.' He immediately burst into tears and said, 
* Mamma, I am not afraid to die ; I am sure God 
has not given me up.' He was then too weak to 
say much in explanation of his feelings, but the 
simple fact that he was not afraid to die was some 
evidence of a change of heart ; as death to chil- 
dren in this country appears usually in the most 
forbidding forms. 

" He however seemed to think of his sins as 
much as of his exposure to danger and to sud- 
den death. One evening, I well recollect, he was 
so affected with a view of his sins that he beg- 
ged me to pray with him, and himself prayed 
alone with me three or four times, appearing to 
feel that he could not sleep till his sins were par- 
doned and he had a new heart. Another time at 
a quarterly meeting, during the sermon and the 
administration of the Lord's supper, he sobbed 
and wept much. On my inquiring why he did so, 
he said that he felt as he never did before, and 
wanted to come to the Lord's supper. This de- 
sire he often afterwards expressed, and regularly 
attended the meetings at the station which were 
held for inquirers and those who wished to make 
a public profession of their faith in Christ. This 
was the more observable, as he always avoid- 
ed any unnecessary exhibition of his feelings ; 



4-r8 MRS. WIZs'SLOW. 

many times brushing the tears from his eyes 
and turning his head away when he thought he 
might be observed." 

It may be added that this son of many prayers 
gave pleasing evidence to his friends in America 
of being truly a child of God. In his journal at 
sea he frequently mentions his religious enjoj'- 
ment. In one of his communications to his pa- 
rents he says, " I still feel that I have given my- 
self to God j" and one of the last sentences that 
he uttered while he retained his reason w^as, " / 
think ffie Lord seems to comfort me very much.'''' 

It is evident in the preceding pages that, dur- 
ing the thirteen years in which Mrs. W. was per- 
mitted to toil on heathen shores, many cheering 
results gladdened her heart — an earnest of richer 
blessings which have already descended, espe- 
cially in the enlargement of the mission, and its 
\vide extension on the continent j and which, in 
the fulfilment of the purposes of mercy to a fallen 
world, shall yet be granted to the prayer of faith 
and the labors and sacrifices of christian love. 

For some years previous to her sudden remo- 
val, the native free schools, eighty or ninety in 
number, had contained from three to four thou- 
sand children, of whom more than five hundred 
were girls. The system on which they were con- 



RESULTS OF LABOR. 449 

ducted having been gradually improved, ihey had 
become much more strictly christian schools — 
christian books, prepared by the missionaries in 
Tamul, were extensively used ; and each school 
was virtually a depository for Bibles and Tracts, 
and a little chapel in which the word of God 
was preached, from time to time, to the parents 
of the children and other villagers. Nearly one 
lialf of the teachers had become hopefully pious, 
among whom was a heathen girl, taught in one 
of the schools, who became a faithful teacher 
of forty or fifty of her own sex — an interesting 
train, that from Sabbath to Sabbath might be 
seen following her through the rice-fields as she 
brought them up with her to the house of God. 
The preparatory school, into which the free 
boarding establishments had been concentrated, 
embraced more than one hundred lads — prejudice 
having so much given way, that when on one 
occasion notice was given that a few select lads 
would be received, more than 07ie hundred and 
fifty, many of them from leading families, were 
brought to the missionaries and strongly urged 
upon their acceptance. On a similar occasion, 
when it was proposed to receive into the Female 
Central School about twenty girls, more than 
seventy were brought by mothers and other fe- 
male friends, all saying, you must receive our 
children, we cannot take them home again. 
38* 



4)50 MRS. WINSLOW. 

The Mission Seminary, at the close of 1832, 
contained one hundred and forty-two students^ 
including a theological class of twenty-five ; and 
of the whole number fifty-three were members of 
the church. The public annual examinations in 
English were attended not only by missionaries 
of other denominations and friends in the vicinity, 
but by, many gentlemen connected with the gov- 
ernment, among whom was Sir Richard Ottley, 
in honor of whom the principal building was 
named Ottley Hall j and the examinations in Ta- 
mul drew together many of the more respectable 
natives, before whom dissertations relating to 
the solar system, and illustrating the great practi- 
cal points in European knowledge, as well as on 
the truth and evidences of Christianity, were 
read ; and mathematical demonstrations and ocu- 
lar experiments, with views of the heavenly bo- 
dies through the telescope, were presented — all 
throwinor the lia:ht of true science on some of the 
deformed features of the puranic systems, and 
siiaking the foundations of a false religion as 
well as of a false philosophy. Of the forty-three 
who had completed their studies in the seminary, 
twenty-three had gone into the service of the 
mission ; eight remained in the seminary as teach- 
ers and students of theology ; four or five were 
employed by other missions ; and eight or nine 
by the government as interpreters in the courts. 



RESULTS OF LABOR. 451 

or assistants in the medical or surveyor's depart- 
ments. Dr. Scudder had also always one or more 
assistants in his practice among the natives, 
whom he instructed as circumstances allowed in 
the medical art, a knowledge of which is of great 
importance among the heathen. 

Permission for the establishment of the Ameri- 
can mission press, which has since issued so many 
millions of pages, had been very recently obtain- 
ed ; but by means of the Church mission press es- 
tablished in 1825, catechisms and other hooks for 
schools and more than fifty Tracts had been print- 
ed ; copies of the Bible, which was translated into 
Tamul a century before by the Danish missiona- 
ries at Tranquebar, had been procured from Ma- 
dras and Colombo ; and by the distribution of these 
publications much light and truth had gone forth 
amidst darkness and error, and had been evident- 
ly blessed in the conversion of some individuals. 
One of these, Katheraman, who was brought by 
one who received a Tract, to the house of God, 
himself brought many others ; and at length met 
such as he could induce to attend, at a prayer- 
house every morning regularly, for reading the 
Scriptures and prayer, until fifteen or sixteen 
had joined the church, and others were inquiring. 

At each of the five stations of the mission, 
from three to six hundred were generally present 
at the public ministry of the word on the Sabbath, 



452 MRS. WINSLOW. 

of whom about one fourth were adults, and the 
remainder children from the schools. United 
meetings for special services were also held, not 
only at the mission stations, but in the midst of 
populous heathen villages ; at which numbers of 
the heathen were often collected under favorable 
circumstances, to hear from successive speak- 
ers the most impressive truths, brought to bear 
with concentrated force upon their hearts and 
consciences, while united prayer was offered for 
the descent of the Holy Spirit. The Gospel was 
also proclaimed from house to house, and tours 
made for preaching and the distribution of books 
both on the island and the continent. In August, 
1831, one hundred and seventeen who had been 
connected with the boarding establishments, 
thirty schoolmasters, *and fifty villagers, includ- 
ing some domestics, had been admitted to the 
church ; and in the following year thirty were 
added, of whom a still larger proportion were 
adults. 

It was easy for the eye of faith to anticipate 
results far more glorious, as the prayer of the 
Great Intercessor for the progress of his king- 
dom should be fulfilled 5 and there is delightful 
evidence that the subject of this memoir could 
commit all to him, whether he would still em- 
ploy her here, or call her to be " with him where 
he is," that she might '^ behold his glory." 



PREPARATION POR DEATH. 453 

The following unfinished letter is the last com- 
menced by Mrs. W. to her ever dear mother : 

" January 3, 1833. 

''Mv BELOVED Mother, — I did not intend to 
delay begiuninir a letter to you, as promised in 
my last, till this time ; but you will excuse it. 
Most anxiously have I been looking and waiting 
(or letters to come ' by another ship in a few 
days.' I long to know how you have been sup- 
ported in the severe disappointment concerning 
dear Charles. AVe are still surrounded by the 
dead and dying, as the cholera is raging with per- 
haps no abatement ; but hitherto our families antl 
the church members have been preserved, except 
in the case of one young man who had left the 
mission and was living in the town. Several have 
been ill, but have been restored to health. 

''I have felt much reproved this evening for 
some of my anxieties concerning our children. 
When shall I learn to cast all my burdens on 
Him who is able to sustain them? I think I have 
more delight in trusting him of late; but still 
' come short.' Have been reading Mrs. Graham's 
life with new pleasure, and I hope profit. Be- 
lieve I have read it three times since coming to 
Jaflna. Have also been enjracred with the memoir 
of Isabella Campbell ; another precious example 
of one who lived 'by faith on the Son of God.' 



454- , MRS. WINSLOAV, 

None I am sure can read it without profiting by 
such an exhibition of simple trust in Christ. 

"In regard to our children, if I had, the means 
I should not wish them put wholly in a boarding- 
school, but in such a place that, by uniting ha- 
bits of domestic labor and economy with cultiva- 
tion of mind, they could be qualified for happi- 
ness and usefulness in life. I seek not great 
things for them. Indeed I hope I can say, with 
Mrs. Graham, that I put a blank into the Lord's 
hands as to all their temporal concerns ; seeking 
only this 07ie thing with all my soul, that they 
may have their portion with the people of God." 

The last night of the year 1832 was spent in 
prayer at Oodooville by the members of the 
mission, who remained in supplication and inter- 
cession until midnight j and then greeted the new 
j^ear with thanksgiving. The uncertainty that life 
would be continued to all through the year was 
of course contemplated ; and if uncommon fitness 
for death had been considered as an intimation 
of its near approach, a presentiment might have 
been felt that the subject of this memoir was 
keeping that ^^watch-night'''' for the last time. 
But no one, except perhaps herself, heard the 
voice which seemed to say, " the Master is come 
and calleth for thee." 

In expectation of her confinement, concerning 



PREPARATION FOR DEATH. 455 

which she was, for no apparent reason, uncom- 
monly doubtful, she made her preparations much 
as she would have done had she known the re- 
sult, and that she should be unable at last even 
to bid any one farewell. All the concerns of the 
boarding-school as well as the affairs of her 
household and of the station, as far as under her 
management, were arranged in the most careful 
manner, and written directions were left con- 
cerning them. There was also a paper of hints 
concerning her children, and a farewell letter to 
her husband. Nor was her soul neglected. She 
had laid up fresh provision for passing over Jor- 
dan. Her affliction, by weaning her from the 
world — by making the Bible and the throne of 
grace more precious — by causing her to look to 
a compassionate Saviour with more steady faith, 
and to appropriate to hersel-f more than ever 
before the precious promises of his word, so 
changed the current of her religious feelings, 
and so carried them upward, that she often spoke 
of them as almost entirely new. 

On Saturday evening, January 12, a few hours 
before her death, though much occupied with 
other concerns, she found time to express some 
of her feelings and desires in her private diary. 
The greatest part of what she wrote is given, as 
the last record of her experience — the dying tes- 
timony of her faith and love. 



456 MRS. WIXSLOW. 

^^ January 12, 1833. — My time for writing is 
nearly gone, at least for the present ; and my 
dear Charles' birth-day reminds me that I owe it 
to the Lord for his merciful affliction to say more 
than I have of what I hope it has done for me. 
I have even thought, at times, that had I appear- 
ed before Him previous to this stroke, I should 
have had my portion vrith hypocrites and unbe- 
lievers. I have thought. Is it possible that, after 
so long a life of profession, after many unspeak- 
ably precious seasons at the throne of grace, af- 
ter so long feeling assured that my poor prayers 
were heard and answered, after experiencing in 
many trials that 'good is the will of the Lord,' 
and rejoicing to have him rule and reign, and af- 
ter hours, weeks and months of bitter agony 
and abhorrence of myself on account of sin, and 
counting the holiness of heaven more to be de- 
sired than all the Vv-orld can offer — I have never 
before submitted to Jesus as my Lord and Saviour 1 
— never before embraced the Gospel as a little 
child 1 — never come unto Jesus so as to be saved % 
Oh, can it be 1 — and yet, sure I am that I never 
before saw the Saviour so lovely, so desirable, — 
never considered as now the length, and breadth, 
and height, and depth of that love which passeth 
knowledge — ^the value of that fountain which is 
set open for sin and uncleanness ; — never saw the 
whole plan of salvation so perfect, so wonderful; 



HER DEATH. 457 

— never with such feeliiifrs could say, ' my Lord 
and my God.' And while this view of the sub- 
ject has seemed greatly to endear the fond object 
whose removal has been the means, I have been 
thankful that the Lord did not wholly forsake 
me, and did not leave me to compass myself 
about with sparks of my own kindling, to strive 
to work out my own righteousness by tears and 
groans for sin. Oh, I bless him for this chas- 
tisement, and long that it should bring forth 
more fruit. 

"Sometimes heaven has seemed very near, 
and as though it would be easy to die. At other 
times' I have had less confidence, and more fear 
whether all is yet right between me and my God. 
Should I now be called from my little family, 
from my dear husband, oh my Saviour, let me 
rest in thine arms; carry me all the Jordan 
through. Oh be with me, even as I cannot ask 
or think. Support, sustain my sinking feet. Oh 
uphold me *-**** *. Be thou my 
Saviour in that dark hour j and do thou most gra- 
ciously bless my dear, dear husband. Uphold 
him with thine everlasting arms. ***** 
i\Iy dear babes! may they be thine, thine only, 
and that for ever. Oh my Saviour, enable me 
this night to give myself unto thee, and do thou 
receive me in that well ordered covenant which 
thou didst die to secure." 

Winslow. *^'' 



458 MRS. WINSLOW. 

She was interrupted and did not record her 
petitions for the school, the station, and the 
brethren and sisters of the mission, as, from other 
circumstances, it is evident was in her heart. 
The closing scene will be best given in a commu- 
nication written at the time. 

" OoDOoviLLE, January 17, 1833. 

"My ever dear and beloved Mother, — The 
Lord has often come very near unto you, and 
removed, one after another, your earthly com- 
forts, until perhaps you feel that you are almost 
desolate, and that the sources of consolation 
below are nearly dried up. But has not heavenly 
consolation descended into your soul in propor- 
tion as earthly comforts have failed % I doubt not 
that this has been the case, and that you are still 
able to say, ' It is good for me that I have been 
afflicted.' How trying in your widowed state to 
look upon our dear Charles only when nature was 
failing, or when he was laid out for the tomb. 
After all your hopes and expectations of clasp- 
ing often to your arms the first-born of your be- 
loved Harriet, and of seeing your eldest daugh- 
ter in her eldest child, how trying the disappoint- 
ment ! Yet you could say, It is well, for the 
Lord hath done it. 

" And what Providence is there, however try- 
ing, however it may wither and blast our hopes, 



HER DEATH. 459 

and scathe our very hearts, concerning which, 
as the will of God, we cannot say, ' It is well V 
Yet alas, we are weak j and unless supported 
from on high, there are dispensations of Provi- 
dence which we cannot bear. We sink beneath 
great waters. Such an affliction has come upon 
me 5 and such, my dearly beloved mother, has 
come upon you. We are mutually and most 
deeply afflicted ; for your and my beloved Har- 
riet is gone. Yes, the wife of my youth, the 
partner of all my joys and sorrows, the mother 
of my three, now motherless children, is gone. 
That tender, that most afTectionate heart, has 
ceased to beat ; and all her anxious cares con- 
cerning those whom she loved as her own soul 
are over. She has passed the Jordan ; and is, I 
doubt not, in the heavenly Canaan, rejoicing with 
joy unspeakable and full of glory. She is now in 
that world of 'spirits bright' where no sin nor 
sorrow can enter. My dear afflicted mother, do 
not mourn, but rejoice. Our too dear Harriet is 
with her Saviour, whom she loved better than all 
here, though she loved us very much. 

" But I must give you a few particulars. On 
Sabbath she was somewhat ill ; but went to 
church both forenoon and afternoon. I tried ra- 
ther to dissuade her from going in the afternoon, 
and she at first concluded to stay at home ; but 
as the children wished it, she went, and seemed 



460 MRS. WINSLOW. 

comfortable. On her return she was a little fa- 
tigued, and lay down a short time ; after which 
she rose and went out to tea. Vie then had 
family prayers. I read the forty-sixth Psalm, 
and made some remarks upon it, which appeared 
to interest her; and we conversed on the privi- 
lege of casting all our burdens upon the Lord. 
Afterwards she went to her room, heard the lit- 
tle girls repeat their hymns and lessons, and di- 
rected their devotions for the night. 

'^ I went out to my study, but not being so 
well as usual, came in early. Finding the door of 
her room shut, and having a sick head-ache, I 
lay down on a couch. This was very unusual for 
me, and caused her to inquire a little anxiously 
about my health Avhen she came from her room. 
She said, ' I cannot bear to see you so unwell ;' 
and soon added, ' I do not feel so well myself. I 
have a peculiar sensation in my breast.' I re- 
quested her to be as quiet as possible, and re- 
commended that she should take a little lauda- 
num, and lie down. She did so, and went to 
sleep ; but in a short time awoke, feeling the 
same distress in her breast. I then immediately 
sent for Dr. Scudder and Mrs. Spaulding, sup- 
posing that she was about to be confined. She 
was partially relieved of the distress, but continued 
very uneasy and unable to rest in any position. 
She frequently requested me to pray for her. 



HER DEATH. 461 

" Dr. Scudder arrived about two o'clock in 
the morning. He bled her freely, and she be- 
came so much relieved that she lay down quiet- 
ly and said that she felt quite at case. She 
took a little coffee ; and before she went to 
sleep called me (as Mrs. Spaulding was taking 
care of her) and insisted on my lying down on 
the couch on account of my being unwell, say- 
ing at the same time, 'Do you know, my dear, 
how good it is to be perfectly at ease after se- 
vere pain V I said, ' You feel thankful.' Her 
reply was, ' Yes, I think I do. How good is the 
Lord.' She then very pleasantly bade me good 
night, and fell quietly asleep. This was probably 
the last she knew on earth. 

"After a short time Mrs. S. noticed a peculi- 
arity in her breathing, and attempted to wake 
her. As she did not succeed, she called Dr. S. 
and myself; but as the sleep was quiet and pulse 
regular, there seemed to be no danger. We 
again left the room ; but were soon called back to 
witness slight spasmodic affections of the eyes 
and face, which were, ere long, followed by a con- 
vulsive lit. We were then greatly alarmed, and 
Dr. S. used every exertion to prevent a recur- 
rence of the spasms. All was without success, 
and after two or three returns of the convulsions 
the breath of my beloved wife grew shorter and 
shorter, and a little before six o'clock on Mon- 
39* 



462 MRS. WINSLOW. 

day morning, the 14th instant, she peacefully re- 
signed her spirit. 

*^ The funeral took place at five o'clock P. M. 
of the same day. We sang at the house, 

' Why should we mourn departing friends,' &c. 

And at the grave, 

' Unveil thy bosom, faithful tomb,' &c. 

And I believe all felt that those hymns expressed 
our sentiments, our feelings, and our hopes. The 
mortal remains were deposited in the church 
near those of our dear George ; — thus was one 
babe by the side^ and one in the arms^ of the 
fond mother ; and the spirits of six are, I trust, 
with her before the throne. Oh ! how she loved 
them ; how she prayed for them ; how assured 
she was of their final salvation. She was indeed 
a precious mother as well as wife and missionary. 
"Our departed Harriet had for the last few 
months been fast ripening for heaven ; espe- 
cially since we heard of Charles' death. How 
severe was that stroke ! But what rich blessings 
did it bring ! It made her* lean more entirely on 
her Saviour. She had, under that affliction, new 
and peculiar evidence of the life of faith in her 
soul. On Saturday evening she expressed her 
feelings in her diary ; and on Sabbath noon re- 
newed her covenant with God — a covenant made 



HER DEATH. 463 

twenty-five years before. This v:ns her finishing 
work. It was the last time she wrote her name. 
As she liad no opportunity for preparation after 
she became ill, it is most frrfitifyini^ and conso- 
ling that she left these last memorials of her un- 
wavering trust in God. She had, in every re- 
spect, set her. ' house in order,' as though she 
fully anticipated being thus removed, almost in 
an instant, from all these scenes. But I did not 
at all expect, nor was I at all prepared for the 
shock. Much had I anticipated my own death ; 
little had I thought that the desire of my eyes 
would be taken away as with a stroke. Yet it 
has been done by the hand of a Father ; I dare 
not, I cannot murmur. I bless his holy name 
that he took my beloved so gently, and that she 
met the enemy without knowing of his approach ; 
for he was disarmed. Should the Lord spare my 
life, I propose to send you another letter soon. 
I now write in haste, and with a bleeding heart. 
" Your ever affectionate, 

'' though afflicted son, 

'' M. WiNSLOW." 

A joint letter from the mission adds, *' The 
funeral was attended by all our number, and b}'- 
our missionary friends in Jafinapatam. The mo- 
ther and babe were buried in the Oodooville 
church, amidst the tears, not only of the immedi- 



464 MRS. TV'INSLOW. 

ate mourners, but of the bereaved children of the 
school, the native members of our churches, and 
of many people around who could not but feel 
their loss. 

'' The following week on Thursday, being the 
time of our quarterly communion at Oodooville, 
a funeral sermon was preached by Mr. Poor, from 
the text — ^ And his disciples came, and took up 
the body and buried it, and went and told Jesus.' 
He described the deceased as like John, a ' burn- 
ing and a shining light.' This description, though 
it made us weep the more for our loss, and for 
the loss of the natives around us, caused us also 
to rejoice for the grace conferred on our depart- 
ed sister while here, and for the assurance that 
she is now enjoying the unveiled presence and 
glory of her Saviour in abetter world." 

We have thus accompanied our missionary 
friend through her brief but useful life. If her 
pathway was frequently thorny, the light of hea- 
ven was often let down upon it, to illuminate and 
cheer her steps. She was happy even in a dis- 
tant land and amidst th^ heathen ; and at last, 
how short was her passage through the dark val- 
ley to brighter regions ; how sudden the transi- 
tion from suffering, sinful mortality, to beati- 
fied immortality. All that remains, is to notice a 
few traits in her character, selected principally 



CHARACTER. 465 

to excite imitation, or show the aboundingr orrace 
of God to one wiio felt that she had nothing of 
her own but sin. 

Mrs. Winslow, in her person, was above the 
usual size and stature ; and with a fine dark eye, 
a pure white skin, and an elevated and expanded 
forehead shaded with dark locks, had an engaging 
countenance, 

" Where dawns the high expression of a mind:" 

while she undoubtedly possessed " a nicer adjust- 
ment both of the intellectual and moral powers 
than is ordinarily to be found." Neat and taste- 
ful in her apparel ; affable and yet dignified in her 
manners; and, in her social intercourse, frank, 
candid, and sincere — always putting the best con- 
struction on the language and deportment of those 
around her, while her careful self-scrutiny made 
her acquainted with the hearts of others — she 
found easy access to persons in every department 
of life, and was a favorite in every circle which 
love of her Saviour did not forbid her to enter. 

In her school-days she had great fondness for 
mathematical studies, and the eflect was seen in 
after life, in her discipline of mind and regard for 
strict order and system. Perhaps this also con- 
tributed, in connection Avith her native strength 
of intellect, to form her uncommon decision of 



466 MRS. WINSLOW. 

character. Such were her habits of thought that 
•she could not but rest steadily in the fixed deci- 
sions of her judgment ; and her determination on 
important subjects was often such as to lead to 
the most untiring perseverance. Difficulties sel- 
dom overcame her. It was a maxim from her 
childhood not to say, '' I can't ;" but " I'll try." 
She generally finished what she undertook, and 
was remarkably Moroi^g^. She had great industry 
as well as energy, and did most things with a 
facility which enabled her, though subject to very 
frequent illness, to accomplish more than do most 
persons in continued health. In addition to the 
care of her family when abroad, the education 
of her children, the charge generally of a large 
boarding establishment, the keeping of pecuniary 
accounts for the station, and various direct mis- 
sionary labors, she maintained a frequent corres- 
pondence with many friends, and did much writ- 
ing for the mission. 

AVith these traits of her character were united 
much delicacy of taste, and an unusual degree 
of sensibility. Her feelings were all acute and 
tender, rendering her peculiarly susceptible to 
sorrow or to joy ; but she studied, and to a good 
degree attained, in these as in other respects, self- 
control. It was her rule, in regard to all wrong 
habits, mental or moral, to strive for the victory 
over them, and never to give up the conflict from 



CHARACTER. 467 

the impression that they were unalterably con- 
firmed. 

It is perhaps frequently the case that the lead- 
ing features of religious character are stamped 
at the time of the new birth. It is certainly re- 
markable in Mrs. W. that concern for the souls of 
others mingled largely with her earliest religious 
impressions. She was imbued with the missiona- 
ry spirit in her first sanctification and sealing by 
the Holy Ghost. From the beginning she was an 
active christian. Her benevolence sprung from 
a deep fountain of christian love, opened by the 
Spirit in her soul, and kept full by free commu- 
nication with the '^ river of the water of life." 
Thus qualified, she could be faithful in reproving 
and seeking the eternal welfare of others, and 
seldom give offence ; and rarely failed in her at- 
tempts to gain access, even in circumstances the 
most forbidding. Her growth in grace w^as per- 
haps more manifest from the increase of love 
than of any other fruit of the Spirit. In one of 
her last letters she says, '^ I have often of late 
thought that it is not sufficiently considered that 
our religion is a religion of love; and there is 
nothing which I have more frequently resolved 
to aim at, especially when coming up from the 
banks of Jordan, than to have love to God and 
love to man the leading principle of my spared 
life " 



468 MRS. WINSLOW. 

While her piety was active it was also medita' 
five. She abounded in self-examination. Mason 
on Self-Knowledge was a constant manual. It was 
her practice, at different periods, to keep a writ- 
ten account of her deficiencies, and in her exami- 
nations to dwell principally on those things in 
which she had come short. She kept at times 
a list of the principal faults, both of omission 
and commission, to Avhich she felt herself ex- 
posed, on which she noticed her delinquencies, 
and kept the account for her subsequent inspec- 
tion. At her seasons of fasting and prayer she 
sometimes recorded at length these and other 
sins as they occurred to her mind. For instance, 
at one time she began her devotional exercises by 
noting her sins against God — against her hus- 
band — against her children — against her domes- 
tics — against the brethren and sisters of the mis- 
-ao-ainst her friends at home, and asrainst 



sion- 



the heathen. Under these heads some pages are 
written, which show the minuteness and severity 
of her examination, and her awful sense of the 
strictness of the divine law. Among the siiis 
against God she in one instance records : 

^' Not meditating upon God at stated seasons, 
and constantly going to him to guide, uphold, and 
deliver — not waiting on him in faith, to keep me 
from temptation, and to give me the victory over 



CHARACTER. 469 

my besetting sins — not desiring more earnestly 
to be with him to behold his glory — not being 
more thankful for the mercies I experience, and 
doing more cheerfully to the Lord whatsoever 
my hands find to do — not committing myself and 
my all to him with entire submission and a de- 
r.ire only that his name may be glorified — not 
trusting in him at all times before any created 
one, and making him my chief good before hus- 
band and children — not desiring life for his sake, 
that I may labor for him among the heathen, ra- 
ther than for the love of the world or of friends — 
■not constantly recommending the Gospel by a 
meek and quiet spirit before the heathen, from 
whom he only has made me to differ — not think- 
incr enoufrh of the exceedinsf love of Jesus, and 
feeling my obligations to him — not giving more 
honor to the Holy Spirit by thankfully receiving 
his influences, giving him a throne in my heart, 
and obeying his teachings." 

She also at such seasons reviewed her resolu- 
tions, which were made when her views of divine 
things were clearest ; and according as she had 
been enabled to keep them or had broken them, 
she gave thanks to God, or humbled herself be- 
fore him. It appeared to be her sincere endeavor 
to act in that manner which had seemed to her 
best when she made the closest approaches to 

Winalow. 40 



470 MKS. v^I^-SLov»^ 

God. If slie could not afterwards recall the emo- 
iions excited at such times, she would have the 
benefit of the opinions formed, and rules of life 
laid down, vvhen farthest from earth and nearest to 
heaven. She desired it to be, as she often said, her 
daily business to make progress in the divine life. 
Her habits of devotion gave soul and life to her 
piety. It was her frequent practice to have speci- 
fic subjects of prayer on each day of the week, 
and also for different parts of the dny. Indeed, 
in a good measure, she obeyed the injunction, 
" praying always with all prayer and supplication 
in the Spirit," and her ijiter cessions were often 
most fervent and prevalent. The ij^stances are 
numerous in -which manifest answers to her 
prayers were granted ; some of them in the con- 
version- of individuals, both at home and abroad, 
who were apparently very far from God. No one 
can easily conceive how great was her anxiety 
at times, and how earnest her petitions, for the 
girls of the school, for her domestics and others 
at the station, and for all connected with the mis- 
sion ; nor can any one tell how much they were 
indebted to her prayers. No domestic lived in 
her family any number of years without becom- 
ing a christian. At the time of her death ^t'e, as- 
sisting in the care of her numerous household, 
were all members of the church, though they 
came to her heathen. In the devout and diligent 



CIIAHACTEE. 471 

reading of the Scripture.^ she had frequent com- 
munion with God. Tlie Bible became more and 
more precious to her as she became more and 
more spiritually-minded ; and meditatini^ on its 
truths until they assumed form and substance, 
she obtained great peace of mind, which often 
shed its lustre on all around her. In one instance, 
in expressing^ her wishes for the day, she says, 
'' I desire especially to walk softly before God ; 
and to this end I would be moderate in all things — 
not hnstij in speaking or acting — kind to all — 
7iot talkative — not noisy — thoughtful — grave — and 
much in ejaculatonj prayer." 

In regard to all her anxieties as a mother and 
the mistress of a family, as well as a missionary 
laborer, she endeavored to roll her burdens on 
the Lord, but felt her responsibilities so deeply 
as to be often " pressed in spirit beyond measure." 
Though few are more frequently occupied in con- 
templating the divine perfections, her views of 
Jesus as a Saviour, or rather as her Saviour, were 
not always equally distinct with those of her de- 
ficiency and guilt, and she groaned being burden- 
ed. But when throusfh ofrace she was accustom- 
ed to look more steadily at the cross of Christ, 
and was more sensible of the actings of faith 
within her, and of her union to Christ as her head, 
she looked away from herself, and rejoiced in 
hope of the glory of God. 



472 MKS. WINSLOW. 

Her progress in the spiritual life is happily de- 
scribed by Mr. Spaulding, in a letter to her moth- 
er, with which we close this short review of her 
estimable character. 

" Your dear Harriet in her religious and social 
feelings continued, for the first five or six years 
of her missionary life, much as when you last saw 
her. She suffered frequently from bad health, 
and was eventually obliged, as you know, to take 
a voyage to Calcutta. Though she always de- 
lighted to spend her whole strength, sometimes 
laboring even beyond her strength ; still the 
growth of her religious affections and her en- 
joymeni in religion and in the missionary work 
have been increased since her return in 1S26 
This may have arisen in part from better health \ 
but I think she had somewhat clearer views than 
before of herself and her Saviour. The intelli 
gence of Charles' death was more than nature 
alone could bear, and with the aid of grace it 
seemed difficult for her to recover at once from 
the suddenness and severity of the shock. Yet. 
though cast down, she was not forsaken. She 
mourned bitterly, but submissively, silently and 
m hope. 

" In one of my last conversations with her, we 
were speaking of the ill health of some of her 
children, when she remarked that she felt that 
she must do all she could for them while spared 



CHARACTER. 473 

to her, as they seemed to be lent but for a little 
season.* Ifer conversation for the last two or 
three months was not only heavenward, but she 
seemed to get new views of Christ, and of salva- 
tion bj'- faith in him. All the more meek, lowly 
and gentle graces of the Spirit seemed to have 
taken a new and rapid growth. She talked of 
that love which Jesus manifested, and still mani- 
fests for us, and of * forbearing one another in 
love ;' and mourned more than ever over those 
dissonant feelings among christians which un- 
happily are sometimes exhibited. In a word, her 
conversation and feelings seemed to be those of 
one who enjoyed a frequent and solitary walk 
along the banks of Jordan ; who looked with un- 
usual interest at the prospect on the other side, 
especially at the loveliness and glory of the Sa- 
viour, as he seemed to holdout his hands towards 
her and say, ' Come, heavy laden and afllicted, I 
will give you rest.' These feelings seemed to be 
new, and almost strange to herself; and while 
she pondered them in her heart, wondering what 
they could mean, she suddenly ' overstepped the 
grave,' and is not, for God hath taken her. 

" She is no more with us, but she lives in our 
hearts. She lives in the affections of relatives, 

* Her three surviving daughters were brought by their 
father to this country, and each adopted into an estimable 
christian family. 



474 MRS. AVIXSLOW. 

and friends, and christians at home. She lives 
and will long live in her labors of love among the 
Tamul people. In this providence there is much 
of comfort as well as of afBiction. Even the sud- 
denness and unexpectedness of it was full of mer- 
cy to her, as she had always some fear in A'iew of 
death. This seem.ed to be regarded by our kind 
and sympathizing Saviour, who so ordered it that 
she should take rest in a sweet and quiet sleep ; 
and putting off the body and mortality in that 
very sleep, ' awake in his likeness.' " 

The following affectionate tribute to the me- 
mory of Mrs. W. is from the highly gifted pen 
of Mrs. SiGouRNEY, who was a friend and com- 
panion of her early days. 



TO THE MEMORY OF 

MRS. HARRIET L. WINSLOW. 

" Thy name hath power like magic. 

" Back it brings 
'* The earliest pictures hung in memory's halls, 
"Tinting them freshly o'er; the rugged cliff, 
" The towering trees, — the wintry walk to school, 
" The page so often conn'd, the needle's task 
" Achieved with weariness, — the hour of sport 
" Well-earned and dearly prized, — the sparkling brook 
•' Making its clear cascade, — the darker rush 
*• Of the pent river through its rocky pass,— 



TRIBUTE TO HER MEMORY. 4-75 

" Our violet-gatherin2;s 'mid the vernal banks, — 
" When oiLT youns: hearts did ope their crystal gate« 
" To every simple joy. 

" I little deem'd, 
" 'Mid all that gay and gentle fellowship, 
" That Asia's sun would beam upon thy grave,— 
" Though even then, from thy calm, serious eye, 
" There was a glancing forth of serious thought, 
*' That scorn'd earth's vanities. 

" I saw thee stand 
" With but a few brief summers o'er thy head, 
" And in the consecrated courts of God 
" Confess thy Saviour's name. And they who mark'd 
" The deep devotion, and the high resolve 
" Of that scarce half-blown bud, — did wondering ask 
" What its full bloom must be. 

" But now thy bed 
" Is with thine infant train, — where the sad voice 
'•' Of the young Ceylon mother tells her child 
" Of all thy prayers and labors. Yes, thy rest 
" Is in the bosom of that fragrant isle 
*' Where heathen man, with lavish nature, strives 
" To blot the lesson she would teach of God. 
" — Thy pensive sisters pause upon thy tomb 
" To catch the spirit that did bear thee through 
*• All tribulation ; till thy robes were white, 
" To join the angelic train. 

" And so farewell, 
" My childhood's playmate, and my sainted friend, — 
" Whose bright example, not without rebuke, 
" Admonisheth, that home, and ease, and wealth, 
" And native land, — are well exchang'd for heaven." 

" L. H. S. 

Hartford, (Cono.) March 17, 1335." 



476 DEATH OF SISTERS. 

The influence of ]Mrs. W. in forming the character of 
her sisters, to -whom I\Irs. Sigourney so beautifully al- 
ludes — one of whom, Avho yet survives, received, on 
arriving: at Ceylon, the first intelligence of her death — 
claims the Ibllowing brief notice of the two others, who 
liad scarcely entered on their labors among the heathen 
when they were called to higher services above. 

Mrs. Charlotte H. Ciierey, the eldest of the three, 
having for some years, in her native land, sought with 
great iidelity and success the eternal welfare of souls, 
especially those under her charge in Sabbath and other 
schools, and whom she met in her Tract distribution, 
reached Ceylon in April, 1837, expecting to be station- 
.ed on the continent; but, after a painful illness, died, 
November 4 of the same year, aged 26. Eight days 
before her departure she wro-te in pencil: 

"I am still spared, although very low. Yes, deal 
friends, our good Dr. Ward thinks the earthly house of. 
this tabernacle will soon be dissolved. Well, if the 
Lord's will be so, is it not far better to be with Christ ? 
I thmk the Lord sent me here ; and though it were 
but to die, I do not regret coming at his bidding. Many, 
many thanks to dear mother and sister, who, in my 
childhood, taught me to prize the Bible, and to learn 
manv passages from its holy pages, which now cheer 
my fainting spirit." 

During her severe illness she was an example of pa- 
tience — cheerful, submissive, happy. Often, when in 
anguish of body, she would say, 

"This sorrow, touched by Thee, grows bright 
" With more than rapture's ray." 



DEATH OF SISTERS. 477 

A few hours before her departure she said, ''Is this 
death ? Yes, this is death. It is a solemn thing to die. 
I want to tell you, that Jesus Christ is ray all — my all. 
1 am a lost, vile, undone sinner, but Jesus Christ is my 
all." Then alter a pause — '"Have not I commanded 
thee V * Have not I commanded V I believe the Lord 
commanded us ; and tell them at home I am not sorry 
we came here, because I believe we came at the Lord's 
command. Do not let them say I have done much. I 
have done nothing. It was all the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Farewell." 

On the stone which marks where her dust is deposit- 
ed by the side of her two sisters at Oodooville, is 
written in Tamul^ "Her dying words were, ^ Jesus 
Christ is my alL He is my precious Advocate with the 
Father: " 

Mrs. Harriet Joanna Perry, the youngest sister, 
who arrived in Ceylon September, 1835, was suddenly 
removed (three days after her husband, both by cholera) 
March 13, 1838, aged 22; leaving an orphan daughter 
at the tender age of a little more than one year. A 
part of the letter from the only surviving sister, which 
bore the intelligence to their widowed mother, may 
close this narrative of the dispensations of a wonder- 
working God. 

" OoDooviLLE, March 19, 1838. 
" My dearest Mother, — We have sometimes lately 
said to each other, 'Perhaps the Lord will have spared 
our dear mother the pain of hearing of the death of 
dear Charlotte, and have taken her to meet her and 
other loved ones before the throne of God and the Lamb 



-i78 DEATH OF SISTERS. 

ere the news reached home.' But why need we say- 
that ? Cannot He who has sustained you in six trouhles, 
support you in this also ? And can He not even (ill you 
with joy at the thought of your precious ones multi- 
plying in heaven? I feel that it is so, and that you 
are enabled 

' To rise within the veil, and see 

' The saints above, how great their joys, 

' How bright their glories be !' 

" Mrs. Spaulding and I, as we sit here this evening, 
have been naming those we know and love among the 
blessed company. They seem a precious, happy band— 
and we almost feel that it would be a privilege to join 
them. 

" The cholera is now prevailing in some parts of this 
district. The poor heathen, in their alarm, fly with 
new zeal to their gods, their ceremonies, and their in- 
cantations. 

" The Lord drew near to us, and laid his hand on one 
of our hrethren. We had all felt for some time that Ave 
needed chastisement ; that those which have been sent 
upon us had not been improved as they ought. But He 
who said, 'I vvdll visit with the rod,' 'nevertheless my 
loving-kindness will I not take from them,' mingled 
tender mercies with the affliction, and permitted us to 
see the sufferer filled with resignation, peace, joy, and 
confidence in God. He was dear to us, but dearer to 
Him who died for him. Do not mourn, dearest mother, 
that he has taken brother Perry to himself. 

" Do not mourn, even on dear Harriets account. I 
was wholly miprepared for the stroke, and felt that she 



DEATH OF SISTERS. 479 

would be; and while I hastened to her aficr receiving 
the intelhr^ence, I dreaded to meet her. But after I liad 
seen her, I ceased to weep fur lier. Even then she wab 
'kept m perfect peace ;' and if you could witness, deai 
mother, the joy with which slie is filled now, you would 
be overwhelmed with gratitude for the grace bestowed 
on her. God has wiped away tears from her eyes, and 
put a new song into her mouth, even praise to her God. 
She is'^pared the sorrows of widowhood in India. She 
is reunited to lier beloved husband — her body rests by 
the side of his. 

" The first words she said to me were, 'Precious sis- 
ter, I have wanted to see you. I have thought all day 
that I should soon go to join his happy spirit before the 
throne.' It was a pleasure to attend her in her short 
sickness, and to hear her continual expressions of peace 
and joy in believing in the Saviour. She talked of Him, 
and almost of Him onlJ^ I would, if I could, make you 
see and hear her; but it is impossible to give any but 
those who were around her an idea of such a scene. 

"A little before her death two Tamul women came 
in to see her, and she told rae to say to them for her, 
*I expect to die in a few hours. I go happily. I de- 
sire very much that when you die, you may be as hap- 
py as I am. But you cannot, unless you believe and 
love the Lord Jesus Christ, who died for you.' 

" Afterwards her countenance became filled with joy, 
and she tried to sing. At first she could articulate no- 
ihmg, but continued to make a cheerful sound, till it ap- 
peared that she was singing, 'Halleluiah, Hallelujah.' 
She seemed for a longtime engaged in this exercise; 
and we thought from her manner that she supposed she 
was mingling her songs with those in heaven." 



Lines suggested hj reading the Memoir of Mrs 
Winslow on the anniversary of her hirth, 

" Thou measurest not thy life by years, 

" By change of night and day ; 
" Nor by the drops of ceaseless tears 

" That wash our bloom away; 

" But on the dial-plate above, 

" "Which blessed seraphs scan, 
" Thou seest eternity roll on • 

" As when it first began. 

" Thou wanderest from thy home no more, 
"Where sprung thy childhood fair, 

" To pitch upon a heathen shore 
" Thy mission-tent of care. 

" No more the insatiate grave shall feed 

" With what thy bosom reared — 
" Nor feel thine inmost spirit bleed 

" Till every vein is seared. 

** Are they not there, — those infant souls, — 

*' Are they not by thy side, — 
*' For whom thy sleepless prayer arose, 

" For whom thy Saviour died 1 

" And do we still, with blinded grief, 

" Lament thy lot sublime, 
" High raised above the countless fears, 

" The countless ills of time 1 

' Is it thy voice that makes response 

" In tone so sweet and free % 
" Weep for yourselves, my dearest friends, 
" But weep no more for me. 

•« L. H. S 
••Hartford, April 9, 1837." 

THE END. 



University of California 

SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 

405 Hilgard Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90024-1388 

Return this material to the library 

from which it was borrowed. 



0m-7.'69(N296s4)— C-120 



bV3^77. W73A2 1840 



B 



iillliillli iiilliiillliiiiililii 
000 011 340 7 



/ 



