S. K. HOLTSINGER'S 



]Mo. 



PRINCETON. N. J. ^ 



BX 7260 .S5 S5x 

Sherman, James, 1796-1862. 

The pastor's wife 



Digitized by the Internet Arcliive 
in 2014 



https://archive.org/details/pastorswifemennoiOOsher_0 



THE PASTOR'S WIFE. 



MEMOIE>i 




UN 11 191P 
LOGICAL StV^V^ 



MRS. MARTHA SHERMAN 



THE REV. JAMES SHERMAN, 



SUCCESSOR OF THE REV. ROWLA^D HILL, 
l.N' SURREY CHAPEL, LONDON. 



ABRIDGED WITH THE SAXCTIO.N OF THE AUTHOR. 



PUBLISHED BY THE 
AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY 

150 N ASS A U -ST REET , NEW YORK 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 

Birth — Her mother's judicious training — Contrast between 
the two sisters — Sweetness of temper — Natural polite- 
ness — Anecdote of Rev. Matthew Wilks — School — Musi- 
cal talent — Power of imitation 9 



CHAPTER II. 

Illness and death of her sister — Instrumental in the con- 
version of two persons — Her own decision for Christ — 
Letter on union with the church — Death of her young 
friend — Her own serious illness and recovery ... 24 



CHAPTER III. 

Marriage — First impressions on settlii;g at Reading — Difli- 
culties in the Sunday-school — Maternal Society — Visit of 
Dr. and Mrs. Codman — Visit to the poor — Providential 
escape — Serious illness of herself and husband — Invita- 
tion to Surrey chapel — Mixed feelings on leaving Read- 
ing 42 



4 



COJJTKNTS. 



CHAPTER IV. 

Removal to London — Sketch of the origin of Suney chapel 
— Her interest in the societies already established there — 
Commencement of Sabbath Bible-class — Young ladies re- 
quest the formation of a similar class — Fears and hopes 
respecting it — Letter to a young lady who had lost a sis- 
ter — To two sisters on exalted piety — To one wishing to 
become a Sunday-school teacher — To one at school — To 
one whom God had chosen from a worldly family — To a 
friend on her buthday — Joy that her efforts had been 
blessed 67 



CHAPTER V. 

Farmation of Maternal Association — Birth of her eldest 
daughter — Ditiiculties and anxieties respecting the asso- 
ciation — Formation of a similar one for the poor — Journey 
on the continent — Death of her daughter Selina — Her 
anxiety that the event should be improved to her class — 
Letter to a young friend, urging immediate decision — Mar- 
riage of her eldest daughter — Birth of her youngest child 
— Letter to her eldest child — To her mother — Illness of 
he - babe Ill 



CHAPTER VI. 

Death of her mother — Interest in the various religious insti- 
tutions — Extracts from letters — On ascribing glory to man 
rather than God — On tempering zeal with humility — On 
the scriptural warrant for taking an oath — Consolation to 
one of her class in the hospital — To one who wished to 
become a missionary — On self-examination — On obedience 



CONTENTS. 



5 



to parents only "in the Lord" — Formation of a mission- 
ary working-party — Specimen of notes of invitation — For- 
mation of another missionary working-party — Meeting to 
consider objections — Letter to her class informing them of 
the result . . 153 

CHAPTEE. VII. 

Commencement of illness — Winter residence at Brighton — 
Letter to a young lady on the duty of taking care of her 
health — Extracts from letters — Thanks to a friend for acts 
of kindness — To the Maternal Association — To her father's 
servant — To a young lady who had undertaken a class of 
Jewish children — Believing hopes respecting her own chil- 
dren — Extract from her memorandum-book — Establishes a 
Maternal Society — Interest in a young widow — Persevering 
and successful eflforts — Conversation with the servants — 
Liquidates the debt of the chapel — State of her health — 
Letter to a young friend in the North — Hopes of final re- 
covery — Second tour on the continent — Return to Eng- 
land 186 



CHAPTER VIII 

Resigns her Bible-classes — Letter to a lady on the unjust 
prosecution of her husband — On the return of her wea- 
ding-day — Thanks for a present — Visit to St. Leonard's — 
Depression of mind — Extracts of letters — To her husband 
— To her father — To a city missionary on the death of liis 
wife — To a young friend, stirring her up to spiritual activ- 
ity — On submission to the divine will — Extracts from let- 
■ ters — On judging uncharitably — Residence at Enfield — 
Letter on being prevented from attending evening wor- 
ship — Confid<>ncr' in G<.d — To a Sunday-sehool teacher — 



6 



CONTENTS. 



On the death of a young person — On the formation of a 
select class for children — Residence at Hastings — Relief 
from mental depression — Calinness with which she re- 
ceived intimation of immediate danger — Return home 209 

CHAPTER IX. 

Farewell interviews — Sabbath class — Poor maternal — La- 
dies' maternal — Young ladies' Bible-class — Memoranda 
of last illness — London missionary sermon — Interview 
with Rev. J. A. James and others — Missionary commun- 
ion — Last moments — Funeral — Funeral-sermons — Poetic 
description of funeral scene 278 

CHAPTER X. 

Character — Industry — Firmness and perseverance — Punctu- 
ality — Freedom from selfishness — Condescension — Humil- 
ity — Love to all the people of God — Fervent piety — Un- 
conscious influence 326 



PREFACE. 



It is a difficult duty for one tenderly related 
to a beloved saint, to draw the faithful linea- 
ments of her character, and present a portrait 
easily recognized by those who were favored 
with her friendship. Ardent affection may 
overlook defects which others would record, 
and fear of exaggeration omit excellences 
which desorve to be prominently exhibited. 
A looker-on sees more of the battle, and can 
better de.scribe the respective qualities of the 
parties engaged in the conflict, than the com- 
batants themselves; for, however each might 
be disposed to do justice to the valor manifest- 
ed by his fellow-soldier, the very nearness of 
contact and limited range of view incapacitate 
them from describing the whole operation in 
the field of vision which a spectator enjoys. 
And it would have been hailed as a great 
blessing, if some friend who had known the 
dear departed from early life could have been 
found, to present her living likeness to those 
who have earnestly solicited some memorials 
of one whom they so ardently loved, and whose 
faith they desire to follow. The materials for 
a memoir, though scantily preserved, would 



8 



PREFACE 



have been quite sufficient, in a practised and 
skilful hand, to make many sincere hearts long 
to be like her, and to bring great glory to the 
Lord for the abundant grace bestowed on his 
devoted child. 

Yet some advantages are possessed by a near 
relative over others. If the spectator of a bat- 
tle can describe better the general operations of 
an army, the man who stands next to his com- 
rade, and fights with him, can more minutely 
recite his valiant deeds, his patience, and vic- 
tory. So in the case of this precious saint: 
her husband knew her best; had far greater 
opportunities than any of her friends of ob- 
serving her steady walk with God, her loving 
and Christ-like spirit, her amiable deportment 
to all her circle. of friends and dependents, and 
her self-denying and useful efforts to win souls 
to her Saviour. Therefore, though deeply sen- 
sible that the sketch of her life here given will 
be rough and unfinished, and in no degree 
worthy of its subject, he believes it will pos- 
sess greater advantages than if written by a 
less intimate acquaintance. His hope, his ar- 
dent prayer to God is, that he will give it his 
rich blessing, and cause many to follow her as 
she followed Christ her Lord. 



THE 



PASTOR'S WIFE. 



CHAPTER I. / 

FKOII HER BIRTH TO HER CONVERSION. 

Thh beloved subject of this Memoir was born 
at Kentish Town, September 14, 1806. Her 
father, Benjamin Tucker, Esq., long known as 
the friend to ministers of Christ's holy gospel, 
of all denominations, and to the establishment 
of his kingdom on earth, had retired from ac- 
tive business, and devoted himself chiefly to aid, 
and carry on the woi'ship of God in the vicinity 
in which he lived. Her mother was the daugh- 
ter of Joseph Page, Esq., to whose munificence 
the poor of the town of Basingstoke are much 
indebted for the erection and endowment of 
some almshouses for pious aged women. 

Her parents had two daughters ; Mary, who 



10 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



died at the age of twenty-two, and Martha, 
whose history we now record. It was her priv- 
ilege to have a mother, to whose piety and 
personal superintendence she was much indebt- 
ed for the formation of habits which enriched 
her character, and rendered her so useful and 
acceptable to the church of Christ. Although 
it is a fact unquestioned by all who revere the 
word of truth, that the most efficient maternal 
guidance cannot change the heart and renew 
the nature for God, without the gracious in- 
fluence of his Spirit; yet, where a mother 
unites piety, wisdom, and perseverance, in the 
training of her children, she seldom fails to 
draw down that influence on her interesting 
charge. 

Education, especially in the formation of 
character, does not consist merely in conveying 
to the mind ethical maxims, useful knowledge, 
and the higher branches of gospel lore ; but in 
the living exhibition of personal graces, a rigid 
love of truth, a spirit of prayer, a dependence 
on divine aid, a delicate sense of purity, and 
an indomitable perseverance in aiming t() win 
the heart to Christ, 



EARLY LIFE. 



11 



These qualities eminently belonged to Mrs. 
Tucker. She was a woman of quiet but fer- 
vent piety; her regularity in retiring for pri- 
vate devotion at stated times, notwithstanding 
great personal indisposition, was sustained till 
within a few days of her decease ; her love of 
punctuality, neatness, and order, prevailed 
throughout every arrangement for the church 
and her family; her attention and liberality 
to the poor were proverbial ; the delicacy of 
holiness was maintained in her conversation 
and habits ; and her constancy in training her 
children for God, had its reward in their early 
devotion to his service. Beyond this, she was 
remarkable for her practical good sense, which, 
while it did not reject the ornamental part of 
education, was generally directed to the pro- 
motion of some useful object of life. 

The value of such a mother is not always 
seen at the time. She may not be showy and 
attractive in her talents, or insure the appro- 
bation of the theorist ; but the patient labor of 
a few years, spent in the cultivation of her 
infant charge, passes not away unobserved by 
those who watch for examples of the power of 



12 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



education, and certainly not unrecompensed hy 
the God of the families of the earth. Let not 
mothers, Conscious of many defects in the 
education of their children, fear the result, if 
they commit their way often to the Lord, and 
strive to exhibit the practical influence of god- 
liness before them. After-days will show the 
effects of such training. 

Perhaps few sisters, so nearly of an age, so 
seldom separated, and so closely united in 
affection, have exhibited so complete a contrast 
in natural disposition and intellectual character, 
as Mary and Martha Tucker. In early child- 
hood, Mary was less engaging than her sister, 
and when she felt the importance of self-dis- 
cipline, had more difficulties to contend with, 
being naturally of a less yielding temper ; con- 
sequently, their temptations and pleasures, 
their pursuits and amusements, were almost 
entirely different. Abstruse reading and the 
acquisition of knowledge were Mary's favorite 
pursuits ; while to please and be pleased, to be 
happy herself and to promote the happiness of 
others, was Martha's highest aim, or rather 
the spontaneous result of her light and buoy- 



EARLY LIFE. 



13 



ant spirit. It must be confessed, that her love 
of play sometimes prevented her from applying 
with sufficient diligence to her various studies; 
but while the masters who attended them, 
found their gravity sometimes overcome by the 
irresistible and fascinating playfulness of their 
younger pupil, the elder was steadily pursuing 
her studies, in the acquisition of which she 
needed rather a rein than a spur. 

Mary's natural reserve, and perhaps con- 
scious superiority of intellect, made her at 
times appear distant to strangers ; though to 
her chosen friends, her affection was warm, 
strong, and lasting. Martha could repel none ; 
an extended hand could never be refused, nor 
a smile unreturned by her. "I love every 
body, and every body loves me," seemed to be 
the language of her confiding, happy temper. 
The tremulous frame alone would betray the 
inward agitation from which Mary was at any 
time suffering; while Martha would pour forth 
her childish sorrows into the first sympathiz- 
ing bosom that presented itself. An act of 
condescension performed by Mary was the re- 
sult of principle, her first impulse being to 



14 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



receive rather than bestow homage ; while a 
pin dropped by an inferior would be immediate- 
ly picked up by Martha, who seemed impelled 
intuitively to pay attention to another, neither 
asking nor expecting a return. 

Let it not, however, be supposed, that the 
one was unamiable, or the other frivolous ; 
whatever tendency there might be in either to 
such dispositions, was effectually checked by 
their judicious training ; and as they travelled 
on side by side in their singularly happy and 
joyous course, it was difficult to say which was 
most loved or most admired, since though the 
instruments upon which they played were so 
different, no jarring sound was heard, but tones 
of harmony and love, which cheered and de- 
lighted a large circle of admiring friends. 
Their difference of character produced on Mar- 
tha's lowly mind that effect which difference 
of years alone usually produces ; and she look- 
ed up to her sister, only twenty months older 
than herself, with as much deference as if she 
had been her senior by so many years. 

In childhood and early youth, Martha, or as 
she was always called, Patty Tucker was not 



t 

EARLY LIFE. 



15 



exempt from many' of the faults and foibles 
usual at that age, nor free from that "foolish- 
ness," which Scripture and experience show, 
"is bound up in the heart of a child;" and 
perhaps she did not materially differ from her 
young companions, except in a more than usual 
volatility of spirits, and in a remarkable sweet- 
ness of temper. Her countenance was never 
disfigured by the pout of ill-humor, or the 
scowl of discontent, but was always smooth 
and serene, as the placid temper of which it 
was the faithful index. Those beautiful lines 
of Cowper might with strict propriety be ap- 
plied to her : 

" Thy constant flow of love, which knew no fall j 
Ne'er roughened by those cataraxjts and breaks, 
Which humor interposed too often makes." 

So completely and constantly was her smooth 
and open brow thus unruffled, that she has 
been asked playfully to frown, to show whether 
such an expression was possible. Whenever 
her eye met the eye of another, it was invari- 
ably lighted up by a smile, and it was often 
said, "I dare not look at Patty in a place of 
worship, for she is sure to smile, look at her 



16 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



when and where you may." Nor was this the 
smile of mere placidity or indifference. Her 
good-humor was an active principle ; she was 
ever the first to assist or do a kind office, ever 
the first to yield precedence to another. "Well 
can one who knew her from childhood remem- 
ber, how she was at all times ready and will- 
ing to he literally "the last of all and the ser- 
vant of all." Many instances might be men- 
tioned, trifling indeed in themselves, yet it is 
the large aggregate of such little things that 
makes up half the happiness of domestic life. 

Being one of a party assembled for the pur- 
pose of seeing several exhibitions, while all 
■were eagerly pressing forward anxious to ob- 
tain the best place and the best view, Patty 
might always be seen behind as they passed 
from room to room, trying to get a peep when 
and how she could, and showing by her patient 
but persevering efTorts that she was not in the 
background from indifference to the pleasure 
the sight afforded, but from her readiness to 
yield to the equally eager but more selfish 
anxiety of her companions. 

Another trait of her childhood should not be 



EARLY LIFE. 



17 



omitted — her natural politeness. While few 
have exceeded, or perhaps equalled her, in her 
•fondness for play and sports of every kind, yet 
even in her most playful days, a stranger call- 
ing, or a guest staying at her father's hospita- 
ble house, was sure of receiving the most mi- 
nute attentions from little Patty ; at the same 
time these were the attentions of a child, as 
far removed from the womanly forwardness of 
some, as from the awkward shyness of others. 
The Rev. Matthew Wilks happening to call 
one day when Patty, then a very little child, 
was alone in the dining-room, she placed a 
chair for him, took his hat, and persuaded him 
to take some refreshment, eJigaging him in 
conversation till her mamma's return. When 
Mrs. Tucker came in, the old gentleman told 
her how much he had been indebted to the 
kind attentions of her little daughter, adding, 
as he patted her on the shoulder, "You are the 
first young lady that has taken a fancy to my. 
old face." 

When she had attained thirteen years of age, 
her parents determined to send her from home 
for education ; and she was placed with a 

Sherman 2 



18 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



friend at Hackney for a short time. It was 
thought that intercourse with young ladies of 
various dispositions and habits, would tend to 
improve her character and test her temper ; 
while she would gain such a knowledge of her 
fellow-probationers for another world, as it was 
impossible to attain under her father's roof 
Her simple manners and amiable spirit gained 
her the universal love of her school-fellows. 
Some of the more selfish and less thoughtful 
would experiment upon her generosity, by ask- 
ing her to do something for them which they 
did not really require, in order to see if she 
could possibly refuse ; but at whatever sacrifice 
of comfort or convenience, if it was represented 
as an act that would save them trouble or 
afford them pleasure, she was never known to 
deny their request. It will easily be conceived, 
that with an engaging person and manners 
which led to her being always introduced on 
the arrival of company, with spirits buoyant 
and untiring, and with a temper so yielding 
and kind, school was not the most likely place 
to forward her education. The discovery was 
made, that whatever knowledge she might gain 



EARLY LIFE. 



19 



in associating with larger numbers of her own 
age and station, a loss was sustained of gen- 
eral information, which a mother's watchful 
attentions could alone supply, and even they 
seemed insufficient to fix so playful a mind 
upon useful and important lessons. 

The fear that all the labor of education 
would be lost upon her, often occasioned much 
grief to her mother ; nothing seemed to remain 
in the memory, and as to the correct repetition 
of a task, carelessness and playfulness seemed 
to render it a thing utterly impossible. Later 
years, however, proved that the seed sown was 
not lost : the substance of all that was taught 
her was preserved, and the memory which was 
thought to be so defective, became by exercise 
one of the most retentive her husband ever 
knew. Parents should not allow themselves 
to grieve, if their children do not excel in such 
branches of education as they fondly dream 
may best adapt them for life. The playful- 
ness and buoyancy which it is so difficult to 
control, may be the necessary qualifications for 
sustaining difficulties and performing duties 
which God has designed for them in after- 



20 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



life — a part of the discipline and preparation of 
an all- wise Mind who foresees all they shall be 
and suffer. Rather let them be most anxious 
about their moral and spiritual training, to 
root in their hearts gospel maxims, and form 
their characters after the model of Jesus Christ, 
and in due season they shall reap, if they faint 
not. 

Considerable musical talent developed itself 
in Martha fi-om her childhood. When not able 
to reach the keys of the piano without stand- 
ing on her toes, she picked out, untaught, the 
tunes she heard in the streets, and often in- 
terested her parents and friends by her con- 
stant readiness to amuse them with her little 
stock of musical knowledge. By tuition and 
practice she became a great proficient, both in 
taste and execution. Her musical memory 
was prodigious ; after once learning a compo- 
sition, she never used notes, and retained it 
with accuracy as long as her fingers were able 
to move the keys. How often has she calmed 
the troubled spirit of her husband, when press- 
ed with duty and care, by the plaintive and 
joyous notes of her graceful hand, the very 



EARLY LIFE. 



2i 



remembrance of which qpcasions a thrill of 
pleasure. 

In addition to other peculiarities, Martha 
could assume almost any character so natu- 
rally, as to avoid detection by her most inti- 
mate friends. Hearing that one of them — a 
neighbor, who had said it was impossible she 
could ever be deceived in Martha's face and 
person — wanted a servant, she went to her in 
that capacity, and after referring for her char- 
acter to several persons whom they both knew, 
she was dismissed, the lady telUng her that 
she feared from her countenance she was not 
good-tempered, but would inquire more about 
her. She did so on the same day, and found, 
to her astonishment, that her young friend with 
the merry face had overmatched all her dis- 
criminating powers. 

Her voice too was wholly under her control ; 
she could adapt it to the cry bf the infant, or 
sing the deep-toned bass of a man ; and often 
she laid it under contribution, to introduce at 
pleasure the peculiar cries of animals and songs 
of birds, so that it was difficult to believe they 
were not present. Her innocent and sparkling 



22 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



wit, and powers of comparison, which seemed 
to present themselves without effort, enlivened 
her conversation and never permitted a gloomy 
countenance long to remain in her presence. 
Yet the universal testimony of all who knew 
her in her youth and beauty would be, that a 
modest and retiring demeanor was her special 
grace. Though adorned with personal and 
mental attractions which few possess, nothing 
was obtruded or permitted to appear that 
would not minister pleasure to all her asso- 
ciates. 

With two such daughters, of equal stature 
and beautiful figure, of varied talents and en- 
gaging manners, the home of the parents was 
light with joy and gladness, and the promise of 
years of future felicity. Perhaps no two young 
persons, without the manifestation of decided 
piety, ever contributed more to the comfort of 
home and. the gratification of a select and val- 
ued circle of friends. Grave theological pro- 
fessors, as well as youthful admirers, found 
the moments delightfully gUde away, while 
listening to the dulcet notes and warbling 
voices of these sweet sisters, and have left the 



EARLY LIFE. 



^3 



peaceful habitation after a well-spent evening, 
refreshed and better fitted for severer studies. 
0, what is so attractive as a Christian home, 
where intelligence, piety, cheerfulness, and 
nospitality^ combine to render it an earthly 
paradise ? 



24 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



CHAPTER II. 

FROM HER CONVERSION TO HER UNION 
- "WITH THE CHURCH OF CHRIST. 

It might well be difficult for a person blessed 
with such advantages to recollect the time 
when serious impressions of eternal things first 
took their rise in her mind. Habituated to a 
reverence for G-od's word, to secret pi^yer, and 
to regular attendance on a gospel ministry, 
Martha generally felt that pious persons were 
right, and that to be among them would be 
her happiness ; but carelessness, rather than 
opposition, nurtured indifference, and a direct 
acceptance of Christ was deferred to a more 
convenient opportunity. A regard for heavenly 
things was evidently cherished, and the society 
of the good preferred to those of a worldly 
character, even in her days of indecision ; still, 
lier heart was a stranger to that vital piety 
which makes Christ the centre of happiness, 
and communion with him the highest pleasure. 
Yet He who designed her to hold a distin- 



HER CONVERSION. 



guished place in his church, so ordered his 
providence, that several events concurred to 
make her conversion to himself singularly in- 
terestino;. 

The first cloud that darkened the hitherto 
happy home of these two lovely sisters, was a 
serious illness which befell Mary in the year 
1826. She was one of a picnic party which 
spent the day "in the neighborhood, of Totte- 
ridge, where they then resided. It was a day 
of uninterrupted pleasure, and all returned to 
their homes delighted with the innocent recre- 
ation they had enjoyed, little thinking that 
death had cast his dart securely into the lungs 
of one of their number. The next morning 
Mary awoke with an entire loss of voice, which 
was attributed to a slight cold taken while sit- 
ting on the grass the previous evening, though 
the weather was warm and unusually fine ; 
and which, it was hoped, a little care and 
medicine would soon remove. But the symp- 
toms became every day more alarming ; all the 
aids of the best medical advice, with change 
of air and scene, were tried in vain ; she never 
recovered her voice ; and early in 1827, at the 



26 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



age of twenty-two, she sunk under the influ- 
ence of the same insidious disease which, 
twenty-one years afterwards, took her sister, 
then a matured Christian, to the world of 
bUss into which she so early entered. 

Mary's timid and retiring character had de- 
terred her from making a public profession, 
by union with a Christian church, which be- 
fore her death she much regretted ; but she 
had long " adorned the doctrine of God her 
Saviour," by her consistent though hidden 
walk, in the family and private circle, and 
died " in sure and certain hope of the resur- 
rection to eternal life;" and now the sisters 
are reunited, and are singing together, in far 
sweeter strains than those by which they so 
often charmed their listening friends on earth, 
the praises of " Him who loved them, and 
washed them from their sins in his blood." 

The death of Mary was the first link in the 
chain of events to bring Martha's heart under 
the dominion of Christ. It will easily be be- 
lieved how tenderly she watched her sister 
during her Jong illness, how hopefully she 
cherished every symptom of amendment, and 



HER CONVERSION. 27 

how acute was her sorrow when her precious 
companion was taken from her ; but He who 
dried up the chief source of her earthly com- 
fort, turned her affections into a new channel, 
which ran towards the heaven into which her 
sister had entered. Her enlightened judgment 
saw the vanity of health, pleasure, and talent — 
the utter insufficiency of all human aid and 
comfort in the hour of death, and the absolute 
necessity of a conscious interest in Christ, to 
prepare her for a useful life and a happy eter- 
nity. Her impressions, however, went no fur- 
ther, and it was reserved for another event to 
deepen and mature them. 

The daughter of an old and valued friend, 
about her own age, to whom she was warmly 
attached, came on a visit to her parents. Mar- 
tha, though not valuing prayer as a spiritual 
exercise, maintained with great punctuality 
the hour of retirement for reading the Scrip- 
tures and devotion, to which she had been 
accustomed by her mother from her childhood, 
and to which the recent death of her sister ha(f 
given a new impulse. Her young friend ob- 
served that this time was always kept sacred 



28 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



for the purpose, and as she did not think it 
absolutely necessary, manifested an indiffer- 
ence to the same scrupulous watchfulness. 
Martha entreated that she would retire for the 
same objects at the same time. She consented, 
and not many months elapsed before she began 
to feel the value of her soul and the importance 
of its salvatiou ; her reading and prayer at- 
tained a vitality and energy which Martha had 
never reached, and these duties became the 
most exquisite pleasures. She saw, felt, and 
enjoyed the blessedness of the man whom G-od 
causes to approach unto him. And now her 
deepest concern was, that her friend who had 
urged her to practise this heavenly exercise, 
might enjoy its spiritual as well as formal ob- 
servance. In her turn she became a pleader : 
with Martha to seek Christ earnestly, and her 
salvation immediately ; and with Grod for her, 
that she might taste the blessing she had 
instrumentally imparted to her friend. This, 
Martha felt to be the one thing needful, and 
the peace and comfort she witnessed in her 
friend gave energy to her petitions that she 
might fully possess the precious gift of justifi- 



HER CONVERSIO.V. • 29 

cation. He who hears the sighing of the pris- 
oner did not disdain her prayer. 

Behold another link in the chain of events 
which led to her conversion and decision for 
God. A District Visiting Society was formed 
about this time in Enfield, to supply the tem- 
poral wants of the poor. One of the districts 
was assigned to Martha, and at her mother's 
request she began her responsible duty of visi- 
tation. Before she undertook it, she felt her 
utter incapacity to direct others to that foun- 
tain of life of which she had not yet herself 
tasted, and often and earnestly entreated God 
to give her light and wisdom. 

Little did she think how literally God was 
about to answer that sincere desire. In the 
district assigned her, lived a poor woman of 
the name of Taylor, nearly ninety years of age, 
exceedingly ignorant and prejudiced ; but like 
Martha, she became earnestly desirous of un- 
derstanding and enjoying the way of salvation, 
and proposed numerous questions to her young 
and interesting visitor about the atonement, 
and especially how she could become inter- 
ested in it. Her inquiries were made with 



30 



MARTHA SHERMAN 



such evident sincerity and anxiety, as to send 
Martha home ejaculating, " Oh, that I could 
show this poor woman the salvation of Jesus 
Christ. Teach me, 0 Lord, the way of thy 
statutes;" and resolving that she would search 
the Bible and other religious books till she 
could understand this great doctrine herself 
and explain it to her aged pupil. For two 
months her visits were repeated nearly every 
day ; she became more and more interested in 
the increased anxiety of the old woman for ex- 
planations, which, though through her reading 
they were given with theological accuracy, 
were not tasted and handled and felt by her- 
self as the word of life. 

One morning after earnest prayer to Grod to 
prepare her for her intended visit, she remem- 
bered that she had heard Dr. Burder deliver a 
series of lectures on the "Essentials of Re- 
hgion," in which she was much interested. 
As she possessed them in a printed form, she 
took up the book, hoping to find some eluci- 
dation of the way of salvation, to assist her in 
her conversation that day with Mrs. Taylor. 
While reading, a flood of heavenly light seemed 



HER CONVERSION. 



31 



poured upon her mind ; the complete and fin- 
ished atonement of the Saviour, the justifica- 
tion of a sinner hy the righteousness of Christ 
imputed to him, the fulness and freeness of 
divine grace in the universal call to come and 
partake of the gospel feast, appeared so clear, 
so explicit, and so glorious, that she embraced 
them by faith, and had literally the joy and 
peace of believing. Now her emancipated 
spirit became a new creature, and revelled in 
the sunshine of divine love. New views of 
truth, new principles of action, new motives 
to serve Christ, new joys and pleasures, new 
attachments to her Lord, and new hopes of 
celestial glory, now found a place in that 
heart, where only dimness and doubt, anxi- 
ety and fear, existed before ; and she knelt 
down to bedew with tears of joy the spot 
where a broken heart had pleaded for mercy, 
and to offer sacrifices of praise to her gracious 
. Lord. 

Better instructed now, she visited her charge 
with renewed diligence, and carried with her 
a precious balm — the finished and glorious 
work of the Lord Jesus, the value and bless- 



32 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



edness of whicli she had realized ; commend- 
ing and opening it to the eager mind of the 
aged inquirer, with a zeal and love proportion- 
ate to her own sense of its importance, and to 
the hrief time her pupil had to live. Twice a 
week for four years, except when interrupted 
- by sickness or absence from home, poor Mrs. 
Taylor saw her lovely young friend, and heard 
her cheerful voice proclaim the glad tidings of 
salvation. Her mind gradually opened to re- 
ceive them, and she became a truly converted 
woman. 

A few weeks before Mrs. Sherman died she 
remarked, " I never think of heaven without 
an assurance that I shall meet Mrs. Taylor 
there. She did indeed receive the word of 
God as a little child. Though she expressed 
herself iguorantly, yet her enjoyment of the 
preciousness of Christ exceeded any thing 1 
had ever seen. Her faith ripened into calm 
and settled assurance. The influence on her 
temper and habits were so remarkable, that 
though her ignorant children could not under- 
stand what had produced the change, yet they 
observed to a friend who accompanied me, that 



HER CONVERSION. 



33 



they were very glad of Miss Tucker's visits, as 
they had made their mother so kind and good- 
tempered, and so thankful for every thing done 
for her. A short time hefore she died, she 
grasped my hand, while the tears flowed down 
her furrowed cheeks, and thanked God that 
she had ever seen me and heard of the way of 
salvation from my lips ; concluding her speech, 
which she had made with great effort, with 
these words : ' There is hope for 7ne, miss,' and 
in a few minutes entered into hliss, at the ad- 
vanced age of ninety-three." 

It is not a little remarkable that two pre- 
cious souls should be given her, one before and 
another soon after her conversion, as the re- 
ward of effort to serve God and do good to 
those who came within her reach. To these 
instances she often referred, as reasons why 
she should sow beside all waters, and in the 
■morning and evening, because she could not 
tell which of her efforts would prosper. Happy 
they who begin to work for God early, and 
form the habit of aiming to win souls, before 
senseless etiquette has quenched their first 
love, or the butsiness and cares of life have 

Sh'.rman. 3 



34 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



deprived them of opportunities which the " un 
married" have of pleasing Christ. 

During the continuance of her visits to Mrs 
Taylor, and the freshness of her joy in her 
Saviour, she resolved to consecrate herself to 
his service more publicly by uniting with the 
church of Christ assembling at Chase Side, 
Enfield, then under the care of the Rev. S. A. 
Davies. One of the most anxious periods of a 
young Christian's life, is that in which duty 
and privilege alike urge a public avowal ot 
faith in the atonement of Christ, love to his 
people, and separation from the world. Such 
it was to Martha. That after all she had ex- 
perienced she might be deluded, that in a short 
time she would make shipwreck of faith and 
disgrace her profession, and that her talents 
and piety were so mean that the church could 
not be benefited by her accession to its mem- 
bers, were suggestions which Satan urged to 
her great discouragement ; but the temptations 
were overruled for good. In consequence o. 
them the step was preceded by long and care- 
ful self-examination, much prayer to God, and 
consultation with her parents and Christian 



HER CONVERSION. 



35 



friends, who greatly encouraged her to more 
direct association with the friends of the Re- 
deemer ; the result of which was the following 
interesting letter to her pastor : 

"Clay Hill, July 28, 1829. 

" Reverend Sir — In venturing to offer my- 
self as a candidate for admission into the 
visible church of Christ under your care, I 
trust I am influenced by a deep conviction of 
sin, and an abandonment of all hope of salva- 
tion on any other ground than the all-sufficient 
sacrifice of the blessed Redeemer, who died, 
the just for the unju.st, to reconcile us to God ; 
and as an adequate return for such infinite 
love is wholly impossible, all I can do is to 
give myself to him as my rightful owner. I 
therefore solemnly dedicate myself to him, 
resolving that whatever others do, I will serve 
the Lord ; I renounce the world and its prof- 
fered joys, and will seek my happiness in him 
alone ; by his help and the influences of his 
Holy Spirit, I resolve to forsake all sin, to do 
his will, and strive after conformity to his 
precepts and example. On his promises I 



36 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



rely, firmly convinced that not one of them 
can fail, for He is faithful that hath promised. 

" ' Though cisterns be broken, 
And creatvires all fail, 
The word he hath spoken 
Shall surely prevail.' 

" To his faithful hand I commit my im- 
mortal soul, to he saved in his own appointed 
way ; and though it may he hy severe trials, 
I trust I shall he enahled to say, ' Thy will he 
done.' By obedience to the divine command, 
and partaking of the symbols of the body and 
blood of Christ, broken and shed for the I'e- 
mission of sins, I hope to keep up a memorial 
deeply humbling, of his dying love, to feed 
upon it for my spiritual nourishment and 
growth in grace, holiness, and resemblance to 
Him who first loved me. 

"I hereby declare my entire dependence on 
the merits of his death and righteousness 
for my acceptance with God; my desire to 
participate of his fulness : that I am not 
ashamed to fight under his banner, and trust 
the blessings resulting from a closer union to 
Christ will be mine. I expect to be assailed 



HER CONVERSION. 



37 



by many temptations ; but though I hope they 
will deeply humble and purify me, yet, trusting 
to the great Captain of my salvation alone, I 
shall finally overcome ; for it is written, ' He 
will not suffer you to be tempted above that 
ye are able, but will with the temptation also 
make a way to escape.' ' We have not a High- 
priest who cannot be touched with the feeling 
of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted 
like as we are:' 

"' The desert his temptations knew, 
His conflict, and his victory too.' 

Though blessed from a child with every advan- 
tage from the pious instruction, example, and 
affectionate prayers of my beloved parents, it 
was not until death visited our family in the 
removal of my dear and only sister, that I felt 
the emptiness of all worldly things, and their 
inability to console and support in affliction. 
To the free and unmerited grace of God I am 
indebted, that I was thus led to seek Him in 
whom alone true happiness is found. Weak 
and cold as are my faith and love, if indeed I 
have any, I would not part with that cheering 
hope of immortality which he has inspired in 



38 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



me, for all this world can promise. 0, may 
each day witness in me a growth in grace and 
in the knowledge of G-od ; an increasing relish 
for spiritual things ; greater love to the word, 
ordinances, day, and people of God, and above 
all, to Him who has washed my soul in the 
fountain of his own precious blood. His be all 
the glory of my salvation; and if indeed it be 
my honor and felicity to leach that blessed 
world where He is, with what joy shall I cast 
my crown at his feet, ascribing all my deliver- 
ance to his matchless love. 

"I am, reverend sir, 

"Yours respectfully, 

"MARTHA TUCKER." 

It will not create surprise that she was wel- 
comed with joy by the pastor to the participa- 
tion of Christian privileges; but it does not 
say much for the liveliness or spirituality of 
that church, that no one member of it took any 
notice of the event, or gave her a word of 
encouragement to pursue the course she had 
begun. This possibly arose, not from want of 
interest in her, or from iniiifference about the 



HER CONVERSION 



39 



prosperity of Christ's kingdom, but from a cold 
carelessness, and from looking at the event 
more as a matter of course, than as one in 
which the whole hierarchy of heaven rejoice. 
The members of a Christian church cannot 
foresee what blessings God may give them, 
through the addition of a youthful member to 
their society: it may be one of the means of 
eliciting talent, and engaging prayer on behalf 
of that church, to give such a youth the im- 
pression that they are interested in his growth 
in piety, and the employment of his energies 
for their Lord. A kind word for Christ and a 
friendly shake of the hand cost nothing to the 
giver, but often impart unspeakable encourage- 
ment to the receiver, and awake the best feel- 
ings of his heart. 

In the visitation of her district and commun- 
ion with Christian friends, Martha continued 
her unostentatious course of usefulness, amidst 
many mental conflicts and disappointments. 
Some who have removed to various parts of the 
country, remember her visits and efforts with 
great affection, and attribute their first impres- 
sions of love to the Saviour, or their more 



40 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



steadfast walk in. his paths, to her interesting 
conversations. . 

A new and heavy trial now awaited her. In 
the year 1833, her young friend to whom she 
had been useful by directing her attention to 
punctual visits at the throne of grace, was 
seized with fever while on a visit to Clay Hill, 
and obliged to be removed home; where, in a 
few days, its malignity terminated her life, and 
ushered her into the presence of her Lord, with 
whom she had learned to hold sweet commun- 
ion on earth. 

Martha was now not only deprived of a friend 
whose piety and devotedness were likely to be 
helpful to her in her Christian course, but from 
having slept with her she caught the infectious 
disease, and for some time her life hung on a 
very slender thread. Many have had cause to 
bless God for a sick-chamber, and it proved to 
Martha a school in which she attained an en- 
larged experience of God's love, and afforded a 
tirial of those graces which the Spirit of God 
had planted and nurtured. Her patience and 
love amid great suffering were the admiration 
of all who saw her, or had the privilege of min- 



HER COITVEIISION. 



41 



istering to her necessities. In the course of a 
few months she recovered, and, by the blessing 
of God, enjoyed renewed health and increased 
devotedness to her best Friend, who, as other 
friends were removed, became more precious to 
her redeemed and sanctified spirit. 



42 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



CHAPTER III. 

HER MARRIAGE AND RESIDENCE AT 
READING. 

On the 3d of March, 1835, her union with 
him who was to be the partner of her joys and 
sorrows was solemnized at Enfield church. 
Like all days of pleasure on earth, the cheer- 
fulness of this day was occasionally interrupted 
by the tears of parents who were resigning 
their only child, and of a dutiful and affection- 
ate dabghter who was separating herself from 
the special care of those who had tenderly loved 
her, and sought her interest with unfailing 
kindness. Amid the hearty wishes and pray- 
ers of her friends she left the parental roof, and 
after a tour in the north, arrived at her new 
home in Reading. 

She must have known, that in marrying a 
widower with three children, and commencing 
life as a wife and a mother, she burdened her- 
self with responsible cares and duties from 
which she had the opportunity, had she so de- 



RESIDENCE AT READINW. 



43 



termined, of being free; but the sphere of use- 
fulness in a large, united, and flourishing con- 
gregation, situated in a lovely country town, 
and among a people where vital religion abound- 
ed, no doubt had great influence on her de- 
cision. God had respect to that decision, and 
honored it by making her extensively useful to 
souls, which satisfied and delighted her more 
than if wealth and titles had been added to her 
name. Her epistolary correspondence prepara- 
tory to her marriage, would for its piety and 
prudence be suited to meet any eye, and fur- 
nish a pattern for many young persons ; for 
while the warm aftection of the heart to him 
who had gained it was not wanting, aspirations 
after spiritual blessings, and earnest desires 
after qualification for the important sphere she 
was about to occupy, formed the chief subjects 
of her letters. The following extract is given 
as a specimen only. 

"I have often thought of your remark the 
other day, on the importance of deep personal 
piety, and its habitual manifestation at home 
in order to usefulness abroad; it completely 
coincides with my views, while it magnifies my 



44 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



feeling of unfitness for so lovely a situation as 
it must be when its duties are indeed per- 
formed. But my very own dear friend, he who 
honors Grod and whom God has honored, has 
no strength in himself — all is imparted; and 
even holy Paul, when declaring that he -could 
'do all things,' was equally obliged to add, 
'through Christ who strengtheneth me.' And 
may not your helpless Patty hope for the much- 
needed aid of Him who surely has led her into 
so responsible a post? "When heaven's win- 
dows are opened for your supply, will she be 
passed by whose necessities are so much great- 
er, and when his name would be peculiarly 
glorified, as the divine hand would be more 
distinctly seen? 0 for the entire, unreserved 
surrender of our all to the service of our Grod. 
May our mutual affection be as oil to the wheels 
of devotion and obedience. I am certain that 
our happiness must depend on our devotedness 
to G-od, and we would not have a happiness, 
falsely so called, which could exist without a 
life of communion with our redeeming God. 
May but the promised Spirit be shed abundantly 
upon us, and then we have nothing to fear." 



RESIDENCE AT READING. 45 



First impressions of any place are allowed to 
have great influence on our content and com- 
fort. Let her describe hers herself. 

" I have now arrived at my apparently 
happy home. It is just what a minister's 
should be — neat, genteel, and cheerful. The 
house stands on a rising ground^ commanding 
delightful views over the valley of the Kennet, 
is very dry and healthy, and, as you would 
expect, very nicely furnished. Think of your 
poor Patty becoming a mother without any 
suffering, and sitting down with three sweet 
children, of ages to understand and appreciate 
affection. I cannot tell what love a mother 
feels to those she has borne, but I think it im- 
possible that I could love Any children of my 
own rriore than these whom I have adopted. 
May I have grace given to train them all for 
God, that if I should be removed from them, 
as their dear mother has been, they may follow 
.her useful life and enter into her unspeakable 
joy. It is too early to say much about our 
nmtual love, but it will comfort you to hear, 
what I believe you never questioned, that I 
find in my precious husband a devoted, sym- 



46 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



pathizing, forbearing heart. Much has he to 
overlook in my ignorance and want of tact, 
but by his persevering tuition I hope to be 
somewhat qualified for the important station I 
now fill. I can scarcely believe that I have 
had the temerity to venture upon such an un- 
tried life; and did I not know the fulness of 
grace in my all-compassionate Saviour, and 
that he is fully acquainted with the desires of 
my heart, however feebly expressed to him, to 
be the humble and honored instrument of win- 
ning souls to himself, I must despair. 

"Every one of the congregation whom I 
have seen cheers me with hope; and I esteem 
this especially kind, as I am the successor of 
one who lives in their hearts and memories, 
and by her prudence, piety, and superintend- 
ence, has won golden opinions from this in- 
teresting circle. 0, how unworthy do I feel 
of such an honor, and how incapable of tread- 
ing in her steps. Several of the members of 
the church are persons of exalted piety, silch 
as I have longed to see, but never yet had in- 
tercourse with; particularly Mr. F. He seems 
more like Enoch than any other person to 



RESIDENCE AT READlWa. 47 

whom I can compare him — walking with God — 
never meeting you without a heart like a foun- 
tain, pouring out streams of love to Christ, and 
desires that all might know and love him. The 
church is active, having something to do, and 
hearts to do it. 

" In the villages around Reading, my dear 
husband has built five chapels, and taken two 
others under his charge. As objects in the 
landscape they are exceedingly picturesque, 
being built of Bath stone, with towers or stee- 
ples, and placed in commanding situations. So 
that at home and abroad there is plenty to 
do. Pity your poor ignorant friend, who has 
every thing to learn, and is very slow in re- 
ceiving instruction ; and pray for her, that the 
Holy Spirit may qualify her to pursue the 
glorious enterprise which presents itself to her 
eye, that Christ may be magnified in her, 
whether it be by life or by death." 

It is very difficult for persons of courageous 
h^pirits, or for those whose lengthened labors in 
spiritual services have rendered them almost a 
habit, to understand the timidity and struggles 
which a delicate and hitherto unpractised mind 



48 



ilARTHA SHERMAN. 



experiences in its first effort in any public 
work for God. They forget their former diffi- 
culties ; or if the work became natural to them 
from the first, they cannot sympathize with 
any whose efforts have been useful, but quite 
of another kind from those in which they have 
been so long engaged. Hence, in their zeal 
instead of leading the timid step by step, they 
often deter and distress them by exclamation? 
of astonishment at their backwardness or un- 
fitness. Females, especially those of refined 
habits and superior education, require the 
most tender treatment to induce them to em- 
ploy their talents in any public manner, and 
have far more difficulties to overcome than 
those of inferior knowledge and station. Oh, 
what would many of them give for a kind and 
sympathizing friend, who has been in similar 
circumstances before her activity for Christ ' 
commenced, and who would lead them on 
gently as they were able to bear it. 

Such was Mrs. Sherman's difficulty in her 
new station. On the first Sunday after her 
entrance into Reading, she went to the Sun- 
day-school to see if she could be useful hy 



RESIDENCE AT READING. 49 

taking a class of children to instruct. Cir- 
cumstances had not permitted her to under- 
take this duty at Enfield, and the labor was 
therefore wholly new to her. A lady who had 
generally superintended the female school, and 
who united in her character, piety, zeal, and 
perseverance, very heartily welcomed her, and 
expressed her joy in finding the minister's 
wife willing to assist m training the children 
for heaven. Immediately in a great bustle, 
she introduced the female teachers to her, one 
after another, and assured them that now the 
minister's wife was come to their help the 
school must prosper. " I fear you miscalcu- 
late my feeble help and influence," meekly 
repHed Mrs. Sherman, heaving a deep sigh. 
Before the teachers dispersed to their classes, 
the zealous superintendent brought the books, 
and described the modes of registering their 
names, marking their attendance, and giving 
rewards. " You see, by these books, we have 
not been so orderly as we ought, but now you 
are come among us every thing will be set to 
rights ; and I merely show you these, in order 
that you may speak to the teachers on the 
s.,„„..„ 4 



50 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



necessity of punctuality and regularity in their 
attendance and records of the school. You do 
not know what good you may do." 

With a heart palpitating from conscious 
ignorance of these plans, and giving the as- 
surance that she could introduce no improve- 
ment, she ventured to say, "It is all new to 
me, and I shall have to learn of you ; I have 
never taught in a Sunday-school before." " In- 
deed !" was the answer, witli a very signifi- 
cant "/tew," which conveyed more than it 
expressed. At this moment a small bell rang 
for the opening of the school. "You will, of 
course, open the school with prayer for us," 
said the lady. "No, I am sorry that I can- 
not possibly undertake that service ; I have 
only prayed in private, with a female, and 
should be quite confounded in the attempt to 
pray before so many," was the answer. The 
blush rose in her cheeks, and her spirit be- 
came well-nigh overwhelmed at the evidences 
of her incapacity, but she proceeded, " You 
will be kind enough to conduct the school as 
usual, and I will take a few children as a 
class, and try to help you." " Oh, no," said 



RESIDENCE AT READING. 51 

this zealous friend, " I cannot pray before you ; 
we thought all our difficulties would be at an 
end when you came. We heard of your use- 
fulness and zeal, and expect you to be a great 
blessing among us." 

Concealing her feelings as much as possible, 
and using her entreaties, Mrs. Sherman at last 
won over the superintendent to open the school, 
I after which she took a class. At its conclu- 
I sion she returned home with a broken heart, 
i gave vent to her sorrow in a flood of tears, and 
I relating the circumstances of the afternoon, 
t expressed her fear that her husband had made 
a wretched choice, in introducing one so utterly 
unqualified to lead as she was ; that everyone 
was disappointed in her, and her Saviour's 
cause would suffer from her inexperience. 
This was not the effect of mortified pride at 
the rough manner in which she had been 
treated, not a complaint of which escaped her 
lips — although no one felt more acutely tlie 
want of courtesy and delicacy in a female 
whenever they were manifested — but a deep 
sense of her deficiency in those qualifications 
which she thought the cause of Christ required 



52 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



from a minister's wife. Now, this lady was a 
talented, useful, devoted person, "but lacked 
the tact required to draw out talent in another, 
and to treat v/ith a delicate mind. Her senti- 
ments were uttered with all honesty and zeal 
for her Master, and for the success of the 
school, yet they had a repellent rather than 
an attractive power to a timid but willing 
mind, which instead of receiving the encour- 
agement that was so peculiarly needed, was 
thus made to feel more painfully helpless. Oh 
how much wisdom, as well as zeal, is required 
in dealing with souls. 

A band, however, of holy women used influ- 
ence of another and a better kind, more adapt- 
ed to her difficulties and timidity. A Maternal 
Society had for some time been formed at Read- 
ing ; the object of which was, by prayer, read- 
ing, and conversation, to awaken in the minds 
of mothers a proper sense of their duties and 
responsibilities, and to inform and direct them 
in their performance. These pious and edu- 
cated mothers were representatives from all 
denominations of Christians in the town, and 
were like working-bees, bringing the honey 



RESIDENCE AT READING. 



53 



they gathered from every source, and making 
it the common property of the whole associa- 
tion. Here social prayer was presented month 
after month, suggestions were offered, and she 
obtained the benefit of their more enlarged ex- 
perience in training the young immortals she 
had so lovingly and so prayerfully taken under 
her wing. 

Jn giving her opinion of these meetings a 
little before her death, she said, "Although 
some who assembled on those occasions were 
a little too fast for me, I can never sufficiently 
thank God for the benefit I derived from the 
prayers and conversation of those holy women. 
Though for a long time I could not be pre- 
vailed upon to pray before them, my mind was 
wonderfully awakened to more serious reflec- 
tion on maternal responsibility, and led to at- 
tempt in maternal discipline, what, without 
these conversations, I should have deemed 
impracticable. Of what little advantage my 
precious children have derived from my im- 
perfect endeavors for their salvation, much 
must be attributed to this heavenly inter- 
course ; and to my latest day, I .shall remem- 



54 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



ber with gratitude the patience, sympathy, and 
affection of that group of mothers, for one so 
inexperienced." 

"While these meetings were in progress, and 
a general desire prevailed for a revival in re- 
ligion, the Rev. Dr. and Mrs. Codman, from 
America, visited Reading, and by their con- 
versation tended greatly to increase the im- 
pression of its necessity and attainahleneas. 
After dinner one day, when Mrs. Codman and 
Mrs. Sherman had retired, the latter entreated- 
the former, as a parting kindness, to pray with 
her that this revival which had been the sub- 
ject of conversation, might come to her, her 
children, her husband, and the church of Christ 
over which he presided; to which she readily 
consented ; and after pouring out her heart in 
fervent supplication, which deeply affected Mrs. 
Sherman, Mrs. Codman before they rose from 
their knees turned to her timid friend and said, 
"Can you allow me to go to America without 
asking G-od to bless me and mine? Come, 
thou blessed of the Lord, let G-od and me hear 
your voice." The appeal was so well-timed, 
so reasonable, so affectionately uttered, and 



RESIDENCE AT READING. 55 

took her so entirely by surprise, that she had 
. not time to summon her fears ; and with a sigh 
for help which reached the divine ear she be- 
gan, and in a strain of heavenly fervency and 
devotional power poured out such petitions for 
her friend and her family, as completely sur- 
prised and delighted her. 

Observing Mrs. Codman much affected, her 
husband asked if any thing had troubled her. 
" 0, no," said Dr. Codman ; your precious wife 
has been praying with her, and she says she 
has never heard a prayer like it for power and 
gracious effect on the heart: she is sure that 
no person can pray in that manner, who is not 
in the habit of very intimate communion with 
God." This was a great encouragement to 
her ever afterwards, and though she shunned 
the engagement, yet when pressed upon her 
by duty, she felt the difficulty far less than 
before. Thus does Grod by his providence often 
appear for us, eliciting hidden talent, and giv- 
ing power to the faint among his disciples, for 
future efforts in his church. 

In all towns there is usually a special local- 
ity where the poorest and most wretched of the 



56 



MARTHA SHEPaiAN. 



inhabitants dwell. This locahty in Reading 
was Hanover-square, in Coley-lane, very un- 
hke the spot in London from which its aristo- 
cratic name was taken; for its houses were 
very filthy, and its residents the worst of the 
population of that otherwise clean and respect- 
able town. Here, however, Mrs. Sherman 
commenced a sy.stematic and regular weekly 
visitation of the families, instructing the poor 
ignorant mothers in the training of their chil- 
dren, and in the way to make domestic life 
happy, as well as in the more important lessons 
of evangelical truth. At first she was .coldly 
received, but after a few visits became such a 
favorite, that the children would run to wel- 
come her, and every door in the district was 
thrown open to receive their "friend," which 
was the name by which they were accustomed 
to designate their benefactress. After twelve 
months' labor, the locality assumed an air of 
greater cleanliness and comfort, many of its 
inhabitants attended the preaching of the gos- 
pel, every child capable of leaving home was 
sent to a Sunday-school, and some few instances 
of hopeful conversion were the high reward of 



RESIDENCE AT READING. 



57 



this disinterested labor of love. And, generally 
speaking, wherever the effort is made in a right 
spirit to help and comfort the poor and elevate 
their condition, without attempting to interfere 
with their independence and make them slaves 
by charity, similar results will follow. 

During her eighteen months' residence in 
Reading, it pleased God to spare her life twice 
by great deliverances. In the month of July 
succeedinsr her marriage, her husband was 
driving her and a Christian friend in a phaeton 
to Henley, when, about half the distance from 
that town, by some extraordinary neglect, the 
linchpin of the forewheel came out, and let 
the carriage down on one end of the fore-axle: 
the friend who sat behind was thrown out first, 
her husband next, and herself last ; but in fall- 
ing out her foot became entangled in the rein, 
which bound itself tightly round her ankle : the 
horse took fright, and ran a distance of above 
one hundred yards with Mrs. Sherman dragging 
by the side of the wheel. Never can the sen- 
sations of that moment be forgotten. Death in 
one of its horrid forms seemed inevitable. In 
an agony strengthened by despair of help from 



58 MARTHA SHERMAN. 

man — for no one was near at the moment — hei 
husband screamed to the horse to stop, and 
God made the animal obedient; for though 
running at a rapid pace, the moment he heard 
his master's voice, he stood still till he came 
up to him and released his precious treasure, 
whom he received again as alive from the dead. 
0, none can tell the intense suffering of such a 
moment to the spectator, but such as have 
experienced it, and it is hoped their number is 
small. Except her clothes being torn from her 
person, and some few lacerations of the skin, 
Mrs. Sherman sustained little injury, and after 
a few days was as well as usual. This occur- 
red on a Friday evening, the regular evening on 
which the weekly concert for prayer was held ; 
and arriving in Reading just at the time of 
their assembling, an opportunity was afforded 
for her husband to lead the people to unite with 
him in thanksgivings to Grod for so signal a 
deliverance. 

The other affliction to which allusion has 
been made, was an illness which at an early 
stage was considered light, but which after a 
short time assumed a very formidable charac- 



RESIDENCE AT READING. 59 

ter, and threatened fatal consequences if not 
speedily checked. That which peculiarly ag- 
gravated her trial, was her husband's affliction 
at the same time. He was engaged to preach 
at the opening of a new chapel in the month 
of January, and preparatory to preaching, as 
the only place of retirement that could he had, 
he was put into an unfinished vestry, the plas- 
ter of which was streaming with water. It 

I was a bitter, frosty night, and as he sat warm- 
ing himself by a fire made of wood, in a grate 
formed by a few bricks, he soon felt alternately 

I shivering with cold and burning with heat. 

&After the service, he mentioned to a friend who 
drove him a distance of about fifteen miles in 
a gig, to London, his fears that a severe cold 
would be the result, the symptoms of which 
clearly enough developed themselves soon after 
his arrival in Reading. In a few days, brain- 
fever began to appear, the head was shaved, 
ice was applied, and copious bleeding resort- 
ed to; and at length, though the symptoms 
were subdued, fears were expressed that the 
system would not rally. Grod, however, gra- 
ciously heard prayer, and restored him to con- 



60 MARTHA SHERMAN. 

valescence; but the first time of going out to 
the house of God, fresh cold was taken. The 
symptoms returned in an aggravated form, and 
for three weeks very slight hopes were enter- 
tained by the medical attendant of ultimate 
restoration. After another month of severe 
distress, improvement began to manifest itself, 
and again he was permitted to sing in the 
sanctuary, "I was brought low, and He helped 
me." 

To be herself a prisoner during the greater 
portion of her husband's illness, and to be un- 
able to minister to him, was to that tender 
heart an aggravation of suffering, which re- 
quired all the courageous efforts of faith and 
patience to bear meekly. And why was this 
trial sent ? Not to awaken love — in that she 
abounded ; but to make affection appear in 
an ingenious method of ministration, which 
1 ended much to calm the slightly disturbed in- 
tellect of her fellow-sufferer. She wrote sen- 
timents and portions of Scripture many times 
during the day, and sent them to be read as 
he could bear them. And truly they were like 
drops of dew on the parched flower. Long con- 



RESIDENCE AT READING. 61 

versations, or reading, or prayers, a head weak- 
ened by suffering cannot endure ; but a golden 
sentence, selected for you from the book of 
God, when you cannot think for yourself, and 
sent unexpectedly, when you most need help, 
is a boon which a gracious heart appreciates. 

When health was again mercifully vouch- 
safed to her, the work of the Lord was her 
chief delight. Though a dear lover of nature, 
and with a refined taste capable of relishing its 
beauties, all her drives round the country were 
made subservient to the welfare of souls, and 
were sure to have associated with them er- 
rands of mercy to the villagers. It will sur- 
prise none that she took the deepest interest 
in the beautiful little chapels which had been 
erected, and still more in the congregations 
which assembled within them, to listen to the 
glad tidings of salvation. 

Some short time previous to her marriage, 
her husband had received a pressing invitation 
tc become the successor of the late Rev. Row- 
land Hill, at Surrey chapel ; but as evangel- 
ical religion did not flourish in the Church of 
England at Reading, and the claims of the 



62 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



people of his charge upon his affections ahd 
labors were preeminent, after conference and 
prayer with the elders of the church, he be- 
lieved it to be his duty to decline the honorable 
and important post. In the spring of 1836, 
the invitation was renewed, accompanied by a 
letter from the church and congregation at 
Surrey chapel, signed by above twelve hundred 
persons. 

A great alteration had, during the interval, 
taken place in the town of Reading. The pul- 
pit of every church but one was occupied by 
an evangelical clergyman ; several of the prin- 
cipal persons in the congregation, who were 
attached members of the Church of England, 
had wholly left, to worship with those of their 
own communion, or were in the habit of onl) 
partially attending at Castle-street chapel 
and the consequence was, that the interest 
such persons had previously felt in the pastor, 
and the church of Christ which he served, was 
divided, and it was difficult to maintain the 
same communion with them, or carry out the 
same designs of usefulness, in which formerly 
they had mutually taken such deep interest. 



RESIDENCE AT READING. 63 

And although many "clave unto him," yet it 
seemed plain to his judgment, and to that of 
his wife, that now the Lord said in his prov- 
idence, "Arise ye, and depart, for this is not 
your rest;" which was confirmed by confer- 
ence with ministerial brethren, who knew the 
claims of both congregations, and who gave 
their unanimous verdict in favor of a removal 
to Surrey chapel. 

The following letter, on the receipt of a ret- 
icule beautifully wrought by a dear friend in 
London, and sent for the purpose of holding 
her tracts for Hanover square, will show her 
feelings in leaving, as she ever called it, "dear 
Reading." 

"April 8, 1836. 

"I think, my sweet friend, you must have 
been surprised at not having received from me, 
before this time, some acknowledgment of your 
very elegant and useful present ; doubly use- 
ful, as containing two beautiful little volumes. 
Many, many thanks for your great kindness to 
so unworthy an individual ; I think it, at pres- 
ent, too delicate to be appropriated as you jn- 



64 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



tended ; the filthy tracts I usually receive from 
Hanover square, vi^ould soon decide the fate of 
the reticule : when it has moved for a season 
in a higher sphere, and its beauty begins to 
fade, it will probably be applied as you pro- 
pose ; but if I can divine at all, that will not 
be in dear Reading. How true is the old adage, 
'Blessings brighten as they take their flight.' 
1 see charms in Hanover square, notwithstand- 
ing the wretchedness of its inhabitants, which 
I never saw before, when I think of what the 
poor of London must be. 

"But I would forget my comforts, which, in 
case of our removal, must be parted with, and 
lose my own will in that of Him who, I firmly 
oelieve, will be our guide. What would we 
live for, but to glorify God? and what are 
outward comforts when compared with the 
honor, the luxury of working for Grod. I some- 
times look with selfish pleasure on my pretty 
house and prospect, and grieve to exchange it 
for smoke and confined air; but it is not al- 
ways that self so frightfully predominates. If 
we may but be made instruments of greater 
usefulness, and of extending the kingdom of 



RESIDENCE AT READIKa. 



65 



Christ, no earthly loss or sJ^crifice will be 
thought of in comparison." 

After sixteen years of labor among a devoted 
and affectionate people, it is no easy thing for 
a minister to bid them farewell, especially if 
they be the first sixteen years of pastoral effort, 
when zeal is most fervent, when the affections 
are warmest, and friendships are most easily 
formed. Oh, the pangs occasioned by tearing 
asunder the bands of union between his con- 
verts and him who had begotten them in the 
gospel ; ^ by leaving the frequented walk, and 
the study, where the voice of prayer had se- 
cretly ascended in fervent and constant sup- 
plications, for the Spirit of God to fill their 
hearts and his house ; by turning away from 
the spot where his children had been reared,, 
and the precious dust of one who had shared 
his early joys and trials was deposited, and by 
sacrificing promised wealth and independence, 
to obey what he believed to be the will of 
God! 

In all these sensations the subject of this 
memoir largely shared, and cheered her hus- 
band with many gladdening hopes of bright 

Shcrmas. 5 



66 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



days, of glorious conversions to Christ amid an 
abundant population, and of occasions for more 
errands to God's throne together, by reason of 
more oppressive duties. Happy the man who, 
in such circumstances, has such " a help meet 
for him," 



LABORS FOE, THE YOUNG. 



67 



CHAPTER IV. 

HER REMOVAL TO SURREY CHAPEL, AND 
LABORS AMONG THE YOUNG. 

On Sabbath-day, August 27, 1836, her hus- 
band preached his last sermon at Castle-street 
chapel, Reading, to a vast and deeply affected 
congregation ; and on the Tuesday following, 
she bade farewell to those who had so kindly 
and so tenderly assisted her in her new and 
responsible duties. Crowds gathered round the 
carriage to have the last shake of the hand, 
and a smile from that loving countenance which 
conveyed such inexpressible sweetness ; while 
mutual good wishes and prayers were ex- 
changed amid many tears. After three days' 
sojourn at Enfield with her parents, she took 
up her residence at the parsonage adjoining 
Surrey chapel, built by Mr. Hill, and in which 
he had lived for above fifty years. 

It may not be uninteresting, and seems al- 
most necessary, in order to estimate her labors 
and devotedness, to give a brief sketch of the 



68 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



origin of Surrey chapel, and the state of the 
church and congregation there at the time she 
arrived. 

About the middle of the eighteenth century 
spiritual darkness prevailed over England, and 
especially over the metropolis, to an extent of 
which at present we have but little conception. 
All denominations of Christians wei'e sunk into 
a state of lukewarmness, and almost entirely 
neglected the claims of a perishing population. 
Vice and immorality abounded among all 
classes of the community, the Sabbath-day was 
awfully profaned, very few of the clergy knew 
or preached the gospel, but a cold, heartless 
system of morality was substituted for its soul- 
saving doctrines ; and the few dissenting minis- 
ters who did preach it, delivered its truths in a 
formal, precise, unimpressive manner ; so that 
the number of places of worship was compara- 
tively small, and most were ill attended. 

At this period, it pleased God to raise up a 
few individuals who were as eminent for their 
godliness as for their zeal. Careless of the 
opinions of the world, and determined to exalt 
the kingdom of their Saviour, they braved dan- 



LABORS FOR THE YOUNG. 



69 



ger and endured persecution, in their efforts to 
awaken sinners to a concern for their eternal 
interests. The Rev. Messrs. G. Whitfield, John 
and Charles "Wesley, Jolin Berridge, W. Ro- 
maine, John Newton, J. Jones, are names well 
known in this religious reformation ; among the 
laity, the Countess of Huntingdon, Sir Richard 
Hill, and several of the nobility and gentry, 
stood nobly forward to help in the good work. 
To the honored names of these champions for 
Christ, must be added that of the Rev. Row- 
land Hill, who was the sixth son of Sir Row- 
land Hill, Baronet, of Hawkstone, Shropshire. 
He was educated at Eton, and after taking his 
degree at Cambridge, on Sunday, June 6, 1773, 
received deacon's orders from Dr. "Wills the 
bishop of Bath and Wells. Yearning over the 
.spiritual miseries of men, he could not confine 
himself to the more regular and established 
mode of preaching in a church, but gladly en- 
gaged in that work wherever he could gather a 
congregation, whether in the market-place or 
in the cathedral, beneath the shade of a tree 
or in the dissenting meeting-house ; his object 
being to win souls to Christ, and ally them to 



70 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



his spiritual church, found in every visible con- 
gregation of his worshippers. After having for 
some years preached in most of the counties of 
England, in many of the chui'ches, chapels, 
and streets of the metropolis, and in the fields 
and commons of its vicinity, to large and 
deeply impressed audiences, he determined to 
erect a chapel in the southern part of London. 

A liberal subscription was commenced, to 
which he was the chief contributor. A site in 
St. George's Fields was obtained, and the first 
stone of Surrey chapel was laid by its future 
minister, on June 24, 1782. In the course of 
a year it was erected, and opened for divine 
worship June 8, 1783; on which occasion its 
founder preached in the morning, from 1 Cor. 
1 : 23, and the Rev. J. Piercy in the evening, 
from Psalm 74 : 22. The building is octagonal, 
and accommodates between two and three 
thousand persons. 

Mr. Hill continued the pastor during a period 
of nearly fifty years, until his death, which 
happened on April 11, 1833; and after that 
event, for three years and a half, the congre- 
gation was served by ministers from variou.s 



LABORS FOR THE YOUNG. 71 

parts of the country, till September 4, 1836, 
on which Sabbath the present minister began 
his responsible labors by preaching from Psalm 
71:16: "I will go in the strength of the 
Lord God ; I will make mention" of thy right- 
eousness, even of thine only." 

From the foundation of Surrey chapel, Mr. 
Hill had collected around him a number of holy 
and liberal men, who by their labors and prop- 
erty were ever ready to second and carry out 
his designs of usefulness; so that the congre- 
gation took part in originating some, and in 
largely supporting most of the existing institu- 
tions for evangelizing the population, and for 
bettering their temporal condition. It was 
therefore known as a focus of liberality and 
activity, to which Mr. Hill, by his munificence 
and devotedness, set a noble example. All its 
original founders had finished their earthly 
course, but a band of Christians of similar 
devotedness, if not of equal wealth, had been 
raised up to succeed them. From the infirm- 
ities of Mr. Hill in the latter years of his life, 
he was not able to pay the same attention to 
its interests as in his prime and energy; and a 



72 



MARTHA SHERMAN 



terra of three years and a half without a pastor 
was not hkely to improve the order and inter- 
ests of the church and congregation. Still, even 
then it might be called a flourishing church. 
It consisted of five hundred and fifty mem- 
bers in actual attendance, and -above twenty- 
five hundred children were under Sabbath 
instruction by three hundred teachers. The 
Benevolent, Missionary, Bible, Tract, and other 
societies were prospering, and many believers 
valuing Christian privileges were waiting until 
the appointment of a pastor to be united to the 
church. 

The wisdom required in the newly appointed 
minister and his wife was, to keep this vast 
machinery in accelerated motion, to bring into 
use these already prepared materials, to con- 
firm the members in their acts of piety and 
devotedness, and, though without the ample 
means of Mr. Hill, to set such an example of 
liberaUty as might advance, rather than check, 
the generosity of the congregation. For such 
purposes Mrs. Sherman was preeminently 
adapted, as her future course gave the most 
satisfactory evidence ; and her husband, on 



LABOE.S FOR THE YOUNG. 73 

looking back, cannot but attribute, under the 
divine blessing, much, of the harmony, piety, 
and zeal evinced, to her prudence, love, exam- 
ple, and unceasing devotedness to the interests 
of the church and its institutions. 

The first object to which she directed her 
attention was the formation of a class of young 
females, too old to attend the Sunday-school, 
and too young and inexperienced to assist in 
teaching; with the hope that by preparatory 
instruction and discipline, they might hereafter 
become intelligent and useful teachers in the 
various schools belonging to the congregation. 
The fact had often occasioned her considerable 
anxiety, that too large a proportion of our Sun- 
day-scholars, when they arrive at the age of 
fourteen or fifteen, commence a system of Sab- 
bath profanation, are lost to the congregations 
who train them, and seldom attend a place of 
worship; and she determined, if possible, to 
arrest the evil, by giving the females an opportu- 
nity of still obtaining instruction without going 
into the school. The dining-room in the par- 
sonage was appropriated to their use on the 
Sabbath afternoon, and she commenced her first 



74 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



effort with fifty-three scholars, on December 1, 
1836. 

Her highest object was to awaken conviction 
of their sinful state ; and by lovely exhibitions 
of Christ and his salvation, to bring them to 
decision for him. The subjects she chose were 
plain and full of the gospel; the plenitude of 
grace and the beauty of holiness were her fa- 
vorite themes, illustrated with the biography 
of the ancient saints of holy writ, or of modern 
believers whose names and characters were 
famiUar to the Chiistian world. She had a 
peculiarly happy art of interspersing hints on 
neatness in dress — on habits of domestic econ- 
omy — on cleanliness, order, and punctuality — 
on submission to parents, which told with great 
effect on their minds; and many of the schol- 
ars, now mothers of families, recollect and re- 
peat those monitions with gratitude and joy. 
It is remarkable how successful her efforts in 
this class were, with respect to the decision of 
the scholars : scarcely one who continued with 
her any length of time remained unconnected 
with the church; and though she had her dis- 
appointments and trials in some, by far the 



LABORS FOR THE YOUNG. 75 

greater number were ornaments to their pro- 
fession, and zealous for the extension of the 
Redeemer's kingdom. 

After nearly twelve months of successful 
tuition in this first class, the young ladies of 
the congregation desired that similar advan- 
tages might be extended to them, as the means 
of bringing them to Grod and his church ; and 
much to their honor, they wrote an interesting 
letter of entreaty that they might share the 
love and wisdom of her instructions, at such 
times as she might feel consistent with Jaer 
increasing engagements. 

The following is the answer sent to their 
solicitations: 

"Surrey Parsonage, December 13, 1837. 

"Permit me, my dear young friends, to ex- 
press the gratification which your request has 
afforded me, as it proves your desire after more 
intimate acquaintance with those precious 
truths which 'are able to make us wise unto 
salvation.' Happy should I be, indeed, if my 
own scriptural knowledge justified your flatter- 
ing ^supposition that I can assist you; my ig- 
norance is a source of daily, though I trust not 



76 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



quite idle lamentation ; but while I am endeav- 
oring to remove the evil I mourn by reading 
and prayer, conscience tells me I shall decline 
one most effectual means of accomplishing my 
object, and also incur guilt, if I refuse compli- 
ance with the request to impart to others my 
little store, as I obtain it. If, therefore, my 
young friends will come, expecting very little 
from me, but much from that heavenly Teacher 
who will, I trust, ever come with them, it 
will delight me to do what I can, not to make 
them theologians — this is neither my ambition 
nor my province — but to aid them, by the 
scripture model alone, in the formation of that 
Christian character to which they aspire. 

"You will allow me to make two stipula- 
tions : one, that perfect punctuality be invari- 
ably observed in meeting and separating; it 
will always afford me pleasure to converse with 
any who may wish to see me, but not either 
before or after these meetings, the time so oc- 
cupied being the utmost I can spare ; in addition 
to which, if Grod should deign to produce im- 
pression on the mind, conversation of any kind 
may remove it. Another stipulation is, that 



LABORS FOR THE YOUNG. 77 

there be much prayer for the influences of the 
Spirit of truth, that he may 'teach us all 
things,' and smile upon the attempt from 
which I shrink while I look at my own utter 
insufficiency ; but when* my faith can rest upon 
the promise, 'My grace is sufficient for thee, 
for my strength is perfected in weakness,' I 
can say with confidence, I welcome you; and 
I believe we shall together pluck of the fruits 
of the tree of life on this side of the river, and 
eat, and live for ever. 

"The first Tue.sday in the month, at twelve 
o'clock, will suit my convenience: as our first 
meeting, Tuesday, January 2, will necessarily 
be rather introductory, any alteration that is 
deemed desirable I will endeavor to make, if 
then proposed. Let us all be earnest in prayer, 
that we may be sanctified through the truth, 
and thus be made meet for the inheritance of 
the saints in light. 

"Believe me, my dear young friends, 

"Yours in much affection, 

"M. SHERMAN." 

Her notes which are preserved show that 
preparation for these classes cost her much 



78 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



prayer and labor, in order to take to her 
young friends something suitable to their age, 
station, and circumstances. Each exercise 
was written tvvice over, once roughly, as 
thoughts occurred and treasure was supplied 
by reading, then more correctly arranged and 
enlarged ; and each class had its separate prep- 
aration, for she argued that as the pupils were 
dissimilar in station and education, they re- 
quired to be addressed accordingly, and she 
never would use the exercises of one for the 
other. Her labor was therefore proportionately 
increased, but a freshness and unction were 
given to her addresses which could scarcely 
have been preserved by repetition. It was 
often a cause of astonishment to those who 
were with her, that with engagements incident 
to so large a congregation, which would have 
crushed an ordinary mind, and with an ex- 
ceedingly extensive and voluminous corre- 
spondence, both foreign and domestic, which 
she kept up with remarkable order and spirit, 
she could find time for these weU-digested 
preparations ; yet she was never known to fin- 
ish one on the morning on which she delivered 



LABORS FOR THE YOUNG. 79 

it; it was ready generally two or three daya 
before it was required, and never later than 
the previous evening. Scraps of time were sr 
judiciously improved, that she seemed never to 
want it. Every place too she could make her 
study, and turn from one subject to another 
with the greatest facility. 

In this manner she prepared, and afterwards 
delivered, a course of studies on the whole of 
the book of Genesis, on the parables of our 
Lord, on the addresses to the seven churches 
of Asia, on the types of Christ, on part of the 
epistle to the Romans, and on the person, 
work, and graces of the Holy Spirit. In de- 
scribing to one whom she loved the nature of 
these preparations, she observed, "My responsi- 
bility often overwhelmed me, but it compelled 
me the more frequently to visit the throne of 
grace; and could any one know the precious, 
the indescribably precious communion I have 
had with Grod under the lime-trees at Enfield 
and in my chamber, they would envy me the 
spiritual luxury. So unskilled a mind as mine 
required more divine influence than others bet- 
ter taught ; and my heavenly Father was gra- 



80 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



cious to his child, in stirring up my spirit to 
seek him, and repaid the grace he gave by 
granting, in answer to prayer, such assurance 
of his love and help, as made me renew the 
exercise with courage and hope, when most 
ready to faint. In studying the Scriptures and 
the writings of holy men to feed my classes, 
my own mind became nourished with the milk 
of the gospel. I saw the glory and grace of 
Christ more clearly, and was the more firmly 
assured of the things which I had previously 
believed. 0, what a rich reward, and what 
encouragement to others to use their talents in 
the service of God and his church; for surely 
none could have greater discouragements in 
making the attempt than I experienced." 

The monthly class of young ladies cost her 
the more anxiety in consequence of their su- 
perior training and advantages, and the greater 
backwardness which educated persons generally 
feel to reveal their religious impressions. She 
thus writes to a friend who proposed a certain 
day and hour for private prayer, in which they 
might each engage in their separate rooms, for 
a blessing on her labors in the class. " I should 



LABORS FOR THE YOUNQ. 



81 



rejoice to meet you at our Father's throne on 
Saturday evening, if that time will suit you. 
I meet my beloved mother and others most 
dear to me at other times, and that is the time 
I devote to prayer for my dear class. I never 
suffered from despondency in any duty, as I 
did in my new class on Tuesday. I felt it a 
complete failure, and I believe the dear young 
people must have felt so too. But I know Grod 
can bless the attempt, and sometimes 1 feel 
almost certain that he will. 0, my dear 
friend, do wrestle for me with Grod, that it may 
prove a great blessing. I want encouragement 
in it, and am ashamed of my own fears." 

The following letter shows that Grod granted 
her heart's desire, and that few remained long 
under her tuition who were not induced to 
leave the world and join themselves to the 
Lord, and in some way serve his church by 
their labors. 

"My very dear Friend — I return you the 
letter with many thanks, and regret that a vio- 
lent cold prevents me from doing so personally. 
I am much interested in its contents, and think 

Sherjiin. 6 



82 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



it should excite us to prayer for that reviving 
influence wMch is promised. I am sometimes, 
disposed to be much discouraged, that no more 
fruit is produced in my class ; but God invari- 
ably sends me some cheering news to disperse 
my gloom, and stimulate me to more simplicity 
in my faith and dependence on him. 

"I was in one of my anxious moods yester- 
day, when the good American, Mr. Dawes, con- 
sented to take my class : he inquired how 
many had decided for Clurist ; I told him it 
was my distress that very day to think that 
scarcely more than half a dozen out of the 
thirty-eight were members of the church. My 
dear husband doubted my statement, and we 
began to reckon, when to my joy I found that 
half the number at least are members, and all 
but one have joined since they entered it. This 
is great cause for gratitude ; and I have thought, 
if we imitated the apostle in forgetting the 
things which are behind, and reaching forth to 
those which are before, how much wiser we 
should be ; we must look at what God has 
done, instead of looking at our own weakness, 
and grumbling. 0, what an honor it is to be 



LABORS FOR THE YOUNG. 83 

permitted to tell of a Saviour's love ; how 
. much more to have that love in our own hearts, 
where enmity once reigned ; and then to have 
the sanction of heaven in our feeble efforts, by 
the Spirit's influences accompanying them and 
rendering them successful; this is happiness 
indeed. "What must heaven be, where we 
shall see Him of whom we loved to tell, and 
where none but happy spirits can be ? May 
we be there, and be permitted to have a long 
train of children given to us, and cast our 
crowns at the feet of Him ' who hath loved us, 
and washed us from our sins in his own blood.' 
May we swell the full choir of glorified ones in 
the song of Moses and the Lamb. 

"Ever yours in the best bonds, 

"M. SHERMAN." 

The success did not, however, wholly arise 
from oral instruction; her letters were also a 
means of great usefulness. Most of these 
young persons had mementos of her care for 
their souls in her own handwriting, and in not 
a few instances their decision was attributed to 
these utterances of her. heart. The following 
specimens, out of a very large number, will be 



S4 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



read with great interest. The first is to a 
young friend who had previously been deprived 
of her mother by death, and had now lost her 
eldest sister. 

" Clay Hill, Enfield, October 25, 1839. 

"My dear young Friend — The intelligence 
of your dear sister's removal did not reach me 
till half an hour before the post left Enfield, or 
I should have written a few lines to you imme- 
diately, to express my sympathy with you in 
your very deep affliction. I think I may truly 
say, I sympathize with you ; for when but a 
few years older than yourself, I was called to 
part with an only sister — one most tenderly 
beloved, and for whose superior piety and judg- 
ment I had the greatest reverence; we were 
indeed like Jonathan and David, and I thought 
it impossible to live without her. I can there- 
fore feel for you, my beloved young friend, in 
the loss of her who in some degree filled the 
place of your lamented mother, and whose 
counsel and care you can receive no more. 

" But this is the dark side of the painful dis- 
pensation: there is a bright and glorious side; 
and happy indeed shall I be if we can sympa- 



LABORS FOR THE YOUNa. 85 

thize with eacli other there. "When my own 
Mary was taken from me, heaven, as the dwell- 
ing-place of God, had no attractions for me; 
my heart was unrenewed and unhumbled for 
sin; but when that heaven was the ahode of 
her happy spirit, my thoughts were constantly 
there, and I longed to be with her; earth had 
lost its great attraction ; nothing could fill the 
dreadful blank which her removal occasioned. 
It pleased God at last to convince me that it 
was sin which made me so desolate, and that 
that place in my heart he could more than fill : 
this led me to seek that pardon which alone 
could unite me to Jesus, and that 'holiness 
without which no man can see the Lord;' and 
my earnest prayer was, that I might prove my 
love to her, not by fruitless repining at my loss, 
but by following in her steps, by consecrating 
myself wholly to the service of Him whom she 
had loved and humbly sought to glorify. 

"I would not thus write about myself, dear, 
but to direct you to the same Source of com- 
fort. To our finite minds it may seem myste- 
rious, that one so beloved and useful should be 
Taken from us in early youth; but remember 



86 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



how little we know what God designs hy his 
providences. His thoughts are not our thoughts, 
nor his ways our ways, happily for us. If ever 
we reach yonder happy world, we shall under- 
stand why these painful dispensations were per- 
mitted ; till then, ever bear in mind that ' God 
is love,' not only when he grants us that which 
delights us, but when he sends deep afflic- 
tion, bereavement, and pain : and God designs 
your good and seeks your happiness in this 
trial; do not lose the blessing. There is one 
tie less to earth. Think of that pure world 
where her happy spirit is now rejoicing in her 
Saviour's love: that Saviour's precious blood 
purchased heaven for her, and that blood and 
that heaven he offers to you. 

"Remember, dear, this world is but the 
passage to that bright world ; keep that in 
sight, and beware of any tiling that may shade 
it from your view : sin only can do this — this 
separates the soul from God. 0, never rest, 
until sin is pardoned through that precious 
blood which cleanseth from all sin, and that 
righteousness which justifies the 'sinner that 
believeth in Jesus.' Pant after holiness, that 



LABORS FOR THE YOUNG. 



87 



you may be fitted for that world where ' noth- 
ing can enter that defileth.' Take up your 
cross, and follow Jesus ; be satisfied with noth- 
ing short of the entire consecration of yourself 
to Him who invited you to come unto him, 
that you may have life. Think of the joy that 
will fill heaven, and the souls of your dear 
sainted mother and sister, to hear the tidings 

through some angelic messenger, that A 

has 'chosen that good part that shall never be 
taken from her.' And would there not be joy on 
earth too ? Think of the tender heart of your 
dear bereaved father ; how would his grief be 
forgotten, in the joy of witnessing your decision 
for Christ. And would not my heart rejoice 
to receive the sweet answer to many a prayer, 
in your conversion to Jesus? 

"Be much in prayer, dear; you have need 
of much wisdom in your doubly responsible 
situation; seek it as a promised, as well as a 
desired blessing, and never lean to your own 
understanding. You have to comfort your 
beloved father's heart, to study his happiness 
to strive to lessen his anxieties in every way, 
and as far as possible to fill the places of those 



88 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



who are gone. Let love be your motto in 
every thing; strive to make every one happier 
for your presence. This will draw your mind 
away from your individual sorrow, and stimu- 
late you to extract advantages from this trial. 

"It is really presumption in me to utter a 
word of advice to one so highly privileged as 
you ; hut as one of the members of my little 
humble Bible-class, I feel a double interest in 
you, and my heartfelt prayer for you has long 
been, that you might 'be blessed and made a 
blessing.' Mamma and papa, whom you know 
only by name, desire me to present to you and 
your dear papa their kind regards and .sympa- 
thy. Dear Selina feels much for you, and were 
she here would unite in affectionate love with, 
"My dear young friend, 

"Yours most sincerely, 

'^M. SHERMAN." 

The following extract discovers her jealousy 
over their piety, and her anxisty that it should 
be of the most exalted kind. 

" Surrey Parsonage, October 4, 1839. 

"My dear young Friend — I often look at 
you and your dear sister with intense interest, 



LABORS FOR, THE YOUNG. 89 

and long to know your progress in your heav- 
enly way ; for the truth and soundness of our 
profession of devotedness to Christ are tested 
by our growth in grace, and in the knowledge 
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Is this 
the case with my dear young friend? Is your 
spirit more meek and humble, and self-deny- 
ing, and Christ-like ? Are you habitually 
' striving against sin ?' for remember, ' he that 
is born of God cannot sin :' it must be a 
sfjuggle, therefore, with the old nature, till it 
is entirely brought into captivity, even every 
thought to the obedience of Christ. Do you 
shrink at the spirituality and extent of the law 
of God, or wish it less strict, and that it would 
allow more conformity to the world ? or do you 
say with David, ' Oh, how love I thy law ; it 
is my meditation all the day V How impor- 
tant is this self-scrutiny : if we deceive our- 
selves in the affairs of the soul, the delusion 
may be fatal. If we are 'born again,' our will 
agrees with the will of God ; what he com- 
mands, it is our delight to fulfil : let us ask 
ourselves. Have we thus the spirit of Christ, 
without which we are none of his ? I long for 



90 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



all the dear young people of my class to be 
patterns of holiness and devotedness ; separated 
from the world both in its pleasures and spirit ; 
but especially for those who, by their public 
profession of Christ, have the eyes of the world 
gazing at them, and have the vows of Grod 
upon them. Be much in prayer, in communion 
with God and your own heart, and in the 
prayerful study of your Bible, and make Christ 
your model for imitation, and you will ' grow 
in grace.' Pardon these few hasty thoughts 
from the heart of, my dear young friend, 
"Yours most sincerely and affectionately, 
"MARTHA SHERMAN." 

The next is to one who had expressed her 
wish to become a teacher in the Surrey chapel 
Sunday-schools. 

" Surrey Parsonage, May 8, 1841. 

"My dear young Friend — I saw Mr. H 

yesterday, and named your wish to become a 
teacher ; he says at present he has not a va- 
cancy for a junior teacher, but he will remem- 
ber you as a candidate ; this will prevent the 
necessity of your leaving the class on Sunday. 
Should we be spared to the day when the priv- 



LABORS FOR THE YOUNa. 91 

ilege of Sunday-school teaching shall be yours, 
I may probably be able to receive you into the 
other class ; at present, you had better remain 
as you are. But though this means of useful- 
ness is for a time postponed, I hope it will not 
prevent your usefulness in some other way. 
We are born to be useful. God is always dis- 
pensing happiness around this great universe 
which he has created ; and as man was 
created in the divine likeness, he is to do like- 
wise. The eflfect of sin is to destroy God's 
image in the soul, and consequently its use- 
fulness : when, by the work of redemption by 
Christ, and the regenerating influence of the 
Holy Spirit, that image begins to be restored, 
then we begin to be useful, and to seek the 
glory of God and the promotion of his cause, 
as our chief delight. Be sure, my dear child, 
that this work of the Spirit is wrought in you. 
Do not mistake a preference for good things, 
for conversion to God ; education may effect 
the one, but the Spirit of God must perform 
the other. Seek that this Spirit may be abun- 
dantly bestowed on you, and improve the in- 
terval before you join the church of Christ in 



92 



MARTHA S-HERMAN. 



self-examination — whether your character will 
bear the scriptural test — and in seeking to 
know more of Christ and his salvation ; strive 
to prepare yourself, by the prayerful and dili- 
gent study of your Bible, to become a valuable 
Sabbath-school teacher. May God sweetly 
encourage and sanctify you, is the earnest 
prayer of 

"Your very sincere friend, 

"MARTHA SHERMAN." 

A young lady had left her class for a situa- 
tion in a school in the country ; but distance 
or separation did not diminish the interest her 
teacher felt in her decision for Christ, as the 
following precious epistle to her will declare. 

"Clay Hill, Enfield, July 1, 1841. 

"My dear young Frienj) — I have often had 
you in my thoughts since you left London, and 
have very often wished to write to you, to 
prove that I still feel a deep interest in you, 
and by no means less so now that you are out 
of sight. We are very apt to be too dependent 
on our senses, and to forget that which is un- 
associated with them. What we seldom hear, 
the friends we seldom see, and the sweets we 



LABORS FOR THE YOUNG. 93 

seldom taste, are easily forgotten, unless there 
be something more than usually interesting in 
them in our estimation. This is the reason 
that you, dear, whom I have not seen for some 
months, and whom I have seldom talked with 
at all, are yet remembered by me with deep 
interest. I feel that you have a precious soul, 
capable of enjoying God, and powers of mind 
for which you are responsible ; they were creat- 
ed for God's glory, and when sin directed them 
to dishonor and displease him, he gave up 
his well-beloved Son to be your substitute, 
that a way might be opened for your restora- 
tion to the divine favor, by his obedience and 
atonement; and to the divine likeness, by the 
purchase of the Holy Spirit to sanctify your 
soul. I believe you often desire that the bless- 
ings which Jesus has thus procured for those 
who will receive them, were yours ; but I want 
you to come to a point, and resolve that you 
will not rest until you are a child of God. 

"If there could be a middle state, in which 
you might be safe, still, I could not be happy 
for you to remain there. I want you to share 
the very highest enjoyments of heaven, to be 



94 



MAE-IHA SHERMAN. 



one of the brightest stars in glory, and to have 
an abundant entrance ministered to you into 
the everlasting kingdom of Christ ; and I could 
never be contented for any one just to enter 
heaven, just to be safe from hell : but if you 
are not the friend of God, you are his enemy; 
if you are not his child, you are Satan's. It 
seems very difficult to believe that an amiable 
character can be the enemy of any, but espe- 
cially of God : but Christ himself says, ' He 
that is not with me is against me.' So if you 
are wavering and undecided for him, you are 
among his enemies. Awful thought! My be- 
loved child, do not hesitate another moment, 
but, in the retirement of your closet, seek that 
grace which shall enable you to give up your 
whole heart to Christ, and resolve in his strength 
that you will be his obedient child ; that you 
will rest your whole salvation on his merits 
alone, and strive to be what he would have 
you. Let the desire to please him be your 
ruling motive in every thought, word, and deed. 
In all your studies, pursue them with the view 
to have them make you a more valuable ser- 
vant of Christ ; and to fit you to dwell with 



LABORS FOR. THE ^OUNG. 95 

him in glory, and to enable you to bring others 
to glory. Make the Bible your constant, pray- 
erful study ; let it bo ' hid ' in your heart, that 
you ' sin not against ' Him ; and when tempted 
to sin, remember that you will grieve his Holy 
Spirit if you do, and most ungratefully requite 
his boundless love to you. 

"Oh, my dear child, if we could view our 
hearts as Grod sees them, how should we loathe 
ourselves, and blush that he should behold in 
us such deformity ; but it is only when we see, 
by faith, the agonies which the Son of God has 
endured for us, to procure our deliverance from 
the curse and power and love of sin, that we 
are led to mourn over it as that abominable 
thing which God hates, and to repent in tears 
of bitter sorrow ; this the Spirit of God alone 
can show us. For this Spirit pray continually, 
until the promise is fulfilled, and you are made 
indeed a child of God ; and, if spared to re- 
turn to school, try to be a little missionary 
there, and to increase the number of those 
happy beings who choose the pleasant path of 
wisdom. ' Her ways are ways of pleasantness, 
and all her paths are peace.' Every eflbrt for 



96 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



the good of others wiH bring blessuigs to your- 
self. Be much in prayer, and do not yield to 
the difficulties which school may present. 
Keep in mind the privilege as well as the ne- 
cessity of prayer, and try to persuade your 
companions to the exercise ; so you will he 
aiding to bring the answer to your own pe- 
tition, 'Thy kingdom come.' AVe must all 
unite our energies to make others happy, and 
happiness is found only in obedience to the 
happy commands of our Father in heaven. 
Give joy in heaven and on earth, by the con- 
secration of yourself wholly to his service, and 
beheve me, 

"Your very sincere and affectionate friend, 
"MARTHA SHERMAN.-' 

Sometimes, to display God's sovereignty and 
grace, one is selected and brought to himself 
from a family wholly consisting of worldly 
minds, who discourage, if they do not persecute 
and oppose. Her judicious advice to one of 
the class in such circumstances, will commend 
itself to every pious mind, and is worthy of 
special attention from all who are simil^ly 
placed. 



LABORS FOR THE YOUNG. 97 

"July, 1841. 

"My dear young Friend — My time has 
been much engaged since I have been here, or 
I should have written a few lines to you before 
this ; but I have not forgotten you ; indeed, 
you have been much in my thoughts. It is 
very difficult to exhibit the Christian character 
in any situation, surrounded and beset with 
snares as we are, from evil hearts of sin and 
unbelief within, and the world and Satan with- 
out, even when all around us delight in our 
decision for Christ. But what must it be to 
maintain it amidst opposition and ridicule ; 
and what must be the anguish of that mind 
which witnesses opposition in hearts most ten- 
derly beloved, and from which it feels there 
must be eternal separation unless a miracle of 
grace interfere ? I deeply feel for you on this 
account : but He who placed you as a solitary 
Christian in your family, knows what a large 
measure of grace you need ; his strength is 
perfected in weakness, and he can make all 
grace to abound towards you. Your situation 
is one that demands much watchfulness and 
prayer ; your eminent consistency of Christian 

Sherman. 7 



98 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



character will do far more to convince the gain- 
sayers than a thousand exhortations ; not that 
I would advise you to neglect to warn them, 
for they can scarcely believe you think them 
in danger of eternal misery if you make no vis- 
isible effort to save them. But the judicious 
prayerful effort of a Christian, whose charac- 
ter stands out from those around her for purity 
and benevolence of principle, and self-denial for 
the glory of Grod and the good of others, can 
scarcely fail of removing prejudice and produc- 
ing a feeling in favor of religion itself; which 
is at least one impediment removed, and so far 
a preparation for their receiving the gospel. 

"I am always more anxious for the develop- 
ment of eminent piety in those who are situat- 
ed as you are, than in others, on this account ; 
though I feel assured that what we call emi- 
nent piety is only what piety ought in every 
instance to be, and I strongly question the gen- 
uineness of that piety which is satisfied with 
any thing short of the perfect likeness of Christ. 
Though we know we shall never be without 
sin, and consequently never perfectly like Christ 
until we reach heaven — where indeed we shall 



LABORS FOE, THE YOUNa. 99 

be like him, 'for we shall see him as he is' — 
yet our aim must be there; we must have 
some pattern for imitation, and none but a per- 
fect one will avail. The most exalted Christian 
is defiled with sin, even in his best estate; 
therefore he will not do for a pattern : no, we 
must press towards the mark, and lay aside 
every impediment to our progress, ' looking un- 
to Jesus.' Keep your eye there, my dear friend, 
and never submit to lower motives or prin- 
ciples than those which actuated the Son ol 
God. There is much to chill and damp yoUr 
piety and zeal, when none sympathize with 
you ; but let this drive you nearer to the Sun 
of righteousness, to gather faith and love and 
vigor and every needed grace from the rich 
treasury which he has provided for all who 
apply to him. It is in this way trials prove 
blessings, by driving us to Christ. When the 
creature-stream fails, we are driven to the 
Fountain, which can never be exhausted. Keep 
close there, make your Bible your constant, 
prayerful study. Seek to have your views of 
the truth and of the plan of salvation very clear ; 
frequently study the grand doctrines of the 



100 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



gospel, and do not depend on the knowledge 
you have of them : an error here would be fa- 
tal, as on incorrect views inconsistent conduct 
is continually based. 

" There must be growth 'in the knowledge 
of our Lord Jesus Christ,' as well as ' in grace,' 
and let that knowledge be drawn immediately 
from the well-spring, the Bible. Search every 
word, with prayer for that Spirit which alone 
can truly enlighten, and ' let your light so shine 
before men that they may see your good works, 
and glorify your Father which is in heaven.' 
Give God no rest, until every member of your 
family is converted to Christ. Why were you 
selected to be a recipient of his grace ? Not 
for your own merits: then it must be of his 
free and sovereign grace, and you are bound to 
communicate to others what has been so freely 
granted to you. Home is your little garden, 
which you must diligently cultivate ; you must 
seek to remove all the stones which would 
check the progress of vegetation, all the im- 
pediments to the existence of piety : perhaps 
there may be, besides those in the heart, many 
which are outward in family arrangements, 



LABORS FOR THE YOUNG. 101 

which your influence may be able to remove. 
If your piety is that which they cannot but 
approve, you have more influence on that ac- 
count, and your wishes would probably be law 
to them. This is only the first step in the culti- 
vation of your garden ; you have to dig, to 
sow, to plant, to water, and to do every thing 
which the gardener who cares for his garden 
will attempt. And 0, what weeds you have 
to destroy! Seek, my dear friend, that the 
moral desert around you may become as 'the 
garden of the Lord, that he may be glorified.' 
I should be very glad to hear from you. 
" Believe me, your very sincere, 

"And affectionate friend, 

"MARTHA SHERMAN." 

The inconsiderateness of friends, both young 
and old, requesting those filling important sta- 
tions, and whose time is much occupied with 
paramount duties, to write to them at special 
seasons of their history, is judiciously -treated 
and improved in the following extract: 

"SuEREY Parsonage, August 10, 1841. 

"My dear Friend — I cannot refuse youi 
request to give you a line of remembrance on, 



102 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



not your birthday, but the day after. My 
dear friend must remember that such a step is 
a precedent which might occasion not a little 
difficulty. Many young friends ask for a letter 
on their birthday, and if I could transmit my 
wishes to paper by a magic touch, I would 
never refuse ; but if one has her request grant- 
ed, all have a claim ; and then, tell me, how 
can I meet such a demand from so many kind 
hearts, however quickly I may scrawl : for the 
quantity of writing which is unavoidable takes 
up so much time, that, contrary to my ap- 
proval, I am obliged to scrawl. The time 
which such an additional correspondence would 
occupy, would require the neglect of many 
important duties; therefor'i, I write not on 
your birthday, that the circumstance of writ- 
ing to you may not be used as an argument 
with others. 

"But why does my dear friend ask me to 
write to her ? You have not to be urged to 
decision on the return of the day which leads 
most young people to think a little seriously. 
Your heart was surrendered to Him who claims 
it, years before mine, and your Christian prog- 



LABORS FOR THE YOUNa 103 

ress must, therefore, have so far outstripped 
mine, that I am too distant from you to urge 
you onward ; unless, as you run your race, you 
occasionally look back in humility and self- 
abasement at the path you have trodden, and 
mark the zigzag footmarks which tell you 
how often you would have gone aside, but for 
Him who directed and upheld you: and while 
thus reviewing the past, you hear a voice cry- 
ing to you, 'Go forward;' 'Press toward the 
mark for the prize of the high calling of God 
in Christ Jesus.' 'Lay aside every weight, 
and the sin which doth so easily beset you, 
and run with patience the race that is set be 
fore you, looking unto Jesus.' Though far be- 
hind you, my cry for myself and for others is, 
' Lord, urge us on ;' and perhaps you may over- 
hear that cry. 

"These are days which call for more than 
ordinary devotedness to Christ. The day is 
hastening when the Christian is to be sifted, 
and 'he that endureth to the end shall be 
saved.' That day will probably introduce the 
millennial glory, for which we must all labor ; 
when every heart shall yield to ' Him whose 



104 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



right it is to reign.' Then the despised, rejected 
Jew shall be ' hronght in with the fulness of 
the Gentiles,' and the blessing, according to 
His promise, be given to him that favors his 
Israel: 'Blessed is he that blesseth thee.' If 
God still loves his ancient people, shall we not 
love them too, and strive after the time when 
the curse shall be removed, and ' Israel shall 
turn to the Lord ?' My heart is ill at ease on 
their account. I think I can respond to the 
apostle's language, 'My heart's desire and 
prayer for Israel is, that they might be saved.' 
How glorious shall that day be, when the veil 
shall be taken away, and thousands be born 
unto God. May I urge you to more persever- 
ing prayer on their behalf : you will reap the 
benefit as well as they. My heart rejoices in 
your usefulness, my dear friend ; and I pray 
that you ' may abound therein more and more.' 
May your birthdays be many, many times 
renewed, and each one witness increasing de- 
votedness to our blessed Redeemer, and more 
of his likeness too — more humility and spirit- 
uality of mind, with more entire consecration 
to his service. 



LABORS FOR THE YOUNG. 105 

"Forgive this hurried, ill- written epistle, 
which bears with it, though unexpressed, the 
fondest wishes of, 
"My dear friend, 

"Yours very affectionately, 

MARTHA SHERMAN.-' 

It was very difficult to persuade her at any 
time that her labors had been useful, or could 
produce fruit to God ; but when the evidence 
was complete and irresistible, her heart over- 
flowed with angelic joy. To one of her class 
she thus utters it, and shows that "we do not 
answer the end of our existence, if our object 
and effort be not to save and bless our race. 

"Clay Hill, Enfield, June 10, 1841. 

"My very dear Friend — If my inclinations 
were the guide of my conduct, how' different 
would that conduct be from what it is. In 
some things, I fear, they would lead me to 
much evil, though with an intention to do 
good ; and in others, much benefit might result, 
and much pleasure be communicated by in- 
clination having its way. My inclination told 
me to write to you as soon as I reached En- 
field, and its sweet retirement; but my time 



106 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



is scarcely at my own disposal, and I feel that 
I must snatch- opportunities like my sweet 
friend. Stolen moments often afford us the 
richest enjoyments, and we appreciate most 
that which has cost us some little difficulty to 
obtain, or to accomplish; and I do not think 
you will spurn the broken, unconnected effusion 
of a heart that dearly loves you, because it 
does not bear the marks of study and arrange- 
ment. Friendship prizes intentions, and Chris- 
tian friendship never suspects : and I trust there 
is a sacred bond uniting our hearts to each 
other, though our mutual circumstances pre- 
vent much exhibition of it. The love which 
springs from the cross unites every heart that 
has laid its burden beneath it ; the blood- 
sprinkled soul recognizes its fellow, and even 
Christian sympathy must unite them ; but there 
is a still sweeter endearment when minds 
have been associated as ours : you, as a lamb 
in the flock over which my dear husband is 
the under-shepherd, and both of us as mingling 
our efforts to understand the sacred page. 

"What joy and gratitude did you excite in 
my oft-discouraged heart, by telling me that 



LABORS FOR THE yOUNCf. 107 

my humble efforts had in any degree assisted 
you with your charge. How often does God 
'lead the blind by a way they know not.' I 
have ever felt that if good in any form arose 
from these feeble attempts, the praise must be 
entirely His, whose blessing can give efficacy 
t9 the weakest instrumentality. The anxiety 
I have endured is amply repaid, if you are 
assisted in your explanation of the sacred 
volume, and I tru.st I shall 'go forward' with 
more simplicity of faith and dependence on 
that influence which must follow as well as 
dictate these exercises. It may be that a soul 
may be saved one day by this instrumentality. 
I feel increasingly that we live only as we 
answer the 'design for which 'man became a 
living soul.' ' I have created him for my glory ;' 
and if the end we have in view, and the ob- 
jects we pursue are beneath this, we do not 
answer the end of our being — we had bettef 
never have been born. The soul was formed 
with the capability to enjoy Grod, and to glorify 
him ; and though it has sunk deep and low 
in degradation from its noble original, yet so 
much remains that the soul refuses satisfaction 



108 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



with any thing but himself. At first it seeks 
it everywhere rather than there ; but when 
drawn there by the attractions of the cross, 
0, how full its satisfaction, how firm its 
ground of hope and rejoicing. And when the 
love of Christ has drawn us to himself, what 
is so sweet and so binding on us, as to draw 
other minds to the right source of enjoyment, 
peace with God and reconciliation to him 
'through the blood of the Lamb.' 

"While I miss you much, I cannot but re- 
joice in the double privileges you enjoy, of- 
continually advancing in mental cultivation 
and spiritual knowledge under the instrumen- 
tality of your invaluable friend, and of im- 
parting as continually to others, that you may 
win and direct them to Jesus. How prone the 
mind is to depend on its privileges, and how 
God sometimes deprives us of them for a sea- 
son, to bring us back to dependence upon him. 
We do not need prayer less because of our 
augmented privileges, but far more ; responsi- 
bility increases with every such additional fa- 
vor, and how can we meet that in our own 
strength ? No, our necessities must always be 



LABORS FOR THE YOUNG. 109 " 

supplied from his fulness, and our opportuni- 
ties profit us only as they draw us nearer to 
him. So may you, dear, find it, and as you 
receive, put out to interest; let every fresh tal- 
ent yield another at least; as you learn, apply 
and practice ; this will be the best proof of 
gratitude to your instructor, and to Him who 
gave him to you. We are bound for heaven, 
and we must take with us every creature whom 
we can reach, nor must we rest while one to 
whom our influence extends is bound to a 
different clime. May the thought of the value 
of an immortal soul, and the shortness of time, 
stimulate us to watchfulness and prayer, that ' 
we may leave no effort untried to win sinners 
to Christ ; may we be so sanctified by the in- 
dwelling of the Spirit of God, that no stum- 
bling-block may exist in us ; but may our 
Christian character be so eminently like Christ, 
that we may glorify and exalt Him who made 
us and remoulded us after that likeness. 

" I love appointments at the throne of gi'ace; 
half past eight is my time for evening retire- 
ment when here, and when evening engage- 
ments do not interpose, at Surrey too. Often 



110 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



there, however, I am compelled to defer the 
sacred hour of devotion till after supper; but 
it is alw^ays painful to me. I hope, however, 
to meet my dear friend in spirit then, where 
we may pour out our souls before Him ; and 
where our poor prayers may find acceptance 
through the merits of our great Intercessor, 
who 'ever liveth to make intercession for us.' 
We are expelled from Surrey for a season, and 
have found a very agreeable dwelling at Clay 
Hill ; but I feel out of my element, and long 
to return. I trust the retirement of this sweet 
place will be beneficial both to my dearest 
husband and myself. Pray much for us, dear, 
that the beloved flock may be benefited by our 
tarrying here. I have a little oratory in the 
garden, to which 1 love to retire : there I find 
a mercy-seat ; and it is sweet to ' come bold- 
ly,' there. I hope every cloud has long since 
been dispersed from your mind, and that your 
faith can cleave to Christ. 

" Believe me, my sweet friend, 

"Ever^ours most afiectionately, 

"MARTHA SHERMAN." 



MATERNAL ASSOCIATIONS. 



Ill 



CHAPTER V. 

FORMATION OF MATERNAL ASSOCIATIONS- 
JOURNEY ON THE CONTINENT. 

Simultaneously with the formation of her 
Sabbath-class, Mrs. Sherman commenced a 
maternal association, composed of mothers 
whose education, piety, and station, gave them 
influence in the church and congregation. In 
June, 1838, she became a mother. Besides 
those to whom she had so faithfully and loving- 
ly sustained the maternal relation, she had now 
a child of her own, and with it all those pecul- 
iar feelings and caves which an infant brings ; 
and if maternal associations appeared to have 
great advantages before, these would not be 
lessened when she could present among her 
coadjutors her own offspring, as an offering to 
the Lord. 

The following letter, one out of many which 
she wrote at the same time, will exhibit the 
intense anxiety Mrs. Sherman felt, that all the 



112 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



mothers in the church, especially such as had 
influence, should in their meetings strive to- 
gether for those spiritual blessings, and that 
domestic bliss, which would make their fami- 
lies the garden of the Lord. 

'■Surrey Parsonage, September 23, 1838. 
"My DEAR Friend — As I find our secretary, 
Mrs. Field, will not have returned by Monday, 
I think it will be better to defer the anticipated 
prayer-meeting until after our maternal asso- 
ciation. My heart is much cast down, to see 
the want of interest generally in our little meet- 
ing. If we desire our families to grow up to 
labor for Christ, we must avail ourselves of 
every means to secure the blessing while they 
are young ; and while I supremely desire to 
see multitudes of those dear laborers teeming 
forth from the numerous families attending 
Surrey, I can scarcely expect the blessing, 
while so little concern is manifested for an as- 
sociation which has this special object in view. 
"Will my dear friend aid me by her special re- 
membrance of it in her closet, and by striving 
to bring mothers to the meeting. "We must 
not remain in our present lifeless state ; there 



MATERNAL ASSOCIATIONS. 



113 



must be a revival, and I look to the very few 
■ who really feel the importance of these meet- 
ings, to seek it from His influence, which first 
'moved on the face of the waters,' and brought 
light out of darkness. If the majority of mothers 
in the congregation think lightly of combined 
prayer, let us seek the blessing for them, nor 
rest till every family among us is consecrated 
to the work of the Lord, and rising up to fill 
our places in the church. I must see them 
thus consecrated, and therefore would implore 
that this blessing may be sought for all, by the 
praying few. Try to induce those to attend 
over whom you have any influence, and you 
may be thus bringing blessings on many, and 
glorifying your heavenly Father, while you re- 
joice the heart of 

"Your aflfectionate friend, 

MARTHA SHERMAN." 

The difficulties, however, did not end in pro- 
curing the attendance of the mothers, for when 
they came, only a few could be prevailed upon 
to take part in the devotional exercises or con- 
versation ; and thus the chief burden was often 
thrown on the mind of the president, already 



114 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



too hea\dly pressed with anxiety for their wel- 
fare. Let her speak for herself. 

"July 14, 1840. 

"My very dear Friend — The ad- 
dress to children, whicli Mr. Sherman delivered 
this morning, from Luke 2 : 51, was very simple 
and practical. May a blessing indeed be given. 
Our last maternal meeting disappointed me, as 
it was a subject requiring conversation ; few 
works appear to me to touch that very impor- 
tant and common sin, equivocation ; the ladies 
who usually speak — but few, alas — were ab- 
sent from London ; and, with immense per- 
suasion, Mrs. concluded, by presenting 

our case to God. "When I commenced in prayer, 
I was so excited by the prospect of no assist- 
ance, that it was a very distressing effort to 
myself, and must have been very unprofitable 

to others. However, Mrs. engaged with 

so much propriety, that I hope I was forgotten, 
though I trust the few blessings I sought were 
not. I deeply lament the prevailing deficiency 
among us, and I really feel surprised that per- 
sons so capable as Mrs. , of whom there 

are, I doubt not, many, do not see it a duty to 



MATERNAL ASSOCIATIONS. 115 

help me in this important engagement I feel 
assured that this gift is not mine ; but I think 
myself extremely culpable, that in the situa- 
tion I occupy I do not try my best cheerfully, 
for example's sake. Ah, when the love of 
Christ, and the glory and honor of God, shall 
fill the soul, it will not be thus ; and I am 
looking for this sweet evidence of growth in 
grace in myself, that whatever God brings be- 
fore me as a duty I shall undertake unhesi- 
tatingly, in dependence upon, and confident 
expectation of, his promised assistance. Some- 
times I can do so ; still, nothing but an ha 
bitual acting of obedience to the first indication 
of my Father's will, can satisfy me. 

" How delightful it is to anticipate a state 
of perfect holiness, when, like the angel flying 
with the everlasting gospel, we too shall haste 
to fulfil his sweet commands. I never muse 
on the happy spirits in heaven, winging their 
way on various commissions, without panting 
almost for emancipation from the fetters of 
clay, and their attendant sin, and thinking when 
these are removed, I will try to exceed them in 
swiftness and in love. In the latter, surely 



116 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



the redeemed spirit must exceed ; angels know 
comparatively little of the deht of love to Jesus. 
He preserved them in holiness ; but to have lost 
holiness, heaven, and happiness, and to have 
them restored ! how overpowering to think of it! 
But I must not trust myself on so dear a theme : 
we are one in heart here ; may we be one with 
Christ and each other in yon bright world. 
" Believe me, my very dear friend, 
"Your ever affectionate and obliged friend, 
^ "MARTHA SHERMAN." 

Mothers who have to gain their bread by 
labor, whose education has been deficient, or 
who have not been accustomed to attend wor- 
ship, are a class which should excite our live- 
liest sympathy. The chief difficulty consists 
in getting'them to take sufficient interest in a 
meeting where nothing but their moral and 
spiritual good is designed, and to attend it 
regularly. Yet perseverance will do wonders, 
and kindness is never ultimately thrown away 
upon the poor. They were not forgotten by 
Mrs. Sherman. She formed another associa- 
tion, consisting of the poor mothers of the con- 
gregation, and all whom they were disposed to 



MATERNAL ASSOCIATIONS. 117 

bring with them ; this might be called her 
favorite institution, for which she prepared 
with great delight. While they treated their 
president with great respect and affection, there 
was less reserve than etiquette imposes on a 
higher class of society, more freedom of con- 
versation, and consequently more knowledge , 
of the good effected. Often has ghe returned 
to her husband after meeting these poor moth- 
ers, with a countenance beaming with joy at 
the interesting communications they made, 
the simple and fervent prayers they offered, 
and the evident benefit their families derived 
from these conversational exercises. These 
good effects were soon visible among them : 
some of the roughest specimens of human na- 
ture became gentle as lambs, and the energy 
of their disposition was directed to the noblest 
end of life ; others, naturally timid, were 
strengthened to serve God without fear ; in 
several of their houses family prayer was es- 
tablished, and in not a few instances the con- 
version of the attending mother followed. Oh, 
it would have cheered any spirit to see her 
who went forth weeping, reaping her sheaves, 



118 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



receiving wages, and gathering fruit to life 
eternal. 

When ahsent from home, through ill health 
or the claims of parental love, her practice was 
frequently to write a letter addressed to the 
poor mothers, which might be read at their 
, assemblies. Several of those epistles became 
instruments .of usefulness, stirring them up to 
devotedness to Christ, punctuality in their at- 
tendance, and a greater watchfulness over their 
femilies. Many speak to this day of the joy 
that was diffused, from the evidence they 
afforded of the sympathy and piety of their 
president's heart; and one of the mothers at- 
tributes her conversion to the impression pro- 
duced by a letter from Mrs. Sherman, which 
was read at one of their meetings. The follow- 
ing is a specimen of this kind of correspondence, 
and will show how intensely she thirsted after 
their temporal and spiritual interests. 

"St. Boniface Hotel, Ventnor, Feb. 23, 1846. 

" My dear Friends — I received your very 
kind and sympathizing letter with much pleas- 
ure, and the gratification I experienced in 
shaking hands with you so immediately be- 



MATERNAL ASSOCIATIONS. 119 

fore my removal from my beloved home, has 
left a most cheering impression on my mind. 
One thing which pleased me in doing so was, 
that you might see for yourselves that I was 
not in so sad a condition as some anxious minds 
have imagined. I trust by thus promptly using 
decided measures, it may be my privilege soon 
to return to you in health and comparative 
strength. The little meetings with you, though 
marked on my part with great weakness and 
insufficiency, have always proved refreshing to 
my own mind, and 1 am anxious to induce the 
healthy ones here to seek the formation of such 
an association. I have not strength, personally, 
to form one, but I will try to influence others 
to do what they can : I know you would glad- 
ly second such a resolution. I think of you all 
with increased interest, now that I have drank 
more deeply of the cup of sorrow. This heart 
has experienced pangs to which it was an utter 
stranger before, and so I have been taught 
more keenly to feel for those who are called to 
drink, if not the same, yet as bitter a cup, and 
much more bitter too. But there are sweet 
promises to such, which not even the Christian 



120 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



can prize till he is in circumstances of trial ; 
and there are consolations and discoveries of 
the divine character in affliction which are 
found only then. It is when thus exercised 
and tried, that we reahze that God is dealing 
with us. When our path is not to he distin- 
guished from that of the mass around us, we 
cannot see that our Father is taking special 
interest in us. 

" The child that plays from morning to night, 
that does any rude thing it chooses, even if hy 
no means a rebellious or wicked child, yet, if 
it meet with no effort to regulate the right 
employment of its time, no check to rude- 
ness, no impediment to its self-pleasing, the 
inference is, that the parent takes no interest 
in that child, and eventually it must suffer for 
the want of necessary guidance and restraint. 
The child that is of an age to reflect, will re- 
gard parental discipline as an evidence of love, 
when properly administered and not under the 
influence of a disposition as evil as that which 
it professes to correct ; and we have only to 
compare our heavenly Father's discipline and 
regulation of his family, with that of a well- 



MATERNAL ASSOCIATIONS. 121 

ordered household, to see indeed a most hum- 
hling contrast, but at the same time to find 
many a mysterious point made clear : an4 who 
would not welcome his all- wise discip/ine ? 

"But each of us has her little vexing trials, * 
such as we cannot talk about ; and if we are 
not watchful, these, which I think are the most 
calculated when rightly viewed to prove choice 
blessings, will miss their design, just because 
we think them too small to spread before God, 
and to seek to derive from them a sanctifying 
influence. Our Christian character is far more 
tried and strengthened by these little things, 
and the opportunities of glorifying God under 
them are much greater than in our larger trials, 
which we must bring before God. More graces 
are proved, a greater variety and number of 
means for purifying are being exercised, in 
those every-day circumstances which too often 
try the temper, conceal Christ's image, hide 
God's smile, and imbitter every thing around. 
The very things of which you are ready to say, 
•but for these things I should be a happy wo- 
man,' are expressly designed by your heavenly 
Father for your special happiness, by correct- 



122 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



ing in you those numberless evils which pre- 
vent real and abiding happiness. 

"Let it be more our prayerful aim to see 
and regard God's all-wise hand in our daily 
circumstances ; and though they may be things 
which he does not approve, let us remember 
that all hearts and events are under his con- 
trol. He permits them for your sanotification, 
to draw you out of yourself to more simple 
dependence on his strength, to gain from them 
the exercise of those graces which his Spirit 
has sown in your hearts. But there are some 
dear mothers among us, who dare not believe 
they belong to the family with which God 
their Father is taking so much pains; their 
vexations are seen only as such, and they know 
no sympathizing heart. My dear friends, who 
made us to differ ? did our superiority to you, 
or our natural excellence, bring us there ? 
Never; his boundless pity and grace gave his 
Son for our salvation and yours. He offered 
forgiveness, eternal life, and admission into his 
family to us, and he inclined us to accept these 
blessings. We would tell you what a dear 
Saviour we have found, and we entreat you to 



MATERNAL ASSOCIATIONS. 



123 



seek liim too : we came empty, so must you ; 
we had nothing but our" guilt and misery to 
bring him, nor have you ; he came to seek and 
to save that which was lost ; we were lost, and 
so are you ; we are saved by grace, and so 
may you be. Come now, before you return to 
your home, lest its temptations crush the de- 
sires that may be rising in your minds. Come, 
and entreat Grod to extend to you for Jesus' 
sake the mercy we have found, and to make 
your whole heart open to receive him, as your 
Saviour, your Friend, and your King; then all 
things must work together for your good, how- 
ever painful, for he says they shall. The bitter 
cup shall be sweet, life with all" its trials a 
blessing, and death eternal gain. May we be 
one unbroken circle in heaven, and together 
review the way He has led us, and rejoice and 
triumph in his love. 

" Believe me, ever your affectionate 
"Friend and sister in Christ, 

"MARTHA SHERMAN." 

In the spring of 1842, Mrs. Sherman's useful 
engagements were interrupted by an unfore- 
seen and afflictive dispensation. The incea- 



124 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



sant labors during the previous five years, 
which the congregation at Surrey cha})el and 
the cause of God generally had required from 
her husband, began to affect his health: the 
organs of speech became greatly enfeebled, and 
the physicians who were consulted, predicted 
that unless he submitted immediately to entire 
cessation from all pulpit exercises for at least 
six months, and resided in purer air, it was 
not improbable he would have to abandon the 
ministry altogether. To insure freedom from 
temptation to preach, and to occupy an active 
mind with new scenes, a tour on the continent 
was advised. In order to accelerate the cure, 
and minister comfort to the invalid, the society 
of his wife and an afflicted daughter was deem- 
ed indispensable. 

This period .of release from pressing and 
responsible duties, was not embraced by Mrs. 
Sherman as an opportunity for cessation from 
active labors, and for a mere abandonment to 
the enjoyment of the novelties by which she 
was surrounded in a foreign land. Her highly 
refined and cultivated taste found its utmost 
gratification in the works of the best masters, 



JOURNEY TO AUSTRIA 



125 



with which most of the continental cities are 
so richly furnished; and especially in the mag- 
nificent display of Grod's workmanship in the 
beauties of creation, which at times so over- 
powered her, that she says, " I could only find 
vent for expression in tears of joy and grati- 
tude to my Grod, who had made for me, a sin- 
ner, such a beauteous world." At the same 
time, her warm heart was constantly alive to 
the ignorance and wretchedness amidst which 
she was moving ; and most gladly did she 
make opportunities, and improve them, for 
dropping the good seed of the word, in the hope 
that this tour might be fruitful in good results 
to the praise and glory of Grod. She lent a 
ready and cordial sympathy to every effort 
which she met with, for establishing pure, spir- 
itual worship, in the place of corrupt and 
superstitious observances; and an occasional 
interview with a sincere and devout Christian 
was, to her rejoicing spirit, "as cold water to 
a thirsty soul." "Without the abridgment of 
any innocent gratification, and with the enjoy- 
ment of a peaceful conscience, she maintained a 
cheerful, fervent piety, in the most barren places, 



126 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



by enlarged communion with God, and by a 
diligent study of that precious book which 
affords the richest nourishment to the soul 
hungering after righteousness. How pleasant 
the survey of a residence in a foreign clime, 
when yielding such fruits of holiness, and sus- 
tained by such living, active piety. 

After an absence of six months, Mrs. Sher- 
man and her husband returned to their home 
and their labors, the chief object of their jour- 
ney having been attained in the entire restora- 
tion of his health. But the result was other- 
wise in the case of their daughter : she did not 
live to return to England. 

This unexpected calamity was most acutely 
felt by Mrs. Sherman, and she anxiously sought 
that it might be made useful, especially to her 
Sabbath-class. In a note to the friend who 
kindly relieved her of the painful task of an- 
nouncing to them this sad event, she says, "In 
the retirement of my closet this afternoon; my 
feeble prayer shall be that an eminent blessing 
may rest on you, and on those endeared young 
people; that the usefulness I had planned only 
for my beloved child, may be accomplished, 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 127 

and not defeated, by her early removal. One 
thing will tend preeminently to heal my 
wounded heart — the conversion of those dear 
girls to God. Long have I pleaded for them ; 
it may he that Grod is about to grant me my 
desire by this solemn dispensation. I believe 
they would rejoice to soothe me in my sorrow. 
This I can say, my sorrow shall be turned 
into joy if they will this day consecrate them- 
selves to God." 

"Mr. Tyler improved the event to my class, 
I understand, in a very impressive manner. 
The weeping among the dear girls will prove, 
I trust, the softening shower which precedes 
the springing of the seed, which shall eventu- 
ally bring forth fruit to life eternal. We had 
fully expected Mr. James of Birmingham to 
preach to the congregation; but as he could 
not come, the elders and some of the more 
judicious of the church so strongly urged my 
dear husband to undertake it, that he reluc- 
tantly consented, and last Sunday evening, to 
an overflowing congregation, he preached from 
John 19:38, 'A disciple of Jesus, but se- 
cretly,' a most suitable and impressive ser- 



128 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



mon. The character was faithfully and affec- 
tionately drawn, and I am looking for much 
fruit. As it will be printed,* pray that its 
usefulness may extend far beyond our congre- 
gation." 

A little before this period, Mrs. Sherman had 
become deeply interested in a group of sisters 
in Lancashire, of cultivated minds and man- 
ners, one of whom only had at that period 
become associated with the church of Christ. 
During repeated visits she labored to impress 
them with the loveliness of religion, and the 
absolute necessity of immediate consecration 
to the Saviour. "Without attributing too much 
to her example and conversation, there is every 
reason to believe they left a conviction of its 
value and importance, and were preliminary 
helps to their decision. She had the joy of 
beholding all of them, before her death, united 
to Christ by faith, and the companions of his 
saints. An extract from a letter to one of these 

* The Secret Disciple, a sermon occasioned by the 
decease of Miss Selina Sherman, at Freiwaldau, Silesia, 
Austria, preached at Surrey chapel, November 27, 1842, 
by the Rev. James Sherman. Fourth edition. 



■BENEVOLENT LABORS. 



129 



amiable sisters, will best exhibit her anxieties 
and prayers on her behalf. 

"June, 1841. 

"I should rejoice in attempting the most 
painful, self-denying thing, if I could but be 
the means of bringing my sweet friend to the 
entire, the unreserved consecration of her heart, 
her life, her all to Christ. This is my earnest 
prayer for you, dear, and my happiness cannot 
be perfect in this world till it is acoomphshed. 
I think of that soul which is destined to im- 
mortaUty, as one whose powers were granted 
that they might promote the glory of Him who 
intrusted them to your care, and fit you for the 
society of the pure spirits in heaven, and en- 
able you to further the glorious designs of God 
in bringing others to that blessed company. 
He is always promoting the happiness and ben- 
efit of the creatures he has formed for himself, 
and he designs that such should be the benev- 
olent and elevated occupation of every redeemed 
spirit in this world. Your powers of mind ; 
their cultivation by education ahd thought ; all 
the events of providence, and the little inci- 
dents in your history ; the vexations and daily 

Shcrmau. 9 



130 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



mortifications to which you, in common with 
every other creature, are suhject, as much as 
the pleasures and enjoyments of life — all are 
designed to lead to heaven, to prepare you for 
its hallowed joys, and expel every weed which 
might not grow in the heavenly garden. Can 
I fail, then, to look with much anxiety on her 
who seems wavering and hesitating ; knowing 
too much of the loveliness of true religion to be 
happy without it, yet not sufficiently acquainted 
with its glories to feel that all besides is worth- 
less, and to take up her cross for its glorious 
Author's sake. 

"Methinks, if you could fairly place side by 
side the value of the pursuits of the two worlds, 
the earthly and the heavenly, you could not 
choose the earthly. What is the end to which 
all your pursuits bear ? I know you are amia- 
ble, intelligent, benevolent, kind, with many 
sweet charms besides. But taking all your 
life together, what end have you in view? 
Your pursuits gratify you as far as they are 
the result of your own choice; they are en- 
larging your mind by adding to your stores of 
knowledge, and thus making you an intelligent 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 131 

and interesting companion ; you fill the station 
in which Providence has placed you with much 
propriety; you administer to the happiness of 
many, as you have done to mine. But there 
is something deficient in it all ; and if I mis- 
take not, the feeling which I had for many 
years is yours : there was wanting one grand 
object of pursuit, which at the entrance of your 
spiritual course, like Christian's wicket-gate, 
is to be always in view. 

"The Christian, when his heart is surren- 
dered to Him from whom ii» its madness it 
wandered, feels he is no longer his own ; his 
own gratification is not his aim — he seeks only 
to please God. Every imagination of his heart 
is so grovelling and defiled, that he longs for a 
purer, higher guide than his own wisdom. 
And he finds the will of God in every respect 
pure and worthy of a soul which is to dwell 
with God. From henceforth the glory of God 
is the aim; in every pursuit enlargement of 
mind is sought, that it may contain and com- 
prehend more of God, and so be fitted to pro- 
mote his designs and work with him in the 
renovation and salvation of the world. Self 



132 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



daily becomes less and less, as Grod appears 
greater and more lovely; earthly pursuits be- 
come uncongenial, and the bearing of every 
thing is the will of God: what he loves, the 
Christian loves; what he hates, the Christian 
hates. Grod loves every creature of the family 
of man, and seeks his happiness; so does the 
Christian. The distinctions he once felt are 
gradually lost as he grows in grace, and his 
desire is to carry out to his utmost influence 
this object of the divine mind. He recognizes 
and loves the tgraces of his Saviour's image 
where they are to be found; and where they 
are not, he remembers that once he too was 
unprofitable and corrupt, and he longs to pro- 
cure the deliverance of that soul through the 
almighty Power which rescued him. 

"And does not even this very faint picture 
prove that happiness is nowhere to be found 
till we begin to pursue the great end of our 
being? Why did the 'Son of God' humble 
himself, and become a curse for us, but that 
we might be delivered from that weight of sin 
which binds the soul to earth? Would he 
thus have suffered and obeyed, but to restore 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 133 

US to the pure joys of pardon and communion 
with our Father ? Lose not a moment of such 
joy, my sweet friend. You feel the burden of 
sin heavier every moment; fly to the cross, 
cast it there, and let that sin-defiled heart be 
washed in that cleansing stream, and there 
seek the promised Spirit to enable you to soar 
towards heaven, to take up your cross, to mor- 
tify self and sin, and to fix your eyes on 
'Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith.' 
Keep his example ever in view for your guide ; 
his cross to remind you of the price of your 
redemption, and your obligation io devote to 
him what he has purchased there. And as 
his Father's glory was his undeviating pursuit 
while working out our redemption, so be it 
yours, as one who reaps the benefit of it 
' You are not your own,' remember. Grive God 
no rest, dear, till you are in the fold, of Jesus. 
Yield not to the difficulties of prayer. Satan 
will try to present such impediments as will 
provoke you to relinquish it at times ; but you 
must apply all your energies, and constantly 
and perseveringly too. All is at stake; you 
must let nothing interpose between you and 



134 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



heaven. This shall be my prayer for you, my 
child." 

Sufferers had always a large share of sym- 
pathy in the heart of the pastor's wife, and an 
event called forth its expression on behalf of a 
little boy, supposed to be a prince of the Semi- 
nole tribe of Indians. His history is full of 
romantic interest. The following particulars 
were communicated by Dr. Welch, who brought 
him to this country. 

On the 25th August, 1836, a scouting party 
of five soldiers set out from Newnansville, 
Florida, to scour the surrounding country, and 
look out for signs of Indians. Early in the 
morning they disturbed several, who were 
helping themselves to some sweet potatoes in a 
fenced field, belonging to a deserted residence ; 
the Indians took the alarm in time to leap over 
the fence and make their escape, retreating 
over a small stream into the forest, through 
which the soldiers followed the trails of one or 
two a short distance ; they then deemed it 
prudent to return, not knowing the strength of 
the enemy, and again made their way into one 
of the military roads lately made in Florida. 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 135 

where they soon fell upon tracks of the foot- 
steps of an Indian child, rendered distinct by 
rain which had recently fallen ; these they 
determined to pursue, considering" it tolerably 
certain that they would be led thereby to one 
of the encampments of the tribe. Towards 
night-fall they came in sight of the little wan- 
derer, he having in fact lost his way. With 
that quickness of hearing which characterizes 
all creatures in a wild state, he seemed to be 
aware of the approach of his pursuers, for they 
saw him bounding like a fawn to seek the 
covert of the bushes; and there they found 
him concealed in the high grass. 

On being seized, he uttered a scream of ter- 
ror, expecting instant death ; but he soon smiled 
through his fast-falling tears, and in an im- 
ploring attitude held up a peach in his little 
hand, as a ransom for his life! In his flight 
he had passed through a peach-orchard ; not 
having eaten or drank the whole day, he pluck- 
ed a few, and put some of them in the front 
part of his dress. The soldier took the offered 
peach and smiled, then returned it; and taking 
the little fugitive in his arms, mounted his 



136 



MAE.THA SHERMAN. 



horse and placed him behind him. It was 
quite dark before they reached Newnansville, 
where he was taken in charge by one of the 
soldiers for the night, who fed the poor little 
famished prisoner with a bowl of milk, and 
gave him a blanket, in which he wrapped him- 
self after the Indian fashion, and lying down 
before the fire was soon asleep. 

On the next morning, he was brought a pris- 
oner to Colonel Warren, commandant at the 
military station at Newnansville, by whom he 
was given into the charge of James Shields, 
the soldier who took him, and who humanely 
preserved him from a proposal made by his 
comrades to murder him. He seemed to be 
five or six years old; he was emaciated, and 
his appearance indicated extreme suffering. 
For at least three weeks, he maintained nearly 
a perfect silence, and apparently brooded over 
what he felt to be a heavy misfortune. Well 
aware that he was in the hands of enemies, he 
looked cautiously and quickly around, when- 
ever a sound reached his ears, and appeared as 
if watching an opportunity to escape. What- 
ever passed in his infant brain, it was quite 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 137 

clear that he did not contemplate starvation, as 
he ate the bread and milk which was given to 
him, accepting it however with indifference or 
shyness, and again relapsing into liis state of 
sadness when the meal was finished. He was 
never heard to cry, sob, or moan, but generally 
sat on the floor cross-legged, motionless and 
thoughtful, and seemed overwhelmed with a 
melancholy which in one so young was touch- 
ing to witness. 

Instead of sending the child a prisoner to 
head-quarters. Colonel Warren, with commend- 
able kindness and generosity, removed him with 
his family to his country residence, where he 
permitted him to eat, drink, play, and sleep 
with his children ; and although the child of 
their enemies, he soon engaged the affections 
and kindly feelings of the colonel's whole es- 
tablishment. When the colonel returned with 
his family to Jacksonville, the little Indian 
accompanied them, and became the frequent 
visitor of Dr. Welch. He had now acquired a 
sufficient knowledge of English to make him- 
self tolerably well understood ; his health had 
greatly improved, and he had grown a pretty, 



138 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



\nteresting child. Dr. "Welch entertaming great 
sympathy for the little captive, fancying he ob- 
served in him the dawning of good qualities, 
and fearing he would be eventually claimed as 
a prisoner of war, preferred a request to Colo- 
nel Warren, that as he was about to leave that 
part of the country, he would allow the doctor 
to constitute himself his guardian. This re- 
quest was gi-anted, and he came under Dr. 
Welch's protection October 31, 1837. 

No persuasions could induce him to divulge 
his own name, or the names of his family ; but 
when sent to school, the governess succeeded 
ill eliciting from him his own name, Nikkano- 
chee, and that of his father, Econchatti; and 
when asked, on one occasion, if he had ever 
been whipped while in his tribe, he replied 
that his uncle had once punished him with 
small switches to make him walk faster — prob- 
ably when retreating from their enemies ; and 
on being questioned what was the name of his 
uncle, in an instant he answered, "Oceola." 
From this and other concurrent testimony, Dr. 
"Welch believes him to be the nephew of the 
valiant Oceola, who was treacherously betray- 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 139 

ed, and died a captive in the fort of St. Augus- 
tine, in East Florida, and the son of Econchatti 
Mico, king of the Red hills. In consequence 
of this discovery, Dr. Welch added Oceola to 
his acknowledged name of Nikkanochee. It 
soon heeame evident, that being freed from 
military guardianship, the hostility of his white 
neighbors, and the risk of his being claimed by 
the authorities and sent *' west," rendered the 
situation of the orphan boy any thing but se- 
cure. Circumstances transpired to determine 
Dr. AVelch to leave Florida and return to Eng- 
land, where he arrived with his little Indian 
on the 2d July, 1840. 

After his residence in England about eigh- 
teen months, reverses rendered it necessary for 
the doctor to place his young charge in some 
establishment where his education would be 
attended to, and he would be prepared to pro- 
vide for his wants in advancing years; but 
every attempt failed to secure the object. By 
Oceola's repeated visits to Mrs. Sherman, she 
had some opportunities of gaining a knowledge 
of his character and habits, and her sympathy 
and affection were drawn forth to the lad. At 



140 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



length, after much consultation with her hus- 
band, whose sympathy ran in the same chan- 
nel, it was determined to receive him into her 
house, and to adopt and educate him as her 
child. Although many blamed her for incur- 
ring so gi-eat a risk as that of taking a half- 
civilized boy into the family, every step of his 
history hitherto has justified her decision. By 
the liberality of friends who were interested in 
his welfare, Oceola was sent to Mill hill gram- 
mar-school, where he, by his courage and 
amiableness, became a favorite of all the 
scholars. After remaining there two years and 
a half, he. chose the sea as a profession, has 
been several voyages, and maintains a high 
character with his pious captain and ship- 
mates. 

It was very refreshing to see the lively inter- 
est which Mrs. Sherman took in this orphan's 
welfare, with what assiduity she instructed 
him in the principles of the gospel, both orally 
and by letter, and furnished him with comforts 
to which heretofore he had been a stranger. 
He loves her memory; may he yet repay all 
her efforts and prayers. 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 



141 



The year 1843 was distinguished, in her 
estimation, by the marriage of her eldest 
daughter Mary to Mr. Charles Burls, junior. 
The pleasure she took in the preparations for 
that event will not he forgotten by all parties 
interested; especially her anxiety that the cer- 
emony and "the marriage feast" might con- 
tribute something to edification, and convey a 
blessing to alf. Nothing was neglected that 
her taste or etiquette could supply; but the 
great desire of her soul was uppermost, that 
the wedded pair should leave her roof with 
sanctified impressions of duty, and enter upon 
a new career of life under its pleasing and 
solemn responsibilities. Little Oceola, in his 
native dress, and her youngest child Martha, 
then nearly five years of age, led the proces- 
sion from the parsonage to the communion- 
table in the chapel, spreading sweet flowers 
in the way. A large number of Christian 
friends, chiefly relatives, followed, and the sa- 
cred edifice was crowded with an interested 
congregation. The father of the bride con- 
ducted the service, amidst the aspirations of 
many hearts for a blessing on the union ; and 



142 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



after their return to the house, at the request 
of Mrs. Sherman, the Rev. Dr. Morison dehv- 
ered a most appropriate and touching charge 
to the bride and bridegroom, and again com- 
mended them to God. At the feast several 
gentlemen addressed the company assembled, 
and produced on those who waited, as well as 
on those who partook of it, a most salutary 
impression. One person became decided for 
G-od, as the fruit of her prayers and efforts on 
that memorable occasion. 

On the 13th of June, in the following year, 
1844, she gave birth to another daughter, after 
a long season of painful suspension from active 
labor. While confined for months previously 
to a horizontal position, her active spirit direct- 
ed her pen and influence in her great Master's 
cause. Only three specimens pf letters, out 
of great numbers written at this period, will 
now be given ; the first showing the fervent 
desires of her pious heart towards her first- 
born child. 

" Surrey Parsonage, June 4, 1844. 

"My precious Child — Mamma has been 
thinking and talking of you so much, that she 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 



143 



is sure you ought to be a very good little child, 
and let her have nothing but wha.t is pleasant 
to talk about. This time six long years ago, 
you came to mamma, a very little baby, but 
so fat, and looking so grave, as if you never 
meant to laugh. Well, mamma was very 
much pleased that (rod had trusted her with 
a baby ; and before he had done so, when she 
only hoped he would give her one, she used 
TO think, what will that baby be, if it should 
live to be a great woman. Mamma only had 
one wish, and that was that her heavenly 
Father would adopt her child into his family, 
that it might always love and serve him in 
this world, and then go into his family in 
heaven, where it would be with him for ever. 
So as soon as he gave her the little baby, 
mamma gave her to God, to be his own happy 
little child. 

"Now, no one likes to have a naughty, sin- 
ful child in their family ; and God is so holy, 
and .so good, that he has only good children in 
his family. When he receives them, they are 
indeed guilty, sinful children ; but he gave his 
dear Son Jesus Christ to suffer for their sins. 



144 



MARTHA SHERMAN 



and to obey his holy law, which all had broken ; 
and now, when a little sinful cliild wishes no 
longer to grieve him, but to be obedient, and 
holy, and fit for his family, she goes to God by 
Jesus Christ; and when the holy God would 
say, 'I cannot receive that Uttle sinful child,' 
she says, ' No, but Jesus has borne away my 
sins, and honored thy holy law, and for his 
sake receive me, and make me one of thy 
happy and obedient children.' Now, he never 
refuses those who come in Christ's name. 
Jesus pleads for that little child, that for his 
sake she may be accepted. Then the Holy 
Spirit of God performs his part : he takes away 
the little heart that was so fond of sin, and 
makes the dear child give up her naughty 
tempers, and try to be like Jesus. He teaches 
her how to please and serve God, and makes 
her love him more than she ever loved any 
body before. Then every one around her can 
find out that there is a great change in that 
little child's mind. She loves her Bible, she 
loves to pray, and instead of trying to please 
herself, she tries to please God first, and then 
every body around her. If any one is unkind 



BENEVOLENT LABOHS. 



145 



to her, instead of being unkind in return, she 
tries to be more kind than ever to that person, 
because Jesus did so, and tells us to do so. 

"Now mamma wants her dear little Patty 
to enter God's happy family on her birthday. 
She has, many thousand times, prayed that 
you might be there, but she is afraid you are 
not yet, and she wants you to try and to pray 
that Grod for Christ's sake may receive you, 
and write your name, Martha Rose Sherman, 
among the long list of his dear children on this 
your birthday. You would indeed be happy 
then and good, and mamma would never be 
afraid if you should die, because she would 
know you were safe with your Father in heav- 
en. Ask your kind friends who are taking so 
much trouble to teach you, to pray with you 
to-day, that whatever shuts you out of that 
family may be taken away. You love to make 
papa and mamma happy, do you not? Now 
they cannot be so, while they think you are 
not quite sure of going to heaven; you are not 
a babe now, and Jesus tells children that they 
may come to him, and he will guide them 
there. How dreadful must it be, not to regard 

Sherman. 10 



146 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



what such a condescending Saviour says ? Let 
mamma hear, that on your birthday you came 
to Jesus, to make you his own child, and that 
from that day you were always trying to please 
and honor him. Oh, how delighted I should 
be to hear such good news of my own dear lit- 
tle Patty. All send their love and kisses, and 
hope you will live to see many more birthdays, 
and that each one may see you serving and 
loving God : none but God loves you more 
than, 

"Your very affectionate mamma, 

"MARTHA SHERMAN." 

The affliction under which her pious mother 
long labored, sometimes cast a dark cloud over 
a spirit ordinarily happy and well assured of 
its interest in Christ. Her daughter thus com- 
forts her in one of these seasons of dejection: 

"How sweet it is to know that redemption 
and reconciliation are achieved for us, entirely 
independent of any merit in us ; the work is 
complete in itself — it is for us to receive it — • 
and though faith often fails to discern its pos- 
session of the infinite treasure, the faint yet 
unquestionable traces of the slow and gradual 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 147 

progress of the divine image in the soul, in 
which Satan's likeness was once too evident, 
give cause for peace and joy, and the full as- 
surance that He who has begun the good work 
will certainly complete it. My precious mam- 
ma, you cannot look into that mind of yours, 
and say, the improvement and elevation in its 
thoughts, its tastes, its hopes, its desires, and 
the results of those feelings, are but the effect 
of self-cultivation and ordinary enlargement of 
mind. Surely the yearning of the soul after 
God and holiness his own blessed Spirit alone 
implanted there. 

"Oh, that faith were ever in vigorous exer- 
cise — how would it aid us in the struggle 
against Satan without, and sin within. Once 
Satan and sin dwelt together in the heart ; but 
while there is any evidence that God dwells 
there, we certainly know that Satan is expel- 
led; and though his wretched design is to seize 
the opportunity of comparative mental weak- 
ness which disease occasions, to try and regain 
his power, there is One far above him ever 
watching at our side, and when weakest, his 
compassionate heart gives double protection, if 



148 



MARIHA SHERMAN. 



faith's dim eye could but discern it. Ah, my 
own mother, yovir title is clear to me; would 
that mine were but as clear. Could I for one 
moment believe that any part of my salvation 
depended on me, I should for ever despair ; but 
I have the assurance that the provision is en- 
tirely made, and is mine, if I will accept it. 
My confidence is strong that my poor sinful 
heart is 'made willing' by 'His power,' and 
rejoices in every acquirement associated with 
that 'free gift,' and loves more and more the 
spirituality of the law of God, and the glories 
of the divine character, as the feeble rays of 
light from heaven discover them more and 
more to my understanding. Associated as 
these are with a sinful, polluted heart, I dare 
not say I have wrought even the very little 
that is there, which resists that sinfulness and 
abhors that pollution. And surely you have 
evidences of sanctification that my poor mind 
has never even imagined, much less possessed. 
Oh, that this afflictive, but righteous and all- 
wise dispensation, may purge away all remain- 
ing dross, and make you unequivocally reflect 
the lovely image of the Crucified." 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 149 

The next note is addressed to a young friend, 
whose marriage took place on the very day Mrs. 
Sherman's youngest child was born, and shows 
her impressions of the duties of the marriage 
relation. 

"Surrey Parsonage, June 10, 1844. 

" My dear Friend — I cannot anticipate the 
momentous events of Thursday next, and at 
the same time the equally momentous event 
which may previously occur to me, without 
expressing, while I can, my deep interest in 
the results of that anxious day, and my most 
heartfelt and affectionate prayers that you may 
be permitted to be the most happy, useful, and 
honored of wives, and your anticipated hus- 
band prove worthy of his treasure, and be 
equally happy, honored, and useful. The 
Christian's ambition in every new undertaking, 
is to be more devoted, more entirely conse- 
crated to the service of his adored Master and 
Lord ; and I believe you would not have ven- 
tured upon this step, had you not believed that 
such would be the result. May your expecta- 
tions and hopes be far exceeded, through the 
rich blessing of your covenant Grod, and may 



150 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



his smile ever be yours, and his presence ever 
fill your dwelling, while you and yours never 
cease to be ' His habitation through the Spirit.' 

"My dear friend knows that one of the im- 
portant duties of married life is, the cheerful 
sacrifice of self-gratification for the pleasure 
of each other, without allowing the sacrifice to 
be recognized. I have been little tried in this 
respect with my most precious husband; but 
• I never make such efforts without an abundant 
repayment of peace of mind, and, I trust, a 
blessing. Such is perfectly consistent, I think, 
with unflinching decision of character, and 
firm hold of what is right, against every at- 
tempt to draw us aside. Such trials as these 
you are not likely to be exposed to, as my 
friend has chosen a decided disciple of Christ. 
May you be strengthened, on your marriage- 
day, more especially and solemnly to renew 
your consecration to Grod ; this will greatly re- 
lieve the trials of that which was to me a ter- 
rible day. Excuse this rough little witness to 
the sympathy and remembrance of, 
"Your very attached friend, 

"MARTHA SHERMAN." 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 151 

A serious attack brought the newly born in- 
fant very near the borders of the grave before 
it was a month old, and the exercise of her 
faith and patience was not without gracious 
fruit. 

"I am thankful to say I am quite well and 
gaining strength. My precious babe is, I trust, 
out of danger; the improvement since yester- 
day morning is very satisfactory. I could al- 
most fancy the dear skeleton limbs had re- 
covered a small portion of their original flesh ; 
she has been smiling so sweetly this day that 
it seemed to tell of returning health. She is 
so perfectly gentle, and in the midst of severe 
external as well as internal suffering, has ex- 
hibited such sweet placidity, that it has re- 
quired no ordinary strength to say from the 
heart, ' Thy will be done ;' but how often do we 
find that when our heavenly Father calls us to 
a trial we never had before, he gives us grace 
and strength we never knew before. The Re- 
finer never removes his eye from the furnace 
while the needed fire is performing its work; 
the tiny piece of metal was not too small for 
him to care for, when he thought it worth put- 



152 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



ting there; and it is a great comfort in sorrow 
to remember that that sorrow is an indication 
that he is noticing us. Which of his children 
would prefer being unnoticed, rather than en- 
dure the purifying but painful evidences of his 
love and care ? 0, that he might see his own 
image clearly reflected in the unworthy and 
unprofitable heart he has been trying so pain- 
fully but so mercifully." 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 



163 



CHAPTER VI. 

i)EATH OF HER MOTHER —FORMATION OF 
MISSIONARY SEWING SOCIETY. 

Only six weeks elapsed from the birth of 
her child, before she was called to witness a 
long expected and painful event, the death of 
her excellent mother. She had been for years 
the subject of disease, which, while it did not 
lessen her activity, produced such acute suffer- 
ings as drew forth the sympathy of every one 
who witnessed them. Her faithfulness to the 
friends of her early life, her hospitality to the 
servants of Christ, her services for the Re- 
deemer's cause amid much weakneSfe, and her 
devotion to the interests of the poor of the 
neighborhood, have embalmed her name in the 
hearts of those who came within the circle of 
her influence. To her daughter, who priaed 
her judicious counsels as one of her best earth- 
ly comforts, she was very precious. Of this 
event she thus writes: 

"I know you have not forgotten your poor 



154 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



unworthy friend, as she has been passing 
through the deep waters, and the promise has 
not been forgotten by Him who gave it, ' I will 
be with thee.' Such a stroke, before my 
strength was regained, might have been over- 
whelming; but my faithful God sustained me, 
permitted me to cheer the dying hours of my 
sainted mother, and I think to comfort my be- 
loved widowed father. But how shall I leave 
him I His mind shrinks from the idea, but 
home has its duties, and responsible duties 
too. He cannot live in London, I cannot live 
at Enfield. Tell me, my dear friend, what is 
my duty; I have no sweet mother's counsels 
now. I feel I am, indeed, motherless. 0, it 
is a painful loss. I know duty caimot clash 
with duty, but I want discernment to discover 
what is duty, and which path to take. My 
dearest papa cUngs to me so fondly, and is 
comparatively happy while I am with him. 
He has never been separated from my beloved 
mother since his marriage, except for two days. 
You may suppose how desolate he will feel. 
There is One who is 'a very present help in 
trouble;' still, the absence of such a lovely 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 155 

character as he has lost, can never be made 
up in this world. May it endear increasingly 
the privilege of communion with his heavenly 
Friend." 

During the years over which these events 
run, she maintained the even tenor of her way 
in supporting, by her correspondence and active 
exertions, every institution in connection with 
Surrey chapel, and as far as her opportunities 
extended, the cause of Christ generally. It 
often happens that an individual has some 
favorite project, which he advocates to the for- 
getfulness of all others equally useful ; but her 
love to her Lord was of that universal charac- 
ter, that every branch of his cause gained her 
energies, and it only required some warm- 
hearted Christian, who knew the merits of the 
society for which he pleaded, to solicit her aid, 
and her whole soul was immediately thrown 
into the object. Among the letters of this pe- 
riod, numbers were written expressly to solicit 
help for poor ministers of Christ's gospel, and 
for afflicted and impoverished saints : also for 
the London Missionary, the British and Foreign 
Bible, the Christian Instruction, the Maternal, 



156 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



the Dorcas, the Clothing, the Jews, the City 
Mission, the Town Mission, the Irish Evangel- 
ical, and the Colonial Missionary Societies ; 
for the villages around Reading, the Sunday- 
schools, the School of Industry, and the work- 
ing missionary parties, pleas were urged and 
efforts made, as if every thing depended on her 
individual efforts. 

To give her numerous epistles on various 
subjects to her Christian friends, and especially 
to her youthful charge, would swell this vol- 
ume to an immoderate size ; and yet to make 
an extract from any one of them is like taking 
a painting out of its frame, for the purpose of 
exhibiting it, but at the same time conceaUng 
a portion of the subject. 

A young friend, whose heart she had been 
instrumental in bringing to the Saviour, and 
who reminded her of that as the cause of her 
ardent affection, extolling the feeble agent 
more than she thought proper, is thus gently 
admonished. 

"April 19, 1845. 

"I have a perfect horror of attributing any 
good to my own exertions : there is such dan- 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 157 

ger of taking to ourselves what belongs only to 
God. Look at it as you will, the praise must 
be his : if I labor ever so self-denyingly, he 
first put into my heart the motive and the de- 
sire to do so, and he only gives the strength ; 
therefore, if my heart says, 'I brought that 
sinner to Jesus; I helped that follower of the 
Saviour on her way,' I immediately fly to the 
blood of Christ, for pardon for that self-glorify- 
ing thought which my pride and ignorance 
suggested. Ah, it is sufficient honor to be 
permitted to suffer or to work for Christ ; let 
not pride spoil and perhaps deprive us of the 
privilege, by robbing him of his glory. What 
need we have of watchfulness ; how many 
undefended parts are there in the heart ; and 
Satan lulls our suspicions by his plausible at- 
tacks ; therefore, the more devoted we are to 
God's service, the more we have need to watch, 
because his temptations then are not usually 
to open worldliness and evident sin, as those 
are not congenial to a mind that is renewed, 
and therefore would be rejected ; but he tempts 
by means of spiritual things, and makes the 
intended blessing often prove an occasion of 



158 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



sin. So it was with St. Paul : the revelations 
which made Isaiah exclaim, 'Woe is me, be- 
cause I am a man of unclean lips ; for mine 
eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts,' 
proved dangerous to the humility of Paul, to 
counteract which it was needful for him to have 
' a thorn in the flesh ;' and if the holy Paul 
was thus dependent, how much more must 
you and I be ? 0, let us be more constant in 
prayer for that humility, without which we 
are never safe. We must be 'kept by the 
power of God through faith unto salvation,' 
or we shall never ' stand.' " 

A zealous disciple belonging to her class, 
whose usefulness was not small, is guided by 
the following admirable counsels : 

"I long to employ your active mind solidly ; 
I want that tongue to talk indeed for Jesus, 
but I also want that mind and judgment to 
I'emember that ' there is a time to talk, and a 
time to keep silence.' I quite understand your 
feelings, my dear child, for I believe I have 
experienced the same ; but while I would not 
for one moment check or damp your earnest- 
ness, I want you to control it — to keep it un- 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 159 

der right direction — to be prudent, quiet, and 
unobtrusive, as well as zealous and devoted. 
Here is the difficulty, I knovi^, with a warm 
heart ; but you must ' adorn the doctrine of 
God our Saviour in all things ;' therefore, 
'avoid the appearance of evil,' of forwardness 
in talking, as though you thought yourself 
somebody ; this sometimes brings an ill name 
on a youthful Christian, and lessens useful- 
ness. Now, I want you to break off every 
habit that is not calculated to glorify God. 

"If you are a favorite in the class, remem- 
ber this is an additional responsibility, which 
calls for much prayer, lest that which may be 
an instrument of extensive usefulness should 
prove an incentive to pride and glorying in 
yourself. Beware of this, my child : I watch 
you with the deepest' interest, because I see 
■ such excellent materials which God has im- 
planted, not you ; and if not directed wisely 
and by divine guidance, they may do as much 
harm as good. Be much, very, very much ia 
prayer, my dear girl, that you may, step by 
step, be guided by infinite wisdom and love, 
and be strengthened to ' let your light so shine 



160 MARTHA SHJ;RMAK. 

before men, that they may see your good works, 
and glorify,' not you, but 'your Father which 
is in heaven.' Thus the lowly Jesus acted, 
not to be seen of men, not to bring glory on 
his own glorious head : throughout his whole 
history, unwearying, unbroken, self-denying 
labor marked his course ; the love of man's 
undying soul led him through the path of 
sorrow, from the manger to the cross. Now 
his work of atonement is finished ; still, he is 
employed as our Intercessor before the throne, 
and ere long ' all nations shall call him blessed.' 
' The whole earth shall be filled with his glory ;' 
' thrones and dominions, and principalities and 
powers, shall bow before him, crying. Blessing 
and honor, etc., to him that sitteth on the 
throne, and to the Lamb, for ever.' May we 
be among them, is the earnest prayer of 
"Your affectionate friend, 

''MARTHA SHERMAN." 

To another, who objected taking an oath be- 
fore a magistrate, and asked her opinion, she 
writes, 

"The same sacred guide that says, 'Swear 
not at all,' says, 'An oath for confirmation is 



BENEVOLENT LABORS 



161 



an end of all strife.' You are therefore per- 
forming a Christian duty, under these circum- 
stances, in taking the solemn oath that you 
will speak only the truth. The necessity of 
this oath is repeatedly shown in scripture his- 
tory; the interests of a fellow-creature are in 
a degree in the hands of another, in such a 
case, and it is necessary to secure even a guilty 
person from false accusation and misrepresen- 
tation ; and as there are certain regulations for 
all classes of society, and not a special one for 
conscientious persons, your duty is to 'suhmit 
to the higher powers,' as 'ordained of God.' 
You see this is very different from taking 'the 
name of God in vain.' " 

The next is a note of consolation directed to 
one of her class in the hospital: 

"You remember the beautiful first Psalm; 
the Christian is there compared to a tree that 
brings forth his fruit 'in his season;' he has 
sometimes a time of affliction, then the fruit 
of submission and self-examination is in sea- 
son; sometimes a time of prosperity, then the 
fruit of watchfulness and prayer is in season , 
sometimes a time of temptation, then the fruit 

Sberman. 1 1 



162 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



of faith and close-cleaving to Christ is in sea- 
son; sometimes a time of spiritual indolence 
and self-indulgence, then the fruit of repent- 
ance and self-abasement is in season. At all 
times, faith, repentance, and love are in season ; 
and when they wither, it is evident the tree 
wants watering with copious showers of divine 
influence. Prayer, as in Elijah's case, must 
open the windows of heaven, which have been 
closed, that there may be an ' abundance of 
rain.' Then how sweet to know that the heav- 
enlv Grardener is watchins^ and training this 
little tree : through his intercession, it has not 
been cut down, and his blood has purchased 
the blessings it needs to revive and sustain it. 
May you and I bring forth much fruit to his 
glory." 

A servant who had tasted largely of the 
grace of G-od, longed to become a missionary 
to the heathen; but Providence did not appear 
to countenance the desire by opening a path, 
and she is thvis sweetly instructed : 

'•Surrey Parsonage, Sept. 27, 1S45. 

" My dear Child — I rejoice to hear you have 
obtained a situation, and as I find the class will 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 



163 



not meet to-morrow, on account of the teach- 
ers' meeting, I cannot help writing to you to 
urge upon you the necessity and duty of not 
allowing your burning desire to work for God, 
to interfere with your diligent performance of 
the duties of your present situation. You 
glorify Grod most, by diligently and as in his 
sight performing the duties devolving on you 
in the sphere in which it has pleased him to 
place you. If your heart is so set upon a cer- 
tain way of serving him, that you fail to serve 
him in any other, you prove yourself unfit to 
serve him at all. I long for you thoroughly to 
understand this : you show your love by bear- 
ing, as well as doing his will, and by doing 
whatever he gives you to perform. It may be 
that by thus calling you to a work so different 
from that which you desire, he is proving and 
exercising you, in order to prepare you for 
work of another kind. If diligent in his ser- 
vice, you will be diligent in serving those 
whom he appoints you to serve. If your one 
desire is to please him, it will make you as 
diligent in scouring, dusting, and sweeping, as 
in distributing tracts — as anxious to be as a 



164 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



Christian a pattern of neatness, punctuality, 
and order, in your situation here, as if you 
were a missionary to the heathen ; you will 
labor to work well with your hands, that you 
may be able to work for him in whatever way 
he chooses. 

"This is your school, where you are fitting 
for future life: if inefficient and inferior in 
your services, you are not yet qualified for 
superior work. Get perfect in your present 
occupation, whatever it may be, and this will 
tend to qualify you in body and mind for any 
service to which you may be called. Till you 
perform household duties well, you are unfit to 
be a valuable missionary. But do not press so 
much any particular path. God knows your 
desire, my dear child, and says, 'It was well 
that it was in thy heart,' and if he sees fit, can 
yet give you your wish. There leave it, simply 
seeking to do his will. Do strive to be in every 
way a treasure to your employers. Cultivate 
great neatness and cleanliness in your work 
and in your appearance. All these things are 
pleasing to God, especially when done to please 
him. God abundantly bless and teach you, 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 



165 



and give you your heart's desire to work, to 
live, to die for him, is the prayer of 

"Your affectionate friend, 

"MARTHA SHERMAN." 

The following letter to a young Christian 
who sought her advice, is so excellent that the 
reader would scarcely pardon its abridgment: 

"Surrey Parsonage, March 20, 1845. 

" My very dear Child — Though my time is 
very fully occupied, those are my happiest that 
are my busiest days. Since it is, I trust, the 
supreme desire of my heart to 'do all to the 
glory of God,' to use my tongue, my pen, my 
influence, my all in his service, therefore a let- 
ter to my sweet friend, to help her instrumen- 
tally in her way to ' the kingdom,' comes most 
pleasurably into the employments of this day. 
When I look within, at my own 'exceeding 
sinfulness,' at the little grace, the tiny portion 
of knowledge I possess, the coldness of my 
heart, and its lifelessness in the service of Him 
who gave himself for me, I am ready to say. 
Can I indeed be of the happy number of those 
who 'are bought with a price,' and who there- 
fore are sweetly constrained by the love of Him 



166 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



who bought them, 'to glorify God with their 
bodies and their spirits, which are his?' But 
one look at the cross of Jesus, at the wonder- 
ful union of every attribute of Deity in the 
accomplishment of the redemption of the world; 
makes me feel that, worthless as I am, He can 
save me, and by my salvation glorify his own 
name. And if in my heart, in the midst of all 
my guilt, there is one all-prevailing determina- 
tion to be his, to 'follow the Lamb,' to give 
glory to none but him, he only gave me that 
disposition, mingled as it is with corruption; 
and he who has thus proved the commence- 
ment of his work in me, will assuredly not 
relinquish it, unless I grieve him away by 
neglect and rebellion. And if he have so far 
gained my heart, he will not leave it- thus to 
return to its former rebellion ; his influence 
there will gradually drive out sin, and restore 
his own image. You see I am writing to you 
about myself, but I do so because I think you 
express the same discouragement that I often 
feel, and I would encourage you from the same 
source whence I have been enabled to receive 
comfort. To a mind really thirsting after Grod, 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 167 

I may thus give encouragement ; but to one 
whose indecision, whose efforts to unite the 
service of God and the world, occasion doubts, 
I should write very differently. 

"You ask, 'Does a true Christian ever feel 
disinclination to serve God?' I certainly should 
say, and so would you, the habitual disincli- 
nation must prove an unrenewed mind ; but 
where this is the exception, not the rule, occa- 
sioning bitter grief, humiliation before God, 
and prayerful resistance to it — this certainly is 
consistent with the Christian's conflict with 
sin and Satan. The many blissful anticipa- 
tions of the heavenly world include the per- 
petual service of God, without weariness or 
lifelessness ; and I think that in proportion as 
'we 'grow in grace,' we shall catch more of the 
spirit of heaven in this, as well as in every 
other respect. It is a great stimulus to exer- 
tion to think of heaven — its holiness, its em- 
ployments, and above all of Him who is its 
glory ; this makes me long to begin and prac- 
tise its occupations, however faintly, and to 
seek that others may glorify Him that sits on 
the throne, and share with me the sweet joys 



168 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



of even the baby efforts to serve and praise him. 
0, the very thought of heaven sweetens every 
thing here ; every trial and cross, every event, 
seems sweet from the conviction that all is 
designed to help us on our way thither, to call 
out by test our character, that we may dis- 
cover what we are; to strengthen our 'faith 
and love and every grace' by exercise and 
trial, and to endear to us the price of our re- 
demption, the precious word of Grod, oar guide 
to heaven, and the blessed Spirit who takes of 
the things of Christ and shows them to us. 

"I think it is a great help to the discovery 
of our own character, to cultivate a constant 
habit of self-inspection, asking ourselves our 
motives for certain actions of the day, and our 
reasons for certain shrinkings from duty. Like 
any other habit, it may to a certain extent 
become a form, so that we use it almost me- 
chanically; but supposing this, we yet must 
glean even at the worst some acquaintance 
with ourselves, and some matter for prayer. 
This must not supersede that self-examination 
whi^h should accompany the regular seasons 
for devotion; this habit greatly facilitates it. 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 



169 



leads through the day to mental prayer, con- 
fession, and praise, and affords mu^h help in 
bringing these matters afresh before God, giv- 
ing to him the glory due for assistance in duties, 
as well as mourning over omissions. 

"Keep in mind, dear, that you are Christ's 
servant, and that you have to glorify him not 
only in acts strictly religious, but also by dili- 
gently performing the duties of your vocation, 
whatever it may be. The true leaven leavens 
the whole lump. Religion consists in the 
exercise of holy principles ; therefore no exter- 
nal consecration to the service of God is owned 
of him, if not the result of the hallowed prin- 
ciples which he by his Spirit imparts when he 
regenerates the mind. Now, we can certainly 
by faithful self-scrutiny ascertain what are the 
motives which induce certain conduct, and 
when the affections of the heart towards God 
are cold, and lifelessness robs us of all enjoy- 
ment in duty, still let us equally pursue it, 
guided by the same holy principles, though 
not wafted along by the sweet gales of love. 

"With every Christian while in this world 
there will be great alternations of feeling; but 



170 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



religion itself does not depend on feeling. Of 
course, i^jg exercise is greatly assisted by a 
warm and glowing heart, but the cold day of a 
Christian's life tests the sincerity of his obe- 
dience. If we serve Him, approach him, and 
speak of him only when the heart is warm, 
there is reason to fear the flame of our piety 
may soon be extinguished. But when coldness 
in Grod's service grieves us, or if we cannot 
grieve, that very thing distresses us^ and we 
labor to discover the cause and apply the rem- 
edy — that precious blood which cleanses from 
all sin, and that divine influence which first 
quickened the soul to spiritual life — I think 
,hese are indubitable marks of the. Spirit's 
work on the heart, and of adoption into God's 
happy redeemed family. A deeper acquaint- 
ance with our own hearts, and with Him who 
redeemed us, and a gi'owing conformity to him 
in our whole character and conduct, are evi- 
dences which we cannot question ; they neces- 
sarily include repentance, faith, and love, and 
every other Christian exercise. May you and 
I experience to the full the extent of Christ's 
glorious work, and be strengthened to win all 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 



171 



around us, both by example and effort, ta 
Jesus. 

"Believe me, my sweet child, 
"Your very affectionate friend, 

" MARTHA SHERMAN." 

A young person who had been singled out 
from an ungodly family by the grace of God, 
had become the subject of parental opposition. 
She had arrived at years of discretion, and gave 
no cause of complaint at home, except concern- 
ing the law of her God. Among other annoy- 
ances, she was prohibited by her mother from 
attending any religious services during the week. 
She asks for advice, and is thus instructed : 

"I have consulted with Mr. Sherman, my 
dear young friend, on the subject which occa- 
sions you so much anxiety ; and he is of opin- 
ion that it is not your duty to give up your 
week-day privileges, for these reasons. First, 
the commandment is, to 'obey in the Lord;', 
therefore, when the parental command is to 
abstain from the use of those blessings and 
privileges which God has put within your 
reach, or to do that which is displeasing to 
him, obedience then would not be in the Lord. 



172 



I 

MARTHA SHERMAN. 



Secondly, if no other duty is neglected by your 
attendance at the house of prayer in the week, 
the requirement is unreasonable; therefore, as 
you are of an age to judge what is proper or 
otherwise, obedience to a command which 
arises from improper motives and causes is not 
binding. Thirdly, in the situation in which 
you are placed, where every effort is made to 
destroy the holy principles which the Spirit 
of God has implanted in your heart, you need 
strength and assistance in your Christian 
course from every divinely appointed means ; 
and as God must be dishonored by a lifeless, 
uninfluential profession of his name, it is your 
duty to use every help to prevent dishonoring 
him, and to cultivate that exalted piety which 
shall glorify him continually. This is, I think, 
his candid opinion, and on second thoughts I 
quite agree with him; still, I feel your situa- 
tion is an extremely delicate one, especially as 
reference was made to the fifth command, in 
connection with your profession of religion. 

"I think your resolution should be stated to 
your mother, after much prayer both for your- 
self and for her, and with much Christian love 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 173 

and respect, remembering that obedience is 
required except where the command interferes 
with God's commands; and I would advise 
you to state your reasons for acting contrary to 
her desire. May this severe trial, my dear 
child, be sanctified to you. Your heavenly 
Father would not permit it, were it not neces- 
sary to make you partaker of his holiness. 
Pray to be enabled to view it as the apostle 
viewed all his trials. 2 Cor. 4:17, 18. Look 
through the trial, and beyond it, to its gracious 
design. Be more anxious that it may be sanc- 
tified than removed, and think more of the 
distressing condition of the persecutor's soul, 
than of the distress she occasions you. May 
God give you grace and strength to glorify him 
in the fires." 

Soon after her connection with Surrey chapel 
she induced several young ladies of the con- 
gregation to form themselves into a party, who 
should meet once a month at each other's 
houses, to make fancy articles and useful 
clothing, to be sent out to a selected station of 
the London Missionary Society, either as gifts, 
or to be sold there for the benefit of its local 



174 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



operations. Most of these young persons being 
also members of the monthly Bible-class, they 
had at these meetings, in addition to their 
ordinary spiritual tuition, the presence and 
assistance of their invaluable president, when- 
ever opportunity permitted. Her letters to 
them of various dates and from various places, 
shoAV how much she sympathized in missionary 
eftbrts, and how earnestly she wished a mis- 
sionary spirit, as the result of lively and fervid 
piety, to be manifested among her young friends. 
Two extracts from letters, one without date, 
and the other while residing at Griifenberg, 
exhibit her faithfulness to her Lord, and her 
watchfulness over her charge. 

" The last object of my letter, though not the 
least, was to inquire if it can possibly be true 
that 3'our numbers and your zeal are dimin- 
ishing. I would hope it is a mistake, as I can 
scarcely suppose that when we are called to 
renew our energies in order to meet the increas- 
ing demand for missionaries, to be more earnest 
in prayer, and to cultivate in every way a 
missionary spirit, the young people of Surrey 
chapel are holding back. Nothing would grieve 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 175 

me more than to hear that you are not increas- 
ing in zeal, in numbers, and in spirituality. 
If the cross meet us, and difficulties assail us, 
we must not shrink from either, but bear in 
mind that it is the cause of Christ — of him 
who purchased us with his own blood— in 
which we are engaged, and each must stimu- 
late others, and do all in her power to aid his 
work, and to hasten on the glorious promised 
day when all shall know him from the least to 
the greatest. Be cautious that in your meet- 
ings you never forget the object for which you 
assemble, namely, to aid the missionary cause 
by your industry, and to promote a missionary 
spirit in each other. Gruard against desultory 
conversation, as this will necessarily defeat the 
design for which you meet. May the God of 
love fill you with his Spirit, and grant that the 
love of Christ may constrain you. 

"I write what is nearest my heart, rathei 
than news of this wonderful place, because 
that intelligence you have received from other 
quarters. I have heard with great regret that 
tbe little missionary working party is not well 
attended. Give my most affectionate love to 



17G 



alARTHA SHERMAN. 



the young ladies, and tell them, that if I could 
have hoped to find them all assembled, to con- 
tribute by their industry and by increased ac- 
quaintance with the importance of missionary 
operations, to send the glad tidings of salvation 
to the millions who are perishing in ignorance 
of the only way of salvation, I should have 
said, ' Go on, not mechanically, but as work- 
ing for Him whose cause you are bound by 
every tie to promote.' It is not a matter of 
choice, whether you may or may not unite 
your energies to bring on the promised time 
when all shall know him from the least to the 
greatest, and to send to your perishing fellow- 
creatures the same gospel which, in your hap- 
pier land, is so universally known and pro- 
claimed ; but this is your duty under whatever 
circumstances you may be placed. It is not 
the hard bondage of a slave to a tyrannical 
master : 0, no ; it is the constraining influence 
of the love of Christ, which calls us to remem- 
ber his own words, ' He that gathereth not with 
me scattereth abroad.' 

"The mind in which a hope exists that a 
Saviour's dying love has procured its deliver- 



BENE-VOLENT LABORS. 



177 



ance from the curse of God, and united it to 
him in bonds of hallowed friendship, and that 
believes the satisfaction he has made to the 
divine justice avails for every creature that 
will embrace his salvation, surely such a mind 
must pant to make known the glad tidings in 
some way. However humble the contribution 
be, whether of money, time, talents, or prayers, 
it must be esteemed a rich privilege to have 
any thing to do with the great work. Oh, I 
desire no other influence than that which 
springs from the love of a crucified Saviour. 
Let this love but dwell habitually in the heart, 
and constantly guide its possessor, and I fear 
not the want of a missionary spirit. Let us, 
my dear friend, be more earnest in prayer for 
the reviving influences of the Spirit of God, to 
make us more decided for God, more unflinch- 
ing in our obedience, more established in the 
truth of the gospel. I long for the time when 
my dear young people shall truly be ' living 
epistles, known and read of all.' There must 
be much secret prayer, much devotional study 
of the sacred volume, to discover the glorious 
character of God, and much self-scrutiny, if 

Sheim.n 1 2 



178 MARTHA SHERMAN. 

we would be Christians indeed. How mourn- 
ful would it he, if owned of the church of God 
on earth, but disowned by its great Head. The 
piercing words, ' If any man have not the Spirit 
of Christ, he is none of his ' — ' Without holi- 
ness no man shall see the Lord' — call loudly to 
us to 'examine whether we be in the faith.' 
To be happy Christians, we must be growing 
in 'grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ.'" 

There lies before the writer a heap of notes, 
which, from an ordinary hand, would have 
been mere notices that the meeting was to be 
held at her house, with an invitation to attend 
on the day appointed; but Mrs. Sherman made 
each a vehicle of some important advice, cau- 
tion, or exhortation, adapted specially to the 
case of the young person to whom it was ad- 
dressed, intended to form habits which would 
adorn the Christian lady, while the cause of 
Christ among the heathen was ardently pro- 
moted. One will serve as a specimen. 

" I am anticipating the pleasure of receiving 
the missionary working-party on Wednesday, 
the 27th, when, I trusty my dear young friend, 



BEKEVOLENT LABORS. 179 

nothing will prevent your attendance; and 
may I add, I hope each will be in the dining- 
room at one minute before ten. I love punctu- 
ality, because I think it is among the ' IdVely ' 
things which the Christian is to pursue. God 
is a being of perfect order in all his arrange- 
ments; and in proportion as the power of sin 
is weakened, and the divine likeness progress- 
ing in the soul, we shall find these things rise 
in importance in our estimation, and nothing 
will be regarded as too little to exercise our 
efforts, which may in the tiniest degree ad- 
vance us nearer to the image of Grod. A mind 
that is truly great, spurns not the little things 
which have — as all must have — power to influ- 
ence its habits, and to promote its true loveli- 
ness. Let us, my dear friend, labor after 
eminent Christian consistency, and a close 
walk with God, that we may learn more of his 
character and will, and 'grow up into him in 
all things.' I am very anxious to see more 
fruit arise out of our little party, which was 
designed to promote personal and relative piety, 
as well as a missionary spirit; these objects 
cannot be advanced by merely meeting together ; 



180 MARTHA SHERMAN. 

much prayer must accompany any efforts or 
means, that the blessing may be bestowed. And 
I trust that the spirit of prayer and effort may be 
granted to us all at our anticipated meeting." 

Mrs. Sherman had long felt that this little 
happy missionary party was not sufficiently 
extensive to represent all the females of the 
congregation, and she therefore wished to form 
another, to embrace every class. She believed 
that where fervent piety exists, it will make its 
possessor anxious to save the souls of others; 
and as the miseries and wants of the heathen 
are brought before the Christian, his piety will 
increase, and his sympathy and love be drawn 
out for their deliverance. Her own spirit was 
eminently missionary. 

"I gain much," she writes, "by union with 
the Missionary Society; for what little piety I 
have is greatly increased by the accounts for- 
warded, month by month, of its operations in 
heathen lands. I learn how grace can triumph 
over the most degraded specimens of my race; 
I see how missionaries, my brethren and sis- 
ters, can, amidst privation and suffering wholly 
unknown to us, 'endure as seeing him who is 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 



181 



invisible ;' I behold real religion producing the 
same gracious effects in the untutored savage, 
when it once gains an entrance, as in the most 
refined ; and above all, I have proof furnished 
that Christ confines not the manifestation of his 
love to any particular class of men or station, 
but gives to the barbarian, bond or free, sup- 
port in trouble, comfort strong and abiding, and 
visions of glory which enable them to die tri- 
umphantly. Who can read the accounts of the 
sacrifices which these newly awakened Chris- 
tians make, the persecutions they endure, their 
glorious translations to another world, without 
rejoicing in the sufliciency of the atonement, 
the efficacy of the Spirit's work, and the sure 
foundation laid for the confidence and joy of 
every sinner under heaven? I am sure I love 
Jesus Christ more every missionary meeting I 
attend. I therefore ought to support missionary 
enterprises, because I gain much by them." 

With such views, it will not create surprise 
that she was anxious to promote a similai 
spirit universally among professing Christians, 
and especially among females, that for their 
own sakes they might inculcate on the minds 



182 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



of their children and relatives lessons of love 
to the heathen. Yet she saw and felt the force 
of many objections urged by some whose piety 
could not be questioned, and who had already 
manifested their decided attachment to mis- 
sionary effort. In order to give them an op- 
portunity of stating their reasons against the 
formation of a more indiscriminate assembly, 
and to hear the arguments of others in its fa- 
vor, with her usual prudence she summoned a 
meeting for conference and prayer, the result 
and improvement of which she sent to her 
Sunday afternoon class in the following judi- 
cious letter: 

"Surrey Parsonage, October 18, 1845. 

"I mentioned to you, my beloved young 
friends, that I expected to meet several friends 
on the proposed plan of forming a missionary 
working association for the congregation gen- 
erally, whether young or old, rich or poor, who 
would subscribe to it from a shilling a year 
and upwards. Accordingly, those who were 
against it, as well as those who were for it, 
consulted together, and the friends in favor of 
it succeeded; but as there is, alas, no perfec- 



BENEVOLENT LABORS. 183 

tion here, and the best designs may prove evil 
if not judiciously carried out, I feel particular- 
ly anxious that the objections which have been 
suggested as likely to prevail may be doubly 
guarded against. It is probable that many 
among my dear class may join the society, and 
as I hope I have a degree of influence over 
them, which I have not over others less known 
to me, I am anxious to use that influence to 
guard them against the abuse of that which 
may, rightly used, prove a great privilege. 

"The danger which many friends anticipate 
is, that home duties less agreeable than these 
little meetings will be neglected; that the 
young people will be tempted to leave to their 
mothers the share of domestic employments 
which properly devolves on the daughters, 
whose pleasure it ought to be not only to do 
what they must, but all they can, to help their 
parents. I see how possible it is that this may 
be the case, and therefore warn my dear young 
friends in the class, who know my opinions of 
the fallacy and emptiness of that profession of 
religion which is not accompanied by gTeat 
diligence in every duty of our station. My ob- 



164 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



ject in desiring this society is, that personal 
piety may he promoted, hy a greater acquaint- 
ance with the sufferings and privations of the 
heathen, who are 'without Grod in the world.' 
My plan, therefore, is to keep the subject of 
missions only before us all the time we are to- 
gether ; to meet from five to eight in the even- 
ing once a month; to get a missionary when- 
ever we can; and when we cannot, to select 
reading on the subjects of interest connected 
with the station for which we are working. 
As Christians are to set an example to the hea- 
then, I am very anxious that the needlework 
be good, and worthy of happy English women. 

"The particulars and rules will shortly be 
printed, when you shall see them, and sub- 
scribers be supplied with them. AVe hope to 
commence the first week in January, each 
subscriber to receive a card to bi'ing in as many 
more subscribers to the society, the London 
Missionary Society, I mean, as we can procure. 
I shall be glad if my dear class will make it 
known as far as they can, as I am not sure 
that it can be publicly announced. Now, let 
my dear friends unitedly supplicate a blessing 



iiiiiMK VOliliJN I -LAiSUKS. ISO 

on this new effort to promote a missionary 
spirit among us. In proportion as we grow 
in the divine Ukeness, the objects that are dear 
to the eternal Mind are dear to us. His one 
intense desire is the salvation of a ruined world, 
by sending it the glad tidings that Jesus Christ 
'came to seek and to save that which was 
lost' Let it be our business to carry out this 
object, first by securing the salvation of our 
own souls, then by efforts and prayers for. 
others at home and abroad ; and part of those 
efforts must be the force of a consistent Chris- 
tian example. Such may my dear class ever 
present, that Grod may be glorified." 

This was the last association she was per- 
mitted to establish: her health having declined 
very rapidly from the time of its formation, 
she was not allowed to attend its first, or any 
subsequent meeting; yet .she had the joy to 
learn that a large number joined immediately, 
and that it progressed in usefulness to them- 
selves and the heathen. God give to its mem- 
bers the spirit of perseverance and devotion to 
missionary objects, which their president so 
richly enjoyed. 



186 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE COMMENCEMENT OF HER ILLNESS- 
SECOND TOUR ON THE CONTINENT. 

In the autumn of the year 1845, Mrs. Sher- 
man took a cold, which resulted in a protracted 
cough, and other symptoms of a threatening 
nature. The progress of disease, and conse- 
quent prostration of strength, became so fear- 
fully rapid, that a temporary removal to a 
more genial atmosphere was prescribed by her 
physician. She accordingly went, for a short 
period, to various places in the vicinity of 
London, where she employed her remaining 
strength in seeking the welfare of souls, as the 
following letters disclose : 

To a young lady in delicate health, she 
writes, 

" November 4, 1845. 

"I plead with you to take care of your 
health, that you may have the honor of serving 
God for many years, and not be called in 
youth to bear instead of to do the will of your 



DECLINING HEALTH-JOURNIES. 



187 



heavenly Father. As we grow in grace, we 
prize more our opportunities and privileges, 
and do not sentimentalize on the joys of an 
early removal from this world. When our 
Christian character advances, we shall unceas- 
ingly breathe after heaven, as we catch more 
of the spirit of heaven; but it seems to me 
more heaven-like to seek to 'spend and be 
spent' for Christ here, with the anticipation of 
being at last 'for ever with the Lord.'" 

To another, whose love and kindness she 
much valued: 

"November 21, 1845. 
"Thank you, dear, for the many kind and 
undeserved expressions in your note. I deeply 
feel that I am, and have been a 'cumberer of 
the ground,' and I can only wonder why I was 
planted in so fruitful a soil, where heavenly 
dews and sun abound : where neighboring 
trees yield their luxuriant fruit to the glory of 
the Lord of the vineyard, though all of them, 
even at the best, ill repaying the pains and 
culture he has bestowed. Well may he say of 
me, ' Cut it down, why cumbereth it the 
ground.' Year after year has he gently dug 



188 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



about my roots, with the same instrument 
with which he will, I think, eventually cut 
me down. Yet I cannot imagine wrath in the 
stroke; not in judgment, but in infinite wis- 
dom, and for the rousing and benefit of others, 
that my removal might effect instrumentally 
what my lifeless presence has failed to do. 
Pray for me, my dear friend, that energy and 
spirituality may be produced by the Spirit of 
life in my dead soul, and that my few remain- 
ing days may be really, what my heart has 
desired and professed past days to be, wholly 
and entirely the Lord's. May every blessing 
be yours, and growing devotedness to his lovely 
>cause." 

The kind attentions of many friends in pre- 
paring for her such delicacies as they thought 
her failing appetite could take, drew forth 
many eff'usions of gratitude, such as the fol- 
lowing: 

"37 King's Road, Brighton, Dec. 11, 1845. 

"My dear Friend — "What can I say to you 
for your kind present, received through my 
dearest husband? I greatly feel your affec- 
tionate remembrance of me in my time of 



DECLINING HEALTH— JOUE.NIES. 



189 



affliction — of 'light affliction' indeed; lor there 
is so very much mercy mingled with it, that 
the difficulty sometimes is to know whether 
that can be an affliction, in which faith brings 
me the enjoyment of so many precious things 
as realities which it only recognized before. 
'The things which are seen,' the 'temporal,' 
may be gloomy — they are so, viewed alone; 
but we are not to look at them : that would be 
to complain of the defects of the casket, which 
contained a precious jewel. The ' far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory' is 
wrought by affliction, while we look not at 
the things which are seen, but at the things 
which are unseen and eternal. Who would 
look at the dark cloud, except for the lovely 
rainbow upon it? The bow is not seen when 
the cloud is not there: and what lovely hues 
of His character are displayed, who ' puts his 
bow in the cloud' of our darkest affliction. 
Ah, it is well, if a Father's hand smites. He 
has blessings in reserve, and I will wait and 
hope for them, and welcome health, if he shall 
please to grant me that too. I am weak in- 
deed, physically and spiritually; but while 



190 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



there is the promise of spiritual strength equal 
to my day, I can bear the other cheerfully. 
How I love the dear Surrey people, for their 
kind prayerful interest in one so unworthy oi 
their regard ! With kindest love to your cir- 
cle, believe me, my dear friend, 

"Yours ver}' sincerely, 

'•MARTHA SHERMAN." 

As soon as her illness assumed a threaten- 
ing aspect, which the air of Brighton did not 
remove, the church met to supplicate the Fa- 
ther of mercies to interpose his gracious hand, 
and if it pleased him, to restore her to health 
and usefvilness. The mothers over whom she 
had presided had repeated concerts for prayer, 
and sent her some precious sentiments of sym- 
pathy and love, to which she thus replies : 

"37 King's Road, December 12. 

"My beloved Friend — What can I say in 
return for the kind and affectionate expression 
of the sympathy of the dear maternal band, 
which your welcome letter contains ? I would 
write my sense of it to them generally, but 
the poor mind sympathizes with the body in 
its weakness, and it is a mental effort to which 



DECLINING HEALTH— JOURNIES. 191 

I am unequal ; but you will express for me 
what you know my heart feels, and how 
cheered I am by the kind remembrance of me 
which has been shown by them, in common 
with all the dear church at Surrey. It is 
sweet to find a special errand to our Father's 
throne, and to be borne there by so many Chris- 
tian hearts. I am perfectly amazed at the un- 
merited interest of my dear friends, and it 
humbles me to know how little I have practi- 
cally shown the deep interest I feel in them. 
How little I have improved the many opportu- 
nities of exercising useful influence over them, 
in exciting to more eminent devotedness, and 
to closer walking with God. Ah, my loved 
friend, I dare not say, should my heavenly 
Father restore my health, how different shall 
my future course be, but I would rather plead 
that such a sanctified result of his chastise- 
ment may be granted ; that so I may act, and 
my desires be no longer floating imaginations 
only, but practical, uniform labors, to draw all 
within my reach to Jesus. Surely if the 
prayers of your — our — dear maternal band 
'come up as a memorial before God,' I shall, 



192 



MARTHA SHERSIAK. 



if not restored to bodily health, yet receive 
that measure of spiritual vigor which I so 
much need. May the dear hearts that remem- 
ber me be ever on the heart of our adorable 
Intercessor before the throne, and all meet him 
there, to unite in one song for ever." 

In reply to some kind and anxious inquiries, 
she thus addresses one of her father's servants. 

"December 18. 1845. 

" I am much obliged for your kind anxiety 
on my account. How delightful to know in 
whose hands my life and health are. Who 
can be anxious in such hands ? I cannot wish 
any other appointment than his own. Reports 
from Surrey say my illness has already been 
blest to many, in rousing them to more prayer 
and diligence. Is it not then worth while to 
suffer, if God be glorified by it? While others 
are being watered by it, pray for me that my 
own vineyard may not miss the heavenly 
shower, and perish in barrenness and fruitless- 
ness." 

A young lady, a member of one of her class- 
es, had gathered around her a number of Jew- 
ish children, to whose instruction in useful and 



DECLINIKG HEALTH— JOUUNIES. 



193 



relio^ious knowledsfe she devoted herself. Mrs. 
Sherman took the deepest interest in this class, 
first from a special love to the children of Is- 
rael, and next from the indefatigable zeal and 
perseverance which prompted her young friend, 
amidst great difficulties and discouragements, 
to proceed in her work of faith. She thus en- 
courages her: 

" December 24, 1845 

" I think you have no reason to be cast down 
about your dear Jews. Think what they were, 
what they now are, and what they are likely 
to become, through the influence of the prayer 
of faith accompanying the valuable ijistructions 
already imparted. It is neither the planter nor 
the waterer, but th^ Spirit which you seek, that 
shall take the veil from their hearts. I often 
think the efforts for them are like one expect- 
ing the rising sun. While gazing and watch- 
ing for the lovely and much-desired orb, his 
eyes get dazzled with the brightness of the 
clouds which give promise of his rising. He 
watches till he can watch no longer, and turns 
his eyes to objects less brilliant, but nearer at 
hand. While he is thus engaged, the sun rises, 

Sherman. 1 3 



194 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



but he sees it not till the warmth and bright- 
ness it diffuses rouse him to turn again and 
Irtok. So we wait and pray for Israel's salva- 
tion, but again and again are disheartened, 
because the bright promises which first encour- 
aged us to pray and watch, yet remain unful- 
filled, though the voice that spoke them as- 
sures us they certainly shall be performed ; and 
while our unbelief leads us often to turn our 
eyes to more tangible and visible fruits, or 
prospects of fruits, the event occurs, the veil 
is removed from their heart, and we perceive 
it not, till the sweet results of Israel's turning 
to the Lord gladden the whole world. 

"You have watched long for the answers to 
our united Thursday praj«ers for your little 
class, and your dear heart seems failing, just 
at the moment when the improvement and the 
remarks of the children seem to indicate a 
state of mind preparing to welcome Christ, 
the once-despised 'Nazarene,' as their Saviour. 
Be not discouraged, dear: expect great things. 
One converted Jewish child may be one of the 
instruments God shall employ. 'A nation 
shall be boTn in a day.' G-o on, my beloved 



DECLINING HEALTH— JOURNIISS. 195 

girl, and expect to see those children in heav- 
en; then I believe you will labor more diligent- 
ly and pray more fervently for them." 

The following extract shows the heart of the 
mother — the loving, praying, believing mother ; 
"The dear children are remarkably well, and 
baby the very best baby that can be. I never 
saw so good a child. I trust she will grow up 
as good as she now is. Perhaps I may not 
live to see her a woman, but I believe she will 
be owned of Him to whom she was given long 
before she was born; and if he take her up 
as David says, I need not fear, if I go home 
first, but my children will follow me in due 
time." 

The following note, written in pencil in a 
small memorandum book, exhibits the calm 
resignation of her spirit to the will of God, 
and the rich enjoyment she possessed of his 
gracious presence. 

"February 10, 1846. — Left dear Surrey for 
Ventnor, by the advice of Sir J. Clark, Drs. 
Latham and Chambers. Felt it a trying de- 
cree, but much relieved by the confidence that 
a loving Father saw it best for me ; no severe 



196 MARTHA SHERMAN. 

chastisement of an angry Grod, but a Father's 
needed discipline. Much cheered hy his deal- 
ings — taking so much trouble with me, to pre- 
pare me for the enjoyment of himself on earth, 
and at last in heaven, where the service and 
worship shall no more be impeded by disease 
and weakness. I would record my enjoyment 
in the chair on Ryde pier; I thought, perhaps 
as silently, but unconsciously, I might be 
borne back again, no more to see my beloved 
earthly home, but to be laid by my dear moth- 
er's side, to await the voice of the archangel; 
yet felt satisfied that if it were so ordered, it 
would be better and more for God's glory that 
it should be so: therefore, checked the rising 
thought of those whose dear hearts might de- 
sire my stay, and who seem to need it. That 
is not necessary which God withdraws in 
love." 

The last private record which she permitted 
to be preserved, immediately follows the pre- 
ceding. 

" February 12. — Dear husband left. Watch- 
ed the coach with its beloved passenger to the 
top of the hill at Bonchurch, and committed 



DECLINING HEALTH— JOUE.NIES. 



197 



him to Him whose word is enough for his pro- 
tection. Took a solitary walJi to divert my 
mind ; ' most lovely scenery. He who created 
the hills is my Beloved and my Friend. Saw 
a poor Jew, and longed to speak to him, but 
could not with my respirator, yet enjoyed 
prayer for him. 'Lord, let a Saviour's blood 
be on him, not as a curse, but as the blood of 
the Lamb of G-od, which taketh away the sins 
of the world.' " 

"I hope to form a maternal association in 
this room in a few days; I am quietly work- 
ing at it. The great difficulty is to find some 

suitable person to superintend it. Mi's. 

has been suggested, but she is neither a mother 
nor motherly. The tradesmen's wives are quite 
encouraging in their response to the proposition, 
and I think it would much promote union and 
love, as \Afell as piety, in the congregation. 
Pray for me, my dear friend, that I may be 
.guided and assisted in the little effort." 

One day, while resting on a stUe near Bon- 
church, a young widow passed, and by her 
appearance indicated that she had not long 
known that mournful condition. Pity instant- 



198 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



ly moved the heart of Mrs. Sherman towards 
the disconsolate stranger, whose inquiry re- 
specting her health afforded the pastor's wife 
an opportunity for ' further conversation. In 
the melting tones of her tender voice she ex- 
pressed her sympathy for the recent loss and 
present circumstances of the widow; which 
seemed to meet the desires of a heart longing 
to tell its griefs to the benevolent mind, of 
whose kindness the soothing words that fell 
from those gracious lips were the evidence. 
This is her deeply interesting recital of the 
event : 

"I walked this morning alone to Bonchurch, 
and felt very tired ; seeing a stile rather farther 
on, I sat there. As I rested I thought how 
humbling it was to be literally disabled by my 
respirator from speaking to any of the poor I 
met. WhUe trying fo get some useful lesson 
from it, a widow and child, whom I had not 
seen before, came up, and seeing me, kindly 
inquired after my health. After a few general 
observations she was moving on, saying, as she 
bowed her leave of me, ' It must be a trial to 
you to be alone in Ventnor.' I simply replied^ 



DECLINING HEALTH— JOURNIES. 



199 



' Your trial is greater than mine ; but if we 
botli know and love Him who tries us, our 
trials will be sweetened, will they not?' She 
imnediately said, 'Oh, that is what I want to 
understand.' I asked permission to join her, 
as she was going home, and I shall not soon 
forget that walk, the eagerness with which she 
soaght instruction, and the liberty that was 
giVen me in placing the gospel before her. I 
believe my respirator helped my freedom, and 
I seem now quite satisfied that God has given 
me something to do here, worth all the trial of 
coming. 

" She begs that I will allow her further con- 
versation another day, which you may be sure 
I will. Indeed, it seemed altogether so ar- 
ranged, and so timed, that I cannot but hope 
an unseen hand directed us to meet. You will 
entreat for her and for me, that I may be as- 
sisted to guide her, for she seems very igno- 
rant, though, as she says, ' longing to be con- 
verted ;' and that her heart may be opened to 
receive the truth in its sweet simplicity. I am 
much interested in the servants, too; I hope 
to get at them thoroughly soon. I have had 



200 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



much conversation with one, and I believe she 
feels some interest. God meant more in send- 
ing me here, and in trials generally he intends 
more than individual benefit. It is for us to 
watch his working, that we may work with 
him and promote all the objects he designs. If 
I may but help another to heaven, I shall not 
think it so painful to be separated from my . 
dear home.'' 

Finding her message acceptable, she follow-, 
ed up this first interview by successive meet- 
ings, in which she endeavored to explain to her 
willing disciple "the way of Grod more per- 
fectly." 

"I am increasingly interested in my widow; 
she usually spends from seven to eight in the 
evening with me ; think of us then. I am en- 
deavoring to instruct her thoroughly in the 
great doctrines of the gospel, for I fear unless 
her mind as well as her heart is influenced, the 
snares around her will prove sadly injurious. 
Every truth is new, and she drinks in instruc- 
tion with great delight." 

She made this widow's case a subject of en- 
treaty with God, that he would be pleased to 



DECLININa HEALTH— JOURNIES. 201 



compensate the loss of her creature comfort, 
by taking up his residence in her heart. She 
wrote to several of her friends to engage their 
prayers on behalf of the "hopeful inquirer," 
and commended her to Christians in the 
vicinity, entreating them to watch over the 
buddings of piety which had begun to ap- 
pear. Mrs. Sherman was soon convinced, that 
repentance for sin, especially for neglected op- 
portunities and faith in Christ, though "as a 
grain of mustard-seed," existed in that spirit, 
whose previously unfriendly habits and present 
hinderances to decision rendered her, to all hu- 
man appearance, a most unlikely person ever 
to taste of gospel privileges. A period of two 
years confirmed the accuracy of her judgment; 
and a short time before her death, she "be- 
queathed the widow's soul as a legacy" to a 
Christian friend, to be watched over and trained 
for God. Subsequent events have brought her 
to London, where she is associated as a mem- 
ber with the church of Christ at Surrey Chapel, 
and walks before God to the comfort of her 
pastor's heart, as a living memorial of the 
precious saint who won her soul for Christ, and 



202 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



a striking illustration of the fact, "Blessed are 
ye that sow heside all waters." 

Her conversation with the servants, and her 
affectionate liindness for their immortal inter- 
ests, so won them that they solicited the privi- 
lege of attending the family service. "I have 
at last found courage to allow the household 
to he present at family worship, when I am 
alone. They always unite with us when Mr. 
Sherman or papa are here; hut till lately I 
only allowed nurse to come in. We now as- 
semble eight, including the waiter. I never 
previously prayed hefore a man, except in the 
cottages of the poor, and I feel it to he a great 
effort; but "the desire on their part to be pres- 
ent, convinced me that I should think of no 
impediment." 

As soon as Mrs. Sherman was informed that 
a small debt encumbered the chapel at Vent- 
nor, with a countenance beaming with benevo- 
lence and decision, she said to her husband, "I 
will try and comfort the dear man's heart, by 
attempting its removal." "Weak as she was, 
she wrote a note every day to some liberal 
Christian, and pleaded with others, from whom 



DECLININa HEALTH— JOURNIES. 



203 



she never had a denial, and in less than a 
month the whole amount required was paid. 
Never can her husband forget the moment 
when he accidentally disturbed her in her 
room, kneeling before a chair on which she had 
placed the money thus collected, begging God 
to accept the offerings of his servants, and 
thanking him for employing her in its collec- 
tion. 0, it was a lovely sight to behold both 
the contributions and the efforts, which were 
great in her state of weakness, alike conse- 
crated to God. Let the contributors to that 
fund be assured that, ere this, good interest 
has come to them from heaven through her 
prayers. 

She thus describes the state of her health: 
"Well, I suppose I must say something about 
myself: I am decidedly stronger; I keep out, 
walking, standing, leaning against posts, sit- 
ting, sauntering, or riding every bright Jay, 
and we have had two days only that were not 
so. My cough is generally much as it was; 
two days this week my old symptoms of ex- 
haustion and sickness have thrown me back, 
but I hope soon to regain lost ground. My 



204 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



heart yearns to speak to the poor invalids I see 
here; I long to know where is their hope, and 
whether I could help to point them to Jesus. 
My respirator is a great impediment, because 
it is as difficult to be heard as to speak." 

To a young friend in the north, in whose 
honored family she had occasionally taken up 
her abode, she addressed the following letter, 
as an answer to objections and difficulties 
arising from a want of assurance: 

'•January, 1846. 

"You have been very much in my heart 
since I received your letter two months since ; 
but my ability to write where any effort is 
requisite, has been so feeble that I have defer- 
red, hoping for better days ; but my weakness 
and cough remain, and therefore, in spite of an 
empty mind, I am going to try to answer you. 
A conversation only could properly respond to 
your note, because, like all in your state, there 
is a mixture of complete contradictions — not 
loving Jesus, yet longing to be like him — lov- 
ing sin, yet aiming at perfection. Now, my 
sweet child, one thing is certain — that no con- 
flict begins in the soul till the Spirit of God 



DECLINING HEALTH— JOURNIES. 



205 



begins to work; therefore set this down at 
once, that these desires after G-od are not pro- 
duced by your own sinful nature. To dis- 
courage you in your path to the kingdom, the 
enemy of souls is perpetually throwing temp- 
tations in your way to make you stumhle, and 
if he can succeed, to induce you to give up 
entirely so difficult an effort. Remember, the 
Christian life is one of conflict and of faith. 
Joyful indeed would any Christian be without 
the trial of faith; but would this glorify Grod? 
No; Christian assurance is the result of close 
walking with God, by simple unshaken faith 
in his word. You are to commit that naked, 
guilty soul to him, to be saved in his own 
way; you are to expect, nay, to receive salva- 
tion, because the offer of it is made to you. 
God has proved his entire satisfaction in the 
work of his beloved Son, by raising him from 
the dead, and seating him at his own right 
hand in glory, as the Intercessor. The work 
of redemption therefore is complete, and now 
the gospel is sent into the world, inviting every 
creature to receive it, because God is 'just, and 
the justifier of him that believeth.' Take God 



206 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



at his word, and accept salvation, and the fruits 
of faith must follow. 

"You must not be discouraged because of 
your many falls and broken resolutions; look 
up cheerfully to Him who promises strength 
to the faint and 'help to the weak.' Keep a ^ 
steady purpose, in most entire reliance on di- 
vine strength and 'the supply of the Spirit of 
Jesus Christ,' and do not stop to look how 
many times you have fallen, but pursue your 
way ; exercise constant repentance and simple 
trust in a faithful Friend; forget the things 
which are behind, and press forward to those 
which are before; tarry not in all the plain, 
but press onward, onward, onward. Thank 
him for every thing you discover of a hopeful 
character; give him the glory, and this will 
greatly encourage you. Do not be idle; you 
will never get on if you are. Your time be- 
longs to God, your talents are his, and for him 
they must be employed. Ask, 'Lord, what 
wilt thou have me to do, and show me how to 
do it; open a way for me, that to thee I may 
render of thine own.' Be much in prayer and 
in prayerful study of the word of God. Use 



DECLININO HEALTH— JOURNIES. 207 



Grod as a friend, and you will soon write cheer- 
ily. If my poor mind can at any time help 
you, or' if I have not caught what you meant, 
do use me, and let me know; I may not be 
able to write immediately, but I will when I 
can. I fear I must at least wait till the spring 
for brighter days, but I am most happy ; I love 
the hand that smites, and I cannot shrink at 
His gentle touch. "With much love to your 
dear circle, I am, ■ 

"Your truly attached friend, 

'■M. SHERMAN." 

As the summer advanced, more strength was 
gained, the cough seemed greatly subdued, and 
hope was entertained that even now her life 
might be given to her family and the service of 
her Lord. "Prayer was made without ceasing 
by the church" for her, and all her friends 
were strengthened to continue in supplication 
by the pleasing indications of recovery. The 
Countess Von Reden of Buchwald, in Silesia, 
Prussia, was exceedingly anxious that a change 
of scene and air should be tried, and sent her 
a most affectionate invitation to visit her hos- 
pitable mansion, and try her maternal superin- 



208 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



tendence. Her physicians thought the plan 
desirable, now her powers were recruited, and 
advised an immediate departure, while the 
brightness of the summer lasted. 

During this second tour on the continent of 
Europe, undertaken now for her own benefit, 
she was no less assiduous than in her days of 
health in employing her energies for the ad- 
vancement of truth and piety among her fellow- 
men. She did not avail herself of the excuse 
which her declining strength might have fur- 
nished for a self-indulgent relaxation in her 
efforts for others. The dictates of a heart filled 
with love to God and man were heeded by her, 
rather than the promptings of a diseased and 
decaying body. 

As on her former tour, she wrote minute and 
highly interesting records of the various objects 
of interest which she met; and many a circum- 
stance which an ordinary observer would fail to 
notice, was to her active mind a connecting link 
between her heavenly Father and his child, and 
suggestive of some thought tending to purify and 
elevate her character. She returned to England 
in September, after an absence of two months. 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 209 



CHAPTER VIII. 

VISIT TO ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 

The continental tour and the visit to Silesia, 
referred to in the preceding chapter, greatly- 
improved Mrs. Sherman's general health, which 
for some time after her return was sustained, 
to the astonishment and comfort of her friends. 
Hope, naturally buoyant in her cheerful tem- 
per, became lively and vigorous. Her recovery, 
before encompassed with uncertainty, she now 
anticipated with confidence, and told her hus- 
band, in cheerful accents, that as she felt bet- 
ter than for months previously, she was assured 
the Lord would again permit her to labor in his 
vineyard. Her cough however had never been 
effectually subdued, and as the winter advanced 
began to show fearful symptoms of increased 
violence. At the commencement of the year 
1847 the strength previously gained declined, 
and the appetite, which had been remarkably 
renewed, rapidly failed. 

Though the parsonage is situated very favor- 

Sherman. "I 4 



210 



ilARIHA SHERMAK. 



ably for a consumptive patient, being protected- 
entirely fron:i the north and east, it was thought 
by her physician that the atmosphere of London 
aggravated her disease ; therefore, as a change 
for the invalid, rather than with any expectation 
of permanent amendment, he ordered her for a 
few weeks to her father's residence at Enfield, 
where every attention that love could invent 
was paid to the precious saint. Here, spas- 
modic attacks of coughing, which were enough 
to excite sympathy for the patient, cheerful 
sufferer in the coldest heart, produced dreadful 
exhaustion and brought her very low. Yet 
she rallied again and again, and it appeared for 
a few days as if the symptoms had taken a 
favorable turn, and that, notwithstanding all 
she had suffered, she might hereafter again 
"work the work of the Lord." She was not 
wholly deprived of attending worship on the 
Sabbath; occasionally in the morning or after- 
noon, she ventured among the assembled saints, 
and ate with a keener spiritual relish the bread 
that came down from heaven. But even a 
short service was more than her enfeebled 
strength could sustain without increased suffer- 



AT ST. LfEONARD'S AJNi) HASTINGS. 211 

ing; and often has her determination to go 
" where Grod dwells" cost her the sacrifice of a 
night's rest and much bodily comfort. Still, 
what relative could authoritatively interpose 
or resist the touching I'emonstrance, '"Let me 
go, I may not worship with you long on earth ; 
and if I do suffer a little more in my body, my 
spirit is refreshed with the dews which fall on 
Zion's hill; 0, it is good to be there." 

Rather than attempt to describe the state of 
her mind, and its gracious employment, it 
will be preferable to show both in some portions 
of letters which she wrote at this period. 
These will prove how near the verge of heaven 
her spirit lived, from whence she derived her 
solid peace, and how intent she was on serving 
her incarnate Lord through the remaining days 
of her suffering existence. That she might not 
appear to be wholly separated from her Sab- 
bath-class, a lady who had occasionally assisted 
her, when necessitated to leave home, kindly 
undertook to superintend it on her behalf; but 
sickness in her friend's family compelled her 
absence from London for a season, and finally 
from the neighborhood of Surrey chapel. Just 



212 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



at this time, and when she felt her resumption 
of its duties was hopeless, the kindness of her 
heavenly Father appeared in sending to her 
Miss Neele, a valued friend with whom she 
had been on terms of intimacy from childhood, 
to take charge of the education of her two 
daughters. She entered the family a few 
weeks before Mrs. Sherman's tour to Silesia, 
and when she returned undertook to instruct 
the class for a few Sabbaths; but her labors 
proving very acceptable to the pupils, at the 
request of Mrs. Sherman, seconded by the class, 
she consented to become its permanent instruct- 
ress. Her Sunday-class being thus happily 
provided for, a great burden was at once re- 
moved from her mind, while by their teacher's 
residence with her, she was still able to main- 
tain communication with them. 

Although her young ladies' class required an 
effort only once a fortnight, her failing strength 
would not permit her longer to indulge the 
pleasing expectation that she might resume its 
duties ; and it became her anxiety and prayer 
that some efficient and cultivated teacher might 
be found for that also. At the beginning of 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 213 



Ihe year 1847 Mrs. Field, a lady well qualified 
for the undertaking, cheered her heart by sig^ 
nifying to the exhausted invalid her acceptance 
of the office. Her joy at this announcement 
will be best told in her own language : 

" January 9, 1847. 

"Many are the instances in which your 
kindness, my beloved friend, has revived my 
heart; but as 'a friend in need is a friend in- 
deed,' you have specially cheered my mind, by 
its unexpected relief from the burden of my 
beloved Bible-class. Long have I desired and 
coveted your valuable aid, but your own deli- 
cacy of health made me shrink from suggest- 
ing any plan that would make demands on 
your strength; but your dear, kind heart has 
anticipated my wishes, and I tender you the 
overflowings of mine in gratitude and love. 
My dear husband fully intended to take charge 
of the class when this year opened ; but the 
state of his chest and of his general health, for 
some weeks, made me think it quite improper 
and even perilous for him to attempt any ad- 
ditional exercise. 

"My grief over that dear class, so much 



214 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



needing assistance, and the hope of resuming 
my place among them being so continually- 
disappointed by the recurrence of old evil 
symptoms, whenever I encounter the slightest 
exertion and excitement, have perhaps aggra- 
vated the trial of banishment from my loved 
place among them. I wish you, my dear 
friend, the same rich enjoyment I have expe- 
rienced in meeting them ; for though physically 
there was rather suffering than enjoyment, my 
nobler part has been often refreshed in the 
feeble, broken effort to draw them near to 
God. I have struggled long with my con- 
sciousness of utter inefficiency for so respon- 
sible a position; now my heavenly Father is 
trying and proving me, whether I would serve 
him or not. 

"Ah, my beloved friend, none but One can 
sympathize with my feelings, in being thus 
step by step, removed from the scenes of rich 
privilege, in which my whole soul has long 
luxuriated, and enjoyed such rich manifesta- 
tions of my Father's condescension and love. 
Why was I permitted to taste the dear cup of 
hallowed joy, so utterly unworthy as I am of 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 



215 



the least notice of my Father's eye ? "Why 
was the cup taken from me, just as I was 
increasingly realizing the happiness of being 
nothing — less than nothing — that God might 
be ' all in all.' It sometimes seems as if it was 
a stroke of his wrath, and while I am over- 
whelmed that his mercy ever reached my guilty 
soul at all, I catch myself continually asking, 
'Wherefore dost thou contend with me?' He 
has brought me so to love him that I am ready, 
I think, to feel 'He doeth all things well;' and 
if he leave me without usefulness or influence 
all my remaining days, it must be for some 
infinitely wise purpose, though hidden from me, 
and contrary to his ordinary method; for he 
surely must be more glorified by the increase 
of my influence, if he sanctify its exercise, than 
by its removal. I am willing, more than 
willing, to be entirely at his disposal, to be 
nothing in the esteem of others, if he be but 
glorified. But is it not mysterious, that in the 
flower of my days, and just arriving at the age 
when, if ever, some degree of wisdom may be 
anticipated, and delighting in every thing in 
proportion to my ability to communicate my 



216 



MAETHA SHERMAN. 



enjoyment to others, I am thus suddenly ar- 
rested in my course? My weakness last win- 
ter prevented all such gloomy musings; but 
the great improvement in my general health 
since my journey, seemed to encourage every 
hope that I might again do as in former happy 
days. But every attempt proves my mistake, 
and sends me back to my closet, to ask that 
resignation which surely I must want, or I 
could not feel so discouraged. Forgive me for 
thus pouring out my heart's grief to you. I 
know you will pray for your unworthy friend, 
as well as so substantially help her." 

One of the members of the church had been 
most unjustly subjected to a criminal prosecu- 
tion, in consequence of the unexpected death 
of the person to whom his kind offices were 
gratuitously rendered. "Weak as she was, she 
would send the following testimony of her sym- 
pathy to his wife : 

"Clay Hill, Enfield, February 1, 1847. 

"I fear you are in anxiety, and I must send 
my paper representative to assure you, dear Mrs. 

L , how truly and heartily I sympathize 

with you and your good husband under this 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 217 



unexpected trial ; for though human syinpathy 
can nf itself do little, it is sometimes cheer- 
ing to know that every Christian sympathizer 
contributes his or her mite to 'open the win- 
dows of heaven,' that ' a blessing may be poured 
out;' and you have many such sympathizers 
at Surrey. When God is about to answer a 
prayer which has long appeared to be unheed- 
ed, he often seems to be sending only judg- 
ments and wrath, raising enemies in return 
for kindness, and crossing our best and most 
hallowed purposes. We are so slow to com- 
prehend our Father's methods of disciplining 
his children, and so unwilling to work with him 
in accomplishing his designs, that we are some- 
times ready in our hearts, if not with our lips, 
to join with Jacob in saying, ' All these things 
are against me.' 

"But, my dear friend, this present trial is 
not more mysterious than Jacob's; all was 
overruled in his case for good, and I am per- 
fectly confident that God's design in your case 
is for your advantage. How many have been 
led to pray for you, who but feebly remem- 
bered you before. Has it not led both you and 



218 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



your hustand to cast yourselves more simply 
on Him who has all hearts in his hands ? Has 
not the unchangeable faithfulness of God been 
endeared in contrast with the malice of man? 
The consciousness of integrity in your hus- 
band's mind must be very consoling; the con- 
viction that, however hateful the circumstances 
of this trial are to the divine mind, yet, that 
while his love permits them, he has entire 
authority over them, so that they cannot do 
more than he allows, is the sweetener of the 
most bitter sorrow. 

"'Look not,' my dear friend, 'at the things 
which are seen' and 'temporal,' but 'at the 
things which are unseen and eternal ;' so, ' our 
light affliction worketh for us a far more ex- 
ceeding and eternal weight of glory.' Look 
through the dark cloud to Him that sits on his 
throne, who makes the clouds his chariots of 
love to draw you nearer to himself; behold him 
in his ways till you love him and all his deal- 
ings, however painful, confident that ' He that 
spared not his own Son ' will ' freely give us 
all things,' whether trial or prosperity, that 
shall tend to our complete and fi.nal redemption. 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 219 

• He loves too much to spare the rod when 
needed, and he strikes because he loves and 
'cares for you.' In his hands leave this week's 
results; he will never betray you. Excuse 
this note, which an anxious and sympathizing 
heart dictates." 

It was her habit on the return of her wed- 
ding-day to review the providences which had 
attended her useful course. A note bearing 
date March 3, 1847, alludes to this event, and 
exhibits how well her mind was disciplined to 
endure and even welcome her altered condition, 
which contrasted so painfully with that of for- 
mer years. 

"If you are in London, my dear friend, do 
try to come and cheer me with your presence 
at the maternal-meeting here on Monday; it 
always delights me to see you, but especially 
when I feel unequal to exertion, and must fall 
back upon my kind friends. Several fresh 
members have joined us lately, and I am 
anxious to secure the assistance of those who 
can speak to good purpose, which you know I 
think you do. I am indeed a poor creature 
now, more so than ever ; and am called to give 



220 



MARTHA SHERMAJT. 



up to other and far more efficient hands the • 
little objects which have so intensely interested 
me. Twelve years of peculiar happiness I have 
passed this day with my beloved husband; it 
is the first wedding-day that has transpired 
without bright hopes of increasing activity and 
usefulness; but I am now bidden to 'stand 
still,' to wait, to submit, and to yield such 
hopes to others. I feel, however, it is right, 
and I do not in my heart desire any other ap- 
pointment ; my flesh sometimes does, but though 
a painful discipline, it is quite enough for me 
that I am in my Father's hands. This sUences 
every rebellious wish, and I hope soon to recog- 
nize submission as more congenial than that 
activity which I once so much enjoyed. I 
want to know no will but his ; quietly and 
cheerfully to sit in sUence, and learn the great 
lessons which he has given to qualify me for 
the enjoyment of himself, and to promote his 
own glory." 

To another of her friends whose attentions to 
her diet were never-failing, she thus replies • 

"Again must I thank you, my very kind 
friend, for the repetition of your affectionate 

* 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 221 



remembrance, and for its extension to my little 
Patty. I can only regard you as a 'minister- 
ing' body, as well as 'spirit,' if I am not pre- 
sumptuous in the humble hope that, 'through 
Him that loved' and 'washed' me, I am 'an 
heir of salvation,' to whom those blessed ones 
are sent to minister. He who commissions 
them is indeed the source of 'every good and 
every perfect gift.' I bless him for making 
your heart the kind well of mercy it is — you 
will give him all the glory ; and I bless you 
for the sweet overflowings of that heart to me, 
which inclines you in all things to do his will, 
and to make others happy. I disobey you by 
writing, but I must thank you while I can hold 
a pen." 

On the 3rd of April, by the advice of Dr. 
Roots, she left London for St. Leonard's. The 
little exercise she was able to take in the open 
air, by the facilities this lovely and quiet place 
afforded, and the warm breezes from the ocean, 
greatly renovated her strength and reduced 
the violence of her cough for a few weeks ; but 
she had now an exercise of another and more 
painful kind. Her mind, which, during the 



222 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



whole period of her sickness had been remark- 
ably placid, and even joyous, became suddenly 
depressed: not that it was apparent to an or- 
dinary observer ; for, like her Saviour, she sel- 
dom mentioned her mental sorrows, except to 
her heavenly Father. Her great anxiety for 
the comfort of others would not allow her, un- 
less absolutely necessary, to obtrude her griefs 
on their attention; even her husband was not 
made acquainted with them till after repeated 
inquiry, lest the tale of sorrow should diminish 
his happiness. 

The dart which the vile archer, taking ad- 
vantage of her bodily M^eakness, cast into her 
tender conscience, was the base insinuation 
that her backwardness to converse on heavenly 
and spiritual topics had been a hinderance to 
her husband's usefulness. Never did he invent 
a more false accusation, for it was scarcely 
possible for a disciple to give a heartier re- 
sponse when the peculiarities of Christian ex- 
perience were introduced, or to show greater 
delight when the tales of Grod's love were the 
subjects of conversation. It was not her habit 
to thrust her religious opinions on every com- 



AI ST. LEONARD S AND HASTINGS. 223 



pany and season; but few opportunities es- 
caped without some delicate allusion to the 
best of topics, with which her heart was 
charged. Poor and rich, pious and profane, 
will confirm this testimony ; and he whose 
ministry her clouded imagination fancied" she 
had injured, can only lament that the charge 
might, with greater propriety, be brought 
against him, that he had not sufficiently im- 
proved the precious opportunities now, alas, 
past, of spiritual communion with her during 
thirteen years of almost uninterrupted bliss. 
The description she gives of her state of mind 
is so mournfully beautiful, that it cannot be 
withheld. 

"Before my marriage, my own impression 
of one of the most important duties of a min- 
ister's wife was this: that as her. husband's 
many and varied occupations, being all on one 
subject, were necessarily likely, in a measure, 
to become mechanical, unless much time could 
be devoted to communion with God and his 
own heart in private ; her duty would be, by 
her piety and spirituality of conversation, to 
help his piety, and to give it the vigor requi- 



224 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



site to its constant exhibition in its brightest, 
purest form at home. Now, my beloved hus- 
band does everywhere show whom he serves; 
but that quiet influence which the wife should 
exert for him — not, believe me, by attempting 
to dictate or teach, quite the reverse — I have 
sought, longed for, prayed for, for twelve 
years, but have never yet attained. And I feel 
powerfully as if I had been your hinderance, 
by my neglect of spiritual conversation; that 
it is one of my wasted opportunities, and that 
I am to be taken away as an utterly useless 
being. For many weeks my heart has been 
deeply oppressed, and it is my relief to shed 
many tears. 

"My Christian course has been a singularly 
happy one: my first sight of the atonement 
and the work of Christ has never lost its clear- 
ness, and my mind seems incapable of long 
depression as to my personal interest in Christ, 
from that my refuge never being concealed. 
This is, probably, partly from my natural hope- 
fulness of disposition. For many long weeks, I 
have lost much of my relish for my Bible, and 
but for the influence of habit and conscience. 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 



225 



should sometimes neither open it nor repeat 
any portion of it to myself, for a whole day. 
I have no enjoyment of the presence of God, 
and literally, I have gone from room to room 
here, almost unconsciously, trying whether my 
absent Lord would meet me anywhere: noth- 
ing affords me any pleasure; 'they have taken 
away my Lord,' and I can find no joy without 
him. I do not feel my hope in Christ shaken; 
this is the bitterness of my sorrow, that I hope, 
unworthy as I am, he has bought me with his 
own most precious blood, and therefore the in- 
gratitude of neglecting his will is so base. He 
delights in the happiness of the meanest of his 
creatures, and hides not his face but in faith- 
fulness and love ; and that such a Father 
should have such a child, is a sorrow indeed. 
It amazes me, that I do not entirely doubt my 
adoption; it is so unlike the spirit of a child 
in his family, to suspect I grieve him, and yet 
spai'e any pains till the cause is removed. 

"He has warned me by sickness, which 
loosens many a tongue, but still to my most 
beloved husband I am dumb. Never ^ave I 
known an habitually heavy heart till this win- 



226 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



ter, and now there seems a shade over every 
thing. It is not enough to hope I am Christ's, 
if I do not glorify him ; and insensibiUty alone, 
such as mine, must be most offensive to Him 
who loves me, and takes such pains to teach 
me, and to draw me nearer to himself. Pray, 
0 pray for your poor wife; it is one comfort 
that I may pray for you, and when unable to 
feel any other prayer, I do pray with my whole 
heart for you. Forgive me for sending you this 
long letter about myself, but it is such a relief 
to feel I have told you my burden. I can 
sometimes roll it on Him who cares for me, 
but the recollection of unforsaken sin renews 
it. Receive a full heart of love from your de- 
voted wife." 

Though this dark cloud continued, with some 
luminous apertures, for about six months, the 
same cheerful tone of conversation, the same 
efforts to help others out of their troubles, the 
same anxiety to save souls which she mani- 
fested in her more joyous days, pervaded her 
conduct, as her letters of this period, as well 
as the testimony of her friend and companion, 
abundantly prove. The following note to her 



AT ST. LEONARB'S AND HASTINGS. 



227 



father shows that, ho^Yevel• dark the valley 
through which she was walking, she obeyed 
the advice of the prophet, to stay herself upon 
her Grod, and encouraged him to the same 
blessed exercise: 

"I am but a poor thing at present, and till 
the night perspirations cease, I cannot get very 
robust. Quiet, which is so very necessary for 
me, is perfectly attainable here, and every 
thing is so peculiarly comfortable, that I stand 
every chance of getting better, as far as means 
and comforts avail. But One only can heal, 
and till he says the word, your Patty must 
cheerfully yield to the little inconveniences oi 
weakness. She can only marvel at ' the good- 
ness and mercy' which surround her, and 
which gave to her the kindest and most indul- 
gent of hu.sbands. How happy shall we be, 
if you and I, with the loosening of our little 
ties to earthly comforts, get more closely united 
to those pure and tangible joys which can nev- 
er be grasped too firmly. The more we look, 
with the simplicity and confidence of children, 
to the riches which are treasured up in Christ, 
as our Father's portion, provided for us in the 



228 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



unfathomable depths of his love and grace, 
surely the more shall we love him and his 
holiness. We must ' behold his glory, till we 
are changed into the same image from glory to 
glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord : and 
is not that look the look of simple faith — 
trusting our all in a faithful, loving Father's 
hand — receiving every promise in Christ, as 
'yea and amen,' in him? Oh, for more sim- 
plicity of faith, dear father." 

Mr. Orne, a city mis.sionary in the Surrey 
chapel district, who had shown much diligence 
and devotedness in his visitation of the poor, 
lost his wife, after a short illness. Though 
writing at this period occasioned great fatigue, 
she willingly made the sacrifice, to comfort the 
widower's heart, and sent him the following 
sympathizing letter : 

"St. Leonard's, April 26. 

"I cannot hear of the deep affliction with 
which our heavenly Father has visited you, 
my dear sir, without writing one line, though 
in much weakness, to express my very deep 
and sincere sympathy with you in the loss of 
your beloved companion, especially when her 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 



229 



maternal care was most needed. I would not 
however for a moment refer to the many dark 
views of this mysterious dispensation, but 
rather help to cheer you by the same means 
with which you have so often cheered many 
drooping widowed hearts; and He who has 
witnessed your efforts with others, fails not, I 
am sure, to comfort you now. Think not, my 
dear sir, of your own loss, but of the 'joy un- 
speakable and full of glory' which that eman- 
cipated spirit now enjoys, 'without spot,' 'with 
Christ,' 'like him,' and no longer capable of 
sin. I often feel consoled under my 'light 
affliction,' with the confidence I have, that 
could our faith penetrate our Father's designs 
in our bitterest trials, we should welcome all, 
and dread as much the loss of one of his in- 
tended strokes as we now do their approach. 
If his faithful love could accomplish his gra- 
cious plans without a pang, would he inflict 
it ? His purposes of mercy are so far beyond 
our finite minds to comprehend, that he does 
not reveal them to us but by their results; in 
heaven all will be unfolded, and the wrench 
that separated two hearts which helped each 



230 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



other in the labors and toils of the missionary's 
self-denying path, will be then found to have 
been one great proof of his unchanging love. 

"We shall soon forget the thorny path when 
we reach our Father's home and see the ' Cap- 
tain of our salvation,' the 'Man of sorrows,' 
whose deeply rugged path smoothed ours, and 
brought us to ' an inheritance incorruptible and 
undefiled, and that fadeth not away.' I doubt 
not your mission is to be advanced, and your 
usefulness and real happiness too, by this blow; 
and if God be glorified, your beloved one per- 
fected in bliss, your work promoted* and your 
sanctification advanced, is not this worth suf- 
fering for? God's will must be good and 
kind; and the 'God of all comfort' will not 
leave you comfortless. May he grant you the 
richest consolations of his Spirit, and make all 
grace to abound towards you, and by every 
loosened tie to earth draw you nearer to heav- 
en, and present you and all your family perfect 
in that day — not one child missing." 

Persons anxious about their salvation, in 
whom there seems to be a work already be- 
gun, often multiply objections to embracing 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 



231 



Christ and his work at once, as if an improve- 
ment would take place ere long, and thus ren- 
der them better able to seize the remedy they 
long to enjoy. They forget that there is guilt 
in this delay, which is every day aggravated, 
and that, instead of becoming more reconciled 
to God's plan, the longer it is refused tlie more 
they are disinclined to it, and in a far greater 
degree 'God is dishonored. This difficulty had 
been expressed to her, in a letter from a young 
person to whom she had been useful in draw- 
ing her from a state of ignorance and neglect 
of her soul, to which she thus replies: 

"St. Leonard's, May G, 1847. 

"Your former letter, .my dear friend, would 
have been answered long since, but I have been 
very ill, and have been forbidden to write; I 
am thankful to say, I am much better since I 
came here, though the symptoms still continue. 
Night perspirations and expectoration of blood, 
both which symptoms I had not last winter, 
have much weakened me, and the progress of 
the disease is said to be very decided ; but as, 
in the kind providence of God, I am so situated 
that I can have every possible care and no ex- 



232 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



posure to cold, there is every hope that with so 
good a constitution as I possess, I may yet be 
spared for some years; though perhaps one 
severe cold would speedily cut the slender 
thread which hinds the frail tabernacle to earth. 
I have all my family and the youngest of three 
grandcjjildren here, so we are a tolerable par- 
ty; but I am not excited by them, they make 
it cheerful for me. 

"I wish, my dear friend, I could spend the 
hour between the lights as formerly, in guiding 
you to 'the Lamb of God, which taketh away 
the sin of the world ;' there I love to look, and 
there I find a 'peace which passeth all under- 
standing,' but nowhere else. If I look within, 
I hope I see some increasing evidence of the 
Spirit's work ; but while I would rejoice in 
the smallest proof that I am a child of God, 
throvigh his work in my heart, I cannot draw 
my peace from that, but from the completeness 
of Christ's work. He is my Prophet, Priest, 
and King; and therefore while he lives, and 
my guilty soul clings to him, I am safe; but 
this is proved only by my growing in meetness 
to dwell with him. 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINas. 233 

"It is very important to keep clearly before 
the mind what is to be the foundation of our 
peace. 'He is our peace,' and there is no 
other ground for hope but his work, by which 
God is reconciled to man ; though we are saved 
only when by faith we receive his atonement 
and are reconciled to God, which is evidenced 
by our forsaking that from which Christ died 
to save us. We cannot have received Christ's 
salvation if we continue to love sin; there is 
no meaning in Christ's work, apart from the 
sanctification which is its necessary result. 
Sin separates us from God, from his favor here, 
and his presence hereafter; and to restore us 
to his favor, Christ bore our punishment and 
curse. To sustain the justice, holiness, and 
truth of God, he was obedient to the law we 
had broken; and to restore us to his presence 
in heaven, he sent his Spirit to renew and sanc- 
tify the mind, and make us fit for and capable 
of enjoying it. But all these blessings flow 
from Christ's satisfaction to divine justice, so 
that ' God is just, and the justifier of the sin- 
ner that believeth in Jesus.' 

"My dear friend, how I long for you richly 



234 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



to experience the two distinct fruits of Christ's 
work, our justification through his blood as the 
foundation of our hope, and the Spirit's work 
in us as the evidence that we are building on 
that only foundation. Your poor mind still 
seems so confused and unsettled, sometimes 
hoping, sometimes fearing ; but this ought not 
to be.'. We are either converted or unconvert- 
ed ; and we must not be satisfied in uncertain- 
ty which of these is our state, when heaven or 
hell is the result. We are exhorted to give all 
diligence to make our election sure, to work 
out our own salvation with fear and trembling, 
not to merit salvation, but by the diligent use 
of every means of grace, watchfulness, hu- 
mility, leaning on God, resisting sin, fighting 
against temptation, and above all, by prayerful 
study of our guide-book the Bible, to strive for 
our salvation, and against every thing that 
would impede it. You must not rest till you 
are reconciled to Grod ; for his reconciliation to 
man is of no avail while the sinful heart is 
practically at enmity with him. The riches of 
his grace and love are displayed in the amazing 
work of redemption, which removes the bar- 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 235 



rier to man's salvation; and how aggravated 
must that guilt be which resists and trifles 
with such love, which can linger and hesitate 
to seize its rich offers. 

"My heart grieves to look back and see how 
long I hesitated ; desiring to be a Christian, but 
forgetting that I was a rebel and an enemy to 
God so long as I was not one. I looked at my 
own happiness, and therefore desired to be a 
Christian, as the only way of being truly and 
eternally happy; but I thought not that I was 
a miracle of his forbearance while out of hell, 
that I deserved hell, that I had chosen sin and 
rejected holiness, that I had no good thing in 
me, and that my utter destruction would be 
perfectly just and righteous. Grod's mercy 
offered me salvation, but I did not think of it 
as such. It seemed a matter only between my 
happiness and me, quite independent of God's 
honor; and this, I fear, is much your own 
state of mind, which makes me very intensely 
anxious that you should pray much for your 
eyes to be opened by the Spirit of God. Such 
will be the Christian's prayer all the way to 
heaven, and how needful it is in first starting. 



236 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



"Our eagerness in pursuit of any object de- 
pends upon the value we set on it, and till we 
know its worth, our zeal and expectation of 
success are not likely to be great. Look at 
wrestling Jacob, and do likewise: 'I will not 
let thee go, except thou bless me.' I was 
much interested in last Sunday's collect: '0, 
Almighty God, who alone canst order the un- 
ruly wills and affections of sinful men, grant 
unto thy people that they may love the thing 
which thou commandest, and desire that which 
thou dost promise ; that so, among the sundry 
and manifold changes of the world, our hearts 
may surely there be fixed where true joys are 
to be found, through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
Amen.' Do mark it, and use it; I refer par- 
ticularly to desiring what Grod has promised. 
I think God's promises are so apt to be over- 
looked by the seeker, whereas we should make 
ourselves familiar with them all, and use them 
as pleas in our prayers. 

" Do, my dear friend, search your Bible, that 
you may be conversant with its sweet and gra- 
cious encouragements. As you read, copy 
every promise you meet with, and make one 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 



237 



or more the subject of thouglit and prayer 
through the day. We dishonor God by under- 
valuing his promises, for none could be offered 
us but through the work and mediation of 
Christ, and every hope and promise is the pur- 
chase of his most precious blood. I long to 
see you rejoicing in Christ Jesus, and enjoying 
that 'peace of God which passeth all under- 
standing,' because that 'shall keep your heart 
and mind through Christ Jesus.' God's ' peace ' 
is not a mere sentiment, but an influential 
principle, 'keeping the heart and mind' from 
sin and in holiness. "We can judge whether 
the peace we possess is true or false by its in- 
fluence. Whatever comes from God tends to 
God ; and that only which separates us from 
sin, and conforms our will and conduct to God, 
comes from him. 

"Oh, be in earnest, my dear friend; you 
must not yield to this listlessness and inactivi- 
ty. I carefully shun it while suffering pain 
and weakness, because I consider it my ene- 
my. How much more should you determine 
against it, when it is natural to you, because 
the least weakness or illness would make you 



238 



MARTHA SHERMA-V. 



a burden to yourself and others. I wish I 
could take you out of bed ; while you allow 
yourself to sleep when you should be dommun- 
ing with Grod, and laying in stores of grace 
and knowledge to meet the circumstances of 
the day, you must not expect to have the evi- 
dence that you are a child of God, for you put 
away the means of returning to him by self- 
indulgence and, must I say it, idleness. I 
speak honestly, because I feel deeply anxious 
about you, and utter most earnest prayer and 
desires for your speedy decision for God." 

When some, to whom she had been useful, 
felt their hope of her restoration begin to ex- 
pire, and that they were to be permanently 
deprived of her services, their grief was ex- 
pressed, as she thought, in too strong terms, 
which exhibited a want of submission to the 
divine will, and reflected on the love and wis- 
dom of God. In reply to one of her spiritual 
children she turns comforter, and thus incul- 
cates acceptance of her Father's discipline : 

"Marina. May 25. 1S47. 

"I feel, my dear child, as if I had no right 
to the endearing title of teacher now, except 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 239 

from the remembrance of past happy days. I 
have learnt some of my sweetest lessons in 
my beloved class, and the last subjects we had 
have peculiarly comforted my mind throughout 
my late affliction. How delightful are the dis- 
coveries of the divine character in the offices 
of the triune Grod, and how sweet to be per- 
mitted to say, ' This is my Beloved, and this is 
my Friend.' ' This Grod is our Grod for ever 
and ever.' God's greatest promise to Abra- 
ham was, ' I will be a God to thee, and to thy 
seed after thee.' And this also is the New 
Testament promise: happy are we, my child, 
though every earthly joy were withdrawn. 
While he is our God, why mourn the loss of 
the poor little murmuring stream that once 
brought to your feet some few refreshing drops 
from the fountain. You have the fountain it- 
.self, unmixed with human errors and infirmi- 
ties. We ought to prize even the dew-drop, 
which our Father so graciously sends to re- 
fresh and help us in our weary pilgrimage; 
but we must receive it as a dew-drop only, not 
as the stream from whence we are to draw 
our strength for the way. 



240 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



" Welcome every appointment of your loving 
Father's hand. If you feel it a trial to be with- 
out your old friend, when I have furnished you, 
or rather, Grod has, with so experienced and 
superior a substitute, what must I feel, thus 
laid aside from all my most beloved occupa- 
tions, truly, as far as I can see, ' a cumberer 
of the ground,' panting to employ my little 
energy for Him who loved me and died for 
me, but suffering serious relapse as soon as I 
make an effort? This requires the full exer- 
cise of that faith I have recommended to oth- 
ers, to believe that all these things are work- 
ing together for good, and are God's method 
for glorifying himself. I know he is working 
while I am still, and he is crossing my desires 
to prepare me for that perfect rejoicing in his 
will which is found only in heaven, but which 
we must labor and pray for here. I cannot 
wish for any thing besides my Lord's will 
now, but there I shall fully rejoice in it all. 

"Now, my child, as you know you will in 
heaven rejoice in this trial, seek to discern the 
lovely character of God more, that you may 
rejoice, not in the thing itself, but io God's 



AT ST. LEOKARD'S AND HASTINaS. 



241 



appointm ; however dark they seem now, it 
is because we know so httle both of God and 
of his designs. As we grow in grace we must 
grow in 'the knowledge of our Lord and Sav- 
iour Jesus Christ;' and as we advance in the 
•true knowledge of him every other grace ad- 
vances, and our whole life, character, and ex- 
ample, prove whose we are, and for whom we 
are living. Let us keep heaven in view as our 
home, and then we shall prize every means our 
Father sends to help us on our way thither. 
Give my most affectionate love to my beloved 
friends in the class." 

Mrs. Sherman had sojourned nearly two 
months at St. Leonard's, and her active mind, 
amidst much depression and weakness, had 
found ample employment. One of her efforts 
while there may be specially mentioned. The 
Countess S., of Weistricht, in Silesia, begged 
her to interest herself in finding an English 
lady who would be a companion to her, and 
at the same time conduct the instruction of 
her child. With an energy which would have 
honored a person in health and comfort, she 
wrote numerous letters to friends, to assist her 



242 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



in this selection. The distance from England 
and the residence in a foreign land, though 
presenting many advantages, were formidahle 
difficulties, which, after some had accepted the 
situation, caused them to alter their minds and 
decline it. In two cases, every thing was ar- 
ranged for the departure, but relatives inter- 
fered and broke the engagement. Still she 
pursued her task as if she was seeking a ben- 
efit to herself, and did not cease till she sent 
the countess a lady whose piety and talents 
have justified her hopes and efforts. 

As the spring advanced, a change was again 
thought desirahle, and she removed to London 
on the 4th of June, 1847. There was every 
reason to fear that no radical improvement had 
taken place in her symptoms; the visit to the 
sea had yielded refreshment, and the dark 
cloud upon her mind was not so dense as it 
had been; still, the disease was progressing 
with slow but certain steps. She bore the 
journey with comparative ease, and her "own 
dear home" was the sweeter for her brief ab- 
sence. Many hearts were gladdened by her 
return ; her very presence at the parsonage not 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINaS. 243 

only delighted its inmates, but cast an air of 
melancholy pleasure over the congregation ; for 
all felt that a dear friend, though an invalid, 
was among them. When her cough permitted 
her to attend worship, to catch a glance at her 
cheerful face as she sat in the vestry, or as she 
passed to the house after the service was con- 
cluded, was considered hy many, especially by 
her classes, as an additional Sabbath joy ; and 
as long as she was able to show herself among 
them, hope lingered as to her final restoration. 
Her weakness was however excessive, and on 
some days occasioned the most pitiable ex- 
haustion; yet, as soon as she rallied, some 
work of mercy engaged her Christ-like mind. 

A person who acknowledged Mrs. Sherman 
had begotten her in Christ, by the gospel, and 
concerning whose spiritual welfare she was 
much interested, sent her a letter, in which 
she attributed unchristian motives to an excel- 
lent clergyman, because he thought it best to 
enlarge the parish church, rather than build a 
district church, which she and some others of 
the parishioners preferred. She was not only 
offended at his conduct, but placed it among 



244 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



the inconsistencies of Christians, which kept 
her and others back from a more public decis- 
ion for Christ. To that friend the following 
judicious advice was sent: 

"SuRRiiY Parsonage, June 29, 1847. 

"Your last note, my dear friend, has given 
me much anxiety on your account, as the spirit 
of complaint and judging which it breathes is 
not only unlovely, but appears to interfere 
with your own decision for God. How I wish 
I could talk with you on the subject: it is so 
difficult to express my meaning on paper, es- 
pecially in this time of weakness ; but I must 
try what I can do, and you must have patience 
with me while I differ from you In the first 
place, I think your impugning your minister's 
intentions very wrong, as you cannot say that 
you are sure his motives are the love of money. 
I think, from what I hear, the fear of a Pusey- 
ite filling the pulpit is more correct; but this 
he must not announce, as it necessarily reflects 
on that system which involves such a possibili- 
ty. There is, at any rate, much reason in his 
preference of an enlargement of a small church 
to the erection of a new one, with the possi- 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINCtS. 245 

bility of error, instead of the pure gospel, pro- 
ceeding from its minister. 

"But supposing that you really have the 

power to discern the motives of Mr. C , and 

suppose he is even worse than you represent 
him, what has that to do with the truth itself? 
Suppose ninety out of every hundred profess- 
ed Christians dishonored their' profession, and 
* went back and walked no more with ' Jesus, 
could their iniquity touch him, or weaken the 
stability of his truth? Oh, how miserable 
would the Christian's hope be, if even the 
whole world, combined with Satan and his 
angels, could touch or shake its deep-laid, its 
eternal foundation. All are against Grod by 
nature, and if their enmity could weaken the 
efficacy of Christ's complete work of redemp- 
tion, or its blessed results, God would himself — 
I speak with reverence — cease to be God : if 
there be a greater in power, he cannot be God. 
Think what is involved in your being discour- 
aged because of an uncharitable impression 
against another; can you ever have laid hold 
on Christ as the only and the all-sufficient 
refuge of your sin-ruined soul, if such a pufF 



246 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



can blow your little bark from its safe moor- 
ings? Something is fearfully wanting, my 
dear friend, or it could not be; while you are 
judging another's motives, time is hastening 
you on to that moment when the bark that is 
not firmly cabled and anchored on the Rock of 
ages, shall be utterly destroyed in the storm of 
divine wrath which shall visit the world of the 
ungodly. 

"Oh, my dear friend, I weep while I write, 
and fear it possible that you are yet without 

Christ. This impression of Mr. C 's conduct 

is a test applied to your faith, and can you not 
bear so slight a one? How then could you 
bear the probable scoffs of the world, when 
you take up your cross and come out from it 
to follow Jesus? Has his love no room in the 
heaVt; can you question its manifestation with 
such glorious proofs all around you ? Remem- 
ber our Saviour's rebuke to Peter's curiosity: 
'What is that to thee? follow thou me;' and 
what would he say when you make a stum- 
bling-block for yourself out of nothing; for 
even if you are correct, what can it be to you 
beyond Christian sympathy for an offender? 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 247 

You must know in whom you believe, and 
why you believe, or you will not only be des- 
titute of all 'peace and joy in believing,' but 
bring a far more fearful dishonor on your pro- 
fession than even the poor accused one. Pray, 
pray much for deliverance from this sad insta- 
bility which can only injure and 'never excel.' 
Read and 'search the Scriptures,' that your 
mind may be more enlightened 'in knowledge 
and in all love,' that you may ' adorn the doc- 
trine of G-od our Saviour in all things.' " 

Country air was soon found to be necessary, 
and the dear invalid at the beginning of July 
repaired to her honored father's charming abode 
at Enfield, anticipating that in the autumn a 
continental tour would aid her recovery; she 
alludes to this design in the following ex- 
tracts : 

"I am really very poorly, and so faint that 
every effort seems almost impracticable, and 
though I do try to rise above it, I fear Sunday 
evening services must be abandoned. I am 
very unwilling to believe they can injure, but 
the oppression I feel on my chest and lungs at 
the time, and the prostration of strength after- 



24S 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



wards, compel me to acknowledge I am hasten- 
ing the progress of disease by attending -them. 
My precious friend, how humiliating it is to 
find the tabernacle which must soon be taken 
down so powerful an impediment to the prog- 
ress of its immortal inhabitant ; is it not ? 
When I can for a moment look beyond ' the 
things which are seen,' the beloved ones on 
earth, I long to be 'with Christ,' no more dis- 
honoring and grieving him, but bearing his 
perfect likeness, and serving him without in- 
terruption, or weakness, or sin. But if as- 
sured that this shall at last be my joy, how 
light every disappointment becomes ; it is even 
my choice sometimes — I would it were always 
so — because there are great and gracious pur- 
poses in the divine mind, which by this means 
are to be accomplished, and any trial is more 
welcome than the failure of one of his designs ; 
they are as his character — love, faithfulness, 
and truth. Even if others, not myself, are to 
gain the benefit, it amply repays for the pres- 
ent trial." 

Her elevated state of peaceful submission 
and entire confidence in her heavenly Father's 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 249 

love, is deliglitfuUy exemplified in the senti- 
ments extracted from a letter sent to a dear 
young friend in Lancashire. 

'•Clay Hill, July 10, 1847. 

" Though my correspondence has been, and 
is likely to be almost entirely prohibited, I can- 
not extend that prohibition to you, my dear 
friend. Delay you will not interpret as indif- 
ference, and therefore when I can venture to 
break my rules, it shall be on your behalf. I 
am here. I sunk so rapidly in London, that I 
was obliged to take flight, though I really be- 
lieve the atmosphere had much less to do with 
it than the circum.stances and unavoidable 
excitements. I rejoice to hear you are better, 
and I almost envy you the privileges now so 
impracticable for me, of telling others of a Sav- 
iour's love. The cough and its attendants 
invariably increase with talking, and conse- 
quently I am scarcely allowed to see any one. 
This I feel the severest part of my present trial, 
as it .seems so difficult to glorify Grod in such 
perfect retirement. He sees and marks the 
spirit with which I bear his holy will, but I 
cannot stimulate others, either by passive 



250 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



example, or by testifying of his love, when, 
only with my little circle of home. They see 
me always, and what I would tell, I have often 
told them before, so that I think even were my 
spirit all it should be, they would not gain 
equal benefit with others who might only occa- 
sionally visit me ; do not you think this is gen- 
erally true ? 

"But though even prohibited from long in- 
tercourse with my precious children, which is 
a very keen trial, yet I think my heart approves 
of it, because my Father does it ; and he has 
infinitely wise and loving purposes to accom- 
plish, which, if I could see and understand 
them now, would make me long for the very 
trials from which I shrink. It is sweet to trust 
a faithful Father ; and that exefcise of mind to 
which he calls us, when we cannot see what 
he~is working, is sometimes in the hands of the 
Spirit of love the very choicest blessing to the 
soul. Every fresh exercise of trust and confi- 
dence in him strengthens and prepares for yet 
stronger confidence, for greater joy in the Lord, 
for more unbroken 'peace in believing.' And 
what a boon this is, to feel earthly and lauda- 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 



251 



ble sources of enjoyment receding from our 
touch, yet our happiness not only undiminish- 
ed, but growing exceedingly in degree and in 
kind, by realizing how entirely independent it 
is of all created sources, how immediately from 
the fountain, God. We are so prone, after all, 
to cling to some earthly thing, Avhich, even if 
a spiritual and hallowed thing in itself, yet be- 
comes a snare, by the tenacity with which we 
hold it, that our Father's love often takes from 
us even this, lest a rival, though a holy one, 
enter the heart with him. The fulness of his 
love can never be understood till no rival is 
there — till he has the sole sovereignty, without 
a thought of another ; and to secure this unut- 
terable joy, he sends trial upon trial, to wean 
us from the beloved, but too engrossing object, 
that we ' may be filled with all the fulness of 
God.' 

" How I should love to join you at , but 

I am not now well enough to bear a journey. 
We intended to spend part of July and all Au- 
gust on the continent, but there is no prospect 
of my removing from Enfield. I am better, 
and by keeping perfectly quiet 1 hope soon to 



252 MARTHA SHERMAN. 



do comfortably again ; if not, I am quite satis- 
fied. Yes, through the riches of His grace we 
know in whom we have believed, and are per- 
suaded, etc. Who are we that we should be 
thus happy, while so many in our own cir» 
cle are fearing to appropriate the great salva- 
tion? What a debt we owe, and who can 
pay it? ' Eternity's too short to utter all His 
praise.' " 

It was customary, when any member left 
her class to be a teacher, to take with her the 
credentials of her instructress, and often a let- 
ter of advice and encouragement. A young 
person who had devoted some of her Sabbath 
evenings in one of the ragged-schools belong- 
ing to Surrey chapel, wrote to ask her sanc- 
tion to become a teacher, morning and after- 
noon, in another Sunday-school. The following 
extract will serve as a specimen of such pre- 
cious epistles: 

"Clay Hill, August 16, 1847. 

"I have always pleasure in my dear young 
friends' leaving the class to be teachers, as the 
prominent design of its formation is to qualify 
young persons for the office, by cultivating an 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 253 



increased knowledge of the Scriptures, not only 
in the letter, but in the spirit ; and by this in- 
strumentality, accompanied with divine influ- 
ence, to form and advance the Christian char- 
acter, and to fit them to be laborers in (rod's 
vineyard, that they may tell others the way to 
eternal life which they have found themselves. 
Now, my dear child, you are entering on new 
and solemn responsibilities; you have spoken 
probably for the last time to your class at Jur- 
ston-street — how will you meet those precious 
souls at the last day ? Are you clear of their 
blood ? Have you earnestly, prayerfully sought 
nothing less than their salvation? Follow up 
those past efforts with constant prayer, and do 
not allow yourself to think you have done with 
them. No ; there is a sort of sacred tie between 
the teacher and the taught which nothing can 
destroy, and which eternity will develope in all 
its solemnity. I feel this deeply myself, and 
naturally wish you to feel it too, but more 
profitably than I have done. 

"You are now going to meet other minds, 
to whom you have the same message to carry, 
that ' Jesus Christ came into the world to save 



254 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



sinners ;' think of all the points in which you 
were deficient as a teacher at Jurston-street, 
and direct your efforts to correct them, and 
with earnest prayer and never-tiring diligence, 
labor to be an example to teachers and schol- 
ars, and especially to your own class, of emi- 
nent practical piety. Let it shine, not only on 
the Sabbath and in religious exercises, but at 
all times, in every look and habit, whether 
seen by others or not. The Christian charac- 
ter is moulded more by little than by great 
things, and the habits of the Christian have 
much to do with his progress, either for good 
or evil. Cultivate habits of constant commun- 
ion with Grod ; associate them with every thing 
you do; this will check sinful inclinations, in- 
jurious reading and companionship, as well as 
other evils, and render the common things of 
life blessings to your soul. Thus, your real 
practical piety will grow, and will render you 
an efficient teacher of others. 

"Let nothing tempt you to neglect prepar- 
ing for your class; never offer tc God that 
wloich costs you nothing ; your interest in your 
work much depends on this, and your intelli- 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 255 



gence also; you will feel increased interest in 
the truth itself by applying your mind prayer- 
fully to understand it. Ever strive to make 
the way of salvation clear to the mind of every 
child. Christ alone — crucified, risen, and glo- 
rified — is the foundation, without which no 
piety can be expected to arise. He is our 
hope, and every motive to holiness and obe- 
dience flows from hence. 'We love him be- 
cause he first loved us.'" 

One of the members of her Sunday class 
M'as called into eternity after a brief illness. 
This event inspired her with new strength to 
seize the favorable opportunity to produce suit- 
able impressions on the minds of the living. It 
seems written with eternity full in view, and 
as it was the last document which they re- 
ceived from the pen of their precious teacher, 
it will be to the members a permanent testi- 
mony of her faithful love and continued long- 
ing for their salvation, while ability existed to 
express it. 

"Clay Hill, August 17, 1847. 

* "My beloved Friends — It seems to me a 
very long time since I had the pleasure of 



256 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



writing to you, but it is an occupation so ex- 
hausting to my strength, that though I would 
risk the suffering for the hope of usefulness, my 
dear kind friends interfered and forbade the at- 
tempt; but I can wait no longer, and therefore 
hoping for the best, and intending to write very 
little, I set to work with a heart so full, that 
neither time nor paper will satisfy me. Per- 
haps you thinlv I am old enough to act with- 
out the control of friends. I might do so per- 
haps, but our Saviour, remember, 'pleased not 
himself;' his will was not his rule, as it is with 
too many of us naturally. But when the grace 
of Grod renews the mind, all the principles of 
action are reversed, and instead of first seek- 
ing to please ourselves, and then, if it give us 
no trouble, or be to our own interest, pleasing 
others, the rule now is love ; self is cast down 
like Dagon before the ark, and the first in- 
quiry is. How can I please God? then, How 
can I please those around me ? and there is far 
more happiness in making a great sacrifice of 
our own inclinations for the pleasure of anoth- 
er, than the most selfish being ever gained by 
making every thing give way to please himself 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 257 

Where ]ove to God and man is implanted 
in the heart by the Holy Spirit's blessed influ- 
ences, we scarcely need be reminded that we 
are not to please ourselves ; for the lovely cata- 
logue of graces described so repeatedly in the 
Scriptures — and which I should ask you to re- 
fresh me by reading to me this moment, if you 
were by my side — necessarily spring up one 
after the other, as we 'grow in grace,' till we 
bear the lovely though faint image of our in- 
carnate Lord. I am sure you are all too well 
instructed to mistalic my meaning, and to 
suppose this touches your decision for Christ 
when that is opposed. No; to give up Christ 
to pletise others would not be folio win g the 
principle of love, which would make you 
ready to relinquish your personal ease or grati- 
fication for another. The one will make you 
a blessing in your family, and contribute to 
every one's comfort: the other would make 
you despicable in the eyes of those whom you 
seek to please at such a price, and 0, how 
utterly despised in the sight of God. 

"My beloved friends, I believe many of you 
have around you those who spare no pains to 

Sherman. J "7 



258 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



draw you from Christ; and will you listen to 
such cruel soul-destroying friends^ falsely so 
called? The apostle describes the depths of 
misery in which the natural mind is, by that 
most striking and comprehensive statement, 
'without Christ,' 'without God,' and 'without 
hope;' and while He waits to be your eternal 
portion, and ofters himself to you, will you 
gratify a miserable lost fellow-sinner by yield- 
ing to the advice which must be his eternal 
ruin as well as yours, if followed ? No ; I dare 
not believe that you have to so little purpose 
heard of the 'height and depth, and length . 
and breadth of love' to you — of the joys which 
far outweigh the crosses of his service — of the 
supplies of grace from himself, proportioned to 
every degree of your need which he has prom- 
ised so many times, and bestowed upon many 
whom you know — of the sense of his unseen 
presence here, and of his immediate and eter- 
nal presence in heaven, to which his Spirit is 
to be your constant guide and teacher; and 
besides these, the unnumbered supplies of 
blessings to even the very meanest and feeblest 
of his flock. With all these so frequently 



AT ST. LEOKARD'S AND HASTINaS. 259 

brought before you, can you be tempted to 
forsake him to please a worldly friend, one 
who is an enemy to him, and as certainly to 
you? 

"Read that beautiful hymn, beginning, 
'When any turn from Zion's way,' and resolve, 
not in your own strength, but in His, that you 
will 'come out from among' those companions 
who would entice you from him either by influ- 
ence or" example. But if your own family, and 
those with whom duty bids you live, entice, 
fear not; God is on your side. He knows the 
most minute circumstance that occurs. He 
has in kindness and faithfulness put you into 
this fiery furnace to try your love, to purge 
away the dross and sin which interrupt the 
formation of his image in your souls ; and he 
sits by, watching the progress of this refining 
process. It is often the means he employs to 
fit for eminent usefulness in his church; and 
when he sees his own image reflected in you, 
your will moulded into his, your love of sin and 
self eradicated, and holiness your joy, then the 
precious one in his sight will be not another 
moment in the furnace. Therefore, instead oi 



■ 260 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



weeping, and sometimes I fear repining, at 
yom- distressing position, rather weep that you 
are so slow to get the blessing he is working 
for you. Take courage, and seek to win your 
persecutors to Jesus, by the heavenly and 
Christ-like spirit with which you bear their 
opposition ; thus you may bring honor to your 
Saviour at least, if not salvation eventually to 
them. 

"I could write much more than my paper 
or strength would allow on this point, but I 
must liow refer to the solemn event which has 
suddenly removed from your number one so 
young, lovely, and apparently strong and 
healthy. Death has rarely visited that dear 
class, and, Who shall be the next? is an in- 
quiry for each; or rather, How shall I meet 
God, should I be the next? It is not for us to 
pass judgment on the dead; perhaps, were it 
ours to do so, she was one more than usually 
difficult to describe, as to the state in which 
death met her. Slie had many struggles with 
a worldly heart, and through the faithful and 
continual efforts of one of your number, she at 
times seemed almost a Christian ; conscious, 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 261 

apparently, that she could never be happy till 
she had renounced her vain pleasures and 
worldly character, yet too little affected with 
the awful character of sin in the sight of God, 
either to repent of it or to prize the great and 
only atonement. Had she seen these points 
aright by the Spirit of God, we know she could 
not have wavered between Christ and the 
world. 

"It is from pur not feeling the awful evil ol 
sin, that we do not prize the precious work of 
Christ for our redemption; and the mind is 
either quite undecided for God, or if his service 
be chosen, piety is but a very feeble spark, 
bringing little or no glory to him. 0, my be- 
loved friends, bring not a divided heart to such 
a Friend and Saviour. _ He demands, not only 
by his authority and right, but by his immeas- 
urable love to you, all your heart. ' Present 
your whole spirit, soul, and body, a living sac- 
rifice to him,' and when you have given up all, 
even if you were called to such a sacrifice, 
what have you done for such a Saviour; and 
what have you lost, compared with what you 
have gained in possessing him and his great 



262 MARTHA SHERMAN. 

salvation? 0, aim at exalted piety, at emi- 
nent holiness, at extensive usefulness, you who 
bear the Christian name; and you who are not 
his, 0 think how death seized your friend — we 
sometimes fear, tiiough we cannot bear the 
thought — while hesitating; there is no middle 
state before God. She was in Christ, and 
eternally safe, or — dreadful thought ! — with- 
out Christ and without hope ; and can you wait 
another moment without an earnest prayer, 
while hearing this letter, that you may rather 
be destitute of home, of food, of friends, of every 
thing necessary to your existence, than with- 
out Christ? 

"By every argument of which love can con- 
ceive, I would implore each of you to make the 
decision this moment, that you will 'give Grod 
no rest' until he has made you his child, and 
till you may call him your Father, your 'own 
God.' Send your mental prayer to him before 
you go home; there get by yourself and tell 
him without disguise how entirely insensible 
you are to your state in his sight, and that you 
do not value Christ or his salvation in conse- 
quence; tell him how this aggravates your 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINaS. 263 



guilt, and that therefore you the more need 
his help. Remind him that you are the very 
character 'he came to seek and to save,' lost — 
'them that are lost.' This one word exactly 
describes your state, and were this the only 
encouragement in the Bible to seek him, it 
would be enough; but you can find unnum- 
bered passages of the same gracious character. 
Well, tell him this: tell him his obedience and 
atoning death have satisfied divine Justice, so 
that God can now pardon and accept you for 
his sake, though not for your own. Tell him, 
his resurrection, ascension, intercession at the 
right hand of God, and his gift of the Holy 
Spirit, prove this blessed fact, and have done 
so ever since he rose. 

"He is far more willing to save you, than 
you are to be saved, and he beseeches you, by 
his ministers and by his providences, to be 
reconciled to God, How easily you yield 
when a fellow-creature beseeches you, and 
sometimes sadly to your injury. And can you 
refuse eternal happiness through forgiveness, 
reconciliation to God, and deliverance from sin, 
misery, and hell ? My beloved friends, per- 



264 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



liaps we may never meet again on earth, but 
certainly we sliall meet at that great day when 
you and I must give account of ourselves to 
Grod. If you refuse and neglect the offered 
deliverance 'from the wrath to come,' your 
reason must be given, and then your awful 
sentence, 'Depart, ye cursed.' Ask yourself 
now why you are not Christ's, and compel 
yourself to answer ; and then surely your mad- 
ness will appear to yourself, and you will flee 
to him to emancipate you from the fetters 
which hind your reason, your soul, to your 
eternal ruin. My beloved friends, holiness is 
the joy of heaven : ' follow after holiness,' with- 
out one exception among you, and this shall 
give greater joy to the angels around the throne, 
than even to her whose anxieties, hopes, and 
fears have dictated this long letter. 

"Your ever affectionate, attached friend, 

MARTHA SHERMAN." 

The last written proof of her joy at the in- 
crease of means of grace for the young, in con- 
nection with Surrey chapel is a note to Mr. 
Hadland, on the formation of a select class, 
meeting in the class-room on Sabbath after- 



AT ST. LEONARDOS AND HASTINGS. 265 

noons, for the female children of respectable 
families in the congregation, which a young 
lady of eminent piety and suitable^ education 
had consented to superintend, and to which she 
sent her daughter as one of the first pupils. 

"As writing is painful to me, I am sure, my 
dear sir, you will excuse me for expressing in 
few words my heartfelt joy at the proposal in 
your note, and my earnest ■ desire that the 
parents will not allow trifling impediments or 
inconvenience, to deprive their little ones of the 
long-needed privileges now offered them. Three 
years ago the subject was suggested by your- 
self, I think, and I had lamented that no prac- 
tical arrangement followed. Now, I trust, the 
time is come, and God is about to answer the 
many prayers of his people for an increase of 
family religion among us, by fulfilling his 
word, 'Out of the mouth of babes and suck- 
lings thou hast perfected praise.' 

"Clay Hill, September 30, 1847.'" 

As the winter approached, a warmer atmos- 
phere became necessary for her comfort, and 
she removed, accompanied by her family, to 
Hastings, where the loving-kindness of her 



266 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



heavenly Father was signally manifested. She 
now felt that the ascent of a few staits required 
greater exertion than she could make, as her 
httle remaining strength declined daily; but 
that which gladdened the heart of her hus- 
band, and made her path to the tomb smooth- 
er, was the removal of mental darkness and 
the return of the joys of God's salvation. On 
Christmas-day, four days after her arrival, in 
the last note she was permitted to write, she 
states her grief that her spirit was still clouded. 

"As to your affectionate hope for the future, 
we must leave that to Him who is able to heal, 
if it be his gracious will ; and though I strong- 
ly chng to life, I cannot desire it for one mo- 
ment, if he see my removal better. I can 
leave it in his hands, I tliink cheerfully, not- 
withstanding the dismal doubts that harass 
me. My mind is really a mass of contradic- 
tions, and I cannot understand myself. Oh, 
how blissful will it be if all be found right at 
last ; but my poor spirit is much oppressed : 
may I not be left to dishonor my best Friend 
in this time of the hidings of his blessed face 
from me." 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 267 

On the Wednesday in the following week, 
her husband, who came to London on Satur- 
day for the duties of his charge, returned to 
Hastings, and found the mind of the precious 
invalid still overwhelmed. After she had re- 
tired to rest, he went into her chamber to com- 
mend her to Grod and to comfort her troubled 
heart with the promises of his faithful word. 
Tt was a night much to be remembered; the 
spirit of prayer was poured out, and the words 
of Scripture pleaded in faith, were applied by 
the Spirit of God to her soul. After he rose 
from his knees, the first words from her lips 
that saluted his ear, were, "The Lord is nigh 
Unto them that are of a broken heart, and 
saveth such as be of a contrite spirit. Return 
unto thy rest, 0 my soul, for the Lord hath 
dealt bountifully with thee; for thou hast de-, 
livered my soul from death, mine eyes from/ 
tears, and my feet from falling." 

Relieved by a flood of tears, but without 
rapture or enthusiasm — calm as a summer's 
eve after a shower of rain has refreshed the 
earth, and the clouds are brilliant with the 
glory of a setting sun — she began to trace the 



266 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



dealings of God with her soul, from the death 
of her sister to the present hour, in language 
beautifully simple but very affecting, and con- 
cluded her review by emphatically repeating, 

" True, I 've been a foolish creature, 
And have slighted oft His grace; 
Yet forgiveness is his nature, 

Even when he hides his face • 
After so much mercy past, 
"Will he let me sink at last ?" 

To the inquiry whether talking did not dis- 
tress her, she repUed, "Not at all; I am not 
excited, but relieved; my mind has never lost 
its hold of the atonement. All along the suffi- 
ciency of my Saviour's merits has been my 
stay; the covenant of grace has appeared like 
the bow round the throne, representing God's 
glory and my security. But Satan, taking 
advantage of a weak body, has pressed a de- 
fect in my Cliristian conduct upon my spirit, 
when my faith was not lively enough to apply 
the blood of Christ for the pardon of that par- 
ticular sin. But when you quoted that pas- 
sage in your prayer, 'We also joy in God 
through our Lord Jesus Clu-ist, by whom we 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 269 



have now received the atonement,' light flash- 
ed on my mind as if I had obtained a new- 
idea, that while I had been recommending 
others to receive the atonement, rejoicing in 
its power to save them, and also welcoming it 
in my judgment as amply sufficient to remove 
all my guilt, I had not received it for the sin 
which oppressed me ; and immediately, blessed 
be my Saviour, I did receive it, saw the sin as 
black as ever, but the guilt gone, and I can 
now rejoice in God through Jesus Christ our 
Lord." 

Then in a celestial strain she pictured forth 
the glories of an unseen world, and especially 
its perfect holiness, and seemed borne on wings 
of faith and love into it. Carried away by the 
surprise and joy of the consecrated hour, the 
writer, overwhelmed as he was, found it im- 
possible to retain in form the expressions which 
fell from her sanctified lips; but their savor 
will never be lost. When he rose to take leave, 
in order that she might have bodily rest, as she 
grasped his hand and bade him "good-night," 
she lifted her joyous eyes to heaven, and 
said, 



270 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



" Never let me go till I, " 

Upborae on wings of love, 
Jom the regions of the sky, 

And take my seat above. 
Thou hast passed thy gracious word 

That thou wilt bring me safely through ; 
Thou wilt therefore keep me, Lord, 

And never let me go." 

The conversation of Moses and Elias on the 
mount, concerning the things which Christ 
should accomplish at Jerusalem, it may he 
presumed, was expressed in language and 
tones suited to the dignity of the glorious 
theme, and that this greatly helped to produce 
those emotions in the hearts of the -disciples 
which led them to exclaim, "Lord, it is good 
to he here." And in this interview it was 
remarkahly the case — with a countenance not 
naturally deficient in heauty, hut now lighted 
up with intelligent persuasion of her heavenly 
Father's love, her eyes hrilliant hy disease, 
now sparkling with conscious joy — her tongue, 
from which the law of kindness had never de- 
parted, now delivering, in tones of devotion 
and tenderness, and in language suhlimely 
beautiful, descriptions of the merit of Christ's 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AKD HASTINGS. 



271 



death and the glory into which it would intro- 
duce her, made an impression on the mind of 
the writer, of the place, the subject, and the 
blessedness of the righteous, which time can 
never efface: "Lord, it is good to be here," 
naturally rose from his heart and found utter- 
ance in private, where a thank-offering was 
presented for the recent deliverance of the suf- 
fering disciple. It is remarkable that after an 
exertion so great to one in extreme weakness, 
she had a better night's rest, and had more 
vigor for a few days than she had experienced 
for some time. 

She was favored with^repeated visits from 
the Rev. J. Davies, the Eiev. J. Vores, and the 
Rev. C. D. Bell; the latter living near, was 
kind enough often to spend a short time with 
her in religious exercises as she could bear 
them, and to lend his sermons at her request, 
parts of which were often read to her. He 
showed both the interest and affection of a 
Christian brother in her affliction: the Lord 
will reward him. She suggested to this excel- 
lent clergyman the formation of a Bible class 
for young men; and the gratification with 



272 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



which she heard of the immediate adoption of 
hsr hint was increased before she left Hastings, 
by intelligence that the class was increasing in 
numbers and interest. 

On the 17th of January, 1848, she removed 
from White ' Rock to an exceedingly warm 
house in Wellington-square, which yielded 
more comforts to an invalid, and where the 
violence of the sea was scarcely heard or felt. 
Though a little revived by the change, it was 
clear to all that the disease was now making 
greater progress, and of this she became more 
conscious, yet struggling against infirmity to 
maintain her habits of early rising and inde- 
pendent action. At this crisis, the advice of 
Dr. Moore was sought, a physician who com- 
bines with great practical skill a deep acquaint- 
ance with doctrinal and experimental religion, 
and who has a facility and tenderness of com- 
municating it which renders him invaluable to 
a pious invalid, nor less so to one who needs 
piety. To Mrs. Sherman his visits were bless- 
ings indeed, and his first prescription did more 
to mitigate suffering and afford rest than any 
medicine she had previously taken. 



AT ST. LEONAUD'-S AND HASTINGS. 273 

Few thing.s were parted with more reluc- 
tantly than her little collecting books, contain- 
ing lists of subscriber.? to the various societies. 
These she kept in her own hands till the very- 
last; and, even when unable to write herself, 
notes were written by her amanuensis as her 
temporary substitute, either soliciting fre.sh do- 
nations or the continuance of former subscrip- 
tions — so fondly did she cling to these labors, 
and so long did she apparently cherish the 
hope of renewing her active interest in them. 

A few days however before the final opinion 
of Dr. Moore was given of immediate danger, 
as if anticipating what that opinion would be, 
she desired that they might be brought to her; 
and arranging them before her, requested that 
letters might be written to several friends 
whom she named, bequeathing them as lega- 
cies to their care. A stranger entering the 
room at that moment would scarcely have no- 
ticed the slight and transient shade of sadness 
that passed over her brow as she gave this 
affecting commission. It was so slight as only 
to be discernible by those who knew full well 
the inward struggle that had preceded that 

Sherman. \ 3 



274 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



resolution, and so transient as to disappear al- 
most as soon as observed. Her collections for 
the Jews, the city mission, the school for mis- 
sionaries' children at Walthamstow, the Dorcas 
and missionary societies, were among those in- 
tended to be thus distributed ; and though the 
sudden return of the family to London pre- 
vented some of the letters from being written, 
it is believed that all to whom these several 
collections were transferred consider them in 
the sacred light of a dying bequest. The case 
of an orphan for whose election into the work- 
ing-school she was solicitous, and of an indi- 
vidual whose soul she had been instrumental 
in winning for her Saviour, were also thus 
solemnly and earnestly commended to Chris- 
tian friends. 

The school of industry, which Mr. HiU es- 
tablished for clothing and educating thirty 
girls, had from the commencement of her resi- 
dence in London occupied much of her atten- 
tive regard, and it was her anxious desire to re- 
sign her treasurership into hands which would 
sustain and advance its interests. Soon after 
her return to London she sent for a dear friend. 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINaS. 275 



and committed to her this special charge; it 
was accepted, and subsequent events have jus- 
tified her hopes for the continued prosperity of 
the school. 

After Dr. Moore had paid her several visits, 
her husband, that he might judge better of her 
state, became anxious to learn his candid opin- 
ion, and inquired if he thought she had passed 
what was termed the second stage of the dis- 
ease. His reply, in substance, instantly was, 
"Yes, she is now in the last stage, and may be 
removed suddenly and soon, though it is not 
improbable she may linger till April or May. 
Home I consider the best place for her, to 
which she ought to return as quickly as possi- 
ble." This opinion was expressed in great 
sympathy, but being very unexpected, it yield- 
ed to her relatives abundant sorrow. 

On her husband now devolved the affecting 
duty of announcing to her that the sickness 
was unto death. With many struggles be- 
tween affection and fidelity to a promise pre- 
viously made to her, he accomplished his pain- 
ful task. The serenity with which she listened 
to the communication, and the joy with which 



276 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



she expressed that "it was quite a rehef to her 
spirit," not only surprised him, hut comforted 
his bleeding heart. She said, "Well, He who 
loved me and saved my soul can save and bless 
my husband and children; to his faithful hands 
1 commend them." The tears gu§hed from her 
eyes; but recovering herself in a minute or 
two, she said, "Do not misunderstand my 
weeping; that is nature feeling the wrench 
from the objects of its affection; but my no- 
bler part says, 'I desire to depart and to be 
with Christ, which is far better.'" 

Her friend Miss Neele thus records the cir- 
cumstances which immediately followed this 
announcement: "When I first saw her after 
Dr. Moore's opinion of more immediate danger 
had been communicated to her, she was lying 
on the sofa in the drawing-room. As I slowly 
opened the door, she held out her arms to me, 
with a smile, as if to remove my hesitation; 
and though for a few moments the tear flowed 
silently down her cheek, she said almost imme- 
diately, ' When Mr. Sherman told me all, I felt 
conscious that neither heart nor pulse moved 
more quickly, in the least.' I said, 'Perhaps 



AT ST. LEONARD'S AND HASTINGS. 



277 



it was not such a surprise to you; I dare say 
you were better prepared to receive the intelli- 
gence than we were.' She answered, ' No, T 
was not at all prepared; I had given up all 
expectation of ever being well again, but I 
had no idea that I should leave you so soon.' 
Thus, 'perfect peace' within produced perfect 
calmness without; and as 'love begets love,' 
so calmness produced calmness; and when 
she subsequently dictated, with unruffled and 
even cheerful composure, various arrangements 
which she wished made after her decease, it 
was scarcely possible for those around her to 
feel agitated, though often themselves wonder- 
ing how they could be so calm while watching 
the gradual decay of one so beloved." 

On February 13th, she left Hastings for the 
parsonage, and arrived there far less fatigued 
than could have been anticipated from her 
great weakness; never more to leave it till 
carried to "the house appointed for all living." 



278 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



CHAPTER IX. 

DEATH AND FUNERAL. 

Immediately after Mrs. Sherman's return to 
her heloved home, she began to set her house 
in order, as one expecting soon to leave it. 
AVith regard to herself, every thing had long 
been ready, and she but waited the Master's 
summons to enter into his serviee in the upper 
sanctuary ; but there were arrangements with 
respect to others which she was desirous of 
having carried into execution before her de- 
cease. Her heart was much set on seeing 
once more those friends with whom she had 
prayed and labored, and on bidding them fare- 
well ; yet her weakness was such, that her med- 
ical attendants feared the excitement which 
such numbers would occasion, especially as 
both the visitors and the invalid were likely 
to be much affected with the interview. She 
overruled the objection, by assuring them that 
the excitement would be trifling compared with 
the refreshment it would afford her spirit; and 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. 



a79 



that as her recovery was now past all reason- 
able hope, she could not resist the gratification 
it would be to herself and to her associates and 
classes. Anticipating also that the Saviour 
might call her suddenly to himself, that as her 
disease increased in power her weakness would 
be proportionably greater, and that if the pres- » 
ent opportunity were not seized, she might be 
unable to see them at all, she determined on 
meeting them as speedily as possible. Accord- 
ingly, on Lord's-day, February 14, when the 
Sunday afternoon class met, all its members 
M'ere invited to come into the study, where, 
reposing on a couch, she was waiting to re- 
ceive them. Between forty and fifty young 
persons were introduced to her singly. Each 
was welcomed with an inexpressibly sweet 
smile, and had a kind word addressed to her; 
and those among them who traced their con- 
version to her faithful labors, had a special 
sentence of warning and encouragement. Ex- 
pecting to see her emaciated and sinking al- 
most unconscious into the arms of death, they 
were surprised to behold a countenance radiant 
with heavenly joy and to hear words of life 



280 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



and salvation from lips anointed •w^th grace. 
Each kissed her hand and received from her a 
hook as a dying gift. Her husband commend- 
ed them to God in her presence, by a brief 
prayer. 

On the next day, ]\Ionday, the mothers ot 
the humbler class met in the school-room for 
their usual exercise, and were invited to come 
and take a last glance of the loving face wliich 
had so oft welcomed them with smiles, cheered 
them in trouble, and instructed them in duty. 
As no previous notice had been given, they 
were taken by surprise ; but their behavior on 
this occasion justified the dying saint's repeat- 
ed observation, that only let the pious poor feel 
you take an interest in their welfare, without 
abridging their independence, and they will 
honor and love you. It was delightful to wit- 
ness their tenderness, respect, and gratitude — 
the subdued tones in which they spoke to their 
benefactress, and the delicacy which they ex- 
hibited during the sad interview. Shaking the 
hand of each, and receiving the kiss of charity 
upon her own, she bade them farewell with a 
look of affectionate regard that will not be 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. 281 

easily forgotten. "Where special circumstances 
required, she addressed a few words suitable 
to the state of the mothers before her, which 
melted many hearts. Her husband delivered 
to them the dying charge of their friend and 
leader, to adhere to Christ and his service, to 
maintain their maternal association, and to 
meet her in glory ; and then in a short prayer 
commended them also to God. 

On Wednesday, the ladies who had been ac- 
customed to meet at her house once a month 
to talk over their common hope, and the best 
means of training their children for heaven, as- 
sembled by appointment for a similar purpose. 
When told that they were waiting to be intro- 
duced to her, and asked if she had any mes- 
sage, as she could with difficulty speak to 
them herself, she said, "I am afraid to say all 
I feel on the subject of these maternal associa- 
tions, lest I should seem to undervalue any 
other society connected with the chapel; but I 
do think them of the first importance, and 
though I trust all will continue to flourish, I 
would rather gjiy should decline than these." 
She then added with energy, " Oh, tell the la- 



232 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



dies, never, never, never to forsake the mater- 
nal associations." 

On Thursday, between thirty and forty of 
the young ladies belonging to the select class 
came also to bid adieu to their loving teacher. 
One of them wrote to her after the interview, 
"The legacy you have bequeathed to me, your 
' collection for the Jews,' I receive with a heavy 
heart, not unwillingly or murmuringly, I hope, 
but with a consciousness of unworthiness and 
unfitness for the task. I consider you have 
conferred a great privilege on me, and I shall 
prize very highly these parting proofs of your 
affectionate regard. The meeting on Thurs- 
day can never be forgotten : may it have a last- 
ing and beneficial effect on all. We then saw 
that true religion was not merely a profession, 
but a reality. My prayer has ever been, ' Lord, 
spare her,' yet the wish seems selfish to detain 
you from going home to your heavenly Father. 

"The cheering thought that Jesus is the 
resurrection and the life, strengthens my faith, 
and enables me to look beyond the silent tomb 
to the blissful state of those who are for ever 
wjth the Lord, knowing that if I am among 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. 283 

his believing children, hut a few years at most 
will separate us, and then we shall meet again 
where partings are unknown. May you have 
your heart's desire in meeting all your beloved 
class there. Many will then appear among the 
children whom G-od has given you ; and though 
since you have been laid aside from active use- 
fulness, the thought may sometimes have arisen 
that you have been useless, God has in many 
instances, though perhaps unknown to you, 
blessed your instructions to others. Many a 
kind hint thrown out by you has been received, 
and the advice attended to. No one could ever 
mistake your earnestness and affection, your 
constant desire to win our souls to Christ. 
' We remenaber your sayings,' and in looking 
back on the past, desire to feel grateful that 
we have been privileged with your example 
and kind instructions so long. 

"Accept, my dearest friend, my best and 
sincere thanks for all your kindness td me; I 
have indeed been a favored child. I have al- 
ways considered myself as one of your chil- 
dren, for it was in your class, ten years ago, 
that I first felt a desire to be the T^ord's. I 



284 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



owe much to you in other respects: in any 
difficulty you were the first to encourage me; 
in undertaking any new and untried duties, 
the knowledge that I had my friend's prayers 
stimulated me to exertion when I began to feel 
weary and despair of success, and especially 
in winning the timid disciple, by setting forth 
religion in its sweetest aspects, and by the love- 
ly exhibition in yourself of the Christian char- 
acter. Farewell, dearest friend; may you still 
continue to enjoy much of your Saviour's 
presence and perfect peace in the prospect of 
death." 

The refreshment of a spiritual exposition of 
scripture and a brief prayer to an invalid, is 
well known by those who have been in a state 
of suffering. It was the privilege of her hus- 
band to be her daily minister, and morning 
and evening to seize the most favorable oppor- 
tunities to conduct her tender spirit into the 
green p'astures of the good Shepherd; but it 
was suggested to her that a visit from some 
man of God might cheer and help her. She 
immediately said, "I have no special wish for 
any one: if Mr. Greorge Clayton could spare a 



DEATH AST) FUNERAL. 



285 



few minutes, I should like to hear his voice in 
prayer; his gentle manner would suit my 
weakness, and he is sure to say something to 
ine ahout Christ, my gracious Master, and his 
salvation." 

An intimation of her wish was enough; the 
Rev. Gr. Clayton was with her the next day, 
and continued his kind attentions till prayer 
was exchanged for praise. The comfort she 
derived from these visits was indeed great, and 
she felt deeply her obligations to her sympa- 
thizing friend. The elders of the church, with 
whom she had for twelve years walked in har- 
monious cooperation, and who Jiad ever shown 
a readiness to aid her in all her works of love 
to souls, were entreated by her, each in his 
turn, to come and commend her spirit to God. 
The Rev. Dr. Harris and the Rev. Newman 
Hall also favored her with their counsels and 
prayers. The constant attentions and invalu- 
able spiritual aid of her old friend Miss Neele, 
were unspeakably delightful to the invalid. 
She often remarked how gracious her Saviour 
had been to provide her such a companion in 
the season of sickness. To her memoranda 



286 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



the following pages are indebted for many cir- 
cumstances and observations, which must oth- 
erwise have been wholly lost. 

The Bible was the only book which she cared 
to hear read, except occasionally a hymn from 
the invalid's hymn-book, or her husband's se- 
lection, with which she was most familiar. At 
first she was guided as usual in her reading by 
the "Scripture Calendar," which she preferred 
to any other, because it arranged for the peru- 
sal of the New Testament and Psalms twice, 
and the Old Testament once, in the course of 
the year; but now she said, "I think I may 
be allowed to pick and choose a chapter suited 
to my state," alluding to a remark which she 
had often made, that the whole Bible should 
be regularly read. The first chapter of the 
epistle to the Colossians might be called her 
favorite ; she asked for it to be read more fre- 
quently than any other; the first and second 
chapters of Ephesians, and the eighth of Ro- 
mans, with the thanksgiving Psalms, were also 
often selected. 

After being in bed a short time, one evening, 
she said, "Oh, I am so comfortable, in perfect 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. 



287 



peace ; I do realize that promise, ' Thou wilt 
keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed 
on thee.' Now for a chapter, that sublime one 
which speaks of the hope laid up in lieaven." 
When it had been read, she exclaimed, "Oh, I 
want a distiller to distil all its sweetness; my 
poor mind cannot dwell long enough upon it 
to extract the joys it affords." Those words 
being quoted, " Ye have need of patience," 
she said, "That does not seem applicable to 
me ; I mean, I have so many mercies that my 
patience does not seem tried." On the next 
day, hearing the merriment of her children in 
another room, her eyes filled with tears, and 
she exclaimed, "Oh, that sweet prattle; those 
enchanting voices to a mother's ear." Think- 
ing they were too noisy, her friend was leaving 
the room to induce them to be quiet, but she 
said, "Oh, don't check them; I love to hear 
their joyous notes when I can bear them; but 
I cannot help feeling a little anxious, because 
I fear there is some danger of the little one 
being spoiled, she will be such a pet." Of 
another she said, "Oh, for some hopeful sign 
before I die." 



288 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



February 21st was a day of comparative 
ease, which allowed her to have a little more 
conversation with her husband and friend than 
her cough usually permitted. Her spirit seem- 
ed on the borders of the heavenly Canaan, look- 
ing in and returning every now and then to tell 
those around her of its blessedness. "I want 
to mention one subject," she said to her "friend, 
"though I hardly like to do so, as perhaps such 
a thing may never be contemplated; but as 
there was an obituary of dear mamma in the 
Evangelical Magazine, perhaps, as a minister's 
wife, there might be one of me, and it is so 
repugnant to my feelings." "Had you not 
better," said her friend, "leave that to the 
judgment of others ; it will not hurt your feel- 
ings then." 

"Well," she replied, "there are no papers, 
not one. I kept a diary once, but I destroyed 
it, as the possibility of its ever being made 
public so completely spoiled the profit and 
comfort I derived from it, that I would not 
keep it; I felt it was no longer only between 
God and my own soul. It was chiefly a rec- 
ord of my sentiments before I was decided, 



DEATH AND FUNERAL 



289 



and was very useful to me then. If there 
should he one, 0 pray for a spirit of wisdom 
and judgment on the writer; else it will be 
such a partial account, dictated by a heart 
overflowing with love." On repeating that 
verse to her, "For thou, Lord, wilt bless the 
righteous, with favor wilt thou compass him 
as with a shield," she remarked, "What a 
comfort to have no opposition from man, to 
have no human enemy ; and even Satan seems 
hardly able to get at me, I have so many pray- 
ing friends, but specially my Saviour interced- 
ing for me." 

Her husband read to her the following quaint 
though beautiful hymn of good Mr. Berridge: 

"The Lord of the earth, to Adam allied, 
Sends messengers forth to fetch him a bride ; 
To many he chooseth his love to impart, 
And none he refuseth who give him their heart. 

Strange marriage indeed for heaven's fair King, 
Yet Jesus will wed with any poor thing; 
He liketh the maimed, the halt, and the blind, 
The poor and defamed, the lowest in kind. 

So, after the banns are' published below, 
Comes joining of hands, with joined hearts too; 
Then debts are discharged, though heavy they be, 
And she is enlarged, from bondage set free. 

et,.rn..r, 1 9 



290 



JMARTHA SHERMAN. 



A rich wedding suit is to. the bride brought, 
Of love the sweet fruit, and by the King wrought ; 
With this he does cover her nakedness quite, 
And deck her all over as fair as the light. 

A ring for the bride is from the King sent. 
With jewels beside, to deck her heart meant; 
With these she grows loving and modest and mild, 
In good works improving, and seemeth a child. 

Now, Christ is her song, her joy, and her hope; 
She for him will sigh and long to look up: 
And he from his tower peeps on her e'erwhile, 
And tells his love to her and drops her a smile. 

At length the approach of wedding is come, 
And lo, a state-coach to fetch the bride home; 
Kind angels are bringing her fast as she list, 
And up she goes singing Hosanna to Christ." 

"Oh, that is exquisite; read that last verso 
again." "But you did not expect to go up 
singing, did you?" "Yes, I did, though I 
was under a cloud ; heaviness may endure for 
a night, but joy cometh in the morning: I 
know I shall go up singing; read it again." 

On another evening, after much pain and 
exhaustion, "Oh, it is hard to get into bed 
without prayer; but He knows I would pray 
if I could ; my knees, in health, have bent with 
cheerfulness before him; my most hallowed 



- DEATH AND FUNERAL. 291 

joys have been in the devotions of my closet, 
and the savor of that communion is not lost 
yet ; but I can now only mentally cry, in brief 
sentences, for his help and favor." Again, af- 
ter a little pause, "I fear I do not feel that 
love to immortal souls which I ought; surely 
the nearer I get to heaven, the more I ought 
to feel for souls. If one scheme fails, love 
devises anothoj', till it accomplishes its ob- 
ject; but I seem to do nothing for Christ 
and souls now. I am obliged to resolve all 
my difficulties into this appeal, 'Lord, thou 
knowest all things; thou knowest that I love 
thee.' " 

On the evening of February 24th, she fell 
asleep on the sofa, biit was continually awaked 
by the cough. Upon being suddenly aroused 
by a distressing fit, she said, "Is it not strange 
that no sooner do I drop asleep than the cough 
awakes me;" but added cheerfully, "It is only 
a trial of patience; I sometimes think my pa- 
tience is not exercised, but the poor body does 
need it sometimes." To a request that she 
would not destroy the notes of her class sub- 
jects, as she wished, and as she had almost 



£92 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



all her other papers, she repUed, " Oh, they are 
so defective, they contain little explanation of 
the great doctrines of the gospel ; a reference 
and a hint were qviite enough for me as a 
guide while speaking; my heart was so full 
of them I knew I should not forget them ; but 
I should not like my children, when they 
grow up, to think they were omitted by me. 
It is not the gospel, if they are left out; it 
may be truth, but not 'the truth as it is in 
Jesus,' not glad tidings of great joy to all 
people. Usefulness to souls, which consists 
in biassing the mind of the hearer to heaven- 
ly things, so that they become natural to him, 
will never be effected but by the motives, doc- 
trines, and influences of the gospel. This I 
conceive is what Christ means, when he says, 
'Sanctify them through thy truth; thy word 
is truth.'" 

February 25th was a day of extreme suffer- 
ing; but during an interval of ease, her hus- 
band uttered a few words on Christ as the 
way to the Father, and how safely and cheer- 
fully afflicted spirits might take advantage of 
that appointed access. "Yes," she replied, 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. 



293 



"old Berridge just describes my feelings on 
that very subject : 

" ' Of Christ I chirp and sing, 

And when he casts an eye, 
I flutter up with brisker wing 
And warble -in the sky. 

Such is my pleasant task, 
To sing of this sweet road ; 

And if the cause a stranger ask, 
It is my way to God.' " 

When laid down for rest at night, being asked 
what chapter she would like read, she whis- 
pered with all her remaining strength, "One 
of the beautiful psalms of praise." 

March 2. — Her exhaustion was so great 
that she thought death was approaching. The 
next day, when a little recovered, she said, "I 
thought it surely must be death ; it was a sol- 
emn moment, a solemn moment indeed, but I 
was not agitated ; I felt even then that I had 
nothing to do but to commit myself to Christ, 
and it seemed quite easy and natural to do 
so." When a little refreshed by sleep, she 
l?egan speaking of the illness from which her 
husband was at that time suffering. "It is 
such an unexpected trial; however, I must roll 



294 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



that on the Lord." Being reminded of the 
command, "In every thing by prayer and 
supplication, with thanksgiving, let your re- 
quests be made known unto Grod," she replied, 
" Thanksgiving seems even more congenial to 
me, or perhaps I should say more spontaneous, 
than prayer ; I feel it specially on first waking. 
Just now, when I awoke, my heart seemed to 
go forth in praise, and I felt such confidence 
in God, when I thought of my dear husband's 
illness." 

The next evening her husband repeated a 
hymn which he had seen in the collection of 
the Rev. J. Gauntlett. On hearing it, she re- 
marked, "That is sweetness itself — the most 
comprehensive hymn I ever heard for a dying 
Christian. You must repeat it to me till I 
can go through it without a mistake ;" after a 
third repetition she mastered the four verses, 
and almost every day, till her death, quoted 
the whole or some verse. The hymn is as fol- 
lows: 

" What is it for a saint to die, 

That we the thought should fear? 
'T is but to pass the heavenly sky, 
And leave pollution here. 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. §95 

True, Jordan's stream is wondrous deep, 

And Canaaa's walls are high ; 
But He that guards us while we sleep, 

Will* guide us when we die. 

A parting world, a gaping tomb, 

Corruption and disease, 
Are thorny paths to heaven, our home, 

And doors to endless bliss ! 

Eternal glory just before. 

And Jesus waiting there; 
A heavenly gale to waft us o'er — 

What have the saints to fear?" 

It was found necessary, for the last three or 
four months, to administer an opiate almost 
daily, to procure rest at night, and she some- 
times expressed a fear lest it should occasion 
her; mind to wander: "Should I become irri- 
table, or be permitted to say any thing incon- 
sistent with the Christian profession, I hope all 
who know me will remember it is an infirmity, 
the effect of disease or medicine. Entreat my 
friends to pray, that if it be the will of G-od, 
my intellect may be preserved unclouded to 
the last." Her desire was fully granted; for 
just at this time God was pleased to direct her 
friends to Dr. Maclean, of Montague-square, 

* The word in the original hymn is "can," hut she always used 
"will," and corrected others when they repeated "can." 



296 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



who, in conjunction with her ordinary medical 
attendant, Mr. Newth, so judiciously adminis- 
tered the necessary opiates, and so carefully 
watched their operation, that, while unexpect- 
ed relief was often ohtaincd, the dreaded evil 
was never experienced. She frequently said 
how deeply she was indebted to her physician 
for his skill and kindness, and how earnestly 
she would have recommended him to others 
in similar circumstances, had her life been 
spared. 

As she had for several months been denied 
the privilege of partaking of the Lord's sup- 
per, she wished to have it administered to her 
privately, in connnunion with her own family 
and a few chosen friends. But in so large and 
affectionate a circle, it was found difficult to 
reduce the number sufficiently, as she was 
unable to bear the excitement of a large as- 
sembly. It was therefore determined to con- 
fine tlae little company to the members of her 
family, the elders of the church, the Rev. J. 
S. Eastmead, and the kind friend who had 
undertaken her young ladies' class. On March 
16, they assembled in the study, where she lay 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. 



297 



on a couch, and the visitors, seventeen in num- 
ber, sat around the room. That "upper room " 
no one who was present will ever forget. She 
had often expressed a desire to "hear that 
sweet hymn sung once more." 

" There is a happy land, far, far away, 
Where saints in glory stand, bright, bright as day; 
Oh, how they sweetly sing. Worthy is our Saviour Kins;, 
Loud let his praises ring, praise, praise for aye. 

Come to this happy land, come, come away; 

Why will ye doubting stand, why still delay? 

Oh, we shall happy be, when from sin and sorrow free ; 

Lord, we shall live with thee, blest, blest for aye. 

Bright in that happy land beams every eye — 
Kept by a Father's hand, love cannot die. 
On then, to glory run, be a crown and kingdom won, 
And bright above the sun, reign, reign for aye." 

It was therefore suggested that some of the 
children from the Infant-school should sing it, 
before the commencement of the sacramental 
service. They were placed in an adjoining 
room, whence their infantine voices, softened 
by distance and subdued by the solemnity of 
the occasion, cheered without exciting the 
spirit of the precious invalid, so soon about to 
enter that "happy land" of which they so 
sweetly sung. 



298 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



The address of Mr. Clayton, and his mode of 
conducting the whole service, wer« peculiarly 
appropriate, edifying, and affecting; and the 
delight she experienced, from the refreshment 
of soul and the sensible enjoyment of her Sav- 
iour's presence at the celebration of this feast 
of love, was much increased by the addition 
to the number of its guests, for the first time, 
of two of her servants, one of whom attrib- 
uted her decision to the exliibition of the 
power of religion to sustain and cheer in the 
hour of sickness, which she had witnessed in 
her beloved mistress. 

"When asked what arrangement she wished 
to be made, she answered, "Let that be left 
to Mr. Clayton ; but there are two parts of the 
communion-service which I should like to hear 
again: the prayer commencing, 'We do not 
presume to come to this Thy table trusting in 
our own righteousness;' and the anthems, be- 
ginning, ' Therefore with angels and archan- 
gels, and with all the company of heaven,' and 
'Glory be to God on high:'" she added, "I 
hope all will join; / will if I am able;" and 
this she did in as audible a whisper as her 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. ' 299 

weakness would allow. Her countenance was 
lighted with the sunshine of heaven, and she 
seemed, as she said after the service was con- 
cluded, as though she was but echoing the 
joyous notes of the angels and the spirits of 
the just made perfect. After a collection had 
been made in the room by her special request 
for the Lord's poor, which amounted to about 
twelve pounds, to be afterwards distributed by 
the elders among some objects which she es- 
pecially selected, the little company separated 
to meet no more unitedly till they sit down at 
the marriage-supper of the Lamb. 

March 18. — One of her young friends who 
came to take leave of her, expecting only to 
shake hands without speaking, being surprised 
to find her so cheerful and animated, said, "I 
am glad to see you so well." The dear invalid 
answered with a sinile, 

"Jesus can make a dying bed 

Feel soft as downy pillows are; 
While on kis breast I lean my head, 

And breathe my life out sweetly there." 

March 19th was the Sabbath. After hear- 
ing the notes of the morning sermon, on 2 



300 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



Samuel 23 : 5, read, she remarked, " Yes, I 
know the covenant is sure, and it is sure to 
me ; and though I cannot always realize it, 
that does not alter its security. All these 
glorious things seem to carnal reason a dream, 
hut they are not; I feel them to be heavenly 
realities." 

March 26. — The symptoms were very alarm- 
ing, and immediate danger was apprehended, 
but towards evening she revived, and was 
cheerful as usual. When the family were at 
chapel she said, I wonder whether I shall be 
here next Sunday. I am come to this point 
now — anticipatian ; whenever the message 
comes it will be welcome. The pins of the 
tabernacle must be taken out, and they are 
being removed very gently ; how I shall rejoice 
when the last is pulled up and the tabernacle 
falls." Her friend replied, "What a blessing 
to meet the last enemy without fear." She 
immediately said, with great composure, "1 
have no fear ; he is not an enemy, at least he 
has no power to hurt me." 

A friend remarking, "Well, there is not 
much to live for," with quickness she observed, 



DEATH AJ^D FUNERAL. 



301 



"Oh, but I have much to live for. I have no 
sympathy with those who talk thus. I sup- 
pose I have had fewer crooks than they ; my 
I)ath has been such an unusually happy one; 
but should it not be a Christian's desire, if it 
be the will of God, to live and glorify him by 
the spread of his truth? Since I have felt 
there was no hope of recovery, I have been 
wonderfully relieved from anxiety respecting 
the dear ones left behind. I cannot suffer 
myself to think much about them, but I know 
that He to whom I have committed my soul 
will take care of them. My early removal is 
indeed a bhght upon all our plans; is it not? 
I may say 'I am cut off in the midst of my 
days,' we were so happy." Thus she showed 
that her composure did not arise from insensi- 
bility. 

April 19. — An old friend and former play- 
fellow called to take leave of her ; in childhood 
and youth they had spent many, many happy 
days together, and the sight of him fdled her 
eyeis with tears; but she soon recovered, and 

said, "Oh, J , tears are not often seen in 

my eyes, but I am so weak in body and mind 



302 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



now, I am scarcely able to speak to you ; 
but I shall soon be where my tongue will be 
loosed, and I shall serve my G-od without 
weakness either of soul or body. Mind; be 
sure you meet me there." Then, giving him 
"Christ on the Cross" as a parting memo- 
rial, she added, "The Cross of Christ is all 
my support and hope. Oh, that I had a 
tongue to urge all to seek refuge there. Is it 
not a comfort to feel the sting of death re- 
moved ?" 

The intelligent and manly traveller whom 
she thus pointedly addressed, was quite over- 
come, giving evidence by his emotion that 
neither her words nor her manner of uttering 
them had been lost on him. May all her 
wishes be realized. When he was gone, she 
said, "I did not convey half my meaning; I 
wanted to exalt my Master more." She usu- 
ally dropped a word in season to each of her 
visitors and attendants, and when unable to 
do so, it was one of her greatest crosses. "I 
know," she said, "I can say little worth being 
remembered ; but a word which at another 
time might be thought little <of, spoken by one 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. 



303 



under my circumstances, may make an im- 
pression and be remembered hereafter." 

April 27. — This being a day of increased 
pain and Aveariness, there was an expression 
of distress on her usually placid countenance 
which it was very affecting to witness. A 
promise being whispered to her, immediately 
a sweet smile, the only sign of pleasure she 
was able to give, confirmed the beautiful sen- 
timent of Cowper : 

" How sweet the name o{ Jesus sounds 
In a believer's ear." 

On her friend expressing a wish that some 
resting-place could be contrived for her back, 
as she sat up wearied on the sofa, afraid to lie 
down on account of the irritation of the cough, 
she replied, "I shall soon have one," and then 
looking up joyfully, asked, evidently hoping to 
be answered in the affirmative, "Do you not 
think I am sinking now?" 

April 28. — She had often said that the time 
which she most enjoyed was just before going to 
sleep, when the cough which was usually very 
troublesome after first lying down in bed, was 
beginning to subside a little; but this after 



304 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



noon she called her friend to her, and said, "I 
have had such a dehghtful time for thinking, 
so unusual during the day. My communion 
with my Lord was sweet indeed. Who says 
that religion is not a reality? Oh, if they had 
enjoyed the precious promises of God, the as- > 
surance of the forgiveness of, sins, and the cer- 
tainty of dwelling for ever in a house not made 
with hands eternal in the heavens, because 
purchased by my Redeemer's blood and pre- 
pared by his glorious residence, as I have done 
this day, they would say as I can, ' that which 
we have seen with our eyes, and our hands 
have handled, declare we unto you.' 1 must 
say I was glad to hear that the expectoration 
was unfavorable, because I know it is a sign 
that the end is near. Do you think it is wrong 
to feel so? I have been examining, and I do 
not think it is. Oh, the thought of being soon 
freed from sin, it is too much, too overpower- 
ing. I do not think I wish death, to be re- 
leased from suffering, though the flesh will 
shrink from that." 

April 29th was a day in which extreme 
weakness was experienced. When she heard 



DEATH AND FUKERAL. 



305 



the voice of her vounsrest child, she called her, 
and had her placed for a moment on her knees. 
Looking at her with inexpressible tenderness, 
she said, "Mamma is going to heaven; will 
my precious child meet me there?" The dear 
little creature replied with energy, "Yes, mam- 
ma." The answer awoke strong emotion, and 
prevented her from saying more. 

May 10. — The annual sermon for the Lon- 
don Missionary Society was preached at Surrey 
chapel by the Rev. Dr. Candlish. When her 
friend went to her in the morning she was 
much exhausted for want of rest; and when 
the text was repeated, "Though I walk 
through the valley of the shadow of death, I 
will fear no evil; for thou art with me; thy 
rod and thy staff, they comfort me," she whis- 
pered something, which her friend thought 
was asking for a hymn, and went to fetch the 
book; but .she repeated in a loud whisper, 
striking the bed to intimate a feeling she was 
unable' to express, "He never will forsake me." 
In the course of the morning, Toplady's hymn 
was read, beginning, "AVhen languor and dis- 
ease invade." On coming to that verse, 

She mi an. 20 



306 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



"Sweet to rejoice in lively hope, 

That when iny change shall come, 
Angels will bear my spirit up 
To my eternal home," 

she said, "Ah, angels carried Rowland Hill'a 
spirit from this room. AVill it not be an honor 
to be escorted into my Saviour's presence from 
the same spot?" 

After the service she expressed a wish "to 
see dear Mr. James of Birmingham; he was 
the instrument of bringing my husband to 
Surrey chapel ; his piety has always appeared 
to me very eminent, and God has signally 
owned his treatises, which have but one object, 
the winning of souls to our divine Lord. I 
should like to shake him by the hand and hear 
his voice in prayer, before I meet him in heav- 
en." Mr. James came in, and thus describes 
his impressions. 

"The interview which I was privileged to 
hold with Mrs. Sherman, about a week before 
her dismissal, was a scene to which I recollect 
no parallel, and which it is quite impossible ff>r 
me either to forget or describe. Her counte- 
nance, beautiful even in death, wa« lighted up 
with a smile that looked rather like the joy 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. 307 

which we can conceive illuminates the soul 
emerging from the cold stream of death, as a 
dreaded event that was over, than of one who 
was looking forward to it as just at hand. It 
was not only a smile in death, but it was a 
smile at death. 

"It was the morning of the missionary ser- 
mon in this place; when she could hear the 
sound of the organ and the chorus of praise 
rising from the congregated host, and which in 
bygone times she had helped to swell. She 
could hear the hum of voices and the sounds 
of recognition and gratulation beneath her 
window, of the tribes that had come up to 
Zion; and there was she, in the chamber of 
sickness, on the bed of death, contrasting her 
situation with the gladsome circumstances of 
multitudes in all the vigor of life and the joy- 
ousness of health. If a momentary cloud, a 
passing gloom, had come over the spirit from 
such a contrast, who could have wondered — 
yea, who docs not wonder that it did not? 
But it. did not. The Sun of righteousness in 
cloudless splendor shone upon her soul, which 
reflected his beams in that, I repeat, most 



308 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



iieavenly smile that I ever saw upon the coun- 
tenance of any human being in life or death. 
She seemed standing -svithin the precincts of 
glory ; and the only thing that reminded me of 
mortality was the wasted form and the natural 
tear she dropped — hut wiped it soon — which, 
though it glistened in her eye, still sparkling, 
did not for a moment interrupt the inefTable 
joy. I felt, yea, I said to her, 'If this he dy- 
ing, who would not lie down and die with you, 
if they could die like you?' She would have 
talked if the strength of her body had been 
equal to the vigor of her soul; but every syl- 
lable she uttered was descriptive of a 'peace 
that passeth understanding,' a 'joy unspeak- 
able and full of glory.' 

"Could such a scene as that be witnessed 
in public — as it must be witnessed to be 
known, for no words can describe it — Chris- 
tianity would, one should suppose, then appear 
to all men a divine reality, a heavenly plant, 
an eternal substance, and no man would have 
power or heart, except he M-ere a demon, to 
say aught against it. Before that scene the 
loftiest philosopher must be humbled, infidelity 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. 



309 



turn pale and silent, and folly and vice, for a 
brief season, become serious, and disposed to 
say, 'Let mo die the death of the righteous, 
and let my last end be like hers.' " 

Mat 14. — One of the elders who visited her 
stated that he could never forget the peculiar 
and inexpressible unction which accompanied 
the few sentences she was enabled to utter, 
which gave him the impression that heaven 
had indeed come down to her, and that she 
could not be far from it. One he particularly 
records: looking at him as Mr. James de- 
scribes, she said, "I am now lying at the foot 
of His cross; I shall soon stand before his 
throne." A cloud, though a bright one, seem- 
ed in the evening to rest upon her spirit. She 
was, however, able to converse with her hus- 
band; but how can he describe the interview? 
She was the comforter and he the mourner. 
Her tongue dropped sentences like sweet- 
smelling myrrh to his afflicted spirit ; her faith 
grasped the promises; and twice or thrice, 
adapting the action to the metaphor, she put 
some of them, which she repeated, into his 
hands, as a wife's legacy — "the words of a 



310 



MARTHA SHEIIMAN. 



living and faithful God." Then looking for- 
ward to the "rising growth" of her children, 
she described Christ as taking first the eldest, 
and guiding her as a lamb into his fold — saw 
her useful in teaching and gathering others to 
her Saviour: then the little one, who by her 
docility and tenderness during her affliction 
had greatly endeared herself to her mother's 
heart, following her sister in the same happy 
course, "blessed and a blessing." A pause 
ensued; she appeared full of thought; the 
tears gushed from her eyes, and in tones of 
tenderest sympathy, she exclaimed, "0 God, 
my son, my son — convert, save my son!" 

Recovering herself and resuming her heav- 
enly smile, she took her husband's hand, say- 
ing, "Thirteen years of more bliss has been 
granted to us than ordinarily falls to the lot of 
most, even of the children of God. We have 
had much to do for Christ, and that has made 
us happy ; we have talked of his grace, united 
in his ordinances, and loved his service; my 
work, feeble as it has been, is done; but 
yours — the Lord lengthen your term of labor, 
for the sake of my babes — may be extensive. 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. 311 

Forgive a wife, if with her dying hreath she 
i'dj, preach Christ and his salvation more fully, 
more conspicuously, more feelingly than ever. 
It has been, I know, your aim to exalt him all 
your life ; hut let your remaining efforts in the 
pulpit extol him and make him very high. I 
am sure I am very near death, and fearing I 
may not be able to speak when he comes, it 
has comforted me to tell you my heart. Do 
not weep, cheer up; Christ your master will 
give you strength and grace, and we shall 
meet after a few short years to dwell in the 
full blaze of glory and immortality." 

May 15. — The members of the London Mis- 
sionary Society met at Surrey chapel, to cele- 
brate the death of Christ by partaking of the 
Lord's supper. After the service, the Rev. D. 
J. Smith of Dublin prayed with her, but her 
exhaustion was so great that she lay apparent- 
ly unconscious of all around. About an hour 
afterwards, the Rev. James Parsons of York 
saw her; she h^id by that time so far recovered 
as to be able to whisper a few words in answer 
to questions which he proposed, and to attend 
to the petitions which he kindly offered. The 



312 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



next day she i^aid, " The last hymn which they 
sang in the chapel reminded me how they 
were engaged, and I felt I could join in spirit 
with them. Afterwards, such joy was diffused 
through my soul that I cannot describe the 
sensation it produced. I seemed to be holding 
communion with a dear friend whom I had 
not seen for some time, and the moments were 
so precious that even the presence of those good 
men was, at first, an interruption." Being told 
that the Rev. Mr. Smith concluded the service 
with a very impressive prayer, in which she 
was specially mentioned, she replied, "Was 
not the joy I felt at that very time an imme- 
diate answer to that prayer? That promise 
was fulfilled in this instance. While they are 
yet .speaking, I will hear." 

On the 17th of May, it was evident that 
death was approaching; but to the surprise of 
all, she rallied again, and slept tolerably well 
during the night. 

About twelve o'clock, on the 18th, no doubt 
could remain what the result must soon be, 
The first intimation of the actual approach of 
death was given by the precious invalid her- 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. 



313 



self. She took the hand of the nurse, smiled, 
and shook it, and beckoned the cook to come 
and receive the same token of aflfection. Then 
looking round for the housemaid, in whom for 
four years she had taken the deepest interest, 
she grasped her hand when she entered the 
room with great emotion, and pointed upwards. 
The struggle for breath, the excessive pain in 
the side, and the convulsive agony of the whole 
frame were fearful; but the celestial joy with- 
in surpassed the expectations of all the family, 
every member of which was present, except 
her venerable father. 

To the last, her intellect was vmimpaired, 
and her speech sufficiently loud to be heard. 
The hour of death is always solemn; it was 
specially felt to be so on this occasion; and 
the fear was, lest any intrusive conversation 
should interrupt the communion, which it was 
evident her sanctified spirit was holding with 
her Redeemer. None doubted her safety, if 
she had not uttered a word ; yet for the con- 
viction of some and the comfort of all, a few 
questions at intervals were put, the answers to 
which showed the stability of her hope. 



314 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



" The long looked-for hour is come, my 
dear," said her husband. "It is," she replied, 
"blessed be my Saviour." "You have long 
professed that Christ was precious; is he pre- 
cious to you now?" Lifting up her almost 
fleshless anus and hands, like the wings of a 
bird ready to fly, she let them fall on the bed, 
and exclaimed, "Infinitely, infinitely!" "Have 
you, my precious one, any consciousness of the 
immediate presence of Jesus Christ?" Pausing 
for a moment, she replied, "No; I do not know 
what that is; my consciousness is the con- 
sciousness of faith. I know that he is with 
me, by the support and ineffable consolations 
he pours into my soul; but I shall soon know 
what it is, for I shall be with him, and be like 
him." "Then, like David, you can say you 
fear no evil in the dark valley." She replied, 
" The valley is very long, but not dark, for he 
is with me in it; his rod and his staff" comfort 
me." " Then you can bear testimony to your 
children that a life spent in the service of God 
is a most pleasant and profitable life?" As if 
making an ■ effort beyond her strength to say 
something which her heart dictated, but find- 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. 315 

ing it impossible, she again raised her arms as 
before, and replied with energy, "7 can; I 
canP "What now, when earth is vanishing, 
is your sole dependence for acceptance with 
God at the great day?" "Only the perfect 
and finished righteousness of the Lord Jesus 
Christ: 

" ' Noth-ing in my hand I bring ; 
Simply to the cross I cling.' " 

Many other precious words and sentences 
fell from her lips; but these will suffice to 
show the fulness of her joy, and what an 
abundant entrance was given her into the 
kingdom of her Grod and Saviour. At a little 
after three o'clock she requested to be left 
with the servants, but in a few minutes the 
family were summoned to witness the last 
convulsive struggle with the enemy, which 
had just commenced, and at twenty minutes 
to four o'clock, on Thursday afternoon. May 
18; 1848, in the 42d year of her age, she fell 
asleep in Jesus. 

Although the painful event had been long 
expected, its announcement produced general 
and sincere sorrow throughout the congrega- 



316 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



tion and neighborhood, and in a large circle of 
friends, who evinced the tenderest sympathy 
for her bereaved husband and family. The 
funeral was appointed to take place on Thurs- 
day, May 25, at Abney-park cemetery, where 
the family vault is situated, and in which the 
remains of her beloved mother are deposited. A 
large number of persons, especially of the poor, 
assembled in the chapel-yard to witness the de- 
parture of the mournful procession, which left 
the parsonage at eleven o'clock. The hearse 
was followed by twelve mourning coaches, 
which contained the relatives of the deceased, 
the officiating ministers, the trustees, the el- 
ders of the church, and many of the most de- 
voted friends connected with the congregation. 
Xext to these were four private carriages, sent 
bv their owners, to show their affectionate es- 
teem for the pastor's wife, in which were seat- 
ed her children, a few female friends, and the 
servants of the family. As a mark of respect, 
many shops in the line of the cavalcade were 
closed, and tears were dropped from many 
spectators who had once witnessed her devoted 
zeal, or received help from her kind hand. 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. 



317 



On the arrival of the body at its earthly 
resting-place, the scene was peculiarly affect- 
ing: the poor women of the maternal associa- 
tion, over which the departed saint had pre- 
sided, and the young people of her classes, 
dressed in respectful mourning, lined the path- 
way to the cemetery chapel, deeply sorrowing 
that they should see her face no more. Friends 
from the congregation and from various parts, 
amounting, it was computed, to not fewer than 
2,000 persons, assembled in the cemetery, to 
show by their presence and habiliments a last 
token of affectionate regard. When the body 
was placed in the cemetery chapel, the chil- 
dren of the school of industry surrounded the 
earthly remains of their treasurer, and showed 
by their youthful sorrow that they felt they 
had lost a friend. 

The Rev. S. A. Davies of Enfield, Mrs. 
Sherman's former pastor, commenced the sol- 
emn service by reading part of the fifteenth 
chapter of the* first of Corinthians, and the 
ninetieth Psalm; and after the congregation 
had sung the suitable hymn of Dr. Watts, be- 
ginning, "Whydowe mourn departing friends," 



318 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



he sought by prayer the benediction of heaven 
on the weeping assembly. The Rev. George 
Clayton, in compliance with the wish of the 
deceased, then delivered a most solemn and 
appropriate address, applying the event by 
sanctified eloquence to the consciences of all 
present, and, it is believed, produced impres- 
sions time will never efface. When the body 
was conveyed from the" chapel to the tomb, the 
elders of the church bore the pall, and as the pro- 
cession slowly advanced, the gentlemen of the 
choir, the children of the school, and the congre- 
gation sung the hymn of Dr. AYatts, beginning, 

"Unveil thy bosom, faithful tomb, 
Take this new treasure to thy trust."' 

Arrived at the place of sepulture, the funeral 
service was read by the Rev. J. S. Eastmead, 
and the benediction pronounced by the Rev. 
George Clayton. The whole assembly closed 
the solemn service by attempting to sing — 
which was accomplished with difficulty — the 
two following verses : 

"Farewell, dear saint, a short adieu! 
Thy soul is gone beyond the spheres; 
Our eyes thy radiant path pursue, 
"While rapture glistens in our tears. 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. 



319 



Farewell, blest saint, a short farewell, 
Till soon we meet again above, 
In the bright world where pleasures dwell, 
And trees of life bear fruits of love." 

"The whole scene," remarks a friend, "was 
one of vinusual interest. Devout men and 
women followed our departed friend to her 
burial, and made great, but sincere lamenta- 
tion over her. ' The widows stood by weep- 
ing,' and the young people of the classes testi- 
fied, by their presence and tears, what had 
been done for them ' while she was with them.' 
The language of every heart that witnessed 
these solemnities appeared to be, "Blessed are 
the dead which die in the Lord from hence- 
forth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may 
re.st from their labors ; and their works do fol- 
low them.' " 

About a week before the sainted spirit enter- 
ed into rest, when familiarly anticipating the 
event, and making her own arrangements to 
send dying tokens of love to her friends, her 
husband asked what message he should carry 
to the people when she was taken from them 
Her brief answer was, "Tell them to love 



320 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



Christ and one another — to labor for souls and 
exhibit holiness — then they must be happy." 
He then ventured to ask what minister she 
would prefer, to improve her decease to the 
congregation. "I would rather," she replied, 
"it should pass with only ordinary observa- 
tion ; but as I suppose the congregation will 
expect, from the situation I occupied, some 
special attempt to benefit others, if Mr. James 
could preach in the morning, to the church, 
and Mr. Parsons in the evening, to the young 
and to my classes, my death might yield some 
fruit; the hope of usefulness alone induces me 
to consent to any arrangement of the kind." 

Her wish was communicated to those hon- 
ored servants of Christ, and on the Lord's-day, 
May 28th, they most kindly carried out her 
desires: the Rev. J. A. James preached to the 
members of the church in the morning, from 
Hebrews 6 : 12, "That ye be not slothful, but 
followers of them who through faith and pa- 
tience, inherit the promises;" a sermon char- 
acterized by fervent piety and powerful appli- 
cation of the principles of the gospel which 
the deceased adorned, to her surviving fellow- 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. 321 

believers. The hearts of the hearers felt its 
spiritual power, and were melted by its tender 
and faithful appeals. In the evening, the Rev. 
James Parsons preached to the young from 
Job 14:2, "He cometh forth like a flower, 
and is cut down." The sermon was full of 
earnest persuasion, and being delivered under 
a full sense of the responsibility of the hour, 
produced a remarkable impression, the saving 
fruits of which have already appeared. 

Thus terminated the career of one whom 
God had graciously endowed with "largeness 
of heart" for his service on earth — whose re- 
moval in the prime of life has excited the 
sober luxury of sanctified grief, and whose 
eminent piety shed a lustre on her character 
and left a beautiful example of female devoted- 
ncss for others to imitate. 



The following description of the funeral 
icene, and the right method of improving it, 
<vas written by her valued friend, Joseph 
Payne, Esq : 



Sherman. 



21 



322 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



MRS. SHERMAN'S FUNERAL. 

BY ONE WHO ATTENDED IT. 

The sun looked glorious from the heavens — the sky 

"Was bright, serene, and cloudless ; and the day 

Seemed fitter for a bridal than the gloom 

Of funeral arrangements, when the good, 

The gentle, the lamented, the admired. 

Was "carried to her burial."* Crowds were there, 

Eager to testify the love and grief 

That filled their friendly bosoms : rich and poor, 

The charioted in splendor, and the lame, 

Supported by a crutch, were mingled then 

In anxious emulation; old and yomig 

Vied with each other : shops were partly closed, 

And busy tradesmen silent stood and gazed. 

On as the funeral procession went. 

Group after group it passed of friendly forms. 

All hastening to the body's resting-place. 

The Sabbath scholar, and the teacher too — 

The mother with her infant in her arms. 

Her little one beside her — roimd whose waist 

Was tied a faded sash which once was black — 

Trudged on, regardless of the scorching heat, 

And of the choking dust: their hearts were fuU, 

And so their bodies were not delicate. 

And as it farther went, the numbers grew : 

And sighs were heard, and eyes with tears were wet, 

And those who in the sombre coaches rode, 

As they looked forth upon the stirring scene. 

Said to themselves, and to each other said, 

"Truly, ' the memory of the just is blessed.' "t 

And when at length they reached the destined spot, 

And in the small and crowded chapel stood, 

•Acfe 8:2. t Proverbs 10 : 7. 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. 



323 



The word was read, the voice of praj'er was heard, 

The hymn of praise arose, and the address, 

Solemn, instructive, eloquent, sincere, 

Gushed forth from feeling and from £i-ieadly lips. 

There sat the widower, binding to his heart 

The consolations, "neither few nor small,'' 

He oft had preached to others : there the child, 

Of many hopeful feelings, by the hand 

Of sisterly affection kindly held. 

There too, the father looked, in deep dismay. 

On the last broken link of love's sweet chain, 

Which bound him to the earth ; yet sorrowing not 

As one who has no hope. A while they paused, 

Then slowly sought the tomb, and to its walls 

Resigned their sacred trust ; and softly sang, 

"Farewell, dear saint!" — and then the mourners left, 

Took off their sable robes, and homeward turned. 

To "go about the streets,"* as heretofore. 

But one looked back, and in his fancy twined 

A wreath for the departed ; tuned his harp. 

And thus expressed the feelings of his heart : 

Mourn for the living, mourn ; • 

But weep not for the dead : . 
They need your tears from whom is torn 

Their pattern and their head. 

But she the suifering saint, 

To whom release is given, 
No tongue can tell, no fancy paint. 

Her joy and peace in heaven. 

Mourn for the living, mourn ; 

For tliey have lost a friend, 
"Whose spirit is by angels borne 

Where unions never end. 
* Eccle»ia»tes 12 : 5. 



321 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



The young she loved to teach, 
For whom her heart was moved. 

Her bright example aimed to reach, 
And while they failed, improved. 

WTien, desolate and sad, 

The wet<;hed sought her care, 
A kind word and a smile she had 

E'en for the meanest there. 

And by her goodness moved, 

They loudly spoke her worth ; 
Comparing her to Him who proved 

The sinner's friend on earth.* 

"Like Jesus Christ" — what joy, 
To hear such praise bestowed 
By those for whom, in love's employ, 
. She sought each sad abode ! 

Long to the couch confined 
^ Of sickness and decay. 

Her form grew weaker, but the mind 
Was strengthened day by day. 

And now and then it seemed 

As if her glance had gained 
Some glimpse of glory where it beamed, 

Which on her soul remained. 

*A lafly, one Friday morning, heard some poor women speaKing 
of Mrs. Sherman. One of them said, " There she is, the dear 
creature; she is like Jesus Christ." "What do you mean?"" said 
another; "I know she is very good, but why is she Uke Jesus 
Christ?" "^Because," replied the first, "she never despises any one, 
and has always a smile and a kind word for the poor. ' 



DEATH AND FUNERAL. 



And tlien such words she spoke 

Of comfort and delight, 
That clouds of gloom dispersed and broke 

And all around was bright. 

Pray for the living, pray ; 

Besiege the throne of God, 
That all may seek the upward way 

Her careful footsteps trod. 

Let faith and hope to bu'th, 

In every heart arise, 
That those who mourn her loss on earth 

May join her in the skies. 



386 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



CHAPTER X. 

SUMMARY AND APPl,iCATION OF HER 
CHARACTER. 

The foregoing pages furnish materials for 
the reader to form his own opinion of the 
qharacter of the deceased, and they might, 
without injury to her memory, he left to work 
their own impressions ; yet, as she lived to be 
useful, the writer will be pardoned if he aim 
to enforce those graces which were so eminent- 
ly conspicuous in her, as forming a bright pat- 
tern of female excellence. The lives of many 
individuals are published, whose intellectual 
greatness checks every hope of attaining to 
their exalted stature. The sublimity of their 
views on divine subjects, the novel and im- 
portant light in which they place ancient doc- 
trines, so as to commend them to the judgment 
of unbelievers, the daring which they exhibit 
in carrying out new schemes for the further- 
ance of truth and righteousness in the world, 
and the hold which their writings and influ- 



VIEW OF HER CHARACTER. 327 

ence gain on the population, fit them to he 
leaders. 

But while multitudes read the lives of such 
moral heroes, the majority, from conscious in- 
feriority, have no intention to imitate their 
exploits. Some attempt to follow in the same 
track ; but as it soon becomes evident to them- 
selves and others that thjey have not the requi- 
site mental resources, very few attain a similar 
elevation; the greater number fall ere they 
have reached a less exalted position, and de- 
monstrate they were never designed to occupy 
it. But the life of Mrs. Sherman presents no 
proofs of mighty intellect: her conduct, letters, 
and journals, only show the Christian lady car- 
rying out her pnnciples into practical opera- 
tion, and therefore leave footsteps in the com- 
mon walk of life, in which any one may safely 
tread. 

Nature had done much for her in her lovely 
person and attractive manners, but grace much 
more. Her scriptural knowledge and ability to 
communicate it, either orally or by letter, were 
not natural, but acquired. Her position de- 
manded exertion to obtain information, and 



328 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



she gave it; she felt unequal to her solemn 
duties, and she prepared accordingly : thus, by 
the ordinary operation of industry in the study 
of the Scriptures, and in prayerful preparation 
for spiritual engagements, she acquired accept- 
ableness and usefulness to which few have at- 
tained. It will be no disparagement to her, to 
put on record that, previous to her marriage, 
no member of her family believed her to pos- 
sess the qualifications which she afterwards 
exhibited. Her sister, had she been spared, 
bade fair, by her mental endowments and 
literary acquirements, to take an influential 
position in the world ; but the amiable, loving, 
merry Martha was thought capable only of 
gracing a drawing-room, binding friends to her 
by affection, and benefiting the poor by gen- 
erosity : such duties as those in which she so 
peculiarly excelled, were among the last for 
which she was supposed to be fitted. 

Now though few, comparatively, are placed 
in her position, yet the world and the church 
are in such circumstances, that it behooves 
every female to inquire how she can best use 
her powers for the honor of Christ and the sal- 



VIEW OF HER CHARACTER. 



329 



vation of her sex. Many satisfy them.selves 
by pleading that they have no talent for teach- 
ing, for the visitation of the poor, or for col- 
lecting on behalf of religious and chai-itable 
objects; yet they show no deficiency of talent 
on any other subject; and it is rational to sup- 
pose, if ordinary means were employed to qual- 
ify them, they would be capable of these ser- 
vices as well as others. 

The ancient excuse, I am married, and can- 
not come to the help of the Lord against the 
mighty, is applicable to both sexes. Though 
chiefly used by males, it is lamentable to see 
many females who, before marriage, were the 
ornament and hope of the community to which 
they belonged, become inactive and indifferent 
afterwards; as if their new relation exempted 
them from exertion on behalf of those objects 
in which they formerly took such deep interest. 
Far be it from the writer to manifest a want 
of sympathy in the increasing cares of a moth- 
er with a rising family, or to intimate that do- 
mestic duties are to be neglected for the sake 
of public services. No; attention to home is 
a part of her religion, and must be considered 



330 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



her first and highest claim, which, being acknow- 
ledged and improved, her husband shall praise 
her, and her children rise up and call her bless- 
ed. But a mother whose zeal for G-od is ac- 
cording to knowledge, will, by a little early 
rising, by a wise regulation of the duties of 
the day, and by a sense of her responsibility 
to her Saviour, make such arrangements as 
will secure a portion, if a smaller portion, of 
her time for assisting the operations of the 
church in the world. 

Firmness and perseverance were strong pe- 
culiarities of her mind, and gave stability and 
decision to her religious character. Her opin- 
ions were not hastily formed ; it often required 
much reading and argument to convince her; 
but when once convinced of the truth of a 
theory, or of the duty of undertaking any 
work for Grod, however laborious and diffi- 
cult, she was immovable. This feature of her 
disposition remarkably contrasted with her 
naturally amiable temper, which, on inferior 
matters, in which conscience was not affected, 
readily yielded at any sacrifice of feeling to 
the opinions, and even to the selfishness of 



VIEW OF HER CHARACTER. 331 

others, while she would not give up a point in 
argument to the dearest friend, if unconvinced. 
Hence, fickleness, inconstancy, and love of 
change were almost unknown to her. Hence 
her perseverance with any thing she under- 
took; it was not commenced till she felt its 
importance, nor was it abandoned for unfore- 
seen difficulties. Hence her punctuality to 
the time appointed for committee, class, or 
other meetings, and the constant inculcation of 
this grace on others. 

And how important is this feature in any 
who attempt to do good. "Unstable as water, 
thou shalt not excel," may be applied to some 
Christian females, as well as to Reiiben. They 
readily engage in every new effort, but after 
attending a few meetings of committee, their 
zeal cools, and they absent themselves ; a new 
theory has them for advocates, but only long 
enough to abandon it for another more novel; 
thus neither the church nor the world is bene- 
fited. It is better to pursue a system of use- 
fulness in which some known defects exist, 
but which is understood, and by which some 
good is done, than to be perpetually changing 



332 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



times, instruments, and measures, with the 
uncertainty of their effective operation. 

Few have exhibited a more entire exemption 
from selfishness than Mrs. Sherman. "If all 
the world were like her," said a friend who 
had known her from infancy, "malice and un- 
charitableness would become obsolete words. 
If I were to describe her, I should do it nega- 
tively, by saying that she had none of the 
disagreeables of so many other persons." Her 
politeness would have made her courteous 
without grace ; but that regulated and refined 
it, so that it was the result of principle ob- 
tained fi'om the cross; and she "thus judged, 
that if One died for all, then were all dead: 
and that He died for all, that they which live 
should not henceforth live unto themselves, 
but to him that died for them and rose again." 
This unselfish feeling ran through the whole of 
her conduct; it was not reserved for state oc- 
casions, when its exhibition would have elicit- 
ed applause, but was spontaneous and natural. 
The comfort and ease of all within her house 
were preferred to her own, and a beggar would 
be as readily served as a prince. 



VIEW OF HER CHARACTER. 333 

Often has she called forth the remonstrances 
of friends, while standing • to hear the tale of 
woe from a poor person in the hall, whose dirty 
condition forbade introduction into a room, 
when her weakness rendered it dangerous for 
her to be in such a situation. Her sleep, her 
meals, her dress, her personal comforts, were 
relinquished with satisfaction, if any one, es- 
pecially of God's children, required such help 
as they would afford. And this is the test by 
which we are to try our discipleship, "If any 
man will be my disciple, let him deny himself; 
let him take up his cross daily and follow me." 
By some it would be considered that the sub- 
ject of this memoir presented this feeling in 
excess; but how short, how far short did 'she 
fall of the example of Jesus Christ, who "was 
rich, yet for our sakes became poor, that we, 
through his poverty, might be made rich." 
Let Christian females study this characteris- 
tic of our divine Lord, and be assured that 
it is one of the principal preparations for use- 
fulness. 

No grace shone more conspicuously in her 
than humility Every thing she undertook 



334 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



was begun with trembling and prosecuted with 
fear ; she had no confidence in herself, nor any 
leaning to her own vinderstandins: : the most 
child-like spirit of dependence on her heavenly 
Father characterized her entire course of life. 
When a letter was read to her, a few weeks 
before her death, containing an allusion to the 
bright example she had set, she remarked, "I 
cannot understand what they mean ; they have 
drawn a picture in their imagination of what 
they think I ought to be as a minister's wife, 
and then have persuaded themseh'^es that I 
resemble it, because they do not know me." 
Such language from the lips of some would be 
a hint for flattery ; but in her, the transparent 
sincerity with which it was uttered was visi- 
ble to all, and her whole conduct demonstrated 
that she believed the lowest place suited her 
best. On an occasion when a similar re- 
mark was made by a friend, she replied, 
" Alas, that any one should think my imper- 
fect walk, every step of which needs cleans- 
ing in my Saviour's blood, suitable for imita- 
tion. I can only answer in the sentiments of 
Cowper: 



VIEW OF HER CHARACTER. 



335 



" ' Since the dear hour that brought me to thy foot, 
And cut up all my follies by the root, 
I never trusted in an arm but thine. 
Nor hoped but in thy righteousness divine ; 
My prayers and alms, imperfect and defiled, 
Were but the feeble efforts of a child ; 
Howe'er performed, it was their brightest part 
That they proceeded from a grateful heart : 
Cleansed in thine own all purifying blood. 
Forgive their evil and accept their good ; 
I cast them at thy feet : my only plea 
Is what it was, dependence upon t^ee ; 
While struggling in the vale of tears below, 
That never failed, nor shall it fail me now.' " 

The apostle lays emphasis on this grace as 
a special ornament of the female character: 
"Whose adorning, let it not be that outward 
adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing 
of gold, or of putting on of apparel; but let it 
be the hidden man of the heart, in that which 
is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek 
and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of Grod of 
great price." She that would do good must be 
content to stoop to the humble and needy, must 
condescend to their position, and sacrifice feel- 
ing and habits to get at their prejudices, and 
convey truth to their minds. 0, how conde- 
scending was Jesus Christ — how readily he 
talked to a leper, listened to the domestic 



336 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



trials of parents, or took the children of the 
poor in his arms. Let us imitate him ; for a 
proud heart, like a high mountain, is sure to 
be an unfruitful place. 

" Grace be with all them who love our Lord 
Jesus Christ in sincerity," she adopted as her 
motto and exhibited in her conduct. Her 
house, her table, her purse, were open to all 
who bore the likeness of her Saviour. She 
dared not separate herself from any whom the 
Master had received, on account of denomina- 
tional peculiarities. Of all such she could say, 

" Whate'er their country or their name, 
With them, when privileged to meet, 
Kindred and fellowship I claim, 

And converse hold, communion sweet ; 
For still my heart will truly move 
Towards all who love the Lord I love." 

Never can the writer forget her joy when a 
native Chinese convert, with Dr. Medhurst 
from China, Tzatzoe an African chief, and 
StofFels a converted Hottentot, Dr. Cheever 
and Mr. Kirk from America, and others from 
the continent of Europe, dined together at the 
parsonage. She observed to Dr. Medhurst, 
" This party not only prefigures the millen- 



v'lfiW OF HER CHARACTEU. 



337 



nium, but is an epitome of it. Here are na- 
tive representatives from the four quarters of 
the globe, all converted to Christ, and support- 
ing his kingdom in their several countries. 
Heaven itself will only be an enlargement 
of such a group." And they who would be 
useful must cultivate this spirit. Denomina- 
tionalism has ruled too long. Reading only 
the books written by one sect, or meeting only 
the friends who think exactly with vis, enfee- 
bles the mind and cramps its energies. There 
are men of God in every division of the Chris- 
tian church, at whose feet it would become 
any of us to sit; and we lose that enlarge- 
ment of heart, that love of the Spirit, which 
embraces "the whole family in heaven and 
earth," if we do not cultivate acquaintance 
with all, and extract what is good from their 
several modes of worship, their Christian in- 
tercourse, and their exertions for the conver- 
sion of the world, and insert them in our stere- 
otyped forms and habits. 

But after all, the great secret of her power 
with her classes and the church lay in her fer- 
vent piety, a faith that embraced and fed upon 
22 



338 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



the living truths of the gospel, and intimate 
communion with God, which no engagements 
were suffered to curtail. Details have been 
furnished which sufficiently prove this fact; 
and her family are witnesses how constantly 
her spirit seemed filled with the, fulness of 
God, and what sacrifices of bodily ease she 
made for the continuance of that heavenly fel- 
lowship. This gave her influence, unconscious 
influence. Though her exertions were great, 
she accomplished more by what she was, than 
by w^at she did. Her spiritual character gave 
an element of silent power to her efforts, which 
was the chief cause of their efficacy. An in- 
fluence, unconsciously to herself, was always 
operating on others with whom she came in 
contact. They felt that influence, but proba- 
bly were, equally with herself, unconscious of 
its exercise, and quite unable to describe its 
character. As the light, which gives no shock 
and utters no roar, silently but effectually 
chases away the darkness, and restores the 
world to beauty and cheerfulness, stealing on 
us gradually and almost insensibly ; so the 
Christian, who shines the brighter firom sitting 



VIEW OF HER CHARACTEIi. 339 



in heavenly places, where he may more fully 
catch the beams and reflect the light of the 
Sun of righteousness, will disperse the dark- 
ness of prejudice, command the homage of 
respect, and excite the desire for imitation in 
those by whom he is surrounded. 

The testimony of one to the practical power 
of this silent influence, may illustrate and con- 
firm these remarks. "I felt," said a young 
lady, "the importance of religion before I en- 
tered Mrs. Sherman's class ; but it was not till 
I saw the happiness she diffused around her 
that I was led to ask myself the question, 
'Why cannot I be as amiable in my family as 
Mrs. Sherman, and make others as happy as 
she does?' and to form the resolution, 'I will 
try ;' and if I have at all succeeded, the effort 
and the success are owing to her lovely exam- 
ple." 

All, therefore, who would be blessings, must 
settle it in their hearts that they must first 
seek to be blessed. Station, education, talent, 
are allowed to have certain influence, but not 
so great as is generally supposed. Had ouy 
Saviour thought much of them, he would have 



340 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



selected a higher class than fishermen to pro- 
claim his gospel and lay the foundations of his 
kingdom. "Knowledge is power" has become 
a household phrase, but it is feebleness itself 
compared with piety. "If God be for us, who 
can be against us?" Therefore the renova- 
tion of the most degraded of our species, and 
the sanctification of the unholiest, which the 
scientific have failed to accomplish, have been 
effected by the humble Christian. 

Oh, ye females, who are the ornaments of 
our churches, and the most powerful helpers 
in establishing the kingdom of Christ, suffer 
the word of exhortation. You cannot speak 
like men, nor rule like him "who was first 
formed ;" but you have influence of your own, 
which all acknowledge: the more mighty, be- 
cause the more gentle; the more efficacious, 
because the less visible. The most potent 
agents in nature are the most simple and 
noiseless — the least seen and the most myste- 
rious — yet they are in constant and mighty 
operation. And if by walking in the light as 
He is in the light, you have fellowship one 
with another, and can declare, "The Lord is 



VIEW OF HER CHARACTER. 341 

my light and my salvation; whom shall I 
fear?"^ — if from continued application to the 
fountain opened, you can with confidence avow, 
"The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth 
us from all sin" — if from repeated experience 
of his gracious assistance, you can invite troub- 
led minds to your Friend, saying, "Behold, 
God is my helper" — if from daily meditation 
on the "mystery of godliness," you become 
rooted and built up in Christ, and established 
in the faith of the gospel, and can affirm, "I 
know whom I have believed, and am persuaded 
that He is able to keep that which I have com- 
mitted to him" — if under conscious weakness 
and infirmity, as Asa, you know not what to 
do, but the eye of your faith is cast up to the 
mediatorial throne, and your heart and lips 
avow, "I will go ir^the strength of the Lord 
Grod; I will make mention of his righteous- 
ness, even of his only" — then, like Deborah, 
you will accompany the Lord's servants, and 
share their honor in fighting his battles; like 
Hannah, you will exalt the Lord's "anointed;" 
like the Shunammite, you will plead for the so- 
ciety of the prophet in your house, and see his 



342 



MARTHA SHERMAN. 



prayers answered in your children; like Mary, 
you will rejoice in G-od your Saviour; like 
Elizabeth, you will walk in all the ordinances 
and commandments of the Lord blameless; 
like Susannah, the wife of Herod's steward, 
you will minister to Christ of your substance ; 
like Martha, you will receive him into your 
house, and — who can tell? — have your brother 
raised to spiritual Ufe, and sit at the table 
with him; like Phoebe, you will become the 
servant of the church, and like Tryphena and 
Tryphosa, labor much in the Lord. "Favor 
is deceitful and beauty is vain; but a woman 
that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised." 



