
Class 



Book 



PRESENTED BY 



n 



. 










THE 



PILIIIMM'S PROGRESS 



nu>M 



THIS WOKLI) TO THAT Willi II IS TO COME; 



i>r.u\E 






UNDER THE SIMILITUDE OF*A DREAM, 



JOHN BUNYAN, 



PUBLISHED BY THE 
AMBRICAN TK.\ OOIBTY, 

NEW YORK. 









ro °~ 



<am 

W. L. Uooamaker 
7 S '06 



CONTENTS. 



Page, 

The Author's Life, 5 

PART I. 

The First Stage. — Christian's deplorable condition — Evan 
gelist directs him — Obstinate and Pliable — Slough of De- 
spond — Worldly Wiseman — Mount Sinai — conversation 
with Evangelist, 27 

The Second Stage. — The Gate — Conversation with Good 
will — the Interpreter's house — Christian, entertained — the 
sights there shown him, ., 51 

The Thikd Stage. — Loses his burden at the Cross — Simple, 
Sloth, Presumption, Formalist, Hypocrisy — hill Difficulty 
• — the Arbor — misses his roll — the palace Beautiful — the 
lions — talk with Discretion, Piety, Prudence, and Charity 
— wonders" shown to Christian — he is armed, ... 70 

The Fourth StaGe. — Valley of Humiliation — conflict with 
Apollyon — valley of the Shadow of Death — Giants Pope 
and Pagan, 97 

The Fifth Stage. — Discourse with Faithful — Talkative and 
Faithful — Talkative's character, 113 

The Sixth Stage. — Evangelist overtakes Christian and 
Faithful — Vanity Fair — the Pilgrims brought to trial — 
Faithful's martyrdom, 143 

The Seventh Stage. — Christian and Hopeful — By-ends and 
his companions— plain of Ease — Lucre-hill — Demas — the 
river of Life — Vain-Confidence — Giant Despair — the pil- 
grims beaten — the dungeon — the key of promise, . 161 

The Eighth Stage. — The Delectable mountains — entertain- 
ed by the shepherds — a by-way to hell, ..... 192 

The Ninth Stage. — Christian and Hopeful meet Ignorance 
— Turnaway — Little Faith — the Flatterer — the net — chas- 
tised by a Shining One — Atheist — Enchanted ground — 
Hopeful's account of his conversion — discourse of Chris- 
tian and Ignorance, 198 

The Tenth Stage. — Talk of Christian and Hopeful — Tem- 
porary — the Backslider — the land of Beulah — Christian 
and Hopeful pass the river — welcome to the Celestial 
City, 237 



CONTENTS. 



PART II. 

Pilgrimage op Christiana and Her Children, . . 271 

The First Stage. — Christiana and Mercy — Slough of De- 
spond — knocking at the gate — the dog — talk between the 
pilgrims, 289 

The Second Stage. — The Devil's garden — two ill-favored 
ones assault them — the Reliever — entertainment at the 
Interpreter's house — the Significant rooms — Christiana 
and Mercy's experience, 301 

The Third Stage. — Accompanied by Great-Heart — the Cross 
— justified by Christ — Sloth and his companions hung — 
the hill Difficulty— the Arbor, 324 

The Fourth Stage. — The lions — Giant Grim slain by 
Great-heart — the pilgrims entertained — the children cate- 
chized by Prudence — Mr. Brisk — Matthew sick — the rem- 
edy — sights shown the pilgrims, 338 

The Fifth Stage. — Valley of Humiliation — valley of the 
Shadow of Death — Giant Maul slain, 366 

The Sixth Stage. — Discourse with Old Honest — character 
and history of Mr. Fearing — Mr. Self-will and some pro- 
fessors — Gaius' house — conversation — the supper — Old 
Honest and Great-Heart's riddles and discourse — Giant 
Slay-good killed — Mr. Feeble-mind's history— Mr. Ready- 
to-halt — Vanity Fair — Mr. Mnason's house — cheering en- 
tertainment and converse — a monster, 383 

The Seventh Stage. — Hill Lucre — river of Life — Giant De- 
spair killed — the Delectable mountains — entertainment 
by the shepherds, 433 

The Eighth Stage. — Valiant-for-truth's victory — his talk 
with Great-Heart — the Enchanted ground — Heedless and 
Too-bold — Mr. Stand-fast — Madam Bubble's temptations 
— the land of Beulah — Christiana summoned — her parting 
addresses — she passes the river — she is followed by Ready- 
to-halt, Feeble-mind, Despondency and his daughter, Hon- 
est, Valiant, and Stand-fast, 449 



THE LIFE 



OF 



REV. JOHN BUNYAN. 



The Rev. John Bunyan, the celebrated author of 
The Pilgrim's Progress, and many other useful works, 
was born at Elstow, near Bedford, England, in the 
year 1628. 

His parents w r ere very poor, but gave him the best 
education in their power. Such, however, was his 
extreme depravity, that he addicted himself, even in 
childhood, to the basest practices, particularly to curs- 
ing and swearing, in* which he exceeded the worst of 
his wicked companions, and arrived at such a sad pre- 
eminence in sin, that he became the ringleader of the 
profane. 

Yet, amidst all these enormities, God left not himself 
without a witness in his bosom. He had many severe 
checks of conscience, and terrifying thoughts of hell. 
After days spent in sin, his dreams were sometimes 
peculiarly frightful. The fears of death and judgment 
intruded into his gayest hours. A copious narrative of 
these early conflicts and crimes is to be found in his 
treatise entitled, Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sin- 



6 THE LIFE OF 

ncrs. The Lord was also pleased to grant him several 
remarkable deliverances from death. Once he fell into 
the river Ouse; at another time he fell into the sea, 
and narrowly escaped being drowned. When he was 
seventeen years of age he became a soldier; and at 
the siege of Leicester, being called out to stand senti- 
nel, another desiring to take his place, he consented, 
and his comrade who took his place was shot through 
the head with a musket-ball. 

But neither mercies nor judgments made any dura- 
ble impression on his hardened heart. He was not 
only insensible of the evil and danger of sin, but an 
enemy to every thing serious. The thought of relig- 
ion, or even the appearance of it in others, was an 
intolerable burden to him. 

The first step toward his reformation was his mar- 
riage with a woman whose parents were accounted 
religious. Being extremely poor, she had brought Mm 
as her whole portion, two books, The Practice of Piety, 
and The Plain Mans Pathway to Heaven. In these 
they sometimes read together; and his wife often talked 
to him of the godly life of her father. By these means, 
and especially in consequence of hearing a sermon 
against Sabbath-breaking, he formed some resolutions 
of reformation, and of performing a few religious du- 
ties, which he then thought would be enough to carry 
him to heaven. His convictions were not, however, 
sufficient to keep him from his beloved sports, even in 
the afternoon of that Sabbath on which ho had received 
them, when, being engaged in a game, a sentence was 
impressed on his mind so forcibly that he thought it like 
a voice from heaven, Wilt thou leave thy sins and go to 



REV. JOHN BUNYAN. 7 

heaven, or have thy sins and go to hell ? This excited 
dreadful consternation in his mind, which was instantly 
followed by suggestions that he was an enormous, un- 
paralleled sinner — that it was now too late to seek 
after heaven, and that his transgressions were "beyond 
the reach of mercy. Despair reached his mind, and 
he formed this desperate conclusion, that he must "be* 
miserable if he left his sins, and miserable if he con- 
tinued in his sins ; and therefore he determined to take 
his fill of them, as the only pleasure he was likely to 
have. It may justly be feared that multitudes perish by 
such temptations as these. Their language is, "There 
is no hope — but we will walk after our own devices, 
and we will every one do the imagination of his evil 
heart." 

Contriving how to gratify himself with sin, yet de- 
riving no satisfaction from it, he continued about a 
month longer; when it pleased God to give him anoth- 
er severe check by means of a woman, who, though a 
notorious sinner herself, was so shocked at the oaths he 
uttered, that she told him " he was the most ungodly 
fellow for swearing that she had ever seen in her life, 
and that he was enough to spoil all the youth in the 
town, if they came into his company." By this re- 
proof from such a person, he was entirely confounded; 
and from that moment he refrained in general from 
swearing, though before he scarcely ever spoke a sen- 
tence without an oath. 

About this time he had several remarkable dreams 
in which he thought that the earth shook and opened her 
mouth to receive him — that the end of the world and 
the day of judgment were arrived. Once he dreamed 



8 THE LIFE OF 

that he was just dropping into the flames among the 
damned, and that a person in white shining raiment 
suddenly plucked him as a brand out of the fire. These 
dreams made impressions on his mind which were 
never forgotten, and perhaps inclined him, many years 
after, to publish the masterpiece of all his works, The 
Pilgrim's Progress, under the similitude of a dream. 

Soon after, he fell into the company of a poor, seri- 
ous man, whose discourses of religion and of the Scrip- 
tures so affected him, that he applied himself to reading 
the Bible, especially the historical parts of it. * 

By degrees a reformation of manners took place, which 
became so remarkable that his neighbors were greatly 
surprised at it, and often complimented him upon it. 
By these commendations he was greatly puffed up with 
pride, and began to think himself a very good Christian, 
and, to use his own words, " that no man in England 
could please God better than he." But all this was 
only lopping off the branches of sin, while the root of 
an unregenerated nature still remained. With much 
difficulty, and by slow degrees, he refrained from his 
accustomed diversions of dancing and ringing ; he re- 
linquished the latter from the apprehension that one of 
the bells, or even the steeple, might fall and crush him 
to death. But hitherto he remained ignorant of Christ, 
and was going about to establish his own righteousness. 
He was still of that generation " who are pure in their 
own eyes, and yet not washed.from their filthiness." 

Not long after, the providence of God so ordered it 
that he went to work at Bedford, and happening to hear 
some women, who were sitting at a door, talk about 
the things of God, his curiosity induced him to listen 



REV. JOHN BUNYAN. 9 

to them, but he soon found their conversation above 
his reach. They were speaking of the new birth, and 
the work of God in their hearts — how they were con- 
vinced of their miserable state by nature — how God 
had visited their souls with his love in Christ Jesus — 
with what promises they had been refreshed, comforted, 
and supported under affliction and temptations. They 
also talked of the wretchedness of their own hearts, 
and of their unbelief — of renouncing their own works 
and righteousness, as insufficient to justify them before 
God. All this appeared to be spoken in such spiritual 
language,- in such a serious manner, and with such an 
air of christian joy and cheerfulness, that he seemed 
like one who had found a new world. 

This conversation was of great service to him. He 
now saw that his case was not so good as he had fondly 
imagined ; that among all his thoughts of religion, the 
grand essential of it, the new birth, had never en- 
tered his mind — that he had never derived comfort 
from the promises of God — that he had never known 
the plague of his own heart, having never taken notice 
of his secret thoughts — and that he was entirely un- 
acquainted with Satan's temptations, and the way to 
resist them. He therefore frequented the company of 
those persons to obtain information ; his mind became 
constantly intent upon gaining spiritual knowledge, and 
his whole soul was so fixed on eternal things, that it 
was difficult to draw his mind from heaven to earth. 
He now began to read his Bible as it were with new 
eyes ; it became inexpressibly sweet and pleasant to 
him, because it held forth a Saviour whom he now felt 
the want of. Reading, meditation, and prayer to under- 



10 THE LIFE OF 

stand the Scriptures, were the employments in which 
he delighted. 

Now the enemy of souls assaulted him with his 
temptations. One of the principal was, whether he 
was elected or not. But it pleased God to relieve him, 
by the application of that scripture, " Look at the gen- 
erations of old, and see ; did ever any trust in God and 
were confounded?" This gave him much encourage- 
ment, as if it had been said, " Begin at Genesis, and 
read to the end of the Revelation, and try if you can 
find any that ever trusted in God and were confound- 
ed; and if none that trusted in God ever miscarried, 
then your duty is to trust in God, and not to concern 
yourself about election, which is a secret thing." 

Another temptation that violently assaulted him was, 
"How if the day of grace should be past and gone?" 
But after many days spent in bitterness of spirit, he 
was relieved by that blessed word, " Compel them to 
come in, that my house may be filled;" and " yet there 
is room." 

Many more were his temptations, of which the reader 
may find a large account in his Grace Abounding, above 
referred to. But the Lord, who knows how to deliver 
the golly out of temptation, was pleased to deliver him 
out of all his spiritual distresses, and to fill his soul 
with joy and peace in believing. 

To this happy event, under the blessing of the Holy 
Spirit, the conversation he had with experienced Chris- 
tians, and the valuable labors of Mr. Gifford, then 
minister of the gospel at Bedford, were chiefly condu- 
cive. When twenty-seven years of age, Mr. Bunyan 
joined a congregation of pious Christians at Bedford. 



REV. JOHN BUNYAN. 11 

His natural abilities, eminent grace, and the remark- 
able temptations he had experienced, soon pointed him 
out as a proper person for the ministry. Curiosity 
naturally excited multitudes to attend his preaching, 
and he soon found that his labors were not in vain in 
the Lord. 

Such were his diffidence and modesty, that at first he 
thought it incredible that God should speak to the hearts 
of sinners by his means. But he was encouraged by 
many seals of his ministry. His views of the work, 
and his method in it, deserve notice and imitation. The 
Lord gave him much compassion for perishing sinners. 
He studied with great diligence to find out such words 
as might awaken the conscience, exhibit Christ in all 
his infinite fulness, and show the sinner that except 
in His precious atonement there is no salvation. 

"In my preaching," says he, "the Lord did lead mc 
to begin where his word begins, with sinners; to con- 
demn all flesh, and to open and allege that the curse of 
God doth lay hold on all men, as they come into the 
world, because of sin. This part of my work I fulfilled 
with the terrors of the law and guilt for my own 
transgressions lying heavy on my conscience. I went 
myself in chains, to preach to them in chains ; and 
carried that fire in my own conscience, of which I per- 
suaded them to beware. I have gone full of a sense of 
guilt and terror even to the pulpit door, and there it 
hath been taken off, and I have been at liberty in my 
mind until I have done my work, and then immediately 
it has returned as heavily as before ; yet God carried 
me on, and surely with a strong hand, for neither guilt 
nor hell could take me off my work. 



12 THE LIFE OF 

"Thus I went on for the space of two years: after 
which the Lord came in upon my soul with some sure 
peace and comfort through Christ, giving me many 
sweet discoveries of his blessed grace. And I did much 
labor to hold forth Jesus Christ in all his offices, rela- 
tions, and benefits, unto the world; and did strive also 
to discover, to condemn, and to remove those false sup- 
ports on which the world lean, and by depending on 
them, fall and perish. 

■ When I have been preaching, my heart hath often, 
all the time of this and the other exercises, witli great 
earnestness, cried to God that he would make the word 
cilectual to salvation ; wherefore I did labor so to speak 
as that thereby, if possible, the sin and the person 
guilty might be particularized. And when I have done 
the exercise, it hath gone to my heart to think the word 
should now fall as rain on stony places ; still wishing, 
O that they who have heard me did but see as I do, 
what sin, and death, and hell, and the curse of God 
are ! and what the grace, and love, and mercy of God 
are, through Christ, to men who are yet estranged from 
him! And indeed I did often say in my heart before 
the Lord, that if to be hanged up presently before their 
eyes would be a means of awakening them and con- 
firming them in the truth. I could gladly consent to it. 
" I never cared to meddle with unimportant points 
which were in dispute among the saints, yet it pleased 
me much to contend with great earnestness for the 
word of faith, and the remission of sins by the suffer- 
ings and death of Jesus. I saw my work before me 
did run in another channel, even to carry the awaken- 
ing word ; to that, therefore, 1 did adher<\ 



REV. JOHN BUNYAN. 13 

| 

'•If any of those who were awakened by my minis- 
try fell back, I can truly say, that their loss hath been 
more to me than if my own child had been going to its 
grave. My heart hath been so wrapped up in the glory 
of this excellent work, that I counted myself more 
blessed and honored by it, than if God had made me 
emperor of the Christian world, or the lord of all the 
glory of the earth, without it. Oh, these words, ( He 
that converteth a sinner from the error of his way, doth 
save a soul from death. They that be wise shall shine 
as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn 
many to righteousness, as the stars, for ever and ever.' 
James 5: 20; Dan. 12: 3. These, with many others of 
a like nature, have been refreshments to me. 

" My great desire, in fulfilling my ministry, was to 
get into the darkest places of the country, because I 
found my spirit leaned most after awakening and con- 
verting work; and the word that I carried did lean 
itself most that way also : ' Yea, so have I strived to 
preach the gospel, not where Christ was named, lest 
I should build on another man's foundation." Rom. 
15: 20. 

This fidelity excited many enemies ; and the time in 
which he lived being a time of persecution for con- 
science' sake, he was thrown into prison, and there 
continued, in the whole, for twelve years. 

He was enabled to bear this tedious imprisonment 
patiently. The Lord was very gracious to him. "I 
never had," he said while in prison, " in all my life, 
so great an insight into the word of God as now. Those 
scriptures which I saw nothing in before, are made, 
in this place and state, to shine upon me. I have had 



14 THE LIFE OF 

sweet sights of the forgiveness of my sins, and of my 
being with Jesus in another world. 0, the mount 
Sion, the heavenly Jerusalem, the innumerable com- 
pany of angels, and God the Judge of all, and the 
spirits of just men made perfect, and Jesus, have been 
sweet unto me in this place ! I have seen that here* 
which 1 am persuaded I shall never while in this world 
be able to express. I have seen a truth in the words 
' Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom, though 
now you see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy 
unspeakable and full of glory.' " 

The thoughts of his afflicted family would some- 
times press upon his mind, especially the case of one 
of his four children who was blind. Mr. Bunyan 
was a man of strong affections, a tender husband, and 
a very indulgent parent. But he was supported under 
this affliction by these two scriptures: "Leave thy 
fatherless children, I will preserve them alive; and let 
thy widows trust in me." The Lord hath said, " ; Verily, 
it shall be well with thy remnant ; verily, I will cause 
the enemy to entreat thee well in the time of evil." 

He was not idle during his long and severe confine- 
ment, but diligently studied his Bible, which, with the 
Book of Martyrs, composed his whole library. His 
own hands also ministered to the necessity of his 
indigent family ; but he was still more usefully em- 
ployed in preaching to all who could gain access to the 
jail, and with a spirit and a power that surprised his 
hearers. 

It was here also that he composed several useful 
treatises, especially The Pilgrim's Progress, a book 
which has done as much good, perhaps, as any other, 



REV. JOHN BUNYAH. 15 

except the Bible ; and by writing which he has proba- 
bly been more useful, than if he had enjoyed the unre- 
strained exercise of his public ministry. In composing 
it, he was evidently favored with a peculiar measure of 
the divine assistance. Within the confines of a jail he 
was able so to delineate the Christian's course, with its 
various difficulties, perils, and conflicts, that scarcely 
any thing seems to have escaped his notice. The most 
accurate observer will hardly find one character, either 
good or bad, or one fatal delusion, or injurious mistake, 
which is not essentially pointed out in the Pilgrim's 
Progress. The book suits all the various descriptions 
of persons who profess godliness, and relates the expe- 
rience, temptations, conflicts, supports, and consolations 
of Christians in our own times, as exactly as if it had 
been penned for their own immediate benefit. Cowper 
has spoken of this book and its author in the following 
manner : 

thou, ■whom, borne on fancy's eager wing 
Back to the season of life's happy spring, 

1 pleased remember, and while memory yet 
Holds fast her office here, can ne'er forget : 
Ingenious dreamer, in whose well-told tale 
Sweet fiction and sweet truth alike prevail ; 

"Whose humorous vein, strong sense, and simple style, 

May teach the gayest, make the gravest smile ; 

Witty, and well employed, and like thy Lord, 

Speaking in parables his slighted word, 

I name thee not, lest so despised a name 

Should move a sneer at thy deserved fame ; 

Yet e'en in transitory life's late day, 

That mingles all my brown with sober gray, 

Revere the man whose Pilgrim marks the road, 

And guides the Progress of the soul to Grod. 



16 THE LIFE OF 

The narrative is so entertaining, that the heart be- 
comes interested in the event of every transaction : 
ministers may draw from it the most valuable instruc- 
tion as a text-book to be used in their private meetings ; 
and parents may with great advantage select portions 
of it to be read and explained to their children. 

After the Lord had accomplished what he had de- 
signed in the works written by this man of God in his 
dreary solitude, he at length disposed Dr. Barlow, then 
Bishop of Lincoln, and others, to pity his undeserved 
sufferings, and to interest themselves in procuring his 
enlargement. 

His active spirit soon improved the liberty afforded 
him: he visited the people of God in several places, 
especially the afflicted, tempted, and persecuted, to 
whom he was now well qualified to speak a word in 
season. He took this opportunity of paying his grate- 
ful acknowledgments to his friends whose kind assis- 
tance he had experienced in prison ; and as occasion 
offered, he preached the gospel with great boldness and 
acceptance, particularly to the congregation at Bedford, 
of whom he was now chosen minister. 

Amidst all his popularity and success, he was kept 
humble, and was seldom or never known to speak of 
himself. His whole behavior was exemplary, so that 
malice herself has not been able to find, even on the 
closest inspection, a single stain on his reputation and 
moral character. 

His valuable life, worn out, with sufferings, age, and 
ministerial labors, was closed with a memorable act of 
christian charity. He was well known under the 
blessed character of a peacemaker. He was therefore 



REV. JOHN BUNYAN. 17 

desired by a young gentleman in the neighborhood of 
Bedford, to interpose as a mediator between him and 
his offended father, who lived at Reading, in Berkshire : 
this friendly business he cheerfully undertook and 
happily effected. But, in his return to London, being 
overtaken with excessive rain, he came to a friend's 
on Snow Hill very wet, and was seized with a violent 
fever, the pains of which he bore with great patience, 
resigning himself to the will of God, desiring to be 
called away that he might be with Christ, looking upon 
life as a delay of that blessedness to which his soul 
was aspiring, and after which it was thirsting. In 
this holy, longing frame of spirit, after a sickness of 
ten days, he breathed out his soul into the hands of 
his blessed Redeemer, August 12, 1688, aged 60. 

His natural abilities were remarkably great; his 
fancy and invention uncommonly fertile. His wit was 
sharp and quick ; his memory very good, it being cus- 
tomary with him to commit his sermons to writing after 
he had preached them. His works are collected in two 
volumes, folio, and contain as many treatises as he 
lived years. His judgment was sound and deep in 
the essential principles of the gospel, as his writings 
sufficiently evince. His piety and sincerity towards 
God were apparent to all who conversed with him. 
He constantly maintained the godlike principle of love, 
often bewailing that there should be so much division 
among Christians. He was a man of heroic courage, 
resolute for Christ and the gospel, and bold in reprov- 
ing sin both in public and private; yet mild, conde- 
scending, and affable to all. Thus lived and died a 
man in whose character, conduct, and usefulness that 

Pil. Prog. 2 



18 LIFE OF REV. JOHN BUNYAN. 

scripture was remarkably verified : a Ye see your call- 
ing, brethren, how that not many wise men after the 
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called; 
but God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to 
confound the wise, that no flesh should glory in hi§ 
presence." 



THE 

AUTHOR'S APOLOGY 



FOR 



HIS BOOK. 



When at the first I took my pen in hand 
Thus for to write, I did not understand 
That I at all should make a little book 
In such a mode : nay, I had undertook 
To make another ; which, when almost done, 
Beforo I was aware I this begun. 

And thus it was : I, writing of the way 
And race of saints in this our gospel-day, 
'Fell suddenly into an allegory 
About their journey, and the way to glory, 
In more than twenty things which I set down; 
This done, I twenty more had in my crown ; 
And they again began to multiply, 
Like sparks that from the coals of fire do fly. 
Nay, then, thought I, if that you breed so fast, 
I'll put you by yourselves, lest you at last 
Should prove ad infinitum* and eat out 
The book that I already am about. 
Well, so I did ; but yet I did not think 
To show to all the world my pen and ink 
In such a mode ; I only thought to make 

* Without end. 



20 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

I knew not what: nor did I undertake 
Thereby to please my neighbor; no, not I; 
I did it my own self to gratify. 

Neither did I but vacant seasons spend 
In this my scribble ; nor did I intend 
But to divert myself, in doing this, 
From worser thoughts, which make me do amiss. 
Thus I set pen to paper with delight, 
And quickly had my thoughts in black and white : 
For having now my method by the end, 
Still as I pulled, it came ; and so I penned 
It down; until it came at last to be, 
For length and breadth, the bigness which you see. 

Well, when I had thus put mine ends together, 
I showed them others, that I might see whether 
They would condemn them, or them justify : 
And some said, Let them live ; some, Let them die: 
Some said, John, print it; others said, Not so: 
Some said, It might do good; others said, No. 

Now was I in a strait, and did not see 
Which was the best thing to be done by me: 
At last I thought, Since ye are thus divided, 
I print it will ; and so the case decided. 

For, thought I, some I see would have it done, 
Though others in that channel do not run : 
To prove, then, who advised for the best, 
Thus I thought fit to put it to the test. 

I further thought, if now I did deny 
Those that would have it, thus to gratify ; 
I did not know, but hinder them I might 
Of that which would to them be great delight. 



THE AUTHOR'S APOLOGY. 21 

For those which were not for its coming forth, 
I said to them, Offend you, I am loath ; 
Yet since your brethren pleased with it be, 
Forbear to judge, till you do further see. 

If that thou wilt not read, let it alone ; 
Some love the meat, some love to pick the bone. 
Yea, that I might them better palliate, 
I did too with them thus expostulate : 

May I not write in such a style as this? 
In such a method too, and yet not miss 
My end — thy good ? Why may it not be done ? 
Dark clouds bring waters, when the bright bring none. 
Yea, dark or bright, if they their silver drops 
Cause to descend, the earth, by yielding crops, 
Gives praise to both, and carpeth not at either. 
But treasures up the fruit they yield together; 
Yea, so commixes both, that in their fruit 
None can distinguish this from that; they suit 
Her well when hungry : but if she be full, 
She spews out both, and makes their blessing null. 

You see the ways the fisherman doth take 
To catch the fish ; what engines doth he make ! 
Behold how he engageth all his wits j 
Also his snares, lines, angles, hooks, and nets : 
Yet fish there be, that neither hook nor line, 
Nor snare, nor net, nor engine can make thine : 
They must be groped for, and be tickled too, 
Or they will not be catched, whate'er you do. 

How does the fowler seek to catch his game 
By divers means ! all which one cannot name. 
Bis guns, his nets, his lime-twigs, light, and bell : 



22 riLGrMM'S PROG-JtESfe. 

He creeps, he goes, he stands ; yea, who can tell 
Of all his postures ? yet there 's none of these 
Will make him master of what fowls he please: 
Yea, he must pipe and whistle, to catch this ; 
Yet if he does so, that bird he will miss. 
If that a pearl may in a toad's head dwell, 
And may be found too in an oyster-shell; 
If things that promise nothing, do contain 
What better is than gold; who will disdain, 
That have an inkling* of it, there to look, 
That they may find it. Now my little book, ^ 
(Though void of all these paintings that may make 
It with this or the other man to take,) 
[s not without those things that do excel 
What do in brave but empty notions dwell. 

" Well, yet I am not fully satisfied 
That this your book will stand, when soundly tried." 

Why, what 's the matter? " It is dark. 1 ' What though? 
•'But it is feigned." What of that ? I trow 
Some men by feigned words, as dark as mine, 
Make truth to spangle, and its rays to shine. 
" But they want solidness." Speak, man, thy mind. 
"They drown the weak; metaphors make us blind." 

Solidity, indeed, becomes the pen 
Of him that writeth things divine to men : 
But must I needs want solidness, because 
By metaphors I speak? Were not God's laws ; 
His gospel laws, in olden time held forth 
By types, shadows, and metaphors ? Yet loath 
Will any sober man be to find fault 

*Hint, whisper, insinuation. 



THE AUTHOR'S ATOLOGl. 23 

With them, lest he be found for to assault 
The highest wisdom ! No, he rather stoops, 
And seeks to find out what, by pins and loops, 
By calves and sheep, by heifers and by rams, 
By birds and herbs, and by the blood of lambs, 
God speaketh to him ; and happy is he 
That finds the light and grace that in them be. 

Be not too forward, therefore, to conclude 
That I want solidness — that I am rude : 
All things solid in show, not solid be ; 
All things in parable despise not we, 
Lest things most hurtful lightly we receive, 
And things that good are, of our souls bereave. 
My dark and cloudy words they do but hold 
The truth, as cabinets inclose the gold. 

The prophets used much by metaphors 
To set forth truth : yea, who so considers 
Christ, his apostles too, shall plainly see, 
That truths to this day in such mantles be. 

Am I afraid to say, that holy writ, 
Which for its style and phrase puts down all wit, 
Is everywhere so full of all these things, 
Dark figures, allegories? Yet there springs 
From that same book, that lustre, and those rays 
Of light, that turn our darkest nights to days. 

Come, let my carper to his life now look, 
And find there darker lines than in my book 
He findeth any ; yea, and let him know, 
That in his best things there are worse lines too. 

May we but stand before impartial men. 
To his poor one I durst adventure ten, 



24 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

That they will take my meaning in these lines 
Far better than his lies in silver shrines. 
Come, truth, although in swaddling-clothes, I find 
Informs the judgment, rectifies the mind; 
Pleases the understanding, makes the will 
Submit; the memory too it doth fill 
With what doth our imagination please ; 
Likewise it tends our troubles to appease. 

Sound words, I know, Timothy is to use, 
And old wives' fables he is to refuse ; 
But yet grave Paul him nowhere doth forbid 
The use of parables, in which lay hid 
That gold, those pearls, and precious stones, that were 
Worth digging for, and that with greatest care. 

Let me add one word more. O man of God, 
Art thou offended? Dost thou wish I had 
Put forth my matter in another dress ? 
Or that I had in things been more express? 
Three things let me propound ; then I submit 
To those that are my betters, as is fit. 

1. I find not that I am denied the use 
Of this my method, so I no abuse 
Put on the words, things, readers, or be rude 
In handling figure or similitude, 
In application : but all that I may 
Seek the advance of truth this or that way. 
Denied, did I say? Nay, I have leave — 
Example too, and that from them that have 
God better pleased, by their words or ways, 
Than any man that breatheth nowadays — 
Thus to express my mind, thus to declare 
Things unto thee that exccllentest are. 



THE AUTHOR'S APOLOGY. 25 

2. I find that men as high as trees will write 
Dialogue-wise ; yet no man doth them slight 
For writing so. Indeed, if they abuse 
Truth, cursed be they, and the craft they use 
To that intent; but yet let truth be free 

To make her sallies upon thee and me, 
Which way it pleases God : for who knows how, 
Better than he that taught us first to plough, 
To guide our minds and pens for his design ? 
And he makes base things usher in divine. 

3. I find that holy writ, in many places, 

Hath semblance with this method, where the cases 
Do call for one thing to set forth another : 
Use it I may then, and yet nothing smother 
Truth's golden beams : nay, by this method may 
Make it cast forth its rays as light as day. 

And now, before I do put up my pen, 
I '11 show the profit of my book; and then 
Commit both thee and it unto that hand 
That pulls the strong down, and makes weak ones stand. 

This book it chalketh out before thine eyes 
The man that seeks the everlasting prize : 
It shows you whence he comes, whither he goes, 
What he leaves undone ; also what he does : 
It also shows you how he runs, and runs, 
Till he unto the gate of glory comes. 
It shows, too, who set out for life amain, 
As if the lasting crown they would obtain; 
Here also you may see the reason why 
They lose their labor, and like fools do die. 

This book will make a traveller of thee, 
If by its counsel thou wilt ruled be ; 



26 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

It will direct thee to the Holy Land, 
If thou wilt its directions understand : 
Yea, it will make the slothful active be ; 
The blind also delightful things to see. 

Art thou for something rare and profitable ? 
Or would'st thou see a truth within a fable? 
Art thou forgetful? Wouldest thou remember 
From New-Year's day to the last of December ? 
Then read my fancies; they will stick like burs, 
And may be, to the helpless, comforters. 

This book is writ in such a dialect 
As may the minds of listless men affect : 
It seems a novelty, and yet contains 
Nothing but sound and honest gospel strains. 

Would'st thou divert thyself from melancholy? 
Would'st thou be pleasant, yet be far from folly? 
Would'st thou read riddles, and their explanation ? 
Or else be drowned in thy contemplation? 
Dost thou love picking meat? Or would'st thou see 
A man i' the clouds, and hear him speak to thee? 
Would'st thou be in a dream, and yet not sleep? 
Or would'st thou in a moment lau^h and weep ? 
Would'st thou lose thyself and catch no harm, 
And find thyself again without a charm? 
Would'st read thyself, and read thou know'st not what, 
And yet know whether thou art blest or not, 
By reading the same lines? then come hither. 
And lay my book, thy head, and heart together. 

JOHN BUXYAN. 



THE 

PILGRIM'S PROGRESS, 

IN THE SIMILITUDE OF A DREAM 



THE FIRST STAGE. 

As I walked through the wilderness of this world, 
I lighted on a certain place where was a den,* and 
The Jail. laid me down in that place to sleep ; 
and as I slept, I dreamed a dream. I dreamed, 
and behold, I saw a man clothed with rags stand- 
ing in a certain place, with his face from his own 
house, a book in his hand, and a great burden upon 
his back. Isa. 64 : 6 ; Luke 14 : 33 ; Psalm 38 : 4. 
I looked, and saw him open the book, and read 
therein ; and as he read, he wept and trembled ; 
and not being able longer to contain, he brake out 
with a lamentable cry, saying, "What shall I do?" 
Acts 2:37; 16:30; Hab. 1:2, 3. 

* Bedford jail, in which the author was a prisoner for con- 
science' sake. 



28 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

In this plight, therefore, he went home, and 
restrained himself as long as he could, that his 
wife and children should not perceive his distress ; 
but he could not be silent long, because that his 
trouble increased. Wherefore at length he brake 
his mind to his wife and children; and thus he 
began to talk to them: "0, my dear wife," said 
he, "and you the children of my bowels, I, your 
dear friend, am in myself undone by reason of a 
burden that lieth hard upon me ; moreover'I am 
certainly informed that this our city will be burnt 
with lire from heaven ; in which fear- This world. 
ful overthrow, both myself, with thee my wife, 
and you my sweet babes, shall miserably come to 
ruin, except — the which yet I see not — He knows no 

r way of escape as 

some way of escape can be found where- yet. 
by we may be delivered." At this his relations 
were sore amazed ; not for that they believed that 
what he had said to them was true, but because 
they thought that some frenzy distemper had got 
into his head ; therefore, it drawing towards night, 
and they hoping that sleep might settle his brains, 
with all haste they got him to bed. But the night 
was as troublesome to him as the day ; wherefore, 
instead of sleeping, he spent it in sighs and tears. 
So when the morning was come, they would know 
how he did. He told them, "Worse and worse:" 
he also set to talking to them again; camai physio 
but they began to be hardened. They for a sick soul - 



EVANGELIST DIRECTS HIM. 29 

also thought to drive away his distemper by harsh 
and surly carriage to him ; sometimes they would 
deride, sometimes they would chide, and some- 
times they would quite neglect him. Wherefore 
he began to retire himself to his chamber to pray 
for and pity them, and also to condole his own 
misery ; he would also walk solitarily in the fields, 
sometimes reading, and sometimes praying: and 
thus for some days he spent his time. 

Now I saw, upon a time, when he was walking 
in the fields, that he was, as he was wont, reading 
in his book, and greatly distressed in his mind: 
and as he read, he burst out, as he had done before, 
crying, "What shall I do to be saved?" Acts 
16:30, 31. 

I saw also that he looked this way, and that 
way, as if he would run ; yet he stood still because, 
as I perceived, he could not tell which way to go. 
I looked then, and saw a man named Evangelist 
coming to him, and he asked, "Wherefore dost thou 
cry?"° 

He answered, "Sir, I perceive, by the book in 
my hand, that I am condemned to die, and after 
that to come to judgment, Heb. 9 : 27 ; and I find 
that I am not willing to do the first, Job 10 : 21, 
22, nor able to do the second." Ezek. 22 : 14. 

Then said Evangelist, " Why not willing to die, 
since this life is attended with so many evils ?" 
The man answered, "Because I fear that this 



30 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

burden that is upon my back will sink me lower 
than the grave, and I shall fall into Tophct. I 
30 : 33. And, sir, if I be not fit to go to prison, I 
am not fit to go to judgment, and from thence to 
execution ; and the thoughts of these things make 
me cry." 

Then said Evangelist, "If this be thy condition, 
why standest thou still ?" He answered, Conviction of 

, . . the necessity of 

"Because I know not whither to go. fleeing. 
Then he gave him a parchment roll, and there was 
written within, "Fly from the wrath to come." 
Matt. 3 :7. 

The man therefore read it, and looking upon 
Evangelist very carefully, said, "Whither must I 
ily?" Then laid Evangelist, pointing with his 
finger over a very wide field, " Do you see yon 
wicket-gate?" Matt. 7:13, 14. The man said, 
"No." Thru Bald the other, "Do you see yonder 
shining light?" Psalm 119: 105; 2 Pet. christandthe 

way to Kim can- 

1 : 19. He said, "I think I do." Then not be found 

. n .. T „ .. , . without the 

said Evangelist, "Keep that light in word. 

your eye, and go up directly thereto, so shalt thou 

see the gate; at which, when thou knockest, it 

shall he told thee what thou shalt do." So I saw 

in my dream that the man began to run. Now 

he had not run far from his own door when his 

wife and children, perceiving it, becran to cry after 

him to return; but the man put his fingers in his 

ears and ran on, crying, "Life! life! eternal life'" 



OBSTINATE AND PLIABLE. 31 

Luke 14 : 26. So he looked not behind him, Gen 
19 : 17, hut fled towards the middle of the plain. 

The neighbors also came out to see him run, 
They that, flee Jer. 20:10; and as he ran, some 
to°come are" a mocked, others threatened, and some 
fhe Z worid°° t0 cried after him to return ; and among 
those that did so, there were two that resolved to 
fetch him -back by force. The name of the one 
was Obstinate, and the name of the other Pliable. 
Now by this time the man was got a good distance 
from them ; but, however, they were resolved to 
pursue him, which they did, and in a little time 
they overtook him. Then said the man, " Neigh- 
bors, wherefore are ye come?" They said, "To 
persuade you to go back with us." But he said, 
"That can by no means be : you dwell," said he, 
"in the city of Destruction, the place also where I 
was born : I see it to be so ; and dying there, sooner 
or later you will sink lower than the grave, into a 
place that burns with fire and brimstone ; be con- 
tent, good neighbors, and go along with me." 

Obst. What, said Obstinate, and leave our friends 
and our comforts behind us ? 

Chr. Yes, said Christian, for that was his 
name, because that all which you forsake is not 
worthy to be compared with a little of that I am 
seeking to enjoy, 2 Cor. 4:18; and if you will go 
along with me, and hold it, you shall fare as I 
myself; for there, where I go, is enough and to 



32 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

spare. Luke 15 : 17. Come away, and prove my 
words. 

Obst. What are the things you seek, since you 
leave all the world to find them ? 

Ciir. I seek an inheritance incorruptible, unde- 
fined, and that fadeth not away, 1 Peter, 1:4; and it 
is laid up in heaven, and safe there, Heb. 11 : 16, to 
be bestowed, at the time appointed, on them that 
diligently seek it. Read it so, if you will, in my book. 
Obst. Tush, said Obstinate, away with" your 
book ; will you go back with us or no ? 

Chr. No, not I, said the other, because I have 
laid my hand to the plough. Luke 9 : G2. 

Obst. Come then, neighbor Pliable, let us turn 
again, and go home without him : there is a com- 
pany of these crazy-headed coxcombs, that when 
they take a fancy by the end, are wiser in their 
own eyes than seven men that can render a reason. 
Pli. Then said Pliable, Don't revile; if what 
good Christian says is true, the things he looks 
after are better than ours : my heart inclines to go 
with my neighbor. 

Obst. What, more fools still ! Be ruled by me, 
and go back ; who knows whither such a brain-sick 
fellow will lead you ? Go back, go back, and be wise. 
Chr. Nay, but do thou come with christian and 
thy neighbor Pliable ; there are such ? ? tina piiabie's 
things to be had which I spoke of, and souL 
many more glories besides. If you believe not me, 



OBSTINATE GOES BACK. 33 

read here in this book ; and for the truth of what 
is expressed therein, behold, all is confirmed by the 
blood of Him that made it. Heb. 9:17-21. 

Pli. Well, neighbor Obstinate, said Pliable, I 
Piiatie con- begin to come to a point; J. intend to 

siiiteth. to go . . 

with christian, go along with this good man, and to 
cast in my lot with him : but, my good companion, 
do you know the way to this desired place ? 

Chr. I am directed by a man whose name is 
Evangelist, to speed me to a little gate that is 
before us, where we shall receive instructions 
about the way. 

Pli. Come then, good neighbor, let us be going 
Then they went both together. 

Obst. And I will go back to my place, said Ob- 
Obstinategoes stinate : I will be no companion of such 
railing back. misled, fantastical fellows. 

Now I saw in my dream, that when Obstinate 
Talk between was gone back, Christian and Pliable 

Christian and . 

Pliable. went talking over the plain ; and thus 

they began their discourse. 

Che.. Come, neighbor Pliable, how do you do 9 
I am glad you are persuaded to go along with me. 
Had even Obstinate himself but felt what I have 
felt of the powers and terrors of what is yet un- 
seen, he would not thus lightly have given us the 
back. 

Pli. Come, neighbor Christian, since there are 
none but us two here, tell me now farther what 

Pil. Pro- 3 



34 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

the things are, and how to he enjoyed, whither we 
are going. 

Ciir. I can hotter conceive of them with my 
mind, than speak of them with my God , g things 
tongue : hut yet, since you are desirous uns P eakable - 
to know, I will read of them in my hook. 

Pli. And do you think that the words of your 
book are certainly true ? 

Ciir. Yes, verily; for it was made by Him that 
cannot lie. Tit. 1 : 2. 

Pli. Well said; what things are they? 

Chr. There is an endless kingdom to he inhab- 
ited, and everlasting life to he given us, that we 
may inhabit that kingdom for ever. Isa. 65 : 17 ; 
John 10:27-29. 

Pli. Well said ; and what else ? 

Chr. There are crowns of glory to be given us, 
and garments that will make us shine like the sun 
in the firmament of heaven. 2 Tim. 4:8; Rev 
22:5; Matt. 13:43. 

Pli. This is very pleasant ; and what else ? 

Chr. There shall be no more crying, nor soi 
row ; for He that is owner of the place will wip' 
all tears from our eyes. Isa. 25 : 8 ; Rev. 7 : l€ 
17; 21:4. 

Pli. And what company shall we have there ? 

Ciir. There we shall be with seraphim and 
cherubim, Isaiah 6:2; 1 Thes. 4:16, 17; Rev. 
5:11; creatures that will dazzle your eyes to look 



CHRISTIAN AND PLIABLE. 35 

on them. There also you shall meet with thou- 
sands and ten thousands that have gone before us 
to that place ; none of them are hurtful, but loving 
and holy; every one walking in the sight of God, 
and standing in his presence with acceptance for 
ever. In a word, there we shall see the elders 
with their golden crowns, Rev. 4:4; there we 
shall see the holy virgins with their golden harps, 
Rev. 14 : 1-5 ; there we shall see men that by the 
world were cut in pieces, burnt in flames, eaten of 
beasts, drowned in the seas, for the love they bare 
to the Lord of the place, John 12:25; all well, 
and clothed with immortality as with a garment. 
2 Cor. 5 : 2. 

Pli. The hearing of this is enough to ravish 
one's heart. But are these things to be enjoyed ? 
How shall we get to be sharers thereof? 

Chr. The Lord, the governor of the country, 
hath recorded that in this book, Isaiah 55:1, 2; 
John 6 : 37 ; 7 : 37 ; Rev. 21:6; 22 : 17 ; the sub- 
stance of which is, If we be truly willing to have 
it, he will bestow it upon us freely. 

Pli. Well, my good companion, glad am I to 
hear of these things : come on, let us mend our 
pace. 

Chr. I cannot go so fast as I would, by reason of 
this burden that is on my back. 

Now I saw in my dream, that just as they had 
ended this talk, they drew nigh to a very miry 



36 PILGRIM'S PROG-RESS. 

slough that was in the midst of the plain : and they 
being heedless, did both fall suddenly into the bog. 
The name of the slough was Despond. The slough ol 
Here, therefore, they wallowed for a Des P ond - 
time, being grievously bedaubed with dirt ; and 
Christian, because of the burden that was on his 
back, began to sink in the mire. 

Pli. Then said Pliable, Ah, neighbor Christian, 
where are you now ? 

Chr. Truly, said Christian, I do not know. 

Pli. At this Pliable began to be offended, and 
angrily said to his fellow, Is this the happiness you 
have told me all this while of? If we have such 
ill speed at our first setting out, what may we 
expect between this and our journey's end ? May 
I get out again with my life, you shall possess the 
brave country alone for me. And with it is not 

enough to be pli- 

that he gave a desperate struggle or able. 
two, and got out of the mire on that side of the 
slough which was next to his own house : so away 
he went, and Christian saw him no more. 

Wherefore Christian was left to tumble in the 
slouch of Despond alone : but still he Christian, in 

- . trouble, seeki 

endeavored to struggle to that side of still to get far- 

iiii r i r l • ther f rom ki« 

the slough that was farthest irom his own house. 
own house, and next to the wicket-gate : the 
which he did, but could not get out because of 
the burden that was upon his back : but I be- 
held in my dream, that a man came to hino 



THE STEPS OF PROMISE. 37 

whose name was Help, and asked him what he 
did there. 

Chr. Sir, said Christian, I was bid to go this 
way by a man called Evangelist, who directed 
me also to yonder gate, that I might escape the 
wrath to come. And as I was going thither, I fell 
in here. 

Help. But why did not you look for the 

The promises. Steps ? 

Chr. Fear followed me so hard that I fled the 
next way, and fell in. 

Help. Then said he, Give me thy hand : so he 
Help lifts him gave him his hand, and he drew him 
out, Psalm 40 : 2, and he set him upon 
sound ground, and bid him go on his way. 

Then I stepped to him that plucked him out, 
and said, "Sir, wherefore, since over this place is 
the way from the city of Destruction to yonder 
gate, is it, that this plat is not mended, that poor 
travellers might go thither with more security V 
And he said unto me, " This miry slough is such a 
what makes place as cannot be mended : it is the 

ihe slough of 

Despond. descent whither the scum and filth 

that attends conviction for sin doth continually 
run, and therefore it is called the slough of De- 
spond ; for still, as the sinner is awakened about 
his lost condition, there arise in his soul many 
fears and doubts, and discouraging apprehensions, 
which all of them get together, and settle in this 



38 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

place : and this is the reason of the badness of this 
ground. 

"It is not the pleasure of the King that this 
place should remain so bad. Isa. 35 : 3, 4. His 
laborers also have, by the direction of his Maj- 
esty's surveyors, been for above these sixteen 
hundred years employed about this patch of 
ground, if perhaps it might have been mended : 
yea, and to my knowledge," said he, "there have 
been swallowed up at least twenty thousand cart- 
loads, yea, millions of wholesome instructions, that 
have at all seasons been brought from all places 
of the King's dominions, (and they that can tell, 
say they are the best materials to make good 
ground of the place,) if so be it might have been 
mended; but it is the sloujrh of Despond still, 
and so will be when they have done what they 
can. 

" True, there are, by the direction of the Law- 
giver, certain good and substantial The promises 

of forgiveness 

steps placed even through the very and acceptance 

. , r ^ ■ ^ i i t to life by faith 

midst ol this slough; but at such time in Christ, 
as this place doth much spew out its filth, as it 
doth against change of weather, these steps are 
hardly seen ; or if they be, men, through the diz- 
ziness of their heads, step beside, and then they 
are bemired to purpose, notwithstanding the steps 
be there : but the ground is good when they are 
once got in at the gate." 1 Sam. 12 : 23. 



PLIABLE GETS HOME. 39 

Now I saw in my dream, that by this time Pli- 
able was got home to his house. So his neighbors 

Pliable got came to visit him ; and some of them 
vSed by d hil called him wise man for coming back, 
neighbors. an( j gome called him fool for hazarding 

himself with Christian : others again did mock at 
his cowardliness, saying, " Surely, since you began 
to venture, I would not have been so base as to 
have given out for a few difficulties : so Pliable sat 
sneaking among them. But at last he got more 
confidence, and then they all turned their tales, 
and began to deride poor Christian behind his back. 
And thus much concerning Pliable. 

Now as Christian was walking solitarily by him- 
self, he espied one afar off come crossing over the 

Mr. Worldly field to meet him ; and their hap was 

Wiseman meets . , 

with Christian, to meet just as they were crossing the 
way of each other. The gentleman's name that 
met him was Mr. Worldly Wiseman : he dwelt in 
the town of Carnal Policy, a very great town, and 
also hard by from whence Christian came. This 
man then, meeting with Christian, and having some 
inkling* of him — for Christian's setting forth from 
the city of Destruction was much noised abroad, 
not only in the town where he dwelt, but also it 
began to be the town-talk in some other places — 
Mr. Worldly Wiseman therefore having some guess 
of him, by beholding his laborious going, by observ 
* Slight knowledge. 



40 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

ing his sighs and groans, and the like, began thua 
to enter into some talk with Christian. 

"World. How now, good fellow, Talk between 
whither away after this burdened man- wVseman "and 

ner 1 Christian. 

Chr. A burdened manner indeed, as ever I think 
poor creature had ! And whereas you ask me, 
Whither away ? I tell you, sir, I am going to yon- 
der wicket-gate before me ; for there, as I am in- 
formed, I shall be put into a way to be rid of my 
heavy burden. 

World. Hast thou a wife and children ? 

Chr. Yes ; but I am so laden with this burden 
that I cannot take that pleasure in them as for- 
merly : methinks I am as if I had none. 1 Cor. 
7:29. 

World. Wilt thou hearken to me, if I give thee 
counsel ? 

Chr. If it be good, I will ; for I stand in need 
of good counsel. 

World. I would advise thee, then, that thou 
with all speed get thyself rid of thy Worldly Wise- 

man's counsel to 

burden ; for thou wilt never be settled Christian. 
in thy mind till then : nor canst thou enjoy the bene- 
fits of the blessings which God hath bestowed upon 
thee till then. 

Chr. That is that which I seek for, even to be 
rid of this heavy burden : but get it off myself I 
cannot, nor is there any man in our country that 



WORLDLY WISEMAN. 41 

can take it off my shoulders ; therefore I am going 
this way, as I told you, that I may be rid of my 
burden. 

World. Who bid thee go this way to be rid of 
thy burden ? 

Chr. A man that appeared to me to be a very 
great and honorable person : his name, as I remem- 
ber, is Evangelist. 

World. I beshrew* him for his counsel! there 

is not a more dangerous and troublesome way in 

Mr. Worldly the world than is that into which he 

Wiseman con- j tll directed thee ; and that thou shalt 

demnetn iiivan- • 

geiist's counsel. £ n( ^ if thou wilt be ruled by his coun- 
sel. Thou hast met with something, as I perceive, 
already ; for I see the dirt of the slough of De- 
spond is upon thee : but that slough is the begin- 
ning of the sorrows that do attend those that go 
on in that way. Hear me ; I am older than thou : 
thou art like to meet with, in the way which thou 
goest, wearisomeness, painfulness, hunger, perils, 
nakedness, sword, lions, dragons, darkness, and, in 
a word, death, and what not. These things are 
certainly true, having been confirmed by many 
testimonies. And should a man so carelessly cast 
away himself, by giving heed to a stranger? 

The frame of Chr. Why, sir, this burden upon 
t] !un hoart Chris- m Y Dac k is more terrible to me than 
tiaIi - all these things which you have men* 

* Wish a curse to. 



42 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

tioned : nay, methinks I care not what I meet with 
in the way, if so be I can also meet with deliver- 
ance from my burden. 

World. How earnest thou by thy burden at 
first? 

Ciir. By reading this book in my hand. 

World. I thought so ; and it has happened unto 
thee as to other weak men, who, meddling with 
things too high for them, do suddenly fall into thy 
distractions ; which distractions do not He does* not 

.like that men 

only unman men, as thine I perceive should be seri- 

- _ _ _ , , ous in reading 

have done thee, but they run them the Bible 
upon desperate ventures, to obtain they know not 
what. 

Chr. I know what I would obtain; it is ease 
from my heavy burden. 

World. But why wilt thou seek for ease this 
way, seeing so many dangers attend it ? especially 
since, hadst thou but patience to hear me, I could 
direct thee to the obtaining of what thou desirest, 
without the dangers that thou in this way wilt 
run thyself into. Yea, and the remedy is at hand. 
Besides, I will add, that instead of those dangew, 
thou shalt meet with much safety, friendship, and 
content. 

Chr. Sir, I pray open this secret to me. 

World. Why, in yonder village — the village is 
named Morality — there dwells a gentleman whose 
name is Legality, a very judicious man, and a man 



WORLDLY WISEMAN. 43 

of a very good name, that has skill to help men 

off with such burdens as thine is from their shoul- 

Heprefersmo- ders ; yea, to my knowledge, he hath 

raLty before the , , r T , . 

strait gate. done a great deal oi good this way ; 
aye, and besides, he hath skill to cure those that 
are somewhat crazed in their wits with their bur- 
dens. To him, as I said, thou may est go, and be 
helped presently. His house is not quite a mile 
from this place ; and if he should not be at home 
himself, he hath a pretty young man to his son, 
whose name is Civility, that can do it, to speak 
on, as well as the old gentleman himself: there, I 
say, thou mayest be eased of thy burden; and if 
thou art not minded to go back to thy former habita- 
tion, as indeed I would not wish thee, thou may- 
est send for thy wife and children to this village, 
where there are houses now standing empty, one 
of which thou mayest have at a reasonable rate : 
provision is there also cheap and good; and that' 
which will make thy life the more happy is, to be 
sure there thou shalt live by honest neighbors, in 
credit and good fashion. 

Now was Christian somewhat at a stand ; but 

Christian presently he concluded, If this be true 

Woddi b Vis I e r - wllicn tms gentleman hath said, my 

Damn's words. w i se st course is to take his advice; 

and with that he thus farther spoke. 

Chr. Sir, which is my way to this honest man's 
house 1 



44 pilgrim's progress- 

World. Do you see yonder high hill ? Mount Sinai. 
Chr. Yes, very well. 

World. By that hill you must go, and the first 
house you come at is his. 

So Christian turned out of his way to go to Mr. 
Legality's house for help : but behold, Cliristi an afraid 
when he was got now hard by the hill, *? ""^ £j] 
it seemed so high, and also that side of 01lhishead - 
it that was next the way-side did hang so much 
over, that Christian was afraid to venture further, 
lest the hill should fall on his head ; wherefore 
there he stood still, and wotted not what to do. 
Also his burden now seemed heavier to him than 
while he was in his way. There came also flashes 
of fire, Ex. 19 : 16, 18, out of the hill, that made 
Christian afraid that he should be burnt: here 
therefore he did sweat and quake for fear. Heb. 
12 : 21. And now he began to be sorry that he 
had taken Mr. Worldly Wiseman's counsel ; and 
with that he saw Evangelist coming to meet him, 
at the sight also of whom he began to blush for 
shame. So Evangelist drew nearer Evangelist 
and nearer ; and coming up to him, he f^ 11 ^"der 
looked upon him with a severe and mount Sinau 
dreadful countenance, and thus began to reason 
with Christian. 

Evan. What doest thou here, Christian ? said 
he: at which words Christian knew not what to 
answer ; wherefore at present he stood speech- 



UNDER MOUNT SINAI. 45 

Evangelist rea- less before him. Then said Evangelist 

Eons afresh with ° 

Christian. farther, Art not thou the man that 1 

found crying without the walls of the city of De- 
struction ? 

Che.. Yes, dear sir, I am the man. 

Evan. Did not I direct thee the way to the lit- 
tle wicket-gate ? 

Chr. Yes, dear sir, said Christian. 

Evan. How is it then that thou art so quickly 
turned aside ? For thou art now out of the way. 

Chr. I met with a gentleman so soon as I had 
got over the slough of Despond, who persuaded 
me that I might, in the village before me, find a 
man that could take off my burden. 

Evan. What was he ? 

Chr. He looked like a gentleman, and talked 
much to me, and got me at last to yield : so I came 
hither ; but when I beheld this hill, and how it 
hangs over the way, I suddenly made a stand, lest 
it should fall on my head. 

Evan. What said that gentleman to you ? 

Chr. Why, he asked me whither I was going; 
and I told him. 

Evan. And what said he then? 

Chr. He asked me if I had a family ; and I told 
him. But, said I, I am so laden with the burden 
that is on my back, that I cannot take pleasure in 
them as formerly. 

Evan. And what said he then? 



46 PILG-RIM'S PROG-RESS. 

Ciir. He bid me with speed get rid of my bur- 
den ; and I told him it was ease that I sought. 
And, said I, I am therefore going to yonder gate, 
to receive farther direction how I may get to the 
place of deliverance. So he said that he would 
show me a better way, and short, not so attended 
with difficulties as the way, sir, that you set me 
in ; which way, said he, will direct you to a gen- 
tleman's house that hath skill to take off these bur- 
dens ; so I believed him, and turned out of Jhat 
way into this, if haply I might be soon eased of my 
burden. But when I came to this place, and be- 
held things as they are, I stopped, for fear, as I 
said, of danger : but I know not what to do. 

Evan. Then said Evangelist, Stand still a little, 
that I may show thee the words of God. So he 
stood trembling. Then said Evangel- Evangelist con- 

c , r , T . vinceshimof his 

ist, " feee that ye reiuse not Him that error. 
speaketh ; for if they escaped not who refused him 
that spake on earth, much more shall not we es- 
cape, if we turn away from Him that speaketh from 
heaven." Heb. 12:25. He said, moreover, "Now 
the just shall live by faith ; but if any man draw 
back my soul shall have no pleasure in him." 
Heb. 10 : 38. He also did thus apply them : Thou 
art the man that art running into this misery ; thou 
hast begun to reject the counsel of the Most High, 
and to draw back thy foot from the way of peace, 
even almost to the hazarding of thy perdition. 




" '■'•> ' ' v -v..,i .^.'";.:** 1 '"^"r 



EVANGELIST CONVINCES HIM. 47 

Then Christian fell down at his feet as dead, 
crying, Woe is me, for I am undone ! At the sight 
of which Evangelist caught him by the right hand, 
saying, " All manner of sin and blasphemies shall 
be forgiven unto men." Matt. 12 : 31. ''Be not 
faithless, but believing." John 20 : 27. Then did 
Christian again a little revive, and stood up trem- 
bling, as at first, before Evangelist. 

Then Evangelist proceeded, saying, Give more 
earnest heed to the things that I shall tell thee of. 
I will now show thee who it was that deluded thee, 
and who it was also to whom he sent thee. The 
Mr. Worldly man that met thee is one Worldly Wise- 
Trib e ed an ty man > and rightly is he so called ; partly 
Evangelist. because he savoreth only the doctrine 
of this world, 1 John, 4 : 5 — therefore he always 
goes to the town of Morality to church — and partly 
because he loveth that doctrine best, for it saveth 
him best from the cross, Gal. 6 : 12: and because 
he is of this carnal temper, therefore he seeketh 
to pervert my ways, though right. Now there are 
three things in this man's counsel that thou must 
utterly abhor. 

1. His turning thee out of the way. 

2. His laboring to render the cross odious to 
thee. 

3. And his setting thy feet in that way thai 
leadeth unto the administration of death. 

First, thou must abhor his turning thee out oi 



48 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

the way ; yea, and thine own consenting thereto ; 
because this is to reject the counsel of God for the 
sake of the counsel of a Worldly Wiseman. The 
Lord says, " Strive to enter in at the strait gate," 
Luke 13 : 24, the gate to which I send thee; " for 
strait is the gate that leadeth unto life, and few 
there be that find it." Matt. 7 : 13, 14. From 
this little wicket-gate, and from the way thereto, 
hath this wicked man turned thee, to the bringing 
of thee almost to destruction: hate, therefore, ^his 
turning thee out of the way, and abhor thyself for 
hearkening to him. 

Secondly, thou must abhor his laboring to ren- 
der the cross odious unto thee ; for thou art to pre- 
fer it before the treasures of Egypt. Heb. 11 : 25, 
26. Besides, the King of glory hath told thee, 
that he that will save his life shall lose it. And 
he that comes after him, and hates not his father, 
and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, 
and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot 
be his disciple. Mark 8 : 35 ; John 12 : 25; Matt. 
10 : 39; Luke 14 : 26. I say, therefore, for man 
to labor to persuade thee that that shall be thy 
death, without which, the truth hath said, thou 
canst not have eternal life, this doctrine thou must 
abhor. 

Thirdly, thou must hate his setting of thy feet 
in the way that leadeth to the ministration of 
death. And for this thou must consider to whom 



EVANG-ELIST CONVINCES HIM. 49 

he sent thee, and also how unable that person was 
to deliver thee from tliy burden. 

He to whom thou wast sent for ease, being by 
name Legality, is the son of the bond-woman 
which now is, and is in bondage with her children, 
Gal. 4 : 21-27, and is, in a mystery, this mount 
Sinai, which thou hast feared will fall on thy 
head. Now if she with her children are in bond- 
age, how canst thou expect by them to be made 
free ? This Legality therefore is not able to set 
thee free from thy burden. No man was as yet 
ever rid of his burden by him ; no, nor ever is 
like to be : ye cannot be justified by the works of 
the law; for by the deeds of the law no man liv- 
ing can be rid of his burden. Therefore Mr. 
Worldly Wiseman is an alien, and Mr. Legality is 
a cheat; and for his son Civility, notwithstanding 
his simpering looks, he is but a hypocrite, and 
cannot help thee. Believe me, there is nothing in 
all this noise that thou hast heard of these sottish 
men, but a design to beguile thee of thy salvation, 
by turning thee from the way in which I had set 
thee. After this, Evangelist called aloud to the 
heavens for confirmation of what he had said ; and 
with that there came words and fire out of the 
mountain under which poor Christian stood, which 
made the hair of his flesh stand up. The words 
were thus pronounced : " As many as are of the 
works of the law, are under the curse ; for it is 

FiL Prog. 4 



50 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

written, Cursed is every one that continueth not 
in all things which are written in the hook of the 
law to do them." Gal. 3 : 10. 

Now Christian looked for nothing but death, 
and began to cry out lamentably; even cursing 
the time in which he met with Mr. Worldly Wise- 
man; still calling himself a thousand fools for 
hearkening to his counsel. He also was greatly 
ashamed to think that this gentleman's arguments, 
flowing only from the flesh, should have the preva- 
lency with him so far as to cause him to forsake 
the right way. This done, he applied himself 
again to Evangelist in words and sense as fol- 
lows. 

Chr. Sir, what think you ? Is there any hope ? 
May I now go back, and go up to the wicket-gate ? 
Shall I not be abandoned for this, and christian in- 

quires if he may 

sent back from thence ashamed ? I yet be happy. 
am sorry I have hearkened to this man's counsel; 
but may my sin be forgiven ? 

Evan. Then said Evangelist to him, Thy sin is 
very great, for by it thou hast committed two 
evils; thou hast forsaken the way that is good, to 
tread in forbidden paths. Yet will the Evan K eiiat 
man at the gate receive thee, for he comforts him - 
has good-will for men ; only, said he, take heed 
that thou turn not aside again, lest thou "perish 
from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a 
little." Psa. 2:12. 



ENTERS IF AT THE GATE. 51 



THE SECOND STAGE. 

Then did Christian address himself to go back ; 
and Evangelist, after he had kissed him, gave him 
one smile, and bid him God speed : so he went on 
with haste, neither spake he to any man by the 
way ; nor if any man asked him, would he vouch- 
safe them an answer. He went like one that was 
all the while treading on forbidden ground, and 
could by no means think himself safe, till again he 
was got into the way which he had left to follow 
Mr. Worldly Wiseman's counsel. So. in process of 
time, Christian got up to the gate. Now, over the 
gate there was written, "Knock, and it shall be 
opened unto you." Matt. 7 : 7. 

He knocked, therefore, more than once or twice, 
saying, 

"May I now enter here ? Will he within 
Open to sorry me, though I have heen 
An undeserving rehel ? Then shall I 
Not fail to sing his lasting praise on high." 

At last there came a grave person to the gate, 
named Goodwill, who asked who was there, and 
whence he came, and what he would have. 

Chr. Here is a poor burdened sinner. I come 
from the city of Destruction, but am going to 
mount Zion, that I may be delivered from the 
wrath to come ; I would therefore, sir, since I am 



52 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

informed that by this gate is the way thither, 
know if you are willing to let me in. 

Good. I am willing with all rny The gate will 
heart, said he ; and with that he open- brokenhearted 
ed the gate. sinners - 

So when Christian was stepping in, the other 
gave him a pull. Then said Christian, What 
means that? The other told him, A littls dis- 
tance from this gate there is erected a strong 
castle, of which Beelzebub is the captain : from., 
thence both he and they that are with Satan envies 

those that enter 

him shoot arrows at those that come the strait gate. 
up to this gate, if haply they may die before they 
can enter in. Then said Christian, I Christ ian en- 
rejoice and tremble. So when he was ^[ t s h ^ g ^ 
got in, the man of the gate asked him trembling. 
who directed him thither. 

Chr. Evangelist bid me come hither and knock, 
as I did : and he said that you, sir, Talk between 

Goodwill and 

would tell me what I must do. Christian. 

Good. An open door is set before thee, and no 
man can shut it. 

Chr. Now I begin to reap the benefit of my 
hazards. 

Good. But how is it that you came alone? 

Chr. Because none of my neighbors saw their 
danger as I saw mine. 

Good. Did any of them know of your coming ? 

Chr. Yes, my wife and children saw me at the 



TALK WITH GOODWILL. 53 

first, and called after me to turn again : also, some 
of my neighbors stood crying and calling after me 
to return ; but I put my fingers in my ears, and so 
came on my way. 

Good. But did none of them follow you, to per- 
suade you to go back ? 

Chr. Yes, both Obstinate and Pliable ; but when 
they saw that they could not prevail, Obstinate 
went railing back, but Pliable came with me a 
little way. 

Good. But why did he not come through? 

Chr. We indeed came both together until we 
came to the slough of Despond, into the which we 
also suddenly fell. And then was my neighbor 
Pliable discouraged, and would not venture further. 
a man may Wherefore, getting out again on the 
t a h V en c r P S side next to his own house, he told me 
and yet goThS I should possess the brave country alone 
er alone. f or ^ j m . so h e wen t his way, and I 

came mine ; he after Obstinate, and I to this gate. 

Good. Then said Goodwill, Alas, poor man; is 
the celestial glory of so little esteem with him, 
that he counteth it not worth running the hazard 
of a few difficulties to obtain it ? 

Chr. Truly, said Christian, I have said the truth 
Christian ac- of Pliable ; and if I should also say all 
before the'^an tne truth of my self, it will appear there 
is no betterment betwixt him and my- 
self. Tt is true, he went back to his own house, 



54 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

but I also turned aside to go into the way of death, 
being persuaded thereto by the carnal argument of 
one Mr. Worldly Wiseman. 

Good. 0, did he light upon you ? What, he 
would have had you seek for ease at the hands of 
Mr. Legality ! They are both of them a very cheat. 
But did you take his counsel? 

Chr. Yes, as far as I durst. I went to find out 
Mr. Legality, until I thought that the mountain 
that stands by his house would have fallen upon 
my head; wherefore there was I forced to stop. 

Good. That mountain has been the death of 
many, and will be the death of many more : it is 
well you escaped being by it dashed in pieces. 

Chr. Why, truly I do not know what had become 
of me there, had not Evangelist happily met me 
again as I was musing in the midst of my dumps ; 
but it was God's mercy that he came to me again, 
for else I had never come hither. But now I am 
come, such a one as I am, more fit indeed for death 
by that mountain, than thus to stand talking with 
my Lord. But 0, what a favor is this to me, that 
yet I am admitted entrance here ! 

Good. We make no objections against any, not- 
withstanding all that they have done before they 
come hither; they in nowise are cast christian is 
out. John 6: 37. And therefore, good ^rect^et 
Christian, come a little way with me, on his wa y- 
and I will teach thee about the way thou must go. 



THE INTERPRETER'S HOUSE. 55 

Look before thee; dost thou see this narrow way? 
That is the way thou must go. It was cast up by 
the patriarchs, prophets, Christ, and his apostles, 
and it is as straight as a rule can make it ; this is 
the way thou must go. 

Chr. But, said Christian, are there no turnings 
Christian nor windings, by which a stranger may 

afraid of losing ° ' J & J 

his way. lose his way ? 

Good. Yes, there are many ways butt down 
upon this, and they are crooked and wide : but 
thus thou mayest distinguish the right from the 
wrong, the right only being straight and narrow. 
Matt. 7 : 14. 

Then I saw in my dream, that Christian asked 
Christian him further, if he could not help him 

weary of his _...,. , , , , . 

burden. off with his burden that was upon his 

back. For as yet he had not got rid thereof; nor 
could he by any means get it off without help. 
There is no He told him, " As to thy burden, be 

deliverance from , 

the guilt and content to bear it until thou comest to 

burden of sin, . . n , ,. r , ., 

but by the death the place ol deliverance ; lor there it 
Christ. ° ' will fall from thy back of itself." 

Then Christian began to gird up his loins, and 
to address himself to his journey. So the other told 
him, that by that he was gone some distance from 
the gate he would come to the house of the Inter- 
preter, at whose door he should knock, and he would 
ehow him excellent things. Then Christian took his 
leave of his friend, and he again biid him God speed. 



56 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Then he went on till he came at the house of 
the Interpreter,* where he knocked christian 

over and over. At last one came to EeVthe in! 
the door, and asked who was there. terpreter. 

Chr. Sir, here is a traveller, who was bid by 
an acquaintance of the good man of this house to 
call here for my profit ; I would therefore speak 
with the master of the house. 

So he called for the master of the house, who, 
after a little time, came to Christian, and asked 
him what he would have. 

Chr. Sir, said Christian, I am a man that am 
come from the city of Destruction, and am going 
to the mount Zion ; and I was told by the man 
that stands at the gate at the head of this way, 
that if I called here you would show me excellent 
things, such as would be helpful to me on my 
journey. 

Inter. Then said the Interpreter, Come in; I 
will show thee that which will be profitable to 
thee. So he commanded his man to „ 

xle is enter- 
light the candle, and bid Christian fol- tained - 

low him ; so he had him into a private illumination. 

room, and bid his man open a door ; the which 

when he had done, Christian saw the --,, ■ . 

' Christian sees 

picture of a very grave person hang a brave picture. 

up against the wall ; and this was the fashion of 

it : it had eyes lifted up to heaven, the best of 

* The Holy Spirit. 



THE INTERPRETER'S HOUSE. 57 

books in its hand, the law of truth was written 
upon its lips, the world was behind its back ; it 
stood as if it pleaded with men, and a crown oi 
gold did hang over its head. 

Che.. Then said Christian, What means this ? 

Inter. The man whose picture this is, is one oi 
a thousand: he can beget children, 1 Cor. 4 : 15, 
travail in birth with children, Gal. 4:19, and nurse 
Meaning of them himself when they are born, 
the picture. ^nd -whereas thou seest him with his 
eyes lift up to heaven, the best of books in his hand, 
and the law of truth writ on his lips :it is to show 
thee, that his work is to know, and unfold dark 
things to sinners ; even as also thou seest him 
stand as if he pleaded with men. And whereas 
thou seest the world as cast behind him, and that 
a crown hangs over his head ; that is to show thee, 
that slighting and despising the things that are 
present, for the love that he hath to his Master's 
service, he is sure in the world that comes next to 
Why he show- have glory for his reward. Now, said 

ed him this pic- T , i i i 

ture first. the Interpreter, 1 have showed thee 

this picture first, because the man whose picture 
this is, is the only man whom the Lord of the place 
whither thou art going hath authorized to be thy 
guide in all difficult places thou mayest meet with 
in the way : wherefore take good heed to what I 
have showed thee, and bear well in thy mind 
what thou hast seen, lest in thy journey thou meet 



58 riLORIM'S PROGRESS. 

with some that pretend to lead thee right, but their 
way goes down to death. 

Then he took him by the hand, and led him into 
a very large parlor that was full of dust, because 
never swept; the which after he reviewed it a 
little while, the Interpreter called for a man to 
sweep. Now, when he began to sweep, the dust 
began so abundantly to fly about, that Christian 
had almost therewith been choked. Then said 
tin- Interpreter to a damsel that stood by, "Bring. 
hither water, and sprinkle the room;" the which 
when she had done, it was swept and cleansed 
with pleasure. 

Cm:. Then said Christian, "What means this? 

Inteb. The Interpreter answered, This parlor is 
the heart of a man that was never sanctified by 
the sweet grace of the gospel. The dust i6 his 
original sin, and inward corruptions, that have 
defiled the whole man. He that began to sweep 
at first, is the law; but she that brought water, 
and did sprinkle it, is the gospel. Now whereas 
then saw est, that so soon as the first began to 
sweep, the dust did so fly about that the room by 
him could not be cleansed, but that thou wast 
almost choked therewith; this is to show thee, that 
the law, instead of cleansing the heart, by its 
working, from sin, doth revive, Rom. 7 : 9, put 
strength into, 1 Cor. 15 : 56, and increase it in the 
soul, Rom. 5 : 20, even as it doth discover and 



THE INTERPRETER'S HOUSE. 59 

forbid it ; for it doth not give power to subdue. 
Again, as thou sawest the damsel sprinkle the 
room with water, upon which it was cleansed with 
pleasure, this is to show thee, that when the gospel 
comes in the sweet and precious influences thereof 
to the heart, then, I say, even as thou sawest the 
damsel lay the dust by sprinkling the floor with 
water, so is sin vanquished and subdued, and the 
soul made clean, through the faith of it, and con- 
sequently fit for the King of glory to inhabit. John 
15:3; Eph. 5:26; Acts 15:9; Rom. 16:25, 26. 

I saw moreover in my dream, that the Inter- 
preter took him by the hand, and had him into a 
Ho showed little room, where sat two little chil- 

him Passion and , . , . , m , 

Patience. dren, each one in his chair. I he name 

of the eldest was Passion, and*the name of the 
other Patience. Passion seemed to be much dis- 
contented, but Patience was very quiet. Then 
Christian asked, "What is the reason of the dis- 

Passion will content of Passion?" The Interpreter 
have it now. answered, " The governor of them 
would have him stay for his best things till the 

Patience is for beginning of the next year, but he will 
waiting. have all now ; but Patience is willing 

to wait." 

Passion hath Then I saw that one came to Pas- 
qSck% sir !avr s h d - sion, and brought him a bag of treas- 
es ail away. ure ^ an( j p 0ure d ft down at his feet: 

the which he took up, and rejoiced therein, and 



60 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

withal laughed Patience to scorn. But I beheld 
but a while, and he had lavished all away, and 
had nothing left him but rags. 

Cur. Then said Christian to the Interpreter, 
Expound this matter more fully to me 

Inter. So he said, These two lads are figures, 
Passion of the men of this world, and Patience of 
the men of that which is to come ; for, as here thou 
seest, Passion will have all now, this year, that is 
to say, in this world ; so are the men of this world :. 
they must have all their good things now; they 
cannot stay till the next year, that is, until the 
next world, lor their portion of good. That prov- 
erb, "A bird LI) the hand is worth two in the bush," 
is of more authority with them than TIm wtridly 

111 T • fl ■ ■ r i mi " '' T a h ' rJ 

are ail the dmrffc testimonies of the in the hand. 
good of the world to come. But as thou lawest 
that he had quickly lavished all away, and had 
presently left him nothing but rags, so will it be 
with all such men at the end of this world. 

Chr. Then said Christian, Now I see that Pa- 
tience has the best wisdom, and that Pati-nce had 

the best H i»- 

upon many accounts. 1. Because he dom. 
stays for the best things. 2. And also because he 
will have the glory of his, when the other has 
nothing but ra^s. 

Inter. Nay, you may add another, to wit, the 
glory of the next world will never wear out ; but 
these are suddenly gone. Therefore Passion had 



THE INTERPRETER'S HOUSE. 61 

not so much reason to laugh at Patience because 
Things that he had his good things first, as Patience 

are hist must c 

give place; but will have to laugh at Passion because 

things that are...... 

last are lasting, he had his best things last; for first 
must give place to last, because last must have his 
time to come : but last gives place to nothing, for 
there is not another to succeed. He, therefore, 
that hath his portion- first, must needs have a time 
to spend it ; but he that hath his portion last, must 
have it lastingly: therefore it is said of Dives, "In 
thy lifetime thou receivedst thy good things, and 

Dives had his likewise Lazarus evil tilings; but now 
good things first. he ig com { ovte ^ an(1 thou art torment- 
ed." Luke 16 : 25. 

Chr. Then I perceive it is not best to covet 
things that are now, but to wait for things to 
come. 

Inter. You say truth: for the things that are 
The first seen are temporal, but the things that 

things are but 

temporal. are not seen are eternal. 2 Cor. 4:18. 

But though this be so, yet since things present and 
our fleshly appetite are such near neighbors one to 
another; and again, because things to come and 
carnal sense are such strangers one to another; 
therefore it is, that the first of these so suddenly 
fall into amity, and that distance is so continued 
between the second. 

Then I saw in my dream, that the Interpieter 
took Christian by the hand, and led him into a 



62 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

place where was a fire burning against a wall, and 
one standing by it, always casting much water 
upon it, to quench it ; yet did the fire burn higher 
and hotter. 

Then said Christian, What means this? 

The Interpreter answered, This fire is the work 
of grace that is wrought in the heart; he that 
casts water upon it, to extinguish and put it out, 
is the devil : but in that thou seest the fire, not- 
withstanding, burn higher and hotter, thou shalt- 
also see the reason of that. So he had him about 
to the back side of the wall, where he saw a man 
with a vessel of oil in his hand, of the which he 
did also continually cast, but secretly, into the 
fire. 

Then said Christian, What means this? 

The Interpreter answered, This is Christ, who 
continually, with the oil of his grace, maintains 
the work already begun in the heart; by the means 
of which, notwithstanding what the devil can do, 
the souls of his people prove gracious still. 2 Cor. 
12:9. And in that thou sawest that the man 
stood behind the wall to maintain the fire : this is 
to teach thee, that it is hard for the tempted to see 
how this work of grace is maintained in the soul. 

I saw also, that the Interpreter took him again 
by the hand, and led him into a pleasant place, 
whore was built a stately palace, beautiful to be- 
hold ; at the sight of which Christian was greatly 



THE INTERPRETER'S HOUSE. 63 

delighted. He saw also upon the top thereof 
certain persons walking, who were clothed all in 
gold. 

Then said Christian, May we go in thither? 

Then the Interpreter took him, and led him up 
towards the door of the palace ; and behold, at the 
door stood a great company of men, as desirous to 
go in, hut durst not.. There also sat a man at a 
little distance from the door, at a table-side, with 
a book and his inkhorn before him, to take the 
names of them that should enter therein ; he saw 
also that in the doorway stood many men in armor 
to keep it, being resolved to do to the men that 
would enter, what hurt and mischief they could. 
Now was Christian somewhat in amaze. At last, 
when every man started back for fear of the armed 
men, Christian saw a man of a very stout counte- 
The valiant man. nance come up to the man that sat 
there to write, saying, " Set down my name, sir ;" 
the which when he had done, he saw the man draw 
his sword, and put a helmet on his head, and rush 
towards the door upon the armed men, who laid 
upon him with deadly force ; but the man, not at 
all discouraged, fell to cutting and hacking most 
fiercely. So after he had received and given many 
wounds to those that attempted to keep him out, 
Matt. 11 z 12, Acts 14 : 22, he cut his way through 
them all, and pressed forward into the palace; at 
which there was a pleasant voice heard from those 



64 PILGRIM'S PROG-RESS. 

that were within, even of those that walked upon 
the top of the palace, saying, 

u Come in, come in, 
Eternal glory thou shalt win." 

So he went in, and was clothed with such gar- 
ments as they. Then Christian smiled, and said, I 
think verily I know the meaning of this. 

Now, said Christian, let me go hence. Nay, 
stay, said the Interpreter, till I have showed thee 
a little more, and after that thou shalt go on thy, 
way. So he took him by the hand Despairlikean 
again, and led him into a very dark iron cage " 
room, where there sat a man in an iron cage. 

Now the man, to look on, seemed very sad ; he 
sat with his eyes looking down to the ground, his 
hands folded together, and he sighed as if he 
would break his heart. Then said Christian, "What 
means this 1 At which the Interpreter bid him 
talk with the man. 

Then said Christian to the man, What art thou ? 
The man answered, I am what I was not once. 

Chr. "What wast thou once? 

Man. The man said, I was once a fair and flour- 
ishing professor, Luke 8:13, both in mine own 
eyes, and also in the eyes of others : I once was, 
as I thought, fair for the celestial city, and had 
then even joy at the thoughts that I should get 
thither. 

Chr. Well, but what art thou now ? 



THE INTERPRETER'S HOUSE. 65 

Man. I am now a man of despair, and am shut 
up in it, as in this iron cage. I cannot get out ; 
now I cannot ! 

Chr. But how earnest thou into this condition? 
Man. I left off to watch and be sober : I laid 
the reins upon the neck of my lusts; I sinned 
against the light of the word, and the goodness of 
God ; I have grieved the Spirit, and he is gone ; I 
tempted the devil, and he is come tome; I have 
provoked God to anger, and he has left me : I have 
so hardened my heart, that I cannot repent. 

Then said Christian to the Interpreter, But is 
there no hope for such a man as this ? Ask him, 
said the Interpreter. 

Chr. Then said Christian, Is there no hope, 
but you must be kept in the iron cage of de- 
spair? 

Man. No, none at all. 

Chr. Why, the Son of the Blessed is very pitiful. 

Man. I have crucified him to myself afresh, 
Hebrews 6 : 6 ; I have despised his person, Luke 
19 : 14 ; I have despised his righteousness ; I have 
counted his blood an unholy thing ; I have done 
despite to the Spirit of grace, Heb. 10 : 29 : there- 
fore I have shut myself out of all the promises, 
and there now remains to me nothing but threat- 
enings, dreadful threatenings, faithful threatenings 
of certain judgment and fiery indignation, which 
shall devour me as an adversary. 

Pil. Prog. 5 



66 PiLG-RIil'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. For what did you bring yourself into this 
condition ? 

Man. For the lusts, pleasures, and profits of this 
world; in the enjoyment of which I did then 
promise myself much delight: but now everyone 
of those things also bite me, and gnaw me like a 
burning worm. 

Chr. But canst thou not now repent and turn? 

Man. God hath denied me repentance His 
word gives me no encouragement to believe ; yea, 
himself hath shut me up in this iron cage : nor can 
all the men in the world let me out. Oh eternity, 
eternity ! how shall I grapple with the misery that 
I must meet with in eternity ? 

Inter. Then said the Interpreter to Christian, 
Let this man's misery be remembered by thee, and 
be an everlasting caution to thee. 

Chr. Well, said Christian, this is fearful ! God 
help me to watch and to be sober, and to pray that 
I may shun the cause of this man's misery. Sir, 
is it not time for me to go on my way now ? 

Inter. Tarry till I shall show thee one thing 
more, and then thou shalt go on thy way. 

So he took Christian by the hand again, and led 
him into a chamber where there was one rising 
out of bed ; and as he put on his raiment, he shook 
and trembled. Then said Christian, Why doth 
this man thus tremble ? The Interpreter then bid 
him tell to Christian the reason of his so doing. 



THE INTERPRETER'S HOUSE. 67 

So he began, and said, "This night, as I was in 
my sleep, I dreamed, and behold the heavens grew 
exceeding black ; also it thundered and lightened 
in most fearful wise, that it put me into an agony. 
So I looked up in my dream, and saw the clouds 
rack at an unusual rate ; upon which I heard a 
great sound of a trumpet, and saw also a man sit- 
ting upon a cloud, attended with the thousands of 
heaven : they were all in flaming fire ; also the 
heavens were in a burning flame. I heard then a 
voice, saying, ' Arise, ye dead, and come to judg- 
ment.' And with that the rocks rent, the graves 
opened, and the dead that were therein came forth : 
some of them were exceeding glad, and looked 
upward ; and some sought to hide themselves 
under the mountains. Then I saw the man that 
sat upon the cloud open the book, and bid the world 
draw near. Yet there was, by reason of a fierce 
flame that issued out and came from before him, a 
convenient distance between him and them, as be- 
tween the judge and the prisoners at the bar. 1 
Cor. 15; 1 Thess. 4 : 16 ; Jude 15; John 5: 28, 
29; 2 Thess. 1: 8-10; Rev. 20: 11-14; Isaiah 
26 : 21 ; Micah 7 : 16, 17 ; Psa. 5 : 4 ; 50 : 1-3 ; Mai 
3 : 2, 3 ; Dan. 7 : 9, 10. I heard it also proclaimed 
to them that attended on the man that sat on the 
cloud, ' Gather together the tares, the chaff, and 
stubble, and cast them into the burning lake.' Matt. 
3:12; IS : 30 ; 24 : 30 ; Mai. 4 : 1. And with 



68 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

that the bottomless pit opened, just whereabout I 
stood ; out of the mouth of which there came, in 
an abundant manner, smoke, and coals of fire, with 
hideous noises. It was also said to the same per- 
sons, ■ Gather my wheat into the garner.' Luke 
3:17. And with that I saw many catched up and 
carried away into the clouds, but I was left behind 
1 Thess. 4: 16, 17. I also sought to hide myself, 
but I could not, for the man that sat upon the 
cloud still kept his eye upon me ; my sins also 
came into my mind, and my conscience did accuse 
me on every side. Rom. 2:14, 15. Upon this I 
awakened from my sleep." 

Chr. But what was it that made you so afraid 
of this sight ? 

Man. Why, I thought that the day of judgment 
was come, and that I was not ready for it : but 
this frightened me most, that the angels gathered 
up several, and left me behind ; also the pit of 
hell opened her mouth just where I stood. My 
conscience too afflicted me ; and, as I thought, the 
Judge had always his eye upon me, showing indig- 
nation in his countenance. 

Then said the Interpreter to Christian, " Hast 
thou considered all these things ?" 

Chr. Yes, and they put me in hope and fear. 

Inter. Well, keep all things so in thy mind, that 
they may be as a goad in thy sides, to prick thee 
forward in the way thou must go. Then Chris- 



LOSES HIS BURDEN. 69 

tian began to gird up his loins, and to address him- 
self to his journey. Then said the Interpreter, 
"The Comforter be always with thee, good Chris- 
tian, to guide thee in the way that leads to the 
city." So Christian went on his way, saying, 

"Here I have seen things rare and profitable, 
Things pleasant, dreadful, things to make me stable 
In what I have begun to take in hand : 
Then let me think on them, and understand 
Wherefore they showed me were, and let me be 
Thankful, good Interpreter to thee." 



70 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

THE THIRD STAGE. 

Now I saw in my dream, that the highway up 
which Christian was to go, was fenced on either 
side with a wall, and that wall was called Salva- 
tion. Isaiah 26: 1. Up this way, therefore, did 
burdened Christian run, but not without great dif- 
ficulty, because of the load on his back. 

Ke ran thus till he came at a place somewhat 
ascending ; and upon that place stood a cross, and 
a little below, in the bottom, a sepulchre. So I 
saw in my dream, that just as Christian came up 
with the cross, his burden loosed from off his 
shoulders, and fell from off his back, and began 
to tumble, and so continued to do till it came to 
the mouth of the sepulchre, where it fell in, and 
I saw it no more. 

Then was Christian glad and lightsome, and 
said with a merry heart, "He hath when God re- 
given me rest by his sorrow, and life ^ e t s £ d of b ™ 
by his death." Then he stood still a f^^"^ 
while, to look and wonder; for it was for J°y- 
very surprising to him that the sight of the cross 
should thus ease him of his burden. He looked, 
therefore, and looked again, even till the springs 
that were in his head sent the waters down his 
cheeks. Zech. 12: 10. Now as he stood looking 
and weeping, behold, three Shining Ones came to 
him, and saluted him with, " Peace be to thee." 



SIMPLE, SLOTH, AND PRESUMPTION. 71 

So the first said to him, " Thy sins be forgiven 
thee," Mark 2:5; the second stripped him of his 
rags, and clothed him with change of raiment, Zech. 
3:4; the third also set a mark on his forehead, 
Eph. 1 : 13, and gave him a roll with a seal upon 
it, which he bid him look on as he ran, and that 
a Christian he should give it in at the celestial 
Xe^^wnfu gate ; so they went their way. Then 
2 fe h in g hi e s Christian gave three leaps for joy, and 
heart. went on singing, 

" Thus far did I come laden with my sin, 
Nor could aught ease the grief that I was in, 
Till I came hither. What a place is this ! 
Must here be the beginning of my bliss ? 
Must here the burden fall from off my back? 
Must here the strings that bound it to me crack ? 
Blest cross ! blest sepulchre ! blest, rather, be 
The Man that there was put to shame for me !" 

I saw then in my dream, that he went on thus 
even until he came at the bottom, where he saw, 
Simple, sioth, a little out of the way, three men fast 
tion. asleep with fetters upon their heels. 

The name of the one was Simple, of another Sloth, 
and of the third Presumption. 

Christian then seeing them lie in this case, went 
to them, if peradventure he might awake them, 
and cried, You are like them that sleep on the top 
of a mast, Prov. 23 : 34, for the Dead sea is under 
you, a gulf that hath no bottom : awake, therefore, 



72 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

and come away ; be willing also, and I will help 
you off with your irons. He also told them, If he 
that goeth about like a roaring lion, 1 Pet. 5: 8, 
comes by, you will certainly become a prey to his 
teeth. With that they looked upon him, and be- 
gan to reply in this sort: Simple said, I see no 
danger; Sloth said, Yet a little more sleep; and 
Presumption said, Every tub must There is no 
stand upon its own bottom. And so JgSfSSViS 
they lay down to sleep again, and eth not the eyes. 
Christian went on his way. 

Yet he was troubled to think that men in that 
danger should so little esteem the kindness of him 
that so freely offered to help them, both by awak- 
ening of them, counselling of them, and proffer- 
ing to help them oif with their irons. And as he 
was troubled thereabout, he espied two men come 
tumbling over the wall, on the left hand of the 
narrow way; and they made up apace to him. 
The name of the one was Formalist, and the 
name of the other Hypocrisy. So, as I said, they 
drew up unto him, who thus entered with them 
into discourse. 

Chr. Gentlemen, whence came you, christian talks 
nd whither do you go ? With them * 

Form, and Hyp. We were born in the land of 
Vain-glory, and are going, for praise, to mount Zion. 

Chr. Why came you not in at the gate which 
standeth at the beginning of the way ? Know ye 



FORMALIST AND HYPOCRISY, 73 

not that it is written, that " he that cometh not in 
by the door, but climbeth up some other way, the 
same is a thief and a robber?" John 10 : 1. 

Form, and Hyp. They said, that to go to the gate 
for entrance was by all their countrymen counted 
too far about; and that thersfore their usual way 
was to make a short cut of it, and to climb over 
the wall, as they had done. 

Chr. But will it not be counted a trespass 
against the Lord of the city whither we are bound, 
thus to violate his revealed will ? 

Form, and Hyp. They told him, that as for that, 
he needed not to trouble his head thereabout : for 
what they did they had custom for, and could pro- 
duce, if need were, testimony that would witness 
it for more than a thousand years. 

Chr, But, said Christian, will you stand a trial 
at law ? 

Form, and Hyp. They told him, that custom, it 
They that being of so long standing as above a 

come into the a ° D 

way, but not by thousand vears, would doubtless now 

the door, think . . 

that they can be admitted as a thing legal by an im- 

say something .,., -ii-i • i i 

in vindication of partial judge : and besides, said they, it 

their own prac- .. . . 

tice. we get into the way, what matter is it 

which way we get in ? If we are in, we are in : 
thou art but in the way, who, as we perceive, 
came in at the gate ; and we also are in the way, 
that came tumbling over the wall : wherein now 
js thy condition better than ours ? 



74 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. I walk by the rule of my Master: you 
walk by the rude working of your fancies. You 
are counted thieves already by the Lord of the 
way : therefore I doubt you will not be found true 
men at the end of the way. You come in by 
yourselves without his direction, and shall go out 
by yourselves without his mercy. 

To this they made him but little answer; only 
they bid him look to himself. Then I saw that 
they went on, every man in his way, without 
much conference one with another, save that these 
two men told Christian, that as to laws and ordi- 
nances, they doubted not but that they should as 
conscientiously do them as he. Therefore, said 
they, we see not wherein thou differest from us, 
but by the coat that is on thy back, which was, as 
we trow, given thee by some of thy neighbors, to 
hide the shame of thy nakedness. 

Chr. By laws and ordinances you will not be 
saved, since you came not in by the door. Gal. 
2:16. And as for this coat that is on my back, it 
was given me by the Lord of the place whither I 
go ; and that, as you say, to cover my nakedness 
with. And I take it as a token of kindness tc 
me; for I had nothing but rags before. Christian has 

1 to to got hls Lord's 

And besides, thus I comfort myself as coat on his back, 

, . , T , t an< ^ lz comforted 

I go. Surely, think I, when I come to therewith. 
the gate of the city, the Lord thereof will know 
me for good, since I have his coat on my back ; 



THE HILL DIFFICULTY. 75 

a ccat that he gave me freely in the day that he 
stripped me of my rags. I have, moreover, a 

He is comfort- mar k in my forehead, of which per- 
mark^and^his na P s vou nav e taken no notice, which 
rolL one of my Lord's most intimate asso- 

ciates fixed there in the day that my burden fell 
off my shoulders. I will tell you, moreover, that 
I had then given me a roll sealed, to comfort me 
by reading as I go on the way ; I was also bid to 
give it in at the celestial gate, in token of my cer- 
tain going in after it: all which things I doubt 
you want, and want them because you came not in 
at the gate. 

To these things they gave him no answer ; only 
they looked upon each other, and laughed, Then 

Christian has I saw that they went all on, save that 

talk with him- /-,•■.,• ■, -, r i i i 

self. Christian kept betore, who had no 

more talk but with himself, and that sometimes 
sighingly, and sometimes comfortably: also he 
would be often reading in the roll that one of the 
Shining Ones gave him, by which he was refreshed. 
I beheld then, that they all went on till they 
He comes to came to the foot of the hill Difficulty, 
ty e ' " at the bottom of which there was a 

spring. There were also in the same place two 
other ways besides that which came straight from 
the gate : one turned to the left hand, and the other 
to the right, at the 'bottom of the hill ; but the 
narrow way lay right up the hill, and the name of 



76 PILG-RIM'S PROttftESS. 

the going up the side of the hill is called Difficulty, 
Christian now went to the spring, Isa. 49 : 10, and 
drank thereof to refresh himself, and then began 
to go up the hill, saying, 

11 The hill, though high, I covet to ascend; 
The difficulty will not me offend ; 
For I perceive the way to life lies here : 
Come, pluck up heart, let 's neither faint nor fear 
Better, though difficult, the right way to go, 
Than wrong, though easy, where the end is woe." 

The other two also came to the foot of the hill. 
But when they saw that the hill was steep and 
high, and that there were two other ways to go ; 
and supposing also that these two ways might 
meet again with that up which Christian went, on 
the other side of the hill ; therefore they were 
resolved to go in those ways. Now the name of 
one of those ways was Danger, and the name of 
the other Destruction. So the one took the way 
which is called Danger, which led him The danger of 

° turning out of 

into a great wood ; and the other took the way. 
directly up the way to Destruction, which led him 
into a wide field, full of dark mountains, where he 
stumbled and fell, and rose no more. 

I looked then after Christian, to see him go up 
the hill, where I perceived he fell from running to 
going, and from going to clambering upon his 
hands and his knees, because of the steepness of 
the place. Now about the midway to the top of 



MISTRUST AND TIMOROUS. 77 

Award of grace, the hill was a pleasant Arbor, made 
by the Lord of the hill for the refreshment of weary 
travellers. Thither, therefore, Christian got, where 
also he sat down to rest him : then he pulled his 
roll out of his bosom, and read therein to his com- 
fort ; he also now began afresh to take a review 
of the coat or garment that was given to him as he 
stood by the cross. Thus pleasing himself awhile, 
he at last fell into a slumber, and thence into 
a fast sleep, which detained him in that place until 
He that sleeps ** was almost night ; and in his sleep 

is a loser. hig roU fell Qut of j^ ^^ ^^ ^ 

he was sleeping, there came one to him, and 
awaked him, saying, " Go to the ant, thou slug- 
gard ; consider her ways, and be wise." Prov. 6:6. 
And with that Christian suddenly started up, and 
sped him on his way, and went apace till he came 
to the top of the hill. 

Now when he was got up to the top of the hill, 
there came two men running amain ; the name of 
Christian tne one was Timorous, and of the 
SrS , 2?mfc**« Mistrust: to whom Christian 
orous - said, Sirs, what 's the matter ? you run 

the wrong way. Timorous answered, that they 
were going to the city of Zion, and had got up 
that difficult place : but, said he, the farther we 
go, the more danger we meet with ; wherefore we 
turned, and are going back again. 

Yes, said Mistrust, for just before us lie a couple 



78 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

of lions in the way, whether sleeping or waking 
we know not ; and we could not think, if we came 
within reach, but they would presently pull us in 
pieces. 

Chr. Then said Christian, You make me afraid , 
but whither shall I fly to be safe ? If I go back to 
my own country, that is prepared for fire and brim- 
stone, and I shall certainly perish there ; if I can 
get to the celestial city, I am sure to be in safety 
there : I must venture. To go back is christian shakes 
nothing but death ; to go forward is off fear- 
fear of death, and life everlasting beyond it : I 
will yet go forward. So Mistrust and Timorous 
ran down the hill, and Christian went on his way. 
But thinking again of what he had heard from the 
men, he felt in his bosom for his roll, that he might 
read therein and be comforted ; but christian 

he felt and found it not. Then was SSJjt Si 
Christian in great distress, and knew to be comforted. 
not what to do ; for he wanted that which used to 
relieve him, and that which should have been his 
pass into the celestial city. Here, therefore, he 
began to be much perplexed, and knew He is perplex . 
not what to do. At last he be- ed for his rolL 
thought himself that he had slept in the arbor that 
is on the side of the hill ; and falling down upon 
his knees, he asked God forgiveness for that foolish 
act, and then went back to look for his roll. But 
all the way he went back, who can sufficiently set 



FINDS HIS ROLL. 79 

forth the sorrow of Christian's heart ? Sometimes 
he sighed, sometimes he wept, and oftentimes he 
chid himself for being so foolish to fall asleep in 
that place, which was erected only for a little re- 
freshment from his weariness. Thus, therefore, 
he went back, carefully looking on this side and on 
that, all the way as he went, if happily he might 
find his roll, that had been his comfort so many 
times in his journey. He went thus till he came 
again within sight of the arbor where he sat and 
slept ; but that sight renewed his sorrow the more, 
Christian be- by bringing again, even afresh, his 

wails his foolish „ . . -^ 

sleeping. evil oi sleeping unto his mind. J&ev. 

2 : 4 ; 1 Thess. 5 : 6-8. Thus, therefore, he now 
went on, bewailing his sinful sleep, saying, 
wretched man that I am, that I should sleep in 
the daytime ! that I should sleep in the midst of 
difficulty ! that I should so indulge the flesh as to 
use that rest for ease to my flesh which the Lord 
of the hill hath erected only for the relief of the 
spirits of pilgrims ! How many steps have I taken 
in vain ! Thus it happened to Israel ; for their 
sin they were sent back again by the way of the 
Red sea ; and I am made to tread those steps 
with sorrow, which I might have trod with delight, 
had it not been for this sinful sleep. How far 
might I have been on my way by this time ! I am 
made to tread those steps thrice over, which I 
needed not to have trod but once : yea, now also I 



80 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

am like to be benighted, for the day is almost 
spent. that I had not slept ! 

Now by this time he was come to the arbor 
again, where for a while he sat down and wept; 
but at last, as Providence would have Christian find- 

„ ... . , , eth his roll where 

it, looking sorrowfully down under the he lost it. 
settle, there he espied his roll, the which he with 
trembling and haste catched up, and put it into 
his bosom. But who can tell how joyful this man 
was when he had gotten his roll again ? For this 
roll was the assurance of his life, and acceptance 
at the desired haven. Therefore he laid it up in 
his bosom, gave thanks to God for directing his eye 
to the place where it lay, and with joy and tears 
betook himself again to his journey. But 0, how 
nimbly did he go up the rest of the hill ! Yet be- 
fore he got up, the sun went down upon Christian ; 
and this made him again recall the vanity of his 
sleeping to his remembrance ; and thus he again 
began to condole with himself: Oh thou sinful 
sleep, how for thy sake am I like to be benighted 
in my journey! I must walk without the sun, dark- 
ness must cover the path of my feet, and I must 
hear the noise of the doleful creatures, because of 
my sinful sleep ! Now also he remembered tho 
story that Mistrust and Timorous told him of, how 
they were frighted with the sight of the lions. 
Then said Christian to himself again, These beasts 
range in the night for their prey ; and if they 



. 




THE PALACE BEAUTIFUL. 81 

should meet with me in the daik, how should I 
shift them ? how should I escape being by them 
torn in pieces ? Thus he went on his way. But 
while he was bewailing his unhappy miscarriage, 
he lift up his eyes, and behold there was a very 
stately palace before him, the name of which was 
Beautiful, and it stood by the highway-side. 

So I saw in my dream that he made haste, and 
went forward, that if possible he might get lodg- 
ing there. Now before he had gone far, he entered 
into a very narrow passage, which was about a 
furlong off the porter's lodge ; and looking very 
narrowly before him as he went, he espied two 
lions in the way. Now, thought he, I see the 
dangers that Mistrust and Timorous were driven 
back by. The lions were chained, but he saw 
not the chains. Then he was afraid, and thought 
also himself to go back after them ; for he thought 
nothing but death was before him. But the por- 
ter at the lodge, whose name is Watchful, perceiv- 
ing that Christian made a halt, as if he would go 
back, cried unto him, saying, Is thy strength so 
small? Mark 4: 40. Fear not the lions, for they 
are chained, and are placed there for trial of faith 
where it is, and for discovery of those that have 
none : keep in the midst of the path, and no hurt 
shall come unto thee. 

Then I saw that he went on, trembling for fear 
of the lions, but taking good heed to the directions 

Pil rr.>£ 



82 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

of the porter; he heard them roar, but they did 
him no harm. Then he clapped his hands, and 
went on till he came and stood before the gate 
where the porter was. Then said Christian to the 
porter, Sir, what house is this ? and may I lodge 
here to-night? The porter answered, This house 
was built by the Lord of the hill, and he built it 
for the relief and security of pilgrims. The porter 
also asked whence he was, and whither he was going. 

Chr. I am come from the city of Destruction, 
and am going to mount Zion ; but because the sun 
is now set, I desire, if I may, to lodge here to-night. 

Port. What is your name ? 

Chr. My name is now Christian, but my name 
at the first was Graceless : I came of the race of 
Japheth, whom God will persuade to dwell in the 
tents of Shem. Gen. 9 : 27. 

Port. But how doth it happen that you come so 
late? The sun is set. 

Chr. I had been here sooner, but that, wretched 
man that I am, I slept in the arbor that stands on 
the hill-side! Nay, I had, notwithstanding that, 
been here much sooner, but that in my sleep I lost 
my evidence, and came without it to the brow of 
the hill ; and then feeling for it, and not finding it, 
I was forced with sorrow of heart to go back to the 
place where I slept my sleep, where I found it; 
and now I am come. 

Port. Well, I will call out one of the virgins of 



TALK WITH DISCRETION. 83 

this place, who will, if she likes your talk, bring 
you in to the rest of the family, according to the 
rules of the house. So Watchful the porter rang a 
bell, at the sound of which came out of the door 
of the house a grave and beautiful damsel named 
Discretion, and asked why she was called. 

The porter answered, This man is on a journey 
from the city of Destruction to mount Zion; but 
being weary and benighted, he asked me if he 
might lodge here to-night : so I told him I would 
call for thee, who, after discourse had with him, 
mayest do as seemeth thee good, even according to 
the law of the house. 

Then she asked him whence he was, and whither 
he was going ; and he told her. She asked him also 
how he got into the way; and he told her. They 
she asked him what he had seen and met with in 
the way, and he told her. And at last she asked 
his name. So he said, It is Christian; and I have 
so much the more a desire to lodge here to-night, 
because, by what I perceive, this place was built 
by the Lord of the hill for the relief and security 
of pilgrims. So she smiled, but the water stood in 
her eyes ; and after a little pause she said, I will 
call forth two or three more of the family. So she 
ran to the door, and called out Prudence, Piety, and 
Charity, who, after a little more discourse with 
him, had him into the family ; and many of them 
meeting him at the threshold of the house, said, 



84 viLaitnrs progress. 

Come in, thou blessed of the Lord ; this house was 
built by the Lord of the hill on purpose to enter- 
tain such pilgrims in. Then he bowed his head, 
and followed them into the house. So when he 
was come in and sat down, they gave him some- 
thing to drink, and consented together that, until 
supper was ready, some of them should have some 
particular discourse with Christian, for the best 
improvement of time ; and they appointed Piety, 
Prudence, and Charity to discourse with him : and 
thus they began. 

Piety. Come, good Christian, since we have 
been so loving to you as to receive you Piety discourses 
into our house this night, let us, if per- Wlth hua ' 
haps we may better ourselves thereby, talk with 
you of all things that have happened to you in 
your pilgrimage. 

Chr. With a very good will ; and I am glad 
that you are so well disposed. 

Piety. What moved you at first to betake your- 
self to a pilgrim's life ? 

Chr. I was driven out of my native country by 
a, dreadful sound that was in mine How Chris. 
ears; to wit, that unavoidable destruc- ou? oT^'own 
tion did attend me, if I abode in that ccuntry - 
place where I was. 

Piety. But how did it happen that you came 
out of your country this way 1 

Chr. It was as God would have it; for when I 



TALK WITH PIETY. 85 

was under the fears of destruction, 1 did not know 
How he got whither to go ; but by chance there 

into the way to T 

zion. came a man, even to me, as 1 was 

trembling and weeping, whose name is Evan- 
gelist, and he directed me to the Wicket-gate, 
which else I should never have found, and so set 
me into the way that hath led me directly to this 
house. 

Piety. But did you not come by the house of the 
Interpreter? 

Chr. Yes, and did see such things there, the 

remembrance of which will stick by me as long 

a rehearsal of as I live, especially three things: to 

what he saw in «i '• ,. ■ i •. p ci . 

the way. wit, how Christ, m despite oi featan, 

maintains his work of grace in the heart ; how the 
man had sinned himself quite out of hopes of God's 
mercy ; and also the dream of him that thought in 
his sleep the day of judgment was come. 

Piety. Why, did you hear him tell his dream 1 

Chr. Yes, and a dreadful one it was, I thought; 
it made my heart ache as he was telling of it, but 
yet I am glad I heard it. 

Piety. Was this all you saw at the house of the 
Interpreter? 

Chr. No; he took me, and had me where he 
showed me a stately palace, and how the people 
were clad in gold that were in it ; and how there 
came a venturous man, and cut his way through 
the armed men that stood in the door to keep him 



86 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

out ; and how he was bid to come in, and win 
eternal glory. Methought those things did ravish 
my heart. I would have stayed at that good 
man's house a twelvemonth, but that I knew I 
had farther to go. 

Piety. And what saw you else in the way? 

Chr. Saw? Why, I went but a little farther, 
and I saw One, as I thought in my mind, hang 
bleeding upon a tree ; and the very sight of him 
made my burden fall off my back ; for I groaned > 
under a very heavy burden, but then it fell down 
from off me. It was a strange thing to me, for I 
never saw such a thing before : yea, and while I 
stood looking up, for then I could not forbear look- 
ing, three Shining Ones came to me. One of them 
testified that my sins were forgiven me ; another 
stripped me of my rags, and gave me this broidered 
coat which you see; and the third set the mark 
which you see in my forehead, and gave me this 
sealed roll; and with that he plucked it out of his 
bosom. 

Piety. But you saw more than this, did you not ? 

Chr. The things that I have told you were the 
best : yet some other matters I saw, as, namely, I 
saw three men, Simple, Sloth, and Presumption, 
lie asleep, a little out of the way, as I came, with 
irons upon their heels ; but do you think I could 
awake them ? I also saw Formality and Hypocrisy 
come tumbling over the wall, to go, as they pro- 



TALK WITH PRUDENCE-. 87 

tended, to Zion; but they were quickly lost, even 
as I myself did tell them, but they would not 
believe. But, above all, I found it hard work to 
get up this hill, and as hard to come by the lions' 
mouths ; and truly, if it had not been for the good 
man the porter, that stands at the gate, I do not 
-mow but that, after all, I might have gone back 
again ; but I thank God I am here, and thank you 
for receiving me. 

Then Prudence thought good to ask him a few 
questions, and desired his answer to them. 
Prudence dis- Pru. Do you not think sometimes of 

courses with 

him. the country from whence you came : 

Chr. Yea, but with much shame and detesta- 
Christian's tion. Truly, if I had been mindful of 

thoughts of his 

native country, that country irom whence 1 came out, 
I might have had opportunity to have returned; 
but now I desire a better country, that is, a heavenly 
one. Heb. 11 : 15, 16. 

Pru. Do you not yet bear away with you some 
of the things that then you were conversant withal ? 

Chr. Yes, but greatly against my will ; especially 
my inward and carnal cogitations, with which all 
my countrymen, as well as myself, were delighted. 
But now all those things are my grief; and might 
Christian's I Dut choose mine own things, I would 
cboice - choose never to think of those things 

more : but when I would be a doing that which is 
best, that which is worst is with me. Rom. 7 : 15, 21 . 



88 PILG-RIM'S PROQRESS. 

Pru. Do you not find sometimes as if those things 
were vanquished, which at other times are your 
perplexity ? 

Chr. Yes, but that is but seldom; but they are 
to me golden hours in which such christian's 
hings happen to me. golden hours. 

Pru. Can you remember by what means you 
find your annoyances at times as if they were van- 
quished ? 

Chr. Yes ; when I think what I saw at the cross, 
that will do it ; and when I look upon How Chris- 
my broidered coat, that will do it; and fg&tf™ 
when I look into the roll that I carry ru P tions - 
in my bosom, that will do it; and when my 
thoughts wax warm about whither I am going, 
that will do it. 

Pru. And what is it that makes you so desirous 
to go to mount Zion? 

Chr. Why, there I hope to see Him alive that 
did hang dead on the cross ; and there Why Chris- 

ti i •i/'-ni -i • t tian would be at 

1 nope to be rid ol all those things that mount zion. 
to this day are in me an annoyance to me : there 
they say there is no death, Isa. 25 : 8 ; Rev. 21:4; 
and there I shall dwell with such company as 1 
like best. For, to tell you the truth, I love Him 
because I was by him eased of my burden ; and 
I am weary of my inward sickness. I would fain 
be where I shall die no more, and with the com- 
pany that shall continually cry, Holy, holy, holy. 



TALK WITH CHARITY. 89 

Charity dis- Then said Charity to Christian, Have 

courses with » r ., • i r» 

him. you a iamiiy ; are you a married man : 

Chr. I have a wife and four small children. 
Char. And why did you not bring them along 

with you ? 

Chr. Then Christian wept, and said, Oh, how 
Christian's willingly would I have done it! but 

love to his wife , n p i i 

md children, they were all ol them utterly averse 
to my going on pilgrimage. 

Char. But you should have talked to them, and 
have endeavored to show them the danger of stay- 
ing behind. 

Chr. So I did; and told them also what God 
had shown to me of the destruction of our city ; 
but I seemed to them as one that mocked, and they 
believed me not. Gen. 19 : 14. 

Char. And did you pray to God that he would 
bless your counsel to them ? 

Chr. Yes, and that with much affection ; for 
you must think that my wife and poor children 
were very dear to me. 

Char. But did you tell them of your own sor- 
row, and fear of destruction ? for I suppose that 
destruction was visible enough to you. 

Chr. Yes, over and over and over. They 
Christian'3 might also see my fears in my counte- 

fear of perishing . ., 

might be read in nance, in my tears, and also in my 



his very counte- 
nance. 

the judgment that did hang over our heads ; but 



trembling under the apprehension of 



90 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

all was not sufficient to prevail with tlicra to come 
with me. 

Char. But what could they say for themselves, 
why they came not ? 

Chr. Why, my wife was afraid of losing this 
world, and my children were given to The cause why 



the foolish delights of youth; so, what ^ ldr ™ fe did ni 



and 
did 

by one thing and what by another, g° with mm. 
they left me to wander in this manner alone. 

Char. But did you not, with your vain life, 
damp all that you, by words, used by way of per- 
suasion to bring them away with you? 

Chr. Indeed, I cannot commend my life, for I 
am conscious to myself of many failings therein. I 
know also, that a man, by his conversation, may 
soon overthrow what, by argument or persuasion, 
he doth labor to fasten upon others for their good. 
Yet this I can say, I was very wary of giving them 
occasion, by any unseemly action, to Christian's 

, . ., good conversa- 

make them averse to going on pilgrim- tion before his 

•■r r ,-[ • ,i • A r wife and chil- 

age. Yea, lor this very thing, they dren. 
would tell me I was too precise, and that I denied 
myself of things, for their sakes, in which they 
saw no evil. Nay, I think I may say, that if what 
they saw in me did hinder them, it was my great 
tenderness in sinning against God, or of doing any 
wrong to my neighbor. 

Char. Indeed, Cain hated his brother because 
his own works were evil, and his brother's right- 



TALK AT SUPPER. 91 

Christian dear eous, 1 John, 3 : 12 ; and if thy wife 
they perish! ' * and children have been offended with 
thee for this, they thereby show themselves to be 
implacable to good ; thou hast delivered thy soul 
from their blood. Ezek. 3 : 19. 

Now I saw in my dream, that thus they sat talk- 
ing together until supper was ready. So when 
they had made- ready, they sat down to meat. 

What Chris- Now the table was furnished with fat 
£££*** *" things, and with wine that was well 
refined ; and all their talk at the table was about 

Their talk at tne L ° rd ° f tn<3 hil1 > aS ' namel y> ab ° Ut 

supper. what he had done, and wherefore he 

did what he did, and why he had builded that 
house : and by what they said, I perceived that he 
had been a great warrior, and had fought with and 
slain him that had the power of death, Hebrews 
2: 14, 15 ; but not without great danger to him- 
self, which made me love him the more. 

For, as they said, and as I believe, said Chris- 
tian, he did it with the loss of much blood. But 
that which put the glory of grace into all he did, 
was, that he did it out of pure love to his country. 
And besides, there were some of them of the 
household that said they had been and spoke with 
him since he did die on the cross ; and they have 
attested that they had it from his own lips, that he 
is such a lover of poor pilgrims, that the like is 
not to be found from the east to the west. They, 



92 PILttRlM'S PROORESS. 

moreover, gave an instance of what they affirmed . 
and that was, he had stripped himself of his glory 
that he might do this for the poor ; and that they 
heard him say and affirm, that he would not dwell 
in the mountain of Zion alone. They said, more- 
over, that he had made many pilgrims Christ makes 

* princes of beg- 

princes, though by nature they were gars. 
beggars born, and their original had been the dung- 
hill. 1 Sam. 2:8; Psa. 113 : 7. 

Thus they discoursed together till late at night ; 
and after they had committed themselves to their 
Lord for protection, they betook themselves to rest 
The pilgrim they laid in a large upper chamber, 
whose window opened towards the chmtian'sbed- 
sunrising. The name of the cham- chamber - 
ber was Peace, where he slept till break of day, 
and then he awoke and sang, 

"Where am I now? Is this the love and care 
Of Jesus for the men that pilgrims are ; 
Thus to provide that I should be forgiven, 
And dwell already the next door to heaven!'' 

So in the morning they all got up ; and, after some 
more discourse, they told him that he should not 
depart till they had shown him the rarities of that 
place. And first they had-him into the Christian had 
6tudy, where they showed him records JJJ^ t JJ5 ia s t tud jJ| 
of the greatest antiquity ; in which, as saw there. 
I remember my dream, they showed him the pedi- 



THE WONDERS SHOWN. 93 

gree of the Lord of the hill, that he was the Son 
of the Ancient of days, and came by eternal gen- 
eration. Here also was more fully recorded the 
acts that he had done, and the names of many 
hundreds that he had taken into his service ; and 
how he had placed them in such habitations, that 
could neither by length of days, nor decays of na- 
ture, be dissolved. 

Then they read to him some of the worthy acts 
that some of his servants had done ; as how they 
had subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, 
obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, 
quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of 
the sword, out of weakness were made strong, 
waxed valiant in fight, and turned to flight the 
armies of the aliens. Heb. 11 : 33, 34. 

Then they read again another part of the rec- 
ords of the house, where it was shown how will- 
ing their Lord was to receive into his favor any, 
even any, though they in time past had offered 
great affronts to his person and proceedings. Here 
also were several other histories of many other 
famous things, of all which Christian had a view ; 
as of things both ancient and modern, together 
with prophecies and predictions of things that have 
their certain accomplishment, both to the dread 
and amazement of enemies, and the comfort and 
solace of pilgrims. 

The next day they took him, and had him into 



94 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

the armory, where they showed him christian had 
all manner of furniture which their intothearmory - 
Lord had provided for pilgrims, as sword, shield, 
helmet, breastplate, all-prayer, and shoes that 
would not wear out. And there was here enough 
of this to harness out as many men for the service 
of their Lord as there be stars in the heaven for 
multitude. 

They also showed him some of the engines with 
which some of his servants had done Christian is 
wonderful things. They showed him cient things. 
Moses' rod; the hammer and nail with which Jael 
slew Sisera; the pitchers, trumpets, and lamps too, 
with which Gideon put to flight the armies of 
Midian. Then they showed him the ox-goad 
wherewith Shamgar slew six hundred men. They 
showed him also the jawbone with which Samson 
did such mighty feats. They showed him more- 
over the sling and stone with which David slew 
Goliath of Gath; and the sword also with which 
their Lord will kill the man of sin, in the day that 
he shall rise up to the prey. They showed him 
besides many excellent things, with which Chris- 
tian was much delighted. This done, they went 
to their rest again. 

Then I saw in my dream, that on the morrow 
he got up to go forward, but they desired him tr 
stay till the next day also; and then, said they 
we will, if the day be clear, show you the Delec 



PURSUES HIS JOURNEY. 95 

table mountains; which, they said, would yet 
farther add to his comfort, because they were 
nearer the desired haven than the place where at 
present he was ; so he consented and stayed. 
When the morning was up, they had him to the 
Christian to P °f * ne house, and bid him look 
&I1 tout s °uth. _ So he did, and behold, at a 
tams. great distance, he saw a most pleasant 

mountainous country, beautified with woods, vine- 
yards, fruits of all sorts, flowers also, with springs 
and fountains, very delectable to behold. Isa. 
33 : 16, 17. Then he asked the name of the 
country. They said it was Immanuel's land ; and 
it is as common, said they, as this hill is, to and 
for all the pilgrims. And when thou comest there, 
from thence thou mayest see to the gate of the 
celestial city, as the shepherds that live there will 
make appear. 

Now he bethought himself of setting forward, 
christian sets and the Y were willing he should. But 

forward. fi rgt) ga j ( J l\ ke y i ^ ug g Q a g a j n i n t the 

armory. So they did; and when he came there, 

they harnessed him from head to foot with what 

was of proof, lest perhaps he should meet with as- 

Christian sent saults in the way. He being therefore 

away armed. tlmg accoutred> wa >ked out with his 

friends to the gate ; and there he asked the porter 
if he saw any pilgrim pass by. Then the porter 
answered, Yes. 



90 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. Pray, did you know him ? said he. 

Port. I asked his name, and he told me it was 
Faithful. 

Chr. 0, said Christian, I know him ; he is my 
townsman, my near neighbor ; he comes from the 
place where I was born. How far do you think 
he may be before ? 

Port. He is got by this time below the hill. 

Chr. Well, said Christian, good por- How Chns- 
ter, the Lord be with thee, and add to p a r " er a g n r J 9t ^ 
all thy blessings much increase for the P**™* 
kindness that thou hast showed me. 



GALLEY 0? HUMILIATION. 97 



THE FOURTH STAGE. 

Then he began to go forward ; but Discretion, 
Piety, Charity, and Prudence would accompany 
him down to the foot of the hill. So they went 
on together, reiterating their former discourses, till 
they came to go "down the hill. Then said Chris- 
tian, As it was difficult coming up, so, so far as I 
can see, it is dangerous going down. Yes, said 
Prudence, so it is; for it is a hard matter for a man 
The yaiiey of to go down into the valley of Humilia- 

Humiliation. ,• .-, , 

tion, as thou art now, and to catch no 
slip by the way; therefore, said they, we are come 
out to accompany thee down the hill. So he began 
to go down, but very warily; yet he caught a slip 
or two. 

Then I saw in my dream, that these good com- 
panions, when Christian was got down to the bot- 
tom of the hill, gave him a loaf of bread, a bottle 
of wine, and a cluster of raisins ; and then he went 
on his way. 

" Whilst Christian is among his godly friends 
Their golden mouths make him sufficient mends 
For all his griefs ; and when they let him go, 
He 's clad with northern steel from top to toe." 
But now, in this valley of Humiliation, poor 
Christian was hard put to it; for he had gone but 
a little way before he espied a foul fiend coming 

Pil. Pro* 7 



98 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

over the field to meet him: his name is Apollyon. 
Then did Christian begin to be afraid, and to east 
in his mind whether to go back, or to stand his 
ground. But he considered again, that he had 
no armor for his back, and therefore Christian has 

no armor for his 

thought that to turn the back to him back. 
might give him greater advantage with ease to 
pierce him with his darts ; therefore he resolved 
to venture and stand his ground : for, thought he, 
had I no more in mine eye than the saving of my 
life, it would be the best way to stand. 

So he went on, and Apollyon met him. Now 
the monster was hideous to behold : he was clothed 
with scales like a fish, and they are his pride; he 
had wings like a dragon, and feet like a bear, 
and out of his belly came fire and smoke, and 
his mouth was as the mouth of a lion. When 
he was come up to Christian, he beheld him with 
a disdainful countenance, and thus began to ques- 
tion him. 

Apollyon. Whence came you, and Discourse be- 
tween Christian 
whither are you bound ? and Apollyon. 

Chr. I am come from the city of Destruction, 
which is the place of all evil, and I am going to 
the city of Zion. 

Apol. By this I perceive that thou art one of my 
subjects ; for all that country is mine, and I am 
the prince and god of it. How is it, then, that 
thou hast run away from thy king? Were it not 



APOLLYON'S DISCOURSE. 99 

that I hope thou mayest do me more service, I 
would strike thee now at one blow to the ground. 

Chr. I was, indeed, born in your dominions, but 
your service was hard, and your wages such as a 
man could not live on ; for the wages of sin is 
death, Rom. 6 : 23 ; therefore, when I was come to 
years, I did, as other considerate persons do, look 
out if perhaps I might mend myself. 

Apol. There is no prince that will thus lightly 
lose his subjects, neither will I as yet lose thee; 
Apoiiyon's hut since thou complainest of thy ser- 
flattery. vice and wages, be content to go back, 

and what our country will afford I do here promise 
to give thee. 

Chr. But I have let myself to another, even to 
the King of princes ; and how can I with fairness 
go back with thee? 

Apol. Thou hast done in this according to the 
Apoiiyon proverb, " changed a bad for a worse ;" 

undervalues . 

Christ's service, but it is ordinary lor those that nave 
professed themselves his servants, after a while to 
give him the slip, and return again to me. Do 
thou so too, and all shall be well. 

Chr. I have given him my faith, and sworn my 
allegiance to him; how then can I go back from 
this, and not be hanged as a traitor? 

Apol. Thou didst the same by me, and yet I am 
willing to pass by all, if now thou wilt yet turn 
again and £o back. 



100 PILG-RIM'S PROORESS. 

Chr. What I promised thee was in my nonage : 
and besides, I count that the Prince, under whose 
banner I now stand, is able to absolve me, yea, 
and to pardon also what I did as to my compliance 
with thee. And besides, thou destroying Apol- 
lyon, to speak truth, I like his service, his wages, 
his servants, his government, his company, and 
country, better than thine ; therefore leave off to 
persuade me farther : I am his servant, and I will 
follow him. 

Apol. Consider again, when thou Apoiiyon 

art in cool blood, what thou art like to £u? dS end s grie of 
meet with in the way that thou goest. gJSSTibiC 
Thou knowest that for the most part S^gTa r ^ 
his servants come to an ill end, because way - 
they are transgressors against me and my ways. 
How many of them have been put to shameful 
deaths! And besides, thou countest his service 
better than mine ; whereas he never yet came from 
the place where he is, to deliver any that served 
him out of their enemies' hands : but as for me, 
how many times, as all the world very well knows, 
have I delivered, either by power or fraud, those 
that have faithfully served me, from him and his, 
though taken by them! And so will I deliver thee. 

Chr. His forbearing at present to deliver them, 
is on purpose to try their love, whether they will 
cleave to him to the end : and as for the ill end 
thou sayest they come to, that is most glorious 



APOLLYON'S DISCOURSE. 101 

in their account. For, for present deliverance, 
they do not much expect it; for they stay for 
their glory; and then they shall have it, when 
their Prince comes in his and the glory of the 
angels. 

Apol. Thou hast already been unfaithful in thy 
service to him ; and how dost thou think to receive 
wages of him ? • 

Chr. Wherein, Apollyon, have I been un- 
faithful to him ? 

Apoiiyon pleads Apol. Thou didst faint at first set- 
fi'mkieragams't tin S out, when thou wast almost choked 
w in the gulf of Despond. Thou didst 

attempt wrong ways to be rid of thy burden, 
whereas thou shouldst have stayed till thy Prince 
had taken it off. Thou didst sinfully sleep, and 
lose thy choice things. Thou wast almost per- 
suaded also to go back at the sight of the lions. 
And when thou talkest of thy journey, and of what 
thou hast seen and heard, thou art inwardly 
desirous of vainglory in all that thou sayest or 
doest. 

Chr. All this is true, and much more which 
thou hast left out; but the Prince whom I serve 
and honor is merciful, and ready to forgive. But 
besides, these infirmities possessed me in thy 
country, for there I sucked them in, and I have 
groaned under them, been sorry for them, and 
have obtained pardon of my Prince. 



102 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Apol. Then Ap oily on broke out into a grievous 
ra.q-e, saying, I am an enemy to this Apoiiyon, in 

. t • r a S e i f a ^ s upon 

Prince ; I hate his person, his laws, Christian. 
and people : I am come out on purpose to with- 
stand thee. 

Chr. Apoiiyon, beware what you do, for I am 
in' the King's highway, the way of holiness ; 
therefore take heed to yourself. 

Apol. Then Apoiiyon straddled quite over the 
whole breadth of the way, and said, I am void 
of fear in this matter. Prepare thyself to die ; for 
I swear by my infernal den, that thou shalt go no 
farther : here will I spill thy soul. And with that 
he threw a naming dart at his breast ; but Chris- 
tian had a shield in his hand, with which he 
caught it, and so prevented the danger of that. 

Then did Christian draw, for he saw it was time 
to bestir him ; and Apoiiyon as fast made at him, 
throwing darts as thick as hail ; by the which, 
notwithstanding all that Christian could do to 
avoid it, Apoiiyon wounded him in his Chris- 

• i mi • tian wounded in 

head, his hand, and foot. This made his understand- 

«**,.. . Tii i a n i"S' faith, and 

Christian give a little back: Apoiiyon, conversation. 
therefore, followed his work amain, and Christian 
again took courage, and resisted as manfully as he 
could. This sore combat lasted for above half a 
day, even till Christian was almost quite spent : 
for you must know, that Christian, by reason of 
his wounds, must needs grow weaker and weaker 



CONFLICT WITH APOLLYON. 103 

Then Apollyon, espying his opportunity, began 
to gather up close to Christian, and wrestling 
Apollyon w * tn n ^ m ? g ave hi m a dreadful fall; 
ffdowntoS: and with that Christian's sword flew 
ground. out f ^g hand. Then said Apollyon, 

I am sure of thee now : and with that he had 
almost pressed him to death, so that Christian 
began to despair of life. But, as God would have 
it, while Apollyon was fetching his last blow, 
thereby to make a full end of this good man, 
Christian nimbly reached out his hand for his 
sword, and caught it, saying, Rejoice not against 
me, mine enemy : when I fall, I shall arise, 
Christian's vie- Mic. 7:8; and with that gave him 

tory over Apol- ° 

iy°n. a deadly thrust, which made him give 

back, as one that had received his mortal wound. 
Christian perceiving that, made at him again, 
saying, Nay, in all these things we are more than 
conquerors, through Him that loved us. Rom. 
8 : 37. And with that Apollyon spread forth his 
dragon wings, and sped him away, that Christian 
saw him no more. James 4:7. 

In this combat no man can imagine, unless he 
a brief reia- nad seen and heard, as I did, what 
oatV/tts^: Y ellin g and hid eous roaring Apollyon 
tator. made all the time of the fight ; he 

spoke like a dragon : and on the other side, what 
sighs and groans burst from Christian's heart. 1 
never saw him all the while give so much as one 



104 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

pleasant look, till he perceived he had wounded 
Apollyon with his two-edged sword ; then, indeed, 
he did smile, and look upward. But it was the 
dreadfullest sight that ever I saw. 

So when the battle was over, Christian said, I 
will here give thanks to Him that Christian gives 

D God thanks for 

hath delivered me out of the mouth of his deliverance. 
the lion, to him that did help me against Apollyon. 
And so he did, saying, 

"Great Beelzebub, the captain of this field, 
Designed my ruin ; therefore to this end 
He sent him harnessed out ; and he with rage 
That hellish was, did fiercely me engage : 
But blessed Michael helped me, and I, 
By dint of sword, did quickly make him fly : 
Therefore to Him let me give lasting praise, 
And thank and bless his holy name always." 

Then there came to him a hand with some of 
the leaves of the tree of life, the which Christian 
took and applied to the wounds that he had re- 
ceived in the battle, and was healed immediately. 
He also sat down in that place to eat bread, and 
to drink of the bottle that was given him a little 
before : so, being refreshed, he addressed himself 
to his journey with his sword drawn Christian goes 

_ . oninhisjotimey 

m his hand; ior he said, 1 know not with his sword 
but some other enemy may be at hand. hand. 
But he met with no other affront from Apollyon 
quite through this valley. 



THE SHADOW OF DEATH. 105 

Now at the end of this valley was another, 
The valley of called the Valley of the Shadow of 

the Shadow of . 

Death. Death; and Christian must needs go 

through it, because the way to the Celestial City 
lay through the midst of it. Now, this valley is 
a very solitary place. The prophet Jeremiah thus 
describes it : "A wilderness, a land of deserts and 
pits, a land of drought, and of the shadow of death, 
a land that no man," but a Christian, " passeth 
through, and where no man dwelt." Jer. 2 : 6. 

Now here Christian was worse put to it than 
in his fight with Apollyon, as by the sequel you 
shall see. 

I saw then in my dream, that when Christian 

was got to the borders of the Shadow of Death, 

The children there met him two men, children of 

of the spies go 

back. them that brought up an evil report of 

the good land, Num. 13 : 32, making haste to go 
back ; to whom Christian spoke as follows. 

Chr. Whither are you going ? 

Men. They said, Back, back; and we would 
have you do so too, if either life or peace is prized 
by you. 

Chr. Why, what's the matter? said Christian. 

Men. Matter! said they; we were going that 
way as you are going, and went as far as we 
durst : and indeed we were almost past coming 
back ; for had we gone a little further, we had 
not been here to bring the news to thee. 



106 PILGRIM'S ritOGRESS. 

Chr. But what have you met with? said 
Christian. 

Men Why, we were almost in the valley of the 
Shadow of Death, but that by good hap we looked 
before us, and saw the dangei before we came to 
it. Pba. 44: 19; 107: 19. 
• Chk. But what have you seen? said Christian. 

Men. Seen! why the valley itself, which is as 
dark as pitch : we also saw there the hobgoblins, 
satyrs, and dragons of the pit: we heard also in 
that valley a continual howling and yelling, as 
of a people under unutterable misery, who there 
sat bound in affliction and irons: and over that 
valley hang the discouraging clouds of confusion : 
Death also doth always spread his wings over it. 
In a word, it is every whit dreadful, being utterly 
without order. Job 3 : 5 ; 10 : 22. 

Chr. Then, said Christian, I perceive not yet, 
by what you have said, but that this is my way 
to the desired haven. Psalm 44: 18, 19; Jer. 
2:6. 

Men. Be it thy way ; we will not choose it for 
ours. 

So they parted, and Christian went on his way, 
but still with his sword drawn in his hand, for 
fear lest he should be assaulted. 

I saw then in my dream, so far as this valley 
reached, there was on the right hand a very deep 
ditch* that ditch is it into which the blind have 



HORRORS OF THE VALLEY. 107 

led the blind in all ages, and have both there 
miserably perished. Again, behold, on the left 
hand there was a very dangerous quag, into 
which, if even a good man falls, he finds no 
bottom for his foot to stand on : into that quag 
king David once did fall, and had no doubt 
therein been smothered, had not He that is able 
plucked him out. Psa. 69: 14. 

The pathway was here also exceeding narrow, 
and therefore good Christian was the more put 
to it ; for when he sought, in the dark, to shun 
the ditch on the one hand, he was ready to tip 
over into the mire on the other ; also, when he 
sought to escape the mire, without great careful- 
ness he would be ready to fall into the ditch. 
Thus he went on, and I heard him here sigh bit- 
terly ; for besides the danger mentioned above, 
the pathway was here so dark, that ofttimes, 
when he lifted up his foot to go forward, he knew 
not where or upon what he should set it next. 

About the midst of this valley I perceived the 
mouth of hell to be, and it stood also hard by 
the wayside. Now, thought Christian, what shall 
I do ? And ever and anon the flame and smoke 
would come out in such abundance, with sparks 
and hideous noises — things that cared not for 
Christian's sword, as did Apollyon before — that 
he was forced to put up his sword, and betake 
himself to another weapon, called All-prayer, 



108 PILGRlk'S PROGRESS. 

Eph. 6 : 18; so he cried, in my hearing, Lord, 
I beseech thee, deliver my soul. Psa. 116: 4. 
Thus he went on a great while, yet still the flames 
would be reaching towards him ; also he heard 
doleful voices, and rushings to and fro, so that 
sometimes he thought he should be torn in pieces, 
or trodden down like mire in the streets. This 
frightful sight was .seen, and these dreadful noises 
were heard by him for several miles together ; 
and coming to a place where he thought he heard 
a company of fiends coming forward to meet him, 
he stopped, and began to muse what Christian put 
he had best to do. Sometimes he had while. 
half a thought to go back ; then again he thought 
he might be half-way through the valley. He 
remembered also how he had already vanquish- 
ed many a danger; and that the danger of going 
back might be much more than for to go forward. 
So he resolved to go on ; yet the fiends seemed 
to come nearer and nearer. But when they were 
come even almost at him, he cried out with a 
most vehement voice, I will walk in the strength 
of the Lord God. So they gave back, and came 
no farther. 

One thing I would not let slip. I took notice 
that now poor Christian was so confounded that 
he did not know his own voice ; and thus I per- 
ceived it. Just when he was come over against 
the mouth of the burning pit, one of the wicked 



HORRORS OF THE VALLEY. 109 

Christian made ones got behind him, and stepped up 

to believe that r.i , i • j i • 1 

he spoke bias- soltly to mm, and wnispermgly sug- 
ft hei wa S S ' swan gested many grievous blasphemies to 

Tm ■SST'SS him > which he veril y th ™ g ht had 

mind, proceeded from his own mind. This 

put Christian more to it than any thing that he 
met with before, even to think that he should now 
blaspheme Him that he loved so much before. 
Yet if he could have helped it, he would not have 
done it ; but he had not the discretion either* to 
stop his ears, or to know from whence these 
blasphemies came. 

When Christian had travelled in this disconso- 
late condition some considerable time, he thought 
he heard the voice of a man, as going before him, 
saying, Though I walk through the valley of the 
Shadow of Death, I will fear no evil, for thou art 
with me. Psa. 23 : 4. 

Then was he glad, and that for these reasons : 

First, because he gathered from thence, that 
some who feared God were in this valley as well 
as himself. 

Secondly, for that he perceived God was with 
them, though in that dark and dismal state. 
And why not, thought he, with me ? though by 
reason of the impediment that attends this place, 
I cannot perceive it. Job 9:11. 

Thirdly, for that he hoped, could he overtake 
them, to have company by and by. So he went 



110 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

on, and called to him that was before ; but he 
knew not what to answer, for that he also thought 
himself to be alone. And by and by the day 
broke : then said Christian, " He hath turned the 
shadow of death into the morning." christian glad 

AmOS 5: 8. at break of day. 

Now morning being come, he looked back, not 
out of desire to return, but to see, by the light of 
the day, what hazards he had gone through in the 
dark. So he saw more perfectly the ditch that 
was on the one hand, and the quag that was on 
the other ; also how narrow the way was which 
led betwixt them both. Also now he saw the 
hobgoblins, and satyrs, and dragons of the pit, 
but all afar off; for after break of day they came 
not nigh ; yet they were discovered to him, ac- 
cording to that which is written, "He discovereth 
deep things out of darkness, and bringeth out to 
light the shadow of death." Job 12 : 22. 

Now was Christian much affected with this 
deliverance from all the dangers of his solitary 
way ; which dangers, though he feared them 
much before, yet he saw them more clearly now, 
because the light of the day made them conspic- 
uous to him. And about this time the sun was 
rising, and this was another mercy to Christian ; 
for you must note, that though the first part of 
the valley of the Shadow of Leath was dangerous, 
yet this second part, which he was yet to go, was, 



POPE AND PAGAN. Ill 

The second $ possible, far more dangerous; for 

FeTverydingcrl fr0m tlie P laCe wnere lle now *> too( l 

ous - even to the end of the valley, the 

way was all along set so full of snares, traps, gins, 
and nets here, and so full of pits, pitfalls, deep 
holes, and shelvings-down there, that had it now 
been dark, as it was when he came the first part 
of the way, had he had a thousand souls, they had 
in reason been cast away ; but, as I said, just now 
the sun was rising. Then said he, " His candle 
shineth on my head, and by his light I go through 
darkness." Job 29: 3. 

In this light, therefore, he came to the end of 
the valley. Now I saw in my dream, that at the 
end of the valley lay blood, bones, ashes, and 
mangled bodies of men, even of pilgrims that had 
gone this way formerly ; and while I was musing 
what should be the reason, I espied a little before 
me a cave, where two giants, Pope and Pagan, 
dwelt in old times ; by whose power and tyranny 
the men whose bones, blood, ashes, etc., lay 
there, were cruelly put to death. But by this place 
Christian went without much danger, whereat I 
somewhat wondered ; but I have learnt since, 
that Pagan had been dead many a day ; and as 
for the other, though he be yet alive, he is, by 
reason of age, and also of the many shrewd 
brushes that he met with in his younger days, 
grown so crazy and stiff in his joints that he can 



112 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

now do little more than sit in his cave's mouth, 
grinning at pilgrims as they go by, and biting his 
nails because he cannot come at them. 

So I saw that Christian went on his way ; yet, 
at the sight of the old man that sat at the mouth 
of the cave, he could not tell what to think, espe- 
cially because he spoke to him, though he could 
not go after him, saying, You will never mend 
till more of you be burned. But he held his 
peace, and set a good face on it ; and so went by, 
and catched no hurt. Then sung Christian, 

" world of wonders — I can say no less — 
That I should be preserved in that distress 
That I have met with here ! blessed be 
That hand that from it hath delivered me ! 
Dangers in darkness, devils, hell, and sin, 
Did compass me, while I this vale was in ; 
Yea, snares, and pits, and traps, and nets did lie 
My path about, that worthless, silly I 
Might have been catched, entangled, and cast down ; 
But since I live, let Jesus wear the crown. 



f.1 - 




CHRISTIAN SEES FAITHFUL. 113 



THE FIFTH STAGE. 

Now, as Christian went on his way, he came 
1,0 a little ascent, which was cast up on purpose 
chat pilgrims might see before them : up there, 
therefore, Christian went ; and looking forward, 
he saw Faithful before him upon his journey. 
Then said Christian aloud, Ho, ho ; so-ho ; stay, 
and I will be your companion. At that Faithful 
looked behind him; to whom Christian cried 
again, Stay, stay, till I come up to you. But 
Faithful answered, No, I am upon my life, and 
the avenger of blood is behind me. 

At this Christian was somewhat moved, and 

putting to all his strength, he quickly got up with 

Christian over- Faithful, and did also overrun him; so 
takes Faithful. the lagt wag first! Then di( j Christian 

vaingloriously smile, because he had gotten the 
start of his brother; but not taking good heed to 
his feet, he suddenly stumbled and fell, and could 
not rise again until Faithful came up to help him. 
Then I saw in my dream, they went very lov- 
christian's fail ingly on together, and had sweet dis- 
S? X/p)™ course of all things that had happened 
ingiy together. to tnem i n their pilgrimage ; and thus 

Christian began. 

Chr. My honored and well-beloved brother 

Pil. Prog. 8 



114 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Faithful, I am glad that I have overtaken you, 
and that God has so tempered our spirits that we 
can walk as companions in this so pleasant a path. 

Faith. I had thought, my dear friend, to have 
had your company quite from our town, but you 
did get the start of me ; wherefore I was forced 
to come thus much of the way alone. 

Chr. How long did you stay in the city of 
Destruction before you set out after me on your 
pilgrimage ? 

Faith. Till I could stay no longer ; for thei 3 
was a great talk presently after you Theirtalkatort 
were gone out, that our city would, in ^ence 1 ^ tSV 
a short time, with fire from heaven, came - 
be burnt down to the ground. 

Chr. "What, did your neighbors talk so ? 

Faith. Yes, it was for a while in every body'« 
mouth. 

Chr. What, and did no more of them but you 
come out to escape the danger ? 

Faith. Though there was, as I said, a great 
talk thereabout, yet I do not think they did firmly 
believe it ; for in the heat of the discourse, I 
heard some of them deridingly speak of you and 
of your desperate journey, for so they called this 
your pilgrimage. But I did believe, and do still, 
that the end of our city will be with fire and 
brimstone from above ; and therefore I have made 
my escape. 



CHRISTIAN AND FAITHFUL. 115 

Chr. Did you hear no talk of neighbor Pliable ? 

Faith. Yes, Christian, I heard that he followed 
you till he came to the slough of Despond, where, 
as some said, he fell in; but he would not be 
known to have so done: but I am sure he was 
soundly bedabbled with that kind of dirt. 

Chr. And what said the neighbors to him ? 

Faith. He hath, since his going back, been 
How Pliable had greatly in derision, and that among 
o?when°he n grt a ^ sorts of people : some do mock and 
home. despise him, and scarce will any set 

him on work. He is now seven times worse than 
if he had never gone out of the city. 

Chr. But why should they be so set against 
him, since they also despise the way that he 
forsook ? 

Faith. 0, they say, Hang him ; he is a turn- 
coat ; he was not true to his profession. I think 
God has stirred up even His enemies to hiss at 
him, and make him a proverb, because he hath 
forsaken the way. Jer. 29 : 18, 19. 

Chr. Had you no talk with him before you 
came out? 

Faith. I met him once in the streets, but he 
leered away on the other side, as one ashamed of 
what he had done ; so I spoke not to him. 

Chr. "Well, at my first setting out I had hopes 
of that man ; but now I fear he will perish in the 
overthrow of the city For it has happened to 



116 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

him according- to the true proverb, The dog is 
turned to his vomit again, and the sow that was 
washed to her wallowing in the mire. 2 Pet. 2 : 22. 

Faith. These are my fears of him too ; but 
who can hinder that which will be? 

Chr. Well, neighbor Faithful, said Christian, 
let us leave him, and talk of things that more im- 
mediately concern ourselves. Tell me now what 
you have met with in the way as you came ; for I 
know you have met with some things, or else it 
may be writ for a wonder. 

Faith. I escaped the slough that I perceived 
you fell into, and got up to the gate without that 
danger ; only I met with one whose name was 
Wanton, who had like to have done Faithful as- 

7 saulted by Waii- 

me mischief. ton - 

Chr. It was well you escaped her net : Joseph 
was hard put to it by her, and he escaped her as 
you did ; but it had like to have cost him his life. 
Gen. 39 : 11-13. But what did she do to you? 

Faith. You cannot think, but that you know 
something, what a nattering tongue she had ; she 
lay at me hard to turn aside with her, promising 
me all manner of content. 

Chr. Nay, she did not promise you the content 
of a good conscience. 

Faith. You know that I mean all carnal and 
fleshly content. 

Chr. Thank God that you escaped her : the 



CHRISTIAN AND FAITHFUL. 117 

abhorred of the Lord shall fall into her pit. Prov. 
22: 14. 

Faith. Nay, I know not whether I did wholly 
escape her or no. 

Chr. Why, I trow you did not consent to her 
desires ? 

Faith. No, not to defile myself; for I remem- 
bered an old writing that I had seen, which said, 
"Her steps take hold on hell." Prov. 5 : 5. So I 
shut mine eyes, because I would not be bewitched 
with her looks. Job 31:1. Then she railed on 
me, and I went my way. 

Chr. Did you meet with no other assault as 
you came ? 

Faith. When I came to the foot of the hill 
sauhed \y 11 called Difficulty, I met with a very aged 

am the first marij w \ lQ as k e( l me w } iat J wagj an( j 

whither bound. I told him that I was a pilgrim, 
going to the Celestial City. Then said the old 
man, Thou lookest like an honest fellow ; wilt 
thou be content to dwell with me for the wages 
that I shall give thee ? Then I asked his name, 
and where he dwelt. He said his name was Ad- 
am the First, and that he dwelt in the town of 
Deceit. Eph. 4 : 22. I asked him then what 
was his work, and what the wages that he would 
give. He told me that his work was many de- 
lights; and his wages, that I should be his heir 
at last. I further asked him, what house he kept, 



118 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

and what other servants he had. So he told me 
that his house was maintained with all the dain- 
ties of the world, and that his servants were those 
of his own begetting. Then I asked how many 
children he had. He said that he had but three 
daughters, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the 
•Eyes, and the Pride of Life, 1 John, 2:16; and 
that I should marry them if I would. Then I 
asked how long time he would have me live with 
him ; and he told me, as long as he lived himself. 

Chr. Well, and what conclusion came the old 
man and you to at last ? 

Faith. Why, at first I found myself somewhat 
inclinable to go with the man, for I thought he 
spoke very fair ; but looking in his forehead, as 
I talked with him, I saw there written, " Put off 
the old man with his deeds." 

Chr. And how then? 

Faith. Then it came burning hot into my mind, 
that whatever he said, and however he flattered, 
when he got me home to his house he would sell 
me for a slave. So I bid him forbear to talk, for 
I would not come near the door of his house. 
Then he reviled me, and told me that he would 
send such a one after me that should make my 
way bitter to my soul. So I turned to go away 
from him ; but just as I turned myself to go 
thence, I felt him take hold of my flesh, and 
give me such a deadly twitch back, that I thought 



CHRISTIAN AND FAITHFUL. 119 

he had pulled part of me after himself: this made 
me cry, "0 wretched man!" Rom. 7 : 24. So 
I went on my way up the hill. 

Now, when I had got about half-way up, I 
looked behind me, and saw one coming after me 
swift as the wind ; so he overtook me just about 
the place where the settle stands. 

Chr. Just there, said Christian, did I sit down 
to rest me ; but being overcome with sleep, I there 
lost this roll out of my bosom. 

Faith. But, good brother, hear me out. So 
soon as the man overtook me, it was but a word 
and a blow ; for down he knocked me, and laid me 
for dead. But when I was a little come to myself 
again, I asked him wherefore he served me so. 
He said, because of my secret inclining to Adam 
the First. And with that he struck me another 
deadly blow on the breast, and beat me down 
backward ; so I lay at his feet as dead as before. 
So when I came to myself again, I cried him 
mercy : but he said, I know not how to show 
mercy; and with that he knocked me down again. 
He had doubtless made an end of me, but that one 
came by and bade him forbear. 

Chr. Who was that that bade him forbear 1 

Faith. I did not know him at first : but as he 
went by, I perceived the holes in his hands and 
in his side : then I concluded that he was our 
Lord. So I went up the hill. 



120 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. That man that overtook you was Moses. 
He spareth none ; neither knoweth The temper ef 
he how to show mercy to those that Mos3S - 
transgress the law. 

Faith. I know it very well ; it was not the 
first time that he has met with me. 'T was he 
that came to me when I dwelt securely at home, 
and that told me that he would burn my house 
over my head if I stayed there. 

Chr. But did you not see the house that stood 
there on the top of the hill, on the side of which 
Moses met you 1 

Faith. Yes, and the lions too, before I came at 
it. But for the lions, I think they were asleep, 
for it was about noon ; and because I had so much 
of the day before me, I passed by the porter, and 
came down the hill. 

Chr. He told me, indeed, that he saw you go 
by ; but I wish that you had called at the house, 
for they would have shown you so many rarities 
that you would scarce have forgot them to the 
day of your death. But pray tell me, did you 
meet nobody in the valley of Humility? 

Faith. Yes, I met with one Discontent, who 
would willingly have persuaded me to Faithful as- 

, , . •.-, i • -> • saulted by Dis- 

go back again with him : his reason content, 
was, for 1hat the valley was altogether without 
honor. He told me, moreover, that to go there 
was the way to disoblige all my friends, as Pride, 



CHRISTIAN AND FAITHFUL. 121 

Arrogancy, Self-Conceit, Worldly-Glory, with oth- 
ers, who he knew, as he said, would be very 
much offended if I made such a fool of myself at 
to wade through this valley. 

Chr. Well, and how did you answer him ? 

Faith. I told him, that although all these that 
Faithful's an- he named might claim a kindred of me. 

swer to Discon- . _ . , ., . 

tent. and that rightly — ior indeed they were 

my relations according to the flesh — yet since I 
became a pilgrim they have disowned me, and I 
also have rejected them ; and therefore they were 
to me now no more than if they had never been 
of my lineage. I told him, moreover, that as to 
this valley, he had quite misrepresented the thing ; 
for before honor is humility, and a haughty spirit 
before a fall. Therefore, said I, I had rather go 
through this valley to the honor that was so ac- 
counted by the wisest, than choose that which he 
esteemed most worthy of our affections. 

Chr. Met you with nothing else in that valley 1 

Faith. Yes, I met with Shame ; but of all the 

He is assaulted men that I met with on my pilgrim- 

by Shame. J r a 

age, he, I think, bears 1jhe wrong name. The 
others would be said nay, after a little argumen- 
tation, and somewhat else ; but this bold-faced 
Shame would never have done. 

Chr. Why, what did he say to you? 

Faith. What? why, he objected against religion 
itself. He said it was a pitiful, low, sneaking 



122 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

business for a man to mind religion. He said, 
that a tender conscience was an unmanly thing ; 
and that for a man to watch over his words and 
ways, so as to tie up himself from that hectoring 
liberty that the brave spirits of the times accus- 
tom themselves unto, would make him the ridi- 
cule of the times. He objected also, that but few 
of the mighty, rich, or wise, were ever of my 
opinion; nor any of them neither, before they 
were persuaded to be fools, and to be of a vol- 
untary fondness to venture the loss of all for 
nobody knows what. 1 Cor. 1 : 26 ; 3 : 18 ; Phil. 
3 : 7-9 ; John 7 : 48. He, moreover, objected the 
base and low estate and condition of those that 
were chiefly the pilgrims of the times in which 
they lived ; also their ignorance and want of un- 
derstanding in all natural science. Yea, he did 
hold me to it at that rate also, about a great many 
more things than here I relate ; as, that it was a 
shame to sit whining and mourning under a 
sermon, and a shame to come sighing and groaning 
home; that it was a shame to ask my neighbor 
forgiveness for petty faults, or to make restitution 
where I have taken from any. He said also, that 
religion made a man grow strange to the great, 
because of a few vices, which he called by finer 
names, and made him own and respect the base, 
because of the same religious fraternity : and is 
not this, said he, a shame ? 



CHRISTIAN AND FAITHF-UL. 123 

Che. And what did you &&y to him 1 
Faith. Say ? I could not tell what to say at 
first. Yea, he put me so to it, that my blood came 
up in my face ; even this Shame fetched it up, 
and had almost beat me quite off. But at last I 
began to consider, that that which is highly 
esteemed among men, is had in abomination with 
God. Luke 16: 15. And I thought again, this 
Shame tells me what men are; but he tells me 
nothing what God, or the word of God is. And 
I thought, moreover, that at the day of doom we 
shall not be doomed to death or life according to 
the hectoring spirits of the world, but according 
to the wisdom and law of the Highest. There- 
fore, thought I, what God says is best, is indeed 
best, though all the men in the world are against 
it. Seeing, then, that God prefers his religion ; 
seeing God prefers a tender conscience ; seeino- 
they that make themselves fools for the kingdom 
of heaven are wisest, and that the poor man that 
loveth Christ is richer than the greatest man in 
the world that hates him — Shame, depart, thou 
art an enemy to my salvation. Shall I entertain 
thee against my sovereign Lord ? How then shall 
I look Him in the face at his coming ? Mark 8 : 38. 
Should I now be ashamed of his ways and ser- 
vants, how can I expect the blessing ? But 
indeed this Shame was a bold villain : I could 
scarcely shake him out of my company ; yea, he 



124 PILGRIM'S PROU-HESS. 

would be haunting of me, and continually whis- 
pering me in the ear with some one or other of 
the infirmities that attend religion. But at last 
I told him, that it was but in vain to attempt 
farther in this business ; for those things that he 
disdained, in those did I see most glory : and so 
at last I got past this importunate one. And 
when I had shaken him off, then I began to sing, 

" The trials that those men do meet withal, 
That are obedient to the heavenly call, 
Are manifold, and suited to the flesh, 
And come and come and come again afresh ; 
That now, or some time else, we by them may 
Be taken, overcome, and cast away. 
O let the pilgrims, let the pilgrims then, 
Be vigilant, and quit themselves like men." 

Chr. I am glad, my brother, that thou didst 
withstand this villain so bravely, for of all, as 
thou sayest, I think he has the wrong name ; for 
he is so bold as to follow us in the streets, and 
to attempt to put us to shame before all men ; 
that is, to make us ashamed of that which is good. 
But if he was not himself audacious, he would 
never attempt to do as he does. But let us still 
resist him ; for, notwithstanding all his bravadoes, 
he promoteth the fool, and none else. " The wise 
shall inherit glory," said Solomon ; " but shame 
shall be the promotion of fools." Prov. 3 : 35. 

Faith. I think we must cry to Him for help 



CHRISTIAN AND FAITHFUL. 125 

against Shame, that would have us to be valiant 
for truth upon the earth. 

Chr. You say true : but did you meet nobody 
else in that valley 1 

Faith. No, not I ; for I had sunshine all the 
rest of the way through that, and also through 
the valley of the Shadow of Death. 

Chr. 'Twas well for you; I am sure it fared 
far otherwise with me. I had for a long season, 
as soon almost as I entered into that valley, a 
dreadful combat with that foul fiend Apollyon ; 
yea, I thought verily he would have killed me, 
especially when he got me down, and crushed 
me under him, as if he would have crushed me 
to pieces; for as he threw me, my sword flew out 
of my hand : nay, he told me he was sure of me ; 
but I cried to God, and he heard me, and deliv- 
ered me out of all my troubles. Then I entered 
into the valley of the Shadow of Death, and had 
no light for almost half the way through it. I 
thought I should have been killed there over and 
over ; but at last day broke, and the # sun rose, and 
I went through that which was behind with far 
more ease and quiet. 

Moreover, I saw in my dream, that as they went 
on, Faithful, as he chanced to look on one side, 
saw a man whose name was Talkative, walking 
at a distance beside them ; for in this place there 
was room enough for them all to walk. He was a 



126 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

tall man, and something more comely Talkative de- 
at a distance than at hand. To this scr ' bed - 
man Faithful addressed himself in this manner. 

Faith. Friend, whither away ? Are you going 
to the heavenly country ? 

Talk. I am going to the same place. 

Faith. That is well; then I hope we shall 
have your good company ? 

Talk. With a very good will will I be your 
companion. 

Faith. Come on, then, and let us go together, 
and let us spend our time in discours- Faithful and 

Talkative enter 

ing oi things that are profitable. into discourse. 

Talk. To talk of things that are good, to me is 
very acceptable, with you or with any other ; and I 
am glad that I have met with those that incline to 
so good a work ; for, to speak the truth, there are 
but few who care thus to spend their Talkative'* dis- 

. like of bad dis- 

time as they are in their travels, but course. 
choose much rather to be speaking of things to no 
profit ; and this hath been a trouble to me. 

Faith. That is. indeed, a thing to be lamented; 
for what thing so worthy of the use of the tongue 
and mouth of men on earth, as are the things of 
the God of heaven? 

Talk. I like you wonderful well, for your 
Baying is full of conviction; and I will add, What 
thing is so pleasant, and what so profitable, as to 
talk of the things of God ? What things so 



TALKATIVE AND FAITHFUL. 127 

pleasant? that is, if a man hath any delight in 
things that are wonderful. For instance, if a 
man doth delight to talk of the history, or the 
mystery of things ; or if a man doth love to talk 
of miracles, wonders, or signs, where shall he find 
things recorded so delightful, and so sweetly 
penned, as in the holy Scripture ? 

Faith. That is true ; but to be profited by such 
things in our talk, should be our chief design. 

Talk. That 's it that I said ; for to talk of such 
things is most profitable ; for by so doing a man 
may get knowledge of many things ; as of the 
vanity of earthly things, and the benefit of things 
Taikative's fine above. Thus in general ; but more 
discourse. particularly, by this a man may learn 

the necessity of the new birth, the insufficiency of 
our works, the need of Christ's righteousness, etc. 
Besides, by this a man may learn what it is to 
repent, to believe, to pray, to suffer, or the like : 
by this, also, a man may learn what are the great 
promises and consolations of the gospel, to his 
own comfort. Farther, by this a man may learn 
to refute false opinions, to vindicate the truth, and 
also to instruct the ignorant. 

Faith. All this is true ; and glad am I to hear 
these things from you. 

Talk. Alas, the want of this is the cause that 
so few understand the need of faith, and the 
necessity of a work of grace in their soul, in order 



128 PILG-RIM'S PK.OG-RESS. 

to eternal life ; but ignorantly live in the works of 
the law, by which a man can by no means obtain 
the kingdom of heaven. 

Faith. But, by your leave, heavenly knowledge 
of these is the gift of God ; no man attaineth to 
them by human industry, or only by the talk of 
them. 

Talk. All this I know very well ; for a man 
can receive nothing, except it be given h, brave 
him from heaven ; all is of grace, not Talkatlve ! 
of works. I could give you a hundred scriptures 
for the confirmation of this. 

Faith. Well, then, said Faithful, what is that 
one thing that we shall at this time found our 
discourse upon ? 

Talk. What you will. I will talk of things 
heavenly, or things earthly ; things oh, brave 
moral, or things evangelical ; things Talkatlve ! 
sacred, or things profane ; things past, or things 
to come ; things foreign, or things at home ; things 
more essential, or things circumstantial : provided 
that all be done to our profit. 

Faith. Now did Faithful begin to wonder ; and 
stepping to Christian, for he walked Faithful be- 
all this while by himself, he said to ative. 
him, but softly, What a brave companion have 
we got ! Surely this man will make a very 
excellent pilgrim. 

Chr. At this Christian modestly smiled, and 



TALKATIVE'S CHARACTER. 129 

a h di S scov e mak of sa ^' ^^ s man > with whom yj>u are 
Talkative tell- so taken, will beguile with this tono-ue 

mgFaithful who ° c 

he was. of his, twenty of them that know him 

not. 

Faith. Do you know him, then ? 

Chr. Know him? Yes, better than he knows 
himself. 

Faith. Pray, what is he ? 

Chr. His name is Talkative : he dwelleth in 
our town. I wonder that you should be a stranger 
to him, only I consider that our town is large. 

Faith. Whose son is he ? And whereabout 
doth he dwell 1 

Chr. He is the son of one Say-well. He dwelt 
in Prating-Row ; and he is known to all that are 
acquainted with him by the name of Talkative 
of Prating-Row ; and, notwithstanding his fine 
tongue, he is but a sorry fellow. • 

Faith. Well, he seems to be a very pretty 
man. 

Chr. That is, to them that have not a thorough 
acquaintance with him, for he is best abroad ; 
near home he is ugly enough. Your saying that 
he is a pretty man, brings to my mind what I 
have observed in the work of a painter, whose 
pictures show best at a distance ; but very near, 
more unpleasing. 

Faith. But I am ready to think you do but jest, 
because you smiled. 

ML Pro*. 9 



130 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. God forbid that I should jest, though 1 
smiled, in this matter, or that I should accuse any 
fa/.sely. I will give you a further discovery of 
him. This man is for any company, and for any 
talk: as he talketh now with you, so will he 
talk when he is on the ale-bench ; and the more 
drink he hath in his crown, the more of these 
things he hath in his mouth. Religion hath no 
place in his heart, or house, or conversation ; all 
he hath lieth in his tongue, and his religion is to 
make a noise therewith. 

Faith. Say you so ? Then am I in this man 
greatly deceived. 

Chr. Deceived ! you may be sure of it. Re- 
member the proverb, " They say, and Talkative talks 
do not ;" but the kingdom of God is but does not - 
not in word, but in power. Matt. 23 : 3 ; 1 Cor. 
4:20. He talketh of prayer, of repentance, of 
faith, and of the new birth ; but he knows but 
only to talk of them. I have been in his family, 
and have observed him both at home and abroad ; 
and I know what I say of him is the truth. His 
house is as empty of religion as the His house is 

* J " m empty of relig- 

"white of an egg is of savor. There is ion. 
there neither prayer, nor sign of repentance for 
sin ; yea, the brute, in his kind, serves God far 
better than he. He is the very stain, He is a«tain 
reproach, and shame of religion to all lore glon ' 
that know him, Rom. 2 : 23, 24 ; it can hardly 



TALKATIVE'S CHARACTER. 131 

have a good word in all that end of the town 

where he dwells, through him. Thus say the 

The proverb common people that know him, " A 

that goes of him. gaint a t, roa d, and a devil at home." 

His poor family finds it so ; he is such a churl, 
such a railer at, and so unreasonable with his 
servants, that they neither know how to do for or 
speak to him. Men that have any dealings with 
Men shun to him say, It is better to deal with 

deal with him ft rp^ than whh j^ f()r fairer 

dealings they shall have at their hands. This 
Talkative, if it be possible, will go beyond them, 
defraud, beguile, and overreach them. Besides, 
he brings up his sons to follow his steps ; and if 
he finds in any of them a foolish timorousness — 
for so he calls the first appearance of a tendei 
conscience — he calls them fools and blockheads, 
and by no means will employ them in much, or 
speak to their commendation before others. For 
my part, I am of opinion that he has, by his 
wicked life, caused many to stumble and fall ; 
and will be, if God prevents not, the ruin of many 
more. 

Faith. Well, my brother, I am bound to believe 
you, not only because you say»you know him, but 
also because like a Christian you make your 
reports of men. Foi I cannot think that you 
speak these things of ill-will, but because it is 
even so as you say. 



132 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. Had I known him no more than you, 1 
might, perhaps, have thought of him as at the 
first you did ; yea, had I received this report at 
their hands only that are enemies to religion, I 
should have thought it had been a slander — a lot 
that often falls from bad men's mouths upon good 
men's names and professions. But all these 
things, yea, and a great many more as bad, of 
my own knowledge, I can prove him guilty of. 
Besides, good men are ashamed of him ; they can 
neither call him brother nor friend ; the very 
naming of him among them makes them blush, 
if they know him. 

Faith. Well, I see that saying and doing are 
two things, and hereafter I shall better observe 
this distinction. 

Chr. They are two things indeed, and are as 
diverse as are the soul and the body ; for, as the 
body without the soul is but a dead The carcass of 
carcass, so saying, if it be alone, is rell s ion - 
but a dead carcass also. The soul of religion is 
the practical part. " Pure religion and undefiled 
before God and the Father is this, to visit the 
fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to 
keep himself unspotted from the world." James 
1 : 27 ; see also verses 22-26. This, Talkative is 
not aware of; he thinks that hearing and saying 
will make a good Christian, and thus he deceivcth 
his own soul. Hearing is but as the sowing of the 



TALKATIVE'S CHARACTER. 133 

seed ; talking is not sufficient to prove that fruit is 
indeed in the heart and life. And let us assure 
ourselves, that at the day of doom men shall be 
judged according to their fruits. Matt. 13 : 23. It 
will not be said then, Did you believe ? but, Were 
you doers, or talkers only 1 and accordingly shall 
they be judged. The end of the world is com- 
pared to our harvest, Matt. 13 : 30, and you know 
men at harvest regard nothing but fruit. Not 
that any thing can be accepted that is not of 
faith ; but I speak this to show you how insig- 
nificant the profession of Talkative will be at that 
day. 

Faith This brings to my mind that of Moses, 
by which he describeth the beast that is clean. 
Lev. 11 ; Deut. 14. He is such an one that part- 
eth the hoof, and cheweth the cud ; not that 
parteth the hoof only, or that cheweth the cud 
only. The hare cheweth the cud, but yet is un- 
clean because he parteth not the hoof. And 
Faithful con- this truly resembleth Talkative : he 
idneiofTaik! cheweth the cud, he seeketh know- 
atlve - ledge ; he cheweth upon the word, 

but he divideth not the hoof. He parteth not 
with the way of sinners ; but as the hare, he 
retaineth the foot of the dog or bear, and there- 
fore he is unclean. 

Chr. You have spoken, for aught I know, the 
true gospel sense of these texts. And I will add 



134 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

another thing : Paul calleth some men, Talkative like 
yea, and those great talkers too, sound- somid^without 
ing brass, and tinkling cymbals, 1 Cor. hfe " 

13 : 1, 3 ; that is, as he expounds them in another 
place, things without life giving sound. 1 Cor. 

14 : 7. Things without life, that is, without the 
true faith and grace of the gospel ; and conse- 
quently, things that shall never be placed in the 
kingdom of heaven among those that are the 
children of life ; though their sound, by their talk, 
be as if it were the tongue or voice of an angel. 

Faith. Well, I was not so fond of his company 
at first, but I am as sick of it now. What shall 
we do to be rid of him ? 

Chr. Take my advice, and do as I bid you, and 
you shall find that he will soon be sick of your 
company too, except God shall touch his heart, 
and turn it. 

Faith. What would you have me to do ? 

Chr. Why, go to him, and enter into some 
serious discourse about the power of religion; and 
ask him plainly, when he has approved of it, for 
that he will, whether this thing be set up in his 
heart, house, or conversation. 

Faith. Then Faithful stepped forward again, 
and said to Talkative, Come, what cheer ? How 
is it now ? 

Talk. Thank you, well : I thought we should 
have had a great deal of talk by this time. 



FAITHFUL AND TALKATIVE. 135 

Faith. Well, if you will, we will fall to if 
now ; and since you left it with me to state the 
question, let it be this : How doth the saving 
grace of God discover itself when it is in the 
heart of man ? 

Talk. I perceive, then, that our talk must be 
about the power of things. Well, it is a very good 
question, and I shall be willing to answer you, 
Taikative's And take my answer in brief, thus : 
oft workTf First, where the grace of God is in 
grace lj ie ^q^^ ft causeth there a great out- 

cry against sin. Secondly — 

Faith. Nay, hold ; let us consider of one at 
once. I think you should rather say, It shows 
itself by inclining the soul to abhor its sin. 

Talk. Why, what difference is there between 
crying out against, and abhorring of sin ? 

Faith. Oh, a great deal. A man may cry out 
against sin, of policy ; but he cannot abhor it but 
by virtue of a godly antipathy against it. I have 

To cry out heard many cry out against sin in 

against sin no . , ... 

sign of grace, the pulpit, who can yet abide it well 
enough in the heart, house, and conversation. 
Gen. 39 : 15. Joseph's mistress cried out with 
a loud voice, as if she had been very holy ; but 
she would willingly, notwithstanding that, have 
committed uncleanness with him. Some cry out 
against sin, even as the mother cries out against 
her child in her lap, when she calleth it slut and 



136 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

naughty girl, and then falls to hugging and kiss- 
ing it. 

Talk. You lie at the catch, I perceive. 

Faith. No, not I ; I am only for setting things 
right. But what is the second thing whereby you 
would prove a discovery of a work of grace in the 
•heart ? 

Talk. Great knowledge of gospel mysteries. 

Faith. This sign should have been first : but, 
first or last, it is also false ; for know- Great know- 

ledge no sign of 

ledge, great knowledge, may be ob- grace, 
tained in the mysteries of the gospel, and yet no 
work of grace in the soul. Yea, if a man have 
all knowledge, he may yet be nothing, and so, 
consequently, be no child of God. 1 Cor. 13 : 2. 
When Christ said, " Do you know all these 
things ?" and the disciples had answered, Yes, 
he added, " Blessed are ye if ye do them." He 
doth not lay the blessing in the knowing of them, 
but in the doing of them. For there is a know- 
ledge that is not attended with doing : Two kinds of 
"He that knoweth his Master's will, ^o^dge 
and doeth it not." A man may know like an 
angel, and yet be no Christian ; therefore your 
sign of it is not true. Indeed, to know is a thing 
that pleaseth talkers and boasters ; but to do, is 
that which pleaseth God. Not that the heart can 
be good without knowledge, for without that the 
heart is naught. There are, therefore, two sorts 



FAITHFUL AND TALKATIVE. 137 

of knowledge, knowledge that resteth in the bare 
speculation of things, and knowledge that is ac- 
companied with the grace of faith and love, which 

True know- puts a man upon doing even the will 
with endeavors, of God from the heart i the first of 
these will serve the talker ; but without the other, 
the true Christian is not content. " Give me un- 
derstanding, and I shall keep thy law ; yea, I 
shall observe it with my whole heart." Psalm 
119:34. 

Talk. You lie at the catch again : this is not 
for edification. 

Faith. Well, if you please, propound another 
sign how this work of grace discovereth itself 
where it is. 

Talk. Not I, for I see we shall not agree. 

Faith. Well, if you will not, will you give me 
leave to do it 1 

Talk. You may use your liberty. 

Faith. A work of grace in the soul discovereth 
itself either to him that hath it, or to standers-by. 

To him that hath it, thus : It gives him convic- 

One good sign tion of sin > especially the defilement 
of grace. f ^j s na tu r e, and the sin of unbelief, 

for the sake of which he is sure to be damned, if 
he findeth not mercy at God's hand, by faith in 
Jesus Christ. This sight and sense of things 
worketh in him sorrow and shame for sin. Psa. 
38 : 18 ; Jer. 31 : 19 ; John 16 : 8 ; Horn. 7 : 24 ; 



138 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Mark 16:16; Gal. 2:16; Rev. 1:6. He find 
eth, moreover, revealed in him the Saviour of the 
world, and the absolute necessity of closing with 
him for life ; at the which he findeth hungerings 
and thirstings after him, to which hungerings, 
etc., the promise is made. Now, according to the 
strength or weakness of his faith in his Saviour, 
so is his joy and peace, so is his love to holiness, 
so are his desires to know him more, and also to 
serve him in this world. But though, I say, it 
discovereth itself thus unto him, yet it is but sel- 
dom that he is able to conclude tliat this is a work 
of grace, because his corruptions now, and his 
abused reason, make his mind to misjudge in this 
matter ; therefore in him that hath this work, there 
is required a very sound judgment, before he can 
with steadiness conclude that this is a work of 
grace. John 16:9; Gal. 2 : 15, 16 ; Acts 4 : 12 ; 
Matt. 5:6; Rev. 21 : 6. 

To others it is thus discovered : 

1. By an experimental confession of his faith in 
Christ. 2. By a life answerable to that confession ; 
to wit, a life of holiness — heart- holiness, family- 
holiness, if he hath a family, and by conversa- 
tion-holiness in the world ; which in the general 
teacheth him inwardly to abhor his sin, and him- 
self for that, in secret; to suppress it in his family, 
and to promote holiness in the world : not by talk 
only, as a hypocrite or talkative person may do, 



FAITHFUL AND TALKATIVE. 139 

but by a practical subjection in faith and love 
to the power of the word. Job 42 : 5, 6 ; Psalm 
50 : 23 ; Ezek. 20 : 43 , Matt. 5:8; John 14:15; 
Rom. 10:10; Ezek.36 : 25 ; Phil. 1 : 27 ; 3 : 17-20. 
And now, sir, as to this brief description of 
the work of grace, and also the discovery of it, 
if you have aught to object, object; if not, then 
give me leave to propound to you a second ques- 
tion. 

Talk. Nay, my part is not now to object, but 
to hear ; let me therefore have your second ques- 
tion. 

Faith. It is this : Do you experience this first 
part of the description of it ; and doth your life 
Another good ana " conversation testify the same ? 
sign of grace. Q r s t a ndeth your religion in word or 
tongue, and not in deed and truth ? Pray, if you 
incline to answer me in this, say no more than 
you know the God above will say Amen to, and 
also nothing but what your conscience can justify 
you in ; for not he that commendeth himself is 
approved, but whom the Lord commendeth. Be- 
sides, to say I am thus and thus, when my conver- 
sation, and all my neighbors, tell me I lie, is great 
wickedness. 

Then Talkative at first began to blush ; but, 
recovering himself, thus he replied: You come 
now to experience, to conscience, and to God ; and 
to appeal to him for justification of what is spoken. 



140 PILU-B-IM'S PROGRESS. 

This kind of discourse I did not expect ; nor arn I 
disposed to give an answer to such Talkative 
questions, because I count not myself Fa'SlfS^ques^ 
bound thereto, unless you take upon tlon - 
you to be a catechizer ; and though you should so 
do, yet I may refuse to make you my judge. But 
I pray, will you tell me why you ask me such 
questions ? 

Faith. Because I saw you forward to talk, and 
because I knew not that you had aught ^^ reason 
else but notion. Besides, to tell you ; u h t y t0 K2 
all the truth, I have heard of you that i uestion - 
you are a man whose religion lies in talk, and that 
your conversation gives this your mouth-profession 
the lie. They say you are a spot Faithful's plain 

~, . , , t • dealing with 

among Christians, and that religion Talkative. 
fareth the worse for your ungodly conversation ; 
that some have already stumbled at your wicked 
ways, and that more are in danger of being de- 
stroyed thereby : your religion, and an ale-house, 
and covetousness, and uncleanness, and swearing, 
and lying, and vain company-keeping, etc., will 
stand together. The proverb is true of you which 
is said of a harlot, to wit, " That she is a shame 
to all women :" so are you a shame to all profes- 
sors. 

Talk. Since you are so ready to take up reports, 
and to judge so rashly as you do, I Talkative hi da 
cannot but conclude you are some Faithful adieu - 



FAITHFUL AND CHRISTIAN. 141 

peevish or melancholy man, not fit to be discoursed 
with ; and so adieu. 

Then up came Christian, and said to his brother, 
1 told you how it would happen ; your words and 
his lusts could not agree. He had rather leave 
your company than reform his life. But he is 
gone, as I said : let him go ; the loss is no man's 

A good rid- but his own. He has saved us the 

trouble of going from him; for he 

continuing, as I suppose he will do, as he is, would 

have been but a blot in our company : besides, the 

apostle says, " From such withdraw thyself." 

Faith. But I am glad we had this little dis- 
course with him ; it may happen that he will think 
of it again : however, I have dealt plainly with 
him, and so am clear of his blood if he perisheth. 

Chr. You did well to talk so plainly to him as 
you did. There is but little of this faithful deal- 
ing with men nowadays, and that makes religion 
to stink so in the nostrils of many, as it doth ; for 
they are these talkative fools, whose religion is 
only in word, and who are debauched and vain in 
their conversation, that, being so much admitted 
into the fellowship of the godly, do puzzle the 
world, blemish Christianity, and grieve the sincere. 
I wish that all men would deal with such as you 
have done ; then should they either be made more 
conformable to religion, or the company of saints 
would be too hot for them. Then did Faithful say, 



142 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

"How Talkative at first lifts up his plumes ! 
How bravely doth he speak ! How he presumes 
To drive down all before him! But so soon 
As Faithful talks of heart-work, like the moon 
That 's past the full, into the wane he goes; 
And so will all but he that heart-work knows." 

Thus they went on, talking of what they had 
seen by the way, and so made that way easy which 
would otherwise no doubt have been tedious to 
them, for now they went through a wilderness. 



TALK WITH EVANGELIST. 143 



THE SIXTH STAGE. 

Now when they were got almost quite out of 
his wilderness, Faithful chanced to cast his eye 
)ack, and espied one coming after them, and he 
mew him. Oh, said Faithful to his brother, who 
somes yonder? Then Christian looked, and said, 
.t is my good friend Evangelist. Aye, and my 
rood friend too, said Faithful, for 't was he that 
;et me on the way to the gate. Now was Evan- 
Evangeiist gelist come up unto them, and thus 

vertakes them. ga ] uted them> 

Evan. Peace be with you, dearly beloved, and 
)eace be to your helpers. 

Chr. Welcome, welcome, my good Evangelist: 
They are glad the sight of thy countenance brings to 

,t the sight of ° J ° 

im. my remembrance thy ancient kindness 

md unwearied labors for my eternal good. 

Faith. And a thousand times welcome, said 
jood Faithful, thy company, sweet Evangelist ; 
low desirable is it to us poor pilgrims ! 

Evan. Then said Evangelist, How hath it fared 
vith you, my friends, since the time of our last 
)arting? "What have you met with, and how 
lave you behaved yourselves? 

Then Christian and Faithful told him of all 
;hings that had happened to them in the way; and 



144 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

how, and with what difficulty they had arrived 
to that place. 

Right glad am I, said Evangelist, not that you 
have met with trials, but that you Hisexhorta- 
have been victors, and for that you tiontothem - 
have, notwithstanding many weaknesses, continu- 
ed in the way to this very day. 

I say, right glad am I of this thing, and that 
for mine own sake and yours : I have sowed, and 
you have reaped ; and the day is coming, when 
"both he that soweth, and they that reap, shall 
rejoice together," John 4: 36; that is, if you hold 
out : " for in due season ye shall reap, if ye faint 
not." Gal. 6 : 9. The crown is before you, and it 
is an incorruptible one ; " so run that ye may ob- 
tain" it. 1 Cor. 9 : 24-27. Some there be that 
set out for this crown, and after they have gone 
far for it, another comes in and takes it from 
them : hold fast, therefore, that you have ; let 
no man take your crown. Rev. 3:11. You are 
not yet out of the gunshot of the devil ; " ye have 
not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin." 
Let the kingdom be always before you, and believe 
steadfastly concerning the things that are invisi- 
ble. Let nothing that is on this side the other 
world get within you. And above all, look well 
to your own hearts and to the lusts thereof; for 
they are " deceitful above all things, and des- 
perately wicked." Set your faces like a flint ; 



EVANGELIST'S EXHORTATIONS. 145 

you have all power in heaven and earth on your 
side. 

Chr. Then Christian thanked him for his ex- 

They do thank hortations ; but told him withal, that 

turn for his ex- 
hortations, they would have him speak farther to 

them, for their help the rest of the way ; and the 

rather, for that they well knew that he was a 

prophet, and could tell them of things that might 

happen unto them, and also how they might 

resist and overcome them. To which request 

Faithful also consented. So Evangelist began as 

followeth. 

Evan. My sons, you have heard in the word 

wSt p ™roub£ °** the truth °f the g° s P el > that y° u 

they shall meet mU st " through much tribulation enter 

■with in Vanity < _ ° 

Fair, and en- into the kingdom of God ;" and again, 

courageth them . , # 

to steadfastness, that " in every city, bonds and afflic- 
tions abide " you ; and therefore you cannot ex- 
pect that you should go long on your pilgrimage 
without them, in some sort or other. You have 
found something of the truth of these testimonies 
upon you already, and more will immediately 
follow : for now, as you see, you are almost out 
of this wilderness, and therefore you will soon 
come into a town that you will by and by see 
before you ; and in that town you will be hardly 
beset with enemies, who will strain hard but they 
will kill you ; and be you sure that one or both of 
you must seal the testimony which you hold, with 

Pii. Prog. 10 



146 PILG-RIM'S PROGRESS. 

blood ; but be you " faithful unto death," and the 
King will give you "a crown of life." He that 
shall die there, although his death will He whose lot 

f it will be there 

be unnatural, and his pain perhaps to suffer, will 

n have the better 

great, he will yet have the better ot of his brother. 
his fellow ; not only because he will be arrived at 
the Celestial City soonest, but because he will 
escape many miseries that the other will meet 
with in the rest of his journey. But when you 
are come to the town, and shall find fulfilled what 
I have here related, then remember your friend, 
and quit yourselves like men, and "commit the 
keeping of your souls to God in well-doing, as 
unto a faithful Creator." 

Then I saw in my dream, that when they were 
gone out of the wilderness, they presently saw a 
town before them, and the name of that town is 
Vanity ; and at the town there is a fair kept, 
called Vanity Fair. It is kept all the year long. 
It beareth the name of Vanity Fair, because the 
town where it is kept is lighter than vanity, Psa. 
62 : 9 ; and also because all that is there sold, or 
that cometh thither, is vanity ; as is the saying of 
the wise, " All that cometh is vanity." Eccl. 
11:8; see also 1 : 2-14 ; 2 : 11-17; Isa. 40: 17. 

This fair is no new-erected business, but a 
thing of ancient standing. I will show The antiquity 
you the original of it. of this fair - 

Almost five thousand years ago there were 



VANITY FAIR. 147 

pilgrims walking to the Celestial City, as these 
two honest persons are : and Beelzebub, Apollyon, 
an- Legion, with their companions, perceiving by 
the path the pilgrims made that their way to the 
city lay through this town of Vanity, they con- 
trived here to set up a fair; a fair wherein should 
be sold all sorts of vanity, and that it should Inst 
all the year long. Therefore, at this fair are all 
The merchan- sucn merchandise sold as houses, lands, 
dise of this fair. trades> p] aces , honors, preferments, 
titles, countries, kingdoms, lusts, pleasures; and 
delights of all sorts, as harlots, wives, husbands, 
children, masters, servants, lives, blood, bodies, 
souls, silver, gold, pearls, precious stones, and 
what not. 

And moreover, at this fair there are at all times 
to be seen jugglings, cheats, games, plays, fools, 
apes, knaves, and rogues, and that of every kind. 

Here are to be seen, too, and that for nothing, 
thefts, murders, adulteries, false-swearers, and that 
of a blood-red color. 

And as in other fairs of less moment there are 
the several rows and streets under their proper 
names, where such and such wares are vended; 
so here, likewise, you have the proper places, 
rows, streets, namely, countries and kingdoms, 
where the wares of this fair are soonest to be 
The streets of found. Here is the Britain Row, the 
this fair. French Row, the Italian Row, the 



148 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Spanish Row, the German Row, where several sorts 
of vanities are to be sold. But, as in other fairs, 
some one commodity is as the chief of all the fair, so 
the ware of Rome and her merchandise is greatly 
promoted in this fair ; only our English nation, 
with some others, have taken a dislike thereat. 

Now, as I said, the way to the Celestial City 
lies just through this town where this lusty fair 
is kept ; and he that would go to the city, and 
yet not go through this town, " must needs go 
out of the world." 1 Cor. 4:10. The Prince 
of princes himself, when here, went Christ went 

through thi8 

through this town to his own country, fair. 
and that upon a fair-day too ; yea, and, as I think, 
it was Beelzebub, the chief lord of this fair, that 
invited him to buy of his vanities, yea, would 
have made him lord of the fair, would he but have 
done him reverence as he went through the town. 
Yea, because he was such a person of honor, 
Beelzebub had him from street to street, and 
showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a 
little time, that he might, if possible, allure that 
blessed One to cheapen and buy some of his 
vanities ; but he had no mind to the Christ bought 

11- ii r i nothing at the 

merchandise, and therefore left the fair. 
town without laying out so much as one farthing 
upon these vanities. Matt. 4 : 1—8 ; Luke 4 : 5-8. 
This fair, therefore, is an ancient thing, of long 
standing, and a very great fair. 



VANITY FAIR. 14y 

Now these pilgrims, as I said, must needs go 
The pilgrims through this fair. Well, so they did ; 

enter the fair. but behold? eyen ag they ente red into 

the fair, all the people in the fair were moved, 
The fair in a and the town itself as it were in a 

hubbub about 

them. hubbub about them, and that for sev- 

eral reasons : For, 

First, the pilgrims were clothed with such kind 
The first cause °f raiment as was diverse from the 

of the hubbub. raiment f any that traded in that 

fair. The people, therefore, of the fair made a 
great gazing upon them : some said they were 
fools; some, they were bedlams ; and some, they 
were outlandish men. Job 12:4; 1 Cor. 4 : 9. 
Secondly, and as they wondered at their ap- 
The second parel, so they did likewise at their 

cause of the • 

nubbub. speech ; for few could understand 

what they said. They naturally spoke the lan- 
guage of Canaan ; but they that kept the fair 
were the men of this world : so that from one end 
of the fair to the other, they seemed barbarians 
each to the other. 1 Cor. 2:7,8. 

Thirdly, but that which did not a little amuse 
Third cause of the merchandisers was, that these pil- 
the hubbub. g r i ms se t very light by all their wares. 
They cared not so much as to look upon them ; and 
if they called upon them to buy, they would put 
their fingers in their ears, and cry, " Turn away 
mine eyes from beholding vanity," Psa. 119: 37, 



150 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

and look upward, signifying that their trade and 
traffic was in heaven. Phil. 3 : 20, 21. 

One chanced, mockingly, beholding the carriage 
of the men, to say unto them, " What will ye buy V 
But they, looking gravely upon him, Fourth cause 
said, « We buy the truth." Prov. 23 : 23. of the hubbub - 
At that there was an occasion taken to despise the 
men the more ; some mocking, some They are mocked. 
taunting, some speaking reproachfully, and some 
calling upon others to smite them. At last, things 
came to a hubbub and great stir in the fair, inso- 
much that all order was confounded. Now was 
word presently brought to the great one of the fair, 
who quickly came down, and deputed some of his 
most trusty friends to take those men into exam- 
ination about whom the fair was almost overturned. 
So the men were brought to examina- ™. „„ „ M ov 

o lhey are ex- 

tion ; and they that sat upon them asked amilied - 
them whence they came, whither they went, and 
what they did there in such an unusual garb. The 
men told them they were pilgrims and They tell who 
strangers in the world, and that they ^Lce™' they 
were going to their own country, which came - 
was the heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 3 1 : 13-16 ; and 
that they had given no occasion to ihe men of the 
town, nor yet to the merchandisers, thus to abuse 
them, and to let them in their journey, except it 
was for that, when one asked them what they would 
buy, they said they would buy the truth. But they 



THE PILGRIMS PERSECUTED. 151 

that were appointed to examine them did not be- 

Th-y are not lieve them to be any other than bedlams 

and mad, or else such as came to put all 

things into a confusion in the fair. Therefore they 

took them and beat them, and besmeared them with 

They are put dirt, and then put them into the cage, 

in the cage. that they m j ght be made ft spectaclc 

to all the men of the fair. There, therefore, they 
lay for some time, and were made the objects of 
any man's sport, or malice, or revenge ; the great 
one of the fair laughing still at all that befell them. 
Their behav- But tne men being patient, and "not 
ior m the cage. ren d er i n g railing for railing, but con- 
trariwise blessing," and giving good words for bad, 
and kindness for injuries done, some men in the 
fair that were more observing and less prejudiced 
than the rest, began to check and blame the baser 
sort for their continual abuses done by them to the 
men. They, therefore, in an angry manner let fly 
at them again, counting them as bad as the men 
in the cage, and telling them that they seemed con- 
federates, and should be made partakers of their 
misfortunes. The others replied that, for aught 
they could see, the men were quiet and sober, and 
intended nobody any harm ; and that there were 
many that traded in their fair that were more wor- 
thy to be put into the cage, yea, and pillory too, 
than were the men that they had abused. Thus, 
after divers words had passed on both sides — the 



152 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

men behaving themselves all the while very wisely 
and soberly before them — they fell to some blows 
among themselves, and did harm one to another. 
Then were these two poor men brought They are made 

the authors ol 

before their examiners again, and were this disturbance. 
charged as being guilty of the late hubbub that 
had been in the fair. So they beat them pitifully, 
and hanged irons upon them, and led They are led 

... . , r . u P an d down 

them in chains up and down the fair, the fair in 

_ , 1 .. , chains, for a ter 

ior an example and terror to others, lest ror to others. 
any should speak in their behalf, or join themselves 
unto them. But Christian and Faithful behaved 
themselves yet more wisely, and received the igno- 
miny and shame that was cast upon them with so 
much meekness and patience, that it won to their 
side, though but few in comparison of the rest, 
several of the men in the fair. This Some men of 

the fair won 

put the other party yet into a greater over to them. 
rage, insomuch that they concluded the death of 
these two men. Wherefore they threatened that 
neither cage nor irons should serve their Their adver- 

, , , i t t t r i saries resolve to 

turn, but that they should die tor the kill them. 
abuse they had done, and for deluding the men of 
the fair. 

Then were they remanded to the cage again, 
until further order should be taken They are again 
with them. So they put them in, and cage, and after- 

!■■./» P . , , waids brought 

made their teet last in the stocks. to trial. 

Here also they called again to mind what they 



FAITHFUL'S TRIAL. 153 

had heard from their faithful friend Evangelist, 
and were the more confirmed in their way and 
sufferings by what he told them would happen to 
them. They also now comforted each other, that 
whose lot it was to suffer, even he should have the 
best of it ; therefore each man secretly wished 
that he might have that preferment. But com- 
mitting themselves to the aL-wise disposal of Him 
that ruleth all things, with much content they 
abode in the condition in which they were, until 
they should be otherwise disposed of. 

Then a convenient time being appointed, they 
brought them forth to their trial, in order to their 
condemnation. "When the time was come, they 
were brought before their enemies and arraigned. 
The judge's name was Lord Hate-good ; their in- 
dictment was one and the same in substance, 
though somewhat varying in form ; the contents 

Their indict- wnere °f was this : " That they were 
ment - enemies to, and disturbers of, the 

trade ; that they had made commotions and divis- 
ions in the town, and had won a party to their 
own most dangerous opinions, in contempt of the 
law of their prince." 

Then Faithful began to answer, that he had 

Faithful an- only set himself against that which 

ewers for him- . „ . . 1 

self. had set itseli against Him that is 

higher than the highest. And, said he, as for dis- 
turbance. I make none, being myself a man of 



154 pilgrim's progress. 

peace : the parties that were won to us, were won 
by beholding our truth and innocence, and they are 
only turned from the worse to the better. And as 
to the king you talk of, since he is Beelzebub, the 
enemy of our Lord, I defy him and all his angels. 

Then proclamation was made, that they that 
had aught to say for their lord the king against 
the prisoner at the bar, should forthwith appear, 
and give in their evidence. So there came in three 
witnesses, to wit, Envy, Superstition, and Pick- 
thank. They were then asked if they knew the 
prisoner at the bar ; and what they had to say for 
their lord the king against him. 

Then stood forth Envy, and said to this effect : 
My lord, I have known this man a long Envy begins. 
time, and will attest upon my oath before this 
honorable bench, that he is — 

Judge. Hold ; give him his oath. 

So they sware him. Then he said, My lord, this 
man, notwithstanding his plausible name, is one 
of the vilest men in our country ; he neither re- 
gardeth prince nor people, law nor custom, but 
doeth all that he can to possess all men with cer- 
tain of his disloyal notions, which he in the gen- 
eral calls principles of faith and holiness. And in 
particular, I heard him once myself affirm, that 
Christianity and the customs of our town of Van- 
ity were diametrically opposite, and could not be 
reconciled. By which saying, my lord, he doth at 




• ■ ■ ■ ^ \\ Pi 




WITNESSES AGAINST FAITHFUL. 155 

once not only condemn all oar laudable doings, but 
us in the doing of them. 

Then did the judge say to him, Hast thou any 
more to say ? 

Envy. My lord, I could say much more, only 1 
would not be tedious to the court. Yet, if need be, 
when the other gentlemen have given in their evi- 
dence, rather than any thing shall be wanting that 
will dispatch him, I will enlarge my testimony 
against him. So he was bid to stand by. 

Then they called Superstition, and bid him look 

Superstition u P on the prisoner. They also asked 
follows. what he could say for their lord the 

king against him. Then they sware him ; so he 
began. 

Super. My lord, I have no great acquaintance 
with this man, nor do I desire to have further 
knowledge of him. However, this I know, that 
he is a very pestilent fellow, from some discourse 
that I had with him the other day, in this town ; 
for then, talking with him, I heard him say that 
our religion was naught, and such by which a man 
could by no means please God. Which saying of 
his, my lord, your lordship very well knows what 
necessarily thence will follow, to wit, that we still 
do worship in vain, are yet in our sins, and finally 
shall be damned : and this is that which I have to 
say. 

Then was Pickthank sworn, and bid say what he 



156 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

knew in the behalf of their lord the king against 
the prisoner at the bar. 

Pick. My lord, and you gentlemen all, this fel- 
low I have known of a long time, and pickthank's 
have heard him speak things that ought testimon y- 
not to be spoken ; for he hath railed on our noble 
prince Beelzebub, and hath spoken contemptibly of 
his honorable friends, whose names are, the Lord 
Old Man, the Lord Carnal Delight, the Sins are all 
Lord Luxurious, the Lord Desire of ones.' 
Vain-Glory, my old Lord Lechery, Sir Having 
Greedy, with all the rest of our nobility : and he 
hath said, moreover, that if all men were of his 
mind, if possible, there is not one of these noble- 
men should have any longer a being in this 
town. Besides, he hath not been afraid to rail 
on you, my lord, who are now appointed to be 
his judge, calling you an ungodly villain, with 
many other such like vilifying terms, with which 
he hath bespattered most of the gentry of our 
town. 

When this Pickthank had told his tale, the judge 
directed his speech to the prisoner at the bar, say- 
ing, Thou runagate, heretic, and traitor, hast thou 
heard what these honest gentlemen have witness- 
ed against thee ? 

Faith. May I speak a few words in my own de- 
fence ? 

Judge. Sirrah, sirrah, thou deservest to live no 



FAITHFUL'S REPLY. 157 

longer, but to be slain immediately upon the place ; 
yet, that all men may see our gentleness towards 
thee, let us hear what thou, vile runagate, hast to 
say. 

Faith. 1. I say then, in answer to what Mr. 
Faithful's de- Envy hath spoken, I never said aught 

fence of himself. but thig . ^ what ^^ QI lawgj Qr 

custom, or people, were flat against the word of 
God, are diametrically opposite to Christianity. If 
I have said amiss in this, convince me of my error, 
and I am ready here before you to make my re- 
cantation. 

2. As to the second, to wit, Mr. Superstition, 
and his charge against me, I said only this: that 
in the worship of God there is required a divine 
faith; but there can be no divine faith without a 
divine revelation of the will of God. Therefore, 
whatever is thrust into the worship of God that is 
not agreeable to divine revelation, cannot be done 
but by a human faith ; which faith will not be 
profitable to eternal life. 

3. As to what Mr. Pickthank hath said, I say — 
avoiding terms, as that I am said to rail, and the 
like — that the prince of this town, with all the 
rabblement, his attendants, by this gentleman 
named, are more fit for a being in hell than in 
this town and country. And so the Lord have 
mercy upon me. 

Then the judge called to the jury, who all this 



158 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

while stood by to hear and observe, Gentlemen 
of the iury, you see this man about The judge's 

J J J sjeech to the 

whom so great an uproar hath been jury. 
made in this town; you have also heard what 
these worthy gentlemen have witnessed against 
him; also, you have heard his reply and confes- 
sion : it lieth now in your breasts to hang him, or 
save his life ; but yet I think meet to instruct you 
in our law. 

There was an act made in the days of Pharaoh 
the Great, servant to our prince, that lest those 
of a contrary religion should multiply and grow 
too strong for him, their males should be thrown 
into the river. Exod. 1 : 22. There was also an 
act made in the days of Nebuchadnezzar the 
Great, another of his servants, that whoever would 
not fall down and worship his golden image, should 
be thrown into a fiery furnace. Dan. 3 : 6. There 
was also an act made in the days of Darius, that 
whoso for some time called upon any god but him, 
should be cast into the lions' den. Dan. 6:7. 
Now the substance of these laws this rebel has 
broken, not only in thought, which is not to be 
borne, but also in word and deed: which must, 
therefore, needs be intolerable. 

For that of Pharaoh, his law was made upon a 
supposition to prevent mischief, no crime being 
yet apparent ; but here is a crime apparent. Foi 
the second and third, you see he disputeth against 



FAITHFUL CONDEMNED. 159 

our religion ; and for the treason that he hath al- 
ready confessed, he deserveth to die the death. 

Then went the jury out, whose names were Mr. 
Blindman, Mr. No-good, Mr. Malice, Mr. Love- 
lust, Mr. Live-loose, Mr. Heady, Mr. Highmind, 
Mr. Enmity, Mr. Liar, Mr. Cruelty, Mr. Hate- 
light, and Mr. Implacable ; who every one gave 
in his private verdict against him among them- 
selves, and afterwards unanimously concluded to 
bring him in guilty before the judge. And first 
among themselves, Mr. Blindman, the foreman, 
said, I see clearly that this man is a heretic. 
Then said Mr. No-good, Away with such a fellow 
from the earth. Aye, said Mr. Malice, for I hate 
the very looks of him. Then said Mr. Love-lust, 
I could never endure him. Nor I, said Mr. Live- 
loose, for he would always be condemning my 
way. Hang him., hang him, said Mr. Heady. A 
sorry scrub, said Mr. Highmind. My heart riseth 
against him, said Mr. Enmity. He is a rogue, 
said Mr. Liar. Hanging is too good for him, said 
Mr. Cruelty. Let us dispatch him out of the way, 
said Mr. Hate-light. Then said Mr. Implacable, 
Might I have all the world given me, I could not 
They conclude be reconciled to him ; therefore let us 

to bring him in . . . 

guilty of death, forthwith bring him in guilty of death. 
And so they did; therefore he was presently 
condemned to be had from the place where he 
was to the place from whence he came, and there 



160 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

to be put to the most cruel death that could be 
invented. 

They therefore brought him out, to do with him 
according to their law ; and first they scourged 
him, then they buffeted him, then they lanced 
his flesh with knives ; after that they stoned him 
with stones, then pricked him with their swords ; 
and last of all, they burned him to The cruel death 
ashes at the stake. Thus came Faith- of FaithfuL 
ful to his end. 

Now I saw that there stood behind the multi- 
tude a chariot and a couple of horses waiting for 
Faithful, who, so soon as his adversaries had dis- 
patched him, was taken up into it, and straight- 
way was carried up through the clouds with 
sound of trumpet, the nearest way to the Celestial 
gate. But as for Christian, he had some respite, 
and was remanded back to prison ; so christian is 
he there remained for a space. But stl11 a P nsoner - 
He who overrules all things, having the power of 
their rage in his own hand, so wrought it about, 
that Christian for that time escaped them, and 
went his way. 

And as he ■tfent he sung, saying, 
" Well, Faithful, thou hast faithfully profest 
Unto thy Lord, with whom thou shalt be blest, 
When faithless ones, with all their vain delights, 
Are crying out under their hellish plights : 
Sing, Faithful, sing, and let thy name survive ; 
For though they killed thee, thou art yet alive." 



HOPEFUL JOINS CHRISTIAN. 161 



THE SEVENTH STAGE. 

Now I saw in my dream, that Christian went 
Christian has not forth alone ; for there was one 

another com- , tt i» i i_ « 

panion. whose name was Hoperul — being so 

made by the beholding of Christian and Faithful 
in their words and behavior, in their sufferings at 
the fair — who joined himself unto him, and en- 
tering into a brotherly covenant, told him that he 
would be his companion. Thus one died to bear 
testimony to the truth, and another rises out of 
his ashes to be a companion with Christian in his 
pilgrimage. This Hopeful also told Christian that 
There are there were many more of the men in 
more of the men tn f j tnat wou i<i take their time 

of the fair will 

follow. an( j f n ow a fter. 

So I saw, that quickly after they were got out 
of the fair, they overtook one that was going be- 
They overtake f° re them, whose name was By-ends ; 
By-ends. g0 t h ev sa id to him, What countryman, 

sir ? and how far go you this way ? He told them 
that he came from the town of Fair-speech, and 
he was going to the Celestial City ; but told them 
not his name. 

From Fair-speech ? said Christian ; is there any 
good that lives there 1 Prov. 26 : 25. 

By. Yes, said By-ends, I hope so. 

Pil. Prog. ] \ 



162 PILQUIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr Pray, sir, what may I call you ? said 
Christian. 

By. I am a stranger to you, and you to me : if 
you be going this way, I shall be glad By . ends loath 
of your company; if not, I must be t0 teil hls name " 
content. 

Chr. This town of Fair-speech, said Christian, 
I have heard of; and, as I remember, they say it's 
a wealthy place. 

By. Yes, I will assure you that it is ; and I 
have very many rich kindred there. 

Chr. Pray, who are your kindred there, if a 
man may be so bold ? 

By. Almost the whole town ; and in particular 
my Lord Turn-about, my Lord Time-server, my 
Lord Fair-speech, from whose ancestors that town 
first took its name ; also Mr. Smooth-man, Mr. 
Facing-both-ways, Mr. Any-thing ; and the parson 
of our parish, Mr. Two-tongues, was my mother's 
own brother, by father's side ; and, to tell you the 
truth, I am become a gentleman of good quality ; 
yet my great-grandfather was but a waterman, 
looking one way and rowing another, and I got 
most of my estate by the same occupation. 

Chr. Are you a married man ? 

By. Yes, and my wife is a very virtuous woman, 
the daughter of a virtuous woman : The wife and 

i t * ti • • i -1 - i kindred of By- 

sns was my Lady Jbeigning s daughter ; ends. 
therefore she came of a very honorable family, and 



DISCOURSE WITH BY-ENDS. 163 

is arrived to such a pitch of breeding, that she 

knows how to carry it to all, even to prince and 

peasant. 'T is true, we somewhat differ in religion 

Where By- fr° m those of the stricter sort, yet but 

othe'rfS^rdi- in two sma11 P oints : First, we never 
ion - strive against wind and tide. Secondly, 

we are always most zealous when Religion goes in 
his silver slippers ; we love much to walk with 
him in the street, if the sun shines and the people 
applaud him. 

Then Christian stepped a little aside to his fellow 
Hopeful, saying, It runs in my mind that this is one 
By-ends of Fair-speech; and if it be he, we have 
as very a knave in our company as dwelleth in all 
these parts. Then said Hopeful, Ask him ; me- 
thinks he should not be ashamed of his name. So 
Christian came up with him again, and said, Sir, 
you talk as if you knew something more than all 
the world doth ; and, if I take not my mark amiss, 
I deem I have half a guess of you. Is not your 
name Mr. By-ends of Fair-speech ? 

By. This is not my name, but indeed it is a nick- 
name that is given me by some that cannot abide 
me, and I must be content to bear it as a reproach, 
as other good men have born theirs before me. 

Chr. But did you never give an occasion to men 
to call you by this name ? 

By. Never, never ! The worst that ever I did 
to give them an occasion to give me this name 



164 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

was, that I had always the luck to jump in my 
judgment with the present way of the How By . ends 
times, whatever it was, and my chance got his name. 
was to get thereby : but if things are thus cast 
upon me, let me count them a blessing ; but 
let not the malicious load me therefore with re- 
, proach. 

Chr. I thought, indeed, that you were the man 
that I heard of; and to tell you what I think, I 
fear this name belongs to you more properly than 
you are willing we should think it doth. 

By. Well, if you will thus imagine, I cannot help 
it ; you shall find me a fair company- He desires to 

i .r. ... ... . . keep company 

keeper, it you will still admit me your with Christian. 
associate. 

Chr. If you will go with us, you must go against 
wind and tide ; the which, I perceive, is against 
your opinion : you must also own Religion in his 
rags, as well as when in his silver slippers ; and 
stand by him, too, when bound in irons, as well as 
when he walketh the streets with applause. 

By. You must not impose, nor lord it over my 
faith ; leave me to my liberty, and let me go with 
you. 

Ohr. Not a step further, unless you will do, in 
what I propound, as we. 

Then said By-ends, I shall never desert my old 
principles, since they are harmless and profitable. 
If I may not go with you, I must do as I did before 



BY-ENDS' COMPANIONS. 165 

you overtook me, even go by myself, until some 
By-ends and overtake me that will be glad of my 
they part. company. 

Now I saw in my* dream, that Christian and 
Hopeful forsook him, and kept their distance be- 
fore him ; but one of them looking back, saw three 
men following Mr. By-ends ; and behold, as they 
came up with him, he made them a very low 
congee ; and they also gave him a compliment. 
The men's names were, Mr. Hold-the-world, Mr. 

Hehasnew Money-love, and Mr. Save-all, men 
companions. that Mr B y . enc i s had formerly been 

acquainted with ; for in their minority they were 
school-fellows, and were taught by one Mr. Gripe- 
man, a schoolmaster in Lovegain, which is a 
market-town in the county of Coveting, in the 
north. This schoolmaster taught them the art of 
getting, either by violence, cozenage, flattering, 
lying, or by putting on a guise of religion; and 
these four gentlemen had attained much of the art 
of their master, so that they could each of them 
have kept such a school themselves. 

Well, when they had, as I said, thus saluted 
each other, Mr. Money-love said to Mr. By-ends, 
Who are they upon the road before us 1 for Chris- 
tian and Hopeful were yet within view. 

By. They are a couple of far-countrymen, that. 
By " e f ( lu ch ^i" after their mode, are going on pilgrim- 

acter of the pil- ' © o r o 

grims. age. 



166 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Money. Alas, why did they not stay, that we 
might have had their good company? for they, 
and we, and you, sir, I hope, are all going on pil- 
grimage. • 

By. We are so, indeed ; hut the men before us 
are so rigid, and love so much their own notions, 
and do also so lightly esteem the opinions of others, 
that let a man be ever so godly, yet if he jumps 
not with them in all things, they thrust him quite 
out of their company. 

Save. That is bad ; but we read of some that 
are righteous overmuch, and such men's rigidness 
prevails with them to judge and condemn all but 
themselves. But I pray, what, and how many, 
were the things wherein you differed ? 

By. Why, they, after their headstrong manner, 
conclude that it is their duty to rush on their jour- 
ney all weathers ; and I am for waiting for wind 
and tide. • They are for hazarding all for God at a 
clap ; and I am for taking all advantages to secure 
my life and estate. They are for holding their 
notions, though all other men be against them ; 
but I am for religion in what and so far as the 
times and my safety will bear it. They are for 
Religion when in rags and contempt ; but I am for 
him when he walks in his silver slippers, in the 
sunshine, and with applause. 

Hold-the-World. Aye, and hold you there still, 
good Mr. By-ends ; for, for my part, I can count 



BY-ENDS' COMPANIONS. 167 

him but a fool, that having- the liberty to keep 
what he has, shall be so unwise as to lose it. 
Let us be wise as serpents. It is best to make 
hay while the sun shines. You see how the bee 
lieth still in winter, and bestirs her only when 
she can have profit with pleasure. God sends 
sometimes rain, and sometimes sunshine ; if they 
be such fools as to go through the first, yet let us 
be content to take fair weather along with us. 
For my part, I like that religion best that will 
stand with the security of God's good blessings 
unto us; for who can imagine, that is ruled by 
his reason, since God has bestowed upon us the 
good things of this life, but that he would have 
us keep them for his sake ? Abraham and Solo- 
mon grew rich in religion ; and Job says, that a 
good man shall lay up gold as dust ; but he must 
not be such as the men before us, if they be as 
you have described them. 

Save. I think that we are all agreed in this 
matter ; and therefore there needs no more words 
about it. 

Money. No, there needs no more words about 
this matter, indeed ; for he that believes neither 
Scripture nor reason — and you see we have both 
on our side — neither knows his own liberty nor 
seeks his own safety. 

By. My brethren, we are, as you see, going all 
on pilgrimage ; and for our better diversion from 



168 ' PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

things that are bad, give me leave to propound 
unto you this question : 

Suppose a man, a minister, or a tradesman, etc., 
should have an advantage lie before him to get 
the good blessings of this life, yet so as that he 
an by no means come by them, except, in appear- 
ance at least, he becomes extraordinarily zealous 
in some points of religion that he meddled not with 
before ; may he not use this means to attain his 
end, and yet be a right honest man ? 

Money. I see the bottom of your question ; and 
with these gentlemen's good leave, I will endeavor 
to shape you an answer. And first, to speak to 
your question as it concerneth a minister himself: 
suppose a minister, a worthy man, possessed but 
of a very small benefice, and has in his eye a 
greater, more fat and plump by far ; he has also 
now an opportunity of getting it, yet so as by being 
more studious, by preaching more frequently and 
zealously, and, because the temper of the people 
requires it, by altering of some of his principles ; 
for my part, I see no reason why a man may not 
do this, provided he has a call, aye, and more a 
great deal besides, and yet be an honest man 
For why ? 

1. His desire of a greater benefice is lawful: 
this cannot be contradicted, since it is set before 
him by Providence ; so then he may get it if he 
can, making no question for conscience' sake. 



BY-ENDS' COMPANIONS. 169 

2. Besides, his desire after that benefice makes 
him more studious, a more zealous preacher, etc., 
and so makes him a better man, yea, makes him 
better improve his parts, which is according- to the 
mind of God. 

3. Now, as for his complying with the tempei 
of his people, by deserting, to serve them, some of 
his principles, this argueth, 1. That he is of a self- 
denying temper, 2. Of a sweet and winning de- 
portment, and, 3. So more fit for the ministerial 
function. 

4. I conclude, then, that a minister that changes 
a small for a great, should not, for so doing, be 
judged as covetous ; but rather, since he is im- 
proved in his parts and industry thereby, be counted 
as one that pursues his call, and the opportunity 
put into his hand to do good. 

And now to the second part of the question, 
which concerns the tradesman you mentioned. 
Suppose such an one to have but a poor employ in 
the world, but by becoming religious he may mend 
his market, perhaps get a rich wife, or more and 
far better customers to his shop ; for my part, I 
see no reason but this may be lawfully done. 
For why ? 

1. To become religious is a virtue, by what 
means soever a man becomes so. 

2. Nor is it unlawful to get a rich wife, or more 
custom to my shop. 



170 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

3. Besides, the man that gets these by becom- 
ing religious, gets that which is good of them that 
are good, by becoming good himself; so then here 
is a good wife, and good customers, and good gain, 
and all these by becoming religious, which is good : 
therefore, to become religious to get all these is 
a good and profitable design. 

This answer, thus made by Mr. Money-love to 
Mr. By-ends' question, was highly applauded by 
them all ; wherefore they concluded, upon the 
whole, that it Avas most wholesome and advanta- 
geous. And because, as they thought, no man 
was able to contradict it ; and because Christian 
and Hopeful were yet within call, they jointly 
agreed to assault them with the question as soon 
as they overtook them ; and the rather, because 
they had opposed Mr. By-ends before. So they 
called after them, and they stopped and stood 
still till they came up to them ; but they con- 
cluded, as they went, that not Mr. By-ends, but 
old Mr. Hold-the-world should propound the ques- 
tion to them, because, as they supposed, their 
answer to him would be without the remainder 
of that heat that was kindled betwixt Mr. By-ends 
and them at their parting a little before. 

So they came up to each other, and after a short 
salutation, Mr. Hold-the-world propounded the 
question to Christian and his fellow, and then bade 
them to answer if they could. 



CHRISTIAN'S ANSWER. 171 

Then said Christian, Even a babe in religion 
may answer ten thousand such questions. For if 
it be unlawful to follow Christ for loaves, as it is, 
John 6 : 26 ; how much more abominable is it to 
make of him and religion a stalking-horse to get 
and enjoy the world ! Nor do we find any other 
than heathens, hypocrites, devils, and wizards, that 
are of this opinion. 

1. Heathens : for when Hamor and Sheehem 
had a mind to the daughter and cattle of Jacob, 
and saw that there was no way for them to come 
at them but by being circumcised, they said to 
their companions, If every male of us be circum- 
cised, as they are circumcised, shall not their cat- 
tle, and their substance, and every beast of theirs 
be ours ? Their daughters and their cattle were 
that which they sought to obtain, and their re- 
ligion the stalking-horse they made use of to 
come at them. Read the whole story, Genesis 
34 : 20-24. 

2. The hypocritical Pharisees were also of this 
religion : long prayers were their pretence, but to 
get widows' houses was their intent ; and greater 
damnation was from God their judgment. Luke 
20:40,47. 

3. Judas the devil was also of this religion: 
he was religious for the bag, that he might be 
possessed of what was put therein ; but he was 
lost, cast away, and the very son of perdition. 



172 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

4. Simon the wizard was of this religion too : 
for he would have had the Holy Ghost, that he 
might have got money therewith ; and his sen- 
tence from Peter's mouth was according. Acts 
8 : 19-22. 

5. Neither will it go out of my mind, but that 
that man who takes up religion for the world, 
will throw away religion for the world ; for so 
surely as Judas designed the world in becoming 
religious, so surely did he also sell religion and his 
Master for the same. To answer the question, 
therefore, affirmatively, as I perceive you have 
done, and to accept of, as authentic, such answer, 
is heathenish, hypocritical, and devilish ; and your 
reward will be according to your works. 

Then they stood staring one upon another, but 
had not wherewith to answer Christian. Hopeful 
also approved of the soundness of Christian's an- 
swer ; so there was a great silence among them. 
Mr. By-ends and his company also staggered and 
kept behind, that Christian and Hopeful might 
outgo them. Then said Christian to his fellow, 
If these men cannot stand before the sentence of 
men, what will they do with the sentence of God? 
And if they are mute when dealt with by vessels 
of clay, what will they do when they shall be 
rebuked by the flames of a devouring fire 1 

Then Christian and Hopeful outwent them again, 
and went till they came at a delicate plain, called 



LUCRE HILL. 173 

Ease, where they went with much content ; but that 
The ease that plain was but narrow, so they were 
SfSfi". fa «* quickly got over it. Now at the farther 
Ufe - side of that plain was a little hill, 

called Lucre, and in that hill a silver mine, which 
some of them that had formerly gone that way, 
because of the rarity of it, had turned aside to 
see ; but going too near the brim of the pit, the 
Lucre hill a ground, being deceitful under them, 

dangerous hill, fa^ an( j they were glain . gome a j g0 

had been maimed there, and could not, to their 
dying day be their own men again. 
Demas at the Then I saw in my dream that a lit- 

hill Lucre. Ue off the roadj ^^ against the sil . 

ver mine, stood Demas, gentleman-like, to call 
He calls to passengers to come and see ; who said 

HopSuUocome to Christian and his fellow, Ho! turn 

to him. aside hither, and I will show you a 

thing. 

Chr. What thing so deserving as to turn us out 

of the way to see it ? 

Demas. Here is a silver mine, and some digging 

in it for treasure ; if you will come, with a little 

pains you may richly provide for yourselves. 

H^efui tempt- Hope. Then said Hopeful, Let us 

•d to go, but 
Christian holds g° See - 

him back. Chr Not I, said Christian : I have 

heard of this place before now, and how many 
there have been slain ; and besides, that treasure 



174 PILG-RIM'S PK.OG-RESS. 

is a snare to those that seek it, for it hindereth 
them in their pilgrimage. 

Then Christian called to Demas, saying, Is not 
the place dangerous ? Hath it not hindered many 
in their pilgrimage ? Hosea 9:6. 

Demas. Not very dangerous, except to those 
that are careless. But withal he blushed as he 
spoke. 

Che. Then said Christian to Hopeful, Let us 
not stir a step, but still keep on our way. 

Hope. I will warrant you, when By-ends comes 
up, if he hath the same invitation as we, he will 
turn in thither to see. 

Chr. No doubt thereof, for his principles lead 
him that way, and a hundred to one but he dies 
there. 

Demas. Then Demas called again, saying, But 
will vou not come over and see ? 

Chr. Then Christian roundly answered, saying, 
Demas, thou art an enemy to the right ways of 
the Lord of this way, and hast been already con- 
demned for thine own turning aside, by one of his 
Majesty's judges, 2 Tim. 4:10; and why seekest 
thou to bring us into the like condemnation ? Be- 
sides, if we at all turn aside, our Lord the King 
will certainly hear thereof, and will there put ug 
to shame, where we would stand with boldness 
before him. 

Demas cried again, that he also was one of their 



BY-ENDS JOINS DEMAS. 175 

fraternity ; and that if they would tarry a little, 
he also himself would walk with them. 

Chr. Then said Christian, What is thy name ? 
Is it not the same by which I have called thee ? 

Demas. Yes, my name is Demas ; I am the son 
of Abraham. 

Chr. I know you : Gehazi was your great-grand- 
father, and Judas your father, and you have trod 
in their steps ; it is but a devilish prank that 
thou usest : thy father was hanged for a traitor, 
and thou deservest no better reward. 2 Kin^s, 
5 : 20-27 ; Matt. 26 : 14, 15 ; 27 : 3-5. Assure 
thyself, that when we come to the King, we will 
tell him of this thy behavior. Thus they went 
their way. 

By this time By-ends and his companions were 

come again within sight, and they at the first beck 

By-ends goes went over to Demas. Now, whether 

oWtoDemt,. they feU ^ th(J pit by J ooking oyer 

the brink thereof, or whether they went down to 
dig, or whether they were smothered in the bot- 
tom by the damps that commonly rise of these 
things, I am not certain ; but this I observed, that 
they were never again seen in the way. Then 
sung Christian, 

" By-ends and silver Demas both agree ; 
One calls, the other runs, that he may be 
A sharer in his lucre ; so these two 
Take up in thi3 world, and no further go." 



176 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Now I saw that just on the other side of this 
plain the pilgrims came to a place where stood 
an old monument, hard by the high- They see a 

• , , • r , . , , strange monu- 

way side, at the sight oi which they ment. 
were both concerned, because of the strangeness 
of the form thereof; for it seemed to them as if 
it had been a woman transformed into the shape 
of a pillar. Here, therefore, they stood looking 
and looking upon it, but could not for a time tell 
what they should make thereof. At last Hopeful 
espied, written above upon the head thereof, a 
writing in an unusual hand ; but he being no 
scholar, called to Christian, for he was learned, 
to see if he could pick out the meaning : so he 
came, and after a little laying of letters together, 
he found the same to be this, " Remember Lot's 
wife." So he read it to his fellow ; after which 
they both concluded that that was the pillar of 
salt into which Lot's wife was turned, for her 
looking back with a covetous heart when she was 
gt)ing from Sodom for safety. Gen. 19 : 26. Which 
sudden and amazing sight gave them occasion for 
this discourse. 

Chr. Ah, my brother, this is a seasonable sight: 
it came opportunely to us after the invitation which 
Demas gave us to come over to view the hill Lucre ; 
and had we gone over, as he desired us, and as 
thou wast inclined to do, my brother, we had, for 
aught I know, been made, like this woman, a 



THE PILLAR OF SALT. 177 

spectacle for those that shall come after to be- 
hold. 

Hope. I am sorry that I was so foolish, and am 
made to wonder that I am not now as Lot's wife ; 
for wherein was the difference betwixt her sin 
and mine ? She only looked back, and I had a 
desire to go see. Let grace be adored, and let nie 
be ashamed that ever such a thing should be in 
my heart. 

Chr. Let us take notice of what we see here, 
for our help for time to come. This woman escaped 
one judgment, for she fell not by the destruction 
of Sodom ; yet she was destroyed by another, ai 
we see : she is turned into a pillar of salt. 

Hope. True, and she may be to us both caution 
and example : caution, that we should shun her 
sin ; or a sign of what judgment will overtake 
such as shall not be prevented by this caution : 
so Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, with the two hun- 
dred and fifty men that perished in their sin, did 
also become a sign or example to others to be- 
ware. Num. 16:31, 32; 26:9, 10. But above 
all, I muse at one thing, to wit, how Demas and 
his fellows can stand so confidently yonder to look 
for that treasure, which this woman but for look- 
ing behind her after — for we read not that she 
stepped one foot out of the way — was turned into 
a pillar of salt ; especially since the judgment 
which overtook her did make her an example 
\ ■•■ - ] 2 



173 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

within sight of where they are ; for they cannot 
choose but see her, did they but lift up their 
eyes. 

Chr. It is a thing to be wondered at, and il 
argueth that their hearts are grown desperate in 
the case ; and I cannot tell who to compare them 
to so fitly, as to them that pick pockets in the pres- 
ence of the judge, or that will cut purses undei 
the gallows. It is said of the men of Sodom, that 
they were " sinners exceedingly," because they 
were sinners " before the Lord," that is, in his 
eyesight, and notwithstanding the kindnesses that 
he had showed them ; for the land of Sodom was 
now like the garden of Eden heretofore. Gen. 
13 : 10, 13. This, therefore, provoked him the 
more to jealousy, and made their plague as hot as 
the fire of the Lord out of heaven could make it. 
And it is most rationally to be concluded, that 
such, even such as these are, that shall sin in the 
sight, yea, and that too in despite of such exam- 
ples that are set continually before them, to cau- 
tion them to the contrary, must be partakers of 
severest judgments. 

Hope. Doubtless thou hast said the truth; but 
what a mercy is it that neither thou, but especially 
I, am not made myself this example ! This min- 
istereth occasion to us to thank God, to fear before 
him, and always to remember Lot's wife. 

I saw then that they went on their way to a 



THE RIVER OF LI*E. 179 

pleasant river, which David the king called " the 

a river. river of God;" but John, " the rivei 

of the water of life." Psa. 65 : 9 ; Rev. 22 : 1 ; 

Ezek. 47 : 1-9. Now their way lay just upon the 

bank of this river; here, therefore, Christian and 

his companion walked with great delight ; they 

drank also of the water of the river, which was 

pleasant and enlivening to their weary spirits. 

Besides, on the banks of this river, on either side, 

Trees by the were green trees with all manner of 

fruit ; and the leaves they ate to pre* 

The fruit and vent surfeits, and other dieases that 

leaves of the 

trees. are incident to those that heat their 

blood by travel. On either side of the river 

Ameadow, in -was also a meadow, curiously beauti- 

which they lie , J 

down to sleep, ficd with lilies ; and it was green all 
the year long. In this meadow they lay down 
and slept, for here they might lie down safely. 
Psa. 23 : 2; Isa. 14 : 30. When they awoke they 
gathered again of the fruit of the trees, and drank 
again of the water of the river, and then lay down 
again to sleep. Thus they did several days and 
nights. Then they sung, 

" Behold ye how these crystal streams do glide, 
To comfort pilgrims by the highway side. 
The meadows green, besides their fragrant smell, 
Yield dainties for them; and he wh? can tell 
What pleasant fruit, yea, leaves these trees do yield, 
Will soon sell all, that he may buy this field." 



180 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

So when they were disposed to go on — for they 
were not as yet at their journey's end — they ate 
and drank, and departed. 

Now I beheld in my dream that they had not 
journeyed far, but the river and the way for a 
time parted, at which they were not a little sorry ; 
yet they durst not go out of the way. Now the 
way from the river was rough, and their feet ten- 
der by reason of their travels ; so the souls of the 
pilgrims were much discouraged because of the 
way. Num. 21:4. Wherefore, still as they went 
on they wished for a better way. Now, a little 
before them there was on the left hand of the 
road a meadow, and a stile to go over By-path meadow. 
into it, and that meadow is called By-path mead- 
ow. Then said Christian to his fellow, If this 
meadow lieth along by our wayside, let 's go over 
into it. Then he went to the stile to see, and 
behold a path lay along by the way on the other 
side of the fence. It is according to One tempta- 

. , . , ~, . . , tion makes way 

my wish, said Christian; here is the for another. 
easiest going ; come, good Hopeful, and let us go 
over. 

Hope. But how if this path should lead us out 
of the way ? 

Chr. That is not likely, said the other. Look, 
doth it not go along by the wayside ? Strong Chris . 
So Hopeful, being persuaded by his tian f may lead 

x <=> r j weak ones out 

fellow, went after him over the stile, of the way. 



BY-PATH MEADOW. 181 

"W hen they were gone over, and were got into 
the path, they found it very easy for their feet; 
and withal, they looking before them, espied a 
man walking as they did, and his name was Vain- 
Confidence ; so they called after him, and asked 
him whither that way led. He said, To the Ce- 
lestial gate. Look, said Christian, did not I tell 
See what it y ou so • by this you may see we are 
g SnTfSU ri e ht - So the y followed, and he went 

strangers. before them But behold the night 

came on, and it grew very dark ; so that they 
that went behind lost the sight of him that went 
before. 

He therefore that went before, Vain-Confidence 
a pit to catch by name, not seeing the wav before 

the vain-glori- ■, . r . . 

ousin. him, fell into a deep pit, which was 

on purpose there made by the prince of those 
grounds to catch vain-glorious fools withal, and 
was dashed in pieces with his fall. Isa. 9 : 1G. 

Now, Christian and his fellow heard him fall. 
So they called to know the matter, but there was 
none to answer, only they heard a groaning. Then 
said Hopeful, Where are we now ? Then was his 
fellow silent, as mistrusting that he had led him 
out of the way ; and now it began to rain and 
thunder and lighten in a most dreadful manner, 
and the water rose amain. 

Then Hopeful groaned in himself, saying, Oh, 
that I had kept on my way. 



182 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

CHR. Who COuld have thought that Reasoningbe- 
.,. ,i i tit it r> i tween Christian 

this path should have led us out ot the and Hopeful. 
way ? 

Hope. I was afraid on 't at the very first, and 
therefore gave you that gentle caution. I would 
have spoken plainer, but that you are older than I. 

Chr. Good brother, be not offended ; I am sorry 
I have brought thee out of the way, and that I 
have put thee into such imminent dan- Christian's 

. repentance for 

ger. Pray, my brother, forgive me ; I leading his bro- 

.. - , r ... ther out of the 

did not do it oi an evil intent. way. 

Hope. Be comforted, my brother, for I forgive 
thee ; and believe, too, that this shall be for our 
good. 

Chr. I am glad I have with me a merciful 
brother: but we must not stand here; let us try 
to go back again. 

Hope. But, good brother, let me go before. 

Chr. No, if you please, let me go first, that if 
there be any danger, I may be first therein, because 
by my means we are both gone out of the way. 

Hope. No, said Hopeful, you shall not go first, 
for your mind being troubled may lead you out of 
the way again. Then for their encouragement 
they heard the voice of one saying, " Let thy 
heart be toward the highway, even the way that 
thou wentest: turn again." Jer. 31 : 21. But by 
this time the waters were greatly risen, by reason 
of which the way of going back was very danger- 



GIANT DESPAIR, 



183 



ous. Then I thought that it is easier going out of 
the way when we are in, than going in when we 
are out. Yet they adventured to go back ; but it was 

They are in so dark, and the flood was so high, that 

ing g a8°they W go in tlleir £ oin S Dac k they had like to 

have been drowned nine or ten times. 

Neither could they, with all the skill they had, 
get again to the style that night Wherefore at 
tLe T gr y ound e s P 5 last ' luting under a little shelter, 
Giant Despair, they sat down there till the day broke ; 
but being weary, they fell asleep. Now there 
was, not far from the place where they lay, a cas- 
tle, called Doubting Castle, the owner whereof was 
Giant Despair, and it was in his grounds they now 
were sleeping: wherefore he, getting up in the 
morning early, and walking up and down in his 
fields, caught Christian and Hopeful asleep in his 
grounds. Then with a grim and surly voice he 
bade them awake, and asked them whence they 
were, and what they did in his grounds. They 
told him they were pilgrims, and that they had 
lost their way. Then said the giant, You have this 
in H h e i s fin gr S ound" ni S ht tres P as *ed on me by trampling 

t^ dca Dou S b[ing m and ] y in ° on m y g ro «nds, and 
Castle. therefore you must go along with me. 

So they were forced to go, because he was stron- 
ger than they. They also had but little to say, 
for they knew themselves in a fault. The giant, 
therefore, drove them before him, and put them 



184 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

into his castle, into a very dark dun- The grievous- 

ness of their im- 

geon, nasty and stinking to the spirits prisonment. 
of those two men. Here, then, they lay from 
Wednesday morning till Saturday night, without 
one bit of bread or drop of drink, or light, or any to 
ask how they did ; they were, therefore, here in evil 
case, and were far from friends and acquaintance. 
Psa. 88 : 18. Now in this place Christian had double 
sorrow, because it was through his unadvised coun- 
sel that they were brought into this distress. 

Now Giant Despair had a wife, and her name 
was Diffidence : so when he was gone to bed he 
told his wife what he had done, to wit, that he had 
taken a couple of prisoners, and cast them into his 
dungeon for trespassing on his grounds. Then he 
asked her also what he had best do further to 
them. So she asked him what they were, whence 
they came, and whither they were bound, and he 
told her. Then she counselled him, that when he 
arose in the morning he should beat them without 
mercy. So when he arose, he getteth him a griev- 
ous crab-tree cudgel, and goes down into the dun- 
geon to them, and there first falls to rating of them 
as if they were dogs, although they gave him 
never a word of distaste. Then he 0n Thursday 
falls upon them, and beats them fear- ? ia ; ut Des pa ir 

•t beats his pris- 

fully, in such sort that they were not oners - 

able i.o help themselves, or to turn them upon the 

floor This done, he withdraws and leaves them 



GIANT DESPAIR. 185 

there to condole their misery, and to mourn under 
their distress : so all that day they spent their time 
in nothing but sighs and bitter lamentations. The 
next night, she, talking with her husband further 
about them, and understanding that they "were yet 
alive, did advise him to counsel them to make 
away with themselves. So when morning was 
come, he goes to them in a surly manner, as be- 
fore, and perceiving them to be very sore with the 
stripes that he had given them the day before, he 
On Friday told them, that since they were never 
counsels thenuo like to come out of that place, their 

kill themselves. Qnly way WQuld be forthwith to make 

an end of themselves, either with knife, halter, 
or poison ; for why, said he, should you choose to 
live, seeing it is attended with so much bitterness ? 
But they desired him to let them go. With that 
he looked ugly upon them, and rushing to them, 
had doubtless made an end of them himself, but 

The giant some- tliat h ° fel1 illto 01ie ° f his ^ &! lie 

times has fits, sometimes in sunshiny weather fell 
into fits, and lost for a time the use of his hands: 
wherefore he withdrew, and left them as before to 
consider what to do. Then did the prisoners con- 
sult between themselves whether it was best to 
take his counsel or no; and thus they began to 
discourse. 

Chk Brother, said Christian, what shall we do? 
The life that we now live is miserable. For my 



186 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

part, T know not whether it is best to live thus, or 
to die out of hand. My soul chooseth christian crush- 
strangling rather than life, and the ed * 
grave is more easy for me than this dungeon. Job 
7 : 15. Shall we be ruled by the giant? 

Hope. Indeed our present condition is dreadful, 
and death would be far more welcome to me than 
thus for ever to abide ; but yet, let us consider, the 
Lord of the country to which we are going hath 
said, "Thou shalt do no murder," no, not to another 
man's person ; much more, then, are we forbid- 
den to take his counsel to kill ourselves. Besides, 
he that kills another, can but commit murder upon 
his body ; but for one to kill himself, is to kill body 
and soul at once. And moreover, my brother, 
thou talkest of ease in the grave ; but hast thou 
forgotten the hell whither for certain the mur- 
derers go? for "no murderer hath H o P efuicom- 
eternal life," etc. And let us consider forts hvca - 
again, that all the law is not in the hand of Giant 
Despair : others, so far as I can understand, have 
been taken by him as well as we, and yet have 
escaped out of his hands. Who knows but that 
God, who made the world, may cause that Giant 
Despair may die ; or that, at some time or other, 
he may forget to lock us in ; or that he may, in a 
short time, have another of his fits before us, and 
may lose the use of his limbs ? And if ever that 
should come to pass again, for my part, I am re- 



THE PILGRIMS DISCOURSE. 187 

solved to pluck up the heart of a man, and to try 
my utmost to get from under his hand. I was a 
fool that I did not try to do it before. But, how- 
ever, my brother, let us be patient, and endure a 
while : the time may come that may give us a 
happy release ; but let us not be our own murder- 
ers. With these words Hopeful at present did 
moderate the mind of his brother ; so they con- 
tinued together in the dark that day, in their sad 
and doleful condition. 

Well, towards evening the giant goes down into 
the dungeon again, to see if his prisoners had 
taken his counsel. But when he came there he 
found them alive ; and truly, alive was all ; for 
now, what for want of bread and water, and by 
reason of the wounds they received when he beat 
them, they could do little but breathe. But I say, 
he found them alive ; at which he fell into a griev- 
ous rage, and told them, that seeing they had diso- 
beyed his counsel, it should be worse with them 
than if they had never been born. 

At this they trembled greatly, and I think that 
Christian fell into a swoon ; but coming a little to 
himself again, they renewed their discourse about 
the giant's counsel, and whether yet they had best 
take it or no. Now Christian again seemed for 
doing it ; but Hopeful made his second reply as 
followeth : 

Hope. My brother, said he, remembere3t thou 



188 PILGRIMS PROGRESS. 

not how valiant thou hast been hereto- Hopeful com- 

forts him again 

fore ? Apollyon could not crush thee, by calling f or - 

merthingstoro- 

nor could all that thou didst hear, or membrance. 
see, or feel, in the valley of the Shadow of Death. 
What hardship, terror, and amazement hast thou 
already gone through ; and art thou now nothing 
but fears? Thou seest that I am in the dungeon 
with thee, a far weaker man by nature than thou 
art. Also this giant hath wounded me as well as 
thee, and hath also cut off the bread and water 
from my mouth, and with thee I mourn without 
the light. But let us exercise a little more pa- 
tience. Remember how thou playedst the man at 
Vanity Fair, and wast neither afraid of the chain 
nor cage, nor yet of bloody death : wherefore let 
us, at least to avoid the shame that it becomes not 
a Christian to be found in, bear up with patience 
as well as we can. 

Now night being come again, and the giant and 
his wife being in bed, she asked him concerning 
the prisoners, and if they had taken his counsel : 
to which he replied, They are sturdy rogues ; they 
choose rather to bear all hardships than to make 
away with themselves. Then said she, Take them 
into the castle-yard to-morrow, and show them the 
bones and skulls of those that thou he. «t already 
dispatched, and make them believe, ere a week 
comes to an end, thou wilt tear them in pieces, as 
thou hast done their fellows before them. 



THE KEY OF PROMISE. 1S9 

So when the morning was come, the giant goes 

to them again, and takes them into the castle-yard, 

and shows them as his wife had hidden him. 

These, said he, were pilgrims, as you are, once, 

On Saturday and they trespassed on my grounds, as 

the giant threat- j 

ened that short- you have done; and when I thought 

ly he would pull 

them in pieces, lit I tore them in pieces ; and so with- 
in ten days I will do you : get you down to your 
den again. And with that he beat them all the 
way thither. They lay, therefore, all day on Sat- 
urday in a lamentable case, as before. Now, when 
night was come, and when Mrs. Diffidence and her 
husband the giant were got to bed, they began to 
renew their discourse of their prisoners ; and 
withal, the old giant wondered that he could nei- 
ther by his blows nor counsel bring them to an end. 
And with that his wife replied, I fear, said she, 
that they live in hopes that some will come to 
relieve them ; or that they have picklocks about 
them, by the means of which they hope to escape. 
And sayest thou so, my dear? said the giant; I 
will then fore search them in the morning. 

Well, on Saturday, about midnight, they began 
to pray, and continued in prayer till almost break 
of day. 

Now, a little before it was day, good Christian, 
as one half amazed, broke out into this passionate 
speech : What a fool, quoth he, am I, thus to lie 
in a stinking dungeon, when I may as well walk 



190 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

at liberty ! I have a key in my bosom a key in Chns- 
called Promise, that will, I am per- ^ned PiW^ 
suaded, open any lock in Doubting g— Jj^jj 
Castle. Then said Hopeful, That is Castle - 
good news ; good brother, pluck it out of thy 
bosom, and try. 

Then Christian pulled it out of his bosom, and 
began to try at the dungeon-door, whose bolt, as 
he turned the key, gave back, and the door flew 
open with ease, and Christian and Hopeful both 
came out. Then, he went to the outward door 
that leads into the castle-yard, and with his key 
opened that door also. After that he went to the 
iron gate, for that must be opened too ; but that 
lock went desperately hard, yet the key did open 
it. Then they thrust open the gate to make theil 
escape with speed ; but that gate, as it opened, 
made such a creaking that it waked Giant Despair, 
who hastily rising to pursue his prisoners, felt his 
limbs to fail, for his fits took him again, so that he 
could by no means go after them. Then they went 
on, and came to the King's highway, and so were 
safe, because they were out of his jurisdiction. 

Now, when they were gone over the stile, they 
began to contrive with themselves what they 
should do at that stile to prevent those that shall 
come after from falling into the hands of Giant 
Despair. So they consented to erect a pillar erect- 

ed by Christian 

there a pillar, and to engrave upon the and his fellow. 



'' ... - 




THEY ESCAPE. ]9l 

side thereof this sentence : " Over this stile is the 
way to Doubting Castle, which is kept by Giant 
Despair, who despiseth the King of the Celestial 
country, and seeks to destroy his holy pilgrims." 
Many, therefore, that followed after, read what 
was written, and escaped the danger. This done, 
they sung as follows : 

" Out of the way we went, and then we found 
What 't was to tread upon forbidden ground : 
And let them that come after have a care, 
Lest heedlessness makes them as we to fare : 
Lest they, for trespassing, his prisoners are, 
Whose castle 'a Doubting, and whose name 's Despair." 



192 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 



THE EIGHTH STAGE. 

They went then till they came to the Delectable 
mountains, which mountains belong The DelecU . 
to the Lord of that hill of which we blemou '- [ 
have spoken before. So they went up to the 
mountains, to behold the gardens and orchards, 
the vineyards and fountains of water ; They are re- 

i freshed in the 

where also they drank and washed mountains. 
themselves, and did freely eat of the vineyards. 
Now, there were on the tops of these mountains 
shepherds feeding their flocks, and they stood by 
the highway side. The pilgrims, therefore, went 
to them, and leaning upon their staffs, as is 
common with weary pilgrims when they stand to 
talk with any by the way, they asked, Ttlkwithtka 
Whose Delectable mountains are these ; she P herds - 
and whose be the sheep that feed upon them ? 

Shep. These mountains are Emmanuel's land, 
and they are within sight of his city ; and the 
sheep also are his, and he laid down his life for 
them. John 10 : 11, 15. 

Chr. Is this the way to the Celestial City? 

Shep. You are just in your way. 

Chr. How far is it thitlier? 

Shep. Too far for any but those who shall got 
thither indeed. 



THE DELECTABLE MOUNTAINS. 193 

Chr. Is the way safe, or dangerous ? 

Shep. Safe for those for whom it is to be safe ; 
but transgressors shall fall therein. Hos. 14 : 9. 

Chr. Is there in this place any relief for pil- 
grims that are weary and faint in the way ? 

Shep. The Lord of these mountains hath given 
us a charge not to be forgetful to entertain 
strangers, Heb. 13:2; therefore the good of the 
place is before you. 

I saw also in my dream, that when the shep- 
herds perceived that they were wayfaring men, 
they also put questions to them, to which they 
made answer as in other places, as, Whence came 
you ? and, How got you into the way ? and, By 
what means have you so persevered therein ? for 
but few of them that begin to come hither, do 
show their face on these mountains. But when 
the shepherds heard their answers, heing pleased 

The shepherds therewith, they looked very lovingly 
welcome them. upon thenlj and gaidj Welcome to the 

Delectable mountains. 

The shepherds, I say, whose names were 
The names of Knowledge, Experience, Watchful, and 

the shepherds. Sincere> took them by lhe haU(]j and 

had them to their tents, and made them partake 
of that which was ready at present. They said 
moreover, We would that you should stay here a 
while to be acquainted with us, and yet more to 
solace yourselves with the good of these Delectable 

Pil. Prog. 1 3 



194 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

mountains. Then they told them that they were 
content to stay. So they went to their rest that 
night, because it was very late. 

Then I saw in my dream, that in the morning 
the shepherds called up Christian and Hopeful to 
walk with them upon the mountains. So they 
went forth with them, and walked a while, having 
a pleasant prospect on every side. Then said the 
shepherds one to another, Shall we They are 

show these pilgrims some wonders? d"™* ™>nde™. 
So when they had concluded to do it, they had 
them first to the top of a hill called The mountain 
Error, which was very steep on the oferror - 
farthest side, and bid them look down to the bot- 
tom. So Christian and Hopeful looked down, and 
saw at the bottom several men dashed all to pieces 
by a fall that they had from the top. Then said 
Christian, What meaneth this? The shepherds 
answered, Have you not heard of them that were 
made to err, by hearkening to Hymeneus and 
Philetus, as concerning the faith of the resurrec- 
tion of the body? 2 Tim. 2 : 17, 18. They an- 
swered, Yes. Then said the shepherds, Those that 
you see lie dashed in pieces at the bottom of this 
mountain are they ; and they have continued to this 
day unburied, as you see, for an example to others 
to take heed how they clamber too high, or how 
they come too near the brink of this mountain. 

Then 1 saw that they had them to the top of 



MOUNT CAUTION. 195 

another mountain, and the name of that is CautioL 
Mount Caution, and bid them look afar off; which, 
when they did, they perceived, as they thought, 
several men walking up and down among the 
tombs that were there ; and they perceived that 
the men were blind, because they stumbled some- 
times upon the tombs, and because they could not 
get out from among them. Then said Christian, 
What means this ? 

The shepherds then answered, Did you not see, 
a little below these mountains, a stile that led into 
a meadow, on the left hand of this way ? They 
answered, Yes. Then said the shepherds, From 
that stile there goes a path that leads directly to 
Doubting Castle, which is kept by Giant Despair ; 
and these men — pointing to them among the 
tombs — came once on pilgrimage, as you do now, 
even until they came to that same stile. And 
because the right way was rough in that place, 
they chose to go out of it into that meadow, and 
there were taken by Giant Despair, and cast into 
Doubting Castle ; where, after they had a while 
been kept in the dungeon, he at last did put out 
their eyes, and led them among those tombs, where 
he has left them to wander to this very day, that 
the saying of the wise man might be fulfilled, 
" He that wandereth out of the way of under- 
standing shall remain in the congregation of the 
dead." Prov. 21 : 16. Then Christian and Hope- 



196 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

ful looked upon one another, with tears gushing 
out, but yet said nothing to the shepherds. 

Then I saw in my dream, that the shepherds had 
them to another place in a bottom, where was a 
door on the side of a hill; and they opened the 
.door, and bid them look in. They looked in, there- 
fore, and saw that within it was very dark and 
smoky; they also thought that they heard there a 
rumbling noise as of fire, and a cry of some tor- 
mented, and that they smelt the scent of brim- 
stone. Then said Christian, What means this ? 
The shepherds told them, This is a by- A by-way to 
way to hell, a way that hypocrites go helL 
in at: namely, such as sell their birthright, with 
Esau ; such as sell their Master, with Judas; such 
as blaspheme the gospel, with Alexander; and 
that lie and dissemble, with Ananias and Sapphira 
his wife. 

Then said Hopeful to the shepherds, I perceive 
that these had on them, even every one, a show of 
pilgrimage, as we have now ; had they not ? 

Shep. Yes, and held it a long time, too. 

Hope. How far might they go on in pilgrimage 
in their day, since they, notwithstanding, were 
miserably cast away 1 

Shep. Some farther, and some not so far as 
these mountains. 

Then said the pilgrims one to the other, We had 
need cry to the Strong for strength. 



THE PILGRIMS DEPART. 197 

Shep. Aye, and you Avill have need to use it, 
when you have it, too. 

By this time the pilgrims had a desire to go for- 
ward, and the shepherds a desire they should ; so 
they walked together towards the end of the moun- 
tains. Then said the shepherds one to another, 
The shep- Let us here show the pilgrims the gates 

herds' perspec- _,. 

tive-giass. oi the Celestial City, 11 they have skill 
to look through our perspective-glass. The pil- 
grims lovingly accepted the motion : so they had 
them to the top of a high hill called Clear, and 
gave them the glass to look. 

Then they tried to look ; but the remembrance of 
The fruits of that ^ as * thing that the shepherds had 
servile feai. shown them made their hands shake, by 
means of which impediment they could not look 
Bteadily through the glass ; yet they thought they 
saw something like the gate, and also some of the 
glory of the place. Then they went away, and sung, 
"Thus by the shepherds secrets are revealed, 
Which from all other men are kept concealed : 
Come to the shepherds then, if you would see 
Things deep, things hid, and that mysterious be." 

When they were about to depart, one of the 
a twofold cau- shepherds gave them a note of the 
tion - way. Another of them bid them be- 

ware of the Flatterer. The third bid them take 
heed that they slept not upon the Enchanted 
ground. And the fourth bid them God speea. So 
I awoke from my dream. 



198 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 



THE NINTH STAGE. 

And I slept, and dreamed again, and saw the 
came two pilgrims going down the mountains 
along the highway towards the city. Now, a little 
below these mountains, on the left The country 
hand, lieth the country of Conceit ; ° f JS^i' 
from which country there comes into 1 s nora - nce - 
the way in which the pilgrims walked, a little 
crooked lane. Here, therefore, they met with a 
very brisk lad that came out of that country, and 
his name was Ignorance. So Christian Christian and 

Ignorance have 

asked him from what parts he came, some talk. 
and whither he was going. 

Ignor. Sir, I was born in the country that lieth 
off there, a little on the left hand, and I am going 
to the Celestial City. 

Chr. But how do you think to get in at the gate, 
for you may find some difficulty there ? 

Ignor. As other good people do, said he. 

Chr. But what have you to show at that gate, 
that the gate should be opened to you ? 

Ignor. I know my Lord's will, and have been a 
good liver ; I pay every man his own ; The grounds 

° . , , or " Ignorance's 

I pray, fast, pay tithes, and give alms, hope. 

and have left my country for whither I am going. 



IGNORANCE. 199 

Chr. But thou earnest not in at the wicket-gate 
that is at the head of this way; thou earnest in 
hither through that same crooked lane, and there- 
fore I fear, however thou mayest think of thyself, 
when the reckoning-day shall come, thou wilt 
have laid to thy charge that thou art a thief and 
a robber, instead of getting admittance into the 
city. 

Ignor. Gentlemen, ye be utter strangers to me, 

He teiieth I know you not : be content to follow 

every one he is . r 

but a, fool. the religion 01 your country, and I will 

follow the religion of mine. I hope all will be 
well. And as for the gate that you talk of, all the 
world knows that it is a great way off of our coun- 
try. I cannot think that any man in all our parts 
doth so much as know the way to it, nor need 
they matter whether they do or no, since we have, 
as you see, a fine, pleasant, green lane, that comes 
down from our country, the next way into the way. 
When Christian saw that the man was wise in 
his own conceit, he said to Hopeful whisperingly, 
" There is more hope of a fool than of him." Prov. 
26 : 12. And said, moreover, "When he that is a 
fool walketh by the way, his wisdom faileth him, 

How to carry an( l ne saith to every one that he is a 
ittoafooi. fooL ,» Eccles. 10:3> what, shall we 

talk further with him 1 or outgo him at present, and 
so leave him to think of what he hath heard already, 
and then stop again for him afterwards, and see if 



200 PILGRIMS PROGRESS. 

by degrees we can do any good to him ? Then said 
Hopeful, 

"Let Ignorance a little while now muse 
On what is said, and let him not refuse 
Good counsel to embrace, lest he remain 
Still ignorant of what 's the chiefest gam. 
God saith, those that no understanding have — 
Although he made them — them he will not save." 

Hope. He further added, It is not good, I think, 
to say so to him all at once ; let us pass him "by, if 
you will, and talk to him anon, even as he is able 
to bear it. 

So they both went on, and Ignorance he came 
after. Now, when they had passed him a little 
way, they entered into a very dark lane, where 
they met a man whom seven devils had bound 
with seven strong cords, and were carrying him 
back to the door that they saw on the side of the 
hill. Matt. 12:4:5; Prov. 5 : 22. Now good Chris- 
tian began to-fctremble, and so did Hopeful his com- 
panion ; yet, as the devils led away the man, Chris- 
tian looked to see if he knew him ; and he thought 
it might be one Turn-away, that dwelt in the town 
of Apostasy. But he did not perfectly .The destruo- 
see his face, for he did hang his head Turn-away, 
like a thief that is found; but being gone past, 
Hopeful looked after him, and espied on his back 
a paper with this inscription, "Wanton professor, 
and damnable apostate." 



LITTLE-FAITH'S TROUBLES. 201 

Then said Christian to his fellow, Now I call to 

remembrance that which was told me of a thing 

that happened to a good man hereabout. The 

christian tell- name of the man was Little-Faith ; but 

eth his compan- ^ man an( j ne d we lt in the town 

ion a story of o ' 

Little-Faith. f Si nce re. The thing was this. At 
the entering in at this passage, there comes down 
Broadway-gate, from Broadway-gate a lane, called 

Dead-Man's Dead-man's lane ; so called because of 
lane - the murders that are commonly done 

there ; and this Little-Faith going on pilgrimage, 
as we do now, chanced to sit down there and 
sleep. Now there happened at that time to come 
down the lane from Broadway-gate, three sturdy 
rogues, and their names were Faint-Heart, Mis- 
trust, and Guilt, three brothers ; and they, espying 
Little-Faith where he was, came galloping up 
with speed. Now the good man was just awaked 
from his sleep, and was getting up to go on his 
journey. So they came up all to him, and with 
threatening language bid him stand. At this, 
Little-Faith looked as white as a sheet, and had 

Little-Faith neither power to fight nor fly. Then 
wfMiSSt ^id Faint-Heart, Deliver thy purse; 
and Gmit. k ut i^ making no haste to do it, for 

he was loath to lose his money, Mistrust ran up to 
They get away him, and thrusting his hand into his 

his silver and r r 

knockhimdown. pocket, pulling out thence a bag ol 
silver. Then'he cried out, Thieves, thieves ! With 



202 PILGRIM'S PROG-HESS. 

that, Guilt, with a great club that was in. his hand, 
struck Little-Faith on the head, and with that blow 
felled him flat to the ground, where he lay bleeding 
as one that would bleed to death. All this while 
the thieves stood by. But at last, they hearing that 
some were upon the road, and fearing lest it should 
be one Great-Grace, that dwells in the town of 
Good-Confidence, they betook themselves to their 
heels, and left this good man to shift for himself. 
Now, after a while, Little-Faith came to himself, 
and getting up, made shift to scramble on his way. 
This was the story. 

Hope. But did they take from him all that ever 
he had ? 

Chr. No ; the place where his jewels were, 
they never ransacked ; so those he kept Little-Faith 

■" tit i * ost not *" s best 

still. But, as I was told, the good man things, 
was much afflicted for his loss ; for the thieves 
got most of his spending-money. That which 
they got not, as I said, were jewels ; also, he had 
a little odd money left, but scarce enough to bring 
him to his journey's end. Nay, if I was not mis- 
informed, he was forced to beg as he Little-Faith 
went, to keep himself alive, for his ^5 journey*'! 
jewels he might not sell ; but beg and end 
do what he could, he went, as we say, with many 
a hungry belly the most part of the rest of the 
way. 1 Pet. 4 : 18. 

Hope. But is it not a wonder they got not from 



DISCOURSE ABOUT LITTLE-FAITH. 203 

him his certificate, by which he was to receive 
his admittance at the Celestial gate ? 

Chr It is a wonder ; but they got not that, 
He kept not though they missed it not through any 
by his e own cun- good cunning of his ; for he, being dis- 
mug " mayed by their coming upon him, had 

neither power nor skill to hide any thing : so it was 
more by good providence than by his endeavor 
tha tthey missed of that good thing. 2 Timothy, 
1 : 12-14; 2 Pet. 2 : 9. 

Hope. But it must needs be a comfort to him 
that they got not this jewel from him. 

Chr. It might have been great comfort to him, 
had he used it as he should ; but they that told 
me the story said that he made but little use of it 
all the rest of the way, and that because of the 
dismay that he had in their taking away his 
money. Indeed, he forgot it a great part of the 
rest of his journey ; and besides, when at any 
time it came into his mind, and he began to be 
comforted therewith, then would fresh thoughts of 
his loss come again upon him, and these thoughts 
would swallow up all. 
He is pitied Hope. Alas, poor man, this could not 

by both. but be a great grie f tQ him 

Chr. Grief? Aye, a grief indeed! Would it not 
have been so to any of us, had we been used as 
he ; to be robbed and wounded too, and that in a 
strange place, as he was ? It is a wonder he did 



204 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

not die with grief, poor heart. I was told that he 
scattered almost all the rest of the way with 
nothing but doleful and bitter complaints ; telling, 
also, to all that overtook him, or that he overtook 
in the way as he went, where he was robbed, and 
how ; who they were that did it, and what he had 
lost ; how he was wounded, and that he hardly 
escaped with life. 

Hope. But it is a wonder that his necessity did 
not put him upon selling or pawning some of his 
jewels, that he might have wherewith to relieve 
himself in his journey. 

Chr. Thou talkest like one upon whose head is 
the shell to this very day. For what christian re- 

i i i i .10 i proveth his fel- 

should he pawn them: or to whom i ow for un ad vis- 
should he sell them? In all that ^p^s- 
country where he was robbed, his jewels were 
not accounted of; nor did he want that relief 
which could from thence be administered to him. 
Besides, had his jewels been missing at the gate of 
the Celestial City, he had, and that he knew well 
enough, been excluded from an inheritance there, 
and that would have been worse to him than the 
appearance and villany of ten thousand thieves. 

Hope. Why art thou so tart, my brother 1 Esau 
sold his birthright, and that for a mess of pottage, 
Heb. 12:16; and that birthright was his greatest 
jewel: and if he, why might not Little-Faith do 
so too 1 



DISCOURSE ABOUT LITTLE-FAITH. 205 

Ohr. Esau did sell his birthright indeed, and so 
Discourse about do many besides, and by so doing ex 
Faith. elude themselves from the chief bless- 

ing, as also that caitiff did ; but you must put a 
difference betwixt Esau and Little-Faith, and 
also betwixt their estates. Esau's birthright was 
typical; but Little-Faith's jewels were not so. 
Esauwasruied Esau's belly was his god; but Little- 
by his lusts. Faith's belly was not so. Esau's want 
}ay in his fleshly appetite ; Little-Faith's did not so. 
Besides, Esau could see no further than to the 
fulfilling of his lusts : For I am at the point to 
die, said he ; and what good will thrs birthright 
do me ? Gen. 25 : 32. But Little-Faith, though 
it was his lot to have but a little faith, was by his 
little faith kept from such extravagances, and 
made to see and prize his jewels more than to 
sell them, as Esau did his birthright. You read 

Esau never not anywhere that Esau had faith, no, 
kad fauh. not gQ mucn as a little ; therefore no 

marvel, where the flesh only bears sway, as it 
will in that man where no faith is to resist, if he 
sells his birthright, and his soul and all, and that 
to the devil of hell ; for it is with such as it is 
with the ass, who in her occasion cannot be turned 
away, Jer. 2 : 24 : when their minds are set upon 
Little-Faith their lusts, they will have them, what- 
u°p U on n Esau V s ever they cost. But Little-Faith was 
pottag-e. f ano ther temper ; his mind was on 



206 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

things divine; his livelihood was upon things 
that were spiritual, and from above : therefore, to 
what end should he that is of such a temper sell 
his jewels, had there been any that would have 
bought them, to fill his mind with empty things 1 
Will a man give a penny to fill his belly with 
nay 1 or can you persuade the turtle- a comparison 

di • • in .i between the tur- 

ove to live upon carrion, like the ,j,.,|, ive and the 

crow ? Though faithless ones can, lor crow ' 

carnal lusts, pawn, or mortgage, or sell what they 

have, and themselves outright to boot; yet they 

that have faith, saving faith, though but a little of 

it, cannot do so. Here, therefore, my brother, is 

thy mistake. 

HorE. I acknowledge it ; but yet your severe 
reflection had almost made me aagry. 

Cur. Why, I did but compare thee to some of 
the birds that are of the brisker sort, who will run 
to and fro in untrodden paths with the shell upon 
their heads : but pass by that, and consider the 
matter under debate, and all shall be well betwixt 
thee and me. 

HorE. But, Christian, these three fellows, I am 
persuaded in my heart, are but a com- Hopeful rwag- 
panv of cowards : would they have run eer8, 
else, think you, as they did, at the noise of one 
that was coming on the road 1 Why did not 
Little-Faith pluck up a greater heart ? He 
might, methinks, have stood one brush with 



DISCOURSE ABOUT LITTLE-FAITH. 207 

them, and have yielded when there had been no 
remedy. 

Chii. That they are cowards, many have B&id, 

No great heart "but few liave found it SO ill the time 

iJjilSS of trial - As for a Sreat heart, Little- 
tie faith. Faith had none ; and I perceive by 

thee, my brother, hadst thou been the man con- 
cerned, thou art but for a brush, and then to yield. 

Wehavemore And verily, since this is the height ol 
we U are S o U t"ha: thy stomach now they are at a distance 
when we are m. f rom US) should they appear to thee as 
they did to him, they might put thee to second 
thoughts. 

But consider again, that they are but journey- 
men thieves ; they serve under the king of the 
bottomless pit, who, if need be, will come to their 
aid himself, and his voice is as the roaring of a 

Christian tells lion. 1 Pet. 5:8. I myself have been 

his own experi- . . . 

ence in this case, enfjanred as this Little-r aith was, and 
I found it a terrible thing. These three villains 
set upon me, and I beginning like a Christian to 
resist, they gave but a call, and in came their 
master. I would, as the saying is, have given my 
life for a penny, but that, as God would have it, I 
was clothed with armor of proof. Aye, and yet, 
though I was so harnessed, I found it hard work 
to quit myself like a man : no man can tell what 
in that combat attends up, but he that hath been 
in the battle himself. 



208 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Hope. Well, but they ran, you see, when they did 
but suppose that one Great-Grace was in the way. 

Chr. True, they have often fled, both they and 
their master, when Great-Grace hath but appear- 
ed ; and no marvel, for Tie is the The j^gi, 
King's champion. But I trow you will c ' nam P ion - 
'put some difference between Little-Faith and the 
King's champion. All the King's subjects are not 
his champions ; nor can they, when tried, do such 
feats of war as he. Is it meet to think that a little 
child should handle Goliath as David did ? or that 
there should be the strength of an ox in a wren ? 
Some are strong, some are weak; some have great 
faith, some have little: this man was one of the 
Weak, and therefore he went to the wall. 

Hope. I would it had been Great-Grace, for their 
sakes. 

Chr. If it had been he, he might have had his 
hands full ; for I must tell you, that though Great- 
Grace is excellent good at his weapons, and has 
done, and can, so long as he keeps them at sword's 
point, do well enough with them ; yet if they get 
within him, even Faint-Heart, Mistrust, or the 
other, it shall go hard but they will throw up his 
heels. And when a man is down, you know, what 
can he do ? 

Whoso looks well upon Great-Grace's face, will 
see those scars and cuts there that shall easily give 
demonstration of what I say. Yea, once I heard 



DISCOURSE ABOUT LITTLE-FAITH. 209 

that he should say, and that when he was in the 
combat, We despaired even of life. How did 
these sturdy rogues and their fellows make David 
groan, mourn, and roar ! Yea, Heman, Psalm 88, 
and Hezekiah too, though champions in their days, 
were forced to bestir them when by these assault- 
ed ; and yet, notwithstanding, they had their 
coats soundly brushed by them. Peter, upon a 
time, would go try what he could do ; but though 
some do say of him that he is the prince of the 
apostles, they handled him so that they made him 
at last afraid of a sorry girl. 

Besides, their king is at their whistle ; he is 
never out of hearing ; and if at any time they be 
put to the worst, he, if possible, comes in to help 
them : and of him it is said, " The sword of him 
Leviathan's tna * ia y e th at him cannot hold ; the 
sturdmess. spear, the dart, nor the habergeon. He 
esteemeth iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood. 
The arrow cannot make him fly; sling-stones are 
turned with him into stubble. Darts are counted 
as stubble ; he laugheth at the shaking of a spear." 
Job 41 : 26-29. "What can a man do in this case? 
It is true, if a man could at every turn have Job's 
horse, and had skill and courage to ride him, he 
might do notable things. " For his neck is clothed 
The excellent with thunder. He will not be afraid 

mettle that is in /» i • 

job's horse. as a grasshopper : the glory ol his nos- 
trils is terrible. He paweth in the valley, and re.- 

Pil. Prog 14 



210 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

joiceth in his strength ; he goeth on to meet the 
armed men. He mocketh at fear, and is not af- 
frighted ; neither turneth he back from the sword. 
The quiver rattleth against him, the glittering 
spear and the shield. He swalloweth the ground 
with fierceness and rage ; neither believeth he that 
it is the sound of the trumpet. He saith among 
the trumpets, Ha, ha ! and he smelleth the battle 
afar off, the thunder of the captains, and the shout- 
ings." Job 39: 19-25. 

But for such footmen as thou and I are, let us 
never desire to meet with an enemy, nor vaunt as 
if we could do better, when we hear of others that 
have been foiled, nor be tickled at the thoughts 
of our own manhood ; for such commonly come by 
the worst when tried. "Witness Peter, of whom 
I made mention before : he would swagger, aye, 
he would ; he would, as his vain mind prompted 
him to say, do better and stand more for his Mas- 
ter than all men : but who so foiled and run down 
by those villains as he? 

When, therefore, we hear that such robberies 
are done on the King's highway, two things be- 
come us to do. 

1. To go out harnessed, and to be sure to take a 
shield with us : for it was for want of that, that he 
who laid so lustily at Leviathan could not make 
him yield ; for indeed, if that be wanting, he fears 
us not at all. Therefore, he that had skill hath 



THE FLATTERER. 211 

said, " Above all, taking the shield of faith, where- 
with ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts 
of the wicked." Eph. 6 : 16. 

2. It is good, also, that we desire of the King a 
It is good to convoy, yea, that he will go with us 
have a convoy, himself. This made David rejoice 
when in the valley of the Shadow of Death ; and 
Moses was rather for dying where he stood, than 
to go one step without his God. Exod. 33 : 15. 
0, my brother, if he will but go along with us, 
what need we be afraid of ten thousands that shall 
set themselves against us ? Psa. 3 : 5-8 ; 27 : 1-3. 
But without him, the proud helpers fall under the 
slain. Isa. 10 : 4. 

I, for my part, have been in the fray before now ; 
and though, through the goodness of Him that is 
best, I am, as you see, alive, yet I cannot boast of 
any manhood. Glad shall I be if I meet with no 
more such brunts ; though I fear we are not got 
beyond all danger. However, since the lion and 
the bear have not as yet devoured me, I hope God 
will also deliver us from the next uncircumcised 
Philistine. Then sung Christian, 

"Poor Little-Faith! hast been among the thieves? 
Wast robbed? Remember this, whoso believes, 
And get more faith; then shall you victors be 
Over ten thousand — else scarce over three." 

So they went on, and Ignorance followed. They 
went then till they came at a place where they 



212 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

saw a way put itself into their way, a way and away. 

and seemed withal to lie as straight as the way 

which they .should go; and here they knew not 

which of the two to take, for both seemed straight 

before them; therefore here they stood still to 

consider. And as they were thinking about the 

way, behold a man black of flesh, but covered 

with a very light robe, came to them, and asked 

them why they stood there. They answered, they 

were going to the Celestial City, but knew not 

which of these ways to take. "Follow me," said 

the man, " it is thither that I am going." So they 

followed him in the way that but now came into 

the road, which by degrees turned, and Christian and 

his fellow de- 
turned them so far from the city that luded. 

they desired to go to, that in a little time their 
faces were turned away from it ; yet they follow- 
ed him. But by and by, before they were aware, 
he led them both within the compass They are taken 
of a net, in which they were both so maneL 
entangled that they knew not what to do ; and 
with that the white robe fell off the black man's 
back. Then they saw where they were. "Where- 
fore there they lay crying some time, for they could 
not get themselves out. 

Chr. Then said Christian to his fellow, Now do 
I see myself in an error. Did not the They bewail 
shepherds bid us beware of the Flat- their colldition - 
terer? As is the saying of the wise man, so we 



A SHINING ONE. 213 

have found it this day : " A man that flattereth 
his neighbor, spreadeth a net for his feet." Prov. 
29 : 5. 

HorE. They also gave us a note of directions 
about the way, for our more sure finding thereof; 
but therein we have also forgotten to read, and 
have not kept ourselves from the paths of the de- 
stroyer. Here David was wiser than we ; for saith 
he, " Concerning the works of men, by the word 
of thy lips I have kept me from the paths of the 
destroyer." Psa. 17 : 4. Thus they lay bewailing 
a shining One themselves in the net. At last they 
Sitha whip 6 S es pi ea " a shining One coming towards 
his hand. them with a whip of small cords in 

his hand. When he was come to the place where 
they were, he asked them whence they came, and 
what they did there. They told him that they 
were poor pilgrims going to Zion, but were led out 
of their way by a black man clothed in white, who 
bid us, say they, fo]low him, for he was going 
thither too. Then said he with the whip, It is 
Flatterer, a false apostle, that hath transformed 
himself into an angel of light. Dan. 11 : 32 ; 2 
Cor. 11 : 13, 14. So he rent the net, and let the 
men out. Then said he to them, Follow me, that 
I may set ycu in your way again. So he led them 
back to the way which they had left to follow the 
Flatterer. Then he asked them, saying, Where 
did you lie the last night? They said. With the 



214 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

shepherds upon the Delectable mountains. He 
asked them then, if they had not of the T hey are exam- 
shepherds a note of direction for the ^ d a j? d for co e n t ; 
way. They answered, Yes. But did fulQ ess. 
you not, said he, when you were at a stand, pluck 
out and read your note 1 They answered, No. He 
-asked them, Why? They said they forgot. He 
asked, moreover, if the shepherds did not bid them 
beware of the Flatterer. They an- -n fl 

J Deceivers iine- 

swered, Yes ; but we did not imagine, s P oken - 
said they, that this fine-spoken man had been he. 
Rom. 16 : 17, 18. 

Then I saw in my dream, that he commanded 
them to lie down ; which when they They are whip- 

,.,,,.,. ped and sent on 

aid, he chastised them sore, to teach their way. 
them the good way wherein they should walk, 
Deut. 25 : 2 ; 2 Chron. 6 : 27 ; and as he chastised 
them, he said, "As many as I love, I rebuke and 
chasten ; be zealous, therefore, and repent." Rev. 
3 : 19. This done, he bids tfiem go on their way, 
and take good heed to the other directions of the 
shepherds. So they thanked him for all his kind- 
ness, and went softly along the right way, sing- 
in * 

M Come hither, you that walk along the way, 
See how the pilgrims fare that go astray : 
They catched are in an entangled net, 
'Cause they good counsel lightly did forget : 
'Tis true, they rescued were ; but yet, you see, 
They 're scourged to boot : let this your caution be.'*' 



ATHEIST MEETS THE PILG-RIMS. 215 

Now, after a while they perceived afar off, one 
coming softly, and alone, all along the highway, 
to meet them. Then said Christian to his fellow, 
Yonder is a man with his back towards Zion, and 
he is coming to meet us. 

Hope. I see him ; let us take heed to ourselves 

The Atheist now > l est ne should prove a Flatterer 

meets them. a i so# S he drew nearer and nearer, and 

at last came up to them. His name was Atheist, 

and he asked them whither they were going. 

Chr. We are going to mount Zion. 
He laughs at Then Atheist fell into a very great 
them. laughter. 

Chr. What's the meaning of your laughter? 

Atheist. I laugh to see what ignorant persons 

you are, to take upon you so tedious a journey, 

and yet are like to have nothing but your travel 

for your pains. 

They reason Chr. Why, man, do you think we 

together. ^j nQt h& received ? 

Atheist. Received ! There is not such a place 
as you dream of in all this world. 

Chr. But there is in the world to come. 

Atheist. When I was at home in my own 
country I heard as you now affirm, and from that 
hearing went out to see, and have been seeking 
this city these twenty years, but find no more of it 
than I did the first day I set out. Eccles. 10 : 15 ; 
Jer. 17 : 15. 



216 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. We have both heard and believe that 
there is such a place to be found. 

Atheist. Had not I, when at home, believed, I 
had not come thus far to seek ; but rinding none — 
and yet I should, had there been such a place to 
be found, for I have gone to seek it farther than 
you— I am going back again, and will The Atheist 
seek to refresh myself with the things SSrtft this 
that I then cast away for hopes of that worl(L 
which I now see is not. 

Chr. Then said Christian to Hopeful his com- 
panion, Is it true which this man hath christian P rov- 

Said ^ et k ^ s brother. 

Hope. Take heed, he is one of the Flatterers. 
Remember what it cost us once al- Hopeful's gra- 
ready for our hearkening to such kind C10US answer - 
of fellows. What, no mount Zion ? Did we not 
see from the Delectable mountains the gate of the 
city ? Also, are we not now to walk by faith ? 
2 Cor. 5 :7. Let us go on, lest the man with the 
whip overtake us again. You should Remembrance 
have taught me that lesson, which I ffj^t' fe* a 
will sound you in the ears withal: Jfi^Jjgg! 
" Cease, my son, to hear the instruc- tion - 
tion that causeth to err from the words of know- 
iedge." Prov. 19 : 27. I say, my brother, cease 
to hear him, and let us believe to the saving of 
the soul. 

Chr. My brother, I did not put the question to 



THE ENCHANTED G-ROUND. 217 

thee for that I doubted of the truth of our belief 
A fruit of an myself, but to prove thee, and to fetch 

honest heart. f rQm thee a fafa Q f t ] ie h oneS ty of thy 

heart. As for this man, I know that he is blinded 
by the god of this world. Let thee and me go on, 
knowing that we have belief of the truth ; and no 
lie is of the truth. 1 John, 2: 21. 

Hope. Now do I rejoice in hope of the g'Joiy of 
God. So they turned away from the man ; and 
he, laughing at them, went his way. 

I then saw in my dream, that they went on 
They come to until they came into a certain country 

the Enchanted 

ground. whose air naturally tended to make 

one drowsy, if he came a stranger into it. And 

Hopeful hegins here Hopeful began to be very dull, 

to he drowsy. an( j h eaV y to s i ee p : wherefore he 

said unto Christian, I do now begin to grow so 
drowsy that I can scarcely hold open mine eyes ; 
let us lie down here, and take one nap. 
Christian keeps Chr. By no means, said the other ; 
him awake. j eg ^ gi ee p m g ? we never awake more. 

Hope. Why, my brother ? sleep is sweet to the 
laboring man ; we may be refreshed, if we take 
a nap. 

Chr. Do you not remember that one of the shep- 
herds bid us beware of the Enchanted ground? He 
meant by that, that we should beware of sleeping ; 
wherefore, " let us not sleep, as do others ; but let 
us watch, and be sober." 1 Thess. 5:6. 



218 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Hope. I acknowledge myself in a fault; and 
had I been here alone, I had by sleep- He is thankful. 
ing run the danger of death. I see it is true that 
the wise man saith, " Two are better than one." 
Eccl. 4 : 9. Hitherto hath thy company been my 
mercy ; and thou shalt have a good reward for thy 
labor. 

Chr. Now, then, said Christian, to prevent 
drowsiness in this place, let us fall into Good discourse 

preventethdrow- 
good discourse. siness. 

Hope. With all my heart, said the other. 
Chr Where shall we begin? 
Hope. Where God began with us. But do you 
begin, if you please. 

Chr.. I will sing you first this song. 

"When saints do sleepy grow, let them come hither, 
And hear how these two pilgrims talk together ; 
Yea, let them learn of them in any wise, 
Thus to keep ope their drowsy, slumb'ring eyes. 
Saints' fellowship, if it be managed well, 
Keeps them awake, and that in spite of hell." 

Then Christian began, and said, I will ask you 
a question. How came you to think They begin at 

. the beginning of 

at first 01 doing What yOU do nOW? their conversion. 

Hope. Do you mean, how I came at first to look 
after the good of my soul ? 

Chr. Yes, that is my meaning. 

Hope. I continued a great while in the delight 
of those things which were seen and sold at our 



HOPEFUL'S CONVERSION. 219 

fair ; things which I believe now would have, had 
I continued in them still, drowned me in perdition 
and destruction. 

Chr. What things are they? 

Hope. All the treasures and riches of the world. 

Hopeful's life Also I delighted much in rioting, rev- 
before conver- . . , 
sion. elling, drinking, swearing, lying, un- 
cle anness, sabbath-breaking, and what not, that 
tended to destroy the soul. But I found at last, 
by hearing and considering of things that are 
divine, which, indeed, I heard of you, as also of 
beloved Faithful that was put to death for his 
faith and good living in Vanity Fair, that the end 
of these things is death, Rom. 6 : 21-23 ; and that 
for these things' sake, the wrath of God cometh 
upon the children of disobedience. Eph. 5 : 6. 

Chr. And did you presently fall under the 
power of this conviction? 

Hope. No, I was not willing presently to know 
Hopeful at the evil of sin, nor the damnation that 

eyesaga^stSJe follows Upon the Commission of it J but 

- lght- endeavored, when my mind at first 

began to be shaken with the word, to shut mine 
eyes against the light thereof. 

Chr. But what was the cause of your carrying 
of it thus to the first workings of God's blessed 
Spirit upon you ? 

Reasons of Hope. The causes were, 1. I was 

his resisting the , . _ _ 

jght. ignorant that this was the work ot Ixod 



220 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

upon me. I never thought that by awakenings 
for sin, God at first begins the conversion of a 
sinner. 2. Sin was yet very sweet to my flesh, 
and I was loath to leave it. 3. I could not tell 
how to part with mine old companions, their 
presence and actions were so desirable unto me. 
4. The hours in which convictions were upon me, 
were such troublesome and such heart-affrighting 
hours, that I could not bear, no, not so much as 
the remembrance of them upon my heart. 

Chr. Then, as it seems, sometimes you got rid 
of your trouble ? 

Hope. Yes, verily, but it would come into my 
mind again ; and then I should be as bad, nay, 
worse than I was before. 

Chr. Why, what was it that brought your sins 
to mind again? 

Hope. Many things ; as, When he had 

1. If I did but meet a good man in If si ^ s £jj5 
the streets; or, brought'it again. 

2. If I have heard any read in the Bible ; or, 

3. If my head did begin to ache ; or, 

4. If I were told that some of my neighbors 
were sick ; or, 

5. If I heard the bell toll for some that were 
dead ; or, 

6. If I thought of dying myself; or, 

7. If I heard that sudden death happened to 
others. 



HOPEFUL'S CONVERSION. 221 

8. But especially when I thought of myself, that 
I must quickly come to judgment. 

Chr. And could you at any time, with ease, 
get off the guilt of sin, when by any of these 
ways it came upon you ? 

Hope. No, not I ; for then they got faster hold 
of my conscience ; and then, if I did but think of 
going back to sin, though my mind was turned 
against it, it would be double torment to me. 

Chr. And how did you do then ? 
When he could Hope. I thought I must endeavor to 
oJts ge g uUt a by mend my life; or else, thought I, I 

SenLeendeav: am SUre to be damned. 

orstomend. q hr< ^nd ^id you endeavor to 

mend? 

Hope. Yes, and fled from, not only my sins, but 
sinful company too, and betook me to religious 
duties, as praying, reading, weeping for sin, 
speaking truth to my neighbors, etc. These 
things did I, with many others, too much here to 
relate. 

Chr. And did you think yourself well then ? 

Hope. Yes, for a while ; but at the last my 
Thenhe thought trouble came tumbling upon me again, 

himself W ell.° and that oyer ^ ne(jk of ^ my ref _ 

ormations. 

Chr. How came that about, since you were now 
reformed ? 

Hope. There were several things brought it 



222 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

upon me, especially such sayings as these : " All 
our righteousnesses are as filthy rags." Reformation at 

b J ° last could not 

Isa. 64:6. "By the works of the help, and why. 
law shall no flesh be justified." Gal. 2 : 16. 
" When ye have done all these things,, say, We 
are unprofitable," Luke 17 : 10 : with many more 
.such like. From whence I began to reason with 
myself thus : If all my righteousnesses are as 
filthy rags ; if by the deeds of the law no man 
can be justified ; and if, when we have done all, 
we are yet unprofitable, then is it but a folly to 
think of heaven by the law I further thought 
thus : If a man runs a hundred pounds His being a 
into the shopkeeper's debt, and after ^ W 0T troubled 
that shall pay for all that he shall him " 
fetch ; yet if his old debt stand still in the book 
uncrossed, the shopkeeper may sue him for it, and 
cast him into prison, till he shall pay the debt. 

Chr. Well, and how did you apply this to 
yourself? 

Hope. Why, I thought thus with myself: I 
have by my sms run a great way into God's book, 
and my now reforming will not pay off that score; 
therefore I should think still, under all my present 
amendments, but how shall I be freed from that 
damnation that I brought myself in danger of by 
my former transgressions. 

Chr. A very good application : but pray go on. 

Hope. Another thing that hath troubled me 



HOPEFUL'S CONVERSIOK. 223 

ever since my late amendments, is, that if I look 

His espying narrowly into the best of what I do 

hi? beTdutiS now > I stin see sin > new sin, mixing 

troubled him. itgelf with the begt of that j Aq . gQ that 

now I am forced to conclude, that notwithstanding 
my former fond conceits of myself and duties, 1 
have committed sin enough in one day to send me 
to hell, though my former life had been faultless. 

Chr. And what did you do then ? 

Hope. Do? I could not tell what to do, until I 

broke my mind to Faithful ; for he and I were 

This made him well acquainted. And he told me, that 

break his mind 

to Faithful, who unless I could obtain the righteousness 

told him the way _ , . n . 

to be saved. oi a man that never had sinned, neither 
mine own, nor all the righteousness of the world, 
could save me. 

Chr. And did you think he spoke true ? 

Hope. Had he told me so when I was pleased 
and satisfied with my own amendments, I had 
called him fool for his pains ; but now, since I 
see my own infirmity, and the sin which cleaves 
to my best performance, I have been forced to be 
of his opinion. 

Chr. But did you think, when at first he sug- 
gested it to you, that there was such a man to be 
found, of whom it might justly be said, that he 
never committed sin 1 

Hope. I must confess the words at first 
sounded strangely ; but after a little more talk 



224 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

and company with, him, I had full conviction 
about it. 

Chr. And did you ask him what man this was, 
and how you must be justified by him 1 

Hope. Yes, and he told me it was the Lord 
Jesus, that dwelleth on the right hand of the Most 
High. Heb. 10 : 12-21. And thus, a more par- 
said he, you must be justified by him, o f c "i"^y tobS 
even by trusting to what he hath done save<L 
by himself in the days of his flesh, and suffered 
when he did hang on the tree. Rom. 4:5; Col. 
1 : 14 ; 1 Pet. 1:19. I asked him further, how 
that man's righteousness could be of that efficacy, 
to justify another before God. And he told me 
he was the mighty God, and did what he did, and 
died the death also, not for himself, but for me ; 
to whom his doings, and the worthiness of them, 
should be imputed, if I believed on him. 

Chr. And what did you do then ? 

Hope. I made my objections against my be- 
lieving, for that I thought he was not He aoubts of 
willing to save me. acceptation. 

Chr. And what said Faithful to you then ? 

Hope. He bid me go to him and see. Then 
I said it was presumption. He said, No ; for I 
was invited to come. Matt. 11:28. He is better 
Then he gave a book of Jesus' indit- ^ structed - 
ing, to encourage me the more freely to come ; 
and he said concerning that book, that every jo* 



HOPEFUL'S CONVERSION. 225 

and tittle thereof stood firmer than hea-ven and 
earth. Matt. 24 : 35. Then I asked him what I 
must do when I came ; and he told me I must 
entreat upon my knees, Psa. 95 : 6, Dan. 6 : 10, 
with all my heart and soul, Jer. 29 : 1 2, 13, the 
Father to reveal him to me. Then I asked him 
further, how I must make my supplications to him ; 
and he said, Go, and thou shalt find him upon a 
mercy-seat, where he sits all the year long to give 
pardon and forgiveness to them that come. Exod. 
25 : 22 ; Lev. 16:2; Num. 7 : 89 ; Heb. 4:16. I 
told him, that I knew not what to say when I 

He is bid to came ; and he bid me say to this 
pray ' effect : God be merciful to me a sinner, 

and make me to know and believe in Jesus Christ ; 
for I see that if his righteousness had not been, or 
I have not faith in that righteousness, I am utterly 
cast away. Lord, I have heard that thou art a 
merciful God, and hast ordained that thy Son Jesus 
Christ should be the Saviour of the world ; and 
moreover, that thou art willing to bestow him upon 
such a poor sinner as I am — and I am a sinner 
indeed. Lord, take therefore this opportunity, and 
magnify thy grace in the salvation of my soul, 
through thy Son Jesus Christ. Amen. 

Chr. And did you do as you were bidden? 
He prays. Hope. Yes, over and over and over. 

Chr. And did the Father reveal the Son to you ? 

Hope. Not at the first, nor second, nor third, 

Pil. Pros. 1 5 



226 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

nor fourth, nor fifth, no, nor at the sixth time 
neither. 

Chr. What did you do then? 

Hope. What? why, I could not tell what to do. 

Chr. Had you not thoughts of leaving off pray- 
ing? 

Hope. Yes ; and a hundred times twice told. 

Chr. And what was the reason you did not? 

Hope. I believed that it was true which hath 
been told me, to wit, that without the righteous- 
ness of this Christ, all the world could not save 
me ; and therefore, thought I with my- He durst not 

, leave off pray- 

self, if I leave off, I die, and I can but ing, and why. 
die at the throne of grace. And withal this came 
into my mind, "If it tarry, wait for it; because it 
will surely come, and will not tarry." Hab. 2 : 3. 
So I continued praying until the Father showed 
me his Son. 

Chr. And how was he revealed unto you? 

Hope. I did not see him with my bodily eyes, 
but with the eyes of my understanding, Christ is re- 

' vealed to him, 

Eph. 1: 18, 19; and thus it was. One and how. 
day I was very sad, I think sadder than at any one 
time in my life ; and this sadness was through a 
fresh sight of the greatness and vileness of my sins. 
And as I was then looking for nothing but hell, 
and the everlasting damnation of my soul, sud- 
denly, as I thought, I saw the Lord Jesus looking 
down from heaven upon me, and saying, ''Believe 



HOPEFUL'S CONVERSION. 227 

on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shaltbe saved." 
Acts 16: 31. 

But I replied, Lord, I am a great, a very great 
sinner: and he answered, "My grace is sufficient 
for thee." 2 Cor. 12: 9. Then I said, But, Lord, 
what is believing? And then I saw from that say- 
ing, "He that cometh to me shall never hunger, 
and he that believeth on me shall never thirst,''' 
John 6 : 35, that believing and coming was all one ; 
and that he that came, that is, that ran out in his 
heart and affections after salvation by Christ, he 
indeed believed in Christ. Then the water stood 
in mine eyes, and I asked further, But, Lord, may 
such a great sinner as I am be indeed accepted of 
thee, and be saved by thee ? And I heard him say, 
" And-him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast 
out." John 6: 37. Then I said, But how, Lord, 
must I consider of thee in my coming to thee, that 
my faith may be placed aright upon thee ? Then 
he said, " Christ Jesus came into the world to save 
sinners." 1 Tim. 1 : 15. He is the end of the law 
for righteousness to every one that believes. Rom. 
10:4, and chap. 4. He died for our sins, and rose 
again for our justification. Rom. 4:25. He lov- 
ed us, and washed us from our sins in his own 
blood. Rev. 1:5. He is Mediator between God 
and us. 1 Tim. 2:5. He ever liveth to make 
intercession for us. Heb. 7 : 25. From all which 
I gathered, that I must look for righteousness in 



228 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

his person, and for satisfaction for my sins by his 
blood : that what he did in obedience to his Father's 
law, and in submitting to the penalty thereof, 
was not for himself, but for him that will accept it 
for his salvation, and be thankful. And now was 
-my heart full of joy, mine eyes full of tears, and 
mine affections running over with love to the name, 
people, and ways of Jesus Christ. 

Chr. This was a revelation of Christ to your soul 
indeed. But tell me particularly what effect this 
had upon your spirit. 

Hope. It made me see that all the world, not- 
withstanding all the righteousness thereof, is in a 
state of condemnation. It made me see that God 
the Father, though he be just, can justly justify 
the coming sinner. It made me greatly ashamed 
of the vileness of my former life, and confounded 
me with the sense of mine own ignorance ; for there 
never came a thought into my heart before now 
that showed me so the beauty of Jesus Christ. It 
made me love a holy life, and long to do something 
for the honor and glory of the name of the Lord 
Tesus. Yea, I thought that had I now a thousand 
gallons of blood in my body, I could spill it all for 
the sake of the Lord Jesus. 

I saw then in my dream, that Hopeful looked 
back, and saw Ignorance, whom they had left be 
hind, coming after. Look, said he to Christian 
how far yonder youngster loitereth behind. 



CHRISTIAN AND IGNORANCE. 229 

Chr. Aye, aye, I see him : he carethnot for oui 
company. 

Hope. But I trow it would not have hurt him, 
had he kept pace with us hitherto. 

Chr. That is true; but I warrant you he think- 
eth otherwise. 

Hope. That I think he doth ; hut, however, let 
us tarry for him. So they did. 

Young igno- Then Christian said to him, Come 

ranee comes up 

again. away, man; why do you stay so be- 

hind? • 

Ignor. I take my pleasure in walking alone, 
even more a great deal than in company, unless I 
like it the better. 

Then said Christian to Hopeful, but softly, Did I 
not tell you he cared not for our company ? But 
however, said he, come up, and let us talk away 
the time in this solitary place. Then directing 
his speech to Ignorance, he said, Come, how do 
you do? How stands it between God and your 
soul now? 

Ignor. I hope, well ; for I am always full ol 
ignorance^ good motions, that come into my mind 

hope, and the 

ground of it. to comfort me as I walk. 

Chr. What good motions? Pray tell us. 
Ignor. Why, I think of God and heaven. 
Chr. So do the devils and damned souls. 
Ignor. But I think of them and desire them. 
Chr. So do many that are ncv?r like to com© 



230 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

there. " The soul of the sluggard desireth, and 
hath nothing.'' Prov. 13:4. 

Ignor. But I think of them, and leave all for 
them. 

Chr. That I doubt: for to leave all is a very- 
hard matter ; yea, a harder matter than many 
are aware of. But why, or by what, art thou 
persuaded that thou hast left all for God and 
heaven. 

Ignor. My heart tells me so. 

Chr. The wise man says, "He that trusteth in 
his own heart is a fool." Prov. 28 : 26. 

Ignor. That is spoken of an evil heart ; but 
mine is a good one. 

Chr. But how dost thou prove that? 

Ignor. It comforts me in hopes of heaven. 

Chr. That may be through its deceitfulness ; for 
a man's heart may minister comfort to him in the 
hopes of that thing for which he has yet no ground 
to hope. 

Ignor. But my heart and life agree together ; 
and therefore my hope is well-grounded. 

Chr. Who told thee that thy heart and life 
agree together? 

Ignor. My heart tells me so. 

Chr. " Ask my fellow if I be a thief." Thy 
heart tells thee so ! Except the word of God bear- 
eth witness in this matter, other testimony is of 
no value. 



CHRISTIAN AND IGNORANCE. 231 

Ignor. But is it not a g<>od heart that hath good 
thoughts ; and is not that a good life that is accord- 
ing to God's commandments ? 

Chr. Yes, that is a good heart that hath good 
thoughts, and that is a good life that is according 
to God's commandments ; but it is one thing in- 
deed to have these, and another thing only to 
think so. 

Ignor. Pray, what count you good thoughts, 
and a life according to God's commandments ? 

Chr. There are good thoughts of divers kinds; 
Eome respecting ourselves, some God, some Christ, 
and some other things. 

Ignor. What be good thoughts respecting our- 
selves ? 

What are good ° HR ' Such aS a S ree wltli the WOrd 
thoughts. f Q od# 

Ignor. When do our thoughts of ourselves agree 
with the word of God ? 

Chr. When we pass the same judgment upon 
ourselves which the word passes. To explain my- 
self: the word of God saith of persons in a natural 
condition, "There is none righteous, there is none 
that doeth good." It saith also, that " every im- 
agination of the heart of man is only evil, and 
that continually." Gen. 6:5; Rom. 3. And again, 
" The imagination of man's heart is evil from his 
youth." Gen. 8 : 21. Now then, when we think 
thus of Durselves, having sense thereof, then are 



232 . PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

our thoughts good ones, because according- to the 
word of God. 

Ignor. I will never believe that my heart is 
thus bad. 

Chr. Therefore thou never hadst one good 
thought concerning thyself in thy life. But let 
me go on. As the word passeth a judgment upon 
our hearts, so it passeth a judgment upon oui 
ways; and when the thoughts of our hearts and 
ways agree with the judgment which the word 
giveth of both, then are both good, because agree- 
ing thereto. 

Ignor. Make out your meaning. 

Chr. Why, the word of God saith, that man's 
ways are crooked ways, not good, but perverse ; it 
saith, they are naturally out of the good way, that 
they have not known it. Psa. 125 : 5; Proverbs 
2:15; Horn. 3 : 12. Now, when a man thus think- 
eth of his ways, I say, when he doth sensibly, and 
with heart-humiliation, thus think, then hath he 
good thoughts of his own ways, because his 
thoughts now agree with the judgment of the 
word of God. 

Ignor. What are good thoughts concerning God? 

Chr. Even as I have said concerning ourselves, 
when our thoughts of God do agree with what the 
word saith of him ; and that is, when we think of 
his being and attributes as the word hath taught, 
of which I cannot now discourse at lar^e. But to 



CHRISTIAN AND IG-NORANCE. 233 

speak of him with reference to us: then have we 
right thoughts of God, when we think that he 
knows us better than we know ourselves, and can 
see sin in us when and where we can see none in 
ourselves ; when we think he knows our inmost 
thoughts, and that our heart, with all its depths, 
is always open unto his eyes ; also when we think 
that all our righteousness stinks in his nostrils, and 
that therefore he cannot abide to see us stand be- 
fore him in any confidence, even in all our best 
performances. 

Ignor. Do you think that I am such a fool as to 
think that God can see no further than I ; or that I 
would come to God in the best of my performances ? 

Chr. Why, how dost thou think in this matter? 

Ignor. Why, to be short, I think I must believe 
in Christ for justification. 

Chr. How? think thou must believe in Christ, 
when thou seest not thy need of him ! Thou nei- 
ther seest thy original nor actual infirmities ; but 
hast such an opinion of thyself, and of what thou 
doest, as plainly renders thee to be one that did 
never see the necessity of Christ's personal right- 
eousness to justify thee before God. How then 
dost thou say, I believe in Christ? 

Ignor. I believe well enough, for all that. 

Chr. How dost thou believe 1 

The faith of Ignor. I believe that Christ died for 
ignorance. sinners ; and that I shall be justified 



234 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS." 

before God from the curse, through his gracious 
acceptance of my obedience to his laws. Or thus, 
Christ makes my duties, that are religious, accep- 
table to his Father by virtue of his merits, and so 
shall I be justified. 

. Chr. Let me give an answer to this confession 
of thy faith. 

1. Thou believest with a fantastical faith; for 
this faith is nowhere described in the word. 

2. Thou believest with a false faith; because it 
taketh justification from the personal righteousness 
of Christ, and applies it to thy own. 

3. This faith maketh not Christ a justifier of thy 
person, but of thy actions ; and of thy person for 
thy actions' sake, which is false. 

4. Therefore this faith is deceitful, even such as 
will leave thee under wrath in the day of God 
Almighty ; for true justifying faith puts the soul, 
as sensible of its lost condition by the law, upon 
flying for refuge unto Christ's righteousness ; which 
righteousness of his is not an act of grace by which 
he maketh, for justification, thy obedience accepted 
with God, but his personal obedience to the law, in 
doing and suffering for us what that required at our 
hands : this righteousness, I say, true faith accept- 
eth, under the skirt of which the soul being shroud- 
ed, and by it presented as spotless before God, it is 
accepted, and acquitted from condemnation. 

Ignor. What, would you have us trust to what 



CHRISTIAN AND IGNORANCE. 235 

Christ in his own person has done without us ? 
This conceit would loosen the reins of our lust, 
and tolerate us to live as we list ; for what matter 
how we live, if we may be justified by Christ's per- 
sonal righteousness from all, when we believe it? 

Chr. Ignorance is thy name, and as thy name is, 
so art thou : even this thy answer demonstrateth 
what I say. Ignorant thou art of what justifying 
righteousness is, and as ignorant how to secure thy 
soul, through the faith of it, from the heavy wrath 
of God. Yea, thou also art ignorant of the true 
effects of saving faith in this righteousness of Christ, 
which is, to bow and win over the heart to God in 
Christ, to love his name, his word, ways, and peo- 
ple, and not as thou ignorantly imaginest. 

Hope. Ask him if ever he had Christ revealed 
to him from heaven. 

Ignor. What, you are a man for revelations ! I do 
ignorance jan- believe, that what both you and all the 

e le* with them.. regt of you gay about that matter| j s 

but the fruit of distracted brains. 

Hope. Why, man, Christ is so hid in God from 
the natural apprehensions of the flesh, that he can- 
not by any man be savingly known, unless God the 
Father reveals him to him. 

Ignor. That is your faith, but not mine : yet 

He speaks re- mme > I doubt not, is as good as yours, 

KS'taSjI thou S h l have not in m 7 head so many 
aot - whimsies as you. 



236 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. Give me leave to put in a word. You 
ought not so slightly to speak of this matter ; for 
this I will boldly affirm, even as my good compan- 
ion hath done, that no man can know Jesus Christ 
but by the revelation of the Father ; yea, and faith 
too, by which the soul layeth hold upon Christ, if 
it be right, must be wrought by the exceeding 
greatness of his mighty power, Matt. 11 : 27; 1 
Cor. 12 : 3 ; Eph. 1 : 17-19; the working of which 
faith, I perceive, poor Ignorance, thou art ignorant 
of. Be awakened then, see thine own wretched- 
ness, and fly to the Lord Jesus ; and by his right- 
eousness, which is the righteousness of God, for 
he himself is God, thou shalt be delivered from 
condemnation. 

Ignor. You go so fast I cannot keep pace with 
you ; do you go on before : I must stay The talkbroke 
a while behind. up * 

Then they said, 

" Well, Ignorance, wilt thou yet foolish be, 
To slight good counsel, ten times given thee ? 
And if thou yet refuse it, thou shalt know, 
Ere long, the evil of thy doing so. 
Remember, man, in time : stoop, do not fear : 
Good counsel, taken well, saves ; therefore hear. 
But if thou yet shalt slight it, thou wilt be 
The loser, Ignorance, I '11 warrant thee." 



CHRISTIAN AND HOPEFUL. 237 



THE TENTH STAGE. 

Then Christian addressed himself thus to his 
fellow : 

Chr. Well, come, my good Hopeful, I perceive 
that thou and I must walk by ourselves again. 

So I saw in my dream, that they went on apace 
before, and Ignorance he came hobbling after. 
Then said Christian to his companion, I much pity 
this poor man: it will certainly go ill with him at 
last. 

Hope. Alas, there are abundance in our town 
m his condition, whole families, yea, whole streets, 
and that of pilgrims too ; and if there be so many 
in our parts, how many, think you, must there be 
in the place where he was born ? 

Chr. Indeed, the word saith, " He hath blinded 
their eyes, lest they should see," etc. 

But, now we are by ourselves, what do you think 
of such men? Have they at no time, think you, 
convictions of sin, and so, consequently, fears that 
their state is dangerous ? 

Hope. Nay, do you answer that question your- 
self, for you are the elder man. 

Chr. Then I say, sometimes, as I think, they may , 
but they being naturally ignorant, understand not 
that such convictions tend to their good ; and there 



238 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

fore they do desperately seek to stifle them, and 
presumptuously continue to flatter themselves in 
the way of their own hearts. 

Hope. I do believe, as you say, that fear tends 
much to men's good, and to make them The good UBe 
.right at their beginning to go on pil- of fear - 
grimage. 

Chr. Without all doubt it doth, if it be right : 
for so says the word, " The fear of the Lord is the 
beginning of wisdom." Job 28 : 28 ; Psa. 111:10; 
Prov. 1:7; 9 : 10. 

Hope. How will you describe right fear? 

Chr. True or right fear is discov- Right fear. 
ered by three things : 

1. By its rise : it is caused by saving convic- 
tions for sin. 

2. It driveth the soul to lay fast hold of Christ 
for salvation. 

3. It begetteth and continueth in the soul a 
great reverence of God, his word, and ways ; keep- 
ing it tender, and making it afraid to turn from 
them, to the right hand or to the left, to any thing 
that may dishonor God, break its peace, grieve the 
Spirit, or cause the enemy to speak reproach- 
fully. 

Hope. Well said; I believe you have said the 
truth. Are we now almost got past the Enchant- 
ed ground 1 

Chr. Why ? are you weary of this discourse ? 



CHRISTIAN AND HOPEFUL. 239 

Hope. No, verily, but that I would know where 
we are. 

Chr. We have not now above two miles further 
to go thereon. But let us return to our matter. 

Now, the ignorant know not that such convic- 
Why ignorant tions as tend to put them in fear, are 

persons stifle _ 

conviction. ior tneir good, and therefore they seek 
to stifle them. 

Hope. How do they seek to stifle them? 

Chr. 1. They think that those fears are wrought 
by the devil, though indeed they are wrought of 
God, and thinking so, they resist them, as things 
that directly tend to their overthrow. 2. They 
also think that these fears tend to the spoiling of 
their faith ; when, alas for them, poor men that they 
are, they have none at all; and therefore they 
harden their hearts against them. 3. They pre- 
sume they ought not to fear, and therefore, in de- 
spite of them, wax presumptuously confident. 4. 
They see that those fears tend to take away from 
them their pitiful old self-holiness, and therefore 
they resist them with all their might. 

Hope. I know something of this myself; for be- 
fore I knew myself it was so with me. 

Chr. "Well, we will leave, at this time, our neigh- 
bor Ignorance by himself, and fall upon another 
profitable question. 

Hope. With all my heart; but you shall still 
besin. 



240 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. Well then, did you know, about ten years 
ago, one Temporary in your parts, who Talk aWone 
was a forward man in religion then ? Temporary. 

Hope. Know him ? yes ; he dwelt in Graceless, 
a town about two miles off of Honesty, and he 
dwelt next door to one Turnback. 

Chr. Right ; he dwelt under the same roof with 
him. Well, that man was much awakened once : 
I believe that then he had some sight of his sins, 
and of the wages that were due thereto. 

Hope. I am of your mind, for, my house not be- 
ing above three miles from him, he would ofttimes 
come to me, and that with many tears. Truly I 
pitied the man, and was not altogether without 
hope of him ; but one may see it is not every one 
that cries, "Lord, Lord!" 

Chr. He told me once that he was resolved to 
go on pilgrimage, as we go now; but all of a sud- 
den he grew acquainted with one Save-self, and 
then he became a stranger to me. 

Hope. Now, since we are talking about him, let 
us a little inquire into the reason of the sudden 
backsliding of him and such others. 

Chr. It may be very profitable ; but do you begin. 

Hope. Well, then, there are. in my judgment, 
four reasons for it : 

1 . Though the consciences of such men are 
awakened, yet their minds are not changed : there- 
fore, when the power of guilt weareth away, that 



TALK OF ONE TEMPORARY. 241 

which provoked them to be religious ceaseth ; 
wherefore they naturally turn, to their old course 
again ; even as we see the dog that is sick of what 
he hath eaten, so long as his sickness prevails, he 
vomits and casts up all ; not that he doth this of 
a free mind, if we may say a dog has a mind, but 
because it troubleth his stomach : but now, when 
his sickness is over, and so his stomach eased, his 
desires being not at all alienated from his vomit, 
lie turns him about, and licks up all ; and so it is 
true which is written, "The dog is turned to his 
vomit again." 2 Peter, 2 : 22. Thus, I say, being 
hot for heaven by virtue only of the sense and fear 
of the torments of hell, as their sense of hell and 
fear of damnation chill and cool, so their desires 
for heaven and salvation cool also. So then it 
comes to pass, that when their guilt and fear is 
gone, their desires for heaven and happiness die, 
and they return to their course again. 

2. Another reason is, they have slavish fears 
that do overmaster them : I speak now of the 
fears that they have of men ; " for the fear of man 
bringeth a snare." Prov. 29 : 25. So then, though 
they seem to be hot for heaven so long as the 
flames of hell are about their ears, yet, when that 
terror is a little over, they betake themselves to 
second thoughts, namely, that it is good to be wise, 
and not to run, for they know not what, the hazard 
of losing all, or at least of bringing themselves 

Fil. Pro*. 1 6 



242 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

into unavoidable and unnecessary troubles , and so 
they fall in with the world again. 

3. The shame that attends religion lies also as a 
block in their way : they are proud and haughty, 
and religion in their eye is low and contemptible : 
therefore when they have lost their sense of hell 
and the wrath to come, they return again to their 
former course. 

4. Guilt, and to meditate terror, are grievous to 
them ; they like not to see their misery before they 
come into it ; though perhaps the sight of it at first, 
if they loved that sight, might make them fly 
whither the righteous fly and are safe ; but because 
they do, as I hinted before, even shun the thoughts 
of guilt and terror, therefore, when once they are 
rid of their awakenings about the terrors and wrath 
of God, they harden their hearts gladly, and choose 
such ways as will harden them more and more. 

Chr. You are pretty near the business, for the 
bottom of all is for want of a change in their mind 
and will. And therefore they are but like the 
felon that standeth before the judge: he quakes 
and trembles, and seems to repent most heartily, 
but the bottom of all is the fear of the halter: not 
that he hath any detestation of the offence, as it 
is evident ; because, let but this man have his lib- 
erty, and he will be a thief, and so a rogue still ; 
whereas, if his mind was changed, he would be 
otherwise. 



THE WAY OF APOSTATES. 243 

Hope. Now I have showed you the reason of 
their going back, do you show me the manner 
thereof. 

Chr. So I will willingly. 

1. They draw off their thoughts, all that they 

BWtheapos- ma y> ^ rom tne remembrance of God, 
tate goes back. deatl^ and judgment to come. 

2. Then they cast off by degrees private duties* 
as closet prayer, curbing their lusts, watching, sor- 
row for sin, and the like. 

3. Then they shun the company of lively and 
warm Christians. 

4. After that, they grow cold to public duty, as 
hearing, reading, godly conference, and the like. 

5. They then begin to pick holes, as we say, in 
the coats of some of the godly, and that devilishly, 
that they may have a seeming color to throw relig- 
ion, for the sake of some infirmities they have es- 
pied in them, behind their backs. 

6. Then they begin to adhere to, and associate 
themselves with loose, carnal, and wanton men. 

7. Then they give way to carnal and wanton 
discourses in secret ; and glad are they if they can 
see such things in any that are counted honest, 
that they may the more boldly do it through their 
example. 

8. After this they begin to play with little sins 
openly. 

9. And then, being hardened, they show them- 



244 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

selves as they are. Thus, being launched again 
into the gulf of misery, unless a miracle of grace 
prevent it, they everlastingly perish in their own 
deceivings. 

Now I saw in my dream, that by this time the 
pilgrims were got over the Enchanted ground, and 
entering into the country of Beulah, whose air was 
very sweet and pleasant, Isaiah 62 : 4-12; Song 
2 : 10-12 ; the way lying directly through it, they 
solaced themselves there for a season. Yea, here 
they heard continually the singing of birds, and 
saw every day the flowers appear in the earth, and 
heard the voice of the turtle in the land. In this 
country the sun shineth night and day : wherefore 
this was beyond the valley of the Shadow of Death, 
and also out of the reach of giant Despair: nei- 
ther could they from this place so much as see 
Doubting Castle. Here they were within sight of 
the city they were going to ; also here met them 
some of the inhabitants thereof; for in this land 
the shining ones commonly walked, be- Angels. 
cause it was upon the borders of heaven. In this 
land also the contract between the bride and the 
Bridegroom was renewed ; yea, here, " as the 
bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so shall thy 
God rejoice over thee." Here they had no want 
of corn and wine ; for in this place they met with 
abundance of what they had sought for in all their 
pilgrimage. Here they heard voices from out of 



PILGRIMS IN BEULAH. 245 

the city, loud voices, saying, " Say ye to the daugh- 
ter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh ! Behold, 
his reward is with him !" Here all the inhabi- 
tants of the country called them " the holy people, 
the redeemed of the Lord, sought out," etc. 

Now, as they walked in this land, they had 
more rejoicing than in parts more remote from the 
kingdom to which they were bound ; and drawing 
near to the city, they had yet a more perfect view 
thereof. It was builded of pearls and precious 
stones, also the streets thereof were paved with 
gold ; so that, by reason of the natural glory of 
the city, and the reflection of the sunbeams upon 
it, Christian with desire fell sick ; Hopeful also had 
a fit or two of the same disease : wherefore here 
they lay by it a while, crying out because of their 
pangs, " If you see my Beloved, tell him that I am 
sick of love." 

But being a little strengthened, and better able 
to bear their sickness, they walked on their way, 
and came yet nearer and nearer, where were or- 
chards, vineyards, and gardens, whose gates open- 
ed into the highway. Now, as they came up to 
these places, behold the gardener stood in the way; 
to whom the pilgrims said, Whose goodly vine- 
yards and gardens are these ? He answered, They 
are the King's, and are planted here for his own 
delight, and also for the solace of pilgrims. So the 
gardener had them into the vineyards, and bid 



246 PILG-RIM'S PROaRESS. 

them refresh, themselves with the dainties, Deut 
23 : 24 ; he also showed them there the King's 
walks and arbors where he delighted to he : and 
here they tarried and slept. 

Now I beheld in my dream, that they talked 
more in their sleep at this time than ever they 
did in all their journey ; and being in a muse 
thereabout, the gardener said even to me, Where- 
fore musest thou at the matter ? it is the nature of 
the fruit of the grapes of these vineyards, to go 
down so sweetly as to cause the lips of them that 
are asleep to speak. Song 7:9. 

So I saw that when they awoke, they addressed 
themselves to go up to the city. But as I said, the 
reflection of the sun upon the city, for the city was 
pure gold, Rev. 21 : 18, was so extremely glorious, 
that they could not as yet with open face behold 
it, but through an instiument made for that pur- 
pose. 2 Cor. 3 : 18. So I saw, that as they went 
on, there met them two men in raiment that shone 
like gold, also their faces shone as the light. 

These men asked the pilgrims whence they came ; 
and they told them. They also asked them where 
they had lodged, what difficulties and dangers, 
what comforts and pleasures, they had met with in 
the way; and they told them. Then said the men 
that met them, You have but two difficulties more 
to meet with, and then you are in the city. 

Christian then and his companion asked the men 



CHRISTIAN'S DISTRESS. 247 

to go along with them : so they told them that they 
would; But, said they, you must obtain it by your 
oWn faith. So I saw in my dream, that they went 
on together till they came in sight of the gate. 
Now I further saw, that betwixt them and the 
Death. gate was a river ; but there was no 
bridge to go over, and the river was very deep. 
A.t the sight, therefore, of this river, the pilgrims 
were much stunned ; but the men that went with 
them said, You must go through, or you cannot 
come at the gate. 

The pilgrims then began to inquire if there was 
no other way to the gate. To which they answer- 
ed, Yes; but there hath not any, save two, to wit, 
Enoch and Elijah, been permitted to tread that 
path since the foundation of the world, nor shall 
until the last trumpet shall sound. The pilgrims 
Death not wei- then, especially Christian, began to 

come to nature, ... . 

though by it we despond in their mind, and looked this 

pass out of this 

world into glory, way and that, but no way could be 
found by them by which they might escape the 
river. Then they asked the men if the waters 
were all of a depth. They said, No ; yet they 
Angels help us could not help them in that case ; for, 

not comfortably . . . 

through death, said they, you snail tind it deeper or 
shallower as you believe in the King of the place. 
They then addressed themselves to the water, 
and entering, Christian began to sink, and crying 
out to his good friend Hopeful, he said, I sink in 



248 PILG-RIM'S PROGRESS. 

deep waters ; the billows go over my head ; all his 
waves go over me. Selah. 

Then said the other, Be of good cheer, my broth- 
er : I feel the bottom, and it is good. Then said 
Christian, Ah, my friend, the sorrows of death 
have compassed me about, I shall not see the land 
that flows with milk and honey. And with that a 
great darkness and horror fell upon Christian's con- 
Christian, so that he could not see be- of death. 
fore him. Also here he in a great measure lost his 
senses, so that he could neither remember nor or- 
derly talk of any of those sweet refreshments that 
he had met with in the way of his pilgrimage. 
But all the words that he spoke still tended to dis- 
cover that he had horror of mind, and heart-fears 
that he should die in that river, and never obtain 
entrance in at the gate. Here also, as they that 
stood by perceived, he was much in the trouble- 
some thoughts of the sins that he had committed, 
both since and before he began to be a pilgrim. It 
was also observed that he was troubled with ap- 
paritions of hobgoblins and evil spirits ; for ever 
and anon he would intimate so much by words. 

Hopeful therefore here had much ado to keep his 
Irother's head above water; yea, sometimes he 
would be quite gone down, and then, ere a while, 
he would rise up again half dead. Hopeful did 
also endeavor to comfort him, saying, Brother, I 
see the gate, and men standing by to receive us ; 



CHRISTIAN DELIVERED FROM FEAR. 219 

but Christian would answer, It is you, it is you 
they wait for ; for you have been hopeful ever since 
I knew you. And so have you, said he to Chris- 
tian. Ah, brother, said he, surely if I was right 
he would now arise to help me ; but for my sins 
he hath brought me into the snare, and hath left 
me. Then said Hopeful, My brother, you have 
quite forgot the text where it is said of the wick- 
ed, " There are no bands in their death, but their 
strength is firm; they are not troubled as other 
men, neither are they plagued like other men." 
Psalm 73 : 4, 5. These troubles and distresses 
that you go through in these waters, are no sign 
that God hath forsaken you ; but are sent to try 
you, whether you will call to mind that which 
heretofore you have received of his goodness, and 
live upon him in your distresses. 

Then I saw in my dream, that Christian was in 

a muse a while. To whom also Hopeful added 

these words, Be of good cheer, Jesus Christ maketh 

Christian de- thee whole. And with that Christian 

livered from his . ( 

fears in death, broke out with a loud voice, Oh, I see 
him again ; and he tells me, " When thou passest 
through the waters, I will be with thee ; and 
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee." 
Isa. 43 : 2. Then they both took courage, and the 
enemy was after that as still as a stone, until they 
were gone over. Christian therefore presently 
found ground to stand upon, and so it followed 



250 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

that the rest of the river was hut shallow. Thus 
they got over. 

Now, upon the hank of the river, on the other 
side, they saw the two shining men again, who 
there waited for them. Wherefore, heing come 
out of the river, they saluted them, The angels do 

. . wait for them so 

saying, We are ministering spirits, sent soon as they are 

r ^ . . r t i i n i passed out of 

iortn to minister lor those that snail be this world. 
heirs of salvation. Thus they went along towards 
the gate. 

Now you must note, that the city stood upon a 
mighty hill ; but the pilgrims went up that hill 
with ease, because they had these two men to lead 
them up by the arms : they had likewise left their 
mortal garments behind them in the They have put 
river ; for though they went in with off m °r ta -iity. 
them, they came out without them. They there- 
fore went up here with much agility and speed, 
though the foundation upon which the city was 
framed was.higher than the clouds ; they therefore 
went up through the region of the air, sweetly 
talking as they went, being comforted because 
they safely got over the river, and had such glori- 
ous companions to attend them. 

The talk that they had with the shining ones 
was about the glory of the place ; who told them 
that the beauty and glory of it was inexpressible. 
There, said they, is "mount Sion, the heavenly 
Jerusalem, the innumerable company of angels, 



THE HAPPINESS OF HEAVEN. 251 

and the spirits of just men made perfect." Heb, 
12 : 22-24. You are going now, said they, to the 
paradise of God, wherein you shall see the tree of 
life, and eat of the never-fading fruits thereof : and 
when you come there you shall have white robes 
given you, and your walk and talk shall be every 
day with the King, even all the days of eternity. 
Rev. 2:7; 3 : 4, 5; 22 : 5. There you shall not 
see again such things as you saw when you were 
in the lower region upon the earth, to wit, sorrow, 
sickness, affliction, and death ; " for the former 
things are passed away." Rev. 21 : 4. You are 
going now to Abraham, to Isaac, and Jacob, and to 
the prophets, men that God hath taken away from 
the evil to come, and that are now " resting upon 
their beds, each one walking in his righteousness." 
The men then asked, What must we do in the holy 
place ? To whom it was answered, You must 
there receive the comfort of all your toil, and have 
joy for all your sorrow; you must reap what you 
have sown, even the fruit of all your prayers and 
tears and sufferings for the King by the way. 
Gal. 6 : 7, 8. In that place you must wear crowns 
of gold, and enjoy the perpetual sight and vision 
of the Holy One ; for there you shall see him as 
he is. 1 John, 3 : 2. There also you shall serve 
Him continually with praise, with shouting and 
thanksgiving, whom you desired to serve in the 
world, though with much difficulty, because of the 



252 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

infirmity of your flesh. There your eyes shall be 
delighted with seeing, and your ears with hearing 
the pleasant voice of the Mighty One. There you 
shall enjoy your friends again that are gone thither 
before you; and there you shall with joy receive 
even every one that follows into the holy place 
after you. There also you shall be clothed with 
glory and majesty, and put into an equipage fit to 
ride out with the King of glory. When he shall 
come with sound of trumpet in the clouds, as upon 
the wings of the wind, you shall come with him ; 
and when he shall sit upon the throne of judg- 
ment, you shall sit by him ; yea, and when he shall 
pass sentence upon all the workers of iniquity, let 
them be angels or men, you also shall have a voice 
in that judgment, because they were his and your 
enemies. Also, when he shall again return to the 
city, you shall go too with sound of trumpet, and 
be ever with him. 1 Thess. 4 : 14-17 ; Jude 14, 
15; Dan. 7:9, 10; 1 Cor. 6 : 2, 3. 

Now, while they were thus drawing towards the 
gate, behold a company of the heavenly host came 
out to meet them : to whom it was said by the 
other two shining ones, These are the men that 
have loved our Lord when they were in the world, 
and that have left all for his holy name ; and he 
hath sent us to fetch them, and we have brought 
them thus far on their desired journey, that they 
may go in and look their Redeemer in the face 



THE WELCOME OF ANGELS. 253 

with joy. Then the heavenly host gave a great 
shout, saying, " Blessed are they that are called to 
the marriage-supper of the Lamb." Rev. 19 : 9. 
There came out also at this time to meet them 
several of the King's trumpeters, clothed in white 
and shining raiment, who, with melodious noises 
and loud, made even the heavens to echo with 
their sound. These trumpeters saluted Christian 
and his fellow with ten thousand welcomes from 
the world ; and this they did with shouting and 
sound of trumpet. 

This done, they compassed them round on every 
side ; some went before, some behind, and some 
on the right hand, and some on the left, as it were 
to guard them through the upper regions, continu- 
ally sounding as they went, with melodious noise, 
in notes on high; so that the very sight was to 
them that could behold it, as if heaven itself was 
come down to meet them. Thus, therefore, they 
walked on together; and as they walked, ever and 
anon these trumpeters, even with joyful sound, 
would ; by mixing their music with looks and ges- 
tures, still signify to Christian and his brother how 
welcome they were into their company, and with 
what gladness they came to meet them. And now 
were these two men, as it were, in heaven, before 
they came to it, being swallowed up with the sight 
of angels, and with hearing of their melodious 
notes. Here also they had the city itself in view ; 



254 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

and they thought they heard all the hells therein 
to ring, to welcome them thereto. But, above all, 
the warm and joyful thoughts that they had about 
their own dwelling there with such company, and 
that for ever and ever ; 0, by what tongue or pen 
can their glorious joy be expressed ! Thus they 
came up to the gate. 

Now when they were come up to the gate, there 
was written over it, in letters of gold, 

"BLESSED ARE THEY THAT DO HIS COMMANDMENTS, 
THAT THEY MAY HAVE RIGHT TO THE TREE OF 
LIFE, AND MAY ENTER IN THROUGH THE GATES IN- 
TO THE CITY." 

Then I saw in my dream, that the shining men 
bid them call at the gate : the which when they 
did, some from above looked over the gate, to wit, 
Enoch, Moses, and Elijah, etc., to whom it was 
said, These pilgrims are come from the city of De- 
struction, for the love that they bear to the King 
of this place ; and then the pilgrims gave in unto 
them each man his certificate, which they had re- 
ceived in the beginning : those therefore were car- 
ried in unto the King, who, when he had read them, 
said, Where are the men? To whom it was an- 
swered, They are standing without the gate. The 
King then commanded to open the gate, "That the 
righteous nation," said he, " that keepeth the truth 
may enter in." Isa. 26 : 2. 

Now I saw in my dream, that these two men 



PILGRIMS ENTER THJtf CITY. 255 

went in at the gate ; and lo, as they entered, they 
were transfigured ; and they had^ raiment put on 
that shone like gold. There were also that met 
them with harps and crowns, and gave them to 
them ; the harps to praise withal, and the crowns 
in token of honor. Then I heard in my dream, 
that all the bells in the city rang again for joy, 
and that it was said unto them, " Enter ye into 
the joy of your Lord." I also heard the men 
themselves, that they sang with a loud voice, say- 
ing, " Blessing, and honor, and glory, and pow- 
er, be unto Him that sitteth upon the throne, 
and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever." 

Now, just as the gates were opened to let in the 
men, I looked in after them : and behold, the city 
shone like the sun; the streets also were paved 
with gold; and in them walked many men, with 
crowns on their heads, palms in their hands, and 
golden harps, to sing praises withal. 

There were also of them that had wings, and 
they answered one another without intermission, 
saying, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord. And after 
that they shut up the gates ; which when I had 
seen, I wished myself among them. 

Now, while I was gazing upon all these things, 

I turned my head to look back, and saw Ignorance 

ignorance come up to the river side ; but he soon 

comes up to the 

river. got over, and that without half the 

difficulty which the other two men met with. Fo 



256 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

it happened that there was then in that place one 
Vain-Hope, a ferryman, that with his Vain-Hope 

i , i , , , . % , , does ferry him 

boat helped him over ; so he, as the over. 
others I saw, did ascend the hill, to come up to 
the gate ; only he came alone, neither did any man 
meet him with the least encouragement. When 
he was come up to the gate, he looked up to the 
writing that was above, and then began to knock, 
supposing that entrance should have been quickly 
administered to him ; but he was asked by the 
men that looked over the top of the gate, Whence 
come you? and what would you have? He an- 
swered, I have ate and drank in the presence of the 
King, and he has taught in our streets. Then they 
asked him for his certificate, that they might go in 
and show it to the King: so he fumbled in his 
bosom for one, and found none. Then said they, 
Have you none ? but the man answered never a 
word. So they told the King, but he would not 
come down to see him, but commanded the two 
shining ones that conducted Christian and Hope- 
ful to the city, to go out and take Ignorance, and 
bind him hand and foot, and have him away. 
Then they took him up, and carried him through 
the air to the door that I saw in the side of the 
hill, and put him in there. Then I saw that there 
was a way to hell even from the gate of heaven, 
as well as from the city of Destruction. So 1 
awoke, and behold, it was a dream. 



CONCLUSION. 257 



CONCLUSION 



Now, reader, I have told my dream to thee, 

See if thou canst interpret it to me, 

Or to thyself, or neighbor: but take heed 

Of misinterpreting ; for that, instead 

Of doing good, will but thyself abuse : 

By misinterpreting, evil ensues. 

Take heed, also, that thou be not extreme 

In playing with the outside of my dream ; 

Nor let my figure or similitude 

Put thee into a laughter, or a feud. 

Leave this for boys and fools ; but as for thee, 

Do thou the substance of my matter see. 

Put by the curtains, look within my veil, 

Turn up my metaphors, and do not fail. 

There, if thou seekest them, such things thou ; lt find 

As will be helpful to an honest mind. 

What of my dross thou findest there, be bold 

To throw away, but yet preserve the gold. 

What if my gold be wrapped up in ore? 

None throws away the apple for the core : 

But if thou shalt cast all away as vain, 

I kmw not but 't will make me dream again. 



PiLProg 17 



THE 

PILGRIM'S PROGRESS 



FROM 



THIS WORLD TO THAT WHICH IS TO COME; 



DELIVERED 



UNDER THE SIMILITUDE OF A DREAM. 



PART II. 



WHEREIN IS SET FORTH THE MANNER OP THE SETTING OUT OV 
CHRISTIAN'S WIFE AND CHILDREN J THEIR DANGER- 
OUS JOURNEY, AND SAFE ARRIVAL AT THE 
DESIRED COUNTRY. 

I HAVE USED SIMILITUDES.— Hos. 12:10. 



THE 

AUTHOR'S WAY 



OF 



SENDING FORTH HIS SECOND PART 



OF 



THE PILGRIM. 



Go now, my little book, to every place 
Where my first Pilgrim has but shown his face : 
Call at their door: if any say, Who 's there? 
Then answer thou, Christiana is here. 
If they bid thee come in, then enter thou, 
With all thy boys ; and then, as thou knowest how, 
Tell who they are, also from whence they came; 
Perhaps they '11 know them by their looks, or name : 
But if they should not, ask them yet again, 
If formerly they did not entertain 
One Christian, a Pilgrim. If they say 
They did, and were delighted in his way ; 
Then let them know that these related were 
Unto him; yea, his wife and children are. 

Tell them, that they have left their house and home 
Are turned Pilgrims; seek a world to come : 
That they have met with hardships in the way ; 
That they do meet with troubles night and day ; 



262 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

That they have trod on serpents ; fought with devils ; 

Have also overcome a many evils ; 

Yea, tell them also of the next who have, 

Of love to pilgrimage, been stout and brave 

Defenders of that way ; and how they still 

Refuse this world to do their Father's will. 

Go tell them also of those dainty things 

That pilgrimage unto the Pilgrim brings. 

Let them acquainted be, too, how they are 

Beloved of their King, under his care ; 

What goodly mansions he for them provides ; 

Though they meet with rough winds and swelling tides 

How brave a calm they will enjoy at last, 

Who to their Lord, and by his ways hold fast. 

Perhaps with heart and hand they will embrace 
Thee, as they did my firstling ; and will grace 
Thee and thy fellows with such cheer and fare, 
As show well they of Pilgrims lovers are. 

OBJECTION I. 
But how if they will not believe of me 
That I am truly thine? 'cause some there be 
That counterfeit the Pilgrim and his name, 
Seek, by disguise, to seem the very same ; 
And by that means have wrought themselves into 
The hands and houses of I know not who. 

ANSWER. 

'T is true, some have, of late, to counterfeit 
My Pilgrim, to their own my title set; 
Yea, others half my name, and title too, 
Have stitched to their books, to make them do. 
But yet they, by their features, do declare 
Themselves not mine to be, whose'er they are 



THE AUTHOR'S APOLOaY. 263 

If such thou meet'st with, then thine only way, 
Before them all, is, to say out thy say 
In thine own native language, which no man 
Now useth, nor with ease dissemble can. 

If, after all, they still of you shall doubt, 
Thinking that you, like gypsies, go about. 
In naughty wise the country to defile; 
Or that you seek good people to beguile 
With things unwarrantable ; send for me, 
And I will testify you pilgrims be ; 
Yea, I will testify that only you 
My pilgrims are, and that alone will do. 

OBJECTION II. 

But yet, perhaps I may inquire for him 
Of those who wish him damned life and limb. 
What shall I do, when I at such a door 
For pilgrims ask, and they shall rage the more? 

ANSWER. 

Fright not thyself, my Book, for such bugbears 
Are nothing else but ground for groundless fears. 
My Pilgrim's book has travelled sea and land, 
Yet could I never come to understand 
That it was slighted or turned out of door 
By any kingdom, were they rich or poor. 
In France and Flanders, where men kill each other, 
My Pilgrim is esteemed a friend, a brother. 

In Holland, too, 't is said, as I am told, 
My Pilgrim is, with some, worth more than gold. 
Highlanders and wild Irish can agree 
My Pilgrim should familiar with them be. 



264 PILGRIM'S P&OttRESS. 

'Tis in New England under such advance, 
Receives there so much loving countenance, 
As to be trimmed, new clothed, and decked with gems, 
That it might show its features, and its limbs. 
Yet more : so comely doth my Pilgrim walk, 
That of him thousands daily sing and talk. 

If you draw nearer home, it will appear 
My Pilgrim knows no ground of shame or fear: 
City and country will him entertain, 
With, Welcome, Pilgrim ; yea, they can't refrain 
From smiling, if my Pilgrim be but by, 
Or shows his head in any company. 

Brave gallants do my Pilgrim hug and love, 
Esteem it much, yea, value it above 
Things of a greater bulk ; yea, with delight 
Say, my lark's leg is better than a kite. 
Young ladies, and young gentlewomen too, 
Do not small kindness to my Pilgrim show : 
Their cabinets, their bosoms, and their hearts, 
My Pilgrim has; 'cause he to them imparts 
His pretty riddles in such wholesome strains, 
As yield them profit double to their pains 
Of reading ; yea, I think I may be bold 
To say, some prize him far above their gold. 
The very children that do walk the street, 
If they do but my holy Pilgrim meet, 
Salute him will ; will wish him well, and say, 
He is the only stripling of the day. 

They that have never seen him, yet admire 
What they have heard of him, and much desire 
To have his company, and hear him tell 
Those pilgrim stories which he knows so well. 



THE AUTHOR'S APOLOGY. 2 65 

Yea, some that did not love him at the first 
But called him fool and noddy, say they must! 
Now they have seen and heard him, him commend, 
And to those whom they love they do him send. 

Wherefore, my Second Part, thou need'st not be 
Afra ld to show thy head: none can hurt thee, 
That wish but well to him that went before ; 
Cause thou com'st after with a second store 
Of things as good, as rich, as profitable, 
For young, for old, for staggering, and for stable. 

OBJECTION III. 

But some there be that say, He laughs too loud: 
And some do say, His head is in a cloud 
Some say, His words and stories are so dark, 
They know not how, by them, to find his mark. 

ANSWER. 

One may I think, say, Both his laughs and cries 
May well be guessed at by his watery eyes 
Some things are of that nature, as to make 
One s fancy chuckle, while his heart doth ache : 
When Jacob saw his Rachel with the sheep 
He did at the same time both kiss and weep. 

Whereas some say, A cloud is in his head: 
1 hat doth but show his wisdom >s covered 
With his own mantle-and to stir the mind 
To search well after what it fain would find, 
Things that seem to be hid in words obscure 
Do but the godly mind the more allure 
To study what those sayings should contain, 
inat speak to us in such a cloudy strain 



266 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

I also know a dark similitude 
Will on the curious fancy more intrude, 
And will stick faster in the heart and head, 
Than things from similes not borrowed. 

Wherefore, my Book, let no discouragement 
Hinder thy travels. Behold, thou art sent 
To friends, not foes ; to friends that will give place 
To thee, thy Pilgrims, and thy words embrace. 

Besides, what my first Pilgrim left concealed, 
Thou, my brave second Pilgrim, hast revealed ; 
What Christian left locked up, and went his way, 
Sweet Christiana opens with her key. 

OBJECTION IV. 

But some love not the method of your first : 
Romance they count it ; throw 't away as dust. 
If I should meet with such, what should I say? 
Must I slight them as they slight me, or nay? 

ANSWER. 

My Christiana, if with such thou meet, 
By all means, in all loving wise them greet; 
Render them not reviling for revile, 
But, if they frown, I prithee on them smile : 
Perhaps 't is nature, or some ill report, 
Has made them thus despise, or thus retort. 

Some love no fish, some love no cheese, and some 
Love not their friends, nor their own house or home; 
Some start at pig, slight chicken, love not fowl 
More than they love a cuckoo or an owl. . 
Leave such, my Christiana, to their choice, 
And seek those who to find thee will rejoice : 



THE AUTHOR'S APOLOG-Y. 267 

By no means strive, but in most humble wise, 
Present thee to them in thy Pilgrim's guise. 

Go then, my little book, and show to all 
That entertain, and bid thee welcome shall, 
What thou shalt keep close shut up from the rest; 
And wish what thou shalt show them may be blessed 
To them for good, and make them choose to be 
Pilgrims, by better far than thee or me. 
Go then, I say, tell all men who thou art : 
Say, I am Christiana ; and my part 
Is now, with my four sons, to tell you what 
It is for men to take a Pilgrim's lot. 

Go, also, tell them who and what they be 
That now do go on pilgrimage with thee; 
Say, Here 's my neighbor Mercy: she is one 
That has long time with me a pilgrim gone : 
Come, see her in her virgin face, and learn 
' Twixt idle ones and pilgrims to discern. 
Yea, let young damsels learn of her to prize 
The world which is to come, in any wise. 
When little tripping maidens follow God, 
And leave old doating sinners to his rod, 
'T is like those days wherein the young ones cried 
Hosanna ! when the old ones did deride. 

Next tell them of old Honest, whom you found 
With his white hairs treading the Pilgrim's ground; 
Yea, tell them how plain-hearted this man was ; 
How after his good Lord he bore the cross. 
Perhaps with some gray head, this may prevail 
With Christ to fall in love, and sin bewail. 

Tell them also, how Master Fearing went 
On pilgrimage, and how the time he spent 



268 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

In solitariness, with fears and cries, 

And how, at last, he won the joyful prize. 

He was a good man, though much down in spirit ; 

He is a good man, and doth life inherit. 

Tell them of Master Feeble-mind also, 
Who not before, but still behind would go. 
Show them also, how he had like been slain, 
And how one Great-Heart did his life regain. 
This man was true of heart; though weak in grace, 
One might true godliness read in his face. 

Then tell them of Master Ready-to-Halt, 
A man with crutches, but much without fault. 
Tell them how Master Feeble-mind and he 
Did love, and in opinion much agree. 
And let all know, though weakness was their chance, 
Yet sometimes one could sing, the other dance. 

Forget not Master Valiant-for-the- Truth, 
That man of courage, though a very youth : 
Tell every one his spirit was so stout, 
No man could ever make him face about ; 
And how Great-Heart and he could not forbear, 
But pull down Doubting Castle, slay Despair. 

Overlook not Master Despondency, 
Nor Much-Afraid, his daughter, though they lie 
Under such mantles, as may make them look, 
With some, as if their God had them forsook. 
They softly went, but sure ; and, at the end, 
Found that the Lord of pilgrims was their friend. 
When thou hast told the world of all these things, 
Then turn about, my Book, and touch these strings ; 



THE AUTHOR'S APOLOGY. 269 

Which, if hut touched, will such music make, 
They '11 make a cripple dance, a giant quake. 

Those riddles that lie couched within thy breast, 
Freely propound, expound ; and for the rest 
Of thy mysterious lines, let them remain 
For those whose nimble fancies shall them gain. 

Now may this little hook a blessing be 
To those who love this little book and me ) 
And may its buyer have no cause to say, 
His money is but lost or thrown away. 
Yea, may this second Pilgrim yield that fruit 
As may with each good pilgrim's fancy suit ; 
And may in some persuade, that go astray, 
To turn their feet and heart to the right way, 
Is the hearty prayer of 

The author, 

JOHN BUNYAN. 



THE 

PILGRIM'S PROGRESS, 



IN 



THE SIMILITUDE OF A DREAM 



PART II. 



COURTEOUS COMPANIONS, 

Some time since, to tell you my dream that I 
had of Christian the pilgrim, and of his dangerous 
journey towards the Celestial country, was pleasant 
to me and profitable to you. I told you then also 
what I saw concerning his wife and children, and 
how unwilling they were to go with him on pil- 
grimage; insomuch that he was forced to go on 
his progress without them ; for he durst not run 
the danger of that destruction which he feared 
would come by staying with them in the city of 
Destruction: wherefore, as I then showed you, he 
left them and departed. 

Now it hath so happened, through the multipli- 
city of business, that I have been much hindered 



272 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

and kept back from my wonted travels into those 
parts whence he went, and so could not, till now, 
obtain an opportunity to make further inquiry after 
those whom he left behind, that I might give you 
an account of them. But having had some con- 
cerns that way of late, I went down again thith- 
erward. Now, having taken up my lodging in a 
wood about a mile off the place, as I slept, I 
dreamed again. 

And as I was in my dream, behold, an aged gen- 
tleman came by where I lay ; and because he was 
to go some part of the way that I was travelling, 
methought I got up and went with him. So, as 
we walked, and as travellers usually do, I was as 
if we fell into a discourse ; and our talk happened 
to be about Christian and his travels; for thus I 
began with the old man: 

Sir, said I, what town is that there below, that 
lieth on the left hand of our way 1 

Then said Mr. Sagacity, for that was his name, 
It is the city of Destruction, a populous place, but 
possessed with a very ill-conditioned and idle sort 
of people. 

I thought that was that city, quoth I : I went 
once myself through that town ; and therefore 
know that this report you give of it is true. 

Sag. Too true ! I wish I could speak truth in 
speaking better of them that dwell therein. 

Well sir, quoth I, then I perceive you to be a 



THE HAPPINESS OF CHRISTIAN. 273 

well-meaning man, and so one that takes pleas- 
ure to hear and tell of that which is good. Pray, 
did you never hear what happened to a man some 
time ago of this town, whose name was Christian, 
that went on a pilgrimage up towards the higher 
regions? 

Sag. Hear of him! Aye, and I also heard of 
the molestations, troubles, wars, captivities, cries, 
groans, frights, and fears that he met with and 
had on his journey. Besides, I must tell you, all 
our country rings of him ; there are hut few houses 
that have heard of him and his doings, but have 
sought after and got the records of his pilgrimage ; 
yea, I think I may say that his hazardous journey 
has got many well-wishers to his ways ; for, though 

Christians are when ne WaS here he waS f ° o1 in eVei T 
when P ° ken ne f mail ' S moutn > vet noW ne * S g one > ne 

though called i s highly commended of all. For 'tis 

fools while they D J 

are here. said he lives bravely where he is : yea, 

many of them that are resolved never to run his 
hazards, yet have their mouths water at his gains. 

They may, quoth I, well think, if they think any 
thing that is true, that he liveth well where he is ; 
for he now lives at, and in the Fountain of life, 
and has what he has without labor and sorrow, for 
there is no grief mixed therewith. But, pray what 
talk have the people about him? 

Sag. Talk! the people talk strangely about him: 
some say that he now walks in white, Rev. 3:4; 

Pil. Prog. 1 8 



276 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

that they are all gone on pilgrimage, both the good 
woman and her four boys. And being we are, as 
I perceive, going some considerable way together, 
I will give you an account of the whole of the 
matter. 

This Christiana — for that was her name from 
the day that she with her children betook them- 
selves to a pilgrim's life — after her husband was 
gone over the river, and she could hear of him no 
more, her thoughts began to work in her mind. 
First, for that she had lost her husband, and for 
that the loving bond of that relation was utterly 
broken betwixt them. For you know, said he to 
me, nature can do no less but entertain the living 
with many a heavy cogitation, in the remembrance 
of the loss of loving relations. This, therefore, of 
her husband did cost her many a tear. Mark this, you 
But this was not all ; for Christiana g^™ c $* 
did also begin to consider with herself, Nations. 
whether her unbecoming behavior towards her hus- 
band was not one cause that she saw him no more, 
and that in such sort he was taken away from her. 
And upon this came into her mind, by swarms, all 
her unkind, unnatural, and ungodly carriage to her 
dear friend ; which also clogged her conscience, 
and did load her with guilt. She was, moreover, 
much broken with recalling to remembrance the 
restless groans, brinish tears, and self-bemoanings 
of her husband, and how she did harden her heart 



-x 







CHRISTIANA-S DISCOURSE. 277 

against all his entreaties and loving persuasions of 
her and her sons to go with him ; yea, there was 
not any thing that Christian either said to her, or 
did before her, all the while that his burden did 
hang on his back, but it returned upon her like a 
flash of lightning, and rent the caul of her heart in 
sunder; especially that bitter outcry of his, "What 
shall I do to be saved?" did ring in her ears most 
dolefully. 

Then said she to her children, Sons, we are all 
undone. I have sinned away your father, and he 
is gone : he would have had us with him, but I 
would not go myself: I also have hindered you of 
life. With that the boys fell into tears, and cried 
out to go after their father. Oh, said Christiana, 
that it had been but our lot to go with him ; then 
had it fared well with us, beyond what it is like 
to do now. For though I formerly foolishly imag- 
ined, concerning the troubles of your father, that 
they proceeded of a foolish fancy that he had, or 
for that he was overrun with melancholy humors ; 
yet now it will not out of my mind, but that they 
sprung from another cause ; to wit, for that the 
light of life was given him, James 1 : 23-25 ; John 
8 : 12 ; by the help of which, as I perceive, he has 
escaped the snares of death. Prov. 14 : 27. Then 
they all wept again, and cried out, Oh, woe worth 
the day ! 

The next night Christiana had a dream ; and 



<.78 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

behold, she saw as if a broad parchment was opened 
before her, in which were recorded the christiana'i 
sum of her ways; and the crimes, as dream - 
she thought, looked very black upon her. Then 
she cried out aloud in her sleep, " Lord, have mercy 
upon me a sinner!" Luke 18:13; and the little 
children heard her. 

After this she thought she saw two very ill- 
favored ones standing by her bedside, and saying, 
What shall we do with this woman? for she cries 
out for mercy, waking and sleeping: if Mark this, this 

x , is the quintes- 

she be suiiered to go on as she begins, sence of hell. 
we shall lose her as we have lost her husband. 
Wherefore we must, by one way or other, seek to 
take her off from the thoughts of what shall be 
hereafter, else all the world cannot help but she 
will become a pilgrim. 

Now she awoke in a great sweat, also a trem- 
bling was upon her ; but after a while she fell to 
sleeping again. And then she thought she saw 
Christian, her husband, in a place of bliss among 
many immortals, with a harp in his Help aga ; nst 
hand, standing and playing upon it be- dlscoura £ ement - 
fore One that sat on a throne with a rainbow about 
his head. She saw also, as if he bowed his head 
with his face to the paved work that was under 
his Prince's feet, saying, " I heartily thank my 
Lord and King for bringing me into this place." 
Then shouted a company of them that stood round 



SECRET VISITS CHRISTIANA. *>79 

about, and harped with their harps ; but no man 
living could tell what they said but Christian and 
his companions. 

Next morning, when she was up, had prayed 
to God, and talked with her children a while, one 
knocked hard at the door ; to whom she spoke out, 
saying, " If thou comest in God's name, come in." 
So he said, " Amen ;" and opened the door, and 
saluted her with, " Peace be to this house." The 
which when he had done, he said, " Christiana, 
knowest thou wherefore I am come ?" Then she 
.blushed and trembled ; also her heart began to 
wax warm with desires to know from whence he 
came, and what was his errand to her. So he said 
unto her, " My name is Secret ; I dwell with those 
that are on high. It is talked of where I dwell as 
if thou hadst a desire to go thither : also there is 
a report that thou art aware of the evil thou hast 
formerly done to thy husband, in hardening of thy 

Convictions heart against his way, and in keepinsr 

seconded by tid- ° . , . 

ings of God's of these babes in their ignorance. Chris- 
readiness to par- . , - T •/» t r\ 
don. tiana, the Merciful One hath sent me 

to tell thee, that he is a God ready to forgive, and 

that he taketh delight to multiply the pardon of 

offences. He also would have thee to know, that 

he inviteth thee to come into his presence, to his 

table, and that he will feed thee with the fat of 

his house, and with the heritage of Jacob thy 

father. 



280 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

" There is Christian, thy husband that was, 
with legions more, his companions, ever behold- 
ing that face that doth minister life to beholders, 
and they will all be glad when they shall hear 
the sound of thy feet step over thy Father's 
threshold." 

Christiana at this was greatly abashed in her- 
self, and bowed her head to the ground. This 
visitor proceeded, and said, " Christiana, here is 
also a letter for thee, which I have brought from 
thy husband's King." So she took it, and opened 
it, but it smelt after the manner of the best per- 
fume. Song 1 : 3. Also it was written in letters 
of gold. The contents of the letter were these, 
That the King would have her to do as did Chris- 
tian her husband ; for that was the way to come 
to his city, and to dwell in his presence with joy 
for ever. At this the good woman was Christiana 
quite overcome ; so she cried out to her qmte overcorae - 
visitor, Sir, will you carry me and my children 
with you, that we also may go and worship the 
King? 

Then said the visitor, Christiana, the bitter is 
before the sweet. Thou must through troubles, as 
did he that went before thee, enter this Celestial 
city. "Wherefore I advise thee to do Further in- 

i . i s-ti • • t •• -, i structions to 

as did Christian thy husband : go to Christiana. 
the Wicket-gate yonder, over the plain, for that 
stands at the head of the way up which thou must 



CHRISTIANA INVITES HER SONS. 281 

go ; and I wish thee all good speed. Also I advise 
that thou put this letter in thy bosom, that thou 
read therein to thyself and to thy children until 
you have got it by heart ; for it is one of the songs 
which thou must sing while thou art in this house 
of thy pilgrimage, Psalm 119 : 54 ; also this thou 
must deliver in at the further gate. 

Now I saw in my dream, that this old gentle- 
man, as he told me the story, did himself seem to 
be greatly affected therewith. He moreover pro- 
ceeded and said, So Christiana called her sons 
Christiana together and began thus to address 
KttSjSS herself unto them : My sons, I have, as 
ney - you may perceive, been of late under 

much exercise in my soul about the death of your 
father : not for that I doubt at all of his happiness, 
for I am satisfied now that he is well. I have 
also been much affected with the thoughts of mine 
own state and yours, which I verily beJieve is by 
nature miserable. My carriage also to your father 
in his distress, is a great load to my conscience; 
for I hardened both mine own heart and yours 
against him, and refused to go with him on pil- 
grimage. 

The thoughts of these things would now kill 
me outright, but for a dream which I had last night, 
and but for the encouragement which this stranger 
has given me this morning. Come, my children, 
let us pack up, and begone to the gate that leads 



282 PILG-RIM'S PROOrRESS. 

to the Celestial country, that we may see your 
father, and be with him and his companions in 
peace, according to the laws of that land. 

Then did her children burst out into tears, for 
joy that the heart of their mother was so inclined. 
So their visitor bid them farewell ; and they began 
to prepare to set out for their journey. 

But while they were thus about to be gone, two 
of the women that were Christiana's Timorous and 

Mercy come to 

neighbors came up to her house, and visit Christiana. 
knocked at her door. To whom she said as be- 
fore, If you come in God's name, come Christiana's 
in. At this the women were stunned: " ew lan s ua se 

' stuns her old 

for this kind of language they used not neighbors. 
to hear, or to perceive to drop from the lips of 
Christiana. Yet they came in : but behold, they 
found the good woman preparing to be gone from' 
her house. 

So they began, and said, Neighbor, pray what 
is your meaning by this? 

Christiana answered, and said to the eldest of 
them, whose name was Mrs. Timorous, I am pre- 
paring for a journey. 

This Timorous was daughter to him that met 
Christian upon the hill of Difficulty, and would 
have had him go back, for fear of the lions. 

Tim. For what journey, I pray you? 

Chr. Even to go after my good husband. And 
with that she fell a weeping. 



CHRISTIANA AND TIMOROUS. 283 

Tim. I hope not so, good neighbor ;• pray, for 
your good children's sake, do not so unwomanly 
cast yourself away. 

Chr. Nay, my children shall go with me ; not 
one of them is willing to stay behind. 

Tim. I wonder in my very heart what or who 
has brought yo u into this mind. 

Chr. neighbor, knew you but as much as I 
do, I doubt not but that you would go along with 
me. 

Tim. Prithee, what new knowledge hast thou 
got, that so worketh off thy mind from thy friends, 
and that tempteth thee to go nobody knows where? 
Chr. Then Christiana replied, I have been sore- 
ly afflicted since my husband's departure from me ; 
Death. but specially since he went over the 

river. But that which troubleth me most is, my 
churlish carriage to him when he was under his 
distress. Besides, I am now as he was then ; noth- 
ing will serve me but going on pilgrimage. I was 
dreaming last night that I saw him. that my 
soul was with him ! He dwelleth in the presence 
of the King of the country; he sits and eats with 
him at his table ; he is become a companion of 
immortals, and has a house now given him to 
dwell in, to which the best palace on earth, if 
compared, seems to me but as a dunghill. 2 Cor 
5 : 1-4. The Prince of the place has also sent for 
me, with promise of entertainment, if I shall come 



284 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

to him ; his messenger was here even now, and 
has brought me a letter, which invites me to 
come. And with that she plucked out her letter 
and read it, and said to them, What now will you 
say to this? 

Tim. Oh, the madness that has possessed thee 
and thy husband, to run yourselves upon such diffi- 
culties ! You have heard, I am sure, what your 
husband did meet with, even in a manner at the 
first step that he took on his way, as our neighbor 
Obstinate can yet testify, for he went along with 
him ; yea, and Pliable too, until they, like wise men, 
were afraid to go any further. We also heard, 
over and above, how he met with the The reaPon . 
lions, Apollyon, the Shadow of Death, in s sof thetlesh - 
and many other things. Ncr is the danger that 
he met with at Vanity Fair to be forgotten by thee. 
For if he, though a man, was so hard put to it, 
what canst thou, being but a poor woman, do? 
Consider also, that these four sweet babes are thy 
children, thy flesh and thy bones. Wherefore, 
though thou shouldest be so rash as to cast away 
thyself, yet, for the sake of the fruit of thy body, 
keep thou at home. 

But Christiana said unto her, Tempt me not, my 
neighbor : I have now a price put into my hands to 
get gain, and I should be a fool of the greatest size 
if I should have no heart to strike in with the oppor- 
tunity. And for that you tell me of all these 



MERCY AND TIMOROUS. 285 

troubles which I am like to meet with in the way, 
a pertinent they are so far from being to me a dis- 

reply to fleshly , . . T 

reasoning. couragement, that they show 1 am in 

the right. The bitter must come before the sweet, 
and that also will make the sweet the sweeter. 
Wherefore, since you came not to my house in God's 
name, as I said, I pray you to be gone, and not to 
disquiet me further. 

Then Timorous reviled her, and said to her fel- 
low, Come, neighbor Mercy, let us leave her in her 
own hands, since she scorns our counsel and com- 
pany. But Mercy was at a stand, and could not 
Mercy's tow- so readily comply with her neighbor : 

els yearn over ^ r 

Christiana. and that for a twofold reason. 1. Her 
bowels yearned over Christiana. So she said with- 
in herself, If my neighbor will needs be gone, 1 
will go a little way with her, and help her. 2. Her 
bowels yearned over her own soul ; for what Chris- 
tiana had said had taken some hold upon her mind. 
"Wherefore she said within herself again, I will yet 
have more talk with this Christiana ; and if I find 
truth and life in what she shall say, I myself 
with my heart shall also go with her. Wherefore 
Mercy began thus to reply to her neighbor Timo- 
rous : 

Mer. Neighbor, I did indeed come with you to 
see Christiana this morning ; and, since she is, as 
you see, taking her last farewell of the country, I 
think to walk this sunshiny morning a little with 



286 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

her, to help her on her way. But she told her not 
of her second reason, but kept it to herself. 

Tim. Well, I see you have a mind to go a fooling 
too ; but take heed in time, and be wise : while 
we are out of danger, we are out ; but when we 
are in, we are in. 

So Mrs. Timorous returned to her house, and 
Christiana betook herself to her journey. But 
when Timorous was got home to her Timorous for- 

, t , r- pi • -i sakes her, but 

house, she sends lor some ot ner neign- Mercy cleaves to 
bors, to wit, Mrs. Bat's-Eyes, Mrs. In- her - 
considerate, Mrs. Light-Mind, and Mrs. Know-No- 
thing. So when they were come to Timorous ac- 

• it r i quaints her 

her house, she falls to telling oi the friends what the 
story of Christiana, and of her intended intends to do. 
journey. And thus she began her tale : 

Tim. Neighbors, having had little to do this 
morning, I went to give Christiana a visit; and 
when I came at the door I knocked, as you know it 
is our custom ; and she answered, If you come in 
God's name, come in. So in I went, thinking all 
was well; but when I came in, I found her pre- 
paring herself to depart the town, she, and also her 
children. So I asked her what was her meaning 
by that. And she told me, in short, that she was 
now of a mind to go on pilgrimage, as did her hus- 
band. She told me also of a dream that she had, 
and how the King of the country where her husband 
was, had sent an inviting letter to come thither. 



FRIENDS OF MRS. TIMOROUS. 287 

Mrs Know- Then said Mrs. Know-Nothing, And 
Nothing. what, do you think she will go ? 

Tim. Aye, go she will, whatever comes on't; 
and methinks I know it "by this, for that which 
was my great argument to persuade her to stay at 
home, to wit, the troubles she was like to meet 
with on the way, is one great argument with her 
to put her forward on her journey. For she told 
me in so many words, The bitter goes before the 
sweet; yea, and forasmuch as it doth, it makes the 
sweet the sweeter. 

Mrs. Bat's-Eyes. Oh, this blind and foolish 
Mrs.Bat's-Eyes. woman, said she ; and will she not 
take warning by her husband's afflictions ? For my 
part, I see, if he were here again, he would rest 
himself content in a whole skin, and never run so 
many hazards for nothing. 

Mrs. Inconsiderate also replied, saying, Away 
Mrs. inconsid- with sucn fantastical fools from the 
erate. town : a good riddance, for my part, 

I say, of her ; should she stay where she dwells, 
and retain this her mind, who could live quietly 
by her? for she will either be dumpish, or unneigh- 
borly, or talk of such matters as no wise body can 
abide. Wherefore, for my part, I shall never be 
sorry for her departure ; let her go, and let better 
come in her room : it was never a good world since 
these whimsical fools dwelt in it. 

Then Mrs. Light-Mind added as followeth , 



288 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Come, put this kind of talk away. I Mrs u ht _ 
was yesterday at Madam Wanton's, Mind - 
where we were as merry as the maids. For who 
do you think should be there but I and Madam Wan- 
Mrs. Love-the-Flesh, and three or four &? n £f b ^ 
more, with Mrs. Lechery, Mrs. Filth, Fa ithf u?, r fntiSe 
and some others : so there we had mu- P ast - 
sic and dancing, and what else was meet to fill up 
the pleasure. And I dare say, my lady herself is 
an admirable well-bred gentlewoman, and Mr. 
Lechery is as pretty a fellow. 



MERCY GOES WITH CHRISTIANA. 289 



THE FIRST STAGE. 

By this time Christiana was got on her way, 

and Mercy went along with her : so as they went, 

her children being there also, Christiana began to 

Discourse "be- discourse. And, Mercy, said Chris- 

frwixt Mercy and . , , 

good Christiana, tiana, 1 take this as an unexpected 
favor, that thou shouldest set forth out of doors 
with me to accompany me a little in the way. 
Mer. Then said young Mercy, for she was but 

Mercyinclines V0Un g> If l thought it Would be to 

to go. purpose to go with you, I would never 

go near the town any more. 

Chr. Well, Mercy, said Christiana, cast in thy 
lot with me ; I well know what will be the end 
of our pilgrimage : my husband is where he would 
not but be for all the gold in the Spanish mines. 
Nor shalt thou be rejected, though thou goest but 
upon my invitation. The King, who hath sent 
for me and my children, is one that delighteth in 
mercy. Besides, if thou wilt, I will hire thee, and 
thou shalt go along with me as my servant. Yet 
we will have all things in common betwixt thee 
and me: only go along with me. 

Mer. But how shall I be ascertained that I a]so 
Mercy doubts should be entertained ? Had I this hope 

of acceptance. j^ from Qne that can tellj J WOU ld 
»fl. Pro*. 1 9 



290 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

make no stick at all, but would go, being helped 
by Him that can help, though the way was never 
so tedious. 

Chr. Well, loving Mercy, I will tell thee what 
thou shalt do : go with me to the Wick- Christiana, ai- 

, , T ... „ , . . lures her to the 

et-gate, and there I will further inquire pate, which is 
for thee; and if there thou shalt not mSw there to 
meet with encouragement, I will be inqU11 
content that thou return to thy place : I will also 
pay thee for thy kindness which thou showest to 
me and my children, in the accompanying of us in 
our way as thou dost. 

Mer. Then will I go thither, and will take what 
shall follow ; and the Lord grant that Mercy prays. 
my lot may there fall, even as the King of heaven 
shall have his heart upon me. 

Christiana then was glad at heart, not only that 
she had a companion, but also for that Christiana glad 

, , , • i -i • i i • • j of Mercy's com- 

she had prevailed with this poor maid pany. 
to fall in love with her own salvation. So they 
went on together, and Mercy began to weep. Then 
said Christiana, Wherefore weepeth my sister so \ 
Mer. Alas, said she, who can but lament, that 
shall but rightly consider what a state Mercy grieve? 

. . .for her carnal 

and condition my poor relations are in, relations. 
that yet remain in our sinful town? And that 
which makes my grief the more heavy is, because 
they have no instructor, nor any to tell them what 
is to come. 



MERCY ENCOURAGED. 201 

Che.. Pity becomes pilgrims ; and thou dost weep 

for thy friends, as my good Christian did for me 

when he left me : he mourned for that I would 

Christian's not heed nor regard him ; but his Lord 

prayers were an- 

Bwered for his and ours did gather up his tears, and 

relations after . . 

he was dead, put them into his bottle ; and now both 
I and thou, and these my sweet babes, are reaping 
the fruit and benefit of them. I hope, Mercy, that 
these tears of thine will not be lost; for the truth 
hath said, that "they that sow in tears shall reap 
in joy." And "he that goeth forth and weepeth, 
bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again 
with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him." 
Psa. 126:5, 6. 
Then said Mercy, 

"Let the Most Blessed by my guide, 
If it be his blessed will, 
L T nto his gate, into his fold, 
Up to his holy hill. 

And let him never suffer me 

To swerve, or turn aside 
From his free grace and holy ways, 

Whate'er shall me betide. 

And let him gather them of mine 

That I have left behind ; 
Lord, make them pray they may be thine, 

With all their heart and mind." 

Now my old friend proceeded, and said, But 
when Christiana came to the slough of Despond 



292 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

she began to be at a stand ; For, said she, this is 
the place in which my dear husband had like to 
have been smothered with mud. She perceived, 
also, that notwithstanding the command of the King 
to make this place for pilgrims good, yet it was 
rather worse than formerly. So I asked if that 
was true. Yes, said the old gentleman, too true ; 
for many there be that pretend to be the King's 
laborers, and that say they are for mending the 
King's highways, who bring dirt and Theirowncar . 
dung instead of stones, and so mar &3firZ 
instead of mending. Here Christiana wwdtflifc. 
therefore, with her boys, did make a stand. But 
said Mercy, Come, let us venture ; only Mercy the boid- 

... est at the slough 

let us be wary. Then they looked of Despond, 
well to their steps, and made a shift to get stag- 
gering over. 

Yet Christiana had like to have been in, and 
that not once or twice. Now they had no sooner 
got over, but they thought they heard words that 
said unto them, " Blessed is she that believeth ; 
for there shall be a performance of those things 
which were told her from the Lord." Luke 1:45 

Then they went on again ; and said Mercy to 
Christiana, Had I as good ground to hope for a lov- 
ing reception at the Wicket-gate as you, I think no 
slough of Despond would discourage me. 

Well, said the other, you know your sore, and 1 
know mine ; and, good friend, we shall all have 



ARRIVAL AT THE GATE. 203 

enough evil before we come to our journey's end. 
For can it be imagined that the people who design 
to attain such excellent glories as we do, and who 
are so envied that happiness as we are, but that 
we shall meet with what fears and snares, with 
what troubles and afflictions they can possibly as- 
sault us with that hate us ? 

And now Mr. Sagacity left me to dream out my 
dream by myself. AYherefore, methought I saw 
Christiana and Mercy, and the boys, go all of thorn 
Prayer should be U p to the gate : to which, when thev 

made with con- ° J 

sideration and were come, they betook themselves to 

- well as in 

faith and hope, a short debate about how they must 
manage their calling at the gate, and what should 
be said unto him that did open to them; so it was 
concluded, since Christiana was the eldest, thai 
she should knock for entrance, and that she should 
speak to him that did open, for the rest. So Chris- 
tiana began to knock, and as her poor husband did, 
she knocked and knocked again. But instead of 
any that answered, they all thought that they 
heard as if a dog came barking upon them ; a dog, 
The dog the and a great one too ; and this made the 

devil, an enemy 

to prayer. women and children afraid. Nor durst 

they for a while to knock any more, for fear the 
mastiff should fly upon them. Now, therefore, 
Christiana anil they were greatly tumbled up and down 
perpfexed^bout ln their minds, and knew not what to 
prayer. ^ Q . knock they durst not, for fear of 



294 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

the dog ; go back they durst not, for fear the keeper 
of that gate should espy them as they so went, and 
should be offended with them ; at last they thought, 
of knocking again, and knocked more vehemently 
than they did at first. Then said the keeper of 
the gate, Who is there ? So the dog left off to bark, 
and he opened unto them. 

Then Christiana made low obeisance, and said, 
Let not our Lord be offended with his hand-maid- 
ens, for that we have knocked at his princely gate. 
Then said the keeper, Whence come ye? And 
what is it that you would have ? 

Christiana answered, We are come from whence 
Christian did come, and upon the same errand as 
he ; to wit, to be, if it shall please you, graciously 
admitted by this gate into the way that leads 
unto the Celestial city. And I answer, my Lord, 
in the next place, that I am Christiana, once the 
wife of Christian, that now is gotten above. 

With that the keeper of the gate did marvel, 
saying, What, is she now become a pilgrim that 
but a while ago abhorred that life? Then she 
bowed her head, and said, Yea; and so are these 
my sweet babes also. 

Then he took her by the hand and led her in. 
and said also, Suffer little children to HowChmtiana 

is entertained at 

come unto me ; and with that he shut the gate. 

up the gate. This done, he called to a trumpeter 

that was above, over the gate, to entertain Chris- 



CHRISTIANA RECEIVED. 295 

tiana with shouting, and the sound of trumpet, for 
joy. So he obeyed, and sounded, and filled the air 
with his melodious notes. 

Now all this while poor Mercy did stand with- 
out, trembling and crying, for fear that she was 
rejected. But when Christiana had got admittance 
for herself and her boys, then she began to make 
intercession for Mercy. 

Chr. And she said, My Lord, I have a compan- 
Christiana's ion of mine that stands yet without, 

prayer for her . . 

friend Mercy, that is come hither upon the same ac- 
count as myself: one that is much dejected in her 
mind, for that she comes, as she thinks, without 
sending for; whereas I was sent for by my hus- 
band's King to come. 

Now Mercy began to be very impatient, and 
Deiavs make each minute was as long to her as an 
muI ^he g mo n r! nour > wherefore she prevented Chris- 
fervent, tiana from a fuller interceding for her, 
by knocking at the gate herself. And she knocked 
then so loud that she made Christiana to start. 
Then said the keeper of the gate, Who is there ? 
And Christiana said, It is my friend. 

So he opened the gate, and looked out, but Mercy 
Mercy faints, was fallen down without in a swoon, 
for she fainted, and was afraid that no gate should 
be opened to her. 

Then he took her by the hand, and said, Damsel, 
I bid thee arise. 



296 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Oh, sir, said she, I am faint ; there is scarce life 
left in me. But he answered, that one once said, 
""When my soul fainted within me I remembered 
the Lord: and my prayer came unto thee, into 
thy holy temple." Jonah 2 : 7. Fear not, but 
stand upon thy feet, and tell me wherefore thou 
art come. 

Mer, I am come for that unto which I was 
never invited, as my friend Christiana was. Hers 
was from the King, and mine was but from her. 
"Wherefore I fear I presume. 

Keep. Did she desire thee to come with her to 
this place ? 

Mer. Yes ; and as my Lord sees, I am come. 
And if there is any grace and forgiveness of sins 
to spare, I beseech that thy poor handmaid may 
be a partaker thereof. 

Then he took her again by the hand, and led 
her gently in, and said, I pray for all them that 
believe on me, by what means soever they come 
unto me. Then said he to those that stood by, 
Fetch something and give it to Mercy to smell 
on, thereby to stay her faintings ; so they fetched 
her a bundle of myrrh, and a while after she was 
revived. 

And now were Christiana and her boys, and 
Mercy, received of the Lord at the head of the 
way, and spoken kindly unto by him. Then said 
they yet further unto him, We are sorrv for our 



MERCY ADMITTED. 297 

sins, and beg of our Lord his pardon, and further 
information what we must do. 

I grant pardon, said he, by word and deed ; by 
word in the promise of forgiveness, by deed in the 
way I obtained it. Take the first from my lips 
with a kiss, and the other as it shall be revealed. 
Song 1:2; John 20:20. 

Now I saw in my dream, that he spoke many 
good words unto them, whereby they were greatly 
gladdened. He also had them up to the top of the 
gate, and showed them by what deed they were 
saved ; and told them withal, that that sight they 
Christ crucified would have again as they went along 
seen afax off. - m the wa y, to their comfort. 

So he left them a while in a summer parlor 
Talk between below, where they entered into talk by 
the Christians, themselves ; and thus Christiana began. 
how glad am I that we are got in hither ! 

Mer. So you well may ; but I, of all, have 
cause to leap for joy. 

Chr. I thought one time, as I stood at the gate, 
because I had knocked and none did answer, that 
all our labor had been lost, especially when that 
ugly cur made such a heavy barking against us. 

Mer. But my worst fear was after I saw that 
you was taken into his favor, and that I was left 
behind. Now, thought I, it is fulfilled which is 
written, "Two women shall be grinding at the 
mill; the one shall be taken, and the other left" 



298 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Matt. 24:41. I had much ado to forbear crying 
out, Undone ' And afraid I was to knock any- 
more ; but when I looked up to what was written 
over the gate, I took courage. I also thought that 
I must either knock again, or die ; so I knocked, 
but I cannot tell how, for my spirit now struggled 
between life and death. 

Chr. Can you not tell how you knocked ? I am 
sure your knocks were so earnest that the very 
sound of them made me start ; I thought I never 
heard such knocking in all my life ; I Christiana 
thought you would come in by a vio- «££** ~ 
lent hand, or take the kingdom by tetter than she. 
storm. Matt. 11 : 12. 

Mer. Alas, to be in my case, who that so was 
could but have done so? You saw that the door 
was shut upon me, and that there was a most cruel 
dog thereabout. Who, I say, that was so faint- 
hearted as I, would not have knocked with all 
their might ? But pray, what said my Lord to 
my rudeness ? Was he not angry with me ? 

Chr. When he heard your lumber- Christ pleased 

, -i r -i • "with loud and 

ing noise, he gave a wonderiul mno- restless prayer. 
cent smile ; I believe what you did pleased him 
well, for he showed no sign to the con- i f the soul a * 

first did know 

trary. But I marvel in my heart why ail it should 

. n .. l-iTi meet with in ita 

he keeps such a dog: had 1 known journey to heav- 
that before, I should not have had heart lyWer set out. " 
enough to have ventured myself in this manner. 



THE EXPLANATION. 299 

But now we are in, we are in, and I am glad with 
all my heart. 

Mer. I will ask, if you please, next time he 
comes down, why he keeps such a filthy cur in his 
yard; I hope he will not take it amiss. 

Do so, said the children, and persuade him to 
The children hang him ; for we are afraid he will 

are afraid of the . 

dog. bite us when we go hence. 

So at last he came down to them again, and 
Mercy fell to the ground on her face before him, 
and worshipped, and said, " Let my Lord accept 
the sacrifice of praise which I now offer unto him 
with the calves of my lips." 

So he said unto her, Peace be to thee ; stand up. 
Eut she continued upon her face, and said, " Right- 
eous art thou, Lord, when I plead with thee ; 
yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments." Jer. 
Mercy expos- 12: 1. Wherefore dost thou keep so 

tulates about the . r 

dog. cruel a dog in thy yard, at the sight 

of which such women and children as we are ready 
to fly from thy gate for fear? 

He answered and said, That dog has another 
The Devil, owner ; he also is kept close in another 
man's ground, only my pilgrims hear his barking ; 
he belongs to the castle which you see there at a 
distance, but can come up to the walls of this 
place. He has frighted many an honest pilgrim 
from worse to better, by the great voice of his roar- 
ing. Indeed, he that owneth him doth not keep 



300 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

him out of any good-will to me or mine, but with 
intent to keep the pilgrims from coming to me, 
and that they may be afraid to come and knock at 
this gate for entrance. Sometimes also he has 
broken out, and has worried some that I loved ; 
but I take all at present patiently. I also give 
my pilgrims timely help, so that they are not de- 
livered to his power, to do with them what his. 
doggish nature would prompt him to. But what, 
my purchased one, I trow, hadst thou known never 
so much beforehand, thou wouldest not have been 
afraid of a dog. The beggars that go from door 
to door, will, rather than lose a sup- a check to the 

. carnal fear o* 

posed alms, run the hazard ot the the pilgrims. 
bawling, barking, and biting too of a dog; and 
shall a dog, a dog in another man's yard, a dog 
whose barking I turn to the profit of pilgrims, keep 
any from coming to me ? I deliver them from the 
lions, and my darling from the power of the dog. 
Psa. 22: 21, 22. 

Mer. Then said Mercy, I confess my christians 
ignorance ; I spoke what I understood 7 n h e u n ghj ac ™! 
not ; I acknowledge that thou doest all I™ in f he their 
things well. Lord - 

Then Christiana began to talk of their jour- 
ney, and to inquire after the way. So he fed 
them, and washed their feet, and set them in the 
way of his steps, according as he had dealt with 
her husband before. 



THE ENEMY'S GARDEN. 30] 



THE SECOND STAGE. 

So I saw in my dream, that they walked on 
their way, and had the weather very comfortable 
to them. 

Then Christiana began to sing, saying, . 

Blessed be the day that I began 

A pilgrim for to be ; 
And blessed also be the man 

That thereto moved me. 

'T is true, 't was long ere I began 

To seek to live for ever ; 
But now I run fast as I can : 

'Tis better late than never. 

Our tears to joy, our fears to faith, 

Are turned, as we see; 
Thus our beginning, as one saith, 

Shows what our end will be. 

Now there was on the other side of the wall 
that fenced in the way up which Christiana and 

The Devil's ner companions were to go, a garden, 
garden. an( j ^hat garden belonged to him whose 

was that barking dog, of whom mention was made 
before. And some of the fruit-trees that grew in 
that garden shot their branches over the wall ; and 
being mellow, they that found them did gather 
them up, and eat of them to their hurt. So Chris- 
tiana's boys, as boys are apt to do, being pleased 



302 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

with the trees, and with the fruit that hung there- 
on, did pluck them, and began to eat. The children 

mi i tii l • l /• eat °f *^ e ene " 

Their mother did also chide them for my's fruit, 
so doing - , but still the boys went on. 

Well, said she, my sons, you transgress, for that 
fruit is none of ours ; but she did not know that it 
belonged to the enemy : I '11 warrant you, if she had 
she would have been ready to die for fear. But 
that passed, and they went on their way. Now, 
by that they were gone about two bow-shots from 
the place that led them into the way, they espied 
two very ill-favored ones coming down apace to 
meet them. With that, Christiana and Mercy her 
friend covered themselves with their veils, and so 
kept on their journey : the children also Two in_f aV or- 
went on before; so that at last they &£tiT£a 
met together. Then they that came Merc y- 
down to meet them, came just up to the women, 
as if they would embrace them ; but Christiana 
said, Stand back, or go peaceably as you should. 
Yet these two, as men that are deaf, regarded not 
Christiana's words, but began to lay hands upon 
them : at that Christiana waxing very wroth, 
spurned at them with her feet. Mercy also, as well 
as she could, did what she could to shift them. 
Christiana again said to them, Stand back, and be 
gone, for we have no money to lose, being pilgrims, 
as you see, and such too as live upon the charity 
of our friends. 



TWO ILL-FAVORED ONES. 303 

Ill-Fav. Then said one of the two men, We 
make no assault upon you for money, but are come 
out to tell you, that if you will but grant one small 
request which we shall ask, we will make women 
of you for ever. 

Chr. Now Christiana, imagining what they 
should mean, made answer again, We will neither 
hear, nor regard, nor yield to what you shall ask. 
We are in haste, and cannot stay ; our business is a 
business of life and death. So again she and her 
companion made a fresh essay to go past them ; but 
they letted them in their way. 

Ill-Fav. And they said, We intend no hurt to 
your lives ; it is another thing we would have. 

Chr. Aye, quoth Christiana, you would have us 
body and soul, for I know it is for that you are 
come ; but we will die rather upon the spot, than 
to suffer ourselves to be brought into such snares 
as shall hazard our well-being hereafter. And 
They cry out. with that they both shrieked out, and 
cried, Murder! murder! and so put themselves 
under those laws that are provided for the protec- 
tion of women. Deut. 22: 25-27. But the men 
still made their approach upon them, with design 
to prevail against them. They therefore cried out 
again. 

Now they being, as I said, not far from the gate 
in at which they came, their voice was heard 
from whence they were, thither : wherefore some 



304 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

of the house came out, and knowing that it was 
Christiana's tongue, they made haste it is good to cry 

. •[ out when we axe 

to her reliei. But by that they were assaulted. 
got within sight of them, the women were in a 
very great scuffle; the children also The re ii e v<»r 
stood crying by. Then did he that came comes - 
in for their relief call out to the ruffians, saying, 
What is that thing you do ? Would you make my 
Lord's people to transgress? He also attempted to 
take them, but they did make their escape over 
the wall into the garden of the man The ill ones 

.nil i fly to the devil 

to whom the great dog belonged; so for relief. 
the dog became their protector. This reliever 
then came up to the women, and asked them how 
they did. So they answered, We thank thy Prince, 
pretty well, only we have been somewhat affright- 
ed : we thank thee also for that thou earnest in to 
our help, otherwise we had been overcome. 

Reliever. So, after a few more words, this re- 
liever said as followeth : I marvelled The reliever 

. talks to the wo- 

much, when you were entertained at men. 
the gate above, seeing ye knew that ye were but 
weak women, that you petitioned not the Lord for 
a conductor ; then might you have avoided these 
troubles and dangers ; for he would have granted 
you one. 

Chr. Alas, said Christiana, we were so taken 
with our present blessing, that dangers Mark this ! 
to come were forgotten by us. Besides, who could 



THE PILGRIMS RESCUED. 305 

have thought, that so near the King's palace there 
could have lurked such naughty ones? Indeed, it 
had been well for us had we asked our Lord for 
one ; but since our Lord knew it w T ould be for our 
profit, I wonder he sent not one along with us. 

Rel. It is not always necessary to grant things 
not asked for, lest by so doing they become of little 
We lose for esteem ; but when the want of a thing 
not asking. ^ s f e1 ^ - t then comes under, in the eyes 
of him that feels it, that estimate that properly is 
its due, and so consequently will be thereafter 
used. Had my Lord granted you a conductor, you 
would not either so have bewailed that oversight 
of yours, in not asking for one, as now you have 
occasion to do. So all things work for good, and 
tend to make you more wary. 

Chr. Shall we go back again to my Lord, and 
confess our folly, and ask one 1 

Rel. Your confession of your folly I will pre- 
sent him with. To go back again, you need not, 
for in all places where you shall come, you will find 
no want at all ; for in every one of my Lord's lodg- 
ings, which he has prepared for the reception of 
his pilgrims, there is sufficient to furnish them 
against all attempts whatsoever. But, as I said, 
He will be inquired of by them, to do it for them. 
Ezek. 36 : 37. And 't is a poor thing that is not worth 
asking for. When he' had thus said, he went back 
to his place, and the pilgrims went on their way. 

P1L Prog. 20 



306 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Mer. Then said Mercy, What a sudden blank 
is here ! I made account that we had The mistake 
been past all danger, and that we ofMer °y- 
should never see sorrow more. 

Chr. Thy innocency, my sister, said Christiana 
to Mercy, may excuse thee much ; but Christiana'* 
as for me, my fault is so much the e uilt - 
greater, for that I saw this danger before I came 
out of the doors, and yet did not provide for it when 
provision might have been had. I am much to 
be blamed. 

Mer. Then said Mercy, How knew you this be- 
fore you came from home ? Pray open to me this 
riddle. 

Chr. Why, I will tell you. Before I set foot out 
of doors, one night as I lay in my bed Christiana's 
I had a dream about this, for methought dream re * eated - 
I saw two men, as like these as ever any in the 
world could look, stand at my bed's feet, plotting 
how they might prevent my salvation. I will tell 
you their very words. They said — it was when 1 
was in my troubles — What shall we do with this 
woman? for she cries out, waking and sleeping, 
for forgiveness : if she be suffered to go on as sho 
begins, we shall lose her as we have lost her hus- 
band. This, you know, might have made me take 
heed, and have provided when provision might 
have been had. 

Mer. Well, said Mercy, as by this neglect we 



THE INTERPRETER'S HOUSE. 307 

have an occasion ministered unto us to behold our 
Mercy makes own imperfections, so our Lord has 

good use of their , , , 

neglect of iuty. taken occasion thereby to make mani- 
fest the riches of his grace ; for he, as we see, has 
followed us with unasked kindness, and has deliv- 
ered us from their hands that were stronger thac 
we, of his mere good pleasure. 

Thus now, when they had talked away a little? 
more time, they drew near to a house which stood 
in the way, which house was built for the reliel 
of pilgrims, as you will find more fully related in 
the first part of these records of the Pilgrim's Prog- 
ress. So they drew on towards the house, the 
house of the interpreter ; and when they came to 
Taikinthein- the door, they heard a great talk in the 

terpreter's house 

about Chhsti- house. Then they gave ear, and heard, 

ana's going on .. , , " . . , 

pilgrimage. as they thought, Christiana mentioned 
by name ; for you must know that there went 
along, even before her, a talk of her and her chil- 
dren's going on pilgrimage. And this was the 
most pleasing to them, because they had heard 
that she was Christian's wife, that woman who 
was some time ago so unwilling to hear of going 
on pilgrimage. Thus, therefore, they stood still, 
and heard the good people within commending 
her who they little thought stood at the door. At 
She knocks at l ast Christiana knocked, as she had 
the door. j pne at fae gate before. Now when 

she had knocked, there came to the door a young 



308 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

damsel, and opened the door, and look- The dcor is 

opened to them 

ed, and behold two women were by innocent. 
there. 

Dam. Then said the damsel to them, With whom 
would you speak in this place ? 

Chr. Christiana answered, "We understand that 
this is a privileged place for those that are become 
pilgrims, and we now at this door are such : 
wherefore we pray that we may be partakers of 
that for which we at this time are come ; for the 
day, as thou seest, is very far spent, and we are 
loath to-night to go any further. 

Dam. Pray, what may I call your name, that I 
may tell it to my Lord within ? 

Chr. My name is Christiana ; I was the wife of 
that pilgrim that some years ago did travel this 
way, and these be his four children. This maiden 
also is my companion, and is going on pilgrimage 

too. 

Innocent. Then Innocent ran in, for that was 
her name, and said to those within, Can you think 
who is at the door ? There is Christiana and her 
children, and her companion, all waiting for en- 
tertainment here. Then they leaped Joy in the 

. house of the 

for iov, and went and told their mas- interpreter that 

J J . jit Christiana is 

ter. So he came to the door, and look- turned pilgrim. 
ing upon her, he said, Art thou that Christiana 
whom Christian the good man left behind him 
when he betook himself to a pilgrim's life ? 



THEIR HAPPY RECEPTION. 309 

Chr. I am that woman that was so hard-heart- 
ed as to slight my husband's troubles, and that left 
him to go on his journey alone, and these are his 
four children ; but now I also am come, for I am 
convinced that no way is right but this. 

Inter. Then is fulfilled that which is written of 
the man that said to his son, "Go work to-day in 
my vineyard ; and he said to his father, I will not : 
but afterwards repented, and went." Matt. 21 : 29. 

Chr. Then said Christiana, So be it: Amen. 
God make it a true saying upon me, and grant 
that I may be found at the last of him in peace, 
without spot, and blameless. 

Inter. But why standest thou thus at the door? 
Come in, thou daughter of Abraham ; we were 
talking of thee but now, for tidings have come to 
us before how thou art become a pilgrim. Come, 
children, come in ; come, maiden, come in. So 
he had them all into the house. 

So when they were within, they were bidden to 
sit down and rest them ; the which when they 
had done, those that attended upon the pilgrims 
in the house came into the room to see them. 
And one smiled, and another smiled, and they all 
smiled for joy that Christiana was become a pil- 
oid saints glad grim. They also looked upon the boys; 
ones' w'JTI! the y stroked them over their faces with 

God'sways. the handj ^ token of ^j. kind recep _ 

tion of them : they also carried it lovingly to Mer- 



310 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

cy, and bid them all welcome into their Master's 
house. 

After a while, because supper was not ready, 
the -Interpreter took them into his Sig- The g igni ft, 
nificant rooms, and showed them what cant rooms - 
Christian, Christiana's husband, had seen some 
time before. Here, therefore, they saw the man 
in the cage, the man and his dream, the man that 
cut his way through his enemies, and the picture 
of the biggest of them all, together with the rest 
of those things that were then so profitable to 
Christian. 

This done, and after those things had been some- 
what digested by Christiana and her company, the 
Interpreter takes them apart again, and has them 
first into a room where was a man that could look 
no way but downwards, with a muck- The man with 

• i • mi the muck " ralce 

rake in his hand. There stood also expounded. 
one over his head with a celestial crown in his 
hand, and proffered him that crown for his muck- 
rake ; but the man did neither look up nor regard, 
but raked to himself the straws, the small sticks, 
and dust of the floor. 

Then said Christiana, I persuade myself that I 
know somewhat the meaning of this ; for this is 
the figure of a man of this world : is it not, good 
Bir ? 

Inter. Thou hast said right, said he ; and his 
muck-rake doth show his carnal mind. And 



THE SPIDER. 311 

whereas thou seest him rather give heed to rake 
up straws and sticks, and the dust of the floor, 
than to do what He says that calls to him from 
above with the celestial crown in his hand ; it is 
to show, that heaven is but as a fable to some, and 
that things here are counted the only things sub- 
stantial. Now, whereas it was also showed thee 
that the man could look no way but downwards, 
it is to let thee know that earthly things, when 
they are with power upon men's minds, quite carry 
their hearts away from God. 

Christiana's Chr. Then said Christiana, de- 
the muck-rake, liver me from this muck-rake. Prov. 
30:8. 

Inter. That prayer, said the Interpreter, has 
lain by till it is almost rusty : " Give me not rich- 
es," is scarce the prayer of one in ten thousand. 
Straws and sticks and dust, with most, are the 
great things now looked after. 

With that Christiana and Mercy wept, and said, 
It is, alas, too true. 

"When the Interpreter had showed them this, he 
had them into the very best room in the house ; a 
very brave room it was. So he bid them look 
round about, and see if they could find any thing 
profitable there. Then they looked round and 
round ; for there was nothing to be seen but a 
of the spider, very great spider on the wall, and that 
they overlooked 



312 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Mer. Then said Mercy, Sir, I see nothing ; but 
Christiana held her peace. 

Inter. But, said the Interpreter, look again. 
She therefore looked again, and said, Here is not 
any thing but an ugly spider, who hangs by her 
hands .upon the wall. Then said he, TalkaWth9 
Is there but one spider in all this spa- s P ider - 
cious room ? Then the water stood in Christiana's 
eyes, for she was a woman quick of apprehension ; 
and she said, Yea, Lord, there are more here than 
one ; yea, and spiders whose venom is far more 
destructive than that which is in her. The In- 
terpreter then looked pleasantly on her, and said, 
Thou hast said the truth. This made Mercy to 
blush, and the boys to cover their faces ; for they 
all began now to understand the riddle. 

Then said the Interpreter again, " The spider 
taketh hold with her hands," as you see, " and is 
in kings' palaces." Prov. 30 : 28. And wherefore 
is this recorded, but to show you, that, how full of 
the venom of sin soever you be, yet you may, by 
the hand of faith, lay hold of and dwell in the best 
room that belongs to the King's house above ? 

Chr. I thought, said Christiana, of something 
of this ; but I could not imagine it at all. I 
thought that we were like spiders, and that we 
look like ugly creatures, in what fine rooms soever 
we were: but that by this spider, that venomous 
and ill-favored creature, we were to learn how to 



THE HEN AND CHICKENS. 313 

act faith, that came not into my thoughts ; and vet 
she had taken hold with her hands, and, as I see, 
dwelleth in the best room in the house. God has 
made nothing in vain. 

Then they seemed all to be glad ; but the water 
stood in their eyes ; yet they looked one upon 
another, and also bowed before the Interpreter. 

He had them into another room, where were a 
Of the hen nen anc ^ chickens, and bid them ob- 
and chickens. serve a while. So one of the chickens 
went to the trough to drink, and every time she 
drank she lifted up her head and her eyes towards 
heaven. See, said he, what this little chick doth, 
and learn of her to acknowledge whence your 
mercies come, by receiving them with looking up. 
Yet, again, said he, observe and look : so they 
gave heed, and perceived that the hen did walk 
in a fourfold method towards her chickens: 1. 
She had a common call, and that she hath all the 
day long. 2. She had a special call, and that she 
had but sometimes. 3. She had a brooding note. 
Matt. 23:37. And, 4. She had an outcry. 

Now, said he, compare this hen to your King, 
and these chickens to his obedient ones ; for, an- 
swerable to her, he himself hath his methods 
which he walketh in towards his people. By his 
common call, he gives nothing ; by his special call, 
he always has something to give ; he has also a 
brooding voice, for them that are under his wing ; 



314 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

and he has an outcry, to give the alarm when he 
seeth the enemy come. I choose, my darlings, to 
lead you into the room where such things are, be- 
cause you are women, and they are easy for you. 

Chr. And, sir, said Christiana, pray let us see 
some more. So he had them into the slaughter- 
house, where was a butcher killing a 0f the butcher 
sheep ; and behold, the sheep was and the shee P- 
quiet, and took her death patiently. Then said the 
Interpreter, You must learn of this sheep to suffer, 
and to put up with wrongs without murmurings 
and complaints. Behold how quietly she takes 
her death, and, without objecting, she suffereth 
her skin to be pulled over her ears. Your King 
doth call you his sheep. 

After this he led them into his garden, where 
was great variety of flowers ; and he Of the garden, 
said, Do you see all these ? So Christiana said, 
Yes. Then said he again, Behold, the flowers are 
diverse in stature, in quality, and color, and smell, 
and virtue ; and some are better than others ; also, 
where the gardener hath set them, there they 
stand, and quarrel not one with another. 

Again, he had them into his field, which he had 
sown with wheat and corn : but when Of the field, 
they beheld, the tops of all were cut off, and only 
the straw remained. He said again, This ground 
was dunged and ploughed and sowed, but what 
shall we do with the crop ? Then said Christiana, 



ROBIN AND SPIDER,. 315 

Burn some, and make muck of the rest. Then 
said the Interpreter again, Fruit, you see, is that 
thing you look for ; and for the want of that you 
condemn it to the fire, and to be trodde'n under 
foot of men : beware that in this you condemn 
not yourselves. 

Then, as they were coming in from abroad, they 
of the robin espied a little robin with a great spi- 
and the spider. <} er j n hi s m0 uth. So the Interpreter 
said, Look here. So they looked, and Mercy won- 
dered, but Christiana said, What a disparagement 
is it to such a pretty little bird as the robin-red- 
breast ; he being also a bird above many, that lov- 
eth to maintain a kind of sociableness with men. 
I had thought they had lived upon crumbs of bread, 
or upon other such harmless matter: I like him 
worse than I did. 

The Interpreter then replied, This robin is an 
emblem, very apt to set forth some professors by ; 
for to sight they are, as this robin, pretty of note, 
color, and carriage. They seem also to have a very 
great love for professors that are sincere ; and, 
above all others, to desire to associate with them, 
and to be in their company, as if they could live 
upon the good man's crumbs. They pretend also, 
that therefore it is that they frequent the house of 
the godly, and the appointments of the Lord : but 
when they are by themselves, as the robin, they 
can catch and gobble up spiders; they can change 



316 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

their diet, drink iniquity, and swallow down sin 
like water. 

So, when they were come again into the house, 
because supper as yet was not ready, Prayj and J0U 
Christiana again desired that the Inter- JjJJ.f \% *£* 
preter. would either show or tell some unreT eaiei 
other things that are profitable. 

Then the Interpreter began, and said, The fatter 
the sow is, the more she desires the mire; the fat- 
ter the ox is, the more gamesomely he goes to the 
slaughter; and the more healthy the lustful man 
is, the more prone he is unto evil. There is a 
desire in women to go neat and fine ; and it is a 
comely thing to be adorned with that which in 
God's sight is of great price. 'Tis easier watch- 
ing a night or two, than to sit up a whole year 
together: so 'tis easier for one to begin to profess 
well, than to hold out as he should to the end. 
Every shipmaster, when in a storm, will willingly 
cast that overboard which is of the smallest value 
in the vessel ; but who will throw the best out 
first? None but he that feareth not God. One 
\ea.\ will sink a ship, and one sin will destroy a 
sinner. He that forgets his friend is ungrateful 
unto him ; but he that forgets his Saviour is un- 
merciful to himself. He that lives in sin, and 
looks for happiness hereafter, is like him that sow- 
eth cockle, and thinks to fill his barn with wheat 
or barley. If a man would live well, let him fetch 



THE SUPPER. 317 

his last day to him, and make it always his com- 
pany-keeper. Whispering, and change of thoughts, 
prove that sin is in the world. If the world, which 
God sets light by, is counted a thing of that worth 
with men, what is heaven, that God commendeth? 
If the life that is attended with so many troubles, 
is so loath to be let go by us, what is the life above ? 
Every body will cry up the goodness of men; but 
who is there that is, as he should be, affected with 
the goodness of God? We seldom sit down to 
meat, but we eat, and leave. So there is in Jesus 
Christ more merit and righteousness than the 
whole world hath need of. 

When the Interpreter had done, he takes them 
out into his garden again, and had them to a tree 

Of the tree whose inside was all rotten and gone, 
heart! 5 r ' and yet it grew and had leaves. Then 
said Mercy, What means this % This tree, said he, 
whose outside is fair, and whose inside is rotten, 
is that to which many may be compared that are 
in the garden of God ; who with their mouths 
speak high in behalf of God, but indeed will do 
nothing for him ; whose leaves are fair, but their 
heart good for nothing but to be tinder for the 
devil's tinder-box. 

Now supper was ready, the table spread, and 

They are at al] - things set on the board : so they sat 
sapper. down, and did eat, when one had given 

thanks. And the Interpreter did usually entertain 



318 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

those that lodged with him with music at meals ; 
so the minstrels played. There was also one that 
did sing, and a very fine voice he had. His song 
was this : 

" The Lord is only my support, 
And he that doth me feed ; 
How can I then want any thing 
Whereof I stand in need?" 

When the song and music were ended, the Inter- 
preter asked Christiana what it was Talk at supper. 
that at first did move her thus to betake herself to 
a pilgrim's life. Christiana answered, First, the 
loss of my husband came into my mind, a repetition 

. of Christiana's 

at which I was heartily grieved; but experience. 
all that was but natural affection. Then after that 
came the troubles and pilgrimage of my husband 
into my mind, and also how like a churl I had car- 
ried it to him as to that. So guilt took hold of my 
mind, and would have drawn me into the pond, 
but that opportunely I had a dream of the well- 
being of my husband, and a letter sent me by the 
King of that country where my husband dwells, 
to come to him. The dream and the letter to- 
gether so wrought upon my mind that they forced 
me to this way. 

Inter. But met you with no opposition before 
you set out of doors ? 

Cur. Yes, a neighbor of mine, one Mrs. Timo- 
rous : she was akin to him that would have per- 



MERCY'S EXPERIENCE. 319 

suaded my husband to go "back, for fear of the lions. 
She also befooled me for, as she called it, my in- 
tended desperate adventure ; she also urged what 
she could to dishearten me from it, the hardships 
and troubles that my husband met with in the 
way ; but all this I got over pretty well. But a 
dream that I had of two ill-looking ones, that 1 
thought did plot how to make me miscarry in my 
journey, that hath troubled me much : yea, it still 
runs in my mind, and makes me afraid of every 
one that I meet, lest they should meet me to do 
me a mischief, and to turn me out of my way. 
Yea, I may tell my Lord, though I would not have 
every body know it, that between this and the 
gate by which we got into the way, we were both 
so sorely assaulted that we were made to cry out 
murder; and the two that made this assault upon 
us, were like the two that I saw in my dream. 

Then said the Interpreter, Thy beginning is 

good ; thy latter end shall greatly increase. So he 

a question put addressed himself to Mercy, and said 

to Mercy. unto her, And what moved thee to 

come hither, sweet heart ? 

Mer. Then Mercy blushed and trembled, and 
for a while continued silent. 

Inter. Then said he, Be not afraid ; only be- 
lieve, and speak thy mind. 

Mer. So she began, and said, Truly, sir, my want 
Mercy's answer, of experience is that which makes me 



20 PILGRIM'S PE.OaE.ESS. 

covet to be in silence, and that also that fills me 
with fears of coming short at last. I cannot tell 
of visions and dreams, as my friend Christiana 
can ; nor know I what it is to mourn for my refus- 
ing the counsel of those that were good relations. 

Inter. What is it, then, dear heart, that hath 
prevailed with thee to do as thou hast done ? 

Mer. Why, when our friend here was packing 
up to be gone from our town, I and another went 
accidentally to see her. So we knocked at the 
door and went in. When we were within, and 
seeing what she was doing, we asked her what 
was her meaning. She said she was sent for to 
go to her husband ; and then she up and told us 
how she had seen him in a dream, dwelling in a 
curious place, among immortals, wearing a crown, 
playing upon a harp, eating and drinking at his 
Prince's table, and singing praises to him for bring- 
ing him thither, etc. Now, methought, while she 
was telling these things unto us, my heart burned 
within me. And I said in my heart, If this be 
true, I will leave my father and my mother, and 
the land of my nativity, and will, if I may, go 
along with Christiana. So I asked her further of 
the truth of these things, and if she would let me 
go with her ; for I saw now that there was no 
dwelling, but with the danger of ruin, any longer 
in our town. But yet I came away with a heavy 
heart ; not for that I was unwilling to come away, 



A GOOD NIGHT'S REST. 321 

but for that so many of my relations were left be- 
hind. And I am come with all the desire of my 
heart, and will go, if I may, with Christiana unto 
her husband and his King. 

Inter. Thy setting out is good, for thou hast 
given credit to the truth ; thou art a Ruth, who 
did, for the love she bare to Naomi and to the Lord 
her God, leave father and mother, and the land of 
her nativity, to come out and go with a people 
that she knew not heretofore. " The Lord recom- 
pense thy work, and a full reward be given thee 
of the Lord God of Israel, under whose wings thou 
art come to trust." Ruth 2 : 11, 12. 

Now supper was ended, and preparation was 
They undress made for bed ; the women were laid 

txi©msGlv6s for 

bed. singly alone, and the boys by them- 

selves. Now when Mercy was in bed, she could 
not sleep for joy, for that now her doubts of missing 
at last were removed further from her than ever 

Mercy's good tnev were before. So she lay blessing 
night's rest. anc [ praising God, who had such favor 
for her. 

In the morning they arose with the sun, and 
prepared themselves for their departure ; but the 
Interpreter would have them tarry a while ; For, 
said he, you must orderly go from hence. Then 
said he to the damsel that first opened unto them, 

The bath of Take them and have them into the 
Sanctification. gar( ien to the bath, and there wash 

pu. nog. 2 1 



322 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

them and make them clean from the soil which 
they have gathered by travelling. Then Innocent 
the damsel took them and led them into the garden, 
and brought them to the bath ; so she told them 
that there they must wash and be clean, for so 
her Master would have the women to do that 
called at his house as they were going on pilgrim- 
age. Then they went in and washed, They wash in it. 
yea, they and the boys, and all ; and they came 
out of that bath not only sweet and clean, but 
also much enlivened and strengthened in their 
joints. So when they came in, they looked fairer 
a deal than when they went out to the washing. 

When they were returned out of the garden from 
the bath, the Interpreter took them and looked 
upon them, and said unto them, " Fair as the 
moon." Then he called for the seal wherewith 
they used to be sealed that were washed in his 
bath. So the seal was brought, and he set his 
mark upon them, that they might be Th are 

known in the places whither they were £ealed - 
yet to go. Now the seal was the contents and 
sum of the passover which the children of Israel 
did eat, Exod. 13 : 8-10, when they came out of 
the land of Egypt ; and the mark was set between 
their eyes. This seal greatly added to their beau- 
ty, for it was an ornament to their faces. It also 
added to their gravity, and made their countenan- 
ces more like those of angels. 



THE PILGRIMS ARE CLOTHED. 323 

Then said the Interpreter again to the damsel 
that waited upon these women, Go into the vestry, 
and fetch out garments for these people. So she 
went and fetched out white raiment, and laid it 
They are clothed, down before him; so he commanded 
them to put it on : it was fine linen, white and 
clean. When the women were thus adorned, they 
seemed to be a terror one to the other; for thai 
they could not see that glory each one had in her 
True humility, self, which they could see in each 
other. Now therefore they began to esteem each 
other better than themselves. For, You are fairer 
than I am, said one ; and, You are more comely 
than I am, said another. The children also stood 
amazed, to see into what fashion they were 
brought 



324 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 



THE THIRD STAGE. 

The Interpreter then called for a man-servant of 
his, one Great-Heart, and bade him take a sword, 
and helmet, and shield ; and, Take these my 
daughters, said he, conduct them to the house 
called Beautiful, at which place they will rest 
next. So he took his weapons, and went before 
them; and the Interpreter said, God-speed. Those 
also that belonged to the family sent them away 
with many a good wish. So they went on theii 
way, and sung, 

This place hath been our second stage : 

Here we have heard and seen 
Those good things, that from age to age 

To others hid have been. 

The dunghill-raker, spider, hen, 

The chicken too, to rne 
Have taught a lesson : let me then 

Conformed to it be. 

The butcher, garden, and the field, 

The robin and his bait, 
Also the rotten tree, doth yield 

Me argument of weight, 

To move me for to watch and pray, 

To strive to be sincere ; 
To take my cross up day by day, 

And serve the Lord with fear. 



G-REAT-HEART. 325 

Now I saw in my dream, that these went on, 
and Great-Heart before them. So they went, and 
came to the place where Christian's bnrden fell off 
his back and tumbled into a sepulchre. Here 
then they made a pause ; here also they blessed 
God. Now, said Christiana, it comes to my mind 
what was said to us at the gate, to wit, that we 
should have pardon by word and deed: by word, 
that is, by the promise ; by deed, to wit, in the 
way it was obtained. What the promise is, of 
that I know something ; but what it is to have 
pardon by deed, or in the way that it was ob- 
tained, Mr. Great-Heart, I suppose you know ; 
wherefore, if you please, let us hear your discourse 
thereof. 

Great. Pardon by the deed done, is pardon ob- 

a comment tained by some one for another that 

SVthe'gS hath need thereof; not by the person 

or a discourse of par( loned, but in the way, saith anoth- 

our being justi- -r •> 

fied by Christ. er> [ n w hi c h I have obtained it. So 
then, to speak to the question more at large, the 
pardon that you, and Mercy, and these boys have 
attained, was obtained by another ; to wit, by him 
that let you in at the gate. And he hath obtained 
it in this double way ; he hath performed right- 
eousness to cover you, and spilt his blood to wash 
you in. 

Chr. But if he parts with his righteousness to 
us, what will he have for himself? 



326 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Gheat. Tie lias more righteousness than you 
have need of. or that he needcth himself. 

Chr. Pray make that appear. 

Great. With all my heart: but first I must pre- 
mise, that He of whom we are now about to speak, 
is one that has not his fellow. He has two natures 
in one person, plain to be distinguished, impossible 
to be divided. Unto each of these natures a right- 
eousness belongeth, and each righteousness is essen- 
tial to that nature ; so that one may as easily cause 
i.\ic nature to be extinct, as to separate its justice 
or righteousness from it. Of these rig 
therefore, we made partakers, so as that 

they, or any of them, should be put upon us, that 
we might be made just, and live thereby. Besides 
these, there is a righteousness which this person 
has, as these two natures are joined in one. And 
this is not the righteousness of the Godhead, as 
distinguished from the manhood ; nor the right- 
eousness of the manhood, as distinguished from the 
Godhead ; but a righteousness which standeth in 
the union of both natures, and may properly be 
called the righteousness that is essential to his 
being prepared of God to the capacity of the medi- 
atory olHce which he was intrusted with. If he 
parts with his first righteousness, he parts with his 
Godhead ; if he parts with his second righteous- 
ness, he parts with the purity of his manhood ; if 
he parts with his third, he parts with that perfec- 



JUSTIFIED BY CHRIST. 327 

tion which capacitates him for. the office of media- 
tion. He has therefore another righteousness, which 
standeth in performance, or obedience to a revealed 
will ; and that is what he puts upon sinners, and 
that by which their sins are covered. Wherefore 
he saith, "As by one man's disobedience many 
were made sinners, so by the obedience of one 
shall many be made righteous." Rom. 5:19. 

Chr. But are the other righteousnesses of no use 
to us? 

Great. Yes; for. though they are essential to 
his natures and office, and cannot be communicated 
unto another, yet it is by virtue of them that the 
righteousness that justifies is for that purpose effi- 
cacious. The righteousness of his Godhead gives 
virtue to his obedience ; the righteousness of his 
manhood giveth capability to his obedience to jus- 
tify ; and the righteousness that standeth in the 
union of these two natures to his office, giveth au- 
thority to that righteousness to do the work for 
which it was ordained. 

So then here is a righteousness that Christ, as 
God, has no need of; for he is God without it. 
Here is a righteousness that Christ, as man, has no 
need of to make him so ; for he is perfect man 
without it. Again, here is a righteousness that 
Christ, as God-man, has no need of; for he is per- 
fectly so without it. Here then is a righteousness 
that Christ, as God, and as God-man, has no need 



328 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

of with reference to himself, and therefore he can 
spare it ; a justifying righteousness, that he for 
himself wanteth not, and therefore giveth it away. 
Hence it is called the gift of righteousness. This 
righteousness, since Christ Jesus the Lord has 
made himself under the law, must be given away ; 
for the law doth not only bind him that is undei 
it, to do justly, but to use charity. Rom. 5 : 17. 
Wherefore he must, or ought by the law, if he 
hath two coats, to give one to him that hath none. 
Now, our Lord indeed hath two coats, one for him- 
self, and one to spare ; wherefore he freely bestows 
one upon those that have none. And thus, Chris- 
tiana and Mercy, and the rest of you that are here, 
doth your pardon come by deed, or by the work of 
another man . Your Lord Christ is he that worked, 
and hath given away what he wrought for, to the 
next poor beggar he meets. 

But again, in order to pardon by deed, there 
must something be paid to God as a price, as well 
as something prepared to cover us withal. Sin 
has delivered us up to the just curse of a right- 
eous law : now from this curse we must be justified 
by way of redemption, a price being paid for the 
harms we have done ; and this is by the blood of 
your Lord, who came and stood in your place and 
stead, and died your death for your transgressions. 
Thus has he ransomed you from your transgres- 
sions by blood, and covered your polluted and de- 



THE GRACE OF CHRIST. 329 

formed souls with righteousness, Rom. 8 : 34 ; for 
the sake of which, God passeth by you, and will 
not hurt you when he comes to judge the world. 
Gal. 3: 13. 

Chr. This is brave ! Now I see that there was 

Christiana af- something to be learned by our being 
^yoftdemp! pardoned by word and deed. Good 
turn. Mercy, let us labor to keep this in 

mind : and, my children, do you remember it also. 
But, sir, was not this it that made my good Chris- 
tian's burden fall from off his shoulders, and that 
made him give three leaps for joy ? 

Great. Yes, it was the belief of this that cut 

How the strings those strings that could not be cut by 

SsZrden ri to other mean s 5 and it was to give him 

him were cut. a proof of ^ yirtue of ^ ^ he 

was suffered to carry his burden to the cross. 

Chr. I thought so; for though my heart was 
lightsome and joyous before, yet it is ten times 
more lightsome and joyous now. And I am per- 
suaded by what I have felt, though I have felt but 
little as yet, that if the most burdened man in the 
world was here, and did see and believe as I now 
do, it would make his heart the more merry and 
blithe. 

Great. There is not only comfort and the ease 
How affection of a burden brought to us bv the sio-ht 

to Christ is begot i . . 

in the soul. and consideration of these, but an en- 
deared affection begot in us by it : for who can, if 



330 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

he doth but once think that pardon comes not only 
by promise but thus, but be affected with the way 
and means of his redemption, and so with the man 
that hath wrought it for him 1 

Chr. True ; methinks it makes my heart bleed 
to think that he should bleed for me. Oh, thou 
loving One ; Oh, thou blessed One. Thou deserv 
est to have me ; thou hast bought me. Thou de- 
servest to have me all: thou hast paid Cause of admU 
for me ten thousand times more than ratlon - 
I am worth. No marvel that this made the tears 
stand in my husband's eyes, and that it made him 
trudge so nimbly on. I am persuaded he wished 
me with him : but, vile wretch that I was, I let 
him come all alone. Oh, Mercy, that thy father 
and mother were here ; yea, and Mrs. Timorous 
also : nay, I wish now with all my heart that 
here was Madam Wanton too. Surely, surely, 
their hearts would be affected ; nor could the fear 
of the one, nor the powerful lusts of the other, pre- 
vail with them to go home again, and refuse to 
become good pilgrims. 

Great. You speak now in the warmth of your 
affections ; will it, think you, be always thus with 
you 1 Besides, this is not communicated to every 
one, nor to every one that did see your Jesus bleed. 
There were that stood by, and that saw the blood 
run from his heart to the ground, and yet were so 
far off this, that instead of lamenting, they laugh- 



THE FOOLISH ONES HANGED. 331 

ed at him, and instead of becoming his disciples, 

did harden their hearts against him. So that all 

To be affected that you have, my daughters, you have 

with Christ, and J . . 

with what he has by peculiar impression made by a di- 

done, is a thing . , . , T , 

special. vine contemplating upon what 1 have 

spoken to you. Remember, that 'twas told you, 
that the hen, by her common call, gives no meat 
to her chickens. This you have therefore by a 
special grace. 

Now I saw in my dream, that they went on until 
they were come to the place that Simple and Sloth 
and Presumption lay and slept in when Christian 
went by on pilgrimage ; and behold, they were 
hanged up in irons a little way off on the other 
side. 

Mer. Then said Mercy to him that was their 

Simple sioth guide and conductor, What are these 

and Presump- ^hree men • and for what are they 

tion hanged ; J 

and why. hanged there ? 

Great. These three were men of bad qualities: 
they had no mind to be pilgrims themselves, and 
whomsoever they could they hindered. They were 
sloth and folly themselves, and whomsoever they 
could persuade they made so too, and withal taught 
them to presume that they should do well at last 
They were asleep when Christian went by ; and 
now you go by, they are hanged. 

Mer. But could they persuade any to be of their 
opinion? 



332 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Great. Yes, they turned several out of the way. 
There was Slow-pace that they persuaded to do 
as they. They also prevailed with Their crimes. 
one Short-wind, with one No-heart, with one Lin- 
ger-after-Lust, and with one Sleepy-head, and with 
a young woman, her name was Dull, to turn out 
of the way and become as they. Besides, they 
brought up an ill-report of your Lord, persuading 
others that he was a hard taskmaster. They also 
brought up an evil report of the good land, saying 
i was not half so good as some pretended it was. 
They also began to vilify his servants, and to count 
the best of them meddlesome, troublesome busy- 
bodies. Further, they would call the bread of God 
husks ; the comforts of his children, fancies ; the 
travel and labor of pilgrims, things to no purpose. 

Chr. Nay, said Christiana, if they were such, 
they should never be bewailed by me : they have 
but what they deserve ; and I think it is well that 
they stand so near the highway, that others may 
see and take warning. But had it not been well 
if their crimes had been engraven in some plate 
of iron or brass, and left here where they did their 
mischiefs, for a caution to other bad men ? 

Great. So it is, as you may well perceive, if 
you will go a little to the wall. 

Mer. No, no ; let them hang, and their names 
rot, and their crimes live for ever against them. I 
think it a high favor that they were hanged before 



THE HILL DIFFICULTY. 333 

we came hither : who knows else what they might 
have done to such poor women as we are ? Then 
she turned it into a song, saying, 

"Now then you three hang there, and be a sign 
To all that 6hall against the truth combine. 
And let him that comes after, fear this end, 
If unto pilgrims he is not a friend. 
And thou, my soul, of all such men beware, 
That unto holiness opposers are." 

Thus they went on till they came to the foot of 
the hill Difficulty, where again the good Mr. Great- 
Heart took an occasion to tell them what happened 
there when Christian himself went by. So he had 
them first to the spring. Lo, saith he, this is the 
spring that Christian drank of before he went up 
this hill : and then it was clear and good ; but now 

it is difficult it is dirty with the feet of some that 
ES^are not desirous that pilgrims here 
neous tunes. should quench their thirst. Ezek. 
34: 18, 19. Thereat Mercy said, And why so en- 
vious, trow? But, said their guide, it will do, if 
taken up and put into a vessel that is sweet and 
good ; for then the dirt will sink to the bottom, 
and the water come out by itself more clear. Thus 
therefore Christiana and her companions were 
compelled to do. They took it up, and put it into 
an earthen pot, and so let it stand till the dirt 
was gone to the bottom, and then they drank 
thereof. 



334 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Next he showed them the two by-ways that 
were at the foot of the hill, where Formality and 
Hypocrisy lost themselves. And, said he, these 
are dangerous paths. Two were here cast away 
when Christian came by; and although, as you 
see, these ways are since stopped up The paths, 

. J ir r though barred 

with chains, posts, and a ditch, yet up, wai not keep 

i i i -n i .all from going 

there are those that wiJl choose to ad- in them, 
venture here, rather than take the pains to go up 
this hill. 

Chr. " The way of transgressors is hard." 
Prov. 13: 15. It is a wonder that they can get 
into these ways without danger of breaking their 
necks. 

Great. They will venture : yea, if at any time 
any of the King's servants do happen to see them, 
and do call upon them, and tell them that they are 
in the wrong way, and do bid them beware of the 
danger, then they railingly return them answer, 
and say, "As for the word that thou hast spoken 
unto us in the name of the King, we will not heark- 
en unto thee ; but we will certainly do whatsoever 
thing goeth out of our own mouth." Jer. 44 : 16, 
17. Nay, if you look a little further, you shall see 
that these ways are made cautionary enough, not 
only by these posts and ditch and chain, but also 
by being hedged up ; yet they will choose to go 
there. 

Chr. They are idle ; they love not to take pains ; 



THE HILL DIFFICULTY. 335 

up-hill way is unpleasant to them. So it is ful- 
The reason why filled unto them as it is written, "The 

some do choose ,,,„..,. „r .i ^ .t n ^ 

to go in by. wa y 0l the slothlul man is as a hedge 
wa ^ s - of thorns." Prov. 15: 19. Yea, they 

will rather choose to walk upon a snare than to 
go up this hill, and the rest of this way to the 
city. 

Then they set forward, and began to go up the 
hill, and up the hill they went. But before they 
jbStfSrt S ot t0 the t0 P' Christiana began to pant, 
"• an( l said, I dare say this is a breathing 

hill ; no marvel if they that love their ease more 
than their souls choose to themselves a smoother 
way. Then said Mercy, I must sit down : also the 
least of the children began to cry. * Come, come, 
said Great-heart, sit not down here ; for a little 
above is the Prince's arbor. Then he took 
the little boy by the hand, and led him up 
thereto. 

When they were come to the arbor, they were 
. They sitdown very willing to sit down, for they were 

in the arbor. „n • i,- , m , 

all in a pelting heat. Then said Mercy, 
How sweet is rest to them that labor, Matt. 
11 : 28 ; and how good is the Prince of pilgrims to 
provide such resting-places for them ! Of this arbor 
I have heard much ; but I never saw it before. But 
here let us beware of sleeping; for, as I have heard, 
it cost poor Christian dear. 

Then said Mr. Great-Heart to the little ones 



336 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Come, my pretty boys, how do you do ? What 
think you now of going on pilgrimage ? Sir, said 
the least, I was almost beat out of The little toy's 
heart ; but I thank you for lending me J^JJ £ 
a hand at my need. And I remember t0 Mer °y- 
now what my mother hath told me, namely, that the 
way to heaven is as a ladder, and the way to hell 
is as down a hill. But I had rather go up the 
ladder to life, than down the hill to death. 

Then said Mercy, But the proverb is, "To go 
down the hill is easy." But James said, for that 
was his name, The day is coming when, in my 
opinion, going down the hill will be the hardest of 
all. 'T is a good boy, said his master ; thou hast 
given her a right answer. Then Mercy smiled, but 
the little boy did blush. 

Chr. Come, said Christiana, will "you eat a bit 
to sweeten your mouths, while you sit They refresh 
here to rest your legs? for I have here themselves - 
a piece of pomegranate which Mr. Interpreter put 
into my hand just when I came out of his door ; he 
gave me also a piece of a honey-comb, and a little 
bottle of spirits. I thought he gave you something, 
said Mercy, because he called you aside. Yes, so 
he did, said the other ; but, said Christiana, it shall 
be still as I said it should, when at first we came 
from home ; thou shalt be a sharer in all the good 
that I have, because thou so willingly didst become 
my companion. Then she gave to them, and they 



THE PILGRIMS RE FRESHED. 337 

did eat, both Mercy and the boys. And said Chris- 
tiana to Mr. Great -Heart, Sir, will you do as we ? 
Bat he answered, You are going on pilgrimage, 
and presently I shall return ; much good may what 
you have do you : at home I eat the same every 
day. 



rti. Frog. Z2 



338 PILGRIM'S PROG-K.ESS. 



THE FOURTH STAGE. 

Now when they had eaten and drank, and had 
chatted a little longer, their guide said to them, 
The day wears away ; if you think good, let us pre- 
pare tG be going. So they got up to go, and the 
little boys went before; but Christiana Christiana for- 

, , . n . . . , g ets ner bottle 

forgot to take her bottle ot spirits with of spirits. 
her, so she sent her little boy back to fetch it. Then 
said Mercy, I think this is a losing place : here 
Christian lost his roll, and here Christiana left her 
bottle behind her. Sir, what is the caiise of this? 
So their guide made answer, and said, The cause 
is sleep, or forgetfulness : some sleep when they 
should keep awake, and some forget when they 
should remember; and this is the very cause why 
often, at the resting-places, some pilgrims in some 
things come offlosers. Pilgrims should watch, and 
remember what they have already received, under 
their greatest enjoyments; but for want of doing 
so, oftentimes their rejoicing ends in Mark this. 
tears, and their sunshine in a cloud : witness the 
story of Christian at this place. 

When they were come to the place where Mis- 
trust and Timorous met Christian, to persuade him 
to go back for fear of the lions, they perceived as it 
were a stage, and before it, towards the road, a 



THE LIONS. 339 

broad plate with a copy of verses written thereon, 
and underneath the reason of raising up that stage 
in that place rendered. The verses were, 

11 Let him that sees this stage take heed 
Unto his heart and tongue ; 
Lest, if he do not, here he speed 
As some have long agone." 

The words underneath the verses were, "This 
stage was built to punish those upon, who, through 
timorousness or mistrust, shall be afraid to go fur- 
ther on pilgrimage. Also, on this stage both Mis- 
trust and Timorous were burned through the tongue 
with a hot iron, for endeavoring to hinder Chris- 
tian on his journey." 

Then said Mercy, This is much like to the say- 
ing of the Beloved, "What shall be given unto 
thee, or what shall be done unto thee, thou false 
tongue ? Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals 
of juniper." Psa. 120:3, 4. 

So they went on till they came within sight of 

the lions. Now Mr. Great-Heart w"as a strong man, 

so he was not afraid of a lion. But yet when they 

were come up to the place where the lions were, 

r £. n e ™ b } em the boys, that went before, were now 

of those that go J 7 

on bravely when glad to cringe behind, for they were 

there is no dan- D a J 

ger, but shrink afraid of the lions ; so they stepped 

when troubles -ii-i a i • i • 

come. back, and went behind. At this their 

guide smiled, and said, How now, my boys, do you 
love to go before when no danger doth approach, 



340 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

and love to come behind so soon as the lions ap- 
pear? 

Now, as they went on, Mr. Great-Heart drew 
his sword, with intent to make a way for the 
pilgrims in spite of the lions. Then there appear- 
ed one that, it seems, had taken upon 0f Grim the 
him to back the lions ; and he said to gg£^£ >£ 
the pilgrims' guide, What is the cause ons - 
of your coming hither ? Now the name of that 
man was Grim, or Bloody-man, because of his 
slaying of pilgrims ; and he was of the race of the 
giants. 

Great. Then said the pilgrims' guide, These 
women and children are going on pilgrimage, and 
this is the way they must go ; and go it they shall, 
in spite of thee and the lions. 

Grim. This is not their way, neither shall they 
go therein. I am -come forth to withstand them, 
and to that end will back the lions. 

Now, to say truth, by reason of the fierceness of 
the lions, and of the grim carriage of him that did 
back them, this way had of late lain much unoc- 
cupied, and was almost grown over with grass. 

Chr. Then said Christiana, Though the high- 
ways have been unoccupied heretofore, and though 
the travellers have been made in times past to 
walk through by-paths, it must not be so now I 
am risen, now I am risen a mother in Israel 
Judges 5:6, 7. 



GRIM IS SLAIH. 341 

Grim. Then he swore by the lions that it should ; 
and therefore bid them turn aside, for they should 
not have passage there. 

But Great-Heart their guide made first his ap« 
a fight be- proach unto Grim, and laid so heavily 

tween Grim and . . J 

Great-Heart. on him with his sword that he forced 
him to retreat. 

Grim. Then said he that attempted to back the 
lions, Will you slay me upon my own ground? 

Great. It is the King's highway that we are in, 
and in this way it is that thou hast placed the 
lions ; but these women, and these children, 
though weak, shall hold on their way in spite of 
thy lions. And with that he gave him again a 
downright blow, and brought him upon his knees. 
With this blow also he broke his helmet, and with 
the next he cut off an arm. Then did the giant 
roar so hideously that his voice frightened the wom- 
en, and yet they were glad to see him lie sprawl- 
The victory, ing upon the ground. Now the lions 
were chained, and so of themselves could do noth- 
ing. Wherefore, when old Grim, that intended to 
back them, was dead, Mr. Great-Heart said to the 
pilgrims, Come now, and follow me, and no hurt 
They pass by sna ^ happen to you from the lions. 
the kons. They therefore went on, but the wom- 

en trembled as they passed by them ; the boys also 
looked as if they would die ; but they all got by 
without further hurt. 



342 PILG-RJM'S PROORESS. 

Now, when they were within sight of the por- 
ter's lodge, they soon came up unto it ; but they 
made the more haste after this to go thither, be- 
cause it is dangerous travelling there in the night 
So when they were come to the gate, They come 

.,-,*,, , , to the portei'i 

the guide knocked, and the porter lodge. 
cried, Who is there ? But as soon as the guide 
had said, It is I, he knew his voice, and came 
down, for the guide had oft before that come 
thither as a conductor of pilgrims. When he was 
come down, he opened the gate ; and seeing the 
guide standing just before it, for he saw not the 
women, for they were behind him, he said unto 
him, How now, Mr. Great-Heart, what is your busi- 
ness here so late at night? I have brought, said 
he, some pilgrims hither, where, by my Lord's 
commandment, they must lodge : I had been here 
some time ago, had I not been opposed by the 
giant that did use to back the lions. But I,, af- 
ter a long and tedious combat with him, have cut 
him off, and have brought the pilgrims hither in 
safety. 

Por. Will you not go in, and stay till morning? 

Great. No, I will return to my Lord Great-Heart 

. attempts to go 

tO-nigllt. back. 

Chr. 0, sir, I know not how to be willing you 
should leave us in our pilgrimage : you have been 
so faithful and so loving to us, you have fought so 
stoutly for us, you have been so hearty in counsel- 



GREAT. HEART LEAVES THEM. 343 

ling of us, that I shall never forget your favor 
towards us. 

Mer. Then said Mercy, that we might have 
The pilgrims thy company to our journey's end. 

implore his com- 1 

pany still. How can such poor women as we hold 

out in a way so full of troubles as this way is, 
without a friend and defender ? 

James. Then said James, the youngest of the 
boys, Pray, sir, be persuaded to go with us, and 
help us, because we are so weak, and the way so 
dangerous as it is. 

Great. I am at my Lord's commandment ; if 
he shall allot me to be your guide quite through, 
I will willingly wait upon you. But here you 

Help lost for failed at first ; for when he bid me 

want of asking . r . 

for it. come thus iar with you, then you 

should have begged me of him to have gone quite 
through with you, and he would have granted 
your request. However, at present I must with- 
draw ; and so, good Christiana, Mercy, and my 
brave children, adieu. 

Then the porter, Mr. Watchful, asked Christiana 
of her country, and of her kindred. And she said, 
I came from the city of Destruction. I am a 
widow woman, and my husband is dead ; his name 
was Christian, the pilgrim. How, said the porter, 
was he your husband ? Yes, said she, and these 
are his children ; and this, pointing to Mercy, is 
one of my townswomen. Then the porter rang 



344 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

his bell, as at such times he is wont, and there 
came to the door one of the damsels, whose name 
was Humble-Mind ; and to her the porter said, Go 
tell it within, that Christiana, the wife of Chris 
tian, and her children, are come hither on pilgrim 
age. She went in, therefore, and told it. But 0, 
what noise for gladness was there Joy at the 

. 1T11 t news of the pil- 

within when the damsel did but drop grims' coming, 
that out of her mouth. 

So they came with haste to the porter, for Chris- 
tiana stood still at the door. Then some of the 
most grave said unto her, Come in, Christiana, 
come in, thou wife of that good man ; come in, 
thou blessed woman, come in, with all that are 
Avith thee. So she went in, and they followed her 
that were her children and companions. Now 
when' they were gone in, they were had into a 
large room, where they were bidden to sit down ; 
so they sat down, and the chief of the house were 
called to see and welcome the guests. Then they 
came in, and understanding who they were, did 
salute each other with a kiss, and said, christians' 
Welcome, ye vessels of the grace of J? ve x ? ^ nd l ed at 

• J ° the sight of one 

God ; welcome to us, your friends. another. 

Now, because it was somewhat late, and because 
the pilgrims were weary with their journey, and 
also made faint with the sight of the fight, and of 
the terrible lions, they desired, as soon as might 
be, to prepare to go to rest. Nay, said those of the 



THE PILGRIMS ENTERTAINED. 345 

family, refresh yourselves first with a morsel of 
meat; for they had prepared for them a lamb, 
with the accustomed sauce belonging thereto, 
Exod. 12:21; John 1:29; for the porter had 
heard before of their coming, and had told it to 
them within. So when they had supped, and end- 
ed their prayer with a psalm, they desired they 
might go to rest. 

But let us, said Christiana, if we may be so bold 
as to choose, be in that chamber that was my 
husband's when he was here ; so they had them 
up thither, and they all lay in a room. "When 
they were at rest, Christiana and Mercy enter- 
ed into discourse about things that were conven- 
ient. 

Chr. Little did I think once, when my husband 
Christ's bosom went on pilgrimage, that I should ever 

is for all pil- 

grims. nave ioliowed him. 

Mer. And you as little thought of lying in his 
bed, and in his chamber to rest, as you do now. 

Chr. And much less did I ever think of seeing 
his face with comfort, and of worshipping the 
Lord the King with him; and yet now I believe I 
shall. 

Mer. Hark, don't you hear a noise ? 

Chr. Yes, it is, as I believe, a noise of music, 

Music. for joy that we are here. 

Mer. Wonderful! Music in the house, music 
i** the heart, and music also in heaven, for joy that 



346 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

we are here. Thus they talked a while, and then 
betook themselves to sleep. 

So in the morning when they were awake, Chris- 
tiana said to Mercy, "What was the Mercy did 
matter, that you did laugh in your sleep sleep. 
to-night? I suppose you were in a dream. 

Mer. So I was, and a sweet dream it was ; but 
are you sure I laughed ? 

Chr. Yes, you laughed heartily ; but prithee, 
Mercy, tell me thy dream. 

Mer. I was dreaming that I sat all alone in a soli- 
tary place, and was bemoaning of the Mercy's dream. 
hardness of my heart. Now I had not set there 
long but methought many were gathered about me 
to see me, and to hear what it was that I said. So 
they hearkened, and I went on bemoaning the 
hardness of my heart. At this, some of them 
laughed at me, some called me fool, and some be- 
gan to thrust me about. With that, methought I 
looked up and saw one coming with wings towards 
me. So he came directly to me, and mat her 
said, Mercy, what aileth thee ? Now dream was - 
when he had heard me make my complaint, he 
said, Peace be to thee ; he also wiped my eyes 
with his handkerchief, and clad me in silver and 
gold. Ezek. 16 : 8—11. He put a chain about my 
neck, and ear-rings in my ears, and a beautiful 
crown upon my head. Then he took me by the 
hand, and said, Mercy, come after me. So he went 



MERCY'S DREAM. 347 

up, and I followed till we came at a golden gate. 
Then he knocked ; and when they within had 
opened, the man went in, and I followed him up 
to a throne, upon which one sat ; and he said to 
me, Welcome, daughter. The place looked bright 
and twinkling, like the stars, or rather like the sun, 
and I thought that I saw your husband there ; so I 
awoke from my dream. But did I laugh? 

Chr. Laugh ! aye, and well you might, to see 
yourself so well. For you must give me leave to 
tell you, that it was a good dream ; and that, as you 
have begun to find the first part true, so you shall 
find the second at last. " God speaks once, yea, 
twice, yet man perceiveth it not : in a dream, in a 
vision of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon 
men, in slumberings upon the bed." Job 33 : 14, 
15. We need not, when abed, to lie awake to talk 
with God ; he can visit us while we sleep, and 
cause us then to hear his voice. Our heart often- 
times wakes when we sleep, and God can speak to 
that, either by words, by proverbs, by signs and 
similitudes, as well as if one was awake. 

Mer. Well, I am glad of my dream , for I hope 
Mercy glad of ere l° n o t° see ** fulfilled, to the mak- 

her dream. ing me laugh ^^ 

Chr. I think it is now high time to rise, and to 
know what we must do. 

Mer. Pray, if they invite us to stay a while, let 
us willingly accept of the proffer. I am the more 



348 PILO-RIM'S PROGRESS. 

willing to stay a while here, to grow better ac- 
quainted with these maids : methinks Prudence, 
Piety, and Charity, have very comely and sober 
countenances. 

Chr. We shall see what they will do 

So when they were up and ready, they came 
down, and they asked one another of their rest, and 
if it was comfortable or not. 

Mer. Very good, said Mercy : it was one of 
the best night's lodgings that ever I had in my 
life. 

Then said Prudence and Piety, If you will be 
persuaded to stay here a while, you shall have what 
the house will afford. 

Char. Aye, and that with a very good will, said 
Charity. So they consented, and stayed They stay here 
there about a month or above, and be- some time - 
came very profitable one to another. And because 
Prudence would see how Christiana had brought 
up her children, she asked leave of her Prudence de- 
to catechize them. So she gave her c h r f z s e ° Chris- 
free consent. Then she began with the tiana ' s children - 
youngest, whose name was James. 

Prud. And she said, Come, James, James cate . 
canst thou tell me who made thee ? chlzed - 

James. God the Father, God the Son, and God 
the Holy Ghost. 

Prud. Good boy. And canst thou tell who saved 
thee ? 



THE CHILDREN CATECHIZED. 349 

James. God the Father, God the Son, and God 
the Holy Ghost. 

Prud. Good hoy still. But how doth God the 
Father save thee? 

James. By his grace. 

Prud. How doth God the Son save thee? 

James. By his righteousness, death and blood, 
and life. 

Prud. And how doth God the Holy Ghost save 
thee? 

James. By his illumination, by his renovation, 
and by his preservation. 

Then said Prudence to Christiana, You are to be 
commended for thus bringing up your children. I 
suppose I ne ed not ask the rest these questions, since 
the youngest of them can answer them so well. I 
will therefore now apply myself to the nextyoungest. 

Prud. Then she said, Come, Joseph, for his name 
Joseph cate- was Joseph, will you let me catechize 

chized. VOU ? 

Joseph. With all my heart. 

Prud. What is man? 

Joseph. A reasonable creature, so made by God, 
as my brother said. 

Prud. What is supposed by this word, saved? 

Joseph. That man, by sin, has brought himseL 
into a state of captivity and misery. 

Prud. What is supposed by his being saved by 
the Trinity? 



350 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Joseph. That sin is so great and mighty a tyrant 
that none can pull us out of its clutches but God ; 
and that God is so good and loving to man, as to pull 
him indeed out of this miserable state. 

Prud. What is God's design in saving poor 
men? 

Joseph. The glorifying of his name, of his grace, 
and justice, etc., and the everlasting happiness of 
his creature. 

Prud. Who are they that will be saved ? 

Joseph. They that accept of his salvation. 

Prud. Good boy, Joseph ; thy mother hath taught 
thee well, and thou hast hearkened unto what she 
has said unto thee. 

Then said Prudence to Samuel, who was the 
eldest but one, 

Prud. Come, Samuel, are you will- Samuel cate- 
ing that I should catechize you 1 chized ' 

Sam. Yes, forsooth, if you please. 

Prud. What is heaven ? 

Sam. A place and state most blessed, because 
God dwelleth there. 

Prud. What is hell ? 

Sam. A place and state most woful, because it 
is the dwelling-place of sin, the devil, and death. 

Prud. Why wouldst thou go to heaven? 

Sam. That I may see God, and serve him with^ 
out weariness ; that I may see Christ, and love him 
everlastingly ; that I may have that fulness of the 



THE CHILDREN CATECHIZED. 351 

Holy Spirit in me which I can by no means here 
enjoy. 

Prud. A very good boy, and one that has learn- 
ed well. 

Then she addressed herself to the eldest, whose 
Matthew cate- nam e was Matthew; and she said to 
chized. him) Come, Matthew, shall I also cate- 

chize you ? 

Matt. With a very good will. 

Prud. I ask, then, if there was ever any thing 
that had a being antecedent to or before God ? 

Matt. No, for God is eternal ; nor is there any 
thing, excepting himself, that had a being until 
the beginning of the first day. For in six days the 
Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that 
in them is. 

Prud. What do you think of the Bible ? 

Matt. It is the holy word of God. 

Prud. Is there nothing written therein but what 
you understand ? 

Matt. Yes, a great deal. 

Prud. What do you do when you meet with 
places therein that you do not understand ? 

Matt. I think God is wiser than I. I pray also 
that he will please to let me know all therein that 
he knows will be for my good. 

Prud. How believe you as touching the resur- 
rection of the dead ? 

Matt. I believe they shall rise the same that 



352 PILGHLIM'S PROaRESS. 

was buried ; the same in nature, though not in cor- 
ruption. And I believe this upon a double account : 
first, because God has promised it; secondly, be- 
cause he is able to perform it. 

Then said Prudence to the boys, You must still 
hearken to your mother; for she can Prudence's con- 
teach you more. You must also dili- ^HJ 11 ^ 
gently give ear to what good talk you the boys - 
shall hear from others : for your sakes do they speak 
good things. Observe also, and that with careful- 
ness, what the heavens and the earth do teach you ; 
but especially be much in the meditation of that 
book which was the cause of your father's becom- 
ing a pilgrim. I, for my part, my children, will 
teach you what I can while you are here, and shall 
be glad if you will ask me questions that tend to 
godly edifying. 

Now by that these pilgrims had been at this place 
a week, Mercy had a visitor that pretended some 
good- will unto her, and his name was Mr. Brisk; 
a man of some breeding, and that pre- Mercy has a 
tended to religion, but a man that stuck sweetheart - 
very close to the world. So he came once or twice, 
or more, to Mercy, and offered love unto her. Now 
Mercy was of a fair countenance, and therefore the 
more alluring. 

Her mind also was to be always busying of her- 
self in doing; for when she had nothing to do for 
herself, she would be making hose and garments 



MERCY HAS A SWEETHEART. 353 

for others, and would bestow them upon those that 
had need. And Mr. Brisk not knowing where or 
how she disposed of what she made, seemed to be 
greatly taken, for that he found her never idle. I 
will warrant her a good housewife, quoth he to 
himself. 

Mercy then revealed the business to the maidens 
that were of the house, and inquired of them con- 
Mercy inquires cerning him, for they did know him 
clncemmg^S better than she. So they told her that 
Bnsk. j ie was a ver y busy young man, and one 

who pretended to religion, but was, as they feared, 
a stranger io the power of that which is good. 

Nay then, said Mercy, I will look no more on 
him ; for I purpose never to have a clog to my 
soul. 

Prudence then replied, that there needed no mat- 
ter of great discouragement to be given to him ; her 
continuing so as she had begun to do for the poor 
would quickly cool his courage. 

So the next time he comes he finds her at her 
Talk betwixt old work, making things for the poor. 

M!crcy 3.11 d IVLr. 

Brisk. " Then said he, "What, always at it ? Yes, 

said she, either for myself or for others. And what 
canst thou earn a day ? said he. I do these things, 
said she, that I may be rich in gocd works, laying 
up in store for myself a good foundation against 
the time to come, that I may lay hold on eternal 
life. ] Tim. 6:17-19. Why, prithee, what doest 

PU. Frojf. 23 



354 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

thou with them? said he. Clothe the naked, said 
she. With that his countenance fell. So he for- 
bore to come at her again. And when He forsakes her, 
he was asked the reason why, he said, and why " 
that Mercy was a pretty lass, but troubled with ill 
conditions. 

When he had left her, Prudence said, Did I not 
tell thee that Mr. Brisk would soon forsake thee ? 
yea, he will raise up an ill report of Mercy in the 
thee ; for, notwithstanding his pretence cy actlce r ^™ed" 
to religion, and his seeming love to J^^naine 7 of 
Mercy, yet Mercy and he are of tern- merc y is liked - 
pers so different that I believe they will never come 
together. 

Mer. I might have had husbands before now, 
though I spoke not of it to any ; but they were such 
as did not like my conditions, though never did any 
of them find fault with my person. So they and 
I could not agree. 

Prud. Mercy in our days is but little set by any 
further than as to its name : the practice which is 
set forth by thy conditions, there are but few that 
can abide. 

Mer. Well, said Mercy, if nobody will have me, 
I will die unmarried, or my conditions Mercy's reaa 
shall be to me as a husband : for I can- lntlon - 
not change my nature ; and to have one who lies 
cross to me in this, that I purpose never to admit of 
as long as I live. I had a sister named Bountiful, 



MATTHEW FALLS SICK. 355 

that was married to one of these churls, but he and 
How Mercy's she could never agree ; but because my 

BlStGT W3.S SGrVBCl 

by her husband, sister was resolved to do as she had be- 
gun, that is, to show kindness to the poor, therefore 
her husband first cried her down at the cross, and 
then turned her out of his doors. 

Prud. And yet he was a professor, I warrant 
you? 

Mer. Yes, such a one as he was, and of such as 
he the world is now full : but I am for none of 
them all. 

Now Matthew, the eldest son of Christiana, fell 
Matthew fails s ^ c ^' an( ^ n ^ s sickness was sore upon 
sick. him, for he was much pained in his 

bowels, so that he was with it at times pulled, as 
it were, both ends together. There dwelt also not 
far from thence one Mr. Skill, an ancient and well- 
approved physician. So Christiana desired it, and 
they sent for him, and he came. When he was 
entered the room, and had a little observed the boy, 
he concluded that he was sick of the gripes. Then 
Gripes of con- ne sa ^ to n * s mother, What diet has 
science. Matthew of late fed upon ? Diet ? said 

Christiana, nothing but what is wholesome. The 

The physi- physician answered, This boy has been 
clan's judgment, tampering with something that lies in 
his stomach undigested, and that will not away 
without means. And I tell you he must be purged, 
or else he will die. 



856 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Sam. Then said Samuel, Mother, what was that 
which my brother did gather up and Samuel puts his 
eat as soon as we were come from the S^tta frait^his 
gate that is at the head of this way? Aether did eat. 
You know that there was an orchard on the left 
hand, on the other side of the wall, and some of 
the trees hung over the wall, and my brother did 
pluck and eat!. 

Chr. True, my child, said Christiana, he did take 
thereof, and did eat : naughty boy as he was, I 
chid him, and yet he would eat thereof. 

Skill. I knew he had eaten something that was 
not wholesome food ; and that food, to wit, that 
fruit, is even the most hurtful of all. It is the 
fruit of Beelzebub's orchard. I do marvel that 
none did warn you of it ; many have died thereof. 

Chr. Then Christiana began to cry; and she 
said, Oh, naughty boy! and Oh, careless mother! 
what shall I do for my son ? 

Skill. Come, do not be too much dejected ; the 
boy may do well again, but he must purge and 
vomit. 

Chr. Pray, sir, try the utmost of your skill with 
him, whatever it costs. 

Skill. Nay, I hope I shall be reasonable. So 
he made him a purge, but it was too weak : it was 
said it was made of the blood of a goat, the ashes 
of a heifer, and some of the juice of hyssop. Heb. 
9 : 1 3, 19 ; 10 : 1-4. When Mr. Skill had seen that 



MR. SKILL'S MEDICINE. 357 

that purge was too weak, he made one to the pur- 
pose. It was made ex came et sanguine Christi,* 

The Latin I J° nn 6 : 54-57 ; Heb. 9 : 14 — you know 
borrow. physicians give strange medicines to 

their patients — and it was made into pills, with a 
promise or two, and a proportionable quantity of 
salt. Mark 9 : 49. Now, he was to take them 
three at a time, fasting, in half a quarter of a pint 
of the tears of repentance. Zech. 12:10. 

When this potion was prepared, and brought to 

The boy loath to tae ^°Y> ne WaS l° atn to ta ^ e **» though 
take the physic. torn ^fjj jfog g r ip es as if he should be 

pulled in pieces. Come, come, said the physician, 
you must take it. It goes against my stomach, said 
the boy. I must have you take it, said his mother. 
I shall vomit it up again, said the boy. Pray, sir, 
said Christiana to Mr. Skill, how does it taste ? It 
has no ill taste, said the doctor; and with that she 
The mother touched one of the pills with the tip 

tastes it, and , 

persuades him. of her tongue. Oh, Matthew, said she, 
this potion is sweeter than honey. If thou lovest 
thy mother, if thou lovest thy brothers, if thou 
lovest Mercy, if thou lovest thy life, take it. So, 
with much ado, after a short prayer for the bless- 
ing of God upon it, he took it, and it wrought kindly 
with him. It caused him to purge ; it caused him 
to sleep, and to rest quietly; it put him into a fine 
heat and breathing sweat, and did quite rid him 

* Of the flesh and blood of Christ. 



358 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

of his gripes. So in a little time he got up, and 
walked about with a staff, and would a word of God 

\ in the hand of 

go from room to room, and talk with faith. 
Prudence, Piety, and Charity, of his distemper, and 
how he was healed. 

So when the boy was healed, Christiana asked 
Mr. Skill, saying, Sir, what will content you for 
your pains and care to and of my child? And he 
said, You must pay the Master of the College of 
Physicians, Heb. 13:1 1—15, according to rules made 
in that case and provided. 

Chr. But, sir, said she, what is this pill good 
for else ? 

Skill. It is a universal pill; it is good against 
all the diseases that pilgrims are inci- The pill a nni- 
dent to; and when it is well prepared, versal remedy ' 
it will keep good, time out of mind. 

Chr. Pray, sir, make me up twelve boxes of 
them ; for if I can get these, I will never take 
other physic. 

Skill. These pills are good to prevent diseases, 
as well as to cure when one is sick. Yea, I dare 
say it, and stand to it, that if a man will but use 
this physic as he should, it will make him live for 
ever. John 6:51. But, good Christiana, thou 
must give these pills no other way but as I have 
prescribed; for if you do, they will do no good. 
So he gave unto Christiana physic for herself and 
her boys, and for Mercy; and bid Matthew take 



PRUDENCE AND MATTHEW. 359 

heed how he ate any more green plums ; and kissed 
them, and went his way. 

It was told you before, that Prudence bid the 
boys, that if at any time they would, they should 
ask her some questions that might be profitable, 
and she would say something to them. 

Matt. Then Matthew, who had been sick, asked 
Of physic. her, why for the most p art physic should 
be bitter to our palates. 

Prud. To show how unwelcome the word of God 
and the effects thereof are to a carnal heart. 

Matt. Why does physic, if it does good, purge, 
and cause to vomit ? 

Prud. To show that the word, when it works 
effectually, cleanseth the heart and mind. For 
look, what the one doth to the body, the other doth 
to the soul. 

Matt. What should we learn by seeing the flame 

Of fire, and of of our fire S° upwards, and by seeing 
the sun. ^g b eams an d sweet influences of the 

sun strike downwards ? 

Prud. By the going up of the fire, we are taught 
to ascend to heaven by fervent and hot desires. 
And by the sun sending his heat, beams, and sweet 
influences downwards, we are taught that the Sav- 
iour of the world, though high, reaches down with 
his grace and love to us below. 

Of the clouds. Matt. Whence have the clouds their 
water ? 



360 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Prud. Out of the sea. 

Matt. What may we learn from that ? 

Prud. That ministers should fetch their doctrine 
from God. 

Matt. Why do they empty themselves upon the 
earth? 

Prud. To show that ministers should give out 
what they know of God to the world. 

Matt. Why is the rainbow caused Of the rainbow. 
by the sun ? 

Prud. To show that the covenant of God's grace 
is confirmed to us in Christ. 

Matt. Why do the springs come from Of the springs, 
the sea to us through the earth ? 

Prud. To show that the grace of God comes to 
us through the body of Christ. 

Matt. Why do some of the springs rise out of the 
tops of high hills ? 

Prud. To show that the Spirit of grace shall 
spring up in some that are great and mighty, as 
well as in many that are poor and low. 

Matt. Why doth the fire fasten upon of thocandie. 
the candle-wick ? 

Prud. To show that unless grace doth kindle 
upon the heart, there will be no true light of life 
in us. 

Matt. Why are the wick and tallow, and all, 
spent to maintain the light of the candle ? 

Prud. To show that body and soul, and all, should 



PRUDENCE AND MATTHEW. 361 

be at the service of, and spend themselves to 
maintain in good condition that grace of God that 
is in us. 

Matt. Why doth the pelican pierce her own 
Of the pelican, breast with her bill ? 

Prud. To nourish her young ones with her blood, 
and thereby to show that Christ the blessed so 
loved his young, (his people,) as to save them from 
death by his blood. 

Matt. What may one learn by hearing the cock 

Of the cock. to crow ? 

Prud. Learn to remember Peter's sin, and Peter's 
repentance. The cock's crowing shows also, that 
day is coming on: let, then, the crowing of the 
cock put thee in mind of that last and terrible day 
of judgment. 

Now about this time their month was out ; 
wherefore they signified to those of the house, that 
it was convenient for them to up and be going. 
Then said Joseph to his mother, It is proper that 

The weak may y ou f° r g e t n °t to Send to the house of 

th? et Son g ° a to Mr - Interpreter, to pray him to grant 
prayers. t h at jy[ r Great-Heart should be sent 

unto us, that he may be our conductor for the rest 
of the way. Good boy, said she, I had almost for- 
got. So she drew up a petition, and prayed Mr. 
Watchful the porter to send it by some fit man to 
her good friend Mr. Interpreter ; who, when it was 
come, and he had seen the contents of the petition, 



362 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

said to the messenger, Go, tell them that ] will 
send him. 

When the family where Christiana was, saw 
that they had a purpose to go forward, Theyirovida 

i nii tit l to be gone on 

tney called the whole house together, their way. 
to give thanks to their King for sending of them 
such profitable guests as these. Which done, they 
said unto Christiana, And shall we not show thee 
something, as our custom is to do to pilgrims, on 
which thou may est meditate when thou art upon 
the way ? So they took Christiana, her children, 
and Mercy, into the closet, and showed them one 
of the apples that Eve ate of, and that Eve's apple, 
she also did give to her husband, and that for the 
eating of which they were both turned out of para- 
dise, and asked her what she thought that was. 
Then Christiana said, It is a food or poison, I know 
not which. So they opened the mat- a sight of sin 
ter to her, and she held up her hands 1S amazm s- 
and wondered. Gen. 3:6; Rom. 7 : 24. 

Then they had her to a place, and showed her 
Jacob's ladder. Gen. 28 : 12. Now at Jacob's ladder. 
that time there were some angels ascending upon 
it. So Christiana looked and looked to see the 
angels go up : so did the rest of the company. 
Then they were going into another place, to show 
them something else ; but James said to his moth- 
er, Pray, bid them stay here a little A sight of Christ 
longer, for this is a curious sight. So u takm s- 



THE SIGHTS SHOWN. 363 

they turned again, and stood feeding their eyes 
with this so pleasant a prospect. 

After this, they had them into a place where did 
Golden anchor, hang up a golden anchor. So they bid 
Christiana take it down ; for, said they, You shall 
have it with you, for it is of absolute necessity 
that you should, that you may lay hold of that 
within the veil, Heb. 6:19, and stand steadfast in 
case you should meet with turbulent weather, Joel 
3:16: so they were glad thereof. 

Then they took them, and had them to the mount 

Of Abraham u P on which Abraham our father offered 

offering up Isaac. U p l saac ;hi s son> an( j showed them the 

altar, the wood, the fire, and the knife, for they 
remain to be seen to this very day. Gen. 22 : 9. 
When they had seen it, they held up their hands, 
and blessed themselves, and said, Oh, what a man 
for love to his Master, and for denial to himself, 
was Abraham ! 

After they had showed them all these things, Pru- 
dence took them into a dining-room, where stood 
Pmdence's vir- a V^ T °f excellent virginals ;* so she 
ginais. played upon them, and turned what she 

had showed them into this excellent song, saying, 

"Eve's apple we have showed you; 
Of that be you aware : 
You have seen Jacob's ladder '■oo, 
Upon which angels are. 

* A musical instrument. 



364 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

An anchor you received have ; 

But let not these suffice, 
Until with Abra'm you have given 

Your best a sacrifice." 

Now, about this time, one knocked at the door; 
so the porter opened, and behold, Mr. Mr. Great-Heart 
Great-Heart was there. But when he comes a s ain - 
was come in, what joy was there ! for it came now 
afresh again into their minds, how but a little while 
ago he had slain old Grim Bloody-man the giant, 
and had deliveied them from the lions. 

Then said Mr. Great-Heart to Christiana and to 
Mercy, My Lord has sent each of you He brings a 

. .. token from his 

a bottle ot wine, and also some parch- Lord with him. 
ed corn, together with a couple of pomegranates ; 
he has also sent the boys some figs and raisins ; to 
refresh you in your way. 

Then they addressed themselves to their jour- 
ney, and Prudence and Piety went along with them. 
When they came to the gate, Christiana asked the 
porter if any of late went by. He said, No ; only 
one, some time since, who also told me that of 
late there had been a great robbery committed on 
the King's highway as you go. But, said he, the 
thieves are taken, and will shortly be tried for their 
lives. Then Christiana and Mercy were afraid ; 
but Matthew said, Mother, fear nothing, as long as 
Mr. Great-Heart is to go with us, and to be our 
conductor. 



THE PORTER'S BLESSING. 365 

Then said Christiana to the porter, Sir, I am 

Christiana much obliged to you for all the kind- 
takes her leave " 1 

of the porter, nesses that you have showed to me 
since I came hither; and also for that you have 
been so loving and kind to my children. I know 
not how to gratify your kindness ; wherefore, pray, 
as a token of my respect to you, accept of this 
small mite. So she put a gold angel* in his hand ; 
and he made her a low obeisance, and said, "Let 
The porter's tftv garments be always white; and 
blessing. j et ^y head want no i n t m ent." 

Eccles. 9 : 8. Let Mercy live and not die, and let 
not her works be few. Deut. 33 : 6. And to the 
boys he said, Do you fly youthful lusts, and follow 
after godliness with them that are grave and wise, 
2 Tim. 2 : 22 ; so shall you put gladness into your 
mother's heart, and obtain praise of all that are 
sober-minded. So they thanked the porter, and 
departed. 

* A gold angel was a coin of the value of ten shillings 
sterling, and according to the comparative value of money 
in Bunyan's time, equal at least to a guinea at the present 
time. 



366 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 



THE FIFTH STAGE. 

Now I saw in my dream, that they went for- 
ward until they were come to the brow of the hill ; 
where Piety, bethinking herself, cried out, Alas, I 
have forgot what I intended to bestow upon Chris- 
tiana and her companions: I will go back and 
fetch it. So she ran and fetched it. While she 
was gone, Christiana thought she heard, in a grove 
a little way off on the right hand, a most curious 
melodious note, with words much like these, 

"Through all my life thy favor is 
So frankly showed to me, 
That in thy house for evermore 
My dwelling-place shall be." 

And listening still, she thought she heard anoth- 
er answer it, saying, 

"For why? The Lord our God is good; 

His mercy is for ever sure ; 
His truth at all times firmly stood, 
And shall from age to age endure." 

So Christiana asked Prudence who it was that 
made those curious notes. Song 2: 11, 12. They 
are, answered she, our country birds : they sing 
these notes but seldom, except it be at the spring, 



THE HAPPINESS OF CHRISTIAN. 367 

when the flowers appear, and the sun shines warm, 
and then you may hear them all day long. I often, 
said she, go out to hear them; we also ofttimes 
keep them tame in our house. They are very fine 
company for us when we are melancholy : also 
they make the woods and groves and solitary pla- 
ces, places desirable to be in. 

By this time Piety was come again. So she 

Piety bestow. S3 -^ ^° Christiana, Look here, I have 
eth something brought t h ee a sc heme of all those 

on them at part- o 

^g- things that thou hast seen at our 

house, upon which thou may est look when thou 
findest thyself forgetful, and call those things 
again to remembrance for thy edification and com- 
fort. 

Now they began to go down the hill into the 
valley of Humiliation. It was a steep hill, and 
the way was slippery ; but they were very careful ; 
so they got down pretty well. When they were 
down in the valley, Piety said to Christiana, This 
is the place where Christian, your husband, met 
with the foul fiend Apollyon, and where they had 
that dreadful fight that they had : I know you 
cannot but have heard thereof. But be of good 
courage ; as long as you have here Mr. Great- 
Heart to be your guide and conductor, we hope 
you will fare the better. So when these two had 
committed the pilgrims unto the conduct of their 
guide, he went forward, and they went alter. 



368 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Great. Then said Mr. Great-Heart, "We need 
not be so afraid of this valley, for here j^ Great . 
is nothing to hurt us, unless we pro- JJj£* |jj ^ 
cure it to ourselves. It is true, Chris- miliation - 
tian did here meet with Apollyon, with whom he 
also had a sore combat : but that fray was the 
fruit of those slips which he got in his going down 
the hill; for they that get slips there, must look 
for combats here. And hence it is, that this valley 
has got so hard a name. For the common people, 
when they hear that some frightful thing has be- 
fallen such a one in such a place, are of opinion 
that that place is haunted with some foul fiend or 
evil spirit; when, alas, it is for the fruit of their 
own doing that such things do befall them there. 
This valley of Humiliation is of itself as fruitful 
a place as any the crow flies over : The reason 

x ii. • w ^y Christian 

and I am persuaded, if we could hit was so beset in 

the valley of 

upon it, we might rind somewhere Humiliation. 
hereabouts something that might give us an ac- 
count why Christian was so hardly beset in this 
place. 

Then said James to his mother, Lo, yonder 
6tands a pillar, and it looks as if something was 
written thereon ; let us go and see what it is. So 
they went, and found there written, " Let Chris- 
tian's slips, before he came hither, and a pillar with 

,, ,, , . , ...an inscription 

the battles that he met with in this on it. 
place, be a warning to those that come after." Lo. 



VALLEY OF HUMILIATION. 369 

said their guide, did not I tell you that there was 
something hereabouts that would give intimation 
of the reason why Christian was so hard beset iti 
this place? Then turning himself to Christiana, 
he said, No disparagement to Christian more than 
to any others whose hap and lot it was. For it is 
easier going up than down this hill, and that can 
be said but of few hills in all these parts of the 
world. But we will leave the good man ; he is at 
rest : he also had a brave victory over his enemy. 
Let Him grant, that dwelleth above, that we fare 
no worse, when we come to be tried, than he. 
But we will come again to this valley of Hu- 
This valley a filiation. It is the best and most 

brave place. fruit& j piece of ^^ [r ^ ^^ 

parts. It is fat ground, and as you see, consistcth 
much in meadows ; and if a man was to come 
here in the summer-time, as we do now, if he 
knew not any thing before thereof, and if he also 
delighted himself in the sight of his eyes, he 
might see that which would be delightful to him. 
Behold how green this valley is ; also how beauti- 
ful with lilies. Song 2:1. I have known many 
laboring men that have got good estates in this 

thp Ie vauTy 6 S vallev °f Humiliation ; for God resist- 
Humiiiation. eth the proud, but giveth grace to the 
humble. James 4 : 6 ; 1 Pet. 5 : 5. Indeed, it is a 
very fruitful soil, and doth bring forth by handfuls. 
Some also have wished that the next way to their 

Pil. Prog. 24 



370 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Father's house were here, that they might be 
troubled no more with either hills or mountains to 
go over ; but the way is the way, and there is an 
end. 

Now, as they were going along and talking, 
they espied a boy feeding his father's sheep. The 
boy was in very mean clothes, but of a fresh and 
well-favored countenance ; and as he sat by him- 
self, he sung. Hark, said Mr. Great-Heart, to 
what the shepherd's boy saith. So they hearken- 
ed, and he said, 

" He that is down, needs fear no fall ; 
He that is low, no pride : 
He that is humhle, ever shall 
Have God to be his guide. 

I am content with what I have. 

Little be it or much ; 
And, Lord, contentment still I crave, 

Because thou savest such. 

Fulness to such a burden is, 

That go on pilgrimage ; 
Here little, and hereafter bliss, 

Is best from age to age." 

Then said the guide, Do you hear him ? I will 
dare to say this boy lives a merrier life, and wears 
more of that herb ca^ed heart's-ease in his bosom, 
than he that is clad in silk and velvet. But we 
will proceed in our discourse. 

In this valley our Lord formerly had his coun- 





4 



^^ 




CHRIST'S COUNTRY-HOUSE. 371 

Christ, when try-house : he loved much to he here. 
hV e country- He loved also to walk these meadows, 

vauly o? Hu! for he found the air was pleasant. Be- 
nuiiation. sides, here a man shall be free from 

the noise, and from the hurryings of this life : all 
states are full of noise and confusion; only the 
valley of Humiliation is that empty and solitary 
place. Here a man shall not be so let and hin- 
dered in his contemplation, as in other places he is 
apt to be. This is a valley that nobody walks in 
but those that love a pilgrim's life. And though 
Christian had the hard hap to meet here with 
Apollyon, and to enter with him in a brisk encoun- 
ter, yet I must tell you, that In former times men 
have met with angels here, Hos. 12:4, 5, have 
found pearls here, Matt. 13 : 46, and have in this 
place found the words of life. Pro v. 8 : 35. 

Did I say our Lord had here in former days his 
country-house, and that he loved here to walk ? I 
will add, in this place, and to the people that love, 
and trace these grounds, he has left a yearly reve- 
nue, to be faithfully paid them at certain seasons, 
for their maintenance by the way, and for their 
further encouragement to go on in their pilgrimage. 

Sam. Now, as they went on, Samuel said to Mr. 
Great-Heart, Sir, I perceive that in this valley my 
father and Apollyon had their battle ; but wherea- 
bout was the fight? for I perceive this valley is 
lanre. 



372 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Great. Your father had the battle with Apol- 
lyon at a place yonder before us, in a narrow pas- 
sage, just beyond Forgetful Green. Forgetful Green. 
A.nd indeed that place is the most dangerous place 
In all these parts. For if at any time pilgrims 
meet with any brunt, it is when they forget what 
favors they have received, and how unworthy they 
are of them. This is the place also where others 
have been hard put to it. But more of the place 
when we are come to it ; for I persuade myself 
that to this day there remains either some sign of 
the battle, or some monument to testify that such 
a battle there was fought. 

Mer. Then said Mercy, I think I am as well in 
this valley as I have been anywhere Humility & 
else in all our journey : the place, me- sweet e race - 
thinks, suits with my spirit. I love to be in such 
places, where there is no rattling with coaches, 
nor rumbling with wheels. Methinks, here one 
may, without much molestation, be thinking what 
he is. whence he came, what he has done, and to 
what the King has called him. Here one may 
think, and break at heart, and melt in one's spirit, 
until one's eyes become as the fish-pools in Hesh- 
bon. Song 7 : 4. They that go rightly through 
this valley of Baca, make it a well ; the rain that 
God sends down from heaven upon them that are 
here, also filleth the pools. This valley is that 
from whence also the King will give to his their 



THE PLACE WHERE THEY FOUG-HT. 373 

vineyards ; and they that go through it shall sing. 
as Christian did, for all he met with Apollyon- 
Psa. 84:5-7; Hos. 2: 15. 

Great. 'T is true, said their guide ; I have gone 
An experiment through this valley many a time, and 
upon n. never was better than when here. I 

have also been a conductor to several pilgrims, 
and they have confessed the same. " To this man 
will I look," saith the King, " even to him that is 
poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my 
word." Isa. 66 : 2. 

Now they were come to the place where the 
aforementioned battle was fought. Then said the 
guide to Christiana, her children, and Mercy, This 

The place * s tne place ', on this ground Christian 
^rthe^fiiS stood > and up there came Apollyon 
did fight. against him. And look, did I not tell 

you ? here is some of your husband's blood upon 
these stones to this day. Behold, also, how here 
and there are yet to be seen upon the place some 
of the shivers of Apollyon's broken darts. See, 
also, how they did beat the ground with their feet 
as they fought, to make good their places against 
Some signs of each other; how also with their by- 

the battle re- . 

main. blows they did split the very stones in 

pieces. Verily, Christian did here play the man, 
and showed himself as stout as Hercules could, 
had he been here, even he himself. When Apol- 
lyon was beat, he made his retreat to the next 



374 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

valley, that is called the valley of the Shadow of 
Death, unto which we shall come anon, a monument 

7 of Christian's 

Lo, yonder stands a monument, on victory. 
which is engraven this battle, and Christian's vic- 
tory, to his fame throughout all ages. So because 
it stood just on the way-side before them, they 
stepped to it, and read the writing, which word 
for word was this : 

" Hard by here was a battle fought, 
Most strange, and yet most true ; 
Christian and Apollyon sought 
Each other to subdue. 

The man so bravely played the man. 

He made the fiend to fly ; 
Of which a monument I stand, 

The same to testify." 

When they had passed by this place, they came 
upon the borders of the Shadow of Death. This 
valley was longer than the other ; a place also 
most strangely haunted with evil things, as many 
are able to testify : but these women and children 
went the better through it, because they had day- 
light, and because Mr. Great-Heart was their con- 
ductor. 

When they were entered upon this valley, they 
thought they heard a groaning, as of Groanings 
dying men ; a very great groaning. hear(L 
They thought also, that they did hear words of 
lamentation, spoken as of some in extreme tor- 



THE SHADOW. OF DEATH. 375 

merit. These things made the boys to quake ; the 
women also looked pale and wan ; but their guide 
bid them be of good comfort. 

So they went on a little further, and they 
The ground thought that they felt the ground be- 
takes. g- m ^ sna k e under them, as if some 
hollow place was there : they heard also a kind of 
hissing, as of serpents, but nothing as yet appear- 
ed. Then said the boys, Are we not yet at the 
end of this doleful place ? But the guide also bid 
them be of good courage, and look well to their 
feet ; lest haply, said he, you be taken in some 
snare. 

Now James began to be sick ; but I think the 
James sick cause thereof was fear : so his mother 
with fear. gave him some of that glass of spirits 

that had been given her at the Interpreter's house, 
and three of the pills that Mr. Skill had prepared, 
and the boy began to revive. Thus they went on 
till they came to about the middle of the valley; 
and then Christiana said, Methinks I see some- 
thing yonder upon the road before us, a thing of a 
shape such as I have not seen. Then said Joseph, 

The fiend a P - Mother, what is it ? An ugly thing, 
pears. child ; an ugly thing, said she. But, 

mother, what is it like ? said he. ' T is like I can- 

The pilgrims n °t te ^ what, said she ] and now it is 

are afraid. but a fc^ way of r* Then gaid ^ It 

is nis:h. 



376 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Well, said Mr. Great-Heart, let them that aro 
most afraid keep close to me. So the Great-Heart en- 
fiend came on, and the conductor met coura s es them - 
it ; but when it was just come to him, it vanish 
ed to all their sights. Then remembered they 
what had been said some time ago, " Resist the 
devil, and he will flee from you." James 4:7. 

They went therefore on, as being a little refresh- 
ed. But they had not gone far, before Mercy, look- 
ing behind her, saw, as she thought, something 
most like a lion, and it came at a great A lion, 
padding pace after: and it had a hollow voice of 
roaring; and at every roar it gave, it made the 
valley echo, and all their hearts to ache, save the 
heart of him that was their guide. So it came 
up, and Mr. Great-Heart went behind, and put 
the pilgrims all before him. The lion also 
came on apace, and Mr. Great-Heart addressed 
himself to give him battle. 1 Pet. 5:8, 9. But 
when he saw that it was determined that resist- 
ance should be made, he also drew back, and 
came no further. 

Then they went on again, and their conductor 
went before them, till they came to a place where 
was cast up a pit the whole breadth of A it and 
the way ; and before they could be pre- darkness - 
pared to go over that, a great mist and a darkness 
fell upon them, so that they could not see. Then 
said the pilgrims, Alas, what now shall we do? 



THE SHADOW OF DEATH. 377 

But their guide made answer, Fear not; stand 
still, and see what an end will be put to this also; 
so they stayed there, because their path was mar- 
red. They then also thought that they did heai 
more apparently the noise and rushing of the ene- 
mies ; the fire also and smoke of the pit was much 
easier to be discerned. Then said Christiana to 
Christiana now Mercy, Now I see what my poor hus- 

knows what her 

husband felt, band went through. I have heard 
much of this place, but I never was here before 
now. Poor man, he went here all alone in the 
night ; he had night almost quite through the way : 
also these fiends were busy about him, as if they 
would have torn him in pieces. Many have spo- 
ken of it ; but none can tell what the valley of 
the Shadow of Death should mean until they come 
in themselves. The heart knoweth its own bit- 
terness ; and a stranger intermeddleth not with 
its joy. Prov. 14 : 10. To be here is a fearful 
thing. 

Great. This is like doing business in great wa- 
ters, or like going down into the deep. This is like 
being in the heart of the sea, and like going down 
to the bottoms of the mountains. Now it seems as 
if the earth, with its bars, were about us for ever. 
But let them that walk in darkness, and have no 
light, trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon 
their God. Isa. 50 : 10. For my part, as I have 
told you already, I have gone often through this 



378 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

valley, and have been much harder put to it than 
now I am ; and yet you see I am alive. I would 
not boast, for that I am not my own saviour; but 
I trust we shall have a good deliverance. Come, 
let us pray for light to Him that can lighten our 
darkness, and that can rebuke not only these, but 
all the Satans in hell. 

So they cried and prayed, and God sent light and 
deliverance, for there was now no let They pray. 
in their way ; no, not there where but now they 
were stopped with a pit. Yet they were not got 
through the valley. So they went on still, and 
met with great stinks and loathsome smells, to the 
great annoyance of them. Then said Mercy to 
Christiana, It is not so pleasant being here as at 
the gate, or at the Interpreter's, or at the house 
where we lay last. 

but, said one of the boys, it is not so bad to go 
through here, as it is to abide here al- 0ne of the 
ways ; and for aught I know, one rea- b °ys replies. 
son why we must go this way to the house prepared 
for us is, that our home might be made the sweeter 
to us. 

"Well said, Samuel, quoth the guide; thou hast 
now spoke like a man. Why, if ever I get out 
here again, said the boy, I think I shall prize light 
and good way better than I ever -did in all my 
life. Then said the guide, We shall be out by 
and by. 



MAUL AND GREAT-HEART. 379 

So on they went, and Joseph said, Cannot W6 
see to the end of this valley as yet ? Then said 
the guide, Look to your feet, for we shall presently 
be among the snares : so they looked to their feet, 
and went on; but they were troubled much with 
the snares. Now, when they were come among 
the snares, they espied a man cast into the ditch 
on the left hand, with his flesh all rent and torn. 

Heedless is Then said the guide, That is one Heed- 

Blain, and Take- , . . . . 

Heed preserved, less, that was going this way : he has 
lain there a great while. There was one Take-Heed 
with him when he was taken and slain, but he 
escaped their hands. You cannot imagine how 
many are killed hereabouts, and yet men are so 
foolishly venturous as to set out lightly on pilgrim- 
age, and to come without a guide. Poor Chris- 
tian ! It was a wonder that he here escaped ; 
but he was beloved of his God : also he had a good 
heart of his own, or else he could never have 
done it. 

Now they drew towards the end of this way ; 

and just there where Christian had seen the cave 

when he went by, out thence came forth Maul, a 

Maui, a giant, giant. This Maul did use to spoil 

quarrels with . . . , . . , - 

Great-Heart. young pilgrims with sophistry ; and he 
called Great-Heart by his name, and said unto 
him, How many times have you been forbidden to 
do these things ? Then said Mr. Great-Heart, 
What things? What things ! quoth the giant; you 



380 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

know what things : but I will put an end to your 
trade. 

But pray, said Mr. Great-Heart, before we fall 
to it, let us understand wherefore we must fight. 
Now the women and children stood trembling, and 
knew not what to do. Quoth the giant, You rob 
the country, and rob it with the worst of thefts. 
These are but generals, said Mr. Great-Heart ; come 
to particulars, man. 

Then said the giant, Thou practisest the craft of 
a kidnapper; thou gatherest up worn- God's ministers 

, , ., , , . , counted as kid- 

en and children, and earnest them nappers. 

into a strange country, to the weakening of my 
master's kingdom. But now Great-Heart replied, 
I am a servant of the God of heaven ; my business 
is to persuade sinners to repentance. I am com- 
manded to do my endeavors to turn men, women, 
and children, from darkness to light, and from the 
power of Satan unto God ; and if this Thegiantand 

, . , , , i^i i Mr. Great-Heart 

be indeed the ground oi thy quarrel, must fight. 
let us fall to it as soon as thou wilt. 

Then the giant came up, and Mr. Great-Heart 
went to meet him ; and as he went he drew his 
sword, but the giant had a club. So without more 
ado they fell to it, and at the first blow the giant 
struck Mr. Great-Heart down upon one of his knees. 
With that the women and children cried Weak folks , 
out. So Mr. Great-Heart recovering P. ra y e f *t soma 

° times help strong 

himself, laid about him in full lusty folks ' cries - 



THE GIANT SLAIN. 381 

manner, and gave the giant a wound in his arm. 
Thus he fought for the space of an hour, to that 
height of heat, that the breath came out of the 
giant's nostrils as the heat doth out of a boiling 
caldron. 

Then they sat down to rest them; but Mr. Great- 
Heart betook himself to prayer. Also the women 
and children did nothing but sigh and cry all the 
time that the battle did last. 

When they had rested them, and taken breath, 
they both fell to it again; and Mr. Great-Heart, 

The giant with a blow, fetched the giant down to 

struck down. th(J ground _ Nay? hold> let me rcCQV . 

er, quoth he : so Mr. Great-Heart fairly let him get 
up. So to it they went again, and the giant missed 
but littie of all-to breaking Mr. Great-Heart's scull 
with his club. 

Mr. Great-Heart seeing that, runs to him in the 

full heat of his spirit, and pierceth him under the 

fifth rib. With that the giant began to faint, and 

He is slain, could hold up his club no longer. Then 

and his head 

disposed of. Mr. Great-Heart seconded his blow, 
and smote the head of the giant from his shoulders. 
Then the women and children rejoiced, and Mr. 
Great-Heart also praised God for the deliverance 
he had wrought. 

When this was done, they amongst them erected 
a pillar, and fastened the giant's head thereon, and 
wrote under it, in letters that passengers might read. 



382 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

" He that did wear this head was one 

That pilgrims did misuse ; 
He stopped their way, he spared none. 

But did them all abuse ; 
Until that I Great-Heart arose, 

The pilgrims' guide to be j 
Until that I did him oppose 

That was their enemy.' 



DISCOURSE OF THE FIGHT. 383 



THE SIXTH STAGE. 

Now I saw that they went on to the ascent that 
was a little way off, cast up to be a prospect for 
pilgrims. That was the place from whence Chris- 
tian had the first sight of Faithful his brother. 
"Wherefore, here they sat down and rested. They 
also here did eat and drink, and make merry, for 
that they had gotten deliverance from this so dan- 
gerous an enemy. As they sat thus and did eat, 
Christiana asked the guide if he had caught no 
hurt in the battle. Then said Mr. Great-Heart, 
No, save a little on my flesh ; yet that also shall 
be so far from being to my detriment, that it is at 
present a proof of my love to my Master and you, 
and shall be a means, by grace, to increase my 
reward at last. 

Chr. But were you not afraid, good sir, when 
you saw him come with his club ? 

Great. It is my duty, said he, to mistrust my 

Discourse of own aDllit y> tnat I mav nave reliance 
the fight. on Him who is stronger than all. 

Chr. But what did you think when he fetched 
you down to the ground at the first blow? 

Great. Why, I thought; quoth he, that so my 
Master himself was served, and yet he it was that 
conquered at last. 2 Cor 4:10,11; Rom. 8:37. 



384 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Matt. When you all have thought what you 
please, I think God has been wonder- Matthew he** 

7. , . admires God's 

fully good unto us, both m bringing us goodness. 
out of this valley, and in delivering us out of the 
hand of this enemy. For my part, I see no reason 
why we should distrust our God any more, since 
he has now, and in such a place as this, given us 
such testimony of his love. Then they got up, and 
went forward. 

Now a little before them stood an oak ; and under 
it, when they came to it, they found an old pilgrim 
fast asleep. They knew that he was Old Honest 

* , * , asleep under an 

a pilgrim by his clothes, and his staff, oak 
and his girdle. 

So the guide, Mr. Great-Heart, awaked him; 
and the old gentleman, as he lifted up his eyes, 
cried out, What's the matter ? Who are you ; and 
what is your business here ? 

Great. Come, man, be not so hot ; here are none 
but friends. Yet the old man gets up, one saint some. 
and stands upon his guard, and will ™ e e r s f or es j|£ 
know of them what they are. Then enem/ ' 
said the guide, My name is Great-Heart : I am the 
guide of these pilgrims that are going to the Ce- 
lestial country. 

Hon. Then said Mr. Honest, I cry you mercy: 
I feared that you had been of the com- Talk between 
pany of those that some time ago did he. 
rob Little-Faith of his money; but, now I look 



DISCOURSE WITH OLD HONEST. 385 

better about me, I perceive you aie honester 
people. 

Great. Why, what would or could you have done 
to have helped yourself, if indeed we had been of 
that company ? 

Hon. Done? why, I would have fought as long 
as breath had been in me : and had I so done, I 
am sure you could never have given me the worst 
on.'t; for a Christian can never be overcome, unless 
he shall yield of himself. 

Great. Well said, father Honest, quoth the guide ; 
for by this I know thou art a cock of the right kind, 
for thou hast said the truth. 

Hon. And by this also I know that thou know- 
est what true pilgrimage is ; for all others do think 
that we are the soonest overcome of any. 

Great. Well, now we are so happily met, pray 
let me crave your name, and the name of the place 
you came from. 

Hon. My name I cannot tell you, but I came 
Whence Mr. from the town of Stupidity: it lieth 
Honest came. aD out four degrees beyond the city of 
Destruction. , 

Great. Oh, are you that countryman ? Then I 
deem I have half a guess of you : your name is 
Old Honesty, is it not? 

Hon. So the old gentleman blushed, and said, 
Not honesty in the abstract, but Honest is my name ; 
and I wish that my nature may agree to what I 

pa. Pros. 25 



386 PILG-RIM'S PROGRESS. 

am called. But, sir, said the old gentleman, how 
could you guess that I am such a man, since I came 
from such a place ? 

Great. I had heard of you before, by my Mas- 
ter; for he knows all things that are done on the 
earth. But I have often wondered stupefied ones 
that any should come from your place ; those^^LereTy 
for your town is worse than is the city carnal - 
of Destruction itself. 

Hon. Yes, we lie more off from the sun, and so 
are more cold and senseless. But were a man in a 
mountain of ice, yet if the Sun of righteousness 
will arise upon him, his frozen heart shall feel a 
thaw; and thus it has been with me. 

Great. I believe it, father Honest, I believe it; 
for I know the thing is true. 

Then the old gentleman saluted all the pilgrims 
with a holy kiss of charity, and asked them their 
names, and how they had fared since they set out 
on their pilgrimage. 

Chr. Then said Christiana, My name I suppose 
you have heard of ; good Christian was old Honest and 
my husband, and these four are his chil- Chnstiana talk - 
dren. But can you think how the old gentleman 
was taken, when she told him who she was? He 
skipped, he smiled, he blessed them with a thou- 
sand good wishes, saying, 

Hon. I have heard much of your husband, and 
of his travels and wars which he underwent in his 



OLD HONEST BLESSES THEM. 387 

days. Be it spoken to your comfort, the name of 
your husband rings all over these parts of the world : 
his faith, his courage, his enduring, and his sincer- 
ity under all, have made his name famous. Then 
he turned him to the boys, and asked them of their 
names, which they told him. Then said he unto 
Old Mr. Hon- them, Matthew, be thou like Matthew 

est's b essing on 

them. the publican, not in vice, but in virtue. 

Matt. 10:3. Samuel, said he, be thou like Sam- 
uel the prophet, a man of faith and prayer. Psa. 
99 : 6. Joseph, said he, be thou like Joseph in Pot- 
iphar's house, chaste, and one that flees from temp- 
tation. Gen. 39. And James, be thou like James 
the just, and like James the brother of our Lord. 
Acts 1:13. Then they told him of Mercy, and 
how she had left her town and her kindred to come 
along with Christiana and with her sons. At that 
He biesseth tne °^ honest man said, Mercy is thy 
Mercy. name : by mercy shalt thou be sus- 

tained and carried through all those difficulties that 
shall assault thee in thy way, till thou shalt come 
thither where thou shalt look the Fountain of me^cy 
in the face with comfort. All this while the guide, 
Mr. G reat-Heart, was very well pleased, and smiled 
upon his companions. 

Now, as they walked along together, the guide 
Talk of one as ked the old gentleman if he did not 
Mr. Fearing. k n0 w one Mr. Fearing, that came on 
pilgrimage out of his parts. 



388 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Hon. Yes, very well, said he. He was a man 
that had the root of the matter in him ; but he was 
one of the most troublesome pilgrims that ever 1 
met with in all my days. 

Great. I perceive you knew him, for you have 
given a very right character of him. 

Hon. Knew him ? I was a great companion of 
his ; I was with him most an end ; when he first 
began to think upon what would come upon us here- 
after, I was with him. 

Great. I was his guide from my Master's house 
to the gates of the Celestial city. 

Hon. Then you knew him to be a troublesome 
one. 

Great. I did so ; but I could very well bear it ; 
for men of my calling are oftentimes intrusted with 
the conduct of such as he was. 

Hon. Well then, pray let us hear a little of 
him, and how he managed himself under your 
conduct. 

Great. Why, he was always afraid that he 
should come short of whither he had a Mr. Fearing'a 

, _, , . _ . troublesome pil- 

desire to go. .hvery thing frightened grimage. 
him that he heard any body speak of, if it had but 
the least appearance of opposition in it. I heard 
that he lay roaring at the slough of De- His behavior 

„ at the slough of 

spond tor above a month together ; nor Despond. 
durst he, for all he saw several go over before him, 
venture, though they many of them offered to lend 



TALK ABOUT MR. FEARING. 389 

him their hands. He would not go back again, 
naither. The Celestial city — he said he should die 
if he came not to it; and yet he was dejected at 
every difficulty, and stumbled at every straw that 
any body cast in his way. "Well, after he had 
lain at the slough of Despond a great while, as I 
have told you, one sunshiny morning, I don't know 
how, he ventured, and so got over; but when he 
was over, he would scarce believe it. He had, I 
think, a slough of Despond in his mind, a slough 
that he carried everywhere with him, or else he 
could never have been as he was. So he came up 
to the gate, you know what I mean, that stands 

His behavior a * tne nea ^ °f this way, and there also 
at the gate. ^ e s tood a good while before he would 
venture to knock. "When the gate was opened, 
he would give back, and give place to others, and 
say that he was not worthy. For, for all he get 
before some to the gate, yet many of them went 
in before him. There the poor man would stand 
shaking and shrinking: I dare say it would have 
pitied one's heart to have seen him. Nor would 
he go back again. At last he took the hammer 
that hanged on the gate, in his hand, and gave a 
small rap or two ; then one opened to him, but he 
shrunk back as before. He that opened stepped 
out after him, and said, Thou trembling one, what 
wantest thou ? With that he fell down to the 
ground. He that spoke to him wondered to see 



390 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

him so faint, so lie said to him, Peace be to thee ; 

up, for I have set open the door to thee ; come in, 

for thou art blessed. With that he got up, and 

went in trembling; and when he was in, he was 

ashamed to show his face. Well, after he had 

been entertained there a while, as you know how 

the manner is, he was bid go on his way, and also 

told the way he should take. So he went on till 

he came to our house ; but as he behaved himself 

at the gate, so he did at my Master the His behavior 
° * at the in terp re- 

Interpreter's door. He lay there about ter'sdoor. 

in the cold a good while, before he would adventure 
to call ; yet he would not go back: and the nights 
were long and cold then. Nay, he had a note of 
necessity in his bosom to my Master to receive him, 
and grant him the comfort of his house, and also 
to allow him a stout and valiant conductor, because 
he was himself so chicken-hearted a man; and yet 
for all that he was afraid to call at the door. So 
he lay up and down thereabouts, till, poor man, 
he was almost starved ; yea, so great was his 
dejection, that though he saw several others for 
knocking get in, yet he was afraid to venture. At 
last, I think I looked out of the window, and per- 
ceiving a man to be up and down about the door, 
I went out to him, and asked what he was; but, 
poor man, the water stood in his eyes ; so I per- 
ceived what he wanted. I went therefore in, and 
told it in the house, and we showed the thing to 



TALK ABOUT MR. FEARING-. 391 

our Lord : so he sent me out again, to entreat him 

to come in ; but I dare say, I had hard work to do 

it. At last he came in ; and I will say that for my 

How he was en- Lord > he carried it wonderfully loving- 

tertained there. ] y to him There were but a few gQod 

bits at the table, but some of it was laid upon his 
trencher. Then he presented the note ; and my 
Lord looked thereon, and said his desire should be 
granted. So when he had been there a good while, 

He is a little ne seemed to get some heart, and to 
the interpreter^ be a little more comfortable. For my 
house. Master, you must know, is one of very 

tender bowels, especially to them that are afraid; 
wherefore he carried it so towards him as might tend 
most to his encouragement. "Well, when he had 
had a sight of the things of the place, and was 
ready to take his journey to go to the city, my Lord, 
as he did to Christian before, gave him a bottle of 
spirits, and some comfortable things to eat. Thus 
we set forward, and I went before him ; but the 
man was but of few words, only he would sigh 
aloud. 

"When we were come to where the three fellows 

He was greatly were hanged, he said that he doubted 

afraid when he , 

saw the gibbet, that that would be his end also. Only 

but chc6rv "wh.611 

be saw the cross, he seemed glad when he saw the cross 
and the sepulchre. There I confess he desired to 
stay a little to look ; and he seemed for a while 
after to be a little cheery. "When he came to the 



392 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

hill Difficulty, he made no stick at that, nor did he 
much fear the lions : for you must know, that his 
troubles were not about such things as these ; his 
fear was about his acceptance at last. 

I got him in at the house Beautiful, I think, be- 
fore he was willing. Also, when he was in, I 
brought him acquainted with the damsels of the 
place ; but he was ashamed to make Dumpish at 

, . , ., ... TT , . , the house Beau- 

nimseli much in company. He desired tifui. 
much to be alone ; yet he always loved good talk, 
and often would get behind the screen to hear it. 
He also loved much to see ancient things, and to be 
pondering them in his mind. He told me after- 
wards, that he loved to be in those two houses from 
which he came last, to wit, at the gate, and that 
of the Interpreter, but that he durst not be so bold 
as to ask. 

When we went also from the house Beautiful, 
down the hill, into the valley of Humiliation, he 
went down as well as ever I saw a Pleasant in the 
man in my life ; for he cared not how initiation, 
mean he was, so he might be happy at last. 
Yea, I think there was a kind of sympathy be- 
twixt that valley and him ; for I never saw him 
better in all his pilgrimage than he was in that 
valley. 

Here he would lie down, embrace the ground, 
and kiss the very flowers that grew in this valley. 
Lam. 3 : 27—29. He would now be up every morn- 



TALK ABOUT MR. FEARING-. 393 

ing- by break of day, tracing and walking to and 
fro in the valley. 

But when he was come to the entrance of the 
Much perplex- valley of the Shadow of Death, 1 
If ^Shadow thought I should have lost my man : 
of Death. no t f or that he had any inclination to 

go back: that he always abhorred; but he was 
ready to die for fear. Oh, the hobgoblins will have 
me ! the hobgoblins will have me ! cried he ; and 
I could not beat him out of it. He made such a 
noise, and such an outcry here, that had they but 
heard him, it was enough to encourage them to 
come and fall upon us. 

But this I took very great notice of, that this 
valley was as quiet when we went through it, as 
ever I knew it before or since. I suppose those 
enemies here had now a special check from our 
Lord, and a command not to meddle until Mr. 
Fearing had passed over it. 

It would be too tedious to tell you of all ; we 
will therefore only mention a passage or two more. 

His behavior When he was come to Vanity Fair, I 
at Vanity Fair, thought he would have fought with 
all the men in the fair. I feared there we should 
have been both knocked on the head, so hot was 
he against their fooleries. Upon the Enchanted 
ground he was very wakeful. But when he was 
come at the river where was no bridge, there again 
he was in a heavy case . Now, now, he said, he 



394 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

should be drowned for ever, and so never see that 
face with comfort that he had come so many miles 
to behold. 

And here also I took notice of what was very 
remarkable : the water of that river was lower at 
this time than ever I saw it in all my life ; so he 
went over at last, not much above wetshod. When 
he was' going up to the gate, I began to take leave 
of him, and to wish him a good recep- Hisboldness 
tion above. So he said, I shall, I shall. atlast - 
Then parted we asunder, and I saw him no more. 

Hon. Then it seems he was well at last ? 

Great. Yes, yes, I never had doubt about him. 
He was a man of a choice spirit, only he was 
always kept very low, and that made his life so 
burdensome to himself, and so troublesome to oth- 
ers. Psa. 88. He was, above many, tender of sin: 
he was so afraid of doing injuries to others, that 
he often would deny himself of that which was 
lawful, because he would not offend. Rom. 14:21; 
1 Cor. 8: 13. 

Hon. But what should be the reason that such 
a good man should be all his days so much in the 
dark? 

Great. There are two sorts of reasons for it. 
One is, the wise God will have it so : Reasons why 

. good men are so 

some must pipe, and some must weep, in the dark. 
Matt. 11 : 16. Now Mr. Fearing was one that 
played upon the bass. He and his fellows sound 



TALK ABOUT MR. FEARING. 395 

the sackbut, whose notes are more doleful than 
the notes of other music are : though indeed, some 
say, the bass is the ground of music. And for my 
part, I care not at all for that profession which 
begins not in heaviness of mind. The first string 
that the musician usually touches is the bass, when 
he intends to put all in tune. God also plays upon 
this string first, when he sets the soul in tune for 
himself. Only there was the imperfection of Mr. 
Fearing; he could play upon no other music but 
this till towards his latter end. 

[I make bold to talk thus metaphorically for the 
ripening of the wits of young readers, and because, 
in the book of the Revelation, the saved are com- 
pared to a company of musicians, that play upon 
their trumpets and harps, and sing their songs be- 
fore the throne. Rev. 5:8; 14 : 2, 3.1 

Hon. He was a very zealous man, as one may 
see by the relation which you have given of him. 
Difficulties, lions, or Vanity Fair, he feared not at 
all ; it was only sin, death, and hell, that were to 
him a terror, because he had some doubts about 
his interest in that celestial country. 

Great. You say right ; those were the things 

that were his troublers ; and they, as you have 

, » well observed, arose from the weak- 

A close about 

him. ness of his mind thereabout, not lrom 

weakness of spirit as to the practical part of a pil- 
grim's life. I dare believe that, as the proverb is, 



396 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

he could have bit a firebrand, had it stood in his 
way ; but the things with which he was oppressed 
no man ever yet could shake off with ease. 

Chr. Then said Christiana, This relation of Mr. 
Fearing has done me good ; I thought Christiana's 
nobody had been like me. But I see sentence - 
there was some semblance. betwixt this good man 
and me: only we differed in two things. His 
troubles were so great that they broke out; but 
mine I kept within. His also lay so hard upon 
him, they made him that he could not knock at 
the houses provided for entertainment; but my 
trouble was always such as made me knock the 
louder. 

Mer. If I might also speak my heart, I must say 
that something of him has also dwelt Mercy > s sen- 
in me. For I have ever been more tence - 
afraid of the lake, and the loss of a place in para- 
dise, than I have been of the loss of other things. 
0, thought I, may I have the happiness to have a 
habitation there ! 'T is enough, though I part with 
all the world to win it. 

Matt. Then said Matthew, Fear was one thing 
that made me think that I was far from Matthew's sen . 
having that within me which accom- tence - 
panies salvation. But if it was so with such a 
good man as he, why may it not also go well with 
me ? 

James. No fears, no grace, said James. Though 



TALK ABOUT SELF-WILL. 397 

there is not always grace where there is the fear 
James' sen- °f ne ^' Y et ' to be sure, there is no grace 
tence. where there is no fear of God. 

Great. Well said, James ; thou hast hit the 
mark. For the fear of God is the beginning of wis- 
dom : and to be sure, they that want the begin- 
ning have neither middle nor end. But we will 
here conclude our discourse of Mr. Fearing, after 
we have sent after him this farewell. 

"Well, Master Fearing, thou didst fear 

Thy God, and wast afraid 
Of doing any thing, while here, 

That would have thee betrayed. 
And didst thou fear the lake and pit? 

Would others do so too ! 
For, as for them that want thy wit, 

They do themselves undo." 

Now I saw that they still went on in their talk. 
For after Mr. Great-Heart had made an end with 
Mr. Fearing, Mr. Honest began to tell them of an- 
Of Mr. Self-will, other, but his name was Mr. Self-will. 
He pretended himself to be a pilgrim, said Mr. 
Honest; but I persuade myself he never came in 
at the gate that stands at the head of the way. 

Great. Had you ever any talk with him about 
it? 

Hon. Yes, more than once or twice ; but he 
Old Honest had would always be like himself, self- 
talked with him. willed> He ne ither cared for man, nor 



398 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

argument, nor yet example ; what his mind prompt- 
ed him to, that he would do, and nothing else could 
he be got to do. 

Great. Pray, what principles did he hold? for 
I suppose you can tell. 

Hon. He held that a man might follow the vices 
as well as the virtues of pilgrims ; and Belf-wilTi 

that if he did both, he should be ccr- <*«*»»• 
tainly saved. 

Great. How? If he had said, it is possible foi 
the best to be guilty of the vices, as well as to 
partake of the virtues of pilgrims, he could not 
much have been blamed; for indeed we are ex- 
empted from no vice absolutely, but on condition 
that we watch and strive. But this, I perceive, is 
not the thing; but if I understand you right, your 
meaning is, that he was of opinion that it was 
allowable so to be. 

Hon. Aye, aye, so I mean, and so he believed 
and practised. 

Great. But what grounds had he for his so say- 
ing? 

Hon. Why, he said he had the Scripture for his 
warrant. 

Great. Prithee, Mr. Honest, present us with a 
few particulars. 

Hon. So I will. He said, to have to do with 
other men's wives had been practised by David, 
God's beloved ; and therefore he could do it. He 



TALK ABOUT SELF-WILL. 399 

said, to have more women than one was a thing 
that Solomon practised, and therefore he could do 
it. He said, that Sarah and the godly midwives 
of Egypt lied, and so did saved Rahab, and there- 
fore he could do it. He said, that the diaciplea went 
at the bidding of their Master, and took a way the 
owner's ass, and therefore he could do so too. He 
said, that Jacob got the inheritance of his father in 
a way of guile and dissimulation, and therefore lie 
could do so too. 

Great. High base, indeed ! And are you sure he 
was of this opinion ? 

Hon. 1 have heard him plead for it, briny Serij>- 
ture for it, bring arguments for it, etc. 

Great. An opinion that is not lit to be with any 
allowance in the world ! 

Hon. You must understand me rightly: he did 
not say that any man might do this ; but that they 
who had the virtues of those that did such things, 
might also do the same. 

Great. But what more false than such a con- 
clusion? For this is as much as to say, that be- 
cause good men heretofore have sinned of infirmity, 
therefore he had allowance to do it of a presump- 
tuous mind ; or that if, because a child, by the 
blast of the wind, or for that it stumbled at a stone, 
fell down and defiled itself in the mire, therefore 
he might wilfully lie down and wallow like a boar 
therein. Who could have thought that any one 



400 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

could so far have been blinded by the power of 
lust ? But what is written must be true : they 
" stumble at the word, being disobedient ; where- 
unto also they were appointed." 1 Peter, 2 : 8. His 
supposing that such may have the godly men's vir- 
tues, who addict themselves to their vices, is also 
a delusion as strong as the other. To eat up the 
sin of God's people, Hos. 4:8, as a dog licks up 
filth, is no sign of one that is possessed with their 
virtues. Nor can I believe that one who is of this 
opinion, can at present have faith or love in him. 
But I know you have made some strong objec- 
tions against him ; prithee, what can he say for 
himself? 

Hon. Why, he says, to do this by way of opinion, 
seems abundantly more honest than to do it, and 
yet hold contrary to it in opinion. 

Great. A very wicked answer. For though to 
let loose the bridle to lusts, while our opinions are 
against such things, is bad ; yet, to sin, and plead 
a toleration so to do, is worse : the one stumbles 
beholders accidentally, the other leads them into 
the snare. 

Hon. There are many of this man's mind, that 
have not this man's mouth ; and that makes going 
on pilgrimage of so little esteem as it is. 

Great. You have said the truth, and it is to be 
lamented : but he that feareth the King of paradise 
shall come out of them all. 



TALK OF SOME PROFESSORS. 401 

Chr. There are strange opinions in the world. 
I know one that said, it was time enough to repent 
when we come to die. 

Great. Such are not overwise ; that man would 
have been loath, might he have had a week to run 
twenty miles in his life, to defer his journey to the 
last hour of that week. 

Hon. You say right ; and yet the generality of 
them who count themselves pilgrims, do indeed do 
thus. I am, as you see, an old man, and have 
been a traveller in this road many a day ; and I 
have taken notice of many things. 

I have seen some that have set out as if they 
would drive all the world before them, who yet 
have, in a few days, died as they in the wilderness, 
and so never got sight of the promised land. I 
have seen some that have promised nothing at first 
setting out to be pilgrims, and who one would have 
thought could not have lived a day, that have yet 
proved very good pilgrims. I have seen some who 
have run hastily forward, that again have, after a 
little time, run just as fast back again. I have 
seen some who have spoken very well of a pil- 
grim's life at first, that after a while have spoken 
as much against it. I have heard some, when they 
first set out for paradise, say positively, there is 
such a place, who, when they have been almost 
there, have come back again, and said there is 
none. 1 have heard some vaunt what they would 

Pfl. Prog. 26 



402 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

do in case they should be opposed, that have, even 
at a false alarm, fled faith, the pilgrim's way, and 
all. 

Now, as they were thus on their way, there 
came one running to meet them, and said, Gentle- 
men, and you of the weaker sort, if you Fresh news of 
love life, shift for yourselves, for the trouble - 
robbers are before you. 

Great. Then said Mr. Great-Heart, They be the 
three that set upon Little-Faith heretofore. Well, 
said he, we are ready for them : so they GTeat _ Hea rt's 
went on their way. Now they looked resolutlon - 
at every turning when they should have met with 
the villains ; but whether they heard of Mr. Great- 
Heart, or whether they had some other game, they 
came not up to the pilgrims. 

Christiana then wished for an inn to refresh her- 
self and her children, because they were Christiana 
weary. Then said Mr. Honest, There wishes for an inn . 
is one a little before us, where a very honorable 
disciple, one Gaius, dwells. Horn. 16 : 23. So 
they all concluded to turn in thither ; and the 
rather, because the old gentleman gave him so 
good a report. "When they came to the door they 
went in, not knocking, for folks use not to knock 
at the door of an inn. Then they called for the 
master of the house, and he came to them. So 
they asked if they might lie there that night. 

Gaius. Yes, gentlemen, if you be true men ; for 



AT GAIUS' HOUSE. 403 

my house is for none but pilgrims. Then were 
Gaius enter- Christiana, Mercy, and the boys the 

•fains them, and i l r ., . ., « ■. 

how. more glad, lor that the innkeeper was a 

lover of pilgrims. So they called for rooms, and 
he showed them one for Christiana and her chil- 
dren and Mercy, and another for Mr. Great-Heart 
and the old gentleman. 

Great. Then said Mr. Great-Heart, Good Gaius, 
what hast thou for supper ? for these pilgrims have 
come far to-day, and are weary. 

Gaius. It is late, said Gaius, so we cannot con- 
veniently go out to seek food; but such as we 
have you shall be welcome to, if that will content. 

Great. We will be content with what thou 
hast in the house ; for as much as I have proved 
thee, thou art never destitute of that which is con- 
venient. 

Then he went down and spoke to the cook, whose 

Gaius' cook, name was Taste-that-which-is-good, to 

get ready supper for so many pilgrims. This done, 

He comes up he comes U P a £ ain > saying, Come, my 
a s am - good friends, you are welcome to me, 

and I am glad that I have a house to entertain you 
in ; and while supper is making ready, if you please, 
let us entertain one another with some good dis- 
course : so they all said, Content. 

Gatus. Then said Gaius, Whose wife is this aged 

Talk between matron ? and whose daughter is this 

Gaius aod his . 

guests young damsel ? 



404 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Great. This woman is the wife of one Christian, 
a pilgrim of former times ; and these are his four 
children. The maid is one of her acquaintance, 
one that she hath persuaded to come with her on 
pilgrimage. 'The boys take all after their father, 
and covet to tread in his steps ; yea, if they do hut 
see any place where the old pilgrim hath lain, or 
any print of his foot, it ministereth joy to their 
hearts, and they covet to lie or tread in the same. 

Gaius. Then said Gaius, Is this Christian's wife, 
and are these Christian's children ? I knew your 
husband's father, yea, also his father's 0f Chr j stian > a 
father. Many have been good of this ancestors - 
stock ; their ancestors dwelt first at Antioch. Acts 
1 1 : 26. Christian's progenitors — I suppose you 
have heard your husband talk of them — were very 
worthy men. They have, above any that I know, 
showed themselves men of great virtue and cour- 
age for the Lord of the pilgrims, his ways, and 
them that loved him. I have heard of many of 
your husband's relations that have stood all trials 
for the sake of the truth. Stephen, that was one 
of the first of the family from whence your husband 
sprang, was knocked on the head with stones. Acts 
7 :59, GO. James, another of this generation, was 
slain with the edge of the sword. Acts 12:2. To 
say nothing of Paul and Peter, men anciently of 
the family from whence your husband came, there 
was Ignatius, who was cast to the lions ; Romanus, 



ADVICE TO CHRISTIANA. 405 

whose flesh was cut by pieces from his bones ; and 
Polycarp, that played the man in the fire. There 
was he that was hanged up in a basket in the sun 
for the wasps to eat ; and he whom they put into a 
sack, and cast into the sea to be drowned. It 
would be impossible utterly to count up all of that 
family who have suffered injuries and death for 
the love of a pilgrim's life. Nor can I but be glad 
to see that thy husband has left behind him four 
such boys as these. I hope they will bear up their 
father's name, and tread in their father's steps, and 
come to their father's end. 

Great. Indeed, sir, they are likely lads : they 
seem to choose heartily their father's ways. 

Gaius. That is it that I said. Wherefore Chris- 
tian's family is like still to spread abroad upon the 
face of the ground, and yet to be numerous upon 
Advice to Chris- the face of the earth; let Christiana 

tiana about her _ 

boys. look out some damsels for her sons, to 

whom they may be betrothed, etc., that the name 
of their father, and the house of his progenitors, may 
never be forgotten in the world. 

Hon. 'Tis pity his family should fall and be 
extinct. 

Gaius. Fall it cannot, but be diminished it may; 
but let Christiana take my advice, and that is the 
way to uphold it. And, Christiana, said this inn- 
keeper, I am glad to see thee and thy friend Mercy 
together here, a lovely couple. And if I may ad- 



406 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

vise, take Mercy into a nearer relation to thee : if 
she will, let her be given to Matthew thy eldest 
son. It is the way to preserve a posterity in the 
earth. So this match was concluded, a match be- 

tween Mercy 

and in process of time they were mar- and Matthew. 
ried : but more of that hereafter. 

Gaius also proceeded, and said, I will now speak 
on the behalf of women, to take away their re- 
proach. For as death and the curse came into the 
world by a woman, Gen. 3, so also did life and 
health: God sent forth his Son, made 'of a woman. 
Gal. 4:4. Yea, to show how much they that 
came after did abhor the act of the mother, this 
sex in the Old Testament coveted chil- Why women 

of old so much 

dren, if happily this or that woman desired children 
might be the mother of the Saviour of the world. 
I will say again, that when the Saviour was come, 
women rejoiced in him, before either man or angel. 
Luke 1 : 42-46. I read not that ever any man did 
give unto Christ so much as one groat ; but the 
women followed him, and ministered to him of their 
substance. Luke 8 : 2, 3. 'T was a woman that 
washed his feet with tears, Luke 7 : 37-50, and a 
woman that anointed his body to the burial. John 
11:2; 12:3. They were women who wept when 
he was going to the cross, Luke 23 : 27. and women 
that followed him from the cross, Matt. 27 : 55, 56, 
Luke 23 : 55, and that sat over against his sepul- 
chre when he was buried. Matt. 27:61. They 



THE SUPPER. 407 

were women that were first with him at his resur- 
rection-morn, Luke 24: 1, and women that brought 
tidings first to his disciples that he was risen from 
the dead. Luke 24 : 22, 23. Women therefore 
are highly favored, and show by these things that 
they are sharers with us in the grace of life. 

Now the cook sent up to signify that supper was 
Supper ready, almost ready, and sent one to lay the 
cloth, and the trenchers, and to set the salt and 
bread in order. 

Then said Matthew, The sight of this cloth, 
and of this forerunner of the supper, begetteth 
in me a greater appetite to my food than I had 
before. 

Gaius. So let all ministering doctrines to thee 
in this life beget in thee a greater desire to sit at 
the supper of the great King in his kingdom ; for 
all preaching, books, and ordinances here, are but 
what is to be as the laying of the trenchers, and the 
gathered from sett i nfy f sa it upon the board, when 

laying of the a ~* v a r 

bread, with the com r, a red with the feast which our 

cloth and trench- -T 

ers. Lord will make for us when we come 

to his house. 

So supper came up. And first a heave-shoulder 
and a wave-breast were set on the table before 
them ; to show that they must begin their meal 
with prayer and praise to God. The heave-shoul- 
der David lifted up his heart to God with ; and with 
the wave-breast, where his heart lay, be used to 



408 PILG-RIM'S PROQRESS. 

lean upon his harp when he played. Leviticus 
7:32-34; 10:14, 15; Psalm 25:1; Heb. 13:15. 
These two dishes were very fresh and good, and 
they all ate heartily thereof. 

The next they brought up was a bottle of wine, 
as red as blood. Deut. 32:14; Judges 9:13; 
John 15:5. So Gaius said to them, Drink freely; 
this is the true juice of the vine, that makes glad 
the heart of God and man. So they drank and 
were merry. 

The next was a dish of milk well crumbed ; Gaius 
said, Let the boys have that, that they a dish of milk. 
may grow thereby. 1 Pet. 2 : 1, 2. 

Then they brought up in course a dish of butter 
and honey. Then said Gaius, Eat free- 0f ho and 
ly of this, for this is good to cheer up butter - 
and strengthen your judgments and understandings. 
This was our Lord's dish when he was a child : 
"Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know 
to refuse the evil, and choose the good." Isaiah 
7:15. 

Then they brought them up a dish of apples, and 
they were very good-tasted fruit. Then a dish of «.ppie§. 
said Matthew, May we eat apples, since it was 
such by and with which the serpent beguiled our 
first mother? 

Then said Gaius, 

11 Apples were they with which we were heguiled, 
Yet sin, not apples, hath our souls defiled: 



PLEASANT DISCOURSE. 409 

Apples forbid, if ate, corrupt the blood ; 
To eat such, when commanded, does us good : 
Drink of his flagons then, thou church, his dove, 
And eat his apples, who art sick of love." 

Then said Matthew, I made the scruple, because 
I a while since was sick with the eating of fruit. 

Gatus. Forbidden fruit will make you sick; but 
not what our Lord has tolerated. 

While they were thus talking, they were pre- 
A dish of nuts, sented with another dish, and it was a 
dish of nuts. Song 6:11. Then said some at the 
table, Nuts spoil tender teeth, especially the teeth 
of children : which when Gaius heard, he said, 
"Hard texts are nuts — I will not call them cheaters — 
Whose shells do keep their kernels from the eaters: 
Open the shells, and you shall have the meat; 
They here are brought for you to crack and eat." 

Then were they very merry, and sat at the table 
a long time, talking of many things. Then said 
the old gentleman, My good landlord, while we 
are cracking your nuts, if you please, do you open 
this riddle : 

A riddle put " ^~ man tnere was > *h° u gh some did count him 
forth by old mad, 

The more he cast away, the more he had." 

Then they all gave good heed, wondering what 
good Gaius would say ; so he sat still a while, and 
then thus replied : 

. " He who bestows his goods upon the poor, 

Shall have as much again, and ten times more." 



410 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Then said Joseph, I dare say, sir, I Joseph wonders, 
did not think you could have found it out. 

Oh, said Gaius, I have been trained up in this 
way a great while : nothing teaches like experience. 
I have learned of my Lord to be kind, and have 
found by experience that I have gained thereby. 
There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and 
there is that withholdeth more than is meet, but 
it tendeth to poverty. There is that maketh him- 
self rich, yet hath nothing : there is that maketh 
himself poor, yet hath great riches. Prov. 1 1 : 24 ; 
13:7. 

Then Samuel whispered to Christiana, 4 his moth- 
er, and said, Mother, this is a very good man's 
house : let us stay here a good while, and let my 
brother Matthew be married here to Mercy, be- 
fore we go any further. The which Gaius the 
host overhearing, said, With a very good will, my 
child. 

So they staid there more than a MattW and 
month, and Mercy was given to Mat- Mercy married. 
thew to wife. While they stayed here, Mercy, as 
her custom was, would be making coats and gar- 
ments to give to the poor, by which she brought a 
very good report upon the pilgrims. 

But to return again to our story. After supper 
the lads desired a bed, for they were Theboysgoto 

. , ,,. mi f ~. . bed, the rest sit 

weary with travelling. JLhen Gaius up. 

called to show them their chamber ; but said Mercy, 



GREAT-HEART'S RIDDLE. 411 

I will have them to bed. So she had them to bed, 
and they slept well : but the rest sat up all night; 
for Gaius and they were such suitable company, 
that they could not tell how to part. After much 
talk of their Lord, themselves, and their journey, 
Old Honest nods, old Mr. Honest, he that put forth the 
riddle to Gaius, began to nod. Then said Great- 
Heart, What, sir, you begin to be drowsy ; come, 
rub up now, here is a riddle for you. Then said 
Mr. Honest, Let us hear it. Then replied Mr. Great- 
Heart, 

" He that would kill, must first be overcome : 
A riddle. w ^ ^ abroad would, first must die at home." 

Ha, said Mr. Honest, it is a hard one ; hard to 
expound, and harder to practise. But come, land- 
lord, said he, I will, if you please, leave my part 
to you : do you expound it, and I will hear what 

you say. 

No, said Gaius, it was put to you, and it is ex- 
pected you should answer it. Then said the old 
gentleman, 

" He first by grace must conquered be, 
The riddle That sin would mortify ; 

opened. Who that he lives would convince me, 

Unto himself must die.' ' 

It is right, said Gaius ; good doctrine and expe- 
rience teach this. For, first, until grace displays 
itself, and overcomes the soul with its glory, it is 
altogether without heart to oppose sin. Besides, 



412 PILQRIM'S PROGRESS. 

if sin is Satan's cords, by which the soul lies bound, 
how should it make resistance before it is loosed 
from that infirmity ? Secondly, nor will any one 
that knows either reason or grace, believe that such 
a man can be a living monument of grace that is 
a slave to his own corruptions. And now it comes 
into my mind, I will tell you a story a question 

-worth the mind- 

worth the hearing. Ihere were two ing. 
men that went on pilgrimage ; the one began when 
he was young, the other when he was old. The 
young man had strong corruptions to grapple 
with ; the old man's were weak with the decays of 
nature. The young man trod his steps as even as 
did the old one, and was every way as light as 
he. Who now, or which of them, had their graces 
shining clearest, since both seemed to be alike? 

Hon. The young man's, doubtless. For that 
which makes head against the greatest a comparison. 
opposition, gives best demonstration that it is stron- 
gest ; especially when it also holdethpace with that 
which meets not with half so much, as to be sure 
old age does not. Besides, I have observed that 
old men have blessed themselves with a mistake. 
this mistake, namely, taking the decays of nature 
for a gracious conquest over corruptions, and so 
have been apt to beguile themselves. Indeed, old 
men that are gracious are best able to give advice 
to them that are young, because they have seen 
most of the emptiness of things ; but yet, for an 



RONEST ; S QUESTION. 413 

old and a young man to set out both together, the 
young one has the advantage of the fairest discov- 
ery of a work of grace within him, though the old 
man's corruptions are naturally the weakest. Thus 
they sat talking till break of day. 

Now, when the family were up, Christiana bid 
her son James that he should read a chapter; so 
he read the 53d of Isaiah. When he had done, 
Another ques- ^* m Honest asked why it was said that 
tlon - the Saviour was to come " out of a dry 

ground ;" and also, that " he had no form nor come- 
liness in him." 

Great. Then said Mr. Great-Heart, To the first 
I answer, because the church of the Jews, of which 
Christ came, had then lost almost all the sap and 
spirit of religion. To the second I say, the words 
are spoken in the person of unbelievers, who, be- 
cause they want the eye that can see into our 
Prince's heart, therefore they judge of him by the 
meanness of his outside ; just like those who, not 
knowing that precious stones are covered over with 
a homely crust, when they have found one, because 
they know not what they have found, cast it away 
again, as men do a common stone. 

Well, said Gaius, now you are here, and since, 
as I know, Mr. Great-Heart is good at his weapons, 
if you please, after we have refreshed ourselves, 
we will walk into the fields, to see if we can do 
any good- About a mile from hence there is one 



414 PILGRIM'S PK.OG-E.ESS. 

Slay-good, a giant, that doth much annoy the King's 
highway in these parts ; and I know whereabout 
his haunt is. He is master of a number of thieves : 
'twould be well if we could clear these parts of 
him. So they consented and went: Mr. Great- 
Heart with his sword, helmet, and shield ; and the 
rest with spears and staves. 

"When they came to the place where he was, 
they found him with one Feeble-mind Giant siay- 
in his hand, whom his servants had f^Feebfe-mind 
brought unto him, having taken him in his han<L 
in the way. Now the giant was rifling him, with 
a purpose after that to pick his bones ; for he was 
of the nature of flesh-eaters. 

Well, so soon as he saw Mr. Great- Heart and his 
friends at the mouth of his cave, with their weap- 
ons, he demanded what they wanted. 

Great. We want thee ; for we are come to re- 
venge the quarrels of the many that thou hast slain 
of the pilgrims, when thou hast dragged them out 
of the King's highway : wherefore come out of thy 
cave. So he armed himself and came out, and to 
battle they went, and fought for above an hour, and 
then stood still to take wind. 

Slay. Then said the giant, Why are you here on 
my ground 1 

Great. To revenge the blood of pilgrims, as I 
told thee before. So they went to it again, and 
the giant made Mr. Great-Heart give back ; but 



GIANT SLAY-GOOD SLAIN. 415 

he came up again, and in the greatness of his mind. 
The giant as- he let fly with such stoutness at the 

Bauited and slain. giant » s head and gideSj that he made 

him let his weapon fall out of his hand. So he 
smote him, and slew him, and cut off his head and 
brought it away to the inn. He also took Feeble- 
mind the pilgrim, and brought him with him to hi* 
lodgings. When they were come home, they show 
ed his head to the family, and set it up, as they 
had done others before, for a terror to those that 
should attempt to do as he hereafter. 

Then they asked Mr. Feeble-mind how he fell 
into his hands. 

Feeble. Then said the poor man, I am a sickly 

man, as you see : and because death did usually 

once a day knock at my door, I thought I should 

How Feetie- never be well at home ; so I betook 

mind came to .,.,,.,, 

be a pilgrim. myself to a pilgrims life, and have 
travelled hither from the town of Uncertain, 
where I and my father were born. I am a man of 
no strength at all of body, nor yet of mind, but 
would, if I could, though I can but crawl, spend 
my life in the pilgrim's way. When I came at 
the gate that is at the head of the way, the Lord 
of that place did entertain me freely ; neither ob- 
jected he against my weakly looks, nor against my 
feeble mind ; but gave me such things as were 
necessary for my journey, and bid me hope to the 
end. When I came to the house of the Interpre- 



416 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

ter, I received much kindness there : and because 
the hill of Difficulty was judged too hard for me, 
I was carried up that by one of his servants. In- 
deed, I have found much relief from pilgrims, 
though none were willing to go so softly as I am 
forced to do : yet still as they came on, they bid 
me be of good cheer, and said, that it was the will 
of their Lord that comfort should be given to the 
feeble-minded, 1 Thess. 5 : 14 ; and so went on 
their own pace. When I was come to Assault- 
lane, then this giant met with me, and bid me pre- 
pare for an encounter. But, alas, feeble one that 
I was, I had more need of a cordial ; so he came 
up and took me. I conceited he would not kill 
me. Also when he had got me into his den, since 
I went not with him willingly, I believed I should 
come out alive again ; for I have heard, that not 
any pilgrim that is taken captive by Mark this. 
violent hands, if he keeps heartwhole towards his 
Master, is, by the laws of Providence, to die by the 
hand of the enemy. Robbed I looked to be, and 
robbed to be sure I am; but I have, as you see, 
escaped with life, for the which I thank my King 
as the author, and you as the means. Other brunts 
I also look for ; but this I have resolved on, to wit, 
to run when I can, to go when I can- Mark this. 
not run, and to creep when I cannot go. As to the 
main, I thank Him that loved me, I am fixed ; my 
way is before me, my mind is beyond the river 



MR. FEEBLE-MIND'S HISTORY. 417 

that has no bridge, though I am as you see, but of 
a feeble mind. 

Hon. Then said old Mr. Honest, Have not you, 
sometime ago, been acquainted with one Mr. Fear- 
ing, a pilgrim ? 

Feeble. Acquainted with him? yes, he came 
from the town of Stupidity, which lieth four de- 
grees to the northward of the city of Destruction, 
and as many off of where I was born : yet we 

Mr. Fearing were well acquainted, for indeed he 

Mr. Feeble- Z 1 

mind's unci«. was my uncle, my father's brother. 
He and I have been much of a temper: he was a 
little shorter than I, but yet we were much of a 
complexion. 

Hon. I perceive you knew him, and I am apt to 

Feeble-mind helieve also that you were related one 
F?arTn7s 0f fea- to another 5 for you have his whitely 
tures - look, a cast like his with your eye, and 

your speech is much alike. 

Feeble. Most have said so, that have known us 
both ; and besides, what I have read in him I have 
for the most part found in myself. 
Gaius comforts Gaius. Come, Bir, said good Gaius, 
hua - be of good cheer; you are welcome to 

me, and to my house. What thou hast a mind to, 
call for freely; and what thou wouldst have my 
servants do for thee, they will do it with a ready 
mind. 

Then said Mr. Feeble-mind, This is an unex- 

ro. Prog. 27 



418 PILG-RIM'S PROGRESS. 

pected favor, and as the sun shining out of a very 
dark cloud. Did giant Slay-good intend me this 
favor when he stopped me, and resolv- Notice to be 

r i n t\- taken of Provi- 

ed to let me go no further ? Did he dence. 
intend, that after he had rifled my pockets, I should 
go to Gains mine host ? Yet so it is. 

Now, just as Mr. Feeble-mind and Gaius were 
thus in talk, there came one running, Tidings how 
and called at the door, and said, that ™ e s B £tfa 
about a mile and a half off there was thunderbolt. 
one Mr. Not-right, a pilgrim, struck dead upon the 
place where he was, with a thunderbolt. 

Feeble. Alas, said Mr. Feeble-mind, is he slain"? 
He overtook me some days before I Mr. Feebie- 

• n tit mind's com- 

came so far as hither, and would be ment upon it. 
my company-keeper. He was also with me when 
Slay-good the giant took me, but he was nimble 
of his heels, and escaped ; but it seems he escaped 
to die, and I was taken to live. 

" What one would think doth seek to slay outright, 
Ofttimes delivers from the saddest plight. 
That very Providence whose face is death, 
Doth ofttimes to the lowly life bequeath. 
I taken was, he did escape and flee ; 
Hands crossed gave death to him and lifo to me." 

Now, about this time Matthew and Mercy were 
married ; also Gaius gave his daughter Phebe to 
James, Matthew's brother, to wife ; after which 
time they yet stayed about ten days at Gaius' 



MATTHEW AND JAMES MARRIED. 419 

house, spending their time and the seasons like as 
pilgrims use to do. 

When they were to depart, Gaius made them a 
feast, and they did eat and drink, and were merry. 
The pilgrims Now the hour was come that they 
forward. must be gone ; wherefore Mr. Great- 

Heart called for a reckoning. But Gaius told him, 
that at his house it was not the custom for pilgrims 
to pay for their entertainment. He boarded them 
by the year, but looked for his pay from the good 
Samaritan, who had promised him, at his return, 
whatsoever charge he was at with them, faithfully 
to repay him. Luke 10 : 34, 35. Then said Mr. 
Great-Heart to him, 

Great. Beloved, thou doest faithfully whatso- 
Howihey greet ever thou doest to the brethren, and to 

one another at . , , e 

parting. strangers, who have borne witness ol 

thy charity before the church, whom if thou yet 
bring forward on their journey, after a godly sort, 
thou shalt do well. 3 John, 5, 6. Then Gaius took 
Gaius' last his leave of them all, and his children, 

kindness to Fee- n , . r hit -n t i i 

bie-mind. and particularly oi Mr. t eeble-mmd. 

He also gave him something to drink by the way. 
Now Mr. Feeble-mind, when they were going 
out of the door, made as if he intended to linger. 
The which, when Mr. Great-Heart espied, he said, 
Come, Mr. Feeble-mind, pray do you go along with 
us : I will be your conductor, and you shall fare as 
the rest. 



420 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Feeble. Alas, I want a suitable companion. 
You are all lusty and strong, but I, as you see, am 
weak ; I choose, therefore, rather to Feeble-mind 
come behind, lest, by reason of my f°rg°uig behind 
many infirmities, I should be both a burden to my- 
self and to you. I am, as I said, a man of a weak 
and feeble mind, and shall be offended and made 
weak at that which others can bear. I shall like 
no laughing ; I shall like no gay attire ; His excuse 
I shall like no unprofitable questions. Nay, I am 
so weak a man as to be offended with that which 
others have a liberty to do. I do not yet know all 
the truth : I am a very ignorant Christian man. 
Sometimes, if I hear some rejoice in the Lord, it 
troubles me because I cannot do so too. It is with 
me as it is with a weak man among the strong, or 
as with a sick man among the healthy, or as a 
lamp despised ; so that I know not what to do. 
"He that is ready to slip with his feet is as a lamp 
despised in the thought of him that is at ease." 
Job 12:5. 

Great. But, brother, said Mr. Great-Heart, I 
have it in commission to comfort the Great-Heart'i 
feeble-minded, and to support the commission. 
weak. You must needs go along with us ; we will 
wait for you; we will lend you our A Christian 
help ; we will deny ourselves of some spmt - 
things, both opinionative and practical, for your 
sake : we will not enter into doubtful disputations 



MR. READY- TO-HALT. 421 

before you ; we will be made all things to you, 
rather than you shall be left behind. 1 Thess. 
5:14; Rom. 14 ; 1 Cor. 8 : 9-13 ; 9 : 22. 

Now, all this while they were at Gaius' door ; 
and behold, as they were thus in the heat of their 
discourse, Mr. Ready-to-halt came by, with his 
crutches in his hand, and he also was going on 
pilgrimage. 

Feeble. Then said Mr. Feeble-mind to him, 
Man, how earnest thou hither? I was but now 

Feeble-mind complaining that I had not a suitable 

glad to see Rea- 
dy-to-halt come, companion, but thou art accord in" 1 

to my wish. Welcome, welcome, good Mr. 

Ready-to-halt ; I hope thou and I may be some 

help. 

Ready. I shall be glad of thy company, said 
the other ; and, good Mr. Feeble-mind, rather than 
we will part, since we are thus happily met, I will 
lend thee one of my crutches. 

Feeble. Nay, said he, though I thank thee for 
thy good-will, I am not inclined to halt before I am 
lame. Howbeit, I think, when occasion is, it may 
help me against a dog. 

Ready. If either myself or my crutches can do 
thee a pleasure, we are both at thy command, 
good Mr. Feeble-mind. 

Thus, therefore, they went on. Mr. Great- 
Heart and Mr. Honest went before, Christiana 
and her children went next, and Mr. Feeble- 



422 PILGRIM'S PROG-RESS. 

mind came "behind, and Mr. Ready-to-halt with his 
crutches. Then said Mr. Honest, 

Hon. Pray, sir, now we are upon the road, tell 
us some profitable things of some that New talk. 
have gone on pilgrimage before us. 

Great. With a good will. I suppose you have 
heard how Christian of old did meet with Apol- 
lyon in the valley of Humiliation, and also what 
hard work he had to go through the valley of the 
Shadow of Death. Also I think you cannot but 
have heard how Faithful was put to it by Madam 
Wanton, with Adam the First, with one Discon- 
tent, and Shame; four as deceitful villains as a 
man can meet with upon the road. 

Hon. Yes, I have heard of all this ; but indeed 
good Faithful was hardest put to it with Shame : 
he was an unwearied one. 

Great. Aye; for, as the pilgrim well said, he of 
all men had the wronjj name. 

Hon. But pray, sir, where was it that Christian 
and Faithful met Talkative ? That same was also 
a notable one. 

Great. He was a confident fool ; yet many fol- 
low his ways. 

Hon. He had like to have beguiled Faithful. 

Great. Aye, but Christian put him into a way 
quickly to find him out. 

Thus they went on till they came to the place 
where Evangelist met with Christian and Faithful, 



NEW TALK OF THE PILG-ItlMS. 423 

and prophesied to them what should befall them 
at Vanity Fair. Then said their guide, Hereabouts 
did Christian and Faithful meet Avith Evangelist, 
who prophesied to them of what troubles they 
should meet with at Vanity Fair. 

Hon. Say you so ? I dare say it was a hard 
chapter that then he did read unto them. 

Great. It was so, but he gave them encourage- 
ment withal. But what do we talk of them ? 
They were a couple of lion-like men ; they had 
set their faces like a flint. Do not you remember 
how undaunted they were when they stood before 
the judge? 

Hon. Well : Faithful bravely suffered. 

Great. v So he did, and as brave things came 
on't ; for Hopeful, and some others, as the story 
relates it, were converted by his death. 

Hon. Well, but pray go on; for you are well 
acquainted with things. 

Great. Above all that Christian met with after 
he had passed through Vanity Fair, one By-ends 
was the arch one. 

Hon. By-ends, what was he? 

Great. A very arch fellow, a downright hypo- 
crite ; one that would be religious, whichever way 
the world went ; but so cunning that he would 
be sure never to lose or suffer for it. He had his 
mode of religion for every fresh occasion, and his 
wife was as good at it as he. He would turn from 



424 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

opinion to opinion ; yea, and plead for so doing v 
too. But, as far as I could learn, he came to an ill 
end with his by-ends ; nor did I ever hear that 
any of his children were ever of any esteem with 
any that truly feared God. 

Now by this time they were come within sight 
of the town of Vanity, where Vanity They come 

•r, . . .. a -i within sight of 

r air is kept, feo, when they saw that Vanity Fair, 
they were so near the town, they consulted with 
one another how they should pass through the 
town ; and some said one thing and some another. 
At last Mr. Great-Heart said, I have, as you may 
understand, often been a conductor of pilgrims 
through this town. Now, I am acquainted with 
one Mr. Mnason, Acts 21*16, a Cyprusian by 
nation, an old disciple, at whose house we may 
lodge. If you think good, we will turn in there. 

Content, said old Honest ; Content, said Chris- 
tiana ; Content, said Mr. Feeble- mind; and so 
they said all. Now you must think it was even- 
tide by that they got to the outside of the town ; 
but Mr. Great-Heart knew the way to the old 
man's house. So thither they came ; and he called 
at the door, and the old man within knew his 
tongue as soon as ever he heard it ; so he opened 
the door, and they all came in. Then They enter into 

• in*- i«i tt r»i one Mr. Mna- 

said Mnason their host, How iar have son's to lodge. 
ye come to-day 1 So they said, From the house of 
Gains our friend. I promise you, said he, you 



MR. MNASON ENTERTAINS THEM. 425 

have gone a good stitch. You may well be weary; 
sit down. So they sat down. 

Great. Then said their guide, Come, what 
cheer, good sirs? I dare say you are welcome to 
my friend. 

Mnas. I also, said Mr. Mnason, do bid you wel- 
come ; and whatever you want, do but say, and we 
will do what we can to get it for you. 

Hon. Our great want a while since, was harbor 
They are glad and good company, and now I hope 

of entertain- .. .. .. 

ment. we nave both. 

Mnas. For harbor, you see what it is ; but for 
good company, that will appear in the trial. 

Great. Well, said Mr. Great-Heart, will you 
have the pilgrims up into their lodging ? 

Mnas. I will, said Mr. Mnason. So he had 
them to their respective places ; and also showed 
them a very fair dining-room, where they might 
be, and sup together until the time should come 
to go to rest. 

Now, when they were seated in their places, 
and were a little cheery after their journey, Mr. 
Honest asked his landlord if there was any store 
of good people in the town. 

Mnas. "We have a few ; for indeed they are but 
a few when compared with them on the other 
side. 

Hon. But how shall we do to see some of them? 
for the sight of good men to them that are going 



426 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

on pilgrimage, is like the appearing The y desire to 
of the moon and stars to them that ^^ ** £ 
are sailing upon the seas. the town> 

Mnas. Then Mr. Mnason stamped with his foot, 
and his daughter Grace came up. So he said 
unto her, Grace, go you, tell my friends, Some sent for. 
Mr. Contrite, Mr. Holy-man, Mr. Love-saints, Mr. 
Dare- not- lie, and Mr. Penitent, that I have a friend 
or two at my house who have a mind this evening 
to see them. So Grace went to call them, and 
they came ; and after salutation made, they sat 
down together at the table. 

Then said Mr. Mnason their landlord, My neigh- 
bors, I have, as you see, a company of strangers 
come to my house ; they are pilgrims : they come 
from afar, and are going to mount Zion. But who, 
quoth he, do you think this is ? pointing his finger 
to Christiana. It is Christiana, the wife of Chris- 
tian, the famous pilgrim, who, with Faithful his 
brother, was so shamefully handled in our town. 
At that they stood amazed, saying, We little 
thought to see Christiana when Grace came to call 
us ; wherefore this is a very comfortable surprise. 
They then asked her of her welfare, and if these 
young men were her husband's sons. And when 
she had told them they were, they said, The King 
whom you love and serve make you as your father, 
and bring you where he is in peace. 

Hon. Then Mr. Honest, when they were all sat 



CONFLICTS OF CHRISTIANS. 427 

Some talk be- down, asked Mr. Contrite and the rest, 

twixt Mr. Hon- , ., . 

est and Mr. in what posture their town was at 

Contrite. , 

present. 

Cont. You may be sure we are full of hurry in 
fair-time ' T is hard keeping our hearts and 
The fruit of spirits in good order when we are in 
watchfulness. a cum bered condition. He that lives 
in such a place as this is, and has to do with such 
as we have, has need of an item to caution him to 
take heed every moment of the day. 

Hon. But how are your neighbors now for 
quietness 1 

Cont. They are much more moderate now than 

Persecution not f ° rmer] y- Y ° U lm0W h ° W Christian 

so hot at Vanity an( j faithful were used at our town; 

Fair as former- 

l y- ' but of late, I say, they have been far 

more moderate. I think the blood of Faithful 
lieth as a load upon them till now ; for since they 
burned him, they have been ashamed to burn any 
more. In those days we were afraid to walk the 
streets ; but now we can show our heads. Then 
the name of a professor was odious ; now, especially 
in some parts of our town, for you know our town 
is lanje, religion is counted honorable. Then said 
Mr. Contrite to them, Pray how fareth it with 
you in your pilgrimage ? how stands the country 
affected towards you ? 

Hon. It happens to us as it happeneth to way- 
faring men : sometimes our way is clean, some- 



428 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

times foul ; sometimes up hill, sometimes down 
hill ; we are seldom at a certainty. The wind is 
not always on our backs, nor is every one a friend 
that we meet with in the way. We have met 
with some notable rubs already, and what are yet 
behind we know not ; but for the most part, we 
find it true that has been talked of old, A good 
man must suffer trouble. 

Cont. You talk of rubs ; what rubs have you 
met withal ? 

Hon. Nay, ask Mr. Great-Heart, our guide ; for 
he can give the best account of that. 

Great. We have been beset three or four times 
already. First, Christiana and her children were 
beset by two ruffians, who they feared would take 
away their lives. We were beset by giant 
Bloody-man, giant Maul, and giant Slaygood. 
Indeed, we did rather beset the last, than were 
beset by him. And thus it was : after we had 
been some time at the house of Gaius mine host, 
and of the whole church, we were minded upon a 
time to take our weapons with us, and go see if we 
could light upon any of those that are enemies to 
pilgrims ; for we heard that there was a notable 
one thereabouts. Now Gaius knew his haunt bet- 
ter than I, because he dwelt thereabout. So we 
looked, and looked, till at last we discerned the 
mouth of his cave : then we were glad, and plucked 
up our spirits. So we approached up to his den ; 



CONVERSATION OF THE PILGRIMS. 429 

and lo, when we came there, he had dragged, by 
mere force, into his net, this poor man, Mr. Feeble- 
mind, and was about to bring him to his end. But 
when he saw us, supposing, as we thought, he had 
another prey, he left the poor man in his hole, and 
came out. So we fell to it full sore, and he lustily 
laid about him ; but, in conclusion, he was brought 
down to the ground, and his head cut off, and set 
up by the way-side for a terror to such as should 
after practise such ungodliness. That I tell you 
the truth, here is the man himself to affirm it, 
who was as a lamb taken out of the mouth of the 
lion. 

Feeble. Then said Mr. Feeble-mind, I found 
this true, to my cost and comfort : to my cost, 
when he threatened to pick my bones every mo- 
ment ; and to my comfort, when I saw Mr. Great- 
Heart and his friends, with their weapons, approach 
so near for my deliverance. 

Holy. Then said Mr. Holy-man, There are two 
Mr Holy- things that they have need to possess 
man's speech. w j 10 g on pilgrimage ; courage, and 
an unspotted life. If they have not courage, they 
can never hold on their way ; and if their lives be 
loose, they will make the very name of a pilgrim 
stink. 

Love. Then said Mr. Love-saints, I hope this 

Mr. Love- caution is not needful among you : but 

•aints' speech. tru jy there are many that go upon the 



4b0 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

road, who rather declare themselves strangers to 
pilgrimage, than strangers and pilgrims on the 
earth. 

Dare. Then said Mr. Dare-not-lie, 'Tis true. 
They have neither the pilgrim's weed, Mr Dare . ]10t . 
nor the pilgrim's courage ; they go not lie ' ss P eech - 
uprightly, but all awry with their feet; one shoe 
goeth inward, another outward ; and their hosen 
are out behind : here a rag, and there a rent, to 
the disparagement of their Lord. 

Pen. These things, said Mr. Penitent, they 
ought to be troubled for; nor are the Mr. Penitent's 
pilgrims like to have that grace put s P eech - 
upon them and their pilgrim progress as they 
desire, until the way is cleared of such spots and 
blemishes. Thus they sat talking and spending 
the time until supper was set upon the table, unto 
which they went, and refreshed their weary 
bodies : so they went to rest. 

Now they stayed in the fair a great while, at the 
house of this Mr. Mnason, who in process of time 
gave his daughter Grace unto Samuel, Christiana's 
son, to wife, and his daughter Martha to Joseph. 

The time, as I said, that they stayed here, was 
long, for it was not now as in former times. 
Wherefore the pilgrims grew acquainted with 
many of the good people of the town, and did them 
what service they could. Mercy, as she was wont, 
labored much for the poor : wherefore their bellies 



A MONSTER. 43] 

and backs blessed her, and she was there an orna- 
ment to her profession. And, to say the truth for 
Grace, Phebe, and Martha, they were all of a very 
good nature, and did much good in their places 
They were also all of them very fruitful ; so that 
Christian's name, as was said before, was like to 
live in the world. 

While they lay here, there came a monster out 
a monster, of the woods, and slew many of the 
people of the town. It would also carry away 
their children, and teach them to suck its whelps 
Now, no man in the town durst so much as face 
this monster; but all fled when they heard the 
noise of his coming. 

The monster was like unto no one beast on the 

His shape. earth. Its body was like a dragon, 
and it had seven heads and ten horns. It made' 
great havoc of children, and yet it was governed 
by a woman. Rev. 17:3. This monster pro- 

His nature, pounded conditions to men; and such 
men as loved their lives more than their souls, ac- 
cepted of those conditions. So they came under. 

Now Mr. Great-Heart, together with those who 
came to visit the pilgrims at Mr. Mnason's house, 
entered into a covenant to go and engage this 
beast, if perhaps they might deliver the people of 
this town from the paws and mouth of this so de- 
vouring a serpent. 

Then did Mr. Great-Heart, Mr. Contrite, Mr. 



432 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Holy-man, Mr. Dare-not-lie, and Mr. Penitent, 
with their weapons, go forth to meet him. Now 
the monster at first was very rampant, and looked 
upon these enemies with great disdain; but they 
so belabored him, being sturdy men-at- How he is en . 
arms, that they made him make a re- e a s ed - 
treat: so they came home to Mr. Mnason's house 
again. • 

The monster, you must know, had his certain 
seasons to come out in, and to make his attempts 
upon the children of the people of the town. At 
these seasons did these valiant worthies watch 
him, and did still continually assault him ; inso- 
much that in process of time he became not only 
wounded, but lame. Also he has not made that 
havoc of the townsmen's children as formerly he 
had done ; and it is verily believed by some that 
this beast will die of his wounds. 

This, therefore, made Mr. Great-Heart and his 
fellows of great fame in this town ; so that many 
of the people that wanted their taste of things, 
yet had a reverent esteem and respect for them. 
Upon this account, therefore, it was, that these pil- 
grims got not much hurt here. True, there were 
some of the baser sort, that could see no more than 
a mole, nor understand any more than a beast ; 
these had no reverence for these men, and took no 
notice of their valor and adventures. 



THEY LEAVE VANITY FAIR. 433 



THE SEVENTH STAGE. 

Well, the time grew on that the pilgrims must 
go on their way ; wherefore they prepared for their 
journey. They sent for their friends ; they con- 
ferred with them; they had some time set apart 
therein to commit each other to the protection of 
their Prince. There were again that brought them 
of such things as they had, that were fit for* the 
weak and the strong, for the women and the men, 
and so laded them with such things as were ne- 
cessary. Acts 2S : 10. Then they set forward on 
their way ; and their friends accompanying them 
so far as was convenient, they again committed 
each other to the protection of their King, and 
parted. 

They therefore that were of the pilgrims' com- 
pany went on, and Mr. Great-Heart went before 
them. Now, the women and children being weak- 
ly, they were forced to go as they could bear ; by 
which means Mr. E.eady-to-halt and Mr. Feeble- 
mind had more to sympathize with their condi- 
tion. 

When they were gone from the townsmen, and 
when their friends • had bid them farewell, they 
quickly came to the place where Faithful was put 
to death. Therefore they made a stand, and thank- 
ed Him that had enabled him to bear his cross so 

pa. Piog. 23 



434 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

well ; and the rather, "because they now found that 
they had a benefit by such a manly suffering as 
his was. 

They went on therefore after this a good way 
further, talking of Christian and Faithful, and how 
Hopeful joined himself to Christian after thai 
Faithful was dead. 

Now they were come up with the hill Lucre, 
where the silver mine was which took Demas off 
fron\ his pilgrimage, and into which, as some think, 
By-ends fell and perished; wherefore they con- 
sidered that. But when they were come to the 
old monument that stood over against the hill 
Lucre, to wit, to the pillar of salt, that stood also 
within view of Sodom and its stinking lake, they 
marvelled, as did Christian before, that men of such 
knowledge and ripeness of wit as they were, should 
be so blinded as to turn aside here. Only they 
considered again, that nature is not affected with 
the harms that others have met with, especially if 
that thing upon which they look has an attracting 
virtue upon the foolish eye. 

I saw now, that they went on till they came to 
the river that was on this side of the Delectable 
mountains ; to the river where the fine trees grow 
on both sides, and whose leaves, if taken inwardly, 
are good against surfeits ; where the meadows are 
green all the year long, and where they might lie 
down safely. Psa. 23 : 2. 



THE HOUSE FOR LAMBS. 435 

By this river- side, in the meadows, there were 
cotes and folds for sheep, a house built for the 
nourishing and bringing up of those lambs, the 
babes of those women that go on pilgrimage. Al- 
so there was here one that was intrusted with 
them, who could have compassion ; and that couW 
gather these lambs with his arm, and carry them 
in his bosom, and gently lead those that were with 
young. Heb. 5:2; Isa. 40 : 11. Now, to the care 
of this man Christiana admonished her four daugh- 
ters to commit their little ones, that by these wa- 
ters they might be housed, harbored, succored, and 
nourished, and that none of them might be lack- 
ing in time to come. This man, if any of them go 
astray, or be lost, will bring them again ; he will 
also bind up that which was broken, and will 
strengthen them that are sick. Jer. 23 :4 ; Ezek. 
34:11-16. Here they will never want meat, 
drink, and clothing ; here they will be kept from 
thieves and robbers ; for this man will die before 
one of those committed to his trust shall be lost. 
Besides, here they shall be sure to have good nur- 
ture and admonition, and shall be taught to walk 
in right paths, and that you know is a favor of no 
small account. Also here, as you see, are delicate 
waters, pleasant meadows, dainty flowers, variety 
of trees, and such as bear wholesome fruit : fruit, 
not like that which Matthew ate of, that fell over 
the wall out of Beelzebub's garden ; but fruit that 



435 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

procureth health where there is none, and that 
continueth and increaseth it where it is. So they 
were content to commit their little ones to him ; 
and that which was also an encouragement to 
them so to do, was, for that all this was to be at 
the charge of the King, and so was as a hospital 
to young children and orphans. 

Now they went on. And when they were come 
to By-path meadow, to the stile over They being 
which Christian went with his fellow JSfJSJ, £9" 
Hopeful, when they were taken by I^j&SJkS 
Giant Despair and put into Doubting ant Des P air - 
Castle, they sat down, and consulted what was 
best to be done : to wit, now they were so strong, 
and had got such a man as Mr. Great-Heart for 
their conductor, whether they had not best to make 
an attempt upon the giant, demolish his castle, 
and if there were any pilgrims in it, to set them 
at liberty before they went any further. So one 
said one thing, and another said the contrary. One 
questioned if it was lawful to go upon unconse- 
crated ground ; another said they might, provided 
their end was good ; but Mr. Great-Heart said, 
Though that assertion offered last cannot be uni- 
versally true, yet I have a commandment to resist 
sin, to overcome evil, to fight the good fight of 
faith : and I pray, with whom should I fight this 
good fight, if not with Giant Despair? I will 
therefore attempt the taking away of his life, and 



GIANT DESPAIR ATTACKED. 437 

the demolishing of Doubting Castle. Then said 
he, Who will go with me ? Then said old Honest, 
I will. And so will we too, said Christiana's four 
sons, Matthew, Samuel, Joseph, and James ; for 
they were young men and strong. 1 John, 2 : 13, 
14. So they left the women in the road, and with 
them Mr. Feeble-mind, and Mr. Ready-to-hal 
with his crutches, to be their guard until they 
came back ; for in that place the Giant Despair 
dwelt so near, they keeping in the road, a little 
child might lead them. Isa. 11:6. 

So Mr. Great-Heart, old Honest, and the four 
young men, went to go up to Doubting Castle, to 
look for Giant Despair. When they came at the 
castle gate, they knocked for entrance with an un- 
usual noise. At that the old giant comes to the 
gate, and Diffidence his wife follows. Then said 
he, Who and what is he that is so hardy, as after 
this manner to molest the Giant Despair? Mr. 
Great-Heart replied, It is I, Great-Heart, one of 
the King of the Celestial country's conductors of 
pilgrims to their place ; and I demand of thee that 
thou open thy gates for my entrance: prepare thy- 
self also to fight, for I am come to take away thy 
head, and to demolish Doubting Castle. 

Now Giant Despair, because he was a giant, 

thought no man could overcome him: and again 

Despair has thought he, Since heretofore I have 

overcome angels. mat [ e a conquest of angels, shall 



438 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Great-Heart make me afraid? So he harnessed 
himself, and went out. He had a cap of steel upon 
his head, a breastplate of fire girded to him, and 
he came out in iron shoes, with a great club in his 
hand. Then these six men made up to him, and 
beset him behind and before : also, when Diffi- 
dence ,the giantess came up to help him, old Mr. 
Honest cut her down at one blow. Then they 
fought for their lives, and Giant Despair was 
brought down to the ground, but was Despir is loath 
very loath to die. He struggled hard, t0 die - 
and had, as they say, as many lives as a cat ; but 
Great-Heart was his death, for he left him not till 
he had severed his head from his shoulders. 

Then they fell to demolishing Doubting Castle, 
and that, you know, might with ease D 0U btm S Cas. 
be done, since Giant Despair was dead. tle demoted. 
They were seven days in destroying of that ; and 
in it of pilgrims they found one Mr. Despondency, 
almost starved to death, and one Much-afraid, his 
daughter : these two they saved alive. But it 
would have made you wonder to have seen the 
dead bodies that lay here and there in the castle 
yard, and how full of dead men's bones the dun- 
geon was. 

When Mr. Great-Heart and his companions had 
performed this exploit, they took Mr. Despondency 
and his daughter Much-afraid into their protec* 
tion; for they were honest people, though they 



THE PILGRIMS REJOICE. 439 

were prisoners in Doubting Castle to that tyrant 
Giant Despair. They therefore, I say, took with 
them the head of the giant, for his body they had 
buried under a heap of stones, and down to the 
road and to their companions they came, and 
showed them what they had done. Now, when 
Feeble-mind and R,eady-to-hait saw that it was the 
head of Giant Despair indeed, they were very 
jocund and merry. Now Christiana, if need 
They have was, could play upon the viol, and her 

music and danc- _ T , . 

big for joy. daughter Mercy upon the Jute: so, 
since they were so merry disposed, she played them 
a lesson, and Ready-to-halt would dance. So he 
took Despondency's daughter Much-afraid by the 
hand, and to dancing they went in the road. True, 
he could not dance without one crutch in his hand, 
but I promise you he footed it well: also the girl 
was to be commended, for she answered the music 
handsomely. 

As for Mr. Despondency, the music was not so 
much to him ; he was for feeding, rather than 
dancing:, for that he was almost starved. So Chris- 
tiana gave him some of her bottle of spirits foi 
present relief, and then prepared him something to 
eat ; and in a little time the old gentleman came 
to himself, and began to be finely revived. 

Now I saw in my dream, when all these things 
were finished, Mr. Great-Heart took the head of 
Giant Despair, and set it upon a pole by the hig*h- 



440 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

way-side, right over against the pillar that Chris- 
tian erected for a caution to pilgrims that came 
after, to take heed of entering into his grounds. 

Then he writ under it upon a marble stone 
these verses following : 

"This is the head of him whose name only; 
In former times, did pilgrims terrify. 
His castle 's down, and Diffidence his wife 
Brave Mr. Great-Heart has bereft of life. 
Despondency, his daughter Much-afraid, 
Great-Heart for them also the man has played. 
Who hereof doubts, if he '11 but cast his eye 
Up hither, may his scruples satisfy. 
This head also, when doubting cripples dance, 
Doth show from fears they have deliverance." 

When these men had thus bravely showed them • 
selves against Doubting Castle, and had slain Gi- 
ant Despair, they went forward, and went on till 
they came to the Delectable mountains, where 
Christian and Hopeful refreshed themselves with 
the varieties of the place. They also acquainted 
themselves with the shepherds there, who wel- 
comed them, as they had done Christian before, 
unto the Delectable mountains. 

Now the shepherds seeing so great a train follow 
Mr. Great-Heart, for with him they were well ac- 
quainted, they said unto him, Good sir, you have 
got a goodly company here ; pray where did you 
find all these 1 



WELCOMED BY THE SHEPHERDS. 441 

Then Mr. Great-Heart replied, 

11 First, here is Christiana and her train, 
Her sons, and her sons' wives, who, like the wain. 
Keep by the pole, and do by compass steer 
From sin to grace, else they had not been here 
Next here's old Honest come on pilgrimage, 
Eeady-to-halt too, who I dare engage 
True-hearted is, and so is Feeble-mind, 
Who willing was not to be left behind. 
Despondency, good man, is coming after, 
And so also is Much-afraid, his daughter. 
May we have entertainment here, or must 
We further go ? Let's know whereon to trust." 

Then said the shepherds, This is a comfortable 
Their enter- company. You are welcome to us ; 
tainment. f or we have for the feeble, as well as 

for the strong. Our Prince has an eye to what is 
done to the least of these ; therefore infirmity must 
not be a block to our entertainment. Matt. 25 : 40. 
So they had them to the palace door, and then 
said unto them, Come in, Mr. Feeble-mind ; come 
in, Mr. Ready-to-halt ; come in, Mr. Despondency, 
and Mrs. Much-afraid his daughter. These, Mr. 
Great-Heart, said the shepherds to the guide, we 
call in by name, for that they are most subject 
to draw back ; but as for you, and the rest that 
are strong, we leave you to your wonted liberty. 
Then said Mr. Great-Heart, This day I see that 
grace doth shine in your faces, and that you are 
my Lord's shepherds indeed ; for that you have 



442 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

not pushed these diseased neither with side noi 
shoulder, but have rather strewed their a description 

of false shep- 

way into the palace with flowers, as herds, 
you should. Ezek. 34 : 21. 

So the feeble and weak went in, and Mr. Great- 
Heart and the rest did follow. When they were 
also set down, the shepherds said to those of the 
weaker sort, What is it that you would have? for, 
said they, all things must be managed here to the 
supporting of the weak, as well as to the warning 
of the unruly. So they made them a feast of 
things easy of digestion, and that were pleasant to 
the palate, and nourishing ; the which when they 
had received, they went to their rest, each one 
respectively unto his proper place. 

When morning was come, because the moun- 
tains were high and the day clear, and because it 
was the custom of the shepherds to show the pil- 
grims before their departure some rarities, there- 
fore, after they were ready, and had refreshed 
themselves, the shepherds took them out into the 
fields, and showed them first what they had shown 
to Christian before. 

Then they had them to some new places. The 
first was mount Marvel, where they Mount Marvel. 
looked, and beheld a man at a distance that tum- 
bled the hills about with words. Then they asked 
the shepherds what that should mean. So they 
told them, that that man was the son of one Mr. 



MOUNT INNOCENCE. 443 

Great-grace, of whom you read in the first part of 
the records of the Pilgrim's Progress ; and he is 
set there to teach pilgrims how to believe down, or 
to tumble out of their ways, what difficulties they 
should meet with, by faith. Mark 11:23, 24. 
Then said Mr. Great-Heart, I know him ; he is a 
man above many. 

Then they had them to another place, called 
Mount Inno- mount Innocence. And there they 
cence. gaw a man c i thed all in white ; and 

two men, Prejudice and Ill-will, continually cast- 
ing dirt upon him. Now behold, the dirt, whatso- 
ever they cast at him, would in a little time fall 
off again, and his garment would look as clear as 
if no dirt had been cast thereat. Then said the 
pilgrims, What means this? The shepherds an- 
swered, This man is named Godly-man, and this 
garment is to show the innocency of his life. Now, 
those that throw dirt at him are such as hate his 
well-doing ; but, as you see the dirt will not stick 
upon his clothes, so it shall be with him that liveth 
innocently in the world. Whoever they be that 
would make such men dirty, they labor all in 
vain ; for God, by that a little time is spent, will 
cause that their innocence shall break forth as the 
light, and their righteousness as the noonday. 

Then they took them, and had them to mount 
Mount Charity. Charity, where they showed them a 
man that had a bundle of cloth lying before him. 



444 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

out of which he cut coats and garments for 
the poor that stood about him ; yet his bundle 
or roll of cloth was never the less. Then said 
they, "What should this be? This is, said the 
shepherds, to show you, that he who has a heart 
to give of his labor to the poor, shall never want 
wherewithal. He that watereth, shall be watered 
himself. And the cake that the widow gave to the 
prophet, did not cause that she had the less in her 
barrel. 

They had them also to the place where they 
saw one Fool and one Want-wit wash- The work of 

-r, . . . , . one Fool and 

ing an Ethiopian, with intention to oneWant-wit. 
make him white ; but the more they washed him 
the blacker he was. Then they asked the shep- 
herds what that should mean. So they told them, 
saying, Thus it is with the vile person ; all means 
used to get such a one a good name, shall in con- 
clusion tend but to make him more abominable. 
Thus it was with the Pharisees ; and so it shall 
be with all hypocrites. 

Then said Mercy, the wife of Matthew, to 
Christiana her mother, Mother, I would, Mercy has a 
if it might be, see the hole in the hill, hoi© in the hill, 
or that commonly called the By-way to hell. So 
her mother broke her mind to the shepherds. 
Then they went to the door ; it was on the side of 
a hill ; and they opened it, and bid Mercy hearken 
a while. So she hearkened, and heard one saying, 



THE BY-WAY TO HELL. 445 

Cursed be my father for holding of my feet Lack 
from the way of peace and life. Another said, 
Oh that I had been torn in pieces before I had, to 
save my life, lost my soul ! And another said, If I 
were to live again, how would I deny myself, 
rather than come to this place ! Then there was 
as if the very earth groaned and quaked under the 
feet of this young woman for fear ; so she looked 
white, and came trembling away, saying, Blessed 
be he and she that is delivered from this place ! 

Now, when the shepherds had shown them all 

these things, then they had them back to the 

palace, and entertained them with what the house 

would afford. But Mercy, being a young and 

Mercy long- married woman, longed for something 

eth, and for 1 , 

what. that she saw there, but was ashamed 

to ask. Her mother-in-law then asked her what 
she ailed, for she looked as one not well. Then 
said Mercy, There is a looking-glass hangs up in 
the dining-room, off which I cannot take my mind ; 
if, therefore, I have it not, I think I shall miscarry. 
Then said her mother, I will mention thy wants 
to the shepherds, and they will not deny it thee. 
But she said, I am ashamed that these men should 
know that I longed. Nay, my daughter, said she, 
it is no shame, but a virtue, to long for such a 
thing as that. So Mercy said, Then, mother, if 
you please, ask the shepherds if they are willing 
to sell it. 



446 PILG-RIM'S PltOaRESS. 

Now the glass was one of a thousand. It would 
present a man, one way, with his own It was tha 
features exactly ; and turn it but an- word of God - 
other way, and it would show one the very face 
and similitude of the Prince of pilgrims himself. 
Yes, I have talked with them that can tell, and 
they have said that they have seen the very crown 
of thorns upon his head by looking in that glass ; 
they have therein also seen the holes in his hands, 
his feet, and his side. Yea, such an excellency is 
there in this glass, that it will show him to one 
where they have a mind to see him, whether living 
or dead ; whether in earth, or in heaven ; whether 
in a state of humiliation, or in his exaltation ; 
whether coming to suffer, or coming to reign. 
James 1 : 23 ; 1 Cor. 13:12; 2 Cor. 3 : 18. 

Christiana therefore went to the shepherds 
apart — now the names of the shepherds were 
Knowledge, Experience, Watchful, and Sincere — 
and said unto them, There is one of my daughters, a 
breeding woman, that I think doth long for some- 
thing that she hath seen in this house ; and she 
thinks that she shall miscarry if she should by yen 
be denied. 

Experience. Call her, call her, she shall as- 

uredly have what we can help her to. So they 

called her, and said to her, Mercy, what is that 

thing thou wouldst have 1 Then she ghe doth not 

blushed, and said, The great glass that ^e her longing 



GIFTS OF THE SHEPHERDS. 447 

hangs up in the dining-room. So Sincere ran and 
fetched it, and with a joyful consent it was given 
her. Then she bowed her head, and gave thanks, 
and said, By this I know that I have obtained 
favor in your eyes. 

They also gave to the other young women such 
things as they desired, and to their husbands 
great commendations, for that they had joined 
with Mr. Great-Heart in the slaying of Giant De- 
spair, and the demolishing of Doubting Castle. 

About Christiana's neck the shepherds put a 
Howtheshep- bracelet, and so did they about the 

herds adorn the , „ , „ ., _ 1 

pilgrims. necks oi her tour daughters ; also they 

put ear-rings in their ears, and jewels on their 
foreheads. 

"When they were minded to go hence, they let 
them go in peace, but gave not to them those cer- 
tain cautions which before were given to Christian 
and his companion. The reason was, for that 
these had Great-Heart to be their guide, who was 
one that was well acquainted with things, and so 
could give them their cautions more seasonably, to 
wit, even when the danger was nigh the approach- 
ing. What cautions Christian and his companion 
had received of the shepherds, they had also lost 
by that the time was come that they had need 
to put them in practice. Wherefore, here was 
the advantage that this company had over the 
other. 



448 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

From thence they went on singing, and they 
said, 

"Behold how fitly are the stages set 

For their relief that pilgrims are become, 
And how they us receive without one let, 

That make the other life our mark and home ! 

What novelties they have to us they give, 

That we, though pilgrims, joyful lives may live; 

They do upon us, too, such things bestow, 
That show we pilgrims are, where'er we go." 



VALIANT. FOR-TRUTH ASSAILED. 449 



THE EIGHTH STAGE. 

When they were gone from the shepherds, they 
quickly came to the place where Christian met 
with one Turn-away that dwelt in the town of 
Apostasy. Wherefore of him Mr. Great-Heart 
their guide did now put them in mind, saying, 
This is the place where Christian met with one 
Turn-away, who carried with him the character 
of his rebellion at his back. And this I have to 
say concerning this man : he would hearken to no 
counsel, but once a falling, persuasion could not stop 
him. When he came to the place where the cross 
How one Turn- and sepulchre were, he did meet with 

away managed . . 

his apostasy. one that bid him look there ; but he 
gnashed with his teeth, and stamped, and said he 
was resolved to go back to his own town. Before 
he came to the gate, he met with Evangelist, who 
offered to lay hands on him, to turn him into the 
way again ; but this Turn-away resisted him, and 
having done much despite unto him, he got away 
over the wall, and so escaped his hand. 

Then they went on ; and just at the place where 
Little-Faith formerly was robbed, there stood a 
man with his sword drawn, and his face all over 
with blood. Then said Mr. Great-Heart, Who art 
thou? The man made answer, saying, I am one 
whose name is Valiant-for-truth. I am a pilgrim, 

ra. prog 29 



450 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

and am going to the Celestial city. Now, as I 
was in mv way, there were three men One Vaiiant- 

_ . _ _ J J . _ . for-Truth beset 

that did heset me, and propounded unto with thieves. 
me these three things : 1. Whether I would become 
one of them ; 2. Or go back from whence I came ; 
3. Or die upon the place. Prov. 1 : 11-14. To 
the first I answered, I had been a true man for a 
long season, and therefore it could not be expected 
that I should now cast in my lot with thieves. 
Then they demanded what I would say to the 
second. So I told them, the place from whence I 
came, had I not found incommodity there, I had 
not forsaken it at all ; but finding it altogether 
unsuitable to me, and very unprofitable for me, I 
forsook it for this way. Then they asked me what 
I said to the third. And I told them my life cost 
far more dear than that I should lightly give it 
away. Besides, you have nothing to do thus to 
put things to my choice ; wherefore at your peril 
be it, if you meddle. Then these three, to wit, 
Wild-head, Inconsiderate, and Pragmatic, drew 
upon me, and I also drew upon them. So we fell 
to it, one against three, for the space of above 
three hours. They have left upon me, as you sec, 
some of the marks of their valor, and have also 
carried away with them some of mine. They are 
but just now gone : I suppose they might, as the 
saying is, hear your horse dash, and so they betook 
themselves to flight. 



VALIANT-FOR-TRUTH'S SWORD. 451 

Great. But here was great odds, three against 
one. 

Valiant. ' T is true ; but little or more are 
nothing 1 to him that has the truth on his side : 
"Though a host should encamp against me," 
said one, " my heart shall not fear : though war 
should rise against me, in this will I be confi- 
dent," etc. Psa. 27 : 3. Besides, said he, I have 
read in some records, that one man has fought an 
army : and how many did Samson slay with the 
jawbone of an ass ! 

Great. Then said the guide, Why did you not cry 
out, that some might have come in for your succor ? 

Valiant. So I did to my King, who I knew 
could hear me, and afford invisible help, and that 
was sufficient for me. 

Great. Then said Great-Heart to Mr. Valiant- 
for- truth, Thou hast worthily behaved thyself; let 
me see thy sword. So he showed it him. 

"When he had taken it in his hand, and looked 
thereon a while, he said, Ha, it is a right Jerusa- 
lem blade. 

Valiant. It is so. Let a man have one of these 
blades, with a hand to wield it, and skill to use it, 
and he may venture upon an angel with it. He 
need not fear its holding, if he can but tell how to 
lay on. Its edge will never blunt. It will cut 
flesh and bones, and soul and spirit, and all. Heb. 
i- 1?. 



452 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Great. But you fought a great while ; I wonder 
you was not weary. 

Valiant. I fought till my sword did cleave to 
my hand ; and then they were joined The word. 
together as if a sword grew out of my The faith 
arm ; and when the blood ran through Blood, 
my fingers, then I fought with most courage/ 

Great., Thou hast done well; thou hast resisted 
unto blood, striving against sin. Thou shalt abide 
by us, come in, and go out with us ; for we are thy 
companions. Then they took him and washed his 
wounds, and gave him of what they had, to refresh 
him : and so they went on together. 

Now, as they went on, because Mr. Great-Heart 
was delighted in him, for he loved one greatly 
that he found to be a man of his hands, and be- 
cause there were in company those that were feeble 
and weak, therefore he questioned with him about 
many things ; as, first, what countryman he was. 

Valiant. I am of Dark-land ; for there was I 
born, and there my father and mother are still. 

Great. Dark-land, said the guide ; doth not 
that lie on the same coast with the city of De- 
struction ? 

Valiant. Yes, it doth. Now that which caused 
me to come on pilgrimage was this How Mr. Vai- 

• * ant came to go 

We had one Mr. I ell-true come into on pilgrimage. 
our parts, and he told it about what Christian had 
done, that went from the city of Destruction; 



VALIANT AND GREAT-HEART. 453 

namely, how he had forsaken his wife and children, 
and had betaken himself to a pilgrim's life. It 
was also confidently reported, how he had killed a 
serpent that did come out to resist him in his 
journey; and how he got through to whither he 
intended. It was also told what welcome he had 
at all his Lord's lodgings, especially when he came 
to the gates of the Celestial city ; for there, said 
the man, he was received with sound of trumpet 
by a company of shining ones. He told also how 
all the bells in the city did ring for joy at his 
reception, and what golden garments he was 
clothed with; with many other things that now I 
shall forbear to relate. In a word, that man so 
told the story of Christian and his travels, that my 
heart fell into a burning haste to be gone after 
him ; nor could father or mother stay me. So I 
got from them, and am come thus far on my way. 

Great. You came in at the gate, did you not? 

Valiant. Yes, yes ; for the same man also told 
He begins right, us, that all would be nothing if we did 
not begin to enter this way at the gate. 

Great. Look you, said the guide to Christiana, 
Christian's tne pilgrimage of your husband, and 

name famous. what he hag gQtten thereby> fe spread 

abroad far and near. 

Valiant. Why, is this Christian's wife ? 

Great. Yes, that it is ; and these also are his 
four sons. 



454 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Valiant, What, and going on pilgrimage too ? 
Great. Yes, verily, they are following after. 
Valiant. It glads me at the heart. Good man, 
how joyful will he be when he shall He is much 

i t , . , , . rejoiced to see 

See them that WOUld not go With him, Christian's wife. 

yet to enter after him in at the gates into the 
Celestial city. 

Great.' Without doubt it will be a comfort to 
him ; for, next to the joy of seeing himself there, 
it will be a joy to meet there his wife and chil- 
dren. 

Valiant. But now you are upon that, pray let 
me hear your opinion about it. Some make a 
question whether we shall know one another 
when we are there. 

Great. Do you think they shall know them- 
selves then, or that they shall rejoice to see them- 
selves in that bliss? And if they think they shall 
know and do this, why not know others, and re- 
joice in their welfare also ? Again, since relations 
are our second self, though that state will be dis- 
solved there, yet why may it not be rationally 
concluded that we shall be more glad to see them 
there, than to see they are wanting ? 

Valiant. Well, I perceive whereabouts you are 
as to this. Have you any more things to ask me 
about my beginning to come on pilgrimage ? 

Great. Yes; were your father and mother 
willing that you should become a pilgrim ? 



VALIANT AND GREAT-HEART. 455 

Valiant. no ; they used all means imaginable 
to persuade me to stay at home. 

Great. Why, what could they say against it? 

Valiant. They said it was an idle life ; and if 
Thegreatstum- I myself were not inclined to sloth and 

bling-blocksthat . 

by his fnends laziness, I would never countenance a 

were laid in his . . . 

way. pilgrim s condition. 

Great. And what did they say else ? 

Valiant. Why, they told me that it was a 
dangerous way; yea, the most dangerous way in 
the world, said they, is that which the pilgrims go. 

Great. Did they show you wherein this way is 
so dangerous ? 

Valiant. Yes; and that in many particulars. 

Great. Name some of them. 

Valiant. They told me of the slough of De- 
The first stum- spond, where Christian was well-nigh 
bimg-biock. smot hered. They told me, that there 
were archers standing ready in Beelzebub castle to 
shoot them who should knock at the Wicket-gate 
for entrance. They told me also of the wood 
and dark mountains ; of the hill Difficulty ; of the 
lions ; and also of the three giants, Bloody-man, 
Maul, and Slay-good. They said, moreover, that 
there was a foul fiend haunted the valley of Hu- 
miliation ; and that Christian was by him almost 
bereft of life. Besides, said they, you must go 
over the valley of the Shadow of Death, where 
the hobgoblins are, where the light is darkness, 



456 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

where the way is full of snares, pits, traps, and 
gins. They told me also of giant Despair, of 
Doubting Castle, and of the ruin that the pilgrims 
met with here. Further, they said I must go over 
the Enchanted ground, which was dangerous ; and 
that after all this I should find a river, over which 
there was no bridge ; and that that river did lie 
betwixt me and the Celestial country. 

Great. And was this all ? 

Valiant. No ; they also told me that this way 
was full of deceivers, and of persons The second. 
that lay in wait there to turn good men out of the 
path. 

Great. But how did they make that out? 

Valiant. They told me that Mr. Worldly Wise- 
man did lie there in wait to deceive. They said 
also, that there were Formality and Hypocrisy 
continually on the road. They said also, that By- 
ends, Talkative, or Demas, would go near to gath- 
er me up ; that the Flatterer would catch me in 
his net; or that, with green-headed Ignorance, I 
would presume to go on to the gate, from whence 
he was sent back to the hole that was in the 
side of the hill, and made to go the by-way to 
ell. 

Great. I promise you this was enough to dis- 
courage you ; but did they make an end here ? 

Valiant. No, stay. They told me also of many 
that had tried that way of old, and that The third. 



VALIANT AND G-REAT-HEART. 457 

had gone a great way therein, to see if they could 
n«id something of the glory there that so many 
had so much talked of from time to time ; and how 
they came hack again, and befooled themselves for 
setting a foot out of doors in that path, to the sat- 
isfaction of all the country. And they named sev- 
eral that did so, as Obstinate and Pliable, Mistrust 
and Timorous, Turn-away and old Atheist, with 
several more ; who, they said, had some of them 
gone far ^o see what they could find, but not one 
of them had found so much advantage by going as 
amounted to the weight of a feather. 

Great. Said they any thing more to discourage 
you? 

Valiant. Yes. They told me of one Mr. Fear- 
The fourth, ing, who was a pilgrim, and how he 
found his way so solitary that he never had a com- 
fortable hour therein ; also, that Mr. Despondency 
had like to have been starved therein : yea, and 
also — which I had almost forgot — that Christian 
himself, about whom there had been such a noise, 
after all his adventures for a celestial crown, was 
certainly drowned in the Black river, and never 
went a foot further ; however, it was smothered up. 

Great. And did none of these things discourage 
you ? 

Valiant. No ; they seemed but as so many noth 
ings to me. 

Great. How came that about ? 



458 PILG-RIM'S PROORESS. 

Valiant. Why, I still believed what Mr. Tell- 
true had said ; and that carried me be- How he got 

i ,-, •.•■ over these stuni» 

yond them all. biing-biocks. 

Great. Then this was your victory, even your faith. 

Valiant. It was so. I believed, and therefore 
came out, got into the way, fought all that set 
themselves against me, and, by believing, am come 
to this place. 

" Who would true valor see, 
Let him come hither ; 
One here will constant be, 

Come wind, come weather : 
There's no discouragement 
Shall make him once relent 
His first avowed intent 

To be a pilgrim. 

Whoso beset him round 

With dismal stories, 
Do but themselves confound j 

His strength the more is. 
No lion can him fright, 
He '11 with a giant fight, 
But he will have a right 
To be a pilgrim. 
Hobgoblin nor foul fiend 

Can daunt his spirit ; 
He knows he at the end 

Shall life inherit. 
Then fancies fly away, 
He'll not fear what men say; 
He '11 labor night and day 
To be a pilgrim." 



THE ENCHANTED GROUND. 459 

By this time they were got to the Enchanted 
ground, where the air naturally tended to make 
one drowsy. And that place was all grown over 
with briers and thorns, excepting here and there, 
where was an enchanted arbor, upon which if a 
man sits, or in which if a man sleeps, it is a ques- 
tion, some say, whether ever he shall rise or wake 
again in this world. Over this forest, therefore, 
they went, both one and another, and Mr. Great- 
Heart went before, for that he was the guide ; and 
Mr. Valiant-for- truth came behind, being rear-guard, 
for fear lest peradventure some fiend, or dragon, or 
giant, or thief, should fall upon their rear, and so 
do mischief. They went on here, each man with 
his sword drawn in his hand ; for they knew it was 
a dangerous place. Also they cheered up one an- 
other as well as they could. Feeble-mind, Mr. 
Great-Heart commanded should come up after him ; 
and Mr. Despondency was under the eye of Mr. 
Valiant. 

Now they had not gone far, but a great mist 
and darkness fell upon them all ; so that they could 
scarce, for a great while, the one see the other. 
Wherefore they were forced, for some time, to feel 
one for another by words ; for they walked not by 
sight. But any one must think, that here was but 
sorry going for the best of them all ; but how much 
worse for the women and children, who both of 
feet and heart were but tender. Yet so it was, 



460 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

that through the encouraging words of him that 
led in the front, and of him that brought them up 
behind, they made a pretty good shift to wag 
along. 

The way also here was very wearisome, through 
dirt and slabbiness. Nor was there, on all this 
ground, so much as one inn or victualling-house 
wherein to refresh the feebler sort. Here, there- 
fore, was grunting and pulfing and sighing, while 
one tumbleth over a bush, another sticks fast in the 
dirt, and the children, some of them, lost their shoes 
in the mire; while one cries out, I am down; and 
another, Ho, where are you ? and a third, The bush- 
es have got such fast hold on me, I think I cannot 
get away from them. 

Then they came at an arbor, warm, and promis- 
ing much refreshing to the pilgrims ; An arbor on 

P r , i,i 11 tne Enchanted 

tor it was hnely wrought above-head, ground, 
beautified with greens, furnished with benches and 
settles. It also had in it a soft couch, whereon 
the weary might lean. This, you must think, all 
things considered, was tempting ; for the pilgrims 
already began to be foiled with the badness of the 
way : but there was not one of them that made so 
much as a motion to stop there. Yea, for aught I 
could perceive, they continually gave so good heed 
to the advice of their guide, and he did so faith- 
fully tell them of dangers, and of the nature of the 
dangers when they were at them, that usually, 



THE ARBOR. 461 

when they were nearest to them they did most 

pluck up their spirits, and hearten one another to 

The name of deny the flesh. This arbor was called 

the arbor. ^he Slothful's Friend, and was made 

on purpose to allure, if it might be, some of the 

pilgrims there to take up their rest when weary. 

I saw then in my dream, that they went on in 

The way dim- tms their solitary ground, till they came 

cult to find. -to a place a t which a man is apt to lose 

his way. Now, though when it was light their 
guide could well enough tell how to miss those 
ways that led wrong, yet in the dark he was put 
The midehas *° a s ^ an( l- But he had in his pocket a 
a map of ways ma p f a ll ways leading to or from the 

leading to or r J 

from the city. Celestial city; wherefore he struck a 
light — for he never goes without his tinder-box 
also — and takes a view of his book or map, which 
bids him to be careful in that place to turn to the 
right hand. And had he not been careful here to 
look in his map, they had all, in probability, been 
smothered in the mud ; for just a little before them, 
and that at the end of the cleanest way too, was 
a pit, none knows how deep, full of nothing but 
mud, there made on purpose to destroy the pil- 
grims in. 

Then thought I with myself, Who that goeth on 
God's book, pilgrimage but would have one of these 
maps about him, that he may look, when he is at 
a stand, which is the way he must take ? 



462 PILG-RIM'S PROGrRESS. 

Then they went on in this Enchanted ground, 
till they came to where there was An arbor, and 

. -, , . . two men asleep 

another arbor, and it was built by the therein, 
highway-side. And in that arbor there lay two 
men, whose names were Heedless and Too-bold. 
These two went thus far on pilgrimage; but here, 
being wearied with their journey, they sat down 
to rest themselves, and so fell fast asleep. When 
the pilgrims saw them, they stood still, and shook 
their heads; for they knew that the sleepers were 
in a pitiful case. Then they consulted what to 
do, whether to go on and leave them in their 
sleep, or to step to them and try to awake them ; 
so they concluded to go to them and awake them, 
that is, if they could ; but with this caution, 
namely, to take heed that they themselves did not 
sit down nor embrace the offered benefit of that 
arbor. 

So they went in, and spoke to the men, and 
called each by his name, for the guide, The pilgrims 

. try to awake 

it seems, did know them; but there them, 
was no voice nor answer. Then the guide did 
shake them, and do what he could to disturb them. 
Then said one of them, I will pay you when I take 
my money. At which the guide shook his head. 
I will fight so long as I can hold my sword in my 
hand, said the other. At that one of the children 
laughed. 

Then said Christiana, What is the meaning of 



HEEDLESS AND TOO-BOLD. 463 

this? The guide said, They talk in their sleep. 
Theirendeavor ^ Y ou strike them, beat them, or what- 
is fruitless. ever else^ you do to them, they will 
answer you after this fashion; or as one of them 
said in old time, when the waves of the sea did 
beat upon him, and he slept as one upon the mast 
of a ship, When I awake, I will seek it yet again. 
Prov. 23:34, 35. You know, when men talk in 
their sleep, they say any thing; but their words 
are not governed either by faith or reason. There 
is an incoherency in their words now, as there was 
before betwixt their going on pilgrimage and sitting 
downhere. This, then, is the mischief of it: when 
heedless ones go on pilgrimage, 'tis twenty to one 
but they are served thus. For this Enchanted 
ground is one of the last refuges that the enemy to 
pilgrims has; wherefore it is, as you see, placed 
almost at the end of the way, and so it stand eth 
against us with the more advantage. For when, 
thinks the enemy, will these fools be so desirous to 
sit down, as when they are weary? and when so 
like to be weary, as when almost at their journey's 
end? Therefore, it is, I say, that the Enchanted 
ground is placed so nigh to the land Beulah, and so 
near the end of their race. Wherefore let pilgrims 
look to themselves, lest it happen to them as it has 
done to these, that, as you see, are fallen asleep, 
and none can awake them. 

Then the pilgrims desired with trembling to go 



464 PILGRIM'S PROG-RESS. 

forward; only they prayed their guide to strike a 
light, that they might go the rest of their way by 
the help of the light of a lantern. So he struck a 
light, and they went by the help of that through 
the rest of this way, though the dark- The 1; ht of 
ness was very great. 2 Peter, 1:19. the word - 
But the children began to be sorely weary, and they 
cried out unto Him that loveth pilgrims The children 
to make their way more comfortable. neL. °' 
So by that they had gone a little further, a wind 
arose and drove away the fog, so the air became 
more clear. Yet they were not off, by much, of 
the Enchanted ground; only now they could see 
one another better, and the way wherein they 
should walk. 

Now when they were almost at the end of this 
ground, they perceived that a little before them 
was a solemn noise, as of one that was much con- 
cerned. So they went on, and looked before them ; 
and behold, they saw, as they thought, Standfast up _ 
a man upon his knees, with hands and ?? hl £ kn u ee Vj 

* the Enchanted 

eyes lifted up, and speaking, as they ground, 
thought, earnestly to one that was above. They 
drew nigh, but could not tell what he said ; so 
they went softly till he had done. When he had 
done, he got up, and began to run towards the 
Celestial city. Then Mr. Great-Heart called aftei 
him, saying, Soho, friend, let us have your com- 
pany, if you go, as I suppose you do, to the Celes- 



STANDFAST ON HIS KNEES. 465 

tial city. So the man stopped, and they came up 
to him. But as soon as Mr. Honest saw him, he 
said, I know this man. Then said Mr. Valiant-for- 
truth, Prithee, who is it ? It is one, said he, that 
comes from whereabout I dwelt. His name is 
The story of Standfast ; he is certainly a right good 

Standfast. p il grim . 

So they came up to one another ; and presently 

Standfast said to old Honest, Ho, father Honest, are 

Talk hetwixt you there? Aye, said he, that I am, 

him and Mr. J ■, t. • -, 

Honest. as sure as you are there. Right glad 

am I, said Mr. Standfast, that I have found you on 
this road. And as glad am I, said the other, that 
I espied you on your knees. Then Mr. Standfast 
blushed, and said, But why, did you see me ? 
Yes, that I did, quoth the other, and with my 
heart was glad at the sight. Why, what did you 
think? said Standfast. Think, said old Honest; 
what could I think ? I thought we had an honest 
man upon the road, and therefore should have his 
company by and by. If you thought not amiss, 
said Standfast, how happy am I ! But if I be 
not as I should, 'tis I alone must bear it. That 
is true, said the other ; but your fear doth further 
confirm me that things are right betwixt the 
Prince of pilgrims and your soul. For he saith, 
" Blessed is the man that feareth always." Prov. 
28 : 14. 

Valiant. Well, but, brother, I pray thee tell us 

Fil. Pro K . 30 



466 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

what was it that was- the cause of thy being upon 
thy knees even now : was it for that They folind 
some special mercy laid obligations him at P ra y er - 
upon thee, or how ? 

Stand. Why, we are, as you see, upon the En- 
chanted ground ; and as I was coming What it was 

° ' . ° that fetched him 

along,. I was musing with myself of upon Ms knees. 
what a dangerous nature the road in this place 
was, and how many that had come even thus far 
on pilgrimage had here been stopped and been de- 
stroyed. I thought also of the manner of the death 
with which this place destroyeth men. Those 
that die here, die of no violent distemper : the 
death which such die is not grievous to them. 
For he that goeth away in a sleep, begins that 
journey with desire and pleasure. Yea, such ac- 
quiesce in the will of that disease. 

Hon. Then Mr. Honest interrupting him, said, 
Did you see the two men asleep in the arbor ? 

Stand. Aye, aye, I saw Heedless and Too-bold 
there ; and for aught I know, there they will lie 
till they rot. Prov. 10 : 7. But let me go on with 
my tale. As I was thus musing, as I said, there 
was one in very pleasant attire, but old, who pre- 
sented herself to me, and offered me three things, 
to wit, her body, her purse, and her bed. Now 
the truth is, I was both weary and sleepy. I am 
also as poor as an owlet, and that perhaps the 
witch knew. Well, I repulsed her once and again. 



WHY STANDFAST PRAYS. 467 

but she put by my repulses, and smiled. Then I 
began to be angry ; but she mattered that nothing 
at all. Then she made offers again, and said, if I 
would be ruled by her, she would make me great 
and happy ; for, said she, I am the mistress of the 
world, and men are made happy by me. Then I 
asked her name, and she told me it was Madam 
Madam Bub- Bubble. This set me further from 

ble, or this vain 

world. her ; but she still followed me with en- 

ticements. Then I betook me, as you saw, to my 
knees, and with hands lifted up, and cries, I prayed 
to Him that had said he would help. So, just as 
you came up, the gentlewoman went her way. 
Then I continued to give thanks for this my great 
deliverance ; for I verily believe she intended no 
good, but rather sought to make stop of me in my 
journey. 

Hon. Without doubt her designs were bad. 
But stay, now you talk of her, methinks I either 
have seen her, or have read some story of her. 

Stand. Perhaps you have done both. 

Hon. Madam Bubble ! Is she not a tall, comely 
dame, somewhat of a swarthy complexion ? 

Stand. Right, you hit it : she is just such a 
one. 

Hon. Doth she not speak very smoothly, and 
give you a smile at the end of a sentence ? 

Stand. You fall right upon it again, for these 
are her very actions. 



468 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Hon. Doth she not wear a great purse by her 
side, and is not her hand often in it, fingering her 
money, as if that was her heart's delight? 

Stand. 'Tis just so ; had she stood by all this 
while, you could not more amply have set her forth 
before me, nor have better described her features. 

Hon. Then he that drew her picture was a good 
limner, and he that wrote of her said true. 

Great. This woman is a witch, and it is by 
virtue of her sorceries that this ground The world, 
is enchanted. Whoever doth lay his head down 
in her lap, had as good lay it down on that block 
over which the axe doth hang; and whoever lay 
their eyes upon her beauty are counted the enemies 
of God. This is she that maintaineth in their 
splendor all those that are the enemies of pilgrims. 
James 4 : 4. Yea, this is she that hath bought oft 
many a man from a pilgrim's life. She is a great 
gossiper ; she is always, both she and her daugh- 
ters, at one pilgrim's heels or another, now com- 
mending, and then preferring the excellencies of 
this life. She is a bold and impudent slut: she 
will talk with any man. She always laugheth 
poor pilgrims to scorn, but highly commends the 
rich. If there be one cunning to get money in a 
place, she will speak well of him from house to 
house. She loveth banqueting and feasting mainly 
well ; she is always at one full table or another. 
She has given it out in some places that she is a 



MADAM BUBBLE'S TEMPTATIONS. 4G9 

goddess, and therefore some do worship her. She 
has her time, and open places of cheating ; and 
she will say and avow it, that none can show a 
good comparable to hers. She promiseth to dwell 
with children's children, if they will but love her 
and make much of her. She will cast out of her 
purse gold like dust in some places and to some 
persons. She loves to be sought after, spoken well 
of, and to lie in the bosoms of men. She is never 
weary of commending her commodities, and she 
loves them most that think best of her. She will 
promise to some crowns and kingdoms, if they will 
but take her advice ; yet many hath she brought 
to the halter, and ten thousand times more to hell. 

Stand. Oh, said Standfast, what a mercy is it 
that I did resist her ; for whither might she have 
drawn me ! 

Great. Whither ? nay, none but God knows 
whither. But in general, to be sure, she would 
have drawn thee into many foolish and hurtful 
lusts, which drown men in destruction and per- 
dition. 1 Tim. 6:9. 'T was she that set Absalom 
against his father, and Jeroboam against his mas- 
ter. 'Twas she that persuaded Judas to sell his 
Lord; and that prevailed with Demas to forsake 
the godly pilgrim's life. None can tell of the 
mischief that she doth. She makes variance be- 
twixt rulers and subjects, betwixt parents and 
children, betwixt neighbor and neighbor, betwixt 



470 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

a man and his wife, betwixt a man and himself ; 
betwixt the flesh and the spirit. Wherefore, good 
Mr. Standfast, be as your name is, and when you 
have done all, stand. 

At this discourse there was among the pilgrims 
a mixture of joy and trembling ; but at length they 
broke out and sung, 

"What danger is the pilgrim in! 
How many are his foes ! 
How many ways there are to sin 
No living mortal knows. 

Some in the ditch are spoiled, yea., can 

Lie tumbling in the mire ; 
Some, though they shun the frying-pan, 

Do leap into the fire." 

After this, I beheld until they were come into 
the land of Beulah, where the sun shineth night 
and day. Here, because they were weary, they 
betook themselves a while to rest. And because 
this country was common for pilgrims, and because 
the orchards and vineyards that were here belonged 
to the King of the Celestial country, therefore they 
were licensed to make bold with any of his things. 
But a little while soon refreshed them here ; for 
the bells did so ring, and the trumpets continually 
sound so melodiously, that they could not sleep, 
and yet they received as much refreshing as if 
they had slept their sleep ever so soundly. Here 
also all the noise of them that walked the streets 



THE LAND OF BEULAH. 471 

was, More pilgrims are come to town! And 
another would answer, saying, And so many went 
over the water, and were let in at the golden gates 
to-day! They would cry again, There is now a 
legion of shining ones just come to town, by which 
we know that there are more pilgrims upon the 
road ; for here they come to wait for them, and to 
comfort them after all their sorrow. Then the 
pilgrims got up, and. walked to and fro. But how 
were their ears now filled with heavenly noises, 
and their eyes delighted with celestial visions ! 
In this land they heard nothing, saw nothing, felt 
nothing, smelt nothing, tasted nothing that was 
offensive to their stomach or mind ; only when 
they tasted of the water of the river over which 
Death bitter they were to go, they thought that it 
to the flesh, but taste( i a ii tt i e bitterish to the palate ; 

sweet to the i ' 

soul. but it proved sweeter when it was 

down. 

In this place there was a record kept of the 
names of them that had been pilgrims of old, and 
a history of all the famous acts that they had done. 
Death has its It was here also much discoursed, how 
flSg S s,iikethe the river to some had had its flowings 
tide - and what ebbings it has had while 

others have gone over. It has been in a manner 
dry for some, while it has overflowed its banks for 
others. 

In this place the children of the town would go 



472 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

into the King's gardens, and gather nosegays foi 
the pilgrims, and bring them to them with much 
affection. Here also grew camphire, with spike- 
nard and saffron, calamus and cinnamon, with all 
the trees of frankincense, myrrh, and aloes, with 
all chief spices. With these the pilgrim's cham- 
bers were perfumed while they stayed here ; and 
with these were their bodies anointed, to prepare 
them to go over the river, when the time appoint- 
ed was come. 

Now, while they lay there, and waited for the 
good hour, there was a noise in the town that there 
was a post come from the Celestial city, with mat- 
ter of great importance to one Chris- a messenger 

° A m of death sent to 

tiana, the wife of Christian the pilgrim. Christiana. 
So inquiry was made for her, and the house was 
found out where she was. So the post presented 
her with a letter. The contents were, Hail, good 
woman; I bring thee tidings that the His message. 
Master calleth for thee, and expecteth that thou 
shouldst stand in his presence in clothes of immor- 
tality within these ten days. 

"When he had read this letter to her, he gave her 
therewith a sure token that he was a true messen- 
ger, and was come to bid her make haste to be gone. 
The token was, an arrow with a point sharpened 
with love let easily into her heart, which by de- 
grees wrought so effectually with her, that at the 
time appointed she must be gone. 



HER PARTING ADVICE. 473 

When Christiana saw that her time was come, 

How welcome and that she was the first of this coin- 
death is to them 
that have noth- pany that was to go over, she called 

die. ° for Mr. Great-Heart her guide, and told 

him how matters were. So he told her he was 
heartily glad of the news, and could have been 
glad had the post come for him. Then she bid 
Her speech to him that he should give advice how all 
her guide. things should be prepared for her jour- 

ney. So he told her, saying, Thus and thus it 
must be, and we that survive will accompany you 
to the river-side. 

Then she called for her children, and gave them 
To her children, her blessing, and told them that she 
had read with comfort the mark that was set in 
their foreheads, and was glad to see them with her 
there, and that they had kept their garments so 
white. Lastly, she bequeathed to the poor that 
little she had, and commanded her sons and daugh- 
ters to be ready against the messenger should come 
for them. 

When she had spoken these words to her guide, 
To Mr.Vaiiant- an( l to her children, she called for Mr. 
for-truth. Valiant-for-truth, and said unto him, 

Sir, you have in all places showed yourself true- 
hearted ; be faithful unto death, and my King will 
give you a crown of life. Rev. 2:10. I would 
also entreat you to have an eye to my children ; 
and if at any time you see them faint, speak com- 



474 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

fortably to them. For my daughters, my sons' 
wives, they have been faithful, and a fulfilling of 
the promise upon them will be their end. But she 
gave Mr. Standfast a ring. To Mr. standfast- 

Then she called for old Mr. Honest, and said of 
him, "Behold an Israelite indeed, in To old Honest. 
whom is no guile!" John 1 :47. Then said he, 
I wish you a fair day when you set out for mount 
Sion, and shall be glad to see that you go over the 
river dry-shod. But she answered, Come wet, 
come dry, I long to be gone ; for however the weath- 
er is in my journey, I shall have time enough 
when I come there to sit down and rest me and 
dry me. 

Then came in that good man Mr. Ready-to-halt, 
to see her. So she said to him, Thy To Mr. Ready 
travel hitherto has been with difficulty ; t0 - halt - 
but that will make thy rest the sweeter. Watch, 
and be ready, for at an hour when ye think not, the 
messenger may come. 

After him came Mr. Despondency and his daugh- 
ter Much-afraid, to whom she said, You To Mr. De- 

i ■ ^ i -i r i r spondency and 

ought, with tnankiulness, lor ever to his daughter. 
remember your deliverance from the hands of Giant 
Despair, and out of Doubting Castle. The effect 
of that mercy is, that you are brought with safety 
hither. Be ye watchful, and cast away fear ; be 
sober, and hope to the end. 

Then she said to Mr. Feeble-mind, Thou wast 



SHE PASSES THE RIVER. 476 

delivered from the mouth of Giant Slay-good, that 
To Mr. Feeble- ' tnou lightest live in the light of the 
mind - living, and see thy King with comfort. 

Only I advise thee to repent of thine aptness to 
fear and doubt of his goodness, before he sends 
for thee; lest thou shouldst, when he comes, be 
forced to stand before him for that fault with 
blushing. 

Now the day drew on that Christiana must be 
Her last day, gone. So the road was full of people 

and manner of • . . -r» -f 

departure. to see her take her journey. But be- 

hold, all the banks beyond the river were full of 
horses and chariots, which were come down from 
above to accompany her to the city gate. So she 
came forth, and entered the river, with a beckon 
of farewell to those that followed her. The last 
words that she was heard to say were, I come, Lord, 
to be with thee and bless thee! So her children 
and friends returned to their place, for those that 
waited for Christiana had carried her out of their 
sight. So she went and called, and entered in at 
the gate with all the ceremonies of joy that her 
husband Christian had entered with before her. 
At her departure, the children wept. But Mr. 
Great-Heart and Mr. Valiant played upon the well- 
tuned cymbal and harp for joy. So all departed 
to their respective places. 

Mr. Ready-to- ^ n P r °cess of time there came a post 
halt summoned. ^ fae town ajrain, and his business 



476 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

wa,s with Mr. Ready-to-halt. So he inquired him 
out, and said, I am come from Him whom thou 
hast loved and followed, though upon crutches ; 
and my message is to tell thee, that he expects thee 
at his table to sup with him in his kingdom, the 
next day after Easter ; wherefore prepare thyself 
for this journey. Then he also gave him a token 
that he was a true messenger, saying, " I have 
broken thy golden bowl, and loosed thy silver cord." 
Eccles. 12:6. 

After this, Mr. Ready-to-halt called for his fel- 
low-pilgrims, and told them, saying, I am sent for, 
and God shall surely visit you also. So he desired 
Mr. Valiant to make his will. And because he had 
nothing to bequeath to them that should survive 
him but his crutches, and his good Promises, 
wishes, therefore thus he said, These crutches I 
bequeath to my son that shall tread in His will, 
my steps, with a hundred warm wishes that he may 
prove better than I have been. Then he thanked 
Mr. Great-Heart for his conduct and kindness, and 
so addressed himself to his journey. When he 
came to the brink of the river, he said, Now I 
shall have no more need of these crutches, since 
yonder are chariots and horses for me to ride on. 
The last words he was heard to say were, His last words. 
Welcome life ! So he went his way. 

After this, Mr. Feeble-mind had tid- Feeble-mind 
mgs brought him that the post sound- summoned - 



FEEBLE. MIND SUMMONED. 477 

ed his horn at his chamber-door. Then he came in, 
and told him, saying, I am come to tell thee that 
thy Master hath need of thee, and that in a very 
little time thou must behold his face in brightness. 
And take this as a token of the truth of my mes- 
sage : "Those that look out at the windows shall 
be°darkened." Eccles. 12:3. Then Mr. Feeble- 
mind called for his friends, and told them what 
errand had been brought unto him, and what token 
he had received of the truth of the message. Then 

He makes no he Said > SinCe l haVe nothing to be- 

wiU - queath to any, to what purpose should 

I make a will? As for my feeble mind, that I 
will leave behind me, for that I shall have no need 
of in the place whither I go, nor is it worth be- 
stowing upon the poorest pilgrims: wherefore, 
when I am gone, I desire that you, Mr. Valiant, 
would bury it in a dunghill. This done, and the 
day being come on which he was to depart, he 
His last words, entered the river as the rest. His last 
words were, Hold out, faith and patience ! So he 
went over to the other side. 

When days had many of them passed away, Mr. 

Mr.Desponde n - I)eS P 0ndenC y WES Sent f ° r '> { ° V * P° St 

«y summoned. was comej and brought this message to 
him : Trembling man, these are to summon thee 
to be ready with the King by the next Lord's day, 
to shout for joy for thy deliverance from all thy 
doubtings. And, said the messenger, that my 



478 PILGMLIM'S PROGRESS. 

message is true, take this for a proof: so he gave 
him a grasshopper to be a burden unto him. Eccles 
12:5. 

Now Mr. Despondency's daughter, whose name 
was Much-afraid, said, when she heard Hisdau«ht<K 
what was done, that she would go with g° est0 °- 
her father. Then Mr. Despondency said to his 
friends, Myself and my daughter, you know what 
we have been, and how troublesomely we have 
behaved ourselves in every company. My will 
and my daughter's is, that our desponds His win. 
and slavish fears be by no man ever received, from 
the day of our departure, for ever ; for I know that 
after my death they will offer themselves to others. 
For, to be plain with you, they are ghosts which 
we entertained when we first began to be pilgrims, 
and could never shake them off after; and they 
will walk about, and seek entertainment of the 
pilgrims : but for our sakes, shut the doors upon 
them. When the time was come for them to de- 
part, they went up to the brink of the river. The 
last words of Mr. Despondency were, His last words. 
Farewell, night; welcome, day! His daughter 
went through the river singing, but none could un- 
derstand what she said. 

Then it came to pass a while after, that there 
was a post in the town that inquired for Mr. Hon- 
est. So he came to the house where Mr Honesl; 
he was, and delivered to his hand these su""* 1011 ^- 



MR. HONEST SUMMONED. 479 

lines : Thou art commanded to be ready against this 
day sevennight, to present thyself before thy Lord 
at his Father's house. And for a token that my 
message is true, "All the daughters of music shall 
be brought low." Eccles. 12:4. Then Mr. Hon- 
He makes no est ca ^ e( i f° r ms friends, and said unto 
WiU - them, I die, but shall make no will. 

As for my honesty, it shall go with me ; let him 
that comes after be told of this. When the day 
that he was to be gone was come, he addressed 
himself to go over the river. Now the river at 
that time overflowed its banks in some places ; but 
Good-conscience Mr. Honest, in his lifetime, had spoken 

helps Mr. Honest ■ r 

over the river, to one Good-conscience to meet him 
there, the which he also did, and lent him his hand, 
and so helped him over. The last words of Mr. 
Honest were, Grace reigns ! So he left the world. 
After this it was noised abroad that Mr. Valiant- 
Mr. Valiant- for-truth was taken with a summons 

for-truth sum- 

moned. by the same post as the other, and had 

this for a token that the summons was true, 
That " his pitcher was broken at the fountain." 
Eccles. 12:6. When he understood it, he called 
for his friends, and told them of it. Then said he, 
I am going to my Father's ; and though with gieat 
difficulty I have got hither, yet now I do not repent 
me of all the trouble I have been at to arrive 
where I am. My sword I give to him that shall 
His will, succeed me in my pilgrimage, and my 



480 PILGRIM'S PROG-RESS. 

courage and skill to him that can get it. My marks 
and scars I carry with me, to be a witness for me 
that I have fought His battles who will now be my 
rewarder. "When the day that he must go hence 
was come, many accompanied him to the river- 
side, into which as he went, he said, " Death, 
where is. thy sting?" And as he went down 
deeper, he said, " Grave, where is thy His last words. 
victory ?" 1 Cor. ] 5 : 55. So he passed over, and 
all the trumpets sounded for him on the other side. 
Then there came forth a summons for Mr. Stand- 
fast. This Mr. Standfast was he whom Mr gtandfast 
the rest of the pilgrims found upon his summoned - 
knees in the Enchanted ground. And the post 
brought it him open in his hands : the contents 
thereof were, that he must prepare for a change 
of life, for his Master was not willing that he 
should be so far from him any longer. At this 
Mr. Standfast was put into a muse. Nay, said the 
messenger, you need not doubt of the truth of my 
message ; for here is a token of the truth thereof, 
"Thy wheel is broken at the cistern." Eccles. 
12:6. Then he called to him Mr. He calls for Mr. 
Great-Heart, who was their guide, and GreatIleart - 
said unto him, Sir, although it was not His speech t0 
my hap to be much in your good com- him - 
pany during the days of my pilgrimage, yet, since 
the time I knew you, you have been profitable to 
me. When I came from home, I left behind me a 



STANDFAST'S LAST WORDS. 481 

wife and five small children ; let me entreat you, 
at your return, for I know that you go and return 
to your Master's house, in hopes that you may yet 
be a conductor to more of the holy pilgrims, that 
His errand to vou send to m y family, and let them 

his family. be acqua j nte( l wit h all that hath an( j 

shall happen unto me. Tell them moreover of mv 
happy arrival at this place, and of the present and 
late blessed condition I am in. Tell them also of 
Christian and Christiana his wife, and how she and 
her children came after her husband. Tell them 
also of what a happy end she made, and whither 
she is gone. I have little or nothing to send to 
my family, unless it be prayers and tears for them ; 
of which it will suffice that you acquaint them, if 
peradventure they may prevail. When Mr. Stand- 
fast had thus set things in order, and the time being 
come for him to haste him away, he alsj went 
down to the river. Now there was a great calm 
at that time in the river ; wherefore Mr. Standfast, 
when he was about half-way in, stood a while, 
and talked with his companions that had waited 
upon him thither. And he said, This river has 
His last words, been a terror to many ; yea, the thoughts 
of it also have often frightened me ; but now me- 
thinks I stand easy; my foot is fixed upon that on 
which the feet of the priests that bare the ark of 
the covenant stood while Israel went over Jordan. 
Josh. 3:17. The waters indeed are to the palate 

PH. Prog. 31 



482 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

bitter, and to the stomach cold ; yet the thoughts 
of what I am going to, and of the convoy that waits 
for me on the other side, do lie as. a glowing coal 
at my heart. I see myself now at the end of my 
journey ; my toilsome days are ended. I am going 
to see that head which was crowned with thorns, 
and that face which was spit upon for me. I have 
formerly lived by hearsay and faith ; but now I go 
where I shall live by sight, and shall be with Him 
in whose company I delight myself. I have loved 
to hear my Lord spoken of ; and wherever I have 
seen the print of his shoe in the earth, there I have 
coveted to set my foot too. His name has been to 
me as a civet-box ; yea, sweeter than all perfumes. 
His voice to me has been most sweet, and his 
countenance I have more desired than they that 
have most desired the light of the sun. His words 
I did use to gather for my food, and for antidotes 
against my faintings. He hath held me, and hath 
kept me from mine iniquities ; yea, my steps hath 
he strengthened in his way. 

Now, while he was thus in discourse, his counte- 
nance changed ; his strong man bowed under him : 
and after he had said, Take me, for I come unto 
thee, he ceased to be seen of them. 

But glorious it was to see how the open region 
was filled with horses and chariots, with trumpet- 
ers and pipers, with singers and players upon 
stringed instruments, to welcome the pilgrims as 



THE AUTHOR'S FAREWELL. 483 

they went up, and followed one another in at the 
beautiful gate of the city. 

As for Christiana's children, the four boys that 
Christiana brought, with their wives and children, 
I did not stay where I was till they were gone 
over. Also, since I came away, I heard one say 
that they were yet alive, and so would be for the 
increase of the church, in that place where they 
were, for a time. 

Should it be my lot to go that way again, I may 
give those that desire it an account of what I here 
am silent about : meantime I bid my reader 

FAREWELL. 



THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY 

IPilIiIIaA the fallacuuijjj amaiiQ atlze^ 
uiafkA ada/ztecL ta JPiiq-aJJ-e^L fcu L tha 

BUNYAN'S PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

DODDRIDGE'S RISE AND PROGRESS OF RELIGION 

IN THE SOUL. 

PIKE'S PERSUASIVES TO EARLY PIETY, GUIDE 

FOR YOUNG DISCIPLES, AND RELIGION AND 

ETERNAL LIFE. 

BAXTER'S SAINTS' REST, AND CALL TO THE 
UNCONVERTED. 

ALLEINE'S ALARM. 

JAMES' ANXIOUS INQUIRER, AND CHRISTIAN 
PROGRESS. 

PRACTICAL PIETY, by Hannah More. 

WILBERFORCE'S PRACTICAL VIEW OF CHRIS- 
TIANITY. 

FOSTER'S APPEAL TO THE YOUNG. 
JAY'S CHRISTIAN CONTEMPLATED. 

SHERMAN'S GUIDE TO AN ACQUAINTANCE 

WITH GOD. 

THE SPRING-TIME OF LIFE, by Dr. Magie. 

WHY DO I LIVE? by Rev. Thomas Smyth, D. D. 

COME TO JESUS; CALL TO PRAYER; YOUR 

SOUL— IS IT SAFE? 

FOR SALE AT THE SOCIETY'S DEPOSITORIES, AND 
IN MANY CITIES AND TOWNS. 



WaLiLaLLe. jHclullclLs. fat c the Jacket 
and $LoAe.t. 



BOGATZKY'S GOLDEN TREASURY ; CLARKE'S 
SCRIPTURE PROMISES; DAILY SCRIPTURE EX- 
POSITOR; SUMMARY OF SCRIPTURE TRUTH; 
MASON'S SELECT REMAINS. 

ADVICE TO A MARRIED COUPLE ; GIFT FOR 
MOURNERS; PORTEUS' EVIDENCES; BOOK OF 
PROVERBS; PASTOR'S COUNSEL; THE FAITHFUL 
PROMISER ; CECIL'S MORNING PORTION. 

DIARY, (daily texts interleaved;) McCHEYNE'S 
GEMS; GEMS OF SACRED POETRY; THREEFOLD 
CORD ; PROVISION FOR PASSING OVER JORDAN, 
by Dr. Scudder; DAILY FOOD FOR CHRISTIANS; 
MASON'S CRUMBS; CHAPLET OF FLOWERS; 
HEAVENLY MANNA. 

DAILY TEXTS ; MILK FOR BABES ; THE LORD'S 
SUPPER ; DEW-DROPS. 



PUBLISHED AND FOR SALE BY 

THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU-STREET, NEW YORK ; 

ALSO 

AT 929 CHESTNUT-STREET, PHILADELPHIA, AND 
IN OTHER PRINCIPAL CITIES AND TOWNS. 



gPtandafd tactical flWafikA af the 
S^euc/ztee/it/i $cfitiu c ij_. 

BAXTER'S SAINTS' BEST, 12mo 60 cts. 

" -- 18mo 40 M 

TREATISE ON CONVERSION, 12mo 50 " 

REFORMED PASTOR,- " 45 " 

CALL TO UNCONVERTED--- 18mo 15 " 

DYING THOUGHTS, " 15 » 

LIFE, " 15 " 

FLAVEL'S REDEMPTION, singly or in a set of 3 vols., viz: 

FOUNTAIN OF LIFE, 55 cts. 

METHOD OF GRACE, 55 " 

CnRIST KNOCKING AT THE DOOR, 50 " 

FLAVEL ON KEEPING THE HEART, - 15 " 

FLAVEL'S TOUCHSTONE, 15 " 

BUNYAN'S TILGRIM'S PROGRESS, 12mol 00 

18mo 40 

RICHES OF BUNYAN, 12mo 55 

ALLEINE'S HEAVEN OPENED, " 50 

" ALARM TO T1IE UNCONVERTED, 18mo 15 
BISHOP HALL'S CONTEMPLATIONS OF SCRIP- 
TURE HISTORY, 55 

BP. HOPKINS ON THE TEN COMMANDMENTS,- 50 
OWEN ON FORGIVENESS, an exposition of Psa. 130, 50 



THE ABOVE, WITH MANY OTHER STANDARD 
WORKS, PRACTICAL AND BIOGRAPHICAL, ARE 
SOLD IN LIBRARIES OR IN SEPARATE VOLUM 
AT THE SOCIETY'S HOUSE, 150 NASSAU-STREET, 
NEW YORK; ALSO AT 929 CHESTNUT-STREET, 
PHILADELPHIA; AT THE SOCIETY'S AGENCIES IN 
ROCHESTER, CINCINNATI, CHICAGO, ST. LOUIS, 
NEW ORLEANS, BALTIMORE, AND CHARLESTON, 
AND BY BOOKSELLERS IN THE PRINCIPAL CITIES 
AND TOWNS. 

LffBM/?8 



-J 



Deacidified using the Bookkeeper process. 
Neutralizing agent: Magnesium Oxide 
Treatment Date: Feb. 2009 

PreservationTechnologies 

A WORLD LEADER IN COLLECTIONS PRESERVATION 
111 Thomson Park Drive 
Cranberry Township, PA 16066 
(724)779-2111 



LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 





014 114 980 5 



