^^ PRINCETON, N. J. *^ 



Presented 



by:^^rA 0\ CI\ .\>$oocX'r\\A\\ , vc\ : 



PR 3330 .Al 

Bunyan, John, 1628-1688 

The pilgrim's progress 



THE 



riLGRIM'S PROGRESS 



THIS WORLD TO THAT WHICH IS TO COME 

DELIVERED 

UNDER THE SIMILITUDE OF A DREAM. 

y 

BY JOHN BUNYAN. 




w> 



PUBLISHED BY THE 
AMERICAX TRACT SOCIETY, 

130 XASSAU-STREET, NEW YORK 



Great pains have been taken in collating this 
edition with other copies, in order to render it a 
correct reprint of the original work. The original 
side-notes, which often throw much light on the text, 
have been preserved. 



CONTENTS. 



The Life of Bunyan, or G race Abounding, ^) 

PART I. 

The First Stage. — Christian's deplorable condition— Evangelist di- 
rects him— Obstinate and Pliable— Slough of Despond— World- 
ly Wiseman — Mount Sinai — Conversation with Evangelist,- HI 

The Second Stage. — The Gate — Conversation with Good-will — The 
Interpreter's house — Christian entertained — The sights there 
shown him, - - - 168 

The Third Stage. — Loses his burden at the cross — Simple, Sloth, 
Presumption, Formalist, Hypocrisy — Hill Difficulty — The Ar- 
bor — Misses his roll — The palace Beautiful — The liens — Talk 
with Discretion, Piety, Prudence, and Charity — Wonders shown 
to Christian — He is armed, - 189 

The Fourth Stage.^ — Valley of Humiliation — Conflict with Apolly- 
on — Valley of the Shadow of Death — Giants Pope and Pagan, 210 

The Fifth Stage. — Discourse with Faithful — Talkative and Faith- 
ful — Talkative's character, 237 

The Sixth Stage. — Evangelist overtakes Christian and Faithful — 
Vanity fiir — The Pilgrims brought to trial — Faithful's martyr- 
dom, — - - 270 

The Seventh Stage. — Christian and Hopeful — By-ends and his com- 
panions — Plain of Ease — Lucre-hill — Demas — The river of life — 
Vain-confidence — Giant Despair — The pilgrims beaten — Tlic 
Dungeon — The Key of Promise, — — 2^)1 

The Eighth Stage.— The Delectable mouutains^Entertained by 
the Shepherds — A by-way to hell. - - 32G 

The Ninth Stage. — Christian and Hopeful meet Ignorance — Turn- 
away— Little-faith— The Flatterer— The net— Chastised by a 
shining One — Atheist — Enchanted ground — Hopeful's account 
of his conversion— Discourse of Chi-istian and Ignorance, — 333 



4 CONTENTS. 

The Tenth Stage. — Talk of Christian and Hopeful — Temporary - 
The Backslider— The land of Beulah— Christian, and Hopeful 
pass the river — Welcome to the celestial city, 377 

PART II. 

Pilgrimage of Christiana and her children, 413 

The First Stage. — Christiana and Mercy— Slough of Despond — 
Knocking at the gate — The dog — Talk between the pilgrims, 433 

The Second Stage. — The devil's garden — Two ill-favored ones as- 
sault them — The Eelicver — Entertainment at the Interpreter's 
house — The Significant rooms — Christiana and Mercy's experi- 
ence, - 447 

The Third Stage. — Accompanied by Great-heart — The cross— justi- 
fied by Christ — Sloth and his companions hung — The hill Diffi- 
culty—The arbor, - 473 

The Fourth Stage. — Tlie lions — Giant Grim slain by Great-heart — ■ 
The pilgrims entertained — The children catechized by Prudence 
— Mr. Brisk — Matthew sick — The remedy — sights shown the pil- 
grims, - 488 

The Fifth Stage. — Valley of Humiliation — Valley of the Shadow of 
Death— Giant Maul slain, 5-0 

The Sixth Stage. — Discourse with Old Honest— Character and his- 
tory of Mr. Fearing — Mr. Self-will and some professors — Gains' 
house — Conversation — The supper— Old Honest and Great-heart's 
riddles and discourse — Giant Slay-good killed — Blr. Feeble-mind's 
history — Mr. Ready-to-halt — Vanity fair — Mr. Mnason's house — 
cheering entertainment and converse — A monster, 538 

The Seventh Stage. — Hill Lucre — River of Life — Giant Despair 
killed — The Delectable mountains — Entertainment by the Shep- 
herds, - - 595 

The Eighth Stage. — Valiant-for-truth's victory — His talk with 
Great-heart — The Enchanted ground — Heedless and Too-bold — • 
Mr. Standfast — Madam Bubble's Temptations — The land of Beu- 
lah — Christiana summoned — her parting addresses — She passes 
the river — She is followed by Read3'-to-halt, Feeble-mind, De- 
spondency and his daughter, Honest, Valiant, and Steadfast, 612 



LIFE Of 




THE AUTHOR TO THOSE WHOM GOD HATH COUNTED 
HIM WORTHY TO BEGET TO FAITH BY HIS MIN- 
ISTRY IN THE WORD. 

CniLnREX, g-raco bo with yon. Amen. I being taken 
fn^ii YOU in presence, and so tied up that I cannot per- 
form that duty that from God doth lie upon nic to you- 
ward, for j^our further edification and building- up in faith 
and holiness, yet, that you may see my soul hath father- 
ly care and desire after your spiritual and everlasting- 
welfare, I now once agahi, as before "from the top of 
Shenir and Ilermon." ^o now "from the lions' den, and 
from the mountain of the leopards," do look after you all, 
i^reatly longing- to see your safe arrival into the desired 
haven. Song- 4 : 8. 

I thank God upon ever}' remembrance of j-ou ; and 
rejoice even while I stick between the teeth of the lions 
in the wilderness, that the grace and mercy and know-^ 
ledge of Christ our Saviour, which God hath bestowed 
upon you with abundance of faith and love, j^our hun- 
gerings and thirstings after further acquaintance with 
tlie Father in the Son, your tenderness of heart, your 
trembling at sin, your sober and holy deportment also. 



G LIFE OF EUNYAN. 

before l)otli God and men, is a great refreshment to me^ 
for YOU are my glory and joy. 1 Thess. 2 : 20. 

1 liave sent you here iuchised a drop of that honey 
lliat I liave taken out of the carcass of a lion. Judg. 
14 : 5-8. 1 have eaten thereof myself, and am much re- 
i.-csh^d thereby. Temptations, when we meet them at 
first, are as the lion that roared upon Samson ; but if we 
overcome them, tlie next time we see them we shall find 
a nest of honey within them. The Philistines understand 
me not. It is something of a relation of the work of God 
upon my sold, even from the very first till now, wherein 
you may perceive my castings down and risings up ; for 
he woundeth, and his hands make whole. It is written 
in the Scripture, The father to the children shall make 
known the truth of God. Yea, it was for this reason I 
lay so long at Sinai, to see the fire, and the cloud, and 
the darkness, that I might fear the Lord all the days of 
my life upon earth, and tell of his wondrous works to my 
children. Isa. 38 : 19 ; Exod. 24 : 15-18 ; Psa. 78 : 3-5. 

Moses wrote of the journeyings of the children of 
Israel from Egypt to the land of Canaan ; and command- 
ed also that they did remember their forty years' travel 
in the wilderness. "Thou shalt remember all the way 
which the Lord thy God led thee tliese forty 3'ears in the 
wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, and to 
know what was in thy heart, whether thou wouldest keep 
his commandments or no." Num. 33 : 1, 2 ; Deut. 8 : 2. 
Wherefore, this I have endeavored to do ; and not only 
so, but to publish it also, that, if God will, others ma}' 
be put in remembrance- of what he hath done for their 
souls, by reading his work upon mc. 

It is profitable for Christians to be often calling to 
mind the very beginnings of grace with their souls. "It 
is a night to be much observed unto the Lord, for bring- 
ing them out from the land of Egypt. This is that night 



INTRODUCTION. 7 

of the Lord to be observed of uli the children of Israel in 
tlieir generations." "My God," saitli David, "my sold is 
cast down within me; therefore will I remember thee 
from the land of Jordan, and of the Ilermonites, IVom the 
hill Mizar." He remembered also the lion and the bear, 
when he went to fight with the giant of Gath. Exod. 
12 : 42 ; Psa. 42 : 6 ; I Sam. IT : 3G, 31 

It was Paul's accustomed manner, and that when 
tried for his life, even to open before his judges the man- 
ner of his conversion ; he would think of that day and 
that hour in which he first did meet with grace, for he 
found it supported him. When God had brought the 
children of Israel out of the Red sea far into the wilder- 
ness, yet they must turn quite about thither again, to re- 
member the drowning of their enemies there ; for though 
they sang his praise before, j^et they soon forgot his 
works. Acts, ch. 22, 26 ; Num. 14 : 25 ; Psa. 106 : 12. 

In this discourse of mine you may see much — much, 
I sa}'^, of the grace of God towards me : I thank God I 
can count it much, for it was above my sins and Satan's 
temptations too. I can remember my fears and doubts 
and sad months with comfort ; they are as the head of 
Goliath in my hand : there was nothing to David like 
Goliath's sword, even that sword that should have been 
sheathed in his bowels ; for the very sight and remem- 
brance of that did preach forth God's deliverance to him. 
the remembrance of my great sins, of my great temp- 
tations, and of my great fear of perishing for ever ! 
They bring afresh into my mind the remembrance of mj' 
g-reat help, my great supports from heaven, and the great 
grace that God extended to such a wretch as I. 

My dear children, call to mind the former days, and 
years of ancient times ; remember also your songs in the 
night, and commune with your own heart. Psa. 71 :5-I2. 
Yea, look dilitreiitlv, and leave no corner therein un- 



8 LIFE OF BFXYAN. 

searched for' that treasure hid, even the treasure of your 
first and second experience of th-e grace of God towards 
you. Komember, I say, the word that first laid hold upon 
you : remember your terrors of conscience, and fear of 
death and hell : remember also your tears and prayers to 
God ; yea, how you sighed under every hedge for mercy. 
Have yoti never a hill Mizar to remember ? Have you 
forgot the closet, the milk-house, the stable, the barn, and. 
the like, where God did visit your souls ? Remember 
also the word — the word, I say, upon which the Lord 
hath caused you to hope. If you have sinned against 
light, if you are tempted to blaspiieme, if you are drowned 
in despair, if you think God fights against you, or if heav- 
en is hid from your eyes, remember it was thus with your 
father ; but out of them all the Lord delivered me. 

I could have enlarged nmch, in this my discourse, of 
my temptations and troubles for sin, as also of the mer- 
ciful kindness and working of God with my soul ; I could 
also have stepped into a style much higher than this in 
which I have here discoursed, and could have adorned 
all things more than here I have seemed to do, but I dare 
not. God did not play in tempting me ; neither did I 
play when I sunk as into a bottomless pit, when the 
pangs of hell caught hold upon me ; wherefore I may 
not play in relating them, but be plain and simple, and 
lay down the thing as it was : he that liketh it, let him 
receive it ; and he that doth not, let him produce a better. 

Farewell, my dear children. The milk and honey are 
beyond this wilderness. God be merciful to you, and 
grant that you be not slothful to go in to posses the land. 

JOHN BUNYAN. 



BUNYAX S LIFE. 



CHAPTER I 



In this my relation of the merciful working of GuJ 
upon my soul, it will not be amiss if in the first place I 
do, in a few words, give you a hint of my pedigree and 
manner of bringing up ; that thereby the goodness and 
bounty of God towards me may be the more advanced 
and magnified before the sons of men. 

For my descent then, it was, as is well known by 
many, of a low and inconsiderable generation ; my fa- 
ther's house being of that rank that is meanest and most 
despised of all the families in the land. Wherefore I 
have not here, as others, to boast of noble blood, or of 
any high-born state according to the flesh, though, all 
things considered, I magnify the heavenly Majesty, for 
that by this door he brought me into this world, to par- 
take of the grace and life that is in Christ by the gospel. 
But yet, notwithstanding the meanness and inconsider- 
ableness of my parents, it pleased God to put it into 
their hearts to put me to school, to learn me both to 
read and write ; the which I also attained according to 
the rate of other men's children, though to my shame, I 
confess I did soon Ljse that little I learned, even almost 
utterly, and that long before the Lord did work his gra- 
cious work of conversion upon my soul. 
1* 



10 LIFE OF BUNYAX. 

As for my own natui-al life for the time that I was 
without God in the world, it was indeed "according to 
the course of this world," and "the spirit that now work- 
eth in the children of disobedience." Eph. 2:2, 3. It 
was my delight to be taken captive by the "devil at his 
will," 2 Tim. 2 : 26, being filled with all unrighteousness •, 
the which did also so strongly work and put forth itself 
both in my heart and life, and that from a child, that I 
had few equals, especially considering my j-ears, which 
were tender, for cursing, swearing, lying, and blasphem- 
ing the holy name of God. Yea, so settled and rooted 
was I in these things, that they became as a second 
nature to me ; the which, as I have also with soberness 
considered since, did so offend the Lord, that even in my 
childhood he did scare and aflfrighten me with fearful 
dreams, and did terrify me with fearful visions. For 
often, after I had spent this and the other day in sin, I 
have in my bed been greatly afflicted, while asleep, with 
the apprehensions of devils and wicked spirits, who still, 
as I then thought, labored to draw me away with them, 
of which I could never be rid. 

Also, I would at these years be greatly afflicted and 
troubled with the thoughts of the fearful torments of 
hell-fire ; still fearing that it would be my lot to be found 
at last among those devils and hellish fiends who are 
there bound down with the chains and bonds of darkness 
unto the judgment of the great day. These things, I 
say, when I was but a child but nine or ten years old, 
did so distress my soul, that then, in the midst of my 
many sports and childish vanities, amid my vain com- 
panions, I was often much cast down and afflicted in my 
mind therewith ; yet could I not let go my sins : yea, I 
was also then so overcome with despair of life and heav- 
en, that I would often wish, either that there had been 
no hell, or that I had been a devil — supposing devils were 



OR GRACE ABOUXDIXG. 11 

only tormentors — that if it must needs be that 1 went 
thitlier, I might be rather a tormentor than be tormented 
myself. 

A while after those terrible dreams did leave me, 
which also I soon forgot ; for my pleasures did quickly 
cut off the remembrance of them, as if they never had 
been ; wherefore, with more greediness, according to the 
strength of nature, I still let loose the reins of my lust, 
and delighted in all transgressions against the law of 
God ; so that until I came to the state of marriage, I 
was the very ringleader of all the youth that kept mc 
company, in all manner of vice and ungodliness. Yea, 
such prevalency had the lusts and fruits of the flesh on 
this poor soul of mine, that, had not a miracle of precious 
grace prevented, I had not only perished by the stroke of 
eternal justice, but had also laid myself open even to the 
stroke of those laws wdiich bring some to disgrace and 
open shame before the face of the world. 

In those days the thoughts of religion were very 
grievous to me : I could neither endure it myself, nor 
that any other should ; so that when I have seen some 
read in thcs-e books that concerned Christian piety, it 
would be as it were a prison to me. Then I said unto 
God, " Depart from me ; for I desire not the knowledge of 
thy way.s." Job 21 : 14, 15. I was now void of all good 
consideration ; heaven and hell were both out of sight 
and mind ; and as for saving and damning, they were 
least in my thoughts. Lord, thou knowest my life, 
and my ways were not hid from thee. 

But this I well remember, that tliough I could myself 
sin with the greatest delight and ease, and also take 
pleasure in the vileness of my companions, yet, even 
then, if 1 had at any time seen wicked things in those 
who professed goodness, it would make my spirit trem- 
ble. As, once above all the rest, when I was in the 



12 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

height of vanity, yet liearing one swear that was reck- 
oned for a religious man, it had so great a stroke upon 
my spirit that it made my heart ache. 

God did not utterly leave me, but followed me still, 
int with convictions, but judgments, yet such as were 
mixed with mercy. For once I fell into a creek of the 
sea, and hardly escaped drowning. Another time I fell 
out of a boat into Bedford river, but mercy yet preserv- 
ed me alive. Besides, another time being in the field 
with one of my companions, it chanced that an adder 
passed over the highway ; so I having a stick in my 
hand, struck her over the back, and having stuimed her, 
I forced open her mouth with my stick, and plucked her 
sting out with my fingers ; by which act, had not God 
been merciful unto me, I might by my desperateness 
have brought myself to my end. 

This also I have taken notice of, with thanksgiving : 
when I was a soldier, I with others was drawn out to go 
to such a place to besiege it ; but wlien I was just ready 
to go, one of the company desired to go in my room : to 
which when I had consented, he took my place ; and 
coming to the siege, as he stood sentinel he was shot in 
the head by a musket-ball, and died. Here, as I said, 
were judgments and mercy, but neither of them did awa- 
ken my soul to righteousness : wherefore I sinned still, 
and grew more and more rebellious against God, and 
cureless of my own salvation. 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 13 



CIIAPTEK II. 

Presently after this I changed my condition into a 
married state, and my mercy was to light upon a wile 
whose fatlier was counted godly. This woman and I, 
though we came together as poor as poor might be, not 
having so much household stuff as a dish or spoon be- 
tween us both, yet this she had for her part, "The Plain 
Man's Pathway to Heaven" and "The Practice of Piety," 
which her father had left her when ho died. In these two 
books I would sometimes read with her, wherein I also 
found some things that were somewhat pleasing to me ; 
but all this while I met with no conviction. She also 
would bo often telling me what a godly man her father 
was, and how he would reprove and correct vice, both 
in his house and among his neighbors ; and what a strict 
and holy life he lived in his daj's, both in words and deeds. 

Wherefore these books, with the relation, though they 
did not reach my heart to awaken it about my sad and 
sinful state, yet they did beget within me some desires 
to reform my vicious life and fall in very eagerly with 
the religi(m of the times, to wit, to go to church twice 
a day, and that too with the foremost ; and there I would 
very devoutly both say and sing as others did, yet re- 
taining my wicked life ; but withal I was so overrun 
with the spirit of superstition that I adored, and that 
with great devotion, even all things, both the high-place, 
priest, clerk, vestment, service, and what else belonging 
to the church — counting all things holy that were there- 
in contained, and especially the priest and clerk most 
happy, and without doubt greatly blessed, because they 
were the servants, as I then thought, of God, and were 
principal in the holy temple, to do his work therein. 



U BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

Tliis conceit grew so strong in a little time upon my 
spirit, that had 1 but seen a priest, though never so sor- 
did and debauched in his life, I should find my spirit fall 
under him, reverence him, and knit unto him ; yea, I 
thought, for the love I did bear unto them— supposing 
they were the ministers of God — I could have laid down 
at their feet, and have been trampled upon by them, 
their name, their garb, and work did so intoxicate and 
bewitch me. 

After I had been thus for some considerable time, 
another thought came into my mind, and that was wheth- 
er we were of the Israelites or no ; for finding in the 
Scriptures that they were once the peculiar people of 
God, thought I, if I were one of this race, my soul must 
needs be happy. Now again I found within me a great 
longing to be resolved about this question, but could not 
tell how I should ; at last I asked my father of it, wlio 
told me we were not. Wherefore then I fell in my spirit 
as to the hopeu of that, and so remained. But all this 
while I was not sensible of the danger and evil of sin ; I 
was kept from considering that sin would damn me, 
what religion soever I followed, unless I was found in 
Christ : nay, I never tliought of him, nor whether there 
was such a one or no. Thus man, while blind, doth won- 
der, but wearieth himself with vanity, for he knoweth 
not the way to the city of God. Ecclcs. 10 : 15. 

But one day, among all the sermons our parson made, 
his subject was to treat of thj Sahbath-day, and of the 
evil of breaking that, either with labor, sports, or other- 
wise. Now I was, notwithstanding my religion, ono 
that took much delight in all manner of vice, and espe- 
cially that was the day that I did solace myself there- 
with ; wherefore I fell in my conscience under this ser- 
mon, thinking and believing that he made that sermon 
on purpose to show me my evil-doing. And at that time 



OR GRACE ABOUXDIXCr. 15 

I felt what gniilt was, tlioug-li never before tliat I can 
remember; but then 1 was Inr the i)resent greatly load- 
ed tliercwitli, and so went home when tlie sermon was 
ended with a g-reat burden upon my spirit. 

This for that instant did benumb the sinews of my 
best delights, and imbitter my former pleasures to me ; 
but behold it lasted not, for before I had well dined, the 
trouble began to go oft' my mind, and my heart returned 
to its old course ; but Oh, how glad was I that this 
trouble was gone from me, and that the fire was put out, 
that I might sin again without control. Wherefore, when 
I had satisfied nature with my food, I shook the sermon 
out of my mind, and to my old custom of sports and 
gaming I returned with great delight. 

But the same day, as I was in the midst of a game of 
cat, and having struck it one blow from the hole, just as 
*I was about to strike it a second tiiiio, a voice did sud- 
denly dart from heaven into my soul, which said, "Wilt 
thou leave thy sins and go to heaven, or have thy sins 
and go to hell?" At tliis I was put to an exceeding 
maze ; wherefore, leaving my bat upon the ground, I 
looked up to heaven, and was as if I had with the ej^cs 
of my understanding seen the Lord Jesus looking down 
upon me, as being very hotly displeased with me, and as 
if ho did severely threaten me with some grievous pun- 
ishment for these and other ungodly practices. I had 
no sooner thus conceived in my mind, but suddenly this 
conclusion was fastened on my spirit, for the former hint 
did set my sins again before my face, that I had been a 
great and grievous sinner, and that it Avas now too lale 
for me to look after heaven, for Christ would not forgive 
me nor pardon my transgressions. Then I fell to musing 
on this also ; and while I was thinking of it, and fearing 
Iqst it should be so, I felt my heart sink in despair, con- 
cluding it was too late, and therefore I resolved in my 



IG BUXYAX'S LIFE, 

mind to go on in sin ; for, thought I, if the case be thus, 
ni}' state is surely miserable — miserable if I leave my 
sins, and but miserable if I follow them : I can but be 
damned ; and if it must be so, I had as good be damned 
for many sins as be damned for few. 

Thus I stood in the midst of my play before all that 
then were present, but yet 1 told them nothing : but, I 
say, having made this conclusion, I returned desperately 
to my sport again ; and I well remember, that presently 
this kind of despair did so possess my soul, that I was 
persuaded I could never attain to other comfort than 
what I should get in sin, for heaven was gone already, 
so that on that I must not think ; wherefore I found 
within me great desire to take my fill of sin, still study- 
ing what sin was yet to be committed, that I might 
taste the sweetness of it ; and I made as much haste as 
I could to fill my belly with its delicacies, lest I should' 
die before I had my desires, for that I feared greatly. 
In these things, I protest before God I lie not, neither do 
I frame this sort of speech ; these were really, strongly, 
and with all my heart, my desires. The good Lord, whose 
mercy is unsearchable, forgive my transgressions. And 
I am very confident that this temptation of the devil is 
more usual among poor creatures than many are aware 
of, even to overrun the spirits with a seared frame of 
heart" and benumbing of conscience ; which frame ho 
stilly and slily supplicth with such despair, that thougli 
no peculiar guilt resteth upon them, yet they continually 
have a secret conclusion within them that there is no 
hope for them, for they have loved sins, therefore after 
them they will go. Jer. 2 : 25 ; 18:12. 

Now therefore I went on in sin with great greediness 
of mind, still grudging that I could not be satisfied with 
it as I would. This continued with me about a month 
or more ; but one day, as I was standing at a neighbor's 



OR nil APE ABOrXDIXC:. IT 

shop-window, and there cursing and swearing and ph^y- 
ing the madman after my wonted manner, there sat 
within the woman of the house, and heard me, who, 
though she was a very loose and ungodly wretch, yet 
protested that I swore and cursed at that most fearful 
rate that she was made to tremble to hear me ; and told 
me further, that I was the ungodliest fellow for swearing 
that she ever heard in all her life, and that I by thus 
doing was able to spoil all the youth in the whole town, 
if they came but in my company. At this reproof I was 
silenced and put to secret shame, and that too, as I 
thought, before the God of heaven ; wherefore while I 
stood there hanging down my head, I wished with all 
my heart that I might be a little child again, that my 
father might learn me to speak without this wicked way 
of swearing ; for, thought I, I am so accustomed to it 
that it is in vain for me to think of reformation, for I 
thought that could never be. 

But — how it came to pass I know not — I did from 
this time forward so leave my swearing that it Avas a 
great wonder to myself to observe it ; and whereas be- 
fore I knew not how to speak unless I put an oath before 
and another behind to make my w'ords have authority, 
now I could without an oath speak better and with more 
pleasantness than ever I could before. All this while I 
knew not Jesus Christ, neither did I leave my sports and 
plays. But quickly after this I fell into company with 
one poor man that made profession of religion, who, as 
I then thought, did talk pleasantly of the Scriptures and 
of the matter of religion ; wherefore, falling into some 
love and liking to what he said, I betook nic to my Bible, 
and began to take great pleasure in reading, but espe- 
cially the historical part the,reof ; for as for Paul's epis- 
tles and such like scriptures I could not away with them, 
being as yet ignorant both of the corruption of our na- 



18 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

tiire and of llio want and worth of Jesus Christ to save 
ns : wherefore I fell to sonu; outward reforniation both 
in my words and life, and did set the commandments bo- 
fore mo for my way to heaven ; which commandments 
1 also did strive to keep, and as I thought did keep them 
jretty well sometimes, and then I would have comfort, 
yet now and then would break one, and so afflict my 
conscience ; but then I would rei)ent and say I was sorry 
for it, and promise God to do better next time, and there 
got help again, for then I thought I i)leased God as well 
as any man in England. 

Thus I continued about a year, all which time our 
neighbors did take me to be a ver}' godly man, a new 
and religious man, and did marvel much to see such 
great and famous alteration in my life and manners; 
and indeed so it was, though I Icnew not Christ, nor 
grace, nor faith, nor hope, for, as 1 have well since seen, 
had I then died my state had been most fearful. But, I 
say, my neighbors were amazed at this my great con- 
version from prodigious profaneness to something like a 
moral life ; and truly so they well might, for this my 
conversion was as great as for Tom of Bedlam to become 
a sober man. Now therefore tliey began to praise, to 
commend, and to speak well of me, both to my face and 
behind my back. Now I w^as, as they said, become god- 
ly — now I was become a right honest man. But Oh, 
when I understood those were their words and opinions 
of me, it pleased me mighty well, for though as yet I 
was nothing but a poor painted hypocrite, yet T loved to 
be, talked of as one that was truly godly. I was proud 
of my godliness, and indeed I did all I did eitlier to be 
seen or to be well spoken of by men ; and thus I contin- 
ued for about a twelvemonth or more. 



OH GRACE ABOLNDING. 19 



CHAPTER III. 

Now you must know, that before this I had taken 
iriUcli delig'ht in ringing; but my conscience beginnirig' 
to be tender, I thought such a practice was but vain, 
and therefore forced myself to leave it, yet my mind 
hankered ; v.dierefore I would go to the steeple-house and 
look on, though 1 durst not ring. But I thought this did 
not become religion neither, yet I forced myself, and 
would look on still ; but quickly after I began to think, 
how if one of the bells should fall ? Then I chose to 
stand under a main beam that lay overthwart the stee-. 
pie from side to side, thinking here I might stand sure ; 
but then I thought again, should the bell fall with a 
swing, it nn'ght first hit the wall, and then rebounding 
upon me, might kill me for all this beam. This made 
me stand in the steeple-door ; and now, thought I, I 
am safe enough, for if the bell should fall I can slip out 
behind these thick walls, and so be ])reserved notwith- 
standing. So after this I would yet go to see them ring, 
but would not go any further than the steeple-door ;,but 
then it came into my head, how if the steeple itself 
should fall ? And this thought — it may be for aught I 
know when I stood and looked on — did continually so 
shako my mind that I durst not stand at the steeple-door 
any longer, but was forced to flee for fear the steeple 
should fall upoujny head. 

< Another thing was my dancing: I was full a year 
before I could quite leave that. All this while, when I 
tiiought I kept this or that connnand, or did by word or 
deed any thing I thought Avas good, I had groat peace 
in my conscience, and would think with myself, God 
cannot clioose but be now ])leased with me ; yea, to 



20 BUXYAN'S LIFE, 

relate it in my own wa}^, I thought no man in England 
could please God better than I. But, poor wretch as I 
was, I was all this while ignorant of Jesus Christ, and 
going- about to establish my own righteousness, and had 
perished therein, had not God in mercy showed mc more 
of my state by nature. 

But upon a day the good providence of God called 
me to Bedford to work at my calling, and in one of the 
streets of that ti^wn 1 came where there were three or 
four poor won\en sitting at a door in the sun talking about 
the things of God : and being now willing to hear their 
discourse, I drew near to hear what they said, for I was 
now a brisk talker of myself in the matters of religion ; 
but I may say I heard, but understood not, for they were 
far above out of my reach. Their talk was about a new 
birth, the work of God in their hearts, as also how they 
were convinced of their miserable state by nature ; they 
talked how God had visited tlieir souls with his love in 
the Lord Jesus, and witli Avhat words and promises they 
had been refreshed, comforted, and supported against the 
temptations of the devil ; moreover, they reasoned of the 
suggestions and temptations of Satan in particular, and 
told to each other by what means they had been afflict- 
ed, and how they were borne up under his assaults. 
They also discoursed of their own wretchedness of heart 
and of their unbelief, and did contemn, slight, and abhor 
their own righteousness as filthy and insufficient to do 
them any good. 

And mcthought they spoke as if joy did make them 
speak ; they spoke with such pleasantness of scriptin-e 
language, and with such appearance of grace in all they 
said, that they -were to me as if they had found a new 
world — as if they were people that dwelt alone, and 
were not to be reckoned among their neighbors. At 
this I felt my own heart begin to shake and mistrust my 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 21 

conditio-) to 1)1? ii:iu;>-lit, fur I saw th;it in all iny tlioug-hts 
abi>ut n.'lig-ioii and salvation the now birth did ucvvr 
enter my mind, neither knew I the comfort of the word 
and promise, n )r the deceitfuhiess and treachery of iiiy 
own wicked heart. As for secret thoug-hts, I took no 
Dotice of them, neither did I understand what Satan's 
temptations were, nor how tliey were to be withstood 
and rosiatcd. 

Thus therefore, when I liad heard and considered 
what they said, I left them and went about my employ- 
ment again, but their talk and discourse wont with me ; 
also my heart would tarry with them, for I was greatly 
afifected with their words, both because by them I was 
convinced that I wanted the true tokens of a truly godly 
man, and also because by them I Avas convinced of the 
happy and blessed condition of him that was such a one. 
Therefore I would often make it my business to be going 
again and again into the company of these poor people, 
for I could not stay away ; and the more I wxmt among 
them, the more I did question my condition ; and as I 
still do remember, presently I found two things within^ 
me at which I did sometimes marvel, especially consid- 
ering what a blind, ignorant, sordid, and ungodly wretch 
but just before I was. The one was a very great soft- 
ness and tenderness of heart, which caused me to fall 
under the conviction of what by Scripture they assert- 
ed ; and the other was a great bending in my mind to a 
continual meditating on it and on all other good tilings 
which at any time I heard or read of. 

By these things my mind was now so turned that it 
Jay like a horse-leech at the vein, still crying out, Give, 
give. My mind was so fixed on eternity and on the 
things about the kingdom of heaven, that is, so far as I 
knew, though as yet God knows I knew but little, that 
neither pleasures, nor profits, nor persuasions, nor threats 



22 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

could loose it or make it let go its hold ; and though I 
may speak it with shame, yet it is in very deed a certain 
truth, it would then have been as difficult for me to have 
taken my mind from heaven to earth, as I have found it 
often since to get it again from earth to heaven. 

One thing I may not omit. There was a young man* 
in our town to whom my heart before was knit more 
than to any other ; but he being a most wicked creature 
for cursing and swearing and uncleanness, 1 now shook 
him off and forsook his company. About a quarter of a 
year after I had left him, I met him in a certain lane and 
asked him how he did. He after his old swearing and 
mad way answered he was well. " But, Harry," said I, 
"why do you curse and swear thus ? What will become 
of you if you die in this condition ?" He answered me in 
a great chafe, " What would the devil do for company, if 
it were not for such as 1 am ?"' 

About this time I me{ with some ranters' books that 
were put forth by some of our countrymen, which books 
were also highly in esteem by several old professors. 
Some of these I read, but was not able to make any 
judgment about them ; wherefore as I read in them and 
thought upon them, seeing myself unable to judge, I 
would betake myself to hearty prayer in this marnier : 

" Lord, I am a fool and not able to know the truth 
from error. Lord, leave me not to my own blindness, 
cither to approve of or condemn this doctrine. If it be 
of God, let me not despise it ; if it be of the devil, let 
me not embrace it. Lord, I lay my soul in this matter 
only at thy feet ; let me not be deceived, 1 hundily be- 
seech thee.'' 

1 had one religious companion all this while, and that 
was the p(jor man I spoke of before ; but about this time 
he also turned a most dev'ilish ranter, and gave himself 
up to all manner of filthiness, especially uncleanness : 



OR GRACE AbOUXDIXG. 23 

he would also deny tlmt there was a God, angel, or 
spirit, and would kuig-li at all exhortations to sobriety. 
When I labored to rebuke his wickedness, he would 
laugh the more, and pretend that ho had gone through 
all religions, and could never hit upon the right till no\Y 
Uo told me also, that in a little time I sViould see all pro- 
iessors tiu'n to the ways of the ranters. Wherefore, 
abominating those cursed principles, I left his company 
forthwith, and became to him as great a stranger as I 
had been before a familiar. 

Neither was this man only a temptation to me, but 
my calling lying in the country, I happened to come into 
several people's company, who though strict in religion 
formerly, yet were also drawn away by these ranters. 
These would also talk with mc of their ways, and con- 
demn mc as legal and dark, pretending that they only 
had attained to perfection, that they could do what they 
would and not sin. Oh, these temptations Avero suitable 
to my flesh, I being but a yoxing man and my nature in 
its prime ; but God, who had as I hoped designed me for 
better things, kept mo in the fear of his name, and did 
not suffer mc to accept such cursed principles. And 
blessed bo God, who put it into my heart to cry to him 
to be kept and directed, still distrusting mine own wis' 
dom, for I have since seen even the eficcts of that prayer 
in his ])reserving mc not only from ranting errors, but 
from those also that have sprung up since. The Bible 
was precious to me in those days. 

And now mothought I began to look into the Bible 
with new eyes, and read as I never did before ; and 
especially the epistles of the apostle Paul were sweet 
and pleasant to me ; and indeed, then I was never out of 
the Bible, either by reading or meditation, still crying 
out to God that I might know the truth and the way to 
heaven and glory. And as I went on and read, I hit 



24: BUNYANS LIFE, 

upon that passage, "To one is given by the Spirit the 
word of wisdom ; to another, the word of knowledge by 
the same Spirit ; to another, faith," etc. 1 Cor. 12:8, 9. 
And though 1 have since seen that by this scripture the 
Holy Ghost intends in special things extraordinary, yet 
on me it did then fasten with conviction that I did want 
things ordinary, oven that understanding and wisdom 
that other Christians had. On this word I mused, and 
could not tell what to do ; especially this word faith put 
me to it, for I could not help it, but sometimes must 
question whether I had any faith or no ; but I was loath 
to conclude I had no faith, for if I do so, thought I, then 
I shall count myself a very castaway indeed. 

No, said 1 with myself, though I am convinced that I 
ani an ignorant sot, and that I want those blessed gifts 
of knowledge and understanding that other people have, 
yet at a venture I will conclude I am not altogether 
faithless, thougli I know not what faith is ; for it was 
shown me, and that too, as I have seen since, by Satan, 
that those who conclude; themselves in a faithless state 
have neither rest nor quiet in their souls, and I was 
loath to fall (piite into despair. 

Wherefore by this suggestion I was for a while made 
afraid to see my want of faith ; but G(k1 would not suffer 
me thus to undo and destroy my soul, but did continually 
against this my sad and blind conclusion create still 
within me such suppositions, insomuch that I could not 
rest content until I did now come to some certain know- 
ledge whether 1 had faith or no, this always running in 
uiy mind: "But how if yon want faith indeed? But 
how can you tell you liave faith ?" And besides, I saw 
for certain that if 1 had not, I was sure to perish for 
ever ; so that though I endeavored at the first to overr 
look the business of faith, yet in a little time, I better 
considering the matter, was willing to put myself upon 



OR GfiACE AliOUNDlNG. 25 

tho trial wIicHkt I liad faith .or no. But alas, poor 
wictcli, so ig'norant and brutish was I, that I know not 
to this day any more how to do it, than I knew how to 
bof^in and accomplish a rare and curious piece of art 
wliicli I never yet saw or consitl(>rcd. 

Wherefore, while I was thus considering' and being 
put to a plunge about it, for you must know tiiat as yet 
I liad not in this matter broken my mind to any one, 
only did hear and consider, the tempter came in with 
this delusion, that there was no way for me to know I 
had faith but by trying to work some miracles, urging 
those scriptures that seem to look that way for enforcing 
and strengthening his temptation. Nay, one day, as I 
was between Elstow and Bedford, the temptation was 
hot upon me to try if I had faith by doing some miracle, 
wWch miracle at this time was this : I must say to the 
puddles that were in the horse-pads, Be dry, and to the 
dry places, Be you puddles And truly one time I was 
going to say so indeed ; but just as I was about to 
speak, this thought came into my mind, " But go under 
yonder hedge and pray first that God would make you 
able," But when I had concluded to pray, this came hot 
upon me, that if I pi^ayed, and came again and tried to 
do it, and yet did nothing notwithstanding, then to be 
sure I had no faith, but was a castaway and lost ; nay, 
thought I, if it be so, I will not try yet, but will stay a 
little longer ; so I continued at a great loss, for I thought 
if they only had faith which coultl do such wondei-ful 
things, then I concluded that for the present I neither had 
it, nor yet for the time to come was ever like to have it. 
Thus 1 was tossed between the devil and my own igno 
ranee, and so perplexed, especially at some times, that I 
could not tell what to do. 



20 BUNYAN'S LIFE. 



CHAPTER IV. 

About this time tlio state and happiness of these poor 
people at Bedford were thus in a kind of vision presented 
to me. I saw as if they were on tlie sunny side of some 
hig'h mountain, there refresliing themselves with the 
pleasant beams of the sun, wliile I was shivering and 
shrinking in tlie cold, afflicted with frost, snow, and dark 
clouds. ]\[ethought also between me and tlum I saw 
a wall that did compass about this mounta'n. Now 
through this wall my soul did greatly desira to pass, 
concluding that if I could I would even go inio the very 
midst of them, and there also comfoi't mysflf with the 
heat of their sun. About this wall I bethought m^ieelf 
to go again and again, still prying as I went to sec if I 
could find some way or passage by which I might enter 
therein, but none could I find for some time. At the last 
I saw as it were a narrow gap, like a little doorway in 
the wall, through which I attempted to pass. Now the 
passage being very strait and narrow, I made many 
efforts to get in, but all in vaifi, even until I was well- 
nigh quite beat out by striving to get in ; at last, with 
great striving, methought I at first did get in my head, 
and after that, by a sidelong striving, my shoulders and 
my whole body ; then I was exceeding glad, and went 
and sat down in the midst of them, and so was comfort- 
ed with the light and heat of their sun. 

Now this mountain and wall were thus made out to 
me. The mountain signified the church of the living 
God ; the sun that shone thereon, the comfortable shin- 
ing of his merciful face on them that were therein : the 
wall I thought was the wall that did make separation 
between Christians and the world ; and the gap that was 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. zl 

ill the wail I tliouglit was J(>siis Christ, wlio is tlio way 
to God the Father. John 14 : G ; Matt. 7 : 14. But for- 
asnuicli as tlie passage was wonderful narrow, even so 
narrow that I could not but with great difficulty enter 
in thereat, it showed me that none could enter into life 
but those that were in downright earnest, and unless 
also they left that wicked world behind them, for hei'c 
was only room for body and soul, but not for body and 
soul and sin. This resemblance abode upon my spirit 
many days, all whicli time I saw myself in a forlorn and 
sad condition, but yet was provoked to a vehement hun- 
ger and desire to be one of that aumber that did sit in 
the sunshine. Now also would I pray wherever I was, 
whether at home or abroad, in house or field ; and would 
also often, with lifting up of heart, sing tliat of the fifty- 
first Psalm, "0 Lord, consider my distress," for as yet I 
knew not where it was. 

Neither as yet could I attain to any comfortable per- 
suasion that I had faith in Christ ; but instead of having 
satisfaction here, I bea;'^n to find my soul to be assault- 
ed with fresh doubts about my future happiness, espe- 
cially with such as these : Whether I was elected. But 
how if the day of grace should be past and gone ? By 
these two temptations I was very much afflicted and 
disquieted, sometimes by one and sometimes by the other 
of them. 

And first, to speak of that about my questioning my 
election, I found at this time that tiiough I was in a flame 
to find the way to heaven and glory, and though noth- 
ing could beat me off from this, yet this question did s > 
offend and discourage me that I was, especially sonio- 
times, as if the very strengtii of my l)ody also had been 
taken away by the force and power theretif. This scrip- 
ture did also seem to me to trample upon all my desires : 
"It is not of liim that willflh, nor of him that runneth, 



28 . BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

but of God that showetli mci-cy." With tliis scripture I 
could not tell what to do, for I evidently saw, uidess the 
great God of his infinite grace and bounty had volunta- 
rily chosen me to be a vessel of merc}^ though I should 
desire and long and labor until my heart did break, no 
good could come of it. Therefore this would stick with 
me : How can you tell that you are elected ? And what,; 
if you are not ? How then ? Lord, thought I, what if. 
I am not indeed ? It may be you are not, said the tempt- 
er. It may be so indeed, thought I. Why then, said 
Satan, j^ou had as good leave off and strive no further ; 
for if indeed you are not elected and chosen of God, 
there is no hope of your being saved, for "it is not of 
him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God 
that showeth mercy." Rom. 9:16. By these things I 
was driven to my wits' end, not knowing what to say or 
how to answer these temptations. Indeed, I little thought 
that Satan had thus assaulted me, but thought it was 
my own prudence thus to start the question : for that 
the elect only obtained eternal life, that I without scru- 
ple did heartily close withal ; but that myself was one 
of them, there lay the question. 

Thus therefore for several days I was greatly assault- 
ed and perplexed, and was often, when I had been walk- 
ing, ready to sink where I went with faintness in my 
mind ; but one day, after I had been so many weeks 
oppressed and cast down therewith, as I was now quite 
giving up the ghost of all my hopes of ever attaining 
life, that sentence fell with M'eight upon my spirit: 
" Look at tlie generations of old, and see ; did ever any 
trust in God, and were confounded?" at wliich I was 
greatly enlightened and encouraged in my soul, for thus 
at that very instant it was expounded to me : "Begin at 
the beginning of Genesis, and read to the end of the 
Hevelation, and see if you can find tliat there was ever 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 20 

any that trnstoil in llic Lord and was confounded." So 
coming liomc, I presently went to my Bible to sec if I 
could find that saying-, not doubting but to find it pres- 
ently, for it was so fresh and with such strength and 
comfort on my spirit, that it was as if it talked with* 
me. Well, I looked, but found it not, only it abode upon 
me. Then did I ask, first this good man and then anoth- 
er, if they knew where it was, but they knew no such 
place. At this I wondered that such a sentence should 
so suddenly and with such comfort and strength seize 
and abide upon my heart, and yet that none could find it, 
for I doubted not but that it was in the holy Scriptures. 
Thus I continued above a year, and could not find tht 
place ; but at last, casting my eye upon the Apocryphal 
books, I found it in Ecclesiasticus, 2:10. This at the 
first did somewhat daunt me ; but because by this time 
I had got more experience of the love and kindness of 
God, it troubled me the less, especially when I consid- 
ered that though it was not in those texts that we call 
holy and' canonical, yet, forasmuch as this sentence was 
the sum and substance of many of the promises, it was 
my duty to take the comfort of it ; and I bless God for 
that word, for it was of good to me : that word doth still 
ofttimes shine before my face. 

After this that other doubt did come with strength 
upon me : But how if the day of grace should be past 
and gone ? How if you have overstood the time of 
mercy ? Now I remember that one day as I was walk- 
ing in the country, I Avas much in the thoughts of this : 
But how if the day of grace is past ? And to aggravate 
my trouble, the tempter presented to my mind those 
good people of Bedford, and suggested thus unto me : 
that these being converted already, they were all that 
God would save in those parts, and that I came too late, 
for these had got the blessing ]ief(M-e I came. Now was 



30 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

I in great distress, thinking in very deed that this might 
well be so ; wherefore I went up and down bemoaning 
my sad condition, counting myself far worse than a thou- 
^sand fools for standing off thus long, and spending so 
many years in sin as I had done, still crying out, Oh 
that I had turned sooner ; Oh that I had turned seven 
years ago. It made me also angry with myself to think 
that I should have no more wit but to trifle away my 
time till my soul and heaven were lost. 

But when I had been long vexed with this fear, and 
was scarce able to take one step more, just about the 
same place where I received my other encouragement, 
these words broke in upon my mind: "Compel them to 
come in, that my house may be filled ; and yet there is 
room." Luke 14 : 22. These words, but especially 
those, " and yet there is room," were sweet words to me, 
for truly I thought that by them I saw there was place 
enough in heaven for me ; and moreover, that when tlie 
Lord Jesus did speak these words, he then did think of 
me, and that he, knowing that the time would come that 
I should be afflicted with fear that there was no place 
left for me in his bosom, did before speak this word, and 
leave it upon record, that I rnight find help thex-eby 
against this vile temptation. This I then verily believ- 
ed. In the light and encouragement of this word I went 
for some time ; and the comfort was the more when I 
thought that the Lord Jesus should think on me so long 
ago, and that he should speak those words on purpose 
for my sake, for I did think verily that he did on purpose 
speak them to encourage me withal. 

But I was not without my temptations to go back 
again — temptations, I say, both from Satan, mine own 
heart, and carnal acquaintance ; but I thank God these 
were outweighed by that soi;nd sense of death and of 
the day of judgment which abode as it were continually 



OK GRACE ABOUNDING. 31 

in my view. I would often also think of Nebtichadnez- 
zar, of whom it was said he had given him all the king- 
doms of the earth. Dan. 5 : 18, 19. Yet, thought I, if 
this great man had all his portion in this world, one hour 
in hell-firc would make him forget all. This considera- 
tion was a great help to me, 

I was almost made about this time to see something 
concerning the beasts that Moses counted clean and un- 
clean, I thought those beasts were types of men : the 
clean, types of them that were the people of God ; but 
the unclean, types of such as were children of the wick- 
ed one. Now I read that the clean beast chewed the 
cud ; that is, thought I, they show us we must feed upon 
the word of God. They also parted the hoof. I thought 
that signified we must part, if we would be saved, with 
the ways of ungodly men. And also, in further reading 
about them, I found that though we did chew the cud as 
the hare, yet if we walked with claws like a dog, or if 
we did part the hoof like the swine, yet if we did not 
chew the cud as the shqpp, we are still for all that but 
unclean ; for I thought the hare to be a type of those 
that talk of the word, yet walk in the ways of sin, and 
that the swine was like him that parteth with his out- 
ward pollution, but still wanteth the word of faith, with- 
out which there would be no way of salvation, let a man 
be ever so devout. Deut. ch. 14, After this I found, by 
reading the word, that those that must be glorified with 
Christ in another world, must be called by him here — 
called to the partaking of a share in his word and right- 
eousness, and to the comforts and first-fruits of his Spir- 
it, and to a peculiar interest in all those heavenly things 
which do indeed prepare the soul for that rest and house 
of glory which is in heaven above. 

Here again I was at a very great stand, not know- 
ing what to do, fearing I was not called ; for, thought I, 



32 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

if I be not called, what then can do mc g-ood? None 
but those who are effectually called, inherit the kingdom 
of heaven. But Oh, how I now loved those words that 
spoke of a Christian's calling ; as when the Lord said to 
one, " Follow me ;" and to another, " Come after me ;" 
and Oh, thought I, that he would say so to mo too ; how 
g-ladly would I run after him. I cannot now express 
with what longings and breathings in my soul I cried to 
Christ to call me. Thus I continued for a time all on a 
flame to be converted to Jesus Christ ; and did also see 
at that day such glory in a converted state, that I could 
not be contented without a share therein. Gold ! could it 
have been gotten for gold, what would I have given for 
it 1 Had I had a whole world, it had all gone ten thou- 
sand times over for this, that my soul might have been 
in a converted state. How lovely now was every one in 
niy eyes that I thought to be a converted man or wom- 
an. They shone ; tliey walked like a people that carried 
the broad seal of heaven aboul them. Oh, I saw the lot 
was fallen to them in pleasant places, and that they had 
a goodly heritage. Psalm IG : 6. 

But that which made me sick was that of Christ in 
Mark, "He went up into a mountain, and called to him 
whom he would, and they came unto him." Mark 3:13. 
This scripture made me faint and fear, yet it kindled a 
fire in my soul. That which made me fear was this, lest 
Christ should have no liking to me, for he called whom 
he would. But Oh, the glory that I saw in that condition 
did still so engage my heart, that I could seldom read of 
any that Christ did call, but I presently wished, Would 
that I had been in their clothes ; would that I had been 
born Peter ; would that I had been born John ; or would 
that I had been by and heard him when he called them ; 
how would I have cried, Lord, call me also. But Oh, 
I feared he would not call me. 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 33 

And truly the Lord let mo go tlms many months 
together, and sliowcd me nothing, either that I was 
already or should be called hereafter ; but at last, after 
much time spent and many groans to God that I might 
be made partaker of the holy and heavenly calling, that 
word came in upon me : " I will cleanse their blood that 
I have not cleansed ; for the Lord dwelleth in Zion." Joel 
3 : 21. These words, I thought, were sent to encourage 
me to wait still upon God, and signified unto me, that if 
I were not ali-eady, yet the time might come when T 
might be in truth converted unto Christ. 

About this time I began to break my mind to those 
poor people in Bedford, and to tell them my condition ; 
which when they had heard, they told Mr. GifTord of me, 
who himself also took occasion to talk with me, and was 
willing to be well persuaded of me, though, I think, from 
little grounds. But he invited me to his house, where I 
should hear him confer with others about the dealings of 
God with their souls ; from all which I still received more 
conviction, and from that time began to see something 
of the vanity and inward wretchedness of my wicked 
heart, for as yet I knew no great matter therein ; but 
now it began to be discovered unto me, and also to work 
at a rate it never did befor^. 

Now I evidently found that lusts and corruptions put 
forth themselves within me in wicked thoughts and de- 
sires, which I did not regard before ; my desires also for 
heaven and life began* to fail. I found also, that where- 
as before my soul was full of longing after God, now it 
began to hanker after every foolish vanity ; yea, my' 
heart would not be moved to mind that which was good ; 
it began to be careless both of my soul and heaven. It 
would now continually hang back, both to and in every 
duty, and was as a clog upon the leg of a bird to hinder 
him from flying. Nay, thought I, now I grow worse and 
2* 



34 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

worse — now I am furthei* from conversion than ever I 
was before ; wherefore I began to sink greatly in my 
souly and began to entertain such discouragement in my 
heart as laid me as low as hell. If now I should have 
burned at the stake I could not believe that Christ had 
a love for me ; alas, I could neither hear him, nor see 
him, nor savor any of his things. I was driven as with 
a tempest ; my heart would be unclean, and the Canaan- 
ites would dwell in the land. 

Sometimes I would tell my condition to the people of 
God, which when they heard they would pity me, and 
would tell me of the promises ; but they had as good 
have told me that I must reach the sun with my finger, 
as have bidden me receive or rely upon the promises, 
and as soon I should have done it. All my sense and 
feeling were against me, and I saw I had a heart that 
would sin, and that lay under a law that would condemn. 
These things have often made me think of the child 
which the father brought to Christ, who, while he was 
yet coming to him, was thrown down by the devil, and 
also so rent and torn by him that he lay and wallowed 
foaming. Mark 9 : 20 ; Luke 9 : 42. 

Further, in these days I would find my heart to shut 
itself up against the Lord anjj against his holy word. I 
have found my unbelief to set as it were the shoulder to 
the door to keep him out, and that too even then when 
I have with many a bitter sigh cried, Good Lord, break 
it open ; Lord, break these gates of brass, and cut these 
bars of iron asunder. Psa. 101:16. Yet that word 
would sometimes create in my heart a peaceful pause, i 
" I girded thee, though thou hast not known me." Isa. 
45 : 5. But all this while, as to the act of sinning, I was 
never more tender than now ; my hinder parts were in- 
ward ; I durst not take a pin or stick, though but so big 
as a straw, for my conscience now was sore, and would 



oil GRACE ABOUNDING. 35 

smart at every touch. I could not now tell how to speak 
my words, for fear I should misplace them. Oli, how 
cautiously did I then go, in all I did or said. I found my- 
self as in a miry bog, that shook if 1 did but stir, and 
was as there left both of God and Christ and the Spirit, 
and all good things. 

But I observed, though I was such a great sinner 
before conversion, yet God never much charged the guilt 
of the sins of my ignorance upon me, only he showed me 
I was lost if I had not Christ, because I had been a sin- 
ner. 1 saw that I wanted a perfect righteousness to 
present me without fault before God, and this righteous- 
ness was nowhere to be found but in the person of 
Jesus Christ. But my original and inward pollution, 
that, that was my plague and aflQiction ; that I saw at a 
dreadful rate always putting forth itself within me ; that 
I had the guilt of to amazement ; by reason of that, I 
was more loathsome in mine own eyes than a toad, and 
I thought I was so in God's eyes too. Sin and corrup- 
tion, I said, would as naturally bubble out of my heart, 
as water would bubble out of a fountain. I thought 
now that every one had a better heart than I had. I 
could have changed heart with any body. I thought 
none but the devil himself could equal me for inward 
wick(>dness and pollution of mind. I fell therefore, at 
the sight of my own vileness, deeply into despair ; for I 
concluded that this condition that I was in could not 
stand with a state of grace. Sure, thought I, I am 
forsaken of God ; sure I am given up to the devil, and 
to a reprobate mind. And thus I continued for a long 
while, even for some years together. 

While 1 was thus afflicted witli the fears of my own 
damnation, there were two things would make me won- 
der. The one was, when I saw old people hunting after 
the things of this life as if they should live here always; 



36 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

the other was, when I found professors much distressed 
and cast down when they met with outward losses, as 
of husband, wife, child, etc. Lord, thought T, what ado 
is here about such little things as these. What seeking 
after carnal things by some, and what grief in others for 
the loss of them. If they so much labor after and shed 
so many tears for the things of this present life, how am 
I to be bemoaned, pitied, and prayed for. My soul is 
dying, my soul is damned. Were my soul but in a good 
condition, and were I but sure of it, ah, how rich should 
•I esteem myself, though blessed but with bread and 
water. I should count those but small afflictions, and 
should bear them as little burdens. A wounded spirit 
who can bear ? 

And though I was much troubled and tossed and 
afflicted with the sight and sense and terror of my own 
wickedness, yet I was afraid to let this sight and sense 
go quite off my mind ; for I found that unless guilt of 
conscience was taken off the right way, that is, by the 
blood of Christ, a man grew rather worse for the loss of 
his trouble of mind than before. Wherefore, if my guilt 
lay hard upon me, then would I cry that the blood of 
Christ might take it off ; and if it was going off without 
it, for tlie cense of sin would be sometimes as if it would 
die and go quite away, then I would also strive to fetch 
it upon my heart again, by bringing the punishment of 
sin in hell-fire upon my spirit, and would cry, Lord, let 
it not go off my heart but in the right way, by the blood 
of Christ and the application of thy mercy through him 
to my soul, for that scripture did lay much upon me : 
"Without the shedding of blood there is no remission." 
Heb. 9 : 22. And that which made me the more afraid 
of this was, because I had seen some, who though when 
they were \mder the wounds of conscience would cry 
and pray, yet feeling rather present ease for their trouble 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 37 

tlian pardon for their sins, cared not liow they lost tlicir 
guilt, so they got it out of their minds. Now, having it 
got off the wrong way, it was not sanctified unto them ; 
hut they grew harder and blinder and more wicked after 
tliei'r trouble. This made mc afraid, and made me cry to 
God the more that it might not be so with me. And 
now I was sorry that God had made mc man, for I feared 
I was a reprobate. I counted man unconvertedt as the 
most doleful of all creatures. Thus being afflicted and 
tossed about my sad condition, I counted myself alone 
and above the most of men unblessed. 

Yea, I thought it impossible that ever I should attain 
to so much godliness of heart as to thank God that Ik; 
had made me a man. Man indeed is the most noble by 
creation of all creatures in the visible world ; but by sin 
he has made himself the most ignoble. The beasts, 
birds, fishes, I have blessed their condition, fen' they had 
not a sinful nature ; they were not obnoxious to the 
wrath of God ; they were not to go to hell-fire after 
death. I could therefore have rejoiced had my condition 
been as any of theirs. 



38 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 



CHAPTER V. 

In this condition I wont a great while ; but when tlie 
conilbrting time was come, I heard one preach a sermon 
on thes6 words in the Song, "Behold, thou art fair, my 
love ; behold, thou art fair." Song 4:1. But at that 
time he made these two words, "my love," his chief sub- 
ject-matter, from which, after he had a little opened the 
text, he drew these several conclusions : 1. That the 
church, and so every saved soul, is Christ's love when 
loveless ; 2. Christ's love without a cause ; 3. Christ's 
love which hath been hated of the world ; 4. Christ's 
love when under temptation and under desertion ; 5. 
Christ's love from first to last. But I got nothing by 
what he said at present, only when he came to the appli- 
cation of the fourth particular, this was the word he 
said : " If it be so that the saved soul is Christ's love 
when under temptation and desertion, then, poor tempt- 
ed soul, when thou art assaulted and afflicted with temp- 
tations and the hidings of his face, yet think on these 
two words, ' my love,' still." 

So as I was coming home, these words came again 
into my thoughts ; and I w(;ll remember, as they came 
in, I said thus in*my heart. What shall I get by thinking 
on these two words ? This thought had no sooner passed 
through my heart, but these words began thus to kindle 
in my spirit : " Thou art my love, thou art my love," 
twenty times together ; and still as they ran in my mind 
they waxed stronger and warmer, and began to make 
me look up ; but being as yet between hope and fear, I 
still replied in my heart. But is it true? but is it true? 
At which that sentence fell upon me, "He wist not that 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 39 

it was true wliicli was clone unto liim of the angel." 
Acts 12:9. 

Tlicu I began to give jjace to the word, wliicli witli 
power did over and over make this joyful sound witliin 
my soirl, "Thou art my love, thou art my love," and noth- 
ing shall separate thee from my love. And with that my 
heart was filled full of comfort and hope, and now I 
could believe that my sins would be forgiven me ; yea, 
1 was now so taken with the love and mercy of God, that 
I remember 1 could not tell how to contain till I got 
home. I tliought I could have spoken of his love and 
have told of his mercy to me, even to the verj"- crows 
that sat upon the plougiied lands before me, liad they 
been capable of understanding me ; wherefore I said in 
my soul with much gladness, " Well, would I had a pen 
and ink here, I would write this down before I go any 
further ; for surely I shall not forget this, forty years 
hence ;" but alas, within less than forty days I began to 
question all again, which made me begin to question all 
still. 

Yet still at times I was liclped to believe that it was 
a true manifestation of grace unto my soul, though I 
had lost much of the life and savor of it. Xow about a 
week or a fortnight after this I was much followed by 
this scripture : " Simon, Simon, behold Satan hath desired 
to have you." Luke 22:31. And sometimes it would 
sound so loud within me, yea, and as it were call so 
strongly after me, that once above all the rest I turned 
my head over my shoulder, thinking verily that some 
man had behind me called me. Being at a gi-eat dis<>' 
tance, mcthought he called so loud, it came, as I have 
thought since, to stir me up to prayer and to watchful- 
ness. It came to acquaint me that a cloud and a storm 
were coming down upon me ; but I understood it not. 
Also, as 1 remember, that time that it called to me so 



40 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

loud was tlic last time tliat it soiindecl in mine ears ; but 
motliinks I hear still with what a loud voice these words, 
"Simon, Simon," sounded in, mine ears. I thought ver- 
ily, as I have told you, that somebody had called after 
me that was half a mile behind me ; and althoug"h that 
was not my name, yet it made me suddenly look behind 
mo, believing that ho that called so loud meant me. 

But so foolish Avas I and ignorant, that I knew not 
the reason of this sound, which, as I did both see and 
feel soon after, was sent from heaven as an alarm to 
awaken me to provide for what was coming, only I 
would muse and wonder 'in my mind to think what 
should be the reason of this scripture, and that at this 
rate so often and .«o loud it shoiild still be sounding and 
rattling in my ears ; but, as I said before, I soon after 
perceived the end of God thei'ein ; for about the space of 
a montli aftei", a very great storm came down upon me, 
which handled me twenty times worse than all I had 
met with before. It came stealing upon me, now by 
one piece and then by another. First, all my comfort 
was taken from me ; then darkness seized upon me ; 
after which whole floods of blasphemies, both against 
God, Christ, and the Scriptures, were poi\red upon my 
spirit, to my great confusion and astonishment. 

These blasphemous thoughts were such as stirred up 
questions in me against the very being of God and of 
his only beloved Son, as whether there were in truth a 
God or Christ, and whether the holy Scriptures were not 
rather a fable and cunning story, than the holy and pure 
word of God. The tempter would also much assault me 
with this : " How can you tell but that the Turks had as 
good scriptures to prove their Mahomet the Saviour as 
we have to prove our Jesus ? and, could I think that so 
many ten thousands in so many countries and kingdoms 
should be without the knowledge of the right way to 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 41 

heaven, if tiiere were indeed a heaven, and that we only, 
wlio live in a corner of the earth, should alone be blessed 
therewitlj ? Every one doth think his own religion light- 
est, Jews and Moors and Pagans ; and how if all our 
faith and Christ and Scriptures should be but a think-so 
too ?" 

Sometimes I have endeavored to argue against these 
suggestions, and to set some of the sentences of blessed 
Paul against them ; but alas, I quickly felt, when I thus 
did, such arguings as these would return again upon me ; 
" Though we made so great a matter of Paul and of his 
words, yet how could I tell but that in very deed he, 
being a subtle and cunning man, might give himself up 
to deceive with strong delusions, and also take the pains 
and travail to undo and destroy his fellows ?" 

These suggestions, with many others which at this 
time I may not and dare not utter, neither by word nor 
pen, did make such a seizure upon my spirit, and did so 
overweigh my heart both with their number, continu- 
ance, and fiery force, that I felt as if there were nothing 
else but these from morning to night within me, and as 
though indeed there could be room for nothing else ; and 
also concluded that God had in very wrath to my soul 
given me up to them, to be carried away with them as 
Avith a mighty whirlwind ; only by the distaste that 
they gave unto my spirit, I felt there was something in 
me that refused to embrace them. But this consider- 
ation I then only had when God gave me leave to swal- 
,low my spittle, otherwise the noise and strength and 
force of these temptations would drown and overflow, 
and as it were bury all such thoughts or the remem- 
brance of any such thing. 

While I was in this temptation I often found my 
mind suddenly put upon it to curse and swear, or to 
speak some grievous thing against God, or Christ his 



42 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

Son, or of the Scriptures. Now 1 tliought, surely I am 
possessed of the devil. At other times, again, I thought 
I should be bereft of my senses ; for instead of lauding 
and magnifying God the Lord with others, if I but heard 
him spoken of, presently some most horrible blasphe- 
mous thought or other would bolt out of my heart against 
him ; so that whether I did think that God was, or again 
did think there was no such thing, no love, nor peace, 
nor gracious disposition could I feel within me. 

These things did sink me into very deep despair, for 
I concluded that such things could not possibly be found 
among them that loved God. I often, when these temp- 
tations had been with force upon me, did compare myself 
to the case of a child whom some gipsy hath by force 
took up in her arms, and is carrying from friend and 
country. Kick sometimes I did, and also shriek and 
cry, but yet I was bound in the wings of the temptation, 
and the wind would carry me away. I thought also of 
Saul, and of the evil spirit that did possess him, and 
did greatly fear that my condition was the same with 
his. 1 Sam. 16:14. 

In these days, when I have heard others talk of what 
was the sin against the Holy Ghost, then would the 
tempter so provoke me to desire to sin that sin, that I 
was as if I could not, must not, neither should be quiet 
until I had committed it. Now no sin would serve but 
that. If it were to be committed by the speaking of 
such a word, then I have been as if my mouth would 
have spoken that word, whether I would or no ; and in 
so strong a measure was this temptation upon me, that 
often I have been ready to clap my hands under my chin 
to hold my mouth from opening ; and to that end also I 
have had thoughts at other times to leap with my head 
downward into some muck-hole or other, to keep my 
mouth from speaking. 



oil Gil ACE AI50UNDING. 43 

Now, at>';iiii, I behold the condition of the dog and 
toad, and counted the slate of every thing tliat God had 
made far better than this dreadful state of mine and my 
companions. Yea, gladly would I have been in the con- 
dition of a dog or horse, for I knew they had no soul to 
perish under the everlasting weight of hell or sin, as 
mine was like to do. Nay, and though I saw this, felt 
this, and was broken to pieces with it, yet that whicli 
added to my sorrow was, that I could not find that with 
all my soul I did desire deliverance. That scripture did 
also tear and rend my soul in the midst of these distrac- 
tions : " Tlie wicked are like the troubled sea, when it 
cannot rest, whoso waters cast up mire and dirt. There 
is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked." Isa. 57 : 20, 21. 

And now ni^' heart was at times exceeding hard. If 
I would have given a thousand pounds for a tear, I could 
uot shed one ; no, nor sometimes scarce desire to shed 
one. I was much dejected to think that this should be 
my lot. I saw some could mourn and lament their sin ; 
and others, again, could rejoice and bless God for Christ ; 
and others, again, could quietly talk of, and with gladness 
remember the word of God, while I only was in the storm 
or tempest. This much sunk me. I thought my con- 
dition was alone ; I would therefore much bewail my 
hard hap ; but get out of or get rid erf these things I 
could not. 

While this temptation las'cd, which was about a 
year, I could attend upon none of the ordinances of God 
but with sore and great affliction ; yea, then I was most 
distressed with blasphemies. If I had been hearing the 
word, then uncleanness, blasphemies, and despair would 
hold me a captive there. If I had been reading, then 
sometimes I had sudden thouglits to question all I read ; 
sometimes, again, my mind would be so strangely snatch- 
ed away and possessed with other thing?, that I have 



44 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

neither known, nor regarded, nor remembered so much as 
the sentence that but now I had read. 

In prayer also I was greatly troubled at this time : 
sometimes I thought I felt Satan behind me pull my 
clothes ; he would be also continually at me in time of 
prayer, to have done : "Break oif ; make haste ; you have 
prayed enough, and stay no longer ;" still drawing my 
mind away. Sometimes also he would cast in such 
wicked thoughts as these : that I must pray to him, or 
for him. I have thought sometimes of that "fall down ;" 
or, "If thou wilt fall down and worship me." Matt. 
4 : 9. Also when, because I have had wandering thoughts 
in the time of this duty, I have labored to compose my 
mind and fix it upon God, then with great force hath 
the tempter labored to distract me and confound me, 
and to turn away my mind by presenting to my heart 
and fancy the form of a bush, a bull, a besom, or the 
like, as if I should pray to these. To these he would 
also, at some times especiall}'^, so hold my mind, that I 
was as if I could think of nothing else, or pray to noth- 
ing else but to these, or such as they. 

Yet at times I would have some strong and heart- 
affecting apprehensions of God and the reality of the 
truth of his gospel ; but .Oh, how would my heart at 
such times put forth itself with inexpressible groanings ! 
My whole soul was then in every word. I would cry 
with pangs after God, that he would be merciful unto 
me ; but then I would be daunted again with such con- 
ceits as these : I would think that God did mock at these 
my prayers, saying, and that in the audience of the holy 
angels, "This poor simple wretch doth hanker after me, 
as if I had nothing to do with my mercy but to bestow 
it on such as he. Alas, poor soul, how art thou deceiv- 
ed. It is not for such as thee to have favor with the 
Highest." 



OR GRACE AROlNDlNd. 4;") 

Then liatli the tempter come upon me also witli such 
discourag-ements as these : "You are very liot for mercy, 
but I will cool you ; this frame shall not last always. 
Many have been as hot as you for a time, but I have 
quenched their zeal ;" and with this, such and such who 
were fallen off would be set before mine eyes. Then T 
would be afraid that I should do so too ; but, thought I, 
I am glad this comes into my mind. Well, I will watch, 
and take what care I can. "Though j'ou do," said Satan, 
" I shall be too hard for j^ou. I will cool you insensibly, 
by degrees, by little. and little. Wliat care I," saith he, 
"though I be scren years in chilling thy heart, if I can 
do it at last ? Continual rocking will lull a crying child 
asleep. I will ply it close, but I will have mj^ end ac- 
complished. Though you be burning hot at present, I 
can pull 3^ou from this fire. I shall have you cold before 
it be long." 

These things brought me into great straits ; for as I 
at present could not find myself fit for present death, so 
I thought, to live long would make me yet more unfit, for 
time would make me forget all, and wear even the 
remembrance of the evil of sin, the worth of heaven, and 
the need I had of the blood of Christ to wash me, both 
out of mind and thought ; but I thank Christ Jesus, 
these things did not at present make me slack my cry- 
ing, but rather did put me more upon it, like her who 
met with the adulterer, Deut. 22 : 27, in which days that 
was a good word to me, after I had suffered these things 
a while : " I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, 
nor angels, etc., shall separate us from the love of God, 
which is in Christ Jesus." Rom. 8 : 39. And now I 
hoped long life would not destroy me, nor make me miss 
of heaven. 

I had some supports in this temptation, though they 
Were then all questioned by me. That in Jer. 3 : 1, was 



46 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

something; to mc ; and so was the consideration of verse 
four of that chapter, that though we have spoken and 
done as evil things as we could, yet we ghall cry unto 
God, "My Father, thou art the guide of my youth," and 
shall return unto him. I had also once a sweet glance 
from that in 2 Cor. 5 : 21, "For he hath made him to bo 
sin for us, who knew no sin, that we miglit be made the 
righteousness of God in him." I remember that one day, 
as I was sitting in a neighbor's house, and there very 
sad at the consideration of my many blasphemies, and 
as I was saying in my mind, "What ground have I to 
think that I, who have been so vile and abominable, 
should ever inherit eternal life T' that word came sud- 
denly upon me: "What shall we say to these things? 
If God be for us, who can be against us ?" That also 
was a help unto me: "Because I live, you shall live 
also." But these words were but hints, touches, and 
short visits, though very sweet when present, only they 
lasted not, but like Peter's sheet, cf a sudden were 
caught up from me to heaven again. Rom. 8:13; John 
14: 19; Acts 10:16. 

But afterwards the Lord did more fully and gracious- 
ly discover himself unto me, and indeed did quite not 
only deliver me from the guilt that by these things was 
laid upon my conscience, but also from the very filth 
thereof; for the temptation was removed, and I was put 
into my right mind again, as other Christians were. I 
remember that one day, as I was travelling into the 
country and musing on the wickedness and blasphemy 
of my heart, and considering the enmity that was in me 
to God, that sci'ipture came into my mind : " Having 
made peace through the blood of His cross." Col. 1 : 29. 
By which I was made to see, both again and again, that 
God and my soul were friends by his blood ; yea, I saw 
that the justice of God and my sinful soul could embrace 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING, 47 

and kiss each other, through Wis blood. Tliis was a p)od 
day to mc ; I hope I shall never forget it. 

At another time, as I sat by the fire in niy house and 
was musing on my wretchedness, the Lord made that 
also a precious word unto me : "Forasmuch then as tlu; 
children arc partakers of flesh and blood, he also himseH 
likewise took part of the same ; that tlumigh death he 
might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, 
the devil ; and deliver them who through fear of death 
were all their lifetime subject to bondage." Ileb. 2:14, 
15. I thought that the glory of these words was then 
so weighty on me, that I was both once and twice ready 
to swoon as I sat, yet not with grief and trouble, but 
with solid joy and peace. 



48 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 



I CHAPTER VI. 

At this time also I sat under tlic ministry of holy Mr. 
^ifford, whose doctrine, by God's grace, was much for 
my stability. This man made it much his business t(j 
deliver the people of God from all those hard and un- 
sound tests that by nature we are prone to. lie would 
bid us take special heed that we took not up any truth 
upon trust, as from this or that, or any other man or 
men ; but cry mightily to God that he would convince 
us of the reality thereof, and establish us thei'ein by his 
own Spirit in the holy word ; for, said he, if you do 
otherwise, when temptation comes, if strongly upon you, 
you not having received the word with evidence from 
heaven, will find you want that help and strength now 
to resist, that once you thought you had. 

This was as seasonable to mj' soul as the former and 
latter rain in their season, for I had found, and that by 
sad experience, the truth of these his words ; for I had 
felt that no man can say, especially when tempted by 
the devil, that Jesus Christ is Lord, but by the Holy 
Ghost. Wherefore I found my soul through grace very 
apt to drink in this doctrine, and to incline to pray to 
God that, in nothing that pertained to God's glory and 
my own eternal happiness, he would suffer me to be 
without the confirmation thereof from heaven ; for now I 
saw clearly that there was an exceeding difference be- 
tween the notion of the flesh and blood, and the revela- 
tion of God in heaven ; also a great difference between 
that faith that is feigned and according to man's wisdom, 
and that which comes by a man's being born thereto of 
God. Matt. 16:17; 1 John 5:1. 

But Oh, how was my soul now led from ti'utli to truth 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 49 

by God ; even from tlie l)irtli and cradle of the Son of 
God, to his ascension and second coming' from heaven to 
judge the workl. Truly I then found upon this account 
the great God was very good unto me, for to my remem- 
brance there was not any thing that I then cried unto 
God to make known and reveal unto me, but he was 
pleased to do it for me — I mean, not one part of the 
gospel of the Lord Jesus, but I was orderly let into it. 
Methought I saw, with great evidence from the four 
evangelists, the woiiderful works of God in giving Jesus 
Christ to save us, from his conception and birth even to 
his second coming to judgment : methought I was as if 
I had seen him born, as if I had seen him grow up, as if 
I had seen him walk through this world from the cradle 
to the cross ; to which also, Avhen lie came, I saw how 
gently he gave himself to be crucified and nailed on the 
cross for my sins and wicked doings. Also, as I was 
musing on this his progress, that passage dropped on 
my spirit : He was ordained for the slaughter. 1 Pet. 
1 : 11, 20. When I have considered also the truth of his 
resurrection, and have remembered that word, "Touch 
me not, Mary," etc., I have seen as if he had leaped out 
of the grave's mouth for joy that he was risen again, 
and had got the conquest over our dreadful foes, John 
20 : 17. I have also in the spirit seen him a man on the 
right hand of God the Father for me ; and have seen the 
manner of his coming from heaven to judge the world 
with glory, and have boon confirmed in these things bj' 
these scriptures : Acts 1:0; 7 : 50 ; 10 : 42 ; Ileb. 7 : 24 ; 
Kev. 1:18; 1 Thess. 4:17, 18. 

Once I was troubled to know whether the Lord Jesus 
was man as well as God, and God as well as man ; and 
truly in those days, let men say what they would, unless 
I had it with evidence from heaven, all was nothing to 
me; I counted myself not set down in any truth of God. 

Pil Troi; ;j 



50 BUXYAN'S LIFE, 

Well, I was much troubled about this point, and could 
not tell how to be resolved ; at last that in Rev. 5 : 6 
came into my mind : "And I beheld, and lo, in the midst 
of the throne and of the four beasts, and in the midst of 
the elders, stood a Lamb." In the midst of the throne, 
thought I, there is the Godhead ; in the midst of the 
ciders, there is manhood. Oh, methought this did glis- 
ter. It was a goodly touch, and gave me sweet satis-^ 
faction. That other scripture also did help me much in 
this : "Unto us a child is born, luito us a son is given : 
and the government shall be upon his shoulder : and his 
name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty 
God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace." Isa. 
9 : 6. Also, besides these teachings of God in his word, 
the Lord made use of two things to confirm me in this 
truth : the one was the errors of the fanatics, and the 
other was the guilt of sin ; for as the fanatics did oppose 
the truth, so God did the more confirm me in it by lead- 
ing me into the scripture that did wonderfully main- 
tain it. 

The errors tlicy maintained were, 

1. That the holy Scriptures were not the word of 
God. 

2. That every man in the world had the Spirit of 
Christ, grace, faith, etc. 

3. That Christ Jesus, as crucified and dying sixteen 
hundred years ago, did not satisfy divine justice for the 
sins of the people. 

4. That Christ's flesh and blood were within the 
saints. 

5. That the bodies of the good and bad that are bur- 
ied in the churchyard shall not rise again. 

6. That the resurrection is passed Avith good men 
already. 

7. That that man Jesus that was crucified between 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 51 

two thieves on mount Calvaiy, in the land of Canaan, 
by Judea, was not ascended above the starry heaven. 

8. That he sliould not, even the same Jesus that died 
by the hands of the Jews, come again at the last da}^, 
and as man judge all nations, etc. 

Many more vile and abominable things were in those 
days fomented by them, by which I was driven to a more 
narrow search of the Scriptures, and was, through their 
light and testimony, not only enlightened, but greatly 
confirmed and comforted in the truth. 

And as I said, the guilt of sin did help mc much, fur 
still, as that would come upon me, the blood of Christ did 
take it off again and again, and that too sweetly, accord- 
ing to the Scriptures. Oh, friends, cry to God to reveal 
Jesus Christ unto you ; there is none teacheth like him. 

It would be too long here to stay to tell 3'ou in par- 
ticular how God did confirm mc in all the things of 
Christ ; and how he did, that he might do so, lead mc 
into his words ; yea, and also how he did open them 
unto mc, and make them shine before me, and cause 
them to dwell with me, talk with me, and comfort me 
over and over, both of his own being and the being of 
his Son and Spirit, and word and gospel. Only this, as 
I said before, I will say unto you again, that in general 
he was pleased to take this course with me : first to suf- 
fer mc to bo afflicted with temptations concerning them, 
and then reveal them unto mc. As sometimes I would 
lie under great guilt for sin, even crushed to the ground 
therewith, and then the Lord would show me the death 
of Christ ; yea, so sprinkle my conscience with his 
blood, that I would find, and that before I was aware, 
that in that conscience, where but just" now did reign 
and rage the law, even there would rest and abide the 
peace and love of God, through Christ. 

Now I had an evidence, as I thought, of mv salva- 



52 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

lion from heaven, with many golden seals thereon, all 
hanging in my sight ; now could I remember this mani- 
festation, and the other discovery of grace with comfort ; 
and would often long and desire that the last day were 
Come, that I iniglit be for ever inflamed with the sight 
and joy and communion with Him whose head was crown- 
ed Avith thorns, whose face was spit upon, and body bro- 
ken, and soul made an offering for my sins ; for whereas 
before I lay continually trembling at the mouth of hell, 
now methought I was got so far therefrom that when I 
looked back I could scarce discern it ; and Oh, thought 
I, that I were fourscore years old now, that I might die 
quickly, that my soul might be gone to rest. 

But before I had got thus far out of these my temp- 
tations, I did greatly long to see some ancient godly 
man's experience, who had written some hundreds of 
years before I was born ; for those who had written in 
our days, I thought — but I desire them now to pardon 
me — that they had written only that which others felt ; 
or else had, through the strength of their wits and parts, 
studied to answer such objections as they perceived 
others were perplexed with, without going down them- 
selves into the deep. 

Well, after many such longings in my mind, the God 
in whose hands are all our days and wa^'s, did cast into 
my hand one day a book of Martin Luther's ; it was his 
Comment on the Galatians. It also was so old that it 
was ready to fall piece from piece, if I did but turn it 
over. Now I was pleased much that such an old book 
had fallen into my hands, the which when I had but a 
little way perused I found my condition in his experience 
so largely and profoundly handled, as if his book had 
been written out of my heart. This made me marvel, 
for thus thought I : this man could not know any thing 
of the state of Christians now, but must needs write and 



OR UUACE A BO r XI) IXC. 53 

speak the experience of former daj^s. besides, ho dotli 
most gravely also in that book debate of the rise of these 
temptations, namely, blasphemy, desperation, and the 
like ; showing that the law of Moses, as well as the 
^devil, death, and hell, hath a very great hand therein, the 
which at first was very strange to me ; but considering 
and watching, I found it so indeed. But of particulars 
here I intend nothing, only this methinks I must let fall 
before all men : I do prefer this book of Martin Luther 
upon the Galatians, excepting the Holy Bible, before all 
the books that ever I have seen, as most fit for a wound- 
ed conscience. 

And now I found, as I thought, that I loved Christ 
dearly. Oh, methought my soul cleaved unto him, my 
affections cleaved unto him ; I felt my love to him as hot 
as fire ; and now, as Job said, I thought I should die in 
my nest : but I quickly found that my great love was 
but too little, and that I, who had, as I thought, such 
burning love to Jesus Christ, could let him go again for 
a very trifle. God can tell how to abase us, and can 
hide pride from man. 

Quickly after this my love was tried to purpose ; for 
after the Lord had in this manner thus graciously deliv- 
ered me irom this great and sore temptation, and had 
established me so sweetly in the faith of his holy gospel, 
and had given me such strong consolation and blessed 
evidence from heaven touching my interest in his love 
through Christ, the tempter came upon me again, and 
that with a more grievous and dreadful temptation than 
before : and that was, to sell and part with this most 
blessed Christ — to exchange him for the things of this 
life, for any thing. The temptation lay upon me for ti.e 
space of a yeax', and did follow me so continually that I 
was not rid of it one day in a month ; no, not sometimes 
one hour in many days together, unless when I was 



54 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

asleep. And thoug-h in my judgment I was persuaded 
that those who were once effectually in Christ, as I liopcd 
through his grace I had seen myself, could never lose 
him for ever : for " the land shall not be sold for ever ; for 
the land is mine," saith God. Lev. 25 : 23. Yet it was 
a continual vexation to me to think that I should have 
so much as one such thought within me against a Christ, 
a Jesus who had done for me as he had done ; and yet 
then I had almost none others but such blasphemous ones. 

It was neither my dislike of the thought, nor yet any 
desire and endeavor to resist it, that in the least did 
shake or abate the continuation or force and strength 
chereof ; for it did always, in almost whatever I thought, 
intermix itself therewith in such sort that I could neither 
eat my food, stoop for a pin, chop a stick, or cast mine 
eyes' to look on this or that, but still the temptation 
would come, Sell Christ for this, or sell Christ for that ; 
sell him, sell him. Sometimes it would run in my 
thoughts not so little as a hundred times together. Sell 
him, sell him, sell him ; against which I may say, for 
whole hours together I have been forced to stand as con- 
tinually leaning and forcing my spirit against it, lest 
haply before I was aware some wicked thought might 
arise in my heart that might consent thereto ; and some- 
times the tempter would make me believe I had consent- 
ed to it ; but then I would be as tortured upon a rack 
for whole days together. 

This temptation did put me to such fears lest I should 
at sometimes, I say, consent thereto and be overcome 
therewith, that by the very force of my mind in laboring 
to gainsay and resist this wickedness, my very body 
would be put in action or motion, by way of pushing or 
thrusting with my hands or elbows, still answering as 
fast as the destroyer said, "Sell him," "I will not, I will 
not, I will not ; no, not for thousands, thousands, thou- 



OR (JRACE ABOLNDIXCI. 55 

sands of worlds ;" thus reckoning-, lest I should in the 
midst of these assaults set too low a value on him, even 
until I scarce well knew where I was, or how to be com- 
posed again. At these seasons he would not let me eat 
my food in quiet ; but forsooth, when I was set at the 
table at my meat, I must go hence to pray ; I must leave 
my food now, and just now, so counterfeit holy would 
this devil be. AVhen I was thus tempted, I would say 
in myself. Now I am at meat, let me make an end. No, 
said he, you must do it now, or you will displease God 
and despise Christ. Wherefore I was much afflicted 
with these things, and because of the sinfulness of my 
nature. If, imagining that these were impulses from 
God, I should deny to do it, would it not be as if I de- 
nied God ? and then should I not be as guilty, because I 
did obey a temptation of the devil, as if I had broken 
the law of God indeed ? 

But to be brief, one morning as I lay in my bed I 
was, as at other times, most fiercely assaulted with this 
temptation to sell and part with Christ, the wicked 
suggestion strll running in my mind, "Sell him, sell hi:n, 
sell him, sell him," as fast as a man could speak ; against 
which also in my mind, as at otlier times, I answered, 
"No, no, not for thousands, thousands, thousands," at 
least twenty times together ; but at last, after much 
striving, even until I was almost out of breath, I felt 
this thought pass through my heart, "Let him go if he 
will ;" and I thought also that I felt my heart freely con- 
sent thereto. Oh the diligence of Satan ; Oh the despe- 
rateness of man's heart ! 

Now was the battle won, and down fell I, as a bird 
that is shot from the top of a tree, into great guilt and 
fearful despair. Tims getting out of my bed, I went 
moping into the fields ; but, God knows, with as heavy a 
heart as mortal man I think could bear, where for tlie 



C6 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

space of two hours I was like a man bereft of life, and 
as now past all recovery, and bound over to eternal pun- 
ishment. 

And withal that scripture did seize upon my soul : 
" Or profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat 
sold his birthright. For ye know how that afterwards, 
when he would have inherited the blessing-, he was 
rejected ; for he found no place of repentance, though ho 
sought it carefully with tears." Heb. 12 : 16, It. 

Now was I as one bound ; I felt myself shut up into 
the judgment to come. Nothing now, for two years 
together, would abide with me but damnation, and an 
expectation of damnation ; I say, nothing now would 
abide with me but this, save some few moments for 
relief, as in the sequel you will see. These words were 
to my soul like fetters of brass to my legs, in the contin- 
ual sound of which I went for several months together. 
But about ten or eleven o'clock on that day, as I was 
walking under a hedge, full of sorrow and guilt, God 
knows, and bemoaning myself for this hard hap that 
such a thought should arise within me, 'suddenly this 
sentence rushed in upon me : '•' The blood of Christ remits 
all guilt." At this I made a stand in my spirit. With 
that this word took hold upon me : " The blood of Jesus 
Christ his Son cleanse'th us from all sin." 1 John 1 : t. 

Now I began to conceive peace in my soul ; and me- 
thought I saw as if the tempter did leer and steal away 
from me, as being ashamed of what he had done. At the 
same time also I had my sin and the blood of Christ thus 
represented to me : that my sin, when compai-ed to the 
blood of Christ, was no more to it than this little clod or 
stone before me is to this vast and wide field that here I 
see. This gave me good encouragement for the space of 
two or three hours ; in which time also methought I saw 
by faith the Son of God as suffering for my sins : but 



OR GRACE ABUlNDIXd. 57 

because it tarried nut, I tlierel\)rc sunk in my spirit 
under exceeding- j^'uilt again ; but cliielly by the at'ure- 
nientioned scripture concerning Esau's selling of his 
birthright, for that scripture would lie all day long in 
my mind, and hold me down, so that I could by no means 
lift up myself; for when I would strive to turn to this 
scripture or that for i-elief, still that sentence would be 
sounding in me: "For ye know how that afterwards, 
when ho would have inherited the blessing-, he found no 
place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with 
tears." Sometimes, indeed, I would have a touch from 
that in Luke 22:32: "I have prayed for thee, that thy 
faith fail not ;" but it would not abide upon me ; neither 
could I indeed, when I considered my state, find ground 
to conceive in the least that there should be the root of 
that grace in mo, having sinned as I had done. Now was 
I torn and rent in a heavy case for many days together. 
Then began I with sad and careful heart to consider 
of the nature and largeness of my sin, and to search into 
the word of God, if 1 could in any place espy a word of 
promise, or any encouraging sentence, by which I might 
take relief. Wherefore I began to cousidcF that of 
Mark 3:28: "All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons 
of men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall 
blaspheme." Which place, methought at a blush, did 
contain a large and glorious promise for the pardon of 
high oflences ; but considering the place more fully, I 
thunglit it was rather to be understood as relating more 
cliielly to those who had, while in a natural state, com- 
mitted such things as thci-e arc mentioned ; but not to 
me, who had not only received light and mercy, but who 
had, both after and also contrary to that, so slighted 
Christ as I had done. I feared therefore that this wick- 
ed sin of mine might be that sin unpardonable of which 
he there thus speakcth : "But he that shall blaspheme 



58 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

against the Hvily Ghost hath never forgiveness, but is in 
danger of eternal damnation." Mark 3 : 29 And 1 did 
the rather give credit to this, because of that sentence 
in the Hebrews : " For ye know how that afterwards, 
when he would have inherited the blessing, he was 
rejected ; for he found no place of repentance, though he 
sought it carefully with tears." And this stuck always 
with nie. And now was I both a burden and a terror to 
myself; nor did I ever so know as now what it was to 
be weary of my life, and yet afraid to die. Oh, how 
gladly now would I have been any body but myself — 
any thing but a man, and in any condition but my own ; 
for there Avas nothing did pass more frequently over my 
mind than that it was impossible for me to be forgiven 
my transgression, and be saved from the wrath to come. 

And now I began to labor to call again time that was 
past, wishing a thousand times twice told that the day 
Avas yet to come when I should be tempted to such a 
sin ; concluding with great indignation, both against 
my heart and all assaults, how I would rather be torn in 
pieces than be found a consenter thereto. But alas, 
these thoughts and wishes and resolvings were now too 
late to help me ; this thought had passed my heart : 
God hath let me go, and I am fallen. Oh, thought I, 
that it was with me as in months past, as in the days 
when God preserved me. Job 29 -. 2. 

Then again, being loath and unwilling to perish, I 
began to compare my sin with others, to see if I could 
find that any of those that were saved had done as I had 
done. So I considered David's adultery and murder, and 
found them most heinous crimes, and those too commit- 
ted after light and grace received. But yet, by consid- 
ering that his transgressions were only such as were 
against the law of Moses, from which the Lord Christ 
could, with the consent of his word, deliver him ; but 



11 Gil A C E A B U X D I X G . 5'^ 

mine -was against the gospel, yea, against the Mediator 
thereof; I liad sold my Saviour: now again would I be 
as if racked upon the wheel, when I considered that be- 
sides the guilt that possessed me, I should be so void of 
grace, so bewitched. What, thought I, must it be no 
sin but this? Must it needs be the great transgression? 
Must that wicked one touch my soul? Psa. 19:13; 
1 John 5 : 18. Oil, what sting did I find in all these 
sentences ! What, thouglit I, is there but one sin that 
is unpardonable — but one sin that layeth the soul with- 
out the reach of God's mercy ? and must I be guilty of 
that ; must it needs be that ? Is there but one sin, 
among so many millions of sins, for which there is no 
forgiveness ; and must I commit this ? Oh imhappy 
sin ! Oh imhappy man ! These things would so break 
and confound my spirit, that I could not tell what to do ; 
I thouglit at times they would have broken my wits : 
and still to aggravate my misery, that would run in my 
mind: "Ye know how that afterwards, when he would 
have inlierited the blessing, he was rejected." Oh, no 
one knows the terrors of those days but myself. 



60 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 



CHAPTER VII. 



After this I began to consider of Peter's sin, which 
he committed in denying his Master. And indeed this 
came nighest to mine of any that I coiild find, for he had 
denied his Saviour as I, after light and mercy received ; 
yea, and that too after warning given him. I also con- 
sidered that he did it once and twice, and that after 
time to consider between. But though I put all these 
circumstances together, that, if possible, L might find 
help, yet I considered again that his was but a denial 
of his Master, but mine was a selling of my Saviour. 
Wherefore I thought with myself that I came nearer to 
Judas than cither to David or Peter. Here, again, my 
torment would flame out and afflict me ; yea, it would 
grind me as it were to powder, to consider the preserva- 
tion of God towards others while I fell into the snare ; 
for in my thus considering other men's sins, and compar- 
ing them with mine own, I could evidently see that God 
preserved them, notwithstanding their wickedness, and 
would not let them, as he had let me, become a son of 
perdition. 

But Oh, how did my soul at this time prize the pres- 
ervation that God did set about his people. Ah, how 
safely did I see them walk whom God had hedged in. 
They were within his care, protection, and special prov- 
idence ; though they were full as bad as I by nature, 
yet because he loved them, he would not suffer them to 
fall without the range of mercy ; but as for me, I was 
gone ; I had done it ; he would not preserve me, nor keep 
me ; but suffered me, because I was a reprobate, to fall 
as I had done. Now did those blessed places that speak 
of God's keeping his people sliinc like the sun before 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 61 

me, though not to comfort nio, yet to show me tlie 
blessed state and heritage of those whom the Ijord had 
blessed. 

Now I saw that as God had his hand in all the prov- 
idences and dispensations that overtook his elect, so he 
had his hand in all the temptations that they had to sin 
against him, not to animate them to wickedness, but to 
choose their temptations and troubles for tllbm, and also 
to leave them for a time to such things only as might 
not destroy, but humble them — as might not put them 
beyond, but lay them in the way of the renewing of his 
mercy. But Oh, what love, what care, what kindness 
and mercy did I now see mixing itself with the most 
severe and dreadful of all God's ways to liis people. He 
would let David, Ilezekiah, Solomon, Peter, and others 
fall, but he would not let them fall into the sin unpar- 
donable, nor into hell for sin. Oh, thought I, these be 
the men that God hath loved ; these be the men that 
God, though he chastiscth them, keeps in safety by him, 
and whom he makes to abide under the shadow of the 
Almiglity. 

But all these thoughts added sorrow, grief, and hor- 
ror to me, as whatever I now thought on it was killing 
to me. If I thought how God kept his own, that was 
killing to me ; if I thought of how I was fallen myself, 
that was killing to me. As all things wrought together 
for thabest, and to do good to them that were the called 
accoi'ding to his purpose ; so I thought that all things 
wrought for damage and for my eternal overthrow. 
Then, again, I began to compare my sin with the sin of 
Judas, that if possible I might find if mine differed from 
that which in truth is unpardonable ; and Oh, thought I, 
if it should differ from it, though but the breadth of a 
hair, what a happy condition is my soul in. And by 
considering I found that Judas did his intentionally, but 



62 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

mine was against prayer and strivings ; besides, his was 
committed with such deliberation, but mine in a fearful 
hurry on a sudden : all this while I was tossed to and fro 
like the locust, and driven from trouble to sorrow, hear- 
ing always the sound of Esau's fall in mine ears, and 
the dreadful consequences thereof. 

This consideration about Judas' sin was for a while 
some little belief to mo, for I saw I had not, as to the 
circumstances, transgressed so fully as he. But this 
was quickly gone again, for I thought with myself there 
might be more ways than one to commit this unpardon- 
able sin ; also I thought there might be degrees of that 
as well as of other transgressions ; wherefore, for aught 
I yet could perceive, this iniquity of mine might be such 
as might never be passed by. I was often now ashamed 
that I should be like such an ugly man as Judas. I 
thought also how loathsome I should be unto all the 
saints in the day of judgment, insomuch that now I 
could scarce see a good man that I believed had a good 
conscience, but I would feel my heart tremble at him 
while I was in his presence. Oh, now I saw a glory in 
walking with God, and what a mercy it was to have a 
good conscience before him. 

I was much about this time tempted to content my- 
self by receiving some false opinions, as that there 
should be no such thing as a day of judgment ; that we 
should not rise again ; and that sin was no such griev- 
ous thing ; the tempter suggesting thus : " If these 
things should indeed be true, yet to believe otherwise 
would yield you ease for the present. If you must per- 
ish, never torment yourself so much beforehand ; drive 
the thoughts of damning out of your mind by possessing 
your mind with some such conclusions that atheists and 
ranters use to help themselves withal." But Oh, when 
such thoughts have fled through my heart, how, as it 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 63 

wore within a step, have death and judgment been in 
my view ! Mcthought the Judge stood at the door ; 1 
was as if it was come already, so that such things could 
have no entertainment. But methiuks I see by this that 
Satan will use any means to keep the soul from Christ ; 
he loveth not an awakened frame of spirit ; security-, 
blindness, darkness, and error are the very kingdom and 
habitation of the wicked one. I found it a hard work 
now to pray to God, because despair was swallowing 
me up ; I thought I was as with a tempest driven away 
from God, for always when I cried to God for mercy this 
would come in : " It is too late ; I am lost ; God hath let 
me fall, not to my correction but my condemnation ; my 
sin is unpardonable, and I know concerning Esau, how 
that, after he had sold his birthright, he would have 
received the blessing, but was rejected." 

About tliis time I did liglit on that dreadful story of 
that miserable mortal, Francis Spira, a book that was 
to my troubled spirit as salt when rubbed into a fresli 
wound. Every sentence in that book, every groan of 
that man, with all the rest of his actions in his dolors, 
as his tears, his prayers, his gnashing of teeth, his 
•wringing of hands, his twisting and languishing and 
pining away nnder that mighty hand of God that was 
upon him, were as knives and daggers in my soul ; es- 
pecially that sentence of his was frightful to me: "Man 
knows- the beginning of sin, but who bounds the issues 
thereof?" Then would the former sentence, as the con- 
clusion of all, fall like a hot thunderbolt again upon my 
conscience : " For ye know how that afterwards, whca 
he would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected ; 
for he found no place of repentance, though he sought it 
carefully with tears." 

Then would I be struck into a very great trembling, 
iiisomucli that at some times I could, for whole days 



04 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

tog-ether, feel my very body as well as my mind shake 
and totter under the sense of this dreadful judgment of 
God that would fall on those that have sinned that most 
fearful and unpardonable sin. I felt also such a clog- 
ging and heat at my stomach, by reason of this my ter- 
ror, that I was, especially at some times, as if my breast- 
bone would split asunder ; then I thought concerning 
that of Judas, who by his falling headlong burst asunder, 
and all his bowels gushed out. Acts 1 : 18. I feared 
also that this was the mark that God did set on Cain, 
even continual fear and trembling-, under the heavy load 
of guilt that he had charged on him for the blood of his 
brother Abel. 

Thus did I wind and twine and shrink under the bur- 
den that was upon me, which burden did so oppress me 
that I could neither stand nor go, nor lie either at rest or 
quiet. Yet that saying would sometimes come into my 
mind : " He hath received gifts for the rebellious." Psa. 
68 : 18. The rebellious, thought I : why, surely they are 
such as QJice were under subjection to their prince ; even 
those who, after they have once sworn subjection to his 
government, have taken up arms against him ; and this, 
thought I, is my very condition. I once loved him, feared 
him, served him ; but now I am a rebel ; I have sold him ; 
I have said. Let him go if he will : but yet he has gifts 
for rebels ; and then why not for me ? This sometimes 
I thought on, and would labor hard to take hold thereof, 
that some, though small refreshment, might have been 
conceived by mc ; but in this also I missed of my desire : 
I was driven with force beyond it ; I was like a man 
going to execution even by that place where he would 
fain creep in and hide himself, but may not. 

Again, after I had thus considered the sins of the 
saints in particular, and found mine went beyond them, 
tlien I began to think with myself. Set the case as I 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 65 

should, put all theirs together, and mine alone against 
them, might I not then find encouragement ? for if mine, 
though bigger than any one, yet should be but equal to 
all, then there is hope ; for that blood that hath virtue 
enough in it to wash away all theirs, hath virtue enough 
in it to wash away mine, though this one be full as big, 
if not bigger than all theirs. Here, again, I would con- 
sider the sin of David, of Solomon, of Manasseh, of 
Peter, and the rest of the great offenders, and would 
also labor, what I might with fairness, to aggravate and 
heighten their sins by several cii-cumstances. I would 
think with myself that David shed blood to cover his 
adultery, and that by the sword of the children of Am- 
nion — a work that could not be done but by contrivance, 
which was a groat aggravation to his sin. 

But then this would turn upon nic : "Ah, but these 
were but sins against the law, from which there was a 
Jesus sent to save them ; but yours is a sin against the 
Saviour, and who shall save you from that?" Then I 
thought on Solomon, and how he sinned in loving strange 
women, in falling away to their idols, in building them 
temples, in doing this after light, in his old age, after 
great mercy received. But the same conclusion that 
cut me off in the former consideration, cut me off as to 
this, namely, that all these were but sins against the 
law, for which God had provided a remedy ; but I had 
sold my Saviour, and there remained no more sacrifice 
for sin. I would then add to these men's sins the sins of 
Manasseh, how that he built altars for idols in the house 
of the Lord ; he also observed times, used enchantments, 
had to do with wizards, was a wizard, had his familiar 
spirits, burned his children in sacrifice to devils, and 
made the streets of Jerusalem run down with the blood 
of innocents. These, thought I, are great sins, sins of a 
bloody color ; but yet it would turn again upon me : 



G6 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

" They are none of them of the nature of yours ; you 
have parted with Jesus, you have sold your Saviour." 
This one consideration would always kill my heart : my 
sin was point-blank against my Saviour, and that too 
at such a height that I had in my heart said of him, 
Let him go if he will. Oh, methought this sin was big- 
ger than the sins of a country, of a kingdom, or of the 
whole world ; no one pardonable, nor all of them togeth- 
er was able to equal mine ; mine outwent them every 
one. 

Now I would find my mind to flee from God as from 
the face of a dreadful judge ; yet this was my torment, 
I could not escape his hand : " It is a fearful thing to 
fall into the hands of the living God." Heb. 10 : 31. 
But blessed be his grace, that scripture in these flying 
fits would call, as running after me : "I have blotted out, 
as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and as a cloud, thy 
sins : return unto me ; for I have redeemed thee " Isa. 
44 : 22. This, I say, would come in upon my mind when 
I was fleeing from the face of God, for I did flee from his 
face, that is, my mind and spirit fled before him, by rea- 
son of his highness I could not endure ; then would the 
text cry, "Return unto me ;" it would cry aloud with a 
very great voice, "Return unto me ; for I have redeemed 
thee." 

Indeed, this would make me make a little stop, and 
as it were look over my shoulder behind me to see if I 
could discern that the God of grace did follow me with 
a pardon in his hand ; but I could no sooner do that but 
all would be clouded and darkened again by that sen- 
tence : ' " For ye know how that afterwards, when he 
would have inherited the blessing, he found no place of 
repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears." 
Wherefore I could not refrain, but fled, though at some- 
times it cried, Return, retui-n, as if it did follow after 



UK (;i{ACl-] AHULXUINU. 67 

me ; but I feared to close in therewith lest it should not 
come from God, for that other, as I said, was still sound- 
ing in my conscience : " For ye know how that after- 
wards, when he would have inherited the blessing-, he 
was rejected," etc. 

Once, as I was walking to and fro in a good man's 
shop, bemoaning myself in my sad and doleful state, 
afflicting mj'self with self-abhorrence for this wicked and 
ungodly thought ; lamenting also this hard hap of mine, 
that I should commit so great a sin, greatly fearing that 
I should not be pardoned ; praying also in m}' heart that 
if this sin of mine did differ from that against the Holy 
Ghost, the Lord would show it me ; and being now ready 
to sink with fear, suddenly there was as if there had 
rushed in at the window the noise of wind upon me, but 
very pleasant, and as if I heard a voice speaking, "Didst 
thou ever refuse to be justifie'd by the blood of Christ ?" 
and withal, my whole life of profession past was in a 
moment opened unto me, wherein I was made to see that 
designedly I had not ; so my heart answered groaning- 
ly, No. 

Then fell with power that word of God upon me : 
" See that ye refuse not him that speaketh." Heb. 12 : 25. 
This made a strange seizure upon my spirit ; it brought 
light with it, and commanded a silence in my heart of 
all those tumultuous thoughts that did before use, like 
masterless hell-hounds, to roar and bellow and make a 
hideous noise within me. It showed me also that Jesus 
Christ had yet a word of grace and mercy for me ; that 
he had not, as I had feared, quite forsaken and cast off 
my soul ; yea, this was a kind of check for my prone- 
ness to desperation — a kind of threatening of me, if I 
did not, notwithstanding my sins and the heinousness of 
them, venture my salvation upon the Son of God. 

But as to my determining about this strange dispen- 



68 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

sation, what it was I know not, or from whence it came 
I know not ; I have not yet in twenty years' time been 
able to make a judgment of it ; I thought then what I 
should be loath here to speak. But verily that sudden 
rushing wind was as if an angel had come upon me ; 
but both it and the salvation I will leave until the day 
of judgment : only this I say, it commanded a great 
calm in my soul ; it persuaded mc there might be hope ; 
it showed me, as I thought, what the sin unpardonable 
was, and that my soul had yet the blessed privilege to 
flee to Jesus Christ for mercy. But I say, concerning 
this dispensation, I know not yet what to say of it ; 
which was also in truth the cause that at first I did not 
speak of it in the book ; I do now also leave it to be 
thought on by men of sound judgment. I lay not the 
stress of my salvation thereupon, but upon the Lord 
Jesus in the promise ; yet' seeing I am here unfolding 
my secret things, I thought it might not be altogether 
inexpedient to. let this also show itself, though I cannot 
now relate the matter as then I did experience it. This 
lasted in the savor of it for about three or four days, and 
then I began to mistrust and to despair again. 

Wherefore still my life hung iu doubt before me, not 
knowing which way I should go ; only this I found my 
soul desire, even to cast itself at the foot of grace by 
prayer and supplication. But Oh, it was bard for me 
now to have the face to pray to this Christ for mercy 
against whom I had thus vilely sinned ; it was hard 
work, I say, to offer to look Him in the face against whom 
I had so vilely sinned ; and indeed I have found it as 
difficult to come to God by prayer, after backsliding from 
him, as to do any other thing. Oh the shame that did 
now attend me, especially when I thought, I am now 
a going to pray to him for mercy that I had so lightly 
esteemed but a while before ; I was ashamed, yea, even 



OK (J RACE ABOUNDING. G9 

confounck'd, liecaiisc lliis villaiiy IkkI been committed by 
me ; but 1 saw that there was but one way with me : I 
must go to him, and humble myself unto him, and beg 
that he of his w'ondcrful mercy would show pity to me, 
and have mercy upon my wretched sinful soul ; ■which, 
when the tempter perceived, he strongly suggested to me 
that "I ought not to pray to God, for prayer was not for 
any in my case ; neither could it do me good, because I 
had rejected the Mediator, .by whom all prayers came 
with acceptance to God the Father, and without whom no 
prayer could come into his presence ; wherefore now to 
pray is but to add sin to sin ; yea, now to pray, seeing 
God hath cast you off, is the next way to anger and 
ofFend him more than you ever did before. For God, 
saith he, hath been weary of you for these several years 
already, because you are none of his ; your bawling in 
his ears hath been no pleasant voice to him, and there- 
fore he let you sin this sin, that you might be quite cut 
off: and will you pray still?'' 

This the devil urged, and set forth that in Numbers, 
when Moses said to the children of Israel, that because 
they would not go up to possess the land when God 
would have them, therefore for ever he did bar them out 
from tlience, though they prayed they might with tears. 
Num. 14 : 36, etc. As it is said in another place, "The 
man that sins presumptuously shall be taken from God's 
altar, that he may die ;" even as Joab was by king Sol- 
omon, when he thought to find shelter there. Exodus 
21 : 14 ; 1 Kings 2 : 28-34. These places did pinch me 
very sore ; yet, my case being desperate, I thought with 
myself, I can but die ; and if it must be so, it shall once 
be said that such an one died at the foot of Christ in 
prayer. This I did, but with great difiBculty, God doth 
know; and that because, together with this, still that 
saying about Esau woulA be sot at my heart, even like 



70 ' BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

a flaming sword, to keep the way of the tree of life, lest 
I should take thereof and live. 

Oh, who knows how hard a thing' I found it to come 
to God in prayer. I did also desire the prayers of the 
people of God for me ; but I feared that God would give 
them no heart to do it ; yea, I trembled in my soul to 
think that some or other of them would shortly tell me 
that God had said those words to them that he once did 
say to the prophet concerning the children of Israel : 
"Pray not for this people, for I will not hear them," 
Jer. 11 : 14 ; so pray not for him, for I have rejected 
him. Yea, I thought that he had whispered this to some 
of them already, only they durst not tell me so ; neither 
durst I ask them of it, for fear, if it should be so, it 
would make me quite beside myself. " Man knows the 
beginning of sin," said Spira, " but who bounds the 
issues thereof ?" 

About this time I took an opportunity to break my 
mind to an ancient Christian, and told him all my case ; 
I told him also that I was afraid that I had sinned the 
sin against the Holy Ghost ; and he told me he thought 
so too. Here therefore I had but cold comfort ; but talk- 
ing a little more with him, I found him, though a good 
man, a stranger to much combat with the devil. Where- 
fore I went to God again, as well as I could, for mercy 
still. Now also did the tempter begin to mock me in 
my misery, saying that, seeing I had thus parted with 
the Lord Jesus, and provoked him to displeasure who 
would have stood between my soul and the flame of 
devouring fire, there was now but one way, and that 
was to pray that God the Father would be a mediator 
between his Son and me ; that he would be reconciled 
again, and that I might have that blessed benefit in him 
that his saints enjoyed. Then did that scripture seize 
upon my soul : " He is of on^-mind, and who can turn 



OR GRACE ABOUXDiX(;. 71 

him ?" Oil, I saw it was as easy to persuade liiin to 
make a new covenant or a new Bible besides those we 
have ah-eady, as to pray for such a thing. This was to 
persuade him tliat wliat he had done ah-eady was mere 
folly, and persuade him to alter, yea, to disannul the 
whole way of salvation ; and then would that saying- 
rend my soul asunder: "Neither is there salvation in 
any other ; for there is none other name under heaven 
given among- men, whereby w^e must be saved." Acts 
4:12. 

Now the most free and full and gracious words of 
the gospel were the greatest torment to me ; yea, noth- 
ing so aflflicted me as the thought of Jesus Christ ; the 
remembrance of a Saviour, because I had cast him off, 
brought forth the villany of my sin and my loss by it to 
mind : nothing did twinge my conscience like this ; every 
thing that I thought of the Lord Jesus, of his grace, love, 
goodness, kindness, gentleness, meekness, death, blood, 
promises, and blessed exhortations, comforts and conso- 
lations, went to my soul like a sword ; for still unto 
these my considerations of the Lord Jesus, these thoughts 
would make place for themselves in my heart: "Aye, 
this is the Jesus, the loving Saviour, the Son of God 
whom you have parted with, whom you have slighted, 
despised, and abused ; this is the only Saviour, the only 
Redeemer, the only one that could so love sinners as to 
wash them from their sins in his own most precious 
blood : but you have no part nor lot in this Jesus ; you 
have put him from you ; you have said in 3-our Jieart, 
Let him go if he will. Now therefore j'ou are severed 
from him ; you have severed yourself from him : behold 
then his goodness, but yourself to be no partaker of it." 
" Oh," thouglit I, " what have I lost ; what have I parted 
with ; what has disinherited my poor soul ! Oh, it is 
sad to be destroyed by the grace and mercy of God — to 



72 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

have the Lamb, the Saviour, turn lion aucl destroj'er." 
Rev. ch. 6. I also trembled, as I have said, at the sight 
of the saints of God, especially at those that greatly 
loved him, and that made it their business to walk con- 
tinually with him in this world; for they did, both in 
their words, their cai-riage, and all their expressions of 
tenderness and fear to sin against their precious Saviour, 
condemn, lay guilt upon, and also add continual afflic- 
tion and shame unto my soul. The dread of them was 
upon me, and I trembled at God's Samuel. 1 Sam. 
16- 



OR GRACE AJ}UUNI)IX(;. 73 



CHAPTER YIII. 

Now also tbe tempter began afresh to mock my soul 
another way, saying that "Christ indeed did pity my 
case, and was sorry for my loss : but forasmuch as 1 had 
sinned and transgressed as I had done, he could by no 
means help me, nor save me from what I feared ; for my 
sin was not of the nature of theirs for whom he bled and 
died, neither was it counted with those that were laid to 
his charge when he hung on the tree. Therefore, unless 
he should come down from heaven and die anew for this 
sin, though indeed he did greatly pity me, yet I could 
have no benefit of him." These things may seem ridicu- 
lous to others, even as ridiculous as they were in them- 
selves ; but to me they were most tormenting cogita- 
tions : every one of them augmented my misei'y, that 
Jesus Christ should have so much love as to pity me 
when yet he could not help me too ; nor did I think that 
the reason why he could not help me was because his 
merits were weak, or his grace and salvation spent on 
others already, but because his faithfulness to his threat- 
enings would not let him extend his mercy to me. Be- 
sides, I thought, as I have already hinted, that my sin 
was not within the bounds of that pardon that was wrap- 
ped up in a promise ; and if not, then I knew surely that 
it was more easy for heaven and earth to pass away tlian 
for me to have eternal life. So that the ground of all 
these fears of mine did arise from a steadfast belief I had 
of the stability of the holy word of God, and also from 
my being misinformed of the nature of my sin. But OIi, 
how this would add to my aflliction, to conceive that 1 
should be guilty of such a sin, for which he did not die. 
These thoughts did so confound mo, and imprison me. 



74 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

and tie mc up from faith, that I knew not what to do. 
B::t Oh, thought I, that he would come down again ! Oh 
that the work of man's redemption was yet to be done 
by Christ ; how would I pray him and entreat him to 
ciunt and reckon this sin among the rest for which he 
died. But this scripture would strike me down as dead : 
" Christ being raised from the dead, dieth no more ; death 
hath no more dominion over him." Rom. 6 : 9. Thus by 
the strange and unusual assaults of the tempter my soul 
was like a broken vessel, driven as with the winds, and 
tossed sometimes headlong into despair ; sometimes upon 
the covenant of works, and sometimes to wish that the 
new covenant and the conditions thereof might, so far as 
I thought myself concerned, be turned another way and 
changed. But in all these I was as those that jostle 
against the rocks, more broken, scattered, and rent. 

Oh, the unthought-of imaginations, frights, fears, and 
terrors that are eifected by a thorough application of 
guilt yielding to desperation 1 This is as the man that 
hath his dwelling among the tombs with the dead, who 
is always crying out and cutting himself with stones. 
Mark 5 : 2-5. But, I say, all in vain ; desperation will 
not comfort him, the old covenant will not save him. 
Nay, heaven and earth shall pass away before one jot or 
tittle of the word and law of grace will fail or be remov- 
ed. This I saw, this I felt, under this I groaned ; yet 
this advantage I got thereby, namely, a fai'ther confir- 
mation of the certainty of the way of salvation, and 
that the Scriptures were the word of God. Oh, I cannot 
now express what I then saw and felt of the steadiness 
of Jesus Christ, the Rock of man's salvation. What 
was done could not be undone, added to, nor altered. I 
saw indeed that sin might drive the soul beyond Christ, 
even the sin which is unpardonable ; but woe to him 
that was so driven, for the word would shut him out. 



OR UUACE ABOrXDlNC. 7'. 

Thus was I always sinking, whatever I did lliink or 
do. So one day I walked to a neighboring town and sat 
down upon a settee in the street, and fell into a very 
deep pause about the most fearful state my sin had 
brought me to ; and after long musing, I lifted up my 
head, but niethought I saw as if the sun that sliineth in 
the heavens did grudge to give light, and as if the very 
stones in the street and tiles upon the houses did bend 
themselves against me. Methought that they all com- 
bined together to banish me out of the world. I was 
abhorred of them, and unlit to dwell among them, or be 
partaker of theii* benefits, because I had sinned against 
the Saviour. Oh, how happy now was every creature 
to what I was ; for they stood fast and kept their station, 
but I was gone and lost. 

Then breaking out in the bitterness of my soul, I 
said to my soul with a grievous sigh. How can God 
comfort such a wretch ? I had no sooner said it but 
this returned upon me as an echo doth answer a voice, 
"This sin is not unto death." At which I was as if I had 
been raised out of the grave, and cried out again, Lord, 
how couldst thou find out such a word as this ? for I was 
filled with admiration at the fitness and at the unexpect- 
edness of the sentence — the fitness of the word, the 
rightness of the timing of it ; the power and sweetness 
and light and glory that came with it also were marvel- 
lous to me to find. I was now for the time out of doubt 
as to that about whicli I was so much in doubt before : 
my fears before were that my sin was not pardonable, and 
so that I had no riglit to pray, to repent, etc. ; or that if 
I did, it would be of no advantage or profit to me. But 
now, thought I, if this sin is not. unto death, then it is 
pardonable ; therefore from this I have encouragement t.» 
come to God by Christ for mercy — to consider the prom- 
ise of forgiveness as that which stands with open arms 



76 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

to receive nie as well as others. This therefore was a 
great easement to my mind, to wit, that my sin was 
pardonable — that it was not the sin unto death. 1 John 
5 : 16, IT. None but those that know what my trouble 
was by their own experience, can tell what relief came to 
my soul by this consideration ; it was a release to me 
from my former bonds, and a shelter from my former 
storms. I seemed now to stand upon the same ground, 
with other sinners, and to have as good right to the word 
and prayer as any of them. 

Now, I say, I was in hopes that my sin was not un- 
pardonable, but that there might be hope for me to obtain 
forgiveness. But Oh, how Satan did now lay about him 
for to bring me down again. But he could by no means 
do it, neither this day nor the most part of the next, for 
that sentence, "This sin is not unto death," stood like a 
mill-post at my back ; yet towards the evening of the 
next day I felt this word begin to leave me, and to with- 
draw its support from me ; and so I returned to my old 
fears again, but with a great deal of grudging and pee- 
vishness, for I feared the sorrow of despair ; nor could 
my faith long retain this word. But the n^xt day at 
evening, being under many fears, I went to seek the 
Lord, and as I prayed I cried, and my soul cried to him 
in these words with strong cries : " Lord, I beseech 
thee show me that thou hast loved me with an everlast- 
ing love." I had no sooner said it than with sweetness 
this returned upon me as an echo or sounding again : "I 
have loved thee with an everlasting love." Jer. 31 : 3. 
Now I went to bed in quiet ; also, when awakened the 
next morning, it was fresh upon my soul, and I believed 
it. But yet the tempter left me not, for it could not be 
so little as a hundred times tliat he that day did labor to 
break my peace. Oh the combats and conflicts that I 
did then meet with. As I strove to hold by this word, 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 77 

that of Esau would fly in my face like lightning. I 
would be sometimes up and down twenty times in an 
houi' ; yet God did bear me out and keep my heart upon 
this word, from which I had also, for several days togeth- 
er, very much sweetness and comfortable hopes of par- 
don ; for thus it was made unto me : "I loved thee while 
thou wast committing this sin. I loved thee before, I 
love thee still, and I will love thee for ever." 

Yet I saw my sin most barbarous, and a filthy crime, 
and could not but conclude, with great shame and aston- 
ishment, that I had horribly abused the holy Son of God ; 
wherefore I felt my soul greatly to love and pity him, 
and my bowels to yearn towards him, for I saw he was 
still my friend, and did reward me good for evil ; yea, 
the love and affection that then did burn within me to 
my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, did work at this 
time such a strong and hot desire of revenge upon my- 
self, for the abuse I had done unto him, that, to speak as 
I then thought, had I a thousand gallons of blood within 
my veins, I could freely then have spilled it all at the 
command and feet of this mj'^ Lord and Saviour. 

And as I was thus musing, and in my studies consid- 
ering how to love the Lord, and to express my love to 
him, that saying came in upon me : " If thou, Lord, 
shouldest mark iniquities, Lord, who shall stand? 
But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be 
feared." Psa. 130 : 3, 4. These were good words to 
me, especially the latter part thereof, to wit, that there 
is forgiveness with the Lord, that he might be feared — 
that is, as I then understood it, that he might be loved 
and had in reverence ; for it was thus made out to me : 
that "the great God did set so high an esteem upon the 
love of his poor creatures, that rather than he would go 
without their love, lie Avould pardon their transgressions." 
And now was tluit word i'liKilled on me, and I was also 



78 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

refreshed by it : " Then shalt thou remember, and be con- 
founded, and never open thy mouth any more because of 
thy shame, when I am pacified towards thee for all that 
thou hast done, saith the Lord God." Ezek, 16 : 63. 

Thus was my soul at this time, and as I then did 
think, for ever set at liberty from being afflicted with my 
former guilt and amazement. But before many weeks 
were gone I began to despond again, fearing lest, not- 
withstanding all I had enjoyed, I might be deserted and 
destroyed at the last ; for this consideration came strong 
into my mind: that "whatever comfort and peace I 
thought I might have from the word of the promise of 
life, yet unless there could be found in my refreshment a 
concurrence and agreement with the Scriptures, let me 
think what I will thereof, and hold it never so fast, I 
should find no such thing at the end, for the Scripture 
cannot be broken." John 10 : 35. Now began my heart 
again to ache and fear I might meet with disappointment 
at last. Wherefore I began with all seriousness to ex- 
amine my former comfort, and to consider whether one 
that had sinned as I had done, might with confidence 
trust upon the faithfulness of God laid down in these 
words by which I had been comforted, and on which I 
had leaned myself. 

But now were brought to my mind, " For it is im- 
possible for those who were once enlightened, and have 
tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of 
the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, 
and the powers of the world to come, if they shall fall 
away, to renew them again unto repentance." "For if 
we sin wilfully after that we have received the know- 
ledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for 
sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and 
fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries." 
Even " as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his birth- 



on (iHAci-: ABoi mum;. TU 

right. For ye know how that afterwards, when he would 
have inherited the blessing-, he was rejected ; for he found 
no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully 
with tears.'' Heb. 6 : 4-6 ; 10 : 27 ; 12 : 11. 

Now was the word of the gospel forced from my soul, 
so that no promise or encouragement was to be found in 
the Bible for me ; and now would that saying work upon 
my spirit to afQict me : " Rejoice not, Israel, for joy, ■ 
as other people." Hos. 9:1. For I saw indeed there 
was cause of rejoicing for those that held to Jesus ; but 
for me, I had cut myself off by my transgressions, and 
left myself neither foothold nor handhold among all the 
stays and props in the precious word of life. And truly 
I did now feel myself to sink into a gulf, as a house 
whose foundation is destroyed : I did liken myself in 
this condition unto the case of a child that was fallen 
into a mill-pit, who, though it could make some shift to 
scramble and sprawl in the water, yet, because it could 
find hold neither for hand nor foot, therefore at last it 
must die in that condition. So soon as this fresh assault 
had fastened on my soul, that scripture came into my 
heart : " This for many days ;" and indeed I found it was 
so, for I could not be delivered nor brought to peace 
again until well-nigh two years and a half were com- 
pletely finished. Wherefore these words, though in 
themselves they tended to no discouragement, yet to me, 
who feared this condition would be eternal, they were 
at some times as a help and a refreshment to me : for, 
thought I, many days are not for ever — many days will 
have an end ; therefore, seeing I was to be afflicted not 
a few, but many days, yet I was glad it was but for 
many days. Thus, I say, I would recall myself some- 
times, and give myself a help ; for as soon as ever the 
word came into my mind, at first I knew my trouble 
would be long ; yet tliis would be but sometimes, for I 



80 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

could not always think on this, nor even be helped by it, 
though I did. 

Now while the Scriptures lay befoi'e me and laid sin 
anew at my door, that saying in Luke 18:1, with others, 
did encourage me to prayer. Then the tempter again 
laid at me very sore, suggesting that neither the mercy 
of God nor yet the blood of Christ did at all concern me, 
nor could they help me for my sin ; therefore it was but 
in vain to pray. Yet, thought I, I will pray. But, said 
the tempter, your sin is unpardonable. Well, said I, I 
will pray. It is to no boot, said he. Yet, said I, I will 
pray. So I went to prayer to God ; and while I was at 
prayer, I uttered words to this effect : " Lord, Satan tells 
me that neither thy mercy nor Christ's blood is sufficient 
to save my souk Lord, shall I honor thee most by be- 
lieving thou wilt and canst ; or him, by believing thou 
neither wilt nor canst ? Lord, I would fain honor thee 
by believing thou wilt and canst." And as I was thus 
before the Lord, that scripture fastened on my heart, 
" man, great is thy faith," even as if one had clapped 
me (fa the back as I was on my knees before God ; yet I 
was not able to believe this, that this was a prayer of 
faith, till almost six months aftei', for I could not think 
that I had faith, or that there should be a word for me to 
act faith on ; therefore I would still be as sticking in the 
jaws of desperation, and went mourning up and down in 
a sad condition. 

There was nothing now that I longed for more than 
to be put out of doubt as to this thing in question, and 
, as I was vehemently desiring to know if there was in- 
deed hope for me, these words came rolling into my 
mind : "Will the Lord cast off for ever ? and will he be 
favorable no more ? Is his mercy clean gone for ever ? 
doth his promise fail for evermore ? Hath God forgotten 
to be gracious ? hath he in anger shut up his tender mer- 



Oli GRACE ABOUNDING. 81 

cies?" Psa. 77 : 7-9. And all the while they ran in my 
niind, methou<yht I had still this as the answer: It is a 
question whether he hath or no ; it may be he hath not. 
Yea, the interrogatory seemed to me to carry in it a sure 
affirmation that indeed he had not, nor would so cast off, 
but would be favorable ; that his promise doth not fail, 
and that he hath not forgotten to be gracious, nor would 
in anger shut up his tender mercy. Something also there 
was upon my heart at the same time, which I cannot 
now call to mind, with which this text did sweeten my 
heart, and make me conclude that his mercy might not 
be quite gone, nor gone for ever. 

At another time I remember I was again much under 
this question, whether the blood of Christ was sufficient 
to save my soul ; in which doubt I continued from morn- 
ing till about seven or eight at night ; and at last, when 
I was as it were quite worn out with fear lest it should 
not lay hold on me, these wdi'ds did sound suddenly with- 
in my heart, "He is able." But methought this word able 
was spoke loud unto me ; it showed a great word ; it 
seemed to be wi'it in great letters, and gave such a jos- 
tle to my fear and doubt — I mean for the time it tarried 
with me, which was about a day — as I had never had 
from that all my life, either before or after. Heb. 7 : 25. 

But one morning, as I was again at prayer, and trem- 
bling under the fear of this, that "no word of God could 
help me," that piece of a sentence darted in upon me, 
"My grace is sufficient." At this methought I felt some 
stay, as if there might be hope. But Oh, how good a 
thing it is for God to send his word ; for about a fort- 
night before I was looking on this very place, and thdn 
I thought it could not come near my soul with comfort ; 
therefore I threw" down my book in a pet ; then I thought 
it was not large enough for me ; no, not large enough ; 
but now it was as- if it had arms of grace so wide that 
•1* 



82 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

it could not only enclose me, but many more besides. 
By these words I was sustained, yet not without exceed- 
ing conflicts, for the space of seven or eight weeks, for 
my peace would be in it and out sometimes twenty times 
a day — comfort now, and trouble presently ; peace now, 
and before I could go a furlong, as full of fear and guilt 
as ever heart could hold ; and this was not only now and 
then, but my whole seven weeks' experience. For this 
about the sufficiency of grace, and that of Esau's part- 
ing with his birthright, would be like a pair of scales 
within my mind — sometimes one end would be upper- 
most, and sometimes again the other, according to which 
would be my peace or trouble. 

Therefore I did still pray to God that he would come 
in with this scripture more fully on my heart, to wit, 
that he would help me to apply the whole sentence, for 
as yet I could not. What he gave me, that I gathered ; 
but further I could not go ;*for as yet it only helped me 
to hope there might be mercy for me : " My grace is suf- 
ficient." And though it came no further, it answered my 
former question, to wit, that there was hope ; yet, be- 
cause "for thee" was left out, I was not contented, but 
prayed to God for that also. Wherefore one day, when 
I was in a meeting of God's people, full of sadness and 
terror, for my fears again were strong upon me, and as I 
was now thinking my soul was never the better, but my 
case most sad and fearful, these words did with great 
power suddenly break in upon me : My grace is sufficient 
for thee, my grace is sufficient for thee, my grace is suf- 
ficient for thee, three times together. And Oh, methought 
that every word was a mighty word unto me, as my, and 
grace, and sufficient, and for thee; they were then, and 
sometimes are still, far bigger than others be. At which 
time my understanding was so enlightened that I was 
as though I had seen the Lord Jesus look down from 



OR GRACE ABUUNDIXii. 83 

heaven through the tiles upon me, and direct tliose words 
unto me. This sent me mourning- home ; it bnjke my 
heart and filled me full of joy, and laid me low as the 
dust, only it stayed not long with me, 1 mean in this 
glory and refreshing comfort ; j'ct it continued with me 
for several weeks, and did encourage me to hope. But 
as soon as tliat powerful operation of it was taken from 
my heart, that other about Esau returned upon me as 
before ; so my soul did hang as in a pair of scales again, 
sometimes up, and sometimes down ; now in peace, and 
anon again in terror. 

Thus I went on for many weeks, sometimes comfort- 
ed and sometimes tormented ; and especially sometimes 
my torment would bo very sore, for all those scriptures 
aforenamed in the Hebrews would be set before me, as 
the only sentences that would keep me out of heaven. 
Then, again, I would begin to repent. that ever that 
thought went through me ; I would also think thus with 
myself; "Why, how many scriptures are there against 
me ? There are but three or four ; and cannot God miss 
them, and save me for all of them ?" Sometimes, again, 
1 w^ould think, " Oh, if it were not for these three or four 
words now, how might I be comforted." And I could 
hardly forbear at sometimes to wish them out of the 
book. Then methought I would sec as if Peter and 
Paul and John and all the holy writers did look with 
scorn upon me, and hold me in derision ; and as if they 
had said unto me, "All our words are truth, one of as 
much force as the other. It is not we that have cut you 
off, but you have cast away yourself There is none of 
our sentences that you must take hold upon but these, 
and such as those: 'It is impossible.' 'There remains 
no more sacrifice for sin.' 'And it had been better for 
them not to have known the will of God, than after they 
had known it, to turn from the holv commandment do- 



84 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

livered unto them.' For 'the Scriptuve cannot be bro- 
ken.'" Ileb. 6:4; 10:26; 2 Pet. 2:21; John 10:35. 
Tliese, as the elders of the city of refuge, I saw were to 
be the judges both of my case and me, while I stood 
with the avenger of blood at my heels, trembling at 
their gates for deliverance ; also with a thousand fears 
and mistrusts, I feared that they would shut me out for 
ever. Josh. 20 : 3, 4. Thus was I confounded, not know- 
ing what to do, or how to be satisfied in this question, 
"whether the Scriptures could agree in the salvation of 
my soul." I quaked at the apostles ; I knew their words 
were true, and that they must stand for ever. 

And I remember one day, as I was in divers frames 
of spirit, and considering that these frames were accord- 
ing to the nature of several scrij^tures that came in upon 
my mind, if this of grace, then was I quiet ; but if that 
of Esau, then tormented. Lord, thought I, if both these 
scriptures should meet in my heart at once, I wonder 
which of them would get the better of me. So methoughl 
I had a longing mind that they might both come togeth 
er upon me ; yea, I desired of God they might. Well, 
about two or three days after, so they did indeed ; they 
bolted both upon me at a time, and did work and strug- 
gle strongly in me for a while ; at last that about Esau's 
birthright began to wax weak and withdraw and van' 
ish, and this about the sufficiency of grace prevailed 
with peace and joy. And as I was in a muse about this 
thing, that scripture came in i:pon me : " Mercy rejoiceth 
against judgment." Jas. 2:13. This was a wonder to 
me, yet truly I am apt to think it was of God ; for the 
word of the law and wrath must give place to the word 
of life and grace, because, though the word of condemna- 
tion be glorious, yet the word of life and salvation doth far 
exceed in glory, 2 Cor. 3 : 8-1 1 ; also that Moses and Elias 
must both vanish, and leave Christ and his saints alone. 



OR GRACE ABOUNDINU. 85 

This scripture did also most swwtly visit my soul: 
"And liim that coiiieth to mc I will in no wise cast out." 
John 6 : 37. Oh the comfort that 1 found from this word, 
" in no wise." As if he had said, By no means, for noth- 
ing-, whatever he hath done. But Satan would greatly 
] ibor to ptdl this promise from me, by tellinj? me that 
Christ did not mean me and such as I, but sinners of a 
lower rank, that had not done as I had done. But I 
woxdd answer him again : "Satan, here is in these words 
no such exception ; but Iilm. Iliat covielh — him, ony him. : 
'him thai comcfh to mc. I will in no wise cast out.'" And 
this I well remember still, that of all the slights that 
Satan used to take this scripture from me, yet he never 
did so much as put this question: "But do you come 
aright?" And I have thought the reason was, because 
he thought 1 knew full well what coming aright was, for 
I saw that to come aright was to come as I was, a vile 
and ungodly sinner, and so cast myself at the feet of 
mercy, condemning* myself for sin. If ever Satan and I 
did strive for any word of God in all my life, it was for 
this good word of Christ ; he at one end, and I at the 
other. Oh, what work we made ! It was for this in 
John, t say, that we did so tug and strive : he pulled, 
and I pulled ; but, God be praised, I overcame him ; I 
got sweetness from it. 

But notwithstanding all these helps and blessed 
words of grace, yet that of Esau's selling his birthright 
would still at times distress my conscience ; for though 
I had been most sweetly comforted, and that but just 
before, yet when that came into my mind, it would make 
me fear again ; I could not be quite rid thereof, it would 
every day be with me. Wherefore noAV I went another 
way to work, even to consider the nature of this blas- 
phemous thought ; I mean, if I siiould take the words at 
the largest, and give them their own natural force and 



86 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

scope, even every word therein. So when I had thus 
considered, I found that if they were fairly taken, they 
would amount to this : that I had freely left the Lord 
Jesus Christ to his choice, whether he would be my Sav- 
iour or no ; for the wicked words were these : Let him 
go if he will. Then that scripture gave me hope : " I 
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee." Heb. 13:5. 
Lord, said I, but I have left thee. Then it answered 
again, "But I will not leave thee." For this I thanked 
God also. Yet I was grievously afraid he would, and 
found it exceeding hard to trust him, seeing I had so 
olfended him. I should have been exceeding glad that 
this thought had never entered my mind ; for then I 
thought I could with more ease and freedom in abun- 
dance have leaned on his grace. I saw it was with me 
as it was with Joseph's brethren ; the guilt of their own 
wickedness did often fill them with fears that their broth- 
er would at last despise them. Gen. 45 : 15, 16. 

Yet above all the scriptures that I yet did meet with, 
that in Joshua, ch. 20, was the greatest comfort to me, 
Avhich speaks of the slayer that was to flee for refuge. 
And if the avenger of blood pursue the slayer, then they 
that are the elders of the city of refuge " shall not deliv- 
er him into his hands, because he smote his neighbor un- 
wittingly, and hated him not aforetime," Josh. 20 : 5. 
Oh, blessed be God for this word. I was convinced that 
I was the slayer, and that the avenger of blood pursued 
me I felt with great terror ; it only now remained that I 
inquire wliethcr I have right to enter the city of refuge. 
So I found that he must not, " who lay in wait to shed 
blood." It was not the wilful murderer, but he who un- 
wittingly did it ; he who did it unawares, not out of 
spite, or grudge, or malice ; he that shed it unwittingly ; 
even he who did not hate his neighbor before. Wliere- 
fore I thought, verily I was the man that must enter, 



on GRACE ADOUXDIXG. 87 

because I had smitten my iiciglibor "unwittingly, and 
hated him not aforetime." I liated liim not aforetime ; 
no, I prayed unto him, was tender of sinning' against 
him ; yea, and against this wicked temptation I had 
strove for twelve months before ; yea, and also when it 
did pass through my heart, it did it in spite of my teeth. 
Wiiereforc I thought I had a right to enter this city ; and 
tlie elders, which are the apostles, were not to deliver me 
up. This therefore was great comfort to me, and gave 
me much ground of hope. 

Yet being very critical, for my smart had made mo 
so tliat I knew not Avhat ground was sure enougli to bear 
me, I had one question that my soul did mucli desire to 
be resolved about, and that was, "whether it be possi- 
ble for any soul that hath sinned the unpardonable sin, 
yet, after that to receive though but the least true spir- 
itual comfort from God through Christ." The which, 
after I had much considered, 1 found the answer was, 
Xo, they could not ; and that for these reasons : First, 
because those that have sinned that sin are debarred a 
share in the blood of Christ ; and being shut out of that, 
they must needs be void of the least ground of hope, 
and so of spiritual comfort, "for to such there remains 
no more sacrifice for sin." Secondl}', because they are 
denied a sliare in the promise of life : they " shall never 
be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in that which is t(f 
come." Thirdly, the Son of God excludes them also from 
a share in his blessed intercession, being for ever asham- 
ed to own them, both before his holy Father and the 
blessed angels in heaven. Ileb. 10 : 2G ; Matt. 12:32; 
Mark 8 : 38. 

When I had with much deliberation considered of this 
matter, and could not but conclude that the Lord had 
comforted me, and that too after this my wicked sin. 
then methought I durst venture to come nigh unto those 



88 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

most fearful and terrible scriptures with which all this 
"» v^hile I had been so greatly affrighted, and on wliich in- 
deed before I durst scarce cast mine eye, yea, had much 
ado a hundred times to forbear wishing them out of the 
Bible, for I thought they would destroy me ; but now, I 
say, 1 began to take some measure of encouragement to 
come clos« to them, to read them and consider them, and 
to weigh their scope and tendency. The which, when I 
began to do, I found their visage changed, for they look- 
ed not so grimly as before I thought they did. And first 
I came to the sixth of Hebrews, yet trembling for fear it 
should strike me ; which, when I had considered, I found 
that the falling there intended was a falling quite away— 
that is, as I conceived, a falling from and absolute deny- 
ing of the gospel, of the remission of sins by Jesus 
Christ ; for from them the apostle begins his argument. 
Heb, 6 : 4-6. Secondly, I found that this falling away 
must be openly, even in the view of the world, even so 
as " to put Christ to an open shame." Thirdly, 1 found 
that those he there intended were for ever shut up of 
God, in blindness, hardness, and impenitency. " It is im- 
possible they should be renewed again unto repentance." 
By all these particulars I found, to God's everlasting 
praise, my sin was not the sin in this place intended. 

First, I confessed I was fallen, but not fallen away, 
that is, from the profession of faith in Jesus unto eternal 
life. 

Secondly, I confessed that I had put Jesus Christ to 
shame by my sin, but not to open shame ; I did not deny 
him before men, nor condemn him as a fruitless one be- 
fore the world. 

Thirdly, nor did I find that God had shut me up, or 
denied me to come — though I found it hard work indeed 
to come — to him by sorrow and repentance. Blessed be 
God for unsearchable grace- 



oil (illACE ABOUNDING. 



89 



Then T considered tlic words in the tenth chapter of 
the Hebrews, and found, 1. That the wilful sin there 
mentioned is not every wilful sin, but that which doth 
throw off Christ, and then his commandments too. 2. 
That it must be done also openly, before two or three 
witnesses, to answer that of the law. Heb. 10 : 28. 
3. This sin cannot be committed but with great despite 
done to the Spirit of grace— despising both the dissua- 
sions from that sin and the persuasions to the contrary. 
But the Lord knows, though this my sin was devilish, 
yet it did not amount to these 

And as touching that in the twelfth chapter of the 
Hebrews, about Esau's selling his birthright, though 
this was that which killed me, and stood like a spear 
against me, yet now I did consider, 1. That his was not 
a"hasty thought against the continual labor of his mmd, 
but a thought consented to, and put in practice likewise, 
and that after some deliberation. Gen. 25 : 34. 2. It 
was a public and open action, even before his brother, if 
not before many more : this made his sin of a far more 
heinous nature than otherwise it would have been. 3. 
He continued to slight his birthright: ho did eat and 
drink, and went his way ; thus Esau despised his birth- 
right : yea, twenty years after, hc^was found to despise 
it^stilL " And Esau said, 1 have enough, my brother : 
keep that thou hast unto thyself." Gen. 33 : 9. 

Now as touching this, that Esau sought a place of 
repentance, thus I thought: 1. This was not for the 
birthright, but the blessing ; this is clear from the apos- 
'tle, and is distinguished by Esau him.self : he hath taken 
away my birthright, that is, formerly, and now he hatli 
. taken away my blessing also. Gen. 27:36. 2. Now 
this being thus considered, I came again to the apostle 
to sec what might be the mind of God, in a- New Testa- 
ment style and sense, concerning Esau's sin ; and so far 



90 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

as I could conceive, this was the mind of God : that the 
birthright signified regeneration, and the blessing the 
eternal inheritance ; for so the apostle seems to hint : 
" Lest there be any profane person, as Esau, who for one 
morsel of meat sold his birthright ;" as if ho should say, 
that shall cast oif all those blessed beginnings of God 
that at present are upon him in order to a new birth, 
lest they become as Esau, even be rejected afterwards, 
when they should inherit the blessing. For many there 
are who in the day of grace and mercy despise those 
things which are indeed the birthright to heaven, who 
yet, when the deciding day appears, will cry as loud as 
Esau, " Lord, Lord, open to us ;" but then, as Isaac would 
not repent, no more will God the Father, but will say, 
"I have blessed these, yea, and they shall be blessed;" 
but as for you, " Depart from mc, ye workers of iniqui- 
ty." Luke 13: 25-21 

When I had thus considered these scriptures, and 
found that thus to understand them was not against, but 
according to other scriptures, this still added further to 
my encouragement and comfort, and also gave a great 
blow to that objection, to wit, that the Scriptures could 
not agree in the salvation of my soul. And now remain- 
ed only the hinder part of the tempest, for the thunder 
was gone beyond me, only some drops did still 'remain 
that now and then would fall upon me ; but because my 
former frights and anguish were very sore and deep, 
therefore it oft befell me still as it befalleth those that 
have been scared with fire. I thought every voice was, 
Fire, fire ; every little touch would hurt my tender con- 
science. 

But one day as I was passing into the field, and that . 
too with some dashes on my conscience, fearing lest yet 
all was not I'ight, suddenly this sentence fell upon my 
soul : Thy righteousness is in heaven. And methought, 



OR (JRACE ABOUNDINC;. 91 

withal, I saw with tlio eyes of my soul Jesus Christ at 
God's rig-ht haiul ; ihoro, I say, was iny righteousness ; 
so that wherever I was, or whatever 1 was doing, God 
could not say of mo, he wants my righteousness, for that 
was just before him. I also saw, moreover, that it was 
not my good frame of heart that made my rigliteousness 
better, nor yet my bad frame that made my righteous- 
ness worse, for my righteousness was Jesus Christ him- 
self, "the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever." Ileb 
13:8. 

Now did my chains fall olf my legs indeed I was 
loosed from my afflictions and irons ; my temptations 
also fled away ; so that from that time those dreadful 
scriptures of God left off to trouble me ; now went I also 
home rejoicing for the grace and love of God. So when 
I came home, 1 looked to see if I could find that sentence, 
Thy righteousness is in heaven, but could find no such 
saying; wherefore my heart began to sink again, only 
that was brought to my remembrance : " Of him arc ye 
in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, 
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption," 1 Cor. 
1 : 30 : by this word 1 saw the other sentence true ; for 
by this scripture I saw that the man Christ Jesus, as he 
is distinct from us as touching his bodily presence, so 
he is our righteousness and sanctification before God. 

Here therefore I lived for some time very sweetly at 
peace with God, through Ch-.'st. Oh, metliotight, Christ, 
Christ ! there was nothing but Christ that was before my 
eyes. I was not now only for looking upon this and the 
other benefits of Christ apart, as of his blood, burial, or 
resurrection, but considering him as a whole Christ, as 
ho in whom all these and all other his virtues, relations, 
offices, and operations met together, and that he sat on 
the right hand of God in heaven. It was glorious to me 
to see his exaltation, and the worth and prevalency of all 



92 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

his benefits, aud that because now I could look from my- 
self to him, aud would reckon that all those graces of 
God that now were green on me, were yet but like those 
cracked groats and four-pence-half-peuuies that rich men 
carry in their purses when their gold is in their trunks 
at home. Oh, I saw my gold was in my trunk at home, 
in Christ my Lord and Saviour. Now Christ was all — • 
all my righteousness, all my sanctification, and all my 
redemption. 

Further, the Lord did also lead me into the mystery 
of union with the Sou of God — that I was joined to him, 
that I was flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone ; and 
now was that a sweet word to me in Ephes. 5 : 30. By 
this also was my faith in him as my righteousness the 
more confirmed in me ; for if he and I were one, then 
his righteousness was mine, his merits mine, his victory 
also mine. Now could I see myself in heaven and earth 
at once ; in heaven by my Christ, by my head, by my 
righteousness aud life, though on earth by my body or 
person. Now I saw Christ Jesus was looked upon of 
God, and should also be looked upon by us as that com- 
mon or public person in whom all the whole body of his 
elect are always to be considered and reckoned ; that we 
fulfilled the law by him, died by him, rose from the dead 
by him, got the victory over sin, death, the devil, and 
hell by him ; when he died, we died ; and so of his resur- 
rection : " Thy dead men shall live ; together with my 
dead body shall they rise," saith he. And again, "After 
two days he will revive us ; and the third day we shall 
live in his sight." Isa. ch. 26 ; Hos. 6 : 2. Which is 
now fulfilled by the sitting down of the Son of man on 
the right hand of the Majesty in the heavens ; according 
to that to the Ephesians : He "hath raised us up together, 
and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ 
Jesus." Ephes. 2 : 6. Ah, these blessed considerations 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 9H 

ami scriptures, with many others of like nature, were in 
those days made to spangle in mine eye ; so that I have 
cause to say, "Praise ye the Lord God in his sanctuary ; 
praise him in the firmament of his jiower. Praise him 
for his mighty acts ; praise him according to his excel- 
lent o-rcatness." Psa. 150 : 1, 2. 



94 BUNYAN'S LIFE. 

CHAPTER IX. 

Having thus, in few words, given you a taste of the 
sorrow and affiiction that my soul endured by the guilt 
and terror that these my wicked thoughts did lay me 
under, and having given you also a touch of n)y deliv- 
erance therefrom, and of the sweet and blessed comfort 
that I met with afterwards, which comfort dwelt about 
a twelvemonth with my heart, to my unspeakable admi- 
ration, I will now, God willing, before I proceed any far- 
ther, give you in a word or two what I conceive was the 
cause of this temptation, and also after that, what advan- 
tage at the last it became unto my soul. 

For the causes, I conceive they were principally^ two, 
of which two also I was deeply convinced all the time 
this trouble lay upon me. The first was, for that I did 
not, when I was delivered from the temptation that went 
before, still pray to God to keep me from the tempta- 
tions that were to come ; for though, as I can say in 
truth, my soul was much in prayer before this trial seiz- 
ed me, yet when I prayed only, or at the most princi- 
pally, for the removal of present troubles, and for fresh 
discoveries of his love in Christ, which I saw afterwards 
was not enough to do, I also should have prayed that 
the great God would keep me from the evil that was to 
come. Of this I was made deeply sensible by the prayer 
of holy David, who, when he was under present mercy, 
yet prayed that God would hold him back from sin and 
temptation to come; "for then," saith he, "shall I be 
upright, and I shall be innocent from the great trans- 
gression." Psa. 19:13. By this very word was I galled 
and condemned quite through this long temptation. 

That was also another word that did much condemn 



UR (JHACE ABUUNI)IN(;. 95 

me for my folly in the neglect of tliis duty : " Ixt us 
therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that \vc 
may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of 
need." Ileb. 4:16. This I had not done, and therefore 
was thus suffered to sin and fall, according to what is 
written : "Pray that ye enter not into temptation." Au.l 
truly this very thing is to this. day of such weight and 
awe upon me, that I dare not, when I come before the 
Lord, go off my knees until I entreat him for help and 
mercy against the temptations that are to come ; and I 
do beseech thee, reader, that thou learn to beware of my 
negligence by the afflictions that for this thing I did for 
days and months and years with sorrow undergo. 

Another cause of this temptation was, that I had 
tempted God ; and on this manner did I do it : upon a 
time my wife was great with child, and before her full 
time was come, her pangs, as of a woman in travail, 
were fierce and strong upon her, even as she would have 
immediately fallen into labor and been delivered of an 
untimely birth. Now at this very time it was that I had 
been so strongly tempted to question the being of God ; 
wherefore, as my wife lay crying by me, 1 said, but with 
all secrecy imaginable, even thinking in my heart, 
"Lord, if now thou wilt remove this sad affliction from 
my wife, and cause that she be troubled no more there- 
with this niglit" — and now were her pangs just upon 
her — " then shall I know that thou canst discern the most 
secret thoughts of the heart." I had no sooner said it in 
my heart but her pangs were taken from her, and she 
was cast into a deep sleep, and so continued till morn- 
ing. At this I greatly marvelled, not knowing what to 
think ; but after I had been awake a good while, and 
heard her cry no more, I fell asleep also. So when I 
awaked in the morning it came upon me again, even 
what I had said in my heart the last night, and how the 



96 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

Lord had sliowcd mc that he knew my secret thouglits, 
which was a great astonisliment unto me for several 
weeks after. 

Well, about a year and a half afterwards, that wick- 
ed, sinful thought of which I have spoken before went 
through my wicked heart, "Let Christ go if he will." 
So when I, was fallen under guilt for this, the remem- 
brance of my other thought, and of the effect thereof, 
would also come upon me with this retort, which also 
carried rebuke along with it : " Now you may see that 
God doth know the most secret thoughts of the heart." 
And with this, that of the passages that were between 
the Lord and his servant Gideon fell upon my spirit : 
how because that Gideon tempted God with his fleece, 
both wet and dry, when he should have believed and 
ventured upon his words, therefore the Lord did after- 
wards so try him as to send him against an innumerable 
company of enemies, and that too, as to outward appear- 
ance, without any strength or help. Judg. 1 : 1. Thus 
he served me, and that justly; for I should have believ- 
ed his word, and not have put an if upon the all-seeing- 
ness of God. 

And now to show you something of the advantages 
that I also gained by this temptation ; and first, by this 
I was made continually to possess in my soul a very 
wonderful sense both of the blessing and glory of God 
and of his beloved Son. In the temptation that went 
before, my soul was perplexed with unbelief, blasphemy, 
hardness of heart, questions about the being of God, 
Christ, the truth of the word, and certainty of the world 
to come : I say, then I was greatly assaulted and tor- 
mented with atheism ; but now the case was otherwise ; 
now was God and Christ continually before my face, 
though not in a way of comfort, but in a way of exceed- 
ing dread and terror. The glory of the holiness of God 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 97 

d;el at lliis tiiiio break ine to pieces, and the bowels and 
compassion of Christ did break me as on the wheel ; for 
I could not consider him but as a lost and rejected Christ, 
the remembrance of which was as the continual break- 
ing of my bones. 

The Scriptures also were wonderful unto me ; I saw ^ 
that the truth and verity of them were the keys of the 
kingdom of heaven : those that the Scriptures favor 
must inherit bliss ; but those that they oppose and con- 
demn must perish for evermore. Oh, this word, "for 
the Scriptures carniot be broken," would rend the caul of 
my heart; and so would that other: "Whose sins ye 
remit, they are remitted ; but whose sins ye retain, they 
are retained." Now I saw the apostles to be the elders 
of the city of refuge. Josh. 20 : 4. Those that they 
were to receive in, were received to life ; but those that 
they shut out, were to be slain by the avenger of blood. 
Oh, one sentence of the Scripture did more afflict and 
terrify my mind — I mean those sentences that stood 
against me, and sometimes I thought they every one 
did — more, I say, than an army of forty thousand men 
that might come against me. Woe be to him against 
whom the Scriptures bend themselves. 

B}' this temptation I was made to see more into the 
nature of the promises than ever I had before ; for I now 
lay trembling under the mighty hand of God, continually 
torn and rent by the thundering of his justice. This 
made me, with careful heart and watchful eye, with great 
fearfulness to turn over every leaf, and with much dili- 
gence, mixed with trembling, to consider every sentence, 
together with its natural force and latitude. By this 
temptation also I was greatly liolden off from my former 
foolish practice of putting by the word of promise wlien 
it came into my mind ; for now, though I could not draw 
that comfort and sweetness from tlie promise which 1 

Pil Prog. .') 



98 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

liad done ut other times, yet, like a iiuui sinking-, I would 
catch at all I saw. Formerly I thought I might not med- 
dle with the promise unless I felt its comfort ; but now 
it was no time thus to do, the avenger of blood too hard- 
ly did pursue me. 

Now therefore was I glad to catch at that word, 
which yet I feared I had no ground or riglit to own, and 
even to leap into the bosom of that promise that yet I« 
feared did shut its heart against me. Now also I would 
labor to take the word as God hath laid it down, without 
restraining the natural force of one syllable thereof 
Oh, what did 1 see in the blessed sixth chapter of John : 
"And him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out." 
John 6:37. Now I began to consider with myself that 
God had a bigger mouth to speak with than 1 had a 
heart to conceive witli ; I thought also with myself that 
he spoke not his w^ords in haste, or in an unadvised heat, 
but with infinite wisdom and judgment, and in very 
truth and faithfulness. 

I would in these days often, in my greatest agonies, 
even flounce towards the promise, as the horses do tow- 
ards sound ground, and yet stick in the mire ; conclud- 
ing, though as one almost bereft of his wits through 
fear, on this will I rest and stay, and leave the fulfilling 
of it to the God of heaven that made it. Oh, many a 
pull hath my heart had with Satan for that blessed sixth 
chapter of John. I did not now, as at other times, look 
principally for comfort, though Oh how welcome would 
it have been unto me ; but now a word, a word to lean a 
weary soul upon, that it might not sink for ever, it was 
that I hunted f8r. Yea, often when I have been looking 
to the promise, I have seen as if the Lord would refuse 
my soul for ever ; I was often as if I had run upon the 
pikes, and as if the Lord had thrust at me to keep me 
from him as with a fiamino" sword. Then would I lliiiik 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 99 

of Esther, who went to petition tlie kinj:^ contrary to the 
Uiw. I thought also of HenlKuhad's servants, who went 
with ropes upon their heads to their ononiies for mercy. 
The woman of Canaan also, that would not be daunted, 
though called dog- by Christ, and the man that went to 
borrow bread at midnight, were also great encourage- 
ments unto inc. Esth. 4 : IG ; 1 Kings 20 : 31, etc. ; Matt. 
15 : 22, etc. ; Luke 11 : 5-8, etc. 

I never saw such heights and deptlis in g-race and 
love and mercy as 1 saw after this temptation — great 
sins to draw out great grace; and* whore guilt is most 
terrible and fierce, there the mercy of God in Christ, 
when showed to the soul, appears most high and mighty. 
When Job had passed through his captivity, he had 
twice as much as he had before. Job 42:10. Blessed 
be God for Jesus Christ our Lord. Many other things I 
might here make observation of, but I woidd be brief, 
and therefore shall at this time omit them, and pray God 
that my harms ma}^ make others fear to offend, lest the}' 
also be made to bear the iron yoke as I did. I had two 
or three times, at or about my deliverance from this 
temptation, such strange apprehensions of the grace of 
God, that I could hardly bear up under it ; it was so 
out of measure amazing, when I th(jught it could reacli 
me, that 1 do think if that sense of it had abode long, 
upon me it would liuvo made me incapable for busi- 
ness. 

Xow T shall go forward to give you a relation of 
other of the Lord's dealings with me at simdry other 
seasons, and of the temptations I then did meet withal. 
I shall begin with what I ixwt with when first I joined in 
fellowship with the i)eople of God in Bedford. After I 
liad propounded to the church that my desire was to 
walk in the order and ordinances of Christ with them, 
and was also admitted by them, while I thwight of that 



100 BUNYAN'S LIFE, . 

blessed ordinance of Christ wliich was liis last supper 
with his disciples before his death, that scriptures, " Do 
this in remembrance of me," Luke 22:19, was made a 
very precious word unto me, for by it the Lord did come 
down upon my conscience with the discovery of his 
death for my sins, and as I then felt, did as if he plunged 
me in the virtue of the same. But behold, I had not 
been long a partaker at that ordinance, but such fierce 
and sad temptation did attend me at all times therein, 
both to blaspheme the ordinance and to wish some dead- 
ly thing to those that then did eat thereof, that, lest I 
should at any time be guilty of cons^ting to these 
wicked and fearful thoughts, I was forced to bend my- 
self all the while to pray to God to keep me from such 
blasphemies ; and also to cry to God to bless the cup 
and bread to them, as it were, fi'om mouth to mouth. 
The reason of this temptation, I have thought since, 
was because I did not with that reverence that became 
me at first approach to partake thereof. Thus I contin- 
ued for three quarters of a year, and could never have 
rest nor ease ; but at the last the Lord came in upon my 
soul with that same scripture by which my soul was vis- 
ited before; and after that I have been usually very 
well and comfortable in the partaking of that blessed 
ordinance, and have, I trust, therein discerned the Lord's 
body as broken for my sins, and that his precious blood 
hath been shed for my transgressions. 

Upon a time I was something inclining to a consump- 
tion, wherewith about the spring I was suddenly and 
violently seized with much weakness in my outward 
man, insomuch that I thought I could not live. Now 
began I afresh to give myself up to a serious examina- 
tion of my state and condition for the future, and of my 
evidences for that blessed world to come ; for it hath, I 
bless the name of God, been my usual course, as always. 



OR (JRAC'E ABOUNDING. 101 

so especially in the clay of aflliction, to ciKk-avor to keep 
my interests in the life to come clear before mi<ic eyes. 
But I had uo sooner began to recall to mind my furmer 
experience of the goodness of God to my soul, than there 
came flocking into my mind an innumerable company of 
my sins and transgressions ; among which these were 
at this time most to my affliction, namely, my deadness, 
dulness, and coldness in my holy duties ; my wanderings 
of heart, my weari.someness in all good things, my want 
of love to G(jd, his ways, and people, with this at the 
end of all: "Are these the fruits of Christianity? are 
these tokens of j*- blessed man ?'' 

At the apprehensions of these things my sickness 
was doubled upon me, for now I was sick in my inward 
man, my soul was clogged with guilt ; now also were 
my former experiences of God's goodness to me quite 
taken out of my mind and hid, as if they had never 
been or seen. Now was my soul greatly pinched be- 
tween these two considerations : Live I must not ; die I 
dare not. Now I sunk and fell in my spirit, and was 
giving up all for lost ; but as I was walking up and 
down my house as a man in a most woful state, that 
word of God took hold of my heart: "Ye are justified 
freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in 
Christ Jesus." Rom. 3 : 24. But Oh, what a turn it 
made upon me. Now was I as one awakened out of 
some troublesome sleep and dream ; and listening to 
this heavenly sentence, I was as if I had heard it thus 
spoken to me: "Sinner, thou thinkest that because of 
thy sins and infirmities I cannot save thy soul ; but be- 
hold, my Son is by me, and upon him I look, and not on 
thee, and shall deal with thee according as I am pleased 
with him." At this I was greatly enlightened in my 
mind, and made to understand that God c(Mdd justify a 
sinner at any time ; it was but his looking upon Christ, 



102 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

and imputing- lii.s benefits to us, and tlie work was forth- 
with done. 

And as I Avas thus in a nuise, tliat scripture also 
came with great power upon my spirit : "Not by works 
of rig-hteousness that we have done, but according- to his 
mercy he saved us." 2 Tim. 1 : 9. Now was I got on 
hig-h ; I saw myself within the arms of grace and mercy ; 
and thougli I was before afraid to think of a dying hour, 
yet now 1 cried, Let mc die ; now death was lovely and 
beautiful in my sight, for I saw we shall never live in- 
deed till wo be gone to the other world. Oh, methought, 
this life is but a slumber in comparison with that above. 
At this time also I saAv more in these words, "heirs oi" 
God," Kom. 8:1*1, than ever I shall be able to express 
while I live in this world. Heirs of God! God himself is 
the portion of the saints. This I saw and wondered at, 
but cannot tell you what I saw. 

Again, as I was at another time very ill and weak ; 
all that time also the tempter did beset me strongly — 
for I find he is much for assaulting the soul when it 
begins to approach towards the grave ; then is his op- 
portunity — laboring to hide from me my former experi- 
ence of God's goodness ; also setting before me the ter- 
rors of death and the judgment of God, insomuch that at 
this time, through my fear of miscarrying for ever, should 
I now die, I was as one dead before death came, and was 
as if I had felt myself already descending into the pit. 
Methought I said, " There is no way, but to hell 1 must ;" 
but behold, just as 1 was in the midst of those fears, 
these words of the angels carrying Lazarus into Abra- 
ham's bosom darted in upon me, as if it were said, "So 
shall it be with thee when thou shalt leave this world." 
This did sweetly revive my spirits, and help me to hope 
in God, which, when I had Avith comfort mused on a 
while, that word fell Avith great weight upon my mind : 



OR GRACE ABOLXDIXC 1(J3 

"0 death, where is tliy sting-? grave, wljcre is tliy 
victory?" 1 Cor. 15 : 55^ At tliis I becaino both well in 
body and mind at once, for my sickness did i)resently 
vanish, and I walked comfortably in my work for God 
a-^ain. 

At another time, though just before I was pretty well 
and savory in my spirit, yet suddeidy there fell upon nic 
a great cloud of darkness, which did so hide from me the 
things of God and Christ that I was as if I had never 
sceu or known them in my life. I was also so overrun 
in my soul with a senseless, heartless frame of spirit, 
that I could not feel my soul move or stir after grace 
and life by Christ ; 1 was as if my loins were broken, o- 
as if my hands and feet had been tied or bound with 
chains. At this time also I felt some weakness seizt. 
upon my outward man, which made still the other afflic- 
tion the more heavy and uncomfortable to me. 

After I had been in this condition some three or four 
days, as I was sitting by the fire I suddenly felt thi» 
word to sound in my heart, I must go to Jesus. At this 
my former darkness and atheism fled away, and the bless- 
ed things of h(;aven were set in my view. While I was 
on this sudden thus overtaken with surprise, "Wife," 
said I, "is there ever such a scripture, 'I must go to 
Jesus ?'" She said she could not tell ; therefore I stood 
musing still, to sec if I could remember such a place. I 
had not sat above two or three minutes but that came; 
bolting in upon me: "And to an innumerable company 
of angels ;" and withal, the twelfth chapter of Hebrews, 
about the mount Sion, was set before mine eyes. Then 
with joy I told my wife, "Oh, now I know, I know." 
Rut that night was a good night to me ; I have had but 
few better : I longed for the company of some of God's 
people, that I might impart unto them what God had 
showed me. Christ was a precious Christ to my sou! 



104 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

tliat night ; I could scarce lie in my bed for joy and 
peace and triumph through Christ. 

This great glory did not continue upon me until 
morning, yet the twelfth chapter of the epistle to the 
Hebrews was a blessed scripture to me for many days 
together after this. The words are these : "Ye are come 
unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the 
heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of 
angels, to the general assembly and church of the first- 
born, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge 
of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and 
to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and to the 
blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things than that 
of Abel." Thi'ough this sentence the Lord led me over 
and over, first to this word, and then to that, and showed 
me wonderful glory in every one of them. These words 
also have oft since that time been great refreshment to 
my spirit. Blessed be God for having mercy on me. 



PR GRACE ABOUNDING. 105 



CHAPTER X. 

And now I am speaking of my experience, I will in 
this place thrust in a word or two concerning my preach- 
ing the word, and of God's dealing with me in that par- 
ticular also. After I had been about five or six years 
awakened, and been helped myself to see both the want 
and worth of Jesus Christ our Lord, and also enabled to 
venture my soul upon him, some of the most able among 
the saints with us — I say, the most able for judgment and 
holiness of life as they conceived, did perceive that God 
had counted me worthy to understand something of liis 
will in his holy and blessed word, and had given me 
utterance in some measure to express what I saw to 
others for edification ; therefore they desired me, and 
that with much earnestness, that I would be willing at 
some times to take in hand in one of the meetings to 
speak a word of exhortation unto them. The which, 
though at the first it did much dash and abash my spirit, 
j-et being still by them desired and entreated, I consent- 
ed to their requests, and did twice, at two several assem- 
blies, but in private, though with much weakness and 
infirmity, discover my gifts among them ; at which they 
not only seemed to be, but did frequently protest as in 
tlie sight of the great God they were both affected and 
comforted ; and gave thanks to the Father of mercies for 
the grace bestowed on me. After this, sometimes when 
some of them did go into the country to teach, they 
would also that 1 would go with them ; where, though 
a 5 yet I did not, and durst not make use of my gifts in 
an open way, yet more privately still, as I came among 
tlie good people in those places, I did sometimes speak a 
word of admonition luito them also; the which they, as 
5* 



106 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

the others, received with rejoicing at the mercy of God 
to mc-ward, professing their souls were edified thereby. 

Wherefore, to be brief, at last, being still desired by 
the church, after some solemn prayer to the Lord, with 
fasting, I was more particularly called forth and appoint- 
ed to a more ordinary and public preaching of the word, 
not only to and among them that believed, but also t.) 
offer the gospel to those who had not yet received the 
faith thereof ; about which time I did evidently find in 
my mind a secret inclination thereto, though, I bless 
God, not for a desire of vainglory, for at that time I 
was most sorely afflicted with the fiery darts of the devil 
concerning my eternal state. 

But yet I could not be content unless I was found in 
the exercise of my gift, unto which also I was greatly 
animated, not only by the continual desires of the godly, 
but also by that saying of Paul to the Corinthians : "I 
beseech you, brethren, (ye know the household of Steph- 
anas, that it is the first-fruits of Achaia, and that they 
have addicted themselves to the ministry of the saints,) 
that ye submit yourselves unto such, and to every one 
that helpeth with us, and laboreth." 1 Cor. 16:15, 16. 
By this text I was made to see that the Holy Ghost 
never intended that men who have gifts and abilities 
should bury them in the earth ; but rather did command 
and stir up such to the exercise of their gift, and also 
did commend those that are apt and ready so to do. 
"They have addicted themselves to the ministry of the 
saints :" this scripture in these days did continually run 
in my mind, to encourage me and strengthen me in this 
my work for God ; I have also been encouraged from 
several other scriptures and examples of the godly, both 
specified in the word and in other ancient histories. Acts 
8:4; 18 : 24, 25 ; 1 Pet. 4 : 10 : Rom. 12:6; and Fox's 
Acts and Monuments. 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 107 

"Whcrofoie, though of myself of all the saints tlie 
most unworthy, yet I, but with great fear and trembling 
at the sight of my own weakness, did set upon the work, 
and did, aecording to my gifts and tlie proportion of my 
faith, preach that blessed gospel that God had showed 
me in the holy word of truth ; which when the country 
understood, they came in to hear the word by hundreds, 
and that from all parts, though upon divers and sundry 
accounts. And I thank God he gave unto me some meas- 
ure of bowels and pity for their souls, which also did put 
me forward to labor with great diligence and earnest- 
ness to find out such a word as might, if God would 
bless it, lay hold of and awaken the conscience, in which 
also the good Lord had respect to the desire of his ser- 
vant ; for I had not preached long before some began to 
be touclied, and be greatly afflicted in their minds at the 
apprehension of the greatness of their sin and of tlicir 
need of Jesus Christ. 

I first could not believe that God should speak by me 
to the heart of any man, still counting myself unworthy ; 
yet those who were thus touched would love me and 
have a particular respect for me : and though I did put 
it from me that they should be awakened by me, still 
they would confess it, and affirm it ■before the saints of 
God ; they would also bless God for me, unworthy Avretch 
that I am, and comit me God's instrument that showed 
to them the way of salvation. Wherefore, seeing them 
in both their words and deeds to be so constant, and 
also in their hearts so earnestly pressing after the know- 
ledge of Jesus Christ, rejoicing that ever God did send 
me where they were, then I began to conclude it might 
be so, that God had owned in his work such a foolish one 
as I ; and then came that word of God to my heart with 
much sweet ix'freshmcnt : " The blessing of them that 
are ready to perish is come upon me ; yea, I caused the 



108 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

widow's heart to sing for joy." Job 29 : 13. At this 
therefore I rejoiced ; yea, the tears of those whom God 
did awaken by my preaching would be both solace and 
encouragement to me. I thought on these sayings : 
" Who is he that maketh me glad, but the same that is 
made sorry by me ?" and again, " Though I be not an 
apostle to others, yet doubtless I am unto you ; for the 
seal of my apostleship are ye in the Lord." 2 Cor. 2:2; 
1 Cor. 9 : 2. These things therefore were as another 
argument unto me that God had called me to, and stood 
by me in this work. 

In my preaching of the word I took special notice of 
this one thing, namely, that the Lord did lead me to be- 
gin where his word begins — with sinners ; that is, to 
condemn all flesh, and to open and allege that the curse 
of God by the law doth belong to and lay hold on all 
men as they come into the world, because of sin. Now 
this part of my work I fulfilled with great earnestness, 
for the terrors of the law and guilt for my transgressions 
lay heavy on my conscience ; I preached what I felt, 
what I smartingly did feel, even that under which my 
poor soul did groan and tremble to astonishment. In- 
deed, I have been as one sent to them from the dead ; I 
went myself in chains to preach to them in chains, and 
carried that fire in my own conscience that I persuaded 
them to be aware of I can truly say, and that without 
dissembling, that when I have been to preach I have 
gone full of guilt and terror, even to the pulpit-door, and 
there it hath been taken off, and I have been at liberty 
in my mind until I have done my work ; and then inune- 
diately, even before I could get down the pulpit stairs, I 
have been as bad as I was before ; yet God carried me 
on, but surely with a strong hand, for neither guilt no*' 
hell could take me off my work. 

Thus I went on for the space of two years, crying 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 109 

out against men's sins, and tlieir fearful state because of 
them ; after which the Lord came in upon my soul with 
some sure peace and comfort through Christ, for he did 
g-ive me many sweet discoveries of his blessed grace 
through him ; wherefore now I altered in my preacliing, 
f »r still I preached what I saw and felt : now therefore 
I did much labor to hold forth Jesus Christ in all his 
offices, relations, and benefits unto the world, and did 
strive also to discover, to condemn, and remove those 
false supports and props on which the world doth both 
lean, and by them fall and perish. On these things also 
I stayed as long as on the other. 

iVfter this God led me into something of the mystery 
of the union of Christ ; wherefore that I discovered and 
showed to them also. And when I had travelled through 
these three chief points of the word of God, about the 
space of five years or more, I was caught in my present 
practice and cast into prison, where I have lain above as 
long again, to confirm the truth by way of suffering, as 
I was before in testifying of it according to the Scrip- 
tures in a way of preaching. When I have been preach- 
ing, I thank God my heart hath often, all the time of this 
and the other exercises, with great earnestness cried to 
God that he would make the word effectual to the salva- 
tion of souls, still being grieved lest the enemy should 
take the word away from the conscience, and so it should 
become unfruitful ; wherefore I labored so to speak the 
word as that thereby, if it were possible, the sin and 
person guilty might be particularized by it. 

Also, when I have done the exercise, it hath gone to 
my heart to think the word should now fall as rain on 
stony places, still wishing from my heart, " Oh that they 
who have heard me speak this day did but see as I do 
what sin, death, hell, and the curse of God are ; and also 
what the grace and love and mercy of God are, through 



110 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

Christ, to men in such a case as they are, who are yet 
estranged from him." And indeed I did often say in my 
heart before the Lord, that if to be hanged up presently 
before their eyes would be a means to awaken them and 
confirm them in the truth, I gladly should consent to it ; 
for 1 have been in my preacliing, especially when I have 
been engaged in the doctrine of life by Christ without 
works, as if an angel of God had stood b}^ at my back to 
encourage me. Oh, it hath been with such power and 
heavenly evidence upon my own soul while I have been 
laboring to unfold it, to demonstrate it, and to fasten it 
upon the consciences of others, that I could not be con- 
tented with saying, I believe and am sure ; methought 
I was more than sure, if it be lawful so to express my- 
self, that those things which then I asserted were true. 

When I first went to preach the word abroad, the 
doctors and priests of the country did open wide against 
me ; but I was persuaded of this, not to render railing 
for railing, but to see how many of these carnal profes- 
sors I could convince of their miserable state by the law, 
and of the want and worth of Christ ; for, thought I, 
this shall answer for me in time to come, when they shall 
be for my hire before tlieir face. Gen. 30 : 33. I never 
cared to meddle with things that were controverted and 
in dispute among the saints, especially things of the 
lowest nature ; j^et it pleased me much to contend with 
great earnestness for the word of faith, and remission of 
sins by the death and sufferings of Jesus ; but, I say, as 
to other things, I would let them alone, because I saw 
they engendered strife, and because that they neither in 
doing nor in leaving undone did commend us to God to 
be his. Besides, I saw my work before me did run into 
another channel, even to carry an awakening word ; to 
that, therefore, I did stick and adhere. I never endeavor- 
ed to nor durst make use of other men's lines, Rom 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. Ill 

15:18, thoug-li I condemn not all tliat do, for I verily 
thoug-ht and found by experience that what was taught 
me by the word and Spirit of Christ could be spoken, 
maintained, and stood to by the soundest and best estab- 
lished conscience ; ftnd though I will not now speak all 
that I know in this matter, yet my experience hatli more 
interest in that text of Scripture, Gal. 1:11, 12, than 
many among men are aware. 

If any of those who were awakened by my ministry 
did after that fall back, as sometimes too many did, 1 
can truly say their loss hath been more to me than if my 
own children, begotten of my own body, had been going 
to their grave. I think verily I may speak it without 
offence to the Lord, nothing has gone so near me as that, - 
unless it was the fear of the loss of the salvation of my 
own sold. I have counted as if I had goodly buildings 
and lordships in those, places where my children were 
born. My heart hath been so wrapped up in the glory 
of this excellent work, that I counted myself more bless- 
ed and honored of God by this, than if he had made me 
the emperor of the Christian world, or the lord of all the 
glory pf the earth without it. Oh these words : " lie 
that converteth a sinner from the error of his ways doth 
save a soul from death." "The fruit of the righteous is 
a tree of life ; and he that winneth sduls is wise." " They 
that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firma- 
ment ; and they that turn many to righteousness, as tha 
stars for ever and ever." " For what is our hope, or joy, 
or crown of rejoicing? Arc not even ye in the presence 
of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming ? For ye are ouij 
glory and joy." These, I say, with many others of a 
like nature, have been great refreshments to me. Jas. 
5 : 20 ; Prov.ll : 30 ; Dan. 12 : 3 ; 1 Thess. 2 : 19, 20. 

I have observed that where I have had a work to do 
for God, I have had first, as it w^ere, the going of God 



112 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

upon my spirit to desire I might preach there. I have 
also observed that such and such souls in particular 
have been strongly set upon my heart, and I stirred up 
to wish for their salvation ; and that those very souls 
have after this been given as the fruits of my ministry. 
I have observed that a word cast in by the by hath done 
more execution in a sermon, than all that was spoken 
besides. Sometimes also, when I have thought I did no 
good, then I did most of all ; and at other times, when I 
thought I should catch them, I have fished for nothing. 

I have also observed that where there has been a work 
to do upon sinners, there the devil hath begun to roar in 
the hearts and by the mouths of his servants ; yea, often- 
times when the wicked world hath raged most, there have 
been souls awakened by the word : I could instance par- 
ticulars, but I forbear. 

My great desire in my fulfilling my ministry was to 
get into the darkest places of the country, even among 
.those people that were farthest off of profession ; yet 
not because I could not endure the light, for I feared not 
to show my gospel to any, but because I found my spirit 
did lean most after awakening and converting work, and 
the word that I carried did lean itself most that way 
also. "Yea, so have I strived to preach the gospel, not 
where Christ was named, lest I should build upon an- 
other man's foundation." Rom. 15 : 20. 

In my preaching I have really been in pain, and have, 
as it were, travailed to bring forth children to God ; nei- 
ther could I be satisfied unless some fruits did appear in 
my work. If I were fruitless, it mattered not who com- 
mended me ; but if I were fruitful, I cared not who did 
condemn. I have thought of that: "Lo, children are a 
lieritage of the Lord ; and the fruit of the womb is his 
reward. As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man, 
so are children of the youth. Happy is the man that 



OR GRACE ABOUNDlXi;. 113 

hath his quiver full of tlioin ; tlicy shall not bo ashamed, 
but thoy shall speak Avith the enemies in the gate." I'sa. 
127 : 3-5. It pleased me nothing to see people drink in 
my opinions, if they seemed ignorant of Jesus Christ and 
the worth of their own salvation. Sound conviction for 
Bin, especially for unbelief, and a heart set on fire to be 
saved by Christ, with strong breathings after a truly 
sanctified soul, this it was that delighted me ; those 
were the souls I counted bless'cd. 

But in this work, as in all others, I liad my tempta- 
tions attending me, and that of divers kinds ; as some- 
times I would be assaulted with great discouragement 
therein, fearing that I should not be able to speak a 
word at all to edification, nay, that I should not be able 
to speak sense to the people ; at which times I would 
have such a strange faintness and strengthlessness seize 
upon my body, that my legs have scarce been able to 
carry mo to the place of exercise. 

Sometimes, again, when I have been preaching, I 
have been violently assaulted with thoughts of blasphe- 
my, and strongly tempted to speak the words with my 
mouth before the congregation. I have also at times, 
even when I have begun to speak the word with much 
clearness, evidence, and libert}^ of speech, yet been, be- 
fore the ending of that opportunity, so blinded and so 
estranged from the things I have been speakbig, and 
have been also so straitened in my speech as to utter- 
ance before the people, that I have been as if I had not 
kjiown or remembered what I have been about, or as if 
my head had been in a bag all the time of my exercise. 

Again, when as sometimes I have been about to 
preach upon some smart and searching portion of the 
word, I have found the tempter suggest, "What, will 
you preach this? This condemns yourself; of this your • 
own soul is guilty ; wherefore preach not of this at all. 



114 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

or if you do, yet so mince it as to make way for your 
own escape ; lest, instead of awakening others, you lay 
that guilt upon your own soul that you will never get 
from under." But, I thank the Lord, I have been kept 
from consenting to these so horrid suggestions, and have 
rather, as Samson, bowed myself with all my might to 
condemn sin and transgression wherever I found it ; yea, 
though therein also I did bring guilt upon my own con- 
science. Let me die, thought I, with the Philistines, 
Judg. 16 : 30, rather than deal corruptly with the blessed 
word of God. "Thou that teachest another, teachest 
thou not thyself?" It is far better then to judge thyself, 
even by preaching plainly unto others, than that thou, 
to save thyself, imprison the truth in unrighteousness. 
Blessed be God for his help also in this. 

I have also, while foimd in this blessed work of Christ, 
been often tempted to pride and liftings up of heart ; and 
though I dare not say I have not been affected with this, 
yet truly the Lord of his precious mercy hath so dealt 
with me, that for the most part I have had but small 
desire to give way to such a thing ; for it hath been my 
every day's portion to be let into the evil'of my own 
heart, and still made to see such a multitude of corrup- 
tions and infirmities therein, that it hath caused hanging 
down of the head under all my gifts and attainments. I 
have felt this thorn in the flesh the very mercy of God to 
me. 2 Cor. 12 : 8. 

I have also had together with this some notable place 
or other of the word presented before me, which word 
hath contained in it some sharp and piercing sentence 
concerning the perishing of the soul, notwithstanding 
gifts and papts ; as for instance, these words have been 
of great use to me : " Though I speak with the tongues 
of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become 
as sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal." 1 Cor. 13: 1, 



OR (ill ACE ABOUNDING. 115 

2. A tinkling cymbal is an instrument of music with 
which a skilful player can make such melodious and 
heart-inflaming- music, that all who hear him play can 
scarcely hold from dancing- ; and yet, behold, the cymbal 
hath not life, neither comes the music from it, but be- 
cause of the art of him that plays therewith : so then the 
instrument at last may come to naught and perish, though 
in times past such music hath been made upon it. Just 
thus I saw it was and will bo with them that have gifts 
but want saving grace : they are in the hand of Christ 
as the cymbal in the hand of David ; and as David could 
with the cymbal make such mirth in the service of God 
as to elevate the hearts of the worshippers, so Christ can 
so use these gifted men as with them to affect the souls 
of his people in the church, yet when he hath done all, 
lay them by as lifeless though sounding cymbals. 

This consideration therefore, together with some 
others, were for the most part as a maul on the head of 
pride and desire of vainglory. What, thought I, shall 1 
be proud because I am as sounding brass ? Is it so 
much to be a fiddle ? Hath not the least creature that 
hath life more of God in it than these ? Besides, I knew 
it was love that should never die, but these must cease 
and vanish ; so I concluded a little grace, a little love, 
a little of the true fear of God, is better than all gifts ; 
yea, and I am fully convinced that it is possible for souls 
that can scarce give a man an answer but with great 
confusion as to method — I say, it is as possible for them 
,to have a thousand times more grace, and so to be more 
in the love and favor of the Lord, than some who by the 
virtue of the gift of knowledge can deliver themselves 
like angels. s» 

Thus, therefore, I came to perceive that though gifts 
in themselves were good to the thing for which they are 
designed, to wit, the edification of others, yet they are 



116 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

empty and without p:)wer to save the soul of him that 
hath them, if they be alone ; neither are they as so any 
sign of a man's state to be happy, being only a dispen- 
sation of God to some, of whose improvement or non- 
improvement they must, when a little more time is over, 
give an account to Him that is ready to judge the quick 
and the dead. This showed me too, that gifts being 
alone were dangerous, not in themselves, but because of 
those evils that attend them that have them, to wit, 
pride, desire of vainglorj'^, self-conceit, etc., all which 
were easily blown up at the applause and commendation 
of every unadvised Christian, to the endangering of a 
poor creature to fall into the condemnation of the devil. 

1 saw, therefore, that he that hath gifts had need to 
be let into a sight of the nature of them, to wit, that 
they come short of making him to be in a truly saved 
condition, lest he rest in them, and so fall short of the 
grace of God. He hath cause also to walk humbly with 
God and be little in his own eyes, and to remember with- 
al that his gifts are not his own, but the church's, and 
that by them he is made a servant to the church ; and he 
must give at last an account of his stewardship unto the 
Lord Jesus ; and to give a good account will be a bless- 
ed thing. Let all men therefore prize a little with the 
fear of the Lord : gifts indeed are desirable, but yet 
great grace and small gifts are better than great gifts 
and no grace. It doth not say the Lord gives gifts and 
glory, but the Lord gives grace and glory ; and blessed 
is such an one to whom the Lord gives grace, true grace, 
for that is a certain forerunner of glory. 

But when Satan perceived that his thus tempting and 
assaulting me would not answer his design, to wit, to 
overthrow the ministry and make it ineffectual as to the 
ends thereof, then he tried another way, which was to 
stir up the minds of the ignorant and malicious to load 



OH QRACE A BOUND 1X0. 117 

mv with sl;iii(lci-s and rr|in.;ulics. \.i\v tlKM-cfurc T may 
say that what the devil could (k-visc and liis instruments 
invent was wliirhd up and down the country against mo, 
thinking, as I said, that by that means they should make 
my ministry to be abandoned. It began therefore to be 
rumored up and down among the people tliat I was a 
witch, a Jesuit, a highwayman, and the like. To all 
wiiicli I shall oidy say, God knows that I am innocent. 
But as for mine accusers, let them provide themselves to 
meet me before the tribunal of the Son of God, there to 
answx^r for all tliese things, with all tlie rest of their ini- 
quities, unless God shall give them repentance for them, 
for the which I pray with all my heart. 

But th^it which was reported with the boldest confi- 
dence was, that I was addicted to gross immoralities and 
the like. Now these slanders, with the others, I gU^ry 
in, because but slanders, foolish or knavish lies and false- 
hoods cast upon me by the devil and his seed ; and should 
I not be dealt with thus wickedly by the world, I should 
want one sign of a saint and a child of God. " Blessed 
arc ye," saith the Lord Jesus, "when men shall revile 
you, and persecute j^ou, and shall say all manner of evil 
against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceed- 
ing glad ; for great is your rclvard in heaven : for so 
persecuted they the prophets which were before you." 
Matt. 5:11, 12. 

These things therefore upon mine own account trouble 
me not ; no, though they were twenty times more than 
they are. I have a good conscience ; and whereas they 
speak evil of me as an evil-doer, they shall be ashamed 
that falsely accuse my good conversation in Christ. So 
then, what shall I say to those who have thus bespatter- 
ed me ? Shall I threaten them ; shall I chide them ; 
shall I flatter them ; shall I entreat them to hold their 
tongues ? No, not I. Were it not that these things 



118 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

make tliem wlio arc the autliors and abettors ripe for 
.damnation, I would say unto tliem, Report it, because it 
will increase my glory. Therefore I bind these lies and 
slanders to me as an ornament ; it belongs to my Chris- ■ 
tian profession to be vilified, slandered, reproached, and 
reviled ; and since all this is nothing else, as my God and 
my conscience do bear me witness, I rejoice in reproach- 
es for Christ's sake. 

I also call upon all those fools and knaves that" have 
thus made it any thing of their business to affirm any of 
these things aforenamed of me, namely, that I have been 
of unchaste life or the like, when they have used. the 
utmost of their endeavors and made the fullest inquiry 
that they can, to prove against me truly that there is 
any one in heaven," or earth, or hell that can say I have 
at any time, in any place, by day or night, so much as 
attempted any unbecoming familiarity. And speak I thus 
to beg mine enemies into a good esteem of me ? No, not 
I ; I will in this beg belief of no man : believe or disbe- 
lieve me in this, all is a similar case to me. My foes 
have missed their mark in this their shooting at me. I 
am not the man. I wish that they themselves be guilt- 
less. If all the fornicators and adulterers in England 
were hanged up by the'neck till they be dead, John Bun- 
yan, the object of their envy, would be still alive and 
well. I know not whether there be such a thing as a 
woman breathing under the cope of the heaven but by 
their apparel, their children, or by common fame, except 
my wife. 

And in this I admire the wisdom of God, that he made 
me in this respect circumspect from my first conversion 
until now. They know and can also bear me witness 
with whom I have been most intimately concerned, that 
it is a rare thing to see me to behave familiarly towards 
females ; the common salutation I abhoi* — it is odious to 



UR URACE AROUXDINC. Hi) 

Jiu- in whoiiisucvcr I sec it. Tiicir company alone I can- 
not approve, for 1 think these tilings are not so becoming 
me. When I have seen good men salute those women 
that they have visited, or that have visited them, 1 have 
at times made my objection against it ; and when they 
have answered that it was but a piece of civility, I have 
told them it was not a comely sight : some indeed have 
urged the " holy kiss ;" but then I have asked why they 
have made such exceptions — why they did salute the 
most handsome, and let the ill-favored go. Thus, how 
laudable soever such things have been in the eyes of 
others, they have been unseemly in my sight. 

And now for a wind-up in this matter. I call not 
only on men but angels to prove me guilty of having 
broken the marriage-covenant ; nor am I afraid to do it 
a second time, knowing that I cannot ofllend the Lord in 
Buch a case to call God for a record upon my soid that 
in these things I am innocent. Not that I have been 
thus kept because of any goodness in me more than any 
other, but God has been merciful to me, and has kept 
me ; to whom I pray that he will keep me still, not only 
from this, but every evil way and work, and preser\e 
me to his heaveidy kingdom. Amen. 

Now, as Satan labored by reproaches and slanders to 
make me vile among my countrymen, that if possible 
my preaching might be made of none effect, so there 
was added hereto a long and tedious imprisonment, that 
thereby I might be frightened from my service for 
Christ,, and the world terrified and made afraid to hear 
me preach, of which I shall in the next place give you a 
brief account. 



120 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 



CHAPTER XT. 



Having made profession of the glorious gospel of 
Christ a long time, and preached the same about five 
years, I was apprehended at a meeting of good people 
in the country, among whom, had they let me alone, I 
should have preached that day, but they took me away 
from among them, and had me before a justice, who, 
after I had offered security for my appearing the next 
sessions, yet committed me because my sureties would 
not consent to be bound that I should preach no more to 
the people. 

At the sessions after, I was indicted for an upholder 
and maintainor of unlawful assemblies and conventicles, 
and for }iot conforming to the national worship of the 
church of England ; and after some conference there 
with the justices, they, taking my plain dealing with 
them for a confession, as they termed it, of the indict- 
ment, did sentence me to perpetual banishment because 
I refused to conform. So being delivered up to the jail- 
er's hand, I was had home to prison, and there have lain 
now complete for twelve years, waiting to see what God 
would suffer those men to do with me. In which condi- 
tion I have continued with much content, through grace, 
but have met with many turnings and goings upon my 
heart, both from the Lord, Satan, and my own corrup- 
tion ; by all which — glory be to Jesus Christ — ^I have 
also received among many things much conviction, in- 
struction, and understanding, of which at large I shall 
not here discourse, only give you a hint or two — a word 
that may stir up the godly to bless God and to pray for 
me, and also to take encouragement, should the case be 
their own, not to fear what man can do unto them. 



UR (;i!.\("I-: ABUrXDINC. 1-il 

I novel- li:ul in all my lil'i' so <;'rcat an iiiU-t into tlic 
Wold ot'lioil as now. Tiioso scriptures tliat 1 saw iiotli- 
in,u- ill liclorc, were made in this place and state to shine 
upon ine ; Jesus Christ also was never more real and 
apparent than now : here I have seen and felt him indeed. 
Oh that word, "AVe have not preached unto you cuii- 
ning-ly devised fal)les ;" and that, " God raised Christ up 
from the dead, and g-ave him g'lory, that our faith and 
hope might be in God," were blessed words inito me in 
this imprisoned condition. 2 Pot. 1:1G; 1 Pet. 1:21. 
These three or four scriptures also have been great 
refreshments in this condition to me : John 14 ': 1-4 ; 
16 : 33 ; Col. 3 : 3, 4 ; Heb. 12 : 22-24. So that sometimes 
when I have enjoyed the savor of them I have been able 
to laugh at destruction, and to fear neither the horse nor 
his rider. 

I have had sweet sights of tlie forgiveness of my 
sins in this place, and of my being with Jesus in another 
world. Oh the mount Sion, the heavenly Jerusalem, the 
innumerable company of angels, and God the Judge of 
all, and the spirits of just men made perfect, and Jesus, 
have been sweet unto me in this place. I have seen that 
here which I am persuaded I shall never while in this 
world be able to express : I have seen a truth in this 
scripture : " Whom having not seen, ye love ; in whom, 
though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice 
with joy unspeakable and full of glory." 1 Pet. 1:8. I 
never knew what it Avas for God to stand by me at all 
times and at every oflfer of Satan to afflict me, as I have 
f)und him since I came in hither; for lo, as fears have 
presented themselves, so have supports and encourage- 
ments ; yea, when I have started, even as it were at 
nothing else but my shadow, yet God, as being very 
tender of me, hath nf>t suffered me to be molested, but 
would with one seriptnre or another strengthen me 

P.I Pro- f) 



122 BUNYANS LIFE, 

against all ; insomuch that I have often said, were it 
lawful I could pray for greater trouble for the greater 
comfort's sake. Eccl. *I : 14 ; 2 Cor. 1 : 5. 

Before I came to prison 1 saw what was coming, and 
had especially two considerations warm upon my heart. 
The first was, how to be able to encounter death, should 
that be here my portion. And for this that scripture, 
was great information to me, narael}'-, to pray to God. 
to be "strengthened with all might, according to his 
glorious power, unto all patience and long-suffering with 
joyfulness." Col. 1:11. I could seldom go to prayer 
before I was imprisoned, for a year together, but this 
sentence or sweet petition would, as it were, thrust itself 
into my mind, and persuade me that if ever I would go 
through long-suffering, I must have patience, especially 
if I would endure it joyfully. 

As to the second consideration, that saying was of 
great use to me : " But we had the sentence of death in 
ourselves, that we should not trust in ourselves, but in 
God that raiseth the dead." 2 Cor. 1 : 9. By this scrip- 
ture I was made to see that if ever I would suffer riglU- 
ly, I must first pass a sentence of death upon every thing 
that can be properly called a thing of this life, even to 
reckon myself, my wife, my children, my health, my en- 
joyment, and all, as dead to me, and myself as dead to 
them. The second was, to live upon God that is invisi- 
ble, as Paul said in another place ; the way not to faint 
is, to " look not at the things Avhich are seen, but at the 
things which are not seen ; for the things which are seen 
are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eter- 
nal." And thus I reasoned with myself: If I provide only 
for a prison, then the whip comes at unawares, and so 
doth also the pillory. Again, if I only provide for these, 
then I am not fit for banishment ; further, if I conclude 
that banishment is the worst, then if death comos I am 



OR GRACE ABOUNDING. 1'26 

surprised ; so that I sec the best way to go through suf- 
ferings is to trust in God through Christ, as toucliing the 
world to come ; and as touching tliis world, to c(junt tlic 
grave my house, to make my bed in darkness — to say to 
corruption, thou art my father, and to the worm, thou 
art my mother and sister : that is to familiarize these 
things to me. 

But notwithstanding these helps, I found myself a 
man encompassed with infirmities ; the parting with my 
wife and poor children hath often been to me in this 
place as pulling the flesh from the bones, and that not 
only because lam somewhat too fond of these great mer- 
cies, but also because I would have often brought to my 
mind the many hardships, miseries, and wants that my 
poor family were like to meet with should I be taken 
from them, especially my poor blind cliild, who lay near- 
er to my heart than all besides. Oh, the thoughts of the 
hardship my poor blind one might undergo Avuuld break 
my heart to pieces. Poor child, thought I, wliat sorrow 
art thou like to have for thy portion in this world ! 
Thou must bo beaten, must beg, suffer hunger, cold, 
nakedness, and a thousand calamities, though I cannot 
now endure the wind should blow upon thee. But yet, 
recalling myself, thought I, I must venture you all with 
God, though it goeth to the quick to leave you. Oh, I 
saw in this condition I Avas as a man M-ho was pulling 
down his house upon the head of his wife and children ; 
yet, thought I, I must do it, I must do it. And now I 
thought on those two milch kine that were to carry the 
ark of God into another country, and to leave their calves 
behind them. 1 Sam. 6:10. 

But that which helped me in this temptation was 
divers considerations, of which three in special here I 
will name : the first was the consideration of these two 
scriptures: "Leave thy fatherless children, I will pre- 



rJ4 BrNYAX\S LIFE, 

serve them alive ; and let thy widows trust in me ;" and 
again, "The Lord said, Verily it shall be well with thy 
roninant; verily I will cause the enemy to entreat thee 
well in the time of evil, and in the time of affliction.'' 
J.T. 49:11 ; 15:11. 

I had also this consideration, that if I should venture 
all for God, I eng-aged God to take care of my concerns ; 
but if I forsook him in his ways, for fear of any trouble 
that should come to me or mine, then I should not only 
I'alsity my profession, but should count also that my con- 
cerns were not so sure if left at God's feet while I stood 
to and for his name, as they would be if they were under 
my own care, thoug-h with the denial of the way of God. 
This was a smarting consideration, and as spurs into my 
llesh. That scripture also greatly helped it to fasten the 
more on me, where Christ prays against Judas, that God 
would disappoint him in his selfish thoughts which mov- 
ed him to sell his Master. Pray read it soberly : Psalm 
109:6, etc. 

I had also another consideration, and that was, the 
dread of the torments of hell, which I was sure they 
must partake of that for fear of the cross do shrink from 
their profession of Christ, his words and laws, before the 
s(jns of men. I thought also of the glory that he had 
prepared for those that in faith and love and patience 
stood to his ways before them. These things, I say, have 
helped me when the thoughts of the misery that both 
myself and mine might, for the sake of my profession, 
be exposed to, have lain pinching on my mind. 

When I have indeed conceited that I might be ban- 
ished for my profession, then I have thought of that 
scripture : "They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, 
were tempted, were slain with the sword ; they wander- 
ed about in sheepskins and goatskins, being destitute, 
afflicted, tormented, of whom the world was not wor- 



OI! (iltACK A Ilor.MilNC.. ll^.") 

thy," lleb. 11 : 37, fur all thoy llion;^lit tlioy were too bad 
to dwell and abide among tlieni. I have also thouglit of 
that saying, "The Holy Ghost witnesseth in every city 
that bonds and afflictions abide me." I have verily 
thought that my soul and it liav<' sometimes reasoned 
about the sore and sad estate of a banished and exiled 
condition— how the}' were exposed to hiniger, to cold, 1o 
perils, to nakedness, to enemies, and a thousand calam- 
ities ; and at last, it may be, to die in a ditch, like a pour 
and desolate sheep. But 1 thank God, hitherto I have 
not been moved by these most delicate reasonings, but 
have rather by tliem more approved my heart to (mh\. 

1 was once, above all the rest, in a very sail and low 
condition for many M'eeks ; at which tinie also, being but 
a young prisimer and not acquainted with the laws, I 
had this lying upon my spirits, that my imprisomnenl 
might end at the gallows, for aught that 1 could tell. 
Now, therefore, Satan laid hard at me to beat me out of 
lieart by suggesting thus unto me: "But how if, when 
you come indeed to die, you should be in this condition ; 
that is, as not to savor the things of God, nor to have 
an evidence upon your soul for a; better state hereafter T 
For indeed at this time all the things of God were hid 
from my soul. Wherefore, when I at first began to think 
of this, it was a great trouble to me, for I thought with 
myself that in the condition I now was in I was not fit 
to die ; neither did I think I could if I should be called 
to it; besides, 1 thought with myself, if 1 should make a 
scrambling shift to clamber up the ladder, yet I should, 
cither with quaking or other symptoms of fainting, give 
occasion to the enemy to reproach the way of God and 
his people for their timorousness. 

This therefore lay with great trouble u])oii me, for 
methought I was ashamed to die with a pale face and 
tottering knees in such a- ease as this. Wher(>foro T 



126 • BUNYAN'S LIFE, 

prayed to God that he would comfort me, and give mc 
strength to do and suffer wliat he should call me to ; yet 
no comfort appeared, but all continued hid. I was also 
at this time so really possessed with the thought of 
death, that oft I was as if I was on the ladder with a 
jrope about my neck ; only this was some encouragement 
to me : I thought I might now have an opportunity to 
speak my last words unto a multitude which I thought 
would come to see me die ; and, thought I, if it must be 
so, if God will but convert one soul by my last words, I 
shall not count my life thrown away nor lost. But yet 
all the things of God were kept out of my sight, and 
still the tempter followed me with, "But whither must 
you go when j^ou die ; what will become of you ; where 
will you be found in another world ; what evidence have 
you for heaven and glory and an inheritance among them 
that are sanctified ?" Thus I was tossed for many weeks, 
and knew not what to do ; at last this consideration feli 
with weight upon me, That it was for the word and way 
of God that I was in this condition ; wherefore I was? 
engaged not to flinch a hair's breadth from it. 

I thought also that God might choose whether he 
would give me comfort now, or at the hour of death ; but 
I might not therefore choose Avhethcr I would hold my 
profession or no. I was bound, but he was free ; yea, it 
was my duty to stand to his word, Avhether he would 
ever look upon me or save me at the last : wherefore, 
thought I, save the point being thus, I am for going on 
and venturing my eternal state with Christ, whether I 
Jiave comfort hei'e or no. If God doth not come in, 
thought I, I will leap off the ladder even blindfold into 
eternity, sink or swim, come heaven, come hell. Lord 
Jesus, if thou wilt catch me, do; if not, I will venture 
all for thy name. 

I was no sooner fixed in this resolution, but this word 



OR GRACE ADOL'XDIXc;. 127 

dropped upon mo-: "Dotli Job serve God for nauf;-lit?" 
As if the accuser had said, Lord, Job is no upright man : 
lie serves thee for by-respects : " Hast thou not made a 
hedge about him," etc. "But put forth now thy iiand, 
and touch all tliat he hath, and he will curse thee to thy 
face." How now, thought I ; is this the sign of an uj)- 
right soul, to desire to serve God wlien all is taken from 
him ? Is he a godly man that will serve God for noth- 
ing, rather than give out? Blessed be God, then I hope 
I have an upright heart, for I am resolved, God giving 
me strength, never to deny my profession, though I have 
nothing at all for my pains ; and as I was thus consider- 
ing, that scripture was set before me, Psalm 44 : 12, etc. 
Now was my heart full of comfort, for I hoped it was 
sincere ; I would not have been without this trial for 
much : I am comforted every time I think of it, and I 
hope I shall bless God for ever for the teachings I have 
had by it. Many more of the dealings of God towards 
me I might relate ; but these, out of the spoils won in 
battle, have I dedicated to maintain the house of the 
Lord. 1 Chron. 26 : 27. 



128 BUNYAN'S LIFE, 



THE CONCLUSION. 

1. Of all the temptations that evei" I met with in my 
life, to question the being- of God and the truth of his 
gospel is the worst, and the worst to be borne. When 
this temptation comes, it takes arway my girdle from me, 
and removes the foundation from imder me. Oh, I have 
often thought of that word, "Having your loins girt 
about with truth ;" and of that, " When the foundations 
are destroyed, what can the righteous do ?" 

2. Sometimes when, after sin committed, I have look- 
ed for sore chastisement from the hand of God, the very 
next that I have had from him hath been the discovery of 
liis grace. Sometimes, when I have been comforted, I 
have called myself a fool for my so sinking under trou- 
ble. And then, again, when I have been cast down, I 
thought I was not wise to give such way to comfort, 
with such strength and weight have both these been 
upon me. 

3. I have wondered much at this one thing, that 
though God doth visit my soul with never so blessed a 
discovery of himself, yet I have found, again, that such 
hours have attended me afterwards, that I have been in 
my spirit so filled with darkness that I could not so 
much as once conceive what that God and that comfort 
was with which I have been refreshed. 

4. I have sometimes seen more in a line of the Bible- 
than 1 could well tell how to stand under ; and yet at 
another time the whole Bible hath been to me as a dry 
stick, or rather, my heart hath been so dead and dry unfo 
it that I could not conceive the least dram of refresh- 
ment, though I have looked it all over. 

5. Of all fears, they are the best that are made by 



on CllACE ABOIMUNC. \'2U 

the blood of Christ; and of all j(jy, that is the .swcotcst 
that is mixed with niouniin^ over ('hiisl. Oli, it is ;i 
g-oodly thiii}^ to he on our knees, with Clirist in our arms, 
before God. I liope I know somothini^ of these thinj;-s. 

(). I lind to this day seven abominations in my heart : 
1. Inelining to unbelief. 2. Suddenly to forget the iov(> 
and mercy that Christ manifesteth. 3. A leaning to the 
works of the law. 4. Wandering's and coldness in pray- 
er. 5. To forget to watch for what I pray for. 0. Ai)t 
to murmur because I have no more, and j'et ready to 
abuse what I have. 7. I can do none of those things 
which God commands me, but my corruptions w'\\l thrust < 
in themselves. "When I would do good, evil is present 
with me." 

7. These things I continually see and feel, and am 
afflicted and oppressed with, yet the wisdom of Goil dotli 
order them for my good : 1. They make me abhor my- 
self. 2. They keep me from trusting my heart. 3. Tliey 
convince me of the insufficiency of all inherent righteous- 
ness. 4. They show me the necessity of flying to Jesus. 
5. They press me to pray unto God. 0. The}- show me 
the need I have to watch and be sober ; and, 7. Provoke 
mc to pray unto God, through Christ, to help me and ^ 
carry me through the world. 



The Ri'v. Robert Philip, author of Buiiyan's Life and 
Times, adds the following: Bunyan's lilx-ration from 
prison was obtained from Charles II. by Whitehead the 
Quaker. On his release he so in became one of the most 
popular preachers of the day, and was, if not the chap- 
Iain, "the teacher" of Sir John Shorter, the Mayor uf 
London. Southey's Life. 

But although free and popular, Bunyan evidently 
dreaded every new crisis in public affairs. lie 1\ad rea- 
6* 



130 BUNYANS LIFE, 

son to do so. Vcnner's conspiracy had increased tho 
severity of his first six years' imprisonment. On the 
occasion of the fire in London, he was thrown into prison 
ag-ain. And soon after James II. came to the throne in 
1)85, Banyan conveyed the whole of his property to his 
wife by a singular deed, which can only be accounted 
for by his suspicions of James and Jeffries, and by his 
horror at tho revocation of the Edict of Nantz. The asy- 
lum which the refugees found in England did not prove 
to him that he was safe. No wonder ; " Kirke and his 
lambs" were abroad, and the Bedford justices still in 
power. It was mider these circumstances that he divest- 
ed himself of all his property, in order to save his family 
from want should he again be made a victim. The deed 
shows his solicitude for Mrs. Bunyan's comfort and his 
confidence in her prudence. And his Elizabeth well de- 
served both. 

Whatever Bunyan may have feared when he thus dis' 
posed of all the little property he had, nothing befell him 
under James II. He published "The Pharisee and Pub- 
lican" in 1685, the year of the king's accession; and ii> 
1688, Charles Doe says "he published six books, being 
the time of King James II.'s Liberty of Conscience.'- 
This appears from Doe's list. It throws also much light 
upon Bunj^an's death. Such labor could not fail to sap 
his strength, even if he did nothing but carry the six 
books through the press, for none of them are small 
except the last. "He was seized with a sweating distem- 
per," says Doe, "after he published six books, whicli, 
after some weeks, pi'oved his death." The Sketch in the 
British Museum states that, "taking a tedious journey 
in a slabby rainy day, and returning late to London, he 
was entertained by one Mr. Strudwick, a grocer on Snow 
hill, with all the kind endearments of a loving friend, 
but sooTi found himself indisposed with a kind of shak- 



OR r. RACE ABOUNDING. i:3l 

ing, as it were an ague, which increasing to a fever, ho 
took to liis bed, where, growing worse, he found he had 
not long to last in this world, and therefore prepared him- 
self for another, towards which he had been journeying us 
I |)ilgriin and stranger upon earth the prime of his days." 

The occasioix of his journey to Reading, which has 
always been called "a labor of love and charity," will 
now be more interesting than it hitherto has been. It 
was not undertaken by a man in health, but by an over- 
wrought author sinking under "a sweating distemper." 
Mr. Ivimey's account of Bunyan's errand being the best, 
I quote it : 

"The last act of his life was a labor of love and char- 
ity. A young gentleman, a neighbor of Mr. Bunyan, 
falling under his father's displeastire, and being much 
troubled in mind on that account, and also from hearing 
it was his father's design to disinherit him, or otherwise 
deprive him of what he had to leave, he pitched upon 
Mr. Bunyan as a fit man to make Avay for his submission, 
and prepare his mind to receive him ; which he, being 
willing to undertake any good office, readily engaged in, 
and went to Reading, in Bedf(5rdshire, for that purpose. 
There he so successfully accomplished his design, by 
using such pressing arguments and reason against an- 
ger and passion, and also for love and reconciliation, 
that the father's heart was softencil, and his bowe!s 
yearned over his son. 

" After Mr. Bunyan had disposed every thing in the 
best manner to promote an accommodation, as he retuin- 
ed to London on horseback, he was overtaken with e.v 
cessive rains, and coming to his lodgings extremely we*, 
he fell sick of a violent fever, which he bore with mticii 
constancy and patience, and expressed himself as if he 
wished nothing more than to depart and to be with 
Christ, considering it as gain, and life oidy a tedious 



132 



BUNYAN'S LIFE, 



delay of expected felicity. Finding his strength decay, 
he settled his worldly affairs as well as the shortness of 
the time and the violence of the disorder would permit ; 
and after an illness of ten days, with unshaken confi- 
dence he resigned his soul, on the 31st of August, 1688, 
being sixty years of age, into the hand of his most mer- 
ciful Redeemer, following his Pilgrim from the city of 
Destruction to the New Jerusalem, his better part having 
been all along there in holy contemplation, pantings, and 
breathings after the hidden manna and the water of life." 
His tomb is in Bunhill Fields. His cottage at El- 
stow, although somewhat modernized, is substantially 
as he left it. His chair, jug, Book of Martyrs, Church 
Book, and some other relics, are carefully preserved at 
his chapel in Bedford ; and best of all, his catholic spirit 
also is preserved there. 




K wv^~?^''wwf'^'i»*(iww; »jMnlfw5»?«?B^^^ 



THE 

AUTHOR'S ArOLUGY 

FOK 

HJS BOOK. 



"When' at the first I took my pon in liaiid 
Tims Ibr to write, I did not understand 
That I at all should make a little book 
In such a mode : nay, I had undertook 
To make another, which, when ahnost done, 
Before I was aware, 1 this begun. 

And thus it was : I, writing of the way 
AthJ race of saints, iji tliis our gospel-day, 
Fell suddenly into an allegory 
About their journey and the way to glory, 
In more than twenty things which I set down. 
This done, I twenty more had in rr^' crown ; 
And they again began to multiply. 
Like sparks that from the coals of fire do fly. 
Nay then, thought I, if that you breed so fast, 
I '11 put you by yourselves, lest you at last 
Should prove ad infinitum,'^ and eat out 
The book that I already am about. 
AVell, so I did ; but yet I did not think 
To show to all the world my pen and ink 
In such a mode ; I only thought to make 
I knew not what: nor did I undertake 
Thereby to please my neighbor ; no, not 1 ; 
I fliVl it mv rnvK self to gratify. 

o Willioutend. 



134 THE AUTHORS APOLOGY. 

Neither did I but vacant seasons spend 
In this my scribble ; nor did I intend 
But to divert myself in doing this 
From worser thoughts, which make me do amiss. 
J'hus I set pen to paper with delight, 
And quickly had my thoughts in black and white : 
For having now my method by the end. 
Still as I pulled it came, and so I penned 
It down, until it came at last to be. 
For length and breadth, the bigness which you see. 

Well, when I had thus put mine ends together, 
I showed them others, that I might see whether 
They would condemn them, or them justify ; 
And some said. Let them live ; some, Let them die : 
Some said, John, print it ; others said. Not so : 
Some said, It might do good ; others said, No. 

Now was I in a strait, and did not see 
Which was the best thing to be done by me : 
At last I thought. Since ye are thus divided, 
I print it will ; and so the case decided. 

For, thought I, some I see would have it done, 
Though others in thai channel do not run : 
To prove, then, who advised for the best. 
Thus I thought fit to put it to the test. 

I further thought, if now I did deny 
Those that would have it, thus to gratify, 
I did not know but hinder them I might 
Of that which would to them be great delight. 
'For those which were not for its coming forth, 
I said to them, Oifend 3'^ou I am loath ; 
Yet since your brethren pleased with it be. 
Forbear to judge till you do further see. 

If that thou wilt not read, let it alone ; 
Some love the meat, some love to pick the bone. 



Till-: AL'TllOR'S ArOLO(JY. 1 

Yea, that I might thorn better palliate, 
1 did too with thcin thus expostulate : 

May I not write in such a style as this ; 
In such a method too, and yet not miss 
I^Iy end, thy good ? Why may it not be done ? 
l)ark clouds bring waters, when the bright bring none 
Yea, dark or bright, if they their silver drops 
Cause to descend, the earth, by yielding crops. 
Gives praise to both, and carpeth not at either. 
But treasures up the fruit they yield together ; 
Yea, so commixes both, that in their fruit 
None can distinguish this from that : they suit 
Her well when hungry ; but if she be full, 
She spews out both, and makes their blessing null. 

You see the ways the fisherman d(jth take 
To catch the fish — what engines doth he make ! 
Behold how he engageth all his wits ; 
Also his snares, lines, angles, hooks, and nets : 
Yet fish there be that neither hook nor line, 
Nor snare, nor net, nor engine, can make thine ; 
They must be groped for, and be tickled too, 
Or they will not be catched, whate'er you do. 

How does the fowler seek to catch his game 
By divers means, all which one cannot nam(>. 
His guns, his nets, his lime-twigs, light, and bell ; 
He creeps, he goes, he stands ; yea, who can tell 
Of all his postures ? yet, there 's none of these 
Will make him master of what fowls he please. 
Yea, he must pipe and whistle to catch this; 
Yet if he does so, that bird he will miss. 
If that a pearl may in a toad's head dwell, 
And may be found too in an oyster-shell ; 
If things that promise nothing do contain 
What better is than gold, who will disdain, 



136 THE AUTHORS APOLOGY. 

That have an iiiklhig-* of it^ there to look, 
That they may find it ? Now, my little book, 
Though void of all these paintings tliat may make 
It with this or the other man to take. 
Is not without those things that do excel 
What do in brave but empty nations dwell. 

" Well, yet I am not fully satisfied 
That this your book will stand, when soundly tried." 

Why, what 's the matter ? " It is dark." What though ? 
"But it is feigned." What of that? I trow 
Some men by feigned words, as dark as mine, 
Make truth to spangle, and its rays to shine. 
"But they want solidness." Speak, man, thy mind. 
"They drown the weak ; metaphors make us blind." 

Solidity, indeed, becomes the pen 
Of him that writeth things divine to men ; 
But must I needs want solidness, because 
By metaphors I speak ? Were not God's laws. 
His gospel laws, in olden time held forth 
By types, shadows, and metaphors ? Yet loutli 
Will any sober man be to find fault 
With- them, lest he be found for to assault 
The highest wisdom. No, he rather stoops, 
And seeks to find out what, by pins and loops, 
By calves and sheep, by heifers and by rams. 
By birds and herbs, and by the blood of lambs, 
God speaketh to him ; and happy is he 
That finds the light and grace that in them be. 

Be not too forward, therefore, to conclude 
That I want solidness — that I am rude : 
All things solid in show, not solid be ; 
All things in parable despise not we, 

■~- Hint, whisper, insinuation. 



TIIK AUTHOR'S APOLOGY. 1: 

Lost things most hurtful lij^^htly wc receive, 
And tilings that good are, of our souls bereave. 
My dark and cloudy words they do but hold 
The truth, as cabinets enclose the gold. 

The prophets used much by metaphor?* 
To set forth truth ; yea, whoso considers 
Clirist, his apostles too, shall plainly see 
That truths to this day in such mantles be. 

Am I afraid to say that holy writ, 
Which for its style and phrase puts down all wit. 
Is everywhere so full of all these things. 
Dark figures, allegories ? Yet there sjjrings 
From that same book that lustre and those rays 
Of light that turn our darkest nights to days. 

Come, let my carper to his life now look, 
And find there darker lines than in my book 
He findeth any ; yea, and let him know 
Tiiat in his best things there are worse lines too. 

May we but stand before impartial men, 
To his poor one I durst adventure ten, 
Tiiat they will take my meaning in these; lines 
Far IJetter than his lies in silver shrines. 
Come, Truth, although in swaddling-clothes, I find 
Informs the judgment, recttfies the mind. 
Pleases the understanding, makes the will 
Submit ; the memory too it doth fill 
With what doth our imagination please ; 
Likewise it tends our troubles to appease. 

Sound words, T know, Timothy is to use, 
And old wives' fables he is to refuse ; 
Hut yet grave Paul him nowhere doth for])i(l 
The use of parables, in which lay hid 
Tiiat gold, those pearls and precious stones that were 
W(jrth digging for, and that with greatest care. 



138 THE AUTHOR'S APOLOGY. 

Let mc add one word move. man of God, 
Art thou offended ? Dost tliou wish 1 had 
Put forth my matter in another dress ; 
Or that I had in things been more express ? 
Thi-co tilings lel^ me propound ; then I submit 
To tliose that are my betters, as is fit. 

L I find not that I am denied the use 
Of this my method, so I no abuse 
Put on the words, things, readers, or be rude 
In handling figure or similitude, 
Li application ; but all that I may 
Seek the advance of truth this or that way. 
Denied, did I say? Nay, I have leave — 
E.xample too, and that from them that have 
God better pleased, by their words or ways, 
Than any man that breatheth nowadays — 
Thus to express my mind, thus to declare 
Things unto thee that excellentest are. 

2. I find that men as high as trees will write 
Dialogue-wise ; yet no man doth them slight 
For writing so. Indeed, if they abuse 
Truth, cursed be they, and the craft they use 
To that intent ; but yet let truth be free 

To make her sallies upon thee and mc 

Which way it pleases God ; for who knows how, 

Better than he that taught us first to plough, 

To guide our minds and pons for his design ? ^ 

And he makes base things usher in divine. 

3. I find that holy writ in many places 

liath semblance with this method, where the cases 
Do call for one thing to set forth another : 
Use it I may then, and yet nothing smother 
Truth's golden beams ; nay, by this method may 
Make it cast forth its rays as light as day. 



Till-: Al'TllOR'.'^ ArOLOCY. 139 

And now, before I do put up my pen, 
I'll show the ju-ofit of my book, and then 
Commit b(jth tlice and it unto that hand 
That pulls the strong down, and makes weak ones stand. 

This book it chalkoth out before thine eyes 
The man that seeks the everlasting prize : 
It shows you whence he comes, whither he goes, 
What he leaves undone, also what he does ; 
It also sliows you how he runs, and runs, 
Till he unto the gate of glory comes. 
It shows too who set out for life amain, 
As if the lasting crown they would obtain ; 
Here also you may see the reason why 
They lose their labor, and like fools do die. 

Tiiis book will make a traveller of thee, 
If by its counsel thou wilt ruled be ; 
It will direct thee to the Iloly Land, 
If thou wilt its directions understand : 
Yea, it will make the slothful active be ; 
The blind also delightful things to see. 

Art thou for something rare and profitable ; 
Or would'st thou see a truth within a fable ? 
Art thou forgetfid ? Wouldest thou remember 
From -New-year's day to the last of December? 
Then read my fancies ; they will stick like burs, 
And may be, to the helpless, comforters. 

ThiS book is writ in such a dialect 
As may the minds of listless men affect : 
It seems a novelty, and yet contains 
Nothing but sound and honest gospel strains. 

"Would'st thou divert thyself from melancholy ? 
"Would'st thou be pleasant, yet be far from folly? 
Would'st thou read riddles, and their explanation, 
Or else be drowned in thy contemplation? 



110 



THE AUTHOR'S APOLOGY. 



Dost than love picking- meat ; tir would'st thou see 

A man i' the clouds, and hear him speak to thee ? 

Would'st thou be in a dream, and yet not sleep ; 

Or would'st thou in a moment laugh and weep ? 

Wouldcst thou lose thj^self, and catch no harm, 

And find thyself again without a charm ? 

Would'st read thyself, and read thou know'st not what, 

And yet know whether thou art blest or not 

By reading the same lines ? Oh then come hither, 

And lay my book, thy head, and heart together. 

JOHN BUN Y AN. 



S: 





IN THE SIMILITUDE OF A DREAM. 



THE FIRST STAGE. 



As I walked through the wilderness of this 
world, I lighted on a certain place where was 
The Jail, a den,'-' and laid me down in that i)lace 
to sleep ; and as I slept, I dreamed a dream. I 
dreamed, and behold, I saw a man clothed with 
rags standing in a certain ])lace, with his face 
from his own house, a book in his hand, and a 
great burden u[)<jn his back. Isa. 04 : G ; Luke 
14 : 33 ; Psalm 38 : 4. I looked, and saw him 
open the book, and read therein ; and as he 
read, he wept and trembled ; and not being able 

* Bedford jail, in wliich the author was a prisoner for con- 
science' sake. 



142 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

longer to contain, lie brake out ^yith a lament- 
able cr}^ saying, "What shall I do?'' Acts 
2:37;\6:30; Habak. 1 : 2, 3. 

In this plight, therefore, he went home, and 
restrained himself as long as he could, that his 
wife and children should not perceive his dis- 
tress ; but he could not be silent long, because 
that his trouble increased. Wherefore at length 
he brake his mind to his wife and children ; and 
thus he began to talk to them : " 0, my dear 
wife," said he, "and you the children of my 
bowels, I, 3'our dear friend, am in myself un- 
done by reason of a burden that lieth hard upon 
me ; moreover, I am certainly informed that 
this our city will be burnt with fire This world. 
from heaven ; in which fearful overthrow, both 
myself, with thee my wife, and you my sweet 
babes, shall miserably come to ruin, neknowsno 

way of Lscape 

except (the which yet I see not) some ""^y"-'^- 
way (if escape can be found whereby we may 
be delivered." At this his relations were sore 
amazed ; not for that they believed that what 
he had said to them was true, but because they 
thought that some frenz}^ distemper had got 
into his head ; therefore, it drawing towards 
night, and they hoping that sleep might settle 
his brains, Avith all haste they got him to bed. 



EVANGLLI::! DIRECTS HIM. 14:) 

I>ut the iiiulit was as Iroublosoino to liini as the 
day ; Avhcrelure, instead of sleei)iiifr, lie spent 
it in siglis and tears. S(3 wlieu the morning was 
eumc, they wonhl know how he did. He told 
them, " Worse and worse :'" he also set to talk- 
ing to them again : but they began to be hard- 
, , , encd. Thev also thoudit to drive 
'"''"'''^""' away his distemper by harsh and 
surly carriage to him ; sometimes they would 
deride, sometimes they would chide, and some- 
times they Avould quite neglect him. AVhere- 
fore he began to retire himself to his chamber 
to j)ray for and jiity them, and also to condole 
his own misery ; he Avould also walk solitarily 
in the fields, sometimes reading, and sometimes 
])raying : and thus for some day-s he si)cnt his 
time. 

Now I saw. ii})on a time, when he was walk- 
ing in the fields, that he was (as he was wont) 
reading in his book, and greatly distressed in 
his mind ; and as he read, he burst out, as he 
had done before, crying, "What shall I do to 
be saved ?"' Acts IG : 30, 31. 

I saw also that he looked this way. and llu.t 
way, as if he would run ; yet he stood still be- 
cause (as I perceived) he could not tell which 
wav to so. I looked then, and saw a man 



144 PILGRIM'S PllOGRESS. 

named Evangelist coming to liim, and he ask- 
ed, " Wherefore dost thou cry?" 

He answered, " Sir, I perceive, b}' the book 
in mj hand, that I am condemned to die, and 
after that to come to judgment, Heb. 9:27; 
and I lind that I am not willing to do the first, 
Job 10:21, 22, nor able to do the second." 
Ezek. 22:14. 

Then said Evangelist, " Why not willing to 
die, since this life is attended with so many 
evils?" The man answered, "Because I fear 
that this 'burden that is upon my back will sink 
me lower than the grave, and I shall fall into 
Tophet. Isa. 30 : 33. And, sir, if I be not fit 
to go to prison, I am not fit to go to judgment, 
and from thence to execution ; and the thoughts 
of these things make me cry." 

Then said Evangelist, "If this be thy 
condition, why standest thou still?'" conviction of 

tlie necessity of 

He answered, "Because I know not *i^^'"s 
whither to go." Then he gave him a parch- 
ment roll, and there was written within, "Fly 
from the wrath to come." Matt. 3 : 7. 

The man therefore read it, and, looking upon 
Evangelist very carefully, said, "Whither must 
I fly?" Then said Evangelist, (pointing with 
his finger over a very wide field,) " Do you see 



OBSTINATE AND I'lJAlJl.E. 145 

yoiidci' wickcl-oalc '.'" Matt. T:l;5, 11. The 

man said, •"No." Then said the other, "Do 

Christ ami the vou See voiider shiniiin- liglit ?"' ]Va. 

u;:\'' K''";,un:i no aor) • 2 ]*et. 1 : 19. He said, " I 

without the ' 

^^"'■" think I do." Then .said Evanoelist, 

'• Kee}) that liuht in your eye, and go np directly 
thereto, so shalt thou ;^ee the gate ; at ^vhicli 
Avhen thou knockest, it shall be told thee wliat 
thou shalt do." So I saw in my dream that the 
man Ix'gan to run. Xow he had not run far 
from his own door when his wife and children, 
perceiving it. began to cry after him to return ; 
but the man ])ut his lingers in his ears and ran 
on, crying, "Life I life! eternal life!"' Luke 
14:26. So he looked not l)ehind him, Gen. 
19:17, but (led towards the middle of the plain. 
The neighbors also came out to see him 
Theythatfiee HUb 'Tcr. 20:10; Rud Rs hc rau, some 
to come are a mockcd. othcrs threatened, and some 

pazmg stock to 

the worui. cried after him to return ; and among 
those that did so, there were two that resolved 
to fetch hiui back by force. The nauie of the 
one was Obstinate, and the name of the other 
Pliable. Xow by this time the man was got a 
good distance from them ; but. liowever, they 
were resolved to pursue him, which they did. 
and in a little time they overtook him. Then 
7 



140 riLGRlM'S PROGRESS. 

said the man, " Xeiglibors, wherefore are ye 
come?"' They said, "To persuade you to go 
back with us." But he said, " That can by no 
means be : you dwell," said he, " in the city of 
Destruction, the place also where I was born : I 
see it to be so ; and dying there, sooner or later^ 
you will sink lower than the grave, into a place 
that burns with fire and brimstone : be content, 
good neighbors, and go along Avith me." 

"What," said Obstinate, "and leave our 
friends and our comforts behind us !" 

"Yes," said Christian, (for that was his 
name,) "because that all which you forsake is 
not worthy to be compared with a little of that 
I am seeking to enjoy, 2 Cor. 4:18; and if you 
will go along with me, and hold it, you shall fare 
as 1 myself; for there, where I go, is enough and 
to spare. Luke 15 : 17. Come away, and prove 
my words." 

Obst. What are the things you seek, since 
you leave all the world to find them ? 

Chr. I seek an inheritance incorruptible, 
undefiled, and that fadeth not away, 1 Peter, 
1:4; and it is laid up in heaven, and safe there, 
Heb. 11 :16, to be bestowed, at the time ap- 
pointed, on them that diligently seek it. Read 
it so, if vou will, in mv book. 



OBSTINATE AND PLIABLE. 1 iT 

''Tush," said Obstiiiato, "away ^vitll your 
book ; will you go l)ac'k with us, or no?" 

"No, not I,"' said the other, "because I have 
hiid my hand to the plough/' Luke 9:G2. 

Orst. Come then. neighl)or Pliable, let us 
turn again, and go home without him : there is a 
company of these crazy-headed coxcombs, that 
when they take a fancy by the end, are wiser 
in their own eyes than seven men that can ren- 
der a reason. 

Then said Pliable, " Don't revile ; if what 
good Christian says is true, the things he looks 
after arc better than ours: my heart inclines to 
go with my neigh])or.'' 

Obst. What, more fools still ! Be ruled by 
me, and go back ; who knows whither such a 
brain-sick fellow will lead you? Go back, go 
back, and be wise. 

Chr. Nay, but do thou come with thy neigh- 
oS[naie",u"n ^^r Plial)le ; there are such things to 
soul. "* *"* be had which I spoke of, and many 
more glories besides. If you believe not me, 
read here in this book ; and for the truth of 
wdiat is expressed therein, behold, all is con- 
firmed by the blood of Him that made it. Heb. 
9:17-21. 

" Well, neighbor Obstinate," said Pliable, 



14S riLGHnrp pp^oorepp. 

"I iK'ii'in to come to a point ; I iuteiid to go along 
with this good man, and to cast in my rnabie con 

senteth to go 

lot with him : l)ut' my good compan- ^""' •^'^'-istian. 
i )n, do you know the way to this desired place?'' 

Chr. I am directed by a man, whose name 
is Evangelist, to speed me to a little gate that 
is before ns, where we shall receive instructions 
about the way. 

Plt. Gome then, good neighbor, let us be 
going. Then they went both together. 

"And I will go back to my place,'"' said 
Obstinate: " I will be no companion nSfngbacf' 
of such misled, fantastical fellows." 

Now I saw in my dream, that when Obsti- 
nate was gone back. Christian and xaikbetween 

Christian and 

Pliable went talking over the plain; I'l'^we. 
and thus they began their discourse. 

Chr. Come, neighbor Pliable, how do jon 
do ? I am glad you are persuaded to go along 
with me. Had even Obstinate himself but felt 
what I have felt of the powers and terrors of 
what is 3'et unseen, he would not thus lightly 
have given us the back. 

Pli. Come, neighbor Christian, since there 
are none but us two here, tell me now farther, 
what the things are, and how to be enjoyed, 
whither we are going. 



rilKlr^TlAN AND rLlAHlJ;. U't 

t'liK. 1 can Ix'tk'i- cuiuhmvc oI' lliciii willi 
unspeakable'^' "iv inintl, tluui sjioak of tlit'iu witli my 
tongue : but yet, since you are -desirous to know, 
I will read of them in nty book. 

Pli. And do you think (hat the words o": 
your book are certainly true ? 

Chr. Yes, verily; for it was made by Him 
that cannot lie. Tit. 1 : 2. 

Pli. Well said ; what things are they ? 

Chr. There is an endless kingdom to l)e in- 
habited, and everlasting life to be given us, thai 
we may inhabit that kingdom for ever. Isa. 
G5:17; John 10:27-20. 

Pli. AVell said ; and what else ? 

Chr. There are crowns of glory to be given 
us ; and garments that will make us shine like 
the sun in the firmament of heaven. 2 TiuL 
4:8; Rev. 22:5; Matt. 13:43. 

Pli. This is very pleasant ; and what else? 

Chr. There shall be no more crying, noi- 
sorrow ; for he that is owner of the place will 
wipe all tears from our eyes. Isa. 25 : 8 ; Rev. 
7:16, 17: 21 :4. 

Pli. And wliat comi)any shall we liave 
there ? 

Chr. There we shall be with seraphim and 
cherul)im. Tsa. H : 2 : 1 Thess. 4:16, 17; Rev. 



150 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

5:11; creatures that will dazzle your eyes to 
look on them. There also you shall meet with 
thousands and ten thousands that have gone be- 
fore us to that place : iTone of them are hurtful 
but loving and holy ; every one Avalking in the 
sight of God, and standing in his presence with 
acceptance for ever. In a word, there we shall 
see the elders with their golden crowns, Rev, 
4:4; there we shall see the holy virgins with 
their golden harps, Rev. 14:1-5 ; there we shall 
see men that by the world were cut in pieces, 
burnt in flames, eaten of beasts, drowned in the 
seas, for the love they bore to the Lord of the 
place, John 12 :25, all well, and clothed with 
immortality as with a garment. 2 Cor. 5 : 2. 

Pli. The hearing of this is enough to rav- 
ish one's heart. But are these things to be 
enjoyed? How shall we get to be sharers 
thereof? 

Chr. The Lord, the governor of the coun- 
try, hath recorded that in this book, Isa. 55 : 1, 
2 ; John 6 : 37 ; 7 : 37 ; Rev. 21 : 6 ; 22 : 17 ; the 
substance of which is, If we be truly willing to 
have it, he will bestow it upon us freely. 

Pli. Well, my good companion, glad am I 
to hear of these things : come on, let us mend 
our pace. 



TLIAIUJ-: llKTl'IINS IK^MK. 151 

C'ilK. 1 cniiiiot ^o so last as 1 would, ])y 
reasoii of this 1)ui-(1imi that is on my ]yM-k. 

Xow T saw ill my dreani, that just as they 
hud imkUmI tliis talk, th(>y di'cw iii^uh to a very 
iiiiry slouuli tliat was in the midst of the plain: 
and they beinj;- lieedless, did l)oth fall suddenly 
Des^o^nd"^" °' ^lU) the bog. The name of the slougli 
was Despond. Here, therefore, they wallowed 
for a time, being grievously bedaubed with dirt ; 
and Christian, because of the burden that was 
(>:i his baek, began to sink in the mire. 

Then said Plial)le, ''Ah, neighbor Christian, 
where are you now?" 

"Truly,"' said Christian, " I do not know."' 

At this Pliable l)egan to be offended, and 
angrily saiil to his fedow. "Is this the happi- 
ness yon have told me all this while of? If 
we have sueli ill speed at our first setting out, 
what may we expect between this an<l our 
journey's end? ^lay I get out again with my 
{o'b^S^i;]""" life, you shall jwssess the brave coun- 
try alone for me." And with that he gave a 
desperate struggle or two, and got out of the 
mire on that side of the slough which was next 
to his own house : so away he went, and Chris- 
tian saw him no more. 

AVherefore Christian was left to tumble in 



152 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

the Sloiigli of Despond alone : but still he en- 
deavored to struggle to that side of christian, in 
the slough that was farthest from his stiii'io'gct''i^r' 

tlier from his 

own house, and next to the wicket- °^"»^""**^- 
gate ; the which he did, but could not get out 
because of the burden that was upon his back : 
but I beheld in my dream, that a man came to 
him, whose name was Help, and asked him 
what he did there. 

" Sir," said Christian, " I was bid to go thic 
way by a man called Evangelist, who directed 
me also to yonder gate, that I might escape the 
wrath to come. And as I was going thither, I 
fell in here." 

Help. But why did not j^ou look The promises. 
for the steps ? 

Chr. Fear followed me so hard that I fled 
the next way, and fell in. 

Then said Help, "Give me thy hand." So 
he gave him his hand, and he drew „K«^p"««h5m 
him out, Psalm 40 : 2, and he set him upon 
sound ground, and bid him go on his way. 

Then I stepped to him that plucked him 
out, and said, "Sir, wherefore, since over this 
place is the way from the city of Destruction 
to yonder gate, is it, that this plat is not mend- 
ed, that poor travellers might go thither with 



THE SLOl'dll OF DKr^rONU. 1.'):; 

more security?"' And lie said unto nio, "This 
What makes iiiirv slou;j,li is sucii u })hice as cauuot 

the f^lough or ' 1 1 • • 1 1 i. 1 -ii 

Despond. |)e uiciided : it is the deseeiit whither 
the scum and filth that attends conviction lor 
sin doth continually run, and therefore it is 
called the Slough of Despond; for still, as the 
sinner is awakened about his lost condition, 
there arise in his soul many fears and doul)ts, 
and discouraging- apprehensions, which all of 
them get together, and settle in this place : 
and this is the reason of the badness of this 
ground. 

"It is not the pleasure of the King that 
this place should remain so bad. Isa. 35 : 3, 4. 
His laborers also have, by the direction of his 
Majesty's surveyors, been for above these six- 
teen hundred years employed about this patch 
of ground, if perhaps it might have been 
mended : yea, and to my knowledge," said 
he, "there have been swallowed up at least 
twenty thousand cartloads, yea, millions of 
wholesome instructions, that have at all sea- 
sons been brought from all i)laces of the King's 
dominions, (and they that can tell, say they 
are the best materials to make good ground 
of the place,) if so be it might have been 
mended; but it is the Slough of Despond still. 



154 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

and so will be when they have done what they 
can. 

"True, there are, by the direction of the 
Lawgiver, certain good and substan- The promises 
tial steps, placed even through the ami accept'ancc 

^ ' i '=' to life by faith 

very midst of this slough ; but at such '" *^'"'''- 
time as this place doth much spew out its filth, 
as it doth against change of weather, these steps 
are hardl}^ seen ; or if they be, men, through the 
dizziness of their heads, step beside, and then 
they are bemired to purpose, notwithstanding 
the steps be there : but the ground is good when 
they are once got in at the gate." 1 Sam. 12 :23. 
NoAV I saw in my dream, that by this time 
Pliable was got home to his house, home^'^and^'is 
So his neighbors came to visit him ; nelghbor^s^ '"' 
and some of them called him wise man for com- 
ing back, and some called him fool for hazard- 
ing himself Avith Christian : others, again, did 
mock at his cowardliness, saying, " Surely, 
since you began to venture, I would not have 
been so base as to have given out for a few dif- 
ficulties :" so Pliable sat sneaking among them. 
But at last he got more confidence, and then 
they all turned their tails, and began to deride 
poor Christian behind his back. And thus 
much concerniug Pliable. 



WORLDLY WISEMAN. 155 

Now as Christian was walking solitary by 

himself, ho es|)icd one alar o(F come crossing 

Mr. Worldly ovor the I'leld to meet him ; and their 

Wist'inan meets 

with Christian, ji^p was to mect jnst as they were 
crossing the way of each other. The gentle- 
man's name that met him was Mr. Worldly 
Wiseman : he dwelt in the town of Carnal Pol- 
icy, a very great town, and also hard by from 
whence Christian came. This man then meet- 
ing with Christian, and having some inkling'^ of 
him, (for Christian's setting forth from the city 
of Destrnction was mneli noised abroad, not 
only in the town where he dwelt, but also it be- 
gan to be the towntalk in some other places) — 
Mr. AVorldly Wiseman, therefore, having some 
guess of him, by beholding his laborious going, 
by observing his sighs and groans, and the like, 
began thus to enter into some talk with Chris- 
tian. 

Mr*'Nv^odcny WOKLD. HoW UOW, gOOd fclloW ; 

Ssmn"^"^ whither away after this burdened 



manner 



C^iiR. A burdened manner indeed, as ever 
I think poor creature had ! And whereas you 
ask me, AVhither away ? I tell you, sir, I am 
going to yonder wicket-gate before me ; for 

* Slight knowledge. 



156 PILGRIM'S niOGRESS. 

there, as I am informed, I shall be put into a 
way to be rid of my heav}' burden. 

World. Hast thou a wife and children? 

Chr. Yes ; but I am so laden with this bur- 
den that I cannot take that pleasure in them 
as formerly: methinks I am as if I had none. 

World. Wilt thou hearken to me, if I give 
thee counsel ? 

Chr. If it be good, I will ; for I stand in 
need of good counsel. 

World. I would advise thee, then, that thou 
with all speed get thj^self rid of thy worwiyAVise- 

man's counsel 

burden ; for thou wilt never be set- to christian 
tied in thy mind till then : nor canst thou enjoy 
the benefits of the blessings which God hath 
bestowed upon thee till then. 

Chr. That is that which I seek for, even-to 
be rid of this heavy burden : but get it off my- 
self I cannot, nor is there any man in our coun- 
try that can take it off my shoulders ; therefore 
I am going this way, as I told you, that I may 
be rid of my burden. 

World. Who bid thee go this way to be 
rid of thy burden ? 

Chr. a man that appeared to me to be a 
very great and honorable person: his name, as 
I remember, is Evangelist. 



WOKLDLV WISK.MAN. 157 

AVoiJM). I bc'slirt'w'^' him lor liis counsel! 
there is not a more dangerous and trouljlesomc 
Av^Ieml\rcolr '^^''^y "^ ^^^^ world than is tliat into 
gSscomiseV. wliicli lie luitli directed thee ; and tliat 
thou shalt fnid, if thou wilt l)e ruled by his coun- 
sel. Thou hast met with something, as I per- 
ceive, already ; for I sec the dirt of the Slough 
of Despond is u})on thee : but that slough is tlTe 
beginning of the sorrows that do attend those 
that go on in that way. Hear me: I am older 
than thou : thou art like to meet with, in the 
way which thou goest, wearisomeness, painful- 
ncss, hunger, perils, nakedness, sword, lions, 
dragons, darkness, and, in a word, death, and 
what not. These things arc certainly true, 
having been contirmed by many testimonies. 
And should a man so carelessly cast away him- 
self, by giving heed to a stranger? 

Chr. Why, sir, this burden ui)on my liack 
is more terrible to me than all these things 
thi' hca?tTf ''J which you have mentioned : nay, me- 
><mi.g ins ^i^jj^i^.g J ^,.^y^^ jjQj. ^vIiqi J nicct with in 

the way, if so be I can also meet with deliver- 
ance from my burden. 

Would. How caniest thou by thy burden 
at first ? 

* Wish u curse to. 



158 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. By reading this book in my hand. 

World. I thought so ; and it has liappened 
unto thee as to other weak men, Avho, meddling 
with things too high for them, do suddenly fall 
into thy distractions ; which distrac- He does not 

. -, - , . like that men 

tions do not only unman men, as thine shoum be seri- 

•^ ' ous in reading 

[ perceive have done thee, but they "^«^'^'''- 
riTn them upon desperate ventures, to obtain 
they know not what. 

Chr. I know Avhat I would obtain ; it is 
ease from my heavy burden. 

AVoRLD. But why wilt thou seek for ease 
this way, seeing so many dangers attend it? 
especially since (hadst thou but patience to hear 
me) I could direct thee to the obtaining of what 
thou desirest, without the dangers that thou in 
this way wilt run thyself into. Yea, and the 
remedy is at hand. Besides, I will add, that 
instead of those dangers, thou slialt meet with 
much safety, friendship, and contefit. 

Chr. Sir, I pray open this secret to me. 

World. Why, in yonder village (the village 
is named Morality) there dwells a gentleman 
whose name is Legality, a very judicious man, 
and a man of a ver}" good name, that He preiers 

*■ morality belore 

has skill to help men off" with such th« strait gate. 
burdens as thine is from their shoulders; yea, 



WORLDLV WIrK.M AN'. 150 

to my knowleclti'c. lie liath done a .a-rent deal of 
good this way; aye, and besides, he hath skill 
to eure those that are somewhat erazed in their 
wits with their burdens. To him, as I said, 
thou mayest go, and be helped presently. His 
house is not quite a mile from this place ; and 
if he should not be at home himself, he hath a 
pretty young man to his son, whose name is 
Civility, that can do it (to speak on) as well as 
the old gentleman himself: there, I .«ay, thou 
mayest be eased of thy burden ; and if thou art 
not minded to go back to thy former habitation, 
(as indeed I would not wish thee.) thou mayest 
send for thy wife and children to this village, 
where there are houses now standing empty, 
one of which thou mayest have at a reasonable 
rate : provision is there also cheap and good ; 
and that which will make thy life the more 
happy is, to be sure there thou shalt live by 
honest neighbors, in credit and good fashion. 

Now was Christian somewhat at a stand ; 
gnare.rby'>Tr" ^^^^^ presently he concluded, If this be 
mans'lvords**" truc whicli this gcntlcman hath said, 
my wisest course is to take his advice : and 
with that he thus farther spoke. 

CiiR. ^iir. which is my way to this honest 
man's house ? 



IGO riLG RIM'S PROGRESS. 

World. Do you see yonder high Mount sinai 
hill? 

Chr. Yes, very well. 

World. By that hill yoii must go, and the 
first house you come at is his. 

So Christian turned out of his way to go 
to Mr. Legality's house for help : but behold, 
when he was got now hard by the tSlL^'^MTunt't^ 
hill, it seemed so high, and also that oiihi'shead/'' 
side of it that was next the way-side did hang 
so much over, that Christian was afraid to ven- 
ture further, lest the hill should fall on his head ; 
wherefore there he stood still, and wotted not 
what to do. Also his burden now seemed heav- 
ier to him than while he was in his way. There 
came also flashes of fire, Exod. 19: 16, 18, out 
of the hill, that made Christian afraid that he 
should be burnt : here therefore he did sweat 
and quake for fear. Heb. 12 :21. And now 
he began to be sorry that he had taken Mr. 
Worldly Wiseman's counsel ; and with that he 
saw Evangelist coming to meet him, at the sight 
also of whom he began to blush for shame. So 
Evangelist drew nearer and nearer; fth^^^chrislrali 

T • i 1 • 1 1 1 1 under Mount 

and coming up to hun, he looked upon sinai. 

him with a severe and dreadful countenance, 

and thus beo:an to reason with Christian. 



UNDEIl .MOUNT SINAI. IGl 

"Wluit (locst tlioii licre, CMiristiiin ?'' said 
Kvanu'clist: at wliii-li Avurds Cliristian knew not 
what to answer ; wherefore at present he stood 
Evanpeiist rca- SDcechless before liiin. Then said 

8ons alri'sli witli 

Christian Evangelist further, "Art not thou 
the man that I found erying without the walls 
of the eity of Destruction?" 

CiiH. Yes. dear sir, I am the man. 

Evan. Did not I direct thee the way to the 
little wicket-gate ? 

Chr. Yes, dear sir. 

Evan. How is it then that thou art so 
quickly turned aside? For thou art now out 
of the way. 

Chk. 1 met with a gentleman, so soon as I 
had got over the Slough of Despond, who per- 
suaded me that I might, in the village before 
me, find a man that could take off my burden. 

Evan. What was he ? 

CiiK. He looked like a gentleman, and talk- 
ed nnich to me, and got ;:ic at last to yield: so 
I came hither; but when I beheld this hill, and 
how it'hangs over the way, I suddenly made a 
stand, lest it should fall on my head. 

Evan. AVliat said that gentleman to you? 

Chr. AVhy, he asked me whither T was go- 
ing; and T told him. 



162 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Evan. And what said lie then? 

Chr. He asked me if I had a family ; and 
I told him. • But, said I, I am so laden with the 
burden that is on my back, that I cannot take 
pleasure in them as formerly. 

Evan. And what said he then ? 

Chr. He bid me with speed get rid of ray 
burden ; and I told him it was ease that I sought. 
And, said I, I am therefore going to yonder 
gate, to receive further direction how I may get 
to the place of deliverance. So he said that he 
would show me a better way, and short, not so 
attended with difficulties as the way, sir, that 
you set me in ; which way, said he, will direct 
you to a gentleman's house that hath skill to 
take off these burdens : so I believed him, and 
turned out of that way into this, if haply I might 
be soon eased of my burden. But when I came 
to this place, and beheld things as they are, I 
stopped, for fear, as I said, of danger : but I 
now know not what to do. 

Then said Evangelist, "Stand still a lit- 
tle, that I may show thee the words of God." 

So he stood trembling. Then said Evangelist con- 
vinces him of 
Evangelist, "See that ye refuse not hisenor. 

Him that speaketh ; for if they escaped not who 

refused him that spake on earth, much more 



EVANGELIST CONVINCES JIIM. 1G3 

shall not wc osca^io, if wc (urn :i\v;iy from Tlim 
that speaketh from heaven.' Ilei). 12 :25. lie 
said, moreover, "Now the just shall live by 
faith ; but if any man draw back, my soul shall 
have no pleasure in him."' ITeb. 10 : 38. He 
also did thus apply them: "Thou art the man 
that art running* into this misery : thou hast 
begun to reject the counsel of the Most High, 
and to draw back thy foot from the way of 
peace, even almost to the hazarding of thy per- 
dition."' 

Then Christian fell down at his feet as dead, 
crying, "Woe is me. for I am undone!'' At the 
sight of which Evangelist caught him by the 
right hand, saying, "All manner of sin and blas- 
phemies shall be forgiven unto men.'' Matt. 
12 : 31. "Be not faithless, but believing." John 
20 : 27. Then did Christian again a little re- 
vive, and stood up trembling, as at first, before 
Evangelist. 

Then Evangelist proceeded, saying, "Give 
more earnest heed to the things -that I shall tell 
'thee of. I will now show thee who it was that 
deluded thee, and who it was also to whom he 
Wiseman"'"' de^ scut thcc. Thc uiau that met thee is 
ETSeiist. ^^ one Worldly AViseman, and rightly is 
he so called : partly because he savoreth only 



164 PILUIMM'S FKOGRESS. 

the doctrine of this world, 1 jTjhii, 4 : 5, (there- 
fore he ahvays goes to the town of Morality to 
church ;) and partly because he loveth that doc- 
trine best, for it saveth him best from the cross, 
Gal. 6:12: and because he is of this carnal tem- 
per, therefore he seeketh to pervert my ways, 
though right. Now there are three things in 
this man's counsel that thou must utterly abhor. 

"1. His turning thee out of the way. 

"2. His laboring to render the cross odious 
to thee. 

"3. And his setting thy feet in that way 
that leadeth unto the administration of death./' 

"First, thou must abhor his turning thee 
out of the way ; yea, and thine own consenting 
thereto ; because this is to reject the counsel of 
God for the sake of the counsel of a Worldly 
Wiseman. The Lord says, ' Strive to enter in 
at the strait gate,' Luke 13:24, the gate to 
which I send thee ; ' for strait is the gate that 
leadeth unto life, and few there be that iind it.' 
Matt. 7:13, 14. From this little wicket-gate, 
and from the way thereto, hath this wicked man 
turned thee, to the bringing of thee almost to 
destruction : hate, therefore, his turning thee 
out of the way, and abhor thyself for hearken- 
ing to him. 



KVANCKI.lJ^T COXVINCES I1I\[. Hi.'. 

"SocoimIIv. llxHi imisl ahlior his laltoiiiiLi to 
render the eross odious unto thee; for thou art 
to jtreter it l)el'ore tlie treasures of Euvpt. 1 lei). 
1 1 : 2'), 20. Besides, the King of glory hath toh' 
ihec. that he that will save his life shall lose it. 
And he that eomes after him. and hates not his 
father, and mother, and wife, and children, and 
brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, 
he eannot be his disciple. Mark 8 :38; John 
12 : 25 ; Matt. 10 : 39 ; Luke 14 : 20. I say, 
therefore, for man to labor to persuade thee 
that that shall be thy death, without which, the 
ti'uth hath said, thou canst not have eternal life, 
this doctrine thou must abhor. 

"Thirdly, thou must hate his setting of th^' 
feet in the way that leadeth to the ministration 
of death. And for this thou must consider to 
whom he sent thee, and also how unable that 
person was to deliver thee from thy burden. 

'"He to whom thou wast sent for ease, being 
by name Legality, is the son of the bond-woman 
which now is, and is in bondage with her chil- 
dren. Gal. 4 : 21-27, and is, in a mystery, this 
Mount Sinai, which thou hast feared will fall on 
thy head. Xow, if she with her children are in 
bondage, how canst thou expect by them to be 
made free? This Legalitv, therefore, is not 



1G6 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

able to set thee free from thy burden. No man 
was as yet ever rid of his burden by him ; no, 
nor ever is like to be : ye cannot be justified 
by the works of the law; for by the deeds of 
the law no man living can be rid of his burden. 
Therefore Mr. Worldly Wiseman is an alien, and 
Mr. Legality is a cheat ; and for his son Civility, 
notwithstanding his simpering looks, he is but a 
hypocrite, and cannot help thee. Believe me, 
there is nothing in all this noise that thou hast 
heard of these sottish men, but a design to be- 
guile thee of thy salvation, by turning thee from 
the way in which I had set thee." After this. 
Evangelist called aloud to the heavens for con- 
firmation of what he had said; and with that 
there came words and fire out of the mountain 
under which poor Christian stood, which made 
the hair of his flesh stand up. The words were 
thus pronounced : " As many as are of the works 
of the law, are under the curse ; for it is writ- 
ten, Cursed is every one that continueth not in 
all things which are written in the book of the 
hw to do them." Gal. 3:10. 

Now Christian looked for nothing but death, 
and began to cry out lamentably ; even cursing 
the time in which he met with Mr. Worldly 
Wiseman ; still calling himself a thousand fools 



EVANGELIST CUMFOIlTri IIIM. Km 

for licarkeniug to his counsel. He also was 
greatly ashamed to tJiiiik that this gentleinaii's 
arguments, flowing only fVom the flesh, should 
liave the prevalency with him so far as to cause 
Iiiin to forsake the light way. This done, he 
applied himself again to Evangelist in words 
and sense as follows. 

Chr. Sir, what think j^ou? Is there any 

iioi)e ? May I now go back, and go up to the 

wicket-gate? Shall I not be abandoned for this, 

Christian in- and scut back from thence ashamed ? 

quires if he may 

yet be happy. J qi^j sorry I luivc licarkencd to this 
man's counsel ; but may my sin be forgiven ? 

Then said Evangelist to him, "Thy sin is 
very great, for b}' it thou hast committed two 
evils ; thou hast forsaken the way that is good, 
comfSs hfn!."' to trcad in forbidden paths. Yet will 
the man at the gate receive thee, for he has 
good-will for men: only," said he, "take heed 
that thou turn not aside again, lest thou 'per- 
ish from the way, when his wrath is kindled 
but a little.'" Psalm 2:12. 



1G8 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 



THE SECOND. STAGE. 

Then did Christian address himself to ge 
back ; and Evangelist, after he had kissed him, 
gave him one smile, and bid him God speed: 
so he went on with haste, neither spoke he to 
any man by the way ; nor if any man asked 
him, would he vouchsafe them an answer. He 
went like one that was all the while treading 
on forbidden ground, and could by no means 
think himself safe, till again he was got into the 
way which he had left to follow Mr. Worldly 
Wiseman's counsel. So, in process of time, 
Christian got up to the gate. Now, over the 
gate there was written, "Knock, and it shall 
be opened unto you." Matt. 7:7. 

He knocked, therefore, more than once or 
twice, saying, 

" I\Iay I now enter here ? "Will he within 
Open to sorry me, though I have been 
An undeserving rebel? Then shaU I 
Not fail to sing his lasting praise on high." 

At last there came a grave person to the gate, 

named Goodwill, who asked who was there, 

and whence he came, and what he would have. 

Chr. Here is a poor burdened sinner. I 



ENTERS IX AT THE CATE. l()t) 

come from the city of Destruction, l)ut am <r()in(.- 
to Blount Zioii. that I may be delivered from 
the wrath to come ; I would therefore, sir, since 
I am informed that by this gate is the way 
thither, know if you are willing to let me in. 
"I am willing with all my heart,'' said 
The gate will Qoodwill ; and w^ith that he opened 

be opened to ^ ■ a 

broken hearted ji „ ™„4.^ 
8;nner8. thC gatC. 

So, when Christian was stei)ping in, the other 
gave him a pull. Then said Christian, 'AVhat 
mealis that?*' The other told him, "A little 
distance from this gate there is erected a strong 
castle, of which Beelzebulj is the captain: from 
Patan envies thcncc both lic aud thcy that are with 

those tliat enter 

the strait gate, jjjjj^ slioot arrows at tliosc that come 

up to this gate, if haply they may die before 

Christian en i\^Qy (.qj^ cutcr iu.'' Thcu Said Chris- 

ters the gate ^ 

^LU ""tian, '-I rejoice and tremble." So 
when he was got in, the man of the gate asked 
him who directed him thither. 

CiiR. Evangelist bid me come hither and 
Talk between kuock, as I did : aud he said that you, 

Goodwill and 

'jhristian. gij- -would tcU uic what I must do. 

Good. An open door is set before thee, and 
no man can shut it. 

Chii. Now T begin to reap the benefit of my 
hazards. 



170 riLGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Good. But how is it that you came alone ? 

Chr. Because none of my neighbors saw 
their clanger as I saw mine. 

Good. Did any of them know of your com- 
ing? 

Chr. Yes, my wife and children saw me at^ 
the first, and called after me to turn again: 
also, some of my neighbors stood crying and 
calling after me to return ; but I put my fingers 
in my ears, and so came on m}^ way. 

Good. But did none of them follow yoti, to 
persuade you to go l^ack ? 

Chr. Yes, both Obstinate and Pliable ; but 
when they saw that they could not prevail. 
Obstinate went railing back, but Pliable came 
with me a little way. 

Good. But why did he not come through? 

Chr. We indeed came both together until 
we came to the Slough of Despond, into the 
which we also suddenly fell. And then was 
my neighbor Pliable discouraged, and would 
not venture further. Wherefore, getting out 
again on the side next to his own . a man may 

O have company 

house, he told me I should possess the o^lf for'hea4l! 

. andyetgothith- 

brave country alone lor hnii : so he er aioue. 
went his wa}^ and I came mine; he after Ob- 
stinate, and T to this gate. 



TALK WITH GOODWILL. ITl 

Then said (Goodwill, *'Alas, poor man: is 
the eelestial glory of so little esteem with hiiu, 
that he counteth it not worth running the haz- 
ard of a few difficulties to obtain it?"' 

"Truly," said Christian, "I have said the 
cus'n.'^*hin.sdf truth of Pliable ; and if I should also 
at tiTegate.'"'"' Say all the truth of myself, it will 
appear there is no betterment betwixt him and 
myself. It is true, he went back to his own 
house, but I also turned aside to go into the 
way of death, being persuaded thereto by the 
carnal argument of one ^Ir. AVorldly Wise- 
man.'' 

Goon. Oh, did he light upon you ? What, 
he would have had you seek for case at the 
hands of ^Mr. Legality ! They are both of them 
a very cheat. But did you take his counsel ? 

Chr. Yes, as far as I durst. I went to find 
out Mr. Legality, until I thought that the moun- 
tain that stands by his house would have fallen 
upon my head ; wherefore there was I forced 
to stop. 

Good. That mountain has been the death of 
many, and will be the death of many more : it is 
well you escaped being by it dashed in pieces. 

Chr. Why, truly I do not know what had 
becomo of mo thoro. had not Evangelist hai>pily 



172. PILGRnr? PROGRESS. 

met me again as 1 was musing in the midst of 
my dumps ; but it was God's mercy that he 
came to me again, for else I had never come 
hither. But now I am come, such a one as I 
am, more lit indeed for death by that mountain, 
than thus to stand talking with ni}^ Lord. But 
Oh, what a favor is this to me, that yet I am 
admitted entrance here! 

Good. We make no objections against any, 
notwithstanding all that they have done before 
they come hither ; they in nowise are iortld'"''agaT 
cast out. John 6:37. And therefore, on'Mswly.''^*"* 
good Christian, come a little way with me, and 
I will teach thee about the way thou must go. 
Look before thee ; dost thou see this narrow 
way ? That is the way thou must go. It was 
cast up by the i)atriarchs, prophets, Christ, and 
his apostles, and it is as straight as a rule can 
make it ; this is the way thou must go. 

"But," said Christian, "are there no turn- 
ino-s nor windinsrs, by which a stran- christian afraid 
ger may lose his way?" '^^y- 

Good. Yes, there are many Avays but down 
upon this, and the}' are crooked and wide : but 
thus thou mayest distinguish the right from the 
wrong, the right only being straight and nar- 
row. Matt. 7 :14. 



Till-: iNTi-:]{i'j{ETEir>s house. 17:^ 

TluMi 1 saw ill my drcaiu, tliat Christian 
or'hi:'buXr^' asked him further, if he could not 
help him off with his burden that was upon his 
kick. For as yet he had not got rid thereof; 
nor could he l)y any means get it off without 
help. 

liTerancr?rom Hc told lliui, " As tO thy bur- 

the guilt and i , ■> • -i i 

burden of sin, deu, be content to bear it until thou 

but by the death ' 

VlLt'""" "' comest to the place of deliverance ; 
for there it will fall from thy back of itself." 

Then Christian began to gird up his loins, 
and to address himself to his journey. So the 
other told him, that by that he was gone some 
distance from the gate, he would come to the 
house of the Interpreter, at whose door he 
should knock, and he would show him excel- 
lent things. Then Christian took his leave of 
his friend, and he again bid him God speed. 

Then he went on till he came at the house 
of the Interpreter,''' where he knocked over 
Christian comes aud ovcr. At last oiic camc to the 

to the liDUse of 

the Interpreter. ^Qor, aud askcd wIk ) was there. 

Chk. Sir, here is a traveller, who was bid 
by an acquaintance of the good man of this 
house to call here for my profit : 1 would there- 
fore s})eak with the master of the Ikjusc. 

* The Holy Spirit. 



174 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

So he called for the master of the house, 
who, after a little time, came to Christian, and 
asked him what he would have. 

"Sir," said Christian, "I am a man that 
am come from the city of Destruction, and am 
going to the Mount Zion; and I was told by 
the man that stands at the gate at the head of 
this way, that if I called here you would shoAV 
me excellent things, such as would be helpful 
to me on my journey." 

Then said the Interpreter, "Come in; I 
will show thee that which will be tain"' " '"'"' 
profitable to thee." So he commanded his man 
to light the candle, and bid Chris- illumination. 
tian follow him ; so he had him into a private 
room, and bid his man open a door ; the which 
when he had done, Christian saw the picture of 
a very grave person hang up against a b^'avfptctme' 
the wall ; and this was the fashion of it : it had 
eyes lifted up to heaven, the best of books in' 
its hand, the law of truth was written upon its 
lips, the world was behind its back; it stood 
as if it pleaded with men, and a crown of gold 
did hang over its head. 

Then said Christian, "What means this?" 

Inter. The man whose picture this is, is one 
of a thousand : he can bejxet children, 1 Cor. 



Till-: I.\TKI!PRKTEir.< II()l\<E. 175 

4:15, travail in Itirth with cliildrcii. (Jal. 4:10, 
and nurse tlieui hinisclt" avIk'u tlicv are born. 
m.amngoithc ^^,^,| ^ylu'reas thou seest him with 
his eyes lift up to heaven, tlie bi'st of books in 
his liand. and the law of truth writ on his lips: 
it is to show thee, that his work is to know, 
and unlbid dark thiims to sinners; even as also 
thou seest him stand as if he pleaded with 
men. And whereas thou seest the world as 
cast behind him. and tliat a crown hangs over 
his head; that is to show thee, that slighting 
and despising the things that are present, for 
the love that he hath to his Master's service, 
he is sure in the world that comes next to 
whyheshow havc glorv for his reward. Now, 

cd him this pic- 
ture first, yai^i the Inter})reter, I have showed 

thee this picture first, because the man whose 
picture this is, is the only man whom the Lord 
of the place whither thou art going hath author- 
ized to be thy guide in all difficult j)laces thou 
mayest meet with in the way: wherefore take 
good heed to what I have showed thee, and 
bear well in thy mind what thou hast seen, 
Jest in thy journey' thou meet with some that 
pretend to lead thee right, but their way goes 
down to death. 

Then he look him 1)V the hand, and led 



176 PILGRIM'S niOGRESS. 

him into a very large parlor that was full of 
dust, because never swept ; the which after he 
reviewed it a little while, the Interpreter called 
for a man to sweep. Now, when he began to 
sweep, the dust began so abundantly to fly 
about, that Christian had almost therewith been 
choked. Then said the Interpreter to a dam- 
sel that stood by, "Bring hither water, and 
sprinkle the room;" the which when she had 
done, it was swept and cleansed with pleasure. 
Then said Christian, "What means this?" 
The Interpreter answered, "This parlor is 
the heart of a man that was never sanctified 
by the sweet grace of the gospel. The dust is 
his original sin, and inward corruptions, that 
have defiled the whole man. He that began 
to sweep at first, is the Law; but she that 
brought water, and did sprinkle it, is the Gos- 
pel. Now, whereas thou sawest that so soon 
as the first began to sweep, the dust did so 
fly about that the room by him could not be 
cleansed, but that thou wast almost choked 
therewith: this is to show thee that the law, 
instead of cleansing the heart (by its working) 
from sin, doth revive, Rom. 7:9, put strength 
into, 1 Cor. 15 :56, and increase it in the soul, 
Rom. 5 : 20, even as it doth discover and for- 



TllK INTKUrHlOTEIlS iiois?:. 177 

bid it; loi" it doth not give power to subdue. 
Again, as thou sawest the damsel sprinkle the 
room with water, upon whieh it was cleansed 
with }»l(>asure, this is to show thee, that when 
the gospel comes in the sweet and precious 
intluences thereof to tlie lu'art. llieii. I say, 
even as thou sawest the damsel lay the dust 
by s})rinkling tlie lloor with water, so is sin 
vane pushed and subdued, and the soul made 
clean, through the faith of it, and consequently 
lit for the King of glory to inhabit." John 15 : 3 ; 
Eph. 5 : 2G ; Acts 15 : 9 ; Rom. 10 : 25, 26. 

I saw moreover in my dream, that the In- 
terpreter took him by the hand, and had him 
Heshowedhim iuto a Httlc rooui, whcrc sat two lit- 

Passion and I'a- 

ticuce. tie children, each one in his chair. 

The name of the eldest was Passion, and the 
name of the other Patience. Passion seemed 
to be much discontented, but Patience was 
very quiet. Then Christian asked, "What is 
the reason of the discontent of Passion?" The 
have^unoV" Interpreter answered, "The govern- 
or of them would have him stay for his best 
things till the beginning of the next year, but 

^Patience is lor jjg ^^.j^ 1,.^^^^ .ill UOW ; but'PatieUCe 

is willing to wait." 

Then I saw that one came to Passion, and 

8* 



178 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 



brought him a bag of treasure, and poured it 
down at his feet ; the which he took ,,i/'fS' ^^^^ 
up, and rejoiced therein, and withal aiTawIy!""'"'^ 
laughed Patience to scorn. But I beheld but 
a while, and he had lavished all away, and 
had nothing left him but rags. 

Then said Christian to the Interpreter, 
"Expound this matter more fully to me." 

So the Interpreter said, "These two lads 
are figures : Passion of the men of this world, 
and Patience of the men of that which is to 
come; for, as here thou seest. Passion will 
have all now, this year, that is to say, in this 
world; so are the men of this world: they 
must have all their good things now; they 
cannot stay till the next year, that is, until 
the next world, for their portion of good. 
That proverb, ' A bird in the hand is worth 
two in the bush," is of more author- The woridiy 

man for a bird 

ity with them than are all the divine '» ^^"^ 'i^"** 
testimonies of the good of the world to come. 
But as thou sawest that he had quickly lav- 
ished all away, and had presently left him 
nothing but rags, so will it be with all such 
men at the end of this world." 

Then said Christian, " Now I see the^b^estwlsdom'^ 
that Patience has the best wisdom, and that 



THE INTKltPKETEirS HOUSE. 170 

Upon nuiiiy accounts. 1. Because he stays for 
the best things. 2. And also because he will 
have the glory of his, when the other has noth» 
ing but rags." 

Inter. Nay, a'Ou may add another, to wit, 
the glory of the next world will never wear 
out; but these are suddenly gone. Therefore 
Passion had not so much reason to laugh at 
Patience because he had his good things first. 
Things that as Patience will have to laugh at 

are first must t-» • i i i n i • i x 

give place, but Passion bccausc he had his best 

things that are 

last are lasting, ^j^jj^^g ^^^^ . f^^^. ||,.^^ ^^^^^^^ ^,j^.^ pj^^^^ 

to last, because last must have his time to 
come : but last gives place to nothing, for there 
is not another to succeed. He, therefore, that 
hath his portion first, must needs have a time 
to s})end it ; but he that hath his portion last, 
must have it lastingly: therefore it is said of 
Dives, 'In thy lifetime thou receivedst thy 
goodth.n'Sin't good things, and likewise Lazarus 
evil things ; but now he is comforted, and thou 
art tormented." Luke IG : 25. 

Chr. Then I perceive it is not best to covet 
things that are now, but to wait for things to 



The first things IxTER. You sav trutli ; for thc 

are but tcmpo- 

"*'• things that are seen are temporal, but 



180 PILGRIM'S rROGRESS. 

the tilings that are not seen are eternal. 2 Cor. 
4:18. But though this be so, yet, since things 
present and our fleshly appetite are such near 
neighbors one to another; and again, because 
things to come and carnal sense are such stran- 
gers one to another ; therefore it is, that the first 
of these so suddenly fall into amity, and that 
distance is so continued between the second. 

Then I saw in my dream, that the Inter- 
preter took Christian by the hand, and led 
him into a place where was a fire burning 
against a wall, and one standing by it, always 
casting nuich water upon it, to quench it ; yet 
did the fire burn higher and hotter. 

Then said Christian, "What means this?" 
The Interpreter answered, "This fire is the 
work of grace that is wrought in the heart : he 
that casts water upon it, to extinguish and put 
it out, is the devil ; but in that thou seest the 
fire notwithstanding burn higher and hotter, 
thou slialt also see the reason of that.'' So he 
had him about to the back side of the wall, 
where he saw a man with a vessel of oil in his 
hand, of the which he did also continually cast 
(but secretly) into the fire. 

Then said Christian, "What means this?" 
The Interpreter answered, "This is Christ, 



TiiK ixti-:iii'I!i:ti-:ii'.< iiorsi;. i^l 

wlio eoiitiimally. with tlic oil of his <:i-a(.'e, 
maintains the work already l)t',i:un in the licart; 
hy the means of which, notwitlistandinii" what 
llie devil ean (h). the souls of his people })rovc 
gracious still, l^ C\)r. 12 : 9. And in that thou 
sawest that the man stood behind the wall to 
maintain the lire, this is to teach thee that it 
is liard for the tempted to see how this work 
of grace is maintained in the soul."' 

I saw also that the Interpreter took liiui 
again by the hand, and led him into a pleasant 
place, where was built a stately ])alace, beau- 
tiful to behold ; at the sight of which Christian 
was greatly delighted. He saw also upon the 
top thereof certain j)ersons walking, who WTre 
clothed all in gold. 

Then said Christian, "May we go in thither?'' 
Then the Interpreter took him, and led 
him \\\) towards the door of the i)alace; and 
behold, at the door stood a great company of 
men, as desirous to go in, but durst not. 
There also sat a man at a little distance from 
the door, at a table-side, with a book and his 
inkhorn before him, to take the names of them 
that should enter therein; he saw also that in 
the doorway stood many men in armor to keej) 
it, being resolved to do to the men that would 



182 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

enter, what hiu't and mischief they could. 
Now was Christian somewhat in amaze. At 
last, when every man started back for fear of 
the armed men. Christian saw a man of a very 
stout countenance come up to the man that sat 
there to write, saying, "Set down man.^° ""''^"^ 
my name, sir ;" the which when he had done, 
he saw the man draw his sword, and put a 
helmet on his head, and rush towards the door 
upon the armed men, Avho laid upon him with 
deadly force ; but the man, not at all discour- 
aged, fell to cutting and hacking most fierce- 
ly. So after he had received and given many 
wounds to those that attempted to keep him 
out. Matt. 11 : 12, Acts 14 : 22, he cut his way 
through them all, and pressed forward into the 
palace; at which there was a pleasant voice 
heard from those that were within, even of 
those that walked upon the top of the palace, 
saying, 

" Come in, come in, 
Eternal glory thou slialt win." 

So he went in, and was clothed with such gar- 
ments as they. Then Christian smiled, and said, 
"I think verily I know the meaning of this. 

"Now," said Christian, "let me go hence."' 
"Nay, stay," said the Interpreter, "till T have 



Till-: iNTEHPi{ETi-:ir8 norsK. 183 

sIiowimI thee a little more, and after that thou 
shalt go on thy way."' So he took him hy 
anScago""' the luiml again, and led him into a 
very dark room, where there sat a man in an 
iron cage. 

Now the man, to look on, seemed very 
sad; he sat with his eyes looking down to 
the ground, his hands folded together, and he 
sighed as if he would break his heart. Then 
said Christian, 'What means this?'' At whieli 
the Interpreter bid him talk with the man. 

Then said Christian to the man, 'What 
art thou?" The man answered, "I am what I 
was not once."' 

Chr. What wast thou once ? 

The man said, "I was once a fair and 
laourishing professor, Luke 8:13, both in mine 
own eyes, and also in the eyes of others: I 
onoe was, as I thought, fair for the celestial 
city, and had then even joy at the thoughts 
that I should get thither." 

Chr. Well, but what art thou now ? 

Max. I am now a man of despair, and am 
shut up in it. as in this iron cage. I cannot 
get out : Oh now I cannot ! 

Chr. But how camest thou into this condi- 
tion '! 



184 riLG RIM'S PROGRESS. 

Man. I left off to watch and be sober: I 
laid the reins upon the neck of my lusts; I 
sinned against the light of the word, and the 
goodness of Grod; I have grieved the Spirit, 
and he is gone ; I tempted the devil, and he is 
come to me ; I have provoked God to. anger, 
and he has left me ; I have so hardened my 
heart, that I cannot repent. 

Then said Christian to the Interpreter, 
"But is there no hope for such a man as this?"' 
"Ask him," said the Interpreter. 

Then said Christian, "Is there no hope, but 
you must be kept in the iron cage of despair ?" 

Man. No, none at all. 

Chr. Why, the Son of the Blessed is very 
pitiful. 

Man. I have crucified him to myself afresh, 
Heb. 6 : 6 ; I have despised his person, Luke 
19:14; I have despised his righteousness; I 
have counted his blood an unholy thing; I 
have done despite to the Spirit of grace, Heb. 
10 : 29 ; therefore I have shut n^yself out of all 
the promises, and there now remains to me 
nothing but threatenings, dreadful threaten- 
ings, faithful threatenings of certain judgment 
and fiery indignation, which shall devour me 
as an adversarv. 



TlIK IXTKIirRKTERS HOU.^K. 185 

CiiR. For what did you l)i'iii.u' yoiifscir iiilo 
this condition ? 

Max. For tlio lusts, pleasures, and profits 
of this world, in the cnjo3'ment of which I did 
then promise myself much delight; but now 
every one of those things also bite me, and 
gnaw me like a burning worm. 

Chr. But canst thou not now rejient and 
turn ? 

Max. God hath denied me repentance. 
His word gives me no encouragement to be- 
lieve; yea, himself hath shut me uj) in this 
iron cage ; nor can all the men in the Avorld 
let me out. Oh, eternity! eternity! how shall 
I grapple with the misery that I must meet 
with in eternity? 

Then said the Interpreter to Christian, 
"Let this man's misery be remembered by 
thee, and be an everlasting caution to thee." 

"Well," said Christian, "this is fearful! 
God help me to watch and to be sober, and to 
pray that I may shun the cause of this man's 
mi.serv. Sir, is it not time for me to go on 



9?? 



my way now 

IxTER. Tarry till I shall show thee one 
thing more, and then thou shalt go on thy wa}'. 

So he took Christian by the hand again, 



186 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

and led him into a clianiber where there was 
one rising out of bed ; and as he put on his 
raiment, he shook and trembled. Then said 
Christian, "Why doth this man thus tremble?" 
The Interpreter then bid him tell to Christian 
the reason of his so doing. 

So he began, and said, "This night, as I 
was in ray sleep, I dreamed, and behold, the 
heavens grew exceeding black; also it thun- 
dered and lightened in most fearful wise, that 
it put me into an agony. So I looked up in 
my dream, and saw the clouds rack at an 
unusual rate; upon which I heard a great 
sound of a trumpet, and saw also a man sitting 
upon a cloud, attended with the thousands of 
heaven : they were all in flaming lire ; also the 
heavens were in a burning flame. I heard 
then a voice, saying, 'Arise, ye dead, and 
come to judgment.' And with that the rocks 
rent, the graves opened, and the dead that 
were therein came forth: some of them were 
exceedingly glad, and looked upward; and 
some sought to hide themselves under the 
mountains. Then I saw the man that sat upon 
the cloud open the book, and bid the world 
draw near. Yet there was, by reason of a 
tierce flame that issued out and came from be- 



THE INTERPRETER'S HOUSE. 1^7 

fore liim, a convenient distance between liim 
and them, as between the jndge and the pris- 
oners at the bar. 1 Cor. 15; 1 Thess. 4:10; 
Jude 15; John 5:28, 29; 2 Thess. 1:8-10; 
Rev. 20:11-14; Isa. 20:21; Micah7:lG, IT; 
Psa. 5:4; 50:1-3; Mai. 3:2, 3; Dan. 7:9, 
10. I heard it also proclaimed to them that 
attended on the man that sat on the clond, 
'Gather together the tares, the chaff, and stub- 
ble, and cast them into the burning lake.' 
Matt. 3:12; 18:30; 24 : 30 ; Mai. 4 : 1. And 
with that the bottomless pit opened just where- 
about I stood ; out of the mouth of which there 
came, in an abundant manner, smoke, and coals 
of fire, with hideous noises. It was also said 
to the same persons, 'Gather my wdieat into 
the garner.' Luke 3:17. And with that I 
saw many catched up and carried away into 
the clouds, but I was left behind. 1 Thess. 
4 : 10, 17. I also sought to hide myself, but I 
could not, for the man that sat upon the cloud 
still kept his eye upon me ; my sins arlso came 
'into my mind, and my conscience did accuse 
me on every side. Rom. 2:14, 15. Upon 
this I awakened from my sleep." 

Cnu. But what was it that made you so 
afraid of this sight ? 



188 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Man. Wli}^, I thought that the day of judg- 
ment was come, and that I was not ready for 
it: but this frighted me most, that the angels 
gathered up several, and left me behind ; also 
the pit of hell opened her mouth just where I 
stood. My conscience too afflicted me • and, as 
I thought, the Judge had always his eye upon 
me, showing indignation in his countenance. 

Then said the Interpreter to Christian, 
"Hast thou considered all these things?" 
' Chr. Yes, and they put me in hope and 
fear. 

Inter. Well, keep all things so in thy 
mind that they may be as a goad in thy sides, 
to prick thee forward in the way thou must go. 

Then Christian began to gird up his loins, 
and to address himself to his journey. Then 
said the Interpreter, "The Comforter be al- 
ways with thee, good Christian, to guide thee 
in the way that leads to the city." So Chris- 
tian went on his way, saying, 

" Here I have seen things rare and profitable, 
Things pleasant, dreadful, things to make me stable 
In what I have begun to take in hand : 
Then let me think on them, and understand 
Wherefore they showed me were, and let me be 
Thankful, good Interpreter, to thee." 



L().<K^^ HIS 15ri:i>KN. 18«» 



THE THIRD STAGE. 

Now I saw in my dream, tliat tlic lii^iliway 
■np which Christian was to tio. was fenced on 
either side with a wall, and that wall was 
called Salvation. Isa. 20:1. Up this way, 
therefore, did burdened Christian run, but not 
without great difficulty, because of the load on 
his back. 

He ran thus till he came at a place some- 
what ascending; and upon that place stood a 
cross, and a little below, in the bottom, a sep- 
ulchre. So 1 saw in my dream, that just as 
Christian came up with the cross, his burden 
loosed from off his shoulders, and fell from oft' 
his back, and began to tumble, and so con- 
tinued to do till it came to the mouth of the 
sepulchre, where it fell in, and I saw it no 
more. 

Then was Christian glad and lightsome, 
wiunGodre- aud sald wMth a merry heart, "He 

leases us of our '' 

§en.\v"'are"as hath givcu uio rcst by his sorrow,, 
lorjoy"'"' '""^ and life ])y his death." Then he 
stood still a while, to look and ^vonder"; for it 
was very surprising to him that the sight of 
the cross should thus ease him of his burden. 



190 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

He looked, therefore, and looked again, even 
till the springs that were in his head sent the 
waters down his cheeks. Zech. 12:10. Now 
as he stood looking and weeping, behold, three 
Shining Ones came to him, and saluted him 
with, "Peace be to thee." So the first said to 
him, ''Thy sins be forgiven thee," Mark 2:5; 
the second stripped him of his rags, and clothed 
him with change of raiment, Zech. 3:4; the 
third also set a mark on his forehead, Eph. 
1:13, and gave him a roll with a seal upon it, 
which he bid him look on as he ran, and that 
he should give it in at the celestial gate: so 
they w^ent their wa}^ Then Chris- a christian 

. TO- ^ can sing though 

tian irave three leai)s tor loy, and aione.whenood 

"- i o ^ J doth give him 

went on singing, joy in his heart. 

"Thus far did I come laden with ray sin, 
Nor could aught ease the grief that I was in, 
Till I came hither. What a place is this ! 
Must here be the beginning of my bliss ? 
Must here the burden fall from off my back ? 
Must here the strings that bound it to me crack? 
Blest cross ! blest sepulchre ! blest, rather, be 
The Man' that there was put to shame for me ! " 

I saw then in my dream, that he went on 
tnus, even until he came at the bottom, where 
he saw, a little out of the way, three simple, sioth, 

and Presump- 

men fast asleep, with fetters upon """• 
their heels. The name of the one was Simple, 



SI.MI'LK. ;>L()TI1. AXI» Ti: K.- T M I'TIUX . 191 

of niiotlioi- Slotli. and of tlic third Pr('siiiii|)- 
tioii. 

Christian then sei'liig' thiMii lie in this case, 
wont to tlicni. it' ))erad venture he mio-ht awake 
them, and cried, 'You are like tlieni that slecj) 
on the top of a mast. Prov. 23 : 84. for the 
Dead t^ea is under you, a <rulf that hath no 
bottom: awake, therefore, and come away; be 
willing also, and I will help you off with your 
irons." He also told them. "If he that "oeth 
about like a roaring lion, 1 Pet. 5:8. comes 
by. you will certainly become a prey to his 
teeth."' With that they looked upon him. and 
began to reply in this sort: Simple said. '1 
see no danger;" Sloth said, ''Yet a little 
pereullfon'wm "lore sleep;"' and Presumption said, 
ctiinoVthe°Te". " Evcry tub must stand upon its own 
bottom." And so they lay down to sleep 
again, and Christian went on his way. 

Yet he was troubled to think that men in 
that danger should so little esteem the kindness 
of him that so freely offered to help them, both 
by awakening of them, counselling of them, 
and prolfering to help them off with their irons. 
And as he was troubled thereabout, he espied 
two men come tumbling over the wall, on the 
left hand of the narrow way ; and the.y made 



192 PILGRIM'S PROCxRESS. 

up apace to him. The name of the one was 
Formalist, and the name of the otlier Hypoc- 
risy. So, as I said, they drew np unto him, 
who thus entered with them into discourse. 

Chr. Gentlemen, whence came wuhthem/"'''^' 
you, and Avhither do you go ? 

Form, and Hyp. We were born in the land 
of Vainglory, and arc going, for i)raise, to 
Mount Zion. 

Chr. Why came you not in at the gate 
which standeth at the beginning of the way ? 
Know ye not that it is written, that "he that 
Cometh not in by the door, but climbeth up 
some other way, the same is a thief and a rob- 
ber?" John 10:1. 

Formalist and Hypocrisy said, that "to go 
to the gate for entrance was by all their coun- 
trymen counted too far about; and that there- 
fore their usual way was to make a short cut 
of it, and to climb over the wall, as they had 
done." 

Chr. But will it not be counted a trespass 
against the Lord of the city whither we are 
bound, thus to violate his revealed will ? 

They told him, that "as for that, he needed 
not to trouble his head thereabout: for what 
they did they had custom for, and could pro- 



FORMALIST AND IIYPUCRISV. 193 

duee, if need wore, testimony that would wit- 
ness it for more tluin a tliousand years." 

"But,-' said Christian, "will 3'ou stand a 
trial at law?" 

They told him, that "custom, it being of 
im^thf waT ^'^ l<^»g' standing as above a thou- 
door°thinkthat Sand veai's, would doubtless now be 

tliey can say 

vrdicS I,'} admitted as a thing legal by an im- 

their own prac x- i • n i i • i m • -i 

tice. partial judge; and besides, said 

they, "if we get into the way, what matter is 
it which way we get in ? If we are in, we are 
in: thou art but in the way, who, as w^e per- 
ceive, came in at the gate; and we also are in 
the way, that came tumbling over the wall : 
wherein now is thy condition better than ours?" 

Chu. I walk by the rule of my Master; 
you walk b}- the rude working of your fancies. 
You are counted thieves already by the Lord 
of the way ; therefore I doubt you will not be 
found true men at the end of the way. You 
come in' by yourselves without his direction, 
and shall go out by yourselves without his 
mercy. 

To this they made him but little answer* 
only they bid him look to himself. Then I 
saw that they went on, every man in his way, 
without much conference one with another. 



liH PlL(;RI.^r•p progress. 

siivc that these two men told Christian, that 
as to laws and ordinances, they doubted not 
but that they should as conscientiously do them 
as he. ''Therefore," said they, "we see not 
wherein thou differest from us, but b}' the coat 
that is on thy back, which was, as we trow, 
given thee by some of thy neighbors, to hide 
the shame of thy nakedness." 

Chr. By laws and ordinances 3^ou will not 
be saved, since you came not in by the door. 
Gal. 2 :16. And as for this coat that is on 
my back, it w^as given me by the Lord of the 
place whither I go ; and that, as you say, to 
cover my nakedness with. And I take it as a 
token of kindness to me; for I had nothing 
but rags before. And besides, thus christian has 
I comfort mvself as I go. Surely, coat o„ his back, 

*-' " ' and IS comfort- 

think I, when I come to the gate of '"^ ^'"■^'=""'" 
the city, the Lord thereof will know me for 
good, since I have his coat on my back ; a coat 
that he gave me freely in the day that he 
stripped me of my rags. I have, JaisowmrhL 

> . f" 1 1 mark and liis 

moreover, a mark m my lorenead, rou. 
of which perhaps you have taken no notice, 
which one of my Lord's most intimate asso- 
ciates fixed there in the day that my burden 
fell off my shoulders. I will tell you, more- 



THE HILL DIFFICULTY. 195 

over, Ihut 1 had then <;iveii me ii roll sealed, 
to comfort mc by reading as I go on the way ; 
I was also bid to give it in at the celestial 
gate, in token of my certain going in alter 
it : all which things I doubt yon want, and 
want them because you came not in at the 
gate. 

To these things they gave him no answer ; 

only they looked upon each other, and laughed. 

Christian has Thcu I saw that tlicy went all on, 

taJk with him- 

^^" save that Christian kept before, who 

had no more talk but with himself, and that 
sometimes sighingly, and sometimes comforta- 
bly: also he would be often reading in the 
roll that one of the Shining Ones gave him. l)y 
which he was refreshed. 

I beheld then, that they all went on till 
He comes to thcv cauic to thc foot of thc hill 

the hill Diflicul- 

*y Difficulty, at the bottom of which 

there was a spring. Tliere were also in the 
same place two other ways besides that which 
came straight from the gate: one turned to tin 
left hand, and tlie othei- to the right, at tli( 
bottom of the hill; but the narrow way lay 
right up the hill, and the name of the going uj) 
the side of the hill is called Difficulty. Chris- 
tian now went to the s|)ring. Isa. 49:10, and 



196 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

drank thereof to refresh himself, and then 
began to go up the hill, saying, 

" The hill, though high, I covet to ascend ; 
The difficulty will not me offend ; 
For I perceive the way to life lies here : 
Come, pluck up heart, let 's neither faint nor fear. 
Better, though difficult, the right way to go, 
Than wrong, though easy, Avhere the end is woe." 

The other two also came to the foot of the 
hill. But when they saw that the hill was 
steep and high, and that there were two other 
ways to go ; and supposing also that these two 
ways might meet again with that up which 
Christian went, on the other side of the hill ; 
therefore they were resolved to go in those 
ways. Now the name of one of those ways 
was Danger, and the name of the other De- 
struction. So the one took the way which is 
called Danger, which led him into The danger of 

turning out of 

a great wood ; and the other took ^^e way. 
directly up the way to Destruction, which led 
him into a wide field full of dark mountains, 
where he stumbled and fell, and rose no more. 
I looked then after Christian, to see him 
go up the hill, where I perceived he fell from 
running to going, and from going to clambering 
upon his hands and his knees, because of the 
steepness of the- place. Now about the mid- 



THE AKl'.OII. 107 

way to llio toj) of tlic hill was a pleasant 
graced""' "'Arbor, made by the Lord of the 
hill for the refreshment of weary travellers. 
Thither, therefore, Christian got, where also 
he sat down to rest him: then he pulled his 
roll out of his bosom, and read therein to his 
comfort; he also now began afresh to take a 
review of the coat or garment that was given 
to him as he stood by the cross. Thus pleas- 
ing himself awhile, he at last fell into a slum- 
ber, and thence into a fast sleep, which de- 
tained him in that place until it was almost 
night ; and in his sleep his roll fell out of his 
is"'ioi;r'*''^hand. Now, as he was sleeping, 
there came one to him, and awaked him, say- 
ing, "Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider 
her ways, and be wise." Prov. 6 : 6. And 
with that, Christian suddenly started up, and 
sped him on his way, and went apace till he 
came to the top of the hill. 

Now when he was got up to the top of the 
hill, there came two men running amain; the 
Christian moeta uamc of thc ouc was Tluiorous, and 

■with Mistrust 

and Timorous, of \\^q othcr Mistrust I to whom Chris- 
tian said, "Sirs, what's the matter? you run 
the wrong way." Timorous answered, that 
"they were going to the city of Zion. and had 



198 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

got up that difficult place: but,"" said he, "the 
further we go, the more danger we meet with ; 
wherefore we turned, and are going back again,'' 

"Yes," said Mistrust, "for just before us 
lie a couple of lions in the way, whether sleep- 
ing or waking we know not ; and we could not 
think, if we came within reach, but they would 
presently pull us in pieces."' 

Then said Christian, "You make me afraid; 
but whither shall I fly to be safe ? If I go back 
to my own country, that is prepared for fire 
and brimstone, and I shall certainly perish 
there ; if I can get to the celestial city, I am 
sure to be in safet}^ there: I must venture. 
To go back is nothing but death: to ^l?7lLr ''"'''' 
go forward is fear of death, and life everlasting 
beyond it: I will yet go forward." So Mis- 
trust and Timorous ran down the hill, and 
Christian went on his way. But thinking again 
of what he had heard from the men, he felt in 
his bosom for his roll, that he might read there- 
in and be comforted ; but he felt, and S^'fj^.'^Sn 
found it not. Then was Christian com"orfed^" ^/ 
in great distress, and knew not what to do; 
for he wanted that which used to relieve him, 
and that which should have been his pass into 
the celestial citv. Here, therefore, he be^ran 



FINDS II [.- Kol.I.. 1'.)'.) 

to be iiuieh |)(M-|)1('X(m1. and knew not wliat to do. 
edlorXr'oir At hist lio betliouulit liiiiiself tliat 
lie had slept in the arbor that is on the side of 
the hill; and falling down upon his knees, he 
asked God forgiveness for that foolish act, and 
then went back to look for his roll. But all 
the way he went l)aek, who can sufficiently set 
forth the sorrow of Christian's heart? Some- 
times he sighed, sometimes he wept, and often- 
times he chid himself for being so foolish to 
fall asleep in that place, which was erected 
only for a little refreshment from his weariness. 
Thus, therefore, he went back, carefully look- 
ing on this side and on that, all the way as he 
went, if happily he might find his roll, that had 
been his comfort for so many times in his jour- 
ney. He went thus till he came again within 
sight of the arbor where he sat and slept ; but 
that sight renewed his sorrow the more, by 
bringing again, even afresh, his evil of sleeping 
Christian be unto hls uiiud. Rcv. 2 : 4 ; 1 Thcss. 

wai's his ioolish 

sleeping 5 . ^.g. Thus, thercforc, he noAv 

went on, bewailing his sinful sleep, saying, "Oh 
wretched man that I am, that I should sleej) in 
the daytime ; that T should sleep in the midst 
of difficulty; that I should so indulge the flesh 
as to use that rest for ease to mv flesh which 



200 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

the Lord of the hill hath erected only for the 
relief of the spirits of pilgrims! How many 
steps have I taken in vain! Thus it happened 
to Israel; for their sin they were sent. back 
again by the way of the Red Sea; and I am 
made to tread those steps with sorrow, which 
I might have trod with delight, had it not been 
for this sinful sleep. How far might I have 
been on my way by this time ! I am made to 
tread those steps thrice over, which I needed 
not to have trod but once: yea, now also I 
am like to be benighted, for the day is almost 
spent. Oh that I had not slept!" 

Now by this time he was come to the arbor 
again, where for a while he sat down and wept; 
but at last, (as Providence would christiamind- 

^ eth his roll 

have it,) looking sorrowfully down where he lost u. 
under the settle, there he espied his roll, the 
which he with trembling and haste catched up, 
and put it into his bosom. But who can tell 
how joyful this man was when he had gotten his 
roll again ? For this roll was the assurance of 
his life, and acceptance at the desired haven. 
Therefore he laid it up in his bosom, gave 
thanks to God for directing his eye to the place 
where it lay, and with joy and tears betook 
himself again to his journey. But Oh, how 



TJIK TALACK U K A T T I FU [.. 2()1 

nimbly did lio pi iij) tlie rest of tlie liill ! Yet 
beroro he frot iij), tlic siiii went down upon 
Christian; and this made him again recall the 
vanity of his sleej)in<2: to his remembrance ; and 
thus he again began to condole with himself: 
"Oh thou sinful sleep, how for thy sake am I like 
to be benighted in my Journey ! I must walk 
without the sun, darkness must cover the path 
of my feet, and I must hear the noise of the 
doleful creatures, because of ni}' sinful sleep." 
Now also he remembered the story that Mis- 
trust and Timorous told him of, how the}' were 
frighted with the sight of the lions. Then said 
Christian to himself again, '"These beasts range 
in the night for their prey; and if the}' should 
meet witli me in the dark, how should I shift 
them ? how should I escape being by them torn 
in pieces?" Thus he went on his wa}'. But while 
he was bewailing his unhappy miscarriage, he 
lift up his eyes, and behold there was a very 
stately palace before him, the name of which 
was Beautiful, and it stood by the highway-side. 
So I saw in my dream that he made haste, 
and went forward, that if possible he might get 
lodging there. Now before he had* gone far, 
he entered into a very narrow passage, which 
was about a furlong off the porter's lodge ; and 



202 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

looking very narrowly before him as he went, 
he espied two lions in the way. Now, thonght 
he, I see the dangers that Mistrust and Tim- 
orous were driven back by. (The lions were 
chained, but he saw not the chains.) Then he 
was afraid, and thought also himself to go back 
after them ; for he thought nothing but death 
was before him. But the porter at the lodge, 
whose name is Watchful, perceiving that Chris- 
tian made a halt, as if he would go back, cried 
unto him, saying, ' ' Is thy strength so small ? 
Mark 4 : 40. Fear not the lions, for they are 
chained, and are placed there for trial of faith 
where it is, and for discovery of those that 
have none : keep in the midst of the path, and 
no hurt shall come unto thee,'' 

Then I saw that he went on, trembling for 
fear of the lions, but taking good heed to the 
directions of the porter; he heard them roar, 
but they did him no harm. Then he clapped 
his hands, and went on till he came and stood 
before the gate where the porter was. Then 
said Christian to the porter, "Sir, what house 
is this ? and may I lodge here to-night ?" The 
porter answered, "This house was built by the 
Lord of the hill, and he built it for the relief 
and security of pilgrims.'' The porter also 



TALK WITH TIIL roilTKI!. 1>UH 

asked whence he was. and wliither lie was 
going. 

Chr. I am come from the ciiy of Destruc- 
tion, and am going to Mount Zion ; but because 
the sun is now" set, I desire, if I may, to lodge 
here to-night. 

Port. What is your name ? 

Chr. My name is now Christian, but my 
name at the first was Graceless: I came of the 
race of Japheth, whom God will persuade to 
dwell in the tents of Shem. Gen. 9 : 27. 

Port. But how doth it happen that you 
come so late ? The sun is set. 

Chr. I had been here sooner, but that, 
wretched man that I am, I slept in the arbor 
that stands on the hill-side! Nay, I had, not- 
withstanding that, been here much sooner, but 
that in my sleep I lost ray evidence, and came 
without it to the brow of the hill; and then 
feeling for it, and not finding it, I w^as forced 
with sorrow of heart to go back to the place 
where I slept my sleep, where I found it ; and 
now I am come. 

Port. Well, I will call out one of the vir- 
gins of this place, who will if she likes your 
talk, bring you in to the rest of the family, 
accordinpf to the rules of the house. 



204 PILGRIM'S TROGRESS. 

So Watchful the porter rang a bell, at the 
sound of which came out of the door of the 
house a grave and beautiful damsel named Dis- 
cretion, and asked why she was called. 

The porter answered, "This man is on a 
journey from the city of Destruction to Mount 
Zion ; but being weary and benighted, he asked 
me if he might lodge here to-night : so I told 
him I would call for thee, who, after discourse 
had with him, mayest do as seemeth thee good, 
even according to the law of the house." 

Then she asked him whence he was, and 
whither he was going; and he told her. She 
asked him also how he got into the way ; and 
he told her. Then she asked him what he had 
seen and met Avith in the way, and he told her. 
And at last she asked his name. So he said, 
"It is Christian ; and I have so much the more 
a desire to lodge here to-night, because, by 
what I perceive, this place was built by the 
Lord of the hill for the relief and security of 
pilgrims." So she smiled, but the water stood 
in her ej^es ; and after a little pause she said, 
" I will call forth two or three more of the 
family." So she ran to the door, and called 
out Prudence, Piety, and Charity, who, after 
a little more discourse with him, had him into 



TALK WITH PIETY. 205 

the family; and many of thorn moctinc: liim at 
the thresljohl of the house, said, "Come in, 
thou blessed of the Lord; this house was built 
by the Lord of the hill on purpose to entertain 
sueh })ils2:rinis in.'' Then he bowed his head, 
and followed them into the house. 80 Avhen 
he was come in and sat down, the}' gave him 
something to drink, and consented together 
that, until su})per was ready, some of them 
should have some particular discourse vvith 
Christian, for the best improvement of time: 
and they api)ointed Piety, Prudence, and Char- 
ity to discourse with him : and thus they be- 
gan. 

Piety. Come, good Christian, since we have 
Ivuh'him""'^''' been so loving to you as to receive 
you into our house this night, let us, if perhaps 
we may better ourselves thereby, talk with 
you of all things that have happened to you in 
your pilgrimage. 

CfiR. With a very good will; and I am 
glad that you are so well disposed. 

Piety, What moved 3'ou at first to betake 
yourself to a pilgrim's life ? 
^!^.Vlril?!'flTf C"ii- I ^vas driven out of mv 

« as (irmii out *- 

olhiaowncoun ,• j. -u iiri i 

try. native country by a dreadlul sound 

that was in mine ears ; to wit, that unavoida- 



20G PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

ble destruction did attend me, if I abode in 
that place where I was. 

Piety. But how did it happen that you 
came out of your country this way ? 

Chr. It was as tlod woukl have it; for 
when I was under the fears of destruction, I 
did not know whither to o;o ; but by now he got 

into the way to 

chance there came a man, even to ^''°n 
me, as I was trembling and weeping, whose 
name is Evangelist, and he directed me to the 
Wicket-gate, which else I should never have 
found, and so set me into the way that hath 
led me directly to this house. 

Piety. But did you not come by the house 
of the Interpreter ? 

Chr. Yes, and did see such things there, 
the remembrance of which will stick a rehearsal of 

what he saw in 

by me as long as I live, especially ^''^ ''"^y- 
three things : to wit, hoAV Christ, in despite 
of Satan, maintains his work of grace in the 
heart ; how the man had sinned himself quite 
out of hopes of God's mercy; and also the 
dream of him that thought in his sleep the day 
of judgment was come. 

Piety. Why, did you hear him tell his 
dream ? 

CiiR. Yes, and a dreadful one it was, I 



TALK WITH rii:TY. 207 

thought; it inatle my heai't ache as ho was toll- 
ing of it, but yot I am glad I lioanl it. 

Piety. Was this all you saw at tho house 
of tho Iutor})rotor ? 

Ciiu. Xo ; ho took mo, and had mo whore 
ho showed mo a stately palace, and how tho 
j)00ple wore clad in gold that wore in it ; and 
how there came a venturous num, and cut his 
way through tho armed men that stood in tho 
tloor to keep him out ; and how ho was l)id to 
come in, and win eternal glory, Metliought 
those things did ravish my heart. I would 
have stayed at that good man's house a twelve- 
month, but that I knew I had farther to go. 

Piety. And what saw you else in the way? 

Chr. Saw! why, I wont but a little farther, 
and I saw One, as I thought in my mind, hang 
bleeding u})on a tree ; and the very sight of him 
made my burden fall off my, back ; for I groaned 
under a very lioav}^ burden, but then it fell 
down from off me. It was a strange thing to me, 
for I never saw such a thing before : yea, and 
while I stood looking uj). (for then I could nofc 
forbear looking.) three Shining Ones came to 
mo. One of them testiliod that my sins were 
forgiven mo; another strij)pod me of my rags, 
and gave me this broidored coat which you see ; 



208 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

and the third set the mark which you see in my 
forehead, and gave me this sealed roll. And 
with that he plucked it out of his bosom. 

Piety. But you saw more than this, did 
you not ? 

Chr. The things that I have told you were 
the best: yet some other matters I saw, as, 
namely, I savf three men. Simple, Sloth, and 
Presumption, lie asleep a little out of the way, 
as I came, with irons upon their heels ; but do 
you think I could awake them? I also saw 
Formality and Hj^pocrisy come tumbling over 
the wall, to go, as they pretended, to Zion; 
but they were quickly lost, even as I myself 
did tell them, but they would not believe. But 
above all, I found it hard work to get up this 
hill, and as hard to come by the lions' mouths; 
and truly, if it had not been for the good man 
the porter, that stands at the gate, I do not 
know but that, after all, I might have gone back 
again ; but I thank God I am here, and thank 
you for receiving me. 

Then Prudence thought good to ask him a 
few questions, and desired his answer to them. 

PrU. Do you not think some- Prudence dis- 
courses with 

times of the country from whence ^™- 
you came ? 



TALK WITH I'RUDEXCE. 200 

Ciiu. Yea, l)ut witli iinicli sliaiiie and dc- 

Christians tCStatiolL Tl'Ulv, If I luul bcCll mind- 
thoughts of his 
native country, f^jj ^f {\y^l COUIltry ffOni wllCnCC I 

canic out, I miglit liavc had opportunity' to 
Lave returned ; but now I desire a better coun- 
try, that is, a heavenly one. Heb. 11 : 15, IG. 

Pru. Do 3'Ou not yet bear away with you 
some of the tilings that then you wore conver- 
sant withal ? 

Chr. Yes, but greatl}' against my will ; 
especially my inward and carnal cogitations, 
with which all my countrymen, as well as my- 
self, were delighted. But now all those things 
choice''"*""" ' are my grief; and might I but choose 
mine own things, I would choose never to think 
of those things niore: but when I would be a 
doing that which is best, that which is worst is 
with me. Rom. 7:15, 21. 

Pru. Do you not find sometimes as if those 
things were vanquished, which at other times 
are your perplexity ? 

Chr. Yes, but that is but seldom ; but they 
gouien'^houre" * ^rc to uic goldcu liours in which such 
things happen to me. 

Pru. Can you remember by what means 
you find your annoyances at times as if they 
were vanquished ? 



210 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. Yes ; when I think what I saw at the 
cross, that will do it ; and when I ^,^^^^1 ^;f;'|^ 
look upon my broidered coat, that ?fptions. 
will do it ; and when I look into the roll that I 
carry in my bosom, that will do it; and when 
my thoughts wax warm about whither I am 
going, that will do it. 

Pru. And Avhat is it that makes jon so 
desirous to go to Mount Zion ? 

Chr. Why, there I hope to see Him alive 
that did hano- dead on the cross ; and why chm 

° ' tian would be 

there I hope to be rid of all those at Mount zion. 

things that to this day are in me an annoyance 

to me: there they say there is no death, Isa. 

25 : 8 ; Eev. 21:4; and there I shall dwell with 

such company as I like best. For, to tell you 

the truth, I love Him because I was by him 

eased of my burden; and I am weary of my 

inward sickness. I would fain be where I shall 

die no more, and with the company that shall 

continually cry, Iloli/, hoi//, holy. 

Then said Charity to Christian, charity dis- 
courses with 

"Have you a family; are you a'"'" / 

married man ?" 

Chr. I have a wife and four small children. 

Char. And why did you not bring them 
alonoj with you ? 



TALK WITH CilAKlTV. 211 

Tlioii Cliristiaii wept, and said, "Oil. how 

Christians love willillgiv WOUUl I luiVO (loUO it! l)Ut 

to his wife and '' 

children. tllCY WCl'C ixU of thcill UttCl'lv aVCl'SC 

to my <ioiiia: on ])ilgTimage." 

. CiiAR. But you sliould have talked to them, 
and have endeavored to show them the danger 
of staying behind. 

Chr. So I did: and told them also what 
God had shown to me of the destruetion of our 
city ; but I seemed to them as one that mocked, 
and they believed me not. Gen. 10 : 14. 

Char. And did you pray to God that he 
would bless your counsel to them ? 

Chr. Yes, and that with much affection; 
for you must think that my wife and poor chil- 
dren were very dear to me. 

Char. But did 3'ou tell them of your own 
sorrow, and fear of destruction? for I sup- 
pose that destruction was visible enough to 
you. 

Chr. Yes, over and ever and over. They 

Christian's might also see my fears in my coun- 

fearotperishing . i i ^ • 

might be read in teuancc, m mv tcars, and also m my 

his very counte- ' ./ > ./ 

nance. trcmbliug uudcr the apprehension of 

the judgment that did hang over our heads; 
but all was not sufficient to prevail with them 
to come with me. 



212 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Char. But what could they say for them- 
selves, why they came not? 

Chr. Why, my wife was afraid of losing 
this world, and my children were Jg^^^vlL'^^nJ 
given to the foolish delights of youth ; f Sl'^"' 
so, what by one thing, and what by another, 
they left me to wander in this manner alone. 

Char. But did you not, with your vain life, 
damp all that you, by words, used by Avay of 
persuasion to bring them away with you ? 

Chr. Indeed, I cannot commend my life, 
for I am conscious to myself of many failings 
therein. I knoAv also, that a man, by his con- 
versation, may soon overthrow what, by argu- 
ment or persuasion, he doth labor to fasten 
upon others for their good. Yet this I can 
say, I was very wary of giving them occasion, 
by any unseemly action, to make christians 

', •! • good conversa- 

them averse to going on pilgrimage. ««" i>^efore^h|s 
Yea, for this very thing, they would '^'""' 
tell me I was too precise, and that I denied 
myself of things (for their sakes) in which they 
saw no evil. Nay, I think I may say, that if 
what they saw in me did hinder them, it was 
my great tenderness in sinning against God, or 
of doing any wrong to my neighbor. 

Char. Indeed, Cain hated his brother, be- 



TAi,K AT sri'i'i:i:. 2i:i 

caiKsc his own woi-ks were v\i\, and his brother's 
Christian clear rliiliteous, 1 Johu 3 :12: and il 



ol'tlu'ir blood, il' 



liv 



theyperLsh. ^yjj^^ j^,,,| ehlhlroii have been oflended 
with thee for this, Wwy thereby show them- 
selves to be inqdaeable to good ; thou hast de- 
livered thy soul from their blood. Ezek. 3:19. 
Now I saAV in my dream, that thus they 
sat talking together until supper was ready. So 
when they had made ready, they sat down to 
What Chris meat. Xow the table was furnished 

tian liatl tor his 

8ui.iH;r. ^yitii f^t things, and with wine thatwas 

well refined ; and all their talk at the table was 
suJSr ^'^^ "' about the Lord of the hill, as, name- 
ly, about what he had done, and wherefore he 
did what he did, and why he had builded that 
house ; and by what they said, I perceived that 
he had been a great warrior, and had fought 
with and slain him that had the power of death, 
Heb. 2:14, 15 ; but not without great danger 
to himself, which made me love him the more. 
For, as they said, and as I believe, said 
Christian, he did it with the loss of much blood. 
But that which put the glory of grace into all 
he did, was, that he did it out of pure love to 
his country. And besides, there were some of 
them of the household that said they had been 
and spoke with him since he did die on the 



214 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

cross ; and they liave attested that they had it 
from his own lips, that lie is such a lover of 
poor pilgrims, that the like is not to be found 
from the east to the west. They, moreover, 
gave an instance of what they aflBrmed; and 
that was, he had stripped himself of his glory 
that he might do this for the poor; and that 
they heard him say and affirm, that he would 
not dwell in the mountain of Zion alone. They 
said, moreover, that he had made many pil- 
grims princes, though bv nature thev Christ makes 

* princes of beg- 

were beggars born, and their origi- s^''^- 

nal had been the dunghill. 1 Sam. 2:8; Psa. 

113:7. 

Thus they discoursed together till late at 
night ; and after they had committed themselves 
to their Lord for protection, they betook them- 
selves to rest. The pilgrim they laid in a large 
upper chamber, whose window opened towards 
the sun-rising. The name of the c'Ser""''''" 
chamber was Peace, where he slept till break 
of day, and then he awoke and sang, 

"Where am I now? Is this the love and care 
Of Jesns, for the men that pilgrims are, 
Thus to provide that I should be forgiven, 
And dwell already the next door to heaven!" 

So in the morning they all got up ; and, after 
some more discourse, thev told him that he 



INTERESTTXC RKCORDP. 21;') 

should not depart till tlicv had shown him the 
info'^'thc^n.'Tv'' I'i^i'ities of that place. And lirst they 

tind what licsuw iii- 'xji ii i ii 

there. had hini into the study, where they 

bhowed him records of the «i-rcatest anti(iuity; 
ill which, as I reiueiiil)er my dream, they showed 
him the pediu'ree of the Lord of the lull, that 
Jie was the J^on of the Ancient of days, and 
came by eternal generation. Here also was 
more fully recorded the acts that he had done, 
and the names of many hundreds that he had 
taken into his service ; and how he had i)laced 
them in such habitations, that could neither by 
length of days, nor decays of nature, be dis- 
solved. 

Then they read to him some of the worthy 
acts that some of his servants had done ; as how 
they had subdued kingdoms,, wrought righteous- 
ness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of 
lions, quenched the violence of iire, escaped the 
edge of the sword, out of weakness were made 
strong, waxed valiant in fight, and turned to 
flight the armies of the aliens. Ileb. 11:33, 34. 

Then they read again another part of the 
records of the house, where it was shown how 
willing their Lord was to receive into his favor 
any, even any, though they in time past had 
offered great affronts to his person and proceed- 



21G PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

ings. Here also were several other histories 
of many other famous things, of all which Chris- 
tian had a Adew ; as of things both ancient and 
modern, together Avith prophecies and predic- 
tions of things that have their certain accom- 
plishment, both to the dread and amazement of 
enemies, and the comfort and solace of pilgrims. 

The next day they took him, and had him 
into the armory, where they showed intothfa?mor*^ 
him all manner of furniture which their Lord 
had provided for pilgrims, as sword, shield, 
helmet, breastplate, all-prayer, and shoes that 
would not wear out. And there was here 
enough of this to harness out as many men for 
the service of their Lord as there be stars in 
the heaven for multitude. 

They also showed him some of the engines 
with which some of his servants had done won- 
derful things. They showed him christian is 

made to see an- 

Moses' rod; the hammer and nail <='<^"*^'^''»s*- 
with which Jael slew Sisera; the pitchers, 
trumpets, and lamps too, with which Gideon 
put to flight the armies of Midian. Then they 
showed him the ox-goad wherewith Shamgar 
slew six hundred men. They showed him 
also the jawbone with which Samson did such 
mighty feats. They showed him, moreover. 



THE WONDERS SHOWN. *J1T 

{]\v sliim- aiul stone \villi wliicli I);ivi(l sk'W 
(foliath of (Jath; and the sword also with 
wliich their Lord will kill the man of sin, in 
the day that he shall i-ise up to the prey. 
They showed him besides many exeellent 
thing's, with which Christian was much de- 
lighted. This done, they went to their rest 
again. 

Then I saw in my dream, that on the mor- 
row he got n}) to go forward, ])ut they desired 
him to stay till the next day also; and then, 
said the}', wc will, if the day be clear, show 
3'ou the Delectable mountains; which, they 
said, would j-et farther add to his comfort, 
because they were nearer the desired haven 
than the place where at present he was ; so he 
consented and staj^ed. AVhen the morning 
was up, they had him to the toj) of the house. 
Christian show- aud bid him look south. So he did, 

cd the Delecta- 
ble mountains, and behold, at a great distance, he 

saw a most pleasant mountainous country, 
beautified with woods, vineyards, fruits of all 
sorts, flowers also, with springs and fountains, 
very delecta])le to behold. Isa. 33:16, 17. 
Then he asked the name of the country. They 
said it was Immanuers land ; and it is as com- 
mon, said they, as this hill is, to and for all 

PJ. Pro- 1 



218 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

the pilgrims. And Avhen thou comest there, 
from thence thou mayest see to the gate of the 
celestial city, as the shepherds that live there 
will make appear. 

Now he bethought himself of jo^vard!"'' ""*' 
setting forward, and they were willing he 
should. But first, said they, let us go again 
into the armor3\ So they did ; and when he 
came there, they harnessed him from head to 
foot with what was of proof, lest perhaps he 
should meet with assaults in the way. He 
being therefore thus accoutred, walked out 
with his friends to the gate ; and avvay armer^' 
there he asked the porter if he saw any pilgrim 
pass by. Then the porter answered, " Yes." 

"Pray, did you know him ?'' said Christian. 

Port. I asked his nam^, and he told me it 
was Faithful. 

"Oh," said Christian, "I know him; he i:^ 
my townsman, my near neighbor; he comes 
from the place where I was born. How far 
do you think he may be before ?" 

Port. He is got by this time below the hill. 

"Well," said Christian, "good porter, the 
Lord be with thee, and add to all aJ?d°'^,fe^;p'S 
thy blessings much increase for the fng!" 
kindness that thou hast showed me." 



greet at part- 



PURSUES HIS JOURNEY. 219 



THE FOUllTH STAGE. 

Thex he began to go forward ; but Dis- 
cretion, Piety, Charity, and Prudence would 
accompany him down to the foot of the hill. 
So they went on together, reiterating their 
former discourses, till they came to go down 
the hill. Then said Christian, "As it was 
difficult coming up, so, so far as I can see, it 
is dangerous going down." "Yes,"' said Pru- 
dence, "so it is; for it is a hard matter for a 
man to go down into the valley of Ilumilia- 
iiumui^/llmr'' tion, as thou art now, and to catch 
no slip l)y the way; therefore,'* said they, "we 
are come out to accomj)any thee down the hill." 
So he began to go down, but very warily ; yd 
he caught a slip or two. 

Then I saw in my dream, that these good 
companions, when Christian was got down to 
the bottom of the hill, gave him a loaf of bread, 
a bottle of wine, and a cluster of raisins; and 
then he went on his way. 

" Wliile Christian is among his godly friends, 
Their golden mouths make him sufficient mends 
For all his griefs ; and when they let him go, 
He 's clad with northern steel from top to toe." 



220 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

But now, ill this valley of Humiliation, 
poor Christian was hard put to it; for he had 
gone but a little Avay before he espied a foul 
fiend coming over the field to meet him : his 
name is ApoUyon. Then drd Christian begin 
to be afraid, and to cast in his mind Avhether 
to go back, or to stand his ground. But he 
considered, again, that he had no armor for his 
back, and therefore thought that to christian has 

no armor for his 

turn the back to him might give him ^'^'^'^ 
greater advantage with ease to pierce him with 
his darts; therefore he resolved to venture 
and stand his ground: "for," thought he, "had 
I no more in mine eye than the saving of my 
life, it would be the best way to stand." 

So he went on, and ApoUyon met him. 
Now the monster was hideous to behold: he 
was clothed with scales like a fish, and they 
are his pride; he had wings like a dragon, and 
feet like a bear, and out of his belly came fire 
and smoke, and his mouth was as the mouth of 
a lion. When he was come up to Christian, 
he beheld him with a disdainful countenance, 
and thus began to question him. 

ApOL. Whence came you, and Discourse be- 
tween Christian 

whither are you bound ? and Aponyon. 

Chr. I am come from the city of Destruc- 



AI'ULI.VUNiS DISCOURSE. 221 

tion, ^hich is tlie i)laec of all evil, and I am 
going to the city of Zion. 

Apol. By this I i)erceive that thou art one 
,of my subjects; for all that country is mine, 
and I am the prince and god of it. How is it, 
then, that thou hast run away from thy king? 
Were it not that I hope thou mayest do me 
more service, I would strike thee now at one 
blow to the ground. 

Chr. I was indeed born in your dominions, 
but your service was hard, and your wages such 
as a man could not live on; for the wages of 
sin is death, Rom. 6 : 23 ; therefore, when I was 
come to years, I did as other considerate persons 
do, look out if perhaps I might mend myself. 

Apol. There is no prince that will thus 
lightly lose his subjects, neither will I as yet 
flatter>^°"^°° ^ losc thcc ; but slncc thou complainest 
of thy service and wages, be content to go 
back, and what our country will afford T do 
here promise to give thee. 

Chr. But I have let myself to another, 
even to the King of princes ; and how can I 
with fairness go back with thee ? 
f iTri^t'^^'uliV/ Apol. Thou hast done in this 
valued by Apol- ^^(.^.^rding to the proverb, "changed 
a bad for a worse ;" but it is ordinary for those 



222 PILGRIM'S TROGRESS. 

that have professed themselves his servants, 
after a while to give him the slip, and return 
again to me. Do thou so too, and all shall be 
well. 

Chr. I have given him my faith, and sworn 
my allegiance to him ; how then can I go back 
from this, and not be hanged as a traitor ? 

Apol. Thou didst the same by me, and yet 
I am willing to pass by all, if now thou wilt 
yet turn again and go back. 

Chr. What I promised thee was in my 
nonage ; and besides, I count that the Prince, 
under whose banner I now stand, is able to 
absolve me, yea, and to pardon also what I 
did as to my compliance with thee. And be- 
sider, thou destroying Apollyon, to speak 
truth, I like his service, his wages, his ser- 
vants, his government, his company, and coun- 
try, better than thine ; therefore leave off to 
persuade me farther : I am his servant, and 
I will follow him. 

Apol. Consider again, when thou Apoiiyon 

pleads the griev- 

art in cool blood, what thou art like ^^'^istian? "o 

. i -ii • ii J.1 i. Ji dissuade Chris- 

to meet with m the wav that thou tian irom per 

*^ sisting in hig 

goest. Thou knowest that for. the ^'"'y- 
most part his servants come to an ill end, be- 
cause they are transgressors against me and 



AI'OLLVUN'S DISCOURSE. 223 

my ways. How many of them have becu put 
to sliameful deatlis! And besides, tliou eouiit- 
est his service better than mine; whereas he 
never yet came from the i>lcfce where he is, to 
deliver any that served him out of their ene- 
mies' liands; but as for me, how many times, 
as all the world very well knows, have I deliv- 
ered, either l)y power or fraud, those that have 
faithfully served me, from him and his, though 
taken by them. And so will I deliver thee. 

Chr. Ilis forbearing at present to deliver 
them, is on purpose to try their love, whether 
they will cleave to him to the end ; and as for 
the ill end thou sayest the}' come to, that is 
most glorious in their account. For, for pres- 
ent deliverance, they do not much expect it; 
for they stay for their glory; and then they 
shall have it, when their Prince comes in his 
and the glory of the angels. 

Apol. Thou hast already been unfaithful 
in thy service to him ; and how dost thou think 
to receive wages of him ? 

Cur. AVherein, Apollyon, have I been 
imfaithful to him ? 
chriinans^'^in" ApoL. Tliou didst faiut at first 

firmitios against ^^^^^j^^^, ^^^^ ^^.j^^^^^ ^j^^^^^ ^^,^^^ ^^^^^^^ 

choked in the gulf of Despond. Thou didst 



224 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

attempt wrong ways to be rid of thy burden, 
whereas thou shouldst have stayed till thy 
Prince had taken it off. Thou didst sinfully 
sleep, and lose thy choice things. Thou wast 
almost persuaded also to go back at the sight 
of the lions. And when thou talkest of thy 
journey, and of what thou hast seen and heard, 
thou art inwardly desirous of vainglory in all 
that thou sayest or doest. 

Chr. All this is true, and much more which 
thou hast left out ; but the Prince whom I serve 
and honor is merciful, and ready to forgive. 
But besides, these infirmities possessed me in 
thy country, for there I sucked them in, and I 
have groaned under them, been sorry for them, 
and have obtained pardon of my Prince. 

Then Apollyon broke out into a grievous 
ra2;e, saying, "I am an enemy to Aponyon, in 

'^ ' *^ ^' '^ rage, falls upon 

this Prince ; I hate his person, his ^uristian. 
laws, and people : I am come out on purpose 
to withstand thee." 

Chr. Apollyon, beware what you do, for 1 
am in the King's highway, the way of holiness ; 
therefore take heed to j^ourself. 

Then Apollyon straddled quite over the 
whole breadth of the way, and said, "I am 
void of fear in this matter. Prepare thyself 



CONFLICT WITH AI'OLLYON. 225 

to (lie; for I swear l)y my inrcnuil dcii, that 
thou slialt go no iurtlier: licrc will 1 spill thy 
soul."' And with that he tlirew a llaniiii,<;- dart 
at his l)reast; hut Christian had a shield in his 
hand, with which he cauuht it, and so i)revented 
the danger of that. 

Then did Christian draw, for he saw it was 
time to bestir him ; and Ajjollyon as fast made 
at him, throwing darts as thick as hail; b}' the 
which, notwithstanding all that Christian could 

Christian do to avold it, Apollyon wounded 

wounded in liis ,. .,., ii-i i iz-j 

understandin-, him HI Jus licad, his JKiiid, aud loot. 

faith, and con- 

versation. rj^j^jg ^^^^^t^^ Christlau glvc a Httlc 
back; Apollyon therefore followed his work 
amain, and Christian again took courage, and 
resisted as manfully as he could. This sore 
combat lasted for above half a day, even till 
Christian was almost quite spent ; for you must 
kflow, that Christian, by reason of his wounds, 
must needs grow weaker and weaker. 

Then Apollyon, esf/ying his opportunity, Ijc- 
gan to gather up close to Christian, and wrest- 

efh^""cS^an ^'"o ^^^'^^ ^^i'"- ^^^^^ ^11""^ ^ drcadful 
ground.*" ""' fall ; and with that Christian's sword 
flew out of his hand. Then said Apollyon, " I 
am sure of thee now;"' and with that he had 
almost pressed him to death, so that Christian 

10^ 



226 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

began to despair of life. But, as Grocl would 

have it, while Apollyon was fetching his last 

blow, thereby to make a full end of this good 

man, Christian nimbly reached out his hand 

for his sword, and caught it, saying, "Rejoice 

not against me, mine enemy: when I fall, 

I shall arise," Mic. 7:8; and with that gave 

him a deadly thrust, which made him cimstian-s vic- 
tory over Apol- 

give back, as one that had received 'y*'"- 
his mortal wound. Christian perceiving that, 
made at him again, saying, "Nay, in all these 
things we are more than conquerors, through 
Him that loved us." Rom. 8 : 3T. And with 
that Apollyon spread forth his dragon wings, 
and sped him away, that Christian saw him no 
more. James 4:7. 

In this combat no man can imagine, unless 
he had seen and heard, as I did, what tioti o^nhe com- 
yelling and hideous roaring Apollyon ta^to/^"*' ^^' 
made all the time of the fight ; he spoke like a 
dragon : and on the other side, what sighs and 
groans burst from Christian's heart. I never 
saw him all the while give so much as one 
pleasant look, till he perceived he had wounded 
Apollyon with his two-edged sword ; then, in- 
deed, he did smile, and look upward. But it 
was the dreadfulest sight that ever I saw. 



THE PIIADOW OF DEATH. 227 

So when the l)atth' was over, Cliristiaii said, 
ciiristian gives "I will luTe glvo thaiiks to lliiii tliat 

God thanks lor 

Lis deliverance. ]y^[\^ delivered iiiG oiit of the inoiitli 
of the lion, to Him that did lielp mp against 
Apollyon." And so he did, saying, 

" Great Beelzebub, the captain of this fiend, 
Designed my ruin ; therefore to this end 
He sent him harnessed out; and he, with rage 
That hellish was, did fiercely me engage: 
But blessed ^lichael helped me, and I, 
By dint of sword, did quickly make him fly ; 
Therefore to Ilim let me give lasting praise, 
And thank and bless his holy name always." 

Then there came to him a hand with some 
of the leaves of the tree of life, the which Chris- 
tian took and applied to the wounds- that he 
had received in the battle, and was healed im- 
mediately. He also sat down in that place to 
eat bread, and to drink of the bottle that was 
given him a little before: so, being refreshed, 
Christian goes hc addrcsscd himself to his journey 

oninhisjourney .., i . t ^ . , . , , 

with his sword With his sword drawn in his hand : 

drawn in his ' 

hand. ^Qj, YiQ said, "I know not but some 

other enemy may be at hand.'' But he met 
with no other affront from Apollyon quite 
through this valley. 
The valley of Now at thc cud of this valley was 

the .Shadow of 

Death. another, called the Valley of the 

Shadow of Death ; and Christian must needs go 



228 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

through it, because the way to the Celestial 
City lay through the midst of it. Now, this 
valley is a very solitary place. The prophet 
Jeremiah thus describes it: "A wilderness, a 
land of deserts and pits, a land of drought, and 
of the Shadow of Death, a land that no man," 
but a Christian, "passeth through, and where 
no man dwelt." Jer. 2:6. 

Now here Christian was worse put to it 
than in his fight with Apollyon, as by the sequel 
you shall see. 

I saw then in my dream, that when Chris- 
tian was got to the borders of the Shadow of 
Death, there met him two men, chil- The children 

of the spies go 

dren of them that brought up an evil ^''''^■ 
report of the good land. Num. 13 : 32, making 
haste to go back ; to whom Christian spoke as 
follows. 

Chr. Whither are you going ? 

The men said, "Back, back; and we would 
have you do so too, if either life or peace is 
prized by you." 

"Why, What's the matter?" said Chris-- 
tian. 

"Matter!" said they; "we were going that 
way as you are going, and went as far as we 
durst : and indeed we were almost past coming 



s?^. 




HORRORS OF THE VALLEV. 229 

back ; for bad we gone a little i"urtlu'i', we had 
not been here to bring the news to thee." 

"But what have you met with ?" said Chris- 
tian. 

Mex. Why, we were almost in the valley 
of the Shadow of Death, but that b}' good hap 
we looked before us, and saw the danger be- 
fore we came to it. Psa. 44 : 19 ; 107 : 19. 

"But what have you seen?'' said Christian. 

Men. Seen! why the valley itself, which is 
as dark as pitch: we also saw there the hob- 
goblins, satyrs, and dragons of. the pit: we 
heard also in that valley a continual howling 
and yelling, as of a people under unutterable 
misery, who there sat bound in affliction and 
irons: and over that valley hang the discour- 
aging clouds of confusion; Death also doth 
always spread his wings over it. . In a word, 
it is every whit dreadful, being utterly without 
order. Job 3:5; 10:22. 

"Then," said Christian, "I perceive not yet, 
l>y what you have said, but that this is my way 
to the desired haven." Psa. 44:18, 19; Jer. 
2:6. 

ISIex. Be it thy way ; we will not choose it 
for ours. 

So they parted, and Christian went <tn his 



230 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

way, but still with his sword drawn in his 
hand, for fear lest he should be assaulted. 

I saw then in my dream, so far as this val- 
ley reached, there was on the right hand a 
very deep ditch ; that ditch is it into which the 
blind have led the blind in all ages, and have 
both there miserably perished. Again, behold, 
on the left hand there was a very dangerous 
quag, into which, if even a good man falls, he 
finds no bottom for his foot to stand on : into 
that quag king David once did fall, and had no 
doubt thereia been smothered, had not He that 
is able plucked him out. Psa. 69 : 14. 

The pathway was here also exceeding nar- 
row, and therefore good Christian was the more 
put to it; for when he sought in the dark, to 
shun the ditch on the one hand, he Avas ready 
to tip over into the mire on the other; also, 
when he sought to escape the mire, without 
great carefulness he would be ready to fall 
into the ditch. Thus he went on, and I heard 
him here sigh bitterly; for besides the danger 
mentioned above, the pathway was here so 
dark, that ofttimes, when he lifted up his foot 
to go forward, he knew not where, or upon 
what he should set it next. 

About the midst of this valley I perceived 



HORRORS OF THE VALLEY. 231 

the inoutli of ]r'11 to bo, and it stood also hai-d 
by the wayside. "Xo^t,■' thought Christian, 
"what shall I do?*' And ever and anon the 
flame and smoke would come out in such abun- 
dance, with sparks and hideous noises, (things 
that cared not for Christian's sword, as did 
Apollyon before,) that he was forced to put 
U}) his sword, and l)etake himself to another 
weapon called All-prayer, Ej)h. 6:18; so he 
cried, in my hearing, "0 Lord, I beseech thee, 
deliver my soul." Psa. 110 : 4. Thus he went 
on a great while, yet still the flames would l)c 
reaching towards him ; also he heard doleful 
voices, and rushings to and fro, so that some- 
times he thought he should be torn in pieces, 
or trodden down like mire in the street. This 
frightful sight was seen, and these dreadful 
noises were heard by him for several miles 
together; and coming to a i)lace where he 
thought he heard a company of fiends coming 
Christian put forwanl to mcct him, he stopped, 

to a stand lor a 

while. r^iid l)ogan to muse what he had best 

to do. Sometimes he had half a thought to go 
back; then, again, he thought he might be half- 
way through the valley. He remembered also, 
how he had already vanquished many a dan- 
ger; and that the clanger of going back might 



232 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

be much more than for to go forward. So he 
resolved to go on 5 yet the fiends seemed to 
come nearer and nearer. But when they were 
come even almost at him, he cried out with a 
most vehement voice, "I will walk in the 
strength of the Lord God." So ihey gave back, 
and came no further. 

One thing I would not let slip. I took 
notice that now poor Christian w^as so con- 
founded that he did not know his own voice; 
and thus I perceived it. Just when he was 
come over against the mouth of the burning 
pit, one of the wicked ones got behind him, 
and stepped up softly to him, and christian made 

i^ ^ ^ ^ to believe that 

whisperingly suggested many griev- ^LS^wiln 
ous blasphemies to him, which he iLt'^sugge^sted 

them into his 

verily thought had proceeded from °*''»*^- 
his own mind. This put Christian more .to it 
than any thing that he met with before, even 
to think that he should now blaspheme Him 
that he loved so much before. Yet if he could 
have helped it, he would not have done it ; but 
he had not the discretion either to stop his 
ears, or to know from whence these blasphe- 
mies came. 

When Christian had travelled in this dis- 
consolate condition some considerable time, he 



MORNING DAWNS. 233 

thought he hoard the voice of a man, as going 
before him, saying, "Though 1 walk through 
the valley of the Shadow of Death, I will fear 
no evil, for thou art with me." Psa. 23 : 4. 

Then was he glad, and that for these rea- 
sons: 

First, because he gathered from thence, 
that some who feared God were in this valley 
as well as himself. 

Secondly, for that he perceived God was 
with them, though in that dark and dismal 
state. "And Avhy not,' thought he, "with 
me ? though by reason of the impediment that 
attends this place, I cannot perceive it.'' Job 
9:11. 

Thirdly, for that he hoj)ed, could he over- 
take them, to have company b}' and by. So 
he went on, and called to him that was before ; 
but he knew not what to answer, for that he 
also thought himself to be alone. And b}' and 
by the day broke; then said Christian, "PIo 
aurtko'l^L^ hath turned the shadow of death 
into the morning." Amos 5 : 8. 

Now morning being come, he looked back, 
not out of desire to return, but to see, by the 
light of the day, what hazards he had gone 
tlirough in the dark. So he saw more perfectly 



234 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

the ditch that was on the one hand, and the 
quag that was on the other ; also how narrow 
the Avay was Avhich led between them both. 
Also now he saw the hobgoblins and satyrs 
and dragons of the pit, but all afar off; for 
after break of day they came not nigh; yet 
they were discovered to him, according to 
that which is written, "He discovereth deep 
things out of darkness, and bringeth out to 
light the shadow of death." Job 12 : 22.' 

Now was Christian much affected Avith this 
deliverance from all the dangers of his solitary 
way; which dangers, though he feared them 
much before, yet he saw them more clearly 
now, because the light of the day made them 
conspicuous to him. And about this time the 
sun was rising, and this was another mercy to 
Christian ; for you must note, that though the 
iirst part of the valley of the Shadow of Death 
was dangerous, yet this second part, part of thTs^'^a^ 
which he was yet to go, was, if pos- J.^-^'^""""- 
sible, far more dangerous ; for, from the place 
where he now stood, even to the end of the 
valley, the way was all along set so full of 
snares, traps, gins, and nets here, and so full 
of pits, pitfalls, deep holes, and shelvings- 
down there, that had it now been dark, as it 



.\[OR\ING DAWNS. 235 

was wlicn he came the first i)ai-t of tlie way, 
had he had a thousand souls, they had in rea- 
son been east away ; but, as I said, just now 
the sun was rising. Then said he "His candle 
shineth on my head, and by his light I go 
through darkness." Job 29 : 3. 

In this light, therefore, he came to the end 
of the valley. Now I saw in my dream, that 
at the end of the valley lay blood, bones, ashes, 
and mangled bodies of men, even of pilgrims 
that had gone this way formerly ;. and Avliile I 
was musing what should be the reason, I espied 
a little before me a cave, where two giants. 
Pope and Pagan, dwelt in old times; by whose 
power and tyranny the men whose bones, 
blood, ashes, etc., lay there, were cruelly put 
to death. But by this place Christian went 
without much danger, whereat I somewhat 
Avondered; l)ut I have learnt since, that Pagan 
has been dead many a day; and as for the 
other, though he be yet alive, he is, by reason 
of age, and also of the many shrewd brushes 
that he met with in his younger days, grown 
so crazy and stifif in his joints that he can now 
do little more than sit in his cave's mouth, 
grinning at ])ilgrims as they go by, and ])iting 
his nails because he cannot come at them. 



236 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

So I saw that Christian went on his way : 
yet, at the sight of the old man that sat at the 
mouth of the cave, he could not tell what to 
think, especially because he spoke to him, 
though he could not go after him, saying, "You 
will never mend till more of you be burned." 
But he held his peace, and set a good face 
on it; and so went by, and catched no hurt. 
Then sang Christian, 

"0 world of wonders— I can say no less— 
That I should be preserved in that distress 
That I have met with liere ! blessed be 
That hand that from it hath delivered me ! 
Dangers in darkness, devils, hell, and sin, 
Did comi)ass me, while I this vale was in ; 
Yea, snares and pits and traps and nets did He 
My path about, that worthless, silly I 
Might have been catched, entangled, and cast down ; 
But since I live, let Jesus wear the crown." 



CURISTIAX SEES FAITHFUL. 237 



THE FIFTH STAGE. 

Now, as Christian went on liis way, he 
came to a little ascent, wliich was cast up on 
])urpose that pilgrims might see before them : 
up there, therefore, Christian went; and look- 
ing forward, he saw Faithful before him upon 
his journey. Then said Christian aloud, "Ho, 
ho ; soho ; stay, and I will be 3'our companion." 
At that Faithful looked behind him ; to whom 
Christian cried again, "Stay, stay, till I come 
up to you." But Faithful answered, "No, I 
am upon my life, and the avenger of blood is 
behind me." 

At this Christian was somewhat moved, 
and putting to all his strength, he quickly got 
takJiSiTu" up with Faithful, and did also over- 
run him; so the last was first. Then did 
Christian vaingloriously smile, because he had 
gotten the start of his brother; but not taking 
good heed to his feet, he suddenl}' stumbled 
and fell, and could not rise again until Faith- 
ful came up to help him. 

nlak't?Kai'thaIl Thcu I saw lu my dream, they 
fngiy 'tSle'ther' wcut vcry lovlngly on together, and 
had sweet disc/^urse of all tliintrs that had 



238 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

happened to them in their pilgrimage ; and 
thus Christian began. 

Cur. My honored and well-beloved brother 
Faithful, I am glad that I have overtaken you, 
and that God has so tempered our spirits that 
we can walk as companions in this so pleasant 
a path. 

Faith. I had thought, my dear friend, to 
have had your company quite from our town, 
but you did get the start of me ; wherefore I 
was forced to come thus much of the way 
alone. 

Chr. How long did you stay in the city of 
Destruction before you set out after me on 
your pilgrimage ? 

Faith. Till I could stay no longer; for 
there was a great talk presently Sf "^''couury 
after you were gone out, that our they canl'e"""''*' 
city would, in a short time, with fire from 
heaven, be burnt down to the ground. 

Chr. What, did your neighbors talk so ? 

Faith. Yes, it was for a while in every 
body's mouth. 

Chr. What, and did no .more of them but 
you come out to escape the danger ? 

Faith. Though there was, as I said, a great 
talk thereabout, yet I do not think thev did 



CIIRISTIAX AX I) FAITHFUL. 239 

firmly Ix'liove it; lor, in the licat of the dis- 
eour.^o, 1 heard sonic of them deridin^ly speak 
of you and of your desperate journey, for so 
they called this your i)ilgrimagc. But I did 
believe, and do still, that the end of our cit}' 
will be with lire and brimstone from above; 
and therefore I have made my escape. 

Ciii{. Did you liear no talk of neighbor 
Pliable ? 

Faith, Yes, Christian, I heard that he fol- 
lowed you till he came to the slough of De- 
spond, where, as some .-^aid, he fell in ; but he 
would not be known to have so done; but I 
am sure he was soundly l)edabbled with that 
kind of dirt. 

Chr. And what said the neighbors to him? 

Faith. He hath, since his going back, been 
w^Tccoumed ^ad greatly in derision, and. that 
home."" '^ ^"' among all sorts of i)eo})le : some do 
mock and despise him, and scarce will any set 
him on work. He is now seven times worse 
than if he had never gone out of the city. 

Chu. But why should they be so set against 
him, since they also despise the way that he 
forsook ? 

Faith. Oh, they say, "Hang him; he is a 
turncoat; he was not true to his profession!" 



240 PILGRIM'S rROGRESS. 

I think God has stirred up even His enemies 
to hiss at him, and make him a proverb, be- 
cause he hath forsaken the way. Jer. 29 :18, 
19. 

Chr. Had you no talk with liim before joii 
came out? 

Faith. I met him once in the streets, but 
he leered away on the other side, as one 
ashamed of what he had done ; so I spoke not 
to him. 

Chr. Well, at my first setting out I had 
hopes of that man ; but now I fear he will per- 
ish in the overthrow of the city. " For it has 
happened to him according to the true proverb, 
"The dog is turned to his vomit again, and the 
sow that was washed to her w^allowing in the 
mire." 2 Pet. 2 : 22. 

I]aith. These are my fears of him too ; but 
who can hinder that which will be ? 

"Well, neighbor Faithful," said Christian, 
"let us leave him, and talk of things that more 
immediately concern ourselves. Tell me now 
what you have met with in the way as you 
came; for I know you have met Avith some 
things, or else it may be writ for a wonder." 

Faith. I escaped the slough that I per- 
ceived you fell into, and got up to the gate 



rilRISTIAN AND FAITHFUL. 241 

williotil lliat daii.tivr; only 1 lucl with one whose 
Faithful as name was Wanton, who had like to 

saultedby Wan • i • p 

ton liave done me miscniet. 

CiiK. It was well you escaped her net : Jo- 
seph was hard put to it by her, and he escaped 
her as you did ; but it had like to have cost 
him his life. Gen. 39:11-13. But what did 
she do to you ? 

FArni. You cannot think (but that you know 
something) what a flattering tongue she had ; 
she lay at me hard to turn aside with her, prom- 
ising me all manner of content. 

CiiR. Xay, she did not promise you the 
content of a good conscience. 

Faith. You know that I mean all carnal 
and fleshly content. 

Chk. Thank God that you escaped her : the 
abhorred of the Lord shall fall into her i)it. 
Prov. 22:14. 

Faitu. Nay, I know not whether I did 
wholly escape her or no. 

CiiK. Why, I trow you did not consent to 
Iier desires. 

Faitit. No, not to defile myself; for I re- 
membered an old w riting that I had seen, which 
said, "Her steps take hold on hell." Prov. 
5 : 5. So I shut mine eves, because I would 



242 PILGRIM'B PROGRESS. 

not be bewitclied with her looks. Job 31:1. 
Then she railed on me, and I went my way. 

Chr. Did yon meet with no other assault 
as you came ? 

Faith. When I came to the foot of the hill • 
called Difficulty, I met with a very raithfui wasj 

" assaulted by*' 

aged man, who asked me what I was, Adam the First. 
and^ whither bound. I told him that I was a 
pilgrim, going to the Celestial City. Then said 
the old man, "Thou lookest like an honest fel- 
low ; wilt thou be content to dwell with me for 
the wages that I shall give thee?" Then I 
asked his name, and where he dwelt. He said 
his name was Adam the First, and that he dwdt 
in the tow^n of Deceit. Eph. 4 : 22. I asked 
him then Avhat was his work, and what the 
wages that he would give. He told me that 
his work was 7?7an?/ delights; and his wages, 
that I should be his heir at last. I further 
asked him what house he kept, and what other 
servants he had. So he told me that his house 
w^as maintained with all the dainties of the 
w^orld, and that his servants were those of hio 
own begetting. Then I asked how many chil- 
dren he had. He said that he had but three 
daughters, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of 
the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, 1 John 2:16; 



CHRISTIAN AND FAITH 111.. ill;; 

and that I sluMild niarrv tliein if I would. Then 
I asked, how long time he would have me live 
with him ; and he told me, as long as he lived 
himself. 

Chr. Well, and what conclusion came the 
old man and you to at last ? 

Faith. Why, at first I found myself some- 
what inclinable to go with the man, for I thought 
he spoke very fair ; but looking in his forehead, 
as I talked with him, I saw there written, "Put 
off the old man with his deeds." 

Chr. And how then ? 

Faith. Then it came burning hot into my 
mind, that, whatever he said, and however he 
flattered, when he got me home to his house he 
would sell me for a slave. So I bid him for- 
bear to talk, for I would not ^^le near the 
door of his house. Then he reviled me, and 
told me that he would send such a one after 
me that should make my way bitter to my soul. 
So I turned to go away from him ; but just as 
I turned myself to go thence, I felt him take 
hold of my flesh, and give me such a deadlv 
twitch back, that I thought he had pulled part 
of me after himself: this made me cry, 'Oh 
wretched man." Rom. 7 : 24. So 1 went on 
my way up the hill. 



244 PILGRIxM'S PROGRESS. 

Now, when I had got about half-way up, I 
looked behind me, and saw one coming after 
me, swift as the wind ; so he overtook me just 
about the place where the settle stands. ' 

"Just there," said Christian, "did I sit 
down to rest me; but being overcome with 
sleep, I there lost this roll out of my bosom." 

Faith. But, good brother, hear me out. So 
soon as the man overtook me, it was but a 
word and a blow; for down he knocked me, 
and laid me for dead. But when I was a little 
come to myself again, I asked him wherefore 
he served me so. He said, because of my 
secret inclining to Adam the First. And with 
that he struck me another deadly blow on the 
breast, and beat me down backward ; so I lay 
at his feet as^ead as before. So when I came 
10 myself again, I cried him mercy: but he 
•said, I know not how to shoAv mercy ; and with 
that he knocked me down again. He had 
doubtless made an end of me, but that one 
came by and bid him forbear. 

Chr. Who was that that bid him forbear ? 

Faith. I did not know him at first: but as 
he went by, I perceived the holes in his hands, 
and in his side ; then I concluded that he was 
our Lord. So I went up the hill. 



CHRISTIAN AND FAITIIKIL. 245 

Chr. That man that otcrtook you was Mo- 
or Mo'lea^*""^'" ses. He spareth none ; neither know- 
eth he how to show mercy to those that trans- 
gress the knv. 

Faith. I know it very well: it was not the 
first time that he has met with me. "T was lie 
that came to me when I dwelt securel}' at home, 
and that told me that he would burn my house 
over my head if T stayed there. 

Chr. But did you not see the house that 
stood there on the top of the hill, on the side 
of which Closes met you ? 

Faith. Yes, and the lions too, before I 
came at it. But, for the lions, I think the}^ 
were asleep, for it was about noon; and be- 
cause I had so much of the day before me, I 
passed by the porter, and came down the hill. 

Chr. He told me, indeed, that he saw you 
go by; but I wish that you had called at the 
house, for they would have showed you so 
many rarities that you would scarce have for- 
got them to the day of your death. But pray 
tell me, did you meet nobody in the valley of 
Humility ? 

Faithful as- Faith. Ycs, I uict with oiic Dis- 

saultcd by Dis- 
content, content, who would willingly have 

persuaded me to go back again with him : his 



246 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

reason was, for that 'the valley was altogether 
without honor. He told me, moreover, that 
to go there was the way to disoblige all my 
friends, as Pride, Arrogancy, Self-Conceit, 
Worldly Glory, with others, who he knew, 
as he said, would be very much offended if I 
made such a fool of myself as to wade through 
this valley. 

Chr. Well, and how did 3^ou answer him ? 

Faith. I told him, that although all these 

that he named might claim a kindred Faithfuls an- 
swer to Discon- 

of me, and that rightly, (for indeed t*^"*- 
they were my relations according to the flesh,) 
yet since I became a pilgrim they have dis- 
owned me, and I also have rejected them ; and 
therefore they were to me now no more than if 
they had never been of my lineage. I told 
him, moreover, that as to this valley, he had 
quite misrepresented the thing; for before 
honor is humility, and a haughty spirit before 
a fall. "Therefore," said I, "I had rather go 
through this valley to the honor that was so 
accounted by the wisest, than choose that 
which he esteemed most worthy of our affec- 
tions." 

Chr. Met you with nothing else in that 
valley ? 



CHRISTIAN AND FAITHFUL. 247 

Faith. Yes, I met with Shame ; but of all 
JyVhamr""* tlic 111011 tluit I luct With Oil iiiv pil- 
grimage, he, I think, bears the wrong name. 
The others would be said nay, after a little 
argumentation, and somewhat else; but this 
bold-faced J^hame would never have done. 

Chr. "Why, what did he sa}' to 3'ou ? 

Faith. What! why, he objected against 
religion itself. He said it was a pitiful, low, 
sneaking business for a man to mind religion. 
He said that a tender conscience was an un- 
manly thing; and that for a man to watch over 
his words and ways, so as to tie up himself 
from that hectoring liberty that the brave 
spirits of the times accustom themselves unto, 
would make him the ridicule of the times. He 
objected also, that but few of the mighty, rich, 
or wise, were ever of my opinion ; nor an}' of 
them neither, before they were persuaded to 
be tools, and to be of a voluntary fondness to 
venture the loss of all for nobody knows what. 
1 Cor. 1:20; 3:18; Phil. 3:7-0: John 7 : 48. 
He, moreover, objected the base and low estate 
and condition of those that were chiefly the 
pilgrims of the times in which they lived: also 
their ignorance and want of understanding in 
all natural science. Yea, he did hold me to it 



248 . PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

at that rate also, about a great many more 
things than here I relate; as, that it was a 
shame to sit whining and mourning under a 
sermon, and a shame to come sighing and 
groaning home; that it was a shame to ask 
my neighbor forgiveness for petty faults, or to 
make restitution where I have taken from any. 
He said also, that religion made a man grow 
strange to the great, because of a few vices, 
which he called by finer names, and made him 
own and respect the base, because of the same 
religious fraternity; ''and is not this," said he, 
"a shame?" 

Chr. And what did you say to him ? 

Faith. Say ? I could not tell what to say 
at first. Yea, he put me so to it, that my 
blood came up in my face; even this Shame 
fetched it up, and had almost beat me quite off. 
But at last I began to consider, that that which 
is highly esteemed among men is abomination 
in the sight of God. Luke 16 :15. And I 
thought again, this Shame tells me what men 
are ; but he tells me nothing what God, or the 
word of God is. And I thought, moreover, 
that at the day of doom we shall not be 
doomed to death or life according to the hec- 
toring spirits of the world, but according to 



CHRISTIAN AND FAITHFUL. 249 

the wisdom and luw of the Highest. "There- 
fore," thought I, "what God says is best, is 
indeed best, though all the men in the world 
are against it." Seeing, thou, that God prefers 
his religion ; seeing God prefers a tender con- 
science ; seeing the}- that make themselves fools 
for the kingdom of heaven are wisest, and that 
the ])oor man that loveth C'hrist is richer than 
the greatest man in the world that hates him„ 
Shame, depart ; thou art an enemy to my sal- 
vation. Shall I entertain thee against my 
sovereign Lord? How then shall I look Him 
in the face at his comiilg? Mark 8:38. 
Should I now be ashamed of his ways and ser- 
vants, how can I expect the blessing? But 
indeed this Shame was a bold villain ; I could 
scarcely shake him out of my company; yea, 
he would be haunting of me, and continually 
whispering me in the ear with some one or 
other of the infirmities that attend religion. 
But at last I told him that it was but in vain 
to attempt further in this business, for those 
things that he disdained, in those did I see 
most glory; and so at last I got past this im- 
portunate one. And when T had shaken him 
off, then I began to sing. 



ir 



250 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

"The trials that those men do meet withal, 
That are obedient to the heavenly call, 
Are manifold, and suited to the flesh, 
And come and come and come again afresh, 
That now, or some time else, we by them may 
Be taken, overcome, and cast away. 
let the pilgrims, let the pilgrims then 
Be vigilant, and quit themselves like men." 

Chr. I am glad, my brother, that thoiitlidst 
withstand this villain so bravely, for of all, as 
thou sayest, I think he has the wrong name ; 
for he is so bold as to follow us in the streets, 
and to attempt to put us to shame before all 
men ; that is, to make us ashamed of that which 
is good. But if he'Avas not himself audacious, 
he would never attempt to do as he does. But 
let us still resist him ; for, notwithstanding all 
his bravadoes, he promoteth the fool, and none 
else. "The wise shall inherit glory," said Sol- 
omon; "but shame shall be the promotion of 
fools." Prov. 3 : 35. ' 

Faith. I think we must cry to Him for 
help against Shame, that w^ould have- us to be 
valiant for truth upon the earth. 

Chr. You say true ; but did you meet no- 
body else in that valley ? 

Faith. No, not I; for I had sunshine all 
the rest of the way through that, and also 
through the valley of the Shadow of Death. 



TALKATIVE MET. 251 

Chr. "T was Avell for yon: I am sure it 
fared far otherwise with me. I had for a loii<^' 
season, as soon ahnost as I entered into tliat 
valley, a dreadful combat with that foul heud 
Apollyon; yea, I thought verily he would have 
killed me, especially wdien he got me down, 
and crushed me under him, as if he would have 
crushed me to pieces ; for as he threw me, my 
sword flew out of my hand : nay, he told mc 
he was sure of me; but I cried to God, and he 
heard me, and delivered me out of all my 
troubles. Then I entered into the valley of 
the Shadow of Death, and had no light for al- 
most half the way through it. I thought I 
should have been killed there over and over; 
but at last day broke, and the sun rose, and I 
went through that which was behind with far 
more ease and quiet. 

Moreover, I saw in my dream, that as they 
went on. Faithful, as he chanced to look on 
one side, saw a man whose name w^as Talka- 
tive, walking at a distance beside them; for in 
this place there was room enough for them all 
sJbid'"'' '" to walk. He was a tall man. and 
something more comely at a distance than at 
hand. To this man Faithful addressed himself 
in this manner. 



252 PILGRIxM'S PROGRESS. 

Faith. Friend, whither away? Are you 
going to the heavenly country ? 

Talk. I am going to the same place. 

Faith. That is well ; then I hope we shall 
have your good company ? 

Talk. With a very good will will I be 
your companion. 

Faith. Come on, then, and let us go to- 
gether, and let us spend our time in raitMui and 

Talkative enter 

discoursing of things that are profit- i"to discourse. 
able. 

Talk. To talk of things that are good, to 
me is very acceptable, with you or with any 
other; and I am glad that I have met with 
those that incline to so good a work ; xaikatives dis. 

like of bad dis 

for, to speak the truth, there are but ''^'i'^*^- 
few who care thus to spend their time as they 
are in their travels, but choose much rather to 
be speaking of things to no profit ; and this hath 
been a trouble to me. 

Faith. That is indeed a thing to be la- 
mented; for what thing so worthy of the use 
of the tongue and mouth of men on earth, as 
are the things of the God of heaven ? 

Talk. I like you wonderful well, for your 
saying is full of conviction; and I will add, 
What thing is so pleasant, and what so profit- 



TALKATIVE AND FAITJIFTL. 253 

able, as to talk of the things of God? AVhat 
things so pleasant? that is, if a man hath any 
delight in things that arc wonderfnl. For 
instance, if 14 man doth delight to talk of (he 
Iiistory or the myster}^ of things, or if a man 
doth love to talk of miracles, wonders, or signs, 
where shall he find things recorded so delight- 
ful, and so sweetly penned, as in the holy 
Scripture ? 

Faith. That is true ; but to be profited by 
such things in our talk, should be our chief 
design. 

Talk. That's it that I said; for to talk 
of such things is most profitable; for by so 
doing a man nuiy get knowledge of many 
things, as of the vanity of earthly things, and 
the benefit of things above. Thus in gen- 
fine ciiscouree'' ' cral ; but more particularly, by this 
a man may learn the necessity of the new 
birth, the insufficiency of our works, the need 
of Christ's righteousness, etc. Besides, by 
this a man may learn what it is to repent, 
to believe, to pray, to suffer, or the like; by 
this also, a man may learn what are the 
great promises and consolations of the gos- 
pel, to his own comfort. Further, by this a 
man may learn to refute false opinions, to 



254 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

vindicate the truth, and also to instruct the 
ignorant. 

Faith. All this is true ; and glad am I to 
hear these things from you, « 

Talk. Alas, the want of this is the cause 
that so few understand the need of faith, and 
'the necessity of a work of grace in their soul, 
in order to eternal life ; but ignorantly live in 
the works of the law, by which a man can by 
no means obtain the kingdom of heaven. 

Faith. But, by your leave, heavenly know- 
ledge of these is the gift of God; no man 
attaineth to them by human industry, or only 
by the talk of them. 

Talk. All this I know very well; for a 
man can receive nothing, except it Taikativef"^''''' 
be given him from heaven : all is of grace, not 
of works. I could give you a hundred scrip- 
tures for the confirmation of this. 

"Well, then,"' said Faithful, "what is that 
one thing that we shall at this time found our 
discourse upon?" 

Talk. What you will. I will talk of things 
heavenly, or things earthly; things Taikauve !"''''" 
moral, or things evangelical ; things sacred, or 
things profane ; things past, or things to come ; 
things foreign, or things at home ; things more 



TALKATIVE DISCOVERED. 255 

essential, or tilings circiinistantial : provided 
that all be done to our profit. 

Now did Faithful begin to wonder; and 
Faithful be- stepping to Christian, (for he walked 
^"''^^ all this while by himself.) he said to 

him, but softly, ''What a brave comjianion 
have we got! Surely this man will make a 
very excellent pilgrim.'' 

At this Christian modestly smiled, and said, 
Christian feakes "This mau. Willi wlioui you are so 
Taik'atrvc.'^^teri takcn, wiU beoHiilc with this tongue 

iu? Faithful ' ° '^ 

who he was. Qf jjjg twenty of them that know him 
not.'' 

Faith. Do you know him, then? 

dm. Know him? Yes, better than he 
knows himself. 

Faith. Pray wdiat is he ? 

Chr. His name is Talkative : he dwelleth in 
our town. I wonder you should be a stranger to 
him, only I consider that our town is large. 

Faith. Whose son is he ? And whereabout 
doth he dwell ? 

Chr. He is the son of one Say-well. He 
dwelt in Prating-row ; and he is known to all 
that are acquainted with him by the name of 
Talkative of Prating-row ; and notwithstanding 
his fine tongue, he is but a sorry fellow. 



256 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Faith. Well, lie seems to be a very pretty 
man. 

Chr. That is, to them that have not a 
thorough acquaintance with him, for he is best 
abroad; near home he is ugly enough. Your 
saying that he is a pretty man, brings to my 
mind what I have observed in the work of a 
painter whose pictures show best at a distance ; 
but very near, more unpleasing. 

Faith. But I am ready to think you do but 
jest, because you smiled. 

Chr. God forbid that I should jest (though 
I smiled) in this matter, or that I should accuse 
any falsely. I will give you a further discov- 
ery of him. This man is for any company, and 
for any talk: as he talketh now with you, so 
will he talk when he is on the ale-bench; and 
the more drink he hath in his crown, the more 
of these things he hath in his mouth. Eeligion 
hath no place in his heart, or house, or conver- 
sation ; all he hath lieth in his tongue, and his 
religion is to make a noise therewith. 

Faith. Say jon so? Then am I in this man 
greatly deceived. 

Chr. Deceived! you may be sure of it. 
Remember the proverb, "They say, biftdols'not^'' 
and do not;'" but the kingdom of God is not 



TALKATIVE'S CHARACTER. 257 

ill word, but in power. ^latt. 23 : 3 ; 1 Cor. 
4 : 20. He talkcth of praj'cr, of '■epentance, 
of faith, and of the new birth ; but he knows 
but only to talk of them. I have })een in his 
family, and have observed him both at home 
and abroad ; and I know what I say of him is 
His house is the. truth. His house is as emptv of 

empty of relig- i •. p ^ e 

ion. religion as the white ot an egg is oi 

savor. There is there neither prayer, nor sign 
of repentance for sin; yea, the brute, in hie 
kind, serves God far better than he. He is 
to"eiigion.'"''" the very stain, reproach, and shame 
of religion to all that know him, Rom. 2 : 23, 
24 ; it can hardly have a good word in all that 
end of the town whrre he dwells, through him. 
use^ofhiT""^ Thus say the common people that 
know him, "A saint abroad, and a devil at 
home." His poor family finds it so ; he is such 
a churl, such a railer at, and so unreasonable 
with his servants, that they neither know how 
to do for or speak to him. ^len that have any 
dealings with him say it is better to deal with 
deal with urm'*' a Turk than with him, for ftiirer deal- 
ings they shall have at their hands. This Talk- 
ative, if it be possible, will go beyond them, 
defraud, beguile, and overreach them. Besides, 
he brings up his sons to follow his steps ; and 



258 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

if lie finds in any of them a foolish timorous- 
ness, (for so he calls the first appearance of a 
tender conscience,) he calls them fools and 
blockheads, and by no means will employ them 
in much, or speak to their commendation before 
others. For my part, I am of opinion that he 
has, by his wicked life, caused many to stum- 
ble and fall ; and will be, if God prevents not, 
the ruin of many more. 

Faith. Well, my brother, I am bound to 
believe you, not only because you say you 
know him, but also because, like a Chris- 
tian, you make your reports of men. For 
I cannot think that you speak these things 
of ill-will, but because it is even so as you 
say. 

Chr. Had I known him no more than you, 
I might perhaps have thought of him as at the 
first you did ; yea, had I received this report 
at their hands only that are enemies to religion, 
I should have thought it had been a slander — a 
lot that often falls from bad men's mouths upon 
good meif's names and professions. But all 
these things, yea, and a great many more as' 
bad, of my own knowledge I can prove him 
guilty of. Besides, good men are ashamed of 
him; they can neither call him brother nor 



TALKATIVE'S CHARACTER. 259 

friend ; the very iiaining of him among them 
makes them bhl^^h, if they know him. 

Faith. Well, I see that saying and doing 
are two things, and hereafter I shall better 
observe this distinetion, 

Chr. They are two things indeed, and are 
as diverse as are the soul and the body ; for, 
rengfor"'''"as the body without the soul is but 
a dead carcass, so saf/t?ig, if it be alone, is but 
a dead carcass also. The soul of religion is- 
the practical part. "Pure religion and unde- 
filed before God and the Father is this. To visit 
the fatherless and widows in their affliction, 
and to keep himself unspotted from the world.'' 
See James 1 : 22-27. This, Talkative is not 
aware of: he thinks that hearing and saying 
will make a good Christian ; and thus he deceiv- 
eth his own soul. Hearing is but as the sowino: 
of the seed ; talking is not sufficient to prove 
that fruit is indeed in the heart and life. . And 
let us assure ourselves, that at the day of doom 
men shall be judged according to their fruits. 
Matt. 13:23. It will not be said then, Did 
you believe ? but. Were you doers, or talkers 
only? and accordingly shall they be judged. 
The end of the world is compared to our har- 
vest, Matt. 13 : 30, and vou know men at har- 



260 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

vest regard nothing but fruit. Not that any 
thing can be accepted that is not of faith ; but 
I speak this to show you how insignificant the 
profession of Talkative will be at that day. 

Faith. This brings to my mind that of 
Moses, by which he describeth the beast that is 
clean. Lev. 11 ; Dent. 14. He is such a one 
that parteth the hoof, and cheweth the cud; 
not that parteth the hoof only, or that cheweth 
the cud only. The hare cheweth the cud, buJ" 
yet is unclean, because he parteth not the hoof- 
And this truly resembleth Talkative : ^il^e^j^^'^^j. X 
he cheweth the cud, he seeketh know- ative!'''''^^^^''" 
ledge ; he cheweth upon the word, but he divid- 
eth not the hoof. He parteth not with the way 
of sinners; but, as the hare, he retaineth the 
foot of the dog or bear, and therefore he is 
unclean. 

Chr. You have spoken, for aught I know, 
the true gospel sense of these texts. And I 
will add another thing: Paul call- tw™hf^g7tha? 

., 1 ,1 , sound without 

eth some men, yea, and those great iife. 
talkers too, sounding brass, and tinkling cym- 
bals, 1 Cor. 13 :1, 3; that is, as he expounds 
them in another place, things without life giv- 
ing sound. 1 Cor. 14:7. Things without life ; 
that is, without the true faith and grace of the 



TALK ATT VE'S ('II A R ACTEi? . 2(')l 

gospel; and, coiiscMniriitly, lliiiius that slinll 
never be placed in the kingdom of heaven 
among those that arc the children of life-, 
though their sound, hy their talk, be as if it 
were the tongue or voice of an angel. 

Faith. Well, I was not so fond of his com- 
pany at first, but I am as sick of it now. 
What shall we do to be rid of him ? 

Chr. Take my advice, and do as I bid you, 
and you shall find that he will soon be sick of 
your company too. except God shall touch his 
heart, and turn it. 

Faith. What would you have me to do ? 

CiiR. Why, go to him, and enter into some 
serious discourse about the power of relig- 
ion; and ask him i)lainly, (when he has ap- 
proved of it, for that he will,) whether this 
thing be set up in his heart, house, or conver- 
sation. 

Then Faithful stepi)ed forward again, and 
said to Talkative, 'Come, what cheer? Plow 
is it now?"' 

Talk. Thank you, well : I thought we should 
have had a great deal of talk by this time. 

Faith. Well, if you will, we will fall to it 
now ; and since you left it with me to state the 
question, let it be this: How doth the saving 



262 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

grace of God discover itself when it is in the 
heart of man ? 

Talk. I perceive, then, that our talk must 
be about the power of things. Well, it is a 
very good question, and I shall be willing to 
answer you. And take my answer ,^^Jf^fJ^,',; 
in brief, thus: First, where the grace gLl "'^■■' '' 
of God is in the heart, it causeth there a great 
outcry against sin. Secondly — 

Faith. Nay, hold; let us consider of one 
at once. I think you should rather say. It 
shows itself by inclining the soul to abhor its 
sin. 

Talk. Why, what difference is there be- 
tween crying out against, and abhorring of sin ? 

Faith. Oh, a great deal. A man may cry 
out against sin of policy ; but he cannot abhor 
it but by virtue of a godly antipathy against 
it. I have heard many crv out against to cry out 

against sin no 

sin in the pulpit, who can yet abide sign of grace. 
it well enough in the heart, house, and conver- 
sation. Gen. 39 : 15. Joseph's mistress cried 
out with a loud voice, as if she had been very 
holy ; but she would willingly, notwithstanding 
that, have committed uncleanness with him. 
Some cry out against sin, even as the mother 
cries out against her child in her lap, when she 



FAITIirrL AND TALKATIVK. 2(y.\ 

ciilletli it slut and iiau.ulity <;ii-l, and then falls 
to hugging and kissing it. 

Talk. You lie at tlie eatcli, I pGrceivo. 

Faith. No, not T; I am oidy for setting 
things right. But what is tTic second thing 
whereby you would prove a discovery of a 
work of grace in the heart ? 

Talk. Great knowledge of gospel mysteries. 

Faith. This sign should have been first : but, 

Great know first or last, it is also false : for know- 
ledge no sign of 

grace. Icdgc, grcat knowledge, may be ob- 

tained in the mysteries of the gospel, and jet 
no work of grace in the soul. Yea, if a man 
have all knowledge, he may yet be nothing, 
and so, consequently, be no child of God. 
1 Cor. 13:2. When Christ said, "Do you 
know all these things ?*' and the disciples had 
answered, Y^'es, he added, "Blessed are ye if 
ye do them." He doth not lay the blessing in 
the knowing of them, but in the doing of them. 
JowUge!'' ''' For there is a knowledge that is not 
attended with doing: "He that knoweOi his 
Master's will, and doeth it not." A man may 
know like an angel, and yet be no Christian; 
therefore your sign of it is not true. Indeed, 
to hiow is a thing that i)leaseth talkers and 
boasters; but to do, is that which pleaseth God. 



264 PILGRIM S PROGRESS. 

r/ Not that the heart can be good without know- 
ledge, for withont that the heart is naught. 
There are therefore two sorts of knowledge — 
knowledge that resteth in the bare speculation 
of things, and knowledge that is accompanied 
with the grace of faith and love, which puts a 

man upon doing even the will of Grod True know- 
ledge attended 

from the heart: the first of these will with endeavors. 
serve the talker; but without the other, the 
true Christian is not content. "Give me un- 
derstanding, and I shall keep thy law; yea, I 
shall observe it with my whole heart." Psa. 
119:34. 

Talk. You lie at the catch again: this is 
not for edification. 

Faith. Well, if you please, propound an- 
other sign how this work of grace discovereth 
itself where it is. 

Talk. Not I, for I see we shall not agree. 

Faith. "Well, if you will not, will you give 
me leave to do it ? 

Talk. You may use your liberty. 

Faith. A work of grace in the soul discov- 
ereth itself, either to him that hath it, or to 
standers b3\ 

To him that hath it, thus: It gives him con- 
viction of sin, especially the defilement of his 



F A IT 1 1 F r L A X D T A 1 . K A T I V K . 2G5 

nature, and (lie sin of unbelief, lor the sake 
oSrair' ''^"' <'<■ ^vlli<'ll he is sure to be damned, if 
he findeth not mercy at God's hand, by faith 
in Jesus Christ. This sight and sense of things 
worketh in him sorrow and shame for sin. Psa. 
38 : 18 ; Jer. 31 : 19 ; John 10:8; Rom. 7 : 24 ; 
Mark IG : 16 ; Gal. 2:16; Rev. 1:6. He find- 
eth, moreover, revealed in him the Saviour of 
the world, and the absolute necessity of closing 
Avith him for life; at the which he findeth hnn- 
gerings and thirstings after him, to which hun- 
gerings and thirstings the promise is made. 
Now, according to the strength or weakness of 
his faith in his Saviour, so is his joy and peace, 
so is his love to holiness, so are his desires to 
know him more, and also to serve him in this 
world. But, though I say it discovereth itself 
thus unto him, yet it is but seldom that he is 
able to conclude that this is a work of grace ; 
because his corruptions now. and his abused 
reason, make his mind to misjudge in this mat- 
ter: therefore in him that hath this work there 
is required a very sound judgment, before he 
can with steadiness conclude that this is a work 
of grace. John 16:9; Gal. 2:15, 16; Acts 
4:12; Matt. 5:0; Rev.- 21 : G. 
To others it is thus discovered: 

P,l. rr.,^ 1 2 



206 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

1. By an experimental confession of his 
faith in Christ. 2. By a life answerable to 
that confession : to Avit, a life of holiness — heart 
holiness, family holiness, (if he hath a family,) 
and by conversation holiness in the world ; 
which in the general teacheth him inwardly to 
abhor his sin, and himself for that, in secret; 
to suppress it in his family, and to promote 
holiness in the world: not by talk only, as a 
hypocrite or talkative person may do, but by 
a practical subjection in faith and love to the 
power of the word. Job 42 : 5, 6 ; Psa. 50:23; 
Ezek. 20 : 43 ; 30 : 25 ; Matt. 5:8; John 14:15; 
Rom. 10 :.10 ; Phil. 1 : 27 ; 3 : 17-20. And now, 
sir, as to this brief description of the work of 
grace, and also the discovery of it, if 3 on have 
aught to object, object; if not, then give me 
leave to propound to you a second question. 

Talk. Nay, my part is not now to object, 
but to hear ; let me, therefore, have your second 
question. 

Faith. It is this: Do .you experience this 
first part of the description of it; and doth 
your life and conversation testify the s\gnof\7Je.°'^ 
same? Or standeth your religion in word or 
tongue, and not in deed and truth ? Pray, if 
you incline to answer me in this, say no more 



FAITHFUL AND TALKATIVE. iK'J 

tlian vou know tlio God abovo will say Amen 
to, aiul also nothing but what your conscience 
can justify you in ; for not lie that commendeth 
liinisclf is approved, l)ut \vhom the Lord com- 
mendeth. Besides, to say I am thus and thus, 
when my conversation, and all my neighbors, 
tell me I lie, is great wickedness. 

Then Talkative at first began to blush ; but, 
recovering himself, thus he replied: "You come 
now to experience, to conscience, and to God; 
and to appeal to him for justification of what 
is spoken. This kind of discourse I did not 

Talkative not oXDCCt ' UOr aiU I dispOScd tO giVG 
pleased with ' 1 ' 

Faithfuls ques- ^^^ ang^yer to such qucstlons, because 
I count not myself bound thereto, unless you 
take upon you to be a catecliizer ; and though 
you should so do, yet I may refuse to make 
you my judge. But I pray, will you tell me 
why you ask me such questions ?"' 

Faith. Because I saw you forward to talk. 
The reason r^in[ bccausc I Ivucw uot that VOU had 

wliy Faithtul 

SA^n'"''''' aught else but notion. Besides, to 
tell you all the truth, I have heard of you that 
Faithfuls plain you arc a man whose religion lies in 
T^katlve. ''"" talk, and that your conversation gives 
this your mouth-profession the lie. They say 
you are a spot among Christians, and that 



268 PILORTA['S PROGRESS. 

rolioioii faretli llio worse for your ungodly con- 
versation ; that some have already stnmbled at 
yonr wicked ways, and that more are in dan- 
ger of being destroyed thereby : your religion^ 
and an ale-house, and covetousness, and iin- 
cleanness, and swearing, and lying, and vain 
company keeping, etc., will stand together. The 
proverb is true of you which is said of a har- 
lot, to wit, "That she is a shame to all women;" 
so are you a shame to all professors. 

Talk, Since you are so ready to take up 
reports, and to judge so rashly as iSSku' 
3'ou do, I cannot but conclude you are some 
peevish or melancholy man, not fit to be dis- 
coursed with ; and so adieu. 

Then up came Christian, and said to his 
brother, "I told you how it would happen ; your 
words and his lusts could not agree. He had 
rather leave your company than reform his life. 
But he is gone, as I said : let him go ; the loss is 
no man's but his own. He has saved us dance^°°'^ "*^ 
the trouble of going from him ; for he continuing 
(as I suppose he will do) as he is, would have 
been but a blot in our company; besides, the 
apostle says, ' From such withdraw thyself.' " 

Faith. But I am glad we had this little 
discourse with him ; it may happen that he 



FAlTlIFrL AX1> (11 IMSTIAX. IIGO 

will lliiiik of it aLiaiu; liowcvcr. I luivc dealt 
l)laiiily witli liiiu. and so am clear ot his Mood 
if he perishelh. 

Cur. You did well (o talk so plainly to him 
as you did. There is but little of this faithful 
dealinp,- -svith meu nowadays, and that uuikes 
religiou to stink so in the nostrils of many as it 
doth ; for they arc these talkative fools, whose 
religion is only in word, and who are debauched 
and vain in their conversation, that (being so 
much admitted into the fellowship of the godly) 
do puzzle the world, blemish Christianity, and 
grieve the sincere. I wish that all men would 
deal with such as you have done ; then should 
they either be made more conformable to relig- 
ion, or the company of saints would be too hot 
for them. 

Then did Faithful say, 

"How Talkative at first lifts up his plumes; 
How bravely doth he speak! How he presumes 
To drive down all before him ! But so soon 
As Faithful talks of heart-work, like the moon 
That's past the full, into the wane he goes; 
And so will all but he that heart-work knows." 

Thus they went on, talking of wdiat they 
had seen by the way, and so made that way 
easy, which would otherwise no doid)l have 
been tedious to them, for now they went through 
a wilderness. 



270 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 



THE SIXTH STAGE. 

Now when they were got ahnost quite cut 
of this wilderness, Faithful chanced to cast his 
eye back, and espied one coming after them, 
and he knew him. "Oh," said Faithful to his 
brother, "who comes yonder?" Then Chris- 
tian looked, and said, "It is my good friend 
Evangelist." "Aye, and my good friend too," 
said Faithful, "for 'twas he that set me on the 
way to the gate." Now was Evan- ovenSrS 
gelist come up unto them, and thus saluted them. 

Evan. Peace be Avith you, dearly beloved, 
and peace be to jouv helpers. 

Chr. Welcome, welcome, my good Evan- 
gelist ; the si";ht of thy countenance They are giad 
brings to my remembrance thy an- '"'^ 
cient kindness and unwearied labors for my 
eternal good. 

"And a thousand times welcome," said 
good Faithful, "thy company, sweet Evan- 
gelist; how desirable is it to us poor pilgrims." 

Then said Evangelist, "How hath it fared 
with you, my friends, since the time of our 
last parting ? What have you met Avith, and 
how have you behaved yourselves ?" 



EVANCELIST'S EXHORTATION. 271 

Tlu'll (Miristiaii and Kaillifiil told liiiii of all 
tilings that had happcnt'd to tlicin in tlie way; 
and how, and with what diilicnlty, they had 
an-ived to tliat ])hR'e. 

'Right glad am I,'' said Evangelist, "not 
tion^V.'h'r'" that you have met with trials, but 
that you have l)eeu victors, and for that you 
luave. notwithstanding many weaknesses, con- 
tinued in the way to this very day. 

"I say, right glad am I of this thing, and 
that for mine own sake and yours: I have 
sowed, and you have reaped; and the day is 
coming, when 'both he that soweth, and they 
that reap, shall rejoice together,' John 4:36; 
that is, if you hold out: for in due season ye 
shall reap, if ye faint not.' Gal. : 9. The 
crow^n is before you, and it is an incorruptible 
one: \so run that ye may obtain' it. 1 Cor. 
9 : 24-27. Some there be that set out for this 
crown, and after they have gone far for it, 
another comes in and takes it from them: 
'hold fast, therefore, that you have; let no 
man take j'our crown.' l\ev. 3 ill. You are 
not yet out of the gunshot of the devil: 'you 
have not resisted unto blood, striving against 
sin.' Let the kingdom be always before you, 
and believe steadfastly ccncerning the things 



272 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

that are invisible. Let nothing that is on this 
side the other world get within you. And, 
above all, look well to your own hearts and to 
the lusts thereof; for they are 'deceitful above 
all things, and desperately wicked.' Set your 
faces like a flint ; you have all power in heaven 
and earth on your side." 

Then Christian thanked him for his exhor- 
tations; but told him withal, that They do thank 

him for his ex- 

they would have him speak further iiortations. 
to them for their help the rest of the way ; and 
the rather, for that they well knew that he 
was a prophet, and could tell them of things 
that might happen unto them, and also how 
they might resist and overcome them. To 
which request Faithful also consented. So 
Evangelist began as folio weth. 

Evan. My sons, you have heard in the 
word of the truth of the gospel, that w"a7TSes 
you must "through many tribula- i»''vanfty ?a?r, 

'' >-j t/ jijjjj encourag- 

tions enter into the kingdom of heav- steadiastMss. *" 
en;" and again, that "in every city, bonds and 
afflictions abide you ;" and therefore you can- 
not expect that you should go long on 3'our 
pilgrimage without them, in some sort or other. 
You have found something of the truth of these 
testimonies upon you already, and more will 



VANITY I'AllJ. 273 

immeiliati'ly follow; loi- now, as you sec, you 
are almost out of this wildci'iiess, and tliere- 
Ibre you will soon eonie into a town that you 
will by and by see before 3-ou; and in that 
town you will be hardly beset with enemies, 
who will strain hard bnt they will kill you; 
and be you sure that one or both of you must 
seal the testimony which you hold with blood; 
but be you faithlul unto death, and the King 
He whose lot will give you a crown of life. He 
to^'utvcr. win that shall die there, althoudi his 

have tliL- better 

01- his brother. ^Ip^^Ij ^^,ju |j^ unnatural, and his 
pain perhaps great, he will yet have the better 
of his fellow; not only because he will be 
arrived at the celestial city soonest, but be- 
cause he will escape many miseries that the 
other will meet with in the I'est of his joui'- 
ney. But when you are come to the town, and 
shall lind fulfilled what T have here related, 
then rememl^er your friend, and (juit yourselves 
like men, and conunit the keeping of your souls 
to God in well-doing, as unto a faithful Crea- 
tor. 

Then I saw in my dream, that when they 
\vere got out of the wilderness, they presently 
saw a town l)efore them, and the name of that 
town is Vamtv; and at the town there is a fair 



274 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. • 

kept, called Yanity Fair. It is kept all the 
year long. It bcaretli the name of Vanity 
Fair, because the town where it is kept is 
lighter than vanity, Psa. 62 : 9 ; and also be- 
cause all that is there sold, or that cometh 
thither, is vanity ; as is the saying of the wise, 
" All that cometh is vanity.'* Eccl. 11 : 8 ; see 
also Eccl. 1 : 2-14 ; 2 : 11-17 ; Isa. 40 : 17. 

This fair is no new-erected business, but a 
thing of ancient standing. I will onwsS""^ 
show you the original of it. 

Almost five thousand years ago there were 
pilgrims walking to the celestial city, as these 
two honest persons are ; and Beelzebub, Apol- 
lyon, and Legion, with their companions, per- 
ceiving by the path the pilgrims made, that 
their way to the city lay through this tow^n of 
Vanity, they contrived here to set up a fair, a 
fair wherein should be sold all sorts of vanity, 
and that it should last all the year long. There- 
fore at this fair are all such mer- dJJoniSk." 
chandise sold as houses, lands, trades, places, 
honors, preferments, titles, countries, kingdoms, 
lusts, pleasures ; and delights of all sorts, as 
harlots, wives, husbands, children, masters, 
servants, lives, blood, bodies, souls, silver, 
gold, pearls, precious stones, and what not. 



VANITY FAIR. 275 

And moreover, at tliis lair there is at all 
times to be seen juggliugs, cheats, games, plays, 
fools, apes, knaves, and rogues, and that of 
every kind. 

Here are to be seen too, and that for noth- 
ing, thefts, murders, adulteries, false-swearers, 
and that of a blood-red color. 

And, as in other fairs of less moment, there 
are the several rows and streets under their 
proper names, where such and such wares are 
vended ; so here, likewise, you have the proper 
places, rows, streets, (namely, countries and 
kingdoms.) where the wares of this fair are 
soonest to be found. Here is the Britain-row, 
thirjaif ''"'the French-row, the Italian-row, the 
Spanish-row, the German-row, where several 
sorts of vanities are to be sold. But, as in other 
fairs, some one commodity is as the chief of all 
the fair, so the ware of Eome and her mer- 
chandise is greatly promoted in this fair ; only 
our English nation, with some others, have 
taken a dislike thereat. 

Now, as I said, the way to the celestial 
city lies just through this town where this lusty 
fair is kept ; and he that would go to the city, 
and yet not go through this town, "must needs 
go out of the world." 1 Cor. 4:10. The Prince 



276 • PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

of princes himself, when here, went through 
this town to his own country, and christ went 

through this 

that upon a fair-day too; yea, and, f''"- 
as I think, it was Beelzebub, the chief lord of 
this fair, that invited him to buy of his vani- 
ties, yea, would have made him lord of the 
fair, would he but have done him reverence as 
he went through the town. Yea, because he 
was such a person of honor, Beelzebub had 
him from street to street, and showed him all 
the kingdoms of the world in a little time, that 
he might, if possible, allure that blessed One 
to cheapen and buy some of his vanities ; but 
he had no mind to the merchandise, Christ bought 

nothing at the 

and therefore left the town without f'^"' 
laying out so much as one farthing upon these 
vanities. Matt. 4:1-8; Luke 4:5-8. This 
fair, therefore, is an ancient thing, of long 
standing, and a very great fair. 

Now these pilgrims, as I said, must needs 
go through this fair. Well, so they en^"th'2'f|[r"' 
did ; but, behold, even as they entered into the 
fair, all the people in the fair were The fair in a 

hubbub about 

moved, and the town itself, as it ^^'^'^■ 
were, in a hul^bub about them, and that for 
several reasons: for. 

First, the pilgrims were clothed with such 



nUBBUB IN THE FAIR. 277 

kind of raiim'iit as was diverse from the i-ai- 
ofulehubbur iiK'iit of any that traded in that lair. 
The ])eople, therefore, of the fair made a great 
gazing npon theni: some said they were fools; 
some, they were bedlams: and some, they were 
outlandish men. Job 12:1; 1 Cor. 4 : 0. 

Secondly, and as they wondered at their 
The second apparel so thev did likewise at their 

cause of the ' 

hubbub. Speech ; for few could understand 

what they said. They naturally spoke the lan- 
guage of Canaan; but they that kept the fair 
were the men of this world: so that fr(jm one 
end of the fair to the other, they seemed bar- 
barians each to the other. 1 Cor. 2:7, 8. 

Thirdly, but that which did not a little 
thlhubbur"' amuse the merchandisers was, that 
these pilgrims set very light by all their wares. 
They cared not so much as to look upon them ; 
and if they called upon them to buy, they 
would put their fingers in their cars, and cry, 
"Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity,"' 
Psa. 119 : 37, and look upward, signifying that 
their trade and traffic was in heaven. Phil. 
3:20, 21. 

One chanced, mockingly, beholding the 
carriage of the men, to say unto them, '"What 
will ye buy?"" Va\[ they, looking gravely upon 



278 PILGRIM'S PROGKESS. 

him, said, "We buy the truth." Prov. 23 : 23. 
At that there was an occasion taken ofthTCbbub'^ 
to despise the men the more; some mock- 
ing, some taunting, some speaking are'inocked""^' 
reproachfully, and some calling upon others to 
smite them. At last, things came to a hub- 
bub and great stir in the fair, insomuch that 
all order was confounded. Now was word 
presently brought to the great one of the fair, 
who quickly came down, and deputed some of 
his most trusty friends to take those men into 
examination about whom the fair was almost 
overturned. So the men were brought to ex- 
amination; and they that sat upon amined.''"' ^''" 
them asked them whence they came, whither 
they went, and what they did there in such an 
unusual garb. The men told them ,ZyVve] Zna 

,-, •^ • 1 i • whence they 

they were pilgrims and strangers in came. 
the world, and that they were going to their 
own country, Avhich was the heavenly Jerusa- 
lem, Heb. 11 : 13-16; and that they had given 
no occasion to the men of the town, nor yet to 
the merchandisers, thus to abuse them, and to 
let them in their journey, except it was for 
that, when one asked them what they would 
buy, they said they would buy the truth. But 
they that were appointed to examine them 



THE riLURIMS rERSECUTP:D. 279 

did not believe them to l)c any other than 
beueved"""" "**' bcdhinis and mad, or else such as 
came to i)ut all tilings into a ccmfnsion in the 
fair. Therefore they took them and beat them, 
and besmeared tliem witli dirt, and then j)ut 
in'th'-caga ''"' them into the cage, that they might 
be made a spectacle to all the men of the fair. 
There, therefore, they lay for some time, and 
were made the objects of any man's sport, or 
malice, or revenge : the great one of the fair 
laun-hino; still at all that befell them. But the 
men being patient, and "not rendering railing 
in'lhJ'cag'e'!''"' for railing, but contrariwise bless- 
ing," and giving good words for bad, and kind- 
ness for injuries done, some men in the fair, 
that were more observing and less prejudiced 
than the rest, began to check and blame the 
baser sort for their continual abuses done by 
them to the men. They, therefore, in an angry 
manner let fly at them again, counting them as 
bad as the men in the cage, and telling them 
that they seemed confederates, and should be 
made partakers of their misfortunes. Tha 
others replied that, for aught they could see, 
the men were quiet and sober, and intended 
nobody any harm: and that there were many 
that traded in their fair that were more worthy 



280 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

to be put into the cage, yea, and pillory too, 
than were the men that they had abused. 
Thus, after divers words had passed on both 
sides, (the men behaving themselves all the 
while very wisely and soberly before them,) 
they fell to some blows among themselves, and 
did harm one to another. Then were these 
two poor men brought before their tKuthorTof 

1 1 1 this cUsturb- 

examiners agani, and were charged ance. 
as being guilty of the late hubbub that had 
been in the fair. So they beat them pitifully, 
and hanged irons upon them, and led They are led 

. . -IT ji r> • "P ^'"^ down 

them ni chains up and down the lair, the fair in 

^ ' chains, lor a 

for an example and terror to others, tenor to others. 
lest any should speak in their behalf, or join 
themselves unto them. But Christian and 
Faithful behaved themselves yet more wisely', 
and received the ignominy and shame that was 
cast upon them with so much meekness and 
patience, that it won to their side some men of 

■^ the fair won 

(though but few in comparison of the °^"' ^^ *"^"'- 
rest) several of the men in the fair. This put 
the other party yet into a greater rage, inso- 
much that they concluded the death of these 
two men. Wherefore they threat- Their adver- 

^ saries resolve to 

ened that neither cage nor irons '^'" ""^^'"■ 
should serve their turn, but that they should 



FA IT II FT L\^ TltlAL. 281 

(lie ioi- tlic iil)iis(^ llicy had done, iiiid fur delud- 
ing llio men of {]u\ lair. 
They arc again Tlieii weTC tliev Teiiianded to 

put into "llu' . /•! /. ji 1 

cape and aiti;r tliG caixe aQiaiii, iiiitu lurtiiei" order 

wards brought '^ 

to trial. should bo taken with them. So 

they put them in. and made their feet fast in 
the stocks. 

Here also they called apiin to mind what 
they had heard from their faithful friend Iv/an- 
gelist, and were the more confirmed in their 
Avay and suftcrings l)y what he told them wouhl 
happen to them. They also now comforted 
each other, that whose lot it was to suffer, even 
he should have the best of it: tlierefore each 
man secretly wished that he might have that 
preferment. But connnitting themselves to the 
all-wise disposal of Him that ruleth all things, 
with nuich content they abode in the condition 
in which they were, until they should be other- 
wise disposed of. 

Then a convenient (!me being appointed, 
they brought them forth to their trial, in order 
to their condemnation. When the time was 
come, the}' were brought l)efore their enemies 
and arraigned. The judge's name was Lord 
Hate-good; their indictment was one and the 
same in subslaiicc thouuh somewhat vai'vin^: 



282 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS, 

in form; the contents whereof was this: "That 
they were enemies to, and disturb- nielit""" '"''"'^" 
ers of, the trade ; that they had made commo- 
tions and divisions in the town, and had won 
a party to their own most dangerous opinions, 
in contem|)t of the law of their prince." 

Then Faithful began to answer, Faithiui an- 
swers for him- 

that he had only set himself against ^"'^^ 
that which had set itself against Him that is 
higher than the highest. "And," said he, "as 
for disturbance, I make none, being myself a 
man of peace : the parties that were won to us, 
were won by beholding our truth and innocence, 
and they are only turned from the worse to the 
better. And as to the king you talk of, since 
he is Beelzebub, the enemy of our Lord, 1 defy 
him and all his angels." 

Then proclamation was made, that they 
that had aught to say for their lord the king 
against the prisoner at the bar, should forth- 
with appear, and give in their evidence. So 
there came in three witnesses, to wit. Envy, 
Superstition, and Pickthank. They were then 
asked if they knew the prisoner at the bar-, 
and what they had to say for their lord the 
King against him. 

Then stood forth Envv, and said to this 



FAITHFUL'S TIUAL. 283 

effect: "My lord, I have known this man a 
Liny begins, long tiiuc, and will attest npon my 
oath before this honorable bench, that he is — "' 
■ Judge. Hold ; give him his oath. 

So they swore him. Then he said, '"My lord, 
this man, notwithstanding his phuisible name, 
is one of the vilest men in our country; he 
neither regardeth prince nor })eoi)le, law nor 
custom, but doeth all that he can to j)ossess all 
men with certain of his disloyal notions, which 
he in the general calls i)rinciples of faith and 
holiness. And in }>articular, I heard him once 
myself aflirm that Christianity and the cus- 
toms of our town of Vanity were diametricall}' 
opposite, and could not be reconciled. By 
which saying, my lord, he doth at once not 
only condemn" all our laudable doings, but us 
in the doing of them."' 

Then did the judge say to him, "Hast thou 
any more to say ?'' 

ExvY. ^ly lord, T could say much more, 
only I would not be tedious to the court. Yet 
if need be, when the other gentlemen have 
given in their evidence, rather than any thing 
shall be wanting that will dispatch him, I will 
enlarge my testimony against him. 

So he was bid to stand bv. 



28tt riLGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Then they called Superstition, and bid him 
look upon the prisoner. They also foiiowf''"""" 
asked what he could say for their lord the 
king against him. Then they swore him; so 
he began. 

Super. My lord, I have no great acquaint- 
ance with this man, nor do I desire to have fur- 
ther knowledge of him. However, this I know, 
that he is a very pestilent fellow, from some 
discourse that I had with him the other day, 
in this town ; for then, talking with him, I heard 
him say, that our religion was naught, and sucli 
by which a man could by no means please 
God. Which saying of his, my lord, your lord- 
ship very well knows what necessarily thence 
will follow, to wit, that we still do worship in 
vain, are yet in our sins, and finally shall be 
damned : and this is that which I have to say. 

Then was Pickthank sworn, and bid say 
what he knew in the behalf of their lord the 
king against the prisoner at the bar. 

Pick. My lord, and you gentle- testimony':""'' 
men all, tliis fellow I have known of a long time, 
and have heard him speak things that ought 
not to be spoken; for he hath railed on our 
noble prince Beelzebub, and hath spoken con- 
temptibly of his honorable friends, whose names 



FAlTIlFn/S OEFEXCH. 285 

aro, llio lionl Old .Man. iho Lord Caiiial De- 
sins are all Hglit, llic Loi'd Liixurious, tlic Lord 

lords, ami great "^ , . . , 

ones. Dosii-e-ol-vaiii-glory, my old Lord 

Lechery, Sir Ilaviiip; Greedy, with all the rest 
of our nobility; and he hath said, moreover, 
that if all men were of his mind, if |)ossil)le, 
there is not one of these nol)lemen should have 
any longer a being in this town. Besides, he 
hath not been afraid to rail on you, my lord, 
who are now appointed to be his judge, calling 
you an ungodly villain, with many other such 
like vilifying terms, with which he hath be- 
spattered most of the gentry of our town. 

When this Pickthank had told his tale, the 
judge directed his speech to the prisoner at the 
bar, saying, "Thou runagate, heretic, and trai- 
tor, hast thou heard what these honest gentle- 
men have witnessed against thee ?"' 

Faith. ]\ray I speak a few words in my 
own defence ? 

JiDOK. Sirrah, sirrah, tliou deservest to 
live no longer, but to lie slain immediately 
upon the i)laee; yet, that all men may see our 
gentleness towards thee, let us hear what thou, 
vile runagate, hast to say. 
n.]^oll;i!;^:^ Faith. First I say. then, in an- 
swer to what ^Fi-. L]iivy hath sitokcn. T never 



286 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

said aiiglit but this, that what rule, or laws, or 
custom, or people, Avere flat against the word 
of God, are diametrically opposite to Chris- 
tianity. If I have said amiss in this, convince 
me of my error, and I am ready here before 
3^ou to make my recantation. 

As to the second, to wit, Mr. Superstition, 
and his charge against me, I said only this, 
that in the worship of God there is required a 
divine faith; but there can be no divine faith 
without a divine revelation of the will of God. 
Therefore, whatever is thrust into the worship 
of God that is not agreeable to divine revela- 
tion, cannot be done but by a human faith; 
which faith will not be profitable to eternal 
life. 

Third, as to what ^Ir. Pickthank hath said, 
I say, (avoiding terms, as that I am said to 
rail, and the like,) that the prince of this town, 
with all the rabblement, his attendants, by this 
gentleman named, are more fit for a being in 
hell than in this town and country. And so 
the Lord have mercy upon me. 

Then the judge called to the jury, (who all 
this while stood by to hear and ob- The judges 

*' speech to the 

serve,) "Gentlemen of the jury, you J"'"^ 

see this man about whom so great an uproar 



THE .irOCE'S CHARGE. 287 

bath boon made in this town ; you liavo also 
heard what these worthy gentlemen have wit- 
nessed against him; also, you haye heaid his 
reply and eonfession : it lieth now in your 
breasts to hang him, or save his life: but yet 
I think meet to instruct you in our law. 

"There Avas an act made in the days of 
Pharaoh the Great, servant to our prince, that, 
lest those of a contrary religion should multi- 
ply and grow too strong for him, their males 
should be thrown into the river. Exod. 1 : 22. 
There was also an act made in the days of 
Xebuchadnezzar the Great, another of his ser- 
vants, that whoever would not fall down and 
worship his golden image, should be thrown 
into a fiery furnace. Dan. 3 : G. There was 
also an act made in the days of Darius, that 
whoso for some time called ujjon any god but 
him. should be cast into the lion's den, Dan. 
G : 7. Now, the substance of these laws this 
rel)el has broken, not only in thought, (which 
is not to be borne,) but also in word and deed ; 
which must, therefore, needs be intolerable. 

"For that of Pharaoh, his law was made 
upon a supposition to prevent mischief, no 
crime being yet ai)parent; but here is a crime 
api)arent. For the second and third, you see 



288 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

lie disputetli against our religion ; and for the 
treason that he hath already confessed, he 
deserveth to die the death." 

Then went the jury out, whose names were 
Mr. Blindman, Mr. No-good, Mr. Malice, Mr. 
Love-lust, Mr. Live-loose, Mr. Heady, Mr. 
High-mind, Mr. Enmity, Mr. Liar, Mr. Cruelty, 
Mr. Hate-light, and Mr. Implacable ; who every 
one gave in his private verdict against him 
among themselves, and afterwards unanimously 
concluded to bring him in guilty They conclude 

to bring him in 

before the judge. And first among gunty of death. 
themselves, Mr. Blindman, the foreman, said, 
"I see clearly that this man is a heretic." Then 
said Mr. Xo-good, "Away with such a fellow 
from the earth." "Aye," said Mr. Malice, 
"for I hate the very looks of him." Then 
said Mr. Love-lust, "I could »ever endure 
him." "Nor I," said Mr. Live-loose, "for 
he would always be condemning my way." 
"Hang him, hang him," said Mr. Heady. "A 
sorry scrub," said Mr. High-mind. "My heart 
risetli against him," said Mr. Enmity. "He 
is a rogue," said Mr. Liar. "Hanging is too 
good for him," said Mr. Cruelty. "Let ns 
dispatch him out of the way," said Mr. Hate- 
light. Then said Mr. Implacable, "Might I 



FAITHFUL'S MARTYRDOM. 289 

have all llie world given me, I could not be 
reconciled to him; therefore let us forthwith 
bring him in guilty of death." 

And so they did ; therefore he was pres- 
ently condemned to be had from the place 
where he was, to the place from whence he 
came, and there to be put to the most cruel 
death that could be invented. 

They therefore brought him out, to do with 
him according to their law; and first, they 
scourged him, then they buffeted him, then 
they lanced his flesh with knives: after that 
they stoned him with stones, then pricked him 
with their swords; and last of all, they burned 
Ii-KaHhiui'"''' liiiii to ashes at the stake. Thus 
came Faithful to his end. 

Xow I saAV. that there stood behind the 
nudtitude a chariot and a coui)le of horses 
waiting for Faithful, who (.^o soon as his ad- 
versaries had dispatched him) was taken np 
info it, and straightway was carried up through 
the clouds with sound of trumpet, the nearest 
way to the celestial gate. But as for Chris- 
tian, he had some respite, and was remanded 
stiii?prisir."r' back to prison: so he there remain- 
ed for a space. But He who overrules all 
things, having the power of their I'age in hin 

V.l I'rug. • 1 3 



290 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

own hand, so wrought it about, that Christian 
for that time escaped them, and went his wa^^ 
And as he went, he sang, saying, 

"Well, Faithful, thou hast faithfully profest 
Unto thy Lord, with whom thou shalt be blest, 
When faithless ones, with all their vain delights, 
Are crying out vnider their hellish plights : 
Sing, Faithful, sing, and let thy name survive ; 
For though they killed thee, thou art yet alive." 



BY-ENDS OVERTAKEN. 2^1 



THE SEVENTH STAGE. 

Xow I saw in my dream, that Christian 
went not forth alone ; for there was one whose 
Christian i>as name was Hopeful, (being so made 
panlon' """ \)j tli^c beholding of Christian ami 
Faithful in their words and behavior, in their 
sufferings at the fair,) who joined himself unto 
him, and entering into a brotherly covenant, 
told him that he would be his companion. 
Thus one died to l)ear testimony to the truth, 
and another rises out of his ashes to be a com- 
panion with Christian in his pilgrimage. This 
There are more jjoneful also told Christiau, that 

of the men ot 1 

thc-fairwilllol ^1^^^.^ ^^,pj.^ j^^.^^^^, j^Qj.(3 ^f (hc UlCU 

in the fair that would take their time and 
follow after. 

So I saw, that quickly after they were got 
out of the fair, they overtook one that was 
By'l^dr^"**''*' going before them, whose name was 
By-ends; so they said to him, "What coun- 
tryman, sir; and how far go you this way?"' 
He told them that he came from the town of 
Fair-speech, and he was going to the celestial 
city ; but told them not his name. 

"From Fair-speech?" said Christian; "is 



292 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

there any good that lives there ?'' Proverbs 

26:25. 

"Yes," said By-ends, "I hope so." 
Chr. Pray, sir, what may I call you? 
By-ends. I am a stranger to you, and you 

. - , . , 1 • „ ^^ T By ends loath ' 

to me: if you be going this wa} , 1 toteiihisname. 
shall be glad of your company ; if not, I must 
be content. 

'•This town of Fair-speech," said Christian, 
"I have heard of; and, as I remember, they 
say it 's a wealthy place." 

By. Yes, I will assure you that it is ; and 
I have very many rich kindred there. 

Chr. Pray, who are your kindred there, if 
a man may be so bold ? 

By. Almost the whole town ; and in par- 
ticular my Lord Turn-about, my Lord Time- 
server, my Lord Fair-speech, from whose an- 
cestors that town first took its name ; also Mr. 
Smooth-man, Mr. Facing-both-ways, Mr. Any- 
thing; and the parson of our parish, Mr. Two- 
tongues, was my mother's own brother, by fa- 
ther's side; and, to tell you the truth, I am 
become a gentleman of good quality, yet my 
great-grandfather was but a waterman, looking 
one way and rowing another, and I got most 
of my estate by the same occupation. 



Dl^L'U LI :.<!•: WITH i;V-KNl)S. 293 

Chr. Are you a niarricd man ? 
By. Yes, and my wife is a very virtuous 
The wife and womau, the dauo'hter of a virtuous 

kindred of By- " 

ends. woman: she was my Lady Feign- 

ing's daughter; therefore she came of a very 
honorable family, and is arrived to such a 
pitch of breeding, that she knows how to carry 
it to all, even to prince and peasant. "Tis 
true, we somewhat differ in religion from those 

AVhcreByends of thc StrlctCr SOrt, VCt but lu tWO 
diflers from oth- 
ers in religion, small points: First, we never strive 

against wind and tide. Secondly, we are 

always most zealous when religion goes in his 

silver slippers; we love much to walk with 

him in the street, if the sun shines and the 

people applaud him. 

Then Christian stepped a little aside to 

his fellow Hopeful, saying, "It runs in my 

mind that this is one By-ends of Fair-speech ; 

and if it be he, we have as very a knave in 

our company as dwelleth in all these parts."' 

Then said Hopeful, "Ask him; methinks he 

should not be ashamed of his name." So 

Christian came up with him again, and said, 

"Sir, you talk as if you knew something more 

than all the world doth ; and, if I take not 

my mark amiss, I deem I have half a guess of 



294 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

you. Is not your name Mr. Bj-ends of Fair- 
speech ?*' 

By. This is not my name, but indeed it is 
a nickname that is giv^n me by some that can- 
not abide me, and J must be content to bear it 
as a reproach, as other good men have borne 
theirs before me. 

Chr. But did you never give an occasion 
to men to call you by this name ? 

By. Never, never. The worst that ever I 
did to give them an occasion to give go"^ nlmf^ 
me this name was, that I had always the luck 
to jump in my judgment with the present way 
of the times, Avhatever it was, and my chance 
was to get thereby ; but if things are thus cast 
upon me, let me count them a blessing; but 
let not the malicious load me therefore with 
reproach. 

Chr. I thought, indeed, that you were the 
man that I heard of; and to tell you what I 
think, I fear this name belongs to you more 
properly than you are willing we should think 
it doth. 

By. Well, if you will thus imag- He desires to 

•^ keep company 

ine, I cannot help it ; you shall find ^"^ christian, 
me a fair company-keeper, if you will still 
admit me your associate. 



BY-ENDS' COMPANIONS. 295 

Chr. If you will g-o with us, you must go 
against wind and tido; the wliich, 1 perceive, 
is against your opinion: you must also own 
religion in his rags, as well as when in his 
silver slippers; and stand by him, too, when 
bound in irons, as well as when he walketh the 
streets with applause. 

By. You must not impose, nor lord it over 
my faith ; leave me to my liberty, and let me 
go with you. 

Chk. Not a step farther, unless you will 
do, in what I propound, as we. 

Then said By-ends, "I shall never desert 
my old i)rinciples, since they are harmless and 
profitable. If I may not go with you, I must 
thlJp^Tt. ^"'^ do as I did before you overtook me, 
even go by myself, until some overtake me 
that will be glad of my company.*' 

Now I saw in my dream, that Christian 
and Hopeful forsook him, and kei)t their dis- 
tance before him; but one of them, looking 
back, saw three men following Mr. By-ends; 
and behold, as they came up with him, he made 
them a very low conge; and they also gave 
him a compliment. The men's names were, 
comU'^ns""' ^^1'- riold-the-W(.rld, :\rr. Money- 
love, and Mr. Save-all, men that Mr. Bv-ends 



296 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

had formerly been acquainted with; for in 
their minority they were school-fellows, and 
were taught by one Mr. Grripeman, a school- 
master in Lovegain, which is a market-town in 
the county of Coveting, in the North. This 
schoolmaster taught them the art of getting, 
either by violence, cozenage, flattering, lying, 
or by putting on a guise of religion ; and these 
four gentlemen had attained much of the art of 
their master, so that they could each of them 
have kept such a school themselves. 

Well, when they had, as I said, thus saluted 
each other, Mr. Money-love said to Mr. By- 
ends, "Who are they upon the road before 
us ?" for Christian and Hopeful were yet within 
view. 

By. They are a couple of far- By ends' char 

"^ acter of the pil- 

countrymen, that, after their mode, g""^- 
are going on pilgrimage. 

Money. Alas, why did they not stay, that 
we might have had their good company? for 
they and we, and you, sir, I hope, are all 
going on pilgrimage. 

By. We are so, indeed ; but the men before 
us are so rigid, and love so much their own 
notions, and do also so lightly esteem the opin- 
ions of others, that let a man be ever so godly, 



HV-KNDr^' COM PAN ION r^. 2i)T 

vet if lio jumps not witli thorn in all tliiii«^-s, 
ilu'V thrust him ([uite out of tlu'ir (•omi)auy. 

Savk. That is bad ; but we read of some that 
are righteous overmueh, and sueh men's rigid- 
uess prevails with tluMu to jmlge and eondenni 
all but themselves. But I pray, what and how 
many were the things wherein you differed ? 

Bv. Why, they, after their headstrong man- 
ner, conclude that it is their duty to rush on 
their journey all weathers ; and I am for wait- 
ing for wind and tide. They are for hazarding 
all for God at a cla}) ; and I am for taking all 
advantages to secure my life and estate. They 
are for holding their notions, though all other 
men be against them ; but I am for religion in 
what and so far as the times and my safety 
will bear it. They are for religion when in 
rags and contempt ; but I am for him when he 
walks in his silver slippers, in the sunshine, 
and with applause. 

IIoLD-THE-WouLD. Ayc, and hold you there 
still, good Mr. By-ends : for, for my part, I can 
count him but a fool, that having the liberty 
to keep what he has, shall be so unwise as to 
lose it. Let us be wise as serpents. It is best 
to make hay while the sun shines. You see 
how the bee licth still in winter, and bestirs 

13^ 



298 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

her only when she can have profit with pleas- 
ure. God sends sometimes rain, and some- 
times sunshine: if they be such fools to go 
through the first, yet let us be content to take 
fair weather along with us. For my part, I 
like that religion best that will stand with the 
security of Grod's good blessings upon us ; for 
who can imagine, that is ruled by his reason, 
since God has bestowed upon us the good things 
of this life, but that he would have us keep 
them for his sake ? Abraham and Solomon 
grew rich in religion ; and Job says that a good 
man shall lay up gold as dust; but he must 
not be such as the men before us, if they be as 
you have described them. 

Save. I think that we are all agreed in this 
matter; and therefore there needs no more 
words about it. 

Money. No, there needs no more words 
about this matter, indeed ; for he that believes 
neither Scripture nor reason, (and you see we 
have both on our side,) neither knows his own 
liberty nor seeks his own safety. 

By. My brethren, we are, as you see, going 
all on pilgrimage ; and for our better diversion 
from things that are bad, give me leave to pro- 
pound unto you this question. 



MONEY- LOVE'S ANSWER. 299 

Suppose a man, a miuistor, or a tradesman, 
etc., should have an advantage lie before him 
to get the good blessings of this life, yet so as 
that he can by no means come by them, except, 
in appearance at least, he becomes extraordi- 
nary zealous in some points of religion that he 
meddled not with before ; may he not use this 
means to attain his end, and yet be a right 
honest man ? 

Money. I see the bottom of your question ; 
and with these gentlemen's good leave, I will 
endeavor to shape you an answer. And first, 
to speak to your question as it concerneth a 
minister himself: suppose a minister, a worthy 
man, possessed but of a very small benefice, 
and has in his eye a greater, more fat and 
plump by far ; he has also now an opportunity 
of getting it, yet so as by being more studious, 
by preaching more frequently and zealously, 
and, because the temper of the people requires 
it, by altering of some of his principles ; for my 
part, I see no reason why a man may not do 
this, provided he has a call, aye, and more a 
great deal besides, and yet be an honest man. 
For why ? 

1 . His desire of a greater benefice is law- 
ful, (this eaniiut be contradicted.) since it is 



300 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

set before him by Providence ; so then he may 
get it if he can, making no question for con- 
science' sake. 

2. Besides, his desire after that benefice 
makes him more studious, a more zealous 
preacher, etc., and so makes him a better man, 
3^ea, makes him better improve his parts, which 
is according to the mind of God. 

3. Now, as for his complying with the tem- 
per of his people, by deserting, to serve them, 
some of his principles, this argueth, first, that 
he is of a self-denying temper; second, of a 
sweet and winning deportment; and, third, so 
more fit for the ministerial function. 

4. I conclude, then, that a minister that 
changes a small for a great, should not, for so 
doing, be judged as covetous ; but rather, since 
he is improved in his parts and industry there- 
by, be counted as one that pursues his call, 
and the opportunity put into his hand to do 
good. 

And now to the second part of the question, 
which concerns the tradesman you mentioned. 
Suppose such a one to have but a poor employ 
in the world, but by becoming religious he may 
mend his market, perhaps get a rich wife, or 
more and far better customers to his shop ; for 



MONEY-LOVE A IM'LA C DK H. :}01 

my })art. I sco no reason but this may be linv- 
fully (lone. For wliy ? 

1. To become religions is avirtne. by what 
means soever a man becomes so, 

2. Xor is it niilawlul to get a rich wife, or 
more enstom to my shop. 

3. Besides, the man that gets these by be- 
coming religious, gets that which is good of 
them that are good, by becoming good himself; 
so then, here is a good wife and good custom- 
ers and good gain, and all these by becoming 
religious, which is good: therefore, to become 
religious to get all these. is a good and profita- 
ble design. 

This answer, thus made by ^Ir. ^loney-love 
to ^rr. By-ends' (juestion, was highly a})i)lauded 
by them all : wherefore they concluded, upon 
the whole, that it was most wholesome and 
advantageous. And because, as they thought, 
no man was able to contradict it, and because 
Christian and Hopeful were yet within call, 
they jointly agreed to assault them with the 
question as soon as they overtook them, and 
the rather, because they had op])Osed Mr. By- 
ends before. So they called after them, and 
they stopped and stood still till they came up 
to them: but thev concluded, as thev went. 



302 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

that not Mr. By-ends, but old Mr. . Hold-the- 
world should propound the question to them, 
because, as they supposed, their answer to him 
would be without the remainder of that heat 
that was kindled between Mr. By-ends and 
them at their parting a little before. 

So they came up to each other, and after a 
short salutation, Mr. Hold-the-world propound- 
ed the question to Christian and his fellow, and 
then bid them to answer if they could. 

Then said Christian, ^' Even a babe in re- 
ligion may answer ten thousand such questions. 
For if it be unlawful to follow Christ for loaves, 
as it is, John 6:26, how much more abomina- 
ble is it to make of him and religion a stalking- 
horse to get and enjoy the world! Nor do we 
find an}^ other than heathens, hypocrites, dev- 
ils, and wizards, that are of this opinion. 

"1. Heathens: for when Hamor and She- 
chem had a mind to the daughter and cattle of 
Jacob, and saw that there was no way for them 
to come at them but by being circumcised, they 
said to their companions, ' If every male of us 
be circumcised, as they are circumcised, shall 
not their cattle, and their substance, and every 
beast of theirs be ours ?' Their daughters and 
their cattle were that which they sought to ob- 



CITRISTIAN'S ANSWER. 303 

tain, and their religion the stalking-horse they 
made use of to come at them. I'ead the whole 
story, Gen. 34 : 20-24. 

"2. The hypocritical Pharisees were also of 
this religion: long prayers were their pretence, 
])nt to get widows' houses -was their intent; 
and greater damnation was from God their 
judgment. Luke 20 : 4G, 47. 

"3. Judas the devil was also of this relig- 
ion : he ^vas religious for the bag, that he might 
be possessed of what was put therein; l)ut he 
was lost, cast away, and the very son of per- 
dition. 

"4. Simon the wizard was of this religion 
too : for he Avould have had the Holy Ghost, 
that he might have got money therewith: and 
his sentence from Peter's mouth was accord- 
ing. Acts 8:19-22. 

'"o. 'Neither will it go out of my mind, but 
that that man who takes up religion for the 
world, will throw away religion for the world ; 
for so surely as Judas designed the world in 
becoming religious, so surely did he also sell 
religion and his Master for the same. To an- 
swer the question, therefore, affirmatively, as 
I perceive you have done, and to accept of, as 
authentic, such answer, is heathenish, hypocrit- 



304 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

ical, and devilish; and your reward will be 
according to your works." 

Then they stood staring one upon another, 
Lut had not wherewith to answer Christian. 
Hopeful also approved of the soundness of 
Christian's answer ; so there was a great silence 
among them. Mr. By-ends and his company 
also staggered and kept behind, that Christian 
and Hopeful might outgo them. Then said 
Christian to his fellow, "If these men cannot 
stand before the sentence of men, what will 
they do with the sentence of God? And if 
they are mute when dealt w^ith by vessels of 
clay, what will they do when they shall be 
rebuked by the flames of a devouring fire ?" 

Then Christian and Hopeful outwent them 
again, and went till they came at a delicate 
plain called Ease, where they went ..?"''? ^'*f *h^* 

I ' «' pilgrims nave is 

with much content; but that plain we '""''"'*''' 
was but narrow, so they were quickly got over 
it. Now at the farther side of that plain was 
a little hill called Lucre, and in that hill a 
silver-mine, which some of them that had for- 
merly gone that way, because of the rarity of 
it, had turned aside to see ; but going too near 
the brim of the pit, the ground, be- dangero''us'hiii.* 
ing deceitful under them, broke, and they were 



LUCRE Un.L. 3U5 

slain: some also had bci'ii maiiiUMl there, and 
couhl not, to their dying day, be their own 
men again. 

Then I saw in my dream, tliat a little olf 
hiKcre"^ *"' the road, over against tlic silver- 
mine, stood Demas (gentleman-like) to call 
chr"uau''"'and piisscngcFs to coHie and see; who 
ii:j|n^{ocome g^.^ ^^ Christian and his fellow, 

"Ho, turn aside hither, and I Avill show you a 
thing.'' 

Cim. AVhat thing so deserving as to turn 
us out of the way to see it? 

Demas. Here is a silver-mine, and some 
digging in it for treasure; if you will come, 
with a little pains you may richly provide for 
yourselves. 
Hopeful tempt- Thcu Said Ho])eful, "Let us go 

ert to go. but i ' ^ 

Christian holds „„„ jj 
him back. SCe. 

"Not I," said Christian: "I have heard of 
this ])lace before now. and how many there 
have been slain; and besides, that treasure is 
a snare to those that seek it, for it hindereth 
them in their pilgrimage." 

Then Christian called to Demas. saying, "Is 
not the place dangerous ? Hath it not hindered 
many in their pilgrimage?" Hosea 9 : 6. 

"Not very dangerous," said Demas, "ex- 



806 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

cept to those that are careless ;" but withal he 
blushed as he spoke. 

Then said Christian to Hopeful, "Let us 
not stir a step, but still keep on our way." 

Hope. I will warrant you, when By-ends 
comes up, if he hath the same invitation as 
we, he will turn in thither to see. 

Chr. No doubt thereof, for his principles 
lead him that way, and a hundred to one but 
he dies there. 

Then Demas called again, saying, "But 
will you not come over and see ?" 

Then Christian roundly answered, saying, 
"Demas, thou art an enemy to the right ways 
of the Lord of this way, and hast been already 
condemned for thine own turning aside, b}^ one 
of his Majesty's judges, 2 Tim. 4:10; and why 
seekest thou to bring us into the like condem- 
nation? Besides, if we at all turn aside, our 
Lord the King will certainly hear thereof, and 
will there put us to shame vv^here we would 
stand with boldness before him." 

Demas cried again, that he also was one of 
their fraternity ; and that if they would tarry 
a little, he also himself would walk with them. 

Then said Christian, "What is thy name? 
Is it not the same by which I have called thee ?" 



BY-ENDS AND DEMxVS AGREE. 307 

Demas. Yes, my name is Demas ; l.diu the 
son of Abraham. 

Chr. I know you: Gehazi was your great- 
grandfather, and Judas your father, and you 
have trod in their stei)s; it is .but a devili.^h 
prank that thou usest : thy father was hanged for 
a traitor, and thou deservest no better reward. 
2 Kings 5 : 20-27 ; Matt. 2G : 14, 15 ; 27 : 3-5. 
Assure thyself, that when we come to the King, 
we will tell him of this thy behavior. 

Thus they went their way. ^ 

By this time By-ends and his companions 
were come again within sight, and they at the 
ovfr^lo Dcnfas' ^^st bcck wcut ovcr to Dcmas. Now, 
Avhether they fell into the pit by looking over 
the brink thereof, or whether they went down 
to dig, or whether they were smothered in the 
bottom by the damps that commonly arise, of 
these things I am not certain ; but this I ob- 
served, that they were never seen again in the 
way. Then sang Christian, 

" By-ends and silver Demas botli agree ; 
One calls, the other runs, that he may be 
A sharer in his lucre : so these two 
Take up in this world, and no farther go." 

They see a Now I saw that, just on thc other 

strange monu „ , . , . ,, -i • 

ment. side of this plain, the pdgrims came 

to a })lace wlicre stood ah old monument, hard 



308 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

by the highway-side, at the sight of which they 
were both concerned, because of the strangeness 
of the form thereof; for it seemed to them as if 
it had been a woman transformed into the shape, 
of a pillar. Here, therefore, they stood look- 
ing and looking upon it, but could not for a 
time tell what they should make thereof. At 
last Hopeful espied, written above upon the 
head thereof, a writing in an unusual hand; 
but he being no scholar, called to Christian (for 
he was learned) to see if he could pick out the 
meaning: so he came, and after a little laying 
of letters together, he found the same to be this, 
"Remember Lot's wife." So he read it to his 
fellow; after which they both concluded that 
that was the pillar of salt into which Lot's wife 
was turned, for her looking back with a cov- 
etous heart when she was going from Sodom 
for safety. Gen. 19 : 26. Which sudden and 
amazing sight gave them occasion for this dis- 
course. 

Chr. Ah, my brother, this is a seasonable 
sight: it came opportunely to us after the in- 
vitation which Demas gave us to come over to 
view the hill Lucre ; and had we gone over, as 
he desired us, and as thou wast inclined to do, 
my brother, we had; for aught I know, been 



TlIK I'l r, [-.\n OF SAT.T. 30U 

made like this woman :i spcclaclc lor those 
that shall coiiic artcr to Ix'hold. 

ITorK. 1 am sorry that 1 was so foolish, aiul 
am made to wonder that I am not now as Lot'-f; 
wife : for wherein Avas the difference between 
lier sin and mine ? She only looked back, and 
I had a desire to go see. Let grace be adored, 
and let nie be ashamed that ever such a thing 
should be in my heart. 

Chr. Let ns take notice of what we see 
here, for our help for time to come. This 
woman escaped one judgment, for she fell not 
by the destruction of Sodom; yet she was de- 
stroyed l)y another, as we see: she is turned 
into a pillar of salt. 

Hope. True, and she may be to ns both 
caution and example: caution, that we should 
shun her sin, or a sign of what judgment will 
overtake such as shall not be pi-evented by this 
caution; so Korah, Dathan, and .Vbiram, with 
the two hundred and lifty men that ])erished 
in their sin, did also become a sign or example 
to others to beware. Xum. 16 : 31, 32 ; 2G : 9, 
10. But above all, I muse at one thing, to wit, 
how Demas and his fellows can stand so confi- 
dently yonder to hxtk for that treas^^•e which 
this woman but U)V lookinu' beliind her after, 



310 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

(for wc read not that she stepped one foot out 
of the way,) was turned into a pillar of salt; 
especially since the judgment which overtook 
her did make her an example within sight of 
where they are; for they cannot choose but 
see her, did they but lift up their eyes. 

Chr. It is a thing to be wondered at, and 
it argueth that their hearts are grown despe- 
rate in the case ; and I cannot tell who to com- 
pare them to so titl}^, as to them that pick 
pockets in the presence of the judge, or that 
will cut purses under the gallows. It is said 
of the men of Sodom, that they were " sinners 
exceedingly," because they were sinners "be- 
fore the Lord," that is, in his eyesight, and 
notwithstanding the kindnesses that he had 
showed them ; for the land of Sodom was now 
like the garden of Eden heretofore. Gen,, 
13 : 10-13. This therefore provoked him the 
more to jealousy, and made their plague as hot 
as the fire of the Lord out of heaven could 
make it. And it is most rationally to be con- 
cluded, that such, even such as these are, that 
shall sin in the sight, yea, and that too in de- 
spite of such exanii)les that are set continually 
before them to caution them to the contrary, 
must be partakers of severest judgments. 



THE nivi:n of life. ;ni 

Hope. Doubtless thou luisl said tlie (I'utli: 
but wliat a urtcv is it tliat noitlior thou, but 
especially J, am not made myself this exam- 
l)le ! This ministereth occasion to us to thaidv 
God, to fear before him, and always to reiueiu- 
ber Lot's wife. 

I saw then that they Avent on their way to 

A river. a plcasant river, which David the 
king" called "the river of God ;" but John, "the 
river of the water of life.'' Psa. 65 : 9 ; Rev. 
22 : 1 ; Ezek. 47 : 1-9. Now their way lay just 
upon, the bank of this river: here, therefore, 
Christian and his companion walked with great 
delight; they drank also of the water of the 
river, which was pleasant and enlivening to 
their weary spirits. Besides, on the banks of 
rivir" ^^' *'"" this river, on either side, were gi-een 
trees with air manner of fruit; and the leaves 

The fruit and thcY atc to prcvcut surfcits, and 

.'Caves of the 

trees. otlicr dlscascs that are incident to 

those that heat their blood by travel. On either 

Ameadow.in sidc of tlic rlvcr was also a meadow, 

which thpy lie 

downtosieep. curlouslv bciiutificd witli lilies: and, 
it was green all the year long. In this meadow 
they lay down and slept, for here they might 
lie down safely. Psa. 23 : 2 ; Isa. 14 : 30. AVhen 
thev awoke thev Q-athered auain of the fruit of 



B12 PILGRIM'S TROGRESS. 

the trees, and drank again of the Avater of the 
river, and then lay down again to sleep. Thus 
they did several days and nights. Then they 
sing, 

" Behold ye liow these crystal streams do ghdo, 
To comfort pilgrims by the high-way side. 
The meadows green, besides their fragrant smell, 
Yield dainties for them ; and he who can tell 
What pleasant fruit, yea, leaves these trees do yield, 
Will soon sell all, that he may buy this field." 

So when they were disposed to go on, (for 
they were not as yet at their journey's end,) 
they ate and drank, and departed. 

Now I beheld in my dream, that they had 
not journeyed far, but the river and the way 
for a time parted, at which they were not a 
little sorry ; yet they durst not go out of the 
way. Now the way from the river was rough, 
and their feet tender by reason of their trav- 
els; so the souls of the pilgrims were much 
discouraged because of the way. Num. 21 : 4. 
Wherefore, still as they went on they wished 
for a better way. Now, a little before them, 
there was on the left hand of the o?/^'"^ ""'''" 
road a meadow, and a stile to go over into it, 
and that meadow is called By-path meadow. 
Then said Christian to his fellow, "If this mead- 
ow lieth along by our way-side, let 's go over 



P.Y-r.\TH MKADOW. :^1H 

into It.'" TIkmi lie went Id tlic slil(> to sec. and 

Ik'IioM. a luitli lay aloiiu" l)y (he way on tlic 

(•lie tcmpta ollici' si(k' ol" tlic Icnco. "It is tic- 

lioii iiiaki-s way , 

lor aiiotiier. corcling to mv wisli,' said Christian ; 
iu>i'(> is the easiest going; come, good Hope- 
ful, and let us go over."' 

Hope. But how if this j)atli should lead us 
out of the way ? 

'That is not likely."" said Christian. "Look, 
doth it not go along by the way-side?"' So 
Hopeful, being persuaded by his fellow, went 

tiifnrnfay wi^l ^^^^''" ^^^"^ ^^'^1' ^^^^ ^^^^^^- ^^heU thcj 

onh'e T^y. ""^ were gone over, and were got into 
the path, they found it very easy for their 
feet; and withal, looking before them, they 
espied a man w^alking as they did, and his 
name was Vain-confidenco ; so they called after 
him, and asked him wdiither that way led. He 
said, "To the celestial gate."' "Look,"' said 
Christian, "did not I tell you'so? hj this you 
is'^o^ucideniy »^i\v scc wc are right." So they 
Itrlngers" ''"'^^ followcd, aud hc wcut bcforc them. 
But behold, the night came on. and it grew 
very dark; so that they that went behind lost 
the sight of him that went before. 

^He therefore that went before, (Vain-confi- 
dence by name.) not seeiipj.- the way before 

Pll I'r..i 1 .} 



314 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

him, fell into a deep pit, which was on purpose 
there made by the prince of those a pit to catch 

. . the vainglorious 

grounds, to catch vamglorious fools *«*• 
withal, and was dashed in pieces with his fall. 
Isa. 9:16. 

Now, Christian and his fellow heard him, 
fall. So they called to know the matter, but 
there was none to answer, only they heard a 
groaning. Then said Hopeful, "Where are 
we now ?" Then was his fellow silent, as mis- 
trusting that he had led him out of the way; 
and now it began to rain and thunder and 
lighten in a most dreadful manner, and the 
water rose amain. 

Then Hopeful groaned in himself, Reasoning 

tween Christ 

saying, ' ' Oh that I had kept on my ^^"^ Hopetui 
way!" 

Chr. Who could have thought that this 
path should have led us out of the way ? 

Hope. I was afraid on 't at the very first, 
and therefore gave you that gentle caution. I 
would have spoken plainer, but that you are 
older than I. 

Chr. Good brother, be not of- christians 

XI 1 ij repentance tor 

fended: 1 am sorry i have brought leading his 

■ •^ ~ brother out of 

thee out of the way, and that I have *^^ "^^^ 
put thee into such imminent danger. Pray, 



be- 
hristian 



THK l'IL(ii;iMS s.\n. 315 

my ])r()tliei', foi-pjive mo ; 1 <li(l not do it ol" uii 
evil intent. 

IIoPK. Be comforted, my brother, for I for- 
trive thee ; and believe, too, that this shall be 
for our good. 

Ciiu. I am glad I have with me a merciful 
brother: but we must not stand here; let us 
try to go back again. 

Hope. But, good brother, let me go be- 
fore. 

Chk. No, if you please, let me go first, that 
if there be any danger, I ma}' be first therein, 
because by my means we are both gone out of 
the way. 

"No,'' said Hopeful, "you shall not go first, 
for your mind being troubled may lead you out 
of the way again." Then for their encour- 
agement they heard the voice of one saying. 
**Let thy heart be toward the highway, even 
the way that thou wentest: turn again."' Jer. 
31:21. But b}' this time the waters were 
greatly risen, by reason of which the way of 
going back was very dangerous. Tlien I thought 
that it is easier going out of the way wlicn we 

in ^'laifglf ''^- ^^'^ ^^^' ^^^^^ &^i»o i'^ when we are out. 
they |o 'back. ^ Yet tlicv advcuturcd to go back: 
but it was so dark, and the fiood was so high, 



BIT) PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

that ill their going back they had like to have 
been drowned nine or ten times. 

Neither could the}^ with all the skill they 
had, get again to the stile that night. Where= 
fore at last, lighting under a little iheysiecpm 

the grounds of 

shelter, they sat down there till the «i=inti>espaii- 
day broke ; but being weary, they fell asleep. 
Now there was, not far from the place where 
they lay, a castle, called Doubting Castle, the 
owner whereof was Giant Despair, and it was 
in his grounds they now were sleeping : where- 
fore he, getting up in the morning early, and 
walking up and down in his fields, caught 
Christian and Hopeful asleep in his grounds. 
Then with a grim and surly voice he bid them 
awake, and asked them whence they were, and 
what they did in his grounds. They told him 
they were pilgrims, and that they had lost 
their way. Then said the giant, "You have 
this night trespassed on me by tram- ho finds them 

, . . 1 1 • 1 '" l"s grounds, 

phno; m and Ivmsi; on my ^'rounds, and carries them 

i '^ . o ^ o ' into Doubting 

and therefore you must go along with ^'''"^■ 
me." So they were forced to go, because he was 
stronger than they. The}^ also had but little 
to say, for the}" knew themselves in a fault. 
The giant therefore drove them before him, 
and put them into his castle, into a very dark 



CIA NT DKSl'A li;. -Ml 

dungeon, na^ty and stinkinu- to the spirits of 
The grievous- these two nuMi. Here, then, thev 

nessol' tlifir im- 

priaonment. jf^y f,.,,,,, AVcdue'Si hi v ni()rnin<i' till 
Saturday night, \vitli()ut one ])it of bread or 
droj) ol" drink, or light, or any to ask how they 
did: they were therefore here in evil ease, 
and were 'far from friends and aequaintanee. 
Psa. 88 : 18. Now in this place Christian had 
double sorrow, because it was through his un- 
advised counsel that they were brought into 
this distress. 

Now Giant Despair had a wife, and her 
name was Ditlidence: so when he was gone 
to bed he t(»ld his wife what he had done, to 
wit, thiit he had taken a couple of prisoners, 
and cast them into his dungeon for trespassing 
on his grounds. Then he asked her also what 
he had best do further to them. So she asked 
him what they were, whence they came, and 
whither they were bound, and he told her. 
Then she counselled him, that when he arose 
in the morning he should beat them without 
mercy. So when he arose, he getteth him a 
grievous crab-tree cudgel, and goes down into 
the dungeon to them, and there first falls to 
rating of them as if they were dogs, although 
they gave him never a word of distaste. Then 



318 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

lie falls upon them, and beats them fearfull}^, 
in such sort that they were not able Gi^nt^DJ'pai^ 
to help themselves, or to turn them Si ''^"^'" 
upon the floor. This done, he withdraws and 
leaves them there to condole their miser}', and 
to mourn under their distress: so all that day 
they spent their time in nothing but sighs and 
bitter lamentations. The next night, she, talk- 
ing with her husband further about them, and 
understanding that they were yet alive, did 
advise him to counsel them to make away with 
themselves. So when morning was come, he 
goes to them in a surly manner, as before, and 
perceiving them to bo very sore with the stripes 
that he had given them the day before, he told 
them, that since they were never like Gian?"Despa^ir 
to come out of that place, their only kuiThem^e^vls" 
way would be forthwith to make an end of 
themselves, either with knife, halter, or poison ; 
"for why," said he, "should you choose to live, 
seeing it is attended with so ifiuch bitterness?" 
But they desired him to let them go. With 
that he looked ugly upon them, and rushing 
to them, had doubtless made an end of them 
himself, but that he fell into one of his fits, (for 
he sometimes in sunshiny weather ume^Sts™''" 
fell into fits,) and lost for a time the use of 



DISCOURSE IN THE DUNGEON. 319 

his hands; whcroibre he withdrew, and left 
them as before to consider what to do. Then 
did the prisoners consult between themselves 
whether it was best to take his counsel or no; 
and thus they began to discourse. 

"Brother," said Christian, "what shall we 
do ? The life that we now live is miserable. 
For my part, I know not whether it is best to 
crusheS.''"'"'" live thus, or to die out of hand. My 
soul chooseth strangling rather than life, and 
the grave is more easy for me than this dun- 
geon. Job 7 : 15. Shall we be ruled by the 
giant ?" 

Hope. Indeed our present condition is dread- 
ful, and death would be far more welcome to 
me than thus for ever to abide ; but yet let us 
consider, the Lord of the country to which we 
are going hath said, "Thou shalt do no mur- 
der," no, not to another man's person; much 
more, then, are we forbidden to take his coun- 
sel to kill oursielves. Besides, he that kills 
another, can but commit murder upon his body ; 
but for one to kill himself, is to kill body and 
soul at once. And moreover, my brother, 
thou talkest of ease in the grave; but hast 
lomTm.''"™ thou forgotten the hell whither for 
certain the murderers pro? for "no murderer 



320 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

liath eternal life," etc. And let us consider, 
again, that all the law is not in the hand of 
Giant Despair ; others, so far as I can under- 
stand, have been taken by him as well as we, 
and vet have escaped out of his hands. Who 
knows but that God who made the world, may 
cause tha,t Giant Despair may die ; or that, at 
some time or other, he may forget to lock us 
in ; or that he may in a short time have another 
of his fits before us, and may lose the use of 
his limbs ? And if ever that should come to 
pass again, for my part, I am resolved to pluck 
up the heart of a man, and to try my utmost 
to get from under his hand, I was a fool that 
I did not try to do it before. But, however, 
my brother, let us be patient, and endure a 
while: the time may come that may give us a 
happy release ; but let us not be our own mur- 
derers. 

With these words Hopeful at. present did 
moderate the mind of his brother; so they 
continued together in the dark that day, in 
their sad and doleful condition. 

Well, towards evening the giant goes down 
into the dungeon again, to see if his prisoners 
had taken his counsel. But when he came 
there he found them alive; and truly, alive 



IIOPEFIL COMFOHTri CHIUSTIAX. 'V2\ 

was all: I'or now. what for want of bread and 
water, and by loasoii of the wounds they re- 
ceived when he l)eat them. th(\v eonld do little 
but breathe. J>ut I say he loiind them alive; 
at which he fell into a grievous rage, and told 
them, that seeing they had disobeyed his coun- 
sel, it should be worse with them than if they 
had never been born. 

At this they trembled greatly, and I think 
that Christian fell into a swoon; Init coming a 
little to himself again, they renewed their dis- 
course about the giant's counsel, and whether 
yet they had best take it or no. Now Chris- 
tian again seemed lor doing it; but Hopeful 
made his second re})ly as followeth : 

"M}' brother,"' said iropefui. •remendjer- 

Hopeiuicom cst tliou uot liow valiuut thou hast 

b7 caii?ig°^ibr" been heretofore ? Ai)ollyon could 



remembrance. ^^^ ^j.^^g]^ ^|^pp^ ,j,^,. (_,,,^1,| .^|| ^hat 

thou didst hear, or sec, or feel, in the valle}' 
of the Shadow^ of Death. What hardship, ter- 
ror, and amazement hast thou already gone 
through: and art thou now nothing but fears? 
Thou seest that I am in the diuigeon with thee, 
a far weaker man by nature than thou art. 
Also this giant hath wounded me as well as 
thee, and hath also cut oft" the bread and water 



322 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

from my mouth, and with thee I mourn without 
the light. But let us exercise a little more 
patience. Remember how thou playedst the 
man at Vanity Fair, and was neither afraid of 
the chain nor cage, nor yet of bloody death: 
wherefore let us (at least to avoid the shame 
that it becomes not a Christian to be found in) 
bear up with patience as well as we can." 

Now night being come again, and the giant 
and his wife being in bed, she asked him con- 
cerning the prisoners, and if they had taken 
his counsel: to which he replied, "They are 
sturdy rogues ; they choose rather to bear all 
hardships than to make away with themselves." 
Then said she, "Take them into the castle-yard 
to-morrow, and show them the bones and skulls 
of those that thou hast already dispatched, and 
make them believe, ere a week comes to an 
end, thou wilt tear them in pieces, as thou hast 
done their fellows before them." 

So when the morning was come, the giant 
goes to them again, and takes them into the 
castle-yard, and shows them as his wife had 
bidden him, ' ' These, " said he, ' ' were on Saturday 

. . the giant tlireat- 

pilgrims, as you are, once, and they ened that «hort 

■^ ^ ' "^ ' ' ^ ly he would pull 

trespassed on my grounds, as you ^''''™ ''' p''"'"''- 
have done ; and when I thought fit I tore them 



Tin-: Ki:v of prom is k. 32a 

ill pieces; and so within li'ii (lavs I Mill do yon: 
get yon down lo yoni- den auain. ' And with 
that he beat them all the way thither. They 
ky therefore all day on Saturday in a lament- 
able case, as before. Xow when night was 
eome, and when Mrs. Diffidence and her hus- 
l)and the giant were got to bed, they began to 
renew their discourse of their prisoners ; and 
withal, the old giant w^ondered that he could 
neither by his blow^s nor counsel bring them to 
an end. And with that his wife replied, "I 
fear," said she, "that they live in hopes that 
some will come to relieve them; or that they 
have picklocks about them, by the means of 
which they hope to escape." "And sayest thou 
so, my dear?" said "the giant; "I will there- 
fore search them in the morning." 

Well, on Saturday, about midnight, they 
began to pray, and continued in prayer till 
almost break of day. 

Now, a little before it was day, good Chris- 
tian, as one half amazed, broke out into this 
passionate speech: "What a fool," quoth he, 
Akeyinchris " am I, thus to Hc In a stinking dun- 

tian's bosom, 

?Sns i;7tTk geon, when I may as well walk at 
Castle. "'' '"^ liberty! I have a key in my bosom, 
called Promise, that will, T am persuaded, open 



324 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

any lock in Doubting Castle." Then said Hope- 
ful, "That is good news; good brother, pluck 
it out of thy bosom, and try.'' 

Then Christian pulled it out of his bosom, 
and began to try at the dungeon-door, whose 
bolt, as he turned the key, gave back, and the 
door flew open with ease, and Christian and 
Hopeful both came out. Then he went to the 
outward door that leads into the castle-yard, 
and with his key opened that door also. After 
tliat he Avent to the iron gate, for that must be 
opened too; but that lock went desperately 
hard, yet the key did open it. Then they 
thrust open the gate to make their escape with 
speed ; but that gate, as it opened, made such 
a creaking that it waked Giant Despair, who 
hastily rising to pursue his prisoners, felt his 
limbs to fail, for his fits took him again, so that 
he could by no means go after them. Then 
they went on, and came to the King's highway, 
and so were safe, because they were out of his 
jurisdiction. 

Now, when they were gone over the stile, 
they began to contrive with themselves what 
they should do at that stile to prevent those 
that shall come after from falling into the hands 
of Giant Despair. So they consented to erect 



Till-: WAUNINC riLI.AIt. 325 

there a itillar. and lo eiiu'rave \\\nm llic side 
Apiiiarcrect- thei'eof lliis seiiteiicc: ■"Over this 

id ^y Christian n A^ 

and his fellow. ^\^[[^. [^ {\^q -^-j|y (y Uoilhtlllg taStlC, 

whieh is kept by Giant Despair, Avho despisctli 
the King of tlie celestial country, and seeks to 
destroy his holy pilgrims." Many therefore 
that followed after, read what was written, and 
escaped the danger. This done, they sang as 
follows : 

"Out of the way we went, and then we found 
What 'twas to tread upon forbidden ground ; 
And let them that come after have a care, 
Lest heedlessness makes them as we to fare ; 
Lest they, for trespassing, his prisoners are. 
Whose castle 's Doubtiujr, and whoso name "s Despair." 



326 PILGRIM'S PnOGRESS. 



THE EIGHTH STAGE. 

They went then till they came to the Delec- 
table mountains, which mountains bie^mountains''" 
belong to the Lord of that hill of which we 
have spoken before. So they Avent up to the 
mountains to behold the gardens and orchards, 

the vineyards and fountains of water ; They are re- 
freshed in the 
where also they drank and washed mountains. 

themselves, and did freely eat of the vineyards. 
Now, there were on the tops of these moun- 
tains shepherds feeding their flocks, and they 
stood by the highway-side. The pilgrims there- 
fore went to them, and leaning upon their 
staffs, (as is common with weary pilgrims when 
they stand to talk with any by the shlpherdf *''" 
way,) they asked, "Whose Delectable moun- 
tains are these ; and whose be the sheep that 
feed upon them ?" 

Shep, These mountains are Emmanuel's 
land, and they are within sight of his city ; and 
the sheep also are his, and he laid down his 
Jife for them. John 10:11, 15. 

Chr. Is this the way to the celestial city ? 

Shep. You are just in your way. 

Chr. How far is it thither ? 



THE DELKCTABLE MOUNTAINS. 327 

SiiEP. Too fur lor any but those who shall 
get thither indeed. 

CiiR. Is the way safe, or dangerous ? 

SiiEP. Safe for those for whom it is to be 
safe, but transgressors shall fall therein. IIos. 
14 :9. 

CiiR. Is tliere in tliis place any relief for 
pilgrims that are weary and faint in the way ? 

Shep. The Lord of these mountains hath 
given us a charge not to be forgetful to enter- 
tain strangers, Heb. 13:2; therefore the good 
of the place is before 3'ou. 

I sa^v also in my dream, that when the shep- 
herds perceived that they were wayfaring men, 
they also put questions to them, (to which they 
made answer as in other places,) as, "AVhence 
came you ?" and, "How got you into the way?" 
and, " By what means have you so persevered 
therein? for but few of them that begin to come 
hither, -do show^ their face on these mountains." 
But when the shepherds heard their answers, 
wdcome'ttm.' bcittg plcascd therewith, they looked' 
very lovingly upon them, and said, "Welcome 
to the Delectable mountains." 

The shepherds, I say, whose names were 
thJ'heprrr' Knowledge, Experience, Watchful, 
and Sincere, took them by the hand, and had 



328 riLGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

them to their tents, and made them partake of 
that which was ready at present. They said, 
moreover, "We would that you should stay 
here a while, to be acquainted with us, and 
yet more to solace yourselves with the good of 
these Delectable mountains." Then they told 
them that they were content to stay. So they 
went to their rest that night, because it was 
very late. 

Then I saw in my dream, that in the morn- 
ing the shepherds called up Christian and Hope- 
ful to walk with them upon the mountains. So 
they went forth with them, and walked a while, 
having a pleasant prospect on every side. Then 
said the shepherds one to another, "Shall we 
show these pilgrims some wonders?" wonders. '''°'^'' 
So when they had concluded to do it, they had 
them first to the top of a hill called o7Err"r°""'''" 
Error, which was very steep on the farthest 
side, and bid them look down to the bottom. 
So Christian and Hopeful looked doAvn, and 
' saw at the bottom several men dashed all to 
pieces by a fall that they had from the top. 
Then said Christian, "What meaneth this?" 
The shepherds answered, "Have you not heard 
of them that were made to err, by hearkening 
to Hymeneus and Philetus, as concerning the 



MOUNT CAUTION'. :'.29 

faitli of tlie ivsuriTction of llie luxly?" 2 Tim. 
2:17.18. Tliey answered, "Yes." Then said 
the sliepherds. "Those that you see lie dashed 
in i)ieces at the bottom of this mountain are 
tliey : and they have continued to this day un- 
buried, as you see, for an example to others to 
take heed how they clamber too high, or how 
they come too near the brink of this mountain.' 

Then I saw that they had them to the to}) 
Mountcaution. of auothcr mouutaiu. and the name 
of that is Caution, and bid them look afar off; 
Avhich when they did, they perceived, as they 
thouo-lit. several men walking- up and down 
among the tombs that were there ; and they per- 
ceived that the men were blind, because they 
stuml)led sometimes upoii the tombs, and be- 
cause they could not get out from among them. 
Then said Christian,. "What means this?" 

The shepherds then answered, "Did you 
not see, a little below these mountains, a stile 
that led into a meadow, on the "left hand of 
this way?' They answered, "Yes." Tlien 
said the shepherds, "From that stile there goes 
a path that leads directly to Doubting Castle, 
which is kept by Giant Despair; and these 
men," pointing to them among the tombs, "came 
once on pilgrimage, as you do now. even until 



330 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

they came to that same stile. And because 
the right way was rough in that place, they 
chose to go out of it into that meadow, and 
there were taken by Griant Despair, and cast 
into Doubting Castle; where, after they had 
a while been kept in the dungeon, he at last 
did put out their e3^es, and led them among 
those tombs, where he has left them to wander 
to this very day, that the saying of the wise 
man might be fulfilled: 'He that wandereth 
out of the way of understanding shall remain 
in the congregation of the dead.' " Proverbs 
21:16. Then Christian and Hopeful looked 
upon one another with tears gushing out, but 
yet said nothing to the shepherds. 

Then I saw in my dream, that the shepherds 
had them to another place in a bottom, where 
was a door on the side of a hill; and they 
opened the door, and bid them look in. They 
looked in, therefore, and saw that within it 
was very dark and smoky ; they also thought 
that they heard there a rumbling noise, as of 
fire, and a cry of some tormented, and that 
they smelt the scent of brimstone. Then said 
Christian, "What means this ?" The shepherds 
told them, "This is a by-way to hell, heu.^^'"''^ *° 
a way that hypocrites go in at ; namely, such 



THE rHRSPHCTIVE-CILASS. 331 

as si'll tlit'ir l)ii-tlii'i,i;lit, with Esiui ; such as sell 
thoii- Master, with Judas; such as blasi)henie 
the gospel, with Alexander; and that lie and 
dissemble, with Ananias and Sa})i)hira his wife."' 

Then said Hopeful to the shepherds, "I 
perceive that these had on them, even every 
one, a show of pilgrimage, as we have now; 
had they not?" 

Shep. Yes, and held it a long time too. 

Hope. How far might they go on in pil- 
grimage in their day, since they, notwithstand- 
ing, were miserably cast away ? 

Shep. Some farther, and some not so far 
as these mountains. 

Then said the pilgrims one to the other, 
"We had need cry to the Strong for strength." 

Shep. Aye, and you will have need to use 
it, when you have it, too. 

By this time the pilgrims had a desire to 
go forward, and the shepherds a desire they 
should; so they walked together towards the 
end of the mountains. Then said the shep-- 
herds one to another, "Let us here show the 
pilgrims the gates of the celestial city, if they 
The perspec havc slvlll to loolv through our i)er- 

tiviplassof the ,, rrn -i • 1 

shepherds spective-glass. Ihe pilgrims lov- 
ingly accepted the motion : so they had them 



332 PILGRIM'S PKOGRESS. 

to the top of a high hill called Clear, and gave 
them the glass to look. 

Then they tried to look; but the remem- 
brance of that last thing that the shepherds 
had shown them made their hands se^lfe itear^ °^ 
shake, by means of which impediment they 
could not look steadily through the glass ; yet 
they thought they saw something like the gate, 
and also some of the glory of the place. Then 
they went away, and sang, 

" Thus by the shepherds secrets are revealed, 
Which from all other men are kept concealed: 
Come to the shepherds then, if you would see 
Things deep, things hid, and that mysterious be." 

When they were about to depart, one of 
the shepherds gave them a note of cautitn*''"'^°^'^ 
the way. Another of them bid them beware 
of the Flatterer. The third bid them take 
heed that they slept not upon the Enchanted 
Ground. And the fourth bid them God speed. 
So I awoke from my dream. 



HJ NORA NCR MHT. 333 



THE NINTH STAGE. 

And I slept, and (Iroaincd again, and saw 
<he same two pilgrims going down the moun- 
tains along the highway towards the eity. Now, 
of ' ■o'i>ceit'"ou^t '^ ^'^^^^' below these mountains, on 

of which came . i i iv i i i • ^ i ^ i i <■ 

Ignorance. the lelt iiaud. lictli tlic couutry ol 
Conceit, from which country there conies into 
the way in which the ])ilgrims walked, a little 
crooked lane. Here therefore they met with 
a very brisk lad that came out of that countr}', 
Christian and aud his uamc was Ignorance. So 

Ignorance have 

some talk. Christian asked him from what pai'ts 
he came, and whither he was going. 

Ignorance. Sir, I was born in the country 
that lieth off there, a little on the left hand, 
and I am going to the celestial city. 

CiiR. But how do you think to get in at 
the gate? for you may lind some difficulty 
there. 

"As other good people do." said Ignorance. 

CiiR. But what have you to show at that 
gate, that the gate should be opened to you ? 

The grounds I(JNOR. I kuOW UIV Lord's wlll. 

ot Ignorances 

^°^ and have Ijeen a good livei : I pay 



every man his own: F pray, fast, pay tithes. 



334 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

and give alms, and have left my country for 
. whither I am going. 

Chr. But thou camest not in at the wick- 
et-gate that is at the head of this way ; thou 
camest in hither through that same crooked 
lane, and therefore I fear, however thou may- 
est think of thyself, when the reckoning-day 
shall come, thou wilt have laid to thy charge, 
that thou art a thief and a robber, instead of 
getting admittance into the city. 

Ign OR. Gentlemen, ye be utter strangers 
to me; I know you not: be content He teiieth 

every one he is 

to follow the religion of your coun- butafooi. 
try, and I will follow the religion of mine. I 
hope all will be well. And as for the gate that 
you talk of, all the world knows that it is a 
great way off of our country. I cannot think 
that any man in all our parts doth so much as 
know the way to it; nor need they matter 
whether they do or no, since we have, as you 
see, a fine, pleasant, green lane, that comes 
down from our country, the next way into the 
way. 

When Christian saw that the man was wise 
in his own conceit, he said to Hopeful whisper- 
ingly, "There is more hope of a fool than of 
him." Prov. 26 : 12. And said, moreover. 



T r U \ - A W A Y -S D I-:ST Pv r I'T 1 X . 335 

" 'AVlic'ii lie lluit i.^a fool Avalkclli l)y tlio way, 
liis wisdom lailctli liiin, and lie saitli to every 
one that he is a fool." Ecel. 10:3. AVhat, sliall 
i.u.TfoCi'"'''"' we talk fnrtherwith him, or ontgo 
him at present, and s(^ leave him to think of 
what he hatfi heard already, and then sto]) 
again for him afterwards, and sec if by degrees 
we can do any good to him ?"' 
Then said Hopeful, 

"Let Ignorance a little while now muse 
On what is saiil, and let him not refuse 
Good counsel to embrace, lest he remain 
Still ignorant of what 's the chiefest gain. 
God saith, those that no imderstanding have, 
(Although he made them,) them he will not save." 

ITopeful further added, "It is not good. 
I think, to say so to him all at once ; let us 
pass him by, if you will, and talk to him anon, 
even as he is able to bear it." 

So they both went on, and Ignorance he 
came after. Now, when they had passed him 
a little way, they entered into a very dark 
lane, where they met a man whom seven devils 
had bound with seven strong cords, and were 
carrying him back to the door that they saw 
on the side of the hill. Matt. 12:45; Prov. 
5 : 22. Now good Christian began to tremble, 
and so did Hopeful his companion ; yet, as the 



336 PILGRI^r'S TROGRESS. 

devils led away the man, ^liristiau looked to 

see if he knew him ; and he thought it might 

be one Tnrn-away, that dwelt in the town of 

Apostasy. Bnt he did not perfectly see his 

face, for he did hang his head like a The destruc- 
tion otone Turn- 
thief that is fonnd ; but being gone -'^'^-^y- 

past, Hopeful looked after him, and espied on 
his back a paper with this inscription, "Wan- 
ton professor, and damnable apostate." 

Then said Christian to his fellow, "Now I 
call to remembrance that which was told me 
of a thing that happened to a good man here- 
about. The name of the man was eth ms'compan- 
Little-faith, but a good man, and he l^utilfalth' '' 
dwelt in the town of Sincere. The thing was this. 
At the entering in at this passage, there comes 
down from Broadway-gate a lane gate.^''"''''^"'"^" 
called Dead-man's lane ; so called lane^''"'^ "''''"'' 
because of the murders that are commonly done 
there; and this Little-faith going on pilgrim- 
age, as Ave do now, chanced to sit down there 
and sleep. Now there happened at that time 
to come down the lane from Broadwaj'-gate 
three sturdy rogues, and their names were 
Faint-heart, Mistrust, and Guilt, three broth- 
ers ; and they, espying Little-faith where he 
was. came galloping up with speed. Now the 



LITTLE-FAITH IIUUBED. 337 

good man was just awaked from liis sloop, 
and was getting u\) to go on his joui-ney. fc?o 
they came up all to him, and with threatening 
language bid him stand. At this Little-faith 
looked as white as a sheet, and had power 
bc.y'bf Famr neither to fight nor fly. Then said 
u.TguJu.'"'^'' Faint-heart, 'Deliver thy purse;' 
but he making no haste to do it, (for he was 
hKiver'*and l^ath to loso his uiouey,) Mistrust ran 
knMk hira ^^ ^^ him, aud thrusting his hand 
into his pocket, pulled out thence a bag of sil- 
ver. Then he cried out, 'Thieves, thieves!' 
With that. Guilt, with a great club that was 
in his hand, struck Little-faith on the head, 
and with that blow felled him flat to the ground, 
where he lay bleeding as one that would bleed 
to death. All this while the thieves stood 
by. But at last they, hearing that some were 
upon the road, and fearing lest it should be 
one Great-grace that dwells in the town of 
Good-confidence, they betook themselves to 
their heels, and left this good man to shift for 
himself. Now, after a while, Little-faith came 
to himself, and getting up, made shift to scram- 
ble on his way. This was the story." 

Hope. But did they take from him all (hat 
ever he had ? 

Pil Prog 15 



338 PILGRIM 8 PKOGltKSS. 

Chr. No ; the place where his jewels were 
they never ransacked; so those he uttipfaith 

lost not liis best 

kept still. But, as I was told, the """g« 
^ood man was much afflicted for his loss; for 
'the thieves got most of his spending-money. 
That which they got not, as I said, were jew- 
els; also, he had a little odd money left, but 
scarce enough to bring him to his journey's 
end. Nay, (if I was not misinform- forced'"t'o ^ beg 
ed,) he was forced to beg as he went, *^j]"^ J""™'^^ ^ 
to keep himself alive, for his jewels he might 
not sell; but beg and do what he could, he 
went, as we say, with many a hungry belly the 
most part of the rest of the way. 1 Pet. 4:18. 

Hope. But is it not a wonder they got not 
from him his certificate, by which he Avas to 
receive his admittance at the celestial gate ? 

Chr. It is a wonder ; but they got not that, 
though they missed it not through his^V^t'^thiS 

1 . p 1 • /• 1 by his own cun- 

any good cunning ot his; lor he, ning. 
being dismayed by their coming upon him, had 
neither power nor skill to hide any thing: so 
it was more by good providence than by his 
endeavor, that they missed of that good thing. 
2 Tim. 1:12-14; 2 Pet. 2:9. 

Hope. But it must needs be a comfort to 
him that thev not not this jewel from him. 



I'lTV Foli I.ITTI.K-KAITII. \VM 

CiiR. It midit have boon great comfori to 
him, had he used it as he shouUl ; but tliey that 
toUl me the story said that he made but littk' 
use of it all the rest of the way. and that be- 
cause of the dismay that lie had in their taking 
away his money. Indeed, he forgot it a great 
part of the rest of his journey; and besides, 
when at any time it came into his mind, and 
he began to be comforted therewith, then would 
fresh thoughts of his loss come again upon him. 
and these thoughts would swallow up all. 

Hope. Alas, poor man, this could not but 
by both' '"""'' ^0 a great grief to him. 

Chr. Grief? aye, a grief indeed! AVould 
it not have been so to any of us, had we been 
used as he— to be robbed and wounded too, and 
that in a strange place, as he was? It is a 
wonder he did not die with grief, poor heart. 
I was told that he scattered almost all the rest 
of the way with nothing but doleful and bitter 
complaints; telling also to all that overtook 
him. or that he overtook in the way as he 
went, where he was robbed, and how: who 
they were that did it. and what he had lost; 
how he was wounded, and that he hardly es- 
cai)ed with life. 

HoPK. But it is a wonder that his neeessitv 



340 rTLoniM'P PR ogress. 

did not put him upon selling or pawning some 
of his jewels, that he might have wherewith to 
relieve himself in his journey. 

Chr. Thou talkest like one upon whose 
head is the shell to this very day. pro?etif Ifis fet 
For what should he pawn them ? or ertVspe'kking'' 
to whom should he sell them ? In all that 
country where he was robbed, his jewels were 
not accounted of; nor did he want that relief 
which could from thence be administered to 
him. Besides, had his jewels been missing at 
the gate of the celestial city, he had (and that 
he knew well enough) been excluded from an 
inheritance there, and that would have been 
worse to him than the appearance and villany 
of ten thousand thieves. 

Hope. Why art thou so tart, ni}^ brother ? 
Esau sold his birthright, and that for a mess of 
pottage, Heb. 12 : IG; and that birthright was 
his greatest jewel : and if he, why might not 
Little-faith do so too? 

Chr. Esau did sell his birthright indeed, 
and so do many besides, and by so Discourse 

about Esau and 

doing exclude themselves from the Little laith. 
chief blessing, as also that caitiff did ; but you 
must put a difference between Esau and Little- 
faith, and also between their estates. Esau's 



LIT ri.K-KAITirS FAITH. 341 

birtliri<ihl was ty[»ical; but Liltk'-raith's jewels 
byTuTus;'"'''* were not so. Esau's belly was liis 
god ; but Little-faith's belly was not so. Esau's 
want lay in his fleshly api)etite ; Little-faith's 
did not so. Besides, Esau could see no further 
than to the fulfilling of his lusts: "Behold, I am 
at the point to die," said he, "and what profit 
shall this birthright do to me?'' Gen. 25:32. But 
Little-faith, though it was his lot to have but a 
little faith, was by his little faith kept from 
such extravagances, and made to see and prize 
his jewels more than to sell them, as Esau did 
his birthright. You read not anywhere that 

a little; therefore no marvel, where the flesh 
only bears sway, (as it will in that man where 
no faith is to resist,) if he sells his birthright, 
and his soul and all, and that to the devil of 
hell ; for it is with such as it is with the ass, 
who in her occasion cannot be turned away, 
Jer. 2 : 24 : when their minds are set upon their 
lusts, they w^ill have them, whatever they cost, 
couid^'ni't *"ihe I^"t Little-faith was of another tem- 
"w'ttoge. *^^^"' per; his mind was on things divine: 
his livelihood was upon things that were spir- 
itual, and from above: therefore to what end 
should he that is of such a temper sell his jew- 



342 riLGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

cls (had there been any that would have bought 
them) to fill his mind with empty things ? Will 
a man give a penny to till his belly with hay ; 
or can you persuade the turtledove betwe^cntS" 

, T • T1 xi o tlcdove and the 

to live upon carrion, like the crow r crow. 
Though faithless ones can, for carnal lusts, 
pawn, or mortgage, or sell what they have, 
and themselves outright to boot ; yet they that 
have faith, saving faith, though but a little of 
it, cannot do so. Here, therefore, my brother, 
is thy mistake. 

Hope. I acknowledge it ; but yet your se- 
vere reflection had almost made me angry. 

Chr. Why, I did but compare thee to some 
of the birds that are of the brisker sort, who 
will run to and fro in untrodden paths Avith 
the shell upon their heads : but pass by that, 
and consider the matter under debate, and all 
shall be well between thee and me. 

Hope. But, Christian, these three fellows, I 
am persuaded in my heart, are but a gers^.P''^"*"''''*^' 
company of cowards : would they have run else, 
think you, as they did, at the noise of one that 
was coining on the road? Why did not Little- 
faith pluck up a greater heart ? He might, me- 
thinks, have stood one brush with them, and 
have vielded when there had been no remedv, 



C 1 1 Tv I S T 1 A N • .< E X V K 11 1 K N ( K . :i4;i 

CiiR. That tliov arc cowards many have said, 
>-opreathcart j^j^jj fe^v havc foiiiul It so in the time of 

for Ciod whore 

u'Juiu.'""'' trial. As lor a great heart, Little-laith 
had none: and I j^ereeive by thee, my brother, 
liadst thon been the man concerned, thon art 
but for a brush, and then to yield. And verily, 

AVehavcmorc ^[^qq (his Is tllC liciullt of thv StonUlcll 
courage wlu-n ~ 

^heu'Ta.^r now they are at a distance from us, 
should they appear to thee as they did to him. 
they might i)ut thee to second thoughts. 

But consider, again, that they are bui jour- 
neymen thieves; they serve under the king of 
the bottomless pit. who. if need l^e. will come 
to their aid himself, and his voice is as the 
Christian tells roaring of a lion. 1 Pet. 5:8. I 

his own cxperi- *"" 

euce in this case, mysclf havc bccu cugaged as this 
Little-faith was, and I found it a terrible thing. 
These three villains set upon me, and I begin- 
ning like a Christian to resist, they gave but a 
call, and in came their master. I would, as 
the saying is, have given my life for a penny, 
but that, as God would have it, I was clothed 
with armor of proof. Aye. and yet, though I 
was so harnessed, I found it hard work to quit 
myself like a man: no man can tell what in 
that combat attends us. but he that hath been 
in the battle 'himself. 



344 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Hope. Well, but they ran, you see, when 
they did but suppose that one Great-grace was 
in the way. 

Chr. True, they have often fled, both they 
and their master, when Great-grace hath but 
appeared ; and no marvel, for he is champfon^*"^ * 
the King's champion. But I trow you will put 
some difference between Little-faith and the 
King's champion. All the King's subjects are 
not his champions; nor can they, when tried, 
do such feats of war as he. Is it meet to think 
that a little child should handle Goliath as 
David did ; or that there should be the strength 
of an ox in a wren? Some are strong, some are 
weak; some have great faith, some have little: 
this man was one of the weak, and therefore 
he went to the wall. 

Hope. I would it had been Great-grace, for 
their sakes. 

Chr. If it had been he, he might have 
had his hands full; for I must tell you, that 
though Great-grace is excellent good at his 
weapons, and has, and can, so long as he keeps 
them at sword's point, do well enough with 
them ; yet if they get within him, even Faint- 
heart, Mistrust, or the other, it shall go hard 
but they will throw up his heels. And 



L i; \ 1 A T 1 1 A N S f^ T H K N (J Til. 345 

Avhcii II man is clown, you know, wliat can he 
do? 

Whoso looks well upon (Treat-grace's face, 
will see those scars and cuts there that shall 
easily give demonstration of what I say. Yea, 
once I heard that he should say, (and that 
when he was in the combat,) AVe despaired 
even of life. How^ did these sturdy rogues 
and their fellows make David groan, mourn, 
and roar! Yea, Ileman, Psalm 88, and Ileze- 
kiah too, though champions in ^heir days, were 
forced to bestir them when by these assaulted ; 
and yet, notwithstanding, they had their coats 
soundly brushed by them. Peter, upon a time, 
would go try what he could do; but though 
some do say of him that he is the prince of the 
apostles, they handled him so that they made 
him at last afraid of a sorry girl. 

Besides, their king is at their whistle ; he 
is never out of hearing; and if at any time 
they be put to the worst, he, if possible, comes 
in to help them: and of him it is said, "The 
stunifnMs.'"*" ^ sword of him that layeth at him can- 
not hold ; the spear, the dart, nor the haber- 
geon. He esteemeth iron as straw, and brass 
as rotten wood. The arrow cannot make him 
fly; sling-stones are turned with him into stub- 
15* 



346 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

ble. Darts are counted as stubble ; he laugh- 
eth at the shaking of a spear." Job 41 : 2G-29. 
What can a man do in this case ? It is true, 
if a man could at every turn have Job's horse, 
and had skill and courage to ride him, he might 
do notable things. "For his neck is clothed 
with thunder. He will not be afraid xne excellent 

mettle that is in 

as a grasshopper: the glory of his Jobs horse. 
nostrils is terrible. He paweth in the valley, 
and rejoiceth in his strength ; he goeth on to 
meet the arme(J men. He mocketh at fear, 
and is not affrighted ; neither turneth he back 
from the sword. The quiver rattleth against 
him, the glittering spear and the shield. He 
swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage ; 
neither believeth he that it is the sound of the 
trmnpet. He saith among the trumpets, Ha, 
ha! and he smelleth the battle afar off, the 
thunder of the captains, and the shoutings." 
Job 39:19-25. 

But for such footmen as thee and I are, let 
us never desire to meet with an enemy, nor 
vaunt as if we could do better, when we hear 
of others that have been foiled, nor be tickled 
at the thoughts of our own manhood ; for such 
commonly come by the worst when tried. "Wit- 
ness Peter, of whom I made mention before; 



A lONVUV IHv^lKAHLK. 347 

hv would .swagger, aye, he would: ho would, as 
his vaiu mind prompted him to say, do better 
and stand more lor his Master than all men : 
but who so foiled and run down by those vil- 
lains as he ? 

When, therefore, we hear that sueh robber- 
ies arc done on the King's highway, two things 
become us to do: 

1. To go out harnessed, and to be sure to 
take a shield with us: for it was for want of 
that, that he who laid so lustily at Leviathan 
could not make him yield; for. indeed, if that 
be wanting, he fears us not at all. Therefore, 
he that had skill hath said, '"Above all, take 
the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able 
to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked." 
Eph. 6:10. 

2. It is good also, that we desire of the 
havcawnvoy" Klug a convoy, yoa, that he w.ll go 
with us himself. This made David rejoice 
when in the valley of the Shadow of Death : 
and Moses was rather for dying where he 
stood, than to go one step without his God. 
Exod. 33 : lo. Oh. my brother, if he will bit 
go along with us. what need we be afraid of 
ten thousands that shall set themselves against 
us ? Psa. 3 : 0-8 : 27 : 1-3. But without him. 



348 PILGRIM'S niOGRESS. 

the proud helpers fall under the slain. Isa. 
10:4. 

I, for my part, have been in the fray before 
now ; and though (through the goodness of Him 
that is best) I am, as you see, alive, yet I can- 
not boast of any manhood. Glad shall I be ii 
I meet with no more such brunts, though I fear 
we are not got beyond all danger. However, 
since the lion and the bear have not as yet 
devoured me, I hope God will also deliver us 
from the next uncircumcised Philistine. Then 
sang Christian, 

"Poor Little-faitli ! hast been among the thieves? 
Wast robbed ? Remember this, whoso beheves, 
And get more faith ; then shall you victors be 
Over ten thousand — else scarce over three." 

So they went on, and Ignorance followed. 
They went^hen till they came at a place where 
they saw a way put itself into their wi^y.'^''^ """^ " 
way, and seemed withal to lie as straight as 
the way which they should go ; and here they 
knew not which of the two to take, for both 
seemed straight before them; therefore here 
they stood still to consider. And as they were 
thinking about the way, behold, a man black of 
flesh, but covered with a very light robe, came 
to them, and asked them why they stood there. 
They answered the}" were going to the celes- 



THE FLATTER EirS NET. 349 

tiiil city, but know not wliicli of those ways to 
take. "Follow lue," said the man, "it is thither 
that I am goinir." So they followed him in the 
way that but now eame into the road, which by 
Christian and degrees turned, and turned them so 

liis It'llow de- 

ludcd. f.^i- fi.(j,^^ (lie ^.[^y that they desired 

to go to, that in a little time their faces were 
turned away from it; yet they followed him. 
But b}' and by, before the}' were aware, he led 
ila'nc't'*' *''^'"" them both within the compass of a 
net. in which they were both so entangled that 
they knew not what to do; and wit^i that the 
white robe fell olf the black man's ])ack. Then 
they saw where they were. Wherefore there 
they lay crying some time, for they could not 
get themselves out. 

Then said Christian to his fellow, '"Xow do 
ihIirc\)n!iiuo''n' T see myself in an error. Did not the 
shepherds bid ns beware of the Flatterer? As 
is the saying of the wise man, so we have found 
it this day: 'A man that llattereth liis neighbor 
spreadeth a net for his feet.' "' Prov. 29 : 5. 

Hope. They also gave us a note of direc- 
tions about the way, for our more sure finding 
thereof; but therein we have also forgotten to 
read, and have not kept ourselves from the 
paths of the destroyer. Here David was wiser 



350 PILGRIMS PROGRESS. 

than we; for saith he, "Concerning the works 
of men, by the Avord of thy lips I have kept 
me from the paths of the destroyer." Psa. 
17:4. Thus they lay bewailing themselves in 
the net. At last they espied a shin- eomS"to^them 
ing One coming towards them with his'hand""^ '" 
a whip of small cords in his hand. When he 
was come to the place where they were, he 
asked them whence they came, and what they 
did there. They told him that they were poor 
pilgrims going to Zion, but were led out of 
their way by a black man clothed in white, 
who bid us, said they, follow him, for he was 
going thither too. Then said he with the whip, 
"It is Flatterer, a false apostle, that hath trans- 
formed himself into an angel of light.'' Dan. 
11 : 32 ; 2 Cor. 11 : 13, 14. So he rent the net, 
and let the men out. Then said he to them, 
"Follow me, that I may set you in your way 
again." So he led them back to the way which 
they had left to follow the Flatterer. Then he 
asked them, saying, "Where did you JeVl^^d'^'c'on: 
lie the last night?" They said, "With fi^ner'^""^^'' 
the shepherds upon the Delectable mountains." 
He asked them then if they had not of the 
shepherds a note of direction for the way. 
Thev answered, "Yes." "But did you not," 



TllK I'lLClMMS CIIASTISKD. :{51 

said \n\ '•wlit'ii you were at a stand, j)luck out 
and read your note?" Tliey answered, 'Xo.'' 
He asked them, "Why?" They said they for- 
got. He asked, moreover, if the shepherds did 
not bid them beware of the Fhitterer. They 
sp'^k';'.'""'""' answered, "Yes; but we did not 
imagine," said they, "that this line-spoken man 
had been he.'' Rom. IG : 17, 18. 

Then I saw in my dream, that he command- 
They are whip- ed theui to He dowu ; whieh when 

pcd, and sent on 

their way. ^hcy did, he ehastised them sore, to 
teach them the good way wherein they should 
walk, Deut. 25 : 2 ; 2 Chr. G : 27 ; and as he 
chastised tliem, he said, "As many as I love, 
I rebuke and chasten; be zealous, therefore, 
and repent." Rev. 3 : 19. This done, he bids 
them go on their way, and take good heed to 
the other directions of the shepherds. So they 
thanked him for all his kindness, and went 
softly along the right way, singing, 

" Come hither, you that walk along the way. 
See how the pilgrims fare that go astray ; 
Tiiey catched are in an entangled net, 
'Cause they good counsel lightly did forget ; 
'T is true, they rescued were ; but yet, you see. 
They 're scourged to boot: let this your caution be." 

Xow, after a while they perceived afar o(f, 
one coming softly and alone all along the high- 



352 PILGRIM'S rilOGRESS. 

wa}^ to meet them. Then said Christian to his 
fellow, "Yonder is a man with his back tow- 
ards Zion, and he is coming to meet us." 

Hope. I see him; let us take heed to our- 
selves now, lest he should prove a Flatterer 
also. 

So he drew nearer and nearer, meets'thel^''"'* 
and at last came up to them. His name was 
Atheist, and he asked them whither they were 
going. 

"We are going to Mount Zion," said Chris- 
tian. 

Then Atheist fell into a very great them.'^^^^^ "* 
laughter. 

"What's the meaning of your laughter?" 
said Christian. 

Atheist. I laugh to see what ignorant per- 
sons you are, to take upon you so tedious a 
journey, and yet are like to have nothing but 
your travel for your pains. 

Chr. Why, man, do you think we tog^ethJr.''''''"' 
shall not be received ? 

Atheist. Eeceived ! there is not such a place 
as you dream of in all this world. 

"But there is in the world to come," said 
Christian. 

Atheist. When I was at home in my own 



ATHKISTS KECEPTIOX. 353 

coiinlrv I licard as you now afiinn. and from 
tluit hearing went out to see, and have been 
seeking this city these twenty years, but lind 
no more of it than I did the lirst day I set out. 
Eecl. 10:15; Jer. 17:15. 

Chu. AVe liave both heard and believe that 
there is such a place to be found. 

Atheist. Had not I when at home be- 
lieved, I had not come thus far to seek ; but 
finding none, (and yet I should, had there been 
such a place to be found, for I have gone to 
takcs^ up^'tfs s<?^'l^ it farther than you,) I am going 
worw"* '" *'" back again, and will seek to refresh 
myself with the things that I then cast away 
for hopes of that which I now see is not. 

Then said Christian to Hopeful his comi)an- 
cfil'h'^'broriaT' ion, " Is it true which this man hath 
said ?" 

Hope. Take heed, he is one of the Flatter- 
c "uSwer""" ers. Remember what it cost us once 
already for our hearkening to such kind of fel- 
lows. What, no Mount Zion ? Did we not see 
Jfrom the Delectable mountains the gate of the 

Romcn-.brance Clty ? AlsO, arC WC UOt UOW tO Walk 
of forinir chas /••xion/^ r >~ Ti 

tiscment a help bv faith ? 2 ( or. 5 : / . Let us go on, 

against present " '- 

temptation. ]^,g|. ^^^^ j^jj^,^ ^^.j(]j ^j^^, ^^.|jjp ^^^.p,., 

take us again. You should have taught me 



354 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

that lesson, which I will sound you in the ears 
withal: "Cease, my son, to hear the instruction 
that causeth to err from the words of know- 
ledge." Prov. 19:27. I say, my brother, 
cease to hear him, and let us believe to the 
saving of the soul. 

Chr. My brother, I did not put the ques- 
tion to thee for that I doubted of the houesrheurl'."' 
truth of our belief myself, but to prove thee, 
and to fetch from thee a fruit of the honesty of 
thy heart. As for this man, I know that he is 
blinded by the god of this world. Let thee 
and me go on, knowing that we have belief of 
the truth ; and no lie is of the truth. 1 John 
2 : 21. 

Hope. Now do I rejoice in hope of the 
glory of God. 

So they turned away from the man; and 
he, laughing at them, went his way. 

I then saw in my dream, that they went on 
until they came into a certain coun- They come ta 

^ the Enchanted 

try whose air naturally tended to Ground. 
make one drowsy, if he came a stranger into 
it. And here Hopeful began to be tobrirowsf " 
very dull, and heavy to sleep: wherefore he 
said unto Christian, "I do now begin to grow 
so drowsy that I can scarcely hold open mine 



THE ENCIIAXTKl) GROUND. 355 

eyes; let us lie down here, and take one 
na})." 

"By no means," said Christian ; "lest, sleep- 
wm awak^.'''"''' ini?- ^vc nevei" awake more." 

HoPK. AVhy. my hrother. sleep is sweet to 
the laboring man ; we may be relVeshcd, if we 
take a naj). 

Chk. Do you not I'emember that one of the 
shepherds bid us beware of the Enchanted 
Ground? He meant by that, that we should 
beware of sleeping: wherefore "let us not sleep, 
as do others: but let us wateh and be sober.'' 
1 Thess. 5 : G. 

Hope. I acknowledge myself in a fault : and 
lie is thankful, had I been here alone 1 liad by 
sleeping run the danger of death. 1 .^ee it is 
true that the wise man saith, "Two are better 
than one."' Eccl. 4 : 9. Hitherto hath thy com- 
pany been my mercy: and thou shalt have a 
good reward for thy labor. 

"Now, then,'' said ( hristian. 'to prevent 
Good dis drow^siness in this place, let us fall 

course prevent- 

eth drowsiness, juto good dlscourse." 

" With all my heart." said Hopeful. 

Chr. Where shall we begin ? 

Hope. Where God began with us. But do 

you begin, if you please. 



356 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. I will sing you first this song : 

" When saints do sleepy grow, let them come hither, 
And hear how these two pilgrims talk together ; 
Yea, let them learn of them in any wise. 
Thus to keep ope their drowsy, slumbering eyea. 
Saints' fellowship, if it be managed well, 
Keeps them awake, and that in spite of hell." 

Then Christian began, and said, tJj^^|>^f^"„ff 
"I will ask 3^011 a question. How sion'' 
came you to think at first of doing what you 
do now ?" 

Hope. Do you mean, how I came at first to 
look after the good of my soul ? 

Chr. Yes, that is my meaning. 

PIoPE. I continued a great while in the de- 
light of those things which were seen and sold 
at our fair ; things which I believe now would 
have, had I continued in them still, drowned 
me in perdition and destruction. 

Chr. What things were they ? 

Hope. All the treasures and riches of the 
world. Also I delighted much in Hopefuls nre 

before conver- 

rioting, revelling, drinking, swearing, ^'"n- 
lying, uncleanness. Sabbath-breaking, and what 
not, that tended to destroy the soul. But I 
found at last, by hearing and considering of 
things that are divine, which, indeed, I heard 
of YOU, as also of beloved Faithful that was 



lioi'r.Kii.s coNVKiisKix. ;;:,7 

put to (li'atli for liis faith and _o-oo<l livinu- in 
Vanity Fair, that the end of tlioso thinus is 
death, Rom. G : 21-23 ; and that for these things' 
sake, the wrath of God cometh upon the ehil- 
dren of disobedience. Eph. 5 : G. 

Chr. And did you presently fall under the 
power of this conviction ? 

Hope. No, I was not willing presently to 
firs""^u'tl his l^i^<^^^' the evil of sin, nor the damna- 

eyc,^again=,t the ^j^^^^ ^|^^^^ foUoWS UpOU thc COmiuis- 

sion of it: but endeavored, when my mind at 
first began to be shaken with the word, to shut 
mine eyes against the light thereof. 

Cur. But what was the cause of your carry- 
ing of it thus to the first workings of God's 
blessed Spirit upon you? 

Hope. The causes were, first, I was igno- 
rant that this was the work of God u[)Ou me. 
Reasons for I ucvcr thouglit tluit bv awakcuings 

resisting tlie '^ ' 

light. fQp gjij^ Q-Q(] r^i fiY^i begins thc con- 

version of a sinner. Second, sin was yet very 
sweet to my flesh, and I was loath to leave it. 
Third, I could not tell how to part with my 
old companions, their presence and actions 
were so desirable unto me. Fourth, the hours 
in wliich convictions were upon me. were such 
troublesome and such heart-affrijih tinge hours, 



358 PTLORTM'S J'ROCIM'PR. 

that I could not bear, no, not so much as the 
remembrance of them upon my heart. 

Chr. Then, as it seems, s.ometimes you got 
rid of your trouble ? 

Hope. Yes, verily, but it would come into 
my mind again ; and then I should be as bad, 
nay, worse than T was before. 

Chr. Why, what was it that brought your 
sins to mind again ? 

Hope. Many things: as, 

1. If I did but meet a good man ,J,^,Z\\lin, 
in the street; or, Siu.'^'^"-""'" 

2. If I have heard any read in the Bible; 
or, 

3. If my head did begin to ache; or, 

4. If I were told that some of my neighbors 
were sick : or, 

5: If I heard the bell toll for some that 
were dead ; or, 

G. If I thought of dying myself; or, 

7. If I heard that sudden death happened 
to others. 

8. But especially when I thought of myself, 
that I must quickly come to judgment. 

Chr. And could you at any time, Avith 
ease, get off the guilt of sin, when by any of 
these ways it came upon you ? 



1101' !• Vl\.'< ( • N \- F. P. .^ I o ^ . : J51» 

Hope. No. not I; for (Ijcn tlicv oot faster 
liokl of my conscience; and llien. if I did but 
tliink of going back to sin. (tli(nigli my mind 
was turned against it.) it would be double toi- 
inent to me. 

Chpv. And how did you do then ? 
^vhcn he could HoPE. I tliouulit I luust cndcavor 

no longer shake *-- 

Mnfuf ^-oul^sK to mend my life; or else, thought I. 

Ihi'ii lie ciideav- _ i i i 

oritomend. 1 am surc to be damned. 

Chk. And did you endeavor to mend ? - 
Hope. Yes, and fled from, not only my 

sins, but sinful comjjany too. and betook me to 

religious duties, as i)raying. reading, weeping 

for sin. speaking truth to my neighbors, etc. 

These things did T. with many othei's. too much 

here to relate. 

Chr. AikI did you think yourself well 

then? 
ThcnHoppfiii Hope. Yes, for a while; but at 

thought himself 

^^•^" the last my trouble came tund)ling 

upon mc again, and that over the neck of all 
my reformations. 

Chr. How came that about, since you were 
now reformed ? 
Keformation HopE. Tlicrc wcrc scvcral thing? 

at last could not 

heip.andwhy. brought it upou lue, especially such 
sayings as these: "AH our i-ighteousnesses 



360 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

are as filthy rags.'' Isa. 64:6. "By the 
works of the law shall no flesh be justified." 
Gal. 2:16. "When ye have done all these 
things, say, We are unprofitable," Luke 17:10; 
with many more such like. From whence I 
began to reason with myself thus: If all my 
righteousnesses are as filthy rags; if by the 
deeds of the law no man can be justified ; and 
if, when we have done all, we are yet unprof- 
itnble, then is it but a folly to think of heaven 
.by the law. I further thought thus: If a man 
runs a hundred pounds into the shop- J-^^^ ^^o"^tl.e 
keeper's debt, and after that shall him. '"""'' 
pay for all that he shall fetch, yet if his old 
debt stand still in the book uncrossed, the 
shopkeeper may sue him for it, and cast him 
into prison, till he shall pay the debt. 

CiiR. Well, and how did you apply^this to 
yourself ? 

Hope. Why, I thought thus with myself: I 
have by my sins run a great way into God's 
book, and my now reforming will not pay off 
that score; therefore I should think still, un- 
der all my present amendments. But how shall 
I be freed from that damnation that I brought 
myself in danger of by my former transgres- 
sions ? 



] I U 1' !•: F U I / r^ ( " U X V K 1! .- 1 1 ) N . ;u; 1 

VuH. A V(M-v o-()()(| application: l)iil pi'uy 
go on. 

Hope. Another thing fbat hath troubled 
bad'^thinTs'm "^^ ^^'^^' ^^^^^^^ '"}' ^'^^^e amendments 

his bist duties • ,i , •!• t 1 i i • i ji 

troubled him. IS, tliat il I looK naiTOwlv into tlie 
best of what I do now, I still see sin, new sin 
mixing itself with the best of. that I do : so that 
now I am foreed to conclude, that notwith- 
standing my former fond conceits of myself 
and duties, I have committed sin enough in 
one day to send me to hell, though my former 
life had l)een faultless. 

CiiK. And what did you do then? 

Hope. Do? I could not tell what to do. until 
I broke my mind to Faithful : for he and I 
This made him wcrc wcU ac(iuainted.. And he told 
to'Faithfui,who me, that unless I could obtain the 

told him the ' 

waytobesavcd. i-jghtcousness of a uiau that never 
had sinned, neither mine own, nor all the 
righteousness of the world, could save me. 

Chr. And did you think he spoke true ? 

Hope. Had he told me so when I was 
j)leased and satisfied with my own amend- 
ments, I had called him fool for his pains; 
but now, since I see my own infirmity, and 
the sin which cleaves to my best perforuuince; 
I have been forced to be of his opinion. 

r.K Pr... 16 



862 riLcnncs PRornjEHP. 

Chr. But did you tliiuk, wlieu at lirst no 
suggested it to you, that there v\^as sueh a man 
to l)e found, ot whom it mi^ht justly be said, 
that he never committed sin ? 

Hope. I must confess the words at first 
sounded strangely; but after a little more talk 
and company with him, I had full conviction 
about it. 

Chr. And did you ask him what man this 
was, and how you must be justified by him? 

Hope. Yes, and he told me it was the Lord 
Jesus, that dwelleth on the right hand of the 
Most High. Heb. 10: 12-21. ''AudJ^;^^ 
thus,'"' said he, "yon must be justi- be slved'''''^ 
fied by him, even by trusting to what he hath 
done by himself in the days of his flesh, and 
suffered when he did hang on the tree." Rom. 
4:5; Col. 1 :14; 1 Pet. 1 :19. I asked him 
further, how that man's righteousness could be 
of that efficacy, to justify anotlier before God- 
And he told me he was the mighty God, and 
did what he did, and died the death also, not 
for himself, Imt for me ; to whom his doings, 
and the worthiness of them, should be imputed, 
if I believed on him. 

Chr. And what did you do then? 

Hope. I made my objections against my 



bi'lirviuLi'. lor thai I lliouLilit lie was not williujj; 

lie doubts of A . v;.,v(» mo 
acceptation in >a \ « im . 

Chr. And what said Faithl'iil to you then? 

HoPi-:. IIo l)id nie uo to him and seo. Then 
1 said it was prosiiiui)tion. Jlc said, " No; for 
nJI-ucle.^""" I ^vas invited to come." .Afatt. 1 1 : 2S. 
Then he gave me a book of Jesus" inditing, to 
encourage me tlie more freely to come ; and he 
said concerning that Ijook, that every jot and 
tittle thereof stood firmer than heaven and 
earth. Matt. 24 : 35. Then I asked him what 
I must do when I came ; and he told me I nmst 
entreat upon my knees, Psa. 95 :G, Dan. G:10, 
with all my heart and soul, Jer. 29:12, 13, 
the Father to reveal him to me. Then I asked 
him further, how^ I must make my sup})lica- 
tions to him; and he said, "Go, and thou shalt 
find him upon a mercy-scat, wdiere he sits all 
the year long to give pardon and forgiveness 
to them that come." Exod. 25 : 22 ; Lev. IG : 2 ; 
Num. 7:89; Pleb. 4:1G. I told him that I 
knew not what to say when I came; and he 
p,''; '^ •^"' '" bid me say to this effect: "God be 
merciful to me a sinner, and make me to kncAv 
and believe in Jesus Christ; for I sec that if 
his righteousness had not been, or I have not 
faith ill that righteousness. I am nttei'ly cast 



364 PILGRIM'S TROGRESS. 

away. Lord, I have lieard that thou art a 
merciful God, and hast ordained that thy Son 
Jesus Christ shoukl be the Saviour of the world ; 
and moreover, that thou art willing to bestow 
him upon such a poor sinner as I am — and I 
am a sinner indeed. Lord, take therefore this 
opportunity, and magnify thy grace in the sal- 
vation of my soul, through thy Son Jesus Christ. 
Amen." 

Chr. And did you do as you w^ere bidden? 

Hope. Yes, over and over and He prays. 
over. 

Chr. Did the Father reveal the Son to you? 

Hope. Not at the first, nor second, nor 
third, nor fourth, nor fifth, no, nor at the sixth 
time neither. 

Chr. What did you do then ? 

Hope. What? why, I could not tell what 
to do. 

Chr. Had you not thoughts of leaving off 
praying ? 

Hope. Yes ; and a hundred times twice told. 

Chr. And what was the reason you did not? 

Hope. I believed that it was true which 
hath been told me, to wit, that with- ne durst not 

leave oil' pray- 

out the righteousness of this Christ, ing>andwhy. 
all the world could not save me ; and therefore, 



riiRiST im-:vi:alp:d. 365 

ihoiiulit I with iiiyscir. if I leave oil". I die, and 
I can Imt die at (lie tlirone of tiTace. And 
withal this came into my mind, "If it tarry 
wait for it, bccansc it will surely come, and 
will not tarry." Hal). 2 : 3. So I continued 
j)raying until the Father showed me his Son. 

CiiR. And how was he revealed unto you ? 

Hope. I did not see him with my hodily 
Christ is re- cvcs, l)ut witli thc eves of my un- 

voalcd to him, 

ami iiow. derstandino-. Eph. 1 : 18. 19 ; and thus 
it was. One day I was very sad. I think sad- 
der than at any one time in my life; and this 
sadness was throu.di a fresh sight of the great- 
ness and viTeness of my sins. And as I was 
then looking for nothing but hell, and the ever- 
lasting damnation of my soul, suddenly, as I 
thought, I saw the Lord Jesus looking down 
from heaven upon me, and saying, "Believe 
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be 
saved."' Acts 1G:31. 

But I replied, " Lord, I am a great, a very 
great sinner;'" and he answered, "My grace is 
sufficient for thee."' 2 Cor. 12 : 9. Then I said, 
"But, Lord, what is believing?"' And then I 
saw from that saying, 'He that cometh to me 
shall never hunger, and he that believeth on 
me shall never thirst," John (V: 3o, that be- 



•d66 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

lioving and coming was all one ; and that lie 
that came, that is, that ran ont in his heart and 
affections after salvation by Christ, he indeed 
believed in Christ. Then the water stood in 
mine eyes, and I asked further, "But, Lord, 
may such a great sinner as I am be indeed 
accepted of thee, and be saved by thee V-^ And 
I heard him say, "And him that cometh to me 
I will in nowise cast out." John 6 : 37. Then 
I said, "But how. Lord, must I consider of 
thee in my coming to thee, that my faith may 
be placed aright upon thee ?" Then he said, 
"Christ Jesus came into the world to save sin- 
ners. 1 Tim. 1 : 15. He is the end of the law 
for righteousness to every one that believes. 
Eom. 10:4, and chap. 4. He died for our 
sins, and rose again for our justification. Rom. 
4 : 25. He loved us, and washed us from our 
sins in his own blood." Rev. 1:5. He is Me- 
diator between God and us. 1 Tim. 2:5. He 
ever liveth to make intercession for us." Heb. 
7 : 25. From all which I gathered that I must 
look for righteousness in his person, and for 
satisfaction for my sins by his blood ; that what 
he did in obedience to his Father's law, and in 
submitting to the penalty thereof, was not for 
himself, but for him that will accept it for his 



iiorKFri/s Lovi;. 367 

salvation, and Ix' tlianklul. And now was my 
heart I'nll of Joy, mine eyes full of tears, and 
mine afteetions running over with love to the 
uame, peo])k\ and ways of Jesus Christ. 

Ciiii. This was a revelation of Christ to 
your soul indeed. Ikit tell nie jjartieukrly 
what eflfeet this had uijon your spirit. 

Hope. It made me see that all the world, 
notwithstandinu- all tlie righteousness thereof, 
is in a state of eondemnation. It luade me see 
that God the Father, though he be just, can 
justly justify the eoming sinner. It made me 
greatly ashamed of the vileness of my former 
life, and eonfounded me with the sense of my 
own ignorauee ; for there never eame a thought 
into my heart befoi-e now that showed me so 
the beauty of Jesus Christ. It made me love 
a holy life, and long to do something for the 
honor and glory of the name of the Lord Jesus. 
Yea, T thought tliat had 1 now a thousand gal- 
lons of blood in my Ijody, I could spill it all 
for the sake of the Lord Jesus. 

I saw then in niy dream, that IIoj)eful look- 
ed back, and saw Ignorance, wliom they had 
left beliind, coming after. " Look," saifl he to 
Christian, "how far yonder youngster loitereth 
behind." 



368 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. A}^, aye, I see him; he careth not 
for our company. 

Hope. But I trow it would not have hurt 
him, had he kept pace with us hitherto. 

Chr. That is true; but I warrant you he 
thiiiketh otherwise. 

Hope. That I think he doth ; but, however, 
let us tarry for him. 

So they did. 

Then good Christian said to him, "Come 

away, man ; why do you stay so be- Young igno- 
rance comes ui) 

hind ?" ^S'-^'" 

Ignor. I take my pleasure in walking alone, 
even more a great deal than in company, unless 
I like it the better. 

Then said Christian to Hopeful, (but softly,) 
" Did I not tell you he cared not for our com- 
pany ? But however," said he, "come up, and 
let us talk away the time in this solitary place." 

Then, directing his speech to Ignorance, he 
said, "Come, how do you do? How stands it 
between God and your soul now ?" 

Ignor. I hope, well ; for I am al- ignorance > 

hope, and tUi 

ways full of good motions, that come ground of u. 
into my mind to comfort me as I walk. 

Chr. What good motions ? Pray tell us. 

Ignor. Why, I think of God and heaven. 



IGNOKANCl-r.^ HOTE. 369 

Chr. So do the di'vils aiitl dainned souls. 

Igxou. But I tliiiik of tluMii, and desire them. 

Chr. So do many that are never like to 
come there. 'The soul of the sluggard desir- 
eth. and hath nothing.'' Prov. 13 : 4. 

Igxou. But I think of them, and leave all 
for them. 

CiiR. That I doubt; for to leave all is a 
very hard matter; yea, a harder matter than 
many are aware of. But why, or by what art 
thou persuaded that thou hast left all for God 
and heaven ? 

Igxor. My heart tells me so. 

CiiR. The wise man says, "He that trust- 
eth in his own heart is a fool." Prov. 28 : 26. 

Igxor. That is spoken of an evil heart; but 
mine is a good one. 

Chr. But how dost thou prove that ? 

Igxor. It comforts me in hopes of heaven. 

Chr. That may be through its deceitful- 
ness ; for a man's heart may minister comfort 
to him in the hopes of that thing for which he 
has yet no ground to lioi)e. 

Igx'OR. But my heart and life agree togeth- 
er; and therefore my ho])e is well grounded. 

Chr. Who told thee that thy heart and life 
agree together? 

16* 



370 PILGRIM'S TROGRESS. 

Ignor. My heart tells me so. 

Chr. "Ask my fellow if I be a thief." Thy 
heart tells thee so ! Except the word of God 
beareth witness in this matter, other testimony 
is of no value. 

Ignor. But is it not a good heart that hath 
good thoughts ; and is not that a good life that 
is according to God's commandments ? 

Chr. Yes, that is a good heart that hath 
good thoughts, and that is a good life that is 
according to God's commandments; but it is 
one thing indeed to have these, and another 
thing only to think so. 

Ignor. Pray, what count you good thoughts, 
and a life according to God's commandments ? 

Chr. There are good thoughts of divers 
kinds; some respecting ourselves, some God, 
some Christ, and some other things. 

Ignor. What be good thoughts respecting 
ourselves ? 

Chr. Such as agree with the word thought ^°"'' 
of God. 

Ignor. When do our thoughts of ourselves 
agree with the Avord of God ? 

Chr. When we pass the same judgment 
upon ourselves which the word passes. To 
explain myself: the word of God saith of per- 



WIl AT SAITII TllK \V()I!I>. 'Mi 

sons ill a natural coiKlition, "'riicre is none 
righteous, there is none that doetli uood." It 
saith also, that "every imagination of the heart 
of man is only evil, and that eontinually." 
Gen. G:o; Rom. 3. And again, "The imagi- 
nation of man's heart is evil from his youth.'' 
Gen. 8:21. Now, then, when we think thus 
of ourselves, having sense thereof, then are 
our thoughts good ones, because according to 
the word of God. 

Ignok. 1 will never believe that my heart 
is thus bad. 

Chk. Therefore thou never hadst one good 
thought concerning thyself in thy life. But let 
me go on. As the word passeth a judgment 
upon our hearts, so it passeth a judgment ui)on 
our ways; and wlieii the thoughts of our hearts 
and ways agree with the, judgment which the 
word giveth of both, then are both good, be- 
cause agreeing thereto. 

Igxor. Make out your meaning. 

Chr. Why, the word of God saith, that 
niaiTs ways are crooked ways, not good, but 
j)erverse; it saith, they are naturally out of the 
good way, that they have not known it. Psa. 
125 : 5 ; Prov. 2:15: Kom. 3:12. Now, when 
a man thus lliiiikctli <>f his wavs — I sav. when 



372 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

he doth sensibly, and with heart-humiliation, 
]hus think, then hath he good thoughts of his 
own ways, because his thoughts now agree with 
the judgment of the word of God. 

Ignor. What are good thoughts concerning 
God? 

Chr. Even, as I have said concerning our- 
selves, when our thoughts of God do agree with 
what the Avord saith of him ; and that is, when 
we think of his being and attributes as the 
word Imth taught, of which I cannot noAV dis- 
course at large. But to speak of him with 
reference to us: then have Ave right thoughts 
of God Avhen we think that he knows us better 
than we know ourselves, and can see sin in us 
when and where Ave can see none in ourselves ; 
Avhen Ave think he knoAvs our inmost thoughts, 
and that our heart Avith all its depths is al- 
Avays open unto his eyes ; also when Ave think 
that all our righteousness stinks in his nostrils, 
and that therefore he cannot abide to see us 
stand before him in any confidence, even in 
all our best performances. 

Ignor. Do you think that I am such a fool 
as to think that God can see no further than I ; 
or that I Avould come to God in the best of my 
})erformances ? 



IGNORANCE'S FAITH. 373 

CiiK. Why. how do.st thou lliiuk in llii.s 
matter? 

Ignor. Wliy, to be short, I think I must 
believe in Chri.^t for Justification. 

CiiR. How? tliiuk thou must believe in 
Christ, when thou seest not thy need of him ? 
Thou neither seest thy original nor actual in- 
firmities; but hast such an opinion of thyself, 
and of what thou doest, as plainly renders thee 
to be one that did never see the necessity of 
Christ's personal righteousness to justify thee 
before God. IIow. then, dost thou .^^ay, I be- 
lieve in Christ ? 

Igxor. I believe well enough, for all that. 

Chr. How dost thou believe ? 

Igxor. I believe that Christ died for sin- 
iglorance''' °' ncrs ; aud tluit I shull be justified 
before God from the curse, through his gra- 
cious acceptance of my obedience to his laws. 
Or thus. Christ makes my duties, tiuit are re- 
ligious, acceptal)le to his Father by virtue of 
his merits, and so shall I l)e justified. 

Chr. Let me give an answer to this con- 
fession of thy faith. 

1. Thou believest with a fantastical faith; 
for this faitli is nowhere described in the 
word. 



374 riLGRIxM'S PROGRESS. 

2. Thou belie vest with a false faith ; be- 
cause it taketh justification from the personal 
righteousness of Christ, and applies it to thy 
own. 

3. This faith maketli not Christ a justiller 
of thy person, but of thy actions, and of thy 
person for thy actions' sake, which is false. 

4. Therefore this faith is deceitful, even 
such as will leave thee under wrath in the day 
of God Almight}^ ; for true justifying faith puts 
the soul, as sensible of its lost condition by the 
law, upon flying for refuge unto Christ's right- 
eousness — which righteousness of his is not an 
act of grace by which he maketh, for justifica- 
tion, thy obedience accepted with God, but 
his personal obedience to the law, in doing 
and suffering for us what that required at our 
hands — this righteousness, I say, true faith 
acccpteth ; under the skirt of which the soul 
being shrouded, and by it presented as spotless 
before God, it is accepted, and acquitted from 
condemnation. 

Ignor, What, would you have us trust to 
what Christ in his own person has done with- 
out us ? This conceit would loosen the reins of 
our lust, and tolerate us to live as we list: for 
what matter how we live, if we may be justi- 



KINOIJANCK 1(;N()I:ANT. 375 

lird by Clii-isfs jhm'soiuiI riulitcousiiess rroiii all, 
wIk'U we l)eliovc it ? 

CiiR. Ignorance is thy name, and as thy 
name is, so art thou : even this thy answer 
demonstrateth what I say. Ignorant thou art 
of what justifying righteousness is, and as igno- 
rant how to secure thy soul, through the faith 
of it, from the lieavy wrath of God. Yea, thou 
also art ignorant of the true effects of saving 
faith in this righteousness of Christ, which is to 
bow and win over the heart to Ood in Christ, 
to love his name, his word, ways, and people, 
and not as thou ignorantly imaginest. 

Hope. Ask him if ever he liad Christ re- 
vealed to him from heaven. 

Igxor. AVhat, you are a man for revela- 
gK^ra: tions ! I do believe, that what both 
you and all the rest of you say about that 
matter, is l)ut the fruit of distracted brains. 

Hope. Why, man, Christ is so hid in (Jod 
from the natural ap[)rehensions of the flesh, 
that he cannot by any man be savingly known, 
unless God the Father reveals him to him. 
proa'chTuri^''of I^'^'^^^- That Is your faith, but 

w>.at he knows ^^^ ^^^j^^^,. ^.^^ ^^j^^ y ^^^^^^y^^ ^^^^^ j^ 

as good as yours, though I have not in my 
liead so nuiuv whimsies as vou. 



376 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. Grive me leave to put in a word. You 
ought not so slightly to speak of this matter ; 
for this I will boldly affirm, even as my good 
companion hath done, that no man can know 
Jesus Christ but by the revelation of the Fa- 
ther; yea, and faith too, by which the soul 
la3^eth hold upon Christ, (if it be right,) must 
be wrought by the exceeding greatness of his 
mighty power, Matthew 11 : 27 ; 1 Cor. 12:3; 
Eph. 1 : 17-19; the working of which faith, I 
perceive, poor Ignorance, thou art ignorant of. 
Be awakened, then ; see thine own wretched- 
ness, and fly to the Lord Jesus; and by his 
righteousness, which is the righteousness of 
God, (for he himself is God,) thou shalt be 
delivered from condemnation. 

Ignor. You go so fast I cannot brokin up.'' '' 
keep pace with you; do you go on before: 1 
must stay a while behind. 

Then they said, 

"Well, Ignorance, wilt thou yet foolish be, 
To slight good counsel, ten times given thee ? 
And if thou yet refuse it, thou shalt know, 
Ere long, the evil of thy doing so. 
Remember, man, in time: stoop, do not fear: 
Good counsel, taken well, saves; therefore hear, 
But if thou yet shalt slight it, thou wilt be 
The loser, Ignorance, I '11 warrant thee." 



BLINDNESS niEVALENT. 377 



THE TEXTH STAGE. 

Then Christian addressed himself thus to 
iis fellow: 

Cur. Well, come, my good TTopefuL I per- 
ceive that thou and I must walk by ourselves 
agaiTi. 

So I saw in my dream, that they went on 
apace before, and Ignorance he came hobbling 
after. Then said Christian to his com])anion, 
"I much pity this poor man: it ^vill certainly 
go ill with him at last." 

Hope. Alas, there are abundance in our 
town in his condition, whole families, yea. 
whole streets, and that of pilgrims too : and if 
there be so many in our parts, how many, 
think you, must there be in the place where he 
was born ? 

Chr. Indeed, the word saith, "lie hath 
blinded their eyes, lest they should see," etc. 

But, now we are by ourselves, what do you 
think of such men? Have they at no time, 
think you, convictions of sin. and so, conse- 
quently, fears that their state is dangerous? 

Hope. Nay, do you answer that question 
vourself. for vou are the elder man? 



378 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. Then I say, sometimes, as I think, 
they may; but they being naturally ignorant, 
understand not that such convictions tend to 
their good ; and therefore they do desperately 
seek to stifle them, and presumptuously con- 
tinue to flatter themselves in the way of their 
own hearts. 

Hope. I do believe, as you say, that" fear 
tends much to men's good, and to onear^""'' "'' 
make them right at their beginning to go on 
pilgrimage. 

Chr. Without all doubt it doth, if it be 
right; for so says the word, "The fear of the 
Lord is the beginning of wisdom." Job 28 : 28 ; 
Psa. 111:10; Prov. 1:7; 9:10. 

Hope. How will you describe right fear ? 

Chr. True or right fear is dis- Right fear, 
covered by three things: 

1. By its rise: it is caused by saving con- 
victions for sin. 

2. It driveth the soul to lay fast hold of 
Christ for salvation. 

3. It begetteth and continueth in the soul a 
great reverence of God, his word, and ways; 
keeping it tender, and making it afraid to turn 
from them, to the right hand or to the left, to 
anv thing that mav dishonor God, break its 



EVILS OF IGNOIIANTE. ^79 

])eaoo, gri(>v(' tlio .spirit, or cause the enemy to 
speak reproaclilully. 

Hope. AVell said ; I believe you have said 
the truth. Are we now ahnost got past the 
Enchanted Ground ? 

CiiH. AVliy ? are you weary of this dis- 
course ? 

PIoPE. Xo. verily, but that I would know 
where we are. 

Ciiu. AVe have not now above two miles 
further to go thereon. But let us return to our 
matter. 

Xow, tlie ignorant know not that such con- 
why ignorant vlctlons as tcud to i)ut tlieui lu fcar 

persons stifle 

conviction. ^rc for thclr good, and therefore they 
seek to stifle them. 

Hope. How do they seek to stifle them ? 

Cur. First, they think that those fears are 
wrought by the devil, (though indeed they are 
wrought of God.) and t1i inking so, they resist 
them, as things that dir( ( lly tend to their over- 
throw. Second, they also think that these fears 
tend to the spoiling of their faitli: when, alas 
for them, poor men tliat they are, they liave 
none at all; and therefoi-e tliey harden their 
hearts against them. Third, they piesunie they 
ought not to fear, and therefore, in des})ite of 



380 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

them, wax presumptuously confident. Fourth, 
they see that those fears tend to take away 
from them their pitiful old self-holiness, and 
therefore they resist them with all their might. 

Hope. I know something of this myself; for 
before I knew myself it was so with me. 

Chr. Well, we will leave, at this time, our 
neighbor Ignorance by himself, and fall upon 
another profitable question. 

Hope. With all my heart; but you shall 
still begin. 

Chr. Well, then, did you know, about ten 
years ago, one Temporary in your xempo^rar^""'' 
parts, who was a forward man in religion 
then ? 

Hope. Know him? yes; he dwelt in Grace- 
less, a town about two miles off of Honesty, 
and he dwelt next door to one Turnback. 

Chr. Right ; he dwelt under the same roof 
with him. Well, that man was much awaken- 
ed once : I believe that then he had some sight 
of his sins, and of the wages that were due 
thereto. 

Hope. I am of your mind, for (my house 
•not being above three miles from him) he would 
ofttimes come to me, and that with many tears. 
Truly I pitied the man, and was not altogether 



ti:mim)i;.\i;v I!.\ck.-^i.ii)Ks. ;',.si 

without liopc of liim ; l)iit one may sco it is n(»t 
evorv OHO that cfics, "Lord, Loi-d." 

Cur. IIo told me once tliat lie was resolved 
to o'o OH ])iluriiiia<re, as we go now ; but all of 
a sudden he ci-ew aeijuainted with one Save- 
self, and then he became a strang-er to me. 

HoPK. Now, since we are talking about him, 
let us a little in(|uire into the reason of the sud- 
den backsliding of him and such others. 

Ciin. It may be very prolitable ; but do you 
begin. 

Hope. Well then, there are. in my judg- 
ment, four reasons for it: 

1. Though the consciences of such men are 
awakened, yet their minds are not changed: 
therefore, when the power of guilt weareth 
away, that which })rovoked them to l)e i-elig- 
ious ceaseth ; wherefore they naturally turn to 
their old course again, even as we see the dog 
that is sick of what he hath eaten, so long as 
his sickness prevails he vomits and casts up 
all: not that he doth this of a free mind, (if we 
may say a dog has a mind.) but because it 
troubleth his stomach ; Ijut now, Avhen his sick- 
- ness is over, and so his stomach eased, his de- 
sires being not at all alienated from his vomit, 
he turns him about, and licks up all; and so it 



382 pil(;rtm'S progress. 

is true wliicli is written, " The dog is turned to 
his own vomit again." 2 Pet. 2 : 22. Thus, I 
say, being hot for heaven by virtue only of 
the sense and fear of the torments of hell, as 
their sense of hell and fear of damnation chills 
and cools, so Iheir desires for heaven and sal- 
vation cool also. So then it comes to pass, that 
when their guilt and fear is gone, their desires 
for heaven and happiness die, and they return 
to their course again. 

2. Another reason is, they have slavish 
fears that do overmaster them : I speak now of 
the fears that they have of men ; ' ' for the fear 
of man bringeth a snare." Prov. 29 : 25. So 
then, though they seem to be hot for heaven so 
long as the flames of hell are about their ears, 
yet, when that terror is a little over, they be- 
take themselves to second thoughts, namely, 
that it is good to be wise, and not to run (for 
they know not what) the hazard of losing all, 
or at least of bringing themselves into unavoid- 
able and unnecessary troubles ; and so they fall 
in with the world again. 

3. The shame that attends religion lies also 
as a block in their way: they are proud and 
haughty, and religion in their eye is low and 
contemptible; therefore when they have lost 



NO CIIANC K OF HKA I'.T :iH8 

tiirir sense of licll mid (lie wralli ti) foiiic. (hey 
i-ctiirn :iu;iiii to their loniu'i- coiifse. 

I. (iiiilt, and to meditate terror, are gi-iev- 
I'lis to them: they like not to .see their misery 
I efore they eome into it, tliongli jjerhajis th^^ 
sio-ht oi" it at first, if they loved that sight, 
mio-lit make them fly whither the righteous fly 
and are safe; but because they do, as I hinted 
before, even shun the tliouglits of guilt and ter- 
ror, therefore, when once they are rid of their 
awakenings about the terrors and wrath ol'i Jod. 
tliey harden their hearts gladly, and choose 
such ways as will harden them more and more. 

Ciin. You are pi-etty near the business, for 
the l)ottom of all is for want of a change in 
their mind and will. And therefore they arc 
but like the felon that standeth l)efore the judge; 
he quakes an<l tremljles, and seems to repent 
most heartily, l)ut the bottom of all is the fear 
of the halter: not that he hath any detestation 
of the offence, as it is evident ; because, let but 
tliis man have his liberty, and lie wMll be a 
thief, and so a rogue still ; whereas, if his mind 
was changed, he would be otherwise. 

Hope. Xow I have showed you the reason 
of their going back, do you show me the nuin- 
ner thereof. 



384 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. So I will willingly. 

1. They draw off their thoughts, all that 
they may, from the remembrance of ta"°goesba?r 
Grod, death, and judgment to come. 

2. Then they cast off by degrees private 
duties, as closet prayer, curbing their lusts, 
watching, sorrow for sin, and the like. 

3. Then they shun the company of lively 
and warm Christians. 

4. After that, they grow cold to public duty, 
as hearing, reading, godly conference, and the 
like. 

5. Then they begin to pick holes, as we say, 
in the coats of some of the godly, and that dev- 
ilishly, that they may have a seeming color to 
throw religion, for the sake of some infirmities 
they have espied in them, behind their backs. 

6. Then they begin to adhere to, and asso- 
ciate themselves with carnal, loose, and wanton 
men. 

7. Then they give way to carnal and wan- 
ton discourses in secret; and glad are they if 
they can see such things in any that are count- 
ed honest, that they may the more boldl}' do it 
through their example. 

8. After this they begin to play with little 
riins openly. 



TllK IM.KASANT LAND. 385 

9. And tlu'ii. bring liartlcncd, tlicy sliow 
theniselves as they ai-e. Tlius, boing hiunchcd 
again into the gnlf of misery, unless a miraeie 
of grace prevent it, they everlastingly perish 
in their own deceivings. 

Now I saw in my dream, that by this time 
the pilgrims were got over the Enchanted 
Ground; and entering into the country of IjCU- 
lah, whose air was very sweet and pleasant, 
Isa. 62:4-12, Song 2:10-12, the way lying 
directly through it, they solaced themselves 
there for a season. Yea, here they heard con- 
tinually the singing of birds, and saw every 
day the flowers appear in the earth, and heard 
the voice of the turtle in the land. In this 
country the sun sliineth night and day: where- 
fore this was beyond the valley of the Shadow 
of Death, and also out of the reach of Giant 
Despair ; neither could they from this place so 
much as see Doubting Castle. Here they were 
within sight of the city they were going to: 
also here met them some of the inhabitants 
Angels. thereof: for in this land the shining 
ones commonly walked. l)ecause it was upon 
the borders of heaven. In this land also the 
contract l)etween the bride and the Bridegroom 
was renewed; yea. here, "as the lu'idegroom 

P.I. Pruj. n 



88G PILGRIM'^ PROGRESS. 

rejoiceth over the bride, so doth their God re- 
joice over them." Here they had no want of 
corn and wine ; for in this phice they met with 
abundance of what they had sought for in all 
their pilgrimage. Here they heard voices from 
out of the city, loud voices, saying, "Say ja 
to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation 
Cometh ! Behold, his reward is with him.'' 
Here all the inhabitants of the country called 
them ''the holy people, the redeemed of the 
Lord, sought out," etc. 

Now, as they walked in this land, they had 
more rejoicing than in parts more remote from 
the kingdom to which they were bound ; and 
drawing near to the city, they had yet a more 
perfect view thereof. It was builded of pearls 
and precious stones, also the streets thereof 
were paved with gold ; so that, by reason of 
the natural glory of the city, and the reflection 
of the sunbeams upon it. Christian with desire 
fell sick ; Hopeful also had a lit or two of the 
same disease; wherefore here they lay by it a 
while, crying out because of their pangs, "If 
you see my Beloved, tell him that I am sick of 
love." 

But, being a little strengthened, and better 
able to bear their sickness, they walked on 



UOOLiLV \ IN EVA lilts'. 387 

tlK'ir way, ami caino yet iioarcr and iicartT. 
wlicre wore orchards, viiioyards. and p:ardon?, 
and their gates opened into the highway. Now. 
as they came up to tliese places, behold th<> 
gardener stood in the way: to whom the pil- 
gi-ims said, "Whose goodly vineyards and gar- 
dens are these ?'' He answered, '"They arc the 
King's, and are planted here for his own de- 
light, and also for the solace of pilgrims."' So 
the gardener had them into the vineyards, and 
bid them refresh themselves with the dainties, 
Deut. 2o : 24 ; he also showed them there the 
King's walks and arbors where he delighted to 
be ; and here they tarried and slept. 

Xow I beheld in my dream, that they talked 
more in their sleep at this time than ever they 
did in all their journey; and l)eing in a muse 
thereabout, the gardener said even to me, 
'"Wherefore musest thou at the matter? it is 
the nature of the fruit of the grai)es of these 
vineyards, 'to go down so sweetly as to cause 
the lips of them that are asleep to speak.' " 
Song 7 : 9. 

So I saw that when they aAvoke, they ad- 
dressed themselves to go up to the city. But, 
as I said, the reflection of the sun uj)on the 
city (for the city was pure gold. Rev. 21:18,) 



388 PILORTM-S PrtOO KESS. 

was so extremely glorious, that they could not 
as yet with open face behold it, but through 
an instrument made for that purpose. 2 Cor. 
3:18. So I saw that as they went on, there 
met them two men in raiment that shone like 
gold, also their faces shone as the light. 

These men asked the pilgrims whence they 
came ; and they told them. They also asked 
them where they had lodged, what difficulties 
and dangers, what comforts and pleasures they 
had met with in the way ; and they told them. 
Then said the men that met them, "You have 
but two difficulties more to meet with, and then 
you are in the city." 

Christian then and his companion asked the 
men to go along with them; so they fold them 
that the}' would: "But,"' said they, "you must 
obtain it by your own faith." So I saw in my 
dream, that they went on together till they 
came in sight of the gate. 

Now I further saw, that between them and 
the gate was a river ; but there was no bridge 
to go over, and the river was very Death 
deep. At the sight, therefore, of this river the 
pilgrims were much stunned ; but the men that 
went with them said, "You must go through, 
or vou cannot come at the p-ate." 



Till-: i;iV Kli OF DKATll. '.\X\) 

The |)il<ii"iins llieu ln'uan to iiKiuire it ihoi-o 
was no other way to the jrate. To whidi Ihey 
answered, *'Yes; bnt there liath not any. save 
two, to wit, p]noch and Elijah. ])een permitted 
to tread tiiat path sinee the l"oundati(jn of tlie 
worhl, nor shall until the last trumpet shall 
sound."' The pilgrims then, espeeialh' Chris- 
Deaihnotwei- tlau, befjau to despond in their mind, 

come to nut 11 re. '^ '■ 

pass ful'if 'this and looked this way and that, but 

world into glo- r j \ ^^ i . 

ry. no way could be tound by them by 

which they might escape the river. Then they 
asked the men if the waters were all of a depth. 
us^noftmlo,''^ Thcy Said, "Nof yet they could not 
Seik ''""'=" help them in that case; "for,"' said 
the}', "you shall find it deeper or shallower as 
you believe in the King of the place." 

They then addressed themselves to the 
water, and entering. Christian began to sink, 
and crying out to his good friend Hopeful, he 
said, '"I sink in deep waters; the billows go 
over my head ; all his Avaves go over me. 
Selah."' 

Then said the otlici-. 'iJe of good cheer, 
my brother: I feel the bottom, and it is good."' 
Then said Christian. ''Ah, my friend, the sor- 
rows of death have compassed me about : I shall 
not see the land that flows with milk and honev."' 



300 riLG RIM'S rROGRESS. 

And with that a great darkness and horror fell 
upon Christian, so that he corJd not oiristians 

conflict at the 

see before him. Also here he in a I'our of death. 
great measure lost his senses, so that he could 
neither remember nor orderly talk of any of 
those sweet refreshments that he had met with 
in the way of his pilgrimage. But all the words 
that he spoke still tended to discoyer that he 
had horror of mind, and heart-fears that he 
should die in that riyer, and neyer obtain en- 
trance in at the gate. Here also, as they that 
stood by perceiyed, he was much in the troub- 
lesome thoughts of the sins that he had com- 
mitted, both since and before he began to be a 
pilgrim. It was also obseryed that he was 
troubled w4th apparitions of hobgoblins and 
eyil spirits ; for eyer and anon he would inti- 
mate so much by w^ords. 

Hopeful therefore here had much ado to 
keep his brother's head aboye water; yea, 
sometimes he would be quite gone down, and 
then, ere a while, he would rise up again half 
dead. Hopeful did also endeayor to comfort 
him, saying, "Brother, I see the gate, and men 
standing by to receiye us ;"' but Christian would 
answer, "It is you, it is you they wait for; for 
you have been hopeful eyer since I knew you." 



Till-: A i>vi:i:sAi: Y oveiicomr. 3'.)1 

".Vnd so liavc voii," said lie to (lii'istiaii. ■" All. 
lii'ollicr."' said lio. ''surely if 1 was riL:lit lie 
would now arise to help me; but for my sins 
lie hath broiiiiht me into the snare, and liath 
left me." Then sai<l Hopeful. '"My In-other, 
you have qnite for^rot the text where it is said 
of the wicked, 'There are no bands in their 
death, but tlieii- strensth is firm: they are not 
troubled as other men, neither are they j)lap:ued 
like other men.' Psa. 73 : 4, 5. These troubles 
and distresses that you _ao throiiiih in these 
Avaters, are no sign that God hath forsaken 
you ; but are sent to try yon, whether you will 
call to mind that whieh heretofore you have 
received of his goodness, and live uj>on him in 
your distresses.*' 

Then I saw in my dream, that Christian 
was in a muse a while. To whom also Hope- 
ful added these words, "Be of good cheer; 
Jesus Christ maketli thee whole."" And with 

Christian de- that Christian broke out with a loud 

livered from liis 

lears in death, yojee, "Oil. I scc liiui agalu ; and he 
tells inc. 'When thou passest through the wa-" 
ters, I will be with thee; and through the 
rivers, they shall not overflow^ thee.' " Isa. 
43:2. Then they ])otli took courage, and the 
enemv was after that as still as a stone, until 



392 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

they were gone over. Christian therefore 
presently found ground to stand upon, and so 
it followed that the rest of the river was but 
shallow. Thus they got over. 

Now, upon the bank of the river, on the 
other side, they saw the two shining men again, 
who there waited for them. Wherefore, being 
come out of the river, they saluted Thean^eisdo 

,, . iiTTT • ' 1 • wait for them SO 

them, saynio;, VVe are mmistermp; soonastiuyare 

' "^ '^' ^ passed out of 

spirits, sent forth to minister for ""' '''°'"^'*- 
those that shall be heirs of salvation." Thus 
they went along tow^ards the gate. 

Now you must note, that the city stood 
upon a mighty hill ; but the pilgrims went up 
that hill with ease, because they had these two 
men to lead them up by the arms; they had 
likewise left their mortal garments behind them 
in the river; for though they went offi^tilt^"* 
in with them, they came out without- them. 
They therefore went up here with much agility 
and speed, though the foundation upon which 
the city was framed was higher than the clouds ; 
they therefore went up through the region of 
the air, sweetly talking as they went, being 
comforted because they safely got over the 
river, and had such glorious companions to 
attend them. 



(;lui:v uf the place. :39:i 

The talk that they had with the shining 
ones was abont the glory of the pkiee; who 
tokl them that the beauty and glory of it was 
inexpressible. "There,"' said they, "is 'Mount 
Sion, the keavenly Jerusalem, the innumerable 
company of angels, and the spirits of just men 
made perfect.'^ Heb. 12:22-24. You are 
going now," said tkey, "to the paradise of 
God, wdierein you shall see tkc tree of life, 
and eat of the never-fading fruits thereof: and 
wdien you come there you shall have white 
robes given you, and your walk and talk shall 
be every day with the King, even all the days 
of eternity. Rev. 2 : T ; 3 : 4, 5 ; 22 : 5. There 
you shall not see again such things as you saw 
when you were in the lower region upon the 
earth, to wit, sorrow, sickness, affliction, and 
death ; 'for the former things are passed away.' 
Rev. 21 : 4. You are going now to Abraham, 
to Isaac, and Jacob, and to the prophets, men 
that God hath taken away from the evil to 
come, and that are now 'resting upon their 
beds, each one walking in his righteousness.' " 
The men then asked, "What must wt do in the 
holy place?" To whom it was answered, "You 
must there receive the comfort of all your toil 
and have joy for all your sorrow : you must 
17* 



394 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

reap what you have sown, even the fruit of all 
your prayers and tears and sufferings for the 
King by the vx'ay. Gal. G : 7, 8. In that place 
you must wear crowns of gold, and enjoy the 
perpetual sight and vision of the Holy One : for 
'there you shall see him as he is.' 1 John 3 : 2. 
There also 3'ou shall serve Him continually 
with praise, with shouting and thanksgiving, 
whom you desired to serve in the world, though 
Avith much difficultv, because of the infirmity 
of your flesh. There your eyes shall be de- 
lighted with seeing, and your ears with hear- 
ing the pleasant voice of the Mighty One. 
There 3'ou shall enjoy 3'our friends again that 
are gone thither before you; and there you 
shall with joy receive even every one that fol- 
lows into the holy place after you. There also 
you shall be clothed with glory and majesty, 
and put into an equipage fit to ride out with 
the King of glory. When he shall come with 
sound of trumpet in the clouds, as upon the 
wings of the wind, you shall come with him ; 
and when he shall sit upon the throne of judg- 
ment, 3'ou shall sit by him ; yea, and when he 
shall pass sentence upon all the workers of 
iniquity, let them be angels or men, you also 
shall have a voice in that judgment, because 



IIKAVKNLY ESCORT. 395 

they were his and your encniics. Also, Avlion 
he shall ag:ain retiiru to the city, you shall iio 
too \\ilh sound of ti-uuiitet. and be ever with 
hiui."" IThess. 1:14-17; Jude 14, 15; Dan. 
7:0. 10: ICor. G :-2, 3. 

Now, while lliey were thus drawing towards 
the gate, behold a company of the heavenly 
host came out to meet them ; to whom it was 
said by the other two shining ones, "These are 
the men that have loved our Lord when they 
were in the world, and that have left all for 
his holy name: and he hath sent us to fetch 
them, and we have Ijrought them thus far on 
their desired Journey, that they may go in and 
look their Redeemer in the face with joy." 
Then the heavenly host gave a great shout, 
saying, 'Blessed are they that are called to 
the marriage-supper of the Land)."' Revelation 
19:9. There came out also at this time to 
meet them several of the King's trum})eters, 
clothetl in white and shining raiment, who, 
with melodious noises and loud, made even 
the heavens to echo with their sound. These 
tiMimpeters saluted Christian and his felhiw 
with ten thousand welcomes from the world; 
and this they did with shouting and sound of 
trumpet. 



396 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

This done, they compassed them round on 
every side ; some went before, some behind, and 
some on the right hand, and some on the left, 
(as it were to guard them through the upper 
regions,) continually sounding as they went, 
with melodious noise, in notes on high ; so that 
the very sight was to them that could behold 
it as if heaven itself was come down to meet 
them. Thus, therefore, they walked on togeth- 
er ; and as they walked, ever and anon these 
trumpeters, even with joyful sound, would, by 
mixing their music with looks and gestures, 
still signify to Christian and his brother how 
welcome they were into their company, and 
with what gladness they came to meet them. 
And now were these two men as it were in 
heaven before they came to it, being swallow- 
ed up with the sight of angels, and with hear- 
ing of their melodious notes. Here also they 
had the city itself in view; and they thought 
they heard all the bells therein to ring, to wel- 
come them thereto. But above all, the warm 
and joyful thoughts that they had about their 
own dwelling there with such company, and 
that for ever and ever, by what tongue or 
pen can their glorious joy be expressed! Thus 
they came up to the gate. 



THE GATE OF IIEAVEX. 397 

Xow when they were come u\) to the gate, 
there was written over it, in letters of gold, 

"BLESSED AI;E THEY THAT PO IIIS COMMANDMENTS, 
THAT THEY JIAY HAVE RIGHT TO THE TREE OF LIFE, 
AND MAY ENTER IN THROUGH THE GATES INTO THE 
CITY." 

Then I saw in my dream, that the shining 
men bid them call at the gate: the which when 
they did, some from above looked over the 
gate, to wit, Enoch, Moses, and p]lijah, etc., to 
whom it was said, ''These pilgrims are come 
from the city of Destrnction, for the love that 
they bear to the King of this place ;" and then 
the pilgrims gave in unto them each man his 
certificate, which they had received in the be- 
ginning; those therefore were carried in unto 
the King, who, when he had read them, said, 
" Where are the men ?'' To whom it was an- 
swered, "They are standing without the gate."' 
The King then connnanded to open the gate, 
"That the righteous nation,'" said he, "that 
keepeth the truth may enter in.*" Isa. 2G :2. 

Xow I saw in my dream, that these two 
men went in at the gate ; and lo, as they enter- 
ed, they were transfigured ; and they had rai- 
ment put on that shone like gold. There were 
also that met them with harps and crowns, and 



398 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

gave them to them ; the harps to praise withal, 
and the crowns in token of honor. Then I 
heard in my dream, that all the bells in the 
city rang again for joy, and that it was said 
anto them, 

"ENTER YE INTO THE JOY OF YOUR LORD." 

I also heard the men themselves, that they 
sang with a loud voice, saying, 

"BLESSING, AND HONOR, AND GLORY, AND POWER, 
BE UNTO HIM THAT SITTETH UPON THE THRONE, AND 
UNTO THE LAMB, FOR EVER AND EVER." 

Now, just as the gates were opened to let 
in the men, I looked in after them, and behold, 
the city shone like the sun; the streets also 
were paved with gold; and in them walked 
many men, with crowns on their heads, palms 
in their hands, and golden harps to sing praises 
withal. 

There were also of them that had wings, 
and they answered one another without inter- 
mission, saying, "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord.'' 
And after that the}^ shut up the gates ; wiiich, 
when I had seen, I wished myself among 
them. 

Now, while I was gazing upon all these 
things, I turned my head to look back, and 



FATK OF KJNOHANCE. 3".»0 

saw Ignorance come up to the river side ; but 
isnorancc lic soon g'ot ovcr, autl that without 

comes up to tlie 

'•»•«'•• half tlie ditlicult y whicli the other two 

men met witli. For it ha^jpened that there was 
tlien in tliat i)lace one Vain-hope, a ferryman, 
i-yrr^'liroveT that witli liis boat help(Ml liini over; 
so he, as the others 1 saw, did ascend the hill, 
to come up to the gate ; only he came alone, 
neither did any man meet him with the least 
encouragement. When he was come up to the 
gate, he looked up to the v/riting that was 
above, and then began to knock, supposing that 
entrance should have been quickly administer- 
ed to him ; but he was asked by (he men that 
looked over the top of the gate, "Whence come 
you ? and what would you have ?"' He answer- 
ed, "I have ate and drank in the presence of 
the King, and he lias taught in our streets." 
Then they asked him for his certilicate, that 
they might go in and show it to the King; so 
he fumbled in his bosom for one, and found 
none. Then said they, "Have yon none?'' but 
the man answered never a word. So they told 
the King, but he would not come down to see 
him. but commanded the two shining ones that 
conducted Christian and Hopeful to the city, 
to go out and take iLrnorance. and bind him 



400 



PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 



hand and foot, and have him away. Then 
they took him up, and carried him through the 
air to the door that I saw in the side of the 
hill, and put him in there. Then I saw that 
there was a way to hell even from the gate of 
heaven, as well as from the city of Destruction. 
So I awoke, and behold, it was a dream. 




CONCLUSION'. 401 



COXCLUSION. 



Now, reader, I have told my dream to thee, 

See if tliou canst interpret it to me. 

Or to thyself, or neighbor : but take heed 

Of misinterpreting- ; for that, instead 

Of doing good, will but thyself abuse : 

By misinterpreting, evil ensues. 

Take heed, also, that thou be not extreme 

In playing with the outside of my dream ; 

Nor let my figure or similitude 

Put thee into a laughter, or a feud. 

Leave this for boys and fools ; but as for thee 

Do thou the substance of my matter see. • 

Put by the curtains, look within my veil, 

Turn up my metaphors, and do not fail. 

There, if thou seekcst them, such things thou 'It find 

As will be helpful to an honest mind. 

What of my dross thou findest there, be bold 

To throw away, but j'et preserve the gold. 

What if my gold be wrapped up in ore? 

None throws away the apple for the core : 

But if thou shalt cast all away as vain, 

I know not but 't will make me dream again. 



THE 

riLGlIDrS PROGRESS 

KllUM 

THIS WORLD TO THAT WHICH IS TO COME 

DELIVERED 

UNDER THE SIMILITUDE OF A DREAM. 



PAKT II, 



WnEREIX IS SET FORTH THE MANNER OF THE SETTING OUT 

OF CHRISTIANS WIFE AND CHILDREN, THEIR DAN 

GEKOUS JOURNEY, AND SAFE ARRIVAL AT 

THE DESIRED COUNTRY. 

I HAVE USED SIMILITUDES. Hos. 12 : 10. 



THE 

AUTIIOirS WAY 

OF 

SEx\DL\G rOllTII Ills SECOND PAllT 

OP 

THE PILGRIM. 



Go now, my little Book, to every place 
Where my first Pilgrim has but shown his face : 
Call at their door ; if any say, " Who 's there V 
Then answer thou, "Christiana is here." 
If they bid thee come in, then enter thou. 
With all tliy boys ; and then, as thou knowest how 
Tell who they are, also from whence they came ; 
Perhaps they '11 know them by their looks, or name : 
But if they should not, ask them yet again, 
If formerly they did not entertain 
One Christian, a Pilgrim. If they say 
They did, and were delighted in his wa}-, 
Then let them know that these related were 
Unto him ; yea, his wife and children are. 

Tell them that they have left their house and home ; 
Are turned Pilgrims ; seek a world to come : 
That they have met with hardships in the way ; 
That they do meet with troubles night aud day ; 
That they have trod on serpents ; fought with devils ; 
Have also overcome a many evils : 
Yea, tell them also of the next who have, 
Of love to pilgrimage, been stout and brave 



406 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Defenders of that way ; and how they still 

Kefuse this world to do their Father's will. 

Go tell them also of those dainty things 

That pilgrimage unto the Pilgrim brings. 

Let them acquainted be, too, how they arc 

Beloved of their King, under his care ; 

What goodly mansions he for them provides ; 

Though they meet with rough winds and swelling tides, 

How brave a calm they will enjoy at last, 

AVho to their Lord and by his ways hold fast. 

Perhaps with heart and hand they will embrace 
Thee, as they did my firstling ; and will grace 
Thee and thy fellows with such cheer and fare, 
As show well they of pilgrims lovers are. 

OBJECTION I. 

But liOAV if they will not believe of m9 
That I am truly thine ? 'cause some there be 
That counterfeit the Pilgrim and his name. 
Seek, by disguise, to seem the very same ; 
And by that means have wrought themselves into 
The hands and houses of I know not v/ho. 

ANSWER. 

'Tis true, some have, of late, to counterfeit 
My Pilgrim, to their own my title set ; 
Yea, others half my name, and title too, 
Have stitched to their books, to make them do. 
But yet they, by their features, do declare 
Themselves not mine to be, whose e'er they are. 

If such thou meetest with, then thine only way, 
Before them all, is, to say out thy say 
In thine own native language, which no man 
Now -useth, nor with ease dissemble can. 



A V T 1 1(.) I : ■ .- I X T p. D r r t i o N" . ■Wl 

If, afler nil, tlicy still cf you .sliiill doubt, 
'riiiiikiiig that you, like gypsies, go about 
lu naughty wise the country to defile. 
Or that you seek good people to beguile 
^VitIl things unwarrantable, send for mo, 
And I will testify you pilgrims be ; 
Yea, I will testify that only you 
!My pilgrims are, and that alone Avill do. 

OBJECTION II. 

But yet, perhaps I may inquire f<jr him 
Of those who wish him damned life and limb. 
AVhat shall I do, when I at such a d(jor 
For pilgrims ask, and they shall rage the more ? 

ANSWER. 

Fright not thyself, ni}' Book, for such bugbears 
Arc nothing else but ground for groundless fejirs, 
y[y Pilgrim's book has travelled sea and land, 
Yet could I never come to understand 
That it was slighted or turned out of door 
By any kingdom, were they rich or poor. 
In France and Flanders, where men kill each other, 
My Pilgrim is esteemed a friend, a brother. 

In ITulland, too, 'tis said, as I am told, 
My Pilgrim is, with some, worth more than gold. 
Highlanders and wild Irish can agree 
My Pilgrim should familiar with them be. 

'Tis in New England under such advance, 
Receives there so much loving countenance^ 
As to be trimmed, new cVothed, and decked with gems. 
That it might show its features, and its limbs. 
Yet more, so comely doth my Pilgrim walk. 
That of him thousands daily sing and talk. 



408 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

If you draw nearer home, it will appear 
My Pilg-rim knows no ground of shame or fear : 
City and country will him entertain 
With, Welcome, Pilgrim ; yea, they can't refrain 
From smiling, if my Pilgrim be but by. 
Or shows his head in any company. 

Brave gallants do my Pilgrim hug and love, 
Esteem it much, yea, value it above 
Things of a greater bulk ; yea, with delight 
Say, my lark's leg is better than a kite. 
Young ladies, and young gentlewomen too. 
Do not small kindness to my Pilgrim show : 
Their cabinets, their bosoms, and their hearts, 
My Pilgrim has ; 'cause he to them imparts 
His pretty riddles in such wholesome strains. 
As yield them profit double to their pains 
Of reading ; yea, I think I may be bold 
To say, some prize him far above their gold. 
The very children that do walk the street. 
If they do but my holy Pilgrim meet, 
Salute him will ; will wish him well, and say, 
He is the only stripling of the day. 

They that have never seen him, yet admire 
What they have heard of him, and much desire 
To have his company, and hear him tell 
Those pilgrim stories which he knows so well. 

Yea, some that did not love him at the first. 
But called him fool and noddy, say they must. 
Now they have seen and heard him, him commend.. 
And to those whom they love they do him send. 

Wherefore, my Second Part, thou need'st not be 
Afraid to show thy head : none can hurt thee. 
That wish but well to him that went before ; 
'Cause thou comest after with a second store 



ALTIIUKS IXTKUDUCTIOX. 409 

Of things as good, as rich, as profitable, 

For young, for old, for staggering, and for stable. 

OBJECTION III. 

But some there be that say, lie laughs too loud ; 
And some do say, Ilis head is in a cloud. 
Some say, Ilis words and stories are so dark, 
They know not how, by them, to find his mark 

ANSWER. 
One may, I think, say, Both his laughs and cries 
May well be guessed at by his watery eyes. 
Some things are of that nature as to make 
One's fancy chuckle, while his heart doth ache : 
AVhen Jacob saw his Ilachel Avith the sheep, 
He did at the same time both kiss and weep. 

Whereas some say, A cloud is in his head ; 
That doth but show his wisdom 's covered 
With his own mantle — and to stir the mind 
To search well after what it fain would find, 
Things that seem to be hid in words obscure 
Do but the godly mind the more allure 
To study what those sayings should contain, 
That speak to us in such a cloudy strain. 
I also know a dark similitude 
"Will on the curious fancy more intrude. 
And will stick faster in the heart and head, 
Than things from similes not borrowed. 

Wherefore, my Book, let no discouragement 
Hinder thy travels. Behold, thou art sent 
To friends, not foes ; to friends that will give place 
To thee, thy pilgrims, and thy words embrace. 

Besides, what my first Pilgrim left concealed, 
Thou, my bravo second Pilgrim, hast revealed ; 

ftt. f.or IS 



410 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

What Christian left locked up, and went his way, 
Sweet Christiana opens with her key. 

OBJECTION lY. 

But some love not the method of your first : 
Eomance they count it ; throw 't away as dust. 
If I should meet with such, what should I say ? 
Must I slight them as they slight me, or nay ? 

ANSWER. 

My Christiana, if with such thou meet, 
By all means, in all loving wise them greet ; 
Render them not reviling for revile. 
But, if they frown, I prithee on them smile : 
Pei-haps 't is nature, or some ill report. 
Has made them thus despise, or thus retort. 

Some love no fish, some love no cheese, and some 
Love not their friends, nor their own house or home ; 
Some start at pig, slight chicken, love not fowl 
More than they love a cuckoo or an owl. 
Leave such, my Christiana, to their choice, 
And seek those who to find thee will rejoice ; 
By no means strive, hut, in most humble wise, 
Present thee to them in thy Pilgrim's guise. 

Go then, my little Book, and show to all 
That entertain and bid thee welcome shall. 
What thou shalt keep close shut up from the rest ; 
And wish what thou shalt show them may be blessed 
To them for good, and make them choose to be 
Pilgrims, by better far than thee or me. 
Go then, I say, tell all men who thou art : 
Say, " I am Christiana ; and my part 
Is now, with my four sons, to tell you what 
It is for men to take a pilgrim's lot." 



AUTHORS INTRODUCTION. 411 

Go, also, tell them ■who and wliat tliey be 
That now do go on pilgrimage with thcc : 
Say, "Here's my neighbor Mercy ; she is one 
That has long time with me a pilgrim gone : 
Come, see lier in her virgin face, and learn 
'Twixt idle ones and pilgrims to discern. 
Yea, let young damsels learn of her to prize 
The world whicli is to come, in any wise. 
Wlien little tripping maidens follow God, 
And leave old doting sinners to his rod, 
'T is like those days wherein the young ones cried 
Hosanna ! when the old ones did deride." 

Next tell them of old Honest, whom j'ou found 
"With his white hairs treading the pilgrim's ground ; 
Yea, tell them how plain-hearted this man was ; 
How after his good Lord he bore the cross. 
Perhaps with some grey head, this may prevail 
With Christ to fall in love, and sin bewail. 

Tell them also, how Master Fearing went 
On pilgrimage, and how the time he spent 
In solitariness, with fears and cries ; 
And how, at last, he won the joyful prize. 
He was a good man, though much down in spirit : 
He is a good man, and doth life inherit. 

Tell them of Master Feeble-mind also. 
Who not before, but still behind would go. 
Show them also, how he had like been slain. 
And how one Great-heart did his life regain. 
This man was true of heart ; though weak in grace, 
One might true godliness read in his face. 

Then tell them of Master Ready-to-halt, 
A man with crutches, but much without fault. 
Tell them how Master Feeble-mind and he 
Did love, and in opinion much agree. 

Pil rroj 



412 I'ILGKIM'3 PROGREyS. 

And let all know, though weakness was their chance, 
Yet sometimes one could sing, the other dance. 

Forget not Master Valiant-for-thc-truth, 
That man of courage, though a very youth : 
Tell every one his spirit was so stout, 
No man could over make him face about ; 
And how Great-heart and he could not forbear, 
But pull down Doubting Castle, slay Despair. 

Overlook not Master Despondency, 
Nor Much-afraid his daughter, thougli they lie 
Under such mantles, as may make them look, 
With some, as if their God had them forsook. 
They softly went, but sure ; and, at the end. 
Found that the Lord of pilgrims was their friend. 
When thou hast told the world of all these things, 
Tlien turn about, my Book, and touch these strings ; 
Which, if but touched, will such music make. 
They '11 make a cripple dance, a giant quake. 

Those riddles that lie couched within thy breast, 
Freely propound, expound ; and for the rest 
Of ihy mysterious lines, let them remain 
For those whose nimble fancies sliall them gain. 

Now may this little book a blessing be 
To those who love this little book and me ; 
And may its buyer have no cause to say, 
Ilis money is but lost or thrown away. 
Yea, may this second Pilgrim yield that fruit 
As may with each good pilgrim's fancy suit ; 
And may it some persuade, that go astray. 
To turn their feet and heart to the right way, 
Is the hearty prayer of 

The author, 

JOHN BUNTAN. 








IN THE SIMILITUDE OF A DREAM. 



PART II. 



Courteous Compaxioxs — Some time since, 
(o tell Yoii my dream that I had of Christian 
the pilgrim, and of his dangerous journey tow- 
ards the celestial country, was pleasant to me 
and profitable to you. I told you then also 
what I saw concerning his wife and children, 
and how unwilling they were to go with him 
on pilgrimage ; insomuch that he was forced to 
go on his progress without them ; for he durst 
not run the danger of that destruction which 
he feared would come bv stavin^r with them in 



414 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

the city of Destruction: wherefore, as I then 
showed you, he left them and departed. 

Now it hath so happened, through the mul- 
tiplicity of business, that I have been much 
hindered and kept back from my wonted trav- 
els into those parts whence he went, and so 
could not, till now, obtain an opportunity to 
make further inquir}^ after those whom he left 
behind, that I might give you an account of 
them. But having had some concerns that 
way of late, I went down again thitherward. 
Now, having taken up my lodging in a wood 
about a mile off the place, as I slept, I dreamed 
again. 

And as I was in my dream, behold, an aged 
gentleman came by where I lay ; and because 
he was to go some part of the way that I was 
travelling, methought I got up and went with 
him. So, as we walked, and as travellers 
usually do, I was as if we fell into a discourse ; 
and our talk happened to be about Christian 
and his travels; for thus I began with the old 
man: 

"Sir," said I, "what town is that there 
below, that lieth on the left hand of our way ?" 

Then said Mr. Sagacity, (for that was his 
name,) "It is the city of Destruction, a popu- 



CIIIIISTIAX-S PILCRI.MAGE. 415 

lous place, hut possessed with a very ill-condi- 
tioned and idle sort of people." 

'I thought that was that city,"' quoth T; "I 
went once myself through that town ; and there- 
fore know that this report you give of it is 
true.*' 

Sagacity. Too true. I wish I could speak 
truth in speaking better of them that dwell 
therein. 

"Well, sir," quoth I, "then I perceive 3'ou 
to be a well-meaning man, and so one that 
takes pleasure to hear and tell of that which is 
good. Pray, did you never hear Avhat hap- 
pened to a man some time ago of this town, 
whose name was Christian, that went on a pil- 
grimage up towards the higher regions?"' 

Sag. Hear of him ? aye, and I also heard 
of the molestations, troubles, wars, captivities, 
cries, groans, frights, and fears, that he met 
with and had on his journey. Besides, I must 
tell you all our country rings of him ; there are 
but few houses that have heard of him and his 
doings, but have sought after and got the rec- 
ords of his pilgrimage ; yea, I think I may say 
that his hazardous journey has got many well- 
wishers to his ways ; for though when he was 
here he was fool in everv man"s mouth, vet 



416 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

now he is gone he is highly commended of all. 
For 'tis said he lives bravely Avhere christians are 

•^ well spoken of 

'he is: yea, many of them that are Jli^i,gh cMed 

. -, I'ools while they 

resolved never to run his hazards, are here. 
yet have their mouths water at his gains. 

"They ma}^," quoth I, "well think, if they 
think any thing that is true, that he liveth well 
where he is; for he now lives at, and in the 
Fountain of life, and has what he has without 
labor and sorrow, for there is no grief mixed 
therewith. But pray, what talk have the peo- 
ple about him ?" 

Sag. Talk ? the people talk strangely about 
him: some say that he now walks in white, 
Eev. 3 : 4, that he has a chain of gold about 
his neck, that he has a crown of gold, beset 
with pearls, upon his head; others say that 
the shining ones, who sometimes showed them- 
selves to him in his journey, are become his 
companions, and that he is as familiar with 
them, in the place where he is, as here one 
neighbor is with another. Besides, it is confi- 
dently affirmed concerning him, that the King 
of the place where he is has bestowed upon' 
him already a very rich and pleasant dwelling 
at court, and that he every day eateth and 
drinketh, and walketh and talketh with him, 



HArriNESS OF CHRISTIAN'. 417 

and rcccivclli of the smiles and favors of him 
Ihat is Judge of all there. Zech. 3:7; Luke 
14 : 14, 15. Moreover, it is expected of some, 
that his Prince, the Lord of that country, will 
shortly come into these parts, and will know 
the reason, if they can give any, wh}- his neigh- 
bors set so little by him, and had him so much 
in derision when they perceived that he would 
be a pilgrim. Judc 14, 1-5. For they say, 
that now he is so in the affections of his Prince. 

Christians that hls SovereiGTU is so much con- 
Kin;; liunors 

chiistiau. cerned with the indignities that wera 
cast upon Christian when he became a pilgrim, 
that he will look upon all as if done unto him- 
self, Luke 10:10; and no marvel, for it was 
for the love that he had to his Prince that he 
ventured as he did. 

" I dare say,"' quoth I; '^I am glad on "t; I 
am glad for the poor man's sake, for that now 
he has rest from his labor, and for that he now 
reapeth the benefit of his tears with joy; and 
for that he has got beyond the gunshot of his 
enemies, and is out of the reach of them that 
hate him. Rev. 14 : 13 ; Pia. 12G : 5, G. I also 
am glad for that a rumor of these things is 
noised abroad in this country; who can tell 
but that it may work some good effect on some 

18'^ 



418 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

that are left behind ? But pray, sir, while it is 
fresh in my mind, do you hear any thing of his 
wife and children ? Poor hearts, I wonder in 
my mind what they do."' 

Sag. Who? Christiana and her sons? They 
are like to do as well as Christian of^°ain-sti!rr?s 
did himself; for though they all play- a^l ""'' "''^'' 
ed the fool at first, and Avould by no means be 
persuaded by either the tears or entreaties of 
Christian, yet second thoughts have wrought 
wonderfully with them ; so they have packed 
up, and are also gone after him. 

"Better and better," quoth I; "but what, 
wife and children and all ?'' 

Sag. It is true ; I can give 3'ou an account 
of the matter, for I was upon the spot at the 
instant, and was thoroughly acquainted with the 
whole affair. 

"Then," said I, "a man, it seems, may re- 
port it for a truth." 

Sag. You need not fear to affirm it : I mean, 
that they are all gone on pilgrimage, both the 
good woman and her four boys. And being 
we are, as I perceive, going some considerable 
way together, I will give you an account of the 
whole of the matter. 

This Christiana, (for that was her name 



nilUSTIANA I'KXITKXT. 410 

from till' (lay (hat slio with lici- cliildi'cii Ix'took 
tlu'insclvi's to a piluriiii's lilV'.) al'ti'i- licr hus- 
band was gone over the river, and she eould 
hear of him no more, her thoii.i2,hts began to 
work in her mind. First, for that she had lost 
her husband, and for that the loving bond of 
that relation was utterly broken between them. 
''For yon know," said he to me, "nature can 
do no less but entertain the living with many 
a heavy cogitation, in the remembrance of the 
loss of loving relations."' This, therefore, of 
thararc^churis ^^^^* husbaiid did cost her many a 
relations. ^"'"^ tcar. But tliis was not all ; for Chris- 
tiana did also begin to consider with herself, 
whether her nnbecoming behavior towards her 
husband was not one cansc that she saw him 
no more, and that in such sort he was taken 
away from her. And ujion this came into her 
mind, by swarms, all her unkind, unnatural, and 
ungodly carriage to her dear friend ; which also 
clogged her conscience, and did load her with 
guilt. She w\as, moreover, much broken with 
recalling to remembrance the restless groans, 
brinish tears, and self-bemoanings of her hu.s- 
band, and how she did harden her heart ag^ainst 
all his entreaties and loving persuasions other 
an<l her sons to go with him; }ea, there was 



420 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

not any thing that Christian either said to her, 
or did before her, all the while that his burden 
did hang on his back, but it returned upon her 
like a flash of lightning, and rent the caul of 
her heart in sunder ; especially that bitter out- 
cry of his, "What shall I do to be saved?'' did 
ring in her ears most dolefully. 

Then said she to her children, "Sons, we 
arc all undone. I have sinned away your fa- 
ther, and he is gone: he would have had us 
with him, but I would not go myself: I also 
have hindered you of life." With that the 
boys fell into tears, and cried out to go after 
their father. "Oh," said Christiana, " that it 
had been but our lot to go with him ! then had 
it fared well with us, beyond what it is like 
to do now. For though I formerly foolishly 
imagined, concerning the troubles of your fa- 
ther, that they proceeded of a foolish fancy 
that he had, or for that he was overrun with 
melancholy humors, yet now it will not out of 
my mind but that they sprang from another 
cause ; to wit, for that the light of life was given 
him, James 1 : 23-25 ; John 8:12; by the help 
of which, as I perceive, he has escaped the snares 
of death." Prov. 14 : 27. Then they all wept 
again, and cried out. "Oh, woe worth the day!" 



CHRIST I AX AS DRKAM. 421 

The next iiiuht Cliristiaiia liad a drcaiii ; and 
drcan';.'"'""'' bfliold, slic saw as if a ])n)ad pai-cli- 
mcnt was ojxMied belurc her, in wliich were 
recorded tlie sum of her ways; and the crimes 
as she thouulit, looked very bhick upon her. 
Then she cried out aloud in her sleep, "Lord, 
have mercy upon me a sinner!"' Luke 18:13; 
and the little children heard her. 

After this she thought she saw two ver}" 
ill-favored ones standing by her bedside, and 
saying, ''What shall we do with this woman? 

this: this for she cries out for mercv, waking 



Mark 
is tile (]iiintcs- 
st.-ncc of hell. 



O 



and sleei)ing: if she be suffered to 
go on as she begins, wc shall lose her as we 
have lost her husband. Wherefore we must, 
by one way or other, seek to take her off from 
the thoughts of what shall be hereafter, else all 
the Avorld cannot help but she will become a 
pilgrim.'' 

Xow she awoke in a great sweat, also a 
trembling was upon her; but after a while she 
fell to sleeping again. And then she thought 
she saw Christian, her husband, in a place of 
depresIioT'"'* bli.ss among many immortals, witii a, 
harp in his hand, standing and playing npon 
it Ijefore One that sat on a throne with a rain- 
bow about his head. She saw also, as if he 



422 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

bowed his head with his face to the paved work 
that was under his Prince's feet, saying, "I 
heartily thank my Lord and King for bringing 
me into this place." Then shouted a company 
of them that stood round about, and harped 
with their harps ; but no man living could tell 
what they said but Christian and his compan- 
ions. 

Next morning, when she was up, had prayed 
to God, and talked with her children a while, 
one knocked hard at the door ; to whom she 
spoke out, saying, " If thou comest in God's 
name, come in." So he said, "Amen;" and 
opened the door, and saluted her with, "Peace 
be to this house." The which when he had 
done, he said, "Christiana, knowest thou where- 
fore I am come ?" Then she blushed and trem- 
bled ; also her heart began to wax warm with 
desires to .know from w^hence he came, and 
what was his errand to her. So he said unto 
her, "My name is Secret; I dwell with those 
that are on high. It is talked of where I dwell 
as if thou hadst a desire to go thither: also 
there is a report that thou art aware convictions 

seconded by tid- 

of the evd thou hast formerly done i"gs of God's 

^ readiness to par- 

to thy husband, in hardening of thy *'°°- 
heart against his way, and in keeping of these 



C1IKI::;TIANA INVITED. 423 

babes in llicir ignorance. Christiana, llie ^^Fer- 
eiful One hath sent me to tell thee, that he is 
a God ready to forgive, and that he taketh 
delight to mnltiply the pardon of offences, lie 
also would have thee to know, that he inviteth 
thee to come into his presence, to his table, 
and that he will feed thee with the fat of his 
house, and with the heritage of Jacob thy fa- 
ther. 

" There is Christian, thy husband that was, 
with legions more, his companions, ever behold- 
ing that face that doth minister life to behold- 
ers, and they will all be glad when they shall 
hear the sound of thy feet step over thy Fa- 
ther's threshold.*' 

Christiana at this was greatly abashed in 
herself, and bowed her head to the ground. 
This visitor proceeded, and said, ''Christiana, 
here is also a letter for thee, which I have 
brought from thy husband's King."' So she 
took it, and opened it, but it smelt after the 
manner of the best perfume. Song 1:3. Also 
it was written in letters of gold. The contents 
of the letter were these: that "the King would 
have her to do as did Christian her husband; 
for that was the way to come to his city, and 
to dwell in his presence with joy for ever." 



424 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

At this the good woman was quite overcome; 
so she cried out to her visitor, "Sir, quite oveJxome* 
will you carry me and my children with you, 
that we also may go and worship the King ?" 

Then said the visitor, "Christiana, the bit- 
ter is before the sweet. Thou must through 
troubles, as did he that went before thee, enter 
this celestial city. Wherefore I ad- Further iu- 

sfnictinns to 

vise thee to do as did Christian thy <-ii"stiana. 
husband; go to the wicket-gate yonder, over 
the plain, for that stands at the head of the 
way up which thou must go; and I wish thee 
all good speed. Also I advise that thou put 
this letter in thy bosom, that thou read therein 
to thyself and to thy children until you have 
got it by heart ; for it is one of the songs that 
thou must sing while thou art in this house of 
thy pilgrimage, Psa. 119:54; also this thou 
must deliver in at the further gate."' 

Now I saw in my dream, that this old gen- 
tlemen, as he told me the story, did himself 
seem to be greatly affected therewith. He 
moreover proceeded, and said. So prayshcJ-So 
Christiana called her sons together, Jf^y^ *''^"" •"'"''■ 
and began thus to address herself unto them: 
"My sons, I have, as you may perceive, been 
of late under much exercise in mv soul about 



VISIT OF XEIGHIJOHS. 425 

the death of your father: not for that I doubt 
at all of his happiness, for I am satisfied now 
that he is well. I have also been mueli affected 
with the thoughts of my own state and yours, 
which I verily believe is by nature miserable. 
My carriage also to your father in his distress 
is a great load to my conscience ; for I harden- 
ed both my own heart and 3'ours against him, 
and refused to go with him on pilgrimage. 

"The thoughts of these things would now 
kill me outright, but for a dream which I had 
last night, and Ijut for the encouragement wliich 
this stranger has given me this morniug. Come, 
my children, let us pack up, and begone to the 
gate that leads to the celestial country, that 
we may see your father, and be with him and 
his companions in peace, according to the laws 
of that land." 

Then did her children burst out into tears, 
for joy that the heart of their mother was so 
inclined. So their visitor bid them Airewell; 
and they began to prepare to set out for their 
journey. 

Ikit while they were thus about to be gone, 
Timorou. ami two of thc wouicu that wcrc Chris- 

Jfrrcy roiiio to 

visit Christiana, tiaua's ucighbors came up to her 
house, and knocked at her door. To whom 



426 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

she said as before, "If you come in God's 
name, come in." At this the wom- „ Christiana's 

' new language 

en were stunned ; for this kind of neighbors': ''^'^ 
language they used not to hear, or to per- 
ceive to drop from the lips of Christiana. Yet 
they came in: but behold, they found the 
good woman preparing to be gone from her 
house. 

So they began, and said, " Neighbor, pray 
what is your meaning by this ?" 

Christiana answered, and said to the eldest 
of them, whose name was Mrs. Timorous, "I 
am preparing for a journey." 

This Timorous was daughter to him that 
met Christian upon the hill of Difficulty, and 
would have had him go back for fear of the 
lions. 

Tim. For what Journey, I pray you ? 

Chr. Even to go after my good husband. 

And with that she fell a weeping. 

Tim. I hope not so, good neighbor; pray, 
for 3'our poor children's sake, do not so un- 
womanly cast away yourself. / 

Chr. Nay, my children shall go with me; 
not one of them is willing to stay behind. 

Tim. I wonder in my very heart what or 
who has brought you into this mind. 



THE PRINCE'S LETTER. 427 

CiiR. neighbor, knew you but as much 
as I do, I doubt not but that you would go 
along with me. 

Tim. Prithee, what new knowledge hast 
thou got, that so worketh ofT thy mind from 
thy friends, and that tempteth tliee to go no- 
body knows where ? 

Then Christiana replied, "I have been sore- 
ly afflicted since my husband's departure from 
Death. me ; but specially since he went over 
the river. But that which troubleth me most 
is, my churlish carriage to him when he was 
under his distress. Besides, I am now as he 
was then; nothing will serve me but going on 
pilgrimage. I was dreaming last night that I 
saw him. that my soul was with him! He 
dwelleth in the presence of the King of the 
country; he sits and eats with him at his table; 
he is become a companion of immortals, and 
has a house now given him to dwell in, to 
which the best palace on earth, if comi)ared, 
seems to me but as a dunghill. 2 Cor. 5 : 1-4. 
The Prince of the place has also sent for me, 
with promise of entertainment, if I shall come 
to him ; his messenger was here even now, and 
has brought me a letter, which invites me to 
come." And with that she plucked out her 



428 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

letter, and read it, and said to them, "What 
now will you say to this ?" 

Tim. Oh the madness that has possessed 
thee and thy husband, to run 3'ourselves upon 
such difficulties. You have heard, I am sure, 
what your husband did meet with, even in a 
manner at the first step that he took on his 
way, as our neighbor Obstinate can yet testify, 
for he went along with him ; yea, and Pliable 
too, until they, like wise men, were afraid to 
go any further. We also heard, over onhlHe.""'"^" 
and above, how he met with the lions, Apollyon, 
the Shadow of Death, and many other things. 
Nor is the danger that he met with in Vanity 
Fair to be forgotten by thee. For if he, though 
a man, was so hard put up to it, what canst 
thou, being but a poor woman, do ? Consider 
also, that these four sweet babes are thy chil- 
dren, thy flesh and thy bones. Wherefore, 
though thou shouldest be so rash as to cast 
away thyself, yet, for the sake of the fruit of 
thy body, keep thou at home. 

But Christiana said unto her, "Tempt me 
not, my neighbor : I have now a price put into 
my hands to get gain, and I should be a fool 
of the greatest size if I should have no heart to 
strike in with the opportunity. And for that 



MKKCV AT A STAND. -129 

you tell mc of all these troubles which I am like 
A pertinent to lucct wlth ju thc Ava}', thcv ai'c so 

reply to llcshlv " " 

reusoning. f^^. fj-Qm ]jeing to inc a discourage- 
ment, that they show I am in thc right. Thc 
bitter must come before the sweet, and that 
also will make thc sweet the sweeter. AVherc- 
fore, since you came not to my house in God's 
name, as I said, I pray you to be gone, and 
not to disquiet me further."' 

Then Timorous reviled her, and said to her 
fellow, "Come, neighbor Mercy, let us leave 
her in her own hands, since she scorns our 
counsel and company." But Mercy was at a 
stand, and could not so readily comply with 
Mercys bow- hcr ucighbor ; and that for a twofold 

cls yuani over 

christiaua. roasou. Flrst, her bowels yearned 
over Christiana. So she said within herself, 
''If my neighbor will needs be gone, I will go 
a little way with her, and help her." Second, 
her bowels yearned over her own soul; for 
what Christiana had said had taken some hold 
upon her mind. "Wherefore she said within 
herself again, ''I will yet have more talk with 
this Christiana ; and, if I find truth and life in 
what she shall say, I myself with my heart 
shall also go with her."' "Wherefore Mercy 
began thus to reply to her neighbor Timorous: 



430 riLGRIM'S rROGRESS. 

Mer. Xciglibor, I did indeed come with you 
to see Christiana this morning; and since she 
is, as you see, taking her last farewell of the 
country, I think to walk this sunshiny morning 
a little with her, to help her on her waj- . 

But she told her not of her second reason, 
but kept it to herself. 

Tim. Well, I see you have a mind to go a 
fooling too ; but take heed in time, and be wise : 
while we are out of danger, we are out; but 
when we are in, we are in. 

So Mrs. Timorous returned to her house, 
and Christiana betook herself to her journey. 
But when Timorous was got home to ^ Jef Tr ' uit 

hi 1 1 i» r 1 Jlei'Cy cleaves 

er house, she sends lor some ot her to her. 

neighbors, to wit, Mrs. Bat's-eyes, Mrs. Incon- 
siderate, Mrs. Light-mind, and Mrs. Know- 
nothing. So when they were come Timorous 
to her house, she falls to tellins: of iviemis what the 

^ good ( hristiaiia 

the story of Christiana, and of her •"''^"'>^*"^" 
intended journey. And thus she began her 
tale : 

Tim. Neighbors, having had little to do this 
morning, I went to give Christiana a visit; and 
when I came at the door I knocked, as you 
know it is our custom; and she answered, "If 
you come in God's name, come in." So in I 



MI?S. BATS-EYES- OPINION. 431 

wont, (liinkinpr all was ^Yell; but when I eamc 
in, 1 found lier proi)aring herself to de})art the 
town, she, and- also her ehildren. So I asked 
her what was her meaning by that. And she 
fold me, in short, that she was now of a mind 
to go on pilgrimage, as did her husband. She 
told me also of a dream that she had, and how 
the King of the country where her husband 
Avas, had sent an inviting letter to come thither. 

Then said Mrs. Know-nothing, "And what, 
noulTng,^'"''''" tlo yoii think she will go ?"' 

Tim. Aye, go she will, whatever comes 
on't; and methinks I know it by this; for 
that which was my great argument to persuade 
her to stay at home, to wit, the troubles she 
was like to meet with on the way, is one great 
argument with her to \n\t her forward on her 
journev. For she told me in so many words, 
"The bitter goes before the sweet; yea, and 
forasmuch as it doth, it makes the sweet the 
sweeter."' 

"Oh, this blind and foolish woman!"' said 
jire. Bats eyes. Mrs. Bat's-cycs ; "and will she not 
take warning by her husband's afflictions ? For 
my i)art, I see, if he were here again, he would 
rest himself content in a whole skin, and never 
run so manv hazards for nothing." 



132 PILGRIM'S PIIUGRESS. 

Mrs. Inconsiderate also replied, sa3ing, 
"Away with sucli fantastical fools era" '""""" 
from the town : a good riddance, for my part, 
I say, of her ; should she stay where she dwells, 
and retain this her mind, who could live quiet- 
ly by her ? for she will cither be dumpish or 
unneighborly, or talk of such matters as no 
wise body can abide. Wherefore, for my part, 
I shall never be sorry for her departure ; let 
her go, and let better come in her room: it 
was never a good world since these whimsical 
fools dwelt in it." 

Then Mrs. Light-mind added as followeth: 
"Come, put this kind of talk away. ,Z2- ^'^'''' 
I was vcsterdav at Madam "Wan- ^ Madam -n-an- 

«• >- ton, she that 

ton's, where we were as merry as been "too" Hard 

- -T -n IT ji • 1 for Failhl'ul, in 

the maids, hor who do you thnik tunc past. 
should be there but I and Mrs. Love-the-flesh, 
and three or four more, with Mrs. Lechery, 
Mrs. Filth, and some others: so there we had 
music and dancing, and what else was meet to 
fill up the pleasure. And I dare say, my lady 
herself is an admirable well-bred gentlewoman, 
and Mr. Lechery is as pretty a fellow." 



CURISTIANA PERSUADES MERCY. 433 



THE FIRST STAGE. 

By this time Cliristiana was got on her 
way. and Mercy went along with her: so as 
they went, her children being there also, Chris- 
twveu°"'Mcrcv ^i^^i^^ bcgan to discourse. "And, 
and^oodlhJu. ^Y^Y^^.,- g^ij Christiana, "I take this 

as an unexpected favor, that thou shouldest set 
forth out of doors with me to accompany me a 
little in the way."' 

Then said young ^lercy, (for she was but 

J^crcyincHncs y^^^^g ) -qf J tllOUght it WOuld bc tO 

purpose to go with you, I would never go near 
the town any more.' 

'Well. Mercy," said Christiana, "cast in 
thy lot with me: I well know what will be the 
end of our pilgrimage: my husband is where 
he would not but be for all the gold in the 
Spanish mines. Xor shalt thou bc rejected, 
though thou goest but upon my invitation. The 
King, who hath sent for me and my children, 
is one that delighteth in mercy. Besides, if 
thou wilt. I will hire thee, and thou shalt go 
along with me as my servant. Yet we will 
have all things in common between thee and 
me ; only go along with me." 

r.l. Pro. 10 



434 PIL0RIM\-5 rnociiEss. 

Mer. But how shall I be ascertained that I 
also should be entertained ? Had I oSptancc- *' 
this hope but from one that can tell, I would 
liiake no stick at all, but would go, being helped 
by Him that can help, though the way was 
never so tedious. 

Chr. Well, loving Mercy, I will tell thee 
what thou shalt do : go with me to aiiure*s''ter'"o 
the wicket-gate, and there I will fur- is'Vuinlt'' and 

^ promises there 

ther inquire for thee ; and if there {."r.'"'^"'''' '''" 
thou shalt not meet Avith encouragement, I will 
])e content that thou return to thy place ; I will 
also pay thee for thy kindness Avhich thou show- 
est to me and my children, in the accompany- 
ing of us in our way as thou dost. 

Mer. Then will I go thither, and will take 
what shall follow : and the Lord grant Mercy riays. 
that my lot may there fall even as the King of 
heaven shall have his heart upon me. 

Christiana then was glad at heart, not only 
that she had a companion, but also chnstianagiad 

^ of Jlcrcyscom- 

for that she had prevailed with this p"">- 
poor maid to fall in love with her own salva- 
tion. So they w^ent on together, and Mercy 
began to weep. Then said Christiana, "Where- 
fore weepeth my sister so ?'' 

''Alas." said Mercv, "who can but lament, 



MEIHV WEEP.? FOR FUIEN1».<. 435 

that shall Imt rightly consider wliat a state and 
Mercy grk'vis condition niv j)oor relations are in, 

for liLT carnal 

relations. {]ir^^ yet remain in onr sinfnl town? 
And that which makes my grief the more heavy 
is, becanse they liave no instructor, nor an}' to 
tell them what is to come.'" 

CiiR. Pity becomes j)ilgrims ; and thon dost 
weep for thy friends, as my good Christian did 
for me when he left me: he mourned for that I 

Christians would uot hccd uor regard him; l)ut 
answ*ered for his jiis Lord aud ours did gather nn his 

relations alter ^ ' 

hewasdcacJ. ^^,^^^ ^^^^^ j,^^^ ^jj^.^j^ i,j|^^ |,|^ bottlc ; 

and now both I and thou, and these my sweet 
babes, are reaping the fruit and benefit of them. 
I hope, Mercy, that these tears of thine will not 
be lost; for the truth hath said, that "they that 
sow in tears shall reap in joy." And "he that 
goeth forth and weepeth. l)earing precious seed, 
shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bring- 
ing his sheaves with him." Psa. 120 -.i), G. 
Then said Mei-cy, 

'•Let tlu' Most Blessed be my guide, 
If 't Ije liis blessed will. 
I'litn Ills gate, into liis foM. 
Tp t<. his lioly hill. 

"And let him never suflfer me 
To swerve, or turn aside 
From his free grace and holy ways, 
What e'er shall me V>eti(le. 



436 PlLGRIiM'S TROGRESS. 

"And let him gather them of mine 
That I have left behind ; 
Lord, make them pray they may be thine 
With all their heart and mind." 

Now my old friend proceeded, and said, 
•But when Christiana came to the Slough of De- 
spond, she began to be at a stand; "for," saidl/^ 
she, "this is tlie place in which my dear hus- 
band had like to have been smothered with 
mud/' She perceived also, that notwithstand- 
ing the command of the King to make this place 
for pilgrims good, yet it was rather worse than 
formerly. So I asked if that Avas true. "Yes," 
said the old gentlemen, "too true; for many 
there be that pretend to ])e the King's labor- 
ers, and that say they are for mend- ,Ji'''eo.Xsim's 
ing the King's highways, who bring wonfofiife/^^ 
dirt and dung instead of stones, and so mar 
instead of mending." Here Christiana" there- 
fore, with her boys, did made a stand. "But," 
said Mercv, "come, let us venture; Mercy the boui- 

*" est at the Slough 

only let us be wary." Then they oti^espond. 
looked well to their steps, and made a shift to 
get staggering over. 

Yet Christiana had like to have been in, 
and that not once or twice. Now they had no 
sooner got over, but they thought they heard 
words that said unto them, "Blessed is she 



TIIH WI("KET-C;aTE. 437 

(hat bclieveth; for there shall be a ])erf()rm- 
aiice of those things whieli were told her from 
the Lord."' Luke 1 : 45. 

Then they went on again ; and said Merer 
to Christiana. 'Had I as good gi-ound to hope 
for a loving reeeption at the wieket-gate as 
you, I think no Slough of Despond would dis- 
courage me." 

''Well'" said the other, "you know your 
sore, and I know mine; and, good friend, wo 
shall all have enough evil befoi-e we come to 
our journey's end. For can it ])e imagined that 
the people who design to attain such excellent 
glories as we do, and who are so envied that 
happiness as we are. Imt that we shall meet 
Avith what fears and snares, with what troubles 
and alllictions they can i)ossibly assault us with 
that hate us ?' 

And now Mr. Sagacity left me to dream out 
my dream by myself. Wherefore, methought 
I saw Christiana and Mercy, and the boys, go 
bi''S7'wJ!h ^^^^ ^^ ^^^^'" "P t^^ the gate: to which. 
fS^l!«\ven a*^ when thev were come, thev betook 

in faith and ' ' 

i>ope. themselves to a short debate about 

how they must manage their calling at the gate, 
and what should be said unto him that did open 
to them : so it was concluded, since Christiana 



438 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

was the eldest, that she should knock for en- 
trance, and that she should speak to him that 
did open, for the rest. So Christiana began 
to knock, and as her poor husband did, she 
knocked and knocked again. But instead of 
any that answered, they all thought that they 
heard as if a dog came barking upon The dog, the 

devil, an enemy 

them ; a dog, and a great one too ; *° p'^'y^'"- 
and this made the women and children afraid. 
Nor durst they for a while to knock any more, 
for fear the mastiff should fly upon them. Now, 
therefore, they were greatly tumbled j[ercy"d"sturb* 

11 • xi • • 1 1 ed with doubts 

up and down ni their mmds, and in prayer. 
knew not what to do: knock they durst not, 
for fear of the dog ; go back they durst not, for 
fear the keeper of that gate should espy them 
as they so went, and should be offended with 
them ; at last they thought of knocking again, 
and knocked more vehemently than they did 
at first. Then said the keeper of the gate, 
" Who is there ?'' So the dog left off to bark, 
and he opened unto them. 

Then Christiana made low obeisance, and 
said, "Let not our Lord be offended with his 
handmaidens, for that we have knocked at his 
princely gate." Then said the keeper, "Whence 
come ye? And what is it that you would have?" 



(11 IIIS'IIANA KNTKIITA INKll. -i'M) 

Christiana aiiswei-od, "AVe are come from 
whence Christian did come, and upon the same 
errand as he; to Avit. to hv. if it shall please 
you, graciously admitted l)y tliis gate into the 
way that leads unto the eelestial city. And I 
answer, my Lord, in the next place, that I am 
Christiana, once the wile of Christian, that now 
is gotten above." 

With that the keeper of the gate did mar- 
vel, saying, 'What, is she now become a pil- 
grim that but a while ago abhorred that life ?" 
Then she bowed her head, and said. "Yea; 
and so are these my sweet babes also." 

Then he took her by the hand and led her 
How christi- in, and said also, 'Suffer little chil- 

ana is entertain- 
ed at the gate. (ii-Qn to come unto me;'' and with 

that he shut uj) the gate. This done, he called 

to a trumpeter that Avas al)ove, over the gate, 

to entertain Christiana with shouting, and the 

sound of trumpet, for joy. So he obeyed, and 

sounded, and filled the air with his melodious 

notes. 

Xow all this while poor Mercy did stand 

without, trembling and crying, for fear that she 

was rejected. But when Christiana had got 

admittance for herself and her boys, then she 

began to make intercession for ^fercv. 



440 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

And Christiana said, "My Lord, I have a 
companion of mine that stands yet Christianas 

prayer lor her 

without, that is come hither upon the f"*^"'^ ^^^'■'^y- 
same account as myself: one that is much de- 
jected in her mind, for that she comes, as she 
thinks, without sending for; whereas I was 
sent for by my husband's King to come." 

Now Mercy began to be very impatient, 
and each minute was as long to her thf'^'hung^i^l 

1 1 /• 1 J. ^ soul tlie more 

as an hour ; Avhereiore she prevented lervent. 
Christiana from a fuller interceding for her, 
by knocking at the gate herself. And she 
knocked then so loud that she made Christiana 
to start. Then said the keeper of the gate, 
"Who is there?" And Christiana said, "It is 
my friend." 

So he opened the gate, and looked out, but 
Mercy was fallen down without in a -^lercy faints, 
swoon; for she fainted, and was afraid that no 
gate should be opened to her. 

Then he took her by the hand, and said, 
"Damsel, I bid thee arise." 

"Oh, sir," said she, "I am faint; there is 
scarce life left in me." But he answered, that 
one once said, "When my soul fainted within 
me I remembered the Lord ; and my prayer 
came unto thee, into thy holy temple. Jonah 



MKIM'Y KECKIVEn. 441 

2:7. Fear not, but stand npon thy feet, and 
tell ine wherefore thou art come."' 

^[i-:it. I am come for that unto which I Avas 
never invited, as my friend Chri.^tiana was. 
Hers was from the King, and mine was but 
from her. AVlierefore I fear I presume. 

Keep. Did she desire thee to come Avith 
her to this phice ? 

]\Ier. Yes ; and as my Lord sees, I am come. 
And if there is any grace and forgiveness of 
sins to spare, I beseech that thy poor hand- 
maid may be a partaker thereof. 

Then he took her again by the hand, and 
led her gently in, and said, '■ I pray for all 
them that believe on me. by what means soever 
they come unto me." Then said he to those 
that stood by, " Fetch something and give it 
to Mercy to smell on, thereby to stay her faint- 
ings;" so they fetched her a bundle of myrrh, 
and a while after she was revived. 

And now were Christiana and her boys, 
and Mercy, received of the Lord at the head 
of the way, and spoken kindly unto by him. 
Then said they yet further unto him, ''We are 
sorry for our sins, and beg of our Lord his par- 
don and further information what we must do." 

"I grant pardon." said he. ''by word and 



442 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

deed; by word in tlie promise of forgiveness, 
by deed in the way I obtained it. Take the 
first from my lips with a kiss, and the other as 
it shall be revealed." Song 1:2; John 20 : 20. 

Now I saw in my dream, that he spoke 
many good words nnto them, whereby they 
were greatly gladdened. He also had them up 
to the top of the gate, and showed them by 
what deed they were saved; and told them 
withal, that that sight they would se'en afaJof "' 
have again as they went along in the way, to 
their comfort. 

So he left them a while in a summer parlor 
below, where they entered into talk thlchr!^ua;r 
by themselves ; and thus Christiana began. "0 
how glad am I that we are got in hither." 

Mer. So you well may ; but I, of all, have 
cause to leap for joy. 

Chr. I thought one time, as I stood at the 
gate, because I had knocked and none did an- 
swer, that all our labor had been lost, espec- 
ially when that ugly cur made such a heavy 
barking against us. 

Mer. But my worst fear was after I saw 
that you was taken into his favor, and that I 
was left behind. Now, thought I, it is fultilled 
which is written, "Two women shall be grind- 



KAKNEST KNTHKATV. 443 

ing- at the mill; the one .shall he taken, and the 
other left."" Matt. 24 : 41. I had nuieh a<h) to 
forbear eryinu" out. rndoiicl And afraid I 
wa.^ to knoek any more: but when 1 looked np 
t(^ what was wi-itten over the uate, I took cour- 
age. I also thouuht that I must eitlier knoek 
again, or die; so I knoeked. l)nt I cannot tell 
how. for my spirit now struggled between life 
and death. 

Ciiu. Can yon not tell how you knoeked? 
I am sure your knocks were so earnest that the 
very sound ol" them made me start; I thought 
thinks 'iK'f com* I iiover licard such knocking in all 

betTr'than she' Uiy Hfc ; I tllOUght yOU WOUld COUIC 

in by a violent hand, or take the kingdom by 
storm. :\ratt. 11:12. 

~SIfai. Alas, to be in my case, who that so 
was could but have done so ? You saw that 
the door was shut upon me. and that there was 
a most cruel dog thereabout. AVho, I say, that 
was so . faint-hearted as I, would not have 
knocked with all their might? But pray, what 
said my Lord to my rudeness? AVas he net 
angry with me ? 
Christ pieaseri Chk. Whcu liG heard vour lum- 

with loud and 

restless prayer, bcrlng uolsc, hc gavG a wondcrful 
innocent smile; I believe what you did pleased 



444 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

him well, for he showed no sign to the contra- 
ry. But I marvel in my heart why if 



th2 soul at 
<irst did know 



he keeps such a clog: had I known nleetwitifin"its 
that before, I should not have had M^'^ir wouw 

hardly ever set 

heart enough to have ventured my- °"' 

self in this manner. But now we are in, we 

are in, and I am glad with all my heart. 

Mer. I will ask, if you please, next time 
he comes down, why he keeps such a lilth}^ cur 
in his yard ; I hope he will not take it amiss. 

"Do so," said the children, "and persuade 
him to hang him ; for we are afraid The children 

arc afraid of the 

he will bite us when we go hence." '^"g- 

So at last he came down to them again, and 
Mercy fell to the ground on her face before 
him, and worshipped, and said, "Let my Lord 
accept the sacrilice of praise which I now offer 
unto him with the calves of my lips." 

So he said unto her, "Peace be to thee; 
stand up." But she continued upon her face, 
and said, "Righteous art thou, Lord, when 
I plead with thee ; yet let me talk with thee of 
thy judgments. Jer. 12:1. Wherefore dost 
thou keep so cruel a dog in thv yard, sicrcy expos- 

" " tulates about 

at the sight of which such women the dog. 
and children as we are ready to fly from thy 
gate for fear ?" 



WORK OF THE DEVIL. 445 

He answered and .^aid, "That dog has an- 
The devil, othei' ownei' ; he also is kept close in 
another man's gronnd, only my pilgrims hear 
his barking ; he belongs to the castle which you 
see there at a distance, but can come up to the 
walls of this place. He has frighted many an 
honest pilgrim from worse to better, by the 
great voice of his roaring. Indeed, he tiuit 
owneth him doth not keep him out of any good- 
will to me or mine, but with intent to keep the 
jiilgrims from coming to me, and that they may 
be afraid to come and knock at this gate for 
entrance. Sometimes also he has broken out, 
and has worried some that I loved; but I take 
all at present patiently. I also give my pil^ 
grims timely help, so that they are not deliv- 
ered to his power, to do with them what his 
doggish nature would prompt him to. But 
what, my purchased one, I trow hadst thou 
known never so much beforehand, thou wonki- 
est not have been afraid of a dog. The beg- 
gars that go from door to door will, rather 
Achccktothe than lose a supposed alms, run tlie 

rarnal fear of 

the pilgrims, hazard of the bawling, barking, and 
biting too of a dog: and shall a dog, a dog in 
anotlier man's yard, a dog whose barking [ 
turn to tlie jirofit of ])ilgrims. keep any iVom 



44G PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

coming to me ? I deliver them from the lions 
and m}^ darling from the power of the dog." 
Psa. 22:21, 22. 

Then said Mercy, ''I confess my igno- 
rance; I spoke what I understood , christians, 

■ I wlien wise 

not , 

all things well." 

Then Christiana began.to talk of their jour- 
ney, and to inquire after the way. So he fed 
them, and washed their feet, and set them in 
the way of his steps, according as he had dealt 
with her husband before. 



GARDEN" OF THE EVIL ONE. 447 



THE SECOND STAGE. 

So T saw ill my dream, that they walked 
on their way. and had the weatlier very com- 
fortable to them. 

Then Christiana began to sing, saying, 

•• Blessed be tlie day that I began 
A jiilgrim for to be; 
And blessed also be the man 
That thereto niovid me. 

" 'T is true, 't was long ere I began 
To seek to live for ever ; 
But now I run fast as I can: 
T is better late than never. 

"Our tears to joy, our fears to faith, 
Are turned, as wc see ; 
Thus our bcginmng, as one saith, 
Shows what our end will be.' 

Now there was, on the other side of the 
wall that fenced in the way up which Chris- 
garden. '*'''''' tiana and her comi)anions were to 
go, a garden, and that garden belonged to him 
wliose was that barking dog of whom mention 
was made before. And some of the fruit-trees, 
that grew in that garden shot their branches 
over the wall : and Ijeing mellow, they that 
found them did gather them up and eat of 
them to their hurt, ^o Christiana's bovs. as 



448 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

boys are apt to do, being pleased with the 
trees, and with the fruit that huni^ The children 

*" eat of the ene- 

thereon, did pluck them, and began mys ftuit- 
to eat. Their mother did also chide them for 
so doing, but still the boys went on. 

"Well," said she, "my sons, you transgress, 
for that fruit is none of ours;" but she did not 
know that it belonged to the eneni}' : I '11 war- 
rant you, if she had she would have been ready 
to die for fear. But that passed, and they 
went on their way. Now, by that they were 
gone about two bow-shots from the place that 
led them into, the way, they espied two very 
ill-favored ones coming down apace to meet 
them. With that, Christiana and Mercy her 
friend covered themselves with their veils, and 
so kept on their journey: the chil- ,7;;°s"a^sluit 

J 1 iii> iiii. Christiana and 

dren also went on before ; so that at Mercy. 
last they met together. Then they that came 
down to meet them, came just up to the women, 
as if they would embrace them ; but Christiana 
said, "Stand back, or go peaceably as you 
should." Yet these two, as men that are deaf, 
regarded not Christiana's words, but began to 
lay hands upon them : at that Christiana wax- 
ing very wroth, spurned at them with her feet. 
Mercy also, as well as she could, did what she 



Till-: rii.r.RiMS assaulted. 449 

could to sliift tlicin. riiristiana again said to 
tlK'in. "Staud l)a('k. and be gone, for we have 
no money to lose, being pilgrims, as you see, 
and such too as live upon the charity of our 
friends." 

Then said one of the two men, "AVe make 
no assault upon you for money, but are come 
out to tell you, that if you will but grant one 
small request which we shall ask, we will make 
women of you for ever." 

Xow Christiana, imagining what they should 
mean. made answeragain, "We will neitherhear, 
nor regard, nor yield to what you shall ask. 
TVe are in haste, and cannot stay; our business 
is a business of life and death."' So again she 
and her companion made a fresh essay to go 
past them ; but they letted them in their way. 

And they said, "'We intend no hurt to your 
lives; it is another thing we would have."' 

"Aye," quoth Christiana, "you would have 
us body and soul, for I know it is for that you 
are come ; but we will die rather upon the Sjiot, 
than to suffer ourselves to be brought into such 
snares as shall hazard our well-being liere- 
Thcycryout aftcr."' A 11(1 wlth tluU they both 
shrieked out. and cried. "Murder, murder!"' 
and so put theiiiselves under those laws that 



450 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

arc provided for the protection of women. 
Deut. 22 : 25-27. But the men still made their 
approach upon them, witli design to prevail 
against them. They therefore cried out again. 
Now they being, as I said, not far from the 
gate in at which they came, their voice was 
heard from whence they were, thither: where- 
fore some of the house came out, J^^ ourwhen 



tongue, they made haste to her relief. But by 
that they were got within sight of eom'I ''"'""' 
them, the women were in a very great scuffle ; 
the children also stood crying by. Then did 
he that came in for their relief call out to the 
ruffians, saying, "What is that thing you do? 
Would you make my Lord's people to trans- 
gress ?" He also attempted to take them, but 
they did make their escape over the The m ones 

•^ _ ^ fly to the devil 

wall into the garden of the man to forreuef. 
whom the great dog belonged ; so the dog be- 
came their protector. This Reliever then came 
up to the women, and asked them how they 
did. So they answered, "We thank thy Prince, 
pretty well, only we have been somewhat af- 
frighted: we thank thee also for that thou 
camest in to our help, otherwise we had been 
overcome.'' 



TIIK IMIJJRIMS' OVEIJSICIIT. 451 

So, after a lew more words, this Reliever 
The Reliever salcl as followetli : " I iiiarvelled mueh. 

talks to the 

women. wluMi voii Were entertained at the 

gate above, seeing ye knew that ye were l)ut 
weak women, that you petitioned not the Lord 
for a conduetor: then niiglit you have avoided 
these troubles and dangers : lor he would have 
granted you one." 

"Alas." said Christiana, 'we were so taken 
Mark this: with our })resent l)lessing, that dan- 
gers to come were forgotten by us. Besides, 
who could have thought, that so near the King's 
palace there could have lurked such naughty 
ones? Indeed, it had been well for us had we 
asked our Lord for one: l)ut since our Lord 
knew it would be for our profit, I wonder he 
sent not one along with us." 

Rkl. It is not always necessary to grant 
things not asked for, lest by so doing they be- 
.noT'i^skS '""■ come of little esteem ; but when the 
want of a thing is felt, ii then comes under, in 
the eyes of him that feels it, that estimate that 
properly is its due, and so consequently will 
be thereafter used. Had my Lord granted 
you a conductor, you would not cither so have 
bewailed that oversight of yours, in not asking 
for one, as now vou have occasion to do. J-^o 



452 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

all things work for good, and tend to make yon 
more wary. 

Chr. Shall we go back again to my Lord, 
and confess our folly, and ask one ? 

Eel. Your confession of your folh^ I will 
present him with. To go back again you need 
not, for in all places where you shall come you 
will find no want at all ; for in every one of 
my Lord's lodgings, which he has prepared for 
the reception of his pilgrims, there is sufficient 
to furnish them against all attempts whatso- 
ever. But, as I said, He will be inquired of 
by them, to do it for them. Ezek. 36 : 37. And 
't is a poor thing that is not worth asking for. 

When he had thus said, he Avent back to 
his place, and the pilgrims went on their Avay. 

Then said Mercy, " What a sudden blank 
is here ! I made account that we had o^llrc^''"'"' 
been past all danger, and that we should never 
see sorrow more." 

"Thine innocency, my sister," said Chris- 
tiana to Mercy, "may excuse thee gunt''"'"^"'''' 
much ; but as for me, my fault is so much the 
greater, for that I saw this danger before I 
came out of the doors, and yet did not provide 
for it when provision might have been had. I 
am much to be blamed '' 



THE nirilES OF GRACE. 453 

Tlion said Mercy, "How knew you this 
Ix'l'orc you came from home? I*ray open to 
me this I'iddh'.*" 

CiiR. Why, I will tell you. Before I set 
dreanl'rSXi' foot out of doors, oue night as I lay 
in my l)ed I had a di-oam ahout this; for me- 
thoutrht I saw two men. as like these as ever 
any in the woi-ld could h)ok, stand at my bed's 
foot. })lotting how they might ])revent my sal- 
vation. I will tell you their very words. They 
said, (it was when I was in my troubles.) "What 
shall we do with this woman? for she cries out, 
waking and sleeping, for forgiveness; if she be 
suffered to go on as she begins, we shall lose her 
as we have lost her husband." This you know 
might have made me take heed, and have pro- 
vided when provision might have been had. 

'•Well," said ^lercy, "as l)y this neglect 
Mercy makes wc liuvc au occaslon miuistcred unto 

good use oClheir 

neglect of duty, ^^g ^0 bchold our own imperfections, 
so our Lord has taken occasion thereby to 
make manifest the riches of his grace ; for he, 
as we see, has followed us with unasked kind- 
ness, and has delivered us froiu tlicir hands 
that were stronger than we, of his mere good 
pleasure." 

Thus now. when thcv ha<l talked awav a 



454 PTLCRTM'? PROGRESS. 

little more time, they drew near to a house 
which stood in the way, Avhich house was built 
for the relief of pilgrims, as you will find more 
fully related in the first part of these records 
of the Pilgrim's Progress. So they drew on 
towards the house, (the house of the Interpret- 
er ;) and Avhen they came to the door, xaik in inter- 
they heard a prreat talk in the house, about ciiristi- 

" '-^ ana s going on 

Then they gave ear, and heard, as p-'s'-^^s^- 
they thought, Christiana mentioned by name ; 
for you must know that there went along, even 
before her, a talk of her and her children's 
going on pilgrimage. And this was the more 
pleasing to them, because they had heard that 
she was Christian's wife, that woman who was 
some time ago so unwilling to hear of going on 
pilgrimage. Thus, therefore, they stood still, 
and heard the good people within commending 
her who they little thought stood at the door. 
At last Christiana knocked, as she thed'oor"'''''' 
had done at the gate before. Now, when she 
had knocked, there came to the door The door is 

opened to them 

a young damsel, and opened the door, ^y innocent. 
and looked, and behold, two women were there. 

Then said the damsel to them, "With whom 
would you speak in this place ?" 

Christiana answered. "We understand that 



JoV IX THE Iior.-^E. -l.-M 

this is a privileuHM] jilncc foi- those (hat are be- 
come piluriiiis, niul we now at this door are 
such: wherefore we pray that we may be j)ar- 
takers of that for which we at this time are 
come; for the day, as thou seest, is very far 
spent, and we are loath to-niglit to go any fur- 
ther."" 

Dam. Pray, what may I call your name, 
that I may tell it to my Lord within ? 

Chr. My name is Christiana; I was the 
wife of that })ilgrim that some years ago did 
travel this way, and these be his four children. 
This maiden also is my companion, and is going 
on j)ilgrimage too. 

Then Innocent ran in, (for that Avas her 
name,) and said to those within, 'Can you think 
who is at the door? There is Christiana and 
her children, and her companion, all, waiting 
.loy in the f<>i* ontertainmcnt here." Then they 
Interpreter that Icapcd for jov, aud wcut aud told 

Christiana is '■ ^ ». ' 

turned pilgrim. |.]^^|j, Mastcr. So hc cauic to the 
door, and looking upon her, he sai<l, ''Art thou 
that Christiana whom (liristian the good man 
left behind him when he betook himself to a 
pilgrim's life ?'" 

CniJ. I am that woman that was so hai'd- 
heartcd as to sliulif mv lius])aiid"s iroubles. and 



456 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

that left him to go on his journey alone, and 
these are his four children. But now I also am 
come, for I am convinced that no way is right 
but this. 

Inter. Then is fulfilled that which is writ- 
ten of the man that said to his son, "Go work 
to-day in my vineyard ; and he said to his fa- 
ther, I will not; but afterwards repented, and 
went." Matt. 21:29. 

Then said Christiana, "So be it: Amen. 
God make it a true saying upon me, and grant 
that I may be found at the last of him in peace, 
without spot, and blameless." 

Inter. But why standest thou thus at the 
door? Come in, thou daughter of Abraham; 
we were talking of thee but now, for tidings 
have come to us before how thou art become a 
pilgrim. Come, children, come in ; come, maid- 
en, come in. 

So he had them all into the house. 

So when they were within, they were bid- 
den to sit down and rest them ; the which when 
they had done, those that attended upon the 
pilgrims in the house came into the room to 
see them. And one smiled, and an- t^^e^eThel^uS 
other smiled, and they all smiled for cfods ways. 
joy that Christiana was become a pilgrim. They 



THE SIGMFICAXT-ROOM?. 457 

also looked upon the bovs; they stroked tlicm 
over tlieir laces with the hand, in token of their 
kind reception ol" them: they also caii-icd it 
lovingly to Mercy, and bid them all welcome 
into their Master's house. 

After a while, because supper was not 
caltTooms^"'" rcady, the Interpreter took them 
into his Significant-rooms, and showed them 
what Christian, Christiana's husband, had seen 
some time before. Here, therefore, they saw 
the man in the cage, the man and his dream, 
the man tliat cut his way througli his enemies. 
and the picture of the biggest of them all, to- 
gether with the rest of those things that were 
then so profitable to Christian. 

This done, and after those things had been 
somewhat digested 1 r Christiana and her com- 
pany, the Interpreter takes them ajiart again, 
and has them first into a room where was a 
The man with nuui that could look no wav but down- 

the muck rake 

expounded. wards, wltli a muck-rake in his hand. 
There stood also one over his head with a celes- 
tial crown in his hand, and proffered him that 
crown ^( V his muck-n.kc; but the man did nei- 
ther look up nor regard, but raked to himself the 
straws, tlie small sticks, and dust of the floor. 
Then said Christiana, "I persuade myseU 



458 J'TLG KIM'S PROr.RESS. 

that I know somewhat the meaning of this ; for 
this is the figure of a man of this world, is it 
not, good sir?" 

"Thou hast said right,"' said the Interpret- 
er; "and his mnck-rake doth show his carnal 
mind. And whereas thon seest him rather give 
heed to i-ake np straws and sticks, and the 
dust of the floor, than to do what He says that 
calls to him from above with the celestial crown 
in his hand, it is to show that heaven is but 
as a fable to some, and that things here are 
counted the only things substantial. Now, 
whereas it was also showed thee tliat the man 
could look no way but downwards, it is to let 
thee know that earthl}' things, when they are 
with power npon men's minds, quite carry their 
hearts away from God.*' 

Then said Christiana, "0 deliver Christianas 

prayer against 

me from this muck-rake." Prov. ^'^e muckrake. 
30 : 8. 

"That prayer," said the Interpreter, "has 
lain by till it is almost rusty: 'Give me not 
riches,' is scarce the prayer of one in ten thou- 
sand. Straws and sticks and dust, with most, 
are the great things now looked after." 

With that Christiana and Mercy wept, and 
said, "It is, alas, too true." 



Til i: si'iDKH. 459 

When the Tii(t'ri)iTtor had showed them 
this, he had them into tlie very best room in 
the house; a very ])i'ave room it was. So he 
bid tliem look round about, and see if they 
eouhl find any thin.ii: })rofita])le there. Then 
the}' looked round and round ; for there was 
Of the spider, nothing to l)e seen but a very great 
spider on the Avail, and that they overlooked. 

Tlien said AFerey, "Sir, I see nothing;" but 
Christiana held her peaee. 

"But," said tlie Interpreter, "look again." 
She tlierefore looked again, and said, "Here is 
sp[der.''^°"**"' not any thing but an ugly si)ider, 
who hangs by her hands upon the wall." Then 
said he, "Is there but one spider in all this 
spacious room?" Then the water stood in Cliris- 
tiana's eyes, for she was a woman (juick of 
appreliension; and she said, "Yea, Lord, there 
are more here than one ; yea, and sj)iders whose 
venom is far more destructive than that which 
is in Iier." The Interpreter then looked pleas- 
antly on her. and said. "Thou liast said the 
truth." This made Mei-cy to blusli, and the 
boys to cover llieir faces; for they all began 
now to understand the riddle. 

Then said tiic Interpreter again. "The spi- 
der takcMli liold widi licr luuids." ns von see. 



460 PILCxRIM'S PROGRESS. 

'and is in kings' palaces.' Prov. 20 : 38. And 
wherefore is this recorded, but to show you 
that, how full of the venom of sin soever you 
be, yet you may, by the hand of Faith, lay 
hold of and dwell in the best room that belongs 
to the King's house above ?" 

"I thought," said Christiana, "of something 
of this; but I could not imagine it at all. I 
thought that we were like spiders, and that we 
looked like ugly creatures, in what fine rooms 
soever we were: but that by this spider, that 
venomous and ill-favored creature, we were to 
learn how to act faith, that came not into my 
thoughts ; and yet she hath taken hold with her 
hands, and as I see, dwelleth in the best room 
in the house. God has made nothing in vain." 

Then they seemed all to be glad ; but the 
water stood in their eyes ; yet they looked one 
upon another, and also bowed before the In- 
terpreter. 

He had them into another room where were 
a hen and chickens, and bid them cwcE""'"'' 
observe a while. So one of the chickens went 
to the trough to drink, and every time she 
drank she lifted up her head and her eyes 
towards heaven. "See," said he, "what this 
little chick doth, and learn of her to acknow- 



THE IIKN AND CHICKENS. 461 

ledge whoiice your mercies eoiiie, by receiving 
them with hxiking up. Yet again,'' said he, 
"observe and look:" so they gave heed, and 
perceived that the hen did walk in a fourfold 
method towards her ehiekens: lirst, she had 
a common call, and that she hath all the day 
long; second, she had a special call, and that 
she had but sometimes ; third, she had a brood- 
ing note, Matt. 23 : 37 ; and, fourth, she had 
an outcry. 

"Now," said he, ■"compare this hen to 3'our 
King, and these chickens to his obedient ones; 
for, answerable to her, he himself hath his 
methods which he walketh in towards his peo- 
ple. By his common call, he gives nothing; 
by his si)ecial call, he always has something to 
give; he has also a brooding voice, for them 
that are under his wing ; and he has an outer}-, 
to give the alarm when he scetli the enemy 
come. I choose, my darlings, to lead you into 
the room v> here such things are, because you 
are women, and they are easy for you." 

"And, sir," said Christiana, "i)rav let us 
see some more." So he had them into the 
an.u'he^^*er slaughtcr-house, where was a butcher 
killing a sheep: and behold, the sheep was 
quiet, and took her death [)atiently. Then said 



462 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

the Interpreter, "You must learn of this sheep 
to suffer, and to put up with wrongs without 
murmurings and complaints. Behold how quiet- 
ly she takes her death, and, without objecting, 
she suftereth her skin to be pulled over her 
ears. Your King doth call you his sheep.'' 

After this he led them into his garden, 
Avhere was great variety of flowers; or the garden. 
and he said, "Do you see all these ?" So Chris- 
tiana said, "Yes." Then said he again, "Be- 
hold, the flowers are diverse in stature, in qual- 
ity and color and smell and virtue, and some 
are better than others ; also, where the gar- 
dener hath set them, there they stand, and 
quarrel not one with another.'' 

Again, he had them into his field, which he 
had sown with wheat and corn; but of the field. 
when they beheld, the tops of all were cut off, 
and only the straw remained. He said again, 
"This ground was dunged and ploughed and 
sowed, but what shall we do with the crop ?" 
Then said Christiana, "Burn some, and make 
muck of the rest." Then said the Interpreter 
again, "Fruit, you see, is that thing jon look 
for ; and for want of that you condenni it to the 
fire, and to be trodden under foot of men : be- 
ware that in this vou condemn not vourselves." 



Tin: pvOBix AND ?piDt:n. 463 

Thou, as they were coining- in from abroad. 
an7ihVVk^r" tliov ospiod a little robin with a great 
j^pider in his mouth. So the Interpreter said, 
"Look here." So they looked, and Mercy 
wondered: but Christiana said, 'What a dis- 
paragement is it to such a pretty little l)ird as 
the robin-redbreast ; he being also a bird above 
many, that loveth to maintain a kind of socia- 
bleness with men I I had thought they had 
lived upon crumbs of bread, or upon other 
such harmless matter: I like him worse than I 
did."' 

The Interpreter then replied, "This robin 
is an emblem very apt to set forth some pro- 
fessors by; for to sight they are. as this robin, 
pretty of note, color, and carriage. They seem 
also to have a ver}^ great love for professors 
that are sincere ; and above all others, to de- 
sire to associate with them, and to be in their 
company, as if they could live upon the good 
man's crumbs. They pretend also, that there- 
fore it is that they frequent the house of the 
godly, and the appointments of the Lord : but 
when they are by themselves, as the robin. 
they can catch and gobble u\) spiders— they 
can change their diet, drink iniquity, and swal- 
low down sin like water." 



464 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

So, when they were come again into the 
house, because supper as yet was not ,vm getTt'S 
ready, Christiana again desired that unreveaied. 
the Interpreter wouki either show or tell some 
other things that are profitable. 

Then the Interpreter began, and said, 
"The fatter the sow is, the more she desires 
the mire ; the fatter the ox is, the more game- 
somcly he goes to the slaughter ; and the more 
healthy the lustful man is, the more prone he is 
unto evil. There is a desire in women to go 
neat and fine ; and it is a comely thing to be 
adorned with that which in God's sight is of 
great price. 'T is easier watching a night or 
two, than to sit up a whole year together ; so 
"t is easier for one to begin to profess well, than 
to hold out as he should to the end. Every 
shipmaster, when in a storm, will willingly 
cast that overboard Avhich is of the smallest 
value in the vessel; but who will throw the 
best out first ? None but he that feareth not 
Grod. One leak will sink a ship, and one sin 
will destroy a sinner. He that forgets his 
friend is ungrateful unto him ; but he that for- 
gets his Saviour is unmerciful to himself. He 
that lives in sin, and looks for happiness here- 
after, is like him that soweth cockle, and thinks 



THE ROTTEN TREE. 4G5 

to fill his barn with wheat or barley. If a man 
would live well, let him feteh his last day to 
him. and make it always his company -keeper. 
AVliisj)erin<i-, and ehang-e of thoughts, prove that 
sin is in the world. If the world, which God 
sets light by. is counted a thing of that worth 
with men, what is heaven, that God connnend- 
eth ? If the life that is attended with so many 
troubles, is so loath to be let go by us, what is 
the life above? Every body will cry up the good- 
ness of men ; but who is there that is, as he should 
be, affected with the goodness of God? We 
seldom sit down to meat, but we eat, and leave ; 
so there is in Jesus Christ more merit and right- 
eousness than the whole world has need of." 

When the Interpreter had done, he takes 
them out into his garden again, and had them 
roueni't'hcarr to a trcc whosc Insldc was all rotten 
and gone, and yet it grew and had leaves. 
Then said Mercy, "What means this?"' "This 
tree,"' said he, "whose outside is fair, and whose 
inside is rotten, is that to which many may be 
compared that are in the garden of God ; who 
wnth their mouths speak Iiigli In behalf of (Jod, 
but indeed will do nothing for him;- whose 
leaves are fair, but their heart good for noth- 
ing but to be tinder for the devil's tinder-box." 
20* 



466 riLG RIM'S PROGRESS. 

Now supper was ready, the table spread, 
and all things set on the board ; so supper. ^'^'^ "' 
they sat down, and did eat, when one had given 
thanks. And the Interpreter did usually en- 
tertain those that lodged with him with music 
at meals ; so the minstrels played. There Avas 
also one that did sing, and a very fine voice he 
had. His song was this : 

" The Lord is only my support, 
And he that doth me feed ; 
How can I then Avant any thing 
Whereof I stand in need ?" 

When the- song and music were ended, the 
Interpreter asked Christiana what it Taik at supper, 
was that at first did move her thus to betake 
herself to a pilgrim's life. Christiana answered, 
"First, the loss of my husband came a repetition 

of Cliristian'8 

into my mind, at which I was heart- experience. 
ily grieved ; but all that was but natural aifec- 
tion. Then after that came the troubles and 
pilgrimage of my husband into my mind, and 
also how like a churl I had carried it to him 
as to that. So guilt took hold of my mind, and 
would have drawn me into the pond, but thct 
opportunely I had a dream of the well-being 
of my husband, and a letter sent me by the 
King of that country where my husband dwells, 
to come to him. The dream and the letter to- 



(■inn^TiANA\>? i-:xi'i:itii:N('i;. 4(h 

gether so wrought upon my mind that they 
forced mo to this way.' 

IxTEK. But mot you with no opposition be- 
fore you set out of doors ? 

Ohr. Yes, a noiglibor of mine, one Mrs. 
Timorous: she was akin to him that woukl liave 
persuaded my husband to go back, for fear of 
the lions. She also befooled me for, as she 
called it, my intended desperate adventure ; she 
also urged what she could to dishearten me 
from it, the hardships and troubles that my 
husband met with in the way; but all this I 
got over pretty well. But a dream that I had 
of two ill-looking ones, that I thought did plot 
how to make me miscari-y in my journey, that 
hath troubled me much ; yea, it still runs in 
my mind, and makes me afraid of every one 
that I meet, lest they should meet me to do 
me a mischief, and to turn me out of my way. 
Yea, I may tell my Lord, though I would not 
have every body know of it. that between this 
and the gate by which wc; got into the way, wc 
were both so sorely assaulted that we were 
made to cry out murder; and the two that made 
this assault upon us, were like the two that I 
saw in my dream. 

Then said tlic Tnterprc'tor. "Thy l)eiTinning 



468 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 



is good ; thy latter end shall greatly increase.'' 
So he addressed himself to Mercy, to^^erc?'"^"' 
and said unto her, "And what moved thee to 
come hither, sweetheart?" 

Then Mercy blushed and trembled, and for 
a while continued silent. 

Then said the Interpreter, "Be not afraid; 
only believe, and speak thy mind." 

So Mercy began, and said, "Truly, sir, my 
want of experience is that which Mercys reply. 
makes me covet to be in silence, and that also 
that fills me with fears of coming short at last. 
I cannot tell of visions and dreams, as my 
frienci Christiana can ; nor know I what it is 
to mourn for my refusing the counsel of those 
that were good relations." 

Inter. What was it, then, dear heart, that 
hath prevailed with thee to do as thou hast 
done ? 

Mer. Why, when our friend here was pack- 
ing up to be gone from our town, I and an- 
other went accidentally to see her. So we 
knocked at the door and went in. When we 
were within, and seeing what she was doing, 
Ave asked her what was her meaning. She said 
she was sent for to go to her husband; and 
then she up and told us how she had seen him 



MERCY'S EXPERIENCE. 469 

in a dream, dwollinp: in a curious place, amoiin; 
immortals, weariup: a crown, i)layinf? upon a 
harp, eating and drinking at his I^rincc's table, 
and singing praises to him for bringing him 
thither, etc. Now, uiethonght, while she was 
telling these things unto us, my heart burned 
within me. And I said in my heart, If this 
be true, I will leave my father and my mother, 
and the land of my nativity, and will, if T may, 
go along with Christiana. So I asked her fur- 
ther of the truth of these things, and if she 
would let me go with her; for I saw now that 
there was no dwelling, ))ut Avitli the danger of 
ruin, any longer in our town. JUit yet I eame 
away with a heavy heart; not for that I was 
unwilling to come away, but for that so many 
of my relations were left behind. And I am 
come with all the desire of my heart, and will 
go, if I may. with Christiana unto her husband 
and his King. 

Inter. Thy setting out is good, for thou 
hast given credit to the truth; thou art a Ruth, 
who did, for the love she bore to Naomi and 
to the Lord her God, leave father and mothei-, 
and the land of her nativity, to come out and 
go with a peoi)le that she knew not heretofore. 
"The Lord recompense thy Avork, and a full 



470 . riLGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

reward be given thee of the Lord God of Is- 
rael, under whose wings thou art come to trust." 
Ruth'2:ll, 12. 

Now supper was ended, and preparation 
was made for bed ; the women were They undress 

themselves for 

laid singly alone, and the boys by ^''^■ 
themselves. Now, when Mercy was in bed, 
she could not sleep for joy, for that now her 
doubts of missing at last were removed further 
from her than ever they were before. So she 
lay blessing and praising God, who night'rrifsr'''^ 
had such favor for her. 

In the morning they arose with the sun, 
and prepared themselves for their departure ; 
but the Interpreter would have them tarry a 
while; "for," said he, "you must orderly go 
from hence." Then said he to the damsel that 
first opened unto them, "Take them and have 
them into the garden to the bath, sanctification"' 
and there Avash them and make them clean 
from the soil which they have gathered by 
travelling." Then Innocent the damsel took 
them and led them into the garden, and brought 
them to the bath ; so she told them that there 
they must wash and be clean, for so her Mas- 
ter would have the women to do that called at 
his house as they were going on pilgrimage. 



w.\<iii;i) AND .<i:alei». 471 

Then tlicv went ill and washed, yea, tlicy and 
ihe&""'"" the l...ys. and all: and tliey\'anie 
out of that l)aTh not (inly sweet and elean. l)ut 
also mucli enlivened and strengthened in their 
johits. So when they came in. they looked 
fairer a deal than when they went out to the 
washing. 

When they were returned out of the garden 
from the bath, the Interpreter took them and 
looked upon them, and said unto them, "Fair 
as the moon." Then he called for the seal 
wherewith they used to he sealed that were 
washed in his bath. So the seal was brought, 
arlseai^^'^""' aud hc sct hls mark upon them, that 
they might be known in the places whither, 
they were yet to go. Xow the seal was the 
contents and sum of the passover which the 
children of Israel did eat, Kxod. 13:8-10, 
when they came out of. the land of P^gy pt; and 
the mark was set between their eyes. This 
seal greatly added to their beauty, for it was 
an ornament to their faces. It also added to 
their gravity, and made their countenances 
more like those of angels. 

Then said the Interpreter again to the dam- 
sel that waited upon these women. "Go into 
the vestry, and fetch out garments for these 



472 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

people." So she went and fetched out white 
raiment, and laid it down before him ; are dothef""' 
so he commanded them to put it on : it was fine 
linen, white and clean. When the women were 
thus adorned, they seemed to be a terror one 
to the other ; for that thej could not see that 
glory each one had in herself, which True humiiuy. 
they could see in each other. Now therefore 
they began to esteem each other better than 
themselves: "For you are fairer than I am," 
said one; and, "You are more comely than I 
am," said another. The children also stood 
amazed, to see into what fashion they were 
brought. 



GREAT-HEART. 473 



THE THIRD STAGE. 

The Interpreter then ealled for a man-ser- 
vant of lii:>;, one Great-heart, and bid him take 
a sword and helmet and shield, and, "Take 
these my danghters," said he, " eondnct them 
to the liouse called Beautiful, at which place 
they will rest next/' So he took his weapons, 
and went before them; and the Interpreter 
said, "God speed/' Those also that belonged 
to the family sent them away with many a good 
wish. So they went on their way, and sang. 

This place liath been our second stage: 

Here we have heard and seen 
Those good things, that from age to age 

To others hid have been. 

The dunghill-raker, spider, hen, 

The chicken, too, to me 
Have taught a lesson : let me then 
Conformed to it be. 

The butcher, garden, and the field, 

The robin and his bait, 
Also the rotten tree, doth yield 

Me argument of weight, 

To move me for to watch and pray, 

To strive to be sincere ; 
To take my cross up day by da}', 

And serve the Lord with fear. 

Now I saw in my dream, that these went 
on, and Great-heart before them. So thev 



474 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

went, and came to the place where Christian's 
burden fell off his back and tumbled into a sep- 
ulchre. Here then they made a pause ; here 
also they blessed God. "Now,'' said Chris- 
tiana, "it comes to my mind what was said to 
us at the gate, to wit, that we should have 
pardon by word and deed: by word, that is, 
by the promise ; by deed, to wit, in the way 
it was obtained. What the promise is, of that 
I know something ; but what it is to have par- 
don by deed, or in the way that it was ob- 
tained, Mr. Great-heart, I suppose you know; 
wherefore, if you please, let us hear your dis- 
course thereof." 

Great-heart. Pardon by the deed done, is 
pardon obtained by some one for an- a comment 

A "^ upon what was 

other that hath need thereof; not by ^f^cu^coSSeof 

our beins justi- 

the person pardoned, but ni the way, fiecibychnst. 
saith another, in which I have obtained it. So 
then, to speak to the question more at large, 
the pardon that you and Mercy and these 
boys have attained, was obtained by another; 
to wit, by him that let you in at the gate. 
And he hath obtained it in this double way ; 
he hath performed righteousness to cover you, 
and spilt his blood to wash you in. 

Christiana. But if he parts with his right- 



.TU^TiriED BY ("IIRIST. 475 

eousncss to iis. what will Ik^ liavc for liiin- 
seir? 

Gkeat. He has more righteousness than 
you have nee<l of, or than he needeth himself. 

Chr. Pray make that appear. 

GiiEAT. AVith all my heart: l)ut lirst I must 
premise, that lie of whom we are now about 
to speak, is one that has not his fellow. He 
has two natures in one i)erson. })lain to be dis- 
tinguished, impossible to be divided. Unto 
each of these natures a righteousness belong- 
eth. and eaeh righteousness is essential to that 
nature; so that one may as easily cause the 
nature to be extinct, as to separate its justice 
or righteousness from it. Of these righteous- 
nesses, therefore, we are not made j)artakers, 
so as that they, or any of them, should be i)ut 
upon us, that we might be made just, and live 
thereby. Besides these, there is a righteous- 
ness which this person has. as these two na- 
tures are joined in one. And this is not the 
righteou.sness of the Godhead as distinguished 
from the manhood, nor the righteousness of the 
manhood as distinguished from the Godhead; 
but a righteousness which standeth in th'e union 
of both natures, and may properly be called 
the righteousness that is essential to his being 



476 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

prepared of God to the capacity of the media- 
tory office, which he was intrusted with. If he 
parts with his first righteousness, he parts with 
his Godhead ; if he parts with his second right- 
eousness, he parts with the purity of his man- 
hood ] if he parts with his third, he parts with 
that perfection which capacitates him for the 
office of mediation. He has therefore another 
righteousness, which standeth in performance, 
or obedience to a revealed will; and that is 
what he puts upon sinners, and that by which 
their sins are covered. Wherefore he saith, 
"As by one man's disobedience many were 
made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall 
many be made righteous." Eom. 5 : 19. 

Chr. But are the other righteousnesses of 
no use to us ? 

Great. Yes ; for though they are essential 
to his natures and office, and cannot be com- 
municated unto another, yet it is by virtue of 
them that the righteousness that justifies is for 
that purpose efficacious. The righteousness of 
his Godhead giveth virtue to his obedience ; the 
righteousness of his manhood giveth capability 
to his obedience to justify; and the righteous- 
ness that standeth in the union of these two 
natures to his office, giveth authority to that 



I'iulitoousnoss (o do tlic work for w]iic]i it was 
oi'tlaiiied. 

J^o then luM'c is a riu-litt'ousiicss tliat riirisl, 
as God, has no need of; lor he is God witliout 
it. Ilrro is a righteousness that Ghrist, as 
man. has no need of to make liim so: for lie is 
perfect man withont it. Again, here is a right- 
eousness that Christ, as God-man, has no need 
of: for he is j)erfectly so without it. Here 
then is a righteousness that Christ, as God, 
and as God-man. has no need of with reference 
to himself, and therefore he can spare it : a Jus- 
tifying righteousness that he for himself want- 
eth not. and therefore giveth it away. Hence 
it is called the gift of righteousness. This right- 
eousness, since Christ Jesus the Lord has made 
himself under the law, must be given away; 
for the law doth not only bind him that is 
under it to do justly, but to use charity. Rom. 
5:17. Wherefore he must, or ought by the 
law. if he hath two coats, to give one to him 
that hath none. Now, our Lord indeed hath 
two coats, one for himself, and one to spare; 
wherefore he freely bestows one upon those 
that have none. And thus, Christiana and 
Mercy, and the rest of you that are here, doth 
your pardon come by deed, or hy the work of 



478 1'TL(;T!I.M\- PROCl^ESS. 

another man. Your Lord Christ is he that 
worked, and hath given away what he wrought 
for, to the next poor beggar he meets. 

But again, in order to pardon by deed, 
there must something be paid to God as a 
price, as well as something prepared to cover 
us withal. Sin has delivered us up to the just 
curse of a righteous law ; now from this curse 
we must be justified by way of redemption, a 
price being paid for the harms we have done ; 
and this is by the blood of your Lord, who 
came and stood in your place and stead, and 
died your death for your transgressions. Thus 
has he ransomed you from your transgressions 
by blood, and covered your polluted and de- 
formed souls with righteousness, Rom. 8:34; 
for the sake of which, God passeth by you, 
and will not hurt you when he comes to judge 
the world. Gal. 3:13. 

Chr. This is brave! Now I see that there 
was something to be learned by our it.ctedUurthfs 
being pardoned by word and deed, tion.'' "'"'"'^' 
Good Mercy, let us labor to keep this in mind ; 
and, my children, do you remember it also. 
But, sir, was not this it that made my good 
Christian's burden fall from off his shoulders, 
and that made him give three leaps for joy ? 



TiiK cr.Aci: OF ('in; 1ST. iT'.i 

Great. Yes. it was llic belief of lliis tliai 
iiowthecords cut tliose striiin's that could not be 

Ihat fastened . 

< hristian s bur- cut bv otliei" uieaus : aud it was to 

flen to liim were 

*"'■" give him a j)roof of the virtue of 

this, that he was suffered to carry his burden 
to the cross. 

Chr. I thouuht SO: for though my lieart 
was lightsome and Joyous before, yet it is ten 
times more lightsome and joyous now. And I 
am persuaded ])y what I have felt, though I 
liave felt but little as yet, that if the most bur- 
dened man in the world was here, and did see 
and believe as I now do, it would make his 
heart the more merry and ])lithe. 

Great. There is not only comfort and the 
How ancction casc of n burdcu brouaht to us bv 

to Christ is l)c- "" 

got in the soul, (j-ip s[cr\i{ aud cousidcration of these, 
but an endeared affection begot in us ])y it; 
for who can, if he doth but once think that 
pardon comes not only by promise but thus, 
but be alfected with the way and means of his 
redemption, and so with the man that hath 
wrought it for him ? 

CiiR. True: methinks it makes my heart 
bleed to think that he should bleed for me. 
Oh, thou loving One : Oh, thou blessed One. 
Thou deservest to have me; thou hast bought 



480 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

me. Thoii deservest to have me all: thou hast 
paid for me ten thousand times more mSumi."^ '"^' 
than I am worth. No marvel that this made 
the tears stand in my husband's e3'es, and that 
it made him trudge so nimbly on. I am per- 
suaded he wished me with him ; but, vile wretch 
that I was, I let him come all alone. Oh, Mer- 
cy, that thy father and mother were here ; j'ea, 
and Mrs. Timorous also ; nay, I wish now with 
all my heart that here was Madam Wanton too. 
Surely, surel}', their hearts would be affected ; 
nor could the fear of the one, nor the powerful 
lusts of the other, prevail with them to go home 
again, and refuse to become good pilgrims. 

Great. You speak now in the warmth of 
your affections; Avill it, think you, be always 
thus with you ? Besides, this is not communi- 
cated to ever}' one, nor to every one that did 
see your Jesus bleed. There were that stood 
by, and that saw the blood run from his heart 
to the ground, and yet were so far off this, that 
instead of lamenting they laughed at him, and 
instead of becoming his disciples did xobeafiected 
harden their hearts against him. So with what" he 

^ lias clone, is a 

that all that you have, my daughters, ^'""g «r-<^i-i- 
you have by peculiar impression made by a 
divine contemplating upon what I have spoken 



END OF THE FOOLISH ONES. 481 

t(i you. Roiiiember, tliut "t was told you, that 
the hcu, by her common call, gives no meat to 
her chickens. This you have therefore by a 
special grace. 

Now I saw in my dream, that they went 
on until they were come to the place that Sim- 
ple and Sloth and Presumption lay and slept 
in when Christian went by on pilgrimage ; and 
behold, they were hanged up in irons a little 
way off on the other side. 

Then said Mercy to him that was their 
and" PrmJ- c^"^^^ ^^^'^ couductor, '"Wliat are 
and why!'"^'"'' these three men; and for what are 
they hanged there ?"' 

Great. These three were men of bad qual- 
ities; they had no mind to be pilgrims them- 
selves, and whomsoever the}' could they hin- 
dered. They were sloth and folly themselves, 
and whomsoever they could persuade they 
made so too, and withal taught them to pre- 
sume that they should do well at last. They 
were asleep when Christian went by ; and now 
you go by, they are hanged, 

Mer. But could they persuade any to be 
of their opinion ? 

Great. Yes, they turned several out of the 
way. There was Slow-pace that they persuad- 



482 riLGr.i.\r\^ pi^oot^ess. 

ed to do as the}'. They also prevailed with 
one Short-wind, with one No-heart, Their crimes. 
with one Linger-after-lust, and with one Sleepy- 
head, and with a yonng woman, her name was 
Dnll, to tnrn out of the way and become as 
(hey. Besides, they brought up. an ill-report 
of your Lord, persuading others that he was a 
hard taskmaster. They also brought up an 
evil report of the good land, saying it was not 
half so good as some pretended it was. They 
also began to vilify his servants, and to count 
the best of them meddlesome, troublesome 
busj^bodies. Further, they would call the bread 
of God husks ; the comforts of his children fan- 
cies; the travel and labor of pilgrims, things 
to no purpose. 

"Nay," said Christiana, "if they were such, 
they should never be bewailed by me: they 
have but what they deserve ; and I think it is 
well that they stand so near the highway, that 
others may see and take warning. But had it 
not been well if their crimes had been engrav- 
en in some plate of iron or brass, and left here 
where they did their mischiefs, for a caution 
to other bad men ?"' 

GrREAT. So it is, as you may well perceive, 
if you will go a little to the wall. 



THE IIIF.L DIFFICULTY. 483 

^rEKCY. Xo, no; let (liom luin^::, and (heir 
names rot. and tlicir crinics Hyo for ever 
ag-ainst tluMn. I tliiid; it a liigli favor tliat 
tliey were lianged before we eamc liitlier: who 
knows else wliat they might have done to such 
j)oor women as we are ? 

Tlieii slie turned it into a song, saying, 

'■ Xow then you three liang there, and be a sign 
To all that shall against the truth combine. 
And let him that comes after fear this end, 
If unto i)ilgrims he is not a friend. 
And thou, my soul, of all such men beware, 
That unto holiness opposcrs are."' 

Thus they went on till they came to the 
foot of the hill DifTiculty, where again the good 
Mr. Great-heart took an occasion to tell them 
what happened there when Christian himself 
went by. So he had them lirst to the spring. 
'"Lo," saith he, "this is the spring that Chris- 
tian drank of before he went up this hill: and 
^cui.ig oi- goo.! tlic'ii it was clear and good; but now 

doctrine in erro •■• t; -jIji p , p .-, 

nt-ous times. it IS du'ty With thc fcct of somc that 
are not desirous that pilgrims here should 
quench their thirst."' Ezek. 34 :18, 19. There- 
at Mercy said, '"And why so envious, trow?"' 
"But,"' said their guide, "it will do, if taken 
up and put into a vessel that is sweet and 
ffood; for tlien tlie dii-t will sink to the bottom, 



484 riLGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

and the water come out by itself more clear." 
Thus therefore Christiana and her companions 
were compelled to do. Tliey took it up, and 
put it into an earthen pot, and so let it stand 
till the dirt was gone to the bottom, and then 
they drank thereof. 

Next he showed them the two by-ways 
that were at the foot of the hill, where Formal- 
ity and Hypocrisy lost themselves. "And," 
said he, "these are dangerous paths. Two 
were here cast away when Christian came b}' ; 
and although, as you see, these ways The paths, 

_ . , 1 . though barred 

are since stopped up with chains, up.wmnotkeep 

I i^ i^ 'all Irom going 

posts, and a ditch, yet there arc '"♦'i«^™- 
those that will choose to adventure here, rather 
than take the pains to go up this hill." 

Celr. "The way of transgressors is hard." 
Prov. 13:15. It is a wonder that they can 
get into these ways without danger of break- 
ing their necks. 

GrREAT. Thc}^ will vcuturc ; yea, if at any 
time any of the King's servants do happen to 
see them, and do call upon them, and tell them 
that they are in the wrong way, and do bid 
them beware of the danger, then they railingly 
return them answer, and say, "As for the word 
that thou hast spoken unto us in the name of 



Tllf] II I LI, DIFFICULTY. 485 

the King, wc will not hearken unto thec; but 
we will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth 
out of our own mouth."' Jer. 44 : ] 0, 17. Xay 
if you look a little further, you shall see that 
these ways are made cautionary enough, not 
only by these posts and ditch and cluiiu but 
also by being hedged up; yet they will choose 
to go there. 

Cur. They are idle ; they love not to take 
why'^'son^^'do pains ; up-hill wav is unpleasant to 

choose to go in J 1 oi . ^ ' 

by-ways. them. So It IS fullilled unto them as 
it is written, "The way of the slothful inan is 
as a hedge of thorns.'' Prov. 15 :19. Yea, 
they will rather choose to walk upon a snare 
than to go up this hill, and the rest of this way 
to the city. 

Then they set forward, and began to go up, 
the hill, and up the hill they went.^. But before^ 
thr'p^,g'il!nr/o^ they got to the top, Christiana ])egan 
•' to pant, and said, "T dare sav this 

is a breathing hill: no marvel if thev that 
love their ease more than their souls choose 
to themselves a smoother way."' Then said 
Mercy, "I must sit down;" also the least of 
the children began to cry. "Tome, come,'' 
said Great-heart, "sit not down here; for a 
little above is the Prince's aibor." Then he 



486 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

took the little boy by the hand, and led him 
up thereto. 

When they were come to the arbor, they 
were very willing to sit down, for arbor.^''*'''^'''' 
they were all in a pelting heat. Then said 
Mercy, "How sweet is rest to them that labor. 
Matt. 11:28; and how good is the Prince of 
pilgrims to provide such resting-places for 
them ! Of this arbor I have heard much; but 
I never saw it before. But here let us beware 
of sleeping; for, as I have heard, it cost poor 
Christian dear." 

Then said Mr. Great-heart to the little 
ones, "Come, my pretty boys, how do you do? 
What think you now of going on pilgrimage ?" 
"Sir," said the least; "I was almost answer^fo^The 
beat out of heart ; but I thank you fo^Mercy!"^ *''*' 
for lending- me a hand at my need. And I 
remember now what iny mother hath told me, 
namely, that the way to heaven is as a ladder, 
and the way to hell is as down a hill. But I 
had rather go up the ladder to life, than down 
the hill to death." 

Then said Mercy, "But the proverb is, 'To 
go down the hill is easy.'" But James said, 
(for that was his name,) "The day is coming 
when, in my opinion, going down the hill will 



THE nilNCES ARBOR. 487 

be the hardest of all." "Tis a good boy," 
said his master: 'thou hast given her a right 
answer." Then Mercy smiled. l)nt the little 
boy did blush. 

"Come,'' said Christiana, "will you eat a 
thlmseivcs'^'"''''' bit to swcetcn your mouths, while 
you sit here to rest your legs ? for I have here 
a piece of pomegranate which Mr. Interpreter 
put into my hand just when I came out of his 
door; he gave me also a piece of a honev- 
c©mb, and a little bottle of spirits.'' 'I thought 
he gave you something," said Mercy, "because 
he called you aside." "Yes, so he did," said 
the other; "but," said Christiana, "it shall be 
still as I said it should, when at first we came 
from home ; thou shalt be a sharer in all the 
good that I have, because thou so willingly 
didst become my companion." Then she gave 
to them, and they did eat, both Mercy and the 
boys. And said Christiana to Mr. Great-heart, 
"Sir, will you do as we?" But he answered, 
"You are going on pilgrimage, and presently 
I shall return ; much good may what you have 
do you : at home I eat the same every day." 



488 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 



THE FOURTH STAGE. 

Now when they had eaten and drank, and 
had chatted a little longer, their gnide said to 
them, "The day wears away; if yon think 
good, let us prepare to be going." So they 
got up to go, and the little boys went before ; 
but Christiana foro;ot to take her bot- cumtianafor- 

""^ gets her bottle 

tie of spirits with her, so she sent ofspints. 
her little boy back to fetch it. Then said Mer- 
cy, " I think this is a losing place; here Chris- 
tian lost his roll, and here Christiana left her 
bottle behind her. Sir, what is the cause of 
this?" So their guide made answer, and said, 
"The cause is sleep, or forgetfulness : some 
sleep when they should keep awake, and some 
forget when they should remember; and this 
is the very cause why often, at the resting- 
places, some pilgrims in some things come off 
losers. Pilgrims should watch, and remember 
what they have already received, under their 
greatest enjoyments ; but for want of doing so, 
oftentimes their rejoicing ends in Mark this. 
tears, and their sunshine in a cloud: witness 
the story of Christian at this place." 

When they were come to the place where 



LI0N5 IN THE ROAD. 480 

Mistrust and Tiinoroiis met Christian, to per- 
suade him to go back for fear of the lions, they 
perceived as it were a stage, and before it, 
towards the road, a broad pUite with a copy 
of verses written thereon, and underneath the 
reason of raising up that stage in that place 
rendered. The verses were, 

'• Let liim that sees this stage, take heed 
Unto his heart and tongue ; 
Lest, if he do not, here he speed 
As some have long agone." 

The words underneath the verses were, 
'"This stage was built to punish those upon, 
who, through timorousness or mistrust, shall 
be afraid to go further on pilgrimage. Also, 
on this stage both Mistrust and Timorous were 
burned through the tongue with a hot iron, for 
endeavoring to hinder Christian on his jour- 
uey." 

Then said Mercy, "This is much like to the 
saying of the Beloved: 'AVhat shall be given 
unto thee. f>r what shall be done unto thee, 
thou false tongue? r^harp arrows of the mighty, 
with coals of juniper." " Psa. 120 : 3, 4. 

So they went on till they came within sight 
of the lions. Now Mr. G reat-heart was a strong 
man, so he was not afraid of a lion. But yet 
when they were come up to the place where 

21* 



490 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

tlie lions were, the boys, that went before, were 
now glad to cringe behind, for they tho^i^a^tgri 
were afraid of the lions; so they there i^ nJarn" 

' "^ ger, but shrink 

stepped back, and went behind. At come. *'*'"^''' 
this their guide smiled, and said, "How now, 
my boys; do yon love to go before when no 
danger doth approach, and love to come be- 
hind so soon as the lions appear ?" 

Now, as they went on, Mr. Great-heart 
drew his sword, with intent to make a way for 
the pilgrims in spite of the lions. Then there 
appeared one that, it seems, had gi,^/t,aiuu.fMs 
taken upon him to back the lions ; hons!"^ 
and he said to the pilgrims' guide, "What is 
the cause of your coming hither?" Now the 
name of that man was Grim, or Blood3^-man, 
because of his slaying of pilgrims ; and he was 
of the race of the giants. 

Then said the pilgrims' guide, "These wom- 
en and children are going on pilgrimage, and 
this is the way they must go ; and go it they 
shall, in spite of thee and the lions." 

Grim. This is not their way, neither shall 
they go therein. I am come forth to withstand 
them, and to that end will back the lions. 

Now, to say truth, by reason of the fierce- 
ness of the lions, and of the grim carriage of 



tiil: c iant (;i;i.m. 4i)l 

him that ditl back them, this way had of late 
lain mucli iinoecupiecl, and was almost grown 
over with grass. 

Then said Christiana, "Though the high- 
ways have been unoccupied heretofore, and 
though the travellers have been made in times 
past to walk through by-patlis, it must not be 
so now I am risen, now 1 am risen a mother in 
Israel.'' Judges 5:0, 7. 

Then Grim swore by the lions that it should ; 
ixrttl therefore bid them turn aside, for they 
should not have passage there. 

But Great-heart their guide made lirst his 
A light be. approach unto Grim, and laid so 

tween Grim and 

Great-heart, hcavlly ou hiui witli liis sword that 
he forced him to retreat. 

Then said he that attempted to back the 
lions, "Will you slay me upon my own ground?"' 

Great. It is the King's highway that we 
are in, and in this way it is that thou hast 
placed the lions ; but these women, and these 
children, though weak, shall hold on their way 
in spite of thy lions. 

And with that he gave him again a down- 
right blow, and brought him upon his knees. 
With this blow also he broke his helmet, and 
with the next he cut oH' an arm. Then did 



492 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

the giant roar so hideously that his voice fright- 
ened the women, and yet they were glad to see 
him lie sprawling upon the ground, me victory. 
Now the lions were chained, and so of them- 
selves could do nothing. Wherefore, when old 
Grim, that intended to back them, was dead, Mr. 
Great-heart said to the pilgrims, "Come now, 
and follow me, and no hurt shall happen to you 
from the lions." They therefore went nluLr' ^^ 
on, but the women trembled as they passed by 
them ; the boys also looked as if they woifid 
die ; but they all got by without further hurt. 

Now, when they were within sight of the 
porter's lodge, they soon came up unto it; but 
they made the more haste after this to go thith- 
er, because it is dangerous travelling there in 
the night. So when they were come They come 

to the porter's 

to the gate, the guide knocked, and ^«'^s<^ 
the porter cried, "Who is there?" But as 
soon as the guide had said, "It is I," he knew 
his voice, and came down, for the guide had 
oft before that come thither as a conductor of 
pilgrims. When he was come down, he open- 
ed the gate ; and seeing the guide standing just 
before it, (for he saw not the women, for they 
were behind him.) he said unto him, "Plow 
now, Mr. Great-heart, what is j^our business 



THE PORTER'S LODGE. 493 

here so late at night?'' '"I have brought," said 
he, "some pilgrims hither, where, by my Lord's 
commandment, they must lodge: I had been 
here some time ago, had I not been opposed 
by the giant that did use to back the lions. 
But r. after a long and tedious combat with 
him, have cut him off, and have brought the 
pilgrims hither in safety." 

PoK. Will you not go in, and stay till morn- 
ing ? 

Great heart GrEAT. Xo, I wlll rctum tO UIV 

attempts to go 

back. XiOrd to-night. 

Chr. sir, I know not how to l)e willing 
you should leave us in our pilgrimage: you 
have been so faithful and so loving to us, you 
have fought so stoutly for us, you have been 
so hearty in counselling of us, that I shall 
never forget your favor towards us. 

Then said Mercy, "0 that we might have 
Tiie pilgrims thv compEuy to our journey's end. 

implore his com- 
pany still. How can such poor women as we 

hold out in a wa}' so full of troubles as this 

way is, without a friend and defender ?" 

Then said James, the youngest of the boys, 

"Pray, sir, be persuaded to go with us, and 

help us, because we are so weak, and the way 

so dangerous as it is." 



494 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Great. I am at my Lord's commandment; 
if he shall allot me to be your guide quite 
through, I will willingly wait upon you. But 
here you failed at first ; for when he Help lost for 

want of asking 

bid me come thus far with you, then ^'°''"- 
you should have begged me of him to have 
gone quite through with you, and he would 
have granted your request. However, at pres- 
ent I must withdraw ; and so, good Christiana, 
Mercy, and my brave children, adieu. 

Then the porter, Mr. Watchful, asked Chris- 
tiana of her country, and of her kindred. And 
she said, "I came from the city of Destruc- 
tion. I am a widow woman, and my husband 
is dead; his name was Christian the pilgrim." 
"How," said the porter, "was he your hus- 
band?" "Yes," said she, "and these are his 
children; and this," pointing to Mercy, "is one 
of my toAvnswomen." Then the porter rang 
his bell, as at such times he was wont, and 
there came to the door one of the damsels, 
whose name was Humble-mind ; and to her the 
porter said, "Go tell it within, that Christiana, 
the wife of Christian, and her children, are 
come hither on pili^rimaore." She joy at the 

•^ ^ ° news of the pil- 

went in therefore, and told it. But grids' coming. 
Oh, what noise for gladness was there within 



TIIH PALACE HHAlTIFrL. 495 

wlic'ii tlic (lainscl did l)iil drop tluit out of her 
mouth ! 

So they came with haste to the porter, Tor 
Christiana stood still at the door. Then some 
of the most grave said iinlo her, "Come in, 
Christiana, come in, thou wile of that good 
man; come in, thou blessed woman, come in, 
with all that are with thee."' So she went in, 
and they followed her that were her children 
and companions. Now when they were gone 
in. they were had into a large room, where 
they were bidden to sit down; so they sat 
down, and the chief of the house were called 
to see and welcome the guests. Then they 
came in, and understanding wdio they were, 
did salute each other with a kiss, and said, 
i^klndiTauhe " "^Velcomc, ye vessels of the grace of 
otCr.'' *'°^''" God; welcome to us, j^our friends." 

Xow, because it was somewhat late, and 
because the pilgrims were weary with their 
journey, and also made faint with the sight of 
the fight and of the terrible lions, they desired, 
as soon as might be, to prepare to go to rest. 
"Xay," said those of the family, "refresh your- 
selves first with a morsel of meat ;" for they 
had prepared for them a lamb, with the accus- 
tomed sauce belonging thereto. Exod. 12 :21; 



496 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

John 1 : 29 ; for the porter had heard before of 
their coming, and had tokl it to them within. 
So when they had supped, and ended their 
prayer with a psahn, they desired they might 
go to rest. 

"But let ns,"' said Christiana, "if we may 
be so bold as to choose, be in that chamber 
that was my husband's when he was here ;" so 
they had them up thither, and they all lay in a 
room. When they were at rest, Christiana and 
Mercy entered into discourse about things that 
were convenient. 

Chr. Little did I think once, when my 
husband went on pilgrimage, that I christs bosom 

is for all pil- 

should ever have followed him. s™"*' 

Mer. And you as little thought of lying in his 
bed, and in his chamber to rest, as you do now, 

Chr. And much less did I ever think of 
seeing his face with c(j|Hifort, and of worship- 
ping the Lord the King with him ; and yet now 
I believe I shall. 

Mer. Hark ; don't you hear a noise ? 

Chr. Yes; it is, as I believe, a M«sic. 
noise of music, for joy that we are here. 

Mer. Wonderful! music in the house, music 
in the heart, and music also in heaven, for joy 
that we are here ! 



MERCY'S DREA.Ar. 497 

Thus they talked a while, and theu betook 
themselves to sleep. 

So in the morning when they were awake, 
h^Sl"?"' Christiana said to Mercy, -'What 
was the matter, that you did lauuli in your sleep 
to-night ? I suppose you were in a dream." 

^ri:i;. So I was, and a sweet dream it was; 
but are you sure I laughed ? 

CiiR. Yes, you laughed heartily; but prithee, 
Mercy, tell me thy dream. 

Mer. I was dreaming that I sat all alone 
Mercys dream, in a soUtary place, and was bemoan- 
ing of the hardness of my heart. Xow I had 
not set there long but methought many were 
gathered about me to see me, and to hear what 
it was that I said. So they hearkened, and I 
went on bemoaning the hardness of my heart. 
At this, some of them laughed at me, some 
called me fool, and some began to thrust me 
about. With that, methought I looked up and 
dr'^m \v£.'"*'^ ^ saw one coming with wings towards 
me. So he came directly to me. and said, 
"Mercy, what aileth thee T' Xow when he had 
'heard me make my complaint, he said, "Peace 
be to thee ;" he also wiped my eyes with his 
handkerchief, and clad me in silver and gold. 
Ezek. 1G:8-11. He put a chain about my 



498 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

neck, and ear-rings in my ears, and a beautiful 
crown upon my head. Then he took me by 
the hand, and said, "Mercy, come after me." 
So he went up, and I followed till we came at 
a golden gate. Then he knocked ; and when 
they within had opened, the man went in, and 
I followed him up to a throne, upon which one 
sat; and he said to me, "Welcome, daughter." 
The place looked bright and twinkling like the 
stars, or rather like the sun, and I thought 
that I saw your husband there; so I awoke 
from my dream. But did I laugh ? 

Chr. Laugh ? aye, and well you might, to 
see yourself so well. For you must give me 
leave to tell you, that it was a good dream ; 
and that, as you have begun to find the first 
part true, so you shall find the second at last. 
"God speaks once, yea, twice, yet man per- 
ceiveth it not; in a dream, in a vision of the 
night, when deep sleep falleth upon men, in 
slumberings upon he bed." Job 33 : 14, 15. 
We need not, when abed, to lie awake to talk 
with God ; he can visit us while we sleep, and 
cause us then to hear his voice. Our heart 
oftentimes wakes when we sleep, and God can 
speak to that, either by words, by proverbs, by 
signs and similitudes, as well as if one was awake. 





it 



TIIKY REST A WHILE. 499 

^Ikr. Well, I mil glad of my dream; fur I 
hor'dre^.S.'"'°Miope oro long to sec it fulfilled, to 
the making me laugh again. 

CiiR. I think it is now high time to rise, 
and to know what we must do. 

Mer. Pray, if they invite us to stay a while, 
let us willingly accept of the proffer. I am 
the more willing to stay a while here, to grow 
better accjuainted with these maids; methinks 
Prudence, Piety, and Charity have very come- 
ly and sober countenances. 

Chr. We shall see what they will do. 

So when they were up and ready, they 
came down, and they asked one another of 
their rest, and if it was comfortable or not. 

"Very good," said Mercy; "it Avas one of 
the best night's lodgings that ever I had in my 
life." 

Then said Prudence and Piety, "If you 
will be persuaded to stay here a while, you 
shall have what the houbc will afford." 

"Aye, and that with a very good will," 
said Charity. So they consented, and stayed 
som'elime^'*'^'"^ thcrc about a month or above, and 
became very profitable one to another. And 
because Prudence would see how Christiana 
had brought up her children, she asked leave 



500 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

of licr to catechize tliera. So she gave her free 
consent. Then she began with the sir^J^'to^^'cale- 

,1 T chize Christi- 

youngest, whose name was James, anas children. 

Prudence. Come, James, canst chi^i^' *"''^" 
thon tell mc who made thee ? 

James. God the Father, God the Son, and 
God the Holj Ghost. 

Prud. Good boy. And canst thou tell who 
saved thee ? 

James. God the Father, God the Son, and 
God the Holy Ghost. 

Prud. Good boy still. But how doth God 
the Father save thee ? 

James. By his grace. 

Prud. How doth God the Son save thee ? 

jAivfES. By his righteousness, death and 
blood, and life. 

Prud. And hoAV doth God the Holy Ghost 
save thee ? 

James. By his illumination, b}^ his renova- 
tion, and by his preservation. 

Then said Prudence to Christiana, "You 
are to be commended for thus bringing up 
your children. I suppose I need not ask the 
rest these questions, since the j^oungest of them 
can answer them so well. I will therefore now 
apply myself to the next youngest." 



TlIK (IIII.DItEX CATECIIIZKI). nol 

Thou Pi'udonre said, ''Conic .loscph," for 
chuer'* ""'" his name was Joseph, "will you let 
me catechize you ?' 

Jot^EPii. AVith all my heart. 
"Prudence. AVliat is man ? 

Joseph. A reasonable creature, so made ])y 
God, as my l)rotlicr said. 

Prud. AVhat is supposed hy this word, 
saved ? 

Joseph. That man. l>y sin, has brought 
himself into a state of captivity and misery. 

PiU'D. What is supj)osed by his being saved 
by the Trinity ? 

Joseph. That sin is so great and mighty a 
tyrant, that none can pull us out of its clutches 
but God: and that God is so good and loving 
to man, as to pull him indeed out of this mis- 
erable state. 

Prud. What is God's design in saving poor 
men? 

Joseph. The glorifying of his name, of his 
grace and justice, etc., and the everlasting hap- 
piness of his creature. 

Prud. Who are they that will be saved? 

Joseph. They that accept of his salva- 
tion. 

Prud. Good boy, Joseph ; thy mother hath 



502 PILCx RIM'S PROGRESS. 

taught tliee well, and thou hast hearkened unto 
what she has said unto thee. 

Then said Prudence to Samuel, who was 
the eldest but one, "Come, Samuel, J^^"^ ''''''■' 
are you willing that I should catechize jou ?" 

Samuel. Yes, forsooth, if you }3lease. 

Prudence. What is heaven ? 

Sam. a place and state most blessed, be- 
cause God dwelleth there. 

Prud. What is hell ? 

Sam. a place and state most woful, because 
it is the dwelling-place of sin, the devil, and 
death. 

Prud. Why wonkiest thou go to heaven ? 

Sam. That I may see God, and serve him 
without weariness; that I may see Christ, and 
love him everlastingly ; that I may have that 
fulness of the Holy Spirit in me which I can 
by no means here enjoy. 

Prud. A ygyj good boy, and one that has 
learned well. 

Then she addressed herself to the eldest, 
whose name was Matthew; and she chized''''' '"''" 
said to him, "Come, Matthew, shall I also cat- 
echize you ?" 

Matthew. With a very good will. 

Prudence. T ask, then, if there was ever 



Tin: rilll.IUJEN' CATECin/.KD. fjOri 

any tliinu- tli;it liad a Ijoiiiq: autoccdcnt to or 
Ijotoro (i()(l ? 

^Iatt. Xo, for God is eternal ; nor is lliere 
any thinir, exeeptinp^ liimself, that had a being 
nntil tlie Ijcginninij^ of the first day. For in 
six days tlie Lord made heaven and earth, tlie 
sea, and all that in them is. 

Prud. Wliat do yon think of the Bible ? 

Matt. It is th^ holy word of God. 

Prud. Is there nothing written therein but 
what you understand ? 

Matt. Yes, a great deal. 

Piiui). AVliat do you do when you meet 
with })laces therein that you do not under- 
stand ? 

Matt. I think God is wiser than I. I pray 
also that he will i)lease to let me know all 
therein that he knows will be for my good. 

Pri'I). How believe you as touehing the 
resurrection of the dead ? 

^Iatt. I believe they shall rise the same 
that was buried ; the same in nature, though 
not in corruption. And I believe this upon a 
double account: first, because God has prom- 
ised it; secondly, because he is able to per- 
form it. 

Then .'^aid Prudence to the bovs, "You 



504 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

must still hearken to your mother ; for she can 
teach you more. You must also clil- conchi^rolfuro'n 
igently give ear to what good talk onhe'^boys.^'"^ 
you shall hear from others ; for your sakes do 
they speak good things. Observe also, and 
that with carefulness, what the heavens and 
the earth do teach you ; but especially be much 
in the meditation of that book which was the 
cause of your father's beconflng a pilgrim. I, 
for my part, my children, will teach you what 
I can while you are here, and shall be glad if 
you will ask me questions that tend to godly 
edifying." 

Now by that these pilgrims had been at 
this place a week, Mercy had a visitor that 
pretended some good-will unto her, and his 
name was Mr. Brisk, a man of some s^vSJart.'" * 
breeding, and that pretended to religion, but a 
man that stuck very close to the world. So he 
came once or twice, or more, to Mercy, and 
offered love unto her. Now Mercy was of a 
fair countenance, and therefore the more allur- 
ing. 

Her mind also was to be always busying of 
herself in doing ; for when she had nothing to 
do for herself, she would be making hose and 
garments for others, and would bestow them 



M !• l\ C Y ■ S S W E E T ] 1 K A 1 : T . r,li.", 

Upon th(i-^o lliat had need. And Mi-, lii-isk not 
kn(twiim- wlicrc oi- Ikiw she dis])osed of Avluit 
she made, seemed to be greatly taken, for that 
he ibund her never idle. I will warrant her a 
good housewife. (|Uoth he to himself. 

Merev then revealed the business to the 
maidens that were of the house, and intjuired 
of'Ti;o'"S of tli^"^ concerning him, for they did 
wiiccmmg Mr. |,j-^q^^, j^jj^^ bcttcr tliau slic. So they 

told her that he was a very busy young man, 
and one who ])retended to religion, but was, as 
the}' feared, a stranger to the power of that 
which is good. 

'"Xay then,"" said Mercy, "I will look no 
more on him; for I purpose never to have a 
clog to my soul.'- 

Prudence then replied, that there needed 
no matter of great discouragement to be given 
to him ; her continuing so as she had begun to 
do for the poor would (piickly cool his cour- 
age. 

So the next time he comes he finds her at 
Talk between hcr old woi'k, making thincrs for the 

Mercy and Mr. '^ "" 

Brisk. poop Then said he, 'What, always 

at it?'' "Yes,"' said she, "either for myself or 
for others." "And Avhat canst thou earn a 
day?" said he. "I do these things,"' saiU she, 

Til Pp.?. 22 



"that I may be rich in good works, laying up 
in store for myself a good foundation against 
the time to come, that I may lay hold on eter- 
nal life." 1 Tim. 6:17-19. -'Why, priihcc, 
what doest thou with them?" said he. ''Clothe 
tile naked,"' said she. With that his counte- 
nance fell. So he forbore to come hS^IZhy^^ 
at her again. And when he was asked the 
reason why, he said that Mercy was a pretty 
lass, but troubled with ill conditions. 

When he had left her. Prudence said, "Did 
I not tell thee that Mr. Brisk would soon for- 
sake thee ? yea, he will raise up an ill report 
of thee ; for, notwithstandino; his pre- Mercy in the 

,' CD X practice of mer- 

tence to religion, and his seeming ^4iil Iiercytn 
love to Mercy, yet Mercy and he mercy is nked. 
are of tempers so different that I believe they 
Avill never come together." 

Mer. I might have had husbands before 
now, though I spoke not of it to any ; but they 
were such as did not like my conditions, though 
never did any of them find fault with my per- 
son. So they and I could not agree. 

Prud. Mercy in our days is but little set 
by any further than as to its name: the prac- 
tice which is set forth by thy conditions, there 
are but few that can abide. 



MATTHEW IS HICK. ',()' 

"Well,"' said ^rcrcy. '"if iiolxxly will liavc 
iu?'oT^* ■"''"" inc. I will (lie uiuiiarrit'd. or my cou- 
ditioiis shall 1)0 to lue as a husband, lor 1 can- 
not chantro my nature : and to have one who 
lies cross to me in this, that I purpose never 
Jt!.rwal"eJv' to admit of as lonir as I live. I had 
blnl'i '""■" ''"' a sister named Bountiful that w^as 
married to one of these churls, l)ut he and she 
could never agree : but because my sister was 
resolved to do as she had beirun, that is, to 
show^ kindness to the ])0or, therefore her hus- 
band first cried her down at the cross, and 
then turned her out of his doors."' 

Prud. And yet he was a professor, I Avar- 
rant you. 

Mku. Yes. such a one as he was. and of 
such as he the world is now full: but I am for 
none of them all. 

Xow ^fatthew. the eldest son of Christiana, 
j^uttiiew foils f^ii ^j^.|. .^jj^i |,j^ sickness was sore 

upon him. for he was much ])ained in his ])ow- 
els, so that he was with it at times ])ulled as it 
were both ends tofrether. There dwelt also 
not far from thence one Mr. Skill, an ancient 
and well-approved ])hysician. So Christiana 
desired it, and they sent f(tr him. and he came. 
When he was entered the room, and had a 



508 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

little observed the boy, he concluded that he 
was sick of the gripes. Then he said sck-nJe':'''^*"'"" 
to his mother, "What diet has Matthew of late 
fed upon?" "Diet?" said Christiana, "noth- 
ing but what is wholesome." The physician 
answered, "This boy has been tam- /lilJ^S'"'"' 
pering with something that lies in his stomach 
undigested, and that will not away without 
means. AndT tell you he must be purged, or 
else he will die." 

Then said Samuel, "Mother, what was that 
which my brother did gather up and n^Xr\rmind 

, « of the fruit his 

eat as soon as we were come irom brother did eat. 
the gate that is at the head of this way ? You 
know that there was an orchard on the left 
hand, on the other side of the wall, and some 
of the trees hung over the wall, and my broth- 
er did pluck and eat." 

"True, my child," said Christiana, "he did 
take thereof, and did eat: naughty boy as he 
was, I chid him, and yet he would eat thereof." 

Skill. I knew he had eaten something that 
was not wholesome food; and that food, to wit, 
that fruit, is even the most hurtful of all. It 
is the fruit of Beelzebub's orchard. I do mar- 
vel that none did warn you of it; many have 
died thereof. 



Then Christiaiui began to cry ; and she said, 
'Oil. naniility boyi and Oh, careless mother! 
what shall 1 do lor my son ?" 

Skill. Come, do not be too much dejected; 
the boy may do well again, but he must purge 
and vomit. 

TnK. Pray, sir, try the utmost of your skill 
with liiin. whatever it costs. 

Skill. Xay. I hope I shall be reasonable. 

So he made him a purge, but it was too 
weak ; it was said it was made of the blood of 
a goat, the ashes of a heifer, and some of the 
juice of hyssop. Heb. 9:13, 19; 10:1-4. 
When Mr. Skill had seen that that purge was 
too weak, he made one to the purpose. It was 
boTrow.^^*"" ^ made e.v came et sanguine Christ i,'-^ 
John 6 : 54-57 ; Heb. 9:14; (you know physi- 
cians give strange medicines to their patients:) 
and it was made into pills, with a promise or 
two, and a proportionate quantity of salt. Mark 
9 : 49. Now, he was to take them three at a 
time, fasting, in half a quarter of a i)int of the 
tears of repentance. Zech. 12 : 10. 
The boy loath AVhcu thls potlou was prepared, 

to take the phy- 

«"= and brought to the boy, he was loath 

to take it. though torn with the gripes as if he 

♦ Of tlie flesh mid blood of Christ. 



510 PILGRIMS PROGRESS. 

should be pulled in pieces. "Come, come," 
said the physician, '"you must take it/" "It 
goes against my stomach," said the boy. "I 
must have you take it," said his mother. "I 
shall vomit it up again," said the boy. "Pray 
sir," said Christiana to Mr. Skill, "how does it 
taste?" "It has no ill taste," said the doctor; 
and with that she touched one of the ihc mother 

tastes it, and 

pills with the tip of her tongue. ' ' Oh, persuades him. 
Matthew," said she, "this potion is sweeter 
than honey. If thou lovest thy mother, if thou 
lovest thy brothers, if thou lovest Mercy, if 
thou lovest thy life, take it." So, with much 
ado, after a short })rayer for the blessing of 
God upon it, he took it, and it wrought kindly 
with him. It caused him to purge ; it caused 
him to sleep, and to rest quietly; it put him 
into a tine heat and breathing sweat, and did 
quite rid him of his gripes. So in a little time 
he got up and walked about with a Awordofood 

in the hand of 

staff, and would go from room to ^^"•^ 
room and talk with Prudence, Piety, and Char- 
ity, of his distemper, and how he was healed. 

So when the boy was healed, Christiana 
asked Mr. Skill, saying, "Sir, what will con- 
tent you for your pains and care to and of my 
child?" And he said, "You must pay the 



A LNlVKKr^Al. IIK.MKDV. ."^ll 

Master of the College of Physicians. Heh. 
lo: 11-15, according to i-ulcs made in that 
case and provided." 

'•But, sir." saifl Christiana, "what is tliis 
])ill good for else ?" 

Skill. It is a universal pill: it is good 
vcr-ui'remJ"' agalust all tlic dlscascs that pilgrims 
are incident to: and when it is well prepared, 
it will keep good time out of mind. 

Cnn. Pray, sir. make me up twelve boxes 
of them: for if I can get these, I will never 
take other physic. 

Skill. These pills are good to prevent dis- 
eases, as well as to cure when one is sick. 
Yea. I dare say it, and stand to it, that if a 
man will but use this physic as he should, it 
will make him live for ever. John G : 51. But, 
good Christiana, thou nuist give these })ills no 
other way but as I have prescribed ; for if you 
do. they will do no good. 

So he gave unto Christiana physic for her- 
self and her boys, and for Mercy: and bid 
Matthew take heed how he ate any more green 
plums; and kissed them, and went his way. 

It was told you before, that Prudence bid 
the ljoy<;. that if at any tiiue they would, tliey 
should ask her some questions that might be 



512 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

profitable, and she would say something to 
them. 

Then Matthew, who had been sick, asked 
her why for the most part physic or physic. 
should be bitter to our palates. 

Prud. To show how unwelcome the word 
of God and the effects thereof are to a carnal 
heart. 

Matt. Why does physic, if it does good, 
purge, and cause to vomit ? 

Prud. To show that the word, when it 
works effectually, cleanseth the heart and mind. 
For look, what the one doth to the body, the 
other doth to the soul. 

Matt. What should we learn by seeing the 
flame of our Are go upwards, and by tuesur'"''^"' 
seeing the beams and sweet influences of the 
sun strike downwards ? 

Prud. By the going up of the lire, we arc 
taught to ascend to heaven by fervent and hot 
desires. And by the sun sending his heat, 
beams, and sweet influences downwards, we are 
taught that the Saviour of. the world, though 
high, reaches down with his grace and love to 
us below. 

Matt. Whence have the clouds ortheciouds. 
their water? 



PROFITABLE DISCOURSE. 513 

Prud. Out of the sea. 

Matt. What may we learn from that? 

Prud. Tliat ministers slionld fetch their 
iloctrinc from God. 

^Iatt. AVhy do they enii)ty themselves upon 
the earth ? 

Prud, To show that ministers should give 
out what they know of God to the world. 

Matt. Why is the rainbow caused by the 

Of the rainbow. SUU ? 

Prud. To show that the covenant of God's 
grace is confirmed to us in Christ. 

Matt. Why do the springs come from the 
Of the springs, sca to US tlirougli tlic carth ? 

Prud. To show that the grace of God comes 
to us through the body of Christ. 

;Matt. Why do some of the springs rise 
out of the tops of high hills ? 

Prud. To show that the Spirit of grace 
shall s])ring up in some that are great and 
mighty, as well as in many that are poor and 
low. 

Matt. Why doth the fire fasten upon the 

Of the candle. candlC-wick ? 

Prud. To show that unless grace doth kin- 
dle upon the heart, there will be no true light 
of life in us. 

.70* 



514 PILGRIMS PROGRESS. 

Matt. Why are the wick and tallow, and 
all, spent to maintain the light of the candle ? 

Prud. To show that body and sonl, and all, 
should be at the service of, and spend them- 
selves to maintain in good condition that grace 
of God that is in us. 

Matt. Why doth the pelican pierce otthe pelican. 
her own breast with her bill ? 

Prud. To nourish her young ones with her 
blood, and thereby to. show that Christ the 
blessed so loved his young, (his people,) as to 
save them from death by his blood. 

Matt. What may one learn by of the cock. 
hearing the cock to crow ? 

Prud. Learn to remember Peter's sin, and 
Peter's repentance. The cock's crowing shows 
also, that day is coming on: Jet then the crow- 
ing of the cock put thee in mind of that last 
and terrible day of judgment. 

Now about this time their month was out; 
wherefore they signified to those of the house, 
that it was convenient for them to up and be 
going. Then said Joseph to his mother, "It is 
proper that you forget not to send , J^- fmes'^ '^ai^ 
to the house of Mr. Interpreter, to prayers.""" 
pray him to grant that Mr. Great-heart should 
be sent unto us, that he may be our conductor 



E\¥:fi APl'LE. ;>lo 

for the rest ot tlio way." "Good boy,"' said 
she; "T had almost forgot." So she drew up a 
petition, and prayed ^Ir. "U'atchful the porter 
to send it by some lit man to her good friend 
Mr. Interpreter: who, when it was come, and 
he had seen the contents of the petition, said 
to the messenger, "Go, tell them that I will 
send him." 

When the family where Christiana was 
They provide saw that thc}' had a purpose to go 

to be gone on 

their way. forward, they called the whole house 
together, to give thanks to their King for send- 
ing of them such profitable guests as these. 
"Which done, they said unto Christiana, "And 
shall w^e not .^how thee something, as our cus- 
tom is to do to pilgrims, on which thou may est 
meditate when thou art upon the way?" So 
they took Christiana, her children, and ^lorcy. 
into the closet, and showed them one of the 
Eves apple, applcs that Eve ate of. and that she 
also did give to her husband, and that for the 
eating of which they were both turned out of 
paradise, and asked her what she thought that 
was. Then Christiana said, "It is food or poi- 
son, I know not which." So they opened the 
isarailinf ''" matter to her. and she held up her 
hand.- and wondered. (Jen. 3:6; Rom. 7 24. 



516 PILGRIM'S PllOGrvESS. 

Then they had her to a place, and showed 
her Jacob's ladder. Gen. 28:12. Jacobs laiidcr. 
Xow at that time there Avere some angels as- 
cending upon it. So Christiana looked and 
looked to see the angels go np : so did the rest 
of the company. Then they were going into 
another place, to show them something else; 
but James said to his mother, "Pray, bid them 
stay here a little longer, for this is a curious 
sight." So they turned again, and ^^ifkilig'''""' 
stood feeding their eyes with this so pleasant 
a prospect. 

After this, they had them into a place where 
did hang up a golden anchor. So elo? ^°'''" '"' 
they bid Christiana take it down ; for said they, 
"You shall have it with you, for it is of abso- 
lute necessity that you should, that j^ou may 
lay hold of that within the veil, Heb. 6:19, 
and stand steadfast in case you should meet 
with turbulent weather," Joel 3:16; so they 
were glad thereof. 

Then they took them, and had them to the 
mount upon which Abraham our fa- feringujifaaa 
ther offered up Isaac his son, and showed them 
the altar, the wood, the fire, and the knife, for 
they remain to be seen to this very day. Gen. 
22 :9. When they had seen it, they held up 



Mil. cm: AT- HE ART liEtUKXS. 517 

tlicir liamls. aiul blessed themselves, and said, 
"Oh. ^vliat a man for love to his Master, and 
for (l(Miial to himself, was .Vbraham!'' 

After they had showed them all these thinjis, 
Prudence took them into a dining-room, where 
j^urtcnccsvir- g^^^^^j .^ ^^.^j^. ^^j- excellent virginals ;=•= 

so she played upon them, and turned what she 
had showed them into this excellent song, say- 



" Eve's apple we have showed you; 

Of that be you aware : 
You have seeu Jacob's ladder too, 

Upon which angels are. 
An anchor you received have ; 

But let not these suffice, 
Until with Abraham you give 

Your best a sacrifice." 

Now, about this time one knocked at the 
Jomfsaganr^' door ; SO tlic portcr oi)ened, and be- 
hold, Mr. Great-heart was there. But when 
he was come in. what joy was there! for it 
came now afresh again into their minds, lutw 
Ijut a while ago he had slain old Grim Bloody- 
man the giant, and had delivered them from 
the lions. 

Then said ^Fr. Great-heart to Christiana and 
He brinRs a to ^Fcrcv, " Mv Lord has sent each 

token from his 

Lord with him. Qf yQ^ ^ bottle of winc, and also 

* A musical instrument. 



^')18 PILGRIMS PROGRESS. 

some parched corn, together with a couple of 
pomegranates ; he has also sent the boys some 
figs and raisins ; to refresh you in your way." 

Then they addressed themselves to their 
journey, and Prudence and' Piety went along 
with them. When they came to the gate, Chris- 
tiana asked the porter if any of late Avent by. 
He said, "No ; only one, some time since, who 
also told me, that of late there had been a 
great robbery committed on the King's high- 
way as you go. But," said he, "the thieves are 
taken, and will shortly be tried for their lives." 
Then Christiana and Mercy Avere afraid; but 
Matthew said, "Mother, fear nothing, as long 
as Mr. Great-heart is to go with us, and to be 
our conductor." 

Then said Christiana to the porter, "Sir, I 
am much obliged to you for all the Christiana 

takes her leave 

kindnesses that you have showed to of the porter. 
me since I came hither ; and also for that you 
have been so loving and kind to my children. 
I know not how to gratify your kindness; 
wherefore, pray, as a token of my respect to 
you, accept of this small mite." So she put a 
gold angeP^ in his hand ; and he made her a low 

* A gold angel was a coin of the value of ten shillings 
sferlinx. and according to the comparative value of money in 
Banyan's time, equal at least to a guinea at the present time. 



TiiK roHTEirs i5i,i:.<siN(;. oio 

olx'isaiieo. and said. " Let thy tianiioiits Itc al- 
bJJSfng'""""'"' ^vays white; and h-t tliy liead want 
no ointment." Keel. I) : 8. -Let Mercy live 
and not die. and let not her works be few.*' 
Deut. 33:(j. And to th(> boys he said. "Do 
you fly youthfnl Insts, and follow after godli- 
ness with them that are grave and wise, 2 Tim. 
2:22: .-^0 shall you put gladness into yonr 
mother's heart, and obtain praise of all that 
are sober-minded." So they thanked the por- 
ter and departed. 



520 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 



THE FIFTH STAGE. 

IvTow I saw in my dream, that they went 
forward nntil they were come to the brow of 
the hill ; where Piety, bethinking herself, cried 
out, "Alas, I have forgot what I intended to 
bestow upon Christiana and her companions : I 
will go back and fetch it." So she ran and 
fetched it. While she was gone, Christiana 
thought she heard, in a grove a little way off 
on the right hand, a most curious melodious 
note, with words much like these : 

" Through all my life thy favor is 
So frankly showed to me, 
That in thy house for evermore 
My dwelling-place shall be." 

And listening still, she thought she heard 
another answer it, saying, 

" For why ? The Lord our God is good ; 
His mercy is for ever sure ; 
His truth at all times firmly stood, 
And shall from age to age endure." 

So Christiana asked Prudence who it was 
fhat made those curious notes. Song 2:11,12. 
"They are," answered she, "our country birds: 
they sing these notes but seldom, except it be 
at the spring, when the flowers appear, and 



VALLEY OF II r >[ I LI ATIOX . 521 

the sun shines warm, and then you may hear 
them all day long. I often,'' said she, "go 
out to hear them ; we also ofttimes keep them 
tame in our house. They are very line com- 
pany for us when we are melancholy; also 
they make the woods and groves and solitary 
places, places desirable to be in.' 

By this time Piety was come again. So 
etr'soiSng ^^^c said to Christiana, ''Look here; 
oiyhematpart- j j^^^,^ brought thcc a schcmc of all 

those things that thou hast seen at our house, 
upon which thou mayest look when thou find- 
est thyself forgetful, and call those things again 
to remembrance for thy edification and com- 
fort."' 

Xow they began to go down the hill into 
the valley of Humiliation. It was a steep hill, 
and the way was slippery ; but they were very 
careful ; so they got down pretty well. AVhen 
they were down in the valley, Piety said to 
Christiana, '"This is the place where Christian, 
your husband, met with the foul fiend Apol- 
'lyon, and where they had that dreadful fight 
that they had: I know you cannot but have 
heard thereof. But be of good courage; as 
long as you have here Mr. Great-heart to be 
your guide and conductor, we hope you will 



522 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

fare the better." So when these two had com- 
mitted the pilgrims unto the conduct of their 
guide, he went forward, and they went after. 

Then said Mr. G-reat-heart, "We need not 
be so afraid of this valley, for here ^ea/t ^t ti^e^^ai^ 

, T . / 1 i 1 ley of Humilia- 

is nothing to hurt us, unless we pro- tion. 
cure it to ourselves. It is true Christian did 
here meet with Apollyon, with whom he also 
had a sore combat: but that fray was the fruit 
of those slips which he got in his going down 
the hill; for they that get slips there, must 
look for combats here. And hence it is, that 
this valley has got so hard a name. For the 
common people, when they hear that some 
frightful thing has befallen such a one in such 
a place, are of opinion that that place is haunted 
with some foul fiend or evil spirit ; when, alas, 
it is for the fruit of their own doing xue reason 
that such things do befall them there, w^s so beset m 

~ the valley of 

This valley of Humiliation is of it- H"™'1'=^"°» 
self as fruitful a place as any the crow flies 
over: and I am persuaded, if we could hit upon 
it, we might find somewhere hereabouts some- 
thing that might give us an account ^vliy Chris- 
tian was so hardly beset in this place."' ' 
Then said James to his mother, "Lo, yon- 
der stands a pillar, and it looks as if something 



Till-: V A Li.KY FitiiTFrL. '>-i:] 

was written thereon : let us a'o and see what it 

!?.'' So they went, and found tliere written. 

A pillar with "Let Christian's slips before he eanie 

an inscription 

upon it. hither, and the battles that he met 

with in this place, bo a warning to those that 
come after." "Lo," said their guide, '"did not 
I tell you tlrat there w^as something hereabouts 
that would give intimation of the reason why 
Christian was so hard beset in this place ?"' 
Then turning himself to Christiana, he said, 
"Xo disparagement to Christian more than to 
any others whose hap and lot it was. For it 
is easier going up than down this hill, and that 
can be said but of few hills in all these parts 
of the world. But we will leave the good 
man ; he is at rest : he also had a brave vic- 
tory over his enemy. Let Ilim grant, that 
dwelleth above, that we fare no worse, when 
we come to be tried, than he. 

"But wx will come again to this valley of 
brlveyac!'^ * Ilumiliatlon. it is the best and most 
fruitful piece of ground in all these parts. It 
is fat ground, and as you see, consisteth nuich 
in meadows ; and if a man was to come here 
in the summer-time, as we do now, if he knew 
not any thing before thereof, and if he also 
delighted iiimself in the sight of his eves, he 



524 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

might see that which would be delightful to 
him. Behold how green this valley is ; also 
how beautiful with lilies. Song 2:1. I have 
known many laboring men that have got good 
estates in this valley of Humiliation ; for God 
resisteth the proud, but giveth grace Men thrive in 

" ^ tlie valley of 

to the humble. James 4 : G ; 1 Pet. humiliation. 
5 : 5. Indeed, it is a very fruitful soil, and 
doth bring forth by handfuls. Some also have 
wished that the next way to their Father's 
house w^ere here, that they might be troubled 
no more with either hills or mountains to go 
over ; but the way is the way, and there is an 
end." 

Now, as they were going along and talking, 
they espied a boy feeding his father's sheep. 
The boy was in veiy mean clothes, but of a 
fresh and Avell-favored countenance ; and as he 
sat by himself, he sung. "Hark," said Mr. 
Great-heart, "to what the shepherd's bovsaith," 
So they hearkened, and he said, 

" He that is down, needs fear no fall ; 
He that is low, no pride : 
He that is humble, ever shall 
Have God to be his guide. 

" I am content with what I have, 
Little be it or much ; 
And, Lord, contentment still T cravp, 
Because thou savcst sucli. 



A PLKA.^AXT VALLEY. 525 

"Fulness to sucli a l)mdeii is, 
That f;o on pilgrimai^o ; 
Here little, ami hereafter bliss, 
Ls best from age to age." 

Then said the guide, "Do you liear him? 
I Avill dare to say this boy lives a merrier life, 
and wears more of that herb called heart's-ease 
in his bosom, than he that is clad in silk and 
velvet. But we will j)roeeed in our discourse. 

"In this valley our Lord formerly had his 

Christ, when COUUt rV-llOUSC : ]\C loVcd lUUcll tO bC 
In the flesh, liad 

house T"n^ licre. lie loved also to walk these 
miiiation. mcadows, foi* he found the air was 
pleasant. Besides, here a man shall be free 
from the noise, and fi-om the liiu'ryiims of this 
life : all states are full of noise and confusion; 
only the valley of Humiliation is that empty and 
solitary jtlace. Here a man shall not be so let 
dUd hindered in his coutemi)lation, as in other 
places he is apt to be. This is a valley that 
nobody walks iu but those that love a pilLi'rim'.s 
life. And though Christian had the hard hap 
to meet here with A])ollyon, and to enter with 
him ill a brisk encounter, yet I must tell you 
that in Ibrmer times men have met Avith angels 
here, IIos. 12:4, 5, have found pearls here, 
Matt. 13 : 4G, and have iu this place found the 
words of life, Prov. 8 : 35. 



. 52G riLGRI.M'S PROHRESS. 

"Did I say our Lord had here in former 
days his country-house, and that he loved here 
to walk? I will add, that in this i)lace, and to 
the people that love and trace these grounds, 
he has left a A^early revenue, to be faithfully 
paid them at certain seasons, for their mainte- 
nance by the way, and for their further encour- 
agement to go on in their pilgrimage." 

Now, as they went on, Samuel said to Mr. 
Great-heart, ' ' Sir, I perceive that in this val- 
ley my father and Apollyon had their battle; 
but whereabout was the fight? for I perceive 
this valley is large."' 

Great. Your father had the battle with 
Apollyon at a place yonder before us, in a 
narrow passage, just beyond Forget- green ^°''^'"""' 
ful green. And indeed that place is the most 
dangerous place in all these parts. For if at 
any time pilgrims meet with any brunt, it is 
when they forget what favors they have re- 
ceived, and how unworthy they are of them. 
This is the place also where others have been 
hard put to it. But more of the place when 
we are come to it; for I persuade myself that 
to this day there remains either some sign of 
the battle, or some monument to testify that 
puch a battle there was fouo-ht. 



A I 'LACK TO i'.i: iik.-ii:f.i». Cri: 

Then snid ^[orcy. "I ihiiik [ ;nii as well in 
.wMTgriV;. " til is valley as I have Ikmmi any where 
else in all oui" Journey: the place, mothinks, 
suits with n\y s])irit. I love to ])c in such 
]»laces. where there is no rattliuir with coaches, 
nor runiblina: with wheels. Methinks. here one 
may. without much molestation, be thinking 
what he is. whence he came. Avliat lie has done, 
and to what the King has called him. Here 
one may think, and break at heart, and melt 
in one's spirit, until one's eyes become as the 
fish-pools in Heshl)on. Song 7 : 4. They that 
go rightly through this valley of Baca, make it 
a well; the rain that God sends down from 
heaven npon them that are here, also fdleth 
the pools. This valley is that from whence 
also the King will give to his their vineyards; 
and they that go through it shall sing, as Chris- 
tian did. for all he met with ApoUyon." Psa. 
84:5-7; Hos. 2:15. 

Great. "T is true ; I have gone through this 
valley many a time, and never was better than 
when here. I have also been a conductor to 
several pilgi-ims. and they have confessed the 
same. "To this man will I look,"' saith the King, 
"even to him that is poor and of a contrite 
spirit, and ti-embleth at my word." I.sa. 66 : 2. 



528 riLGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Now they were come to the place where 
the aforementioned battle was fonght. Then 
said the guide to Christiana, her children, and 
Mercy, "This is the place; on this J^l-^hnS 
ground Christian stood, and up there Sla r.g.u. '""' 
came Apollyon against him. And, look, did I 
not tell you? here is some of your husband's 
blood upon these stones to this day. Behold, 
also, how here and there are yet to be seen 
upon the place some of the shiyers of Apol- 
lyon's broken darts. See, also, how they did 
beat the ground with their feet as they fought, 
to make good their i)laces against each other ; 
how also with their by-blows they some signs oi 

^ "^ the battle re- 

did split the very stones in pieces. ""^'" 

Yerily, Christian did here play the man, and 
showed himself as stout as Hercules could, had 
he been here, eyen he himself. When Apol- 
lyon was beat, he made his retreat to the next 
valley, that is called the valley of the Shadow 
of Death, unto which we shall come a monument 

of Christian's 

anon. Lo, yonder also stands a mon- victory. 
ument, on which is engraven this battle, and 
Christian's victory, to his fame throughout all 
ages." So, because it stood just on the way- 
side before them, they stepped to it. and read 
the writing, which word for Avord was this : 



TIIK SHADOW OF DEATH. C2Q 

"nurd In- here was a battle fought, 
Most strange, and yet most true ; 
Cliristian and Apollyon souglit 
Each other to subdue. 

The man so bravely played the man, 

lie made the fiend to fly ; 
Of which a monument I stand, 

The same to testify." 

When tliov had passed by this i)lace, tho} 
came 111)011 tlie Itonlcrs of the ^^hadow of Death. 
This valley was longer than the other; a i)lace 
also most stranfrcly jiannted with evil things, 
as many are al)le to testify: but these women 
and children went the better through it, be- 
cause they had daylight, and because Mr. 
Great-heart was their conductor. 

When they were entered upon this valley, 
heard:""'""^' thcy thought they heard a groaning, 
as of dying men, a very great groaning. They 
thought also that they did hear words of lam- 
entation, spoken as of some in extreme tor- 
ment. These things made the boys to quake; 
the women also looked i)alc and wan ; but their 
guide bid them be of good comfort. 

So they went on a little further, and they 
.hikes ^"■°""" thought that they felt the ground 
begin to shake under them, as if some hollow 
place was there: they heard also a kind of 
hissing, as of ser})ents, but nothing as yet ap- 

Pil. Pro- 23 



fiBO PILGRIM'S PROPxRESS. 

pearcd. Then said the boys, "Are we not yet 
at the end of this doleful place?" But the 
p:nide also bid them be of good courage, and 
j3ok well to their feet; "lest haply," said he, 
"you be taken in some snare." 

Now James began to be sick; but I think 
the cause thereof was fear : so his wilnian' '*'"' 
mother gaye him some of that glass of spirits 
that had been giyen her at the Interpreter's 
house, and three of the pills that Mr. Skill had 
prepared, and the boy began to reyiye. Thus 
they went on till they came to about the mid- 
dle of the yalley; and then Christiana said, 
" Methinks I see something yonder upon the 
road before us, a thing of a shape such as I 
haye not seen." Then said Joseph, ^,1^1 ^^''^ "P" 
"Mother, what is it?" "An ugly thing, child; 
an ugly thing." said she. "But, mother, what 
is it like?" said he. " "T is like I cannot tell 
what," said she ; " and now it is but arlat.a'id.'"'^' 
a little way off." Then said she, "It is nigh." 

"Well," said Mr. Great-heart, "let them 
that are most afraid keep close to c^^nagcruiem"" 
me." So the fiend came on, and the conductor 
met it; but when it was just come to him, it 
yanished to all their sights. Then remembered 
they what had been said some time ap;o: "Re- 



(;i!K.\T MIST .\M> DA II K\ ESP. 581 

sist llic devil. Mild lie will Ileo Trom you."' 
James 4:7. 

They went therefore on, as bein^ a little 
refreshed. But they had not gone far, before 
Merey, looking- beliind her, saw, as she thought, 
Alien. something most like a lion, and it 
came at a great padding pace after ; and it had 
a hollow voice of roaring; and at every roar 
it gave, it made the valley echo, and all their 
hearts to ache, save the heart of him that was 
their guide, l-^o it came' up, and ^Mr. Great- 
heart went behind, and put the pilgrims all 
before him. The lion also came on apace, and 
Mr. Great-heart addressed himself to give him 
battle. 1 Pet. 5:8, 9. But when he saw that 
it was determined that resistance should be 
made, he also drew back, and came no further. 

Then they went on again, and their con- 
ductor went before them, till they came to a 
da^knei' ""'^ place where was cast up a pit the 
wliole ])readth of the w^ay; and before they 
could be prepared to go over that, a great mist 
and a darkness fell uj)on them, so that tlicv 
could not see. Then said the pilgrims, "Alas, 
what now shall w^e do ?" But their guide made 
answer. "Fear not; stand still, and see what 
an end will be ])ut to this also:"' so they stayed 



532 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

there, because their path was marred. They 
then also thought that they did hear more ap- 
parently the noise and rushing of the enemies ; 
the fire also and smoke of the pit were much 
easier to be discerned. Then said Christiana 
to Mercy, ' ' Now I see what my poor husband.^ 
went through. I have heard much Christiana now 

knows what her 

of this place, but I never was here i^ustand teit. 
before now. Poor man! he went here all alone 
in the night ; he had night almost quite through 
tjie.way: also these* fiends were busy about 
him, as if they would have torn him in pieces. 
Many have spoken of it; but none can tell 
what the valley of the Shadow of Death should 
mean until they come in themselves. The 
heart knoweth its own bitterness ; and a stran- 
ger intermeddleth not with its joy. Prov. 
14:10. To be here is a fearful thing." 

Great. This is like doing business in great 
waters, or like going down into the deep. This 
is like being in the heart of the sea, and like 
going down to the bottoms of the mountains. 
Now it seems as if the earth, with its bars,, 
were about us for ever. But let them that 
walk in darkness, and have no light, trust in 
the name of the Lord, and stay upon their 
God. Isa. 50:10. For my part, as I have 



FIUITri UF r It AVER. 533 

told you already. I have frone often through 
this valley, and have been much harder put to 
it than now I am; and yet you see 1 am alive. 
J would not boast, for that I am not my own 
fsaviour; but I trust we shall have a good de- 
liverance. Come, let us i)ray for light to ITim 
that can lighten our darkness, and that can 
rebuke not only these, but all the Satans in 
hell. 

So they cried and prayed, and God sent 
They pray, light aud dcliverauce, for there was 
now no let in their way ; no, not there where 
but now they were stopped with a pit. Yet 
they were not got through the valley. So they 
went on still, and met with great stinks and 
loathsome smells, to the great annoyance of 
them. Then said Mercy to Christiana, "It is 
not so pleasant being here as at the gate, or at 
the Interpreter's, or at the house where we 
lay last.'' 

" Oh, but," said one of the boys, "it is not 
bo'Jrrcp'iLs.*'"' so bad to go through here, as it is to 
abide here always ; and for aught I know, one 
reason why we must go this way to the house 
prepared for us is, that our home might be 
made the sweeter to us." 

"Well said. Samuel," (juoth the guide ; "thou 



534 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS, 

hast now spoke like a man." "Why, if ever 
I get out here again," said the boy, " I think I 
shall prize light and good way better than I 
ever did in all my life." Then said the guide, 
" We shall be out by and by." 

So on the}' went, and Joseph said, "Cannot 
we see to the end of this valley as yet ?" Then 
said the guide, "Look to your feet, for we 
shall presently be among the snares:" so they 
looked to their feet, and went on; but they 
were troubled much with the snares. Now, 
when they were come among the snares, they 
espied a man cast into the ditch on the left 
hand, with his flesh all rent and torn. Heedless is 

slaiu,and Take- 

Then said the guide, "That is one i^'^'^'^ p'^'^^^^'^'^- 
Heedless, that was going this way ; he has lain 
there a great while. There was one Take-heed 
with him when he was taken and slain, but he 
escaped their hands. You cannot imagine how 
many are killed hereabouts, and yet men are 
so foolishly venturous as to set out lightly on 
pilgrimage, and to come without a guide. Poor 
Christian ! it was a wonder that he here es- 
caped; but he was beloved of his God; also 
he had a good heart of his own, or else he 
could never have done it." 

Now they drew towards the end of this 



MAIL'S ACCLSATION. 530 

way ; and just tlierc where Christian had seen 

the cave when he went by, out thence came 

Maul, a giant, forth Maul, a giant. This Maul did 

quarrels willi 

Great heart. ^^^(^ ^q i^poW yOUHg pilgriuiS witll 

sopliistry: and he calh'd Great-heart by liis 
name, and said unto him. 'How many times 
have you been forbidden to do these things ?*' 
Then said Mr. Great-heart, "What things?'' 
'What things?'' quoth the giant; "you know 
what things: but I will [lut an end to your 
trade."' 

"But pray," said Mr. GTeat-heart, "before 
we fall to it, let us understand wherefore we 
must fight." Xow the women and child len 
stood trembling, and knew not what to do. 
Quoth the giant, "You rob the countr}', and 
rob it with the worst of thefts." "These are 
but generals," said Mr. Great-heart; "come 
to particulars, man." 

Then said the giant, "Thou practisest the 
(iods ministers Craft of a kidnap])er: thou gatherest 

counted as kid- 
nappers. Yip women and children, and carriest 

them into a strange country, to the weakening 
of my master's kingdom." But now Great- 
heart replied, "I am a servant of the God o\' 
heaven ; my business is to persuade sinners to 
repentance. I am commanded to do my en- 



536 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

deavors to turn men, women, and children from 
darkness to light, and from the power The giant and 

° '■ Mr. Great heart 

of Satan unto God; and if this be in^stfight. 
indeed the ground of thy quarrel, let us fall to 
it as soon as thou wilt." 

Then the giant came up, and Mr. Great- 
heart went to meet him; and as he went he 
drew his sword, but the giant had a club. So 
without more ado they fell to it, and at the 
first blow the giant struck Mr. Great-heart 
down upon one of his knees. With ^veak folks' 

prayers at some 

that the women atid chudren cried tim^s heip the 

cries ot stronger 



himself, laid about him in full lusty manner, 
and gave the giant a wound in his arm. Thus 
he fought for the space of an hour, to that 
height of heat, that the breath came out of the 
giant's nostrils as the heat doth out of a boil- 
ing caldron. 

Then they sat down to rest them ; but Mr. 
Great-heart betook himself to prayer. Also 
the women and children did nothing but sigh 
and cry all the time that the battle did last. 

When they had rested them, and taken 
breath, they both fell to it again; and Mr. 
Great-heart, with a blow, fetched the struik do^^M!''"* 
giant down to the ground. "Nay, hold, let me 



TIIK CIA NT SLAIN. 537 

recover/' (Hioth he: so Mr. (Ji-eat-lieiirt fairly 
let him uet up. So to it tliev went a.L^aiu, and 
tlie giant niis.^^ed but little of all to breaking 
Mr. Great-lieart's seuU with his elub. 

Mr. Great-heart seeing that, runs to him 

in the full heat of his spirit, and j)iereeth him 

under the tilth rib. With that the giant began 

He is slain, to faiut, aiid couId hold lip his elub 

and his head 

disposed of. jiQ longer. Then Mr. Great-heart 
seconded his blow, and smit the head of the 
giant from his shoulders. Then the women 
and children rejoiced, and Mr. Great-heart 
also praised God for the deliverance he had 
wrought. 

When this was done, they among them 
erected a pillar, and fastened the giant's head 
thereon, and wrote under it in letters that pas- 
sengers might read, 

'• He that did wear tliis head was one 

That pilgrims did misuse ; 
He stopped tlicir vray, he spared none. 

But did them all abuse ; 
Until that I Great-heart arose, 

The pilgrims' guide to be ; 
Until that I did him oppose 

That was their enemy." 



23=" 



538 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 



THE SIXTH STAGE. 

Now I saw that they went on to the ascent 
that was a little way off, cast up to be a pros- 
pect for pilgrims. That was the i)lace from 
whence Christian had the first sight of Faithful 
his brother. Wherefore, here they sat down 
and rested. They also here did eat and drink, 
and make merry, for that they had gotten de- 
liverance from this so dangerous an enemy. 
As they sat thus and did eat, Christiana asked 
the guide if he had caught no hurt in the bat- 
tle. Then said Mr. Clreat-heart, "No, save a 
little on my flesh ; yet that also shall be so far 
from being to my detriment, that it is at pres- 
ent a proof of my love to my Master and you, 
and shall be a means, by grace, to increase my 
reward at last." 

Ohr. But were you not afraid, good sir, 
when you saw him come with his club ? 

" It is my duty," said Mr. Great-heart, "to 
mistrust my own ability, that I may th^Shr'^ ""^ 
have reliance on Him who is stronger than all." 

Chr. But what did you think when he fetch- 
ed you down to the ground at the first blow ? 
"Why, I thought," quoth Mr. Great-heart, 



OLD HONEST. 53'.) 

'"that so my ^faster liiinsclt" was servi'd. luid 
yet lie it was that coiiqiUM-cd at last."' '2 Cor. 
4:10, 11 : Rom. 8 : 37. 

M.VTT. AVheii you all have thought what 
Matthcwhcre YOU plcasc, I thiulv Go(l has been 

admires God's ^ 

goodness. wonderfully good unto us, both iu 
bringing us out of this valley, and in deliver- 
ing us out of the hand of this enemy. P'or my 
part, I see no reason why we should distrust 
our God any more, since he has now, and in 
such a place as this, given us such testimony 
of his love. 

Then they got up, and went ibrward. 

Xowa little before them stood an oak; and 

under it, when they came to it, they found an 

Old Honest oUl pilgrim fast asleep. Thev knew 

asleep under an ^ 

'"'^- that he was a pilgrim by his clothes, 

and his staff, and his girdle. 

So the guide, Mr. Great-heart, awaked him, 
and the old gentleman, as he lifted up his eyes, 
cried out, "What's the matter? Who are you; 
and what is your business here ?" 

Gre.vt. Come, man. be not so hot: here 
are none but friends. 
i^^l^^^"^. Yet the old man gets up. an.l 

other for his en- , n , . , i -n i 

emy. stauds ujM)!! his guanl. and will know 

of them what they are. Then said the guide, 



540 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

"My name is Great-heart; I am the guide of 
these pilgrims that are going to the celestial 
country." 

Then said Mr. Honest, ' ' I cry you mercy ; 
I feared that you had been of the xaik between 

Great-heart aud 

company of those that some time ago "onest. 
did rob Little-faith of his money; but, now I 
look better about me, I perceive you are hon- 
ester people." 

GrREAT. Wh}^, what would or could j^ou 
have done to have helped yourself, if indeed 
we had been of that company ? 

Hon. Done ? why, I would have fought as 
long as breath had been in me ; and had I so 
done, I am sure you could never have given 
me the worst on 't ; for a Christian can never 
be overcome, unless he shall yield of himself. 

' ' Well said, Father Honest, " quoth the guide ; 
" for by this I know thou art a cock of the 
right kind, for thou hast said the truth." 

Hon. And by this also I know that thou 
knowest what true pilgrimage is ; for all others 
do think that we are the soonest overcome of 
any. 

Great. Well, now we are so happily met, 
pra}^ let me crave your name, and the name of 
the place you came from. 



OLD IIONEST'S STORY. 541 

Hon. My name T cannot tell von., but T 
H^I^TcanK^"" came from the town of Stupidity ; it 
liotli about four degrees beyond the city of 
Destruction. 

Great. Oh. are you that countryman? Then 
I deem I have half a guess of you; your name 
is Old Honesty, is it not ? 

So the old gentleman blushed, and said, 
"Not honesty in the abstract, but Honest is 
my name; and I wish that my nature may 
agree to what I am called. But, sir,'"' said 
the old gentleman, "how could you guess that 
I am such a man, since I came from such a 
place ?" 

Great. I had heard of you before,' b}^ my 
Master; for he knows all things that are done 
are «^^e''tZu Oil the earth. But I have often Avon- 
carnai. "'"^'''^ dcrcd that any should come from 
your place ; for your town is worse than is the 
city of Destruction itself. 

Hox. Yes, we lie more off from the sun, and 
so are more cold and senseless. But were a man 
in a mountain of ice, yet if the Sun of right- 
eousness will arise upon him, his frozen heart 
shall feel a thaw : and thus it has been with me. 

Great. T believe it. Father Honest, I be- 
lieve it; for T know the thinti- is true. 



542 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Then the old gentleman saluted all the pil- 
grims with a holy kiss of eharity, and asked 
them their names, and how they had fared 
since they set out on their pilgrimage. 

Then said Christiana, "My name I suppose 
you have heard of; good Christian ^.Smftaif 
was my husband, and these four are his chil- 
dren." But can you think how the old gentle- 
man was taken, when she told him who she 
was ? He skipped, he smiled, he blessed them 
with a thousand good wishes, saying, 

"I have heard much of your husband, and 
of his travels and wars which he underwent in 
his days. Be it spoken to your comfort, the 
name of your husband rings all over these 
parts of the world; his faith, his courage, his 
enduring, and his sincerity under all, have made 
his name famous." Then he turned him to the 
boys, and asked them of their names, which 
they told him. Then said he unto owMr. Hon- 

est's blessing ou 

them, "Matthew, be thou like Mat- "i'^"!- 
thew the publican, not in vice, but in virtue." 
Matt. 10:3. " Samuel," said he, " be thou like 
Samuel the prophet, a man of faith and prayer." 
Psa. 99 : 6. " Joseph," said he, "be thou like 
Joseph in Potiphar's house, chaste, and one 
that flees from temptation. Gen. 39. And 



MR. feaiunh;. .',43 

James, \)v lliou like flames tlie just, and like 
James the hrotlicr ol" our Lord." Aets l:]o. 
Then they told him of Merey. and how she had 
left her town and her kindred to come along 
with Christiana and with her sons. At that 
^^iie^ bicsseth tij^ ^3ij j^j^jj^.^j- jj^.^j^ g^j^l^ "Merey is 

thy name; by mercy shalt thou be sustained 
and carried through all those difficulties that 
shall assault thee in thy way, till tlion shalt 
come thither where thon shalt look the Foun- 
tain of mercy in the face with comfort." All 
this while the guide Mr. Great-heart was very 
well i)leased, and smiled upon his companions. 

Now, as they walked along together, the 
Mr.l^caring""' g"itlc askcd thc old gentleman if he 
did not know one Mr. Fearing, that came on 
pilgrimage out of his parts. 

" Yes, very well," said Honest. " Pie was 
a man that had the root of the matter in him; 
but he was one of the most troublesome pil- 
grims that ever I met with in all my days."' 

Great. I perceive yon knew him, for you 
have given a very right character of him. 

ITox. Knew him ? I was a great compan- 
ion of his; I was with him most an end; when 
he lirst began to think upon what would come 
npon us hereafter, T was with him. 



544 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Great. I was his guide from my Master's 
house to the gates of the celestial city. 

Hon. Then you knew him to be a trouble- 
gome one. 

Great. I did so; but I could very well 
bear it; for men of my calling are oftentimes 
intrusted w^ith the conduct of such as he was. 

Hon. Well, then, pray let us hear a little 
of him, and how he managed himself under 
your conduct. 

Great. Why, he was always afraid that he 
should come short of whither he had Mr. reanng's 

troublesome pil- 

a desire to go. Every thing fright- s^mage. 
ened him that he heard any body speak of, if 
it had but the least appearance of opposition 
in it. I heard that he lay roaring His behavior 

•^ ^ at the Slough 

at the Slough of Despond for above otvespond. 
a month together ; nor durst he, for all he saw 
several go over before him, venture, though 
they many of them offered to lend him their 
hands. He would not go back again, neither. 
The celestial city — he said he should die if he 
came not to it ; and yet he was dejected at 
every difficulty, and stumbled at every straw 
that any body cast in his way. Well, after 
he had lain at the Slough of Despond a great 
while, as I have told you, one sunshiny morn^ 



F E A W I X G ' S I) I F F I D E X C E . 545 

iiig, I (l()ii"t know hnw. lie ventured, and so 
got over ; l)ii( when lie was over, lie would 
scarce believe it. He had, I think, a Slough 
of Despond in his mind, a slough that he car- 
Tied everywhere with him, or else he could 
never have been as he was. So he came up 
to the gate, you know what I mean, that stands 
at the head oC this way, and there also he 
atVhegatr'''' stood a good while before he would 
venture to knock. When the gate was opened, 
he would give back, and give place to others, 
and say that he was not worthy. For, for all 
he got before some to the gate, yet many of 
them Avent in before him. There the poor man 
would stand shaking and shrinking, I dare say 
it would have pitied one's heart to have seen 
him. Xor would he go back again. At last 
he took the hammer that hanged on the gate, 
in his hand, and gave a small rap or two ; then 
one opened to him, but he shrunk back as be- 
fore. He that opened stei)ped out after him, 
and said, "Thou trembling one, what wantest 
'thou?"' With that he fell down to the ground. 
He that spoke to him wondered to sec him so 
faint, so he said to him, "Peace be to thee; 
np. for I have set open the door to thee: come 
in, for thou art blessed." With that he got np, 



546 riLGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

and went in trembling; and when he was in, 
he was ashamed to show his face. Well, after 
he had been entertained there a while, as yon 
know how the manner is, he was bid go on his 
way, and also told the way he should take. 
So he went on till he came to our house ; but 
as he behayed himself at the gate, so he did at 
mj^ Master the Interpreter's door, ms behavior 

atthelnterpret- 

He lay there about in the cold a ""^ d"'*^'"- 
good while, before he would adyenture to call ; 
yet he would not go back : and the nights were 
long and cold then. Nay, he had a note of 
necessity in his bosom to my Master to receiye 
him, and grant him the comfort of his house, 
and also to allow him a stout and yaliant con- 
ductor, because he was himself so chicken- 
hearted a man; and yet for all that he y>^as 
afraid to call at the door. So he lay up and 
down thereabouts, till, poor man, he was al- 
most staryed ; yea, so great was his dejection, 
that though he saw seyeral others for knocking 
get in, yet he was afraid to yenture. At last, 
I think I looked out of the window, and per- 
ceiying a man to be up and down about the 
door, I went out to him, and asked what he 
was: but, poor man, the water stood in his 
eyes; so I perceiyed what he wanted. T went 



FEARING p:NCOURAr, ED. 547 

tlicrelbre in, ainl told it in tlic lionse, and we 
showed tlie thing to our Lord; so he sent me 
out again, to entreat him to come in; but I 
dare say, I had hard work to do it. At last 
tlSed™" lie came in; and I will say that for 
my Lord, he carried it wonderfully lovingly to 
him. There were but a few good bits at the 
table, but some of it was laid upon his trencher. 
Then he presented the note ; and my Lord 
looked thereon, and said his desire should be 
granted. So wdien he had been there a good 
.•n"our^.a"?t ^vhile, he seemed to get eome heart, 
cr'^s houJr^'"'" and to be- a little more comfortable. 
For my blaster, you must know, is one of very 
tender boAvels, especially to them that are 
afraid; wherefore he carried it so towards him 
as might tend most to his encouragement. AVell, 
when he had had a sight of the things of the 
place, and was ready to take his journey to go 
to the city, my Lord, as he did to Christian 
before, gave him a bottle of sj)irits, and some 
comfortaljle things to eat. Thus Ave set for- 
ward, and I went before him ; ])nt the man was 
but of few words, only he would sigh aloud. 

AVhen we were come to where the three 
fellows were hanged, he said that he doubted 
that that would l)e liis end also. Onlv he 



548 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

seemed glad when lie saw the cross and the 
sepulchre. There I confess he de- Hewasgreat- 

■■■ ly afraid when 

sired to stay a little to look ; and he be't!''b'^t'cLt''y 

-, „ , ., (,, , , T., when he saw the 

seemed lor a while alter to be a lit- cross. 
tie cheery. When he came to the hill Difficul- 
ty, he made no stick at that, nor did he much 
fear the lions; for you must know that his 
troubles were not about such things as these: 
his fear was about his acceptance at last. 

I got him in at the house Beautiful, I think 
before he was willing. Also, when he was in, 
I brought him acquainted with the damsels of 

the place ; but he was ashamed to rearing dump- 
ish at the house 

make himself much in company. He i^eautitui. 
desired much to be alone ; yet he always loved 
good talk, and often would get behind the 
screen to hear it. He also loved much to see 
ancient things, and to be pondering them in 
his mind. He told me afterwards, that he 
loved to be in those two houses from which he 
came last, to wit, at the gate, and that of the 
Interpreter, but that he durst not be so bold 
as to ask. 

When we went also from the house Beauti- 
ful, down the hill, into the vallej^ of pieasantinthe 

valley of Hu- 

Humiliation, he went down as well ""ijation. 
as ever I saw a man in my life ; for he cat ed 



iKAlllXr, DISTRESf^ED. 510 

not li(»w mean he was, so he miuht l)e haj)i>y 
at hist. Yea, I tliiiik tluM-e was a kind of 
sympathy between that valley and him ; tor 1 
never saw him better in all his pilgrimage than 
he was in that valley. 

Here he wonld lie down, embrace the gronnd, 
and kiss the very flowers that grew in this val- 
ley. Lam. 3:27-29. He wonld now be np 
every morning by break of day, tracing and 
walking to and fro in the valley. 

But when he was come to the entrance of 
ed\u''t\rvaiu^v ^^^^ vallcy of the Shadow of Death, I 
iiiiktl*''"'"" thonght i shonld have lost my man: 
not for that he had any inclination to go back ; 
that he always abhorred ; but he was ready to 
die for fear. "Oh, the hobgoblins will have 
me! the hobgoblins will have me I" cried he; 
and I could not beat him out of it. lie made 
such a noise, and such an outcry here, that had 
they but heard him, it was enough to encourage 
them to come and fall upon us. 

But this I took very great notice of, that 
this valley was as (juiet when we went through 
it, as ever I knew it before or shice. I su})- 
])Ose- those enemies here had now a special 
check Trom our Lord, and a command not to 
meddle until ^Ir. Fearing had i)assed over it. 



550 PILCxRIM'^ PROGRESS. 

It would be too tedious to tell you of all ; 
we will therefore only mention a passage or 
two more. When he was eome to at v'anHy Fiilr'' 
Vanity Fair, I thought he would have fought 
with all the men in the fair. I feared there we 
should have been both knocked on the head, 
so hot was he against their fooleries. Upon 
the Enchanted ground he was very wakeful. 
But when he was come at the river where was 
no bridge, there again he was in a h^avy case. 
"Now, now," he said, ''he should be drowned 
for ever," and so never see that face with com- 
fort that he had come so man}^ miles to behold. 

And here also I took notice of what was 
very remarkable: the water of that river was 
lower at this time than ever I saw it in all my 
life ; so he went over at last, not much above 
wetshod. When he was going up to the gate, 
I began to take leave of him, and to wish him 
a good reception above. So he said, auast. ^"'''"''' 
"I shall, I shall." Then parted we asunder, 
and I saw him no more. 

Hon. Then it seems he was well at last ? 

Great. Tes, yes, I never had doubt about 
him. He was a man of a choice spirit, only he 
was always kept very low, and that made his 
life so burdensome to himself, and so trouble- 



EEASOXS FOR DEPRESSION. 5ol 

porno to otln'i's. V^'A. ><S. \\v was. al)ovo niiuiy, 
toiuler ol" sill ; he was so alVaid of doing injuries 
to oUiers, that he often Avoukl deny himself of 
iliat whieli was lawful, beeause he would not 
oflfend. Rom. 14 : 21 ; 1 Cor. 8 : 13. 

Hox. But what should l)e the reason that 
such a good man should be all his days so 
much in the dark ? 

Great. There are two sorts of reasons for 
Reasons why it: ouc Is, thc ^vlse God wlll havc it 

good men are so 

in the dark. gQ . souic uiust |)ipe, aud some must 
weep. Matt. 11:16. Now^ Mr. Fearing was 
one that playecl upon the bass. He and his 
fellows sound the sackbut, whose notes are 
iuore doleful than the notes of other music are; 
though indeed some say the bass is the ground 
of music. And for my i)art, I care not at all 
for that profession which begins not in heavi- 
ness of mind. Thc first string that the musi- 
cian usually touches is the bass, when he in- 
tends to put all in tune. God also i)lays u[)on 
this string first, when he sets the soul in tune 
for himself. Only there was the imi)erfection 
of Mr. Fearing; he could play upon no other 
music but this, till towards his latter end. 

(I make bold to talk thus metaphorically 
for the ri])eiiing of the wits of young readers, 



552 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

and because, in the book of the Revelation the 
saved are compared to a company of musicians, 
that play upon their trumpets and harps, and 
sing their songs before the throne. Rev. 5:8; 
14:2, 3.) 

Hon. He was a very zealous man, as one 
may see by the relation which you have given 
of him. Difficulties, lions, or Vanity fair, he 
feared not at all ; it was only sin, death, and 
hell, that w^ere to him a terror, because he had 
some doubts about his interest in that celestial 
country. 

Great. You say right ; those were the things 
that were his troublers ; and they, as you have 
well observed, arose from the weak- him.*''"'" ''^""^ 
ness of his mind thereabout, not from weak- 
ness of spirit as to the practical part of a pil- 
.grim's life. I dare believe that, as the proverb 
is, he could have bit a firebrand, had it stood 
in his way; but the things with which he was 
oppressed no man ever yet could shake off 
with ease. 

Then said Christiana, "This relation of Mr. 
Fearing has done me good ; I thought sentence!'"''"'' ' 
nobody had been like me. But I see there 
was some semblance between this good man 
and me; onlv we differed in two things: his 



Til E p I Lc RIMS', s !•: X T !•: X V Hs . r,r,?j 

troubles were so great tliat tliey broke out; 
but mine 1 kept williiii. Jlis also lay so liard 
upon liiiii, they made him that he eould not 
knoek at the houses ])rovided for entertain- 
ment ; l)ut my trouble was always such as made 
me knoek the louder.'' 

^Ikr. It' I might also speak my lieart. I 

^Mercys sen ^^^^^^^ ^^^. ^^^^^ SOUlCthlng of llilU liaS 

also dwelt in me. For I have ever been more 
afraid of the lake, and the loss of a i)lace in 
paradise, than T have been of the loss of other 
things. Oh, thought T. may I have the happi- 
ness to have a habitation there ! 'T is enouah 
though I part with all the world to win it. 

Then said Matthew, "Fear was one thing 
te'^?:""*^"'^^"'- that. made me think that I was far 
from having that within me which accompanies 
salvation. But if it was so with such a good 
man as he, why may it not also go well with 
me? 

' ' No fears, no grace, * ' said James. ' ' Though 
^jamcs' sen- ^j^^^.^ jg ^^^^ always gracc where there 
is the fear of hell, yet, to be sure, there is no 
grace where there is no fear of God." • 

Great. Well said, James; thou hast hit 
the mark. For the fear of God is the begin- 
ning of wisdom : and to be sure, they that want 



554 PILGRIiM'S PR0G11KS8. 

the beginning have neither middle nor end. But 
we will here conclude our discourse of Mr. Fear- 
ing, after we have sent after him this farewell : 

'• AVell, Master Fearing, thou didst fear 

Thy God, and wast afraid 
Of doing any thing, while here. 

That would have thee betrayed. 
And didst thou fear the lake and jDit? 

Would others do so too ! 
For, as for them that want thy wit, 

They do themselves undo." 

Now I saw that they still went on in their 
talk. For after Mr. Great-heart had made an 
end with Mr. Fearing, Mr. Honest began to 
tell them of another, but his name .vul ^^''' ^''^^' 
was Mr. Self-will. "He pretended himself to 
be a pilgrim," said Mr. Honest; "but I per- 
suade myself he never came in iit the gate that 
stands at the head of the way." 

GrREAT. Had you ever any talk Avith him 
about it ? 

Hon. Yes, more than once or twice; but 
he would always be like himself, self- ow Honest 

liad talked with 

willed. He neither cared for man, '"'" 
nor argument, nor yet example ; what his mind 
prompted him to, that he would do, and noth- 
ing else could he be got to do. 

Great. Pray, what principles did he hold? 
for I suppose you can tell. 



Hon. He lit'ld that a inau luiulit (ullow tlie 
opinions'/™'"" vices as ^vell as the virtues of jiil- 
grinis; and that if lie did both, he shoidd l)e 
certainly saved. 

Great. How ? if he had said, it is possible 
for the best to be guilty of the vices, as well 
as to })artake of the virtues of pilgrims, he 
could not nnicli have been blamed; for indeed 
we are exempted from no vice absolutely, but 
on condition that we watch and strive. But 
this, I perceive, is not tlie thing; but if I un- 
derstand you right, youi* meaning is, that he 
was of opinion that it was allowable so to be. 

Hex. Aye, aye, so T mean, and so he be- 
lieved ard practised. 

Great. But what grounds had he for his 
so saying ? 

Hox. Why. he said lie had the Scripture 
for his warrant. 

Great. Prithee, Mr. Honest, ])resent us 
with a few particulars. 

Hox. So I will. He said, to have to do 
with other men's wives had been practised by 
David. God's beloved, and tliei-eforc he could 
do it. He said, to have more women than one 
was a thing that Solomon practised, and there- 
fore he could do it. Uo said that Sarah and 



556 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

the godly midwives of Egypt lied, and so did 
saved Rahab, and therefore he could do it. 
He said that the disciples went, at the bidding 
of their Master, and took away the owner's 
ass, and therefore he could do so too. He 
said that Jacob got the inheritance of his father- 
in a way of guile and dissimulation, and there- 
fore he could do so too. 

G-REAT. High base, indeed ! And are you 
sure he was of this opinion ? 

Hon. I have heard him plead for it, bring 
Scripture for it, bring arguments for it, etc. 

Great. An opinion that is not fit to be 
with any allowance in the world. 

Hon. You must understand me rightly : he 
did not say that any man might do this ; but 
that they who had the virtues of those that did 
such things, might also do the same. 

Great. But what more false than such a 
conclusion? For this is as much as to say that 
because good men heretofore have sinned of 
infirmity, therefore he had allowance to do it 
of a presumptuous mind ; or that if, because a 
child, by the blast of the wind, or for that it 
stumbled at a stone, fell down and defiled it- 
self in the mire, therefore he might wilfully lie 
down and wallow like a boar therein. Who 



SKI.F-WIIJ. IN' ERIIOM. o")" 

could luivc (Imimiit that nuy one could so far 
have IxM'U Minded hy the powcM' of lust? But 
what is written must l)e true: they 'stumble 
at the word, being disobedient ; whereunto also 
'they were appointed.'' 1 Pet. 2 : 8. His sup- 
posing that such may have the godly men's 
virtues, who addict themselves to their vices, 
is also a delusion as strong as the other. To 
eat up the sin of God's people, Hos. 4 : 8, as a 
dog licks up fdth, is no sign of one that is 
possessed with their virtues. Xor can I be- 
lieve that one who is of this opinion, can at 
present have faith or love in him. But I know 
you have made some strong objections against 
him; prithee what can he say for himself? 

Hon. AVliy, he says, to do this by way of 
opinion, seems abundantly more honest than to 
do it, and yet hold contrary to it in opinion. 

Great. A very wicked answer. For though 
to let loose the bridle to lusts, while our opin- 
ions are against such things, is bad ; yet, to sin 
and i)lead a toleration so to do, is worse: the 
one stumbles beholders accidentally, the other 
leads them into the snare. 

IIox. There are many of this man's mind, 
that have not this man's mouth : and that makes 
going on pilgrimage of so little esteem as it is. 



558 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

GrREAT. You liave said the truth, and it is 
to be lamented ; but he that feareth the King 
of paradise shall come out of them all. 

Chr. There are strange opinions in the 
world. I know one that said it was time 
enough to repent when we come to die. 

Great. Such are not overwise; that man 
would have been loath, might he have had a 
week to run twenty miles in his life, to defer 
his journey to the last hour of that week. 

Hon. You say right; and yet the gener- 
ality of them who count themselves pilgrims, 
do indeed do thus. I am, as you see, an old 
man, and have been a traveller in this road 
many a day ; and I have taken notice of many 
things. I have seen some that have set out as 
if they would drive all the world before them, 
who yet have, in a few days, died as they in 
the wilderness, and so never got sight of the 
promised land. I have seen some that have 
promised nothing at first setting out to be pil- 
grims, and who one would have thought could 
not have lived a day, that have yet proved 
very good pilgrims. I have seen some who 
have run hastily forward, that again have, after 
a little time, run just as fast back again. I 
have seen some who have spoken very well of 



FKAR OF TRorni,r-;. 559 

a pilLTrim's lii\' at first, that after a while have 
spoken as much against it. I have heard some, 
when they first set out for paradise, say posi- 
tively there is such a place, who, when they 
have been almost there, have come back again, 
and said there is none. I have heard some 
vaunt what they would do in case they should 
be opposed, that have, even at a false alarm, 
fled faith, the pilgrim's way, and all. 

Xow, as they were thus on their way. there 
came one running to meet them, and said, 
tvo^ubi!*."'"'"*' '-Gentlemen, and you of the weaker 
sort, if you love life, shift for yourselves, for 
the robbers arc before you." 

Then said Mr. Grreat-heart, "They be the 
three that set upon Little-faith heretofore. 
resoiutUn'"''' ^Vcll"' Said lic, '■wc arc ready for 
them ;" so they went on their way. Xow they 
looked at every turning when they should have 
met with the villains; but whether they heard 
of Mr. Great-heart, or whether they had some 
other game, they came not up to the pilgrims. 

Christiana then wished for an inn to refresh 

Christiana hcrsclf aud her children, because 

wishes lor an 

'"»• they were weary. Then said Mr. 

Honest, "There is one a little before us, where 
a very honorable disciple, one Gains, dwells." 



560 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Rom. 16 : 23. So they all concluded to turn in 
thither; and the rather, because the old gen- 
tleman gave him so good a report. When they 
came to the door they went in, not knocking, 
for folks use not to knock at the door of an 
inn. Then they called for the master of the 
house, and he came to them. So they asked if 
they might lie there that night. 

"Yes, gentlemen,'" said Gains, " if you be 

true men : for my house is for none Gaius enter- 
tains them, and 

but pilgrims." Then were Christiana, ^^°^^- 
Mercy, and the boys the more glad, for that the 
innkeeper was a lover of pilgrims. So they call- 
ed for rooms, and he showed them one for Chris- 
tiana and her children and Mercy, and another 
for Mr. Great-heart and the old gentleman. 

Then said Mr. Great-heart, "Good Gaius, 
what hast thou for supper ? for these pilgrims 
have come far to-day, and are weary."' 

"It is late," said Gaius, "so we cannot 
conveniently go out to seek food; but such as 
we have 3'ou shall be welcome to, if that will 
content." 

Great. We will be content with what thou 
hast in the house ; for as much as I have proved 
thee, thou art never destitute of that which is 
convenient. 



C,\]V^ AND TlIK riLGunf^^. 561 

Then lit' went down and spokt' to tlic cook, 
Gaiusc.H.k. whose iiaiue was Taste-tliat-wliich-is- 
good, to get ready supper for so many pilgrims, 
agahi."""'''' "'' This (h^iie, lie comes up again, say- 
ing, "Come, my good IViends, you are welcome 
to me, and I am glad that I have a house to 
entertain you in ; and while supper is making 
ready, if you i)lease, let us entertain one an- 
other with some good discourse ;'' so they all 
said, "Content." 

Then said Gains, "Whose wife is this aged 
Talk between uiatrou ? aud whosc daughter is this 

Gaius and his 

guests. young damsel ? 

Great. This woman is the wife of one Chris- 
tian, a pilgrim of former times ; and these are 
his four children. The maid is one of her 
acquaintance, one that she hath persuaded to 
come with her on pilgrimage. The boys take 
all after their father, and covet to tread in his 
steps ; yea, if they do but see any place where 
the old pilgrim hath lain, or any print of his 
foot, it ministereth joy to their hearts, and they 
covet to lie or tread in the same. 

Then said Gains. "Is this Christian's wife, 
and are these Christian's children? I knew 
an'ces'to;""'"' y^ur liusband's father, yea, also his 
father's father. ^lany have been good of this 



562 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

stock; their ancestors dwelt first at Antioch, 
Acts 11:26. Christian's progenitors (I suppose 
you have heard your husband talk of them) 
were very worthy men. They have, above 
any that I know, showed themselves men of 
great virtue and courage for the Lord of the 
pilgrims, his ways, and them that loved him- 
I have heard of many of your -husband's rela- 
tions that have stood all trials for the sake of 
the truth. Stephen, that was one of the first of 
the family from- whence your husband sprang, 
was knocked on the head with stones. Acts 
7 : 59, 60. James, another of this generation j 
was slain with the edge of the sword. Acts 
12 : 2. To say nothing of Paul and Peter, men 
anciently of the family from whence "your hus- 
band came, there was Ignatius, who was cast 
to the lions ; Romanus, whose flesh was cut by 
pieces from his bones ; and Polycarp, that play- 
ed the man in the fire. There was he that 
was hanged up in a basket in the sun for the 
wasps to eat; and he whom they put into a 
sack, and cast into the sea to be drowned. It 
would be impossible utterly to count up all of 
that family who have suffered injuries and death 
for the love of a pilgrim's life. Nor can I but 
be glad to see that thy husband has left behind 



(J A I US- ADVICK. 003 

liini foui- siR'li boys as these. I liope they will 
bear iij» their father's name, and tread in their 
lather's steps, and come to their lather's end." 

(iREAT. Indeed, sir, they arc likely lads; 
they seem to choose heartily their lather's ways. 

Gaius. That is it that I said. AVherefore 
Christian's family is like still to spread abroad 
npon the face of the ground, and yet to be 
Advice to Chris- numcrous npon the face of the earth ; 

tiiina about her 

*>*'y^- let Christiana look out some damsels 

for her sons, to whom they may be betrothed, 
etc., that the name of their father, and the 
house of his progenitors, may never be forgot- 
ten in the world. 

Hon. 'T is pity his family should fall and 
be extinct. 

"Fall it cannot,'' said Gaius, "but be di- 
minished it may ; but let Christiana take my 
advice, and that is the way to uphold it. And, 
Christiana," said this innkeeper, "I am glad to 
see thee and thy friend Mercy together here, 
a lovely couple. And if I may advise, take 
Mercy into a nearer I'clation to thee: if she 
will, let her be given to Matthew thy eldest: 
A match be- SOU. It Is tlic wav to ])reserve a 

tween Mercy 

and Matthew, posterity in the earth." So this 
mateh was concluded, and in process of time 



564 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

they were married; but more of that here- 
after. 

Gains also proceeded, ami said, "I will 
,now speak on the behalf of women, to take 
away their reproach. For as death and the 
curse came into the world by a woman, Gen. 3, 
so also did life and health; God sent forth 
his Son, made of a woman. Gal. 4 : 4. Yea, 
to show how much they that came after did 
abhor the act of the mother, this sex whywomenot 

old SO much de- 

in the Old Testament coveted chil- sired children. 
dren, if happily this or that woman might be 
the mother of the Saviour of the world. I will 
say again, that when the Saviour was come, 
women rejoiced in him, before either man or 
angel. Luke 1 : 42-4 G. I read not that ever 
any man did give unto Christ so much as one 
groat; but the women followed him, and min- 
istered to him of their substance. Luke 8 : 2, 
3. 'T was a woman that washed his feet with 
tears, Luke 7 : 37-50, and a woman that anoint- 
ed his body to the burial, John 11:2; 12 : 3. 
They were women who wept when he was going 
to the cross, Luke 23 : 27, and women that fol- 
lowed him from the cross, Matt. 27:55, 56, 
Luke 23:55, and that sat over against his 
sepulchre when he was buried, Matt. 27:61. 



THE SrPPKR. 5G5 

Tliev were women that were lir^t with him at 
his re.surrectiou-inorn, Luke 24 : 1, and women 
that brought tidings first to his disei})les tliat 
lie was risen from tlie dead. Luke 24 : 22. 2.'). 
Women therefore ai-e liiglily i'avored, and sliuw 
l)y these -things that they are sharers with us 
in the grace of life." 

Now the cook sent up to signify that sup- 
supper ready, per was ahuost Tcadv, and sent one 
to ky the cloth, and the trenchers, and to set 
the salt and bread in order. 

Then said Matthew, "The sight of this 
cloth, and of this forerunner of the supper, be- 
getteth in me a greater appetite to my lood 
than I had before." 

Gaius. So let all ministering doctrines to 
thee in this life beget in thee a greater desire 
to sit at the supper of the great King in his 
kingdom ; for all preaching, books, and ordinan- 
ces here, are but as the laying of the trench- 
what istobe crs, and the setting of salt upon the 

patlK-red from ' ~ ^ 

S'wfth't'he board, when compared with the feast 

cloth and tren . 

Chens. which our Lord will make lor us 

when we come to his house. 

So supper came up. And first a heave- 
shoulder and a wave-breast were set on the 
table before them, to show that they must be- 



566 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

gin their meal with prayer and praise to God. 
The heave-shonlder David lifted up his heart 
to God with ; and with the wave-breast, where 
his heart lay, he used to lean upon his harp 
when he played. Lev. 7:32-34; 10:14, 15; 
Psa. 25:1; Heb. 13:15. These two dishes 
were very fresh and good, and they all ate 
heartily thereof. 

The next they brought up was a bottle of 
wine, as red as blood. Deut. 32 :14; Judges 
9:13; John 15:5. So Gains said to them, 
"Drink freely; this is the true juice of the 
vine, that makes glad the heart of God and 
man." So they drank and were merry. 

The next was a dish of milk well crumbed ; 
jGaius said, "Let the boys have that, a dish of muk. 
that they may grow thereby." 1 Pet. 2:1, 2. 

Then they brought up in course a dish of 
butter and honey. Then said Gains, buuer.°"'' '"^ 
"Eat freely of this, for this is good to cheer 
up and strengthen your judgments and under- 
standings. This was our Lord's dish Avhen he 
was a child : ' Butter and honey shall he eat, 
that he may know to refuse the evil, and choose 
the good.' " Isa. 7 : 15. 

Then they brought them up a disli ,A ^'^"^ ''' "P" 
of apples, and they were very good-tasted fruit. 



AI'IM.KS AND NlTf^. •'<>' 

Thou said Matthew. -May wo eat apples, since 
it was such by and witii whicli the serpent be- 
o-uiled our first mother?"' 
Then said Gains, 

•'Apples were they with whieh we were beguiled; 
Yet sin, not apples, hath our souls defiled : 
Apples forbid, if ate, corrupt the blood ; 
To eat such, when commanded, does us good : 
Drink of his flagons then, thou church, his dove, 
And eat his apples, who art sick of love." 

Then said :\[attliew, "I made the scruple, 
because I a while since was sick with the eat- 
ing of fruit."' 

Gar-s. Forbidden fruit will make you sick ; 
but not what our Lord has tolerated. 

While they were thus talking, they were 
A dish of nut., presented with another dish, and it 
wjis a dish of nuts. Song 6:11. Then said 
some at the table, " Xuts spoil tender teeth, 
especially the teeth of children ;"' which when 
Gains heard, he said, 

'•Hard texts are nuts, (I will not call them cheaters,) 
^Vhose shells do keep their kernels from the eaters: 
Open the shells, and you shall have the meat; 
Thev here are brought fur yuu to crack and eat." 

Then were they very merry, and sat at the 
table a long time, talking of many things. Then 
said the old avntloman. 'My n'ood landlord, 



568 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

while we are cracking your nuts, if you please, 
do you open this riddle : 

" Amantherewas.thoua-hsomcdidcounthimmad, ^ riddle put 
llie more he cast away, tiio more he had. Honest. 

' Then they all gave good heed, wondering 
what good Gains would say ; so he sat still a 
while,. and then thus replied: 

"He who bestows his goods upon the poor, 
ai 11 1 1 • IX,- „ Gaius opens it. 

Shall have as much again, and ten times more. 

Then said Joseph, "I dare say, sir, I did 
not think you could have found it Jr^^^' ''""" 
out." 

"Oh," said Gains, "I have been trained up 
in this way a great while ; nothing teaches like 
experience. I have learned of my Lord to be 
kind, and have found by experience that I have 
gained thereby. There is that scattereth, and 
yet increaseth ; and there is that withholdeth 
more than is meet, but it tendeth to poverty. 
There is that maketh himself rich, yet hath 
nothing; there is that maketh himself poor, yet 
hath great riches." Prov. 11 : 24 ; 13:7. 

Tlien Samuel whispered to Christiana his 
mother, and said, "Mother, this is a very good 
man's house; let us stay here a good while, 
and let my brother Matthew be married here 
to Mercy, before we go any further." The 



CIJHAT-HKAKTS KIDnLK. 509 

-which (Jaiiis llie liost overhearing, said, "With 
a very good will, my cliild."' 

So they stayed there more than a month, 
Mm";"ui^kT' and Mercy was givtMi to ^[atthew to 
wile. While they stayed here, Mercy, as her 
custom was, would be making coats and gar- 
ments to give to the poor, by which she brought 
a very good report u})on the pilgrims. 

But to return again to our story. After 
The boys po sup])er thc lads desired a bed, for 

to bed, the rest ^ ^ 

situp. {]^Qy ^vere weary with travelling. 

Then Gains called to show them their cham- 
ber; but said Mercy, "I Avili have them to 
bed." r^o she had them to bed, and they slept 
well: but the rest sat up all night; for Gains 
and they were such suitable company, that they 
could not tell how to part. After nuich talk 
of their Lord, themselves, and their journey, 
old Mr. Honest, he that i)ut forth the riddle to 

^Old Honest Q^^^^^ ^^„^^^ ^^ j^^^l rpj^^^^^ ^.^j^^ 

Great-heart, "What, sir, you begin to be 
drowsy? come, rub up now, here is a riddle 
'for you." Then said ^Ir. Honest, "Let us 
hear it." Then replied Mr. Great-heart, 

'^'' ''^'^^ wouM kill, must first be overcome : 
Who live iibioad would, first must die at home." 

"Ha,'' saitl ^Fr. Honest, "it is a hard one; 



570 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

hard to expound, and harder to practise. But 
come, landlord," said he, "I will, if you please, 
leave my part to you; do you expound it, and 
I will hear Avhat you say." 

"No," said Gains, "it was put to you, and 
it is expected you should answer it." Then 
said the old gentleman, 

"He first by grace must conquered be, 

That sin would mortify ; xhe riddle 

Who that lie lives would convince me, opened. 
Unto himself must die." 

"It is right," said Grains; "good doctrine 
and experience teach this. For, first, until 
grace displays- itself, and overcomes the soul 
with its gloiT, it is altogether without heart to 
oppose sin. Besides, if sin is Satan's cords by 
which the soul lies bound, how should it make 
resistance before it is loosed from that infirmi- 
ty? Secondly, nor will any one that knows 
either reason or grace, believe that such a man 
can be a living monument of grace that is a 
slave to his own corruptions. And a question 

worth the mind- 

now it comes into my mind, I will >"^ 
tell 3^ou a story worth the hearing. There 
were two men that went on pilgrimage; the 
one began when he Avas young, the other when 
he was old. The young man had strong cor- 
ruptions to grapple with ; the old man's were 



IIONE<Trf IIKI'LY. 571 

weak witli the decays of nature. Tlie youii<;- 
man trod his ste|)s as even as did the old one, 
and was every way as light as he. Who now, 
or which of them, had their graces shining 
clearest, since both seemed to be alike ?'' 

Hox. The young man's, doubtless. For 
A comparison, that wluch makcs head against the 
greatest opposition, gives best demonstration 
that it is strongest; especially when it also 
holdeth pace with that which meets not with 
half so much, as to be sure old age docs not. 
Besides, I have observed that old men have 
A mistake, blcsscd themsclvcs with this mistake : 
namely, taking the decays of nature for a gra- 
cious conquest over corruptions, and so have 
been apt to beguile themselves. Indeed, old 
men that are gracious are best able to give 
advice to them that are young, because they 
have seen most of the emptiness of things: but 
yet, for an old and a young man to set out 
both together, the young one has the advan- 
tage of the fairest discovery of a work of grace 
within him. though the old man's corrujitions 
are naturally the weakest. 

Thus they .sat talking till break (jf day. 

Now, w^hen the family were uj), Christiana 
Ijid her son James that he should read a chap- 



572 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 



ter; SO lie read the fifty-third of Isaiah. When 
he had done, Mr. Honest asked why tio^r""''"''' 
it was said that the Saviour was to come "out 
of a dry ground;" and also, that "he had no 
form nor comeliness in him.'' 

Then said Mr. Great-heart, ' ' To the first I 
answer, because the church of the Jews, of 
which Christ came, had then lost almost all the 
sap and spirit of religion. To the second I 
say, the words are spoken in the person of 
unbelievers, who, because the}^ want the eye 
that can see into our Prince's heart, therefore 
they judge of him by the meanness of his out- 
side; just like those who, not knowing that 
precious stones are covered over with a home- 
ly ci'ust, when they have found one, because 
they know not what they have found, cast it 
away again, as men do a common stone." 

"Well," said Gains, "now you are here, 
and since, as I know, Mr. Great-heart is good 
at his weapons, if you please, after we have 
refreshed ourselves, we will walk into the 
fields, to see if we can do any good. About a 
mile from hence there is one Slay-good, a giant, 
that doth much annoy the King's highway in 
these parts ; and I know whereabout his haunt 
is. He is master of a number of thieves; 



SLAY-COOI) ATTACKED. 5(3 

"t would !)(' well if wo could clcnf (hi'se jtarts 
of jiiiu."" 

t^o tliev coiiseiitod and went: Mr. Great- 
heart with his sword, liehnet, and shield; and 
the rest with spears and staves. 

TTlien they eanie to the place wliere lie 

Giant Slaygood ^yj^^, ^|jpy f,)ii]|,| liim y;\[\i one Feeble- 
round with CHIC ' 
Feeble -mind in • t • i • i i i i • , 

hishand. iiiiud 111 lus luuid. wlioiii lus servants 
had brought niito him, having taken liini in the 
way. Xow the giant was rifling him, with a 
purpose after that to jnck his bones; for he 
was of the nature of flesh-eaters. 

AVell, so soon as he saw Mr. Great-heart 
and his friends at the mouth of his cave, with 
their weajions, he demanded what they wanted. 

Great. AVe want thee; for we are come to 
revenge the c|uarrels of the many that thou hast 
slain of the pilgiims, when thou hast dragged 
them out of the King's^ highwa}' : wherefore 
come out of thy cave. 

So he armed himself and came out, and to 
battle they went, and fought for above an hour, 
and then stood still to take wind. 

Then said the giant. "AVhy are you here 
on my ground ?" 

Great. To revenge the blood of j)ilgrims, 
as T told thee before. 



574 rTi.r; RIM'S progress. 

So tliey went to it again, and the giant 
made Mr. Great-heart give back ; but he came 
up again, and in the greatness of his mind lie 
let fly with such stoutness at the The giant 

assaulted and 

giant's head and sides, that he made '•''*" 
him let his weapon fall out of his hand. So 
he smote him, and slew him, and cut off his 
head, and brought it away to the inn. He 
also took Feeble-mind the pilgrim, and brought 
him with him to his lodgings. When they were 
come home, they showed his head to the fam- 
ily, and set it up, as thej^ had done others be- 
fore, for a terror to those that should attempt 
to do as he hereafter. 

Then they asked Mr. Feeble-mind how he 
fell into his hands. 

Then said the poor man, "I am a sickly 
man, as you see ; and because death did usual- 
ly once a day knock at my door, I thought I 
should never be well at home : so I now Feebie. 

mind came to 

betook myself to a pilgrim's life, and beapiignm. 
have travelled hither from the town of Uncer- 
tain, where I and my father were born. I am 
a man of no strength at all of bod}^, nor yet of 
mind ; but wT)uld, if I could, though I can but 
crawl, spend my life in the pilgrim's way. 
When I came at the 2;ate that is at the head 



F !•: i: r. 1. 1-: - m i x i > • s k \ v k \i i e x c i: . '>!'> 

of the way. tho Lord of that jdacc did ciitci- 
taiii 1110 tVccly : neither objected he against my 
weakly looks, nor against my feeble mind, but 
gave me such things jis were necessary for my, 
journey, and bid me h()])e to the end. AVheu 
I came to the house of the lnteri)reter, I iv- 
ceived much kindness there; and because the 
hill of Difliculty was judged too hard for me, I 
was carried up that by one of his servants. 
Indeed, I have found much relief from pilgrims, 
though none were willing to go so softly as T 
am forced to do : yet still, as they came on they 
bid me be of good cheer, and said that it w^as 
the will of their Lord that comfort should be 
given to the feeble-minded, 1 Thess. 5 : 14 ; and 
so went on their ow'u pace. When I was come 
to Assault-lane, then this giant met with me, 
and bid me i)repare for an encounter. But, 
alas, feeble one that I was, I had more need of 
a cordial ; so he came up and took me. I con- 
ceited he Avould not kill me. Also when he 
had got me into his den, since I went not with 
him willingly, I believed I should come out 
alive again; for I have heard, that not any 
Mark this! pilgrim that is taken captive by vio- 
lent hands, if he keeps heartwhole towards his 
Master, is, by the laws of providence, to die 



576 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

by the liaiid of the eiiemj'. Eobbed I looked 
to be, and robbed to be sure I am ; but I Iiave, 
as you see, escaped with life, for the which I 
thank my King as the ai]J:hor, and you as the 
means. Other brunts I also look for; but this 
I have resolved on, to wit, to run Mark tins: 
when I can, to go when I cannot run, and to 
creep when I cannot go. As to the main, I 
thank Him that loved me, I am fixed ; my way 
is before me, my mind is beyond the river that 
has no bridge, though I am, as you see, but of 
a feeble mind."' 

Then said old Mr. Honest, "Have not you, 
some time ago, been acquainted with one Mr. 
Fearing, a pilgrim ?" 

Feeble. Acquainted with him? yes; he 
came from the town of Stupidity, which lieth 
four degrees to the northward of the cit}' of 
Destruction, and as many off of where I was 
born: yet we were well acquainted, Mr rearing 

is Mr Feeble- 

for indeed he was my uncle, mj^ fa- ""ndsuncie. 
ther's brother. He and I have been much of 
a temper; he was a little shorter than I, but 
yet we were much of a complexion. 

Hon. I perceive you knew him, has^omiorMr"^ 
and I am apt to believe also that you tm%T^ ' 
were related one to another ; for you have his 



NOT-RIGHT r^THUCK UKAl) f.TT 

wliitoly look, a cast like liis with your eye, and 
your speecli is iiiucli alike. 

Feeble. Most have said so, that have known 
us both; and besides, what I have read in liim 
I have for the most i)art found in myself. 

''Come, sir,"' said good Gains, "be of good 
^Gaiusccnforts ^^^^^^. . ^.^^^ ^^,^ welcomc to mo, and 

to my house. What thou hast a mind to, call 
for freely ; and what thou wonkiest have my 
servants do for thee, they will do it with a 
ready mind." 

Then said Mr. Feeble-mind, "This is an 

unexpected favor, and as the sun shining out 

of a very dark cloud. Did giant Slay-good in- 

xoticc to be tend me this favor when he stopped 

taken of provi ^ '■ 

dcnce. j^-,p r^jjfi resolved to let me go no 

further? Did lie intend, that after he had rifled 
my pockets I should go to Gains my host? 
Yet so it is."' 

Now, just as Mr. Feeble-mind and Gains 

on™'"ft S ^^'^^'G ^^^"'"^ ill ^^^^^^ t^i^i'G came one 
thundeXit.^ * running, and called at the door, and 
said, that about a mile and a half off there was 
one Mr. Xot-right, a pilgrin^, struck dead njjon 
the placcTwhere he was, with a thunderbolt. 
Mr Feeble- "Alas," Said Mr. Feeble-mind, 

mind remarks 

upon it. '^\^ jje gij^in 7 He overtook me some 



.")7S PTLOp.TAfs rr; on REPS'. 

(lavs before I came so far as hither, and would 
l)e my company-keeper. He was also with me 
when Slay -good the giant took me, but he was 
nimble of his heels, and escaped; but it seems 
he escaped to die, and I w^as taken to liye." 

" Ayiiat one would tliiuk dotli seek to slay outright, 
Ofttinies delivers from the saddest plight. 
That very providence whose face is death, 
Doth ofttimes to the lowly life bequeath. 
I taken Avas, he did escape and flee ; 
Hands crossed gave death to him and life to me." 

Now^, about this time Matthew and Mercy 
were married; also Gains gaye his daughter 
Phebe to James, Matthew's brother, to wife; 
after which time they yet stayed about ten 
days at G-aius' house, spending their time and 
the seasons like as pilgrims use to do. 

When they were to depart, Gains made 
them a feast, and they did eat and drink, and 
were merry. Xow the hour was The pilgrims 

' prepare to go 

come that they must be gone ; wdiere- for^^'J 
fore Mr. Great-heart called for a reckoning. 
But Gaius told him, that at his house it was 
not the custom for pilgrims to pay for their 
entertainment. He boarded them by the year, 
but looked for his pay from the good Samari- 
tan, wdio had promised him, at his return, 
whatsoeyer charge he was at with them, faith- 



F K K H I. K- M I \ I) S IX F 1 I! M I T V . 'u'd 

iully to repay liim. Luke 10:34, 35. Then 
saifl -Mr. ( Jreat-lieart to liiiii, 

• lieloved, thou doost laitlifully whatsoever 
ihnv tiuy greet thou doest to tlic brethren, and to 

one another at 

parting. straHgeFS, who liave borne witness of 

thy charity before the church ; wdioni if thou 
yet bring forward on their journey after a 
godly sort, thou shalt do well." 3 John 5, G. 
Tlien Gains took his leave of them all, and 
Gaius- last his childrcu, and particularly of Mr. 

kindness to Fee 

biemind. Feeble-uiind. He also gave hnn 
something to driidv by the way. 

Xow ^Ir. Feeble-mind, when they were 
going out of the door, made as if he intended 
to linger. The which when Mr. Great-heart 
espied, he said, "Come, Mr. Feeble-mind, pray 
do you go along with us; I will be your con- 
ductor, and you shall fare as the rest." 

Feeble. Alas, I want a suitable compan- 
ion. Yon are all lusty and strong, but I, as 

Feeble-mind you scc, aiu wcak ; I choosc, there- 
for going be- 
hind, fore, rather to come behind, lest, by 

reason of my many intirmities, I should be 

a burden both to myself and to you. I am, as 

I said, a man of a weak and feeble mind, and 

ex^cuSI?.'*'' shall b(^ offended and made weak at 

that whieh others' can bear. T shall like no 



580 PILCxRIM'tf PROGRESS. 

laughing; I shall like no gay attire; I shall 
like no nnprofitable questions. Nay, I am so 
weak a man as to be offended with that which 
others have a liberty to do. I do not yet 
know all the truth ; I am a very ignorant Chris- 
tian man. Sometimes, if I hear some rejoice 
in the Lord, it troubles me because I cannot 
do so too. It is with me as it is with a weak 
man among the strong, or as with a sick man 
among the healthy, or as a lamp despised ; so 
that I know not what to do. "He that is ready 
to slip with his feet is as a lamp despised in 
the thought of him that is at ease." Job 12:5. 

"But, brother," said Mr. Great-heart, "I 
have it in commission to comfort the commi^sion^'"' ^ 
feeble-minded, and to support the weak. You 
must needs go along Avith us ; we Avill wait for 
you; we will lend you our help; we spnit/'""""'" 
Avill deny ourselves of some things, bofli opin- 
ionative and practical, for 3'our sake ; we will 
not enter into doubtful disputations before you ; 
we will be made all .'hings to you, rather than 
you shall be left behind." 1 Thess. 5:14; Rom. 
14; iCor. 8:9-13; 9:22. 

Now, all this while they were at Gains' 
door; and behold, as they were thus in the 
heat of their discourse, Mr. Ready-to-halt 



Fi:i;i!I,K-Ml-\I>'S Ct'.M I'ANIOX. 581 

came by. with his crutehes iii his hand, and 
he also was goinii: on pilgrimage. 

Then said Mr. Feeble-mind to him, "Man, 

hcnv eamest thon hither? I was bnt now com- 

]>huning that I had not a suital)le e(>m})ani()n, 

Feeble min.i jj^jj; ^hon art aecordlng to mv wish. 

glad to see <^ * 

ucaayto-hait ^y^q^.^^^^, welcome, good Mr. Keady- 
to-halt : I hope thon and I may be some help." 

"I shall be glad of thy company,'' said 
Pteady-to-halt ; "and, good Mr. Feeble-mind, 
rather than we will part, since we are thns hap- 
l)ily met, I will lend thee one of my crntches." 

■Xay." said ^Mr. Feeble-mind, "though I 
thank thee for thy good-will, I am not inclined 
to halt before I am lame. Howbeit, I think, 
wdien occasion is, it may help me against a dog.'' 

Ready. If either myself or my crutches 
can do thee a pleasure, we are both at thy 
command, good Mr. Feeble-mind. 

Thus, therefore, they went on. ^Ir. Great- 
heart and Mr. Honest went before, Christiana 
and her children went next, and Mr. Feeble- 
mind came behind, and ^Mr. Ready-to-halt with 
his crutches. Then said Mr. Honest, 

" Pray, sir, now we arc upon the road, tell 
New talk us some profitable things of some that 
have gone on i)ilgr image Ix'fore us." 



582 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Great. With a good will. I suppose you 
have heard how Christian of old did meet with 
Apoll3^on ill the valley of Humiliation, and 
also what hard work he had to go through the 
valley of the Shadow of Death. Also I think 
you cannot but have heard how Faithful was 
put to it by Madam Wanton, Avith Adam the 
First, with one Discontent, and Shame; four 
as deceitful villains as a man can meet with 
upon the road. 

Hon. Yes, I have heard of all this; but 
indeed, good Faithful was hardest put to it with 
Shame ; he was an unwearied one. 

G-REAT. Aye ; for, as the pilgrim well said, 
he of all men had the wrong name. 

Hon. But pra}^, sir, where was it that 
Christian and Faithful met Talkative? That 
same w^as also a notable one. 

Great. He was a confident fool ; yet many 
follow his ways. 

Hon. He had like to have beguiled Faith- 
ful. 

Great. Aye, but Christian put him into a 
Avay quickly to find him out. 

Thus they went on till they came to the 
place where Evangelist met with Christian and 
Faithful, and prophesied to them what should 



TALK ABOUT I'l IJJ 11I.M«. 583 

betall them at Vanity fair. Then said their 
guide. "Hereabouts did Christian and Faith- 
ful meet with Evangelist, who prophesied to 
them of what troubles they should meet witli 
at Vanity fair." 

Hon. Say you so? I dare say it was a 
bard chapter that then he did read unto them. 

Great. It was so, but lie gave them en- 
couragement withal. But what do we talk of 
them ? They were a couple of lion-like men ; 
they had set their faces like a flint. Do not 
you rememl)er how undaunted they were when 
they stood before the judge ? 

IIox. AVell: Faithful bravely suffered. 

Great. So he did, and as brave things 
came on't; for Hopeful, and some others, as 
the story relates it, were converted by his 
death. 

Hox. Well, but pray go on ; for you arc 
well acquainted with things. 

Great. Above all that Christian met witli 
after he had passed through Vanity fair, one 
By-ends was the arch one. 

Hon. By-ends? what was he? 

Great. A very arch fellow, a downrigiil 
hypocrite ; one that would be religious which- 
ever wav the world went, but so cunnin": that 



584 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

he would be sure never to lose or suffer for it. 
He had his mode of religion for every fresh 
occasion, and his wife was as good at it as he. 
He would turn from opinion to opinion; yea, 
and plead for so doing too. But, so far as I 
could learn, he came to an ill end with his by- 
ends ; nor did I ever hear that -any of his chil- 
dren were ever of any esteem with any that 
truly feared God. 

Now by this time they were come within 
sisfht of the town of Yanitv, where xhey come 

"^ ' within sii;lit of 

Vanity fair is kept. So, when they Canity fair. 
saw that they were so near the town, they con- 
sulted with one another how they should pass 
through the town; and some said one thing, 
and some another. At last Mr. G-reat-heart 
said, "I have, as you may understand, often 
been a conductor of pilgrims through this town. 
Now, I am acquainted with one Mr. Mnason, 
Acts 21:1G, a Cyprusian by nation, dn old 
disciple, at whose house we may lodge. If 
you think good, we will turn in there."' 

"Content," said old Honest; "Content," 
said Christiana; "Content," said Mr. Feeble- 
mind; and so they said all. Now you must 
think it was eventide by that they got to the 
outside of the town ; but Mr. Great-heart knew 



E X T K 11 T A I N K I • I". V .M 11 . M X A .<0 X . 585 

the way to tlic old inaii's lioiiso. So tliitlior 
tlicy ciiiiio: and lie called at. the door, aiul the 
old man within knew his tongue as soon as 
Tuoj- enter into evei" lic heafd it: so he opened the 

one >lr. Mna- . 

sons to lodge, (jooi', and they all eanie m. i lieu 
said ^Inason their host, " IIow far have ye 
come to-day ?" So they said, "From the house 
of Gains our friend."' "I promise you," said 
lie, '"you have g-one a good stitch. You may 
well l)e weary ; sit down."' So they sat down. 

Then said their guide, "Come, what cheer, 
good sirs ? I dare say you are welcome to my 
friend.*' 

"I also,"" said Mr. ^Inason, "do bid you 
welcome ; and whatever you want, do but say, 
and we will do what we can to get it for 
you."' 

IIox. Our great want, a wdiile since, w^as 
They are glad harbor and good comi)any, and now 

of entertain- 
ment. J hope we have both. 

^[XA. For harbor, you see what it is; but 
for good company, that will appear in the trial. 

"Well,"' said Mr Great-heart, "will you 
have the pilgrims np into their lodging ?" 

"T will," said Mr. Miiason. So he had 
them to their respective- plaees; and also show- 
ed them a verv fair dining-room, where they 



586" riLGRIM'S rrvOGRESS. 

might be, and sup together until the time should 
come to go to rest. 

Kow, when they were seated in their places, 
and were a little cheery after their journey. 
Mr. Honest asked his landlord if there was any 
store of good people in the town. 

Mna. We have a few ; for indeed they are 
but a few when compared with them on the 
other side. 

Hon. But how shall we do to see some of 
them ? for the sight of good men to J'lZfot-Ml 
them that are going on pilgrimage, fhe'lown.^'^'' ""^ 
is like the appearing of the moon and stars to 
them that are sailing upon the seas. 

Then Mr. Mnason stamped with his foot, 
and his daughter Grace came up. So he said 
unto her, "Grace, go you, tell my some sent for. 
friends, Mr. Contrite, Mr. Holy-man, Mr. Love- 
saints, Mr. Dare-not-lie, and Mr. Penitent, that 
I have a friend or two at my house who have 
a mind this evening to see them."' So Grace 
went to call them, and they came ; and after 
salutation made, they sat down together at the 
table. 

Then said Mr. Mnason their landlord, "My 
neighbors, I have, as you see, a company of 
strangers come to my house : they are pilgrims ; 



TUWN UV VANITV. 587 

they come I'nmi afar, and arc going to Mount 
Zion. ?>ut who."' <iuotli lie, '"do you think this 
is?'" pointing his linger to Christiana. "It is 
Christiana, tlie wile of Christian, the famous 
pilgrim, -who, witli Faithful his brother, was so 
shamefully handled in our town.'' At that they 
stood amazed, saying, "We little thought to 
see Christiana when Grace came to call us; 
wherefore this is a very comfortable surprise.'' 
They then asked her of her welfare, and if 
these young men were her husband's sons. And 
when she had told them they were, they said, 
' ' The King whom you love and serve make 
you as your father, and bring you where he is 
in peace.'' 

Then ^Ir. Honest, when they were all sat 
twecuj/r^'Hon" <^^own, uskcd Mr. Contrite and the 
c^t^andMr.con ^.^^^ j^^ wluit posturc tlicir towu was 

at present. 

Cox. You may be sure we are lull of hurry 
in fair-time. 'T is hard keeping our hearts 
wJtcfuuhKL."^ and spirits in good order when we 
are in a cumbered condition. He that lives 
in such a place as this is, and has to do with 
such as we have, has need of an item to cau- 
tion him to take heed every moment of the 
dav. 



588 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Hon. But how are your neighbors now for 
quietness ? 

Con. They are much more moderate now 
than formerly. You know how CKris- , rerseci.tion 

«/ not so liot at 

tian and Faithful were used at our formerly'''"' "' 
town; but of late, I say, they have been far 
more moderate. I think the blood of Faithful 
lietli as a load upon them till now ; for since 
they burned him, they have been ashamed to 
burn any more. In those days we were afraid 
to walk the streets ; but now we can show our 
heads. Then the name of a professor was 
odious; now, especially in some parts of our 
town, (for you know our town is large,) relig- 
ion is counted honorable. 

Then said Mr. Contrite to them, "Pray, 
how fareth it with you in your pilgrimage? how 
stands the country affected towards you ?" 

Hon. It happens to us as it happeneth to 
wayfaring men: sometimes our way is clean, 
sometimes foul; sometimes up hill, sometimes 
down hill ; we are seldom at a certainty. The 
wind is not always on our backs, nor is every 
one a friend that we meet with in the wa}^ 
We have met with some notable rubs already, 
and what are yet behind we know not; but 
for the most part, we find it true that has 



RUBS OF THE TILGRIMS. 589 

been lalkiMJ of old, "A good man must sufler 
trouble.*' 

Cox. You talk of rubs: what rubs have you 
met withal ? 

Hox. Xay, ask Mr. Great-heart, our guide; 
for he can give the best account of that. 

Great. We have been beset thiee or four 
times already. First, Christiana and her chil- 
dren were beset by two ruffians, who they fear- 
ed would take away their lives. We were 
beset by giant Bloody-man, giant ^laul, and 
giant Play-good. Indeed, we did rather beset 
the last than were beset by him. And thus it 
was: after we had been some time at the house 
of Gains my host, and of the whole church, w^e 
were minded upon a time to take our weapons 
with us, and go see if we could light upon any 
of those that are enemies to pilgrims ; for we 
heard that there was a notable one thereabouts. 
Xow Gains knew his haunt better than I, be- 
cause he dwelt thereabout. So we looked and 
looked, till at last we discerned the mouth of 
his cave; then we were glad, an<l ]»liickcd up 
our spirit'^. So we approached up to his den ; 
and lo, when we came there, he had dragged, 
by mere force, into his net, this poor man, Mr. 
Feeble-mind, and was about to brine: him to 



590 PILGKIM-S PROGRESS. 

his end. But wlien lie saw us, supposing, as 
we tliouglit, he had another prey, he left the 
poor man in his hole, and came out. So we 
fell to it full sore, and he lustily laid about 
him ; but, in conclusion, he was brought down 
to the ground, and his head cut off, and set up 
by the way-side for a terror to such as should 
after practise such ungodliness. That I tell 
you the truth, here is the man himself to affirm 
it, who was as a lamb taken out of the mouth 
of the lion. 

Then said Mr. Feeble-mind, "I found this 
true, to my cost and comfort: to my cost, when 
he threatened to pick my bones every moment ; 
and to my comfort, when I saw Mr. Grreat- 
heart and his friends, with their weapons, ap- 
proach so near for my deliverance." 

Then said Mr. Holy-man, ' ' There are two 
things that they have need to pos- sJU""'^ "''"''' 
sess who go on pilgrimage— courage, and an 
unspotted life. If they have not courage, they 
can never hold on their way; and if their- lives 
be loose, the}^ will make the very name of a 
pilgrim stink." 

Then said Mr. Love-saints, "I hope this 
caution is not needful among you ; sjeecir^ '^'"''' 
but truly there are many that go upon the 



TWO ^^ONS M AIMMKl). 591 

road, ^vllt^ i'atli(M- (k'clar(> tlicinsclvcs straiiti-crs 
to pil,L:-i'iina,i:('. than slraii.uxTs and pil.iiTiiiis on 
the earth." 

Then said Mr. Dare-not-lie, " T is true. 
lie-Isi^ccT.:""* Tlieyliave neither the pil-rim'.s weed, 
nor the pilgrim's eonrage ; they go not ui)right- 
ly, l)iit all awry with their feet; one shoe goeth 
inward, another outward; and their liosen are 
out behind: here a rag, and there a rent, to 
the disparagement of their Lord." 

"These things,"' said ^Ir. Penitent, ''they 
Bpc^Jcir""'"'' ought to be troubled for; nor are the 
])ilgrims like to have that grace put upon them 
and their pilgrim's j)rogress as they desire, 
until the ^vay is cleared .of such spots and 
blemishes."' Thus they sat talking and spend- 
ing the time until suj)})er was set upon the ta- 
ble, unto which they went, and refreshed their 
Aveary bodies : so they Avent to rest. 

Xow they staid in the fair a great while, at 
the house of this ^Ir. ^Inason, who in process 
of time gave his daughter Grace unto t^amuel, 
Christiana"s son, to wife, and his daughter Mar- 
tha to Joseph. 

The time, as I said, that they stayed here, 
was long, for it was not now as in former times. 
Wherefore the [)ilgrims grew a('(|uainted with 



592 riLGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

many of the good people of the town, and did 
them what service they coiikl. Mercy, as she 
was wont, labored much for the poor: where- 
fore their bellies and backs blessed her, and 
she was there an ornament to her profession. 
And, to say the truth for (Iracc, Phebe, and 
Martha, the}^ were all of a very good nature, 
and did much good in their places. They were 
also all of them very fruitful ; so that Chris- 
tian's name, as was said before, was like to 
live in the Avorld. 

While they la}' here, there came a monster 
out of the woods, and slew many of a monster. 
the people of the town. It would also carry 
away their children, and teach them to suck 
its whelps. Now, no man in the town durst 
so much as face this monster ; but all fled when 
they heard the noise of his coming. 

The monster was like unto no one beast on 
the earth. Its body was like a drag- Misshape. 
on, and it had seven heads and ten horns. It 
made great havoc of children, and yet it was 
governed by a woman. Eev. 17:3. This mon- 
ster propounded conditions to men; His nature, 
and such men as loved their lives more than 
their souls, accepted of those conditions. So 
they came under. 



TlIK .MONSTER DIOFEATED. 593 

Now Mv. (Jrcat-lioart. to.aetlicr with those 
who caiiR' to visit the piluriiiis at Mr. Mnason's 
house, entered into a eoveiiant to go and en- 
gage this beast, if perhajts tliey might deliver 
the i)eople of this town from tlic paws and 
moutli of this so devouring a serpent. 

Then did Mv. Great-heart, Mr. Contrite, 
^Ir. IToly-man. Mr. Dare-not-lie, and Mr. Pen- 
itent, with their weapons, go forth to meet him. 
Xow the monster at first was very rampant, 
and looked upon these enemies with great dis- 
^mnvhcsen ^i^j^^ . ^^^ ^|^g^, g^ j^elabored him, 

being sturdy men at arms, that they made him 
make a retreat. So they came home to Mr. 
Mnason's house again. 

The monster, you must know, had his cer- 
tain seasons to come out in, and to make his 
attempts upon the children of the jieople of the 
town. At these seasons did these valiant wor- 
thies watch him, and did still continually as- 
sault him ; insomuch that in process of time he 
became not only wounded, but lame. Also he 
'has not made that havoc of the townsmen's 
•children as formerly he had done; and it is 
verily believed by some that this beast will die 
of his wounds. 

This, therefore, made Mr. Great-heart and 



594 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

his fellows of great fame in this town; so that 
many of the people that wanted their taste of 
things, yet had a reverent esteem and respect 
for them. Upon this account, therefore, it was 
that these pilgrims got not much hurt here. 
True, there were some of the baser sort, that 
could see no more than a mole, nor understand 
any more than a beast ; these had no reverence 
for these men, and took no notice of their valor 
and adventures. 



THE riLGRlMS GO FOKWAKD. 595 



THE SEVEXTH STAGE. 

Well, tlit' time <ire\v uii lluit tlie pilgrims 
must go oil their way ; wherelbre tliev prepared 
for their joiirnev. They sent for their friends ; 
they conferred with them ; they had some time 
set apart therein to commit each other to tlie 
protection of their Prince. There were again 
tliat brought them of such things as they had, 
that ^vere fit for the weak and the strong, for 
the w^omen and the men, and so laded them with 
such things as were necessary. Acts 28 : 10. 
Then they set forward on their way ; and their 
friends accompanying them so far as was con- 
venient, they again committed each other to 
the protection of their King, and parted. 

The}' therefore that w^re of tlie ])ilgrims' 
company went on, and ^Ir. Great-heart went 
before them. Xow, the women and children 
being weakly, they were forced to go as the}" 
could bear ; by which means Mr. Ready-to-halt 
and Mr. Feeble-mind had more to sympathize 
with their condition. 

AVhen they were gone from the townsmen, 
and wlieii their friends had bid them farewell, 
they quickly came to the place where Faithful 



596 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

was put to death. Therefore they made a 
stand, and thanked Him that had enabled him 
to bear his cross so well ; and the rather, be- 
cause they now found that theyjiad a benefit 
by such a manly suffering as his was. 

They went on therefore after this a good 
way further, talking of Christian and Faithful, 
and how Hopeful joined himself to Christian 
after that Faithful was dead. 

Now they were come up with the hill Lucre, 
where the silver mine was which took Demas 
off from his pilgrimage, and into which, as 
some think, By-ends fell and perished ; where- 
fore they considered that. But wdicn they 
were come to the old monument that stood 
over against the hill Lucre, to wit, to the pillar 
of salt, that stood also within view of Sodom 
and its stinking lake, they marvelled, as did 
Christian before, that men of such knowledge 
and ripeness of wit as they were, should be so 
blinded as to turn aside here. Only the}^ con- 
sidered, again, that nature is not affected with 
the harms that others have met with, especially 
if that thing upon which they look has an at- 
tracting virtue upon the foolish eye. 

I saw now that they went on till they came 
to the river that was on this side of the Delec- 



TIIK IIOUHK F(»I! l..\Mr,,<. 597 

tal)lc iiKMiiitniiis ; {o (lu> river wlior(^ Die fiiio 
trees grow on both sides, and Avliose leaves, if 
taken inwardly. are g^od against snrfeits : where 
the meadows are green all the year long, and 
where they might lie down safely. Psa. 23 : 2. 
]>y this river-side, in the meadows, there 
"were cotes and folds for sheep, a lionse bnilt 
for the nourishing and bi'inging u\) of those 
lambs. th(^ babes of those women that go on 
l)ilgrimage. .Vlso there was here one that was 
intrusted with them, who could have compas- 
sion; and that could gather these lambs with 
his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and 
gently lead those that were with young. Ileb. 
5:2; Isa. 40:11. Xow, to the care of this 
man Christiana admonished her four daughters 
to commit their little ones, that l)y these waters 
they might be housed, harbored, succored, and 
nourished, and that none of them might be lack- 
ing in time to come. This man, if any of them 
go astray, or be lost, will bring them again ; 
he Avill also bind up that Avhich was broken, 
and will strengthen them that are sick. eTer. 
23 : 4 ; Ezek. 34 : 11-1(3. Here they will never 
want meat, drink, and clothing: here they will 
be kept from thieves and robbei's : Ibr this man 
will die l)efore one of those committed to his 



598 PILGRIM'S PROOKESS. 

trust shall be lost. Besides, here they shall be 
sure to have good nurture and admonition, and 
shall be taught to walk in right paths, and that 
you know is a favor of no small account. Also 
here, as you see, are delicate waters, pleasant 
meadows, dainty flowers, variety of trees, and 
such as bear wholesome fruit: fruit, not like 
that which Matthew ate of, that fell over the 
wall out of Beelzebub's garden ; but fruit that 
procureth health where there is none, and that 
continuetli and increaseth it where it is. So 
they were content to commit their little ones 
to him ; and that which was also an encourage- 
ment to them so to do, was, for that all this 
was to be at the charge of the King, and so was 
as a hospital to young children and orphans. 

Xow they went on. And when they were 
come to Bv-path meadow, to the stile They being 

» ^ ' come to By-path 

over which Christian went with his S to^'have a 
fellow Hopeful, when they were taken despair. 
by giant Des})air, and put into Doubting cas- 
tle, they sat down, and consulted what was 
best to be done: to wit, now they were so 
strong, and had got such a man as Mr. Great- 
heart for their conductor, whether they had 
not best to make an attempt upon the giant, 
demolish his castle, and if there were any pil- 



.:i.\\r i>Ksiv\ii: attack kd. • 509 

o-rims ill it. to set iIkmu ;iI lilxTly Itcforr tlicy 
went any fiirtlu'r. So one said one tiling, and 
another said llie eontrary. One qnestioned if 
it was lawt'nl to go nj)on nnconsecrated ground ; 
anotlier said they might, provided tlieir end 
was good; but Mr. Great-heart said, '^Though 
that assertion offered last cannot be universally 
true, yet I have a commandment to resist sin, 
to overcome evil, to fight the good fight of 
faith: and I pray, with whom should I fight 
this good fight, if not with giant Despair ? I 
will therefore attempt the taking away of his 
life, and the demolishing of Doubting castle.*' 
Then said* he, '" Who will go with me?" Then 
said old Honest, ''I will." ''And so will we 
too,'' said Christiana's four sons, Matthew, Sam- 
uel, Joseph, and James; for they were young 
men and strong. 1 John 2:13, 14. So they 
left the women in the road, and with them Mr. 
Feeble-mind, and Mr. Ready-to-halt with his 
crutches, to Ije their guard until they came 
back ; for in that place the giant Despair dwelt 
so near, they keeping in the road, a little child 
might lead them. Isa. 11 : G. 

So Mr. Great-heart, old Honest, and the 
four young men. went to go up to Doubting 
castle, to look for giant Despair. When they 



600 * PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

came at the castle gate, they knocked for en- 
trance with an unusual noise. At that the old 
giant comes to the gate, and Diffidence his wife 
follows. Then said he, "Who and what is he 
that is so hardy as after this manner to molest 
the giant Despair ?" Mr. Great-heart replied, 
"It is I, Great-heart, one of the King of the 
celestial countr3^'s conductors of pilgrims to 
their place ; and I demand of thee that thou 
open thy gates for my entrance ; prepare thy- 
self also to tight, for I am come to take away 
thy head, and to demolish Doubting castle." 

Now giant Despair, because he was a giant, 
thought no man could overcome him ; and again 
thought he, "Since heretofore I have made a 
conquest of ans^els, shall Great-heart Despair has 

'" overcome an- 

make me afraid ?■' So he harnessed g^is. 
himself, and went out. He had a cap of steel 
upon his head, a breastplate of fire girded to 
him, and he came out in iron shoes, with a 
great club in his hand. Then these six men 
made up to him, and beset him behind and be- 
fore; also, when Diffidence the giantess came 
up to help him, old Mr. Honest cut her down 
at one blow. Then they fought for their lives, 
and giant Despair was brought down to'ii^!'"'''''''^*'' 
to the ground, but was very loath to die. He 



iMHliTlXC CASTLK D K M O 1. 1.< II Hit.' Cdl 

struggled liard. and liad. as th(\v say. as niaiiy 
lives as a oat; hut Great-lieait was liis death, 
for lie loft him iKjt till he liad severed his head 
from his shoulders. 

Then they Icll to demoli.-;hiiig Douhtiiig eas- 
tiedcmouiiieir tie. aiid that, you know, might with 
ease be done, sinee giant Despair was dead. 
They were seven days in destroying of that ; 
and in it of jiilgrims tliey found one Mr. Dc- 
spondeney. almost starved to death, and one 
^rueh-atVaid. his daughter ; these two they saved 
alive. But it would have made you wonder to 
have seen the dead l)odies that lay here and 
there in the eastle yard, and how full of dead 
men's bones the dungeon was. 

When Mr. Great-heart and his companions 
had performed this exj)loit. they took Mr. De- 
spondency and his daughter Much-afraid into 
their protection ; for the}' were honest people, 
though they were prisoners in Doubting castle 
to that tyrant giant Despair. They therefore, 
I say. took with them the head of the giant, 
(for his body they had buried under a heap of 
stones.) and down to the road and to their 
companions they came, and .showed them what 
they had done. Xow. when Feeble-mind and 
Ready-to-halt saw that it was the head of giant 



602 ^lL^;lM^r•^: Pi^or;REf^s. 

Despair indeed, they were very jocund and 

merry. Now Christiana, if need was, They nave mu- 
sic and dancing 

could play upon the yiol, and her *°''J°>' 
daughter Mercy upon the lute; so, since they 
'were so merry disposed, she played them a 
lesson, and Ready-to-halt would dance. So he 
took Despondency's daughter Much-afraid hy 
the hand, and to dancing they went in the 
road. True, he could not dance without one 
crutch in his hand, but I promise you he footed 
it well; also the girl was to be commended, for 
she answered the music handsomely. 

As for Mr. Despondency, the music was not 
so much to him ; he was for feeding, rather 
than dancing, for that he was almost starved. 
So Christiana gave him some of her bottle of 
spirits for present relief, and then prepared 
him something to eat; and in a little time the 
old gentleman came to himself, and began to 
be finely reyiyed. 

Now I saw in my dream, when all these 
things were finished, Mr. Great-heart took the 
head of giant Despair, and set it upon a pole 
by the highway-side, right oyer against the 
pillar that Christian erected for a caution to 
pilgrims that came after, to take heed of enter- 
ino; into his o-rounds. 



Til K I» E I. H( -T AIM. K .\I( » T N T A i X < . 6U3 

Then he writ under it iii)Oii a marble stoue 
these verses following: 

" This is tlic head of him whose name only 
In former times did pilgrims terrify. 
His castle 's down, and Diffidence his wife 
Brave ^fr. Great-heart has bereft of Hfe. 
Despondency, his daughter Much-ufraid, 
Oreat-hcart for them also the man has played. 
Who liercof doubts, if he '11 but cast his eye 
Up liither, may his scruples satisfy. 
This head also, when doubting cripples dance, 
Doth show from fears they have deliverance." 

When these men had thus bravely showed 
themselves against Doubting castle, and had 
slain giant Desi)air, they went forward, and 
went on till they came to the Delectable moun- 
tains, where T'hristian and Hopeful refreshed 
themselves with the varieties of the place. 
They also acquainted themselves with the shep- 
herds there, who welcomed them, as they had 
done Christian before, unto the Delectable 
mountains. • 

X(nv the shejiherds seeing so great a train 
follow Mr. Great-heart, (for witli him they were 
well ac([uainted.) they said inito him, "(rood 
sir, yon have got a goodly comi)any hei'C ; pray, 
where did you lind nil these?" 

Then Mr. (ireat-hcart replied, 

"First, here is Christiana and her train. 
Her sons, and her sons' wives, who, like the wain, 



fi04 PILCx RIM'S PROGRESS. 

Keep by the pole, and do by compass steer 
From sin to grace, else they had not been here. 
Next here 's old Honest come on pilgrimage. 
Ready-to-halt too, who, I dare engage, 
True-hearted is, and so is Feeble-mind, 
Who willing was not to be left behind. 
Despondency, good man, is coming after, 
And so also is Much-afraid, his daughter. 
Mdy we have entertainment here, or must 
We further go ? Let 's know whereon to trust." 

Then said the shepherds, " This is a com- 
fortable company. You are welcome tauiment.^"*^''" 
to us; for we have for the feeble, as well as 
for the strong. Our Prince has an eye to what 
is done to the least of these ; therefore infirm- 
ity must not be a block to our entertainment." 
Matt. 25 : 40. So they had them to the palace 
door, and then said unto them, "Come in, Mr. 
Feeble-mind ; come in, Mr. Ready-to-halt; come 
in, Mr. Despondency, and Mrs. Much-afraid 
his daughter. These, Mr. Great-heart," said 
the shepherds to the guide, "we call in by 
name, for that they are most subject to draw 
back; but as for you, and the rest that are 
strong, we leave you to your wonted liberty." 
Then said Mr. Great-heart, "This day I see 
that grace doth shine in your faces, and that 
you are my Lord's shepherds indeed ; for that 
you have not pushed these diseased a description 

•^ ^ of false shep 

neither with side nor shoulder, but ^"'^''- 



Mo INT MA i;\ r:i>. 605 

havo rather sti-owctl (lu'ir way hiio the palace 
with Howci's. as yoti shoiihl."" K/.rk. oi :21. 

So the feeble ami weak went in, and Mr. 
Great-heart and the rest did follow. AYhen 
thev wi>re also set down, the shepherds said to 
those of the weaker sort, '• What is it that you 
would have? for,'' said they, ''all thing's must 
l)e managed here to the supi)orting of the weak, 
as well as to the warning; of the unruly." So 
they made them a feast of things easy of diges- 
tion, and tliat were ])leasant to the j)alate, and 
nourishing; the which when they had received, 
they went to their rest, each one respectively 
unto his pro})er place. 

When morning was come, because the moun- 
tains were high, and the day clear, and because 
it was the custom of the shepherds to show the 
pilgrims before their dei)arture some rarities, 
therefore, after they were ready, and had re- 
freshed themselves, the shepherds took them 
out into the fields, and showed them first what 
they had shown to Christian before. 

'JIkmi they had them to some new places. 
Mount jiarvci. Thc first was uiouut ^larvcl, where 
they looked, and lieheld a man at a distance 
that tuml)lcd the liills about with words. Then 
they asked the sheidierds what that should 



606 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

mean. So the}^ told them, that that man was 
the son of one Mr. Great-grace, of whom you 
read in the first part of the records of the Pil- 
grim's Progress; and he is set there to teach 
pilgrims how to believe down, or to tumble 
out of their ways, what difficulties they should 
meet with, by faith. Mark 11 : 23, 24. Then 
said Mr. Great-heart, " I know him; he is a 
man above many." 

Then they had them to another place, called 
mount Innocence. And there they JlT'"' ^""'" 
saw a man clothed all in white ; and two men, 
Prejudice and Ill-will, continually casting dirt 
upon him. Xow behold, the dirt, whatsoever 
they cast at him, would in a little time fall off 
again, and his garment would look as clean as 
if no dirt had been cast thereat. Then said 
the pilgrims, "What means this?" The shep- 
herds answered, "This man is named Godl}^- 
man, and this garment is to show the innocency 
of his life. Now, those that throw dirt at him, 
are such as hate his well-doing; but, as you 
see the dirt will not stick upon his "clothes, so 
it shall be with him that liveth innocently in 
the world. Whoever they be that would make 
such men dirty, they labor all in vain; for 
God, by that a little time is spent, will cause 



TIIK KTIlluri AX \\A.<1IH1>. 607 

that their innocence shall break forth as the 
light, and their righteousness as the noonday." 

Then they took them, and had them to 
,,""""' ^""" mount Charity, where they showed 
them a man that had a bundle of cloth lying 
before him, out of which he cut coats and gar- 
ments for the poor that stood about him : yet 
his bundle or roll of cloth was never the less. 
Then said they, ' • What should this be ?" ' ' This 
is,"' said the shepherds, "to show you, that he 
who has a heart to give of his labor to the 
])Oor. shall never want wherewithal. He that 
watereth shall be watered himself. And the 
cake that the widow gave to the i)rophet did 
not cause that she had the less in her barrel."' 

They had them also to the place where 

The work of thcv saw ouc Fool and one Want- 
one Fool and 

one Want wit. ^^y\^ washlug au Ethiopian, with in- 
tention to make him white ; but the more they 
washed him, the blacker he was. Then they 
asked the slie})herds what that should mean. 
So they told them, saying, "Thus it is with 
the vile p(?rson : all means used to get such a 
one a goo<l name, shall in conclusion tend but 
to make him more abominal)le. Thus it was 
with the Pharisees; and so it shall be with all 
hypocrites."' 



608 PILGIIIM'S PROGRESS. 

Tlicii said Mercy, the wife of Matthew, to 
Christiana her mother, "Mother, I Mercy has a 

mind to see the 

would, if it might be, see the hole in iioi« "^ ""^ i»ii. 
the hill, or that commonly called the Bj'-way 
to hell." So her mother broke her mind to the 
shepherds. Then they went to the door; it 
was on the side of a hill; and they opened it, 
and bid Mercy hearken a while. So she heark- 
ened, and heard one saying, "Cursed be my 
father for holding of my feet back from the 
way of peace and life." Another said, "Oh 
that I had been torn in pieces before I had, to 
save my life, lost my soul !" And another said, 
" If I were to live again, how would I deny 
myself, rather than come to this place !" Then 
there was as if the very earth groaned and 
quaked under the feet of this young woman for 
fear ; so she looked white, and came trembling 
away, saying, "Blessed be he and she that is 
delivered from this place." 

Now, when the shepherds had shown them 
all these things, then they had them back to 
the palace, and entertained them with what 
the house would afford. But Mercy, being a 
young and married woman, longed anrforwhit*"' 
for something that she saw there, l)ut was 
ashamed to ask. Her mother-in-law then asked 



EXCKLLEXrV OF THE CLASS. 609 

her wliat she ailed, lor she looked as one not 
well. Then said Mercy, "There is a looking- 
glass hangs np in the dining-room, o(F which I 
(^Unnot take my mind; if, therefore, I have it 
not, I think I shall miscarry." Then said her 
mother, ''I will mention thy wants to the shep- 
herds, and they will not deny it thee." But 
she said, "'I am ashamed that these men should 
know that I longed." 'Xay, my daughter," 
said she. '• it is no shame, l)ut a virtue, to long 
for such a thing as that.'' So Mercy said, 
"Then, mother, if you please, ask the shep- 
herds if they are willing to sell it." 

Now the glass was one of a thousand. It 
wo^cToff.u.i*'"' would present a man, one way, with 
his own features exactly; and turn it but an- 
other Avay, and it would show one the very 
face and similitude of the Prince of pilgrims 
himself. Yes, I have talked with them that 
can tell, and they have said that they have 
seen the very crown of thorns upon his head 
by looking in that glass; they have therein 
also seen the holes in his hands, his feet, and 
his side. Yea. such an excellency is there in 
this glass, that it will show him to one where 
they have a mind to see him, whether living or 
dead ; whether in earth, or in heaven; whether 



610 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

in a state of humiliation, or in his exaltation; 
whether coming to suffer, or coming to reign. 
James 1 : 23 ; 1 Cor. 13:12; 2 Cor. 3 : 18. 

Christiana therefore went to the shepherds 
apart, (now the names of the shepherds were 
Knowledge, Experience, Watchful, and Sin- 
cere,) and said nnto them, '"There is one of 
my daughters, a breeding woman, that I think 
doth long for something that she hath seen in 
this house ; and she thinks that she shall mis- 
carry if she should by you l)e denied." 

Then said Experience, "Call her, call her, 
she shall assuredl}^ haye what we can help her 
to." So they called her, and said to her, "Mer- 
cy, what is that thing thou wouldest haye ?" 
Then she blushed, and said, "The great glass 
that hangs up in the dining-room." So Sincere 
Tan and fetched it, and with a joyful shc dotu not 

lose her long- 

consent it was giyen her. Then she '"^ 
bowed her head, and gaye thanks, and said, 
" By this 1 know that I haye obtained fayor in 
your eyes." 

They also gaye to the other young women 
such things as they desired, and to their husbands 
great commendations, for that they had joined 
with Mr. Great-heart in the slaying of giant De- 
spair, and the demolishing of Doubting castle. 



TlIK l'\ lJii;i.\I^ DKl'AUT. (ill 

About Christiana's neck the shepherds put 
irowthoshcp- a bracelet, and so did they about the 

herds adorn the .if 11' i 

pilgrims necks ot her four daughters ; also 

they ])ut ear-rings in their ears, and jewels on 
their foreheads. 

AVhen they were minded to go hence, they 
let them go in peace, but gave not to them those 
certain cautions which before were given to 
Christian and his companion. The reason was, 
ibr that these had Great-heart to be their guide, 
who was one that was well acquainted with 
things, and so could give them their cautions 
more seasonably, to wit, even when the dan- 
ger was nigh the approaching. What cautions 
Christian and his companion had received of 
the shepherds, they had also lost by that the 
time was come that they had need to put them 
in practice. Wherefore here was the advan- 
tage that this company had over the other. 

From thence they went on singing, and they 
said, 

'• Behold how fitly arc the stages set 

For tlieir relief that pilgrims are become, 
Ami how they us receive without one let, 
That make the other life our mark and home. 

AVliat novelties they have to us they give, 

That we, though pilgrims, joyful lives may live ; 

Tliey do upon us, too, such things bestow. 
Tliat show we pilgrims are. where'er we go." 



612 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 



THE EIGHTH STAGE. 

When they were gone from the shepherds, 
they quickly came to the phicc where Christian 
met Avith one Turn-away that dwelt in the town 
of Apostasy. Wherefore of him Mr. Great- 
heart their guide did now put them in mind, 
saying, "This is the place where Christian met 
with one Turn-away, who carried with him the 
cliaracter of his rebellion at his back. And 
this I have to say concerning this man, he 
would hearken to no counsel, but once a fall- 
ing, persuasion could not stop him. When he 
came to the place where the cross Howonexum- 

away managed 

and sepulchre were, he did meet with i>is apostasy. 
one that bid him look there ; but he gnashed 
with his teeth, and stamped, and said he was 
resolved to go back to his own town. Before 
he came to the gate, he met with Evangelist, 
who offered to lay hands on him, to turn him 
into the way again ; but this Turn-away resist- 
ed him, and having done much despite unto 
him, he got away over the wall, and so escaped 
his hand." 

Then they went on; and just at the place 
where Little-faith formerly was robbed, there 



V ALIANT-FOR-TIU-TH BH^ET. G13 

stood Si HKiii with liis sword drawn, and his 
lace all over with blood. Then said Mr. Great- 
heart, "Who art tliou?" Tlie mau made an- 
swer, saying, •" I am one whose name is Yal- 
iant-l"or-truth. I am a pilgrim, and am going 
One vaiiunt to tlie celestial city. Now. as I was 

fort ruth beset 

with thieves, ii^ my y^ay, there were three men 
that did beset me, and proponnded nnto me 
these three things: First, whether I would be- 
come one of them; second, or go back from 
whence I came; third, or die upon the place. 
Prov. 1:11-14. To the first I answered, I had 
been a true man for a long season, and there- 
fore it could not be expected that I should now 
cast in my lot with thieves. Then they de- 
manded what I would say to the second. So 
I told them, the place from whence I came, 
had I not found incommodity there, I had not 
forsaken it at all; but finding it altogether un- 
suitable to me, and very unprofitable for me, I 
forsook it for this way. Then they asked me 
what I said to the third. And 1 told them my 
life cost far more dear than that I should light- 
ly give it away. Besides, you have nothing 
to do thus to put things to my choice ; where- 
fore at your peril be it, if you meddle. Then 
these three, to wit, Wild-head, Inconsiderate, 



614 riLGRIM'S PRUURESS. 

and Pragmatic, drew upon mc, and I also drew 
upon tliem. So we fell to it, one against three, 
for the space of above three hours. They have 
left upon me, as you see, some of the marks of 
their valor, and have also carried away with 
them some of mine. They are but just now 
gone ; I suppose they might, as the saying is, 
hear your horse dash, and so they betook them- 
selves to flight." 

Great. But here was great odds, three 
against one. 

' ' 'T is true, " replied Yaliant-for-truth ; ' ' but 
little or more are nothing to him that has the 
truth on his side. ' Though a host should en- 
camp against me,' said one, Psa. 27:3, 'my 
heart shall not fear; though war should rise 
against me, in this will I be confident,' etc. Be- 
sides," said he, "I have read in some records, 
that one man has fought an army; and how many 
did Samson slay with the jawbone of an ass !" 

Then said the guide, " AVhy did 3'ou not 
cry out, that some might have come in for your 
succor ?" 

Valiant. So I did to m}^ King, who I kncAV 
could hear me, and afford invisible help, and 
that was sufficient for me. 

Then said Great-heart to Mr. Yaliant-for- 



V.\ l.I ANT CO.MMKNDKM. 615 

triitli. "'riKtu liast worthily Ix-liavrd tliysell"; 
let iiic sec lliy .^word.'" So lie sliowcd it liiiil. 

>Vln'ii he liad taken it in liis liand. and 
looked llicrcon a wliilo, hv said. "lla. it is a 
riglit Jerusalem blade." 

Valiant. It is so. Let a man have one of 
these blades, with a hand to wield it. and skill 
to use it. and he may venture ujjon an angel 
with it. lie need not fear its holding, if he 
ean but tell how to lay on. Its edge will never 
blunt, it will eut llesh and l)ones, and soul 
and spirit, and all. lleb. 1 : 12. 

Great. But you fought a great while ; I 
wonder you was not weary. 

Thewoni. -Yaliaxt. I fouglit till uiv sword 

did eleave to my hand; and then they were 

The faith, jolued together as if a sword grew 

Blood. out of my arm ; and when the blood 

ran through my lingers, then I fought with 

most courage. 

Great. Thou hast done well; thou hast 
resisted unto blood, striving against sin. Thou 
shalt a])ide by us, come in and go out with us; 
for we are thy companions. 

Then they took him and washed his wounds, 
and gave him of what they had, to refresh him ; 
and so thev went on tooether. 



61G PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

^ow, as they went on, because Mr. Great- 
lieart was delighted in him, (for he loved one 
greatly that he found to be a man of his hands,) 
and because there were in company those that 
were feeble and weak, therefore he questioned 
with him about many things; as, first, what 
countryman he was. 

Yaliant. I am of Dark-land ; for there was 
I born, and there my father and mother are 
still. 

''Dark-land?" said the guide; "doth not 
that lie on the same coast with the city of De- 
struction ?" 

Yaliant. Yes, it doth. Now that which 

caused me to come on pilgrimage how Mr. val- 
iant came to go 

was this. We had one Mr. Tell-true on pilgrimage. 
come into our parts, and he told it about what 
Christian had done, that Avent from the city of 
Destruction ; namely, how he had forsaken his. 
wife and children, and had betaken himself to 
a pilgrim^s life. It was also confidently re- 
ported, how he had killed a serpent that did 
come out to resist him in his journey; and how 
he got through to whither he intended. It was 
also told what welcome he had at all his Lord's 
lodgings, especially when he came to the gates 
of the celestial city; for there, said the man 



TALK OF CIIKISTIAX. 617 

lie was receivoil willi sound of tniiupot by a, 
coinpaiiy of shiniiw^- ones. lie told also how 
all the bells in the city did ring for joy at his 
reception, and what golden garments he was 
clothed with : with many other things that now 
I shall forbear to relate. In a word, that man 
so told the story of Christian and his travels 
that my heart fell into a burning haste to be 
g(jne after him; nor could father or mother 
stay me. So I got from them, and am come 
thus far on my way. 

Great. You came in at the gate, did you 
not ? 

Valiant. Yes, yes ; for the same man also 
He begins right, told US, that all would be nothing if 
we did not begin to enter this way at the gate. 

"Look you/' said the guide to Christiana, 
nameS^mou^s"" "the .pilgrimage of your husband, 
and what he has gotten thereby, is spread 
abroad far and near." 

Valiant. Why, is this Christian's wife ? 

Great. Yes, that it is; and these also are 
his four sons. 

Valiant. What, and going on pilgrimage 
too? 

Great. Yes, verily, they are following after. 

Valiant. Tt glads' me at the heart. Good 



618 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

man, how joyful will he be when he shall see 
them that would not go Avith him, He is much 

rejoiced to see 

yet to enter after him in at the gates <-i»"stiana. 
into the celestial city. 

Great. Without doubt it will be a comfort 
to him; for, next to the joy of seeing himself 
there, it will be a joy to meet there his wife 
and children. 

Valiant. But now you are upon that, pray 
let me hear your opinion about it. Some make 
a question whether ayc shall know one another 
when we are there. 

Great. Do you think they shall know them- 
selves then, or that they shall rejoice to see 
themselves in that bliss? And if they think 
they shall know and do this, why not know 
others, and rejoice in their welfare also? Again, 
since relations are our second self, though that 
state Avill be dissolved there, yet why may it 
not be rationally concluded that we shall be 
more glad to see them there than to see they 
are Avanting ? 

Yaliaxt. Well, I perceive whereabouts you 
are as to this. Have you any more things to ask 
me about my beginning to come on pilgrimage ? 

Great. Yes ; were your father and mother 
willing that you should become a pilgrim ? 



STlMBLIXC-BLOrKS. 619 

Valiant. no: thcv used all means imag- 
inable to persuade me to stay at home. 

Great. AVhy, \vliat could they say against 
it? 

Valiant. They said it was an idle life; 
Thegrcatstum rj|j(| jf { myself wcFC not inclined to 

blmgblocks by 

!nws'w4v''"'sl()th and laziness, I would never 
countenance a |)ilgrim"s condition. 

Great. And what did they say else ? 

Valiant. Why, they told me that it was a 
dangerous way ; yea, the most dangerous way 
in the world, said they, is that which the ])il- 
grims go. 

Great. Did they show you whei'ein this 
way is so dangerous ? 

Valiant. Yes; and that in many particu- 
lars. 

Great. Xamc some of them. 

Valiant. They told me of the Slough of 
bHng-bK"™' Despond, whei-e Christian was well- 
nigh smothered. They lold me that there were 
archers standing ready in Beelzebub-castle to 
shoot them who should knock at the Wicket- 
gate for entrance. They told me also of the 
wood and dark mountains: (jf the hill Diflicul- 
ty: of the lions; and also of the three giants, 
Bloodv-man. Alaul. and Slav-frood. Thev said, 



620 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

moreover, that there Avas a foul fiend haunted 
the valley of Humiliation; and that Christian 
was by him almost bereft of life. Besides, 
said the}^, you must go over the valley of the 
Shadow of Death, where the hobgoblins are, 
where the light is darkness, where the way is 
full of snares, pits, traps, and gins. They told 
me also of giant Despair, of Doubting castle, 
and of the ruin that the pilgrims met with here. 
Further, they said I must go over the Enchant 
ed ground, which was dangerous; and that 
after all this I should find a river over which 
there was no bridge, and that that river did 
lie between me and the celestial country. 

Great. And was this all ? 

Yaliant. No ; they also told me that this 
way was full of deceivers, and of The second. 
persons that lay in wait there to turn good 
men out of the path. 

Great. But how did they make that out ? 

Yaliant. They told me that Mr. Worldly- 
wiseman did lie there in wait to deceive. They 
said also, that there, were Formality and Hy- 
pocrisy continually on the road. They said 
also, that By-ends, Talkative, or Dema5, would 
go near to gather me up; that the Flatterer 
would catch me in his net ; or that, with green- 



STrMr.I.IN'C -BLOCKS. 021 

headed Tuiioriuice. T would presume to p;^ ou 
to the gate, froui wheuee lie was seut back to 
the hole that was in the side of the hill, aud 
made to go the by-way to hell. 

Great. I ])roniise you this was enough to 
discourage yon ; l)ut (bd they make an end here? 

Valiant. Xo. stay; they tohl me also of 
Thcthini. many that had tried that way of old, 
and that had gone a great way therein, to see 
if they could find something of the glory there 
that so many had so much talked of from time 
to time, iind how they came back again, and 
befooled themselves for setting a foot ont of 
doors in that path, to the satisfaction of all the 
country. And they named several that did so, 
as Obstinate and Plial)le. ^fistrust and Timo- 
rous, Turn-away and old Atheist, with several 
more; who, they said, had soiue of them gone 
far to see what they could find, but not one of 
them had found so much advantage bv going 
as amounted to the Aveight of a feather. 

Great. Said they any tiling more to dis- 
courage yon ? 

Yaliaxt. Yes: they told me of one Mr. 

The fourth. Fcariug, who was a pilgrim, and how 

he found his way so solitary that he never had 

a comfoi'tablc lioui- Ihereiu: al.<o. that ^Fr. De- 



622 PTLCimL-f^ PRorniESP. 

spondency had like to have been starved there- 
in: yea, and also (which I had almost forgot,) 
(hat Christian himself, about whom there has 
been such a noise, after all his adventures for 
a celestial crown, was certainly drowned in the 
Black river, and never went a foot further; 
however, it was smothered up. 

Great. And did none of these things dis- 
courage you ? 

Yaliant. No ; they seemed but as so many 
nothings to me. 

Great. How came that about ? 

Yaliant. Whv, I still believed how he got 

'' over these stum- 

what Mr. Tell-true had said ; and bii»g blocks. 
that carried me beyond them all. 

Great. Then this was your victory, even 
your faith. 

Yaliant. It was so. I believed, and there- 
fore came out, got into the way, fought all that 
set themselves against me, and, by believing, 
am come to this place. 

"Who would true valor see, 

Let him come hither ; 

One here will constant be, 

Come wind, come weather ; 
There 's no discouragement 
Shall make him once relent 
His first avowed intent 
To be a pilgrim. 



Tin: i: x<iiANTF. I) ciMtrxD. 023 

" Wlinso' besot liim idimil 
With dismal stdrii'S, 
Do but themselves confound ; 

His strciif^th the more is. 
No lion can him frij^ht, 
lie "11 with a giant fight, 
But he will have a right 
To be a pilgrim. 

"Hobgoblin nor foul fiend 
Can daunt his spirit; 
He knows he at the end 

Shall life inherit. 
Then fancies fly away, 
He '11 not fear what men say ; 
He '11 labor night and day 
To be a pilgrim." 

By tbi.s time tlioy were got to the Enchanted 
ground, where the air naturally tended to 
make one drow.^y. And that place was all 
grown over with briers and thorns, excepting 
here and tliere. where was an enchanted arbor, 
upon wliich if a man sits, or in which if a man 
sleeps, it is a question, some say, whether ever 
he shall rise or wake again in tliis world. Over 
this forest, therefore, they went both one and 
another, and Mr. Great-heart went before, for 
that he was the guide; and ^Ir. Yaliant-for 
truth came behind, being rear-guard, for fear 
lest perad venture some fiend, or dragon, or 
giant, or thief, should fall ui)0ii their rear, and 
so do mischief. Thev went on here, each man 



624 PILGRIM'S TROGRESS. 

with liis sword drawn in His hand; for they 
knew it was a dangerous phice. Also the}^ 
cheered up one another as well as the}^ could. 
Mr. Feeble-mind Mr. Great-heart commanded 
should come up after him ; and Mr. Despond- 
ency was under the eye of Mr. Yaliant. 

Now they had not gone far, but a great 
mist and darkness fell upon them all ; so that 
they could scarce, for a great while, the one 
see the other. AYherefore they were forced, 
for some time, to feel one for another by words ; 
for they walked not by sight. But any one 
must think that here was but sorry going for 
the best of them all ; but how much worse for 
the women and children, who both of feet and 
heart were but tender ! Yet so it was, that 
through the encouraging words of him that led 
in the front, and of him that brought them up 
behind, they made a pretty good shift to wag 
along. 

The way also here w^as very wearisome, 
through dirt and slabbiness. Nor w^as there on 
all this ground so much as one inn or victual- 
ling house wherein to refresh the feebler sort. 
Here, therefore, was grunting and puffing and 
sighing, wdiile one tumbleth over a bush, an- 
other sticks fast in the dirt, and the children, 



THE SI.OTIIFI'I.'S ri!IKNl>. iVlo 

ponio of tlieni, lost tlieir slioos in \ho m'wc : 
wliile Olio crit's out. "I am down:"" and an- 
other. ■' IIo, wlierc arc you?" and a tliird. 
''The bushes have got such fast hold on me, I 
lliiuk T cannot a'ct away from them."' 

Then they came at an arljor, warm, and 
An arbor on promlsinu' mucli rcfrcshinQ,- to the iiil- 

thc Enchantcil ^ "^ 

ground. o-rims; for it was finely wn-ouiiht 

above-head, beautified with greens, furnished 
with benches and settles. It also had in it a 
soft couch, whereon the weary might lean. This, 
you must think, all things considered, was 
tempting; for the pilgrims already began to be 
foiled with the badness of the way; but there 
was not one of them that made so much as a 
motion to stop there. Yea, for aught I could 
perceive, they continually gave so good heed 
to the advice of their guide, and he did so 
faithfully tell them of dangers, and of the na- 
ture of the dangers when they were at them, 
that usually, when they were nearest to them 
they did most j)luck up their spirits, and heart- 
en one another to deny the flesh. This arbor 
thIarbS?'"' **' was called The Slothfufs Friend. 
and was made on purpose to allure, if it might 
be, sonn' of the i)ilgrims there to take u]) their 
rest when wearv. 



02g riLCiinrs i^r.ooiiE^^?. 

T saw then in my dream, that they went on 
in this their solitary ground, till they cuTt'tVraui'''"'' 
came to a place at Avhich a man is apt to lose 
his way. Now, though when it was light their 
guide could well enough tell how to miss those 
ways that led wrong, yet in the dark he was 
])ut to a stand. But he had in his alX^ol'Vays 
pocket a map of all ways leading to froni'iL city""^ 
or from the celestial city : wherefore he struck 
a light, (for he neyer goes without his tinder- 
box also,) and takes a yiew of his book or 
map, which bids him to be careful in that place 
to turn to the right hand. And had lie not 
1)een careful here to look in his map, they had 
all, in probability, been smothered in the mud ; 
for just a little before them, and that at the 
end of the cleanest way too, was a pit, none 
knows how deep, full of nothing but mud, there 
made on purpose to destroy the pilgrims in. 

Then thought I with mj^self. Who that goeth 
on pilgrimage but w'ould haye one of Gods book. 
these maps about him, that he may look, when 
he is at a stand, which is the way he must take ? 

Then they went on in this Enchanted ground 
till they came to where there was An arbor, an^ 

two aslee;. 

another arbor, and it was built by O'erein 
tlie hio'hway-side. And in that arbor there 



'1' 1 1 K !•: N (■ 1 1 A N T K I » ( ; IJ O f N I ) . ('.27 

lay two incii. wlioso nanics were Heedless and 
T<»()-1>(>1<1. These two ^veut lliiis far on pilgriin- 
aiic: I'ut here, beiiii;- wearied with their jour- 
ney, they sat down to rest themselves, and so 
fell fast asleep. When the jtilgrims saw them, 
they stood still, and shook their heads; for 
they knew that the sleepers were in a pitiful 
case. Then they eonsnlted what to do, whether 
to go on and leave them in their sleep, or to 
stei> to them and try to awake them ; so they 
concluded to go to them and awake them, that 
is. if they could: but with this caution, name- 
ly, to take heed that they themselves did not 
sit down, nor eml)race the offered benefit of 
that arbor. 

So they went in. and spoke to the men, and 
The pilgrims callcd cach by his name, for the 
tlam ' guide, it seems, did know them : but 
there was no voice nor answer. Then the 
guide did shake them, and do what he could to 
disturb thein. Then said one of them. '• T will 
pay you when T take my money. '" At which 
the guide shook his head. ''T will fight so 
long as I can hold my swoi-d in my hand,"" said 
the other. At that, one of the children laughed. 
Then said CMii-istiana. "What is the mean- 
inir of this?"" The guide said. -They talk in 



628 PILPrRT^r'S PROCrRESS. 

their sleep. If you strike them, beat them, or 
whatever else you do to them, they ilirLlues!::''''"' 
will answer you after this fashion ; or as one 
of them said in old time, when the waves of 
the sea did beat upon him, and he slept as one 
upon the mast of a ship, When I awake, I will 
seek it yet again. Prov. 23 : 34, 35. You 
know, when men talk in their sleep, they say 
any thing; but their words are not governed 
either by faith or reason. There is an inco- 
herency in their words now, as there was be- 
fore between their going on jnlgrimage and 
sitting down here. This, then, is the mischief 
of it: when heedless ones go on pilgrimage, 
'tis twenty to one but they are served thus. 
For this Enchanted ground is one of the last 
refuges that the enemy to pilgrims has ; where- 
fore it is, as you see, placed almost at the end 
of the way, and so it standeth against us with 
the more advantage. For when, thinks the ene- 
my, will these fools be so desirous to sit down 
as when they are weary ? And when so like to 
be weary as when almost at their journey's 
end ? Therefore it is, I say, that the Enchanted 
ground is placed so nigh to the land Beulah, 
and so near the end of their race. Wherefore 
let pilgrims look to themselves, lest it happen 



PTANUFAST AT T I! AVER. 629 

to them as it lias done to tliese that, as you sec, 
are lallen asleep, and none can awake them." 

Then the })ilgi-ims desired Avith trembling 
to go forward ; only they i)rayed their guide 
to strike a light, that they might go the rest of 
their way by the help of the light of a lantern. 
So he struck a light, and they went by the 
thlword^''' "'help of that through the rest of this 
way, though the darkness was very great. 
2 Pet. 1:19. But the children began to be 
The children sorelv wearv, and thev cried out 

cry lor weari- - ^ 

ness. i^^to Him that loveth pilgrims to 

make their wiiy more comfortable. So by that 
they had gone a little further, a wind arose 
that drove away the fog, so the air became 
more clear. Yet they were not off, by much, 
of the Enchanted ground ; only now the}' could 
see one another better, and the way wherein 
they should walk. 

Xow when they w^ere almost at the end of 
this ground, they perceived that a little before 
them Avas a solemn noise, as of one that Avas 
much concerned. So they went on, and looked 
on'his'knee.s''rn ^^^forc thcm ; aud behold, they saw, 

tlie Enchanted ii ±i ^ i^ l • 

ground. as they thought, a man upon his 

knees, with hands and eyes lifted up, and 
speaking, as they thought, earnestly to one that 



630 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

was above. They drew nigli, but could not 
tell what he said • so they went softly till he 
had done. When he had done, he got up, and 
began to run towards the celestial city. Then 
Mr. Great-heart called after him, saying, "So- 
ho, friend, let us have your company, if you 
go, as I suppose you do, to the celestial city." 
So the man stopped, and they came up to him. 
But as soon as Mr. Honest saw him, he said, 
"I know this man." Then said Mr. Yaliant- 
for- truth, "Prithee, who is it?'' "It is one," 
said he, " that comes from whereabout I dwelt. 
His name is Standfast ; he is certain- stlndiafr^ °* 
ly a right good pilgrim." 

So they came up to one another ; and pres- 
ently Standfast said to old Honest, "Ho, Fa- 
ther Honest, are you there ?" ' 'Aye, " Talk between 

standfast and 

said he, "that I am, as sure as you Mr Honest. 
are there." "Right glad am I," said Mr. Stand- 
fast, "that I have found you on this road." 
"And as glad am I," said the other, "that I 
espied you on your knees." Then Mr. Stand- 
fast blushed, and said, "But why, did you see 
me?" "Yes, that I did," quoth the other, 
"and with my heart was glad at the sight." 
"Why, what did you think?" said Standfast. 
'"Think?" said old Honest; "what could I 



WHY STANDFAST rHAYHD. )j:U 

tliiiik ? I tlioii^u'lit WO had an honest man upon 
the road, and therefore shouhl have his com- 
pany V»y and l)y.'' "If you thought not amiss," 
said .^andfast, •ho^v hapi)y am 1 1 But if I be 
not as I should, 't is I ah)ne nnist bear it." 
"That is true," said the other; "but your fear 
doth further confirm me that things are right 
between the Prince of pilgrims and your soul. 
For he saith, ' Blessed is the man that feareth 
always.'" Prov. 28:14. 

Valiant. Well. Init, brother, I pray thee 
tell us what was it that was the cause of thy 
iiim'at pra*?""'' bclug upou tliy knees even now : w\as 
it for that some special mercy laid obligations 
upon thee, or how ? 

Stand. Why, we are, as you see, uj)on the 
What it was Enchanted ground ; and as I was 

that fetched him ' 

upou his knees, couilug aloug, I was uiusing With 
myself of what a dangerous nature the road in 
this place was, and how many that had come 
oven thus far on pilgrimage had here been 
stop])ed and been destroyed. I thought also 
of the manner of the death with which this 
place destroyeth men. Those that die here, 
die of no violent distemper: the dcalli which 
such die is not grievous to them. For he that 
goeth away in a sleep, T)egins that Journey 



632 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

with desire and pleasure. Yea, such acquiesce 
in the will of that disease. 

Then Mr. Honest interrupting him, said, 
"Did you see the two men asleep in tiie ar- 
bor r 

Stand. A3'e, aye, I saw Heedless and Too- 
bold there; and for aught I know, there they 
will lie till they rot. Prov. 10:7. But let me 
go on with my tale. As I was thus musing, as 
I said, there was one in very pleasant attire, 
but old, who presented herself to me, and 
offered me three things, to wit, her body, her 
purse, and her bed. Now the truth is, I was 
both Aveary and sleepy. I am also as poor as 
an owlet, and that perhaps the witch knew. 
Well, I repulsed her once and again, but she 
put by my repulses, and smiled. Then I began 
to be angry ; but she mattered that nothing at 
all. Then she made offers again, and said if I 
would be ruled by her, she Avould make me 
great and happy; "for," said she, "I am the 
mistress of the world, and men are made happy 
by me." Then I asked her name, and she told 

me it was Madam Bubble. This set Madam Bub- 
ble or this vain 

me further from her ; but she still "'^^••''' 
followed me with enticements. Then I betook 
me, as j'ou saw, to my knees, and with hands 



MADAM i;il5I!Li:'.< PH'TrKE. G33 

lifted up, ami cries. I prayed to Him lliat had 
said he would hel|). So, just as you came up. 
the ji-eutlewomau wcut her way. .Then I eoip 
tiuued to give thanks lor this my great deliv- 
erauce; for I verily believe she intended no 
good, but rather sought to make stop of mc in 
my journey. 

Hex. Without doubt her designs were bad. 
But stay, now you talk of her, methinks I 
either have seen her. or have read some story 
of her. 

Stand. Perhaps you have done both. 

Hon. Madam Bubble? is she not a tall, 
comely dame, somewhat of a swarthy complex- 
ion? 

Stand. Right, you hit it; she is just such 
a one. 

Hon. Doth she not speak very smoothly, 
and give you a smile at the end of a sentence \ 

Stand. You fall right upf>n it again, for 
these are her very actions. 

Hon. Doth she not w^ear a great purse by 
her side, and is not her hand often in it, fin- 
gering her money, as if that was her heart's 
delight ? 

Stand. T is just so; had she stood l)y all 
(his while, you could not more am])ly have set 



634 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

her forth before me, nor have better described 
her features. 

Hon. Then he that drew her picture was 
a good limner, and he that wrote of her said 
true. 

Great. This woman is a witch, and it is 
by virtue of her sorceries that this The world. 
ground is enchanted. Whoever doth lay his 
head doAvn in her lap, had as good lay it down 
on that block over which the axe doth hang; 
and whoever lay their eyes upon her beauty 
are counted the enemies of God. This is she 
that maintaineth in their splendor all those that 
arc the enemies of pilgrims. James 4:4. Yea, 
this is she that hath bought off many a man 
from a pilgrim's life. She is a great gossiper ; 
she is always, both she and her daughters, at 
one pilgrim's heels or another, now commend- 
ing, and then preferring the excellences of this 
life. She is a bold and impudent slut; she 
will talk with any man. She always laugheth 
poor pilgrims to scorn, but highl}^ commends 
the rich. If there be one cunning to get money 
in a place, she will speak well of him from 
house to house. She loveth banqueting and 
feasting mainly well ; she is always at one full 
table or another. She has given it out in some 



MADAM lU IJULK.^ LLllKj^. 03.') 

places that she is a goddess, and therclbrc 
some do worship her. She has her time, and 
open places of cheating ; and she will say and 
avow it, that none can show a ^ood compara- 
ble to hers. She promiseth to dwell with chil- 
dren's children, if they will but love her and 
make much of her. She will cast out of her 
purse gold like dust in some i)laces and to 
some persons. She loves to be sought after, 
spoken well of, and to lie in the bosoms of 
men. She is never weary of commending her 
commodities,, and she loves them most that 
think best of her. She will promise to some 
crowns and kingdoms, if they will but take her 
advice ; yet many hath she brought to the hal- 
ter, and ten thousand times more to hell. 

"Oh," said Standfast, "what a mercy is it 
that I did resist her; for whither might she 
have drawn me I' 

Great. Whither? nay, none but God knows 
whither. But in general, to be sure, she would 
have drawn thee into many foolish and hurtful 
lusts, which drown men in destruction and per- 
dition. 1 Tim. G : 9. 'T was she that set Absa- 
lom against his father, and Jeroboam against 
his master. T was she that persuaded Judas 
to sell his Lord : and that prevailed with De- 



636 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

mas to forsake the godly pilgrim's life. None 
can tell of the mischief that she doth. She 
makes variance between rnlers and subjects, 
between parents and children, between neigh- 
bor and neighbor, between a man and his wife, 
between a man and himself, between the flesh 
and the spirit. Wherefore, good Mr. Stand- 
fast, be as your name is, and when you have 
done all, stand. 

At this discourse there was among the pil- 
grims a mixture of joy and trembling ; but at 
length they broke out and sang, 

"What clanger is the iiilgrim in! 
How many are his foes ! 
How many ways there are to sin 
No living mortal knows. 

Some in the ditch are spoiled, yea, can 

Lie tumbling in the mire : 
Some, though they shun the frying-pan, 

Do leap into the fire." 

After this, I beheld until they were come 
into the land of Beulah^ where the sun shineth 
night and day. Here, because they were wea- 
ry, they betook themselves a while to rest. 
And because this country was common for pil- 
grims, and because the orchards and vineyards 
that were here belonged to the King of the 
celestial country, therefore they were licensed 
to make bold with anv of his thino:s. But a 



LAND or BKULAH. 637 

little while <nnn relVcsliod them hero; lor the 
bells (lid so ring, and the trumpets coiitiiiiially 
sound so melodiously, that they could not sleep, 
iind yet they received as much refreshing as 
if they had slept their sleej) ever so soundly. 
Here also all the noise of them that Avalked the 
streets was, '"^lore pilgrims are come to town."' 
And another would answer, saying, "And so 
many went over the water, and were let in at 
the golden gates to-day I" They would cry 
again, "There is now a legion of shining ones 
just come to town, by which we know that 
there are more jtilgrims upon the road; for 
hero they come to wait for them, and to com- 
fort them after all their sorrow." Then the 
})ilgrims got up. and walked to and fro. But 
how were their ears now filled with heavenly 
noises, and their eyes delighted with celestial 
visions ! In this land they heard nothing, saw 
nothing, felt nothing, smelt nothing, tasted 
nothing, that was offensive to their stomach or 
mind; only when they tasted of the water of 
toVheViesil'.'biit tlic river over which they Averc to 
loui.^ to tiCg.^ ^j^^^^, thonght that it tasted a little 
bitterish to the palate; but it j)roved sweeter 
when it was down. 

In this place there was a record kept of 



638 PILGRIM-y PROGRESS. 

the names of them that had been pilgrims of 
old, and a history of all the famous acts that 
they had done. It was here also much dis- 
coursed, how the river to some had e^bfifg^' ^''\^^^ 
had its flo wings, and what ebbings theme.' 
it has had while others have gone over. It 
has been in a manner dry for some, while it 
has overflowed its banks for others. 

In this place the children of the town would 
go into the King's gardens, and gather nose- 
gajs for the pilgrims, and bring them to them 
with much affection. Here also grew camphor, 
with spikenard and saffron, calamus and cinna- 
mon, with all the trees of frankincense, myrrh, 
and aloes, with all chief spices. With these 
the pilgrim's chambers w^ere perfumed while 
they stayed here ; and with these vfere their 
bodies anointed, to prepare them to go over 
the river, when the time appointed was come. 

Now, while they lay here, and waited for 
the good hour, there was a noise in the town 
that there was a post come from the celestial 
city, with matter of erreat importance a messenger 

•^ ^ '^ of death sent to 

to one Christiana, the wife of Chris- Christiana. 
tian the pilgrim. So inquiry was made for 
her, and the house was found out where she 
was. So the post presented her with a letter. 



MK^SAGK TO ("IIUISTIAXA. (\:]\) 

Tlie contents were. •"Hail, f^-ood wonian ; I l)rin<;- 
His message, tlicc tldings tluit tlic Master ealletli 
for thee, and expeotetli that then shouldst stand 
in liis presence in clothes of immortality with- 
in tliese ten days." 

When he had read this letter to lier. he 
gave her therewith a snre token that he was a 
true messenger, and was come to bid her make 
haste to be gone. The token was, an arrow 
with a point sharpened with love, let easil}' 
into her heart, which hy degrees wrought so 
effectually with her, that at the time appointed 
she must be gone. 

When Christiana saw" that her time Avas 
Howweicome couic, aud that she was the first of 

death is to them , . , 

that have iioth this companv that was to o;o over, 

iiig to do but to 1 V o 7 

''" she called for Mr. Great-heart her 

guide, and told him how matters were. So he 
told her he was heartily glad of the news, and 
could have been glad had the post come for 

Jler speech to lj|,j^ rpj^^^^ ^|^^ ^.^| j^j^^^ ^^^^^ j^^ shoiM 

give advice how all things should be prepared 
for her journey. So he told her, saying, ''Thus 
and thus it must be, and we that survive will 
accompany you to the river-side." 

^ To her chil- * rpj^^^^ ^j^^ ^^^j^^| ^^^^ j^^^. ^.J^|l^|j.^j^^ 

and gave them her blessing, and told* them that 



640 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

she liacl read with comfort the mark that was 
set ill their foreheads, and was gUxd to see 
them with her there, and that they had kept 
their garments so white. Lastly, she bequeath- 
ed to the poor that liftle she had, and com- 
manded her sons and daughters to be ready 
against the messenger should come for them. 

When she had spoken these words to her 
guide, and to her children, she called ianWOT^trum'!^' 
for Mr. Yaliant-for-truth, and said unto him, 
"Sir, you have in all places showed yourself 
true-hearted; be faithful unto death, and my 
King will give you a crown of life. Rev. 2:10. 
I would also entreat you to have an eye to my 
children ; and if at any time you see them faint, 
speak comfortably to them. For my daughters, 
my sons' wives, they have been faithful, and a 
fulfilling of the promise upon them will be their 
end." But she gave Mr. Standfast lust '''' '*""'■ 
a ring. 

Then she called for old Mr. Honest, and 
said of him, "'Behold an Israelite to ow Honest. 
indeed, in whom is no guile !' " John 1 : 47. 
Then said he, "I wish you a fair day when 
you set out for Mount Sion, and shall be glad 
to see that you go over the river dry-shod." 
But she answered, "Come wet, come dry, I 



Cimi^TlANAS corxsEL. G41 

loiiLT to be gone; for liowevei- the weather is in 
my jonrney. I shall have time enough when I 
eome there to sit down and rest, and dry me."' 

Then came in that good man Mr. Ileady- 
tJhait' ^'*''"'^'" to-halt, to sec her. So she said to 
him, "Thy travel hitherto has been with diffi- 
culty; but that will make thy rest the sweeter. 
Watch, and be ready; for at an hour when yc 
think not, the messenger may come." 

After him came Mr. Despondency and his 
To Mr. PC daughter Much-afraid, to whom she 

spondencv ' and ^ • ^ ^ \ o ^ 

his daughter. pqI,^]^ "lou ought. With thanklulncss, 
for ever to remember your deliverance from 
the hands of giant Despair, and out of Doubt- 
ing castle. The effect of that mercy is, that 
you arc brought with safety hither. Be ye 
watchful, and cast away fear; be sober, and 
hope to the end." 

Then she said to ^Ir. Feeble-mind, "Thou 
Jo Mr. Feeble ^^.^^^ dclivcrcd froui the mouth of 
giant Slay-good, that thou mightest live in the 
light of the living, and see thy King with com- 
'fort. Only I advise thee to repent of thine 
aptness to fear and doubt of his goodness, be- 
fore he sends for thee ; lest thou shouldst, when 
he comes, be forced to stand before him for 
that fault with blushing." 



642 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Now the day drew on that Christiana must 
be gone. So the road was full of Her last day. 

and manner of 

people to see her take her journey, departure. 
But behold, all the banks beyond the riyer 
were full of horses and chariots, which were 
come down from aboye to accompany her to 
the city gate. So she came forth, and entered 
the riyer, with a beckon of farewell to those 
that followed her. The last words that she 
Avas heard to say were, "I come. Lord, to be 
with thee and bless thee!" So her children 
and friends returned to their place, for those 
that waited for Christiana had carried her out 
of their sight. So she went and called, and 
entered in at the gate Avith all the ceremonies 
of joy that her husband Christian had entered 
with before her. At her departure, the chil- 
dren wept. But Mr. Great-heart and Mr. Val- 
iant played upon the well-tuned cymbal and 
harp for joy. So all departed to their respec- 
tiye places. 

In process of time there came a post to the 
town again, and his business was hausummoued! 
with Mr. Ready-to-halt. So he inquired him 
out, and said, "I am come from Him whom 
thou hast loyed and followed, though upon 
crutches ; and my message is to tell thee, that 



TWO PILGRIMS SENT FOR. 643 

he expects thee at his table to sup with him in 
liis kingdom, tlie next day after Easter ; where- 
fore prepare thyself for this journey." Then 
he also gave liim a token that he was a true 
messenger, saying, "I liavc broken thy goklen 
bowl, and loosed thy silver cord."' Eccl. 12 : G. 
After this, Mr. Ready-to-halt called for his 
fellow-})ilgrims, and told them, saying, "I am 
sent for; and God shall surely visit 3'ou also." 
So he desired Mr. Valiant to make his will. 
And because he had nothing to bequeath to 
them that should survive him but his crutches, 
Promises, aud his good wishes, therefore thus 
His will, he said, "These crutches I bequeath 
to 'my son that shall tread in my steps, with a 
hundred warm wishes that he may prove bet- 
ter than I have been." Then he thanked ^Mr. 
Great-heart for his conduct and kindness, and 
so addressed himself to his journey. When he 
came to the brink of the river, he said, " Xow 
I shall hav€ no more need of these crutches, 
since yonder are chariots and horses for me to 
ride on." The last words he was heard to say 
His last words, wcrc, " AYclcome life !" So he went 
his way. 

,unfmonir'"'' Aftcr this Mr. Feeble-mind had 
tidings brought him that the post sounded his 



644 PILGRIM'S PR0G11L6S. 

horn at his chambcr-dooi\ Then he- cuiae in. 
and told him, saying, "I am come to tell thee 
that ihj Master hath need of thee, and that in 
a very little time thou must behold his face in 
brightness. And take this as a token of the 
truth of my message : ' Those that look out at 
the windows shall be darkened.' " Eccl. 12 : 3. 
Then Mr. Feeble-mind called for his friends, 
and told them what errand had been brought 
unto him, and what token he had received of 
the truth of the message. Then he said, "Since 
I have nothing to bequeath to any, ^vul ""'"" "" 
to what purpose should I make a will ? As for 
my feeble mind, that I will leave behind me, 
for that I shall have no need of in the place 
whither I go, nor is it worth bestowing upon 
the poorest pilgrims; wherefore, when I am 
gone, I desire that you, Mr. Valiant, would 
bury it in a dunghill.'' This done, and the 
day being come on which he was to depart, he 
entered the river as the rest. Hi§ last words 
were, ' ' Hold out, faith and patience ! " his last words. 
So he went over to the other side. 

When days had many of them passed away, 
Mr. Despondencv was sent for: for Mr. Despond 

ency summon- 

a post was come, and brought this ^<^- 
message to him: "Trembling man. these are 



D K s po X D V. \ ( • V s r ^r m o x k d . (Uo 

to siiminon llico lo l)c' ready witli the Kinii' by 
the next Lord's day. to sliout lor Joy for tliy 
ileliveriiiiec from all tliy doiibting's. And,'" said 
the niessengor, ''tliat my messa.a'e is true, take 
this for a proof:' so lie gave him a grassliop- 
per to be a burden unto him, Ecel. 12 rT). 

Xow ^Fr. Despondency's daughter, wliosc 
gooitoo""^"*" name was Much-afraid, said, when 
sh(^ heard wliat was done, that she would go 
with her father. Then ^Iv. Despondency said 
to his friends. ••^lyself and my daughter, you 
know what avc have been, and how trouble- 
somely we liave behaved ourselves in every 
His will. comi)any, ^[y will and my daugh- 
ter's is, that our desponds and slavish fears be 
by no man ever received, from the day of our 
departure, for ever; for I know that after my 
death they will offer themselves to others. 
For, to be i)lain with you, they are ghosts 
which we entertained when we first began to 
be })ilgrims, and could never shake them off 
after: and they will walk about, and seek en- 
tertainment of the pilgrims: but for our sakes, 
shut the doors u})on them." When the time 
was come for them to d'l^part. they went u}) to 
iiis last words, thc bi'luk of tlic rivcr. The last 
words of Mr. Despondency were. " Farewell, 



G46 PlLCnUM'S PROai^ERP. 

night; welcome, day!" His daughter Avent 
through the river singing, but none could un- 
derstand what she said. 

Then it came to pass a while after, that 
there was a post in the town that inquired for 
Mr. Honest. So he came to the house where 
he was, and delivered to his hand summoiJd""'''* 
these lines : "Thou art commanded to be ready 
against this day sevennight, to present thyself 
before thy Lord at his Father's house. And 
for a token that my message is true, ' All the 
daughters of music shall be brought low." "■ 
Eccl. 12 : 4. Then Mr. Honest called for his 
friends, and said unto them, "I die, ^"^ makes no 
but shall make no will. As for my honesty, it 
shall go with me ; let him that comes after be 
told of this." When the day that he Avas to be 
gone was come, he addressed himself to go 
over the river. Now the river at that time 
overflowed its banks in some places; but Mr. 
Honest, in his lifetime, had spoken science °°'^ifeips 

, /^ 1 • J. i. 1 • Mr. Honest 

to one (jood-conscience to meet him over the river. 
there, the which he also did, and lent him his 
hand, and so helped him over. The last words 
of Mr. Honest were, "Grace reigns!" So he 
left the world. 

After this it was noised abroad that Mr. 



VAI.IWTS LAST WOIUiS. 04te 

Valiniit-foi-tfiilli was taken with a siiinmoiis l)y 

Mr. Valiant tllC SaillC JlOSt aS tllC OtllOl", aiul luul 
for truth sum- 

ii.oned. ^i^jg f<),. j^ token (liat (lie suminoiis 

was true, that liis •• pitclier was broken at the 
fountain." Keel. 12 : (1. When he understood 
it. lie called for liis friends, and told them of 
it. Then said lie. "I am iroinir to my Father's; 
and though with great difficulty I have got 
hither, yet now I do not repent me of all the 
trouble I have been at to arrive where I am. 
His will. My sword I give to him that shall 
succeed me in my i)ilgrimage, and my courage 
and skill to him that can get it. ^Fy marks 
and scars I carry with me, to be a witness for 
me that I have fought His battles who will 
now be my rewarder."' When the day that he 
must go hence was come, many accompanied 
him to the river-side, into which as he went, 
he said, "Death, where is thy sting?'' And 
Kis last words, as hc wcut dowu deeper, he said, 
"Grave, where is thy victory ?" 1 Cor. 15 : 55. 
So he passed over, and all the trumpets sound- 
ed for him on the other side. 

Then there came forth a summons for ^fr. 
summoned''''' Staudfast. This Mr. Standfast was 
lie whom the rest of the i)ilgi'ims found upon 
his knees in the Enchanted ground. And the 



648 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

post broiiglit it him open in liis hands ; the con- 
tents thereof were, that he must prepare for a 
change of life, for his Master was not willing 
that he shonld be so far from him any longer. 
At this Mr. Standfast was put into a muse. 
"Nay," said the messenger, "you need not 
doubt of the truth of my message ; for here is 
a token of the truth thereof, ' Thy wheel is 
broken at the cistern.'" Eccl. 12:6. Then 
he called to him Mr. Great-heart, ^'r'eat'helrt.^'"'- 
who was their guide, and said unto him, "Sir, 
although it was not my hap to be ^iS'^ '^"''^ **' 
much in your good company during the days 
of my pilgrimage, yet, since the time I knew 
you, you have been profitable to me. When I 
came from home, I left behind me a wife and 
five small children ; let me entreat 3^ou, at your 
return, (for I know that you go and return to 
your Master's house, in hopes that you may 
yet be a conductor to more of the holy pil- 
grims,) that you send to my family, and let 
them be acquainted with all that hath .iSdiy"' '° 
and shall happen unto me. Tell them more- 
over of my happy arrival at this place, and of 
the present and late blessed condition I am in. 
Tell them also of Christian and Christiana his 
wife, and how she and her children came after 



licr liiisl)an<l. Tell tliciii also of what a luippy 
ciitl she iiiatK'. and whilhcr she is p>ii('. I 
luivc litlh' oi- iiothiiiLi- ((> ^'vwd to my I'aniily. 
unless it be pi-ayei's and tears j'oi- them: ol" 
which it will siillire th;it you ae(iuaiiit them, if 
l)eradveului'e they may prevail." When Mr. 
Standfast had thus set thiu^tis in order, and the 
time 'heinu' come lor him to haste him away, 
he also went down to the ri\'er. Now there 
was a groat calm at that time in the river; 
wluM-efore Mr. Standfast, when he was about 
hall'-way in, stood a while, and talked with his 
comi)anions that liad waited upon him thither. 
His last wouis And he said, "This river ha.s been 
a terror to many ; yea, the thoughts of it also 
have often frightened me ; but now mcthinks I 
stand easy ; my foot is lixed uj)on that on which 
the feet of the priests that bore the ark of the 
covenant stood while Israel w^nt over Jordan. 
Josh o : IT. The waters indeed are to the pal- 
ate l)itter, and to the stomach cold: yet the 
thoughts of what I am going to, and of the 
convoy that waits for me on the other side, do 
lie as a glowing coal at my heart. I see my- 
self now at the end of my journey; my toil- 
some days are ended. T am going to see that 
head which was crowned with thorns, and that 



G50 riLG RIM'S PROGRESS. 

face which was spit upon for inc. I have for- 
merly lived by hearsay and faith : but now I 
go where I shall live by sight, and shall be 
with Him in whose conqjany I delight myself. 
I have loved to hear my Lord spoken of; and 
wherever I have seen the print of his shoe i:i 
the earth, there I have coveted to set my foot 
too. His name has been to me as a civet-box ; 
yea, sweeter than all perfumes. His voice to 
me has been most sweet, and his countenance 
I have more desired than they that have most 
desired the light of the sun. His words I did 
use to gather for my food, and for antidotes 
against my faintings. He hath held me, and 
hath kept me from mine iniquities ; yea, my 
steps hath he strengthened in his way."' 

Now, while he was thus in discourse, his 
countenance changed; his strong man bowed 
under him: and after he had said, "Take me, 
for I come unto thee,"' he ceased to be s^en of 
them. 

But glorious it was to see how the open 
region was filled with horses and chariots, with 
trumpeters and pipers, with singers and players 
upon stringed instruments, to welcome the pil- 
grims as they went up, and followed one an- 
other in at the beautiful gate of the city. 



THE AlTllUir< FAIIKWKl.I.. 051 

As for Clii-istiamrs chiMrcn, tli(> igiir boys 
tlmt Clirisliaim l)i-()iiglit, willi llieir wives and 
cliikli-eii, 1 did not stay ^vIlel•c I ^Yas till they 
were gone over. Also, since I came away, I 
lieai'd one say that they wore yet alive, and so 
would lie for the increase of the church in that 
place where they were, for a time. 

Should it be my lot to go that way again, 
T may give those that desire it an account of 
what r here am silent about; meantime I bid 
mv reader 

FAREWELL. 



STA^DAED AVOEKS ON INHDELITY AND 
THE EVIDENCES OF CIIEISTIANITY. 



Paley's Natural Theology and Horse Paiiliaa;. IllnsUa 
tions on wood $1 25 

Paley's Horae PaiilinaB - - )0 

God's Word "VYritteii : the luspiratiou of Holy Scripture ex- 
plained and Enforced. Strong, clear, logical and conclusive SI 

Evidences of Christianity. By Bishop Mcllvaine. It has 
won manj' from infidelity to Christ-- 80 

Letters on Infidelity. By Olinthus Gregory, I;L. D. It 
combines solid learning and argument with clearness of thought 
ttud illustration ■ -- 7o 

Cause and Cure of Infidolity. By David Nelson. D. D. Steel 
portrait. It is full of interest and is greatly useful 70 

The r.ible not of Man. By Kev. Dr. Spring 70 

Astronomical Discourses. By Bev. Dr. Chalmers. Evan- 
gelical and eloquent - fiJ 

Volanie on Infidelity. Arguments of Jenyns, Leslie, Lyttle- 
ton. Watson and West, unanswered and unansucerable — tO 

Universalisni not of God. Arguments from the word of God 
and from the Author's bitter exiaerience - - 40 

Bogue's Authenticity of the New Testament. Able, candid, 

couchisive - 40 

Bisliop Watson's Reply to Paine «^5 

Morison's Counsels to Yoniig Men on Modern Infidelity- 35 

Five Sermons on llie Atonemeat. By Eminent Divines: 

Chalmers, Butler, Hall, Bishop, Baring, and Maclaurin 35 

Keitli's Evidence of Prophecy - - - - 25 

Catholic Doctrine of a Trinity. A hundred short and clear 

argiiments- - - ■ 2.3 

Hawes' Letters on Tniversalism - 2') 

When were our Gospels Written J By Tischendorf 25 

Conversion of St. Paul. Lyttkton 2:) 

Saonie Jenyns' Evidences '-" 

The Bible True, and Infidelity Wickcil. By Dr. riuracr-- - £(j 

Summary of Scrijiture Truth - S'j 

Bisliop Porteus on tlie Evi;lences of Christiaiiity. A pockc t 

treatise of great value - - - - b') 

The Truth of Scriptures. By Ibv. Richard Cecil- 15 



Narralivi's and Aiiecilotcs of StiiTiiiii Inter- 
est, and Lariiclv Jllnstnitod. 



Skolchos from Life. Series I. and Series II. A choico selpo 
tiou of iiarmtivos illustrating almost overy phase of Christiau 
cliaraetcr, and the operations of the Spirit each volniue, $1 2i 

Elotraiit Narraflvos. Twenty lour choiee Tracts bcantifully 
printed and illustrated i 

A Pastor's Jotlins'S. Hiyhly instructive and entertaining 
facts and reniiniscenees SI 

Eloquent Preachers. Graphic and discriminating sketches 
of distinguished and successful gospel preachers of diflfcrent de- 
nominations. Six steel portraits — SI 

Anecdotes for the Faniil)- and S;)cial Circle. Full of enter- 
tjiinment and in.struction for all. Handsomely illustrated 75 

Temperance Vohline. Twenty-five choice treatises, mostly 
tiarrative - 70 

Pictorial Narratives. Twenty-four in number, finely illus- 
trated - CO 

John Vine Hal!. An autobiography of intense interest. 
Steel portrait. Instructive and cheering to the inebriate who 
would reform - 50 

Spirit of Popery. A calm and accurate description of its 
origin, character, and results, in a style adapted to all classes of 
readers. Twelve engravings 60 

Haste to the Resene. Noble and successful cflForts of a lady 
to reclaim and bless five hundred working men 50 

Annals of the Poor. Tlie three inimitable stories of Lcgh 
Richmond 50 

Seamen's Narratives. Full of interest and finely illustra- 
ted - 4Q 

Five Years i:i the Allcfrhanies. Erpial in interest to any 
work of the traveller in unexplored regions 40 

The Dairyman's Dausrhter; 

The Yonn^ Colta'zer. In .separate form and finely illus- 
irated c^eb 35 



IIISTOEICAL AM) BlOGEAPllICAL WOKKS 
OF GEEAT INTEEEST. 12M0. 



THE GREAT REFORMATION. 

Five Yoliiiues l)y W. Carlos Marljn. Of uuqiieslioued 
^alue for every Library. 

Lutlier and his Times SI ^lO 

TIte Diiteli Reformation - $1 50 

Tlie Hiicriieiiots of France SI 50 

Tiie riiritaiis ofEisglaiid - SI 25 

Tlie Pilgrim Fathers of New Englaml Si 25 

The above in a set, iu a case — - S7 

Life and Times of John Milton. B\' the same Author. Steel 

portrait - - SI 

J)'Anhig'ue's History of the Reformation. Five vols., a 

steel portrait in each S4 50 

The Awakening- of Italy, and the Crisis of Rome. A most 

life-like view of that classic land, from aii able pen $1 

Life of Gearge Whitefleld. Steel portrait and other engrav- 
ings. He preached 18,000 serjuons, crossed the ocean 13 times, 
and poured evangelical light on millions of minds in Britain and 

the United States - -$1 25 

Records of S. V. S. "Wilder, the earnest Christian and busi- 
ness man. Steel portrait -- $1 25 

Lady Hnutington and her Friends. Four steel portraits- -$1 
Hannah More, or Life in Hall and Cottasfe. Steel por- 
trait ■■ - SI 

3Iary Lyon, the distinguished founder of Mount Holyoke 

Seminary. Steel portrait — SI 

MejHoir of Dr. Philip Doddridge, with his Character and 

Writings. Steel portrait - 75 

Mrs. Isabella Gralians. One of the richest biographies of 

any age - - - 75 

Mrs. Sarah L. H. Smith. A model of female excellence. 

Steel portrait - 70 

Rev. John Snmmerfield. Steel portrait 70 

Life of Philip Kei;ry. One of the richest memoirs iu our 

language - - 71) 

Life of Rev. Jeremiah Hallock. Steel fioutispiece, with 

BketchofRev. Mcses Hallock - 7> 

Haldanes and their Friends. Steel portrait. Earnest anil 
successful work for Jesus * — IjO 



Bl 

Pi. 



