:f.'^> .>^ •"*. 

































• • ' ^^ v" 

f,' ,^^'\ '"^^•' /\ .^. 








t >..^^ »: 







- — ^ y- ' 



THE 



PILGRIM'S PROGEESS 



FEOM THIS WORLD 



TO 



THAT WHICH IS TO COME; 

DELIVERED 

UNDER THE SIMILITUDE OF A DKEAM, 
BY JOHN BUNYAN. 



PUBLISHED BY THE 
AMEKICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

;60 NASSAU-STREET, NEW YORK. 






By Bxv .«.-> rt^ 
Army And Navy Ciui^ 
Aug, 13JS«2» . 



CONTENTS. 



The Author's Life 5 

PAET I. 

The FrRST Stage.— Christian's deplorable condition— Evan- 
gelist directs him— Obstinate and Pliable— Slough of Do- 
epond — Worldly TV^iseman- Mount Sinai — Conversation with 
Evangehst • • 27 

The Second Stage.— The Gate— Conversation with Good- will— 
the Interpreter's house — Christian entertained — the sights 
there shown him • 52 

The Third Stage.— Loses his burden at the Cross— Simple, 
Sloth, Presumption, Formalist, Hypocrisy— HUl Difficulty— 
the Arbor — misses his roll— the palace Beautiful — the hons — 

i talk with Discretion, Piety, Prudence, and Charity— won- 
ders shown to Christian— he is armed 71 

The Fourth Stage— Valley of HumiHation- conflict with 
Apollyon— valley of the Shadow of Death— Giants Pope and 
Pagan 98 

The Fifth Stage.— Discourse with Faithful— Talkative and 
Faithful— Talkative's character 114 

The Sixth Stage.— Evangehst overtakes Christian and Faith- 
ful — Yauity Fair — the Pilgrims brought to trial— Faithful's 
martyrdom Ill 

The Seventh Stage.— Christian and Hopeful— By-ends and 
his companions— plain of Ease— Lucre-hill — Demas— the 
river of Life — Yain-Confidence — Giant Despair — the pilgrims 
beaten— the dungeon — the key of promise 163 

The Eighth Stage. — The Delectable mountains — entertained 
by the shepherds — a by-way to heU 195 

The Ninth Stage. — Christian and Hopeful meet Ignorance — 
Turnaway — Little Faith — the Flatterer — the net— chastised 
by a Shining One — Atheist — Enchanted ground — Hopeful's 
account of his conversion — discourse of Christian and Ig- 
norance : 202 

The Tenth Stage.— Talk of Christian and Hopeful— Tempo- 
rary — the Backslider — the land of Beulah — Christian and 
Hopeful pass the river— welcome to the Celestial City- ■ 212 



4 CONTENTS. 

PART II. 

Pilgrimage of Chkistiana and her Children 277 

The First Stage. — Christiana and Mercy — Slough of De- 
spond—knocking at the gate— the dog — talk between the 
pilgrims 295 

The Second Stage. — The Devil's garden — t^yo ill-favored ones 
assault them — the Heliever— entertainment at the Inter- 
preter's house — the Significant rooms— Christiana and Mer- 
C3^'s experience 308 

The Third Stage. — Accompanied by Great-Heart— the Cross — 
justified by Christ — Sloth and hia companions hung — the 
hill Difficulty— the Arbor 332 

The Fourth Stage. — The liona— Giant Grim slain by Great- 
heart — the pilgrims entertained — the children catechized 
by Prudence— Mr. Brisk— Matthew sick — the remedy — sights 
shown the pilgrims 346 

The Fifth Stage. — Valley of Humiliation — valley of tlie Shad- 
ow of Death — Giant Maul slain 375 

The Sixth Stage.— Discourse wath Old Honest— character 
and history of Mr. Fearing — Mr. Self-will and some profes- 
sors— Gains' house — conversation — the supper — Old Honest 
and Great-Heart's riddles and discourse — Giant Slay-good 
killed — Mr. Feeble-mind's history — Mr. Keady-to-halt — Van- 
ity Fair— Mr. Mnasou's house— cheering entertainment and 
converse — a monster ■ 392 

The Seventh Stage. — Hill Lucre — river of Life — Giant De- 
spair killed— the Delectable mountains— entertainment by 
the shepherds 4M 

The Eighth Stage. — ^Valiant-for-truth's %'ictory — ^liis talk with 
Great-Heart — the Enchanted ground — Heedless and Too- 
bold— Mr. Standfast — Madam Bubble's temptations — the 
land of Beulah — Christiana summoned — her parting ad- 
dresses — she passes the river — she is followed by Eeady-to- 
halt, Feeble-mind, Despondency and his daughter, Honest, 
Valiant, and Standfast 460 



THE LIFE 



OF 



REV. JOHN BUNTAN 



The Eev. John Bunyan, the celebrated author of 
The Pzlgiiim's Peogkess, and many other useful works, 
was born at Elstow, near Bedford, England, in the 
year 1628. 

His parents were very poor, but gave him the best 
education in their jDower, Such, however, was his 
extreme depravity, that he addicted himself, even in 
childhood, to the basest practices, j)articularly to cui-s- 
ing and swearing, in v/hich he exceeded the worst of 
his wicked companions, and arrived at such a sad i^re- 
eminence in sin, that he became the ringleader of tho 
profane. 

Yet, amid all these enormities, God left not himself 
without a witness in his bosom. He had many severe 
checks of conscience, and terrifying thoughts of hell. 
After days spent in sin, his dreams were sometimes 
peculiarly frightful. The fears of death and judgment 
intruded into his gayest hours. A copious narrative of 
these early conflicts and crimes is to bo found in his 



6 THE LIFE OP 

treatise entitled, Grace Ahowiding to tJie Chief of Sin- 
ners. The Lord was also x^leased to grant him several 
remarkable deliverances from death. Once he fell into 
the river Ouse ; at another time he fell into the sea, 
and narrowly escaped being drowned. When he was 
seventeen years of age he became a soldier ; and at 
the siege of Leicester, being called out to stand senti- 
nel, another desiring to take his place, he consented, 
and his comrade who took his place was shot through 
the head with a musket-ball. 

But neither mercies nor judgments made any dura- 
ble impression on his hardened heart. He was not 
only insensible of the evil and danger of sin, but an 
enemy to every thing serious. The thought of rehg- 
ion, or even the appearance of it in others, was an 
intolerable burden to him. 

The first step towards his reformation was his mar- 
riage with a woman whose parents were accounted 
religious. Being extremely poor, she had brought him 
as her whole x^ortion, two books, The Practice of Piety y 
and TJie Plain Man's Pathway to Heaven. In these 
they sometimes read together, and his wife often talked 
to him of the godly life of her father. By these means, 
and especially in consequence of hearing a sermon 
against Sabbath-breaking, he formed some resolutions 
of reformation, and of performing a few rehgious du- 
ties, which he then thought would be enough to carry 
liim to heaven. His convictions were not, however, 
sufficient to keep him from his beloved sports, even in 
the afternoon of that Sabbath on which he had received 
them, when, being engaged in a game, a sentence was 



EEV. JOHN BUNYAN. 7 

impressed on his mind so forcibly that he thought it Hke 
a voice from heaven, Wilt thou leave thy sins and go to 
heaven, or have thy sins and go to hell? This excited 
dreadful consternation in his mind, which was instantly 
followed by suggestions that he was an enormous, un- 
paralleled sinner — that it was now too late to seek 
after heaven, and- that his transgTessions were beyond 
the reach of mercy. Desj^air reached his mind, and 
he formed this desperate conclusion, that he must be 
miserable if he left his sins, and miserable if he con- 
tinued in his sins ; and therefore he determined to take 
his fill of them, as the only i)leasure he was likely to 
have. It may j ustly be f eai-ed that multitudes perish by 
such temptations as these. Their language is, ' ' There 
is no hoj^e — but we will walk after our own devices, 
and we -vnH. every one do the imagination of his evil 
heart." 

Contriving how to gratify himself with sin, yet de- 
riving no satisfaction from it, he continued about a 
month longer ; when it pleased God to give him anoth- 
er severe check by means of a woman, who, though a 
notorious sinner herself, was so shocked at the oaths he 
uttered, that she told him "he was the most ungodly 
fellow for swearing that she had ever seen in her hfe, 
and that he was enough to spoil all the youth in the 
town, if they came into his company." By this re- 
proof from such a person he was entirely confounded ; 
and from that moment he refrained in general from 
swearing, though before he scarcely ever spoke a sen- 
tence without an oath. 

About this time he had several remarkable dreams. 



8 THE LIFE or 

in which he thought that the earth shook and opened 
her mouth to receive him — that the end of the world 
and the day of judgment were arrived. Once he dream- 
ed that he was just dropx3ing into the flames among the 
damned, and that a person in white shining raiment 
suddenly plucked him as a brand out of the fire. These 
dreams made impressions on his mind which were 
never forgotten, and perhaps inchned him, many years 
after, to j)ublish the masterpiece of all his works, The 
Pllgkim's Peogeess, under the similitude of a dream. 

Soon after, he fell into the company of a poor, seri- 
ous man, whose discourses of religion and of the Scrip- 
tures so affected him, that he api^lied himself to read- 
ing the Bible, especially the historical parts of it. 

By degrees a reformation of manners took place, 
which became so remarkable that. his neighbors were 
greatly surprised at it, and often compUmented him 
upon it. By these commendations he was greatly 
puffed up with pride, and began to think himself a 
very good Christian, and, to use his own words, 
that *'no man in England could please God better 
than he." But all this was only loiDping off the 
branches of sin, while the root of an imregenerated 
natitre still remained. With much difficulty, and by 
slow degrees, he refrained from his accustomed di- 
versions of dancing and ringing ; he relinquish( d the 
lattea* from the a|)X)rehension that one of the bells, or 
even the steeple, might fall and crush him to death. 
But hitherto he remained ignorant of Christ, and 
was going about to establish his own righteousness. 
He was still of that generation "who are pure in 



KEV» JOHN BUNYAN. 9 

their owii eyes, and yet not washed from their filthi- 
ness." 

Not long after, the providence of God so ordered it 
that he went to work at Bedford, and happening to 
hear some women, who were sitting at a door, talk 
about the things of God, his curiosity induced him to 
Hsten to them, but he soon found their conversation 
above his reach. They were sj)eaking of the new 
birth, and the v/ork of God in their hearts — how they 
were convinced of their miserable state by nature — ■ 
how God had visited their souls with his love in 
Christ Jesus — with what promises they had been re- 
freshed, comforted, and suiDported under affliction 
and temptations. They also talked of the wTctchcd- 
ness of their own hearts, and of their unbehef — of re- 
nouncing their own works and righteousness, as in- 
sufficient to justify them before God. All this ap- 
peared to be spoken in such spmtual language, in such 
a serious manner, and with such an air of Christian 
joy and cheerfulness, that he seemed hke one who had 
found a new world. 

This conversation was of gTeat service to him. He 
now saw that his case was not so good as he had fond- 
ly imagined ; that among all his thoughts of reUgion, 
the grand essential of it, the new bieth, had never 
entered his mind — that he had never derived comfort 
from the promises of God — that he had never kno^\^l 
the j)lague of his own heart, ha\-ing never taken notice 
of his secret thoughts — and that he was entirely un- 
acquainted with Satan's temiDtations, and the way io 
resist them. He therefore fi'equented the company of 



10 THE LIFE OF 

those persons to obtain information ; liis mind be- 
came constantly intent upon gaining si)iritual know- 
ledge, and his whole sonl was so fixed on eternal 
things, that it was difficult to draw his mind from 
heaven to earth. He now began to read his Bible as 
it were with new eyes ; it became inexpressibly sweet 
and pleasant to him, because it held forth a Saviour 
whom he now felt the want of. Beading, medita- 
tion, and prayer to understand the Scriptures, were 
the employments in which he delighted. 

Now the enemy of souls assaulted him with his 
temptations. One of the principal was, whether he 
was elected or not. But it pleased God to relieve 
him by the application of that Scripture, "Look at 
the generations of old, and see ; did ever any trust 
in God and were confounded ?" This gave him much 
encouragement, as if it had been said, "Begin at 
Genesis, and read to the end of the Revelation, and 
try if you can find any that ever trusted in God and 
were confounded ; and if none that trusted in God 
ever miscarried, then your duty is to trust in God, and 
not to concern yourself about election, which is a 
secret thing." 

Another temptation that violently assaulted him 
was, ' ' How if the day of grace should be past and 
gone ?" But after many days spent in bitterness of 
spirit, he was relieved by that blessed word, " Compel 
them to come in, that my house may be filled ;" and 
" yet there is room." 

Many more were his temptations, of which the 
reader may find a large account in his Grace Abound- 



REV. JOHN BUNTAN. 11 

ing^ above referred to. But the Lord, ^\\o knows 
liow to deliver the godly out of temptation, was 
pleased to deliver him out of all his spmtual dis- 
tresses, and to fill his soul with joy and peace in be- 
lieving. 

To this happy event, under the blessing of the Holy 
Spirit, the conversation he had with experienced 
Clii'istians, and the valuable labors of Mr. Gififord, then 
minister of the gospel at Bedford, were chiefly condu- 
cive. "When twenty-seven years of age, Mr. Bunyan 
joined a congregation of pious Christians at Bedford. 
His natiu-al abilities, eminent gi-ace, and the remark- 
able temptations he had experienced, soon pointed him 
out as^ a proper person for the ministry. Curiosity 
natui-ally excited multitudes to attend his preaching, 
and he soon found that his labors were not in vain in 
the Lord. 

Such were his diffidence and modesty that at first he 
thought it incredible that God should sj^eak to the 
hearts of sinners by his means. But he was encour- 
aged by many seals of his ministry. His views of the 
work, and his method in it, deserve notice and imita- 
tion. The Lord gave him much comi^assion for per- 
ishing sinners. He studied with great diligence to 
find out such words as might awaken the conscience, 
exhibit Christ in all his infinite fulness, and show the 
sinner that except in His precious atonement there is 
no salvation. 

' * In my preaching, " says he, ' ' the Lord did lead me 
to begin where his word begins, with sinners; to con- 
demn all flesh, and to open and allege that the curse 



12 THE LIFE OF 

of God dotli lay hold on all men, as they come into the 
world, because of sin. This part of my work I fulfilled 
with the terrors of the law and guilt for my own trans- 
gressions lying heavy on my conscience. I went my- 
self in chains, to preach to them in chains; and car- 
ried that fire in my own conscience, of which I per- 
suaded them to beware, I have gone full of a sense 
of guilt and terror even to the i^ulpit door, and there 
it hath been taken off, and I have been at liberty in 
my mind until I have done my work, and then imme- 
diately it has returned as heavily as before; yet God 
carried me on, and surely with a strong hand, for 
neither guilt nor hell could take me off my work. 

' ' Thus I went on for the s^Dace of two years, after 
which the Lord came in upon my soul with some sure 
peace and comfort through Christ, giving me many 
sweet discoveries of his blessed grace. And I did 
much labor to hold forth Jesus Christ in all his offi- 
ces, relations, and benefits, unto the world; and did 
strive also to discover, to condemn, and to remove 
those false supports on wliicli the world lean, and by 
depending on them, fall and perish. 

' ' When I have been preaching, my heart hath often, 
all the time of this and the other exercises, with great 
earnestness, cried to God that he would make the word 
effectual to salvation ; wherefore I did labor so to 
speak as that thereby, if possible, the sin and the per- 
son guilty might be particularized. And when I have 
done the exercise, it hath gone to my heart to think 
the word should nov/ fall as rain on stony j^laces ; still 
wishing, O that they who have heard me did but see 



REV. JOHN BUNYAN. 13 

as I tlo, what sin, and death, and hell, and the curse 
of God are ! and what the grace, and love, and mercy 
of God are, through Christ, to men who are yet es- 
tranged from him ! And indeed I did often say in my 
heart before the Lord, that if to be hanged up pres- 
ently before theii* eyes would be a means of awaken- 
ing them and confirming them in the truth, I could 
gladly consent to it. 

"I never cared to meddle with unimportant jDoints 
which were in dispute among the saints, yet it pleased 
jne much to contend with great earnestness for the 
word of faith, and the remission of sins by the suffer- 
ings and death of Jesus. I saw my work before mo 
did run in another channel, even to carry the awak- 
ening word ; to that, therefore, I did adhere. 

** If any of those who w^ere awakened by my minis- 
try fell back, I can truly say, that their loss hath been 
more to me than if my own child had been going to its 
grave. My heart hath been so wrapped up in the glory 
of this excellent work, that I counted myseK more 
blessed and honored by it, than if God had made me 
emperor of the Christian world, or the lord of all the 
glory of the earth, without it. Oh, these words, ' He 
that converteth a sinner from the error of his way, 
doth save a soul from death. They that be wise shall 
shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that 
turn many to righteousness, as the stars, for ever and 
ever. ' James 5:20; Dan. 12 : 3. These, with many 
others of a hke nature, have been refreshments to me. 

' ' My great desire, in fulfilling my ministry, was to 
get into the darkest j)laces of the country, because I 



14 THE LIFE OF 

found my sx)irit leaned most after awakening and con- 
verting work ; and the word that I carried did lean 
itself most that way also : ' Yea, so have I strived to 
X^reach the gospel, not where Christ was named, lest 
I should build on another man's foundation.' " Kom, 
15:20. 

This fidehty excited many enemies ; and the time 
in which he Uved being a time of persecution for con- 
science' sake, he was thrown into jDrison, and there 
continued, in the whole, for twelve years. 

He was enabled to bear this tedious imprisonment 
patiently. The Lord was very gracious to him. " I 
never had," he said while in prison, '*in all my life, 
so great an insight into the word of God as now. Those 
scriptures which I saw nothing in before, are made, in 
this place and state, to shine upon me. I have had 
sweet sights of the forgiveness of my sins, and of my 
being with Jesus in another world. Oh the mount 
Sion, the heavenly Jerusalem, the innumerable com- 
pany of angels, and God the Judge of all, and the 
spirits of just men made perfect, and Jesus, have been 
sweet unto me in this place ! I have seen that here 
which I am persuaded I shall never while in this world 
be able to express. I have seen a truth in the words, 
' Whom having not seen, ye love ; in whom, though 
now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with 
joy unspeakable and full of glory.' " 

The thoughts of his afflicted family would some- 
times press upon his mind, especially the case of one 
of his four children who was bhnd. Mr. Bunyan was 
a man of strong affections, a tender husband, and a 



REV. JOHN BUNYAN. 15 

very indulgent parent. But he was supported under 
tliis affliction by these two scriptui-es : ' ' Leave thy 
fatherless childi'en, I will preserve them alive ; and let 
thy widows trust in me. " The Lord hath said, * ' Ver- 
ily, it shall be well with thy remnant ; verily, I will 
cause the enemy to entreat thee well in the time of 
evil." 

He was not idle during his long and severe confine- 
ment, but diligently studied his Bible, which, with 
the Book of Martyrs, composed his whole library. 
His own hands also ministered to the necessity of his 
indigent family ; but he was still more usefuUy em- 
IDloyed in preaching to all who could gain access to 
the jail, and with a sj^irit and power that surprised 
his hearers. 

It was here also that he composed several useful 
treatises, especially The Pzlgeim's Peogeess, a book 
which has done as much good, perhaps, as any other, 
except the Bible ; and by writing which he has j)rob- 
ably been more useful, than if he had enjoyed the 
unrestrained exercise of his public ministry. In com- 
posing it, he was evidently favored with a peculiar 
measure of the divine assistance. "Within the con- 
fines of a jail he was able so to dehneate the Chris- 
tian's course, with its various difiiculties, i)erils, and 
conflicts, that scarcely any thing seems to have escaped 
his notice. The most accurate observer will hardly 
find one character, either good or bad, or one fatal 
delusion, or injimous mistake, which is not essentially 
pointed out in the Pilgrim's Progress. The book suits 
all the various descriptions of persons who profess 



16 THE LIFE OF ' 

godliness, sjicl relates the experience, temptations, 
conflicts, sux^ports, and consolations of Christians in 
our own times, as exactly as if it had been penned for 
tlieir own immediate benefit. Cowjper has spoken of 
this book and its author in the following manner : 

thou, whom, borne on fancy's eager wing 
Back to the season of life's happy spring, 

1 pleased remember, and while memory yet 
Holds fast her ofSce here, can ne'er forget: 
Ingenious dreamer, in whose weU-told tale 
Sweet fiction and sweet truth alike prevail; 

Wliose humorous vein, strong sense, and simple style, 

May teach the gayest, make the gravest smile; 

Witty, and well employed, and hke thy Lord, 

Speaking in parables his slighted word, 

I name thee not, lest so despised a name 

Should move a sneer at thy deserved fame; 

Yet e'en in transitory life's late day. 

That mingles all my brown with sober gray. 

Revere the man whose Pilgrim marks the road. 

And guides the Progress of the soul to God. 

The narrative is so entertaining, that the heart be- 
comes interested in the event of every transaction : 
ministers may draw from it the most valuable instruc- 
tion as a text-book to be used in their private meet- 
ings ; and parents may with great advantage select 
portions of it to be read and explained to their chil- 
dren. 

After the Lord had accomplished what he had de- 
signed in the works written by this man of God in his 
dreary solitude, he at length disposed Dr. Barlow, 
then Bislioi) of Lincoln, and others, to pity his unde- 
served sufferings, and to interest themselves in pro- 
curing his enlargement. 

His active spirit soon improved the liberty*afforded 



REV. JOHN BUNYAN. It 

him : he visited the iDeople of God in several places, 
especially the afEicted, tempted, and persecuted, to 
^ whom he was now well qualified to speak a word in 
season. He took this opportunity of paying his gi-ate- 
ful acknowledgments to liis friends whose kind assist- 
ance he had experienced in prison ; and as occasion 
offered, he preached the gospel with gi'eat boldness 
and acceptance, particularly to the congregation at 
Bedford, of whom he was now chosen minister. 

Amidst all his popularity and success, he was kept 
humble, and was seldom or never known to speak of 
himself. His whole behavior was exemplary, so that 
mahce herself has not been able to find, even on the 
closest inspection, a single stain on his reputation and 
moral character. 

His valuable Hf e, worn out with sufferings, age, and 
ministerial labors, was closed mth a memorable act 
of Christian charity. He was well known mider the 
blessed character of a peacemaker. He was therefore 
desired by a young gentleman in the neighborhood of 
Bedford, to interpose as a mediator between him and 
his offended father, who hved at Reading, in Berk- 
shire : this friendly business he cheerfully undertook, 
and happily effected. But in his return to London, 
being overtaken with excessive rain, he came to a 
friend's on Snow Hill very wet, and was seized vrith. a 
violent fever, the pains of which he bore "uith great 
patience, resigning himself to the will of God, deshing 
to be called away that he might be ^4th Christ, look- 
ing upon hfe as a delay of that blessedness to which 
his soul was aspiring, and after which it was thirsting. 

Pil. Prog. 2 



18 LIFE OF EEV. JOHN BUNYAN. 

In this lioly, longing frame of spirit, after a sickness 
of ten clays, he breathed out his soul into the hands 
of his blessed Bedeemer, August 12, 1688, aged 60. 

His natural abilities were remarkably great; his 
fancy and invention uncommonly fertile. His wit 
was sharp and quick ; his memory very good, it being 
customary with him to commit his sermons to wTiting 
after he had preached them. His works are collected 
in two volumes, folio, and contain as many treatises 
as he lived years. His judgment was sound and deep 
in the essential i^rinciples of the gospel, as his writ- 
ings sufficiently evince. His piety and sincerity tow- 
ards God were apparent to aU who conversed with 
him. He constantly maintained the godlike princi- 
ple of love, often bewailing that there should be so 
much division among Christians, He was a man of 
heroic courage, resolute for Christ and the gospel, 
and bold in reproving sin both in public and private ; 
yet mild, condescending, and affable to all. Thus 
lived and died a man in whose character, conduct, 
and usefulness that scripture was remarkably yerified : 
*'Ye see your calhng, brethren, how that not many 
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many 
noble, are called ; but God hath chosen the foohsh 
things of the world to confound the wise, that no 
flesh should glory in his presence," 



THE 

AUTHOK'S APOLOGY 

FOB 

HIS BOOK. 



When at the first I took my pen in hand 
Thus for to ^Tite, I did not understand 
That I at all should make a little book 
In such a mode : nay, I had undertook 
To make another ; which, when almost done, 
Before I was aware I this begun. 

And thus it was : I, wi'iting of the way 
And race of saints in this our gospel-day, 
Fell suddenly into an allegoiy 
About their journey, and the way to glory, 
In more than twenty things which I set down ; 
This done, I twenty more had in my cro^Ti ; 
And they again began to multij^ly. 
Like sparks that from the coals of fire do fly. 
Nay, then, thought I, if that you breed so fast, 
I'U put you by yourselves, lest you at last 
Should prove ad infinitum,* and eat out 
The book that I ah-eady am about. 
Well, so I did ; but yet I did not think 
To show to all the world my pen and ink 
In such a mode ; I only thought to make 

* Witlaout end. 



20 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

I knew not wliat : nor did I undertake 
Thereby to please my neighbor ; no, not I : 
I did it my own self to gratify. 

Neither did I but vacant seasons spend 
In this my scribble ; nor did I intend 
But to divert myself, in doing this. 
From worser thoughts, which make me do amiss. 
Thus I set pen to ]3aper with dehght, 
And quickly had my thoughts in black and white : 
For having now my method by the end, 
Still as I pulled, it came ; and so I penned 
It down ; until it came at last to be, 
For length and breadth, the bigness which you see. 

Well, when I had thus i)ut mine ends together, 
I showed them ^thers, that I might see whether 
They would condemn them, or them justify : 
And some said. Let them live ; some. Let them die ; 
Some said, John, print it ; others said. Not so' : 
Some said, It might do good ; others said. No. 

Now was I in a strait, and did not see 
Which was the best thing to be done by me : 
At last I thought. Since ye are thus divided, 
I print it will ; and so the case decided. 

For, thought I, some I see would have it done, 
Though others in that channel do not run : 
To prove, then, who advised for the best, 
Thus I thought fit to put it to the test. 

I further thought, if now I did deny 
Those that would have it, thus to gratify, 
I did not know but hinder them I might 
Of that which would to them be great delight. 



THE AUTHOR'S APOLOGY. 21 

For those which were not for its coming forth, 
I said to them, Offend you, I am loath ; 
Yet since your brethren pleased with it be. 
Forbear to judge, till you do further see. 

If that thou wait not read, let it alone ; 
Some love the meat, some love to pick the bone. 
Yea, that I might them better palliate, 
I did too with them thus expostulate : 

May I not WTite in such a style as this ? 
In such a method too, and yet not miss 
My end — thy good ? Whj may it not be done ? 
Dark clouds bring waters, w^hen the bright bring none. 
Yea, dark or bright, if they theii- silver drops 
Cause to descend, the earth, by yielding crox)s, 
Gives praise to both, and carpeth not at either, 
But treasures up the fruit they yield together ; 
Yea, so commixes both, that in their fruit 
None can distinguish this from that ; they suit 
Her well when hungry : but if she be full. 
She spews out both, and makes their blessing null. 

You see the ways the fisherman doth take 
To catch the fish ; what engines doth he make ! 
Behold how he engageth all his wits ; 
Also his snares, lines, angles, hooks, and nets : 
Yet fish there be, that neither hook nor line. 
Nor snare, nor net, nor engine can make thine : 
They must be groped for, and be tickled too. 
Or they will not be catched, whate'er you do. 

How does the fowler seek to catch his game 
By divers means ! all which one cannot name. 
His guns, his nets, his lime-twigs, light and bell : 



22 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

He creeps, lie goes, lie stands ; yea, wlio can tell 
Of all his postures ? yet there 's none of these 
Will make him master of what fowls he please : 
Yea, he must pijje and whistle, to catch this ; 
Yet if he does so, that bird he will miss. 
If that a pearl may in a toad's head dwell, 
And may be found too in an oyster-shell ; 
If things that promise nothing, do contain 
What better is than gold ; who will disdain, 
That have an inlding* of it, there to look. 
That they may find it ? Now my httle book, 
Though void of all these paintings that may jnake 
It with this or the other man to take. 
Is not without those things that do excel 
What do in brave but emj)ty notions dwell. 

" Well, yet I am not fully satisfied 
That this your book will stand, when soundly tried. '* 

Why, what 's the matter ? * ' It is dark. ' ' ^Vliat though ? 
"But it is feigned." What of that ? I trow 
Some men by feigned words, as dark as mine, 
Make truth to spangle, and its rays to shine. 
"But they want solidness." Speak, man, thy mind. 
" They drown the weak ; metaj^hors make us bUnd." 

Solidity, indeed, becomes the pen 
Of him that writeth things divine to men ; 
But must I needs want sohdness, because 
By metaphors I speak ? Were not God's laws. 
His gospel laws, in olden time held forth 
By shadows, tyiDcs, and metaphors ? Yet loath 
Will any sober man be to find fault 

* Hint, whisper, insinuation. 



THE AUTHOB'S APOLOGY. 23 

With them, lest he be found for to assault 
The highest wisdom. No, he rather stoops, 
And seeks to find out what, bj j^ins and loops, 
Bj calves and sheep, by heifers and by rams. 
By birds and herbs, and by the blood of lambs, 
God speaketh to him ; and happy is he 
That finds the hght and grace that in them be. 

Be not too forward, therefore, to conclude 
That I want solidness — that I am rude : 
All things solid in show, not sohd be ; 
All things in parable despise not we, 
Lest things most hm-tful lightly we receive, 
And things that good are, of our souls bereave. 
My dark and cloudy words they do but hold 
The truth, as cabinets inclose the gold. 

The prophets used much by metaphors 
To set forth truth : yea, whosoe'er considers 
Christ, his apostles too, shall plainly see, 
That truths to this day in such mantles be. 

Am I afraid to say, that holy writ. 
Which for its style and phrase jDuts down all Tvit, 
Is everywhere so full of all these tilings, 
Dark figiu-es, allegories ? Yet there si:)rings 
From that same book that lustre, and those rays 
Of hght, that tui"n our darkest nights to days. 

Come, let my carper to his hfe now look. 
And find there darker hues than in my book 
He findeth any ; yea, and let liim know, 
That in his best things there are worse lines too. 

May we but stand before imj)artial men, 
To his poor one I durst adventure ten, 



24 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

That they will take my meaning in these lines 
Far better than his lies in silver shrines. 
Come, truth, although in swaddling-clothes, I find 
Informs the judgment, rectifies the mind; 
Pleases the understanding, makes the will 
Submit ; the memory too it doth fill 
With what doth our imagination please ; 
Likewise it tends our troubles to apjpease. 

Sound words, I know, Timothy is to use, 
And old wives' fables he is to refuse ; 
But yet grave Paul him nowhere doth forbid 
The use of parables, in which lay hid 
That gold, those pearls, and precious stones, that wer« 
Worth digging for, and that with greatest care. 

Let me add one word more. O man of God, 
Art thou offended ? Dost thou wish I had 
Put forth my matter in another dress ? 
Or that I had in things been mor« express ? 
Three things let me propound ; then I submit 
To those that are my betters, as is fit. 

1. I find not that I am denied the use 
Of this my method, so I no abuse 
Put on the words, things, readers, or be rudd 
In handling figure or simihtude, 
In application ; but all that I may 
Seek the advance of truth this or that way. 
Denied, did I say ? Nay, I have leave — 
Example too, and that from them that have 
God better pleased, by their words or ways, 
Than any man that breatheth nowadays — 
Tlius to express my mind, thus to declare 
Things unto thee that excellentest are. 



THE AUTHOR'S APOLOGY. 25 

2. I find that men as liigli as trees will vrrite 
Dialogue-wise ; yet no man doth them slight 
For writing so. Indeed, if they abuse 
Truth, cursed be they, and the craft they use 
To that intent ; but yet let truth be free 

To make her salUes upon thee and me, 
Which way it pleases God: for who knows how, 
Better than he that taught us first to plough, 
To guide our minds and pens for his design ? 
And he makes base things usher in divine. 

3. I find that holy writ, in many places. 

Hath semblance with this method, where the cases 
Do call for one thing to set forth another : 
Use it I may then, and yet nothing smother 
Truth's golden beams : nay, by this method may 
Make it cast forth its rays as light as day. 

And now, before I do jiut \ip my pen, 
I '11 show the iDrofit of my book ; and then 
Commit both thee and it unto that hand 
That pulls the strong down, and makes weak ones-stand 

This book it chalketh out before thine eyes 
The man that seeks the everlasting prize : 
It shows you whence he comes, whither he goes, 
"What he leaves imdone ; also what he does : 
It also shows you how he runs, and runs, 
Till he unto the gate of glory comes. 
It shows too, who set out for life amain. 
As if the lasting cro^vn they would obtain: 
Here also you may see the reason w4iy 
They lose their labor, and like fools do die. 

This book will make a traveller of thee, 
If by its counsel thou wilt ruled be ; 



26 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

It will direct thee to the Holy Land, 
If thou wilt its directions understand: 
Yea, it will make the slothful active be ; 
The blind also delightful things to see. 

Art thou for something rare and profitable? 
Or would'st thou see a truth within a fable? 
^ Art thou forgetful ? "Wouldest thou remember 
From New- Years day to the last of December ? 
Then read my fancies; they will stick like burs. 
And may be, to the helpless, comforters. 

This book is writ in such a dialect 
As may the minds of Ustless men affect : 
It seems a novelty, and yet contains 
Nothing but sound and honest gospel strains. 

Would'st thou divert thyself from melancholy ? 
"Would'st thou be pleasant, yet be far from folly ? 
Would'st thou read riddles, and their explanation ? 
Or else be drowned in thy contemplation ? 
Dost thou love picking meat ? Or would'st thou see 
A man i' the clouds, and hear him speak to thee ? 
Would'st thou be in a dream, and yet not sleep ? 
Or would'st thou in a moment laugh and weex^ ? 
Wouldest thou lose thyself and catch no harm, 
And find thyself again without a charm ? 
Would'st read thyself, and read thou know'st not what, 
And yet know whether thou art blest or not, 
By reading the same lines ? O then come hither, 
And lay my book, thy head, and heart together. 

JOHN BUNYAN. 



THE 

PILGRIM'S PROGRESS, 

IN 

THE SIMILITUDE OF A DREAM. 



THE FIRST STAGE, 

As I walked tlirough the wilderness of this world 
I lighted on a certain place where was a den,* and 
The Jail. laid me down in that place to sleep ; 
and as I slept, I dreamed a dream. I dreamed, 
and behold, I saw a man clothed with rags stand- 
ing in a certain place, with his face from his ovm 
house, a book in his hand, and a gi'eat burden upon 
his back. Isa. 64:6; Luke 14:33; Psalm 38:4. 
I looked, and saw him open the book, and read 
therein; and as he read, he wept and trembled; 
and not being able longer to contain, he broke out 
{ with a lamentable cry, saying, " What shall I do ?" 
Acts 2:37; 16:30; Hab. 1:2, 3. 

* Bedford Jail, iu "nliicli tlie author was a prisoner for conscience* 
Bake. 



28 PILGRIM'S PEOGRESS. 

In this pliglit, therefore, he went home, and 
restrained himself as long as he could, that his 
wife and children should not perceive his distress ; 
but he could not be silent long, because that his 
trouble increased. "Wherefore at length he broke 
his mind to his wife and children ; and thus he 
began to talk to them : " O, my dear wife," said 
he, " and you the children of my bowels, I, your 
dear friend, am in myself undone by reason of a 
burden that lieth hard upon me ; moreover, I am 
certainly informed that this our city will be buint 
with fire from heaven ; in which fear- tms world, 
ful overthrow, both myself, with thee my wife, 
and you my sweet babes, shall miserably come to 
ruin, except — the which yet I see not — He knows no 

„ , „ -. , way of escape 

some way of escape can be found where- as yet. 
by we may be delivered." At this his relations 
were sore amazed ; not for that they believed that 
what he had said to them was true, but because 
they thought that some frenzy distemper had got 
into his head ; therefore, it drawing towards night, 
and they hoping that sleep might settle his brains, 
with all haste they got him to bed. But the night 
was as troublesome to him as the day ; wherefore, 
instead of sleeping, he spent it in sighs and tears. 
So when the morning was come, they would know 
how he did. He told them, " Worse and worse :" 
he also set to talking to them again ; but they 
began to be hardened. They also thought to drive 



EVANGELIST DIRECTS HIM. 29 

Carnal phys- awav liis distemper by liarsli and snr- 

ic lor a sick , . , i • . . , i 

soul. ly carnage to liim ; sometimes tney 

would deride, sometimes they would chide, and 
sometimes they would quite neglect him. Where- 
fore he began to retire himself to his chamber to 
pray for and pity them, and also to condole his 
own misery ; he would also walk solitarily in the 
fields, sometimes reading, and sometimes pray- 
ing ; and thus for some days he spent his time. 

Now I saw upon a time, when he was Avalking in 
the fields, that he was, as he was wont, reading 
in his book, and greatly distressed in his mmd; 
and as he read, he burst out as he had done be- 
fore, crying, "What shall I do to be saved?" 
Acts 1G:30, 31. 

I saw also that he looked this waj^, and that 
way, as if he would run ; jet he stood still be- 
cause, as I perceived, he could not tell which way 
to go. I looked then, and saw a man named 
Evangehst coming to him, and he asked, " AVhere- 
fore dost thou cry ?" 

He answered, " Sir, I perceive by the book in 
my hand that I am condemned to die, and after 
that to come to judgment, Heb. 9: 27 ; and I find 
that I am not willing to do the first, Job 10: 21, 
22, nor able to do the second." Ezek. 22: 14. 

Then said Evangelist, " Why not willing to die, 
since this life is attended with so many evils?" 
The man answered, " Because I fear that this 



30 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

burden that is Tipon my back will sink me lower 
than the grave, and I shall fall into Tophet. Isa. 
30 : 33. And, sir, if I be not fit to go to prison, I 
am not fit to go to judgment, and from thence to 
execution; and the thoughts of these things make 
me cry." 

Then said Evangelist, " If this be thy condition, 
why standest thou still ?" He answer- conviction of 
ed, " Because I know not whither to fleeing. 
go." Then he gave him a parchment roll, and 
there was written witliin, " Fly from the wrath to 
come." Matt. 3:7. 

The man therefore read it, and looking upon 
Evangelist very carefully, said, " Whither must I 
fly?" Then said Evangelist, pointing with his 
finger over a very wide field, " Do you see yonder 
wicket-gate?" Matt. 7 : 13, 14. The man said, 
"No." Then said the other, " Do you see yonder 
shining light ?" Psa. 119 ; 105 ; 2 Pet. ^^^ christ^^ and 
1:19. He said, "I think I do." Then cannot be dis- 
said Evangelist, " Keep that light in the word, 
your eye, and go up directly thereto, so shalt thou 
see the gate ; at which, w^hen thou knockest, it 
shall be told thee what thou shalt do." So I saw 
in my dream that the man began to run. Now 
he had not run far from his own door when his 
wife and children, perceiving it, began to cry after 
him to return ; but the man put his fingers in his 
ears and ran on, crying, "Life ! life ! eternal life !" 



OBSTINATE AND PLIABLE. 31 

Luke 14 : 26. So he looked not beliind liim, Gen. 
19 : 17, but fled towards the middle of the plain. 
The neighbors also came out to see him run, 
Theythatflee Jer. 20 : 10 : and as he ran, some 

irom the wrath 

to come are a mocked, others threatened, and some 

gazing-stock to .-,„,,. , , , 

the world. cricd alter him to return ; and among 
those that did so, there were two that resolved to 
fetch him back by force. The name of the one 
was Obstinate, and the name of the other Pliable. 
Now by this time the man was got a good distance 
from them ; but, however, they were resolved to 
pursue^him, which they did, and in a little time 
they overtook him. Then said the man, "Neigh- 
bors, wherefore are ye come ?" They said, " To 
persuade you to go back with us." But he said, 
" That can by no means be : you dwell," said he, 
" in the city of Destruction, the place also where I 
was born : I see it to be so; and dying there, sooner 
or later you will sink lower than the grave, into a 
place that burns with fire and brimstone ; be con- 
tent, good neighbors, and go along with me." 

Obst. AYhat, said Obstinate, and leave our 
friends and our comforts behind us ? 

Che. Yes, said Christian, for that was his 
name, because that all which you forsake is not 
worthy to be compared with a little of that I am 
seeking to enjoy, 2 Cor. 4 : 18 ; and if you will go 
along with me, and hold it, you shall fare as I 
myself ; for there, where I go, is enough and to 



32 PILGHIM'S PROGRESS. _ 

spare. Luke 15 : 17. Come away, and prove my 
words. 

Obst. What are the things you seek, since you 
leave all the world to find them ? 

Chk. I seek an inheritance incorruptible, unde- 
filed, and that f adeth not away, 1 Peter 1:4; and it 
is laid up in heaven, and safe there, Heb. 11 : 16, to 
be bestowed, at the time appointed, on them that 
diligently seek it. Read it so, if you will, in my 
book. 

Obst. Tush, said Obstinate, away with your 
book ; will you go back with us or no ? 

Chr. No, not I, said the other, because I have 
laid my hand to the jDlough. Luke 9 : 62. 

Obst. Come then, neighbor Pliable, let us turn 
again, and go home without him : there is a com- 
pany of these crazy-headed coxcombs, that when 
they take a fancy by the end, are wiser in their 
own eyes than seven men that can render a reason. 

Pli. Then said Pliable, Do n't revile ; if what 
good Christian says is true, the things he looks 
after are better than ours : my heart inclines to 
go with my neighbor. 

Obst. What, more fools still ! Be ruled by me, 
and go back ; who knows whither such christian and 
a brain-sick fellow will lead you? Go ?or'''''puaWe-s 
back, go back, and be wise. ^'^^^• 

Chk. Nay, but do thou come with thy neighbor 
Pliable ; there are such things to be had which I 



OBSTINATE GOES BACK. 33 

siDoke of, and many more glories besides. If you 
believe not me, read here in this book ; and for 
^ the truth of what is expressed therein, behold, all 
is confirmed by the blood of Him that made it 
Heb. 9:17-21. 

Pli. Well, neighbor Obstinate, said Phable, I 

puabie con- begin to come to a point ; I intend to 

with christiau. go along with this good man, and to 

cast m my lot with him : but, my good com^^an- 

ion, do you know the way to this desired place ? 

Chr. I am directed by a man whose name is 
Evangelist, to speed me to a little gate that is 
before us, where we shall receive instructions 
about the way. 

Pli. Come then, good neighbor, let us be going. 
Then they went both together. 

Obst. And I will go back to my place, said 
Obstinate Obstinate : I will be no companion of 
back. such mislcd, fantastical fellows. 

Now I saw in my dream, that when Obstinate 
Talk between was gouc back. Christian and Pliable 
puabie. went talking over the plain ; and thus 

they began their discourse. 

Chr. Come, neighbor Pliable, how do you do ? 
I am glad you are persuaded to go along with 
me. Had even Obstinate himself but felt what 
I have felt of the powers and terrors of what is 
yet unseen, he would not thus lightly have given 
us the back. 

PU. Piog. 3 



34 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Pli. Come, neighbor Christian, since there are 
none but us two here, tell me now further Avhat 
the things are, and how to be enjoyed, whither 
we are going. 

Chr. I can better conceive of them with my 
mind, than speak of them with my ^odg things 
tongue : but yet, since you are desir- ^^pea^a^ie. 
ous to know, I will read of them in my book. 

Pli. And do you think that the words of your 
book are certainly true ? 

Chr. Yes, verily; for it was made by Him that 
cannot lie. Tit. 1 : 2. 

Pli. ^yell said; what things are they? 

Chr. There is an endless kingdom to be inhab- 
ited, and everlasting life to be given us, that we 
may inhabit that kingdom for ever. Isa. 65:17; 
John 10:27-29. 

Pll Well said; and what else? 

Chr. There are crowns of glory to be given us, 
and garments that will make us shine like the 
sun in the firmament of heaven. 2 Tim. 4:8; 
Kev. 22:5; Matt. 13u43. 

Pli. This is very pleasant; and what else ? 

Chr. There shall be no more crying, nor sor- 
row; for He that is owner of the place wiU wipe 
all tears from our eyes. Isa. 25 : 8; Kev. 7: 16, 
17; 21 : 4. 

Pli. And what company shall we have there ? 

Chr. There we shall be with seraphim and 



CHRISTIAN AND PLIABLE. 35 

cherubim, Isaiali 6 :2; 1 Thess. 4:16, 17; Rev. 
5:11; creatures that will dazzle your eyes to look 
on them. There also you shall meet with thou- 
sands and ten thousands that have gone before us 
to that place; none of them are hurtful, but loving 
and holy; every one walking in the sight of God, 
and standing in his presence with acceptance for 
ever. In a word, there we shall see the elders 
with their golden crowns. Rev. 4:4; there we 
shall see the holy virgins with their golden harps, 
Rev. 14:1-5; there we shall see men that by the 
w^orld were cut in pieces, burnt in flames, eaten 
of beasts, drowned ^in the seas, for the love they 
bore to the Lord of the place, John 12:25, all 
well, and clothed with immortahty as with a gar- 
ment. 2 Cor. 5:2. 

Pli. The hearing of this is enough to ravish 
one's heart. But are these things to be enjoyed ? 
How shall we get to be sharers thereof ? 

Chr. The Loud, the governor of the country, 
hath recorded that in this book, Isaiah 55:1, 2; 
John 6 : 37; 7 : 37; Rev. 21 : 6; 22 : 17; the sub- 
stance of which is, If we be truly willing to have 
it, .he mil bestow it upon us freely. 

Pli. Well, my good companion, glad am I to 
hear of these things: come on, let us mend our 
pace. 

Chr. I cannot go so fast as I would, by reason 
of this burden that is on my back. 



86 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Now I saw in my dream, that just as they had 
ended this talk, they drew nigh to a very miry 
slough that was in the midst of the plain: and 
they being heedless, did both fall suddenly into 
the bog. The name of the slough was The slough of 
Desj)ond. Here, therefore, they wal- i>espond. 
lowed for a time, being grievously bedaubed with 
dirt; and Christian, because of the burden that 
was on his back, began to sink in the mire. 

Pli. Then said Pliable, Ah, neighbor Chris- 
tian, where are you now ? 

Chr. Truly, said Christian, I do not know. 

Pli. At this Pliable began to be offended, and 
angrily said to his fellow. Is this the happiness 
you have told me all this while of ? If we have 
such ill speed at our first setting out, what may 
we expect between this and our journey's end? 
May I get out again with my life, you shall pos- 
sess the brave country alone for me. it is not 

•^ enough to be 

And With that he gave a desperate piiabie. 
struggle or two, and got out of the mire on that 
side of the slough which was next to his own 
house : so away he went, and Christian saw him 
no more. 

Wherefore Christian was left to tumble in the 
slousfh of Despond alone: but still he christian, in 

*-* -^ J 1 1 • T p trouble, seeks 

endeavored to struggle to that side oi stiii to get fur- 
the slough that was furthest from his own house. 
own house, and next to the wicket-gate : the 



THE STEPS OF PROMISE. 37 

whicli lie did, but could not get out because 
of the bui'den that was upon his back : but I 
beheld in my dream, that a man came to him 
whose name was Help, and asked him what he 
did there. 

Chr. Sir, said Christian, I was bid to go this 
way by a man called Evangehst, who directed me 
also to yonder gate, that I might escape the wrath 
to come. And as I was going thither, I fell in here. 

Help. But why did not you look for the 

The promises, stcpS ? 

Chr. Fear followed me so hard that I fled the 
next way, and fell in. 

Help. Then said he. Give me thy hand : so he 
Help lifts him g^^^ l^i^ liis hand, and he drew him 
°^*- out, Psalm 40 : 2, and he set him upon 

sound ground, and bid him go on his way. 

Then I stepped to him that plucked him out, 
and said, " Sir, wherefore, since over this place is 
the way from the city of Destruction to yonder 
gate, is it that this plat is not mended, that poor 
travellers might go thither with more security ?" 
And he said unto me, "This miiy slough is such a 
What makes placc as cauuot be mended : it is the 

the slough ot . n • i 

Despond. desccut whithcr the scum and filth 

that attends conviction for sin doth continually 
run, and therefore it is called the slough of De- 
spond ; for still, as the sinner is awakened about 
his lost condition, there arise in his soul many 



88 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

fears and doubts, and discouraging apprehen- 
sions, which all of them get together, and settle 
in this place: and this is the reason of the bad- 
ness of this ground. 

"It is not the i)leasure of the King that this 
place should remain so bad. Isa. 35:3, 4. Hia 
laborers also have, by the direction of his Maj- 
esty's surveyors, been for above these sixteen 
hundred years employed about this patch of 
ground, if perhaps it might have been mended: 
yea, and to my knowledge," said he, " there have 
been swallowed up at least twenty thousand cart- 
loads, yea, millions of wholesome instructions, 
that have at all seasons been brought from all 
places of the King's dominions, (and they that 
can tell, say they are the best materials to make 
good ground of the place,) if so be it might have 
been mended; but it is the slough of Despond 
still, and so will be when they have done what 
they can. 

" True, there are, by the direction of the Law- 
giver, certain good and substantial Tj^e promis- 
steps placed even through the very ^^^f aJS^™ 
midst of this slough; but at such time ^y^^^'JJft^" ^^^ 
as this place doth much spew out its Christ. 
filth, as it doth against change of weather, these 
steps are hardly seen; or if they be, men, through 
the dizziness of their heads, step beside, and then 
they are bemired to purpose, notwithstanding the 



PLIABLE GETS HOME. 39 

steps be there : but the ground is good when they 
are once got in at the gate." 1 Sam. 12:23. 

Now I saw in my dream, that by this time Pli- 
able was got home to his house. So his neighbor;^ 

Pliable got Came to visit him; and some of them 
vfsited b"y^ his Called him wise man for coming back, 
neighbors. ^nd some called him fool for hazard- 
ing himself with Christian : others again did mock 
at his cowardliness, saying, "Sui'ely, since you 
began to venture, I would not have been so base 
as to have given out for a few difficulties: so Pli- 
able sat sneaking among them. But at last he got 
more confidence, and then they all turned their 
tales, and began to deride poor Christian behind 
his back. And thus much concerning Phable. 

Now as Christian was walking sohtarily by him- 
self, he espied one afar off come crossing over the 

Mr. Worldly field to meet him; and their hap was 

Wiseman meets . , n • ii 

witii Christian, to meet just as they were crossing tne 
way of each other. The gentleman's name that 
met him was Mr. Worldly Wiseman : he dwelt in 
the town of Carnal Policy, a very great town, and 
also hard by fi-om whence Christian came. This 
man then, meeting with Christian, and having 
some inkling* of him — for Christian's setting 
forth from the city of Destruction was much nois- 
ed abroad, not only in the town where he dwelt, 
but also it began to be the town-talk in soma 
* Slight knowledge. 



40 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

otlier places — Mr. Worldly Wiseman therefore 
having some guess of him, by beholding his br 
borious going, by observing his sighs and groans, 
and the like, began thus to enter into some talk 
with Christian. 

World. How now, good fellow, Talk between 
whither away after this burdened wiseman^^^^ 
manner? christian. 

Chr. a burdened manner indeed, as ever I 
think poor creature had ! And whereas you ask 
me. Whither away ? I tell you, sir, I am going to 
yonder wicket-gate before me; for there, as I am 
informed, I shall be put into a way to be rid of 
my heavy burden. 

World, Hast thou a wife and children ? 

Chr. Yes; but I am so laden with this burden 
that I cannot take that pleasure in them as for- 
merly: methinks I am as if I had none. 1 Cor. 
7:29. 

World. Wilt thou hearken to me, if I give thee 
counsel ? 

Chr. If it be good, I will; for I stand in need 
of good counsel. 

World. I would advise thee, then, that thou 
with all speed get thyself rid of thy worwiywise- 
burden; for thou wilt never be settled to christian. 
in thy mind till then: nor canst thou enjoy the 
•benefits of the blessings which God hath bestow- 
ed upon thee till then. 



WORLDLY WISEMAN. 41 

Chr. That is that which I seek for, even to be 
rid of this heavy burden: but get it off myself I 
cannot, nor is there any man in our country that 
can take it off my shoulders; therefore I am going 
this way, as I told you, that I may be rid of my 
burden. 

World. Who bid thee go this way to be rid of 
thy burden ? 

Chr. a man that appeared to me to be a very 
great and honorable person: his name, as I re- 
member, is Evangelist. 

World. I beshrew* him for his counsel ! there 

is not a more dangerous and troublesome way in 

Mr. Worldly the w^orld than is that into which ho 

delmfeth EvaS- li^th directed thee; and that thou shalt 

gelisf scounsel. £j^^^ ^f ^j^^^ ^^^ ^q ^,^q^ l^y j^^g Cq^^^_ 

sel. Thou hast met with something, as I perceive, 
already; for I see the dirt of the slough of De- 
spond is upon thee : but that slough is the begin- 
ning of the sorrows that do attend those that go 
on in that way. Hear me; I am older than thou: 
thou art like to meet with, in the way which thou 
goest, wearisomeness, painfulness, hunger, perils, 
nakedness, sword, lions, dragons, darkness, and, in 
a word, death, and what not. These things are 
certainly true, having been confirmed by many 
testimonies. And should a man so carelessly cast 
away himself, by giving heed to a stranger ? 
* Wish a cursG to. 



42 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Cek. Why, sir, tliis burden upon The frame of 
my back is more terrible to me than young^^^chris^ 
all these things which you have men- ^^' 
tioned; nay, methinks I care not what I meet with 
in the way, if so be I can also meet with deHver- 
ance from my burden. 

i World. How camest thou by thy burden at 
first? 

Chr. By reading this book in my hand. 

World. I thought so; and it has happened unto 
thee as to other weak men, who, meddling with 
things too high for them, do suddenly fall into 
thy distractions ; which distractions He does not 

^ like that men 

do not only unman men, as thine I should be seri- 

, T J.1, 1 J. J.1 o^s "^ reading 

perceive have done thee, but they run the Bible, 
them upon desperate ventures, to obtain they 
know not what. 

Chr. I know what I would obtain; it is ease 
from my heavy burden. 

World. But why wilt thou seek for ease this 
way, seeing so many dangers attend it ? especially 
since, hadst thou but patience to hear me, I could 
direct thee to the obtaining of what thou desirest, 
without the dangers that thou in this way wilt 
run thyself into. Yea, and the remedy is at hand. 
Besides, I will add, that instead of those dangers, 
thou shalt meet with much safety, friendship, and 
content. 

Chr. Sir, I pray open this secret to me. 



WORLDLY WISEMAN. 4(^ 

"World. Wliy, in yonder village — the village is 
named Morality — there dwells a gentleman whose 
name is Legahty, a very judicious man, and a man 
of a very good name, that has skill to help men 
off with such buixlens as thine is fi'om thek shoul- 
He prefers dcrs ; yea, to my knowledge, he hath 

moraUty before ^ *" , -, ^ p ij.i- 

ihe strait gate. Qone a great deal oi good this way ; 
aye, and besides, he hath skill to cure those that 
are somewhat crazed in then- wits ■v\dth their bur- 
dens. To him, as I said, thou mayest go, and be 
helped presently. His house is not quite a mile 
fi'om this place; and if he should not be at home 
himself, he hath a pretty young man to his son, 
whose name is Civility, that can do it, to speak 
on, as well as the old gentleman himself: there, I 
say, thou mayest be eased of thy burden; and if 
thou art not minded to go back to thy former 
habitation, as indeed I would not wish thee, thou 
mayest send for thy wife and children to this vil- 
lage, where there ate houses now standing emp- 
ty, one of which thou mayest have at a reasonable 
rate: provision is there also cheap and good; and 
that which will make thy life the more happy is, 
to be sure there thou shalt live by honest neigh- 
bors, in credit and good fashion. 

Now was Christian somew^hat at a stand; 

Christian ^^^ presently he concluded. If this 

mrwiy^isel ^e true which this gentleman hath 

jnau's words, g^id, my wisest course is to take 



44 PILGBIM'S PKOGRESS. 

his advice; and with that he thus further 
spoke. 

Che. Sir, which is my way to this honest man's 
house ? 

World. Do you see yonder high Mount smai. 
hill? 

Chr. Yes, very well. 

World. By that hill you must go, and the first 
house you come at is his. 

So Christian turned out of his way to go to Mr. 
Legality's house for help: but behold, ^fraid^^^^tiS 
when he was efot now hard by the hill, mount sinai 

? • 1 T 1 j^i i 1 would fall on 

it seemed so high, and also that side his head, 
of it that was next the way-side did hang so much 
over, that Christian was afraid to venture further, 
lest the hill should fall on his head; wherefore 
there he stood still; and wotted not what to do. 
Also his burden now seemed heavier to him than 
while he was in his way. There came also flashes 
of fire, Exod. 19: 16, 18, out of the hill, that made 
Christian afraid that he should be burnt: here 
therefore he did sweat and quake for fear. Heb. 
12:21. And now he began to be sorry that he 
had taken Mr. Worldly Wiseman's counsel; and 
with that he saw Evangelist coming to meet him, 
at the sight also of whom he began to blush for 
shame. So Evangelist drew nearer Evangelist 
and nearer; and coming up to him, he fj^^^*^ uSS 
looked upon him with a severe and ^^^^^ smai. 



UNDER MOUNT SINAI. 45 

dreadful countenance, and thus began to reason 
with Christian. 

Evan. What doest thou here, Christian ? said 
he: at which words Christian knew not what to 
answer ; wherefore at present he stood speech- 
Evangeiist less before him. Then said Evangel- 
with Christian, ist further, Ai't uot thou the man that 
I found crying without the walls of the city of 
Destruction ? 

Chr. Yes, dear sir, I am the man. 

Evan. Did not I direct thee the way to the 
little wicket-gate ? 

Chr. Yes, dear sir, said Christian. 

Evan. How is it then that thou art so quickly 
turned aside ? For thou art now out of the way. 

Chr. I met with a gentleman so soon as I had 
got over the slough of Despond, who persuaded 
me that I might, in the village before me, find a 
man that could take off my burden. 

Evan. What was he ? 

Chr. He looked like a gentleman, and talked 
much to me, and got me at last to yield : so I 
came hither ; but when I beheld this hill, and 
how it hangs over the way, I suddenly made a 
stand, lest it should fall on my head. 

Evan. What said that gentleman to you ? 

Chk. Why, he asked me whither I was going ; 
and I told him. 

Evan. And what said he then ? 



46 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Che. He asked me if I liad a family ; and I 
told him. But, said I, I am so laden with the 
burden that is on my back, that I cannot take 
pleasure in them as formerly. 

Evan. And what said he then ? 

Chr. He bid me with speed get rid of my bur- 
den; and I told him it was ease that I sought. 
And, said I, I am therefore going to yonder gate, 
to receive further direction how I may get to the 
place of deliverance. So he said that he would 
show me a better way, and short, not so attended 
with difficulties as the way, sir, that you set me 
in; which way, said he, will direct you to a gen- 
tleman's house that hath skill to take off these 
burdens ; so I believed him, and turned out of 
that way into this, if haply I might be soon eased 
of my burden. But when I came to this place, 
and beheld things as they are, I stopped, for 
fear, as I said, of danger : but I know not what 
to do. 

Evan. Then said Evangelist, stand still a little, 
that I may show thee the words of God. So he 
stood trembling. Then said Evan- Evangelist 

*^ 1 TT- convinces him 

gelist, "See that ye reiuse not Him of Ms error, 
that speaketh ; for if they escaped not who re- 
fused him that spake on earth, much more shall 
not we escape, if we turn away from Him that 
speaketh from heaven." Heb. 12 : 25. He said, 
moreovei% " Now the just shall Hve by faith ; but 



EVANGELIST CONVINCES HIM. 47 

if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleas- 
ure in him." Heb. 10 : 38. He also did thus 
apply them : Thou art the man that art running 
into this misery ; thou hast begun to reject the 
counsel of the Most High, and to draw back thy 
foot fi'om the way of peace, even almost* to the 
hazarding of thy perdition. 

Then Christian fell down at his feet as dead, 
crying, "Woe is me, for I am undone! At the 
sight of which Evangelist caught him by the right 
hand, saying, " All manner of sin and blasphe- 
mies shall be forgiven unto men." Matt. 12 : 31. 
"Be not faithless, but beheving." John 20 : 27. 
Then did Christian again a little revive, and 
stood up trembling, as at first, before Evan- 
gelist. 

Then Evangelist proceeded, saying. Give more 
earnest heed to the things that I shall tell thee of. 
I will now show thee who it was that deluded 
thee, and who it was also to whom he sent thee, 
ivir. Worldly The man that met thee is one Worldly 
^cSr by Wiseman, and rightly is he so caUed; 
Evangelist. partly bccause he savoreth only the 
doctrine of this world, 1 John 4 : 5 — therefore he 
always goes to the town of Morahty to church — 
and partly because he loveth that doctrine best, 
for it saveth him best fi-om the cross. Gal. 6 : 12 : 
and because he is of this carnal temper, there- 
fore he seeketh to pervert my ways, though right. 



48 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Now there are three things in this man's counsel 
that thou must utterly abhor. 

1. His turning thee out of the way. 

2. His laboring to render the cross odious to 
thee. 

3. And his setting thy feet in that way that 
leadeth unto the administration of death. 

First, thou must abhor his turning thee out of 
the way; yea, and thine own consenting thereto, 
because this is to reject the counsel of God for 
the sake of the counsel of a "Worldly Wiseman. 
The Lord says, " Strive to enter in at the strait 
gate," Luke 13 : 24, the gate to which I send 
thee ; " for strait is the gate that leadeth unto 
life, and few there be that find it." Matt. 7 : 13, 
14. From this little wicket-gate, and from the 
way thereto, hath this wicked man tui'ned thee, 
to the bringing of thee almost to destruction: 
hate, therefore, his turning thee out of the way, 
and abhor thyself for hearkening to him. 

Secondly, thou must abhor his laboring to ren- 
der the cross odious mito thee ; for thou art to pre- 
fer it before the treasures of Egypt. Heb. 11:25, 
26. Besides, the King of glory hath told thee, 
that he that will save his life shall lose it. And 
he that comes after him, and hates not his father, 
and mother, and wife, and children, and breth- 
ren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he 
cannot be his disciple. Mark 8 : 35; John 12:25; 



EVANGELIST CONVINCES HIM. 49 

Matt. 10:39; Luke 14:^6. I say therefore, for 
man to labor to persuade thee that that shall be 
thy death, without which, the truth hath said, 
thou canst not have eternal life, this doctrine 
thou must abhor. 

Thirdly, thou must hate his setting of thy feet 
in the way that leadeth to the ministration of 
death. And for this thou must consider to whom 
he sent thee, and also how unable that person 
was to deliver thee from thy bui'den. 

He to whom thou wast sent for ease, being by 
name Legality, is the son of the bond-woman 
which now is, and is in bondage with her chil- 
dren, Gal. 4 : 21-27, and is, in a myster}^, this 
mount Sinai, which thou hast feared v/ill fall on 
thy head. Now if she with her children are in 
bondage, how canst thou expect by them to bo 
made free ? This Legality therefore is not able 
to set thee free from thy burden. No man was 
as yet ever rid of his burden by him ; no, nor 
ever is like to be : ye cannot be justified by the 
works of the law ; for by the deeds of the law no 
man living can be rid of his burden. Therefore 
Mr. Worldly "Wiseman is an alien, and Mr. Le- 
gaUty is a cheat; and for his son Civility, not- 
withstanding his simpering looks, he is but a 
hypocrite, and cannot help thee. Believe me, 
there is nothing in all this noise that thou hast 
heard of these sottish men, but a design to beguile 

Pll. Pros. 4 



50 PILGRIM'S mOGKESS. 

thee of thy salvation, by turning thee from the 
way in which I had set thee. After this, Evan- 
gehst called aloud to the heavens for confirmation 
of what he had said; and with that there came 
words and fire out of the mountain under which 
poor Christian stood, which made the hair of his 
flesh stand up. The words were thus pronounced : 
*' As many as are of the works of the law, are 
under the curse ; for it is written, Cursed is every 
one that continueth not in all things which are 
written in the book of the law to do them." 
Gal. 3:10. 

Now Christian looked for nothing but death, 
and began to cry out lamentably; even cursing 
the time in which he met with Mr. Worldly Wise- 
man ; still calling himself a thousand fools for 
hearkening to his counsel. He also was greatly 
ashamed to think that this gentleman's argu- 
ments, flowing only from the flesh, should have 
the prevalency with him so far as to cause him to 
forsake the right way. This done, he applied 
himself again to Evangelist in word and sense as 
follows. 

CiiR. Sir, what think you ? Is there any hope ? 
May I now go back, and go uj) to the wicket-gate ? 
Shall I not be abandoned for this, and christian in- 
sent back from thence ashamed ? I yet be hapisy. 
am sorry I have hearkened to this man's coiuisel; 
but may my sin be forgiven ?' 



EVANGELIST COMPORTS HIM. 51 

Evan. Then said Evangelist to him, Thy sin is 
very great, for by it thou hast committed two 
evils; thou hast forsaken the way that is good, to 
tread in forbidden paths. Yet will Evangelist 
the Man at the gate receive thee, for comforts Mm. 
he has good will for men; only, said he, take heed 
that thou turn not aside again, lest thou " perish 
fi'om the way, w^hen his wrath is kindled but a 
Httle." Psa. 2:12. 



62 PILGRIM'S PEOGEESS. 



THE SECOND STAGE. 

Then did Christian address himself to go back; 
and EvangeHst, after he had kissed him, gave him 
one smile, and bid him God speed: so he went on 
■with haste, neither spoke he to any man by the 
■way; nor if any man asked him, would he vouch- 
safe them an answer. He went like one that was 
all the while treading on forbidden ground, and 
could by no means think himself safe, till again 
he was got into the way which he had left to fol- 
low Mr. "Worldly Wiseman's counsel. So in pro- 
cess of time, Christian got up to the gate. Now, 
over the gate there was written, " Knock, and it 
shall be opened unto you." Matt. 7:7. 

He knocked therefore, more than once or twice, 
saying, 

"May I now enter here ? V/ill he within 
Open to sorry me, though I have been 
An undeserving rebel ? Then shall I 
Not fail to sing his lasting praise on high." 

At last there came a gi-ave person to the gate, 
named Goodwill, who asked who was there, and 
whence he came, and what he would have. 

Chr. Here is a poor burdened sinner. I come 
from the city of Destruction, but am going to 
mount Zion, that I may be delivered from the 
wrath to come; I would therefore, sir, since I am 



TALK WITH GOODWILL. 53 

informed that by this gate is the way thither, 
know if you are willing to let me in. 

The gate wiu GooD. I am willing with all my 
broken-hearted heart, Said lie ; and with that he open- 

So when Christian was stepping in, the other 
gave him a pull. Then said Christian, What 
means that? The other told him, A little dis- 
tance from this gate there is erected a strong 
castle, of which Beelzebub is the captain : from 
Satan envies thencc botli he and they that are with 

those that enter , . , , 1 1 i 

the strait gate, huu shoot arrows at those that come 
up to this gate, if haply they may die before they 
Christian en- cau enter in. Then said Christian, I 
with *joy and rcjoice and tremble. So when he was 
trembhng. ^^^ ^^^ ^l^^ ^^^ ^f ^^^ ^^^^ askcd him 

who du-ected him thither. 

Chr. Evangelist bid me come hither and knock. 
Talk between as I did: and he said that you, sir. 
Christian. would tell me what I must do. 

Goon. An open door is set before thee, and no 
man can shut it. 

Chr. Now I begin to reap the benefit of my 
hazards. 

Goon. But how is it that you came alone ? 

Chr. Because none of my neighbors saw their 
danger as I sav/ mine. 

Good. Did any of them know of your coming? 

Chr. Yes, my wife and children saw me at the 



54 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

first, and called after me to turn again : also, some 
of my neighbors stood crjdng and calling after 
me to return ; but I put my fingers in my ears, 
and so came on my way. 

Good. But did none of tliem follow you, to 
persuade you to go back? 

Chr. Yes, both Obstinate and Phable; but 
when they saw that they could not prevail, Ob- 
stinate went railing back, but Pliable came with 
me a little way. 
. Good. But why did he not come through? 

Chr. "We indeed came both together until we 
came to the slough of Despond, into the which we 
also suddenly fell. And then was my neighbor Pli- 
able discouraged, and would not venture further. 
Wherefore, getting out again on the a man may 
side next to his own house, he told me wSi Te^^S 
I should possess the brave country ^j^^'^^er'go 
alone for him : so he went his way, ^^^^^^^' ^^^one. 
and I came mine ; he after Obstinate, and I, to 
this gate. 

Good. Then said Goodwill, Alas, poor man ; is 
the celestial glory of so little esteem with him, 
that he counteth it not worth running the hazard 
of a few difficulties to obtain it? 

Chr. Truly, said Christian, I have christian ac- 
said the truth of Phable ; and if I Sole tSfman 
should also say all the truth of myself, ^* ^^^ g'^*^- 
it will appear there is no betterment betwixt him 



TALK WITH GOOD\VILL. 55 

find myself. It is true, lie went back to liis o^^^l 
house, but I also turned aside to go into tlie way 
of death, being persuaded thereto by the carnal 
argument of one Mr. AYorldly AViseman. 

Good. Oh, did he light upon you? What, he 
would have had you seek for ease at the hands 
of Mr. Legality ! They are both of them a very 
cheat. But did you take his counsel? 

Chr. Yes, as far as I durst. I went to find out 
Mr. Legality, until I thought that the mountain 
that stands by his house would have fallen upon 
my head ; wherefore there was I forced to stop. 

Good. That mountain has been the death of 
many, and will be the death of many more : it is 
well you escaped being by it dashed in pieces. 

Chr, "Why, truly I do not know what had be- 
come of me there, had not Evangelist haj)pily met 
me again as I was musing in the midst of my 
dumps ; but it was God's mercy that he came to 
me again, for else I had never come hither. But 
now I am come, such a one as I am, more fit in- 
deed for death by that mountain, than thus to 
stand talking with my Lord. But Oh, what a favor 
is this to me, that yet I am admitted entrance 
here ! 

Good. We make no objections against any, not- 
Christian witlistandiuo- all that they have done 

is comforted , ,, i • ^ i 

again, and di- bciore they come hither ; they m no- 
bis way.^^ ^^ wise are cast out. John 6:37. And 



56 PILGRIM'S PEOGEESS. 

tlierefore, good Cliristian, come a little way with 
me, and I will teach thee about the way thou 
must go. Look before thee; dost thou see this 
narrow way? That is the way thou must go. It 
was cast u^) by the patriarchs, prophets, Christ, 
and his apostles, and it is as straight as a rule 
can make it; this is the way thou must go. 
Chr. But, said Christian, are there ciiristian 

. 1 • 1 afraid of losing 

no turnings nor windings, by which Ms way. 
a stranger may lose his way ? 

Good. Yes, there are many ways butt down 
upon this, and they are crooked and wide: but 
thus thou mayest distinguish the right from the 
wrong, the right only being straight and narrow. 
Matt. 7:14. 

Then I saw in my dream that Christian asked 
him further, if he could not helj3 him christian 

, . , T , . weary of his 

off with his burden that was upon Ins bm-den. 
back. For as yet he had not got rid thereof; nor 
could he by any means get it off without help. 

He told him, -As to thy bui-den, be ^^ ^^J^^-e is 
content to bear it until thou comest from the guilt 

and burden of 

to the place of deliverance; for there sin but by the 

■'- p toy death andblood 

it will fall from thy back of itsen. of Christ. 

Then Christian began to gird up his loins, and 
to addi-ess himself to his journey. So the other 
told him, that by that he was gone some distance 
from the gate he would come to the house of the 
Interpreter, at whose door he should knock, and 



THE INTERPRETER'S HOUSE. 57 

he woiild sliow him excellent things. Then Chris- 
tian took his leave of his friend, and he again bid 
him God sx)eed. 

Then he went on till he came at the house of 
Christian the Interpreter,* where he knocked 

comes to the t a i. i a 

house of the In- over and over. At last one came 
terpreter. ^^ ^-^q cloor, and asked who was 
there. 

Che. Sir, here is a traveller, who was bid by an 
acquaintance of the good man of this house to call 
here for my profit ; I would therefore speak with 
the master of the house. 

So he called for the master of the house, who, 
after a little time, came to Christian, and asked 
him what he would have. 

Che. Sir, said Christian, I am a man that am 
come fi-om the city of Destruction, and am going 
to the mount Zion ; and I was told by the man 
that stands at the gate at the head of this way, 
that if I called here you would show me excellent 
tilings, such as would be helpful to me on my 
journey. 

Intee. Then said the Interpreter, Come in ; I 

He is enter- ^'^^ show thee that which will be prof- 

tained. itablc to thee. So he commanded 

niumination. his man to light the candle, and bid 

Christian follow him ; so he had him into a 

* The Holy Spirit. 



58 PILGRIM'S PIIOGIIESS. 

private room, and bid Ins man open a door ; the 
which when he had done, Christian christian sees 
saw the picture of a very grave per- abravepictm-e. 
son hang up against the wall ; and this was the 
fashion of it : it had eyes lifted up to heaven, the 
best of books in its hand, the law of truth was 
written u]3on its lips, the world was behind its 
back ; it stood as if it pleaded with men, and a 
crown of gold did hang over its head. 

Chr. Then said Christian, "What means this? 

Inter. The man whose picture this is, is one of 
a thousand : he can beget children, 1 Cor. 4 : 15, 
travail in birth with children. Gal. 4 : 19, and 
nurse them himself when they are Meaning of 
born. And whereas thou seest him *^^ i^^^^^^'^- 
with his eyes lift up to heaven, the best of books 
in his hand, and the law of truth writ on his 
lips ; it is to show thee that his work is to know 
and unfold dark things to sinners, even as also 
thou seest him stand as if he pleaded with men. 
And whereas thou seest the world as cast behind 
him, and that a crown hangs over his head ; that 
is to show thee that, slighting and despising the 
things that are present, for the love that he hath 
to his Master's service, he is sure in the world that 
comes next to have glory for his reward. Now, 
said the Interpreter, I have show- Tsiiy he show- 
ed thee this picture first, because the ture first. 
man whose picture this is, is the only man whom 



THE INTERPKETEK'S HOUSE. 59 

the Lord of the place whither thou art going hath 
authorized to be thy guide in all difficult places 
thou mayest meet with in the way : wherefore 
take good heed to what I have show^ed thee, and 
bear well in thy mind what thou hast seen, lest 
in thy journey thou meet with some that pretend 
to lead thee right, but their w^ay goes down to 
death. 

Then he took him by the hand, an-d led him 
into a very large parlor that was full of dust, be- 
cause never swept ; the which after he reviewed 
it a little while, the Interpreter called for a man 
to sweep. Now, when he began to sweep, the 
dust began so abundantly to fly about, that Chris- 
tian had almost therewith been choked. Then 
said the Interpreter to a damsel that stood by, 
" Bring hither water, and sx^rinkle the room ;" 
the which w4ien she had done, it was swept and 
cleansed with j)leasure. 

Che. Then said Christian, "WTiat means this ? 

Inter. The Interpreter answered. This parlor 
is the heart of a man that w^as never sanctified 
by the sweet grace of the gospel. The dust is his 
original sin, and inward corruptions, that have 
defiled the w^hole man. He that began to sweep 
at first, is the law ; but she that brought water, 
and did sprinkle it, is the gospel. Now whereas 
thou sawest that so soon as the first began to 
sweep, the dust did so fly about that the room by 



60 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

liim could not be cleansed, but that tlion wast 
almost choked therewith ; this is to show thee 
that the law, instead of cleansing the heart, by 
its working, from sin, doth revive, Rom. 7 : 9, put 
strength into, 1 Cor. 15 : 5G, and increase it in the 
soul, Rom. 5 : 20, even as it doth discover and 
forbid it ; for it doth not give power to subdue. 
Again, as thou sawest the damsel sprinkle the 
room with water, upon w^hich it was cleansed 
with pleasure, this is to show thee that when the 
gospel comes in the sweet and ^^recious influences 
thereof to the heart, then, I say, even as thou 
sav/est the damsel lay the dust by sprinkling the 
floor with water, so is sin vanquished and sub- 
dued, and the soul made clean through the faith 
of it, and consequently fit for the King of glory 
to inhabit. John 15 : 3; Eph. 5 : 26; Acts 15 : 9; 
Rom. 16 : 25, 26. 

I saw moreover in my dream, that the Inter- 
preter took him by the hand, and had him into a 
little room, where sat two little chil- ho showed 

. , him Passion 

dren, each one m his chair. The name and Patience. 
of the eldest was Passion, and the name of the 
other Patience. Passion seemed to be much dis- 
contented, but Patience was very quiet. Then 
Christian asked, " What is the reason of the dis- 
content of Passion ?" The Interpreter passion wiu 
answered, "The governor of them ^^^^ ^* "°^- 
would have him stay for his best things till the 



THE INTERPRETER'S HOUSE. 61 

Patience is beginning of tlie next 3- ear, but he will 
for v/aiting. liave all now ; bnt Patience is willing 
to wait." 

Passion hath Then I saw that one came to Pas- 

his desire, and . t i i i. i • i £ 1 

quickly la^-ish- sion, ancl brouglit him a bag 01 treas- 
esauaway. ^^^^^ ^^^ poiirecl it down at his feet : 
the which he took up, ancl rejoiced therein, and 
^\dthal laughed Patience to scorn. But I beheld 
but a while, and he had lavished all away, and 
had nothing left him but rags. 

Che. Then said Christian to the Interpreter, 
Expound this matter more fully to me. 

Inter. So he said. These two lads are figures. 
Passion of the men of this world, and Patience 
of the men of that which is to come ; for, as here 
thou seest. Passion will have all now, this year, 
that is to say, in this world ; so are the men of 
this world : they must have all their good things 
now ; they cannot stay till the next year, that is, 
until the next world, for their portion of good. 
That proverb, "A bird in the hand is worth two 

The worldly in the bush," is of more authority 

man lor a bird ni -,• • 

in the hand. With them than are all the divme tes- 
timonies of the good of the world to come. But 
as thou sawest that he had quickly lavished all 
away, and had presently left him nothing but 
rags, so will it be with all such men at the end of 
this world. 

Chk. Then said Christian, Now I see that Pa- 



62 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

tience has the best •wisdom, and that Patience had 

the best wis- 

"upon many accounts.. 1. Because he dom. 
stays for the best things. 2. And also because he 
will have the glory of his, when the other has 
nothing but rags. 

Inter. Nay, you may add another, to wit, the 
glory of the next world will never wear out ; but 
these are suddenly gone. Therefore Passion had 
not so much reason to laugh at Patience because 
he had his good things first, as Pa- ^ J^^js' must 
tience will have to lauofh at Passion give place; but 

" , _ things that are 

because he had his best things last ; last are lasting. 
for first must give place to last, because last must 
have his time to come : but last gives place to 
nothing, for there is not another to succeed. He, 
therefore, that hath his portion first, must needs 
have a time to spend it ; but he that hath his 
portion last, must have it lastingly : therefore it 
is said of Dives, "In thy lifetime thou receiv- 
edst thy ffood thinpfs, and likewise Dives had his 
Lazarus evil things ; but now he is first, 
comforted, and thou art tormented." Luke 
16 : 25. 

Chr. Then I perceive it is not best to covei 
things that are now, but to wait for things to 
come. 

Inter. You say truth: for the things The first 
that are seen are temporal, but tne temporal, 
things that are not seen are eternal. 2 Cor. 4 : 18. 



THE INTERPBETEK'S HOUSE. 63 

But tliougii this be so, yet since things present 
and our fleshly appetite are such near neighbors 
one to another ; and again, because things to 
come and carnal sense are such strangers one to 
another ; therefore it is that the first of these so 
suddenly fall into amity, and that distance is so 
continued between the second. 

Then I saw in my dream, that the Interpreter 
took Christian by the hand, and led him into a 
place where was a fire burning against a wall, and 
one standing by it, always casting much water 
upon it, to quench it ; yet did the fire bui'n high- 
er and "hotter. 

Then said Christian, AVliat means this ? 

The Interpreter answered. This fire is the work 
of grace that is wrought in the heart ; he that 
casts water upon it, to extinguish and put it out, 
is the devil : but in that thou seest the fire, not- 
withstanding, burn higher and hotter, thou shalt 
also see the reason of that. So he had him about 
to the back side of the wall, where he saw a man 
with a vessel of oil in his hand, of the which he 
did also continually cast, but secretly, into the fire. 

Then said Christian, What means this ? 

The Interpreter answered, This is Christ, who 
continually, with the oil of his grace, maintains 
the work ah'eady begun in the heart; by the means 
of which, notwithstanding what the devil can do, 
the souls of his people prove gracious still. 2 Cor. 



64 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

12 : 9. And in that tliou sawest that the man 
stood behind the wall to maintain the fire : this is 
to teach thee, that it is hard for the tempted to see 
how this work of grace is maintained in the soul. 

I saw also, that the Interpreter took him again 
by the hand, and led him into a i)leasant place, 
where was built a stately palace, beautiful to be- 
hold ; at the sight of which Christian was greatly 
delighted. He saw also upon the top thereof cer- 
tain persons walking, who were clothed all in gold. 

Then said Christian, May we go in thither? 

Then the Interpreter took him, and led him up 
towards the door of the palace ; and behold, at 
the door stood a great company of men, as de- 
sirous to go in, but durst not. There also sat a 
man at a little distance from the door, at a table- 
side, with a book and his inkhorn before him, to 
take the names of them that should enter therein ; 
he saw also that in the doorway stood many men 
in armor to keep it, being resolved to do to the 
men that would enter, what hurt and mischief 
they could. Now was Christian somewhat in 
amaze. At last, when every man started back for 
fear of the armed men. Christian saw a man of a 
very stout countenance come up to the tj^q valiant 
man that sat there to write, saying, "^^"• 
" Set down my name, sir ;" the which when he 
had done, he saw the man draw his sword, and 
put a helmet on his head, and rush towards the 



THE INTERPRETER'S HOUSE. 65 

door upon the armed men, wlio laid upon liim 
with deadly force ; but the man, not at all dis- 
couraged, fell to cutting and hacking most fierce- 
ly. So after he had received and given many 
wounds to those that attempted to keep him out, 
Matt. 11 : 12, Acts 14 : 22, he cut his way through 
them all, and pressed forward into the palace ; at 
which there was a j)leasant voice heard from those 
that were within, even of those that walked upon 
the top of the palace, saying, 
"Come in, come in, 
Eternal glory thou slialt van. " 

So he went in, and was clothed with such gar- 
ments as they. Then Christian smiled, and said, 
I think verily I know the meaning of this. 

Now, said Christian, let me go hence. Nay, 
stay, said the Interpreter, till I have showed thee 
a little more, and after that thou shalt go on thy 
Despair like ^'^^J- ^o he took him by the hand 
an iron cage, again, and led him into a very dark 
room, where there sat a man in an iron cage. 

Now the man, to look on, seemed very sad ; he 
sat with his eyes looking down to the ground, his 
hands folded together, and he sighed as if he 
would break his heart. Then said Christian, "Wliat 
means this? At which the Interpreter bid him 
talk with the man. 

Then said Christian to the man. What art thou ? 
The man answered, I am what I was not once. 

Fil. Prog. 5 



66 PILGRIM'S PEOGEESS. 

CiiR. What wast tliou once ? 

Man. The man said, I was once a fail' and flour- 
ishing professor, Luke 8 : 13, both in my own 
eyes, and also in the eyes of others : I once was, 
as I thought, fair for the celestial city, and had 
then even joy at the thoughts that I should get 
thither. 

Chr. Well, but what art thou now ? 

Man. I am now a man of despair, and am shut 
up in it, as in this iron cage. I cannot get out ; 
Oh now I cannot ! 

Chr. But how earnest thou into this condition ? 

Man. I left off to watch and be sober : I laid 
the reins upon the neck of my lusts ; I sinned 
against the light of the word, and the goodness 
of God ; I have grieved the Spirit, and he is gone ; 
I tempted the devil, and he is come to me ; I have 
provoked God to anger, and he has left me ; I 
have so hardened my heart that I cannot repent. 

Then said Christian to the Interpreter, But is 
there no hope for such a man as this ? Ask him, 
said the Interpreter. 

Chr. Then said Christian, Is there no hope, 
but you must be kept in the iron cage of de- 
spair ? 

Man. No-, none at all. 

Chr. Why, the Son of the Blessed is very pitiful. 

Man. I have crucified him to myself afresh, 
Hebrews 6 : 6 ; I have desxDised his person, Luke 



THE INTEKPRETEK'S HOUSE. 67 

19 : 14 ; I have despised liis righteousness ; I have 
counted his blood an unholy thing ; I have done 
despite to the Spiiit of grace, Heb. 10:29: there- 
fore I have shut myself out of all the promises, 
and there now remains to me nothing but threat- 
enings, dreadful threatenings, faithful threaten- 
ings of certain judgment and fiery indignation, 
which shall devoui' me as an adversary. 

Che. For v/hat did you bring yourself into this 
condition ? 

IVIan. For the lust, pleasures, and profits of this 
world; in the enjoyment of which I did then 
promise myself much delight : but now every one 
of those things also bite me, and gnaw me Hke a 
bui'ning worm. 

Chr. But canst thou not now repent and turn ? 

Man. God hath denied me repentance. His 
word gives me no encouragement to believe ; yea, 
himseK hath shut me up in this iron cage, nor can 
all the men in the world let me out. Oh eternity, 
eternity ! how shall I grapj)le with the miseiy that 
I must meet with in eternity? 

Inter. Then said the Interpreter to Christian, 
Let this man's misery be remembered by thee, and 
be an everlasting caution to thee. 

Chr. "Well, said Christian, this is fearful ! God 
help me to watch and to be sober, and to pray that 
I may shun the cause of this man's misery. Sir, 
is it not time for me to go on my way now ? 



68 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Inter. Tarry till I shall show thee one thing 
more, and then thon shalt go on thy way. 

So he took Christian by the hand again, and led 
him into a chamber where there was one rising 
out of bed ; and as he put on his raiment, he shook 
and trembled. Then said Christian, Why doth 
this man thus tremble ? The Interpreter then bid 
him tell to Christian the reason of his so doing. 

So he began, and said, "This night, as I was 
in my sleep, I dreamed, and behold, the heavens 
grew exceeding black; also it thundered and 
lightened in most fearful wise, that it put- me into 
an agony. So I looked up in my dream, and saw 
the clouds rack at an unusual rate ; upon which 
I heard a gTeat sound of a trumpet, and saw also 
a man sitting upon a cloud, attended with the 
thousands of heaven : they were all in flaming 
fire ; also the heavens were in a burning flame. 
I heard then a voice, saying, ' Arise, ye dead, and 
come to judgment.' And with that the rocks 
rent, the graves opened, and the dead that were 
therein came forth : some of them were exceed- 
ing glad, and looked upward ; and some sought 
to hide themselves under the mountains. Then 
I saw the man that sat upon the cloud open the 
book, and bid the world draw near. Yet there 
was, by reason of a fierce flame that issued out 
and came fi'om before him, a convenient distance 
between him and them, as between the judge and 



THE INTERPRETER'S HOUSE. 69 

tlie prisoners at the bar. 1 Cor. 15 ; 1 Thess. 
4 : 16 ; Jude 15 ; John 5 : 28, 29 ; 2 Thess. 1 : 8-10; 
Eev. 20 : 11-14 ; Isaiah 26 : 21 ; Micah 7 : 16, 17; 
Psa. 5:4; 50:1-3; Mai. 3:2, 3; Dan. 7:9, 10. 
I heard it also proclaimed to them that attended 
on the man that sat on the cloud, 'Gather to- 
gether the tares, the chaff, and stubble, and cast 
them into the burning lake.' Matt. 3 : 12 ; 18 : 30; 
24 : 30; Mai. 4 : 1. And with that the bottomless 
pit opened, just whereabout I stood ; out of the 
mouth of which there came, in an abundant man- 
ner, smoke, and coals of fire, with liideous noises. 
It was also said to the same persons, * Gather my 
wheat into the garner.' Luke 3 : 17. And Avith 
that I saw many catched up and carried away 
into the clouds, but I was left behind. 1 Thess. 
4 : 16, 17. I also sought to hide myself, but I 
could not, for the man that sat uj)on the cloud 
still kept his eye upon me ; my sins also came 
into my mind, and my conscience did accuse me 
on every side. Eom. 2 : 14, 15. Upon this I 
awakened from my sleep." 

Chr. But what was it that made you so aft'aid 
of this sight? 

IVIan, Why, I thought that the day of judgment 
was come, and that I was not ready for it : but 
this frightened me most, that the angels gather- 
ed up several, and left me behind ; also the pit of 
hell opened her mouth just where I stood. My 



70 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

conscience too afflicted me ; and, as I thought, 
the Judge had always his eye upon me, showing 
indignation in his countenance. 

Then said the Interpreter to Christian, "Hast 
thou considered all these things ?" 

Chr. Yes, and they put me in hope and fear. 

Inter. Well, keep all things so in thy mind that 
they may be as a goad in thy sides, to prick thee 
forward in the way thou must go. Then Chris- 
tian began to gird up his loins, and to address 
himself to his j ourney. Then said the Interpreter, 
" The Comforter be always with thee, good Chris- 
tian, to guide thee in the way that leads to the 
city." So Christian went on his way, saying, 

"Here I have seen things rare and profitable, 
Things pleasant, dreadful, things to make me stable 
In what I have begiin to take in hand : 
Then let me think on them, and understand 
Wherefore they showed me were, and let me be 
Thankful, O good Interpreter, to thee, " 



THREE SHINING ONES. 71 

THE THIRD STAGE. 

Now I saw in my dream, tliat the liigliway up 
which Christian W' as to go, was fenced on either 
side with a wall, and that wall was called Salva- 
tion. Isaiah 26 : 1. Up this way, therefore, did 
burdened Christian run, but not without gxeat 
difficulty, because of the load on his back. 

He ran thus till he came at a place somewhat 
ascending ; and upon that place stood a cross, and 
a little below^ in the bottom, a sepulchre. So I 
saw in my dream, that just as Christian came up 
with the cross, his burden loosed from off his 
shoulders, and fell from off his back, and began 
to tumble, and so continued to do till it came to 
the mouth of the sepulchre, where it fell in, and I 
saw it no more. 

Then was Christian glad and lightsome, and 

wiien God Said with a merry heart, " He hath 
ourgtiiit^\ud given me rest by his sorrow, and hfe 
as'^'tSe'Vat ^J ^^^ death." Then he stood stiH a 
leap tor joy. ^yhilc, to look and wonder ; for it w^as 
very surprising to him that the sight of the cross 
should thus ease him of his burden. He looked 
therefore, and looked again, even till the springs 
that were in his head sent the waters down his 
cheeks. Zech. 12 : 10. Now as he stood looking 
and w^eeping, behold, three Shining Ones came to 



72 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

him, and saluted him with, "Peace be to thee." 
So the first said to him, " Thy sins be forgiven 
thee," Mark 2:5; the second stripped him of his 
rags, and clothed him with a change of raiment, 
Zech. 3:4; the third also set a mark on his fore- 
head, Eph. 1:13, and gave him a roll with a seal 
upon it, which he bid him look on as he ran, and 
that he should give it in at the celes- a christian 
tial gate ; so they went their way. Sougii aK| 
Then Christian gave three leaps for givriiim joy in 
joy, and went on singmg, ^^ ^^^''*- 

''Thus far did I come laden with my sin, 
Nor could auglit ease the grief that I was in, 
Till I came hither. What a place is this ! 
Must here be the beginning of my bliss ? 
Must here the burden fall from off my back ? 
Must here the strings that bound it to me crack ? 
Blest cross ! blest sepulchre ! blest, rather, be 
The Man that there was put to shame for me ! " 

I saw then in my dream, that he went on thus 
even until he came at the bottom, where he saw, 
a little out of the way, three men fast ^^sjmpk.sMh. 
asleep with fetters upon their heels, tion. 
The name of the one was Simple, of another Sloth, 
and of the third Presumption. 

Christian then seeing them He in this case, went 
to them, if per adventure he might awake them, 
and cried. You are like them that sleep on the top 
of a mast, Prov. 23 : 34, for the Dead sea is under 
you, a gulf that hath no bottom : awake, therefore, 



FOBMALIST AND HYPOCRISY. 73 

and come away ; be willing also, and I will help 
you off mth your irons. He also told them, If he 
that goeth about Uke a roaring lion, 1 Pet. 5 : 8, 
comes by, you will certainly become a prey to his 
teeth. With that they looked upon him, and be- 
gan to reply in this sort : Simple said, I see no 
danger ; Sloth said. Yet a little more sleep ; and 
There is no Prcsumption Said, Every tub must 

persuasion will -^ . 

do, if God open- stand upou its owu bottom. And so 

eth not the ., , ^ . , . -. 

eyes. they lay down to sleep agam, and 

Christian went on his way. 

Yet he was troubled to think that men in that 
danger should so little esteem the kindness of him 
that so freely offered to help them, both by awak- 
ening of them, counselling of them, and proffer- 
ing to help them off with their irons. And as ho 
was troubled thereabout, he espied two men come 
tumblmg over the wall, on the left hand of the 
narrow way ; and they made up apace to him. 
The name of the one was Formalist, and the 
name of the other Hypocrisy. So, as I said, they 
drew up unto him, who thus entered with them 
into discourse. 

Christian ^^^- Grcntlemen, whence came you, 
talks with them, ^nd whithcr do you go? 

Form, and Hyp. We were born in the land of 
Vain-glory, and are going, for praise, to mount 
Zion. 

Che. Why came you not in at the gate which 



74 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

standetli at th6 beginning of the way? Know 
ye not that it is written, that "he that cometh 
not in by the door, but climbeth up some other 
way, the same is a thief and a robber?" John 
, 10 : 1. 

I • Form, and Hyp. They said, that to go to the gate 
for entrance was by all their countrymen counted 
too far about ; and that therefore their usual way 
was to make a short cut of it, and to climb over 
the wall, as they had done. 

Ghr. But will it not be counted a trespass 
against the Lord of the city whither we are bound, 
thus to violate his revealed v/ill? 

Form, and Hyp. They told him, that as for that, 
he needed not to trouble his head thereabout : for 
what they did they had custom for, and could 
produce, if need were, testimony that would wit- 
ness it for more than a thousand years. 

Chr. But, said Christian, will you stand a trial 
at law ? 

Form, and Hyp. They told him, that custom, it 
being of so long standing as above a coj^g'^nto ^fho 
thousand years, would doubtless now way but not by 

^ , , the door, thiuk 

be admitted as a thing legal by an im- that they can 

, . , . T 11 -1 •Ti.i •i?^^y something 

partial judge : and besides, said they, it in vindication 
' we get into the way, what matter is it practice. 
which way we get in ? If we are in, we are in : 
thou art but in the waj^, who, as we perceive, 
came in at the gate ; and we also are in the way, 



FORMALIST AND HYPOCRISY. 7.^ 

that came tumbling over the wall : wherein now 
is thy condition better than oui'S ? 

Chr. I w^alk by the rule of my Master : you 
walk by the rude working of your fancies. You 
are counted thieves ah'eady by the Lord of the 
way : therefore I doubt you will not be found true 
men at the end of the way. You come in by 
yourselves without his direction, and shall go out 
by yourselves without his mercy. 

To this they made hun but little answer ; only 
they bid him look to himself. Then I saw that 
they went on, every man in his way, without 
much conference one mth another, save that these 
two men told Christian, that as to laws and ordi- 
nances, they doubted not but that they should as 
conscientiously do them as he. Therefore, said 
they, we see not wherein thou difierest from us, 
but by the coat that is on thy back, which was, as 
we trow, given thee by some of thy neighbors, to 
hide the shame of thy nakedness. 

Cek. By laws and ordinances you vrill not be 
saved, since you came not in by the door. Gal. 
2 : 16. And as for this coat that is on my back, it 
was given me by the Lord of the place whither I 
go ; and that, as you say, to cover my nakedness 
c Christian lias with. And I take it as a token of 
coat ^ on °\i3 kindness to me ; for I had nothing 
^'''"^''comforted t»^^t rags before. And besides, thus I 
therewith. comfort myself as I go. Surely, think 



76 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

I, when I coine to tlie gate of the city, tlie Lord 
thereof will know me for good, since I have his 
coat on my back ; a coat that he gave me freely 
in the day that he stripped me of my rags. I have, 
moreover, a mark in my forehead, of jj^ ^g ^oj^, 
which perhaps yon have taken no fSf ^fnal? Tnd 
notice, which one of my Lord's most ^^^ ^■'^^• 
intimate associates fixed there in the day that my 
burden fell off my shoulders. I will tell yon, 
moreover, that I had then given me a roll sealed, 
to comfort me by reading as I go on the way ; I 
was also bid to give it in at the celestial gate, in 
token of my certain going in after it : all which 
things I doubt you want, and want them because 
you came not in at the gate. 

To these things they gave him no answer ; only 
they looked upon each other, and laughed. Then 
I saw that they went all on, save that christian haa 
Christian kept before, who had no self. 
more talk but with himself, and that sometimes 
sighingly, and sometimes comfortably : also he 
would be often reading in the roll that one of the 
Shining Ones gave him, by which he was refreshed. 

I beheld then, that they all went on till they 
came to the foot of the hill Difficulty, He comes to 

'' the hill Diflicul- 

at the bottom of which there was a ty. 
spring. There were also in the same place two 
other ways besides that which came straight from 
the gate : one turned to the left hand, and the other 



THE HILL DIFFICULTY. 77 

to the right, at the bottom of the hill ; but the 
narrow way lay right u^d the hill, and the name of 
the going up the side of the hill is called Difficul- 
ty. Christian now went to the sjmng, Isa. 49 : 10, 
and drank thereof to refi'esh himseK, and then 
began to go up the hill, saying, 

"The liill, tliougli high, I covet to ascend; 
The difSiculty Tvill not me offend; 
For I perceive the way to life lies here : 
Come, j)luck up heart, let 's neither faint nor fear; 
Better, though difficult, the right way to go, 
Than wrong, though easy, where the end is woe." 

The other two also came to the foot of the hill. 
But when they saw that the hill was steep and 
high, and that there were two other ways to go; 
and supposing also that these two ways might 
meet again with that up which Christian went, on 
the other side of the hill ; therefore they were 
resolved to go in those ways. Kow the name of 
one of those ways was Danger, and the name of 
the other Destruction. So the one took the way 
The danger of which is Called Danger, which led him 
tiie way. into a gTcat wood ; and the other took 

directly up the way to Destruction, which led him 
into a wide field, full of dark mountains, where he 
stumbled and fell, and rose no more. 

I looked then after Christian, to see him go up 
the hill, where I perceived he fell from running to 
going, and from going to clambering upon his 



78 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

hands and Ms knees, because of tlie steepness of 
the place. Now about the midway to the toj) of the 
hill was a pleasant Arbor, made by ^ ^,^^^ ^^ 
the Lord of the hill for the refresh- H^^^e. 
ment of weary travellers. Thither, therefore^, 
Christian got, where also he sat down to rest 
him : then he pulled his roll out of his bosom, 
and read therein to his comfort ; he also now be- 
gan afresh to take a review of the coat or gar- 
ment that was given to him as he stood by the 
cross. Thus pleasing himself a while, he at last 
fell into a slumber, and thence into a fast sleep, 
which detained him in that place until it was al- 
most night ; and in his slee]3 his roll He that sleeps 
fell out of his hand. Now, as he was '' ^ ^^''^• 
sleeping, there came one to him, and awaked him, 
saying, " Go to the ant, thou sluggard ; consider 
her ways, and be wise." Prov. 6 : 6. And with 
that Christian suddenly started up, and sped him 
on his way, and went apace till he came to the 
top of the hill. 

Now when he was' got up to the top of the hill, 
there came two men running amain ; the name 
of the one was Timorous, and of the christian 
other Mistrust: to whom Christian l^^^'aM^Tl': 
said. Sirs, what's the matter? you ^^•°^^^- 
run the wrong way. Timorous answered, that 
they were going to the city of Zion, and had got 
up that difficult place: but, said he, the further 



MISSES HIS KOLL. 79 

we go, tlie more danger we meet with; where- 
fore we turned, and are going back again. 

Yes, said Mistrust, for just before us he a couple 
of hons in the way, whether sleeping or waking 
we know not; and we could not think, if we came 
within reach, but they would presently pull us in 
pieces. 

Chr. Then said Christian, You make me afi'aid, 
but whither shall I fly to be safe ? If I go back to 
my own country, that is prepared for fire and 
brimstone, and I shall certainly perish there; if 
I can get to the celestia city, I am sure to be m 
Christian Safety there : I must yenture. To go 
shakes off fear. ^^^^-^ -g nothing but death; to go for- 
ward is fear of death, and life everlasting beyond 
it: I will yet go forward. So Mistrust and Tim- 
orous ran down the hill, and Christian went on 
his way. But thinking again of what he had 
heard from the men, he felt in his bosom for his 
roll, that he might read therein and be comfort- 
Christian q^. ^^^ -j^q fgjt and fouud it not. 

misses his roll, ' 

whereinheused Then was Christian in e-reat distress, 

to be comfort- -, t> i 

ed. and knew not what to do; for he 

wanted that which used to relieve him, and that 
which should have been his pass into the celes- 
tial city. Here, therefore, he began to be much 
He is pennies- perplexed, and knew not what to do. 
ed for his roll, j^^ i^^^ |^g bcthouglit himself that he 
had slept in the arbor that is on the side of the 



80 PILGEIM'S PROGRESS. 

liill; and falling down upon his knees, tie asked 
God forgiveness for that foolish act, and then 
went back to look for his roll. But all the way- 
he went back, who can sufficiently set forth the 
sorrow of Christian's heart? Sometimes he 
sighed, sometimes he wept, and oftentimes he 
chid himself for being so foohsh as to fall asleep 
in that place, which was erected only for a little 
refreshment from his weariness. Thus, therefore, 
he went back, carefully looking on this side and 
on that, all the way as he went, if happily he 
might find his roll, that had been his comfort so 
many times in his journey. He w^ent thus till 
he came again within sight of the arbor where he 
sat and slept; but that sight renewed his sorrow 
the more, by bringing again, even christian be- 

•1 PI- , 1 . wails his foolish 

afresh, his evil of sleeping unto his sleeping. 
mind. Kev. 2 :4; 1 Thess. 6 : 6-8. Thus, there- 
fore, he now went on, bewailing his sinful sleep, 
saying. Oh wretched man that I am, that I 
should sleep in the dc.jiime\ that I should sleep 
in the midst of difficulty! that I should so in- 
dulge the flesh as to use that rest for ease to my 
flesh which the Lord of the hill hath erected 
only for the rehef of the spirits of pilgrims! 
How many steps have I taken in vain! Thus 
it happened to Israel; for their sin they were 
sent back again by the way of the Eed sea ; and 
I am made to tread those steps with sorrow, 



HE FINDETH HIS ROLL. 81 

which I might have trod with dehght, had it not 
been for this sinful sleep. How far might I 
have been on my way by this time ! I am made 
to tread those steps thrice over, which I need- 
ed not to have trod but once: yea, now also I 
am like to be benighted, for the day is almost 
spent. Oh that I had not slept ! 

Now by this time he was come to the arbor 
again, where for a while he sat down and wept ; 
but at last, as Providence would have it, looking 
Christian find- sorrowfully dowu uudcr the settle, 
where he lost it. there he espied his roll, the which he 
with trembling and haste catched up, and put 
it into his bosom. But who can tell how joy- 
ful this man was when he had gotten his roll 
again ? For this roll was the assurance of his 
life, and acceptance at the desired haven. There- 
fore he laid it up in his bosom, gave thanks to 
God for directing his eye to the place where it 
lay, and with joy and tears betook himself again 
to his journey. But Oh, how nimbly did he go 
up the rest of the hill! Yet before he got up, 
the sun went down upon Christian; and this 
made him agam recall the vanity of his sleeping 
to his remembrance; and thus he again began 
to condole with himself : Oh thou sinful sleep, 
how for thy sake am I like to be benighted in 
my journey ! I must walk without the sun, dark- 
ness must cover the path of my feet, and I must 

Pll. Pros. 6 



82 PILGRIM'S PEOGEESS. 

hear the noise of the doleful creatures, because of 
my sinful sleep! Now also he remembered the 
story that Mistrust and Timorous told him of, 
how they were fi'igiited with the sight of the 
lions. Then said Christian to himself again, 
These beasts range in the night for their prey ; 
and if they should meet with me in the dark, how 
should I shift them ; how should I escape being 
by them torn in pieces? .Thus he went on his 
way. But while he was bewailing his unhappy 
miscarriage, he lift up his eyes, and behold, there 
was a very stately palace before him, the name of 
which was Beautiful, and it stood by the high- 
way-side. 

So I saw in my dream that he made haste, 
and went forward, that if possible he might get 
lodging there. Now before he had gone far, he 
entered into a very narrow passage, which was 
about a furlong off the porter's lodge; and look- 
ing very narrowly before him as he went, he es- 
pied two hons in the way. Now, thought he, I 
see the dangers that Mistrust and Timorous were 
driven back by. The lions were chained, but 
ne saw not the chains. Then he was afraid, 
and thought also himself to go back after them; 
for he thought nothing but death was before 
him. But the porter at the lodge, whose name 
is Watchful, perceiving that Christian made a 
halt, as if he would go back, cried unto him, 




jia.i'fc 




THE PALACE BEAUTIFUL. 83 

saying, Is thy strength so small ? Mark 4 : 40. 
Fear not the lions, for they are chained, and are 
placed there for trial of faith where it is, and for 
discovery of those that have none : keep in the 
midst of the path, and no hui't shall come unto 
thee. 

Then I saw that he went on, trembhng for fear 
of the lions, but taking good heed to the direc- 
tions of the porter ; he heard them roar, but they 
did him no harm. Then he clapped his hands, and 
went on till he came and stood before the gate 
where the porter was. Then said Christian to 
the porter. Sir, what house is this? and may I 
lodge here to-night ? The porter answered, This 
house was built by the Lord of the hill, and ho 
built it for the relief and security of pilgrims. 
The porter also asked whence he was, and whither 
he was going. 

Chr. I am come from the city of Destruction, 
and am going to mount Zion; but because the 
sun is now set, I desire, if I may, to lodge hero 
to-night. 

Port. "What is your name ? 

Chr. My name is now Christian, but my name 
at the first was Graceless: I came of the race of 
Japheth, whom God will persuade to dwell in the 
tents of Shem. Gen. 9 : 27. 

Port. But how doth it happen that you come 
so late ? The sun is set. 



84 PILGTRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Che. I had been liere sooner, but that, wretch- 
ed man that I am, I slept in the arbor that stands 
on the hill-side ! Nay, I had, notwithstanding 
that, been here much sooner, but that in my sleep 
I lost my evidence, and came without it to the 
brow of the hill; and then feeling for it, and not 
finding it, I was forced with sorrow of heart to 
go back to the place where I slept my sleep, where 
I found it; and now I am come. 

Port. "Well, I will call out one of the virgins of 
this place, who will, if she likes your talk, bring 
you in to the rest of the family, according to the 
rules of the house. So Watchful the porter 
rang a bell, at the sound of which came out of 
the door of the house a grave and beautiful 
damsel named Discretion, and asked why she 
was called. 

The porter answered. This man is on a journey 
from the city of Destruction to mount Zion; but 
being weary and benighted, he asked me if he 
might lodge here to-night: so 1 told him I would 
call for thee, who, after discourse had with him, 
mayest do as seemeth thee good, even according 
to the law of the house. 

Then she asked him whence he was, and whith- 
er he was going ; and he told her. She asked 
him also how he got into the way; and he told 
her. Then she asked him what he had seen and 
met with in the way, and he told her. And at 



TALK WITH PIETY. 85 

last she askecj his name. So he said, It is Chris- 
tian; and I have so much the more a desu-e to 
lodge here to-night, because, by what I perceive, 
this place was built by the Lord of the hill for 
the rehef and security of pilgrims. So she smil- 
ed, but the water stood in her eyes ; and after a 
little pause she said, I will call forth two or three 
more of the family. So she ran to the door, and 
called out Prudence, Piety, and Charity, who, 
after a little more discourse with him, had him 
into the family; and many of them meeting him 
at the threshold of the house, said. Come in, thou . 
blessed of the Lord; this house Avas built by the 
Lord of the hill on purpose to entertain such 
pilgrims in. Then he bowed his head, and fol- 
lowed them into the house. So when he was 
come in and sat down, they gave him something 
to drink, and consented together that, until sup- 
per Avas ready, some of them should have some 
particular discourse with Christian, for the best 
improvement of time; and they appointed Piety, 
Prudence, and Charity to discourse with him : and 
thus they began. 

Piety. Come, good Christian, since we have 
Pietydiscours-been SO loviug to you as to receive 
es vnth hiin. jq^ ^j^^q q^jp house this night, let us, 
if perhaps we may better ourselves thereby, talk 
with you of all things that have happened to you 
in your pilgrimage. 



86 PILGEIM'S PROGRESS. 

Che. With a very good will ; ajid I am glad 
that you are so well disposed. 

Piety. What moved you at first to betake your- 
self to a pilgrim's life ? 

Chb. I was driven out of my native country by 
a dreadful sound that was in mine Howchris- 
ears; to wit, that unavoidable destruc- ^^^rmfo''^ 
tion did attend me, if I abode in that ^o^^t^y- 
place where I was. 

Piety. But how did it happen that you came 
out of your country this way ? 

Chr. It was as God would have it; for when I 
was under the fears of destruction, I did not know 
whither to go; but by chance there came a man 
even to me, as I was trembling and . How he got 

' , ^ into the way to 

weeping, whose name is Evangelist, zion. 
and he directed me to the Wicket-gate, which 
else I should never have found, and so set me into 
the way that hath led me directly to this house. 

Piety. But did you not come by the house of 
the Interpreter ? 

Chr. Yes, and did see such things there, the 
remembrance of which will stick by me as long 
as I live, especially three things: to a rehearsal of 

' ••- ^ 'r what he saw m 

wit, how Christ, in despite of batan, the way. 
maintains his work of grace in the heart ; how the 
man had sinned himself quite out of hopes of God's 
mercy ; and also the dream of him that thought 
in his sleep the day of judgment was come. 



TALK WITH PIETY. 87 

Piety. AYliy, did you liear liim tell his dream ? 

Chr. Yes, and a dreadful one it was, I thought ; 
it made my heart ache as he was telling of it, but 
yet I am glad I heard it. 

Piety. Was this all you saw at the house of the 
Interpreter ? 

Chr. No; he took me, and had me where he 
showed me a stately palace, and how the people 
were clad in gold that were in it ; and how there 
came a venturous man, and cut his way through 
the armed men that stood in the door to keep 
liim out ; and how he was bid to come in, and win 
eternal glory. Methought those things did ravish 
my heart. I would have stayed at that good 
man's house a twelvemonth, but that I knew I 
had further to go. 

Piety. And what saw you else in the way ? 

Chr. Saw ? Why, I went but a little further, 
and I saw One, as I thought in my mind, hang- 
bleeding ux3on a tree; and the very sight of him 
made my burden fall off my back ; for I groaned 
under a very heavy bui'den, but then it fell down 
from off me. It was a strange thing to me, for I 
never saw such a thing before: yea, and while I 
stood looking up, for then I could not forbear 
looking, three Shining Ones came to me. One of 
them testified that my sins were forgiven me; 
another stripped me of my rags, and gave me this 
broidered coat which you see; and the third set 



88 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

tlie mark wliicli yon see in my forehead, and gave 
me this sealed roll; and with that he plucked it 
out of his bosom. 

Piety. But you saw more than this, did you 
not? 

Chr. The things that I have told you were the 
best: yet some other matters I saw, as, namely, I 
saw three men. Simple, Sloth, and Presumption, 
lie asleep, a little out of the way, as I came, with 
irons upon their heels ; but do you think I could 
awake them? I also saw Formality and Hypocrisy 
come tumbling over the wall, to go, as they pre- 
tended, to Zion; but they were quickly lost, even 
as I myself did tell them, but they would not 
believe. But, above all, I found it hard work to 
get up this hill, and as hard to come by the lions' 
mouths ; and truly, if it had not been for the good 
man the porter, that stands at the gate, I do not 
know but that, after all, I might have gone back 
again; but I thank God I am here, and thank you 
for receiving me. 

Then Prudence thought good to ask him a few 
questions, and desired his answer to them. 

Pku. Do you not think sometimes of Prudence dis- 
the country from whence you came? Mm. 

Che. Yea, but with much shame and detesta- 
tion. Truly, if I had been mindful of christian's 

'' thoughts of his 

that country irom whence i came out, native country. 
I might have had opportunity to have returned; 



TALK WITH PRUDENCi:. 89 

but now I desire a better country, that is, a heav- 
enly one. Heb. 11 : 15, 16. 

Pku. Do you not yet bear away with you some 
of the things that then you were conversant withal ? 

Chr. Yes, but greatly against my will; espec- 
ially my inward and carnal cogitations, with 
which all my countrymen, as well as myself, were 
delighted. But now all those things are my 
grief ; and might I but choose my own things, I 

Christian's would choosc ucvcr to think of those 
choice. things more : but when I would be a 

doing that which is best, that which is worst is 
with me. Eom. 7 : 15, 21. 

Peu. Do you not find sometimes as if those 
things were vanquished, which at other times are 
your perplexity ? 

Chr. Yes, but that is but seldom ; but they are 

Christian's ^o me goldcu hours in which such 
golden hours, ^j^^j^gg happen to me. 

Peu. Can you remember by what means jou 
find your annoyances at times as if they were 
vanquished ? 

Cmi. Yes; when I think what I saw at the cross. 

How Chris- tbat will do it; and when I look upon 

aSnst MsTr- ^J broidcrcd coat, that will do it; and 

rSptions. ^^l^Q^ I i^Q^ i^^Q il^Q roll l-l^a^ I (,^ri,y 

in my bosom, that will do it ; and when my 
thoughts wax warm about whither I am going, 
that will do it. 



90 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Pru. And wliat is it tliat makes you so desirous 
to go to mount Zion ? 

Chr. Why, there I hope to see Him alive that 
did hang dead on the cross ; and there whycims. 
I hope to be rid of all those things mount zion. 
that to this day are in me an annoyance to me ; 
there they say there is no death, Isa. 25 : 8; Rev. 
21:4; and there I shall dwell with such company 
as I like best. For to tell you the truth, I love 
Him because I was by him eased of my burden; 
and I am weary of my inward sickness. I would 
fain be where I shall die no more, and with the 
company that shall continually cry, HoJij, holy, 
holy. 

Then said Charity to Christian, charity ciis- 

T-x n -1 • T courses with 

Have 3^ou a lamily ; are you a married Mm. 
man? 

Chr. I have a wife and four small children. 

Char. And why did you not bring them along 
with you ? 

Chr. Then Christian wept, and said. Oh, how 
willingly would I have done it ! but christian's 

,1 ,, p . , i J 1 love to his wife 

they were all oi them utterly averse and children. 
to my going on pilgrimage. 

Char. But you should have talked to them, and 
have endeavored to show them the danger of stay- 
ing behind. 

Chr. So I did; and told them also what God 
had shown to me of the destruction of our city; 



TALK WITH CHARITY. 91 

but I seemed to them as one that mocked, and 
they beheved me not. Gen. 19 : 14. 

Chak. And did you pray to God that he would 
bless your counsel to them? 

Chr. Yes, and that with much affection ; for you 
must think that my wife and poor children were 
very dear to me. 

Char. But did you tell them of youi' own sor- 
row, and fear of destruction ? for I suppose that 
destruction was visible enough to you. 

Chr. Yes, over and over and over. They might 

Christian's also scc my fcars in my countenance, 

fear of perish- . . ^ - . 

ing might be lu my tcars, and also m my trem- 

read in his very ■, -,. i i.i i • £ ji 

countenance, bliug uudcr the apprehension oi the 
judgment that did hang over our heads ; but all 
was not sufficient to prevail with them to come 
with me. 

Char. But what could they say for themselves, 
why they came not? 

Chr. Wliy, my wife was afraid of losing this 

The cause why world, and my children were given to 

?mid7en' ^5d the foohsh delights of youth; so, what 

notgomthhim. by oj^e thing and what by another, 

they left me to wander in this manner alone. 

Char. But did you not, with your vain hfe, 
damp all that you, by words, used by way of per- 
suasion to bring them away with you ? 

Chr. Indeed I cannot commend my life, for I 
am conscious to myself of many failings therein. 



92 PILGRIM'S PEOGRESS. 

I know also that a man, by his conversation, 
may soon overthrow what, by argument or per- 
suasion, he cloth labor to fasten upon others for 
their good. Yet this I can say, I was very wary 
of giving them occasion, by any un- christian's 

1 J . . n n good conversa- 

seemly action, to make them averse tion before ws 
to going on pilgrimage. Yea, for this dren.^" 
very thing, they would tell me I was too precise, 
and that I denied myself of things, for their 
sakes, in which they saw no evil. Nay, I think 
I may say, that if what they saw in me did hin- 
der them, it was my great tenderness in sinning 
against God, or of doing any wi'ong to my neigh- 
bor. 

Chab. Indeed, Cain hated his brother because 
his own works were evil, and his brother's right- 
eous, 1 John 3:12; and if thy wife christian clear 
and children have been offended with they perish. ' 
thee for this, they thereby show themselves to be 
implacable to good; thou hast delivered thy soul 
from their blood. Ezek. 3 : 19. 

Now I saw in my dream, that thus they sat 
talking together until supper was ready. So when 
they had made ready, they sat down to meat. 
Now the table was furnished with fat . what chris- 
things, and with wine that was well supper. 
refined ; and all their talk at the table was about 
the Lord of the hill ; as, namely, about Their taui at 
what he had done, and wherefore he ^^^^^^^- 



TALK AT SUPPER. 93 

did wliat lie did, and why lie had builded that 
house: and by what they said, I perceived that 
he had been a great warrior, and had fought with 
and slain him that had the power of death, 
Hebrews 2 :14, 15; but not without great dan- 
ger to himself, which made me love him the 
more. 

For, as they said, and as I beheve, said Chris-' 
tain, he did it with the loss of much blood. But 
that which put the glory of grace into all he did, 
was, that he did it out of pure love to his country. 
And besides, there were some of them of the 
household that said they had been and spoke with 
him since he did die on the cross ; and they have 
attested that they had it from his own lips, that 
he is such a lover of poor pilgrims that the like is 
not to be found from the east to the west. They, 
moreover, gave an instance of what they affirmed: 
and that was, he had stripped himself of his glory 
that he might do this for the poor; and that they 
heard him say and affirm, that he would not 
dwell in the mountain of Zion alone. They said, 
Christ makes moreovcr, that he had made many 

princes of beg- . . j.i i, i j. 

gars. pilgrims princes, though by nature 

they were beggars born, and their original had 
been the dunghiU. 1 Sam. 2:8; Psa. 113 : 7. 

Thus they discoursed together till late at night; 
and after they had committed themselves to their 
Lord for protection, they betook themselves to 



94 PILGRIM'S PEOGEESS. 

rest. The pilgrim tliey laid in a large upper 
chamber, whose window opened tow- christian's 
ards the sunrising. The name of the bedcuamber. 
chamber was Peace, where he slept till break of 
day, and then he awoke and sang, 

""Where am I now? Is this the love and care 
Of Jesus for the men that pilgrims are ; 
Thus to provide that I should be forgiven, 
And dwell already the next door to heaven!" 

So in the morning they all got np; and, after 
some more discourse, they told him that he should 
not depart till they had shown him the rarities 
of that place. And first they had him ciiristian had 
into the study, where they showed and ^whaf'^ho 
him records of the greatest antiquity; «^^tJ^«r«- 
in which, as I remember my dream, they showed 
him the pedigree of the Lord of the hill, that he 
was the Son of the Ancient of da,js, and came by 
eternal generation. Here also was more fully 
recorded the acts that he had done, and the 
names of many hundreds that he had taken into 
his service; and how he had placed them in such 
habitations, that could neither by length of days, 
nor decays of natui'e, be dissolved. 

Then they read to liim some of the worthy acts 
that some of his servants had done; as how they 
had subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, 
obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, 
quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of 



' THE WONDERS SHOWN. 95 

the sword, out of weakness were made strong, 
waxed valiant in figlit, and turned to flight the 
armies of the ahens. Heb. 11 : 33, 34. 

Then they read again another part of the rec- 
ords of the house, where it was shown how will' 
ing their Lord was to receive into his favor any, 
even any, though they in time past had offered 
gTcat affronts to his person and proceedings. 
Here also were several other histories of many 
other famous things, of all which Christian had 
a view: as of things both ancient and modern, 
together with prophecies and predictions of things 
that have their certain Accomplishment, both to 
the dread aud amazement of enemies, and the 
comfort and solace of pilgrims. 

The next day they took him, and had him into 
Christian had the armory, where they showed him 
ry. all manner of furniture which their 

Lord had provided for pilgrims, as sword, shield, 
helmet, breastplate, all-prayer, and shoes that 
would not wear out. And there was here enough 
of this to harness out as many men for the service 
of their Lord as there be stars in the heaven for 
multitude. 

They also showed him some of the engines 

Christian is with which some of his servants had 
cieut things, douc wouderful things. They show- 
ed him Moses' rod; the hammer and nail with 
which Jael slew Sisera; the pitchers, trumpetSj 



9G PILGRIM'S PROGEESS. 

and lamias too, "witli which Gideon put to flight 
the armies of Midian. Then they showed him 
the ox-goad wherewith Shamgar slew six hun- 
dred men. They showed him also the jaw- 
bone with which Samson did such mighty feats. 
They showed him moreover the sling and stone 
with which David slew Goliath of Gath ; and 
the sword also with which their Lord will kill 
the man of sin, in the day that he shall rise up 
to the prey. They showed him besides many 
excellent things, with which Christian was much 
delighted. This done, they went to their rest 
again. 

Then I saw in my dream, that on the mor- 
row he got up to go forward, but they desired 
him to stay till the next day also ; and then, 
said they, we will, if the day be clear, show you 
the Delectable mountains ; which, they said, 
would yet further add to his comfort, because 
they were nearer the desired haven than the 
place where at present he was ; so he consented 
and stayed. "When the morning was up, they 
had him to the top of the house, and bid him 
look south. So he did, and behold, ciiristiau 
at a great distance, he saw a most f^Sit^^-^J- 
pleasant mountainous country, beau- *^"^^- 
tilled with woods, vineyards, fruits of all sorts, 
flowers also, with springs and fountains, very de- 
lectable to behold. Isa. 33 : 16, 17. Then he 



PURSUES HIS JOURNEY. 97 

asked tlie name of tlie country. They said it was 
Immanuel's land; and it is as common, said they, 
as this hill is, to and for all the pilgruns. And 
when thou comest there, from thence thou mayest 
see to the gate of the celestial city, as the shep- 
herds that hve there will make appear. 

Now he bethought himself of setting forward. 
Christian sets and they were willing he should. But 

forward. ^^,g|.^ ^^^^ ^-^^^^ ^^^ ^^^ ^^ ^^^^^ j^^O tho 

armory. So they did; and when he came there, 
they harnessed him from head to foot with what 
was of proof, lest perhaps he should meet with 
Christian sent assaults in the way. If e being there- 
away armed, f^j.^ ^]^^g accoutered, walked out with 
his friends to the gate; and there he asked the 
porter if he saw any pilgrim pass by. Then tho 
porter answered. Yes. 

Che. Pray, did you know him ? said he. 

PoKT. I asked his name, and he told me it Yf as 
Paithful. 

Che. Oh, said Christian, I know him; he is my 
townsman, my near neighbor; he comes from the 
j)lace where I was born. How far do you think 
he may be before? 

Port. He is got by this time below the hill. 

How Chris- Cer. Well, Said Christian, good por- 
pSer'^^eet^at tcr, the Lord be mth thee, and add to 
parting. ^tq ^-^j blessiugs much increase for the 

kindness that thou hast showed me. 

Va. Pros. 7 



98 PILGRIM'S rnOGRESS. 

THE FOURTH STAGE. 

Then lie began to go forward; but Discretion, 
Piety, Charity, and Prudence would accompany 
him down to the foot of the hill. So they went 
on together, reiterating their former discourses, 
till they came to go down the hill. Then said 
Christian, As it was difficult coming up, so, so far 
as I can see, it is dangerous going down. Yes, 
said Prudence, so it is ; for it is a hard matter 
for a man to go down into the valley T^e vauey of 
of Humihation, as thou art now, and Humiliation. 
to catch no slip by the way ; therefore, said they, 
we are come out to accompany thee down the hill. 
So he began to go down, but very warily; yet he 
caught a slip or two. 

Then I saw in my dream, that these good com- 
panions, when Christian was got down to the bot- 
tom of the hill, gave him a loaf of bread, a bottle 
of Avine, and a cluster of raisins; and then he went 
on his way. 

"^Vliilst Cliristian is among his godly friends, 
Their golden mouths make him sufficient mends 
For all his griefs; and when they let him go, 
He 's clad with northern steel from top to toe. " 

But now, in this valley of Humiliation, poor 
Christian was hard put to it ; for he had gone but 
a little way before he espied a foul fiend coming 



CHRISTIAN AND APOLLYON. 99 

over the field to meet liim : Ids name is Apollyon. 
Then did Christian begin to be afraid, and to 
cast in his mind whether to go back, or to stand 
his gTound. But he considered again, that he 

Christian has had no armor for his back, and there- 
hiaback. fore thought that to turn the back 
to him might give him greater advantage with 
ease to pierce him with his darts ; therefore he 
resolved to venture and stand his ground: for, 
thought he, had I no more in mine eye than the 
saving of my life, it would be the best way to 
stand. 

So he went on, and Apollyon met him. Now 
the monster was hideous to behold: he was cloth- 
ed with scales like a fish, and they are his pride; 
he had wmgs hke a dragon, and feet like a bear, 
and out of his belly came fire and smoke, and 
his mouth was as the mouth of a lion. When 
he was come up to Christian, he beheld him "\\dth 
a disdainful countenance^ and thus began to ques- 
tion him. 

Discourse be- Apollyon. "Whence came you, and 

tweeu Christian ./ ■- 

and Apouyon. whither are you bound r 

Chr. I am come from the city of Destruction, 
which is the place of all evil, and I am going to 
the city of Zion. 

Apol. By this I perceive that thou art one of 
my subjects ; for all that country is mine, and I 
am the prince and god of it. How is it, then. 



IGO PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

that thou hast run away from thy king? Were 
it not that I hope thou mayest do me more ser- 
vice, I would strike thee now at one blow to the 
ground. 

Che. I was indeed born in your dominions, 
but your service was hard, and your wages 
such as a man could not hve on ; for the v/ages 
of sin is death, Komans 6 : 23 ; therefore, when 
I was come to years, I did, as other considerate 
persons do, look out if perhaps I might mend 
myself. 

Apol. There is no prince that will thus lightly 
lose his subjects, neither will I as yet lose thee; 
but since thou complainest of thy ser- ApoUyon's 
vice and wages, be content to go back, fl'^**^^^- 
and what our country will afford I do here promise 
to give thee. 

Chr. But I have let myself to another, even to 
the King of princes ; and how can I with fairness 
go back with thee? 

Apol. Thou hast done in this according to the 
iiroverb, "changed a bad for a worse ;" ApoUyommcier- 

J- TP n ji 1 -I values Clii-ist'3 

but it IS ordinary lor those that have service. 
; professed themselves his servants, after a while to 
' give him the slip, and return again to me. Do 

thou so too, and all shall be well. 

Chr. I have given him my faith, and sworn my 

allegiance to him ; how then can I go back from 

this, an4 not be hanged as a traitor? 



CHEISTIAN AND APOLLYON. 101 

Apol. Tlion didst the same by me, and yet I am 
"vviUing to pass by all, if now tlioii wilt yet tui-n 
again and go back. 

Chr. What I promised thee was in my nonage : 
and besides, I count that the Prince under whose 
banner I now stand is able to absolve me, yea, 
and to pardon also what I did as to my compHance 
with thee. And besides. Oh thou destroying Apol- 
lyon, to speak truth, I like his service, his wages, 
his servants, his government, his company, and 
country, better than thine ; therefore leave off to 
persuade me further ; I am his servant, and I 
will follow him. 

Apoiiyon Apol. Consider again, when thou 
grievous ends art in cool blood, what thou art Hke 
SSe CM?- to meet with in the way that thou 
SsSugTn^hSS'oest. Thou knowest that for the 
way. most part his servants come to an ill 

end, because they are transgressors against me 
and my ways. How many of them have been 
put to shameful deaths ! And besides, thou 
countest his service better than mine ; whereas 
he never yet came from the place where he is, 
to deliver any that served him out of their ene- 
mies' hands : but as for me, how many times, 
as all the world very well knows, have I dehver- 
ed either by power or fi'aud, those that have 
faithfuUy served me, fi'om him and his, though 
taken by them ! And so will I deliver thee. 



102 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. His forbearing at present to deliver tliem 
is on purpose to try their love, whether they will 
cleave to him to the end : and as for the ill end 
thou sayest they come to, that is most glorious 
in their account. For, for present dehverance, 
they do not much expect it ; for they stay for 
their glory; and then. they shall have it, when 
their Prince comes in his and the glory of the 
angels. 

Apol. Thou hast already been unfaithful in thy 
service to him ; and how dost thou think to re- 
ceive wages of him ? 

Chr. Wherein, Oh Apollyon, have I been un- 
faithful to him? 

Apol. Thou didst faint at first set- Apoiiyon 

ting out, when thou wast almost chok- San's^ infirSi- 
ed in the gulf of Despond. Thou didst ties against him. 
attempt wrong ways to be rid of thy burden, 
whereas thou shouldest have stayed till thy Prince 
had taken it off. Thou didst sinfully sleep, and 
lose thy choice things. Thou wast almost per- 
suaded also to go back at the sight of the lions. 
And when thou talkest of thy journey, and of 
what thou hast seen and heard, thou art inward- 
ly desirous of vainglory in all that thou sayest or 
doest. 

Chr. All this is true, and much more which 
thou hast left out ; but the Prince whom I serve 
and honor is merciful, and ready to forgive. But 



CONFLICT WITH APOLLYON. 103 

besides, these infirmities possessed me iii thy 
country, for there I sucked them in ; and I have 
groaned under them, been sorry for them, and 
have obtained pardon of my Prince. 

Apol. Then Apollyon broke out into a grievous 
ApoUyon, in raofc, saviug, I am an enemy to this 

rage,fansupou^ ' -r i x i • -. • i 

Christian. i^rmcc ; 1 hate his person, his laws, 
and people : I am come out on purpose to with- 
stand thee. 

Chr. Apollyon, beware what you do, for I am 
in the King's, highway, the way of holiness ; 
therefore take heed to yourself. 

Apol. Then Apollyon straddled quite over the 
whole breadth of the way, and said, I am void 
of fear in this matter. Prepare thyself to die ; 
for I swear by my infernal den, that thou shalt 
go no further : here wiU I spiU thy soul. And 
with that he threw a ilaming dart at his breast ; 
but Christian had a shield in his hand, with 
which he caught it, and so prevented the danger 
of that. 

Then did Christian draw, for he saw it was 

time to bestii* him ; and Apollyon as fast made 

at him, throwing darts as thick as hail ; by the 

which, notwithstanding all that Christian could 

Christian clo to avoid it, ApoUvou wouudcd him 

wounded in his . "T mi- 

understanding, m liis head, his hand, and foot. This 
versation. made Christian give a little back ; 
Apollyon therefore followed his work amain, and 



104 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Christian again took courage, and resisted as 
manfully as lie could. This sore combat lasted 
for above half a day, even till Christian was al- 
most quite spent : for you must know that Chris- 
tian, by reason of his wounds, must needs grow 
weaker and Aveaker. 

Then Apoliyon, espying his opportunity, began 
to gather up close to Christian, and ApoUyon 

wrestling Y\^ith him, gave him a dread- SaS^*do\S^"to 
ful fall; and with that Christian's *^« g^'°^^^- 
sword flew out of his hand. Then said Apol- 
iyon, I am sure of thee nov\^ : and with that ho 
had almost pressed him to death, so that Chris- 
tian began to despair of life. But as God would 
have it, while Apoliyon was fetching his last 
blow, thereby to make a full end of this good 
man. Christian nimbly reached out his hand for 
his sword, and caught it, saying, Eejoice not 
against me, Oh mine enemy : when I fall, I shall 
arise, Mic. 7:8; and with that gave christian's vic- 
him a deadly thrust, which made him lyou. 
give back, as one that had received his mortal 
wound. Christian perceiving that, made at him 
again, saying, Nay, in all these things we are 
more than conquerors, through Him that loved 
US. Eomans 8 : 37. And with that Apoliyon 
s]3read forth his dragon wings, and sped him 
away, "that Christian saw him no more. James 
4:7. 



THANKS FOR VICTORY. 105 

In tliis combat no man can imagine, miless lie 
A brief reia- li^d soen and lieard, as I did, what 
ba?bythlspS: yeUing and hideous roaring Apollyon 
tator. made all the time of the fight; he 

spoke like a dragon : and on the other side, 
what sighs and groans burst from Christian's 
heart. I never saw him all the while give so 
much as one pleasant look, till he perceived 
he had wounded Apollyon with his two-edged 
sword ; then indeed he did smile, and look up- 
ward. But it was the dreadfullest sight that 
ever I saw. 

So when the battle w^as over, Christian said, I 
Christian gives yriU here mvc thauks to Him that 

God thanks for 

his deliverance, hath delivered me out of the mouth 
of the lion, to him that did help me against Apol- 
lyon. And so he did, sa^dng, 

"Great Beelzebub, the ca]3tam of tliis field, 
Designed my ruin ; therefore to this end 
He sent him harnessed out ; and he -v^dth rage 
That hellish was, did fiercely me engage : 
But blessed Michael helped me, and I, 
By dint of sword, did quickly make him fly : 
Therefore to Him let me give lasting praise, 
And thank and bless his holy name always. " 

Then there came to him a hand with some of 
the leaves of tlie tree of life, the which Christian 
took and applied to the wounds that he had re- 
ceived in the battle, and v^'as healed immediately. 
He also sat down in that place to eat bread, and 



106 PILGRIM'S PROGEESS. 

to drink of tlie bottle that was given him a httle 

before : so, being refreshed, he addressed himself 

Christian goes to liis loumev witli his sword di'awn 

on m his jour- '' '^ 

ney with his in his hand ; for he said, I know not 

sword drawn in i ji i 

his hand. but some other enemy may be at hand. 
But he met with no other affront from Apollyon 
quite through this valley. 

Now at the end 'of this valley was another, 

Thevaiiey of called the Valley of the Shadow of 
Death. Death ; and Christian must needs go 

through it, because the way to the celestial city 
lay through the midst of it. Now, this valley is 
a very solitary place. The j)rophet Jeremiah thus 
describes it: "A wilderness, a land of deserts 
and pits, a land of drought, and of the shadow 
of death, a land that no man," but a Christian, 
"passeth through, and where no man dv/elt." 
Jer. 2:6. 

Now here Christian was worse put to it than 
in his fight with Apollyon, as by the sequel you 
shall see. 

I saw then in my dream, that when Christian 
was got to the borders of the Shadow of Death, 
The children there met him two men, children of 
back. them that brought up an evil report of 

the good land. Num. 13 : 32, making haste to go 
back ; to whom Christian spoke as follows. 

Chr. "Whither are you going? 
' Men. They said, Back, back; and wo would 



THE SHADOW OF DEATH. 107 

haYe you do so too, if either life or j^eace is prized 
by you. 

Chr. "WTiy, what's the matter? said Chris- 
tian. 

Men. Matter ! said they ; we were going that 
way as you are going, and went as far as we 
durst : and indeed we were almost past coming 
back ; for had we gone a little further, we had 
not been here to bring the news to thee. 

Chr. But Avhat have you met with ? said Chris- 
tian. 

Men. "Why, we were almost in the valley of the 
Shadow of Death, but that by good hap we looked 
before us, and saw the danger before we came to 
it. Psa. 44:19; 107:19. 

Chr. But what have you seen? said Christian. 

]\Ien. Seen! why the valley itself, which is as 
dark as pitch : we also saw there the hobgobhns, 
satyi's, and dragons of the pit : we heard also in 
that valley a continual howling and yelling, as 
of a people under unutterable misery, who there 
sat bound in affliction and irons : and over that 
valley hang the discouraging clouds of confusion: 
Death also doth always spread his wings over it. 
In a Avord, it is every whit dreadful, being utter- 
ly without order. Job 3:5; 10 : 22. 

Chr. Then, said Christian, I perceive not yet, 
by what you have said, but that this is my way 
to the desired haven. Psalm 44 : 18, 19 ; Jer. 2 : a 



108 PILGRIM B PliOGRESS. 

Men. Be it thy way ; we will not choose it for 
ours. 

So they parted, and Christian went on his way, 
but still with his sword drawn in his hand, for 
fear lest he should be assaulted. 

I saw then in my dream, so far as this valley 
reached, there was on the right hand a very deep 
ditch : that ditch is it into which the blind have 
led the blind in all ages, and have both there 
miserably perished. Again, behold, on the left 
hand there was a very dangerous quag, into 
which, if even a good man falls, he finds no bot- 
tom for his foot to stand on: into that quag king 
Da"\id once did fall, and had no doubt therein 
been smothered, had not He that is able plucked 
him out. Psa. 69:14. 

The pathway was here also exceeding narrow, 
and therefore good Christian was the more put 
to it ; for when he sought, in the dark, to shun 
the ditch on the one hand, he was ready to ti]3 
over into the mire on the other ; also, when he " 
sought to escape the mu-e, without great careful- 
ness he would be ready to fall into the ditch. 
Thus he went on, and I heard him here sigh 
bitterly; for besides the danger mentioned 
above, the pathway was here so dark, that oft- 
times, when he lifted up his foot to go forward, 
he knew not where or upon what he should set it 
next. 



THE SHADOW OF DEATH. 109 

About the midst of this valley I perceived the 
mouth of hell to be, and it stood also hard by 
the wayside. Now, thought Christian, what 
shall I do? And ever and anon the flame and 
smoke would come out in such abundance, with 
sparks and hideous noises — things that cared 
not for Christian's sword, as did ApoUyon be- 
fore — that he was forced to put up his sword, 
and betake himself to another weapon, called 
All-prayer, Eph. 6 : 18 ; so he cried, in my hear- 
ing, O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my soul. 
Psa. 116 : 4. Thus he went on a great v>^hile, yet 
still the flames would be reaching towards him ; 
also he heard doleful voices, and rushings to 
and fro, so that sometimes he thought he should 
be torn in j)ieces, or trodden down like mire in 
the streets. This frightful sight was seen, and 
these dreadful noises were heard by him for sev- 
eral miles together ; and coming to a place where 
he thought he heard a company of fiends com- 
christian put ing forward to meet him, he stopped, 

to a stand for a _ , . i i i i t i i 

while. and began to muse what he had best 

to do. Sometimes he had haK a thought to go 
back ; then again he thought he might be haK- 
way through the valley. He remembered also 
how he had already vanquished many a danger ; 
and that the danger of going back might be 
much more than for to go forward. So he re- 
solved to go on J yet the fiends seemed to come 



110 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

nearer and nearer. But when they were come 
even ahnost at him, he cried out with a most 
vehement voice, I will walk in the strength of 
the Lord God. So they gave back and came no 
further. 

One thing I would not let slip. I took notice 
that now poor Christian was so confounded that 
he did not know his own voice ; and thus I per- 
ceived it. Just when he was come over against 
the mouth of the burning pit, one of the wicked 
ones got behind him, and stepped christian made 
up softly to him, and whisperingly h°e ^sp^k7 b£a- 
suggested many grievous blasphe- |f '^^'3'' ^^^f J 
mies to him, which he verily thought {J^J^ ^"fto^^Ss 
had proceeded from his own mind. ™^^^- 
This put Christian more to it than any thing that 
he met with before, even to think that he should 
now blaspheme Him that he loved so much be- 
fore. Yet if he could have helped it, he would 
not have done it ; but he had not the discretion 
either to stop his ears, or to know from whence 
these blasphemies came. 

When Christian had travelled in this disconso- 
late condition some considerable time, he thought 
he heard the voice of a man, as going before him, 
saying. Though I walk through the valley of the 
Shadow of Death, I will fear no evil ; for thou art 
with me. Psa. 23:4. 

Then was he glad, and that for these reasons : 



THE BREAK OF DAY. Ill 

First, because lie gathered from thence, that 
some who feared God were in this valley as well 
as himself. 

Secondly, for that he perceived God was with 
them, though in that dark and dismal state. And 
why not, thought he, with me ? though by reason 
of the impediment that attends this place, I can- 
not perceive it. Job 9 : 11. 

Thirdly, for that he hoped, could he overtake 
them, to have company by and by. So he went 
on, and called to him that was before ; but he 
knew not what to answer, for that he also thought 
himself to be alone. And by and by the day 
Christian glad brokc: then said Christian, "He hath 
at break of day. turned the shadow of death into the 
morning." Amos 5:8. 

Now morning being come, he looked back, not 
out of desu'e to return, but to see, by the light of 
the day, what hazards he had gone through in 
the dark. So he saw more perfectly the ditch that 
was on the one hand, and the quag that was on 
the other ; also how narrow the way was which 
led betwixt them both. Also now he saw the 
hobgobhns, and satyrs, and di'agons of the pit, 
but all afar off; for after break of day they came 
not nigh ; yet they were discovered to him, ac- 
cording to that which is written, "He discover- 
eth deep things out of darkness, and bringeth out 
to light the shadow of death." Job 12:22. 



112 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Now was Christian mucli affected with this 
deliverance from all the dangers of his solitary 
way; which dangers, though he feared them 
much before, yet he saw them more clearly now, 
because the light of the day made them conspic- 
uous to him. And about this time the sun was 
rising, and this was another mercy to Christian ; 
for you must note, that though the first part of 
the valley of the Shadow of Death was dangerous, 
yet this second part, which he was yet to go, was, 
if possible, far more dangerous; for The second 

n l•^^~^■\ j.i part of this val- 

irom the place where he now stood, fey very danger- 
even to the end of the valley, the °^^' 
way was all along set so full of snares, traps, gins, 
and nets here, and so full of pits, pitfalls, deep 
holes, and shelvings-down there, that had it now 
been dark, as it was when he came the first part 
of the way, had he had a thousand souls, they had 
in reason been cast away ; but, as I said, just now 
the sun was rising. Then said he, "His candle 
shineth on my head, and by his light I go through 
darkness." Job 29:3. 

In this light; therefore, he came to the end of 
the valley. Now I saw in my dream, that at the 
end of the valley lay blood, bones, ashes, and 
mangled bodies of men, even of pilgrims that had 
gone this way formerly ; and while I was musing 
what should be the reason, I espied a little before 
me a cave, where two giants, Pope and Pagan, 



POPE AND PAGAN. 113 

dwelt in old times ; by whose power and tjTanny 
the men whose bones, blood, ashes, etc., lay there, 
were cruelly put to death. But by this j)lace 
Christian went without much danger, whereat I 
somewhat wondered ; but I have learned since, 
that Pagan had been dead many a day ; and as 
for the other, though he be yet alive, he is, by 
reason of age, and also of the many shrewd 
brushes that he met with in his younger days, 
grown so crazy and stiff in his joints that he can 
now do Httle more than sit in his cave's mouth, 
grinning at pilgrims as they go by, and biting his 
nails because he cannot come at them. 

So I saw that Christian went on his way ; yet, 
at the sight of the old man that sat at the mouth 
of the cave, he could not tell what to think, espec- 
ially because he spoke to him, though he could 
not go after him, saving, You will never mend till 
more of you be burned. But he held his peace, 
and set a good face on it ; and so he went by, and 
catched no hurt. Then sung Christian, 
"0 world of wonders — I can say no less — 
Tliat I should be preserved in that distress 
That I have met v.ith here ! O blessed be • 
That hand that from it hath delivered me ! 
Dangers in darkness, devils, heU, and sin, 
Did compass me, while I this vale was in; 
Yea, snares and pits and traps and nets did lie 
My path about, that worthless, silly I 
Might have been catched, entangled, and cast down; 
But since I live, let Jesus wear the crown." 

«J- Prog. 8 



114 riLoniM's riioQEESs. 



THE FIFTH STAGE. 

Now, as Cliristian went on liis way, lie came to 
a little ascent, wliich was cast up on purpose that 
pilgrims miglit see before them : up there, there- 
fore. Christian went; and looking forward, he saw 
Faithful before him upon his journey. Then said 
Christian aloud. Ho, ho; so-ho; stay, and I will 
be your companion. At that Faithful looked be- 
hind him ; to whom Christian cried again, Stay, 
stay, till I come up to you. But Faithful answer- 
ed, No, I am upon my life, and the avenger of 
blood is behind me. 

At this Christian was somewhat moved, and 
putting to all his strength, he quickly got up with 
Faithful, and did also overrun him; so christian over- 
the last was first. Then did Christian *^^«« ^^"^^"^• 
vaingioriously smile, because he had gotten the 
start of his brother ; but not taking good heed to 
his feet, he suddenly stumbled and fell, and could 
not rise again until Faithful came up to help him. 

Then I saw in my dream, they went very lov- 
ingly on together, and had sweet dis- christian's fau 
course of all things that had happen- Si?hii^go^ovl 
ed to them in their pilgrimage ; and "^e^y together, 
thus Christian began. 

Chr. My honored and well-beloved brother 



CHRISTIAN AND FAITHFUL. 115 

Faitliful, I am glad that I have overtaken you, and 
that God has so tempered our spmts that we can 
walk as companions in this so j)leasant a path. 

Paith. I had thought, my dear friend, to have 
had your company quite from our town, but you 
did get the start of me ; wherefore I was forced 
to come thus much of the way alone. 

Chb. How long did you stay in the city of 
Destruction before you set out after me on your 
pilgrimage ? 

Faith. Till I could stay no longer ; for there 
Their talk -^vas a great talk presently after you 

about the coun- ^ r J j 

try from were goue out, that our city would, in 

came. a short time, with fire from heaven, 

be burnt down to the ground. 

Chr. What, did your neighbors talk so ? 

Faith. Yes, it was for a while in every body's 
mouth. 

Che. What, and did no more of them but you 
come out to escape the danger? 

Faith. Though there was, as I said, a great 
talk thereabout, yet I do not think they did firmly 
believe it ; for in the heat of the discoui'se, I 
heard some of them deridingly speak of you and 
of your desperate journey, for so they called this 
your pilgrimage. But I did believe, and do still, 
that the end of our city will be with fire and 
brimstone from above; and therefore I have 
made my escape. 



IIG PILGRIM'S PIIOGRESS. 

Che. Did you hear no talk of neighbor PHable? 

Faith. Yes, Christian, I heard that he followed 
you till he came to the slough of Despond, where, 
as some said, he fell in; but he would not be 
known to have so done ; but I am sure he was 
soundly bedabbled with that kind of dirt. 

Chr. And what said the neighbors to him ? 

Faith. He hath, since his going back, been had 
greatly in derision, and that among how piiaWo 
all sorts of x^eople: some do mock and oTtShl'^got 
despise him, and scarce will any set ^°^®- 
him on work. He is now seven times worse than 
if he had never gone out of the city. 

Chr. But why should they be so set against 
him, since they also despise the way that he for- 
sook? 

Faith. Oh, they say, Hang him ; he is a turn- 
coat ; he was not true to his profession. I think 
God has stirred up even His enemies to hiss at 
him, and make him a proverb, because he hath 
forsaken the way. Jer. 29 : 18, 19. 

Chr. Had you no talk with him before you 
came out? 

Faith. I met him once in the streets, but he 
leered away on the other side, as one ashamed of 
what he had done ; so I spoke not to him. 

Chr. "Well, at my first setting out I had hopes 
of that man ; but now I fear he will perish in the 
overthrow of the city. For it has happened to 



CHRISTIAN AND FAITHFUL. 117 

him according to the true proverb. The dog in 
turned to his vomit again, and the sow that was 
washed to her wallowing in the'mire. 2 Pet. 2 : 22. 

Faith. These are my fears of him too ; but 
v/ho can hinder that which will be ? 

Chr. Well, neighbor Faithful, said Christian, 
let us leave him, and talk of things that more im- 
mediately concern ourselves. Tell me now what 
you have met with in the way as you came ; for I 
know you have met with some things, or else it 
may be writ for a wonder. 

Faith. I escaped the slough that I perceived 
you fell into, and got up to the gate without that 
danger ; only I met with one whose name was 

Faithful as- "VVantoii, who had like to have done 

BaultedbyWan- . , . „ 

ton. me mischiei. 

Chr. It was well you escaped her net : Joseph 
was hard put to it by her, and he escaped her as 
you did ; but it had like to have cost him his life. 
Gen. 39 : 11-13. But what did she do to you ? 

Faith. You cannot think, but that you know 
something, what a flattering tongue she had ; she 
lay at me hard to turn aside with her, promising 
me all manner of content. 

Che. Nay, she did not promise you the content 
of a good conscience. 

Faith. You know that I mean all carnal and 
fleshly content. 

Chk. Thank God that you escaped her : the 



118 PILGRIM'S rROGRESS. 

abhorred of the Lord shall fall into her pit. Prov. 
22 : 14. 

Faith. Nay, I know not whether I did wholly- 
escape her or no, 

Che. Why, I trow you did not consent to her 
desires ? 

Faith. No, not to defile myself ; for I remem- 
bered an old writing that I had seen, which said, 
"Her steps take hold on hell." Prov. 5:5. So I 
shut mine eyes, because I would not be bewitched 
with her looks. Job 31:1. Then she railed on 
me, and I went my way. 

Chr. Did you meet with no other assault as 
you came ? 

Faith. When I came to the foot of the hill 
called Difficulty, I met a very aged He was as- 
man, who asked me what i was, and am the first, 
whither bound. I told him that I was a pilgrim, 
going to the celestial city. Then said the old 
man. Thou lookest like an honest fellow; wilt 
thou be content to dwell with me for the wages 
that I shall give thee ? Then I asked his name, 
and where he dwelt. He said his name was Ad- 
am the First, and that he dwelt in the town of 
Deceit. Ej)h. 4 : 22. I asked him then what 
was his v/ork, and what the wages that he would 
give. He told me that his work was many de- 
lights; and his wages, that I should be his heir 
at last. I further asked him what house he kept, 



CHRISTIAN AND FAITHFUL. 119 

and what other servants lie had. So he told me 
that his house was mamtained with all the dain- 
ties of the world, and that his servants were those 
of his own begetting. Then I asked how many- 
children he had. He said that he had but three 
daughters, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the 
Eyes, and the Pride of Life, 1 John 2 : 16 ; and 
that I should marry them if I would. Then I 
asked how long time he would have me live with 
him; and he told me, as long as he lived himself. 

Che. Well, and what conclusion came the old 
man and you to at last ? 

Faith. Why, at first I found myself somewhat 
inchnable to go with the man, for I thought he 
spoke very fair ; but looking in his forehead, as 
I talked with him, I saw there written, "Put off 
the old man with his deeds." 

Chr. And how then ? 

Faith. Then it came burning hot into my mind, 
that whatever he said, and however he flattered, 
when he got me home to his house he would sell 
me for a slave. So I bid him forbear to talk, for 
I would not come near the door of his house. 
Then he reviled me, and told me that he would 
send such a one after me that should make my 
way bitter to my soul. So I turned to go away 
fi'om him ; but just as I turned myself to go 
thence, I felt him take hold of my flesh, and 
give me such a deadly twitch back, that I thought 



120 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

he had pulled part of me after himself : this made 
me cry, "Oh wretched man!" Rom. 7:24. So 
I went on my way up the hill. 

Now, when I had got about half-way up, I 
looked behind me, and saw one coming after me 
swift as the wind ; so he overtook me just about 
the place where the settle stands. 

Chr. Just there, said Christian, did I sit down 
to rest me ; but being overcome with sleep, I there 
lost this roll out of my bosom. 

Faith. But, good brother, hear me out. So 
soon as the man overtook me, it was but a word 
and a blow; for down he knocked me, and laid me 
for dead. But when I was a little come to myself 
again, I asked him wherefore he served me so. 
He said, because of my secret inclining to Adam 
the First. And with that he struck me another 
deadly blow on the breast, and beat me down 
backward ; so I lay at his feet as dead as before. 
So when I came to myself again, I cried him 
mercy : but he said, I know not how to show 
mercy ; and with that he knocked me down again. 
He had doubtless made an end of me, but that 
one came by and bade him forbear. 

Chr. Who was that that bade him forbear ? 

Faith. I did not know him at first : but as he 
went by, I perceived the holes in his hands and 
in his side : then I concluded thai he was our 
Lord. So I went up the hill. 



CHRISTIAN AND FAITHFUL. 121 

Che. Tliat man that overtook you was Moses. 
The temper of He sparetli none ; neitlier knowetli lie 
Moses. ]^Q^ ^Q show mercy to those that 

transgress the law. 

Faith. I know it very well ; it was not the first 
time that he has met with me. 'T was he that 
came to me when I dwelt securely at home, and 
that told me that he would burn my house over 
my head if I stayed there. 

Chr. But did you not see the house that stood 
there on the top of the hill, on the side of which 
Moses met you? 

Faith. Yes, and the lions too, before I came at 
it. But for the Hons, I think they were asleep, 
for it was about noon ; and because I had so much 
of the day before me, I passed by the porter, and 
came down the hill. 

Chr. He told me, indeed, that he saw you go 
by ; but I msh that you had called at the house, 
for they would have shovoi you so many rarities 
that 3^ou would scarce have forgot them to the 
day of your death. But pray tell me, did you 
meet nobody in the valley of Humility ? 

Faith. Yes, I met with one Discontent, who 

Faithful as- would willinoiv havc persuaded me to 

eatated by Dis- • -^1, 1 • i • 

content. go bacK again with him : his reason 

was, for that the valley was altogether without 
honor. He told me, moreover, that to go there 
was the way to disobhge all my friends, as Pride, 



122 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Arroganc}^, Self-Conceit, Worldly-Glory, with oth- 
ers, who he knew, as he said, would be very much 
offended if I made such a fool of myself as to wade 
through this valley. 

\ Chr. Well, and how clid you answer him ? 
I Faith. I told him, that although all these that 
he named might claim a kindred of FaitMui's an- 
me, and that rightly — for indeed they tent, 
were my relations according to the flesh — yet 
since I became a pilgrim they have disowned me, 
and I also have rejected them ; and therefore they 
wore to me now no more than if they had never 
been of my lineage. I told him, moreover, that 
as to this valley, he had quite misrepresented the 
thing ; for before honor is humility, and a haughty 
epirit before a fall. Therefore, said I, I had rather 
go through this valley to the honor that was so 
accounted by the wisest, than choose that which 
he esteemed most worthy of our affections. 

Chr. Met you with nothing else in that valley ? 

Faith. Yes, I met with Shame ; but of all the 
men that I met with on my pilgrini- He is assault- 
age, he, I think, bears the wrong name. ^^ ^^ shame. 
The others would be said nay, after a little argu- 
mentation, and somewhat else i but this bold-faced 
Shame would never have done. 

Chr. Why, what did he say to you? 

Faith. What? why, he objected against religion 
itself. He said it was a pitiful, low, sneaking 



CHRISTIAN AND FAITHFUL. 12.'i 

business for a man to mind religion. He said, 
that a tender conscience was an unmanly thing ; 
and that for a man to watch over his words and 
ways, so as to tie up himself from that hectoring 
liberty that the brave spirits of the times accus- 
tom themselves unto, would make him the ridi- 
cule of the times. He objected also, that but few 
of the mighty, rich, or wise, were ever of my 
opinion ; nor any of them neither, before they 
v/ere persuaded to be fools, and to be of a vol- 
untary fondness to ventui'e the loss of all for 
nobody knows what. 1 Cor. 1 : 26 ; 3 : 18 ; Phil. 
3 : 7-9; John 7:48. He, moreover, objected the 
base and low estate and condition of those that 
were chiefly the pilgrims of the times in which 
they lived ; also their ignorance and want of un- 
derstanding in all natural science. Yea, he did 
hold me to it at that rate also, about a great many 
more things than here I relate ; as, that it was a 
shame to sit whining and mourning under a 
sermon, and a shame to come sighing and groaning 
home ; that it was a shame to ask my neighbor 
forgiveness for 'peitj faults, or to make restitution 
where I have taken from any. He said also, that 
religion made a man grow strange to the great, 
'because of a few vices, which he called by finer 
names, and made him own and respect the base, 
because of the same religious fraternity ; and is 
not this, said he, a shame? 



124 PILGRIM'S rROGRESS. 

Chr. And what did you say to liim ? 

Faith. Sciy? I could not tell wliat to snj at 
first. Yea, lie put me so to it that my blood came 
up in my face ; even this Shame fetched it up, 
and had almost beat me quite off. But at last I 
began to consider, that that which is highly 
esteemed among men, is had in abomination with 
God. Luke 16 : 15. And I thought again, this 
Shame tells me what men are ; but he tells me 
nothing what God, or the word of God is. And 
I thought, moreover, that at the day of doom we 
shall not be doomed to death or life according to 
the hectoring spirits of the world, but according 
to the wisdom and law of the Highest. There- 
fore, thought I, what God says is best, is indeed 
best, though all the men in the world are against 
it. Seeing, then, that God prefers his rehgion ; 
seeing God prefers a tender conscience ; seeing 
they that make themselves fools for the kingdom 
of heaven are wisest, and that the poor man that 
loveth Christ is richer than the greatest man in 
the world that hates him — Shame, depart, thou 
art an enemy to my salvation. Shall I entertain 
thee against my sovereign Lord? How then shall 
I look Him in the face at his coming ? Mark 8 : 38. 
Should I now be ashamed of his ways and ser- 
vants, how can I expect the blessing? But 
indeed this Shame was a bold villain : I could 
scarcely shake him out of my company ; yea, he 



CHRISTIAN AND FAITHFUL. 125 

would be liaunting of me, and continually whis- 
pering me in the ear with some one or other of 
the infirmities that attend religion. But at last 
I told him, that it was but in vain to attempt 
further in this business ; for those things that he 
disdained, in those did I see most glory : and so 
at last I got past this importunate one. And 
Tyhen I had shaken him off, then I began to sing, 

"The trials that those men do meet ■withal, 
That are obedient to the heavenly call, 
Are manifold, and suited to the flesh, 
And come and come and come again afresh; 
That now, or some time else, we by them may 
Be taken, overcome, and cast away. 
Oh let the pilgrims, let the pilgrims then 
Be vigilant, and quit themselves like men. " 

Che. I am glad, my brother, that thou didst 
withstand this yillain so bravely, for of all, as 
thou sayest, I think he has the wrong name ; for 
he is so bold as to follow us in the streets, and 
to attempt to put us to shame before all men ; 
that is, to make us ashamed of that which is good. 
But if he was not himself audacious, he would 
never attempt to do as he does. But let us still 
resist him ; for, notwithstanding all his bravadoes, 
he promoteth the fool, and none else. " The wise 
shall inhent glory," said Solomon ; "but shame 
shall be the promotion of fools." Pro v. 3 : 35. 

Faith. I think we must cry to Him for help 



12G PILGEIM'S TROGBESS. 

against Shame, tliat would have us to be valiant 
for truth upon the earth. 

Che. You say true : but did you meet nobody 
else in that valley? 

Faith. No, not I ; for I had sunshine all the 
rest of the way through that, and also through 
the valley of the Shadow of Death. 

Chk. 'Twas well for you; I am sui'e it fared 
far otherwise with me. I had for a long season, 
as soon almost as I entered into that valley, a 
dreadful combat with that foul fiend Apollyon ; 
yea, I thought verily he would have killed me, 
especially when he got me down, and crushed 
me under him, as if he would have crushed me 
to pieces ; for as he threw me, my sword flew out 
of my hand: nay, he told me he was sure of me ; 
but I cried to God, and he heard me, and deliv- 
ered me out of all my troubles. Then I entered 
into the valley of the Shadow of Death, and had 
no light for almost half the way through it. I 
thought I should have been killed there over and 
over ; but at last day broke, and the sun rose, 
and I went through that which was behind with 
far more ease and quiet. 

Moreover I saw in my dream, that as they went 
on. Faithful, as he chanced to look on one side, 
saw a man whose name was Talkative, walking 
at a distance beside them ; for in this place there 
was room enough for them all to walk. He was a 



TALKATIVE AND FAITHFUL. 127 

Talkative cTe- ^^^ mail, aiicl Something more comely 
scribed. ^^ ^ distance than at hand. To this 

man Faithful addressed himself in this manner. 

Faith. Friend, whither away ? Are you going 
to the heavenly country ? 

Talk. I am going to the same place. 

Faith. That is well ; then I hope we shall have 
your good company? 

Talk. "With a very good will will I be your 
companion. 

Faith. Come on, then, and let us go together, 
Fathfiii and and let US Spend our time in discours- 
into discoiu-se. iiig of things that are profitable. 

Talk. To talk of things that are good, to me is 
very acceptable, with you or v,dth any other ; and 
I am glad that I have met with those that incline 
to so good a work ; for, to speak the truth, there 
are but few who care thus to spend their time as 
they are in their travels, but choose much rather 
Taikative's to be spcakinff of thinc^s to no profit : 

dislike of bad T . 1 . 1 ^1 1 . n . 

discoui'se. and tins hatn been a trouble to me. 

Faith. That is, indeed, a thing to be lamented; 
for what thing so worthy of the use of the tongue 
and mouth of men on earth, as are the things of 
the God of heaven ? 

Talk. I like you wonderful well, for your say- 
ing is full of conviction ; and I will add. What 
thing is so pleasant, and whp.t so profitable, as to 
talk of the things of God? What things so 



128 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

l^leasant? tliat is, if a man liatli any delight in 
things that are wonderful. For instance, if a 
man doth dehght to talk of the history, or the 
mystery of things ; or if a man doth love to talk 
of miracles, wonders, or signs, where shall he find 
things recorded so delightful, and so sweetly 
penned, as in the holy Scripture ? 

Faith. That is true; but to be profited by such 
things in our talk, should be our chief design. 

Talk. That 's it that I said ; for to talk of such 
things is most profitable ; for by so doing a man 
may get knowledge of many things; as of the 
vanity of earthly things, and the benefit of things 
above. Thus in general ; but more Taiiative-sfmo 
particularly, by this a man may learn discourse, 
the necessity of the new birth, the insufficiency of 
our works, the need of Christ's righteousness, etc. 
Besides, by this a man may learn what it is to 
repent, to believe, to pray, to suffer, or the like: 
by this, also, a man may learn what are the great 
promises and consolations of the gospel, to his 
own comfort. Further, by this a man may learn 
to refute false opinions, to vindicate the truth, and 
also to instruct the ignorant. 

Faith. All this is true ; and glad am I to hear 
these things from you. 

Talk. Alas, the want of this is the cause that 
so few understand the need of faith, and the 
necessity of a work of grace in their soul, in order 



TALKATIVE AND FAITHFUL. 129 

to eternal life ; but ignorantly live in the works of 
the law, by which a man can by no means obtain 
the kingdom of heaven. 

Faith. But, by your leave, heavenly knowledge 
of these is the gift of God ; no man attaineth to 
them by human industry, or only by the talk of 
them. 

Talk. All this I know very well; for a man 

Oh, brave Can receive nothing, except it be given 

Talkative! jiim from hcavcu ; all is of grace, not 

of works. I could give you a hundred scriptui-es 

for the confirmation of this. 

Faith. Well, then, said Faithful, what is that 
one thing that we shall at this time found our 
discourse upon? 

Talk, ^^at you will. I will talk of things 
oil, brave heavenly, or things earthly ; things 
Talkative! moral, or things evangehcal ; things 
sacred, or things profane ; things past, or things 
to come ; things foreign, or things at home ; 
things more essential, or things circumstantial : 
provided that all be done to our profit. 

Faith. Now did Faithful begin to wonder ; and 

FaitMui be- steppiusf to Christian, for he walked 

guUedbyTalk- i/A . *^ , ., i i • i. i • -, . 

ative. all this while by himseli, he said to 

him, but softly. What a brave companion have we 
got ! Surely this man wiU make a very excellent 
pilgTim. 

Chr. At this Christian modestly smiled, and 

Pll. Prog. 9 



130 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

said, This man, with whom you are christian 

, -I -n ■, '^ -ii ji • J makes a discov- 

so taken, will beguile with this tongue ery of Taika- 
of his, twenty of them that know him Faithful wSe 
not. ^'^'• 

Faith. Do you know liim, then ? 

Che. Know him? Yes, better than he knows 
himself. 

Faith. Pray, what is he ? 

Chr. His name is Talkative : he dwelleth in our 
tow^n. I wonder that you should be a stranger 
to him, only I consider that our town is large. 

Faith. Whose son is he? And whereabout 
doth he dwell ? 

Chr. He is the son of one Say-well. He dwelt 
in Prating-Eow ; and he is known to all that are 
acquainted with him by the name of Talkative 
of Prating-Kow; and, notwithstanding his fine 
tongue, he is but a sorry fellow. 

Faith. Well, he seems to be a very pretty 
man. 

Chr. That is, to them that have not a thorough 
acquaintance with him, for he is best abroad ; 
near home he is ugly enough. Your saying that 
he is a pretty man, brings to my mind what I 
have observed in the work of a painter, whose 
pictures show best at a distance ; but very near, 
more unpleasing. 

Faith. But I am ready to think you do but jest, 
because you smiled. 



TALKATIVE'S CIIARAOTEB. 133 

Chr. God forbid that I should jest, though J 
smiled, in this matter, or that I should accuse any 
falsely. I will give you a further discovery ot 
him. This man is for any company, and for any 
talk : as he talketh now with you, so will ho 
talk when he is on the ale-bench ; and the more 
drink he hath in his crown, the more of these 
things he hath in his mouth. Religion hath no 
place in his heart, or house, or conversation ; all 
he hath lieth in his tongue, and his religion is to 
make a noise therewith. 

Faith. Say you so ? Then am I in this man 
greatly deceived. 

Chr. Deceived! you may be sure of it. Ee- 
Taikative talks, member the proverb, "They say, and 
but does not. ' ^^ ^^^^ .» ^^^^ ^-^^ kingdom of God is 

not in word, but in power. Matt. 23 : 3 ; 1 Cor. 
4 : 20, He talketh of prayer, of repentance, of 
faith, and of the new birth ; but he knows but 
only to talk of them. I have been in his family, 
and have observed him both at home and abroad; 
and I know what I say of him is the truth. His 
His iioi^se is house is as empty of rehgion as the 

empty of relig- , . , o • p rrn 

iou. white 01 an egg is oi savor. There is 

there neither prayer, nor sign of repentance for 
sin ; yea, the brute, in his kind, serves God far 
He is a stain better than he. He is the very stain, 
to religion. reproach, and shame of rehgion to all 
that know him, Rom. 2 : 23, 24 ; it can hardly 



132 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

have a good word in all that end of the town 
where he dwells, through him. Thus say the 
common people that know him, "A The proverb 
saint abroad, and a devil at home," Mm. 
His poor family finds it so; he is such a churl, 
such a railer at, and so unreasonable with his 
servants, that they neither know how to do for or 
speak to him. Men that have any dealings with 
him say. It is better to deal with -^^^ ^-^^^ ^o 
a Turk than with him, for fairer ^^^^^ ^^"^ ^^• 
dealings they shall have at their liands. This 
Talkative, if it be possible, will go beyond them, 
defraud, beguile, and overreach them. Besides, 
he brings up his sons to follow his steps ; and if 
lie finds in any of them a foolish timorousness — 
for so he calls the first appearance of a tender 
conscience — he calls them fools and blockheads, 
and by no means will employ them in much, or 
speak to their commendation before others. For 
my part, I am of o^Dinion that he has, by his 
wicked life, caused many to stumble and fall; 
and will be, if God prevents not, the ruin of many 
more. 

Faith. Well, my brother, I am bound to believe 
you, not only because you say you know him, but 
also because like a Christian you make your 
reports of men. For I cannot think that 'you 
speak these things of ill-will, but because it is 
even so as you say. 



TALKATIVE'S CHARACTEB. 133 

Chr. Had I known liim no more than you, I 
might, perhaps, have thought of him as at the 
first you did ; yea, had I received this report at 
their hands only that are enemies to reHgion, I 
should have thought it had been a slander — a lot 
that often falls from bad men's mouths upon good 
men's names and professions. But all these 
things, yea, and a great many more as bad, of 
my own knowledge I can prove him guilty of. 
Besides, good men are ashamed of him ; they can 
neither call him brother nor friend ; the very 
naming of him among them makes them blush, 
if they know him. 

Faith. Well, I see that saying and doing are 
two things, and hereafter I shall better observe 
this distinction. 

Chr. They are two things indeed, and are as 
diverse as are the soul and the body ; for, as the 
The carcass of body mthout the soul is but a dead 
religion. carcass, SO sayiTig, if it be alone, is 

but a dead carcass also. The soul of religion is 
the practical part. "IJure religion and undefiled 
before God and the Father is this, to visit the 
fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to 
keep himself unspotted from the world." James 
1 : 27; see also verses 22-28. This, Talkative is 
not aware of ; he thinks that hearing and saying 
will make a good Christian, and thus he deceiveth 
his own soul. Hearing is but as the sowing of the 



134 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

seed ; talking is not sufficient to prove that frnit 
is indeed in the heart and life. And let us assure 
ourselves, that at the day of doom men shall be 
judged according to their fruits. Matt. 13 : 23. It 
will not be said then, Did you believe? but, Were 
you doers, or talkers only? and accordingly shall 
they be judged. The end of the world is com- 
pared to our harvest. Matt. 13 : 30, and you know 
men at harvest regard nothing but fruit. Not 
that any thing can be accepted that is not of 
faith ; but I speak this to show you how insig- 
nificant the profession of Talkative will be at that 
day. 

Faith. This brings to my mind that of Moses, 
by which he describeth the beast that is clean. 
Lev. 11 ; Deut. 14. He is such an one that part- 
eth the hoof, and cheweth the cud ; not that 
parteth the hoof only, or that cheweth the cud 
only. The haioe cheweth the cud, but yet is un- 
clean because he parteth not the hoof. And 
this truly resembleth Talkative : he FaitMui con- 
cheweth the cud, he seeketh know- SJfness^ of 
ledge; he cheweth upon^he word, ^^"^^^^^^• 
but he divideth not the hoof. He parteth not 
with the way of sinners; but as the hare, he 
retaineth the foot of the dog or bear, and there- 
fore he is unclean. 

Che. You have spoken, for aught I know, the 
true gospel sense of these texts. And I will add 



FAITHFUL AND TALKATIVE. 135 

Talkative like another tiling : Paul calletli some men, 
^und "Without y®'% and those great talkers too, sound- 
liie. ij^g brass, and tinkling cymbals, 1 Cor. 

13:1, 3 ; that is, as he expounds them in another 
l^lace, things without life giving sound. 1 Cor. 
14 : 7. Things without life, that is, without the 
true faith and grace of the gospel ; and conse- 
quently, things that shall never be jDlaced in the 
kingdom of heaven among those that are the 
childi'en of hfe; though their sound, by their talk, 
be as if it were the tongue or voice of an angel. 

Faith. Well, I v/as not so fond of his company 
at first, but I am as sick of it now. What shall 
we do to be rid of him? 

Chr. Take my advice, and do as I bid you, and 
you shall find that he will soon be sick of your 
company too, except God shall touch his heart, 
and turn it. 

Faith. What would you have me to do ? 

Chr. Why, go to him, and enter into some 
serious discourse about the power of religion ; 
and ask him plainly, when he has approved of it, 
for that he will, whether this thing be set up in 
his heart, house, or conversation. 

Faith, Then Faithful stepi^ed forward again, 
and said to Talkative, Come, what cheer ? How 
is it now? 

Talk. Thank you, well : I thought we should 
have had a great deal of talk by this time. 



136 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS, 

Faith. Well, if you v/ill, we will fall to it now; 
and since you left it with me to state the question, 
let it be this : How doth the saving grace of 
God discover itself when it is in the heart of 
man? 

Talk. I perceive, then, that our talk must be 
about the power of things. Well, it is a very good 
question, and I shall be willing to answer you. 
And take my answer in brief, thus : Taikative's 
First, where the grace of God is in S^^^/^^oXof 
the heart, it causeth there a gi'eat out- s^^ace. 
cry against sin. Secondly — 

Faith. Nay, hold; let us consider of one at 
once. I think you should rather say, It shows 
itself by inclining the soul to abhor its sin. 

Talk. Why, what difference is there between 
crying out against, and abhorring of sin? 

Faith. Oh, a great deal. A man may cry out 
against sin, of policy ; but he cannot abhor it but 
by virtue of a godly antipathy against it. I have 
heard many cry out against sin in To cry out 
the pulpit, who can yet abide it well sfguofgi-ace. 
enough in the heart, house, and conversation. 
Gen. 39:15. Josejph's mistress cried out with 
a loud voice, as if she had been very holy ; but 
she would willingly, notwithstanding that, have 
committed uncleanness with him. Some cry out 
against sin, even as the mother cries out against 
licr child in her lap, when she calleth it slut and 



FAITHFUL AND TALKATIVE. 137 

nauglity girl, and tlien falls to liugging and kiss- 
ing it. 

Talk. You lie at the catcli, I perceive. 

Faith. No, not I ; I am only for setting tilings 
riglit. But what is the second thing whereby you 
would prove a di'scovery of a work of garace in the 
heart ? 

Talk. Great knowledge of gospel mysteries. 

Faith. This sign should have been first : but. 

Great know- first Or last, it is alsO false ; for know- 
ledge no slgu of ' 

grace. ledge, great knowledge may be ob- 

tained in the mysteries of the gospel, and yet no 
work of grace in the soul. Yea, if a man have 
all knowledge, he may yet be nothing, and so, 
consequently, be no child of God. 1 Cor. 13 : 2. 
When Christ said, "Do you know all these 
things?" and the disciples had answered. Yes, 
he added, " Blessed are ye if ye do them." He 
doth not lay the blessing in the knowing of them, 
but in the doing of them. For there is a know- 
T^o kinds of ledge that is not attended with doing : 
knowledge. «jjg ^-^^^ kuowcth his Master's wHl, 
and doeth it not." A man may know like an 
angel, and yet be no Christian ; therefore your 
sign of it is not true. Indeed, to knoio is a thing 
that pleaseth talkers and boasters ; but to do, is 
that which pleaseth God. Not that the heart can 
be good without knowledge, for without that the 
heart is naught. There are therefore two sorts 



138 PILGRIM'S PEOGBESS. 

of knowledge, knowledge that resteth in the bare 
speculation of things, and knowledge that is ac- 
companied with the grace of faith and love, which 
puts a man upon doing even the will True know- 
of God from the heart : the first of mth endeavors. 
these will serve the talker ; but without the other, 
the true Christian is not content. " Give me un- 
derstanding, and I shall keep thy law; yea, I 
shall observe it vath my whole heart." Psalm 
119:34. 

Talk. You lie at the catch again : this is not 
for edification. 

Faith. Well, if you j^lease, propound another 
sign how this work of grace discovereth itself 
where it is. 

Talk. Not I, for I see we shall not agree. 

Faith. Well, if you will not, Will you give mo 
leave to do it ? 

Talk. You may use your liberty. 

Faith. A work of grace in the soul discovereth 
itself either to him that hath it, or to standers-by. 

To him that hath it, thus : It gives him convic- 
tion of sin, especially the defilement one good sign 
of his nature, and the sin of unbelief, ^^ ^^^^^' 
for the sake of which he is sure to be damned, if 
he findeth not mercy at God's hand, by faith in 
Jesus Christ. This sight and sense of things 
worketh in him sorrow and shame for sin. Psa. 
38 : 18 ; Jer. 31 : 19; John IG : 8 ; Eomans 7 : 21 ; 



FAITHFUL AND TALKATIVE. 139 

Mark 16:16; Gal. 2:16; Key. 1 : 6. He find- 
eth, moreover, revealed in him tlie Savioiu* of the 
world, and the absolute necessity of closing with 
him for Hfe ; at the which he findeth hungerings 
and thirstings after him, to which hungerings, 
etc., the promise is made. Now, according to the 
strength or weakness of his faith in his Saviour, 
so is his joy and peace, so is his love to holiness, 
so are his desires to know him more, and also to 
serve him in this world. But though, I say, it 
discovereth itself thus unto him, yet it is but sel- 
dom that he is able to conclude that this is a work 
of grace, because his corruptions now, and his 
abused reason, make his mind to misjudge in this 
matter ; therefore in him that hath this work, there 
is required a very sound judgment, before he can 
with steadiness conclude that this is a work of 
grace. John IB : 9; GaL 2 : 15, 16 ; Acts 4 : 12 ; 
Matt. 5:6; Kev. 21 : 6. 

To others it is thus discovered : 

1. By an experimental confession of his faith in 
Christ. 2. By a life answerable to that confession ; 
to wit, a life of holiness — heart-holiness, family- 
hohness, if he hath a family, and by conversa- 
tion-holiness in the world ; which in the general 
teacheth him inwardly to abhor his sin, and him- 
self for that, in secret ; to suppress it in his fam- 
ily, and to promote holiness in the world : not by 
talk only, as a hypocrite or talkative person may 



140 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

do, but by a practical subjection in faith and love 
to the power of the word. Job 42 : 5, 6 ; Psalni 
60 : 23 ; Ezek 20 : 43 ; Matt. 5:8; John 14 : 15 ; 
Rom. 10:10; Ezek. 36:25; Phil. 1:27; 3:17-20. 
And now, sir, as to this brief description of 
the work of grace, and also the discovery of it, 
if you have aught to object, object ; if not, then 
give me leave to propound to you a second ques- 
tion. 

Talk. Nay, my part is not now to object, but 
to hear ; let me therefore have your second ques- 
tion. 

Faith. It is this : Do you experience this first 
part of the description of it ; and doth your life 
and conversation testify the same? Another good 
Or standeth your religion in word or ®^^^ of grace, 
tongue, and not in deed and truth ? Pray, if you 
incline to answer me in this, say no more than 
you know the God above will say Amen to, and 
also nothing but what your conscience can justify 
you in ; for not he that commendeth himself is 
approved, but whom the Lord commendeth. Be- 
sides, to say I am thus and thus, when my conver- 
sation, and all my neighbors, tell me I lie, is great 
wickedness. 

Then Talkative at first began to blush ; but, 
recovering himseK, thus he replied : You come 
now to experience, to conscience, and to God; and 
to appeal to him for justification of what is spoken. 



FAITHFUL AND TALKATIVE. 141 

Tliis kind of discourse I did not expect ; nor am I 
Talkative not disposed lo give an answer to such 

pleased with ■ • -i t i i n <• 

Faithful's ques- qucstious, bccausc I count not myself 
tious. bound thereto, unless you take upon 

you to be a catechizer ; and though you should so 
do, yet I may refuse to make you my judge. But 
I pray, will you tell me why you ask me such 
questions ? 

Faith. Because I saw you forward to talk, and 
The reason bccausc I loiewnotthat you had aught 
JuYto h™hS else but notion. Besides, to teU you 
question. ^11 the truth, I have heard of you that 
you are a man whose religion lies in talk, and that 
your conversation gives this your mouth-profes- 
Faithfui's siou the lie. They say you are a spot 
mi Talkative, amoug Christians, and that religion 
fareth the w^orse for your ungodly conversation ; 
that some have akeady stumbled at yoiu' wicked 
ways, and that more are in danger of being de- 
stroyed thereby: your rehgion, and an ale-house, 
and covetousness, and uncleanness, and swearing, 
and lying, and vain company-keeping, etc., will 
stand together. The j)roverb is true of you which 
is said of a harlot, to wit, that "she is a shame 
to all women ;" so are you a shame to all profes- 
sors. 

Talk. Since you are so ready to take up rej)orts, 

Talkative bids ^ud to judge SO rashly as you do, I 

Faithful adieu, q^^^q^ j^^t conclude you are some 



142 PILGBIM'S PROGRESS. 

j)eevisli or melancholy man, not fit to be discours- 
ed with ; and so adieu. 

Then up came Christian, and said to his brother, 
I told you how it would happen; your words and 
his lusts could not agree. He had rather leave 
your company than reform his hfe. But he is 
gone, as I said : let him go ; the loss is no man's 
but his own. He has saved us the ^ goo^ rid- 
trouble of going from him ; for he '^^"^®- 
continuing, as I suj^pose he will do, as he is, would 
have been but a blot in our company: besides, the 
apostle says, " From such withdraw thyself." 

Faith. But I am glad we had this httle dis- 
course with him ; it may happen that he will think 
of it again : however, I have dealt plainly with 
him, and so am clear of his blood if he perisheth. 

Chr. You did well to talk so plainly to him as 
you did. There is but little of this faithful deal- 
ing with men nowadays, and that makes religion 
to stink so in the nostrils of many, as it doth ; for 
they are these talkative fools, whose religion is 
only in word, and who are debauched and vain in 
their conversation, that, being so much admitted 
into the fellowship of the godly, do puzzle the 
w^orld, blemish Christianity, and grieve the sincere. 
I wish that all men would deal with such as you 
have done ; then should they either be made more 
conformable to religion, or the company of saints 
would be too hot for them. Then did Faithful say, 



FAITHFUL AND CHRISTIAN. 145 

"How Talkative at first lifts up his illumes! 
How bravely doth he speak ! How he presumes 
To drive do^sTi all before him ! But so soon 
As Faithful talks of heart-work, like the moon 
That 's past the full, into the wane he goes ; 
And so ^^all all but he that heart-work knows. " 

Thus they went on, talking of what they had 
seen by the way, and so made that way easy which 
would otherwise no doubt have been tedious to 
them, for now they went through a wilderness. 



144 PILGEIM'S PBOGEESS. 



THE SIXTH STAGE. 

Now wlien they were got almost quite out of 
this wilderness, Faithful chanced to cast his eye 
back, and espied one coming after them, and he 
knew him. Oh, said Faithful to his brother, who 
comes yonder? Then Christian looked, and said. 
It is my good friend Evangelist. Aye, and my 
good friend too, said Faithful, for 't was he that 
set me on the way to the gate. Now was Evan- 
gelist come up unto them, and thus Evangelist 

saluted them. overtakes them. 

Evan. Peace be with you, dearly beloved, and 
peace be to your helpers. 

Chr. Welcome, welcome, my good Evangelist : 
the siffht of thy countenance brings to They are giad 

^ , "^ ,, . , ,° T at the sight of 

my remembrance thy ancient Jiincl- him. 

ness and unwearied labors for my eternal good. 

Faith. And a thousand times welcome, said 
good Faithful, thy company, Oh sweet Evangelist; 
how desirable is it to us i)oor pilgrims ! 

Evan. Then said Evangelist, How hath it fared 
with you, my friends, since the time of our last 
parting? "What have you met with, and how 
have you behaved yourselves ? 

Then Christian and Faithful told him of all 
things that had happened to them in the way; and 



EVANGELIST'S EXHORTATIONS. 145 

how, and with what difficulty, they had arrived 
to that place. 
Eight glad am I, said Evangelist, not that you 
His exhorta- have met with trials, but that you 
tiontotnem. ^^^^ ^^^^ victors, and for that you 
have, notwithstanding many weaknesses, contin- 
ued in the way to this very day. 

I say, right glad am I of this thing, and that 
for mine own sake and yours : I have sowed, and 
you have reaped ; and the day is coming, when 
**both he that soweth, and they that reap, shall 
rejoice together," John 4 : 36; that is, if you hold 
out : "for in due season ye shall reap, if ye faint 
not." Gal. 6 : 9. The crown is before you, and it 
is an incorruptible one ; " so run that ye may ob- 
tam" it. 1 Cor. 9:24-27. Some there be that 
set out for this crown, and after they have gone 
far for ic, another comes in and takes it fi'om 
them : hold fast, therefore, that you have ; lot 
no man take your cro^m. Eev. 3 : 11. You are 
not yet out of the g-unshot of the devil ; "ye have 
not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin." 
Let the kmgdom be always before you, and believe 
steadfastly concerning the things that are invisi- 
ble. Let nothing that is on this side the other 
world get within you. And above all, look well 
to your own hearts and to the lusts thereof ; for 
they are "deceitful above all things, and des- 
perately wicked." Set your faces like a flint; 

PU. Prog. 10 



146 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

you have all power in heaven and earth on your 
side. 

Che. Then Christian thanked him for his ex- 
hortations ; but told him withal, that They do than]} 
they would have him speak further to hortations. 
them, for their help the rest of the way; and the 
rather, for that they well knew that he was a 
prophet, and could tell them of things that might 
happen imto them, and also how they might 
resist and overcome them. To which request 
Faithful also consented. So Evangehst began as 
foUoweth. 

Evan. My sons, you have heard in the word 
of the truth of the gosjpel, that you ncprcdicteth 

iff.T -I 1 I'liJ- what troubles 

must through much tribulation they shaU meet 

enter into the kingdom of God ;" and ^^^ 'iZ^^'^l 
again, that " in every city, bonds and S^^^'^lteadS 
afflictions abide " you ; and there- ^'^^^■ 
fore you cannot expect that you should go long 
on your pilgrimage without them, in some sort 
or other. You have found something of the 
truth of these testimonies upon you already, and 
more will immediately follow ; for now, as you 
see, you are almost out of this wilderness, and 
therefore you will soon come into a town that 
you will by and by see before you ; and in that 
town you will be hardly beset with enemies, 
vdio will strain hard but they wdll kill you ; and 
be you sure that one or both of you must seal 



VANITY FAIE. 147 

the testimony which you hold, with blood ; but 

be you "faithful unto death," and the King will 

give you "a crown of hfe." He that shall die 

He whose lot there, although his death will be un- 
it will be there , ^ t i • • i , 

to suffer, will natural, and his ]3ain perhaps gi-eat, 
of his brother.^ he will yet have the better of his 
fellow ; not only because he will be arrived at 
the celestial city soonest, but because he will 
escaj)e many miseries that the other will meet 
with in the rest of his journey. But when you 
are come to the town, and shall find fulfilled what 
I have here related, then remember your friend, 
and quit yourselves like men, and "commit tho 
keeping of your souls to God in well-doing, as 
unto a faithful Creator." 

Then I saw in my dream, that when they were 
gone out of the wilderness, they presently saw a 
town before them, and the name of that town is 
Vanity; and at the town there is a fair kept, 
called Vanity Fair. It is kept all the year long. 
It beareth the name of Vanity Fair, because tho 
town where it is kept is lighter than vanity, Psa. 
62:9; and also because all that is there sold, or 
that Cometh thither, is vanity ; as is the saying of 
the wise, "AU that cometh is vanity." Eccl. 
11 : 8 ; see also 1 : 2-14 ; 2 : 11-17; Isa. 40:17. 

This fair is no new-erected business, but a 
The antiquity thing of aucicnt standing. I will show 
of this fail-. ^^^ ^-^Q original of it. 



148 PII^GRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Almost five tliousand j^ears ago there Avoro 
pilgrims walking to the celestial city, as these 
two honest persons are : and Beelzebub, ApoUyon, 
and Legion, with their companions, perceiving by 
the path the pilgrims made that their way to the 
city lay through this town of Vanity, they con- 
trived here to set up a fair — a fair wherein should 
be sold all sorts of vanity, and that it should last 
all the year long. Therefore at this fair are all 
such merchandise sold as houses, Thcmerciian- 
lands, trades, places, honors, prefer- dise of this fair, 
ments, titles, countries, kingdoms, lusts, pleasures; 
and delights of all sorts, as harlots, wives, hus- 
bands, children, masters, servants, lives, blood, 
bodies, souls, silver, gold, pearls, precious stones, 
and what not. 

And moreover, at this fair there are at all 
times to be seen, jugglings, cheats, games, plays, 
fools, apes, knaves, and rogues, and that of every 
kind. 

Here are to be seen too, and that for nothing, 
thefts, murders, adulteries, false-swearers, and 
that of a blood-red color. 

And as in other fairs of less moment there are 
the several rows and streets under their proper 
names, where such and such wares are vended ; 
so here, likewise, you have the proper places, 
rows, streets, namely, countries and kingdoms, 
where the wares of this fair are soonest to bo 



VANITY FAIR. 149 

The streets of foimd. Here is the Britain Eow, the 
this fair. French Eow, the Itahan Kow, the 

Spanish Eow, the German Eow, where several 
sorts of vanities are to be sold. But, as in other 
fau's, some one commodity is as the chief of aU 
the fair, so the ware of Eome and her merchandise 
is greatly promoted in this fair ; only our English 
nation, with some others, have taken a dislike 
thereat. 

Now, as I said, the way to the celestial city 
lies just through this town -sphere this lusty fair 
is kept; and he that would go to the city, and 
yet not go through this town, "must needs go 
out of the world." 1 Cor. 4 : 10. The Prince 

Christ went of priuccs himsclf, when here, went 
fair. ° through this town to his own country, 

and that upon a fair-day too; yea, and, as I think, 
it was Beelzebub, the chief lord of this fair, that 
invited him to buy of his vanities, yea, would 
have made him lord of the fan-, would he but have 
done him reverence as he went through the to"svn. 
Yea, because he was such a person of honor, 
Beelzebub had him from street to street, and 
showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a 
little time, that he might, if possible, allure that 
blessed One to cheapen and buy some of his 

christbought vanities ; but he had no mind to the 
fair. merchandise, and therefore left the 

town without laying out so much as one farthing 



150 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

upon these vanities. Matt. 4 : 1-8; Luke 4 : 5-8. 
This fair therefore is an ancient thing, of long 
standing, and a very great fair. 

Now these pilgrims, as I said, must needs go 
through this fair. Well, so they did ; The pilgrims 
but behold, even as they entered into ^^^^^ t^^^ fair. 
the fair, all the people in the fair were moved, 
and the town itself as it were in a The fair in a 
hubbub about them, and that for sev- them. 
eral reasons : for. 

First, the pilgrims were clothed with such kind 
of raiment as was diverse from the The first cause 
raiment of any that traded in that °* *^« ^^^^^^• 
fair. The people therefore of the fair made a 
great gazing upon them : some said they were 
fools ; some, they were bedlams ; and some, they 
were outlandish men. Job 12 : 4 ; 1 Cor. 4 : 9. 

Secondly, and as they wondered at their ap- 
parel, so they did likewise at their The seeond 

- „ „ , T TIT cause of the 

speech ; lor lew could understand hubbub, 
what they said. They naturally spoke the lan- 
guage of Canaan ; but they that kept the fair 
were the men of this world : so that from one end 
of the fair to the other, they seemed barbarians 
each to the other. 1 Cor. 2 : 7, 8. 

Thirdly, but that which did not a little amuse 
the merchandisers was, that these pil- Third cause of 
grims set very light by all their wares. *^^ i^^^^bub. 
They cared not so much as to look upon them ; 



VANITY PAIR. 151 

and if they called upon tliem to buy, they 
would put tlieir fingers in their ears, and cry, 
"Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity," 
Psa. 119 : 37, and look upward, signifjang that 
their trade and traffic was in heaven. Phil. 3 ; 20, 
21. 

One chanced, mockingly, beholding the carriage 
of the men, to say imto them, " ^Tiat will ye buy ?" 

Fourth cause 33nt they, looking gravely upon him, 
of the Hubbub, saia, "We buy the truth." Proverbs 
23 : 23. At that there was an occasion taken to 
They are tl^spise the men the more ; some 
mocked. mocking, some taunting, some speak- 

ing reproachfully, and some calling uponr others 
to smite them. At last, things came to a hubbub 
and great stir in the fair, insomuch that all order 
was confounded. Now was word presently 
brought to the great one of the fair, who quick- 
ly came down, and deputed some of his most 
trusty fi'iends to take those men into examina- 
tion about whom the fair was almost overturned. 

They are ex- ^^ ^^® ^^^^ wcrc brouglit to cxamiua- 
amiued. tiou ; and they that sat upon them 

asked them whence they came, whither they went, 
and what they did there in such an unusual garb. 

They teu who The men told them they were pilgrims 
whencJ'^^' tiSy ^^^ straugers in the world, and that 
came. ^j^gy wcre goiug to thek own country, 

which was the heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 11 : 13-16 ; 



152 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

and tliat they had given no occasion to the men 
of the town, nor yet to the merchandisers, thus to 
abuse them, and to let them in their journey, ex- 
cept it was for that, when one asked them what 
they would buy, they said they would buy the 
truth. But they that were appointed to examine 
them did not believe them to be any They are not 
other than bedlams and mad, or else ^®^®^^^- 
such as came to put all things into a confusion 
in the fair. Therefore they took them and beat 
them, and besmeared them with dirt, and then 
put them into the cage, that they They are put 
might be made a spectacle to all the ^^ *^® '^^se. 
men of the fair. There therefore they lay for 
some time, and were made the objects of any 
man's sport, or malice, or revenge ; the great one 
of the fair laughing still at all that befell them. 
But the men being patient, and "not Their behav- 
rendering railing for railing, but con- ^°^ ^^ *^® '^^®* 
trariwise blessing," and giving good words forbad, 
and kindness for injuries done, some men in the 
fair that were more observing and less prejudiced 
than the rest, began to check and blame the baser 
sort for their continual abuses done by them to the 
men. They therefore in an angry manner let fly 
at them again, counting them as bad as the men 
in the cage, and telling them that they seemed 
confederates, and should be made partakers of 
their misfortunes. The others replied that, for 



THE PILGRIMS PERSECUTED. 153 

auglit they could see, the men were quiet and 
sober, and intended nobody any harm ; and that 
there were many that traded in their fair that 
were more worthy to be put into the cage, yea, 
and pillory too, than were the men that they had 
abused. Thus, after divers words had passed on 
both sides — the men behaving themselves all the 
while very wisely and soberly before them — ^they 
fell to some blows among themselves, and did 
harm one to another. Then were these two poor 

They are made i^^u brought before their examiners. 
tl^''''*^sSrb-agai^' a^^ ^ere charged as being 
ance. guiIty of the late hubbub that had 

been in the fair. So they beat them pitifully, and 

They are led hau^jed irons upou them, and led them 

up and down . ^ . ^ ,-, i, . „ 

the fair in m chaius up and down the fair, for an 
terror to others, example and terror to others, lest any 
should speak in their behalf, or join themselves 
unto them. But Christian and Eaithful behaved 
themselves yet more wisely, and received the ig- 
nominy and shame that was cast upon them vvdth 
so much meekness and patience, that it won to 
their side, though but few in comparison of the 

Some men of rest, several of the men in the fair, 
over to them. This put the other party yet into a 
gTeater rage, insomuch that they concluded the 
death of these two men. Wherefore they threat- 

Their adver- eucd that neither caefe nor irons 

sanes resolve to . ^ 

idu them. should serve their turn, but that they 



154 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

should die for the abuse they had done, and for 
deluding the men of the fair. 

Then were they remanded to the cage again, 
until further order should be taken They are again 
with them. So they put them in, and cage, ami after^ 
made their feet fast in the stocks. to^trili. ^°"° * 

Here also they called again to mind what they 
had heard from their faithful friend Evangelist, 
and were the more confirmed in their way and 
sufferings by what he told them would happen to 
.them. They also now comforted each other, that 
whose lot it was to suffer, even he should have the 
best of it; therefore each man secretly wished 
that he might have that preferment. But com- 
mitting themselves to the all-wise disposal of Him 
that ruleth all things, with much content they 
abode in the condition in which they were, rmtil 
they should be otherwise disposed of. 

Then a convenient time being appointed, they 
brought them forth to their trial, in order to their 
condemnation. When the time was come, they 
were brought before their enemies and arraigned. 
The judge's name was Lord Hate-good : their 
indictment was one and the same in substance, 
though somewhat varying in form ; the contents 
whereof was this: "That they were Their intuct- 
enemies to, and disturbers of, the ™^"^* 
trade ; that they had made commotions and divis- 
ions in the town, and had won a party to their 



.. ..^ 



\J ^v^W f 



r'l 




FAITHFUL'S TRIAL. 155 

owii most dangerous opinions, in contempt of tlie 
law of their prince." 

Then Faithful began to answer, that he had 

Faithful an- only sct himsclf against that which 
self. had set itself against Him that is 

higher than the highest. And, said he, as for dis- 
turbance, I make none, being myself a man of 
peace : the parties that were won to us, were won 
by beholding our truth and innocence, and they 
are only turned from the worse to the better. 
And as to the king you talk of, since he is Beel- 
zebub, the enemy of our Lord, I defy him and aU 
his angels. 

Then proclamation was made, that they that 
had aught to say for their lord the king against 
the prisoner at the bar, should forthwith appear, 
and give in their evidence. So there came in three 
witnesses, to wit, En\^^, Superstition, and Pick- 
thank. They were then asked if they knew the 
prisoner at the bar ; and what they had to say for 
their lord the king against him. 

Then stood forth Envy, and said to this effect : 
Envy begins. My lord, I have known this man a long 
time, and will attest upon my oath before this 
honorable bench, that he is — 

Judge. Hold ; give him his oath. 

So they sware him. Then he said, My lord, 
this man, notwithstanding his plausible name, is 
one of the vilest men in our country; he neither 



156 PILGBIM'S PROGRESS. 

regardeth prince nor people, law nor cnstom, but 
cloeth all that lie can to possess all men with cer- 
tain of his disloyal notions, which he in the gen- 
eral calls principles of faith and hoHness. And in 
particular I heard him once myself affirm, that 
Christianity and the customs of our town of Van- 
ity were diametrically opposite, and could not be 
reconciled. By which saying, my lord, he doth 
at once not only condemn all our laudable doings, 
but us in the doing of them. 

Then did the judge say to Mm, Hast thou any 
more to say ? 

Envy. My lord, I could say much more, only I 
would not be tedious to the court. Yet, if need 
be, when the other gentlemen have given in their 
evidence, rather than any thing shall be wanting 
that will dispatch him, I will enlarge my testimo- 
ny against him. So he was bid to stand by. 

Then they called Superstition, and bid him look 
upon the prisoner. They also asked superstition 
what he could say for their lord the ^^^°'"'- 
king against him. Then they sware him ; so he 
began. 

Super. My lord, I have no great acquaintance 
with this man, nor do I desire to have further 
knowledge of him. However, this I know, that 
he is a very pestilent fellow, from some discourse 
that I had with him the other day, in this town; 
for then, talking with him, I heard him say that 



WITNESSES AGAINST FAITHFUL. 157 

our religion was nauglit, and such by wliicli a man 
could by no means please God. "WTiicli saying of 
liis, my lord, your lordship very well knows what 
necessarily thence will follow, to wit, that we stiU 
do worship in vain, are yet in our sins, and finally 
shall be damned : and this is that which I have 
to say. 

Then was Pickthank sworn, and bid say what he 
knew in the behaK of their lord the king against 
the prisoner at the bar. 

Pick. My lord, and you gentlemen aU, this fel- 

Pickthank's l^w I havc kuowu of a loug time, and 
testimony. j^g^^g heard him speak things that 
ought not to be spoken; for he hath railed on our 
noble prince Beelzebub, and hath spoken con- 
temptibly of his honorable friends, whose names 

Sins are all are, the Lord Old Man, the Lord 
ones.' Carnal Dehght, the Lord Luxurious, 

the Lord Desire of Vain-Glory, my old Lord 
Lechery, Sir Having Greedy, with aU the rest of 
our nobihty: and he hath said, moreover, that if 
all men were of his mind, if possible, there is not 
one of these noblemen should have any longer a 
being in this town. Besides he hath not been 
afraid to rail on you, my lord, who are now ap- 
pointed to be his judge, calling you an ungodly 
villain, with many other such like viHfying terms, 
with which he hath bespattered most of the gen- 
try of our town. 



158 PILGRIM'S PEOGEESS. 

When tills Picktliank had told his tale, the 
judge directed his speech to the prisoner at the 
bar, saying, Thou runagate, heretic, and traitor, 
hast thou heard what these honest gentlemen 
have witnessed against thee ? 

Faith. May I speak a few words in my own 
defence ? 

Judge. Sirrah, sirrah, thou deservest to live no 
longer, but to be slain immediately upon the place; 
yet, that all men may see our gentleness towards 
thee, let us hear what thou, vile runagate, hast to 
say. 

Faith. 1. I say then, in answer to what Mr. 
Envy hath spoken, I never said aueiit Faithful's de- 

,,•;,. .... . T T fence of him- 

but this : that what rule, or laws, or self. 
custom, or people, were flat against the word of 
God, are diametrically opposite to Christianity. 
If I have said amiss in this, convince me of my 
error, and I am ready here before you to make 
my recantation. 

2. As to the second, to wit, Mr. Superstition, 
and his charge against me, I said only this : that 
in the worship) of God there is required a divine 
faith ; but there can be no divine faith without a 
divine revelation of the will of God. Therefore 
whatever is thrust into the worship of God that 
is not- agreeable to divine revelation, cannot be 
done but by a human faith ; which faith will not 
be" profitable to eternal life. 



THE JUDGE'S SrEECH. 159 

3. As to wliat Mr. Picktliank hath said, I say — 
avoiding terms, as that I am said to rail, and the 
like — that the prince of this town, with all the 
rabblement, his attendants, by this gentleman 
named, are more fit for being in hell than in 
this town and countiy. And so the Lord have 
mercy upon me. 

Then the judge called to the jury, who all this 
while stood by to hear and observe. Gentlemen 

The judge's of the iurv, Tou scc this man about 

speech to the , J ./ ' ./ , ,, , 

jury. whom SO great an uproar hath been 

made in this town ; you have also heard what 
these worthy gentlemen have witnessed against 
him ; also, you have heard his reply and confes- 
sion : it lieth now in your breasts to hang him, 
or save his life ; but yet I think meet to instruct 
you in our law. 

There was an act made in the days of Pharaoh 
the Great, servant to our prince, that lest those 
of a contrary rehgion should multiply and gTow 
too strong for him, their males should be thrown 
into the river. Exod. 1 : 22. There was also an 
act made in the days of Nebuchadnezzar the 
Great, another of his servants, that whoever would 
not fall down and worship his golden image, 
should be thrown into a fiery furnace. Dan. 3 : 6. 
There was also an act made in the days of Darius, 
that whoso for some time called upon any god 
but him, should be cast into the lions' den. Dan. 



160 PILGRIM'S PROGRES-S. 

6 : 7. Now tlie substance of these laws this rebel 
has broken, not only in thought, which is not to 
be borne, but also in word and deed; which 
must therefore needs be intolerable. 

For that of Pharaoh, his law was made upon a 
supposition to prevent mischief, no crime being 
yet apparent ; but here is a crime apparent. For 
the second and third, you see he disputeth against 
our religion ; and for the treason that he hath al- 
ready confessed, he deserveth to die the death. 

Then went the jury out, whose names were Mr. 
Blindman, Mr. No-good, Mr. Malice, IMr. Love- 
lust, Mr. Live-loose, Mr. Heady, Mr. Highmind, 
I\Ir. Enmity, Mr. Liar, Mr. Cruelty, Mr. Hate- 
light, and Mr. Implacable ; who every one gave 
in his private verdict against him among them- 
selves, and afterwards unanimously concluded to 
bring him in guilty before the judge. And first 
among themselves, Mr. Blindman the foreman 
said, I see 'clearly that this man is a heretic. 
Then said Mr. No-good, Away with such a fellow 
from the earth. Aye, said Mr. Malice, for I hate 
the very looks of him. Then said Mr. Love-lust, 
I could never endure him. Nor I, said Mr. Live- 
loose, for he would always be condemning my 
way. Hang him, hang him, said Mr. Heady. A 
sorry scrub, said Mr. Highmind. My heart riseth 
against him, said Mr. Enmity. He is a rogue, 
said Mr. Liar. Hanging is too good for him, said 



DEATH OF FAITHFUL. 161 

Mr. Cruelty. Let us dispatch him out of the way, 
said Mr. Hate-hght. Then said Mr. Implacable, 
Might I have all the world given me, I could not 
They conclude be reconciled to him ; therefore let 
guuty of death. US forthwith bring him in guilty of 
death. 

And so they did ; therefore he was presently 
condemned to be had fi'om the place where he 
was to the place from whence he came, and there 
to be put to the most cruel death that could be 
invented. 

They therefore brought him out, to do with him 
according to their law; and first they scourged 
him, then they buffeted him, then they lanced 
his flesh with knives ; after that they stoned him 
with stones, then pricked him with their swords ; 
The cruel and last of all, they burned him to 

death of Faith- . ^ ^. '. -L. _ .,, 

fui. ashes at the stake. Thus came r aith- 

ful to his end. 

Now I saw that there stood behind the multi- 
tude a chariot and a couple of horses waiting for 
Faithful, who, so soon as his adversaries had dis- 
patched him, was taken up into it, and straight- 
way was carried up through the clouds with 
sound of trumpet, the nearest way to the celestial 
gate. But as for Christian he had some respite, 

Christian is ^^^ was remanded back to prison ; so 
still a prisoner. ^^ ^-^^^^^ remained for a space. But 

He who overrules all things, having the power of 

PU, Prog. 11 



162 PILGRIM'S PROGEESS. 

their rage in his own hand, so wrought it about, 
that Christian for that time escaped them, and 
went his way. 

And as he went he sung, saying, 

"Well, Faithful, thou hast faithfully professed 
Unto thy Lord, with whom thou shalt be blest 
When faithless ones, with all their vain dehghts, 
Are crying out under their hellish plights : 
Sing, Faithful, sing, and let thy name survive ; 
For thougli they killed thee, thou art yet alive.'* 



HOPEFUL JOIKS CHSISTIAN. 163 



THE SEVENTH STAGE. 

Now I saw in my dream, tliat Christian went 
Christian lias not fortli alone ; for tliere was one 

anotlier com- _^ „ , , , 

panion. wJiose name was Hopeiul — bemg so 

made by the beholding of Christian and Faithful 
in their words and behavior, in their sufferings 
at the fair — who joined himself imto him, and 
entering into a brotherly covenant, told him that 
he would be his companion. Thus one died to 
bear testimony to the truth, and another rises out 
of his ashes to be a companion with Christian in 
his pilgrimage. This Hopeful also told Chi'istian 
Tiiere are that there werc many more of the men 
men^f tieMr ^^ ^hc fair that would take theii' time 
will follow. and foUow after. 

So I saw, that quickly after they were got out 
of the fair, they overtook one that was going be- 
They overtake ^^re them, whose name was By-ends ; 
By-ends. g^ ^]^gy g^|^l j.^ him,'V\Qiat couiitrjTQan, 

sir? and how far go you this way ? He told them 
that he came from the town of Fair-si)eech, and 
he was going to the celestial city ; but told them 
not his name. 

From Fair-speech ? said Christian ; is there any 
good that lives there? Prov. 26 : 25. 

By. Yes, said By-ends, I hope so. 



164 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. Pray, sir, wliat may I call you? said 
Christian. 

By. I am a stranger to you, and you to me : if 
you be going this way, I shall be glad By-ends loath 
of your comx^any ; if not, I must be toteumsname. 
content. 

Chr. This town of Fair-speech, said Christian, 
I have heard of; and, as I remember, they say 
it 's a wealthy place. 

By. Yes, I will assure you that it is; and I 
have very many rich kindred there. 

Chr. Pray, who are your kindred there, if a 
man may be so bold ? 

By. Almost the whole town ; and in particular 
my Lord Turn-about, my Lord Time-server, my 
Lord Fair-speech, from whose ancestors that 
town first took its name ; also Mr. Smooth-man, 
Mr. Facing-both-ways, Mr. Any-thing; and the 
parson of our parish, Mr. Two-tongues, was my 
mother's own brother, by father's side ; and, to 
tell you the truth, I am become a gentleman of 
good quality ; yet my great-grandfather was but 
a waterman, looking one way and rowing another, 
and I got most of my estate by the same occupa- 
tion. 

Chr. Are you a married man? 

By. Yes, and my wife is a very virtuous wom- 
an, the daughter of a virtuous worn- Thewiieand 

, ^ ^ . . tindi-ed of By- 

an : she was my Lady Feignmg s ends. 



DISCOURSE WITH BY-ENDS. 1G5 

daughter ; therefore she came of a very honor- 
able family, and is arrived to such a pitch of 
breeding, that she knows how to carry it to all, 
even to prince and peasant. 'T is true, we some- 
what differ in reHgion fi'om those of the stricter 
Where By- sort, yet but in two small points : 
from othtSTi First, we never strive against wind 
religion. g^j^^ |.^jg^ Secondly, we are always 

most zealous when Keligion goes in his silver 
slippers ; we love much to walk with him in the 
street, if the sun shines and the people applaud 
him. 

Then Christian stepped a little aside to his 
fellow Hopeful, saying, It runs in my mind that 
this is one By-ends of Fair-speech ; and if it be 
he, we have as very a knave in our company as 
dwelleth in all these parts. Then said Hopeful, 
Ask him ; methmks he should not be ashamed 
of his name. So Christian came up with him 
again, and said. Sir, you talk as if you knew 
sofnething more than all the world doth ; and, 
if I take not my mark amiss, I deem I have half 
a guess of you. Is not your name Mr. By-ends 
of Fair-speech ? 

By. This is not my name, but indeed it is a 
nickname that is given me by some that cannot 
abide me, and I must be content to bear it as a 
reproach, as other good men have borne theirs 
before me. 



IGG PILGniM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. But did you never give an occasion to 
men to call you by this name ? 

By. Never, never ! The worst that ever I did 
to give them an occasion to give me this name 
was, that I had always the luck to jumjo in my 
judgment with the present way of the ^ow By-ends 
times, whatever it was, and my chance got i^is name, 
was to get thereby : but if things are thus cast 
upon me, let me count them a blessing ; but let 
not the malicious load me therefore with reproach. 

Chr. I thought, indeed, that you were the 
man that I heard of; and to tell you what I 
think, I fear this name belongs to you more 
properly than you are wiUing we should think it 
doth. 

By. "Well, if you will thus imagine, I cannot help 
it ; you shall find me a fair company- He desires to 

keep company 

keeper, ii you will still admit me your with christian, 
associate. 

Chr. If you will go with us, you must go 
against wind and tide ; the which, I perceive, is 
against your opinion : you must also own Ke- 
ligion in his rags, as well as when in his silver 
slippers ; and stand by him too, when bomid in 
irons, as well as when he walketh the streets 
with applause. 

By. You must not impose, nor lord it over my 
faith ; leave me to my liberty, and let me go with 

you. 



BY-ENDS' COMPANIONS. 1G7 

Gnu. Not a step further, unless you will do, in 
what I propound, as we. 

Then said By-ends, I shall never desert my old 
principles, since they are harmless and profitable. 
If I may not go with you, I must do as I did 
before you overtook me, even go by myself, until 

By-ends and somc Overtake me that will be glad of 
they part. ^^j company. 

Now I saw in my dream, that Christian and 
Hopeful forsook him, and kept their distance be- 
fore him ; but one of them looking back, saw three 
men following Mr. By-ends ; and l^ehold, as they 
came u^ with him, he made them a very low 
congee ; and they also gave him a comphment. 
The men's names were, Mr. Hold-the-world, Mr. 
Hehasnew ^-^oney-love, and Mr. Save-all, men 
companions. ^^^^^ -^i^. By-cuds had formerly been 
acquainted with ; for in their minority they were 
school-fellows, and were taught by one Mr. Gripe- 
man, a schoolmaster in Lovegain, which is a 
market-town in the county of Coveting, in the 
north. This schoolmaster taught them the art of 
getting, either by violence, cozenage, flattering, 
l;>'ing, or by putting on a guise of rehgion ; and 
these four gentlemen had attained much of the 
art of then* master, so that they could each of 
them have kept such a school themselves. 

Well, when they had, as I said, thus saluted 
each other, Mr. Money-love said to Mr. By ends. 



1G8 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Who are they upon the road before us? for 
Christian and Hopeful were yet within view. 

By. They are a couple of far countrymen, that, 
after their mode, are eroinsr on pilgrim- By-ends- char- 

o o ± o acter of the pil- 

age. grims. 

Money. Alas, why did they not stay, that we 
might have had their good company? for they 
and we, and you, sir, I hope, are all going on pil- 
grimage. 

By. We are so, indeed ; but the men before us 
are so rigid, and love so much their own notions, 
and do also so lightly esteem the opinions of 
others, that let a man be ever so godly, yet if he 
jumps not with them in all things, they thrust 
him quite out of their company. 

Save. That is bad ; but we read of some that 
are righteous overmuch, and such men's rigid- 
ness prevails with them to judge and condemn 
all but themselves. But I pray, what, and how 
many, were the things wherein you differed? 

By. Why, they, after their headstrong man- 
ner, conclude that it is their duty to rush on 
their joui'ney all weathers ; and I am for waiting 
for wind and tide. They are for hazarding all 
for God at a clap ; and I am for taking all ad- 
vantages to secure my life and estate. They are 
for holding their notions, though all other men 
be against them ; but I am for religion in what 
and so far as the times and my safety will bear 



BY-ENDS' COMPANIONS. 169 

it. Tliey are for Religion when in rags and 
contempt ; but I am for him when he walks in 
his silver slippers, in the sunshine, and with ap- 
plause. 

HoLD-THE- World. Aye, and hold you there 
still, good Mr. By-ends ; for, for my part, I can 
count him but a fool, that, having the hberty to 
keep what he has, shall be so unwise as to lose 
it. Let us be wise as serpents. It is best to 
make hay while the sun shines. You see how 
the bee lieth still in winter, and bestirs her only 
when she can have profit with pleasure. God 
sends sometimes rain, and sometimes sunshine ; 
if they be such fools as to go through the first, 
yet let us be content to take fair weather along 
with us. For my part, I like that religion best 
that will stand with the security of God's good 
blessmgs unto us; for who can imagine, that 
is ruled by his reason, since God has bestowed 
npon us the good things of this life, but that 
he would have us keep them for his sake? 
Abraham and Solomon grew rich in religion ; 
and Job says, that a good man shall lay up 
gold as dust ; but he must not be such as the 
men before us, if they be as you have described 
them. 

Sa\\e. I think that we are all agreed in this 
matter ; and therefore there needs no more words 
about it 



170 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Money. No, there needs no more words about 
this matter, indeed ; for he that beheves neither 
Scripture nor reason — and you see we have both 
on our side — neither knows his own hberty nor 
seeks his own safety. 

By. My brethren, we are, as you see, going all' 
on pilgrimage ; and for our better diversion from 
things that are bad, give me leave to propound 
unto you this question : 

Suppose a man, a minister, or a tradesman, 
etc., should have an advantage lie before him to 
get the good blessings of this life, yet so as 
that he can by no means come by them except, 
in appearance at least, he becomes extraordina- 
rily zealous in some points of religion that he 
meddled not with before ; may he not use this 
means to attain his end, and yet be a right honest 
man? 

Money. I see the bottom of your question ; and 
with these gentlemen's good leave, I will endeavor 
to shape you an answer. And first, to speak to 
your question as it concerneth a minister himself : 
suj)pose a minister, a worthy man, possessed but 
of a very small benefice, and has in his eye a 
greater, more fat and plump by far ; he has also 
now an opportmiity of getting it, yet so as by being 
more studious, by preaching more frequently and 
zealously, and, because the temper of the people 
requires it, by altering of some of his principles ; 



BY-ENDS' COMPANIONS. 171 

for my part, I see no reason why a man may not 
do this, provided lie lias a call, aye, and more a 
great deal besides, and yet be an honest man. 
Eor why? 

1. His desire of a greater benefice is lawful ; 
this cannot be contradicted, since it is set before 
him by Providence ; so then he may get it if he 
can, making no question for conscience' sake. 

2. Besides, his desire after that benefice makes 
him more studious, a more zealous preacher, etc., 
and so makes him a better man, yea, makes him 
better improve his parts, which is according to 
the mind of God. 

3. Now, as for his complying with the temper 
of his people by deserting, to serve them, some of 
his principles, this argueth, 1. That he is of a 
self-denying temper, 2, Of a sweet and winning 
deportment, and, 3. So more fit for the ministerial 
function. 

4. I conclude then, that a minister that 
changes a small for a great, should not, for so 
doing, be judged as covetous ; but rather, since 
he is improved in his parts and industry thereby, 
be counted as one that pursues his call, and the 
opportunity put into his hand to do good. 

And now to the second part of the question, 
which concerns the tradesman you mentioned. 
Suppose such a one to have but a poor em^^loy 
in the world, but by becoming religious he may 



172 riLGRIM"S PEOGP.ESS. 

mend liis market, perhaps get a rich wife, or 
more and far better customers to his shop ; for 
my part, I see no reason but this may be lawfully 
done. For why? 

1. To become religious is a virtue, by what 
means soever a man becomes so. 

2. Nor is it unlawful to get a rich wife, or more 
custom to my shop. 

3. Besides, the man that gets these by becom- 
ing rehgious, gets that which is good, of them that 
are good, by becoming good himself ; so then here 
is a good wife and good customers and good 
gain, and all these by becoming religious, which 
is good : therefore to become religious to get all 
these is a good and profitable design. 

This answer, thus made by Mr. Money-love to 
Mr. By-ends' question, was highly applauded by 
them all; wherefore they concluded, upon the 
whole, that it was most wholesome and advanta- 
geous. And because, as they thought, no man 
was able to contradict it ; and because Christian 
and Hopeful were yet within call, they jointly 
agreed to assault them with the question as soon 
as they overtook them ; and the rather, because 
they had opposed Mr. By-ends before. So they 
called after them, and they stopped and stood 
still till they came up to them ; but they con- 
cluded, as they went, that not Mr. By-ends, but 
old Mr. Hold-the-world should propound the 



CHRISTIAN'S ANSWER. 173 

question to them, because, as tliey supposed, 
their answer to him would be without the re- 
mainder of that heat that was kindled betwixt 
]Mi\ By-ends and them at their parting a little 
before. ^ 

So they came up to each other, and after a 
short salutation, IVli-. Hold-the-world propounded 
the question to Christian and his fellow, and then 
bade them to answer if they could. 

Then said Christian, Even a babe in religion 
may answer ten thousand such questions. For if 
it be unlawful to follow Christ for loaves, as it is, 
John 6:26; how much more abominable is it to 
make of him and rehgion a stalking-horse to get 
and enjoy the world ! Nor do we find any other 
than heathens, hypocrites, devils, and wizards, 
that are of this opinion. 

1. Heathens : for when Hamor and Shechem 
had a mind to the daughter and cattle of Jacob, 
and saw that there was no way for them to come 
at them but by being circumcised, they said to 
their companions. If every male of us be circum- 
cised, as they are circumcised, shall not their cat- 
tle, and theu' substance, and every beast of theirs 
be ours? Their daughters and their cattle were ' 
that which they sought to obtain, and their re- 
ligion the stalking-horse they made use of to 
come at them. Read the whole story. Genesis 
34:20-24. 



174 PILGRI^rS PROGRESS. 

2. The hypocritical Pharisees were also of this 
religion : long prayers were their pretence, but 
to get widows' houses was their intent; and 
greater damnation was from God their judgment. 
Luke 20:46, 47. 

3. Judas the devil was also of this religion : 
he was religious for the bag, that he might 
be possessed of what was put therein ; but he 
was lost, cast away, and the very son of perdi- 
tion. 

4. Simon the wizard was of this religion too: 
for he would have had the Holy Ghost, that he 
might have got money therewith ; and his sen- 
tence from Peter's mouth was according. Acts 
8 : 19-22. 

5. Neither will it go out of my mind, but that 
that man who takes up religion for the world, 
will throw away religion for the world ; for so 
surely as Judas designed the world in becoming 
religious, so surely did he also sell religion and 
his Master for the same. To answer the ques- 
tion therefore affirmatively, as I perceive you 
have done, and to accept of, as authentic, such 
answer, is heathenish, hypocritical, and devil- 
ish ; and your reward will be according to your 
works. 

Then they stood staring one upon another, but 
had not wherewith to answer Christian. Hopeful 
also approved of the soundness of Christian's an- 



LUCRE HILL. 175 

swer ; so tliere was a gi-eat silence among tliem. 
Mr. By-ends and liis company also staggered 
and kept behind, that Christian and Hopeful 
might outgo them. Then said Christian to his 
fellow, If these men cannot stand before the sen- 
tence of men, what will they do with the sen- 
tence of God ? And if they are mute when dealt 
with by vessels of clay, what will they do when 
they shall be rebuked by the flames of a devour- 
ing fire? 

Then Christian and Hopeful outwent them 
again, and went till they came at a delicate plain, 
called Ease, where they went with much content; 

The ease that but that plain was but narrow, so 
EufmlSlhS they were quickly got over it. Now 
^^^* at the further side of that plain was a 

little hill, called Lucre, and in that hill a silver 
mine, which some of them that had formerly 
gone that way, because of the rarity of it, had 
tiu^ned aside to see ; but going too near the brim 
of the pit, the ground being deceitful under 

LiTcre hill a them, brokc, and they were slain : 
dangerous hill, gome also had been maimed there, and 
could not, to their dying day be their own men 
again. 

Demasatthe Then I saw in my dream that a 
hm Lucre. ji^^ig o£f ^-^q j.q^q^ q^^j. against the 

silver mme, stood Demas, gentleman-like, to 
call passengers to come and see ; who said to 



176 PILGRIM'S PROGBESS. 

Christian and his fellow, Ho ! turn „, ?t ^^^^ *2 

' Chnstian and 

aside hither, and I will show you a HopeM to 

*' come to turn. 

thing. 

Chr. "What tiding so deserving as to turn us 
out of the way to see it ? 

Demas. Here is a silver mine, and some dig- 
ging in it for treasure ; if you will come, with 
a little pains you may richly provide for your- 
selves. 

Hope. Then said Hopeful, Let us Hopeftdtempt- 

crn, coo ^^ *° ^o, but 

go see. Christian holds 

Chr. Not I, said Christian : I have i^^^ack. 
heard of this place before now, and how many 
there have been slain ; and besides, that treasure 
is a snare to those that seek it> for it hindereth 
them in their pilgrimage. 

Then Christian called to Demas, saying, Is not 
the place dangerous ? Hath it not hindered many 
in their pilgrimage ? Hosea 9 : 6. 

Demas. Not very dangerous, except to those that 
are careless. But withal he blushed as he spoke. 

Chr. Then said Christian to Hopeful, Let us 
not stir a step, but still keep on our way. 

Hope. I will warrant you, when By-ends comes 
up, if he hath the same invitation as we, he will 
turn in thither to see. 

Chr. No doubt thereof, for his principles lead 
him that way, and a hundred to one but he dies 
there. 



CliRISTIAN AND DEMAS. 177 

Demas. Then Demas called again, saying, Cut 
•will yon not come over and see ? 

Che. Then Christian roundly answered, say- 
ing, Demas, thou art an enemy to the right ways 
of the Lord of this way, and hast been ah'eady 
condemned for thine own turning aside, by one 
of his Majesty's judges, 2 Tim. 4:10; and why 
seekest thou to bring us into the lilie condemna- 
tion? Besides, if we at all turn aside, our Lord 
the King will certainly hear thereof, and will 
there put us to shame where we would stand 
with boldness before him. 

Demas cried again, that he also was one of 
their fraternity ; and that if they would tariy a 
little, he also himself would Y/alk Tvdth them. 

Che. Then said Christian, "V^^at is thy 
name ? Is it not the same by which I have call- 
ed thee? 

Demas. Yes, my name is Demas ; I am the son 
of Abraham. 

Che. I know you : Gehazi was your great- 
grandfather, and Judas your father, and you have 
trod in their steps; it is but a devilish prank 
that thou usest : thy father was hanged for a 
traitor, and thou deservest no better reward. 
2 Kings 5 : 20-27; Matt. 26 : 14, 15; 27:3-5. As- 
sure thyself, that when we come to the King vv^e 
will tell him of this thy behavior. Thus they 
went their way. 

Pil. Prog. 12 



178 PILGEIM'S PROGRESS. 

By this time By-ends and his companions were 
come again within sight, and they at the first 
beck went over to Demas. Now, By-ends goes 
whether they feU into the pit by look- ^^^^ *^ ^^'''^^^ 
ing over the brink thereof, or whether they went 
down to dig, or whether they were smothered m 
the bottom by the damps that commonly rise of 
these things, I am not certain ; but this I observ- 
ed, that they w^ere never again seen in the way. 
Then sung Christian, 

"By-ends and silver Demas both agree; 
One calls, the other rnns, that he may be 
A sharer in his lucre ; so these t^vo 
Talie up in this world, and no further go." 

Now I saw that just on the other side of this 
plain the pilgrims came to a place where stood 
an old monument, hard by the high- They see a 
way side, at the sight of which they ment 
were both concerned, because of the strangeness 
of the form thereof ; for it seemed to them as if 
it had been a woman transformed into the shape 
of a pillar. Here therefore they stood looking 
and looking upon it, but could not for a time 
tell what they should make thereof. . At last 
Hopeful espied, written above upon the head 
thereof, a writing in an unusual hand ; but he 
being no scholar, called to Christian, for he was 
learned, to see if he could pick out the meaning : 
so he came, and after a little laying of letters 



THE riLLAR OF SALT. 179 

together, he found the same to be this, "Ee- 
member Lot's wife." So he read it to his fel- 
low ; after which they both concluded that that 
was the pillar of salt into which Lot's wife was 
turned, for her looking back with a covetous 
heart when she was going from Sodom for safe- 
ty. Gen, 19:26. Which sudden and amazing 
sight gave them occasion for this discoui'se. 

Chr. Ah, my brother, this is a seasonable 
sight : it came opportunely to us after the invita- 
tion which Demas gave us to come over to view 
the hill Lucre ; and had we gone over, as he de- 
sired us, and as thou wast inclined to do, my 
brother, we had, for aught I know, been made, 
like this woman, a spectacle for those that shall 
come after to behold. 

Hope. I am sorry that I was so foolish, and am 
made to wonder that I am not now as Lot's wife; 
for wherein was the difference betwixt her sin 
and mine? She only looked back, and I had a 
desire to go see. Let grace be adored, and let 
me be ashamed that ever such a thing should be 
in my heart. 

Chr. Let us take notice of what we see here, 
for our help for time to come. This vvoman 
escaped one judgment, for she feU not by the 
destruction of Sodom ; yet she was destroyed by 
another, as we see : she is turned into a pillar of 
salt. 



180 PILGRIM'S PEOGPvESS. 

Hope. True, and she may be to us botli cau- 
tion and example : caution, that we should sliuu 
her sin ; or a sign of what judgment will over- 
take such as shall not be prevented by this 
caution : so Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, with 
the two hundred and fifty men that perished in 
their sin, did also become a sign or example to 
others to beware. Num. 16 : 31, 32 ; 26 : 9, 10. 
But above all, I muse at one thing, to wit, hovvr 
Demas and his fellows can stand so confidently 
yonder to look for that treasure, which this 
woman but for looking behind her after — for we 
read not that she stepped one foot out of the 
way — was turned into a pillar of salt ; especially 
since the judgment which overtook her did make 
her an example within sight of where they are ; 
for they cannot choose but see her, did they but 
lift up their eyes. 

Chr. It is a thing to be wondered at, and it 
argueth that then- hearts are grown desperate 
in the case ; and I cannot tell who to compare 
them to so fitty, as to them that pick pockets 
in the presence of the judge, or that will cut 
purses under the gallows. It is said of the men 
of Sodom, that they were "sinners exceedingly," 
because they were sinners "before the Lord," 
that is, in his eyesight, and notwithstanding the 
kindnesses that he had showed them ; for the 
land of Sodom Avas. now like the garden of Eden 



THE RIVER OF LIFE. ISl 

lieretofore. Genesis 13 : 10, 13. This therefore 
provoked him the more to jealousy, and made 
their plague as hot as the fire of the Lord out 
of heaven could make it. And it is most ration- 
ally to be concluded, that such, even such as 
these are, that shall sin in the sight, yea, and 
that too in despite of such examples that are 
set continually before them, to caution them to 
the contrary, must be partakers of severest judg- 
ments. 

Hope. Doubtless thou hast said the truth ; 
but what a mercy is it that neither thou, but es- 
pecially I, am not made myself this example f 
This ministereth occasion to us to thank God, 
to fear before him, and always to remember Lot's 
wife. 

I saw then that they went on their way to a 
pleasant river, which David the king called "the 

A river.' rivcr of God ;" but John, " the river 
of the water of Hfe." Psa. 65:9; Kev. 22:1; 
Ezek. 47:1-9. Now theii* w^ay lay just upon the 
bank of this river ; here therefore Christian and 
his companion walked with great delight ; they 
drank also of the water of the river, which was 
pleasant and enlivening to their weary spirits. 

Trees by the Besides, ou the banks of this river, on 
^^^'''^' either side, were green trees with ail 

The fruit and manner of fruit ; and the leaves they 
trees. ate to prevent surfeits, and other dis- 



182 PILGRIM'S PKOGRESS. 

eases that are incident to tliose that heat their 
blood by travel. On either side of the river 
"was also a meadow, curiously beauti- Ameadovr.in 
fied with lilies ; and it was green all down to sleep. 
the year long. In this meadow they lay down 
and slept, for here they might lie down safely. 
Psa. 23 : 2 ; Isa. 14 : 30. When they awoke they 
gathered again of the fi-uit of the trees, and di^ank 
again of the water of the river, and then lay down, 
again to sleep. Thus they did several days and 
nights. Then they sung, 

"Behold ye how these crystal streams do glide, 
To comfort pilgrims by the highway side. 
The meadows green, besides their fragrant smeU, 
Yield dainties for them ; and he who can tell 
"What pleasant frnit, yea, leaves these trees do yield, 
Will soon sell all, that he may buy this field." 

So when they were disposed to go on — for they 
were not as yet at their journey's end — they ate 
and drank, and departed. 

Now I beheld in my dream that they had not 
journeyed far, but the river and the way for a 
time parted, at which they were not a little 
sorry; yet they durst not go out of the way. 
Now the way from the river was rough, and their 
feet tender by reason of their travels ; so the 
souls of the pilgrims were much discouraged be- 
cause of the way. Num. 21 : 4. Wherefore, still 
as they went on they wished for a better way. 



BY-PATH MEADOW. 183 

Now, a little before them there was on the left 
By-path mead- hand of the roacl a meadow, and a 
^'^- stile to go over into it, and that 

meadow is called By-path meadow. Then said 
Christian to his fellow, If this meadow Heth 
along by our wayside, let 's go over into it. Then 
he went to the stile to see, and behold a path 
lay along by the way on the other side of 
One tempta- the fence. It is accordinsf to my 

tion makes way -j r^r • i.- i • .i 

for anotiier. wish, saiQ Christian ; here is the 
easiest going ; come, good Hopeful, and let us go 
over. 

Hope. But how if this path should lead us out 
of the way? 

Chk. That is not likely, said the other. Look, 
strong Chris- doth it uot go aloug by the wayside? 
SSs'ou^t So Hopeful, being persuaded by his 
of the way. fgUow, Went after him over the stile. 
When they were gone over, and were got into 
the path, they found it very easy for their feet ; 
and withal, they, looking before them, espied a 
man walking as they did, and his name was Vain- 
Confidence ; so they called after him, and asked 
him whither that way led. He said, To the ce- 
lestial gate. Look, said Christian, did not I tell 
See whnt it you SO? by this you may see we are 
tolV "if wuh riglit. So they foUowed, and he went 
strangers. i^gf^^^g ^-^^^^^ ^^^ behold the night 

came on, and it grew very dark ; so that they 



13'i riLGniM'S PROGKESS. 

that went behind lost the sight of him that went 
before. 

He therefore that went before, Yain-Confi- 
dence by name, not seeing the wa^r a pit to catch 
before him, fell into a deep pit, which ousin. 
was on purpose there made by the prmce of 
those grounds to catch vain-glorious fools ^vith- 
al, and was dashed in pieces with his fall. Isa. 
9:16. 

Now Christian and his fellow heard him fall. 
So they called to know the matter, but there was 
none to answer, only they heard a groaning. 
Then said Hopeful, Where are we now ? Then 
was his fellow silent, as mistrusting that he had 
led him out of the way ; and now it began to rain 
and thunder and ligiiten in a most dreadful man- 
ner, and the water rose amain. 

Then Hopeful groaned in himself, saying. Oh, 
that I had kept on my way. 

ChR. "Who could have thought that Eeasoningbe- 

tween Cliristiau 

this path should have led us out of and Hopeiui. 
the way? 

Hope. I was afraid on 't at the very first, and 
therefore gave you that gentle caution. I would 
have spoken plainer, but that you are older tlian I. 

Chr. Good brother, be not offended : I am 
sorry I have brought thee out of the christian's 
way, and that I have j)ut thee in such leading msbvo- 

. , -T^ ■•J.I ther out of the 

immment danger, i ray, my uroth- way. 



OUT OF THE ^AY. 185 

er, forgive me ; I did not do it of an evil in- 
tent. 

Hope. Be comforted, my brother, for I forgive 
tiiee ; and believe too that tliis shall be for our 
good. 

Chr. I am glad that I have with me a merciful 
brother : but we must not stand here ; let us try 
to go back again. 

Hope. But, good brother, let me go before. 

Che. No, if you please, let me go first, that if 
there be any danger, I may be first therein, be- 
cause by my means we are both gone out of the 
way. 

Hope. No, said Hopeful, you shall not go first, 
for your mind being troubled may lead you out 
of the way again. Then for thek encouragement 
they heard the voice of one saying, "Let thy 
heart be toward the highway, even the way that 
thou wentest : tui-n again." Jer. 31:21. But by 
this time the waters were greatly risen, by reason 
of which the way of going back was very danger- 
ous. Then I thought that it is easier going out 
of the way when we are in, than going in when 
we are out. Yet they adventured to go back ; but 
They are in it was SO dark, and the flood was so 
d^&g 2liig^, that in their going back they 
they go back, j^g^^ -^q ^q hskYQ been di'owned nine 
or ten times. 

Neither could they, with all the skill they had, 



18G PILGEIM'S TROGRESS. 

get again to the stile that night. Wherefore at 
last lighting under a little shelter, They sleep in 
they sat down there tiU the day broke; Giant Despair, 
but being weary, they fell asleep. Now there 
was, not far from the place where they lay, a 
castle, called Doubting Castle, the owner whereof 
was Giant Despair, and it was in his grounds 
they now were sleepmg: wherefore he, getting 
uj) in the morning early, and walking up and 
down in his fields, caught Christian and Hopeful 
asleep in his grounds. Then with a grim and 
surly voice he bade them awake, and asked them 
v/hence they were, and what they did in his 
grounds. They told him they were pilgrims, 
and that they had lost their way. Then said the 
Sfiant, You have this night trespassed He finds them 

^ , , ,. . -, -, ■ in his grounds 

on me by tramplmg m and lying on and carries 

-, -I n i> j_ them to Doubt- 

niy grounds, and tnereiore you must mg castie. 
go along with me. So they were forced to go, 
because he was stronger than they. They also 
had but, little to say, for they knew themselves in 
a fault. The giant therefore drove them before 
him, and jDut them into his castle, into a very 
dark dungeon, nasty and stinking to The grievous- 
the S23irits of those two men. Here imprisonment, 
then they lay from Wednesday morning till Sat- 
urday night, without one bit of bread or drop of 
drink, or Hgiit, or any to ask how they did ; they 
were therefore here in evil case, and were far 



GIANT DESPAIR. 187 

from friends and acquaintance. Psalm 88 : 18. 
Now in this place Christian had double sorrow, 
because it w*as through his unadvised counsel 
that they were brought into this distress. • 

Now Giant Despair had a wife, and her name 
was Diffidence : so when he was gone to bed he 
told his wife what he had done, to ^vit, that he 
had taken a couple of prisoners, and cast them 
into his dungeon for trespassing on his gToimds. 
Then he asked her also what he had best do 
further to them. So she asked him what they 
were, whence they came, and whither they were 
bound, and he told her. Then she counselled 
him, that when he arose in the morning he 
should beat them without mercy. So when he 
arose, he getteth him a grievous crab-tree cudgel, 
and goes down into the dungeon to them, and 
there first falls to rating of them as if they were 
dogs, although they gave him never a word of 
On Timrsday distastc. Then he falls upon them, 
Ss h?s'prU- and beats them fearfully, in such sort 
oners. \]^q^^ they wcre not able to help them- 

selves, or to turn them upon the floor. This 
done, he withdraws and leaves them there to 
condole the'ir misery, and to moui'n under their 
distress : so all that day they spent their time in 
nothing but sighs and bitter lamentations. The 
next night, she, talking with her husband further 
about them, and understanding that they were 



138 PILGIIIM'3 mOGIlESS. 

yet alive, did advise liim to counsel tliem to make 
av^ay with tliemselves. So wlien morning was 
come, he goes to them in a surly manner as be- 
fore, and perceiving them- to be very sore with 
the stripes that he had given them the day be- 
fore, he told them, that since they on Friday 

' .^ ' "^ Giant Despair 

were never like to come out of that counsels them 
place, their only way would be forth- selves, 
v/ith to make an end of themselves, either with 
knife, halter, or poison ; for why, said he, should 
you choose to live, seeing it is attended with so 
much bitterness? But they desired him to let 
them go. With that he looked ugly upon them, 
and rushing to them, Iiad doubtless made an end 
of them himself, but that he fell into one of his 
fits — ^for he sometimes in sunshiny The giant 
weather fell into fits, and lost for a fits. 
time the use of his hands : wherefore he with- 
drew, and left them as before to consider what 
to do. Then did the prisoners consult be- 
tween themselves whether it was best to take 
his counsel or no ; and thus they began to dis- 
course. 

Chk. Brother, said Christian, what shall we do ? 
The life that we now live is miserable. For 
my part, I know not whether it is best to live 
thus, or to die out of hand. My soul christian 
chooseth strangling rather than hfe, ^™^^'^'^- 
and the grave is more easy for me than this 



THE riLGIlIMS' DISCOURSE. 189 

dungeon. Job 7 : 15. Shall we be ruled bj tlio 
giant ? 

Hope. Indeed our present condition is dread- 
ful, and death would be far more welcome to mo 
than thus for ever to abide ; but yet, let us con- 
sider, the Lord of the country to which we are 
going hath said, "Thou shalt do no murder," no, 
not to another man's person ; much more then 
are we forbidden to take his counsel to kill our- 
selves. Besides, he that kills another, can but 
commit murder upon his body ; but for one to 
kill himseK, is to kill body and soul at once. 
And moreover, my brother, thou talkest of ease 
in the grave ; but hast thou forgotten the hell 
w^hither for certain the murderers go? for "no 
Hopefvu com- murderer hath eternal life," etc. And 
forts iimi. 2et us cousidcr again, that all the law 
is not in the hand of Giant Despair : others, so 
far as I can understand, have been taken by him 
as well as we, and yet have escaped out of his 
Lands. "Who knows but that God, v/ho made 
tlie world, may cause that Giant Despair may 
die ; or that, at some time or other, he may for- 
get to lock us in ; or that he may, in a short 
time, have another of his fits before us, and may 
lose the use of his limbs? And if ever that 
should come to pass again, for m}^ part, I am re- 
solved to pluck up the heart of a man, and to try 
my utmost to get from under his hand. I was 



190 PILGEIM'S PEOGHESS. 

a fool that I did not try to do it before. But 
however, my brother, let us be patient, and en- 
dure a while : the time may come that may 
give us a happy release ; but let us not be our 
own murderers. With these words Hopeful at 
present did moderate the mind of his brother ; 
so they contmued together in the dark that day, 
in their sad and dolefal condition. 

Well, towards evening the giant goes down 
into the dungeon again, to see if his prisoners 
had taken his counsel. But when he came there 
he found them alive ; and truly, alive was all ; 
for now, what for want of bread and water, 
and by reason of the wounds they received 
when \xe beat them, they could do little but 
breathe. But I say, he found them alive ; at 
which he fell into a grievous rage, and told them, 
that seeing they had disobeyed his counsel, it 
should be worse with them than if they had never 
been born. 

At this they trembled greatly, and I think that 
Christian fell into a swoon ; but coming a little to 
himself again, they renewed their discourse about 
the giant's counsel, and whether yet they had best 
take it or no. Now Christian again seemed for 
•loing it ; but Hopeful made his second reply as 
foUoweth : 

Hope. My brother, said he, remembercst thou 
not how valiant thou hast been heretofore? 



THE PILGEIMS' DISCOURSE. 191 

Hopeful com- AiDollyon could not crush thee, nor 

forts nun again ^ '' ^ 

by calling for- coulcl all that tliou didst hear, or see, 

mer things to . 

remembrance, or leel, iH the valley 01 the Shadow of 
Death. "WTiat hardship, terror, and amazement 
hast thou ah-eady gone through ; and art thou 
now nothing but fears ? Thou seest that I am in 
the dungeon with thee, a far weaker man by 
nature than thou art. Also this giant hath 
wounded me as well as thee, and hath also cut 
off the bread and water from my mouth, and 
wdth thee I moiu*n without the light. But let 
us exercise a little more patience. Eemember 
how thou playedst the man at Vanity Fair, and 
wast neither afi'aid of the chain nor cage, nor 
yet of bloody death : wherefore let us, at least to 
avoid the shame that it becomes not a Christian 
to be found in, bear up with patience as well as 
we can. 

Now night being come again, and the giant and 
his wife being in bed, she asked him concei-ning 
the prisoners, and if they had taken his counsel : 
to which he replied. They are sturdy rogues ; they 
choose rather to bear all hardships than to make 
away with themselves. Then said she, Take them 
into the castle-yard to-morrow, and show them the 
bones and skulls of those that thou hast already 
dispatched, and make them believe, ere a week 
comes to an end, thou wilt tear them in pieces, as 
thou hast done their fellows before them. 



J92 PILGRIM'S rRoariESS. 

So wlien the morning v/as come, the giant goes 
to them again, and takes them into the castle- 
yard, and shows them as his wife had bidden 
liim. These, said he, were joilgrims, as you are, 
once, and they trespassed on my^ on Saturday 

• ' J I J the giant threat- 

PTounds, as you have done ; and when ened that short- 

T il 1 . i. T ^ ^1 • • lyhcwouldpuU 

i tliought nt I tore them m j)ieces ; them in pieces. 
and so within ten days I will do you : get you 
down to your den again. And with that he beat 
them all the way thither. They lay therefore all 
day on Saturday in a lamentable case, as before. 
Now when night was come, and when Mrs. Dif- 
fidence and her husband the giant were got to 
bed, they began to renew their discourse of their 
prisoners ; and withal, the old giant wondered 
that he could neither by hi-s blows nor counsel 
bring them to an end. And with that his wife 
rephed, I fear, said she, that they live in hopes 
that some will come to relieve them; or that 
they have picklocks about them, by the means of 
which they hope to escape. And sayest thou so, 
my dear? said the giant ; I will therefore search 
them in the morninof. 

o 

AVell, on Saturday about midnight they began 
to pray, and continued in prayer till almost break 
of day. 

Now, a little before it was day, good Christian, 
as one half amazed, broke out into this passionate 
speech : What a fool, quoth he, am I, thus to lie 



THEY ESCAPE. 193 

in a stinking dungeon, ^vlien I may as well walk 
A key in Chris- ^^ liberty! I liavG a key in my bosom 
c^uedPi'SS: caUed Promise, that will, I am per- 
S'^^'Do^'ubSng siiaded, open any lock in Doubting 
Castle. ° Castle. Then said Hopeful, That is 

good news ; good brother, pluck it out of thy 
bosom, and try. 

Then Christian pulled it out of his bosom, and 
began to try at the dungeon-door, whose bolt, as 
he tui-ned the key, gave back, and the door flew 
oi^en with ease, and Christian and Hopeful both 
came out. Then he went to the outward door 
that leads into the castle-yard, and with his key 
0]Dened that door also. After that he went to the 
iron gate, for that must be opened too ; but that 
lock went desperately hard, yet the key did open 
it. Then they thrust oj^en the gate to make their 
escape with speed ; but that gate, as it opened, 
made such a creaking that it waked Giant De- 
spair, who hastily rising to pursue his prisoners, 
felt his limbs to fail, for his fits took him again, 
so that he could by no means go after them. 
Then they went went on, and came to the King's 
highway, and so were safe, because they were out 
of his jurisdiction. 

Now, when they were gone over the stile, they 
began to contrive with themselves what they 
should do at that stile to prevent those that shall 
come after from falling into the hands of Giant 

PU. Prog. 13 



194 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Despair. So they consented to erect a piuar erect- 

•"■ -^ ed by Cliristian 

there a pillar, and to engrave upon and iiis feUow. 
the side thereof this sentence : "Over this stile is 
the way to Doubting Castle, which is kept by 
Giant Despair, who despiseth the King of the 
celestial country, and seeks to destroy his holy 
pilgrims." Many therefore that followed after, 
read what was v/ritten, and escaped the danger. 
This done, they sung as follows : 

*' Out of tlie way we went, and then we found 
Wliat 't was to tread upon forbidden ground : ' 
And let them that come after have a care, 
Lest heedlessness makes them as we to fare : 
Lest they, for trespassmg, his prisoners are, 
Whose castle 's Doubting, and whose name 's Despair.'* 



THE DELECTABLE MOUNTAINS. 



THE EIGHTH STAGE. 

They went tlien till they came to the Delectable 

The Deiecta- mouiitpins, wMcli mountaiiis belong 

blemoTmtams. ^^ j^:^q j^^^,^^ ^f tliat hill of which WO 

have spoken before. So they went up to the 

mountains, to behold the gardens and orchards, 

Tiiey are re- the ^ducyards and fountains of water ; 

freshed in the , i ji t i -, it 

mountaiiis. whero also they cli'anii and washed 
themselves, and did freely eat of the vineyards. 
Now there were on the tops of these mountains 
shepherds feeding then- flocks, and they stood by 
the highway side. The pilgTims therefore went to 
them, and leaning upon then- staffs, as is common 
with weary pilgrims when they stand to talk with 
Talk xvith the any by the way, they asked. Whose 
shepherds. Delcctablc mouutaius are these ? and 
whose be the sheep that feed upon them ? 

Shep. These mountains are Emmanuel's land, 
and they are within sight of his city : and the 
sheej) also are his, and he laid down his life for 
them. John 10:11, 15. 

Che. Is this the way to the celestial city? 

Shep. You are just in your way. 

Chr. How far is it thither? 

Shep. Too far for any but those who shall get 
thither indeed. 



196 PILGKIM'S PEOGEESS. 

Chr. Is the way safe, or dangerous? 

Shep. Safe for those for whom it is to be 
safe ; but trangressors shall fall therein. Hosea 
14:9. 

Chr. Is there in this place any relief for pil- 
grims that are weary and faint in the Vv^ay? 

Shep. The Lord of these mountains hath given 
us a charge not to be forgetful to entertain 
strangers, Heb. 13 : 2 ; therefore the good of the 
place is before you. 

I saw also in my dream, that when the shep- 
herds perceived that they were wayfaring men, 
they also put questions to them, to which they 
made answer as in other places, as. Whence 
came you? and, How got you into the way? 
and. By what means have you so persevered 
therein ? for but few of them that begin to 
come hither, do show their face on these moun- 
tains. But Avhen the shepherds heard their 
answers, being pleased therewith, they looked 
very lovingly upon them, and said, xiie shepherds 
"Welcome to the Delectable moun- ^^^^^^^^^^ *^^^- 
tains. 

The shepherds, I sa}^, whose names were 
Knowledge, Experience, Watchful, • The names of 
and Sincere, took them by the hand, ti^^ shepherds. 
and had them to their tents, and made them 
partake of that Avhich was ready at present. 
They said, moreover, Yv'e would that you should 



MOUNTAIN OF ERROE. 197 

stay here a while to bo acquainted with us, and 
yet more to solace 3'ourselves with the good of 
these Delectable mountains. Then they told 
them that they were content to stay. So they 
went to their rest that night, because it was very 
late. 

Then I saw in my dream, that in the morning 
the shepherds called up Christian and Hopeful 
to walk with them upon the mountains. So 
they went forth with them, and walked a while, 
having a pleasant prospect on every side. Then 
They are said tho shcpherds one to a,n other, 
ders. ShpJl we show these pilgrims some 

wonders ? So when they had concluded to do it, 
Themoiintain they had them first to the top of a 
of Error. j^^ ^,^^^^^1 Error, which was very 

steep on the farthest side, and bid them look 
down to the bottom. So Christian and Hopeful 
looked down, and saw at the bottom several 
men dashed all to pieces by a fall that they had 
from the top. Then said Christian, VvTiat mean- 
eth this? The shepherds answered. Have you 
not heard of them that were made to err, by 
hearkening to H^Tiieneus and Philetus, as con- 
cerning the faith of the resurrection of the body? 
2 Tim. 2 : 17, 18. They answered. Yes. Then 
said the shepherds. Those that you see he dash- 
ed in pieces at the bottom of this mountain arc 
they : and they have continued to this day un- 



198 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

buried, as you see, for an example to others to 
take lieecl how they clamber too high, or how 
they come too near the brink of this mountain. 

Then I saw that they had them to the top of 
another mountain, and the name of that is 
Caution, and bid them look afar off; Mountcaution. 
which, v/hen they did, they perceived, as they 
thought, several men walking up and down 
among the tombs that were there ; and they 
perceived that the men were blind, because they 
stumbled sometimes upon the tombs, and because 
they could not get out from among them. Then 
said Christian, What means this? 

The shepherds then answered. Did you not 
see, a little below these mountains, a stile that 
led into a meadow, on the left hand of this 
way ? They answered. Yes. Then said the shep- 
herds, From that stile there goes a path that 
leads directly to Doubting Castle, which is kept 
by Giant Despair ; and these men — pointing to 
them among the tombs — came once on pilgrim- 
age, as you do now, even until they came to that 
same stile. Aiid because the right way was 
rough in that place, they chose to go out of it 
into that meadow, and there were taken by 
Giant Desj)air, and cast into Doubtmg Castle ; 
where, after they had a while been kept in the 
dungeon, he at last did put out their eyes, and 
led them among those tombs, where he has left 



LUCRE HILL. 199 

tliem to wander to tliis very day, that tlie say- 
ing of tlie wise man might be fulfilled, "He 
that wandereth out of the way of understanding 
shall remain in the congregation of the dead." 
Prov. 21 : 16. Then Christian and Hopeful look- 
ed upon one another, with tears gushing out, but 
yet said nothing to the shej)herds. 

Then I saw in my dream, that the shepherds 
had them to another place in a bottom, whero 
was a door on the side of a hill ; and the}^ open- 
ed the door, and bid them look in. They look- 
ed in therefore, and saw that within it was very- 
dark and smoky; they also thought that they 
heard there a rumbhng noise as of fire, and a 
cry of some tormented, and that they smelt the 
scent of brimstone. Then said Christian, "What 
means this? The shepherds told them, This is 
A by-way to ^ by-way to heU, a way that hypo- 
^^^' crites go m at : namely, such as sell 

their bu'thright, with Esau; such as sell their 
Master, with Judas ; such as blaspheme the gos- 
pel, with Alexander , and that he and dissemble, 
with Ananias and Sapphira his wife. 

Then said Hopeful to the shepherds, I per- 
ceive that these had on them, even every one, a 
show of pilgrimage, as we have now ; had they 
not? 

Shep. Yes, and held it a long time too. 

Hope. How far might they go on in pilgTimago 



200 PILGRIM'S PB0GRE8S. 

in their day, since tliey, notwithstanding, were 
miserably cast away ? 

Shep. Some further, and some not so far as 
these mountains. 

Then said the pilgrims one to the other, "We 
had need cry to the Strong for strength. 

Shep. Aye, and you will have need to use it, 
when you have it, too. 

By this time the pilgrims had a deshe to go 
forward, and the shepherds a desire they should ; 
so they walked together towards the end of the 
mountains. Then said the shepherds one to an- 
other. Let us here show the pilgrims the gates 
of the celestial city, if they have skill , The shep- 

•^ " . lierds' perspec- 

to look through our perspective-glass, tive-giass. 
The pilgrims lovingly accepted the motion : so 
they had them to the top of a high hill called 
Clear, and gave them the glass to look. 

Then they tried to look ; but the remembrance 
of that last thing that the shepherds The fmita of 
had shown them made their hands ^^^^^ ^^^^•• 
shake, by means of which impediment they could 
not look steadily through the glass ; yet they 
thought they saw something hke the gate, and 
also some of the glory of the place. Then they 
went away, and sung, 

"Thus by the shejDherds secrets are revealed, 
Which from all other men are kept concealed 
Come to the shepherds then, if yon would see 
Things deep, things hid, and that mysterious bo. " 



THE PILGRIMS DEPART. 201 

"When tliey were about to depart, one of tlie 
A twofold shepherds gave them a note of the 
caution. wsij. Another of them bid them be- 

ware of the Flatterer. The third bid them take 
heed that they slept not upon the Enchanted 
ground. And the fourth bid them God speed. 
So I awoke from my dream. 



202 PILGEIM'S PEOGBESS. 



THE NINTH STAGE. 

And I slept, and dreamed again, and saw tlie 
same two pilgTims going down the mountains 
along the liigliway towards the city. Now, a 
little below these mountains, on the rj^^ country 
left hand, lieth the country of Con- ^ SSch ca^e 
ceit ; from which country there comes igiiorance. 
into the way in which the pilgrims walked, a lit- 
tle crooked lane. Here therefore they met with 
a very brisk lad that came out of that country, 
and his name was lo-norance. So christian and 

Ignorance have 

Christian asked him from what parts some talk, 
he came, and whither he was going. 

Ignoe. Sir, I was born in the country that lieth 
off there, a little on the left hand, and I am go- 
ing to the celestial city. 

Chr. But how do you think to get in at the 
gate, for you may find some difficulty there ? 

Ignor. As other good people do, said he. 

Chr. But what have you to show at that gate, 
that the gate should be opened to you? 

Ignor. I know my Lord's will, and have been 
a crood liver ; I pay every man his The grounds 

^ _ P I Ai 1 of Ignorance's 

own ; I pray, last, pay tithes, and hope. 

give alms, and have left my country for whither 

I am going. 



IGNORANCE. 203 

Chr. But tlioii earnest not in at tlie wlcket-gate 
that is at the head of this way ; thou earnest in 
hither through^ that same crooked lane, and 
therefore I fear, however thou majest think of 
thyself, when the reckoning-day shall come, thou 
wilt have laid to thy charge that thou art a thief 
and a robber, instead of getting admittance into 
the city. 

Ignor. Gentlemen, ye be utter strangers to me; 

He teUeth I know you not : be content to follow 

every one he is . „ 

but a fool. the religion oi your country, and I 
will follow the religion of mine. I hope all will 
be well. And as for the gate that you talk of, 
all the world knows that it is a great way off of 
our country. I cannot think that any man in all 
our parts doth so much as know the way to it j 
nor need they matter whether they do or no, 
since we have, as you see, a line, pleasant, gTeen 
lane, that comes down from our country, the 
next way into the Avay. 

When Chi-istian sav/ that the man was wise in 
his own conceit, he said to Hopeful whispering- 
ly, " There is more hope of a fool than of him." 
Prov. 26 : 12. And said, moreover, " When he 
that is a fo.ol walketh by the way, his wisdom 
How to carry f ailetli him, and he saith to every one 
it to a fool. that he is a fool." Eccles. 10:3. 
What, shall we talk further with him ; or outgo 
him at present, and so leave him to think of 



204 PILGPtlM'S PEOGIiESS. 

what he hath heard ah-eady, and then stop again 
for him afterwards, and see if by degrees we can 
do any good to him? Then said Hopeful, 

"Let Ignorance a little while now muse 
On what is said, and let him not refuse 
Good counsel to embrace, lest he remain 
Still ignorant of what 's the chieftest gain. 
God saith, those that no understanding have — 
Although he made them — them he mil not save." 

Hope. He further added, It is not good, I 
think, to say so to him all at once ; let us pass 
him by, if you will, and t>alk to him anon, even as 
he is able to bear it. 

So they both went on, and Ignorance he came 
after. Now, when they had passed him a little 
way, they entered into a very dark lane, where 
they met a man whom seven devils had bound 
with seven strong cords, and were carrying him 
back to the door that they saw on the side of the 
hill. Matt. 12 : 45 ; Proverbs 5 : 22. Now good 
Christian began to tremble, and so did Hopeful 
his companion ; yet, as the devils led away the 
man. Christian looked to see if he knew him; 
and he thought it might be one Turn-away, that 
dwelt in the town of Apostasy. But he did not 
perfectly see his face, for he did hang . The destruc- 
his head like a thief that is found ; Tum-away. 
but being gone past. Hopeful looked after him, 
and espied on his back a paper with this in- 



LITTLE-FAITH'S TEOUBLES. 205 

scription, "Wanton professor, and damnable 
apostate." 

Then said Christian to his fellow, Now I call to 
remembrance that wliich was told me of a thing 
that happened to a good man hereabout. The 
Christian teu- ^3-^6 of the man was Little-Faith; 
Sn^'l'Srof b^^t a good man, and he dwelt in the 
Little-Faith. ^^^^ ^.f Sincere. The thing was 
this. At the entering in at this passage, there 
Broadway-gate, comcs down from Broadwaj-gate a 
Dead-Man's lane, Called Dead-man's lane ; so 
^^®* called because of the murders that 

are commonly done there ; and this Little-Faith 
going on pilgi'image, as we do now, chanced to 
sit down there and sleep. Now there happened 
at that time to come down the lane from Broad- 
w^ay-gate, three sturdy rogues, and their names 
were Faint-Heart, IMistrust, and Guilt, three 
brothers ; and they, espying Little-Faith where 
he was, came galloping up with speed. Now 
the good man was just awaked from his sleep, 
and was getting up to go, on his journey. So 
they came up all to him, and with threatening 
language bid him stand. At this Little-Faith 
looked as white as a sheet, and had neither 
^1*,"^: power to fight nor fly. Then said 

Faith robbed L^ ^ '^ 

by Faint-heart, Faiut-Hcart, Deliver thy purse : but 

]Mistrust, and l j. t -. . i 

Guilt. he making no haste to do it, for he 

was loath to lose his money, llistrust ran u-p to 



206 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Iiim, and thrusting his hand into his pocket, 
pulled out thence a bag of silver. They get away 
Then he cried out, Thieves, thieves ! Jjf<,,f^^"' ^"^ 
With that, GuHt, with a great club ^«^^- 
that was in his hand, struck Little-Faith on the 
head, and with that blow felled him flat to the 
ground, where he lay bleeding as one that would 
bleed to death. All this while the thieves stood 
by. But at last, they hearing that some were 
upon the road, and fearing lest it should be one 
Great-Grace, that dwells in the town of Good- 
Confidence, they betook themselves to their heels, 
and left this good man to shift for himself. Now, 
after a while, Little-Faith came to himself, and 
getting up, made shift to scramble on his way. 
This was the story. 

Hope. But did they take from him all that ever 
he had ? 

Chr. No ; the place where his jewels were, 
they never ransacked ; so those he , Littie-Faith 

'^ 1 T in lost not Ills best 

kept still. But, as I w^as told, the things. 
good man was much afflicted for his loss ; for 
the thieves got most of his spending-money. 
That w^hich they got not, as I said, were jewels ; 
also, he had a little odd money left, but scarce 
enough to bring him to his journey's end. Nay, 
if I was not misinformed, he was Littie-raith 
forced to beg as he went, to keep tXa^Sney'l 
himself alive, for his jewels he might ^^'^* 



DISCOURSE ABOUT LITTLE-FAITH. 207 

not sell ; but beg and do wlio.t tie could, lie went, 
fis we say, with many a hungry belly the most 
part of the rest of the way. 1 Pet. 4 : 18. 

Hope. But is it not a wonder they got not 
from him his certificate, by which he was to re- 
ceive his admittance at the celestial gate? 

Chr. It is a wonder ; but they got not that, 

He kept not though they missed it not through 
b^MstwnSa^y good cunnmg of his; for he, 
^™s- being dismayed by their coming 

upon him, had neither power nor skill to hide 
any thing : so it was more by good providence 
than by his endeavor, that they missed of that 
good thing. 2 Tim. 1 : 12-14 ; 2 Pet. 2 : 9. 

Hope. But it must needs be a comfort to him 
that they got not this jewel from him. 

Chr. It might have been great comfort to him, 
had he used it as he should ; but they that told 
me the story said that he made but little use of 
it all the rest of the way, and that because of the 
dismay that he had in their taking away his 
money. Indeed, he forgot it a great part of the 
rest of his journey; and besides, when at any 
time it came into his mind, and he began to be 
comforted therewith, then would fresh thoughts 
of his loss come again upon him, and these 
thoughts would swallow up all. 

He is pitied HoPE. Alas, poor man, this could 
by botii. ^qI j^^^ I^Q r^ great grief to him. 



208 PILGllIM'S PllOGRESS. 

Chr. Grief ? Aye, a grief indeed ! Would it 
not have been so to any of us, had we been 
used as he ; to be robbed and wounded too, and 
that in a strange place, as he was? It is a won- 
der he did not die with grief, j^oor heart. I 
was told that he scattered almost all the rest 
of the way with nothing but doleful and bitter 
complaints; telling also, to all that overtook 
him, or that he overtook in the way as he went, 
where he was robbed, and how ; who they were 
that did it, and what he had lost ; how he was 
wounded, and that he hardly escaped with life. 

Hope. But it is a wonder that his necessity did 
not put him upon selling or pawning some of his 
jewels, that he might have wherewith to relieve 
himself in his journej^ 

Chr. Thou talkest like one upon whose head 
is the shell to this very day. For christian re- 
what should he pawn them? or to Kor u^dvgl 
whom should he sell them? In all ^'^y ^p^^'^^s- 
that country where he v/as robbed, his jewels 
were not accounted of ; nor did he want that re- 
lief which could from thence be administered to 
him. Besides, had his jewels been missing at 
the gate of the celestial city, he had, and that he 
knew well enough, been excluded from an inher- 
itance there, and that would have been worse to 
him than the appearance and viUany of ten thou- 
sand thieves. 



DISCOURSE ABOUT LITTLE-FAITH. 209 

Hope. Why art thou so tart, my brother? Esau 
sold his bh'thright, and that for a mess of pottage, 
Heb. 12 : 16 ; and that birthright was his greatest 
jewel : and if he, why might not Little-Faith do 
so too? 

Che. Esau did sell his birthright indeed, and 
Discourse so do many besides, and by so doiner 

about Esau and ■,-,,■, ■, „ 

Little-Faith, exclude themselves from the chief 
blessing, as also that caitiff did ; but you must 
put a difference betwixt Esau and Little-Faith, 
and also betwixt their estates. Esau's birthright 
was typical ; but Little-Faith's jewels were not so. 
Esauwasruied Esau's beUy was his god ; but Little- 
by his lusts. Faith's belly was not so. Esau's want 
lay in his fleshly appetite ; Little-Faith's did not 
so. Besides, Esau could see no further than to 
the fulfilling of his lusts : For I am at the point 
to die, said he ; and what good will this bu'th- 
right do me? Gen. 25:32. But Little-Faith, 
though it was his lot to have but a Httle faith, was 
by his httle faith kept from such extravagances, 
and made to see and prize his jewels more than 
to sell them, as Esau did his birthi-ight. You read 
Esau never ^^^ anywhere that Esau had faith, no, 
had faith. j^Q^ gQ much as a little ; therefore no 
marvel, where the flesh only bears sway, as it 
will in that man where no faith is to resist, if he 
sells his bu'thright, and his soul and all, and that 
to the devil of hell ; for it is with such as it is 

PU. Prog. 14; 



210 PILGIIIM';:! mo GUESS. 

vdtli the ass, wlio in lier occasion cannot be turn- 
ed away, Jer. 2 : 24 : Y>rlien their minds are set 
upon theu' lusts, they will have them, Littie-Faith 
whatever they cos-t. But Little-Faith Spon ""Iwa 
was of another temper ; his mind was p^^^^^s®- 
on things divine ; his livelihood was upon things 
that were spiritual, and from above : therefore to 
what end should he that is of such a temper sell 
his jewels, had there been any that would have 
bought them, to fill his mind with empty things ? 
"Will a man give a penny to fill his belly with 
hay? or can you persuade the turtle- a comparison 
dove to live upon carrion, Hke the ^^iZtlmo ^d 
crow ? Though faithless ones can, for *^^ «^<^w- 
carnal lusts, pawn, or mortgage, or sell what they 
have, and themselves outright to boot ; yet they 
that have faith, saving faith, though but a little 
of it, cannot do so. Here therefore, my brother, 
is thy mistake. 

Hope. I acknowledge it ; but yet your severe 
reflection had almost made me angry. 

Chr. "Why, I did but compare thee to some of 
the birds that are of the brisker sort, who will 
run to and fro m untrodden paths with the shell 
upon their heads : but pass by that, and consider 
the matter under debate, and all shall be well be- 
twixt thee and me. 

Hope. But, Christian, these three Hopeful swag, 
fellows, I am persuaded in my heart, ^^^^- 



DISCOURSE ABOUT LITTLE-FAITH. 211 

are but a company of cowards : would they 
have run else, think you, as they did, at the noise 
of one that was coming on the road? Why did 
not Little-Faith pluck up a greater heart ? He 
might, methinks, have stood one brush with 
them, and have yielded when there Jiad been no 
remedy. 

Che. That they are cowards, many have said, 

No great heart ^^^i-^ few liavc fouud it SO in the time 
Serf Sbu?nS oi trial. As for a great heart, Little- 
tie faith. Faith had none ; and I perceive by 
thee, my brother, hadst thou been the man con- 
cerned, thou art but for a brush, and then to 

We have more yi^l^^- ^^^^^ vcrily, siucc this is the 
weare'oVthaS ^^ight of thy stomach uow they are 
when we are in. ^t a distance from us, should they ap- 
pear to thee as they did to him, they might put 
thee to second thoughts. 

But consider again, that they are but journey- 
men thieves ; they serve under the king of the 
bottomless pit, who, if need be, will come to their 
aid himself, and his voice is as the roaring of a 

Christian teus liou. 1 Pet. 5:8. I myself have been 
eice'^n ""Thl" engaged as this Little-Faith was, and 
case. I found it a terrible thing. These 

three villains set upon me, and I beginning like 
a Christian to resist, they gave but a call, and in 
came their master. I would, as the saying is, 
have given my life for a penny, but that, as God 



212 PILGEIM'S PROGRESS. 

would have it, I was clothed with armor of proof. 
Aye, and yet, though I was so harnessed, I found 
it hard work to quit myself like a man : no man 
can tell what in that combat attends us, but he 
that hath been in the battle himself. 

Hope. Well, but they* ran, you see, when they 
did but suppose that one Great-Grace was in the 
way. 

Chr. True, they have often fled, both they and 
their master, when Great-Grace hath but appear- 
ed; and no marvel, for he is the The king's 
King's champion. But I trow you will ^iiampiou. 
put some difference between Little-Faith and the 
King's champion. All the King's subjects are not 
his champions ; nor can they, when tried, do such 
feats of war as he. Is it meet to think that a little 
child should handle Goliath as David did ? or that 
there should be the strength of an ox in a wi'en? 
Some are strong, some are weak ; some have 
great faith, some have little : this man was one of 
the weak, and therefore he went to the wall. 

Hope. I would it had been Great-Grace, for 
their sakes. 

Chr. If it had been he, he might have had his 
hands full ; for I must tell j^ou, that though Great- 
Grace is excellent good at his weapons, and has 
done, and can, so long as he keeps them at sword's 
point, do well enough with them ; yet if they get 
within him, even Faint-Heart, Mistrust, or the 



DISCOURSE ABOUT LITTLE-FAITH. 213 

otlier, it sliall go hard but tliey will throw up his 
heels. And when a man is down, you know, 
what can he do ? 

'\^Tioso looks well upon Great-Grace's face, will 
see those scars and cuts there that shall easily give 
demonstration of what I say. Yea, once I heard 
that he should say, and that when he was in the 
combat, We despaired even of life. How did 
these sturdy rogues and their fellows make David 
groan, mourn, and roar! Yea, Heman, Psalm 88, 
and Hezekiah too, though champions in their 
days, were forced to bestir them when by these 
assaulted ; and yet, notwithstanding, they had 
their coats soundly brushed by them. Peter, 
upon a time, would go try what he could do ; but 
though some do say of him that he is the prince 
of the apostles, they handled him so that they 
made him at last afraid of a sorry girl. 

Besides, their king is at their whistle ; he is 
never out of hearing ; and if at any time they be 
put to the worst, he, if possible, comes in to help 
them : and of him it is said, " The sword of him 

Leviathan's that laycth at him cannot hold ; the 

sturdiness. g^^^^,^ ^|^^ ^1^^,^^ ^^^, ^^^ habergCOU. 

He esteemeth iron as straw, and brass as rotten 
wood. The arrow cannot make him fly ; sHng- 
stones are turned with him into stubble. Darts 
are counted as stubble ; he laugheth at the shak- 
ing of a spear." Job 41 : 26-29. Vvliat can a man 



214: PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

do in this case? It is true, if a man could at 
every turn have Job's horse, and had skill and 
courage to ride him, he might do notable things. 
"For his neck is clothed with thun- The excellent 

T T-TT -n , ^ p • 1 mettle that is in 

der. He will not be arraid as a grass- Job's horse. 
hopper : the glory of his nostrils is terrible. He 
paweth in the valley, and rejoiceth in his strength; 
he goeth on to meet the armed men. He mocketh 
at fear, and is not affrighted ; neither turneth he 
back fi'om the sword. The quiver rattleth against 
him, the glittering sj^ear and the shield. He 
swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage ; 
neither believeth he that it is the sound of the 
trumpet. He saith among the trumpets. Ha, 
ha ! and he smelleth the battle afar off, the thun- 
der of the captains, and the shoutings." Job 
39:19-25. 

But for such footmen as thou and I are, let us 
never desire to meet with an enemy, nor vaunt as 
if we could do better, when we hear of others that 
have been foiled, nor be tickled at the thoughts 
of our own manhood : for such commonly come 
by the worst when tried. Witness Peter, of whom 
I made mention before : he would swagger, aye, 
he would ; he would, as his vain mind prompted 
him to say, do better and stand more for his 
Master than all men : but who so foiled and run 
down by those villains as he ? 

When therefore we hear that such robberies 



DISCOUKSE ABOUT LITTLE-FAITH. 215 

are done on the King's highway, two things be- 
come lis to do. 

1. To go out harnessed, and to be sure to take 
a shield with us : for it was for want of that, that 
he who laid so lustily at Leviathan could not 
make him jaeld ; for indeed, if that be wanting, 
he fears us not at all. Therefore he that hath 
skill hath said, "Above all, taking the shield of. 
faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all 
the fiery darts of the wicked." Eph. G : 16. 

2. It is good also, that we desire of the King a 
It is good to convoy, yea, that he will go with us 

have a convoy, iiiu^gelf. This made David rejoice 
when in the valley of the Shadow of Death ; and 
Moses was rather for dying where he stood, than 
to go one step without his God. Exod. 33 : 15. 
Oh, my brother, if he will but go along with us, 
what need we be afraid of ten thousands that shall 
set themselves against us? Psa. 3 : 5-8; 27: 1-3. 
But without him, the proud helpers fall under 
the slain. Isa. 10:4 

I, for my part, have been- in the fray before 
now ; and though, through the goodness of Him 
that is best, I am, as you see, alive, yet I cannot 
boast of any manhood. Glad shall I be if I meet 
with no more such brunts ; though I fear we are 
not got beyond all danger. However, since the 
lion and the bear have not as yet devoured me, 
I hope God will also deliver us from the next 



2-16 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

uncircumcised Philistine. Then sung Chris- 
tian, 

"Poor Little-Faith ! hast been among the thieves? 
"Wast robbed? Kemember this, whoso beheves, 
And get more faith ; then shall j^oUi^ictors be 
Over ten thousand — else scarce over three." 

So they went on, and Ignorance followed. 
They went then till they came at a place where 
they saw a way put itself into their a way and a 
way, and seeming withal to lie as ^^^' 
straight as the way which they should go ; and 
here they knew not which of the two to take, for 
both seemed strpight before them ; therefore here 
they stood still to consider. And as they were 
thinking about the way, behold a man black of 
flesh, but covered with a very light robe, came to 
them, and asked them why they stood there. 
They answered, they were going to the celestial 
city, but knew not which of these ways to take. 
"Follow me," said the man ; "it is thither that I 
am going." So they followed him in the way 
that but now came into the road, which by degrees 
turned, and turned them so far from christian and 
the city that they desired to go to, luded. 
that in a little time their faces were turned away 
from it ; yet they followed him. But by and by, 
before they were aware, he led them both within 
the compass of a net, in which they They are taken 
were both so entangled that they knew ^" ^ "®*' 



A SHINING ONE. 217 

not what to do; and with that the white robe fell 
off the black man's back. Then they saw where 
they were. Wherefore there they lay crying 
some time, for they could not get themselves out. 
Chr. Then said Christian to his fellow, Now do 
They bewau ^ ^^^ myself in an error. Did not the 
their condition, ghepherds bid us beware of the Flat- 
terer? As is the saying of the wise man, so wo 
have found it this day : "A man that flattereth 
his neighbor, spreadeth a net for his feet." Prov. 
29; 5. 

Hope. They also gave us a note of directions 
about the way, for our more sure finding thereof ; 
but therein we have also forgotten to read, and 
have not kept ourselves from the paths of the de- 
stroyer. Here Da^dd was wiser than we ; for saith 
he, " Concerning the works of men, by the word 
of thy lips I have kept me from the paths of tho 
destroyer." Psa. 17:4. Thus they lay bewailing 
A shining One themsclvcs in the net. At last they 
^S^a wMp^S espied a shining One coming towards 
his hand. ^Yiem with a whip of small cords in 
his hand. When he was come to the place where 
they were, he asked them whence they came, and 
what they did there. They told him that they 
were poor pilgrims going to Zion, but were led out 
of their way by a black man clothed in white, who 
bid us, say they, follow him, for he was going 
thither too. Then said he with the v/hip, It is 



218 PILGKIM'S PROGRESS. 

Flatterer, a false apostle, that hath transformed 
himself into an angel of light. Daniel 11 : 32 ; 

2 Cor. 11 : 13, 14. So he rent the net, and let the 
men out. Then said he to them. Follow me, that I 
may set you in your way agam. So he led them 
back to the way which they had left to follow the 
Flatterer. Then he asked them, saying. Where 
did you lie the last night? They said. With the 
shepherds upon the Delectable mountains. He 
asked them then, if they had not of They are exam- 
the shepherds a note of direction for Sctedofforgetl 
the way. They answered. Yes. But did ^^^^«- 
you not, said he, v/hen you were at a stand, pluck 
out and read your note? They answered, No. 
He asked them. Why? They said they forgot. 
He asked moreover if the shepherds did not bid 
them beware of the Flatterei\ They Deceivers fine- 
answered. Yes ; but we did not im- ^^°^^'^' 
agine, said they, that this fine-spoken man had 
been he. Rom. 16 1 17, 18. 

Then I saw in my dream, that he commanded 
them to lie down; which when they They are whip- 
did, he chastised them sore, to teach their way. 
them the good way wherein they should walk, 
Deut. 25 : 2 ; 2 Chron. C : 27; and as he chastised 
them, he said, "As many as I love, I rebuke and 
chasten ; be zealous therefore, and repent." Rev. 

3 : 19. This done, he bids them go on their way, 
and take good heed to the other directions of the 



ATHEIST MEETS THE PILGRIMS. 219 

slieplierds. So tliey thanked him for all his kind- 
ness, and went softly along the right way, sing- 
ing, 

"Come liitlier, you that walk along the \vay, 
See how the i3ilgrims fare that go astray, 
They catched are in an entangled net, 
'Cause they good counsel lightly did forget : 
'T is true, they rescued were ; but yet, you see, 
They 're- scourged to boot : let this your caution be. " 

Now, after a while they perceived, afar off, ono 
coming softly and alone, all' along the highway, 
to meet them. Then said Christian to his fellow, 
Yonder is a man with his back towards Zion, and 
he is coming to meet us. 

Hope. I see him ; let ns take heed to ourselves 

The Atheist HOW, lest lie should prove a Flatterer 
meets them. ^^so. So he drew nearer and nearer, 
and at last came up to them. His name was 
Atheist, and he asked them whither they were 
going. 

Chr. We are going to mount Zion. 
He laughs at Then Atheist fell into a very great 
them. laughter. 

Chr. "What 's the meaning of your laughter ? 

Atheist. I laugh to see w^hat ignorant persons 
you are, to take upon you so tedious a journey, 
and yet are like to have nothing but your travel 
for your pains. 

They reason ^HR. Why, man, do you think we 
together. ^-^^n j^^i. ^^ received ? 



220 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Atheist. Eeceivecl! There is not such a place 
as you dream of in all this world. 

Chr. But there is in the world to come. 

Atheist. When I was at home in my own 
country I heard as you now affirm, and from that 
hearing went out to see, and have been seeking 
this city these twenty years, but find no more of it 
than I did the first day I set out. Eccles. 10: 15 ; 
Jer. 17:15. 

Chr= We have both heard and beheve that 
there is such a jDlace to be found. 

Atheist. Had not I, when at home, beheved, I 
had not come thus far to seek ; but finding none — 
and yet I should, had there been such a place to 
be found, for I have gone to seek it further than 
you — I am going back again, and will The Atheist 
seek to refresh myself with the things *onTent'S thi^ 
that I then cast away for hopes of that '*^°^^^* 
which I now see is not. 

Chr. Then said Christian to Hope- christian prov- 
ful his companion, Is it true which ^*^^''^^°*^''^- 
this man hath said? 

Hope. Take heed, he is one of the Flatterers. 
Remember what it cost us once al- Hopeful's gra- 
ready for our hearkening to sucli kind ^^°^^ answer. 
of fellows. Wliat, no mount Zion? Did we not 
see from the Delectable mountains the gate of the 
city ? Also are we not now to walk by faith ? 
2 Cor. 5 : 7. Let us go on, lest the man with tho 



THE ENCHANTED GROUND. 221 

Remembrance wliip Overtake US again. You should 
tisenS^ is^t liavG taught me that lesson, which I 
prSent ^temp- '^^^ sound you in the ears withal : 
tation. ({ Cease, my son, to hear the instruc- 

tion that causeth to err from the words of know- 
ledge." Prov. 19 : 27. I say, my brother, cease 
to hear him, and let us believe to the saving of 
the soul. 

Chr. My brother, I did not put the question to 
thee for that I doubted of the truth of our belief 
A fruit of an i^yself, but to provo thee, and to 
honest heart, f^tch from thee a fi'uit of the honesty 
of thy heart. As for this man, I know that he 
is blinded by the god of this world. Let thee 
and me go on, knowing that we have belief of 
the truth ; and no He is of the truth. 1 John 
2:21. 

Hope. Now do I rejoice in hope of the glory of 
God. So they turned away fi'om the man ; and 
he, laughing at them, went his way. 

I then saw in my dream, that they went on 
They come to Until they Came into a certain country 

the Enchanted , . , t, , i ■, , i 

ground. whose au* naturally tended to make 

one drowsy, if he came a stranger into it. And 
Hopeful here Hopeful began to be very dull, 
drowsy. ^ ^ and heavy to sleep : wherefore he 
said unto Christian, I do now begin to grow so 
drowsy that I can scarcely hold open mine eyes ; 
let us lie down here, and take one nap. 



222 PILGBIM'S PROGRESS. 

Che. By no means, said tlie other ; christian teeps 
lest, sleeping, we never awake more. ■'^^ awake. 

Hope. Why, my brother ? sleep is sweet to the 
laboring man ; we may be refreshed if we take 
a nap. 

Chr. Do you not remember that one of the shep- 
herds bid ns beware of the Enchanted ground? 
He meant by that, that we should beware of sleep- 
ing; wherefore "let us not sleep, as do others; 
but let us watch, and be sober." 1 Thess. 5 : 6. 

Hope. I acknowledge myself in a fault ; and had 
I been here alone, I had by sleeping He is thankful. 
run the danger of death. I see it is true that the 
wise man saith, " Two are better than one." Eccl. 
4 : 9. Hitherto hath thy company been my mercy ; 
and thou shalt have a good reward for thy labor. 

Chr. Now then, said Christian, to Good dis- 

. ., . , , , course prevent- 

prevent drowsiness m this place, let us eth drowsiness, 
fall into good discourse. 

Hope. With all my heart, said the other. 

Chr. "SVliere shall we begin ? 

Hope. Where God began with us. But do you 
begin, if you j)lease. 

Chr. I will sing you first this song. 

"When saints do sleepy gi'ow, let them come hither, 
And hear how these two pilgrims talk together ; 
Yea, let them learn of them in any wise, 
Thus to keep ope their drowsy, slumb'ring eyes. 
Saints' fellowship, if it be managed well, 
Keeps them awake, and that in spite of hell." 



HOPEFUL'S CONVERSION. 223 

They begin at TliGii Christian began, and said, I 
of*ttie'i??(SrYe2 will ask yon a question. How camo 
Bion. y^^^ ^Q tliink at first of doing what 

you do now ? 

Hope. Do you mean, how I came at first to 
look after the good of my soul? 

Chr. Yes, that is my meaning. 

Hope. I continued a great while in the dehght 
of those things which were seen and sold at our 
fair ; things which I believe now would have, had 
I continued in them still, di'owned me in perdi- 
tion and destruction. 

Chr. What things are they? 

Hope. All the treasures and riches of the world. 

Hopefurs life Also I delighted much in rioting, rev- 
before conver- ,,. ^ . , . . _ . 

sion. ellmg, drinking, swearing, lymg, un- 

cleanness, sabbath-breaking, and what not, that 
tended to destroy the soul. But I found at last, by 
hearing and considering of things that are divine, 
which indeed I heard of you, as also of beloved 
Faithful that was put to death for his faith and 
good living in Vanity Fair, that the end of these 
things is death, Eom. 6 : 21-23 ; and that for 
these things' sake, the wrath of God cometh upon 
the children of disobedience. Eph. 5 : 6. 

Cmi. And did you presently fall under the 
power of this conviction ? 

Hope. No, I was not willing presently to know 
the evil of sin, nor the damnation that follows 



224 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

upon the commission of it ; but en- nopefui at 
cleavored, wlien my mind at first be- eyesagStSo 
gan to be shaken with the word, to ^s^*- 
shut mine eyes against the light thereof. 

Chk. But what was the cause of your carrying 
of it thus to the first workings of God's blessed 
Spirit upon you? 

Hope. The causes were, 1, I was ^. Reasons of 

' ' his resisting tho 

ignorant that this was the work of ught. 
God upon me. I never thought that by awaken- 
ings for sin, God at first begins the conversion of 
a sinner. 2. Sin was yet very sweet to my flesh, 
and I was loath to leave it. 3. I could not tell 
how to part with mine old companions, their 
presence and actions were so desirable unto me. 
4. The hours in which convictions were upon me, 
were such troublesome and such heart-affrighting 
hours, that I could not bear, no, not so much as 
the remembrance of them upon my heart. 

Chr. Then, as it seems, sometimes you got rid 
of your trouble? 

Hope. Yes, verily, but it would come into my 
mind again ; and then I should be as bad, nay, 
worse than I was before. 

Chr. Why, what was it that brought your sins 
to mind again ? 

Hope. Many things : as when he had 

^ Tj.-r TTT , , 1 • lost liis sense 

1. If I did but meet a good man m of sm, what 

,1 , , brought it 

the streets ; or, again. 



HOPEFUL'S CONVERSION. 225 

2. If I have heard any read in the Bible ; or, 

3. If my head did begin to ache; or, 

4 If I were told that some of my neighbors 
were sick ; or, 

5. If I heard the- bell toll for some that were 
dead; or, 

6, If I thought of dying myself ; or, 

7. If I heard that sudden death happened to 
others ; 

8, But especially when I thought of in^^self, 
that I must quickly come to judgment 

Ckk And could you at any time with ease 
get off the guilt of sin, when by any of these 
ways it came upon you ? 

Hope. No, not I ; for then they got faster hold 
of my conscience ; and then, if I did but tliink of 
going back to sin, though my mind was turned 
against it, it would be double torment to me. 

Ghr. And how did you do then ? 
-^Tien he could HoPE, I thought I must endcavor 
oS hrsTuTif b^ to mend my life ; or else, thought I, I 
fiSnLrn™: am sure to be damned 
ors to mend. Q^^^ j^^^ ^^^i j^^ eudcavor to mend ? 

Hope. Yes, and fled fi'om, not only my sins, 
but sinful company too, and betook me to relig- 
ious dutie:S, as praying, reading, weeping for sin, 
speaking truth to my neighbors, etc. These 
things did I, with many others, too much here to 
relate. 

Pil. Pros. 15 



228 PILGIIIM'S PROGRESS. 

Chr. And did you think yourself well then ? 

Hope. Yes, for a while ; but at the last my 
trouble came tumbling upon me Then he 
again, and that over the neck of all self weu. 
my reformations. 

Che. How came that about, since you were 
now reformed? 

Hope. There were scTcral things brought it 
upon me, especially such sayings as these : "All 
our righteousnesses are as filthy rags." Reformation at 
Isa. 64:6. "By the works of the help, and ^Yhy. 
law shall no flesh be justified." Gal. 2 : 16. 
"When ye have done all these things, say. We 
are unprofitable," Luke 17 : 10 ; with many more 
such like. From whence I began to reason with 
myself thus : If all my righteousnesses are as 
filthy rags ; if by the deeds of the law no man 
can be justified ; and if, when we have done all, 
we are yet unprofitable, then is it but a folly to 
think of heaven by the law. I further thought 
thus : If a man runs a hundred pounds his being a 
into the shopkeeper's debt, and after faw*°Voubled 
that shall pay for all that he shall ^^'^^ 
fetch ; yet if his old debt stand still in the book 
uncrossed, the shopkeeper may sue him for it, and 
cast him into prison, till he shall pay the debt. 

Chr. Well, and how did you apply this to 
yourself? 

Hope. Why, I thought thus with myself : I have 



HOPEFUL'S CONVERSION. 227 

by my sins run a great way into God's book, and 
my now reforming will not pay off that score; 
therefore I should think still, under all my present 
amendments, but how shall I be fi'eed from that 
damnation that I brought myself in danger of by 
my former transgressions. 

Chr. a very good application : but pray go on. 

Hope. Another thing that hath troubled me 
ever since my late amendments, is, that if I look 

His espying uarrowly into ^the best of what I do 

bad tilings in x i.*n * • • • • -i 

his best duties UOW, i Stlil See Sm, UCW Sm, mixmg it- 
troubled him. ggif ^^..^1^ ^^g l^gg^ ^f ^j^^^ J ^^^ . g^ ^^^^ 

now I am forced to conclude, that notwithstanding 
my former fond conceits of myself and duties, I 
have committed sin enough in one day to send me 
to hell, though my former life had been faultless. 

Chr. And what did you do then ? 

Hope. Do ? I could not tell what to do, until I 
broke my mind to Faithful ; for he and I were 
This made him -^ell acquainted. And he told me, 

break his mmd -^ 

toFaithiui,who that uuless I could obtam the rif>-ht- 

told him the . ,. , 1 T • 

vay to be saved, eousucss 01 a man that never had sin- 
ned, neither mine own, nor all the righteousness 
of the world could save me. 

Chr. And did you think he spoke true? 

Hope. Had he told me so when I was pleased 
and satisfied with my own amendments, I had 
called him fool for his pains ; but now, since I 
see my own infirmity, and the sin which cleaves 



223 PILGPtlM'S rnoGEEss. 

to mj best performance, I have been forced to be 
of liis opinion. 

Chr. But did yon tliink, when at first he sug- 
gested it to you, that there we s such a man to be 
found, of whom it might justly be said, that ho 
never committed sin ? 

Hope. I must confess the words at first 
sounded strangely ; but after a little more talk 
and company with him, I had full conviction 
about it. 

Cue. And did you a'sk him what man this was, 
and how j^ou must be justified by him? 

Hope. Yes, and he told me it was the Lord 
Jesus, that dwelleth on the right hand of the 

Most High. Heb. 10:12-21. And Amorepartic- 

thus, said he, you must be justified SlL ^""^0 
by him, even by trusting to what he ^*^'^'^' 
hath done by himself in the days of his flesh, and 
suffered when he did hang on the tree. Eom. 
4:5; Col. 1 : 14 ; 1 Peter 1 : 19. I asked him 
further, how that man's righteousness could bo 
of that efficacy, to justify another before God. 
And he told me he was the mighty God, and did 
what he did, and died the death also, not for 
himself, but for me ; to whom his doings, and the 
worthiness of them, should be imputed, if I be- 
lieved on him. 

Chr. And what did you do then ? 

Hope. I made my objections against my be- 



ILOPEFUL'S CONVERSION. 229 

He doubts of lieving, for that I thouglit lie was not 
acceptation. ^{Y^i^g to save me. 

Che. And what said Faithful to you then? 

Hope. He bid me go to him and see. Then 
I said it was presumption. He said, No ; for I 

He is better "^'^s invited to come. Matt. 11 : 28. 
instructed. Then he gave me a book of Jesus' in- 
diting, to encourage me the more freely to come ; 
and he said concerning that book, that every jot 
and tittle thereof stood firmer than heaven and 
earth. Matt. 24 : 35. Then I asked him what I 
must do when I came ; and he told me I must 
entreat upon my knees, Psa. 95 : 6, Dan. 6 : 10, 
with all my heart and soul, Jer. 29:12, 13, the 
Father to reveal him to me. Then I asked him 
fui'ther, how I must make my supplications to 
him ; and he said, Go, and thou shalt find him 
upon a mercy-seat, where he sits all the year long- 
to give pardon and forgiveness to them that come. 
Exod. 25:22 ; Lev. 16 : 2 ; Num. 7:89; Heb. 4 : 16. 
I told him, that I knew not what to say w^hen I 

He is bid to Came ; and he bid me say to this ef' 
pray. £g^|. . q^^ ^q mcrciful to me a sinner, 

p.nd make me to know and believe in Jesus Christ ; 
for I see that if his righteousness had not been, 
or I have not faith in that righteousness, I am 
utterly cast away. • Lord, I have heard that thou 
art a merciful God, and hast ordained that thy Son 
Jesus Christ should be the Saviour of the world ; 



230 riLGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

and moreover that tliou art willing to bestow liim 
upon such a poor sinner as I am — and I am a 
sinner indeed. Lord, take therefore this oppor- 
tunity, and magnify thy grace in the salvation of 
my soul, through thy Son Jesus Christ. Amen. 

Chr. And did you do as you were bidden ? 

Hope. Yes, over and over and over. He prays. 

Chr. And did the Father reveal the Son to you ? 

Hope. Not at the first, nor second, nor third, 
nor fourth, nor fifth, no, nor at the sixth time 
neither. 

Chr. What did you do then? 

Hope. What ? why, I could not tell what to do. 

Chr. Had you not thoughts of leaving off pray- 
ing? 

Hope. Yes ; and a hundred times twice told. 

Chr. And what was the reason you did not ? 

Hope. I believed that it was true which hath 
been told me, to wit, that without the righteous- 
ness of this Christ, all the world could not save 
me ; and therefore, thoueiit I with He durst not 

leave off pray- 

myself, if I leave off, I die, and I can ing, and why. 
but die at the throne of grace. And withal this 
came into my mind, " If it tarry, wait for it ; be- 
cause it will surely come, and will not tarry.'* 
Hab. 2:3. So I continued praying until the 
Father showed me his Son. 

Chr. And how was he revealed unto you ? 

Hope. I did not see him with my bodily eyes, 



HOTEFUL'S CONYEESION. 231 

Christ is re- butwiththeeyesofmyunclerstandiuof, 

vealed to Mm, t^ , ^ ^ „ ^ ;; -, ., ., ^ ^ 

and how. Epli. 1 :18, 19; andtnusitwas. One 

day I was very sad, I tliink sadder tlian at any 
one time in my life; and this sadness was tlirougli 
a fresh sight of the greatness and vileness of my 
sins. And as I was then looking for nothing but 
hell, and the everlasting damnation of my soul, 
suddenly, as I thought, I saw the Lord Jesus 
looking down fi'om heaven upon me, and saying, 
*'BeUeve on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou 
Shalt be saved." Acts 16 : 31. 

But I replied, Lord, I am a great, a very great 
sinner : and he answered, " My gi*ace is sufncient 
for thee." 2 Cor. 12 : 9. Then I said. But, Lord, 
w^hat is beheving? x4jid then I saw from that 
saying, "He that cometh to me shall never hun- 
ger, and he that believeth on me shall never 
thirst," John 6 : 35, that beheving and coming 
was all one ; and that he that came, that is, that 
ran out in his heart and affections after salvation 
by Christ, he indeed beUeved in Christ. Then 
the water stood in mine eyes, and I asked fur- 
ther. But, Lord, may such a great sinner as. I am 
be indeed accepted of thee, and be saved by thee ? 
and I heard him say, "Him that cometh to 
me I will in no wise cast out." John 6 : 37. Then 
I said, But how, Lord, must I consider of thee in 
my coming to thee, that my faith may be placed 
aright upon thee ? Then he said, " Christ Jesus 



232 riLGEiM's rnoGKEss. 

came into the world to save sinners. 1 Tim. 1 : 15. 
He is the end of the law for righteousness to 
every one that believes. Rom. 10 : 4, and chap. 4. 
He died for our sins^ and rose again for our jus- 
tification. Rom. 4 : 25. He loved us, and wash- 
ed us fi'om our sins in his own blood. Rev. 1 : 5, 
He is Mediator between God and us. 1 Tim. 2 : 5. 
He ever liveth to make intercession for us. Heb. 
7:25. From all which I gathered, that I must 
look for righteousness in liis person, and for satis- 
faction for my sins by his blood: that what he 
did in obedience to his Father's law, and in sub- 
mitting to the penalty thereof, was not for him- 
self, but for him that will accept it for his salva- 
tion, and be thankful. And now was my heart 
full of joy, mine eyes full of tears, and mine af- 
fections running over with love to the name, 
people, and ways of Jesus Christ. 

Chr. This was a revelation of Christ to your 
soul indeed. But tell me particularly v^^hat effect 
this had upon your spirit. . 

Hope. It made me see that all the world, not- 
withstanding all the righteousness thereof, is in a 
state of condemnation. It made me see that God 
the Father, though he be just, can justly justify 
the coming sinner. It made me greatly ashamed 
of the vileness of my former life, and confounded 
me with the sense of mine own ignorance ; for 
there never came a thought into my heart before 



CHRISTIAN AXD IGXOEANCE. 233 

now tliat showed me so the beauty of Jesns Christ. 
It made me loye a holy hfe, and long to do some- 
thing for the honor and glory of the name of the 
Lord Jesus. Yea, I thought that had I now a 
thousand gallons of blood in my body, I could 
spill it all for the sake of the Lord Jesus. 

I saw then in my dream, that Hopeful looked 
back, and saw Ignorance, whom, they had left be- 
hind, coming after. Look, said he to Christian, 
how far yonder youngster loitereth behind. 

Chr. Aye, aye, I see him : he careth not for 
our company. 

Hope. But I trow it would not have hurt hiin 
had he kept pace with us hitherto. 

Chr. That is true; but I warrant you he think- 
eth otherwise. 

Hope. That I think he doth ; but, however, let 
us tarry for him. So they did. 
Young igno- Then Christian said to him. Come 

ranee comes up 

again. away, man ; why do you stay so be- 

hind? 

Ignor. I take my pleasure in walking alone, 
even more a great deal than in company, unless 
I like it the better. 

Then said Christian to Hopeful, but softty. Did 
I not tell you he cared not for our company ? But 
however, said he, come up, and let us talk away 
the time in this solitary place. Then directing 
his speech to Ignorance, he said, Come, how do 



231 riLGRIM'S TROGRESS. 

you do ? How stands it between G-od find your 
soul now ? 

Ignoe. I hope, well ; for I am al- ignorance's 
ways full of good notions, tliat come ground of it. 
into my mind to comfort me as I walk. 

Chr. Wliat good notions ? Pray tell us. 

Ignor. Wliy, I think of God and heaven. 

Chr. So do the devils and damned souls. 

Ignoe. But I think of them and desire them. 

Chr. So do many that are never like to come 
there. "The soul of the sluggard desireth, and 
hath nothing." Prov. 13 : 4. 

Ignor. But I think of them, and leave all for 
them. 

Chr. That I doubt : for to leave all is a very hard 
matter; yea, a harder matter than many are aware 
of. But why, or by w^hat, art thou persuaded 
that thou hast left all for God and heaven? 

Ignor. My heart tells me so. 

Chr. The wise man says, "He that trusteth in 
his own heart is a fool." Prov. 28 : 26. 

Ignor. That is spoken of an evil heart ; but 
mine is a good one. 

Chr. But how dost thou prove that ? 

Ignor. It comforts me in hopes of heaven. 

Chr. That may be through its deceitfulness ; 
for a man's heart may minister comfort to him in 
the hopes of that thing for which he has yet no 
ground to hope. 



CHRISTIAN AND IGNORANCE. 235 

Ignoe. But my liearfc and life agree togetlier ; 
and therefore my liope is well-grounded. 

Che. "W^io told tliee that thy heart and life 
agree together? 

Ignor. My heart tells me so. 

Che. "Ask my fellow if I be a thief." Thy 
heart tells thee so ! Except the word of God bear- 
eth witness in this matter, other testimony is of 
no value. 

Ignoe. But is it not a good heart that hath good 
thoughts ; and is not that a good life that is ac- 
cording to God's commandments ? 

Chr. Yes, that is a good heart that hath good 
thoughts, and that is a good life that is accord- 
ing to God's commandments ; but it is one thing 
indeed to have these, and another thing only to 
think so. 

Ignoe. Pray, what count you good thoughts, 
and a hfe according to God's commandments ? 

Chr. There are good thoughts of divers kinds ; 
some respecting ourselves, some God, some 
Christ, and some other things. 

Ignor. "What be good thoughts respecting our- 
selves? 
■vMiat are good Chr. Sucli as agree with the word 

thoughts. ^f Q^^^^ 

Ignor. "When do our thoughts of ourselves 
agree with the word of God? 

Chr. "When we pass the same jiidgment upon 



23G PILGRIM'S rnOGRESS. 

ourselves wliicli tlie word passes. To explain 
myself : the word of God saith of persons in a 
natural condition, " There is none righteous, there 
is none that doeth good." It saith also, that 
"every imagination of the heart of man is only 
evil, and that continually." Gen. 6:5; Rom. 3. 
And again, "The imagination of man's heart is 
evil from his youth." Gen. 8 : 21. Now then, 
when we think thus of ourselves, having sense 
thereof, then are our thoughts good ones, because 
according to the word of God. 

Ignok. I will never believe that my heart is 
thus bad. 

Chr. Therefore thou never hadst one good 
thought concerning thyself in thy life. But let 
me go on. As the word passeth a judgment upon 
our hearts, so it passeth a judgment upon our 
ways ; and when the thoughts of our hearts and 
ways agree v/ith the judgment which the word 
giveth of both, then are both good, because agree- 
ing thereto. 

Ignor. Make out your meaning. 

Chr. Why, the word of God saith, that man's 
ways are crooked ways, not good, but perverse ; 
it saith, they are naturally out of the good way, 
that they have not known it. Psa. 125 : 5 ; Prov. 
2:15; Rom. 3 : 12. Now, when a man thus think- 
eth of his ways, I say, ^vhen he doth sensibly, and 
with heart-humiliation, thus think, then hath he 



CHRISTIAN AND IGNOEANCE. 237 

good tlionglits of liis own ways, because liis 
thoughts Jlo^Y agree with the judgment of the 
word of God. 

Ignok. ^ATiat are good thoughts concerning 
God? 

Chr. Even as I have naid concerning ourselves, 
w^hen our thoughts of God do agree with what 
the word saith of him ; and that is, when we think 
of his being and attributes as the word hath 
taught, of which I cannot now discourse at large. 
But to speak of him with reference to us : then 
have we right thoughts of God, when we think 
that he knows us better than we know ourselves, 
and can see sin in us when and where we can see 
none in ourselves ; when we think he knows our 
inmost thoughts, and that our heart, with all its 
depths, is always open unto his eyes ; also when 
we think that all our righteousness stinks in his 
nostrils, and that therefore he cannot abide to see 
us stand before him in any confidence, even in all 
cu; best performances. 

Igj^or. Do you think that I am such a fool as 
to think that God can see no further than I ; or 
that I would come to God in the best of my per- 
formances? 

Chr. Why, how dost thou think in this matter ? 

Ignor. Why, to be short, I think I must beheve 
in Christ for justification. 

Chr. How? think thou must believe in Christ, 



23S riLGKIM'S PEOGIIESS. 

when tlion seest not tliy need of liim ! Thou nci« 
ther seest thy original nor actual infirmities ; but 
Jhast such an opinion of thyself, and of what thou 
doest, as plainly renders thee to be one that did 
never see the necessity of Christ's personal right- 
eousness to justify thee before God. How then 
dost thou say, I believe in Christ? 

Ignoe. I believe well enough, for all that. 

Chr. How dost thou believe ? 

Ignor. I believe that Christ died for rphe faith of 
sinners ; and that I shall be justified ^snom^ie. 
before God from the curse, through his gracious 
acceptance of my obedience to his laws. Or thus, 
Christ makes my duties, that are religious, ac- 
cepta,ble to his Father by vh'tue of his merits, 
and so shall I be justified. 

Chr. JLet me give an answer to this confession 
of thy faith. 

1. Thou believest with a fantastical faith ; for 
this faith is nowhere described in the word. 

2. Thou believest with a false faith ; because 
it taketh justification from the personal right- 
eousness of Christ, and applies it to thy own. 

3. This faith maketh not Christ a justifier of 
thy person, but of thy actions ; and of thy person 
for thy actions' sake, which is false. 

4. Therefore this faith is deceitful, even such as 
will leave thee under v/rath in the day of God 
Almighty ; for true justifying faith puts the soul, 



CHRISTIAN AND IGNOEANCE. 239 

as sensible of its lost condition by tlie law, upon 
flying for refuge unto Christ's righteousness ; 
which righteousness of his is not an act of grace 
by which he maketh, for justification, thy obedi- 
ence accepted with God, but his personal obedi- 
ence to the law, in doing and suffering for us 
what that required at our hands : this righteous- 
3iess, I say, true faith accepteth, under the skirt 
of which the soul being shrouded, and by it pre- 
sented as spotless before God, it is accepted, and 
acquitted from condemnation. 

Ignoe. What, would you have us trust to what 
Christ in his own person has done without us? 
This conceit would loosen the reins of our lust, 
and tolerate us to live as we list ; for what matter 
how we Hve, if we may be justified by Christ's 
personal righteousness from all, when avc believe 
it? 

Chr. Ignorance is thy name, and as thy name 
is, so art thou : even this thy answer demonstrat- 
eth what I say. Ignorant thou art of what j ustify- 
ing righteousness is, and as ignorant how to sc- 
cm-e thy soul, through the faith of it, from the 
heavy wrath of God. Yea, thou also art ignorant 
of the true effects of saving faith in this right- 
eousness of Christ, which is, to bow and win over 
the heart to God in Christ, to love his name, his 
word, ways, and people, and not as thou igno- 
rantly imaginest. 



240 PILGRIM'S TBOGRESS. 

Hope. Ask liiin if ever lie had Christ revealed 
to him from heaven. 

Ignob. "What, you are a man io'r revelations ! I 
do believe, that what both you and all ignorance jan- 
the rest of you say about that matter, eies with them. 
is but the fruit of distracted brains. 

Hope. Why, man, Christ is so hid in God from 
the natural apprehensions of the flesh, that he 
cannot by any man be savingly known, unless 
God the Father reveals him to him. 

Ignoe. That is your faith, but not He speaks re- 
mine: yet mine, I doubt not, is as P-The^kL^^' 
good as yours, though I have not in^*^*- 
my head so many whimsies as you. 

Chr. Give me leave to put in a word. You 
ought not so slightly to speak of this matter ; for 
this I will boldly affirm, even as my good com- 
panion hath done, that no man can know Jesus 
Christ but by the revelation of the Father ; yea, 
and faith too, by which the soul layeth hold upon 
Christ, if it be right, must be wrought by the 
exceeding greatness of his mighty power. Matt. 
11 : 27; 1 Cor. 12 : 3 ; Eph. 1 : 17-19; the working 
of which faith, I j)erceive, poor Ignorance, thou 
art ignorant of. Be awakened then, see thine 
own wretchedness, and fly to the Lord Jesus ; 
and by his righteousness, which is the righteous- 
ness of God, for he himself is God, thou slialt be 
delivered from condemnation. v 



IGNORANCE. 241 

Ignor. You go so fast I cannot keep pace with 
The talk broke you; clo jou go on before I I must 
^^' stay a while behind. 

Then they said, 

""Well, Ignorance, wilt thou yet foolish be, 
To slight good counsel, -ten times given thee ? 
And if thou yet refuse it, thou shalt know, 
Ere long, the e^ol of thy doing so. 
Eemember, man, in time : stoop, do not fear : 
Good counsel, taken well, saves ; therefore hear. 
But if thou yet shalt slight it, thou vnlt be 
The loser, Ignorance, I '11 warrant thee. " _^ 



I'yog. 16 



242 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 



THE TENTH STAGE. 

Then Cliristian addressed himself thus to his 
fellow : 

Chr. Well, come, my good Hopeful, I perceive 
that thou and I must walk by ourselves again. 

So I saw in my dream, that they went on apace 
before, and Ignorance he came hobbling after. 
Then said Christian to his companion, I much 
pity this poor man : it will certainly go ill with 
him at last. 

Hope. Alas, there are abundance in our town 
in his condition, whole families, yea, whole streets, 
and that of pilgrims too ; and if there be so many 
in our parts, how many, think you, must there 
be in the place where he was born? 

Chr. Indeed, the word saith, "He hath blind- 
ed their eyes, lest they should see," etc. 

But, now we are by ourselves, what do you 
think of such men ? Have they at no time, think 
you, convictions of sin, and so, consequently, 
fears that their state is dangerous ? 

Hope. Nay, do you answer that question your- 
self, for 3^ou are the elder man. 

Chr. Then I say, sometimes, as I think, they 
may ; but they being naturally ignorant, under- 
stand not that such convictions tend to their 



CHRISTIAN AND HOPEFUL. 243 

good ; and therefore they do desperately seek to 
stifle them, and presumptuously continue to flat- 
ter themselves in the way of their own hearts, 
Hope. I do believe, as you say, that fear tends 
The good use ^iich to meu's good, and to make 
of fear. them right at their beginning to go 

on pilgrimage. 

Chk. Without all doubt it doth, if it be right : 
for so says the word, " The fear of the IJord is the 
beginning of wisdom." Job 28 : 28 ; Psa. Ill : 10; 
Prov. 1:7; 9:10. 

Hope. How will you describe right fear? 
Kgiitfear- Chr. True or right fear is discov- 
ered by three things : 

1. Ey its rise : it is caused by saving convic- 
tions for sin. 

2. It driveth the soul to lay fast hold of Christ 
for salvation. 

3. It begetteth and continueth in the soul a 
great reverence of God, his word, and ways; 
keeping it tender, and making it afraid to turn 
from them, to the right hand or to the left, to any 
thing that may dishonor God, break its peace, 
grieve the Spirit, or cause the enemy to sj)®^^ 
reproachfully. 

Hope. Well said ; I beheve you have said the 
truth. Are we now almost got past the Enchant- 
ed ground ? 

Chr. ^^Hiy ? are you weary of this discourse? 



21:1 PILGllIM'S PIlOGr.ESS. 

Hope. No, verily, but that I would know where 
we are. 

Chr. We have not now above two miles further 
to go thereon. But let us return to our matter. 

Now, the ignorant know not that such convic- 
tions as tend to put them hi fear are "^Tiy ignorant 
for their good, and therefore they conviction. 
seek to stifle them. 

Hope. How do they seek to stifle them? 

Che. 1. They think that those fears are wrought 
by the devil, though indeed they are wrought of 
God ; and thinking so, they resist them, as things 
that directly tend to theu' overthrow. 2. They 
also think that these fears tend to the spoiling of 
their faith ; when, alas for them, poor men that 
they are, they have none at all ; and therefore 
they harden their hearts against them. 3. They 
presume they ought not to fear, and therefore, m 
despite of them, wax presumptuously confident. 
4. They see that those fears tend to take away 
from them their pitiful old self-holiness, and 
therefore they resist them with all their might. 

Hope. I know something of this myself; for 
before I knew myself it was so with me. 
I Chr. Well, we will leave, at this time, our 
neighbor Ignorance by himself, and fall upon 
another profitable question. 

Hope. With all my heart ; but you shall still 
beirin. 



TALX OF ONE TEMPORAEY. 245 

Che. Weil then, did you linow, about ten years 
Talk about one ^go^ 0^6 Temporary in your parts, 
Temporary. ^]^q ^r^g r^ forward man in religion 
then? 

Hope. Know him ? yes ; he dwelt in Graceless, 
a town about two miles off of Honesty, and he 
dwelt next door to one Turnback. 

Chr. Right ; he dwelt under the same roof 
with him. Well, that man was much awakened 
once: I beheve that then he had some sight of 
his sins, and of the wages that were due thereto. 

Hope. I am of your mind, for, my house not 
being above three miles from him, he would oft- 
times come to me, and that with many tears. 
Truly I pitied the man, and was not altogether 
without hope of him ; but one may see it is " not 
every one that cries, 'Lord, Lord!'" 

Chr. He told me once that he was resolved to 
go on pilgrimage, as we go now; but all of a 
sudden he gi-ew acquainted with one Save-self, 
and then he became a stranger to me. 

Hope. Now, since we are talking about him, let 
us a little inquire into the reason of the sudden 
backsliding of him and such others. 

Chr. It may be very profitable; but do you 
begin. 

Hope. Well, then, there are, in mj judgment, 
four reasons for it : 

1. Though the consciences of such men are 



246 PILGRIM'S PKOGIIESS. 

awakened, yet their miiids are not cliangecl: 
therefore, when the power of guilt weareth away, 
that which provoked them to be religious ceas- 
eth ; wherefore they naturally turn to their old 
course again ; even as we see the dog that is sick 
of what he hath eaten, so long as his sickness 
prevails, he vomits and casts up all : not that he 
doth this of a free mind, if we may say a dog has 
a mind, but because it troubleth his stomach ; 
but now, when his sickness is over, and so his 
stomach eased, his desires being not at all alien- 
ated from his vomit, he turns him about, and 
licks up all ; and so it is true which is written, 
"The dog is turned to his vomit again." 2 Peter 
2 : 22. Thus, I say, being hot for heaven by virtue 
only of the sense and fear of the torments of hell, 
as their sense of hell and fear of damnation chill 
and cool, so their desires for heaven and salvation 
cool also. So then it comes to j)ass, that when 
their guilt and fear are gone, theu' desires for 
heaven and happiness die, and they return to 
their course again. 

2. Another reason is, they have slavish fears 
that do overmaster them : I speak now of the 
fears that they have of men ; "for the fear of man 
bringeth a snare." Prov. 29 : 25. So then, though 
they seem to be hot for heaven so long as tho 
flames of hell are about their ears, yet, when that 
terror is a little over, they betake themselves to 



TALK OF ONE TEMrOExVRY. 24.7 

second tlioiiglits, namely, tliat it is good to bo 
wise, and not to run, for they know not wliat, tlie 
hazard of losing all, or at least of bringing them- 
selves into unaYoidable and unnecessary troubles ; 
and so they fall in with the world again. 

3. The shame that attends religion lies also as 
a block in their way : they are proud and haugh-' 
ty, and religion in their eye is low and contempt- 
ible : therefore when they have lost their sense of 
hell and the wrath to come, they retui'n again to 
their former course. 

4. Guilt, and to meditate terror, are grievous 
to them ; they like not to see their misery before 
they come into it ; though perhaps the sight of it 
at first, if they loved that sight, might make them 
fly whither the righteous fly and are safe ; but 
because they do, as I hinted before, even shun 
the thoughts of guilt and terror, therefore, when 
once they are rid of their awakenings about the 
terrors and wrath of God, they harden their 
hearts gladly, and choose such ways as will hard- 
en them more and more. 

Che. You are pretty near the business, for the 
bottom of all is for want of a change in their 
mind and will. And therefore they are but Hke 
the felon that standeth before the judge: he 
quakes and trembles, and seems to repent most 
heartily, but the bottom of all is the fear of the 
halter : not that he hath any detestation of the 



248 PILGRIM'S PROGEESS. 

offence, as it is evident ; because, let but this man 
have his liberty, and he "svill be a thief, and so a 
rogue still ; whereas, if his mind was changed, 
he would be otherwise. 

Hope. Now I have showed you the reason of 
their going back, do you show me the manner 
thereof. 

Chr. So I will willingly. 

1. They draw off their thoughts, all that they 
may, from the remembrance of God, Howtheapos. 
death, and judgment to come. ^^^^ soes back. 

2. Then they cast off by degrees private duties, 
as closet prayer, curbing their lusts, watching, 
sorrow for sin, and the like. 

3. Then they shun the company of lively and 
warm Christians. 

4. After that, they grow cold to pubhc duty, 
as hearing, reading, godly conference, and the 
like. 

5. They then begin to pick holes, as we say, in 
the coats of some of the godly, and that devilish- 
ly, that they may have a seeming color to throw 
religion, for the sake of some infirmities they 
have espied in them, behind their backs. 

6. Then they begin to adhere to, and associate 
themselves with loose, carnal, and wanton men. 

7. Then they give way to carnal and wanton 
discourses in secret ; and glad are they if they 
can see such things in any that are counted 



PILGRIMS IN BEULAH. 249 

honest, tliat they may the more boldly do it 
through their example. 

8. After this they begin to play with little sins 
openly. 

9. And then, being hardened, they show them- 
selves as they are. Thus, being launched again 
into the gulf of misery, unless a miracle of grace 
j)revent it, they everlastingly perish in their own 
deceivings. 

Now I saw in my dream, that by this time the 
j)ilgrims were got over the Enchanted ground, 
and entering into the country of Beulah, whose 
air was very sweet and pleasant, Isa. 62 : 4-12 ; 
Song 2 : 10-12 ; the way lying directly through 
it, they solaced themselves there for a season. 
Yea, here they heard continually the singing of 
birds, and saw every day the flowers appear in 
the earth, and heard the voice of the tui'tle in the 
iand. In this country the sun shineth night and 
day : wherefore this was beyond the valley of the 
Shadow of Death, and also out of the reach of 
giant Despair ; neither could they from this place 
so much as see Doubting Castle. Here they 
were within sight of the city they were going to ; 
also here met them some of the inhabitants there- i 

Angels. of ; for in this land the shining ones 

commonly walked, because it was upon the bor- 
ders of heaven. In this land also the contract 
between the bride and the Bridegroom was re- 



250 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

newed; yea, here, "as the bridegroom rejoicetli 
over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee." 
Here they had no want of corn and wine ; for in 
this place they met with abundance of what they 
had sought for in all their pilgrimage. Here 
they heard voices fi'om out of the city, loud 
voices, saying, " Say ye to the daughter of Zion, 
Behold, thy salvation cometh! Behold, his re- 
ward is with him !" Here all the inhabitants of 
the country called them "the holy j)eople, the 
redeemed of the Lord, sought out," etc. 

Now, as they walked in this land, they had 
moue rejoicing than in parts more remote from 
the kingdom to which they were bound; and 
drawing near to the city, they had yet a more 
perfect view thereof. It was builded of pearls and 
I)recious stones, also the streets thereof were pav- 
ed with gold ; so that, by reason of the natural 
glory of the city, and the reflection of the sun- 
beams upon it. Christian with desire fell sick ; 
Hopeful also had a fit or two of the same dis- 
ease : wherefore here they lay by it a while, cry- 
ing out because of their pangs, "If you see my 
Beloved, tell him that I am sick of love." 

But being a little strengthened, and better able 
to bear their sickness, they walked on their way, 
and came yet nearer and nearer, where were or- 
chards, vineya^rds, and gardens, whose gates open- 
ed into the higiiwaj. Now, as they came up to 



IN BEULAH. 251 

these places, behold, the gardener stood in the 
way ; to whom the pilgrims said, "Whose goodly 
vineyards and gardens are these? He answered. 
They are the King's, and are planted here for his 
own delight, and also for the solace of pilgrims. 
So the gardener had them into the vineyards, and 
bid them refresh themselves with the dainties, 
Deut. 23 : 24 ; he also showed them there the 
King's walks and arbors where he delighted to 
be : and here they tarried and slept. 

Now I beheld in my dream, that they talked 
more in their sleep at this time than ever they 
did in all their journey ; and being in a muse 
thereabout, the gardener said even to me, ^Miere- 
fore musest thou at the matter ? it is the nature 
of the fruit of the grapes of these vineyards to go 
down so sweetly as to cause tlie lips of them that 
are asleep to speak. Song 7 : 9. 

So I saw that when they awoke, tney address- 
ed themselves to go up to the city. But as I said, 
the reflection of the sun upon the city, for the 
city was pure gold, Eev. 21 : 18, was so extremely 
glorious, that they could not as yet with open face 
behold it, but through an instrument made for 
that purpose. 2 Cor. 3 : 18. So I saw, that as 
they went on, there met them two men in rai- 
ment that shone like gold, also their faces shone 
as the light. 

These men asked the pilgrims whence they 



252 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

camo ; and they told tliem. Tliey also asked 
them where they had lodged, what difficulties 
and dangers, what comforts and pleasures, they 
had met with in the way ; and they told them. 
Then said the men that met them, You have but 
two difficulties more to meet with, and then you 
are in the city. 

Christian then and his companion asked the 
men to go along with them ; so they told them 
that they would : But, said they, you must ob- 
tain it b}^ your own faith. So I saw in my dream, 
that they went on together till they came in sight 
of the gate. 

Now I further saw, that betwixt them and the 
gate was a river ; but there was no Death, 
bridge to go over, and the river was very deep. 
At the sight therefore of this river, the pilgrims 
were much stunned ; but the men that went with 
them said, You must go through, or you cannot 
come at the gate. 

The pilgrims then began to inquire if there was 
no other way to the gate. To which they answer- 
ed. Yes ; but there hath not any, save two, to wit, 
Enoch and Elijah, been j)ermitted to tread that 
path since the foundation of the world, nor shall 
until the last trumpet shall sound. Death not wei- 
The pilgrims then, especially Chris- fZgh b^itTe 
tian, began to despond in their mind, S^yorid into 
and looked this way and that, but no s^^^'y* 



CHllISTIAN'S DI>STIlESy. 253 

way could be found by them by wbicli tliey might 
escape the river. Then they asked the men if the 
■waters were all of a depth. They said, No ; yet 
Angels help us ^^^7 could not help them in that case; 
Ely ° ' tSm'gh f oi*' ^'^^"^ ^liey, you shall find it deeper 
death. q^ shallower as you belieye in the 

King of the place. 

They then addressed themselves to the water, 
and entering, Christian began to sink, and crying- 
out to his good friend Hopeful, he said, I sink in 
deep waters ; the billows go over my head ; all 
his waves go over me. Selah. 

Then said the other, Be of good cheer, my 
brother : I feel the bottom, and it is good. Then 
said Christian, Ah, my fiiend, the sorrows of 
death have compassed me about, I shall not see 
the land that flows with milk and honey. And 

Christian's with that a great darkness and horror 
hour of death, fell upon Christian, so that he could 
not see before him. Also here he in a great 
measure lost his senses, so that he could neither 
rem<?mber nor orderly talk of any of those sweet 
refreshments that he had met with in the way of 
his pilgrimage. But all the words that he spoke 
still tended to discover that he had horror of 
mind, and heart-fears that he should die in that 
river, and never obtain entrance in at the gate. 
Here also, as they that stood by perceived, he was 
much in the troublesome thoughts of the sins 



254 riLGRIM^S TROGRESS. 

that lie had committed, both since and before he 
began to be a pilgrim. It was also observed that 
he was troubled with apparitions of hobgoblins 
and evil spirits ; for ever and anon he would in- 
timate so much by words. 

Hopeful therefore here had much ado to keep 
his brother's head above water ; yea, sometimes he 
would be quite gone down, and then, ere a while, 
he would rise up again half dead. Hopeful did 
also endeavor to comfort him, saying. Brother, I 
see the gate, and men standing by to receive us ; 
but Christian would answer. It is you, it is you 
thej^ wait for; for you have been hopeful ever 
since I knew you. And so have you, said he to 
Chi-istian. Ah, brother, said he, surely if I was 
right he would now arise to help me; but for my 
sms he hath brought me into the snare, and hath 
left me. Then said Hopeful, My brother, you 
have quite forgot the text where it is said of the 
wicked, "There are no bands in their death, but 
their strength is firm ; they are not troubled as 
other men, neither are they plagued like other 
men." Psalm 73 : 4, 5. These troubles and dis- 
tresses that you go through in these waters, are 
no sign that God hath forsaken you ; but are sent 
to try you, whether you will call to mind that 
which heretofore you have received of his good- 
ness, and live upon him in your distresses. 

Then I saw in my di'eam, that Chiistian y^B in 



MINISTERING SPIRITS. 255 

fi muse a wliile. To wliom also Hopeful added 
these words, Be of good clieer, Jesus Christ mak- 

ciiristian de- eth thee whole. And with that Chris- 
fears in death, tiau broke out with a loud voice, Oh, 
I see him again; and he tells me, "When thou 
passest through the waters, I will be with thee ; 
and through the rivers, they shall not overflow 
thee." Isa. 43 : 2. Then they both took courage, 
and the enemy was after that as still as a stone, 
until they were gone over. Christian therefore 
presently found gromid to stand upon, and so it 
followed that the rest of the river was but shal- 
low. Thus they got over. 

Now, upon the bank of the river, on the other 
side, they saw the two shining men again, who 
there waited for them. Wherefore, being come 

The angels do out of the rivcr, thcv salutcd them, 

waitforthemso ' ./ 

soon as they are saying,* We are ministering spirits, 

passed out of *^ , J , , , • • . j? S xi x 

this world. scut lorth to mmistcr lor those that 
shall be heirs of salvation. Thus they went along 
towards the gate. 

Now 3^ou must note, that the city stood upon a 
mighty hill ; but the pilgrims went up that hill 
with ease, because they had these two men to lead 
them up by the arms : they had likewise left their 
They have put Hiortal garments behind them in the 
off mortality, ^.-^g^, . f^^^. though they wcut in with 

them, they came out without them. They there- 
fore went up here with much agility and speed, 



256 PILGllIM'S TEOGRESS. 

though the foundation upon which the city was 
framed was higher than the clouds ; they there- 
fore went up through the region of the air, sweet- 
ly talking as they went, being comforted because 
they safely got over the river, and had such glori- 
ous companions to attend them. 

The talk that they had with the shining ones 
was about the glory of the place; who told them 
that the beauty and glory of it was inexpressible. 
There, said they, is "mount Sion, the heavenly 
Jerusalem, the innumerable company of angels, 
and the spirits of just men made perfect." Heb. 
12 : 22-24. You are going now, said they, to the 
paradise of God, wherein you shall see the tree 
of life, and eat of the never fading fruits thereof : 
and when you come there you shall have white 
robes given you, and your walk and talk shall be 
every day with the King, eyen aU the days of 
eternity. Eev. 2:7; 3 : 4, 5 ; 22 : 5. There you 
shall not see again such things as you saw when 
you were in the lower region upon the earth,'to 
wit, sorrow, sickness, affiiction, and death; "for 
the former things are passed away." Rev. 21 : 4. 
You are going now to Abraham, to Isaac, and 
Jacob, and to the prophets, men that God hath 
taken away from the evil to come, and that are 
now "resting upon their beds, each one walking 
in his righteousness." The men then asked. 
What must we do in the holy place ? To whom 



HAPPINESS OP HEAVEN. 257 

it was answered, You must there receive the com- 
fort of all your toil, and have joy for all your sor- 
row ; you must reap what you have sown, even 
the fruit of all your prayers and tears and suffer- 
ings for the King by the way. Gal. 6:7, 8. In 
that place you must wear crowns of gold, and 
enjoy the perpetual sight and vision of the Holy 
One ; for there you shall see him as he is. 1 John 
3 : 2. There also you shall serve Him continual- 
ly with praise, with shouting and thanksgiving, 
whom you desired to serve in the world, though 
with much difficulty, because of the infirmity of 
your flesh. There your eyes shall be dehghted 
with seeing, and your ears with hearing the pleas- 
ant voice of the IMighty One. There you shall 
enjoy your friends again that are gone thither 
before you ; and there you shall with joy receive 
even every one that follows into the holy place 
after you. There also you shall be clothed with 
glory ^id majesty, and put into an equipage fit 
to ride out with the King of glory When he shall 
come with sound of trumpet in the clouds, as 
upon the wings of the wind, you shall come with 
him ; and when he shall sit upon the throne of 
judgment, you shall sit by him ; yea, and when 
he shall pass sentence upon all the workers of in- 
iquity, let them be angels or men, you also shall 
have a voice in that judgment, because they were 
his and your enemies. Also, when he shall again 

PlLProg. 17 



258 PILGBIM'S PROGRESS. 

return to tlie city, j^^ou sliall go too with sound of 
trumpet, and be ever with him. 1 Thess. 4 : 14-17; 
Jude 14, 15 ; Dan. 7:9, 10; 1 Cor. 6 : 2, 3. 

Now while they were thus drawing towards 
the gate, behold, a company of the heavenly host 
came out to meet them ; to whom it was said by 
the other two shining ones. These are the men that 
have loved our Lord when they were in the world, 
and that have left all for his holy name ; and he 
hath sent us to fetch them, and we have brought 
them thus far on theii' desired journey, that they 
may go in and look their Redeemer in the face 
with joy. Then the heavenly host gave a great 
shout, sajdng, "Blessed are they that are called 
to the marriage-supper of the Lamb." Rev. 19 : 9, 
There came out also at this time to meet them 
several of the King's trumpeters, clothed in white 
and shining raiment, who, with melodious noiseg 
and loud, made even the heavens to echo with 
their sound. These trumj)eters saluted Christian 
and his fellow with ten thousand welcomes from 
the world ; and this they did with shouting and 
sound of trumpet. 

This done, they compassed them round on 
every side ; some went before, some behind, and 
some on the right hand, and some on the left, as 
it were to guard them through the upper regions, 
continually sounding as they went, with melodi- 
ous noise, in notes on high ; so that the very sight 



THE GATE OF HEAVEN. 259 

Tvas to them that could behold it, as if heaven 
itself was come down to meet them. Thus there- 
fore they walked on together ; and as they walk- 
ed, ever and anon these trumpeters, even with 
jo}rful sound, would, by mixing then* music with 
looks and gestures, still signify to Christian and 
his brother how welcome they were into their 
company, and with what gladness they came to 
meet them. And now were these two men, as 
it- were, in heaven before they came to it, being 
swallowed up with the sight of angels, and with 
hearing of theu' melodious notes. Here also they 
had the city itseK in Aiew ; and they thought they 
heard all the bells therein to ring, to welcome 
them thereto. But, above all, the warm and joyful 
thoughts that they had about their own dweUing 
there with such company, and that for ever and 
ever ; Oh, by what tongue or pen can their glori- 
ous joy be expressed! Thus they came up to the 
gate. 

Now when they were come up to the gate, thero 
was written over it, in letters of gold, 

•'BLESSED AEE THEY THAT DO HIS C0]^OIAXDME:^sTS, 
THAT THEY jMAY B.A.YB EIGHT TO THE TREE OF 
LUTE, A2sD MAY EXTEE IN THROUGH THE GATES INTO 
THE CITY." 

Then I saw in my dream, that the shining men 
bid them call at the gate : the which when they 
did, some fi^om above looked over the gate, to 
wit, Enoch, Moses, and Elijah, etc., to whom ifc 



2G0 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

■was said, These pilgrims are come from the city 
of Destruction, for the love that they bear to the 
King of this place ; and then the pilgrims gave in 
unto them each man his certi^cate, which they 
had received in the beginning : those therefore 
were carried in unto the King, who, when he had 
read them, said. Where are the men ? To whom 
it was answered. They are standing without the 
gate. The King then commanded to open the 
gate, ''That the righteous nation," said he, "that 
keejoeth the truth may enter in." Isa. 26 : 2. 

Now I saw in my dream, that these two men 
went in at the gate ; and lo, as they entered, they 
were transfigured ; and they had raiment put on 
that shone hke gold. There were also that met 
them with harp^ and crowns, and gave them to 
them : the harps to praise withal, and the crowns 
in token of honor. Then I heard in my dream, 
that all the bells in the city rang again for joy, 
and that it was said unto them, " Enter ye into 
THE joy or your Lord." I also heard the men 
themselves, that they sang with a loud voice, say- 
ing, "Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, 
BE UNTO Him that sitteth upon the throne, and 
UNTO THE Lamb, for ever and ever." 

Now, just as the gates were opened to let in the 
men, I looked in after them ; and behold, the city 
shone like the sun ; the streets also were paved 
with gold ; and in them walked many men with 



PILGEIMS ENTER THE CITY. 261 

crowns on their heads, palms in their hands, and 
golden harps, to sing praises withal. 

There were also of them that had wings, and 
they answered one another without intermission, 
saying, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord. And after 
that they shut up the gates ; which when I had 
seen, I wished myself among them. 

Now, while I was gazing upon all these things, 
I turned my head to look back, and saw Igno- 
ignorance rauce come up to the river side ; but 
river. he soou got ovcr, and that without 

half the difficulty which the other two men met 
with. For it happened that there was then in 
Vain-Hope that place one Yain-HoiDC, a ferry- 
over. ^^^^ man, that with his boat helped him 
over ; so he, as the others I saw, did ascend the 
hill, to come uj) to the gate ; only he came alone, 
neither did any man meet him ^ith the least en- 
couragement. "WTien he was come up to the gate, 
he looked up to the writing that was above, and 
then began to knock, suj^posing that entrance 
should have been quickly administered to him ; 
but he was asked by the men that looked over 
the top of the gate, ^Tience come you? and what 
would you have ? He answered, I have ate and 
drank in the presence of the King, and he has 
taught in our streets. Then they asked him for 
his certificate, that they might go in and show it 
to the King : so he fumbled in his bosom for one, 



262 PILGKIM'S PROGRESS. 

and found none. Then said they, Have you none ? 
but the man answered never a word. So they 
told the King, but he would not come down to 
see him, but commanded the two shining ones 
that conducted Christian and Hopeful to the city, 
to go out and take Ignorance, and bind him hand 
and foot, and have him away. Then they took 
him up, and carried him through the air to the 
door that I saw in the side of the hill, and put 
him in there. Then I saw that there was a way 
to hell even from the gate of heaven, as well as 
from the city of Destruction. So I awoke, and 
behold, it was a dream. 



CONCLUSION. 263 



CONCLUSION, 



Now, reader, I have told my dream to thee, 

See if thou canst interpret it to me, 

Or to thyself, or neighbor : but take heed 

Of misinterjDreting ; for that, instead 

Of doing good,. -^^tH but thyself abuse: 

By misinterpreting, evil ensues. 

Take heed also, that thou be not extreme 

In playing with the outside of my dream ; 

Nor let my figure or simihtude 

Put thee into a laughter, or a feud. 

Leave this for boys and fools ; but as for thee, 

Do thou the substance of my matter see. 

Put by. the curtains, look within my veil. 

Turn up my metaphors, and do not fail. 

There, if thou seekest them, such things thou 'It find 

As ^ill be heli)ful to an honest mind. 

What of my dross thou findest there, be bold 

To throw away, but yet jDreserve the gold. 

What if my gold be wrapped uj) in ore ? 

None throws away the apjDle for the core: 

But if thou shalt cast all away as vain, 

I know not but 't will make me dream again. 



THE 

PILGRIM'S PROGEESS 

FEOM THIS WOELD 



TO 



THAT WHICH IS TO COME; 



DELH^ERED 



UNDER THE SBHLITUDE OF A DREMI. 



PART 11. 



WHEEEIN IS SET FOETH THE MAXNEK OF THE SETTING 

OUT OF CHEISTIAN^S WIFE AXD CHLLDEEN ; THEIE 

DANGEEOUS JOUENEY, AND SAFE AEEIVAIi AT 

THE DESIEED COUNTEY. 

I HAVE USED SIMILITUDES. Hos. 12:10. 



THE 

AUTHOR'S WAY 

OF 

SENDING FORTH HIS SECOND PART 

OF 

THE PILGRIM. 



Go now, my little book, to every place 
Where my first PilgTim has but shown his face ; 
Call at their door : if any say, Who 's there? 
Then answer thou, Christiana is here. 
If they bid thee come in, then enter thou, 
"With all thy boys ; and then, as thou knowest how, 
Tell who they are, also from whence they came ; 
Perhaj)s they '11 know them by their looks, or name : 
But if they should not, ask them yet again, 
If formerly they did not enitertain 
One Christian, a Pilgrim. If they say 
They did, and were dehghted in his way ; 
Then let them know that these related were 
Unto him ; yea, his wife and children are. 

Tell them that they have left their house and home ; 
Are turned Pilgrims ; seek a world to come : 
That they have met with hardships in the way ; 
That they do meet with troubles night and day; 



268 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

That they have trod on serpents, fought with devils ; 

Have also overcome a many evils ; 

Yea, tell them also of the next who have, 

Of love to pilgrimage, been stout and brave 

Defenders of that way ; and how they still 

Eefuse this world to do their Father's will. 

Go tell them also of those dainty things 

That pilgrimage unto the Pilgrim brings. 

Let them acquainted be, too, how they are 

Beloved of their King, under his care; 

What goodly mansions he for them provides ; 

Though they meet with rough winds and swelling tides. 

How brave a calm they will enjoy at last. 

Who to their Lord, and by his ways hold fast. 

Perhaps with heart and hand they will embrace 
Thee, as they did my firsthng ; and will grace 
Thee and thy fellows with such che«r and fare, 
As show well they of Pilgrims lovers are. 
OBJECTION I. 

But how if they will not beheve of me 
That I am truly thine ? 'cause some there be 
That counterfeit the Pilgrim and his name. 
Seek, by disguise, to seeripi the very same; 
And by that means have wrought themselves into 
The hands and houses of I know not who. 
ANSWER. 

'T is true, some have, of late, to counterfeit 
My Pilgrim, to their own my title set ; 
Yea, others half my name, and title too. 
Have stitched to their books, to make them do. 
But yet they, by their features, do declare 
Themselves not mine to be, whose'er they are. 



THE AUTHOB'S APOLOGY. 269 

If sucli tlion meet'st with, then thiue only way, 
Before them all, is, to say out thy say 
In thine own native language, which no man 
Now useth, nor with ease dissemble can. 

If, after all, they still of you shall doubt, 
Thinking that you, like g^q^sies, go about, 
In naughty wise the country to defile ; 
Or that you seek good people to beguile 
With things unwarrantable; send for me, 
And I will testify you pilgrims be ; 
Yea, I will testify that only you 
My i^ilgrims are, and that alone will do. 

OBJECTION 11. 
But yet, perhaps I may inquire for him 
Of those who wish him damned life and limb, 
"^^lat shall I do, when I at such a door 
For pilgrims ask, and they shall rage the more ? 

ANSWEB. 
Fright not thyself, my Book, for such bugbears 
Are nothing else l)ut ground for groundless fears. 
My Pilgrim's book has travelled sea and land, 
Yet could I never come to understand 
That it was sHghted or turned out of door 
By any kingdom, were they rich or poor. 
In France and Flanders, where men kill each other, 
My Pilgi'im is esteemed a friend, a brother. 

In HoUand too 't is said, as I am told, 
My Pilgrim is, with some, worth more than gold. 
Highlanders and wild Irish can agree 
My Pilgrim should familiar with them be. 



270 PILGRIM'S PROGEESS. 

'Tis in New England under such advance, 
Receives there so much loving countenance, 
As to be trimmed, new clothed, and decked with gems, 
That it might show its featiu'es, and its limbs. 
Yet more: so comely doth my Pilgrim walk, 
That of him thousands daily sing and talk. 

If you draw nearer home, it will appear 
My Pilgrim knows no ground of shame or fear : 
City and country will him entertain, 
With, Welcome, Pilgrim ; yea, they can't refrain 
From smiling, if my Pilgrim be but by, 
Or shows his head in any company. 

Brave gallants do my Pilgrim hug and love, 
Esteem it much, yea, value it above 
Things of a greater bulk ; yea, with dehght 
Say, my lark's leg is better than a kite. 
Young ladies, and young gentlewomen too, 
Do not small kindness to my Pilgrim show : 
Their cabinets, their bosoms, and their hearts. 
My Pilgrim has ; 'cause he to them imparts 
His pretty riddles in such wholesome strains. 
As yield them i)rofit double to their ijains 
Of reading ; yea, I think I may be bold 
To say, some prize him far above their gold. 
The very children that do walk the street, 
If they do but my holy Pilgrim meet. 
Salute him will ; will wish him well, and say, 
He is the only stripKng of the day. 

They that have never seen him, yet admire 
What they have heard of him, and much desire 
To have his company, and hear him tell 
Those pilgrim stories which he knows so well. 



THE AUTHOR'S APOLOGY. 271 

Yea, some that did not love him at the first, 
But called him fool and noddy, say they must, 
Now they have seen and heard him, him commend, 
And to those whom they love they do him send. 

Wherefore, my Second Part, thou need'st not be 
Afraid to show thy head ; none can hurt thee, 
That wish but well to him that went before ; 
'Cause thou com'st after with a second store 
Of things as good, as rich, as profitable. 
For young, for old, for staggering and for stable. 

OBJECTION III. 
But some there be that say. He laughs too loud ; 
And some do say. His head is in a cloud. 
Some say, His words and stories are so dark, 
They know not how, by them, to find his mark. 

ANSWER. 
One may, I think, say, Both his laughs and cries 
May well be guessed at by his watery eyes. 
Some things are of that nature, as to make 
One's fancy chuckle, while his heart doth ache : 
When Jacob saw his Eachel with the sheej). 
He did at the same time both kiss and weep. 

Whereas some say, A cloud is in his head ; ; 
That doth but show his wisdom 's covered 
With his own mantle — and to stir the mind 
To search well after what it fain would find. 
Things that seem to be hid in words obscure 
Do but the godly mind the more allure 
To study what those sayings should contain, 
That speak to us in such a cloudy strain. 



272 PILGEIM'S PROGEESS. 

I also know a dark similitude 
Will on the curious fancy more intrude, 
And will stick faster in tlie heart and head, 
Than things from similes not borrowed. 

Wherefore, my Book, let no discouragement 
Hinder thy travels. Behold, thou art sent 
To friends, not foes ; to friends that will give place 
To thee, thy Pilgrims, and thy words embrace. 

Besides, what my first Pilgrim left concealed, 
Thou, my brave second Pilgrim, hast revealed ; 
What Christian left locked up, and went his way, 
Sweet Christiana opens with her key. 

OBJECTION lY. 
But some love not the method of your first : 
Bomance they count it ; throw 't away as dust. 
If I should meet with such, what should I say ? 
Must I slight them as they slight me, or nay ? 

ANSWEE. 
My Christiana, if with such thou meet, 
By all means in all loving wise them greet ; 
Render them not revihng for revile. 
But, if they frown, I j)rithee on them smile : 
Perhaps 't is nature, or some iU rej^ort. 
Has made them thus despise, or thus retort. 

Some love no fish, some love no cheese, and some 
Love not their friends, nor their own house or home. 
Some start at pig, shght chicken, love not fowl 
More than they love a cuckoo or an owl. 
Leave such, my Christiana, to their choice. 
And seek those v/ho to find thee wiU rejoice: 



THE AUTHOR'S APOLOGY. 273 

By no means striye, but in most humble wise, 
present thee to them in thy Pilgi'im's guise. 

Go then, my little book, and show to all 
That entertain, and bid thee welcome shall, 
What thou shalt keep close shut up from the rest ; 
AJdd wish what thou shalt show them may be blessed 
To them for good, and make them choose to be 
Pilgrims, by better far than thee or me. 
Go then, I say, tell all men who thou art : 
Say, I am Christiana ; and my part 
Is now, with my four sons, to tell you what 
It is for men to take a Pilgrim's lot. 

Go, also tell them who and what they be 
That now do go on pilgrimage with thee ; 
Say, Here 's my neighbor Mercy : she is one 
That has long time with me a pilgrim gone : 
Come, see her in her virgin face, and learn 
'Twixt idle ones and j)ilgrims to discern. 
Yea, let young damsels learn of her to prize 
The world which is to come, in any wise. 
When little trij)ping maidens follow God, 
And leave old doating sinners to his rod, 
'T is like those days wherein the young ones cried 
Hosanna ! when the old ones did deride. 

Next tell them of old Honest, whom you found 
With his white hairs treading the Pilgrim's gi'ound. 
Yea, tell them how plain-hearted this man was ; 
How after his good Lord he bore the cross. 
Perhaps with some gray head this may prevail 
With Christ to fall in love and sin bewail. 

Tell them also, how Master Fearing went 
On i^ilgTimage, and how the time he spent 

Pil. Prog. 18 



274 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

In solitariness, with fears and cries, 

And how at last he won the joyful prize : 

He was a good man, though much down in spirit ; 

He is a good man, and doth life inherit. 

Tell them of Master Feeble-mind also, 
Who not before, but still behind would go. 
Show them also, how he had Hke been slain, 
And how one Great-Heart did his life regain. 
This man was true of heart ; though weak in grace, 
One might true godliness read in his face. 

Then tell them of Master Eeady-to-Halt, 
A man with crutches, but much without fault. 
Tell them how Master Feeble-mind and he 
Did love, and in opinion much agree. 
And let all know, though weakness was their chance, 
Yet sometimes one could sing, the other dance. 

Forget not Master Yaliant-for-the-Truth, 
That man of courage, though a very youth : 
Tell every one his s^^irit was so stout, 
No man could ever make him face about ; 
And how Great-Heart and he could not forbear. 
But pull dovm Doubting Castle, slay Despair. 

Overlook not Master Despondency, 
Nor Much- Afraid his daughter, though they He 
Under such mantles as may make them look, 
V/ith some, as if their God had them forsook. 
They softly went, but sure ; and at the end, 
Found that the Lord of pilgrims was their friend. 
When thou hast told the world of all these things, 
Then turn about, my Book, and touch these strings.* 



THE AUTHOR'S APOLOGY. 275 

Wliich, if but touclied, will such music make, 
They '11 make a cripj)le dance, a giant quake. 

Those riddles that lie couched within thy breast. 
Freely j)ropound, expound ; and for the rest 
Of thy mysterious hnes, let them remain 
For those whose nimble fancies shaU them gain. 

Now may this httle book a blessing be 
To those who love this httle book and me; 
And may its buyer have no cause to say, 
His money is but lost or thrown away. 
Yea, may this second Pilgrim yield that fruit 
As may with each good jDilgi-im's fancy suit ; 
And may in some persuade, that go astray. 
To turn their feet and heart to the right way, 
Is the hearty prayer of 

The author, 

JOHN BUNYAN, 



THE 

PILGRIM'S PROGRESS, 

IN 

THE SIMILITUDE OP A DREAM. 



PART II. 



COURTEOUS CO:\IPANIONS: 

Some time since, to tell yon my cTi-eam tliat I 
had of Cliristian the pilgrim, and of his danger- 
ous journey towards the celestial country, was 
pleasant to me and profitable to you. I told you 
then also what I saw concerning his wife and 
cliildren, and how unwilling they were to go with 
him on pilgrimage; insomuch that he was forced 
to go on his progress without them ; for he durst 
not run the danger of that destruction which he 
feared would come by staying with them in the 
city of Destruction : wherefore, as I then showed 
you, he left them and departed. 

Now it hath so happened, through the multi- 
X^licity of business, that I have been much hin- 



278 PILGRIM'S PROaEESS. 

dered and kept back from my wonted travels into 
those parts whence he went, and so could not, till 
now, obtain an opportunity to make further in- 
quiry after those whom he left behind, that I 
might give you an account of them. But having 
had some concerns that way of late, I went down 
again thitherward. Now, having taken up my 
lodging in a wood about a mile off the place, as I 
slept, I dreamed again. 

And as I was in my dream, behold, an aged 
gentleman came by where I lay ; and because he 
was to go some part of the way that I was travel- 
ling, methought I got up and went with him. 
So, as we walked, and as travellers usually do*, I 
was as if we fell into a discourse ; and our talk 
happened to be about Christian and his travels ; 
for thus I began with the old man : 

Sir, said I, what town is that there below, that 
lieth on the left hand of our way? 

Then said Mr. Sagacity, for that was his name, 
It is the city of Destruction, a populous i^lace, 
but possessed with a very ill-conditioned and idle 
sort of people. 

I thought that was that city, quoth I : I went 
once myself through that town ; and therefore 
know that this report you give of it is true= 

Sag. Too true ; I wish I could speak truth in 
siDeaking better of them that dNvell therein. 

Well sir, quoth I, then I j)erceive you to be a 



THE HAPPINESS OF CHRISTIAN. 279 

well-meaning man, and so one tliat takes pleas- 
ure to hear and tell of that which is good. Pray, 
did you never hear what- happened to a man 
some time ago of this town, whose name was 
Christian, that v/ent on a pilgrimage tip towards 
the higher regions? 

Sag. Hear of him! A^^e, and I also heard of 
the molestations, troubles, wars, captivities, cries, 
groans, frights, and fears that he met with and 
had on his journey. Besides, I must tell you, all 
our country rings of him ; there are but few houses 
that have heard of him and his doings, but have 
sought after and got the records of his pilgrim- 
age; yea, I think I may say that his haza^rdous 
journey has got many well-wishers to his ways ; 
Christians are for, though whcu he was here he was 
weii-spoiien^^o^ fool in cvcry man's mouth, yet now he 
Ss whiifthly is gone, he is highly commended of 
are here. ^Yl. For 'tis Said he lives bravely 

where he is : yea, many of them that are resolved 
never to run his hazards, yet have their mouths 
water at his gains. 

They niay, quoth I, well think, if they think 
any thing that is true, that he liveth well where 
he is ; for he now Hves at, and in the Fountain 
of life, and has what he has without labor and 
sorrow, for there is no grief mixed therewith. 
But, pray what talk have the peoj^le about him? 

Sag. Talk! the people talk strangely about 



280 PILGKIM'S PEOGEESS. 

him : some say that he now walks in white, Rev. 
3:4; that he has a chain of gold about his neck, 
that he has a crown of gold, beset with pearls, 
upon his head : others say, that the shining ones, 
who sometimes showed themselves to him in his 
journey, are become his companions, and that he 
is as familiar with them in the i)lace where he is, 
as here one neighbor is with another. Besides, 
it is confidently affirmed concerning him, that the 
King of the place where he is has bestowed upon 
him already a very rich and pleasant dwelling at 
court, and that he every day eatetli and drinketh 
and walketh and talketh with him, and receiveth 
of the smiles and favors of him that is Judge of 
all there. Zech. 3 : 7; Luke 14 : 14, 15. Moreover 
it is expected of some, that his Prince, the Lord 
of that country, will shortly come into these parts, 
and will know the reason, if they can give any, 
why his neighbors set so little by him, and had 
him so much in derision when they perceived 
that he would be a pilgrim. Jude 14, 15. 

For they say, that now he is so in the affections 
of his Prince, that his Sovereign is so christian's 
much concerned with the indignities chrfstiau's**^^^ 
that were cast upon Christian when p^"^*- 
he became a pilgi'im, that he will look upon all 
as if done unto himself, Luke 10 : 16 ; and no 
marvel, for it was for the love that he had to hia 
Prince, that he ventured as he did. 



CHRISTIANA AND HEK SONS. 281 

I dare say, quoth I : I am glad on 't ; I am glad 
for the poor man's sake, for that now he has 
rest from his labor, and for that he now reapeth 
the benefit of his tears with joy ; and for that he 
has got beyond the gunshot of his enemies, and 
is out of the reach of them that hate him. Rev. 
14 : 13 ; Psa. 126 : 5, 6. I also am glad for that a 
rumor of these things is noised abroad in this 
countiy ; who can tell but that it may work some 
good effect on some that are left behind? But 
pray, sir, while it is fresh in my mind, do you 
hear any thing of his wife and childi-en? Poor 
hearts ! I wonder in my mind what they do. 

Sag. Who? Chi-istiana and her sons? They 
Good tidings ^^'® ^^^^ ^^ ^^ ^^ '^'^ll ^^ Christian did 
wk^aif c£i-lii^self; for though they aU played 
dx-en. ii^Q fQQi ^i ^vst, and would by no 

means be persuaded by either the tears or en- 
treaties of Christian, yet second thoughts have 
wrought wonderfully with them : so they have 
packed up, and are also gone after him. 

Better and better, quoth I : but what, wife and 
children, and all? 

Sag. It is true: I can give you an account of 
the matter, for I was upon the spot at the instant-, 
and was thoroughly acquainted with the whole 
affair. 

Then, said I, a man, it seems, may rejoort it for 
a truth. 



282 PILGBIM'S PROGRESS. 

Sag. You need not fear to affirm it : I mean, 
that tliey are .all gone on pilgrimage, both the 
good woman and her four boys. And being we 
are, as I perceive, going some considerable way 
together, I will give you an account of the whole 
of the matter. 

This Christiana — for that was her name from 
the day that she with her children betook them- 
selves to a pilgrim's life — after her husband was 
gon6 over the river, and she could hear of him no 
more, her thoughts began to work in her mind. 
Fkst, for that she had lost her husband, and for 
that the loving bond of that relation was utterly 
broken betwixt them. For you know, said he to 
me, nature can do no less but entertain the Hving 
with many a heavy cogitation, in the remem- 
brance of the loss of loving relations. This there- 
fore of her husband did cost her many j^ark this you 
a tear. But this was not aU; f or g^^y-J. f ,^^« 
Christiana did also begin to consider relations. 
with herself, whether her unbecoming behavior 
towards her husband was not one cause that she 
saw him no more, and that in such sort he was 
taken away from her. And upon this came into 
her mind, by swarms, all her unkind, unnatural, 
and ungodly carriage to her dear friend ; which 
also clogged her conscience, and did load her 
with guilt. She was, moreover, much broken with 
recalling to remembrance the restless groans, 



X. 




CHRISTIANA'S DISCOURSE. 283 

brinish tears, and self-bemoanings of lier lins- 
band, and how she did harden her heart against 
all his entreaties and loving persuasions of her 
and her sons to go with him ; yea, there was not 
any thing that Christian either said to her, or did 
before her, all the while that his burden did 
hang on his back, but it returned upon her like a 
flash of lightning, and rent the caul of her heart 
in sunder; especially that bitter outcry of his, 
"What shall I do to be saved?" did ring in her 
ears most dolefully. 

Then said she to her children. Sons, we are all 
undone. I have sinned away your father, and 
he is gone : he would have had us '^dth him, 
but I would not go myself : I also have hinder- 
ed you of life. Yv'ith that the boys fell into 
tears, and cried out to go after their father. Oh, 
said Christiana, that it had been but our lot to 
go with him ; then had it fared well with us be- 
yond what it is like to do now. For though I 
formerly foolishly imagined, concerning the troub- 
les of your father, that they proceeded of a fool- 
ish fancy that he had, or for that he was overrun 
with melancholy humors ; yet now it will not 
out of my mind, but that they sprung from an- 
other cause ; to wit, for that the hght of life 
was given him, James 1 : 23-25 ; John 8 : 12 ; by 
the help of which, as I perceive, he has escaped 
the snares of death. Prov. 14 : 27. Then they 



284 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

all wept again, and cried out, Oh, woe wortli the 
day! 

The next night Christiana had a dream ; and 
behold, she saw as if a broad parchment was 
opened before her, in which were Christiana's 
recorded the sum of her ways ; <^^'^^- 
and the crimes, as she thought, looked very 
black upon her. Then she cried out aloud in 
her sleep, "Lord, have mercy ujDon me a sin- 
ner!" Luke 18 : 13 ; and the Httle children heard 
her. 

After this she thought she saw two very ill- 
favored ones standing by her bedside, and say- 
ing. What shall we do with this woman? for 
she cries out for mercy, waking and Mark this, this 
sleeping : if she be suffered to go on sence of heu. 
as she begins, we shall lose her as we have lost 
her husband. Wherefore we must, by one way 
or other, seek to take her off from the thoughts 
of what shall be hereafter, else all the world can- 
not help but she wdll become a pilgrim. 

Now she awoke in a great sweat, also a trem- 
bling was upon her ; but after a while she fell to 
sleeping again. And then she thought she saw 
Christian her husband in a place of bliss among 
many immortals, with a harp in his Help against 
hand, standing and playing upon it meut!^'^'^^'^' 
before One that sat on a throne with a rainbow 
about his head. She saw also, as if he bowed 



SECRET VISITS CHRISTIANA. 285 

his head with his face to the payed work that 
was under his Prince's feet, saying, "I heartily 
thank my Lord and King for bringing me into 
this place." Then shouted a company of them 
that stood round about, and harped with their 
harps ; but no man living could tell what they 
said but Christian and his companions. 

Next morning, when she was up, had -prajed 
to God, and talked with her children a while, ono 
knocked hard at the door ; to whom she spoke 
out, saying, "If thou comest in God's name, 
come in." So he said, " Amen ;" and opened the 
door, and saluted her with, "Peace be to this 
house." The which when he had done, he said, 
" Christiana, knowest thou wherefore I am come ?" 
Then she blushed and trembled ; also her heart 
began to wax warm with desires to know from 
whence he came, and what was his errand to her. 
So he said unto her, " My name is Secret ; I dwell 
with those that are on high. It is talked of 
where I dwell as if thou hadst a desu-e to go 
thither : also there is a report that thou art aware 
of the evil thou hast formerly done to thy hus- 

convictiona band, in hardeninof of thy heart ap;-ainst 

seconded by o J o 

tidings of God's his wav, and in keei3inef of these babes 

readiness *» • ■ i • . >^i • i • . i 

pardon. m tneu' iguorancc. Christiana, the 

Merciful One hath .sent me to tell thee, that he 
is a God ready to forgive, and that he taketh de- 
light to multiply the pardon of offences. He also 



286 PILGRIM'S PBOGRESS. 

would have tliee to know, that he inviteth th.ee to 
come into his presence, to his table, and that he 
will feed thee with the fat of his house, and with 
the heritage of Jacob thy father. 

"There is Christian, thy husband that was, 
with legions more, his companions, ever behold- 
ing that face that doth minister hfe to beholders, 
and they will all be glad when they shall hear the 
sound of thy feet step over thy Father's thresh- 
old." 

Christiana at this was greatly abashed in her- 
self, and bowed her head to the ground. This 
visitor j)roceeded, and said, "Christiana, here is 
also a letter for thee, which I have brought from 
thy husband's King." So she took it, and opened 
it ; but it smelt after the manner of the best per- 
fume. Song 1 : 3. Also it was written in letters 
of gold. The contents of the letter were these : 
That the King would have her to do as did Chris- 
tian her husband ; for that was the way to come 
to his city, and to dwell in his presence with joy 
for ever. At this the good woman Christiana 
was quite overcome; so she cried out amte overcome. 
to her visitor. Sir, will you carry me and my chil- 
dren with you, that we also may go and worship 
the King? 

Then said the visitor, Christiana, the bitter is 
before the sweet. Thou must through troubles, as 
did he that went before thee, enter this celestial 



CHRISTIANA INVITES HER SONS. 287 

Further in- city. "Wherefore I advise tliee to do 
Christiana. as did Christian thy husband : go to 
the Wicket-gate yonder, over the plain, for that 
stands at the head of the way up which thou must 
go ; and I wish thee all good speed. Also I ad- 
vise that thou put this letter in thy bosom, that 
thou read therein to thyself and to thy children 
until you have got it by heart ; for it is one of the 
songs which thou must sing while thou art in 
this house of thy pilgrimage, Psalm 119 : 54 ; also 
this thou must dehver in at the further gate. 

Now I saw in my dream, that this old gentle- 
man, as he told me the story, did himself seem to 
be greatly affected therewith. He moreover pro- 
ceeded, and said. So Christiana called her sons 
together, and began thus to address herself unto 
Christiana them I My sons, I have, as you may 
to^^take ^ thSr pcrccive, been of late under much ex- 
journey. ercise in my soul about the death of 

your father : not for that I doubt at all of his 
happiness, for I am satisfied now that he is well. 
I have also been much affected with the thoughts 
of mine own state and yours, which I verily be- 
lieve is by nature miserable. My carriage also to 
your father in his distress is a great load to my 
conscience; for I hardened both mine own heart 
and yours against him, and refused to go with 
him on pilgrimage. 

The thoughts of these things would now kill 



288 PILGRIM'S PROGBESS. 

me outriglit, but for a dream wliicli I liad last 
night, and but for the encouragement which this 
stranger has given me this morning. Come, my 
children, let us i)ack up, and begone to the gate 
that leads to the celestial country, that we may 
see your father, and be with him and his com- 
panions in peace, according to the laws of that 
land. 

Then did her children burst out into tears, for 
joy that the heart of their mother was so inclined. 
So their visitor bid them farewell ; and they be- 
gan to prepare to set out for their journey. 

But while they were thus about to be gone, two 
of the women that were Christiana's Timorous and 

. , ., J 1 1 -I Mercy come to 

neighbors, came up to ner house, and visit cin-istiana. 
knocked at her door. To whom she said as be- 
fore, If you come in God's name, come Christiana's 
in. At this the women were stunned ; Ss ^hTS 
for this kind of language they used neighbors. 
not to hear, or to perceive to drop from the lips 
of Christiana. Yet they came in : but behold, they 
found the good woman preparing to be gone from 
her house. 

So they began, and said. Neighbor, pray what 
is your meaning by this ? 

Christiana answered, and said to the eldest of 
them, whose name was Mrs. Timorous, I am pre- 
paring for a journey. 

This Timorous was daughter to him that met 



CHEISTIANA AND TIMOROUS. 289 

Christian upon the hill of Difficulty, and would 
have had him go back, for fear of the lions. 
V Tim, For what journey, I pray you? 
^ Chr. Even to go after my good husband. And 
•with that she fell a weeping. 

Tim. I hope not so, good neighbor ; pray, for 
your good children's sake, do not so unwomanly 
cast yourself away. 

Chr. Nay, my children shall go with me ; not 
one of them is willing to stay behind. 

Tm. I wonder in my very heai-t what or who 
has brought you into this mind. 

Chr. Oh neighbor, knew you hut as much as I 
do, I doubt not but that you would go along with 
me. 

Tim. Prithee, what new knowledge hast thou 
got, that so worketh off thy mind from thy friends, 
and that tempteth thee to go nobody knows 
where? 

Chr. Then Christiana replied, I have been sore- 
ly afflicted since my husband's departure fi*om 
Death. me; but specially since he went over 

the river. But that which troubleth me most is, 
my churhsh carriage to him when he was under 
his distress. Besides, I am now as he was then ; 
nothing will serve me but going on pilgrimage. I 
was dreaming last night that I saw him. Oh that 
my soul was with him! He dwelleth in the pres- 
ence of the Iving of the country; he sits and eats 

Til. Prog. X9 



230 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

witli liim at his table; lie is become a companion 
of immortals, and has a house nov/ given him to 
dwell in, to which the best palace on earth, if 
compared, seems to me but as a dunghill. 2 Cor. 
5 : 1-4. The Prince of the place has also sent 
for me, with promise of entertainment, if I shall 
come to him ; his messenger was here even now, 
and has brought me a letter, which invites me to 
come. And with that she plucked out her letter, 
and read it, and said to them, "What now will you 
say to this ? 

Tim. Oh the madness that has possessed thee 
and thy husband, to run yourselves upon such 
difficulties. You have heard, I am sure, what 
your husband did meet with, even in a manner at 
the first step that he toolj: on his way, as our neigh- 
bor Obstinate can yet testify, for he went along 
with him; yea, and Pliable too, until they, like 
wise men, were afraid to go any further. We also 
heard, over and above, how he met The reason- 
with the lions, Apollyon, the Shadow ^"ss of the uesn. 
of Death, and many other things. Nor is the 
danger that he met with at Vanity Fair to be for- 
gotten by thee. For if he, though a man, was so 
hard put to it, what canst thou, being but a poor 
woman, do? Consider also, that these four 
sweet babes are thy children, thy flesh and 
thy bones. "WHierefore, though thou shouldest 
be so rash as to cast away thyself, yet, for tho 



MEKCY AND TIMOROUS. 291 

sake of tlie fruit of tliy body, keep tliou at 
home. 

But Christiana said unto her, Tempt me not, 
my neighbor : I have now a price put into my 
hands to get gain, and I should be a fool of the 
greatest size if I should have no heart to strike in 
with the opportunity. And for that you tell me 
of all these troubles which I am hke to meet with 

A perHnent in the wav, they are so far fi'om beinsf 

reply to fleshly •'' -^ ^ xi ^ xi 

reasoning. to me a discouragcment, that they 
show I am in the right. The bitter must come 
before the sweet, and that also will make the 
sweet the sweeter. "Wherefore, since you came 
not to my house in God's name, as I said, I pray 
you to be gone, and not to disquiet me further. 

Then Timorous reviled her, and said to her 
fellow. Come, neighbor Mercy, let us leave her in 
her own hands, since she scorns our counsel and 
company. But Mercy was at a stand, and could 
Mercy's bow- not SO readily comply with her 
cin-istiana. neighbor ; and that for a twofold 
reason : 1. Her bowels yearned over Christiana. 
So she said within herself, If my neighbor will 
needs be gone, I will go a little way with her, and 
help her. 2. Her bowels yearned over her own 
soul; for what Christiana had said had taken 
some hold upon her mind. Wherefore she said 
within herself again, I will yet have more talk 
with this Christiana ; and if I find truth and life 



292 PILGRIM'S PIIOGP.ESS. 

in what she shall say, I myself with my heart 
shall also go with her. Wherefore Mercy began 
thus to reply to her neighbor Timorous : 

Mek. Neighbor, I did indeed come with you to 
see Christiana this morning ; and since she is, as 
you see, taking her last farewell of the country, I 
think to walk this sunshiny morning a little with 
her, to help her on her way. But she told her 
not of her second reason, but kept it to herself. 

Tim. Well, I see you have a mind to go a fooling 
too; but take heed in time, and be wise: while 
we are out of danger, we are out ; but when we 
are in, we are in. 

So Mrs. Timorous returned to her house, and 
Christiana betook herself to her journey. But 
when Timorous was got home to her Timorous for- 
house, she sends for some of her Srcy ^cleaves 
neighbors, to wit, Mrs. Bat's-Eyes, *^ ^^^• 
Mrs. Inconsiderate, Mrs. Light-Mind, and Mrs. 
Know-Nothing. So when they were Timorous ac- 
come to her house, she falls to tellings g^eid? what 
of the story of Christiana, and .of her the good chris- 

•^ ' tiana intends to 

intended journey. And thus she be- ^o. 
gan her tale : 

Tim. Neighbors, having had little to do this 
morning, I went to give Christiana a visit ; and 
when I came at the door I knocked, as you know 
it is our custom ; and she answered, If you come 
in God's name, come in. So in I went, thinking 



FBIENDS OF MRS. TIMOBOUS. 293 

all was well ; but when I came in, I fonnd lier 
preparing herself to depart the town, she, and 
also her children. So I asked her what was her 
meaning by that. And she told me, in short, 
that she was now of a mind to go on pilgrimage, 
as did her husband. She told me also of a dream 
that she had, and how the King of the coimtry 
where her husband was, had sent an inviting 
letter to come thither. 

Mrs. Know- Then said ]Mrs. Know-Nothing, And 
Nothing. ^i^at, do you think she will go ? 

Tim. Aye, go she will, whatever comes on 't : 
and methinks I know it by this, for that which 
was my great argument to persuade her to stay 
at home, to wit, the troubles she was like to meet 
with on the way, is one great argument with her 
to put her forward on her journey. For she told 
me in so many words. The bitter goes before the 
sweet ; yea, and forasmuch as it doth, it makes 
the sweet the sweeter. 

Mes. Bat's-Eyes. Oh, this blind and foolish 
Mrs. Bat's-Eyes. woman. Said shc ; and will she not 
take warning by her husband's afflictions ? For 
my part, I see, if he were here again, he would 
rest himself content in a whole skin, and never 
run so many hazards for nothing. 

]VIrs. Inconsiderate also replied, saying. Away 

Mrs. incon- ^^^^ such fantastical fools from the 
Biderate. towu : a good riddaucc, for my part, 



204 PILGRIM'3 PEOGBESS. 

I sPtj, of her ; should she stay where she dwells, 
and retain this her mind, who could live quietly 
by her? for she will either be dumpish or un- 
neighborl}^, or talk of such matters as no wise 
])ody can abide. "Wherefore, for my part, I shall 
never be sorry for her departure ; let her go, and 
let better come in her room : it was never a good 
world since these whimsical fools dwelt in it. 

Then Mrs. Light-Mind added as foUoweth : 
Come, put this kind of talk away. I Mrs. Ligiit- 
was yesterday at Madam Wanton's, ^^^* 
where we were as merry as the maids. For who 
do you think should be there but I and Madam wan- 
Mrs. Love-the-Flesh, and three or jSiiketobave 
four more, with Mrs. Lechery, Mrs. forriJhfXS 
Filth, and some others : so there we ^^^^p^^^*- 
had music and dancing, and what else was meet 
to fill up the pleasure. And I dare say, my lady 
herself is an admirable well-bred gentlewoman, 
and Mr. Lechery is as pretty a fellow. 



MEP.Cy GOES ^TITH CHRISTIANA. 29! 



THE FIRST STAGE. 

By this time Christiana was got on her way, 
and Mercy went along with her ; so as they went, 
her children being there also, Christiana began 
Discourse be- to discoursc. And, Mcrcy, said Chris- 
aTd'goodchS tiana, I take this as an unexpected 
tiaua. favor, that thou shouldest set forth 

out of doors with me to accompany me a little in 
the way. 

Mer. Then said young Mercy, for she was but 

Mercy inclines yOHUg, If I thoUght it WOUld be to 

to go. purpose to go with you, I would never 

go near the town any more. 

Chr. "Well, Mercy, said Christiana, cast in thy 
lot with me; I well know what will be the end of 
our pilgrimage : my husband is where he would 
not but be for all the gold in the Spanish mines. 
Nor shalt thou be rejected, though thou goest but 
upon my invitation. The King, who hath sent 
for me and my children, is one that delighteth in 
mercy. Besides, if thou wilt, I wiU hire thee, and 
thou shalt go along with me as my servant. Yet 
we will have all things in common betwixt thee 
and me : only go along with me. 

Mercy doubts Mer. But how shall I bc asccrtaiu- 
of acceptance. ^^ ^--^^^ j ^^^^ ^j^^^j^ ^^ entertained? 



20G riLGKiM's rnoGriEss. 

Had I this lioj)e but from one that can tell, I 
■would make no stick at all, but would go, being 
helped by Him that can help, though the way 
was never so tedious. 

Che. "Well, loving Mercy, I will tell thee what 

thou Shalt do : go with me to the Christiana al- 

"Wicket- gate, and there I will further ^gX wmch^^ia 
inquire for thee; and if there thou ^^^|*'^J^^p^°^ 
shalt not meet with encouragement, inquire for her. 
I will be content that thou return to thy place : I 
will also pay thee for thy kindness which thou 
showest to me and my children, in the accompa- 
nying us in our way. as thou dost. 

Mer. Then I will go thither, and will take what 
shall follow ; and the Lord grant that Mercy prays, 
my lot may there fall even as the King of heaven 
shall have his heart upon me. 

Christiana then was glad at heart, not only that 
she had a companion, but also for Christiana giaci 

■•■ of Mercy's coni- 

that she had prevailed with this ]50or pany. 
maid to fall in love with her own salvation. So 
they went on together, and Mercy began to weep. 
Then said Christiana, Wherefore weepeth my 
sister so? 

Mee. Alas, said she, who can but lament, that 
shall but riefhtly consider what a state Mercy grieves 

'=> ^ , for her carnal 

and condition my poor relations are relations, 
in, that yet remain in our sinful town? And that 
which makes my grief the more heavy is, because 



MERCY ENCOURAGED. 297 

they have no instructor, nor any to tell them 
■what is to come. 

Che. Pity becomes pilgrims; and thou dost 

weep for thy friends, as my good Christian did 

for me when he left me : he mourned for that I 

Christian's would not hccd uor regard him ; but 

answered ^for his Lord and ours did gather up his 

his relations af- . -, i i.i • j. r, • i j. j i 

ter he was dead, tears, and put them mto his bottle; 
and now both I and thou, and these my sweet 
babes, are reaping the fruit and benefit of them. I 
hope, Mercy, that these tears of thine will not bo 
lost ; for the truth hath said, that "they that sow 
in tears shall reap in joy." And "he that goeth 
forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall 
doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his 
sheaves with him." Psa. 126 : 5, 6. 
Then said Mercy, 

"Let the Most Blessed by my guide, 
If it be his blessed will, 
Unto his gate, into his fold, 
Uj) to his holy hill. 

And let him never suffer me 

To swerve, or turn aside 
From his free grace and holy ways, 

Whate'er shall me betide. 

And let him gather them of mine 

That I have left behind ; 
Lord, make them pray they may be thine, 

With all their heart and mind. " 



208 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Now my old friend proceeded, and said, But 
when Christiana came to the slough of Despond, 
she began to be at a stand ; For, said she, this is 
the place in which my dear husband had like to 
have been smothered with mud. She perceived 
also, that notwithstanding the command of the 
King to make this place for pilgrims good, yet it 
was rather worse than formerly. So I asked if 
that was true. Yes, said the old gentleman, too 
true ; for many there be that pretend to be the 
King's laborers, and that say they are for mend- 
ing the King's highways, who bring Their own car- 
dirt and dung instead of stones, and LlS'^of Z 
so mar instead of mending. Here '^^^'^ ^*" ^^"®- 
Christiana therefore, with her boys, did make a 
stand. But said Mercy, Come, let Mercy the boid- 

, 1 T I I est at the slough 

US venture; only let us be wary, of Despond. 
Then they looked well to their steps, and made 
a shift to get staggering over. 

Yet Christiana had like to have been in, and 
that not once or twice. Now they had no sooner 
got over, but they thought they heard words that 
said unto them, "Blessed is she that believeth ; 
for there shall be a performance of those things 
which were told her from the Lord." Luke 1 : 45. 

Then they went on again ; and said Mercy to 
Christiana, Had I as good ground to hope for a 
loving reception at the Wicket-gate as you, I 
think no slough of Despond would discourage me. 



AERIVAL AT THE GATE. 299 

Well, said tlie other, you know your sore, and 
I know mine ; and, good friend, we sliall all have 
enough evil before we come to our journey's end. 
For can it be imagined that the people who de- 
sign to attain such excellent glories as we do, and 
who are so envied that happiness as we are, but 
that we shall meet with what fears and snares, 
with what troubles and afflictions they can pos- 
sibly assault us with that hate us ? 

And now Mr. Sagacity left me to dream out my 
dream by myself. T^Tierefore, methought I saw 
Christiana and Mercy, and the boys, go all of 
Prayer should them up to the gate : to which, when 
consTde^rati^i*'' they wero come, they betook them- 
afin'SInd selves to a short debate about how 
hope. ^\^Qj niust manage their calling at 

the gate, and what should be said unto jiim that 
did open to them ; so it was concluded, since 
Christiana was the eldest, that she should knock 
for entrance, and that she should speak to him 
that did open, for the rest. So Christiana began 
to knock, and as her poor husband did, she 
knocked and knocked again. But instead of any 
that answered, they all thought that they heard 
as if a dog came barking upon them ; a dog, and 

The dog the a great one too ; and this made the 

devil, an enemy ^ _ , ., ^ n ^^ xt 

to prayer. womcu and children airaid. JNor 
durst they for a while to knock any more, for 
fear the mastiff should fly upon them. Now 



800 PILGRIM'S mOGTvESS. 

therefore tliey were greatly tumbled Christiana and 

-, -, • Ji • ' 1 ^ her compan- 

up and down m tneir mmds, and ions perplexed 
knew not what to do: knock they ^^'^^^ p^'^"'- 
durst not, for fear of the dog ; go back they durst 
not, for fear the keeper of that gate should espy 
them as they so went, and should be offended 
with them; at last they thought of knockmg 
again, and knocked more vehemently than they 
did at first. Then said the keeper of the gate, 
"Who is there ? So the dog left off to bark, tind 
he opened unto them. 

Then Christiana made low obeisance, and said, 
Let not our Lord be offended with his hand- 
maidens, for that we have knocked at his prince- 
ly gate. Then said the keeper. Whence come ye ? 
And what is it that you would have ? 

Christiana answered, We are come from 
whence Christian did come, and upon the same 
errand as he ; to wit, to be, if it shall please you, 
graciously admitted by this gate into the way 
that leads unto the celestial city. And I an- 
swer, my Lord, in the next place, that I am Chris- 
tiana, once the wife of Christian that now is got- 
ten above. 

With that the keeper of the gate did marvel, ' 
saying, "What, is she now become a pilgrim that 
but a while ago abhorred that life? Then she 
bowed her head, and said, Yea ; and so are these 
my sweet babes also. 



CHRISTIANA RECEIVED. 301 

Tlien lie took lier by tlie hand and led lier in, 
How Christiana and Said also, Suffer little cliildren to 
at the gate. come unto me ; and with that he shut 
up the gate. This done, he called to a trumpeter 
that was above, over the gate, to entertain Chris- 
tiana with shouting, and the sound of trumpet, 
for joy. So he obeyed, and sounded, and filled 
the air with his melodious notes. 

Now all this while poor Mercy did stand with- 
out, trembling and crying, for fear that she was 
rejected. But when Christiana had got admit- 
tance for herself and her boys, then she began to 
make intercession for Mercy. 

Che. And she said. My Lord, I have a com- 
■ Christiana's panion of mine that stands yet with- 

prayer for her -^ , ,. . . ,.,, ,, 

friend Mercy, out, that IS come hither upon the 
same account as myself: one that is much de- 
jected in her mind, for that she comes, as she 
thinks, without sending for ; whereas I was sent 
for by my husband's King to come. 

Now Mercy began to be very impatient, and 
Delays make ©ach minutc was as long to her as an 
soul ^tSe^m?rl ^oux ; whcreforc she prevented Chris- 
fervent. tiana from a fuller mterceding for her, 

by knocking at the gate herself. And she knock- 
ed then so loud that she made Christiana to 
start. Then said the keeper of the gate, Yv'ho is 
there? And Christiana said, It is my friend. 

So he opened the gate, and looked out, but 



302 riLGIlIM'S TEOGIIESS. 

Mercy was fallen down witliout in a Mercy faints, 
swoon, for she fainted, and was afraid that no 
gate should be opened to her. 

Then he took her by the hand, and said, Dam- 
sel, I bid thee arise. 

Oh, sir, said she, I am faint ; there is scarce 
life left in me. But he answered, that one 
once said, "When my soul fainted within me 
•I remembered the Lord : and my prayer came 
unto thee, into thy holy temple." Jonah 2 : 7. 
Tear not, but stand upon thy feet, and tell me 
wherefore thou art come. 

Mer. I am come for that unto which I was 
never invited, as my friend Christiana was. Hera 
was from the King, and mine was but from her. 
Wherefore I fear I presume. 

Keep. Did she desire you to come with her to 
this place ? 

Mer. Yes ; and as my Lord sees, I am come. 
And if there is any grace and forgiveness of sins 
to spare, I beseech that thy poor handmaid may 
be a partaker thereof. 

Then he took her again by the hand, and led her 
gently in, and said, I pray for all them that believe 
on me, by what means soever they come unto me. 
Then said he to those that stood by. Fetch some- 
thing and give it to Mercy to smell on, thereby to 
stay her faintings ; so they fetched her a bundle 
of myrrh, and a while after she was revived. 



MEECY ADMITTED. 303 

And now were Christiana and her boys and 
Mercy received of the Lord at the head of the 
way, and spoken kindly unto by him. Then said 
they yet further unto him, "We are sorry for our 
sins, and beg of our Lord his pardon, and further 
information what we must do. 

I grant pardon, said he, by word and deed: by 
word in the promise of forgiveness, by deed in the 
way I obtained it. Take the first from my hps 
with a kiss, and the other as it shall be revealed. 
Song 1:2; John 20:20. 

Now I saw in my dream, that he spoke many 
good words unto them, whereby they were great- 
ly gladdened. He also had them up ta the top of 
the gate, and showed them by what deed they 
were saved ; and told them withal, that that sight 
Christ crucified they would havc again as they went 
Been afar off. ^long in the way, to their comfort. 

So he left them a while in a summer parlor 

Talk between bclow, whcrc they entered into talk 

the Christians. ^^ themsclves ; and thus Christiana 

began. Oh how glad am I that we are got in 

hither ! 

Mee. So you well may; but I, of all, have 
cause to leap for joy. 

Chr. I thought one time, as I stood at the gate, 
because I had knocked and none did answer, that 
all our labor had been lost, especially when that 
ugly cur made such a heavy barking against us. 



301 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Mer. But my worst fear was after I saw that 
you was taken into his favor, and that I was left 
behind. Now, thought I, it is fulfilled which is 
written, "Two women shall be grinding at the 
mill ; the one shall be taken, and the other left." 
Matt. 24 : 41. I had much ado to forbear crying 
out, Undone! And afraid I was to knock any 
more ; but when I looked up to what was written 
over the gate, I took courage. I also thought 
that I must either knock again, or die; so I 
knocked, but I cannot tell how, for my spirit now 
struggled betvfeen life and death. 

Chr. Can you not tell how you knocked? I 
am sure your knocks were so earnest that the 
very sound of them made me start ; I thought I 
never heard such knocking in all my Christiana 
life ; I thought you would come in by ^p^aSfn^^^r^ys 
a violent hand, or take the kingdom better than she. 
by storm. Matt. 11 : 12. 

Mer. Alas, to be in my case, who that* so was 
could but have done so? You saw that the 
door was shut upon me, and that there was a 
most cruel dog thereabout. Who, I say, that 
was so faint-hearted as I, would not have knock- 
ed with all their might? But pray, what said 
my Lord to my rudeness? Was he not angi-y 
with me ? 

Chr. When he heard your lumber- Christ pleased 

- T p 1 • ■with loud and 

mg noise, he gave a wonderful mno- resucss grayer. 



MERCY EXPOSTULATES. 305 

cent smile ; I believe Avliat you did pleased him 

If the soul at Well, for lie showed no sign to the con- 
first did know , t-> l t i • i j 

au it should trary. J3ut 1 marvel m my heart 
it^loiJ^nJy to why he keeiDS such a dog : had I 
wouw' hardly ^^own that before, I should not 
ever set out. liave had heart enough to have 
ventured myself in this manner. But now we 
are in, we are in, and I am glad with all my 
heart. 

Mer. I will ask, if you please, next time he 
comes down, why he keeps such a filthy cur in 
his yard ; I hope he will not take it amiss. 

Do so, said the children, and persuade him to 
The children hanof him I for wc are afraid he will 

are afraid of the ^ 

dog. bite us when we go hence. 

So at last he came down to them again, and 
Mercy fell to the ground on her face before him, 
and worshipped, and said, "Let my Lord accept 
the sacrifice of praise which I now offer unto him 
with the calves of my lips." 

So he said unto her. Peace be to thee ; stand 

up. But she continued upon her face, and said, 

" Kighteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with 

thee ; yet let me talk with thee of th}^ judgments.", 

Mercy expos- Jer. 12 : 1. Wherefore dost thou keep 

tulates about . ^ 

the dog. SO cruel a dog m thy yard, at the sight 

of which such women and children as we are 
ready to fly from thy gate for fear? 

He answered and said, That dog has another 

FIl. rrog. 20 



806 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

owner; he also is kept close in an- TheDevii. 
other man's ground, only my pilgrims hear hi3 
barking ; he belongs to the castle which you see 
there at a distance, but can come up to the walls 
of this place. He has frighted many an honest 
pilgrim from worse to better, by the great voice 
of his roaring. Indeed he that owneth him 
doth not keep him out of any good-will to me or 
mine, but with intent to keep the pilgrims from 
coming to me, and that they may be afraid 
to come and knock at this gate for entrance. 
Sometimes also he has broken out, and has 
worried some that I loved ; but I take all at; 
present patiently. I also give my pilgrims time- 
ly help, so that they are not delivered to his 
power, to do with them what his doggish nature 
would prompt him to. But what, my purchas- 
ed one, I trow, hadst thou known never so much 
beforehand, thou wouldest not have been afraid 
of a dog. The beggars that go from door to 
door, will, rather than lose a sup- a check to the 
posed alms, run the hazard of the the pilgrims. 
bawling, barking, and biting too of a dog; 
and shall a dog, a dog in another man*s yard, 
a dog whose barking I turn to the profit of 
pilgrims, keep any from coming to me ? I 
deliver them from the lions, and my darling 
from the power of the dog. Psalm 22 : 21, 
22. 



MEECY'S CONFESSION. 307 

Christians, Mer. Tlien Said Mercy, I confess 
euoTgh, acquS Hiy ignorancG ; I spoke wliat I under- 
dom'^^^'mS stood not ; I acknowledge that thou 
^^^^- doest all things well. 

Then Christiana began to talk of their jour- 
ney, and to inquire after the way. So he fed 
them, and washed their feet, and set them in the 
way of his steps, accordmg as he had dealt with 
her husband before. 



303 PILGEIM'S PEOGEESS. 



THE SECOND STAGE. 

So I saw in my dream, that they walked on 
their way, and had the weather very comfortable 
to them. 

Then Christiana began to sing, saying, 

Blessed be the day that I began 

A pilgrim for to be ; 
And blessed also be the man 

That thereto moved me. 

'T is true, 't was long ere I began 

To seek to live for ever ; 
But now I run fast as I can : 

'T is better late than never. 

Our tears to joy, our fears to faith, 

Are turned, as we see ; 
Thus our beginning, as one saith, 

Shows what our end will be. 

Now there was on the other side of the wall 
that fenced in the way up which Christiana and 
her companions were to go, a garden. The DevU'a 
and that garden belonged to him sadden, 
•whose was that barking dog of whom mention 
was made before. And some of the fruit-trees 
that grew in that garden shot their branches 
over the wall ; and being mellow, they that found 
them did gather them up, and eat of them to 
their hurt. So Christiana's boys, as boys are Sipt 



TWO ILL-FAVORED ONES. 309 

to do, being pleased witli the trees, and with the 
The chiidreu fruit that hunof thereon, did pkick 

eat of the ene- ° •'■ 

my's fruit. them, and began to eat. Their moth- 
er did also chide them for so doing, but still the 
boys went on. 

Well, said she, my sons, you transgress, for 
that fruit is none of ours. But she did not know 
that it belonged to the enemy : I '11 warrant you, 
if she had she would have been ready to die for 
fear. But that passed, and they went on their 
way. Now, by that they were gone about two 
bow-shots from the place that led them into the 
way, they espied two very ill-favored ones com- 
ing down apace to meet them. With that, Chris- 
tiana and Mercy her fiiend covered themselves 
w^ith their veils, and so kept on their journey ; 
the children also went on before ; so that at last 
they met together. Then they that came down 
Two m-favor- to meet them, came just up to the 
chSTanTand women, as if they would embrace 
Mercy. them ; but Christiana said, Stand back, 

or go peaceably as you should. Yet these two, 
as men that are deaf, regarded not Christiana's 
words, but began to lay hands upon them : at 
that Christiana waxing very wroth, spurned at 
them with her feet. Mercy also, as well as she 
could, did what she could to shift them. Chris- 
tiana again said to them. Stand back, and be 
gone, for we have no money to lose, being pil- 



310 PILGEIM'S PROGRESS. 

grims, as you see, and such too as live upon tlie 
charity of our friends. 

Ill-Fay. Then said one of the two men, "We 
make no assault upon you for money, but are 
come out to tell you, that if you wiU but grant 
one small request which we shall ask, we will 
make women of you for ever. 

Che. Now Christiana, imagining what they 
should mean, made answer again. We will nei- 
ther hear, nor regard, nor yield to what you 
shall ask. We are in haste, and cannot stay; 
our business is a business of life and death. So 
again she and her companion made a fresh essay 
to go past them ; but they letted them in then' 
way. 

Ill-Fay. And they said. We intend no hurt to 
your lives ; it is another thing we would have. 

Chr. Aye, quoth Christiana, you would have 
us body and soul, for I know it is for that you 
are come ; but we will die rather upon the spot, 
than to suffer ourselves to be brought into such 
snares as shall hazard our well-being hereafter. 
And with that they both shrieked out, They cry out. 
and cried. Murder! murder! and so put them- 
selves under those laws that are provided for the 
protection of women. Deut. 22 : 25-27. But the 
men still made their approach upon them, with 
design to prevail against them. They therefore 
cried out again. 



THE riLGIillTS RESCUED. 311 

[Now tliey being, as I said, not far from tlie 
gate in at wliich they came, their voice waa 
heard from whence they were, thither : where- 
fore some of the house came out, and knowing 
It is good to that it was Christiana's tongue, they 
are assaulted, made hastc to her reliel But by 
that they were got within sight of them, the 
women were in a very great scuffle; the chil- 

The reliever ^^^^ ^^^o stood ciyiug by. Then did 
comes. -j^Q ^-j^c^^ came in for their i-ehef call 

out to the ruffians, saying. What is that thing 
you do ? Would you make my Lord's people to 
transgress? He also attempted to take them, 
but they did make their escape over the wall 

The ill ones into the garden of the man to whom 
fo^r relief! ^ the great dog helonged ; so the dog 
]became their protector- This reHever then 
came up to the women, and asked them how 
they did. So they answered, We thank thy 
Prince, pretty well, only we have been somewhat 
affrighted: we thank thee also for that thou 
camest in to our help, otherwise we had been 
overcome. 

Eeliever. So, after a few more words, this re- 

The reHever liever Said as followcth : I marvelled 

talks t© the wo- , , ■ • t , 

men. mucu, whcu you were entertained at 

the gate above, seeing ye knew that ye were but 
weak women, that you petitioned not the Lord 
for a conductor j then might you have avoided 



312 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

these troubles and dangers ; for he would have 
granted you one. 

Chr. Alas, said Christiana, we were so taken 
with our present blessing, that dan- Marktiusi 
gers to come were forgotten by us. Besides, who 
could have thought that so near the King's pal- 
ace there could have lui'ked such naughty ones? 
Indeed it had been well for us had we asked our 
Lord for one ; but since our Lord knew it would 
be for our profit, I wonder he sent not one along 
with us. 

Eel. It is not always necessary to grant things 
not asked for, lest by so doing they become of 
little esteem ; but when the want of ^^ jogo for 
a thing is felt, it then comes under, ^°* asking. 
in the eyes of him that feels it, that estimate 
that properly is its due, and so consequently will 
be thereafter used. Had my Lord gTanted you 
a conductor, you would not either so have be- 
wailed that oversight of yours, in not asking for 
one, as now you have occasion to do. So all 
things work for good, and tend to make you 
more wary. 

Chb. Shall we go back again to my Lord, and 
confess our folly, and ask one? 

Rel. Your confession of your folly I will pre- 
sent him with. To go back again you need not, 
for in all places where you shall come you will 
find no want at all ; for in every one of my Lord's 



NEGLECT OF DUTY. 313 

lodgings, wliicli lie lias prepared for the recep- 
tion of liis pilgrims, there is sufficient to furnish 
them against all attempts whatsoever. But, as I 
said. He will be inquired of by them, to do it for 
them. Ezek. 36 : 37. And 't is a poor thing that 
is not worth asking for. "\Vhen he had thus said 
he went back to his i^lace, and the pilgrims went 
on their way. 

Mek. Then said Mercy, ^^^lat a sudden blank 
The mistake is here ! I made account that we had 
of Mercy. been past all danger, and that we 
should never see sorrow more. 

Chr. Thy innocency, my sister, said Christiana 
Christiana's ^^ Mercy, may excuse thee much ; but 
^^*- as for me, my fault is so much the 

greater, for that I saw this danger before I came 
out of the doors, and yet did not provide for it 
when provision might have been had. I am 
much to be blamed. 

Mer. Then said Merc}^, How knew you this 
before you came from home? Pray open to me 
this riddle. 

Chr. Why, I will tell you. Before I set foot 
Christiana's out of doors, ouc night as I lay in my 

dream repeat- , ^ r x. t ;j u j. /i ' £ 

ed. bed I had a dream about this, tor 

methought I saw two men, as like these as ever 
any in the world could look, stand at my bM's 
feet, plotting how they might prevent my salva- 
tion. I will tell you theii' very words. They 



314 PILGEIM'S PROGRESS. 

said — it was when I was in my troubles — Wliat 
shall we do with this woman? for she cries out, 
waking and sleeping, for forgiveness : if she bo 
suffered to go on as she begins, we shall lose 
her as we have lost her husband. This, you 
know, might have made me take heed, and 
have provided when provision might have been 
had. 

Mer. Well, said Mercy, as by this neglect we 
have an occasion ministered unto us to behold 
our own imperfections, so our Lord ^^^^^^ ^^^^ 
has taken occasion thereby to make f^°P^ n^Uct of 
manifest the riches of his grace ; for <^^^*y- 
he, as we see, has followed us with unasked 
kindness, and has delivered us from their hands 
that were stronger than we, of his mere good 
I)leasure. 

Thus now, when they had talked away a little 
more time, they drew near to a house which 
stood in the way, which house was built for the 
relief of pilgrims, as you will find more fully re- 
lated in the first part of these records of tlio 
Pilgrim's Progress. So they drew on towards 
the house, the house of the Interpreter; and 
when they came to the door, they heard a great 
tali in the house. Then they gave Talk in the 
eay, and heard, as they thought, ^^*4"f^*|"b^^t 
Christiana mentioned by name : for piiristiana-sgo- 

•^ ' mg ou pilgnm- 

you must know that there went along, age. 



THE INTERPRETER'S HOUSE. 815 

even before her, a talk of her and her children's 
going on pilgrimage. And this was the most 
pleasing to them, because they had heard that 
she was Christian's wife, that woman who was 
some time ago* so unwilHng to hear of going on 
pilgrimage. Thus therefore they stood still and 
heard the good people within commending her 
who they little thought stood at the door. At 
She knocks at l^st Christiana knocked, as she had 
the door. ^^^^ ^^ ^-^q ^^^q before. Now when 

she had knocked, there came to the door a 3^oung 
The door is damscl, and Opened the door, and look- 

opened to them _ ^ , , , ^ , ., 

by Innocent, ed, and bchold, two women were there. 

Dam. Then said the damsel to them, "With 
whom would you speak in this place ? 

Che. Christiana answered, We understand that 
this is a privileged place for those that are be- 
come pilgi'ims, and we now at this door are such : 
wherefore we pray that we may be partakers of 
that for which we at this tune are come ; for the 
day, as thou seest, is very far spent, and we are 
loath to-night to go any further. 

Dam. Pray, what may I call your name, that I 
may tell it to my Lord within ? 

Chr. My name is Christiana ; I was the wife of 
that pilgrim that some years ago did travel this 
way, and these be his four children. This maid- 
en also is my companion, and i^ going on pil- 
grimage too. 



816 PILGEIM'S PBOGPvESS. 

Innocent. Then Innocent ran in, for that was 
her name, and said to those within. Can you 
think who is at the door? There is Christiana 
and her children, and her companion, all waiting 
for entertainment here. Then they Joy in the 

. "i house of the 

leaped for ioy, and went and told interpreterthat 

OliT'istiiTifli is 

their master. So he came to the turned pUgrim. 
door, and looking upon her, he said. Art thou 
that Christiana whom Christian the good man 
left behind him when he betook himself to a pil- 
grim's life? 

Chr. I am that woman that was so hard-heart- 
ed as to sHght my husband's troubles, and that 
left him to go on his journey alone, and these are 
his four children ; but now I also am come, for I 
am convinced that no way is right but this. 

Inter. Then is fulfilled that which is written 
of the man that said to his son, "Go work to-day 
in my vineyard ; and he said to his father, I will 
not : but afterwards repented, and went." Matt. 
21 : 29. 

Chr. Then said Christiana, So be it: Amen. 
God make it a true saying upon me, and grant 
that I may be found at the last of him in peace, 
without spot, and blameless. 

Inter. But why standest thou thus at the 
door ? Come in, thou daughter of Abraham ; we 
were talking of thee but now, for tidings have 
come to us before how thou art become a pil- 



THEIR HAPPY RECEPTION. S17 

grim. Come, children, come in ; come, maiden, 
come in. So he had them all into the house. 

So when they were within, they were bidden to 
sit down and rest them ; the which when they 
had done, those that attended upon the pilgrims 
in the house come into the room to see them. 
And one smiled, and another smiled, and they all 
smiled for joy that Christiana was become a pil- 
oid saints glad gi'ii^- They also looked upon the 
onef warn''?? ^^ys ; they stroked them over their 
God's ways, faces with the hand, in token of their 
kind reception of them : they also carried it lov- 
ingly to Mercy, and bid them all welcome into 
their Master's house. 
; After a while, because supper was not ready. 

The signifi- ^^^ Interpreter took them into his 
cant rooms. Significant rooms, and showed them 
what Christian, Christiana's husband, had seen 
some time before. Here therefore they saw the 
man in the cage, the man and his dream, the man 
that cut his way through his enemies, and the 
picture of the biggest of them all, together with 
the rest of those things that were then so profit- 
able to Christian. 

This done, and after those things had been 
somewhat digested by Christiana and her com- 
pany, the Interpreter takes them apart again, 
and has them first into a room where was a man 
that could look no way but downwards, with a 



318 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS, 

muck-rake in his hand. There stood The man with 

, 1-1 n«ji ij'i ^^^ muck-rake 

also one over nis head with a celestial expounded, 
crown in his hand, and proffered him that crown 
for his muck-rake ; but the man did neither look 
up nor regard, but raked to himself the straws, 
the small sticks, and dust of the floor. 

Then said Christiana, I persuade myself that I 
know somewhat the meaning of this ; for this is 
the figure of a man of this world : is it not, good 
sir? 

Inter. Thou hast said right, said he; and his 
muck-rake doth show his carnal mind. And 
whereas thou seest him rather give heed to rake 
up straws and sticks, and the dust .of the floor, 
than to do what he says that calls to him from 
above with the celestial crown in his hand ; it is 
to show that heaven is but as a fable to some, 
and that things here are counted the only things 
substantial. Now, whereas it was also showed 
thee that the man could look no way but down- 
wards, it is to let thee know that earthly things, 
when they are with power upon men's minds, 
quite carry their hearts away from God. 

Che. Then said Christiana, Oh de- Christiana's 

T - ,, . , , -r, prayer against 

liver me from this muck-rake. , Frov. the muck-rake. 
30 : 8. 

Inter. That prayer, said the Interpreter, has 
lain by till it is almost rusty : " Give me not rich- 
es," is scarce the prayer of one in ten thousand. 



THE SPIDER. 819 

Straws find sticks and dust, with most, are tlio 
great tilings now looked after. 

With that Christiana and Mercy wept, and 
said, It is, alas, too true. 

"W^ien the Interpreter had showed them this, 
he had them into the very best room in the 
house ; a very brave room it was. So he bid 
them look round about, and see if they could find 
any thing profitable there. Then they looked 
round and round ; for there was nothing to be 

Of the spider, seen but a very great spider on the 
wall, and that they overlooked. 

Mer. Then said Mercy, Sir, I see nothing ; but 
Christiana held her peace. 

Inter. But, said the Interpreter, look again. 

She therefore looked again, and said. Here is not 

any thing but an ugly spider, who hangs by her 

Talk about the hands upon the wall. Then said he, 

epider. jg i}^qj.q ^^^^j^ q-^q spider in all this 

spacious room ? Then the water stood in Chris- 
tiana's eyes, for she was a woman of quick ap- 
prehension ; and she said, Tea, Lord, there are 
more here than one ; yea, and spiders whose 
venom is far more destructive than that which is 
in her. The Interpreter then looked pleasantly 
on her, and said, Thou hast said the truth. This 
made Mercy to blush, and the boys to cover their 
faces ; for they all began now to understand the 
liddle. 



S20 PILGBIM'S PEOGBESS. 

Then said the Interpreter again, "The spider 
taketh hold with her hands," as you see, " and is 
in kings' palaces." Prov. 30:28. And wherefore 
is this recorded, but to show you that, how full of 
the venom of sin soever you be, yet you may, by 
the hand of faith, lay hold of and dwell in the best 
room that belongs to the King's house above? 

Che. I thought, said Christiana, of something 
of this; but I could not imagine it at all. I 
thought that we were like spiders, and that we 
look like ugly creatures, in what fine rooms so- 
ever we were : but that by this spider, that ven- 
omous and ill-favored creature, we were to learn 
how to act faith, that came not into my thoughts ; 
and yet she had taken hold with her hands, and, 
as I see, dwelleth in the best room in the house. 
God has made nothing in vain. 

Then they seemed all to be glad ; but the water 
stood in their eyes ; yet they looked one upon 
another, and also bowed before the Interpreter. 

He had them into another room, where were a 
hen and chickens, and bid them ob- of the hen 
serve a while. So one of the chick- and chickens, 
ens went to the trough to drink, and every time 
she drank she lifted up her head and her eyes 
towards heaven. See, said he, what this little 
chick doth, and learn of her to acknowledge 
whence your mercies come, by receiving them 
with looking up. Yet, again, said he, observe 



THE BUTCHER AND SHEEP. 321 

and look :*so they gave heed, and perceived that 
the hen did walk in a fourfold method towards 
her chickens : 1. She had a common call, and that 
she hath all the day long. 2. She had a special 
call, and that she had but sometimes. 3. She had 
a brooding note. Matt. 23 : 37. And, 4. She 
had an onitcry. 

Now, said he, compare this hen to your King, 
and these chickens to his obedient ones ; for, an- 
swerable to her, he himself hath his methods 
which he walketh in towards his people. By his 
common call, he gives nothing ; by his special 
call, he always has something to give ; he has 
also a brooding voice, for them that are under 
his wings, and he has an outcry, to give the alarm 
when he seeth the enemy come. I choose, my 
darlings, to lead you into the room where such 
things are, because you are women, and they are 
easy for you. 

Chr. And, sir, said Christiana, pray let us see 
some more. So he had them into the slaughter- 
er the butcher iio^se, where was a butcher killing a 
and the sheep, ghccp ; and bchold, the sheep was 
quiet, and took her death patiently. Then said 
the Interpreter, You must learn of this sheep to 
suffer, and to put up with wrongs without 
murmurings and complaints. Behold how 
quietly she takes her death, and, without ob- 
jecting, she suffereth her skin to be pulled 

PU. Prog. 21 



322 PILGEIM'S PROGRESS. 

over her ears. Your Kin:;j doth calt yon his 
sheep. 

After this ho led them mto his garden, where 
was great variety of flowers; and he of the garden, 
said, Do you see all these ? So Christiana said, 
Yes. Then said he again, Behold, the flowers 
are diverse in stature, in quality, and color, and 
smell, and virtue ; and some are better than 
others ; also, where the gardener hath set them, 
there they stand, and quarrel not one with an- 
other. 

Again, he had them into his field, which he had 
sown v/ith wheat and corn : but when of the field, 
they beheld, the tops of all were cut off, and only 
the straw remained. He said again, This ground 
was dunged and ploughed and sowed, but what 
shall we do with the crop ? Then said Christiana, 
Burn some, and make muck of the rest. Then 
said the Interpreter again, Fruit, you see, is that 
thing you look for : and for the want of that you 
condemn it to the fire, and to be trodden under 
foot of men : beware that in this you condemn 
not yourselves. 

Then, as they were coming in from abroad, 
they espied a little robin with a Qf ^he robin 
great spider in his mouth. So the and the spider. 
Interpreter said, Look here. So they looked, 
and Mercy wondered, but Christiana said, What 
a disparagement is it to such a pretty little bird 



THE ROBIN AND SPIDER. 823 

as the robin-red-breast; he being also a bird 
above many, that loveth to maintain a kind of 
sociableness with men. I had thought they had 
lived upon crumbs of bread, or upon other such 
harmless matter : I like him worse than I did. 

The Interpreter then replied. This robin is an 
emblem, very apt to set forth some professors 
by ; for to sight they are, as this robin, pretty of 
note, color, and carriage. They seem also to 
have a very gi'eat love for professors that are 
sincere ; and, above all others, to desire to asso- 
ciate with them, and to be in their company, as 
if they could live upon the good man's crumbs. 
They preten.d also, that therefore it is that they 
frequent the house of the godly, and the appoint- 
ments of the Lord : but when they are by them- 
selves, as the robin, they can catch and gobble 
up spiders ; they can change their diet, di'ink in- 
iquity, and swallow down sin hke water. 

So, when they were come again into the house, 

Pray^ndyou bccause suppcr as yet was not ready, 

wilLt \?t ues Christiana again desired that the In- 

unreveaied. tcrpretcr would either show or tell 

some other things that are profitable. 

Then the Interpreter began, and said. The fat- 
ter the sow is, the more she desires the mire ; 
the fatter the ox is, the more gamesomely he 
goes to the slaughter ; and the more healthy the 
lustful man is, the more prone he is unto evil. 



324 PILGBIM'S PEOGEESS. 

There is a desire iu women to go neai> and fine ; 
and it is a comely thing to be adorned with that 
v/hich in God's sight is of great price. 'T is 
easier watching a night or two, than to sit up the 
whole year together ; so 't is easier for one to be- 
gin to profess well, than to hold out as he should 
to the end. Every shipmaster, when in a storm, 
will willingly cast that overboard which is of the 
smallest value in the vessel ; but who will throw 
the best out first? None but he that fearethnot 
God. One leak will sink a ship, and one sin will 
destroy a sinner. He that forgets his friend is 
ungrateful unto him ; but he that forgets his 
Saviour is unmerciful to himself. He that lives 
in sin, and looks for happiness hereafter, is like 
him that soweth cockle, and thinks to fill his 
barn Vv^ith wheat or barley. If a man would live 
well, let him fetch his last day to him, and make 
it always his company-keeper. Whispering, and 
change of thoughts, prove that sin is in tlie 
world. If the world, whicli God sets light by, is 
counted a thing of that worth with men, what is 
heaven, that God commendeth ? If the life that 
is attended with so many troubles is so loath to 
be let go by us, what is the life above ? Every 
body will cry up the goodness of men ; but who 
is there that is, as he should be, affected with the 
goodness of God? We seldom sit down to meat, 
but we eat and leave ; so there is iu Jesus Chiist 



THE SUPPER. 325 

more merit and rigliteonsness than the whole 
world hath need of. 

When the Interpreter had done, he takes them 
out into his garden again, and had them to a tree 

Of the tree whose inside was all rotten and gone, 

that is rotten at n , • , t i t i rm 

heart. and yet it grew and had leaves, ihen 

said Mercy, What means this? This tree, said 
he, whose outside is fair, and whose inside is 
rotten, is that to which many may be compared 
that are in the garden of God ; who with their 
mouths speak high in behalf of God, but indeed 
will do nothing for him ; whose leaves are fair, 
but their heart good for nothing but to be tinder 
for the devil's tinder-box. 

Now supper was ready, the table spread, and 
They are at ^U things set ou the board : so they 
supper. gg^^ dovv^n, and did eat, when one had 

given thanks. And the Interpreter did usually 
entertain those that lodged with him with music 
at meals; so the minstrels played. There was 
also one that did sing, and a very fine voice he 
had. His song was this : 

♦'The Lord is only my support, 
Aiid lie that doth me feed ; 
How can I then want any thing 
Whereof I stand ia need ?" 

WTien the song and music were ended, the In- 

Taik at supper, terpreter asked Christiana what it 
was that at first did move her thus to betake 



326 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

herself to a pilgrim's life. Christiana answered, 
First, the loss of my husband came a repetition 

/ of Christiana's 

mto my mind, at wuicn I was hoarti- experience. 
ly grieved ; but all that was but natural affection. 
Then after that came the troubles and pilgrim- 
age of my husband into my mind, and also how 
like a churl I had carried it to him as to that. 
So guilt took hold of my mind, and would have 
drawn me into the pond, but that opportunely I 
had a dream of the well-being of my husband, 
and a letter sent me by the King of that country 
^w^here my husband dwells, to come to him. The 
dream and the letter together so wrought upon 
my mind that they forced me to this way. 

Inter. But met you with no opposition before 
you set out of doors ? 

Chr. Yes, a neighbor of mine, one Mrs. Timo- 
rous : she was akin to him that would have per- 
suaded my husband to go back, for fear of the 
lions. She also befooled me for, as she called it, 
my intended desperate adventui-e ; she also urged 
what she could to dishearten me from it, the 
hardships and troubles that my husband met with 
in the way ; but all this I got over pretty well. 
But a dream that I had of two ill-looking ones, 
that I thought did plot how to make me miscar- 
ry, in my journey, that hath troubled me much; 
yea, it still runs in -my mind, and makes me 
afraid of every one that I meet, lest they should 



MERCY'S EXPERIENCE. 327 

meet me to do me a miscliief, and to tnrn me out 
of my way. Yea, I may tell my Lord, tbougli I 
would not liave every body know it, tliat betv/een 
this and the gate by which we got into tlie way, 
we were both so sorely assaulted that we were 
made to cry out murder ; and Hie two that made 
this assault upon us, were like the two that I saw 
in my dream. 

Then said the Interpreter, Thy beginning is 

good ; thy latter end shall greatly increase. So 

A question i3ut ^^ addrcssed himself to Mercy, and 

to Mercy. gj^j^-j ^^j^^o her. And what moved thee 

to come hither, sweet heart? 

Mer. Then Mercy blushed and trembled, and 
for a while continued silent. 

Inter. Then said he. Be not afraid; only be- 
lieve, and speak thy mind. 

Mer. So she began, and said, Truly, sir, my 
Mercy's an- Want of experience is tha,t which 
^^^^' makes me covet to be in silence, and 

that also that fills me with fears of coming short 
at last. I cannot tell of visions and dreams, as 
my fi'iend Christiana can ; nor know I what it is 
to mourn for my refusing the counsel of those 
that were good relations. 

Inter. "What is it, then, dear heart, that hath 
prevailed vvith thee to do as thou hast done ? 

Mer. Yv'^hy, when our friend here was packing 
up to be gone from our town, I and another went 



328 PILGEIM'S PROGRESS. 

accidentally to see her. So we knocked at the 
door and went in. When we were within, and 
seeing what she was doing, we asked her what 
was her meaning. She said she was sent for to 
go to her husband ; and then she up and told us 
how she had seen him in a dream, dwelling in a 
curious place, among immortals, wearing a crown, 
playing upon a harp, eating and drinking at his 
Prince's table, and singing praises to Him for 
bringing him thither, etc. Now, methought, 
while she was telling these things unto us, my 
heart burned within me. And I said in my heart. 
If this be true, I will leave my father and my 
mother, and the land of my nativity, and will, if 
I may, go along with Christiana. So I asked her 
further of the truth of these things, and if she 
would let me go with her ; for I saw now that 
there was no dwelling, but with the danger of 
ruin, any longer in our town. But yet I came 
avfay with a heavy heart ; not for that I was un- 
willing to come away, but for that so many of 
my relations were left behind. And I am come 
with all the desire of my heart, and will go, if I 
may, with Christiana unto her husband and his 
King. 

Inter. Thy setting out is good, for thou hast 
given credit to the truth ; thou art a Ruth, who 
did, for the love she bare to Naomi and to the 
Lord her God, leave father and mother, and the 



BATH OF SANCTIFICATION. 329 

land of lier nativit}'-, to come out and go with a 
people that she knew not heretofore. " The 
Lord recompense thy work, and a full reward 
be given thee of the Lord God of Israel, under 
whose wings thou art come to trust." Euth 2 : 11, 
12. 

Now supper was ended, and preparation was 
They undress made for bed ; the w^omen were laid 

themselves for . i ,i i -i ii 

bed. smgiy alone, and the boys by them- 

selves. Now when Mercy was in bed, she could 
not sleep for joy, for that now her doubts of miss- 
ing at last were removed further from her than 

Mercy's good ^^^^^ they wcre before. So she lay 
night's rest. ^Icssing and x)raising God, Who had 
such favor for her. 

In the morning they arose with the sun, and 
prepared themselves for their departure ; but the 
Interpreter would have them tarry a while ; For, 
said he, you must orderly go from hence. Then 
said he to the damsel that first opened unto them, 

The bath of Take thcm and have them into the 
sanctification. garden to the bath, and there wash 
them and make them clean from the soil which 
they have gathered by travelling. Then Innocent 
the damsel took them and led them into the 
garden, and brought them to the bath ; so she 
told them that there they must wash and be clean, 
for so her Master would have the women to do 
that called at his house as they were going on 



330 PILGEIM'S PEOGEESS. 

pilgrimage. Then they went in and They wash in it. 
washed, yea, they and the boys, and all; and 
they came out of that bath not only sweet and 
clean, but also much enlivened and strengthened 
in their joints. So when they came in, they 
looked fairer a deal than when they went out to 
the washing. 

When they were returned out of the garden 
from the bath, the Interpreter took them and 
looked upon them, and said unto them, "Fair as 
the moon." Then he called for the seal w^here- 
with they used to be sealed that were washed in 
his bath. So the seal was brought, and he set 
his mark upon them, that they might They are 
be known in the places whither they ^^^^•^'^• 
were yet to go. Now the seal was the contents 
and sum of the passover which the children of 
Israel did eat, Exod.l3 :8-10, when they came 
out of the land of Egypt ; and the mark was set 
between their eyes. This seal greatly added to 
their beauty, for it was an ornament to their faces. 
It also added to their gravity'-, and made their 
countenances more like those of angels. 

Then said the Interpreter again to the damsel 
that waited upon these women. Go into the ves- 
try, and fetch out garments for these people. So 
she went and fetched out white raiment, and laid 
They are i^ down before him ; so he command- 
ciothed. g^ them to put it on : it w\as fine 



THE PILGRIMS CLOTHED. 331 

linen, wliite and clean. AYlien tlie women were 
thus adorned, they seemed to be a terror one to 
the other ; for that they could not see that glory 
True humility, each oue had in herself, which they 
could see in each other. Now therefore they 
began to esteem each other better than them- 
selves. For, You are fairer than I am, said one ; 
and, You are more comely than I am, said an- 
other. The children also stood amazed, to see 
into what fashion they were brought. 



332 PILGEIM'S PROGEESS. 



THE THIRD STAGE. 

The Interpreter then called for a man-servant 
of his, one Great-Heart, and bade him take a 
sword and helmet and shield ; and, Take these 
my daughters, said he, conduct them to the house 
called Beautiful, at which place they will rest 
next. So he took his weapons, and went before 
them ; and the Interpreter said, God-speed. 
Those also that belonged to the family sent them 
away with many a good wish. So they went on 
their way, and sung, 

Tills place hath been our second stage : 

Here we have heard and seen 
Those good things that from age to age 

To others hid have been. 

The dnnghill-raker, spider, hen, 

The chicken too, to me 
Have taught a lesson : let me then 

Conformed to it be. 

The butcher, garden, and the field, 

The robin and his bait. 
Also the rotten tree, doth yield 

Me argument of weight, 

To move me for to watch and pray, 

To strive to be sincere ; 
To take my cross up day by day, 

And servo the Lord with fear. 



GREAT-HEART. 333 

^Now I saw in my dream, that tliese went on, 
and Great-Heart before them. So they went, 
and came to the X3lace where Christian's burden 
fell off his back and tumbled into a sepulchre. 
Here then they made a pause; here also they 
blessed God. Now, said Christiana, it comes to 
my mind what was said to us at the gate, to wit, 
that we should haye pardon by word and deed: 
by word, that is, by the promise ; by deed, to 
wit, in the way it was obtained. What the prom- 
ise is, of that I know something ; but what it 
is to have pardon by deed, or in the way that it 
was obtained, Mr. Great-Heart, I suppose you 
know ; wherefore, if you please, let us hear your 
discourse thereof. 

Gkeat. Pardon by the deed done, is pardon 

A comment obtained by some one for another that 

said at the gate, hath needthercof ; not by the person 

or a discourse -, i i i • ±t -xi 

of our being pardoned, but m the way, saitn an- 
christ! ^ other, in which I have obtained it. 
So then, to speak to the question more at large, 
the pardon that you and Mercy and these boys 
have attained, was obtamed by another ; to wit, 
by him that let you in at the gate. And he hath 
obtaified it in this double way ; he hath perform- 
ed righteousness to cover you, and epilt his 
blood to wash you in. 

Che. But if he parts with his righteousness to 
us, what will he have for himself? 



334: PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Great. He lias more righteousness tlian you 
have need of, or than he needeth himself. 

Che. Pray make that appear. 

Great. With all my heart : but first I must pre- 
mise, that He of whom we are now about to speak, 
is one that has not his fellow. He has two na- 
tures in one person, plain to be distinguished, 
impossible to be divided. Unto each of these 
natures a righteousness belongeth, and each 
righteousness is essential to that nature ; so that 
one may as easily cause the nature to be extinct, 
as to separate its justice or righteousness from it. 
Of these righteousnesses therefore we are nob 
made partakers, so as that they, or any of them, 
should be put upon us, that we might be made 
just, and live thereby. Besides these, there is a 
righteousness which this person has, as these 
two natures are joined in "one. And this is not 
the righteousness of the Godhead, as distinguish- 
ed from the manhood ; nor the righteousness of 
the manhood, as distinguished from the Godhead; 
but a righteousness which standeth in the union 
of both natures, and may properly be called the 
righteousness that is essential to his being pre- 
pared of God to the capacity of the mediatory 
office which he was intrusted with. If he parts 
with his first righteousness, he j)arts with his 
Godhead; if he parts with his second righteous- 
ness, he parts with the purity of his manhood; if 



JUSTIFIED BY CHRIST. 335 

he parts witli his third, he parts with that perfec- 
tion which capacitates him for the office of media- 
tion. He has therefore another righteousness, 
which standeth in performance, or obedience to 
a revealed will ; and that is what he puts upon 
sinners, and that by which their sins are covered. 
'\'\'Tierefore he saith, "As by one man's disobedi- 
ence many were made sinners, so by the obedi- 
ence of one shall many be made rigliteous." 
Kom. 5 : 19. 

Che. But are the other righteousnesses of no 
use to us ? 

Great. Yes; for though they are essential to 
his natures and ofiice, and cannot be communi- 
cated unto another, yet it is by virtue of them 
that the righteousness that justifies is for that 
purpose efficacious. The righteousness of his 
Godhead gives virtue to his obedience ; the right- 
eousness of his manhood giveth capability to his 
obedience to justify ; and the righteousness that 
standeth in the union of these two natures to his 
office, giveth authority to that righteousness to 
do the work for which it was ordained. 

So then here is a righteousness that Christ, as 
God, has no need of; for he is God without it. 
Here is a righteousness that Christ, as man, has no 
need of to make him so ; for he is perfect man 
without it. Again, here is a righteousness that 
Christ, as God-man, has no need of ; for he is 



336 PILGRIM'S PROGEESS. 

perfectly so without it. Here then is a right- 
eousness that Christ, as God, and as God-man, 
has no need of with reference to himself, and 
therefore he can spare it ; a justifying righteous- 
ness, that he for himself wanteth not, and there- 
fore giveth it away. Hence it is called the gift 
of righteousness. This righteousness, since 
Christ Jesus the Lord has made himself under 
the law, must be given away ; for the law doth 
not only bind him that is under it, to do justly, 
but to use charity. Bom. 5 : 17. AVherefore he 
must, or ought by the law, if he hath two coats, 
to give one to him that hath none. Now, our 
Lord indeed hath two coats, one for himself, and 
one to spare ; wherefore he freely bestows one 
uj^on those that have none. And thus Christiana 
and Mercyi and the rest of you that are here, 
doth your pardon come by deed, or by the work 
of another man. Your Lord Christ is he that 
worked, and hath given away what he wrought 
for, to the next poor beggar he meets. 

But again, in order to pardon by deed, there 
must something be paid to God as a price, as 
well as something prepared to cover us withal. 
Sin has delivered us up to the just curse of a 
righteous law : now from this curse we must be 
justified by way of redemption, a price being paid 
for the harms we have done ; and this is by the 
blood of your Lord, who came and stood in your 



THE GRACE OF CHRIST. 337 

place and stead, and died your death for your 
transgressions. Thus has he ransomed you from 
your transgressions by blood, and covered your 
polluted and deformed souls with righteousness, 
Rom. 8 : 34 ; for the sake of which, God passeth 
by you, and will not hurt you when he comes to 
judge the world. Gal. 3 : 13. 

Chr. This, is brave ! Now I see that there was 
Christiana af- Something to be learned by our being 
w oVSSi- pardoned by word and deed. Good 
tiou. Mercy, let us labor to keep this in 

mind; and, my children, do you remember it also. 
But, sir, was not this it that made my good Chris- 
tian's burden fall from off his shoulders, and that 
made him give three leaps for joy? 

Great. Yes, it was the belief of this that cut 
How the those strings that could not be cut by 

Btrings that j, , ., i. • i • 

bound Chris- Other mcans ; and it was to give liim 

tian's burden to p p l^ • l £ l.^ • ji^i 

him were cut. a prooi 01 the Virtue oi this, that he 
was suffered to carry his burden to the cross. 

Chr. I thought so ; for though my heart was 
Hghtsome and joyous before, yet it is ten times 
more lightsome and joyous now. And I am per- 
suaded by what I have felt, though I have felt but 
little as yet, that if the most burdened man in the 
world w^as here, and did see and believe as I now 
do, it would make his heart the more merry and 
bhthe. 

Great. There is not only comfort and the ease 

I'il. ITog. 22 



338 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

of a bui'clen broiiglit to us bj the sight How affection 

-, . T . . » , , , , to Christ is be- 

and consideration oi these, but an en- got iu the eoui, 
deared affection begot in us by it ; for who can, 
if he doth but once think that pardon comes not 
only by promise but thus, but be affected with 
the w^ay and means of his redemption, and so 
with the man that hath wrought it for him ? 

Che. True ; methinks it makes my heart bleed 
to think that he should bleed for me. Oh, thou 
loving One ; Oh, thou blessed One. Thou de- 
servest to haye me ; thou hast bought me. Thou 
deservest to have me all : thou hast ^^^^gg of admi- 
paid for me ten thousand times more ^^a*^^^"' 
than I am worth. No marvel that this made the 
tears stand in my husband's eyes, and that it 
made him trudge so nimbly on. I am persuad- 
ed he wished me with him ; but, vile wretch that 
I was, I let him come all alone. Oh, Mercy, that 
thy father and mother were here ; yea, and Mrs. 
Timorous also : nay, I wish now with all my heart 
that here was Madam Wanton too. Surely, sure- 
ly their hearts would be affected ; nor could the 
fear of the one, nor the powerful lusts of the 
other, prevail with them to go home again, and 
refuse to become good pilgrims. 

Great. You speak now in the warmth of your 
affections ; will it, think you, be always thus with 
you ? Besides, this is not communicated to every 
one, nor to every one that did see your Jesus 



THE FOOLISH ONES HANGED. 839 

bleed. There were tliat stood by, and that saw 
the blood run from his heart to the ground, and 
yet were so far off this, that instead of lamenting, 
they laughed at him, and instead of becoming his 
disciples, did harden their hearts against him. 
To be affected So that all that you have, my daugh- 

witli Christ, , , , , . . 

and with what tcrs, you havc by peculiar impression 

he has done, is -, ■, t • • i ^ • 

a thing special, made by a cUvine contemplating upon 
what I have spoken to you. Hemember that 
'twas told you, that the hen, by her common 
call, gives no meat to her chickens. This you 
have therefore by a special grace. 

Now I saw in my di*eam, that they went on 
until they were come to the place that Simple 
and Sloth and Presumption lay and slept in when 
Christian went by on pilgTimage; and behold, 
they were hanged uj) in irons a little way off on 
the other side. 

Mee. Then said Mercy to him that was their 

Simple Sloth, g^'^iclc and conductor, "What are these 

and Presumpl ^^^j^qq j^g^ . ^nd for what are they 

tion hanged ; ' •^ 

and why. hanged there? 

Great. These three were men of bad qualities : 
they had no mind to be pilgrims themselves, and 
whomsoever they could they hindered. They 
were sloth and folly themselves, and whomso- 
ever they could persuade they made so too, and 
withal taught them to presume that they should 
do well at last. They were asleep when Chris- 



340 PILGRIM'S PEOGRESS. 

tian went by; and now you go by, they are 
hanged. 

Mer. But could they persuade any to be of 
their opinion? 

Great. Yes, they turned several out of the way. 
There was Slow-pace that they persuaded to do 
as they. They also prevailed with Their cnmes. 
one Short-wind, with one No-heart, with one Lin- 
ger-after-Lust, and with one Sleepy-head, and 
with a young woman, her name was Dull, to turn 
out of the way and become as they. Besides, 
they brought up an ill-report of your Lord, per- 
suading others that he was a hard taskmaster. 
They also brought up an evil report of the good 
land, saying it was not half so good as some pre- 
tended it Avas. They also began to vilify his ser- 
vants, and to count the best of them meddlesome, 
troublesome busybodies. Further, they would 
call the bread of God husks ; the comforts of his 
children, fancies ; the travel and labor of pil- 
grims, things to no purpose. 

Chr. Nay, said Christiana, if they were such, 
they should never be bewailed by me : they have 
but what they deserve ; and I think it is weU that 
they stand so near the highway, that others may 
see and take warning. But had it not been well 
if their crimes had been engraven in some plate 
of iron or brass, and left here where they did 
their mischiefs, for a caution to other bad men ? 



THE HILL DIFFICULTY. 841 

Geeat. So it is, as you may -well perceive, if 
you will go a little to the wall. 

Mer. No, no ; let them hang, and their names 
rot, and their crimes live for ever against them. 
I think it a high favor that they were hanged be- 
fore we came liither : who knows else what they 
might have done to such poor women as we are ? 
Then she turned it into a song, saying, 

"Now then yon tliree liang there, and be a sign 
To all that shall against the truth combine. 
And let him that comes after fear this end, 
If unto pilgrims he is not a friend. 
And thou, my soul, of all such men beware, 
That unto holiness opposers are." 

Thus they went on till they came to the foot of 
the hill Difficulty, where again the good Mr. 
Great-Heart took an occasion to teU them what 
happened there when Christian himself went by. 
So he had them first to the spring. Lo, saith he, 
this is the spring that Christian drank of before 
he went up this hiU : and then it was clear and 
It is difficult goo^ ; t)ut now it is dirty with the 
doSe° hf "e'S fee^ of some that are not desirous that 
roneous times, pilgrims hcro should c[uench their 
thirst. Ezek. 34 : 18, 19. Thereat Mercy said. 
And why so envious, trow ? But, said their guide, 
it will do, if taken up and put into a vessel that 
is sweet and good ; for then the dirt vv^ill sink to 
the bottom, and the water come out by itself 



342 PILGRIM'S PROGEESS. 

more clep.r. Thus therefore Christiana and her 
companions were compelled to do. They took it 
up, and put it into an earthern pot, and so let it 
stand till the dirt was gone to the bottom, and 
then they drank thereof. 

Next he showed them the two by-ways that 
were at the foot of the hill, where Formality and 
Hypocrisy lost themselves. And, said he, these 
are dangerous j^aths. Two were here cast away 
when Christian came by ; and although, as you 
see, these ways are since stopped up The paths 

•XI 1 • X T 1 •/ 1 - x tliough barred 

With chains, posts, and a ditcn, yet up.wiunotkeep 
there are those that will choose to ad- m them. 
venture here, rather than take the pains lo go up 
this hm. 

Che. "The way of transgressors is hard.'* 
Prov. 13 : 15. It is a wonder that they can get 
into these ways without danger of breaking their 
necks. 

Great. They will venture : yea, if at any time 
any of the King's servants do happen to see them, 
and do call upon them, and tell them that they are 
in the wrong way, and do bid them beware of the 
danger, then they railingly return them answer, 
and say, "As for the word that thou hast spoken 
unto us in the name of the King, we will not 
hearken unto thee ; but we will certainly do what- 
soever thing goetli out of our ovm mouth." Jer. 
4.1 : 16, 17. Nay, if you look a little further, you 



THE PEINCE'S AEBOR. 343 

sliall see that these ways are made cautionary 
enough, not only by these posts and ditch and 
chain, but also by being hedged up ; yet they will 
choose to go there. 

Che. They are idle ; they love not to take pains; 
up-hill way is unpleasant to them. So it is ful- 

The reason filled unto them as it is written, " The 
SfoseTlotn way of the slothful man is as a hedge 
by-ways. of thoms." Prov. 15 : 19. Yea, they 

will rather choose to walk upon a snare than to 
go up this hill, and the rest of this way to the 
city. 

Then they set forward, and began to go up the 

hill, and up the hill they went. But before they 

The hill puts cfot to the top, Christiana be^-an to 

the pilgrims to ^ -IT 1 ^1 ^ • 

it. pant, and said, i dare say this is a 

breathing hill ; no marvel if they that love their 
ease more than their souls choose to themselves 
a smoother way. Then said Mercy, I must sit 
down ; also the least of the children began to cry. 
Come, come, said Great-Heart, sit not down here ; 
for a httle above is the Prince's arbor. Then he 
took the httle boy by the hand, and led him up 
thereto. 

When they were come to the arbor, they were 

They sit down Very willing to sit down, for they were 

in the arbor ^^ in a pelting heat. Then said Mercy, 

Hovf sweet is rest to them that labor. Matt. 

11 : 28 ; and how good is the Prince of pilgrims 



3M PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

to provide such resting-places for them! Of this 
arbor I have heard much ; but I never saw it be- 
fore. But here let us beware of sleeping ; for, as 
I have heard, it cost poor Christian dear. 

Then said Mr. Great-Heart to the little ones, 
Come, my pretty boys, how do you do? What 
think you now of going on pilgrimage ? Sir, said 
the least, I was almost beat out of Theiittie boy's 
heart ; but I thank you for lending me -^t^and also 
a hand at my need. And I remember ^ ^^rcy. 
now what my mother hath told me, namely, that 
the way to heaven is as a ladder, and the way to 
hell is as down a hill. But I had rather go up 
the ladder to life, than down the hill to death. 

Then said Mercy, But the proverb is, "To go 
down the hill is easy." But James said, for that 
was his name. The day is coming when, in my 
opinion, going down the hill will be the hardest 
of all. 'T is a good boy, said his master ; thou 
hast given her a right answer. Then Mercy 
smiled, but the httle boy did blush. 

Chr. Come, said Christiana, will you eat a bit 
to sweeten your mouths, while you sit They refresh 
here to rest youi' legs? for I have here themselves. 
a piece of pomegranate which IMr. Interpreter put 
into my hand just when I came out of his door ; he 
gave me also a piece of a honey-comb, and a little 
bottle of spirits. I thought he gave you some- 
thing, said Mercy, because he called you aside. 



THE PILGRIMS EEFRESHED. 345 

Yes, so lie did, said the other ; but, said Chris- 
tiana, it shall be still as I said it should, when at 
first we came from home ; thoii shalt be a sharer 
in all the good that I have, because thou so will- 
ingly didst become my companion. Then she 
gave to them, and they did eat, both Mercy and 
the boys. And said Christiana to IMi'. Great- 
Heart, Su', will you do as we? But he answered. 
You are going on pilgrimage, and iDresently I 
shall return ; much good may what you have do 
you : at home I eat the same every day. 



346 PILGIIIM'S PEOGEESS. 



THE FOURTH STAGE. 

Now when tliey had eaten and drank, and had 
chatted a httle longer, their guide said to them, 
The day wears away ; if you think good, let us 
prepare to be going. So they got up to go, and 
the little boys went before ; but Chris- Christiana for- 
tiana forgot to take her bottle of of spirits, 
spirits with her, so she sent her little boy back to 
fetch it. Then said Mercy, I think this is a losing 
place : here Christian lost his roll, and here 
Christiana left her bottle behind her. Sir, what 
is the cause of this? So their guide made an- 
swer, and said, The cause is sleep, or forgetful- 
ness : some sleep when they should keep awake, 
and some forget when they should remember ; 
and this is the very cause why often, at the rest- 
ing-places, some pilgrims in some things come off 
losers. Pilgrims should watch, and remember 
what they have already received, under their 
greatest enjoyments ; but for want of doing so, 
oftentimes their rejoicing ends in Marktwa. 
tears, and their sunshine in a cloud : witness the 
stor}'- of Christian at this place. 

When they were come to the place where Mis- 
trust and Timorous met Christian, to persuade 
liim to go back for fear of the lions, they per- 



THE LIONS. 347 

ceived as it were a stage, and before it, towards 
the road, a broad plate with a copy of verses 
wi'itten thereon, and underneath the reason of 
raising up that stage in that place rendered. 
The verses were, 

"Let him that sees this stage take heed i 

Unto his heart and tongue ; 
Lest, if he do not, here he speed 
As some have long agone." 

The words tinderneath the verses were, "This 
stage was built to punish those upon, who, 
through timorousness or mistrust, shall be afraid 
to go further on pilgrimage. Also, on this stage 
both Mistrust and Timorous were burned through 
the tongue with a hot iron, for endeavoring to 
hinder Christian on his joiu*ney." 

Then said j\Iercy, This is much like to the say- 
ing of the Beloved, ""Wliat shall be given unto 
thee, or what shall be done unto thee, thou false 
tongue ? Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals 
of juniper." Psa. 120:3, 4. 

So they went on till they came within sight of 
the hons. Now Mr. Great-Heart was a strong 
man, so he was not afraid of a lion. But yet 
when they were come up to the place where the 

An emblem lions were, the boys, that went before, 

of tliose that » .; ' ' 

go on bravely were uow cflad to crincfc behind, for 

•when there is ^ ° 

no danger, but they Were afraid of the Hons ; so they 
troubles come, stepped back, and went behind. At 



348 PILGKIM'S PROGBESS. 

this their guide smiled, and said, How now, my 
boys, do you love to go before when no danger 
doth approach, and love to come behind so soon 
as the lions appear? 

Now, as they went on, Mr. Great-Heart drew 
his sword, with intent to make a way for the 
pilgrims in spite of the lions. Then there appear- 
ed one that, it seems, had taken upon of Grim the 
him to back the lions ; and he said to g^ng the^S 
the pilgrims' guide, What is the cause °^^- 
of your coming hither ? Now the name of that 
man was Grim-, or Bloody-man, because of his 
slaying of pilgrims ; and he was of the race of 
the giants. 

Gkeat. Then said the pilgrims' guide. These 
women and children are going on pilgrimage, 
and this is the way they must go; and go it they 
shall, in spite of thee and the Hons. 

Gkim. This is not their way, neither shall they 
go therein. I am come forth to withstand them, 
and to that end will back the lions. 

Now, to say truth, by reason of the fierceness of 
the lions, and of the grim carriage of him that did 
back them, this way had of late lain much unoc- 
cupied, and was almost grown over with grass. 

Chk. Then said Christiana, Though the high- 
ways have been unoccupied heretofore, and 
though the travellers have been made in times 
past to walk through by-i)aths, it must not be so 



GRIM IS SLAIN. 349 

novf I am risen, now I am risen a motlier in Is- 
rael, Judges 5:6, 7. 

Grim. Then he swore by the lions that it 
should; and therefore bid them turn aside, for 
they should not have passage there. 

But Great-Heart their guide made first liis ap- 
A fight be- proach unto Grim, and laid so heavily 

tweenOrimaud ^ . -xi i • t i i j. i j? -i 

Great-Heart, ou him With his sword that he lorced 
him to retreat. 

Grim. Then said he that attempted to back the 
lions. Will you slay me upon my own ground ? 

Great. It is the King's highway that we are in, 
and in this way it is that thou hast placed the 
lions ; but these women, and these children, 
though weak, shall hold on theu' way in spite of 
thy lions. And with that he gave him again a 
downright blow, and brought him upon his knees. 
With this blow also he broke his helmet, and with 
the next he cut off an arm. Then did the gitint 
roar so hideously that his voice frightened the 
women, and yet they were glad to see him lie 

The victory, sprawliiig upou the ground. Now the 
Hons were chained, and so of themselves could do 
nothing. Wherefore, when old Grim, that intend- 
ed to back them, was dead, Mr. Great-Heart said 
to the pilgrims. Come now, and follow me, and 

They pass by ^^^ hurt shall happen to you from the 
the hons. liQj^g^ rpj^gy therefore went on, but 

the women trembled as they passed by them ; the 



350 PILGEIM'S PEOGRESS. 

boys also looked as if tliey wonld die ; but they 
all got by without further hurt. 

Now, when they were within sight of the por- 
ter's lodge, they soon came up unto it ; but they 
made the more haste after this to go thither, be- 
cause it is dangerous travelling there in the night. 
So when they were come to the erate. They como 

• T T 1 T Til '^ to the porter's 

the guide iinocked, and the porter lodge, 
cried, Who is there ? But as soon as the guide 
had said, It is I, he knew his voice, and came 
down, for the guide had oft before that como 
thither as a conductor of pilgrims. "When he was 
come down, he opened the gate ; and seeing the 
guide standing just before it, for he saw not the 
women, for they were behind him, he said unto 
him. How now, Mr. Great-Heart, what is your 
business here so late at night? I have brought, 
said he, some pilgrims hither, where, by my Lord's 
commandment, they must lodge : I had been here 
some time ago, had I not been opposed by the 
giant that did use to back the lions. But I, af- 
ter a long and tedious combat with him, have cut 
him off, and have brought the pilgrims hither in 
safety. 

PoR. Will you not go in, and stay tiU morning ? 

Great. No, I will return to my Great-Heart 

"^ attempts to go 

liord to-night. back. 

Chr. Oh, sir, I know not how to be wilhng you 
should leave us in our pilgrimage : you have been 



GKEAT-HEAKT LEAVES THEM. 351 

SO faitliful and so loving to us, you have fouglit 
so stoutly for us, you have been so hearty in 
counselling of us, that I shall never forget your 
favor towards u«. 

Mer. Then said Mercy, Oh that we might have 
The pugrims thv compauv to our ioui-ney's end. 

implore liis *^ i 

company still. How cau such poor womcu as we hold 
out in a way so full of troubles as this way is, 
without a friend and defender ? 

James. Then said James, the youngest of the 
boys. Pray, sir, be persuaded to go with us, and 
help us, because we are so weak, and the way so 
dangerous as it is. 

Great. I am at my Lord's commandment ; if 

he shall allot me to be your guide quite through, 

I will willingly wait upon you. But here you 

Help lost for failed at first ; for when he bid me 

want of asking 

for it. come thus lar with you, then j^ou 

should have begged me of him to have gone quite 
through with you, and he v/ould have granted 
your request. However, at present I must with- 
draw; and so, good Christiana, Mercy, and my 
brave children, adieu. 

Then the porter, Mr. Watchful, asked Christiana 
of her country, and of her kindred. And she said, 
I came fi-om the city of Destruction. I am a 
widow woman, and my husband is dead ; his name 
was Christian, the pilgrim. How, said the j)orter, 
was he your husband? Yes, said she, and these 



o52 PILGrvIM'S mOGRESS. 

are his children ; and this, pointing to Mercy, is 
one of my townswomen. Then the porter rang 
his bell, as at such times he is wont, and there 
came to the door one of the damsels, whose name 
was Humble-Mind; and to her the porter said, 
Go tell it within, that Christiana, the wife of 
Christian, and her children, are come hither on 
pilgrimage. She went in therefore and told it. 
But Oh, what noise for gladness was Joy at the 

T-i 1TT1J ^6^vs ot the pil- 

there within when the damsel did but grims' coming. 
drop that out of her mouth. 

So they came with haste to the porter, for Chris- 
tiana stood still at the door. Then some of the 
most grave said unto her. Come in, Christiana, 
come in, thou wife of that good man ; come in, 
thou blessed woman, come in, with all that are 
with thee. So she went in, and they followed her 
that were her children and companions. Now 
when they were gone in, they were had into a 
large room, where they vf ere bidden to sit down ; 
so they sat down, and the chief of 'the house were 
called to see and welcome the guests. Then they 
came in, and understanding who they were, did 
salute each other with a kiss, and said, christians' 
Welcome, ye vessels of the grace of ifth^ ,^^^f ^^^ 
God; welcome to us, your friends. °"® another. 

Now, because it was somewhat late, and be- 
cause the pilgrims were weary with their journey, 
and also made faint with the sight of the fight, 



THE PILGRIMS ENTEETAINED. 353 

and of tlie terrible lions, they desired, as soon as 
might be, to prepare to go to rest. Nay, said 
those of the family, refresh yourselves first with 
a morsel of meat ; for they had prepared for them 
a lamb, with the accustomed sauce belonging 
thereto, Exod. 12 : 21 ; John 1:29; for the porter 
had heard before of their coming, and had told it 
to them within. So when they had supped, and 
ended their prayer with a psalm, they desired 
they might go to rest. 

But let us, said Christiana, if we may be so 
bold as to choose, be in that chamber that wag 
my husband's when he was here ; so they had 
them up thither, and they all lay in a room. 
When they were at rest, Christiana and Mercy 
entered into discourse about things that were 
convenient. 

CsR. Little did I think once, when my hus- 
christ's bosom band Went on pilgiimage, that I 
grims! ^ ^ should cver have followed him. 

Mer. And you as little thought of lying in his 
bed, and in his chamber to rest, as you do now. 

Chr. And much less did I ever think of seeing 
his face with comfort, and of worshipping the 
Lord the King with him ; and yet now I beheve 
I shaU. 

Mer. Hark, don't you hear a noise ? 

Chr. Yes, it is, as I beheve, a noise of music, 

Music. for joy that we are here. 

PU. Prog. 23 



o5i PILGRIM'S PRCGEESS. 

Mek. "Wonderful! Music iu the house, music 
in the heart, and music also in heaven, for joy 
that we are here. Thus they talked a while, and 
then betook themselves to sleep. 

So in the morning when they were awake, 
Christiana said to Mercy, What was Mercy did 
the matter that you did laugh in your sleep. 
sleep to-night ? I suppose you were in a dream. 

Mee. So I was, and a sweet dream it was ; but 
are you sure I laughed ? 

Chr. Yes, you laughed heartily; but prithee, 
Mercy, tell me thy dream. 

Mer. I was dreaming that I sat all alone in a 
solitary place, and was bemoaning of Mercy's dream, 
the hardness of my heart. Now I had not set 
there long but methought many were gathered 
about me to see me, and to hear what it was I 
said. So they hearkened, and I went on be- 
moaning the hardness of my heart. At this, 
some of them laughed at me, some called me 
fool, and some began to thrust me about. With 
that, methought I looked up and saw one com- 
ing with wings towards me. So he what her 
came directly to me, and said, Mercy, ^^^^ ^^^* 
what aileth thee ? Now when he had heard me 
make my complaint, he said, Peace" be to thee ; 
he also wiped my eyes with his handkerchief, and 
clad me in silver and gold. Ezek. 16 : 8-11. He 
put a chain about my neck, and car-rings in my 



MERCY'S DBEAM. 355 

ears, and a beautiful crown upon my head. Tlien 
lie took me by the hand, and said, Mercy, come 
after me. So he went up, and I followed till we 
came at a golden gate. Then he knocked ; and 
when they within had opened, the man went in, 
and I followed him up to a throne, upon which 
one sat ; and he said to me. Welcome, daughter. 
The place looked bright and twinkling, hke the 
stars, or rather like the sun, and I thought that 
I saw your husband there ; so I awoke from my 
dream. But did I laugh? 

Chr. Laugh ! aye, and well .you might, to see 
yourself so well. For you must give me leave to 
teU you, that it was a good dream ; and that, as 
you have begun to find the first part true, so you 
shall find the second at last. " God speaks once, 
yea, twice, yet man perceiveth it not : in a dream, 
in a vision of the night, when deep sleep faUeth 
upon men, in slumberings upon the bed.'* Job 
33 : 14, 15. We need not, when abed, to lie awake 
to talk with God; he can visit us while we 
sleep, and cause us then to hear his voice. Our 
heart oftentimes wakes when we sleep, and God 
can speak to that, either by words, by proverbs, 
by signs and similitudes, as well as if one was 
awake. 

Mer. Well, I am glad of my dream ; for I hope 
Mercy glad of ^^'^ loug to sce it fulfiUed, to the mak' 

her dream. -j^g ^^ j^^^gj^ ^^^^^^ 



356 PILGRIM'S PROGKESS. 

Chr. I think it is now high time to rise, and to 
know what we must do. 

Mer. Pray, if they invite us to stay a while, let 
us willingly accept of the pro£fer. I am the more 
willing to stay a while here, to grow better ac- 
quainted with these maids : methinks Prudence, 
Piety, and Charity, have very comely and sober 
countenances. 

Chr. We shall see what they will do. 

So when they were up and ready, they came 
down, and they asked one another of their rest, 
and if it was comfortable or not. 

Mer. Very good, said Mercy : it was one of the 
best night's lodgings that ever I had in my life. 

Then said Prudence and Piety, If you will be 
persuaded to stay here a while, you shall have 
what the house will afford. 

Char. Aye, and that with a very good will, 
said Charity. So they consented, and They stay here 
stayed there about a month, or above, ^°^^ *"^®' 
and became very profitable one to another. 
And because Prudence would see how Christiana 
had brought up her children, she ask- . Prudence de- 

*=•••• sires to cate- 

ed leave of her to catechize them. cMze chris- 

n ^ -IP 1 rm tiana's chil- 

bo she gave her n*ee consent. Then dren, 

she began with the youngest, whose name was 

James. 

Prud. And she said. Come, James, james cate- 
canst thou tell me who made thee ? ciuzed. 



THE CHILDllEN CATECHIZED. 357 

James. God tlie Father, God the Son, and God 
the Holy Ghost. 

Prud. Good boy. And canst thon tell who 
saved thee ? 

James. God the Father, God the Son, and God 
the Holy Ghost. * 

Prud. Good boy still. But how doth God the 
Father save thee ? 

James. By his grace. 

Prud. How doth God the Son save thee ? 

James. By his righteousness,' death and blood, 
and life. 

Prud. And how doth God the Holy Ghost 
save thee? 

James. By his illumination, by his renovation, 
and by his preservation. 

Then said Prudence to Christiana, You are to 
be commended for thus bringing up your chil- 
dren. I suppose I need not ask the rest these 
questions, since the youngest of them can answer 
them so well. I will therefore now apply myseK 
to the next youngest. 

Prud. Then she said. Come, Joseph, for his 
Joseph cate- name was Joseph, will you let me cat- 
chized. echizeyou? 

Joseph. With all my heart. 

Prud. What is man ? 

Joseph. A reasonable creature, so made by 
God, as my brother said. 



358 PILGRIM'S PIIOGHESS. 

Prud. Wliat is supposed by this word, saved? 

Joseph. That man, by sin, has brought himseli 
into a state of captivity and misery. 

Prud. What is supposed by his being saved by 
the Trinity? 

Joseph. That sin is so great and mighty a 
tyrant that none can pull us out of its clutches 
but God ; and that God is so good and loving to 
man, as to pull him indeed out of this miserable 
state. 

Prud. "What is God's design in saving poor 
men? 

Joseph. The glorifying of his name, of his grace, 
and justice, etc., and the everlasting happiness of 
his creature. 

Prud. Wlio are they that will be saved? 

Joseph. They that accept of his salvation. 

Prid. Good boy, Joseph ; thy mother hath 
xaught thee well, and thou hast hearkened unto 
what she has said unto thee. 

Then said Prudence to Samuel, who was the 
eldest but one, 

Prud. Come, Samuel, are you will- samuei cate- 
ing that I should catechize you ? ^^^®^' 

Sam. Yes, forsooth, if you please. 

Prud. What is heaven ? 

Sam. a place and state most blessed, because 
God dwelleth there. 

Prud. What is hell? 



THE CniLDEEN CATECHIZED. 359 

Sam. a place and state most woful, because it 
is the dwelling-place of sin, the devil, and death. 

Prud. "Why would'st thou go to heaven If 

Sam. That I may see God, and serve him with- 
out weariness ; that I may see Christ, and love 
him everlastingly ; that I may have that fulness 
of the Holy Spiiit in me which I can by no means 
here enjoy. 

Prud. A very good boy, and one that has learn- 
ed well. 

Then she addressed herself to the eldest, whose 
Matthew cate- name was Matthew ; and she said to 
chized. ^^^ Q^j^Q^ Matthew, shall I also cate- 

chize you? 

Matt. "With a very good will; 

Prud. I ask, then, if there was ever any thing 
that had a being antecedent to or before God ? 

]\Iatt. No, for God is eternal ; nor is there any 
thing, excepting himself, that had a being until 
the beginning of the first day. For in six days 
the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all 
that in them is. 

Prud. What do you think of the Bible? 

Matt. It is the holy word of God. 

Prud. Is there nothing written therein but 
what you understand ? 

Matt. Yes, a great deal. 

Prud. "What do you do when you meet with 
•places therein that you do not understand ? 



360 PILGRIM'S rEOGRESS. 

Matt. I tliink God is wiser than I. I pray 
also that he will please to let me know all therein 
that he knows will be for my good. 

Prud. How beheve you as touching the resur- 
rection of the dead ? 

Matt. I believe they shall rise the same that 
was buried; the same in nature, though not in 
corruption. And I beheve this upon a double 
account : first, because God has promised it ; 
secondly, because he is able to perform it. 

Then said Prudence to the boys, You must still 
hearken to your mother ; for she can Prudence's 
teach you more. You must also dili- oS^cltechi?! 
gently give ear to what good talk you "ig of the boys. 
shall hear from others : for your sakes do they 
speak good things. Observe also, and that with 
carefulness, what the heavens and the earth do 
teach you ; but especially be much in the medita- 
tion of that book which was the cause of your 
father's becoming a pilgrim. I, for my part, my 
children, will teach you what I can while you are 
here, and shall be glad if you will ask mo ques- 
tions that tend to godly edifying. 

Now by that these pilgrims had been at this 
place a week, Mercy had a visitor that pretended 
some good-will unto her, and his name was Mr. 
Brisk ; a man of some breeding, and ^^^^^ ^^^ ^ 
that pretended to religion, but a man sweetheart. 
that stuck vei'y close to the world. So he came 



MERCY HAS A SWEETHEArvT. 361 

oncG or twice, or more, to Mercy, and offered 
love unto her. Now Mercy was of a fair counte- 
nance, and therefore the more alluring. 

Her mind also was to be always busying of 
herself in doing ; for when she had nothing to do 
for herself, she would be making hose and gar- 
ments for others, and would bestow them upon 
those that had need. And Mr. Brisk not know- 
ing where or how she disposed of what she made, 
seemed to be greatly taken, for that he found her 
never idle. I will warrant her a good housewife, 
quoth he to himself. 

Mercy then revealed the business to the maid- 
ens that were of the house, and inquired of them 
Mercy inquires Concerning him, for they did know 
concernin'^'iS ^^^ better than she. So they told her 
Brisk. ^i^r^^ j^Q ^g^g r^ y.Qyj busy young man, 

and one who pretended to religion, but was, as 
they feared, a stranger to the power of that which 
is good. 

Nay then, said Mercy, I will look no more on 
him ; for I purpose never to have a clog to my 
soul. 

Prudence then replied, that there needed no 
matter of great discouragement to be given to 
him ; her continuing so as she had begun to do 
for the poor would quickly cool his courage. 

So the next time he comes he finds her at her 
-old work, making things for the poor. Then said 



3G2 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

he, Wliat, always at it ? Yes, said she, Talk betwixt 
either for myself or for others. And Brisk^ ^ 
what canst thou earn a day ? said he. I do these 
things, said she, that I may be rich in good 
works, laying up in store for myself a good foun- 
dation against the time to come, that I may lay 
hold on eternal life. 1 Tim. 6 : 17-19. Why, 
prithee, what doest thou with them? said he. 
Clothe the naked, said she. With that his 
countenance fell. So he forbore to come at 
her again. And when he was asked He forsakes 
the reason why, he said, that Mercy ^^"' ^^^ ^^y- 
was a pretty lass, but troubled with ill condi- 
tions. 

When he had left her, Prudence said. Did I not 
tell thee that Mr. Brisk would soon forsake thee? 
yea, he will raise up an ill report of Mercy in the 
thee ; for, notwithstanding his pre- ^y^^ ^^reieSed, 
tence to religion, and his seeming love tii?\aSe'^^ S 
to Mercy, yet Mercy and he are of ^^^^^ ^^ ^^^• 
temper so different that I beheve they wiU never 
come together. 

Mer. I might have had husbands before now, 
though I spoke not of it to any ; but they were 
such as did not like my conditions, though never 
did any of them find fault mth my person. So 
they and I could not agree. 

Peud. Mercy in our days is but little set by any 
further than as to its name : the practice which is 



MATTHEW FALLS SICK. 3G3 

sfet fortli by thy conditions, there are but few that 
can abide. 

JVIek. "Well, said Mercj'-, if nobody will have me, 
Mercy's reso- 1 ^^^ ^^^ Unmarried, or my conditions 
lution. shall be to me as a husband : for I can- 

not change my nature ; and to have one who lies 
cross to me in this, that I purpose never to admit 
of as long as I live. I had a sister named Boun- 
tiful, that was married to one of these churls, bul 
How Mercy's ^® ^'^^ ^^^ could ucver agree ; but 
ed brS>r hus- ^^cause my sister was resolved to do 
band. as she had begun, that is, to show 

kindness to the ]30or, therefore her husband first 
cried her down at the cross, and then turned her 
out of his doors. 

Prud. And yet he was a professor, I warrant 
you? 

Mer. Yes, such a one as he was, and of such as 
he the world is now full : but I am for none of 
them all. 

Now Matthew, the eldest son of Christiana, fell 

Matthew faus sick, and his sickness was sore upon 

sick. j^jj^^ fQj_, j^g ^^g much pained in his 

bowels, so that he was with it at times pulled, as 
it were, both ends together. There dwelt also not 
far from thence one Mr. Skill, an ancient and well- 
approved physician. So Christiana desired it, and 
they sent for him, and he came. When he was 
entered the room, and had a Httle observed the 



3G-i PILGEIM'S PROGEESS. 

boy, lie concluded that lie was sick of tlie gripes. 
Then he said to his mother, "What Gripes of con- 
diet has Matthew of late fed upon? ^'^^^^'=^' 
Diet? said Christiana; nothing but what is whole- 
some. The physician answered, This . The physi- 
boy has been tampering with some- ment. 
thing that hes in his stomach undigested, and that 
will not away without means. And I tell you he 
must be purged, or else he will die. 

Sam. Then said Samuel, Mother, what was that 
which my brother did gather up and samuei puts 

•^ *^ -^ his mother in 

eat as soon as we were come from the mind of the 
gate that is at the head of this way? er did eat. 
You know that there was an orchard on the left 
hand, on the other side of the wall, and some of 
the trees hung over the wall, and my brother did 
pluck and eat. 

Chr. True, my child, said Christiana, he did 
take thereof, and did eat : naughty boy as he 
was, I chid him, and yet he would eat thereof. 

Skill. I knew he had eaten something that was 
not wholesome food; and that food, to wit, that 
fi-uit, is even the most huiiful of all. It is the 
fruit of Beelzebub's orchard. I do marvel that 
none did warn you of it ; many have died thereof. 

Chr. Then Christiana began to cry ; and she 
said. Oh, naughty boy! and Oh, careless mother! 
what shall I do for my son ? 

Skill. Come, do not be too much dejected; the 



MB. SKILL'S MEDICINE. 3G5 

boy may do -well again, but he must purge and 
Tomit. 

Chr. Pray, sir, try the utmost of your skill with 
him, whatever it costs. 

Skill. Nay, I hope I shall be reasonable. So 
he made him a purge, but it was too weak : it was 
said it was made of the blood of a goat, the ashes 
of a heifer, and some of the juice of hyssop. Heb. 
9 : 13, 19 ; 10 : 1-4. ^Vhen Mr. Skill had seen that 
that purge was too weak, he made one to the pur- 
pose. It was made ex came et sanguine Christi,'^ 
The Latin I John 6:64-57; Heb. 9:14 — you know 
borrow. physiciaus give strange medicines to 

their patients — and it was made into pills, with a 
promise or two, and a ^proportionable quantity of 
salt. Mark 9:49. Now he was to take them 
three at a time, fasting, in half a quarter of a j)int 
of the tears of repentance. Zech. 12 : 10. 

When this ]Dotion was prepared, and brought to 
The boy loath the boy, he was loath to take it, though 
physic. torn with the gripes as if he should be 

pulled in pieces. Come, come, said the physician, 
you must take it. It goes against my stomach, said 
the boy. I must have you take it, said his mother. 
I shall vomit it up again, said the boy. Pray, sir, 
said Christiana to Mr. Skill, how does it taste ? It 
has no ill taste, said the doctor ; and with that 
she touched one of the pills with the tip of her 
* Of the flesh and blood of Christ. 



88G PILGKIM'S PROGRESS. 

tongiie. Oh, Matthew, said she, this The mother 

, , . J Ji 1 Tc J.1 tastes it, and 

potion IS sweeter than honey. Ii thou persuades him. 
lovest thy mother, if thou lovest thy brothers, if 
thou lovest Mercy, if thou lovest thy life, take it. 
So, with much ado, after a short prayer for the 
blessing of God upon it, he took it, and it wrought 
kindly with him. It caused him to purge ; it 
caused him to sleep, and to rest quietly ; it put 
him into a fine heat and breathing sweat, and 
did quite rid him of his gripes. So in a little 
time he got up, and walked about a word of God 
with a staff, and would go from room faith. 
to room, and talk with Prudence, Piety, and 
Charity, of his distemper, and how he was healed. 

So when the boy was healed, Christiana asked 
Mr. Skill, sajdng. Sir, what will content you for 
your pains and care to and of my child? And 
he said, You must pay the Master of the College 
of Physicians, Heb. 13 : 11-15, according to rules 
made in that case and provided. 

Chr. But, sir, said she, what is this pill good 
for else ? 

Skill. It is a universal pill ; it is good against 
all the diseases that pilgrims are inci- ThepiUauni- 
dent to ; and when it is weU prepar- versai remedy. 
ed, it will keep good, time out of mind. 

Chr. Pray, sir, make me up twelve boxes of 
them ; for if I can get these, I will never take 
other physic. 



PEUDENCE AND MATTHEYf. SG7 

Skill. These pills are good to* prevent diseases, 
as well as to cure when one is sick. Yea, I dare 
say it, and stand to it, that if a man will but use 
this physic as he should, it will make him live for 
ever. John 6 : 51. But, good Christiana, thou 
must give these pills no other way but as I have 
prescribed; for if you do, they will do no good. 
So he gave unto Christiana physic for herself and 
her boys, and for Mercy ; and bid Matthew take 
heed how he ate any more green plums; and 
kissed them, and went his way. 

It was told you before, that Prudence bid the 
boys, that if at any tinie they would, they should 
ask her some questions that might be profitable, 
and she would say something to them. 

IVIatt. Then Matthew, who had been sick, ask- 
of physic, ed her why for the most part physic 
should be bitter to our palates. 

Prud. To show how unwelcome the word of 
God and the effects thereof are to a carnal 
heart. 

Matt. "Why does physic, if it does good, purge, 
and cause to vomit? 

Peud. To show that the word, when it works 
effectually, cleanseth the heart and mind. For 
look, what the one doth to the body, the other 
doth to the soul. 

Matt. What should we learn by seeing the 
flame of our fire go upwards, and ])y seeing the 



368 PILGRIM'S PROGBESS. 

beams and sweet influences of the sun of fire, and of 
strike downwards? the sun. 

Prud. By the going up of the fire, we are taught 
to ascend to heaven by fervent and hot desires. 
And by the sun sending his heat, beams, and 
sweet influences downwards, we are taught that 
the Saviour of the world, though high, reaches 
down with his grace and love to us below. 

Matt. Whence have the clouds of the clouds. 
their water? 

Prud. Out of the sea. 

Matt. What may we learn from that? 

Prud. That ministers should fetch their doc- 
trine from God. 

Matt. Why do they empty themselves upon 
the earth? 

Prud. To show that ministers should give out 
what they know of God to the world. 

Matt. Why is the rainbow caused q^ tj^^ ^,^, 
by the sun? ^«^- 

Prud. To show that the covenant of God's 
grace is confirmed to us in Christ. 

Matt. Why do the springs come ofthespringa. 
from the sea to us through the earth ? 

Prud. To show that the grace of God comes to 
us through the body of Christ. 

Matt. AVhy do some of the springs rise out of 
the tops of high hills? 

Prud. To show that the Spirit of grace shall 



PEUDENCE AND MATTHEW. 369 

spring up in some that are great and mighty, as 
well as in many that are poor and low. 

ofthecandi<5. Matt. Why doth the fire fasten 
ii23on the candle-wick? 

Peud. To show that nnless grace doth kindle 
upon the heart, there will be no true light of hfe 
in us. 

Matt. "Why are the wick and tallow, and all, 
spent to maintain the light of the candle? 

Prud. To show that body and soul, and all, 
should be at the service of, and spend themselves 
to maintain in good condition that ^'ace of God 
that is in us. 

IVIatt. WTiy doth the pelican pierce her own 
ofthepeUcan. breast with her bill? 

Prud. To nourish h^r young ones with her 
blood, and thereby to show that Christ the bless- 
ed so loved his young, (his people,) as to save 
them from death by his blood. 

Matt. What may one learn by hearing the cock 

Of the cock, to CrOW? 

Prud. Learn to remember Peter's sin, and 
Peter's repentance. The cock's crowing shows 
also, that day is coming on : let, then, the crow- 
ing of the cock put thee in mind of that last and 
terrible day of judgment. 

Now about this time their month was out ; 
wherefore they signified to those of the house, that 
it was convenient for them to up and be going. 

Ptl. Prog. 24: 



370 PILGIilM-S PIIOGRESS. 

Then said Joseph to his mother, It is proper that 

you forget not to send to the house of Theweakmay 

Mr. Interpreter, to pray him to grant thr^st?ong ^ S 
that Mr. Great-Heart should be sent ^'^^'^''• 
unto us, that he may be our conductor for the 
rest of the way. Good boy, said she, I had almost 
forgot. So she d:|;ew up a petition, and prayed Mr. 
"Watchful the porter to send it by some fit man to 
her good friend Mr. Interpreter ; who, when it 
Avas come, and he had seen the contents of the 
petition, said to the messenger, Go, tell them that 
I will send him. 

When the family where Christiana was, saw 
that they had a purpose to go forward. They provide 
they called the whole house together, their way, 
to give thanks to their King for sending of them 
such profitable guests as these. Which done, they 
said unto Christiana, And shall we not show thee 
something, as our custom is to do to pilgrims, on 
which thou mayest meditate when thou art upon 
the w^ay ? So they took Christiana, her children, 
and Mercy, into the closet, and showed them on© 
of the apples that Eve ate of, and that Eve's apple, 
she also did give to her husband, and that for the 
eating of which they were both turned out of para- 
dise, and asked her what she thought that was. 
Then Christiana said. It is a food or poison, I 
know not which. So they opened AsightofsiB 
the matter to her, and she held up^^^^""^"^. 



THE SIGHTS SHOWN. 371 

her hands and wondered. Genesis 3:6; Eom. 
7:24. 

Then they had her to a place, and showed her 
Jacob's ladder. Jacob's ladder. Gen. 28 : 12. Now at 
that time there were some angels ascending upon 
it. So Christiana looked and looked to see the 
angels go up : so did the rest of the company. 
Then they were going into another place, to show 
them something else ; but James said to his moth- 

A sight of ^^'j ^^^7) t>icl them stay here a little 
Christ is taking, longer, for this is a curious sight. So 
they turned again, and stood feeding their eyes 
with this so pleasant a prospect. 

After this, they had them into a place where 
Golden anchor, did hang up a golden anchor. So 
they bid Christiana take it down ; for said 
they. You shall have it with you, for it is of ab- 
solute necessity that you should, that you may 
lay hold of that within the veil, Heb. 6 : 19, and 
stand steadfast in case you should meet with 
turbulent weather, Joel 3 : 16 : so they were glad 
thereof. 

Then they took them, and had them to the 

Of Abraham mouut upou which Abraham our fa- 
isaac.'' ther offered up Isaac his son, and 

showed them the altar, the wood, the fire, and the 
knife, for they remain to be seen to this very day. 
Gen. 22 : 9. When they had seen it, they held up 
their hands, and blessed themselves, and said, 



372 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Oh, what a man for love to liis Master, and for 
denial to himself, was Abraham ! 

After they had showed them all these things. 
Prudence took them into a dining-room, where 
stood a pair of excellent virginals ;* prudence's 
so she played upon them, and turned ^^s^^^^^- 
what she had showed them into this excellent 
song, saying, ^ 

"Eve's apple we have showed you ; 
Of that be you aware : 
You have seen Jacob's ladder too, 
Upon which angels are. 

"An anchor you received have ; 
But let not these suffice, 
Until with Abra'm you have given 
Your best a sacrifice." 

Now, about this time, one knocked at the door ; 
so the porter opened, and behold, Mr. _ Mr. Great- 

■"■ -^ Heart comes 

Great-Heart was there. But when he again, 
was come in, what joy was there ! for it came now 
afi-esh again into their minds, how but a little 
while ago he had slain old Grim Bloody-man 
the giant, and had delivered them from the 
lions. 

Then said Mr. Great-Heart to Christiana and 
to Mercy, My Lord has sent each of He brings a 

„ , T , token from his 

you a bottle of wine, and also some Lord with mm. 
]3arched\ corn, together with a couple of pome- 

* A musical instrument. 



THE POETEE'S BLESSING. 373 

granates; lie has also sent the boys some figs 
and raisins ; to refresh you in your way. 

Then they addressed themselves to their jour- 
ney, and Prudence and Piety went along with 
them. When they came to the gate, Christiana 
asked the porter if any of late went by. He said. 
No ; only one, some time since, who also told me 
that of late there had been a great robbery com- 
mitted on the King's highway as you go. But, 
said he, the thieves are taken, and will shortly bo 
tried for their lives. Then Christiana and Mercy 
were afraid; but Matthew said. Mother, fear 
nothing, as long as Mr. Great-Heart is to go with 
us, and to be our conductor. 

Then said Christiana to the porter, Sii', I am 
Christiana much obUgcd to you for all the kind- 
oftiie porter, nesscs that you have showed to me 
since I came hither ; and also for that you have 
been so loving and kind to my children. I know 
not how to gratify your kindness; wherefore, 
pray, as a token of my respect to you, accept of 
this small mite. So she put a gold angel* in his 
hand; and he made her a low obeisance, and said, 

The porter's "Let thy garments be always white ; 
blessing. ^^^ 1^^^ ^Yij head want na ointment." 

Eccles. 9 : 8. Let Mercy live and not die, and let 

* A gold angel was a coin of the value of ten shillings ster- 
ling, and according to the comparative value of money in Bun- 
yan's time, equal at least to a guinea at the present time. 



374 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

not lier works be few. Deut. 33 : 6. And to the 
boys he said, Do you fly youthful lusts, and follow 
after godliness with them that are grave and wise, 
2 Tim. 2:22; so shall you put gladness into your 
mother's heart, and obtain praise of all that are 
sober-minded. So they thanked the porter, and 
dex^arted. 



MELODIOUS MUSIC. 375 



- THE FIFTH STAGE. 

Now I saw in my dream, tliat they went for- 
ward until they were come to the brow of the hill ; 
where Piety, bethinking herself, cried out, Alas, I 
have forgot what I intended to bestow upon Chris- 
tiana and her companions : I will go back and 
fetch it. So she ran and fetched it. While she 
was gone, Christiana thought she heard, in a grove 
a little way off on the right hand, a most curious 
melodious note, with words much like these, 

"Through all my life thy favor is 
So frankly showed to me, 
That m thy house for evermore 
My dweUing-place shall be." 

And listening still, she thought she heard an- 
other answer it, saying, 

**For why? The Lord our God is good ; 
His mercy is for ever sure ; 
His truth at all times firmly stood, 
And shall from age to age endure." 

So Christiana asked Prudence who it was that 
made those curious notes. Song 2 : 11, 12. They 
are, answered she, our country birds : they sing 
these notes but seldom, except it be at the spring, 
when the flowers appear, and the sun shines warm, 



376 PILGRIM'S PEOGRISS. 

and then yon may hear them all day long. I often, 
said she, go out to hear them ; we also ofttimes 
keep them tame in our house. They are very fine 
company for us when we are melancholy : also 
they make the woods and groves and solitar;5f 
places i)laces desirable to be in. 

By this time Piety was come again. So she 
said to Christiana, Look here, I have piety bestow 
brought thee a scheme of all those ^nVoSpi^g 
things that thou hast seen at our ™°- 
house, upon which thou mayest look when thou 
findest thyself forgetful, and call those things 
again to remembrance for thy edification and 
comfort. 

Now they began to go down the hill into the 
valley of Humiliation. It was a steep hill, and 
the way was slippery ; but they were very care- 
ful ; so they got down pretty well. When they 
were down in the valley, Piety said to Christiana, 
This is the place where Christian your husband 
met with the foul fiend Apollyon, and where they 
had that dreadful fight that they had: I know 
you cannot but have heard thereof. But be of good 
courage; as long as you have here Mr. Great- 
Heart to be your guide and conductor, we hope 
you will fare the better. So when these two had 
committed the pilgrims unto the conduct of their 
guide, he went forward, and they went after. 

Great. Then said Mr. Great-Heart, "We need 



VALLEY or HUMILIATION. 377 

Mr. Great- ^^^ ^^ ^^ afraid of this valley, for here 
?ane'J o1^ Hu! ^^ nothing to hurt us, unless we pro- 
iniiiatiou. ^^^^e it to ouTselves. It is true, Chris- 
tian did here meet with ApoUyon, with whom he 
also had a sore combat : but that fray was the 
fruit of those slips which he got in his going down 
the hill ; for they that get slips there, must look 
for combats here. And hence it is that this valley 
has got so hard a name. For the common people, 
when they hear that some frightful thing has be- 
fallen such a one in such a j)lace, are of opinion 
that that place is haunted with some foul fiend or 
evil spirit ; when, alas, it is for the fruit of their 
own doing that such things do befall them there. 
This valley of Humiliation is of itself as fruitful a 
, ^^?,x,^?^.^°^ place as any the crow flies over : and 

vrhj Christian ±. . „ 

was so beset in I am pcrsuadcd, if we could hit upon 

the vaUey of ■ ■,. r,\ i , 

Humiliation, it, we might ilnd somewhere here- 
abouts something that might give us an account 
why Christian was so hardly beset in this place. 
Then said James to his mother, Lo, yonder 
stands a pillar, and it looks as if something was 
written thereon ; let us go and see what it is. So 
they went, and found there written, "Let Chris- 
A pillar with tiau's sHps, before he came hither, and 
on it. the battles that he met with in this 

place, be a warning to those that come after." ■ 
Lo, said their guide, did not I tell you that there 
was something hereabouts that vrould give inti- 



878 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

mation of tlie reason wliy Cliristian was so hard 
beset in tliis ^Dlace? Then turning himself to 
Christiana, he said, No disparagement to Chris- 
tian more than to any others whose hap and lot 
it was. For it is easier going up than down this 
hill, and that can be said but of few hills in all 
these parts of the world. But we will leave the 
good man ; he is at rest : he also had a brave 
victory over his enemy. Let Him grant, that 
dwelleth above, that we fare no worse, when we 
come to be tried, than he. 

But we will come again to this valley of Hu- 
miliation. It is the best and most riiisvaUeya 
fruitful piece of ground in all these i>rave place, 
parts. It is fat ground, and as you see, consisteth 
much in meadows ; and if a man was to come 
here in the summer-time, as we do now, if he 
knew not any thing before thereof, and if he also 
delighted himself in the sight of his eyes, he 
might see that which would be delightful to him. 
Behold how green this valley is ; also how beau- 
tiful with hlies. Song 2:1. I have known many 
laboring men that have got good estates in this 
valley of Humiliation ; for God resist- Men thrive in 

'' , the valley of 

eth the proud, but giveth grace to the Humiliation, 
jiumble. James 4 : 6 ; 1 Pet. 5 : 5. Indeed it is a 
very fruitful soil, and doth bring forth by hand- 
fuls. Some also have wished tliat the next way 
to their Father's house were here, that they might 



Cnr.IST'S COUNTRY-HOUSE. 370 

be troubled no more witli eitlier bills or mouu- 
taiiTS to go over ; but tbe way is the way, and 
there is an end. 

Now, as they were going along and talking, 
they espied a boy feeding his father's sheep. The 
boy was in very mean clothes, but of a fresh and 
well-favored countenance ; and as he sat by him- 
self, he sung. Hark, said Mr. Great-Heart, to 
what the shepherd's boy saith. So they hearken- 
ed, and he said, 

"He that is cIo^^ti, needs fear no fall ; 
He that is low, no pride : 
He that is humble, ever shall 
Have God to be his guide. 
I am content with what I have, 

Little be it or much ; 
And, Lord, contentment still I crave, 

Because thou savest such. 
Fulness to such a burden is, 

That go on pilgrimage ; 
Here little, and hereafter bliss. 
Is best from age to age. " 

Then said the guide. Do you hear him? I will 
dare to say this boy Hves a merrier life, and wears 
more of that herb called heart's-ease in his bosom, 
than he that is clad in silk and velvet. But we 
will proceed in our discourse. 

Christ, when ^ this vaUcy our Lord formerly 
Ss^^^co^?^^^ad his counti-y-house : he loved 
house in the j^uch to be hcrc. He loved also to 

valley of Hu- 

uiihation. walk thcsc meadows, for he found the 



380 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

air was pleasant. Besides, here a man shall be 
free from the noise, and from the hurryings of 
this life : all states are full of noise and confu- 
sion ; only the valley of Humiliation is that empty 
and solitary place. Here a man shall not be so 
let and hindered in his contemplation, as in other 
j)laces he is apt to be. This is a valley that no- 
body walks in but those that love a pilgrim's life. 
And though Christian had the hard hap to meet 
here with Apollyon, and to enter with him in a 
brisk encounter, yet I must tell you, that in for- 
mer times men have met with angels here, Hos. 
12:4, 5, have found pearls here. Matt. 13 : 46, and 
have in this place found the words of life. Prov. 
8 : 35. 

Did I say our Lord had here in former days 
his country-house, and that he loved here to 
walk ? I will add, in this place, and to the peo- 
ple that love and trace these grounds, he has left 
a yearly revenue, to be faithfully paid them at 
certain seasons, for their maintenance by the way, 
and for their further encouragement to go on in 
their pilgrimage. 

Sam. Now, as they went on, Samuel said to Mr. 
Great-Heart, Sir, I perceive that in this valley my 
father and Apollyon had their battle ; but where- 
about was the fight ? for I perceive this valley is 
large. 

Gbeat. Your father had the battle with Apol- 



HUMILITY A SWEET GEACE. 381 

lyon at a place yonder before us, in a narrow 
Forgetful passage, just beyond Forgetful Green. 
Green. j^^^^ indeed that place is the most 

dangerous place in all these parts. For if at any 
time j)ilgrims meet with any brunt, it is when they 
forget what favors they have received, and how 
unworthy they are of them. This is the place also 
where others have been hard put to it. But more 
of the place when we are come to it ; for I per- 
suade myself that to this day there remains either 
some sign of the battle, or some monument to 
testify that such a battle there was fought. 

Mee. Then said Merc}^ I think I am as well in 
Humility a ^^^^ vallcy as I havc been anj^^here 
Bweet grace, g^gg ^^ ^yi QUI' joumey : the place, me- 
thinks, suits with my spirit. I love to be in such 
places, where there is no rattling with coaches, 
nor rumbling with wheels. Methinks here one 
may, without much molestation, be thinking what 
he is, whence he came, what he has done, and to 
what the King has called him. Here one may 
think, and break at heart, and melt in one's spirit, 
until one's eyes become as the fish-pools in Plesh- 
bon. Song 7:4. They that go rightly through 
tliis valley of Baca, make it a well ; the rain that 
God sends down from heaven upon them that are 
here, also fiUeth the pools. This valley is that 
from whence also the King will give to his their 
vineyards ; and they that go through it shall sing, 



382 riLGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

as Christian did, for all he met with ApoUyon. 
Psa. 84 : 5-7; Hos. 2 : 15. 

Grea-t. 'T is true, said their guide ; I have gone 
through this valley many a time, and An experimeBt 
never was better than when here. I "p°^ ^*- 
have also been a conductor to several pilgrims, 
and they have confessed the same. "To this 
man will I look," saith the King, "even to him 
that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trem- 
bleth at my word." Isa. 66 : 2. 

Now they were come to the place where the 
aforementioned battle was fought. Then said the 
guide to Christiana, her children, and Mercy, This 
is the place ; on this ground Christian The place 
stood, and up there came Apollyon Sa^^and ^the 
against him. And look, did I not tell ^^^^ ^'^ ^s^^- 
you? here is some of your husband's blood upon 
these stones to this day. Behold also how here 
and there are yet to be seen upon the place some 
of the shivers of ApoUyon's broken darts. See 
also how they did beat the ground with their feet 
as they fought, to make good their places against 
each other; how also with their by- Some signs of 
blows they did split the very stones in main, 
pieces. Verily Christian did here play the man, 
and showed himself as stout as Hercules could, 
had he been here, even he himself. When Apol- 
lyon was beat, he made his retreat to the next 
valley, that is called the valley of the Shadow of 



THE SHADOW OF DEATH. 383 

Death, unto wliicti we shall come anon. Lo, yon- 
A monument clei' stands a monument, on which is 
victory. engraven this battle, and Christian's 

victory, to his fame throughout all ages. So be- 
cause it stood just on- the way-side before them, 
they stepped to it, and read the writing, which 
word for word was this : 

"Hard by here was a battle fought, 
Most strange, and yet most true ; 
Christian and ApoUyon sought 
Each other to subdue. 

The man so bravely played the man, 

He made the fiend to fly ; 
Of which a monument I stand, 

The same to testify." 

"When they had passed by this place, they came 
upon the borders of the Shadow of Death. This 
valley was longer than the other; a place also 
most strangely haunted with evil things, as many 
are able to testify : but these women and children 
went the better through it, because they had day- 
light, and because Mr. Great-Heart was their 
conductor. 

"V\^en they were entered upon this valley, they 
Groanings thought they heard a gi'oaning, as of 
heard. dying men ; a very great groaning. 

They thought also that they did hear words of 
lamentation, spoken as of some in extreme tor- 
ment. These things made the boys to quake ; the 



384 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

■women also looked pale and wan ; but their 
guide bid them be of good comfort. 

So they went on a little further, and they 
thought that they felt the ground be- Tjie ground 
gin to shake under them, as if some ^^^^s- 
hollow place was there : they heard also a kind 
of hissing, as of serpents, but nothing as yet aj)- 
peared. Then said the boys. Are we not yet at 
the end of this doleful place ? But the guide also 
bid them be of good courage, and look well to 
their feet ; lest haply, said he, you be taken in 
some snare. 

Now James began to be sick ; but I think the 
cause thereof was fear : so his mother j^^j^es sick 
gave him some of that glass of spirits "^^^ ^^^^• 
that had been given her at the Interpreter's house, 
and three of the j)ills that Mr. Skill had prepared, 
and the boy began to revive. Thus they went on 
till they came to about the middle of the valley ; 
and then Christiana said, Methinks I see some- 
thing yonder upon the road before us, a thing of a 
shape such as I have not seen. Then said Joseph, 
Mother, what is it? An ugly thing. The fiend ap- 
child; an ugly thing, said she. But, p®^^' 
mother, what is it like? said he. 'T is like I can- 
not tell what, said she ; and now it is T^e pilgrims 
but a little way off. Then said she. It ^^^ ^^i^- 
is nigh. 

Well, said Mr. Great-Heart, let them that are 



THE SHADOW OF DEATH. 385 

Great-Hearten- ^ost afraid keep closG to me. So the 
courages them. £end Came on, and the conductor met 
it ; but when it was just come to him, it vanish- 
ed to all their sights. Then remembered they 
what had been said some time ago, "Resist the 
devil, and he will flee from you." James 4 : 7. 

They went therefore on, as being a little refresh- 
ed. But they had not gone far, before Mercy, look- 
ing behind her, saw, as she thought, something 
A lion. most like a lion, and it came at a great 

padding pace after ; and it had a hollow voice of 
roaring ; and at every roar it gave, it made the 
yalley echo, and all their hearts to ache, save the 
heart of him that was their guide. So it came 
up, and Mr. Great-Heart went behind, and put 
the pilgrims all before him. The lion also 
came on apace, and Mr. Great-Heart addressed 
himself to give him battle. 1 Pet. 5:8, 9. Biit 
when he saw that it was determined that resist- 
ance should be made, he also drew back, and 
came no further. 

Then they went on again, and their conductor 
went before them, till they came to a place v/here 

A pit and ^^^ ^^^^ ^P ^ P^^ ^^^ wholc breadth of 
darkness. i]^q ^g^y . q^j^^ bcf orc they could be pre- 
pared to go over that, a great mist and a darkness 
fell upon them, so that they could not see. Then 
said the pilgrims, Alas, what now shall we do? 
But their guide made answer, Fear not; stand 

Pil. Prog. 25 



386 PILGRIM'S PROGBESS. 

still, and see wliat an end will be put to this also ; 
BO they stayed there, because their path was mar- 
red. They then also thought that they did hear 
more apparently the noise and rushing of the 
enemies ; the fire also and smoke of the pit was 
much easier to be discerned. Then said Chris- 
tiana to Mercy, Now I see what my Christiana 
poor husband went through. I have ^^^ her^iSTs- 
heard much of this place, but I never ^^^^ ^'^"• 
was here before now. Poor man, he went here all 
alone in the night ; he had night almost quite 
through the Avay : also these fiends wex'e busy 
about him, as if they would have torn him in 
pieces. Many have spoken of it ; but none can 
tell what the valley of the Shadow of Death 
should mean until they come in themselves. The 
heart knoweth its own bitterness ; and a stranger 
intermeddleth not with its joy. Prov. 14 : 10. 
To be here is a fearful thing. 

Great. This is like doing business in great wa- 
ters, or like going down into the deep. This is 
like being in the heart of the sea, and like going 
down to the bottoms of the mountains. Now it 
seems as if the earth, with its bars, were about us 
for ever. But let them that walk in darkness, and 
have no light, trust in the name of the Lord, and 
stay upon their God. Isa. 50:10. For my part, 
as I have told you already, I have gone often 
through this valley, and have been much harder 



PRAYER EFFECTUAL. 387 

put to it than now I am ; and jei you see I am 
alive. I would not boast, for that I am not my 
own saviour ; but I trust we shall have a good 
deliverance. Come, let us pray for light to Him 
that can hghten our darkness, and that can re- 
buke not only these, but all the Satans in hell. 

So they cried and prayed, and God sent light 
They pray, and deliverance, for there was now no 
let in their way; no, not there where but now they 
were stopx^ed with a pit. Yet they were not got 
through the valley. So they went on still, and 
met with great stinks arad loathsome smells, to the 
gi'eat annoyance of them. Then said Mercy to 
Christiana, It is not so pleasant being here as at 
the gate, or at the Interpreter's, or at the house 
where we lay last. 

Oh but, said one of the boys, it is not so bad to 

One of the S^ through here, as it is to abide here 
boys replies, always ; and for aught I know, one 
reason why we must go this way to the house 
prepared for us is, that our home might be made 
the sweeter to us. 

Well said, Samuel, quoth the guide ; thou hast 
now spoke like a man. Why, if ever I get out 
here again, said the boy, I think I shall prize light 
and good way better than I ever did in all my 
hfe. Then said the guide, We shall be out by 
and by. 

So on they went, and Joseph said, Cannot we 



388 PILGEIM'S PROGBESS. 

see to the end of tins valley as yet? Then said 
the guide, Look to your feet, for we shall presently 
be among the snares : so they looked to their feet, 
and went on ; but they were troubled much with 
the snares. Now when they were come among 
the snares, they espied a man cast into the ditch 
on the left hand, with his flesh all rent and torn. 
Then said the guide, That is one Heed- Heedless is 
less, that was going this way: he has Seed ^ presSv- 
lain there a great while. There was ^^* 
one Take-Heed with him when he was taken and 
slain, but he escaped their hands. You cannot 
imagine how many are killed hereabouts, and yet 
men are so foolishly venturous as to set out 
lightly on pilgrimage, and to come without a 
guide. Poor Christian, it was a wonder that 
he here escaped; but he was beloved of his God: 
also he had a good heart of his own, or else he 
could never have done it. 

Now they drew towards the end of this way; and 
just there where Christian had seen the cave when 
he went by, out thence came forth Maul, a giant. 
This Maul did use to spoil young pil- Mavii,agiant, 
grims with sophistry ; and he called Cxreat-Heart. 
Great-Heart by his name, and said unto him, How 
many times have you been forbidden to do these 
things ? Then said Mr. Great-Heart, What thmgs ? 
"What things! quoth the giant; you know what 
things : but I will put an end to your trade. 



FIGHT WITH THE GIANT. 389 

But pray, said Mr. Great-Heart, before we fall 
to it, let us understand wherefore we must figlit. 
Now tlie women and children stood trembling, 
and knew not what to do. Quoth the giant, You 
rob the country, and rob it with the worst of 
thefts. These are but generals, said Mr. Great- 
Heart ; come to particulars, man. 

Then said the giant, Thou practisest the craft 
God's minis- of a kidnapper ; thou gatherest up 

ters counted as . ^ . , 

kidnappers. womeu and children, and cari'iest 
them into a strange country, to the weakening of 
my master's kingdam. But now Great-Heurt 
replied, I am a servant of the God of heaven ; my 
business is to persuade sinners to repentance. I 
am commanded to do my endeavors to turn 
men, women, and children, from darkness to 
light, and from the power of Satan unto God; 
Thegiantand and if this be indeed the ground of 

Mr. Great-Heart i i , i? n i -i. 

must fight. thy quarrel, let us tail to it as soon as 
thou wilt. 

Then the Giant came up, and Mr. Great-Heart 
went to meet him ; and as he went he drew his 
sword, but the giant had a club. So without more 
ado they fell to it, and at the first blow the giant 
struck Mr. Great-Heart down upon one of his 

Weak folks' kuccs. With that the women and 
timer^^ ^heip children cried out. So Mr. Great- 
cries!° ^^^^ Heart recovering himself, laid about 
him in full lusty manner, and gave the giant a 



390 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

wound in his arm. Thus he fought for the space 
of an hour, to that height of heat, that the breath 
came out of the giant's nostrils as the heat doth 
out of a boihng caldron. 

Then they sat down to rest them ; but Mr. 
Great-Heart betook himself to prayer. Also the 
women and children did nothing but sigh and 
cry all the time that the battle did last. 

When they had rested them, and taken breath, 
they both fell to it again ; and Mr. Great-Heart 
with a blow fetched the giant down The giant 
to the ground. Nay, hold, let me re- ^^^^'^^ ^«^"- 
cover, quoth he : so Mr. Great-Heart fairly let him 
get up. So to it they went again, and the giant 
missed but little of all-to breaking Mr. Great- 
Heart's scull with his club. 

Mr. Great-Heart seeing that, runs to him in 
the full heat of his spirit, and pierceth him under 
the fifth rib. With that the giant began to faint, 
and could hold up his club no longer. He is slain. 
Then Mr. Great-Heart seconded his disposed of. 
blow, and smote the head of the giant from his 
shoulders. Then the women and children re- 
joiced, and Mr. Great-Heart also praised God for 
the deliverance he had wrought. 

When this was done, they amongst them erect- 
ed a pillar, and fastened the giant's head thereon, 
and wrote under it, in letters that passengers 
might read, 



THE INSCRIPTION. 391 

' He that did -wear tliis head was one 

That pilgrims did misuse ; 
He stopped their way, he s^Dared none, 

But did them all abuse ; 
Until that I Great-Heart arose, 

The pilgi-ims' guide to be ; 
Until that I did him oppose 

That was their enemy," 



392 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 



THE SIXTH STAGE. 

Now I saw that tliey went on to the ascent that 
was a little way off, cast up to be a prospect for 
pilgrims. That was the place from whence Chris- 
tian had the first sight of Faithful his brother. 
Wherefore here they sat down and rested. They 
also here did eat and drink, and make merry, for 
that they had gotten deliverance from this so dan- 
gerous an enemy. As they sat thus and did eat, 
Christiana asked the guide if he had caught no 
hurt in the battle. Then said Mr. Great-Heart, 
No, save a little on my flesh ; yet that also shall 
be so far from being to my detriment, that it is at 
present a proof of my love to my Master and you, 
and shall be a means, by grace, to increase my 
reward at last. 

Che. But were you not afraid, good sir, when 
you saw him come with his club ? 

Great. It is my duty, said he, to mistrust my 
own ability, that I may have reliance Discourse of 
on Him who is stronger than all. *^® ^^^*' 

Che. But what did you think when he fetched 
you down to the ground at the first blow ? 

Geeat. Why, I thought, quoth he, that so my 
Master himself was served, and yet he it was that 
conquered at last. 2 Cor. 4 : 10, 11 ; Rom. 8 : 37. 



GREAT-HEART AND OLD HONEST. 393 

Matt. "WTien you all liave thoiiglit what you 
Matthew here pleasG, I think God lias been wonder- 
goodness, fully good unto us, both in bringing 
us out of this valley, and in dehvering us out of 
the hand of this enemy. For my part, I see no 
reason why we should distrust our God any more, 
since he has now, and in such a place as this, 
■given us such testimony of his love. Then they 
got up, and went forward. 

Now a little before them stood an oak ; and 

under it, when they came to it, they found an old 

Old Honest pilgrim fast asleep. They knew that 

asleep under an i: •■,•■, t •-, .-i 

oak. lie was a pilgrim by his clothes, and 

his staff, and his gu'dle. 

So the guide, 'Mr. Great-Heart, awaked him ; 
and the old gentleman, as he hfted up his eyes, 
cried out, "What's the matter? "Who are you ; and 
what is your business here ? 

Great. Come, man, be not so hot ; here are none 
One saint some- but frieuds. Yet the old man gets uj), 
other *for hia ^-ud stauds upou his guard, and will 
enemy. kuow of them what they are. Then 

said the guide. My name is Great-Heart : I am 
the guide of these pilgrims that are going to the 
celestial country. 

Hon. Then said IMr. Honest, I cry jou mercy : 

Talk between I feared that you had been of the com- 

and he. pany of thoso that some time ago did 

rob Little-Faith of his money ; but, now I look 



894 PILGEIM'S PROaEESS. 

better about me, I perceive you are honester 
people. 

Gkeat. Why, wliat would or could you have 
done to have hel^Ded yourself, if indeed we had 
been of that company ? 

Hon. Done ? why, I would have fought as long 
as breath had been in me : and had I so done, I 
am sure you could never have given me the worst" 
on 't ; for a Christian can never be overcome, un- 
less he shall yield of himself. 

Great. Well said, father Honest, quoth the 
guide ; for by this I know thou art a cock of the 
right kind, for thou hast said the truth. 

Hon. And by this also I know that thou kno^ 
est what true pilgrimage is; for all others do 
think that we are the soonest overcome of any. 

Great. Well, now we are so happily met, pray 
let me crave your name, and the name of the 
place you came from. 

Hon. My name I cannot tell you, but I came 
from the town of Stupidity : it lieth whence Mr. 
about four degrees beyond the city of Honest came. 
Destruction. 

Great. Oh, are you that countryman? Then I 
deem I have half a guess of you : your name is 
Old Honesty, is it not ? 

Hon. So the old gentleman blushed, and said, 
Not honesty in the abstract, but Honest is my 
name ; and I wish that my nature may agree to 



OLD HONEST AND CHRISTIANA. 395 

"what I am called. But, sir, said the old gentle^ 
man, how could you guess that I am such a man, 
since I came from such a place ? 

Great. I had heard of you before, by my Mas- 
ter ; for he knows all things that are done on the 
stupefied ones earth. But I liave often wondered ' 
thosr'' merely ^i^t any should come fi'om your i^lace; 
carnal f^j, ^^^^j, town is worse than is the city 

of Destruction itself. 

Hon. Yes, we lie more off from the sun, and sa 
are more cold and senseless. But were a man in a 
mountain of ice, yet if the Sun of righteousness 
will arise upon him, his fi'ozen heart shall feel a 
thaw ; and thus it has been with me. 

Great. I* believe it, father Honest, I believe it ; 
for I know the thiug is true. 

Then the old gentleman saluted all the pilgrims 
with a holy kiss of charity, and asked them their 
names, and how they had fared since they set out 
on theu' pilgrimage. 

Chr. Then said Christiana, My name I suppose 

Old Honest you havc heard of : e^ood Christian was 

and Christiana *^ ' ° 

talk. my husband, and these four are his 

children. But can you think how the old gentle- 
man was taken, when she told him who she was ? 
He skipped, he smiled, he blessed them with a 
thousand good wishes, saying, 

Hon. I have heard much of your husband, and 
of his travels and wars which he underwent in his 



396 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

days. Be it spoken to your comfort, the name of 
your husband rings all over these parts of the 
world: his faith, his courage, his enduring, and his 
sincerity under all, have made his name famous. 
Then he turned him to the boys, and asked them of 
their names, which they told him. Then said he 
unto them, Matthew, be thou like Mat- ow Mr. Hon- 
thew the publican, not in vice, but in on tiaem. 
virtue. Matt. 10 : 3. Samuel, said he, be thou like 
Samuel the prophet, a man of faith and prayer. 
Psa. 99 : 6. Joseph, said he, be thou like Joseph in 
Potiphar's house, chaste, and one that flees from 
temptation. Gen. 39. And, James, be thou like 
James the just, and like James the brother of our 
Lord. Acts 1 : 13. Then they told him of Mercy, 
and how she had left her town and her kindred 
to come along with Christiana and with her sons. 
At that the old honest man said, Mer- He wesseth 
cy is thy name : by mercy shalt thou '^^^^^y- 
be sustained and carried through all those difficul- 
ties that shall assault thee in thy way, till thou 
shalt come thither where thou shalt look the 
[Fountain of mercy in the face with comfort. All 
this while the guide, Mr. Great-Heart, was very 
well pleased, and smiled ujDon his companions. 

Now, as they walked along together, the guide 
asked the old gentleman if he did not rj^^^-^ ^^ ^^q 
know one Mr. Fearing, that came on ^^- bearing, 
pilgrimage out of his parts. 



TALK ABOUT MR. FEARING. 397 

Hon. Yes, very well, said he. He was a man 
tliat had the root of the matter in him ; but he 
Avas one of the most troublesome pilgrims that 
ever I met with in all my days. 

Great. I perceive you knew him, for you have 
given a very right character of him. 

Hon. Knew him ? I was a great companion of 
his ; I was with him most an end ; when he first 
began to think upon what would come upon us 
hereafter, I was with him. 

Great. I was his guide from my Master's house 
to the gates of the celestial city. 

Hon. Then you knew him to be a troublesome 
one. 

Grkit. I did so ; but I could very well bear it ; 
for men of my calling are oftentimes intrusted 
with the conduct of such as he was. 

Hon. Well then, pray let us hear a little of 
him, and how he managed himself under your 
conduct. 

Great. "Why, he was plways afraid that he 
Mr.Fearing's should comc short of wliither he had a 

troublesome 

pilgrimage. desu'e to go. Every thing frightened 

him that he heard any body speak of, if it had but 

the least appearance of opposition in it. I heard 

His behavior that he lay roarinof at the slouerh of 

at the slough of ^ -, f ■, -, -, 

Despond, Despoud for above a month together ; 
nor durst he, for all he saw several go over before 
him, venture, though they many of them offered 



398 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

to lend him their hands. He would not go back 
again, neither. The celestial city — he said he 
should die if he came not to it ; and yet he was 
dejected at every difficulty, and stumbled at every 
straw that any body cast in his way. Well, after 
he had lain at the slough of Despond a great while, 
as I have told you, one sunshiny morning, I don't 
know how, he ventured, and so got over ; but when 
he was over, he would scarcely believe it. He had, 
I think, a slough of Despond in his mind, a slough 
that he carried everywhere with him, or else he 
could never have been as he was. So he came up 
to the gate, you know what I mean, that stands 
at the head of this way, and there also His behavior 
he stood a good while before he would ^' *^^ ^^*^- 
venture to knock. When the gate was opened, 
he would give back, and give place to others, and 
say that he was not worthy. For, for all he got 
before some to the gate, yet many of them went 
in before him. There the poor man would stand 
shaking and shrinking : I dare say it would have 
pitied one's heart to have seen him. Nor would 
he go back again. At last he took the hammer 
that hanged on the gate in his hand, and gave a 
small rap or two ; then one opened to him, but he 
shrunk back as before. He that opened stepped 
out after him, and said, Thou trembling one, what 
wantest thou? With that he fell down to the 
ground. He that spoke to him wondered to see 



TALK ABOUT MR. FEARINa. 399 

him so faint, so he said to him, Peace be to thee ; 
up, for I have set open the door to thee ; come in, 
for thou art blessed. With that he got up, and 
went in trembhng ; and when he was in, he was 
ashamed to show his face. Well, after he had 
been entertained there a while, as you know how 
the manner is, he was bid go on his way, and also 
told the way he should take. So he went on till 
he came to our house ; but as he behaved himself 
ms behavior at the gate, so he did at my Master the 

at the Interpre- . , -, tt i ^i ^ , 

ter's door. interpreter s door. He lay there about 
in the cold a good while, before he would adven- 
ture to call ; yet he would not go back : and the 
nights were long and cold then. Nay, he had a 
note of necessity in his bosom to my Master to 
receive him, and grant him the comfort of his 
house, and also to allow him a stout and vaHant 
conductor, because he was himself so chicken- 
hearted a man ; and yet for all that he was afi'aid 
to call at the door. So he lay up and down there- 
abouts, till, poor man, he was almost starved; yea, 
so great was his dejection, that though he saw 
several others for knocking get in, yet he was 
afi'aid to venture. At last I think I looked out 
of the window, and perceiving a man to be up and 
down about the door, I went out to him, and asked 
what he was ; but, poor man, the water stood in 
his eyes ; so I perceived what he wanted. I went 
therefore in, and told it in the house, and we 



400 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

showed the thing to our Lord : so he sent me out 
again, to entreat him to come in ; but I dare say, 
I had hard work to do it. At last he came in ; 
and I will say that for my Lord, he Howiaewasen- 
carried it wonderfully lovingly to him. tertained there. 
There were but a few good bits at the table, but 
some of it was laid upon his trencher. Then he 
presented the note ; and my Lord looked thereon, 
and said his desire should be granted. So when 
he had been there a good while, he seemed to ^t 
some heart, and to be a little more jj^ jg ^ mtie 
comfortable. For my Master, you f J^^^Y^f^^^^* 
must know, is one of very tender ^^^'^ ^o^^®- 
bowels, especially to them who are afraid ; where- 
fore he carried it so towards him as might tend 
most to his encouragement. Well, when he had 
had a sight of the things of the place, and was 
ready to take his journey to go to the city, my 
Lord, as he did to Christian before, gave him a 
bottle of spirits, and some comfortable things to 
eat. Thus we set forward, and I went before 
him ; but the man was but of few words, only he 
would sigh aloud. 

When we were come to where the three fellows 
were hanged, he said that he doubted He was greatly 
that that would be his end also. Only saw'thrgibbet! 
he seemed glad when he saw the cross Ssn h?S 
and the sepulchre. There I confess *^® ^'^'^^^• 
ho desked to stay a little to look ; and he seem- 



TALK ABOUT MR. FEARING. 401 

ed for a while after to be a liMle cheery. When 
he came to the hill Difficulty, he made no stick 
at that, nor did he much fear the lions : for you 
must know, that his troubles were not about such 
things as these; his fear was. about his accept- 
ance at last. 

I got him in at the house Beautiful, I think, 

before he was willing. Also, when he was in, I 

brought him acquainted with the damsels of the 

Diimpisii at place : but he was ashamed to make 

the house Beau- i . , „ t . ^^ ^ . _ 

tiiui. nimseli much m company. Hedesu-ed 

much to be alone ; yet he always loved good talk, 
and often would get behind the screen to hear it. 
He also loved much to see ancient things, and to 
be pondering them in his mind. He told me af- 
terwards, that he loved to be in those two houses 
from which he came last, to wit, at the gate, and 
that of the Interpreter, but that he durst not be 
so bold as to ask. 

When we went also from the house Beautiful, 
down the hill, into the valley of Humiliation, he 
Pleasant in wcut dowu as Well as cvcr I saw a 
Humiliation, man in my life ; for he cared not how 
mean he was, so he might be happy at last. 
Yea, I think there was a kind of sympathy betwixt 
that valley and him ; for I never saw him better 
in alL his pilgrimage than he was in that valley. 
Here he would lie down, embrace the ground, 
and kiss the very flowers that grew in this valley. 

ni. Prog. 26 



402 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Lam. 8 : 27-29. H^ would now be up every morn- 
ing by break of clay, tracing and walking to and 
fro in the valley. 

But when he was come to the entrance of the 
valley of the Shadow of Death, I Much perplex- 
thought I should have lost my man : ^? 'the^lhadow 
not for that he had any inclination to °^ i^^ath. 
go back ; that he always abhorred ; but he was 
ready to die for fear. Oh, the hobgoblins will 
have me ! the hobgoblins Avill have me ! cried he ; 
and I could not beat him out of it. He made such 
a noise, and such an outcry here, that had they 
but heard him, it was enough to encourage them 
to come and fall upon us. 

But this I took very great notice of, that this 
valley was as quiet when we went through it as 
ever I knew it, before or since. I suppose those 
enemies here had now a special check from our 
Lord, and a command not to meddle until Mr. 
Fearing had passed over it. 

It would be too tedious to tell you of all ; we 
will therefore only mention a passage or two more. 
When he was come to Vanity Fair, I His behavior 
thought he would have fought with ^* ^^""^ ^^• 
all the men in the fair. I feared there we should 
have been both knocked on the head, so hot was 
he against their fooleries. Upon the Enchanted 
ground he was very wakeful. But when he was 
come at the river where was" no bridge, there 



TALK ABOUT ME. FEARING. 403 

again he was in a heavy- case. Now, now, he 
said, he should be drowned for ever, and so never 
see that face with comfort that he had come so 
many miles to behold. 

And here also I took notice of what was very 
remarkable : the water of that river was lower at 
this time than ever I saw it in all my life ; so he 
went over at last, not much above wetshod. "When 
he was going up to the gate, I began to take 

His boldness ^^^"^"^ oi him, and to wish him a good 
at last. reception above. So he said, I shall, 

I shall. Then parted we asunder, and I saw him 
no more. 

Hon. Then it seems he was well at last ? 

Geeat. Yes, yes, I never had doubt about him. 
He was a man of a choice spirit, only he was 
always kept very low, and that made his life so 
burdensome to himself, and so troublesome to 
others. Psa. 88. He was, above many, tender of 
sin : he was so afraid of doing injuries to others, 
that he often would deny himself of that which 
was lawful, because he would not offend. Rom. 
14:21; 1 Cor. 8 : 13. 

Hon. But what should be the reason that such 
a good man should be all his days so much in the 
dark? 

Gkeat. There are two sorts of reasons for it. 
Eeasons why One is, the wisc God will have it so : 

good men are , . n 

BO in the dark, some must pipe, and some must weep. 



4:04 PILGRIM'S PROGEESS. 

Matt. 11 : 16. Now Mr. Fearing was one that 
played upon the bass. He and his fellows sound 
the sackbut, whose notes are more doleful than 
the notes of other music are : though indeed, 
some say the bass is the ground of music. And 
for my part, I care not at all for that profession 
which begins not in heaviness of mind. The first 
string that the musician usually touches is the 
bass, when he intends to put all in tune. God 
also plays upon this string first, when he sets the 
soul in tune for himself. Only there was the im- 
perfection of Mr. Fearing ; he could play upon no 
other music but this till towards his latter end. 

[I make bold to talk thus metaphorically for 
the ripening of the wits of young readers, and 
because, in the book of the Revelation, the saved 
are compared to a company of musicians, that play 
upon their trumpets and harps, and sing their 
songs before the throne. Rev. 5:8; 14 : 2, 3.] 

Hon. He was a very zealous man, as one may 
see by the relation which you have given of him. 
Difficulties, lions, or Yanity Fair he feared not 
at all ; it was only sin, death, and hell that were 
to him a terror, because he had some doubts 
about his interest in that celestial country. 

Great. You say right ; those were the things 
that were his troublers ; and they, as you have 
well observed, arose from the weak- a close about 
saess of his mind thereabout, not from ^^^' 



TALK ABOUT MR. FEARINa. 405 

weakness of spirit as to tlie practical part of a pil- 
grim's life. I dare believe that, as the proverb is, 
he could have bit a firebrand, had it stood in his 
way ; but the things with which he was oppress- 
ed no man ever yet could shake off with ease. 

Cmi. Then said Christiana, This relation of Mr. 

Christiana's I'earing has done me good ; I thought! 
sentence. nobody had been like me. But I seej 
there was some semblance betwixt this good man 
and me : only we, differed in two things: His 
troubles were so great that they broke out ; but 
mine I kept within. His also lay so hard upon him, 
they made him that he could not knock at the 
houses provided for entertainment ; but my trou- 
ble was always such as made me knock the louder. 

IMer. If I niight also speak my heart, I must 

Mercy's sen- ^^J *^^^ Something of him has also 
tence. , dwelt in me. For I have ever been 

more afraid of the lake, and ^e loss of a place in 
paradise, than I have been of the loss of other 
things. Oh, thought I, may I have the happiness 
to have a habitation there ! 'T is enough, though 
I part with all the world to wiji it. 

Matt. Then said Matthew, Fear was one thing 
Matthew's that made me thmk that I was far from 
sentence. having that within me which acccfm- 
panies salvation. But if it was so with such a 
good man as he, why may it not also go well with 
me? 



406 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

James. No fears, no grace, said James. Tliougli 
there is not always grace where there james' sen- 
is the fear of hell, yet, to be sure, there *®"'^®- 
is no grace where there is no fear of God. 

Great. Well said, James ; thou hast hit the 
mark. For the fear of God is the beginning of 
wisdom : and to be sure, they that want the be- 
ginning have neither middle nor end. But we 
will here conclude our discourse of Mr. Fearing, 
after we have sent after him this farewell. 

"Well, Master Fearing, thou didst fear 

Thy God, and wast afraid 
Of doing any thing, while here, 

That would have thee betrayed. 
And didst thou fear the lake and pit? 

Would others do so too! 
For, as for them that v/ant thy wit, 

They do themselves undo." 

Now I saw that they still went on in their talk. 
For after Mr. Great-Heart had made an end with 
Mr. Fearing, Mr. Honest began to tell them of an- 
other, but his name was Mr. Self-will, of i^ir. seif- 
He pretended himself to be a pilgrim, '^'^• 
said Mr. Honest; but I persuaded myself he 
never came in at the gate that stands at the head 
of the way. 

Geeat. Had you ever -any talk with hixn about 
it? 

Hon. Yes, more than once or twice ; ^ oid Honest 

' ' had talked with 

but he would always be like himself, him. 



TALK ABOUT SELF-WILL. 407 

self-willed. He neither cared for man, nor argu- 
ment, nor yet example ; what his mind prompted 
him to, that he would do, and nothing else could 
he be got to do. 

Great. Pray, what principles did he hold? for 
I suppose you can tell. 

Hon. He held that a man might follow the vices 
seif-wiU's as w^ell as the virtues of pilgrims ; and 
opinions. ^1^^^^ if ^^ j-^ ^^^^^ I^Q should be cer- 
tainly saved. 

Great. How ? If he had said it is possible for 
the best to be guilty of the vices, as w^ell as to 
X^artake of the virtues of pilgrims, he could not 
much have been blamed ; for indeed we are ex- 
empted from no vice absolutely, but on condition 
that we watch and strive. But this, I perceive, 
is not the thing ; but if I understand you right, 
your meaning is, that he was of opinion that it 
was allowable so to be. 

Hon. Aye, aye, so I mean, and so he believed 
and practised. 

Great. But what grounds had he for his so 
saying? 

Hon. Why, he said he had the Scripture for his 
warrant. 

Great. Prithee, Mr. Honest, present us wdth a 
few particulars. 

Hon. So I will. He said, to have to do wdth 
other men's wives had been practised by David^ 



408 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

God's beloved ; and therefore he could do it. He 
said, to have more women than one was a thing 
that Solomon practised, and therefore he could do 
it. He said that Sarah and the godly midwives 
of Egypt lied, and so did saved Rahab, and there- 
fore he could do it. He said that the disciples 
went, at the bidding of their Master, and took 
away the owner's ass, and therefore he could do 
so too. He said that Jacob got the inheritance 
of his father in a way of guile and dissimulation, 
and therefore he could do so too. 

Geeat. High base, indeed! And are you sui'g 
he was of this opinion ? 

Hon. I have heard him plead for it, bring Scrip- 
ture for it, bring arguments for it, etc. 

Great. An opinion that is not fit to be with any 
allowance in the world. 

Hon. You must understand me rightly : he did 
not say that any man might do this; but that 
they who had the virtues of those that did such 
things, might also do the same. 

Great. But what more false than such a con- 
clusion ? For this is as much as to say, that be- 
cause good men heretofore have sinned of infirmi- 
ty, therefore he had allowance to do it of a pre- 
sumptuous mind ; or that if, because a child, by 
the blast of the wind, or for that it stumbled at 
a stone, fell down and defiled itself in the mire, 
therefore he might wilfully lie down and wallow 



TALK ABOUT SELF-WILL. 409 

like a boar therein. Wlio could have tliouglit 
that any one could so far have been blinded by 
the power of lust? But what is written must be 
true: they "stumble at the word, being disobe- 
dient; whereunto also they were appointed." 
1 Peter 2 : 8. His supposing that such may have 
the godly men's vu'tues who addict themselves to 
their vices, is also a delusion as strong as the other. 
To eat up the sin of God's people, Hos. 4 : 8, as a 
dog licks up filth, is no sign of one that is pos- 
sessed with their virtues. Nor can I believe that 
one who is of this opinion, can at present have 
faith or love in him. But I know you have made 
some strong objections against him ; jprithee, 
w^hat can he say for himself? 

Hon. Why, he says, to do this by way of opinion, 
seems abundantly more honest than to do it, and 
yet hold contrary to it in opinion. 

Great. A very wicked answer. For though to 
let loose the bridle to lusts, while our opinions are 
against such things, is bad ; yet, to sin, and plead ^ 
a toleration so to do, is worse : the one stumbles 
beholders accidentally, the other leads them into 
the snare. 

Hon. There are many of this man's mind, that 
have not this man's mouth; and that makes 
going on pilgrimage of so little esteem as it 
is. 

Great. You have said the truth, and it is to be 



410 PILGRIM'S PROGEESS. 

lamented : but lie that fearetli the King of para- 
dise shall come out of them all. 

Chr. There are strange opinions in the world. 
I know one that said it was time enough to repent 
when we come to die. 

Geeat. Such are not overwise ; that man would 
have been loath, might he have had a week to run 
twenty miles in his life, to defer his journey to 
the last hour of that week. 

Hon. You say right ; and yet the generality of 
them who count themselves pilgrims, do indeed 
do thus. I am, as you see, an old man, and have 
been a traveller in this road many a day ; and I 
have taken notice of many things. 

I have seen some that have set out as if they 
would drive all the world before them, who yet 
have, in a few days, died as they in the wilderness, 
and so never got sight of the promised land. I 
have seen some that have promised nothing at 
first setting out to be pilgrims, and who one would 
have thought could not have lived a day, that 
have yet proved very good pilgrims. I have seen 
some who have run hastily forward, that again 
have, after a little time, run just as fast back again* 
I have seen some who have spoken very well of a 
pilgrim's life at first, that after a while have 
spoken as much against it. I have heard some, 
when they first set out for paradise, say positive- 
ly there is such a place, who, when they have 



AT GAIUS' HOUSE. 411 

been almost tliere, have come back again, and 
said there is none. I have heard some vaunt 
what they would do in case they should be op- 
posed, that have, even at a false alarm, fled faith, 
the pilgrim's way, and all. 

Now, as they werp thus on their way, there 
came one running to meet them, and said, Gentle- 
Fresh news of i^^n, and you of the weaker sort, if 
trouble. ^^^.^ j^^.^ ^ife, shift for yourselves, for 

the robbers are before joii. 

Great. Then said Mr. Great-Heart, They be 

the thi-ee that set ui)on Little-Faith heretofore. 

Great-Heaxt's Well, said he, wc are ready for them : 

resolution. g^ ^-^^^^ ^^.^^^ ^^ ^|^g- j, ^,^^y^ -^^^^ ^^^^ 

looked at every turning when they should have 
met with the villains ; but whether they heard of 
Mr. Great-Heart, or whether they had some other 
game, they came not up to the pilgrims. 

Christiana then wished for an inn to refresh 
Christiana hcrsclf and her children, because they 

•wishes for an 

inn. were weary. Then said Mr. Honest, 

There is one a little before us, where a very hon- 
orable disciple, one Gains, dwells. Kom. 16 : 23. 
So they all concluded to turn in thither ; and 
the rather, because the old gentleman gave him 
so good a report. When they came to the door 
they went in, not knocking, for folks use not to 
knock at the door of an inn. Then they call- 
ed for the master of the house, and he came to 



412 PILGRIM'S PEOGRESS. 

them. So tlicy asked if they migiit lie there that 
night. 

Gaius. Yes, gentlemen, if you be true men ; 
for my house is for none but pilgrims. Then were 
Christiana, Mercy, and the boys the Gaius enter- 

1 T J? j-i, i. J.1 • 1 tains them, aud 

more glad, lor that the innkeeper was how. 
a lover of pilgrims. So they called for rooms, and 
he showed them one for Christiana and her chil- 
dren and Mercy, and another for Mr. Great-Heart 
and the old gentleman. 

Great. Then said Mr. Great-Heart, Good Gaius, 
what hast thou for supper? for these pilgrims 
have come far to-day, and are weary. 

Gaius. It is late, said Gaius, so we cannot con- 
veniently go out to seek food ; but such as we 
have you shall be welcome to, if that will con- 
tent. 

Great. We will 'be content with w^hat thou 
hast in the house ; for as much as I have proved 
thee, thou art never destitute of that w^hich is 
convenient. 

Then he went down and spoke to the cook, 
whose name was Taste-that-which-is- Gains' cook, 
good, to get ready sujDper for so many pilgrims. 
This done, he comes up again, saying, ne comes up 
Come, my good friends, you are wel- ^s^^"- 
come to me, and I am glad that I have a house to 
entertain you in ; and while supper is making 
ready, if you j)lease, let us entertain one another 



DISCOURSE WITH GAIUS. 413 

mth some good discourse : so tliey all said, Con- 
tent. 

Gaius. Then said Gains, Whose wife is this aged 
Tali: between matron? and whose daughter is this 

Gains and his ^ , „ 

guests. young damsel f 

Great. This woman is the wife of one Chris- 
tian, a pilgrim of former times ; and these are his 
four children. The maid is one of her acquaint- 
ance, one that she hath persuaded to come with 
her on pilgrimage. The boys take all after their 
father, and covet to tread in his steps ; yea, if 
they do but see any place where the old pilgrim 
hath lain, or any print of his foot, it ministereth 
joy to their hearts, and they covet to lie or tread 
in the same. 

Gaius. Then said Gaius, Is this Christian's wife, 
and are these Christian's children ? I knew your 
Of Christian's husbaud's father, yea, also his father's 
ancestors. father. Many have been good of this 
stock; their ancestors dwelt first at Antioch. 
Acts 11 : 26. Christian's progenitors — I suppose 
you have heard your husband talk of them — were 
very worthy men. They have, above any that I 
know, showed themselves men of great virtue and 
courage for the Lord of the pilgrims, his ways, 
and them that loved him. I have heard of many 
of your husband's relations that have stood all 
trials for the sake of the truth. Stephen, that 
was one of the first of the family from whence 



4U PILGEIM'S PROGRESS, 

your husband sprang, was knocked on the head 
with stones Acts 7:59, 60. James, another of 
this generation, was slain with the edge of the 
sword. Acts 12 ; 2. To say nothing of Paul and 
Peter, men anciently of the family from whence 
your husband came, there was Ignatius, who was 
cast to the lions ; Romanus, whose flesh was cut 
by pieces from his bones ; and Polycarp, that 
played the man in the fire. There was he that 
was hanged up in a basket in the sun for the 
wasps to eat ; and he whom they put into a sack, 
and cast into the sea to be drowned. It would be 
impossible utterly to count up all of that family 
who have suffered injuries and death for the love 
of a pilgrim's life. Nor can I but be glad to see 
that thy husband has left behind him four such 
boys as these. I hope they will bear up their 
father's name, and tread in their father's steps, 
and come to their father's end. 

Great. Indeed, sir, they are likely lads : they 
seem to choose heartily their father's ways. 

Gaius. That is it that I said. AVlierefore Chris- 
tian's family is hke still to spread abroad upon the 
face of the ground, and yet to be numerous upon 
the face of the earth ; let Christiana Advice to chris- 

- T , , , p , ' tiana about her 

look out some damsels lor her sons, to boys. 
whom they may be betrothed, etc., that the name 
of their father, and the house of his progenitors, 
may never be forgotten m the world. 



AT GAIUS' HOUSE. 415 

Hon. 'T is pity his family sliould fall and bo 
extinct. 

Gaius. Fall it cannot, but be diminished it mp.y; 
but let Christiana take my advice, and that is the 
way to uphold it. And, Christiana, said this inn- 
keeper, I am glad to see thee and thy friend Mercy 
together here, a lovely couple. And if I may ad- 
vise, take Mercy into a nearer relation to thee : if 
she will, let her be given to ^Matthew thy eldest 
son. It is the way to x^reserve a posterity in the 
A match be- earth. So this match was concluded, 

tween Mercy ^ . ... ^ , 

and Matthew, and in proccss oi time tney were mar- 
ried : but more of that hereafter. 

Gaius also proceeded, and said, I will now 
S]3eak on the behalf of Avomen, to take away their 
reproach. Tor as death and the curse came into 
the world by a woman, Gen. 3, so also did life and 
health : God sent forth his Son, made of a woman. 
Gal. 4 : 4. Yea, to show how much they that 
came after did abhor the act of the mother, this 
Why women scx ill the Old Testament coveted cliil- 
des^red^ ^wi- drcii, if happily this or that w^oman 
^®^" might be the mother of the Saviour of 

the world. I will say again, that when the Saviour 
was come, women rejoiced in him, before either 
man or angel. Luke 1 : 42-46. I read not that 
ever any man did give unto Christ so much as one 
groat ; but the women followed him, and minister- 
ed to him of their substance. Luke 8 : 2, 3. 'T was 



416 PILGEIM'S PROGBESS. 

a "woman that waslied liis feet with tears, Luke 
7: 37-50, and a woman that anointed his body to 
the burial. John 11:2; 12 : 3. They were women 
who wept when he was going to the cross, Luke 

23 : 27, and women that followed him irom the 
cross, Matt. 27:55, 56, Luke 23 : 65, and that sat 
over against his sepulclire when he was buried. 
Matt. 27:61. They were women that were first 
with him at his resurrection-morn, Luke 24 : 1, 
and women that brought tidings first to his dis- 
ciples that he was risen from the dead. Luke 

24 : 22, 23. "Women therefore are highly favored, 
and show by these things that they are sharers 
with us in the grace of life. 

Now the cook sent up to signify that supper 
was almost ready, and sent one to lay Supper ready, 
the cloth, and the trenchers, and to set the salt 
and bread in order. 

Then said Matthew, The sight of this cloth, 
and of this forerunner of the supper, begetteth 
in me a greater appetite to my food than I had 
before. 

Gaius. So let all ministering doctrines to thee 
in this life beget in thee a greater desire to sit at 
the supper of the great King in his kingdom ; for 
all preaching, books, and ordinances wimt is to be 
here, are but as the laying of the g^Sfg^'lf'X 
trenchers, and the setting of salt upon ^^Tif' ^^*^^tj^ 
the board, when compared with the trenchers. 



SUPPER WITH GAIUS. 417 

feast ^Yllicll onr Lord will make for us Vi'lien we 
come to Ills house. 

So supper came up. And first a heave-slioulder 
and a wave-breast were set on tlie table before 
them, to show that they must begin their meal 
wdth j)rayer and praise to God. The heave-shoul- 
der David Hfted up his heart to God wath ; and 
with the wave-breast, where his heart lay, he used 
to lean ujDon his harp w^hen he played. Leviticus 
7 : 32-34 ; 10 : 14, 15 ; Psalm 25:1; Heb. 13 : 15. 
These two dishes were very fresh and good, and 
they all ate heartily thereof. 

The next they brought up was a bottle of wine, 
as red as blood. Deut. 32:14; Judges 9:13; 
John 15 : 5. So Gains said to them, Drink freely ; 
this is the true juice of the vine, that makes glad 
the heart of God and man. So they drank and 
were merry. 

The next was a dish of milk well crumbed. 
A dish of milk. Gaius Said, Let the boys have that, 
that they may grow thereb3^ 1 Pei 2 : 1, 2. 

Then they brought up in course a dish of butter 
Of honey and ^^^ honey. Then said Gaius, Eat free- 
butter, ij Qf ^|-^jg^ fQj. ^^g jg good to cheer up 

and strengthen your judgments and understand- 
ings. This was our Lord's dish when he was a 
child : " Butter and honey shall he eat, that he 
may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good." 
Isaiah 7:15. 

jt Pil. Proff. 27 



413 PILGRIM'S TROGRESS. 

Then they bronglit tliem up a dish of apples, 
and they were Tery good-tasted fruit, a disii of ap- 
Then said Matthew, May we eat ap- ^^^^• 
pies, since it was such by and with which the 
serpent beguiled our first mother? 

Then said Gains, 

"Apples -were they with wliicli we were beguiled, 
Yet sin, not apples, hath our soul defiled: 
Apples forbid, if ate, corrupt the blood ; 
To eat such, when commanded, does us good : 
Drink of his flagons then, thou church, his dove, 
And eat his aj^ples, who art sick of love." 

Then said Matthew, I made the scruple, be- 
cause I a while since was sick with the eating of 
fruit. 

Gaius. Forbidden fruit will make you sick ; but 
not what our Lord has tolerated. 

While they were thus talking, they were pre- 
sented with another dish, and it was a a dish of nuts. 
dish of nuts. Song 6 : 11. Then said some at the 
table, Nuts spoil tender teeth, especially the teeth 
of children : which when Gaius heard, he said, 

' ' Hard texts are nuts — I will not call them cheaters — 
Whose shells do keep their kernels from the eaters : 
Open the shells, and you shall have the meat ; 
They here are brought for you to crack and eat.* 

Then were they very merry, and sat at the table 
a long time, talking of many things. Then said 
the old gentleman, My good landlord, while wo 



OLD HONEST'S KIDDLE. 419 

are cracking yqur nuts, if you please, do you open 
this riddle : 

A riddle put ""^ ^^^ there was, tliough some did count 
forth by old him mad, 

Honest. rjij^g more he cast away, the more he had." 

Then they all gave good heed, wondering what 
good Gaius would say ; so he sat still a while, and 
then thus repHed : 

"He who bestows his goods iii^on the poor, 
Gaius opens it. Shall have as much again, and ten times 
more. " 

Joseph won- Then said Joseph, I dare say, sir, I 
^^^^' did not think you could have found 

it out. 

Oh, said Gaius, I have been trained up in this 
way a great while : nothing teaches Hke experi- 
ence. I have learned of my Lord to be kind, and 
have found by experience that I have gained 
thereby. There is that scattereth, and yet in- 
creaseth ; and there is that withholdeth more 
than is meet, but it tendeth to poverty. There 
is that maketh himseK rich, yet hath nothing: 
there is that maketh himself x^oor, yet hath great 
riches. Prov. 11 : 24 ; 13 : 7. 

Then Samuel whispered to Christiana his 
mother, and said. Mother, this is a very good 
man's house : let us stay here a good while, and 
let my brother Matthew be married here to Mer- 
cy, before we go any further. The which Gaius 



420 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

the liost overliearing, said, Witli a very good will, 
my child. 

So they staid there more than a Matthew and 
month, and Mercy was given to Mat- ^^'^y^^^'^^^- 
thew to wife. While they stayed here, Mercy, as 
her custom was, would be making coats and gar- 
ments to give to the poor, by which she brought 
a very good report upon the pilgrims. 

But to return again to our story. After supper 
the lads desired a bed, for they were The boys go to 

.,, , IT rri. n • bed, the rest Bit 

weary with travellmg. Then Gams up. 
called to show them their chamber; but said 
Mercy, I will have them to bed. So she had them 
to bed, and they slept well : but the rest sat up 
all night ; for Gains and they were such suit- 
able company, that they could not tell how to 
part. After much talk of their Lord, them- 
selves, and their journey, old Mr. Hon- q^^ Honest 
est, he that put forth the riddle to ^°*i«- 
Gains, began to nod. Then said Great-Heart, 
"What, sir, you begin to be drowsy; come, rub 
up now, here is a riddle for you. Then said Mr. 
Honest, Let us hear it. Then rephed Mr. Great- 
Heart, 

"He that would kill, must first be overcome ; 
^Vho Hve abroad would, first must die at ^"^dle. 
home." 

Ha, said Mr. Honest, it is a hard one ; hard to 
expound, and harder to x^ractise. But come, land- 



GREAT-HEAKT'S EIDDLE. 421 

lord, said he, I will, if you ^Dlease, leave my part 
to you : do you expound it, and I will hear what 
you say. 

No, said Gains, it was put to 3-0U, and it is 
expected you should answer it. Then said the 
old gentleman, 

"He first by grace must conquered be, 
The riddle That sin would mortify ; 

opened. -WTio that he lives would convince me, ^ 

Unto himself must die." 

It is right, said Gains ; good doctrine and ex- 
perience teach this. For, first, until grace dis- 
plays itself, and overcomes the soul with its 
glory, it is altogether without heart to oppose 
sin. Besides, if sin is Satan's cords, by w^hich 
the soul lies bound, how should it make resist- 
ance before it is loosed from that infirmity? 
Secondly, nor v/ill any one that knows either 
reason or grace, believe that such a man can be 
a living monument of grace that is a slave to 
his own corruptions. And now it comes into 

A question my mind, I will tell you a story 
minding. worth the hearing. There were two 
men that went on pilgTimage ; the one began 
when he was young, the other when he was old. 
The young man had strong corruptions to grap- 
ple with ; the old man's were weak with the de- 
cays of nature. The young man trod his steps 
as even as did the old one, and was every way 



422 PILGKIM'S PROGRESS. 

as liglit as lie. Wlio now, or whicli of them, liad 
their graces shining clearest, since both seemed 
to be alike? 

Hon. The young man's doubtless. For that 
which makes head against the great- a comparison. 
est opposition, gives best demonstration that it is 
strongest ; especially when it also holdeth pace 
with that which meets not with half so much, as 
to be sure old age does not. Besides, I have 
observed that old men have blessed a mistake, 
themselves with this mistake, namely, taking tho 
decays of nature for a gracious conquest over 
corruptions, and so have been apt to beguile 
themselves. Indeed old men that are gracious 
are best able to give advice to them that are 
young, because they have seen most of the empti- 
ness of things ; but yet, for an old and a young- 
man to set out both together, the young one has 
the advantage of the fairest discovery of a work 
of grace within him, though the old man's cor- 
ruptions are naturally the weakest. Thus they 
sat talking till break of day. 

Now, when the family were up, Christiana bid 
her son James that he should read a chapter ; so 
he read the 53d of Isaiah. When he had done, 
Mr. Honest asked why it was said Another ques- 
that the Saviour was to come " out of *'°"- 
a dry ground ;" and also, that "he had no form 
nor comeliness in him." 



GIANT SLAY-GOOD. 423 

Great. Then said Mr. Great-Heart, To the 
first I answer, because the church of the Jews, of 
which Christ came, had then lost ahnost all tlie 
sap and spirit of religion. To the second I saj, 
the words are spoken in the person of unbeHev- 
ers, who, because they want the eye that can see 
into our Prince's heart, therefore they judge of 
him by the meanness of his outside ; just liko 
those who, not knowing that precious stones are 
covered over with a homely crust, when they 
have found one, because they know not what they 
have found, cast it away again, as men do a com- 
mon stone. 

Well, said Gains, now you are here, and since, 
as I know, Mr. Great-Heart is good at his 
weapons, If you please, after we have refreshed 
ourselves, we will walk into the fields, to see if 
we can do any good. About a mile from hence 
there is one Slay-good, a giant, that doth much 
annoy the King's highway in these parts ; and I 
know whereabout his haunt is. He is master 
of a number of thieves : 't would be well if we 
could clear these parts of him. So they consent- 
ed and went : Mr. Great-Heart with his sword, 
helmet, and shield ; and the rest with spears and 
staves. 

Giant Slay- When they came to the place 
?\dth one °Fee- where he was, they found him with 

ble-mind in his tti i i • i • i • i t ^ 

hand. ouc Jb eebie-mind m ins hand, whom 



424 PILGRIM'S PROGBESS. 

his servants had brought unto him, having taken 
him in the way. Now the giant was rifling him, 
with a purpose after that to pick his bones ; for 
he was of the nature of flesh-eaters. 

Well, so soon as he saw Mr. Great-Heart and 
his friends at the mouth of his cave, with their 
weapons, he demanded what they wanted. 

Great. "We want thee; for we are come to 
revenge the quarrels of the many that thou hast 
slain of the pilgrims, when thou hast dragged 
them out of the King's highway : wherefore 
come out of thy cave. So he armed himself 
and came out, and to battle they went, and 
fought for above an hour, and then stood still to 
take wind. 

Slay. Then said the giant, Why are you here 
on my ground ? 

Gkeat. To revenge the blood of pilgrims, as I 
told thee before. So they went to it again, and 
the giant made Mr. Great-Heart give back ; but 
he came up again, and in the greatness of his 
mind he let flv with such stoutness The giant 

•^ -, • -, assaulted and 

at the giant's head and sides, that he siaiu. 
made him let his weapon fall out of his hand. 
So he smote him, and slew him, and cut off his 
head ^nd brought it away to the inn. He also 
took Feeble-mind the pilgrim, and brought him 
with him to his lodgings. When they were come 
home, they showed his head to the family, and 



MR. FEEBLE-MIND. 425 

set it up, as tliey had done others before, for a 
terror to those that should attempt to do as he 
hereafter. 

Then they asked Mr. Feeble-mind how he fell 
into his hands. 

Feeble. Then said the poor man, I am a sick- 
ly man, as you see : and because death did 
usually once a day knock at my door, I thought 
How Feeble- 1 sliould never be well at home : so 

miiid came to .,.,,.„ 

be a pUgrim. I bctook myself to a pilgrim s life, 
and have travelled hither from the town of 
Uncertain, where I and my father were born. I 
am a man of no strength at all of body, nor yet 
of mind, but would, if I could, though I can 
but crawl, spend my life in the pilgrim's way. 
When I came at the gate that is at the head of 
the way, the Lord of that place did entertain mo 
freely ; neither objected he against my weakly 
looks, nor against my feeble mind ; but gave me 
such things as were necessary for my journey, 
and bid me hope to the end. When I came to 
the house of the Interpreter, I received much 
kindness there : and because the hill of Diffi- 
culty was judged too hard for me, I was carried 
up that by one of his servants. Indeed, I have 
found much relief from pilgrims, though none 
were willing to go so softly as I am forced to 
do : yet still as they came on, they bid me be of 
good cheer, and said, that it was the will of 



42G riLGiiiM's rrtOGRESS. 

tlieir Lord that comfort should be given to the 
feeble-minded, 1 Thess. 5 : 14 ; and so went on 
their own pace. When I was come to Assault- 
lane, then this giant met with me, and bid me 
prepare for an encounter. But, alas, feeble one 
that I was, I had more need of a cordial ; so he 
came up and took me. I conceited he would not 
kill me. Also when he had got me into his den, 
since I went not with him willingly, I believed I 
should come out alive again ; for I have heard, 
that not any pilgrim that is taken Mark this. 
captive by violent hands, if he keeps heartwhole 
towards his Master, is, by the laws of Provi- 
dence, to die by the hand of the enemy. Bob- 
bed I looked to be, and robbed to be sure I am ; 
but I have, as you see, escaped with life, for the 
which I thank my King as the author, and you 
as the means. Other brunts I also look for ; but 
this I have resolved on, to wit, to run when I 
can, to go when I cannot run, and to Mark tws. 
creep when I cannot go. As to the main, I thank 
Him that loved me, I am fixed ; my way is be- 
fore me, my mind is beyond the river that has no 
bridge, though I am, as you see, but of a feeble 
mind. 

Hon. Then said old Mr. Honest, Have not you, 
sometime ago, been acquainted with one Mr. Fear- 
ing, a pilgrim? 

Feeble. Acquainted with him? yes, he came 



Mil. FEEELE-MIND. 127 

from tlie town of Stupidity, wliicli lietli four de- 
grees to the northward of the city of Destruction, 
and as many off of where I was born : yet we 
Mr. Fearing were Well acquainted, for indeed he 

Mr. Feeble- / j; \li . i i.1 

mind's uucie. was my unclc, my lather s brother. 
He and I have been much of a temper : he was a 
little shorter than I, but yet we were much of a 
complexion. 

Hon. I perceive you knew him, and I am apt 

Feeble-mind to bclicve also that you were related 
FlarS°^£ oi^e to another; for you have his 
tm-ea. whitely look, a cast like his with your 

eye, and your speech is much alike. 

Feeble. Most have said so, that have known us 
both ; and besides, what I have read in him I 
have for the most part found in myself. 

G-AIU3. Come, sir, said good Gains, be of good 

Gains com- cliccr ; joii fXYO wclcomc to me, and to 
forts iiim. jr^y house. What thou hast a mind to, 
call for freely ; and what thou w^ouldest have my 
servants do for thee, they will do it with a ready 
mind. 

Then said Mr. Feeble-mind, This is an unex- 
pected favor, and as the sun shining out of a 
very dark cloud. Did giant Slay -good intend 

Notice to be me tliis favor when he stopped me, 

taken of Provi- e ,-i a 

deuce. and resolved to let me go no lurtner .'' 

Did he intend, that after he had rifled my pockets, 
I should QO to G aius my host ? Yet so it is. 



423 PILGTvIM'S TROGEESS. 

Now, jnst as Mr. Feeble-mind and Gains 
were tlins in talk, there came one Tidings how 
mnning, and called at tlie door, and ^^g giafn by a 
said, that about a mile and a half tt^^^derboit. 
off there was one Mr. Not-right, a pilgrim, struck 
dead upon the place where he was, with a thun- 
derbolt. 

Feeble. Alas, said Mr. Feeble-mind, is he 
slain? He overtook me some days Mr. reebie- 

1 n -r !> 1-1-1 -I inind's com- 

beiore I came so tar as nitner, and ment upon it. 
would be my company-keeper. He was also 
with ma when Slay-good the giant took me, 
but he was nimble of his heels, and escaped ; but 
it seems he escaped to die, and I was taken to 
live. 

"Wliat one would think doth seek to slay outright, 
Ofttimes delivers from the saddest plight. 
That very Providence whose face is death, 
Doth ofttimes to the lowly life bequeath. 
I taken was, he did escape and flee ; 
Hands crossed gave death to him and life to me." 

Now, about this time Matthew and Mercy were 
married ; also Gains gave his daughter Phebe to 
James, Matthew's brother, to wife ; after which 
time they yet stayed about ten days at Gains* 
house, spending their time and the seasons like 
as pilgrims use to do. 

"When they were to depart. Gains made them 
a feast, and they did eat and drink, and wore 



TAETING niOM GAIUS. 429 

The pUgrims meiTj. Now the liour was come 
torward. that they must be gone ; wherefore 

Mr. Great-Heart called for a reckoning. But 
Gains told him that at his house it was not the 
custom for pilgrims to pay for their entertain- 
ment. He boarded them by the year, but look- 
ed for his pay fi'om the good Samaritan, who had 
promised him, at his return, whatsoever charge 
he was at with them, faithfully to repay him. 
Luke 10:34, 35. Then said Mr. Great-Heart to 
him, 

Grk\t. Beloved, thou doest faithfully whatso- 
How they greet ever tliou doest to the brethren, and 

one another at . , . . . .. 

parting. to strangers, who have borne witness 

of thy charity before the church, whom if thou 
yet bring forward on their journey, after a godly 
sort, thou shalt do well. 3 John 5, 6. Then 

Gains' last Gaius took his Icavc of them all, and 
Feeble-mind, his children, and particularly of ]VIr. 
reeble-mind. He also gave him something to 
drink by the way. 

Now Mr. Feeble-mind, when they were going 
out of the door, made as if he intended to Hnger. 
The which, when Mr. Great-Heart espied, he said, 
Come, Mr. Feeble-mind, pray do you go along 
with us : I will be your conductor, and you shall 
fare as the rest. 

Feeble. Alas, I want a suitable companion. 
You are all lusty and strong, but I, as you see, 



430 PILGRIM'S mOGEESS. 

am weak ; I clioose tlierefore rather Feebic-mind 
to come beliind, lest, by reason of my hind, 
many infirmities, I sbjould be both a burden to 
myself and to you. I am, as I said, a man of a 
weak and feeble mind, and shall be offended and 
make weak at that which others can bear. I 
shall like no laughing ; I shall like His excuse. 
no gay attire ; I shall like no unprofitable ques- 
tions. Nay, I am so weak a man as to be offend- 
ed with that which others have a liberty to do. 
I do not yet know all the truth : I am a very 
ignorant Christian man. Sometimes, if I hear 
some rejoice in the Lord, it troubles me because 
I cannot do so too. It is with me as it is with 
a weak man among the strong, or as with a sick 
man among the healthy, or as a lamp despised ; so 
that I know not what to do. " He that is ready 
to slip with his feet is as a lamp despised in 
the thought of him that is at ease." Job 12 : 5. 

Great. But, brother, said Mr. Great-Heart, I 
have it in commission to comfort the Great-Heart's 
feeble-minded, and to support the ^^^'^^^i^"- 
weak. You must needs go along with us; wo 
will wait for you; we will lend you a christian 
our help ; we will deny ourselves of ^P"^^'- 
some things, both opinionative and practical, for 
your sake : we will not enter into doubtful dis- 
putations before you ; we will be made all things 
to you, rather than you shall be left behind. 



MR. BEADY-TO-HALT. 431 

1 Tiiess, 5 : 14 ; Rom. 14 ; 1 Corintliians 8 : 9-13 ; 
9:22. 

Now all tliis while tliey were at Gains' door ; 
and behold, as they were thus in the heat of their 
discourse, IMi'. Ready-to-halt came by, with his 
crutches in his hand, and he also was going on 
pilgrimage. 

Feeble. Then said Mr. Feeble-mind to him, 
Man, how camest thou hither? I was but now 

Feebie-rQind complainiuGf that I had not a suitable 

glad to see Rea- • i i j i t 

dy-to-haitcome. Companion, but tnou art according 
to my wish. Welcome, welcome, good Mr. 
Ready-to-halt ; I hope thou and I may be some 
help. 

Ready. I shall be glad of thy company, 
said the other ; and, good Mr. Feeble-mind, 
rather than we will part, since we are thus 
happily met, I will lend thee one of my 
crutches. 

Feeble. Nay, said he, though I thank thee for 
thy good-will, I am not incUned to halt before I 
am lame. Howbeit, I think, when occasion is, it 
may help me against a dog. 

Ready. If either myseK or my crutches can do 
thee a pleasure, we are both at thy command, 
good Mr. Feeble-mind. 

Thus therefore they went on. Mr. Great-Heart 
and Mr. Honest went before, Christiana and her 
childi-en went next, and Mr. Feeble-mind came 



432 PILGRIM'S PEOGRESS. 

beliiiid, and Mr. Eeady-to-lialt witli liis crutches. 
Then said Mr. Honest, 

Hon. Pray, sir, now we are upon the road, tell 
us some profitable things of some that New talk. 
have gone on pilgrimage before us. 

Great. "With a good will. I suppose you 
have heard how Christian of old did meet with 
ApoUyon in the valley of Humiliation, and also 
what hard work he had to go through the val- 
ley of the Shadow of Death. Also I think jon 
cannot but have heard how Faithful was put to 
it by Madam Wanton, with Adam the First, 
with one Discontent, and Shame; four as de- 
ceitful villains as a man can meet with upon the 
road. 

Hon. Yes, I have heard of all this ; but indeed 
good Faithful was hardest jput to it with Shame : 
he was an unwearied one. 

Great. Aye ; for as the pilgrim well said, he 
of all men had the wrong name. 

Hon. But pray, sir, where was it that Christian 
and Faithful met Talkative ? That same was also 
a notable one. 

Great. He was a confident fool ; yet many fol- 
low his ways. 

Hon. He had like to have beguiled Faithful. 

Great. Aye, but Christian put him into a way 
quickly to find him out. 

Thus they went on till they came to the place 



NEW TALK OF THE PILGRIMS. 4^3 

■\vlierc Evangelist met with Christian and Faith- 
ful, and prophesied to them what should befall 
them at Yanity Fair. Then said their guide, 
Hereabouts did Christian and Faithful meet 
with Evangelist, who prophesied to them of what 
troubles they should meet with at Vanity Fair. 

Hon. Say you so ? I dare say it was a hard 
chapter that then he did read unto them. 

Great. It was so, but he gave them encourage- 
ment withal But what do w^e talk of them? 
They were a couple of lion-like men ; they had 
set theu" faces like a flint. Do not you remember 
liow undaunted they were when they stood before 
the judge ? 

Hon. Well : Faithful bravely suffered. 

Great. So he did, and as brave things camo 
on 't ; for Hopeful, and some others, as the story 
relates it, were converted by his death. 

Hon. "Well, but pray go on ; for you are well 
acquainted with things. 

Great. Above all that Christian met with after 
he had passed through Yanity Fair, one By-ends 
was the arch one. 

Hon. By-ends, what was he ? 

Great. A very arch fellow, a downright hyp- 
ocrite : one that would be religious, which- 
ever way the world went ; but so cunning that 
he would be sure never to lose or suffer for it. 
He had his mode of religion for every fresh oc- 

Pil. Pros. 28 



434 riLGEIM'S PEOGEESS. 

casioiij and his wife was as good at it as lie. He 
would turn from opinion to opinion ; yea, and 
plead for so doing too. But, as far as I could 
learn, lie came to an ill end witli his by-ends ; 
nor did I ever hear that any of his children 
were ever of any esteem with any that truly fear- 
ed God. 

Now by this time they were come within sight 
of the town of Vanity, where Vanity They come 
Fair is kept. So, when they saw that vanity Fau-. 
they were so near the town, they consulted with 
one another how they should pass through the 
town ; and some said one thing and some an- 
other. At last Mr. Grea.t-Heart said, I have, as 
you may understand, often been a conductor of 
pilgrims through this town. Now I am acquaint- 
ed with one Mr. Mnason, Acts 21 : 16, a Cyprusian 
by nation, an old disciple, at whose house we 
may lodge. If you think good, we will turn in 
there. 

Content, said old Honest ; Content, said Chris- 
tiana ; Content, said Mr. Feeble-mind ; and so 
they said all. Now you must think it was even- 
tide by that they got to the outside of the town ; 
but Mr. Great-Heart knew the way to the old 
man's house. So thither they came ; and he 
called at the door, and the old man within 
knew his tongue as soon as ever he heard it ; so 
he opened the door, and they all came in. Then 



MK. MNASON ENTERTAINS THEM. 435 

Theyenterinto said Mnason their host, How far 
son's to "lodge. havG ye come to-day ? So they said, 
From the house of Gaius our friend. I prom- 
ise you, said he, you have gone a good stitch. 
You may well be weary ; sit do-vvn. So they sat 
down. 

Gkeat. Then said their guide, Come, what 
cheer, good sirs ? I dare say you are welcome to 
my friend. 

JVInas. I also, said Mr. Mnason, do bid you wel- 
come ; and whatever you want, do but say, and 
we will do what we can to get it for you. 

Hon. Our great want a while since, was harbor 
They are glad and s^ood Company, and now I hope 

of entertain- ■, ■, ,^ 

nient. we have both. 

Mnas. For harbor, you see what it is ; but for 
good company, that will appear in the trial. 

Great. Well, said Mr. Great-Heart, w411 you 
have the pilgrims up into their lodging 

Mnas. I will, said Mr. Mnason. So he had 
them to their respective places ; and also showed 
them a very fair dining-room, where they might ' 
be, and sup together until the time should come 
to go to rest. 

Now when they were seated in their places, 
and were a little cheery after their journey, Mr. 
Honest asked his landlord if there was any store 
of good people in the town. 

Mnas. "We have a few ; for indeed they are but 



436 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

a few wlien compared with them on the other 
side. 

Hon. But how shall we do to see They desire to 
some of them? for the sight of good ^^oodTeopl'of 
men to them that are going on pil- *^® *°^- 
grimage, is like the appearing of the moon und 
stars to them that are sailing uj^on the seas. 

Mnas. Then Mr. Mnason stamped with his 
foot, and his daughter Grace came up. So he 
said unto her, Grace, go you, tell my some sent for. 
friends, Mr. Contrite, Mr. Holy-man, Mr. Love- 
saints, Mr. Dare-not-lie, and Mr. Penitent, that 
I have a friend or two at my house who have a 
mind this evening to see them. So Grace went 
to call them, and they came ; and after saluta- 
tion made, they sat down together at the table. 

Then said Mr. Mnason their landlord, My neigh- 
bors, I have, as you see, a company of strangers 
come to my house ; they are pilgrims : they come 
from afar, and are going to mount Zion. But 
-who, quoth he, do you think this is ? pointing his 
finger to Christiana. It is Christiana, the v^fe of 
Christian, the famous pilgrim, who, with Faith- 
ful his brother, was so shamefully handled in our 
town. At that they stood amazed, saying. We 
little thought to see Christiana when Grace came 
to call us ; wherefore this is a very comfortable 
surprise. They then asked her of her welfare, 
and if these young men were her husband's 



CONFLICTS OF CHBISTIANS. 437 

sons. Aiid when she had told them they were, 
they said, The King whom you lov-e and serve 
make you as your father, and bring you where he 
is in peace. 

Hon. Then Mr. Honest, when they were all sat 
Some talk be- down, asked Mr. Contrite and the 
est''\ud ^Mr! ^'®^*' iu'wliat posture their town was 
Contrite. ' ^t present. 

CoNT. You may be sure we are full of hurry in 
fair-time. 'Tis hard keeping our hearts and 
The fniit of Spirits in good order when we are in 
watchfulness, a cumbcrcd Condition. Hethathves 
in such a place as this is, and has to do with such 
as we have, has need of an item to caution him to 
take heed every moment of the day. 

Hon. But how are your neighbors now for 
quietness ? 

CoNT. They are much more moderate now than 

Persecution formerly. You know how Christian 
Vanity Fa°r as ^^^ Faithful wcre used at our town ; 
formerly. ]j^^ of late, I Say, they have been far 
more moderate. I think the blood of Faithful 
lieth as a load upon them till now ; for since they 
burned him, they have been ashamed to burn any 
more. In those days we were afraid to walk the 
streets ; but now we can show our heads. Then 
the name of a professor was odious ; now, espe- 
cially in some parts of our town, for you know 
our town is large, religion is counted honorable. 



438 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Then said Mr. Contrite to them, Pray how fareth 
it with you in your pilgrimage ? how stands the 
country affected towards you? 

Hon. It happens to us as it happeneth to way- 
faring men : sometimes our way is clean, some- 
times foul ; sometimes up hill, sometimes down 
hill ; we are seldom at a certainty. The wind is 
not always on our backs, nor is every one a friend 
that we meet with in the way. We have met 
with some notable rubs already, and what are yet 
behind we know not ; but for the most part, we 
find it true that has been talked of old, A good 
man must suffer trouble. 

CoNT. You talk of rubs ; what rubs have you 
met withal ? 

Hon. Nay, ask Mr. Great-Heart, our guide ; for 
he can give the best account of that. 

Great. "We have been beset three or four times 
already. First, Christiana and her children were 
beset by two ruffians, who they feared would take 
away their lives. "We v/ere beset by giant 
Bloody-man, giant Maul, and giant Slay-good. 
Indeed we did rather beset the last, than were 
beset by him. . And thus it was : after we had 
been some time at the house of Gains my host, 
and of the whole church, we were minded upon a 
time to take our weapons with us, and go see if 
we could light upon any of those that are ene- 
mies to pilgrims ; for we heard that there was 



conyeb;:;aTiox or the riLcniMS. 439 

a notable one thereabouts. Now Gains knew 
Ins haunt better than I, because he dwelt there- 
about. So we looked, and looked, till at last 
we discerned the mouth of his cave : then we 
were glad, and plucked up our sjpirits. So we 
approached up to his den ; and lo, when we 
came there, he had di-agged, by mere force, into 
his net, this poor man, Mr. Feeble-mind, and 
was about to brmg him to his end. But when he 
saw us, supposing, as we thought, he had anoth- 
er prey, he left the poor man in his hole, and 
came out. So we fell to it full sore, and he lustily 
laid about him ; but, in conclusion, he was 
brought down to the ground, and his head cut 
off, and set up by the way-side for a terror to such 
as should after practise such ungodhness. That 
I tell you the truth, here is the man himself to 
affirm it, who was as a lamb taken out of the 
mouth of the lion. 

Feeble. Then said Mr. Feeble-mind, I found 
this true, to my cost and comfort : to my cost, 
when he threatened to pick my bones every mo- 
ment ; and to my comfort, when I saw Mr. Great- 
Heart and his friends, with their weapons, H]}- 
proach so near for my deliverance. 

Holy. Then said Mr. Holy-man, There are two 

Mr. Holy- tilings that they have need to possess 

man's speecii. ^-j^^ ^^ ^^ pilgrimage : courage, and 

an unspotted life. If they have not courage, they 



440 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

can never hold on tlieir way ; and if their Hvcst 
be loose, they will make the very name of a pil- 
grim stink. 

Love. Then said ]\Ir. Love-saints, I hope this 
caution is not needful among you : but Mr. Love- 
truly there are many that go upon the ^^^''*'' "P"'^^' 
road, who rather declai'e themselves strangers to 
pilgrimage, than strangers and pilgrims on the 
earth. 

Dake. Then said Mr. Dare-not-lie, 'Ti» true. 
They have neither the pilgrim's weed, Mr. care-not- 
nor the pilgrim's courage ; they go not ^®'^ speech. 
uprightly, but all awry with their feet ; one shoo 
goeth inward, another outward ; and then* hosen 
are out behind : here a rag, and there a rent, to 
the disparagement of their Lord. 

Pen. These things, said Mr. Penitent, they 
ought to be troubled for ; nor are the Mr. Penitent's 
pilgrims like to have that grace put speech. 
upon them and their pilgrim progress as they 
desire, until the way is cleared of such spots and 
blemishes. Thus they sat talking and spending 
the time until supper was set upon the table, unto 
which they went, and refreshed their weary 
bodies : so they went to rest. 

Now they stayed in the fair a great while, at the 
house of this Mr. Mnason, who in process of time 
gave his daughter Grace unto Samuel, Christiana's 
son, to wife, and his daughter Martha to Joseph. 



A MONSTER. 441 

The time, as I said, that tliey staj^ed here, was 
long, for it was not now as in former times. 
"Wlierefore the pilgi'ims grew acquainted with 
many of the good people of the town, and did 
them what service they could. Mercy, as she 
was wont, labored much for the poor : where- 
fore their bellies and backs blessed her, and she 
was there an ornament to her profession. And, to 
say the truth for Grace, Phebe, and Martha, they 
were all of a very good nature, and did much 
good in their places. They were also all of them 
very fruitful ; so that Christian's name, as was 
said before, was like to live in the world. 

While they lay here, there came a monster out 
A monster, of the woods, and slew many of the 
people of the town. It would also carry away their 
children, and teach them to suck its whelps. Now 
no man in the town durst so much as face this 
monster ; but all fled when they heard the noise 
of his coming. 

The monster was like unto no one beast on the 
• ms shape, earth. Its body was hke a dragon, 
and it had seven heads and ten horns. It made 
great havoc of children, and yet it was governed 
by a woman. Eev. 17 : 3. This monster pro- ' 

His nature, pouuded Conditions to men ; and such 
men as loved their lives more than their souls, ! 
accepted of those* conditions. So they came 
under. 



4-12 riLGKIM'S PROGRESS. 

Now Mr. Great-Heart, together with those who 
came to visit the pilgrims at Mr. Mnason's house, 
entered into a covenant to go and engage this 
beast, if perhaps they might deHver the people of 
this town from the pav/s and mouth of this so 
devouring a serpent. 

Then did Mr. Great-Heart, Mr. Contrite, Mr. 
Holy-man, Mr. Dare-not-lie, and Mr. Penitent, 
with their weapons, go forth to meet him. Now 
the monster at first was very rampant, and look- 
ed upon these enemies with great disdain ; but 
they so belabored him, being sturdy how he is en- 
men-at-arms, that they made him s^^^^- 
make a retreat : so they came home to Mr. Mna- 
son's house again. 

The monster, you must know, had his certain 
seasons to come out in, and to make his attempts 
upon the children of the people of the town. At 
these seasons did these valiant worthies watch 
him, and did still continually assault him ; inso- 
much that in process of time he became not only 
wounded, but lame. Also he has not made that 
havoc of the townsmen's children as formerly he 
had done ; and it is verily believed by some that 
this beast will die of his wounds. 

This therefore made Mr. Great-Heart and hia 
fellows of great fame in this town ; so that many 
of the people that wanted their taste of things, 
yet had a reverent esteem and respect for them. 



IN VANITY FAIR. 4.-13 

• 

Upon this account therefore it Yras, that these 
pilgrims got not much hui't here. True, there 
were some of the baser sort, that could see no 
more than a mole, nor understand any more 
than a beast ; these had no reverence for these 
men, and took no notice of their valor and ad- 
ventures. 



4M riLGEIM'S PROGRESS. 



• 



THE SEVENTH STAGE. 

Well, the time grew on that the pilgrims must 
go on their way ; wherefore they prepared for 
their journey. They sent for their friends ; they 
conferred with them ; they had some time set 
apart therein to commit each other to the pro- 
tection of their Prince. There were again that 
brought them of such things as they had, that 
were fit for the weak and the strong, for the wom- 
en and the men, and so laded them with such 
things as were necessary. Acts 28 : 10. Then 
they set forward on their way ; and their friends 
accompanying them so far as was convenient, 
they again -committed each other to the protec- 
tion of their King, and parted. 

They therefore that were of the pilgrims' com- 
pany went on, and Mr. Great-Heart went before 
them. Now the women and children being 
weakly, they were forced to go as they could 
bear ; by which means Mr. Eeady-to-halt and Mr. 
Peeble-mind had more to sympathize with their 
condition. 

"WHien they were gone from the townsmen, and 
when their friends had bid them farewell, they 
quickly came to the place where Faithful was put 
to death. Therefore they made a stand, and 
thanked Him that had enabled him to bear his 



THE HILL LUC HE. 4-15 

cross so well ; and the rather, because they now 
found that they had a benefit by such a manly 
suffering as his was. 

They went on therefore after this a good way 
further, talking of Christian and Faithful, and 
how Hopeful joined himself to Christian after 
that Faithful was dead. 

Now they were come up with the hill Lucre, 
where the silver mine was which took Demas off 
fi'om his pilgrimage, and into which, as some 
think. By-ends fell and perished; wherefore they 
considered that. But when they were come to 
the old monument that stood over against the hill 
Lucre, to wit, to the pillar of salt, that stood also 
within view of Sodom and its stinking lake, they 
marvelled, as did Christian before, that men of 
such knowledge and ripeness of wit as they were, 
should be so blinded as to turn aside here. Only 
they considered again, that nature is not affected 
with the harms that others have met with, espe- 
cially if that thing upon which they look has an 
attracting virtue upon the foolish eye. 

I saw now, that they went on till they came to 
the river that was on this side of the Delectable 
mountains ; to the river where the fine trees grow 
on both sides, and whose leaves, if taken inward- 
ly, are good against surfeits ; where the meadows 
are green all the year long, and where they might 
lie down safely. Psa. 23 : 2. 



446 PILGIilM'S PROGKESS. 

By this river-side, in the meaciows, there were 
cotes and folds for sheep, a house built for the 
nourishing and bringing up of those lambs, the 
babes of those women that go on pilgrimage. 
Also there was here one that was intrusted with 
them, who could have compassion ; and that could 
gather these lambs with his arm, and carry them 
in his bosom, and gently lead those that were with 
young. Heb. 5:2; Isa. 40 : 11. Now, to the care 
of this man Christiana admonished her four 
daughters to commit their little ones, that by these 
waters they might be housed, harbored, succored, 
and nourished, and that none of them might be 
lacking in time to come. This man, if any of them 
go astray, or be lost, will bring them again ; he 
will also bind up that which was broken, and will 
Btrengthen them that are sick. Jer. 23 : 4 ; Ezek. 
84 : 11-16. Here they will never want meat, 
drink, and clothing ; here they will be kept from 
thieves and robbers ; for this man will die before 
one of those committed to his trust shall be lost. 
Besides, here they shall be sure to have good nur- 
ture and admonition, and shall be taught to walk 
in right paths, and that you know is a favor of no 
small account. Also here, as you see, are delicate 
waters, pleasant meadows, dainty flowers, variety 
of trees, and such as bear wholesome fi'uit : fruit, 
not like that which Matthew ate of, that fell over 
the wall out of Beelzebub's garden ; but fruit that 



GIANT DESPAIll. M7 

procuretli health where there is none, and that 
continueth and increaseth it where it is. So they 
were content to commit their little ones to him ; 
and that which was also an encouragement to 
them so to do, was, for that all this was to be at 
the charge of the King, and so was as a hospital 
to young children and orphans. 

Now they went on. And when they were come 
They being to By-path mcadow, to the stile over 
path\tne have which Christian went with his fellow 
rphfck^^S Hopeful, when they were taken by 
Giant Despair. Q^^j^^ Despair and put into Doubting 
Castle, they sat down, and consulted what was 
best to be done : to wit, now they were so strong-, 
and had got such a man as Mr. Great-Heart for 
their conductor, whether they had not best to 
make an attempt upon the giant, demolish his 
castle, and if there were any pilgrims in it, to set 
them at hberty before they went any further. So 
one said one thing, and another said the contrary. 
One questioned if it was lawful to go upon uncon- 
secrated ground; another said they might, pro- 
Tided their end was good; but Mr. Great-Heart 
said, Though that assertion offered last cannot be 
universally true, yet I have a commandment to 
resist sin, to overcome evil, to fight the good fight 
of faith : and I pray, with whom should I fight 
this good fight, if not with Giant Despair ? I will 
therefore attempt the taking away of his life, and 



448 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

the demolisliing of Doubting Castle. Then said 
lie, Who will go with me ? Then said old Honest, 
I will. And so will we too, said Christiana's four 
sons, Matthew, Samuel, Joseph, and James ; for 
thej were young men and strong. 1 John 2 : 13, 
14. So they left the women in the road, and with 
them Mr. Feeble-mind, and Mr. Keady-to-halt 
with his crutches, to be their guard until they 
came back ; for in that place the Giant Despair 
dwelt so near, they keeping in the road, a little 
child might lead them. Isa. 11 : 6. 

So Mr. Great-Heart, old Honest, and the four 
young men, went to go up to Doubting Castle, to 
look for Giant Despair. When they came at tho 
castle gate, they knocked for entrance with an un- 
usual noise. At that the old giant comes to the 
gate, and DiJBfidence his wife follows. Then said 
lie. Who and what is he that is so hardy as after 
this manner to molest the Giant Despair? Mr. 
Great-Heart rei)lied, It is I, Great-Heart, one of 
the King of the celestial country's conductors of 
pilgrims to their place ; and I demand of thee that 
thou open thy gates for my entrance : prepare 
thyself also to fight, for I am come to take away 
thy head, and to demolish Doubting Castle. 

Now Giant Despair, because he was a giant, 
thought no man could overcome him : and again 
thought he. Since heretofore I have Despair has 

^ ' Tin overcome an- 

made a conquest of angels, shall geis. 



GIANT DESPAIR SLAIN. 449 

Great-Heart make me afraid ? So lie harnessed 
himself, and went out. He had a cap of steel upon 
his head, a breastplate of fire girded to him, and 
he came out in iron shoes, with a great club in his 
hand. Then these six men made up to him, and 
beset him behind and before : also, vfhen Diffi- 
dence the giantess came up to help him, old Mr. 
Honest cut her down at one blow. Then they 
fought for then' Hves, and Giant Despair was 
Despair is brouglit dowu to the ground, but was 
loath to die. ^.g^,y Iq^^]^ ^q ^|-g^ jjg struggled hard, 

and had, as they say, as many lives as a cat ; but 
Great-Heart was his death, for he left him not 
till he had severed his head from his shoulders. 
Then they fell to demolishing Doubting Castle, 
Doubting Gas- ^^^ that, you know, might with ease 
tie demolished. ^^ ^^^^^^ ^^^^^ q^^^^ Despair was dead. 

They were seven days in destroying of that ; and 
in it of pilgrims they found one Mr. Despondency, 
almost starved to death, and one Much-afraid 
his daughter : these two they saved ahve. But it 
would have made you wonder to have seen the 
dead bodies that lay here and there in the castle 
yard, and how full of dead men's bones the dun- 
geon was. 

"When Mr. Great-Heart and his companions had 
performed this exploit, they took Mr. Despond- 
ency and his daughter Much-afraid into their pro- 
tection ; for they were honest people, though they 

rU. Prog. 29 



450 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

were prisoners in Doubting Castle to that tjTsnit 
Giant Despair. They therefore, I say, took with 
them the head of the giant, for his body they had 
buried under a heap of stones, and down to the 
road and to their companions they came, and 
showed them what they had done. Now, when 
Feeble-mind and Ready-to-halt saw that it was 
the head of Giant Despair indeed, they were very 
jocund and merry. Now Christiana, if need was, 
could play upon the viol, and her Theyhavo 

T T , z.^ ., , . music aud 

daughter Mercy upon the lute : so, dancing for joy. 
since they were so merry disj)osed, she played 
them a lesson, and Eeady-to halt would dance. 
So he took Despondency's daughter Much-afraid 
by the hand, and to dancing they went in the 
road. True, he could not dance .without one 
crutch in his hand, but I promise you he footed 
it well : also the girl was to be commended, for 
she answered the music handsomely. 

As for Mr. Despondency, the music was not so 
much to him ; he was for feeding, rather than 
dancing, for that he was almost starved. So Chris- 
tiana gave him some of her bottle of spirits for 
present relief, and then prepared him something 
to eat ; and in a little time the old gentleman 
came to himself, and began to be finely revived. 

Now I saw in my dream, when all these things 
were finished, Mr. Great-Heart took the head of 
Giant Despair, and set it upon a pole by the high- 



DELECTABLE MOUNTAINS. 451 

way-side, right over against the pillar that Chris- 
tian erected for a caution to j)ilgrims that came 
after, to take heed of entering into his grounds. 
Then he writ under it upon a marble stone 
these verses following : 

"Tins is the liead of him whose name only, 
In former times, did pilgi-ims terrify. 
His castle 's down, and Diffidence his wife 
Brave Mr. Great-Heart has bereft of hfe. 
Despondency, his daughter Much-afraid, 
Great-Heart for them also the man has played. 
Who hereof doubts, if he '11 but cast his eye 
Up hither, may his scruples satisfy. 
This head also, when doubting cripples dance, 
Doth show from fears they have deliverance." 

When these men had thus bravely showed 
themselves against Doubting Castle, and had slain 
Giant Despair, they went forward, and went on 
till they came to the Delectable mountains, where 
Christian and Hopeful refi'eshed themselves with 
the varieties of the place. They also acquainted 
themselves with the shepherds there, who wel- 
comed them, as they had done Christian before, 
unto the Delectable mountains. 

Now the shepherds seeing so great a train fol- 
low Mr. Great-Heart, for with him they were well 
acquainted, they said unto him. Good sir, you 
have got a goodly company here ; pray where did 
you find all these ? 



452 PILGRIM'S PEOGRESS. 

Then Mr. Great-Heart replied, 

"First, here is Christiana and her train, 
Her sons, and her sons' wives, who, like the wain, 
Keep by the pole, and do by compass steer 
From sin to grace, else they had not been here. 
Next here 's old Honest come on pilgrimage, 
Eeady-to-halt too, who I dare engage 
True-hearted is, and so is Feeble-mind, 
Who willing was not to be left behind. 
Despondency, good man, is coming after, 
And so also is Much-afraid, his daughter. 
May we have entertainment here, or must 
We further go ? Let 's Imow whereon to trust." 

Then said the shepherds, This is a comfortable 
company. Yon are welcome to us ; -n^^^ij, gn^gj., 
for we have for the feeble, as well as tammeut. 
for the strong. Our Prince has an eye to what is 
done to the least of these ; therefore infirmity 
must not be a block to our entertainment. Matt. 
25 : 40. So they had them to the palace-door, 
and then said unto them, Come in, Mr. Feeble- 
mind ; come in, Mr. Keady-to-halt ; come in, Mr. 
Despondency, and Mrs. Much-afraid his daugh- 
ter. These, Mr. Great-Heart, said the shepherds 
to the guide, we call in by name, for that they are 
most subject to draw back ; but as for you, and 
the rest that are strong, we leave you to your 
wonted liberty. Then said Mr. Great-Heart, This 
day I see that grace doth shine in your faces, and 
that you are my Lord's shepherds indeed ; for 



MOUNT MARVEL. 453 

that you have not pushed these diseased neither 
A description with side uoi' shoulder, but have rath- 
herds. ^ er strewed their way into the palace 
with flowers, as you should. Ezek. 34 : 21. 

So the feeble and weak went in, and Mr. Great- 
Heart and the rest did follov/. When they were 
also set down, the shepherds said to those of the 
weaker sort, What is it that you would have ? for, 
said they, all things must be managed here to the 
supporting of the weak, as well as to the warning 
of the unruly. So they made them a feast of 
things easy of digestion, and that were pleasant 
to the palate and nourishing ; the which when 
they had received, they went to their rest, each 
one respectively unto his proper place. 

When morning was come, because the moun- 
tains were high and the day clear, and because it 
was the custom of the shepherds to show the pil- 
grims before their departure some rarities, there- 
fore, after they v/ere ready, and had refreshed 
themselves, the shepherds took them out into the 
fields, and showed them first what they had 
shown to Christian before. 

Then they had them to some new places. The 
Mount Marvel, first was mouut Marvcl, where they 
looked, and beheld a man at a distance that tum- 
bled the hills about with words. Then they asked 
the shepherds what that should mean. So they 
told them, that that man was the son of one Mr. 



454 PILGEIM'S PKOGKESS. 

Great-grace, of wliom you read in tlie first part 
of the records of tlie Pilgrim's Progress ; and he 
is set there to teach pilgrims how to believe down, 
or to tumble out of their ways, what difficulties 
they should meet with, by faith. Mark 11 : 23, 
24. Then said Mr. Great-Heart, I know him ; he 
is a man above many. 

Then they had them to another place, called 
mount Innocence. And there they Mount inno- 
saw a man clothed all in white ; and ^®^^^* 
two men, Prejudice and Ill-will, continually cast- 
ing dirt upon him. Now behold, the dirt, whatso- 
ever they cast at him, would in a little time fall 
off again, and his garment would look as clear as 
if no dirt had been cast thereat. Then said the 
pilgrims, "What means this? The shepherds an- 
swered. This man is named Godly-man, and this 
garment is to show the innocency of his life. Now 
those that throw dirt at him are such as hate his 
well-doing ; but, as you see the dirt will not stick 
upon his clothes, so it shall be with him that liv- 
eth innocently in the world. Whoever they be that 
would make such men dirty, they labor all in 
vain ; for God, by that a little time is spent, will 
cause that their innocence shall break forth as 
the light, and their righteousness as the noonday. 

Then they took them, and had them to mount 
Charity, where they showed them a Mount charity. 
man that had a bundle of cloth lying before him. 



BY-WAY TO HELL. 455 

out of which he cut coats and garments for the 
poor that stood about him ; yet his bundle or roll 
of cloth was never the less. Then said they, 
AYliat should this be ? This is, said the shepherds, 
to show you that he who has a heart to give of 
his labor to the poor, shall never want where- 
withal. He that watereth shall be watered him- 
self. And the cake that the widow gave to the 
prophet, did not cause that she had the less in 
her barrel. ^ 

They had them also to the place where they 

The work of saw oue Fool and one Want-wit wash- 
one Fool and . ._ ^ . . -ji • i i- j. 

one Want-wit. mg an Ethiopian, witn intention to 
make him white ; but the more they washed him 
the blacker he was. Then they asked the shep- 
herds what that should mean. So they told them, 
saying, Thus it is with the vile person ; all means 
used to get such a one a good name, shall in con- 
clusion tend but to make him more abominable. 
Thus it was with the Pharisees ; and so it shall 
be with all hypocrites. 

Then said Mercy, the wife of Matthew, to Chris- 
Mercy has a tiana her mother. Mother, I would, 
hole in the hill, if it might be, scc the hole in the hill, 
or that commonly called the By-way to hell. So 
her mother broke her mind to the shepherds. 
Then they went to the door ; it was on the side of 
a hill ; and they opened it, and bid Mercy hearken 
a while. So she hearkened, and heard one saying. 



456 PILGEIM'S PROGBESS. 

Cursed be my father for holding of my feet back 
from the way of peace and life. Another said, 
Oh that I had been torn in pieces before I had, to 
save my life, lost my soul ! And another said, If I 
were to live again, how would I deny myself, 
rather than come to this place ! Then there was 
as if the very earth groaned and quaked under the 
feet of this young woman for fear ; so she looked 
Yfhite, and came trembling away, saying. Blessed 
be he and she that is delivered from this place! 

Now when the shepherds had shown them ail 
these things, then they had them back to tho 
palace, and entertained them with what the house 
would afford. But Mercy, being a j^oung and 
married woman, longed for something Mercy long- 
that she saw there, but was ashamed what. 
to ask. Her mother-in-law then asked her what 
she ailed, for she looked as one not well. Then 
said Mercy, There is a looking-glass hangs up in 
the dining-room, off which I cannot take my mind; 
if therefore I have it not, I think I shall miscarry. 
Then said her mother, I will mention thy wants 
to the shepherds, and they will not deny it thee. 
But she said, I am ashamed that these men should 
know that I longed. Nay, my daughter, said she, 
it is no shame, but a virtue, to long for such a 
thing as that. So Mercy said, Then, mother, if 
you please, ask the shepherds if they are willing 
to sell it, 



THE ^Y01^!DERFUL. 457 

Now the glass was one of a tlioiisand. It would 
It ^vas the pi'esent a man, one way, with his own 
Tvordof God. features exactly ; and turn it but an- 
other way, and it would show one the very face 
and simihtude of the Prince of pilgrims himself. 
Yes, I have talked with them that can tell, and 
they have said that they have seen the very crown 
of thorns upon his head by looking in that glass ; 
they have therein also seen the holes in his hands, 
his feet, and his side. Yea, such an excellency is 
there in this glass, that it wilt show him to one 
where they have a mind to see him, whether living 
or dead ; whether in earth, or in heaven ; whether 
in a state of humiliation, or in his exaltation ; 
whether coming to suffer, or coming to reign. 
James 1 : 23 ; 1 Cor. 13 : 12 ; 2 Cor. 3 : 18. 

Christiana therefore went to the shepherds 
apart — now the names of the shepherds were 
Knowledge, Experience, "Watchful, and Sincere — 
and said unto them. There is one of my daughters, 
a breedmg woman, that I think doth long for 
something that she hath seen in this house ; and 
she thinks that she shall miscarry if she should 
by you be denied. 

ExPERiHxcE. Call her, call her, she shall as- 
suredly have what we can help her to. So they 
called her, and said to her, Mercy, what is that 
She doth not thing thou would'st have ? Then she 
iiig. '^ blushed, and said. The great glass that 



458 PILGRIM'S PROGEESS. 

hangs up in tlie dining-room. So Sincere ran and 
fetched it, and with a joyful consent it was given 
her. Then she bowed her head, and gave thanks, 
and said. By this I know that I have obtained 
favor in your eyes. 

They also gave to the other young women such 
things as they desired, and to their husbands 
great commendations, for that they had joined 
with Mr. Great-Heart in the slaying of Giant De- 
spair, and the demolishing of Doubting Castle. 

About Christiana's neck the shepherds put a 
bracelet, and so did they about the uowtheshep- 

herds adoru the 

necks of her four daughters ; also they pugrims. 
put ear-rings in their ears, and jewels on their 
foreheads. 

"When they were minded to go hence, they let 
them go in peace, but gave not to them those cer- 
tain cautions which before were given to Christian 
and his companion. The reason was, for that 
these had Great-Heart to be their guide, who was 
one that was well acquainted with things, and so 
could give them their cautions more seasonably, 
to wit, even when the danger was nigh the ap- 
proaching. Wliat cautions Christian and his 
companion had received of the shepherds, they 
had also lost by that the time was come that they 
had need to put them in practice. Wherefore, 
here was the advantage that this company had 
over the other. 



A PILGBIM SONG. 459 

From thence tliey went on singing, and they 
said, 

'Behold how fitly are the stages set 

For their rehef that pilgrims are become, 
And how they us receive without one let, 

That make the other life our mark and home ! 

What novelties they have to us they give, 

That we, though pilgrims, joyful lives may live; 

They do upon us too such things bestow, 
That show we pilgrims are, where'er we go." 



460 PILGRIM'S PE0GEES3. 



THE EIGHTH STAGE. 

When they were gone from tlie shepherds, they 
quickly came to the place where Christian met 
with one Turn-away that dwelt in the town of 
Apostasy. Wherefore of him Mr. Great-Heart 
their guide did now put them in mind, saying, 
This is the place where Christian met with one 
Turn-away, who carried with him the character 
of his rebellion at his back. And this I have to 
say concerning this man : he would hearken to 
no counsel ; but once a falling, persuasion could 
not stop him. When he came to the place where 
the cross and sepulchre were, he did How one Turn- 
meet with one that bid him look iiis apostasy! 
there ; but he gnashed with his teeth, and stamp- 
ed, and said he was resolved to go back to his 
own town. Before he came to the gate, he met 
with Evangelist, who offered to lay hands on him, 
to turn him into the way again ; but this Turn- 
away resisted him, and having done much despite 
unto him, he got away over the wall, and so es- 
caped his hand. 

Then they went on ; and just at the place where 
Little-Faith formerly was robbed, there stood a 
man with his 'sword drawn, and his face all over 
with blood. Then said Mr. Great-Heart, Who 



VALIANT-FOR-TEUTH. 461 

art tliou? The man made answer, sapng, I am 

one wliose name is Valiant-for-trutli. I am a 

I)ilgrim, and am going to the celestial city. Now, 

One Valiant- as I was in. mv way, there w^ere three 

for-tnith beset j.r. , t t ^ . t -, 

with thieves, men that did beset me, and propound- 
ed unto me these three things : 1. Whether I 
would become one of them ; 2. Or go back from 
whence I came ; 3. Or die upon the place. Prov. 
1 : 11-14. To the first I answered, I had been a 
true man for a long season, and therefore it could 
not be expected that I should now cast in my lot 
with thieves. Then they demanded what I would 
say to the second. So I told them, the place 
from whence I came, had I not found incommod- 
ity there, I had not forsaken it at all ; but find- 
ing it altogether unsuitable to me, and very un- 
profitable for me, I forsook it for this way. Then 
they asked me what I said to the third. And I 
told them my life cost far more dear than that 
I should lightly give it away. Besides, jou have 
nothing to do thus to put things to my choice ; 
wherefore at your peril be it, if jou meddle. 
Then these three, to wit. Wild-head, Inconsid- 
erate, and Pragmatic, drew upon me, and I also 
drew upon them. So we fell to it, one against 
three, for the space of above three hours. They 
have left upon me, as you see, some of the marks 
of their valor, and have also carried away with 
them some of mine. They are but just now 



462 PILGBIM'S PBOGEESS. 

gone : I suppose they might, as the saying is, 
hear your horse dash, and so they betook them- 
selves to flight. 

Great. But here was great odds, three against 
one. 

Valiant. 'T is true ; but little or more are 
nothing to him that has the truth on his side : 
"Though a host should encamp against me/' 
said one, " my heart shall not fear : though war 
should rise against me, in this will I be confi- 
dent," etc. Psa. 27:3. Besides, said he, I have 
read in some records, that one man has fought 
an army : and how many did Samson slay with 
the jawbone of an ass! 

Great. Then said the guide, Why did you not 
cry out, that some might have come in for your 
succor ? 

Valiant. So I did to my King, who I knew 
could hear me, and afford invisible help, and that 
was sufficient for me. 

Great. Then said Great-Heart to Mr. Valiant- 
f or-truth. Thou hast worthily behaved thyself ; let 
me see thy sword. So he showed it him. 

When he had taken it in his hand, and looked 
thereon a while, he said, Ha, it is a right Jerusa- 
lem blade. 

Valiant. It is so. Let a man have one of these 
blades, with a hand to wield it and skill to use 
it, and he may venture upon an angel with it. He 



YALIANT-FOK-TRUTH. 4G3 

need not fear its liolding, if tie can but tell how to 
lay on. Its edge will never blunt. It will cut 
flesh and bones, and soul and spirit, and aU. 
Heb. 4 : 12. 

Gbeat. But you fought a great while ; I won- 
der yoii was not weary. 

Yaliant. I fought till my sword did cleave to 

The ^ord. my hand ; and then they were joined 

The faith. together as if a sword grew out of my 

Blood. arm ; and when the blood ran through 

my fingers then I fought with most courage. 

Geeat. Thou hast done well ; thou hast resist- 
ed unto blood, stri\dng against sin. Thou shalt 
abide by us, come in, and go out with us ; for we 
are thy companions. Then they took him and 
washed his wounds, and gave him of what they 
had, to refresh him : and so they went on together. 

Now as they went on, because Mr. Great-Heart 
was delighted in him, for he loved one greatly 
that he found to be a man of his hands, and be- 
cause there were in company those that were 
feeble and w^k, therefore he questioned with 
him about many things ; as, first, what country- 
man he was. 

Yaliant. I am of Dark-land ; for there was I 
born, and there my father and mother are still. 

Gek\t. Dark-land, said the guide ; doth not 
that lie on the same coast with the city of De- 
struction? 



464: PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

Yaliant. Yes, it dotli. Now that whicli caused 
me to come on pilOTimage was this : How Mr. vai- 

nr rn n • iant came to go 

we had one Mr. Tell-true come into on pUgrimage. 
our parts, and he told it about what Christian had 
done, that went from the city of Destruction; 
namely, how he had forsaken his wife and chil- 
dren, and had betaken himseK to a pilgrim's life. 
It was also confidently reported, how he had 
killed a serpent that did come out to resist him 
in his journey ; and how he got through to whith- 
er he intended. It was also told what welcome he 
had at all his Lord's lodgings, especially when he 
came to the gates of the celestial city ; for there, 
said the man, he was received with sound of 
trumpet by a company of shining ones. He told 
also how all the bells in the city did ring for joy 
at his reception, and what golden garments he 
was clothed with ; with many other things that 
now I shall forbear to relate. In a word, that 
man so told the story of Christian and his trav- 
els, that my heart fell into a burning haste to be 
gone after him ; nor could father or mother stay 
me. So I got from them, and am come thus far 
on my way. 

Great. You came in at the gate, did you not ? 

Yaliant. Yes, yes ; for the same man also told 
us, that all would be nothing if we He begins right. 
did not begin to enter this way at the gate. 

Great. Look you, said the guide to Christiana, 



VALIANT-FOR-TRUTH. 465 

Christian's the pilgrimage of your husband, and 
name famous. ^^^^ -^^ ^^^ ^^^^^^ thereby, is Spread 

abroad far and near. • 

Yallint. Why, is this Christian's wife ? 

Geeat. Yes, that it is ; and these also are his 
four sons. 
I Valiant. What, and going on pilgi'image too ? 

Gek^t. Yes, verily, they are following after. 

Valiant. It glads me at the heart. Good man, 

He is much how joyful will he be when he shall 

chrisTiin's ^^^ see them that would not go with him, 

"*^^^' yet to enter after him in at the gates 

into the celestial city. 

Great. Without doubt it will be a comfort to 
him ; for, next to the joy of seeing himself there, 
it will be a joy to meet there his wife and chil- 
dren. 

Vall^nt. But now you are upon that, j)ray let 
me hear your opinion about it. Some make a 
question whether we shall know one another 
when we are there. 

Geeat. Do you think they shall know them- 
selves then, or that they shall rejoice to see them- 
selves in that bliss ? And if they think they shall 
know and do this, why not know others, and re- 
joice in their welfare also? Again, since rela- 
tions are our second self, though that state 
will be dissolved there, yet why may it not 
■ be rationally .concluded that we shall bo more 

Til. riog. 30 



466 riLGRIM'S PROGEESS. 

glad to see tliem there, than to see they are 
wanting? 

VALiAifr. Well, I perceive whereabouts you are 
as to this. Have you any more things to ask me 
about my beginning to come on pilgrimage ? 

Great. Yes ; were * your father and . mother 
•willing that you should become a pilgrim ? 

Yaliant. Oh no ; they used all means imagin- 
able to persuade me to stay at home. 

Great. Why, what could they say against it? 

Yaliant. They said it was an idle hfe ; and if 
I myself were not inclined to sloth and The great stum- 

/ blmg-blocks 

laziness, I would never countenance a that by Ms 

. , ,... friends were 

pilgrim S condition. laid in lua way. 

Great. And what did they say else ? 

Yaliant. Why, they told me that it was a 
dangerous way ; yea, the most dangerous way in 
the world, said they, is that which the pilgrims go. 

Great. Did they shov7 you wherein this way is 
so dangerous? 

Yaliant. Yes ; and that in many particulars. 

Great. Name some of them. 

Yaliant. They told me of the slough of De- 
spond, where Christian was well-nigh The first stum- 
smothered. They told me, that there ^li^g-biock. 
were archers standing ready in Beelzebub castle 
to shoot them who should knock at the Wicket 
gate for entrance. They told me also of the wood 
and dark mountains; of the hill Difficulty; of 



DANGERS OF THE WAY. 467 

the lions ; and also of the three giants, Bloody- 
man, Maul, and Slay-good. They said, more- 
over, that there was a foul fiend haunted the 
valley of Humiliation; and that Christian was 
by him almost bereft of life. Besides, said they, 
you must go over the valley of the Shadow of 
Death, where the hobgoblins are, where the light 
is darkness, where the way is full of snares, pits, 
traps, and gins. They told me also of giant 
Despair, of Doubting Castle, and of the ruin that 
the pilgrims met with here. Further, they said 
I must go over the Enchanted ground, which 
was dangerous ; and that after all this I should 
find a river, over which there was no bridge ; and 
that that river did lie betwixt me and the celestial 
country. 

Gekit. And was this all ? 

Valiant. No ; they also told me that this way 
The second, was full of dcceivcrs, and of persons 
that lay in wait there to turn good men out of the 
path. 

Great. But how did they make that out? 

Valiant. They told me that Mr. Worldly Wise- 
man did lie there in wait to deceive. They said 
also, that there were Formality and Hypocrisy 
continually on the road. They said also, that 
By-ends, Talkative, or Demas, would go near to 
gather me up ; that the Flatterer would catch 
me in his net ; or that, with green-headed Igno- 



468 PILGEIM'S PROGRESS. 

ranee, I would presume to go on to the gate, from 
whence he was sent back to the hole that was in 
the side of the hill, and made to go the by-way 
to hell. 

Great. I promise you this was enough to dis- 
courage you ; but did they make an end here ? 

Valiant. No, stay. They told me also of many 
that had tried that way of old, and that The third. 
had gone a great way therein, to see if they could 
find something of the glory there that so many 
had so much talked of from time to time ; and 
how they came back again, and befooled them- 
selves for setting a foot out of doors in that path, 
to the satisfaction of all the country. And they 
named several that did so, as Obstinate and 
Pliable, Mistrust and Timorous, Turn-away and 
old Atheist, with several more ; who, they said, 
had some of them gone far to see what they could 
find, but not one of them had found so much ad- 
vantage by going as amounted to the weight of 
a feather. 

Great. Said they any thing more to discourage 
you? 

Valiant. Yes. They told me of one Mr. Fear- 
ing, who was a pilgrim, and how he The fourth. 
found his way so solitary that he never had a 
comfortable hour therein ; also, that Mr. De- 
spondency had like to have been starved therein : 
yea, and also — which I had almost forgot — that 



VICTORY BY FAITH. 469 

Christian liimseK, about whom there had been 
such a noise, after all his adventures for a celes- 
tial crown, was certainly di'owned in -the Black 
river, and never went a foot further ; however it 
was smothered up. 

Great. And did none of these things discour- 
age you ? 

Valiant. No ; they seemed but as so many 
nothings to me. 

Grk\t. How came that about? 
How he got Valiant. Why, I still beheved what 
Btumbiing-^^"'' Mr. Tell-true had said ; and that car- 
biocks. y[q^ jj^q beyond them all. 

Gek\t. Then this was your victory, even your 
faith. 

Valiant. It was so. I believed, and therefore 
came out, got into the way, fought all that set 
themselves against me, and, by believing, am 
come to this place. 

Who would trne valor see, 

Let him come hither ; 
One here vnll constant be, 

Come -v^-ind, come weather • 
There 's no discouragement 
Shall make him once relent , 
His first avowed intent 
To bfe a pilgrim. 

Whoso beset him round 

With dismal stories, 
Do but themselves confound ; 

His strength the more is. 



470 PILGEIM'S PROGRESS. 

No lion can liim friglit, 
He '11 with a giant figlit, 
But lie will have a right 
To be a pilgrim. 

Hobgoblin nor foul fiend 

Can daunt his spirit ; 
He knows he at the end 

Shall life inherit. 
Then fancies fly away, 
He '11 not fear what men say ; 
He '11 labor night and day 
To be a pilgrim. 

By this time tliey were got to the Enclianted 
gi'ound, where the air naturally tended to make 
one drowsy. And that place was all grown over 
with briers and thorns, excepting here and there, 
where was an enchanted arbor, upon which if a 
man sits, or in which if a man sleeps, it is a ques- 
tion, some say, whether ever he shall rise or wake 
again in this world. Over this forest therefore 
they went, both one and another, and Mr. Great- 
Heart went before, for that he was the guide ; 
and Mr. YaHant-for-truth came behind, being 
tear-guard, for fear lest peradventure some fiend, 
or dragon, or giant, or thief, should fall upon 
their rear, and so do mischief. They went on here, 
each man with his sword drawn in his hand ; for 
they knew it was a dangerous place. Also they 
cheered up one another as* well as they could. 
iTeeble-mind Mr. Great-Heart commanded should 



ENCHANTED GROUND. 471 

come up after him ; and Mr. Despondency was 
under tlie eye of Mr. Valiant. 

Now they had not gone far, but a great mist 
and darkness fell upon them all ; so that they 
could scarce, for a great while, the one see the 
other. Wherefore they were forced, for some 
time, to feel one for another by words ; for they 
walked not by sight. But any one must "think 
that here was but sorry going for the best of 
them aU ; but how much worse for the women 
and children, who both of feet and heart were 
but tender. Yet so it was, that through the en- 
couraging words of him that led in the fi'ont, and 
of him that brought them up behind, they made 
a pretty good shift to wag along. 

The way also here was very wearisome, through 
dirt and slabbiness. Nor was there, on all this 
ground, so much as one inn or victualling-house 
wherein to refresh the feebler sort. Here there- 
fore was grunting and puffing and sighing, while 
one tumbleth over a bush, another sticks fast in 
the dirt, and the children, some of them, lost their 
shoes in the mire ; while one cries out, I am down ; 
, and another, Ho, where are you? and a third, 
' The bushes have got such fast hold on me, I 
think I cannot get away from them. 

Then they came at an arbor, warm, and i^romis- 

An arbor on ing much refi'eshment to the pilgrims ; 

froi''''''''^ for it was finely wrought above-head, 



4:72 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

beautified with greens, furnislied witli benclies 
and settles. It also had in it a soft couch, whercr 
on the weary might lean. This you must think, 
all things considered, was tempting ; for the pil- 
grims already began to be foiled with the badness 
of the way : but there was not one of them that 
made so much as a motion to stop there. Yea, 
for aught I could perceive, they continually gave 
so good heed to the advice of their guide, and ho 
did so faithfully tell them of dangers, and of the 
nature of the dangers when they were at them, 
that usually, when they were nearest to them 
they did most pluck up their spirits, and hearten 
one another to deny the flesh. This The name of 
arbor was called The Slothful's Friend, *^^ ^'^^^• 
and was made on purpose to allure, if it might 
be, some of the pilgrims there to take up their 
rest when weary. 

I saw then in my dream, that they went on in 
this their solitary ground, till they Thewaydiffl- 
came to a place at which a man is apt ^^^ *° ^^'^• 
to lose his way. Now though when it was light 
their guide could well enough tell how to miss 
those ways that led wrong, yet in the dark ho 
was put to a stand. But he had in The guide has 
his pocket a map of all ways leading feSfng^^to^^or 
to or from the celestial city ; where- ^^^^^ *^^ ^">'- 
fore he struck a light — for he never goes without 
his tinder-box also — and takes a view of his book 



HEEDLESS AND TOO-BOLD. 473 

or map, which bids him to be careful in that 
place to turn to the right hand. And had he not 
been careful here to look in his map, they had all, 
in j)robability, been smothered in the mud; for 
just a little before them, and that at the end of 
the cleanest way too, was a pit, none knows how 
deep, full of nothing but mud, there made on 
purpose to destroy the pilgrims in. 

Then thought I ^\dth myself. Who that goeth 

God's book, on pilgrimage but would have one of 
these maps about him, that he may look, when 
he is at a stand, which is the way he must 
take? 

Then they went on in this Enchanted ground. 

An arbor, and till they camc to wherc there was 
therein. another arbor, and it was built b}^ the 

highway-side. And in that arbor there lay two 
men, whose names were Heedless and Too-bold. 
These two went thus far on pilgrimage ; but here, 
being wearied with their journey, they sat down 
to rest themselves, and so fell fast asleep, "When 
the pilgrims saw them, they stood still, and shook 
their heads ; for they knew that the sleepers were 
in a pitiful case. Then they consulted v\^hat to 
do, whether to go on and leave them in their 
sleep, or to step to them and try to awake them; 
so they concluded to go to them and awake them, 
that is, if they could ; but with this caution, 
namely, to take heed that they themselves did 



474 PILGEIM'S PBOGEESS. 

not sit down nor embrace the offered benefit of 
tliat arbor. 

So they went in, and spoke to the men, and 
called each by his name, for the guide. The pilgrims 
it seems, did know them ; but there tiiem. 
was no voice nor answer. Then the guide did 
shake them, and do what he could to disturb 
them. Then said one of them, I will i^ay you 
when I take my money. At which the guide 
shook his head. I will fight so long as I can hold 
my sword in my hand, said the other. At that 
one of the children laughed. 

Then said Christiana, What is the meaning of 
this? The guide said. They talk in their sleep. 
If you strike them, beat them, or what Their endeav- 
ever else you do to them, they ^iU °^ ^^ ^™"^^''- 
answer you after this fashion ; or as one of them 
said in old time, when the waves of the sea did 
beat upon him, and he slept as one uj)on the mast 
of a ship, When I awake, I will seek it yet again. 
Prov. 23 : 34, 35. You know, when men talk in 
their sleep, they say any thing ; but their words 
are not governed either by faith or reason. There 
is an incoherency in their words now, as there was 
before betwixt their going on pilgrimage and sit- 
ting down here. This then is the mischief of it : 
when heedless ones go on pilgrimage, 't is twenty 
to one but they are served thus. For this En- 
chanted ground is one of the last refuges that the 



ENCHANTED GROUND. 475 

enemy to pilgrims has ; wherefore it is, as 3-ou 
see, placed almost at the end of the way, and so 
it standeth against us with the more advantage. 
For when, thinks the enemy, will these fools be 
so desirous to sit down, as when they are weary ? 
and when so like to be weary, as when almost at 
their journey's end ? Therefore it is, I say, that 
the Enchanted ground is placed so nigh to the 
land Beulah, and so near the end of their race. 
Wherefore let pilgrims look to themselves, lest it 
happen to them as it has done to these, that, as you 
see, are fallen asleep, and none can awake them. 
Then the pilgrims desired with trembling to 
go forward; only they prayed their guide to strike 
a light, that they might go the rest of their way by 
the help of the light of a lantern. So he struck a 
light, and they went by the help of that through 
The li-^iit of ^^^ ^'®st of this Way, though the dark- 
tiie woi-dr j^egg ^j^s ^Qj,j great. 2 Peter 1 : 19. 

But the children began to be sorely weary, and 
The chudren they cricd out uuto Him that loveth 

cry for weari- ., . , , ii • 

ness. pilgrims to make their way more 

comfortable. So by that they had gone a little 
further, a wind arose and drove away the fog, so 
the air became more clear. Yet they were not 
off, by much, of the Enchanted ground ; only now 
they could see one another better, and the way 
wherein they should walk. 

Kow when they were almost at the end of this 



476 PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. 

ground, they perceived tliat a little before tliem 
was a solemn noise, as of one that was mucli con- 
cerned. So tliey went on, and looked before 
them ; and behold, they saw, as they standfast np- 
thought, a man upon his knees, with tTe^^^^^StS 
hands and eyes lifted up, and speak- ground, 
ing, as they thought, earnestly to one that was 
above. They drew nigh, but could not tell what 
he said; so they went softly till he had done. 
When he had done, he got up, and began to run 
towards the celestial city. Then Mr. Great-Heart 
called after him, saying, Soho, friend, let us have 
your company, if you go, as I supj)Ose you do, to 
the celestial city. So the man stopped, and they 
came up to him. But as soon as Mr. Honest saw 
him, he said, I know this man. Then said Mr. 
Valiant-for-truth, Prithee, who is it? It is one, 
said he, that comes from whereabout I dwelt. 
His name is Standfast ; he is certain- r^^g gjo^y of 
ly a right good ]3ilgrim. standfast. 

So they came up to one another ; and present- 
ly Standfast said to old Honest, Ho, father Hon- 
est, are you there ? Aye, said he, that Talk betwixt 

" him and Mr. 

I am, as sure as you are there. Kight Honest. 
glad am I, said Mr. Standfast, that I have found 
you on this road. And as glad am I, said the 
other, that I espied you on your knees. Then 
IVIr. Standfast blushed, and said. But why, did 
you see me ? Yes, that I did, quoth the other, 



MR. STANDFAST. 477 

and with my heart was glad at the sight. AVhy, 
what did you think ? said Standfast. Think, said 
old Honest ; what could I think? I thought we 
had an honest man upon the road, and therefore 
should have his company by and by. If you 
thought not amiss, said Standfast, how happy am 
I ! But if I be not as I should, 't is I alone must 
bear it. That is true, said the other ; but your 
fear doth further confirm me that things are 
right betwixt the Prince of pilgrims and your 
soul. For he saith, "Blessed is the man that 
feareth always." Prov. 28 : 14. 

Valiant. Well, but, brother, I pray thee tell us 
what was it that was the cause of thy being upon 

Tiiey found thy knecs even now : was it for that 
him at prayer. ^^^^ special mcrcy laid obligations 
upon thee, or how ? 

Stand. Why, we are, as you see, upon the En- 

what it was chauted ground ; and as I was coming 
£m upoi' Ms alo^g' I ^as musing with myself of 
knees. what a dangerous nature the road in 

this j)lace was, and how many that had come even 
thus far on pilgrimage had here been stopped and 
been destroyed. I thought also of the manner of 
the death ^ith which this place destroyeth men. 
Those that die here, die of no violent distemj)er : 
the death which such die is not grievous to 
them. For he that goeth away in a sleep, 
begins that jom-ney with desire and pleasure. 



478 PILGEIM'S PEOGEESS. 

Yea, such acquiesce iii tlie will of that dis- 
ease. 

Hon. Then Mr. Honest interrui)ting him, said. 
Did you see the two men asleep in the arbor ? 

Stand. Aye, aye, I saw Heedless and Too-bold 
there ; and for aught I know, there they will lie 
till they rot. Prov. 10 : 7. But lefme go on with 
my tale. As I was thus musing, as I said, there 
was one in very pleasant attire^ but old, who j)re- 
sented herself to me, and offered me three things, 
to wit, her body, her purse, and her bed. Now 
the truth is, I was both weary and sleepy. I am 
also as poor as an owlet, and that perhaps the 
witch knew. "Well, I repulsed her once and again, 
but she put by my repulses, and smiled. Then I 
began to be angry ; but she mattered that noth- 
ing at all. Then she made offers again, and said, 
if I would be ruled by her, she would make mo 
great and happy ; for said she, I am the mistress 
of the world, and men are made happy by me. 
Then I asked her name, and she told me it was 
Madam Bubble. This set me further Madam Bub- 

_ ble, or this vain 

from her ; but she still lollowed me world, 
with enticements. Then I betook me, as you 
saw, to my knees, and with hands liffed up, and 
cries, I prayed to Him that had said he would 
help. So, just as you came up, the gentlewoman 
went her way. Then I continued to give thanks 
for this my great deliverance ; for I verily beheve 



MADAM BUBBLE. 479 

she intended no good, but rather songht to make 
stop of me in my joiu'ney. 

Hon. Without doubt her designs were bad. 
But stay, now you talk of her, methinks I either 
have seen her, or have read some story of her. 

Stand. Perhaps you have done both. 

Hon. Madam Bubble ! Is she not a tall, come- 
ly dame, somewhat of a swarthy complexion? 

Stand. Right, you hit it : she is just such a one. 

Hon. Doth she not speak very smoothly, and 
give you a smile at the end of a sentence ? 

Stand. You fall right upon it again, for these 
are her very actions. 

Hon. Doth she not wear a great purse by her 
side, and is not her hand often in it, fingering her 
money, as if that was her heart's delight ? 

Stand. 'T is just so ; had she stood by all this 
while, you could not more amply have set her 
forth before me, nor have better described her 
features. 

Hon. Then he that drew her picture was a good 
limner, and he that wrote of her said true. 

Geeat. This woman is a witch, and it is by 
The world, virtue of her sorceries that this ground 
is enchanted. "WHioever doth lay his head down 
in her lap, had as good lay it down on that block 
over which the axe doth hang ; and whoever lay 
their eyes upon her beauty are counted the ene- 
mies of God. This is she that maintaineth in 



480 PILGRIM'S PBOGRESS. 

their si^lendor all those that are the enemies of 
l)ilgrims. James 4 : 4. Yea, this is she that hath 
bought off many a man from a pilgrim's life. She 
is a great gossij)er ; she is always, both she and 
her daughters, at one pilgrim's heels or another, 
now commending, and then preferring the excel- 
lencies of this life. She is a bold and impudent 
slut : she will talk with any man. She always 
laugheth poor pilgrims to scorn, but highly com- 
mends the rich. If there be one cunning to get 
money in a place, she will speak well of him from 
house to house. She loveth banqueting and 
feasting mainly well ; she is always at one full 
table or another. She has given it out in some 
places that she is a goddess, and therefore some 
do worship her. She has her time, and open 
l^laces of cheating ; and she will say and avow it, 
that none can show a good comparable to hers. 
She promiseth to dwell with children's children, 
if they will but love her and make much of her. 
She will cast out of her purse gold like dust in 
some places and to some persons. She loves to 
be sought after, sj)oken well of, and to lie in the 
bosoms of men. She is never weary of commend- 
ing her commodities, and she loves them most 
that think best of her. She will promise to some 
crowns and kingdoms, if they will but take her 
advice ; yet many hath she brought to the halter^ 
and ten thousand times more to heU. 



MADAM BUBBLE. , 481 

Staxp. Oil, said standfast, T.'liat a mercy is it 
that I did resist lier ; for wliither miglit she have 
drawn me I 

GaKiT, "\^Tiitlier? nay, none but God knows 
whither. But in general, to be sure, she would 
have drawn thee into many foolish and hurtful 
lusts, which di'own men in destruction and per- 
dition. 1 Tim. G : 9. 'T was she that set Absalom 
against his father, and Jeroboam against his mas- 
ter. 'T was she that persuaded Judas to sell his 
Lord ; and that prevailed with Demas to forsake 
the godly pilgrun's Hfe. None can t^ll of the 
mischief that she doth. She makes vaiiance be- 
twixt rulers and subjects, betwixt parents and 
children, betwixt neighbor and neighbor, betwixt 
fi man and his wife, betwixt a man and himself, 
betwixt the flesh and the spmt. '\^Tierefore, good 
Idr. Standfast, be as your name is, and when you 
have done all, stand. 

At this discourse there was among the jjilgTims 
a mixture of joy and trembling ; but at length 
they broke out and sung, 

"What danger is the pilgrim iii! 

How many are his foes ! 
How many waj^s tliere are to sin 

No living mortal laiows. 

Some in the ditch are spoiled, yea, can 

Lie tumbling in the mire ; 
Some, though they shun the frying-pan, 

Do lea^) into the fire. 

Til. Pros. 31 



4S2 riLGllIM'S PllOGLESS. 

After tins, I belicld until tliey were come into 
the land of Benlali, wliere the sun shinetli niglit 
and day. Here, because tliey were weary, tliey 
betook tliemselves a while to rest. And because 
this country was common for pilgrims, and be- 
cause the orchards and. vineyards that were here 
belonged to the King of the celestial country, 
therefore they were licensed to make bold with 
any of his things. Eut a little while soon refresh- 
ed them here ; for the bells did so ring, and the 
trumpets continually sound so melodiously, that 
they could not sleep, and yet they received as 
mucl\ refreshing as if they had sle^^t their sleep 
ever so soundly. Here also all the noise of them 
that walked the streets was. More pilgrims are 
come to town ! And another would answer, say- 
ing. And so many v/ent over the water, and were 
let in at the golden gates to-day! They would 
ciy again, There is now a legion of shining ones 
just come to town, by which Yve know that there 
?.re more pilgrims upon the road ; for here they 
come to wait for them, and to comfort them after 
all their sorrow. Then the j)ilgrims got up and 
walked to and fro. But how w^ere their ears now 
filled with heavenly noises, and their eyes de- 
lighted with celestial visions! In this land they 
heard nothing, saw nothing, felt nothing, smelt 
nothing, tasted nothing that was offensive to their 
stomach or mind ; only when they tasted of the 



LAND OF BEULAH. 483 

Death bitter Water of tliG river over wliicli tliey 
Bwfef ?f 'Se ^ere to go, tliey thought that it tasted 
Boiii. g^ httle bitterish to the j)alate ; but it 

proved sweeter when it was down. 

In this place there was a record kept of the 
names of them that had been pilgrims of old, and 
a history of all the famous acts that they had done. 

Death lias its ^^ ^^^ tiGve also much discoui*sed, how 
floSrs^^^iiie ^-^^ river to some has had its Sowings, 
the tide. ^ud what ebbings it has had w^hile 

others have gone overc It has been in a manner 
dry for some, while it has overflowed its banks 
for others. 

In this place the children of the town would go 
into the King's gardens, and gather nosegays for 
the j)ilgrims, and bring them to them with much 
affection. Here also grew camphire, with spike- 
nard and saffron, cpJamus and cinnamon, with all 
the trees of frankincense, myrrh, and aloes, with 
all chief spices. With these the pilgrims' cham- 
bers were perfumed while they stayed here ; and 
with these were their bodies anointed, to prepare 
them to go over the river, w^hen the time ax^point- 
ed was come. 

Kovv" while they lay there, and waited for the 
good hour, there was a noise in the town that 
there was a post come from the celestial city, 

A messenger with matter of OTcat importance to 

of death sent to rn • jl- xi -i- i! rn • x- 

chiistitma. oue Christiana, the wile ot Christian 



'13-1 riLGRIM'S PIIOGIIESS. 

tlie pilgrim. So inquiry was made for her, and 
the house was found out where she was. So the 
post presented her with a letter. The contents 
were, Hail, good woman ; I bring thee tidings that 
the Master calleth for thee, and ex- His message, 
pecteth that thou should' st stand in his presence 
in clothes of immortality within these ten days. 

When he had read this letter to her, he gave 
her therewith a sure token that he was a true 
messenger, and was come to bid her make haste 
to be gone. The token was, an arrow with a point 
sharpened with love let easily into her heart, 
which by degrees wrought so effectually with her, 
that at the time appointed she must be gone. 

When Christiana saw that her time was come, 
and that she was the first of this com- How welcome 

death is to them 

l^any that was to go over, she called that have noth- 
for Mr. Great-Heart her guide, and die. 
told him how matters w^ere. So he told her he 
was heartily glad of the news, and could have been 
glad had the post come for him. Then she bid 
him that he should give advice hov/ all Her speech to 
things should be prepared for her ^^^' °'^"-^'^- 
journey. So he told her, saying, Thus and thus 
it must be, and we that survive will accompany 
you to the river-side. 

Then she called for her children, and gave them 
her blessing, and told them that she rpo her chii- 
had read with comfort the mark that ^^^^- 



CHRISTIANA SUilMOXED. 485 

was set in tlieii' foreheads, and was glad to see 
them with her there, and that they had kept their 
garments so white. Lastly, she bequeathed to 
the poor that little she had, and commanded her 
sons and daughters to be ready against the mes- 
senger should come for them. 

"When she had spoken these words to her guide. 
To ]vir. Vair ^^^ ^^ ^®^' children, she called for Mr. 
iant-for-truth. Valiaut-for-truth, and said unto him. 
Sir, you have in all places showed yourself true- 
hearted ; be faithful unto death, and my King will 
give you a crown of life. Eev. 2 : 10. I would 
also entreat you to have an eye to my children ; 
and if at any time you see them faint, speak com- 
fortably to them. For my daughters, my sons' 
wives, they have been faithful, and a fulfilling of 
the promise upon them will be their end. But 
To Mr. standfast, she gave Mr. Standfast a ring. 

Then she called for old Mr. Honest, and said 
To old Honest, of him, "Beliold an Israelite indeed, in 
whom is no guile I" John 1 : 47. Then said ho, 
I wish you a fair day when you set out for mount 
Sion, and shall be glad to see that you go over 
the river dry-shod. But she answered, Como 
wet, come dr}^, I long to be gone ; for however 
the weather is in my journey, I shall have time 
enough when I come there to sit down and rest 
me and dry me. 

Then came in that good man Mr. Ecady-to- 



4oG riLGKIM'S TEOGEESS. 

lialt, to see lier. So slie said to liim, Mr. Ready- 
Thy travel hitherto has been with clif- *°-^^^'^- ' 
licnlty ; but that will make thy rest the sweeter. 
Watch, and be ready, for at an hour v/hen yo 
think not, the messenger may come. 

After him came Mr. Despondency and his 
dauoiiter Much-afraid, to whom she To Mr. do- 

. 1 1 1 n T spondency and 

said. You ought, with thankfulness, iiis daughter. 
for ever to remember your deliverance from the 
hands of Giant Desj^air, and out of Doubting 
Castle. The effect of that mercy is, that you are 
brought with safety hither. Be ye watchful, and 
cast away fear ; be sober, and hoj^e to the end. 

Then she said to Mr. Feeble-mind, Thou wast 
delivered from the mouth of Giant Slay-good, 
that thou mightest live in the light ToMr.reebie- 
of the living, and see thy King with ^^'^• 
comfort. Only I advise thee to repent of thine 
aptness to fear and doubt of his goodness, before 
he sends for thee ; lest thou should'st, when he 
comes, be forced to stand before him for that 
fault with blushing. 

Now the day drew on that Christiana must bo 
C'one. So the road was full of i^eople Her last day, 

" . -tT 1 1 *^tl manner ot 

to see her take her joiu'ney. J3ut be- departure, 
hold, all the banks beyond the river were full of 
horses and chariots, which were come down from 
alcove to accompany her to the city gate. So she 
came forth, and entered the river, with a beckon 



EEADY-TO-nALT. 487 

of farcv\^ell to tiiose that follo-^cd lier. The last 
words that she was heard to say were, I come, 
Lord, to be with thee and bless thee! So her 
children and friends returned to their place, for 
those that waited for Christiana had carried her 
out of their sight. So she went and called,' and 
entered in at the gate with all the ceremonies of 
joy that her husband Christian had entered with 
l^efore her. At her departui'e, the children wept. 
But Mr. Great-Heart and Mr. Valiant played upon 
the well-tuned cymbal and harp for joy. So all 
departed for their respective places. 
Mr. Eeady-to- In proccss of time there came a post 

halt sumuiou- , ,, , . ^ , . , 

ed. to the town agam, and ms busmess 

was with Mr. Heady-to-halt. So he inquired him 
out, and said, I am come from Him whom thou 
hast loved and followed, though upon crutches ; 
and my message is to tell thee, that he expects 
thee at his table to sup with him in his kingdom, 
the next day after Easter; wherefore prepare 
thyseK for this journey. Then he also gave him 
a token that he was a true messenger, saying, I 
have broken thy golden bowl, and loosed thy 
Gilver cord. Eccles. 12 : 6. 

After this, Mr. Eeady-to-halt called for his fel- 
low-pilgrims, and told them, saying, I am sent 
for, and God shall sui*ely visit you also. So he 
desired Mr. Valiant to make his. will. And bc- 
cansG ho had nothing to bequeath to them that 



483 PILGRIM'S rr.OGEESS. 

slioulcl survive liim but his crutclies, and liis 
good wishes, therefore thus he said. Promises. 
These crutches I bequeath to my son His wiu. 
that shall tread in my steps, with a hundred 
Trarm wishes that he may prove better than I 
have been. Then he thanked Mr. Great-Heart 
for his conduct and kindness, and so addressed 
liimself to his journey. "When he came to the 
brink of the river, he said, Now I shall have no 
more need of these crutches, since yonder are 
chariots and horses for me to ride on. The last 
words he was heard to say were, Wei- His last words, 
come hfe I So he went his way. 

After this, Mr. Feeble-mind had reebie-mind 
tidings broug-ht him that the post ^^^^"^<i- 
sounded his horn at his chamber-door. Then he 
came in, and told him, saying, I am come to tell 
thee that thy Master hath need of thee, and that 
in a very little time thou must behold his face in 
brightness. And take t]iis as a token of the truth 
of my message: "Those that look out of the 
windows shall be darkened." Eccles. 12 : 3. Then 
Mr. Feeble-mind called for his friends, and told 
them what errand had been brought unto him, 
and what token he had received of the truth of 
the message. Then he said, Since I have noth- 
ing to bequeath to any, to what pur- He makes m 
pose should I make a mil? As for ^^'^' 
my feeble mind, that I will leave behind me, foi 



DESPONDENCY SUMMONED. 489 

that I sliall have jio need of in the place whither 
I go, nor is it worth bestowing upon the poorest 
pilgrims : wherefore, when I am gone, I desire 
that yon, Mr. Valiant, would bury it in a dung- 
hill. This done, and the day being come on 
which he was to depart, he entered the river as 
His last words, the rest. His last words were, Hold 
out, faith and patience ! So he went over to the 
other side. 

When days had many of them passed away, 
iMr. Despond- Mr. DesiDondencv was sent for ; for a 

ency summon- ^ '' 

ed. post was come, and brought this mes- 

sage to him : Trembling man, these are to sum- 
mon thee to be ready with the King by the next 
Xord's day, to shout for joy for thy deliverance 
from all thy doubtings. And, said the messenger, 
that my message is true, talie this for a proof : so 
he gave him a/ grasshopper to be a burden unto 
him. Eccles. 12 : 5. 

Now Mr. Despondency's daughter, whose name 
His daughter ^^"^ Much-afraid, said, when she heard 
goes too. -^^hat was done, that she would go with 

her father. Then Mr. Despondency said to his 
friends. Myself and my daughter, you know what 
we have been, and how troublesomely we have 
behaved ourselves in every comjpany. jMy will 
Hiswiu. and my daughter's is, that our de- 
sponds and slavish fears be by no man ever re- 
ceived, from the day of our departui^e, for ever ; 



400 riLG RIM'S rPtOGRESS. 

for I know tliat after iiij death tliey will offer 
themselves to others. For, to be plain with you, 
they are ghosts which we entertained when we 
first began to be pilgrims, and could never shake 
them off after ; and they will walk about, and 
.seek entertainment of the 2^ilgrinis : but for our 
.sakes, shut the doors ux^on them. "When the 
time was come for them to depart, they went up 
to the brink of the river. The last words of Mr. 
Despondency were, Farewell, night ; His last words, 
w^elcome, day ! His daughter went through the 
river singing, but none could understand what 
she said. 

Then it came to pass a while after, that there 
was a post in the town that inquired for Mr. Hon- 
est. So he came to the house where jj^. Honest 
he was, and delivered to his hand these summoned, 
lines : Thou art commanded to be ready against 
this day sevennight, to present thyself before thy 
liord at his Father's house. And for a token that 
my message is true, "All the daughters of music 
shall be brought low." Eccles. 12 : 4. Then Mr. 
Honest called for his friends, and He makes no 
said unto them, I die, but shall make '^^^• 
no will. As for my honesty, it shall go with me ; 
let him that comes after be told of this. "When 
the day that he was to be gone was come, he ad- 
dressed himself to go over the river. Now the 
river at that time overflowed its banks in some 



YALIANT-FOn-TRUTII. 491 

Good-con- places ; but Mr. Honest, in liis lifc- 

Mr^Hones?over *i^®' ^^^ Spoken to 0316 Good-COH- 

the river. scieiice to meet liim there, tlie wliicli 

lie also did, and lent liim liis hand, and so help- 
ed him over. The last words of Mr. Honest were, 
Grace reigns ! So he left the world. 

After this it was noised abroad that Mr. Yahant- 
Mr. Valiant- for-truth was taken with a summons 

for-truth sum- 
moned, by the same post as the other, and had 

this for a token that the summons was true, 

that "his pitcher was broken at the fountain." 

Eccles. 12 : 6. When he understood it, he called 

for his friends, and told them of it. Then said he, 

I am going to my Father's ; and though mth 

great difficulty I have got hither, yet now I do 

not repent me of all the trouble I have been at to 

arrive where I am. My sword I give to him that 

Hiswiu. shall succeed me in my pilgrimage, 

and my courage and skill to him that can get it. 

My marks and scars I carry with me, to be a 

witness for me that I have fought His battles who 

w^ill now be my rewarder. When the day that 

he must go hence was come, many accompanied 

him to the river-side, into which as he went, he 

said, ''Death, where is thy sting?" And as he 

His last words, went dowu deeper, he said, " Grave, 

where is thy victory ?" 1 Cor. 15 : 55. So he 

passed over, and all the trumpets sounded for 

him on the other side. 



492 PILGEIM'S rKOGKESS. 

Then there ' came forth a summons for Mr. 
Standfast. This Mr. Standfast was |jir_ standfast 
he whom the rest of the pilgrims s^^^^^o^ed. 
found upon his knees in the Enchanted ground. 
And the post brought it him o]3en in his hands : 
the contents thereof Avere, thp.t he must pre- 
pare for a change of Hfe, for his Master was 
not willing that he should be so far from him 
any longer. At this Mr. Standfast was put into 
a muse. Nay, said the messenger, you need not 
doubt of the truth of my message ; for here is 
a token ^of the truth thereof, "Thy wheel is 
broken at the cistern." Eccles. 12 : 6. Then 
he called to him Mr. Great-Heart, HecaiisforMr. 
who was their guide, and said unto G^^^t-Heart. 
him, Sir, although it was not my hap his speech to 
to be much in your good company ^™- 
during the days of my pilgrimage, yet, since 
the time I knew you, you have been profitable 
to me. When I came from home, I left behind 
me a wife and five small children ; let me entreat 
you, at your return, for I know that you go and 
return to your Master's house, in hoj)es that you 
may yet be a conductor to more of the holy pil- 
grims, that you send to my family, ms errand to 
and let them be acquainted with all ^^' ^^^^'^y- 
that hath and shall happen unto me. Tell them 
moreover of my happy arrival at this place, and 
of the present and late blessed condition I am in. 



STANDFAST SUMMONED. 4.03 

Tell tliem also of Cliristian and Christiana liis 
wife, and liow she and her children came after 
her husband. Tell them also of what a haj^i^y 
end she made, and whither she is gone. I have 
little or nothing to send to my family, unless it 
be prayers and tears for them ; of which it will 
suffice that you acquaint them, if peradventui'e 
they may prevail. When Mr. Standfast had thus 
sot things in order, and the time being come for 
him to haste him away, he also went down to 
the river. Kow there was a great calm at that 
time in the river ; Vvherefore Mr. Standfast, when 
he was about half way in, stood a while and 
talked with his companions that had waited upon 
him thither. And he said. This river has been 
His last v^-ords. a terror to many ; jeti, the thoughts 
of it also have often frightened me ; but now me- 
thinks I stand easy ; my foot is fixed upon that 
on vvhich the feet of the priests that bare tlio 
ark of the covenant stood while Israel went over 
Jordan. Josh. 3 : 17. The waters indeed are to 
the -polaie bitter, and to the stomach cold ; yet 
the thoughts of what I am going to, and of the 
convoy that waits for me on the other side, do lie 
as a glowing coal at my heart. I see myself now 
at the end of my joiu'ney ; my toilsome days are 
ended. I am going to see that head which was 
crowned with thorns, and that face which Avas 
spit upon for me. I have formerly lived by hear- 



4.9i riLGllIM'S rROGEESS. 

say and faith ; but now I go where I shall live by 
sight, and shall be with Him in whose company 
I delight myself. I have loved to hear my Lord 
spoken of ; and wherever I have seen the print of 
his shoe in the earth, there I have coveted to set 
my foot too. His name has been to me as a 
civet-bos ; yea, sweeter than all perfumes. His 
voice to me has been most sweet, and his coun- 
tenance I have more desired than they that have 
most desired the light of the sun. His words 
I did use to gather for my food, and for antidotes 
against my faintings. He hath held me, and hath 
kept me fi'om mine iniquities ; yea, my steps 
hath he strengthened in his way. 
■ Now while he was thus in discourse, his coun- 
tenance changed ; his strong man bowed under 
him : and after he had said. Take me, for I come 
unto thee, he ceased to be seen of them. 

But glorious it was to see how the open region 
w^as filled with horses and chariots, with trumpet- 
ers and pipers, with singers and players upon 
stringed instruments, to v/elcome the pilgrims as 
they went up, and followed one another in at the 
beautiful gate of the city. 

As for Christiana's children, the four boys that 
Christiana brought, with their wives and children, 
I did not stay v/here I was till they were gone 
over. Also, since I came away, I heard one say 
that they were yet alive, and so would be for the 



CONCLUSION. 495 

increase of tlie cliiircli, in that place wlicrc tliey 

•were, for a time. 

Should it be my lot to go that way again, I 

may give those that desire it an account of what 

I here am silent about : meantime I bid m^ 

reader 

FAREWELL. 



FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH. 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 150 NASSAU-STREET, 
NEW YORK. 



Flowers of Spring-time. Combining amusement aiul 
instruction in most attractive forms. One hundred and 
fifty Engravings. Quarto size. 

Home Scenes. An elegant small quarto for the family, 
with fourteen photographic pictures, fac-similes of fine 
Engravings. 

Tiews from Nature. Forty scenes in nature and art. 
Finely printed in tint. 

Songs for the Little Ones at Home. Attractive as 
ever. Beautifully illustrated. 

Lullabies, Ditties, and Tales. Original short Poems 
for the Children, containing Tales, Songs, and Dialogues. 
"W'ith eighty-four Engravings. 

Home Pictures. 72 pages. A fine Cut on each page. 

My Picture-book. 64 pages. Sixty-one Engravings. 

Fireside Pictures. 6-1 pages. With a Cut on each 
page. 

The Illustrated Tract Primer. The Children's favor- 
ite. Finely Illustrated. 

FOR SALE AT 150 NASSAU-STREET, NEW YORK ; 
40 CoENHiLL, BOSTON ; 1210 Ciiestnut-steeet, PHIL- 
ADELPHM.; 75 State-stkeet, ROCHESTER; 1G3 
Walkut-steeet, CINCINNATI ; and in other cities and 
principal towns. 



H 9 8b 













'^^ f. " o ♦ ^"^^ 



^^'*'^°^/>i^'^'-., .^*^•^^^''•^. 

■^0* 



A°^ 




Deacidified using the Bookkeeper process. 
Neutralizing agent: Magnesium Oxide 
. Treatment Date: Feb. 2009 



s V ,. "^c^ "" " PreservationTechnologies 

•^j^ X*^ A WORLD LEADER IN COLLECTIONS PRESERVATION 

111 Thomson Park Drive 
Cranberry Township, PA 16066 
(724)779-2111 




^-^.^-^ 










^ 





^°^^. '.1 
















mim 



