

109097 



Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1S5S, by 0. R. KINGS- 
raY, in the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the Southern District of 
ew York. 

Transferred to the American Tract Society. 



THERE is nothing in the universe that I fear, 
except that I may not know all my duty, or may 
fail to do it. Mary Lyon. 



PREFACE. 



"The Power of Christian Benevolence illustrated 
in the Life and Labors of Mary Lyon, compiled by 
Edward Hitchcock, D. D., LL. D., President of Am- 
herst College, with the assistance of others," was 
originally published at Northampton by Messrs. Hop- 
kins and Bridgman, in 1851, and that edition is con- 
tinued in circulation. That work has been made the 
basis of this ; but much has been omitted, especially 
in numerous details of the Mount Holyoke Seminary ; 
much has been added, and many parts have been re- 
cast. This has been chiefly done by those who fur- 
nished the principal material for the first edition, and 
who were long and intimately associated with Miss 
Lyon in her public labors. Invaluable as their servi- 
ces have been, their names, at their united request, are 
here omitted, as is also that of the Key. Dr. Hitch- 
cock from the title-page at his own suggestion. The 
work is intended as a monument, not to its authors, 
nor to Mis? Lyon, but to His most holy praise through 
whose mighty power and abounding grace she became 
what she was, and finished the work which was given 
her to do. 

The life of Miss Lyon is a lesson and a treasure 



4 PREFACE. 

to the race. The wise may be made wiser and the 
good better by it. It will teach the teacher and fur- 
nish impulse and encouragement to the Christian min- 
ister. It will kindle in the hearts of many young 
ladies new desires after knowledge and usefulness. 
It will show them that they can worthily imitate Miss 
Lyon by Christian fidelity and energy in their appro- 
priate sphere, though God should not call them as he 
did her to the work of founding a new and peculiar 
seminary. It will deepen the public sense of the im- 
portance of Christian education, and show how, by 
heavenly wisdom and zeal, it may be promoted. It 
will illustrate the value of moral and religious influ- 
ence in regulating the conduct and forming the char- 
acter of the young. It will show what a wise econo- 
my there is in making religion the first, the second, 
and the third thing in a literary institution. It will 
prove that the entrance of the word of God into a 
school of any kind giveth light and comfort, and 
every blessing to teacher, parent, and pupil, as well 
as to the church and the world. It will do something 
to stay the general declension from the good old way 
of our Puritan fathers, who taught their children be- 
times to worship God and fear his holy name. It 
will add fresh fuel to the flame of missionary zeal, 
and bring forward many a living sacrifice to the work 
of the gospel among the heathen. Fathers and moth- 
ers by their firesides may learn wisdom from it. The 
Christian philanthropist may see where rests the 
great hope of the world's regeneration and of the 
corning in of millennial glory ; and scarcelv anv trav- 



PREFACE. 5 

eller to the shores of eternity can read without nrofit 
the story of Miss Lyon's pilgrimage thither. 

To the service of the Redeemer, in the fervent 
hope that it may contribute to these blessed ends, the 
present work is devoutly consecrated. 

APRIL, 1858. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 

EARLY LIFE, TO HER ENTERING MR. EMERSON'S 

SCHOOL AT BYPIELD. 

1797-1821. 

Ancestors of Mary Lyon Her maternal grandparents Character 
of her parentsHer own. description of her " mountain, home," 
the farm, the garden, the landscape, vicissitudes Her youthful 
sobriety Rapid progress in study Early concern about relig- 
ionHopeful conversion in 1816 Marriage of her asters and 
mother Removal of her brother In the academy at Xshfield 
Unparalleled avidity for knowledge Alternate teaching and 
studying, - IS 

CHAPTER II. 

LABORS AT ASHFIELD, BUCKLAND, AND DERRY. 

1821-1828. 

Miss Lyon enters Rev. Joseph Emerson's school at Byfleld Her 
room-mate Character as a student Religious character de- 
scribed by her room-mate Letters to her mother on religion in 
the school Letter to her sister Important benefits there re- 
ceivedEngages in teaching in the academy at Ashfield Relig- 
ious character at that time She unites with the church in Buck- 
land An important crisis Invitation to teach in Chautauque 
county, N. Y. Invitation to assist Miss Z. P. Grant in the 
Adams Female Academy, Derry, N. H. Letters to Miss Grant- 
Decides to go to Deny Preparatory studies Letters to her 
mother and others as to the course of study at- Derry, daily du- 
ties, and study of the Bible Opens a winter school in Buck- 
land Letter to Miss C. Vacation in Troy Letters from Derry 
and Buckland, chiefly as to the state of religion Letters to Miss 



8 CONTENTS. 

Grant Singleness of eyo to the salvation of others A revival 
in the school at Ashfield, 28 

CHAPTER III. 

LABOES AT BUCKLAND AND AT IPSWICH. 

1828-1830. 

Engages in the school at Ipswich during the summer At Buckland 
in the winter Reasons for so doing Letters to her mother and 
Miss Grant Letter showing her interest in individual scholars 
Excess of labors Decides to spend two winters in Ipswich Re- 
view of her labor's and successes at Buckland History of one of 
her pupils Her reward, 73 

CHAPTER IV. 

EXCLUSIVE CONNECTION WITH THE IPSWICH FE- 
MALE SEMINARY. 

1830-1834. 

Great variety of labors Remarks to her pupils on early rising A 
successful plan Increase and religious prosperity of the school- 
Absence of Miss Grant Letters to Miss Grant Vocal music- 
Project of a permanent female seminary Resolution as to mar- 
riageLetter to Prof. Hitchcock of Amherst, on the proposed 
seminary Letters to Miss Grant Letter to one of her nieces 
Testimony of her niece, afterwards Mrs. Burgess Mount Pleas- 
ant, at Amherst Letters to Miss Grant as to a proposed semi- 
nary at Amherst, the claims of its poorer friends, and a separa- 
tionDissolution, of the Board of Trustees General discourage- 
ment Lessons of experience, 90 

CHAPTER Y. 

MISS LYON'S PLANS MODIFIED AND MATUREDCLOS- 
ING LABORS AT IPSWICH-PECULIAR TRAINING 
AND FITNESS FOR HER WORK. 

1834. 

Summer rambles in 1833 Circular to the friends of Ipswich semi- 
nary, proposing plan of a new seminary Letter to Thomas 
White, Esq. Conversion of a nephew Letters to Miss Grant, 
and to her mother, as to the proposed institution Letter to 
Miss White To her youngest sister Qualifications for her now 
aad great work, health, enthusiasm, sound sense, knowledge of 



CONTENTS. 9 

human nature, distinct ideas of her plan, indifference to worldly 
things, eminent piety, vividness of her views of truth Charac- 
ter of her pupils, 126 

CHAPTER VI. 

ENLISTMENT OP INFLUENTIAL FRIENDS. 

1835. 

Meeting of a few friends at Ipswich A committee appointed Con- 
tributions commence in Ipswich Her mode of personal appeal 
Letters to pupils and others Winter at Amherst Location fixed 
at South Hadley Letter to her mother The heart of a henevo- 
lent Christian of Boston opened Name of the seminary Agen- 
cy of Rev. Mr. Hawks Letters to her friends The seminary 
incorporated Devotion of Trustees to the work, 159 

CHAPTER VII. 

THE ERECTION AND FURNISHING OF THE EDIFICE. 

1836, 1837. 

Laying of the corner-stone, Oct 3, 1836 Circular to ohtain furni- 
tureEfforts to enstamp on it a high character at the outset 
Letters to friends Frequent journeys Superintends the build- 
ingDescription of the building State of the enterprise in the 
Fall of 1837, 178 

CHAPTER VIII. 

THE FIRST TEAR OF THE MOUNT HOLTOKBTEMALE 
SEMINARY. 

1837, 1838. 

Opening of the school in Nov. 1837 Hardships met by the first pu- 
pilsTheir welcome by Miss Lyon Providential supplies The 
pupils all boarders Domestic labor performed by them Advan- 
tages of this plan as to economy and health Difficulties in the 
outset Miss Lyon's energy fully taxed Bread-making A no- 
ble band of helpers Financial skill Instruction The course 
of study, 194 

CHAPTER 15. 

LEADING PRINCIPLES OF THE INSTITUTION. 
The seminary her home Marriage of Miss Caldwell Miss Lyon's 
increased labors in teaching, especially religious truth and 
duty Usefulness of her pupils in the church a chief aim Con- 



10 CONTENTS. 

stant reference to the Bible Obedience "as unto the Lord" 
Her own conformity to rules Incidents illustrating her skill m 
government Benevolence inculcated Her care in selecting 
teachers Their character and cooperation with her " The half- 
hour system" Counsels as to prayer " Recess meetings" 
Regular study of the Bible Aptitude in drawing lessons from 
it Morning lectures Letter from a pupil Faithfulness of her 
religious teachings Inquirers' meetings Meetings for Chris- 
tians, and for the unconverted, 209 



OHAPTEE X. 

{, 

RELIGIOUS HISTORY OF THE SEMINARY THE MIS- 
SIONARY SPIRIT. 

Seasons of revival every year Summary by Miss Whitman Most 
of the pupils the first year pious Revival during the second 
year, resulting in the hopeful conversion of all the pupils Sim- 
ilar result on the third year Subsequent years The means em- 
ployed Special prayer requested Letters to Mrs. Banister and 
Mrs. Saflford The secret of success, making religion the one 
thing needful The seminary a nursery of missionaries Early 
efforts to inspire Christian benevolence Fervid views of the 
woes and claims of the heathen Missionary meetings Results 
Contributions Notes from the missionary journal, sketches of 
addresses Extract from "The Missionary Offering" Wide dis- 
persion of her pupils as missionaries, 243 

OHAPTEE XI. 

MISCELLANEOUS CORRESPONDENCEPUBLISHED 
PAMPHLET FIFTIETH BIRTHDAY. 

Letter on the first death in the seminary On her mother's death 
Kindness to relatives in the state of New York Letter to Miss 
Grant before her marriage Enlargement of the seminary build- 
ingExtracts from a pamphlet ou the subject Letters to Mrs. 
Banister, Mrs. Safford, Rev. Justin- Perkins, D. D., aad Miss 
Fiske Teachers becoming missionaries Note on the subject 
from Miss Whitman "Missionary journal " during a revival 
Letters to Hon. D. Safford To Miss Fiske and Miss Rice To 
Mrs. Banister To her pupils on heathen ground A visit at 
Springfield, interview with Mrs. Winslow Miss Lyon's fiftieth 
birthday Letter to Miss Hannah White, 286 



CONTENTS. 11 

CHAPTER XII. 

THE LAST LETTERS, THE LAST VISIT, THE LAST IN- 
STRUCTION, AND THE DEPARTURE. 

Visit to Mrs. Porter at Monson Letters to Mrs. Burgess To Miss 
Whitman Her last letter Mrs. Porter's account of her first 
and her last visit at Monson "Missionary journal" relative to 
Miss Lyon's last illness Death of a pupil from malignant ery- 
sipelas Illness of Miss Lyon Last address to her pupils Ag- 
gravations of her disease Erysipelas appears Visit of her pas- 
tor, Mr. Laurie Her happy release March 5, 1849 Funeral ser- 
vices Sermon by Rev. Dr. Humphrey Marble monument at 
her grave, 319 

CHAPTER XIII. 

MISS LYON'S CHARACTER AND LABORS. 
A glance in review of the foregoing records Her firm and well- 
balanced constitution Mental vigor Practical wisdom In- 
vention and combination Executive and administrative skill 
Thorough discipline Power of influencing others Natural ac- 
tivity Value of the aid she received Training up efficient 
women Secret of success in teaching She understood the 
truth of God Her unbounded benevolence Her life one of 
strenuous exertion Her powers consecrated to the service of 
God and man Her desire to know and do all her duty, 342 

DR. HUMPHREY'S SKETCH AT HER FUNERAL, 357 

DR. HITCHCOCK'S ADDRESS AT THE EXSUIXG A^TVERSARY, 360 

SENTENCES FROM HES LIPS, XOTISD BY ONE OP HER PUPILS, 369 



LIFE AND LABORS 



OF 



MART LION. 



CHAPTER I. 

EARLY LIFE TO HER ENTERING- ME. EMERSON'S 

SCHOOL AT BYFIELD. 

1797-1821. 



LYON was born in Buckland, Franklin coun- 
ty, Massachusetts, Feb. 28, 1797. Her ancestors were 
among the first settlers of Ashfield, & town adjoining 
Buckland, in the same county. As far back as they 
can be traced, they lived, with one or two exceptions, 
to a very advanced age, were remarkable for the dis- 
charge of filial duties, and were of irreproachable 
character. All were followers of Christ. 

Deacon Isaac Shepard, her maternal grandfather, 
was an eminently pious man. His six children all 
became Christians in early life, and were blessings to 
society around them. His father and his son bore tho 
.name of Isaac, and each held the office of deacon, thus 1 



U LIFE OF MART LiOlN. 

making three deacons in succession of the same name 
in the family. A letter from her maternal grand- 
mother is preserved among Miss Lyon's papers, writ- 
ten with the tremulous hand of extreme old age, in 
which she says it is more than seventy years since she 
" 'listed a soldier for Jesus." She was the' daughtef 
of Ohileab Smith, a man of ardent piety, whose pray 
ers for his "posterity to the latest generation" are 
still remembered by those who heard them. 

There being no Baptist meeting in the vicinity^, 
and Mr. Smith having a preference for that denomina-* 
tion, he opened his house for public worship, and was 
instrumental in organizing a small church from the 
borders of three adjoining townships, Conway, Ash- 
field, and Buckland. Of this church, Mr. Smith was 
the first leader and instructor. Two of his sons be- 
came preachers in the Baptist denomination. One of 
them succeeded his father in the care of this little 
church a good man, who long and steadfastly re- 
sisted the current of error and immorality which at 
times threatened to overwhelm that community. This 
church still exists, a blessing to the neighborhood. 

Aaron Lyon and Jemima Shepard, the parents of 
Mary, were both members of this church. Their resi- 
dence was in Buckland, within half a mile of the Ash- 
field line, and about one mile and a half from the par- 
ents of each, and from the place of worship. They 
therefore continued to worship with then* fathers. 
These and other circumstances led Mary often to say, 
playfully, that she belonged to both towns. 

Her father was remarkable for the uniformity of 
his temper. He was never known to speak an angry 



EARLY LIFE. 15 

word. Kind and obliging in his manners, he was 
greatly beloved by his acquaintance, and often was 
sent for to pray with the sick and dying. Her moth- 
er was a person of strong mind and active piety. 
Her praise is in the churches, and it is enough to giy 
of her here/that Mary was emphatically in her moth- 
er's own image. These parents were united in hon- 
oring the institution of the Sabbath, and in training 
their children to make preparation for entering on 
holy time at an early hour Saturday evening. 

* Under such influences, " the germ of Mary's char- 
acter received the culture that decided its future form 
and growth." It is not known how many of her ex- 
cellences or principles of action are to be attributed 
to early and judicious parental training; for often 
" the descending stream of influence owes its salubrity 
to the salt some pious hand cast into it at a point 
so high that it has ceased to be acknowledged or 
known." 

Mary was the fifth of seven children, of whom only 
two, the eldest daughter and the only son, survived 
her. Her parents, though in comfortable circumstan- 
ces, were not among the rich of this world. With 
industry and economy, they were enabled to meet all 
the necessary wants of their rising family. On the 
death of the father, in 1802, at the age of forty-five, 
the family were left to depend mostly on their own 
exertions. 

Let us learn their situation from Mary's own 
words in the "Missionary Offering," a small book 
written by her in 1843. After speaking of a want 
of correspondence between the dress and contribu- 



16 LIFE OP MARY LYON. 

tions of a widow and her daughter, who were sup- 
ported by the widow's needle, she says, "I was strong- 
ly reminded by contrast of another widow, whom I 
knew and loved forty years ago, and of her 'mountain 
home/ She was not rich in the treasures of earth. 
Her little farm was siirely not more to her, in pro- 
viding for her seven, than was that skilful needle in 
providing for the one. But want, at that 'mountain 
home/ was made to walk so fairly and so gracefully 
within that circle of limited means, that there was 
always room enough and to spare for a more restrict- 
ed neighbor. I can now see that loved widow, just 
as I did in the days of my childhood. She is less 
than forty years of age, and her complexion is as 
fair and her forehead as noble and as lofty as on her 
bridal day. Now she is in that sweet garden, which 
needs only to be seen to be loved. Now she is sur- 
veying the work of the hired man and her young son 
on that wild, romantic farm, made, one would think, 
more to feast the soul than to feed the body. But 
almost always she was to be found busy, both early 
and late, amid her household cares, and in the culture 
of the olive plants around her table. In that domain, 
nothing was left to take its own way. Every thing 
yas made to yield to her faithful and diligent hand. 
It was no mistake of that good-hearted neighbor who 
came in one day, begging the privilege of setting a 
plant of rare virtue in a corner of her garden, be- 
cause, as he said, there it could never die. The roses, 
the pinks, and the peonies, those old-fashioned flowers 
which keep time with Old Hundred, could nowhere 
grow so fresh and so sweet as in that little garden. 



EARLY LIFE. 11 

Nowhere else have I ever seen wild 'strawberries in 
such profusion and richness as were gathered near by. 
Never were rareripes so large and so yellow, and 
never were peaches so delicious and so fair, as grew 
on the trees of that favored farm. The apples too 
contrived to ripen before all others, so as to meet in 
sweet fellowship with peaches and plums, to entertain 
the aunts and cousins. 

"I can now see thar * mountain home/ with its 
sweet rivulet finding its way among rocks and cliffs 
and hillocks and deep craggy dells. Then just be- 
yond the precincts of the family domain was the 'top 
of the hill/ crowned by its high, rolling rock, ever 
inviting the enterprise of each aspiring heart. Every 
one was amply repaid who would climb that steep hill 
and ascend that high rock. There might be seen the 
far-off mountains in all their grandeur, and the deep 
valleys and widely extended plains, and more ^han all, 
that village below, containing only a very few white 
houses, but more than some young eyes had previous- 
ly seen. But sweetest of aU, the length of a mile or 
more, to the village church, was that wild, winding 
way, traversed each Sabbath morning by that orderly 
group, while the family pony gave the mother her 
horseback ride. There too in winter was that sleigh,, 
packed so snugly and gliding so gently over that same 
winding way to that same small church. 

"At that 'mountain home 7 every want was prompt- 
ly and abundantly met by the bounties of summer and 
the provident care for winter. The autumnal stores, 
so nicely sorted and arranged, always travelled hand 
in hand, through the long winter, like the barrel of 



18 LIFE OF MA.RY LYON. 

meal and cruse of oil. The apples came out fresh in 
the spring, and the maple sugar, that most important 
grocery of the neighborhood, was never known to fail, 
before the warm sun on the sparkling snow gave der 
lightful indication that sugar days were near. When 
gathered around that simple table, no one desired a 
richer supply than was furnished by the hand of that 
dear mother. The simple school-day dress too, so neat 
and so clean, and amply sufficient in the view of those 
young minds, should not be forgotten; while the rare 
gift of the Sunday suit, kept expressly for the occasion, 
formed an important era in the life of the possessgr, 
and was remembered with grateful smiles for many 
days afterwards. The children of that household, 
thus abundantly supplied, never thought of being de^ 
pendent or depressed. They felt that their father had 
laid up for them a rich store in grateful hearts, and 
among the treasures which will fcever decay ; and that 
their mother, who was considered in all that neigh- 
borhood a sort of presiding angel of good works, was 
continually adding to those stores. I can now remem- 
ber just the appearance of that neighbor who had a 
numerous household to clothe, as she said one day, 
'How is it that the widow can do more for me than 
any one else ?' 

"But I remember the sorrows as well as the joys 
and the labors of that loved widow, that dearest 
friend of my young heart. On the 21st of last De- 
cember, about noon, the days of forty long years were 
just numbered and finished since death came to that 
' mountain home 7 and took away that affectionate hus- 
band, that kindest of fathers. The dying scene in 



EARLY LIFE. 19 

that retired 'north room' I can never forget. How 
mournful was the contrast between the clear midday 
sun and those sorrowing hearts, those bursting sighs, 
and those flowing tears. Those last faltering words, 
1 My dear children what shall I say to you, my chil- 
dren? God bless you, my children/ have not yet 
died away on my ear. Then came the funeral, which 
gathered all the neighborhood around that mourning 
circle. Gently was it whispered by one and another, 
1 We have all lost a friend ; the peacemaker is gone/ 
How deep were those weeds of mourning, shrouding 
that family. Even the plaintive tones of the little 
one, but just able to lisp her father's name, were oft 
and long repeated by kind-hearted neighbors. Then 
came that first cold winter of widowhood. How 
mournfully did the cheerful fire blaze on the domestic 
hearth, as we gathered around that bereaved family 
altar. What child of that household could ever for- 
get those extraordinary prayers of the sorrowing 
mother for the salvation of her fatherless children, as 
they were offered up, day by day, through all the 
long cold winter ? Before that mourning day came, 
the eldest, while yet a child, professed to love the 
God of her fathers. As the remaining six were gath- 
ered in one by one, and all before they had passed the 
years of their youth, the mother failed not to refer to 
her own agonizing prayers during that first winter of 
her widowhood. But the mother is gone, and most of 
the seven are gone. Together they are gathered to 
their peaceful rest. Only a remnant is left to talk of 
that sweet 'mountain home/ of that bereaving Decem- 
ber, and of those never-to-be-forgotten prayers." 



20 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

Prom all the sources left us, it appears that from 
childhood to womanhood Mary was remarkable for a 
solidity of mind and sobriety of deportment rarely 
found in the volatile season of youth. With teach- 
ableness, energy, frankness, and warmth of heart, were 
combined elasticity of spirits and an ardent desire to 
do something to augment the happiness of her friends. 
To this were added a keen perception of the ludi- 
crous, and a power of humorous description, which 
rendered her a very enlivening companion. 

5 In childhood her opportunities for education were 
limited; but being one of the youngest of a family 
which is known to have excelled in intelligence and 
scholarship, she undoubtedly received much instruc- 
tion at home. Until she was six or seven years of 
age, there was a district school within a mile of her 
mother's residence. From the time that she was old 
enough to walk that distance, she attended it regular- 
ly when it was in operation. It was then removed 
two miles from them, and she attended but occasion- 
ally. Sometimes she lived with her relatives in Ash- 
field, sometimes near a school in Buckland, assisting 
the families into which she was received, as a remu- 
neration for her board. 

She was early noticed for her uncommon progress 
in study. {One of her teachers said, "I should like to 
see what she would make if she could be sent to col- 
lege." 

She committed to memory with unusual facility, 
and recited with verbal accuracy; yet she did not 
fell to get a clear understanding of the meaning of 
her lessons. The teacher is now living with whom 



EARLY LIFE. 21 

she studied Alexander's Grammar ; and he says that 
in four days she learned all that scholars were accus- 
tomed to commit, and repeated it with correctness at 
one recitation. Her progress in arithmetic was equal- 
ly rapid, and she understood clearly and at once the 
reasons for every operation. But instead of depend- 
ing on genius, as minds less gifted are prone to do, 
she believed that her school lessons were to be mas- 
tered only by hard study, and applied herself to them 
with great assiduity and perseverance. She could not 
express her thoughts in as few words as many do who 
have fewer thoughts to express ; and her enunciation 
was so rapid as sometimes to be painful to: the listen- 
er. She is remembered, even when quite young, to 
have been particularly attentive to religious instruc- 
tion. There wore then no Sabbath-schools ; and when 
the weather would permit, it was customary, during 
the interval of public worship, for the congregation 
to resort to the cool grove, or the burying-place of 
the dead. As a consequence, especially where young 
people are thus grouped together, levity and conver- 
sation unsuited to the Sabbath would prevail. Mary 
is remembered as withdrawing herself from those cir- 
cles, and expressing surprise to her associates that 
any one could indulge in such things on God's holy 
day. 

The old beech-tree is still remembered which stood 
behind a school-house in Ashfield, on whose crooked 
trunk, in a season of religious interest, she used to sit 
during the school intermissions, and tell those who 
gathered around her of the way of salvation, as she 
had been taught it by her parents, though, as she 



22 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

supposed, she had not then herself begun, to tread 
in it. 

It is not known that she has left any record of 
her mental conflict while under religious conviction. 
Some of her early friends know that the first exercises 
of her mind, which she was led afterwards to look 
upon as indicative of a saving change, were in 1816, 
under the plain, simple explanations of Bible truth 
from elder Enos Smith, the brother of her grand- 
mother. The day which she afterwards regarded as 
probably the one on which her heart was renewed 
by the Holy Spirit, was the Sabbath. The sermon to 
which she had been listening was on the character of 
God; and as she walked through the fields, on her 
return home, reflecting on his glorious attributes, her 
mind was filled with a sweet sense of his love, and 
her affections seemed for the first time to flow out tow- 
ards Him whom she had reverenced, and whose char- 
acter she had approved from her earliest recollection. 
But her feelings were not then so marked in their 
character as to lead her to speak of them to others, 
or to give her much confidence that she was accepted 
of God. 

Let us return to the inmates of "the mountain 
home." The three sisters older than herself, at a 
suitable age, entered into the married state. In 1810, 
her mother married again, and removed to Ashfield, 
taking with her the two younger sisters. Mary, with 
her only brother, remained at the homestead. For ar 
year previous to the marriage of this brother, she, 
being about fifteen years of age, took charge of the 
house. The remuneration which she received from 



EARLY LIFE. 23 

him aided her in the prosecution of her studies. From 
this time until 1819, when he removed to Chautauque 
county, N. Y., her home continued to be-in his family. 
The removal of her brother, to whom she was 
tenderly attached, was a great trial to her. She felt 
that, for the second time, she was made an orphan. 
Not only must* she leave the spot that gave her birth, 
but she must also be separated from the family so dear 
to her heart. Yet, while distressed at the separation, 
with characteristic composure she handed these lines, 
from an old familiar song, to her brother's wife : 

* " Not one sigh .shall tell my story, 

Not one tear my cheek shall stain ; 
Silent grief shall be my glory 
Grief that stoops not to complain." 

But those dear children, whose "little hands cling 
closest to the heart," how did she grieve for them. 
Her friends that remained with her well remember 
her grief as they were borne away. For months after- 
wards, whenever that brother was spoken of in her 
presence, her tears would flow, and her silent and sub- 
dued feelings did not hinder her friends from seeing 
how deeply and tenderly she loved him. Little did 
she then imagine that in process of time those daugh- 
ters were to return, to receive instruction from her 
lips in a seminary founded by her instrumentality, 
and to go fbrth, some to labor as teachers in our own 
country, and one to teach the benighted heathen under 
the shadow of a Chinese pagoda. 

From her brother's marriage until 1817, little is 
Known of her, except that she occasionally attended 
school, and commenced her career as teacher near 



24 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

Shelburne Falls, Massachusetts, receiving as compen 
sation at first seventy-five cents per week with board 

In the autumn of 1817 she entered Sanderson 
Academy at Ashfield, between four and five mile 
from her birthplace. She was- then emphatically na- 
ture's child. Those who knew her only at Ipswich 
or South Hadley, can realize but little of the Mary 
Lyon of those days. One remarked of her then, 
"She is all intellect; she does not know that she 
has a body to care for." But a warm and true heart 
soon gained the love and confidence of her associates. 
Her whole appearance at that time was so unique, her 
progress in study so unprecendetted, her broad intel- 
ligent face so inviting, that no one who was then a 
member of the academy will ever forget her; nor 
how the scholars used to lay aside their books when 
she commenced her recitation. Here she found friends 
to encourage and assist her in her search for know- 
ledge.; In the rough specimen, they could see a dia- 
mond of uncommon brilliancy, and knew that it need- 
ed only to be polished to shine with peculiar lustre. 

Her slender means, received from her brother and 
obtained by spinning, weaving, teaching, etc., were 
soon expended. She was about to return to her old 
employments, when the trustees of the academy gave 
her the free use of all its advantages. It is supposed 
that this was the time when she resolved to prepare 
herself particularly for teaching. She collected her 
bedding, table linen, etc., constituting the full amount 
of her household treasures, and exchanged the whole 
at a boarding-house for a room and a seat at the table. 
Nothing could exceed the eagerness with which she 



EARLf LIFE. 25 

engaged in the prosecution of her studies. It was 
judged by the family where she boarded, that she 
slept on an average not more than four hours in the 
twenty-four ; and all her waking moments, except the 
time occupied by her hurried meals, were spent in 
study. The academy in Ashfield, although it may at 
times have enjoyed more prosperity, yet never had 
collected within its walls minds more fitted to bless 
the world by their influence. But distinguished as 
some of them have been for talents and acquirements, 
no one was able to keep up with Mary in her recita- 
tions; and one additional study after another was 
given her by her teacher to keep her within reciting 
distance of her classes. But all proved insufficient 
for the purpose. The more her powers were taxed, 
the more she seemed capable of performing. At last 
her teacher gave her Adams' Latin Grammar, direct- 
ing her to omit her extra lessons while committing it 
to memory, only keeping up with her regular classes 
in their studies. This, he supposed, would employ her 
for some time. But within three days she had commit- 
ted and recited all those portions which students then 
commonly learned when first going over the work. 
Her teacher, who preceded her to the spirit- world, 
was frequently heard to say that he never knew the 
Latin grammar more accurately recited; and there 
are peisons now living who heard the recitations, and 
can bear the same testimony. 

Her services as a teacher soon began to be eager- 
ly sought, and wherever she could find an opportunity 
to improve herself and others, she would take a class 
of pupils. When she had thus obtained sufficient 

MwyLyon. 2 



26 LIFE OF MARY LTON. 

means to justify it, she would go to some place and 
receive instruction on particular subjects in which 
she found herself deficient. No one was more ready 
to set about and accomplish an improvement in any 
respect, when convinced it was necessary. 

At one time she might be found in a family school 
in Buckland, teaching all the variety of studies neces- 
sary or desirable for an intelligent group of sons and 
daughters. At another time she resided for a season 
in the family of Rev. Edward Hitchcock, then pastor 
of a church in Conway now Dr. Hitchcock, Resi- 
dent of Amherst College learning from him the 
principles of natural science, and from his wife the 
arts of drawing and painting. In that place also she 
taught a select school with much ability and success. 
Then we find her for one term in Amherst Academy, 
when for the first time she encroached on the small 
patrimony left her by her father. 
/ At this period of her history, a love for spiritual 
things did not prominently appear, and she studiously 
avoided any allusion to her own exercises of mind. 

About two years after first entering the academy 
at Ashfield, being desirous of improving her handwrit- 
ing, she placed herself under the instruction of one 
who was known to excel in the art of penmanship. 
Prom him we have the following testimony as to her 
character and appearance at that time : 

"About the year 1819, 1 was engaged as usual in 
instructing a district winter school. After I had 
taught a few weeks, as I went one morning into the 
schoolroom, I saw there a stranger seated with my 
first class. They immediately introduced her, stating 



EARLY LIFE. 27 

that she wished to attend a while, and devote her 
time especially to penmanship. With that unassum- 
ing manner .which ever characterized her, she took 
her place among the common scholars, until, by their 
request, she was famished with a chair and a place 
at the table, there being no desk in the house. Here 
she patiently sat from day to day, affording assistance 
in instructing the younger classes as she found she 
was needed, until she had acquired the elementary 
principles of the art. ? After beginning to combine 
those principles, she handed me her book for a copy. 
I wrote it in Latin. She returned her book, request- 
ing that she might have it in English, remarking that 
shtf feared those who might review her book would 
tfaVfc her to be wiser than she was. f I mention this 
circumstance merely to show that it was a prominent 
trait in her character never to appear better than she 
was. She was naturally unostentatious, willing to be 
taught, thankful for favors in any form, but especially 
for those which related to the mind." 



28 LIFE OF MARY LYON 



CHAPTER II. 

LABOES AT ASHFIELD, AT BUCELAND, AND A I 

DEREY. 
1821-1828. 

WE have now traced Miss Lyon's course until 
1821, when, with the avails of her labor and the rem- 
nant of her patrimony, she went to attend the Kev. 
Joseph Emerson's school in Byfield, near Newbury- 
port, Mass. 

Miss Amanda White, affcerw'ards Mrs. Perry, a 
missionary at Mackinaw, influenced Miss Lyon* to 
accompany her to Byfield, and was her room-mate 
while there. She writes, "My first acquaintance 
with dear Mary was at the time when she became a 
pupil in the academy at Ashfield. On returning from 
a religious lecture, we fell in company with each 
other, and we needed no formal introduction. Her 
frank, open countenance invited confidence, and a 
mutual interest was at once awakened. Our walk 
was a long one, and we conversed freely on various 
subjects. Learning that I was expecting to enter the 
school also, she expressed a wish that we might occu- 
py the same desk. With this I readily complied ; 
and I pursued the same branches of study that she 
did, so far as I could keep up with her. ' She was 
ever ready to lay aside her books, and lend a helping 
hand to those of weaker intellect. Though nearly 
thirty years have elapsed since then, I seem even now 
to see her cheerful, laughing face turned upon me, as 



AT BYFIELD. 29 

I presented some Gordian knot in my studies for her 
to unravel." 

/When she entered the school at Byfield, her mind 
was active and powerful, but undisciplined. Mr. 
Emerson remarked, years afterwards, that in original 
power, though not in discipline, he considered her 
superior to any other pupil he ever had in his sem- 
inary. /In a letter written at that period, her room- 
mate says, "Mary sends love to all; but time with 
her is too precious to spend it in -writing letters. She 
is gaining knowledge by handfdls." 

Prom this friend we have also some account of the 
growth in her religious character while at Byfield. 

" Within two or three days after our term com- 
menced, Mr. Emerson, having prepared the way by 
appropriate remarks, requested such of his pupils as 
were professors of religion, or hoped they had been 
renewed by divine grace, to remain in the seminary 
hall during the time of recess, that he might see them 
a few minutes by themselves. He then endeavored to 
show them their responsibility as the representatives 
of Christ in that school j/the importance of their 
growing in grace while there ; and the propriety of 
their exerting an influence in favor of the Redeemer 
and his cause upon their fellow-pupils. He then ap- 
pointed a weekly prayer-meeting, which he requested 
they would all uniformly attend. This caused Mary 
much agitation of mind, for she felt that here was a 
dividing line. She must now class herself with the 
children of God, or with those who knew him not. 
She said that she had too long denied -Christ before 
men, while her conscience testified that the friends of 



80 LIFE OF MAEY LYON. 

God were her chosen companions. After much delih- 
eration, she concluded to attend the meeting. She 
never regretted her decision, although for some weeks 
she was so entirely absorbed in her studies as to 
neglect many Christian duties. There was unusual 
interest in religious subjects, and Mary's mind became 
deeply exercised. She said she had neglected duty, 
yielded to temptation, and that her unbounded thirst 
for knowledge had so absorbed every feeling, that 
there was no room left for a Saviour's love. " Oh my 
leanness, my leanness 1" was her bitter cry. In the 
course of a few days she became more calm. As there 
was no family worship under the roof where we 
boarded, she proposed that we should invite one of 
the young ladies of the family who was serious, to 
unite with us in our evening devotions. Prom this 
time Mary was faithful in conversing with her and 
her sisters ; and she seemed, in her daily pursuits, to 
do all heartily as unto the Lord." 

The following letters to her mother and sisters 
should here find a place : 

To her Mother. 

BYFDBLD, May 13, 1821. 

"I feel that this summer is, or ought to be, pecul- 
iarly profitable to me. Much depends on it. Such a 
spirit of piety is mingled with all Mr. Emerson's in- 
structions, that the one thing needful is daily impress- 
ed on our minds. From our scientific pursuits he is 
ever ready to draw practical and religious instruction. 
Oh my mother, I know you would be delighted to 
witness our devotional exercises, both morning and 
evening, to hear him read and explain the Scriptures, 



AT BYFIELD. 31 

) hear such pious counsel from his lips, and to unite 
ith him in his fervent prayers at the throne of grace 
i behalf of his scholars. Etajenders every recitation 
ttractive. Never have I attended one from which I 
light not gain valuable information, either scientific, 
ioral, or religious. We have Sabbath lessons to 
ecite Monday morning. 

"You ask if I am contented, and if I am satisfied 
rith my school. I am perfectly so. I can complain 
>f nothing but myself." 

To the same. 

"July 21, 1821. 

" Each passing day carries my heart home to you, 
ny dear parent, and all my other friends, till I can 
no longer refrain from writing. Did you know how 
much my heart dwells on her who loves me with a 
mother's love, some of you, ere this, would have filled 
a sheet for my perusal. I long to see you ; but I will 
suppress my tender emotions, while I have recourse 
to my slow, feeble pen, as a poor substitute for the 
rapid conversation at the meeting hour of a mother 
and daughter conversation which stops not for 
thoughts. Recently I have thought more of you 
than ever, and there has been a reason. Dear mother, 
could you in imagination have visited Byfield this 
week, and have had presented to your view a true 
picture of the passing scene, your heart would have 
risen in gratitude to Him who is able to soften the 
hardest heart, and arouse the most stupid mind. We 
have a female prayer-meeting on Saturday evenings, 
termed ' the seminary concert/ for those members of 
the school who dare to hope that they have an inter- 



34 LIFE OF MAEY LTON. 

daily gives us much good instruction. Friday morn- 
ing was a solemn time. Mr. Emerson remarked upon 
the great importance of improving the present period 
to secure our salvation, observing that a little cloud 
Lad arisen, which was gently distilling a few drops on 
this favored spot. Though it was equally easy with 
God, yet it was not probable, when most of us should 
disperse and mingle with our friends and companions, 
that the cloud would follow us ; but most likely that 
those who had not made their peace with God would 
gradually lose their impressions, and when they should 
return, the shower would be past. This school term 
closes to-morrow, and the vacation is two weeks. 
After earnestly and solemnly inviting, entreating, and 
warning us not to. let the present moment pass, he 
closed by saying, ' What you do, do quickly/ There 
is great reason to fear that this cloud will pass by. 
It reminds me of the favorable appearance at Buck- 
land last fall ; but, alas, it passed away. Will that be 
the case here? I cannot bear the thought. As we 
are about to separate, the members of the seminary 
concert met at our chamber after school for prayer. 
We had an impressive season. my mother, will you 
not remember this meeting Saturday evening ? ;/ 

To her youngest Sister. 

" BYPIELD, August 11, 1821. 

" I have many facilities for improvement, but they 
only increase my obligation. I believe I have never 
before realized the solemnity of living, so much as 
I do this summer. I often think that, if possible, 
it is more solemn to live than to die. What impor- 
tant consequences may depend on a single word, or 



AT BYPIELD. 35 

on the most trifling deed. With how much care and 
deliberation should we regulate all our conduct, and 
even our every thought. This requires the most vig- 
orous exertion of all our faculties ; nay, more, we need 
constant instruction from heaven, and the daily guid- 
ance of the Holy Spirit." 

Jkiss Lyon ever regarded her connection with Mr. 
Emerson's school as an important era in her life. She 
remarked, a short time before her death, that she owed 
more to Mr. Emerson than to any other teacher. In 
teaching, no less than in learning, it is of the greatest 
consequence to get a right start, and she always felt 
she first received that at Byfield. Previous to her 
enjoying his instruction, the intellect rather than the 
heart had occupied her attention; from him she 
learned that she ought to give to each its due pro- 
portion. On being asked about the story of her 
learning the Latin grammar through in three days. 
" Oh/' she replied, " it was at one of those schools 
where they do nothing but study <md recite; not at all 
so good for the character as Mr. Emerson's. You 
just learned what was in the book. I traced out the 
likenesses and differences among the declensions and 
conjugations, and I could commit any thing to memory 
quick, when I was young ; and as to the rules of syn- 
tax, they are so much like those in English grammar 
that it did not take long to learn them. So you see," 
she said, " it was no great feat, after all."* She went 
on to praise Mr. Emerson's school as the one where 
she treasured up great principles of action, and re- 
ceived a complete change in her views of education. 



36 LIFE OF MARY LTON. 

/The school at Byfield was superior to any Miss 
Lyon had attended, in the society of mature and cul- 
tivated minds which it afforded ; in giving the first 
place to efforts for enlisting its pupils in the work 
of blessing the world, and in leading them to adopt 
principles of faith and action ; in making the Bible 
prominent among its text-books, and referring all 
questions of truth and duty to its decisions ; and in 
aiming immediately at the conversion of sinners and 
the edification of Christians. Many there learned the 
way of salvation, some entering its strait gate under 
the eye of their heavenly-minded instructor, while 
others treasured up his instructions, and months or 
years after they left the seminary, turned their feet 
into the path pointed out by their beloved teacher. 

| Miss Lyon's prodigious powers of mind, her docil- 
ity, her good-will to all about her, and her unclouded 
temper, made her from the first an object of special 
interest to her teachers and companions. No pupil 
of her own was ever more industrious, more yielding, 
or more respectful. At twenty-four years of age, and 
after having taught for several seasons, her obedience 
and submission were as implicit as she ever desired to 
see in her own scholars. 

While her instructors took delight in their pupil, 
and sought to mould her wonderful powers aright, she 
in gratitude, spoken and unspoken, treasured up every 
hint, and endeavored to put it in immediate practice. 
With fear and trembling she ventured to class herself 
with those who loved the Lord ; and in no knowledge 
did she grow faster than in that of God and his will. 
How often have her pupils heard her quote the pre- 



AT ASHPIBLD. 37 

cepts and sayings of " my beloved teacher, now in 
heaven," the style in which she usually spoke of him 
after his removal thither. 

In the fall of 1821, Miss Lyon returned to Ash- 
field, and engaged in teaching in the Sanderson Acad- 
emy, which was then under the care of Mr. Abijah 
Cross. There had been a season of deep religious 
interest in that academy, and Miss Lyon coining into 
it directly from Byfield, where her spirit had been 
quickened, there was an evident change in her relig- 
ious character. She was not then inclined to speak 
to others of the things concerning their eternal wel- 
fare, nor did she acknowledge much religious enjoy- 
ment ; but she listened with the greatest deference 
and interest to religious instruction, and it is the 
testimony of Mr. Cross that her influence was de- 
cidedly for Christ and his cause. 

It should not be understood that she did not at 
this time converse with her pupils on what would 
generally be termed religious subjects. /Her regard 
for the Bible was so fervent, and her reverence for it 
so 'profound, that she would dwell on its beauty and 
sublimity with deep interest. She would also talk 
with great delight of the principles of natural relig- 
ion; and when instructing in natural philosophy, 
astronomy, etc., she never omitted an opportunity of 
impressing on the minds of her pupils the power, wis- 
dom, and goodness of G-od, as displayed in his works. 
But she was not then in the habit of bringing Bible 
truth to bear on the minds of her pupils, and of lead- 
ing them to feel personal responsibility in the great 
work of renovating the world. Indeed, the -desire to 



38 LIFE OF MART LTON. 

labor for Christ had not then possessed her own 
heart as it afterwards did. Still, her consciousness 
of reliance on him for salvation, and of her obligation 
to honor him by obeying his last command, led her 
openly to profess her faith in him by uniting herself 
with the Congregational church in Buckland in the 
spring of 1822. 

Moments often occur in the lives of individuals 
which give character to their whole future existence. 
There were two of these seasons in Miss Lyon's life, 
in which we cannot but admire and adore the wisdom 
of that Providence which led her in a path that she 
had not known. One was when, principally for want 
of success, she seriously contemplated never again 
engaging in teaching. She has been heard to remark 
that the reasons for and against it were so nearly 
balanced, that the least circumstance on either side 
would have turned the scale. But she was guided by 
an unseen hand, and was induced again to make the 
attempt. ^ The other was when she was invited by 
her brother, in 1822, to go to Chautauque county, New 
York, as a teacher. The question then before her 
was one which tried her exceedingly, and was not 
only one of the most difficult, but one of the most im- 
portant of her life. On the one hand were the wishes 
of her dear and only brother, who had come from a 
great distance, with all the anxiety he would natu- 
rally feel to secure her return with him ; the consid- 
eration of his increasing family, in a comparatively 
destitute region, and her own personal affection for 
them. On the other hand were the expectations of 
the friends who had encouraged and assisted her to 



AT ASHFIELD. 39 

fit herself for what they thought a more appropriate 
sphere than a new country, and their increasing es- 
teem for her services in that sphere. For a long time 
she hesitated, and seemed to find no relief in her per- 
plexity, save in her flowing tears. But God opened 
to her mind the way she should choose. 

/Soon after her decision not to go with her broth- 
er, she was invited to assist Miss Z. P. Grant since 
Mrs. Banistei> in the Adams Female Academy at 
Londonderry, now Derry, New Hampshire. 

The following letters will show the light in which 
she viewed this invitation. 

To Miss Grant. 

" ASHFIELD, Dec. 1, 1823. 

"I will not waste time in describing my feelings 
on receiving a letter from your own hand. I had re- 
ceived some indirect information respecting the acad- 
emy at Londonderry before. A few days previous to 
the reception of your letter, a secret desire entered 
my heart that you might be connected with that insti- 
tution. After breaking the seal of your letter, and 
eagerly running over the contents, said I, ' Is this a 
dream, or a sober reality ?' 

"I must say something upon the great question 
before me, and I hardly know what to say. The 
academy in which I am now engaged is an infant 
institution. The founder, Rev. Alvan Sanderson, was 
governed by the purest motives ; and I consider it a 
privilege to aid in carrying out Ms benevolent ie- 
signs. Many of its guardians are my friends, and 
from them I have frequently received favors. This 
is the school where I was principally educated, and 



40 LIFE OF MISS LYON. 

to which I feel in no small degree indebted. It has 
so far "been a silent and powerful means of doing 
good. The number of pupils has usually been small ; 
but I believe the church will hereafter count some 
able supporters -which she would not have had if this 
school had never existed. Soon after I returned from 
Byfield, I entered this school as an assistant. No 
other female teacher has ever been employed by the 
trustees, and they earnestly desire to secure myjabors 
as great a proportion of the time as their funds will 
permit. Besides, there have been circumstances which 
have led me to think that my usefulness might be 
more extensive here than in almost any other place 
of equal importance. 

"Yet the inducements to accept your invitation 
are great It seems to be a field especially adapted 
to my capacity. The systematic arrangement which 
yon propose meets my views. Finally, the pleasure 
of spending the time with you is truly inviting. If I 
am not deceived, I have taken some satisfaction in 
committing this subject to Q-od. If that is not the 
place for me, may he give you some other one, who 
will be a useful assistant and a pleasant companion. 
I slept but little for one or two nights after I first 
heard from you ; since that time, my mind has been 
remarkably calm. May the Lord direct our course. 
I cannot, I would not choose for myself." 

To Miss Grant. 

" ASHPIELD, Dec. 30, 1823. 

"By the last mail I received your letter. I am 
glad you have decided affirmatively respecting Derry. 
The plan of that school will require some peculiar 



AT ASHPIELD. 41 

qualifications in those who are to take charge of it. 
The more I think of the plan, the more I approve it. 
Should it succeed, the influence of example would be 
something. , : Public opinion in favor of systematic 
female education needs support. Every proof that 
system is practicable, would add its weight in the 



" Respecting myself, though the proposal did not 
strike my mind unfavorably at first, yet the more I 
think of it, the more I am inclined to decide affirma- 
tively. The obstacles have seemed gradually to di- 
minish, and the favorable circumstances rather to 
brighten by examination. In relation to my own per- 
sonal situation, the prospect, since you first wrote me, 
has appeared sufficiently pleasant ; indeed, I fear too 
pleasant. I tremble more than if the path appeared 
more rugged. The desire you have expressed that I 
should engage with you, has been one means of inclin- 
ing me to believe that my field of labor is with you. 
It did, however, lead me to much self-scrutiny. Ex- 
pect not too much from me, I beseech you. I fear 
you will be disappointed. I have a strange, rebel- 
lious, wicked heart. When shall I be wholly devoted 
to God ? I cannot trust myself. I find my best prom- 
ises violated, my best resolutions broken. The half 
cannot be told." 

At the close of another letter to the same friend, 
she writes, 

"January 15, 1823. 

"Pray for me, that I may habitually know and 
feel my dependence on God. How safe it is to trust 



42 LIFE OF MISS LYON. 

in God. How easily can he give counsel and assist- 
ance in all things, the smallest as well as the greatest. 
And how ready and willing is he always to assist. It 
would seem that I have too frequently tried my own 
strength, that I have experienced too many instances 
of the particular guardian care and protection of God, 
to doubt in whom I should place my trust. Alas, I 
have a treacherous heart. But our God is faithful. 
The unfaithfulness of his rebellious creatures cannot 
exceed his mercy and long-suffering. His mercy 
endures for ever, and his promises never Ml." 

As the result of this correspondence, Miss Grant 
paid a visit to Miss Lyon at Ashfield. /Miss Lyon, 
having decided to go with her to Derry, attended 
Professor Eaton's lectures on chemistry and natural 
history at Amherst, Massachusetts, that she might be 
prepared to illustrate by experiments the science of 
chemistry. 

As the plan adopted in the school at Derry was 
the commencement of that which was so successfully 
carried out at Ipswich, and afterwards at South Had- 
ley, a few extracts will be made from her letters dur- 
ing the first summer she was at Derry, which will at 
once introduce us to the operations of that school, 
and carry forward her personal history. 

To her Mother. 

" LONDONDERRY, June 5, 1824. 

"My health has been much better since I came 
here than it was during the spring. My spirits, 
which commonly rise and sink with my health, are 
consequently very good. We have a very pleasant 



AT DEBRY. 43 

school, over sixty in number. There axe two assist- 
ants besides myself, and we all find enough to engage 
our whole time. So many young ladies are collected 
here from different places to gain knowledge, and 
form habits which they are to carry with them to 
their respective homes, that it is to us an interesting 
spot. 

"We hope a few of our pupils love the Lord Jesus 
Christ in sincerity. What cause of rejoicing, should 
others be added to the number. You will not cease 
to pray for us, my mother, that we may be blessed, 
and that we may be made a blessing in the world." 

To Hiss H. White. 

" LONDONDKBET, July 2, 1824. 

" The regulations of this school are such as to 
enable us to have much system and order. This reg- 
ular system is calculated to give our pupils faithful, 
attentive habits. They understand that their course 
is marked out, and that whatever is assigned them is 
to be accomplished. Composition, you know, is one 
of the most trying exercises. But even in this we 
have not had an instance yet in which any young 
lady has been in the least delinquent. In some re- 
spects, perhaps, this school meets our wishes more 
fully than any I have seen. Miss Grant has adopted 
a" plan to prevent whispering, which has been very 
successful. After leading her pupils to feel the im- 
portance of being truthful, and stating facts as they 
are, she requires each to bring in a weekly ticket 
with her name attached, stating whether she has, or 
has not, made any communication in school during 
the week, either by whispering, or by writing, or in 



44 LIFE OF MISS LYON. 

any other way equally suited to divert the attention. 
We have some young ladies who have succeeded in 
controlling themselves entirely, and probably none 
who have not passed some weeks without a failure on 
this point. Miss Grant of course would not adopt 
this plan unless the scholars evinced a conscience 
both enlightened and lively as to the distinction be- 
tween truth and falsehood. 

" The prospects of this school at present are very 
promising. The trustees take a deep interest in its 
prosperity. They place great confidence in the prin- 
cipal, and are ready to do every thing she requests. 
The location here not being favorable for a winter 
school, our academy is open only thirty weeks in a 
year ; Miss Grant devoting the winter, however, as 
well as the summer, to the interests of the institu- 
tion." 

To her Sister I 

"LONDONDERRY, July 7, 1824. 

" Although I am pleasantly situated, and have no 
more cares and little daily trials than I should ex- 
pect, yet it would be pleasant to spend an hour with 
one of my dear sisters, to whom I could tell all my 
heart. The fact that no two of our family, unless it 
be our brother and our sister Eosina, are spending 
this summer together, awakens emotions peculiar and 
rather gloomy. Ever since I heard of brother Moore's 
death, but more particularly for two days past, I liave 
thought much of my brother and sisters. I have 
seemed to review twenty years in relation to our- 
selves. Change and revolution, uncertainty and dis- 
appointment, decay and death, are stamped on every 



AT DEBRY. 45 

object. I see this family, that about twenty years ago 
were prattling children, united and happy in the arms 
of their fond parents, now scattered over four differ 
ent states of the Union, and some of them seven hun 
dred miles apart. I see the eldest, in whom we all 
placed confidence as a counsellor and friend, and to 
whom we are in some degree indebted, separated from 
her friends, carried by Providence into the lonely 
wilderness, there to pass her days almost alone and 
unpitied, where no one of us can give her a cheerful 
smile or a word of consolation. I well remember 
how much animation and energy she possessed, when 
she used to spend her days in teaching. But over 
her head age has crept apace ; ill health has worn 
down her spirits ; and to use her own language, 'sick- 
ness and trials have followed, till now this terrible 
blow is struck.' Where now are her buoyant spirits ; 
where her resolution ? I see another sister too, pass- 
ing through different scenes, and now called to con- 
sign her oldest child to the silent tomb. 

" You wrote in somewhat of a gloomy strain, but 
I hope it was only momentary. You will do well to 
endeavor to gain the confidence of your pupils, and 
to make them see the reasons of your requirements. 
Do not say too much to them at one time. I think it 
best to devote some attention to their behavior, even 
if they do not study so much. If your older pupils 
should be disposed to trouble you, perhaps it may be 
beneficial to converse with each one out of school, 
and entirely alone. By taking such a method occa- 
sionally, you may reach their feelings, and lead them 
to a right determination, when you otherwise could 



46 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

not. The good influence of every well-behaved pupil 
in school is great. Endeavor to lead them always to 
speak the truth, and then let them know that you de- 
pend on their word. 

"Let me hear not only from yourself, but also 
from my other friends. Separation does not lessen 
the interest I take in their welfare. When I think of 
the older members of our family, I also involuntarily 
think of their children. I have the same kind of in- 
terest in their prosperity that I have ever had for that 
of their parents. Sometimes I feel that it would be 
a privilege to live, if I could only render myself use- 
ful to the children of my brother and sisters." 

To Miss Amanda White, her room-mate at Byfield. 
"LONDONDERRY, Sept. 26, 1824. 

"I am now engaged in teaching in the 'Adams 
Female Academy/ Londonderry, N. H. The plan of 
the school may be called Emersonian, though consid- 
erably altered to meet our particular purpose. Miss 
Grant spent about six weeks here last autumn, mak- 
ing arrangements with reference to the school. In 
every part of the plan I can see her design ; conse- 
quently it is much more easily executed. Although I 
have the highest opinion of the utility of Mr. Emer- 
son's plan for young ladies of adult age, yet I never 
considered it fitted for a whole course of education; 
I mean, as conducted when we were at Byfield. It 
supposed too much previous improvement. The course 
was too rapid for ordinary minds, and also for such 
as were young, or but little improved. We have 
more classes, our course is slower, and the increased 
number of teachers will enable us to execute our plans 



AT DERBY. 4T 

thoroughly. We have three regular classes, denomi- 
nated Senior, Middle, aiid Junior. Certain defined 
qualifications are necessary to enter each of these 
classes. Members of the Senior and Middle classes 
can attend a course of drawing and painting if they 
choose. We have also as many preparatory classes 
as circumstances require. The young ladies are ex- 
amined, and are classed, not according to the number 
of books they have studied, but according to the real 
knowledge they are found to possess. We have but 
very few under fifteen years of age who can enter the 
regular classes. You know that Mr. Emerson attend- 
ed to many little things in his school which were not 
common in schools generally. Some, however, he was 
able only to recommend, and leave for the young 
ladies to accomplish or not, as they thought proper. 
The design of Miss Grant is to have every thing that 
is proposed for immediate attention accomplished, 
and the teachers see that it is done. Bach pupil, for 
instance, is required to write with a pen of her own 
making, and.no one is allowed to request any of her 
mates to make or mend her pen. 

"In several branches we use a method commenced 
in Mr. Emerson's school, and termed the topic system. 
Subjects are selected from the lesson, which are first 
to be simply defined; and then more or less, or all 
that the book contains, is to be learned and recited. 

" Before coming to this place, Miss Grant had tried 
the experiment, term after term, in her own private 
school, of having young ladies give daily attention to 
lessons from the Bible. She has great confidence in 
the study of this book for intellectual discipline, as 



48 LIFE OP MARY LTON. 

well as for the guidance and control of the heart. 
Before she engaged to take charge of this academy, 
she gained the consent of the Executive committee, 
that, in accordance with a deeply-cherished purpose, 
she should be at liberty to employ one-seventh part of 
the intellectual energies of her pupils in the study of 
the Bible. While examining the classes at the com- 
mencement of the school, all the scholars were occu- 
pied daily in the study and recitation of Scripture 
history. Every week of the term, each pupil is ex- 
pected to apply her mind closely, two hours or more, 
to the Scripture lesson given out early in the week, 
and recited the next Monday morning. This study 
has excited more deep and universal interest than any 
other. Some now feel the force of the truths they 
are learning ; and many, I trust, will eventually be 
made wise unto salvation. 

"I. will annex a few of the topics selected from 
Genesis : Creation ; the Sabbath ; garden of Eden ; 
tree of knowledge of good and evil ; tree of life ; the 
serpent ; disobedience of our first parents ; expulsion 
of our first parents from the garden of Eden ; Adam; 
Eve ; sacrifices ; Cain ; Abel ; Enoch ; wickedness of 
man; the flood; Noah's ark; the rainbow; Noah; 
Babel/ 7 

As the school year at Derry did not include the 
winter, Miss Lyon returned late 'in the fall to Buck- 
land, and writes to Miss Grant under date of Decem- 
ber 13: 

"I ought to be thankful that Providence has so 
ordered it that I do not spend the winter at Derry, 



AT BUCKLAND. 49 

"because I thinjc the privilege of seeing my friends, 
and enjoying more society, is favorable to my health 
and spirits, and conducive to my usefulness. 

" Bev. Mr. Clark, the pastor of this church, has 
proposed my taking a school in this place, if pupils 
can be obtained, and I have concluded to do so. As 
the school will be small, I shall not have to make exer- 
tions that will injure my health, and thus prevent my 
usefulness next summer." 

/This school in Buckland was the origin of a suc- 
cession of winter schools in that place and in Ashfield. 
Many teachers of the common schools in that vicinity 
availed themselves of these opportunities. They were 
the means of awakening a lively interest in the cause 
of education, and some efforts were made to retain 
her there permanently. The influence of her school 
attracted the attention and secured the cooperation of 
the clergymen throughout that region ; and the seed 
there sown is now bearing fruit a hundred-fold. 

The following letter, written to one of the teach- 
ers at Derry, gives some account of this school, and 
shows her diffidence at this period of her life: 

To Miss C . 

"BucELAND, Feb. 21, 1825. 

"MY DEAR Miss C ' My school here consists 

of twenty-five young ladies. Before it commenced, I 
had some anxiety respecting it. As I possess not 
much natural dignity, I foresaw my scholars crowding 
around the fire, some whispering, some idle, etc. I 
remembered that, several years ago, I had a school of 
young ladies in this town, in which there was more 

MaryLyoo. 3 



50 LIFE OP MART LTON. 

whispering than in all the schools in which I have 
been engaged for the last three or four years. The 
fault then was mine, and I knew not but that the 
effects might be felt even now. 

"At the commencement, I thought it best to bor- 
row Miss Grant's plan to prevent whispering. All 
came into the arrangement except one of the best 
scholars. But after I had passed a few almost sleep- 
less nights about it, a kind Providence so directed 
and guided her mind that she came cheerfully into 
the arrangement. 

" One pupil refused entirely to write; but I was 
assisted in leading her to comply with the require- 
ment. Some other things I could mention. Suffice it 
to say, that I have had just enough of such things to 
give me continual anxiety; but God in his providence 
has been very kind to me. Many events have termi- 
nated as I desired, when it seemed not at all in my 
power to control them. My school, in many respects, 
is very pleasant. I have but two or three pupils under 
sixteen years of age. On the whole, I think it the 
best school I ever bad ; I do not mean the best in 
which I have been engaged. I have an opportu- 
nity this winter to see the value of what I gained at 
Deny. 

" I hope, my dear sister, you live near your Sav- 
iour, while I am far from him, and walk on in dark- 
ness. I hope you enjoy the light of his countenance, 
and rejoice in the God of your salvation. I do not 
think it favorable to piety to have so much anxiety 
as I have had this winter; but I would not attribute 
iny coldness to any outward circumstances ; I would 



AT DERBY. 51 

rather fear thai? I have never known the love of the 
Lord Jesus Christ." 

/After the close of her school in Buckland, she 
went to Troy, N. T., and passed her vacation in the 
family of Professor Eaton, from which place she wrote 
to Miss Grant. 

" April 1, 1825. I wrote to Professor Eaton, stat- 
ing my general success and difficulties in experiments 
in chemistry, last summer. He returned an answer, 
generously inviting me to his house, and saying that 
I should do well to come to Troy, even if I could stay 
only two or three weeks, as he could tell .me many 
things during that time which would be useful to me. 
Accordingly I packed up all, as soon as possible, and 
arrived here .this morning. 

f"I shall attend what lectures are given to the 
Rensselaer school while I am here, principally in 
chemistry and natural philosophy. I shall endeavor 
to review the most difficult and most important prin- 
ciples of chemistry, in order to avail myself of the 
opportunity to gain the information which I need." 

To her Mother. 

" LONDONDERBY, Sept. 7, 1825. 

" Our school continues prosperous and pleasant. 
We had one hundred scholars the first term ; now we 
have ninety-two. 

"We need the influence of the Holy Spirit more 
than any other blessing. Most of our scholars are 
probably without hope and without God in the world. 
We have .here the children of many pious parents, 



52 LIFE OF MART LTON. 

whose prayers are daily offered up for them and us ; 
we also have the prayers of many others. Several 
mothers who have daughters here, devote a little time 
every Wednesday morning, between eight and nine 
o'clock, to supplicate the influence of the Spirit on 
this institution. Will not you, my mother, sometimes 
think of us at that hour ? May we not hope for a 
blessing?" ' 

To the same. 

September 25, 1825. 

" I have thought much more of you than usual for 
a week or two past. Although my situation is neces- 
sarily rather different from what it was in childhood, 
yet you will not suppose that on this account I love 
my friends less. I sincerely desire that I may ever 
be saved from neglecting my early friends, especially 
my mother, to whom I am more indebted than to all 
others, except my Maker. When I think of my moth- 
er, I think of one who ardently and unceasingly de- 
sires my temporal and spiritual welfare ; one to whom 
I owe much that I can never repay ; one who never 
forgets me, and never forgets that I have an immortal 
soul ; one the benefit of whose prayers I have long 
enjoyed, and whose desires, I trust, are now every day 
ascending to the throne of mercy in my behalf. 

" I have thought considerably this day of the im- 
portance of being prepared to do the will of my heav- 
enly Parent. What is more desirable than to have 
such a frame o&mind, that the habitual and uniform 
desire of the heart shall be, c Lord, what wilt thou 
have me to do V But I find a strange propensity to 
desire ardently those things which would seem to be a 



AT BUCKLAND. 5B 

peculiar gratification to myself. I would desire such 
a frame of mind that I might be ever ready to say, 
'Not my will,.but thine, be done.' I "would not desire 
any thing that would not be for the glory of God, and 
in accordance with the will of my Saviour. Some- 
times I almost feel that I am not my own ; but then 
again I find my heart desiring those things from which 
I had hoped it was for ever separated." 

To Kiss Grant. 

BUCKLAND, Dec. 26, 1825. 

"At present there is a little more than usual relig- 
ious attention in this town. This circumstance pro- 
duces in my mind some hopes and some fears. It adds, 
if possible, to my responsibility. The thought that 
some who were beginning to think about their eternal 
interests, may become so much absorbed in their stud- 
ies as to exclude God from iheir hearts, is truly pain- 
ful. I hope I may not be the instrument of hardening 
the hearts of those whom I tenderly love. My pupils 
appear very attentive to religious truth. Some are 
thoughtful, though I have no evidence that any are 
particularly serious, except those who profess to love 
the Saviour. Two or three of the latter appear very 
well. That heart must be insensible which could not 
feel, on observing the general attention manifest when 
a sermon is reviewed, a Bible lesson recited, or any 
religious Subject brought forward. Perhaps the Lord 
"may visit us with his grace. In him is all oijr hope. 
< " For a long time I have at intervals been anxious 
about my own state of mind. I have felt that if I 
were ardently attached to the Saviour, my desires to 
Tionor him would be more uniform. I have hoped 



54 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

that the Lord -would direct to means which would 
effectually more my soul, so that I could no longer 
sleep when reflecting on the cause of our dear Be- 
deemer. I have thought that possibly Providence 
had brought me to this place for good, that this sea- 
son might be profitable to my soul. But let me not 
depend on any means ; let me depend on nothing 
short of God. I know, my dear friend, that you will 
pray for me. Pray that I may be altogether devoted 
to the Saviour, that I may ever do his will, ever hon- 
or his name. 

"Fourteen of my scholars board in the family 
with me. The members of the school in the family 
have a table by themselves. As I was well aware 
that it. would require more than an ordinary share 
of dignity to prevent improper conversation at meals, 
I thought it was best to introduce some entertaining 
exercise. This requires an effort on my part, which 
I had scarcely realized. But I find it pleasant indeed. 
I frequently think, ' How could Miss Grant take care 
of so many last summer ? ; *But I recollect hearing 
you say that your first schools were as much your all 
as your one hundred pupils at Derry. 

" My spirits have been unusually uniform for four 
weeks. I do not recollect an hour of depression. I 
consider this a blessing for which I ought to be thank- 
ful.^ 

To Mrs. A. W. F 

"BucELAND, Feb. 20, 1826. 

"I can scarcely believe I have written you so sel- 
dom since you have been away. The truth is, for two 
years past my time has been so constantly occupied 



AT DBRRY. 55 

that I now understand what you mean, when you say 
that it is almost necessary to blind the eyes and hard- 
en the feelings against present and urgent calls, and 
calmly sit Tlown to write letters of friendship. Be- 
sides, every thing which I could write you will receive 
from other sources. 

"Tour sister H assists me, and we have a 

pleasant school of about fifty members. I enjoy so 
much that I sometimes almost fear lest I may have all 
my good things in this life. "We have eleven in our 
school professedly pious, and some of them appear 
very well. Some others are particularly attentive to 
religious truth. I have had a faint hope through the 
winter that this town and my school might be visited 
by the special influence of the Holy Spirit." 

The hopes expressed in the foregoing letters were 
realized, and several under her care, there commenced 
a religious life. 

To her Mother. 

" LONDONDBEBY, May 20, 1826. 

" I hope my friends will remember that I am inter- 
ested in little things. It does my heart good to read 
a page filled with home, friends, 'and acquaintance. 
Especially am I interested in all that I can learn 
about my dear pupils, or rather, those whom I called 
such last winter. My attachment to that school and 
to that spot I cannot well describe. I delight to 
dwell on some of the last weeks of that term. Those 
days must be numbered with the most precious of my 
life ; and sometimes I can scarcely believe that all of 
those scenes were real. 

" I do not number it among the least of my bless* 



56 LIFE OF MARY LTON. 

ings that I am permitted to do something. Surely I 
ought to be thankful for an active life. I hope, how- 
ever, not to be so attached to activity, that, if health 
should be taken away, all my enjoyment; would be 
gone. I would rather so enjoy present favors, as com- 
ing from the hand of God, that, should the streams 
hereafter be cut off, the fountain might remain to me 
a never-failing source of enjoyment. I would desire 
ever to acquiesce in all the dispensations of Provi- 
dence. I would fain have it my first desire to do 
those things which are well pleasing in the sight of 
God ; and I believe I may safely leave all futurity in 
his hands. For this, my dear mother, I hope I have 
your daily prayers. 

" We have a pleasant school of ninety pupils, thirty- 
nine of whom have been with us before the present 
year. They are very attentive and studious. Only 
a small proportion profess religion, or hope they are 
Christians. At this period, when so many spiritual 
blessings are bestowed on literary institutions, may 
we not hope that ours will be among the favored num- 
ber ? Many Christians, parents and others, have been 
interested for this institution. We hope their prayers 
will be answered. 

" The young ladies are so very attentive to Bible 
lessons, that I sometimes hope there are good things 
in store for us; but my own heart is so cold I have 
reason to fear. Surely there is no hope but in the 
mercy of God. 

" The intelligence which we receive of the work 
of grace in Dartmouth College is refreshing. I hopo 
the students from Ashfield share in the work." 



AT DERBY. 51 

To her Sister F. 

" LONDONDERRY, July 4, 1826. 

" This day, you will recollect, completes half a 
century since the declaration of our Independence. 
How interesting must be the reflections of those few 
who can remember that eventful day ! And to every 
one, the events in our history must be an exciting 
theme. Who, on the face of the earth, fifty years ago, 
could have anticipated such results ? It is true that 
Washington, and almost all Americans who lived in 
his day, hoped for independence. But did they an- 
ticipate such a nation as this ? Must not all believe 
that 'promotion cometh neither from the east, nor 
from the west, nor from the south ; but God is the 
judge ; he putteth down one, and setteth up another V 
Must not all exclaim, 'This is the finger of God?' 
We wonder why we are made to differ irom others. 
Perhaps that same Being, that could with a glance 
look through the course of the Israelitish nation, from 
the selling of Joseph to the coming of the Messiah, 
has designs of mercy on all the nations of the earth, 
through the unparalleled blessings which he has be- 
stowed on this great people. And have not his deal- 
ings with our beloved country some connection with 
the causes which will bring forward that happy day, 
to which all who love the Lord Jesus Christ are look- 
ing with earnest prayer? 

" Considerable attention has been devoted to the 
celebration of the anniversary in this place; conse- 
quently we have not been able to continue the usual 
exercises of the school. We have had some anxiety 
for our young ladies, as ihe scenes of the day would, 

3* 



68 LIFE OP MARY LTON. 

of course, be rather exhilarating. Perhaps you will 
wonder why there should be this anxiety. I will tell 
you, my sister. We believe the Holy Spirit is now 
with us by his special operations. I think the school 
is in such a state as ours was last winter, about three 
weeks before its close. Seven or eight give more or 
less evidence of a change of heart. Several others 
are more or less solicitous, and perhaps nearly half 
the school occasionally inquire with interest what 
these things mean. "We have about ninety .pupils, 
and a great variety of character. A large number 
continue -thoughtless. Throughout the school, how- 
ever, there is a propriety of conduct, and an interest 
in Scripture recitations; and when I look on their 
state, it seems as if ' the fields were white already to 
the harvest/ 

To the same. 

" LONDONDERRY, July 30, 1826. 

" I seem to hear you anxiously inquiring about our 
school. The showers of divine grace continued to 
descend after I wrote you, even to the clo'se of the 
term. But to give you a just account of the work 
would be difficult. If you will look back to our school 
last winter, you will have a more correct view of our 
state than I can give you, as the scenes of a few weeks 
past have brought that season vividly before my mind. 
The attention cannot be considered so general here as 
it was in my school near its close last winter. This 
might naturally be expected in a school like this, 
where there is such a variety of character in the 
young ladies. Their habits, education, views, feel- 
ings, and principles are so entirely different, that it is 



AT DEERT. 59 

to be expected that there will be a great number who 
will feel that it is all an idle tale; a great number 
who will have it in their hearts to ridicule, could they 
but find a favorable opportunity. I have no doubt 
that many left the school as thoughtless as when they 
entered. This painful conviction forces itself on our 
hearts. But on the other hand, we are encouraged. 
We have decisive evidence that the Spirit of ^GLod has 
been present with us. The hearts of'several have 
apparently been humbled hearts which the power of 
man could never have softened. When our term 
closed, about twenty had expressed hope ; a few were 
anxious, while others were just beginning to ask their 
own hearts whether these things concerned themselves. 
In this state of things our pupils dispersed ; and what 
will be the result we know not. Revivals in semina- 
ries of learning generally terminate with the com- 
mencement of vacation. Tet there are some excep- 
tions, and we hope that our case will be one of these 
exceptions. For this, I believe many of our Christian 
friends are praying ; and we hope their prayers may 
be heard and answered. Should the Spirit leave us 
now, it would be mournful indeed. Much the largest 
part of our school are still without God. At the com- 
mencement of the term, eleven indulged a hope that 
they loved the Saviour, though they were not all pro- 
fessors ; add to these the new plants, some of which, 
we trust, will bear fruit, and you will see how many 
are left in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of 
iniquity. 

" Do write to me immediately, and tell me all I 
want to know. Give a great deal of love to our dear 



60 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

mother, brothers, sisters, nephews, nieces, and all my 
friends." 

During the next term, the religious interest was 
deep and extensive; but there is no record of the 
number who received the truth in love. 

To the same. 

"LONDONDERRY, Oct. 25, 1826. 

" The influence of the Holy Spirit on schools is 
indeed a great blessing. It should call forth the 
gratitude of Christians, that this blessing is more fre- 
quently and abundantly bestowed than in former days. 
I trust you will not forget my anticipated charge for 
next winter, in Sanderson Academy, and that you will 
pray that we may there receive a refreshing from the 
presence of the Lord. The school commences Decem- 
ber 13. About the 20th of next month you may ex- 
pect me. 

" Give a great deal of love to my mother. I want 
she should share largely in this hasty letter." 

To Miss Grant. 

ASHFIELD, March 13, 1827. 

"I must confess, were it not for my personal 
attachment to yourself, I believe I should feel an in- 
creasing inducement to devote my labors to the youth 
of my native hills ; but as it is, I am not inclined in 
the least to give any encouragement of teaching here 
in the summer, before I shall have again seen you. 
There is an increasing interest on the subject of edu- 
cation in this vicinity. The number prepared to 
teach is much greater this winter than last ; and the 
demand from our common schools is so urgent, that I 
feel it to be a duty to endeavor to do something, at 



AT DERBY. 61 

least one winter more. I have therefore made engage- 
ments to return here next autumn." 

To her sister F . 

" DERBY, Aug. 22, 1827. 

" I love Miss Grant's society more than ever, and 
1 bslieve we may love our friends very ardently, and 
love them according to the principles and spirit of 
the gospel. I also think' we may love them in a man- 
ner displeasing in the sight of God. May I love in 
that manner which God will- approve. I have been 
interested in the lovely and perfect example of Jesus 
Christ. Though he loved all his own as the world 
loveth not, and though he laid down his life for his 
enemies, yet as a man we have reason to thi-nlr he ac- 
knowledged some as his particular friends. It is said 
emphatically, that Jesus loved Martha and her sister 
and Lazarus; and among the twelve was found 'that 
disciple whom Jesus loved. 7 

"My health is very good. I believe I have had 
more vigor of body and mind than usual this summer." 

/When Miss Lyon left Derry, in the autumn of 
1827, the question was pending whether the plan 
commenced in the Adams Female Academy should be 
carried on there or in some other place. After reach- 
ing Ashfield, she writes. 

To Kiss Grant. 

. ASHFIELD, Nov. 26, 1827. 

" I do ardently desire to continue with you, if I 
can be useful, even though trials should beset us be- 
hind and before, on the right and on the left. My 
own trials from without have seemed to decrease with 



62 LIFE OF MISS LYON. 

my distance from Derry, while the privilege of being 
with my dearest earthly friend has increased in my 
estimation. If I am ever permanently separated from 
you, I hope it will be by slow and cautious steps, and 
that I shall have clear evidence that I am deprived 
of this precious blessing by a direct dispensation of 
Providence," 

To the same. 

" ASHPIBLD, Dec. 10, 1827. 

"I ought to be humbled in view of my own igno- 
rance, and to be led to depend more entirely on God. 
I know that I have been earthly and grovelling in my 
desires, that I have been far from the fountain of life, 
and that I have been inclined to trust the creature 
more than the Creator. Since I received your letter 
I have deeply felt that I needed a heart conformed to 
the will of God, and I believe that my distance from 
the fountain of all consolation does not seem quite so 
great. 

" If I should try to tell you how much I sympa- 
thize with you in your trials, and how I want to be 
with you, and share in your daily sorrows and joys, 
the attempt would be altogether in vain. I know I 
can do nothing but commit you to God. May I have 
a heart to do this daily. May I remember you as 
Paul did the Romans. Rom, 1 : 9. 

" It is a sweet relief to my mind that you have 
a Father in heaven, and I do believe that all things 
will work together for your good, though the way in 
which this is to be effected may seem to us very un- 
desirable. You may not be saved from trials, but I 
believe you will be supported under them ; and after 



AT ASHFIELD. 63 

all, I trust you "will find more enjoyment even in the 
present life than the worldling who has no such sup- 
port. 

"When you supplicate the throne of mercy in my 
behalf, pray that I may love my dearest friends ac- 
cording to the spirit and precepts of the gospel; that 
I may so regard and improve my most precious bless- 
ings, that it shall not be necessary to take them from 
me ; and that I may be like Him who when on earth 
was holy, harmless, and undefiled. You know I am 
prone to be earthly, and that I need the grace of 
God." 

To the same. 

"December 26, 1827. 

"I fear that I ask more for you that is temporal 
than I do that is spiritual. I have been led to in- 
quire whether it is not very common for my prayers 
to centre on blessings which may end with this life. 
Three things I desire for you, and for these I daily 
supplicate the Father of mercies : that you may have 
wisdom from above to direct you to the best meas- 
ures; that you may daily trust in your almighty 
Friend, and in him find immediate and continual sup- 
port in every time of need ; and that you may be sav- 
ed from overwhelming trials. 

" If you should leave Derry, my feelings are all in 
favor of engaging with you summers. If, however, 
Providence should so direct that you should think it 
not my duly to be with you, probably a field of labor 
would be opened in this region. But I do not pur- 
pose to make any provision, even in my mind, for sum* 
mers at present, for I do not ^n to be reconciled to 



64 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

parting with you, unless I see that I must. About 
the winter I am not so confident. I have gone on 
here from winter to winter in a regular and advanc- 
ing course ; and in scarcely any sphere can I expect 
to be so useful ; but I entreat you not to act on the 
idea that I cannot be with you winters. 

"We have between forty and fifty pupils in school, 
and more are expected." 

" Dec. 28. The care I had at Derry of two trou- 
blesome pupils caused me more anxiety than my 
whole school this winter. I must confess that I have 
a strong partiality for pupils in this region ; they are 
so easily guided. I ought to be very thankful that I 
have so good a school, when I must go on without my 
best friend to counsel and comfort me." 

"Jan. 6, 1828. For some time I have been en- 
deavoring to examine my past life. The review is 
sad and mournful. It is now the twelfth year since 
the thought first entered my mind, ' Can these be the 
feelings of an unregenerate heart?' I remember the 
moment as well as if it were but yesterday; but since 
then there has been a period of clouds and thick dark- 
ness. "What an immense loss I must suffer through 
life, on account of the misimprovement of so long a 
period of my existence. I humbly hope I shall finally 
be saved, although as by fire ; but I have no reason 
to expect ever in this world all that spiritual enjoy- 
ment with which I might have been favored, if all 
these years had witnessed a regular advance in a life 
of faith and piety. Neither can I expect that satis- 
faction and success in laboring in the cause of the 
Saviour which I might enjoy, if I had received that 



AT ASHFIELD. 65 

preparation which can be gained by no means but by 
a long course of active, faithful obedience. May I be 
enabled to improve the precious moments as they fly, 
realizing that when they are gone they can never be 
redeemed. 

"It seems to me more and more important that 
the professed followers of the Lamb should commence 
their Christian course guided by the pure and per- 
fect standard of truth. Is it not too true that many 
take their standard from those around them, and on 
that account live a life which leads others justly to 
inquire, ' What do ye more than others V During all 
these years, I know not how many just commencing 
a life of godliness may have received an impression 
from me which will be felt all their lives. May I in 
this be saved from blood-guiltiness. But I tremble 
lest even this winter should bear witness against me. 
You know that I frequently feel that I 'can do little 
or nothing to aid Christians in a life of holiness. In 
this respect my responsibility is greater than ever 
before ; indeed, it is so great, that I know not what 
to do. Almost half of my pupils have more or less 
hope that they are the friends of the Redeemer. Sev- 
eral have indulged this hope but a few months ; in 
some it is like the faint glimmering of a distant taper. 
But few can be considered established Christians ; 
and of scarcely any have I much evidence that they 
possess deep feeling and a lively faith. Here we are ; 
what shall we do ? What can we do ? The influence 
of these on each other, the influence from absorbing 
studies, and that which I may exert, may produce an 
impression which shall affect their whole* lives. These 



66 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

precious souls have been sent here by the providence 
of God ; but what to do I know not. I am weaker 
than weakness itself, and my wisdom is altogether 
folly. May I be more and more sensible of the pre- 
ciousncss of the direction, " If any of you lack wisdom, 
let him ask of God. 7 " 

"Jan. 8. I hope you will never fear lest your 
letters should increase my solicitude for you ; for the 
reverse is always the effect. The more definitely I 
know all about you, the less difficult I find it to avoid 
that restlessness which I always find so unprofitable. 
What you have written to me, from week to week, 
has been useful as well as gratifying. Sometimes, 
when I have been reperusing your letters, sentence 
by sentence, to see if there was not some idea express- 
ed or implied which I did not at first apprehend, I 
have thought it would be well for me to read my 
Bible with like care." 

"Feb. 12. The privilege of laboring is to me 
more and more precious. I would not choose the 
spot. I would not choose the circumstances. To be 
able to do something, is a privilege of which I am 
altogether unworthy. Should I be laid aside, as a 
useless servant, it would be just. I would humbly 
seek that I may be permitted to labor faithfully and 
successfully, that I may be saved from those tempta- 
tions which my feeble heart cannot withstand, and 
that I may be blessed with whatever may be desira- 
ble for health of body and health of mind, and for 
general usefulness. For little else of this world do 
I feel at present that I ought to ask. May I be the 
Lord's, spirit' and soul and body." 



AT ASEFIELD. 67 

It was at about this period of Miss Lyon's life, 
that she came to a settled purpose that, however 
distrustful she might be of her own good estate, she 
would spare no effort for the salvation of others. Her 
prevailing fear had been, that she loved human sci- 
ence more than divine truth. Her mind, she often said, 
was of such a cast, that she could not look for much 
religious fervor or enjoyment. She often remarked 
to her intimate friend and religious adviser, " I think 
it very doubtful whether I ever see heaven myself, 
but I mean to do all in my power to prepare others 
for that blessed world. It will be a comfort to think 
that there are souls among the saved whom I helped 
to draw from the dreadful pit." 

Committing the salvation of her own soul to her 
Redeemer, and setting herself with a single eye to the 
work of saving others, she advanced rapidly in the 
divine life. In a few years her feeble hope became 
such an assurance, that she remarked to a friend, that 
though in degree her peace and joy were to those of 
a saint in glory only as the tiny pearl in a ring to 
heaven's massive gates, she yet trusted and believed 
they were of the same kind. 

To Miss Grant. 

ASHPIELD, March 18, 1828. 

"I have this day parted with my dear pupils. 
Since I last wrote you, my labors have been greatly 
increased ; but that they have been thus increased, I 
consider one of the greatest blessings I have ever en- 
joyed. 

" When our school commenced, I had a faint hope 
that the Lord would visit us by his Holy Spirit. But 



68 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

on viewing my own heart, I felt that I had very lit- 
tle reason to expect it. There I found an apathy, 
chilling and distressing. It seemed almost as if the 
fallow ground could not be broken up. I felt that I 
was taking on myself a great responsibility; but 
what to do I scarcely knew ; and the little that I did 
know I was very poorly prepared to perform. 

" The first week I made a separation in the school, 
after the plan that you have generally practised. To 
my surprise, nearly twenty were found who, in some 
form or other, indulged a hope that they were the 
friends of God. This affected my heart. The respon- 
sibility of attempting to do something for their spirit- 
ual improvement rested on my mind with an inde- 
scribable weight. It seemed to me that something 
must be done ; but I felt that I could do little more 
than endeavor to ascertain something about them in- 
dividually, and attempt to commit them to God. You 
know that this is a field of labor which I have gen- 
erally avoided. I felt myself like a little child, with- 
out resolution, without strength, without experience, 
and without wisdom. During my life, I have done 
very little for 'the growth of Christians ; but through 
the mercy of God, I humbly hope, that during the 
present winter, I have been enabled to labor rather 
more in this field, and that I have labored more suc- 
cessfully. 

" For several weeks, my desires for the impenitent 
were faint and few ; and almost all I met, either in 
school or out, appeared to partake^of the same spirit. 

I used to say to Miss W , that if the Lord should 

visit this school, we must always remember it as one 



AT ASHFIELD. 69 

of the more wonderful displays of Ms poorer, which 
lie sometimes condescends to make. We would re- 
count the scenes of Buckland, and contrast some 
who, from the commencement of the term there, seem- 
ed to pray the prayer of faith, with those in this 
school who were the most interested for the salvation 
of souls ; and we would say, ' There is no prospect of 
a revival, for this is not the way that God generally 
works ;' and then my heart would sink within me. 
Thus I lived on, week after week, till more than half 
the term was gone. But while man looketh on the 
outward appearance, God judgeth righteous judg- 
ment. I now believe that the eye which saw seven 
thousand in Israel who had not bowed the knee to 
Baal, has seen the effectual prayer rising continually 
from some hearts in towns around us, though I knew 
it not at the time. 

" The eighth "week of the school, Rev. Mr. M 

of H called to take a daughter home on account 

of sickness in the family. At the time he came for 
his daughter, I saw him only a moment. After ex- 
pressing a great interest in the school on account of 
its influence on society, and on account of its contain- 
ing so many teachers for district-schools the ensuing 
summer, he said that he had been anxious for its spir- 
itual prosperity. He only said it, but it found a rest- 
ing place in my heart, and there it has rested to the 
present time. I could read in his countenance and 
manner, that it was not an expression of common in- 
terest. It seemed suited at once to encourage and 
reprove me, and also to humble me in the dust. I 
have since learned, in more ways than one, that he 



70 LIFE OF MART LYON. 

has undoubtedly had great anxiety for souls here ; 
and I believe some others have had a like spirit. It 
is worthy of notice that the attention commenced 
among the young ladies from his parish, and was al- 
most entirely confined to them for some time. It did 
seem that the prayers of this good man were answered. 
He has since said to me, that he had indeed been anx- 
ious for the school ; but in the ardent desires of his 
heart, he had not been conscious of making any selec- 
tion, even though he had a daughter here without 
God and without hope. 

" This daughter returned, after an absence of three 
weeks ; but her father said he did not bring her de- 
pending on the school to give her a new heart. She 
found the influences in her room entirely changed. 
Her three companions, young ladies from the same 
town, were all rejoicing in hope. They had been 
ardently desiring her return, and now they could not 
see her willing to reject the Saviour. She was imme- 
diately affected ; but I did not dare to hope, for a 
while, that it was any thing but sympathy. Soon, 
however, her tears were exchanged for a solemn and 
distressed countenance, which bespoke deep, heartfelt 
sorrow. For a few days her distress was great. 
Though generally very much inclined to converse, she 
would now pass the whole morning, scarcely speaking 
a word; and her companions, though possessing all 
the joy and ardor of young converts, were awed into 
silence ; and like Job's friends, c none spake a word.' 
In eight days after her return, she was brought to 
rejoice in hope of a blessed immortality. 

"During the whole winter, Scripture recitations 



AT ASHFIELD. 71 

have been uncommonly impressive, compared with the 
means used to make them so. This interest was most 
manifest when the subject was a solemn one, such as 
'the mercy-seat/ 'the thunderings of mount Sinai/ 
etc. During some of these still and impressive exer- 
cises, it did seem that the effect must remain ; but the 
first recess would carry it all away. It was not until 
about the middle of the term that I became sensible 
that professing Christians were more awake, and felt 
more deeply their responsibility. Sometimes we 
hoped that the mind of here and there one, among 
the impenitent, was not quite so indifferent as usual. 
The first of the tenth week I was convinced that the 
Holy Spirit was indeed among us. From this time, 
with a very few apparent interruptions, the work 
went forward with a regular and increasing advance, 
till the very last day. About twenty expressed hope 
in the Saviour, six or seven left without hope, of 
whom two were not deeply affected. One of them 
tried to be interested, depending on her own efforts ; 
but her efforts were in vain. 

" The work was very still ; so much so, that many 
in town knew scarcely any thing about it. Our school 
exercises were as usual. Many of our friends who 
visited us observed nothing to mark this as the place 
where the Spirit was operating so powerfully, except 
a general stillness, and here and there a deeply solemn 
countenance. But to us connected with the school, 
the work has appeared great and wonderful. We 
have daily said to each other, ' Can this be true ? 7 It 
has been carried on so -independently of means, that 
we have frequently felt that our best hopes might 



72 LIFE OP MAEY LYON. 

easily "be blasted, and as frequently that the Lord 
could work and none could hinder. We have all had 
the conviction daily that this work is wholly of the 
Lord. The effect of this revival on those who in- 
dulged a hope at the commencement of the school, has 
been favorable. Many of them seemed to leave the 
school with a much higher sense of their obligation to 
labor continually for the kingdom of Christ." 

To the same. 

" ASHFDELD, April 3, 1828. 

"I am not indifferent to enjoyments. Your soci- 
ety seems to me a greater blessing than ever before. 
If I should enjoy it, may my soul be filled with grati- 
tude to God : if in his providence he should deprive 
me of this in a greater or less degree, may I never 
complain in my heart of him who does all things well. 
The will of the Lord be done. My own strength is 
weakness. I am a sinner, a great sinner. I can have 
no hope but in the infinite mercy of God. Sometimes 
I do hope I depend on him. But Oh, my wicked 
heart ; I dare not trust it. Still the Lord can give 
me pardoning mercy; he can give me strength; he 
can give me submission to his will, and a faithful, 
obedient heart. It may be he will do it. My daily 
desire for myself is, that I may know and do the will 
of God ; that I may live by faith ; that I may have a 
calm and quiet mind ; that I may be a help to you; 
that I may be useful in your school ; and that, in some 
way or other, I may be permitted to do something for 
the salvation of souls. I know I am remembered in 
your prayers." 



AT BUCKLAND. TS 



CHAPTER III. 

LABORS AT BUCZLAND AND AT IPSWICH. 
1828-1830. 

IN the spring of 1828, Miss Grant removed from 
Derry to Ipswich, Massachusetts, where a large num- 
ber of her pupils followed her. Miss Lyon, as before, 
cooperated personally with Miss Grant in the sum- 
mer, and kept up her winter school at Buckland the 
two following years. The school at Ipswich was in 
operation throughout the year. 

Near the close of her first summer in Ipswich, 
Miss Lyon was confined with a bilious fever, from 
which she had not entirely recovered when she went 
to her friends in Franklin county. Prom thence she 
wrote to Miss Grant. 

"November 28, 1828. 

'It seems to me more and more that we must ex- 
pect afflictions in this world ; but I think it appears 
to me more and more too, that they are no cause for 
despondency. I feel that it is safe trusting in God ; 
that he is a sure rock, which can never be removed. 
I believe that the blessings of this life are very great, 
and will continue to be so ; and that trials are trials 
under all circumstances. But I think I can faintly 
see that there is a foundation for support, when this 
world is not made all in all. 

" I believe I mentioned to you that my sister Put- 
nam and her husband were both sick. My sickness, 

llaiy Lyon. 



74 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

and all its attendant consequences, seem to me a small 
trial, compared with what I am now called to experi- 
ence on account of their family." 

Miss Grant proposed to Miss Lyon to assist her 
at Ipswich during the winter as well as summer. In 
reply to this proposition, Miss Lyon writes, 

"BuCKLAND, Jan. 22, 1829. 

"Had you made the proposal contained in your 
last two years ago, I should have had no doubt about 
the path of duty. But within this time, I have given 
encouragement of continuing in this region winter 
after winter. Within this period, the number of the 
friends of my school has greatly increased, till now 
there are many who would not justify my leaving this 
region, except for obvious and sufficient reasons. 

"The present necessities of this region; the expe- 
rience I have had in attempting, during five winters, 
to accommodate my plan to the wants of this com- 
munity ; the increased number of schools in the vicin- 
ity of Ipswich, compared with the scarcity here ; your 
abundant ability alone to form all your plans; the 
ease with which you could procure experienced assist- 
ants in the winter lead me to "doubt very much 
whether we should do right to be together the whole 
year. In endeavoring to decide, I do not estimate 
what I should accomplish with you, but compare what 
you would accomplish with my assistance with what 
you would do with the assistance of other experienced 
teachers. This I have considered a just balance, and 
weighed in this, you can judge as well as 1 how the 
subject appears to me. Since I last saw you, the im 



AT BUCKLAND. T5 

portance of this field has increased in my estimation. 
May we both be directed from above. 

"I have seventy-four pupils, and Miss L. B 

assists me this winter." 

Miss Lyon was nearly a year considering the ques- 
tions, " Where can I do the greatest good ? Where am 
I called to serve my Lord and Master ?" At Buck- 
land and Ashfield, she was surrounded by sensible and 
efficient young women, who looked to her with filial 
confidence and respect, and who, in most cases, could 
not command the means to go to the more distant 
and more expensive school at Ipswich. By them she 
seemed to be able to take hold of society, as of a sheet 
knit by its four corners, and raigfc it towards heaven. 
For them she had given up all elegant leisure and 
hours of literary recreation. Many of them she had 
pointed to the cross of Christ, and been the instru- 
ment of opening to them, in the certain future, the 
gate of heaven, the entrance to his presence. Her 
spiritual children, her sisters in Christ, as they were, 
could she leave them to be guided by other and un- 
known hands ? 

To Miss Grant. 

"February 16, 1829. 

" The past week has been an unusual time. I trust 
it has been a time when many hard hearts have been 
softened, and many a proud one brought low. I 
should be glad to tell you all, but I cannot describe 
the scenes I have witnessed. It is the Lord's doing, 
and it is marvellous in our eyes. The rapidity with 
which this work of grace has been carried forward 



76 LIFE OP MART LYON 

the week past, has never been equalled, I think, where 
T have been permitted to be an eye-witness. It is 
now just a week since the first instance of conversion, 
and fifteen are now indulging a hope, though very 
feeble in some cases, that they know the grace of God 
in truth. I find it difficult to know how much to press 
study. I am satisfied, however, that it is not best to 
make much alteration from the usual course. On this 
point I have had the advice of some of my judicious 
friends, and this is their opinion. On the whole, there 
is not much excitement in school, but all appears as 
usual, and in order. I have encouraged their coming 
to me frequently and familiarly. As my room is in 
the same building with the school, and as twenty-five 
of the pupils board here, my opportunities for private 
conversation are very good. I have had many inter- 
esting interviews with individuals, several since I 
have been writing this." 

"BuoELAND, March 2, 1829. 

"As you have cast on me all the responsibility of 
deciding the place for my labors next winter, I havo 
uow only to tell you that the matter is settled. I 

have followed the course of Rev. Mr. W , when 

he could not decide whether to go to N . He did 

not decide, but continued where he was. 

"In settling this question, I have looked at the 
situation of my sister's family, and the probability that 
my being here might enable me to render them some 
littje service. I have looked at the marked provi- 
dence that has led me along since I have occupied 
this field, Gen. 32 : 10, and especially have I reflect- 
ed on the spiritual blessings bestowed on this school 



AT IPSWICH. 77 

from time to time, notwithstanding my extreme un- 
worthiness, base ingratitude, unbelief, hardness of 
heart, and blindness of mind. When I reflect on these 
things, I fear to forsake this field of labor. 

" There have been no new cases of seriousness in 
school recently. Still we have evidence that the 
Holy Spirit has not left us altogether. Do pray for 
us. Your niece Mary expresses some hope that she 
has commenced a religious life. I consider her case 
unusually interesting." 

To her Mother. 

"IPSWICH, Sept. 21, 1829. 

"I have been considering, or rather reconsider- 
ing the subject of my winter labors. I am more in- 
clined to think that I ought to continue them here 
through the winter. My dear mother, what do you 
think about it ? At first, it seems more like parting 
with my family friends, than the present arrangement. 
But at second view the subject appears rather differ- 
ently. It is true that I have not generally favored 
visiting so much as to approve of the feelings and 
conduct of some who seem to think that every thing 
must bend to this one object; that, however much 
self-denial they might practise in relation to others, if 
it is a mother or sister, every other object must yield. 
I would have all contented, wherever Providence may 
place them, whether or not they may be favored with 
the society of father or mother, brother or sister. 
And if duty should call, I would endeavor to be con- 
tented, though years should pass without my behold* 
ing the face of one near relative. With my present 
prospects, I have no need to anticipate this trial. By 



78 LIFE OF MAEY LYON. 

visiting my native place once a year, disencumbered 
of school affairs, I might in a few weeks enjoy quite 
as much of my friends as I now can. 

" The religious state of our school is interesting, 
and has been so for several weeks. The Spirit of 
God is evidently among us, operating on the hearts 
of our dear pupils. The work is silent and gradual, 
but the effects are certain ; and that it is the work of 
God there can be no doubt. Eight or nine have in- 
dulged hope that they have found the Saviour, and 
the state of many others is very encouraging. So far 
the work has been slow; but the way seems all pre- 
pared by the Holy Spirit for richer and more abun- 
dant displays of mercy. It does appear that the fields 
are white already to the harvest. The blessing seems 
just ready to descend upon us. If there is no Achan 
in the camp, if there is no stumbling-block in the way, 
if there is not a manifest and decided fault on the part 
of Christians, we shall probably see greater things 
than these. Perhaps the Lord may put it into the 
heart of my dear mother to pray for these souls that 
prayer of faith which God will hear in heaven, his 
holy dwelling-place, and answer on earth. The school 
is very attentive to general instruction on the subject 
of religion, but still there are many who think little 
or nothing on these things, and care as little as they 
think. 

" Give my love to your family, especially to Mary. 
When I last parted with her, I supposed ere this she 
would probably be called to know the realities of 
eternity. May the Lord bless her." 



AT IPSWICH. T9 

The following letter will show her interest in in- 
dividual scholars : 

To Mrs. Ferry. 

" IPSWICH, Oct 1,1829. 
" MY VERY DEAR FRIEND I know you feel a deep 

interest in , and that your first inquiries would 

be about her. She possesses a large share of our 
affection, and her "welfare will continue to be a sub- 
ject of anxious solicitude, and I hope of our faithful 
exertions. She is more than commonly engaging, 
and she requires more than common care. The in- 
genuousness with which she receives new ideas is very 
gratifying. This is particularly manifest in gaining 
instruction from the Bible, whether this instruction 
relates to historical facts, or to its doctrines and du- 
ties. She began to think of her own salvation nearly 
three months ago, just before vacation. During vaca- 
tion she quite dismissed the subject ; but soon after 
her return, she began to realize that in the giving up 
of seeking religion for the world, she had greatly sin- 
ned, if in nothing else. Since that time, she has evi- 
dently experienced much of the strivings of the Holy 
Spirit. Her feelings have been variable, but her case 
has been very interesting, and for a few days particu- 
larly so. The result we must leave with God. When 
you remember yourself at the throne of grace, I know 
you will remember her. 

" The religious state of our school is encouraging. 
Between ten and fifteen are indulging more or less 
hope. Several others seem near the kingdom of heav- 
en, and in many there is an habitual solemnity. 
"I am to teach in Buckland again next winter." 



80 LIFE OF MARY LTON. 

Miss Lyon's multiplied labors, near the close of 
the summer term at Ipswich, in 1829, the journey 
thence to Buckland, and the care and toil connected 
with commencing her own school there for the win- 
ter, together with a severe cold, almost prostrated 
her. Her friends, as well as herself, saw that she 
might injure her health, and be lost to the cause of 
education. 

Writing to Miss Grant soon after her school at 
Buckland commenced, she says of these ills, " Perhaps 
they were sent in kindness to convince my friends 
here that my health can fail." 

When her friends in the western part of the state 
saw that she could not with safety labor in two fields 
so distant from each other, they urged her to locate 
herself with them. To this request she had but one 
reply that she had sacredly pledged her assistance 
to Miss Grant for the summers. 

To Miss Grant. 

" BUCKLAND, Nov. 18, 1829. 

"Though my school is such as to involve great 
and increasing responsibilities, yet some things are 
encouraging. I have quite as many of mature age in 
school as I have ever had, and I think quite as much 
improvement. Our present number is ninety-nine, 
and about forty indulge more or less hope that they 
love the Saviour. Pray for us that these may not be 
dead, while they have a name to live." 

" Nov. 30. I have just had an interview with Rev. 

Dr. P of S . He waited on me to express the 

wish of the Franklin Association of ministers, that I 
would continue in this region. He took up the com- 



AT BUCKLAND. 81 

parative importance of my labors here and with yon. 
I did not succeed in my efforts to lead him to look 
directly at the two important points : one, the great 
difficulties of my laboring in two places ; and the 
other, that I am pledged to you for summers. He 
brought no argument to prove that I ought to labor 
in both places, but like many others, urged that I 
ought to labor here both, winter and summer." 

In view of her happiness, her health, and her con- 
sequent usefulness, Miss Lyon finally decided to unite 
with Miss Grant for the two succeeding winters as 
well as summers, leaving the question as to the place 
of her labors after that period for future considera- 
tion. In a letter of December 9, 1829, communicating 
this decision to Miss Grant, gjie says, " It is fully un- 
derstood that I leave Buckland because I consider it 
injudicious to attempt to occupy two fields of labor 
so distant from each other. 

jne year ago, I should not have supposed that I 
could so quietly and cheerfully have decided to leave 
this beloved field. The prospect of my future labors 
is pleasant, but excites no high anticipations. Tour 
society will always be to me a source of the highest 
earthly enjoyment, but I do not mean to make it 'my 
meat and my drink.'" 

This decision was, no doubt, a wise one. She had 
won confidence and honor in her own country, and 
He whose counsel she devoutly sought, saw that it 
would forward the work which he had raised her up 
to accomplish, if she should for a time fully identify 
herself with the Ipswich school. 



82 LIFE OF MAEY LYON. 

To Miss Grant. 

" BUCKLAND, Jan. 1, 1830. 

" My labors are indeed abundant, my cares almost 
overwhelming, and they continue to increase. I de- 
vote more attention to individuals than formerly. I 
consider it an important way of doing good, especial 
ly as this is my last winter with them. It is always 
convenient to find some one whom I want to see, or 
some one who wants to see me ; so that I have not a 
single half hour on which I can depend, from eight in 
the morning till nine in the evening. You will say 
that I need more aid, and I am happy to say that I 
have engaged Miss White for the remainder of the 
winter." 

. To her sister Bosina. 

" BUCKLAND, March 9, 1830. 

" It is now a week since I parted with my pupils. 
I believe that my schools have been more -and more 
interesting every winter, and we all think this has 
been the most so of all. I have never witnessed such 
an improvement in moral character, in ardent desire 
to possess meekness, humility, patience, perseverance, 
etc. A spirit of benevolence has prevailed among us 
to such a degree that selfishness has appeared to most 
of our little community somewhat in its own charac- 
ter. We have made it an object to gain enlarged and 
correct views, especially relating to our own country, 
its present state, its interesting character, its wants, 
its prospects, as to what needs to be done, what can 
be done, what ought to be done; and finally, as to 
what is our duty. Many intelligent, refined young 
ladies, who have been brought up in the lap of indul- 
gence, thought they should be willing to go to the 



AT BTJCELAND. 83 

remotest corner of the world, and teach a school 
among the most degraded and ignorant, might it only 
be said of them by their Master, as it was said of one 
of old, ' She hath done what she could. 7 But more 
than all, we have been visited by the influence of the 
Holy Spirit. Soon after the commencement of the 
school, the gentle dews began to, descend, and con- 
tinued to increase until the last week, when we were 
blessed with a plentiful and refreshing shower. More 
than thirty expressed some hope that they had found 
the Saviour precious to their souls. At the com- 
mencement of the term more than forty indulged this 
hope. Among these there was evidently a great im- 
provement in Christian character. It has seemed as 
if the effects of this work of the Spirit must continue." 

The success of the beloved school to which Miss 
Lyon bade a final farewell, March 2, 1830, shows 
what one competent woman can do with compara- 
tively small accommodations, in a community alive to 
the blessings of education. In Ashfield, she had the use 
of the academy building ; in Buckland, where she spent 
the first two and the last two of the six winters, her 
school-room was a hall used for social religious meet- 
ings ; and as the pupils increased, the teachers used 
their own rooms for recitations. The first winter, 
the school numbered twenty-five; the last, nearly one 
hundred. The scholars of one winter were an adver- 
tisement for the next. Hiding herself in the shadow 
of her own loved hills, happy in her work, and seek- 
ing only to do it well, she and her assistant were often 
occupied with it twelve hours out of the twenty-four. 



84 LIFE OP MARY LYON. 

The school was moderate in its expenses ; the fam- 
ilies near by, sensible of its advantages, made every 
effort to board the pupils, one family receiving twelve, 
and another fourteen. The Mends of the school open- 
ed their honses, not to make a living, but to accom- 
modate the young women, who were expected to wait 
on themselves as njuch as they could without hinder- 
ing the work of the family. They either did their 
own washing or sent it home. Tuition was three 
dollars per quarter, and board from one dollar to one 
dollar twenty-five cents per week. This school be- 
coming the resort of many who had been, or expected 
.0 be teachers, and Miss Lyon aiming to fit them for 
their work, reading, writing, spelling, mental and 
written arithmetic, geography, English grammar, and 
the Scriptures, were made leading studies. Herself a 
pattern teacher in them all, she showed every pupil 
how to teach. After the first winter, she introduced 
one or two higher branches, varying the choice so as 
to meet the wants and wishes of the former pupils. 
The celebrity of the school in that region was such, 
that to have attended it one or more winters became 
a letter of recommendation to a candidate for teach- 
ing. If sfie had the imitativeness, tact, or talent to 
make her scholars do as well as she had been made to 
do, she was sure to be employed and to be wanted in 
the, same district the next year. Though the word 
had not then found its way thither, it was, to all in- 
tents and purposes, a normal school. 

rhe religious character of the Buckland school, 
more than any thing else, drew the hearts of the 
good people towards it. Daughters who went thither 



AT BUCKLAND. 85 

thoughtless and bent on pleasure, returned home seri- 
ous, and bent on doing good. The gentle influences 
of heaven falling on the school, its members were 
turned from the path of sin and death to that of holi- 
ness and life, till, to the churches in the vicinity, it 
became a consecrated spot. In many a working-man's 
house, at many a family altar, it was remembered 
daily with earnest prayer and with pious gratitude. 
The absent daughter and her youthful companions 
were prayed for together, with hope and trust that 
there they might learn the way of life. Ministers in 
the sanctuary, when they prayed for colleges, did not 
forget the school at Buckland. Pastors and people 
alike felt that there education was truly a handmaid 
to religion. 

The young women gathered into that school had 
been trained to consider the mind more than raiment, 
and education better than the most palatable dainties. 
Equally removed from luxurious effeminacy and abject 
dependence, neither fearing the rich nor despising the 
poor, they sought to turn their time and means to the 
best account, to make the most they could of them- 
selves for the high purposes of usefulness and duty. 
Their minds and hearts were open to receive the great 
truths and principles which Miss Lyon revelled in 
presenting, and as it were, infusing into the minds of 
others. Becoming acceptable teachers in that part of 
the state, they made Miss Lyon known as a capable, 
efficient, and benevolent woman, untiring in her efforts 
to benefit the young, " Oh, 77 said Miss Lyon in after- 
years, " how I used to enjoy my labors in the western 
part of the state ; and how hard it was to me to break 



86 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

away from that beloved spot. I used to wish I could 
find some retreat in the woods where I could gather 
all the young women, and explain to them the great 
principles of benevolence, and set them to doing 
good." What she was able to do, only revealed the 
more fully what remained to be done. She often 
quoted a remark of Dr. Lyman Beecher : " The wear 
and tear of what I cannot do, is a great deal more 
than the wear and tear of what I do." Of the few, 
comparatively, for whom she labored there, she lived 
to see some eminently useful. Their history would 
exhibit the fruit of Miss Lyon's labors fruit " whose 
seed is in itself," thus yielding its hundred-fold. 

One of those pupils may be referred to as a speci- 
men. For six successive winters she was under Miss 
Lyon's care. With her she studied arithmetic and 
grammar, geography and history, astronomy and chem- 
istry. With Miss Lyon, too, she studied the Bible, and 
under its light and guidance, sought first the kingdom 
of heaven and its righteousness ; and from this early 
choice she has never wavered. Her mother had 
trained her to habits of courtesy, self-denial, and pa- 
tient labor. There was but little in-her external life 
to alter, when slie subscribed herself the Lord's. Her 
habits are all unobtrusive. Her spirit preferred, and 
prefers retirement. But she learned from her teacher 
that the business of her ransomed spirit, while on 
earth, should be to make this world the better for 
her presence in it. Who, save the pupils themselves, 
can ever know the impressive manner in which Miss 
Lyon could say, " young ladies, as they bear your 
body to its resting-place, may all who have known 



AT BTJCKLAND. 87 

you be able to say, ' She hath done what she could.' " 
Thus educated, and thus impressed, this beloved pupil 
of Miss Lyon, many years ago, left her father's rural 
home, closed behind her that pleasant chamber, so 
comfortably and neatly furnished, bade farewell to 
the privileges of her New England home, and took 
up her abode in a western territory. Miss Lyon's 
blessing went with her, and the blessing of many has 
fallen upon her since. She became an inmate in the 
house of a married sister, who, as to the good things 
of this life, was far differently situated from their 
parents in the old country. In a small room of their 
small house, she opened a school for any who wanted 
instruction. Fifteen timidly came in. She took them, 
such as they were, French, Dutch, and Yankees, taught 
them what they most needed to know, spent time, 
energy, and pains upon them, as though they had been 
princes, and she were to be richly remunerated for 
her labors. Plain in her person, and simple in her 
manners, almost as much out of sight as moles or 
miners, she labored to do good to those fifteen youth- 
ful minds. Others soon came in. The private dwell- 
ing becoming too strait for the school, the next year 
a house was built for its accommodation. The num- 
ber of pupils often exceeds one hundred. Yery many 
of the younger people of that region have been under 
her instruction. Her youngest scholars are children 
unable to speak plain ; her oldest, in the winter, are 
often masters and sailors of the vessels that ply on 
the lakes in summer, and these are among her most 
docile, studious, and agreeable pupils. On the Sab- 
bath, when there is preaching in the school-house, it 



88 LIFE OF MART LTON. 

is her business to keep her little scholars in due order. 
When they are not favored with preaching, as well 
as when they are, the Sabbath-school is h:li in this 
same school-house, in which, besides being the super- 
intendent, she has charge of a class of twenty of the 
younger scholars. Every one in that part of the 
state for it is no longer a territory knows her, 
loves her, and reverences her. The man who repre- 
sents the town in which she lives, in the state legisla- 
ture, at this very writing, was for ten years her pupil. 
Perhaps Miss Lyon herself, in the same situation, could 
hardly have been more useful than this lady. A num- 
ber of her school-mates at Buckland and Ashfield have 
been called to labor among the heathen in lands be- 
yond the seas; and though they may be more con- 
spicuous, they are not more self-denying, more patient, 
or more Ohristlike. Her vacations are short. The 
one room of her narrow school-house is her dwelling, 
for the most of her waking hours. When she can 
stand the additional labor, she opens it for an even- 
ing school in grammar, spelling, and the like, and 
among her pupils come parents as well as children. 
Some from the old countries have learned at this 
evening school to read, write, and cipher. She has 
always on hand stockings to knit, or garments to 
make for the orphans and the destitute among her 
varied flock. While she is doing much service for 
her Master, chills and fever, toil and time, are bring- 
ing her nearer every week to his glorious face. A 
few more years, and her humble soul, laying aside its 
weary, aching, and way-worn tenement, shall pass the 
portals of heaven, and enter on its promised rest. 



AT BTJOKLAND. 89 

What a happiness to Miss Lyon, as she looks from 
her Father's presence, from the heights of heaven, on 
the scene of her earthly labors, to behold not one, but 
many such streams of influence, destined to deepen 
and widen as long as earth and time shall endure. 
She has had many equals in disciplining minds and 
imparting information; she has had few in training 
characters for usefulness and happiness. The dura- 
ble impression for good that has been made on the 
multitude of living minds brought under her control ; 
the intellect unrolled in her presence, on which, by 
God's grace, holiness to the Lord has been inscribed 
in deathless letters ; the hearts of immortals, starting 
on an unending existence, which have been swayed 
aright; the souls which, under the influence of her 
fervid eloquence, have been kindled with zeal to go 
and do likewise the privilege to have been a co- 
worker with God in bringing about such results 
this, and nothing less, is the imperishable work of 
her life. Its fruits must meet her, not only when she 
glances from heaven to earth, but at every turn of 
her walks in paradise. The brick walls, the library, 
the apparatus at South Hadley, nay, even the cheap- 
ening of education to the daughters of our country, 
were but the external conditions to this work, and val- 
uable only as they conduced to its accomplishment. 



90 LIFE OF MAEY LYON. 



OHAPTEE IY. 

EXCLUSIVE CONNECTION WITH THE IPSWICH 
FEMALE SEMINARY. 

1830-1834. 

HAVING relinquished her own winter school, Miss 
Lyon gave herself exclusively to that of Miss Grant 
at Ipswich. Her labors here were varied, numerous, 
and important. She heard one, two, or three recita- 
tions daily, but gave the most of her time and strength 
to the duties of an assistant principal. The care of 
so mating scholars in their boarding-houses and rooms 
as to secure their highest good, of classing them and 
appropriating studies to each, and of arranging reci- 
tations, devolved at times in whole or in part upon 
her. She counselled the younger teachers, attended 
their recitations, kept order in the seminary building, 
and acquainted herself with the character, progress, 
and wants of every pupil. She gave much general 
instruction, had an open ear and a quick, ready sym- 
pathy for every scholar, and was regarded by all as a 
general friend and adviser. 

The following extempore remarks will illustrate 
the manner in which she would introduce a new regu- 
lation, and lead the pupils to self-discipline. 

" Early rising, young ladies, is not rising at any 
particular hour ; for what is early for one, may be 
late for another. Early rising, for any individual, is 
rising at the earliest time proper for her under the 
existing circumstances. The hour of rising should 



AT IPS-WICH. 91 

not be decided on in the delicious dreaminess of the 
half-waking and more than half-dozing state of one's 
morning slumbers, but the decision should be made 
when you are up and awake, with all your powers in 
vigorous exercise. In deciding, you must take into 
view your age. Young persons, who have not fully 
attained their growth, need more sleep than those of 
mature age. You must consider the state of your 
health. Feeble persons, with constitutions made to 
run only half the threescore years and ten allotted 
to man, often need more sleep than the strong and 
healthy. Some allowance, too, must be made for the 
temperaments of different individuals. Some require 
more sleep than others; but those who need a large 
amount should take their additional sleep in the early 
part of the night. Who was it that said, ' One hour's 
sleep before midnight is worth two after V Yes, Dr. 
Dwight, a man of large experience and careful obser- 
vation. Now, young ladies, you are here at great 
expense. Your board and tuition cost a great deal, 
and your time ought to be worth more than both ; 
but, in order to get an equivalent for the money and 
time you are spending, you must be systematic, and 
that is impossible unless you have a regular hour for 
rising. If that hour is five, and you are on your feet 
before the clock has done striking, then you are punc- 
tual ; but if you lie five minutes, or even one, after 
that hour passes, you are tardy, and you must lose a 
little respect for yourself in consequence. Persons 
who run round all day to regain the half hour they 
lost in the morning, never accomplish much. You 
may know them by a rip in the glove, a string pinned 



92 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

to the bonnet, a shawl left on the balustrade, which 
they had no time to hang up, they were in such a hur 
ry to catch their lost thirty minutes. You will see 
them opening their books and trying to study at the 
time of general exercises in school ; but it is a fruit- 
less race; they never will overtake their lost half 
hour. Good men, from Abraham to Washington, have 
been early risers." 

She kept on in this lively strain, till she saw the 
school prepared to make a proper decision, when she 
would say, " Now, young ladies, I want every one of 
you to fix on an hour of rising for a week to come. 
Be sure not to fix on too early an hour, for it would 
not injure your character so much to make a mistake, 
and decide to rise at six, when you might rise at half 
past five without any injury to your health, as to fail 
of meeting your own appointment." 

In the freshness of the forenoon, their minds un- 
clouded by overeating, overstudy, or unhealthy excite- 
ment, the pupils would generally fix on an earlier 
hour for themselves than their teachers would for 
them. 

Mss Lyon would proceed : " All who have decided 
on their time of rising, for a week, may raise their 
hands." The irresolute and the sluggish would be 
unable to come to any decision. She would next say, 
" You may all rise ; all means every one. Yes, all are 
on their feet now. If you have decided on your time 
of rising, you may take your seat." The lovers of 
their own ease and comfort would be left standing, 
while a large majority of the school were comfortably 
seated. "As fast as you fix on the hour, you may 



AT IPSWICH. 93 

take your seats," "was the curt and effective address to 
those who were still unable to decide. No one could 
sit down undecided, without acting a falsehood, which 
was considered in the school dishonorable, as well as 
wrong. If any were inclined to stand it out, she was 
patient with them, and willing to stand as long as 
they did. When all had signified that the decision 
was made, they were directed to write down their 
decision, and hand the papers to her, or keep them 
till she called for them. One of the first remarks on 
th succeeding day would be, " How did you succeed, 
young ladies, about rising? You may all stand. 
Those who were up this morning at the time they set 
yesterday, may take their seats." A very large ma- 
jority would be found to have kept their resolutions, 
and the delinquents could complain of no one but 
themselves. Having broken their own rules, and 
fallen short of their own standard, they could not but 
feel self-condemned. 

The school at Ipswich continued to increase until, 
in 1831, there were one hundred and ninety pupils; 
but as there were not suitable and available accom- 
modations for so many, the number was reduced: 
first, by not receiving any under the age of fourteen ; 
then by requiring certain qualifications for admission ; 
and finally by limiting the number of boarders to one 
hundred. On all these pupils, Miss Lyon inscribed 
her name and character as inefficeably as she had on 
those at Buckland and Ashfield. They went their 
several ways when they left her, with the impression 
that, for efficiency, for unpretending goodness, for 
power to direct and control mind, and for skill in 



94 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

exhibiting divine troth, she had scarcely an equal 
among the daughters of men. 

The following letter to her mother gives us a 
glance at the religious prosperity enjoyed in that 
school during the first winter she was connected 
with it. 

"April 9, 1831. In great mercy, the Lord has 
been pleased again to visit our school by the influence 
of his Holy Spirit. There is seldom a time when 
some one belonging to the seminary is not apparently 
seeking the way of eternal life. During most of he 
winter, the school has been in an interesting state. 
For several of the last weeks it became much more so. 
Not far from twenty indulged a hope of having passed 
from death unto life. Our school will soon be togeth- 
er again. I trust you will pray for us, that we may 
again be visited by a refreshing from the presence of 
the Lord." 

In the autumn of 1831, after Miss Lyon had been 
continuously with Miss Grant, in the Ipswich semina- 
ry, for a year and a half, the latter committed the 
charge of the school to Miss Lyon, and sought the* 
restoration of her health in a milder climate. Though 
unable to resume her active labors until the spring of 
1833, the hope of a more speedy return led to a most 
copious correspondence between these ladies. In this 
Miss Lyon found her pastime, generally filling a sheet 
of folio post weekly. Prom these letters a few ex- 
tracts are here given. 

" Oct. 24, 1831. Rev. Joseph Emdrson was in 
school this morning. for a multitude of such souls 
as his. Could they be scattered all over the earth, 



AT IPSWICH. 05 

this polluted and wretched world must soon become 
changed. The more I see of the rest of the world, 
the more I admire, the more I love such a spirit as 
his. What a delightful place will heaven be! Thanks 
be to God, that ' nothing shall enter there that defileth, 
or maketh a lie.' Shall we, my dear sister, after pass- 
ing through this wicked world, and having been so 
severely tried with our own evil hearts shall we, 
being washed and made white in the blood of the 
Lamb, be permitted, through rich, free, and wonderful 
grace, to sit down in that holy place, where there 
shall be no more pollution, no more pride, no more 
selfishness, no more disobedience to God ; where we 
shall be no more distressed with our own sin, no more 
pained with the sins of others ? May you, my dearest 
friend, be ripening more and more continually for 
that blessed home." 

" Jan. 29, 1832. I am almost a stranger to lively 
faith and sensible communion with spiritual things. 
Subjects of great anxiety, I believe, I generally de- 
light to commit to God ; and I seem to have a reli- 
ance on him which casteth out fear. But most of 
these subjects are more or less connected with the 
world. In view of invisible and divine realities, my 
mind is darkened, my perceptions feeble, my heart 
cold and stupid. It seems as if such a low, grovel- 
ling worm of the dust could never be fitted for heaven. 
"With men it is impossible, but with God all things 
are possible. 

" Ever since vocal music was introduced into our 
seminary, 1 have had an increasing sense of its great 
practical importance. By our influence, and the influ- 



96 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

ence of our pupils on this subject, probably hundreds 
may be benefited, for a succession of generations. 
Those -who have been able to sing from childhood, 
do not know by experience the feelings which some 
have who cannot sing. When passing near the music- 
room last summer, and thinking that a large part of 
the choir, probably, had no more of a natural voice 
than myself, I found it necessary to restrain, with firm 
determination, a rising murmur. I have sometimes 
felt, that I would have given six months of my time, 
when I was under twenty, and defrayed my expenses, 
difficult as it was to find time or money, could I have 
enjoyed the privileges for learning vocal music that 
some of our pupils enjoy." 

When, in 1823, the trustees of the Adams Female- 
Academy at Londonderry invited Miss Grant to take 
charge of it, they stated to her their design of mak- 
ing it a permanent school of a high order. Entering 
into this design, and forwarding it all in her power, 
she had become, when she left Londonderry, exceed- 
ingly interested in the idea of a seminary which should 
be to young women what the college is to young men, 
and was full of the earnest purpose of doing what in 
her lay for embodying this conception. 

Miss Grant naturally conversed much with Miss 
Lyon on the subject of the establishing of a seminary, 
with buildings, library, and apparatus, owned as col- 
leges are, where successive generations of young ladies 
might be trained for respectability and usefulness ; 
but Miss Lyon entered into the project very slowly. 
" Never mind," she many a time said, between 1824 



AT IPSWICH. 9t 

and 1829, "never mind the brick and mortar; only 
let us have living minds to work upon." 

Miss Lyon, however, became convinced of the im- 
portance of such a seminary, and entered into the 
project, not merely as before from sympathy with 
Miss Grant, but also from her own firm and deep 
conviction that the thing was both desirable and 
necessary. 

During the summer of 1830, after the crowning 
success of her sixth winter in Franklin county, after 
she had decided to cooperate with Miss Grant 
winters as well as summers, and her mind had 
become interested in the idea of a permanent foun- 
dation for a school of substantial character, she gave 
the final negative to the question of marrying. 
Weighing carefully the probabilities of her compara- 
tive usefulness in wedded life and in teaching, the 
latter, in her view, predominated. The occasion of 
her decision was a tempting offer which she thought 
held out as good a prospect of a life of love and hap- 
piness as any she could expect. When she had once 
decided on giving her undivided labors to the ad- 
vancement of female education, it was fixed beyond 
reconsideration. The answer to any letter of a par- 
ticular character thereafter was quickly despatched. 
If the bishop of all the churches had thrown an apple 
of gold in her path, she would not have stopped in 
her race to pick it up. But between the day in which 
she sold the et ceteras towards beginning housekeep- 
ing which she had collected, like her sisters before 
her, and the day in which she made up her mind to 
give herself wholly to the work of female education, 

Mary Lyon. 5 



98 LIFE OE MABY LTON 

there was time enough for her to have been sought 
and won, if any one could have gained her respect 
and love. A warm heart beat in that broad chest, 
which, once appropriated, she would never have wish- 
ed to recall. She was without ambition to be known ; 
and, settled for life, she would have moved along in 
an even, lovely course, like her noble mother before 
her. Her life might have been many years longer 
here below, but the Holyoke Seminary would be 
among the things yet to come. Whatever were the 
means or the occasion, we cannot but see a provi- 
dence in the fact that she did not become encumbered 
with domestic cares, but remained heart-whole for the 
work of her life. 

Feb. 4, 1832, she writes to Rev. Professor Hitch- 
cock of Amherst : 

"REVEREND AND DEAR SIB Knowing that you 
are interested to learn any thing about the plan for a 
permanent female seminary which has been agitated 
by some of our friends for more than a year, I make 
no apology for this communication. The friends of 
this object, I think, are beginning to look upon it as 
connected with the prosperity and advancement of 
female education in general, and not simply as a very 
good thing to promote Miss Grant's and Miss Lyon's 
school, and facilitate their usefulness. These local, 
private, and personal views, I think, should be far 
removed from this object. Could I but be permitted 
to labor in the portico, and spend my days in clearing 
the ground for that which is destined to continue, 
and to exert an extensive and salutary influence on 
female education and on religion from generation to 



AT IPSWICH. 99 

generation, it would be the height of my ambition. 
What permanent female seminaries are now in exist- 
ence? What one in New England, of a high charac- 
ter, is necessarily from its plan destined to outlive its 
present teachers? Ought this so to be? Are not a 
few permanent female seminaries needed ; say one or 
two in a state ? Could there be a few of this charac- 
ter, designed exclusively for older young ladies pre- 
paring to teach, and soon to go forth and exert an 
influence in a variety of ways on the cause of educa- 
tion and religion a place of resort, where those from 
different parts of the country designing to spend their 
lives in doing good, might come together, together 
receive instruction, form and mature their plans, and 
exert over each other's views and feelings an exten- 
sive and powerful influence would not great good 
result? Might not such seminaries have an extensive 
influence in removing that false mantle of charity 
which has been thrown over a great many little 
schools, and great ones too, which have to a great 
extent had the moulding of the female character, but 
which have not been what they should be ? 

"The prospect now is, that this subject will be 
presented to the public in some form or other. To 
give the public confidence, it has been considered 
very important to obtain an able board of trustees. 
This business has been on hand several months. It is 
now settled. Seven have been appointed as trustees 
elect, and have accepted, and if the plan should go 
forward, will obtain an act of incorporation, and will 
become the trustees. 

"It is generally understood that the location 



100 LIFE OF MART LYON. 

should be in Ipswich, but some of the trustees con- 
sider it somewhat doubtful whether this is the best 
location, and will be disposed to make inquiry about 
other places. Feeling that a genial soil would be of 
vast importance in this first attempt, I have been 
exceedingly desirous that the locations on Connecti- 
cut river should receive at least a little attention, 
before it is finally settled in Essex county. 

" I desire that the state of feeling in your vicinity 
should be tested, if there is any way in which it can 
be done. I can do nothing more than to mention it 
to some of my friends there. One reason why I feel 
desirous that your part of the state should be selected 
as the location is, that I think it might affect the pub- 
lic in general more favorably, and give a greater pros- 
pect of success. If you think it a foolish and imprac- 
ticable scheme, my only request is, that you would 
commit this sheet to the flames, and bury the whole 
in oblivion. 

" Nothing can be done on a subject like this, with- 
out the attention of a few benevolent individuals 
whose time and talents are exceedingly precious, and 
whose hands are already full of other great and im 
portant concerns. None but such could excite an 
interest on this hitherto neglected subject. None but 
such could carry it forward. None but such could 
give any hope of success. 

" I must now, my dear sir, beg that you wilt not 
look on this subject in the view of personal friendship, 
and feel under a kind of obligation to treat it with 
some little respect. Unless it commends itself to 
your judgment as one which has a high claim on our 



AT IPSWICH 101 

benevolence, I could not ask you to devote to it a 
single moment of your very precious time. But if it 
has such claims, I would most gladly entreat all who 
would befriend such an object to lend a helping 
hand." 

After a personal interview with Miss Grant, she 
writes to her, June 21, 1832 : " The last evening I 
was with you, a little cloud of discouragement passed 
over me, such as I have scarcely before seen for sev- 
eral months. But it was soon gone. Even before I 
left you, future duties seemed pleasant. Whatever 
God may appoint, it is enough if I can see the path 
of duty. I doubt not you have learned, to a great 
extent, to depend on God day by day for your daily 
bread. This lesson I desire to learn. How sweet it 
is to be directed from v hour to hour, with scarce a ray 
of light beyond. The darker the future, the brighter 
often is faith, and the more firmly do we rely on that 
arm which can never fail. I have often found myself 
attempting to preserve the manna till morning, but I 
have never succeeded. How wise is the economy of 
Providence, and the economy of grace. How should 
we rejoice that we cannot lay up stores for ourselves, 
either of wisdom or of faith." 

To Miss Grant. 

"IPSWICH, July, 1832. 

" Last week my labors were unusually fatiguing, 
and of course I had a headache in the morning, which 
once or twice continued all day. I had a few difficult 
cases, imperatively requiring much personal effort, 
besides some labors in school which demanded the 



102 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

last particle of my intellect and feeling, till I seemed 
to have but just physical strength enough left to bear 
me home, just intellect enough to think the very small 
thoughts of a little infant, and just emotion enough 
to tremble under the shock. I had been delaying 
some time, for a convenient opportunity to make as 
great an effort as I was capable of making, on the 
subject of conscientiousness in giving in accounts. I 
believe I have had some feeble desires, that in this 
and all other things every will should be bowed; 
that neither teachers nor scholars should have any 
way of iheir own, or will of their own, but that all 
might be swallowed up in the will of God. Pray for 
us, that in all these things God may be honored, and 
that it may be manifest to all that the will of God is 
done. For a few days, I have had a trying languor 
and stupidity, especially yesterday. How much of 
this I should attribute to the fatigue of last week, I 
know not ; but I doubt not that much of it may be 
ascribed to my own barrenness of soul. On the 
whole, I have .some reason to hope that I am becom- 
ing a little less worldly-minded. Pray that I may 
set my affections on things above. 

" Sometimes my instruction in school is so barren, 
and so disconnected, that it distresses me all the day 
long. But perhaps more frequently, I remember these 
seasons with some emotions of gratitude, that in the 
midst of great weakness, infirmity, and sinfulness, the 
Lord is my strength and my Redeemer." 

" Aug. 17.- that my soul were in health as my 
body is. When my obtuse intellect and more obtuse 
heart can perceive the truths of the Bible, they seem 



AT IPSWICH. 103 

exceedingly precious. The vagueness of my own 
mind is most trying, as connected with religious 
things. I often enjoy the anticipation of its not being 
thus in heaven. "What a wonder of mercy, if I shall 
at last find a seat in that glorious world, where the 
will of God shall be known and loved and obeyed. 
If, amid so many deviations, so much lack in our ser- 
vices, the little seasons of conscious sincerity, when 
we desire for ourselves and others that we may do 
just what God sees to be exactly according to his 
will, are so precious, how glorious must heaven be. 
Did we know nothing more than that God is there, 
and that his will is done continually by all, it would 
be enough. Do you think it any proof of great holi- 
ness in those who shall live in the days of the millen- 
nium, that we are taught to pray that the will of God 
may be done on earth, as it is in heaven?" 

To Hiss Grant. 

"IPSWICH, Sept. 15, 1832. 

" A letter arrived this morning, stating the death 
of my dear sister Ellsworth Rosina, you have heard 
me call her. She was a very dear sister tonne. 

" This event of Providence is peculiarly suited to 
touch the tender cords of my heart. She was a kind 
of darling among us all, and among others besides our 
family friends. She has left four little sons. Sister 
Moore, in writing of her, says, ' Another such blow 
cannot be struck in our family. Among all her nu- 
merous relatives, none can fill her place. Heartfelt 
kindness marked her whole manner. It seemed to 
reverberate from heart to heart the moment she was 
announced. The sound of her voice, like some charm, 



104 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

infused a thrill of joy, animating every countenance. 
Even now, I seem to hear her sweet voice, and see 
her animated smile, and the welcome of her fine eyes, 
when lighted with joy on seeing her friends/ " 

To the same. 

"Octobers. 

" My dear afflicted sister Putnam has finished her 
work and her sufferings. It is a great comfort to 
me, that she was so favorably situated during the last 
months of her life. The care I have had for her, ever 
since the death of her husband, has been so great 
that it now seems as if one of the strong cords which 
bound me to earth, was broken asunder. She was 
comfortably situated; there was nothing peculiarly 
trying in her last sickness and death ; and now, I 
trust, she is sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed and 
in her right mind. My mother has buried two chil- 
dren in one month, five hundred miles from each 
other." 

To the same. 

"November 3. 

" In oteervinghow ignorant the disciples were on 
some points, after they had been with Jesus three 
years, I was reminded of our inability to determine 
the way by which Christ will be most glorified. How 
easy it would have been for Christ to make them un- 
derstand that he should rise from the dead. But he 
knew it was not then best that they should under- 
stand this clearly. How little do I know what is 
best. I can pray, without reserve, that the will of 
God may be done ; that the kingdom of Christ may 
speedily come ; that the events which Christ sees to 



AT IPSWICH. 105 

be best may take place, and that we may have hearts 
to do the whole will of God. But when I pray for 
particular blessings, I often feel that perhaps I know 
not what I ask ; and it is a delightful privilege to 
refer the whole to God. I hope that Christians in 
this school may be fitted to labor in the field of Christ. 
May the regenerating influence of the Spirit be given, 
and may many be born of God. How few have been 
the hopeful conversions the present year. I was for- 
cibly reminded of this to-day, when I inquired who 
had made a public profession of religion. Almost all, 
who hope they are Christians. may the Lord 
again return, and may the showers of divine grace 
descend as in former days," 

To the same. 

" November 9. 

" I feel so well now every morning, when I rise, 
that I do emphatically enjoy health. My daily busi- 
ness, connected with school, is peculiarly sweet and 
delightful, I think I never loved a school so much 
in so short a time. There is an unusual evenness in 
my feelings, freedom from excitement, or from any 
rising above the common level. My cup is full and 
running over, and every future labor, or future scene, 
seems all that I could desire. I often say to myself, 
' How sweet are all my labors ; how sweet is life !' In 
what I have said, I have not referred to religious en- 
joyment. I find great cause for daily repentance in 
the sight of God. Though I often walk in darkness, 
and see no light, I am not left to wander long with- 
out any light. In my own experience I have abun- 
dant evidence that the Saviour is ready, not only to 

5* 



106 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

forgive seven times, but until seventy times seven. I 
have been very much interested, within a few days, in 
some parts of Scripture which treat of the forgiveness 
of sin. How boundless is the love of Christ in the 
way of pardon. How inexpressibly great and glori- 
ous is this subject. During a few months past, I have 
learned a little of the minor prophets. I have just 
commenced reading these books. 'I am now reading 
Hosea. The figurative language in the second chap- 
ter is exceedingly forcible. How strikingly are de- 
scribed the treachery, ingratitude, unreasonableness, 
and wickedness of spiritual departures from God. 
How exceedingly sinful is sin. How deserving of all 
the judgments denounced against it. But the bound- 
less love and mercy of God, as exhibited in the prom- 
ises contained in this chapter, I think most wonder- 
ful ; and so of all the promises to guilty sinners. 
How very interesting that Peter should receive an 
assurance that, though Satan had desired to sift hini 
as wheat, Jesus had prayed for him, that his faith 
might not fail. Our Mediator will never leave the 
weakest nor the most unworthy of his followers. He 
has undertaken in their behalf. He has begun their 
salvation, and he will complete it. How safe it is to 
trust in him. Here is all our confidence, all our hope. 
Here is an unfailing fountain. May we, my dear 
friend, both of us be permitted to rest under the shad- 
ow of his wings. May we walk with the Saviour day 
by day, hear his voice, and listen to his words. May 
we feel as he would have us feel, tMiiTr as he would 
have us think, speak as he would have us speak, and 
do what he would have us do. It is indeed a precious 



AT IPSWICH. 107 

privilege to live, if we dan have a single eye to the 
glory of God. I want you should pray for me daily, 
that I may have a heart filled with love to Christ, 
that I may have a zeal according to knowledge in 
laboring in his service, and that I may have wisdom 
from above to direct me in the right path. Pray that 
our teachers may be holy, devoted to God, and faith- 
ful in his service ; that we may none of us be entan- 
gled in the things of this world ; that we may all be 
able so to connect our temporal duties with the great 
business of eternity, that they shall not prove a 



Most of Miss Lyon's nieces, of adult age, enjoyed 
her instructions one year or more. One of them 
writes that the influence she exerted over them, in 
early life, in causing them to be educated, and in rais- 
ing higher their tone of piety, can be known and 
acknowledged only by their own grateful hearts. A 
letter to one of them, written at Ipswich, in 1832, will 
show the motives she held before them. 

" MY DEAR A In advising you what course 

to take in future, I should be guided very much by 
your own views and feelings about giving up yourseif 
to do good to do all you can to render those with 
whom you may be connected better and happier. I 
used to think much about leading my friends to en- 
deavor to educate themselves, that they might take a 
more respectable position in society. This is compar- 
atively of little importance. There is a great work 
to be performed before that time shall come which is 
foretold, and many hands are needed to be employed 



108 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

in this work ; not only those of ministers and mis- 
sionaries, tut also of females. The labor to be done 
seems greater and greater every year ; perhaps I may 
say every month and every week. How much is to 
be done by influence, in a variety of ways. How 
nrach prejudice to be removed. What an almost end- 
less catalogue of evils exists among the middle-aged 
and youth of the present generation. And the chil- 
dren will follow on in their steps, unless some greater 
and more powerful influence is used. I do most ar- 
dently desire that laborers may be raised up, possess- 
ing willing hearts and a self-denying spirit. Teach- 
ers of the right character can do much. 

"Now, my dear niece, will you not, in a measure, 
forget self, and decide to give yourself wholly to the 
service of the Lord, to labor in his vineyard, whei> 
ever he shall call, and ' whatsoever you do, to do it 
heartily, as unto the Lord, and not unto men? 3 If this 
is your decision, and you have evidence that you pos- 
sess a tolerable aptness for teaching, and can obtain 
your mother's consent do nothing without your 
mother's consent I should think it might be your 
duty to make even a great pecuniary sacrifice, in 
order by that means to be prepared to do the greater 
good. You need that skill in exercising moral power 
over others which you cannot possess without a thoi* 
oughly cultivated mind, and cultivated on the best 
principles. If your object is to devote yourself wholly 
to the service of God, and to labor to promote his 
glory by increasing human excellence and human hap- 
piness, I advise you by all means to bear the expenses 
of the journey, and come here to school. 



AT IPSWICH. 109 

" Tour tuition will be twenty-five dollars a year. 
I will give you enough to pay your tuition bills while 
here, without any charge except the charge in He- 
brews 13 : 16. " May you be guided in the path of 
duty, which is the path of peace." 

Mrs. Burgess, the neice to whom the last letter 
was addressed, writing to Dr. Hitchcock from Ahmed- 
nuggur after her aunt's death, says : 

" There was one way her ever-flowing benevolence 
manifested itself, of which you may not be fully aware. 
I refer to the pecuniary aid she rendered her younger 
relatives to obtain an education. This aid, if of much 
amount, was always in the form of a loan, to be repaid 
as circumstances would permit. I am one who remem- 
ber with many emotions of gratitude her timely offer 
of assistance when I was strongly desiring to enjoy 
higher opportunities for mental improvement than 
could be possessed in an academy in a western vil- 
lage. One remark in the letter conveying to me the 
offer of assistance made a permanent impression on 
my mind. It was her expressed hope that I should 
never forget the injunction, ' To do good and to commu- 
nicate forget not ; for with such sacrifices God is well 
pleased. 7 I feel now without doubt the influence of 
that wish, when I am trying to communicate to the 
school of Hindoo girls under my charge, and a group 
of women and little children who come more or less 
under my influence, the truths of the Bible. Many of 
her younger relatives who generally possessed more 
of a desire for knowledge than the means of obtain* 
ing it are much indebted to her for timely 'assistance. 



110 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

She did very much, also, to inspire love of knowledge 
and hope of success by her own cheerful temperament 
and looks of encouragement. 

" The aid she rendered was mostly in the form of 
a loan ; but her right hand, prompted by her generous 
heart, often gave when her left hand knew it not. I 
well remember the Tisit of a nephew, who spent a part 
of a college vacation with her. As he left her room, 
where he had been to take leave of her, she slipped 
into his hand a five dollar bill, saying, ' Take that to 
help in your college expenses the coming term.' 

" This pecuniary assistance was not by any means 
confined to her relatives. Many young ladies with 
whom she became acquainted, shared largely in her 
sympathies in this form. But of that I need not 
speak ; it was, as you well know, her abounding de- 
sire always in every way to do good to others, and to 
subserve the cause of her Master." 

In November, 1832, the attention of Miss Lyon 
was called to Amherst as a location for the school. 
Dr. Humphrey, President of Amherst College, wrote 
to Miss Lyon, saying, " Mount Pleasant school is at 
an end. The teachers and pupils are dispersed, and 
the buildings are soon to be closed. Providence has, 
so to speak, thrown Mount Pleasant into the market, 
and we should be glad to see such a seminary as yours 
there, if it should be thought an advantageous loca- 
tion." 

" The situation of Mount Pleasant," writes Miss 
Lyon, "is delightful. There are about fifteen acres 
of land connected with it." The owner was willing 



AT IPSWICH. Ill 

to sell it at its market value, or rent it at six hundred 
dollars per annum. There was no hope of raising a 
sum sufficient for the purchase. The utmost that could 
be hoped was, that the rent might be met for three 
or five years by the friends of female education." 

Nov. 29, 1832, she wrote to Miss Grant, "I am in 
favor of endeavoring to secure Mount Pleasant, be- 
cause I have next to no faith that the public are now 
prepared to raise a sum sufficient to meet the necessi- 
ties of the institution, unless it is done by stepping 
stones, and those must be laid by the actual progress 
of the institution. You know this is the way every 
thing is done in New England. Amherst College, 
and all the other institutions of the kind, have been 
founded by commencing operations, by forming a 
nucleus, and then calling for assistance." 

As Miss Lyon saw that the attempt to endow that 
school would probably fail, she began to revolve the 
idea of engaging in teaching in a distinct field. Her 
letter to Miss Grant, dated Dec. 9, 1832, contains her 
first mention of this subject. 

"I take my pen to introduce a subject which has 
agitated my mind for several months. Is it not your 
solemn duty and mine to review the question, whether 
my services are needed as much in our beloved semi- 
nary, as in some other portion of the Lord's vineyard? 
This is a question of deep solicitude with me. For a 
long time, previous to the present year, I felt that the 
question was settled. I had made a kind of decision 
that I should not mention the subject to you again. 
For some time after the above query arose in my 
mind, the trial of mentioning it to you seemed greater 



112 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

than I could bear. Often, when alone, I have found 
relief in tears. The burden of my prayer has been, 
that if it were most for the glory of God that I should 
continue to labor with you, the path of duty might be 
made plain ; and if it were his will that I should labor 
elsewhere, the way might be laid open that you might 
see it, and both of us be prepared for the separation. 

"In taking the superintendence the past year, I 
have seen that very many of the things which you and 
I do, when we are together, can be as well done by 
our experienced teachers. In the present improved 
state of the institution, there is really no more busi- 
ness that would come under the head of superintend- 
ing than can be done by one of us. Of the labor 
which needs our experience, and even mind, some 
could be done nearly as well by one as by two, some 
just as well, and some could be done better. I have 
been led to, make a little calculation how much might 
be done by the assistant teachers, and what is the 
least amount of labor which it is indispensable that 
the principal should accomplish, in order that the in- 
stitution may flourish. After a while the query invol- 
untarily arose in my mind, whether my services were 
really needed here, whether the experience I had 
gained was not more needed somewhere else, in this 
needy, impoverished state of the world. I did not 
intend to mention the subject till you returned ; and 
in the event of my leaving, I supposed it would prob- 
ably be best for us to take a year to plan for it. 

" But since your proposal that I should journey 
next summer, a new query has arisen, whether my 
leaving tfwn, and not returning, might not be a less 



AT IPSWICH. 113 

injury to the school than my leaving at any more dis- 
tant period ; whether it might not cause less excite- 
ment, and be less the means of increasing your labor. 
I should very much need more time to collect and 
arrange the fragments of improvement which we have 
been enabled to make, which are now more in my 
possession than in yours, in order that I might trans- 
mit them to you in the best order. But it would un- 
doubtedly be my duty to take some time to become 
refreshed, and during that time I could collect these 
items from memory, notes, etc., and arrange them for 
your use about as well as if I were on the spot. I 
could have no object so important, and surely I could 
have none so very dear to my heart, as that of leaving 
this dearly beloved seminary, this darling of my heart, 
under the most favorable circumstances. Now, my 
dearest sister, the subject is before you. Will yon 
commend it to our heavenly Father every morning 
with me? My faltering pen has obeyed my will ; I 
have succeeded in telling what I would. And now I 
beg, that while this question is under consideration, 
you will never allude to personal considerations on 
either side, for they are not the data by which this 
interesting question must be decided. It would be 
to us both a needless trial of our feelings. You will 
ask about our great plan. I do not think there is 
one chance in twenty for it to succeed. If it should, 
a different course might be taken." 

Alluding to difficulties which had arisen about 
Amherst, she says, "It seems rather discouraging, 
when I look over the last two years. How much 
'ime and strength I have spent in thinking, feeling, 



114 LIFE OP MARY LYON. 

conversing, and planning on this subject, and to how 
little purpose. How many plans I have drawn and 
altered, and how many sheets -written and burnt. I 
am not, however, disheartened. I am ready to at- 
tempt any thing which seems pointed out by Provi- 
dence, even -without any surety of success." 

Two days after she writes, " I have never known 
such an overwhelming interest in the great plan as I 
have for a few weeks past. It does appear to me 
that it is a good plan, and one which God in his own 
time will own and bless. I know of nothing which I 
should not be ready to do, nor any sacrifice which I 
should not be ready to make, to promote the object." 

Again in the same letter, " Every thing connected 
with the great plan in which we have been interested, 
takes hold of my inmost soul, and at once seems to 
prostrate all my powers." 

To Miss Grant. 

" IPSWICH, Jan. 15, 1833. 

"Is it indeed so, that your dear sister has gone to 
dwell for ever with the Saviour ? It is pleasant to 
think how many whom we have tenderly loved have, 
during the last year, gone home to glory, and are now 
enjoying that which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard. 
It brings the heavenly world very near. May we 
both be preparing for that everlasting rest. But it 
is a great privilege to live and labor in the cause of 
Christ." 

Referring to a school about to be opened, she adds, 
" I am afraid that their school will be suited only to 
the higher class, which in every part of our country is 
a very small class ; that their plans will promote dis- 



AT IPSWICH. 115 

tinctions in society ; and that, in their view, the im- 
provement of the masses is but a small consideration. 
But on the whole, I am glad they are about to com- 
mence. I trust they will do much more good than 
harm. They will lead their pupils to gain knowledge. 
They -will teach the Bible too, and I hope they will 
be careful to let the Bible take the lead. Then I care 
not how closely intellectual philosophy follows after." 

To her Mother. 

" IPSWICH, January, 1833. 

" I should be glad to have you write to me, and 
tell me all you know respecting the religious state 
and character of your descendants. I wish to obtain 
and preserve their names and ages, and keep a record 
of their deaths, as they may occur. I should be glad 
to keep some account of the evidence of piety there is 
among them. May they all be brought into the ark 
of safety ; and whatever may be their temporal condi- 
tion, may they bear the image of our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ. Will you, my dear mother, pray par- 
ticularly for your children, that they may all be wholly 
devoted to the service of God; that they may let 
their light so shine, that others, and especially those 
over whom they shall have an influence, may take 
knowledge of them that they have been with Jesus? 
How small a thing is the greatest worldly prosperity, 
compared with the blessing of true piety, in those so 
near to your heart. 

"There are a few cases in school of more than 
usual religious interest. Our whole number is one 
hundred. About half are either professors of relig- 
ion, or indulge a hope that they are Christians. I 



116 LIFE OP MARY LYON. 

hope you will pray for us daily, that all who love the 
Saviour may become his decided, active, and devoted fol- 
lowers ; and that all who do not now love God, may 
give their hearts to him, and be prepared for his ser- 
vice. May your life be spared many years to pray 
for the prosperity of Zion." 

To Miss Grant. 

" IPSWICH, Jan. 23, 1833. 

" It sometimes seems as if I had no place in my 
letters for small matters, there are so many great 
things demanding immediate attention. I enjoy ac- 
knowledging God at our meals very much. I never 
before realized so constantly his good hand in tempo- 
ral blessings as since we commenced this exercise. 
Before the first attempt, the trial became greater and 
greater every hour. After commencing, it gradually 
lessened from meal to meal, till now I feel that the 
privilege far overbalances the trial. 

" I have just commenced giving instruction on the 
epistles of Peter. We have had two exercises, three 
verses each. I have looked forward to studying and 
teaching these epistles as a kind of feast. But the 
commencement is more precious than I anticipated. 
that I might have a heart to receive into my inmost 
soul the glorious truths which emanate from many a 
'radiant point. 7 The good Mr. Shepard of Cam- 
bridge, on his dying bed, mentioned to the young 
ministers around him three things concerning him- 
self : 4 That the study of every sermon cost him tears ; 
that before he preached any sermon, he got good by it 
himself; that he always went into the pulpit as if he 
were to give up his account to his Master/ ;; 



AT IPSWICH. 117 

To the same. 

" IPSWICH, Feb. 24, 1833. 

"I begin to doubt whether you will consider it 
expedient to go to Amherst on the best terms on 
which there is any hope that we can go. The high- 
est of my hopes is only that by some means the rent 
can be collected by dollars and cents from the farmers 
and mechanics all over Franklin and Hampshire coun- 
ties, in order to make an experiment of three years. 
The greater prospect is, that at the close of that pe- 
riod the school will be thrown on the public without 
a home. But I am inclined to hazard, for nothing 
will ever be done without it on this subject. I cannot 
see one important step towards the 'New England 
Female Seminary/ which can safely be taken at pres- 
ent, and perhaps not for many years to come, unless 
this experiment at Amherst can be tried. If an agent 
for raising funds should now be sent out, in towns 
where he would need to raise one or two thousand 
dollars, he might not raise more than twenty or fifty. 
As the subject has gone forward for three years past, 
the public will not be prepared to be called on for 
money for twenty years to come. 

" Interest and zeal, I think, are what we now need. 
. This is not the time to inquire how the money can be 
raised ; but it is needful now to put forth every nerve 
and sinew to awaken an interest among ministers and 
other good men, till they shall feel that the object is 
good, and that it is feasible. But this interest cannot 
be awakened so much by writing, preaching, and the 
like, as by putting certain secret springs into action. 
Now, if any thing is done at Amherst, I think it should 



118 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

aim only at an experiment for three years, with, the 
express design of preparing the way for a permanent 
seminary. If this experiment can be made, borne on 
the broad shoulders of an associate body of gentle- 
men from different parts of the state as their plan, I 
have a hope that these gentlemen would so bring the 
subject before the public, that it would be safe, before 
the close of the three years, to solicit of the commu- 
nity the sum of forty thousand dollars." 

In the conclusion of this letter, we have the first 
distinct hints of those modifications of her plans which 
enabled Miss Lyon to triumph over all difficulties. 

" One point more. The funds for Amherst Col- 
lege have been collected, not from the rich, but from 
liberal Christians in common life. At the commence- 
ment of that enterprise, the prospect was held out that 
it would be a college of high standing, where the ex- 
penses would be low, and that it would be accessible 
to all. This was like a main-spring, without which it 
is doubtful whether it would have been possible to 
raise the funds. I am inclined to think that some- 
thing of this kind may be indispensable to our success. 
The great and honorable among the good will not 
listen to our cause ; but perhaps the more humble in 
life, led forward by their own ministers, may befriend 
this important but forsaken object. If so, if there is 
any class of Christians that we should seek to gratify, 
it must surely be the benefactors, whether high or low. 
If the same class of Christians who support our mis- 
sionaries should contribute principally to the raising 
of the funds, is it not important that the style of 
the whole establishment should professedly be plain, 



AT IPSWICH. 119 

though very neat ? If it were redly plain, would it 
not be more respectable to hare it professedly so?" 

The following interesting letter alludes again to 
the matter of a separation : 

To the same. 

" IPSWICH, Marcn i, i833. 

" Yesterday was my birthday. Thirty-six years of 
my life are gone, and now I am one year more than 
middle-aged. To look back step by step, it seems a 
long life, and the remaining years in prospect seem 
few and short. But my life and strength may be pro- 
longed for many years to come. I would that it might 
be so, if it is the will of the Lord. But in one thing 
I can rejoice that as long as the Lord of the vine- 
yard hath any need of my feeble -service, he will allow 
me the unspeakable privilege of living and laboring; 
and when he sees it to be best that I should labor no 
longer in this dark, wicked world, which has been 
promised to the Saviour as his inheritance, then may 
I be prepared to lay down this tabernacle with joy 
and rejoicing, and go to dwell with Christ, which is 
far better. Daily, my dear sister, do I endeavor to 
ask for you the same blessings which I ask for myself. 
Oh, this vast field, which is white already to the har- 
vest. May laborers be raised up in great numbers, 
to gather in the harvest, which is continually wasting 
away. May those who are in the field labor while 
the day lasts. May you and I be so directed, that we 
shall spend the remainder of our days in that manner 
which shall be the means of the greatest possible 
results. 

" One thing I have, for several weeks, wanted to 



120 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

propose to you. It is this : if Providence should ever 
make it plainly our duty to occupy different fields of 
labor, and to dissolve our legal connection, I should 
deem it one of the greatest earthly blessings which I 
could possibly enjoy, to keep as many of the cords 
which now bind us together unbroken, as could be 
done under existing circumstances 5 that we should 
assist each other in forming plans; that we should 
visit each other often, write to each other often ; that 
we should each feel that, next to our own field of 
labor, that of the other is the most endearing the 
field to which we have pledged our services, our influ- 
ence, our hearts. A union somewhat like this would 
be to me an unspeakable satisfaction ; it would seem 
to save my bleeding heart from sinking under the 
stroke of a separation; and my judgment says, that 
such a union would be suited to advance the great 
cause to which we have consecrated our lives. 

" If I should separate from you, I have no definite 
plan. But my thoughts, feelings, and judgment are 
turned towards the middle classes of society. For 
this class I want to labor, and for this class I consider 
myself rather peculiarly fitted to labor. To this class 
in society would I devote, directly, all the remainder 
of my strength, God permitting not to the higher 
classes, not to the poorer classes. This middle class 
contains the main springs and main wheels which are 
to move the world. Whatever field I may occupy, it 
must be a humble, laborious work. How I can get 
a footing sufficiently firm for my feet to rest upon for 
the remainder of my days, and where my hands can 
work, I know not. But by wandering around, and 



AT IPSWICH. 121 

by resting from my labors a year or two, perhaps 
Providence might open the door. I should seek for 
nothing permanent, to continue after my death, as to 
the location of my labors ; but I should consider it 
very desirable that I should oc3upy but one more field, 
that I should make but one more remove, till I remove 
into my grave. I shall soon be literally forty years 
old ; and if I am ever to leave my present field of 
labor, and begin entirely anew, it seems desirable, for 
my future usefulness, that I should begin soon, before 
many more of my remaining days are gone, or much 
more of my remaining strength exhausted. 

" The founding of a permanent seminary is so great 
an object, that it would be right to sacrifice consid- 
erable good for the sake of a small probability of suc- 
cess. My feelings are most deeply interested in this 
cause, and I do believe that such a work will be effect- 
ed at some future day, perhaps some twenty or fifty 
years from this time. But if it must be delayed en- 
tirely for several years, I have thought that there was 
nothing that we could do together which we could 
not do separately. If any indication of Providence 
should appear in favor of the great object, either be- 
fore it should be time to act, or before I should take 
fast hold of any other which time must be consider- 
able we could again unite our labors as before. My 
tandid judgment has been, that the probability that 
such a seminary would be founded during our day has 
been constantly diminishing ; but I have felt it my 
duty not to say much about it, but to put forth every 
'possible effort, till we should professedly give up the 
subject for the present. If in my own mind the chance 

Mary Lyon. 6 



122 LIFE OP MARY LTON. 

two years ago was equal to one in five, it is now re- 
duced to not more than one in fifty I would say to 
one in one hundred, or five hundred, if we except the 
ray of hope which beams from the possibility that an 
experiment may be made at Amherst, and the possi- 
bility that something favorable may grow out of such 
an experiment, if it should be made. My belief has 
been, that unless something unexpected should be 
brought forward by the wheels of Providence, the 
'time has nearly come when it will be your duty and 
mine avowedly to relinquish the object not our 
interest in the plan, but our attempts for its execu- 
tion. This I have not expressed before, and now it 
pains me to acknowledge my conviction. My convic- 
tion arose from the manner in which the scheme is 
regarded by various individuals, who, I think, are a 
fair index of the public. The public, as such, know 
nothing of any consequence about the object, and care 
less than they know. The public, as such, know not, 
and care not how Miss Grant and Miss Lyon are unit- 
ed, or when they separate, or how, if the school at 
Ipswich can go on well. 

" If the plan for the permanent seminary does not 
succeed, I have long felt that you and I must continue 
to labor, and make no more attempts for any thing 
permanent to result, except what is planted perma- 
nently in the hearts and in the lives of those over 
whom God may give us a direct or indirect influence. 
I consider it so important that your school should con- 
tinue to flourish during your remaining days of labor, 
that I ought to take a course which would diminish 
my present usefulness and hazard my future useful- 



AT IPSWICH. 123 

ness, rather than greatly to hazard the prosperity of 
your school, and thus your usefulness. A small haz- 
ard may be justifiable. 

" This letter has cost me more hours than any let- 
ter I have written you this winter, and I fear it will 
cost you more to read it ; and how little it contains." 

The aspect of things was such, that the nominal 
trustees of the proposed "New England Seminary" 
judged it expedient to dissolve their connection as a 
board. They had held several meetings, passed sun- 
dry resolutions, and made some inquiries in reference 
to the object; but finding the public mind indifferent 
to it, the zeal of most of them entirely failed. Miss 
Grant had been absent from Ipswich, and unable to 
engage in teaching during the fourteen months. in 
which they had been associated as a board, and this 
may in part have occasioned the apathy which was 
nearly everywhere manifest. April 6, 1833, Miss 
Lyon writes : "I think there are more than nine 
chances out of ten that the door of Providence will 
be closed against all future operations towards found- 
ing a permanent institution. If this effort should 
fail, it seems to me evident that it will be the duty of 
Messrs. Heard and Felt, and of ourselves, to take a 
different attitude ; to give up all thought and expec- 
tation of doing any thing directly for the object, but 
only to disseminate knowledge which may operate on 
the next generation. If the effort now commencing 
should fail, I think that we should select a favorable 
location for usefulness, and settle down for life, dis- 
claiming all expectation that any plan for a perma- 



124 LIFE OF MAET LYON. 

nent seminary will ever succeed in our day. We may 
describe the advantages of suet an institution, what 
the public ought to do, and what they probably will 
do in the next generation. We might always speak 
as if the public were not now prepared for such an 
undertaking, and would not be prepared for many 
years. When it is evident that all has been done 
that can be done on our part, would there not be 
essential advantages in our taking this attitude? It 
would be more according to the common leadings of 
Providence that we should in this way collect the 
materials, and that the temple should be built by our 
successors." 

These apparently fruitless efforts were not without 
their uses. A portion of the community had become 
familiar with the idea of founding a permanent female 
seminary, and some few were sorry that the scheme 
had failed. Miss Lyon's own soul had become com- 
pletely permeated with the subject. She knew not 
her own heart when she spoke of giving up all thought 
and expectation of doing any thing more towards the 
object, in case the effort in which she was then en- 
gaged should fail. Only ten days later she writes to 
Miss Grant : " I believe I once said something to you 
about having an institution at the West, with the style 
plain, the food simple, almost all the labor done by 
the teachers and scholars, and the expenses very low. 
Involuntarily my spirit has been stirred within me to 
try such a plan on a small scale, but I have hereto- 
fore subdued these emotions. I should not wish to 
undertake* it unless two or three judicious gentlemen 
and ladies should enter into it most cordially. Might 



AT IPSWICH. 125 

it not be of advantage, as a preparatory step for test- 
ing the practicability of tlie object, to make an exper- 
iment for a year or two on a small scale, say of thirty, 
forty, or fifty scholars, in New England ? A failure 
here would be less unfavorable than a failure at the 
West." 

Miss Lyon had learned to lay plans for buildings 
for a school and family in an economical and conven- 
ient manner. Most thoroughly had she been taught, 
that for efficient aid she must look, not to the honored 
and wealthy, who were already laden with responsi- 
bilities, and drained by constant calls for charity, but 
to men comparatively retired and unknown. She 
saw that it might be necessary to commence opera- 
tions on a small scale, and work with such means as 
she could command ; and by the experiment win pub- 
lic confidence and public aid to assist more largely in 
the enterprise. She moderated her expectations as 
to friends, till she felt that she could work if only 
two or three gentlemen and ladies would cordially 
sustain her by their influence and cooperation. She 
was convinced to a degree to which no abstract rea- 
soning could have conducted her, that the argument 
from the superior literary and scientific advantages 
of a permanent school could not be relied on for gain- 
ing the attention of the community, and securing their 
interest; but that some peculiar and tangible feature, 
addressing itself to the feelings and perceptions of 
the middling classes of society, must be used as a 
lever for moving public opinion and obtaining the 
needed funds. These lessons were of great use to 
her in her future and successful labors. 



126 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 



CHAPTER V. 

MISS LYON'S PLAKS MODIFIED AND MATURED CLOS- 
ING- LABORS AT IPSWICH PECULIAR TRAINING- 
AND FITNESS FOR HER WORK. 
1834. 



Miss LYOff spent the summer of 1833 in travel- 
ling and visiting. Her correspondence during her 
rambles is entertaining and instructive, but is omit- 
ted to make room for matter more directly connected 
with her great mission. Her mind, abroad as at 
home, was constantly at work on the problem, How 
can a permanent Protestant female seminary be establish- 
ed ? On her return to Ipswich, although she contin- 
ued her connection with the school, she devoted much 
thought and energy to the ways and means for secur- 
ing this object. Feb. 26, 1834, she wrote to Miss 
White, "During the past year my heart has so yearned 
over the adult female youth in the common walks of 
life, that it has sometimes seemed as though a fire 
were shut up in my bones. I should esteem it a 
greater favo to labor in this field than in any other 
on which I have ever fastened my attention. 77 With 
Miss Grant 7 s concurrence, she prepared and circulat- 
ed the following letter. It was obviously intended 
for any and all friends of an enlarged Christian edu- 
cation, as well as for those to whom it was particu- 
larly addressed. 

" To the Friends and Patrons of Ipswich Female Seminary : 

" It has long been a subject of deep regret to indi- 
viduals familiarly acquainted with the character and 



PLAN OF A SEMINARY. 127 

influence of tliis institution, that many promising 
young ladies, for the want of pecuniary means, should 
be denied its privileges. These friends of education 
and of religion have fixed their eyes on one and 
another of their acquaintances, who would be greatly 
benefited by the advantages of this seminary, and 
who have ardently desired to enjoy them for at least 
one year, but whose desires have hitherto been in 
vain. In behalf of such individuals, the inquiry has 
often been made, whether board in some families in 
Ipswich could not be furnished at a lower rate than 
usual ; and whether they could not render some assist- 
ance by labor, so as partly to defray the expense, and 
thus bring these privileges within their reach. Efforts 
which should meet in any degree the wants of this 
interesting portion of the community, would without 
doubt find a response in many a benevolent heart. 
Could the expenses be reduced one-third or one-half, 
a great number who now almost despair of ever being 
able to realize the object of their ardent desires, would 
be made to rejoice in the possession of opportunities 
for instruction and improvement, which they would 
value more than silver or gold. Many others, whose 
resources will not now permit them to enjoy these 
privileges more than one term, or one year, would de- 
rive scarcely less benefit from such a provision. To 
effect such an object, could not a separate and inde- 
pendent institution, similar in character to the Ips- 
wich seminary, be founded and sustained by the Chris- 
tian public ? Could not this be effected by some plan 
like the following? 

" 1. Buildings for the accommodation of the school 



128 LIFE OF MART LYON. 

and of boarders, together with furniture and all other 
things necessary for the outfit, to be furnished by vol- 
untary contributions, and placed, free from encum- 
brance, in' the hands of trustees, who should be mea 
of enlarged views and of Christian benevolence. 

" 2. Teachers to be secured possessing so much of 
a missionary spirit that they would labor faithfully 
and cheerfully, receiving only a moderate salary com- 
pared with what they could command in other situa- 
tions. 

" 3. Style of living neat, but very plain and simple. 

" 4. Domestic work of the family to be performed 
by the members of the school. 

" 5. Board and tuition to be placed at cost, or as 
low as may be, and still cover the common expenses 
of the family, instruction, etc. 

" 6. The whole plan to be conducted on the prin- 
ciples of our missionary operations; no surplus income 
to go to the teachers, to the domestic superintendent, 
or to any other person, but all to be cast into the 
treasury, for the still further reduction of the expenses 
the ensuing year. 

"Prom a careful review of the above principles, 
would it not be safe to calculate on a reduction of 
one-third, and perhaps one-half, from the expense of 
board and tuition at Ipswich ? Such a reduction could 
not indeed be expected to meet the wants of the more 
needy and dependent. The design would be to bene- 
fit more directly a very large and interesting portion 
of the industrious and enterprising, who are able to 
do something for their daughters, and who would be 
induced to make far greater eiforts in behalf of their 



PLAN OF A SEMINARY 129 

education than they now do, could they secure to them 
advantages equal to those of one of our best and most 
respectable female seminaries, at so moderate an ex- 
pense. If the s'tandard of female education among this 
class could by any means be raised, and its influence 
more extensively diffused, every department of society 
must sooner or later experience the beneficial results. 

" The difficulty of raising funds would doubtless 
be the greatest obstacle to such an undertaking. But 
there are many individuals in different parts of our 
country who confidently believe that something of the 
kind could be effected, if the proper course were taken 
to interest the public. The object should be brought 
forward with very broad and liberal views, without 
any semblance of local interest. It should be pre- 
sented as a public enterprise, for the public benefit, 
claiming equally the patronage of every part of New 
England. To effect this, and to secure public confi- 
dence, no special favors should be granted to the town 
where the institution is established. For example, 
none should be received into the school unless they 
enter the establishment as boarders, subject to all its 
regulations, in the same manner as those from abroad. 

" The location would be a matter of special impor- 
tance. It should be one which would be viewed with 
a favorable eye, not only by the immediate vicinity, 
but by the community in general ; and one for which 
funds could as easily be raised as for any other loca- 
tion. The spot selected should be adapted to the 
growth and prosperity of such an institution. It 
should be alike suited to nourish the tender plant and 
to support the lofty oak." 

6* 



130 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

To Thomas White, Esq., of Ashfield, who had 
been like a father to her, and who had taken a deep 
interest in her Buckland and Ashfield schools, she 
forwarded a number of these circulars for distribu- 
tion among the gentlemen of his acquaintance, accom 
panying them with the following letter. 

1 ' IPSWICH, March 5, 1834. 

"5fY DEAR SIR I have long felt a great desire 
that the advantages of a seminary like this should be 
brought within the reach of the common people gen- 
erally, and that by some means the expenses should 
be reduced to a level with their ability. I do wish 
our farmers would look at this, and see what can be 
done. If they would take hold of it vigorously, I do 
think something could be done, perhaps something 
which would secure the interests of thousands of their 
posterity. While it is desirable that every benevo- 
lent man should be able to grasp all the benevolent 
objects of the day, and do something for all, I doubt 
not but the best interests of the whole are promoted 
by having one mind directed to one object, and an- 
other to another. I have been thinking that if this 
object should be brought up and viewed in its true 
light, some of our fathers in the cause of benevolence 
might select it as the child of their prayers and of 
their charities. Who would be more likely to begin 
upon it than our wealthy farmers ? 

" And now, my dear sir, in your old age, would 
you not be glad, with a few other kindred souls, to 
be the means of commencing a great work which, in 
importance to the welfare of our country, of the 
church, and of the world, shall not fall behind the 



PLAN OP A SEMINARY. 181 

home missionary, or any other of our leading benev- 
olent societies? Would you not gladly see such a 
work begun, and advancing ? And how would your 
heart rejoice, if, before you sleep in the dust, you could 
see it rise and spread as our foreign missionary oper- 
ations have done. This, I believe, may be accom- 
plished, and he who, first putting his hand to the 
work, shall say to others, ' Come, and do likewise/ 
will deserve a place with Mills, with Robert Eaikes, 
and others of like eminence. I do long to have some 
one or more gentlemen look at this object, till they 
are ready to do something for it. I would gladly do 
as much of the work as I can, and I find other ladies 
ready to join in it. 

"I have long had a secret hope that the time 
would arri^p when I could consistently give up my 
present sphere of labor, and in some way devote my 
life, my strength, and all my powers to this object. 
That time has now arrived ; and after laboring half 
a year longer for this seminary, I expect to close my 
connection with it." 

Miss Grant was absent from the school during the 
summer of 1834, leaving Miss Lyon again in charge 
of it. The following are selections from her corre- 
spondence during this period. 

Writing to her mother in April of that year, after 
speaking of the conversion of a nephew, she adds, "I 
consider this a special blessing. I have thought of no 
one in the family circle so much 3uring the winter as 
I have of him. He was the eldest that gave no evi- 
dence of being born again, I was much interested 



132 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

in his general character when I last saw him ; but he 
seemed far from the kingdom of heaven. Have we 
not renewed cause to bless the Lord and praise his 
holy name ? We have surely another pledge of his 
goodness and everlasting love. And now, my dear 
mother, I hope you will have an increased spirit of 
prayer for your children and grandchildren. More 
than for almost any thing else do I desire to have 
your life spared, that you may have more time to pray 
for your large, increasing family. I hope you will 
stand at the last day on the right hand of the Judge, 
with all your posterity down to the latest generation." 

To Miss Grant. 

"May 6, 1834. 

" Yesterday we heard of the death of our former 
pupil, Miss Farnum. We have not hearc^the particu- 
lars, except that she had her reason to the last, and 
was calm in death. It is very pleasant to think of 
the five individuals who once were members of our 
family, that we believe are now together with the 
Lord Mrs. Wright, Miss Marsh, Miss Kingsley, Mrs. 
Bishop, and Miss Farnum. How evident is it that we 
do not know who it is "best should be called home, 
and who it is best should stay. In times past, life 
has seemed to me pleasant, and the privilege of labor- 
ing very desirable. But my feelings have undergone 
some change for a few months past. Now it seems to 
me that if God sees it to be best that we should live, 
it is vastly important that we should labor with all 
our strength ; but that whenever God may see it best 
to call us hence, we should cheerfully leave our work 
at a moment's warning. He who has given us our 



PLAN OF A SEMINARY. 13E 

work to do, can easily commit it to other hands. It 
is my desire to "be in daily readiness to leave all. I 
believe I do have some foretastes, from time to time, 
of what I think heaven is, though between these sea- 
sons there is much of strange stupidity. These little 
foretastes too, as they return again and again, become 
more and more enriching to my soul, and ravishing 
to my heart. But the imperfect fruit which I bring 
forth, and the more imperfect fountain within, form a 
strange paradox. The grace of Christ is sufficient to 
cleanse from all sin. This is my only hope, and a 
precious hope it is." 

In the nest extract she gives her reasons for insist- 
ing on comparatively low salaries for the teachers in 
the proposed school. 

" Is it not true that, on extraordinary occasions, it 
may be the duty of benevolent individuals to labor 
without expecting to receive that which is their just 
due ? Does not any good object which has not yet 
gained the public confidence, often furnish such an 
occasion? In such emergencies, has not the church 
always been able to furnish some who are ready to 
turn a deaf ear to louder calls, and continue to do so 
while the necessity lasts ? Was not the apostle Paul 
one who acted preeminently on this principle ? How 
plainly does he teach that the laborer is worthy of 
his reward, and that the Lord hath so ordained that 
those who preach the gospel should live of the gos- 
pel. Yet he used not this power, lest he should hin- 
der the gospel, and lest his good should be evil spo- 
ken of. That necessity has passed away, and it is no 
longer desirable that in Christian lands the gospel 



1?4 LIFE OF MAEY LTON. 

should be without charge. But do not some of our 
missionaries adopt a similar principle ? How great 
are their sacrifices, compared with those of ministers 
at home. What minister in a Christian land would 
not sooner relinquish one half of his salary, and even 
one half of the remainder, than subject his children 
to the evils to which the children of missionaries are 
exposed ? What reward is given to missionaries for 
all this sacrifice? Does it not appear that even jus- 
tice, to say nothing of mercy, would compel those who 
send them forth to pledge at least the education of 
their children ? This would be but a small return for 
the debt of gratitude due to some of our missionaries 
from the churches. But this return, the most precious 
of a pecuniary kind that can be made, the Christian 
public are not sufficiently enlightened to render. But 
the missionary cause has not been forsaken on this 
account. Louder calls do not turn the devoted mis- 
sionary from his purpose. Is not this the condition 
of the object under consideration? Is it not very 
important that mothers should be so trained, that 
they will be proper educators for the children of the 
church? To effect this, is there not great need of 
female seminaries, cheap but good schools? And is 
there any hope of establishing such schools without 
the aid of the benevolent Christian public? And 
while the public are so little prepared to contribute 
liberally to an object like this, may it not be expe- 
dient that "those who first enter the field as laborers 
should receive as a reward so little of c filthy lucre/ 
that they may be able to commend themselves to every 
man ; s conscience, even to those whose minds are nar- 



PLAN OF A SEMINARY. 135 

row, and whose hearts are not much enlarged by Chris- 
tian philanthropy ? If such a course should be desir- 
able at the commencement, how many years, or how 
many scores of years must elapse before it would be no 
longer needful, time and experience alone can decide." 

"May 12, 1834 

" My VERY DEAR MOTHER I do not expect to con- 
tinue my connection with Miss Grant after this sum- 
mer. I have for a great while been thinking about 
those young ladies who find it necessary to make such 
an effort for their education as I made when I was 
obtaining mine. In one respect, from year to year, I 
have not felt quite satisfied with my present field of 
labor. I have desired to be in a school, the expenses 
of which would be so small, that many who are now 
discouraged from endeavoring to enjoy the privileges 
of this, might be favored with those which are similar 
at less expense. 

" The course of instruction adopted in this institu- 
tion, and the course which I have endeavored to adopt 
when I have instructed among my native hills, I be- 
lieve is eminently suited to make good mothers as well 
as teachers. I have had the pleasure of seeing many 
who have enjoyed these privileges occupying the place 
of mothers. I have noticed with peculiar interest the 
cultivated and good common-sense, the correct rea- 
soning, the industry and perseverance, the patience, 
meekness, and gentleness of many of them. I have 
felt, that if all our common farmers, men of plain, 
good common-sense, could go through the country and 
witness these mothers in their own families, and com- 
pare them with others in similar circumstances, they 



136 LIFE OF MART LYON. 

would no longer consider the money expended on 
these mothers as thrown away. 

" Since I have lived to see so many of these ladies 
in their own families, I have felt more than ever be- 
fore that my field of labor was among the most desir- 
able. I have felt that I could thank Him who has 
given me my work to do. Oh how immensely impor- 
tant is this work of preparing the daughters of the 
land to be good mothers ! If they are prepared for 
this situation, they will have the most important 
preparation which they can have for any other ; they 
can soon and easily become good teachers, and they 
will become, at all events, good members of society. 
The false delicacy which some young ladies indulge, 
will vanish away as they see most of the companions 
of their childhood and youth occupying the solemn 
and responsible situation of mothers. It will no lon- 
ger appear like a subject for which no care should be 
taken in the training of daughters. 

" While, in the good providence of God, I have 
been permitted to occupy a field of labor where I 
could aid in preparing some who must mould the 
character of fature generations for their great work, 
and while I have enjoyed much in my labor, I have 
not been quite satisfied. I have looked out from my 
quiet scene of labor on the wide world, and my heart 
has longed to see many enjoying these privileges who 
cannot for the want of means. I have longed to be 
permitted to labor where the expenses would be less 
than they are here, so that more of our daughters 
could reap the fruits. Sometimes my heart has 
burned within me ; and again I have bid it be quiet. 



PLAN OF A SEMINARY.. 13' 

I "have sometimes speculated, and built airy castles 
and again I have bid my mind dwell on sober real 
ities. I have thought that there might be a plai 
devised by which something could be done. I have 
further thought, that if I could be entirely released 
from all engagements and all encumbrances, perhaps 
I might in time find some way opened before me foi 
promoting this good object. With this view, I de- 
cided some time since, if Miss Grant's health should 
be sufficiently restored, to propose a separation. Thai 
time has now come, and we have agreed to close our 
joint labors next fall. Miss Grant is to be absent 
through the summer term, to improve her strength, 
and then I expect to leave this scene of labor for 
ever. 

" I do not expect immediately to commence in any 
other field. I very much want six months or a year 
to read, write, 'plan, and do a thgusand other things. 
I do not expect to be idle. This may seem like a 
wild scheme ; but I cannot plead that it is a hasty 
one. I have had it under careful consideration two 
years or more, and for one whole year the question 
has been weighed by Miss Grant and myself. 

" I hope and trust that this is of the Lord, and 
that he will prosper it. In this^movement I have 
thought much more constantly, and have felt much 
more deeply, about doing that which shall be for the 
honor of Christ and for the good of souls, than I ever 
did in any step in my life. I want that you should 
pray for me, my dear mother, that I may in this thing 
be guided by wisdom from above, and that the Lord 
Y.ould bless me, and make me a blessing. My daily 



138 LIFE OF MAEY LYON. 

prayer to God is, Lord, what wilt thou have me to 
do ? If the Lord go not with me, let me not go 
hence. 

" Perhaps you may inquire what course I expect 
to take, and where is to be my future scene of labor. 
This I do not know. The present path of duty is 
plain. The future I can leave with Him who doeth. 
all things well." 

In a supplement the next day, she writes, " My 
dear mother, I want you to pray for the family with 
which I reside." 

After describing the different members, particu- 
larly their religious state, she adds, "Another member 
of the family is a young man whose mind was injured 
by sickness when he was a child. He makes himself 
useful, and is very faithful. As I have seen poor 

J go about, I have thought of his soul, and hoped 

he would at last shine in heaven.* 

" Another, for whom I feel great solicitude, is a 
woman who works in the kitchen. She is about forty 
years old, and cannot read. She is now absent on a 
visit. I commenced teaching her to read before she 
went away, and design to continue it when she re- 
turns, or engage some one of the teachers to do it. 
She has been very much ashamed to let any one know 
that she could not read. I taught her in my cham- 
ber alone. I want you should pray for these indi- 
viduals. I hope salvation will come to this house. 

* It is gratifying to state, that after the above letter was 

written, J , in great simplicity and sincerity, came like a 

child to Christ, and has since adorned a religious profession 
fey a humble and exemplary life. 



AT IPSWICH. 139 

" The religious state of our school was favorable 
last term. About twenty indulged some hope of 
having been born again. In about two weeks, the 
school reassembles. Pray for us that the Lord may 
meet with us." . 

To Miss Grant. 

"IPSWICH, May 16, 1834 

" What can any of us do without the blessing of 
God ? I do hope we shall not be forsaken of him. 
Pray for us all, and especially for the teachers, that 
we all may be fed with heavenly food, granted day 
by day, like our daily bread. When there is so much 
to be done for the blessed and glorious Saviour, how 
important that all our strength, feeble as it is, should 
be wholly devoted to his service. I am feeling more 
and more, that it is much more important that all our 
powers, greater or less, should be devoted to God, than 
that our powers should be great ; and that it is more 
important that all our time, whether longer or short- 
er, should be devoted to him, than that this life should 
be long. What a privilege to labor, feeling that, 
while we are spared, God in his infinite love can 
make use of our labors to promote the best of all 
causes, and whenever he calls us hence, we can lay 
by our work, as we lay off a garment, and the work 
can go on just as well without us. How full of wis- 
dom, goodness, and mercy, are all the ways of God. 
In eternity, we shall for ever feast upon his love. 
Sometimes I have great hope that the Lord will meet 
with us and bless us this summer teachers, scholars, 
and all. To save by few or by many is the same 
with God. It may be that he will honor his name 



140 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

by remembering us in our weakness, and by taking 
us all to be his own. It seems to me that this is my 
heart's desire and prayer to God from day to day. 

" Last week, I wanted to tell you how weak I felt. 
In the first place, a pain seemed to play around my 
head, just ready to seize upon it, and to unfit me for 
every thing. It became necessary to watch and guard 
my efforts as carefully as I would a candle in the gen- 
tle breeze. In the next place, my mind was locked as 
in a cage, and my heart was seized with a painful chill. 
So much for myself. In looking over the boarding- 
houses and scholars, I could find so little salt on which 
I could depend that it would not lose its savor, that 
my heart sank within me. The inquiry, 'How can 
these boarding-houses be so regulated, and the school 
so guided, that every thing may be done which ought 
to be done to prepare the way of the Lord, and make 
his paths straight?' came home to my soul, I felt 
like sinking ; but the thought that the Lord is able 
was comforting. Yesterday, I seemed to gather some 
crumbs from my Father's table, which revived my 
strength of body, mind, and heart." 

To the same. 

"June 5, 1834. 

" Last evening, the Life of dear Mr. Emerson came. 
I seemed to have a visit with the good man, asil glanc- 
ed over the pages one after another. I hope every 
one who loved him will enjoy the privilege of reading 
it. that I might derive important and permanent 
profit from this precious book. How large a portion 
of my life has already gone, and to how little purpose! 
When I look at such a character as his, whose time 



AT IPSWICH. 141 

was so systematically divided, so filled up with varied 
usefulness, and who was so persevering on so many 
different and seemingly opposite points, I feel a kind 
of stirring influence in my inmost soul, making me 
feel that I want to begin anew, like a little child, and 
live as I should live ; though it must be a short life, 
comparatively. But when and how shall I begin? 
How shall I live, and how shall I labor ?" 

" June 25. Three or four young ladies were anx- 
ious about their salvation when they entered the 
school. Others are somewhat interested. Last Sab- 
bath morning, I met twelve at my room who thought 
they were decided to make religion their first con- 
cern. Two of the number are now indulging some 
hope." 

" July 4. Returning by way of Beverly, I passed 

the night in the hospitable home of kind Mrs. B , 

and spent some time in reading to her and another 
good lady from Mr. Emerson's Life. It was a luxury, 
indeed, to read to people possessing such hearts. How 
justly might he say, ' Oh, with what eyes, with what 
smiles, with what hands, with what hearts, with what 
words, did they meet the feeble remnant of him they 
once honored as their minister so much above his 
deserving.' I love to read his letters. I delight to 
dwell on his sincerity. Surely, mine eyes have seen 
one honest-hearted man in this dark, deceitful world. 
I am distressed with the apparent want of sincerity 
among Christians on the first and grand principles of 
duty ; and more than all, with my own real deficien- 
cies in this respect. I am distressed that so many 
momentous subjects of Christian duty should wear so 



142 LIFE OF MART LTON. 

different an aspect in the pnlpit, and in the solemn 
and attentive audience, from what they do in the social 
circle, and in the business of life. Is there real cause 
for this distress? Is it owing to partial views of 
things ? that my own heart might be sincere, and 
my hands clean! 

" Last evening, Mrs. showed me an old tract, 

1 Mary and Martha/ which her daughter had brought 
from Vermont. I fbund it was written more than 
forty years ago, by my grandmother's sister. She 
was a good woman, in whom the meek and heavenly 
spirit of Jesus reigned all her life, almost without a 
spot. She nursed her aged parents till their death, 
after which she was married, and had one only son, 
who was content to be brought up by his mother's 
side, a stranger to the arts of the world. This child 
has now three little daughters, and for a son has taken 
the youngest child of my afflicted sister Putnam. 

" This little tract brought up a long train of family 
associations. It seemed an interesting relic of the old, 
venerated family of my mother's grandfather." 

To a gentleman at Andover, who had suggested 
that location for the proposed school, she writes, 
July 5, "I have decided to close my connection with 
this institution, with a hope of using my limited influ- 
ence towards advancing the belief that female schools 
of an elevated character may be furnished at a very 
moderate expense. I have much stronger desires to 
do something towards establishing some general prin- 
ciples on female education than to accomplish much 
myself. But I do hope that Providence will open a 
door where I may labor directly in a school in behalf 



PLAN OP A SEMINARY. 143 

of this great and important cause, as I believe I can 
do more in this "way than in any other. 

"I have no definite spot in view where I may 
spend the remnant of my strength in behalf of an 
object which for a long time has seemed to drink up 
my spirits. I have not been so affected, because this 
object is more important than many others, but on the 
same principle that I should be more moved by the 
cries of a drowning child where no deliverer was 
near, than by those of one actually in the arms of re- 
lief. I have no doubt there will be many objections 
raised. To avoid these, as far as possible, as well as 
to rouse a candid attention to any features which may 
be somewhat new and peculiar, I have supposed that, 
in many particulars, it would be of great importance 
to meet the views of the judicious part of the commu- 
nity. On this account, I have been desirous that a 
location might be selected by a committee so appoint- 
ed that they would be regarded as a kind of repre- 
sentative of the public. 

" I cannot now therefore give any definite opinion 
with regard to Andover as a location. If it should 
be judged by gentlemen from different parts of New 
England to be favorable, or the most favorable one 
for which there is any probability of raising funds, I 
should not shrink from undertaking even there, though 
it would be a location attended with difficulties. 

" The question of the expediency of my devoting 
myself to this object in some place farther west, has 
been several times mentioned to me. That influence 
needs to be put forth in the more western states, as 
in New England, cannot be doubted. The opinion 



144 LIFE OF MAEY LYON. 

which has so universally prevailed here, that female 
seminaries of the first respectability must necessarily 
be expensive, has overspread the whole state of New- 
York, and marched on farther still, keeping pace with 
every effort in behalf of female education. As I be- 
lieve,, with many others, that this opinion is an error, 
and a highly injurious one, this is the point on which 
my mind centres more than on any other, and on which 
I wish to use an influence as far as I can. Consider- 
ing the vast importance of the more western portion 
of our country, and the more abundant zeal, and the 
greater rapidity with which they carry any thing for- 
ward, when they are once convinced of its importance, 
I have been half inclined, at times, to look upon some 
spot beyond the limits of New England as more de- 
sirable for experiments on this subject. But consid- 
ering that improvements in education seldom make 
any progress eastward, my purpose to live and labor 
in New England has, during the last six months, be- 
come fixed and unchanging." 

To Miss Hannah White. 

"IPSWICH, August 1, 1834. 

" MY DBAS Miss -WHITE How long, very long it 
is since you have written to me, or I to you. I can 
hardly realize that I have so little intercourse with 
those whom I so tenderly love, those whom I onco 
met daily face to face, and with whom I held delight- 
ful intercourse sometimes from hour to hour. But it 

is even so. I have not written to dear A for a 

great, very great while. How was my soul knit to 
her soul. Seldom have I loved any one so much, dear 
Miss Grant excepted. But we have long been sepa- 



PLAN OF A SEMINARY. 147 

expense, rather than an income, to any female semina- 
ry. After the acquaintance I have had with many 
cultivated and interesting families, where tlie daugh- 
ters, in a systematic manner, perform all the labor. I 
have the "greatest confidence that a system might be 
formed, by which all the domestic work of a family of 
one hundred could be performed by the young ladies 
themselves, and in the most perfect order, without any 
sacrifice of improvement in knowledge or of refine- 
ment. Might not this simple feature do away much 
of the prejudice against female education among com- 
mon people ? If this prejudice could by any means 
be removed, how much would it do for the cause. 
Some of the specific features of the great object in 
which I am engaged will seem to some of our friends 
like new views, different from my former ones. Not 
so new as might seem ; they are of no very recent 
date. The only difference is, that I did not consider 
it expedient, while I was connected with Miss Grant 
and this institution, to say much about these views. I 
should be very glad to see you a day or two, and talk 
over this whole subject." 

To her youngest sister she writes, August 26, " You 
already know that I expect to close my labors here, 
and my connection with Miss Grant on earth, this 
fall. I am about to embark in a frail boat on a bois- 
terous sea. I know not whither I shall be driven, 
nor how I shall be tossed, nor to what port I shall 
aim. I know not what is before me, nor where will 
be my next field of labor. I know not when I shall 
find myself engaged in regular labor in the great 



148 LIFE OF MART LYON. 

work of teaching, for which Providence has fitted me 
more than for any thing else. But I am not anxious. 
I have decided to close my labors here, because I felt 
it to be probable that I could do more good in another 
field. And now, after breaking asunder a thousand 
cords to separate myself from this beloved institution, 
I feel that I must at present keep myself disengaged 
from any school, because by so doing I have more 
hope that the way will be open for me yet to engage 
in the specific field in which my heart is so deeply in- 
terested. I never had a prospect of engaging in any 
labor which seemed so directly the work of the Lord 
as this. It is very sweet, in the midst of darkness and 
doubt, to commit the whole to his guidance. 

" The next winter I want to spend partly in study, 
and partly in laying out plans for the future, writ- 
ing, etc. I wish to be in a family where I shall meet 
friends, and where I shall have access to a good li- 
brary, and in a town where I shall not be out of the 
way of society, for I shall often want counsel. Provi- 
dence has very kindly given me such a home at Am- 
herst, in the family of Professor Hitchcock. 

"The religious state of our school has been in 
some degree interesting. Many are anxious for the 
salvation of their souls ; some deeply so. A few have 
recently expressed hope. The interest increases from 
week to week. I want that you and dear mother 
should pray for us much while the school shall con- 
tinue, -which will be about three weeks longer." 

Miss Lyon remained in the school at Ipswich till 
the term was finished, but for several weeks before its 
close, her thoughts and energies were absorbed in her 



HER QUALIFICATIONS. 14S 

favorite scheme, and it was evident to the other 
teachers that she had a great work before her, and 
was straitened until it should be accomplished. Her 
plans during the summer had assumed a definite form, 
and she was fully ready to commence her prospective 
labors. 

It seems proper to pause here, and take a survey 
of Miss Lyon's qualifications for the work to which 
she was now sacredly devoted. 

' She was thirty-seven years of age. Her health 
was remarkably good. Her power of endurance was 
great. Her faith, courage, and enthusiasm were un- 
bounded. Her strong common-sense was undiluted by 
any sentimental weakness. Probably she had never 
read a novel in her life, certainly not after she be- 
came a member of the Sanderson academy. Her most 
intimate friend Mrs. Banister, to whom she was as 
transparent as the ether around us, in the- intercourse 
which ran through a quarter of a century, never heard 
her refer or allude to one by name. Her knowledge 
of school studies was liberal and exact; and what 
she knew was always at hand, and in serviceable 
order. She was widely known as a thorough teacher, 
a successful manager, and an honorable woman. Her 
name was sufficient to gather around her scholars of 
fine minds, high moral tone, and good home training. 
Though her presence in private was 1 not to be com- 
pared with the same presence in the desk, yet liberal 
and discerning minds that were brought into contact 
with her even for a single half-hour, felt that her con- 
secration to the great object before her, her energy, 



150 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

and perseverance, would insure the accomplishment of 
her plans. 

Miss Lyon at this time had a familiar and prac- 
tical acquaintance with mind. Few could take the 
measure of hers ; she measured every one she met. 
She had studied her scholars until she instinctively 
read and analyzed every character that came under 
her observation. She knew that the arguments which 
had commended her plan to her own understanding, 
would, if fairly presented, convince many others. She 
was not therefore afraid to go in search of minds 
that could comprehend and appreciate her great and 
darling object. 

She had a distinct conception of the seminary she 
was to found. The pattern had been shown her by 
Him who orders all things after the counsel of his 
own will, and directs trains of thought no less than 
events. To the embodying of this vision, she had 
solemnly consecrated the residue of her life. She 
accepted this as the work appointed by her heavenly 
Father, without one misgiving as to the final result. 
With a property of less than two thousand dollars, 
and with powers and attainments that would have 
secured an ample salary, she turned from every school 
and every service that promised pecuniary reward, 
and at her own charges undertook a long and painful 
warfare, to found an institution from which, though 
it were under God her own creation, she inflexibly 
resolved to receive for compensation only a home and 
two -hundred dollars a year. Not a man of wealth 
had at this time given her his countenance and aid. 
Even the religious press, in most cases, declined to 



HER QUALIFICATIONS. 151 

publish the articles she sent them, setting forth the 
plans and principles of the proposed institution. Yery 
few of the ministers were interested in her project, 
and the public were in quiet ignorance of her plans. 
5Tet she was not wholly alone. A few gentlemen who 
bad known her long and well, relying on her under- 
standing, energy, and benevolence, lent her their ear, 
and gave her their influence. In the hundreds of 
young ladies scattered over the state who had enjoyed 
her instructions, she had intelligent and efficient friends. 
In herself and in her scholars she was a host. 

Her superior estimate of mind, intelligence, and 
goodness, and her indifference to things that perish 
in the using, were a part of her outfit for her mission. 
She had learned the infinite value of those possessions 
which the soul can ta.ke across the river of death. 
In her eyes, every thing else was of small conse- 
quence. The notice and favor of the great constituted 
no part of her ambition. The parade of wealth and 
the glitter of pageantry could not dazzle her eyes. 
They had come to be but the rattles and trinkets of 
babyhood. No display of costly silks or precious 
gems could divert her eyes from the soul within, hast- 
ening on to the judgment. The boast of family was 
but a waste of breath in her ears. She knew no satis- 
faction in ancestry beyond the remembrance of their 
piety. Yet she made no war on the factitious dis- 
tinctions of society. A school and a church, she said, 
should not know such distinctions. She was consti- 
tutionally indifferent to dress, and to what in common 
parlance is called gentility. The shade of a color, the- 
fit of a glove, or the texture of a shawl, never as- 



152 LIFE OF MART LYON. 

sumed in her eyes more than its true importance. 
How many times during her last two years at Ips- 
wich, did she say, " My heart is sick, my soul is pain- 
ed with this empty gentility, this genteel nothing- 
ness." In her estimatioD, clothing, food, and outward 
manner, were not ends, but only means. In her early 
and susceptible years, her mother had turned her 
attention to that adorning which is incorruptible and 
in the sight of God of great price, which money can- 
not buy, nor artificial rules confer. Her beloved 
daughter wore ever, where all who approached her 
could see it, the ornament of a guileless, pure, hum- 
ble, enlightened, and intensely benevolent spirit. A 
question in dress she was obliged to study as closely 
as most ladies would one in political economy, which 
she in her turn would grasp almost intuitively. It 
was the drudgery of her life to see that her outward 
robes conformed to her station. When she stood be- 
fore the glass, her thoughts were at the world's end, 
or above it. Her room-mate in 1834 says, she well 
remembers her standing before the mirror in their 
room, adjusting her bonnet strings, and saying at the 
same time, in an impressive manner, "Well, I may fail 
of heaven, but I shall be very much disappointed if I 
do," and then slowly and emphatically repeating, " very 
much disappointed." 

These points in her character, whether they were 
the result of constitutional bias, of education, or of 
grace, fitted her for bearing the burdens which she 
was assuming when she left the Ipswich school. They 
helped her to be willing to make herself of no repu- 
tation, and to do any thing that was not sinful to 



HER QUALIFICATIONS. 153 

procure the timber and the stone, the gold and the 
silver necessary to the temple which her heart was 
set on building for the Lord her God. Of course 
she was to make many unsuccessful applications for 
aid ; and almost equally of course, some who refused 
her would say that she was a masculine woman, or 
that her plans were chimerical. Certain that her 
work would be understood when it was accomplished, 
she was prepared to hear such remarks without the 
least loss of temper. They grated on her soul like 
discord on the ear, but she could soon compose herself, 
saying, " Why should I suffer when I know the con- 
trary ?" Not an unkind word in such cases escaped 
her; and those who uttered reproaches were never 
able to divine, from her manner towards them, that a 
bird of the air had borne them to her ear. 

t But the best of all her qualifications was her emi- 
nent piety, and the power and skill she had attained 
in presenting gospel truth. For several years before 
she left Ipswich, it was a rich entertainment to hear 
her unfold the hidden wealth of some simple text. 
During Miss Grant's absence she had stood at the 
head of the school, and had consequently been in the 
habit of occupying half an hour in the morning, three 
days in the week, in explaining and enforcing some 
particular scriptural truth. The ten commandments, 
for example, the sermon on the mount, the first chap- 
ter of first of Peter, and many other parts of the Bible, 
she had presented, text by text, and clause by clause, 
to attentive listeners. She came to her hearers in 
the fulness of the gospel of Christ. Unseen things, in 
her mind, were living realities, and seemed to become 

t 



154 LIFE OF MART LYON. 

such to those to -whom she described them. Her 
faith was substance ; and her imagination, fertile and 
sacred as the garden of the Lord, -was put under its 
tuition. She had a great deal of moral intuition, and 
she never exhausted that fund of great first truths to 
which the human heart echoes a response, and which 
find their -way directly, when properly presented, to 
the consciences of intelligent moral beings. Her 
manner -was simple. There was not the slightest 
appearance of speaking for effect, or trying to speak 
eloquently. The speaker was in the shade, -where 
she evidently wished to be, completely hidden by the 
truth she was holding forth. She did not crowd 
ideas before the mind, but would dwell on one impor- 
tant thought, present it in different lights, illustrate 
it in several ways, and detain her hearers on it till 
they were as fully possessed of it as she was. How 
many have heard her thus dwell on the passage, 
" Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap," 
until their minds were all pervaded with the great 
truth, that they were to meet the deeds of every day 
hereafter. A part of her power lay in securing con- 
tinued attention to one single, but great and solemn 
conception. Active as was her own mind, and easy 
as it was for her to grasp large ideas, and to survey 
many almost in a single breath, she could parcel out 
truth in those small proportions in which common 
minds are obliged to receive it. The superior schol- 
ars who loved to give themselves up to a kind of 
moral exhilaration, and those of spiritual discern- 
ment who watched the effect of truth on other minds, 
were never weary of her religious instruction. 



HER QUALIFICATIONS. 155 

The vividness "with which she evidently saw and 
felt the very truth she was uttering, was one secret 
of her power. If she had ever a flitting doubt of the 
certainty of future retribution, that doubt was never 
Known or suspected by her most intimate friends. 
The foundations of her faith never wavered. It 
seemed as though the principles of our holy religion 
were interwoven with the fibres of her soul. The 
world to come was as present to her thoughts as this 
world to her eyes. Her confidence in God was as 
simple and true as a child's in its mother. She felt 
the Saviour to be present with her, her friend, her 
counsellor, sustaining and directing as really as though 
she had seen him at her side, had leaned bodily on 
his arm, had heard his lips respond to her petitions, 
and seen his wounded, but almighty hands reach down 
deliverance. 

The commands of God were as practical to her 
as the commands of a father to the docile child at his 
knee. She ran the way of his commandments. They 
were welcome to her soul. It was hardly a self-denial 
to her to keep them. It was to her a delightful fact, 
that the eye of God never wandered from her, and 
one of which she seemed ever joyfully conscious 
somewhat as we are conscious of light and the pres- 
ence of the sun, even though our minds are intensely 
occupied with a different class of subjects. t She de- 
lighted to discover the great principles of God's gov- 
ernment in his word and works, in providence and 
grace. In this science she was an apt scholar, ever 
learning and -ever coming nearer those great and 
magnificent truths which doubtless she still studies 



158 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

depths of the soul, and planted seeds there to germi- 
nate, and grow, and yield fruit in the after-life, and 
to eternity. 

These and similar instructions from kindred minds, 
were richly attended with the renewing and sanctify- 
ing influences of the Spirit. More than half of those 
who entered the school impenitent, and remained for 
any length of time, left with a warm and permanent 
interest in the Redeemer's kingdom. Many Chris- 
tians also had received there a new impulse in the 
divine life. These pupils, as the standing representa- 
tives of the institution Miss Lyon declared it her aim 
to stereotype, disposed the community to favor her 
plans. It was the testimony both of herself and of 
her agent, Rev. Roswell Hawks, that when they went 
to towns where any of these pupils were located, they 
found the way prepared for their efforts, and gained 
a readier access to the hearts of the people. Minis- 
ters and laymen who loved revivals, and loved to see 
the young choosing the path that leads to eternal life, 
were glad to hear of a plan for perpetuating these 
happy influences in a seminary which might live and 
do good after they should be gathered to their fa- 
thers. 

Thus ripe was Miss Lyon, at the period of which 
we are speaking, in power, in piety, and in influence. 
Thus also, while many even good people hesitated 
and some opposed, had the providence of God raised 
up a still greater number of earnest minds that were 
prepared to welcome her mission with corresponding 
faith, hope, and zeal. 



FRIENDS ENLISTED. 159 

CHAPTER YI. 

ENLISTMENT OF INFLUENTIAL FRIENDS. 

ON September 6, 1834, a few days before the term 
closed, a few gentlemen met in Miss Lyon's private par- 
lor in Ipswich, to devise ways and means for founding 
a permanent female seminary upon a plan embracing 
her favorite views and principles. It had been sug- 
gested that the first movement towards the object 
should be made in the Essex County Teachers' Asso- 
ciation; but Rev. Dr. Packard of Shelbume, who 
was in Ipswich as the informal representative of his 
part of the state, objected that in such bodies there 
was apt to be much talk and little progress, and sug- 
gested, instead, the calling of a meeting of a few 
friends of education for the purpose. The point being 
yielded to his judgment, some dozen gentlemen of 
known benevolence and candor were invited to at- 
tend the proposed meeting. Miss Lyon writes, on 
September 8th, " Dr. Packard came here last TVednes- 
day evening, and left this morning. "We talked much 
of the time, for three days, respecting the proposed 
seminary. A meeting of a few gentlemen was held 
on Saturday, and Rev. Drs. Dana and ^Packard, Pro- 
fessor Hitchcock, Rev. Mr. Felt, Mr. George W. Heard, 
Mr. David Choate, and General Howland, were ap- 
pointed a committee to make a commencement, and 
go on provided they are successful to appoint trus- 
tees, etc. A circular is soon to be printed, with the 
doings of the meeting/ 7 



160 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

The committee appointed at this quiet meeting, 
which was scarcely known to twenty persons out of 
the room where it was held, supplied their own va- 
cancies, and added to their number, from time to time, 
Rev. Roswell Hawks, Rev. William Tyler, Rev. John 
Todd, Rev. Dr. Joseph Penney, Rev. Joseph D. Con- 
dit, Mr. William Bowdoin, and Mr. Samuel Williston, 
and stood before the public as the responsible agents 
for establishing the proposed seminary until, a charter 
having been obtained and trustees appointed, their 
services were no longer needed. Some of them be- 
came trustees, and others resigned their places on the 
committee. 

The first contribution towards the funds of the 
projected seminary was made soon after the meeting 
just mentioned. Miss Lyon proposed to raise one 
thousand dollars from ladies, as a fund for the contin- 
gent expenses of the undertaking. The school over 
which she was presiding had been accustomed, once 
or twice a year, to unite in a contribution to some 
one of the leading benevolent societies. She pro- 
posed to them, on that occasion, to make her projected 
seminary the object of their charities. A freewill- 
offering of two hundred and sixty-nine dollars was 
the result. She next applied to the ladies in Ips- 
wich, who contributed four hundred and seventy-five 
dollars more towards the proposed thousand. Miss 
Lyon herself went from house to house ftT solicit 
subscriptions. The Ipswich ladies have a vivid rec- 
ollection of her farewell visits that autumn. She 
represented her object as calling the most loudly for 
aid, because, though very deserving, it was the most 



FRIENDS ENLISTED. 161 

unknown, unnoticed, and unappreciated by the benev- 
olent community. She talked, now with the lady 
of the house, now with the husband. She told the 
husbands, in a very good-natured but earnest way, 
that she had come to get them to cut off one little 
corner of their estates, and give it to their wives to 
invest in the form of a seminary for young ladies. 
She held before them the object dear to her heart 
the bringing of a liberal education within the means 
of the daughters of the common people, till it loomed 
up to them, for the time, as it did ever before her 
eyes. She asked the lady whether, if she wanted a 
new shawl, a card-table, a new carpet, or some other 
.article of elegance in her furniture or wardrobe, she 
could not contrive means to procure it. She spread 
out the whole subject, talking so fast that her hearers 
could hardly say a word, answering every objection 
before it was uttered, and finally appealing to their 
individual humanity and benevolence. She poured 
out truth, she offered arguments to make out her 
case, and, last and best of all, she carried the will of 
nearly every person with whom she labored. Ladies 
that, in ordinary subscriptions to benevolent objects, 
did well to put down their fifty cents, gave her five 
or ten dollars of hard-earned money, collected by the 
slow gains of patient industry, and gave it of their 
own free will, yea, gave it as a privilege from which 
they would not have been willing to be debarred. 
They paid it on the spot, grateful that it had come 
to their hands at such a time as that. Every dollar 
of that money was well invested. All of it brought 
h<?.r a hundred per cent. It was, as Miss Lyon always 



162 LIFE OP MAEY LTON. 

called it, the corner-stone of that noble edifice. She 
carried the story of the liberality of those ladies from 
town to town. Wherever she collected the ladies to 
awaken their zeal in behalf of her undertaking, there 
with her impassioned eloquence she stirred up the 
spirit of emulation by holding up the example of the 
Ipswich ladies ; and in the next two years, those five 
talents gained many more. 

She wrote letters to former pupils of the Ipswich 
school, soliciting their aid in making up this contin- 
gent fund. She went herself to ladies with whom 
she was acquainted, in the towns about Ipswich, and 
invited them to contribute to it. Such was her per- 
severance, that in less than two months the sum was 
nearly raised. It was a pledge of her future suc- 
cess. She used to say that it was a "thorough commit- 
ment of herself and all concerned to the object. The 
effort to raise this fund, together with her labors in 
school, made her almost sick. She writes to Miss 
Grant, October 7, "I do not recollect being so fatigued, 
even to prostration, as I have been for a few weeks 
past, since I have been connected with the institution, 
except during your sickness in 1828, and a year ago 
last spring. The school business, as usual, accumu- 
lated ; the business relating to my future enterprise 
hung in suspense all summer, and then required nearly 
a week of my time near the close of school, besides 
absorbing much strength of intellect and of the inner 
soul." 

When, from long and close application, Miss Lyon 
became brain-weary, it was her practice, at this period 
of her life, to sink voluntarily into a state of absolute 



FRIENDS ENLISTED. 163 

rest for one, two, or three days, as the case might 
require, keeping her bed most of the time, and taking 
very little food. From such seasons she would come 
forth rejuvenated, and ready for a campaign that 
would exhaust any body else. 

Always preferring that the proposed school should 
be located in the central or western part of the state, 
after leaving Ipswich she took up her abode for the 
winter at Amherst. She attended some of the college 
lectures, and reviewed the natural sciences, that she 
might be the better fitted to superintend the education 
of her future scholars. She improved every oppor- 
tunity that offered for conversing on her project with 
the intelligent gentlemen whom she met. "Whenever 
there was a prospect of forwarding her plans by her 
presence in any other part of the state, she was sure 
to be promptly there. Some very important questions 
were settled that fall and winter. One was, whether 
the funds should consist of free donations or of pro- 
prietary subscriptions. Dr. Packard devised a plan 
for raising funds by scholarships of two hundred and 
fifty dollars each, to be owned in whole, half, or 
quarter shares, the owner or owners being at liberty 
to send a pupil for fifteen dollars a year less than 
others. But Miss Lyon saw objections to this scheme 
which appeared to her so great that she doubted 
whether it would be right for her to go forward in 
case it were adopted. After much free and friendly 
conference, the committee decided to depend on the 
freewill-offerings of an enlightened Christian public. 

The question of location was settled that winter. 
The towns of South Deerfield, Sunderland, and South 



164 LIFE OF MAEY LYON. 

Hadley each, offered handsome subscriptions, if the 
seminary might be located within its limits. 

A meeting of the committee was held at Worcester, 
January 8, 1835, at which South Hadley was fixed 
upon as the location, provided the subscription there 
could be "raised to eight thousand dollars. It was 
the wish of the gentlemen that Miss Lyon should be 
there, that they might be able to consult her in the 
course of the meeting. The thermometer was below 
zero on the night when she and Professor Hitchcock 
left Amherst for Worcester. Having commended 
themselves to God, they took their seats in the stage 
some three or four hours before sunrise, each wrapped 
in a buffalo robe. Miss Lyon said she never suffered 
less from a journey in her life. Prom Worcester she 
wrote to Miss Grant : 

" Last night, about midnight, Mr. Felt came and 
told me that the question of the location at South 
Deerfield was decided in the negative. My heart 
was filled with gratitude to Him who directs all 
events according to his own infinite wisdom. The 
other two places are to be considered to-day. Be- 
tween them I had no choice, and it did appear to me 
that I could commit the whole to God more entirely 
than ever before. The decision, as Mr. Heard will 
tell you, is in favor of South Hadley." 

Writing to her mother from Amherst, April 2, 
1835, she says, " I have been to Ipswich twice this 
winter. The last time I staid two weeks. There I 
have enjoyed much that relates to this world, and 
much, I hope, that relates to a better. There, more 
than anywhere else, I have looked out upon this 



FRIENDS ENLISTED. Ifi5 

broad and cricked world, till my heart has longed 
that laborers might go forth to reap the harvest 
which is already ripe for gathering. When I have 
there looked around on those committed to my care, 
how has my heart gone forth in their behalf, that they 
might be ready to do with their might what their 
hands find to do. 

" I often feel that my life is far advanced, and that 
I can do but little more myself. But this great work 
is all to be done through human instrumentality. How 
small a portion of it has yet been done ! that I 
might do a little more before I depart hence. But 
my greatest hope is, that I may have the privilege 
of encouraging, stimulating, and strengthening some 
who may continue to labor when I am laid in the 
grave. It is so pleasant for me to go to Ipswich, I 
am rather glad that I occasionally have business 
which calls me there. But it awakens many tender 
and sad emotions. Sometimes I fear that I never 
shall have another field of labor where I can do so 
much good. But if the Lord has more work for me 
to do in the world, he will provide it for me, and point 
out the way. 

" For special reasons, I think it best to keep my- 
self disengaged from any school till the new school 
goes into operation in South Hadley. But the work 
goes forward very slowly. It will be a great while 
before I can expect the privilege of laboring there. 
Will you, my dear mother, pray for this new institu- 
tion, that God will open the hearts of his children in its 
behalf, and that the Spirit of God may rest on its 
future teachers and pupils, that it may be a spot where 



166 LIFE OF ilARY LYON. 

souls may be born of God, and saints quickened in 
their Lord's service? It is my heart's desire, that 
holiness to the Lord may be inscribed upon all con- 
nected with it, and that a succession of teachers may 
be raised up, who shall there continue to labor for 
Christ long after we are laid in our graves." 

This prayer of Miss Lyon, which, while she sought 
the intercessions of others, she continually offered 
herself, that " God would open the hearts of his chil- 
dren in behalf of this new institution," seemed several 
times to be directly answered. One such instance 
we will give. A. gentleman in Boston whom the 
Lord had blessed with competence, had decided that 
all the increase of his property, over and above what 
was needed for the support of his family, should not 
merely be held as the Lord's, but should be, year 
by year, spent in his service. Subsequently to this 
resolve, he married a lady of one mind with himself 
on this subject. Previous to their marriage, she had 
read some articles in a religious newspaper giving an 
jmtline of the proposed school. In the course of her 
own education, she had been sent to a school where 
the instruction given and the money expended for it 
seemed to be almost in an inverse ratio, and she had 
had the good sense to make the discovery. A semi- 
nary for young ladies of high order, where the ex- 
penses should be put at cost, fully met her views. On 
a journey with her husband from Boston to. Belcher- 
town in their own carriage, she beguiled the way 
with conversation on this subject, and they agreed to 
use some of their surplus funds for this object. As 
they entered Belchertown, some unoccupied buildings 



FRIENDS BXLISTED. 169 

plated institution received the name of the "Mount 
Holyoke Female Seminary." 

In the fall of 1834, while Dr. Packard still felt a 
father's zeal and interest in the enterprise, he suc- 
ceeded in enlisting in its behalf Rev. Roswell Hawks 
of Cummington, who about the first of Xovember first 
met Miss Lyon at her mother's in Ashfield, reported 
to her a considerable amount of funds collected, and 
they together visited Dr. Packard, uniting their coun- 
sels with his for the object so dear to her heart. Mr. 
Hawks was then a young man, and happily settled ; 
but he obtained leave of absence from his people, pro- 
viding them a supply for the pulpit, and engaged for 
a few months in an agency for the seminary. Under 
about the same date as the last extract, she says, " I am 
very well satisfied with Mr. Hawks. The query be- 
gins to arise in my mind, whether early efforts should 
not be made to secure his services for the summer. 
This matter ought to receive the immediate attention 
of the committee." He was continued in his agency. 
At that crisis, when it required a clear eye and a 
strong heart to embark in the cause, Mr. Hawks gave 
himself sincerely to its advancement. Miss Lyon some- 
times accompanied him. in his pilgrimages, aiding his 
arguments with her presence and conversation. From 
the day in which they met at Ashfield to that of her 
death, no person was a more patient listener to her 
many and varied plans, nor a more sincere coworker 
with her in giving these plans life and form. 

To Miss Caldwell, then at Norton, she writes, 

" Give a large share of love to Miss A from me. 

I want to see her, to talk with her about the good 

Mry L.,oo. 8 



170 LIFE OF MARY LTON 

which slie can do by being a member of the school 
tkefrst year. Ought we not to ascertain -what young 
ladies of our acquaintance, who are advanced in their 
education, intend at some time to become members of 
the institution, and lay before them the good that they 
would do by joining the school the very first year?" 

To her ilother and Sister. 

"NORTHAMPTON, July 23, 1835. 

"I cannot undertake to tell you where I hare been, 
and what I hare been doing, since I last saw yon. I 
seem to be ever busy, and yet I accomplish nothing. I 
scarcely know one week where I shall be the next In 
this way I expect to live, at least until one year from 
next spring, the earliest possible time that our new in- 
stitution can open. And then I may only make a change 
for a situation of overwhelming cares. But I have no 
doubt that I am following the leadings of Providence, 
His dealings towards this new enterprise have been 
such as should lead me to trust wholly in the Lord. 
Every token of success has been rather strongly mark- 
ed by his hand ; and every trial and discouragement 
have been such, that when good comes we feel con- 
strained to say, ' This is the work of the Lord. 7 

"In looking back, I feel that, whatever may be the 
result, I can never regret that these things were not 
directed differently. It seems to me more and more 
that this institution,, and other similar ones, are a 
necessary part of the great system of means now in 
operation for the conversion of the world. When I 
look abroad and see how much abounds that is con- 
trary to the spirit of the gospel, I sometimes feel it to 
be a precious privilege to pray, 'Thy kingdom come; 



PRIENDS ENLISTED. HI 

thy "will be done on earth, as it is done in heaven.' 
Whatever we are permitted to do in accordance with 
these desires, is a precious privilege. The feeble 
efforts which I am allowed to put forth in cooperating 
with others in laying the foundation of this new sem- 
inary, will probably do more for the cause of Christ 
after I am laid in my grave, than all I may have done 
in my life before. Do not cease to pray for this sem- 
inary, that in every succeeding age it may be most 
sacredly the Lord's ; and that no wicked hand may 
ever be allowed to turn it aside from its consecration 
to the Kedeemer." 

To Miss Grant. 

" NORTHAMPTON, July 24, 1835. 
" How vain would it be for us to hope by our pres- 
ent efforts to make our situation more comfortable or 
quiet. We have every reason to believe that the 
more we seek to draw the public to aid us in doing 
good, the more perplexing will be our cares and la- 
bors. But then we shall not shrink from this, if we 
can thus lay a foundation for our successors to labor 
abundantly for the cause of Christ." 

To her Sister. 

"NoETOsr, Oct. 24, 1835. 

" MY DEAR SiSTEB^-Tou will doubtless be glad to 
know something about the Mount Holyoke Seminary. 
The work goes on slowly. I hope they will be able 
to commence building next spring. We have much 
to try our faith, and much to excite our hopes, I love 
to look at the hand of Providence as connected with 
this enterprise. With how much wisdom and good- 
ness are trials and blessings mingled together in our 



172 LIFE OF MARY LYON, 

cnp. The work of endeavoring to found and build 
up this seminary, is one which I trust the Lord will 
own and bless. But I do not expect that it will be 
carried forward as on flowery beds of ease. This I 
have never asked. I only ask that it may receive the 
smile of Providence in that way which shall best pro- 
mote the interests of the great cause to which it is 
consecrated. I hope that in your prayers you will 
commend this enterprise to God." 

To Miss Grant. 

" AMHERST, Dec. 23, 1835. 

"MY TBEY DEAR SISTER It is sweet to review 
our past years, the time of our first acquaintance, the 
commencement of our connection, and the many years 
we spent so delightfully together, and in some degree, 
as I hope, profitably to the best of causes. When I 
look back and compare my own views and feelings 
fifteen years ago, with what they are now, I am con- 
strained to believe there has been a very great 
change. Comparatively it does seem to me now a 
great privilege to live and labor for the cause of 
Christ in any place, and under any circumstances, 
where He may direct ; and if possible, a still greater 
privilege to lead others to attempt and to do more 
than I can ever myself accomplish. . It seems to me 
uniformly as if my strength was mostly spent, and 
my years, a great proportion of them, gone. But if I 
may be permitted to do something more, it will be 
indeed a great privilege. In this respect, life seems 
to me a greater and greater blessing. 

u I anticipate trials in fixture, such as I have never 
yet known, I ezpect them, from indications of Prov* 



FRIBXDS ENLISTED. H3 

idence already manifested towards the enterprise in 
which I am engaged. Sometimes my heart and spirits 
seem to sink under the prospect, and I am almost 
ready to exclaim, ' When will the work of my feeble 
hands be done, that I may go home V But through 
the mercy of God, these seasons do not often occur, 
and do not continue long. Generally I feel that the 
dark, portentous cloud which hangs over the future, 
is under the direction of Him who led his chosen peo- 
ple by a pillar of cloud and of fire. I do hope that 
in some way the remainder of my life may be instru- 
mental of more good than my past life has been, 
though it may be in a manner very different from 
what I anticipate. The years which I hare had the 
privilege of spending with you, have done more to fit 
me to enjoy so great a blessing than almost all other 
circumstances. Such a view gives a peculiar sweet- 
ness to the remembrance." 

To Miss Caia^rell. 

" January 11, 1836. 

a In Conway I visited the family of Mr. A. , who 

probably, during the past twenty years, has given 
more to benevolent objects, in proportion to his prop- 
erty and family, than any other man in New Eng- 
land. I was delighted with their godly simplicity, 
their systematic mode of benevolent action, and their 
well-balanced views of things." 

In Conway Miss Lyon visited two maiden sisters, 

the Misses M , who were living comfortably on 

some property left them by an honored brother. Out 
of their moderate means, they subscribed one hundred 
dollars each to the object They soon after lost iheir 



174 LIFE OP MART LYON. 

property ; but rather than be denied the luxury of 
helping the good work, they labored with their own 
hands, and earned the money to meet their subscrip- 
tion as it became due. 

"Well do I remember," says a Holyoke pupil^ 
" standing with Miss Lyon by her open drawer, when 
she took up several silver dollars bearing the traces 
of fire. Her eye kindled as she said, 'These were 
among the first contributions to our seminary. They 
were given by two sisters in Conway, whose house 
was burned after they had subscribed one hundred 
dollars each. We of course felt that they were re- 
leased from their obligation, but they paid the whole, 
working with their own hands to earn the money. 
These dollars gathered from the smoking embers 
were a part of their donation. They seemed so pre- 
cious that I replaced them with my .own money, and 
kept them as a memento of their faithfulness, and of 
God's goodness to this seminary.' " Their married 
sister also contributed one hundred dollars. With 
such money was the institution built. With the pray- 
ers of these and kindred spirits was every stone and 
every brick consecrated to the Lord. 

The act of incorporation passed both houses of 
the state legislature, February 10, 1836, and was 
signed by the governor the next day. The instru- 
ment named as trustees, Messrs. William Bowdoin, 
John Todd, Joseph D. Condit, David Choate, and 
Samuel Williston, and empowered them to hold real 
and personal estate not exceeding in value one hun* 
dred thousand dollars, to be devoted exclusively to 
purposes of education. 



FRIENDS ENLISTED. 175 

On March 2, the trustees met at South Hadley. 
They accepted the act of incorporation, added Rev. 
William Tyler and Rev. Roswell Hawks to the board, 
elected officers of the board, appointed an executive 
committee from their number, and took measures for 
obtaining plans and estimates for carrying forward 
the contemplated operations. On the 13th of the fol- 
lowing month, the trustees met again in South Had- 
ley. In reference to the meeting of the 13th of April, 
Miss Lyon writes from Boston, April 25th : 

"The late meeting of the trustees at South Had- 
ley was as favorable as could be expected. A com* 
mittee was appointed to attend to the preparations 
for building, and more general responsibility was com- 
mitted to Mr. Hawks than heretofore. Mr. Joseph 
Avery of Conway was added to the trustees. At 
an adjourned meeting at Northampton, on the 19th, 
Deacon Andrew W. Porter of Monson was appoint- 
ed a trustee. T^e have had our eye on him for 
some time. He has had more experience in super- 
intending workmen and in putting up buildings than 
any one on our board. Benevolent, disinterested, 
and of sound judgment, he is also one of the first of 
accountants. He is an acquaintance of Mr. Tyler, 
and at South Hadley, Mr. Tyler, with Mr. Hawks 
and myself, agreed to meet at Monson the next day. 
When we reached Monson, the gentleman we went to 
see was absent, not to return till Saturday night, and 
on this account I did not leave Monson till the fol- 
lowing Tuesday. I was much interested in my visit 

there. Both Mr. P and his wife can look at our 

cause. 



176 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

" I hare been endeavoring to ascertain whether we 
can depend on Mr. and Mrs. Safford's firm support, 
whenever it is desirable to bring our cause up here. 
The Lord is, I believe, inclining their hearts in our 
favor." 

Messrs. A very, Porter, and Safford, the three gen- 
tlemen to whom Miss Lyon above alludes, entered 
fully into her plans, and were as active in promoting 
them as though the seminary had been their own 
private property. The first named gave, for several 
years, much of the surplus revenue of his rock-bound 
but productive farm to the good work in which she 
was employed. Like Miss Lyon, he could not endure 
to see a mill of the sacred funds of the institution 
spent for a fruitless purpose. When, on one occasion, 
a plan had been purchased of an artist at an artist's 
price, which, as Miss Lyon thought, was not available 
for her purpose, the bill was voluntarily met from his 
own purse, in addition to his large subscription. It 
was a kind deed, which gave Miss Lyon great satis- 
faction. Her private funds had suffered many drafts, 
and were ill able at that time to bear another. 

Mr. Porter, for several -months, left his own ex- 
tensive and lucrative business to the oversight of 
others, and went every Monday morning to South 
Hadley, and there, often till the sunset of Saturday, 
gave his financial skill and rare business abilities to 
overseeing the erection of the seminary building. It 
was in his hospitable mansion that she spent her very 
last season of rest, and refreshed her soul for the 
heavenly employments on which she was so soon to 
enter. 



FRIENDS ENLISTED. If7 

To none is the institution more indebted for pecu- 
niary aid than to the friends of whom she said in the 
last letter, ' The Lord is, I believe, inclining their 
hearts in our favor." But for the cooperation of 
these three men, we cannot see how the enterprise 
could have gone forward. TVho can doubt that the 
Lord helped her to find them, and to set her object 
before them, and inclined their hearts and minds to 
receive and understand the complicated plans of a 
woman so unlike all other women they had ever met? 
It seemed to herself a providential interposition that, 
at a crisis rrhen many wise men even in the church 
could not comprehend her plans, and assist in their 
execution, such men as these lent her their efficient 
aid. 



ItS LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

CHAPTER Til. 

THE ERECTION AND FURNISHINGS OF THE EDIFICE. 

THE site for the seminary had been selected at 
a meeting of the trustees, held May 19, 1836. The 
corner-stone was laid October 3, 1836. On the 7th, 
Miss Lyon writes from South Hadley to Miss Cald- 
well, " TFe had a fine day for the laying of the comer- 
stone. I should have enjoyed your being present. 
It was a day of deep interest. The associations were 
very tender. That is an affecting spot to me. The 
stones and brick and mortar speak a language which 
vibrates through my very soul. How much thought 
and how much feeling have I had on this general sub- 
ject in years that are past. And I have indeed lived 
to see the time when a body of gentlemen have ven- 
tured to lay the corner-stone of an edifice which will 
cost about fifteen thousand dollars, and will be an 
institution for the education of females. Surely the 
Lord hath remembered our low estate. This will be 
an era in female education. The work will not stop 
with this institution. The enterprise may have to 
struggle through embarrassments for years, but its 
influence will be felt." 

At their meeting in South Hadley, October 3, the 
trustees added to their number Rev. Dr. Heman 
Humphrey and Professor Edward Hitchcock, and at 
a meeting soon after, Dea. Daniel Safford. 

In the fall of 1836, the building having been com- 



ERECTION OP THE EDIFICE. 179 

meneed, Hiss Lyon undertook the business of obtain- 
ing funds and articles for furnishing the house. In 
addition to crockery and cutlery for about one hun- 
dred persons, in addition to parlor furniture and 
kitchen utensils, forty scholars' rooms were to be 
provided with bedsteads, beds, bedding, tables, wash- 
stands, chairs, and mirrors. 

In a letter which she sent to many ladies, she 
spreads before them the merits and claims of the en- 
terprise as follows : 

u The enterprise of founding this institution was 
commenced about two years ago. The work has since 
been going forward slowly. The first edifice is now 
erecting. It is ninety-four feet by fifty, and of four 
stories, besides the basement. It will furnish good 
public accommodations for the school and the family, 
private chambers for the teachers, and for eighty 
young ladies. Additions are to be made hereafter, 
as the liberality of the Christian public shall furnish 
the means. If there is no delay on account of funds, 
this first building can be finished, and a school of 
eighty scholars commenced, the latter part of next 
summer. 

" The time has now come when we must make our 
arrangements for furniture. 3?or this we must depend 
principally on ladies. We have no doubt but the 
call will be promptly met. In all our progress, ladies 
have been prompt to do all that we have asked. The 
first contribution in behalf of this object was made by 
them. The institution had then assumed no name, 
nor place, nor legal standing. The whole enterprise 
was less in appearance than a man's hand, when a few 



ISO LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

ladies came forward, and generously raised one thou- 
sand dollars to meet incidental expenses. This was 
a noble beginning. 

** Though I have no doubt that all the furniture 
can be easily obtained -without the interposition of 
an agent, yet some regular plan will be necessary. 
We propose the plan of distinct towns or parishes 
furnishing one chamber each, by a united contribu- 
tion. The other parts of the furniture will, we hope, 
be promptly supplied by donations from individuals. 
Some towns are now ready to commence the work of 
furnishing a chamber, and the teachers and pupils of 
one school, under the care of a lady from the Ipswich 
Female Seminary, have already given a donation of 
one hundred and thirty dollars, to be expended in 
furnishing a parlor. Will not other schools follow 
this example, and especially those instructed by ladies 
from the Ipswich seminary, on whose influence over 
the community this enterprise has been able to rely 
with so much confidence ? Will not many ladies feel 
it to be a privilege to make a large donation for some 
specific articles of furniture? 

" But the business of furnishing chambers needs 
immediate attention. The sum necessary for one 
chamber will be from fifty to sixty dollars; fifty dol- 
lars will furnish the essential articles, though some 
other conveniences would be very desirable, and 
might be procured for a few dollars more. This will 
be left optional with the donors. Let one efficient 
lady, in almost any place, either alone or with one or 
two to aid her, commence the work with determina- 
tion, and it will be done ; while, in the most flourish- 



EKECTION OF THE EDIFICE. 181 

ing town, it would not be accomplished unless some 
one lady should undertake the work as her own busi- 
ness. I should advise that the contributions should 
be obtained from a great number of ladies. It may 
be best to request, that the largest contribution should 
not exceed five dollars. Individuals who are able to 
do more might make a donation in addition, to be 
appropriated in some other way. Perhaps in some 
cases the bedding and some money might be ad- 
vanced by a young ladies 7 sewing society, and the 
remainder raised by a general contribution from 
ladies of all ages. The plan of operation must, how- 
ever, vary according to circumstances. 

" And now, dear madam, would not the ladies in 
your place consider it a privilege to furnish one of 
these chambers ? "Would you not consider it a privi- 
lege so to bring the subject before them, that they 
will do it with promptness ? 

" Among the means essential to the safety of the 
nation, many are convinced of the necessity of pre- 
paring and employing a multitude of benevolent, self- 
denying female teachers. Many of the most candid 
and discriminating, who have the advantage of obser- 
vation on this subject, are convinced that all other 
means without this will be insufficient. But Fhat can 
be done? Most of the calls which come to New 
England, and are multiplying every year, must be 
returned unanswered. The seminary at Ipswich 
whose teachers are found in every part of our country, 
and whose influence has done so much to prepare the 
way for this enterprise, is compelled even now to 
return a negative reply to a multitude of calls every 



182 LIFE OP MART LTON. 

year. And the necessities of the country are yet 
scarcely beginning to be known. 

"After these remarks, you would expect that 1 
should feel deeply interested in the success of Mount 
Holyoke Female Seminary. Had I a thousand lives, 
I could sacrifice them all in suffering and hardship 
for its sake. Did I possess the greatest fortune, I 
could readily relinquish it all, and become poor, and 
more than poor, if its prosperity should demand it. 
Its grand object is to furnish the greatest possible 
number of female teachers, of high literary qualificar 
tions, and of benevolent, self-denying zeal. The in- 
stitution is to be only for an older class of young 
ladies, and every scholar is to board in the establish- 
ment. The general course of study, and the general 
character of the instruction, are to be like those at 
Ipswich. The institution is to be permanent, continu- 
ing onward in its operations from generation to gen- 
eration. In the thousands of teachers which it will 
send forth, it will doubtless be an instrument of good, 
far beyond the present grasp of my feeble compre- 
hension. 

" But this is not all. This experiment has an impor- 
tant bearing on the great subject of adopting suitable 
means fgr supplying our country with well-qualified 
female teachers, and it is testing the great question 
of duty on this subject. This constitutes its chief 
importance. It is like the signing of the Declaration 
of Independence; the battles were still to be fought, 
but the question of independence was then settled. 
It is like fitting out our first little band of missionar 
ries. The great work of evangelizing a world was 



ERECTION OF THE EDIFICE. 183 

still before the American churches; but the grand 
question of duty, and the mode of meeting duty, were 
then settled, never again to be seriously doubted. 
Let this enterprise be carried through by the liberal- 
ity of the Christian community, and it Trill no longer 
be doubted whether the work of supplying our coun- 
try with well-qualified female teachers shall be al- 
lowed a standing among the benevolent operations 
of the day. The work will still be before us, but the 
principle on which it is to be accomplished will be 
settled. Another stone in the foundation of our great 
system of benevolent operations, which are destined, 
in the hand of God, to convert the world, will then 
be laid. 

" The work of bringing this institution into oper- 
ation has been longer than was anticipated. But the 
progress of the enterprise in taking an acknowledged 
standing among the benevolent operations of the day, 
has exceeded the expectations of its warmest friends. 
I doubt whether any benevolent object, not excepting 
even the missionary cause, has ever, within two years 
from its commencement, made a greater advance in 
gaining access to the understanding and hearts of the 
people. Many have rejoiced that so noble a design 
has been formed in the heart of New England. Many 
hearts have been filled with hope, as they have beheld 
this enterprise go forward in obedience to the great 
command, 'Love thy neighbor as thyself/ 

"And now, dear madam, will you allow me to 
appeal to your benevolence in behalf of this cause ? 
There may be some gentlemen, in the circle of your 
friends, whose hearts the Lord will incline to favor 



184 LIFE OF MARY LTON. 

this object, and wliose hands the Lord Trill open in its 
behalf. If so, I do most earnestly desire that they 
may speedily do that which has been pnt into their 
hearts. There may be some ladies in your circle of 
acquaintance, who will feel it to be a privilege to 
make an uncommon sacrifice for the benefit of this 
cause, and make out in its behalf a generous donation, 
either to the principal fund, or to supply some of the 
more expensive articles of furniture. But the ques- 
tion of furnishing a chamber is one to which a direct 
reply is particularly requested. It is important that 
the reply should be DECISIVE, and as early as conven- 
ient, so that in case the answer should be negative, 
which, however, I do not expect, a substitute may be 
found." 

In this circular letter, Miss Lyon reaffirms what 
the active friends of the new seminary everywhere 
pleaded : that they intended to stereotype the thorough 
study and high tone of moral and religious character 
of the Ipswich seminary, and afford the same advan- 
tages at less expense. It was the known character, 
and the wide and substantial usefulness of the Ipswich 
school, and Miss Lyon's identity with it, that gave to 
those pleas much of their power and success. As 
preliminary to the enterprise, she engaged its first 
teachers from the graduates of Ipswich, and also, 
with the concurrence of Miss Grant, by appeals to 
the collected school, and by efforts with individual 
scholars, drew from it a class of valuable pupils on 
whom she could rely to give character and tone to 
the new school. The motives she presented to induce 



ERECTION OF THE EDIFICE. 185 

them to change their literary home were, that slie 
needed their help, that their influence -would be worth 
more in the new institution, and that, if they would go 
with her, they might share in the solemn responsibility 
and in the glorious reward of helping to found the Hoi- 
yoke seminary, an institution that would live and do 
good long after they should rest from their labors. 

An effort which had long been contemplated, was 
made in Boston in March, 1837. Its results are 
chronicled by Miss Lyon, in a letter to Miss Grant, 
under date of March 13 : " Thursday evening, though 
it was so rainy, we had a very interesting little meet- 
ing in Deacon Safford's parlor. At the close of the 
meeting, a subscription was taken up of a little more 
than three thousand dollars, which has since been 
increased to four thousand. The largest subscrip- 
tions were, one of one thousand dollars from Deacon 
Safford, two of five hundred dollars each, and four 
of two hundred and fifty dollars each, from other 
individuals." 

On the 29th of May, Miss Lyon writes to Miss 
Cutter, a pupil in the seminary at Ipswich : " I very 
much want to see you and others whom I place among 
the particular friends of Mount Holyoke Female Sem- 
inary. We are now in a very great strait about 
obtaining furniture, etc. If I should visit you, could 
the whole school devote from one to two hours to the 
subject ? I do not expect that they will contrioute 
any thing to this object while they are members oi 
the school, but only use their influence in its behall 
when they go to their various homes. 

" I would by all means have the teachers choose 



Ittt) JLjJLJTJi UF MAttJt JLilUJN. 

their object of benevolence, present its claims to the 
scholars, and lead them to give abundantly and cheer- 
fully ; but I do more and more feel it to be important 
that young ladies engaged in study, and spending 
freely on themselves for board and tuition, should 
give liberally to the treasury of the Lord. This is 
essential to their cultivating right principles, to their 
forming right habits. Are not young ladies, as well 
as young men, while engaged in study, in danger of 
excusing themselves from contributing liberally, be- 
cause they are spending their money to prepare them- 
selves for usefulness? By fortifying themselves with 
this excuse through their whole course of education, 
may they not almost form the habit of feeling that 
every thing of large amount that is to be cast into 
the treasury of the Lord by their own hands, must 
first pass through the channel of self, to fit it for the 
Master's service? Ought not young ladies, in a 
course of education, carefully to economize in the 
least expenditures, lest something which ought to be 
put into the treasury of the Lord should flow into 
some other channel ? I hope the teachers in Ipswich 
will be faithful on this subject." 

In the midst of all her cares and labors, she yet 
found time and heart for the personal concerns of her 
friends. We give an extract from a letter to one who 
had been her pupil at Ipswich, and who was soon to 
become her pupil at South Hadley. 

To Miss Sarah Brigham. 

"NoBToar, July 24, 1837. 

" I have sympathized with you in your late afflic- 
tions. I need not tell you that I feel deeply inter- 



ERECTION OF THE EDIFICE. 181 

ested in all that relates to yourself and friends, and 
that my interest in your behalf is now more deeply 
enlisted than ever. How sweet, though painful, must 
it be to think of your dear mother. You do not dwell 
on her image, which is ever before you, with painful 
emotions and anxious doubt where she now is, and 
what is now her condition, and what her present em- 
ployments. You can rest quietly in the belief that 
she is now with God, beyond all dangers and all 
troubles. When you first awake in the morning, do 
you not think of her for a moment as still alive ? But 
the next moment the painful reality rushes upon you 
that she is indeed no more that she has gone, for 
ever gone, and you are all motherless. But the pain- 
ful truth scarcely finds its way into your wounded 
heart, when your soul is filled with the sweet consola- 
tion that she is happy, for ever happy that she does 
not lie distressed on that painful couch, where you 
watched her by day and by night. She has gone to 
rest, eternal rest. How important that such afflic- 
tions should lead us to do with our might what our 
hands find to do. What have we to do with this 
world, except as a place to prepare for eternity our- 
selves, and to seek the same preparation in behalf of 
others?" 

To her Mother. 

" SOUTH HADLEY, Sept 6, 183*7. 
"Mr DBAS MOTHER I want you should let me 
hear from you often. Letters sent to this place will 
find me very soon ; indeed, I must be here now most 
of the time. I have so much letter writing to do, that 
I seem not to have time for much else. And yet I 



18S LIFE OF MARY LYOBT. 

hare five times as much as I can do which I wish to 
do. But I must do what I can, and let the rest go 
undone. There is scarcely a mail which does not 
bring me a letter; yesterday's brought five. Most 
of them require an answer, and many of them will 
require two or three before I get through with them. 
Among all these letters, I should now and then like 
to receive one from my own dear mother. As for 
myself, my head is filled with such a variety, that- 1 
can write nothing except it is on business. Our 
building is going on finely. The seal to every tiling 
about it must soon be fixed, My head is full of closets, 
shelves, cupboards, doors, sinks, tables, etc. You will 
think this is new work for me, and indeed it is. 

" Give my love to father. I hope he will have 
the presence of God, and be prepared for a long and 
happy eternity, where he will feel no more of his 
infirmities, and where all can Iiear" Mr. Taylor was 
deaf " distinctly the song of Moses and the Lamb." 
This letter was written precisely three years after 
the meeting in Miss Lyon's parlor at Ipswich, where 
the first resolves were passed to attempt to found a 
female seminary of a high order. 

These years, as Miss Lyon's letters abundantly 
show, had been with her years of much and increasing 
toil. For the cause to which she had given her life 
she dared do any thing that became a woman, and 
any thing which she deemed not wrong in the sight 
of God, that appeared to have any tendency to fur- 
ther her object. She went hither and thither, by pub- 
lic conveyances, with Mr. Hawks, or any other friend 
of the enterprise. Travelling the road from Boston 



ERECTION OF THE EDIFICE. 189 

to the Connecticut often, she could scarce ride any 
ten miles of the route without being recognized by 
some fellow-traveller whose cordial salutation would 
introduce her to the company. All felt very veil 
acquainted with her, as soon as they heard her name, 
and she would soon be invited to detail the progress 
of the enterprise. Being certain that the object would 
commend itself to the good common-sense and best 
impulses of true Xew Englanders, she improved every 
opportunity of unfolding its merits to any who seemed 
capable of comprehending them, whether acquaint- 
ances or strangers. She could make herself heard 
easily, although the road might be a little uneven, 
and would expatiate on the subject as freely as in her 
own parlor. Many a man can say, " I saw Miss Lyon 
once ; I met her in the stage-coach ; an original char- 
acter, quite." One young lady certainly enjoyed her 
instruction the first year of the school in consequence 
of such a casual interview of her father with Miss 
Lyon. The father had penetration enough to discover 
that she understood female education, and could so 
train young women in the way they should go, that 
when they were old they would not depart from it. 
Feeling that the cause for which she toiled was the 
Lord's, she was willing to make herself of no reputa- 
tion for its advancement. Certain that her feet were 
on a rock, she stood firm and fearless of sinking. 
Along with unbounded trust in God, she had a rea 
sonable and intelligent trust in herself ; and both 
combined to help her cling tenaciously to her darling 
object. So long as what she did was not sinful, she 
eft the consequences entirely to that Providence 



190 LIFE OF MAEY LYON. 

whose agent she felt herself to "be. To any who 
urged her to rely less on personal efforts, and more 
on her pen and the agent, she had but one reply : " I 
am doing a great work; I cannot come down." 
When she differed from any of her coadjutors, the 
result generally proved that she was in the right. 
The trustees came, as one of them said, to be afraid 
to oppose her plans, because they had so much proof 
that the Lord was with her, and that what she pro- 
posed to do he had purposed to prosper. 

The summer and fall of 1837 she spent mostly at 
South Hadley. Rev. Mr. and Mrs. Condit took her 
into their family as they would a sister. How grate- 
ful was she ever to them and to the Providence that 
thus inclined them. One of her last deeds of grateful 
love was devising a plan for his widow's comfort, 
which she did not live to execute. 

She slept and ate at Mr. Condit's, but her days 
were spent in the unfinished edifice, overseeing work- 
men, and doing many things which needed to be done, 
much as an efficient lady of moderate means would 
superintend a house she was building, in the absence 
of her husband. She looked after the drawers, cup- 
boards, closets, shelves, latches, and hinges, and saw 
that the church's funds were applied to promote the 
convenience and welfare of the church's daughters. 
When the joiner work was done, she made ready for 
the mason ; when the masonry was- done, she made 
ready for the painter; and when the painter had 
done, she saw to the drying. The peculiar manner 
in which the rooms were provided with furniture, 
also rolled much care and solicitude upon her shoul- 



EBECTION 0? THE EDIFICE. 191 

ders. Altogether the autumn of 183T was with her 
a season of the most arduous labors, as well as of the 
most intense solicitude. 

It was this finishing and furnishing work which 
was before her, September 14, 1887, when she ad- 
dressed the following lines to Miss Grant. The 
school was to open November 8, about seven weeks 
after the date of the letter from which the extract is 
taken* 

" I should like to tell you many things. When I 
look through to November 8, it seems like looking 
down a precipice of many hundred feet, which I must 
descend. I can only avoid looking at the bottom, 
and fix my eye on the nearest stone, till I have safely 
reached it. I try to take the best possible care of 
my health. I have had more real sick days, with 
headache and the like, during the last few weeks, 
than usual ; but on the whole, I am very much sus- 
tained by a kind Providence." 

The edifice which had so long existed only in Miss 
Lyon's mind was at length, in part, a reality. The 
walls of a portion of the main building and one wing 
were erected, and rooms to accommodate the teachers 
and eighty pupils were completed. The edifice, of 
which but a part at that time was built, consists of a 
main building, one hundred and sixty-six feet by fifty, 
four stories above the basement, and two wings. The 
basement story is divided into a large domestic hall 
or kitchen furnished with every convenience, a dining- 
room capable of accommodating four hundred per- 
sons, and several smaller rooms. The first story con- 



192 LIFE OF MART LYON. 

tains a hall, sixty feet by fifty, used for devotional 
and school exercises, a library and reading-room, a 
cabinet for specimens in natural history, and several 
parlors. The second story is divided into six recita- 
tion rooms, and several private rooms for pupils and 
teachers. The two upper stories, and one wing, are 
divided into one hundred and thirty-two private rooms, 
arranged so as to accommodate nearly three hundred 
persons. The other wing, completed since Miss Lyon's 
death, is occupied by private rooms, rooms for guests, 
a philosophical room, and a chemical room and labo- 
ratory. These were all included in her one great 
plan, which has been carried into execution as fast as 
means would permit. In the rear of the main edifice 
is a court surrounded by buildings, and devoted to 
the purposes of the laundry. To the east of the 
building, the ground slopes towards a narrow stream 
of water. Hitherto the more important wants of the 
institution have prevented the expenditure of much 
money upon objects of taste. The grounds are capa- 
ble of forming agreeable and beautiful walks, which 
when laid out tastefully and well shaded, will be very 
attractive. The upper stories of the seminary com- 
mand extensive and delightful views of Holyoke and 
Tom, with the intervening valleys and gorges. 

The buildings were all planned by Miss Lyon, 
not indeed without consultation with others. This 
required much time and care, and it was so well done 
that but few subsequent changes have been found 
desirable. 

In the fall of 1837, so much of this plan had been 
executed that Miss Lyon had in her hands the means 



ERECTION OF THE EDIFICE. 193 

of making the grand experiment towards which she 
had so long looked forward with intense interest. 
Though thankful to God that he had at last given her 
a place where she could firmly plant her feet, little 
thought she of exultation while less than half the 
money requisite to complete the edifice had been ob- 
tained, while the great experiment remained untried, 
and especially while so many of the most judicious 
Christians had much hesitation as to its success. It 
was still a struggle so severe as hardly to permit the 
leader in it to draw her breath freely. Girding her 
loins anew, in faith and hope she pressed forward 
with unabated ardor to reach the goal set before her. 



194 LIFE OF MABY LYON. 

CHAPTEK VIII. 

FIRST YEAR OF THE MOUNT EOLYOKE SEMINARY. 

NOVEMBER 8, 1837, the time advertised for open- 
ing the school arrived, but the building was hardly 
completed. The doors were without steps, the wood- 
house was not covered, the furniture, delayed by 
storms, had not arrived, the stoves were not set up, 
and the bedding pledged by the ladies in different 
towns had not nearly all made its appearance. There 
were rooms for eighty pupils, and more than that 
number within a few days gathered to the spot. They 
were not, however, young and inexperienced pupils. 
The larger part of them were over twenty years of 
age, some of whom had been suspending their educa- 
tion two or three years in order to finish it at the 
new seminary. They had acquired a knowledge of 
persons and things which books cannot give, and 
which, in the exigencies of life, is to book knowledge 
what gold and silver are to the paper currency which 
represents them. Mr. Porter of Monson, and Mr. and 
Mrs. SaSbrd of Boston, were on hand for the first 
week or ten days, to aid and encourage the teachers 
in their work. Mr. Safford, lending a hand where- 
ever he was most needed, worked day after day till 
long after dark, setting up bedsteads and stoves, un- 
packing and arranging furniture, and the like, just as 
if he were the father of this great family. Mr. Porter 
devoted his attention mostly to the out-door concerns, 
and, by the way, gave Miss Lyon lessons in book- 
keeping. 



FIRST YEAR AT HOLYOKE. 195 

lli.?3 Lyon received every new comer with tlio 
welcome of a mother to a daughter. The grasp of 
her hand, the light of her eye, and the tones of her 
voice, went to the stranger's heart, as on learning 
the name she said, "Oh yes, Miss Reed," or "Miss 

Bailey," or "Miss , I know you; I was expecting 

you; I am glad you have arrived. Miss Whitman, 
who has arrived before you, will show you your 
room; and you can take off your things, and then 
come down stairs, and we will give you something 
to do to help along in our great work. We are all 
bees here busy and happy/ 7 That voice had an 
own mother's ring in it. Heart met heart instantly. 
Teacher and pupil were one. So, instead of sitting 
down in her half-furnished room, to shiver and hold 
her hands, she was forthwith employed on some part 
of the work necessary to the settling of the family 
m their new home. Benevolence, the genius that 
hovered over the spot, came down and rested upon 
them, warming every heart and lighting every face 
with contentment and peace. Never gathered at one 
place eighty more willing hearts, or more nimble 
hands and feet. By example, precept, and practice, 
they learned that year the best of lessons, to endure 
hardness as good soldiers of Jesus Christ. 

Not knowing in the morning how the wants of 
the night were to be met, Miss Lyon ? s heart would 
go forth in gratitude to God and to the distant donor 
as, again and again, on the arrival of different pupils, 
the welcome communication would be made, " Miss 
Lyon, I have brought the box of bedding that the 
ladies of our towri"have furnished for a room; where 



196 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

shall it be put ?" "When evening came, the oil failed 
not in the cruse. "Paint, yet pursuing," had long 
been her motto ; " perplexed, but not in despair/' 1 
was now added. Her Father's hand, seen in every 
extremity, sweetened every gift, multiplied every joy, 
She had long been one of those who, "observing prov- 
idences, have providences to observe." How often 
with a seraphic smile did she say, " Whoso is wise, 
and will observe these things, even they shall under- 
stand the loving-kindness of the Lord." 

The domestic arrangements were peculiar in two 
respects : 

First, all the pupils were required to room and 
board within the walls of the seminary. The nearest 
neighbor cannot send a daughter thither, who does 
not conform to this regulation. It was adopted by 
Miss Lyon in order to exclude all adverse outward 
influences, to bring the scholars directly under the 
eye and example of the teachers, and to place all the 
pupils on the most perfect equality as to restrictions 
and privileges. 

The second feature peculiar to the seminary con- 
sisted, as has been seen, in having the domestic work 
performed by the members, so that no hired female 
help need be admitted. The amount of labor required, 
usually about an hour daily, she believed would give 
health, and instead of being a hinderance to study, 
would be a valuable means of mental as well as phys- 
ical culture. At the outset of the undertaking in 
1834, Miss Lyon had incorporated this feature into 
her project as one means of lessening the expenses of 
the school, and of gaining the attention, approbation, 



FIRST YEAR AT HOLYOKE. 197 

and assistance of the Christian yeomanry of Xew 
England. It has been seen that it was a cherished 
object with her, to establish a seminary where the 
pupils might be united in one family, and which might 
be so moderate in its expenses as to be open to the 
daughters of those whose means are limited. But as 
she dwelt longer on this feature of the plan, she saw 
other and still stronger reasons in its favor, until the 
argument from the mere saving of expense sunk, in 
her view, into comparative insignificance. She be- 
came so thoroughly convinced, even before her own 
school opened, that this plan was desirable, indepen- 
dently of its pecuniary advantages, that on one of her 
visits to Ipswich she tried all her powers of logic 
and rhetoric on Miss Grant, to convince her that it 
would be wise to adopt the same in the school at Ips- 
wich. 

In a circular published before the school opened, 
she hardly alludes to the economy of the plan as a 
reason for its adoption. " One object of this arrange- 
ment is," she says, " to give to the institution a greater 
degree of independence. The arrangements for board- 
ing all the pupils in the establishment will give it an 
independence with regard to private families in the 
neighborhood, without which it would be difficult, if 
not impossible, to secure its perpetual prosperity. The 
arrangements for the domestic work will, in a great 
measure, relieve it from another source of depressing 
dependence a dependence on the will of hired do- 
mestics. 

" Another object of this arrangement," she adds, 
" is to promote the health, the improvement, and the 



198 LIFE OP MARY LYON. 

happiness of the pupils : their health, by its furnish- 
ing them with a little daily exercise of the best kind ; 
their improvement, by its tending to preserve their 
interest in domestic pursuits; and their happiness, 
by its relieving them from that servile dependence on 
common domestics, to which young ladies, as mere 
boarders in a large establishment, are often subject, 
to their great inconvenience. The adoption of a fea- 
ture like this, in an institution which aims to be better 
endowed than any other existing female seminary in 
the country, must give it an attitude of noble inde- 
pendence which can scarcely fail to exert an elevating 
influence on its members." 

To her friends she used playfully to say, that 
" the domestic work would prove a sieve, that would 
exclude from the school the refuse, the indolent, the 
fastidious, and the weakly, of whom you could never 
make much, and leave the finest of the wheat, the 
energetic, the benevolent, and those whose early train- 
ing had been favorable to usefulness, from whom you 
might expect great things." 

This feature was entirely original with Miss Lyon, 
and was much objected to by many of her judicious 
friends, some of whom dared not recommend her plans 
while this scheme formed a part of them. On the 
other hand, it gave the plan most interest with a 
large and highly respectable class of the community, 
and it was, no doubt, one of the most successful argu- 
ments employed in obtaining funds. 

The time had now indeed come in which her the- 
ory was to be put to the test. Here were eighty 
pupils to be fed, the food to be cooked with their own 



FIRST YEAR AT HOLTOKE. 190 

Lands, and a mansion ninety-four feet by fifty, with 
its halls and staircases, to be kept in order, while the 
appurtenances and utensils for housekeeping were 
incomplete and untried. A scheme was to be tested 
without any previous experience, and in the face of 
many predictions of failure. 

But she who had shed tears of joy and gratitude, 
while walking over the site the evening after the first 
ground was broken and the comer-stone laid she 
who with prayer and earnest longings had seen the 
walls slowly rise, found no place for despondency 
now that her feet rested on a firm and sure founda- 
tion, where she could put forth all her strength. 

Fully determined to quiet objectors and satisfy 
donors, Miss Lyon at the outset gave to the domestic 
department her first and chief attention. It was com- 
paratively easy to find a lady to whom the literary 
interests of the institution could be In a great degree 
confided, but on no one but herself could she rely for 
setting in happy and harmonious motion the compli- 
cated wheels of the domestic and culinary depart- 
ments. Although she had never been a proficient in 
household work, and for more than a dozen years 
had been entirely out of practice, she not merely gave 
her time and strength to planning and superintending 
it, but also when it was necessary labored diligently 
with her own hands. She esteemed nothing as drudg- 
ery which the exigencies of the institution required 
of her. Let the embarrassment be what it might, she 
was never known to "worry," but in patience she 
possessed her soul. Her trust in God and her confi- 
dence in herself were too strong to allow her equa- 



200 LIFE OF MARY LTON. 

nimity to "be disturbed. Like Joshua the servant of 
the Lord, whom she often held up for imitation, she 
was strong and of good courage. 

None but those who have known from experience 
can appreciate the brain-work required in adjusting 
a time-table to meet the studies, the recitations, and 
the housework of a family and school conducted on 
the principles of the Holyoke seminary. Miss Lyon 
had the tact of an Elizabeth in discovering what 
every body was good for, and the skill of a Napoleon 
in finding her generals and putting them in their right 
places. But then it would happen that the very best 
person to aid in preparing the dinner was" in the 
geometry class that recited at eleven o'clock. What 
was to be done ? It was easier to alter the time of a 
recitation than to find a competent person to take 
the scholar's place on the dinner circle, or to change 
the dinner hour. " But when the recitation hour was 
altered, some one else might be incommoded, and an- 
other change must be made. Never had Miss Lyon 
more frequent use for her wondrous power of inven- 
tion. Yet her resources proved inexhaustible. When 
for the twentieth time the literary and domestic de- 
partments interfered with one another, she set herself 
for the twentieth time to readjust her time-table with 
as much cheerfulness as she had constructed it at 
first. She had often said at Ipswich, that she could 
suggest plans by the score, leaving Miss Grant to 
reject or adopt them as she chose. So at the Hol- 
yoke seminary her treasury was always full, and in 
every exigency the right order of exercises would 
appear in due season. 



FIRST YEAR AT HOLYOKE. 201 

During that first cold winter, iliss Lyon's powers 
of body and mind were in constant service from sis- 
teen to eighteen hours out of the twenty-four. On 
her devolved not only the care of forming and ma- 
turing plans for the school, but also of seeing that 
fourscore and five persons had three sufficient and 
comfortable meals each day, along with the veriest 
minutiae of household duties. From basement to at- 
tic she was in constant request. The celerity of her 
movements was almost equal to the gift of multipres- 
ence, and yet she could hardly answer the calls for 
her aid and counsel. As with Joseph, so with her, 
whatsoever was done in the house, she was the doer 
of it. It is no small thing for a matron, even with 
well-trained and ready servants, to put and keep 
every thing in order in so large a house ; but it is 
more yet, lovingly to lead eighty scholarly girls to 
do it. Not only had every thing a place, but she 
knew the place of every thing. No wonder that, as 
she sometimes playfully said, her head seemed full of 
bread, pans, tin-dippers, spoons, and clothes-pins ; but 
she saw " holiness to the Lord " legibly inscribed on 
the building and every thing appertaining to it. 
Hence her minute care that not a single utensil 
should be abused, not an ounce of flour wasted, not a 
door or window-sill defaced. All had been conse- 
crated to Christ, and all was regarded by her as his, 
and not her own. 

To a family of students, bread is emphatically the 
staff of life. Considering the quantity necessary for 
so large a family, the season of the year, and the 

manner in which the work was performed, no practi* 

9* 



202 LIFE OF MISS LYON. 

cal housekeeper will be surprised to know that the 
first batches proved sour, or heavy, or overdone, or 
underdone. Miss Lyon looked the difficulty in the 
face. " We have the best of flour," she said, " we can 
have goo4 bread, we must have it." Selecting some 
of her most reliable pupils, she took the lead herself 
in the business of bread-making, until her large fam- 
ily was regularly supplied with sweet, light bread. 
Xot a teacher or pupil in the establishment had ever 
before seen a Euuiford oven. She carried her porta- 
ble writing-desk to the baking-room, and there, in a 
warm corner beside the oven, at such intervals as 
she could command, conducted at the same time her 
extensive correspondence, and watched the baking 
processes. This she did for days and weeks, until 
she had learned herself and taught her baking circle 
all the mysteries of this important operation. To her 
happy, view, whatever was necessary to the health 
and comfort of her numerous family, was ss vitally 
connected with the cause of Christ, as direct labors 
for the salvation of souls. On those winter morn- 
ings, while it was yet dark and cold, she rose from 
her couch to watch the rising of the bread, with an 
eye as single to the glory of God as though she had 
risen to pray. In fact almost her every breath was 
a prayer. Although no one was ever more careful to 
secure set seasons for devotion, she used to say that 
one could pray not only when on her knees, but while 
making her bed, if she had sufficient discipline of 
mind, and had trained herself to it. That baking- 
room was consecrated by many a prayer offered 
before daybreak on those winter mornings. With 



FIRST YEAR AT HOLYOKE. 203 

the simplicity of a child, along with her prayers for 
blessings on a lost and perishing world, she would 
also mingle requests to her heavenly Father to bless 
her in the work of her hands. 

A noble band, as has already been implied, was 
that which ^gathered in those halls that first year : 
young maidens of lofty aims, noble impulses, and 
steady devotion to Christ and his cause. The Lord 
magnified his handmaid in their sight, and helped 
them to see with her eyes the importance of her plans, 
and to enter into the work with a zeal scarcely sec- 
ond to her own. How did they delight to rally 
round such a leader. Imbibing her spirit, their am- 
bition was not so much to learn the greatest possible 
amount from their books, as to vie with one another 
in the noble strife of self-denying labors and sacrifices 
for the good of the institution. In every strait, some 
could always be found ready and glad to put their 
shoulders to the wheel. As Paul was no less an 
apostle when stitching the canvas for a tent, than 
when writing the epistle to the Romans; so they, 
instructed by their heaven-taught guide, felt them- 
selves no less the children of a heavenly King when 
employed at their domestic work, than when wor- 
shipping in his courts. The love of Christ constrain- 
ed them as much in the one case as in tho other. 
Scattered in this and other lands, they have, almost 
without exception of name, or time, or place, been 
working women, serving their day and generation 
asking neither thanks nor praise, seeking no reward 
but the blessed consciousness of entering into the 
work and sufferings of their divine Master. Some 



204 LIFE OF MISS LTON. 

have already reached the goal, and received their 
crown. Others are still waiting serving or endur- 
ing. But whether walking the golden streets, or tar- 
rying on the race-ground below, they are sisters all, 
living in an atmosphere of love and purity, bound to 
one another, to their sainted friend, and to their com- 
mon Lord, by ties as invisible and as indissoluble as 
that which binds satellites to planets, and planets to 
the great centre. 

The care of bringing the expenditures within the 
receipts, fell also on Miss Lyo$. She had insisted, 
against the advice of the trustees even, on having 
the charge for board and tuition placed at sixty- 
four dollars per annum, a little more than half the 
expense at Ipswich. Provisions were higher that 
year than previous years. Never did financier more 
carefully manage and economize his resources. She 
looked well to the ways of her household to see that 
there was no waste, and that the most was made of 
every thing. She succeeded. What joy at the close 
of the year filled her heart and illumined her face, 
as she exhibited her accounts to the trustees, and 
showed them that the income had not only met the 
outgoes, but that there remained a balance on hand 
towards defraying the debt which had been incurred 
in the erection of the edifice, and for which they 
were personally responsible. Their incredulity van- 
ished. They saw that she understood business. A 
home at the seminary and two hundred dollars a 
year, was all that she could ever be induced to receive 
as compensation for her services. She meant that 
missionary self-denial and economy should be exer- 



FIRST YEAR AT HOLYOKE. 205 

cised by all who had any thing to do with the 
school ; and she set the example herself. Gladly 
would the directors of many a corporation pay thou- 
sands a year for such financial skill and care as she 
exercised for Christ and the church, almost at her 
own cost. 

Let it not be supposed that Miss Lyon ? s labors 
this first year were limited to the domestic and finan- 
cial concerns of the institution. She matured a course 
of study, watched the recitations, directed individual 
scholars in the selection of their studies, criticised 
compositions, instructed the Middle class in chemistry, 
performing with them a course of experiments, and 
taught several other branches. For the first time in 
her life, she taught Whately's logic. It was her first 
acquaintance with that prince of living thinkers and 
reasoners. She entered into the science with as 
much eagerness and relish as she had plunged into 
Yirgil in the days of her youth, leading the class 
through moods, figures, and fallacies, as ably as any 
professor of metaphysics. 

The course of study as laid out by Miss Lyon 
occupied at least three years. The pupils are ar- 
ranged according to their attainments in three classes, 
denominated Junior, Middle, and Senior. The requi 
sites for admission to the Junior class amount to a 
good common-school education, and pupils are ad- 
mitted only on a thorough examination. The course 
of study coincides very nearly with that pursued in 
our best colleges, with the exception of Greek, the 
more difficult Latin authors, and the higher branches 
of mathematics. 



206 LIFE OF MAEY LYON. 

As a general rale, Miss Lyon did not permit any 
scholar to pursue more than three new studies at the 
same time. The recitations occupy from half an hour 
to an hour each. The teachers endeavor by weekly 
reviews to fix permanently in the mind the knowledge 
acquired. " It takes longer," Miss Lyon would say, 
" to learn a lesson for a lifetime than for a week, but 
it is the best economy to give it the extra attention 
necessary to make it a sure and lasting investment." 
The standard of recitation held before the pupil from 
the first, has been unfailing accuracy, and a large 
majority attain it. No prizes are ever offered, nor 
appointments held out to the gifted and ambitious. 
The great motive presented to the scholars is their 
accountability to God for the right use of minutes 
and hours. As a general rule, they are so anxious to 
advance in knowledge, that they need much oftener 
the exhortation to let their moderation be known, 
than to redeem the time. 

Nearly all the scholars of the first year were pro- 
fessing Christians. Miss Lyon often regaled her own 
soul and theirs by unfolding to them the riches of the 
gospel of Christ. Then she would spread before them 
as on a map, in glowing colors, the wants of a perish- 
ing world. Again, by strong appeals, she would in 
her own irresistible manner, unlock the fountains of 
emotion, and kindle in their hearts the high purpose 
of consecrating themselves to the interests of the Ke- 
deemer's kingdom. 

The first anniversary occurred in the latter part 
of August, and was a season replete with interest. 
The principal examinations were on Monday and 



FIRST TEAR AT HOLYOKE. 2UT 

Tuesday, and were well sustained. On Wednesday, 
while more than one half the school went to Amherst 
to attend the commencement exercises, the remainder, 
with ready minds and willing hands, devoted the 
time to preparing a collation for the next day. About 
forty invited guests were to be entertained, and as 
usual, all was to be done without a vestige of foreign 
aid. 

Thursday morning rose clear and bright. Miss 
Lyon with a womanly modesty shrunk from leading 
her band of maidens to the church, and so far as pro- 
priety would allow, insisted that the address should 
be given, and the presentation of the diplomas made, 
in the seminary hall. But the evident fact, that not 
one half of the friends of the school and of the pupils 
could be accommodated in the hall, led her to submit 
the question to the trustees. They decided in favor 
of going to the church. Under their escort, the 
orator of the day, Rev. Dr. Hawes of Hartford, the 
teachers, the Senior clas?, and the school, went to the 
church in procession. They walked with heads un- 
covered, shaded by parasols. The side pews and gal- 
leries were already crowded with interested specta- 
tors, when Miss Lyon led her beautiful troop in quiet 
dignity to the seats reserved for them. It was an 
hour in her life never to be forgotten. The battle 
had been fought, the victory was hers. Public opin- 
ion had come over in a good degree to her side. 
She knew that she had prevailed. In all that year, 
she had never found an hour to spend in astonish- 
ment at her success and position, but the circum- 
stances now forced the view upon her ; and wonder, 



208 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

gratitude, and praise filled her heart with a flood of 
emotions such as ordinary minds cannot conceive. 
Her great soul was surcharged with pent up joy. 
Smiles and tears strove for the mastery on her radi- 
ant face. She retired within herself, gave way to a 
joy with which no one could intermeddle, and for an 
hour resigned herself to the emotions of the occa- 
sion. 

Every thing was done to her mind. Dr. Hawes 7 
address was practical and judicious. Her beloved 
pastor and friend, the Rev. Joseph D. Condit, Secre- 
tary of the Board of Trustees, neatly and elegantly 
presented the diplomas to the three eldest-born daugh- 
ters of the seminary. Her heart was in the gift. Her 
name was on the parchments. The trio were hence- 
forth her fellow-laborers in the work of the world's 
regeneration. He who gave the diplomas, she who 
signed them, aod one of the three who received them, 
a child of her own sister and a child of her own heart, 
now mingle their praises together before the great 
white throne. 



LEADING PBINCIPLES. 209 



CHAPTER IX. 

LEADING PRINCIPLES OF TEE INSTITUTION. 

THE guiding cloud which had gone before Miss 
Lyon in her three years wanderings, and which had 
hovered over the house erected and consecrated to 
the Lord during the first year of the school, no? 
entered and rested permanently within its walls. 
Welcome to her soul was the Shechinah of the Lord. 
Henceforth the seminary was to be her home. Its 
inmates were her children, intrusted to her by their 
heavenly Father to be brought up for him. Like a 
true Christian mother, she had no joy comparable to 
that of seeing them walking in truth and peace. The 
school was but an expansion of herself. Though ter 
immediate duties lay mostly within the walls of the 
seminary, their bearings connected her with the liter- 
ary, religious, and benevolent interests of the wide 
world. It was this which made her devotion to the 
seminary a pure and expansive benevolence. 

At the close of the first year Miss Caldwell, who 
had been associate principal, was married, leaving the 
entire care of the literary department to Miss Lyon. 
At the reopening of the school, the building, by some 
crowding, was made to accommodate one hundred 
pupils. A new band of teachers, the three graduates 
of the first class, now came to her aid. Having, dur- 
ing the first year, in a good measure settled the organ- 
ization of the school and family, she was now able to 
giverherself more fully to the business of instruction. 



210 LIFE OP MARY LTON. 

Besides continuing to teach chemistry to the Middle 
class, she took almost the entire charge of the recita- 
tions of the Senior class. 

But the most absorbing and the most exhausting, 
as well as the most delightful part of her work, was 
the training and instructing of her pupils in the way 
to heaven. Every thing else was not only kept sub- 
ordinate, but made subservient to their entrance and 
advancement in the divine life. To her resorted 
many destined to be the helpmeet of ministers, and 
the teachers of Christian schools. To that fold came 
also many daughters who had been given to the 
Lord in the faith of godly parents, and prayed over 
in the closet and at the family altar every day since 
the light first dawned upon their eyes. Miss Lyon 
looked beyond fathers and mothers, guardians and 
fridhds, and the wills of the pupils even, and received 
them, each and all, as intrusted to her by God to be 
trained for his service. To her the Bible was the 
source of light divine, and she sought to cast its radi- 
ance on every mind. She asked no parent's creed, 
and never spoke of sects, but industriously inculcated 
the doctrines of the Bible as she understood them, 
holding herself accountable to God for faithfulness to 
him and to those committed to her charge. She re- 
garded each pupil as selected and sent to the seminary 
on purpose to be moulded into his likeness. She 
sought not merely their conversion, but their enlist- 
ment in the great work of saving a lost world. It 
was the end and aim of all her efforts to make the 
seminary a nursery to the church. She diligently " 
prayed and sought that all the genius and learning, 



LEADING PRINCIPLES. 211 

talent and tact there gathered, might be baptized into 
the spirit of the gospel. Whatsoever would interfere 
with this object she scrupulously avoided. Hence 
her rule, that on the Sabbath's sacred hours no visit* 
ing should be allowed out of the house or within it. 
" The Sabbath," she would say. " is a key to unlock 
treasures for the week. It is the day that God most 
honors in the conversion of sinners, and the strength- 
ening and comforting of his people. Let us each be 
in our place, so that if the blessing should descend, 
we may not miss it.'" 

In fact, every plan of Hiss Lyon, whether it refer- 
red to the disposing of the outward circumstances, or 
the controlling of the inward life of her pupils, had 
their spiritual welfare for its end and aim. In all 
her arrangements, the invisible world and the ever- 
lasting life were taken into the account as easily and 
naturally as the present and tangible. From an exer- 
cise in spelling to the giving of the diplomas, and 
from washing the glasses to preparing the anniversary 
dinner, every thing was definitely intended to fit these 
beloved daughters, as she delighted to call them, for 
service in the church ; and had Miss Lyon been asked, 
she could have shown in any case the connection be- 
tween these passing engagements and their future use- 
fulness. The studies were carefully selected to this 
end. "Xever pursue any study," she often said to the 
pupils, "merely because yon will be called to teach it. 
If you cannot turn it to account yourselves in hasten 
ing the millennial glory, neither can your pupils. 
Study and teach nothing that cannot be made to help 
in the great work of converting the world to Christ." 



212 LIFE OP MART LYON. 

She assigned to every hour of the twenty-four its ap- 
propriate duty, not merely to make her pupils indus- 
trious and efficient women, but that Satan might not 
be able to find mischief for idle brains and idle hands 
to do. She allowed them to take but two or three 
studies at a time, lest they should become distracted 
by too great a variety of pursuits, or diverted by 
overmuch business, from thinking of God and their 
obligations. She inspired them to aim at entire fix- 
edness and concentration in study, that they might be 
able to pray without wandering thoughts. Mental 
culture was with h3r, not an end, but a means. She 
sought to discipline and enrich the mind, that it might 
be a keener and more effective instrument in the ser- 
vice of the Lord. 

She made constant reference to the Bible. She 
had a text for every principle, every hint, and every 
theme. TThen requesting her pupils not to visit each 
other on the Sabbath, she would say, " It is not in our 
power to make you keep the day holy in your hearts, 
yet we are bound by the fourth commandment to 
see that you keep it externally." When requesting 
them to attend meeting on the Sabbath, she would 
quote the words of the apostle, " Not forsaking the 
assembling of yourselves together, as the manner of 
some is." The psalmist's comparison*of a good man 
to " a tree which bringeth forth his fruit in his sea- 
son," was her favorite sanction of punctuality. In 
the time of green fruit, Paul's direction to the jailer, 
"Do thyself no harm/' was enforced upon the pupils. 
Violations of physiological laws, such as overindul- 
gence of the appetite, thin shoes, or tight waists, were 



LEADING PRINCIPLES. 

shown, to the satisfaction of the pupils, to be viola- 
tions of the sixth commandment. By the eighth, using 
things without leave, injuring or not returning bor- 
rowed articles, defacing furniture not their own, and 
all careless use of common property, were shown to 
be forbidden. 

Did she desire to warn her pupils against the 
treachery of a fashionable education, in which the 
fingers and the feet, the passions and the appetites 
are educated at the expense of the reason and the 
affections, the dancing daughter of the licentious He- 
rodias was exactly in point* ' This young lady," she 
would say, "who could move with so much beauty 
and grace as to delight the king and his court, the 
next hour bore to her mother, in her own delicate 
hands, the bleeding head of John the Baptist, the 
harbinger of the Messiah. Thus many a young lady 
of the present day, notwithstanding all that a fashion- 
able education can do for her, appears in the parlor 
with angelic sweetness in her face and tones, the ad- 
mired of all admirers, when she has a moment before 
pierced the heart of her mother with cutting words, 
or roused the evil passions of a weary servant by 
harsh and needless fault-finding. The education that 
is given in nunneries does not tend to form a benevo- 
lent character, but to produce mere outward embel- 
lishment. It does not aim to educate the pupil to 
think, to take enlarged views of life, and to awaken 
her interest in the welfare of the whole human family ; 
but it aims to keep her from thinking, to contract her 
views, and to limit her affections to herself and the 
circle about her." 



2U LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

In so large and complicated an establishment, nu- 
merous rules and regulations were necessary to the 
comfort and order of the house. In all these, Miss 
Lyon sought to have the pupils obey, not herself, but 
God. She could show any of her rules to be but an 
offshoot of the first or second great commandment. 
Family devotion, public worship, and private prayer 
were the natural details of the first : " Thou shalt love 
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all 
thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy 
strength." Patting every thing in its place, prompt- 
ness at meals, faithfulness in the domestic work, were 
but the carrying out of the second : " Thou shalt love 
thy neighbor as thyself." She was accustomed so to 
set forth this view, that the heart of that great school 
and its hundreds of beaming eyes would respond a 
full amen. She led them to see and to feel that eveiy 
thing, from hanging up a holder, or setting away a 
flat-iron, to watching by the side of the sick, or pray- 
ing with the impenitent, was to be done as to the 
Lord, and not to their teachers. Thus the humblest 
service was raised to the dignity of a solemn duty. 
Its connection with eternity elevated ordinary house- 
work to a level with the work of breaking the bread 
of life to a benighted mind in Africa or India. " A 
lady who has the genuine missionary spirit," she 
would say, " will carry it to the kitchen, as well as to 
the monthly concert." This was no feigned theory 
with Miss Lyon. She did not resort to it as a means 
of carrying her own will and way under pretence 
of its being the Lord's. Every pupil, however inca- 
pable of rising to the same stand-point, I new and felt 



LEADING PRINCIPLES. 215 

that this was no device of Miss Lyon to bring her 
into subjection. Most of the pupils, after observing 
the rules for a few weeks, saw and felt that they were 
adopted and enforced for their good. The moral 
effect on young and susceptible minds, of bringing 
conscience to bear so universally and equally on the 
daily life, in small matters as in great, was overpow- 
ering. If they violated a rule of school, they felt that 
they violated the great law of love. They walked in 
the open air, and studied in their own rooms, equally 
under a sense of duty. This made it easy to keep all 
their appointments. It made them sober and vigilant 
without a conscious effort. 

Miss Lyon kept all the rules of school herself. 
Xone of her pupils were more scrupulous than herself 
to rise or retire at the appointed hour. The lan- 
guage of her lips and life was, we will all do right 
together. " God in his providence/' she would say, 
" has placed us teachers, in a sense, over you. Not 
that we are any better, or any more worthy of respect 
than you, but in our position it is our duty to see 
that you keep the rules. It is easier to conform to a 
law than to oblige others to conform to it. We hope 
that you will not impose upon us this painful neces- 
sity. "We hope that each of you will do right of her- 
self ; but if any should not, we must not forget the 
case of good old Eli. He expostulated with his sons, 
and said, * Why do ye so V but he did not oblige them 
to mend their ways ; and how dreadful was the end of 
those sons, how awful God ? s frown on Eli. Now we 
mean not only to explain the rules, but to see that you 
keep them. This is the work God puts upon us, and 



216 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

we do not intend to shirk it. Tour predecessors have 
made it a very pleasant task, and you, we hope and 
trust, will do the same." 

It was mote as a family than as a school that Miss 
Lyon governed her pupils. "Family government," 
she held, " should be fixed, mild, undeviating, inflex- 
ible ; so that on the part of the parent nothing is 
necessary but advice ; on the part of the child, noth- 
ing but the most respectful deference." To this point, 
year after year, she brought the government of her 
large family. 

The following incidents, related by one who had 
been a member of the seminary, show us Miss Lyon's 
skill in controlling the conduct of pupils without the 
direct exercise of authority : 

" It was contrary to the rules of Miss Lyon's estab- 
lishment that any young lady, sick or well, should ab- 
sent herself from the regular meals without permis- 
sion so to do. c If you are not able to come to me 
yourself, or some other teacher, send your room-mate/ 
was ever her injunction. Some young ladies would 
go to the table without turning their plates. The 
sick had thejur particular table, which each could 
leave for her own room whenever she chose, without 
waiting for the whole company to rise, as was the 
rule at the health tables. No young lady expected to 
be a little unwell and stay in her own room during 
meal-time, and keep it from Miss Lyon's knowledge, 
without being disappointed. Her Argus eyes saw 
every thing. Neither would a young lady unnecessa- 
rily send an apology for non-appearance more than 
once or twice. Miss Lyon nipped such things in the 



LEADING PRINCIPLES. 217 

bud most effectually. I well remember a case illus- 
trative of this power of hers. A friend of mine, feel- 
ing rather indisposed, concluded not to go down to 
the dining-room to tea one night. I was deputed, as 
her friend, to report her case to Miss Lyon, at wliose 
table she sat. Through carelessness, I did not speak 
of my friend's illness till after the family had risen 
from the meal. Then Hiss Lyoa was inquiring of 
another teacher why this young lady absented herself 
from the supper-table. I explained the matter, as I 
thought, most satisfactorily : ' My friend did not feel 
able to come down to-night. 7 ' Ah, sick, is she ? : ex- 
claimed Miss Lyon, fixing her piercing eyes full upon 
me. 'Xo, no, only a little unwell. 7 'Would n ? t she 
like something in her room ? J t Yes, she commission- 
ed me to carry up to her a cup of tea and a cracker. 7 
1 You may go to her now,' replied Miss Lyon ; ' I J ll 
see to that. 7 I ascended to the fourth story to my 
companion ; I found her very comfortably seated in 
her rocking-chair by the window, watching a glorious 
sunset. I placed myself by her side, and soon forgot 
the tea and cracker and all things pertaining to it. 
In a few moments, a slight tap was heard at the door. 
' Come in, 7 both exclaimed in one voice. The door 
slowly opened, and Miss Lyon walked into the room, 
bearing a waiter, with my friend's tea and cracker. 
Had a spirit from the unseen world appeared before 
us, we could not have been more astonished. Our 
apologies were profuse. My poor friend had no idea 
of Miss Lyon 7 s coming from the basement to the fourth 
story for her. With perfect kindness, our beloved 
teacher told us that every one was tired at night, and 

10 



218 LIFE OF MAEY LYON. 

she could come as well as any other. She made par- 
ticular inquiries of my friend, who had nothing to 
say, and then departed. That young lady never re- 
mained in her room afterwards, as the bell rang for 
the dining-room, when she was able to take a little 
tea and cracker. 

" I knew a young lady, at the commencement of the 
term, arrive rather tired, feel rather selfish and indo- 
lent, and fancy refreshments would taste much sweeter 
in her own room. Accordingly she sent to the gen- 
eral directress of domestic work, and asked that some 
young lady might .come to such a number, with such 
and such articles of food. Not long after, the supper 
came. But Miss Lyon brought it to the healthy, stout 
young lady, lounging carelessly upon the bed, detail- 
ing the incidents of her recent journey to her social 
companions. How thankful was I not to meet the 
calm, kind, half-reproachful glance from the weary 
eye of Miss Lyon." 

Now and then at long intervals a jclique of re- 
spectable scholars would lean the wrong way. Their 
influence would be in the wrong scale. While they 
would be careful to keep within the letter of the law, 
their spirits would be sadly out of tune with Christ's 
and with Miss Lyon's. It would be not so much 
what they did as what they failed to do, that would 
grieve her. In such cases, if a few general remarks 
before the whole school did not remedy the evil, she 
would take them to her room, one by one, and set 
before each alone the wrong she was doing to herself 
and to that beloved institution. Seldom did she fail 
to find access in this way to the heart of the perverse 



LEADING PRINCIPLES 219 

pupils, and they, having seen her tenderness and 
regard for them, often became her closest friends, 
and were the last to suffer a word against her to be 
uttered in their presence. In many cases each would 
yield, saying, " Miss Lyon, trust me, I Trill not give 
you any more trouble." Some few would never yield 
to her arguments or remonstrances. When it became 
necessary, she could apply the amputating knife, sev- 
ering the unruly member from the body to which it 
was a damage. But it has been said, that she would 
expel a pupil in as good humor as she would receive 
one. " I am sorry for you," she would say, " but the 
good of this beloved institution requires it." 

Napoleon, it has been said, took it for granted 
that every body was selfish. 3kliss Lyon took it for 
granted that every one with whom she had to do was 
benevolent. Her own soul was so imbued with love, 
that she unconsciously attributed the same to others. 
She included every human soul among her kindred, 
and never tried to realize that others felt no such 
broad relationship. If any work was to be done for 
the good of the family, like an hour's ironing in a 
warm day, she would not ask, Is any one willing, but. 
" How many would like to do " thus and so. This 
assumption infused a sort of temporary benevolence 
into those who were in communication with her. 
When urging a pupil to some self-denying act like 
taking an uncongenial, a slack, or an indolent room- 
mate, it was an understood principle in all her rea- 
sonings, that the young lady with whom she was con- 
versing had as tender a regard for the well-being and 
personal comfort of the room-mate in question as for 



220 LIFE OF MISS LYON. 

her own, and that she would do as much to promote 
them. " If we put two of these unfortunate children 
together," she would say, " they will certainly injure 
one another. Somebody must take pity on them. 

Who for one can do it better than you ? Miss ? s 

mother died when she was a child, and her early 
training, I know, has been deficient. She needs 
some one to help her. She loves you, you know, and 
you cannot tell how much good you can do her by 
rooming with her. Of course, you would he glad to 
do her good, wouldn't you? Some self-denial, no 
doubt, but then we cannot do much without self- 
denial. I made up my mind on that point many years 
ago." She would talk on in this way, until the young 
lady would go away counting it a privilege granted 
her by the Saviour to receive that forlorn companion 
to her own room, and take care of her as a sister, 
without money and without price. 

It is a fact abundantly illustrated, both at Ipswich 
and South Hadley, that characters voluntarily sub- 
jected to this sort of discipline, grow astonishingly in 
grace and excellence, but it requires a great and rare 
power of persuasion to induce them to enter upon the 
work. Entered upon heartily, in the spirit in which 
Miss Lyon enjoined it, it is a labor of love for the 
lost which the Saviour delights to own and bless. 

Miss Lyon's corps of teachers warmly and power- 
fully seconded her views and efforts. They were one 
to every twenty of the pupils, and had they been of 
diverse purposes, could have counteracted her influ- 
ence. She carefully guarded against any such con- 
tingency. At her suggestion, the trustees at the out- 



LEADING PRINCIPLES. 221 

set adopted the rule, that the right of appointing the 
assistants should be vested in the principal. On no 
consideration would Miss Lyon have taken charge of 
a school where the right of selecting her assistants was 
not conceded to her. Her teachers must be a trained 
band, who could sympathize and cooperate with her 
in the great work of doing good to the minds and 
hearts of the pupils. In order to this, they must be 
of her own choosing. 

The first year the teachers, as has been stated, 
were all from the Ipswich school. After that, they 
were selected from her own graduates. They regard- 
ed Miss Lyon with mingled love, confidence, and ven- 
eration, entered enthusiastically into her views of 
education, and saw in her the servant of the Lord, 
raised up for the very work that she was doing. Like 
her, they taught not for money or for fame, but from 
the love of God, and to do good. If dollars and 
cents were the first want of any mind, Miss Lyon 
neither needed nor desired that mind in her work. 
The more genius and talent she could command the 
better, provided they were baptized into the spirit of 
Christ ; but if they were only means of self-exaltation, 
she could better dispense with them. In selecting 
her assistants, Miss Lyon's first question was not, Are 
you of one religious denomination, or another, but, 
Are you, like the Lord Jesus Christ, willing to make 
yourself poor, that others through your poverty may 
be rich ? Though respectably paid, they could often 
have commanded larger salaries elsewhere. Money 
was not even second in the list of motives which kept 
them at their Alma Mater. A desire to do good, 



222 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

the pleasure of unfolding minds of a high order, de- 
light in communing with congenial spirits, the identi- 
fication of the seminary with themselves, and the lux- 
ury of Hying in what seemed to them a miniature 
paradise, and of anticipating the millennial glory, 
were far stronger motives with them. They were 
not women of transports and revelations. Calm, 
contemplative, energetic, reverential minds, able to 
comprehend the plan of redemption, transparent to 
her and to one another, gathered around her. How- 
ever they might differ in taste and attainments, they 
all believed their beloved Alma Mater the model of 
a school, a copy of the pattern shown Miss Lyon 
in the mount; especially in giving the first' place 
in its list of studies to the Bible, and in employing 
no domestics. They were able to see that man's 
chief end is to glorify God, and that the chief end of 
a school should be to bring its pupils to adopt this 
high and holy end. They held with Miss Lyon, that 
the intellect is as much made for the moral and sen- 
tient soul as the body for the mind ; that the first and 
most important use of memory is to be a tablet for 
the engraving of God's law and the recording of the 
soul's acts, and that the primary office of reason and 
imagination is to read and apply that law. They 
kept constantly in mind, that at the winding up of 
life's drama, they and their pupils are not to be 
asked how much Latin or algebra they knew, but 
whether they had loved and followed Jesus Christ, 
and were united to him as a branch is united to the 
vine. Yet a solemn sense of accountability to God 
for the right use of their time and faculties, secured 



LEADING PRINCIPLES. 223 

a higher standard of study and recitation among the 
scholars than any motives drawn from the world of 
time and sense could have done. The fear of the 
Lord is indeed " wisdom and instruction." 

At the weekly teachers 7 meetings, there was no 
clashing. All saw eye to eye. Miss Lyon mingled 
with her assistants like an older sister, as ready to 
receive as to give hints. No slurs on poor scholars 
were allowed. " Speak of them as of sisters," was Hiss 
Lyon's oft-repeated injunction ; and the precept was 
observed in letter and in spirit. The progress of the 
pupils in whatsoever is lovely and of good report, 
was communicated ; and the benevolent labor neces- 
sary in behalf of any who were not making the best 
use of their opportunities, was apportioned among the 
teachers. 

In direct labors for the conversion of sinners, they 
also cooperated with Miss Lyon, seeming often to be 
more like pastors than simple members of " the church 
in the seminary," as Miss Lyon used to call her band 
of Christians. They conducted the lesser meetings, 
conversed and prayed with pupils alone, and sought, 
first of all, that souls might be given them as seals of 
their fidelity, and crowns of joy in the great day. 

One of the most efficient means of grace employed 
in the school was what is called the half-hour system. 
It had been adopted at Ipswich, at Ashfield, and at 
Buckland, in seasons of the outpouring of the Spirit, 
and had been continued on account of its happy effects* 
It was at once stereotyped by Hiss Lyon at South. 
Hadley. It was adapted to serious and reflecting 
minds, that know how to make good use of such in- 



224 LIFE OF MAKY LYON. 

tervals, and consider it a privilege to be alone with 
themselves and with God twice every day. 

In the construction of the house, as great care 
was taken to secure facilities for private devotion as 
for sleeping. For the first and every successive set 
of pupils, Miss Lyon took as much pains to provide 
seasons for secret prayer as for unbroken study. 
Before breakfast, at the ringing of a bell, every pupil, 
except the few who were busied in the domestic hall, 
was expected to be alone, either in her room, or in 
tho large lighted closet with which each room was 
furnished, and to remain there until a second bell 
gave notice that the half-hour was ended. A similar 
arrangement was made for the evening. Early in the 
year Miss Lyon illustrated and enforced the preeept 
of our Saviour, " Enter into thy closet, and when thou 
hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in 
secret." " Christ," she would say, "has given the 
command. TVe have seen to your having the oppor- 
tunity to obey it. The responsibility of keeping it is 
now on you, and not on us. We cannot make you 
pray if we would. The matter is between God and 
your own soul. If you count it a privilege to spread 
out your wants before God, you have the opportunity. 
If you misuse the time, you and you alone must answer 
for it." 

She would at the same or at some other time give 
to young Christians, who wished to grow in grace, 
directions for spending the time profitably. No illus- 
tration perhaps can do justice to her instructions ; but 
they were much in the following strain. 

" Read a portion of Scripture. Look up to God 



LEADING PRINCIPLES. 225 

before you begin, and while you are reading, for light 
from his holy -word. Read in course; you trill be 
more likely to read regularly. Perhaps you think 
that you will not in this way be so likely to meet 
with the passage suited to your particular case. It 
is suprising how the Christian, truly led by the Spirit, 
will find in his daily portion just the instruction and 
comfort adapted to his circumstances. The same om- 
niscient God who gives the wayside violet its beauti- 
ful tints, and guides satellites and suns in their mighty 
courses, knows your circumstances. You know not. 
how many hairs you have upon your head, but He 
has numbered them all. He knows every thing about 
you. He knew millions of years before you were 
born just what you would need for guidance and for 
food this day. He knew what chapter would come 
in course in your reading, and that it would just meet 
your case. In the counsels of eternity he arranged 
all the circumstances that surround you here. You 
need not think you must read three chapters. Read 
with a heart lifted upwards imploring guidance and 
ready to be instructed, until you come to something 
which seems to take hold of you. Lay hold on that, 
hide it in your heart and feed upon it." 

Miss Lyon well knew what it is to draw sup- 
plies of grace from the exhaustless fountain of inspir 
ed truth. When she was at Ipswich, an intimate 
friend relates that in one of their seasons of spirit- 
ual communion, she asked Miss Lyon what means she 
thought had been especially conducive to her own 
progress in the divine life. She replied, " Studying 
the. Scriptures, and laboring to save souls." 
10* 



226 LIFE OF MART LYON. 

"Before you kneel to pray, consider -what you 
want to ask God to grant you. Be careful for noth- 
ing ; but in every thing by prayer and supplication, 
with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known 
unto him. You need not be careful about your words. 
When you pray with others you have to seek out 
acceptable words, but when you are alone, use any 
language that comes easiest to you. Bring every 
thing before him ; spread out all your wants. Con- 
fess your sins, your secret sins. Kecount your mer- 
cies ; thank God for his goodness. When love flows 
in upon your soul, tell your Saviour that you love 
him, that you would gladly serve him, that you will 
go anywhere and do any thing for his sake, that you 
will receive what he sends, and submit to what he 
appoints. Pray for those you love at home; pray 
for them by name. You feel a great deal more inter- 
ested when you pray for particular individuals than 
you do in general petitions. Plead for God's Spirit 
on your teachers, your companions on those who 
have gone out from the seminary, especially on those 
who are laboring far away among the heathen. You 
will find your half hour entirely too short. How 
often when the bell rings for its close, it seems to me 
as though it had but just begun. You will not know 
how to leave your Father and your God, You will 
want to stay longer in his more immediate presence." 

The pupil, if she desired, might be sure to find 
other opportunities to go to God in prayer. Many 
inmates of the house knew what it was oftener than 
twice a daj to make known their requests to their 
heavenly Father. But on these set- seasons, the si- 



LEADING PRINCIPLES. 227 

lence was as deep, the seclusion as perfect, the still- 
ness as impressive as though they had been on Ta- 
bor's sacred hill, and to many it was a season scarce- 
ly less refreshing. Miss Lyon's happiness was a living 
spring, clear and sparkling, bubbling up and over- 
flowing its bounds and refreshing whatever came near 
it. It did not need to be vaunted. It proclaimed 
itself. God seemed so to surround her soul with his 
presence, that every side of it was kept warm and 
bright. In her 'half-hour,''" for she prayed when the 
rest did, we learned by tlie embodiment of her expe- 
rience in her morning lectures, that she canie into a 
nearness to God too close to be described. In those 
sacred moments she seemed to have that sense of his 
presence which we anticipate when death removes the 
veil. Just as no reasoning can make it plainer that 
we are surrounded by material objects, so she in her 
closet knew God without a reason and without a 
doubt. She said little about assurance, or enjoyment : 
that kingdom which is not meat and drink, but right- 
eousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, was 
within her own soul. Her face, as she left her closet, 
was often radiant with celestial joy and beauty. 

The Christians in the school of course took thank- 
fully the moments thus assigned to communion with 
heaven, and grew in holy love thereby. Serious and 
reflecting minds also, although unaccustomed to pray- 
er, often received an abiding impression. An hour a 
day alone, an hour which the scholar may, to be sure, 
spend as she pleases, but which she distinctly under- 
stands is given her to commune with her own heart 
and with God, and which she well knows is thus used 



228 LIFE OF MART LYON. 



by a large majority of her companions, lias a powerful 
influence to lead her to think of her moral relations, 
to open the Bible, and to bow before her God. Said 
a pupil who entered the seminary unconverted, " My 
conscience would not let me study any thing in my 
half hour, less serious than Wayland or Butler." To 
these quiet half hours, many refer their first abiding 
interest in divine things. 

It should be stated, that in calling the pupils to 
account for this time, they were never asked to report 
how they spent it, but only whether they were free 
from interruption, and innocent of interrupting others. 

It should also be said, that if the school had been 
composed entirely or chiefly of thoughtless and friv- 
olous girls, who would have considered the solitary 
hour a weariness, Miss Lyon would not have enforced 
the season upon them, but rather have furnished 
them a time and a place to pray, when truth had so 
affected their minds and hearts, that they would count 
the opportunity a priceless boon. 

Another means of growth in grace, of a noiseless 
and unpretending character, is thus described by 
Mrs. Eddy : 

" The recess meetings are short seasons of prayer, 
held at eight o'clock in the evening. There are in 
the evening two study hours, separated by an inter- 
val of fifteen minutes. At the commencement of the 
school year, each section-teacher* invites those of her 
section who desire to spend this recess in social pray- 

* The school is divided into eight or ten sections. Each 
section is committed to a teacher who has especial charge of 
the manners, conduct, and religious welfare of its members. 



LEADING PRINCIPLES. 229 

er, to assemble in her room. The exercises commence 
with the singing of a verse or two of a familiar hymn. 
The teacher next calls on some ono by name to lead 
in prayer, and others voluntarily follow. Usually 
there are three or four prayers. Often on these oc- 
casions the whole school at the ringing of the bell, is 
seen moving silently towards the appointed places of 
concourse. For about two minutes the passage halls 
are thronged. Then all is silent, save the voice of 
song from eight or ten different quarters. The low 
voice of supplication follows. The bell again rings. 
All rise and silently return to their rooms. Each 
door closes. A. few words perhaps are exchanged 
between room-mates, and all are again deeply absorbed 
in their studies. Refreshed in spirit and strengthen- 
ed in mind by this entire change of thought, by this 
elevation of the soul to heaven, they are able again 
to apply themselves earnestly, vigorously, and suc- 
cessfully to their lessons. 

The moral influence of these little meetings has 
always been great. The few who are disposed to 
continue in their rooms, cannot be rude with such 
impressive voices around them. Every influence leads 
them to go with the many whose hearts incline them 
to pray. The section-teacher seeks to influence all 
the members of her own division to attend. The 
meeting being entirely voluntary, the young ladies 
regard it as peculiarly their own. It is devoid of 
formality, a sort of ejaculatorv prayer-meeting. It 
is also a sort of moral thermometer, indicating the 
temperature of religious feeling both among Chris- 
tians and the impenitent. 



230 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 



regular study of the Bible was another visi- 
ble means of grace. The scholars were expected to 
study the weekly lesson at least two hours in their 
own rooms. On Monday they were examined on it 
an hour or more, in separate divisions, by teachers of 
sections, much as in a well-conducted Bible class ; 
and on some subsequent day of the week it was re- 
viewed. The result of this arrangement was, that in 
a three years' course of study, more time was given 
to the Bible than to any other book. The Old Tes- 
tament received its full share of attention, for Miss 
Lyon saw in the old dispensation the marrow of the 
new. The object aimed at in the study of the Scrip- 
tures was, not to enter into minute criticisms or curi- 
ous speculations, but to fix permanently in the mind 
graphic pictures of scenes and events, imperishable 
conceptions of divine truth, and a practical under- 
stan$ing of God's revealed will. The lesson of the 
week often suggested themes for her morning lectures. 
The offering of Isaac, the ladder between earth and 
heaven, the manna of the desert, and the grapes of 
Eshcol, under her earnest eloquence, became invested 
in many minds with the most sacred and delightful 
associations. 

Miss Lyon had a peculiar tact for drawing a 
direct reproof from the lesson in hand. Was the 
history of Esau's selling his birthright a part of the les- 
son, and was any pupil disposed to give the pleasures 
of the palate a high rank in her list of enjoyments, she 
could so link the two that no one could fail to see 
and feel the likeness. The self-indulgent child could 
not but see her own image in Esau, who, as he said, 



LEADING PRINCIPLES. 231 

was "ready to die" because, forsooth, it was dinner- 
time, and lie smelt the savory viands which did not 
belong to him, and so in the moment of desire sold 
his priceless birthright for a mess of pottage. The 
murmurings of the Israelites over their sweet, light 
bread would be so presented, that the grumbling pu- 
pil would see herself in the mirror, and blush at her 
devotion to things that perish in the using. ' Keep the 
body under," was enforced once and again from the ex- 
ample of Daniel and his three companions, as well as 
from that of Paul. If there was one lesson which more 
tlian another she taught by precept and enforced by 
her example, it was, that the body is made for the 
mind, and not the mind for the body. " Eat to live, 
not live to eat ;" " keep the body a servant, give rea- 
son and conscience the reins," were her oft-repeated 
injunctions. She delighted in subjecting the flesh to 
the spirit. She relished the endurance and fortitude 
of the apostle Paul. His stripes and perils, Ms hun- 
ger and thirst, his cold and nakedness, were no more 
than what she would have borne in the same blessed 
cause. Had she been beaten and thrust into an inner 
prison, she would have been found praying and prais- 
ing God, rather than moaning and lamenting. She 
often said to her pupils, t: Keep your tears for your 
sins." 

The crossing of the Red sea and of the Jordan, 
the march around Jericho, and the sin of Achan, were 
lessons from which Miss Lyon set forth the beauty of 
faith and truthfulness in the most impressive manner. 
A shudder ran through the school as she depicted the 
casting of lots before the Lord for the detection of 



232 LIFE OF MARY LTON. 

the sacrilegious offender. Nearer and yet nearer 
came the fatal designation. Slowly but surely comes 
the decisive cast. The last lot is drawn. The doomed 
man is singled out. He stands before them all, the 
convicted thief, the troubler of Israel. And Joshua 
says, " My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord 
God of Israel, and make confession." What a demand I 
Called on to praise God for his own detection. None 
but the truly regenerate can do that, and yet this 
was his duty. He confesses ; he seems penitent. 
Perhaps he finds mercy above, but on earth the sen- 
tence must be executed. He must receive the threat- 
ened penalty. He has sinned publicly ; he must be 
publicly punished. His family connived at the wick- 
ed deed, and they must share his doom : they were 
silent when they should have spoken ; they were par- 
takers of his crime. Children and parents are bound 
together companions in sin here ; companions in 
suffering hereafter. A wondrous power she had of 
kindling the conception of her hearers; and just 
when their interest was most intense, she would turn 
and say, " What was Achan's sin ? He disobeyed the 
express command of God. Have not you many times 
done the same thing ? He robbed, not man, but God. 
He took for himself that which belonged to the Lord. 
Have you never done the same? Have you never 
spent on yourself, on your appetites, on your dress, 
the time or the money that belonged to the Lord ? 
In the days of Joshua, before revelation had been 
fully given, God punished sin in the presence of the 
people. This was necessary in order to convey to 
them his hatred of sin, and its certain consequences. 



LEADING "PRINCIPLES. 233 

God hates sin just as much now. Every instance of 
robbing God, of appropriating to ourselves what be- 
longs to him, he marks as with a pen of iron and the 
point of a diamond. The Sabbath, the day of holy 
rest, is God's time. We have arranged the house 
and the domestic work so as to favor the keeping of 
it sacred to its appointed purpose. If you spend its 
precious hours in sleep, or in listlessness, in reading 
works which merely gratify your taste and imagina- 
tion, or in writing letters home, the robbery is regis- 
tered on high. The sin is the same as Achan's. God 
may not see fit at this period of the world to punish 
it openly and immediately, but it is none the less 
recorded above. It will not be forgotten. God will 
mete out to every sin its due. Achan received the 
penalty of his here. You may not receive yours until 
you stand disembodied at his bar. In that world, 
which is lighted by no sweet Sabbath sun, the recol- 
lection of every desecrated day of rest will be as 
fresh in your mind as Achan's theft was in his on that 
day of trial and judgment. With him, you will be 
constrained to say, ' I have sinned/ God is no re- 
specter of persons. Because he does not touch you 
here, do not think you will escape there. He will do 
none of his creatures any wrong : mercy to the peni- 
tent, humble, and obedient; but to the impenitent, 
proud, and disobedient, even-handed justice. In eter- 
nity there will be time for every wrong act and word 
and thought to receive its just desert. Oh, my be- 
loved children, take heed how you rob God." 

The mercy-seat, the daily sacrifice, the great day 
of atonement, and the scape-goat, were topics for the 



234 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

most solemn and affecting representations of eternal 
truth. She taught no abstract system of technical 
theology. She gave her pupils, according to their 
state and growth, the sincere milk, or the strong 
meat of the word. It was as easy for her to unfold 
and illustrate great theological truths as to give prac- 
tical instruction. Indeed, she always founded the lat- 
ter on the former. God's sovereignty and man's free 
agency she would illustrate by the history of Joseph, 
whose brethren, sold him for evil, while God meant it 
for good ; or by the Assyrian, used as a staff and a 
rod in the hand of the Lord, while he " meant not so, 
neither did his heart think so." The depravity of 
men's hearts she not only taught regularly and sys- 
tematically from the third chapter of Romans, but 
incidentally from the history of the Israelites, which, 
she used to say, is a glass in which every one may see 
himself. She led her scholars to see God's hatred of 
sin in the destruction of Korah and his company, as 
well as in the cross of Calvary. She sought to tem- 
per their zeal with knowledge, to make them intelli- 
gent Christians, to enable them to give a reason for 
their belief, and to plant their feet firmly on a rock 
that none of the " isms " of the day could shake. The 
law and the testimony were her touchstone for all 
religious theories and experiences. 

While she exhibited and applied the law of God 
so that every soul acknowledged herself guilty before 
him, she mingled with it the glad tidings of salvation. 
When commenting on the twenty-fifth chapter of Mat- 
thew, none but those who listened to her can ever 
understand the power with which she would say, " I 



LEADING PRINCIPLES. 235 

"iope that on that great day I shall see no one of you 
on the left hand. My mind refuses to think that any 
one of you Trill be there. Ever since this institution 
was founded, my daily prayer has been, that not one 
of its beloved members may fail of the great salva- 
tion. But if, on that last day, any one of you should 
be on the left hand, nothing Trill more aggravate your 
sufferings than seeing in the assembly of the saved 
those who have been forgiven such sins as yours. 
Not one of the countless sins you are called to answer 
for, but you can find a soul among the redeemed who 
has committed the same. If you are sent to the world " 
of darkness ' prepared for the devil and his angels/ 
it will not be because you have broken God's law ; 
but because, having broken it, you did not accept the 
offered pardon. No matter how great your sins are, 
only come and believe. It is as easy for God to forgive 
ten thousand sins as one. The bitterest ingredient in 
the cup of the lost will be, that they have made ship- 
. wreck of their souls, and lost heaven and happiness 
for ever, not merely because they have sinned, but 
because, when full provision was made for their de- 
liverance and pardon, they rejected proffered mercy, 
and rushed thoughtlessly on to death and judgment. 
How terrible the sound, * Depart/ from the tender 
lips of Him who, all your lifetime, waited to be gra- 
cious." Such words as these, spoken in clear con- 
versational tones with a pathos that can neither be 
imitated nor counterfeited, were the means that the 
Holy Ghost employed to bring many a heavy-laden 
sinner to "the Lamb of God, which taketh away the 
sin of the world/ 7 



236 LIFE OF MART LYON. 

These morning lectures were the complement and 
crowning of all the other means of grace. Three 
times a week she went before her assembled school 
with oil beaten as for the sanctuary. In preparation 
for this duty, she spent a season in study, meditation, 
and prayer, and went directly from her closet to her 
desk. As she passed into the assembly-room to her 
accustomed place with her old octavo Bible on her 
arm, she seemed surrounded with the atmosphere of 
heaven. That Bible had been her companion from 
the commencement of her teaching at Buckland. At 
the time of her death it was in its third binding. She 
used sometimes to say, she did not know what she 
should do when it again needed a new dress, for the 
margin was already too narrow to admit of another 
trimming. Blessed saint, ere it needed one, thou 
hadst the open vision, and hadst no farther use for 
the familiar glass through which, from thy hill-top on 
earth, thy faith had long espied so clearly the golden 
streets and crystal sea of the new Jerusalem. 

On these occasions the lecture often took its turn 
from some circumstance in the family. Miss Lyon 
was kept well informed by her teachers of the state 
of mind of the pupils. She aimed to meet their wants 
and their need. One of her pupils has given a vivid 
account of the way in which she once drew on her 
ample treasury to meet a pressing want. 

"I have often," she says, " perplexed myself while 
endeavoring to decide in what lay Miss Lyon's great 
power to influence her pupils. No doubt many causes 
cooperated; but no one, I believe, ever questioned the 
n faw sinrole words spoken by our beloved 



LEADING PRINCIPLES. 231 

teacher carried with them irresistible force. An 
incident in point now occurs to me. 

" During the time of probation/ which was a pe- 
riod of a few weeks at the beginning of the term, in 
vrhich the pupils were carefully and thoroughly ex- 
amined in regard to proficiency in study, good moral 
training, health, and general habits, one of our number 
sickened and died. Her disease was a painful one, 
and the circumstances attending her dissolution par- 
ticularly distressing. I allude to bodily suffering 
only, for her peace had long been made with God. 
This death occurred when our stay in the seminary 
had been but brief, and home longings were fresh in 
our hearts. The new comers, too, naturally felt fear- 
ful that they might not pass successfully the ordeal of 
examination. These circumstances produced in many 
great depression of mind. It seemed impossible for 
us to control our feelings sufficiently to go through 
the routine of duty. The long halls of the seminary 
seemed silent and desolate ; an uncertain dread rested 
on our minds ; and many shuddered when called to 
pass the room so lately the scene of the death-struggle. 
I, for one, seemed to have changed my nature. It was 
terrible to me to be left alone. The moan of agony 
still sounded in my ears, and an indefinite fear per- 
vaded my every thought. 

" During this state of things, we assembled as usual 
for general instruction in the seminary hall. The 
subject of Miss Lyon's lecture, as nearly as I can re- 
call it, was the privileges of the Christian in life and 
in death ; and truly did she make it appear a blessed 
privilege to be a child of God. It was easy and nat- 



238 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

ural for her to bring her remarks to bear upon the 
departure of one -who had so recently been numbered 
in our assembly. She spoke of the sudden summon? 
to eternity, of young hopes blighted, of the home cir- 
cle desolate because of a missing one, and of the try- 
ing circumstances of her removal. 

" Our hearts grew sadder as we listened, and it 
seemed * a dread and awful thing to die/ But when, 
in tones rapid and earnest, and with face radiant from 
the glowing heart within, she told of the release from 
sin and sorrow, the safety from peril and temptation, 
the full assurance of a Saviour's love, and perfect bliss 
throughout eternity as she spoke of these glorious 
themes with the impressiveness of manner so peculiar 
to her, and which said more plainly than words, I 
speak that I do know/ our spirits seemed struggling 
to quit their cumbrous clay and soar above to a reali- 
zation of the joys depicted. ' And now, my dear pu- 
pils/ she added, c think no more of that death-chamber 
as the mournful place where a poor frail body, wasted 
with disease, stiffened for the grave ; rather regard it 
as the honored, hallowed spot whence a purified and 
glorious spirit ascended to its God.' 

" There was no more dread upon my mind, no more 
shuddering, when, after leaving the hall, I entered the 
room of death ; it seemed but the waiting-room, where 
the freed spirit had paused a moment, before it was 
ushered into the immediate presence 'of its Maker." 

At these morning exercises, Miss Lyon took up 
the ten commandments, the sermon on the mount, the 
first epistle of Peter, or some other rich portion of 
Scripture, as she had formerly done at Ipswich. In 



LEADING PRINCIPLES. 239 

language mostly scriptural, she would spread before 
her youthful audience the depravity of the heart, the 
plan of salvation through Christ, the woes of the lost, 
and the glories of the redeemed. 

As she looked over the hundreds of her attentive 
auditors, whose faces were all turned towards her, 
she beheld so many Immortal souls. Their spirits 
were more present to her mind than their forms and 
faces to her mortal eyes. The sight was inspiring. 
She could fill the whole of the hall with her voice, 
without seeming to speak loud or to make an effort. 
Through all her lectures, she preserved the friendly, 
sincere tones of conversation. When she read such 
a passage as, " He that is holy let him be holy still," 
or, "If any man thirst, let him come unto me and 
drink," the very words seemed to the hearer to have 
a soul in them. She uncovered the inward workings 
of her own mind. She brought out the truth that had 
been hidden for years in her own heart, with all the 
layers of thought which meditation had gathered 
around it. She could describe the plague of a sinful 
heart, for she had studied her own. She knew what 
fierce temptation means, for she had felt the same. 
The peace and hope of him that overcometh, was a 
jewel which she carried with her. She prepared the 
soil. She deposited the seed, looking to God to bless 
his own word. She seemed to see both worlds as 
Jesus saw them when he gave the history of the rich 
man and Lazarus. Her stand-point was on that nar- 
row verge whence she could look both ways, upon 
time and upon eternity. No foolish weakness, no 
false kindness, no fastidious taste, prevented her from 



240 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

dwelling on the solemn truth, that the wicked " shall 
go away into everlasting punishment." She seemed 
to have walked the long, dark corridors of hell, to 
have heard the clanking chains, to have seen the un- 
dying worm and the quenchless flames. "Language is 
exhausted," she would say, "in portraying the portion 
of the wicked. The reality is more awful than any 
description. I shrink from it as much as you do. But 
I find it in my Bible, and it is not for me to object or to 
cavil. God knows what every sin deserves. He will 
punish as little as he can, consistently with his right- 
eousness. How essential to complete happiness, that it 
should be everlasting. How would it be damped by 
the apprehension that it might cease. The smallest 
evil, if it is to last for ever, how terrible! No misery 
can be complete that is not endless. But this, more- 
over, is unmitigated. Not a drop of cold water could 
the rich man have to cool his burning tongue. Here, 
one may sometimes forget even a heavy sorrow ; but 
in the world of darkness, no exciting amusements, no 
witty friend, no agreeable occupation, no oblivious 
slumbers, can recreate or divert the mind from the 
agony which consumes it, and yet leaves it uncon- 
sumed. No relief to that aching heart, not even the 
poor one of hearing the clock strike the long hours 
of eternity." 

But more and more, with passing years, she turned 
the thoughts of pupils and teachers to the glories of 
the heavenly state. She had frequent foretastes of its 
blessedness, and invited all to partake with her of the 
hidden manna. Many who sat under her instruction 
and gave themselves up to the invisible pictures with 



LEADING PRINCIPLES. 241 

which she could fill their minds, treasure that sweet 
school-day experience as a precious antepast of heav- 
en. They were solemnly and delightfully absorbed 
in the sense of a personal and a present God, and of 
their individual responsibility. It was like the com- 
munion of the closet. Every soul in the assembly was 
alone with God. No one took thought of her neigh- 
bor. Passion, pride, and petulance, seemed for the 
time dead and buried. When called again to engage 
in secular duties, it was as if they had been out of the 
body into the invisible world, on a visit from which 
they were reluctantly returning. 

When, in the course of the morning instruction, 
the solemn look and the suppressed sigh of the uncon- 
verted indicated a work of the Spirit in their minds, 
a meeting would be appointed for those who desired 
instruction in the way of salvation. Frequently each 
anxious one would go alone to the place designated, 
neither knowing nor asking whether any of her com- 
panions needed or sought the same light and guidance ; 
and great was often the surprise when room-mate met 
room-mate, and friend met friend in that consecrated 
room. 

Without the other means of grace, the morning 
lecture would have been but a brilliant coruscation, 
light without heat; with them, it was as the sun, 
through whose heat, added to its light, God quickens 
the buried seed into life and fruitfulness. Or it was 
the top-stone of the arch, without which the piers and 
abutments had been useless and vain. It was Miss 
Lyon's faith and life that gave such indescribable 
power to her words. The truth she uttered had in 

Harrison. 11 



242 LIFE OF MART LTON. 

her a living representation so simple, so lovely, and o 
majestic, as to attract and awe the youthful mind. 

Miss Lyon held a -weekly meeting with the pro- 
fessors of religion. Her addresses to them were after 
the general style of her morning lectures, but adapted 
more particularly to comfort, instruct, and confirm 
believers. She had also a meeting every Sabbath for 
those -who were destitute of the Christian hope, in 
which she sought to unfold to them their true state 
and prospects, their sins and their duty. At the same 
hour, the rest of the school met in circles with the 
teachers for prayer and conference. As the general 
result of these means, few left the school without the 
hope of the Christian. The history of the school, as 
will appear in the next chapter, was a history of the 
effusions of the Spirit. The harvests came almost as 
regularly as in husbandry. He who appointed the 
means blessed their faithful use. What God has 
joined together, let not man put asunder. 



RELIGIOUS HISTORY. 243 



CHAPTER X. 

RELiaiOUS HISTOEY OF THE SEMINARY THE MIS* 
SIONARY SPIRIT. 

WE hare seen that the religious character of the 
schools with which Hiss Lyon had been connected 
before coming to South Hadley, was the trait that 
had endeared them most to religious men. They 
looked, therefore, with deep interest to the Holyoke 
Seminary, to learn whether a high tone of piety 
would be there also associated with a high literary 
standard. So commonly had they been disjoined, 
that it was a question whether their union were prac- 
ticable. During the first year, amid the distractions 
and exciting novelties incident to starting a com- 
plex system of education, there was scarcely room 
for that calm reflection, and that deep and thorough 
self-examination which are essential to genuine revi- 
vals of religion. Moreover, the number of pupils des- 
titute of 'the Christian's hope the first year was very 
small, not more than one in eight or ten. But in 
every subsequent year to the present, there have been 
witnessed in the school long-continued seasons of 
- special interest in personal religion. Most of these 
works of divine grace have had a thoroughness and 
extent almost unheard of in the modern history of the 
church. We have a brief summary of these revivals 
for the first nine years of the institution, from the pen 
of Miss Mary C. Whitman, who was connected with 
it almost from its commencement; first as a pupil, 



244 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

then as a teacher, ail associate principal, and finally 
as principal ; and whose whole soul was as intensely 
devoted to the school as that of its founder ; so much 
devoted, indeed, that nature gave way under labors 
too severe and unremitted. Miss Whitman's letter 
on this subject was -written at the request of Dr. 
Hitchcock in 1846. 

"The school has been in operation nine years, 
and each year since its commencement there has been 
decided religious interest, unless we except the first 
and the eighth several times amounting to a deep 
and extensive work of grace. Among the pupils of 
the first year, there were but ten or twelve who were 
not hopefully pious ; and although there was a gen- 
eral consistency of character and deportment, and 
great zeal in building up the new institution, there 
was no marked religious interest. 

"The second year, the number regarding them- 
selves as unconverted was about thirty. During 
that year God manifested his acceptance of the con- 
secrated institution, not by a visible cloud, but by a 
baptism of the Holy Ghost. The work was very 
rapid, and advanced with great power. It occurred 
in connection with the fast for literary institutions. 
The whole school bowed beneath its influence. The 
breathings of the Spirit were felt in every heart* 
The lukewarm professor and the openly irreligious 
alike trembled for their personal safety. The light 
footstep, the hushed voice, and the solemn counte- 
nance indicated the thoughts of all hearts. Many a 
slumbering professor awoke to newness of life. Dur- 
ing the three days succeeding the last Thursday of 



RELIGIOUS HISTOEY. 245 

February, which had been sacredly observed by the 
teachers and scholars as a season of fasting and 
prayer, about one half of the impenitent indulged the 
hope of having passed from death unto life. 

" Saturday of the same week was a day of recrea- 
tion. In the afternoon nearly the whole school with 
one accord came together, filling to its utmost capac- 
ity the reading-room, where the meeting was held. 
After continuous prayer for an hour, the meeting was 
appropriately closed by one of the teachers. No one 
rose to leave the room. The feeling pervaded the 
circle that prayer must be continued until every soul 
was converted. Another prayer was then offered, 
after which the same teacher proposed that they 
should all retire to their rooms for half an hour, and 
then those who desired should meet again in the 
same place. At the end of the half hour the burdened 
souls came together to plead once more for their com- 
panions who were still out of Christ, But one, that 
year, remained destitute of the Christian hope. Many 
were the prayers offered for that halting one, and in 
after-years it was found that praying breath had not 
been spent in vain. She has since died in a peaceful 
hope of divine acceptance, referring its origin to that 
second year of the Holyoke seminary. 

" Thus did this young seminary receive its baptism 
of the Spirit. Thus did God condescend to manifest 
his acceptance of the offering. Thus did he receive as 
his own the seminary which had been privately and 
publicly consecrated to him by the donors, the trus- 
tees, and most of all, by her who, standing at its head, 
was often heard earnestly pleading, that not one of 



246 LIFE OF MISS LTON. 

all who should enjoy its privileges down to tlie dawn 
of the millennial day, should fail of eternal life. 

" This revival gave the school that religious char- 
acter which its founders desired. Its effects were 
felt for several successive years, but especially in the 
next, which was the third in the history of the semi- 
nary. That year all indulged the Christian hope. The 
work was gradual, and there was a continued interest 
from the first week of the school till the close of the 
year. The presence of the Spirit was manifested 
from the first, by attention to instruction, the tearful 
eye, and exhibition of tenderness of feeling whenever 
the subject of personal religion was introduced. The 
number of cases of hopeful conversion this year was 
nearly the same as the preceding, or about thirty. 
The fourth year the religious interest still continued, 
somewhat diminished in its power, yet manifest 
through the year. Christians were not so generally 
and deeply affected as at some former times, yet 
there was an interesting growth and maturing of 
Christian character ; six or eight only remained, at 
the close of the year, without hope. The fifth year 
our building was enlarged, and our numbers greatly 
increased. There were in many cases a decided and 
interesting development and settling of religious 
principle, and also several cases of hopeful conver- 
sion of an unusually marked character. The number 
expressing hope was perhaps about seventeen, being 
nearly half who entered without hope. 

" The following year, the sixth, was one rich in 
blessing. A more careful division of responsibility 
and labor among the teachers was made, and from 



RELIGIOUS HISTORY. 247 

the commencement of the year there was an increased 
personal effort in relation to every member of the 
family. God crowned these efforts with abundant 
success. Prom the first there was an attentive lis- 
tening to instruction, and truth seemed to be taking 
a deep hold of the understanding and conscience. 
But it was not till March that the Spirit of the Lord 
came upon us with great power, and at once a large 
number stood up on the Lord's side, having received 
the breath of life. The work was sudden, rapid, and 
powerful. We could only stand still and see the sal- 
vation of God. Some cases of conversion were of a 
very marked character, and of great interest. Of 
the sixty-six who entered the school without hope, 
only six remained destitute of it. The missionary 
interest this year received a new impulse by the 
departure of Miss Fisk, one of our teachers, on a for- 
eign mission, and there was an increase in the mis- 
sionary contributions. During the seventh year, 
there were about thirty cases of hopeful conversion, 
but no powerful and general work. 

" The last year, the eighth, there were very few 
cases of hopeful conversion, and very many passed 
through the whole year apparently without receiving 
any religious impression. The present year has thus 
far been one of greater blessing. Very soon after 
its commencement, there appeared cases of marked 
interest, and generally an unusual tenderness on the 
subject of religion. Through the whole of the first 
term there was a gathering of interest, which, tow- 
ards its close, appeared to promise a return of the 
scenes of former years. The vacation dispersed our 



248 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

family, and since the commencement of the present 
term the state of feeling has not reached the point 
which seemed to be gained before vacation. During 
the last term there were about twenty cases of hope- 
ful conversion, and a number have occurred the pres^ 
ent term. In all cases where there was any depth of 
interest the last term, it has continued till the pres- 
ent time, and some have resulted in hope. The indi- 
cations of a gradual and. protracted work of grace, 
are perhaps now more encouraging than at any pre- 
vious time this term." 

Nearly eleven years have elapsed since the above 
account was written, and all of them have left a 
similar testimony to the special converting influences 
of the Spirit of God in the institution. The number 
apparently converted in 1850, was between forty and 
fifty. This work occurred after the death of Miss 
Lyon. Every succeeding year has told the same 
story, so joyful to the Christian's heart. It shows 
that Miss Lyon's presence was not necessary to 
secure the agency of the Holy Spirit. 

Yet so far as means are concerned, doubtless the 
system which she adopted, her prayers of faith, and 
the example of fidelity which she left, have still a 
most important influence. May we not hope that 
that influence will be identified with the institution 
as long as it stands ? 

Some would imagine, from this account, that to 
secure such an almost uninterrupted series of spirit- 
ual blessings, extraordinary means must have been 
employed. But nothing of this kind has ev.er been 



RELIGIOUS HISTORY. 249 

done. A person might live for weeks in the semina- 
ry, during one of these revivals, and yet see nothing 
unusual, save a deep solemnity and tenderness dur- 
ing religious exercises. Those exercises would not 
be much multiplied, nor would the literary exercises 
be suspended or diminished, unless in individual cases 
of deep seriousness. Both teachers and pupils would 
seem to be deeply engrossed in their studies, and 
would be in fact, during the hours appropriated to 
study. Nor would the subject of religion be obtrud- 
ed upon the visitor, or introduced, unless he mani- 
fested an unusual interest in the state of the school ; 
and then would he find, what he hardly suspected 
before, that in the hearts of those teachers and pious 
pupils there was a deep fountain of religious feeling, 
that was ready to gush forth and overflow if the 
channel was once opened. He would learn that in 
their closets, in their fidelity to their pupils and com- 
panions, and in the assiduous presentation of Bible 
truth, lay the secret of the means blessed in such a 
constant descent of divine influence. 

It is well known to the Christian familiar with 
revivals in our churches, that such a work is not to 
be expected without a previous season of deep humili- 
ation, anxiety, and prayer, on the part of ministers 
and private Christians. But so often had the outward 
signs of any special religious interest been wanting, 
when there were many anxious inquirers in this sem- 
inary ; so calm and cheerful did the principal and her 
band of teachers appear, and so much interested in 
literary and secular objects, that the question might 
arise whether here were not an exception to this 

11* 



250 LIFE OF HART LYON. 

almost universal experience of tlie church. But a re- 
view of Miss Lyon's correspondence shows that the 
suggestion is entirely unfounded. Not a revival has 
ever occurred in this seminary, nay, probably not a 
single conversion has taken place there, which was 
not preceded by deep humiliation and agonizing pray- 
er on the part of teachers or pious pupils. The let- 
ters already given show this in respect to the other 
schools in which Miss Lyon was engaged, and those 
that follow are no less instructive on this point. 

The readers of this memoir ought to understand 
that probably Miss Lyon never had the thought pass 
through her mind that one of the letters given in this 
work would ever be published. They are obviously 
the honest, unsophisticated outpourings of her heart, 
for the most part into the hearts of personal Mends, 
and give us the true and exact state of her own feel- 
ings and views. 

One of the most frequent modes in which Miss 
Lyon manifested a deeper interest than usual such 
an interest as Christians very well know usually pre- 
cedes a revival in the religious state of the school, 
is a confession of spiritual stupidity, and a request to 
Christian friends that they would offer special prayer 
in behalf of the school or of individuals. She was 
no believer in the frigid doctrine which self-styled 
philosophy would impose upon us, that prayer is of 
no use to move God, but only to move ourselves. 
She believed that God is influenced as really by the 
prayer of faith as any earthly friend. Hence she felt 
that by multiplying petitions for great blessings, an 
answer might be more surely expected. She probably 



RELIGIOUS HISTOEY. 251 

had but few friends to whom she appealed for such 
aid. But they were individuals in whose ardent piety 
she felt the fullest confidence. One of them was her 
mother, as we have seen at an earlier date. We find 
more letters of Miss Lyon respecting the revival of 
1843, than of any other similar work of grace. That 
she had similar feelings, and made similar efforts at 
other times, cannot be doubted. It is cause for grat- 
itude that we have the history of her own mind so 
fully in respect to that powerful work. 

To Mrs. Banister. 

" Sonn HADLEY, March 8, 1843. 
"I have been absent a short time, and on my 
return yesterday found your two letters. You ask 
about the spiritual interests of our school, I was 
just thinking of writing to you on this very subject, 
that I might beseech your prayers at this time, for it 
is one of great darkness, of anxiety, of hope, of fear. 
In temporal things we have been greatly blessed. 
We have a much greater supply of teachers than usual. 
Misses Moore and Whitman have applied their minds 
closely to reducing every thing under their control 
to the most beautiful order and symmetry, and with 
great success. Our young ladies are very youthful, 
more and more so every year ; but there is so much 
docility, such a sweet atmosphere all around, that I 
feel, from day to day, that our home is a sweet home. 
There is more missionary interest than usual, and 
more desire in some Christians to be prepared for 
the service of God. But, alas, one thing is lack- 
ing the direct and powerful influences of 'the Holy 
Spirit. A few gentle drops have descended, but we 



252 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

have enjoyed no plentiful shower, and this we greatly 
need. According to all former experience, the har- 
vest-time for this year will be past in four or five 
weeks. Then -will come the finishing up of the term, 
and the spring examinations. After that mil follow 
the short summer term, a most favorable time for 
fixing last impressions, for attempting to lead Chris* 
tians into green and living pastures, but not a favor- 
able time for the work of the Holy Spirit in break- 
ing up the fallow ground by conviction and conver- 
sion. Nearly sixty of our number are without hope. 
As teachers, as Christians, as an institution, we 
greatly need the effects of a powerful revival. I fear 
to make any extra effort ; I fear to omit it. I know 
not what to do. The way seems greatly hedged up. 
I fear to go forward ; I dare not stand still ; I can- 
not go back. 

" I went to Boston to help fit off one of our teach- 
ers as a missionary to the Nestorians. I made ar- 
rangements to be absent a few days longer, that I 
might have time to look over our sad, very sad state, 
and that I might inquire of the Lord for a right path 
in which to walk. I wanted exceedingly to go to 
Newburyport, and also to Monson ; but I thought it 
my duty to stay in one place, to make no calls, to do 
but a little business, and only attend meetings as I 
could. I have seldom had so profitable a week, when 
I have had so much physical and mental rest, an'd so 
much, as I humbly hope, of spiritual refreshing. I 
have been greatly interested in examining the subject 
of prayer. Since I returned, a few more drops have 
fallen. But how so great a work can be done in so 



RELIGIOUS HISTORY. 253 

short a time I know not. All is yet darkness, but I 
hope and trust that light will shine out of darkness. 
Now I have one urgent request to make of you. It 
is, that you would set apart a little time every day to 
pray in sincerity and in truth for us. Pray that God 
would, in his own way, do a great work here, and 
give us a great blessing ; pray that we may be taught 
what the Lord would have us do. Will you thus pray 
every day till you hear from us again, which shall be 
soon ? For a few days, I design to study daily two 
passages of Scripture, praying that I may be led by 
the Spirit to receive into the understanding and heart 
just what the Holy Ghost has revealed in these won- 
derful passages, Luke 11 : 5-13 ; James 1 : 5-8. Would 
you like to study these daily with me, as you pray for 
us?" 

What a different meaning did Miss Lyon attach 
to the word rest from what is generally understood. 
Her views must have approximated to what the Bible 
calls rest in heaven, namely, a state of intense activity 
in the service of God. 

The next day, March 9th, she writes to Mrs. Saf- 
ford of Boston: 

" As I have a little business on which I must write 
this morning, I will take this opportunity to say a few 
things on the subject so near my heart. On my return, 
I found things in some respects a little more favorable 
than when I left. The general seriousness has in- 
creased somewhat, and considerably in one small sec- 
tion under the care of one teacher. The teachers have 
had some increase of interest, and are making some 



254 LIFE OF MAEY LYON. 

new efforts in tlieir sections. Among those who have 
most heart for such a work, there is a growing con- 
viction of the great need of a thorough, powerful 
revival, to "break up the fallow ground, to give a new 
current to thought and feeling among the younger and 
least experienced Christians, among the coldest, most 
lukewarm, and most backward professors, and among 
?ome who stand on middle ground. Thursday morn- 
iiig is one of the three mornings in the week when I 
reserve a half hour for religious instruction and devo- 
tional exercises. I have just met the pupils in the 
hall. I took occasion to spread out before them our 
present position, with our necessity, our danger, our 
fear, and our hope, mingling all along my own feel- 
ings, my own solemn convictions of the urgency of 
the case. I stated my own views, that something 
must be done, though entire darkness was spread over 
the path of duty. I told them that a little while ago 
I came to them to ask of them a missionary. I would 
not go from one to another, lest I should not find the 
best. And the Lord so stirred up the willing hearts, 
that we all believed that we had sent the one whom 
he had called and qualified for the work. And now 
I came to ask for a willing heart to unite with me 
in prayer for this great thing, as this seemed our 
last refuge. The scene was very interesting to my 
feelings. How I should have loved to have you with 
us, to mingle in our sympathies and prayers. There 
was a very tender spirit this morning, an atmosphere 
in which it was very easy to breathe, and to speak 
too. Probably little circumstances might have some 
effect. It is so seldom that I leave this beloved 



EELIGIOUS HISTORY. 255 

household for a single day, that my meeting them 
after an absence of only a week and a half is suited 
to awaken some tender emotions on both sides. Such 
things are the veriest trifles in themselves ; but my 
sentiment is, that the most trifling .circumstances 
should be used for the same great end. With regard 
to efforts in behalf of the impenitent, all is dark. But* 
amid the darkness, and with a burden on my heart 
which I cannot describe, there is something in my 
soul which seems like trust in God, that is like a 
peaceful river, overflowing all its banks. Light can. 
shine out of darkness, and I have great hope that we 
shall receive a blessing, whether or not the provi- 
dence of God shall permit Mr. Kirk to come and 
share with us in our labors, our joys, and our sor- 
rows. 

" I have an increasing sense of the importance of 
a work of the Spirit, a universal work, one which 
shall reach our whole church of more than one hun- 
dred, all young. You recollect Mr. Kirk's vivid 
description of the difference between passing through 
the deep valley and rising up into a revival, and leap- 
ing immediately into the sympathies of a revival. We 
need experience of the first kind to fit us for the 
varied and important remaining duties of the year. 
On this account, I have some query whether it may 
not be better that Mr. Kirk's visit should be deferred 
a little longer. If he could stay two or three full 
weeks, I would as soon that he would come to-day 
as ever. But if he can stay but one week, and pos- 
sibly even less, it is very important that he come 
at the right time, and expend his power in the best 



256 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

way. His fear that he could not stay long enough is 
my great fear. It seems to me like a very desirable 
thing that certain minds, certain difficult cases, should 
come under the influence of a powerful mind and 
warm heart like Mr. Kirk's, and we all need some 
stirring means ; but my own will has ever been gra- 
ciously kept in an even balance concerning this thing. 
I am prepared to rejoice or to acquiesce as soon as 
the will of the Lord shall be made known. 

" Now, whatever may be in relation to these 
things, let me ask and beseech you three, [Mr. and 
Mrs. Safford, and Mr. Kirk,] my dear sympathizing 
friends, to grant me one petition. Will you every 
day offer a short prayer on our behalf, which shall 
arise from your inmost heart, till you h6ar from me 
again, which shall be soon? Only ask God our 
heavenly Father, in the name of Jesus our blessed 
Eedeemer, and you shall have your request." 

From Miss Whitman to Mrs. Safford. 

" SOUTH HADLET, March 16, 1843. 
"Mr DEAR MRS. SAFFORD Miss Lyon requests me 
to write a few lines, just to tell you the reason why 
she has not written, and to ask a continuance of your 
prayers for us. She is now quite unwell with a cold, 
and thinks it her duty to reserve her strength for the 
religious exercises of the school. To-day she is per- 
haps rather better than yesterday, yet I have some 
fears that she will have a fever. The physician was 
yesterday somewhat apprehensive of a lung fever. 
Should she remain entirely quiet, it would undoubt- 
edly do much towards a restoration ; but as the pres- 



RELIGIOUS HISTORY. 25? 

ent religions state of the school is, this seems very 
difficult. You will perhaps recollect that Miss Lyon 
was absent three Sabbaths, previous to her return from 
Boston. She found, on her return, that there had 
been considerable increase of feeling, and a state of 
apparent preparation for the reception of truth, which 
was not so manifest when she left. By all the indica- 
tions it appears that we are approaching a very im- 
portant crisis. There seems to be an increase of the 
spirit of prayer, and of desire for spiritual blessings, 
on the part of Christians ; and among those who are 
yet impenitent, there is not perhaps one who is not 
more or less affected, and some are deeply impressed. 
The solemn countenance and tearful eye whenever 
the subject is personally introduced, show that the 
Spirit is operating. We feel very much the need of 
fervent, importunate prayer to bring us the rich bless- 
ing which seems so near to us, and which appears to 
be delayed only for us to seek it. Our meetings this 
week have been increased. The regular recess meet- 
ings are very promptly attended. These have been 
occasionally lengthened, and a daily sectional meet- 
ing of half an hour has been added from the recrea- 
tion hours, the time usually devoted to reading. 
In some members of our sections there seems to be 
quite a revival spirit. As teachers, we feel that we 
very much need the prayers of our friends, that we 
may be prepared, by the reception of a large meas- 
ure of the Spirit, to be leaders of the flock. As teach- 
ers, may I not ask a special remembrance in your 
prayers? Our need is great, and very pressing. Since 
her return, Miss Lyon has been giving some connected 



258 LIFE OF MAEY LYON. 

instruction upon the subject of prayer. It will indeed 
be a mysterious providence should she now be unable 
to speak to us." 

Miss Lyon to Mr. Safford. 

" FRIDAY MOBKIXO, March 17, 1843. 
"DEAH SIR The present state of our school is 
exceedingly critical. May you have a mind and a 
heart to pray for us. The testimony from every 
source from the teachers, from the prayer-meetings, 
from meetings for the impenitent, from individual 
conversation with Christians and. with the impeni- 
tent is all the same, proving beyond doubt that the 
Spirit of God is moving with a gentle influence on the 
face of the waters. Still there is not that point and 
decision which must be attained, or we shall fail of 
the blessing. The great and distressing doubt which 
rested on my mind about using any extra means myself 
has, in the providence of God, been somewhat remov- 
ed. That interesting state of feeling on many things, 
such as missions, the general path of duty, etc., seems 
now changing to an increasing desire for the direct 
and special influences of the Holy Spirit. Our regu- 
lar business goes forward just as usual, but many have 
been looking up their leisure time for religion. The 
teachers are most of them very much engaged in gath- 
ering up the fragments of time, that nothing be lost. 
I have had a short extra meeting for the impenitent 
every day. I have been able to meet all my appoint- 
ments, though sometimes I have concentrated all the 
strength of three or four hours into half an hour. 
Every thing I do is such a privilege. It is such a 
privilege, too, to depend daily and hourly for light 



KELIGIOUS HISTORY. 259 

for strength, and for hope on our heavenly Father, 
through Jesus Christ our Eedeemer. 

"It is so difficult for me to stop writing. My 
heart is so full. But I fear you cannot read this. If 
not, let it go as of no great importance." 

To Mrs. Banister. 

" March 20, 1843. ' 

" When I last wrote to you, I engaged to address 
you again very soon. I have been very sick for a 
week, or I should have written some days sooner. 

" In my last, I requested a special interest in your 
prayers until you heard from us again. I communi- 
cated also something respecting our religious state. 
Just at that time, I felt that we were in a very trying, 
critical condition. I had been absent three Sabbaths. 
After spending another Sabbath here, and becoming 
more acquainted with the state of things, I began to 
feel, ' Surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew it 
not. 7 In all seasons of religious interest in this house, 
the Lord has ever delighted to own and bless the holy 
Sabbath. For the last week a work has been going 
forward with convincing evidence that it is indeed 
the work of the Lord. I believe I told you in my 
last that I spent a few days in Boston, that I might 
have quiet and time to look over our condition, and 
to seek the right way. The state of our school in gen- 
eral has been unusually encouraging this year. There 
has been a very sweet spirit, a pleasant docility, and 
a consistent deportment. Our evening prayer-meet- 
ings have been like a connecting artery through which 
the lifeblood flowed. Our semimonthly missionary 
meeting has been better attended than ever before, 



260 LIFE OP MARY LYON. 

and we have all thought that the missionary spirit 
was advancing in the seminary. This spirit seemed 
to receive an impulse by Miss Fisk's leaving us, 
and devoting herself to this work. I have thought 
we seemed preparing for every thing else desirable, 
except for the reception of the special influences of 
the Holy Spirit. To this there seemed some great 
barrier. This was the great thing to be sought. 
This we needed to convict and convert sinners, to 
give that living faith in the great atoning sacrifice 
without which it is impossible to please God. This 
we needed to overcome the world, to fix our hopes, 
to establish our joys, to settle for ever our confidence. 
I returned from Boston not knowing whither I should 
be led, or whether there was any thing special that 
could be done. But I felt a trust, and a reliance on 
an invisible arm, greater and sweeter than I can ever 
describe. "What a privilege it is to walk by faith. 
What a privilege it is to have no wisdom of our own, 
to have no plan for the future, that the wisdom of 
God may be more manifest, and that the indications 
of Providence and the guidance of the Spirit day by 
day may be more precious. I found, on my return, 
that a spiritual change was passing over the face of 
things, that the Spirit of God was gently moving on 
the face of the waters. The teachers I found more 
active in gathering up the fragments of time for relig- 
ous duties and privileges connected with those under 
their care. Some Christians were becoming deeply 
interested. Many of the impenitent were in an inquir- 
ing state, and some very deeply affected. The work 
appears now to be going directly forward. Some 



BELIGIOUS HISTORY. 261 

eight or ten expressed a hope at different times along 
in the winter. This number is now increased prob- 
ably to about twenty-five. We are passing a very 
important time. There are some exceedingly difficult, 
dark cases. Some have passed through revival after 
revival, have been deeply affected, indulged a hope 
once or twice, have made one effort after another, 
and now, as they suppose, are settled down in a state 
of disconsolate indifference. May the Lord give you 
a mind and heart to pray for us. May I not hear 
from you soon ? Let me have a page from your own 
heart. 

" I should love to write you a long letter about 
my own personal feelings. Some views of truth have 
of late passed before my mind in an exceedingly inter- 
esting manner to myself. With what condescension 
does God come down in the simplicity of truth to our 
own personal wants. Let God be honored, let Christ 
be all in all, and let every created being be less than 
nothing and vanity." 

To Mrs. Safford. 

4 'March 21, 1843. 

" I must write you a few lines this morning, though 
I can say but little. I want to ask your prayers 
especially in two or three respects. Respecting our 
state generally I have little to say, only that the Lord 
is doing his own work in his own blessed way. The 
work is going forward apparently with great rapid- 
ity, stillness, universality, gentleness, and power. I 
believe I mentioned about sixty who entered the 
school without hope. I should have excepted some 
eight or ten, as the fruits of the drops of mercy which 



262 LIFE OP MARY LYON. 

have been falling upon us from month to month dur- 
ing the year. I suppose now not less than one half 
of the sixty are indulging a hope of pardoning mer- 
cy through the blood of Christ. A large number 
of hopeful conversions hare occurred in three days, 
including the Sabbath. The Sabbath is of indescrib- 
able value to us. There can be no community to 
which it is more important. In times of revival, it 
seems always to be the day that God delights pecul- 
iarly to honor. At other times, it seems to be worth 
more than all other days in bringing the thoughts 
into captivity to the will of Christ. 

" You will ask what means we are using. They 
are so small that I can hardly tell what they are, and 
yet they are numerous, simple, and through the infi- 
nite condescension of God, they seem to be adapted 
to our state. In the use of means, we simply walk, 
day by day, by the light which is so graciously shed 
on our path. We cannot, we would not look forward. 
Our studies go forward as usual, with all their regu- 
larity, our family duties with all their accustomed 
order. But we feel that we can and ought to turn 
aside from other sources of social improvement and 
enjoyment, that all the fragments of time may be gath- 
ered up and devoted to the great and grand business 
of seeking a divine blessing to descend on all this 
family. The teachers are all of one mind and one 
heart in this thing. We use our fragments of time 
just when they happen to come, and just for the object 
for which they seem at the time to be most needed. 
The prayer-meetings are sometimes fifteen minutes, 
sometimes half an hour, and sometimes longer, accord- 



RELIGIOUS HISTORY. 263 

ing to circumstances. Some of the teachers have 
quite a prayer-meeting in fifteen minutes at recess in 
the evening with their sections. They adopted the 
practice in these little daily meetings, long ago, of 
having the prayers unsolicited. This turns to a fa- 
vorable account just now. Sometimes they find time 
for three or four prayers in fifteen minutes. They 
can return to their duties with renewed energy and 
submission, if not pleasure in their 1 studies. The 
teachers really seem to be emphatically the leaders 
of the flock. In the meetings for the impenitent I 
have no very definite plan. My waiting eyes are unto 
God. From day to day, thus far, the path of duty 
has been plain. The almost Egyptian darkness which 
rested on my mind about the path of duty, was but a 
contrast to that light which shines from day to day. 
I have no knowledge of future duty, and I ask for 
none. It is so sweet to carry every burden and every 
care to the throne of everlasting love, in perfect con- 
fidence through the Lord Jesus Christ. My lungs 
have not allowed me the privilege of individual con- 
versation, but the teachers and others are -instant in 
season and out of season. 

"But my sheet is full, and I fear the mail will be 
gone, and I have not told my errand. Eirst, I want 
you should pray daily and unitedly with great fer- 
vency for . She has some rather peculiar asso- 
ciations, as I suppose. She retains her hope, but some- 
thing in her character revolts from every thing social 
in feeling or action. I cannot find that an individual 
in the house has been able to approach her success- 
fully in the least degree on the religion of her heart 



264 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

and life. I have met minds in a similar state, and, as 
a matter of judgment in her case, have avoided meet- 
ing her on the subject, hoping that some door might 
be opened in her behalf before the year closes. Many 
things may be done and said in a time of revival, that 
cannot be done and said at any other time. This may 
be the favored time for her. I have approached her 
gently, and hope I may have the privilege of doing 
something more. I think it not best that she 'should 
know that her case is mentioned between us. But 
I hope you will really pray in her behalf, 

" We have some individuals that seem among the 
most hopeless. They are among the righteous tow- 
ards men. They have passed seasons of conviction, 
and perhaps indulged hope once or twice. They are 
clothed now in the self-righteousness of not being de- 
ceived this time. Do pray for them. 

"My continued desire and prayer is, that this 
whole -family as a family, and every individual as an 
individual, may be baptized by the Holy Spirit. We 
are witnessing some interesting reconversions among 
those who have long indulged a hope." 

" SOUTH HJLDLET, Saturday Eve, March 25, 1843. 
"Mr DBAS MBS. SAPFOBD I cannot tell you 
how rejoiced I was to receive your letter. I had 
been looking and longing for it. I knew you were 
praying for us, but I wanted to have you tell me so. 
We are in greater need than ever of the power of 
prayer. As you hear from us from time to time, I 
trust that you will not cease to give thanks, and to 
pray without ceasing, making all our requests known 



REUGIOUS HISTORY. 205 

to God. It is sweet to think of you as praying in 
on. behalf, if you cannot come and see us. TTe are 
on the verge of another holy Sabbath. It is a great 
event for us to pass a holy Sabbath. that a great, 
a very great blessing may descend upon us! The 
past week has been a wonderful time. Of those 
sixty over whom I mourned so much, and wept so 
much, and prayed so much, the week I was with you, 
only a remnant are now without hope. But some 
very trying cases are left. for that all-prevail- 
ing prayer in their behalf which shall be heard! 
Several professors of religion have given up their 
hope, and a few have disclosed the fact that they 
have had no hope for a long time. Some of them are 
now walking in light, and others are shrouded in 
thick darkness. But the Lord has wrought for us 
such great things, that we can but trust him in every 
time of need. 

" Monday morning. We have decided to devote 
this day to fasting and prayer. It is the first day 
this year that we have set apart to seek a blessing 
on ourselves as individuals, and on our family as a 
family. It is a great and solemn thing to set apart 
such a day. It is a great thing voluntarily to givo 
up all our business for a whole day, that we may meet 
God in the inner sanctuary of his holy, spiritual tem- 
ple. I trust this day is brought by many hearts as a 
willing offering, and that it will be accepted through 
the blood of the everlasting covenant. 

" I have many things which I want to write, but I 
cannot now. I should be glad to tell you how the 
Lord has led us along by his own right hand. I should 

MaiyLyoa. 12 



2(>6 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

love to give you one simple page from my own soul. 
Do write very soon/' 

To Mrs. Banister. 

" April 13, 1843. 

" I hoped I should have quite a large part of this 
sheet to tell you what the Lord hath wrought for us 
since I last wrote you. I believe, just at the time that 
I sent my last letter, a cloud of mercy was gathering 
over our heads, and a few drops had fallen upon us. 
The cloud had so long been gathering, and so gently, 
that we scarcely knew it ; but soon the windows of 
heaven were opened, and the blessing descended, so 
that there was scarcely room in our minds or hearts 
to receive it. When I returned from Boston, there 
were a few more than fifty without hope. In about 
three weeks, all but six expressed some hope that they 
had found the Saviour ; in a single week of this time, 
more than thirty of the number. 

" In all my privileged experience connected with 
the work of lie Spirit, this, I think, has been of un- 
paralleled rapidity ; and yet I have never witnessed 
more quietness and stillness than in its progress, or 
any less of what some call reaction, to be watched 
against in the result. It has seemed like a sudden, 
powerful shower bursting upon us, but descending 
with so much gentleness that not a leaf or twig among 
the tender plants is turned out of its place, and then 
so suddenly giving way to the beautiful stln and re- 
freshing dews. But as teachers, we have a great work 
to cherish these tender plants. Shall we not have 
your prayers? to follow Christ in the work of 
cherishing them, is what I want. This desire enters 



THE MISSIONARY SPIRIT. 26T 

almost daily into the very depths of my soul with an 
untold and unwonted strength." 

Such a history as the preceding is certainly very 
instructive as well as interesting to every Christian 
who loves revivals. It lets us into the true secret of 
the extraordinary exhibitions of divine grace with 
which the schools where she labored and prayed have 
been favored ; and that is, the uniform and systematic 
fidelity of the instructors. Practically, as well as 
theoretically, they have given religion the first place 
in their teachings, and have really felt more solicitous 
about the eternal than the literary welfare of their 
pupils ; and God has honored those who thus honored 
him, by that special influence that subdues and con- 
verts the soul. 

The seminary has been A KUBSEBY OF MTSSTONA- 
BIBS. One of its members left, the first year, to go to 
the Zulus in South Africa, and several of the earlier 
members were subsequently stationed in other dark 
corners of the earth. 

Not much was said, in starting this institution, 
about raising up missionaries. Yet in fact the prin- 
ciples on which it was founded, and the manner in 
which it has been conducted, tended directly to such 
a result. All who engaged in the work of founding 
and conducting the enterprise, were expected to do 
it on the same benevolent principles that form the 
main-spring of missionary labors. They were not to 
expect any pecuniary reward, save what was essential 
to a comfortable support. The pupils were taught 
that they ought to engage in the business of teaching. 



268 LIFE OF MART LTON. 

from a sense of duty, and a benevolent desire to do 
good. They were not to avoid any field of labor be- 
cause it was hard and uninviting. They were to hold 
themselves in readiness to go to any part of our own 
wide country where Providence should point out the 
post of duty ; and such, would easily be persuaded to 
go to foreign lands on a like errand of mercy. 

From the first, special and systematic efforts were 
made to awaken an interest in the great cause of 
Christian benevolence. Miss Lyon was in the habit 
of presenting the gospel view of this subject for sev- 
eral successive mornings each year. The great prin- 
ciples and motives which she urged on her auditors 
came every year clothed with new power. She labored 
with untiring zeal and with rare success to start her 
pupils on a voluntary course of self-denying action. 
The command, " Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thy- 
self," was held up day by day in new and interesting 
relations. She labored to enforce the duty of setting 
apart from their income a fair and handsome propor- 
tion to meet the calls of benevolence, and really made 
them ashamed to wear costly apparel and drop at 
the same time only " two mites" into the treasury of 
the Lord. 

What Christian was ever a year with her without 
hearing the passage, " Whether ye eat, or drink, or 
whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God," ex- 
pounded ? and who did not carry away with her a 
livelier sense of its meaning and power than she had 
carried there? Any one who has read Miss Lyon's 
work on missions, must have seen that her conceptions 
.of eternity, of an eternity of sorrow, spent under the 



THE MJSSIONARY SPIRIT. 269 

frown of God, were awfully distinct, vivid, and con- 
trolling. How her hearers would almost hold their 
breath as she dwelt on this subject. 

"Take," she would say, "any slight trouble or 
trivial suffering, bodily or mental, a throbbing tooth, 
a tedious, complaining, disagreeable room-mate, and 
think, ' I am to bear this pain a year, night and day;' 
or, ' I am to have this companion always in my pres- 
ence for twelve months.' That seems long. Yet hope 
lends strength to bear the evil. A year, you say, and 
it will be gone. When one day is past, you subtract 
it from three hundred and sixty-five, and rejoice that 
you are one" day nearer the end of your trial. Let the 
load accumulate to the utmost that can be endured 
by mortal frame, or conceived by mortal mind let 
the year before you be one of anguish, of remorse, of 
grief, of suffering like that which separates the soul 
from the body, and yet you cannot die. You are 
doomed to a living death, always dying, yet never to 
die ; for this is the import of those solemn words, the 
second death : a year spent in such agony, how long, 
how slow its moments roll ! Yet hope lends her pen- 
cil, and the happy future appears beyond, in dim, but 
certain light. Let years be added and multiplied, till 
the sum reach a number equal to all the years of all 
the lives of all the sons and daughters of Adam, and 
let the soul be strung to endure suffering to the utmost 
stretch of its capacity in all these years, yet, in tho 
infinite ages of eternity, there would come a period 
for these sufferings to cease. Relief, however distant, 
would lighten the woe. But ' the smoke of their tor- 
ment ascendeth up for ever and ever.' It is an ever- 



270 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

lasting punishment ; the worm dieth not, the fire is 
not quenched. - No sun shall rise on that darkness, no 
time shall measure out those groans. It will he one 
blank scene of woe, with nothing to mark its dura- 
tion ; and when the soul shall ask, ' How long?' noth- 
ing but that awful 'How fang' shall echo from its 
prison walls. Oh, for ever, for ever! Think of this 
word, and its import. Add life to life, and age to age, 
and you have not approximated it." 

Many a pupil could say, in a manner recognized 
at once by her companions as Miss Lyon's, "You 
wont do so again, will you, dear ?" but no one could 
ever imitate her manner in such remarks as these. 
They were the embodiment of her own experience. 
" Souls bought and redeemed from all this woe," she 
would say, " how should they show forth the glory of 
God ! How should they feel towards the multitudes 
in danger of perishing for lack of the bread of life ! 
Who that has been redeemed, and permitted to linger 
on the shores of earth a while to represent her as- 
cended Saviour, would not wish to eat and drink and 
live to the glory of God ? "Who but would rejoice to 
give all her money, her time, her talents, her influence 
to this great cause, the salvation of the perishing ? 
When you are about spending a single shilling, re- 
member, that shilling might carry leaves of healing 
to those who are sick unto death, unto the second 
death, and ask whether you are investing it to God's 
glory. The question for the Christian is not, 'Is it 
right for me to buy this little elegance for myself?' 
but, 'Would it be wrong for me to do without it?' 
You waste a shilling's worth of paper. That single 



THE MISSIONARY SPIRIT. 271 

shilling might hare sent the bread of life to the fam- 
ishing." Her sympathy for the heathen was ever 
alive and active, and she communicated Tier own 
feelings of indebtedness to them for Christ's sake 
to many of her pupils* She led them to feel that 
all they were, and all they had, were indeed the 
Lord's, to be actively and constantly employed in his 
service. 

Ever after the first two years of its existence, a 
missionary meeting was held in the seminary at least 
as often as once a month, and frequently once a fort- 
night. It is the object of the meeting to disseminate 
throughout the school information relative to the 
moral and religious condition of the human race, to 
excite inquiry, and to awaken zeal in the great object 
of the world's regeneration. The result has been y 
that not less than sixty-one members of the seminary 
have entered the foreign field of missionary labor ; 
of whom not less than eleven were teachers at the 
seminary. Every Senior class, for the first fifteen 
years, has had one or more representatives in the mis- 
sionary field, "With these beloved distant daughters 
of the seminary communications are frequent, and 
their letters give great interest to the monthly meet- 
ings. At the seminary a journal is kept of the events 
transpiring there, and a copy of it is sent to each mis- 
sionary. The correspondence forms galvanic wires 
through which the missionary spirit is transmitted 
backward and forward. 

Personal consecration is the strongest evidence of 
interest in the missionary work, but contributions in 
money are also an index of the feelings of the heart. 



272 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

Judged of by this standard, one is struck with the 
amount contributed by the Holyoke seminary. 

The teachers have set a good example to their 
pupils in this respect. They generally head the sub- 
scription paper with handsome sums. The tithe 
which Miss Lyon brought to the storehouse of the 
Lord, was gradually increased until it became nearer 
one half than one tenth of her income. 

The annual offering of the school has varied from 
six hundred to eleven hundred dollars. This has 
been the voluntary gift of teachers whose salaries, 
besides board, have been from one hundred and 
twenty-five to two hundred dollars ; and of pupils 
many of whom are from families of small pecuniary 
means. 

It may not be out of place to give a few notes 
from the missionary journal, bearing on the manner 
in which the subject of benevolence was presented by 
Miss Lyon, and illustrating the missionary spirit in 
the school. 

"January 28, 1847. Miss Lyon commenced her 
lectures upon* the subject of missions this morning. 
She read passages of Scripture, and remarked gen- 
erally upon the duty of Christian benevolence. She 
then alluded to the reward to be expected in conse- 
quence of denying ourselves for Christ's sake : she 
differed from some who say one is never poorer for 
giving to the Lord. 'If, 7 said she, ' they mean poorer 
in a spiritual point of view, I agree with them, but 
not when they say poorer in property ; for I do be- 
lieve the Christian ought to give to the Lord, so as 
really to feel the need of what he gives. It is a pfe- 



THE MISSIONARY SPIRIT. 2tS 

cious privilege to suffer for Christ. 7 She seemed, if 
possible, more earnest and animated than ever. that 
there were many more who would, in like manner, pre- 
sent to Christians the claims resting upon them, who 
would, at the same time, be themselves examples. 

" February 2. Miss Lyon has continued her re- 
marks upon the subject of missions for several morn- 
ings. "We will try and give you the mere outline. 
Your own minds can supply the rest, better than our 
poor pen. 

" First, we must do all Christ requires of us, be- 
cause a reward is promised to him who gives a cup 
of cold water ; if we have the means to do more, we 
must not think it sufficient to do this, and only this. 
Secondly, we must feel that we are as unworthy to 
give in the name of Christ as we are to receive. 
Thirdly, when we give the most with the most self- 
denial, then do we most deeply feel our unworthiness. 
When we do so contribute for Christ's sake, then are 
we brought into a blessed sympathy with his poverty, 
his sufferings. ' wonderful, wonderful, 7 she ex- 
claimed, ' this work in which we may share. How 
would angels delight to have a part in it. And shall 
we hinder it by unwillingness to give ?' 

" We should adopt the Bible standard of benevo- 
lence, because of the infinite value of souls of the 
sacrifice of Christ as our example of our relations 
to each other of the unseen cords that bind us to 
the heathen world ; last, though not least, because it 
is God's appointed means for the conversion of the 
world. Take the Bible standard of benevolence, said 
she, and cling to it as long as you live. 
12* 



274 LIFE OP MART LYON. 

" April 7. Miss Lyon this forenoon dwelt in a most 
touching manner upon the great principle that Chris- 
tian charity may be so practised and illustrated as to 
make us feel what a price was paid for our redemp- 
tion. She noticed expressions of Scripture like this : 
*Ye are bought with a price/ etc. 'Always, 7 she 
added, 'remember this when you put your hand to 
this work/ 

" April 13. I wish it were in my power to convey 
to you all th$ precious thoughts Miss Lyon has given 
us upon the subject of Christian charity. Though 
she has dwelt so many years upon this theme, there 
is nothing tedious through repetition. She leads us 
not in the same beaten track of thought. Every year 
brings out some new thing from the rich treasury of 
her full soul. In her remarks this forenoon she said 
the telegraphic wires had been established between 
us and the heathen ; if we do not now send them the 
gospel, they must perish. 

"May 19 Within a short time letters have been 
received from correspondents in Persia, India, China, 
Sandwich Islands, and the far west ; all of them full 
of glad tidings. Could you but witness, dear sisters, 
how much interest these journals of yours add to our 
missionary meetings, you would feel yourselves richly 
rewarded for all the labor they cost you. 

"Juno 18. In our teachers 7 prayer-meeting this 
evening, Miss Lyon spoke of a little note received 
from Mrs. Burgess. She proposed we should mention 
the names of those who have been connected with us, 
and are now on missionary ground. We each men- 
tioned one or more of them, until all your names were 



THE MISSIONARY SPIRIT. 275 

repeated. We then united in prayer in your behalf. 
Miss Lyon led. In speaking of you afterwards, she 
said, ' Let us each be faithful, and we may be but a 
step behind them in heaven. 7 If any one has a bright 
crown there, it will be our dear Miss Lyon. Xumbers 
in heathen lands will rise up and call her blessed. 

"July 11. Our missionary subscription is com- 
pleted, and the amount has been stated to the school. 
Amount given to foreign missions, $646 79 ; home 
missions, $361 00 : whole amount, $1,007 79. 

" August 29. You will ask, ' Where is Miss Lyon 
during the long vacation? Is she also enjoying rest?' 
We would we could say she is. But she is in South 
Hadley. Much does her spirit long for rest, and 
much does she need it We fear for the next year. 
Yet I would trust and remember that c our Father is 
at the helm. ; We, doubting, often ask, ' If she falls, 
who shall take her place T - We often fear she may 
fail. Powers of mind and body so hardly tasked can- 
not always last. We fall back on the assurance, God 
will provide." 

In illustration of Miss Lyon's missionary spirit, 
we give the following passages from her " Missionary 
Offering," already referred to, a little work published 
by Messrs. Crocker and Brewster in 1843. Of this 
work she says, "I wrote it because my heart was so 
full that I could not but write." 

" In the great work of converting the world to 
God, Christian sympathy, and a just and solemn sense 
of responsibility, are the two grand and effective im- 
pulses of the human soul* 



276 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

"Ho who acts under these impulses, will be lis- 
tening to the still small voice of duty. He will not 
be partial in judging between the interests of self, 
and the eternal interests of others. He will be 
constrained to adopt and practise the sentiments of 
Howard : 6 Our superfluities should be given up for the 
convenience of others ; our conveniences should give 
way to others 7 necessities ; our necessities should give 
way to the extremities of others.' Are not these the 
sentiments which must be adopted and practised to 
bring the whole world to a knowledge of the truth ? 
Are they not sentiments contained in the second great 
command of the law, and in the golden rule ? In the 
great work of saving souls from death, let us then first 
give up our superfluities. When that is done, if the 
providence of God still calls, let us next give up our 
conveniences. When we have done that, if souls are 
still left unsaved and unenlightened, and if the door 
is still kept open by divine Providence, inviting us 
to enter, let us last of all give up our necessities to 
the infinite extremities of immortal beings. 

"As I mused on these things, my heart burned 
within me, and I was carried away to visit* the three 
great scenes of Christian sympathy. 

" The first scene was that offfie Saviour's life, suffer- 
ings, and death. I wandered over the plains of Judea. 
Silently I walked in the cold garden. I stood by 
the fatal cross. I seemed to hear the Saviour's voice, 
calling in accents of melting tenderness, ' Go ye into 
all the world, and preach the gospel to every crea- 
ture.' ' The servant is not greater than his Lord. 7 
Come, follow me ; walk in my footsteps, and we shall 



THE MISSIONARY SPIRIT. 27? 

be glorified together.' The sympathy between the 
infinite Son of God and his unworthy followers ap- 
peared to me "wonderful indeed, casting a bright halo 
over the whole subject of missions, and calling into 
life a thousand illustrations, living epistles, known and 
i-ead of all men. What remarkable expressions do we 
find in the sacred volume on this subject. None but 
an infinite mind could conceive such thoughts, or dare 
to write them. ' He was tempted in &11 points, like as 
we are. 7 ' He can be touched with the feeling of our 
infirmities. 7 ' The Captain of our salvation is made 
perfect through sufferings/ ' He learned obedience by 
the things which he suffered.' c Himself being tempt- 
ed, he is able to succor them that are tempted. 3 His 
is not a sympathy which siiuply pities and feels for 
us. It is a sympathy which knows by experience how 
to partake in our every cap of joy, and in our every 
cup of sorrow. But this is not all. He not only suffers 
with us and for us, but he even invites and accepts 
our sympathy in his behalf. Here is the preeminent 
glory of all this subject. We are permitted to labor 
with him, and for him ; to suffer with him, and for 
him ; to be partakers in his reward ; to share in the 
joy tiiat was set before him, for which he endured the 
cross, despising the shame. We are said to be cruci- 
fied with Christ to be partakers of his sufferings; 
to weep with him ; to rejoice with him ; to reign with 
him. He is not ashamed to call us brethren breth- 
ren in labors, brethren in sufferings, brethren in gath- 
ering in the rich harvest of immortal souls. We are 
to be conformed to his image, that he may be the 
first-born among many brethren. We are to be heir? 



278 LIFE OF MART LYON. 

of God, and joint-heirs with Christ, if so be that 
we suffer with him. Who could conceive of conde- 
scension like this? Is not a life of suffering for 
Christ's sake a great privilege ? Is it not surround- 
ed by an unparalleled halo of glory ? Well might 
the apostle seek to know the fellowship of Christ's 
sufferings, being made conformable to his death. My 
heart exclaimed, Lord, teach me thus to manifest the 
life of Jesus ; heavenly Father, teach me to live more 
as he lived, to feel more as he felt, to labor more as 
he labored, to deny myself more as he denied him- 
self, to pray more as he prayed, to agonize over a 
lost and dying world more as he agonized. 

" But I was led on to another, and a very different 
scene. It was a seem on the borders of the world of de- 
spair a scene casting a glare of lurid light over the 
whole missionary enterprise, and urging the Christian 
on to unknown and untold sacrifices and sufferings 
for its sake. Necessity seemed laid upon me to take a 
nearer view of the finally lost than I ever had done. 
I had formerly turned to those fearful passages in my 
Bible. I had followed the criminal as near the place 
of execution as -I dared approach. But as the flames 
began to flash in my face, and as the groans of despair 
began to fall on my ear, my affrighted spirit started 
back, and fled away from the dreadful sight. But now 
I felt that I must take a nearer view of the second death 
than I ever had done. Without such a view, I feared 
that I should not weigh things in a just balance, that 
I should not keep the skirts of my garments pure from 
the blood of souls, that I should not use as I ought 
each hour of my passing days, and spend as I should 



THE MISSIONARY SPIRIT. 279 

each dollar that comes under my control. Without 
such a view, I feared that I should not understand as 
I might, and value as I ought, that infinite price paid 
for the ransom of the soul, 

" I asked God for strength to meet the dreadful 
scene. I approached nearer and nearer to the awful 
brink of the bottomless pit, and I trembled at every 
step. I arrived at its very edge, and the foundations 
seemed to crumble beneath my feet. I stooped over 
to take a view of the dreadful place, and the yawning 
gulf seemed to open wide its mouth to receive my 
fainting spirit. I beheld the worm that never dies, 
and the fire that never is quenched. I heard the un- 
utterable groans of the for-ever lost, and I saw the 
smoke of their torment, which ascendeth up for ever 
and ever. Who can endure this, I exclaimed, a sin- 
gle year a single day a single hour ? But Oh, for 
ever and ever ! An eternity of misery ! what is it ? 
Many have told us what it is not, but who can tell us 
what it is ? What a view did I then have of the 
bleeding Lamb of God, groaning, agonizing, and dy- 
ing to save a lost and ruined world from hopeless 
despair. How did my heart at that moment cling 
to that 'hope which is as an anchor to the soul, both 
sure and steadfast, and which entereth into that with- 
in the veil. 7 But Oh, the for-ever lost! They know 
nothing of this precious hope. Those teeming mill- 
ions just ready to perish, know nothing of this pre- 
cious hope. Who that knows aught of its worth 
who that has ever stood on the borders of that world 
of endless woe, will not strive with all his might to 
save a fellow-immortal from the anguish of the second 



280 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

death? Who, in suck a work, can count Ms life 
dear unto him ; -who can call aught that ho has his 
own? 

" I was led on to another scene. It was a scene at 
the gate of Jieaven, casting a sweet and glorious light 
over the whole subject of missions. There I beheld 
a ' great multitude, which no man could number, of 
all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, 
stand before the throne.' And one said to me, 
1 These are they which came out of great tribulation, 
and have washed their robes and made them white 
in the blood of the Lamb.' Then I heard the Sav- 
iour's voice, that sweetest music of the heavenly 
world, saying, These are my followers ; these are my 
dearest friends. They have known of the fellowship 
of my sufferings ; they shall now be partakers of my 
joy. c Where I am, there shall they be also, that they 
may behold my glory/ And I heard that new song, 
which no man could learn but those 'who follow the 
Lamb whithersoever he goeth.' And as they sung, 
'Worthy art thou, for thou hast redeemed us to God 
by ihy blood/ my heart responded, 

<"My -willing soul would stay 

In such a frame as this, 
And sit and sing herself away 
To everlasting bliss.' 

" * But Oh, the for-ever lost !' I again exclaimed. 
Never, Oh never will they unite in that new song ; 
never will they hear the Saviour's blessed voice; 
never will they sit under the banner of his love, 
the millions ready to perish 1 Must they be shut out 
for ever from the new Jerusalem? Must they be 



THE MISSIONAET SPIBIT. 281 

banished for ever from the Saviour's blissful pres- 
ence? Oh, who will not give his all to save them 
from eternal death, and raise them to eternal glory? 
"But I was led away to view other scenes, and to 
receive other impressions. First I mingled in the 
busy scenes of our own Christian land. The veil 
was lifted from mine eyes, and I saw things as they 
are seen by Him, with whom * one day is as a thousand 
years, and a thousand years as one day.' Spread out 
before me was a solemn and awful view of personal 
responsibility. I saw the folly and the delusion of 
those who are ever striving to secure for some of 
their steps a middle path between the service of 
Christ and the service of his enemy. That vast field 
of supposed neutral ground in human affairs, so long 
and so carefully maintained, seemed in reality divid- 
ed between the two great contending powers of eter- 
nal life and of eternal death. I saw that each one's 
life must be devoted to the salvation of men, or its 
influence be felt for their eternal destruction. Every 
thing about me seemed written all over with the Sav- 
iour's words, 'He that is not for me, is against me; 
and he that gathereth not with me, scattereth abroad.' 
I seemed to hear a mighty harp of a thousand strings 
vibrating at the least touch of the hand, at the least 
breath of the lips. Its every tone seemed to echo 
and reecho, and ceased not^till it mingled in the 
songs of the new Jerusalem, or till it waked up a 
deep wail in the bottomless pit. who can strike 
with a careless, heedless hand the chords of such a 
harp? Who does not tremble to live, to walk, to 
speak in such a world as this ? How distressing is 



282 LIFE OF MABT LTON. 

the mere apprehension of having by accident admin- 
istered a fatal cup of poison to a fellow-being. How 
unavailing would be the assurance that the same hand, 
in a hundred other cases, had given bread to the hun- 
gry, and water to the thirsty, and clothing to the des- 
titute. But infinitely more distressing must be the 
certainty of having, by neglect or self-indulgence, 
destroyed a never-dying soul. My heart exclaimed, 
Let the past of my life suffice in the work of death ; 
henceforth let me live only for the salvation of men. 
I looked up to the God of my salvation, and cried, 
Lord, grant that I may never again spend aught of 
my time or of my possessions without seeking guid- 
ance and direction from above ; grant that I may 
never again spend aught of earth's treasures on my- 
self without the united approval of the word of God, 
the providence of God, and the Spirit of God. 

" But time hastened me away, and I passed on to 
another scene. It was the scene of the judgment. 
There I beheld the Son of man seated on his throne 
of glory, and all the holy angels with him. And I 
beheld the books as they were opened ; ' and the dead 
were to be judged out of those things which were 
written in the books, according to their works.' 
First came an unfolding of the scenes of time ; . . . . 
and when this was over, then came the judgment. 
And I saw another balance lifted high. On its pol- 
ished front was engraved, ' Love the Lord thy God 
with all thy heart; love thy neighbor as thyself. 7 
This was the balance of eternal truth and justice, by 
which are weighed all other scales and all other 
weights, and all the principles and all the deeds of 



THE MISSIONARY SPIRIT. 2S 

the children of men. By the decisions of this revealer 
of truth, I saw that personal responsibility, which had 
been so much neglected, overlooked, and resisted, had 
ever been a most fearful and solemn reality. I saw 
that * there is a way which seemeth right unto a man, 
but the end thereof are the ways of death/ And I 
beheld the speechless agony of those in whose gar- 
ments was found the blood of souls. I saw many a 
face gather blackness, and I heard many a despair- 
ing cry, Lord, when did I destroy the souls of the 
heathen? And the reply was, Inasmuch as thou 
didst not what thou couldst to save them, ' thou art 
weighed in the balances, and art found wanting/ 
Then I heard a voice saying, What shall it profit a 
man, if he gain the whole world, and destroy an im- 
mortal soul ? What shall it profit a Christian fa- 
ther, though by his wisdom and foresight he provide 
well for his own household, if he refuse the bread of 
life to the perishing heathen ? What shall it profit a 
Christian mother, though by her industry and discre- 
tion she clothe all 'her household in scarlet, in silk, 
and in purple/ if she refuse the robe of Christ's right 
eousness to the destitute heathen? But as I heard the 
last and awful sentence, 'Depart, ye cursed/ I turned 
away and came back, again to mingle in the scenes 
and doings of time. 

" A view of my own individual responsibility rest- 
ed on me with an indescribable weight. I felt that, 
in the sight of God, my duty in my own little sphere, 
and with my own feeble ability, was more to me than 
the duty of all the world besides. Could I throw 
my influence over the whole country, and bring thou- 



284 LIFE OP MARY LYON. 

sands into the treasury of the Lord, it might not be 
so important a duty for me, as to give from my own 
little purse that last farthing which God requires. 
Could I make my voice heard from one end of the 
land to the other, and so plead in behalf of the per- 
ishing heathen, that all our missionary concerts should 
be filled with hearts bowing together in the presence 
of God, it might not be so important a duty for me, 
as to carry my own feeble petition myself to the 
throne of mercy, and there, in the name of our bless- 
ed Redeemer, plead the promises with an earnestness 
which cannot be denied. While I mused on these 
things, my heart seemed ready to sink under its load, 
and I fled away to the cross of Christ, that there my 
weak and fainting spirit might find support, comfort, 
and guidance. There I looked up, and cried, My 
dear Redeemer, make me ' to know the fellowship of 
thy sufferings ; make me conformable unto thy death/ 
There, under the banner of the Saviour's dying love, 
I felt it to be the most precious privilege in the uni- 
verse to deny myself, to take up my cross, and to fol- 
low the Lamb whithersoever he goeth." 

In a notice of Miss Lyon, published soon after her 
death, the writer asks : 

"Is she missed? Scarcely a state in the Amer- 
ican Union but contains those she trained. Long ere 
this, amid the hunting-grounds of the Sioux and the 
villages of the Cherokees, the tear of the missionary 
has wet the page which has told of Miss Lyon's de- 
parture. The Sandwich Islander will ask why is his 
white teacher's eye dim, as she reads her American 



THE MISSIONARY SPIRIT. 285 

letters. The swarthy African Trill lament with his 
sorrowing guide, who cries, c Help, Lord ; for the 
godly ceaseth. 7 The cinnamon groves of Ceylon and 
the palm-trees of India overshadow her early de- 
ceased missionary pnpils, while those left to bear the 
burden and heat of the day will wail the saint whose 
prayers and letters they so prized. Among the Nes- 
torians of Persia and at the base of mount Olympus 
will her name be breathed softly, as the household 
name of one whom God hath taken." 



286 LIFE OF MART LYON. 



CHAPTER XI. 

MISCELLANEOUS CORRE SPONDENCE PUBLISHED 
PAMPHLET FIFTIETH BIRTHDAY. 

WE go back a little to give some of Miss Lyon's 
letters which could not be inserted earlier without 
breaking the thread of the narrative. 

In 1839, the first death occurred at the seminary. 
In a letter to Miss Grant, dated April 12, 1839, Miss 
Lyon thus alludes to it: 

"We have just been passing through a trying 
scene. Death for the first time has entered our win- 
dows, and marked one of our number as his victim. 
It has been a trying, solemn time. It was a disease 
of the head, and as is common in such cases, was very 
deceitful in developing its true nature till a short 
time before her death. On this account, none of her 
friends were here to see her breathe h'er last. Her 
sister arrived about two hours after, and her father 
met the remains a few miles from this place, as they 
were moving towards her last earthly home. She 
had been with us about a year, and I trust her being 
here has been the means of preparing her for heaven. 

" She became serious last summer, indulged a hope 
in the autumn, has been consistent through the winter 
as a Christian, and has seemed to share deeply in the 
late revival. She has not been very well through the 
whole year, and I now think that the causes of her 
last disease have been long at work in her system. 
But it seems as if an unseen hand had kept back its 



COBRESPONDENCE. 2fT 

progress, that she might repent and believe, and pre- 
pare for eternity." 

In 1840, Miss Lyon's mother was removed to the 
unseen -world. On this occasion she wrote to her 

only brother : 

SOUTH HADLEY, Dec. 3, 1840. 

" But a few years ago, and we were an unbroken 
circle. Though separated from each other, we seven 
were all living, and could think and pray for one 
another from day to day. After the hand of death 
was laid on our dear father, nearly thirty years pass- 
ed- away before any one of us was called out of time 
into eternity. Since then, how frequently have we 
been called to mourning. How great have been the 

ravages of death. You have heard of sister F 's 

departure, and now it becomes my painful duty to tell 
you that another one is gone. Yes, our dear mother 
is no more. My dear brother, can you think how 
lonely it was to me as I followed her dear remains to 
the grave, with no brother or sister by my side ? I 
felt that indeed our family was but a broken circle. 
As I passed out of the door where I had often met 
her gladdened and joyful face, as I went along the 
way where we had so many times rode together to 

see sister J , and as I looked on her placid face 

for the last time, l Can this be/ thought I, ' my dear 
mother; and is this my last visit to her solitary 
home? 111 

In the summer of 1841, Miss Lyon was persuaded 
to journey a few weeks for her health. She visited 
her near and dear relatives in the state of New York, 



288 LIFE OF MARY LTON. 

They were at the time in distressing straits, and knew 
not whence help could come. By a series of misfor- 
tunes, sicknesses, and losses, they had been driven to 
mortgage their small farm. They were in anxious 
conference at the moment of her arrival, because iheir 
homestead was expected that very day to come under 
the hammer of the auctioneer. " Here is Mary ; she 
will help you," said her uncle, as she stopped at the 
door of their humble dwelling. She was the angel 
of mercy to them in their hour of need. She redeemed 
the farm, took the deed in her own name, gave them 
a life-lease, and on their death it was bequeathed by 
her last will and testament to the American Board of 
Commissioners for Foreign Missions. 

The next letter has reference to the event that 
changed the address of her friend Miss Grant. 

"August 18, 1841. 

" MY DEAR Miss GRANT I received yours by last 
mail. To say that I was so deeply interested in its 
contents that I could hardly sleep, would be saying 
but little. I have nothing to say on the subject, 
either good or bad. I have only to desire that this 
exceedingly important event may be for your own 
happiness and usefulness, for the happiness and use- 
fulness of others, and also for the glory of God. I 
trust I shall be able to be with you on Tuesday, the 
7th. My thanks to yourself and Mrs. B for in- 
viting me to pass Monday night with you. If I am 
prevented from being with you on the 7th, it will be 
to me a great trial. May the Lord guide, keep, and 
sustain yon, my dear friend." 



CIRCULAR. 280 

From the beginning of the enterprise, Miss Lyon 
had desired that the institution should furnish accom- 
modations for two hundred pupils. Though compel- 
led to commence the school with room for only half 
that number, she never for a moment abandoned the 
intention of completing the original plan. Every 
year after the first brought several times as many 
applications as could be accepted. She desired to 
multiply the beneficent influences of the institution by 
multiplying its members. The initiatory measures 
for an addition to the building were taken in 1839, 
and were fully carried out in 18-12. "With reference 
to obtaining funds for this addition, Miss Lyon pre- 
pared a pamphlet on the " Tendencies of the Princi- 
ples embraced, and the System adopted in the Mount 
Holyoke Female Seminary." No longer obliged to 
speak merely of what was expected and intended, she 
was able to state what the school was, and what it 
was doing. To the community which had provided 
the institution, she could appeal to enlarge its accom- 
modations and increase its privileges. From this 
pamphlet we make some extracts. 

"The enterprise of founding this seminary was 
commenced nearly five years ago. More than three 
years were occupied in preparing the way, in raising 
the funds, and in erecting the building now occupied. 
It was ready for the reception of scholars November 
8, 1837. 

"The original* plan was to provide for two hun- 
dred. Only the first building has yet been erected. 
This can accommodate only ninety. In order .to finish 
the plan, at least twenty thousand dollars more will 

Mwytyou. 13 



290 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

be needed for the "buildings, besides perhaps five 
thousand dollars or more for furniture, library, and 
apparatus. 

" The seminary has peculiar advantages for high 
intellectual culture. The age required for entrance 
secures to the pupils mental power, and the attain- 
ments required for admission insure a high standard 
of scholarship. 

" Eeligious culture lies at the foundation of that 
female character which the founders of this seminary 
have contemplated. The donors and benefactors, 
with its trustees and teachers, have felt a united 
obligation to seek, in its behalf, c first the kingdom of 
God and his righteousness.' They would have the 
spirit of benevolence manifest in all its principles, 
and in the manner of conferring its privilcges^in the 
mutual duties it requires of its members, and in the 
claims it makes on them to devote their fdture lives 
to doing good. Endeavors have been made to raise 
the funds, and to lay the whole foundation on Chris- 
tian principles, to organize a school and form a fam- 
ily that from day to day might illustrate the precepts 
and spirit of the gospel. Public worship, the Bible 
lesson, and other appropriate duties of the Sabbath, 
a regular observance of secret devotion, suitable 
attention to religious instruction and social prayer- 
meetings, and the maintaining of a consistent Chris- 
tian deportment, are considered the most important 
objects of regard, for both teachers and scholars. 
The friends of this seminary have sought that this 
might be a. spot where souls shall be born of God, 
and where much shall be done for maturing and ele- 



CIRCULAR. 291 

vating Christian character. The smiles of Provi- 
dence and the influences of the Holy Spirit have 
encouraged them to hope that their desires will not 
be in vain. 

" Physical culture is an object of special regard in 
this seminary. The value of health to a lady is ines- 
timable. How difficult is it for her to perform all 
her duties faithfully and successfully, unless she pos- 
sesses at all times a calm mind, an even temper, a 
cheerful heart, and a happy face. But a feeble sys- 
tem and a nervous frame are often the direct antago- 
nists of these indispensable traits in a lady's charac- 
ter. To preserve the health and promote the physical 
comfort of the family, the time is all regularly and 
systematically divided. The hours for rising and 
retiring are early. The food is plain and simple, but 
well prepared, and from the best materials. No arti- 
cle of second quality of the kind is ever purchased 
for the family, and no standard of cooking is allowed 
but that of doing every thing as well as it can be 
done. The day is so divided that the lessons can be 
well learned, and ample time allowed for sleep ; the 
hour for exercise in the domestic department can bo 
secured without interruption, and a half hour in the 
morning and evening for secret devotion, also half an 
hour for vocal music, and twenty minutes for calis- 
thenics. Besides, there are the leisure hours, in which 
much is done of sewing, knitting, and ornamental 
needlework; and much is enjoyed in social inter- 
course, in walking, and in botanical excursions. This 
institution presupposes a good degree of health and 
correct habits. Little can be done in this seminary. 



292 LIFE OF MAEY LYON. 

or any other, for those whose constitution is already 
impaired, or whose physical habits, up to the age of 
sixteen, are particularly defective. But it is believed 
that a young lady who is fitted for the system, and 
who can voluntarily and cheerfully adopt it as her 
own, will find this place favorable for preserving un- 
impaired the health she brings with her, and for pro- 
moting and establishing the good physical habits 
already acquired. 

" This institution, it is well known, is distinguish- 
ed for its economical features. Economy consists in 
providing well at little comparative expense. It can 
be equally manifested in the tasteful decorations of a 
palace and in the simple comforts of a cottage. It is 
not adopted in this seminary principally for its own 
sake, but as a mode of producing favorable effects on 
character, and of preparing young ladies for the duties 
of life. The great object is to make the school really 
better. An economical character is to be formed by 
precept, by practice, and by example. Example has 
great effect, not only in furnishing a model for imita- 
tion, but also in proving that economy is practicable, 
which is one of the most essential requisites for suc- 
cess. Let a young lady spend two or three years, on 
intimate terms, in a family distinguished for a judi- 
cious and consistent illustration of this principle, and 
the effects cannot be lost. 

"This institution seeks to exert a decided influ- 
ence against that feeling of dependence on the will of 
servants which is so common in our cities and large 
towns, and from which ladies in the country are not 
wholly exempt. The whole aspect of the family, aad 



CIRCULAR. 

all the plans of the school, are suited to cultivate 
domestic independence. The daily hour for these 
duties returns to each at the appointed time, and no 
one inquires whether it can be omitted or transferred 
to another. No one receives any pecuniary reward 
for her services, and no one seeks with her money to 
deprive herself of the privilege of sharing in the free- 
dom, simplicity, and independence of her home. 

"The power of bringing personal and family ex- 
penses fairly and easily within the means enjoyed, is 
also very essential to a high degree of domestic happi- 
ness. The whole system adopted in this seminary is 
designed to give a living illustration of the principle 
by which this power is to be gained. This ability will 
be of immense value in active life. It will prepare 
one to sustain the reverses of fortune with submis- 
sion, or to meet the claims of hospitality and charity 
with promptness. This kind of independence might 
be to the great cause of benevolence like an overflow- 
ing fountain, whose streams will never fail. The 
institution is not designed to conduct a young lady's 
domestic education. It would not take this privilege 
from the mother. But it does seek to preserve the 
good habits already acquired, and to make a favor- 
able impression with regard to the value of system, 
promptness, and fidelity in this branch of the duties 
of woman. 

"To cultivate an obliging disposition, and to 
bring every little opportunity for self-denial to bear 
on the character, has been a leading object in all the 
plans of this institution, in the organization of the 
school, and especially in the arrangements of the fam- 



294 LIFE OF MART LTON. 

ily. As the domestic -work is done entirely by the 
young ladies, the varied and mutual duties of the day 
furnish many little opportunities for the manifesta- 
tion of a generous, obliging, and self-denying spirit, 
the influence of which, we trust, will be felt through 
life. ' He that is faithful in the least, is faithful also 
in much/ is a motto for the daily guidance of this 
household. 

"On entering this seminary, young ladies can 
scarcely avoid feeling that they are sharing the fruits 
of benevolent efforts ; that they are enjoying privi- 
leges which they cannot purchase; that they owe a 
debt of gratitude to the founders which gold and sil- 
ver can never cancel, and which can be met only by 
a useful Christian life." 

To Mrs. Banister, formerly Miss Grant. 

" SOUTH HADLET, December, 1842. 

" To say that the death of your niece, Mrs. Bur- 
gess,* was sorely felt by many, would be saying but 
very little. You know I loved her much, and valued 
her highly. I had the privilege of seeing and know- 
ing much of her, taking together all the time, from 
my first meeting her at her father's in "Colebrook, 
Connecticut, and my first calling her my pupil in 
Buckland, to her last, farewell visit here, which I 
shall always remember. She has gone, but she has 
left in our hearts a sweet memorial. What a privi- 
lege it is so to live as to leave such a sweet savor, 
such a precious treasure in the hearts of surviving 
friends. 

" We have had a very prosperous year in worldly 
* Missionary in 



CORRESPONDENCE. 295 

things. Every thing is systematized, and Miss Moore 
and Miss Whitman urge forward the wheels so beau- 
tifully that all seems more than ever like clockwork. 
I enjoy very much having every thing done better by 
others than it can be by myself. If this pleasure con- 
tinues to increase as it has done for a year or two, I 
hope I may be prepared to be happy in being old, and 
in being laid aside as a useless thing. But in spirit- 
ual things we are less favored. There has been less 
interest than we have had any year since the first. 
Pray for us, that we may not receive all our good 
things in this life." 

To Mrs. ^afford. 

" SOITTH HADLET, May 1, 1843. 
" You express a desire that I should think of Bos- 
ton. How could I do less, when God has given you 
a heart so full of interest in our behalf? 'Ye knew 
what great conflict' I had about the time I' was in 
Boston, and you opened your heart to sympathize 
with me in behalf of those who had never seen your 
face in the flesh. I thought I had reason to believe 
that out of our family no one was like-minded with 
yourselves to care for our souls. How can I but 
remember you in return, and the desires of your 
hearts, and the work of your hands ? That infantile 
church has its own place, and a very important place, 
in the great system of means in the world. In bring- 
ing that church to occupy just its own place in this 
blessed work, the labors and responsibilities which 
Providence has assigned to yourself and husband, 
are by no means small. When I pour out my heart 
before the mercy-seat, I cannot but remember your 



LIFE OF MARY LTON. 

church, your labors in it, and the labors of your be- 
loved pastor. How much do you all need of heavenly 
wisdom, of holy love, and of godly zeal. May the 
Lord give you more than we can ask or think." 

To Mrs. Banister. 

"My, 1843. 

"My DEAR MRS. BANISTER I have finished my 
business so as to leave to-morrow. I have given 
directions to have your thirty-two copies of the 'Mis- 
sionary Offering' sent to you. Will you accompany 
each copy which you give away with one petition 
that, sooner or later, God would honor the exceeding 
riches of his condescending love in blessing it to the 
salvation of some souls ? I have thought more about 
the instrumentality of prayer, for a few months past, 
than ever before in the same time. What a field of 
usefulness is here opened for all, under all circum- 
stances. What a privilege is it to pray that God 
may be honored by all our friends, and by ourselves, 
at all times and in all places ; that the interests of 
immortal souls may be promoted, and Christ's king- 
dom advanced. It seems to me an infinite privilege 
to have my Mends pray that God may be honored in 
all I do, compared with their simply praying for my 
own comfort and happiness." 

To Mrs. Safford, Sept. 26, 1843, she writes : 
. "The thought of giving instruction to so many 
minds brings with it an increasing anxiety. For this 
I must reserve all the mental and moral strength which 
I can. I must not depend on the impulse of the mo- 
ment, and on the strength which I can rally for the 
occasion, so much as I have done the last six years. 



CORRESPONDENCE. 297 

When I think of the sudden and strong transitions of 
mind and heart which I have often been obliged to 
make, I feel that I can never make them again ; and 
even if I could, I could not sustain the shock many 
times more. 

" I have taken a health excursion among the hills, 
about forty miles distant, and just returned quite in- 
vigorated. I have a good old aunt among the hills. 
Her home is in the highest, and wildest, and roughest 
place which I ever visit. She is the last remnant of 
the old stock, the liveliest image of my dear mother. 
I always find the ride to her mountain home, and the 
communing with her as on former days, very sweet." 

Miss Fidelia Piske, mentioned in the next letter, 
entered the seminary in 1840, graduated in 1842, and 
then engaged in teaching in the seminary. In 1843, 
she accepted an invitation to go to Oroomiah, Persia, 
as a missionary. 

To Rev. Justin Perkins, D. D., of Oroomiah, Persia. 
" SOTTCH HADLEY, Feb. 6, 1844. 

" DEAR SIR Tour kind letter, bearing date July 7, 
I have received, for which please accept my cordial 
thanks. Perhaps you may occasionally grant me 
other like favors. 

"Your testimony to Miss Fiske's happiness and 
usefulness is very gratifying. Her own letters, too, 
are all suited to make her friends happy in having 
given her up for such a work. It is my opinion that 
the leadings of Providence should be decisive to jus- 
tify our encouraging an unmarried female to go on a 
foreign mission. My impressions on this subject were 
13* 



LIFE OF MAET LTON. 

strengthened as I saw Misses Fiske and Myers bidding 
farewell to friends and home, and kindred and coun- 
try. How different was their situation from that of 
the rest of the company. Every other missionary had 
one intimate friend, and that one the dearest friend on 
earth. But Miss Fiske has been admirably prepared 
by the endowments of nature, by the dealings of Prov- 
idence, and by the influence of grace, for just such a 
sacrifice. I rejoice that her heavenly Father has called 
her to this self-denying work, and that she was not 
disobedient to the heavenly voice. I rejoice, too, that 
the finger of Providence pointed her out to go, rather 
than any other one about whom we had conversation. 
I doubt not that she will find many ways of doing good 
besides that of teaching. As you wander along to- 
gether, a lonely band through this vale of tears, and 
as you are laboring and suffering for Christ's sake, I 
doubt not that Miss Fiske will often be able, in her 
own quiet way, to come to one heart and another as 
an angel of mercy and kindness. Sometimes she may 
be able to give to some of her companions in toil a 
cup of consolation, when others, who would fain enjoy 
the same privilege, have not the time nor the strength 
granted them. 

" Miss Piske has been very faithful and successful 
in writing letters. I think this not among the least 
of the ways given her to serve the cause. 

" You speak with interest of your visit to Amer- 
ica, and to our beloved institution. Your remem- 
brance of us is gratifying to our hearts. I rejoice 
that I was permitted to see so much of yon while in 
this country. I enjoyed your visits here very much, 



CORRESPONDENCE. 299 

and the memory is still precious. We love to recog- 
nize your mission and your name, as well as that of 
our beloved friend Miss Fiske. I would rejoice and 
thank God in your behalf, that your return, your visit, 
and your departure, were attended with so many cir- 
cumstances comforting to yourselves and favorable 
to the cause. Among all the duties that devolve on 
a missionary, it is far from being the least responsible, 
to be called in providence to visit his native land, 
and to meet all the people and all things which he 
must meet, and to make everywhere an honest, a 
faithful, and a salutary impression an impression 
worthy of Him who came from heaven to earth on a 
great mission to save a lost and guilty world. 

" Give my very affectionate regards to Mrs. Per- 
kins.* May you both have strength given you, for 
many years to come, to enjoy the privilege of labor- 
ing and suffering for Christ's sake. 

" Give my affectionate remembrance to Mar To- 
hannan. I hope he will live to see many missiona- 
ries go from his country to different parts of Asia. 
My love to Miss Myers." 

Miss Lyon to !Miss Fiske. 

" March 4, 1S44 

" MY DEAR Miss FISKE It is one year this week 
since we were in Boston together. I have often de- 
sired to write you of the passing events, some of deep 
and thrilling interest, which have transpired since 
that time. As my mind and heart have been borne 
along upon the swelling wave, I have thought of you, 

* Mrs. Perkins was a pupil at Ipswich. 



300 LIFE OF MARY LYOtf. 

and thought, too, that I should love to have you know 
what "was passing among us. But I have almost done 
writing letters, except on business. I can never again 
sit down to write what will be worth sending so far 
by mail. But in our little box for you I cannot re- 
frain from depositing a note. But what shall I write? 
Every thing will be told you over and over again, ex- 
cept it may be some of the passing thoughts and feel- 
ings in my own breast. And first I would thank you 
sincerely for your faithfulness and promptness in writ- 
ing to me, and to us all. I believe it is one prominent 
way offered you of doing good to write to this semi- 
nary. I hope you will have mind, heart, and strength 
to continue to do in this respect as you have begun. 
I shall enjoy, in my turn, receiving an occasional let- 
ter, though I may never write you again." 

To Mrs. Banister. 

"MoxsoN, Sept. 3, 1844. 

" MY DEAB MBS. BAITCSTER I am now on my way 
to Boston, where I shall spend a few days, and return 
to attend the meeting of the Board at Worcester. 
Shall we not see you at Worcester? Is it not the 
duty and privilege of Christians to carry this mission- 
ary meeting on their hearts to the throne of grace? 
Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain 
who build it. What a privilege it is to be allowed 
to cooperate in the least degree in the great work of 
bringing this world to the love and service of our 
blessed Redeemer. As we advance in life, may we 
have a more single eye to the glory of God in all we 
do, in all we desire, and in all we feel. May we have 
deeper and more affecting views of the value of the 



CORRESPONDENCE. 301 

soul, and of the unspeakable and incomprehensible 
price which has been paid for its ransom. I often feel 
that my days are rapidly passing, and that I have but 
a few remaining. But these remaining days will be 
precious, if spent for the cause of Christ. And what 
an unspeakable privilege is it to indulge the hope 
that when our work is done, we may be admitted, 
through infinite grace, to dwell for ever with the 
Lord." 

To Mrs. Banister. 

"SOUTH HADLET, July 23, 1845. 
" Mr VERY DEARFRIESD I have allowed your letter 
to lie by one mail, and if you had been with us yester- 
day morning you would not think it strange. About 
three o'clock in the morning our building was struck 
with lightning, but it was saved from a speedy and 
dreadful destruction. Do you recollect a closet over 
our ovens for drying towels ? The frame to hold the 
towels was moved on iron rails. The electric fluid 
was attracted to these rails, and, as I suppose, in a 
moment every towel was lighted to an intense blaze, 
and in a few minutes the whole closet was like a burn- 
ing oven. I think I heard the report when the light- 
ning struck, and in less than five minutes I heard the 
cry off re. In a few minutes more, I think it would 
have found its way to the woodwork and doors lead- 
ing to the stairways, and would have been past con- 
trol. I have not time to tell you how we were deliv- 
ered. My mind has been affected by this striking 
illustration of eternal things, and of our dependence 
on that unseen hand by which we have been saved 
from everlasting burning." 



302 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

To Hiss Fiske. 

"January 15, 1846. 

" Ton sympathize in all the tilings which are pass- 
ing among us, and especially in those events which 
relate to the missionary cause. I know that some of 
your kind friends will be sure to tell you that Miss 
Moore is really going. It will surprise you, as it has 
many here. The first question generally is, l What 
does Miss Lyon think of it V I have nothing to say 
in all these things, only to ask that the will of the 
Lord may be done, and to submit to all the dispensa- 
tions of Providence, whether with or without means, 
to carry out our plans. This is certainly a great 
event to us, and especially to me. My only wish con- 
cerning it is, that it may be for the furtherance of the 
gospel. We know so little of the great plans of God, 
that it is wisest and safest and sweetest to leave all 
with him." 

To Mrs. Banister. 

" March 25, 1846. 

" I wrote to Mrs. Breese of E , Illinois, last 

month, making inquiries about her present situation 
and prospects. She writes, in reply, c I am now teach- 
ing a select school in our own house, sixteen by thirty 
feet, one story and a half high. We have seventeen 
scholars, eleven of whom board with us. I sit day 
after day with my babe, a large, resolute boy of five 
and a half months, in my arms, teaching them as well 
as I can.' Mrs. Breese has already sent out a few 
teachers from her school, and several more are pre- 
paring for the same avocation. Most of them could 
have attended school nowhere else. Such schools as 



CORRESPONDENCE. 303 

Mrs. Breese is teaching must do much for the Vest. 
The larger schools cannot meet all their wants and 
if such a one as hers could be established wherever 
pupils could be collected together, or even where the 
influence of a home missionary is felt, much would be 
done to bless our nation." 

At the opening of the school in the autumn of 
1846, Miss Lyon, and her associate Miss "Whitman, 
missed from their ranks three of their most valued 
fellow-laborers. Miss Abigail Moore * Miss Martha 
E. Chapin,t and Miss Lucy Lyon,J were transfer- 
red that year from their work in the seminary to 
the more needy field in Asia. They had been some 
years engaged in aiding others to prepare for the 
work of the Lord among the heathen. They now 
entered upon it themselves. Misses Moore and Lyon 
were affectionate and beloved neices of Miss Lyon. 

In a letter to Mrs. Banister, Nov. 27, 1846, Miss 
Lyon says, " I have passed through many scenes, the 
last year, of deep and tender interest to me, concen- 
trating the feelings of many years into one, and obvi- 
ously increasing my gray hairs. I feel the loss of my 
two nieces very much. I feel the loss socially more 
than in our business, though they were both very 
important to the school. Mrs. Burgess has gone, and 
I could not, as I expected, go with her to Boston. 
It came so near the time of commencing school, that 
I thought it not prudent to use the extra strength it 

* Married, Sept., 1846, to Rev. Ebenezer Burgess, Satara, 
India. f Married, Sept., 1846, to Rev. AJlen Hazen, Ah- 
medmiggnr, India. J Married, Sept., 1846, to Rev. Edward 
C. Lord, Missionary to China. 



504 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

would require, especially after the excitement and 
fatigue connected with, so great changes in the school. 
Kj niece Miss Lyoi* (now Mrs. Lord) has just come 
to make us her last visit. She and her husband ex- 
pect to sail next month from New York to China. I 
had depended on going to be with her a little while, 
at the time of her sailing, but my health will not 
allow. 77 

Miss Lyon and Miss Whitman especially missed 
the cooperation of these friends and assistants in labor- 
ing for the spiritual good of their charge. 

"Then, 77 says Miss Whitman, "when we felt so 
weak from losing so many teachers on whom we had 
been accustomed to lean, the Lord showed us that our 
host, like Gideon 7 s, was yet too large. Early in the 
year, Miss Lyon was confined to her room by a severe . 
lung affection and general prostration. She was 
scarcely able to speak to the school for the whole 
term. The morning exercises in school were con- 
ducted by the Rev. Mr. Hawks, and were eminently 
blessed. Among the impenitent there were tMrty 
old scholars, who had listened to Miss Lyon 7 s instruc- 
tions, some for one, others for two years, who, it was 
feared, had become gospel hardened. Of the new 
scholars, about sixty were without hope, making ninety 
in all. Miss Lyon had been accustomed to meet this 
class of persons on Sabbath evenings, and labor with 
them for-their conviction and conversion. The teacher 
who was appointed to take Miss Lyon's place on this 
occasion met them, and conducted the meeting to the 
best of her ability. She went from the meeting dis- 
couraged and despairing, feeling that she could not 



CORRESPONDENCE. 305 

again undertake to gain the attention of ninety care- 
less, unconverted persons to the great truths of the 
gospel. Before she was called to hold another such 
meeting, sixty of the number were rejoicing in a 
Christian hope. The meeting which she had so much 
dreaded became a sweet season of intimate and heav- 
enly communion. Two Sabbaths had intervened be- 
tween these meetings. On the evening of the first, 
the impenitent with the rest of the school had, as 
usual, attended the monthly concert ; and on the even- 
ing of the second, a public service in the church of 
the village had supplied the place of Miss Lyon's 
usual meeting. So rapid was the work, that at the 
appointed hours Miss Lyon's large parlor was crowd- 
ed with anxious inquirers. One of the teachers as- 
sisted Miss Lyon by asking questions to ascertain 
their state of mind and points of difficulty. Miss 
Lyon was then able, in a weak voice, to give such 
general instruction as would meet their case. 

" God provided a supply of helpers where it was 
least looked for. A circle of youthful Christians, 
members of the Middle class, banded themselves to- 
gether to help the teachers by their prayers and efforts. 
Their earnest and constant labors for the impenitent 
were, next to the public religious instruction, the 
most important agency employed by the Spirit in the 
promotion of this happy work." 

Prom a journal kept at the seminary for the mis- 
sionary sisters, we make a few extracts relative to 
this interesting work of grace. 

" Dec. 9. To-day Miss Lyon invited to her room 
those whose hearts were moved by the Spirit's teach- 



306 LIFE OF MARY LTON. 

ings. Nineteen were present ; most seemed deeply 
impressed. We cannot but feel that God is in the 
midst of us. Christians are beginning to pray more 
earnestly. Many seem prostrate in the dust before 
the awful presence of Him who searcheth the secrets 
of every soul. 

"Dec. 12. Truly this has been a day of blessing. 
Eight are now expressing a hope in Christ. The 
interest appears to be deepening and extending every 
hour. Thus far, those who have indulged hope have 
been principally from the Middle class. In fact the 
interest seemed to commence there with a few praying 
hearts. 

" Dec. 14. Still the interest is increasing. It 
goes from heart to heart silently, yet powerfully. 
The whole house is as still as on the Sabbath. Every 
footstep is light every voice is hushed. Several 
have asked to be excused from school exercises, so 
intense are their feelings. Many in the Senior class 
without hope begin to inquire for Him who is the 
way, the truth, and the life. 

" Dec. 15. There are now more than twenty who 
hope they have found the Saviour precious as he never 
was before. Five of the number are from the Senior 
class. Some of the most careless are awakened, and 
anxiously inquire, ' What shall I do to be saved V 

" Dec. 16. To-day is recreation day ; but it has 
seemed more like the Sabbath. We can only say, 
God is here. There is scarcely one who is indif- 
ferent. 

" Dec. 18. We had a short religious exercise in 
the hall this afternoon. Miss Lyon's word to us was, 



CORRESPONDENCE. 307 

'Say little pray much.' This evening, thirty-one 
who trust that they have recently consecrated them- 
selves upon the altar of their God, met for a prayer- 
meeting. May the future of their lives prove that 
this sacrifice is no partial one. 

" Dec. 25. We have had sad tidings to-day. Miss 

B , one of our teachers, who went home a few 

weeks ago in feeble health, has been summoned to 
the spirit land. Miss Lyon mourns deeply her early 
removal. She had anticipated much from her. But 
with her sweet submission she says, ' I feel that it is 
a blessed privilege to fit dear ones for heaven.' "With 
tears coursing down her cheeks, she added, ' I thank 
God that I have not yet heard of the death of any 
pupil of this beloved seminary who was without hope 
in Jesus. If any have died thus, I have been spared 
the trial of hearing of it. 

"Dec. 30. The Spirit still abides with us. There 
have been signal manifestations of God's power in 
this revival. * Behold, the Lord hath passed by us, 
not in the great and strong wind, not in the earth- 
quake, not in the fire, but in the still small voice. 7 " 

To Hon. D. Safford. 

" SOUTH HADLEY, Dec. 3, 1846. 
" My health is much better. I can now ride, and 
I am taking this tonic every pleasant day with great 
advantage* Let me know how dear Mrs. Safford is, 
when you write. When shall I set my eyes on your 
faces again ? Perhaps you know that my niece Lucy 
Lyon, now Mrs. Lord, is going to China on a mission 
under the Baptist Board. She and her husband are 
now here, making their last visit. They sail from 



308 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

New York some time this month. If my health im 
proves, I may go and be with them at the time they 
sail. Perhaps you will ask why I do not sit for my 
portrait. I have thought of it, but think I cannot at 
this time. 

"How afflicting is the providence which has re- 
moved Dr. Armstrong. My mind dwells much on his 
sudden transition to his eternal home* How must 
that world of glory have burst on his astonished 
vision ! But we are left to mourn. Yet let us re- 
member that it is no accident which has taken him 
away. It is a stroke of the divine hand, planned, 
directed, and executed by infinite wisdom and infi- 
nite goodness. May we not yet see, and may he not 
even now see, how it comes in to forward the great 
work of saving a lost and dying world? What a 
place does Christ occupy as an atoning sacrifice in 
all the great things of divine Providence ! "What a 
book is there yet to be opened and read in the glo- 
rious doctrine of the atonement I" 

In June, 1847, Miss Mary S. Eice, who had been 
three years connected with the seminary, left the 
country to join Miss Piske in Oroomiah, Persia. In 
a letter which Miss Lyon sent to Miss Piske by Miss 
Eice, she also inclosed one for Miss Eice, which she 
might receive on her arrival. We give a part of the 
note to Miss Piske, and the note to Miss Eice. 

" SOUTH HADLET, June 16, 184*7. 
MY DEAR, MY VEBY DEAB MlSS FlSKfr How I 

should love, if I ever did such a thing, to write you a 
long letter. I would not try to repeat the many pass- 
ing events which I hope some of your kind friends 



CORRESPONDENCE. 309 

continue to tell you. Nor would I tell you any 
new truth, nor any new duty, nor any new prom- 
ise, nor any new encouragement to labor and suffer 
for Christ's sake. I would not attempt to point out 
to you any new resting-place for the feet of weary 
pilgrims on their way to the celestial city. No ; I 
would only repeat, if I could, a few of the many and 
precious things which you already know, and on which 
your heart now delights to dwell. I would only, 
while I am in this tabernacle, now and then write 
you a few words, stirring you up by way of remem- 
brance. I would have you, after my decease, also 
have these things always in remembrance. 

" How I should love to tell you how a kind Prov- 
idence has led me along ever since last we met, and 
last parted ; how one comfort has been taken away, 
and another granted ; how good, very good God has 
been to us ; and how the promise, 'As thy days, so 
shall thy strength be/ has never failed. 

"Finally, I should love to tell you how my heart 
goes with Miss Rice, as I seem to send her forth as 
one of my own children ; how I now commend her 
to you, to your acquaintance, to your love, to your 
sympathy, to your prayers, to a participation in all 
your labors, your joys, and your sorrows. May you 
both live long, together be abundant in labors, ear- 
nest in prayer, and rich in faith, and at last may you 
receive a crown of glory which shall never fade 
away. 

" My very affectionate regards to Mr. and Mrs. 
Perkins. Many thanks for what he has written mo 
in days that are past Will he not write me again? 



310 LIFE OP MARY LYON. 

Ask Mm to be a father to another of my daugh 
tors." 

" SOUTH FATOLEY, June 17, 1847. 

" MY DEAR Miss EICE When Miss Fiske shall hand 
you this little note yon will be far, far away. Kind 
Providence preserving your life, I trust this will find 
you in your new, your chosen, your adopted home. 

" Your eyes will there look on the same glorious 
sun, the same beautiful moon, and the same sparkling 
stars, that ours do in your own native land. Will it 
not be pleasant, when you are removed from all that 
once met your eyes, to look up to the heavens, and 
think that the eyes of your father and your mother 
may be looking at the same objects ? But nearer than 
this can we come together, when we approach the 
mercy-seat. You will be no farther from that pre- 
cious place of resort, no farther from your God, no 
farther from your last and best home in heaven. My 
dear, dear friend, be thou faithful unto death, and 
thou shalt have a crown of life." 

To Mrs. Banister. 

" SOUTH HADLEY, April 27, 1848. 

" We have again received a spiritual blessing in 
our family, according to the riches of the grace of 
Jesus Christ. During our first term, about fifty ex- 
pressed hope. During the last term, there has been 
a continued, gradual, progressive interest. Some one 
case of hope has occurred nearly every week ; still, 
there are about thirty without hope. 77 

'' June 5. Will you not come and make us a visit 
the week of our anniversary ? It happens the first 
Thursday in August. The examination will occupy 



CORRESPONDENCE. 31) 

two or three days preceding. You have a standing 
invitation to come, and I enjoy the belief that you 
always will if you can. I do not know that yon can 
realize what a great pleasure it is to me to have your- 
self and husband with us on these occasions. 

"Our dear Mr. Condit I am reminded of him 
every way; I shall be especially at the time of our 
anniversary. I loved him as a friend on earth ; if pos- 
sible, my spirit loves him more as a friend in heaven. 
His memory is precious, very precious. But we have 
another man of God in his stead, Mr. Laurie. For 
this I would thank God. I should love to tell you all 
about the dealings of our heavenly Father in bringing 
him here, in helping him along, and the various occur- 
rences, all interesting to my own feelings, connected 
with his becoming our pastor. But this I must leave 
till I have the privilege of communing with you fiicc 
to face. 

" I have recently been reading, or rather, am now 
reading McCheyne's ' Life, Letters, and Lectures/ It 
is just what I need the sincere milk dealt out in 
childlike simplicity and godly sincerity. It is just 
what I need to feed and refresh me when I am so 
tired that I can do nothing with strong meat. With 
my feeble strength, and with the burden laid upon me, 
I feel that henceforth my reading must be mostly for 
another world. I do want to commune more with 
your spirit on earth before we go home to our rest in 
heaven." 

September 1, 1848, Miss Lyon addressed to her 
pupils on heathen ground the following letter : 



31Ss LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

" MY DEAR MISSIONARY DAUGHTEBS It has been 
a gratification to me that you have received, through 

Miss W 7 s instrumentality, the journal so long 

kept by the pen of dear Miss T , who is now to be 

one of your number. I have enjoyed the thought that 
you would thus keep along with the little occurrences 
at your Holyoke home. Often have I desired to beg 
the privilege of inserting a little note, with the salu- 
tation of mine own hand. But communion like this, 
even 'with ink and pen,' I seldom can enjoy upon earth. 
There is one place of meeting, of sweet commun- 
ion of spirit, when absent in body. There I love to 
ask our heavenly Father to bless you all, to bless you 
individually in your work, to bless the dear compan- 
ions of your missionary joys and your missionary toils^ 
and to bless too the children whom God has given 
you in the land of your adoption. But there is an- 
other and better home than this. There I trust we 
shall all meet, and hold such communion as earth has 
never known. May you all have grace to run with 
patience "the race set before you, looking unto Jesus 
in all your missionary course. 

"As you will learn, Miss W had it in her 

heart to keep the journal for you this year herself. 
But Providence has otherwise decided. Her health 
will not allow her even to be an observer of the 
events at your former happy home. I anticipated 
much pleasure to herself in writing, and to you in 
reading from the pen of her whom you all know and 
love. To supply her place, my thoughts have rested 

on Misses H and C , as being those whom 

you all remember. They have consented to take it. 



COREESPONDBNCB. 313 

" In this arrangement I am very happy, as you 
will feel more the link of friendship than if coming 
from the pen of one whom you have never seen. With 
some of you they were class-mates, seat-mates, or room- 
mates. With others of you they were fellow-teachers, 
striving with you for the upbuilding of Christ's king- 
dom in this little miniature of a world. You will 
feel more sure of their personal sympathy, because 
while writing for you they are writing also for a dear 
brother and sister far off in India. You will remem- 
ber that we expect from you a return. We are aware 
of the effort this must cost you amid all your other 
cares and abundant labors. But we trust that this 
effort will not be in vain, as a small item in your 
missionary work. While I am writing this, I am 
forcibly reminded of the probability that one of your 
number will never read it one dear to my heart, my 
only sister's own daughter, and to me a daughter in- 
deed, and even more than a daughter. Yes, I think 
from day to day of dear Mrs. Burgess as now in heav- 
en ; though it is possible, in the events of Providence, 

that her life is spared. Mrs. W too, another 

of our missionary band, has finished her short work, 
and gone home to her rest. May you who still live 
work while the day lasts, and may you long be spared, 
and yet gather in many sheaves from the opening 
fields, which are now white and ready for the har- 
vest. While life and memory are spared, you will 
be remembered and loved by me." 

In September, 1848, Miss Lyon passed an hour or 
two at Springfield with her old friends Mrs. Ezekiel 
Eussell, then of that place, and Mrs. Miron Winslow 

Maryljoa. 14 



314 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

of Madras, formerly the Misses Billings of 
Both of them had been pupils of Miss Lyon, and Mrs. 
Bussell had also been one of her assistant teachers in 
the Buckland and Ashfield schools. From Mrs. Bus 
sell we have the following notice of that "visit : 

" Miss Lyon was spending the day in Springfield, 
and while walking the street, she unexpectedly met 
my sister Mrs. Winslow, then on the eve of her sec- 
ond departure for India. Perceiving that this was a 
last occasion for an interview with one of her pupils, 
she readily accepted an invitation to take tea with us. 
At the table was a gentleman who attended school 
with her at the academy in Ashfield. Many years 
had since passed. He was at that time a mere lad, 
and on one occasion had played the part of Moses 
in the bulrushes, while she took the part of the 
mother. The scene was revived, and along with it a 
train of circumstances and events on which her active 
mind and warm heart expatiated with an interest pe- 
culiar to herself. The effect on her was electric ; and 
the whole company at the table felt the power of the 
current as it passed along the invisible wires of thought 
and feeling. 

" The founder of that school in Ashfield, said she, 
was a man of genuine benevolence. He was in the 
habit of visiting the different schools of the town, and 
when he did, his eye was sure to fix on every promis- 
ing scholar, and a word was dropped that never failed 
to awaken brighter hopes and give fresher vigor in 
the work of acquisition. Perceiving that many were 
in moderate circumstances, and could not be sent 
abroad for the purpose of an education, he founded 



CORRESPONDENCE. 315 

that academy, the genial influences of -which, ehe re- 
marked, first wakened to life her own mental ener- 
gies, and gave her an impulse that had never ceased. 
That institution, she continued, has done immense 
good. Many who otherwise would never have had 
access to any thing worthy the name of literary ad- 
vantages, received there the first rudiments of an ed- 
ucation. In that quiet retreat among the hills, the 
intellect was stirred, the taste refined, and intensity 
given to the desire for knowledge. To mind and 
heart, that institution was what the mountain airs are 
to the physical powers. And I can perceive, she said, 
that those who have gone forth from it have bright- 
ened and cheered "and blessed the pathways which 
they have trod. It was a sunny scene that opened on 
her view at the table, and all seemed to share with 
her in the exhilaration. 

" How thankful ought I to be, she continued, on 
returning to the parlor, for the incidents that have 
revived these pleasant portions of my life. This was' 
unexpected. My duties for years have been so urgent, 
and my cares so pressing, as to shut these past scenes 
from my thoughts. But seeing you, Mrs. "Winslow, 
and your sister, brings before me, fresh as yesterday, 
those winter scenes in my Ashfield and Buckland 
schools, over which the Spirit of the living God hov- 
ered, and moved in the bosom of many a pupil, I trust, 
the pulsations of that life which is spiritual and eter- 
nal. And my friend here, Mr. S , once the infant 

in the bulrushes, has carried me still farther back in my 
career, and made the morning shine on the noon, or 
the evening, as I now begin to think it is, of my life. 



316 LIFE OF MART LYON. 

Something of this I have before experienced. Former 
pupils have often met me, -whose countenances had 
faded from my recollection, when the mention of their 
names would flash whole trains of delightful associa- 
tions upon my mind. This, I apprehend, will be one 
source of our happiness in heaven. As we move to 
and fro amid the myriads there gathered on the mount 
of vision, we shall meet one after another, now forgot- 
ten, who will bring different portions of our lives to 
our recollection, filling us with untold wonder and 
joy. Oh, I love to think of the joy in reserve for the 
righteous, and of the various sources of it at the com- 
mand of the Redeemer, who is himself the crowning 
attraction of heaven. Mrs. Winslow replied, Tour 
pupils are going up to participate in this joy from all 
quarters of the globe, and it must be pleasant for you 
to think of it. Yes, was her answer, I often think of 
the happiness of being permitted, through grace, to 
welcome one after another, as they finish the toils of 
earth, to the rest of heaven. 

" My fiftieth birthday, she continued, was the most 
solemn day of my life. I devoted it to reflection and 
prayer. I felt that half a century had been given me 
for exertion, that opportunities had been furnished 
for usefulness in a noble sphere, and my heart went 
up to God in grateful praise that he had enabled me 
to bear such burdens, sustain such toils, and accom- 
plish something, as I devoutly trust, for the good of 
the world and the cause of Christ. Half a century ! 
The thought all but overwhelmed me. Yet it had 
been given me, and it was gone gone with its burdens, 
its toils, and its scenes of precious, thrilling delight, 



CORRESPONDENCE. 317 

I was sensible of deficiencies, of great deficiencies. 
These I regretted. But I could not regret that the 
toil of half a century had ended. It was certain that 
another such period of exertion of cheerful exertion 
it had always been to me would never be allotted 
on earth. I was certain that before another fifty 
years should elapse, I should wake up amid far differ- 
erent scenes, and far other thoughts would fill my 
mind, and other employments would engage my at- 
tention. 

"You, Mrs. Winslow, are to be separated from 
your children. But it is a sacrifice for Christ. In 
heaven, we shall never regret any sacrifice however 
painful, or labor however protracted, made or per- 
formed here for his cause." 

In December, 1848, Miss Lyon addressed to Miss 
Hannah White the following kind and sympathizing 
letter on the death of her parents. 

SOUTH HADLBY, Dec. 14, 1848. 

" MY VERY DEAR FRIEND I have received your 
letter, and should have replied immediately, but I 
wanted to write a little, besides on mere business. I 
wanted at least to express a little of that full heart of 
sympathy which I have had in your behalf. But now 
a severe headache on the one hand, and a conviction 
that I must not let another mail pass on the other, 
will give me but little opportunity. Allow me to say, 
that in the bereavements through which you have 
passed, I too have felt that I had lost a father and a 
mother. Who else living has any such claim, com- 
paratively, to a place in my heart? These events 
have brought fresh to my mind my first acquaintance 



818 LIFE OF MA.BY LTON. 

with your dear family, and the many acts of unfeigned 
friendship which I received, as I was creeping my 
way along towards an humble place in my Master's 
service. In a very special manner do I remember 
your father's great parental kindness to me. With 
what a cheering face would he ask me to come direct- 
ly to his house from the stage, and depend on Mm to 
carry me to see my dear mother, just as if he expected 
it, and in a way to make me feel perfectly at home. 
Tour house has indeed been to me a sweet home. I 
must go and see that dear home before it is broken 
up, 

" 1 have many things which I want to say, but can- 
not with pen and ink. Shortly, I hope, I may see 
you face to face. If there is any time when I should 
not find you at home, please write and let me know. 
I wish I could meet your brother, and his wife also, 
it would seem so much like meeting a remnant of the 
family." 

The Eev. Mr. Hawks writes, October, 1857, "It 
was my blessed privilege to be associated with Miss 
Lyon for fourteen years. Nothing she ever said or 
did gave me the idea that she thought of what would 
be for her interest, her ease, comfort, or reputation, 
except as identified with the great object on which 
her heart was set. I regard her as a most remarka- 
ble woman, and believe the revelations of eternity will 
show her to have been among the most distinguished - 
benefactors of her race. When will such another ap- 
pear ? I am thankful that so good a memoir of her 
has been obtained." 



THE LAST LETTERS. 319 



CHAPTER XII. 

THE LAST LETTERS, THE LAST VISIT, THE LAST 
INSTRUCTION, A3STD THE DEPARTURE. 

THUS successfully have we seen the great enter- 
prise to which Miss Lyon had consecrated the vigor 
of her days carried forward for nearly twelve years. 
But the hour of release was at hand, and we cannot 
but feel a deep interest to witness the close of a life 
so happy and useful. A few weeks before her last 
sickness, God seems to have led her to her chosen 
retreat in Monson, that she might enjoy a favorable 
opportunity of preparation for her departure. The 
tone of the following letters shows how well she im- 
proved it, though God mercifully hid his purpose from 
her. She thought the opportunity she enjoyed was 
intended to prepare her for usefulness on earth ; lie 
meant it to fit her for a higher sphere. 

To Mrs. Burgess. 

MONSON, Jan. 20, 1849. 

"MY VERT DEAR NIECE Here I am again with 
my dear Mrs. Porter. She proposes that we should 
again write a joint letter to comfort you in your pil- 
grimage and voluntary exile for Christ's sake. This 
I am very happy to do, though I think it will not take 
a very large part of the sheet to assure you of my con- 
tinued remembrance of you, and of former scenes. I 
wrote once before in Mrs. Porter's letter, two years 
ago I have scarcely had a vacation of any sort since 
then. But I am now enjoying an old-fashioned vaca- 
tion of real rest in this sweetest of all resting-places. 



320 LIFE OP MART LTON. 

Miss Hazen proposed to stay and take all the car*, 
and let me go away. I decided to accept. I began 
a week beforehand to arrange all things. I had my 
plans made out in writing, and left all behind me. 
Here I can quietly read, write letters, ride, and -visit, 
with nothing to annoy me, and with scarcely a thought 
of home, escept as I attempt to send up my feeble 
petitions that the Holy Spirit may come down and 
dwell with ns. This is the more remarkable, as Miss 
Whitman is away. But one providence meets an- 
other. I had many things planned and arranged 
last year for this, so that this proves one of the easiest 
years. Such years come along now and then. 

" My health has been unusually good this year, 
thus far. So unlike has it been to the winter after 
you left us, that I have great cause for gratitude. 
But at all times, whether I have more or less strength, 
I feel that I am fast hastening to my eternal home, 
my home of rest in the bosom of my God, as I hope. 
Still, I trust I may have a little more work to do on 
earth, and that little may I do faithfully. By grace 
I am the little that I am, and by grace alone would 
I do the little that I hope to do. The doctrine of 
grace, in all its aspects and relations, is more and 
more precious here; and what will it be hereafter, 
when we shall be permitted to join in that song of 
Moses and the Lamb to Him who has redeemed us, 
and washed our robes, and made them white in his 
own blood ! By grace we are redeemed, by grace we 
are saved, by grace we are received and sanctified, 
by grace we have our work given us, and by grace 
strength and a heart to do it. 



THE LAST LETTERS. 321 

" My work is made up, as you know, of an endless 
number of nameless duties interwoven if not confused 
together. But still my work is a good work. By the 
enduring grace of God, am I permitted to enjoy such 
a goodly heritage of toil and labor. Every hour I 
feel not only the need of divine aid to lead me, but 
of an internal, divine power, to carry me along in the 
right path. It is ever a pathway of grace, unmerited 
grace.. When I am about my work, sometimes called 
unexpectedly and suddenly from one thing to another, 
I whisper in my heart, * Lord, help me to be patient, 
help me to remember, and help me to be faithful. 
Lord, enable me to do all for Christ's sake, and to go 
forward, leaning on the bosom of his infinite grace.' 
How amazing is that goodness that allows us to do 
all for Christ's sake, and always to pray in his name! 
May you experience largely of that grace which alone 
can make your spared life a blessing. 

" Much love to Mr. Burgess, Mr. and Mrs. Hazen, 
Mrss. Wilder and Fairbanks, and Mrs. Ballantine. 
The thought is pleasant to me that an early friend />f 
mine is your fellow-laborer."* 

To Miss Whitman. 

"Moxsox, Jan. 22, 1849. 

"During two or three years past, I have been try- 
ing to mature in the literary department the changes 
which sprung up in the agitation of the waters on 
Miss Moore's leaving, and I have been trying to ma- 
ture things, too, in the domestic department. I had 
every thing about ready for the work of this year, 

* Mrs. Ballantine, a pupil in the school at Deny and at 
Ipswich. 

14* 



322 LIFE OP MARY LTON. 

without much planning, or agitation, or change. 
Thus it has come to pass that this has been the easi- 
est year we have almost ever had; and that this 
easy year should come right along when you are 
called away in Providence, is surely no planning of 
mine. So it is. If one thing is made comfortable 
and easy, we may expect some corresponding trial. 
If trials and perplexities come, then we may look 
for some comforting, consoling providence. "We may 
always expect enough of trial and difficulties to make 
us love to sing, 

" ' Is this, dear Lord, that thorny road 
- r That leads TLS to the mount of Gk>d? r 

and enough of consolation and support and blessing 
to make us feel that Christ's yoke is easy and his bur- 
den light. 

" I feel rather anxious about you, and shall till I 
hear again. I shall not send this sheet till I hear 
from you. My heart's desire and prayer to God is, 
that you may be kept in the arms of Him who never 
slranbereth nor sleepeth, and who numbereth the very 
hairs of our heads. I pray that you may experience 
much of the grace of God in body, soul, and spirit. 
As for me, I always carry about enough of myself to 
be a fit occasion for loathing and abhorrence, for dis- 
trusting myself, and casting off all confidence in the 
flesh. But from day to day, I think I do find crumbs 
enough falling from the table to prove the infinite 
mercy and long-suffering of God, and enough to prove 
the exceeding grace of the gospel, and enough of 
strength in times of extremity to prove that there is 
an arm on which we may lean with safety. I want to 



THE LAST LETTERS. 323 

ask you to pray for me in a very special manner about 
one thing. It is for divine guidance and strength in 
giving religious instruction. Pray that I may have 
hid in my own heart all that I attempt to say. Pray 
that I may speak the words of truth, every jot and 
tittle that which God sees and knows to be truth. 
Pray that hearts may receive the truth in honesty, 
sincerity, and faith. Pray that in these seasons, God 
may be magnified and glorified. We have great rea- 
son to fear and tremble about our next term. Vaca- 
tion came just as the religious interest seemed to be 
spreading from heart to heart. Miss Hazen will write 
you all general facts, I suppose. Between twenty and 
thirty expressed hope. I miss you most of all in the 
care of souls. But we know not how much you may 
do by your prayers." 

In her last letter to her friend and associate Miss 
Whitman, dated the 15th of February, she says : 

" I need not tell you we were much gratified last 
evening in receiving a letter from Miss Whitman. 
First I thank God for your expressed desires to live 
for God alone. Next would I thank him for your 
continued desire to spend your strength for the good 
of this precious institution, the founding and building 
up of which I feel more and more to be the handiwork 
of God. I trust that you will have fifteen years add- 
ed to your life, if we will all suffer the trial of your 
taking a thorough rest and recruiting now. I hope 
fifteen years, too, will be granted to you after I shall 
cease from my labors." 

Suggesting a course for Miss Whitman, in. her 
feeble state of health, she says, " I have thought that 



&24 LIFE OF MAET LYON. 

during the vacation in the autumn, we might journey 
together, or visit and read together, or both, some- 
where among the mountains and in the quiet valleys 
of New England. So you see that I am calculating 
on quite a resting time next autumn myself." 

And indeed she found that "resting time," but 
not on earth. It was among celestial scenery that 
her autumn and her eternity were to be spent, and in 
sweet converse with her Saviour and with some of the 
spirits whom she had been instrumental in guiding to 
that blessed world. Often had her thoughts turned 
to that better laud with strong desire; but it is obvi- 
ous she did not deem it so near. One week previous 
she Had said in a note to Miss Whitman, " I often feel 
a longing of heart to sit down and tell you some of 
my joys, or sorrows, or anxieties. Then I feel that 
you are absent indeed. But I get along. Sometimes 

I make a substitute of Miss , sometimes I ponder 

all in my own heart alone, and always I endeavor to 
go to Him who can be touched with the feeling of our 
infirmities. This world is to be used faithfully and 
diligently, but only as a waymark to that better home, 
where, I trust, we shall rejoice together over many 
dear ones gathered into our Father's house." 

Thus in her favorite retreat in Monson, whither 
she so often resorted to escape from care and labor 
and refresh her weary spirit as with heavenly manna, 
did Miss Lyon write what proved to be her farewell 
letters, to some of her oldest and dearest Mends. We 
give Mrs. Porter's account of her first, and of her last 
visit. 

" My first acquaintance with Miss Mary Lyon was 



THE LAST VISIT. 325 

in the spring of 1836. On answering myself to the 
door-bell on a snowy day, a stranger lady stood be- 
fore me. She introduced herself as Mary Lyon of 
Ipswich, and remarked that the gentleman with whom 
she came had driven round to the carriage-house on 
account of the storm. I was prepared to give her a 
cordial reception, having a high regard for Miss Grant 
and Miss Lyon, as principals of the Ipswich seminary ; 
but what could have led her there that stormy day, I 
could not think. Soon the Rev. Mr. Tyler, an ac- 
quaintance of ours, came in and introduced her, inquir- 
ing if Mr. Porter was at home. I replied, He is 
gone to Boston, but we expect him home this even- 
ing. 7 Some regret was expressed, but Miss Lyon 
immediately remarked, Providence orders all things 
right.' As soon as outside garments were disposed 
of, she. with much animation told me in brief their 
errand. 'You have probably heard/ she says, 'of 
the contemplated female seminary,' mentioning its 
principles. I told her I had heard something of it, 
and had read some articles in print, in which I was 
much interested. She proceeded : ' The trustees met 
yesterday. We have arrived now at a point where 
we cannot proceed much farther till a gentleman is 
found to superintend the erection of the building. 
An act of incorporation has been obtained the past 
winter, and the town in which it is to be located has 
been decided on ; a gentleman is needed whose busi- 
ness talents have been tested, who has had experience 
- in building, and one in whose integrity the community 
would have confidence ; one, too, who would do it with- 
out remuneration, for there are not sufficient funds to 



326 LIFE OF MART LYON. 

> 
devote any to that purpose 5 and it is all a work of 

benevolence. Last evening your husband was men- 
tioned to the trustees, as one to whom it was best 
that application should be made. Rev. Messrs. Hawks 
and Tyler were appointed to wait on him, and I was 
requested to accompany them. Now, do you know 
of any thing in his business, health, or views, that 
you think would prevent his considering the sub- 
ject V I told her he had suffered much the past year 
from a nervous headache, and had decided on a long 
journey to the far west as soon as travelling would 
allow, to try the effect of relaxation and journeying. 
Aside from that, I should expect he would at least 
consider the subject. 

"Mr. Hawks, who had now arrived, Mr. Tyler, 
and Miss Lyon held a consultation, and it was decided 
the gentlemen should leave to attend to their Sabbath 
appointments, and Miss Lyon remain, as I had invited 
her to do, till the next week. One of the gentlemen 
was to return on Monday. Miss Lyon remarked, ' If 
the enterprise is to go forward, the Lord has some 
one provided for this service, and it may be Mr. Por- 
ter, and it may not.' 

"After tea she proposed going to her room, as 
Mr. Porter would be fatigued when he arrived, and 
she had been up till a late hour the night previous. 

" Not a word was said about the proposed semi- 
nary till Monday. Some ten or twelve years after, 
she told me those were nights of prayer with her ; 
and 'the Lord/ said she, 'not only answered my 
prayer in inclining your husband to engage in the 
work, but granted much more than I asked. He gave 



THE LAST VISIT. 32? 

me in yourself and Mr. Porter personal friends, and 
at your house a home whenever I have needed quiet 
and rest. that first visit/ she remarked, ' and that 
chamber where I commended anew the enterprise to 
God, and could finally submit the question of your 
husband's acceptance and all to him. 7 

"I have thus told you of her first visit to our 
house ; I will now tell you of her last. 

" "When I was at the seminary on the Thanksgiving 
occasion previous to her death, I said to Miss Lyon, 
1 You know the invitation to spend your vacations with 
us is stereotyped ; may we not expect you in the win- 
ter vacation? 7 She replied, 'I think I shall come previ- 
ous to vacation, and rest, for circles here are so broken 
up then, that it. is more difficult getting along than in 
the term time. She came, however, in that vacation j 
and the first evening after she arrived, she told me, 
that what decided her to come, after concluding she 
should remain at the seminary during vacation, was, 
she had never felt the responsibility of giving relig- 
ious instruction as she had that winter. ' Oh, when I 
come before those young immortals to teach them eter- 
nal truths, I am borne down with a sense of its im- 
portance as never before, and I wanted to come to 
my resting-fxme, where, in that quiet chamber, I could 
seek anew for wisdom, grace, and strength for the 
great work. 7 

"The teachers, she said, were very urgent she 
should go to New York to sit for her portrait j so 
much so, that she was reluctant not to comply with 
their kind request, and accept of their generous offer 
to bear all the expense. * But/ she added, * it seemed 



LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

of so little consequence to have my picture taken, 
compared with seeking a better preparation for my 
important duties, that I could not comply. 7 

" Every thing in her conversation and appearance 
indicated a ' fresh anointing. 7 All business with re- 
gard to the seminary was laid aside. Previously, she 
had invariably come with account-books, and a list of 
various items of business to consult Mr. Porter about; 
and as soon as he came in, business was the theme. 
Now she introduced no subject of business but twice 
during her stay, and one of those times said but a few 
words. 

" Mr. Porter said to me on Sabbath evening she 
came the Friday previous ' Does not Miss Lyon seem 
unusually spiritual V I replied, c I think so, evident- 
ly ; I never saw her so heavenly-minded/ Little did 
I then think she was pluming her wings for her up- 
ward flight. She appeared as well as I ever saw her, 
and repeatedly spoke with gratitude of her excellent 
health. At our dinner-table, a day or two previous 
to her leaving, she remarked, playfully, c Mr. Porter, 
you and Mrs. Porter have been afraid I should break 
down at the seminary, but ; dropping her knife and 
fork, and straightening up' do you not think I am 
in pretty good trim ? I have an excellent appetite, I 
sleep like a child, and have none of that chilliness I 
have had when rather exhausted with my labors ; I 
feel quite vigorous. 7 We both told her we thought 
we had not seen her better, and the conclusion of us 
all was, that she had as good a prospect of physical 
ability to labor on at the seminary for ten years to 
come, as she had ten years fcgo. 



THE LAST VISIT. 329 

"Except coming down to breakfast and family 
worship, she spent the mornings till our hour for din- 
ner in her chamber. I had frequent occasion to go 
to her room, and always found her with her Bible, 
Hodge's Way of Life, or Goodrich's Bible History of 
Prayer, and her remarks showed an elevated state of 
devotional feeling, 

" One morning, soon after breakfast, I found her 
with a large Bible open at Solomon's Song. She told 
me she rose early that morning, and had read through 
that book. She added, ' I think I have never enjoyed 
it so before, though I have read it often for a few 
years past. I have been able to drop the figure, and 
view Christ's strong love to the church. how 
wonderful this love! What infinite condescension, 
in his exalted state, to leave the realms of purity, and 
dwell with fallen, polluted man! Yet by it he lost 
none of his dignity.' Prom this she drew the inference, 
that when, from the principle of benevolence, we vol- 
untarily dwell among the wicked, we need not be 
degraded. 

" She seemed, in conversation, to dwell more on 
the scenes of childhood and youth than I had ever 
known her. One afternoon she told us of her mater- 
nal grandfather, who was a Baptist clergyman. C I 
think/ she says, ' he was a most holy man. When a 
child, I can remember my conviction that he loved 
and served God, and was living for another world, not 
this. When I was about ten years old, there was 
what was called a reformation among his people, and 
many were baptized. I think it was a genuine work 
of grace. My mind was then much impressed by hear- 



830 LIFE OF MART LTON. 

ing his conversation with those who came to him under 
conviction for sin, as it was termed, and I never lost 
those impressions. He was remarkable for praying 
much for his posterity, that none of them might ever 
be left to slight the offers of mercy through a Saviour. 
When I last visited my native place, I went with a 
relative to two graveyards where forty-two of his 
descendants are buried. I had a delightful view of 
the faithfulness of God to his believing people. They 
had all left a comforting evidence that they had died 
in the Jaith. ; She was enthusiastic in talking of him, 
and said, * What a blessing to have such a grandfather ; 
how to be prized above all the world calls great.' 

" When she left us, I felt, more than ever before, 
that it was a rare privilege to enjoy her personal 
friendship, and have her so frequently an inmate of 
our family. Ever since my first acquaintance with 
Miss Lyon, I thought I had never seen the blessed 
principles and precepts of the gospel of Christ so 
strikingly exemplified in any of his professed follow- 
ers. But on account of her active business habits, 
and her being so much engaged in planning for im- 
provements in her beloved seminary, I had not before 
seen so much of that contemplative, devotional state 
of mind as was developed in this visit. There was 
evinced an absorbing love to the Lord Jesus ; Christ 
was her theme, and she dwelt much on the privilege 
of laboring for him, and making sacrifices for Ms 
cause. I think I have never witnessed a nearer ap- 
proach to the mercy-seat than was apparent in social 
prayer just before her leaving. It was almost the 
last sound of her voice that I heard." 



THE DEPASTURE. 331 

When the time has come for those who are great- 
ly beloved, and who are in stations of great useful- 
ness, to die, Providence sometimes commissions the 
destroyer suddenly to execute his work. Thus is 
the anguish of the separation shortened ; and though 
nature may murmur, grace teaches us perhaps to look 
upon such a course as an indication of mercy. Such 
is the aspect in which we ought to regard the sick- 
ness and death of Miss Lyon. They came suddenly 
and unexpectedly, and reason was taken away also. 
But before that took place, an opportunity was given 
for her to leave in the hearts of her pupils some of 
the noblest sentiments ever uttered by uninspired 
mortals. These constituted her "last instruction." 
The " departure," which followed, had nothing in it 
very peculiar. She sunk rapidly under the power of 
strong disease, against which her vigorous constitu- 
tion struggled mightily. But the event and all the 
circumstances relating to it were ordered by a wise 
and benevolent Providence ; and the language of our 
hearts should be, " The Lord gave, and the Lord hath 
taken away ; blessed be the name of the Lord." 

The details of this trying event, and of the last in- 
struction given by Miss Lyon to the seminary, are con- 
tained in the journal kept there for the missionaries. 
Prom this the following extracts are made : 

" March 9, 1849. Since our last date, we have been 
led through scenes of deep, deep affliction. About 
four weeks ago, one of our young ladies had a severe 
attack of influenza, with swelling in the throat, some- 
what like quinsy. An additional cold brought on 



LIFE OF MART LYON. 

erysipelas, and she was quite sick with it. For two 
or three days, we saw no cause for alarm in her case, 
as we supposed it to be a common form of the disease ; 
but it proved to be the malignant erysipelas, so preva- 
lent and so fatal in many places four or five years 
since. On Wednesday, February 21, it became evi- 
dent that she must die. The disease settled upon the 
brain, congestion followed, and she lay in a senseless 
state, from which nothing could arouse her. It was 
thought she could not live through the night. This 
was to us all a most unexpected stroke. The painful 
intelligence must be communicated to her parents in 
Weare, New Hampshire, who, as yet, knew nothing of 
her sickness. The brief notice that she wa*s very sick, 
and could live but a few hours, was sent by private 
conveyance, telegraph, and mail, and reached them in 
about thirty-six hours. The anxious father, in entire 
suspense with regard to the circumstances of her sick- 
ness, started immediately, and arrived Friday even- 
ing? just in season to see her die. She recognized 
him, but was too far gone to say any thing. There 
had never been a death here when the external cir- 
cumstances seemed more trying. 

" But we knew not that a still heavier affliction 
awaited us. We thought not that death would very 
soon come again, and take from us our dearly loved 
Miss Lyon. But so it was. For about two weeks 
before Miss Wingate was taken down so suddenly, 
Miss Lyon had had something of the influenza hang- 
ing about her, but had not allowed herself to give up 
to it at all. When the intelligence of Miss Wingate's 
condition was communicated to her, she was in a state 



THE DEPARTURE. 333 

to feel most deeply all that was trying in the case. 
She had just taken more cold, was more fatigued than 
usual, and had one of her severe headaches coining 
on. The next day was the annual fast for literary 
institutions, and she felt much anxiety to have the day 
blessed to us. The result of all was, such a headache 
and nervous excitement, that she could not sleep that 
night, and the next morning she was scarcely able to 
lift her head from her pillow. She attended devo- 
tions, but was able to say only a very few words. 
We have never seen her appear so sick in the hall as 
she did that morning. She was kept as quiet as pos- 
sible during the day, slept well that night, and on 
Friday seemed better. She went into the hall both 
in the morning and afternoon. Those who heard her 
will not soon forget her remarks on that day. Would 
that we could convey to you her words, her manner, 
and the impression made upon our minds. But this 
we cannot do. 

" She wished to lead us to turn from the trying 
circumstances in which we were placed, and follow 
that dear dying one up to the t celestial city, 7 and, as 
its pearly gates opened to receive her, look in, and 
catch a glimpse of its glories. She seemed to have a 
most enrapturing view of heaven, and with a full 
heart, exclaimed, ' Oh, if it were I, how happy I 
should be to go I ; but added, ' Not that I would be 
unclothed, while I can do any thing for you, my dear 
children/ She then addressed the impenitent in a 
most impressive manner, and expressed much grati- 
tude that the dying one was not of their number. A 
sense of the misery of the lost seemed to come over 



334 LIFE OP MARY LYON. 

her, as she said, with much feeling, f If one of you 
were on that dying bed, I could not take you by the 
hand and go with you down to that world of despair. 
It would be too painful for me. I should feel that I 
must draw the veil and leave you.' She urged them 
to enter at once upon the service of Christ, not from 
fear of death, but from a view of his infinite perfec- 
tions, and his claims upon them. 

" Miss WingateV disease was of a form so malig- 
nant, and so dreaded, that there was a tendency to 
excitement. Miss Lyon read to us some passages 
from the Bible which speak of the fear of God, and 
made some remarks in connection with them. She 
looked upon all anxiety about the future as distrust 
of God, and asked, ' Shall we fear what he is about 
to do ?' adding, f There is nothing in the universe that 
I am afraid of, but that I shall not know and do all 
my duty/ 

" Miss Wingate died about ten o'clock that even- 
ing, and it was important that her father and sister 
should leave with the remains early the next morning, 
Of course there was much to be done to get every 
thing in readiness. Much effort was made to relieve 
Miss Lyon entirely from care and anxiety, and every 
thing was done faithfully and promptly. Still she did 
not sleep. She had felt a strong desire to have the 
father arrive before death had done its work, and she 
said she was ' so filled with gratitude to God for his 
goodness in this respect, that she could not rest.' 
The next morning, her whole appearance indicated 
too plainly that she was suffering from severe head- 
ache and intense mental excitement. She slept con- 



THE DEPARTURE. 335 

siderably during the day, and as she seemed quite 
comfortable, we fondly hoped that, after the rest of 
the night, she would be quite well ; but that evening's 
mail brought the distressing intelligence of the death 
of a nephew by suicide while deranged, and without 
leaving evidence that he was a Christian. TVith her 
clear views of what it is for a soul to be lost, and her 
deep feeling in regard to it, this intelligence, coming 
when she was in that weak state, was too much for 
her, and that was not only a sleepless night, but a 
night of anguish. "We could have wished that letter 
had not come just at that time. Still we know that 
that, as well as every other circumstance, was ordered 
in infinite wisdom, and we would not complain. 

"As might be expected after such a nigh*, the 
morning found her worse. She has had an affection 
in her head somewhat like scrofula, which has troubled 
her more or less for years. It has been worse than 
usual all this winter. In past seasons, when she has 
had a cold, there has been a swelling of the face con- 
nected with this difficulty. On Saturday there was 
some swelling, and it increased on the Sabbath, but 
did not appear like erysipelas till Sabbath evening. 
Monday morning, her physician pronounced it a mild 
form of the epidemic erysipelas not malignant, like 
Miss Wingate's. He expressed much fear for the 
result, not from the disease, but on account- of her 
peculiar temperament, her age, the state of her con- 
stitution, her past labors, and the extreme nervous 
excitement from which she was suffering when taken 
ill. We felt exceedingly anxious for her. Tor a time, 
every thing seemed encouraging. There was scarcely 



336 LIFE OF MAEY LYON. 

an unfavorable symptom in her case. The disease 
seemed to be entirely under control. Wednesday it 
reached its crisis, and then the swelling began grad- 
ually to disappear where it first appeared. We had 
looked forward to this turning-point with intense anx- 
iety, as we supposed it to be the critical time with 
her. When Thursday morning came, the swelling 
had continued to lessen, and she seemed no worse, 
and for a little time our anxiety was relieved. But 
she was not so much better during the day as we 
hoped she would be. As we have before said, her 
nervous system was intensely excited when the ery- 
sipelas came on, and as the disease left her, the excite- 
ment returned. This was the only unfavorable symp- 
tom. There was a free circulation, her pulse was 
good, and her skin seemed in a natural state. Every 
effort was made to keep her quiet, but all was in vain. 
That excitement increased until it became insanity: 
^ot the delirium frequently attendant upon fever, but 
real mental derangement. For nearly three days, 
she talked day and night, without intermission, in a 
worried, excited manner. This was connected with 
congestion of the brain. During the day she said very 
little, and seemed to be in an unconscious state most 
of the time. 

Early Monday evening her pastor, Mr. Laurie, 
called &> see her. His voice seemed to recall her 
to consciousness for a little time. He said to her, 
' Christ precious ? ; She seemed to summon all her 
energies to make one great effort, raised both hands 
and clinched them, lifted her head from her pillow, 
and exclaimed audibly and with emphasis, 'Yes.' 



THE DEPARTURE. 337 

This was the last word she uttered. Short passages 
of Scripture were repeated, and her countenance 
showed that she understood and appreciated them. 
Those which spoke of the glory of God seemed to 
interest her most. She made an effort to speak, but 
Lad not sufficient strength. Seeing this, Mr. Laurie 
said to her, ' You need not speak ; God can be glori- 
fied in silence.' As he said this, an indescribable 
smile came over her countenance. Mr. Laurie, speak- 
ing of it, said, ' Oh, that soul is full of the love of the 
Saviour/ This moment of consciousness, this last raj 
from her setting sun, was very precious to us. In 
about an hour after, her freed spirit was mingling in 
the glories of heaven. We thought of those almost 
* last words,' ' Oh, if it was I, how happy I should be 
to go 1' If the thought of these glories was so enrap- 
turing to her, what must the reality be ? Mourn for 
her we cannot. If there ever was a Christian emi- 
nently prepared for heaven, surely she was one. She 
has been unusually well this winter, and with her in- 
crease of physical strength there has been an increase 
of spiritual strength. "We have never known her 
present the truth in a more clear, impressive manner, 
or speak more from the fulness of her heart, than slie 
has this winter, especially the few times she has met 
us this term. Her increased spirituality has mani- 
fested itself in her daily familiar intercourse, as well 
as in her instructions in the hall. There was a vivid- 
ness in her thoughts, a life and a power in her words, 
that seemed irresistible. As we were alone with her 
in her room one day, but a very short time before her 
sickness, she said to us familiarly, ' I don't know why 

MaryLyon. 15 



338 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

it is that my mind is so active. It seems to me, some- 
times, as though I am doing my last work.' We 
thonght not then that those were prophetic words. 
But how soon were we made to feel their truth ! We 
would not recall her from that ' exceeding and eter- 
nal weight of glory ' which is now hers. We would 
not have her lay aside her harp and come back to 
this sinful, sorrowing world. We would not mur- 
muringly ask, ' Why was she not spared to us a little 
longer ?' Eather would we be grateful to the GhVer 
of all good, that we have ever known her, that her 
light has shone upon us and the world so long and 
bo brilliantly. 

" The fiineral was on Thursday, March 8, at two 
o'clock, P. M. Previously the corpse had been kept in 
the little room adjoining the seminary hall on the 
south side. It had been used for a similar purpose 
several times before. When Miss Wingate was laid 
there, Miss Lyon spoke of it as ' that sacred little 
room.' It is doubly sacred now. The young ladies 
took their last look of that loved countenance before 
going to church. There was*a peaceful, pleasant, 
natural expression, that we scarcely dared to hope 
for. This was a great comfort to us, for during her 
sickness she looked so unlike herself, that friends 
would not have recognized her. After prayer in the 
seminary hall by Mr. Laurie, we walked in proces- 
sion to the church. There were only three Relatives 
present Mr. Wing her brother-in-law, his son, and 
Mrs. Burgess' brother. These walked next to the 
coffin 5 then, in order, the trustees of the institution, 
the teachers, the Senior class, the remainder of the 



THE DEPARTURE. 339 

school, and friends with us from abroad. We were 
forcibly reminded of those anniversary occasions, 
when we have so many times walked in procession 
and taken our seats in church in a similar manner ; 
and the thought that we were for the last time follow- 
ing that dear one who had always been with us, was 
almost overwhelming. 

"All the services in church were impressive. 
Prayers were offered by two of the trustees, Rev. 
Mr. Harris of Conway, and Rev. Mr. Swift of North- 
ampton. The sermon was preached by Rev. Dr. Hum- 
phrey, from the tests, ' The path of the just is as the 
shining light, that shineth more and more unto the 
perfect day ;' ' The memory of the just is blessed.' 
They were afflicted in our affliction, and knew how 
to guide our thoughts, and lead us to the throne of 
grace. The hymns sung were those commencing, 

1 God moves in a mysterious way/ 

'Servants of Christ, well done,' 

'Why do we mourn departing friends?' 

We were interested in having this last one sung, be- 
cause it was the one our dear Miss Lyon read to us 
as expressive of her feelings, when we were assem- 
bled in the hall just before Mr. Wingate left us with 
the remains of his daughter. This was the last time 
we heard her voice in that hall. The evening be- 
fore, which was the last time she met us at the table, 
she read the fifth chapter of second Corinthians. 

" From church the procession moved to the grave. 
This is on the seminary ground, a little south of the 
orchard. It can be distinctly seen from most of the 
rooms on that side of the building. It is a sacred 



340 LIFE OF MARY LTON. 

spot, and many will love to visit it. As we gathered 
around the grave, the school sung the words set to 
the tune 'Mount Vernon/ 

" Sister, thou wast mild and lovely," 
altering them a little to make them appropriate. 
We need not tell you how sad our hearts were as 
we returned from that grave to this desolate house. 
The trustees all cheered and comforted us "by their 
sympathizing and prayerful spirit. Last evening, 
their wives and the teachers had a precious little 
prayer-meeting. They pledged us a daily remem- 
brance at the throne of grace. It encourages us 
very much to know that others are seeking divine 
strength and divine guidance for us. The trustees 
wish us to go on, and carry out as fully as possible 
all Miss Lyon's principles and plans; and we feel 
strongly that -there is a sacred obligation resting 
upon us to do this as far as is in our power." 

Over the grave of Miss Lyon a beautiful monu- 
ment of white Italian marble was erected a few months 
after her burial. This is defended by an iron railing 
about thirty feet square. The monument is a single 
square column, resting on a pedestal of granite. The 
inscriptions on the four sides are as follows: 

On the west side : 



THE DEPARTURE. 341 

MARY LYON, 

THE FOUNDER OP 

MOUNT HOLYOKE FEMALE SEMINARY, 
FOR TWELVE YEARS ITS PRINCIPAL; 

AND 

A TEACHER FOR THIRTY-FIVE TEARS, 

AND 

OF MORE THAN THREE THOUSAND PUPILS. 

BORN FEBRUARY 28, 1797. 
DIED MARCH 5, 1849. 

On the north side : 

" GIVE HER OF THE FRUITS OF HER. HANDS, AND LET 
HER OWN WORKS PRAISE HER IN THE GATES." 
On the south side: 

" Servant of God, well done ; 

Rest from thy loved employ : 
The battle fought, the victory won, 
Enter thy Master's joy." 

On the east side the trustees directed to be placed 
the memorable sentence which Miss Lyon uttered in 
the last instruction she gave to her school, as related 
on the preceding pages : 

" THERE IS NOTHING IN THE UNIVERSE THAT I FEAR, 
BUT THAT I SHALL NOT KNOW ALL MY DUTY, OR SHALL 
FAIL TO DO IT." 



342 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

CHAPTER XIII. 
MISS LYON'S CHARACTER AND LABORS. 

WE have seen the assiduity and success with which 
Miss Lyon studied in her youth and early prime ; how 
well she economized and contrived that she might 
have time and means to study, counting knowledge 
more precious than silver; what friends were raised 
up to aid her in her extremity, and with what wisdom 
and liberality they fulfilled their highly privileged 
office in her education. 

We have seen how the rays of divine truth, fall- 
ing first on her luminous understanding, lingered 
there a while, and then penetrating her large heart, 
kindled and became a living fire, so that she was in- 
fleed a burning and a shining light to all around. 

We have seen what schools enjoyed the first fruits 
of her labors, and what other schools had the full 
ingathering of her riper years and rare powers ; how 
almost from the first, as if she were a chosen vessel 
unto God, the " dews " of his grace fell on the soil she 
cultivated and the seed she sowed. 

We have seen how in her full maturity the inspi- 
ration of the All-wise gave her counsel and under- 
standing to devise and plan a female seminary, in 
some respects wholly, and in others comparatively, 
new and without precedent ; with what humble faith 
and holy courage and high resolve she ventured on 
her undertaking, as on almost pathless waters, in a 
bark frail, yet freighted with every hope she held 



HER CHARACTER AND LABORS. 343 

dearest on earth ; hew she looked to her Bible and 
her God alone for chart, compass, and courage ; and 
how her own clear eye and unshaken soul stood ready 
bankers, disbursing light and faith and hope on de- 
mand to every one whose heart failed him for fear 
and for thinking too much of what the world would 



We have seen how the foundations of her institu- 
tion, so beloved and longed for, were at last laid with 
prayers and tears and toil, and its topstone with joy 
and praise and giving of thanks and holy consecra- 
tion to Him who had shown her the pattern, and bade 
her build a school to his great name ; how God ac- 
cepted the work and service of her hands, and blessed 
both it and her abundantly. 

We have seen how, though she sleeps with her 
fathers, yet the Lord still remembers his holy cove- 
nant with her, that he would be a Gk>d to her and to 
her spiritual children after her, and how he hath in 
all things done for her beloved seminary exceeding 
abundantly above all that she asked or thought. 

All this, and more, this history of Miss Lyon 
teaches so fully and clearly, that present and future 
generations may learn something of the ways and 
wisdom of God, and something also of the vast power 
for good which he can give to one woman for the 
whole race in all coming time. 

Nothing now remains but briefly to present some 
of the leading points of Miss Lyon's character, labors, 
and success. 

~ God gave her a vigorous and wett-balanced constitu- 
tion. Her frame was robust; the muscular powers 



344 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

were displayed in great strength and vigor ; the vital 
apparatus was strong ; in short, all the bodily powers 
were developed in harmonious proportion. Such a 
physical system seems essential to the part in life for 
which she was destined. 

It gives a just view of her mind to say that it 
corresponded well with her bodily frame. She was 
largely endowed in those faculties which are thought 
to hold the first rank in the human intellect. She 
could grasp and handle abstract truths with the ease 
and skill of the practised philosopher. She could at 
the same time illustrate them with a woman's fertility 
of invention, and enforce them with a woman's ear- 
nestness. Her mental eye was originally steady, 
clear, and far-seeing; and its angle of vision was 
peculiarly large. Her thoughts were accustomed to 
work themselves clear in speech, rather than in 
silence; and hence she would often at first give a 
less distinct utterance to principles which at length 
would fall from her lips with startling vividness and 
power. She spoke with so much ease and pleasure 
to herself, that it seemed not to disturb, but rather 
to quicken and array in proper order the train of 
thgught which was going on within. 

While she could race with the swiftest and soar 
with the loftiest, she had that natural greatness of 
soul which does not exult over the intellectual weak- 
nesses and failures of others. She took no vain no- 
tice of her own triumphs. She showed no compla- 
cency in the exercise of her own shining talents. She 
was naturally generous, and seemed never to envy 
those that were above, nor despise those that wero 



HER CHARACTER AND LABORS. 345 

below her, nor to exercise for a moment an emotion 
of resentment to any who opposed her. 

^\STiss Lyon was distinguished for practical wisdom. 
The proof of it is in the success of her life. Viewed 
as a whole, it gives one a pleasing sense of its com- 
pleteness. Of her many steps, none had to be back- 
ward, none downward. Her career is a climax in 
which every successive round is a gain on the preced- 
ing, f She understood the two great elements in this 
world's affairs, human nature and divine providence. 
In view of both she laid her plans ; and whatsoever 
she did prospered. Her wisdom was not the under- 
ground cunning which mines and countermines, and 
can do nothing more. It was open as the sun's face 
in a fair day, and straightforward as his rays. She 
was honest and truthful as an echo, or as the clear 
blue sky after an April shower. 
/. Miss Lyon possessed rare powers of invention and 
combination. This was strikingly manifested by her 
in the planning of the seminary edifice, and in the 
arranging of a system by which the domestic labors 
could be performed by the pupils without interfer- 
ence with their studies. Her invention was prompted 
by the highest benevolence, and made practically use- 
ful by uncommon firmness, by a just reliance on her- 
self, and an absolute reliance on God. Some thought 
her quiKotic, and pitied her enthusiasm ; but with 
her heart fixed on God and on doing good, she made 
no reply, or returned only blessing for reproach. In 
her noblest enterprise, it was a severe trial to her to 
go forward in opposition to the deliberate conclusions 
of some of the best and wisest minds ; but when, upon 
15* 



346 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

careful examination, she saw clearly the practicability 
and importance of the undertaking, she did not hesi- 
tate to act; hoping at the same time that the day 
would come when all the wise and good would see the 
subject as she did. So long, so carefully, and so 
prayerfully had she surveyed the whole ground, that 
the path through it was radiant with light to her eye, 
although clouded to many ; and she could not refuse 
to go forward without doing violence to her strongest 
convictions. The points on which she differed from 
some of her judicious friends were, attempting to ob- 
tain funds by appealing solely to the benevolence of 
the community; undertaking to have the domestic 
labors of the institution performed by the pupils 
themselves ; and proposing to conduct it on such a 
plan that the expenses would be very low. One or 
more of this trio of principles had the power to reach 
the hearts and open the purses of a large proportion 
of the benevolent in the middle ranks of society, and 
of some among the wealthy. The triumphant success 
of the Mount Holyoke Seminary for two-thirds of a 
generation, strikingly illustrates the foresight and 
good judgment as well as the invention of its 
founder. 

-^ Nor did Miss Lyon's executive and administrative 
skill fall behind her wisdom and her invention. She 
had a marvellous power of accomplishing whatever 
she desired to do and had the means of doing. In 
the large educational establishments with which she 
wag connected, nothing was left at loose ends. No 
drones were allowed in the hive ; teachers and pupils 
were all employed, and the result was order, neat- 



HER CHARACTER AND LABORS. 341 

ness, and dispatch. The promptness too with which 
this executive power was manifested, deserves notice. 
The moment a thing was found to be desirable and 
practicable, she felt that it must be in a course of 
execution. With her there was no putting oflf till 
to-morrow what could be done to-day. 

Much wisdom as well as energy is essential to the 
management of a large literary institution. Numer- 
ous and diverse elements are to be controlled. As to 
the pupils, it is one important qualification in a teach- 
er to be able to adapt means and motives to their pe- 
culiarities of character. And then, a large corps of 
teachers must be selected and made to act in unison, 
or a firebrand will be thrown into the school. More- 
over, in most schools in this country, it is necessary 
that the principal should exercise a rigid watchful- 
ness over its pecuniary interests, being cognizant of 
every expenditure, and of the smallest means of in- 
come the whole demanding no small financial ability. 
Still further, in schools dependent on public patron- 
age, the principal is expected to see to it that the 
public are kept informed of its advantages, and their 
attention favorably drawn towards it. To meet suc- 
cessfully these various and dissimilar duties, requires 
something beyond mere knowledge of literature and 
science. It requires great versatility of powers, and 
practical wisdom, to choose and apply the means nec- 
essary to give energy and success to so complicated a 
system. None who are acquainted with Miss Lyon's 
management of the Holyoke Seminary will doubt that 
her talents for administration were equal to her skill 
as an instructor in science and literature. 



348 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 



intellectual powers were vigorous and thor- 
oughly disciplined. Her health was firm, her nerves 
strong, her interest in any important object in which 
she was engaged absorbing, and her powers were 
schooled into complete subjection to her will. Hence 
in study, in teaching, and in benevolent effort, many 
of her fellow-laborers became exhausted while she was 
yet fresh and vigorous. In the responsible and diffi- 
cult circumstances in which she was often placed, these 
powers of concentration and endurance were of great 
service, indispensable indeed to eminent success. 

\* Another characteristic of Miss Lyon was her influr 
erm over others. The two motives which she found of 
mighty efficacy in enforcing school and family regula- 
tions were, their reasonableness, and the demands of 
benevolence. It was often wonderful to see how tri- 
umphantly she would carry any measure that seemed 
important. She knew how to set in motion a current 
which made individual opposition as powerless as 
chaff before the whirlwind. But this talent was not 
confined to her schools. "Whenever it was desirable 
to influence people in the common walks of life, she 
knew how to spin those silken cords that would lead 
them where she pleased. Yet she never pleased to 
lead where reason, conscience, and benevolence, the 
secrets of her power, did not point the way. Thus it 
was that many an individual was brought to aid a 
cause to which he was before indifferent or opposed. 
VMiss Lyon's natural activity was great. There 
was as much of fire in the susceptible part of her 
being as there was of light in the intellectual. She 
was exceedingly intense for a person of so large an 



HER CHARACTER AND LABORS. 849 

understanding. Her -watchword was action, not un- 
steady and fitful, but like the flow of a river fed with 
many and unfailing streams. So strong a vitality 
reigned within her as would have forbidden the busy 
idleness so common when outward circumstances ex- 
cuse from toil. Miss Lyon clearly saw the duties to 
which she was called ; and like her Master, she was 
straitened till her work was accomplished. Her zeal 
consumed her, but it was long in doing it. Her frame 
was like asbestos, and stood an intense heat for many 
years. 

-a-- The history of Miss Lyon shows what good may 
often be done by a discerning liberality applied in the 
education of young women. But for the counsel and 
aid of her early friends, there is no probability that 
she would have accomplished her mission of good to 
her country and the world. They saw her promise. 
9 They knew her power and her integrity of purpose. 
They counselled her ; and she corrected her defects, 
enlarged her views, and elevated her aims. They 
cheered her ; and she ran in the paths of knowledge 
and opening usefulness with eager steps and great 
joy. They assisted her; and she was borne upward 
and onward, when otherwise she might have sunk 
under fatal depression. As they witness the bright 
crown she won and wears, how pure must be the joy 
of those who stood by her and befriended her in the 
early and untried beginnings of her career. It was 
but little to hold a light and lend a hand to that 
young and ingenuous Mary Lyon who felt within her 
a quickening power and purpose to do good in her 
day and generation ; yet that little led her forth into 



350 LIFE OF MARY LTON. 

a broad land of shining usefulness, which the world 
will not willingly let die, and which can be measured 
only by the dateless ages of eternity. 
^ Great and invaluable was the influence of Miss 
Lyon in training up active and efficient women. It was 
great while she lived. It is still great now that she 
is departed. There were many who drew from her 
urn both light and fire that will never go out. All 
her plans of school management favored the develop- 
ment of energy in her scholars. She made them feel 
the value of time, and provided for its fullest occupa- 
tion and improvement. By precept and example she 
showed the duty and dignity of labor. It is not men 
of science and letters, nor merchant princes whose 
ships are in every sea, nor all the authors of great 
and valuable improvements in the arts and convenien- 
ces of life, nor busy politicians with eye ever so clear 
and heart ever so true to work out and bring in the 
best system of public economy, nor is it mighty mon- 
archs with all their wealth and power, and with more 
wisdom even than monarchs ever had before, that can 
make the Sun of righteousness arise on the dark world, 
and bring the glad day of purity and peace. It is, 
under Him who only giveth the increase, the noiseless 
but effectual care of mothers, rising betimes and sow- 
ing the good seed, sleeping with the eyes open, nip- 
ping vice in the early bud and not waiting till the 
sun is risen to find the enemy's tares already sprung 
up, commending the right and shaming the wrong by 
their own bright example, maintaining God's cause 
as their own, and by an ever-present and absolute 
but just and reasonable authority, defending their 



HER CHARACTER AND LABORS. 351 

children's best and truest interests for all duration 
against their present short-sighted wishes it is this 
that lies at the foundation of all effectual instrumen- 
talities for the temporal and eternal salvation of the 
race. Every great interest of the human family is 
lodged in those hands which have charge of our in- 
fancy and youth. The millennium must begin in and 
spread from the nursery. Miss Lyon saw and under- 
stood all this. With far-reaching wisdom, she plan- 
ned for the activity and energy, for the usefulness 
and independence, for the virtue and happiness, not 
only of her immediate pupils, but, as far as in her lay, 
of the race. 

^ The example of Miss Lyon illustrates the nature 
and secret of the highest success in teadiing. It is not 
the whole of true success to make a pupil's mind thor- 
oughly expert in all its intellectual exercises. He is 
the teacher of teachers and winner of the prize, who 
is favored of heaven so highly as to be enabled to 
mould the character and shape the moral course of 
his pupils aright for both worlds. It is the love that 
sides with God and lives to his praise that listens 
to his voice and patterns after the example of his 
Son ; the love whose work is doing good, and its rest, 
the happiness found in doing it that cleaves to the 
right though it be weak, and shuns and withstands 
the wrong though it be popular and mighty: it is 
commending and instilling such love it is being the 
channel and instrumentality through which it descends 
to the heart and penetrates and moulds the character 
of others, that constitutes the teacher's highest suc- 
cess and brightest crown. 



252 LIFE OF MARY LYON.' 

The secret of Miss Lyon's winning this was not a 
mystery. She was instant in prayer for this very 
thing. She felt that if she failed here, she failed 
essentially.^ She was a woman of great faith, and 
saw divine things without a cloud. Her faith was 
not idle and quietistic, but wrought in her unto hope 
and labor and success. She was herself filled with 
the charity that suffers long, and is kind. The secret 
of the Lord was with her, as it is with all that fear 
him. The moral power of her life and character 
seconded her instructions. Her earnestness was a 
fixed certainty to all. With divine help, she meant 
and expected to train pupils for glory, honor, and 
immortality. She reached the goal ; she grasped the 
prize. Let all those whose hearts throb responsive 
to every wise effort to level the masses upward to 
the broad table-land of intelligence, virtue, and use- 
fulness, instead of downward to the dead monotony 
of ignorance, depravity, and despair let any and all 
such go and do likewise. 

Mrs. Banister gives the following outline of Miss 
Ljpn's excellences as an educator. 

' She understood and loved the character and gov- 
ernment of God. She was acquainted with the human 
mind in its relations to him and to its fellow-crea- 
tures, and had a living sense of its capacity and des- 
tiny, and of the effect of habits and the way to form 
them aright. She cordially welcomed the Bible as a 
revelation from God to man, and diligently employed 
herself in learning its divine truths. She had the 
first and the second table of the moral law written on 
her heart, and had a peculiar facility in leading others 



HER CHARACTER AND LABORS. 353 

to understand it. She thoroughly appreciated the 
gospel as opening a way for the salvation of the lost, 
and had a living faith in all its truths, especially in 
Him who is 'THE TRUTH.' She cherished a glowiug 
benevolence towards all for whom Christ died, and 
felt a burning zeal to do all in her power towards 
extending the knowledge of the Eedeemer to every 
creature. She understood and felt the necessity of 
bringing great and unalterable truths before the hu- 
man mind in a way suited to produce their legitimate 
eifects. She really believed that what ought to be 
done can be done, and yet that without God's bless- 
ing all ^ill be in vain ; and united an abiding reli- 
ance on 'him with a cheerful expectation of his bless- 
ing." 



is highly intellectual woman began her Chris- 
tian life, as all Christian life must begin, in study and 
conviction. She "thought on her ways, and turned 
her feet to God's testimonies." It seemed to her at 
first, as it did to others, that her intellectual percep- 
tions were far in advance of her moral susceptibilities, 
and she adopted the true means of moral and religious 
culture. She studied the Bible thoroughly. She re- 
flected. No new truth came to her without its own 
fresh welcome. She became rooted and grounded 
and settled in the faith. She searched till she found 
the Bock, and tried it till she felt her foothold to be 
firm and sure. She laid up divine knowledge as many 
dig for and treasure up gold, till showers of divine 
grace descended upon her, and her soul was full of 
emotion. It was not fitful and unsteady emotion, like 
gusts of wind in early spring-time. It was not over- 



354 LIFE OF MART LYON. 

wlielmingly strong, breaking down the metes and 
bounds of humanity. It was steady and true, as the 
sun to his appointed time. The feeling heart became 
as deep and steady as the seeing eye was clear and 
true.* 

* Miss Lyon left no private journal. The following memo- 
randum which casually escaped destruction, reveals her habit 
of self-discipline, and shows that she was not able, more than 
those who have gone before her, to reach a high standard of 
piety without strenuous efforts. 

"I. Worldly intrusion on sacred time. 1. In secret prayer; 
2. In reading the Bible ; 3. In little opportunities for ejacula- 
tory prayer; 4. In family devotions; 5. Sabbath generally; 
6. Hearing the word; 7. Prayer in sanctuary; 8. Holy com- 
munion with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and with 
the disciples of Christ. 

"II. Misspending time. 1. Indefinite musings; 2. Anticipat- 
ing needlessly ; 3. Needless speculations ; 4. Indulging in re- 
luctance to begin a duly; 5. In doubtful cases hesitating too 
long ; 6. Spending time in reverie which should be spent in 
prayer. 

"HI. Self-control. 1. Too ardent in a new thought; 2. Too 
desirous for immediate execution; 3. Feelings discomposed 
by opposition; 4. Expressing dissent when it would be better 
to wait a little ; 5. Reminding others of their deficiencies with- 
out sufficient object (Be like Christ Inquire, before speak- 
ing, whether it will do good whether duty requires it; if 
not, avoid alluding to them.) 6. Referring to mistakes of pu- 
pils in little things, family duties, domestic work, etc. (Inquire 
if they designed to do right; if their mistake involves any 
general principle ; whether there will be any occasion for them 
to commit the same again. Be like Christ like Christ.) 11 

Miss Lyon often set apart a day or a part of a day as a 
season of special self-examination and prayer. On these occa- 
sions she often drew up for her own use a paper similar to the 
above, and it would sometimes lie in her Bible for days or 
weeks, to remind her of the points against which she wished 
to set a special watch. 



HER CHARACTER AND LABORS. 355 

Lyon's benevolence was pure and deep, and as 
like God's as is perhaps ever seen in this imperfect 
world. It was not limited by rank or intelligence, 
or creed or character. It was love to all, and she 
had so much of it that thousands of individuals drank 
of its full overflowings, and yet it did not fail. It 
was not the mere conviction that she ought to be be- 
nevolent. It was not merely an emotion. It was a 
strong will bent on doing good, and bringing every 
power and every instrument into sweet captivity to 
that high end. It was such as requires and presup- 
poses a high intelligence. She could not have loved 
and chosen the welfare of others as she did without 
a large and clear eye to see wherein it consisted. In 
few minds is there a better balance of the moral and 
the intellectual than she attained and for a long time 
exhibited. Each power acted on every other unto the 
enlargement and most profitable investment of all in 
works of wisdom and love. Her benevolence was 
not official. It was not officious. He who seeth not 
as man seeth, doubtless saw in it great deficiency; 
but judging and speaking after the manner of men, 
she dwelt in Christian love and in the Christian's 
God. 

*c?$tiss Lyon's life on earth was nearly all spent in 
the most strenuous exertion. From the early morning 
of her day till its close she wrought with all dili- 
gence. She gathered together the treasures of useful 
knowledge betimes. She disciplined her powers ; she 
polished her armor ; she made herself ready for the 
battle of life. To others she might appear to be walk- 
ing in darkness, with no star of hope to cheer and 



856 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

guide her steps. But she felt sure that an infinite 
hand had taken hold of hers, and was leading her 
forward ; and therefore she could take step after step 
in the dark with as much confidence as if she could 
see before her an iron pavement. To human sagacity 
the next step might seem to lead over a precipice. 
But confident that she was in the path of duty, she was 
equally sure that God would hold her up. And so 
he did at last plant her feet upon a rock. 

^rom the time she began to distinguish herself as 
a teacher, her physical, intellectual^ and moral powers 
were brought into the service of God and man. "Wher- 
ever she went, her pathway was radiant with love, 
though she seemed unconscious of its brightness. It 
is interesting to see how her course widened and 
ascended as she went forward. If one plan had to 
be given up, another succeeded. At her death she 
had opened a perennial fountain of influence, whose 
streams had already reached the remotest nations of 
the earth. The whole picture impresses us forcibly 
with its moral sublimity ; and we might almost have 
expected that the chariot and horses of fire would be 
granted to close a scene so much like an angel visit. 

The chariot had indeed come for her removal, 
though she knew not that it stood by the door. She 
had just been down to the banks of Jordan to see one 
of her beloved pupils pass over ; and as she returned, 
she said to those who survived, " if it were I, how 
happy I should be to go I" She had been called, yet 
there was one more message for her to deliver, the 
noblest she ever uttered. Fear and anxiety had be- 
gun to spread in the seminary lest a malignant and 



HER CHARACTER AND LABORS. 357 

fatal disease were among them. Under the influence 
of an excitement almost supernatural, having just 
been looking, as it were, into heaven, and burning 
with a desire to lead her pupils to trust Providence 
and fear no evil, she appeared before them and ex- 
claimed, ft Shall we fear what God is about to do ? 
THERE is NOTHING IN THE UNIVERSE THAT I PEAR, BUT 

THAT I SHALL OT KNOW ALL MY DUTY, OR SHALL PAIL 
TO DO IT." 

Noble sentiments to constitute this Christian 
teacher's last instruction to her pupils ! Appropriate 
words for her to utter just as she was entering the 
portals of heaven ! Worthy a place on the marble 
that transmits her memory to posterity. 



The Rev. Dr. HUMPHREY, in his sermon preached 
at her funeral, says, 

" In glancing at Miss Lyon's character, taken all 
in all, I hardly dare to express the high estimation 
which my long acquaintance constrains me to cherish, 
lest I should seem to exaggerate. I certainly should 
not express it but in the presence of those who have 
enjoyed equal or better opportunities for marking her 
radiant and upward course. I do not say that in her 
intellectual endowments she was superior to many 
other females, nor that she attained to the first rank 
in external graces and accomplishments; but this I 
do say, that, so far as I can remember, I have never 
known so much physical, intellectual, and moral pow- 
er all combined in any one female as in our departed 



358 LIFE OP MARY LYON. 

friend. Such labors as she performed would have 
broken down almost any other constitution years ago. 
Such constitutional energy as she possessed, always in 
action, often intense, would have shattered any ordi- 
nary framework long ere the meridian of life. Such 
tasks as she imposed upon her brain, especially dur- 
ing the three years which she spent in planning the 
seminary and enlisting the necessary agencies for get- 
ting it up, would have disorganized almost any other. 
How, under such extreme tension, the 'thousand 
strings' held together, and 'kept in tune so long, 7 
was a wonder to all her acquaintances. 

"Miss Lyon's mind was of a high order, clear, 
strong, active, well balanced, inventive, which no dis- 
couragement could depress, no obstacle daunt. It is 
very rare indeed to find such mental strength and 
such quenchless ardor controlled by the soundest dis- 
cretion and the best 'round-about common-sense/ 
One of the strong proofs of Miss Lyon's intellectual 
superiority, which must have struck all who knew 
her, was the power which she had to influence other 
minds. As a teacher and governess of a great school, 
few have equalled her in this respect. It might be 
difficult to show exactly wherein her great skill and 
success lay ; but no scholar, I believe, was ever long 
under her care without feeling herself in a sort of 
enchanted circle, held there by invisible attractions 
which it was hard to resist, and from which very few 
wished to be released. Nor was it the young alone 
whom she had $e power to influence. The maturest 
minds felt it when she needed their aid ; and but for 
this, she could never have enlisted so many heada 



HER CHARACTER AND LABORS. 359 

and hearts and hands as were necessary to build and 
establish this noble seminary. 

" But it was the moral -and religious in Miss Lyon's 
character which eclipsed all her other endowments, 
and in which her great strength lay. And the most 
prominent feature was benevolence. To do the greatest 
possible good to the greatest number was her study 
and delight. I feel that on this point there is hardly 
any danger of using too strong language. To say 
that she was preeminently benevolent is not strong 
enough. In humble imitation of her Saviour, she 
seemed, wherever she went, and in all her relations, 
to be the very embodiment of love and good will to 
men, and never to have thought of herself, of her own 
ease, advantage, or convenience. It was enough for 
her that others were made wiser and better and hap- 
pier, at whatever cost of toil or sacrifice to herself. 
She seemed scarcely to know that she had any per- 
sonal interests to care for. If it were not a solecism 
in terms, I should say that Miss Lyon lived out of her- 
self; and I do say, and I appeal to all who marked 
her beneficent course from early life, that she lived 
incomparably more for others, for her pupils, for the 
church, and for the world, than for herself. I do not 
believe that an instance can be recollected by any 
human being, since she entered on her bright career 
of usefulness, in which she appeared to be actuated in 
the slightest degree by selfishness. Mistakes she un- 
doubtedly made, for who does not ? but all the thou- 
sands who knew her might be challenged to show that 
she ever, by word or deed, appeared to prefer her 
own advantage to the good of others." 



360 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

PROM THE ADDRESS OP REV. DR. HITCHCOCK, AT THE FIRST 
ANNIVERSARY OP THE SEMINARY AFTER MISS LYON'S 
DEATH. 

DR. HITCHCOCK, in noticing some of her general 
characteristics, says, 

" In her intellectual adaptation to the work assigned 
her, there was a full development of all the powers, 
with no undue predominance in any one of them. It 
were easy to find individuals more distinguished by 
particular characteristics, but not easy to find one 
where the powers were more harmoniously balanced, 
and where, as a whole, the mind would operate with 
more energy and efficiency. She did, however, ex- 
hibit some mental characteristics, either original or 
acquired, more or less peculiar. It was, for example, 
the great features of a subject which her mind always 
seized upon first. And when she had gained a clear 
conception of these, she took less interest in minute 
details ; or rather, her mind seemed better adapted to 
master fundamental principles than to trace out mi- 
nute differences. Her mind would work like a giant 
when tracing out the history of redemption with Ed- 
wards, or the analogies of nature to religion with 
Butler, or the great truths of Theism with Chalmers ; 
but it would nod over the pages of the metaphysical 
quibbler, as if conscious that it had a higher destiny. 
And yet this did not result from an inability to de- 
scend to the details of a science when necessary. 

"The inventive faculties were also very fully devel- 
oped in our friend. It was not the creations of fancy 
merely, such as form the poet, but the power of find- 
ing means to accomplish important ends. Nor was 



HER CHARACTEE AND LABORS. 361 

it invention unbalanced "by judgment, such as leads 
many to attempt schemes impracticable and quixotic. 
For rarely did she attempt any thing in which she 
did not succeed; nor did she undertake it till her 
clear judgment told her that it would succeed. Then 
it mattered little who or what opposed. At first she 
hesitated, especially when any plan was under con- 
sideration that would not be generally approved ; 
but when, upon careful examination, she saw clearly 
its practicability and importance, she nailed the col- 
ors to the mast, and though the enemy's fire might be 
terrific, she stood calmly at her post, and usually saw 
her opposers lower their flag. She possessed in an 
eminent degree that most striking of all tne charac- 
teristics of a great mind, namely, perseverance under 
difficulties. When thoroughly convinced that she had 
truth on her side, she did not fear to stand alone and 
act alone, patiently waiting for the hour when others 
would see the subject as she did. This was firmness, 
not obstinacy, for no one was more open to convic- 
tion than she ; but her conversion must result from 
stronger arguments, not from fear, or the authority of 
names. Had she not possessed this feature of charac- 
ter, Mount Holyoke Seminary never would have ex- 
isted, at least not on its present plan. But its tri- 
umphant success for one third of a generation is a 
striking illustration of the far-reaching sagacity and 
accurate judgment of its originator. 

"Besides this seminary, the most striking example 
of the inventive powers of our friend is that only vol- 
ume which she has left us I mean the ' Missionary 
Offering 7 called forth by an exigency in a cause 

MnryLyon. 16 



362 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

which she dearly loved, and whose most striking char- 
acteristic is its missionary spirit. Yet it is in fact a 
well-sustained allegory, demanding for its composition 
no mean powers of invention and imagination. 

" Miss Lyon possessed also the power of concen- 
trating the attention and enduring long-continued men- 
tal labor in an extraordinary degree. When once 
fairly engaged in any important subject, literary, sci- 
entific, theological, or economical, there seemed to be 
nothing in the external world to break up her train 
of thought, or prevent her reaching the desired result. 

" Another mental characteristic of our friend was 
her great power to control the minds of others. And it 
was done too without their suspecting it; nay, in 
opposition often to strong prejudice. Before you 
were aware, her well-woven net of argument was over 
you, and so soft were its silken meshes that you did 
not feel them. One reason was, that you soon learnt 
that the fingers of love and knowledge had unitedly 
formed the web and woof of that net. You saw that 
she knew more than you did about the subject ; that 
she had thrown her whole soul into it ; that in urg- 
ing it upon you, she was actuated by benevolent mo- 
tives, and was anxious for your good ; and that it was 
hazardous for you to resist so much light and love. 
And thus it was that many a refractory pupil was 
subdued, and many an individual brought to aid a 
cause to which he was before indifferent or opposed. 

"I must not omit to mention her great mental 
energy and invincible perseverance. That energy was 
a quiet power, but you saw that it had giant strength. 
It might fail of success to-day, but in that case it 



HER CHARACTER AND LABORS. 363 

calmly waited till to-morrow. Nay, a score of fail- 
ures seemed only to rouse the inventive faculty to 
devise new modes of operation ; nor would the story 
of the ant that fell backward sixty-nine times in at- 
tempting to climb a wall, and succeeded only upon 
the seventieth trial, be an exaggerated representation 
of her perseverance. Had she lacked this energy and 
perseverance, she might have been distinguished in 
something else, but she never would have been the 
founder of Mount Holyoke Female Seminary. 

" Yet it is in HER RELIGIOUS CHARACTER, and there 
alone, that wo shall find the secret and the powerful 
spring of all the efforts of her life which she would 
wish to have remembered. But I approach this part 
of her character with a kind of awe, as if I were on 
holy ground, and were attempting .to lay open that 
which she would wish never revealed. In her ordi- 
nary intercourse, so full was she of suggestions and 
plans on the subject of education, and of her new 
seminary, that you would not suspect how deep and 
pure was the fountain of piety in her heart, nor that 
from thence the waters flowed in which all her plans 
and efforts were baptized and devoted to God. But 
as for the last thirty years the motives of her actions 
have been brought to light, I have been every year 
more deeply impressed with their Christian disinter- 
estedness, and with the entireness of her consecration 
to God. "Without a knowledge of this fact, a stran- 
ger might "mistake for selfishness the earnestness and 
exclusiveness with which she often urged the inter- 
ests of her seminary. But in the light of this know- 
ledge, the apparent selfishness is transmuted into 



364 LIFE OF MARY LTON. 

sacred Christian love. Her whole life indeed, for 
many years past, has seemed to me to be only a bright 
example of missionary devotedness and missionary 
labor. I have never met with the individual who 
seemed to me more ready to sacrifice even life in a 
good cause than she was; and had that sacrifice been 
necessary for securing the establishment of her favor- 
ite seminary, cheerfully, and without a moment's hes- 
itation, do I believe she would have laid down her* 
life. I would indeed by no means represent her as 
an example of Christian perfection. I could not do 
so great injustice to her own convictions. But since 
her death I have looked back over the whole of my 
long acquaintance with her in almost every variety of 
circumstance, to see if I could recollect an instance 
in which she spoke of any individual in such a way 
as to indicate feelings not perfectly Christian ; or if 
I could discover any lurkings of inordinate worldly 
ambition, or traces of sinful pride, or envy, or undue 
excitement, or disposition to shrink from duty, or of 
unwillingness to make any sacrifices which God de- 
manded; and I confess that the tablet of memory 
furnishes not a single example. What I considered 
errors of judgment I can indeed remember, but not 
any moral obliquity in feeling or action-. They doubt- 
less existed, but it needed nicer moral vision than I 
possess to discover them. 

" I ought to add that this eminence of Christian 
character was founded upon a clear apprehension of 
biblical principles. She thoroughly understood and 
cordially embraced the doctrines of the Puritans, just 
as they lie in their massive strength in the Bible 



HER CHARACTER AND LABORS. 365 

not as they often como forth, alloyed and weakened, 
from the moulds of a self-confident philosophy. To 
study these truths was her delight. To explain them 
to her pupils was one of her most successful efforts as 
a teacher. Would that I could present on canvas the 
picture of Miss Lyon as it lies in my memory, when 
she was engaged on the Sabbath absorbed in the study 
and contemplation of divine truth. 

" There were two religious principles which exert- 
ed an overmastering influence upon Miss Lyon's char- 
acter. One was a sense of personal responsibility ; 
the other, trust in an oyerruling Providence. As the 
Saviour, when he went up to Jerusalem for the last 
time, with his sufferings full in view, advanced before 
his disciples, as if in haste to suffer, so she, when 
duty called, did not wait for others, but was ready to 
precede them, and measure the amount of her sacrifi- 
ces, donations, and efforts by her sense of duty, rather 
than by the example of others. And it was this sense 
of personal responsibility which she urged always 
upon her pupils, and with great success. So strong 
too was her faith in a special providence, that delay 
and discomfiture in the execution of her favorite plans 
produced little or no discouragement, but led her to 
inquire more carefully whether there was not some- 
thing wrong in her or her plans which occasioned the 
delay ; and having done all she could, she would wait 
long and cheerfully for the divine manifestation. And 
so often had she witnessed interpositions in her behalf 
almost miraculous, that her faith might often be seen 
steady and buoyant when that of others yielded to 
appalling difficulties and dangers. 



366 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

" Such was Miss Lyon such the discipline through 
which she was made to pass to fit her for her work, 
and such the magnificent results. We are amazed 
when we look back at the amount and magnitude of 
her labors. Very few females have done so much for 
the world while they lived, or have left so rich a leg- 
acy when they died. Nor is the fair picture marred 
by dark stains, save those of microscopic littleness. 
From the days of her childhood to the time of her 
death, all her physical, intellectual, and moral powers 
were concentrated upon some useful and noble object ; 
while selfishness and self-gratification seem never to 
have stood at all in the way, or to have retarded the 
fervid wheels of benevolence. I cannot therefore be- 
lieve that it is the partiality of personal friendship 
which leads me to place Miss Lyon among the most 
remarkable women of her generation. Her history 
too shows the guiding hand of a special providence 
almost as strikingly as the miraculous history of 
Abraham, of Moses, of Elijah, or of Paul. Oh, it tells 
us all how blessed it is to trust Providence implicitly 
when we are trying to do good, though the darkness 
be so thick around us that we cannot see forward one 
hand's breadth, and bids us advance with as confident 
a step as if all were light before us. 

"This picture, too, is a complete one. Her life 
was .neither too long nor too short. She died at the 
right time, with her armor on and yet bright. But 
her friends saw that, strong as her constitution natu- 
rally was, it was giving way under such severe and 
protracted labor, and the infirmities of declining years 
beginning to show themselves, even at the age of fifty- 



HER CHARACTER AND LABORS. 361 

two. But with her Saviour she could say, ' I have 
finished the work which thou gavest me to do.' All 
her important plans had been carried into successful 
operation, and tested by long experiment; and the 
institution was in the right condition to be committed 
to other hands. She had also of late been rapidly 
ripening for another sphere of labor. One of her 
friends, who had been more intimately connected with 
her for several years past than any other, when at a 
distance she heard of her sickness, felt confident that 
it would be unto death ; for she had known how, for 
some months previous, her friend had been feeding 
daily on manna, and pluming her wings for her up- 
ward flight. Severe therefore as her removal seemed 
when first announced, it happened just at the right 
time ; and I cannot wish to call her back. But I do 
feel and many who hear me, I doubt not, feel it too 
I do feel a strong desire to be borne upward, on an 
angel's wing, to the mount Zion where she now dwells, 
and to hear her describe, in the glowing language of 
heaven, the wonders of Providence, as manifested in 
her own earthly course, as they now appear in the 
bright transparencies of heaven. Yet further, I long 
to hear her describe the still wider plans she' is now 
devising and executing for the good of the universe 
and the glory of Q-od ; and how admirably her earth- 
ly discipline fitted her for a nobler field of labor 
above ; so that these providences, which appear to us 
to have been consummated on earth, were, in fact, 
only a necessary means of adapting her to a work 
which shall fill and delight all her powers throughout 
eternal ages. Gladly too would I listen to her in- 



368 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

tensely earnest inquiries respecting her beloved sem- 
inary and friends on earth; and learn whether, in 
some way unknown to us, she may not be still able to 
administer to their welfare. how sweet too would 
it be, could we listen to that rapturous song of praise 
which ever and anon she would pour forth to her 
Redeemer, as his glories strike her eye, or his past 
kindness touches a chord of gratitude in her heart. 

"But alas, how vain are all such aspirations! 
And yet, my Christian friends, if we are faithful to 
God and duty as she was, in a very few days all this 
intercourse and communion will be a reality. Some 
of us may not indeed be able to sound so lofty a note 
of praise as our glorified friend ; but our song and 
our communion shall nevertheless be the music and 
the intercourse of heaven, and that will be enough." 



SENTENCES PROM HER LIPS. 369 



SENTENCES FROM MISS LION'S LIPS, 

TAKEN FROM THE NOTE-BOOK OF ONE OF HER 
PUPILS. 

NEVER destroy any thing that God has made, or given 
skill to others to make ; not even a kernel of corn, nor a 
pin. Never think any thing worthless until it has done 
all the good it can. This is the true sense of economy. 
Let it be an unobtrusive habit, practised constantly 
for Christ. Economy and self-denial are the two great 
springs which feed the fountains of benevolence. 

Comfort and economy, good taste and true Christian 
liberality, are not incompatible, but their union requires 
care, forethought, and good judgment. 

We must give according to our means and according 
to our outlays upon ourselves. A twenty-five cent do- 
nation by the side of a twenty-five dollar shawl would 
present a painful contrast. * 

Much in the Bible establishes the doctrine that a cer- 
tain proportion of our property should be devoted to the 
Lord. The system of tithing among God's chosen peo- 
ple is fully delineated in the Old Testament, while the 
clearer light of the New discloses our obligations so 
fully that it dispenses with specific directions, and leaves 
each to do what a heart touched by the love of Jesus 
prompts. With increased ability and increased demands 
upon us, our obligations are increased. Treasures are a 
touchstone for the heart. 

Our time as well as our property belongs to the 
Lord. We ought to take care of every hour, that we 
may have the more for communion with heaven. To be 

16* 



3TO LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

most exact in secular appointments and give only frag- 
ments to religious duties, is not seeking first the king- 
dom of God. When the daughters of the millennium 
shall occupy this seminary, they will not think a half- 
hour, morning and evening, sufficient for secret devo- 
tion. 

Ladies should not expect a large compensation for 
teaching. They should go into the business of instruc- 
tion from the same motives with which the servant of 
the Lord goes into the ministry. They do not always 
have to wait until they reach heaven to begin to receive 
their reward. The love of grateful hearts is a rich treas- 
ure, and even a better resource for a supply of our bod- 
ily wants than coffers of gold. 

Where is the unmarried lady with a good education 
and a well-balanced character who is not able to find 
employment and support? 

To be a good wife, it matters not what there is with 
a lady, but what there is of her. 

Happy is she who possesses the ability to live re- 
spefttably on a little. 

Teaching is a valuable preparation for influence. In 
no other way can the principles of the human mind and 
heart be so well learned. If you commence teaching 
and do not succeed, teach until you do succeed. Pre- 
pare thoroughly for every exercise and for every recita- 
tion, but study the minds and hearts of your children 
more than any book. She who can teach well, who can 
control the minds of the young happily and rightly, is 
all the better prepared for any sphere to which a lady 
can be called to be a minister's wife, or a missionary, 
or to stand at any post Perhaps the qualification for 
the highest influence is power to wield the pen, to write 
so as to make others desire to be better. 



SENTENCES FROM HER LIPS. 311 

To accomplish any thing valuable,. it is necessary to 
divide time wisely and systematically. Many have no 
definite lines to mark out their time. If they occasion- 
ally accomplish a considerable amount in a day, they 
know not how it was done ; and when they accomplish 
nothing, they know not the reason why. Just so with 
speaking ; many do not know the boundary where slan- 
der begins. Nearly all think it their duty or their priv- 
ilege to speak against others. 

When the Bible speaks, we are not to parley. It 
is our statute-book, and when it makes known our duty, 
we are not to answer back, any more than Abraham 
when he was commanded by a voice from heaven to 
offer up his son, his only son Isaac. 

The mind may have to bear a pressure of care, and 
yet the heart may be on the things of religion. A moth- 
er whose time and thoughts are necessarily engrossed 
with the care of her family, may yet have much enjoy- 
ment in God. 

This world is intended as a place of education for 
heaven, and when it is not made such, it is perverted 
from its true use. To this end, God has so arranged 
his providences, so planned his government, as to require 
unintermitting watchfulness, diligence, and effort. We 
are not to look for ease ; as fast as we acquire a facility 
in accomplishing one task, we may expect that another 
more difficult will be assigned us. This world is not 
our rest. 

Promptly and faithfully to perform every duty in the 
place where you are, as a member of a family, or of a 
school, is the best way to prepare for the duties of any 
and every station in life. Avoid, for your whole life, 
trying the patience or irritating the feelings of others, 
and cultivate those habits which will make you welcome 



312 LIFE OF MARY LTON. 

visitors and valuable friends anywhere. Pay all bills 
when they are due. Be perfect in all the requirements 
of this school, and you will have power to control your- 
self anywhere. 

We have great power over ourselves. We may be- 
come almost what we will. Portray to yourself a char- 
acter in mind, heart, education, taste, and manners, such 
as you ought to be, and then aim to be such. 

Never, under the plea of peculiar circumstances, 
allow yourself to do what you know would be wrong in 
another. 

Never write a foolish thing in a letter or elsewhere ; 
"what is written is written." 

When in doubt which of two courses to take, it is 
usually wise to choose that which involves the greatest 
self-denial : as when, for example, you feel loath to riso 
in the morning, or to go to meeting on the Sabbath. 

Never indulge inordinate desires for an earthly good. 
Experience has taught me to fear the gratification of any 
ardent desire, unless I have first been brought to yield 
my own will entirely to say from the heart, "Not as I 
will, but as thou wilt." 

We should so live that it will be pleasant for others 
to think of us when we are gone. Let us not only have 
our hearts right, "sprinkled from an evil conscience," 
but " our bodies washed with pure water 77 our external 
conduct, on which our influence and usefulness so much 
depend, free from reproach. 

Entire consecration to the service of God makes a 
person willing to take just the place to which he in his 
providence calls her, whether it be to a post of distinc- 
tion, or of humble and tedious labor. Outward circum- 
stances neither greatly elate or depress such an one. 
The blessings that we should most earnestly crave are, 



SENTENCES PROM HER LIPS. 373 

first, that we may dwell for ever in the presence of God ; 
and second, that we may be permitted to labor for him 
while we continue on earth. 

Scholars in the end respect and love those teachers 
best who seek their interest rather than their gratifica- 
tion. 

It is not by a person's seeking her own happiness 
directly, that it is attained ; but by a forgetfulness of 
self, and a consecration of thought, feeling, property, 
and time, to the interests of others. 

Cultivate a personal interest in all whom you meet, 
and make many general acquaintances, that you may 
lay a broad foundation for influence and usefulness, but 
be slow in forming intimate friendships. Be sure to 
have your heavenly Father for your most intimate 
friend. 

Write brief resolutions for the sake of self-admoni- 
tion, rather than a diary or journal. 

Happiness is to be measured not by present gratifi- 
cation, but by the results of our acts. A remembered joy 
is sometimes the bitterest sorrow. Kecollections of 
strenuous exertion in a good cause, of patient endurance 
for the sake of the right, of self-denial borne cheerfully 
for Christ's sake, are always agreeable. To be truly 
delightful, a thing must be increasingly sweet on every 
recollection, not only through time but to eternity. 
Acts to whose effects sin now blinds the mental vision, 
may yet be in the end sources of indescribable woe. 
" Son, remember," said Abraham to the rich man in his 
place of torment. 

The most wretched beings are those who think only 
of their own little selves, who are always regretting the 
past and reproaching themselves, and take no interest 
in any but themselves. This is a portion of the misery 



874 LIFE OP MARY LYON. 

of the lost in hell, and we often see it painfully fore- 
shadowed in the wretchedness of the selfish on earth. 

One main difference between the moral laws of God 
and his laws of life and health is, that the former are 
founded on the immutable principles of right, and can 
never he set aside ; while the latter derive their authori- 
ty from God's natural appointment, and where they clear- 
ly conflict with right and duty may give place, as in 
exposing one's own life to preserve that of others. God 
has given us a certain amount of elasticity within which 
we can safely venture beyond the strictest regard for 
our own health. We must take care never to lessen this 
elasticity by using it in self-indulgence. 

When the mind is deeply impressed with eternal 
truths there is no disposition to be frivolous or trifling. 

A stated time, a particular place, and a punctual at- 
tention to secret prayer, are necessary to keep up the 
life and power of religion in the soul. 

There is a threefold duty in reference to the truth : 
to receive it, to believe and love it, and to obey it. 

The law of the Lord is perfect. Its requirements 
are in accordance with the principles implanted in our 
natures. It treats all alike. Thou shalt love the Lord 
thy God with all thy strength, and thy neighbor as thy- 
self. This is as easily obeyed in sickness as in health, 
in weakness as in strength by the wise as by the igno- 
rant, by the child as by the adult, by the poor as by the 
rich. It is exactly adapted to the wisdom of the wisest, 
to the poverty of the poorest, to the various conditions 
of all. Obedience is easy where there is first a willing 
mind. A conscience void of offence, enlightened by the 
Spirit, is the best exposition of this glorious law. 

God is the supreme Governor of the world, and of 
every thing that takes place in it. Every act as it is 



SENTENCES FEOM HER LIPS. 375 

performed, every word as it is spoken, every thought 
as it passes through the mind, takes its foreseen place 
in the infinite series of events out of which God will 
evolve the glory of his great name and the greatest good 
of the created universe. 

Some professing Christians depend on their plans fur 
religious improvement, instead of depending solely on 
Christ. We must do all that God would have us because 
he would have us, and leave the future with him. Some 
easily find dark hours. They are perpetually seeking 
enjoyment, assurance, or some remarkable manifestation, 
instead of seeking to do just what their heavenly Father 
appoints. They want to be able to look to themselves, 
to get through with the conflict. Keep the mind on 
Christ. Follow him through good report and through 
evil report, not for the sake of getting certainty, of feel- 
ing security, but to please him. Seek more grace instead 
of seeking more assurance. The way to increase your 
evidence is to increase in faith and love and conformity 
to the divine will. Drink in divine truth, obey all your 
heavenly Father's commands. " Then shall ye know, if 
ye follow on to know the Lord." 

A day set apart by ourselves from its ordinary avo- 
cations to be devoted exclusively to religious purposes, 
is like the alabaster box of ointment broken over the 
head of our Saviour. Some may ask, What profit is there 
in it ? why such waste ? why was this ointment poured 
upon the Saviour's head? It is from love to him. An 
hour spent in religious worship does not fail to meet its 
end. Time spent in earnest prayer, in sacred medita- 
tion, in absorbing adoration and praise, approximates 
more nearly to the felicity of heaven, than that spent in 
any other way or manner. 



376 LIFE OF MARY LYON. 

"Sweet the moments, rich in blessing, 
Which before the cross we spend." 

We know just as much of heaven as we know* ex- 
perimentally of feelings, purposes, and employments in 
unison with those of the saints about the throne of God. 
Communion with God the Father, God the Son, and God 
the Holy Ghost here below, is an earnest of the bliss 
reserved above. 



