r BV 
.(\3 



Class. 



Book. 

A 




Withdraw 
Drnison 



urn 



Vniv 



from 
'. Library 



Subject No. On page i SuTJeliNo. On page 



PROCEEDINGS 



FIRST TEN YEARS 



^MimiMJf sAra i@@iii^ 



INSTITUTED AT BOSTON, 1814. 



TO WHICH IS ADDED A BRIEF VIEW OF THE PRINCIPAL RELIGIOUS 
TRACT SOCIETIES THROUGHOUT THE WORLD. 



PRINTED FOR 
THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

BY FLAGG AND GOULD. 

1824. * 



I 






FORM OF A BEQUEST TO THE SOCIETY. 

I give unto the Treasurer, for the time being, of the American 

Tract Society, instituted at Boston in the year 1814, the sum of 

Dollars, for the purposes of said Society, 

and for which the receipt of such Treasurer shall be a sufficient 

discharge. 



LIBRARY. 

The Committee of the American Tract Society would suggest, 
that Donations of Books, for the purpose of forming a Library for 
the use of the Publishing Committee in the discharge of their ap- 
propriate duties, will be very acceptable ; and will, they trust, es- 
sentially promote the objects of the Institution. Any works of gen- 
eral utility are desirable, particularly those upon Theological sub- 
jects, and Books of Reference. 



1 



aw 



J 50 



PREFACE. 

The hand of Providence has been strikingly exhibited, in 
conducting many of the Benevolent Institutions which char- 
acterize the present age, from very small beginnings, to a 
state of powerful and successful operation. This remark is 
applicable to the American Tract Society, the origin of 
which may be traced to a little meeting of half a dozen indi- 
viduals, assembled to enjoy the advantages of christian in- 
tercourse, and to consult upon the interests of the Redeem- 
er's kingdom. A circumstance in itself unimportant, had 
suggested to one of them the thought, that a few choice 
Tracts, printed in large editions, might be afforded to be- 
nevolent individuals in the neighbourhood, at a much less 
expense, than the little books which they were frequent- 
ly purchasing for gratuitious distribution. The idea was 
suggested to his brethren, and excited so much interest, 
as to be made the subject of conversation and serious re- 
flection, which soon led to a proposition for forming a small 
Tract Society to put the design in execution. As the sub- 
ject was contemplated, it grew in importance j and though 
perhaps no one, at that time, anticipated that the Society 
they were about to form, would extend throughout the 
United States, yet it was seen that the subject demanded 
more mature consideration, and fervent prayer to the Fa- 
ther of mercies for his guidance and blessing. 

It was but a few days, before the Constitution which 
still forms the bond of union to the Society, was adopted ; 
and a subscription opened, giving each donor the privi- 
lege of receiving Tracts for gratuitious distribution, to a 
considerable part of the amount of the sum contributed. 

The plan was communicated to numerous friends ; and 
meeting their approbation, persons were designated to 



Withdrawn fepm 
Denison Univ. Library 



4 PREFACE. 

superintend such measures as might be adopted previous 
to the time specified for the formal organization of the 
Society. In the mean time contributions were made ; and 
the first Tract, containing addresses recommending the 
distribution of Religious Tracts, and testimonies to their 
usefulness, was published and circulated. This excited a 
deeper and more extensive interest. The work was in- 
deed begun ; and many seemed anxious to take a part in 
it. A large number of individuals advanced a sum suffi- 
cient to print each a Tract of his own choice— -and such 
was the blessing of God upon their efforts, that, though 
bound together by scarcely any thing but christian affec- 
tion, in less than three months previous to the formation 
of the Society, in May, 1814, Mty Tracts were printed, 
comprising two volumes of the Society's publications, and 
amounting, in all, to about three hundred thousand copies. 

Such was the origin of the Societ}', of whose proceed- 
ings for the first ten years, the Committee, in obedience to 
the call of friends and patrons, now present a brief out- 
line. They have supposed it expedient to record the do- 
ings of the Society, so far as practicable, in the order of 
time ; and to present, in succession, the ten Annual Re- 
ports, with such alterations as the nature of this publica- 
tion seemed to require. 

The Committee trust that the brief view of similar So- 
cieties in various parts of the world, which they have add- 
ed, will not be unacceptable to those whose interest in Re- 
ligious Tracts as an instrument of promoting the Redeem- 
er's cause in the earth, has occasioned the publication of 
this little volume. — To them it is affectionately commend- 
ed ; with humble reliance on the aids of the Holy Spirit, 
without whose blessing the Committee wish ever to feel 
that all their efforts will be in vain. 



FORMATION OF THE SOCIETY, 



At a meeting held in Boston, May 23, 1814, after the 
due appointment of a Chairman, 

It was resolved unanimously, 
That the members of this meeting learn, with much 
pleasure, the measures which have been adopted with 
reference to the formation of a Society for the purpose of 
printing and distributing Religious Tracts; and that it ap- 
pears desirable to form such a Society. 

The Constitution, previously framed, was then present- 
ed ; and having been adopted, the following gentlemen 
were elected as Officers for the year ensuing, vjz: 

WILLIAM BARTLET, Esq. Newbury port, President. 
Rev. JEDEDIAH MORSE, D. D. Charlestown, V. Pres. 
Rev. JOHN CODMAN, Dorchester, Corresp. Secretary. 
Rev. JOSHUA HUNTINGTON, Boston, Rec. Secretary. 

HENRY GRAY, Esq.* Boston, Treasurer. 
Mr. SAMUEL T. ARMSTRONG, Boston, Assistant Treas. 

Rev. JEDEDIAH MORSE, D. D. . 

Rev. LEONARD WOODS, D. D. Andover, ) „ . 
Rev. JOHN H. CHURCH, Pelham, N. H. > * xecut ™ e 
Rev. JOSEPH EMERSON, Beverly, V L ' otnmlttee - 

SAMUEL FARRAR, Esq. Andover, J 

* Mr. Gray declining to act as Treasurer, the office was trans* 
ferred to Jeremiah Evarts, Esq,. Boston. 



THE CONSTITUTION. 



During the last twenty years, many millions of Religious 
Tracts have been distributed by Christians, in Europe and 
America ; and during the last twelve years the religious 
public in the United States have taken an active part in 
this labour of love. The experience of the past affords 
abundant encouragement to continue and extend efforts of 
this description. For the purpose of directing and com- 
bining all the energy and activity which can be brought 
into operation, in this cause, a number of individuals, in 
different parts of New England, have agreed to form them- 
selves into a Society, and have adopted the following Con- 
stitution. 

Art. 1. The Society shall be styled The American Tract 
Society.* 

Art. 2. The object of this Society is to promote the in- 
terests of vital godliness and good morals, by the distribu- 
tion of such Tracts, as shall be calculated to receive the 
approbation of serious Christians of all denominations. 

Art. 3. Any person, who shall pay twenty dollars, or 
more, into the Treasury of the Society, at any one time, 
shall be a member for life ; and any person, who shall en- 
gage to pay two dollars, or more, annually, shall be a 
member so long as his subscription shall be paid. 

Art A. Every member shall be entitled to receive three 
fourths of the amount of his subscription, in Tracts, at cost. 
And any person, who shall engage to pay a less sum, annu- 

* In June, 1823, the name of this Society was changed from the 
" New England, " to the " American," Tract Society. 



CONSTITUTION. 7 

ally, than is sufficient to constitute him a member, shall be 
entitled to receive Tracts in the same proportion and at 
the same rate. 

Art. 5. There shall be an annual meeting of the Society 
in Boston, on the Monday preceding the General Election, 
at 6 o'clock, p. m. when a President, a Vice President, a 
Corresponding Secretary, a Recording Secretary, a Treas- 
urer, an Assistant Treasurer, an Auditor, and an Executive 
Committee, shall be appointed by ballot. 

Art. 6. It shall be the duty of the Executive Committee 
to superintend the publication and distribution of Tracts ; 
to procure a place of deposit in Boston ; to appoint corres- 
ponding committees ; to appoint a general agent, who shall 
conduct the sales ; and to make report of their doings at 
each annual meeting. 

Art. 7. It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to make 
an annual Report to the Society. 

Art. 8. Any Religious or Charitable Society, or any As- 
sociation of persons for the reformation of morals, or the 
suppression of vice, shall be entitled to receive Tracts at 
cost. 

Art. 9. No assessment shall be laid upon the members 
in addition to the annual subscription. 

Art. 10. Every meeting of the Society shall be opened 
and closed with prayer. 

Art. 11. At any annual meeting, such amendments of 
the Constitution may be made, as shall be recommended 
by the Executive Committee, and approved by two thirds 
of the members present. 

# * # See plan of an Auxiliary Society, page 3#. 



TO THE 

FRIENDS OF RELIGION, 

IN 

NEW ENGLAND. 

That the extensive distribution of cheap Tracts, must 
have an important influence upon the community, cannot be 
doubted. This influence will be good, or bad, according to 
the nature of the Tracts distributed. The splendid talents 
of Voltaire were never employed against Christianity with 
so much effect, as when they were devoted to the writing 
of small tracts, of licentious tendency, for gratuitous dis- 
persion among common people. A respectable writer, who 
had ample means of information, affirms, that the industry 
and efforts of a few infidels, directed to this object, was a 
prime instrument of producing those terrible convulsions, 
which have since shaken the civilized world. The British 
Christians, taught by the zeal and enterprise of infidels, re- 
solved ; to foil the enemy at his own weapons.' A Society 
was formed, whose design was to print Religious Tracts, in 
so great quantities, and at so cheap a rate, that good men of 
small means might be able to give them away; and that all 
the hawkers and little pamphlet shops in the kingdom, might 
be enlisted, from the ordinary love of gain, to aid their cir- 
culation. The success of this undertaking surpassed the 
most sanguine expectations of its friends. From the last 
Report of this Society, it appears that its Tracts have cir- 
culated u fromthe shores of the Baltic to the Cape of Good 
Hope, through the whole of Europe and India, and were 
pressing upon the inhabitants of China; and that within 
the short period since the Institution commenced its ope- 
rations, upwards of thirteen millions of Tracts have been 
distributed by its agency ." 

Within the same period, similar Societies have been es- 
tablished in various countries of Europe, particularly in 
Denmark and Sweden. By one parish in the latter king- 
dom 600,000 Tracts have been distributed ; and 500,000 



TO THE FRIENDS OF RELIGION. 9 

in another place, by the benevolence of a single wealthy 
individual. 

In different parts of our own country, many have engaged 
in the same good work with no inconsiderable zeal and 
success. Indeed the amount of good already accomplished 
in the United States, by means of Religious Tracts, can nev- 
er be estimated, till it is revealed in the light of eternity. 
But much remains to be done. No Society has hitherto 
been established, on a plan of operation sufficiently exten- 
sive and permanent to answer all the great purposes for 
which such an institution is needed. To create a Society 
that shall possess means adequate to these purposes, is the 
design of the plan herewith presented to the public. 

It is to be distinctly understood, that this Society is not 
designed to interfere with the province of religious Maga- 
zines. Much of the matter which renders these periodi- 
cal works especially valuable to their readers, is not adapt- 
ed to the design of Tracts. These must be simple, serious, 
practical. They must be intelligible to the fc way-faring 
man,' and the tenant of the cottage. Learned criticism, 
discussions in polemic theology, and even articles of relig- 
ious intelligence, unless comprised in a few sentences, can 
have no place in these little pamphlets which are design- 
ed for promiscuous and, to a great extent, gratuitous 
dispersion among those, who otherwise would scarcely 
read any thing. Instead of diminishing, they will doubt- 
less increase the demand for religious Magazines. 

It is to be understood also, that this Society is not intend- 
ed to supersede, or to interfere with any of those Tract or 
Moral Societies which are already established. On the 
contrary, its primary object is to aid such Societies wher- 
ever they are formed ; to multiply their numbers, to en- 
courage and increase their efforts, till their salutary influ- 
ence shall be felt in every village of our country. 

Too long have good men stood still, in criminal supine- 
ness, or silent despondence, while a flood of licentiousness 
has been sweeping away the institutions of Christianity, 
and the landmarks of our fathers. It is time that they, 
who have slumbered amidst these growing impieties, or 
bave wept over them in secret places, should unite in a 



10 TO THE FRIENDS OF RELIGION. 

common effort to 6 strengthen the things that remain, and 
that are ready to die.' 

The period is portentous. While war with its dire ca- 
lamities rages over Christendom; while the worst passions 
of men are let loose from restraint; while the world is 
overturned and the earth rent in pieces ; it becomes the 
friends of Zion to adore the righteous Providence that is 
thus smiting the nations. But it becomes them not to sit 
down in sloth. God has made every man responsible for 
the use or abuse of his personal influence. Whether that 
influence is great or small, he is sacredly bound to employ 
it in doing good. The field for action is extensive ; the mo- 
tives to action are various and momentous. In this Chris- 
tian land, the Sabbath is dreadfully profaned, and in some 
places, is in danger of being utterly forgotten. Multitudes 
throng the road to death. These immortal creatures can- 
not be brought to consideration, till they are first brought 
to read. They cannot read without books ; and a great 
proportion of them will never have books, unless they are 
furnished by the hand of charity. Here then is an urgent 
call for the exercise of Christian benevolence, on a large 
scale. The New England Tract Society is established 
for the purpose of publishing a great variety of the best 
Tracts that can be procured, by selection, or original com- 
position, and in such quantities as to supply all the demands 
of individuals or Societies, in different parts of the country. 
The deep interest which this subject has already excited, 
the promptitude and liberalitjr with which many have en- 
tered into the plan, and contributed the means for its ex- 
ecution, is regarded as an auspicious omen that it will be 
attended with the blessing of Heaven, and the cordial co- 
operation of the friends of religion. 



AN 

ADDRESS TO CHRISTIANS, 

RECOMMENDING THE 

DISTRIBUTION OF RELIGIOUS TRACTS. 



When Jesus was on earth, he went about doing 1 good. 
Can he claim the name of a disciple who does not imitate 
the example of the Master? Are we not in this respect pe- 
culiarly called on to have the same mind in us, which was 
also in Christ Jesus? A spirit of active benevolence is one 
of the distinguishing features of Christianity. Thou shalt 
love thy neighbour as thyself, is a precept enjoined by the 
authority, and illustrated and enforced by the example of 
the Redeemer, with an energy which nothing but the 
blindness and obduracy of human depravity could resist. 

Where the Gospel has its full influence, it calls into ex- 
ertion all the powers of the soul ; and produces the most 
tender concern for the happiness of mankind. This concern 
does not evaporate in unavailing pity ; but rouses to action^ 
and girding itself for service, inquires,' What can be done 
toward banishing human misery, and making man happy V 
While the temporal necessities of the poor and the afflicted 
are affectionately inquired into and relieved, the Christian, 
enlightened from above to view the state of man, as an im- 
mortal being, is most concerned for his eternal blessedness. 
This is the grand object he is called to pursue with seven- 
fold ardor; and it is an object so vast, that if we saw all its 
excellence and all its importance, it would cover us with 
shame and confusion for our past negligence, and pierce us 
to the heart, while we recollect so many precious opportu- 
nities of usefulness which now, alas ! are irrecoverably 
lost. We have all need to go again, and sit down at the 
feet of Jesus, and hear him discourse on the one thing need- 
ful. We have all need to go and stand at the foot of the 
cross, and look up, and see in the death of Jesus the val- 
ue of immortal souls ; and learn thence the proper em- 
ployment of beings destined for eternity. If Jesus con- 
descend to teach us, and open our eyes to see the state 



12 ADDRESS TO CHRISTIANS. 

and worth of souls, we shall, with eager desire to become 
instruments of their salvation, cry out in tender pity, Lore?, 
what wilt thou have me to do ? 

This is the age of ingenuity. How many discoveries 
useful to individuals and to society have been made since 
we first trod the stage of life, and took our part in the dra- 
ma of human affairs. But is there an object in which the 
ingenuity of the mind should be so ardently employed as 
in searching for the best way, and the various means of 
doing good to the souls of men ? Would it not be to the 
most humiliating disgrace of Christians, if the mechanic, 
the manufacturer, the artist, and the philosopher, were 
ail actively employed with the utmost stretch of thought 
to find out what may be useful in their peculiar art or sci- 
ence, while the professed disciples of Jesus employ no en- 
ergies, nor exert the vigour of their souls in their proper 
department, the cause of their blessed Master ? Let us 
not be excelled by any ; and, if possible, let the maxim, 
' That the children of this world are wiser in their gen- 
eration than the children of light,' become inapplicable 
to us. Whatever may be said as to past negligence, let 
it now appear that we are busied in discovering every 
way of access for divine truth into the human heart ; and 
that we are resolved to employ every means we can think 
of as conducive to that end. 

Among many others, none of which should be neglect- 
ed, there is one which merits peculiar notice, and which 
we would earnestly recommend to the serious attention of 
the disciples of Jesus, as calculated to be of eminent and 
extensive benefit : namely, 

THE DISTRIBUTION OF RELIGIOUS TRACTS. 

To this subject many zealous followers of the Redeem- 
er, who are a blessing to the generation in which they 
live, have never turned their thoughts; and at first sight 
may not perceive its great utility : but when they have 
examined it maturely, they will find that there remains one 
method of doing good, which they never used, and which 
they will now have the pleasure to employ. 

The advantages which may be expected to result from 



ADDRESS TO CHRISTIANS. 13 

the distribution of Religious Tracts, are indeed so many 
and so great, that, where duly weighed, it is to be hoped 
they will have a powerful influence on the mind of every 
lover of Jesus and of souls. The following will be readily 
allowed, and carry with them their own recommendation. 
It is a method which is likely to do good. Is not divine 
truth the grand instrument, of which God makes use for 
the conversion of sinners, and for the edification and com- 
fort of saints, till they come, in the unity of the faith and 
of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, 
to the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ ? All 
the wonders of faith, holiness, and patience, which Chris- 
tians have displayed, have been wrought by the influence 
of truth upon the soul. In the promulgation of truth by 
preaching, which was God's first way of making the Gos- 
pel known, there are assuredly some peculiar advantages. 
But in doing it by writing, there are advantages also ; and 
it has this recommendation, that it is God's chief way of 
making himself known to the human race from age to age, 
and of presenting truth to the minds of men from day to 
day in every land where the revelation of his will is known. 
Are there not thousands and tens of thousands now in glo- 
rv, whose first impressions of religion, as well as their fu- 
ture improvement, have been made by reading; and is it 
not calculated to be as useful now, as ever? What is a 
Religious Tract, but a select portion of divine truth, de- 
signed and adapted to make the reader wise unto salvation? 
It is an easy way of doing good. Every one has not the 
talent of talking to those he meets with, especially to stran- 
gers, on subjects of religion. They who possess this tal- 
ent cannot see what should hinder any body from convers- 
ing about eternal things, as readily as they do. But there 
are many pious people who find it extremely difficult to 
speak for God, and for the salvation of their fellow crea- 
tures. Some have a diffidence which they cannot over- 
come. They know that they ought to warn sinners of 
their danger ; but how to do it they cannot tell. Here is 
a method by which it may be done with case. Choose 
from your collection of Tracts what you think is suited to 
the person to whom you wish to speak. It is not hard to 
gay, ' My friend, read that, and tell me what you think of 



14 ADDRESS TO CHRISTIANS. 

it.' You have given him a wise, faithful, and serious 
counsel, which, accompanied with your prayers, (and 
these should never be omitted when you give a Tract,) 
may, by the blessing of Heaven, be made useful to his 
soul. You may, in consequence of this, afterwards have 
an opportunity of conversing with him on the subject. 
At any rate you have conveyed divine truth to the door 
of his mind. 

It is a cheap way of diffusing the knowledge of religion. 
The Tracts are in general small. They may be had at a 
very reasonable rate ; and the person who will devote a 
small sum annually for this purpose,, may convey to many 
hundred people in the course of a year, the knowledge 
of the way of salvation by a crucified Redeemer. A cent 
or two, which would furnish but a scanty relief to the bod- 
ily wants of the poor and the destitute, will purchase a 
Religious Tract, plainly and affectionately directing the 
sinner to the 'Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins 
of the world.' None will grudge the pittance, or com- 
plain that this is a dear way of doing good to the souls of 
men. It will be indeed difficult to say, in what other way 
there is a probability of so much good being done with so 
small a sura. 

It is not so likely to give offence as some other methods 
of doing good. When we speak to a neighbour or a stran- 
ger on divine things, he is apt to consider us as assuming 
the place of a master, and setting up for his superior in 
knowledge and goodness. Pride instantly takes the alarm. 
He scorns to be dictated, as he conceives it. His heart 
is steeled against counsel, and a tart answer, expressive of 
disdain, is all the fruit of our labour. But when a little 
Tract is put into his hand, the teacher is not the giver of 
the book ; but a third person, an absent lettered sage. It is 
read apart from him who gave it. The idea of inferiori- 
ty, which was so mortifying, is removed. There is not that 
enmity against the paper and print, which was raised by 
the presence and living voice of the instructer; and he 
listens with greater candor and patience. This method 
has more the appearance of a person's teaching himself, 
than when he is spoken to by another, and is on that ac- 
count more agreeable to his feelings, and the truth is more 
readily received, Some are accessible in no other way. 



ADDRESS TO CHRISTIANS. 15 

It is more extensive in its use, than any other method of 
conveying religious knowledge which a private Christian 
can employ. Personal instruction must, from the time it 
requires, be limited to few comparatively. A Religious 
Tract contains a plain, serious, and striking lecture on the 
salvation of the soul. It would require half an hour to de- 
liver its contents ; and they might slip out of the memory, 
and could not afterwards be recalled. But it is given away 
in an instant ; it may be perused and re-perused at pleasure; 
and the truth may thus flow through a great variety of 
channels. An intimate and respected friend has for some 
time endeavoured to do good in this way ; and what can 
be done, may be learned from his practice. He altvays 
keeps by him a store of Tracts of different kinds, and suit- 
ed to different characters ; and he pays particular atten- 
tion to character in the distribution. He gives them to 
his poor neighbours, and to people who call at his house. 
When he walks out, he tries to get into conversation with 
those he meets, and puts a Tract into their hands. He 
gives them to children to read to their parents. When he 
travels, Religious Tracts are a necessary part of his bag- 
gage. If he sees a person walking along the road, who 
is likely to listen to instruction, he reaches him a Tract. 
At every turnpike he hands the gate keeper one ; and 
wishes him God's blessing with it. When he comes to an 
inn, he puts a Tract into the hands of the waiter, the ser- 
vant-maid, and the hostler; the driver never fails to have 
two or three. If he saunter about the town, he looks 
into the habitations of the poor, and talks kindly to them, 
and gives the parents or the children one or two of his 
little books, with an affectionate wish that God may bless 
them. When he stops at a friend's house, he presents 
them to the children and servants. Besides these person- 
al distributions, he sends parcels of his Tracts to ministers 
of his acquaintance, and other friends in the country, for 
them to distribute in a similar manner. When it is con- 
sidered, that a Tract given by a friend, recommends it to 
an attentive perusal; and when by a stranger, excites cu- 
riosity to see what it contains ; and that each of these 
Tracts may be read not only by the person who receives 
it^ but by four or five more who compose his household ; 



16 ADDRESS TO CHRISTIANS. 

and that it may be lent from one family to another ; we 
may form some idea how extensively divine truth is dis- 
seminated by his means. What one person does, others 
may do; and if every Christian, according to his abilities 
and opportunities, were to exert himself in this manner, 
how many in the course of a year might learn the method 
of salvation by Christ, and be excited to seek after it un- 
der the preaching of the Gospel, who, in all probability, 
would not have heard of it in any other way ! 

Nor in the enumeration of advantages, should it be omit- 
ted, that the distribution of Religious Tracts forms an excel- 
lent accompaniment to other means of doing good. If in the 
intercourse of life you meet with a person who appears 
teachable and desirous of instruction, what can be more pro- 
per, after you have discoursed with him, than to say, "Here 
is a little book which will give you distinct information on 
the subject ; read it again and again, and pray to God for 
his blessing." When by conversation you have impressed 
a person with a sense of the importance of divine things, 
would it not conduce greatly to rivet the impression, if at 
parting, when you observe him loath to leave you, a Tract 
be put into his hands, with these words, "My friend, this 
will more fully explain what we have been talking of; it 
contains the truths of God?" Should there fall in your way 
a man distressed in mind, and inquiring with tears, " What 
must I do to be saved ?" can your pious counsels be better 
followed up than by a Tract to read at home, directing the 
wounded soul to the blood of Jesus, which cleanseth from 
all sin ? Has a person been awakened under the ministry 
of the word, and afterwards brings his complaints to the 
preacher, who with the tongue of the learned knows how 
to speak a word in season to him that is weary ; would it 
not be a very proper method of dismissing the inquirer, to 
give him a Tract which will, when he is at a distance from 
ordinances or pious friends, refresh his heart with the same 
precious truths which he felt so much adapted to his case ? 
How beneficial the practice here recommended would be 
in all these, and many other instances which might be ad- 
duced, must be obvious to every one concerned for the 
welfare of immortal souls. 

In addition to these advantages and as a practical con= 



ADDRESS TO CHRISTIANS. 17 

firmation of them, the happiest effects have resulted from the 
practice recommended. Nothing has the weight of facts: 
to fair reasoning, therefore, it is of use to subjoin examples. 
If any should say, " We are not convinced by your argu- 
ments;" they cannot controvert matters of fact. Two in- 
stances came within the knowledge of an individual, (who 
is a warm advocate for the distribution of Religious Tracts,) 
which he had from the lips of the persons themselves, and 
which he will briefly relate. The one is a young gentle- 
man who had been in a situation peculiarly unfavourable to 
religion and morality, who was living in profaneness and 
vice, and who discovered a peculiar enmity to real godli- 
ness, and could not bear, without expressing bitter indigna- 
tion, the counsels of pious friends. A relation of his, being on 
a visit at the house where he lived, one evening put into 
his hand a Religious Tract, and begged the favour of him 
to read it. He took it up with him to his apartment; and 
before he went to rest looked over the first page. It 
struck him that something was there he had never seen nor 
thought of before. He next day read the whole ; and the 
happy consequence was a deep concern for the salvation of 
his soul, a discovery of the way of obtaining mercy, and an 
immediate application to Jesus for pardon, grace, ana peace. 
He is now an eminently zealous Christian, and is vigorous- 
ly exerting himself to promote the knowledge of Christ in 
the neighbourhood where he resides. The Tract which 
proved so useful is peculiarly excellent, and merits a place 
in every collection, it is Vivian? s Three Dialogues between 
a Minister and one of his Parishioners. 

The other person had been a Seaman in the Navy. He 
was a Sabbath breaker, a drunkard, and a swearer; in 
short, a notorious sinner. His wife brought home, from 
the country hospital, a Religious Tract, which is given to 
those who go out recovered. He read it and was convinced 
of his sinful ways. It led him immediately to attend on the 
preaching of the Gospel, where he could hear the way 
pointed out by which a sinner can be saved; and there is 
every reason to conclude, from several years' observation, 
that he is a true disciple of Jesus Christ. 

Let the worth of the soul be duly considered ; and what 

a reward is here for the labours of thousands ! If two ex= 
2* 



18 ADDRESS TO CHRISTIANS. 

amples fall within the personal acquaintance of one man, 
how many, may we hope, will have reason to bless God 
through all eternity, for this method of conveying religious 
knowledge ; especially when we take into the account, that 
numbers of persons have not the courage, nor "the oppor- 
tunity, of making known in this life, the benefit they have 
received. Heaven will present a thousand glorious instan- 
ces of this nature, to the astonishment and joy of faithful 
ministers, and of zealous Christians, who have laboured to 
shed abroad the sweet savour of the Redeemer's name. 

From the serious consideration of these things, accompa- 
nied with the divine blessing which is earnestly implored 
to descend on every reader, may it not be hoped that there 
will not be one disciple of Jesus, who follows the Lord ful- 
ly, and who is desirous to be always abounding in the 
work of the Lord, but will be disposed henceforth to add 
this method of doing good, to those he has formerly em- 
ployed ? 

But perhaps he may inquire, Ct What Tracts are most 
proper to be given away, and calculated to do most good, 
that I may procure them." This is a question of no small 
importance. For as it is with religious books, some are 
highly valuable, some are comparatively useless, and some 
are exceedingly hurtful ; so it is as to small Tracts. Too 
much care cannot be taken, that they should all be excel- 
lent in their kind. Those who compose them ehould ex- 
ert their talents to the utmost; and those who give them 
away should carefully examine what are best worth their 
distribution. The following qualities should be sought for 
and are united in a good Tract. 

Pure truth. This, flowing from the sacred fountain of 
the Bible, should run from beginningio end, uncontaminated 
with error, undisturbed with human systems ; clear as 
crystal, like the river of life. There should be nothing 
in it of the shibboleth of a sect ; nothing to recommend 
one denomination, or to throw odium on another ; nothing 
of the acrimony of contending parties against those that 
differ from them ; but pure, good-natured Christianity, in 
which all the followers of the Lamb, who are looking for 
the mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life, can 
unite with pleasure, as in one great common cause. Nor 



ADDRESS TO CHRISTIANS. 19 

should any worldly scheme be interwoven with the truth; 
nor attempted to be concealed under its folds. Here 
should not be seen the slightest vestige of any carnal end, 
in any form or for any purpose, however laudable some 
may think it ; nothing but divine truth, unmingled, una- 
dulterated, and pure as it came from heaven, fit for the 
whole human race to imbibe. 

It should be plain. Perspicuity here is, next to truth, the 
first quality of a good Tract. If the Rhetorician's rule, 
4 That the meaning should be not only so plain that it may 
be understood, but so plain that it cannot possibly be mis- 
understood,' call for the writer's observance in one instance 
more than another, it is here, where the mass of readers are 
but little acquainted with divine things ; and their minds, 
unaccustomed to application, need to have truth made clear 
as the light of day. The want of this quality is more than 
sufficient to exclude a Tract from circulation. 

It should be striking. The design is to engage the atten- 
tion of those, who have but little relish for divine things ; 
and how difficult a matter that is, when religion is the sub- 
ject, those who are accustomed to address mankind on their 
most important interests can fully testify. However good a 
Tract may be, as to purity of doctrine, and perspicuity of 
style, if it be not so composed as to interest the reader in a 
more than ordinary degree, it is in danger of being thrown 
aside without a perusal. There is a way of representing 
divine truth, which renders it striking, and makes it pen- 
etrate the mind, and arrest the attention. With this view, 
strong, pithy expressions, lively representations of truth, 
and pathetic addresses, are here quite in point. For this 
quality should the liberal distributor of Tracts diligently 
search. 

It should be entertaining. A plain didactic essay on a 
religious subject may be read by a Christian with much 
pleasure; but the persons for whom these Tracts are chiefly 
designed, will fall asleep over it. This will not do ; it is 
throwing labour and money away. There must be some- 
thing to allure the listless to read, and this can only be 
done by blending entertainment with instruction. Where 
narrative can be made the medium of conveying truth, it is 
eagerly to be embraced, as it not only engages the atten- 



20 ADDRESS TO CHRISTIANS. 

tion, but also assists the memory, and makes a deeper im- 
pression on the heart. Dialogue is , another way of ren- 
dering* a Tract entertaining*. The conversation draws the 
reader insensibly along. He is generally one of the speak- 
ers introduced ; he finds his own sentiments and reasonings 
attacked and defended ; he feels every argument that is 
adduced; and the subject fixes itself strongly and deeply 
in his mind. Where neither of these methods can be used, 
ingenuity will have recourse to various other ways of giv- 
ing an agreeable relish to truth, and of seasoning it so as 
to whet the appetite of the reader. 

It should be full of ideas. There are but few instances 
in which this quality can be dispensed with. It is but a 
small present, and therefore should be made as valuable 
as possible. Its value will rise in proportion to the num- 
ber of precious truths which it contains. To ring a change 
upon two or three ideas is likely to be of little service ; it 
is but a mere taste of food. But when every sentence con- 
tains something useful, there is in a little Tract an abun- 
dant meal of the bread of life. For this purpose, truth 
should be compressed. The motto of every Tract should 
be, Multum in parvo ; and if the foregoing qualities be at- 
tended to, there is no danger of compressing too much. In 
preaching it may be necessary to dilate more, and to spread 
out truth to a larger extent ; but in a printed Tract, that is 
not necessary; for it is one of the advantages of reading 
above hearing, that a person may go over any part of the 
subject again and again, till he fully comprehends it, and 
lays it up in his mind. One of the excellencies of sacred 
Scripture is its fulness of truth ; and yet what book is so 
plain ? The more a Tract imitates it in this respect, the 
more valuable, and the more useful, through the divine 
blessing, it is likely to prove. 

What has been just hinted at before, requires to be en- 
larged on : namely, that in a collection of Tracts, besides 
those which are of common concern, there should be some 
adapted to various situations and conditions. General ex- 
hortations, men are too apt to consider as things with which 
they have no immediate concern. When an address is par- 
ticular, and directed to a specified situation, it comes home 
to the man's bosom, who feels himself described j and it 



ADDRESS TO CHRISTIANS. £1 

has a more powerful effect on his mind. In Tracts, as in 
preaching, therefore, the more particularly a subject can 
be brought close to an individual's case and feelings, the 
more useful it is likely to be. Hence the propriety and 
necessity of Tracts for the young and for the aged, for the 
children of prosperity and of affliction, for careless and for 
awakened sinners, and of entering into the reasonings, ex- 
cuses, temptations, duties, &c. &c. of each, and pointing 
out to them the way of the Lord. Hereby is presented 
to the judicious Christian an opportunity of giving to eve- 
ry one his portion of spiritual food in due season. 

That small Religious Tracts possessing these qualities, 
must be highly valuable, and well suited to the important 
purpose of conveying divine instruction, will be readily 
acknowledged ; but the difficulty is to find them. 

To remove this difficulty, and to provide an abundant 
supply of such as have been described, that shall be always 
ready when called for, a Society is instituted ; whose ob- 
ject will be to collect, compose, print, and distribute small 
Religious Tracts, and to dispose of them to subscribers and 
purchasers on the lowest terms. 

Here then is a favourable opportunity presented to every 
man, of doing good to the human race. And should it not 
be eagerly embraced ? How loudly do the necessities of the 
world call for relief! There are multitudes in this highly 
favoured country, as grossly ignorant of the way in which 
a sinner can be saved, as the idolaters of China: and how 
widely vice, wickedness, profaneness, irreligion and prac- 
tical atheism prevail in every town and village, a person 
has but to open his eyes to see ; and converse with men, to 
hear. Viewing men in the light of immortal creatures, 
their case is truly deplorable. If the wicked ; shall be 
turned into hell ; and they, that know not God and obey not 
the Gospel, shall be punished with everlasting destruction 
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his 
power;' surely, those who believe the Scriptures should 
deeply feel for the misery of so many wicked creatures as 
we see every day around us ; and be anxiously concerned 
by this means, as well as others, if possible, to pluck these 
brands out of the everlasting burnings. 

Perhaps some may say, S I am endeavouring to be useful 



22 ADDRESS TO CHRISTIANS. 

to my fellow creatures in many ways, I cannot in all.' 
Many who read this address, are without doubt, laying 
themselves out to do good to mankind ; and every pious 
heart must rejoice in their benevolence. But would »t not 
be well, O disciple of Jesus, to add this to the other means 
which you employ, and to enlarge your sphere of useful- 
ness ? Few things require less trouble, less expense, or less 
time. Rich Christians may very extensively disseminate 
the knowledge of Christ in this way, both by their own dis- 
tribution and by the assistance of others ; and persons, who 
have not a large proportion of the world's goods may be 
able to devote a small sum for this purpose, which, by the 
divine blessing, may turn to good account. 

Will it be objected by some reader : 4 1 do not think the 
distribution of Religious Tracts will do any good V Consid- 
er, friend, here is an evident tendency to do good. That 
you must allow ; and where there is a tendency, we ought 
to employ the means, depending upon God for his blessing. 
But even granting that no good should be done, your labour 
is not lost. God is honoured by your pious endeavours to 
promote his glory. You enjoy likewise the pleasing con- 
sciousness of having aimed at the salvation of immortal 
souls ; and if a cup of cold water, given to a disciple of 
Christ in the name of a disciple, shall in no wise lose its re- 
ward, an attempt to advance the kingdom of the Redeemer 
will not be forgotten by him, nor overlooked in that day 
when he maketh up his jewels. 

But your labour cannot be altogether in vain. There 
are effects, which, though they fall short of the sinner's sal- 
vation, are far from being unimportant to him, or to the 
world. Though the truth do not convert his soul, it with- 
holds him both from vices and from crimes. He is not ren- 
dered truly virtuous ; but he is much less vicious than he 
would otherwise be. In the present state of society, when 
wickedness stalks abroad in every form with a brazen 
front; to take away from the mass of vice, though but a 
small portion, and to add to the sum of virtue but a single 
grain, will, by the philosopher and the moralist, be neither 
overlooked nor despised. 

But there is reason to hope that still higher and nobler 
ends may be attained ; and that many may be hereby led 



ADDRESS TO CHRISTIANS. 23 

to the saving knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus. Sur- 
vey for a moment, in the case of an individual, the bless- 
ings you have conveyed. The man is, by reading your 
Tract, made wiser than if you had taught him all science, 
and richer and happier than if you had given him a world. 
He follows Jesus, and shines as a light on the earth. His 
children are trained up in the fear of God ; and his family 
is the abode of sanctity and love. He is a blessing to all 
around; and endeavours, both by his example and his in- 
struction, to bring his neighbours and his friends to an ac- 
quaintance, with the Saviour. Those, who are yet unborn, 
will have reason to call him blessed, and to thank the 
Christian who put the chosen Tract into his hand. 

The pleasure of success will unspeakably surpass what 
the world's epicures rind in the sweetest draught from the 
most delicious fountains of sensual delight. Should Heaven 
by its divine influences render the portion of sacred truth, 
contained in a Tract you handed to a humble traveller, as 
you passed along the road, the power of God to his salva- 
tion; and should you afterwards meet him and hear with 
astonishment the forgotten stranger say, ' I shall have rea- 
son eternally to bless you, Sir, for your present ; it has 
saved my soul ;' princes might envy your feelings, and beg 
a share of your joys. Should you not hear of it on earth, 
if when you are in heaven, one of its glorious inhabitants 
should approach you with looks of gratitude, and say, ' To 
you, my dear friend, under God, I owe this bright, eternal 
crown ; that memorable day when you put the little book 
into my hand, though forgotten by you, will never be erased 
from my rnind ; through the grace of Jesus, it made me 
wise unto salvation ;' who shall attempt to express, in the 
language of mortal men, the raptures of your soul ! Such 
words must be sweeter than the music of heaven to the ear. 
Let not these be considered as improbable suppositions: 
they may be realized to many of the members of the Relig- 
ious Tract Society. With what ardour should the thought 
inspire the disciple of Jesus! The \ery possibility should 
make every one afraid of neglecting to enrol his name among 
the friends of this institution, and to become a sower of the 
precious seed of heavenly truth. 



PROCEEDINGS 

XEPORTED AT THE FORMATION OF THE SOCIETY. 



At the meeting, held May 23, 1814, when the above 
Constitution and Addresses were adopted, it appeared that 
within the last three months, the following Tracts have 
been printed, making two entire volumes: viz. 

JVb. VOL. I. No. pages. 

1. Constitution of the Society, Address, &c. . . .24 

2. The Work of the Holy Spirit. By Rev. Robert Hall, A. m. 16 

3. On Intemperance ........ 32 

4. Without Holiness, no Man shall see the Lord ... 4 

5. The Warning- Voice 8 

6. A Dialogue between a Traveller and Yourself . . 4 

7. Happy Negro — Profligate Reclaimed — Praying Soldier . 8 

8. On the Lord's Day 4 

9. The Dairyman's Daughter. By Rev. Legh Richmond . 24 

10. The Shepherd of Salisbury Plain 24 

11. 'Tis all for the Best . . . . . . .16 

12. On the Third Commandment ...... 4 

13. To the Spectator of a Funeral 4 

14. The Power of Truth 12 

15. The Progress of Sin — On the Abuse of the Sabbath . . 8 

16. Pious Resolutions 4 

17. Parley the Porter ........ 12 

18. On Family Worship 12 

19. Three Dialogues between a Minister and Parishioner . 20 

20. " Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy" . . 4 

21. A Closet Companion, or a Help to Self-Examination . 8 

22. Repentance and happy death of the Earl of Rochester . 8 

23. Letter from Dr. Watts to Madam Sewall ... 8 

24. The Christian Indeed 12 

25. The Evils of Excessive Drinking ..... 8 

26. Sin no Trifle 4 

27. Parental Duties 12 

VOL. II. 

28. Instruction of the Rising Generation recommended . . 16 

29. Address to Children and Youth, relating to Prayer . . 4 

30. Advice to Children relating to Prayer .... 4 



1814] PROCEEDINGS, &C. 25 

JVo. Pages. 

31. The Westminster Assembly's Shorter Catechism . . 12 

32. Divine and Moral Songs for Children . . . .20 

33. To a Child 4 

34. Hymns for Infant Minds 60 

35. Sermons to Children, with Hymns suited to the Subjects 36 

36. Present to Children at School 4 

37. A New Heart the Child's Best Portion .... 8 

38. History of Miss Dinah Doudney, of Portsea, (Eng.) . 20 

39. Filial Duties 16 

40. Affectionate Address to Young Christians — Here and There 8 

41. A Persuasive to Public Worship — Faith and Works . 8 

42. The Importance of speaking Truth 8 

43. On Moderation in Food . . . . . . .4 

44. An Address to Youth ....... 12 

45. No Life Pleasing to God, but that which is Useful to Man- 

kind — The Art of Happiness — A New-Year's Song . 8 

46. Subjects for Consideration .8 

47. To the Afflicted— The Day of Judgment ... 8 

48. To the Aged 8 

49. Life of the Rev. John Cowper. By Wm. Cowper, Esq. 16 

50. The Swearers Prayer, or his Oath Explained ... 4 

The edition of No. 1, contained 3,000 copies : that of 
each of the remaining numbers, 6,000 — amounting in all 
to 297,000 Tracts. 



State of the Society's Fuivds, May 23, 1814. 

Paid for Printing, Folding &c. an edition of two vol- ? * 2 o/*-.qo 
umes of Tracts, with other contingent expenses > * ' 

Received of persons who subscribed to print Tracts $ 2,745-00 
Balance due from the Society $190*90 
Samuel Farrar, Treas. pro tem>. 



26 



ORIGINAL DONORS. 



[1814 



The following is a list of donations and subscriptions to 
print Tracts, received before, or about the time of the 
organization of the Society ; each Donor being entitled to 
receive Tracts to three fourths of the amount of the sum 
contributed. 



Jlndover, Mass. 

Mr. John Adams $40 

Mr. Timothy Ballard 60 

Amos Blanchard, Esq. 40 

Rev. Justin Edwards 20 

Samuel Farrar, Esq. 120 

Messrs. Flagg & Gould 40 

Mr. William Foster 20 

Rev. Ebenezer Porter, d. d. 20 

Theological Seminary 60 

Rev. Leonard Woods, d. d. 20 

Beverly. 

William Burley, Esq. 120 

Rev. David Oliphant 41 

Robert Rantoul, Esq. ,20 

Boston. 

Mr. Samuel T. x4rmstrong 60 

Mr. Pliny Cutler 40 

Henry Gray, Esq. 60 

Mr. William Harris 20 

Mr. Henry Homes 180 

Messrs. Homes & Homer 120 

Mr. Jonathan Howe 20 

Rev. Joshua Huntington 120 

Mr. James Murphy 2Q 

Abner Phelps, m. d. 30 

William Ropes, Esq. 120 

William Thurston, Esq. 20 

Samuel H. Walley, Esq. 60 

Charlestown. 

Rev. Jedidiah Morse, d. d. 120 

Danvers. 

Dea. James Brown 120 

Dea. Fitch Pool 20 

Dorchester. 

Rev. John Codman, d. d. 80 

Marblehead. 

Hon. Nathaniel Hooper 60 

Mrs. Polly Hooper 60 



William Hooper, Esq. 120 

Mr. Benjamin T. Reed 100 

Hon. William Reed 60 

Newburyport. 

William Bartlet, Esq. 275 

Moses Brown, Esq. 40 

Thomas M. Clark, Esq. 20 

Rev. Daniel Dana, d. d. 20 

Mr. James Kimball 20 

John Pearson, Esq. 30 

Mr. Ebenezer Wheelwright 20 

Reading. 

Daniel Chute, Esq. 30 

Solera. 

Mr. Samuel Adams 20 

Mrs. Elizabeth Bartlet 120 

Ebenezer Beckford, Esq. 20 

Capt. Andrew Haraden 100 

Mr. John Jenks 120 

Dea. Eliphalet Kimball 120 

James King, Esq. 120 

Mr. Ebenezer Secomb 40 

Col. Henry Whipple 60 

Stockbridge. 

Thaddeus Pomeroy, m. d. 20 

Topsjield. 
Hon. Nehemiah Cleaveland 20 

Portland, Me. 

Rev. Edward Payson, d. d. 84 

Mr. Edward H. Cobb 150 

Pelham, N H. 

Rev. John H. Church, d.d. 20 

Rockingham, Vt. 

Hon. William Hall 20 

Vernon, Con. 

Rev. Ebenezer Kellogg 90 

New Orleans. 

Alfred Hennen, Esq. 20 



$3,830 



MAY 29, 1815. 



The object of this Society is to furnish a deposito- 
ry of tracts, sufficient for the supply of all who may 
wish to purchase, either for their own use, or for charita- 
ble distribution. For various reasons, it is deemed proper 
that the Society should direct its attention and its meas- 
ures, primarily, to this simple design. To publish Tracts, 
and at the same time to take the care and responsibility 
of an extensive charitable distribution, would constitute a 
work so complicated and difficult, that a small Society, on 
attempting it, would be likely to be discouraged, and to 
fail. 

This establishment, by furnishing a supply of the best 
Tracts, to be sold on the lowest terms, will prevent much 
of the inconvenience and expense to which single Char- 
itable Societies must be subjected, by undertaking to pub- 
lish their own Tracts. Here, the same Tracts which they 
would print for themselves, and a great variety of others, 
will be supplied upon cheaper terms, than in any other 
way. Where any Society is desirous of circulating any 
useful Tract not contained in the Depository, it will, on 
the shortest notice, having received the approbation of 
the Committee, be published, and added to this Society's 
list. The facilities for the transportation of Tracts by 
water to the principal towns in the United States are great, 
and it will be attended with very trifling expense. 

It will then be understood, that the object of this estab- 
lishment, considered by itself, is not, at present, to act as 
a Charitable Society in the gratuitous distribution of Tracts ; 
but to furnish to Tract Societies, on the easiest terms, the 
most abundant means of accomplishing their designs; and 
to aid all general arrangements for the circulation of 
Tracts, by Benevolent Societies and individuals. 



28 FIRST REPORT. [1815 

The public have already been informed, that previously 
to the organization of the Society in May, 1814, 297,000 
Tracts, embracing fifty numbers, and making two vol- 
umes of 300 pages each, had been printed. But only a 
part of this amount could be considered as the property 
of the Society ; because a large proportion had been, or 
might be, taken by original subscribers, agreeably to the 
terms of their subscription. The actual capital of the So- 
ciety was therefore, at that time, but small, compared 
with the amount of Tracts which had been published. 
Hence the Executive Committee, after appointing Cor- 
responding Committees in some of the more distant parts 
of the country, and adopting measures to facilitate the sale 
and distribution of Tracts, soon found it necessary to so- 
licit further donations, in order to increase their capital, 
and to enable the Society to extend its operations. En- 
couraged by the liberality of generous patrons, they com- 
menced, and have now completed the publication of a 
third volume of Tracts, embracing the following num- 
bers : viz. 

JVfc. VOL. III. Pages. 

51. Preservative against the Sins and Follies of Youth . . 20 

52. Letter from an aged Mother to her only Son . . 4 

53. The African Servant. By Rev. Legh Richmond . . 16 

54. Friendly Advice 4 

55. How to make the most of a Day — Letter from a Clergyman 4 

56. Happy Poverty, an authentic History of Blind Ellen . 8 

57. The Duty of Caring for the Souls of Relatives . . 8 

58. History of Elizabeth L**** 8 

59. A Token for Mourners. By Rev. John Flavel . . 36 

60. Prayer for the Revival of Religion recommended . . 24 

61. Growth in Grace. By Rev. Dr. Thomas Goodwin . . 36 

62. An Adventure in Vermont, or the Story of Mr. Anderson 24 

63. The Cottager's Wife 24 

64. The Interpreter's House . - . . . . 8 

65. To a Youth at School 4 

66. Reflections on the Seven Days of the Week. By C. Talbot 24 

67. Address to Youth. By Bishop Watson .... 28 

68. Reason's Plea for Temperance ..... 4 

69. Religion of the Closet 16 

Besides publishing an edition of 6,000 of each of the 
above, the Committee have reprinted Nos. 2,9, and 10, 
m an edition of 6,000 ; and No> 1, in an edition of 3,000 ; 



1815] FIRST REPORT. 29 

together with 6,000 copies of the Proceedings of the Mid- 
dlesex Convention for Suppressing Violations of the Sab- 
bath, not numbered in the series on account of its local 
nature — making the whole number of 

Tracts published the last year 141,000. 

Whole number from the beginning 438,000. 

Having proceeded thus far in the publication of Tracts, 
and finding so ready a market, the Committee have been 
able to discharge all demands against the Society ; and al- 
so to form a permanent connexion with the printers, upon 
such terms, that they will print Tracts to any amount, ac- 
cording to the directions of the Committee, receiving their 
pay as sales may be made. This completes the system, 
and, in an important sense, renders it easy, consistent, and 
permanent. The Committee have, therefore, the satis- 
faction of announcing to the Society, that the establish- 
ment, at the close of the first year, is carried to a degree 
of perfection in its internal state, and to an extent of oper- 
ation, altogether unlooked for at the commencement of 
the Society. Sixty nine numbers are now on hand ; any 
of which may be immediately reprinted, whenever it is 
necessary. 

During the year, the Committee have located four De- 
positories: viz. 

•Rndover, Mass, (Th. Sem.) George A. Calhoun, Agent. 

Bridgeport, Con. Lambert Lockwood. 

Hartford, Con. Peter B. Gleason, & Co. 

Norwich, Con. Russell Hubbard. 

In Charleston, S. C. and in other states, Auxiliary Tract 
Societies have been formed. By the active cooperation 
of the Christian community, especially of persons of af- 
fluence and liberalit}', of Tract Societies, Moral Socie- 
ties, and other Charitable Institutions, in the circulation 
of Tracts, we may reasonably hope that rapid progress 
will be made in the diffusion of moral and religious in- 
struction through our land, 

3* 



30 FfRST REPORT. [1815 

OFFICERS, 

ELECTED MAY 29, 1815. 

WILLIAM BARTLET, Esa. President. 
Rev. JEDIDIAH MORSE, d. d. Vice President* 
Rev. JOHN CODMAN, d. d. Corresponding Secretary, 
Rev. JOSHUA HUNTINGTON, Recording Secretary. 

JEREMIAH EVARTS, Esa. Treasurer. 

SAMUEL T. ARMSTRONG, Assistant Treasurer, 

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE. 

Rev. JEDIDIAH MORSE, d. d. 
Rev. LEONARD WOODS, d. d. 
Rev. JOHN H. CHURCH. 

SAMUEL FARRAR, Esa. 
Mr. JOHN ADAMS, of Andover. 



>4C 



State of the Society's Funds. 

Paid Samuel Farrar, Esq. balance due to him on his \ 
account as Treasurer and Superintendant, pre- f 1 90*90 

vious to the organization of the Society, May ( 

23, 1814 ) 

Paid for paper and printing, with other contingent ) ft g 1 ~i 

expenses, from May 23, 1814, to May 29, 1815 \ 

$1,082-11 

Received, from May 23, 1814, to May 29, 1815, ) 200-00 

in Donations .....> 

Of the Agent of the General Depository, including) - Q^-bO 
some small Donations > 

$1,252-50 

Balance in favour of the Society, May, 29, 1815 170-39 

Jeremiah Evarts, Treasurer, 



MAY 27, 1816. 



With cordial congratulations on the return of this Anni- 
versary, your Committee would now submit their Second 
Annual Report. And they would do it with devout thank- 
fulness to God, that his benediction has attended their ex- 
ertions in his cause, and rendered them beneficial in ad- 
vancing the interests of the Redeemer's kingdom. 

During the past year, your Committee have steadily 
kept in view two prominent objects — the publication of 
Tracts, and the establishment of new Depositories. 

They have commenced a fourth volume, and since the 
last Annual Meeting, have published the following num- 
bers : viz. 

JVo. VOL. IV. Pages. 

70. On the Importance of Educating- Young Men for the Min- 

istry. By Rev. Lyman Beecher, d. d. . . .20 

71. The Bible above all Price. By Edward Payson, d. d. . 16 

72. Sixteen Short Sermons .24 

73. On Fashionable Amusements 12 

74. Great Effects result from Little Causes. By E. Porter, d.d. 12 

75. Life of William Kelly. An Authentic Narrative . . 16 

76. The Hermit — On Divine Providence (from Venn's Sermons) 8 

77. History of a Bible 12 

78. Conversion of Abigai 1 Hutchinson. By Rev. J. Edwards 8 

79. The Young Cottager. By Rev. Legh Richmond . . 36 

Your Committee have also completed second editions of 
the whole series of Tracts in the first and second volumes; 
and have published third editions of Nos. 1, 10, and 25. 
They have also published a second edition of No. 53, in 
the third volume ; and an edition of " The Christian Min- 
ister's Affectionate Advice to a Married Couple. By Rev. 
James Bean," as a substitute for Bishop Watson's Address, 
No. 67. The edition of Nos. 1 and 34, was 3,000; of No. 
8, 8,000; of No. 79, 10,000; and of each of the other 
numbers, 6,000 : to which must be added 4771 sheets of 



32 SECOND REPORT. [1816 

Tracts procured of Messrs. Cummings and Hilliard and 
Mr. Jonathan Howe, which may be reckoned as 12,000 
Tracts of nearly 10 pages each — making the whole num- 
ber of 

Tracts issued the last year 378,000. 

Whole number from the beginning 816,000. 

In this statement, your Committee make no account of 
the title pages and indexes to the volumes, or of covers, of 
which they have printed 6,000 for a part of the edition of 
the Young Cottager, and 3,000 for half the edition of Rev. 
Mr. Bean's Affectionate Advice. It is proposed, in future, 
if sufficient encouragement be given, to attach printed 
covers to a great proportion of the larger Tracts. 

In the course of the past year, your Committee have es- 
tablished four new Depositories : viz. 

Concord, JV. H. Dea. James Kimball. 

Middltbury, Vt. "William G. Hooker. 

Montpelier, Vt. Walton & Goss. 

Windsor, Vt. Dea. Nathan Coolidge. 

making the whole number now established, eight. Your 
Committee are happy to inform you that Auxiliary Tract 
Societies are multiplying; and that by the activity of 
them, and of benevolent individuals, a large proportion of 
the Tracts which have been published, is now in circula- 
tion. 

From the foregoing statements, you will perceive that 
this Society has made no inconsiderable effort in promot- 
ing the cause of truth and righteousness. Much, howev- 
er, remains to be done. The Tracts, which we have 
hitherto published, bear but a very small proportion to the 
amount which is immediately needed in our extensive 
country. We have indeed done little towards supplying 
New England. But few have yet been circulated in the 
District of Maine, in New Hampshire, Vermont, or Rhode 
Island. An adequate supply for all these States cannot be 
furnished without much labour and expense. 

But leaving New England, and surveying the Middle, 
the Southern, and the Western States, a wide field opens be- 
fore you. There are large districts, inhabited by a numer- 
ous and increasing population, in which the means of mor- 
al and religious improvement, are but little enjoyed. So 



1816] SECOND REPORT. 33 

extensive is the field, and so great the dearth of religious 
instruction, that millions of Tracts might soon be distrib- 
uted, with the most pleasing prospects of usefulness. 

Your Committee, therefore, feel the pressing necessity 
of more vigorous and extensive exertions in the business 
which has been intrusted to their care. As they proceed, 
they have a more full conviction of the magnitude and im- 
portance of the object of this Institution. They regret 
that they have accomplished so little, when so much needs 
to be done. And they are deeply solicitous to devise and 
execute more efficient measures for the full attainment of 
the benevolent views and wishes of the Society. 

For this purpose, your funds must be augmented, that 
your Committee may enlarge the sphere of their opera- 
tions. It is of great consequence that they should be able 
to transmit large quantities of Tracts to Agents in distant 
places, for charitable distribution ; and to encourage, by 
generous appropriations, the establishment of Tract So- 
cieties, in remote parts of our country. In this way, your 
benevolent object would be vastly promoted. Nor can it 
be fully attained without the adoption of such measures. 
Had your funds admitted, your Committee might, the last 
year, have forwarded large quantities of Tracts to the 
south-western region of the United States, where they 
would have been distributed to the best advantage. 

Your Committee would therefore propose that the So- 
ciety request the Patrons of the Institution and Auxiliary 
Tract Societies to enlarge your funds for the above pur- 
poses. Many Auxiliary Societies annually collect more 
money than they would judge it advisable to expend in 
purchasing Tracts for their immediate vicinity. The sums 
which such Societies could well spare, would be productive 
of far greater good to the cause, by being added together 
and expended in the manner stated above, than by being 
expended by the individual Societies. Let it be known 
that the Society is ardently desirous of adopting the meas- 
ures just proposed, and many new Auxiliary Societies and 
Tract Associations would probably be formed, and new 
zeal and liberality be excited. 

While the object of this establishment is prosecuted with 
judgment and fidelity, it must commend itself to every cor- 



34 SECOND REPORT. [1816 

rect, enlightened mind — to every friend of his country and 
of the souls of men. Who that has any good will to his 
fellow men does not wish them to be furnished with the 
means of moral and religious improvement? What en- 
lightened Civilian or sound Patriot can do otherwise than 
wish success to a Society, whose sole object is to afford the 
advantages of instruction, on the most interesting subjects, 
to the members of the Community, especially to those who 
are justly called u the rising hope of Society." But can he 
stop here ? Can he refrain from giving to such an object 
his decided and liberal support ? Surely such support 
is to be confidently expected from every friend of the Re- 
deemer. 

In soliciting the general cooperation of the Christian 
community, and in urging a more zealous prosecution of 
the object of the Society, your Committee beg leave to 
suggest the following considerations. 

The Tracts, which it is the aim of the Society to circulate^ 
are adapted to promote the highest advantage of individuals , 
and of the community* It is designed that they should " be 
simple, serious, practical; — intelligible to the wayfaring- 
man, and the tenant of the cottage;" that they should con- 
tain pure truth, flowing from the fountain of the sacred 
Scriptures; that there should be in them "nothing to re- 
commend one denomination of Christians, or to throw odium 
on another ; nothing of the acrimony of contending parties 
against those that differ from them ; but pure Christianity, 
in which all the followers of the Lamb, who are looking 
for the mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life, 
can unite with pleasure, as in one great common cause." 
While good morals are inculcated and enforced, and fla- 
grant vices condemned ; every thing of the nature of party 
politics will be carefully avoided. Must not the extensive 
dispersion of such Tracts be of immense importance ? Must 
not their influence in every point of view be highly salu- 
tary ? Surely, in this day of great things, the benevolent 
plan which j'ou have undertaken to advance, will not fail 
for want of patronage. 

The extensive distribution of Religious Tracts is one of 
the " signs of the times." This among other schemes of 
Christian benevolence, eminently distinguishes the eventful 



1816] SECOND REPORT. 35 

period in which we live. Bible Societies, Missionary So- 
cieties, Societies and Seminaries for educating young men 
for the Gospel ministry, and Tract Societies, combine 
and bring into vigorous action, the energies and resources 
of the Christian world. All these Societies are needed ;— 
all are loudly called for by existing circumstances. Neither 
of them can be neglected without injury to the others. 
They ought not to be viewed as rival Institutions, or as mil- 
itating against each other. But by their concurrent oper- 
ations and influence, they are to be the grand means of ef- 
fecting the conversion of the world. It is peculiarly ani- 
mating to trace the exertions and beneficial results of each 
of these Institutions. We wish the most signal success to 
them all, while we earnestly solicit a more liberal support 
of the Tract establishment. We are fully persuaded that 
the finger of Divine providence points to this as a method 
of no small consequence in enlightening and reforming 
mankind. We might appeal to facts. We might detail 
what exertions have been made, and what good has been 
achieved, by Tract Societies in Great Britain, Sweden, 
Denmark, and other countries. These facts incontestibly 
prove that the plan is not chimerical, or of doubtful utili- 
ty. Its vast importance is more and more evinced by the 
experience of each succeeding year. It commends itself 
more and more to the judgment of the well informed ; and 
receives the warm and generous patronage of an increas- 
ing multitude. The Divine blessing attends it. 

The state of our country urgently demands the wide dis- 
persion of moral and religious Tracts. Our nation is more 
rapidly increasing in population than any other on earth. 
Thousands of families annually leave the older States, and 
commence settlements in the wilderness. New Societies 
and new States are formed. In this way, a large extent of 
territory is fast filling with inhabitants. But what is like- 
ly to be the moral and religious character of these new 
Societies and States ? Will it be such as to ensure the Divine 
favour, without peculiar and vigorous exertions to render 
it so ? What is the present moral and religious character 
of a great majority of our nation ? Is it formed upon the 
maxims of Divine revelation ? How can these maxims have 
their due influence, without being widely disseminated ? 



36 SECOND REPORT. [181£ 

And how can they be disseminated without great and per- 
severing efforts ? If the friends of truth and godliness are 
inactive, what can be expected but the rapid spread and 
prevalence of most destructive errors, of flagrant vice and 
impiety ? Shall we passively suffer such a state of things 
to exist, and in this way, abandon the best interests of our 
fellow men ? Shall we, through negligence or parsimony, 
lose the immense advantages of this establishment? Shall 
error, and immorality, and irreligion triumph for want of 
union and benevolent action among the friends of virtue 
and happiness? Shall sordid avarice and love of the world 
palsy our exertions in the cause of righteousness, till sin 
becomes the ruin as well as reproach of our nation ? No ! 
let us all reply. We will give ourselves and ail that we 
have to the Lord. We will remember thee, O Jerusalem. 
We will spare no exertion or sacrifice, to promote the in- 
struction and salvation of our fellow men. 

Immortal souls are perishing for lack of knowledge. 
Thousands and thousands, in our country, are enveloped in 
the most deplorable ignorance. This ignorance, in numer- 
ous instances, is of the most destructive kind; for it res- 
pects the only way of salvation. Multitudes, who are wise 
in the things of this world, have no heart-affecting view of 
Christ and him crucified. They know not themselves. 
They feel no need of a Saviour, who is God manifest in the 
flesh, to atone for their sins by his death, and to cleanse 
their hearts by the operations of his Spirit. Multitudes of 
youth and children are growing up in ignorance of divine 
things, while their minds are open to receive whatever 
may corrupt their hearts, or inflame their evil passions. 
All these have immortal souls ; — they are destined to exist 
forever, and must receive according to the character form- 
ed, and the deeds done, here in the body. Shall then pre- 
cious souls be neglected, and left to perish forever? Shall 
we do nothing to rescue them from everlasting destruction ? 
While it is an accepted time, shall we not cause them to 
read or hear the messages of Divine mercy? 

Glorious success is to be expected. The cause is the 
Lord^s. He opens to us this door of usefulness. He gives 
us the means of widely disseminating the knowledge of his 
truth, and of the riches of his grace. He bids us use the 



1816] SECOND REPORT. 37 

talents committed to our trust, and gives us assurance of 
his blessing*, while we are laborers together with him. His 
cause now prospers ; and it will prosper still more abun- 
dantly. This work of redeeming mercy shall be accom- 
plished. Souls innumerable shall be saved. The means 
employed shall be successful. And how glorious will be 
the success ! How delightful, how animating to anticipate 
it as certain! Look abroad, ye compassionate friends of 
wretched, dying men, and behold your bounty richly con- 
tributing to their comfort and salvation. Look into numer- 
ous dwellings, and see persons ot different ages, eagerly 
reading or hearing the precious Tracts, which your liber- 
ality has furnished. They show evident marks of serious 
reflection, deep conviction, and unfeigned penitence. They 
yield cheerful and humble obedience to the Divine com- 
mands. They who before lived without hope, and without 
God in the world, now offer up fervent prayers and thanks- 
givings, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. Step in- 
to the cottages of the poor, and behold the glistening eyes 
and heavenly looks of those who were wretched, peevish, 
and ungrateful; but have learned, by the blessing of God 
on your deeds of charity, to be contented, thankful, and 
happy. Look down the lapse of ages; see numerous gen- 
erations rising up in the love and fear of the Lord, as fruits 
of the seed which you are now sowing. Parents and chil- 
dren are adorned with the beauties of holiness, and praise 
the Lord for the wonders of his love. Rulers and people 
bow to the sceptre of Immanuel, adoring him as God over 
all, blessed forever, and largely participating the blessed- 
ness of that kingdom, which consists in righteousness, 
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Behold Zion in her 
glory, her walls salvation, and her gates praise. 



APPENDIX. 



In the foregoing Report, the Committee suggested the impor- 
tance of enlarging the funds of the Society, with a view to the 
charitable distribution of Tracts in different parts of the United 
States. They wish this subject to be well considered by Auxiliary 
Tract Societies, and opulent Christians. Various and very urgent 
applications have been made by missionaries and others, for a gra- 
tuitous supply of Tracts for the southern, western, and north- 
western parts of our country. The Committee are very desirous of 
transmitting Tracts to a large amount, to the care of respectable 
and pious men in those parts, who shall distribute them according 
to their discretion. Thousands, and hundreds of thousands, of 
these silent preachers might be sent, at a small expense, to the 
poor and destitute, with the best prospect of promoting their good. 
The Christian public are earnestly requested to take into serious* 
consideration the magnitude of this object. Should any benevolent 
persons, or Tract Societies, wish to furnish the means of sending 
Tracts to distant places, as New Orleans, Natchez, Ohio, the more 
destitute parts of Georgia, Tennessee, &c. it will be at their option 
either to designate the particular object of their charity, or to re- 
fer the application of it to the Executive Committee. 

For the sake of this object, it seems proper that the plan of Aux- 
1 ia ry Tract Societies, which has heretofore been suggested, should 
receive some alterations and enlargements. As the result of experi- 
ence, and in conformity to the principles on which Auxiliary Tract 
Societies in Great Britain are formed, the following hints on the 
Constitution and objects of Auxiliary Tract Societies, are offered to 
the consideration of the friends of this establishment. 

RESOLUTIONS 

recommended for adoption by Auxiliary Tract Societies. 

1. That the object of the American Tract Society has the cor- 
dial approbation of this meeting. 

2. That a Society be formed, to be called the Auxiliary Tract 
Society of for the purpose of promoting the circulation of mor- 
al and religious Tracts in this vicinity, and of aiding the Amer- 
ican Tract Society in the extensive distribution of Tracts through 
the most destitute parts of the United States, and of the conti- 
nent of America. 

3. That one third [or one fourth] of the funds of this Society, be 
annually transmitted to the Treasurer of the American Tract 



2d REP.] APPENDIX. 39 

Society, to aid the Executive Committee in the gratuitous circula- 
tion of Tracts in destitute places. 

4. That one fourth of the annual subscriptions, together with 
the whole of the donations, be at the disposal of the Committee 
of the Auxiliary Society, to purchase Tracts for local distribution, 
and to apply the surplus, (if any,) in aid of the American Tract 
Society. 

5. That each subscriber be entitled to receive Tracts to the 
amount of one half his subscription. 

6. That each subscriber of per week, or a year, be a 

member. 

7. That the business of this Society shall be conducted by a 
Committee, consisting of members, together with the Treas- 
urer and Secretary, who shall be annually chosen. 

8. That the Society appoint a Depositary of their Tracts, and a 
Collector. 

9. That the members be requested to communicate such instan- 
ces of usefulness as may have come within their knowledge ; the 
most interesting of which shall be annually communicated to the 
Executive Committee of the American Tract Society. 



Particular attention, it is hoped, will be given to the 2d, 3d, and 
Oth articles of the plan above suggested. — This plan is proposed in 
compliance with the wishes of many, who have found some dif- 
ficulty in forming a constitution for Auxiliary Societies. The plan 
is only proposed for consideration, and is subject to modification, as 
circumstances require. Those Societies which have already adopt- 
ed a constitution, can make what additions to it they judge proper. 

The Executive Committee request that particular information 
may be given to them, of the existence and formation of every Aux- 
iliary Tract Society, of the number of subscribers, the amount of 
contributions, the manner in which they circulate their Tracts, and 
their views as to the more distant objects which the general Soci? 
ety should endeavour to promote. 



40 SECOND REPORT. [1816 

OFFICERS, 

ELECTED MAY 27, 1816. 

WILLIAM BARTLET, Esa. President. 
Rev. JEDIDIAH MORSE, d. d. Vice President. 
Rev. JOHN CODMAN, Corresponding Secretary. 
Rev. JOSHUA HUNTINGTON, Recording Secretary. 

JEREMIAH EVARTS, Esa. Treasurer. 
Mr. HENRY HOMES, Auditor. 

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE^ 

Rev. JEDIDIAH MORSE, d. d. 
Rev. JOHN H. CHURCH, 
Rev. LEONARD WOODS, d. d, 
SAMUEL FARRAR, Esa, 
Mr. JOHN ADAMS. 



State of the Society's Funds. 

Expense for paper, printing, &c. from May 29 ,1815, ) ** la* ** n 
to May 26, 1816, $ *^75J.JO 



Received, from May 29, 1815, /o JUa?/ 27, 1816. 

Balance in hands of Treasurer brought to* new > <3£i7o^o. 
account $ * 

Donations 100.34 

From the Agent of the General Depository for Tracts ) ^ fi( ,o nc 
sold, including some small Donations ... 5 ' 

$3,128.78 
Balance due from the Society, May 27, 1816 . . . $624.52 

Jeremiah Evarts, Treasurer. 



MAY 26, 1817. 

With gratitude to God for his smiles upon their humble 
efforts, your Committee now present their Third Annual 
Report. 

Your publications have been extensively circulated the 
past year, in various parts of the United States ; and your 
Committee cannot fail to indulge the confident belief, that 
they will, in many instances, be made effectual to the pull- 
ing down of the strong holds of the adversary, and to the 
promotion of the cause of the Redeemer. God will as- 
suredly bless his own truth ; and he " hath chosen the 
weak things of this world to confound the things that are 
mighty," ^ ; so that no flesh should glory in his presence." 
Your publications, containing the truths of the Gospel of 
Jesus Christ, and being sent abroad, as on eagle's wings, 
in every direction, your Committee believe that God will 
not permit the glad tidings they bear to return to him void; 
but that they will u accomplish what he shall please, and 
prosper in that whereto he has sent them." It is their 
reliance on divine aid to accompany their exertions with a 
blessing, that has animated your Committee in their efforts 
through another year; and they would most affectionately 
and earnestly call upon the members of the Society, and 
upon all its friends every where, to offer their fervent sup- 
plications to the God of all grace, for his continued smiles, 
and his life giving influence, to accompany their exertions ; 
remembering that it is M not by might, nor by power, but 
by my Spirit, saith the Lord of Hosts." 

During the past year, your Committee have added six 
new Tracts to the Series, making the whole number pub- 
lished by the Society 85, and nearly completing the 
fourth volume. They are the following : 

Mo. Pages. 

80. The Danger of Delay . . „ $ . . .12 

81. The Seaman's Compass 16 

4* 



42 THIRD REPORT, [1817 

82. Conversion of a Mahometan to the Christian Religion . 12 

83. Account of Eiiza Cunningham. By Rev. John Newton 8 
94. On the Lord's Supper. Abridged from Rev. Henry Grove 44 
85. A Sermon on War 16 

Besides these, your Committee have printed new edi- 
tions of a large part of the series ; making the whole num- 
ber of 

Tracts published the past year .... 411,000 

Whole number from the beginning . . . 1,227,000 

Scon after your last Annual Meeting, the General Depos- 
itory was removed from Boston to Andover, and Messrs. 
Flagg and Gould, appointed General Depositaries. There 
have been also twenty five new Depositories established, 
making the whole number thirty three. The following 
is a list c f all the Agents now employed by the Committee, 
with the value of the Tracts, received by them the past 
year. 



Bangor, Maine 
Bath, Maine 
Portland* Maine 
Amherst, W. H. 
Concord, N. H. 
Hanover, N. H. 
Keene, N. H. 
Portsmouth, N. H. 
Dorset, Vt. 
Middltbury, "Vt. 
Montpelier, Vt. 
Windsor, Vt^ 
Andover, Mass. 
Belchertown, Mass. 
Boston, Mass. 
Newbury port, Mass. 
Northampton, Mass. 
Salem, Muss. 
Spring fie Id., Mass. 
Newport, R. I. 
Providerice, R. I, 
Bridgeport, Con. 
Hartford, Con. 
Neiv Haven, Con. 
Norwich, Con. 
Tolland, Con. 
New York,N.Y. 
Princeton, N. J. 



Daniel Pike, $66,95 

Zina Hyde, 127,00 

W. & H. Hyde, 232,66 

Richard Boylston, 92,81 

Dea. John Kimball, 19,65 

Doct. Reuben D. Muzzey, 100,00 

Jonathan Weldon, 137,05 

Amos Tappan, 75,31 

Rev. W. Jackson, 138,15 

Silas Barrett, 113,20 

E. P. Walton, 68,75 

Dea. Nathan Coolidge, 125,68 

George A. Calhoun, ' 713,39 

Luther Holland, 90,70 

Isaac Bowers, 1,072,06 

Charles Whipple, 218,85 

Dea. E. S. Phelps, 106,45 

Henry Whipple, 104,13 

Rev. Samuel Osgood, 40,10 

Rev. Calvin Hitchcock, 88,90 
John Johnson, and Tern. Tract Soc. 333,32 

Lambert Lockwood, 50,00 

P. B. Gleason & Co. 66,85 

Nathan Whiting, 403,30 

Russell Hubbard, 66,65 

Elish'a Stearns, 61,10 

P. W. Gallaudet, 355,25 

Henry Woodward, 34,65 



1817] THIRD REPORT. 43 



Fayetteville, JV. C. 


Rev. Jesse H. Turner, 


207,70 


Charleston, S. C. 


Rev. Dr. A. W. Leland, 


425,25 


Sparta, Geo. 


Rev. N. S. S. Beeman, 


134,86 


Natchez, Miss. Ter. 


Richard Pearse, 


293,11 


Chillicothe, Ohio 


Rev. Robert G. Wilson, 


239,09 



Whole amount of Tracts delivered to Agents > *„ 4fr q9 

of Depositories the past year \ $t>,4UD,y^ 

This extension of the publications, and of the conse- 
quent usefulness of the Society, your Committee view 
with peculiar interest, and devout acknowledgments to 
the Giver of all good. They would mention also that nu- 
merous Auxiliary Tract Societies have been formed ; and 
that many private individuals, in various parts of the coun- 
try, are aiding in the good work. 

They obtained, soon after the last Annual Meeting, an 
act of incorporation from the Legislature of this Common- 
wealth ; and they fondly hope that the Society may be- 
come a permanent Institution, and by the divine blessing 
extend to multitudes, in future ages, the saving knowl- 
edge of Jesus Christ. 



APPENDIX. 



The following Letter, dated Oct 11, 1816, is from the 
Rev. Daniel Smith, to whom, first in company with Rev. Sam- 
uel J. Mills, and afterwards alone 9 Tracts were delivered by 
the instrumentality of the Committee, for gratuitous distri- 
bution in the Southern and Western parts of the United 
States. 

Through your instrumentality, and through the liberality of va- 
rious original subscribers to your Institution, and other individuals, 
I have had the means of extensive usefulness placed in my hands. 
When Mr. Mills and myself performed a missionary tour through 
the western and southern States and Territories, we had near fif- 
teen thousand of your Tracts for gratuitous distribution. We, at 
that time, widely dispersed these u winged messengers of salva 
tion," through the most destitute regions of the west and south. 
And during the last year, on my second missionary excursion, I 
have been enabled to distribute upwards of eight thousand more. 
Permit me to lay before you a brief account of the manner in which 
I have discharged my trust, and of some of the effects produced by 
these interesting charities. 

Many of the Tracts, I distributed with my own hands ; but by 
far the greater part, I sent for distribution into various places in the 
southern and western states ; confiding them to faithful and judi- 
cious men, with whom,for the most part, I am personally acquainted. 

While 1 remained in New Orleans, I saw the convent of the Ur- 
suline nuns supplied with a variety of Tracts both in the English 
and French languages. (A number of French Tracts had been re- 
ceived by A. Hennen, Esq. from England.) Our intercourse on 
this subject was chiefly held with Miss J. an American lady who 
has lately taken the vail. When we placed them in her hands, she 
frankly said she would read them all ; but if she found any thing 
in them hostile to her church, she should certainly burn them. 
When she had perused them, she found no fault with any of them, 
and expressed a high degree of satisfaction in some of them ; par- 
ticularly, in u The Dairyman's Daughter," " The Shepherd of 
Salisbury Plain," and u The Negro Servant." She requested a 
number of each of these Tracts, for the use of the classes in a 
school of young ladies attached to the convent. The young ladies, 
she said, were quite delighted with them. Some of the French 
nuns likewise spoke of them in terms of the most decided approba- 
tion. Who can tell how much may be effected by your publica- 
tions within the cloisters of a convent ? 

At a meeting of the Mississippi Presbytery, I made that body a 



3d REP.] APPENDIX. 45 

donation of one thousand Tracts, to be distributed in the congrega- 
tions connected with it. The offer of them occasioned a burst of 
grateful feeling that was truly surprising. One elder said, he had 
distributed some before, and that nothing set the people to reading 
like them. A vote of thanks was immediately passed to the liberal 
donors of them. 

When the Amite and West Florida Bible Society was organized, 
I sent the Board of Trustees a number of copies of w The Bible 
above all Price," (No. 71.) to accompany their subscription papers. 
This was considered a very seasonable and very useful present. 
The Trustees passed a resolution of thanks for it. This resolution 
was communicated by the Vice President of the Society. From the 
same gentleman I afterwards received a still more pleasing testimo- 
nial of the usefulness of your Tracts. It was transmitted to me 
in a letter from a worthy clergyman, who says, u Accept, Rever- 
end Brother, this my acknowledgment for the receipt of the Tracts 
and Pamphlets by the hand of Capt. D. I have examined a part, 
and have distributed some in my neighbourhood. I consider them 
well calculated to promote the cause of the Redeemer. I am au- 
thorized by a wealthy and respectable gentleman, (the Vice Presi*- 
dent,) to state to you, that c in the good Providence of God he has 
shared bountifully in spiritual consolations through the reading of 
those pamphlets ; while they have disclosed to him the numerous 
sinks of pollution in his heart which were unobserved before.' " 

Another respectable clergyman in the Mississippi Territory, hav- 
ing spoken of the usefulness of Bibles, says, " Tracts also have fre- 
quently contained a word in season to the receivers. One instance 
I beg leave to mention. To a lady, a sister in our communion, who 
was in a distressed state of mind, I sent one by her husband. The 
next time I saw him, he said, fc You have done me an unspeakable 
kindness. Nothing could have been more seasonable than the book 
you sent her.' The next visit I made to the family, I found it had 
been blessed to her edification and comfort. Where I preached 
last Sunday, the people meet every Sabbath ; and when destitute 
of preaching they profess to have been edified by the reading of 
the Tracts. On the whole, I am well satisfied that the circulation 
of the Scriptures and other books on religious subjects will be bless- 
ed to effect a happy change in the state of society. Those hum- 
bling doctrines of the Gospel, explained and supported in those 
books, are the only ones to reform mankind. Our worthy New 
England friends are doing a great work. I am happy to assist in 
succeeding their views. I feel we are much their debtors.'" 

From an elder in the Presbyterian church at Pine Ridge, Missis- 
sippi Territory, I received a letter in substance as follows : 

Pine Ridge, June 11, 1816. 

u Rev. Sir, — I wish to address you a few lines respecting the 
Tracts and other books you were pleased to put into my hands for 
circulation. The reception they met was truly gratifying. The 
Tracts in particular had a great effect on all classes of people. 



46 APPENDIX. [3d REP. 

They are generally looked upon by the youth, as a divine message 
$ent for their conviction. I have been much gratified in distribut- 
ing them, having seen and heard the praise and thanks returned 
on receiving them. Many instances 1 could give you in detail. I 
shall confine myself to two or three that I cannot pass by unnotic- 
ed. Riding into Natchez, one day, I heard the sound of a voice in 
the woods. I followed it, and found a negro man kneeling behind 
a tree at prayer. When he approached me, I inquired what he 
was doing there. He replied with diffidence, " I was saying my 
prayers." What, do negroes pray ? " Yes, master, some few do ; 
but it is to be lamented that so few of them pray," How long have 
you been in the habit of praying ? « Not more than three or four 
years." What was the means of your having a desire to pray ? " It 
was the will of God. The Scripture tells us we always should 
pray and make our requests known to God." Can you read? 
u Yes, Sir." I had some Tracts in my pocket, and required him 
to show that he could read. He took one and read distinctly. It 
was " The Negro Servant." I gave it to him, with " The Shep- 
herd of Salisbury Plain." He received them with uplifted hands 
and eyes giving thanks to God for the kind gift. On inquiry I find 
it is his business every Sabbath day to read them to wicked negroes, 
and to exhort them to turn from sin and serve God. Another ne- 
gro, who had received a couple of Tracts from me, carries them in 
his bosom, calling them, the gift of heaven. Being asked by one 
of his fellow servants, if he would sell him the gift of heaven, his 
jeply was, " The gift of God is not to be purchased with money. 
Your money perishes with you, and you (I fear) are in the gall of 
bitterness and bond of iniquity, and have neither part nor lot in this 
matter. I would not take fifty dollars for them, if there were no 
more of them." One of my neighbours, a very moral and well in- 
formed man, and a friend of religion, received a few Tracts for the 
use of his children. But on reading them himself, as his wife in- 
formed me, he was quite overcome by them. He was so deeply af- 
fected that he could not read without stopping. And in another in- 
stance, I have every reason to believe a good work is begun. A 
little boy of genteel and moral parents received a couple of Tracts, 
and read them with so much interest, and discovered so much grav- 
ity of deportment afterwards, that his mother desired to see the 
little books herself. And when she had commenced, she could 
not stop until she had read them through. The little boy tells me 
that the reading of them makes his mother cry. He often inquires 
of me, u When will you return with more good books ? Other 
books," he says, u are very useful for information, but do no good in 
dying." I have frequent opportunities of observing him and he is 
very sedate in his behaviour." 

Wishing you success in your useful labours, I subscribe myself. 
Your obliged friend, 

DANIEL SMITH'. 



1817] "THIRD REPORT. 47 

OFFICERS, 

ELECTED MAY 26, 1817. 

Hon. WILLIAM REED, Marblehead, President. 
Rev. JEDIDIAH MORSE, d. d. 1st Vice President. 
Mr. JOHN JENKS, of Salem, 2d Vice President. 
Rev. JOHN CODMAN, Corresponding Secretary. 
Rev. JOSHUA HUNTINGTON, Recording Secretary. 

AMOS BLANCHARD, Esq. of Andover, Treasurer. 

SAMUEL FARRAR, Esq. Auditor. 

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE. 

Rev. JEDIDIAH MORSE, d. d. 
Rev. LEONARD WOODS, d. d. 
Rev. JOHN H. CHURCH, 
Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS, of Andover, 
AMOS BLANCHARD, Esq. 



State op the Society's Funds. 

.Balance due from the Society, May 27, 1816 $624.5$ 

Expense for paper, printing, &c from May 27, 1816, > 91WM 

to May 26, 1817 ..... $ Z *> VZ1 ' 5a 

$2,752.10 
Received from May 27, 1816, to May 26, 1817. 

Donations . $7.62 

From the Agents of the General Depository for Tracts ) - 1 in t « 
sold, &c. ....... \ M1U.10 

$1,117.78 

Balance due from he Society May 26, 1817. 1,634.32 

Jeremiah Evakts, Treasurer- 



MAY 27, 1818, 



The Executive Committee present their Fourth Annual 
Report, deeply impressed with the importance of the es- 
tablishment which has been committed to their charge. 
And they would not failto offer their tribute of thanksgiv- 
ing to the Father of mercies, for his blessing which has 
so manifestly attended their humble endeavours. 

They have added, the past year, four new Tracts to 
the Series, viz. 
JVo. Pages. 

86. The Mother's Catechism 28 

VOL. V- 

87. Conversation in a Boat between Two Seamen . . 24 
38. To the Sick who are without hope .... 8 
89. The Dairyman. By Rev. D. Tyerman . . . .24 

They have also printed new editions of fifty nine of the 
Tracts previously published. All were editions of 6,000 
except those of Nos. 13 and 88, which were 10,000, mak- 
ing the whole number of 

Tracts published the last year .... 386,000 

Whole number from the beginning . . . 1,613,000 

Your Committee have also, the past year, established 
seven new Depositories : viz. 

St. Albans, Vt. Horace Janes, Esq. 

Greenfield, Mass. S. Wells. Jun. 

Buffalo, JV. Y. Jasper Corning". 

Lewiston, JV. Y. Rev. David M. Smith. 

Knoxville, Ten. Rev. D. A. Sherman. 

Bowling Green, Ken. Alexander Graham. 

Cincinnati, Ohio. Thomas L. Paine. 

These, with those reported the last year, make 40 De- 
positories now depending* on this Society for a constant 
supply of Tracts. These are stationed in fourteen dif- 
ferent States, besides the one in Mississippi Territory. 
Thus the benefits of this Society are extending to multi- 
tudes whom its patrons will probably never see, till they 



1818] FOURTH REPORT. 49 

meet them at the bar of God. And, Brethren, could we 
believe that even one soul would be happy forever, and 
sing the song of praise to Redeeming love, in consequence 
of the existence of this Society, how amply would it re- 
pay all our exertions. But your Committee have abun- 
dant evidence, that numbers have already been turned 
from darkness to light by the instrumentality of this Insti- 
tution ; and they look forward with delightful anticipa- 
tions of good which will result, in years and ages to come. 

Your Committee believe, that the Tracts which have 
been issued contain the true spirit of the Gospel of Jesus 
Christ, and they rely on the promise of God, through the 
agency of the Holy Spirit, that he will bless his own 
truth, and that his word shall not return to him void. 

An instance of the usefulness of a Tract to a young La- 
dy in this vicinity, has just been reported to the Commit- 
tee, which bears so striking a testimony, at once to the im- 
portance of the measures adopted by this Society and to 
the power of Divine grace, that they cannot deny them- 
selves the pleasure of relating it. 

w I transmit you, by request," says she, " a narrative of 
the effect produced on my own mind by the instrumental- 
ity of the Tract entitled the ; Young Cottager,' which was 
presented me by a child under the age of seven years. 
On reading it, I was brought, as I trust, by Divine grace, 
to behold myself as a sinner — an enemy to God and holi- 
ness, justly exposed to his wrath, yet living without God 
and without hope in the world,' and travelling the broad 
road to destruction. When I compared my past life with 
the holy law of God, it appeared exceedingly sinful. I 
had transgressed against great light and knowledge — had 
4 cast off fear and restrained prayer.' It appeared that 
I was beyond the reach of mercy, and that it only remain- 
ed for justice to cut me down, and make me, eternally, as 
miserable as I was sinful. For many days, my mind 
was filled with horror, and almost complete despair ; 
when, at length, through the boundless mercy of God in 
Christ, as one of his faithful servants was pleading for me 
at the throne of grace, my burden and fears were sweetly 
removed ; and with a joy and peace unknown before, I 
could say, J Worthy is the Lamb that was slain.' Christ 
5 



50 FOURTH REPORT. [1818 

was indeed to me, ' the chiefest among ten thousand, and 
altogether lovely.' These having been my exercises a 
number df months since, I can only add, that I have found, 
as I trust, by a blessed experience, that fc wisdom's ways 
are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.' 
I have to mourn over the remains of sin ; and my prayer 
is, that the work of sanctification may be perfected in my 
soul. 

" After submitting this humble sketch, permit me to 
urge upon you to exhort your Society not to be ' weary 
in well doing,' knowing that 'in due season they shall 
reap, if they faint not.' Doubtless, time will never disclose 
the benefit which many immortal souls may derive from 
your united exertions ; but how happy the consideration, 
that on that day when all shall stand before the judgment 
seat of Christ, here and there one will be found at the 
right hand of the Judge, who, under God, will attribute 
their conversion to those means which have been used by 
your Society." 

Your Committee cannot but feel their hearts respond 
to the language of this child, as they have reason to be- 
lieve, of redeeming mercy ; and they would earnestly in- 
vite the friends of the cross of Christ and of the souls of 
men, to give their efficient aid in promoting an Institution 
which is so signally blessed by God. Your Committee 
are now involved in a debt of more than one thousand dol- 
lars, yet the field is opening before them with brighter 
and brighter prospects. Our population is most rapidly 
extending, and multitudes are now almost entirely desti- 
tute of religious instruction, some of whom stretch out their 
hands to us and ask, with affecting interest, for Religious 
Tracts. 

The Committee earnestly recommend the formation 
of Auxiliary Societies ; and they believe that, on a little 
reflection, all will feel the importance of aiding the Parent 
Institution, in extending its efforts among those who are 
not favoured with the rich blessings of the Gospel. They 
are our brethren. They are members of our own com- 
munity. They are bound to the same eternity with us. 
And we must meet them at the judgment. — And can we 
rliere see them with horror on their countenances, and 



1818] FOURTH REPORT. 51 

hear the righteous Judge pronounce upon them the sen- 
tence that drives them down to unutterable wo; and re- 
member that we, while enjoying the richest gifts of Prov- 
idence, did not do so much for them as to send them a 
Religious Tract, to tell them of the way of salvation, and 
warn them to flee from the wrath to come ? 

Brethren, while the Committee would be thankful that, 
in the short space of four years, this Society has done so 
much, they are compelled to feel that it is little in com- 
parison with what we are encouraged and required to do. 
by the great Head of the church. We have only begun 
to occupv the field which spreads itself invitingly before 
us. The stations from which our Tracts are distributed 
are few in comparison with what they should be, and the 
circulation, from each station, is by far too limited. What 
blessings might we not hope for, if our publications were 
put into every family in our country, where all, in the 
moment of leisure, might be induced to take them, and 
hear what God, through them, will say. M What blessings 
might occur, in the course of Providence," says the ex- 
cellent Montgomery, a man scarcely less distinguished as 
a poet, than as a friend of the religion of Jesus, " if these 
small but effectual calls to repentance were universally 
and abundantly distributed ? We say universally and abun- 
dantly, — because, though a few Tracts, carefully scattered, 
may and must do good, yet what can be produced by sup- 
plies so disproportioned to the wants of mankind ? but 
here a blade of grass, and there perhaps a flower, where 
all was barren before, and where all is still barren around : 
whereas to make the wilderness and the solitary place to 
rejoice, and the desert to blossom like the rose, we must, 
in our measure, imitate the bounty of our heavenly Fa- 
ther, who causes the sun in his progress to shine on every 
spot of land and sea, and his rain to fall on the rock and 
the highway, as well as on the fertile plain and the cultured 
garden. Tracts must be unsparingly and unceasingly dissem- 
inated, to produce extensive and permanent effects. How 
many have been warned, reproved, instructed, restrained, 
encouraged, strengthened, or established in faith, by the 
perusal of the thousands and ten of thousands of the little 
fugitive pieces, circulated by Tract Societies — can never 



52 FOURTH REPORT. [1818 

be known till the day of judgment ; but the records are 
in heaven, and there they will be held in everlasting re- 
membrance. Spirits in glory, a million ages hence, may 
be telling their companions, what great things the Lor*d 
has done for them, on earth, by these humble instruments. 
If we knew of but one instance, in which, by such means, 
a sinner had been turned from the error of his way, we 
might safely calculate on many more ; nay, if we knew of 
none, we ought still to believe, that we might see the sal- 
vation of God, — remembering that, while it is our duty to 
plant and to water, it is He only, who giveth the increase. 
Having done our part, can we doubt that he has done his ? 
The casual reading of a single page in one of these pamph- 
lets, may, under the blessing of God, be the earliest breath 
of a new birth unto righteousness ; the first step of a pil- 
grimage to the heavenly Jerusalem. 

"A Tract lying in a cottage window is a preacher, with 
a message from God to every one who takes it up. This 
preacher will be instant in season and out of season ; it 
will wait patiently till it can deliver its message, and it 
will deliver it fully, faithfully, without apology, equivoca- 
tion, or respect of persons ; it will fearlessly tell the truth, 
and we hope nothing but the truth : it will speak to the 
conscience, and it will teach the conscience to speak." 



1818] FOURTH REPORT. 53 

OFFICERS, 

ELECTED MAY 27, 1818. 

How. WILLIAM REED, President. 

Rev. JEDIDIAH MORSE, d. d. 1st Vice President. 

Mr. JOHN JENKS, 2d Vice President. 

Rev. JOHN CODMAN, Corresponding Secretary. 

Rev. JOSHUA HUNTINGTON, Recording Secretary. 

AMOS BLANCHARD, Esq. Treasurer. 

SAMUEL FARRAR, Esq. Auditor. 

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE. 

Rev. JEDIDIAH MORSE, d. d. 
Rev. LEONARD WOODS, d. d. 
Rev. JOHN H. CHURCH, 
Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS, 

AMOS BLANCHARD, Esq. 



State of the Society's Funds. 

Balance due from the Society, May 26, 1817, . 1,634,3£ 

Expense for paper, printing, &c from May 26, 1817, } 1 „ 01 M 

to May 27, 1818, . . . . . jj h 7Z **** 

$3,355,36 
Received, /rom May 26, 1817, to May 27, 1818, 

Donations 52,22 

From the Agents of the General Depository for Tracts ) 01 , 

sold, &c. ....... \ 2 ^ 214 ^3 

$2,266,85 

Balance due from the Society May 27, 1818, . „ 1,088,51 

Amos Blanchard, Treasurer. 



5* 



May 26, 1819. 



It is with much satisfaction, that the Executive Com- 
mittee have this opportunity to submit to the Members 
and Patrons of this Society, their Fifth Annual Report. In 
commencing this service, they would render thanks to the 
Author of all good, that their efforts have been so far 
crowned with his blessing. To his gracious Providence, 
their success should be ascribed. By his favour, the op- 
erations of the Society were at first commenced with 
pleading prospects of extensive usefulness : and these 
prospects still animate the Committee. 

During the past year, the Committee have published 
thirteen new Tracts : viz. 
JVo. Pages. 

90. A Word in Season — Thoughts on Eternity — Hymn . 12 

91 . Two Letters of Pearsall, written after a dangerous sickness 8 

92. The Praying Negro 4 

93. Address to Females, in favour of the Missionary Society 16 

94. Interesting Conversion and exemplary Life of Mrs. Tooly 7 

95. Home, or a short account of Charles Grafton . .16 

96. The Sailor's Friend . ' 8 

97. A Parting Address to a Sabbath-School Child . . 8 

98. The New Birth 12 

99. Sanctified Afflictions . 16 

100. Advice from a Master to his Apprentice, 8 

101. The Shipmates, a supplement to Conversation in a Boat 28 

102. A Dialogue on Saturday Evening . • . .12 

The whole number of 

Tracts published the past year is : 258,000 

Whole number from the beginning, . . . 1,871,000 

Your Committee have also, the past year, established 
the following new Depositories : 

Exeter, JV. H. M. Haliburton. 

Haverhill, Mass. Fisher Howe. 

Angelica, N. Y. Rev. Robert Hubbard. 

Utica, JV. Y. Merrill & Hastings. 

Washington, Dist. Col. Rev. James Lawrie. 



1819] FIFTH REPORT. 55 

Of Depositories formerly established, five have been 
discontinued, making the whole number now in efficient 
operation, forty. 

The Committee feel happy in stating that the establish- 
ment is rising. Its concerns are prosperous. New orders 
for Tracts are received from distant parts of the country. 
Tract Societies have been formed, and are forming in va- 
rious places ; and many individuals manifest a commenda- 
ble zeal to purchase and distribute Tracts. By these 
means, the interest of the Society is promoted ; though 
not to the extent, which is desirable. A larger capital is 
needed to enable the Committee to prosecute the business 
to the best advantage. It must be evident to every Mem- 
ber and Friend of the Society, that a large quantity of 
Tracts must constantly be kept on hand, in order to meet 
the wishes and expectations of those who would purchase. 
The series must also be increased by publishing new 
Tracts, or the interest and operations of the Society can- 
not continue in the progressive state, which must be de- 
sired by every friend to the cause. The funds of the So- 
ciety must therefore be enlarged. And the Committee 
entertain no doubt but that this may be easily done. 
Thousands are ready to afford, in various ways, their aid, 
as opportunity shall present. And by the requisite sup- 
port, this establishment may soon perform no inconsidera- 
ble part in disseminating Divine knowledge, and promot- 
ing good morals. Impressed with these considerations, 
the Committee would suggest the following measures for 
aiding this Society. 

One is a more general and extensive formation of Tract 
Societies. Cannot this be accomplished with much ease ? 
May not a Tract Society be formed in almost every town, 
or parish, or village ? Would not such a Society be ad- 
vantageously connected with every Sabbath School ? 
These Societies, with little exertion, might annually col- 
lect twice as much money, as they would wish to expend 
in Tracts for their own use, or to distribute in their imme- 
diate vicinity. Having procured a sufficiency for those 
purposes, they misrht transmit their surplus monies to the 
Treasurer of this Society. This would enable the Com- 
mittee to enlarge the sphere of their operations ; and to 



56 FIFTH REPORT. [1819 

answer some pressing calls for Tracts, which they have 
hitherto been obliged to deny. It would also exceedingly 
facilitate the circulation of Tracts, wherever such Socie- 
ties are formed. 

Another measure, is an increase of the funds of the Socie- 
ty) % donations and legacies. These, of different sums, 
might be easily made by a great proportion of our fellow 
citizens. Who cannot contribute something to this Socie- 
ty, without diminishing his contributions to other charita- 
ble objects ? If necessary, might not a little more economy 
be practised for this purpose ? And would not such chari- 
ty be profitably bestowed ? Without disparaging other 
charities, may it not be said that peculiar advantages at- 
tend the circulation of Religious Tracts ? Much is here 
done by small sums. And consequently it is in the power 
of many to promote this design more effectually than they 
could some other design. And here the affluent may at 
once put a mighty engine in motion. With a few thou- 
sand dollars, the influence of the American Tract So- 
ciety might be soon extended, with great effect, from 
Maine to Florida, and from the shores of the Atlantic to 
unknown limits in the West. 

A third measure is the general circulation of Tracts. 
This must chiefly devolve on the Christian community. 
To publish Tracts, and superintend the general agency 
of the business, will sufficiently occupy the time and atten- 
tion of the Executive Committee. Nor can they so well 
distribute Tracts, in the various places where they are 
needed, as persons living in those places. They have nei- 
ther the knowledge nor the means of doing it so advan- 
tageously. But, in every district of our country, there are 
those who can do it. By a little inquiry, they can ascer- 
tain what Tracts are most needed, and where they will 
be most likely to do good ; and then distribute accordingly. 
How many of these u winged messengers," may thus be 
put in motion in different directions. Who is unable to 
give them circulation ? Even ten cents will purchase 100 
pages, or ten Tracts of different sizes. With a dollar, 1,000 
pages, or 100 small Tracts may be purchased. A hundred 
Tracts might be read, or be heard, by more than a thou- 
sand persons, and be blessed as means of their salvation. 



1819] FIFTH REPORT, 57 

Let a person devote $100 to this object; and the interest 
of this sum would annually circulate 600 Tracts among 
thousands who are perishing for lack of knowledge. This 
is surely no trifling method of doing good. Who can think 
it beneath his attention ? 

In the circulation of Tracts, persons of different occu- 
pations, may conveniently and successfully engage. 

This may be done by ministers of the Gospel. What 
minister will not find it a pleasant thing to circulate Tracts 
among his people. It may give more interest to his pas- 
toral visits, to distribute these as he goes from house to 
house. Impressions made by his conversation may be in- 
creased by the perusal of a Tract after he retires. In 
this way, he may gain the affection, and promote the 
improvement of children and young persons. Tracts, in 
some cases, he may give as presents ; and, in others,as small 
premiums. Some, of various kinds, may be loaned and re- 
turned ; and thus supply the want of other books, among 
those who are unable to purchase them. How many 
might thus derive great and lasting benefit from a few dol- 
lars' worth of Tracts ? And how much would a minister 
feel himself assisted and encouraged in his labours ? 

In numerous places, destitute of ministers, there are 
active christians, and persons of benevolence, who can en- 
gage in this business. Every person of this description, 
by procuring and distributing Tracts, may enjoy the priv- 
ilege of doing great good to his fellow men. He may be 
the instrument of reforming the vicious, enlightening the 
ignorant, and directing the lost and perishing to the Lamb 
of God for salvation. How much may an active female 
accomplish in the circle of her acquaintance, and especial- 
ly among the rising generation, by these means of instruc- 
tion and improvement? What mode of doing good is more 
congenial to the female mind ; more delightful to the 
daughters of Zion ? By their affectionate kindness, by 
their familiar and pleasant remarks, they may have more 
influence than the other sex, in engaging the attention, and 
impressing the minds of young persons, as they put Relig- 
ious Tracts into their hands. 

In schools there is a good opportunity to distribute 
Tracts. Every teacher might well bestow them as re- 



58 FIFTH REPORT. [ 1 8 1 § 

wards for punctual attendance, diligence in study, and good 
behaviour. While this excited a spirit of improvement in 
youth, it would also convey many Tracts into families^ 
where they would be read with peculiar interest, and be 
likely to produce very pleasing effects. This mode of 
distributing Tracts claims the attention of Tract Societies, 
and benevolent individuals. These could easily furnish 
teachers with a sufficiency for distribution in schools. In 
prosecuting journej's, the pious and benevolent might scat- 
ter much of this precious seed ; which, by the divine bles- 
sing, would yield an immortal harvest. A Tract given by 
a stranger, and accompanied with a serious friendly re- 
mark, might excite much attention in the receiver, and be 
blessed to his everlasting good. Who knows what im- 
mense benefit this kind of charit}' may produce ? It is not con- 
fined to the individual who receives a Tract from a friendly 
stranger; but he wishes others to read what has been so 
useful to him ; and he is anxious to fix their attention on 
the things of their future peace. And thus, by the bless- 
ing of God, the influence of a single Tract is felt through 
a circle of immortal beings, and extends to generations un- 
born. 

In such benevolent designs, the Committee would not 
only animate the members of this Society to renewed ex- 
ertions : but also earnestly solicit the generous and effi- 
cient cooperation of the liberal and affluent in different 
parts of our country. 

Brethren and Friends : — The number engaged in this 
good work is an animating consideration. Among the Tract 
Societies of the present period, the Religious Tract Socie- 
ty in London holds the foremost rank. This was estab- 
lished in 1799. In 1813, this Society had distributed sev- 
€nteen millions of Tracts. In each year since, the aver- 
age number circulated is said to be about three millions. 
In the year ending May 1817, it was three millions and a 
half. The whole number of Tracts distributed by this 
Society is thought to exceed thirty two millions. These 
Tracts have been printed in fourteen different languages, 
besides the English, viz. Welsh, Irish, Manks, Gaelick, 
French, Dutch, Spanish, Portuguese/German, Danish, Fin- 
nish, Russian, Calmuck, and Chinese. This Society has 



1819] FIFTH REPORT. 59 

124 Auxiliaries within the limits of England. By its in- 
fluence and aid, it has been instrumental of forming, in 
various parts of Europe, many Societies on principles 
similar to its own; making them fountains, from which 
small streams might receive a constant supply. Such are 
the Societies in Stockholm, Hanover, Berlin, Sleswick, 
Holstein, Elberfield, Stutgard, Nurenberg, Frankfort, 
Neuwied, Koenigsfeld, Basle, Zurich, Berne, St. Gall, 
Scaffhausen, Lausanne, and Piedmont among the Walden- 
ses ; also at different places in Italy, Russia, and Finland. 
Some of the smallest of these Societies have published 
from fifty to one hundred thousand Tracts. Others have 
done much more. The Society at Stockholm, which was 
established in 1809, during the four first years from its for- 
mation, printed Tracts in the Swedish, Finnish, and Lap- 
anese languages ; and circulated, in the same period, up- 
wards of 400,000. It has since circulated several times 
that number. 

The Church of England Tract Society, established at 
Bristol, in 181 1, promises much for the cause. It has 
Auxiliaries in different parts of England and Ireland, and 
in several of the British Provinces. 

The Liverpool Religious Tract Society has distributed, 
in two years and a half, upwards of 622,000 Tracts. 

In the United States, there is a sister Society, whose 
exertions in the common cause are highly commendable. 
This is the New York Tract Society. It was formed in 
1810. During the year 1 8 1 5, it distributed 35,600 Tracts, 
including the number sold to other Societies. According 
to the sixth annual Report, the whole number of Tracts 
then published was 493,586. During every succeeding 
year, the number of Tracts published, has increased ; and 
the prospect is, that in a few years, some hundred thou- 
sands will be annually published by this Society. Some of 
their Tracts are in the Spanish and French languages. 
Their English series contains 62 numbers ; the Spanish 
four; and the French one. These have been distributed 
among the French and Spanish in our own country; in the 
West Indies ; and some in South America. 

The Committee believe that many thousands of Tracts 
have been published, in the United Siates, by smaller So- 



60 FIFTH REPORT. [1819 

cieties and benevolent individuals ; but they are not able 
to specify particulars. 

How many are engaged in this noble enterprise ! And 
how cheering is the prospect of success ! Shall not your 
breasts glow with love and zeal ; and your hands abound 
in liberality? 

The good effected is another animating consideration. The 
beneficial effects of circulating Tracts can be known but 
very imperfectly in this world. The light of eternity 
must show how many have been converted from the error 
of their ways, or have been quickened in their christian 
course, or edified in the faith of the Gospel, by these si- 
lent monitors. They have vast influence where saving ef- 
fects are not produced, in ameliorating the condition of 
families and nations. Mrs. Hannah More, it is supposed, 
has done more for the preservation of England, by her 
Cheap Repository Tracts, than did the celebrated Nelson, 
as a naval Commander, by ail his splendid achievements. 
u No works tended more to counteract the delusive and 
irreligious spirit of the French revolution," than these 
above mentioned from her pen. And wherever her Tracts 
and others of a similar kind are circulated, they must tend 
to check the progress of error, to suppress vice and irre- 
ligion, and to counteract efforts to destroy civil and relig- 
ous order. Their influence on the rising generation is in- 
calculable. They take the attention and guide the youth- 
ful mind to a profitable course of reflection. They both 
amuse and instruct. Divine truth, when conveyed by in- 
teresting narrative or striking incidents, takes faster hold 
of the mind, is more easily retained, and has greater effect. 

We have many accounts of hopeful conversions, which 
are to be traced to these small vehicles of truth as the 
means. A relation of them would much enrich the pre- 
sent Report. But your Committee will content themselves 
with relating only one instance, which has lately occurred 
in New England, and which, it is believed, has not been 
published. 

As a respectable Physician, who had long been an avow- 
ed infidel, was reading the Tract entitled The Praying Ne- 
gro, he was led to reflect that he possessed a very differ- 
ent temper from this pious person. When he was injured, 
he was disposed to seek revenge ; but this pious person^ 



1819] FIFTH REPORT. 6^1 

when injured, found relief in prayer to God. This pro- 
duced a conviction of his sinfulness, guilt and danger. He 
saw no hope of salvation by his own works; but felt him- 
self a lost sinner. What then could he do, but look to that 
Saviour, whom he had so long" rejected, as not worthy 
his regard. By faith in him, he obtained peace and com- 
fort. He then collected his deistical books at home, and 
those which he had lent to his neighbours, and committed 
them to the flames. He found the Bible infinitely better. 
Recollecting one night that one of these books was lent 
to his Minister, he knewnot how to sleep till it was burn- 
ed ; but as the night was dark and stormy he concluded to 
wait till morning. Then neither the severity of the storm, 
nor the infirmities of his age, prevented the execution of 
his purpose. When he asked for the book, the Minister 
was fearful that he might still doubt the truth and inspira- 
tion of the Scriptures, and so wish to read this book again. 
This had been his favourite author. But no sooner was 
it returned, than with much emphasis, he said, u In the 
presence of the Lord Jesus Chnst and these witnesses, I 
now solemnly renounce all the errors contained in this 
book." He then cast it into the fire. — He since warns, 
with much affection and faithfulness, those whom he had 
before led astray, and entreats them to renounce their er- 
rors and embrace the Saviour. His exertions are not in 
vain. Christians are animated, and sinners alarmed. 

Does a single Tract produce such effects? Who then is 
willing to be inactive ? Who can withhold his aid ? 

Muck remains to be done. This is another motive to lib- 
eral exertion. The work is still in its commencement; 
but little of its blessed fruits is yet seen. Still it is seed 
time ; and the full harvest is yet to come. But the field 
is large; and with due cultivation, it promises a very rich 
harvest. He that soweth bountifully, shall reap also bounti- 
fully. 

Lift up your eyes and behold the prospect before you. 
See the thousands and millions that need to be enlightened 
and turned to the Lord. Let their condition awaken your 
compassion, and rouse you to action. Never relax, but 
rather increase your exertions, until the whole land is 
filled with Divine knowledge, and righteousness, and peace. 
6 



FIFTH REPORT. [1819 

OFFICERS, 

'. ELECTED, MAT 26, 1819. 

Hon. WILLIAM REED, President. 
Rev. JEDIDIAH MORSE, d. d. Vice President. 
Rev. JOHN CODMAN, Corresponding Secretary. 
Rev. JOSHUA HUNTINGTON, Recording Secretary. 
AMOS BLANCHARD, Esq. Treasurer. 

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE. 

Rev. JEDIDIAH MORSE, d. d. 
Rev. JOHN H. CHURCH, 
Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS, 
Rev. JOHN CODMAN, 

AMOS BLANCHARD, Esa. 



State oe the Society's Funds. 

Balance due from the Society, May 27, 1818, 1,088,51 

Expenses of paper, printing, &c from May 27, 1818, ) 1fi1Q4i 

to May 26, 1819, * . • . . J i,oiy,44 

$2,707,95 

RECEivED,/rom May 27, 1818, to May 26, 1819. 

Donations .* 22,13 

Loan . 1,000,00 

From the Agents of the General Depository for Tracts ) ^^ ^ 

sold, &c • . »*;"-_• . > 

$1,718,86 

Balance due from the Society May 26, 1819, for print- > 1 Qg9 ^ 
ing, &c. and for Loan > 

Amos Blanchard, Treasurer. 



L4U mm4g^ 
MAY 31, 1820. 



The race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to 
the strong. The Lord, in many instances, accomplishes 
important purposes by humble instruments and feeble 
means. This secures the glory of his name, and increases 
the admiration and joy of those, who love him in sincerity* 
The happy subjects of his grace have likewise a more 
lively sense of their immense obligations of love and obe- 
dience to him, who worketh all things after the counsel 
of his own will. 

It is no disparagement to the more splendid operations 
of Missionary and Bible Societies, that so much good is ef- 
fected by the circulation of Religious Tracts. Nor can it 
diminish those operations. It must greatly increase and 
strengthen them. Tract Societies are also aided in re- 
turn. There is a reciprocal and combined influence, which 
will be mighty through God to the pulling down of the 
strong holds of sin and Satan, and the universal establish- 
ment of the kingdom of truth and righteousness. 

The first projectors and liberal founders of this estab- 
lishment must witness, with no ordinary satisfaction, its 
rising prosperity. Each revolving year brings fresh and 
augmented evidence of its vast utility. And who can doubt 
but that this Society*may be regarded with peculiar inter- 
est, by future generations, as one of the means of evangel- 
izing and saving the world. 

The Executive Committee indulge the hope that a brief 
view of what has been done the past year, will animate 
the members and patrons of this Society to renew their 
zeal, and increase their exertions in the cause. 

The Society are sensible that the plans and efforts of 
the Committee are chiefly directed to one point — the pub- 
lishing of Tracts to such amount, and in such variety, that 
Societies and individuals in all parts of our widely extend- 



64 SIXTH REPORT. [1820 

ed country, may be supplied on the most advantageous 
terms for charitable distribution. For this purpose the 
Committee have felt that the capital of the Society must 
be much enlarged ; and that when this should be done to 
a sufficient amount, the establishment, under a kind Prov- 
idence, would be able to maintain itself for ages to come, 
or even to the end of the world. For instance, a given 
sum will print an edition of a Tract : when this edition is 
sold, the avails of the sale will print another edition; and 
so on, as long as the Tract shall be needed. 

The Committee were so impressed on this subject, that 
they resolved to employ an Agent to travel through vari- 
ous parts of our country with a view of increasing the 
funds of the Society, and extending its operations. They 
accordingly engaged Mr. Louis Dwight for the term of 
twelve months. Mr. Dwight commenced his mission, the 
beginning of October last. He has been well received in 
the places which he has visited ; Jhid the Lord haslnclin- 
ed the hearts of many to promote, by their liberality, the 
great object of the Institution. The concerns of the Soci- 
ety were previously in a state of much embarrassment. 
The publication of Tracts was much retarded, and almost 
suspended for a time. But it was soon resumed with new 
energy, and 372,000 Tracts, embracing 62 numbers, have 
since been published. This revival of the business is to 
be attributed to the renewed and lively interest in the ob- 
ject of the Society, which was excited by Mr. D wight's 
agency in Boston and other places. Should his efforts still 
continue to be crowned with success, and the patronage 
of the Christian community be further afforded, the friends 
of the establishment will have increasing cause of grati- 
tude to the Father of mercies. By his smiles upon the 
operations of the Society, and its patrons and agents, the 
number of Tracts will continue to be increased, and to be 
more extensively circulated. 

It may be gratifying to the Society to be informed, that 
in the last six months previous to the first of the present 
month, the number of Tracts published was a third great- 
er than was published in the year preceding the last An- 
nual Meeting. 

The following new Tracts have been added to the se- 
ries the past year : viz. 



1820] SIXTH REPORT. 65 

No. Pages. 

103. Every man the Friend or Enemy of Christ ... 8 

104. History of Tracts 28 

105. The Happy Waterman 8 

106. Pause and think, "Am I a Christian ?" By Rev. J. Alleine 24 

107. Little Henry and his Bearer 32 

70. Scripture Extracts 20 

The last Tract supplies the place of Rev. Dr. Beecher's 
Address. The Tract No. 34 will also, in future, be pub- 
lished in smaller type, which will reduce it from 60 pages 
to 28 ; and the remaining 32 pages will be supplied by 
34. Part IT. A Memorial for Sunday-School Boys . .16 

34. Part III. A Memorial for Sunday School Girls . . 16 

These will immediately be put to press. 

The whole number of Tracts published the past year is 383,000 

Whole number from the beginning" 2,254,000 

Nineteen new Depositories have the past year been es- 
tablished in the following towns : viz. 

Brunswick, Me. Joseph Griffin. 

East-port, Me. Abiel Stevens. 

Hallow til, Me. Gow & Lincoln. 

Newport, N. H. Rev. James R. Wheelock. 

Brattleborough, Vt. Rev. Jonathan Magee. 

Beverly, Mass. Israel Trask. 

Pittsjield, Mass. Josiah Bissell. 

Williamstown (Will.Coll.y Isaac Oakes. 

Chelsea, Con. Thomas Robinson. 

Pomfort, Con. Rev. James Porter. • 

Brownville, N. Y. Rev. Phineas Smith. 

Cambridge, N. Y. Rev. Nathaniel S. Prime. 

Johnstown, N. Y. Rev. Elisha Yale. 

Rochester, N. Y. Everard Peck. 

Alexandria, Va. James & A. Douglass. 

Norfolk, Va. John M'Phail. 

Staunton, Va. Joseph Cowan. 

Edenton, N. C. Thomas Brownrigg. 

St. Louis, Missouri, Rev. Salmon Giddings. 

The whole number of Depositories in operation is now 
fifty seven, and the sales have much increased. From 
this it is manifest, that greater interest is excited in favour 
of the Society, and a much larger number of its Tracts 
have been put in circulation. 

As the agency of Mr. Dwight is not closed, a report of 
hi? labours and success must be reserved to a future op- 
6* 



t>b 



SIXTH REPORT. [1820 



portunity. The Committee would however advert to one 
interesting circumstance attending his exertions. This 
is the increase of the Life Members of the Society. By 
means of a Circular, which he has addressed to Ladies in 
various towns, the daughters of Zion have generously con- 
tributed the requisite sum to constitute their respective 
Ministers members of the Society for life. It is much to 
he desired that this very laudable practice should very 
generally prevail. It will both increase the attachment 
of the minister and members of his flock to each other, 
and excite in their minds a more lively interest in the con- 
cerns of this Society. And should the privilege, which 
the constitution allows, of taking back a part of the money 
in Tracts, be generously relinquished for the benefit of the 
Society, the contributors might have the additional satis- 
faction of reflecting that the $20, which they have given, 
will keep a Tract of four pages in circulation as long as it 
shall be wanted ; — or such sums united, would print any 
other Tract in like manner. — The Committee trust that 
this suggestion will be well received, and that instead of 
diminishing the funds of the Society, such generous bene- 
factors will by a little additional effort make purchase of 
as many Tracts as they or their beloved Minister may wish 
to distribute, And will it not be far more satisfactory to 
their benevolent minds, (o pursue this course, than to have 
tbe greater part of their donation immediately withdrawn, 
so that the Society shall have no further benefit from it? 
The principle here disclosed deserves particular atten- 
tion ; for it is found to be of vital consequence to the 
great object of the Society. This object, it will be re- 
membered, is to establish and keep good a General Tract 
Depository of such magnitude, as shall promptly meet all 
the demands of numerous purchasers. Let every donation 
remain unbroken and entire, and the grand object of the 
Society will soon be secured. But if donations are brok- 
en, and in a great measure taken back, the Society may 
not only have to struggle with embarrassments for years 
to come, hut the General Depository will also fail of an- 
swering its design. Besides ; a donation will be far more 
useful to be employed in printing successive editions of a 
Tract, than to be mostly expended in the immediate dis- 



1820] SIXTH REPORT. 67 

tribution of Tracts ; when this distribution might very 
easily be made by other means. 

The Committee have adopted another measure of con- 
siderable consequence. Such has been tiie desire to ob- 
tain all the series of our Tracts in bound volumes, that the 
Committee have determined to bind a thousand complete 
sets in neat binding*. The tive volumes will be lettered 
and numbered ; and will be sold at such a moderate 
price, as to induce a ready sale. It is expected that this 
measure will soon be executed. 

The Committee have no wish to deviate materially 
from that simplicity of design, which has been hitherto pur- 
sued. Nor do they think it needful. Still they apprehend 
that some peculiar advantages might result to the Charitable 
Institutions of the present day, if some new measures were 
adopted. It is their settled conviction, that the want of 
information much prevents the success of benevolent de- 
signs to spread the Gospel. A great proportion of the 
people in various sections of our country know but very 
little of the operations of the American Board of Commis- 
sioners for Foreign Missions; or of the American Education 
Society ; or of Bible and Missionary Societies generally, 
Many have strong prejudices against things of this kind, 
which more enlarged, correct information would much re- 
move. The Committee have therefore thought it very 
desirable to be furnished with the means of publishing 
some new series of Tracts, which should be devoted to 
these benevolent objects. For instance; let a Tract be 
published annually for the American Board of Commission- 
ers. Let the first Tract in the series comprise a summary 
history of the operations of the Hoard to the present time ; 
and let each succeeding number contain the principal 
events of the year, with such appeals to the heart and 
conscience as shall serve to enlist every one in the cause. 
Let a similar series of Tracts be devoted to the interests 
of the American Education Society. Let another series be 
devoted to Domestic Missions ; and another to the cause 
of Bible Societies. These Tracts, instead of being sold 
by the General Agents, like the other publications of 
the Society, should be gratuitously distributed by them 
through the medium of Auxiliary Tract Societies and 



$3 SIXTH REPORT. [1820 

other purchasers. In this way, these Tracts would be 
more widely dispersed, and with far less trouble, than these 
Institutions couid disperse them. And such a plan would 
greatly promote the sale and circulation of other Tracts. 
It would be very gratifying to a purchaser to have some 
of these new series put into his bundle to scatter in his 
journey, or among his neighbours at home. — The Com- 
mittee are not without hope that something of the kind 
will be accomplished. The greatest difficulty is the want 
of funds. But cannot these be furnished ? 

The Committee see no cause to relax their exertions 
for want of success. But they are animated to proceed 
with increasing zeal and energy, by the frequent testimony 
they receive, that God blesses the truth which they are the 
means of disseminating. Instead of now giving extracts of 
correspondence in confirmation of this, the Committee 
would rather direct your attention to a Tract, which has 
been recently published on this subject. It is a History of 
Tracts, of 28 pages. It discloses more interesting facts, 
than we have ever seen in any other publication of equal 
size. No one, it would seem, can rise from the perusal 
of it without a deep conviction of the utility of Tracts, or 
of his duty to disperse them. Here you see the most 
striking evidence of their blessed effects on seamen and 
soldiers. Men, hardened in sin, and who had long with- 
stood powerful attacks of Divine truth, are subdued by 
these lighter weapons. These, like David's sling and 
stone, have eluded the armour in which they gloried, and 
pierced their souls with such wounds, as none but Jesus 
can heal. — You see hoary-headed sinners brought to the 
feet of the Saviour by these simple means. The poor are 
enriched with gold tried in the fire ; and the ignorant made 
wise unto salvation. These are great effects from little 
causes. They both display surprising grace, and show 
what immense good may be done by means, which are too 
often overlooked. Who has not within his reach these 
means of saving fellow sinners from eternal death? Who 
cannot apply them? 

The history of particular Tracts is no less interesting. 
Three are noticed in the Tract before us. These are 
" Sixteen Short Sermons ;" " The Dairyman's Daughter ;" 



1820] SIXTH REPORT. 69 

and, "the Swearer's Prayer." These Tracts have been 
remarkably blessed. Few men have seen such fruits of 
their labor, as the Rev. Mr. Richmond, the Author of the 
Dairyman's Daughter. " Seven hundred thousand of this 
interesting narrative have been printed in Russia, France, 
Germany, Sweden, Finland, England, and America.'" Many 
have been already converted by it ; and thousands more 
may ascribe their salvation, under Divine grace, to this af- 
fecting account of a poor sinner saved by the blood of the 
Lamb. — The Swearer's Prayer is a Tract of only four pa- 
ges. It costs but four mills : five of them can be had for 
only two cents. But it has been a powerful arrow in the 
Lord's quiver. Between the joints of the harness, it has 
many times reached the heart. Pungent conviction has 
been succeeded by saving conversion ; and lips, long dev- 
illed with oaths and curses, have thenceforward proclaim- 
ed the wonders of redeeming love. — Of this Tract, seven 
editions, amounting to 44,000 copies, have already been 
published for this Society. As these have been very wide- 
ly dispersed, their blessed effects cannot be immediately 
known. Time, but especially eternity, will reveal them 
to our admiration and joy. The subject before us is so 
copious, that the one half cannot now be told. A scene 
has just begun to open, which will disclose far greater 
things, than }'ou have yet beheld. Is its commencement so 
glorious? What will be its consummation ? What wonders 
will future ages unfold? 

The immortal harvest will bear proportion to the seed 
soon. As a man soweth, so shall he reap. But the har- 
vest, through Divine mercy, will be exceedingly great. It 
may be a hundred, or even a thousand fold greater, than 
your fondest hopes anticipated. The conversions, which 
you are the means of effecting, may be the commencement 
of a series, which may be increased far beyond your pres- 
ent expectations. You give a Tract to a neighbour, or to 
a stranger, which is blessed to his conversion ; he is made 
the instrument of converting others ; each of them is made 
successful in turning others from the error of their ways; 
and so the work spreads, by the grace of God, on the train 
of events which you commenced, until the souls convert- 
ed become exceedingly numerous. The rivulet becomes 



70 SIXTH REPORT. [1820 

a broad, majestic river. — The Tract, which you publish, 
is circulated in every direction : and the effects which it 
produces are vastly multiplied from year to year. An in- 
creasing number arise, and bless the name of the generous 
benefactor, who contributed so much to the salvation of 
their souls. Some of these publish other Tracts; which 
by the Divine blessing, produce like effects in augmented 
ratios. But human calculation fails. None but the eye 
of Omniscience can discover all the fruits of your pious 
efforts, of your christian liberality. 

Yours is a privilege highly exalted. Thousands now in 
glory, labored and toiled in their day, but with no such 
means of doing good, as are put in your power. Your 
nearness to the millennial days, greatly increases the influ- 
ence you may have in the conversion of the world. You 
can sow more bountifully, and in a far wider field ; and the 
more abundant showers of Divine grace will cause the 
seed sown to be immensely more productive than in past 
ages. 

Are there no peculiar obligations imposed by these 
things? Can you free yourselves from these bonds ? Shall 
these motives be lost upon you? Then it had been good 
for you to have lived in the dark ages, and not have wit- 
nessed the flood of light, which God is now pouring upon 
this long benighted world. But, beloved Brethren, we are 
persuaded better things of you. Surely. you will take hold 
of this good work in earnest, and pursue it, with most an* 
imating hopes that the kingdoms of this world, will soon 
become the kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 



APPENDIX. 



Among the friends and benefactors which have been raised up 
for the Society the past year, when pecuniary aid has L>2en so much 
needed, are a few of the poor of this world, whose i rTorts to pro- 
mote the interests of the Society, the Committee believe are wor- 
thy of remembrance. 

The first is of a Female, who has long- resided in a respectable 
family and received a weekly compensation for her services ; and 
who on learning the usefulness and wants of this Society, told the 
lady with whom she lived, that she had resolved to give twenty 
dollars, which she had laid aside for other purposes, to print the 
Swearers Prayer, The donation was accordingly presented in a 
humble and affectionate manner, and with an earnest desire that 
it might be the means of good, especially to the unhappy beings 
Who profane the name of their Maker. 

Not long after the above, the Agent of the Society was directed 
to a house in a retired street in one of our large towns. His con- 
nexion with this Society was made known to a lady in whose dress 
and appearance simplicity and neatness were happily united, 
when the following conversation occurred. M But who," said she f 
" sent you here ?" " The Lord, I hope," he answered. M Well," 
said she, u I believe he did ; do tell me something about the Tract 
Society." He began to state particulars, but soon saw the subject 
was familiar to the lady ; and added that he was glad to find it un- 
necessary to delay his business, to mention all the circumstances 
of the Society. u But," said she, M stay a moment." She went 
into her chamber, returned, and put a bill in his hand which he 
saw to be twenty dollars ! M What does this mean ?" said he. U I 
will tell you what it means. I was reading in the Boston Recor- 
der of a female that works for a dollar a week, giving twenty dol- 
lars to the Tract Society ; and I went into my chamber, and laid 
that into my drawer for the same object, and have been waiting two 
or three weeks, for some one to call and take it." 

On the arrival of the ship Exeter, on board of which, during her 
voyage, there had been great seriousness among the sailors, Capt. 
L. invited the Agent of the Society to meet his mtn and converse 
and pray with them. Before his departure, it was made known 
that he was endeavouring to increase the funds of this Society ; — 
one of the honest tars stepped forward and said, u There is one dol- 
lar." Another gave three ; another, three ; another, five ; anoth- 
er, whose first serious impressions had been made by reading a 
Tract, gave ten ; and the Captain, twenty. Thus making a dona- 
tion of forty two dollars from this little church of six members. Let 



72 APPENDIX. [6th. REP. 

the sister churches look at this example, and go away and do like- 
wise. 

The following facts are communicated by a Gentleman, who has 
been made acquainted with them during the last winter. 

The Rev. Dr. B presented a Tract to a young" woman of his 

society, to whose salvation it was made effectual. A poor woman 

in M traces her first serious impressions to the reading o a Tract. 

Two ladies in S were led to the Saviour by the same means. 

A lady in N , who was teaching school in the country, picked 

up a Tract which was dropped for the children, by a passenger in 
the stage. It was the means of her conversion. 

The following is from a Sailor. 
u I think I am persuaded, that the Religious Tracts are of great 
use. I carried some to sea with me, which were read by the sea- 
men, with solemnity and attention, and were instrumental of bring- 
ing two of the Ship's company to a sense of their awful state of 
sin and misery, and of their need of sanctification by our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ. I therefore subscribe three dollars for the 
support of that blessed institution. 1 ' A Mariner. 

From an aged Gentleman, employed to pass through the country with 
Bibles and Tracts. 
A young woman in Vermont, who appeared to he under an aw- 
ful gloom, on account of her undone state by nature, so that she 
could hardly take care of her little family, received from me a large 
number of Tracts. When I returned, after distributing Tracts in 
almost every house, and to every person I met by the way, many 
of whom received them m love and thankfulness, I called on the 
woman. She appeared very differently from what she did before. 
She was solemn, but not melancholy ; cheerful, but not light. 
She said that the books, which I left, had been blessed of G-od to 
her soul. 

Extract of a letter from Mr. P of Woodville^ Mississippi, dated 

November 30, 1819. 
u The only good effects, arising from the distribution of Tracts, 
which have come to my knowledge, are three, and those confined to 
my school. Three of my pupils have hopefully been made subjects 
of divine grace by the instrumentality of these silent messengers of 
truth. For this I thank my God. — Yours affectionately, R. P. 



1820] SIXTH REPORT. 73 

OFFICERS, 

ELECTED MAY, 1820. 

Hon. WILLIAM REED, President. 
Rev. SAMUEL WORCESTER, D. D. Vice President. 
Rev. JOHN CODMAN, Corresponding Secretary. 
Rev. RICHARD S. STORRS, Recording Secretary. 
AMOS BLANCHARD, Esq. Treasurer. 

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE. 

Rev. JOHN H. CHURCH, 
Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS, 
Rev. JOHN CODMAN, 
Rev. JOSEPH CHICKERING, of Wobura. 
AMOS BLANCHARD Esq. 



State of the Society's Funds. 

Balance due from the Society, May 26, 1819, $1,989 09 

Expense of paper, printing, &c from May 26, 1819, ) 

to May 1, 1820, including interest on loan \ 2,193,23 



$4,182,32 

Received, from May 26, 1819, to May 1, 1820. 

Donations *$545 16 

Two loans of $500, each ..... i 000 00 

From Agents of the General Depository for Tracts sold, &c 1,41807 

$2,963,23 

Balance due from the Society for printing, &c. 1 219,09 

Due on loans . .... 2,000^00 

Balance due from the Society, May 1, 1820, $3 219 09 

Amos Blanchard, Treasurer. 

* In addition to this amount of donations, the Society received 
two loans of $500, each, together with use of loan of $1000 pre- 
viously made, all without interest for one year. 

7 



MAY 30, 1821. 

With gratitude to the God of all grace, for his continu- 
ed smiles upon this Society ; and with devout acknowl- 
edgment of him, to whom they are indebted for all its pros- 
perity, the Executive Committee present their Seyenth 
Annual Report. It will be recollected, by those who 
heard the last Report, that, in consequence of the embar- 
rassed state of the funds, and the numerous calls for Tracts, 
which the Committee were unable to satisfy, they had ap- 
pointed Mr. Louis Dwight, as an Agent, to travel through 
various parts of the country, and solicit donations, to in- 
crease the funds, and extend the operations of the Society. 

He was commissioned for the term of one year. As 
that term had not expired at the last Annual Meeting, a 
report of his agency was deferred to this time. 

Mr. Dwight began his labors in Andover, and before 
leaving that place, obtained about $400, He then visit- 
ed Boston, where he obtained about $1200. He also obtain- 
ed two loans, of $500 each, without interest, for one year. 
He then visited Salem, and Newburyport; and from those 
places obtained about $600. He also obtained, in New- 
buryport, a loan of $1000, without interest, for one year. 
He then prepared the u History of Tracts," which forms 
No. 104 of the Series. Of this Tract 14,000 copies have 
been published ; and have been the means of exciting 
much interest in the objects of the Society. 

He then visited various places in New Hampshire, 
Maine, Mass., Rhode Island, Conn., Vermont, Canada, and 
New York. Wherever he went, the blessing of God 
seemed to attend him. He was received with kindness — 
peculiar interest was excited in the objects of this Socie- 
ty, and his labours were crowned with success. In addi- 
tion to obtaining donations, he was instrumental in increas- 
ing the number of Depositories and extending the circula- 
tion of Tracts. He formed numerous Tract Societies, and 
greatly increased and strengthened many which were al- 
ready formed. He also addressed letters to hundreds of 



1821] 



SEVENTH REPORT. 



75 



persons whom he was not able to see, and made known 
the object and the wants of this Society. 

More than a 100 persons since the commencement of his 
agency, and 87 of them during the last year, have become 
Life Members of the Society. Of these 78 are ministers 
of the Gospel — and 72 of them have been made Life Mem- 
bers by benevolent individuals, or Societies, in their res- 
pective parishes ; a great proportion of them by Females, 
whose lively interest in the objects of this Society, and 
whose benevolent efforts for its prosperity, shall be told 
to all generations, for a memorial of them. 

The whole amount of monies received by the Treas- 
urer since the commencement of Mr. D wight's agency is 
$4,137,17. 

By this assistance, which the Committee would acknowl- 
edge with gratitude to the Father of mercies, they have 
been enabled to prosecute the objects of the Society with 
increasing energy and effect. 

They have published, since the last Annual Meeting, 27 
new Tracts, constituting an entire volume, and completing 
six volumes of the Society's publications. They are the 
following : 

M>. VOL. VI. pager, 

108. True Prophecies, addressed to all whom they may concern 12 



109. The Way to Happiness 

110. History of Edward Poole and George Crosby 

111. The Two Lambs— Hymn 

112. History of Peter and John Hay 

113. Questions and Counsel. By Dr. Green 

114. The Busy Bee. By Mrs. Sherwood 

115. Catherine Haldane .... 

116. The Sabbath Scholar . 

117. Important Questions — Hymns 

118. The Strayed Lamb .... 

119. The Sabbath School Remembrancer — Little Hannah 

120. Heaven Lost. Extracted from Baxter's Saint's Rest 

121. On the Lord's Prayer .... 

122. The Assizes— Hymn .... 

123. The way to Convert a Cottage into a Palace 

124. Address to the Sabbath Breaker . 

125. Fatal Effects of Ardent Spirits. By E. Porter, D. D 

126. The Heavenly Pilot— Hymns 

127. The Two Sisters. By Mrs. Sherwood— Hymns 



4 

16 

12 

12 

4 

8 

20 
8 

12 
4 

12 

16 
8 
8 
8 
4 

28 
8 

If 



76 SEVENTH REPORT. [1821 

128. Poor Sarah, an Indian Woman 8 

129. The Two Apprentices — Address to Youth ... 8 

130. The Richmond Alarm . . . . . . .4 

131. Saving Faith. Abridged from Thomas Bostons-Hymns . 12 

132. The Power of Grace, or History of Anna Emery . . 24 

133. The Life of Emelia Geddie— Hymns .... 24 

134. Eternity of Future Punishment. By Rev. A. Fuller . 12 

Besides the above, the Committee have issued editions 
of 51 other Tracts, making the whole number of 

Tracts published the past year 468,000 

Whole number from the beginning 2,722,000 

The Committee have also procured another Tract to 
be published, and one of a different kind from what they 
have ever published before. It is a Tract of 48 pages, 
made up principally of facts relative to the present state 
of the world, with a Calendar or astronomical Diary pre- 
fixed to it. It is entitled, " The Christian Almanack." The 
Committee were informed by a company of respectable 
printers that they would print and circulate such a pub- 
lication, provided the Committee would furnish the copy, 
and that they would devote the avails of it to this So- 
ciety. The Committee therefore furnished the copy. 
And although it was late in the season before it was pub* 
lished, yet through the laudable exertions of the printers, 
and the numerous friends of the Tract Society, there has 
been a circulation of more than 14,000 copies. And al- 
though the Committee are not able to state the sum, yet 
they believe that something valuable will accrue from 
this measure to the funds of the Society. 

The Committee are now preparing another copy of a 
similar Tract, which they hope will be still more worthy 
of the public patronage ; and which they intend soon to 
publish. 

It will contain, in addition to all that is valuable in other 
Astronomical Diaries, a great collection of facts, relative 
to the present state of Christian, and Heathen countries; 
and a condensed view of all the Benevolent Societies, and 
their operations for evangelizing the world. It will also 
contain useful directions to farmers, mechanics, and all de- 
scriptions of persons, and will be a truly valuable little 
manual for every family throughout the country. And 



1821] SEVENTH REPORT. T7 

from the many inquiries made, from various parts of the 
country, concerning" this Tract (in consequence of the one 
published the last year) the Committee cannot but expect 
that the circulation of it will be extensive. They intend, 
if there should continue to be a call for such a Tract, to 
print one of this kind yearly, and to number them in a 
separate series. In seven years, they will make a volume, 
which may be bound, and which will conform in size and 
appearance to the other volumes of Tracts. 

The Committee have also procured 1,000 sets of the 
five first volumes of Tracts, to be bound; and 200 sets of 
the last volume; that all who wish, may be supplied with 
complete sets. These volumes contain each about 300 
pages. They are bound in strong and neat full binding ; 
gilt and lettered ; and sold at fifty cents a volume. 

The Committee cannot but view it as exceedingly de- 
sirable that a complete set of Tracts should be possessed 
by every family. 

Few books, if any, beside the Bible, contain, within the 
same compass, so much moral and religious truth. Few, 
if any, present it in such an interesting and impressive 
form; and few are calculated to be so useful, especially to 
the young. Some of the most benevolent, active persons 
now on the stage, attribute their first serious impressions, 
to the reading of Tracts, in childhood. 

In what way can a parent lay out three dollars for his 
children to greater advantage; or with a greater prospect 
of promoting their salvation, than in furnishing them with 
six volumes of Tracts — containing no less than 1800 pa- 
ges, of the most interesting instruction, and in the very 
form, in which it has already been blessed to the salva- 
tion of thousands ? 

The Committee have also established, during the past 
year, fourteen new Depositories, in the following towns : 

Champlain, JV. F. Rev. Joseph Labaree. 

Be Kalb, JV. F. Gen. Thomas B. Benedict. 

Ogdensburg, JV. F. John Fine, Esq. 

Piatt sburg, JV. F. Rev. Samuel Whelpley. 

Saratoga, JV*. F. Rev. Darius O. Griswold. 

Georgetown, Dis. Col. Robert Ober. 

Petersbutgh, Va. Joseph Thayer. 

Richmond, Va. Nathan Pollard. 
7* 



78 SEVENTH REPORT. [1821 

Raleigh, N. C. William Shaw. 

Chapel Hill, JV. C. Prof. Elisha Mitchell. 

Maiietta, Ohio, Mrs. B. Putnam. 

Detroit, Mich. Ter. Lemuel Shattuck. 

Green Bay, Mich. Ter. Maj. Matthew Irvin. 

Montreal, L. Canada, William Hedge. 

The whole number of Depositories now belonging to 
the Society is seventy one : viz. 10 in Mass. 6 in Maine, 
7 in N. Hampshire, 5 in Vermont, 6 in Conn. 1 in Rhode 
Island, 14 in N. York, 5 in Virginia, 2 in the District of 
Columbia, 4 in North Carolina, 3 in Ohio, 1 in Kentucky, 
1 in Tennessee, 1 in Georgia, 1 in Mississippi, 1 in Mis- 
souri, 2 in the Michigan Territory, and 1 in Lower Can- 
ada. 

Each of these Depositories is under the care of an 
Agent, appointed by the Committee, who receives the 
Tracts, becomes responsible for them, and when they are 
sold, returns the money and receives a new supply of 
Tracts. Every agent is entitled to 10 per cent upon all 
the Tracts which he sells; and is at liberty, if he chooses, 
at the close of his agency, to return all Tracts which re- 
main unsold. Each Depository supplies numerous Tract 
Societies, and individuals, with Tracts at one mill a page, 
for their own use, and gratuitous distribution. 

Thus the Society has 71 fountains, each of which is sup- 
plying numerous streams, which are continually, and in 
every direction, carrying the waters of life over many a 
barren desert. 

Weary pilgrims who are traversing those deserts, and 
perishing with thirst are, by hundreds, daily meeting with 
these waters — they drink, and are refreshed. They are 
strengthened— and many of them will never thirst. The 
water which they receive, will be in them, " a well of wa- 
ter springing up into everlasting life." 

It must be evident, however, to all, that these Deposito- 
ries must be kept constantly supplied ; and to meet the 
numerous calls which are made upon them for Tracts, it 
is important that they should be supplied with all the va- 
riety which the Society have published; and in such quan- 
tities, that they will not need to send to the General De- 
pository, oftener than once a year. This will lessen the 



1821] SEVENTH REPORT. 79 

trouble of Agents — lessen the expense of transportation, 
and al the same time give greater encouragement to pur- 
chasers. It will enable Agents to meet promptly every 
demand, to afford the greatest variety, and at the least 
expense. 

But if any Depository is not able promptly to meet the 
demand for Tracts, those who wish to distribute them are 
discouraged, and their efforts will cease. And if you urge 
others to form Tract Societies, you are immediately met 
by the objection, tk if we do, we cannot obtain Tracts.*" 
And some important Tract Societies have actually been dis- 
solved, and many more have been rendered almost useless, 
on account of the difficulty of obtaining Tracts. They have 
sent to the nearest Depository, at the distance of 20, and 
perhaps 40 miles, and have from time to time, been disap- 
pointed, until their efforts have ceased. And the Com- 
mittee are becoming every year more and more impress- 
ed with the necessity of having every Depository constant- 
ly supplied. This, like energy at the seat of life, will 
promote circulation throughout all the surrounding region. 

But in order to afford this supply, the General Deposito- 
ry must be kept constantly full. If there is a want here, 
it will be felt to the extremities of the system. An Agent, 
for instance, applies to have the Depository at St. Louis 
replenished. He may have formed numerous Tract So- 
cieties, and with much trouble to himself, have raised 
monies ; but if he cannot obtain Tracts, he is discourag- 
ed — all his efforts are palsied, and the system of efforts 
which he has put in operation, will in a short time stop. 
At the same time there are calls upon the Depository from 
various other places, and if they cannot be promptly sup- 
plied, the effect on them is the same. The system then 
cannot go forward with energy and effect, unless the Gen- 
eral Depository be kept constantly full. This is the foun- 
tain which must supply all other fountains, and through 
them, ail the streams. But to keep this Depository con- 
stantly full, requires a larger capital than the Society 
have yet been able to obtain. 

The various Depositories, on an average, ought to have 
continually on hand, at least $100 worth of Tracts. This, 



80 SEVENTH REPORT. [1821 

to supply only our present number, would require $7,000. 
And to keep the General Depository so full as to be able 
promptly to supply them, would require Tracts to the 
amount of, at least, $7,000 more. 

There are now in the Depository, Tracts to the amount 
of $4,400, and yet many of the numbers are nearly, and 
some entirely out of print. And to furnish the Tracts 
which are now on hand, the Committee have been obliged 
to incur a debt of more than $2,500. 

Thus with only their present number of Depositories, 
in order to keep the system in the most efficient operation, 
they need a capital of at least $14,000. 

And yet there are many extensive regions of our coun- 
try, and those too, the most of all destitute of moral and 
religious instruction, where there are no Depositories, and 
where Tracts are almost entirely unknown. To supply 
these regions would require at least 70 Depositories more, 
and the capital of the Society would need to be propor- 
tionably increased. 

It will always be embarrassing to the Society, to be in 
debt for Tracts which it is needful to have on hand, in order 
to supply Depositories. But if it can obtain a capital equal 
to that amount, it may then, on that scale, continue to sup- 
port itself. It may without additional funds continue to 
circulate its thousands, and hundreds of thousands of Tracts, 
annually, to the end of the world. 

In addition to establishing Depositories, the Committee 
have had numerous and pressing applications for Tracts 
for gratuitous distribution. Some have been from seamen, 
some from missionaries, and many from the destitute 
parts of our country. But for want of funds the Commit- 
tee have not been able to supply them. One of these ap- 
plications, however, is peculiarly worthy of notice. It is 
from the Rev. Gordon Hall, Missionary at Bombay, in In- 
dia. " I want," says he, M a complete set of Tracts for 
my own use, and a large quantity for distribution. It has 
often occurred to me that your Society, and other Tract 
Societies in America, might extend their operations to 
this country with great advantage, and that it might 
have a very happy influence both here, and at home. 
The populous countries of the East 5 with their various re- 



1821] SEVENTH REPORT. 8 1 

ligions and languages, open an immense field for the oper- 
ations of Tract Societies, as well as Missionary Societies. 
And should Tract Societies see fit thus to extend their op- 
erations, it would form an additional bond of union, bind- 
ing the Eastern nations still more closely to the hearts of 
christians in the West, and would I think promise well for 
the cause of our great Redeemer. 

For similar reasons I think that the American Bible So- 
ciety should extend its operations here, as well as else- 
where, among the heathen, as God shall open the way. 
Let Missionary Societies, Bible Societies, and Tract Soci- 
eties draw the bonds of Christian union still closer; their 
harmony will thereby be more perfect — their operations 
more efficient, and the result more glorious. Let them 
enter into partnership, and all extend the cultivating hand 
to the same field. Let Missionary Societies send and sup- 
port Missionaries — let Bible Societies provide Bibles — 
and let Tract Societies provide Tracts. Thus each may 
labour, upon the same spot, without interference and 
greatly to the encouragement of all." 

Thus writes this excellent missionary, after labouring, 
with unwearied diligence, for seven years, in spreading the 
Gospel among the heathen. 

And the Committee could not but regret that they were 
not able to grant him an immediate supply. He needs a 
quantity of Tracts every time he makes an excursion into 
the country. And this is the case with every missionary, 
in every country, who travels among a people that can 
read. 

And could all missionaries be supplied with a complete 
assortment, they might probably do as much good by the 
distribution of Tracts, as by all their other labours. 

This is the case especially in India. A strong feeling 
of doubt and uncertainty exists in a large portion of the 
natives respecting their own opinions, and practices. Many 
have come to the conclusion that their system of idolatry 
is vain; although they have not yet courage to renounce 
it. Many more are halting between two opinions; and all 
seem to be aware that an important crisis is approaching. 
This state of things presents a field, peculiarly encourag- 
ing for the distribution of Tracts. 



8£ SEVENTH REPORT. [1821 

And, writes an English missionary from that country, 
millions of Tracts might be scattered with the prospect of 
an abundant harvest. 

Several persons have been to the missionaries, who sta- 
ted, that they had come two hundred miles on purpose to 
get a sight of the Tracts. 

An immense field is opening also for the distribution of 
Tracts in Canada, in Louisiana, and in East and West 
Florida. 

With the blessing of Him who has raised up this Socie- 
ty and hitherto prospered it beyond all human expecta- 
tions, the Committee cannot but hope that the time is ap- 
proaching, when they shall be able to supply them. 

They hope that the time is approaching when every 
missionary in our country will be supplied — and as Tracts 
shall be needed, every missionary who goes from our 
country to the heathen. 

But for this, there must be a great increase of funds. 
And where, the Committee would ask, where on earth, 
can funds be employed to greater advantage, than by this 
Society ? 

There are several considerations which must, when du- 
ly examined, give this Society a strong hold upon the 
hearts of all benevolent persons in our country. 

The first is, its extended operations, the ease and effect 
with which it may operate upon millions of minds. 

Suppose the Society has 100 Depositories, (only 29 
more than it now has,) placed at equal distances through- 
out our country. Suppose that around each of these De- 
positories are 20 Tract Societies, and 100 individuals who 
wish to purchase Tracts. 

Suppose the Societies purchase each $20 worth in a 
year, and the individuals only $2 for their own use and 
gratuitous distribution. Each Depository will then cir- 
culate annually 60,000 Tracts. And the 100 Depositories 
will circulate annually 6,000,000. 

Here then will be six millions of preachers of righteous- 
ness annually goiPv^ forth and beseeching persons of every 
description, from the little child up to the hoary head of 
age, to turn unto God and live. 

The next consideration is, The immense call for Tracts* 



1821] SEVENTH REPORT. 83 

Some may suppose, that if this Society should circulate 
6,000,000 annually, the country would soon be supplied. 
But the country cannot be considered as supplied till each 
family has, at least, one set of Tracts. 

Should the Society continue to circulate 6,000,000 an- 
nually, they could not furnish even one set to a family, of 
what they have already published, in less than 40 years. 
And as Tracts, if used by a whole family, would not last on 
an average more than 20 years ; this rate of circulation 
would never supply them, even if the number of families 
should never increase. But as the number of families is 
rapidly increasing, and to an extent beyond what 6,000,000 
of Tracts in a year would supply, the number of families 
which must still be destitute, will continue to increase. 

This calculation regards simply our own country. And 
yet we are but little more than one to a hundred among 
the inhabitants of the earth ; all of whom are as needy 
as ourselves, and vastly the greater portion of them, far 
more so. The demand then for Tracts will continue 
to increase ; and without vastly greater efforts than have 
ever yet been made, can never be supplied. 

Another consideration is, The great amount of good which 
may be accomplished^ by small means. 

A man gives to the funds of this Society $100. This 
may furnish 30,000 Tracts of 4 pages each, and place 
them in all the Depositories throughout the country. Thus 
with $100 he may speak to 30,000 persons. Suppose 
each of these Tracts goes into a family, and is read by 5 
persons. He then speaks to 150,000 persons, and as ef- 
fectually perhaps as he would were he personally to ad- 
dress them. And if each Tract is lent in the neighbour- 
hood and read by 10 persons more, he speaks to 450,000 
persons. A missionary, were he to preach 200 times in a 
year, and every time to a congregation of 100 different 
persons, could not address so many in 22 years. And this 
is as long as missionaries, on an average, after commenc- 
ing their labours, can be expected to live. 

And how many persons have been more benefitted by 
reading the Swearer's Prayer, a Tract of 4 pages, than 
they probably would be, by hearing the best sermon which 
any missionary could preach upon profaneness* 



84 SEVENTH REPORT. [1821 

Another consideration is, The ease and effect, with which 
this Society may assist all other benevolent Societies. 

A man has $100 which he wishes to devote in such a man- 
ner as will most effectually promote the object of Foreign 
Missions; and he gives it to the Tract Society, to 
print a statement of facts, with respect to the christian and 
heathen world ; which probably would be the best Tract, 
which could be published upon that subject. This Tract 
is immediately in 70 Depositories and circulating among 
thousands of individuals — and among many who would 
probably obtain the information contained in it, in no oth- 
er way. By diffusing information, and thus enlightening 
and exciting the public mind, this $100 might bring in thou- 
sands to the treasury of the Lord. 

If this sum were given annually, such a Tract might be 
annually printed, and all the copies gratuitously distributed. 
And so with every benevolent Society, 

Thus the Tract Society may be made a grand engine 
of spreading, continually, to every part of the country, a 
knowledge of facts ; which must always be the grand spring 
of every benevolent operation. And considering the ease, 
constancy, and effect, with which it may circulate informa- 
tion, as well as present divine truth ; the Committee can- 
not but view it as destined, by lmmanuel, to bear an im- 
portant part in the renovation of the world. 

It is related by the Rev. Dr. Henderson, that during 
his travels in the Northern part of Europe, he was de- 
tained for a time, at Copenhagen ; and that while there 
he employed himself in translating the Tract, entitled, 
" The Great Question Answered ;" and that the circulation of 
this Tract, had been traced as the source of all the Bible 
Societies in Russia, Sweden, and the neighbouring coun- 
tries. 

In Russia alone, there are at present no less than 120 
Bible Societies extending over that wide spreading empire. 
They have printed the Scriptures in 26 languages ; in 
twelve of which, they were never before printed. They 
are now preparing translations in seven other languages. 
They have also purchased immense quantities of Bibles 
from abroad, and distributed them in 13 other languages, 
making a total of 46 languages, in which they have pro- 



1821] SEVENTH REPORT. 85 

moted the distribution of the Word of God, Who can see 
this simply in Russia, besides all which has been done for 
the spread of the Bible in Sweden and the neighbouring 
countries, resulting from the circulation of one Tract, and 
not feel a conviction, that the Tract Society is an impor- 
tant branch, of that wide spreading tree — whose leaves 
are for the healing of the nations — whose boughs are ex- 
tending from sea to sea — under whose shadow all nations 
will repose — whose top will reach unto heaven, and 
whose fruit will refresh the universe. 

Another consideration connected with this Society, is 
what has been called, by one of its eloquent advocates, 
Its delightful feature of permanency, 

The funds which are given to this Society are never 
expended. They remain as in bank, to be employed for- 
ever in furnishing Tracts. And not only is the interest 
employed, as with permanent stock in other Societies, but 
the principal. And yet no part of it is ever expended. 

A donation is made, and it prints an edition of Tracts. 
These are sold at cost, and the avails furnish another edi- 
tion, and the avails of that another, and so on as long as 
Tracts shall be needed. 

Now only apply this principle of permanency to the do- 
nation of the man who gives §100. He may not only fur- 
nish 30,000 Tracts, and if they are read each by a fami- 
ly of five, speak to 150,000 persons — and if they are read 
each by ten other persons in the neighbourhood, speak 
to 450,000 persons ; but when these Tracts are circulated, 
the avails may print another edition, and the avails of that 
another, and so on to the end of the world. In what way 
then can 100 dollars do more good, or be the means of 
bringing more persons to glory. 

Another consideration is, The Tract System is one which 
God approves. 

A Clergyman in a neighbouring state, assured the Agent 
of this Society, that during a revival of religion in his 
parish, the Tracts which he distributed seemed to have as 
much effect as all his other labours. And he remarked 
that he seldom made inquiry in any town, or even of any 
person, without hearing of some new instances of conver- 
sion, through the instrumentality of Tracts. 

Am I asked, writes another gentleman, of distinguished 



86 SEVENTH REPORT. [1821 

piety and beneficence, What hath God wrought by means 
of Tracts? I answer, to my certain knowledge, God hath 
wrought wonders. A leaf of a Tract was picked up by a 
man in this town, which proved effectual in bringing him 
to throw down the weapons of his rebellion, and enlist 
himself under the banner of the Lord of Hosts. And this 
is not a solitary instance. I do know, and can testify, that 
many others have found Jesus Christ to be precious to their 
souls, by the same means. And a man to whom he had 
given Bibles and Tracts, in a distant place, writes to him : 
The Bibles and Tracts which you left, have been blessed 
of God in leading poor sinners to inquire what they should 
do to be saved. About thirty of these persons, together 
with the gentleman who wrote the letter and his wife, 
had all become, in the judgment of charity, heirs of salva- 
tion. 

It is with peculiar pleasure, says the Secretary of a 
Tract Society, that I bear testimony to the efficacy of dis- 
tributing Tracts. It appears to me to be one of the most 
useful means of doing good to the souls of men. He then 
mentions more than forty cases of great good which had 
been connected with the reading of Tracts. 

The Committee might also relate four cases of hope- 
ful conversion, from the reading of the Tract entitled 
Sixteen Short Sermons, And in one case a revival of relig- 
ion commenced in a meeting where this Tract was read, 
which issued in the hopeful conversion of more than forty 
persons. 

They might relate thirteen cases of hopeful conversion 
from the reading of the Dairyman's Daughter — and twelve 
from the reading of the Swearer's Prayer. And yet but 
very few cases of saving benefit, compared with the whole, 
have, probably, or ever will, in this world, come to their 
knowledge. But there is a world where they will all be 
known ■ and where the persons, and those who have been 
instrumental in their salvation, will look back with wonder 
and with holy transport, on the means by which they were 
brought to glory. 

One single Tract, printed by this Society, was read at a 
meetin *, in a town in this Commonwealth, and was the 



1821] SEVENTH REPORT. 87 

means of powerfully impressing the minds of no less than 
eight persons. Their impressions resulted in hopeful 
conversion. They have all since publicly professed the 
religion of Jesus Christ. 

Another of the Society's Tracts, in a town in a neigh- 
bouring state, was hopefully the means of the conversion 
of four persons in one family. And said the father to the 
man who gave him the Tract, " I can never pay you. 
Take all the property, and every thing I have, it shall 
all go before I will part with that Tract. It was my sal- 
vation — it was my all. And you have not only sent sal- 
vation to my soul, but my wife, seeing my distress, was 
soon awakened to a sense of her duty, and my second son 
and eldest daughter are now joyful companions with us in 
consequence of your giving me that little Tract." 

If two of our Tracts have been connected with the 
hopeful conversion of twelve persons, which have come 
to our knowledge, what may we not hope, with the bless- 
ing of Heaven, from the 400,000 which have issued from 
our Depository the past year — and from the millions which 
have issued in seven years — and from the millions and mil- 
lions, which will continue to issue to all future generations ? 

Who can contemplate these six considerations connected 
with this Society: viz. the ease and effect with which it 
may speak at the same time to millions ; the immense call 
for Tracts; the great amount of good which may be done 
by small means; the ease and effect with which it may as- 
sist all other Benevolent Societies ; its permanency, its 
adaptedness, with present means, for perpetual operation; 
and above all, who can witness the approbation of God 
which it has already received ; see one Tract instrumen- 
tal in the hopeful conversion of four persons, and more in- 
directly in the conversion of forty — another in the con- 
version of eight — another of twelve — another of thirteen 
— and many of these, out of the way of other means of grace 
— who can see a Tract put in operation all the Bible So- 
cieties in Russia, Sweden, and the neighbouring coun- 
tries, and not expect, when he stands on Mount Zion, to 
see the multitude which no man can number, vastly aug- 
mented through the instrumentality of Tracts ? And who, 
with a conviction that he had been instrumental in their 



38 SEVENTH REPORT. [1821 

salvation, would not join, with ineffable delight, in their 
anthems of glory unto him that loved us and washed us 
from our sins in his own blood, and hath made us kings 
and priests unto God, and his Father, to whom be glory, 
and dominion, forever and ever. 



OFFICERS, 

ELECTED MAY 30, 1821. 

Hoar. WILLIAM REED, President. 
Rev. SAMUEL WORCESTER, d. d. Vice President. 
Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS, Corresponding Secretary. 
Rev. RICHARD S. STORRS, Recording Secretary. 
AMOS BLANCHARD, Esq. Treasurer. 

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE. 

Rev. JOHN H. CHURCH, 
Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS, 
Rev. JOHN CODMAN, 
Rev. WARREN FAY, 

AMOS BLANCHARD, Esq. 

State oe the Society's Funds. 

Balance due from the Society, May 1, 1820, — in-) ooton^ 
eluding loans \ «Via,Ub 

Expense for paper, printing, &c from May 1, 1820, ) - non on 
to May 1, 1821, $ 5,089,90 

$8,308,96 

Received, from May 1, 1820, to May 1, 1821, 

Donations 1,778,57 

From the Agents of the General Depository for Tracts ) <, QQQ Q1 
sold, &c $ ^,»J»,»l 

$5617,48 

Balance due from the Society May 1, 1821, . . 2,691,48 

Amos BLANCHARD, Treasurer. 



mm wmw 

MAY 29, 1822. 



While your Committee mention the goodness of God 
which has attended their efforts the past year, they would 
congratulate the members and friends of this Society on 
the nature of the glorious enterprise in which they are 
engaged. It is from its being an instrument of promoting 
the cause of Christ, that this Institution derives all its im- 
portance, and all that renders it dear to the heart of the 
Christian. And your Committee believe, that though the 
operations of Religious Tract Societies are less splendid 
than those of many others, they will appear, when the se- 
crets of men's hearts shall be revealed, to have borne a 
very important part in extending " to every creature," 
the knowledge of a Redeemer. 

By the circulation of Religious Tracts, much good may 
be done with small means. With the price of a Bible, you 
may procure perhaps a hundred of these winged messen- 
gers. If you sell them, you may purchase the same quan- 
tity again, and so continue to put an equal number in cir- 
culation from time to time. If you give them away, those 
who receive them may be induced to purchase a parcel 
to read themselves, and to distribute to their neighbours, 
and on journies. Each of these Tracts may pass from one 
person to another, and from one family to another ; and 
who can tell how many may be instructed, be excited to 
attend with earnestness to the Gospel, and to prize, more 
highly than before, the Scriptures and the ministry of re- 
conciliation. Let the sum necessary to employ a mission- 
ary one week, be expended in Religious Tracts, and these 
be judiciously distributed; and many more than he could 
address in that time, may be instructed, and reproved, and 
comforted, for months to come. And by these means their 
minds may be prepared to hear the word with greater ad- 
vantage ; and the preaching of the Gospel may be attend- 
ed with much more happy success. 
8* 



30 EIGHTH REPORT. [1822 

Through the medium of Tracts, the truth has more 
ready access to many, than it might otherwise have. 
Many have no inclination, either from curiosity or other 
motives, to read the Bible : it is an old book, with which, 
as they think, they are sufficiently acquainted ; or it con- 
tains doctrines and reproofs, which wound their feelings ; 
or it urges duties, which they are not willing to perform. 
Nor would they take up a volume of a hundred pages, 
with an intention of reading it through. But a Religious 
Tract, when it falls in their way, seizes their attention, 
partly from its novelty, and partly from its being so easily 
read. It will occupy but little of their time. They not 
only read it with avidity ; but their minds are open to re- 
ceive and to retain the principal things, which strike their 
attention. Truth, presented in a new form, clothed in a 
new dress, or illustrated and enforced by striking occur* 
rences, deeply impresses the mind and affects the heart ; 
their spiritual state soon comes to view ; the Bible is 
sought for, and examined ; the Gospel, which was before 
neglected, and might still have been neglected^ had not 
these silent, unobtrusive monitors found access to their 
minds, is heard with deep interest, and, by the grace of 
God, produces a great change in their feelings and pur- 
poses of life. 

Youth and children have a great fondness for these pub- 
lications. They eagerly obtain and read them ; and in 
this way, many parents, who had been thoughtless and in- 
attentive to their grand concerns, have heard or read 
things of great moment, and strikingly adapted to their 
habits and turn of thought ; and by which deep and abid- 
ing impressions are made upon their minds. In the same 
way, very seasonable reproof is often given, without the 
repulsiveness of a personal address by a neighbour or re- 
ligious teacher, and has a much better effect on the per- 
son who receives it. 

This method of disseminating truth can be ttsed to a great 
extent, in the absence of other means, and especially of the 
preaching of the Gospel It is well known that, in our coun- 
try, there is at present a great deficiency of well qualified 
preachers. This deficiency is every year increasing and 
becoming more manifest, by reason of the increase of our 
population. It presents an alarming prospect both to the 



1822] EIGHTH REPORT. 91 

christian and enlightened patriot. Nor, as we can see, is 
it likely to be soon supplied. It seems that, in many sec- 
tions of our country, it must exist for years to come, and 
probably increase. But wherever the servants of the 
Lord cannot be sent to preach his word, it may be dis- 
seminated by means of Religious Tracts. These may be 
furnished to schools, and thence find their way into al- 
most every dwelling. They may be read in various cir- 
cles ; and excite a taste for reading, and an earnest de- 
sire for moral and religious improvement. Souls may be 
converted, by the grace of God attending these humble 
means ; numbers may be deeply impressed with the im- 
mense value of the Gospel and its privileges; and efforts 
may be successfully made, which shall put them in the 
full enjoyment of the ministry of the word. Such may be 
the important results of the measures under consideration. 

But not in our own country only may such results be 
witnessed. Religious Tracts may be widely dispersed, and 
produce great effects among millions in pagan lands, where 
missionaries may distribute them. Our Brethren at Bom- 
bay have a very extensive field before them for this pur- 
pose. With the requisite means, they could publish and 
circulate Tracts in the Mahratta language, among ten mil- 
lions of people. And this seems to be the only way of 
communicating a knowledge of the Gospel, and of the on- 
ly method of salvation, to most of the present genera- 
tion there. Comparatively few of them can be taught the 
words of eternal life by Missionaries already sent, or that 
will be sent while the present generation is on the stage. 
Tracts which should explain some of the first principles of 
our religion, would be read with interest, promote a spir- 
it of inquiry, and lead many to search the Scriptures, and 
to listen to religious instruction, as they should be favour- 
ed with the privilege. But without these additional ad- 
vantages, they might by Religious Tracts gain so much 
knowledge of divine things as to be made wise unto sal- 
vation. In this way, many precious souls, that would oth- 
erwise be lost, might obtain eternal life ; and at the same 
time seed might be extensively sown, which would yield 
afar more plentiful harvest in years to come. 

The circulation of Tracts affords peculiar facilities for 



92 EIGHTH REPORT. [1822 

enlisting thousands in the execution of important designs. It 
is well known that the circulation of a single Tract has 
been " traced as the source of all the Bible Societies in 
Russia, Sweden, and the neighbouring countries ;" — and by 
extensively distributing appropriate Tracts, all the charita- 
ble objects of the day may be promoted to great effect. 
Such Tracts may be sent in every direction. They may 
find their way to many, whom agents could not visit, and 
have a secret, but a powerful influence, in opening the 
hearts, and unlocking the treasures of the rich. 

Impressed with such considerations, your Committee 
earnestly desire that the operations of this Society may 
be greatly extended. But though less has been accom- 
plished than could have been desired, yet the Committee 
would devoutly acknowledge the smiles of a gracious Prov- 
idence which have attended this Society from its forma- 
tion ; and are constrained to say, " Hitherto the Lord hath 
helped us." 

During the past year, six new Tracts have been added 
to the series, viz. 
No. Vol. VII. Pages. 

135. Sermon before Am. Ed.- Soc. By E. Porter, D. D. . 20 

136. The Macedonian Cry 32 

137. The Church Safe 16 

138. Conversion of the World 24 

139. Correspondence &c 16 

140. Address to Seamen. By E. Payson, D. D. . . .12 

The whole number of 

Tracts published the past year is 255,500 

Whole number from the beginning-, . . 2,977,500 

It was stated in the last Report that 14,000 copies of the 
Christian Almanack, No. I., had been put in circulation. 
The public are now informed that 40,000 copies of No. II. 
have been sold ; and that there is a prospect of circulating 
a still larger quantity the ensuing year. By the sale of 
this Almanack, there is not only a net profit to the Society, 
by which their operations are more extended, but much 
important and very useful information is communicated to 
every family, where this manual finds a place, in addition 
to the appropriate matter of an astronomical diary. This 
Almanack therefore has peculiar recommendations, which 



1822] EIGHTH REPORT. 93 

the Christian community cannot fail more and more to re- 
gard. 

The sale of this Almanack the last year gave rise to an 
important measure respecting the heathen. An active 
friend of Christ and of missions devoted $50 of the avails 
of this Tract, sold by himself, to publish Tracts in the Mah- 
ratta language. This sum will print more than 6,000 
copies of a Tract of eight pages in that language, which 
may be extensively circulated and read among the millions 
of that people. The grand results of this single measure, 
eternity will disclose. 

To those who feel an interest in the cause of truth and 
righteousness, it may be gratifying to learn that 50,000 pa- 
ges of our Tracts have, the past year, been sent to our Mis- 
sionaries at Bombay, for distribution in the wide field of 
their labors. Had our funds permitted, many more might 
have been sent, with very encouraging prospects of their 
utility. 

The operations of the Society have been increased, the 
past year, by establishing ten new Depositories ; viz. 

Francestown, N. H. Peter Clark. 

Plymouth, JV. H. J. & G. W. Ward, 

Danville, Vt. Augustine Clark. 

Rutland, Vt. James D. Butler. 

Plymouth, Mass. Joseph Avery. 

Bristol, R. I. John A. Pitman. 

Cat skill, JV. Y. Henry Hyde. 

Geneva, JV\ Y. Perez Hastings. 

Philadelphia, Pa. Littell & Henry. 

Charleston, S. C. Joseph Tyler. 

Making eighty one Depositories now belonging to the 
Society, and located in eighteen different States, besides 
the District of Columbia, Michigan Territory, and Lower 
Canada. Thus extensively are the Society's publications 
spread abroad and exerting their salutary influence among 
millions of immortal beings, some of whom are daily en- 
tering upon their endless state of future existence. — And 
who can tell the blessed effects which may result from a 
single Tract, given with a proper reliance on the Holy 
Spirit for his blessing ? 



94 EIGHTH REPORT. [1822 

"On a Sabbath noon," writes a Clergyman in New 
Hampshire, " a little girl came into my house, to whom 
my wife handed several Tracts. She lived with a man 
partially deaf, and who seldom attended public worship, 
not being able, as he said, to hear. His attention was at- 
tracted by the Tracts he saw in the hands of this young 
member of his family, and he began himself the perusal 
of the " Shepherd of Salisbury Plain." He had not read 
far, before he became much interested in the story, and 
deep convictions of sin soon ensued. From this origin be- 
gan a season of anxious concern respecting his salvation, 
which, under the Divine blessing, ended in apparently 
genuine conversion. He is now a member of our church, 
and such is his desire for the sincere milk of the word, 
that he is indulged with a seat in the pulpit, where he 
stands a living witness to the truth, " The deaf shall hear" 

Brethren, could you follow the publications of this So- 
ciety, wherever, in the Providence of God, they are dis- 
persed, the Committee believe your hearts would be filled 
with joy, and that you would exclaim with wonder and 
praise, " What hath God wrought?" 

And the Committee earnestly invite the members and 
friends of this Institution, to survey the wide field of use- 
fulness which is open to receive Religious Tracts ; and to 
contemplate the vast and increasing influence, which, by 
Divine favor, they may have in meliorating the condition 
of millions of our fellow creatures. 

What multitudes of these swift messengers may be dis- 
persed through the United States. How many thousands, 
yea, millions of Tracts are this moment needed in new set- 
tlements, and in places where the Gospel ministry is little 
enjoyed. Were the Society supplied with the means, 
large quantities might be sent forthwith to the South, and 
to the West, where they could be distributed to the best 
advantage, be read with the liveliest interest, and produce 
the noblest effects. 

ThousandsDf Tracts could be given to Seamen, and have 
surprising influence in reforming their lives and saving 
their souls. And what portion of our race more needs 
this means of instruction, and religious improvement? Se- 



1822] EIGHTH REPORT. 95 

eluded as they are from Gospel ministrations, how much 
might the free circulation of suitable Tracts among them 
contribute to eniighten their minds, to regulate their affec- 
tions, to form their hearts to religious principles, to direct 
their conduct, to give them an elevated christian charac- 
ter, and prepare them for the most extensive usefulness, 
as they traverse the globe. In every port which they 
enter, and every place which they visit, they might dif- 
fuse the knowledge of Jesus and his salvation among their 
seafaring brethren, and others with whom they should be 
conversant. How much wickedness and vice would in 
this way be prevented ; how many evils would cease ; and 
how greatly would the Redeemer's cause be promoted? 

In the West India Islands, and in the nations of South 
America, whose independence has recently been acknowl- 
edged by our Government, there is a region of great ex- 
tent, which should be supplied with Religious Tracts, as 
abundantly and as speedily as circumstances will possibly 
admit. There is no doubt that numerous facilities will be 
afforded for their distribution, in many places, where in- 
calculable benefits, by the Divine blessing, would result. 

Our Missionaries, in the Isles of the Pacific, and in Asia, 
might annually distribute many thousands of Tracts, where 
" darkness has long covered the earth, and gross darkness 
the people;" and " the word of the Lord have," by this 
means, " free course, and run, and be glorified," even to 
the most distant parts of the inhabited earth. 

A beloved Brother, who has laboured some years, as a 
Missionary, in Bombay,writes thus to the Committee : "The 
usefulness of Religious Tracts in Christian lands is uni- 
versally acknowledged to be great ; and I know not that 
any abatement should be made respecting heathen lands. 
Indeed 1 have thought that the state of the heathen in In- 
dia, is such that Tracts are the only books that afford any 
considerable prospe-ct of usefulness, particularly in those 
parts of the country where missionaries cannot go. 

" Though the Bible is the great means of evangelizing 
the world, yet it requires but little reflection and observa- 
tion to see, that the heathen, thousands of whom never in 
their lives read half so much as the New Testament, would 
not have patience to read a tenth part of the Bible, were it 



96 EIGHTH REPORT. [ 1 822 

presented to them. Whereas they would gladly sit down 
and read a Tract of a few pages, which, if judiciously 
written, would convey important instruction to their minds. 

" The great utility of Christian Tracts among the hea- 
then was often a subject of conversation among my mis- 
sionary brethren at Bombay, while I was united with 
them. Many thousands were printed and distributed be- 
fore I left ; and Brother Hall says in a letter which I have 
received since my arrival in this country, 4 I am very de- 
sirous that we should prepare and print a great number 
and variety of Tracts, and employ the best means we can 
of distributing them through all the principal towns in the 
Mahratta country, where missionaries at present cannot 
go. What more can we do for those to whom we cannot 
preach V 

" Before I left Bombay, we had employed some of the 
best natives we could obtain to distribute the Gospels and 
Tracts, in those parts of the country which we could not 
visit ourselves. If money were furnished to supply Tracts 
and to employ a few of these agents in the distribution of 
them, thousands of pagans of this generation may by these 
means become acquainted with Jesus Christ, who other- 
wise would die in ignorance. 

" There is also a great call for Tracts to furnish the 
many hundreds of children in the mission schools. These 
children are all anxious to read every thing that comes 
from our press. Many Tracts might be profitably distrib- 
uted among the native Catholics in Bombay and vicinity. 
Indeed I do not know of any field, where Tract Societies 
might act with a greater prospect of extensive usefulness, 
than at our Foreign Mission stations." 

From the writer of the above extracts, we also learn that 
there may be nearly a thousand Jews in Bombay ; that 
they have not the .strong prejudices of their brethren in 
other places against Jesus of Nazareth, but listen with 
lively interest to the information which our missionaries 
give them of their nation, and of the faith and hope of their 
fathers ; and might be easily led to a knowledge of the 
Messiah, who has been cut off for their sins. They have 
heretofore been ignorant of the memorable transactions in 
Judea and Galilee, and on Mount Calvary, eighteen cen- 



1822] EIGHTH REPORT. 97 

turies ago : they hear them, with some degree of surprise ; 
and they delight to speak of the missionaries, and to point 
them out to others as believers in their God, and the God 
of their fathers. — Let them be instructed in the Christian 
religion, and converted ; and they would be powerful wit- 
nesses for the truth as it is in Jesus. And how practi- 
cable is their instruction ; how hopeful their conversion ? 
Of what immense and everlasting benefit to them would 
be Tracts concerning Jesus and his salvation. 

Can such inviting prospects of usefulness be neglected 
by those who hear these things ? Are you not ready, my 
friends, to seize them, and by your free-will offerings to 
furnish this Society with the means of distributing thou- 
sands and thousands of Tracts in the Mahratta language ? 
Are there not many in this large and opulent City, where 
so much liberality has been shown in behalf of Jews and 
Pagans, who only wait for the opportunity to contribute of 
their substance, and of the first fruits of their increase; to 
disseminate the truths of the Gospel among the Israelites 
in Bombay ? The opportunity is now given. The Socie- 
ty here convened will gladly receive your bounty, and see 
that it is duly appropriated to publish and circulate Tracts 
agreeably to your benevolent intentions. 

Millions are dying in ignorance and sin, who need all 
the help which you can afford. Thou shah love thy neigh- 
bor as thyself. The persons for whom we plead are your 
neighbours, members of the same human family, descend- 
ants from the same original stock, involved in the same 
apostacy and ruin, and in absolute need of the same salva- 
tion with yourselves. Are not their souls of as much worth 
in the Divine account as yours? Is not the blood of Christ 
a ransom for them, as well as for you? i^re you not bound 
to love them, and to relieve their wants, as God gives you 
power? Their loss or gain will be eternal They will either 
lose their souls, or gain eternal life. Let them die in sin, 
and their loss can never be repaired. The whole world 
could make them no amends, But now a portion of your 
substance will furnish many of them with those means, 
which God can bless to their salvation. Then their souls 
will be delivered from eternal wrath and enjoy endless fe- 
licity. And in their felicity you may have an eternal re- 
9 



98 EIGHTH REPORT. [1822 

ward. But even if your charity, bestowed in love to 
their souls, should not be blessed to their salvation, you 
will lose nothing, but find your reward great in heaven. 

Christ has made a sacrifice infinitely more costly than 
he requires you to make. He gave himself a sacrifice. He 
shed his blood on the cross. Nothing of this kind is re- 
quired of you ; but that you would give some of the sil- 
ver and gold, which he has lent you, which he has intrust- 
ed to you as stewards of his goods. Can you refuse this 
to Him, who though he was rich, made himself poor for your 
sakes, that through his poverty you might be rich, indeed, and 
forever ? You are called in the present case to do much less 
than many of your brethren and sisters have cheerfully 
done. They have left father and mother, brothers and 
sisters, houses and lands ; and exchanged all the endear- 
ments and comforts of their native home, for a residence 
among strangers and pagans, amidst numerous privations, 
and hardships, and painful scenes of sin and wretchedness, 
that they might be the humble instruments of saving souls 
from eternal death. But with little or no self-denial, you 
may promote the same glorious object by your liberality. 
This surely you will not withhold; but rather feel that 
you must have a part in this work. The more extensive- 
ly you diffuse the knowledge of Jesus and his salvation, 
the sooner will the way be prepared for him to reign 
throughout the earth. It is his word, clothed with Divine 
power, that subdues the nations to the obedience of faith. 
His word you may spread to the east and west, to the north 
and south; and do more than millions before you have 
done, to fill the earth with the glory of Zion, and the 
greater glory of her King. 

With the mammon of unrighteousness, you may make 
to yourselves friends in distant lands, and in the islands of 
the seas, who will welcome you to everlasting habita- 
tions. When Jesus shall say, Come, ye blessed of my Fath- 
er, inherit the kingdom prepared for you ; and shall recount 
your deeds of love and kindness to those who were ready 
to perish, how joyful it will be to hear many from the east 
and west, the north and south, unite in saying, w We bid 
you welcome to the mansions prepared for you ; we shar- 
ed in your kindness ; we were enlightened and saved, 
through your bounty." 



1822] EIGHTH REPORT. 99 

OFFICERS, 

ELECTED, MAT 29, 1822. 

How. WILLIAM REED, President. 
Rev. MOSES STUART, Vice President. 
Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS, Corresponding Secretary. 
Rev. RICHARD S. STORRS, Recording Secretary. 
AMOS BLANCHARD, Esq. Treasurer. 

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE. 

Rev. JOHN H. CHURCH, 
Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS, 
Rev. JOHN CODMAN, 
Rev. WARREN FAY, 

AMOS BLANCHARD, Esa. 



State oe the Society's Funds. 

Balance due from the Society, May 1, 1821, . . 2,691,48 

Expense of paper, printing, &c. from May 1, 1821, ) Q A( . R « 1 

to May 1,1822, j ^,450,01 



$5,147,99 



Received, from May 1, 1821, to May 1, 1822. 

Donations 1,091,68 

From the Agents of the General Depository for Tracts ) Gnr/ ~~ 
sold, &c . . I ^,607,72 



$3,699,40 



Balance due from the Society May 1, 1822, . . 1,448,59 

Amos Blanchard, Treasurer. 



May 28, 1823. 



The Executive Committee of the American Tract Soci- 
ety, gratefully acknowledge the kindness of God, in contin- 
uing to smile upon their labours; and as a testimony to his 
goodness, present their Ninth Annual Reportr 

The first important measure, adopted by the Committee, 
after their Annual Meeting, was the appointment of an 
Agent, whose time and attention should be devoted to the 
objects of the Society. By the blessing of God, its con- 
cerns had become so numerous and extensive, that this 
measure appeared to the Committee to be essential to its 
increasing prosperity. They therefore appointed Mr. 
William A. Hallock, and commissioned him to act as Agent 
for the Society, for the space of one year. He accepted 
his appointment, and entered upon its duties about the 
first of October. Since that time he has been employed 
in the service of the Society. His principal objects have 
been to disseminate information concerning the Society, to 
increase the number of its Life Members, form Auxiliary 
Societies, obtain donations for establishing Depositories, 
and furnishing Tracts for circulation throughout the coun- 
try, and as Providence shall open the way, throughout the 
world. Several important communications he has pre- 
pared, and published in the religious journals of the day. 
He has addressed several hundred persons by letter, and 
communicated much important information on the subject 
of Tracts. He has personally visited 128 towns and par- 
ishes, namely, 39 in New Hampshire, 84 in Massachusetts, 
and 5 in New York. He has preached often to numerous 
congregations ; and conversed with thousands of individuals, 
on the duty and utility of circulating Religious Tracts. 
He has been received and treated with great kindness ; 
and the Lord has caused the object of his mission to be 
viewed with peculiar favour. He has found that nothing 



1823] LIFE MEMBERS. 101 

is wanting but information with regard to this Society, in 
order to engage the hearts of christians strongly in its fa- 
vour. In many cases the Spirit of the Lord had gone be- 
fore him, and by applying truth to the heart, had prepar- 
ed the way for his success. 

On meeting a man in , and offering him a sub- 
scription paper to make his minister a Life Member, and 
asking him if he would subscribe, he answered with strong 
emotion, " Yes, I will give a dollar; for one of those 
Tracts has saved me from ruin." And in almost all cases, 
after explaining the object, he has found persons ready to 
assist. 

Eighty one persons, during the past year have been 
made Life Members of the Society. Sixty-nine of them 
are ministers of the Gospel. Sixty eight of these have been 
made Life Members by their people; and 41 by Females. 
More than 100 ministers of the Gospel had before been 
made Life Members of this Society, by Benevolent Fe- 
males in their parishes. May the Daughters of Zion, 
while they thus manifest their regard for the Gospel, and 
respect for its ministers, share richly in its blessings, their 
labours be labours of love to Jesus, and they receive the 
rewards of grace in the day of his appearing. Five in- 
structed have, during the last year, been made Life Mem- 
bers by their pupils. And Henry Martyn , a little 

child, has been made a Life Member by his father. 

The Committee cannot view this increase of Life Mem- 
bers, and the manner in which it has been effected, with- 
out peculiar emotion. That kind regard for a minister, 
which leads his people to make him a Life Member of a 
Benevolent Society, must have a peculiarly favourable ef- 
fect both upon his mind, and theirs. Seeing them engaged 
in sending the Gospel to others, he has increasing hopes, 
that they will share in its everlasting blessings themselves. 
And knowing that, " he that watereth, shall be watered 
also himself," he is animated to new exertions ; and is 
borne onward by new hopes, that his " labours shall not 
be in vain in the Lord ;" and that in being faithful, he 
shall not only save himself and them that hear him, but 
with them be instrumental in saving vast multitudes of oth- 
ers, whom he never shall see, till he meets them in glo- 
9* 



102 NINTH REPORT. [l823 

ry. — The $20, paid by his people to make him a Life 
Member of this Society, he sees turned into 6000 Tracts, 
and placed in more than 90 Depositories. Around these 
Depositories are numerous Societies and individuals, ready 
to purchase and distribute them. Soon they are in 6000 fam- 
ilies ; and read probably by more than 20,000 individuals. 
Me then recollects that a single copy of one little Tract, 
no larger than one of these, has evidently been the means 
of the conversion of a father, a mother, a son and a daugh- 
ter, all in one family. And he seems to hear the father, 
as he uttered the memorable declaration, "Take all the 
property, and every thing I have, it shall all go before I 
will part with that Tract." But here, springing from the 
benevolence of his parishioners, this minister sees not 
simply one Tract speaking to a single family, but 6000 
Tracts speaking to 6000 families, and telling them words 
by which they maybe saved. And the avails of these 
Tracts will furnish for circulation 6000 more ; and the 
avails of those, 6000 more ; and so onward, continually. 
If one copy of a single Tract has been the means of the 
conversion of 4 persons in one family, what, he asks, may 
we not hope from the circulation of thousands and thou- 
sands, from generation to generation to the end of time. 

The same delightful considerations may animate the 
hearts of those instructers who have been made Life Mem- 
bers by their pupils ; of those individuals who have made 
themselves Life Members; and of that father too, who 
has laid the foundation for such immense good, by the 
life membership of his child. Their example may ex- 
cite others to go and do likewise. Many people may thus 
manifest their regard for their ministers, pupils for their 
instructers, and parents for their children ; and thus, while 
all exert a mutual influence in promoting each others sal- 
vation, they may lay the foundation for millions and mil- 
lions of silent but pungent preachers of righteousness to 
go forth and speak each one to an individual, a family, a 
neighbourhood, till they shall have no need to say any 
more, " Know ye the Lord, for all shall know him from 
the least to the greatest ;" and the whole " earth be fill- 
ed with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the 
waters fill the sea." 



1823] AUXILIARY SOCIETIES. 103 

There is another circumstance connected with the in- 
crease of Life Members, worthy of grateful remembrance. 
Nearly all who have become Life Members the past year, 
have generously devoted the whole donation of $20, to the 
Society. And the amount of Tracts which they have re- 
quested in return, has but little exceeded the amount 
of monies which they have paid above that sum. — So that 
the whole sum of $20, will, in nearly all instances, be de- 
voted to the permanent means of the Society. 

Connected with this, is another important measure. 
Those individuals who have made their ministers Life 
Members, have in numerous instances, made arrangements 
for supplying themselves with Tracts, by means of Auxil- 
iary Tract Societies. Mr. Hallock has been present, and 
assisted in the formation of 24, all Auxiliary to the Parent 
Society. These Societies pay one third of their receipts 
to the Parent Society ; and with the other two thirds, 
procure Tracts for their own use, and gratuitous distribu- 
tion. In this way, their own wants will be supplied, a 
great quantity of Tracts put in circulation, and at the same 
time, substantial aid be afforded to the Society. Numer- 
ous other Societies have been formed through the instru- 
mentality of Mr. Hallock, of which he has not received a 
particular account. The number cannot now be definite- 
ly stated. This, with many other important things, con- 
nected with his Agency, must be deferred till the next 
Annual Report. 

The Committee cannot, however, but notice one or two 
interesting facts connected with donations which he has 
received. 

An aged and venerable Judge, who has been, for many 
years, upon the bench of one of our Probate Courts, and 
a distinguished benefactor of the fatherless, remarked 
that he found no difficulty in taking care of their proper- 
ty ; but he wished that something might be done for their 
souls. The law, said he, points out the reciprocal civil 
duties of Guardians and Wards; but they need something 
to point out more explicitly, their reciprocal moral and 
religious duties. And he has engaged to give $100, to 
print a Tract for the spiritual benefit of Guardians and 
Wards. This Tract is designed to point out the recipro- 
cal moral and religious duties of each; and to be such as 



104 NINTH REPORT. [1823 

may be distributed, with great advantage, by Judges and 
Registers of Probate, to all Guardians and Wards, through- 
out the country. And when we look abroad, amidst the 
ravages of death, among 10,000,000 of people, over this 
widely extended country ; and see the large and increasing 
number of fatherless, and in many cases, motherless child- 
ren, whose property is indeed, in some measure protect- 
ed by the laws, but whose souls are in the utmost danger 
of being neglected ; we cannot but admire that christian 
philanthropy, which, while it officially operates with fidel- 
ity, to secure for the widow and fatherless, " the meat 
that perisheth," operates with still greater watchful- 
ness and ardor, to secure for them also " that meat 
which endureth unto eternal life." May the American 
Bench be blessed with a long succession of such Judges, 
who, while they stand as a bulwark for the protection of 
the civil interests of men, shall manifest a paramount re- 
gard for their spiritual and eternal interests ; and thus re- 
flect brightly the image of Him, who is the "Father of 
the fatherless, and a Judge of the widows, in his holy hab- 
itation." And after being fathers to the fatherless here 
on earth, may they meet them in heaven, saved from 
eternal poverty and wretchedness, through their instru- 
mentality, and mingle with them in giving the glory " to 
Him that sitteth upon the throne, and to the Lamb, for- 
ever." 

It will be recollected by many, that proposals were 
made by the Agent, in the Boston Recorder, for publish- 
ing the Memoirs of Mrs. Emerson as a Tract, provided 
means could be obtained to defray the expense. Soon af- 
ter this he received a letter from the Rev. Daniel Smith, 
Pastor of the church in Louisville^ Kentucky. " The ac- 
count," says he, u of the conversion of Mrs. Emerson is 
one in which I have long felt a deep interest. The events 
narrated in that little Tract, transpired in my father's fam- 
ily, and within my own recollection. I think it worthy 
the most extensive circulation, and calculated to be emi- 
nently useful. Many readers may think the colouring of 
the narration too high. But when I read it, having a dis- 
tinct recollection of the facts contained in it, I did not 
think that it at all exceeded the sober truth. 1 have," 
says he, " $500, from the late lamented Mrs. Margaret 



1823] INTERESTING DONATIONS. 105 

Douglass, of Natchez, Mississippi, a lady who, during my 
residence in that place, left the world with a triumphant 
faith in the Saviour of sinners. This money was commit- 
ted to me for charitable purposes; and $100 of it, I give 
to the American Tract Society to print (hat Tract.'' And 
although it does not appear from the letter, and it is not 
known to the Committee, but that his prospects of life 
were, at that time, as great as usual, yet he added this sen- 
tence, In case of my decease, this letter shall be sufficient au- 
thority/or your Treasurer to obtain the money from my exec- 
utors^ to be appropriated to the above mentioned object" A 
few days after, this beloved man closed his earthly la- 
bours, and entered, we trust, into that rest which remain- 
eth for the people of God ; there to meet with her whose 
pious bounty he had distributed, and with her whose con- 
version he had witnessed, and an account of which he 
wished to perpetuate to all future generations, to look 
back on the way by which the Lord had led them, and 
with all his ransomed people, to join with united hearts 
and immortal tongues, in everlasting thanks unto his 
name. 

This Mr. Smith was an intimate friend and companion 
of Samuel J. Mills, whose memory will be precious to 
the hearts of christians on every continent, and will be as- 
sociated with the dearest interests of the Church, till the 
second coming of her King. They were both ardent 
friends of the American Tract Society. They took a 
deep interest in its concerns ; and viewed it as destined, 
in the providence of God, to bear an important part in 
the renovation of the world. While on a tour together in 
1814 and 1815, of more than 5000 miles, through the 
Southern and Western States, forming Benevolent Socie- 
ties, and devising and executing plans for the salvation of 
the world, they distributed great numbers of the Society's 
Tracts ; and bore the most ample testimony to their utili- 
ty and importance. May many young men be raised up, 
to follow their example, and after serving God and their 
generation, meet them in heaven, to witness the consum- 
mation of their benevolent labours, and see them eternal- 
ly resulting in the glory of God, and the ever growing joy 
of bis people. 



106 



NINTH REPORT. 



[1823 



About the time of receiving Mr. Smith's letter, the 
Agent received another letter, from another part of the 
country. The writer of this says, " Your proposal to pub- 
lish as a Tract the Memoirs of Mrs. Emerson, was pecu- 
liarly gratifying to me, I have ever considered that Tract 
as one of the principal instruments, in the hands of Divine 
Providence, of drawing my attention to the things of eter- 
nity. I enclose you $30, to defray, in part, the expense 
of its publication. " Other donations have been received 
from other individuals, for the same object. 

Can we not here see reasons why angels rejoice " over 
one sinner that repenteth ?" The conversion of Mrs. 
Emerson has, we trust, resulted in her eternal salvation. 
The account of it, written by herself, is already known to 
have been the means of the hopeful conversion of several 
others ; and some of them are now distinguished benefac- 
tors of the Church. These and others whose hearts have 
been warmed and animated by the history, lay the found- 
ation for its perpetual circulation. Well may angels re- 
joice ; for the circulation of this Tract may be the means 
of greatly increasing the number of their companions ; and 
adding multitudes to the multitude which no man can 
number, who will shout unto their God and ours, harmo- 
nious songs of salvation forever and ever. 

This Tract is printed and already in circulation. 

The Committee have, during the past year, printed 76 
other Tracts, making in all 77. Sixteen of these are new 
Tracts: viz. 



No. 
145. 
146. 
147. 
148. 



On Hearing the Word of God 
Helps to Self Examination 
On Supporting the Gospel Ministry 
The Barren Fig-Tree 

149. The Splendid Wedding 

150. Memoir of William Churchman 

151. Important Discovery 

152. Life and Death of Eliza Thornton 

153. The End of Time. 

154. Memoir of Dr. Bateman 

Vol. VIII. 

155. Universalism Exposed . 

156. Search the Scriptures 

157. Address to Parents on Sabbath Schools 



Pages. 
16 



20 

8 
4 
12 
8 
12 
12 
12 

8 
8 

4 



1323] NEW PUBLICATIONS. 107 

93. The Great Question Answered 16 

133. Conversion of Mrs. Eleanor Emerson . . . .24 
136. Memoir of Elizabeth Davidson 24 

Of 13 of the new Tracts, the Committee have publish- 
ed 6000 copies each ; of 2 of them, 7000; and of one, 
9000; making 101,000 new Tracts published the last 
year. Of 60 of the old Tracts they have published a new 
edition of 6000 copies each ; and of one, a new edition of 
9000, making in all 369,000. So that the whole number of 

Tracts published the last year, is 470,000 

Whole number from the beginning 3,447,500 

Of several of the Tracts there have been 7 editions, of 
6000 copies each, in 9 years. 

Of the first 5 volumes 1000 copies have been bound; 
and 500 copies of the 6th volume. An additional number 
of this volume, and 500 copies of the 7th, will shortly be 
bound, so that all persons who wish, may be supplied with 
complete sets. These volumes are bound in strong, neat, 
full binding, gilt, and lettered. They contain 300 pages 
each, and are sold at fifty cents a volume. Few books, it 
is believed, if any beside the Bible, will be more useful, 
especially to children and youth. And the Committee 
view it as exceedingly desirable, that a complete set 
should be owned by every family. For $3,50, parents may 
obtain 7 volumes, containing no less than 2,100 pages of 
important matter, exhibited in a striking and impressive 
manner ; and in the very form in which it has already 
been blessed to the salvation of thousands. In what way 
can this small sum be expended by parents to greater ad- 
vantage, or with a greater prospect of promoting the sal- 
vation of their children? In what way can charitable in- 
dividuals more benefit the families of the poor, than by 
furnishing them with a set of Tracts ? While they pro- 
vide 7 volumes of interesting instruction, for parents and 
children, they also provide means for furnishing 7 volumes 
more ; and the avails of these will furnish 7 volumes more, 
and so on, as long as they shall be needed. Every one who 
purchases these 7 volumes, may have the satisfaction of 
knowing that his money will print more than 3000 pages 
of Tracts, for perpetual circulation. 



108 NINTH REP6RT. [1823 

The Committee have also, during* the past year, pub- 
lished No. 3 of the Christian Almanack. This Tract of 48 
pages with an Astronomical Diary perfixed to it, contains 
an extensive collection of facts relative to the present 
state of Christian and Heathen countries ; numerous ta- 
bles, exhibiting condensed views of the various Benevo- 
lent Societies, their origin, means, and ope rations for evan- 
gelizing the world ; and also much information, interesting 
to children and youth, to farmers, mechanics, merchants, 
ministers, and all descriptions of persons ; and it is calcu- 
lated to be a useful little manual for every family in the 
country. 

This Tract has been published for the Society, in Bos- 
ton ; in Washington, District of Columbia ; and in Roch- 
ester, New York. Of the edition published in Boston 
nearly 39,000 have been circulated ; of that at Washing- 
ton, about 1,000; and of that at Rochester 1,500, being 
500 more than were circulated from that place for the year 
preceding. Thus the whole number of copies circu- 
lated the past year is about 41,500. These have proba- 
bly gone into nearly as many families, and been read by 
more than 150,000 individuals. By many of them they 
will be read, in the course of the year, a number of times ; 
and the prominent facts recorded in them, be deeply fixed 
in the mind. And the Committee cannot but hope, that 
great and everlasting benefits will result to many from 
this publication. It is designed, and the Committee be- 
lieve calculated, to lead men to M look not at the things 
which are seen and temporal, but at the things which 
are not seen, and eternal ;" and to impress upon them, 
that "godliness is profitable unto all things, having the 
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to 
come ;" and to lead them to be " diligent in business, fer- 
vent in spirit, serving the Lord." 

The Committee are now preparing No. 4 of the same 
Tract; and by availing themselves of their past experi- 
ence, and of the friendly hints which have been suggest- 
ed by readers of the past numbers, they hope to make the 
next number still more worthy of the public patronage ; 
and to obtain for it a still more extensive circulation. And 
it is devoutly hoped, that at no distant period, such a Tract 



1823] NEW DEPOSITORIES. 109 

will be published in every state, and be found in every 
family in the country ; and that it will bear no unimpor- 
tant part, in hastening the time when M holiness to the 
Lord" shall be written upon all the publications of men. 

By the avails of this Almanack, more than 50.000 
Tracts were printed the last year. And every person who 
purchased one, may have the satisfaction of knowing, that 
he provided the means for printing a copy of a Tract for 
perpetual circulation. 

The Committee have also, during the past year, estab- 
lished thirteen new Depositories : viz. 

Kennebunk, Me. Owen Burnham. 

Waldoborough, Me. Rev. D. M. Mitchell. 

Dover, Jf. H. Asa A. Tufts. 

Lynn, Mass. Ezra Mudge. 

Plymouth, Mass. Joseph Avery. 

Albany, JV. F. E. & E. Hosford. 

Hiidson. JV. Y. Fitch Shepard. 

Little Falls, JV. Y. Rev. S. W. Burritt. 

Onondaga, JV. Y. Rev. James H. Mills. 

Harrisburg, Pa. Alexander Graydon. 

Wilmington, Del. Robert Porter. 

Alexandria, Dist. Col. James & A. Douglass. 

Statesville, JV. C. Rev. Daniel Gould. 

Making the whole number now belonging to the Socie 
ty, ninety two. 

Each of these Depositories is under the care of an 
Agent, appointed by the Committee, who sells the Tracts 
and returns the money, reserving to himself, if he chooses, 
ten per cent for his trouble. Around these Depositories 
are numerous Tract Societies, and individuals, who pur- 
chase the Tracts ; and thus they are extended through 
the surrounding country. 

Upon the application of the Agent, each Depository is 
furnished, as it may need, with a new supply. But to 
keep the Tracts in rapid circulation, it is evident that each 
Depository must be constantly supplied. It must have a 
variety, and in such numbers as to accommodate purchas- 
ers. If after making efforts to form a Society, and send- 
ing 20, or as is often the case, 50 miles to a Depository, 
they cannot be supplied, they soon become discouraged, 
and their efforts cease. 
10 



110 NINTH REPORT. [1823 

Some important Tract Societies have actually suspend- 
ed their operations, and others have been rendered near- 
ly useless, on account of the difficulty of obtaining Tracts. 
A gentleman in a neighbouring state informed a member 
of the Committee, that they had formed a Tract Society, 
and raised a considerable sum of money ; had sent a num- 
ber of times nearly thirty miles to a Depository, but could 
not obtain Tracts. After being repeatedly disappointed, 
they sent more than 100 miles, to the General Depository, 
for Tracts ; and concluded to suspend their operations, 
till the local Depositories could be supplied. Such dis- 
appointments not only destroy Societies which are form- 
ed, but prevent the formation of others. A gentleman 
from Pennsylvania writes, " We wish a Depository of 
Tracts to be established in this place. We have formed 
a Tract Society ; and the principal reason why there are 
not more Tract Societies among us, is the great difficulty 
of obtaining Tracts." 

This difficulty, which is felt and deplored, by many, in 
all parts of the country, cannot be removed, but by estab- 
lishing Depositories where they are needed, and furnish- 
ing them with a constant supply. But in order to do this, 
the Society must have greater funds. 

Should each Depository, now established, be furnished 
with Tracts to the amount of only $100, which must be 
considered as a small supply, it would require Tracts to 
the amount of $9,200. And the General Depository, in 
order to be able promptly to supply them, and meet the 
other demands which would be made upon it, would need 
to have constantly on hand, Tracts to the amount of $9,200 
more. $18,400 are needed in order to supply to the best 
advantage, our present Depositories. And by forming 
around each of these Depositories only 20 Tract Socie- 
ties, raising annually twenty dollars each, all these Tracts 
would be put in circulation ; and a new supply to the same 
amount, might be furnished every year. 

Over a vast portion of the country, and that the most 
destitute of moral and religious instruction, we have at 
present no Depositories ; and Religious Tracts are almost 
entirely unknown. 

To supply that part of the country which lies east of 



1823] CALLS FOR TRACTS. HI 

the Mississippi River, south of Maryland, and west of Penn- 
sylvania, we need, in addition to those we now have, more 
than 100 Depositories. Supposing each Depository should 
supply with Tracts 2500 square miles containing 30,000 
inhabitants, we need, in addition to those which are al- 
ready established, 20 Depositories in Virginia, 15 in N. 
Carolina, 9 in S. Carolina, 9 in Georgia, 12 in Ohio, 16 in 
Kentucky, 13 in Tennessee, 5 in Indiana, 3 in Alabama, 1 
in Mississippi, and 2 in Illinois. In Virginia alone, is a por- 
tion of country of more than 40,000 square miles, contain- 
ing an extensive population, in which there is no Deposi- 
tory. Farther south is another district of more than 
200,000 square miles, containing nearly a million of souls, 
exceedingly destitute of the means of grace, and needing, 
according to the above estimate, 30 Depositories, in which 
there is not one. The state of Kentucky, which needs 17, 
has but one. In Ohio is a tract of country of 30,000 square 
miles, embracing the whole of the Connecticut Reserve, 
in which there is not one. In the whole states of Indiana 
and Illinois, containing a population of more than 200,000 
souls, deplorably destitute of the means of grace, there is 
no Depository ; and but one in all the country west of the 
Mississippi River. And yet from numerous parts of these 
destitute regions, there are pressing calls for Tracts. 

A gentleman from Virginia writes, " I enclose you 80 
dollars, on account of Tracts which 1 have sold ; and I 
wish you to send me 100,000 pages more, The demand 
for Tracts is increasing ; and several Auxiliary Societies 
have been formed." 

A gentleman from North Carolina writes, " You can 
have no idea of the destitute moral state of all this region. 
We have formed a Tract Society, and wish for a Deposito- 
ry of Tracts. If you will establish one here, I will take 
the charge of it." 

A gentleman from Georgia writes, " My business is to 
request that a Tract Depository may be established at Sa- 
vannah. Much may be done, in this desolate region, with 
Religious Tracts. But there is great difficulty in obtaining 
them. Did you know the wants of the destitute, in this 
state, you would make every exertion to put something 
into their hands, which they might read with profit." 



112 NINTH REPORT. [1823 

A gentleman from Louisiana writes, " Multitudes here 
are utterly ignorant of the Gospel. A vast field is open- 
ing for the distribution of Tracts in English, Spanish, and 
French. An internal communication is opened with Mex- 
ico ; and millions of Tracts might be distributed, in that 
country, to great advantage." 

To meet these, and the numerous other calls for Tracts, 
the Society must have greater funds. 

It has sent out, during the past year, more than 389,000 
Tracts. More than 20 of its numbers are now out of print; 
and yet the Depositories now established have not, upon 
an average, Tracts to the amount of 50 dollars each. To 
furnish the numbers now out of print will require 1000 
dollars. And to establish and supply Depositories over 
one half of the country which now remains destitute, and 
where, had we the means, they might be established to the 
greatest advantage, we need funds to the amount of 10,00© 
dollars more. And where, the Committee would ask, can 
funds be employed to greater advantage, or with a pros- 
pect of greater success? Should each Depository now es- 
tablished, instead of supplying the 30,000 souls assigned it, 
furnish but one Tract a year, to one third of that number, 
the Society would speak to 920,000 souls. And could it 
obtain the means to establish as many more Depositories, 
it would speak on the most interesting of all concerns, the 
salvation of the soul, to 1,840,000 people. 

And here small means will accomplish great ends. 

Suppose a man has 5000 dollars which he intends to de- 
vote to some charitable object, and he gives it to the Amer- 
ican Tract Society. This will establish 50 Depositories, 
and supply them with 500,000 Tracts. Around each of 
these Depositories, is a destitute population of 30,000 peo- 
ple. They furnish one Tract in a year, to one third of 
this number. And supposing it is read only by the person 
who receives it, this man is speaking, through the medi- 
um of these Tracts, to 500,000 people; and if each Tract 
is read by 2 persons, to 1,000,000 people. Nor does he 
speak simply by these 500,000 Tracts. But the avails of 
these furnish 500,000 more, and the avails of those, 500,000 
more. The sum is never expended, or even diminished, 



1823] GALLS FOR TRACTS. 113 

but, should Providence so order, it may continue in oper- 
ation to the end of the world. 

Suppose a man gives 20 dollars, and thus becomes a Life 
Member; this sum will furnish 2,400 Tracts of ten pages 
each, or 6000 of 4 pages, for perpetual circulation. In 
what way can he, with this sum, do more ? 

In the United States are 2000 ministers of the Gospel, 
not connected with this Society. Should their people 
make them Life Members, besides producing an influence 
on their ministers, themselves, and their children, which 
might be connected with blessings infinitely surpassing in 
value all earthly treasures, they would furnish for circu- 
lation 4,000,000 Tracts by which they might speak to as 
many million people, to all future generations. And should 
each parish form an Auxiliary Society containing eighty 
members, paying 25 cents each, they would furnish for 
circulation 1,333,000 more, and procure 2,666,000 for 
their own use, and gratuitous distribution. 

In these two ways, the Society might be enabled to fur- 
nish 8,000,000 Tracts. And should half of this number 
be circulated in a year, there would be a circulation, in 
10 years, of 40,000,000. 

Some may think, at first view, that this circulation, an- 
nually continued, would soon siippty the world. But it 
would not furnish, of what we have already published, 
one set to a family, in our own country, in 70 years, on 
supposition that the number of families should not increase, 
and that none of the Tracts should be worn out. But as a 
set of Tracts cannot be supposed, on an average, to last 
more than 50 years ; and the number of families, accord- 
ing to the past rate of increase, will in that time be doub- 
led ; this rate of circulation would never supply even our 
own country. 

And yet our country is only a small part, even of this 
continent, which is destitute of Religious Tracts, and which 
greatly needs a supply. Upper and Lower Canada, Mexi- 
co, and all South America, containing a population of ma- 
ny millions of people, deplorably destitute of the means of 
salvation, are in pressing need of Tracts. 

Over many portions of these countries, nothing is want- 
10* 



114 KiNTH REPORT. [1823 

ing but the means, in order to give them an immediate 
and extensive circulation. 

A gentleman from Canada, who has repeatedly applied 
to the Committee for Tracts, states that, could they be 
obtained, they might be circulated extensively, and with 
the prospect of immense advantage. Three persons, he 
states, in one family, notorious for their profaneness, have 
not only been outwardly reformed, but have become hope- 
fully pious, and appear now to be truly devoted to God, 
in consequence of reading the Swearer's Prayer; a little 
Tract of 4 pages, 6,000 copies of which may be printed 
for 20 dollars. 

Another gentleman who resides near the borders of 
Mexico, and can have almost constant communication with 
its inhabitants, states that the way is opened for an imme- 
diate introduction of Tracts into that country. And that 
could they be obtained, millions might be distributed with 
the greatest prospect of success. 

A respectable Merchant in Brazil, applied to the Com- 
mittee for Tracts, offered to take charge of them himself, 
and stated, that by means of merchants with whom he 
was acquainted, he could circulate them very extensively 
in that country. He also wished for Testaments, in Por- 
tuguese, and Spanish, which, he said, might be distributed, 
and be exceedingly useful. 

A gentleman who has resided, a number of years, at 
Valparaiso, and is well acquainted with the country, states 
that missionaries may travel, without difficulty, from Bue- 
nos Ayres to Chili, and distribute to advantage, great num- 
bers of Religious Tracts. 

A young man, commissioned by the American Board, 
who is soon to enter upon an exploring mission through 
South America, applied to the Committee for Spanish 
Tracts ; and it was a source of deep regret that they 
were not able to supply him. They expressed to him, 
however, the hope and the confidence, that when his ap- 
plication should be generally known, means would be pro- 
vided for a supply. 

Nor is the want of Tracts confined to this continent. 
Immense fields are opening for their distribution on other 
continents. 



1823] WANT OF TRACTS IN INDIA, 115 

In the vicinity of Bombay, in India, where the Ameri- 
can Board of Commissioners have a printing press, are 
11,000,000 people all speaking one language. Nearly all 
of them are destitute of the Gospel, there being only 3 
missionaries among them. And writes one of these mis- 
sionaries, " The distribution of Tracts is the only possible 
way in which we can exhibit any portion of the Gospel, 
to vast portions of the present generation of India. Minis- 
isters enough to go and preach to them the Gospel, can- 
not be obtained. We must print and circulate Tracts, or 
millions and millions of the present and future generations 
of India must go down, in unbroken succession, through 
pagan darkness, to the grave." 

And, writes another missionary, " Tracts can be printed 
at Bombay in the Mahratta language, as cheap as you can 
print them in New England. And there is no section of 
the world where they may be distributed with a prospect 
of greater usefulness, than in the Mahratta Country. The 
great body of the people would be likely to receive more 
instruction from a little Tract, which they could read in 
five minutes, than they would from the entire New Testa- 
ment ; because they would be much more likely to read 
it." And after they have read one Tract, they are often 
anxious to get another. Soon they may read, if they can 
obtain it, the whole New Testament. 

A missionary in Ceylon writes, M We visit from 2 to 8 
families in a daj'. Sometimes we take long journeys, and 
are out 6 or 8 days ; taking with us some of the boys 
from the schools. At such times particularly, we feel the 
need of Tracts. Passing through villages where the Gospel 
was never before heard, we find hundreds who can, and 
who would read, had we books, or Tracts, to give them. 
But alas, we have none ! No Bible, no Tract, to show the 
poor heathen how to flee from the wrath to come. The 
only Tracts which we have ever had, have been written 
upon the Olla, and procured, of course, at a great expense. 
Perhaps, in all our missions, we have distributed 200, 
obtained in that way. O that we could get a supply print- 
ed. Into how many villages could the Gospel be sent by 
means of Tracts. How many souls, by a single Tract* 
might be saved from endless misery." 



116 NINTH REPORT* [1823 

And shall the Christian Missionary, who has left his fa- 
ther's house, his native land, and gone 13,000 miles to tell 
the dying heathen of a Saviour, and point them to the 
Lamb of God, go from village to village through the wide 
spreading desolation, find hundreds and thousands who 
have never heard the Gospel, who can and who would 
read, if they could get a Bible, or a Tract — and yet have 
none to give them ? Shall he be left to cry in the ears of a 
thousand churches abounding with wealth, u Alas, we have 
none to give them : no Bible, no Tract, to show the poor 
heathen how to flee from the wrath to come ?" Shall it 
be told in the ears of all Christendom, that after years of 
toil and labour, the only Tracts which they have ever had, 
were written upon the Olla, and procured at a great ex- 
pense ; and that the whole mission had not been able to ob- 
tain for circulation more than 2©0 ? And shall they still 
remain destitute, to cry, " O that we could get a supply 
printed? Into how many villages could the Gospel be 
sent by Tracts ? How many souls, by a single Tract might 
be saved from endless misery?"' — and yet cry in vain? 
Let Christendom answer. 

Six years ago, a heathen youth, for the first time, ob- 
tained a New Testament. In reading it, the Holy Spirit 
enlighted his mind, and he was hopefully brought to that 
knowledge of Jesus Christ which is u life eternal." Of 
his own accord, and unknown to any christian friend, he 
began to preach the Gospel ; and publish to his country- 
men, the glad tidings of salvation. A few months ago he 
became acquainted with Christian Missionaries, and found 
to his astonishment, that they were disciples of Jesus. He 
is now with them, studying the Bible, and labouring among 
the people. He has become a member of the church, and 
gives, say the missionaries, u satisfactory evidence of love 
to God, and love to man." Who can estimate the good 
which ma} r result from furnishing the heathen with a sin- 
gle Bible, or a single Tract ? And who can forbear, when 
he sees how easily, and with what numbers, he may fur- 
nish them ? 

A respectable Mercantile House in , purchased the 

last year 10,000 copies of the Christian Almanack. Ey 
this purchase a profit accrued to the Society, sufficient to 



1823] CIRCULATION OF THE CHRISTIAN ALMANACK. 117 

furnish for circulation, in our own country, Tracts of 4 
pages each, to the number of 30,000. From their profits, 
they made a donation to the Society of 50 dollars, to be 
appropriated to the printing of Tracts, in the Mahratta 
language, at Bombay. Witness the effects of this meas- 
ure. There has been a circulation of 10,000 copies of the 
Christian Almanack. These have gone probably into 
10,000 families, and been read by 30,000 individuals. 
From the avails, 30,000 Tracts of 4 pages each, will be 
furnished for circulation in this country, which may go in- 
to as many more families, and be read by twice as many 
more individuals. The avails of these may furnish anoth- 
er edition ; and the avails of those, another. And when 
they have passed through 8 editions, (the number which 
the Society has actually printed of some of its Tracts, in 9 
years,) there will be furnished for circulation, from the 
avails of those 10,000 copies of the Almanack, 240,000 
Tracts. And from the donation of 50 dollars, given from 
the profits of the second sale of the Almanack, there may 
be furnished 15,000 Tracts of 4 pages each, in the Mah- 
ratta language, at Bombay. These may be carried into 
15,000 families and be read by 30,000 people in that 
country. 

Let only 100 Mercantile Houses in the United States, 
do annually what has been done by the one above men- 
tioned, and they would circulate annually 1,000,000 cop- 
ies of the Almanack; and furnish for circulation in our 
own country 3,000,000 Tracts. In 10 years they would 
circulate 10,000,000 copies of the Almanack; and furnish 
for circulation in our own country 30,000,000 Tracts. In 
the same time they would furnish 15,000,000 Tracts for 
circulation in the Mahratta country. Some of them might 
find their way into every family ; and point many to him, 
who M although he was rich, yet for their sakes became 
poor, that they through his poverty might be rich." And 
as they gaze upon him, they will begin to see " the light 
of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Je- 
sus Christ." And as they follow him through his humilia- 
tion, and see him " bearing his cross," till he is u lifted 
up," they may experience the fulfilment of his promise, 
H I will draw all men unto me." 



118 NINTH REPORT. [1823 

Trace the amount of influence which these 15,000,000 
Tracts may have upon 11,000,000 minds in the Mahratta 
country, and upon all who shall come after them ; and add 
to this the influence of 30,000,000 Tracts upon 10,000,000 
minds in our own country ; and upon all the minds which 
shall come after them, down to the period, when M time 
shall be no longer ;" and go forward with these minds 
which are to carry onward this influence, till all finite pe- 
riods are lost in eternal duration, and say, cannot 100 men 
with small means, by the blessing of God, accomplish great 

ENDS ? 

The American Board of Commissioners have also a 
printing press at Malta. And from the present indications 
of Providence, it maybe expected, that ere long all West- 
ern Asia will be stretching out her arms for Tracts. There 
is now no effectual obstacle, could they be furnished, to 
their immediate and extensive circulation. And not only 
could they be circulated, but they would be read, with 
most lively interest. A gentleman, lately from that coun- 
try, who had himself distributed numerous Tracts in ports 
around the Mediterranean, remarked, on his return to Eng- 
land, to those who had supplied him, "I thank you, Gen- 
tlemen, ten thousand times, for the Tracts which you gave 
me. I had often been told that it was of no use to think 
of offering Italians, Greeks, Portuguese, and Spaniards, 
religious books ; for they would not read them, they dare 
not take them. But I now know better. You can have 
no idea how welcome the Tracts were, in all the ports 
where we touched along the Mediterranean. The people 
ran after me in the streets, and pulled me into their hous- 
es, in order to obtain them : and that too, after I had dis- 
tributed all I had. And I could hardly pacify them, but 
by telling them that I would bring them more, when I 
should come again. I assure you that I became well known ; 
and I hope to carry out a good supply the next time, 
knowing how glad they will be to see me, and the good 
books." 

From persons acquainted with the subject, the Commit- 
tee learn that Tracts can be printed, at Malta, at even a 
less expense than they can be in the United States. And 
from Malta, Jerusalem, Smyrna, and ports around the 



1823] USEFULNESS OF TRACTS. 119 

Mediterranean, they may be sent to more than 20,000,000 
people. Here then is an immense field for the distribu- 
tion of Tracts. Men who have property may here employ 
it in a manner, which, while it does not make them poor, 
will make many rich ; and secure for them M an inherit- 
ance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away." 
And when all earthly treasures shall be melting in the last 
conflagration, they shall have M durable riches and right- 
eousness," M eternal in the heavens." 

To be convinced that Tracts are the means of infinite 
blessings, we need only look at facts. 

A man from an adjoining state, was passing, with a 
drove of cattle, through a town in this Commonwealth, on 
the Sabbath; a little Tract was handed him, inculcating 
the duty of remembering the Sabbath day and keeping it 
holy. He determined that he would not read it, though 
he did not throw it away. When out of sight, he felt a 
curiosity to see what it contained, and began to read it. 
He soon began to feel the guilt and danger of profaning the 
Sabbath ; and said to his companion, " Let us stop till the 
Sabbath is over." His companion refused. " Well," said 
he, " you may go on, but I shall stop." They both put up 
till the close of the Sabbath. But the man still felt the bur- 
den of a u wounded spirit ;" and he found no relief, till, as 
he hopes, he submitted to Jesus. He is now apparently 
devoted to God, and traces his first serious impressions to 
that little Tract. 

A benevolent individual in , put a sum of money in- 
to the hands of his minister, to purchase Religious Tracts 
for gratuitous distribution. He purchased a number, and 
among them was " A Persuasive to Public Worship." It 
fell into the hands of a careless man, who carried it in his 
pocket to a neighbouring town, where it fell into the hands 
of a pious woman, who sent it to an acquaintance of hers 
that neglected public worship. He read it, and became 
alarmed at his condition. He immediately began to attend 
upon the preaching of the Gospel, and to hear with anx- 
ious concern. And there is reason to believe, that he is 
now heartily devoted to God. 

An instructress of a school in New Hampshire, receiv- 
ed from her minister a parcel of Tracts, to be lent as re- 



120 NINTH REPORT. [1823 

wards to her scholars. The Tract on Intemperance, 
found its way into the families of two intemperate men, 
and before the close of the season, they manifested an es- 
sential reformation. 

As a young man, in a neighbouring state, was about to 
set out on a voyage at sea, a pious friend put into his trunk 
a parcel of Tracts. While on his voyage, curiosity led 
him to examine this little bundle. On opening it, his eye 
fastened on " The Young Cottager." it arrested his at- 
tention, and he read it through. And there is reason to 
hope that it has left an impression on his mind which will 
never be effaced. He separated from his companions, and 
spent much of his time in reading, meditation, and prayer. 
He continued this course until his return ; when he found 
that his relish for former pleasures was gone, and he was 
led to say, " I had rather be a door keeper in the house 
of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness." He 
has since made a public profession of religion, and relates 
with humility and gratitude, the kindness of God in caus- 
ing to be put into his trunk that little Tract. 

" The Young Cottager" is an authentic narrative writ- 
ten by Rev. Legh Richmond, and has repeatedly been 
blessed to the salvation of men. 

A copy of it was handed to a young Lady in this Com- 
monwealth. As she read it an involuntary tear started 
from her eye, and offended with herself for being over- 
come by a Tract, she threw it down and resolved to have 
nothing more to do with it. But she could not rest, and 
took it up again. She was again affected even to tears, 
and angrily threw it down. But she could not rest then ; 
she took it up again, and at length read it through. And 
an impression was fastened upon her mind, which there is 
reason to believe will be eternal. " What," said she, 
"can this poor cottager so bewail her sins, and I, who am 
tenfold more guilty, feel no relentings ?" Days and weeks 
of anguish, on account of her sins, passed away ; and she 
wandered in darkness, and saw no light. But at length a 
ray from the Sun of righteousness broke in upon her, and 
she was brought out of darkness into marvellous light. 
For years she has now been engaged in seeking out the 
poor, and destitute, and distributing among them Bibles, 



1823] USEFULNESS OF TRACTS. 121 

and Religious Tracts ; instructing them in Sabbath Schools, 
and exciting her acquaintance to greater and more sys- 
tematical efforts for the salvation of men. 

The Tract entitled " Sixteen Short Sermons," was 
handed by an aged lady in this state, to a little boy. He 
read till he came to the third sermon, which is from this 
text, " All have sinned and come short of the glory of 
God." This appeared to be for him. He felt that he 
had sinned, and in a thousand instances, come short of the 
glory of God. He became deeply distressed, began from 
that time to search the Scriptures daily, and to seek the 
salvation of his soul. In a few months he obtained, as he 
hopes, joy and peace in believing in Jesus. He was ad- 
mitted a member of the visible church, has since been 
preparing for the ministry, and is now about to enter up- 
on its sacred duties. 

Four other cases of hopeful conversion, and indirectly 
upwards of 40 cases more, already known to the Commit- 
tee, appear to have been connected with the reading of 
only 5 copies of the above mentioned Tract. 

Here then are nearly 50 persons whose hopeful conver- 
sion is seen, by the feeble eye of mortals, even in this dis- 
tant world, and while looking u through a glass darkly," 
to have been connected with the reading of only 6 copies 
of one single Tract. Of this Tract 24,000 copies have 
been published by this Society, and great numbers by oth- 
er Societies. Add to the influence of those 6 copies, the 
influence of all these ; and to the influence of all these, 
add the influence of 3,000,000 other Tracts published by 
this Society ; and 2,000,000 by other Societies in this coun- 
try; and to the influence of these, add the influence of 
50,000,000 published by the London Tract Society; and 
other millions by other Tract Societies on the conti- 
nent of Europe, and who can estimate the result ! Let 
the increase of Tracts go forward, as it has done for 10 
years past, only 20 years to come, and there are hundreds 
of millions in actual circulation. Sum up the amount of 
the influence of all these, upon the souls of men. See 
them speaking to immortal beings in every town, village, 
and family, on the continent of Europe ; American and 
European Tracts, meeting and mingling together on the 
11 



122 NINTH REPORT* [1823 

shores of the Caspian; extending their influence to every 
part of Asia ; to the Islands of every sea ; to every con- 
tinent, and kingdom, and family, on the globe ; and moving 
onward with accumulating influence to the end of the 
world ; " and, lo, a great multitude which no man can 
number, out of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and 
tongues, stand before the throne of God, and before the 
Lamb," and open their everlasting song, "Unto Him that 
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, 
and hath made us kings and priests unto God and his Fa- 
ther; to him be glory and dominipn forever and ever." 



APPENDIX. 



From a Young Clergyman. 
While travelling in Tennessee, I staid for a night at the house 

of , where I met with Miss C of W , an in 

telligent young Lady, who appeared deeply to lament the igno- 
rance, and want of Christian enterprise, which prevailed around 
her. u I wish," said she, u that some of your Eastern ladies would 
come among us, and tell us how to form Tract Societies and other 
associations for doing good." I remarked that the process was very 
simple, and at her request, immediately drew up a short Constitu- 
tion of a Tract Society, which she promised to bring forward among 
the ladies in W . I soon afterwards learned with pleas- 
ure, that 20 dollars had been sent from W to the Deposi- 
tory, for the purchase of Tracts. As I supposed that this had been 

brought about through the influence of Miss C , I afterwards 

sent her a copy of the Prospectus of the Family Visitor, a Relig- 
ious Newspaper published in Richmond, Va. in consequence of 
which she very soon returned to the Editor a long list of subscrib- 
ers, who are now probably enjoying the precious privilege of read- 
ing weekly religious intelligence, from all parts of the Christian 
world. How much good might be done in the distribution of Re- 
ligious Newspapers and Tracts, would all intelligent Females, like 
Miss C , only consent to try. 

Extract of a Letter from Rev. L. Whitney, one of the Missionaries 

employed by the Connecticut Missionary Society, dated at Lex* 

ington, Kentucky, March 2, 1823. 

One who has not visited the Western and Southern divisions of 
our country, has no just conception how much good may be effect- 
ed, in our destitute settlements, by Tracts. They reach individu- 
als who otherwise would receive no religious instruction. They 
become subjects of conversation and reflection ; and by thus pre- 
paring the way, contribute much to the success of Missionary la- 
bours. 

In most of the destitute settlements, are found some pious and in- 
telligent men, who would take a pleasure in perusing and circulat- 
ing them. You will permit me to mention one instance of individ- 
ual exertion ; and the salutary effects produced by it. 

When in Alabama, last spring, I became acquainted with a pi* 
ous and intelligent planter, who came originally from Virginia, and 
settled in the County of Morgan. His feelings were highly excit- 



124 APPENDIX. [9th REP. 

ed in view of the immorality of the country. Many of the inhabi- 
tants, and especially those who lived in the ranges, and near the 
mountain, were idle and dissolute. They paid no respect to relig- 
ion, and regarded the Sabbath merely as a holiday. He revolv- 
ed in his mind various methods of effecting their moral improve- 
ment ; and at length fixed on the distribution of Tracts. He sent 
immediately to Knoxville, Tennessee, (for none could be obtained 
nearer,) and procured a considerable number; and distributed 
them not only among his neighbours, but in remote parts of the 
County. 

The consequences were happy beyond what he anticipated. A 
change in the conduct of many was soon visible. They were led 
to respect religion and its institutions. And instead of spending the 
Sabbath in idleness, or amusement, or vice ; they might frequent- 
ly be seen in little groups, on that sacred day, reading the Tracts, 
or listening to some one of their circle, as he read to the others, 
seated around him in tearful silence. Repeated applications have 
been made to this gentleman for new supplies. He assured me 
that many of his neighbours were now ready to cooperate with him; 
and requested me to delay a little, and organize a Tract Society. 
My previous engagements rendering this impracticable, I merely 
furnished him with a constitution of a Society, and pledged myself 
to forward him some Tracts. 

In all the states west of the Alleghany mountains, excepting Ohio, 
I know of only Jive Depositories. Could you establish Depositories 
throughout the country, the itinerating preachers, who can carry 
but few Tracts at a time, might easily supply themselves for distri- 
bution. Many of the Methodist and Baptist preachers would find 
it in perfect accordance with their feelings, and the objects they 
have in view, to put them in circulation. 

Among the places where a Depository of Tracts is especially 
needed, I would mention Lexington, Louisville, and Hopkinsville, 
in Kentucky ; Madison and Indianapolis, in Indiana ; Golconda and 
Edwards ville, in Illinois; Clarksville, Nashville, and Columbia, in 
Tennessee ; Natchez, in Mississippi ; and Huntsville and Florence, 
in Alabama. 



Extract of a Letter from Mr. David Brown, a Cherokee, converted 
to the Christian Religion by the instrumentality of the Mission 
School at Brainerd, dated, JLndover, Mass. 5th June, 1823. 
Living facts testify, that Religious Tracts are of immense utili- 
ty. They, as well as the Bible, are the harbingers of light and 
life. Many have already felt their happy influence ; and will have 
lasting occasion to praise God for the perusal of them. They have 
silently crept into courts and palaces ; and within their royal walls, 
many princes have, by their pathetic eloquence, been made to 
u tremble." Even to huts and wigwams they have gone, to expos- 
tulate with the sons and daughters of poverty and affliction. By 



9th REP.] APPENDIX. 125 

them, the desponding saint has been comforted, and the impious' 
have been warned to u flee from the wrath to come. 1 ' 

In the Western parts of the United States, a great proportion of 
the inhabitants are awfully corrupt in their morals. Whether 
white, red, or black, they seem to be subject to the same moral dis- 
ease, that is, " There is no fear of God before their eyes. 1 ' Oh, 
the state of the dying thousands in Arkansas, Mississippi, and Mis- 
souri. Vast numbers of them have never yet heard of a Saviour's 
love ; and without any of the consolations of the Gospel, they are 
pressing into the region of gloom and death. Haste then, Dear 
Sir, let these winged messengers of Heaven fly Westward. You 
can hardly imagine the happy results that would follow from their 
extensive circulation. The more you send, the better. 



From Mr. John C. Brigham, employed in the Western States in in- 
creasing the funds of the American Board for Foreign Missions. 
The field opening before you at the West is boundless. On the 
bosom of the Ohio River, and all along its banks, from Pittsburgh 
to its junction with the Mississippi, and thence to New Orleans, a 
distance of 2,000 miles, are vast multitudes very destitute of the 
means of grace. Had I thousands of dollars, I know of no way in 
which t could employ it with a greater prospect of usefulness, than 
in establishing Depositories of Tracts in Pittsburgh, Steubenville, 
Wheeling, Marietta, Maysville, Augusta, Cincinnati, Louisville, 
and other towns on these rivers, from which Tracts might be dis- 
tributed into the numerous boats continually passing, and often 
crowded with travellers and families moving, who would not only 
read the Tracts, but carry them to multitudes of others. In these 
towns, there are ministers and private christians of first character, 
who would cheerfully distribute Tracts if put into their hands. 
There are also many large growing towns in the interior of Ohio, 
Kentucky, Tennessee, and Alabama, where Tracts might be depos- 
ited ; and then scattered among the numerous families, which are 
growing up without religious instruction. 

I am happy to learn the success of the American Tract Society. 
I hope it will continue to receive the smiles of Heaven, and that 
your zeal for its welfare will not diminish. Had you rode, as I 
have, over this vast growing country west of the Mountains ; and 
seen the pressing want of religious instruction ; you would be in- 
cited to still greater efforts to increase its friends, and extend its 
more than golden treasures. 



126 NINTH REPORT. [1823 

OFFICERS, 

ELECTED, MAY 28, 1823. 

Hon, WILLIAM REED, President. 

Rev. MOSES STUART, Vice President. 

Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS, Corresponding Secretary. 

Rev. RICHARD S. STORRS, Recording Secretary. 

AMOS BLANCHARD, Esq. Treasurer. 

SAMUEL FARRAR, Esq* Auditor. 

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE* 

Rev. JOHN H. CHURCH, 
Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS, 
Rev. JOHN CODMAN, d. d. 
Rev. WARREN FAY, 

AMOS BLANCHARD, Esa. 



State oe the Society's Funds. 

Balance due from the Society, May 1, 1822, . . 1,448,59 

Expense of paper, printing-, &c from May 1, 1822, ) « RRCi nA 

to May 1,1823, ..... $ ^ooj,U4 

$5,111,63 

RECEiVED,/rom May 1, 1822, to May 1, 1823. 

Donations 1,729,81 

From the Agents of the General Depository for Tracts ) ^ 454 43 
sold, &c > 

$4,184,24 
Balance due from the Society May 1, 1823, . . 927,39 

Amos B&anchAKd, Treasurer. 



MAY 26, 1824. 



Your Commute, in presenting the Tenth Annual Re- 
port of the American T ract Society, have much occasion 
for gratitude to the Supreme Disposer of events, for the 
unexampled prosperity which ht ^ as g ran ted to this Insti- 
tution, during the past year. 

Since the last Annual Meeting, they ha\„ printed new 
editions of 95 Tracts ; being about three fifths oi\h e whole 
number which had then been published. They hav^also 
published, the past year, twenty two new Tracts : viz. 

No. Pages. 

158. Hopes for Eternity 8 

159. Wonderful Advantages of Drunkenness ... 4 

160. The Two Ends and the Two Ways .... 4 

161. To the Keeper of a Turnpike Gate .... 8 

162. Common Errors 12 

163. Thomas Brown 4 

164. Bethel, or the Flag Unfurled 16 

165. Village in the Mountains 8 

166. The Alarm . . .4 

167. "All Right 1 ' .8 

168. To a Person engaged in a Lawsuit .... 4 

23. God a Refuge 8 

55. The Well-spent Day 12 

60. Scripture Marks of Salvation . , . .24 

81. Seaman's Spy-Glass 16 

85. Watchmaker and his Family . . . . .16 

104. Anecdotes, illustrating the Usefulness of Tracts . . 28 

109. James Covey 4 

111. The Christ of God 12 

131. On Walking by Faith .16 

139. Contentment in Humble Life 16 

144. Conversion of President Edwards 16 

Of eleven of the new Tracts, the circulation has been 
such, that second editions have already been called for and 
published ; making 12,000 copies of each of these Tracts, 
printed during the year. 



128 ^TENTH REPORT. [1824 

The whole number of Tracts published the past year, 
exceeds that of the two preceding years, 

amounting to 770,000 

Whole tnumber from the beginning . . 4,217^00 

Previous to the last Annual Meeting, 1000 copies of 
the first five volumes, and 500 copies of the sixth. **ad 
been bound ; since which, 300 entire sets of seven volumes 
have been bound, besides 550 copies of tht* seventh, 350 
of the sixth, 100 of the first, and 50 ^ tir e sets in calf; 
making 3,450 volumes, bound * Ae past year; and 8,950 
since the formation of the society. Almost all these have 
been put in circulation During the year, numerous fam- 
ilies have suppl ua themselves with complete sets ; and 
benevolent ^dividuals have, in many instances, procured 
them ** be loaned or presented to the families of the poor. 
Yoav Committee hope that the time will soon arrive, when 
every family in our country shall possess such a treasure 
of religious knowledge, as that embraced in this Society's 
publications. 

Your Committee have, the past year, made special ex- 
ertions, by correcting errors of the press, and by substi- 
tuting new Tracts for such as seemed less adapted to gen- 
eral and lasting utility, to render the complete set in all 
respects worthy of the most extensive circulation. This 
attention to the series was especially important at the pre- 
sent time, as the Committee have begun to use stereotype 
plates. This mode of printing will promote correct- 
ness, and at the same time add to the neatness of the im- 
pression. And though much care in preparing the edi- 
tions, and a large advance of capital, will be required, 
yet your Committee are assured, that the pecuniary inter- 
ests of the Society, will, in the progress of a few years, 
be essentially promoted by the measure. 

Your Committee have also begun to ornament the pub- 
lications of the Society with Cuts ; both for the sake of 
rendering them more attractive and acceptable in their ex- 
ternal appearance, and of exciting an interest in their con- 
tents. Within the last four months, they have prepared 
cuts for about sixty Tracts, and have every encourage- 
ment to proceed, till they have furnished them, for all to 
which they are appropriate. 



1824] PUBLICATIONS OF THE SOCIETY. 129 

For the sake of neatness, and convenience, your Com- 
mittee have had all the Tracts trimmed. They have al- 
so improved the quality of paper on which they are print- 
ed. And they have the pleasure to say, that the ex- 
pected benefits of the improvements made in the publica- 
tions of the Society, have been, thus far, more than real- 
ized, in their increased circulation, and in the cordial appro- 
bation of all who have favoured them with their opinion. 

During the past year, your Committee have pub- 
lished the fourth number of the Christian Almanack, a pub- 
lication to which they attach much importance, as an in- 
strument of diffusing religious knowledge. Of the edition 
of this work for 1824, 36,000 copies were sold in Boston; 
3,500 in Rochester, N. Y.; 4,000 in New York city ; 4,000 
in Pittsburgh, Pa.; and an edition about equally large in 
Philadelphia ; making the whole number of copies circu- 
lated in the United States, about 50,000. The edition in 
New York was published under the patronage of the New 
York Religious Tract Society, and the edition in Philadel- 
phia, under the patronage of the Sunday and Adult School 
Union. Your Committee have endeavoured to render 
this publication complete as an Almanack, and at the same 
time, subservient to the cause of evangelical religion and 
the spread of the Gospel. They are now preparing a 
copy for 1 825, which will be issued early, that it may be 
seasonably reprinted ; and that persons, in every part of 
the United States, who are disposed to aid in its circula- 
tion, m£y be able to furnish supplies for all around them. 
It is expected that editions of this work for 1825, will be 
published in the following places : viz. 

Boston, Mass. by Lincoln & Edmands. 

New York, F. & R. Lockwood, 154 Broadway. 

Rochester, Monroe, Co. JV. Y. Everard Peck. 

Philadelphia, Pa. Xfie Amer. Sunday School Union. 

Pittsburgh, Pa. § ev * J° nn Andrews. 

Huntsville, Alabama, Samuel Hazard, Esq. 

The Committee have also had correspondence respect- 
ing one or two other editions, for which no definite ar- 
rangements are yet made. 

Besides this attention to the series of publications issued 



130 TENTH REPORT. [1824 

in past years, your Committee have also begun a new se- 
ries for Sabbath Schools ; to contain matter especially in- 
teresting to the young, in a neat form, and ornamented 
with many cuts. Such a series has been much called for; 
and your Committee, deeply impressed with the impor- 
tance of every measure which invites the attention of the 
young to the great subjects of religion, have long been 
desirous to commence it ; but their limited pecuniary re- 
sources, especially in connexion with the urgent calls for 
new Depositories in the destitute parts of the country, 
have hitherto prevented them. They now begin the se- 
ries, depending entirely on the aid of the Benevolent to 
enable them to increase it, till they shall meet, in some 
degree, the wants of multitudes who are looking to this 
Society for a supply. It is designed to fit this series, like 
the other, to be bound in volumes. 

Your Committee have also put to press, The Proceed- 
ings of the First Ten Years of the American Tract Society, 
consisting, mainly, of the ten Annual Reports with extracts 
from the Appendices. Only the serenth and ninth Re- 
ports remained in print, and many facts relating to the 
early history of the Society had been registered only in 
the memory of its friends and patrons. The volume will 
be issued in the same form as the volumes in which the 
publications of the Society are now bound ; and to those 
who are interested in this institution, and in the cause of 
Tracts generally, it will form a pleasant and valuable ac- 
companiment to the complete set. It is designed to add 
to this volume, a condensed view of the operations of Re- 
ligious TraGt Societies, throughout the world. 

Your Committee would also invite your attention to the 
American Tract Magazine. The want of a periodical pub- 
lication, to be a medium of intercourse with the Christian 
Public, has long been felt ty this Society. They have 
wished for such a publication to announce to donors the 
receipt of their charities ; to contain lists of new Tracts 
published, and new Depositories established; to convey 
information of the wants of different parts of our own coun- 
try, and other parts of the world ; and to contain whatev- 
er may be interesting in the correspondence of the Socie- 
ty ; especially, accounts of instances in which Religious 



1824] NEW PUBLICATIONS AND DEPOSITORIES. 131 

Tracts have been blessed by the Holy Spirit, to the re- 
formation of the immoral, and the salvation of those who 
were ready to perish. In these circumstances, your Com- 
mittee received the two first numbers of the Tract Maga- 
zine issued by the Religious Tract Society of London ; 
containing, with the correspondence of that Society, a va- 
riety of miscellaneous articles equally interesting to the 
friends of Tracts in Europe and America. The receipt 
of these numbers seemed to the Committee at once to 
open the way for issuing a similar Publication, containing 
the principal articles in that work, and adapted to the par- 
ticular circumstances of our country. The first number 
is already in the press, and will appear in June. It will 
comprise 24 pages, in a form corresponding with the oth- 
er publications of the Society, and be continued regularly, 
once in two months. As it is the main design of the work 
to promote the general interests of the Society, it will be 
furnished to subscribers at half a dollar a year, and gra- 
tuitously to all Auxiliaries who make yearly remittances 
in aid of the Society's funds. 

During the year, your Committee have established 28 
Dew Depositories, in the following towns : viz. 

Fryeburg, Me. Rev. Carlton Hurd. 

Norridgewock, Me, Rev. Josiah Peet. 

Plainfield, N. H. Levi Bryant. 

Brownington, Vt* Jasper Robinson. 

Manchester, Vt. Rev. H. A. Parsons. 

Montpelier, Vt. Warren Swift. 

Columbus, N. F. Isaac Jones. 

Martinsburg, N. F. Rev. David Kimball. 

New Haven, N. Y. Rev. William Williams. 

Pultney, N. F. Rev. Charles Yale. 
New Brunswick, N J. Samuel Seymour. 

Pittsburgh, Pa. Rev. Robert Patterson. 

Fredericksburg, Va. William Kellogg, Esq. 

Oxford, N. C. Joseph Lindsey. 

Savannah, Geo. Edward Coppee. 
Huntsville, JLlab, Samuel Hazard, Esq. 

Mobile, Alab. Rev. John B. Warren. 
Nashville, Ten. R, P. Hayes, Esq. 

Danville, Ken. Rev. Thomas Hand. 

Elkton, Ken. Rev. Wm. K. Stewart, 

Lexington, Ken. Rev. Mr. Ward. 

Louisville^ Ken. Thomas Jones. 



132 ^TENTH REPORT. [1824 

Columbus, Ohio, Messrs. O. & S. Crosby, 

Hudson, Ohio, Rev. William Hanford. 

Norwalk, Huron Co, Ohio, Henry Buckingham. 
Steubenville, Ohio, Rev. Charles Beatty. 

Strongsville, Ohio, Nathan Brittan, Esq. 

Vernon, Ohio, Rev. Harvey Coe. 

These with those formerly established, make 112 De- 
positories now depending on this Society for a constant 
supply of Religious Tracts; viz. 10 in Me.; 16 in N. H. ; 
10 in Vt.; 12 in Mass.; 1 in R. Isl. ; 6 in Con.; 22 in N.Y.; 
1 in N. J.; 2 in Penn.; 2 in Dist.Col.; 5 in Va.; 6 in N. C; 
1 in S. C; 2 in Geo.; 2 in Alab.; 2 in Ten.; 5 in Ken.; 9 in 
Ohio ; 1 in Missouri; 2 inMich.Ter.; and 1 in L. Canada. 

Your Committee cannot but advert with much pleasure 
to the fact, that the Depositories established the past year 
are so many of them in parts where the blessings of a 
preached Gospel are less richly enjoyed ; and where the 
circulation of Tracts promises especial good. Of the 
28 new Depositories, fourteen are west of the Alleghany 
Mountains, or farther south than those Mountains reach ; 
four are in the extreme parts of the State of New York, 
and one in Vermont, near the borders of Canada. The 
Tracts sent to these new Depositories amount to more 
than 2,500,000 pages. These, together with Tracts fur- 
nished to Depositories formerly established, to Tract So- 
cieties, and individuals, make the whole amount of Tracts 
sent from the General Depository, the past year, more 
than 10,000,000 pages, or about 800,000 Tracts. Two 
million pages were sent from the Depository in the month 
of April. 

Besides the usual modes of circulation, the Committee 
have complied with the request of a gentleman in New 
Hampshire, by furnishing him with a supply of Tracts, 
that he might visit parts of the country where Deposito- 
ries are not established, form Tract Societies, and put 
them in circulation. He has gone out on his agency, the 
result of which cannot be reported till another year. 

Your Committee furnished this gentleman with several 
thousand pages for gratuitous distribution. They have also 
sent 10,000 pages to a Missionary among the Penobscot 
Indians, for a particular account of whose condition they 



1824] GRATUITOUS DISTRIBUTION. 133 

must refer to the Appendix. They have also presented 
20,000 pages to the Auxiliary Tract Society in Machias, 
Me. in consideration of a loss sustained by that Society in 
transporting Tracts to that amount, which they had pur- 
chased at the Society's Depository in Boston : — this being 
the first purchase made by that Society, and there being 
many destitute in the vicinity, depending on it for a sup- 

P lv - 

The Committee have also received a communication 

from the Missionaries at the Sandwich Islands, requesting 
a supply of Tracts to be distributed by them to the crews 
of whaling and other ships, and to others who read the 
English language. Their communication has been an- 
swered by a grant of 25,000 pages. 

The subject of gratuitous distribution, is one in which 
your Committee have felt a deep interest; and nothing 
but a want of means has prevented them from answering 
numerous other calls which have been made, and which 
have commended themselves as highly important. One 
in particular, from the Massachusetts Missionary Society, for 
a supply of their Missionaries, your Committee would 
mention as suggesting a way in which much good may be 
done by Tracts. Wherever the Domestic Missionary may 
properly be sent, Religious Tracts are needed, and may 
be eminently beneficial, as an accompaniment to his la- 
bours, and a means of instruction after his departure. A 
few Tracts dispersed by the Missionary, would also make 
known their importance, and induce many, in places des- 
titute of the stated preaching of the Gospel, to procure 
them for themselves, their children^ and others around 
them. 

A friend of the American Colonization Society, has also 
suggested to your Committee, the importance of establish- 
ing a considerable Depository at Liberia, to aid in promot- 
ing religion among the blacks, who are to be members of 
the Republic which is there springing into existence. 

Your Committee earnestly hope that the time will soon 
come, when they shall not be compelled to deafen their 
ears to such calls as these ; and when the funds which 
might be appropriated with such manifest advantage shall 
be abundantly furnished. 
12 



134 TENTH REPORT. [1824 

But fully as your Committee believe that resources, far 
greater than have hitherto been committed to the charge 
of this Society, might be appropriated with the greatest 
advantage, they mention with gratitude to the Most High, 
the aid which he has inclined the benevolent to afford. 

During the year ending May 1,91 persons have been 
constituted Life Members, Of these, 64 are Clergymen, 
or the wives of clergymen, constituted life members by 
Ladies and others in their respective Societies ; 2 are 
Preceptors of Academies made life members by their pu- 
pils ; and 17 are Gentlemen, and 7 Ladies, constituted life 
members by their own donations. 

The Society has also recognized, the past year, 146 
new Auxiliaries, making the whole number of Auxiliaries 
163. These have contributed to the Parent Institution, 
during the year ending May 1, $701,38. The receipts for 
the Christian Almanack, have been more than $400 ; and 
the whole receipts for Tracts sold, $4,114,86. 

Yet the Society, with no capital except the Tracts in 
its Depositories, is involved in a debt of more than $1,000, 
and has other large pecuniary engagements. Every new 
Tract published, and every new Depository established, de- 
mands an increase of capital. And these two methods of ex- 
tending the operations of the Society have a reciprocal in- 
fluence. The greater the number of Tracts published, the 
greater is the expense of establishing each Depository ; 
and the more numerous the Depositories, the greater is 
the expense of publishing each particular Tract in suffi- 
cient quantities to furnish a supply. Should the Commit- 
tee, for the ensuing year, publish as many new Tracts, 
and establish as many new Depositories, as they have the 
past year, and at an equal expense, the increase of capi- 
tal demanded would be more than $3,000. And should 
they publish twenty five Tracts in the Sabbath School se- 
ries, the expense will probably amount to $1,500 more. 
And should they stereotype nine-tenths of their Tracts, it 
will require an advance of $2,000 more. These sums 
united, amount to $6,500. Your Committee know not 
whence the funds requisite will be obtained; but they 
would not distrust that Providence which has hitherto 
smiled on this Institution. They are assured that the cause 



1824] FOREIGN CORRESPONDENCE. 135 

in which they are engaged, is approved by Him who died 
for a wretched world •, they know it will prevail ; and by 
his grace assisting them, they will still go forward. 

In affectionately inviting the cooperation of the friends 
of Jesus, your Committee would suggest the desirableness 
of a far more extensive formation of Auxiliary Societies. 
In every city, town, and village, these Societies may be 
attended with important benefits both to the inhabitants 
themselves, and through the Parent Institution, to multi- 
tudes in the most destitute portions of our country ; and 
their extensive formation would constitute a bond of 
union among the friends of Tracts, which would tend 
greatly to their mutual advantage, and to the^ promotion of 
the cause which this Society is endeavouring to advance. 

A rule is now adopted, entitling all Auxiliaries to re- 
ceive Tracts at ten per cent discount, from any of the So- 
ciety's Depositories, wherever located ; and also giving 
to those who shall hereafter be constituted Life Members, 
a right to draw Tracts from any Depository, to the amount 
of 15,000 pages, or three-fourths of the sum contributed. 

In connexion with the desirableness of increasing the 
Societies funds, the Committee would mention the advan- 
tages which might result from a Library for the use of the 
Publishing Committee. All books of general utility are 
desirable ; especially those on Theological subjects, and 
books of reference. 

Your Committee are happy to mention the very 
friendly and gratifying relations which this Society sus- 
tains to kindred Institutions in this country and in Great 
Britian. They are bound, especially, to acknowledge their 
obligations to the Religious Tract Society of London, an 
Institution which has probably accomplished more than all 
other Religious Tract Societies united ; and which is 
equally distinguished by its unwavering attachment to the 
doctrines of the cross, its true liberality of sentiment and 
conduct, the energy of its proceedings, and its success 
in promoting the cause of Christ. From the latest infor- 
mation received, it appears, that this Society has now pub- 
lished about fifty eight millions of Tracts, embracing, be- 
sides its general series, a series for circulation by Hawk- 



136 TENTH REPORT. [1824 

ers ; a series for Sunday Schools ; and a series on Broad 
Sheets ; together with a variety of hand-bills, and other 
small publications designed to draw the attention of chil- 
dren to the great truths of religion. The Correspondence 
and the generous aid of this Society were extended, the 
last year, to Russia, Sweden, Finland, Poland, Prussia, 
and Germany; to France, Spain, Palestine, and various 
parts of Africa ; to India and China ; to South America, 
the West Indies, the Canadas, and the United States. In 
all these countries, it is extending its operations, kindling 
the same spirit in kindred Institutions with which itself is 
animated, and which your Committee trust will glow with 
increasing ardour, till the world shall be converted to God. 

A letter just received from the Secretary of this noble In- 
stitution, containing the most cordial congratulations, was 
accompanied by a copy of all the Society's publications, 
and 10,500 Spanish Tracts for gratuitous distribution to the 
Spanish population in America. 

Your Committee have also received the publications of 
the Prayer-Book and Homily Society of London, with a file 
of their Reports, accompanied by 6,000 Homilies in Eng- 
lish, Spanish, and French, and 500 of the Burial Service 
. v ' fr >r fifratuitous distribution by this Society. 
1 OHh^Spanrsh anJ French Tracts and Homilies 5,000 
have been entrusted to the exposal of Henry Hill Esq. 
Treasurer of the A. B. C. F. M. ; 2,500 to the charge of 
the Rev. William Jenks of Boston ; and 2,000 to the care 
of the Rev. Eleazar Lathrop of St. Augustine, Florida. A 
further account of the disposal of them must be deferred. 

The publications of the Religious Tract Society of Liv- 
erpool have also been received. 

To each of these Societies, and to other Tract and Sun- 
day School Societies in Great Britain, your Committee have 
forwarded your Reports and specimens of your publications. 

Your publications have, the past year, been presented 
to the Religious Tract Society of New- York, the Phila- 
delphia Sunday and Adult School Union, the Religious 
Tract Society of Baltimore, and the Western Navigation 
Bible and Tract Society of Cincinnati ; and the publications 
of each of these Societies have been received by your 
Committee. Your Reports have been presented to the 



1324] DOMESTIC CORRESPONDEJSXE. 137 

Evangelical Tract Society of Boston, the Methodist Epis- 
copal Tract Society of New- York, the Female Episcopal 
Tract Society of Baltimore, the Religious Tract Society of 
Albany,the Baptist General Tract Society, the Hartford Re- 
ligious Tract Society, the Female Tract Society of Provi- 
dence, and to others. For a brief account of the operations 
of all these Societies, your Committee must refer to the 
" Proceedings of the First Ten Years." 

In prosecuting the measures which have been adopted 
the past year, your Committee have deeply felt the im- 
portance of having a qualified and faithful Agent, or Super- 
intendant, devoted permanently to this branch of benevo- 
lence. And they believe there are few stations, in which 
a man may. employ the talents which God has given him, 
with more advantage to the Church. 

While the Committee look back on all the way in which 
they have been led, they are constrained to say, that " good- 
ness and mercy have attended them ;" and to consider 
the language of Providence as most intelligible, directing 
them to go onward. 

We are placed in the midst of a reading community, in 
which not only the man of letters, but often the humblest 
cottager, is looking to the press for amusement and instruc- 
tion. In no country is the spirit of independent inquiry so 
prevalent. In no country has the private individual such 
power. He is in fact one of the rulers of a mighty nation ; 
his influence on our civil and religious institutions is felt 
through every vein of our country. Our country, too, is 
in its childhood, and the religious influence which is exer- 
ted now, will be felt by millions yet unborn. These mil- 
lions, Brethren, will all be either the friends, or the ene- 
mies of God in another world ; and with our faithfulness or 
unfaithfulness to them, may be intimately connected their 
songs of triumph, or their unutterable anguish, forever 
and ever. 

There are many of the followers of Christ, scattered 
abroad through our country, who feel in some degree the 
importance of the work to be accomplished. They write 
to your Committee, and ask what can be done ; and urge 
them, with affecting importunity, to lend them their aid. 
And your Committee cannot hear their cries, without the 
12* 



138 TENTH REPORT. [1824 

most heart-felt emotion. Many of thetri orice enjoyed 
their Sabbath with all its blessings ; their meeting-houses ; 
their ministers ; their christian friends ; and are now des- 
titute of them all. Their children are growing up with- 
out the means of grace. Their neighbors are living " with- 
out hope, and without God in the world." And they are 
our countrymen; they are near us; they speak and read 
our language ; their prejudices and sympathies are the 
same as ours ; their wants we daily behold ; they are 
members of our own family, " bone of our bone, and flesh 
of our flesh." God has opened to us the way to do them 
good ; and your Committee feel that they cannot answer 
it before Him in the judgment, if they refuse their utmost 
endeavours, by the means which he has placed in their 
power, to supply their spiritual wants. 

"The Presbytery of Steubenville, Ohio," says a member 
of that body, u embraces within its bounds a population of 
from sixty to seventy thousand souls; and I am requested 
to write and urge the American Tract Society to establish 
a Depository here, as soon as practicable. At a full meet- 
ing, all the members of the Presbytery became members of an 
Auxiliary Tract Society, and took copies of the Constitu- 
tion, in order to form similar Societies in their own par- 
ishes and vicinity. Many Societies have, at different times, 
been formed in this region, but have all fallen through, in 
consequence of not being able to procure Tracts" 

" A small Tract Society," says a Gentleman in one of 
the south-western counties of New- Yor k 9 "has been es- 
tablished in the town in which I reside ; but we have found 
much difficulty in obtaining Tracts, We have long been 
wishing to have a Depository established here. The 
country around us is very destitute of religious information. 
Applications for Tracts have been made to our little Soci- 
ety, from towns 60 miles distant." 

A Gentleman in one of the central counties of Ohio, says, 
;t I have just now learned where to apply for Tracts. The 
section bordering on the settlement where I reside is ex- 
ceedingly destitute of the means of grace ; the state of 
morals is deplorable ; and could you establish a Deposi- 
tory here, I have no doubt, that by the exertions of a few 
— our little few — of the pious followers of the Lamb, great 
good might be done." 



1824] WANT OF TRACTS IN THE UNITED STATES. 139 

44 The region of country lying along the shores of Lake 
Ontario" says a Clergyman in that vicinity, " is very des- 
titute of religious information. Many of the inhabitants 
are in low circumstances, unable to purchase, and conse- 
quently destitute of religious books. There- is a disposi- 
tion, however, to possess themselves, as far as they can, 
of the means of religious knowledge ; and could there be 
a Depository of Tracts in this county, a great many would 
be purchased and circulated ; and instruction communica- 
ted for which multitudes are perishing." 

A Clergyman in the eastern section of Ohio, says, u Per- 
haps there is no place where there is a greater prospect 
that Tracts would be useful, than in this region. A great 
proportion of the people can hear preaching only occasion- 
ally ; in many of the new settlements no churches are yet 
formed, and of those that exist great numbers are destitute 
of pastors. I can hardly imagine a more promising field 
for the circulation of Tracts. A Depository is much need- 
ed. Could the Committee step here, and survey the field 
themselves, and see the corruptions which many are striv- 
ing to introduce ; the demoralizing, scandalous publications 
which are industriously circulated ; and the destitute and 
exposed state of the people ; they would be grieved, that 
it is not in their power to do more for us." 

Says the Secretary of a Female Tract Society in Ken- 
tucky, " The Board have observed with pleasure, that this 
place has been mentioned as an important station for a De- 
pository. We would add, that it is a place of resort for 
great numbers of youth; that many clergymen travelling 
to different parts of the state, might here be conveniently 
supplied with Tracts for distribution ; and that great num- 
bers around us have not the means of grace. And who 
can calculate the happy results of opening here a fountain, 
from which the waters of salvation shall flow in every di- 
rection ?" 

44 We greatly need," says a Clergyman in the nothern 
part of Vermont, "a supply of Tracts in these new settle- 
ments. Many would purchase them, could they be obtain- 
ed, instead of a multitude of pernicious books which the 
enemy contrives every where to get in circulation. We 
want them much also for our Sabbath Schools. Tracts, 



140 TENTH REPORT. [1824 

dispersed in this desolate region, prepare the way for the 
Bible and the preaching of the Gospel. Could a Tract, 
addressed to the inhabitants of new settlements, be ably 
written and extensively circulated, it would doubtless be 
very useful." 

u I wish to inquire," writes a Clergyman in Alabama^ 
u whether a Depository of Tracts can be established in 
this State ? Cannot the American Tract Society forward 
us some for gratuitous distribution ? Will the good people 
of New England, amidst such a profusion of the means of 
grace as they enjoy, refuse to send us a few Tracts ? I 
have travelled extensively in various parts of Alabama, 
keeping the cause of Tracts in view, and making arrange- 
ments for the organization of Auxiliary Societies ; and 
nothing is wanting but Tracts. The members of the Pres- 
bytery and other Christian friends, urge the importance 
of a Depository. Establish one, and ail that can be done, 
shall be done, God assisting me." 

" I am glad," says a minister in Kentucky, " to learn 
the prosperity of the American Tract Society; for 1 think 
it one of the best means of promoting the cause of Christ. 
Four millions of unassuming advocates of the cross, preach- 
ing to as many immortal beings the unsearchable riches of 
Christ ! What a spectacle ! I believe it will be reserved 
for eternity to unfold the amount of good which this sin- 
gle Society will have accomplished, under the agency of 
the Holy Spirit. The thing is new here, and there have 
been some opposers; but when 1 have showed them, in 
the " Anecdotes illustrating the usefulness of Tracts," 
what God has done by their instrumentality, they have re- 
frained from opposition, fc lest haply they should be found 
fighting against God.' " 

A Correspondent in Upper Canada writes, that a most 
wide and interesting field is opening there, for the circula- 
tion of Tracts ; that the moral state of Society, though 
low, is, by the efforts of Missionaries and other benevolent 
individuals, improving ; that Sabbath Schools are forming, 
especially in connexion with the efforts of the Rev. Thad- 
deus Osgood ; that many who have migrated there from 
the United States, have a great desire for Tracts and oth- 
er religious information ; and that the Canadians, though 



1824] WANT OF TRACTS IN THE UNITED STATES. 141 

they have not been a reading people, are becoming more 
and more desirous to obtain the knowledge which shall 
make them wise unto salvation. 

Says a Clergyman in one of the western counties of 
New York, " A great desire to read Tracts is manifested 
by my people. "Little Henry and his Bearer," of which, 
unfortunately, I had but one copy, has gone from house 
to house. I read it in a public meeting, and the whole 
assembly was in tears. One teacher suspended the or- 
dinary business of her school, that she might read it to 
her pupils. Several little boys and girls have their cents 
laid by, to purchase " Henry" when he comes, and are 
often inquiring when the box of Tracts will arrive. The 
heart of the orphan has been made to rejoice, by these 
little heralds of salvation ; and the giddy youth has paus- 
ed for a moment, to reflect, when addressed by the silent 
monitor. Yes, I have seen the big tear, trickling down 
the furrowed cheek of age, when presented with that 
which teaches to be wise unto salvation, and to prepare to 
die. The Tracts you sent me before, have also visited 
the bed of the dying impenitent — but the veil of eternity 
is drawn, and we cannot see beyond it. Do send me a 
supply sufficient for a Depository for my own people and 
others around me." 

u . The Presbyteries of Grand River and of Portage," 
says a Clergyman in Ohio, " have taken up the subject 
of procuring and distributing Tracts, forming Auxiliaries, 
and obtaining a Depository in each county. 1 have also 
been endeavouring to do something myself, to aid this im- 
portant cause. Within a month, I have formed 21 Socie- 
ties, 20 of which are Auxiliary to the American Tract So- 
ciety ; embracing 235 members, male and female, who 
have subscribed near $80. These Societies I have or- 
ganized while performing missionary labor, and have found 
it no interruption to the main object in which I am engag- 
ed. I must now request the Committee immediately to 
establish a Depository here, as the existence of these So- 
cieties, depends entirely on the measure." 

" The American Tract Society," says a minister in Ten- 
nessee, " I regard as one of the grand engines the Lord 
Jesus Christ is using to demolish the kingdom of darkness 



142 TENTH REPORT. [1824 

in the United States, particularly in that part of them, 
which lies west of the Alleghany. Many parts of the wes- 
tern and southern States, being new, must of necessity be 
for a considerable time, destitute of the preaching of the 
Gospel and the means of religious knowledge. Yet in 
this wide spread region of country, beings created for im- 
mortality, are springing up in millions. Your Society fur- 
nishes the best means of instruction for each of these in- 
dividuals. Yet your Tracts have hitherto had but a 
small circulation here. I have conversed with a preach- 
er of the Gospel, who had never heard of such a thing as 
a Religious Tract. But a Tract ! — 'tis welcomed every- 
where ; and it does execution everywhere. Your Tracts 
on Intemperance find their way %o the hardest heart. 
The Swearer's Prayer will stop the mouth of the boldest 
blasphemer. I have carried your Tracts on board boats 
descending our large rivers, where noise and riot have 
been hushed by them, and given way to the glad tidings 
of salvatiori. Among the rich and the poor, they are re- 
ceived with gratitude, read with avidity, studied, remem- 
bered. Why is it, we pray you, that the sluices of be- 
nevolence are not opened, so that these waters of salva- 
tion may flow out, through this important portion of our 
country ?" 

" Will you disregard this western world," says another 
minister, on the borders of Ohio, u till irreligion shall take 
deep root ; till error shall have overspread the whole 
territory, and your influence is lost ? W r ill you have no 
compassion for hundreds of thousands of your country- 
men who are perishing for lack of spiritual food ? While 
you most properly regard the poor heathen in distant 
lands, how can you let u flesh of your flesh and bone of 
your bone" starve and perish with hunger. Take a map 
of this western world; look from the Alleghany moun- 
tains to the Mississippi, and from Detroit to New Orleans; 
and calculate, if you can, the extent of our spiritual 
wants." 

But the voice of the friends of Jesus comes not only 
from among the perishing in the waste places of our coun- 
try ; it sounds from pagan lands, wherever the messengers 



1824] WANT OF TRACTS IN INDIA AND CHINA. 143 

of the Gospel are sent. From Finland to the Cape of 
Good Hope, and from China in the East, to the Sandwich 
Islands in the West, the devoted Missionaries and servants 
of Christ have borne their testimony to the usefulness of 
Religious Tracts, and have called upon those who enjoy 
the blessings of Divine grace, to furnish them for distribu- 
tion. 

" Great," says the departed Rev. Dr. Milne, whose loss 
is lamented by every friend of China, " great are our ob- 
ligations to the Religious Tract Society ; and great is the 
necessity that exists in these pagan lands, for the exercise 
of its beneficence. Tracts are soon read through, and ea- 
sily carried about with one. They may be circulated more 
widely than the sacred Scriptures can. If we calculate 
either the price, or the persons capable of deriving profit 
from religious books among the Chinese, we shall find 
that fifty Tracts may be given away for the expense of 
one New Testament. A Missionary among the Heathen, 
can carry a hundred Tracts in his hand ; and he will ever 
find great satisfaction, in leaving an appropriate one in the 
house where he has been visiting ; or in putting one into 
the hands of those with whom he has been conversing ; or 
dropping one in the highway, where it is likely to be ta- 
ken up by some passing stranger ; or in reading and ex- 
plaining one to those who are inclined to hear. The 
Tract Society is a most important Auxiliary in the work 
of converting the Heathen to Christ; and though, in com- 
parison with Missionary and Bible Societies, it holds, in 
some respects, a lower place ; in other respects its utility 
is more immediate, more extensive, and more apparent.*" 

" We returned from our excursion," says Dr. Scudder, 
one of the Missionaries at Ceylon, u rejoicing in the good- 
ness of God. We had distributed 300 Scripture Extracts 
and 550 Tracts ; leaving the word of life in the hands of 
many precious, immortal souls : what is to be the result is 
known to Infinite Wisdom. I regret that I had no more 
of these little messengers of truth to distribute. They are 
of great importance to us, when we itinerate. The peo- 
ple in general will read them, and what they read they 
will probably remember better than our conversations. 



1 44 TENTH REPORT. [1824 

Large funds are needed to print that variety of Tracts 
which we should be glad to circulate." 

The Committee are gratified to acknowledge one dona- 
tion of $35, occasioned by the above letter, to be appro- 
priated to the printing of Tracts in Ceylon ; and they con- 
sider it very desirable that their funds for foreign objects 
should be, greatly increased. 

Your Committee have only to add a few instances that 
have been communicated to them, in which the reading of 
Religious Tracts has been attended by the special influ- 
ences of the Holy Spirit. 

A respectable Gentleman who had not enjoyed the ad- 
vantages of an early religious education, and was inclined 
often to expose and magnify the faults of Christians, call- 
ed, about four years ago, on a professor of religion, who 
affectionately proposed to read him a Tract. " I waited," 
says he, " and heard him through. As he proceeded, my 
attention became fixed ; my mind was, as it were, riveted 
upon the Tract. 1 found my own character drawn in the 
strongest living colours. Conviction seized my mind. I 
saw myself to be one who had abused the long-suffering 
of God; despised the rich offers of the Gospel ; trifled 
with a Saviour's love ; and felt, that if I were cut off in my 
sins, God would remain forever glorious. In about six 
weeks afterwards, 1 was brought, as I trust, to throw my- 
self into the arms of Sovereign mercy, and to embrace 
that Saviour whom I had rejected for almost twenty-eight 
years." This gentleman has since printed for gratuitous 
distribution a considerable edition of the Tract which had 
been thus blessed to him ; and an edition of two others, 
one of which is the Swearer's Prayer — " feeling it to be 
his duty," as he informed the Committee, " thus to mani- 
fest his gratitude ; and especially, as he had been once 
addicted to profaneness, to counteract as much as possi- 
ble, the evils of his former example." 

A pious Gentleman, travelling in Rhode Island, left the 
Tract called " The Warning Voice," at a house where 
he had lodged one night ; — it was read by a young woman 
in the family, and proved, as she hopes, and as is be- 



1824] BLESSING OF GOD ON RELIGIOUS TRACTS. 145 

lieved by those who know her, the means of her conver- 
sion to God. She has since united with a Christian church. 

A man and his wife who were both lamentably indiffer- 
ent to the subject of religion, and were removing for the 
purpose of settlement in a distant part of the country, pur- 
suing different routes, were so long separated that the la- 
dy was filled with the most alarming apprehensions for 

the safety of her husband. While she remained at M , 

in deep affliction, a Tract was given her, which, by the 
Divine blessing, led her to put her trust in Christ, the only 
true source of consolation. Her husband was at length 
restored to her, and seeing the change in her character, 
was led to acknowledge the reality and excellency of 
true religion ; and they are now, in a destitute part of the 
country, using their united exertions to promote the spir- 
itual welfare of those around them. 

In the town ofM , where the above event occurred, 

a Tract, given to a profane and dissolute young man, was 
the evident means of his conversion. He lived in health, 
a few months; when he was suddenly removed into eter- 
nity. 

A Lady in New Hampshire, who has been, for several 
years, a professor of religion, traces her first serious im- 
pressions to the reading of the Tract entitled, No Life 
Pleasing to God, but that which is Useful to Mankind. 

u \ consider it," says a valuable Correspondent, " one 
of the greatest enjoyments of my life, that I have been 
permitted to scatter so many thousands of these arrows of 
truth, in our own and other countries, by land and by sea. 
They have uniformly been received with apparent pleas- 
ure, and in many instances with great joy, and even with 
tears of gratitude. As I was but a traveller, I could only 
sow the seed, leaving it to future days to reveal the fruit. 
Yet, in some instances, immediate good was apparent. I 
gave a Tract to a female servant who was much alarmed 
in a thunder storm, and accompanied it with some con- 
versation. It made known to her the wrath of God re- 
vealed against her, while continuing impenitent, and was 
the means, as there is reason to believe, of directing her 
to the only Refuge from the eternal storm that is coming 
13 



H6 TENTH REPORT. [1824 

on the ungodly. She continues, so far as man can judge^ 
a sincere friend of Jesus. 

" I gave a few Tracts and a Testament, to a young wo- 
man, confined in a solitary cell in a jail. I had the pleas- 
ure of hearing afterwards that there was reason to hope 
that they were blessed to the conversion of her soul. 

u When I reached the end of a long journey into a des- 
titute part of the United States, I found that my Tracts 
were almost gone, and engaged a man to go on horseback, 
on Sabbath rooming, and loan one Tract to each of thirty 
families in the neighbourhood, saying that he would take 
it the next Sabbath morning, and lend them another. One 
woman gave evidence of conversion in consequence of 
reading these Tracts. 

" To one poor old woman who could not read, and had 
been for years confined to her bed, I read that most ex- 
cellent Tract, " To the Aged." She could sit up in her 
bed ; and as I read, the tears streamed down her furrow- 
ed cheeks, and many an interruption did she make, to ex- 
press her delight with the feast Providence was giving her. 
' O /' said she, fc / do bless God for sending you to me, and 
shall recollect you when I meet you in Heaven ; 1 know I 
shall? It was a precious season to me, and I trust to sev- 
eral others who could not read, but sat around and heard 
the words of salvation. 

" I might add many interesting occurrences," continues 
this Correspondent ; u but if there were no other advan- 
tage in distributing Religious Tracts, than its influence on 
the individual who scatters them, 1 would recommend to 
all, never to travel without them. A hint from a friend 
suggested to me the duty of lifting my heart in prayer for 
a blessing on every Tract I delivered ; and I never dared 
omit it. Thus, having the affections constantly elevated 
to God, c I seemed to be borne in the arms of mv Saviour,' 
as I journeyed onward ; and I felt his strength enabling 
me to utter a word for Him, whenever I had opportu- 
nity to speak to the person to whom a Tract was present- 
ed." 

A lady in one of our large towns heard a man swearing 
profanely at his team, while passing by her house, and 
handed him the Swearer's Prayer. He took the Tract, 



1824] BLESSING OF GOD ON RELIGIOUS TRACTS. 147 

put it in his hat, and went on. About six month9 after- 
wards, the lady had the pleasure to learn that he had re- 
lated the circumstance with much interest ; and said, that 
he had never sworn since, and had resolved, God assisting" 
him, never to swear again. 

" About four years ago, on a tour to Canada," says Mr. 

C , a gentleman in a neighbouring state, u I travelled 

near the White Mountains in New Hampshire, visiting 
from house to house, conversing with every person I met 
about their eternal interests, and presenting all with 
Religious Tracts, which were received with so much gra- 
titude and joy, as to render my journey exceedingly pleas- 
ant. The next year I was employed by the New Hamp- 
shire Bible Society to travel around the White Mountains; 
and calling at a house, 1 said in an affectionate manner, 
8 Will you tell me if the Lord Jesus Christ dwells here?' 
i I trust,' said the woman, ' he is precious to my soul, yea, 
and altogether lovely.' I inquired when, and by what 
means, she hoped she had been born again. l A man by 

the name of C ,' she said, ' came in here, about a 

year since, and gave me a Tract. When he was gone, 
one of my children began to read it aloud. It showed me 
my sins against a holy God, and revealed his wrath against 
me. I felt that I was lost forever. I read the Tract 
again and again, and my ruin only appeared greater 4han 
before, till at length I had a discovery of the way of salva- 
tion by a crucified Redeemer.' She added, c 1 have 

longed to see that Mr. C , ever since.' When I told 

her I was he, she looked at me with a pleasing surprise, 
and expressed her emotions of joy and gratitude with such 
unaffected sincerity, as abundantly repaid me for all the 
sacrifices I had made. — Her husband then said, c You gave 
me a Tract also, but I was unmoved by it ; since that, 
however, 1 hope the Lord has shewed mercy to my soul.' 

Four s€asons," adds Mr. C , " I have been out on the 

delightful business of scattering your silent and powerful 
Missionaries, and were I able, I would travel through ev- 
ery destitute portion of our country, dispersing Bibles and 
Tracts, at my own expense—' though faint, yet pursuing.'" 
" A man from the country," says a pious Merchant, in 
one of our large cities, " was leaving my store on Satur- 



148 TENTH REPORT. [1824 

day afternoon ; when, suspecting his purpose to travel the 
next day, 1 inquired where he would spend the Sabbath. 
He avowed his determination to travel ; and introduced 
many of the reasons, so often urged to show that the com- 
mandment of God can be innocently violated. I remon- 
strated with him on the wickedness of the course he in- 
tended to pursue ; and as he left me, placed in his hand 
a Religious Tract, hoping it might prove a blessing to 
him. It was about three months after, that he returned ; 
referred me to the humble effort I had made for his good; 
told me that while he broke God's law by travelling on 
that Sabbath, there was anguish in his heart; and that he 
found no rest, till, as he hoped, he rested on Christ, the 
rock of salvation, He has since professed religion, and I 
am assured, is an active and valuable member of the 
Church." 

In the store of another Merchant, a quantity of Tracts, 
was, several years ago, deposited by a benevolent clergy- 
man, for sale. The merchant, supposing that the profits 
were for the Clergyman's personal benefit, disposed of the 
Tracts as he had opportunity, but took no interest in them 
himself; till one day curiosity led him to examine their 
contents. He soon found among them the Shepherd of 
Salisbury Plain; which its excellent author, Mrs. Hannah 
More, has mentioned as, in her judgment, the most useful 
of her publications. It found the way to his heart. He 
felt that he needed a religion which would render him 
happy in poverty and affliction. He sought, and found. 
His partner in trade was influenced by a Tract which he 
found in the same parcel, to attend to the things of relig- 
ion and consecrate himself to God. Both have since felt 
an unwavering attachment to the cause of Christ ; have 
distributed thousands of Religious Tracts, and been effi- 
cient friends of Missions, Bible Societies, and all the Be- 
nevolent Institutions which God is now using to promote 
the kingdom of his dear Son. 

Thus, Brethren, has the Lord smiled upon the work in 
which, we trust, he has called us to engage, and crowned 
it with his blessing. And your Committee cannot but re- 



1824] conclusion. 149 

gard these tokens of his favour as an animating evidence 
that he has chosen this Society to be an important means 
of extending a knowledge of the Redeemer through the 
earth. They look forward, with joyful anticipation, to the 
time, when the publications of this Society shall not mere- 
ly be circulated from a few Depositories, scattered hun- 
dreds of miles from each other, but when a fountain of 
them shall be opened in every county, and they shall 
spread to every town, and church ; when they shall enter 
every family, and be in the hands of every child ; when 
they shall meet the Intemperate man, and the Profane 
Swearer, and the Sabbath Breaker, in all their violations 
of God's law; and shall speak to every immortal being, 
throughout all our territories, and tell him he is ruined by 
sin, and must flee speedily to the cross of Christ, or per- 
ish. And when they shall not only be found in every dark 
corner of our own country, but shall be extended to the 
Canadas, to Mexico, the West Indies, and South America, 
to Africa and Western Asia, to India and China ; and God 
shall incline the hearts of his creatures to listen to the mes- 
sages they bear, to believe in a dying Saviour, and live for- 
ever. 

Such is the work which God may accomplish by the 
means which this Society is using, and which the Commit- 
tee believe he will accomplish in his own appointed time. 
And they would affectionately invite the friends of this 
Society to remember its interests before him, in fervent 
supplication; and while they praise him for his goodness 
in time past, and the bright prospect he is opening for the 
future, to unite in ascribing salvation, and glory, and pow- 
er, and might "unto Him who sitteth upon the throne, and 
unto the Lamb" " that was slain, and hath redeemed us to 
God by his blood," " forever and ever." 



13* 



APPENDIX. 

London Religious Tract Society. 
The Twenty-fourth Annual Report of this Institution, just pub- 
lished, contains very interesting" details of the Society's Proceed- 
ings, both at home and abroad. The following brief summary of 
its operations is extracted from the Report. 

FOREIGN OPERATIONS. 

Interesting communications have been received from Drs. Hend- 
erson and Pinkerton, respecting the circulation of Tracts in Rus- 
sia. Since 1812, nearly 100 Tracts have been printed at St. Pe- 
tersburg and Moscow, and about 600,000 copies issued. Dr. H. 
has been active in distributing Tracts at Cronstadt, particularly to 
sailors of different nations. Dr. P. states that in Sweden and Fin- 
land the Tract Societies are proceeding- with activity. The Evan- 
gelical Society at Stockholm has circulated between two and three 
millions. 501. have been appropriated for printing Tracts at St. 
Petersburg in the Polish language, and 30/. for the purchase of 
French and German Tracts, to be circulated in Poland. The Prus- 
sian Tract Society continues its labours. Since its formation in 
1814, about half a million Tracts have been printed at Berlin. The 
efforts of the Societies formed in Germany have been considerable, 
and crowned with much success. At Dantzic, Tracts have been 
distributed by commanders of vessels engaged in that trade. The 
Hamburgh Society continues its labour. The Society at Amster- 
dam has proceeded with activity and success, and is now become 
a Society for the Netherlands. It has been presented by this Soci- 
ety with 20,000 copies of the Tract u On Regeneration," with the 
stereotype plates from which the edition was printed : a further edi- 
tion has been printed at Amsterdam. The Paris Society has en- 
larged its sphere of action, with a hope that much good will result. 
The labours of the Rev. C. Malan, of Geneva, demand particular 
mention. This indefatigable and useful servant of the Lord is an 
active circulator of Tracts, of which he is also the author and pub- 
lisher, principally at his own expense. During the past year 8,000 
Tracts in the Spanish language bave been distributed from Gibral- 
tar. The Rev. S. S. Wilson is about to return to the Mediter- 
ranean, and measures have been taken to forward the important 
work of translating and printing Tracts in the Greek language, to 
which Mr. Wilson is devoting- considerable attention. In the A- 
zores, a merchant has distributed several thousand Tracts chiefly in 
the Portuguese language. A lady at Madeira is active in distributing' 



10th REP.] LONDON RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY. 151 

Tracts to the residents, and to the shipping which touch there ; fur- 
ther supplies have been sent. Opportunities have offered for sending 
Tracts to the Cape de Verd Islands, to Sierra Leone, and other places 
on the Western Coast of Africa. At the Cape of Good Hope, Drs. 
Philip and Thom have circulated Tracts extensively ; considerable 
supplies have also been forwarded to Simon's Bay and Graham 
Town. To Chili and Peru 11,000 Spanish Tracts have been for- 
warded. English and Spanish Tracts have also been sent to the 
Rev. J. Armstrong at Honduras. Correspondents from South 
America unite in stating that a general avidity for publications of 
all descriptions now prevails throughout that extensive field of op- 
eration. To the West Indies nearly 10,000 Tracts were sent last 
year. To New Providence, and to the Burmudas, 3,000. In vari- 
ous parts of the United States of America, Tract Societies are pro- 
ceeding with activity, chiefly in connexion with the American, 
New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore Societies ; "which are going 
through the land in the length and breadth of it, and proceeding to 
occupy it, in every direction, with Branch and affiliated Institutions. 
Your Committee would particularly notice the American Tract So- 
ciety, which in extent of operations, ranks next to your own ; they 
have also much pleasure in mentioning, that at New York a Ladies'* 
Auxiliary has recently been formed." To Virginia, 1,600 Tracts 
have been sent, hoping they might excite attention in that 
province. To Canada upwards of 20,000 Tracts have been for- 
warded, and to Halifax, in Nova Scotia, 11,000. Applications for 
Tracts have been made from Newfoundland, by a Captain in the 
Royal Navy stationed there, and some respectable Merchants in 
that Island, and your Committee have forwarded to them 54,000. 
The extensive and interesting regions of Asia have not been for- 
gotten. To the Missionaries of the London Missionary Society at 
Bellary, 32r earns of printing paper, and 15,000 English Tracts, 
have been forwarded. To the Societies at Serampore and Calcut- 
ta, 64 reams of paper, and 13,900 Tracts. To Madras, 32 reams of 
paper, and 12,500 Tracts. To the Missionaries of the Church Mis- 
sionary Society, and of the Methodist Missionary Society, at Cey- 
lon, 32 reams of paper, and 10,100 Tracts. The Missionaries pro- 
ceeding to Bombay, from the Church Missionary Society, have re- 
ceived a supply of Tracts ; and scarcely a vessel or a Missionary 
has sailed to any part of India without Tracts. To the Baptist 
-Missionaries at Bencoolen, 32 reams of paper have been sent. To 
the Missionary Station at Malacca, 32 reams of paper, and 6,500 
Tracts. Renewed exertions are making for China also, and the 
sum of 200Z. has been devoted for this cause. The total of grants to 
India and China, during the past year, amounts to more than 450/. 
Australasia has not been forgotten : convict and other ships, and 
settlers proceeding from London, and the out-ports, have been sup- 
plied with Tracts ; and a considerable quantity has been forward- 
ed to the ministers of the Colony, to form a Depot in New South 
Wales. 



152 AP*£ffr>ft. [10th rep. 

u In closing this detail of Foreign Operations, your Committee 
would earnestly call your attention to what remains to be done : — 
c light may have glanced upon a Continent, it may h? ve partially 
illumined an Island,' but it is only as the beams of the morning up- 
on the top of the mountains, — c darkness yet covers the nations, and 
gross darkness the people ; T but we may trust the day is at hand, 
and may even now say, c Arise t be enlightened, for thy light com- 
eth, and the glory of the Lord hath risen upon thee.'' Let us not 
be slothful in this work, but c fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.'' " 

DOMESTIC PROCEEDINGS. 

In Scotland, increased exertions for the circulation of Tracts have 
been made. During the past year the Tract Society at Edinburgh 
has purchased upwards of 200,000 of your publications, and has 
been active in taking measures for their sale and distribution ; not 
forgetting the importance of attention to hawkers and other itine- 
rant venders. Other Societies in Scotland are also proceeding. 
A considerable grant of Gaelic and English Tracts have been dis- 
tributed in the Highlands and Islands. The Religious Tract and 
Book Society for Ireland report, that during the past year 443,686 
Tracts have been sold, and 18,983 issued gratuitously, from their 
Depository, being one-fourth more than the issues of the former 
year. In addition to these, 30,585 books have been sold. A Tract 
Society has been formed, called the Cambrian Union, for promot- 
ing the cause in Wales. The Cross of Christ, and Poor Joseph, 
are already translated and published, and others are in progress. 
About twelve months since, an edition of Watts's Divine Songs 
was printed in Manx, which proved very acceptable. In the Isl- 
and of Guernsey a Tract Society is in operation, and has printed 
several Tracts in the French language. In the Scilly Isles, Tracts 
have been distributed from house to house, and affixed to the walls, 
which have proved exceedingly useful and acceptable. 

The total expense to the Society of gratuitous issues of Tracts, 
for the past year, amounts to $5,084, and the loss on Tracts and 
Broad Sheets sold to hawkers to upwards of $872. 

The establishment of forty Auxiliary Societies and Associations 
has been reported since the publication of the last Annual Report. 

From the following statement, it will appear that the Society is 
still extending its issues of Tracts. 

English Tracts issued this year . . 5,656,675 
Foreign ditto ditto . . 54,325 



5,711,000 
Issued last year . 5,222,471 



Increase . . 488,529 

To this increase of nearly half a million, must be added an in- 
crease also in the number of Children's Books of 97,275. The whole 
number issued since the formation of the Society exceeds 51,000.000. 



10th REP.] FOR.EISN CORRESPONDENCE. 153 

Extract of a Letter from the Lady of Rev. Dr. Henderson, St. Pe- 
tersburg, Russia, to a Female Friend in America, dated Bible So- 
ciety House, August 1, 1821, describing the way in which a sin- 
gle tract put in operation all the Bible Societies in Russia, and 
several of the adjoining countries, 

A mutual friendship subsisted between Mr. Henderson and our ex- 
cellent friend [Rev.Dr.]Paterson,in early life. The latter, having fin- 
ished his studies at Glasgow, was bent on labouring- as a missionary 
in India. He sought a companion and fellow-labourer; and Mr. Hen- 
derson being willing to devote himself to the same work, they em- 
barked together for Copenhagen,intending to proceed from that port. 
But war breaking out between England and Denmark, they were 
detained in that capital, and laboured in acquiring the language, 
translating and distributing Tracts, &c. It happened one day as 
they were in the royal gardens, that Henderson gave a Tract [The 
Great Question Answered. By Rev. JLndrew Fuller] to a young 
Physician, who passed by. He read it, and it made such an im- 
pression on his mind, that he wished to find who was the stranger 
that gave it to him. For this purpose he went to a patient, one of 
the Moravian Brethren, from whom he thought himself likely to ob- 
tain the information. This pious man rejoiced to find, that such 
measures were taking to evangelize his countrymen, and rested not 
till he found out the abode of Paterson and his friend, and introduc- 
ed himself to them. From this individual our young missionaries 
learned the deplorable state of Iceland, in respect to the distribu- 
tion of the Scriptures, and a correspondence was entered into with 
the Bible Society for supplying its inhabitants. This laid the 
foundation for our two friends being engaged in the service of the 
Bible Society, and consequently for all the blessings that have flow- 
ed, are still flowing, and, no doubt, will yet more abundantly flow, 
from the Societies now existing in Denmark, Sweden, Russia, Ice- 
land, — I was going to add, by anticipation, Turkey, Persia, &c. 
&c — See, my friend, what consequences may result from a single 
Tract ! 



Extract of a Letter from the Secretary of the ReUgious Tract Socie- 
ty of London, dated Jan. 20, 1824. 

Your highly esteemed communication of the 20th Sept. is now 
before me, and permit me to congratulate you on the important 
station the American Tract Society now occupies, and to present 
my most ardent wishes for its increased prosperity. The perusal of 
your excellent Report was productive of the most unfeigned grati- 
tude and thankfulness to the Almighty Giver of all good, for the 
evident manifestations of his divine approbation on the extensive la- 
bours of your Society. 

We observe with much satisfaction the attention you are mani- 
festing towards the Spanish population in America ; and this Com- 
mittee, desirous of strengthening your hands in this good work, re- 



154 APPENDIX. [10th REP. 

quest your acceptance of 10,500 Tracts in the Spanish language, 
which, we doubt not will soon obtain a speedy circulation, through 
your instrumentality. We have the pleasure also to forward you 
complete copies of all our publications. 

We are greatly obliged by your present of your Reports, copies 
of the Christian Almanack, and your other publications. This re- 
ciprocity of kindness and attention between kindred Institutions we 
are very desirous to cultivate, assured that the great cause in 
which we are privileged to be engaged, is promoted thereby. The 
general operations of this Society are extending on every side ; and 
our intelligence, from all quarters, is of the most animating nature. 
I apprehend, from present appearances, that our issues for the cur- 
rent year will be not far from seven millions. I solicit the favour 
of your future correspondence, praying that the blessing of the God 
of grace may rest on the Societies for which we mutually labour, 
and that the cause of our Lord and Saviour may speedily prevail 
throughout the universe. 



Extract of a Letter from the Secretary of the Prayer Book and Hom- 
ily Society, dated, London, Jan. 7, 1824. 

Having received your last Report, we have taken the opportu- 
nity, offered us by a parcel proceeding from the Religious Tract So- 
ciety, to inclose 1,000 select English Homilies, 4,000 Spanish 
do. 1,000 French do. and 500 copies of the Burial Service in French. 
You are probably not unacquainted with the Homilies composed 
by Cranmer, Ridley, and others, and know the sound, practi- 
cal, and truly evangelical character of the doctrines contained in 
them. We earnestly hope they may prove useful among the thou- 
sands in America, mentioned in your Report as destitute of spirit- 
ual instruction. We also forward you our Reports and specimens 
of our publications. These will explain to you our general views, 
and our earnest desire to promote the spiritual welfare of our fel- 
low men. May the great Head of the Church bless all the efforts 
that are now made, or ever shall be made, by those who love him, 
to make known his ways upon earth, and his saving health among 
all nations. 



From the Correspondent who communicated the interesting facts 
mentioned in the Report, page 145. 

Though I have circulated thousands of Tracts, furnished by Be- 
nevolent Societies and individuals, and at my own expense, in a 
dozen of the United States and in several other countries, in only one 
instance has the Tract I have presented been refused, and that be- 
cause it was supposed to be a political work. At one time, a little 
girl came running to beg u I would give her one of those nice little 
books. " As soon as she had received it, she added, " If you please 



10th REP.] DOMESTIC CORRESPONDENCE. 155 

do give me one for my school teacher — and one for another young- 
woman — and there is a young gentleman wanted I should get one 
for him too — and — " She was going on to ask for more, when I gave 
her a dozen, saying I was glad she wanted so many, and hoped the 
Lord would make them instrumental of salvation to all who should 
read them. 

A wagoner inquired if I could tell him where he could obtain 
such a little book as a man had picked up at the tavern below, 
u for," said he, u I looked over him, while he was reading, and 
would give aay money if I could get such a one." After ascertain- 
ing that he lived at a small village, half a dozen miles from the 
main road, and some hundred miles from any efficient Religious 
Tract Society, and was not favoured with the preaching of the 
Gospel, and had little access to books, I gave him 24 Tracts, de- 
siring him to loan them in turn to all his neighbours, believing they 
might be the means of great good to them. The man offered to pay 
the price of the books ; and I was afterwards sorry that I did not 
receive it, for the amount of Tracts sold may always be reserved 
to purchase the same quantity of Tracts again, and be the means 
of putting many in circulation. 

In crossing a ferry over the river Niagara, I was exceedingly pain- 
ed with the profane oaths of one of the ferrymen. 1 presented 
him a Tract, and said to him in a low tone of voice, and I believe 
with a true spirit of kindness, " When 1 cross again, at some fu- 
ture time, I hope you will be able to manage your boat without 
taking the Lord's name in vain.'" u I hope I shall be," said he, 
u for I know it is wrong, and I will try to improve by your advice. " 
One such reply is encouraging to him who desires to promote the 
love of God among his fellow men ; and I enjoyed the pleasure of 
hearing many such, in the frequent journies I have taken. 

In one instance, I gave some Tracts to a Tavern-keeper who was 
a professed Deist, and resting on his own good works for salvation. 
His promise, that he would read them has encouraged me to pre- 
sent Tracts in other instances, even when there is but little pros- 
pect, apparently, that good will result. 

At a village far from the Atlantic, where we held a prayer meet- 
ing, I gave several Tracts to the children who were present. The 
next morning eight or ten little girls came to attend family wor- 
ship, as I supposed ; but after this duty was over, I discovered that 
they came hoping I would give them Tracts. I gladly gave each 
of them one, and a few to carry tome to their friends ; but first 
gathered them around me and endeavoured to impress upon their 
minds the necessity of " remembering their Creator," and the im- 
portance of often repeating to themselves this sentence, " Thou 
God seest me." One of the dear children, who was about eight 
years old, came nearer to me and in a very affectionate manner in- 
quired, with tears in her eyes, u if I should return to that house in 
six weeks ?" Her appearance was such as led me to hold her to 
my heart, and converse with her further, for I hoped God was 



156 APPENDIX. [10th REP. 

about to bless to her the instructions I had given her, and the 
Tracts I had put in her hand. 

I will only add, that one of the most evident advantages of dis- 
tributing Tracts is the facility it affords for introducing the subject 
of religion, and the consequent watchfulness which such conversa- 
tion ought always to produce in the mind of every Christian, lest he 
should at any time, undo by his example what he has taught by 
precept. 



From a Missionary in a distant part of the United States. 
Having been for a year past, an eye witness of the desolations of 
Zion in a part of our beloved country, I feel that the work in 
which you are engaged, must excite in the breast of every friend 
of truth, the most ardent desires for your success. I have seen 
many children and youth, who are literally trained in the school 
of vice, who are scarcely allowed, much less encouraged, by their 
profligate Insti ucters, to read the Bible or any other religious book. 
I immediately attempted to gather them in Sabbath Schools, and 
succeeded in several villages far beyond my expectations : and it 
was on organizing these schools, that I felt especially, the want of 
Religious Tracts. I wrote to a friend in a large city, to procure 
me a considerable supply at my own expense ; stating the circum- 
stances in which I was placed, and the purposes to which I wish- 
ed to appropriate them. My letter was, however, communicated 
by him to pious friends, and a much larger quantity than I had 
requested, was gratuitously furnished. I found them very accept- 
able to almost all classes of people. One fact I consider well wor- 
thy the attention of the Committee, namely, that those Tracts which 
most pointedly condemned the most alarming and prevalent sins of 
the country were the most popular. Among these was the " Fatal 
Effects of Ardent Spirits." After reading this in a public meeting, 
one requested a copy and another, till my stock was entirely ex- 
hausted ; and many applications were made which I could not sup- 
ply. One citizen, who had been, till of late, a very respectable and 
valuable member of society, was hopefully reclaimed by this Tract 
from the destructive sin of intemperate drinking. The Tracts ac- 
complished all that I had anticipated, and more. They were all 
soon disposed of, and I regretted much that my supply of them had 
not been greater. The Christian Almanack was inquired after by 
many, with great interest ; and I believe if I had been supplied 
with them, 1 could have sold some hundreds in the field of my mis- 
sionary labour. 



From the Agent of a Depository lately established in Ohio. 
Since the Tracts arrived, I have used my best endeavours, by 
inserting notices in our county Newspaper, and in other ways, to 



10th REP.] DOMESTIC CORRESPONDENCE. 157 

circulate information of the existence of the Depository committed 
to my trust, and have been instrumental in forming a number of 
Auxiliaries. I have distributed your Reports extensively, and an 
Auxiliary is formed in every town where they have been sent. 
Through these Societies, the Tracts come within the reach of al- 
most every one, whether old or young", rich or poor. I have rea- 
son to hope that, by the blessing of Heaven, they will produce the 
most salutary effects. Yes, Sir, they have done this already. They 
have attended our public worship on the Sabbath, and have preach- 
ed, in a very pungent manner, the truths of the Gospel. They have 
attended our meetings for religious conference, and spoken the word 
of God faithfully. And they are silently preaching in almost every 
family ; and I have 
has not been in vain. 



From an Instructer among the Indians on the Penobscot, Me. 

I write to request the Committee of the American Tract Society 
to furnish the destitute people among- whom I have been labouring, 
with a quantity of Tracts for gratuitous distribution. Perhaps there 
are few places, where a part of the funds committed to the charge 
of the Society can be appropriated with a greater prospect of good. 
The tribe of Indians which Providence has located here, consists of 
nearly 300, who are deplorably ignorant ; and whose means of in- 
formation, both literary and religious, have been till lately extreme- 
ly limited. Happily, instruction is now furnished them by the be- 
nevolent, and there is a fair prospect that many of them will soon 
be able to read with facility. Religious Tracts are very gratefully 
received by them, and are eminently calculated to arrest their at- 
tention ; and could you furnish a supply, they would doubtless be 
productive of great good to children and to their parents, in the 
school and in the private family. 

There are also numbers of men employed, a great part of the 
year, in procuring lumber on the Penobscot and its branches. The 
business of these men leads them to retire into the forests, beyond 
the most remote settlements, far from their families, from the Sanc- 
tuary of God, and in too many instances, there is reason to fear, 
from his holy Sabbath and his precious Word. I can hardly con- 
ceive of any class of men to whom Religious Tracts promise great- 
er usefulness. Could Tracts be obtained, the temporary dwellings 
of these men might be furnished with them, and on the Sabbath, and 
at many other times, they could hardly fail of being read. And 
could the Benevolent, whose stores God has filled with earthly 
treasure, come and visit the moral desolations which I here behold, 
and which exist to a lamentable extent in other parts of our coun- 
try, I am sure the American Tract Society would no longer want 
means to disseminate thousands and millions of Tracts where there 
is so fair a prospect that they would furnish an abundant harvest 
to the glory of our Redeemer. 
14 



158 APPENDIX. [10th REP\ 

From a Correspondent. 
It would afford me a high degree of satisfaction, if in my power, 
to contribute any thing which might impress more generally on the 
Christian public, the deep conviction I have of the usefulness of 
Religious Tracts. This conviction is the result of personal experi- 
ence and observation, which have done more than to confirm all 
the arguments I have ever met with, in support of this Christian 
charity. I have, for some years, found it my privilege to keep by 
me, whether at home or abroad, a supply of the excellent publica- 
tions of the American Tract Society, and have had more real felic- 
ity in the evidences of pleasure and good which have resulted from 
their distribution, than in all other exertions I have made in the 
cause of benevolence. When I journey, I usually take with me a 
supply of Tracts, and in one instance, some years since, I made 
the distribution of them the main object of a somewhat extensive 
tour. They were received with avidity by persons of many reli- 
gious denominations, in the various places which I visited. In a 
considerable neighbourhood of Friends they were purchased with 
an eagerness which promised much good ; for I then thought, as I 
do now, that when the Society's prices can be obtained, the Tract 
is likely to be valued more highly, and to be more useful, than if 
presented gratuitously. 

Having considerable intercourse with Seamen, I have of late had 
much satisfaction in furnishing them with Religious Tracts. They 
are a class of men wno I believe are designed by the Lord to be of 
the first importance to the cause of Christ ; and Tracts are most 
generally received by them with apparent interest, and read with 
professed pleasure. 

From a Correspondent. 

A Clergyman in the state of New York, who always keeps on 
hand a supply of Tracts for distribution among his parishioners, 
was one day called upon by two little boys, one of whom request- 
ed, and received, a Tract. Perceiving from some expression of the 
other, (who belonged to a family noted for vice and irreligion,) 
that he was desirous of a similar present, he first inquired of him 
if he could read ; and on being answered in the negative, gave 
him also an appropriate Tract, with the express condition, that he 
should get his mother to read it to him. On the following Sab- 
bath, the clergyman was gratified by the unusual sight of the 
mother in the house of God, and soon after received an invitation 
to visit the family. Both the parents were found to be under con- 
cern for their salvation ; and eventually, by the change in their 
lives, gave evidence of a genuine change of heart. 

The conversion of this wicked family from the error of their ways, 
was distinctly to be traced to the influence of the Tract — and most 
seasonable was the visit of this messenger of mercy, for death was 
already at the door. Not long after the hopeful change in her char- 



10th REP.] FOREIGN CORRESPONDENCE. 159 

acter, the mother sickened and died ; but not without leaving great 
reason to hope that c her sins which were many, had been forgiven 
her.' Here then, may be seen that some contributor to the Tract 
Society, has been the instrument of ; saving a soul from death, and 
hiding a multitude of sins.' 

Extract of a Letter from the Secretary of the Liverpool Religious 
Tract Society, dated, Liverpool, 5th May, 1824. 

I have to acknowledge the receipt of your favour which came to 
hand about a fortnight since. 1 now forward you a packet con- 
taining the publications of the Liverpool Religious Tract Society, 
which are presented by the Committee as a token of their cordial 
approbation of the objects your Society proposes to itself — objects 
of the highest possible importance, since they affect not the tem- 
poral only, but the eternal interests of our fellow men. We have 
read your Reports at various periods, as they have been brought 
before us, and have, admired the zeal and patient continuance in 
well doing, of which your labours of love have given such satisfac- 
tory evidence. 

Since the alteration was made in the designation of your Society, 
your responsibility is, I dare say you are fully sensible, greatly, I 
might add, fearfully increased. The entire Union is now under 
your charge ; and with such a brilliant prospect before you as the 
London Religious Tract Society, our National Society, presents, 
of what may be effected by heaven-inspired and heaven-directed 
enterprise, we look with hope and confidence to your Committee, 
trusting you will u quit yourselves like men," u attempting great 
things, and expecting great things," in the full assurance that your 
labour in the Lord shall not be in vain. 

It will always afford our Committee pleasure to hear of the wel- 
fare of your Society, and still more to be able, if in ever so small a 
degree, to contribute to it. 

From the Rev. Messrs. Bird and Goodell, Missionaries to Western 
Jisia ; addressed to the Secretary of the New York Religious 
Tract Society. 

Dear Sir, Malta, Oct. 3, 1823. 

The Tracts with which the New York Religious Tract Society 
kindly furnished us, we found to be a very important addition to 
our means of usefulness in the Mediterranean. Those in Spanish 
were particularly so. Nearly two thousand of them in all we sent, 
at two different times, to Gibraltar, at the solicitation of a Commit- 
tee there, who act equally for the Bible, Missionary, Tract, and 
other Benevolent Societies of England. This Committee had daily 
opportunities of distributing* them in Gibraltar, or of conveying 
them into the interior of Spain, where a wide field was then open- 
ed for extensive and successful operation in this respect. Of these 



160 APPENDIX. 10th REP* 

opportunities the Committee had availed themselves, till their own 
stock was nearly or quite expended ; and very seasonable indeed 
was the supply, with which your liberality enabled us to furnish 
them, until their Depository could be replenished from England. 
Others of your Tracts we have put into the hand of the sailor, the 
soldier, the civilian, the gay, the rich, the profane, the child of ten 
years, and the man of grey hairs. Those that we have not yet dis- 
tributed we have placed at the disposal of a Tract Association, 
that has been formed in this city ; and from this we shall supply 
ourselves liberally for the tour, which (except we go to Palestine) 
we propose soon to take to Smyrna and the Greek Islands. Happy 
the missionary, u that hath his quiver full of these." When we 
have had serious conversation with a man, whether he be of the 
Greek or Roman Church, whether he be a scoffer at Religion, or 
be earnest in seeking it, we are always happy at parting, to give 
him a Tract for his perusal, and an assurance of an interest in our 
prayers. Scarcely has a week passed, since we have been here, 
in which persons have not called, generally on an appointed even- 
ing, to know what they should do to be saved. Many of these we 
have found exceedingly ignorant of the Scriptures and of religion ; 
and some of them, we trust, have received much light and know- 
ledge, not only from our conversation and preaching, but also from 
the Tracts which we have given them, and of which they have 
sometimes made grateful mention — so great a change has been 
wrought in a few soldiers, who were formerly abandoned to almost 
every vice, as to be observed, not only by their fellows, but their 
officers. This should inspire our hearts with thankfulness, and 
with renewed ardour in the cause of Him, who works by what in- 
struments he pleases. All the results of benevolent effort cannot 
be known in this world. May we learn to wait a while for our 
reward ; and in the mean time never " forget to do good and to 
communicate, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased." " In 
the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy 
hand," should be our motto ; and the reason annexed, u For thou 
knowest not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whether 
they both shall be alike good," should be our encouragement. 



EXTRACT FROM THE TWENTY FOURTH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE 
RELIGI0T7S TRACT SOCIETY OF LONDON. 

From a Letter of the Rev. J. Hands, communicated to the Bellary 
•Auxiliary Tract Society, giving an account of the distribution of 
Tracts in tivo long journeys in India. 

On arriving, in the morning, at the place where I intended to 
halt for the day, as soon as I had taken a little refreshment, I gen- 
erally inquired whether there was a school in the town, or not ; if 
answered in the affirmative, I requested to be conducted to it, and 



10th REP.] FROM THE LONDON REPORT. 161 

rafter some conversation with the Master and scholars, calculated 
to disarm their prejudices and gain their good will, 1 presented a 
Tract to the Master or one of the scholars, which I requested him 
to read aloud. While this was reading-, the visit of an Englishman 
to the school generally excited the attention of the people of the 
town, so much as to draw together a great number of its inhabit- 
ants. During the reading, I frequently stopped the reader for a 
time, that I might explain and improve what had been read ; and 
when the reading was over, I made the subject of the Tract mat- 
ter of discourse for some time, which I concluded by distributing 
Tracts among those who could read, and inviting the people to ac- 
company me to the Choultry, where I would give them more 
books, and tell them more about the way of salvation. Frequent- 
ly, a crowd accompanied me, and in several towns, the places I 
occupied were thronged almost the whole of the day, which was 
spent in reading the Tracts, or a portion of the Sacred Scriptures, 
and explaining them to the people : and thus endeavouring to 
make them acquainted with the Great God, and Jesus Christ 
whom he hath sent. 

By these means, and by treating all with kindness and respect, 
I generally succeeded in removing prejudice and fear ; and in 
those towns where there were many persons who could read, al- 
ways found much larger demands for books than my stock, though 
at first considerable, would allow me to supply. 

In some places, such was the eagerness of the people to obtain 
Tracts, that they were almost torn out of my hands. I was often 
•delighted by seeing the poor people, after they had received a 
number of these little instructers, withdrawing a short distance, 
and sitting 'down in little groups of eight or teYi persons, one read- 
ing, while the others attentively listened. At several towns, where 
I had distributed all that I had allotted for that place, and was 
leaving it to proceed on another stage, persons ran after the Palan- 
quin, and would not return till they had obtained a book. 

In several visits to the large Native City of Bangalore, after ad- 
dressing the people in the schools or Bazar, the Tracts were sought 
after with such eagerness, that I was sometimes obliged to desist 
from giving more, to prevent their being torn by the multitude of 
hands that were stretched out to receive them ; and more than 
once, I was followed home, (a distance of two miles,) to obtain a 
Tract. Since that time, a few pious individuals at Bangalore, 
have hired a shop in the Bazar, which they have stored with 
Tracts, in various languages, for sale, at a low price. Numbers 
of the Natives flock there to read them, and many have been in- 
duced to purchase them. 

Having received another good supply from Beilary, while at 
Bangalore, I distributed a great number on the road from thence 
to Sermgapatam ; and during my stay of three weeks at the latter 
place, where I was daily occupied in conversing and preaching to 
the natives and others, I distributed some hundreds more. Many 
14* 



162 APPENDIX. [10th REP. 

read them, apparently with much attention, and some came fre- 
quently to my dwelling", to ask the meaning" of things in the Tracts, 
which they could not understand. My hopes were much excited 
by one man, who professed to have been much impressed by read- 
ing the Memoir of Petumber Sing, one of the Serampore Chris- 
tians. He seemed, in many respects, a character similar to that? 
of Petumber Sing before his conversion. The man was with us 
daily, read all our Tracts, and much of the New Testament ; pro- 
fessed to be fully convinced of the truth and excellence of Chris- 
tianity, and expressed much concern to obtain salvation. When I 
was leaving Seringapatam, he wished much to accompany me, and 
said, if I would allow him, he would support himself; but as I 
had a long journey and a voyage before me, I persuaded him to 
remain at home for the present, and, in a few months, pay us a 
visit at Bellary. I hope, at some future time, we shall see or hear 
something more of this poor man, and that it will be found he did 
not read our Tracts in vain. 

While at Seringapatam I was not a little gratified by a respecta- 
ble country-born young man coming to me, and requesting me to 
accept of six Rupees, as a donation to the Bellary Tract Society. 
I had met with him once before at Cauverypank, and had given 
him a few Tracts, with a copy of Doddridge's Rise and Progress, 
and he told me he had derived so much advantage from the Tracts 
I had given him, that he felt himself bound to do something to 
support the Society. He gave me also, quite unsolicited, a simi- 
lar sum, for the Bellary Branch Bible Society. 

The following is the translation of part of a letter, received from 
one of the Schoolmasters, whose school I visited in my last jour- 
ney : — 6 You desired me to make known your good books to my 
children : I have acted agreeably to your request, and taught 
them the First Catechism. Now, many of the people in our village, 
speaking of your Scripture, say, This is the true Shaster, and are 
much pleased with it. Several are now studying, saying, that if 
they become well acquainted with its contents, they shall find the 
way of salvation, and obtain every blessing. We are thinking of 
you morning, noon, and night ; and We hope you will do something" 
to assist in the education of our children.' 

In these journies, thousands of Tracts have been put in circula- 
tion, and much of the seed of Divine Truth scattered abroad. May 
the sacred influences of the Spirit, like the refreshing rains of heav- 
en, descend and render it fruitful ! It has been sown with much la- 
bour, and many prayers ; may it produce an abundant harvest, to 
the glory of God I 



Distribution of Tracts in India, by Rev, W. Reeve. From the 

Bellary Report, 
The Rev. W. Reeve, in distributing your Tracts at the last 
Humpee Festival, had a fine field for the labours of Christian be- 



10th REP.] FROM THE LONDON REPORT. 163 

nevolence, which, with the cultivation and tillage of succeeding 
years, we would trust, will ultimately become u white unto the 
harvest. M Thousands and thousands, assembled from all parts of 
the country, on that occasion, have, through your means, heard the 
words of eternal life. The throngs that came together, to receive 
the fruits of your liberality, were immense ; subsequent to every 
distribution might be seen, in various directions, almost as far as 
the eye could reach, groups of people, composed of men, women, 
and children, sitting at the doors of their tents, reading aloud, for 
the instruction and edification of each other, these interesting mes^ 
sages of peace and mercy to a guilty world. If every application 
had been attended to, 10,000, instead of 1,000, would have been 
insufficient to meet their importunity. 



From a Correspondent in Nova Scotia. ■ 

Some time ago, I lent the Tract, entitled Conversation in a 
Boat, to a respectable farmer, who was here on business, from a 
remote part of the country; he was a pious and intelligent man* 
Some time afterwards he called to see me, and apologized for not 
returning the Tract, and told me, that he had in his establishment 
in the country, an a°"ed servant, who h^d been many years at sea, 
and had contracted the vile habit of profane swearing. His master 
had tried every experiment, but in vain, to convince him of the sin- 
fulness of his conduct, and almost despaired of his reformation, when 
one day, going unexpectedly into a room where he was sitting, he 
saw him bathed in tears, reading the Tract, and never afterwards 
found him guilty of swearing ; there was also a reformation in his 
conduct in other respects. 

That excellent Tract, The Swearer's Prayer, I have also 
found very useful. In one instance, a pious young Schoolmaster 
writes thus : " You gave me a number of Tracts, among which was 
The Swearer's Prater. I had in my School a boy, who habit- 
ually made use of profane language. I made many efforts to reclaim 
him, by inflicting various punishments, but in vain. I directed all 
my Scholars not to associate with him, on any occasion, lest he 
should corrupt them, and had almost determined to exclude him 
from the School ; this enraged him so violently, that I was at a loss 
w T hat to do. One day, about twelve months since, while I was re- 
monstrating with him, it occurred to me, that to make him learn 
The Swearer's Prayer, by heart, might have a good effect ; I 
therefore gave it to him on Saturday, to commit to memory. On 
the Monday following, he came to School with a dejected counte- 
nance, and I was convinced there was an outward sign of inward 
sorrow — his tongue faltered while repeating some of his task, and 
tears of contrition ran down his cheeks* I was affected very much 
at the sudden change in this boy, to see what the Lord can do by the 
simplest means. I asked his elder brother, lately, whether he had 
s-rorn since ? — he replied, ; No ; — I think The Swearer's Pray- 



164 APPENDIX. [10th REP. 

er has cured him of shearing, and he has been more obedient to his 
parents since he got it, than he ever was before.^ I can truly say, 
that I have not a better behaved lad, among- my forty Scholars, 
than he has been during the last year." 



From the Rev, Dr. Pinkerton, St. Petersburg. 

It will afford pleasure to hear, that during- the past year, the cir- 
culation of Religious Tracts in the Russian Empire has not been 
neglected. The number of copies printed, of near one hundred dif- 
ferent Tracts, in St. Petersburg and Moscow, through the benevo- 
lent instrumentality of pious individuals, since the year 1812, has 
been about 600,000. The most of these are now in the hands of all 
classes of the people, in every province of the Empire. None have 
-shown more zeal in this distribution, than several of the Russian 
Prelates, and a few distinguished nobles. Incalculable is the ben- 
efit which will arise from the perusal of these publications by the 
people, among whom, before their appearance, works of this kind, 
treating of moral and religious subjects, written in the common lan- 
guage of the Russians, and printed in the civil character, were al- 
most unknown. In very many instances they have led the readers 
to seek to obtain copies of the Holy Scriptures ; and they have been 
read with peculiar delight by the Russian Military, especially by 
the Kazaks. " These Tracts," writes a correspondent, from the 
shores of the Caspian, u I trust have not been distributed in vain. 
I have often seen the Soldiers in small companies, and overheard 
them, in their dwellings below ground, reading Tracts or the Bi- 
ble." Another correspondent, residing near the mountains of Cau- 
casus, says, u The Tracts have been circulated far and wide in the 
country around, as Mr. • , who travelled much about in the 
course of last summer, sold nearly all that he had with him ; and 
disposed of many of them at Mozdak, Kitzlaer, &c. ; and there is 
every reason to believe, that these small publications are perused 
with diligence by those who receive them." 

From the Master of a Merchant Vessel employed in the 
Baltic Trade, Nov. 1822. 

On my clearing at the Sound, I distributed about 110 Tracts in 
Danish, and 40 in the English language. On my arrival at Me- 
mel, I generally carried a quantity of Tracts, in the German lan- 
guage, in my pocket ; at this place I distributed 270. When I re- 
turned to Hull, finding my stock of Tracts low, I applied to a friend 
there for a fresh 3upply, and he gave me about 50 in German. On 
going ashore at Elsinore, during my second voyage, one of the boat- 
men said to me, " Oh, Sir, I hope you have some little books ; I 
will buy some." I replied I had not any to sell, but gave him two. 
On my coming out of the Custom House, I was surrounded by the 
people, saying, " This is the Captain that has the little books," and 



10th REP.] FROM THE LONDON REPORT. 165 

my pockets were soon cleared. Some of them said, u Have you 
any more on board ? — We will come for them." They did so, and 
I gave them about 30. The wind being fair, we did not come to 
anchor. 

On my arrival at Memel, a gentleman of some respectability came 
to me, and said, u Captain, 1 want you." I stepped aside with him, 
and with tears in his eyes he thanked me. I asked him for what. 
" Oh," said he, u that book — that good bcok you gave me J It told 
me to read my Bible — I have done so, and 1 find I must believe in 
Jesus Christ, or 1 shall be miserable for ever." I told him that Je- 
sus Christ offered to make him happy, for he came to save sinners, 
such as he said he was, and was ready to save him. 

This gentleman was very intimate in a family to which my busi- 
ness called me, and I perceived that he had been exhorting them all 
to seek happiness in Christ ; and I have reason to believe that what 
he had said was not in vain, for I saw a visible change in their man- 
ner, by his exhortations, and the Tracts I had given them before. 
They now revered the Sabbath day, which is, in that country, aw- 
fully profaned. Others also came inquiring for more Tracts ; and 
a very respectable merchant promised that he would have 500 cop- 
ies printed of all the different Tracts I had given him. 



From a Clergyman in England. 

A few weeks ago, I was passing through G , and, while I 

was waiting at the Inn for a conveyance, my feelings were much 
pained by the dreadful oaths and curses of a man in the next room. 
I bore with this some time, but at last could endure it no long- 
er. Taking The Swearer's Prater in my hand, I approached 
the man, and looking very seriously at him, I said, " I heard you 
pray just now, did not I ?" — " Me pray, Sir," replied the man, 
with a confused and astonished look, as if it was the first time he 
had ever had such a charge brought against him : M Me pray, Sir ! 
what did I pray for ?" — u For Damnation," I replied ; " and I have 
got a copy of your prayer in my hand ; if you wish to see it, I will 
give it you." Accordingly the man accepted the book : his tone 
and his manners were immediately softened, and his language ma- 
terially changed. — A short time ago, I was travelling in one of the 

steam packets to L , and after some time, I went into another 

room, where I found all the passengers vacant and unemployed, ex- 
cept two men who were sitting in the corner playing at cards ; af- 
ter having furnished each of the party with a Tract, except the 
card-players, I ventured to address one of them, and asked him if 
he would accept of some of my cards. u Yes," said he, with per- 
fect good nature, M that I will ; and I will lay my cards down, and 
read yours." His companion followed his example ; and I had 
the satisfaction of perceiving, when I left the room, that not only 
had the Tracts prevailed above the cards, but also that the persons 
who were before lounging away their time in a listless and unprof? 



166 APPENDIX. [10th REP. 

itable manner, were now busily, and I would hope, usefully em- 
ployed, in reading important and interesting truths. 



From the Address of a Clergyman at the Anniversary of the Boston 
(Eng.} Auxiliary Religious Tract Society. 

Some months ago, I had occasion to visit a remote part of my 
parish, the inhabitants of which live at too great a distance (eleven 
miles) to attend their Parish Church. After preaching to them, I 
distributed a number of Tracts to the people that were assembltd, 
and they received them with the greatest avidity and thankfulness. 
It so happened, that The Swearer's Prayer fell into the hands 
of a notorious swearer, and one that was addicted to almost every 
kind of gross immorality. It pleased God to bless the reading of 
this Tract, and to apply it to the man's heart ; he was not only 
convinced of the sin of swearing in particular, but of all his other 
sins ; he felt them u as a heavy burden, too heavy for him to bear," 
and he was thus led to the " Lamb of God that taketh away the 
sin of the world." He now regularly attends the ordinances of God, 
which before he as regularly neglected; and is, I understand, a 
consistent, and sober, and upright character. In consequence of a 
blessing from above attending the perusal of this single Tract, the 
drunkard has become sober, the profane has become devout, the 
swearer has learned to fear an oath, and he that profaned the Sab- 
bath has now a delight in its holy services, and has been taught to 
hallow that sacred day. 



Extract Df a Letter from M . Jan. 9, 1823. 

One of our Tracts fell, some time ago, into the hands of a young 
woman, living four miles off, who, I believe, had never heard the 
Gospel. The perusal of the Tract was made the means of awak- 
ening her to a sense of her danger as a sinner, and directing her to 
a Saviour^, she was in an ill state of health, and after lingering 
some time in a consumption, she died happy in the Lord. 

The liberal present of Tracts was very acceptable and seasona- 
ble ; two of our young men are now beating through the drifted 
snow, with part of them in their hands. I found a poor old man, 
who had lived, to the age of fourscore, a life of the greatest iniqui- 
ty, abandoned to every vice — struggling in all the horrors of black 
despair. He spurned all consolation, refused to join in prayer, or 
listen to the promises of God's holy word, and even told me, he 
would gladly, by an act of suicide, if permitted, leap into hell at 
once. Our Tract Distributors were unwearied in their endeavours 
to direct his views to the " Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin 
of the world ;" and while thus engaged, in their last visit, a pleas- 
ing change took place ; the storm was abated, he began to pray for 
mercy ; thus He, who once stilled the roaring of the tempest, in 
like manner said to the tempest in his soul,, " Peace ! be still !"— 



10th REP*] FROM THE LONDON REPORT. 167 

He lived a few days afterwards — -the storm was succeeded by a 
calm ; his breath was no more employed in uttering" the language 
of blasphemy and d<;spair, but in ardent prayer and humble praise. 
He lived till the following- Saturday, in a comfortable frame of mind, 
and while sitting in his arm-chair, by the fire-side, he calmly pass- 
ed from time to eternity. 



Letter J rom a friend at E . July, 1822. 

In April last, I visited the Workhouses in this place, in order to 
converse and leave Tracts with the poor creatures living in them, 
and found in one of them a wretched old man, more than seventy 
years of age, and lame and blind ; but for violence of temper and 
profane swearing, he was proverbial. I talked with all I found in 
the house, but chiefly with Old William ; having previously been 
informed of his character, I enlarged on the enormity of profane 
swearing, and read to them The Swearer's Prayer, making re- 
marks on each part separately. Fully to describe the attention of 
the poor creatures, especially of old William, is impossible : — 

Tracts were unknown in B Poorhouse, the inmates of which 

were exceedingly depraved. After reading the Tract, and giving 
them others, I read the third chapter of John, and prayed with 
them. The matron also was present ; the greatest seriousness per- 
vaded their minds, and old William, instead of offering any rude- 
ness, as he usually did when spoken to on religious subjects, had 
taken off his hat, an 1 mentioned his lameness as an apology for his 
inability to kneel with us. I told them that I would come again, 
which I did ; when they said, that they thought it a long time 
since I w r as there before. Every one was astonished that Blind 
William had left off ^wearing, and I was told, that during the fort- 
night, he had not been heard to utter one oath. 



JL Letter to the Rev. J. Clayton, Jun. read by him at the Annual 
Meeting, May 16, 1823. 

Rev. Sir, 

The writer requests you to mention his case, (for the encourage- 
ment of others,) at tie Annual Meeting of the Religious Tract So- 
ciety. The enclosed Tracts, (Friejvdly Conversation and Sin 
no Trifle,) were placed in the writer's hands, about three years 
since, by a female friend, when he was on a visit at her house. He 
received them, and put them in his pocket, and thought no more of 
them for a long time, but they came again to his view unexpected- 
ly, and were rt,ad with attention ; — they led to self-examination, 
and to a regard of the Sabbath-day — to an attendance on a preach- 
ed Gospel — and to the establishment of family worship in his house. 
He considers himself bound to offer some acknowledgment of his 
obligation to that excellent Society, through whose means he was 
first awakened to a knowledge of his own sinfulness ; he has there- 



168 APPENDIX. [10th REP. 

fore enclosed a small donation, (five pounds,) to its funds ; and, 
through you, pledges himself to aid the Institution by his example, 
influence, and prayers for its success and prosperity. 



From a Minister in the Country, (Eng.*) 

At N I was assisted in my labours, one Sabbath, (being en- 
gaged in six services that day,) by a person whose prayers were truly 
scriptural and devout, and whose conduct is, I believe, exemplary. 
In the course of the day, while looking at some Tracts, The Swear- 
er's Prayer met his eye ; — u There," said he, u is the instrument 
of my conversion ! 1 was one of the most reprobate swearers, when 
that Tract was put into my hand \ — I read and trembled, and fled 
to Christ as my Refuge from the wrath to come." 



From a Friend who distributes Tracts on the Hirer Tliames. 

Respecting our Seamen I am happy to say the work goes on well, 
and 1 always enjoy meeting with them at their prayer-meetings. I 
sometimes read over the first letter I had the pleasure of writing 
you on their behalf; and when I reflect on the amazing good that 
has resulted from it, I cannot but see the finger of God. Then, it 
was like the grain of mustard seed ; now, it is like a great tree 
yielding both shade ^.rA fruit. Then it was like the rloud the size 
of a man's hand ; now it has spread over the shores of England. — • 
America has caught the flame, and is now leading her seamen to 
the feet of Jesus. In Spanish America the flag has invited sailors 
to worship God ; and English seamen now hoist the signal for wor- 
ship in the ports where papal superstition abounds. 

The Lord has raised up instruments to carry on this work ; but I 
will venture to say, that without the liberal grants of the Religious 
Tract Society, not one half that has been done would have been 
effected. The sailors acknowledge the fact, and earnestly pray 
for you. They are becoming Missionaries in every port they visit. 
They are constantly applying for Tracts when they go on foreign 
voyages, and had I double the number which you have been so 
kind as to supply me with, I could find channels to distribute them, 
'where they are likely to be of essential benefit. 



1824] TENTH REPORT. 169 

OFFICERS, 

ELECTED, MAY 26, 1824. 

Hon. WILLIAM REED, President. 

Rev. MOSES STUART, Vict President. 

Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS, Corresponding Secretary. 

Rev. RICHARD S. STORRS, Recording Secretary. 

AMOS BLANCHARD, Esa. Treasurer. 

SAMUEL FARRAR, Esa. Auditor. 
Mr. WILLIAM A. HALLOCK, Assistant Secretary. 

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE. 

Rev. JOHN H. CHURCH, D. D. 
Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS. 
Rev. JOHN CODMAN, D. D. 
Rev. WARREN FAY. 

AMOS BLANCHARD, Esa. 



State of the Society's Funds. 

Balance due from the Society, May 1, 1823 . . $ 927,39 

Expense of paper, printing-, &c from May 1, 1823, ) c APia cf> 

to May 1, 1824 ..... \ M™,58 

9,403,97 
Received, from May 1, 1823, to May I, 1824. 
Donations, premium on Christian Almanack, &c 4,195,01 

From the Agents of the General Depository for Tracts ) . t , A 
sold, &c \ 4 ' 1J4 > 



86 



8,309,87 

Balance due from the Society, May 1, 1824, . . 1,094,10 

Amos Blanchard, Treasurer. 

15 



AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

June, 1824. 



MAINE. 



Augusta 


Hampden 


Portland 


Brooks and Jackson 


Harpswell 


Chapel 


Brunswick 


Jackson 


Prospect 


Patd-H Pnl 


Limerick 


Waterford & Vicinity 




Gorham 


North Yarmouth 


Wiscasset 


Hallo well 


Parsonsfield 






NEW HAMPSHIRE 


i 


Acworth 


Dover 


Marlborough 


Alexandria 


Enfield 


Meredith & Guilford 


Alstead 


Fishersfield 


Merrimac 


Andover 


Fitzwilliam 


Nelson 


Atkinson 


Gilsum 


Orford 


Bedford 


Hampstead 


Pelham 


Boscawen 


Hancock 


Richmond 


Bradford 


Haverhill 


Rindge 


Bridge water 


Hillsborough 


Roxbury 


Burton 


Hinsdale 


Salisbury 


Campton 


Hopkinton 


Stoddard 


Campton 


Jaffrey 


Stratham 


Canterbury- 


Fern. 


Sullivan 


Chester, W. Par. 


Keene 


Swanzey 


Chester, E. Par. 


Kensington 


Troy 


Chesterfield 


Kingston 


Unity 


Chichester 


Langdon 


Walpole 


Columbia 


Lebanon 


Washington 


Concord 


Lempster 


Wilton 


Cornish 


Loudon 

VERMONT. 




Barnet 


Corinth 


Manchester 


Barre 


Cornwall 


Peacham 


Barton 


Danville 


Pomfret 


Braintree 


Franklin 


Rockingham 


Brandon 


Hartford 


Royalton 


Brattleborough 


Hubbardston 


Rutland 


Chelsea 


Jamaica 


Rutland, W. Par. 



AUXILIARY SOCIETIES. 



171 



St. Albans 


Sudbury, Fern. 


Waitsfield 


Salisbury 


Thetford 


Wallingford 


Springfield 


Tunbridge 


Windham 


Sudbury 


MASSACHUSETTS. 




Amherst, W. Par. 


Hanover 


Palmer 


Amherst, E. Par. 


Hardwick 


Petersham 


Ashby 


Hatfield 


Pittsfield 


Ashfield 


Haverhill 


Plainfield 


Bedford 


Hinsdale 


Prescott 


South Boston 


Holden 


Provincetown 


Braintree 


Hopkinton 


Reading 


Buckland 


Leominster 


Rochester 


Canton 


Ludlow 


Sheffield 


Chelmsford 


Maiden 


Shelburne 


Cohasset 


Marblehead 


South Hadley Canal 


Conway 


Marlborough 


Spencer 


Cummington 


Medford 


Sunderland 


Dartmouth 


Medway 


Townsend 


Dedham 


Methuen 


Truro 


Dedham, S. Par. 


Middleborough 


Upton 


Deerfield 


&l Taunton 


West Boylston 
Westford 


Dunstable 


Middlefield 


East Bridgewater 


Middleton 


Western 


Fitchburg 


Milford 


Weston 


Framingham 


New Braintree 


Whately 


Gloucester 


Newbury 


Williamsburgh 


Goshen 


Northbridge 


Winchendon 


Grafton 


Orleans 


Worcester 


Greenfield 


Oxford 


Worthington 


Halifax 


RHODE ISLAND. 

Newport 

CONNECTICUT. 




Brooklyn 


Lebanon 


North Woodstock 


Cornwall 


Norwich 


South Woodstock 


Danbury 


NEW YORK. 




Greenbush 


Jamaica 
PENNSYLVANIA. 


Onondaga Hollow 


Greensburgh Holme sburg 




OHIO. 




Aurora 


Grafton 


Steubenville 


Cadiz 


Liverpool 


Strongsville 


Elyria 


Medina 


Fern. 



*£* Whole number of Auxiliaries, 205, 



DONATIONS, 

DURING THE FIRST TEN YEARS, APPROPRIATED TO THE KEEPING OV 
PARTICULAR TRACTS IN PERPETUAL CIRCULATION, OR FOR OTHER 
SPECIFIED PURPOSES. 

For No. 74, Great Effects, &c. Collected by Rev. Cyrus 

Kingsbury, 1816 54,34 

For. No. 130, Richmond Alarm, E. W. 1820 - - 20,00 

For No. 107, Little Henry and his Bearer, Ladies in Spring- 

fxeld, Mass. 1820 7,00 

For No. 9, Dairyman's 'Daughter, Ladies in Dedham, 

Mass. 1820 55,76 

Friend, 1S21 5,00 

For No. 142, Francis Newport, 1821 - 10,00 

For No. 150, Swearers Prayer, Miss Betsey Cleaveland, 

Andover, Mass. 1820 20,00 

R. D. Muzzey, M. D. Hanover, N. H. 1821 - - 20,00 

For No. 23, God the Only Refuge, Friends, 1821 - 15,00 

For No. 133, Conversion of Mrs. Emerson, Mrs. Margaret 

Douglass, Natchez, Miss, by Legacy, 1823 - - 100,00 

F. C. 1823 - - - - - . 30,00 

John Parker and others, Maiden, Mass. 1823 - - 21,00 

For No. 169, Harriet Newell, Benjamin Greenleaf, Brad- 
ford, Mass. by his pupils, 1824 - 20,00 
Other Individuals, 1824 13,25 

For a Tract on the Duties of Guardians and Wards. An 

Old Judge of Probate, 1824 100,00 

For Conversion of Elisabeth Bartlet, Mrs. John Hall, El- 
lington, Conn, by Legacy, 1824 - - - - 20,00 

For a Tract to Guard Youth against Intemperance. In- 
dividuals, 1823 and 1824 24,00 

For printing Tracts in India, Homes & Homer, Boston, 

Mass. 1823 50,00 

Friend, profits on 6,000 Christian Almanack, 1824 - 35,00 

Misses Bracket, Greenland, N. H. 1824 - - - 2,00 

For Printing Tracts at Malta. Moses Ordway, Loudon 

N. H. 1823 ---.---- 1,00 

Mrs. William Thurston, Boston, Mass. 1824 - - 20,00 

For Tract in behalf of the Jews. Miss Sally Crosby, 

Brookfield, Mass. 1821 20,00 

For Tract for American Education Society. Friend - 20,00 



ILtet of 3Se#ostto*ieg* 



Flagg & Gould, Agents of General Depository, Astdover, Mass. 



MAINE. 
Bangor, Charles Plummer. 
Bath, Henry Hyde. 
Belfast, Rev. Charles Soule. 
Brunswick, James H. Mills. 
Fryeburg, Rev. Carlton Hurd. 
Hallowell, Gow & Lincoln. 
Kennebunk, Owen Burnham. 
Lubec, Dennis Garland. 
Norridgewock, Rev. Josiah Peet. 
Portland, William Hyde. 
Thomaston, Rev. J.H. Ingraham. 
Waldoboro\ Rev.D. M. Mitchell. 
Waterville, George W. Osborne. 

NEW HAMPSHIRE. 
Amherst, Rev. Nathan Lord. 
Concord, John W. Shepard. 
Dover, Asa A. Tufts. 
Exeter, Mary Haliburton. 
Francestown, Mary Fairbanks. 
Hanover, Benjamin Perkins. 
Haverhill George Woodward. 
Ktene, Abijah Kingsbury. 
Plainfield, Levi Bryant. 
Plymouth, John Ward. 
Portsmouth, T. H. Miller. 

VERMONT. 
Brattleborough, Alex. Putnam. 
Brownington, Jasper Robinson. 
Burlington, Anson Bowman. 
Danville, Augustine Clark. 
Manchester, Rev. H. A. Parsons. 
Middlebury, E. Brewster & Co. 
Montpelier, Warren Swift. 
Rutland, James D. Butler. 
St. Albans, Horace Janes, Esq. 
Windsor, Nathan Coolidge. 

MASSACHUSETTS. 
Beverly, Israel Trask. 
Boston, Samuel T. Armstrong. 
Greenfield, A. Phelps. 

15* 



Haverhill, James Gale. 
Lenox, John G. Stanley. 
Newburyport, Charles Whipple. 
Northampton, Dea. E. S. Phelps. 
Plymouth, Ezra Collier. 
Salem, Whipple & Lawrence. 
Springfield, Col. S. Warriner. 
Williamstown, Chester Balch. 

RHODE ISLAND. 
Providence, John Hutchins. 

CONNECTICUT. 
Bridgeport, Lock wood & Sterling. 
Chelsea, Robinson & Dunham. 
Hartford, Charles Hosmer. 
New Haven, Dea. N. Whiting. 
Pomfret, Rev. James Porter. 
Tolland, Elisha Stearns. 
NEW YORK. 
Albany, George J. Loomis. 
Angelica, Rev. Robert Hubbard. 
Brownville, Rev. Phineas Smith. 
Brutus, Rev. Charles Yale. 
Buffalo, Abner Bryant. 
Cat skill, Henry Hyde. 
Casenovia, Luther Burnell. 
Champlain, Rev.Joseph Labaree. 
Columbus, Isaac Jones, Jr. 
Geneva, Perez Hastings. 
Homer, William H. Arnell. 
Hudson, Ira C. Baldwin. 
Jay, Rev. Henry Slater. 
Johnstown, Rev. Elisha Yale. 
Lewiston, Rev. David M. Smith. 
Little Falls, Rev. S. W. Burritt. 
Malone, Rev. Ashbel Parmelee. 
Martinsburg, Rev. D. Kimball. 
New Haven, Rev. W. Williams. 
New York, Gray & Bunce. 
Ogdensburg, David R. Strachan. 
Onondaga, 
Plattsburgh, Rev. S. Whelpley. 



174 



LIST OF DEPOSITORIES. 



Rochester, Everard Peck. 
Saratoga, Rev. D. O. Griswold. 
Utica, Merrell & Hastings. 

NEW JERSEY. 
New Brunswick, S. Seymour. 

PENNSYLVANIA. 
Erie, Ebenezer D. Gunnison. 
Harrisburg, Alexander Graydon 
Meadville, Rev. T. Alden, D. D. 
Pittsburgh, Rev. R. Patterson. 

DELAWARE. 
Wilmington, Robert Porter. 
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA. 
•Alexandria, J. & A. Douglass. 
Georgetown, Robert Ober. 

VIRGINIA. 
Fredericksburg, W. Kellogg, Esq 
Norfolk, John jVPPhail. 
Petersburg, Joseph Thayer. 
Richmond, Nathan Pollard. 
Staunton, Joseph Cowan. 

NORTH CAROLINA. 
Chapel Hill, Prof. E. Mitchell. 
Edenton, Thomas Brownrigg. 
Fayetteville, James B. Cochran. 
Oxford, Joseph Lindsey. 
Raleigh, William Shaw. 
Staiesville, Rev. D. Gould. 
SOUTH CAROLINA. 
Charleston, H. C. McLeod. 



GEORGIA. 

Savannah, Edward Coppee, 

ALABAMA. 
Huntsville, Samuel Hazard, Esq* 
Mobile, Rev. John B. Warren. 

TENNESSEE. 
Knoxville, Rev. D. A. Sherman. 
Nashville, Dr. R. P. Hayes. 

KENTUCKY. 
Bowling Green, Alex. Graham. 
Danville, Rev. Thomas Hand. 
Elkton, Rev. Wm. K. Stewart. 
Lexington, Rev. Mr. Ward. 
Louisville, Thomas Jones. 

OHIO. 
Chillicothe, Rev. R. G. Wilson* 
Cincinnati, Thomas L. Paine. 
Columbus, O. & S. Crosby. 
Hudson, Rev. William Hanford. 
Marrietta, Mrs. B. Putnam. 
Norwalk, Henry Buckingham. 
Steubenville, Rev. C. C. Beatty. 
Strongsville, Nathan Brittan, Esq* 
Vernon, Rev. Harvey Coe. 
Warren, William Williams. 

MISSOURI. 
St. Louis, Rev. S. Giddings. 

MICHIGAN TERRITORY. 
Detroit, John I. Derning. 
Green Bay, Maj. Matthew Irvin. 



Whole number of Depositories, 122. 



PUBLICATIONS 



OF THE 



atmerfniu ®ract Society 



JVo. VOL. I. Pages. 

1. Constitution, Address, &c. 24 

2. The Work of the Holy 

Spirit. By Rev. Robert 
Hall, A. m. 16 

3. On Intemperance 32 

4. Without Holiness, no Man 

shall see the Lord 4 

5. The Warning Voice 8 

6. Traveller and Yourself 4 

7. The Happy Negro 8 

8. On the Lord's Day 4 

9. The Dairyman's Daughter 28 

10. Shepherd of Salisbury 

Plain 24 

11. 'Tis all for the Best 16 

12. On the Third Command- 

ment 4 

13. To the Spectator of a Fu- 

neral 4 

14. The Poor Villager 8 

15. The Progress of Sin 8 

16. Pious Resolutions 4 

17. Parley the Porter 12 

18. On Family Worship 12 

19. Three Dialogues be- 

tween a Minister and 
Parishioner 20 

20. "Remember the Sabbath 

Day" 4 

21. A Closet Companion 8 

22. Repentance and happy 

Death of the Earl of 
Rochester 8 

23. God the Only Refuge 8 

24. The Christian Indeed 12 

25. The Evils of Excessive 

Drinking 8 

26. Sin no Trifle 4 

27. Parental Duties 12 

VOL. II. 

28. Instruction of the Rising 

Generation recommended 16 



29. 
30. 

31. 

32. 
33. 



34. 



To Children, on Prayer 8 
Assembly's Shorter Cate- 
chism 12 
Divine Songs for Children 20 
Hymns for Infant Minds 28 
A Memorial for Sabbath 
School Boys. By Rev. 
G. Hendley 16 
A Memorial for Sabbath 
School Girls. By Rev. 
G. Hendley 16 
Sermons to Children 36 
Present to Children at 
School 8 
A New Heart the Child's 
Best Portion 8 
Dinah Doudney 20 
Filial Duties 16 
Address to Young Chris- 
tians 8 
Persuasive to Public Wor- 
ship 8 
Importance of speaking 
Truth 8 
On Temperance 4 
An Address to Youth 12 
The Christian Atonement 12 
Subjects for Consideration 8 
To the Afflicted 8 
To the Aged (large type) 8 
Last hours of the Rev. 
John Cowper. By Wm. 
Cowper, Esq. 16 
The Swearer's Prayer 4 

VOL. III. 
A Preservative against the 
Sins and Follies of Youth 20 
Letter from an aged Moth- 
er to her only Son 4 
The African Servant 20 
Friendly Advice 4 
The Well-Spent Day 12 
Blind Ellen 8 



in 



FtTBLIGATIONS. 



[1824. 



57, 

58. 

59. 
60. 

61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 

67. 

68. 
69. 

70. 
71. 

72. 
73. 

74. 



75. 
76. 
77. 
78. 



79. 

80. 
81. 

82. 

83. 

84. 
85. 

86. 

87. 



90. 
91. 



The Duty of Caring for 
the Souls of Relatives 
History of Elizabeth 
Loveless 

Token for Mourners 
Scripture Marks of Salva- 
tion 

Growth in Grace 
Storv of Mr. Anderson 
Thetottager's Wife 
The Interpreter's House 
To a Youth at School 
Reflections on the Seven 
Days of the Week 
Advice to a Married 
Couple 
Poor Joseph 
Religion of the Closet 

VOL. IV. 
Scripture Extracts 



8 


94. 


36 


95. 




96. 


24 


97. 


24 




24 


98. 


24 


99. 



The Bible above all Price 16 
Sixteen Short Sermons 24 
On Fashionable Amuse- 
ments 12 
Great Effects result from 
Little Causes. By E. 
Porter, d. d. 12 
Life of William Kelly 16 
To-Day 8 
History of a Bible 12 
Conversion of Abigail 
Hutchinson. By Rev. 
J. Edwards 8 
The Young Cottager 36 
The Danger of Delay 12 
The Seaman's Spy-Glass 16 
Conversion of a Mahom- 
etan 12 
Account of Eliza Cun- 
ningham 20 
On the Lord's Supper 32 
Watchmaker and his 
Family 16 
The Mother's Catechism 28 

VOL. V. 

Conversation in a Boat 24 
To the Sick, without hope 8 

The Dairyman 24 

A Word in Season 8 
Letter of Richard Pearsall 8 



92. The Praying Negro 

93. The Great Question An- 
swered 

History of Mrs. Tooly 
The Sailor's Return 
The Sailor's Friend 
Parting Address to a 
Sabbath School Child 
The New Birth 
Sanctified Afflictions 

100. Advice from a Master 
to his Apprentice 

101. The Shipmates 

102. Saturday Night, a Di- 
alogue 

Every man the Friend 
or Enemy of Christ 

Anecdotes illustrating 
the Usefulness of Re- 
ligious Tracts 

The Happy Waterman 

Pause and think, u Am 
I a Christian ?" 

Little Henry and his 
Bearer 



103. 
104. 



105. 
106. 

107. 



VOL. VI. 

True Prophecies 

James Covey 

History of Edward Poole 

and George Crosby 
The Christ of God 
112. History of Peter and 
John Hay 
Questions and Counsel 
Serious Thoughts on 

Eternity 
Catherine Haldane 

116. Sabbath Occupations 

1 17. Important Questions — 

Hymns 

118. Friendly Conversation 

119. The Sabbath School Re- 

membrancer — Little 
Hannah 

120. Heaven Lost 

121. On the Lord's Prayer 

122. The Assizes — Hymn 

123. The way to convert a 

Cottage into a Palace 



108. 
109. 
110. 

111. 



113. 
114. 

115. 



16 
8 

16 
8 



12 
16 

8 

24 

12 



28 
8 

24 

32 



12 
4 

16 
12 

12 

4 



20 
8 

12 
4 



12 

16 

8 



1824] 



PUBLICATIONS. 



177 



124. 


Address to the Sabbath 




147. 


On Supporting the Gos- 






Breaker 


4 




pel Ministry. By Rev. 




125. 


Fatal Effects of Ardent 






J. Bennett 


20 




Spirits 


28 


148. 


The Barren Fig Tree 


8 


126. 


The Heavenly Pilot- 




149. 


The Splendid Wedding 


4 




Hymns 


8 


150. 


William Churchman 


12 


127. 


The Two Sisters 


12 


151. 


Important Discovery — 




128. 


Poor Sarah, the Indian 






Hymn 


8 




Woman 


8 


152. 


Eliza Thornton 


12 


129. 


The Two Apprentices 


8 


153. 


The End of Time 


12 


130. 


The Richmond Alarm 


4 


154. 


Memoir of Dr. Bateman 12 


131. 


On Walking by Faith 


16 




VOL. VIII. 




132. 


History of Anna Emery 


16 


155. 


Universalism Exposed 


8 


133. 


Conversion of Mrs. Em- 




156. 


Search the Scriptures 


8 




erson 


24 


157. 


To Parents on Sabbath 




134. 


Eternity of Future Pun- 






Schools 


4 




ishment. By Rev. A. 




158. 


Hopes for Eternity 


8 




Fuller 


8 


159. 


Advantages of Drunk- 






VOL. VII. 






enness 


4 


135. 


Life of Colonel Gardinei 


•20 


160. 


Two Ends and Two Ways 4 


136. 


Memoir of Elizabeth 




161. 


To Keeper of a Turn- 






Davidson 


24 




pike Gate 


8 


137. 


The Church Safe 


16 


162. 


Common Errors 


12 


138. 


Conversion of the World 24 


163. 


History of Thomas Brown 4 


139. 


Memoir of Thomas Hogg 


•16 


164. 


Bethel, or the Flag 




140. 


Address to Seamen 


12 




Unfurled 


16 


141. 


The Sabbath at Sea 


28 


165. 


Village in the Mountains 8 


142. 


Francis Newport 


16 


166. 


The Alarm 


4 


143. 


On Early Religious 




167. 


« All Right" 


8 




Education 


16 


168. 


To a Person engaged 




144. 


Conversion of Presi- 






in a Lawsuit 


8 




dent Edwards. Writ- 




169. 


Memoir of Mrs. Harriet 






ten by himself 


16 




Newell 


24 


145. 


On Hearing the Word 




170. 


To Females, on Sim- 






of God 


16 




plicity in Dress 


4 


146. 


Helps to Self Examina- 




171. 


Parental Faithfulness 


12 




tion 


8 


172. 


A Time to Dance 


4 



WITH NUMEROUS ENGRAVINGS. 



1. 



Advice to Sabbath School 
Children 16 

2. Memoir of Bowyer Smith 24 

3. Bible Happiness 16 

4. The Christian Drummer 12 

5. John of the Score 12 

6. Life of Rev. John Bunyan 16 

7. Principles of the Christian 

Religion in Verse. By P. 
Doddridge, D. D. 24 



8. Little Children invited 

to Christ. By Rev. 
Samuel Davies. 

9. The Image Boys 

10. Milk for Babes, or a 

Catechism in verse 

11. Letters to a Child at 

School. By Rev, 
John Newton 

12. The Vine 



24 
12 

12 



60 
12 



SUMMARY 

OF THE OPERATIONS OF THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, DURING 
THE FIRST TEN YEARS. 

The following Table shews the number of Tracts published in each 
year ; the annual receipts, in donations and for Tracts sold ; 
and the yearly amount of the Society's debt. 



For the year 
ending 

May 23, 1814 
May 29, 1815 
May 27, 1816 
May 26, 1817 
May 27, 1818 
May 26, 1819 
May 1, 1820 
May 1, 1821 
May 1, 1822 
May 1, 1823 
May 1, 1824 

Total 



Tracts pub- 


Receipts 


Receipts 




lished in 


chiefly 


chiefly for 


Debt. 


each year. 


Donations, 


Tracts sold. 




297,000 


2,745,00 




190,90 


141,000 


200,00 


1,052,50 




378,000 


100,34 


2,858,05 


624,52 


411,000 


7,62 


1,110,16 


1,634,32 


386,000 


52,22 


2,214,63 


1,088,51 


258,000 


22,13 


696,73 


1,989,09 


383,000 


545,16 


1,418,07 


3,219,09 


468,000 


1,778,57 


3,838,91 


2,691,48 


255,500 


1,091,68 


2,607,72 


1,448,59 


470,000 


1,729,81 


2,454,43 


927,39 


770,000 


4,195,01 


4,114,86 


1,094,10 


4,217,500 


$12,467,54 


$22,366,06 





From the above Table it appears, that the whole amount of do- 
nations received in ten years, is less than $12,500. It is estimated, 
that about one third of this amount has been delivered to donors in 
Tracts at cost. Hence the amount of charity which has been suf- 
fered to remain at the disposal of the Society is about $8,500. 
With this sum, in ten years, 4,217,500 Tracts have been printed ; 
that is, each dollar devoted to the objects of the Society, has' al- 
ready been, on an average, the means of printing about 500 Tracts. 
But the value of the Tracts now contained in all the Society's De- 
positories, is more than $8,500. Hence every dollar given has not 
only been the means of printing 500 Tracts, but remains, some- 
what increased, to print the same number in an equal space of 
time, or about once in five years, so long as the Society shall con- 
tinue its operations. Perhaps an equal sum of money was never 
more advantageously appropriated. 



imiiF Timw 



OF THE PRINCIPAL RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES, THROUGHOUT 
THE WORLD. 



EUROPE. 

ENGLAND. 

The first Society known to have engaged extensively in the 
printing and circulation of Religious Tracts is The Society in 
England for Promoting Christian Knowledge, incorpora- 
ted by the British Parliament, in 1647. It is not known how ear- 
ly the Society commenced this mode of operation, nor how much 
it accomplished in this way, during the first 150 years. From the 
first volume of the Christian Observer, for the year 1802, it appears, 
that it had circulated many Tracts previous to that time. In 1804, 
it circulated 103,000; in 1811, 130,000; in 1816, 683,301, in 
which year the whole amount of its issues, in Books, Tracts, Broad 
Sheets, &c*was 1,202,961. In 1819, this Society, alarmed by the 
progress of infidelity, issued a circular requesting funds to print 
Tracts expressly designed to counteract its influence ; j£5,000 were 
soon contributed for the purpose, which enabled the Society to is- 
sue 34 new Tracts, of which, in three months previous to May, 
1819, 400,000 copies were put in circulation. The issues of this 
Society in 1823 amounted to 1,400,711 Books and Tracts and oth- 
er small publications ; and it had then printed 14,000 Tracts in the 
languages of India. 

The Tracts issued by this Society, however, constitute but a very 
small part of its operations ; its annual receipts and expenditures 
for the spread of the Gospel, especially for missions, amount to 
near $250,000. 

The Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge among the Poor 
in England, and some other kindred Institutions, have circulated 
many Tracts as an Auxiliary to their other and more prominent be- 
nevolent designs. 



180 RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES. 

LONDON RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY. 

This Society was instituted in 1799, and may properly be termed 
the parent of all other Religious Tract Societies, now existing- in 
any part of the world. It had circulated several millions of Tracts 
before any other, of any considerable magnitude, was institut- 
ed ; and has given to all, whether in Britain, or in foreign 
lands, the use of its publications, the benefit of its example, its cor- 
dial co-operation, and in many instances, essential pecuniary aid. 
It was instituted four years after Mrs. Hannah More and her friends 
commenced the publication of the Tracts of the Cheap Repository, 
The happy influence of these Tracts was perceived by the friends 
of Religion, and the Rev. George Burder and the Rev. Samu- 
el Greatheed soon published a number of Tracts, exclusively 
Religious, under the denomination of Village Tracts. By the suc- 
cess of this measure, the importance of this branch of benevolent 
exertion was more deeply felt, and at the suggestion of the former 
of these Gentlemen, a number of valuable friends united with him 
in forming The Religious Tract Society, on the broad princi- 
ple of circulating" those simple evangelical truths, in which all, of 
every denomination, " who are looking for the mercy of the Lord 
Jesus unto eternal life, may unite with pleasure, as in one great 
common cause." During the same year, another Society was 
formed in London, " for the gratuitous distribution of Evangelical 
Tracts ;" but a conference being proposed between the Commit- 
tees of the two Institutions, they were immediately united in the 
Religious Tract Society. 

Though the operations of the Society in its commencement, were 
humble, in comparison with what they have since been, they were 
characterized by energy and fixedness of purpose. Previous to 
presenting the first annual report, thirty four Tracts were publish- 
ed, twenty three of them original ; and above 200,000 copies were 
put in circulation. At the end of its second year, the series of 
Tracts amounted to sixty one, and 800,000 had been circulated. 
At the end of the third year, 1,000,000 had been circulated; at 
the end of the fourth, 1,400,000 ; at the end of the fifth, 1,700,000.* 

* It is an interesting fact, that the British and Foreign Bible 
Society, instituted in 1804, owes its origin, under God, to the Lon- 
don Religious Tract Society. 



EUROPE LONDON. ff* 181 

While the Committee were thus pursuing their operations, they 
discovered a constantly widening" field of usefulness opening before 
them. They not only increased the exertions they had hitherto 
been making, but commenced the Translation of Tracts into other 
languages ; and in August, 1805, moved by the overwhelming in- 
fluence which a flood of infidel and other vile publications was 
exerting upon the lower orders of society, they conceived the idea 
of publishing a distinct series of Tracts, adapted to gain their atten- 
tion, and to supplant the mischievous publications with which they 
were furnished in great profusion by unprincipled men, for mere 
purposes of gain. A new and considerably extensive series for this 
purpose, was immediately issued. They were short; and by narrat- 
ing memorable and interesting incidents, with which suitable and 
serious reflections were interwoven, were peculiarly calculated to 
answer the end designed. They were ornamented with engrav- 
ings illustrating the striking scenes, and were sold, in many instan- 
ces, below the actual cost, that the vender might realize more 
profit from the sale of them, than from disposing of other and inju- 
rious publications. And so happy was the result of the measure, 
that in nineteen months, ending May, 1807, seven hundred and fifty 
two thousand copies of this series were put in circulation. In the 
succeeding year, in addition to a million of the first series, four 
hundred and fifty thousand of this gained a circulation ; and the 
Committee reported, at their annual meeting, that in less than ten 
months, about three hundred thousand of the profane and immor- 
al books commonly sold to Hawkers, were known to have been kept 
out of circulation, by this series of Tracts having been purchased in- 
stead of them. In order to promote the circulation of this series, 
measures were early adopted to enlist beggars and other vagrants 
in the work. One of these measures was the issuing of Tickets, 
each of which entitled the bearer to twelve Hawker's Tracts. 
Great numbers of these tickets have been purchased by the benev- 
olent, and given to the beggar, instead of money. These publica- 
tions were afforded at so low a rate, that, in numerous instances, 
Booksellers, wholly unconnected with the Society, adopted the ex- 
pedient of making them up into little books, with neat covers and 
coloured prints, for the use of children; and in 1810, the Society 
printed a selection on superior paper and in a neat style, to be us- 
ed as Reward Books for Children in Sabbath Schools. 
16 



f 



182 RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES. 

In 1819, this series of Tracts was carefully revised by the Com- 
mittee ; and in 1820, those of this series which are not embraced 
in the first series, were republished in a duodecimo volume of 650 
pages. Near the close of this year, by a simultaneous effort of the 
Committee and other friends of evangelical truth, to stem the cur- 
rent of Infidel and other vile publications at that time most indus- 
triously circulated, there were sold and distributed, in the short 
space of nine weeks, no less than 600,000 Tracts of this series. 

In the year 1814, the Society commenced the- publication of 
Tracts on Broad Sheets, to be affixed to the walls of cottages, pub- 
lic houses, ships, &c. In 1815, it began a new series of Child- 
ren's Books, in a small size, ornamented with many engravings, 
and adapted, every way, to excite the attention of the young, and 
to meet their approbation. This series has been constantly re- 
ceiving improvements, and has been sought with such avidity, that 
the issues, in the year ending May, 1824, amounted to 1,688,760. 
Owing to these and other similar efforts, together with the estab- 
lishment of Sabbath Schools, it is calculated, that u more than 
two hundred thousand juvenile readers are, in Great Britain, every 
year added to the mass already athirst for information, and com- 
paratively destitute of the means to obtain it." 

The Society has also, from time to time, seized on the occasions 
which have created great popular excitements, as the death of the 
Princess Charlotte and the Coronation, to publish Occasional Tracts, 
not numbered in any series. In 1823, a series of Hand Bills was 
commenced, and soon after, a series of Short Stories for Children 
under ten years of age, calculated to allure their attention and 
leave some important truth fixed in their tender minds. 

To these publications are to be added the Tract Magazine, and 
the ChiWs Companion, commenced in January 1824, and issued 
monthly ; the former in a duodecimo size and containing 12 pa- 
ges, the latter in a very small size and containing 32 pages. Each 
of these had, a half year after their commencement, a circulation 
of 30,000 copies monthly. Both are composed chiefly of short ar- 
ticles, of the same character as the other publications of the Soci- 
ety ; and the Magazine embraces extracts from the correspondence 
of the Society, lists of its new publications, its monthly receipts, &c. 

In 1820, this Society had printed one Tract in the Welsh Ian- 



EUROPE LONDO N. 



183 



guage, 7 in the Irish, 18 in French, 12 in Dutch, 4 in Spanish, 2 in 
Portuguese, 6 in Italian, 7 in German, 3 in Danish, and 1 in Swed- 
ish. It has since added 9 new Tracts to the series in Spanish. 
Some of the Society's Tracts, either in part or wholly at their ex- 
pense, have been translated into each of the following languages : 



Armenian 


Icelandic 


Polish 


Calmuc 


Indian 


Portuguese 


Chinese 


Irish 


Prussian 


Danish 


Italian 


Russian 


Dorp at 


Laponese 


Spanish 


Dutch 


Lascar 


Swedish 


Esthonian 


Lettish 


Tamul 


Finnish 


Lithuanian 


Tartar 


French 


Manks 


Telinga 


Gaelic 


Mongolian 


Welsh 


German 


Persian 


Wendish 


Greek 







The Society had, at the end of its twenty fifth year, May 1824, 



in its 



First Series . . . . . 206 Tracts. 

Second Series ..... 84 

Occasional Tracts .... 6 

Broad Sheets 41 

Hand Bills ..... 29 

Tracts in Foreign Languages, about 68 

Children's Books .... 62 

For Children under ten years of age 36 

Total 532 



Besides a considerable number of Bound volumes and Christmas 
Carols, and its periodical publications. 



The following brief outline of the progress of the Society, from 
the comparatively small issues of its first year, to the ten millions 
reported at its t<venty fifth anniversary, though given in round 
numbers down to the year 1818, and in the years 1814 — 1816 prob- 
ably falling somewhat short of the reality, is sufficiently accurate, 
for all practical purposes. 



184 



EELTGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES, 



Tracts circulated in the year ending May 



1800 


200,000 


1814 


1,100,000 


1801 


600,000 


1815 


1,110,000 


1802 


250,000 


1816 


1,100,000 


1803 


350,000 


1817 


3,500,000 


1804 


350,000 


1818 


3,510,005 


1805 


350,000 


1819 


4,043,321 


1806 


600,000 


1820 


5,526,674 


1807 


1,400,000 


1821 


4,823,770 


1808 


1,450,000 


1822 


5,222,470 


1809 


1,550,000 


1823 


5,711,000 


1810 


1,480,000 


1824 


10,012,760 


1811 


1,970,000 






J812 


2,960,000 


Total about 


61,500,000 


1813 


2,330,000 







Receipts in 1324, $49,544,78, ofwhich $14,513,65 were charita- 
ble donations. Treasurer, Joseph Reiner, Esq. Secretaries, 
Rev. Legh Richmond, Rev. Joseph Hughes, Rev. Peter 
Treschow. Assistant Secretary, Mr. William Jones. Superin- 
tendent, Mr. John Davis. Depository, No. 56, Paternoster Row. 



Auxiliaries of the London Religious Tract Society. 

In the year ending May 1820, this Society acknowledged contri- 
butions from 73 Auxiliaries, since which 134 new Auxiliaries have 
been added. The sum of these is 207, which is probably some less 
than the whole number recognized by the Society. In the year 
ending May 1824, 146 Auxiliaries contributed $4,815. Some of 
these have been very efficient. 

The Auxiliary at Leeds, in the north of England, has, for four 
years, annually contributed 100 pounds, in aid of the Parent Soci- 
ciety's funds. 

The Boston Auxiliary Religious Tract Society, formed in 1817, 
which has in its connexion a number of Branch Societies, has giv- 
en essential aid to the Parent Institution, and circulated, in six 
years, 235,876 Tracts. Secretary, Mr. John Noble. 

The Norwich Auxiliary Tract Society, formed in 1823, circulated 
in its first year 86,820 Tracts. 

These, and the following Auxiliaries, with others, have from 
time to time encouraged the Parent Society and kindred Institu- 
tions, by communicating interesting intelligence of the Divine bless- 



EUROPE LONDON. 



185 



ing that has attended the reading* of Tracts which they have put 
in circulation. 

Ebenezer Chapel Tract Society, Birmingham. 

Auxiliary Religious Tract Society of Hull. 

Auxiliary Religious Tract Society of Taunton. 

Auxiliary Religious Tract Society of Walworth. 

Auxiliary Tract Society of Truro. 

Bishop Stortford's Auxiliary Religious Tract Society. 

H'oxton Chapel Sund. Sch. Auxiliary Rel. Tract Society. 

York Auxiliary Religious Tract Society. 

Dundee Tract Society. {Scotland) 

Perthshire Religious Tract Society. {Scotland) 

Branch Tract Society at Holbeach. 

Stroud Auxiliary Religious Tract Society. 

Cambridgeshire Auxiliary Religious Tract Society. 

Tewksbury Auxiliary Tract Society. 

Gloucester Auxiliary Religious Tract Society. 

Helston Auxiliary Tract Society. 



PRAYER BOOK AND HOMILY SOCIETY, 

Instituted at London, 1812. 

The " sole object' 1 of this Society is " to distribute gratis, and to 
circulate, at reduced prices — the authorized Formularies of the 
United Church of England and Ireland, without note or comment; 
viz. the Book of Common Prayer, including the Thirty nine Articles ; 
and the Homilies, in separate sermons, or in the entire volume.'" 

The Homilies, of which there are thirty three, were originally 
published about the middle of the sixteenth century, and their re- 
puted authors are Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, and Jewell. They 
are " short and familiar sermons, conveying divine truth in an easy 
and popular manner, adapted to the apprehension of the ignorant 
and uninstructed." They are truly evangelical in sentiment, were 
composed with great care, and on their first publication, u a Royal 
Visitation was undertaken by a Committee of Divines and Laymen, 
who divided the kingdom into six circuits, and distributed a copy to 
every parish." The Thirty fifth Article of the Church of England 
affirms, that the Homilies "contain a godly and wholesome doctrine, 
and necessary for these times ;" and "judges them to be read ia 
16* 



186 RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES. 

Churches by the Ministers, diligently and distinctly.*" The fol- 
lowing are the subjects of these Homilies : 
No. 1. On the Reading and Knowledge of Holy Scripture. 

2. Of the Misery of all Mankind ; and of his Condemnation to 

Death everlasting by his own Sin. 

3. Of the Salvation of Mankind by only Christ our Saviour. 

4. Of the true, lively, and Christian Faith. 

5. Of good Works annexed unto Faith. 

6. Of Christian Love and Charity. 

7. Against Swearing and Perjury. 

8. Of the Declining from God. 

9. Against the Fear of Death. 

10. On Good Order and Obedience. 

11. Against Whoredom and Adultery. 

12. Against Strife and Contention. 

13. Of the right use of the Church. 

14. Against Peril of Idolatry. 

15. On Repairing and keeping Clean the Church. 

16. Of Good Works; and first, of Fasting. 

17. Against Gluttony and Drunkenness, 

18. Against Excess of Apparel. 

19. Of Prayer. 

20. Of the Place and Time of Prayer. 

21. Of Common Prayer and Sacraments. 

22. An Information for them which take Offence at certain 

Places of Holy Scripture. 

23. Of Alms-deeds. 

24. Of the Nativity. 

25. Of the Passion : for Good Friday. 

26. Of the Resurrection : for Easter-day. 

27. Of the worthy receiving the Sacrament of the Body and 

Blood of Christ. 

28. Of the coming down of the Holy Ghost : for Whit-Sunday. 

29. For Rogation Week : that all good things come from God. 

30. Of the State of Matrimony. 

31. Against Idleness. 

32. Of Repentance, and true Reconciliation unto God. 

33. Against Disobedience and wilful Rebellion. 
Articles of Religion. 

They are printed as Tracts, in a plain and cheap style ; and al- 
so on fine paper and ornamented with engravings. They are like- 
wise printed in volumes ; in duodecimo, octavo, and folio. Some 
of them have been translated, and published by the Society, in the 
following languages : Irish, Welch, Manks, French, Spanish, Ital- 
ian, German, Dutch, Modern Greek, Arabic, and Chinese. 

From the beginning of its operations in 1812, to its Twelfth An- 
nual Meeting, May 1824, this Society has been the means of circus 



EUROPE — ENGLAND . 187 

latin* 112,291 prayer Books and Psalters, and 809,904 Homily 
Tracts. Its receipts during its twelfth year, were $8,169. The 
Society has several Auxiliaries. 

Joseph Wilson, Esq. Treasurer ; Rev. C. R. Pritchett, M. A. 
Secretary ; Mr. Thomas Seaward, Assistant Secretary and Ac- 
countant ; 134, Salisbury Square. 



CHURCH OF ENGLAND TRACT SOCIETY, 
Instituted at Bristol, 1811. 
The object of this Society is professedly, " to circulate in a cheap 
form, among the poor members of the Church of England, her Hom- 
ilies, the lives of her reformers and martyrs, extracts from their 
writings, and from the publications of her bishops : with such short 
pieces illustrative of the primitive history, constitution, and disci- 
pline of the Church, as the Committee may approve. M In the year 
ending Dec. 1816, it printed 275,000 Tracts, and had, at the time 
of its annual meeting in that month, a series of 50 Numbers. In 
the year 1817, the Society resigned the printing of Homilies to the 
Prayer Book and Homily Society established at London, and a 
Depository was opened at Bristol by the latter Society for the sale 
of Homilies and Prayer Books. The Society at Bristol circulated, 
in the year ending December, 





Tracts. 


1820 


118,821 


1817 


84,396 


1821 


123,504 


1818 


123,812 


1822 


203,240 


1819 


87,250 


1823 


226,716 



The whole number of Tracts issued in 1824 is probably not far 
from 1,500,000 ; its General Series embraces 72 numbers ; Sab- 
bath School Series, 10 ; Broad Sheets, 10. Receipts the last year, 
$2,829. Depositary, W. Richardson, 6, Clare Street. 

This Society has derived essential aid in the circulation of its 
Tracts from several kindred Institutions, among which are the fol- 
lowing: 

Church Tract Society, Sheffield, instituted, 1816. 

Durham Church Tract Society. 

Cork Religious Tiact Society. (Ireland) 

Religious Tract Society at York. 

Bath Religious Tract Society. 

Gloucester Religious Tract Society. 

Prayer Book and Church of England Tract Society at Dudley. 



188 RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES. 



BRISTOL TRACT SOCIETY. 



It appears that a Tract Society, distinct from the Church of 
England Tract Society, was formed at Bristol in 1806, which still 
continues its operations. 



LIVERPOOL RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY. 

Instituted, 1814. 

The object of this Society is, u to promote, by sale or by gift, an 
extensive circulation of Religious Tracts ; especially in the. North- 
ern Counties of England, in Wales, in the Isle of Man, in Ireland, 
and in foreign parts.'" In the character of its publications and of 
its operations generally, this Society has taken the Religious Tract 
Society of London for its model. Its series of Tracts, which in 
1823 consisted of no less than two hundred and sixty seven, is, 
through the first 128 numbers, essentially the same with the first 
Series of the London Society, and embraces nearly all of that Se- 
ries, with a large selection from the Series designed for circulation 
by Hawkers. Thirty three of these Tracts, and several others, have 
been translated, and published by the Liverpool Society, in one or 
more of the following languages ; Welch, Manx, Danish, German, 
Dutch, Italian, French, Spanish, and Portuguese. The Society has 
also published a considerable number of Broad Sheets and Hand- 
bills, similar to those issued by the London Society ; and in addi- 
tion to its own publications, has for sale at its Depository, a very 
extensive collection of Tracts published by other Societies and by 
individuals. 

The following is an outline of the amount of Tracts distributed 
by this Society in each year since its formation. 



1815 98,998 

1816 258,134 

1817 265,757 

1818 345,631 

1819 252,795 

1820 211,449 



1821 249,003 

1822 377,931 

1823 494,070 



Total 2,553,768 



EUROPE SCOTLAND. 189 

The Society has distributed many Tracts gratuitously ; and like 
the London Society, has done much to aid in the religious instruc- 
tion of Seamen. With reference to their benefit, it established, in 
its ninth year, a Depository of Tracts on board the Floating Chap- 
el belonging to the Liverpool Seamen's Friend Society and Bethel 
Union, under the direction of a trusty ship-keeper. The Society 
has several Auxiliaries, among which is the Liverpool Ladies As- 
sociation, which has been very efficient. Secretaries, Rev. Thom- 
as Raffles, LL. D. and Mr. Samuel Hope. 



METHODIST TRACT SOCIETY, 

Instituted at Sheffield, 1808. 

This Society, during six years previous to Dec. 1814, circulated 
160,000 Tracts. At that time it made a donation of five guineas 
to the Religious Tract Society in London, and of three guineas to 
the Methodist Tract Society in London. 



SCOTLAND. 

EDINBURGH RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY. 

This has been for some years an efficient Institution, and has pub- 
lished many Tracts, among which are several in Gaelic. The 
number of Tracts and small books circulated during the year end- 
ing in 1823, is 303,661. 



GLASGOW RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY. 

This Society has published a somewhat extensive Series of 
Tracts, which have been put in circulation by its members and by 
other kindred Institutions in the vicinity. 



190 RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES. 

ABERDEEN RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY. 

This Society, which has published a number of Tracts, was in- 
stituted in 1811. In 1320 it distributed 17,000 Tracts gratuitous- 
ly, and sold, at or under cost prices, 50,000 ; making the whole 
number distributed gratis, since the formation of the Society, 
144,000; the number sold, 283,000 ; the whole number circulated, 
427,000. In the year ending in 1823, this Society circulated 
63,000 Tracts. 



HADDINGTON RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY. 

This Society was instituted about the year 1805, and in 1812 
became connected with the Religious Tract Society of London, as 
an Auxiliary. Previous to 1822, it had issued 118,000 Tracts, of 
which 60,000 were of the Series designed for Hawkers. These 
have been industriously circulated in every part of the county in 
which the Society is located. 



IRELAND. 

RELIGIOUS TRACT AND BOOK SOCIETY FOR 
IRELAND. 

Instituted at Dublin, 1814. Became a National Institution, 1819. 

It was not till some years after the formation of this Society, that 
the friends of Religion in England and Scotland seem to have felt 
its importance. In May, 1820, a deputation from the Society vis- 
ited London with the view of furthering its designs ; and under the 
patronage of some of the most distinguished Christians in England, 
a Society was immediately formed, denominated the London Aux- 
iliary Society, in aid of the Religious Tract and Book Society for 
Ireland. This Auxiliary, together with the London Ladies y Aux- 
iliary Society, contributed during the first year of their operations, 
nearly $2,500 to the Parent Society in Ireland, which received 



EUROPE — ICELAND, SWEDEN. 191 

during the same year, about $1,000 from friends in Scotland. 
The number of Books and Tracts issued by this Society in the last 
four years is as follows : 

In 1821 111,671 I 1823 493,254 

1822 nearly 400,000 1824 416,277 

The Society^had published in 1823, 25 new Tracts, consisting of 
original compositions and compilations never published before in 
that form ; and in that year printed editions of 64. The whole 
number of its publications, including Books, Tracts, and Broad 
Sheets, amounts to nearly four hundred. By means of this and kind- 
red Institutions established for Ireland, the circulation of thou- 
sands of small books of most injurious tendency, and many ol 
which openly oppose the cause of truth, has been prevented, and 
much light diffused through that country, which yet has a most 
powerful claim on British beneficence. 



ICELAND. 

A Society was formed in Iceland about the year 1817, which in 
1821 had published editions of 22 Tracts, amounting in all to 18,000 
copies. 



SWEDEN. 

EVANGELICAL TRACT SOCIETY, 

Instituted at Stockholm, 1808. 

This Society was instituted by the special efforts of the Pcev. 
Dr. Paterson, and early enjoyed the patronage of the King of 
Sweden. Its principles of operation are the same with those of 
the Religious Tract Society of London, from which it received, in 
the commencement of its operations, a grant of £100. On the pre- 
sentation of its first Report, in 1809, it had printed nine Tracts in 
Swedish, and one in Finnish, in all 207,000 copies ; and had dis- 



192 RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES. 

tributed, principally gratis, in the capital and provinces of Swed- 
en, 135,948 Tracts. In the year 1810, it printed 190,000 Tracts, 
and published three large editions of the New Testament. In 1811, 
it printed 129,000 Tracts, besides three Tracts, to the number of 
15,000 copies, in the Laponese, above 11,000 of which it granted, 
the same year, for distribution in Swedish Lapland. The whole 
number printed in 1817, nine years from its commencement, was 
1,203,750, of which 1,014,324 had been distributed; the series of 
Tracts, exclusive of those published in the Finnish and Laponese 
languages, then consisted of about 40 Numbers ; and the Society 
had 4,000 members. The whole number of Tracts published by 
this Society in 1824 is probably not much less than 3,000,000. 

Another Tract Society in Sweden, which has been quite efficient, 
is the Wasa Religious Tract Society, 



FINLAND. 

The Finnish Tract Society was instituted at Abo, in 1818, and 
has been patronized by the Archbishop, and other persons of dis- 
tinguished rank. The Rev. Drs. Paterson and Henderson, and 
through them the Religious Tract Society of London, have lent 
the Society essential aid ; and it has the cordial co-operation of 
the Tract Societies at Stockholm and Wasa. It has published 
several Tracts. 



RUSSIA. 

The Tract operations in Russia commenced about the year 1812, 
chiefly in connexion with the labours of Rev. Drs. Paterson and 
Henderson, who have had the co-operation of many of the digni- 
taries of the Russian Church, and particularly of a pious and ex- 
cellent Princess, who, in 1814, had translated fourteen of the Tracts 
of the London Society, most of which, with several others, she has 
printed at her own expense. Among them was the Tract, u To the 
•Afflicted, published immediately after the retreat of the French 



EUROPE — PRUSSIA, DENMARK, GERMANY. 193 

army from Moscow, which proved a most seasonable and unex- 
pected comfort to the poor sufferers. In 1822, editions of one hun- 
dred different Tracts had been published in the Russian language, 
at Moscow and St. Petersburgh, amounting to 600,000 copies, which 
have been circulated through almost every province of the empire, 
Tracts have been published in some other towns in the Russian 
territories, among which are Dorpatia, Courland, Astrachan, and 
tlae Island Oesel in the Baltic. 



PRUSSIA. 

The Prussian Tract Society was established at Berlin, in 1814, 
It had printed, in 1818, a series of thirteen Numbers, and in 1821, 
had issued in the German, Lithuanian, and Polish languages, 
605,880 Tracts which have been very useful, especially in the 
Prussian Army. The King of Prussia has aided this Society by lib- 
eral donations. 



DENMARK. 

The Danish Religious Tract Society was established at Fueh- 
nen, an island of the Baltic, in 1800 ; and in 1812, had published 
100,000 Tracts. It has been patronized by distinguished individ- 
uals in Denmark, and received the favour of the King. — Another 
Tract Society was formed at Lyngby, near Copenhagen, about the 
year 1819. In March, 1821, it had published editions of 9 Tracts, 



GERMANY. 

The Northern Union, or Christian Association in Northern Ger- 
many, was instituted at Eislebenm 1812. In 1815 it had published 
three volumes of Tracts, and in 1819 had more than twenty Auxil- 
17 



194 RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES. 

iary Committees, all collecting monies for the central Society, and 
assisting in distributing its publications. 

The Hamburg Religious Tract Society, for Lower Saxony, was 
instituted in 1820, two years after the Religious Tract Society at 
Bremen. The former circulated within six months after its forma- 
tion 15,000 Tracts, and during the last year 13,000. 

The Stutgard Religious Tract Society, formed in 1809, has dis- 
tributed many thousands of Tracts in Swabia and other parts of 
Germany. — The Elberfeld and Barmen, or Wupper Valley Relig- 
ious Tract Society, in the Grand Dutchy of Berg, established in 
1814, and the Hanover Tract Society, established the same year, 
have each published considerable numbers of Tracts and circu- 
lated them extensively. — The Wurtemburg Tract Society had is- 
sued in 1817, 109,000 Tracts.— In 1804, a Tract Society was form- 
ed at Heidelberg, and one at Leipsic in 1821. — Other Tract Societies 
have been formed at Frankfort, Koenegsfeld, Neuwied, Nuremburg, 
Cologne, Cleves, Altona, &c. 



NETHERLANDS. 

The Amsterdam Religious Tract Society, instituted in 1820, and 
which has since become a Tract Society for the Netherlands, is now 
one of the most active Institutions on the continent. It has 2,000 
members, a Series of 53 Tracts in the Dutch language, and has 
circulated 243,875 copies. — The Rotterdam Missionary Society had, 
in 1815, published 23 Tracts, and circulated in the Dutch, Ger- 
man, and French languages, 100,000 copies. — In 1815, a Tract So- 
ciety was formed at Zeist. 



SWITZERLAND. 

A small Tract Association was formed at Basle in 1802, which 
in 1813 became a regularly organized Tract Society. In 1815 it 
had printed and purchased 80,000 Tracts, and in 1817 its series 
was so large as to constitute a volume of considerable size. — An 
Institution was formed at Bern in 1802, which engaged somewhat 



AFRICA, ASIA. 



195 



extensively in the circulation of Tracts ; and in 1815, encouraged 
by the visit of Rev. C. F. A. Steinkopff, Foreign Secretary of the 
Religious Tract Society of London, in his second tour to the conti- 
nent, it became a Tract Society. It has published several Tracts, 
which it has circulated extensively in the Bishoprick of Basle, 
among the inhabitants of the Alps, and elsewhere. — Other Tract 
Societies in Switzerland are those at Zurich, St. Gall, Shaffhausen, 
Lucern, and Lausanne ; the latter of which had printed, in 1817. 
66,000 Tracts. 



FRANCE. 

The Paris Tract Society published in the year ending May. 
1824, 200,000 Tracts. 



AFRICA. 

The African Tract Society was formed at the Cape of Good 
Hope, in 1820, for the u purpose of distributing Prayer Books, 
Tracts, Hymns, and other religious and moral books, in English, 
Dutch, and other languages." 



ASIA. 

The Bellary Tract Society, (India,) was instituted in 1818, and 
in 1823 distributed 26,734 Tracts, making the whole number dis- 
tributed in five years more than 60,000 ; a large part of them were 
printed by the Society in the languages of India, 

The Madras Religious Tract Association was also formed in 
1818 ; and in 1822 had circulated, in various languages, 40,487 
Tracts. In 1822, a Native Tract Society was formed at JVagercoil, 
in Travancore. — In 1823, a Tract Society was formed at Jaffna, in 
Ceylon. — In the same year, a Tract Society was formed at Sydney, 
hi New South Wales. 



196 RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES. 

TRACTS IN CONNEXION WITH FOREIGN MISSIONS. 

The reports of every Society extensively engaged in endeavours 
to diffuse divine knowledge in pagan lands, show that " the Mis- 
sionary, without a supply of Tracts, is unprovided for his work ;" 
and that throughout a great part of the heathen world, there is 
" no impediment among the people, to the dispersion of millions of 
them," if funds and men were provided, for putting them in circu- 
lation. The few facts which follow are collected from the multi- 
tude which are treasured up in the numerous publications conse- 
crated to the work of evangelizing the world. 

The London Jews Society circulated in 1822, in Hebrew, Eng- 
lish, and German, 116,436 Tracts and cards for the diffusion of 
Scripture knowledge among Jews ; by whom they were received 
and read, in many instances, with great avidity. 

At Astrachan, in the Russian dominions near the Caspian, 3,430 
Tracts were circulated the last year by Scottish Missionaries, who, 
in 1821 and 1822, distributed at Orenburg, 600 miles N. E. of As- 
trachan, 1840 Tracts. 

At the islands of Malta and Corfu, in the Mediterranean, many 
Tracts have been printed at the expense of the London Religious 
Tract Society. At Malta, the American Missionaries had printed, 
in 1823, editions of 6 Tracts in Italian and 9 in Modern Greek, to 
which they have since made considerable additions. In three 
months, Messrs. Fisk, Wolff, &c. distributed in Western Asia, 3,700 
Tracts. Large appropriations have been made by the Religious 
Tract Society of London for promoting the circulation of Tracts in 
the places above mentioned, and in the Ottoman Empire. 

Considerable numbers of Tracts have been circulated at Sierra 
Leone and other parts of Africa. 

At Bombay, the American and other Missionaries have printed 
more than 70,000 Tracts and portions of the Bible. The Society 
for Promoting Christian Knowledge printed, at this station, in 1820 
and 1821,24,166 Books and Tracts.— At Madras, 30,000 books 
and Tracts were printed the last year by the Church Missionary 



FOREIGN MISSIONS — SABBATH SCHOOLS. 197 

Society. — In Tinnevelly, the circulation is limited only by the 
supplies. — Several Tracts have been printed at Serampore. 

The Calcutta Baptist Missionary Society had, in 1822, published 
editions of 18 Tracts in Bengalee, 3 in Sunscrit, 4 in Hindostanee, 
and 4 in other languages, making in all 50,200 copies. Various 
Missionary Societies, in England, have printed and circulated 
Tracts at Calcutta. Two presses, established here by the Church 
Missionary Society, have been actively engaged in printing Bibles, 
school books and Tracts, and have been found so inadequate to 
meet the demand, that other presses have been ordered, to cooper- 
ate with them. 

In China, during three years previous to May, 1823, through 
the agency of the lamented Rev. Dr. Milne, Rev. Dr. Morrison, 
and other Missionaries, and at the expense of the London Relig- 
ious Tract Society, editions of 23 Tracts were printed in Chinese, 
making 102,150 copies ; and editions of four Tracts, amounting to 
3,500 copies, in the Malay. 



TRACTS CIRCULATED BY SABBATH SCHOOL UNIONS. 

These interesting Institutions have found a very extensive use 
of Tracts and other small Books for the benefit of pupils and teach- 
ers, to be essential to their success. The Sunday School Union es- 
tablished at London in 1803, has published a series of nearly one 
hundred publications, consisting of Lessons, Primers, Hymn Books, 
Tracts, Catechisms, Instructions for Teachers, &c. and has also for 
sale at its Depository a very large assortment of Books published 
by other Institutions and Individuals, which have been examined 
and approved by the Committee. A very flourishing similar Insti- 
tution is established in Ireland, and another in Scotland, These 
three Institutions have in their connexion 7,173 Schools, 71,275 
Teachers, and 764,991 Scholars. Schools of this nature are rapid- 
ly spreading wherever the religion of Christ is extending its influ- 
ence. The publications of the American Sunday School Union will 
be mentioned in our notice of the Religious Tract Society of Phila- ■ 
delphia.^ 

17* 



1 93 RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES* 

AMERICA. 

In South America Religious Tracts have been circulated to some 
extent by Benevolent Societies and individuals, and this country is 
contemplated With increasing interest as a field for future exer- 
tions. — Many Tracts have also been sent into the West Indies, and 
gratuitously distributed.— This is true also of various parts of the 
British Dominions in North America, where some Auxiliaries to the 
London Religious Tract Society have been formed. Among these 
are the Auxiliary Tract Society of Montreal, formed in 1821 ; 
Auxiliary Tract Society at Truro, Nova Scotia, formed 1810 ; and 
that at Guysborough, Nova Scotia, formed 1824, 



UNITED STATES. 

The first Society of any considerable magnitude, known to have 
been formed in the United States to promote the circulation of 
Tracts, is the Massachusetts Society for Promoting Christian Knowl* 
edge, instituted at Boston in 1803, at the suggestion of the late 
Hon. Samuel Phillips and Professor Tappajnt. The prominent 
object for which the Society was instituted was the circulation of 
Tracts and Books, of the latter of which it distributed in 1804, 
6,253, and in 1806, 9,174. In 1815, the Society had printed 8,224 
Books, and 30,350 Tracts, Since that period it has depended 
chiefly on the American (then New England) Tract Society to 
publish Tracts and promote their circulation, and has turned its 
efforts to another means of accomplishing the object for which it 
was instituted, that of sending Missionaries to strengthen the lan- 
guishing churches and build up the waste places. 

In 1804, the Female Tract Society of Hancock County, Me. was 
instituted, having a Committee of three, from the Hancock Associa- 
tion of Ministers, to aid in superintending its concerns. Receipts 
during the three first years, $107. 

In September, 1807, the Connecticut Religious Tract Society was 
instituted at New Haven, and continued its operations for several 
years. Rev. Dr. Dwight was President, and Jeremiah Evarts, 



UNITED STATES — NEW YORK. 1 99 

Esa. Secretary, It published a series of 26 Tracts, making a vol- 
ume of about 300 pages. The Tracts were neatly done up in blue, 
and about 100,000 copies were circulated before the Society ceas- 
ed its operations. 

In 1808, the Vermont Religious Tract Society was instituted, 
under the direction of the Trustees of the Vermont Missionary So- 
ciety. It published a considerable number of Tracts, which were 
sold at cost and distributed from its Depository in Middlebury ; 
Hooker and Brewster, Agents. 

In 1810, the Protestant Episcopal Tract Society was instituted at 
New York) and in 1815 had published a series of 13 Tracts. Right 
Rev. John H. Hobart, D. D. (ex officio) President ; Mr. Floyd 
Smith, Secretary ; Depository, No. 99, Pearl Street. 



NEW YORK RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY, 

Instituted^ 1812. 
The number of Tracts published by this Society in each year 
since its formation in February, 1812, is as follows : 



1813 


38,586 


1820 


200,500 


1814 


40,000 


1821 


219,500 


1815 


45,000 


1822 


41,008 


1816 


70,000 


1823 


171,650 


1817 


120,000 


1824 


254,500 


1818 
1819 


i QO 000 






J. OUiWv 

181,000 


Total 


1,561,744 



This Society's series of English Tracts comprised, May, 1824 a 
192 Numbers, making 1800 pages, which are equal to 6 volumes 
of 300 pages each. The series in French has 15 Numbers, and 
that in Spanish, 9. During the last year 17,501 Tracts were de- 
livered to subscribers ; 19,565 to the Ladies' Branch Society ; 
39,205 gratuitously distributed, in various parts of the United 
States, the West Indies, South America, and Palestine, among Sea- 
men and others ; 94,826 sold to Societies and individuals ; and 
there remained in the Depository not far from 300,000. Receipts 
the last year, $2,229,18. The Society has several Auxiliaries, 
among which is the Religious Tract Society of Young Gentlemen 
of the City of Troy, which sold and distributed, during the last 



200 RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES. 

year, 13,356 Tracts, in which time its Receipts were $160,41. The 
Parent Society has about 70 life members, and about 350 members 
by Annual subscription. 

The Female Branch of the New York Religious Tract Society, 
formed in 1322, has a list of 450 members. In its first year it dis- 
tributed many Tracts and aided the New York Religious Tract 
Society by a grant of $550. During the last year, 119,000 pages 
were delivered to subscribers, 25,262 pages sold, and $461,40 
granted to the Parent Society. 



EVANGELICAL TRACT SOCIETY, 

Instituted at Boston, 1813. 

In the year ending May, 1824, this Society printed 66,000 Tracts, 
making the whole number published in eleven years 466,000. Its 
series comprises 31 Numbers. Receipts the last year, $322,93. 
Depositaries, Lincoln & Edmands. 

The Albany Religious Tract Society was instituted in 1813, and 
in 1824 had printed 277,000 Tracts ; when it committed its funds 
and Tracts to the New York State Tract Society, 



RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY OF PHILADELPHIA, 

Instituted, 1815. 

This Society published during the first year of its operations, 
78,000 Tracts, and continued to publish Tracts for five years, when 
the Managers u transferred the printing, publishing, and sale of 
Tracts, to the Board of Managers of the Philadelphia Sunday and 
Adult School Union," instituted in 1817. The Union received 
from the Religious Tract Society 75,000 Tracts, and published the 
same year, 43,000. The number of Tracts published by the Re- 
ligious Tract Society in the year in which the transfer was made is 
not known. With this exception, the following table is supposed 
to contain an accurate statement of the Tracts published by the 
two Societies previous to May, 1824. 



UNITED STATES PHILADELPHIA. 201 

The Religious Tract Society published in the year ending May, 



1816 


78,000 


The Un. 


in 1821 


43,000 


1817 


141,000 


do. 


1822 


173,000 


1818 


156,000 


do. 


1823 


80,000 


1819 


271,000 


do. 


1824 


133,000 


1820 


149,000 











Total 1,224,000 

If we estimate the number of Tracts published by the Religious 

Tract Society in the year ending May 1821, to be 76,000, the sum 

total of Tracts published will be 1,300,000. 

The number of Premium Books, Spelling Books, Cards, Ad^ 

dresses, Reports, &c. published by the Union, was, in the year 

ending May, 



1818 about 56,000 


1822 


288,000 


1819 60,000 


1823 


113,500 


1820 82,000 


1824 


71,500 


1821 79,000 







Total about 750,000 
At the seventh Anniversary of the Union, May, 1824, it " transfer- 
red its funds, books, and other property, to the American Sunday 
School Union," and ceased to act as a distinct Institution. It had 
then in its connexion 723 Schools, 7,300 Teachers, and 49,619 Schol- 
ars. The series of Tracts contained 52 Numbers, besides about 70 
Children's Books, Catechisms, &c. In July, it commenced the 
Sunday School Magazine, published monthly, and containing 32 
octavo pages. Receipts the last year, $5,161,19. Alexander 
Henry, President ; George B. Claxton, Secretary ; Deposita- 
ry, A. Claxton, No. 29, North Fourth Street. 

The Philadelphia Female Tract Society was formed about the 
year 1816. During its second and third years it printed 190,500 
Tracts ; sold upwards of 35,000, and distributed gratuitously 
nearly 52,000. At the end of the third year it had on its list more 
than 400 annual contributors. 

The Providence (i£. /.) Female Tract and School Society was 
instituted in 1815, and at the end of one year had 469 subscribers, 
and had distributed 10,303 Tracts. It has for some years past di- 
rected its efforts mainly to the promotion of Schools. In 1823, its 
receipts were $336,18 ; Tracts distributed, 2,218. Receipts in 
1824, $175,80 ; Tracts distributed, about 2,000. Secretary, Sally 
S, Gano. 



202 RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES, 

The Religious Tract Society of Charleston, South Carolina, was 
instituted in 1815 ; and on presenting its first annual report, June 
1816, had received 20 life members and 241 annual subscribers ; 
total receipts during the year, $516,00 ; Tracts distributed, 
20,000. In the year ending 1822, 18,538 Tracts were distributed. 
Receipts, $111,28. 

The Auxiliary Tract Society of Keene, JV. H. was formed in July, 
1815. It received, during the year ending in 1824, $46,50, from 102 
members ; of which $ 16,17 were appropriated to the American Tract 
Society ; and the remainder expended in purchasing, for circula- 
tion, 26 bound volumes of Tracts, and 17,330 pages unbound. 
Receipts since the formation of the Society, $306,62. Depositary, 
Mr. Abijah Kingsbury. 



RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY OF BALTIMORE, 

Instituted, 1816. 

The number of Tracts purcLcsed and printed, during each 
year, not including the edition of the first and second Annual Re- 
ports, is as follows : in the year ending May 

21,500 
9,550 
4,863 
60,000 
35,000 
47,000 
42,000 
74,000 
36,500 



1817 


purchased 


1818 


do. 


1819 


< purchased 
\ printed 


1820 


do. 


1821 


do- 


1822 


do. 


1833 


do. 


1824 


do. 



330,413 
The number of Tracts remaining in the Depository, May, 1824, 
was 91,299. The series of Tracts in English embraces 62 Num- 
bers ; that in German, 3 Numbers. President, Rev. William 
Nevins ; Secretary, Mr. Samuel Young ; Depositaries^ Cushing 
and Jewett, and Armstrong and Plaskitt. 



UNITED STATES — HARTFORD. 203 

HARTFORD EVANGELICAL TRACT SOCIETY, 

Instituted, January, 1816. 

This Society has published a series of 57 Numbers, the various 
editions of which, in eight years, amount to 376,237 Tracts. Re- 
ceipts, the last year, about $500. Since the Tenth Annual Re- 
port of the American Tract Society was presented, this Society has 
become the Connecticut Branch of the American Tract So- 
ciety. President, Rev. Joel Hawes ; Secretary and Depositary,, 
Mr. Charles Hosmer. 



OTHER TRACT SOCIETIES INSTITUTED IN 1816. 

Boston Auxiliary Tract Society. Receipts in eight years, about 
$1,000. The object to which the efforts of this Society have been 
primarily directed is the gratuitous distribution of Tracts in the 
city and its environs. Whole amount of Tracts distributed, about 
1,000,000 pages. President, Mr. Henry Homes ; Secretary, Mr. 
James Clap. 

Female Tract Society of Boston and its Vicinity. Receipts about 
$100, annually. Whole amount of Tracts distributed, about 800,000 
pages. President, Mrs. Mary Bowers. 

Episcopal Prayer Book and Tract Society for the Eastern Dio- 
cese, located in Boston. This Society has published several Tracts. 

Newburyport Female Bible and Tract Society. This Society, 
though the annual subscription paid by each member is only 25 
cents, has in eight years received $488,87, and has distributed 
287 Bibles, 177 Testaments, 96 Hymn Books, 181,836 pages of 
Tracts, and some other small publications. It has made a dona- 
tion of $30, to the American Bible Society, of $10, to the American 
Tract Society, and $5, to aid the Rev. Thaddeus Osgood in distrib- 
uting Tracts and other books in tlie new settlements. Secretary ^ 
Miss Mary D. Hodge. 

Female Tract Society at Raleigh, N. C. This Society, at its 
commencement, purchased 6,578 Tracts. In 1819, it purchased 
13,568. Miss R. E. Goodwin, Secretary. 



204 RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES. 

Augusta {Geo.) Religious Tract Society, Annual receipts, $300. 
Secretary, William Bostwick. 

Religious Tract Society at Savannah. Distributed 22,000 Tracts 
during the first year of its operations ; in 1817, granted $100, in 
aid of the New York Religious Tract Society ; in 1821, distributed 
36,000 Tracts. Secretary, L. Mason. 

Other Tract Societies formed in 1816, are the Utica Tract Socie- 
ty, which soon after its formation distributed nearly 7,000 Tracts 
in less than one month ; — Female Tract Society at Brooklyn, L. 1. 
which in 15 months from its formation distributed 12,000 Tracts ; 
—Female Tract Society at Morristown, New Jersey. 



NEW YORK METHODIST TRACT SOCIETY, 

Instituted, 1817. 

This Society, in 1823, had published 43 Tracts in English and 
4 in French. The first 37 Numbers of the series in English are 
bound in one volume. In the year ending July, 1822, 90,000 
Tracts were printed ; in the following year, 5,000. Receipts in 
1823, $319,97. President, Rev. N. Bangs ; Secretary, Rev. T. 
Mason. 



PROTESTANT EPISCOPAL FEMALE TRACT SOCIETY 
OF BALTIMORE, 

Instituted, 1817. 
The receipts of this Society, during the year ending May, 1823, 
were $520, during which time it published 61,000 Tracts and dis- 
tributed 32,013. Its series at the end of the year, embraced 44 
Numbers. It then had five Auxiliaries, three of them in the city 
of Baltimore. President, Mrs. John Gibson ; Secretary, Mrs. 
Hesselifs. 

The Newark (New Jersey) Religious Tract Society, formed in 
1817, has published a few Numbers of Tracts. During the first 
yeai of its operations, ending January, 1818, its receipts were 
$99 12, and the whole number of Tracts purchased and printed. 



UNITED STATES. 205 

12,052. In 1819, it purchased 7,479 Tracts of the New York Re- 
ligious Tract Society. In 1820, its receipts were $123,86 and it 
distributed 13,720 Tracts. Secretary, in 1818, M. Lyon. 

In 1817, a Tract Society was formed at Canonsburg, Penn. 

The Maryland Prayer Book and Homily Society, instituted, May, 
1818, had in 1820, purchased 1,050 Prayer Books, and printed 
£,000 Homilies, a considerable part of which had been distributed. 

The Religious Tract Society of the City of Washington was insti- 
tuted, December, 1818 ; and on presenting its fifth Annual Re- 
port, July, 1824, had circulated 32,500 Tracts. Secretary, Mr. 
John Coyle, Jun. 

The Western Navigation Bible and Tract Society of Cincinnati 
was instituted in 1819, with the primary object of benefiting the 
boatmen and crews of steam-boats and other water craft plying be- 
tween the various towns on the Ohio, and New Orleans ; the 
whole number of persons engaged on these waters being estimated 
at 30,000. The Society had printed, in 1824, 700,000 pages of 
Tracts, embracing editions of 54 different kinds ; and had purchas- 
ed about 25,000 pages. Annual Receipts about $40. President^ 
Rev. Elijah Slack ; Secretary, Samuel Johnston. 

The East Tennessee Tract Society was instituted in Knoxville, 
March, 1819 ; and in three months after its formation, distributed 
113,000 pages of Tracts. 

The Religious Tract Society of Richmond, Va. was instituted in 
1820. In the year ending May, 1824, it sold 36,790 pages of 
Tracts; delivered 2,458 pages to subscribers ; and distributed 
6,756 pages gratuitously. The whole amount of Tracts circulated 
in four years is 291,755 pages ; and 24,282 pages were remaining 
in the Depository. 

The Homily Society of St, PauVs Church, Philadelphia, was in- 
stituted in 1822. At its first Annual Meeting, March, 1823, it had 
published editions of three Homilies, and five other Tracts ; amount- 
ing in all to 36,750 copies. Receipts during the year, $177,7^. 
Secretary, A. S. Van Pelt. 

18 



20(5 RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES. 

The Lexington ( JTm.) Female Union Tract Society was instituted, 
September, 1823. Receipts, the first year of its operations, $124,25, 
including $7, from a former Tract Society. In the last four months 
of the year, more than 45,000 pages of Tracts were circulated. 
President, Mrs. Martha Mc Calla ; Secretary, Miss Margaret 
A. Blythe. 

The Baptist General Tract Society was instituted at Washington, 
February 25, 1824. It began immediately to issue a series of 
Tracts, has established several Depositories, and has been encourag- 
ed by donations and the formation of Auxiliaries. President, Rev. 
O. B. Brown ; Treasurer, Rev. Luther Rice. . 

The New York State Tract Society was instituted at Albany, Feb- 
ruary 26, 1824, (the day after the Baptist General Tract Society 
was instituted,) and has commenced the publication of Tracts. It 
has been encouraged by liberal donations and the formation of sev- 
eral Auxiliaries. Immediately after it was established, it commenced 
the New York Tract Magazine, comprising 24 pages 12mo, and issu- 
ed monthly. President, Hon. Stephen Van Rensselaer ; Secreta- 
ry, Mr. Ebenezer Watson. 

Several other Tract Societies exist in the United States, of the 
operations of which no definite intelligence has been receive^. 
Among them are the following ; 

Albany Female Missionary and Tract Society. Miss C. Carter? 
•Secretary. 

Nassau Hall Tract Society. 

Pittsburgh, Pa. Religious Tract Society. 

Common Prayer Book and Tract Society of Virginia. 

Fredericksburg Auxiliary Common Prayer Book and Tract Soci- 
ety. Mr. John Gray, Secretary. 



%* Page 200, line 3, after subscription, read, Mr. ZechARIAH 
Lewis, President ; Dr. James C. Bliss, Secretary. 



TABLE OF RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES.* 



FOREIGN. 



London • • • . 


1799 


61,500,000 


Danish, (at Fuehnen) 


1800 


200,000 ? 


Basle, (Switzerland) 


1802 


200,000? 


Bern, do. 


— 


100,000 ? 


Heidelberg, (Germany) 


1804 




Haddington, (Scotland) 


1805 


150,000 


Bristol, (England) 


1806 




Stockholm, Evangelical 


1808 


3,000,000? 


Sheffield, Methodist 


— 


400,000 ? 


Stutgard, (Germany) 


1809 


100,000 ? 


Bristol, Church of England « 


1811 


1,500,000 


Aberdeen, (Scotland) 


— 


600,000 


London, Prayer Book and Homily 


1812 


809,904 


Russia, Individuals and Associations 


— 


800,000 


Northern Union, (Germany) 


— 


250,000? 


Liverpool 


1814 


2,553,768 


Ireland, Rel. Tract and Book Soc. 


— 


1,500,000 


Prussian, (at Berlin) 


— 


1,000,000? 


Wupper Valley, (Germany) 


— 




Hanover, do. 


— 




Zeist, (Netherlands) 


1815 




Iceland 


1817 


40,000 


Finnish, (at Abo) 


1818 




Bremen, (Germany) 


— 




Bellary, (India) 


— 


75,000 


Madras, (India) 


— 


75,000 


Lyngby, (near Copenhagen) 


1819 




Amsterdam 


1820 


243,875 


Hamburg 


— . 


60,000? 


African, (at the Cape of Good Hope 


j) 1820 




Leipsic 


1821 




Nagercoil, Native, (India) 


1822 




Jaffra, (Ceylon) 


1823 




Sydney, (New South Wales) 


— 




Wurtemburg, (Germany 


unkn. 


200,000? 


Paris 


unkn. 


200,000 


Edinburgh 


unkn. 


1,500,000? 


Soc. for Promoting Christian Knowl 


England, perhaps 6,000,000? 


Other Foreign Tract, Missionary, a 


nd other Benevo- 


1 6,942,453? 


lent Societies and Individuals, ] 


perhaps 



Whole number of Tracts circulated in Foreign Coun- > go 0ftft ftno 
tries, about ) yu,uuu,uuu 

** Of the above, the issues of the London Prayer Book and Hom- 
ily and Liverpool Societies only, are stated with perfect accuracy. 
The results which are not known to be essentially correct are dis- 
tinguished by a (?). 



208 



TABLE OF RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES. 



1803 
1804 
1807 

IftOft 


30,350 
100,000 


louo 

1810 
1812 
1813 
1814 
1815 


1,561,744 

466,000 

4,217,000 

1,300,000 


1816 


330,413 
376,237 
200,000 



UNITED STATES. 

Massachusetts, for Pro. Chr. Knowledge 

Hancock County, Fern. 

Connecticut 

Vermont 

New York, Protestant Episcopal 

New York 

Evangelical, (at Boston) 

American, (at Boston) 

Philadelphia 

Providence, Fem. 

Charleston, S. Carolina 

Keene, N. H. 

Baltimore 

Hartford, Evangelical 

Philadelphia^, Female 

Boston 

Female 

Epis. East. Diocese, (Boston) 

Newburvport, Female 

Raleigh, N. Car. 

Augusta, Geo. 

Savannah, Geo. 

Utica, N. Y. 

Brooklyn, L. I. 

Morristown, N. J. 

New York, Methodist 

Baltimore, Female Episcopal 

Canonsburg, Pa. . 

Washington City 

Maryland Pr. Book and Homily 

Cincinnati 

East Tennessee 

Richmond, Va. 

Philadelphia, St. Paul's Church 

Lexington, Female Union 

Baptist General, (Washington City) 

New York State (Albany) 

Other Societies and individuals in the U. 

Total of Tracts published in U. States, about 

Total published in all parts of the earth, about 100,000,000 

According to the above outline, the Religious Tract Society of 
London has published more Tracts than all the world besides ; and 
the American Tract Society has published nearly half of all that 
have been issued in the United States, 



1817 


200,000 ? 
200,000? 


1818 




1819 


70,000 


1820 
1822 
1823 
1824 


50,000 


States, perhap 


s 898,256 > 


bout 


10,000,000 



INDEX. 



Aberdeen Tract Society 190 
Abo, Finnish Tract Soc. at, 192 
Adams, Mr. John, member of Ex- 
ecutive Committee, 30, 40 
Address to friends of religion in 
New England 8 
to Christians on the distri- 
bution of Tracts, 11 
African Tract Society, 195 
Aged, Tract to the, usefulness 
of, 146 
Alabama, a planter in, 123 

Tracts wanted in, 123, 140 

Albany, Fern. Miss, and Tract 
Society, 206 

N. Y. State Tr. Soc. at, 206 

American Board, send exploring 
Missionary to S. Amer. 114 

Colonization Society,Tracts 

wanted by, 133 
Education Society, dona- 
tions to print a Tract for, 172 

Sunday School Union, 201 

American Tract Society, history 
of its origin, 3.— Its principal 
design, 6,27, 31, 63.— Act of 
Incorporation, 43. — Change 
of name, 6. — Proceedings re- 
ported at its formation,. 24. — 
List of its Auxiliaries, 170. — 
Depositories, 173. — Publica- 
tions, 175. — Summary of its 
operations, 178. — Plea for 
increase of its funds, 33, 50, 
56,80,83, 110.— Wide field 
of operation before it, 32, 35 
—37, 50, 61, 80, 113, 116, 
137 — 143. — Operates with 
ease on millions, 82. — Ac- 
complishes great good with 
small means, 83, 89, 112. — 
Its permanency, 85. — See 
Grants, Magazines, Letters. 
18* 



Amsterdam Tract Society, 194 
Armstrong, Samuel T. Assistant 
Treasurer, 5, 30 

Asia, Tracts in, 195 — 197 

Astrachan, Tracts published 
at, 193, 196. 

Augusta, Georgia, Tract Socie- 
ty, 204 
Auxiliaries of Amer. Tr. Soc. 170 

of Church of England Tract 

Society, 187 

of London Rel. Tr. Soc. 184 

Auxiliary Tract Societies, Con- 
stitution of, 38. — Their 
formation urged, 33, 55, 113, 
135. — Increase of, 134 

B 

Baltimore Rel. Tr. Soc. 202 

Fern. Epis. Tr. Soc. 204 

Bangs, Rev. N. 204 

Baptist General Tr. Soc. 205 
Bartlet, William, Esq. President 
of the Society, 5, 30, 40 

Basle Tract Society, 59, 194 

Bellary Tract Society, 195 

Benevolent Societies, all aided 
by Tracts, 84. — Funds re- 
quested to publish Tracts 
for, 67 

Bequest, form of a, 2- 

Berlin Tract Society, 59, 193 
Bern Tract Society, 59, 194 

Blanchard, Amos, Esq. Treasur- 
er, and member of Execu- 
tive Committee, 47, 53, 62, 
73, 88, 99, 126, 169. 
Bliss, Dr. James C. 206 

Blythe, Miss Margaret A. 206 
Bombay, Tracts wanted in, 93, 
95, 115. — circulated in, 96, 
196. See Grants. 
Boston Tract Society, 203 



216 



tmm. 



Boston Fern. Tract Soc. 203 

Boston, Eng. Aux. Tr. Soc, 184 
Bostwick, William, 204 

Bowers, Mrs. Mary, 203 

Brazil, Tracts wanted in, 114 
Brief View of Religious Tract 

Societies 179 

Brig-ham, Mr. John C. letter 

from, 125 

Bristol Tract Society, 188 

Church of England Tr. Soc. 187 
British Dominions in N.America, 

Tracts in, 198 

Brooklyn, L. I. Fern. Tr. Soc.204 
Brown, Mr. D. letter from, 124 

« Rev. O. B. 205 

Buenos Ayres, Tr. wanted in,114 
Burder, Rev. George, 180 



Calcutta, Tracts at, 197 

Canada, Tracts wanted in, 82, 

113,114, 140. See Osgood. 
Canonsburg Tr. Soc. 205 

Cape of Good Hope, Tract Soci- 
ety at, 195 
Carter, Miss C. 206 
Ceylon, Tract Society, 195 

' Tracts wanted in, 115, 143 

> distributed in, 143 

Charleston Tract Society, 202 
Chickering, Rev. Joseph, mem- 
ber of Executive Com. 73 
Children's Books, 130, 177 

China, Tracts wanted in, 143.— 
circulated in, 197 

Christian Almanack, its Useful- 
ness, 76, 92, 108. — Exten- 
sive circulation, 76, 92, 108, 
129. — Various editions of, 
108, 129. — Avails of print 
many Tracts, 1 17. — Mercan- 
tile House circulates in one 
year, 10,000 copies, 117 
Church, Rev. John H. D. D. 
member of Executive Com- 
mittee, 5, 30, 40, 47, 53, 62, 
73, 88, 99, 126, 169. 
Church of JEnff. Tr. Soc. 187 



Cincinnati Tract Society, 205 
Clap, Mr. James, 203 

Claxton, Mr. George B. 201 
Codman, Rev. John, D. D. Cor- 
responding Secretary, 5, 30, 
40, 47, 53, 62, 73.— member 
of Executive Committee, 62, 
73, 88, 99, 126, 169. 
Connecticut Tract Soc. 198 

— Bj anch of Amer.Tr.Soc. 203 
Constitution of the Society, 6 
' Conversation in a Boat,' useful- 
ness of, 163 
Coylfe, Mr. John, Jun. 205 

D 

'Dairyman's Daughter,' history 
of, 69.— Usefulness of, 86.— 
Extensive circulation of, 69 
Danish Tract Society, 1 93 

Denominations of Christians, all 
may unite in Amer. Tract 
Society, 6, 18 

Depositories of Amer. Tr. Soc. 
173. — Should be constantly 
supplied, 79. — Compared to 
fountains, 78. — Want of, 
111, 124.— West of Allegha- 
ny, 132 
Donations to print specified 
Tracts, 172 
Donors, Original, 26 
Douglass, Mrs. Margaret, 104 
Dublin, Rel. Tract and Book 
Society, 190 
Dwight, Mr. Louis, Agent of the 
Society, 64 . — Increases its 
activity, 64. — Addresses cir- 
cular to Ladies, 66. — Inter- 
esting incidents in his agen- 
cy, 71 

E 

Eastern Diocese, Tract Society 

for, 203 

Edinburgh Tract Society, 189 

Edwards Rev. Justin, member of 

Executive Committee, 47, 

53,62,73,88,99, 126, 169. 



fftDEX. 



211 



Corresponding Secretary,88, 
99, 126, 169. 
Eisleben Tract Society, 193 

Elberfeld Tract Society, 59, 194 
Emerson, Mrs. Eleanor, Conver- 
sion of, printed as a Tract, 
104—106 
Emerson, Rev. Joseph, member 
of Executive Committee, 5 
Engravings used for Tracts, 128 
Evangelical Tr. Soc. Boston, 200 
Evarts, Jeremiah, Esq. Treasur- 
er, 5, 30, 40, 47 



Farrar, Samuel, Esq. member of 
Executive Committee, 5,30, 
40. — Treasurer, 25.— Audi- 
tor, 47, 53, 126, 169. 

* Fatal Effects of Ardent Spirits,' 
usefulness of, 156 

Fay, Rev. Warren, member of 
Executive Committee, 88, 
96, 126, 169. 

Finnish Tract Society, 59, 192 

Fisk, Rev. Mr. circulates Tracts 
in Western Asia, 196 

Flagg and Gould, appointed 
General Depositaries, 42 

Florida, Tracts wanted in, 82 

Foreign Missions, aided by Tr. 
116, 196.— Tracts circulat- 
ed in connexion with, 196 

Formation of the Society, 5. — 
Proceedings reported at, 24 

Fredericksburg Tr. Soc. 206 

' Friendly Conversation,' useful- 
ness of, 167 

Funds of the Society, state of, 
each year, 178 

G 

Gano, Sally S. 201 

Georgia, Tracts wanted in, 111 

Germany, Tract Socc. in, 193 

Gibson, Mrs. John, 204 

Glasgow Tract Society, 189 

Goodwin, Miss R. E. 203 
Grants, of the Society's publica- 



tions, 136 — For gratuitous 
distribution, 132, 133. — To 
Bombay, 93.— Of funds to 
print Tracts inMahratta, 93, 
117, 144. 
Gratuitous distribution, funds 
needed for, 80, 133 

Gray, Henry, Esq. elected Treas- 
urer, 5 
Gray, Mr. John, 206 
; Great Question Answered,' 
translated by Rev. Dr. 
Henderson, puts in opera- 
tion Bible Societies in North 
of Europe, 84, 153 
Greatheed, Rev. Samuel, 180 
Guardians and W T ards, a Tract 
for, 103 

H 

Haddington Tract Society, 190 
Hall, Rev. Gordon, letter from, 80 
Hallock, Mr. William A. Agent 
of the Society, 100. — Diffus- 
es information, 100. — Visits 
numerous places, 100. — As- 
sistant Secretary, 169 
Hamburg Tract Society, 194 
Hanover Tract Society. 59, 194 
Hands, Rev. J. Letter from, 160 
Hartford Evangelical Tr. So. 203 
Hawes, Rev. Joel, 203 
Hawker's Tracts, 181 
Henderson, Rev. Dr. circulates 
Tracts in Finland and Rus- 
sia, 192. — Letter from La- 
dy of, 153. See 'Great 
Question Answered,' and 
Paterson. 
Henry, Alexander, Esq. 201 
Hesselius, Mrs. 204 
Hill, Henry, Esq. distributes 
Spanish Tracts, 136 
History of Tracts, 68 
Hobart, Right Rev. John H. 
D. D. 199 
Hodge, Miss Mary D. 203 
Homes, Mr. Henry, 203.— Audi- 
tor. 40 



212 



INDEX. 



Homilies, list of, - 186 

Hosmer, Mr. Charles, 203 

Hunting-ton, Rev. Joshua, Re- 
cording Secretary, 5, 30,40, 
47, 53, 62. 

I 

Iceland Tract Society, 191 

India, Tracts wanted in, 30 — 
82. — Acceptable and use- 
ful in, 160— 162. —Dona- 
tions to print Tracts in, 172 

Indians, Penobscot, Tracts want- 
ed for, 157 

Infidel converted by 6 Praying 
Negro,' 60 

Intemperance, usefulness of Tr. 
on, 101, 120. See Fatal 
Effects. 

Ireland, Tr. and Book Soc. 190 



Jaffra Tract Society, 1 95 

Jenks, Mr. John, 2d Vice Pres- 
ident, 47, 53 
Jenks, Rev. William, distributes 
Spanish Tracts, 136 
Jews, Tracts wanted for, 96. — 
Donation to print a Tract 
for, 172 
Johnston, Mr. Samuel, 205 
Judge of Probate, aged, donation 
from, 103 

K 

Keene Tract Society, 202 

Kentucky, Tr.wanted in,139,140 



Lady, donation of a pious, 71 
Languages, Tracts printed in va- 
rious, 58, 183, 186, 183. 
Lathrop, Rev. Eleazar, distrib- 
utes Span. Tr._in Florida, 136 
Lausanne Tract Society, 59, 195 
Leeds Tract Society, 184 

Letters, from Rev. Daniel Smith, 
44. — Gentleman, 72. — Sai- 
lor, 72. — Aged Gentleman, 



72. — Missionary in Bombay, 
95, — Young Clergyman in 
Tennessee, 123. — Rev. L. 
Whitney, 123.— Mr. David 
Brown, 124.— Mr. John C. 
Brigham, 124. — Valuable 
Correspondent, 145. — Lady 
of Rev. Dr. Henderson, 153. 
— Messrs. Bird andGoodell, 
159. — Secretary London 
Rel. Tract Soc. 153. — Of 
Prayer Book and Homi- 
ly Society, 154. — Of Liver- 
pool Tr. Soc. 159. —Mis- 
sionary in United States, 156. 
— Agent of Depository in O- 
hio, 156. — Instructor among 
Penobscot Indians, 157. — 
Correspondents, 158. 
Lewis, Mr. Zechariah, 206 

Lexington Tract Society, 206 
Liberia, Tracts wanted in, 133 
Library of the Society, 2, 135 
Life members, how constituted, 
and privileges of, 6. — Im- 
portance of Ladies constitut- 
ing their Ministers, 66^ 101, 
1 13. — Their numberincreas- 
ed, 75, 101, 134 

Liverpool Tract Society, 188. — 
Receipt of its publications, 136 
London Religious Tract Society, 
its history and operations, 
58, 180. — Its Auxiliaries, 
184. — Its publications, 183. 
— Extracts from 24th Re- 
port, 150, 152, 160—168.— 
Grant of Spanish Tracts,136. 
— Receipt of its publications, 
136. — Correspondence with, 
135. — Gives rise to British & 
Foreign Bible Society, 180 

Prayer Book and Homily 

Society, J 85. — Receipt of 
its publications, 136. See 
Letters. 

Jews' Soc. circulates Tr.196 

Methodist Tr. Society, 189 

Louisiana, Tr. wanted in, 1 12 



INDfiX. 



213 



Lyngby Tract Society, 193 

Lyon, M. 205 

M 
McCalla, Mrs. Martha, 206 

Machias, grant to, 133 

Madras Tract Society, 195. — 
Tracts circulated at, 196 
Magazine, American Tract, com- 
menced, 130 

London Tract, 131, 182 

Malta, Tracts wanted at, 118. — 
Published at, 196. — Dona- 
tion for, 172 
Maryland Pr.Book & Tr. Soc. 205 
Mason, L. and Rev. T. 204 
Massachusetts Society for Prom. 
Chr. Knowledge, 198 
Mediterranean, Tracts wanted in 
ports of, 118 
Merchant presents a Tract on the 
Sabbath, 148 
Merchants, two converted by 
Tracts, 148 
Mexico, Tracts wanted in, 113 
Mills, Rev. Samuel J. distributes 
Tracts at South & West, 44, 
105. 
Milne, the late Rev. Dr. 197 

Letter from, 143 

Ministers of the Gospel may cir- 
culate Tracts, 57 
Missionaries want Tracts, 196 
Modern Greek, Tracts published 
in, 196 
Montgomery, the poet, extracts 
from report written by, 51 
More, Mrs. Hannah, usefulness 
of Tracts of Cheap Reposito- 
ry, by her and others, 60, 
180. — Considers Shepherd of 
Salisbury Plain most useful 
of her publications, 148. — 
Compared with Lord Nel- 
son, 60 
Morrison, Rev. Dr. 197 
Morristown Fern. Tr. Soc. 204 
Morse, Rev. Jedidiah, D.D. 
Vice President and member 



of Executive Committee, 5 4 
30, 40, 47, 53, 62. 



N 



195 

206 



46 
194 
202 
204 
203 



Nagercoil, Native Tr. Soc. 
Nassau Hall Tract Soc. 
Negro, a pious, 46. — Tracts 

useful to a, 
Netherlands Tract Soc. 
Nevins, Rev. William, 
Newark Tr. Soc. 
Newburyport Fern. Tr. Soc. 
New Orleans, Tracts in the con- 
vent of nuns at, 44 
New South Wales Tr. Soc. 195 
New York, Religious Tract Soci- 
ety, 199. — Female Branch, 
200. 

Protestant Episcopal Tract 

Society, 199 

Methodist Tract Soc. 204 

State Tract Soc. 206 

Tracts wanted in, 138, 141 

N. Carolina, Tr. wanted in, 111 

Northern Union Tr. Soc. 193 

Nova Scotia, Tracts in, 198. — 

Letter from a Correspondent 

in, 163 

O 

Oesel, Tracts printed at, 193 

Ohio, Tracts wanted in, 138, 

139, 141, 142.— Letter from 

Agent of Depository in, 156 

River, Tr. wanted on, 125 

Ontario, Lake, Tracts wanted 

on shores of, 139 

Origin of the Society, 3 

Original Dcnors, 4, 26 

Osgood, Rev. Thaddeus, 140,203 



Palestine, Tr. distributed in, 159 
Paris Tract Society 195 

Paterson, Rev. Dr. unites with 
Rev. Dr. Henderson in be- 
nevolent efforts, 153. — Pro- 
motes cause of Tracts in 
Sweden, 191. — Russia, and 
Finland, 192. 



214 



INDEX. 



c Persuasive to Public Worship,' 
means of conversion, 1 1 9 

Philadelphia, Religious Tract 
Society, 200. — Sunday Sc. 
Union, 201. — Receipt of its 
publications, 136. — Female 
Tract Soc. 201.-— Homily 
Soc. St. Paul's Church, 205 

Phillips, Hon. Samuel, suggests 
first Society in U. S. for dis- 
tributing Tracts, 198 

Pinkerton, Rev. Dr. letter from, 
164. 

Pittsburgh Tract Soc. 206 

Prayer Book and Homily Society, 
London, 185. — Receipt of its 
publications, and French & 
Spanish Tracts from, 136 

* Praying Negro,' means of con- 
version, 60 

Providence Fern. Tr. Soc. 201 

Prussian Tract Society, 193 

R 

Raleigh Fern. Tr. Soc. 203 

Reed, Hon. William, president 

of the Soc. 47, 53, 62, 73, 

88, 99. 

Reeve, Rev. W. distributes Tr. 

in India, 162 

Rice, Rev. Luther, 206 

Rotterdam Missionary Society 

publishes Tracts, 194 

Russia, Tracts in, 59, 164, 192. 

— Blessed by a single Tract, 

85, 92. 

S 
Sabbath, profaned in United 
States, 10. — Usefulness of a 
Tract on, 119,124 
School Unions, Tracts in con- 
nexion with, 197. — England, 
Ireland, and Scotland, 197 
— • Schools, series of Tracts for, 

130, 177 

Sandwich Islands, grant to, 133 

Savannah Tract Society, 204 

School Teachers may circulate 

Tracts, 57 



Scotland, Tr. Societies in, 189 
Scudder, Dr. letter from, 143 
Seaman converted by Tract, 17 
Seamen, Tracts wanted by, 94 

158, 168. 

'Shepherd of Salisbury Plain,' 

means of con version, 94, 148. 

See More. 

; Sin no Trifle,' usefulness of, 167 

4 Sixteen Short Sermons,' history 

of, 68, 86, 121. 
Slack, Rev. Elijah, 205 

Smith, Mr. Floyd, 199 

Smith, Rev. Daniel, letter from, 
44. — Travels at South and 
West, 44. — Prints ' Conver- 
sion of Mrs. Emerson,' 104. 
— His activity, 105. — His 
death. 105. 
Society for Prom. Chr. Knowl- 
edge, England, 179. 
South America, Tracts wanted 
in, 95, 113, 114.— Tracts in, 
198. — Exploring Missionary 
sent to, 114. 
Spanish Tracts, want of, 114. — 

Receipt of, 136. 
Stereotype plates, 128 

Stockholm Tract Society, 59, 191 
Storrs, Rev. Richard S. Record- 
ing Secretary, 73, 88, 99, 
126, 169 
Stuart, Rev. Moses, Vice Presi- 
dent, 99, 126, 169 
Stutgard Tract Soc. 59, 194 

Summary of operations of the So- 
ciety, 178. See Table. 
; Swearer's Prayer, history of, 69. 
— Printed by a poor pious 
female, 71. — Usefulness of, 
86, 87, 114, 144, 146, 163, 
165, 166, 167, 168. 



Table of Tract Societies, 207 
Tappan, Professor, 198 

Tennessee, Tracts wanted in, 141 

East, Tract Society, 205 

Tinnevelly, Tracts at, 197 



INDEX. 



215 



Tract, influence of a single, 153 
Tracts, should contain pure truth 
18. — Be plain, striking, en- 
tertaining, full of ideas, a- 
dapted to all conditions, 19, 
20.— Ways of distributing, 1 5 
— Acceptable, 154, 155. — 
the most pungent the most 
popular, 156. — Means of ac- 
cess to sinners, 90. — May be 
used in absence of other 
means, 90. — A blessing to 
community, 34. — Useful in 
Pagan lands, 91, 196. 

— distribution of, an easy way 
of doing good, 13. — A cheap 
way, not likely to give of- 
fence, 14. — Extensive in its 
use, 15. — Aids other means 
of grace, 16. — Happy effects 
of, 17, 69, 70, 72, 85—87, 94 
101,121, 124, 144—148, 154 
— 168. — A blessing to the 
distributor, 146, 156.— De- 
manded by state of our 
country, 35. — All bound to 
engage in, 56. 

Societies should cooperate 

with all others. See Benev- 
olent Societies, History, Vol- 
umes. 

Troy, Tract Society, 199 

U 
Utica Tract Society, 204 

V 

Van Pelt, A. S. 205 

Van Rensselaer, Hon. Ste- 
phen, 206 
Vermont, Tracts wajated in, 139 



Vermont Tract Society, 199 
Virginia, Tracts wanted in, 111 

Common Prayer Book and 

Tract Society, 206 

Vivian's Dialogues, means of con- 
version, 17 
Voltaire, publishes infidel Tracts, 
8. — His weapons turned a- 
gainst him, 8, 179, 182. 
Volumes, Tracts bound in, 67, 77, 
128. — Valuable to families, 
77, 107. 

W 

6 Warning Voice,' means of con- 
version, 144 
Wasa Tract Society, 192 
Washington City Tract Soc. 205 

Baptist General Tract 

Society, 206 

Watson, Mr. Ebenezer, 206 

Western States, Tracts wanted 
in, 123—125 

White Mountains, a travel- 
ler near, 147 
Whitney, Rev. L. letter from, 123 
Woods, Rev. Leonard, D.D. 
member of Executive Com- 
mittee, 5, 30, 40, 47. 
Worcester, Rev. Samuel, D. D. 
Vice President, 73, 88. 
Wupper Valley Tract Socie- 
ty, 194 
Wurtemburg Tract Society, 194 



Young, Mr. Samuel, 202 

c Young Cottager,' happy effects 
of, 49, 120 

Young woman in a jail, convert- 
ed by Tract* 146 



20(d. A. 

Q/wuA. . <JAXXJtL o caxtu- 



\ 



L'BRARY OF CONGRESS 



022 171 554 8 



