Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



(- /^O'^/. Jl^- i> 




HARVARD 
COLLEGE 



LIBRARY 




^ PROCEEDINGS 



OV THJB 



f 

FIRST TEJV YEARS 



OF THE 



Asmmi^oAiT ?mA(OT s(0(0O?r7» 



INSTITUTED AT BOSTON, 1814, 



TO WHICH IS ADDED A BRIEF VIEW OF THE PHIirCIPAX. BELIGIOVt 
TEACT SOCIETIES THEOUGHOUT THE WO&XJ). 



PKIRTED FOR 
THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

BT FLAGO AND GOULD. 
1824. 



C 10(}HU10S 




FORM OF A BE^^ST TO THE SOCIETY. 

I give unto the Treasurer, for the time being, of the Jinurican 
Tract Society^ instituted at Boston in the year 1814, the sum of 

Dollars, for the purposes of said Society, 
and for which the receipt of such Treasurer shall be a sufficient 
dischai^e. 



LIBRARY. 

The Committee of the American Tract Society would suggest, 
that Donations of Books, for the purpose of forming a Library for 
the use of the Publishing Committee in the discharge of their ap- 
propriate duties, will be very acceptable ; and will, they trust, es- 
sentially promote the objects of the Institution. Any works of gen- 
eral utility are desirable, particularly those upon Theological sub- 
jects, and Books of Reference. 



PREFACE. 

The hand of Providence has been strikingly exhibited, in 
condactjng many of the Benevolent Institutions which char- 
acterize the present age, from very' small beginnings, to a 
state of powerful and successful operation. This remark is 
applicable to the American Tract Society, the origin of 
which may be traced to a little n\eeting of half a dozen indi- 
viduab, assembled to enjoy the advantages of christian in- 
tercourse, and to consult upon the interests of the Redeem- 
er's kingdom. A circumstance in itself unimportant, had 
suggested to one of them the thought, that a few choice 
Tracts, printed in large editions, might be afforded to be- 
nevolent individuals in the neighbourhood, at a much less 
expense, than the little books which they were frequent- 
ly purchasing for gratuitious distribution. The idea was 
suggested to his brethren, and excited so much interest, 
as to be made the subject of conversation and serious re- 
ikction, which soon led to a proposition for forming a small 
Tract Society to put the design io ezecation. As the sub- 
ject was contemplated, it grew in importance ; and though 
perhaps no one, at that time, anticipated that the Society 
they were about' to form, would extend throughout the 
Tfnited States, yet it was seen that the subject demanded 
more mature consideration, and fervent prayer to the fa- 
ther of mercies for his guidance and blessing. 

It was but a few days, before the Constitution which 
still forms the bond of union to the Society, was adopted ; 
and a subscription opened, giving each donor the privi- 
lege of receiving Tracts for gratuitious distribution, to a 
considerable part of the amount of the sum contributed. 

The plan was communicated to numerous friends ; and 
meeting their approbation, persons were designated to 



superintead auch meaeares as might be adnpled previous 
to tbe time flpecitied for the formal organization of the 
Society. In tbe mean time contributions ivere made ; and 
tbe drst Tract, contaioiDg addresBes rccommeDding tbe 
distribution of Religious Tracts, and testlmouies to their 
usefulDGsa, viaa published aod circulated. This excited a 
deeper and more extensive interest. The work was in* 
deed begun ; and many seemed anxious lo lake a part in 
it. A large number of individuiils advanced a sum suffi- 
cient lo print each a Tract of his own choice — and such 
was the blessing of God upon tbeir elTorls, that, though 
bound together by scarcely any thing but christian affec- 
tion, in lesG than three mouths previous to (he formation 
of the Society, in May, 13U, fifty Tracts were printed, 
comprising two volumes of the Society's publications, and 
amounting, in nil, to about three hundred thousand copies. 

Such was the origin of the Society, of whoso proceed- 
jngB for the first ten years, the Committee, in obedience to 
tbe call of friends and patrons, now present a brief out- 
i!"G. They have supposed it expedient to record tbe do- 
ings of the Society, so far as practicable, in the order of 
time; and to present, in Buccession, the ten Annual Re- 
ports, nilh such alterations as the nature of tiiis publica- 
tion seemed to require. 

The Committee trust that the brief view of similar So- 
cieties in varioue parts of the world, which they have add- 
ed, will not be unacceptable to those whose interest in Re- 
ligious TracU as an instrument of promoting the Redeem- 
er's cause in the earth, has occasioned (he pubUcatioD of 
this little volume. — To them it is afTectlonately commend- 
ed J with humble reliance on the aids of (he Holy Spirit, 
without whose blessing the Committee wish ever to feel 
that all their efforts will be in vain. 



FORMATION OF THE SOCIETY. 



At a meetiDg held in Boston^ May 23, 1814, after the 
dae appointment of a Chairman, 

It was resolved unanimously, 

That the members of this meeting learn, with much 

pleasure^ the measures which have been adopted with 

reference to the formation of a Society for the purpose of 

printing and distributing Religious Tracts ; and that it ap- 

^ pears desirable to form such a Society. 

The Constitution, previously framed, was then present- 
ed ; and having been adopted, the following gentlemen 
were elected as Officers for the year ensuing, viz : 

WILLIAM BARTLET, Esq. Newburyport, Prmdent. 
Rev. JEDEDIAH MORSE, D. D. Charlestown, V. Pres. 
Rev. JOHN CODMAN, Dorchester, Corresp. Secretary, 
Rev. JOSHUA HUNTINGTON, Boston, Rec. Secretary^ 

HENRY GRAY, Esq.* Boston, Treasurer. 
Mr. SAMUEL T. ARMSTRONG, Boston, Atsistant Treat. 

Rev. JEDED'AH MORSE, D. D. v 

Rev. LEONARD WOODS, D. D. Andover, / e.^,^„, • , 
Rev. JOHN H. CHURCH, Pelharo, N. H. > rT^^inL 
Rev. JOSEPH EMERSON, Beverly, \ ^«"»'»«««v 

SAMUEL FARRAR, Esq. Andover, ^ 

• Mr. Gray declining to act as Treasurer, the office was trans- 
ienred to Jeremiah Evarts, Csa. Boston. 

1* 



CONSTITUTION. 7 

ally, than is sufficient to constitute him a member, shall be 
entitled to receive Tracts in the same proportion and at 
the same rate. 

Art. 5. There shall be an annual meeting of the Society 
in Boston, on the Monday preceding the General Election, 
at 6 o^clock, p. M. when a President, a Vice President, a 
Corresponding Secretary, a Recording Secretary, a Treas- 
urer, an Assistant Treasurer, an Auditor, and an Executive 
Committee, shall be appointed by ballot. 

Ari, 6. It shall be the duty of the Executive Committee 
to superintend the publication and distribution of Tracts ; 
to procure a place of deposit in Boston ; to appoint corres- 
ponding cora^iittees ; to appoint a general agent, who shall 
conduct the sales ; and to make report of their doings at 
each annual meeting. 

ArL 7. It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to make 
an annual Report to the Society. 

Art. 8. Any Religious or Charitable Society, or any As- 
sociation of persons for the reformation of morals, or the 
suppression of vice, shall be ^titled to receive Tracts at 
cost. 

Art, 9. No assessment shall be laid upon the members 
in addition to the annual subscription. 

Art. 10. Every meeting of the Society shall be opened 
and closed vvith prayer. 

Art. 11. At any annual meeting, such amendments of 
the Constitution may be made, as shall be recommended 
by the Executive Commi<ltee, and approved by two thirds 
of the members present. 

^% See plan of an Auxiliary Society, page 38. 



TO THE 

FRIENDS OF RELIGION,. 



NEW ENGLAND. 

That the exleosive distribution of cheap Tracts, must 
have an importmil inSueace upon the community, cannot be 
doubled. This inSuence will be g-ood, or bad, according to 
the nature of the Tracts distritiiled. The splendid talents 
orVoltajre ivereneveremployed agaln^itCbristiaDity nilh 
so much effect, as wheu tbey were devoted to the writing 
of small tracts, of licentious tendency, for gniluitous dis- 
persion among common people. A respeclahle writer, who ■ 
had umple means of informatiou, afiirme, that Ihe industry 
and efforts of a few infidels, directed to this object, was a 
prime instrument of producing those terrible conruisions, 
which have since shaken the civilized world. The British 
Gbristinns, taught b^ the zeal and ealerprlse of infidels, re- 
solved ' to foil the enemy at his own weapons.' A Society 
was formed, whose design was to print Religious Tracts, in 
BO great quantities, and at so cheap a rate, that good men of 
small means might be able to give thera away; and that all 
the hawkers and tilllc pamphletshopsinlhe kingdom, might 
be enlisted, from the ordinary love of gain, to aid their cir- 
culation. The success of this undertaking surpassed Ihe 
most sanguine expectations ol'its friends. From the last 
Report of this Society, it appears that its Tracts have cir- 
culated "from the shores sf Ibe Baltic lo the Cape of Good 
Mope, through Ihe whole of Europe and India, and were 
pressing upon Ihe inhabilRiits of China ; and Ihal within 
Ihe shon period since the Inslttntion commenced ils ope- 
rations, upwards of thirtecn miij.[ons of Traeli have bten 
dittr^uttd by ill agency." 

Wilbln the same period, simitar Societies bnve been es' 
tahlished in Tarious countries of Europe, particularly in 
Denmark and Sweden. By one parish in the latter king- 
dom 600,000 Tracts have been distributed; and 500,000 



TO VBK FRIXVDI 09 RBUOIOV, 

in another place, by the benefoleoce of a single wealthy 
individual. 

In different parts of oar own country, many hare engaged 
in the same good work with no inconsiderable zeal and 
snccesfl* Indeed the amount of jrood already accomplished 
in the United States, by means of Religious Tracts, can noT* 
er be estimated, till it is revealed in the light of eternity. 
But much remains to be done. No Society has hitherto 
been established, on a plan of operation sufficiently exten* 
sire and permanent to answer all the great purposes for 
which soch an institution is needed. To create a Society 
that shall possess means adequate to these purposes, is the 
design of the plan herewith presented to the public. 

It is to be distinctly understood, that this Society is not 
designed to interfere with the province of religious Maga- 
zines. Much of the matter which renders these period!* 
cal works especially valuable to their readers, is not adapt* 
ed to the design of Tracts. These must be simple, serious, 
practical. They must be intelligible to the ^ way-faring 
man,' and the tenant of the cottage. Learned criticism, 
discussions in polemic theology, and even articles of relig- 
ious intelligence, unless comprised in a few sentences, can 
have no place in these little pamphlets which are design- 
ed for promiscuous and, to a great eitent, gratuitiont 
dispersion among those, who otherwise would scarcely 
read any thing. Instead of diminishing, they will doubt* 
less increase the demand for religious Magazines. 

It is to be understood also, that this Society is not intend- 
ed to supersede, or to interfere with any of those Tract or 
Moral Societies which are already established.. On the 
contrary, its primary object is to aid such Societies wher- 
ever they are formed ; to multiply their numbers, to en- 
courage and increase their efforts, till their salutary influ- 
ence shall be felt in every village of our country. 

Too long have good men stood still, in criminal supine- 
ness, or silent despondence, while a flood of licentiousness 
has been sweeping away the institutions of Christianity, 
and the landmarks of our fathers. It is time that they, 
who have slumbered amidst these growing impieties, or 
have wept over them in secret places, should unite in a 



■( to ' atrengtben the things that remaio, anil 
Ihnl nre ready to die.' 

The period is portenlous. While war with its dire ca- 
lamities rag'es over Christendom; while Ihe worst passions 
of men are let loose from restraint; while tbe world is 
overturned aod Ihe earth rent inpieces ; it becomes the 
iriends of Zion lo adore the righteous Providence that is 
thus smiting Ihe nations. But it becomes them not to sit 
down in sloth. God has made every man responsible for 
the use or abuse of his personal inllueace. Whether that 
inftueace is great or small, he is sacredly hound to employ 
it in doing good. Tbe field for action is exieosive; the mO' 
tives to Hclion are various and momentous. In IbisChriS' 
linn land, the Sabbath is dreadfully profaned, and in some 
places, is in danger of being utterly forgotten. Multitudes 
throng the road lo death. Tbese immortal creatures can- 
not be brought to consideration, till they are first brought 
to read. They cannot read without books ; and a great 
proportion of ihem will never have books, unless they are 
Curoished by the hand of charity. Uere then is an urgent 
caH for the exercise of Christian benevolence, on a large 
scale. The New Esoland Tiwct Societv is established 
for the purpose of publishing a great variety of the best 
Tracts that can be procured, by selection, or original com* 
position, and in such quantities as to supply all the demands 
of individuals or Societies, in difTerent parts of the country. 
The deep interest which this subject has already esclled, 
tbe promptitude and liberality with which many have en- 
tered into the plan, and contributed the means for its ex- 
ecution, J3 regarded as an auspicious omen that it will be 
attended with (he blessing of Heaven, and the cordial co- 
operation of the friends of religion. 



AM 

ADDRESS TO CHRISTIANS, 

RECOMMENDING THE 

DISTRIBUTION OF RELIGIOUS TRACTS. 

When JesQS was on earth, he went about doing good. 
Can he claim the name of a disciple who does not imitate 
the example of the Master ? Are we not in this respect pe- 
culiarly called on to have the same mind in ns, which was 
also in Christ Jesus? A spirit of actife benevolence is one 
of the distinguishing features of Christianity. Thou shah 
love tky neighbour as thyself^ is a precept enjoined by the 
authority, and illustrated and enforced by the example of 
the Redeemer, with an energy which nothing but the 
blindness and obduracy of human depravity could resist. 

Where the Gospel has its full influence, it calls into ex- 
ertion all the powers of the soul ; and produces the most 
tender concern for the happiness of mankind. This conceiti 
does not evaporate in unavailing pity ; but rouses to action^ 
and girding itself for service, inquires,^ What can be done 
toward banishing human misery, and making man happy V 
While the temporal necessities of the poor and the afflicted 
are affectionately inquired into and relieved, the Christian, 
enlightened from above to view the state of man, as an im- 
mortal being, is most concerned for his eternal blessedness. 
This is the grand object he is called to pursue wilh seven- 
fold ardor ; and it is an object so vast, that if we saw all its 
excellence and all its importance, it would cover us with 
shame and confusion for our past negligence, and pierce us 
to the heart, while we recollect so many precious opportu- 
nities of usefulness which now, alas ! are irrecoverably 
lost. We have all need to go again, and sit down at the 
feet of Jesus, and hear him discourse on the one thing need- 
ful. We have all need to go and stand at the foot of the 
cross, and look up, and see in the death of Jesus the val- 
ue of jmmortal souls ; and learn thence the proper em- 
ployment of beings destined for eternity. If Jesus con- 
descend to teach us, and open our eyes to see the state 



12 ADDRESS TO CHBISTIANS. 

and worth of souls, we shall, tvith tager desire to hecome 
iDBtnimentfi oflbeir salvatign, crj outia leoderpity, Z^oriJ) 
Vihal will ikau have me to do ? 

This \i the age of ingenuity. Hom m-aay discoveries 
useful to individuals and to society huve been made since 
we Rrsl Icod the slage of life, and took our part in the dra- 
ma of h'iman afTiiirs. But is there an object io nhicb [be 
ingenuity of the mind should be so ardently employed aa 
iu searcbiDg for the best wny, aod the various meaDs of 
doing good to the souls of men 7 Would it not be to tha 
most bumitiating disgrace of Christians, if Iba mechanii^ 
the manufacturer, the artist, and the phiioaopber, wer^ 
all actively employed with the utmost stretch of thought 
to find out what may be useful in their peculiar art or sci- 
ence, while the professed disciples of Jesus employ no ep> 
ergies, nor eiert the vigour of their souls in their propel 
department, the cause of their blessed Master? Let of 
not be excelled by any; and, if possible, let the mai * 
' That the children of tbia world are wiser in their ^ 
eration (ban the children of light,' become inapplicable 
to us. Whatever may be said as to past negligence, le^. 
it now appear that we are busied in discovering everj. 
■may o( access for divine truth into the human heart ; and 
that we are resolved to employ every means we can think 
of as conducive to that end. 

Among many others, none of which should be neglect- 
ed, there is one which merits peculiar notice, and whic^ 
we would earnestly recommend to the serious attention <if 
the disciples of Jesus, as calculated to be of emmeot aa4, 
eilensive benefit: namely, 

THE DISTRIBUTION OF RF.UGIOUS TRACTS. 

To this subject many zealous followers of (he Redeem- 
er, who are a blessing lo the generation in which Ibey 
live, have never turned their thoughts; and at lirst siglrf 
may not perceive its great nllliiy : hut when tbey bavBi 
examined it maturely, Ihey will tind Ihnl there remains nac 
method of doing gooil, which they nf ver used, and which, 
they will now have the pleasure to employ. 

The advantages which may be expected to resuJt froin 



, ^'^RESB TO CBRI1TUII8. 13 

the distributioD^f Religious Tracts^ are indeed so many 
and 80 great, that, where duly weighed, it is to be hoped 
they will have a powerful influence on the mind of every 
loverof Jesus and of souls. The following will he readily 
qUofwed, and carry with them their own recommendation. 
It is a method which is likely to do good. Is not divine 
truth the grand instrument, of which God makes use for 
the conversion of sinners, and for the edilication and com- 
fort of saints, till they come, in the unity of the faith and 
of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, 
jto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ? All 
the wonders of faith, holiness, and patience, which Chris- 
tians have displayed, have been wrought by the influence 
tff truth upon the .soul. In the promulgation of truth by 
preachings which was God's first way of making the Gos- 
:pel known, there are assuredly some ueculiar advantages. 
-Bat in doing it by writing, there are advantages also ; and 
it {las this recommendation, that it is God's chief way of 
•V^kiog himself known to the human race from age to age, 
and of presenting truth to the minds of men from day to 
-day-io every land where the revelation of his will is known. 
Are there not thousands and tens of thousands now in glo- 
ly, whose first impressions of religion, as well as their fa- 
tare ifoprovement, have been made by treading ; and is it 
not calculated to be as useful now, as ever? What is a 
^Religieiis Tract, but a select portion of divine truth, de- 
f ligBed and adapted to make the reader wise unto salvation? 
It is an eiuymay of doing good. Every one has not the 
talent of talking to those he meets with, especially tostran- 
: gers,- «n. subjects of religion. They who possess- this tal- 
ent cannot see what should hinder any body from convers- 
. ing about eternal things, as readily as they do. But there 
. are many pious people who find it extremely difficult to 
speiftk for God, and for the salvation of their fellow crea- 
tures. Some have a diffidence which they cannot over- 
come. They know that they ought to warn sinners of 
their -danger ; but how to do it they cannot tell. Here is 
a method by which it may be done with case. Choose 
from your collection of Tracts what you think is suited to 
the person to whom you wish to speak. It is not hard to 
say, ^ My friend, read that, and tell me what you think of 

2 



14 ADDRESa TO CHIUST1A5S. 

it.' Vou have giveu faim a wise, failhrul) and aerioiN 
couDsel, which, accompRnied with your prayers, (nod 
these should never be omitted when jou give a Tract,)' 
may, by the blessing of Heaven, be made useful to b\» 
soul. You may, in consequence of this, aAerwards have! 
an opportunity of conversing with him on the subjectJ 
At any rate you have conveyed divine Irulh to the door 
•f his mind. 

[t is a cheap way of diffusing the knowledge of religioiki 
The Tracts are in general small. They may be had ata 
very reasonable rate; and the person who will devote t| 
smalt sum nnnually for this purpose, may convey to manjr 
hundred people in the course of a year, the knowledga 
of the way of salvation by a crucified Redeemer. A cent 
or two, which would furnish but a scanty relief to the bod" 
ity wants of the poor and the destitute, will purchase ■ 
Religious Tract, plainly and affectionately directing tha 
sinner to the 'Lamb ofGod, which taketb away the sini 
of the world,' None will grudge the pittance, or com' 
plain that this is a dear way of doing good to the souls of 
men. It will he indeed difficult to say, in what other waj; 
there is a probability of so much good being done with so 
small a sum. 

It is nor so likely to give offence as some other methods 
of doing good. When we speak loa neighbour or a straD« 
gee on divine things, he is apt to consider lis as assuming 
the place of a master, and setting up for his superior in 
knowledge and goodness. Pride instantly lakes the alarm. 
He scorns to he dictated, as he conceives it. His heart 
is steeled against counsel, and a tart answer, expressive o( 
disdain, is all the fruit of our labour. But when a littls: 
Tract is put into his hand, the teacher is not the giver of, 
the book ; but a third person, an absent leitered lage. It il 
read apart from him who gave it. The idea of inferiorW 
ty, which was so mortifying, is removed. There is not that 
enmity against the paper and print, which was r^tised bf^ 
ihe presence and living voice of the instructer; and hs 
listens with greater candor and patience. This method 
has more the appearance of a person's teaching himself, 
than when he is spoken to by another, and is on that ac- 
count more agreeable to his feelings, and the trulh is mors 
readily received. Some are accessible in no other way. 



▲DDREflS TO CHRISTUm. lo 

4 

It is more extentive in its use^ than any other method of 
conyeying religions knowledge which a private Christian 
can employ. Persooal instractioD must, from the time it 
requires, be limited to few comparatively. A Religious 
Tract cootaiDS a plain, serious, and striking lectnre on the 
salvation of the soul. It would require half an hour to de- 
Hver its contents ; and th^y might slip out of the memory, 
and could not afterwards be recalled. Bat it is given away 
in an instant ; it may be perused and re-perused at pleasure; 
and the truth may thus flow through a great variety of 
channels. An intimate and respected friend has for some 
time endeavoured to do good in this way ; and what can 
be done, may be learned from his practice. He always 
keeps by him a store of Tracts of different kinds, and suit- 
ed to different characters ; and he pays particular atten- 
tion to character in the distribution. He gives them to 
his poor neighbours, and to people who call at his house. 
When he walks out, he tries to get into conversation with 
thoee he meets, and puts a Tract into their hands. He 
l^ves them to children to read to their parents. When he 
travels. Religious Tracts are a necessary part of his bag- 
gage. If he sees a person walking along the road, who 
is likely to listen to instruction, he reaches him a Tract. 
At every turnpike he hands the g^te keeper one ; and 
wishes him God's blessing with it. When he comes to an 
ino, he puts a Tract into the hands of the waiter, the ser- 
vant-maid, and the hostler; the driver never fails to have 
two or three. If he saunter about the town, he looks 
into the habitations of the poor, and talks kindly to them, 
and given the parents or the children one or two of his 
little books, with an affectionate wish that God may bless 
them. When he stops at a friend's house, he presents 
them to the children and servants. Besides these person- 
al distributions, be sends parcels of his Tracts to ministers 
of his acquaintance, and other friends in the country, for 
them to distribute in a similar manner. When it is con- 
sidered, that a Tract given by a friend, recommends it to 
an attentive perusal ; and when by a stranger, excites cu- 
riosity to see what it contains ; and that each of thesc^ 
Tracts may be read not only by the person who receives 
i^ bat by four or five more who compose his household ; 



16 ADDREBS TO CHR1STUK9. 

,< and tliat it mny be lent from one family to another ; ne 
may rorm aome idea how exlengively divioe Irulb is His^i 
Beminaled by bis means. What one person does, otherS> 
may do; and if every Christian, according' to his abihtien 
and oifportunitiea, were to exert himself in this manner/ 
how many in the course of a year might learn the method* 
ofsaivalinn by Christ, and be excited to seek after it on-' 
der the preaching' of the Gospel, who, in all probabililyji 
would not have beard of it in any other way ! 

Nor in the enumeration of advantages, should it be omit-^ 
ted, that the dislrihution of Religious Tracts /onnj an ex^x[.^ 
tent aecompaniinent to other mtam of doing good. If it 
intercourse of life you meet with a person who ap| 
teachable and desirous orinstruction, what can be more pro 
per, after you have discoursed with bim, than to say, "Her 
is a little book which will give you distinct informiition o 
the subject; read it again, and again, and pray to Qod fon 
hiB blessing." When by conversation you hare impressedf 
a persou with a sense of the importance of divine thii 
would it not conduce greatly to rivet the impression, i 
partin)^, when you observe him loutb to leave you, a TracH 
be put into his hands, with these words, "My friend, tbiBi 
will more fully explain what ne have been talking of; il^ 
Contains the truths of God V Should there fall in your wajfc 
a man distressed in mind, and inquiring with tears, " Whaf) 
must I do to be saved ?" can your pious counsels be better! 
followed up than by a Tract to read at home, directing th« 
wounded soul to the blood of Jesus, which cleanseth fronw 
nil sin? Has a person been awakened under the ministry^ 
of the word, and afterwards brin^ his complainls to th«1 
preacher, who with the tongue of the learned knows horn 
to speak a if ord in season to him that is wenry j would itj 
not be a very proper method of dismissing the inquirer, tM 
give him a Tract which will, when he is at a distance frortt^ 
ordinances or pious friends, refresh his heart with thesamO^ 
precious truths which he felt so much adapted to his case V 
How beneficiHl the practice here recommended would be< 
in all these, and many other instances which might be ad-^ 
duced, must be obvious to every one concerned for tbe^ 
welfare orimmorlal souls. 

In addition to these advantages and as a practical coiim 



ADDRESS TO CHJUSTUNS. 17 

firmatioD of tliea^ the happiest effiets. have resultedfrom tbe 
practice recomm^aded. Nothing haa the weight of facts: 
to &ir reaaoning^ therefore, it b of ase to subjoia examples 
Utuaj should say^ ^^ We are oot coovinced by your argu- 
meDts;^' they caimot controvert matters of fact Two in- 
itaDces came within the knowledge of an individual, (who 
is a warm-advocate for the distribution of Religious Tracts,) 
which he had from the lips of the pe^ons theopaelyes, an4 
which he will briefly relate. The Qai9- is a young gentle- 
man wba had been in a situation peculiarly unfavourable to 
religioa and morality, who was living in profaneness and 
Tice, and who discovered a peculiar enmity to real godli- 
9ess, and could not bear, without expressing bitter indigna- 
tion, the counsels of pious friends. A relation of his, being on 
a visit at the house where he lived, one evening put into 
his hand a Religious Tract, and begged the favour of him 
to read it. He took it up wilh him to his apartment; and 
before he went to rest looked over the first page. It 
struck him that something was (here he had never seen nor 
thought of before. He next day read the whole ; and the 
bappy consequence was a deep concern ibr the salvation of 
his soul, a discovery of the way of obtaining mercy, and an 
immediate application to Jesus for pardon,grace,and peace. 
He is now an eminently zealous Christian, and is vigorous- 
ly exerting himself to promote the knowledge of Christ in 
the neighbourhood where he resides. The Tract which 
proved so useful is peculiarly excellent, and merits a place 
in every collection. It is FivianU Three Dialogues between 
a Minister and one of his Parishioners, 

The other person had been a Seaman in the Navy. He 
was a Sabbath breaker, a drunkard, and a swearer ; in 
short, a notorious sinner. His wife brought home, from 
the country hospital, a Religious Tract, which is given to 
those who go out recovered. He read it and was convinced 
of his sinful ways. It led him immediately to attend on the ' 
preaching of the Gospel, where he could hear the way 
pointed out by which a sinner can be saved; and there is 
every reason to conclude, from several years' observation, 
that he is a true disciple of Jesus Christ. 

Let the worth of the soul be duly considered ; and what 
a reward is here for the labours of thousands I If twoex- 

2* 



amples full within the pergonal acqiiaiataoce of one man, 
how QiLiny, may we hope, will hare reason to bless God 
througli all eternity, for tbis method ofcoaveyiDg religious 
kuowledge; especially when we take into the accouDt, that 
numbers of persons have not the courage, nor the oppoi> 
tuaily, ofinakiDg known in this life, the benefit they have 
received. Heaven will present a thousand glorious instan* 
ces of this nature, to the astonishment and joy of faithful 
ministers, .ind of zealous Chrialians, who have laboured tdi 
shed abroad ibe sweet savour of the Redeemer's name, i 
From the aerious consideration ofthese things, accompa)-, 
tiled with the divine blessing which is earnestly implored, 
to descend on every reader, may it not be hoped that therdt 
will not be one disciple of Jesus, irho follows the Lord faM 
ly, and who is desirous to be always abounding in thcii 
work oflhe Lord, but will be disposed henceforth to ad^i 
this method of doing good, to those he has (brraeriy em* 

But perhaps he may inquire, " What Tracts are nnosfc 
proper to be given away, and calculated to do most good^i 
that I may procure ibera." This is a question of no smalt! 
importance. For as It is with religious books, some ard) 
highly valuable, some are comparatively useless, and some' 
are exceedingly hurtful ; so itis as to small Tracts. TooJ 
much care cannot be taken, that they should nil be ezceUl 
lent in their kind. Those who compose tbera should es-V 
ert their talents to the utmost^ and those who give tbentf 
away should carefully examine what are best worth theipt 
diatribntion. The following qualities should be sought for, 
and are united in a good Tract. 

Pure IrulA. This, flowing from the sacred fountain of 
the Bible, should run from 1>e ginning to end, uncontaminale4> 
with error, undisturbed with human system^* ; clear aB' 
crystal, like the river of life. There should he nothing^ 
in it of the thibboUlk of a sect; nothing to recommend' 
one denomination, or to tlirow odium on another ; nothing, 
oflhe Rcrimnny of contending parties against those that) 
differ from Ihem ; but pure, good-nalured Chrislinnity, irf 
which all the followers oflhe Lamh, who are looking focj 
the roercy of the Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life, caK 
unite with pleasure, tis in one great common cause. No4| 



AtmoM TO cttRtartUsm. 19 

choald any worldly scheme be interwoveD with the trath; 
nor attempted to be concealed under its folds. Here 
should not be seen the slightest vestige of any carnal end, 
in any form or for any purpose, however laudable some 
may think it ; nothing but divine truth, unmingled, una* 
dulterated, and pure as it came from heaven, fit for the 
whole human race to imbibe. 

It should be plain. Perspicuity here is, next to truth, the 
first quality of a good Tract. If the Rhetorician's rule, 
^ That the meaning should be not only so plain that it may 
be understood, but so plain that it cannot possibly be mis- 
understood,' call for the writer's observance in one instance 
more than another, it is here,where the mass of readers are 
but little acquainted with divine things ; and their minds, 
unaccustomed to application, need to have truth made clear 
as the light of day. The want of this quality is more than 
sufficient to exclude a Tract from circulation. 

it should be striking. The design is to engage the atten- 
tion of those, who have but little relish for divine things ; 
and how difficult a matter that is, when religion is the sub- 
ject, those who are accustomed to address mankind on their 
most important interests can fully testify. However good a 
Tract may be, as to purity of doctrine, and perspicuity of 
style, if it be not so composed as to interest the reader in a 
more than ordinary degree, it is in danger of being thrown 
aside without a perusal. There is a way of representing 
divine truth, which renders it striking, and makes it pen- 
etrate the mind, and arrest the attention. With this view, 
strong, pithy expressions, lively representations of truth, 
HDd pathetic addresses, arc here quite in point. For this 
quality should the liberal distributor of Tracts diligently 
search. 

ft should be entertaining. A plain didactic essay on a 
religious subject may be read by a Christian with much 
pleasure; hot the persons for whom these Tracts are chiefly 
designed, will fall asleep over it. This will not do ; it is 
throwing labour and money away. There must be some- 
thing to allure the listless to read, and this can only be 
done by blending entertainment with instruction. Where 
narrative can be made the medium of conveying truth, it is 
eagerly to be embraced^ as it not only engages the attend 



30 iumtEsa to chiustiahs. 

tioD, but also assists tlie memorj, aod makes a deeper im' 
pressioD on the tieart. Dinlogue is aoollier way ol' cen- 
deriiig a Tr>ict entertaining, Th« conversuliou driiiva Ch^ 
reader insensibly along. He is generally one of the apeak* 
ers introduced ; he tintls liis own senlimenla and reasonings 
attacked and defended; Le feels every argument that 14 
adduced ; and Ihe subject fises ilsell' strongly and deeply 
ia his mind. Where neither of these methods can be used, 
ingenuity will have recourse to various other ways ofgir* 
ing an agreeable relieh to truth, and of aeasoniog it so n 
to whet the appetite of the reader. 

It ihoald befull o/idtas. There are but few instance* 
in which thia quality can be dispensed with. It is but « 
small present, and theretbre should he made as valuable 
as possible. Its value will rific in proportion to (he aumi 
ber of precious truths which it contains. To ring a change 
upon two or three ideas is likely to be ofhttle service ; it 
is but a mere lasle of food. But when every sentence con- 
triiiis soniethiag uf^eful, there is in a litlle Tract an abun- 
dant meal of the bread of life. For this purpose, truth 
should be compressed. The raolto of every Tract should 
bct Multiiin ia parvo ; and if Ihe foregoing quahlies be at. 
tended to, there is no danger of compressing loo much. la 
preaching it maybe necessary to dilate more, and to spread 
out trulb to a larger extent ; but in a printed Tract, Ibal it 
not necessary! for it is one of Ihe advantages of readios 
above hearing, that a person may go over any part of Iha 
subject again and again, till he fully comprehends it, aai 
lays it up in his mind. One of the e)tcellencie<> of sacred 
Scripture ia its fulaess of truth ,- and yet what book is so 
plain ? The more a Tract imitates il in this respect, th« 
more valuable, atid the more useful, through the divin« 
blesRJng, it is likely to prove. 

What has been ju^t liinitfd at before, requires to be em 
brged on : namely, that in a collection of Tracts, besides 
(hOHe which are of common concern, there should he some 
adapted to varioHt tiluatioas and condittont. General ex* 
bortationn, men are too apt to consideras Ihings with tvhicb 
(hey have no immediate concern. When an address is par^ 
ticniar, and directed to a specified situation, it comes homa 
Id Ih« man's boaom, wbo feels himseir described ; and i\ 



^ ASDRBU Tff cmatnAifi* 21. 

hm a molr^ powerfal effect od his miod. Id Tracts, at in- 
|ireacbii^, therefore, the more particalarly a subject can 
he brooglit' close to an individuars case and feelings, the 
more useful it is likely to be. Hence the propriety aod 
rieci^ty of Tracts for the young aod for the aged, for the 
^ildreb of prosperity and of affliction, for careless and for 
avrakened sinners^ aod of entering into the reasonings, ex- 
CDses, temptations, duties, &c. &c. of each, and pointing 
out to them the way of the Lord. Hereby is presented 
to the' judicious Christian an opportunity of giving to eve- 
ry one his portion of spiritual food in doe season. 

That small Religious Tracts possessing these qualities, 
most be highly valuable, and well suited to the important 
purpose of conveying divine instruction, will be readily 
acknowledged ; but the difficulty is to find them. 

To remove this difficulty, and to provide an abundant 
supply of such as hare been described, that shall be always 
ready when called for, a Society is instituted ; whose ob- 
ject will be to collect, compose, print, and distribute small 
Religious Tracts, and to dispose of them to subscribers and 
purchasers on the lowest terms. 

Here then is afavourable opportunity presented to every 
man, of doing good to the human race. And should it not 
be eagerly embraced ? How loudly do the necessities of the 
world call for relief! There are multitudes in this highly 
favoured country^ as grossly- ignorant of the way in which 
a sinner can be saved, as the idolaters of China : and how 
widely vice, wickedness, profaneness, irreligion and prac- 
tical atheism prevail in every town and village, a person • 
has but to open his eyes to see ; and converse with men, to 
hear. Viewing men in the light of immortal creatures, 
their case is truly deplorable. If the wicked ^ shall be 
turned into hell ; and they, that know not God and obey not 
the Gospel, shall be punished with everlasting destruction 
f)rom the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his 
power ;^ surely, those who believe the Scriptures should- 
deeply feel for the misery of so many wicked creatures as 
we see every day around us ; and be anxiously concerned 
by this means, as well as others, if possible, to pluck these 
brands out of the everlasting burnings. 

Perhaps some may say, ^ I am endeayooriog to he useful 



22 ASDHEBB TO camaTiANB. 

to my fellow creatures in many ways, I cannot in all. 
Many who read this address, are without douht, laying 
tLemselres out to do good to mankind ; and every piou) 
heart must rejoice in their benevolence. But would it not 
be well, O disciple of Jesus, (o add this to the other meant 
which you employ, aod to enlarge your sphere of useful- 
ness ? Feiv things require less trouble, less expense, or lest 
time. Rich Christians may very extensively disseminate 
the knowledge of Christ in this way, both by their own dia- 
Iribulionand by the asaislance of others; and peraons, wht 
have not a large proportion of the world's goods may ht 
able to devote a small sura for this purpose, which, by the 
divine blessing, may turn to good account. 

Will it be objected by some reader : ' I do not think the 
distribution of Religions Tracts will do any good ?' Consid* 
er, friend, here is an evident tendency to do good. Thai 
you must allow ; and where there is a tendency, we ought 
to employ the means, depending upon God for his blessing;. 
But even granting lh:it no good should be done, your laboai 
is pol lost. God is honoured by your pious endeavours to 
promote his glory. You enjoy likeivise the pleasiog coa- 
sciousness of having aimed at the salvation of immortal 
souls; and if a cup of cold water, given to a disciple oi 
Christ in the name of a disciple, shall in no wise lose its re- 
ward, sn altempi to advance the kingdom of the Redeemei 
will not be forgotten by him, nor overlooked in that daji 
when he maketh up his jewels. 

But your labour cannot be altogether in vain. There 
are eflects, which, though they fall short of tbe sinner's sal- 
vation, are far from beiog unimportant to him, or to the 
world. Though the truth do not convert bis soul, it with- 
holds him both from vices and from crimes. He is not ren< 
dered truly virtuous; bol he is much less vicious than ha 
would otherwi»>e be. In the present slate of society, when 
wickedness stalks abroad in everv form with a brazen 
front; to take away from the m.iss of vice, though but a 
small portion, and to add to the sum of virtue but a single 
grain, will, by the philosopher and the moralist, be neither 
overlooked nor despised. 

But there is reason to hope that still higher and noblen 
$Dds may be atlaioed ; imd that many may be hereby Ie4 



AODESSS TO CBRISTIANfl. 23 

to the saying knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesos. Sar- 
vey for a moment, in the case of an individaal, the hless- 
ings you have conyejed. The man is,' by reading your 
Tract, made wiser than if you had taught him all science, 
and richer and happier than if you had given him a world. 
He follows Jesus, and shines as a light on the earth. His 
children are trained up in the fear of God ; and his family 
is the abode of sanctity and love. He is a blessing to all 
around; and endeavours, both by his example and his in- 
struction, to bring his neighbours and his friends to an ac- 
quaintance, with the Saviour. Those, who are yet unborn, 
will have reason to call him blessed, and to thank the 
Christian who put the chosen Tract into his hand. 

The pleasure of success will unspeakably surpass what 
the world^s epicures find in the sweetest draught from the 
most delicious fountains of sensual delight. Should Heaven 
by its divine influences render the portion of sacred truth, 
contained in a Tract you handed to a humble traveller, as 
you passed along the road, the power of God to his salva- 
tion ; and should you afterwards meet him and hear with 
astonishment the forgotten stranger say, ^ I shall have rea- 
son eternally to bless you. Sir, for your present ; it has 
saved my soul ;' princes might envy your feelings, and beg 
a share of your joys. Should you not hear of it on earth, 
if when you are in heaven, one of its glorious inhabitants 
should approach you with looks of gratitude, and ^ay, ' To 
jou, my dear friend, under God, 1 owe this bright, eternal 
crown ; that memorable day when you put the little book 
into my hand, though forgotten by you, will never be erased 
from my mind ; through the grace of Jesus, it made me 
wise unto salvation ;' who shall attempt to express, in the 
language of mortal men, the raptures of your soul ! Such 
words must be sweeter than the music of heaven to the ear. 
Let not these be considered as improbable suppositions : 
they may be realized to many of the members of the Relig- 
ious Tract Society. With what ardour should the thought 
inspire the disciple of Jesus! The very possibility should 
make every one afraid of neglecting to enrol his name among 
the friends of this institution, and to become a sower of the 
precious seed of heavenly truth. 



PROCEEDINGS 

REPORTED AT THE FORMATION OF THE SOCIETY. 



At the meetiog, held iMaj 23, 1814, when the ahoi 
Constitution and Addresses were adopted, it^ppeared th 
within the last three months, the following Tracts hai 
heen printed, making two entire volumes: viz. 

JVb. " VOL. I. ^0,'pagi. 

1* Constitution of the Society, Address, &c. . . .2 

2. The Work of the Holy Spirit. By Rev. Robert Hall, A. m . ■ 

3. On Intemperance . . .' \ 

4. Without Holiness, no Man jfhall seeitke Lord . . . . 

5. The Warning Voice 

6. A Dialogue between a Traveller and Yourself 

7. Happy Negro— Profligate Reclaimed — Praying Soldier . 

8. On the Lord^a Day 

9. The Dairyman's Daughter. By Rev. Legh Richmond . 5 

10. The Shepherd of Salisbury Plain .2 

11. 'Tis all for the»Best : 

12. On the Third Commandment . . . 

13. To the Spectator of a Funeral . • 

14. The Power of Truth 

15. The Progress of Sii^^On the Abuse of the Sabbath . 

16. Pioaa Resolutions . < 

17. Parley the Porter 

18. On Family Worship 

19. Three Dialogues between a Minister and Parishioner 

20. «^ Remember the. Sabbath Day to keep it holy ^' 

21 . A Closet Companion, or a Help to Self-Ezamination 

22. Repentance and happy death of the Earl of Rochester 

23. Letter from Dr. Watts to Madam Sewall 

24. The Christian Indeed 

25. The Evils of Ebicessive Drinking 

26. Sin no Trifle 

27. Parental Dij^es 

VOL. IL 

28. Instruction of the Rising Generation recommended . 

29. Address to Children and Touth, relating to Prayer . 

30. Advice to Children relating to Prayer .... 



1814^ F110CEBDIR09, ftC. 25 

31. The Wesimintter Assembly's Shorter Catechism . . 1% 

32. Divine and Moral Song^s for Children .... 20 

33. To a Chfld 4 

34. Hymns for Infant Minds . .60 

35. Sermons to Children, with Hymns suited to the Subjects 36 

36. Present to Children at School 4' 

37. A New Heart the Child's Best Portion .... 8 

38. History of Miss Dinah Dondney, of Portsea, (£ng^.) . 20 

39. Filial DnUes 16 

40. Affectionate Address to Toung^ Christians — Here and There 8 

41. A Persuasive to Public Worship — Paith and Works 8 

42. The Importance of speaking Truth 8 

43. On Moderation in Food 4 

44. An Address to Touth 12 

45. No Life Pleasing £o God, but that which is Useful to Man- 

kind — The Art of Happiness — A New- Year's Song . 8 

46. Subjects for Consideration 8 

4n. To the AflELicted— The Day of Judgment ... 8 

48. To the Aged .8 

49. Life of the Rev. John Cowper. By Wm. Cowper, Esq. 16 

50. The Swesirer^s Prayer, or his Oath Explained ... 4 

The editioD of No. 1, contained 3.000 copies : that of 
each of the remaining numbers, 6,000 — amounting in all 
to 297,000 Tracts. 



Statb 01* THU Society's Fuitds, Mat 23, 1814. 

Pitn for Printing, Folding &c. an edition of two vol- \ »a 035. oa 
umes of Tracts, with other contingent expenses > ^ ' 

Rbcjeiveo of persons who subscribed to print Tracts $ 2,745*00 

" Balance due from the Society $190'90 
Samuel F^ar&ar, TVeotf. pro ttm. 







'■ se om 


OINAL DONORS. [1814 


The following ia a list of dooations and aubscriptions to 


print Tracts, recei?ei] 


jefore, or about the time of the 


organization of tiie Society ; each Donor being entitled to 


receive Tracts to three fourths of the amount of the sum 


contributed. 




Jndo..r,Jtf<,„. 




William Hooper, Esq. 180 


Mr. John Adams' 


$40 


Mr. Benjamin T. Reed 100 


;» Mr. Timothy Ballard 


6(1 


Hon, William Reed 60 


Amos Blancfaard, Esq. 


40 


JVfiefturyport. 
William Bartlel, Esq. 275 


Rev. Jiutiu Edvards 


20 


Samael Farrar, Esq. 


130 


Moses Brown, Esq. 40- 


Mesira. naec k Gould 
Mr. WilliamToater 


40 


Thomas M. Clark, Esq, 20 


20 


Rev. Daniel Dana, D. D. " 20 


Rev. EbeoeEer Porter, d. d 


2fl 


Mr. James Kimball 20 


Theological Seminary 


60 


John Pearson, Esq. 30 


Rev. Leonard Woods, d. d 


20 


Mr. Ebeneier Wheelwright SO 


1 Bcvirlj,. 




Reading. 


' William Burley, Esq. 


130 


Daniel Chute, Esq. 30 


Rev. David Oliphaot 




S\km. 


Robert Rantoul, Esq. 


20 


Mr, Samuel Adams 20 


Bojlan, 




Mrs. Elizabeth Bartlet 120 


Mr. Samuel T. Armstrong 


60 


Ebeneier Beckford, Esq. 20 


Mr. Flioy CuUer 


40 


Capt, Andrew Haiaden lOO 


Henry Cray, Esq. 


60 


Mr, JohQ Jenk) 120 


f Mr. William Harris 


20 


Dea. Eliphalet Kimball 120 


i Mr. Henry Homes 


180 


Jajnes King, Esq. 120 


I Messrs. Homes & Homer 


120 


Mr. Ebenezer Secomb 40 ( 


r Mr. Jonathan Howe 


ao 


Col. Henry Whipple 60 . 


f Rev. Joshua Huntington 


120 


Slockbndgi. 


, Mr. James Murphy 


20 


ThaddeuB Ponieroy, m. d. SO 


[' Ahner Phelps, M.D. 


30 


Tapifitld. , 


William Ropei, Esq. 


120 




William Thurston, Esq. 


20 


Porlhnd, Mc. 


Samuel H. Walley, Esq. 


60 


Rev. Edward Payson, v. n. 84 


, Charhilotcn. 




Mr. Edward H. Cobb 150 


, Rev. Jedidiah Morse, d. d 


120 


PMam, JV. H. 
Rev. John H. Church, D.D. -SO 


,1 Danrin. 




Dea. James Brown 


120 


r Dea. Fitch Pool 


20 


Hon. William Hall 20 " 






r.mon. Con. 


U Rev. John Codman, D. D. 
J MarbUluad. 


80 


Rev. Ebeneier Kellore 90 




JVfM Orltanj. 


Hon. Nathaniel Moo|]er 


60 


Alfred HenMH, Esq. SO , 


Mrs. Polly Hooper 


60 


J 


[ 


. "1 












The object of this Society is to faroish i 
RV OF TRACTS, sufficient for the supply of all who may 
wish to purchase, either for th^ir own use, or for charila- 
ble distribution. For various reasoos, it is deemed propev 
that (he Society should direct its attention and its meas- 
ures, primarily, to this simple design. To publish Tracts, 
aod at the same time to take the care and responsibility 
of an extensive charitable distribution, ^ould constitute a 
work so complicated and difficult, that a small Society, on 
attempting it, would be likely to be discouraged, and to 
fail. 

This estabhshment, by furnishing a supply of the best 
Tracts, to be sold on the lotveat terms, will prevent much 
of the iDconTenience and expeuae to which single Char- 
itable Societies must be subjected, by undertaking to pub- 
Lsh their own Tracts. Here, the same Tracts which thej 
would print for Ihcmselres, and a great variety of others, 
vill be sapplied upon cheaper terms, than in any othec 
way. Where any Society is desirous of circulating any 
useful Tract not contained in the Depository, it will, on 
the shortest notice, having received the approbation of 
the Committee, be published, snd added to Ibis Society's 
list. The facilities for the transportation of Tracts by 
water to the principal towns in the United States are great, 
and it wilt be attended with very triffing expenaa. 

It will then be understood, that the object of this estab- 
lishment, considered by itself, is not, at present, to act as 
a Charitable Society in the gTaiuitoua distribution of Tracts ; 
but to furnish to Tract SocictieG, on the easiest terms, the 
most abundant means of accomplishing Iheir designs; and 
to aid >il1 general arrangements for the circulation of 
Tracts, by Benevolent Societias and individuals. 



2B M»*T REPORT. [181S 

The public have alreadj' beeo ioformed, that prerionsly 
to the organization of the Society in May, 18)4,297,000 
Traclfl, embracing fifty numbers, and maltiiig two vol- 
umes of 300 pagpH each, bad been prioled. But only a. 
pari of this amount could be considered as the properly 
of the Society; because a large proportion had been, or 
might be, taken by original subscribers, agreeably Eo the 
terms of Iheir subscription. The actual capital of the So- 
ciety nas therefore, at that time, but small, compared 
with the amount of Tracts irhich had been published. 
Hence the Executive Commillee, after appointing Cor- 
responding Committees in some of the more distant parts 
oftbe country, and adopliag measures to facilitate the sals 
and dislribution of Tracts, soon found it necessary lo so- 
licit further donations, in order lo increase their capital, 
and to enable the Society lo extend its operations. En- 
couraged by (he llberidily of generous patrons, they com: 
mericed. and have noiv completed the publication of a 
third volume of Tracts, embracing the following; nam- 
bera : viz. 

ffo- VOL. III. Pagu. 

61. Preservative a-ainitthe Sim and FoUiea of Yonth . . 38 

52. Utter from an aged Molhtr to ha only Son . . 4 

53. The African Servant. By Rev. Legh Richmond , . 18 

H4. Friendly Advice 4 

55. How to make the moil of a Day— Letter from a Clergyman 4 

66. Happy Poverty, an authentic History of Blind Ellen . 8 

67. The Duty of Caring for the Souls of Relatives . . 8 

68. Hiftory of Elizabeth L*"* ' B 

5S. A Toket. for Mourners. Bj Rev. John Flavel . . 36 

60. Prayer for the Revival of Religion recommended . . 24 
fi) Growth in Grace. By Rev. Dr. Thomas Goodwin . 
63. An Adventure in Vermont, or the Story of Mr. Anderson 

63. The Cottager's Wife 

64. The Interpreter's House 

65. To a Youth al School 

66. RtfleclkmiontheaevenDaysoftheWeek. ByC. Talbot 

61. Address to Youth. By Bishop Walson .... 

68. Btasnn'a Plea for Temperance 

69. Religion of the Closet 

Besides puHUhing an edition of 6,000 of each of the 
above, the Commiltee have reprinted Nos. 2, 9, and 10, 
in an edilion of 6,000 ; and No. ) , in an edition of 3,000 ; 



1815] urst report. 29 

together with 6,000 copies of the ProceediDgs of the Mid- 
dlesex CoDYeotioD for Suppressing Violations of the Sab- 
hath, not oamber^d in the series on account of its local 
nature — making the whole number of 

Tracts published the last year 141,000. 

Whole number from the beginning 438,000. 

Having proceeded thus far in the publication of Tracts, 
and finding so ready a market, the Committee have been 
able to discharge all demands against the Society ; and al- 
so to form a permanent connexion with the printers, upon 
soch terms, that they will print Tracts to any amount, ac- 
cording to the directions of the Committee, receiving their 
pay as sales may be made. This completes the system, 
and, in an important sense, renders it easy, consistent, and 
permanent The Committee have, therefore, the satis- 
faction of announcing to the Society, that the establish- 
ment, at the close of the first year, is carried to a degree 
of perfection in its internal state, and to an extent of oper- 
ation, altogether unlooked for at the commencement of 
the Society. Sixty nine nnmbers are now on hand ; any 
of which may be immediately reprinted, whenever it is 
necessary. 

During the year, the Committee have located four De- 
positories: viz. 

mAndovtr^ Mass,- (Th.^ Se.m,') George A. Calhoun, Agent. 

Bridgeport^ Con. Lambert Lockwood. 

Hartford^ Con. Peter B. Gleason, & Co. 

^erwch^ Con. Russell Hubbard. 

In Charleston, S. C. and in other states, Auxiliary Tract 
Societies have been formed. By the active cooperation 
of the Christian community, especially of persons of af- 
fluence and liberality, of Tract Societies, Moral Socie- 
ties, and other Charitable Institutions, in the circulation 
of Tracts, we may reasonably hope that rapid progress 
will be made in the diffusion of moral and religious in- 
struction through our land. 

3* 



30 FIRST REPORT. [H 

OFFICERS, 

ELECTED. MAT )29, 1815. 

WILLIAM BARTLET, Esa. President. 
Rev. JEDIDIAH MORSE, d. d. Vice President. 
Rev. JOHN CODMAN, d. d. Corresponding Secretary, 
Rev. JOSHUA HUNTINGTON, Recording Secretary, 
JEREMIAH EVARTS, Esa. Treasurer, 
SAMUEL T. ARMSTRONG, Assutant Treasurer. 

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE. ^ 

Rev. JEDIDIAH MORSE, d. d. 
Rev. LEONARD WOODS, d. d. 
Rev. JOHN H. CHURCH. 

SAMUEL FARRAR, Esa. 
Mr. JOHN ADAMS, of Andoveit. 



State of the Societt^s Funds. 

Paid Samuel Farrar, Esq. balance due to him on his \ 

account as Treasurer and Superintendant, pre- f wg 

vious to the organization of the Society, May ^ 
23, 1814 ) 

Paid for paper and printing, with other contingent > 
expenses, (rom May 23, 1814, to May 29, 1815 > 



89 
$1,08 

2C 



Received, from May 23, 1814, to May 29, 1815, > 
in Donations * > 

Of the Agent of the General Depository, including) ^ q^ 
spme small Donations S ^ 

$1,2£ 

Balance in fayour of the Society, May, 29, 181& 1*: 

Jeremiah Evarts, Treaswr 



MAY 27, 1816. 



With cordial coDgratalatioQs oo the return of this Anni- 
Tersary, joar Committee woald dow sabmit their Second 
Annaal Report. Aod thej would do it with devout tbauk- 
fuloess to God| that his benedictioo has attended their ex- 
ertions in his cause, and rendered them beneficial in ad* 
Tancing the interests of the Redeemer's kingdom. 

During the past year, your Committee have steadily 
kept in view two prominent objects — the publication of 
Tracts, and the establishment of new Depositories. 

They have commenced a fourth volume, and since the 
last Annual Meeting, have published the following num- 
bers: viz. 

Ab. VOL. IV. Pages. 

70. On the Importance of Educating^ Young Men for the Min- 

istry. By Rev. Lyman Beecher, d. d. . . .20 

71. The Bible above all Price. By Edward Payson, n. d. . 16 

72. Sixteen Short Sermons 24 

73. On Fashionable Amusements . . . .12 

74. Great l^ects result from Little Causes. By £. Porter, d.d. 12 

75. Life of Waiiam Kelly. An Authentic Narrative . 16 

76. The Hermit — On Divine Providence (from Venn^s Sermons) 8 

77. History of a Bible 12 

78. Conversion of Abig^ Hutchinson. By Rev. J. Ixiwards 8 

79. The Young Cottager. By Rev. Leg^h Richmond . 36 

Tour Committee have also completed second editions of 
the whole series of Tracts in the first and second volumes ; 
and have published third editions of Nos. 1, 10, and 25. 
Thej have also pablisbed a second edition of No. 53, in 
the third volume ; and an edition of ^^ The Christian Min- ' 
ister's Affectionate Advice to a Married Couple. By Rev. 
James Bean,^' as a substitute for Bishop Watson's Address, 
No. 67. The edition of Nos. 1 and 34, was 3,000,* of No. 
8, 8,000; of No. 79, 10,000; and of each of the other 
numbers, 6,000 : to which must be added 4711 «Vie.^^ ^^ 



32 sECOiTD SEPOBT. i;i816' 

TracU procured of Messrs. Cummings nnd Hilliard and 
Mr. Jonalhan Howe, which may be reckoned iis 12,000 
Tracfa of nearlj 10 pages eacb — making the whole Dutn- 

Tracts issued the last year 378,000. 

Whole number from the beginning 816,000. 

In this stiilemenl, your Cpmmittee make no account of 
(he title pdges and indexes lo the volumes, or of covers, of 
which they have printed 6,000 for a pari of (he edition of 
the Young Cottager, and 3,000 for hall' the edition of Rev. 
Mr. Beau's AfTectiooate Advice. It is proposed, in future. 
if snl^hcient encouragement be given, lo attach printed 
covers to n great projjorlion of the larger Tracts. 

In the course of the paet year, your Committee have eS' 
tablisheil four new DepoBitoriefi: viz. 

Concord, A". B. Dea. James Kimball. 

Mddltbvrg, n. William G. Hooktr. 

Jltonlpelitr, Vt. Walton & Goas. i 

Windier, Vt. Deb,. Nathan Coolid^. I 

making the ivhole number now e^tabhshed, eight. Your ■' 
Committee are happy lo inform you that Auxiliiiry Tract I 
Societies are multiplying; and that by the activity of I 
them, and of benevolent individuals, a large proportion of I 
the Tracts ivhich have beeg publiahed, is now ju circula* I 

From the foregoing statements, you will perceive that 
this Sociely has made no inconsiderable effort in promot- 
ing the cause of truth and right eouaness. Much, howeT- 
er, remains to be done. The Tract", which we have , 
hitherto published, bear but a very small proportion to the . 
amount which is immediately needed in our extensive 
country. We have indeed done little towards supplying 
New Englnnd. But few have yet been circulated in ihs 
Tlistriclof Maine.in New Hampshire, Vermont, or Rhode 
Island. An adequate supply for all these Slates cannot be 
furnished without much labour nnd expense. 

Bui leaving New F.ngl»nd, and surveying liie Middle, 
the Southern, and the Weslem States, a wide lield opens be- 
fore you. There arc large districts, inliabtteJ hy a numer- 
on» and increasing poi'iilalion, in which the meaos of mor- 
al and religious iraproTemeot, are hut Utile enjoyed. So 



1816] SECOND REPORT. 33 

eztensire is the field, and so great the dearth of religious 
instractioD, that millions of Tracts might sooq be distrib- 
uted, with the most pleasing prospects of usefulness. 

Your Committee, therefore, feel the pressing necessity 
pf more rigorous and extensive exertions in the business 
which has been intrusted to their care. As thej proceed, 
thej have a more full conviction of the magnitude and im- 
portance of the object of this Institution. Thej regret 
that4hej have accomplished so httle, when so much needs 
to be done. And they are deeply solicitous to devise and 
execute more efficient measures for the full attainment of 
the benevolent views and wishes of the Society. 

For this purpose, your funds must be augmented, that 
jour Committee may enlarge the sphere of their opera- 
tions. It is of great consequence that they should be able 
to transmit large quantities of Tracts to Agents in distant 
places, for charitable distribution ; and to encourage, by 
generous appropriations, the establishment of Tract So- 
cieties, in remote parts of our country. In this way, your 
benevolent object would be vastly promoted. Nor can it 
be fully attained without the adoption of such measures. 
]Bad yoor funds admitted, yoi^r Committee might, the last 
year, have forwarded large quantities of Tracts to the 
9oath-westem region- of the United States, where they 
would have been distributed to the best advantage. 

Your Committee would therefore propose that the So- 
ciety request the Patrons of the Institution and Auxiliary 
Tract Societies to enlarge your funds for the above pur- 
poses. Many Auxiliary Societies annually collect more 
tnooey than they would judge it advisable to expend in 
purchasing Tracts for their immediate vicinity. The sums 
vhichsuch Societies could well spare, would be productive 
of far greater good to the cause, by being added together 
and expended in the manner stated above, than by being 
expended by the individual Societies. Let it be known 
that the Society is ardently desirous of adopting the meas- 
ures just proposed, and many new Auxiliary Societies and 
Tract Associations would probably be formed, and new 
zeal and liberality be excited. 

While the object of this establishment is prosecuted with 
judgment and fidelity, it must commend itself to every cor- 



rect, enlightened mintl — to every friend of his coontry and 
of the souls of men. Who that has any g^ood will to bis 
fellow men does not ivish them to be furnished with the 
meiins of moral and religious improvement? What ea- 
ligbteaed Civiliua or sound Patriot can do otherwise thaa 
wish success to a Society, whose sole object is to afford the 
advantages of inelructioD, on the most interesting Buhject*, 
to the members of the Counnunity, especially to those who 
are justly called "ifte rtiing hope of Society.''^ But can he 
slop here ? Can he refrain from giving.to such an object 
his decided and liberal support? Surely such support 
is to be conddently expected from every friend of the Re- 
deemer. 

In soliciting the general cooperation of the Christian 
community, and in urging a more zealous prosecution of 
the object of the Society, your Committee beg leave to 
sug-^est the following considerations. 

The Tracti, wkieli il ii tite aim of the Society to cireutattt 
are adapted to promote the kishat advantage if individualt, 
and of the community. It is designed that they should " be 
simple, serious, practical; — intelligible to the wayfaring- 
man, and the tenant of the cottage;" that they should con- 
tain pure truth, flowing from the fountain of the sacred 
Scriptures; that there should be in them " nothing to re- 
commend one denomination ofChristians,or to throw odium 
on another ; nothing of the acrimony of contending parties 
against those that differ from them ; but pure Christianity, 
in which all the followers of the Lamb, who are looking 
for the mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life, 
can unite with pleasure, as in one great common cause." 
While good morals are inculcated and enforced, and fla- 
grant vices condemned ; every thing of the nature of party j 
politics will be carefully avoided. Must not the extensive 
dispersion of such Tracts be of immense importance? Must | 
not their influence in every point of view be highly salu- i 
tary? Surely, in this day of great things, the benevolent 
plan which you have undertaken to advance, will not fail i 
for want of patronage. 1 

The exlemive diatribution of Retisioiia Tracts ii one of j 
the " lignt of the liwM." This among other schemes of 1 
Christian beRevoleace,eminently distinguishes the eventful ' 



1816] iEOORD REPORT. 35 

1 period in which we lire. Bible Societies, Miwioiiary So- 
f* cieties. Societies and Seminaries for edacatiog yoang men 
I for the Gospel ministry, and Tract Societies, combine 
I and bring into Tigorons action, the energies and resources 
of the Christian world. All these Societies are needed ; — 
ail are loodlj called for bj existing circumstances. Neither 
of them can be neglected without injury to the others. 
They ought not to be viewed as rival Institutions, or as mil- 
itating against each other.. But by their concurrent oper- 
ations and influence, they are tp be the grand means of eA 
fecting the conversion of the world. It is peculiarly ani- 
mating to trace the exertions and beneficial results of each 
of these Institutions. We wish the most signal success to 
tbem all, while we earnestly solicit a more liberal support 
of the Tract establishment. We are fully persuaded that 
the finger of Divine providence points to this as a method 
of no small consequence in enlightening and reforming 
maDkind. We might ajppeal to facts. We might detail 
what exertions have been made, and what good has been 
achieved, by Tract Societies in Great Britain, Sweden, 
Denmark, and other countries. These facts incontestibly 
prore that the plan is not chimerical, or of doubtful utili- 
ty. Its vast importance is more and more evinced by the 
experience of each succeeding year. It commends itself 
more and more to the judgment of the well informed ; and 
receives the warm and generous patronage of an increas- 
ii^ multitude. The Divine blessing attends it. 

T7u $iaU of our country urgently demandt the wide dis' 
persum of moral and religious Tracts. Our nation is more 
rapidly increasing in population than any other on earth. 
Thousands of families annually leave the older States, and 
commence settlements in the wilderness. New Societies 
and new States are formed. In this way, a large extent of 
territory is fast filling with inhabitants. But what is like- 
ly to be the moral and religious character of these new 
Societies and States ? Will it be such as to ensure the Divine 
favour, without peculiar and vigorous exertions to render 
it so ? What is the present moral and religious character 
of a great majority of our nation ? Is it formed upon the 
maxims of Divine revelation ? How cr»n these maxims have 
their due influence, without being widely disseminated ? 



36 SECONB REPORT. [1816 

And how can fhey be disseminated witlioul great and per- 
severing efforts 1 11" the friends of trulh and godliness arc' | 
innctire, what cao bp expectpd but the rapid spread and' j 
prevalence of most destructive errors, of flagrant vice and' 
impiely ? Shall we pas^irely suffer such a state of things 
to exist, und in this waj^, abaodnn the best interests ofoui'^ 
fellow men? Shall we, through negligence or parsimony,;, 
lose the immense adrantages ofthis establishment? Shall, 
error, and immorality, and irreligion triumph for want oF 
union and benevolent action among the friends of virtutf 
and hiippinesH? Shall sordid avarice and love of the world', 
palsy our exertions in the cause of rig-hteotLiness, till sin'' 
becomes the ruin ns well as reproach ofour nation ? Nof. 
let us all reply. We will give ourselves and all that we" 
have to the Lord. We will remember thee, O JerusalentV 
We will spare no exeition or sacrifice, to promote the in- 
struction and salvalion of our fellow men. 

Immortal louts are periskitig for lack of knnvsledgt. 
Thonsanda and thousands, in our counlry, are enveloped In 
the moBt deplorable ignorance. This ignoritnce, in namer- 
ous instances, is of the most destructive kind; for it rei-- ' 
pGcts the only way of salvation. Multitudes, who are wise' 
in (he things of this world, have no heart-afiecting view of 
Christ and him crucified. They know not themselves. 
They feel no need of a .Saviour, who Is God manifest in Ibd* 
flesh, to alone for their sins hy his death, and to cleans^ 
their hearts by the operations of his Spirit. Multitudes 6? 
youth and children are growing np in ignorance of divine 
things, while their minds are open to receive whatevei'^, 
may corrupt their hearts, or inflame their evil passions.; 
All ihete have immortal souls; — Ihey are destined to esist'l 
forever, and must receive according to the character form-j 
ed, and the deeds done, here in the body. Shall then pre-JI 
cious SDula be neglected, and left to perish forever? Shall < 
we do nothing lo rescue them from everlasting destruction/' 
While it is an accepted time, shall we nol cause them to', 
read or hear the messages of Divine mercy? 

Glorioat iiiccfi. is to be expicled. The cause is th( 
Lord's. He opens to u? (hiedoorofusefuiness. He givet 
us the means of widely disseminating the knowledge of hii 
truth, and of the richeii of his grace. He bids us oae the 



1816] SBCOHD EEPORT. 97 

talents committed to oar trusty and gires vm aisarance of 
his blessing, while we are laborers together with him. Hitr 
cause now prospers ; and it will prosper still more abon- 
dantly. This work of redeeming mercy shall be accom- 
plished. Souls innamerable shall be sared. The means 
employed shall be saccessfal. And how glorious will be 
the success ! How delightful, how animating to anticipate 
it as certain ! Look abroad, ye compassionate friends of 
wretched, dying men, and behold your bounty richly con- 
tributing to their comfort and salvation. Look into numer- 
CNM dwellings, and see persons of different ages, eagerly 
reading or hearing the precious Tracts, which your liber- 
ality has furnished. They show evident marks of serious 
reflection, deep conviction, and unfeigned penitence. They 
jield cheerful and humble obedience to the Divine com- 
maods. They who before lived without hope, and without 
God in the world, now offer up fervent prayers and thanks- 
givings, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. Step in- 
to the cottages of the poor, and behold the glistening eyes 
and heavenly looks of those who were wretched, peevish, 
and ungrateful ; but have learned, by the blessing of God 
on your deeds of charity, to be contented, thankful, and 
happy. Look down the lapse of ages ; see numerous gen- 
eraiioDS rising up in the love and fear of the Lord, as fruits 
iotibe seed which you are now sowing. Parents and chil- 
dren are adorned with the beauties of holiness, and praise 
tiie Lord for the wonders of his love. Rulers and people 
bow to the sceptre of Immanuel, adoring him as God over 
all, blessed forever, and largely participating the blessed- 
neas of that kingdom, which consists in righteousness, 
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Behold Zion in her 
gloiy, her walls salvation, and her gates praise. 



APPENDIX. 



In the foreg^oing^ Report, the Committee suggested the impot 
tance of enlaiging the funds of the Society, with a view to th 
charitable distribution of Tracts in different parts of the Unite< 
States. Thej wish this subject to be well considered bj Auxiliar 
Tract Societies, and opulent Christians. Various and very urgen 
applications have been made by missionaries and others, for a gra 
tuitous supply of Tracts for the southern, western, and north 
western parts of our country. The Committee are very desirous c 
transmitting Tracts to a large amount, to the care 6f respectabl 
and pious men in those parts, who shall distribute them accordin, 
to their discretion. Thousands, and hundreds of thousands, c 
these silent preachers might be sent, at a small expense, to th 
poor and destitute, with the best prospect, of promoting their good 
The Christian public are earnestly requested to take into seriou 
consideration the magnitude of this object. Should any benevolen 
persons, or Tract Societies, wish to furnish the means of sendinj 
Tracts to distant places, as New Orleans, Natchez, Ohio, the mor 
destitute parts of Georgia, Tennessee, &c. it will be at their optio: 
either to designate the particular object of their charity, or to re 
fer the application of it to the Executive Committee. 

For the sake of this object, it seems proper that the plan of Aux 
lia ry Tract Societies, which has heretofore been suggested, shouli 
receive some alterations and enlargements. As the result of experi 
ence, and in conformity to the principles on which Auxiliary Trac 
Societies in Great Britain are formed, the following hints on th 
Constitution and objects of Auxiliary Tract Societies, are offered t 
the consideration of the friends of this establishment. 

RESOLUTIONS 
reconvmended for adoption by •Auxiliary Tract Societiet. 

1. That the object of the American Tract Society has the coi 
dial approbation of this meeting. 

2. That a Society be formed, to be called the Auxiliary Trac 

Society of for the purpose of promoting the circulation of moi 

al and religious Tracts in this vicinity, and of aiding the Amei 
ican Tract Society in the extensive distribution of Tracts throng 
the most destitute parts of the United States, and of the cont: 
nent of America. 

3. That one third [or one fourth] of the funds of this Society, b 
Mwually transmitted to the Treasurer of the American Trac 



8d RET.] APPEITDIX. S9 

Society, to aid the -Ezecntive C<Hiimittee in the grataitons circula- 
tion of Tracts in destitute places. 

4. That one fourth of the annoal subscriptions, tog^ether with 
the whole of the donations, be at the disposal of the Committee 
of the Auxiliary Society, to purchase Tracts for l#cal distribution, 
and to apply the surplus, (if any,) in aid of the American Tract 
Society. 

5. That each subscriber be entitled to receive Tracts to the 
amount of one'half his subscription. 

6. That each subscriber of per week, or -«— a year, be a 

member. 

7. That the business of this Society shall be conducted by a 

Committee, consisting^ of members, tog^ether with the Treaa* 

orer and Secretary, who shall be annually chosen. 

8. That the Society appoint a Depositary of their Tracts, and a 
Collector. 

9. That the members be requested to communicate such instan- 
ces of usefulness as may have come within their knowledge ; the 
most interesting of which shall be annually communicated to the 
fiKecutiye Committee of the American Tract Society. 



Particular attention, it is hoped, will be ffjven to the 2d, 3d, and 
9th articles of the plan aboye sug;gested. — This plan is proposed in 
onnpliance with the wishes of many, who have found some dif- 
iicalty in forming a constitution for Auxiliary Societies. The plan 
is on^ proposed for consideration, and is subject to modification, as 
drcumstances require. Those Societies which have already adopt- 
ed a constitution, can make what additions to it they judgpe proper. 

The Executive Committee request that particular information 
may be given to them, of the existence and formation of every Aux-_ 
ifiary Tract Society, of the number of subscribers, the amount of 
contributions, the manner in which they circulate their Tracts, and 
their views as to the more distant objects which the general Soci- 
ety should endeavour to promote. 



49 SBCORD RBPORT. [J 

dFFrCERS, 

« 

WILLIAM BARTLET, Esa. Prendent. 
R«ir. JEDIDIAH MORSE^ d. d. Ftce President, 
Rkv. JOHN CODMAN, Corresponding Secretary. 
Rbv. JOSHUA HUNTINGTONvHecofdin^ Secretary, 

JEREMIAH EVARTS, Esa. Treasurer. 
Ma. HENRY HOMES, Jluditor. 

£XS«imVB COMMrrTBK. 

Rev. JEt)IDIAH MORSE, d. p. 
Rbv. JOHN H. CHURCH, 
Rev. LEONARD WOODS, d. d. 
SAMUEL FARRAR, Esa. 
Mr. JOHN ADAMS. 



StATlS Ot THB SoClKTt^S FvNBS. 

ExpBVSB for paper, printings, &c. from May 39 ,1815, > ^<| .^ 
to May ^, 1816, $ ''^'^ 



^; 



Balance in hands of TVeasnrer brought to new 
account 



RBdEivEO, /rom May 29, 1815, to May 27, 1816. 

\ $1 

Donations 1 

From the Agent of the General Depository for Tracts ) -»- o 
sold, including some small Donations . . . ) \ZL. 

$3,1 
Balance-due from the Society, May 27, 1816 . . . $6 

Jbreboah Evarts, Trcasu 



MAY 26, 18 !7. 



With g^Utude to God for bis smiles upon their humble 
effort!, your Committee now present their Third AqddhI 
Report. 

Yoqr pablications ha?e been extensively circulated the 
past year, in various parts of th3 United States ; and your 
ComiDittee cannot fail to indulge the confident belief, that 
they will, in many instances, be made effectual to the pull- 
ing down of the strong holds of the adversary, and to the 
promotion of the cause of the Redeemer. Gt>d will as? 
suredly bless his own truth ; and he '^ hath chosen the 
weak things of this world to confound the things that are 
mighty,^' ^^ so that no flesh shonid glory in his presence.'* 
Your publications, containing the truths of the Gospel of 
Jesus Christ, and being sent abroad, as on eaglets wings, 
in every direction, your Committee believe that God will 
not permit the glad tidings they bear to return to him void; 
but that they will ^^ accomplish what he shall please, and 
prosper in that whereto he lias sent them.*' It is their 
relraoce on divine aid to accompany their exertions witba 
blessing, that has animated your Committee in their efforts 
through another year; and they would most affectionately 
and earnestly call upon the members of the Society, and 
upon all its friends every where, to offer their fervent sup- 
plications to the God of all grace, for his continued smiles, 
and his life giving influence, to accompany their exertions ; 
remembering that it is ^^ not by might, nor by power, but 
by my Spirit, saith the Lord of Hosts.*' 

During the past year, your Committee have added sit 
D€w Tracts to the Series, making the whole number pub^ 
lished by the Society 85, and nearly completing the 
fourth volume. They are the fbllowing : 

8e. The Danger of Delay , 12 

8L The Seaman^s Compass . . • * . . .16 

4* 



42 THIRD REPORT. [1817 

82. Cooveraionofa Mahometan (o the Christian Religion . H 

83. Account of Eliza Cuoningham. By Rev. John Newtoa B 
94. On (he Lord') Supper. Abridged from Rev. Henry Grove 44 
85. A Sermon on War . . , 16 

Besides these, your Commillee have printed new edi- 
tions of a lareepart of the series; makine the whole num- 
ber of 

Tracta published the pa^t year .... 411,000 

Whole Dumber from the beginoing ■ - 1,327,000 

Soon after your last Anneal Meeting, the General Depot- 
itory was removed from Boston to Andover, and Messrs. 
Flagg and Gould, appoint^ General Depositaries. There 
have been also liventy five new Depositories eslablished, 
making the whole number thirty three. The following 
is a list of all the Agents now employed by the Commillee, 
with the value of the Tracts, received by Ihem the past 
year. 

Bangor, Maine 
Bath, Ma4nt 
PottUmi, Maine 
.SmAer*/, JV. H. 
Concord, Jf. H. 
ifonoirr, JV. H. 
jTeene, JV. H. 
Perlimnulk, Jf. H. 
Dorttt, VI. 
MiddUburs, V- 
Monlpetier, Vt. 
Wmdiar, h. 
JndoTcT, Mail. 
Belcherl ovTi, Matt, 
Botlon, Man. 
JVitttury/ior/, JWojj. 
Jfarlhamplon, Mail. 
Sakm, Mail. 
Springfield, Man. 
JVeuport, R. I. 
Froiidente, R. I. 
Bridgeport, Con. 
Hartford, Con. 
JVcw flopen, Con. 
^urvich. Can, 
Tolland, Con. 
JVetr York, Jf. Y. 
Princtlan, Jf. J. 



Daniel Pdlce, 


$66,9S 


Zina Hjde, 


187,00 


W. & H. Hyde, 


S32,6G 


Richard BoyUton, 


93,81 


Dea. John Kimball, 


I9,e5 


Doct. Reuben D. MuMev, 


100,00 


Jonathan Weldon, 


137,05 


AmoaTappan, 


75,31 


Rev. W. Jackaon, 


138,15 


Silas Barrett, 


116,20 


E. P. Walton, 


68,75 


Dea. Nathan Cool idge. 


126,68 


George A. Calhoun, 


713,39 


Luther Holland, 


90,70 



haste Bower., 
Charles Whipple, 
Dea. E. S. Phelpa, 
Henry Whipple, 
Rev. Samuel Oigood, 
Rev. Calvin Hitchcock, 
John Johnson, and Fem, Trart 
Lambert Lockwood, 
P. B. GleaaoD&Co. 
Nathan Whitiug, 
Rusacll Hubbard, 
-Eliahs Stearns, 
P. W. Gallandet, 
Henry Woodwarrt. 



106,45 
104,13 
40,10 



1817] 

Charleston^ S. C. 
Sparta^ Oeo, 
Jfaiehet^ Mist, Ttr, 
ChiUicotke, Ohio 



THIRD ltl2^01lT. 

Rev. Jesse H. Turner, 
Rev. Dr. A, W. Leland, 
Rev. N. 8. S. Beeman, 
Richard Pearse, 
Rev. Robert G. Wilson, 



43 

207,70 
425,25 
134,86 
293,11 
239,09 



Whole amount of Tracts delivered to Agents ) ^^ ^^ ^^ 
of Depositories the past year 5 ^,406,i« 

This extension of the publications, and of the conse- 
quent Qsefalness of the Society, yonr Committee Tiew 
with- peculiar interest, and doToat acknowledgments to 
the Gi?er of all good. They would mention also that nu- 
merous Auxiliary Tract Societies have been formed ; and 
that many private individuals, in various parts of the coun- 
try, are aiding in the good work. , 

They obtained, soon after the last Annual Meeting, an 
act of incorporation from the Legislature of this Common- 
wealth ; and they fondly hope that the Society may be- 
come a permanent Institutioui and by the divine blessing 
extend to multitudes, in future ages, the saying knowf 
edge of Jesus Christ. 



i 



1\e foUowittg Ltlter, dated 0«.11,1B16, it Jrrni' 
Rev- Daniel Smiik, tovrhom.Jirst in compn-ny with Rtv. Sai 
uel J. Mills, and a/temarda alone, Tratta were HelivtreA 1 
tkt tnstTumeatality of the Commitlee, for gratuitaui tlittr 
button in ike Southern and Weilern parti of the Uaitl 
Statei. ' 

Throagh 70UP iostrumeotalily, and throogh the liberality of n 
rioua origmHl aubicribera to 7~oDr Inititutim], and other intliTidu>b| 
1 havOiad the meant or exttcsiTe usefulneu placed in my hand' 
When Mr, Mills and myielf petfonned a miBnionary tour throaf 
th(- western and taathem Statei and Territories, we bE 
teen thousand of your Tracts for grataitom diBtributior 
that time, widely diapersed these " winged meaiengen of lali 
tion," through the moat deilitule regiona of the west and 
And during the laat year, on my second miaaionary excni 
have been enabled to diatrjbute upwards of eight thoiiiand 
Permit me to lay before you abrief account of the manner in 
I have discharged my trust, and of aome of the effecta produced 

Many of the Tracts, I distributed with my own hands ; 
far the greater part, 1 sent for distribution into various plac 
Bouthem and western states -, confiding them to faithful a: 
cious men, with whom,for the moat part, 1 am personally acquainted 
While I remained in New Orleans, I saw the convent of the U' 
auline nuns supplied with a variety of Tracts both in the En^ 
and French languages. (A number of French Tracts h: ' ~ 
ceived by A. Hennen, Esq, from England.) Our intercourie a 
this subject was chiefly held with Miss J. an American lady 1 
has lately taken the vail. When we placed them in her hands, sk, 
frankly said she would read them all ; but if she found any UiiM 
in them hostile to her church, she should certainly bum then 
When she had perused them, she found no fault with any of then 
and expressed a high degree of satisfaction in some of them ; pat 
licularly, in " The Dairyman's Danghter," " The Shepherd « 
BalisbaiT Plain," and " The Negro Servant." She requested d 
number of each of these Tracts, for the use of the classes in ( 
school of young ladies attached to the convent. The yonng ladiei 
she eaid, were quite delighted with them. Some of the Freni^ 
nuns likewise spoke of them in terms of the most decided approbM 
Who can tell how much may be effected by your pnbiicW 
within the cloisters of a convent? ) 

a meeting of the Mississippi Presbytery, I made that body M 



3d AtV.] AFPEITDIX. 45 

kmatioB <tf <nw thousand Tracts, to be distributed in the congngH' 
ions f3omiected with it. The offer of them occasioned a bnrst of 
eratefiil feeling that was trulj 8arprifin§f. One elder said, he had 
listributed smne before, and that nothing set the people to readings 
ike them. A vote of thanks was immediately passed to the liberal 
lonors of thenu 

When the Amite and West Florida Bible Society was orgftoized, 
I sent the Board of Trustees a number of copies of ^^ The Bible 
iboye all Price,^' (No. 71.) to accompany their subscription papers. 
Iliis was considered a very seasonable and very useful present. 
Db Tmstees passed a resdlution of thanks for it. This resolution 
mui communicated by the Vice President of the Society. From the 
lame gentleman I afterwards received a still more pleasing testimo- 
nial A the usefulness of your TVacts. It was transmitted to me 
in a letter from a worthy clergyman, who says, ^^ Accept, Rever- 
md Brother, this my aclmowledgment for the receipt of the Tracts 
ind Pamphlets by the hand of Capt. D. I have examined a part, 
and have distributed some in my neighbourhood. I consider them 
well calculated to promote the cause of the Redeemer. I am au- 
thorised by a wealtiiy and respectable gentleman, (the Vice Presi- 
dent,) to state to you, that ^ in the good Proridence of God he has 
rittied bountifully in spiritual consolations through the reading of 
thoee pamphlets ; while they have disclosed to him the numerous 
Buiki of pcdlotion in his heart which were unobserved before.^ '^ 

Another respectable clergyman in the Mississippi Territory, hav- 
tag spokat of the usefulnees of Bibles, says, ^^ Tracts also have fre» 

ricntly contained a word in season to the receivers. One instance 
beg leave to mention. To a lady, a sister in our communion, who 
was in a distressed state of mind, I sent one by her husband. The 
M9Et time I saw him, he said, ^ You have done me an unspeakable 
kfaidness. Nothing could have been more seasonable than the book 
yoQ seat her.' The next visit I made to the family, I found it had ■ 
been blessed to her edification and comfort. Where I preached 
last Sunday, the people meet every Sabbath ; and when destitute 
afpreaching they profess to have been edified by the reading of 
the Tracts. On the whole, I am well satisfied that the circulation 
of the Scriptures and other books on religious subjects will be bless- 
ed to effect a happy change in the state of society. Those hum- 
bling doctrines of the Ck>spel, explained and supported in those 
books, are the only ones to reform mankind. Our worthy New 
England friends are doing a great work. I am happy to assist in 
succeeding their views. I feel we are much their debtors." 

From an elder in the Presbyterian church at Pine Ridge, Missis- 
sippi Territory, I received a letter in substance as follows : 

Piju Ridgt^ June 11, 1816. 

^^ Rev. Sir, — I wish to address you a few lines respecting the 

Tracts and other books you were pleased to put into my hands for 

circulation. The reception they met was truly gratifying. The 

Tracts in particular had a great effect on all classes of peo^lev 



46 APPENDIX. [3(] RKP. 



They are jeiierally looked upon by the youth, as a divinp mei ^ 
Bent for theii coDvictian. I have been much gnttified in diitribul- 
ii^ them, haviag; leen and heard the praise and thaoka returned 
on receiving them. Many inatances I could give yon in detail. 1 
(hall confine myielf to two or three that I cannot paas by unt ■'- 
ed. Riding into Natchez, one day, I heard the aound of a voi 
the wooda. I followed it, and fonnd a negro man kneeling behind 
a tree at prayer. When he approached me, 1 inquired what h« 
waa doing- there. He replied with diffidence, " I was saying my 
prayers." What, do negroea pray ! " Tea, master, some few do ; 
but it is to be lamented that so few of Ihrm pray." How long have 
you been in the habit of praying ; " Not more than three or ff" 
yeara." What waa the means of yoor having a deaire to pray.' ' 
was the will of God. The Scripture tells us we always ahoi 
pray and make our requests known to God." Can you read! 
" Yes, Sir." I had some TracU in my pocket, and required h' 
to show that he could read. He took one and read distinctly, 
was " The Negro Servant." 1 gave it to 'him, with " The Shep- 
herd of Salisbury Plain." He received them with uplifted handi 
and eyes giving thanks to Ood for the kind gift. On inquiry I find 
it ta his business every Sabbath day lo read them to wicked negroes, 
and to exhort them to turn from sin and serve God. Another ne- 
gro, who bad received a couple of Tracta from me, carries them in 
his bosom, calling them, the gift of heaven. Being asked by on* 
of his feHow strvanta, if he would sell him the gift of heaven, bii 
reply was, ■>The gift of God is not to be purchased with money. 
Your money periahea with you, and you (I tear) are in the gall of 
bittemeas and bond of iniquity, and have neither part nor lot in tbil 
matter. I would not take fifty dollars for them, if there were no 
more oflhem." One of my neigbhours, a very moral and well In- 
Ibrmed man, and a friend of religion, received a few Tracts for tliE 
, use of his children. But on readiug them himself, as his wife in 
formed me, be was quite overcome by them. He waa so deeply »t 
fected that he conld not read without stopping. And in another in- 
stance, 1 have every reason to believe a good work is begun. A 
little boy of genteel and moral parents received acouple of Tracti, 
and read them with so much interest, and discovered so much grai^ 
ity of deportment afterwards, that his mother desired to see tht 
little books herself. And when she had commenced, she could 
not atop until she had read them through. The little boy tells ne 
thai the reading of them makes his mother cry. He often inquire! 
of me, "When will you retam with more good books? Otber 
Jiooks," he-saya, '■ are very useful for information, but do no good in 
dying." I have frequent opportuniliea of observing him and be ii 
*ery sedate in bis behaviour." 

Wishing you luccecs in your useful labours, I subscribe myself, 



Your obliged frirnud. 



6aN!EL 



SMITH. 



817] THIRD RBPORT. 47 

OFFICERS, 

XLXCTXD MAT 26, 1817. 

How. WILLIAM REED, Marblehead, Prttident. 
Rnv. JEDIDIAH MORSE, d. d. \tt Vict President. 
Mb. JOHN JENKS, of Salem, 2d Vice President. 
Rbv. JOHN CODMAN, Corresponding Secretary. 
R«v. JOSHUA HUNTINGTON, Recording Secretary. 

AMOS BLANCHARD, Esq. of Andover, Treasurer. 

SAMUEL FARRAR, Esq. JludUor. 

EXSCUTIVE COimiTTEE. 

Rev. JEDIDIAH MORSE, d. d. 
Rev. LEONARD WOODS, d. d. 
Rev. JOHN H. CHURCH, 
Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS, of Andover^ 
AMOS BLANCHARD, Esq. 



State of the Societt^s Fvvofi. 
^AULircE due from the Society, May 27, 1816 $624.52 

SxPXJ'SB for paper, printing, &c. from May 27, 1816, ) 9.127 58 
to May 26, 1817 J ^ • 

$2,762.10 

Received from May 27, 1816, to May 26, 1817. 

>onation8 $7.62 

•Void the Agents of the General Depository for Tracts ) i no 16 

sold, &c r. . . J ' ' 

$1,117.78 

Sadaace due from he Society May 26, 1817. 1,634.32 

Jeri&miak Evabts, Treasurer, 



MAY 27, 1818. 



The Executive Committee present their Fourth AddoeI 
Report, deeply impressed with the importance of the es- 
tablishment which has been committed to their charge. 
And they would not fail to offer their tribute of thanksg^f- 
ing to the Father of mercies, for his blessing which has 
so manifestly attended their humble endeavours. 

They have added, the past ye^r, four new Tracts to 
the Series, viz. 

JVb. Pogi*, 

86. The Mother^s Catechism S8 

VOL. V- , 

87. Conversation in a Boat between Two Seamen . . lU 

88. To the Sick who are without hope . . . .8 

89. The Dairyman. By Rev. D. Tyerman ... . i4 

They hav^ also printed new editionB of fifty nint of the 
Tracts previously published. All were editions of 6,000 
except those of Nos. 13 and 88, which were 10,000, mak< 
ing the whole number of 

Tracts published the last year .... 386,0M 
Whole number from the beginning . . . 1,613,000 

Your Committee have also, the past year, established 

seven new Depositories : viz. 

St. Alhdnt^ Vt. Horace Janes, Esq. 

OreenJUld^ Mats, S. Wells. Jun. 

Buffalo^ JV. F. Jasper Coming. 

Ltwitton^ JV. Y. Rev. David M. Smith. 

KnoxviUt^ Ten, Rev. D. A. Sherman. * 

Bowling Grten^ Ken, Alexander Graham. 

€)incinnati^ Ohio, Thomas L. Paine. 

These, with those reported the last year, make 40 De- 
positories now depending on this Society for a constant 
supply of Tracts. These are stationed in fourteen dif> 
/erent States, besides the one in Mississippi Territory. 
Thus the benefits of this Society are extending to mnlti- 
tqdes whom its patrons will probably never see, till they 



1818] VOURTH REPORT. * 49 

meet them at the bar of God. And, Brethren, coald we 
belieTe that even one soal would be happy forever, aod 
sing the song of praise to Redeeming love, in cousequeoce 
of the existence of this Society, how amply would it re- 
pay all our exertions. But your Committee have abun- 
dant evidence, that numbers have already been turned 
from darkness to light by the instrumentality of this Insti- 
tution ; and they look forward with delightful anticipa- 
tions of good which will result, in years and agi^s to come. 

Your Committee believe, that the Tracts which have 
been issued contain the true spirit of the Gospel of Jenus. 
Cbriflt, and they rely on the promise of God, through the 
agency of the Holy Spirit, that he will bless his own 
tmth, and that his word shall not return to him void. 

An instance of the usefulness of a Tract to a young La- 
dy in this vicinity, has just been reported to the Commit- 
tee, which bears so striking a testimony, at once to the im- 
portance of the measures adopted by this Society and to 
the power of Divine grace, that they cannot deny them- 
selves Che pleasure of relating it. 

^ I traosmit you, by request,'' says she, ^^ a narrative of 
tlie effect produced on my own mind by the instrumental- 
ity of the Tract entitled the ^ Young Cottager^'* which was 
presented me by a child under the age of seven years. 
Od reading it, 1 was brought, as 1 trust, by Divine grace, 
to behold myself <is a sinner — an enemy to God and holi- . 
M|88, justly exposed to his wrath, yet Hiving without God 
arid without hope in the world,' and travelling the broad 
road to destruction. When 1 compared my past life vi^ith 
the holy law of God, it appeared exceedingly sinful. I 
had transgressed against great light and knowledge — had 
'cast off fear and restrained prayer.' It appeared that 
I was beyond the reach of mercy, and that it only remain- 
ed for justice to cut me down, aod make me, eternally, aa 
miserable as 1 was sinful. For many days, my mind 
was filled with horror, and almost complete despair; 
when, at length, through the boundless mercy of God in 
Christy as one of his faithful servants was pleading for me 
at the throne of grace, my burden and fears were sweetly 
removed; and with a -joy and peace unknown before, I 
ceuld say, ^ Worthy is the Lamb that was slain.' Christ 



am. [181S 

was indeed to me, ' the chiefest among ten thousand, nnd 
altog^etlier lovely.' These having been my exercises a 
Dumber of monlba alnce, I can only add, that I have found, 
as I truat, by a bleared experience, that ' wisdom's wayi 
are ways of pleasaotnesa, and all her paths are peace,' 
I 1 have to moura over the remains of sin; and my prayei 

13, (hat the work of sanctilication may be perfected in my 

I ''' After submitting this humble sketch, permit me to 

urge upon you to exhort your Society not to be ' weary 

I in well doing,' knowing- that 'in due season they shall 

I reap, if they faint not.' Doubtless, time will never disclose 

the benefit which many immortal souls may derive from 

your united exertions ; but how happy the consideration, 

that on that day when all shall stand belore the judgment 

seat of Christ, here and there one will be found at th« 

I right hand of the Judge, who, under God, will attribnta 

their conversion to those means which have been used by 

your Society," 

Your Committee cannot but feel their hearts respond 
(0 the language of (his child, as they have reaaon to be- 
lieve, of redeeming mercy ; and they would earnestly in- 
vite the friends of the cross of Christ and of the souls of 
' men, to give (heir eflicient aid In promoting an Institution 

r which is 90 signally blessed by God. Your Commitlea 

I are now involved in a debt of more than one thousand dol- 

I iars, yet the field is opening before them with brighter 

and brighter prospects. Our population is most rapidly 
extending, and multitudes are now almost entirely desti- 
tnte of religious instruction, some of whom stretch out theii 
hands to us and ask, with nlTecting interest, for Religion 
Tracto. 

The Committee earnestly recommend (he formation 
of Auxiliary Societies j and they believe that, on a lillla 
reflection, all will feel Ihe importance of aiding the Parent 
Institution, in extending Its eiforts among those who at* 
not favoured with the rich blessings of the Gospel. They 
are our brethren. They are members of our own cod* 
muoity. They are bound lo the same eternity with a» 
And we must raeet thera at the judgmetil. — And can wa 
there see thero with horror on theiy countenances, and 



1618] votraiB retokt. 61 



the i%hteoa8 Judge pronouDce upon them the sen- 
tence that drives them down to anatterable wo ; and re- 
member that we, while emoynig the richest gifts of Proy- 
idence, did not do so much for them as to sead them a 
Reltgioos Tract, to tell them of the way of salyation, and 
warn them to flee from the wrath to come ? 

Brethren, while the Committee would be thankful that, 
in the short space of four years, this Society has done so 
much, they are compelled to feel that it is little in com- 
parison with what we are encouraged and required to do, 
Bj the great Head of the church. We haye only begun 
'to eiccupy the field which spreads itself inyitingly before 
ni. The stations from which our Tracts are distributed 
are few hi comparison with what they should be, and the 
eircfilatioa, from each station, is by far too limited. What 
blessings might we not hope for, if our publications were 
pat into eyery family in our country, where all, in the 
moment of leisure, might be induced to take them, and 
hear what God, through them, will say. ^' What blessingi 
might occur, in the course of Providence," says the ex- 
celleit Montgomery* a man scarcely less distinguished as 
a peet, than as a friend of the religion of Jesus, ^' if these 
mwU bet eflectnal calls to repentance were universally 
and abundantly distributed ? We say wUverHdly and 061111- 
domlfy,— because, though a few Tracts, carefully scattered, 
may and must do good, yet what can be produced by sup- 

E*'ee so disproportioned to the wants of mankind ? but 
re a blade of grass, and there perhaps a flower, where 
all was barren before, and where all is still barren around : 
whereas to make the wilderness and the solitary place to 
vejoice, and the desert to blossom like the rose, we must, 
in onr measure, imitate the bounty of our heavenly Fa- 
ttier, who causes the sun in his progress to shine on every 
spot of land and sea, and his rain to fall on the rock and 
the highway, as well as on the fertile plain and the cultured 
garden. Tracts must be unsparingly and unceasingly dissem- 
inated, to produce extensive and permanent effects. How 
many have been warned, reproved, instructed, restrained, 
encouraged, strengthened, or established in faith, by the 
perusal of the thousands and ten of thousands of the little 
fugitive pieces, circulated by Tract Societies— can never 



52 f OVRTtt lUTORT. [I8tt 

be known (ill the day of judgment ; bat the records are 
in heaven, and there they will be held in everlasting re- 
membrance. Spirits in glory, a million ages hence, may 
be telling their companions, what great things the LoM 
has done for them, on earth, by these humble instruments. 
If we knew of but one instance, in which, by such means, 
a sinner had been turned from the error^of his way, we 
might safely calculate on many more ; nay, if we knew of 
none, we ought still to believe, that we might see the sal* 
vafion of God, — remembering that, while it is our duty to 
plant and to water, it is He only, who giveth the increase* 
Having done our part, can we doubt that he has done hit f 
The casual reading of a single page in one of these pamph- 
lets, may, under the blessing of God, be the earliest breath 
of a new birth unto righteousness ; the first step of a pil- 
grimage to the heavenly Jerusalem. 

^^A Tract lying in a cottage window is a preacher, with 
a message from God to every one who takes it up. This 
preacher will be instant in season and out of season ; it 
will wait patiently till it can deliver its message, and it 
will deliver it fully, faithfully, without apology, equivoca* 
tioo, or respect of pel*sons ; it will fearlessly tell the truth, 
and we hope nothing but the truth : it will speak to the 
conscience, and it will teach the conscience to speak.^' 



1818] FOURTH REPORT. 63 

OFFICERS, 

XLSCTXD MAT 9!7y 1818. 

How. WILLIAM REED, President, 

Rev. JEDIDIAH MORSE, d. d. 1*/ Fice President. 

JAbl. JOHN JENKS, 2rf Vict President, 

Rbv. JOHN CODMAN, Corresponding Secretary. 

Rev. JOSHUA HUNTINGTON, Recording Secretary. 

AMOS BLANCHARD, Esq. Treasurer. 

SAMUEL FARRAR, Esq. Auditor, 

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE. 

Rev. JEDIDIAH MORSE, o. d. 
Rev. LEONARD WOODS, d. d. 
Rev. JOHN H. CHURCH, 
Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS, 

' AMOS BLANCHARD, Esq. 



State op the Society's Funds. 

Balance due fVom the Society, May 26, 1817, . 1,634,32 

Expense for paper, printing, &c. from May 26, 1817, ) ^ ^^-t e\A 
to May 27, 1818, $ i,7^i,U4 

$3,355,36 

REC£ivED,//om Jtfay 26, 1817, to May 27, 1818, 

Donations 52,22 

FVom the Agents of the General Depository for Tracts ) ^ ^14 go 
sold, &c. ....... J ' ' 

$2,266,85 

Balance due from the Society May 27, 1818, . . 1,088,51 

Amob Blajtchaad, Treasurer, 



6* 



Mat 26^ 1819. 



It is with orach satisfaction^ that the Execotiye Com- 
mittee haye this opportonity to submit to the Members 
and Patrons of this Society, their Fifth Annual RepoYt. Id 
commencing this service, they would render thanks to the 
Author of ail good, that their efforts have been so far 
crowned with his blessing. To his gracious Providencei 
their success should be ascribed. By his favour, the op- 
erations of the Society were at first commenced with 
pleasing prospects of extensive usefulness : and these 
prospects still animate the Committee. 

During the past year, the Committee have published 
thirteen new Tracts : viz. 

JVb. Pagti. 

90. A Word in Season — ^Thoughts on Eternity — Hymn . \i 

9 1 . Two Letters of Pearsall, written after a dangerous sickness 8 

92. The Praying Negro . . . . . . .4 

93. Address to Females, in favour of the Missionary Society 16 

94. Interesting Conversion and exemplary Life of JMxs. Tooly 7 

95. Home, or a short account of Charles Grafton • • 16 

96. The Sailor^s Friend 8 

97. A Farting Address to a Sabbath^chool Child . . 8 

"98. The New Birth It 

99. Sanctified AfiOictions 16 

100. Advice from a Master to his Ap|»entice, . - . 8 

101. The Shipmates, a supplement to Conversation in a Boat 28 

102. A Dialog^ue on Saturday Evenhig ... .It 

The whole number of 

Tracts published the past year is . : . 258,000 

Whole number from the beo^ning, . . . 1,871,000 

Your Committee have also, the past year, established 
the folio wiog new Depositories : 

£2re/«r, /T. H. M. Haliburton. 

HaverhtU^ Mass, Fisher Howe. 

Angelica. JV. Y. Rev. Robert Hubbard. 

Utica, Jf. Y, Merrill & Hastings. 

Wathingion^ Ditt, Coh Rev. James Lawfie. 



181§] nrvH RSPORV. 56 

Of Depositories formerly esUblished, five hare beeo 
discontinued, making the whole number now in efficient 
operationv forty. 

The Committee feel happy in stating that the establish* 
meat is rising. Its concerns are prosperous. New orders 
ibr Tracts are received from distant parts of the country. 
Tract Societies have been formed, and are forming in va* 
rioua places j and many individuals manifest a commenda- 
ble seal to purchase and distribute Tracts. By these 
means, the interest of the Society is promoted ; though 
act to the extent, which is desirable. A larger capital is 
needed to enable the Committee to prosecute the business 
to the best advantage. It must be evident to every Mem- 
ber and Friend of the Society, that a large quantity of 
Tracts must constantly be kept on hand, in order to meet 
the wishes and expectations of those who would purchase. 
The series most also be increased by publishing new 
Tracts, or the interest and operations of the Society can- 
not continue in the progressive state, which must be de- 
sired by every friend to the cause. The funds of the So- 
ciety most therefore be enlarged. And the Committee 
entertain no doubt but that this may be easily done. 
Thousands are ready to afford, in various ways, their aid, 
as opportunity shall present. And by the requisite sup- 
port, this establishment may soon perform no inconsidera- 
ble part in disseminating Divine knowledge, and promot- 
ing good morals. Impressed with these considerations, 
the Committee would suggest the following measures for 
aiding this Society. 

One is a more general and extensive ybrtna^um of Tract 
8oeUtu$. Cannot this be accomplished with much ease t 
May not a Tract Society be formed in almost every town, 
or parish, or village t Would not suoh a Society be ad- 
Tantageously connected with every Sabbath School t 
These Societies, with little exertion, might annually col- 
lect twice as much money, as they would wish to expend 
in Tracts for their own use, or to distribute in their imme- 
diate vicinity. Having procured a sufficiency for those 
purposes, they might transmit their surplus monies to the 
Treasurer of this Society. This would enable the Com- 
mittee to enlarge the sphere of their operations; and to 



ansiver some pressing' calls for Tracts, which they have 
hitherto been obliged to deny. U would also exceedingly 
facilitate the cii-culalioa of Tracts, ivht:rever such Socie- 
ties are formed. 

Another measure, is an increast of t)it funds of the 5oou- 
ty, by donationi imd legaeita, Theste, of diHereut aDmSf 
might be easily made by a great proporlioo of our felloW 
citizeaa. Wbo cannot contribute somelhing to this Socie- 
ty, ivitbout diminishing hi^ contributions to other charita* 
ble objects ? If necessary, oiighl no) a little more economy 
tie practised for this purpose 1 And would not such chnri- 
ty be profitably bestowed? Without disparaging other 
charities, may it not be said that peculiar advantages at- 
tend the circulalioQ of Religious Tracts? Much is here 
done by small sums. And consequently it is in the power 
of many to promote this design more eSeclually than tbey 
could some olber design. Aod here the affluent may at 
once put a mighty engine in motion. With a few thoa- 
saad dollars, the influence of the American Tract So- 
ciety might be soon eKtended, with great effect, from 
Maine to Florida, and from the shores of the Atlantic to 
unknown limits in the West. 

A third mPiisure is the general circulation of Traeli, 
This must chiefly devolve on the Chrititiao community. 
To publish Tracts, and enperialend the general agency 
of the business, will sufficiently occupy the time and atten- 
tion of the Eiecutive Committee. Nor can they so well 
distribute Tracts, in the v^iVioiis places where Ihey a» 
needed, as persons living in those places. They have'neU 
ther the knowledge nor the means of doing it su adran- 
tageously. But, in every district of our country, there are 
those who can do it. By n lillle inquiry, they can ascer- 
tain what Tracts are most needed, and where they will 
be most likely to do good ; and then dislribute accordingly. 
How many of these " winged messengers," may thus he 
pitl in motion io different directions. Who is unable to 
giT<^ them circulation t Even ten rents will purchase 100 
pagei, or ten Tracts of differi^nt sizes. With a dollar, 1,000 
piig^'i, or 11)0 small Tracls may be purchased. A hundred- 
Triicis might he read, or be heard, by more than a thou- 
sand persons, and be blessed as means of their salvation. 



1819] nrra report. 67 

Let a person de?ote ^100 to thii object; and the interest 
of this sum would annually circulate 600 Tracts among; 
thousands who are perishing for lack of knowledge. Thia 
is surelj no trifling method of doing good. Who can think 
it beneath his attention ? 

In the circulation of Tracts, persons of different \)ccu- 
pations, may conveniently and successfully engzge. 

This may be done by ministers of the Gospel. What 
minister will not find it a pleasant thing to circulate Tracta 
among his people. It may give more interest to his pas- 
toral visits, to distribute these as he goes from house to 
house. Impressions made by his conversation may be in- 
creased by the perusal of a Tract after he retires. In 
this way, he may gain the affection, and promote the 
improvement of children and young persons. Tracts, in 
some cases, he may give as presents ; and, in others, as small 
premiums. Some, of various kinds, may be loaned and re- 
turned ; and thus supply the want of other books, among 
those who are unable to purchase them. How many 
might thus derive great and lasting benefit from a few dol- 
lars' worth of Tracts ? And how much would a minister 
feel himself assisted and encouraged in his labours ? 

In numerous places, destitute of ministers, there are 
active christians, and persons of benevolence, wbo can en- 
gage in this business. Every person of tbis description, 
by procuring and distributing Tracts, may enjoy the priv- 
ilege of doing great good to his fellow men. He may be 
the instrument of reforming the vicious, enlightening the 
ignorant, and directing the lost and perishing to the Lamb 
of God for salvation. How much may an active female 
accomplish in the circle of her acquaintance, and especial^ 
]y among the rising generation, by these means of instruct 
tion and improvement ? What mode of doing good is more 
congenial to the female mind ; more delightful to the 
daughters of Zion ? By their affectionate kindness, by 
their familiar and pleasant remarks, they may have more 
influence than the other sex, in engaging the attention, and 
impressing the minds of young persons, as they put Relig- 
ious Tracts into their hands. 

In schools there is a good opportunity to distribute 
Tracts* Every teacher might well bestow tbem as re-^ 



58 FIFTH REPOllT. {1819 

warda for punctual attPtnlanee, diligence in study, and good 
behaviour. While Ihis excited a spiril of Improrementia 
youth, it would also conrey mHny Tracts into families, 
where Ihey vrould be read with peculiar interest, and be 
likely to produce very pleasing' effects. This raode ot 
distributing Tracts claims the attention of Tract Societiei, 
and benevolent individuala. These could easily furnish 
teachers with a sufficiency for dislribatimi in scbools. In 
prosecuting journeys, the pious and benevolent might seat* 
ter much of this precious seed ; which, by the divine We*- 
sing, would yield an immortal hnrveit. A Tract given by 
a stranger, and accompanied with a serious friendly re- 
murk, might excite much allenlion in the receiver, and b« 
blessed to his everlasting good. Who knows what im- 
mense benefit this kind of charity may produce ! It is not con- 
fined lothe individual who receives a Tract from a friendly 
strat^er; but he wishes others to read what has been m 
useful to bin ; and he is ani:lous to Rs their attention m 
the things of their future peace. And thus, by the Mess- 
ing of God, the influence of u single Tract is felt through 
a circle of immortal beings, and extends to generations un- 
born. 

In such benevolent designs, the Committee would not 
only animate the members of this Society to renewed ex- 
ertions; but also earnestly solicit the generous and effi- 
cient cooperation of the liberal and affluent in differeitt 
parts of our country. 

BHUTttaen and Friends : — 7V« number engaged in thit 
goad aiork ii an animating eoniideration. Among the Tnct 
Societies of the present period, the Religious Tract Socie- 
ty in London holds the foremost rank. This was estab* 
tished In 1799. In 1813, (his Society had distributed sev- 
enteen millions of Tracts, In each year since, Ibe ttvtf 
age number circulated is said to be about three mitlianft 
In the year ending May 1817, it was three millions and « 
half. The wbole number of Tracts dislribmed by tUl 
Society is thooghl to exceed thirty two millions. Thesa 
Tracts have been printed in fourteen different langnageit 
besides the English, viz. Welsh, Irish, Manks, GaelJcki 
French, Dutch, Spanish, Porlnguese.'German, Danish, Flo- 
nisb, Rintiftn, Calmuck, and Chinese. This Society bM 



J 81 9] flFTM REPORT. 59 

1S4 Aozilkries within the limits of England. By its in* 
fluence and aid, it has been instrumental of formii^, im 
varioas parts of Europe, manj Societies on principles 
similar to its own ; makings them fountains^ from which 
small streams might receive a constant supply. Such are 
the Societies in Stockholm, Hanover, Berlin, Sleswick, 
Ht>l8t6in, Elberfield, Stutgard, Nurenberg, Frankfort, 
Neowied, Koenigsfeld, Basle, Zurich, Berne, St. GaH, 
Scaffhausen, Lausanne, and Piedmont among the Walden- 
ses ; also at different places in Italy, Russia, and Finland. 
Some of the smallest of these Societies have published 
from fifty to one hundred thousand Tracts. Others have 
done much more. The Society at Stockholm, which was 
established in 1809, during the four first years from its for- 
mation, printed Tracts in the Swedish, Finnish, and Lap- 
anese languages ; and circulated, in the same period, up- 
wards of 400,000. It has since circulated several times 
that number. 

The Church of England Tract Society, estaiblished at 
Bristol, in 181 1, promises much for the cause. It has 
Auxiliaries in different parts of England and Ireland, and 
in several of the British Provinces. 

The Liverpool Religious Tract Society has distributed, 
in two years and a half, upwards of 622,000 Tracts. 

In the United States, there is a sister Society, whose 
exertions in the common cause are highly commendable. 
This is the New York Tract Society. It was formed in 
18 10. During the year 1 8 1 5, it distributed 35,600 Tracts, 
inclnding the number sold to other Societies. According 
to the sixth annual Report, the whole number of Tracts 
then published was 493,586. During every succeeding 
year, the number of Tracts published, has increased ; and 
the prospect is, that in a few years, some hundred thou- 
sands will be annually published by this Society. Some of 
their Tracts are in the Spanish and French languages. 
Their English series contains 62 numbers ; the Spanish 
four ; and the French one. These have been distributed 
amoi^ the French and Spanish in our own country ; in the 
West Indies ; and some in South America. 

The Committee believe that many thousands of Tracts 
have hi^en published, in the United Siates, by smaller So- 



CO riFTH REPORT. [1819 

cietiea and benevolent iDdividuala; but they are notable 
to Hpecity )>articiilar9. 

How many are enga^ied in this noble enterprise ! And 
bom cbeering' is Ibe prospect orsucceas ! Slinll not your 
brensts glow with love nnd zeal; and your bands abound 
in liberHlily ? 

The good effected ii another animating comideration. The 
beneScial effects of ciraiilaiing Tract? can be known bnt 
very imperfectly in this wnrld. The Ug'ht of eternity 
must show how many have lieen converted from the error 
of their naya, or have been quickened In their chriEtian 
course, or edified in the fiiilb of Ibe Gospel, by these si- 
lent monitors. They have ynst influence where savingef* 
feels are not produced, In ameliorating the condiiion of 
families and naliona. Mrs. Hannah More, it is supposed, 
bas done more for the preservation of Eng^land, by her 
Cheap Kepnsitory Tracts, than did the celebrated NelsoDi 
as a naval Commuoder, by ail his splendid achievements, 
" No works tended more to counteract the delusive and 
irreligious spirit of the French revolution," than these 
above mentioned from hep pen. And wherever her TnicH 
and others of a similar kind are circulated, (hey must leod 
to check the progress of error, to suppress vice and irre- 
ligion, and to counteract efforts to destroy civil and refig- 
ous order. Their influence on the rising generation is in- 
calculable. They take the attention and guide Ibe youth- 
ful mind to a prolitable course of reflection. They both 
amuse and instruct. Divine truth, when conveyed by in- 
teresting narrative or striking incidents, lakes faster hold 
of the mind. Is more easily retained, and has greater effect 

We have many accounts of hopeful conversions, which 
are to be traced to these small vehicles of truth aa tiM 
means. A relation of Ihem would much enrich Ihe prfr^ 
seni Report. But your Committee will conleni thcmselret 
with relating only one instance, which has lately occurred 
in New England, and which, it is believed, has not been 
published. 

As a respectable Physician, who h.id long been an avow- 
ed infidel, was reading the Tract entitled The Praoin^JVf 
gro, he wa« led to reflect that be posoessed a very difler- 
ent temper from Ihls pious person. When ke was injnreJ, 
ie ttas ditposed to seek revenge-, but this piou* ptnat^ 



1819] FIFTB KEPOET. '61 

when injured, fooDd relief in prajtr to God. This pro- 
duced a conviction of his sinfulness, guilt and danger. He 
sair no hope of salvation by hit own works ; but felt him- 
self a lost sinner. What then conld be do, bat look to that 
Saviour, whom he had so long rejected, as not worthy 
his regard. By faith in him, he obtained peace and com- 
fort. He then collected his deistical books at home, and 
those which he had fent to his neighbours, and committed 
them to the flames. He found the Bible infinitely better. 
Recollecting one night that one of these books was lent 
to his Minister, he knew not how to sleep till it was burn- 
ed ; but as the night was dark and stormy he concluded to 
wait till morning. Then neither the severity of the storm, 
nor the infirmities of his age^ prevented the execution of 
his purpose. When he asketd for the book, the Minister 
was fearful that he might still doubt the truth and inspira- 
tion of the Scriptures, and so wish to read this book again. 
Tbia had been his favourite author. But no sooner was 
it returned, than with much emphasis, he said, ^^ In the 
presence of the Lord Jesus Christ anJ these witnesses, I 
now solemnlv renounce all the errors contained in this 
book.^' He then cast it into the fire. — He since warns, 
with much affection and faithfulness, those whom he had 
before led astray, and entreats them to renounce their er- 
rers and embrace the Saviour. His exertions are not in 
vain. Christians are animated, and sinners alarmed. 

Dees a single Tract produce such effects? Who then is 
willii^ te be inactive ? Who can withhold his aid ? 

Mmek remains to be done. This is another motive to lib- 
eral exertion. The work is still in its commencement ; 
bat little of its blessed fruits is yet seen. Still it is seed 
time ; and the full harvest is yet to come. But the field 
is larger and with due cultivation, it promises a very rich 
hanrest. He thai soweth bountifully^ shall reap also bountir 

Lift up your eyes and behold the prospect before you. 
See the thousands and millions that need to be enlightened 
and turned to the Lord. Let their condition awaken your 
compassion, and rouse you to action. Never relax, but 
rather increase your exertions, until the whole land is 
filled with Divine knowledge, and righteousness, and peace. 

6 



62 FIFTH REPORT. [1819 

OFFICERS, 

ELECTED, MAT 26, 1819. 

How. WILLIAM REED, Pretident. 
Rev. JEDIDIAH MORSE, d. d. Fiee President, 
Rev. JOHN CODMAN, Corresponding Secretary. 
Rev. JOSHUA HUNTINGTON, Recording Secretary. 
AMOS BLANCHARD, Esq. Treasurer. 

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE. 

Rev. JEDIDIAH MORSE, d. d. 
Rev. JOHN H. CHURCH, 
Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS, 
Rev. JOHN CODMAN, 

AMOS BLANCHARD, Esa, 



r 



State OF the Societt^s Funds. 

e 
Balance due from the Society, May 27, 1818, 1,088,51 

Expenses of paper, printing, &c. from May 27, 1818, > -i ata aa 
to May 26, 1819, . .- . . . $ i,oi»,44 

$2,707,96 

RECEivED,/rom May 27, 1818, to May 26, 1819. 

Donations 22,13 

Loan 1,000,00 

^om the Agrents of the General Depository for Tracts ) ^,.„ -« 

80ld,&C \ ^^'^ 

$1,718,86 

Balance due from the Society May 26, 1819, for print- } - ^^ ^ 
inff, &c. and for Loan • • • • J ^'®^»^ 

Amos Blanobaro, Treonirer. 



MAY 31, 1820. 



The race is not always to the swift, Dor the battle to 
the stroDg. The Lord, in maDj iDstances, accomplishes 
importaot purposes by humble instruments and feeble 
means. Tbis secures the glory of his name, and increases 
the admiration and joy of those, who love him in sincerity. 
The happy subjects of his grace have likewise a more 
lively sense of their immense obligations of love and obe- 
dience to him, who worketh all things after the counsel 
of his own will. 

It is no disparagement to the more splendid operations 
of Missionary and Bible Societies, that so much good is ef- 
fected by the circulation of Religious Tracts. Nor can it 
diminish those operations. It roust greatly increase and 
strengthen them. Tract Societies are also aided in re- 
turn. There is a reciprocal and combined influence, which 
will be mighty through God to the puHing down of the 
strong holds of sin and Satan, and the universal establish- 
ment of the kingdom of truth and righteousness. 

The first projectors and liberal founders of this estab- 
lishment must witness, with no ordinary satisfaction, its 
rising prosperity. Each revolving year brings fresh and 
augmented evidence of its vast utility. And who can doubt 
but that this Society may be regarded with peculiar inter- 
est, by future generations, as one of the means of evangel- 
izing and saving the world. 

The Executive Committee indulge the hope that a brief 
view of what has been done the past year, will animate 
the members and patrons of this Society to renew their 
zeal, and increase their exertions in the cause. 

The Society are sensible that the plans and efforts of 
the Committee are chiefly directed to one point — the pub- 
lishing of Tracts to such amount, and in such variety, that 
Societies and individuals in all parts of our widely exteadr 



64 SIXTH REPORT. [ISaO 

ed country, may be supplied oa the moat advaotageou* 
terms Tor charitable distribution. For this purpose (he 
CommiLtee hare felt that the capital of the Society must 
be much enlarged ; and that when this should be done to 
a sufficient amount, the establishment, under a kind Pror- 
idence, ivoutd be able to maintain itself for ages to come, 
or even to the eud of the world. For instance, a givea 
sum ivill print an edition of a Tract : when this editioD la 
sold, the avails of the sale will print another edition; ind 
so □□, as long as the Tract shall be needed. 

The Committee were so impressed on this subject, that 
they resolved lo employ an Agent to travel through vari- 
ous parts of our country with a view of increasing (he 
funds of the Society, and extending its operalioos. Tfaej 
accordingly engaged Mr. Louis Bwight for the term of 
twelve months, Mr. Dwight commenced his mission, Iha 
beginning of October lust. He has been well received in 
the places which he has visited ; and the Lord has iDclin- 
ed the hearts of many lo promote, by Iheir liberality, the 
great object ofthe Institution. The concerns of the Soci- 
ety were previously iti a stale of much embarrassmeDL 
The publication of Tracts was much retarded, and almost 
suspended fnr a time. But it was soon resumed with new 
energy, and 3TS,000 Tracts, embracing 6S numbers, bare 
since been pabliahed. This revival of (he business is la 
be attributed to the renewed and lively interest in the ab- 
ject of the Society, which was excited by Mr. DnigbCs 
agency in Boston and other places. Should his efforts still 
continue to he crowned with success, and the patronage 
of the Christian community he further aflorded, the frieodd 
of (he eslabhshment will have increasing cause of grati- 
tude lo the Father of mercies. By his smiles upon the 
operations of the Society, and its patrons and agents, the 
uumber of Tracts will continue to be increased, and to be 
more extensively circulated. 

It may be gratifying to the Society to be informed, that 
in Ihe last six months previous to Ihe 5rst of Ihe present 
month, Ihe number of Tracts published was a third great- 
er than was published in the year preceding the last Ad* 
iiual Meeting. 

The following neiv Tracts have been added (o the so 
rJea the past year : 



18!0] SIXTH REPORT. 65 

■Vs. Pagci. 

103. Cvtry man the Friend or Enemy of Christ ... 8 

iM. History of Tracli 2G 

1115. The Happy Walgrman U 

106. Pause and think, "Am T a Christian !" By Rev. J. AUtine 24 

llfl. Little Henry and hia Bearer 32 

TO, Scriplure Eatracta ....... 20 

The last Tract supplies the pliice of Rev. Dr. Beecher'a 
AdJreas. The Tract No. 34 wilt also, Ln future, be pub- 
liihed in smaller type, which will reduce it from GO prtgea 

Id 28; and the remaining 33 pages ivill be supplied hj 
34. Part n. A Memorial for Sunday-School Boy» . 16 

M. Ffkrt HI. A Memorial for Sanday School Girla . . IG 

These nill immediately be put to prest. 
The whole number oC Tracts published the patt fear is 3S3,000 
Whole number from the beginning 2,254,000 

Nineteen new Depositories have the past year been es- 
labliahed in the foIlotviDg towns : viz. 

Bnauviick, Me, Joseph Griffin. 

Emtpart, Me. Abiel Slevens. 

Hallmcta, Me. Gow & Lincoln. 

Jftwport, JV. H. Rev. James 11. Wheelock. 

Bfutlltboraiieh, Vt. Rev. Jonathan M»;ee. 

BtviTly, Mai.. Israel Trask. 

Pitlifitld, Mass. Josiah Iiia..;eO. 

Waiiamslnom {mil.Call.) Isaac Oakta. 

ChcUta, Con. ThomaB llohLniun. 

PomfoTt. Con. Rev. James Porter. 

BromiBiiU, Jf. T. Rev, Phineaa Smith. 

Carnbridge, JV. Y. Rev. Nathaniel S. Prime. 

Johnslown, JV. Y. Rev. Elisha Yale. 

RBCheiler, JV, ¥. Everard Pect. 

Alixandria, Fa, James & A, Douglass. 

jVorfott, Fa. John M'Phail. 

Sbiunton, To. Joseph Cowan. 

Edtnlan, JV. C. Thoinaa Browitrig-. 

Si. LbuU, JMiMDUri, Rev. Salmozi Gidilings. 

The whole number of Deposltnrie* in operatioQ is dow 
fil\y Reven. and the snles have much increased. From 
this it is manifest, that greater intcreM is eiLclted in favour 
of the Society, and a much larger number of its Tracts 
hiFe been put in circulation. 

Aa the ageacj of Mr. Dwight is not closed, a report of 
his Ubours and success must be reserred to a future «■ 



4)6 3ISTH REPORT. [laeo 

portunity. The Committee would however aJvert to one 
interesting circiimslance attending his exertions. This 
is the increase of the Life Members of the Society. By 
means of a Circular, which he has addressed ti ' " 
various towns, the daoghters of Zion have generously con- 
tributed the requisite sum to constitute their respective 
Ministers members of the Society for life. It is much to 
be desired that this very laudable practice should very 
"generally prevail. It will both Increase the Httachment 
of the mioister aod members of his Sock to each other, 
and excite in their miudsa more lively interest in the con- 
cerns of this Society. And should the privilege, which 
the constitution allows, of taking back a part of the money 
in Tracts, be generously relinquished for the benelit of tiie 
Society, the contributors might have the additional satis- 
fnction of reflecting that the g20, which they have given, 
will keep a Tract of four page? In circulation as long as it 
shall be wanted; — or such sums united, would print any 
other Tr.ict in like manner. — The Committee trust that 
this suggestion will be well received, and that instead of 
diminishing the funds of the Society, such generous bene- 
factors will by a little additional effort mnke purchase of 
as many Tracts ns they or their beloved Minister may wish 
to distribute. And will it not be far more satisfactory to 
their benevolent minds, to pursue this course, than to have 
the greater parf of their douation immediatelv withdrawn, 
so that the Society shall have no further benefit from it! 
The principle here disclosed deserves particular atteo- 
lion j for it is found to be of vital consequence to the 
great object of ibe Society. This object, it mill be ro-. 
membered, is to establish and keep good a General Trut' 
Depository of such magnitude, as shall promptly meet all 
the demands of numerous parchasers. Let every donatio^ 
remain unbroken nnd entire, and the ^rand object of tht 
Society will soon be secured. But if doaations are hrok- 

not 




18S0] SIXTH REPOET. 6? 

tribatioD of Tracts ; when this distribntioa might yery 
easiJj be made by other means. 

The Committee have adopted another measure of con- 
siderable consequence. Such has been the desire to ob- 
tain all the series of our Tracts in bound volumes, that the 
Committee have determined to bind a thousand complete 
setfl in neat binding. The five volumes will be lettered 
and numbered ; and will be sold at such a modertite 
price, as to induce a ready sale, it is expected that this 
measure will soon be executed* 

The Committee have no wish to deviate materially 
fr6m that simplicity ofdesig^n, which has been hitherto pur- 
sued. Nor do they think it needful. Still they apprehend 
that some peculiar advantages might result to the Charitable 
Institutions of the present day, if some new measures were 
adopted. It is their settled conviction, that the want of 
information much prevents the success of benevolent de- 
signs to spread the Gospel. A great proportion of the 
people in various sections of our country know but very 
little of the operations of the American Board of Commis^ 
sioners for Foreign Missions; or of the American Education 
Society ; or of Bible and Missionary' Societies generally. 
Many have strong prejudices against things of this kind, 
which more enlarged, correct information would much re- 
move. The Committee have therefore thought it very 
desirable to be furnished w^th the means of publishing 
some new series of Tracts, which should be devoted to 
these benevolent objects. For instance*, let a Tract be 
published annually for the American Board of Commission- 
ers. Let the first Tract in the series comprise a summary 
history of the operations of the Board to the present time ; 
and let each succeeding number contain the principal 
events of the year, with such appeals to the heart and 
conscience as shall serve to enlist every one in the cause. 
Let a similar series of Tracts be devoted to the interests 
of the American Education Society. Let another series be 
devoted to Domestic Missions ; and another to the cause 
of Bible Societies. These Tracts, instead of being sold 
by the General Agents, like the other publications of 
the Society, should be gratuitously distributed by them 
through the medium of Auxiliary Tract Societies and 



68 SIXTH REPORT. [1890 

other purchasers. In this way, these Tracts would be 
more widely dispersed, and with far less trouble, than these 
lastilutions could disperse them. And such a plau would 
greatly promote the sale and circulation of other Tracts. 
It would be very gratifying to a purchaser to have some 
of these neiv series put into his bundle to scatter in hii 
journey, or among hia neighbours at home, — The Com- 
mittee arc aot without hope that something of the kind 
will be accomplished. The greutest diHiculty is the want' 
of funds. Bui connot these be furnished ? 

The Committee see no cause to relai their exertions 
for want of success. But they are animated to proceed 
with increasing zeal and energy, by the frequent testlmoDy 
they receive, that God blesses the truth which they are the 
means of disseminating. Instead of now givmg extracts at 
correspondence in contirmiition of this, the Committes 
would rather direct your attention to a Tract, which has 
been recently published on (his subject. It is a History of 
Tracts, of 28 pages. It discloses more interesting facts, 
than we have ever seen in any other publication of equal 
size. No one, it would seem, can rise from the perusal 
of it without a deep conviction of the ntililj of Tracts, or 
of his dtity to disperse them. Here you see the most 
striking evidence of their blessed elTocts on seamen and 
Soldiers. Men, hardened in sin, und who had long wiA- 
stood powerful attacks of Divine truth, are subdued by 
these lighter weapons. These, like David's sling and 
atone, have eluded the armour in which they gloried, and 
pierced their bouIs with such wounds, as none but Jastw 
can heal. — You see hoary-headed sinners brought to the 
feet of the Saviour by these simple means. The poor are 
enriched with gold tried in the fire ; and the ignorant made 
wise unto salvaliou. These are great effects from litlla 
causes. They both display surprising grace, and sbotr 
what immense good may b« done by means, which are loo 
often overlooked. Who has not within his reach these 
means of saving fellow sinners from eternal death? Who 
cannot apply them? 

The history of particulnr Tracts is nn less interesting- 
Three are noticed in the Tract before us. These are 
"Sialeen Short Sermons;" " The Dairyman's Daugbteri" 



O] mTH acpoEt. 69* 

, « the Swearer's Prayer." These Tracts hare been 
larkablj blessed. Few men have seen such fruits of 
\r labor, as the Rer. Mr. Richmond, the Author of the 
rjman's Daughter. ** Seven hundred thaueand of this 
resting narrative have been printed in Russia, France, 
inany, Sweden, Finland, England, and America." Manj 
e been already converted by it ; and thousands more 
f ascribe their salvation, under Divine grace, to this af- 
tiog account of a poor sinner saved by the blood of the 
nb. — The Swearer's Prayer is a Tract of only four pa- 
. It costs but four mills : five of them can be had for 
f two cents. But it has been a powerful arrow in the 
•d's quiver. Between the joints of the harness, it has 
ly times reached the heart. Pungent conviction has 
n succeeded by saving conversion ; and lips, long de- 
d with oaths and curses, have thenceforward proclaim- 
the wonders of redeeming love. — Of this Tract, seven 
tions, amounting to 44,000 copies, have already been 
dished for this Society. As these have been very wide- 
lispersed, their blessed effects cannot be immediately 
»wn. Time, but especially eternity, will reveal them 
>ur admiration and joy. The subject before us is so 
»ions, that the one half cannot now be told. A scene 
I just beg^n to open, which will disclose far greater 
igs, than you have yet beheld. Is its commencement so 
rioas ? What will be its consummation ? What wonders 
1 future ages unfold ? 

The immortal harvest will bear proportion to the seed 
n. As a man soweth, so shall he reap. But the bar- 
it, through Divine mercy, will be exceedingly great. It 
y be a hundred, or even a thousand fold greater, than 
IT fondest hopes anticipated. The conversions, which 
lare the means of effecting, may be the commencement 
a series, which may be increased far beyond your pres- 
; expectations. You give a Tract to a neighbour, or to 
tranger, which is blessed to his conversion ; he is made 
5 instrument of converting others ; each of them is made 
xessful in turning others from the error of their ways; 
J so the work spreads, by the grace of God, on the train 
events which you commenced, until the souls convert- 
become exceedingly numerous. The rivulet becomes- 



70 SIXTH REPORT. [1520 

a broad, majestic river. — The Trad, which yoo publish, 
is circulated in cTery directioD : and the eflects which it 
produces are vastly multiplied from year to year. A: 
creasing' number arise, and blesd the name of the gcnerom 
benelactor, who contributed bo much to the aalvatioa of 
their souts. Some of the*e publish other Tracta ; which 
by the Divine blessing, produce like effects in augmentedi 
ratios. But human calculatien fnil*:. None but the eyfi' 
of Omniscience can discover all the fruila of your piOD^. 
efforts, ofyoiir christian liberality. 

Yours is a privilege highly exalted. Thousands no 
gplory, labored and toiled io their day, but with no such 
means of doing good, as are put in your power. Your 
nearneas to the millennial day.'', greatly increases Ihe infla* 
encc you may have in Ihe conversion of Ihe world. 
cnn sow more hountifutly, and in a far wider (ield ; and the 
more abundant showers of Divine g'race will Cause the 
seed sown to be immensely more productive than in put 
ages. 

Are there no peculiar obligations imposed by theM' 
things? Can yon free yourselves from these bonds ? Shall 
these motives be lost upon you? Then it had been gooif 
for you to have lived in the dark ages, and not have wit* 
ne^sed the flood of ligbl, which God is now pouring upon 
this long benighted world. But, beloved Brethren, we UV 
persuaded better things of you. Surely you will lake faoU 
of this good work in earnest, and pursue it, with mostai 
imating hopes that Ihe kingdoms of this world, will soc 
become the kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Cbrat 



APPENDIX. 



imong^ the friends and benefactors which have been raised up 
the Society the past year, when pecuniary aid has been so much 
ided, are a few of the poor of this world, whose efforts to pro- 
te the interests of the Society, the Committee believe are wor- 
r (tf remembrance. 

Vbe first is of a Female, who has long resided in a respectable 
lilj and received a weekly compensation for her services ; and 
o on learning the usefulness and wants of this Society, told the 
7 with whom she lived, that she had resolved to give twenty 
lars, which she had laid aside for other purposes, to print the 
tarer'^s Prayer. The donation was accordingly presented in a 
nble and affectionate manner, and with an earnest desire that 
tnight be the means of good, especially to the unhappy beings 

profane the name of their Maker. 

Sfot long after the above, the Agent of the Society was directed 
\ house in a retired street in one of our large towns. His con- 
Lion with this Society was made known to a lady in whose dress 

1 appearance simplicity and neatness were happily united, 
en the following conversation occurred. ^^ But who,^^ said she, 
ent you here ?" " The Lord, I hope," he answered. " Well," 
1 she, ^^ I believe he did ; do tell me something about the Tract 
;iety.^^ He began to state particulars, but soon saw the subject 
s familiar to the lady ; and added that he was glad to find it un- 
:e8sary to delay his business, to Mention all the circumstances 
he Society. " But," said she, " itay a moment." She went 
> her chamber, returned, and put a bill in his hand which he 
?^ to be twenty dollars ! " What does this mean ?" said he. "I 
1 tell you what it means. I was reading in the Boston Recor- 

of a female that works for a dollar a week, giving twenty dol- 
i to the Tract Society ; and I went into my chamber, and laid 
t into my drawer for the same object, and have been waiting two 
^ree weeks, for some one to csdl and take it." 
!)n the arrival of the ship Exeter, on board of which, during her 
'^e, there had been great seriousness among the sailors, Capt. 
invited the Agent of the Society to meet his m€n, and converse 
1 pray with them. Before his departure, it was made known 
it he was endeavouring to increase the funds of this Society ;— 
i of the honest tars stepped forward and said, '^ There is one dol- 
." Another gave three ; another, three ; another, five ; anoth- 

whose first serious impressions had been made by reading a 
ict, gave ten ; and the Captain, twenty. Thus making a dona- 
a. of forty two dollars from this little church of six members. Let 



1 



7S ATfUfMX. [6th. R^t 

the sister cburches look at this example, aod go away and do li 

The followini; facta are camintmicated by a Gentleman, wAo fl 
beaiTiiade acifV,aintediirUh.thtm, during the lait w'-'" 

The Rev. Dr. B preaeoteii a Tract to a youiig w 

society, to whose salvation it waa made effectual. A poor n 

inM traces hprfirat serious impreBsimii to the reading of a' 

Two ladies in S ; were led to the Saviour by the same i 

A lady in N , who was teaching school in the country, i 

up B Tract which waa dropped for the children, by a passe^elj 
the stage. It was the means ofher conversion. 
TTufollowifig it from a Sailor. 

"J think I am persuaded, that the Religious Tracts a 
use. I carried some to 5ea with me, which were read by tie > 
men, with solemnity and attention, and were instrumental crfhi^ 
ing two of the Ship's company to a sense of (heir awfnl Itatcl 
sin and misery, and of their need of sanctiiication by our Lord d 
Saviour Jesua Christ. 1 therefore sabscribe three dollars for t| 
support of that blessed institution." A Mariukk. 

From an aged Genlleman, employed to pott tkrougk Ike country itii 
Biblei and Tracli. 

A young woman in Vermont, who appeared to be under an an 
ful gloom, on account of her undone state by nature, so that ri 
could hardly take care of her little famiiy, received from me al*^ 
number of Tracts. When 1 returned, after distributing TractM 
almost erery house, and to every person 1 met by the way, WM 
of whom received them in love and thaakfolnes^ I called oai 
woman. She appeared very differently from what she did beffll 
She was solemn, but not miriancholy ; cheerful, but not lid 
She said that the books, whtoh ■ left, bad been blessed of G^ 
her soul. I 

ExIracI of a letter frotn Mr. P of IVo<l<lvilte,Miiiiinppiy d4 

A"orEmb£r 30, 1819. ,| 

" The only good effects, arising from the distribution of Tra* 
which have come to mj knowledge, are three, and those confioeo 
my school. Three of my pupils have hopefully been made subjj 
of divine "race by the instrumenlality of these silent mEssenge* 
truth. Tot this I thank my God-— Yours affectiouately, R. P. ' 



JOJ SIXTH REPORT. 

I' OFFICERS, 

KLBCTED MAT, 1820. 

I Hon. WILLIAM REED, Pretidcnt. 

P aiv. SAMUEL WORCESTER, D. D. Vict Prtndenl. 

b aev. JOHN COUMAN, Correiponding StereCary. 

i Rkv. RICHARD S. STORRS, Reioniin^ Secretary. 
■ AMOS BLaNCHARU, Eflq. rrtoM/rw. 



Rbv. JOHN H. CHURCH, 
Rfv. JUSTIN EDWARDS, 
Rkv. JOHN CODMAN, 
Rbv. JOSEPH CHICKERING, of Wobum. 
AMOS BLANCHARD Esq. 



State of thb Society's Fdnds. 
■UUDII due from the Society, Maf 26, 1819, $1,939,09 

fimcOBB of papef, printing, &c. from May 26, 1819, ) 

to May 1, 1G20, iucluding intErest on loan i J,i9J,iJ 



Recbivbd, /rom Jtfaj 86, 1SJ9, (o ^Rij 1, 1820. 

Bmatioos *J345,(B 

•-- ' '•'"" -^ch l,000,6li 

enera.1 Depository for Tracts sold, Sic. I,41S,07 

$2,903,23 



Balance due from the Society, May I, 1B20, $3,^19,09. 

Amos BlanchArd, Trfoturer, 
* In addition to this amouBt of donationa, the Society received 
»»o ioau! of $500, each, toe-ether with use of loan ofllOOO, pte- 
Tisnily made, all without iuU^reat for one year. 



MAY 30, 1821. 

WiTR gratitude to the Got) of all grace, for bis coatini 
ed smiles upon Ihia Society ; and with devout acknoi 
edgtnent of bim, to tvbom they are iodebted for all lis pr 
perily, the Esecutive Comtniltee present their Se»ei 
Aonual Report. Il will be recollected, by those «r1 
heard the last Report, that, in consequence of the etabaJ 
raaaed state of the fuods, aod the numerous calls forTractM 
which the Committee were unable to satisfy, they had aM 
pointed Mr. Louis Dwigbt, as an Agent, to travel Ihroii^ 
various parts of the country, aod solicit dooatioas, to IM 
crease the funds, and extend the operations of the SecietM 

He was commissioned for the term of one year, AC 
that term had not expired at the kit Annual Meeting;,!' 
report of his agency waa deferred to this time. ] 

Mr. Dwight began his labors in Andover, and befon 
leaving that place, oblitined about ^100. He then visit 
ed Boston, where he obtained about $1300. He also obtaii 
ed two loans, of $bOO each, without inlereal, for one yeal 
He then visited Salem, and Newburyport; and from lho< 
places obtained about $600. He also obtained, in Ne* 
buryport, a loan of $1000, without interest, for one yea 
He then prepared the '^History of Tracts," which forni 
No. 104 of the Series. Of this Tract 14,ono copies haT 
been published; and have been the means of excitlq 
much interest in the object!) of the Society. 

He then visited various places in New Hampshiri 
Maine, Mass., Rhode Island, Conn., Vermont, Canada, an 
New York. Wherever he went, (he blessing of Go 
seemed (o attend him. He was received with kimlneBsr 
peculiar interest was excited in the objects of this Socii 
ty, and bis labours were crowned with success. In add 
tioQ to obtaining donHlions, he was Instrumental in increa 
lag the numherof Depositories and extendinfc the circoh 
tion of Traclfl. He formed numerous Tract Societies, an 
greatly increased and alrenglhened many which wei 
rcndy formed. He also addressed letters (o hi ' 



:iundreds ofl 



MU} t lCVia i TH RCPORT. 75 

penoos whom he was not able to see, and made known 
the object and the wants of this Society. 

More than a 100 persons since the commenpement of his 
ag«ncj, and 87 of them during the last year, have become 
Life Members of the Society. Of these 78 are ministers 
of the (Gospel — and 72 of them have been made Life Mem- 
ben by benevolent individuals, or Societies, in their res- 
pective parishes ; a great proportion of them by Females, 
whose lively interest in the objects of this Society, and 
whose benevolent efforts for its prosperity, shall be told 
to all generations, for a memorial of them. 

The jrbole amount of monies received by the Treas- 
urer since the commencement of Mr. Dwight'dP agency b 
^,137,17. 

By this assistance, which the Committee would acknowl- 
edge with gratitude to the Father of mercies, they have 
been enabled to prosecute the objects of the Society with 
increasing energy and effect. 

They have published, since the last Annual Meeting, 27 
aew Tracts, constituting an entire volume, and completing 
six volumes of the Society's publications. They are the 
following : 

^•. VOL. VI. page*. 

108. Tnie Propheciefl, addressed to all whom they may concern It 

109. Tke Way to Happiness 4 

110. History of Edward Poole and George Crosby 16 

111. The Two Lambs— Hymn 12 

lis. Hi8toi7 of Peter and John Hay 12 

113. Qaettions and Counsel . By Dr. Green ... 4 

114. The Busy Bee. By Mrs. Sherwood .... 8 

115. Catherine Haldane 20 

116. The Sabbath Scholar . 8 

117. Lopoftant Questions— Hymns 12 

118. The Strayed Lamb » 4 

116. The Sabbath School Remembrancer — Little Hannah 12 

IfO. HeaTen Lost. Extracted from Bazter^s Saint^s Rest 16 

ISl. QntheLord^s Prayer 8 

US. The Assises— Hymn 8 

1S3L The way to Convert a Cottage into a Palace 8 

1S4. Address to the Sabbath Breaker 4 

125. Fatal Effects of Ardent Spirits. By E. Porter, D. D. .28 

156. The Heavenly Pilot— Hymns 8 

157. The Two Sisters. By Mrs. Sherwood— Hymns 12 



76 sEVEirni KEFOKT. [1831 

128. Poor Samh, an Icdiaii Woman 

129. The Two ApprenticpB— Addreaa to YoDth 

130. The Richmond Alarm 

131. Saring Faith. Abridged from Thoraaa Boston — Hymna , 

132. The Power of Gracf, or History of Aona Emery . 

133. The Life of Emelia Gtddie— Hymns .... 
, 134. Etomity of Future Punishmeat, By Rev. A. Fuller 

Beaidea the above, Ihe Committee bave issued editioiH 
of 51 oihfir Tracia, making the whole number of 

I Tracts published the past year 468,000 

Whole number from the beginning 2,788,000 

I The Committee biive also procured another Tract to 

1 be puhlis|)ecl, nnd one of a different kind from whfit they 

have ever published before, it is n Triict of 48 pngT<i 

L made up principnlly of facts relative to the presetit statd 

of the world, with a Calendar or astronomical Diary pre- 

^ fixed to it. It is eotitled, " The Christian Almanack," The 

Committee were informed by a company of respectable 
printers that they nould priot and circulate such a pab- 
licatioa, provided the Committee would furnish the copfi 
and that they would devote the avails of it to this t" 
ciely. The Committee therefore furnished the copy, 
And although it was late in the season before it was ptu>^ 
liahed, yet through the laudable exertions of the prinlen, 
and the numerous friends of the Tract Society, there hu, 
been a circulation of more than 14,000 copies. And afc^ 
though the Committee are cot able to state the sum, ytit' 
they believe th^it something valuable wilt accriie icon 
Ibis measure to the funds of the Society. 

The Committee are now preparing another copy of | 
limilar Tract, which they hope wilt be still more worthy 
of the public patronage ; and which they intend soo 
publish. 

It will contain, in addition to all that is valuable in other 
Astronomical Diaries, a great collection of facts, relaltve 
lo the present state of Christian, and Healben countries; 
and a condensed view of all the Benevolent Societies, and 
their operations for evangelizing the world. It will abo 
contain useful directions to farmers, mechanics, and slld«> 
scriplions of persons, and will be a truly valuable little 
manunl for every family throughout the country. 



f 



4B81] SEVEBTH REPORT. TJ 

from Ihe taaay inquiries Eaade, from various parts of the 
country, concerning this Tract (in consequence of the one 
published the last year) the Commitlee canuot but expect 
that the circulation of it ivill be eilenaive. They intend, 
f there should continue to be a call for such a Tract, to 
print one of this kind yearly, and (o number them in a 
separate series. In seven years, they will make a volume, 
which may be bound, and nhich will cnnfortn in size aod 
appearance to the other volumes of Tracts. 

The Committee have also procured 1,000 sets of the 
five first volumes ofTracts, to be bound ; and 200 sets of 
the last volume ; that all who wish, may be supplied with 
complete sets. These volumes contain each about 300 
pagvs. They are bound in strong andncat full bindings 
gill and lettered ; and sold at lifly cents a volume. 

The Committee cannot but view it as exceedingly de- 
sirable that a complete set of Tracts should be possessed 
bj erety fumily, 

Few books, if any, beside the Bible, cootain, ivithin the 
same compnss, so much moral and religious truth. Few, 
if any, present it in such an interesting and impressive 
form; and few ;ire calculated to be so useful, especially to 
the j'oung. Some of (he most benevolent, active persons 
now on the singe, attribute their first serious impressions, 
to the reading of Tracts, in childhood. 

In what way can a parent lay out three dolhirs for his 
children to greater advantage ; or with a greater prospect 
of promoting their salvation, (ban in furnishing them with 
lii volumes of Tracts — containing no less than 1800 pa- 
ges, of the most interesting instruction, and in the very 
form, in which it has already been blessed to the salva- 
tion of thousands ? 

The Commitlee have also established, during the past 
year, fourteen new Depositories, in the following towns : 

C/iamplain, A". Y. Rev. Joseph Latiatee. 

De Kalbj JV. y. Gen. Thomas B. Btnedict, 

OgdtmbuTg^ JV. r. , Jwhn Fine, Esq. 

PiallibuTg, J^. Y. Btv. Samuel WliElpIey. 

Saraloga, JV. Y. Rev. Dariaa O. Griawold. 

Oeorgtlovm, Dh. Col. Robert Ober. 

PitcTiburgh, fa. Jos-eph Thayer. 

Richmand, Fa. Nathan Pollard, 



78 SEVENTH RtFORT. [1841 

Raltigh, N, C. \Vaiiam Bhaw. 

Ckavel Hill, A". C. Prof. Elisha Mitchell, 

jtfumilo, Ohio, Mr«.B. Putnam. 

nelToil.Mieh. Ttr. Lemuel Shattuck. 

Orttn Bag, Mch. Ter. Mnj. Matthew Irvin. 

Montreal, L. Canada, William UeAge. 

The whole aumber of Depoiitories now belonging to 
the Society is seventy one : viz. 10 in Mass. 6 in Maine, 
7 in N. Hiimpphire, 6 in Vermont, 6 in Conn. 1 in Rhode 
Island, 14 in N.York, 6 in Virginia, 2inlhe District of 
Columbia, 4 in North Carolina, 3 in Ohio, 1 in Kentucky, 
1 in Tennessee, 1 in Georgiu, 1 in Mississippi, 1 in Mis- 
souri, S in the Michigan Territory, and 1 in Loner Can- 
ada. 

Each of these Depoaitoriea is under the care of an 
Agent, Rppointcd by the Committee, who receives tbe 
Tracts, becomes responsible for them, and when they are 
sold, returns the money and receives a new supply of 
Trncls, Every agent is entitled to 10 per cent upon all 
the Tracts nhich he sells ; and is at liberty, ifhe chooses, 
at the close of his agency, to return all Tracts which re- 
main unsold. Each Depository supplies numerous Tract ■ 
Societies, and individuals with Tracts at one mill a pagC) 
for their own use, and gratuitous distribution. 

Thus the Society hasll fountains, each ofwhich is sup* 
plyiog numerous streams, which are continually, and in 
every direction, carrying the waters of life over many R 
barren desert. 

Weary pilgrims who are traversing those deserts, toA 
perishing with thirst are, by hundreds, daily meeting wilb 
these waters — they drink, and are refreshed. They are 
slrenglhened — and many of them will neuer thirst. Tha 
water which they receive, will be in thera, " a well of w 
ter springing up into everlasting life." 

It must be evident, however, to all, that these Deposilo- 
ries must be kepi constantly supplied ; and to hieet the 
nomerons calls which are made upon them for Tracts, il 
is important that they should be supplied with all the vk- 
riety which the Society have published ; and in auch (juan- 
tiliea, that they will not need to send to the General De- 
poiitoi7, ofteoer than oDce a year. This will lesaeo the 



J821] SEVEHTB REPORT. 79 

trouble of Agents — lessen the espeose of transportation. 
and Hi llie SHnie time give greater encouragenient to pur- 
chasers. It will enable Agents lo meet promptly every 
demand, to afibrti the greatest variety, and at the least 
cipeDse. 

But if any Depository Is not able promptly lo meet the 
'demand for Tracts, Ihose who wish to distribute (hem are 
discouraged, nnd Iheir efforts will cease. And ifyoti urge 
athers to (orm Tract Societies, you are immediately met 
fey the objection, " If we do, we cannot obtain Tracts." 
And some important Tract Societies have actually been dis- 
solved, and many more have been rendered almost useless, 
CD account of the difficulty of obtaining Tracts. They have 
seat to ihe nearest Depository, at the distance of 30, and 
perhaps 40 miles, and have from time to time, been disap- 
pointed, until their efforts have ceased. And the Com- 
mittee are becoming every year more and more impress- 
ed with the necessity of having every Depository constant- 
ly supplied. TbiR, like energy at the seat of life, ivill 
promote circulation throughout all the surrounding region. 
. But in order to afford Ihis supply, the Gmerat Dijiaaito- 
' rgmusi be kept conatautly full. If (here is a want here, 
I it will be felt lo the extremities of the system. An Agent, 
. for instance, applies (o have the Depositary at St. Louis 
'replenished. He may have formed numerous Tract So- 
cieties, and with much trouble to himself, have raised 
'bonieB; but if he cannot obtain Tracts, he is disco urag- 
^i — nil his efforts are palsied, and the system of efforts 
[Which he has put in operation, will in a short time slop. 
At ihe same time there are calls upon the Depository from 
Various other places, and if they cannot be promptly sup- 
plied, the effect on them is the same. The system then 
cannot go forward with energy and effect, unless the Gen- 
eral Depository be kept constantly full. This is the foun- 
tain which must supply all other fountains, and through 
them, all the streams. But to keep this Depository con- 
stantly full, requires a lai^er capital than the Society 
liHve yet been able to obtain. 

The various Depositories, tn an average, ought to have 
continually on hand, at least ^100 worth of TracU. Thi«, 



80 BF.VENTB HETOBT. [1881 

to supply only our present number, nonld require ^7,000, 
And to keep the General Depositary ao full ns lo be able 
promptly to aupply Ihem, would require Tracts lo the 
amount of, at leaat, ^7,000 more. 

There nre now id the Depository, Tracts to the amount 
of iS-ljaOU, and yet many of the numbers are nearly, and 
Bome entirely out of print. And lo furnish the Tradi 
which are dow on band, the Committee have been obliged 
to incur a debt of more than j!2,500. 

Thus nith only Iheir present nunaber of Depositoriei) 
in order to keep the system in the most efficient operatioo, 
Ihey need a capital of at least gll4,000. 

And yet there are many exteusive reg-ions of our coun- 
try, and those too, the most of all destitute of moral and 
religious instruction, where there are do Depositories, and 
where Tracts are almost entirely unknown. To supply 
these regions would require at least 70 Depositories more, 
and the capital of the Society would need lo be propor- 

It will always be embarrassing to the Society, to be in 
debt for Tracts which it is needful to have on hand, in order 
lo supply Depositories. But if it can obtain a capital equit 
lo that amount, it may then, on that scule, continue to sii[K ' 
port itself It may without additional funds continue to 
circulate its thousands, and hundreds of thousands of Tracla," 
annually, to (he end of (he world. 

tu addition to establishing Depositories, (he CommilteQ' 
have had numerous and pressing applications for Tracli 
for gratuitous dislribution. Some have been from seamen, 
some from missionaries, and many from the destitute 
parts of our country. But lor wnn( of funds the Commit- 
tee have not been able to supply Ihem. One of these ap* 
plications, however, is peculiarly worthy of notice. It il 
from the Rev. Gordon Hall, Missionary at Bombay, ia In- 
dia. " 1 want," says he, " a complete set of Tracts for 
my own use, and a largw quantity fur distribution. It fan 
often occurred to me that your Society, and other Trnc( 
Societies iu America, might eilend their operalioni 
this country with great advantage, and that il tnig^Iil 
have a very happy influence both here, and a( home. 
Tbe populous countries of the East, with their various n- 



Ji^joos anil langoafes, open an immense field for the oper- 
BlionB of' Tract SociE;liea, as well aa Missjooary SocietieB. 
And should Tract Societies see St thus to exteDd their op- 
•ratiODS, it would farm an additional bond of union, biod- 
iag the Eastern nations still more closely to the hearts of, 
christians in the West, nrid would 1 think promise well Tor 
4fec cause of our great Uedeemer. 

For similar reasons I think that the American Bible So> 
ciety should extend its operations here, as well as else- 
where, among the healbeu, as God shall open the way. 
Let Missionary Societies, Bihle Societies, and Triict Soci- 
eties draw the bonds of Christian union still closer j their 
barmooy will thereby be more perfect — their operations 
more efficient, and the result more glorious. Lei tham 
enter into partnership, and all eslend the cultivating hand 
to the same field. Let Missionary Societies send and sup- 
port Missionaries — let Bible Societies provide Bibles — 
and let Tract Societies provide Tracts. Thus each may 
labour, upon the same spot, without interference and 
greatly to the encouragement of ali.^' 

Thus writes this excellent missionarj', after labouring, 
with nnwearied diligence, for seven years, in spreading the 
Gospel among the heathen. 

And the Commitlee could not hut regret that they were 
not able to grant him an immediate supply. He needs a 
quantity of Tracts every lime he makes an excursion into 
^^e country. And this is the case wilh every missionary, 
-ip every country, who travels among a people that can 

And could all missionaries be supplied with a complete 
assortment, they migbl probably do as much good by the 
distribution of Tracts, as by all (heir other labours. 

This is the case especially in India. A strong feeling 
of doubt and uncertainty exists in a large portion of the 
native* respecting their own opinions, and practices. Many 
have come to the conclusion that their system of idolatry 
<ii vain; although they have not yet courage to renounce 
it. Many more are halting between two opinions ; and all 
feem lo. be .nware that an important crisis is approaching. 
This state of things presents a field, peculiarly encourag- 
JBg for the distribution of Tracts. 



82 SEVENTH REPORT. [1B!1 

And, writes an English missionarj' from that country, 
millions of Tracts might be scattered nilh the prospect of 
ait abundant harvest. 

Several persons have been to the missionaries, whofH- 
. ted, that they bad come two hundred miles on purpos" '■ 
^t a sight of the Tracts. 

An immense tield is opening also for the distribution of 
TfbcU in Canada, in Louisiana, and in East and Weil 
Florida, 

With the blessing of Hinn who has raised up this Socie- 
ty and hitherto prospered it beyond all human eipecU- 
tiona, the Committee cannot but hope that the time i( "" 
preaching, when ihey shall be able lo supply them. 

They hope that the tipie is approaching when everj 
missionary in our country will be supplied — and its Tracis 
shall be needed, every missionary who goes from our 
country lo the heathen. 

But for this, there must be a great increase of funds, 
And where, the Committee would ask, where on earth, 
can funds be employed to greater advantage, than by tbia 
Society ? 

There are several considerations which must, when du- 
ly examined, give this Society a otroog bold upon the 
hearts of all benevolent persons in our country. 

The first is, its ixltndrd operations, the ease and effiet 
with ^hich it may operate upon millions of minds. 

Suppose the Society has 100 Depositories, (only 29 
more than it now has,) placed at equal distances through- 
out our country. Suppose that around each of these De- 
positories are SO Tract Societies, and 100 individuals who 
wish to purchase Tracts. 

Suppose the Societies purchase each {£20 worth in > 
year, and the individuals only gS for their own ose and 
gratuitous distribution. Each Depository will then tir- 
culote annually 60,000 Tracts. And the 100 Depositoriw 
will circulate annually 6,000,000. 

Here then will be six millioosof preachers of righteous- 
ness annually going forth and beseeching persons of every 
description, from the little child up to the hoary head of 
age, to tarn unto God and live. 

The neil consideration is, Tht immtnst call for Traeit. 




1621] 

Some may suppose, that if this Society shoold circulate 
6,000,000 anoually, the couDtry would soon be auppliej. 
But the country caDnot be coasiiiered as supplied lit) each 
family has, at least, one set of Tracts. 
, Should the Society continue to circulate 6,000,000 au- 
>anally, they could not furuish even one set to a family, of 
'what they have »lrendy published, in leas tbau 40 years. 
And as Tracts, if used by a whole family, vould not last on 
^aa average more than 20 years; this rate of circulation 
would never supply them, even if the number of families 
■hould never increase. But as the number of families is 
rapidly increasing, and to an extent beyond what 6,000,000 
of Tracts in a year would supply, the number of families 
which must still be destitute, niit continue to increase. 

This calculation regards simply our owp country. And 
yet we are but little more than one to a hundred among 
the inhabitants of the earth ; all of whom are as needy 
u ourselves, and vastly the greater portion of them, far 
more so. The demand then for Tracts will continue 
to increase ; and without vastly greater efforts than have 
ever yet been made, can never be supplied. 

Another consideration is. The great amotini o/goadwhich 
may be aeeomiiliihed, by imalt intana, ' 

A man gives to the funds of this Society $100. This 
may furnish 30,000 Tnicts of 4 pages each, and place 
Uiem in all the Depositories throughout the country. Thus 
;with glOO he may speak to 30,000 penons. Suppose 
< Wch of these Tracts goes into a family, and is read by 5 

Etnions. He then speak<: to J5O,000 persons, and as ef- 
clually perhaps as he would were he personally to ad- 
dress them. And if each Tract is lent in the neighboor- 
bood and read by 10 persons more, he speaks to 450,000 
l^rsons. A missionary, were he to preach 200 times in a 
[Tear, and every time to a congregation of 100 diflTerent 
|MraoRB, could not address so many in S3 years. And this 
WV long as missionaries, on an average, after commenc- 
Jgig their labours, can be expected to live. 
1. And how many persons have been more benefitted by 
isBdiag the Swearer's Prayer, a Tract of 4 piige?, than 
Hiey probably would be, by hearing the bei!t sermon which 
Kay missionary could preach upon profanenesa. 



64 



SEVENTH REPORT. 



[188M 



Aoolher consideration is, The eaa and effect, with whi 
thii Sociity may atiiit atl other btntTiolent AodelUs. 

A man ba» ^'^^ which he wishes to devote in such 
ner as will most effecta^lly promote the object of Forei 
Missions ; and he gives il to the Tract Society, 
print a stutement of facts, with re'tpecl to the christian 
heathen norld ; which probably would be the best Ti 
which could be published apon (hat subject. This Ti 
is immediately in 70 Deposnories and circulating ai 
thousands of individuals — and among miin 
probablj' obtain the information contained in it, in no oil 
er way. By diffusing information, and thus enligrhti 
and esciting the public mind, this ^100 might bring id thoQ' 
sands to the treasury of the Lord. 

If this sum were given annually, such a Tract might be 
annually printed, and all the copies gratuitously dislribuleA 
■And so wilh every benevotent Socifly. 

Thus the Tract Society may be made a grand enginS 
of spreading, continually, to every part of the country,!^ 
knoTilntge of facts ; which must always be the grand spriqf 
of .every benevolent operation. And considering the Chb^, 
constancy, and effect, with which it may circulate iDfomia- 
tion, as well as present divine truth ; the Committee ctKH 
not but view it as destined, by Jmmanoel, to bear sti JD^. 
portrint part in the renovation of the world. 

[| is related by the Rev. Dr. Hendersoo, that durii^ 
his travels in the Northern part of Europe, he was if*' 
tained for a time, at Copenhagen; and that while ihei 
he employed himself m translating the Tract, entitle 
" The Great Qaeifinn Jlnnrered ;" and thai the circulattOB „ 
this Tract, bad been traced as the <>onrce of all the Bibli 
Societies in Russia, Sweden, and the neighbouring cotm^ 

In Russia alone, there are at pres<-nt no less fhan ISQ 
Bible Societies extending overthat wide spreading enpli 
They have printed the Scriptures" m 2S lungUBges 
twelve of which, they were never before printed, 
are now preparing translations in seven olh 
They have also purchased immense qunntiti 
from abroad, and distributed them in 1.3 other Innguni 
making a total of 46 laoguagev, in which they bare 



ISSl] 9ETEHTH RKPOET. 85 

moted the diatribution of the Word of God. Who can see 
this simply in Russia, besides all which has been done for 
the spread of the Bible in Sweden and the neighbouring 
coontries, resulting from the circulation of one Tract, and 
not feel- a conviction, that the Tract Society is an impor- 
tant branch, of that wide spreading tree — whose leaves 
are for the healing of the nations — whose boi^hs are ex- 
tending from sea to sea — under whose shadow all nations 
will repose — whose top will reach unto heaven, and 
whose fruit will refresh the universe. 

Another consideration connected with this Society, is 
what has been called, by one of its eloquent advocates, 
Iti delightful feature of permanency. 

The funds which are given to this Society are never 
expended. They remain as in bank, to be employed for- 
ever in fumishiog Tracts. And not only is the interest 
employed, as with permanent stock in other Societies, but 
the principal. And yet no part of it is ever expended. 

A donation is made, and it prints an edition of Tracts. 
These are sold at cost, and the avails furnish another edi- 
tion, and the avails of that another, and so on as long as 
Tracts shall be needed. 

Now only apply this principle of permanency to the do- 
nation of the man who gives $100. He may not only fur- 
nish 30,000 Tracts, and if they are read each by a fami- 
ly of five, speak to 1 50,000 persons — and if they are read 
each by ten other persons in the neighbourhood, speak 
to 460,000 persons ; but when these Tracts are circulated, 
the avails may print another edition, and the avails of that 
another, and so on to the end of the world. In what way 
then can 100 dollars do more good, or be the means of 
bringing more persons to glory. 

Another consideration is. The Tract System is one which 
God Mproves. 

A Clergyman in a neighbouring state, assured the Agent 
of this Society, that during a revival of religion in his 
parish, the Tracts which he distributed seemed to have as 
much effect as all his other labours. And he remarked 
that he seldom made inquiry in any town, or even of any 
person, without hearing of some new instances of conver- 
sion, through the instrumentality of Tracts. 

Am I asked, writes another gentleman^ of dist\ii%vA%\sftA 

53 



86 SCVENTH REFORT. [1S!t 

piety and beaeGceace, What hath God wrougfat b; meant 
of Tracts? I answer, to my certain kaoiviedge, God batli 

wrought wondera. A leaf of a Tract was picked np bj a 
man in this toiva, which proved effectual ia bringing liiiq 
to throw down the weapons of bis rebellion, and enlitl 
himself under the banner of the Lord of Hosts. And thJi 
is not a aolilary iostance. 1 do know, and can testify, that 
many others have found Jeaus Christ (o be precious lo theii 
souls, by the same means. And a man to whom he had 
given Bibles and Tracts, in a distant place, writes to him: 
The Bibles and Tracts which you left, have been blewed 
of God in leading poor sinners lo inqoire what they shonU 
do to be saved. About thirty of Ibese persons, together 
with the gentleman who wrote the letter and his wife, 
had all become, in the judgment of charity, heirs of satTir 

It is with peculiar pleasure, says (he Secretary of t 
Tract Society, that I bear testimony to the etRcacy ofdis- 
tributing Tracts. It appears lo me to be one of the moil 
useful means of doing good to the souls of men. He then 
mentions more than forty cases of great good which had 
been connected with the reading of Tracts. 

The Committee might also relate four cases of hope- 
ful conversion, from Ihe reading of the Tract entitled 
Sixteen Short Sermons.' And in one cane a revival of relig- 
ion commenced in a meetiag where this Tract was read, 
which issued in the hopeful conversion of more than fortj 
persons. 

They might relate thirteen cases of hopeful conversion 
from the reading of the Dairyman't Daughter — and twelve 
from the reading of Ihe Sweartr'j Prayer, And yet but 
very few cases of saving benefit, compared with the whole, 
have, probably, or ever will, in this world, come lo their 
knowledge. But there is n world where they will all be 
known ; and where the persons, and those who have been 
instrumental in their salvation, will look back with wonder 
and wilb holy transport, on Ihe means by which Ibey were 
brought lo glory. 

One single Tract, printed by this Society, was read at a 
meeting, in a town in this Commonwealth, and was the 



lit 1] 8E7E3ITH REPORT. 87 

iMuis of powerfally impressing the minds of no lets than 
e%ht persons. Their impressions resulted in hopeful 
eoorersion. They have all since publicly professed the 
religion of Jesas Christ. 

Another of the Society's Tracts, in a town in a neigh* 
booring state, was hopefally the means of the conversion 
of four persons in one family. And said the father to the 
man who gave him the Tract, '^ 1 can never pay you. 
Take all the property, and every thing I have, it shall 
all go before I will part with that Tract. It was my sal- 
vation — it was my all. And you have not only sent sal- 
vation to my soul, but my wife, seeing my distress, was 
soon awakened to a sense of her duty, and my second son 
and eldest daughter are now joyful companions with us in 
tonsequence of your giving me that little Tract.'' 

If two of our Tracts have been connected with the 
hopeful conversion of twelve persons, which have come 
to our knowledge, what may we not hope, with the bless- 
ing of Heaven, from the 400,000 which have issued from 
our Depository the past year — and from the millions which 
have issued in seven years — and from the millions and mil- 
lions, which will continue to issue to all future generations ? 

Who can contemplate these six considerations connected 
with this Society: viz. the ease and effect with which it 
may speak at the same time to millions ; the immense call 
for Tracts; the great amount of good which may be done 
by small means; the ease and effect with which it may as- 
sist all other Benevolent Societies ; its permanency, its 
adaptedness, with present means, for perpetual operation; 
and above all, who can witness the approbation of God 
which it has already received ; see one Tract instrumen- 
tal in the hopeful conversion of four persons, and more in- 
directly in the conversion of forty — another in the con- 
Tersion of eight — another of twelve — another of thirteen 
»— «nd many of these, out of the way of other means ofgract 
«— who can see a Tract put in operation all the Bible So- 
cieties in Russia, Sweden, and the neighbouring coun- 
tries, and not expect, when he stands on Mount Zion, to 
see the multitude which no man can number, vastly aug- 
mented through the instrumentality of Tracts ? And who, 
with a conviction that he had been instrumental in their 



HS aSVENTB REPORT. [1821 

salvatioD, would not join, vrith ineffable delight, in Iheii 
anthems of glorj uato him that loved w and washed as 
from our sius in hia own blood, and hath made us kingfa 
Rod priests uato God, aad his Father, to nrhom be glory, 
and domioion, forever and ever. 



OFFICERS, 

ELECTED MAI 30, 1831. 

Ho», WILLIAM REED, Prtndenl. 
Rev. SAMUEL WORCESTER, d. d. Vice Prisidcnl. 
Rkv. JUSTIN EDWARDS, Correiponding Secretary. 
Rev. RICHARD S. STORRS, Retarding SuTctary. 
AMOS BLANCHARD, Esq. IVeoiurtr. 



Rkv. JOHN H. CHURCH, 
Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS, 
Rbv. JOHN CODMAN, 
Rkv. WARREN FAY, 

AMOS BLANCHARD, Esi. 

State os thb Socibti's Fckds. 

BAi.AifOEdue from the Society, May 1, 1Q20,— in-> -a.n/u, 

eluding loana ( 3,219,06 

Etpxhbb for piqrer, prinliog, &c. from May 1, 1B20, ) , „,„ „ 

to May 1, 1821, J ."i.OaB,*) 

|8,30B,96 
RKcEiVED,/romJtfa.s 1, 1820,(0 Jttni/ 1, 1821, 

Donations 1,T78,51 

From the AjeoU of tbeGeneral Depository for Tractfi > - „-„ „, 
sold, &c \ J,B38,91 

$5617,48 

Balance du« from the Society May 1, 1031, . . 9,691,43 
Amos BEAscaAKn, Trtasuur. 



MAY 29, 1822. 



While yoar Committee mentioD the goodness of God 
which has attended their efforts the past year, they would 
congratulate the members and friends of this Society on 
the nature of the glorious enterprise in which they are 
engaged. It is from its being an instrument of promoting 
the cause of Christ, that this Institution derives all its im- 
portance, and all that renders it dear to the heart of the 
Christian. And your Committee belieye, that though the 
operations of Religious Tract Societies are less splendid 
than those of many others, they will appear, when the se- 
crets of men's hearts shall be revealed, to have borne a 
very important part in extending ^' to every creature,^' 
the knowledge of a Redeemer. 

By the circulation of Religious Tracts, much good may 
be done with small means. With the price of a Bible, you 
may procure perhaps a hundred of these winged messen- 
gers. If you sell them, you may purchase the same quan- 
tity again, and so continue to put an equal number in cir- 
culation from time to time. If you give them away, those 
who receive them may be induced to purchase a parcel 
to read themselves, and to distribute to their neighbours, 
and on joumies. Each of these Tracts may pass from one 
person to another, and from one family to another ; and 
who can tell how many may be instructed, be excited to 
attend with earnestness to the Gospel, and to prize, more 
highly than before, the Scriptures and the ministry of re- 
conciliation. Let the sum necessary to employ a mission- 
ary one week, be expended in Religious Tracts, and these 
be judiciously distributed ; and many more than he could 
address in that time, may be instructed, and reproved, and 
comforted, for months to come. And by these means their 
DDiinds may be prepared to hear the word with greater ad- 
vantage ; and the preaching of the Gospel may be attend* 
Bd with much more happy success. 



90 mcHTa HEFORT. [18!3 

Through Ihe medium of Tracts, the truth has more 
ready accea to many, than it miglit othertrise have. 
Many have no inclination, either from curiosity or other 
motivoB, (o read the Bible : it is aa old book, with which, 
as they think, they are sufficiently acquainted ; or it con- 
tains doctrines and reproofs, which wound their feeliDg;s ; 
or it urges duties, which they are not willing to perfonn. 
Nor would they take up a volume of a hundred pagfeSt 
with an intention of reading it through. But a Refigioiu 
Tract, when it fnlls in their way, seizes their attentiOD, 
partly from its novelty, and partly from its being so easilj 
read. It will occupy but little of their time. They aat 
only read it with avidity; but their minds are open to re> 
ceive and to retain the principal thingi, which strike their 
attention. Truth, preaented in a new form, clothed in a 
new dress, or illuslrated and enforced by striking occur' 
rencea, deeply impresses the mind and affects the heart; 
their spiritual stale soon comes to view; the Bible is 
Bought for, and examined; Ihe Gospel, which was before 
neglected, and might still have been neglected, had not 
these silent, unobtrusive monitors found access to their 
mind^, is heard with deep interest, and, by the grace of 
God, produces a great change in their feelings and pur- 
poses of life. 

Youth and children have a great fondness for these pub* 
licatione. They eagerly obtain and read them; and in 
this way, many parents, who had been thoughtless and in- 
attentive to their grand concerns, have heard or read 
things ofgreat moment, and strikingly adapted tv their 
habits and turn of thought ; and by which deep and abid- 
ing impressions are made upon their minds. In the same 
wa)', very seasonable reproof is often given, without the 
repulsireoess of a personal address by a neighbour or re- 
ligious teacher, and has a much better effect on the per- 
son who receives it. 

This method of disseminating truth can be used loagrut 
extent, in the abimce of other means, and especially ^ (ii 
preaching ej'the Gospel. It is well known that, in our couih 
try, there is at present a great deficiency of well qualified 
preachers. This deficiency is every year increasing ■wl 
becoming more manifest, by reason of the increase of our 
popuhtioa. U presents an alacmiog prospect both to Ibe 



1822] EIGHTH REPORT. 91 

diristian and enlightened patriot Nor, as we can see, is 
it likely to be soon supplied. It seems that, in many sec- 
tions CI oar conn try, it must exist for years to come, and 
probably increase. Bat wherever the servants of the 
Lord cannot be sent to preach his word, it may be dis- 
leannated by me&ns of Religious Tracts. These may be 
famished to schools, and thence find their way into al- 
noat every dwelling. They may be read in various cir- 
cles ; and excite a taste for reading, and an earnest de- 
nre for moral and religious improvement. Souls may be 
converted, by the grace of God attending these humble 
means ; numbers may be deeply impressed with the im- 
mense value of the Gospel and its privileges ; and efforts 
may be successfully made, which shall put them in the 
fiill enjoyment of the ministry of the woH. Such may be 
the important results of the measures under consideration. 

Bot not in our own country only may such results be 
witnessed. Rel^rious Tracts may be widely dispersed, and 
prodnce great eflects among millions in pagan lands, where 
missionaries may distribute them. Our Brethren at Bom- 
bay have a very extensive field before them for this pur- 
pose. With the requisite means, they could publish and 
ciicolate Tracts in the Mahratta language, among ten mil- 
lions of people. And this seems to be the only way of 
commonicatinjg a knowledge of the Gospel, and of the on- 
ly method of salvation, to most of the present genera- 
tion there. Comparatively few of them can be taught the 
wordsof eternal life by Missionaries already sent, or that 
will be sent while the present generation is on the stage. 
Tracts which should explain some of the first principles of 
onr religion, would be read with interest, promote a spir- 
it of inquiry, and lead many to search the Scriptures, and 
to listen to religious instruction, as they should be favour- 
ed with the privilege. But without these additional ad- 
vantages, they might by Religious Tracts gain so much 
knowledge of divine things as to be made wise unto sal- 
vaticNB* In this way, many precious souls, that would oth- 
erwise be lost, might obtain eternal life ; and at the same 
time seed might be extensively sown, which would yield 
%far more plentiful harvest in years to come. 

The circnlation of Tracts affords peculiar fadlitiesfor 



gf EIGHTH REPORT. [IBSS 

enlisting thoutands in the execution of important dengm. It 
is well known that the circulation of a single Tract has 
been ^^ traced as the source of all the Bible Societies in 
Russia, Sweden, and the neighbouririg countries ;^^-^aDd bj 
extensively distributing appropriate Tracts, all the charita- 
ble objects of the day may be promoted to great effect 
Such Tracts may be sent in every direction. They may 
£nd their way to many, whom agents could not visit, aod 
have a secret, but a powerful influence, in opening the 
hearts, and unlocking the treasures of the rich. 

Impressed with such considerations, your Committee 
earnestly desire that the operations of this Society may 
be greatly extended. But though less has been accom- 
plished than could have been desired, yet the Committee 
would devoutly acknowledge the smiles of a gracious Prov- 
idence which have attended this Society from its forma- 
tion ; and are constrained to say, '' Hitherto the Lord hath 
helped us.'^ 

During the past year, six new Tracts have been added 
to the series, viz. 

JNTo. Vol. VII. Paget. 

135. Sermon before Am. Ed. Soc. By E. Porter, D. D. .20 

136. The Macedonian Cry 32 

137. The Church Safe 16 

138. Conversion of the World S4 

139. Correspondence &c 16 

140. Address to Seamen. By E. Payson, D. D. . . .11 

The whole number of 

Tracts published the past year is . . . 255,500 
Whole number from the begpinning-, . . 2,977,500 

It was stated in the last Report that 14,000 copies of the 
Christian Almanack, No. I., had been put in circulation. 
The public are now informed that 40,000 copies of No. II. 
have been sold ; and that there is a prospect of circnlatiny 
a still larger quantity (he ensuing year. By the sale of 
this Almanack, there is not only a net profit to the Society, 
by which their operations are more extended, but aioch 
important and very useful information is communicated to 
every family, where this manual finds a place, in addition 
to the appropriate matter of an astronomical diary. Tiiis 
Almanack therefore has peculiar recommeodatioos, which 



r 



[ 



I8«] ElOHTH RCTORT. 93 

the Christian commuDity cannot fail more and more to re- 
gard. 

The sale of this Almanack the laat year gare rise to an 
important measure respecting the heathen. An active 
friend of Christ nnd of missions devoted ^50 of the avails 
of this Tract, aold by himself, to publish Tracts ia the Mah- 
rafta language. This sum will print more than 6,000 
copies of a Tract of eight pages in that language, nhtcb 
may be extensively circulated and read among the miHions 
of that people. The grand results of this single measure, 
eternity will disclose. 

To those who feel an interest in the cause of truth and 
righteonsneaa, it may be gratifying to learn that 50,000 pa- 
ges of our Tracts have, the past year, been sent to our Mis- 
nonaries at Bombay, for distribution in tfae wide field of 
their lahora. Had our fuods permitted, many more might 
have been tient, with very encouraging prospects of their 
utility. 

The operations of the Society have been increased, the 
past year, by establishing ten oew Depositories ; viz. 

Francetloum, JV. H. Peter Clark. 

Piymnu/ft, JV. if. J. & G. W. Ward. 

DtmvilU, Ft. AagBBtine ClaA. 

RutUmd, n. James D. Butler. 

Plymeulk, Mail. Joseph Avery. 

BrUtol, R. I. Johu A. Pitman. 

CatikiU, JV. Y. Henry Hyde. 

Oentva, J^. ¥. TeTex Haalinga. 

Pkiiadetphia, Pa. Litlell & Henry. 

Charleilan, S. C. Joseph Tyler. 

Making eighty one Depositories now belongiog to the 
Society, and located in eigbteen different Stales, besides 
the District of Columbia, Michigan Territory, and Lower 
Canada. Thus extensively are the Society's publications 
spread abroad and everting their salutary influence among 
millions of immortal beings, some of whom are daily en- 
tering upon their endless state of future existence. — And 
who can tell tbe blessed eflfecls which may result from a 
single Tract, given with a proper reliance on the Holy 
Spirit for bis blessing ? 



i 



94 EIGHTH REPORT. [1888 

" On a Sabbath dood," writes a Clergyman in New 
HRmpshire, "a little girl came into my house, to whom 
my wife handed aeveral Tracts. She lived with u man 
parliallj deaf, aod who seldom attended public worship, 
not being able, as he said, lo hear. His atteation was at- 
tracted by the Tracts he saw in the hands of this y0Qi« 
member of his family, and be began himself the peruM^ 
of the " Shepherd of Salisbury Plain." He had not n ' 
far, before he became much interested in the story, t 
deep convictions of ain soon ensued. From this origin be- 
gan a season of anxious concern respecting his salvation, 
which, under the Divine blessing, ended in apparently 
genuine conversion. He is now a member of our church, 
and such is his desire for the sincere milk of the word, 
that he is indulged with a seat in the pulpit, where he 
stands a living witness lo the truth, " The deaf thall hear," 

Brethren, could you follow the publications of thia So- 
ciety, wherever, in the Providence of God, they are dts- 
pereed, Ihe Committee believe your hearts would be Gtled 
with Joy, and that you would esclaim with wonder ii 
praise, " What hath God wrought?" 

And [he Commiltee earnestly invite the members and 
friends of this Institution, to survey the wide field of use- 
fulness which is open to receive Religious Tracts ; and to 
contemplate the vast and increasing inSuence, which, by 
Divine favor, they mny have in meliorating the condition 
of millions of our fellow creatures. 

What multitudes of these swift messengers may be di^ 
peraed through the United States. How many IhoiisaDdi, 
yea, millions of Tnicia are this moment needed in new set- 
dements, and in places where the Gospel ministry is little 
enjoyed. Were the Society supplied with the meaMi 
large qiiantities might be sent forthwith to the South, and 
to the West, where they couhl he distributed to the be«l 
advantage, be rend with the liveliest interest, and prodmf 
the noblest effects. 

Thousands of Tracts could be given to Seamen, and faare 
snrprising influence in reforming their lives and saring 
their souls. And what portion of our race more need! 
this means of instruction, and religious improvement? St- 



Btf ] EIGHTH REPORT. M 

Boded 88 they are from Gospel ministratioDS, how much 
light the free circulation of suitable Tracts among them 
oothbate to enlighten their minds, to regulate their affec- 
0D8, to form their hearts to religious principles, to direct 
leir conduct, to give them an elevated christian charac- 
)r, and prepare them for the most extensive usefulness, 
i thej traverse the globe. In every port which they 
Bter, and every place which they visit, they might dif- 
ise the knowledge of Jesus and his salvation among their 
safaring brethren, and others with whom they should, be 
onversant. How much wickedness and vice would in 
lis way be prevented ; how many evils would cease ; and 
ow greatly would the Redeemer's cause be promoted ? 

Id the West India Islands, and in the nations of South 
jnerica, whose independence has recently been acknowl- 
dged by our Government, there is a region of great ex- 
Mit, which should be supplied with Religious Tracts, as 
bandantly and as speedily as circumstances will possibly 
dmit There is no doubt that numerous facilities will be 
fforded for their distribution, in many places, where in- 
alculable benefits, by the Divine blessing, would result. 

Our Missionaries, in the Isles of the Pacific, and in Asia, 
light annually distribute many thousands of Tracts, where 
darkness has long covered the earth, and gross darkness 
tie people ;^' and ^^ the word of the Lord have,'' by this 
leans, ^' free course, and run, and be glorified,'^ even to 
tie most distant parts of the inhabited earth. 

A beloved Brother, who has laboured some years, as a 
[issionary, in Bombay,writes thus to the Committee : ^^The 
lefolness of Religious Tracts in Christian lands is uni- 
ersally acknowledged to be great ; and I know not that 
ay abatement should be made respecting heathen lands, 
ideed 1 have thought that the state of the heathen in In- 
ia, is stich that Tracts are the only books that afibrd any 
Misiderable prospect of usefulness, particularly in those 
arts of the country where missionaries cannot go. 

^ Though the Bible is the great means of evangelizing 
le world, yet it requires but little reflection and observa- 
on to see, that the heathen, thousands of whom never in 
leir lives read half so much as the New Testament, would 
ot have patience to read a tenth part of the Bible, were it 



96 EIGHTH REPORT. [IflSS 

preBented lo them. Whereas they woold gladly sit down 
and read a Tract of a few pages, which, if judicioustj 
writlen, would convey important instruction to their minds. 

" The great utilify of Christian Tracts amoDg the hea- 
then was often a subject of conversation among my mis- 
siooary brethren at Bombay, while I was uoited with 
them. Many thousands were printed and distributed be- 
fore I left ; and Brother Hall says in a letter which I ban 
received siuce my arrival in this country, ' 1 am very de- 
sirous that we aboutd prepare and print a great numbet 
and variety of Tracts, and employ the best means we can 
of distributing them through all the principal towns in Ibe 
Mahratta counlry, where missionariea at present caDDOt 
go. What more can we do for those to whom we ci 
preach V 

"Before I left Bombay, we had employed some of the 
best natives we could obtain to distribute the Gospels and 
Tracts, in those parts of Che country which we could not 
visit ourselves. If tnoney were furnished to supply Tracts 
and to employ a few of these agents in the distribittioD of 
them, thousands of pagans of this generation may by these 
mean8 become acquainted with Jesus Christ, who other- 
wiae would die in ignorance. 

" There is also a greal call for Tracts to furnish the 
many hundreds of children in the mission schools. These 
children are all anxious to read every thing- that comei 
from our press. Many Tracts might be profitably distrib- 
uted among the native Catholics in Bombay and vicinity. 
Indeed I do not know of any field, where Tract Societies 
might act with a greater prospect of extensive usefulness, 
than at our Foreign Mission stations." 

From the writer of the above eitracts, we also learn that 
there may be nearly a thousand Jews in Bombay; that 
they have not the strong prejudices of their brethren in 
other places against Jeaus of Nazareth, but listen with 
lively interest to the information which our missionariei 
give them of their nation, and of the faith and hope of their 
fathers; and might be easily led to a knowledge of (he 
Messiah, who has been cut off for their sins. They hare 
heretofore been ignorant of the memorable transaciioos in 
Judea and Galilee, and on Mount Calvary, eighteen cen- 



1829] riGHTH REPORT, 97 

taries ago : they hear [hem, with some degree of surprise ; 
and they delig'hl to ?peak of the miseionaries, aqd to point 

,fliem out to others as believers in their God, and (he God 
of their fathers. — Let them be iaslructeif in the Christian 
religion, and converted ; and they would be powerful wit- 

P^Bsee for the tnilh as it is in Jesus. And how practi- 
cable Js their instruction ; how hopeful their conversion ? 
Of whut immense imd eferlafiting benefit to them ivould 

' be Tracts concerning Jesus and his salTalioa. 

Can such inviting prospects of uaefulne.'ra be neglected 

"by those who hear these things 1 Are you not ready, my 
menda, to seize them, and by your free-will ofieriugs to 
famish this Society with the means of distributing thou- 
rands and thousands of Tracts in the Mahratia language ? 
Are there not many in this large and opulent City, where 
BO mach liberality has been shown in behalf of Jews and 
Fagms, who only wait for the opportunity to contribute of 
their substance, and of the lirst fruits of their iocrease ; to 

''diMcminate the truths of the Gospel among the Israelites 
in Bombay? The opportunity is now given. The Socie- 
^here convened will gladly receive your bounty, and see 

. mat it is dnly appropriated to publish and circulate Tracts 

! agreeably to your benevolent intentions. 

Hillions are dying in ignorance and sin, who need all 
the help which you can afford. Thou ikalt love tky neigk- 
hor tu thy$elf. The persons for whom we plead are your 
'neighbours, members of the same haman family, descend- 
utlfl from the same original stock, involved in the same 
■postacy and ruin, and in absolute need of the same salva- 
tion with yourselves. Are not their souls of as much worth 
in the Divine account as yours? is not the blood of Christ 
$ riinsom for them, as well as for yoii ? Are you not bound 
» love them, and (o relieve their wants, as God gives you 
power? Theirloss orgain will be«(emal. They will either 
lege their souls, or gain eternal life. Let them dio in sin, 
and their loss can never he repaired. The whole world 
conld make them no amends. Bnt now a portion of your 
rabstance will furnish many of them with (hose monns, 
which God can bless to their salv.-ition. Then their souls 
will be delivered from eternal vrrath and enjoy endlefs fe- 
licity. And in Iheir felicity you may ba^e w^ (AwwA \t- 



9& EIGHTH nEFOHT. [I8£S 

ward. But even if your cbnrit;, beslowed in lore to 
Ibeir souls, should not be blessed to Ibeir salvatioo, yaa 
will lo«e nothing;, but find your reward great iu heaven. 

Cbriat has made a sacrifice infinitely more costly than 
he requires you to make. He gave himiel/a sacrifice. He 
shed hie blood on the cross. Nothing of this kind is re- 
quired of you i but that you would give some of the sil- 
ver and gold, which he bas lent you, which he has intrast- 
ed to you as stewards of his goods. Can you refuse this 
to Him, mho though he zcai rich, made himitlfpoor for yoar 
laka, that through hit povrrty you might be rich, indeed, and 
forever ? You are called in Ibe present case to do much lest 
than many of your brethren and sisters have cheerlolly* 
done. They have left father and mother, brothers ana 
sisters, bouses and lands ; and exchaoged all the endear- 
ments and comforts of their native home, for a residence 
among strangers and pagans, amidst numerous privations, 
and hardships, and painful scenes of sin and wretchednesfg 
that they might be (he humble instruments of saving souli 
from eternal death. But with little or no self-denial, yov 
mny promote Ihe same glorious object by your liberality. 
This sureJy you will not withhold; but rather feel that 
you must have a part in this work. The more esteosire- 
Ij you diffuse Ihe knowledge of Jesus and his salvation, 
the sooner will the way be prepared for him to reign 
throughout the earth. It is his word, clothed with Divine 
power, that subdues the nations to the obedience of faith. 
flis word yon may spread to the east and west, to the north 
and south,- and do more than millions before you have 
done, to fill the earth with the glory of Zion, and the 
greater glory of her King. 

With the mammon of unrighleousness, you may make 
to yourselves friends in distant lands, and in the islands of 
the seas, who will welcome you to everlasting hatuti- 
tions. When Jesus shall aay, Come, yt bleisiil of my FalA- 
«r, ipiAerii ihe kingdom prepared for you ; and shall recoDDt 
your deeds of love and kindness to those who were ready 
to perish, how joyful it will be to hear many from the east 
and west, the north and south, unite in saying, " We bid 
you welcome to the mansions prepared for you ; we shar- 
ed in your kindness; we were enlightened and tajti, 
through yoai bounty." 




hepdkt. 
OFFICERS, 

as, 1822. 
Hob. WILLIAM REED, Preiident. 
Rev. MOSES STUART, fice Prindenl. 
RIY. JUSTIN EDWARDS, Corroponding SecTctaTg. 
Rbv. RICHARD 9. STOKRS, Recording Secretary. 
AMOS BLANCH.ARD, Esq, TreaiurcT. 



REV. JOHN H, CHURCH, 
Rkv. JUSTIN EDWARDS, 
Rev. JOHtJ CODMAN, 
Rev. warren FAY, 

AMOa blanchard, 



State of the Societi's Febdb. 
Bai-AHCE due fiomthe Society, May 1,1821, . . 2,891,48 

Emense of paper, printing, &c. ftom May 1, 1821, > „ .,» _, 

to May 1,1822, i -:,«d,di 

J5,147,99 
Rmceivio, from May 1, 1B2I, to May t, 1822. 

DoDatioDs 1,091,88 

Ttam the Agents of the General Depository for Tracts j « no? 72 

$3,699,40 
Baluce due from the Society May 1, 1E22, . . 1,448,69 



Amos ULAncBARD, Treaiurtr. 



k 



a 



The EieculiTe Committee of the Axericaji Tract Son- 
ETT, gratefully acUnonledgfe the kindness of God, iu cootin- 
uiog to emtle upon theirlabours; andas ateslimonj' toUi 
^oodoeaa, present their Ninlh AdquhI Report. 

The lirst imporlnot measure, adopted by the Committee, 
after their Annual Meeting, nas the appoiDtment of aa 
Agent, whose lime and attention ahoaid he devoted to the 
objects of the Society. By the hleaaiog of God, its con- 
cerns hud become eo numerous and exteDsive, that this 
measure appeared to the Committee to be essential to its 
increasing prosperity. They therefore appointed Mr. 
William A. Hallock, and commissioned him to act as Agent 
for the Society, for the space of one year. He accepted 
his dppotntmeni, and entered upon its duties about the 
firatof October. Since that time he has been employed 
in the service of the Society. His principal objects bate 
been to disseminate information concerniog the Society, to 
increase the number of its Life Members, form Auxiliary 
Societies, obtain donations for establishing Depositories, 
and furnishing Tracts for circulation throughout the coud- 
try. and as Providence shall open the way, throughout the 
world. Several importaot communicationa he has pre- 
pared, and published in the religious journals of the day. 
He bas addriissed several buodred persons by letter, and 
communicated much important information on the subject 
of Tracts. He has personally visited 128 towns and par- 
ishes, namely, 3^ in Nen Hampshire, 84 in Maasachusetts, 
and 5 iu New York. He has preached often to numerous 
congregations ; and conversed with thousands of individuals, 
on the duly and utility of circulating Religious TraalB. 
He has been received and treated with great kindness; 
and the Lord has caused the object of hia mission to be 
viewed with peculiar favour. He has found that nothing 



1823] UFB MBKIBM. lOi 

H irantiiig but information with regard to this Society, in 
order to engage the hearts of christians strongly in its fa- 
▼oor. In many cases the Spirit of the Lord had gone be* 
fere him, and by applying truth to the heart, had prepar- 
ed the way for his success. 

On meeting a man in , and offering him a sub- 

scription paper to make his minister a Life Member, and 
asking him if he would subscribe, he answered with stroi^ 
emotion, '^ Yes, I will give a dollar ; for one of those 
Tracts has saved me from ruin.^'* And in almost all cases, 
after explaining the object, he has found persons ready to 
assist 

Eighty one persons, during the past year have been 
made Liife Members of the Society. Sixty-nine of them 
are ministers of the Gospel. Sixty eight of these have been 
made Life Members by their people ; and 41 by Females. 
More than 100 ministers of the Gospel had before been 
made Life Members of this Society, by Benevolent Fe- 
males in their parishes. May the Daughters of Zion, 
while they thus manifest their regard for the Gospel, and 
respect for its ministers, share richly in its blessing^, their 
hbonrs be labours of love to Jesus, and they receive the 
rewards of grace in the day of his appearing. Five in- 
ftmcters have, during the last year, been made Life Mem* 

bers by their pupils. And Henry Martya , a little 

child, has been made a Life Member by his father. 

The Committee cannot view this increase of Life Mem- 
bers, and the manner in which it has been effected, with- 
out peculiar emotion. That kind regard for a minister, 
which leads his people to make him a Life Member of a 
Benevolent Society, must have a peculiarly favourable ef- 
fect both upon his mind, and theirs. Seeing them engaged 
in sending the Gospel to others, he has increasing hopes, 
that they will share in its everlasting blessing^ themselves. 
And knowing that, *' he that watereth, shall be watered 
also himself," he is animated to new exertions ; and is 
borne onward by new hopes, that his '^ labours shall not 
be in vain in the Lord ;'' and that in being faithful, he 
shall not only save himself and them that hear him, but 
with them be instrumental in saving vast multitudes of oth- 
ers, whom, he never shall see, till he meets them in glo- 

9* 



r 



t 102, NINTH REPORT. [18!3 

ry. — The ^20, paid by his people lo make him a Life 

1. Member of this Society, lie $ees tnrned into 6U00 Tracli, 

K and placed in more than 90 Depositories, Around theae 

L Depoaitories are namerous Societies and individuals, ready 

to purchase and distribute them. Soon they are in 6000 km- 

ilies ; and read probably by more than 30,000 iadividnala, 

' He then recollecta that a single copy of one little Tract, 

n ■ no lai^er (hao one of these, has evidently been the meane 

[l oftheconrerEion of a father, a mother, a son and a daugb- 

I ter, all in one family. And he aeeroa to hear the father, 

" as he uUered tbe memorable declaration, "Take all the 

I properly, and every thing I have, it shall all go before 1 

' wilt part with that Tract." But here, springing fromtha 

benevolence of his parishioners, this minister sees not 

simply one Tract speaking to a single family, hut 6000 

Tracts speaking to 6000 families, and telling them wordi 

by which they may be saved. And Ihe avails of these 

Tracts tv ill furnish for circulation 6000 more; and ttu 

^ avails of those, 6000 more ; and so onward, continually. 

If one copy ofa single Tract has been the means of the 

* conversion of 4 persons in one family, what, he asks, inajr 

), we not hope from Ihe circulation of thousands and Ihoo- 

( sands, from generation to generation to the end of time. 

The same delightful considerations may animate the 
. hearts of those instruclers who have been made Life Mem- 

d bers by their pupils; of those individuals who have made 

i themselves Life Members; and of that father too, who 

j has laid the foundation for such immenee good, by tbe 

)ifn membership of hia child. Their example may et> 
i cite others to go and do likewise. Many people may thai 

, manifest their regard for their ministers, pupils for ibeir 

k inslructers, and parents for their children ; and thus, while 

r all exert a mutual influence in promoting each other* as)* 

Talion, they may lay the foundation for millions and mfl> 
4 lions of silent but pungent preachers of righteousness tn 

I go forth and speak each one lo an individual, a familyi^* 

neighbourhood, till they shall have no need to say any 
I more, " Know ye the Lord, for all shall know him (ron 

I the least to the greatest ;" and the whole " earth b« fill- 

ed with Ihe knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as Ike 
' waters fill the sea." 



1823] AUXILIARY SOCIETICS. ]03 

There is another circumstance connected with the in- 
ureaie of Life Members, worthy of g^rateful remembrance. 
Nearly all who have become Life Members the past year, 
Mve generously devoted the whole donation of $20, to the 
k>ciat7. And the amount of Tracts which they have re- 
loested in retom, has bat little exceeded the amount 
i£ monies which they have paid above that sum. — So that 
lie whole sam of $20, will, in nearly all instances, be de- 
roted to the permanent means of the Society. 

Connected with this, is another important measure. 
Those individuals who have made their ministers Life 
Members, have in numerous instances, made arrangements 
for supplying themselves with Tracts, by means of Auzil- 
itry Tract Societies. Mr. Hallock has been present, and 
misted in the formation of 24, all Auxilianr to the Parent 
Society. These Societies pay one third of their receipts 
to the Parent Society ; and with the other two thinJs, 
procure Tracts for their own use, and gratuitous distribu- 
tion. In this way, their own wants will be supplied, a 
preat quantity of Tracts put in circulation, and at the same 
tiine, substantial aid be afforded to the Society. Numer- 
oui other Societies have been formed through the instru- 
mentality of Mr. Hallock, of which he has not received a 
particular account. The number cannot now be definite- 
ly stated. This, with many other important things, con- 
nected with his Agency, must be deferred till the next 
Annual Report. 

The Committee cannot, however, but notice one or two 
interesting facts connected with donations which he has 
received. 

An ag^d and venerable Judge, who has been, for many 
years, upon the bench of one of our Probate Courts, and 
a distinguished benefactor of the fatherless, remarked 
that he found no difficulty in taking care of their proper- 
ty ; but he wished that something might be done for their 
fonb. The law, said he, points out the reciprocal civil 
dotiesof Guardians and Wards; but they need something 
to point out more explicitly, their reciprocal moral and 
r^ligioui duties. And he has engaged to give ^100, to 
print a Tract for the spiritual benefit of Quardiant and 
Wards. This Tract is designed to point out the recipro- 
cal moral and religious duties of each ; and to be such as 



104 NIHTH REPORT. [1B!3 

may be distributed, with great HtlTaotage, by Judges and 
Registers of ProbalCi lo all GuardiaDS and Wards, through- 
out the country. And when we look abroad, amidst the 
ravages of death, amoDg 10,000,000 of people, orer ihie 
widely extended country ; and see the larg-e and iacreasiDg 
number of fatherless, and in many cases, motherless child- 
ren, whose property ia indeed, in some measure protect- 
ed by the laws, but whose souls are in the utmost danger 
of being neglected i we cannot but admire that cbrislinn 
philanthropy, which, while it officially operates with fidel- 
ity, to secure for the widow and falherlesa, " the meat 
that periahetb," operates with still greater natchfnl- 
neas and ardor, to secure for them also " that meal 
which endureth unto eternal life." May the Americsa 
Bench be blessed with a long succession of auch Judges, 
who, while they stand as a bulwark for the protection of 
the civil intereata of men, shall manifest a paramount re- 
gard for their spiritual and eternal interests ,- and thus re- 
flect brightly the image of Him, who is the "Father of 
the fatherless, and a Judge of the widows, in his holy hal> 
itation." And al^er being- fathers lo the fatherless here 
on earth, may they meet them in heaven, saved from 
eternal poverty and wretchedness, through their instru- 
mentality, and mingle with them in giving the glory " lo 
Him thatsitteth upon the throne, and lo the Lamb, for- 
ever."" 

It will be recollected by many, that proposals wen 
made by the Agent, in the Boston Recorder, for publisb- 
tng the Memoirs of Mrs. Emerson us a Tract, provided 
means could be obtained to defray the expense. Soond^ 
ler this he received a leller from the Rev. Daniel Smith, 
Pastor of the church in Louisville, Kentucky. " The ac- 
count," Hays he, " of the conversion of Mrs. Emersoa is 
one in which 1 have long felt a deep interest. The eventt 
narrated in thai little Tract, transpired in my father's fam- 
ily, and within my own recollection. 1 think it worUty 
the most extensive circulation, and calculated to be enu- 
nentiy useful. Many readers may think the colouring of 
the narration loo high, iiut when I read it, having b dis- 
tinct recollection of the facts contained in it, 1 did not 
think that it at all exceeded the sober truth. I have," 
aajrahe, "^500, from the late lamented Mrs. Margaret 



1823] iNTERfitmro donations. 106 

Douglass, of Natchez, Mississippi, a lady who, during my 
residence in thai place, lefl the world with a triumphant 
faith in the Saviour of sinners. This money was commit- 
ted to me for charitable purposes; and ji 1 00 of it, I give 
to the American Tract Society to print that Tract." And 
Although it does not appear from the letter, and it is not 
known to the Committee, hut that his prospects of life 
Vl^re, at that time, as great as usual, yet he added this sen- 
tence; In ease of my deceate^ (his letter shall be sufficient au* 
thority/or your Treasurer to obtain the money from my exec- 
lilon, to be appropriated to the above mentioned objecu*^ A 
few days aAer, this beloved man closed his earthly la- 
bours, and entered, we trust, into that rest which remain- 
eth for the people of God ; there to meet with her whose 
pio88 bounty he had distributed, and with her whose con- 
version he had witnessed, and an account of which he 
wished to perpetuate to all future generations, to look 
back on the way by which the Lord had led them, and 
with all his ransomed people, to join with united hearts 
and immortal tongues, in everlasting thanks unto his 
name. 

This Mr. Smith was an intimate friend and companion 
of Samuel J. Mills, whose memory will be precious to 
the hearts of christians on every continent, and will be as- 
sociated with the dearest interests of the Church, till the 
second coming of her King. They were both ardent 
friends of the American Tract Society. They took a 
deep interest in its concerns ; and viewed it as destined, 
in the providetice of God, to bear an important part in 
the renovation of the world. While on a tour together in 
1814 and 1815, of more than 6000 miles, through the 
Southern and Western States, forming Benevolent Socie- 
ties, and devising and executing plans for the salvation of 
the world, they distributed great numbers of the Society's 
Tracts ; and bore the most ample testimony to their utili- 
ty and importance. May many young men be raised up, 
to follow their example, and after serving God and their 
generation, meet them in heaven, to witness the consum- 
mation of their benevolent labours, and see them eternal- 
ly resulting in the glory of God, and the ever growing joy 
of bis people. 



106 NINTH REPORT. [1883 

About [he time of receiring Mr. Smith's letter, the 

Ageni received another letter, from another pari of the 
country. The writer of this aavs, " Your proposal to pub- 
lish a« a Tract the Memoirs of Mrs- Emerson, was pecu- 
liarly gratifying lo me. I have everconsidered that Tract 
as ooe of the principal inGlriiuents, in the hands of Divine 
Providence, of drawing my attention lo the things of eter- 
uily. 1 enclose you §30, to defray, in part, the expense 
ofits publication." Other donations have been ret^eJTed 
from other individuals, for the aame object. 

Can ive not here see reasons why angels rejoice " over 
one sinner that repenteth?" The conversion of Mn. 
Emerson has, we trust, resulted in her eternal salvation. 
The account of it, written by herself, is already known lo 
have been the means of the hopeful conversion of several 
others; and some of (hem are now distinguished benefac- 
tors of the Church. These and others whose hearts have 
been warmed and animated by the history, lay Ihe found- 
ation for its perpetual circulation. Well may angels re- 
joice ; for the circulation of this Tract may be the meana 
of ^really increasiug the number of their companions ; 
adding mullitudea (o the multitude which no man 
number, who will shout unto their God and ours, harmo- 
nious songs of salvation forever and ever. 

This Tract ia printed and already in circulation. 

The Committee have, during the past year, printed 76 
other Tracts, making in all 17. Sixteen of these are n» 
Tracts: viz. 

JVo, Fam. 

145. On Hearing the Word of God 

146. Helps to Self ExaminaUon 

147. On Hupporling Ihe Gospel Miniatry 

148. The Barren Fj^-Tree . 

149. The Splendid Wedding 

150. Memoir o! William Churchman 

151. Important Diecovery 
153. Life and Death of Elim Thornton 

153. The End of Time. 

154. Memoir of Dr. liateman 

Vol. VIII. 

155. Unirersalinn Eipo«d . 

156. Search the Scriptures . 

157. Address to Faieats oa Sabbath Schooli 



18i3] NEW PVBUCATI0V8. 107 

93. The Great Question Answered 16 

133. Conversion of Afrs. Eleanor Emerson .... 24 
136. Memoir o/ Elizabeth Davidson 24 

Of 13 of the new Tracts, the Committee have publish- 
ed 6000 copies each ; of 2 of them, 7000 ; and of one, 
9000; making 101,000 new Tracts published the last 
year. Of 60 of the old Tracts they have published a new 
edition of 6000 copies each ; and of one, a new edition of 
9000, making in all 369,000. So that the whole number of 

Tracts published the last year, is 470,000 

Whole number from the beginning 3,447,500 

Of several of the Tracts there have been 7 editions, of 
6000 copies each, in 9 years. 

Of the first 5 volumes 1000 copies have been bound; 
and 600 copies of the 6th volume. An additional number 
of this Tolume, and 600 copies of the 7th, will shortly be 
bound, so that all persons who wish, may be supplied with 
complete sets. These volumes are bound in strong, neat, 
full binding, gilt, and lettered. They contain 300 pages 
each, and are sold at fifty cents a volume. Few books, it 
is believed, if any beside the Bible, will be more useful, 
especially to children and youth. And the Committee 
Tiew it as exceedingly desirable, that a complete set 
should be owned by every family. For ^3,60, parents may 
obtain 7 volumes, containing no less than 2,100 pages of 
important matter, exhibited in a striking and impressive 
manner ; and in the very form in which it has already 
been blessed to the salvation of thousands. In what way 
can this small sum be expended by parents to greater ad- 
vantage, or with a greater prospect of promoting the sal- 
vation of their children? In what way can charitable in- 
dividuals more benefit the families of the poor, than by 
furnishing them with a set of Tracts ? While they pro- 
vide 7 volumes of interesting instruction, for parents and 
children, they also provide means for furnishing 7 volumes 
more ; and the avails of these will furnish 7 volumes more, 
and so on, as long as they shall be needed. Every one who 
purchases these 7 volumes, may have the satisfaction of 
knowing that his money will print more than 3000 pages 
of Tracts, for perpetual circulation. 



108 NINTH BEFORT, [1813 

The Committee have also, during the past year, pnb- 
lished No. 3 of the Chrialiaa Almanack. This Tract of 4B 
pages with an Astronomical Diary perfined to it, coataini 
an estenaive collection of facts relative to the prewnt 
stale of Christian and Heatheo countries ; aumerous ta- 
bles, exhibitlDg condensed views of the various Beoevo- 
leDt Societies, their origin, means, and operations for evan- 
gelizing the world -, and also much iurormation, intereating 
to children and youth, to farmers, mechanics, merchanti, 
ministers, and all descriptions of persons; and it is calcu- 
lated to be a useful little manual for every family in the 
country. 

This Tract has been published for the Society, in Bos- 
ton | in Washington, District of Columbia; and in Roch- 
ester, New York. Of the edition published in Boston 
nearly 39,000 have been circulated; of that at Washii^ 
ton, about J,000; anil of that at Rochester 1,500, being 
500 more then were circulated from that place forthe year 
preceding. Thus the whole number of copies circu- 
lated the past year is about 41,500. These have proba- 
bly gone into nearly aa many families, and been read by 
more than 160,000 individuals. By many of thetn they 
will be read, in the course of the year, a number of IJBiet; 
and the prominent facts recorded in them, be deeply fixed 
in the mind. And the Committee cannot but hope, thil 
great and evertaiiting henetits will result to many from 
this publication. It is designed, and the Committee be- 
lieve calculated, to lead men to ■' look not at the thing) 
which are seen and temporal, but at the things wbtch 
are not seen, and eternal ;'" and to impress upon tbepi, 
that "godliness ia profitable unto all things, having the 
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is U 
come ;" and to lead them to be " diligent in business, fe^ 
vent in spirit, serving the Lord." 

The Committee are now preparing No. 4 of the same 
Tract ; and by availing themselves of their past ezperi* 
ence, and of the friendly hints which have been suggest 
ed hj readers of the past numbers, they hope to make the 
next number slill more worthy of the public pntroni^i 
nod to obtain for it a still more extensive circulation. Afld 
it is devontly hoped, that at no distant period, such a Tract 



tt] www DBPOIITO&nS. 109 

1 be publidied in every state, and be found in every 
sly in the conntry ; and that it will bear no nnimpor- 
t part) in hastening the time whefn ^^ holiness to the 
id*! shall be written upon all the publications of men. 
Ij the avails of this Almanack, more than 60,000 
icts were printed the last year. And every person who 
tbased one, may have the satisfaction of knowing, that 
provided the means for printing a copy of a Tract for 
petnal circulation. 

The Committee have also, daring the past year, estab* 
ed thirteen new Depositories : viz. 

Kennehunk^ Me. Owen Bnmham. 

Waldoboroughy Mc, Rev. D. M. Mitchell. 

Dover^ JV. H. Asa A. Tofts. 

JLywn^ Mass, Ezra Madge. 

Pljpnouth^ Mass, Joseph Aveiy. 

Albany^ JV. F. E. & E. Hosford. 

Hudson^ JV. F. Fitch Shepard. 

LiitU FaUs^ JV. F. Rey. S. W. Borritt. 

Onondaga^ JV. F. Rey. James H. Mills. 

Harrisburg^ Pa. Alexander Graydon. 

Wilmington^ Del. Robert Porter. 
JiUxandria<f Dist, Col, James & A. Douglass. 

StatesviUe^ JV. C. Rey. Daniel Gould. 

faking the whole number now belonging to the Socie 
ninety two. 

Hach of these Depositories is under the care of an 
Bnt, appointed by the Committee, who sells the Tracts 
returns the -money, reserving to himself, if he chooses, 
per cent for his trouble. Around these Depositories 
numerous Tract Societies, and individuals, who pur- 
se the Tracts ; and thus they are extended through 
surrounding country. 

7pon the applicatiop of the Agent, each Depository is 

lished, as it may need, with a new supply. But to 

\p the Tracts in rapid circulation, it is evident that each 

pository must be constantly supplied. It must have a 

iety, and in such numbers as to accommodate purchas- 

If after making efforts to form a Society, and send- 

20, or as is oflen the case, 50 miles to a Depository, 

y Cannot be supplied, they soon become' discouraged^ 

their efforts cease. 

10 



no NINTH REPORT. [1813 

Some important Tract Societies bare RCtually fiuspend< 
ed their operatioDS, aad others hare been rendered near- 
ly useless, on account of the difljciilty of obtaioiag Tractt. 
A geulleman in a neig;hbouriag state informed a tnembet 
of the Committee, that they bad formed a Tract Society, 
aod raised a considerable sum of money ; had sent a nuB»- 
ber of times nearly Ihirly miles to a Depository, but could 
not obtain Tracts. After being repeatedly disappointed, 
they sent more than 100 miles, to Ihe General Depository^ 
for Tracts 1 and concluded to' suspend their operatiooi, 
till the local Depositories could be supplied. Such di» 
appointroeuts not only destroy Societies which are fom^ 
ed, but prevent Ihe formation of olberB. A gentleman 
from Pennsylvfmin writes, " We wish a Depository of 
Tracts to be established in this place. We have formed 
a Tract Society ; and the principal reason why there are 
not more Tract Societies among us, is Ihe great difftcuttf 
of obtaining Tracts." 

This difficulty, which is felt and deplored, by many, is 
all parts of the country, caonot be removed, but by eslab- 
liahing Depositories where they are needed, and fumisb- 
ing them with a constant supply. But in order to do this, 
the Society must have greater fundi. 

Should each Depository, now established, be famished 
with Tracts to the amount of only jJlOO, which mast be 
considered as a small supply, it would require Tracts lo 
the amount of §9,200. And (he General Depository, in 
order to be able promptly lo supply ihem, and meet the 
other demands which would be made upon it, would need 
to haTB constantly on hand, Tracts to the amount of ^9,ZW 
more. ^18,400 are needed in order to supply to the best 
advantage, our present Depositories. And by formiif 
around each of these Depositories only SO Tract Socie- 
ties, raising annually twenty dollars each, all these TracU 
would be put in circulation ; and a new supply to the snine 
amount, might be furnisbeil every year, 

0»er a Tast portion of the country, and that the most 
destitute of moral and jeligious inslruclion, we have il 
present no Depositories; and Religious Tracts are almoil 
entirely unknown. 
'To supply (hat part of the country which lies eaitor 



IM3] CAlXB FOR TftACTS. Ill 

}hm Mnufrippi Rirer, soath of MarylaDd, and west of Peim- 
ivinmia, we need, in addition to those we now hare, more 
■an too Depositories. Supposing each Depository should 
■■PP^7 ^itb Tracts 2600 square miles containing 30,000 
B&abitants, we need, in addition to those which are al- 
ready established, 20 Depositories in Virginia, 15 in N. 
Carolina, 9 in S. Carolina, 9 in Geoi^a, 12 in Ohio, 16 in 
Kentucky, 13 in Tennessee, 6 in Indiana, 3 in Alabama, 1 
Hi Mississippi, and 2 in Illinois. In Virginia alone, is a por* 
tioB of country of more than 40,000 square miles, coo tain- 
■g an extensive population, in which there is no Deposi* 
tory. Farther south is another district of more than 
100,000 square miles, containing nearly a million of souls, 
ixceedingly destitute of the means of grace, and needing, 
■ccording to the abore estimate, 30 Depositories, in which 
there is not one. The state of Kentucky, which needs 1 7, 
has but one. In Ohio is a tract of country of 30,000 square 
Biles, embracing the whole of the Connecticut Reserre, 
in which there is not one. In the whole states of Indiana 
nd Illinois, containing a population of more than 200,009 
loals, deplorably destitute of the means of g^ce, there is 
so Depository ; and but one in all the country west of the 
Mississippi River. And yet from numerous parts of these 
iestitute regions, there are pressing calls for Tracts. 

A gentleman from Virginia writes, ^^ I enclose you 80 
iollars, on account of Tracts which 1 have sold ; and I 
Irish you to send me 100,000 pages more. The demand 
for Tracts is increasing ; and several Auxiliary Societies 
baT€ been formed.'^ 

A gentleman from North Carolina writes, ^* You can 
have no idea of the destitute moral state of all this region. 
We have formed a Tract Society, and wish for a Deposito- 
tj of Tracts. If you will establish one here, I will take 
me charge of it^ 

A gentleman from Georgia writes, ^ My business is to 
request that a Tract Depository may be established at Sa- 
rannah. Much may be done, in this desolate region, with 
Religious Tracts. But there is great difficulty in obtaining 
them. Did you know the wants' of the destitute. In this 
itate, you would make every exertion to put something 
into their hands, which they might read with profit.^' 



112 HI UTH REPORT. * [1823 I 

A gentleman from Louisiana trrites, " Mnltitudea here 
are utterly ignorant of the Gospel. A vast field is o^eor 
ing for the distribution of Tracts in English, Spaniah, and 
French. An internal commuoication is opened with Mex- 
ico ; an<] miliionH of Tracts might be distributed, id that 
conntry, lo great advantage." 

To meet these, and the numerous other calls for Tracts, 
the Society matt have grgateh punss. 

It has sent out, during tiie past year, more than 389,000 
Tracts. More than 20 of its numbers are now out of print; 
and yet the Depositories now established have not, upon 
an average, Tracts to the amount of 50 dollars each. To 
furnish the numbers now out of print will require lOOO 
dollars. And to establish and supply Depositories otbi 
one half at' the country which now remains destitute, anJ 
where, had we the means, they might be established to the 
greatest advantage, we need funds to the amount of 10,000 
dollars more. And where, the Committee would ask, can 
funds be employed to greater advantage, or with a prot- 
pect of greater success ? Should each Depository now es- 
tablished, instead of supplying the 30,000 souls aHsiguedit) 
furnish but one Tract a year, to one third of that number, 
the Society would speak to 920,000 souls. And could it 
obtain the means to establish as many more Depositories, 
it would speak on the most interesting of all concerns, ikt 
salvation of tht soul, to 1,840,000 people. 

And here fmall means will accomplish cheat i'nus. 

Suppose a man has 5000 dollars which he intends to de- 
vote lo some charitable object, and be gives it to the Amer- 
ican Tract Society. This will establish 60 Depositories, 
and supply them with 600,000 Tracts. Around each of 
these Depositories, is a destitute population of 30,000 peo- 
ple. They furnish one Tract in a year, lo one third of 
Ibis number. And supposing it is read only by the person 
who receives it, this man is speaking, through the medi- 
um of these Tracts, to 5011,000 people; and if each Tract 
is read by 2 persons, to 1,000,000 people. Not does be 
speak simply by these 500,000 Tracts. But the avails of 
these furnish 500,000 more, and the avails of those, 500,000 
more. The sum is never expended, or even diminished, 



18S9] CALU FOR TRACTS* 113 

^ot, shoald ProTidenca so order, it may coDtinue in oper- 
itioo to the end of the world. 

Soppose a man gives 20 dollars, and thus becomes a Life 
If ember ; this sam will faraish 2,400 Tracts of ten pages 
sacb, or 6000 of 4 pages, for perpetual circalation. In 
what waj can he, with this sum, do more ? 

In the United States are 2000 ministers of the Gospel, 
sot connected with this Society. Should their people 
BMke them Life Members, besides producing an innuence 
on their ministers, themselves, and their children, which 
wght be connected with blessings infinitely surpassing in 
faUie ail earthly treasures, they would furnish for circu- 
lation 4,000,000 Tracts by which they might speak to as 
many million people, to all future generations. And should 
each parish form an Auxiliary Society containing eighty 
members, paying 25 cents each, they would furnish for 
drcnlation 1,333,000 more, and procure 2,666,000 for 
their own use, and gratuitous distribution. 

In these two ways, the Society might be enabled to fur- 
nish 8,000,000 Tracts. And should half of this number 
he circulated in a year, there would be a circulation, in 
10 years, of 40,000,000. 

Some may think, at first view, that this circulation, an- 
noally continued, would soon supply the world. But it 
would not furnish, of what we have already published, 
one set to a family, in mtr orni country^ in 70 years, on 
supposition that the number of families should not increase, 
and that none of the Tracts should be worn out. But as a 
set of Tracts cannot be supposed, on an average, to last 
more than 50 years ; and the number of families, accord- 
ing to the past rate of increase, will in that time be doub- 
led ; this rate of circulation would never supply even our 
own country. 

And yet our country is only a small part, even of this 
continent, which is destitute of Religious Tracts, and which 
greatly needs a supply. Upper and Lower Canada, Mexi- 
co, and all South America, containing a population of ma- 
ny millions of people, deplorably destitute, of the means of 
salvation, are in pressing need of Tracts. 

Over many portions of these countries, nothing is want^ 

10* 



1 



114 HINTH HEPORT. [18*3 I 

ing but the means, io order to give them an immediate 
and extenaive circulatioa. 

A geDtlemHn from Canada, who haa repeatedly apphed 
lo the Committee for Tracts, state* that, could fhey be 
obtaiDed, tbey might be circulated exteniively, and with 
the pi-oapect of immenae advantage. Three peraoDS, be 
etates, in one family, notorious for their profaoenese, hare 
not only been outwardly reformed, but have become hope- 
fully pious, aod appear now to be truly devoted to God, 
in consequence of reading tbe Swearer^s Prayer; a little 
Tract of 4 pages, 6,000 copiea of which may be printed 
for SO dollars. 

Another gentleman who resides near the borders of 
Mexico, and can have almost constant communication with 
its iababitants, states that the way is opened for an imme- 
diate introduction of Tracts iolo that country. And lb>t 
could tbey be obtained, millions might be distributed wilb 
the greatest prospect of success. 

A respectable Merchant in Brazil, applied lo the Com- 
mittee for Tracts, offered to take charge of them himself, 
and stated, that by means of merchants with whom be 
was acquainted, he could circulate them very estensirelj 
in that country. He also wished for Testaments, ia Por- 
tuguese, and Spanish, which, he said, might be distributed, 
and be exceedingly useful. 

A gentleman who has resided, a number of years, at 
Valparaiso, and is well acquainted with the country, state! 
that missionaries may travel, without difficulty, from Bue- 
nos Ayres to Chili, and distribute to advantage, great nam- 
bera of Religious Tracts. 

A young man, commissioned by tbe American Board, 
who is soon to enter upon an exploring missioo throagll 
South America, applied to the Committee for Spanish 
Tracts ; and it was a source of deep regret that ihejr 
were not able to supply him. They expressed to bin, 
however, the hope and the confldence, that ivben hit up* 
plication should be generally known, means would be pro> 
Tided for a supply. 

Not is the want of Tracts confined to this contiDenl. 
Immense fields are opening for their diitnbutioD on other 
continents. 



I 1823] KAKT OP TRACTS IN IBDli. 1 1 5 

In the vicinity of Bonibaj, ID India, where the Amert- 
I «aD Board of Commissi oners haye a printing press, are 
. 11,000,000 people nil speaking ooe Innguage, Nearly all 
l«f them are destitute of the Gospel, there being only 3 
iMnMoaaries amoog them. And writes one of these mis- 
^■ooaries, "The distribution of Tracts is the only possible 
imjin which we can exhibit any portion of the Gospel, 
[to vast portions of the present generation of India. Minis- 
I'Mere enough to go and preach to Ihem the Gospel, can- 
I B0( be oblained. We must print and circulate Tracts, or 
; aillioDs and millions of the present and future g-eoerations 
I Vf India must go down, in unbroken successioa, through 
' p^^B darkness, to the grave." 

I And, writes another missionary, " Tracts can be printed 
at Bombay in the Mahratia langua^^e, as cheap as you can 
I pnnt them in New England And there is no section of 
I'tbe world where they may be distributed with a prospect 
of greater osefulness, than in the Mahratta Country. The 
great body of the people would be likely to receive more 
instruction from a little Tract, which they could read in 
,£ve minutes, than they would from the entire New Testa- 
Ment; because they would be much more likely to read 
it," And after they have read one Tract, Ihey are often 
'aDxiotis to get another. So«n they may read, if they can 
obtain it, the whole New Testament. 
A missionary in Ceylon writes, " We visit from 2 to 8 
I 6milies in a day. Sometimes we lake long journeys, and 
■re out 6 or 8 days ; taking with us some of the boys 
from the schools. At such times particularly, we feel the 
Ked of Dractt. Passing through villages where the Gospel 
iras never before heard, we find hundreds who can, aud 
who would read, had we books, or Tracts, to give them. 
But alas, we have none • No Bible, no Tract, to show the 
^or heathen how to flee from the wrath to come. The 
only Tracts which we have ever had, have been written 
apoo the Olla, and procured, of course, at a great expense. 
Perhaps, in all our missions, we have distributed 300, 
obtained in that way. O that we could get a supply print- 
«d. Into how many villages could the Gospel he sent hj 
Bteans of Tracts. How many souls, by a tingU "^ '^ 
toight be saved from endless misery." 




116 NINTH HEFORT. [1823 

And shall Ihe Chriaiian Missionary, who ha3 left hia 
ther'a house, his native land, and gone 13,000 miles to (ell 
the dying heathen of a Saviour, and point thena to 
Lamb of God, go from village to village through the h 
spreading desolation, find hundreds and thousands vrho 
have never beard the Gospel, tvho can and who wouli 
read, if they could get a Bible, or a Trad — and yet have 
none to give them t Shall he be left to cry l> " 
thousand churches abouodlDg with wealth, " Alas, we havs 
none to give them : no Bible, no Tract, to show the poM 
heathen how to flee from the wrath to come ?" Shall it 
be told ID the ears of all Christendom, that after yeara o( 
toil and labour, the only Tracia which they have ever had, 
were written upon the CHIa, and procured at a great ex- 
pense ; and that the whole mission had not been able to ob> 
tain for circiilatioD more than SOO ? And shall they «tiQ 
remain destitute, to cry, " O that we could get a aupplf 
printed 7 Into how many villages could the Gospel be 
8ent by Tracts ? How many souls, by a single Tract migbt 
be saved from endless misery?-' — and yet cry in vain! 
Let Christendom answer. 

Six years ago, a heathen youth, for the first time, ob- 
tained a New Testament. In reading it, the Holy Spirit 
enlightedhis mind, and he was hopefully brought to tbit 
knowledge of Jesus Christ which is " life eternal." Of 
his own accord, and unknown to any christian friend, be 
began to preach the Gospel ; and publish to his conntiy- 
tneo, the glad tidings of salvation. A few months ago be 
became acquainted with Christian Missionaries, and found 
to his astonishment, that they were discipUa ofJtim. ~ 
is now with them, studying the Bible, and labouring amov 
th« people. He has become a member of the church, uia 
gives, say the missionaries, " satisfactory evidence of love 
to God, and love lo man." Who can estimate the good 
which may result from furnishing the heathen with a lin- 
gle Bible, or a single Tract ? And who can forbear, whea 
he sees how easily, and with what numhers, he may ^u^ 
nish them? 

A respectable Mercantile House in , pQrchased the 

last year 10,000 copies of the Christian Almaoack. By 
this pnrcbase a profit accrued lo the Society, sufficient to 



1623] CIRCCLATION OP THE CHRBTliN ALMANACK. 11? 



fnruish Tor circulatioo, in our ona country, Tracts of 4 

pages each, to the number of 30,000. From their profits, 

I they made a donation to the Society of 50 do]lan, to he 

' appropriated lo the printing of Tracts, in the Mahratta 

ilaogaagfl, at Bombay. Witness the effects of this meas- 
ure. There has been a circulation of 10,000 copies of the 
Christian Almanack. These have gone probably into 
10,000 families, and been read by 30,000 indif'idualB. 
From the avails,. 30,000 Tracts of 4 pages each, ivill be 
farnished for circulation in (his country, which may go in- 
I to as many more families, and be read by twice as many 
' more individuals. The avails of these may furnish anoth- 
er edition ; and the avtiils of those, another. And when 
I Ihey have passed through 8 editions, (the number which 
: (he Society has actually printed of some of its Tracts, in 9 
I years,) there will be furnished for circulation, from the 
ivails of those 10,000 copies of the Almanack, 240,000 
Tracts. And from the donation of 60 dollars, giren from 
the profits of the second sale of the Almanack, there may 
be furnished 15,000 Tracts of 4 pages each, in the Mah- 
ratta language, at Bombay. These may be carried into 
16,000 families and be read by 30,000 people in that 
country. 

Let only 100 Mercantile Houses in the United States, 
do annually what has been done by the one above men- 
tioned, and Ihey would circulate annually 1,000,000 cop- 
ies of the Almanack; and furnish for circulation in out 
own country 3,000,000 Tracts. In 10 years they would 
circulate 10,000,000 copies of the Almanack; and furnish 
for circulation in our own country 30,000,000 Tracts. In 
the same time they would furnish 16,000,000 Tracts for 
urculation in the Mahratta country. Some of them might 
find their way into every family ; and point many to him, 
who " although he was rich, yet for their sakes became 
poor, that they through his poverty might be rich." And 
u they gaze upon him, they will begin to see " the light 
of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Je- 
ms Christ." And as they follow him through his humilia- 
tion, and see him " bearing his cross," till he is " lifted 
up," they may experience the fulfilment of his promise, 
" 1 will draw all men unto me" 



J 



Ua BIKTH REPORT. 

Trace the amount of intlnence which these t> 
TracW may have upon ll,OOO.OiM) mind-i in the HabrMM 
country, iind upon all who !ihall come afler them ; aoA ndd 
to this the influence of 30,000,000 Tracts upon 10,000,006 
minds in our onn country ; and upon all the minds wbicfa 
shall come after them, down to the period, tvhen ■■ titH 
ihall be no longer;" and go forward with these mindi 
which are (o carry onward tbia indiience, till all Guite pe- 
riodH are lost in rlernal duration, and fay, cannot 100 mea 
with ititall meaus, by the blessing of God, accomplish caeiT 

ENDS? 

The American Board of Commissioners have also a 
printing press at Malta. And from the present indicatiou 
of Providence, it may be expected, that ere long all West- 
em Asia will hp stretching out her arms for Tracts. There 
is now no etFeclnal obstacle, could they be fnmished, to 
their immediate and extensive circulation. And not ooh 
could tbej be circulated, but ibey would be read, wiu 
most lively interest. A gentleman, lately frnm that codd- 
try, who had btmne If distributed numerous Tracts in ports 
around the Mediterranean, remarked, on his return to Eog* 
land, to those who had supplied him, " 1 thank you, Geii> 
llemen, ten thousand times, for the Tracts which yoD gave 
me. 1 had often been told thai it was of no use to think 
of offering Italiani. Greek?. Portuguese, and Spanianls, 
religious books ; for they would not read them, thej dare 
not lake them. But 1 now know better. You can ban 
no idea bow welcome the Tracis were, in alt the porti 
where we touched along the Mediterranean The people 
ran after me in the streets, and pulled me into their hoos* 
es, in order to obtain them : and that too, after 1 bad <U^ 
tribnied nil 1 had. And 1 could hardly pacify them, bnl 
by telling them that 1 would bring them more, wbeol 
should come ngHin. 1 assure you thai 1 became well knoHs; 
and I hope to carry out a good supply the next tine, 
knowing how glad they will be to see me, and the gooi 
books." 

Prom persons acquainted with the subject, the Coumit* 
lee learn that Tracis can be printed, at Malta, at efcne 
less expense than Ibey can be in the United States. And 
from Malta, Jerusalem, Smyrna, and ports around the 



IStS} VSEftruriflS OF TRACTS. 110 

Httditernmemii, they mmy be sent to more than 20,000,000 
people. Here then is an immeDse field for the distribu- 
tton of Tracts. Men who haVe property may here employ 
it in a manner, which, while it does not make them poor, 
will make many rich ; and secure for them ^^ an inherit- 
aace incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away.'' 
And when all earthly treasures shall be melting in the last 
conflagration, they shall have ^^ durable riches and right- 
toosness/' ^^ eternal in the heaTons.'' 

To be convinced that Tracts are the means of infinite 
blessings, we need only look at yactt. 

A man from an adjoining state, was passing, with a 
drove of cattle, through a town in this Commonwealth, on 
the Sabbath ; a little Tract was handed him, inculcating 
the duty of remembering the Sabbath day and keeping it 
holy. He determined that he would not read it, though 
he did not throw it away. When oat of sight, he felt a 
curiosity to see what it contained, and began to read it. 
He soon beg^n to feel the guilt and danger of profaning the 
Sabbath ; and said to his companion, ^^ Let us stop till the 
Sabbath is over.'' His companion refused. ^^ Well," said 
he, ^ you may go on, but 1 shall stop." They both put up 
till the close of the Sabbath. But the man still felt the bur- 
den of a ^ -wounded spirit ;" and he found no relief, till, as 
he hopes, he submitted tp Jesus. He is now apparently 
devoted to God, and traces his first serious impressions to 
that Uttle Tract. 

A benevolent individual in , put a sum of money in* 

to the hands of his minister, to purchase Religious Tracts 
for gratuitous distribution. He purchased a number, and 
among them was ^^ A Persuasive to Public Worship*" It 
fell into the hands of a careless man, who carried it in his 
pocket to a neighbouring town, where it fell into the hands 
of a pious woman, who sent it to an acquaintance of hers 
that neglected public worship. He read it, and became 
alarmed at his condition. He immediately began to attend 
upon the preaching of the Gospel, and to hear with anx- 
ious concern. And there is reason to believe, that he is 
now heartily devoted to God. 

Ah instructress of a school in New Hampshire, receiv- 
ed from her minister a parcel of Tracts, to be lent as re* 



I 

ISO ItlNTH HEPOBT. [18M 

It wards to her scholars. The Tract on iDtempcraoce, 

L found its way into the families of Iwo ialcmperale raeu, 

j and before the close of (he season, they manifested an ei- 

I sential reformation. 

I As a young mao, in a neighbouring state, was aboal ti 

set out on e voyage at sea, a pious friend put into hia troak 
• a parcel of Tracts. While on his voyage, curiosity led 

him (o examine this Utile bundle. On opening it, his eye 
fastened OB "The Young Cottager." It arrested his at- 
tention, and he read it through. And there is reason 
hope (hat it has left an impression on his mind which v 
never be effaced. He separated from his companions, and 
spent much of his time in reading, meditation, and prayer. 
He continued this course uniil his return ; when he found 
that his relish Ibr former pleasures iv as gone, and he wai 
led to say, " 1 had r.ither be a door keeper in the house 
of my God, (ban (odnell in the tents of wickedness." He 
has since made a public profession of religion, and relaia 
with humility and gratitude, the kindness of God in caus- 
ing lo be put into his trunk (hat little Tract. 

" The Young Cottager" is an authentic narrative * 
ten by Rev. Legh Richmond, and has repeatedly been 
blessed to the salvation of men. 

A copy of it was handed lo a young Lady in this Con 
moDwealth. As she read it an involuntary tear started 
from her eye, ami offended with herself for being Ofer- 
come by a Tract, she threw it down and resolved to hare 
nothing more to do with it But she could not rest, and 
took it up again. She was again affected even to teait, 
and angrily threw il down. But she could not rest then; 
she took it up again, and at length read it through. And 
an impression was fastened upon her mind, which tfaereil 
reason lo believe will be eternal. " What,'^ said shCi 
"can this poor cottager so bewail her sins, and I, whou 
tenfold more guilty, feel no relentings ?" Days and weekl 
of anguish, on account of her sins, passed away ; and ibc 
wandered in darkness, and saw no light. But at length ■ 
ray from the Sun of righteousness broke in upon her, aoJ 
she was brought out of darkness into marvellous light 
For years she has now been engaged in seeking out tbe 
poor, and destitute, and distributing among ihem Bibleii 



-fSt^ rsEFUunoMi of tiugts. 11^1 

mid Religioof Tracts ; iDstmcting them in Sabbath Schooli, 
wui ezcitiiig her acqaaintance to gpreater and more ays- 
temmtical efforts for the salvation of men. 

The Tract entitled ^^ Sixteen Short Sermons^^' was 
handed by an aged lady in this state, to a little boy. He 
i«ad till he came to the third sermon, which is from this 
text, ^ All have sinned and come short of the glory of 
God/' This appeared to be for kirn. He felt that he 
had sinned, and in a thousand instances, come short of the 
giory of God. He became deeply distressed, began from 
that time to search the Scriptures daily, and to seek the 
salvation of his soul. In a few months he obtained, as he 
hopes, joy and peace in believing in Jesus. He was ad- 
mitted a member of the visible church, has since been 
preparing for the ministry, and is now about to enter up- 
<m its sacred duties. 

Four other cases of hopeful conversion, and indirectly 
upwards of 40 cases more, already known to the Commit- 
t^, appear to have been connected with the reading of 
only 5 copies of the above mentioned Tract. 

Here then are nearly 50 persons whose hopeful conver* 
sion is seen, by the feeble eye of mortals, even in this dis- 
tant world, and while looking ^^ through a glass darkly,'' 
to htive been connected with the reading of only 6 copies 
of one single Tract. Of this Tract 24,000 copies have 
been published by this Society, and great numbers by oth- 
er Societies. Add to the influence of those 6 copies, the 
infloence of all these ; and to the influence of all these, 
add the influence of 3,000,000 other Tracts published by 
this Society ; and 2,000,000 by other Societies in this coun- 
try ; and to the influence of these, add the influence of 
WfiOOfiOO published by the London Tract Society ; and 
other millions by other Tract Societies on the conti- 
nent of Europe, and who can estimate the result ! Let 
the increase of Tracts go forward, as it has done for 10 
years past, only 20 years to come, and there are hundreds 
of millions in actual circulation. Sum up the amount of 
the influence of all these, upon the souls of men. See 
them speaking to immortal beings in every town, village, 
and family, on the continent of Europe ; American and 
iSoropean Tracts, meeting and mingling together on the 

U 



122 NINTH BEP<»IT. [1813 

shores of the Caspian ; extending their influence to every 
part of Asia ; to the Islands of every sea ; to every con- 
tinent, and kingdom, and family, on the globe ; and movii^ 
onward with accumulating influence to' the end of the 
world ; '^ and, lo, a great multitude which no man can 
number, out of all nations, and kindreds, apd people, and 
tongues, stand before the throne of God, and before the 
Lamb," and open their everlasting song, ^^ Unto Him that 
loved us, and washbd us from our sins in his owti blood, 
and hath made us kings and priests unto God and his Fa- 
ther; to him be glory and dominion forever and evef.'^ 



APPENDIX. 



From a Young Clergyman, 

While travelling in Tennessee, I staid for a ni|;ht at the hoiue 

of , where I met with Miss C of W- ^ an in 

telligent young Lady, who appeared deeply to lament the igno- 
rance, and want of Christian enterprise, which prevailed around 
her. '^ / vdtk^'^'* said she, ^^ that tome of your Eastern ladies vfouli 
come among m, and tell us how to form Tract Societies and other 
associations for doing good. ^^ I remarked that the process was very 
simple, and at her request, immediately drew up a short Constitu- 
tion of a Tract Society, which she promised to hring forward among 
the ladies in W I soon afterwards learned with pleas- 
ure, that 20 dollars had been sent from W to the Deposi- 
tory, for the purchase of Tracts. As I supposed that this had been 
brought about through the influence of Miss C , I afterwards 
sent her a copy of the Prospectus of the Family Visitor^ a Relig. 
ious Newspaper published in Richmond, Va« in consequence of 
which she very soon returned to the Editor a long list of subscrib- 
ers, who are now probably enjoying the precious privilege of read- 
ing weekly religious inteUigence, from all parts of the Christian 
world. How much good might be done in the distribution of Re- 
lu^ous Newspapers and Tracts, would all intelligent Females, like 
Miss C — — — ) only consent to try. 

Extract of a Letter from Rev. L. Whitney^ one of the Missionaries 
employed by the Connecticut Missionary Society^ dated at Lex^ 
tng/on, Kentucky^ March 2, 1823. 

One who has not visited the Western and Southern divisions of 
OUT country, has no just conception how much good may be eflect- 
ed, in our destitute settlements, by Tracts. They reach individu- 
als who otherwise would receive no religious instruction. They • 
become subjects of conversation and reflection ; and by thus pre- 
paring the way, contribute much to the success of Missionary la- 
bours. 

In most of the destitute settlements, are found some pious and in- 
telligent men, who would take a pleasure in perusing and circulat- 
ing them. You will permit me to mention one instance of individ- 
ual exertion ; and the salutary effects produced by it. 

When in Alabama, last spring, I became acquainted with a pi- 
ous and intelligent planter, who came originally from Virginia, and 
settled in the County of Morgan. His feelings were higMy excite 



124 apfehdix. [dtllBtt. 

ed in view of the immorality of the country. Many of tha inlnbi' 
tants, and especially tboee who lived in the ran^^ea, and iteai the 
mountain, were idle and dissolute. They paid no respect to relig- 
ion, and regarded the Sabbath merely as a holiday. He revolv- 
ed in his mind various methods of effecting their moral imptove- 
jnent ; and at length filed on the distrihntion of Tracts. He «nt 
immediately to Knoxville, Tenneaaee, (for none could be obtainod 
nearer,) and procured a considerable number ; and diateibnted 
them not only among his neighbours, but in remote parts of the 
County. 

The con9e5nence! were happy beyond what he anticipated, i 
change in the conduct of many was soon visible. They were led 
tortspect religion and its institutions. And instead of spending the 
Sabbath in idleness, or amusement, or vice ; they might frequent' 
ly be seen in little groops, on that sacred day, reading the Tracb, 
or lirtening to some one of their circle, as he read to the oQtetf, 
seated around him in tearful sileDce. Repeated applicationi have 
been made to thie gentleman for new supplies. He asstired nu 
-that many of his neighbours were now ready to cooperate withhia; 
and requested me to delay a little, and organize a Tract Society. 
My {>reviauB engagements rendering this impracticable, I merely 
furniahed him with a cDoBtitulicn of a Society, and pledged myKlf 
to forward him Bome Tracts. 

In all the states west of the Alleghany mountains, excepting OUtt, 
I kpow oi only Jive Depositories. Could yoQ establiflh Depositoliti 
throughout the country, the itinerating preachers, who caa canj 
but few Tracts at a time, might easily supply tbeoiselvefl for ^M& 
bution.. Many of the Methodist and Baptist preachers would And 
it in perfect accordance with their feelings, and the objects Ihqr 
Ilave in view, to put them in circulation. 

Among the places where a Depoiitory of Tracts is especially 
needed, I would mention Lexington, Louisville, and Hopkinsville, 
in Kentucky: Madison and Indianapolis, in Indiana ; Golcondaand 
Edwardsville, in Illinois ; Clarksville, Nashville, and Coliuabia, in 
Tennessee; Natchez, in Missiaslppi ; and Hnntsville and Floreitcet 
in Alabama. 



Extrael of a Lelltrfrom Mr. Darid Brovm, a Cherokee, 
lo ihe Chrutian RrbgiQn by Ihi imirumenlalilg of Ihe Miukli 
School al Brainerd, dated, Jtuianer, Man. bih June, 1823. 
Living facts testify, that Religious Tracts are of immenie utili- 
ly. They, as well as the Bible, are the harbingers of light and 
life. Many have already felt their bappy influence ; and will ban 
lasting occasion to praise God for the perusal of them. They Inn 
silently crept into courts and palaces ; and withintbeirroyal walUi 
many princes have, by their pathetic eloquence, been made to 
" tremble." Even to huts and wigwams they have gone, to expos- 
tulate with the sons and daughters of poverty and aMcUon- ^J 



9th AD.] APPENDIX. 126 

them, the desponding saint has been comforted, and the impious 
hare been warned to '^ flee from the wrath to come.^^ 

In the Western parts of the United States, a g^eat proportion of 
tlie inhabitants are awfully corrupt in their morals. Whether 
white, red, or black, they seem to be subject to the same moral dis- 
ease, that is, *'*' There is no fear of God before their eyes.^^ Oh, 
the state of the dyings thousands in Arkansas, Mississippi, and Mis- 
souri. Vast numbers of them have never yet heard of a Saviour^s 
love ; and without any of the consolations of the Gospel, they are 
pressing into the region of gloom and death. Haste then. Dear 
sir, let these winged messengers of Heaven fly Westward. Tou 
can hardly imagine the happy results that woiUd follow from their 
extensive circulation. The more you send, the better. 



From Mr, John C, Brigham^ employed in the Western States in in- 
creasing the funds of the •American Board for Foreign Missions, 

The field opening before you at the West is boundless. On the 
bosom of the Ohio River, and all along its banks, from Pittsburgh 
to its junction with the Mississippi, ana thence to New Orleans, a 
distance of 3,000 miles, are vast multitudes very destitute of tiie 
means of gprace. Had I thousands of dollars, I know of no way in 
which I could employ it with a greater prospect of usefulness, than 
in establislung Depositories of lYacts in Pittsburgh, Steubenville, 
Wheeling, marietta, Maysville, Augusta, Cincinnati, Louisville, 
and other towns on these rivers, from which Tracts might be dis- 
tributed into the numerous boats continually passing, and often 
crowded with travellers and families moving^ who would not only 
read the Tracts, but carry them to multitudes of others. In these 
towns, there are ministers and private christians of first character, 
who would cheerfully distribute Tracts if put into their hands. 
There are also many large growing towns in the interior of Ohio, 
Kentucky, Tennessee, and Alabama, where Tracts might be depos- 
ited ; and then scattered among the numerous families, which are 
growing up without religious instruction. 

I amJiappy to learn the success of the American Tract Society. 
I hop^t will continue to receive the smiles of Heaven, and that 
your seal for its welfare will not diminish. Had you rode, as I 
have, over this vast growing country west of the Mountains ; and 
seen the pressing want of religious instruction ; you would be in- 
cited to still greater efforts to increase its friends, and extend its 
more than golden treasures. 



2S6 NIKTB REPORT. [1823 

OFFICERS, 

SLECTSD, MAT 28, 1823, 

How. WILLIAM REED, President. 

Rev. MOSES STUART^ Vice PrendenU 

Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS, Corresponding Secretary, 

Rev. RICHARD S. STORRS, Recording Secretary. 

AMOS BLANCHARD, Esq. Treasurer. 

SAMUEL FARRAR, Esq, JlvdUor. . 

EXfiCTrriVE COMMITTEE. 

Rev. JOHN H. CHURCH, 
Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS, 
Rev. JOHN CODMAN, d. r. 
Rbv. WARREN FAY, 

AMOS BLANCHARD, Ega, 



State oe the Society's Funds. 

Balance due from the Society, May 1, 1822, . . 1,448,59 

Expense of paper, printinif, &c. from May 1, 1822, > » a«q m 

to May 1,1823, J iSOiM,u* 

$5,iii,e3 

Received, /rom May 1, 1822, to Xay 1, 1823. 

Donations 1019,81 

From the Agents of the General Depository for Tracts > ^ ^^^ ^m 
sold, &c S *»*^**^ 

$4,184,24 

Balance due from the Society May 1, 1823, . . 927,39 

Amos BlanghARD, 2Vea#ur<r. 



wMw^m wsMn'mT. 


' 


MAY 26, 1824. 








Yovfi Committee, in presenting the Tenth Annual Re- 


port of the American Tract Society', have much occnsion 


for gratitude to the Supreme Disposer of events, 


or the 


nnexumpled prosperity which he has granted to th 


9 Insti- 


tnlion, during the past year. 




Since the last Annual Meeting, they have printed new 


editions of 95 Tracts ; being about three Bftha of the whole 


number which had theft beeD publishe(f. They ha 


ve also 


pablished, the past year, twenty two new Tracts : 


Tiz. 


JVo. 


Page.. 


158. Hopes for Eternity 


. e 


159. Wondirful Advantages of Drunkenness 


4 


160. The Two Ends and the Two Waji 


4 


161. To the Keeper of a. Turnpike Gate 


8 


162. Common Errors 


. 13 


163. Thomas Brown 


- 4 


164. Bethel, or the Flag Unfurled .... 


. 13 


165. Village in the Mountains 


. 8 


166. The Alarm 


4 


167. " All Right" 


8 


168. To a Person engaged in a Lawsuit 


4 


S3. God a Refuge 




55. The Well-spent Day 


. 12 


eo. Scripture Marks of Salvation .... 


. S4 


81. Seaman's Spy-Glasa 


. 18 


85. Watchmaker and his Family .... 


. 18 


104. Anecdotes, illustrating the Urefulneit of Tracts . 


. 38 


109. James Covey 


. 4 


111. The Christ of God 


. 12 


131. On Walking by raith 


. 18 


139. Contentment io Humble Lift ... . 


. 16 


144. Conversion of President Edwards .... 


. 16 


Of eleven of the new Tracts, the circulation h 


s been 


Bucfa, that second editions have already been called for and 


published { making 12,000 copies of each of tbeae Tractf, 


printed during the year. 


1 



126 *rEIiTH REPORT. [1844 

The whole number of Tracts published the past year, 
exceeds that of the two preceding years, 

amouating lo T70,OM 

Whole nuDilier from Iho beginning , . 4,817,500 

Previous to the last Annual Meeting, 1000 copies of 
the 6rst five volumes, aud 500 copies of the sixth, hid 
beea bound ; sioce which, 300 entire sets ofseven TOlum€i 
have been bound, besides 550 copies of the seventh, 350 
of the sistb, 100 of the Srsi, aod 50 entire sets in calfi 
making 3,450 volumes, bound the pastjear; and 8 
since the formation of the Socielj. Almost all these have 
been put in circulation. Daring the jear, numerous fam- 
ilies hare supplied themselves with complete sets ; and 
benevolent individuals have, in many instances, procured 
them to be loatted or presented to the families of the poor. 
Your Committee hope Ibnt the lime tvill soon arrive, wbeo 
every family in our country shall possess such a treasure 
of religious knowledge, as that embraced in this Societf'i 
publications. 

Your Commitlee have, Ihe past year, made special ei- 
erlions, by correcting errors of the press, and by substi- 
tuting new Tracts for such as seemed less adapted to gen- 
eral and lasting utility, to render the complete !!et in all 
respects worthy of the most estensive circululion. This 
attention to the series was especially important at the pre- 
sent time, as the Committee have begun to use atereoljipe 
plates. This mode of printing will promote correct- 
ness, and at the same time add to Ibe neatness of the im- 
pression. And though much care in preparing the edi- 
tions, and a large advance of capital, will be required, 
yet your Committee are assured, that the pecuniary ioler- 
esls of the Society, will, in the progress of a few yeatt, 
be essentially promoted by the mea-sure. 

Your Committee have also begun lo ornament the pub- 
lications of the Society with Cull ; bolh for Ihe sake of 
rendering them more allractive and acceptable in their ex- 
ternal appearance, and of exciting an interest in IheJrcon- 
tents. Within the last four months, they have prepared 
cuts for about sixty Tracts, and h.ive every encourage- 
ment to proceed, till Ihey have furnished them for all to 
which they are appropriate. 



18S4] puBucATiom of the society. 120 

For the sake of neatness, and convenience, your Com- 
mittee hare had all the Tracts trimmed. The j have al- 
io improved the quality of paper on which thej are print- 
ad. And they have the pleasure to say, that the ex- 
pected henefits of the improvements made in the publica- 
tions of the Society, have been, thus far, more than real- 
ized, in their increased circulation, and in thexordial appro- 
bation of all who have favoured them with their opinion. 

During the past year, your Committee have pub- 
lished the fourth number of the Ckrutian Almanack, a pub- 
lication to which they attach much importance, as an in- 
strument of diffusing religious knowledge. Of the edition 
of this work for 1824, 56,000 copies were sold in Boston; 
8,600 in Rochester, N. Y.; 4,000 in New York city ; 4,000 
10 Pittsburgh, Pa.; and an edition about equally large in 
Philadelphia ; making the whole number of copies circu- 
lated in the United States, about 50,000. The edition in 
"S^m York was published under the patronage of the New 
YoriE Religious Tract Society, and the edition in Philadel- 
phia, under the patronage of the Sunday and Adult School 
Union. Your Committee have endeavoured to render 
this publication complete as an Almanack, and at the same 
time, subservient to the cause of evangelical religion and 
the spread of the Gospel. They are now preparing a 
copy for 1825, which will be issued early, that it may be 
seasonably reprinted ; and that persons, in every part of 
the United States, who are disposed to aid in its circula- 
tion, may be able to famish supplies for all around them. 
It is expected that editions of this work for 1825, will be 
published in the following places : viz. 

Boiton^ Ma$a, by Lincoln & Edmands. 

New York^ F. & R. Lockwood, 154 Broadway. 

Rochester^ Monroe^ Co, Jf, Y, Everard* Peck. 

Philadelphia^ Pa, The Amer. Sunday School Union. 

Pittsburgh^ Pa, Rev. John Andrews. 

HuntnriUe^ Alabama^ Samuel Hazard, Esq. 

The Committee have also had correspondence respect- 
ing one or two other editions, for which no definite ar- 
rangements are yet made. 

Besides this attention to the series of publications issued 



r 



130 TENTH BEPOllT, [18841 

ID past years, your Committee have also begun a new se- 
Ties for Sabbatk Schools ; to contain matter eapecially in- 
teresting to the young, in a neat form, and ornamented 
ivi(b many cuts. Such a series has been much called for; 
and your Committee, deeply impressed with the impor- 
tance of eyery measure which invites the attention of th« 
young to the ^reat subjects of religion, have long been 
desirous to commence it; but their limited pecuniary re- 
sources, especially in connexion wilb the urgent calls for 
new Depositories in Ibe rlestitule parts of the country, 
have hitherto prevented them. Tbey now begin the se- 
ries, depending entirely on the aid of the Benevolent to 
enable them to increase it, till they shall meet, in Bome 
degree, the wants of multitudes who are looking to tbii 
Society for a supply. It is designed to fit this series, like 
ibe olbcr, to be bound in volumes, 

Your Committee have also put lo press. The Proeetd- 
ingi of the First Ttn Years of the American Tract SocUtg, 
consisting, mainly, of the ten Annual Reports with extrflcD 
from the Appendices. Only the seventh and nioth Re- 
ports remained in print, and many facts relating to the 
early history of the Society had been registered only in 
the memory of its friends and patrons. The volume will 
be issued in the same form as the volumes in which the 
publications of the Society are now bound; and to those 
who are interested in this institution, and in the cause of 
Tracts generally, it will form a pleasant and valuable ac- 
compaoiment to (he complete set. It is designed to add 
to this volume, a condensed view of Ibe operations of Re- 
ligious Tract Societies, throughout the world. 

Vour Committee would also invite your attention to the 
.American Tract Magazine. The wantofa periodical pub- 
lication, lo be a medium of intercourse with the Christiaa 
Public, has long been felt by this Society. They have 
wished for such a publication to announce lo donors (he 
receipt of their charities; to contain lists of new Tracts 
published, and new Depositories established; to convey 
information of the wants of di£ferent parts of our own coua- 
try, and other parts of the world; and to contain whatev- 
er may be interesting in the correspondence of the Socie- 
ty j especially, accounts of instances in which ReligioDi 



4] nVW PUBUCATIOBTS AND DEPOSITORIES. 131 

icts have been blessed by the Holj Spirit, to the re- 
nation of the immoral, and the saWatioD or those who 
re ready to perish. In these circamstances, your Corn- 
tee received the two first numbers of the Tract Maga- 
e issued by the Religious Tract Society of London ; 
taining, with the correspondence of that Society, a va- 
^ of miscellaneous articles equally interesting to the 
tnds of Tracts in Europe and America. The receipt 
Jiese numbers seemed to the Committee at once to 
m the way for issuing a similar Publication, containing 
principal articles in that work, and adapted to the par- 
ilar circumstances of our country. The first number 
ilready in the press, and will appear in June. It will 
Dprise 24 pages, in a form coriresponding with the oth- 
pablications of the Society," and be continued regularly, 
^ in two months. As it is the main design of the work 
promote the general interests of the Society, it will be 
Dished to subscribers at half a dollar a year, and gra- 
tously to all Auxiliaries who make yearly remittances 
Eud of the Society^s funds. 

During the year, your Committee have established 28 
f¥ Depositories, in the following towns : viz. 

Fryeburg^ Me. Rev. Carlton Hard. 

Jiorridgtwock^ Me. Rev. Josiah Peet. 

Plainfield^ A*. H. Levi Bryant. 

Brownington^ Vt. Jasper Robinson. 

Manchester^ Vt, Rev. H. A. Parsons. 

MorUpelier^ Vt. Warren Swift. 

Cohm^fw^ JV. F. Isaac Jones. 

Martintburgy JV. F. Rev. David Kimball. 

JVcw Haven^ JV. F. Rev. WUUam Williams. 

PuUney^ A*. F. Rev. Charles Yale. 
Jfew Brunswicky A*. /. Samuel Seymour. 

Pitttburghy Pa. Rev. Robert Patterson. 

Fredericksburg^ Fa. William Kellogg^, Esq. 

Oxford^ JV. C. Joseph Lindsey. 

Savannah^ Oeo. Edward Coppee. 

HwUsviUey Alab. Samuel Hazard, Esq. 

Mobilcy Alab. Rev. John B. Warren. 

J^ashviUe^ Ten. R. P. Hayes, Esq. 
DanviUe, Ken, Rev. Thomas Hand. 

Elkton, Ken. Rev. Wm. K. Stewart, 

Lexington, Ken. Rev. Mr. Ward. 

fjOuiivilU, Ken. Thomas Jones. 



132 TENTH REPORT, 

Columbui, Ohio, Messrs. O. k, S. CroBby.^ 

Kurfion, Ohio, Rtv. William Ilanford. 

JVorieaift, Huron Co.Ohio, Henrj Buckingham. 
SlcMbenrilU, Ohio, Key. Charles Btatly. 

Strongmille, Ohio, Kathan Brittan, Eaq. 

feman, Oftso, Ret. Harvey Coe. 

Theae with those formerly eslabliBhed, make 118 D«- 
posiloriea now depending on this Society for a constant 
supply of Religious Tracts; viz. 10 in Me.; 19 in N. H.i 
10 in Vt; 12 in Mass.; 1 in R. lai. ; 6 in Con.; 22 in N.V.i 
linN. J.; 2inPenn.j 2 in Dist.Col.; 5 in Va.j Gin N.C.; 
1 in S. C; 2 in Geo.; 2 in Alab,; 2 in Ten.; 6 in Ken.; 9ia 
Ohio ; 1 in Missouri ; 2 in Micb.Ter.; and 1 in L. Caaada. 

Your Commiltee cannot hut advert wilh much pleatnre 
to the fact, that (he Deposilories established the past yeai 
are so many of them in parts where the blessings of a 
preached Gospel are less richly enjoyed; and where the 
circulation of Tracts promises especial good. Of Ibe 
26 new Depositories, foariecn are west of the Alleghanj' 
Mountains, or farther south than those Mountains reac&;> 
four are in the extreme parts of the State of New York, 
and one in Vermont, near the borders of Canada. Tha 
Tracts sent to theae new Depositories amount to n 
than 2,500,000 pages. These, together with Tracts fnf 
nisbed to Depositories formerly established, to Tract So- 
cieties, and individuals, make the whole amount of Trvcti 
sent from the General Depository, the past year, more 
than 10,000,000 pages, or about 800,000 Tracts. Two 
million pages were sent from the Depository in the month 
of April. 

Besides the usual modes of circulation, the Committee 
have comphed with the request of a gentleman in Neir 
Hampshire, by furnishing him wilh a supply of Trac^j 
that he might visit parts of the country where DeponH* 
ries are not established, form Tract Societies, and put 
them in circulation. He has gone out on his agency, t' ~ 
result of which cannot be reported till another year. 

Your Committee furnished this gentleman with several 
thousand pages for grafuifoui distribution. They have ain 
sent 10,000 pages to a Missionary among the PenobKOl 
Indians, for a particular account of whose coodition the; 



IS24] GRATUITOUS DOTtlBUTlON. 133 

rnnst refer to the Appendix. Thej bare also presented 
SOfOOO pages to the Auxiliary Tract Society in Machias, 
Me. in consideration of a loss sustained by that Society in 
transporting Tracts to that amount, which they had pur- 
chased at the Society's Depository in Boston : — this being 
the first purchase made by that Society, and there being 
many destitute in the riciniiy, depending on it for a sup- 
ply. 

The Committee haye also receired a communication 
from the Missionaries at the Sandwich Islands, requesting 
a otipply of Tracts to be distributed by them to the crews 
of whaling and other ships, and to others who read the 
English language. Their communication has been an- 
swered by a grant of 25,000 pages. 

The subject of gratuitous distribution, is one in which 

Jour Committee have felt a deep interest ; and nothing 
ut a want of means has prevented them from answering 
numerous other calls which have been made, and which 
have commended themselves as highly important. One 
in particular, from the Massachusetts Missionary Society^ for 
a supply of their Missionaries, your Committee would 
nention as suggesting a way in which much good may be 
dooe by Tracts. Wherever the Domestic Missiooary may 
properly be sent. Religious Tracts are needed, and may 
be eminentiy beneficial, as an accompaniment to his la- 
bours, and a means of instruction after his departure. A 
few Tracts dispersed by the Missionary, would also make 
known their importance, and induce many, in places des- 
titute of the stated preaching of the Gospel, to procure 
them for themselves, their children, and others around 
them. 

- A friend of the American Colonization Society, has also 
fug^ested to your Committee, the importance of establish- 
ing a considerable Depository at Liberia, to aid in promot- 
ing religion among the blacks, who are to be members of 
the Republic which is there springing into existence. 
Your Committee earnestly hope that the time will soon 
come, when they shall not be compelled to deafen their 
ears to such calls as these ; and when the funds which 
might be appropriated with such manifest advantage shall 
be abundantly furnished. 

12 



13'1 TENTH REPORT. [IS24 

But fully as your Committee believe lliat reaources, far 
greater than have hitherto been committed to the charge 
of this Society, might be appropriated tvilh Ihe greatest 
advantage, they mentioD with gratitude to the Most High, 
the aid which he has ioclined the benevoleat to afford. 

Duriog the year eoding May 1, 91 persons have been 
coDSlitiiled Life Members. Of Iheae, 64 are Ctei^ymeD, 
or Ihe wiveB of clergymeD, coDslitnled life membera by 
Ladies and others in their respective Societies j 2 are 
Preceptors of Academies made life members by their pn- 
pila ; and 17 are Gentlemen, and 7 Ladies, constituted lite 
members by their own donations. 

The Society has also recognized, the past year, 146 
new Auxiliaries, making the whole number of Auxiliaries 
163. These have contributed to the Parent InsuiutioD, 
during the year ending May 1, $701,38. The receipts for 
the Christian Almanack, have been more than ^'"^i ^il 
the whole receipts for Tracts sold, $4,1 14,86. 

Yet the Society, with no capital except the Tracts in 
its Depositories, is involved in a debt of more than $1,000, 
and has other lai^e pecuniary engagements. Every new 
Tract published, and every new Depository established, de- 
mands an increase of capital. And these two methods of ex- 
tending the operations of the Society have a reciprocal in- 
fluence. The greater the numberof Tracts published, the 
greater is the expense of establishing each Depository; 
and the more numerous the Depositories, the greater it 
Ihe expense of publishing each particular Tract in aoffi- 
cient quaoliliea to furnish a supply. Should the Commit- 
tee, for the ensuing year, publish as many new TracU, 
and establish aa many new Depositories, as they have the 
past year, and at an equal expense, the increase of capi- 
tal demanded would be more than $3,0U0. And should 
(hey publish twenty live Tracts in the Sabbath Schoolse- 
ne«, Ihe expense will probably amount to $1,500 more. 
And should they stereotype nine-tenths of their Tracts, it 
will require an advance of $2,000 more. These sunu 
united, amount to ^6,500. Your Committee know not 
whence the funds requisite will be obtained; but (bey 
would not distrust that Providence which has hitherto 
aJDiled on this Institution. They are assured that the caiiw 



1824] FORBION CORRESPONDENCE. 135 

ID which they are engaged, is approyed by Him who died 
for a wretched world *, they know it will preyail ; and by 
his grace assisting them, they will still go forward. 

Id affectionately iDviting the cooperatioD of the frieods 
of JesQS, your Committee would suggest the desirableuesa 
of a far more exteosive formatioD of Auxiliary Socieiiu. 
Id eyery city, town, and Tillage, these Societies may be 
attended with important benefits both to the inhabitants 
themselves, and through the Parent Institution, to multi- 
tudes in the most destitute portions of our country ; and* 
their extensiye formation would constitute a bond of 
noioD among the friends of Tracts, which would tend 
greatly to their mutual advantage, and to the promotion of 
the cause which this Society is eudeavouriDg to advance. 

A rule is now adopted, entitling all Auxiliaries to re- 
ceive Tracts at ten per cent discount, from any of the So- 
ciety's Depositories, wherever located ; and also giving 
to those who shall hereafter be constituted Life Members, 
a right to draw Tracts from any Depository, to the amount 
of 15,000 pages, or three-fourths of the sum cootributed. 

Id coDuexioD with the desirableness of increasing the 
Societies funds, the Committee would mention the advan- 
tages which might result from a Library for the use of the 
Publishiog Committee. All books of general utility are 
desirable ; especially those on Theological subjects, and 
books of reference. 

Your Committee are happy to mention the very 
friendly and gratifying relations which this Society sus- 
tains to kindred Institutions in this country and in Great 
Britian* They are bound, especially, to Acknowledge their 
obligations to the Religiow l^ract Society of London^ an 
Institution which has probably accomplished more than all 
other Religious Tract Societies united ; and which is 
equally distinguished by its unwavering attachment to the 
doctrines of the cross, its true liberality of sentiment and 
cooduct, the energy of its proceedings, and its success 
in promoting the cause of Christ. From the latest infor- 
mation received, it appears, that this Society has now pub- 
lished about fifty eight millions of Tracts, embracing, be- 
sides its general series, a series for circulation by Hawk- 



136 TENTH RGrOKT, [1824 

ers ; a series for Sunday Schools ; aod a series on Broad 
Sheets ; together with a variety of hand-bills, and other 
small publications designed lo draw the attention of chil- 
dren to the g^reat truths of religion. The Correspondence 
and the generous aid of this Society were extended, the 
last year, to Russia, Swedeog Finland, Poland, Pruatia, 
and Germany; to France, Spain, Palestine, and Tarioui 
parts of Africa ; to India and China; lo South America, 
the West Indies, the Canadas, and the United States. In 
all these countries, it is extending its operations, kindling 
the same spirit in kindred Institutions with which itself is 
animated, and which your Committee trust will glow with 
increasing ardour, till the world shall be conrerted to God. 

A letter just received from the Secretary of this noble In- 
stitution, containing the most cordial congratiilationB, was 
accompanied by a copy of all the Society's publications, 
and 10,500 Spanish^racts forgratuilous distribution tothe 
Spanish populatiOQ in America. 

Your Committee have also received the publications of 
the Prayer-Book and Homily Society of London, with a filo 
of their Reports, accompaDied by G,000 Homilies io Eng- 
lish, Spanish, and French, and 500 of the Burial Service 
in French, for gratuitous distribution by this Society. 

Of the Spanish and French Tracts and Homilies 5,000 
have been entrusted to the disposal of Henry Hill Esq. 
Treasurer of the A. B, C. F. M. ; 2,500 to the chaise of 
the Rev. William Jenks of Boston ; and 2,000 to the care 
oflhe Rev. Eleazar Lathrop of St. Augustine, Florida. A 
further account of the disposal of (hem must be deferred. 

The publications of the Religious Tract Society of Liv- 
erpool have also been received. 

To each of these Societies, and to other Tract and Sun- 
day School Societies in Great Britain, your Committee have 
forwarded your Reports and specimens of your publications. 

Your publications have, (he past year, been presented 
to the Religious Tract Society of New-York, the Phila- 
delphia Sunday and Adult School Union, the Religious 
Tract Society of Baltimore, and the Western NavigatioQ 
Bible and Tract Society of Cincinnati ; and ibe publicatiooi 
of each of these Societies have been received by jopr 
Committee. Your Reports have been presented to Ihe 



i 



1824] DOMESTIC CORRESPONDENCE. 137 

Eyange Ileal Tract Society of Boston, the Methodist Epis- 
copal Tract Society of New- York, the Female Episcopal 
Tract Society of Baltimore, the Religious Tract Society of 
AlbaQy,the Baptist General Tract Society, the Hartford Re- 
ligious Tract Society, the Female Tract Society of ProTi- 
dence, and to others. For a brief account of the operatioM 
of all these Societies, your Committee must refer to th6 
" Proceedings of the First Ten Years." 

In prosecuting the measures which have been adopted 
the past year, your Committee have deeply felt the im- 
portance of having a qualified and faithful Agent, or Super- 
intendant, devoted permanently to this branch of benevo- 
lence. And they believe there are few stations, in which 
a man may employ the talents which God has given him^ 
with more advantage to the Church. 

While the Committee look back on all the way in which 
they have been led, they are constrained to say, that ^^ good- 
ness and mercy have attended them ;'' and to consider 
the language of Providence as most intelligible, directing 
them to go onward. 

We are placed in the midst of a reading community, ia 
which not only the man of letters, but often the humblest 
cottager, is looking to the press for amusement and instruc- 
tion. In no country is the spirit of independent inquiry so 
prevalent. In no country has the private individual such 
power. He is in fact one of the rulers of a mighty nation ; 
his influence on our civil and religious institutions is felt 
through every vein of our country. Our country, too, is 
in its childhood, and the religious influence which is exer- 
ted now, will be felt by millions yet unborn. These mil- 
lions, Brethren, will all be either the friends, or the ene- 
mies of God in another world ; and with our faithfulness or 
unfaithfulness to them, may be intimately connected their 
songs of triumph, or their unutterable anguish, forevet 
and ever. 

There are many of the followers of Christ, scattered 
abroad through our country, who feel in some degree the 
importance of the work to be accomplished. They write 
to your Committee, and ask what can be done ; and urge 
them, with affecting importunity, to lend them their aid. 
And your Committee cannot hear ftie\t cty^^.^ W^Stj^woX^^ 



138 TENTH REPORT. 

nioat hearl-felt emotion, Manj of ibem once i 
their Sabbuth with all its blessings ; their meetlag-booBWi 
their ministers; their christian friends; and a 
tltute of them all. Their children are growing up with- 
out the means of grace. Their neighbors are living" wi& 
out bope, and tvilbout God in (be world." And the; are 
our countrymen ; they are near us; (hey speak and read 
our language ; their prejudices and sympathies are (he 
same as ours; their wants we daily behold; they are 
members ofour own family, " bone of our bone, and flesh 
of our flesb." God has opened to us the way to do them 
good; and your Committee feel that they cannot answer 
it before Him in (he judgment, if they refuse their utmost 
endeavours, by the means which he has placed in their 
power, to sopply their spiritual wants. 

"The Presbytery of Steubenville, OAio," says a member 
of that body, " embraces within its bounds a population of 
from sisty to seventy thousand souls; and I am requested 
to write and ui^e the American Tract Society to establish 
a Depository here, as soon as practicable. At a full meet- 
ing, all tke members of the PrabyUry beenme members of ait 
Auxiliary Tract Society, and took copies of the Constita* 
tion, in order to form similar Societies iu their own par- 
ishes and vicinity. Many Societies have, at different times, 
been formed in this region, ^1 have ali fallen lhrougK,i» 
consequence of not being able to procure Tracts." 

" A small Tract Society," says a Gentleman in oae of 
the south-western counties of ^ew-York, "has been es- 
tubJished in the town in which 1 reside ; but we have fouod 
much difficuUy tn obtaining Traeli. We have long I 
wishing to have a Depository established here. The 
country around us is very destitute of religious informatioiL 
Applications for Tracts have been made to our little Soc^ 
cly, from towns 60 miles distant." 

A GeDtlemao in one of the central coantie* of Okio, eays, 
" 1 have just now learned where to apply for Tracts. The 
section bordering on the settlement where I reside is ex- 
ceedingly destitute of the means of grace ; the state of 
morals is deplorable; and could you establish a Depou- 
tory here, 1 have no doubt, that by the exertions of a few 
— our little few — of the pious followers of the Lamb, great 
good might be done." 



1824] WART OF T1UCT8 Iff THE UNITED STATES. 139 

^ The region of country lying along the shores of Lake 
Ontario^^^ says a Clergyman in that vicinity, ^^ is yery des- 
titute of religious information. Many of the inhabitants 
are in low circumstances, unable to purchase, and conse- 
quently destitute of religious books. There is a disposi- 
tion, however, to possess themselves, as far as they can, 
of the means of religious knowledge ;• and could there be 
a Depository of Tracts in this county, a great many would 
be purchased and circulated ; and instruction communica- 
ted for which multitudes are perishing.'' 

A Clergyman in the easUm $eetion of Ohio, says, ^^ Per- 
haps there is no place where there is a greater prospect 
that Tracts would be useful, than in this region. A great 
proportion of the people can hear preaching only occasion- 
ally ; in many of the new settlements no churches are yet 
formed, and of those that exist great numbers are destitute 
of pastors. I can hardly imagine a more promising field 
for the circulation of Tracts. A Depository is much need- 
fed. Could the Committee step here, and survey the field 
themselves, and see the corruptions which many are striv- 
ing to introduce ; the demoralizing, scandalous publications 
which are industriously circulated ; and the destitute and 
exposed state of the people; they would be g^eved, that 
it is not in their power to do more for us." 

Says the Secretary of a Female Tract Society in Ken- 
tneky, ^^ The Board have ohserved with pleasure, that this 
place has been mentioned as an important station for a De- 
pository. We would add, that it is a place of resort for 
great numbers of youth ; that many clergymen travelling 
to different parts of the state, might here be conveniently 
supplied with Tracts for distribution ; and that great num- 
bers around us have not the means of grace. And who 
can calculate the happy results of opening here a fountain, 
from which the waters of salvation shall flow in every di- 
rection ?" 

. ^^ We greatly need,'' says a Clergyman in the nothera 
part of Vermont, ^^ a supply of Tracts in these new settle- 
ments. Many would purchase them, could they be obtain- 
ed, instead of a multitude of pernicious books which the 
enemy contrives every where to get in circulation. We 
want them much also for our Sabbath Schools. Tracts, 



MO TENTH EEPOBT. [1824 

dispersed in this desolate region, prepare the way for the 
Bible and the preaciiing of the Gospel. Could a Tract, 
addressed to the inhabitaols of new settlements, be ably 
written aad exteoeivelj^ circulated, it would doubtless be 
very useful." 

"1 wish to inquire," trrites a Clergyman in Alabama, 
"whether a Depository of Tracts can be established ii 
this Stale? Cannot the American Tract Society forward 
us some for gratuitous distribution ? Will the good people 
of New England, amidst such a profusion of the means of 
grace as they enjoy, refuse to send us a few Tracts? [ 
hare travelled extenstvelj in various parls of Alabami, 
keeping the cause of Tracts in view, and making arrange' 
menls for the organization of Auxiliary Societies ; and 
nothing is wanting but Tractt. The members of the Pres- 
bytery and other Christian friends, ui^e the importance 
of a Depository. Establish one, and all that can be done, 
shall be done, God assisting me.'^ 

" I am glad," says a minister in Kentucky, " to learn 
the prosperity of the American Tract Society ; for 1 Ihinlc 
it one of the best means of promoting the cause of Gbrist. 
Four millions ofunassuming advocates of the cross, prench* 
ing to as many immortal hcings the unsearchable riches of 
Christ ! What a spectacle 1 I believe it will ho reserved 
for eternity to unfold the amount of good which thii sin- 
gle Society will have accomplished, under the agency of 
the Holy Spirit. The thing is new here, and there hare 
been some opposers; but when I have showed them, m 
the " Anecdotes illustrating the usefulness of Tracts," 
what God has done by their inslrumentalily, they have re* 
frained from opposition, 'lest haply they should be founit 
fighting against God.' " 

A Correspondent in Ujiper Canada writes, that 8 most 
wide and interesting 6eld ia opening ibere, for the circnlft' 
tion of Tracts ; that the moral slate of Society, ihougb 
low, is, by the efforts of Missionaries and other benevolent 
individuals, improving ; that Sabbath Schools are formni;, 
especially in conoeiion with the efforts of (he Rev. Thad- 
deus Osgood ; that many who have migrated there from 
the United Slates, have a great desire for Tracts and oth- 
er religious information ; and thai the Canadians, though 



1824] wjlht of tracts in the united states. 141 

they have not been a reading people, are becomiDg more 
and more desirous to obtain the knowledge which shall 
make them wise unto salvation. 

Says a Clergyman in one of the western counties of 
New York^ ^* A great desire to read Tracts is manifested 
by my people. ^^ Little Henry and his Bearer,^' of which, 
onfortunately, I had but one copy, has gone from house 
to house. I read it in a public meeting, and the whole 
assembly was in tears. One teacher suspended the or- 
dinary business of her school, that she might read it to 
her pupils. Several little boys and girls have their cents 
laid by, to purchase ^^ Henry'' when he comes, and are 
often inquiring when the box of Tracts will arrive. The 
heart of the orphan has been made to rejoice, by these 
little heralds of salvation ; and the giddy youth has paus- 
ed for a moment, to reflect, when addressed by the silent 
monitor. Yes, I have seen the big tear, trickling down 
the furrowed cheek of age, when presented with that 
which teaches to be wise unto salvation, and to prepare to 
die. The Tracts you sent me before, have abo visited 
the bed of the dying iropenitent-*bat the veil of eternity 
is drawn, and we cannot see beyond it. • Do send me a 
supply sufficient for a Depoiitory for my own people and 
others around me.'' 

" The Presbyteries of Grand River and of Portage," 
says a Clergyman in Ohio^ '^ have taken up the subject 
of procuring and distributing Tracts, forming Auxiliarlos, 
and obtaining a Depository in each county. 1 have also 
been endeavouring to do something myself, to aid this im- 
portant cause. Within a month, I have formed 21 Socie- 
ties, 20 of which are Auxiliary to the American Tract So- 
ciety ; embracing 235 members, male and female, who 
have subscribed near jJS80. These Societies I have or- 
ganized while performing missionary labor, and have found 
it no interruption to the main object in which I am engag- 
ed. I must now request the Committee immediately to 
establish a Depository here, as the existence of these So- 
cieties, depends entirely on the measure." 

" The American Tract Society," says a minister in Ten- 
nessee^ " I regard as one of the grand engines the Lord 
Jesus Christ is using to demolish the kingdom of darkness 



14S TENTH REPORT. 

ID tbe United States, particularly in that part of 
which lies west aftbe Alleghany. Many parts of the 
tern and southern States, being new, mast of oeceBsity be 
for a considerable time, dealitute of tbe preaching of the 
Gospel and the means of religious knowledge. Yet in 
this wide spread region of country, beings created fop iav 
mortality, are springing up in millions. Your SocietyflI^ 
nishes the best means of iDstrnction for each of these in- 
dlridnals. Yet your Tracts have hitherto had bat B 
small circulation here. 1 have conversed with a preach- 
er of the Gospel, who had never heard of such a thing u 
a Religions Tract. But a Tract! — 'tis ivelcomed every- 
where ; and it does execution everywhere. Your Tracts 
on Intemperance find their way to the hardest beart. 
The Stvearer's Prayer will stop tbe nionth of the boldest 
blasphemer. I have curried your Tracts on hoard boali 
descending our large rivers, where noise and riot hava 
been bushed by tbctm, and given way to the glad tidingl 
of salvation, Among (he rich and the poor, they are re- 
ceived with gratitude, read with avidity, studied, remem- 
bered. Why is it, we prny you, that the sluices of be- 
nevolence are not opened, so (hat ihese waters of salri- 
tion may Qow out, through this important portion of oat 
country?" 

" Will you disregard this western world," says another 
minister, on tbe borders of OIno, " till irreligioo shall take 
deep root ; till error shall have overspread the nholc 
territory, iind your influence is lost? Will you have no 
compassion for hundreds of thousands of your country 
men who are perishing for lack of spiritual food ? Wbili 
you most properly regan) the poor heathen in distui 
lands, how can you let " flesh of your ilesh and bone eS 
your bone" starve and perish with hunger. Take a map 
of this western world; look from the Alleghany rnonft- 
tains to tbe Mississippi, and from Detroit to New OrleaoK 
and calculate, if you can, the extent of our ipiritaal 
wants." 

But the voice of the friends of .lesua comes not oolj 
from among tbe perishing in the waste places of onr coun- 
try ; it sounds from pagan lands, wherever the messengen 



1824] WAvr OF tracts in utdia and china. 143 

of tke Gospel are sent. From Finland to the Cape of 
Good Hope, and from China in the East, to the Sandwich 
Iskods in the West, the devoted Missionaries and servants 
of Christ have borne their testimony to the usefulness of 
Religions Tracts, and have called upon those who enjoy 
the blessings of Divine grace, to furnish them for distribu- 
tioD. 

« Great," says the departed Rev. Dr. Milne, whose loss 
is lamented by every friend of China, ^^ great are our ob- 
ligations to the Religious Tract Society ; and great is the 
necessity that exists in these pagan lands, for the exercise 
of its beneficence. Tracts are soon read through, and ea- 
sily carried about with one. They may be circulated more 
widely than the sacred Scriptures can. If we calculate 
either the price, or the persons capable of deriving profit 
from religious books among the Chinese, we shall find 
that fifty Tracts may be given away for the expense of 
one New Testament. A Missionary among the Heathen, 
can carry a hundred Tracts in his hand ; and he will eve^ 
fiod great satisfaction, in leaving an appropriate one in the 
house where he has been visiting ; or in putting one into 
the hands of those with whom he has been conversing ; or 
dropping one in the highway, where it is likely to be ta- 
ken up by some passing stranger ; or in reading and ex- 
plaining one to those who are inclined to hear. The 
Tract Society is a most important Auxiliary in the work 
of converting the Heathen to Christ; and though, in com- 
parison with Missionary and Bible Societies, it holds, in 
some respects, a lower place ; in other respects its utility 
it more immediate, more extensive, and more apparent." 

" We returned from our excursion," says Dr. Scudder, 
one' of the Missionaries at Ceylon, '' rejoicing in the good- 
ness of God. We had distributed 300 Scripture Extracts 
and 650 Tracts ; leaving the word of life in the bands of 
many precious, immortal souls : what is to be the result is 
known to Infinite Wisdom. 1 regret that I had no more 
of these little messengers of truth to distribute. They are 
of great importance to us, when we itinerate. The peo- 
ple in general will read them, and what they read they 
will probably remember better than our conversations. 



144 TEHTH REPORT. 

Lai^e funda are needed to print that variety of i^ 

which we should be glad to circulate." 

The Committee are gratified to acknowledge one doDa< 

tion of $35, occasioned by the above letter, to be appro- 
I priated to the printing of Tracts in Ceylon ; and theycoQ- 

\ aider it very desirable that their funds for foreign objectl 

[ should be greatly increaaed. 

F Your Committee have only lo add a few instances that 

I have been communicated Co them, in which the reading of 

I Eeligions Tracts has been attended by the special influ- 

'^ encea of the Holy Spirit. 

\ A retpectable Gentleman who had not enjoyed the «d- 

1 vantages of an early religious education, and was inclined 

[ of^en to expose and magnify the faults of Christians, call- 

^ ed, about four years ago, on n professor of religion, who 

I affectionately proposed to read him a Tract. " 1 waited," 

saya he, " and heard him through. As he proceeded, my 
allenlion became fixed; my mind wan, as it were, riveted 
upon the Tract. I found my own character drawn iu the 
strongest living colours. Conviction seized my mind. 1 
I saw myself to be one who bad abused the long-suffering; 

of God; despised the rich offers of the Gospel ; trifled 
with a Saviour's love; and felt, that if I were cutoff inmy 
Bins, God would remain forever glorious. In about six 
weeks afterwards, 1 was brought, as 1 trust, to throw my- 
self into the arms of Sovereign mercy, and to embrace 
that Saviour whom I had rejected for almost twenty-eight 
years." This gentleman has since printed for gratuittnu 
distribution a considerable edition of the Tract which had 
been thus blessed to him ; and an edition of two olhen, 
one of which is the Swearer'* Prayer — " feeling it to b« 
his duty," as he informed the Committee, " thus to mani- 
fest bis gratitude ; and especially, as he bad been oiiC4 
addicted to profaneness, lo counteract as much as possi- 
ble, the evils of his former example." 

A pious Gentleman, travelling io Rhode Island, left lb« 
Tract called " The Warning Voice," al a house where 
be had lodged one night ; — it was read by a young womsn 
in the family, and proved, as she hopes, and i 



a 



1824] BUE8SIN6 OF GOD ON RELIGIOUS T1UCT9. 445 

lie ted by those who know her, the meaos of her cooTer^ 
sioQ to God. She has sioce united with a Christian charch. 

A man and his wife who were both lamentably indiffer- 
ent to the subject of religion, and were removing for the 
purpose of settlement in a distant part of the country, pur- 
suing different routes, were so Jong separated that the la- 
dy was filled with the most alarming apprehensions for 

the safety of her husband. While she remained at M ^ 

in deep affliction, a Tract was g^ven her, which, by the 
Divine blessing, led her to put her trust in Christ, the only 
true source of consolation. Her husband was at length 
restored to her, and seeing the change in her character, 
was led to acknowledge the reality and excellency of 
true religion ; and they are now, in a destitute part of the 
country, using their united exertions to promote the spir- 
itual welfare of those around them. 

. In the town of M , where the above event occurred, 

a Tract, given to a profane and dissolute young man, was 
the evident means of his conversion. He lived in health, 
a few months; when he was suddenly removed into eter- 
nity. 

A Lady in New Hampshire, who has been, for several 
years, a professor of religion, traces her first serious im- 
pressions to the reading of the Tract entitled, Ab Life 
Pleoiing to God^ but that which i$ Useful to Mankind, 
• " I consider it," says a valuable Correspondent, " one 
of the greatest enjoyments of my life, that I have beeii 
permitted to scatter so many thousands of these arrows of 
truth, in our own and other countries, by land and by sea.' 
They have uniformly been received with apparent pleas- 
ure, and in many Instances with gprekt joy, and even with 
tears of gratitude. As 1 was but a traveller^ Icould only 
sow the seed, leaving it to future days to reveal the fruit. 
Yet, in some instances, immediate good was apparent. I 
gave a Tract to a female servant who was much alarmed 
in a thunder storm, and accompanied it with some con- 
Tersation. It made known to her the wrath of God re- 
vealed against her, while continuing impenitent, and was 
the means, as there is reason to believe, of directing her 
fo the only Refuge from the eternal storm that is coming 

13 



I 146 tehthkhfokt. 

f on the ODgodly. She caatiaues, so far aa man 

L a sincere friend of Jesus. 

[ "1 ga.ve a few Tracts and a Testament, to a young vo- 

k man, coofioed in a solitary cell in a jail. I had the pleas- 

ure of hearing afterwards that there was reason to hope 
t that they were blessed to the coDveraion of her aoul. 

' " When I reached the end of a long journey into a del- 

. tilute part of the Uniicd States, I found thai my Tracts 

' were almost g^one, and eng^aged a man to go on horseback, 

I on Sabbath morning, and loan one Tract to each of thirty 

f families in Ihe neighbourhood, saying that he would take 

! it the nest Sabbath morning, and lend thetn another. One 

I woman gave evidence of conversion in consequence of 

reading these Tracts. 
i "To one poor old woman who could not read, and had 

\ been for years confined to her bed, ) read that most ex- 

cellent Tract, " To the Aged." She could sit up in het 
bed ; and as I read, the tears streamed down her furroff- 
ed cheeks, and many an interruption did she make, (o ei- 
press her delight with tbeyiiail Providence was giving her. 
^ .'' said she, ' / do bUta God for sending you to me, and 
thatl recelteet tfO» aiAen / tacet you tn Utmien ; I k.av» I 
ukali.' It If as a precious season to me, and 1 trust toser- 
eral others who could not read, but sat around and hoard 
the words of salralion. 

" 1 might add many interesting occurrences," coolinaes 
this Correspondent ; "butif there were no other advan- 
tage in distributing Religious Tracts, than its influence on 
the individual who scatters them, I would re Co mm end to 
all, never to travel without them. A hint frnnt a friend 
suggested to me the duty of lifting my heart in pmyci for 
a blessing on every Tract I delivered ; and 1 never dared 
omit it Thus, having the aflections constantly elevaMi 
to God, ' I seemed to be borne in the arms of my Savivnr,* 
as 1 journeyed onward; and I felt his strength emUiaf 
Hie to utter a word for Him, whenever 1 had opportB> 
Dity to speak to the person to whom a Tract was presMit 
ed." 

A lady ia one of our large towns heard a man •wearing 
profanely at his team, while passing by her house, UM 
banded him the Swtartr'i Prayer. He took the Trac^- 



^ 



1324] BUBBUBQ OF OOD 09 MMUOiOVS TRACTS. 14^ 

pat it in hif hit, tnd went on. Abont mx MontlM after- 
irardt, the Udj htd the pleasure to lean that he had re* 
lated the circamttaoce with much interest ; and said, that 
he had never sworn since, and had resolred, God assisting 
him, never to swear again. 

*' About four yean ago, on a tonr to Canada,^' says Mr. 
C ■ ^ a gentleman in a neighbonring state, *^ I trarelled 
near the White Mountains in New Hampshire, visiting 
from house to house, conversing with every person I met 
about their eternal interests, and presenting all with 
Religious Tracts, which were received with so much gra- 
titude and joy, as to render my journey exceedingly pleas- 
ant. The next year I was employed by the New Hamp- 
shire Bible Society to travel around the White Mountains j 
and calling at a house, I said in an affectionate manner, 
^ Will you tell me if the Lord Jesus Christ dwells here V 
' I trust,' said the woman, ^ he is precious to my soul, yea, 
and altogether lovely.' I inquired when, and by what 
means, she hoped she had been bom again. ^ A man by 
the name of C ■ ,' she said, * came in here, about a 
year since, and gave me a Tract. When he was gone, 
one of my children began to read it aloud. It showed me 
my sins against a fioly God, and revealed his wrath againft 
me. 1 felt that I was lost forever. ^ I read the Tract 
again and again, and my ruin only appeared greater than 
before, till at length I had a discovery of the way ofsalva* 
tion by a crucified Redeemer.' She added, ^1 have 

longed to see that Mr. C ^, ever since.' When I told 

her I was he, she looked at me with a pleasing surprise, 
and expressed her emotions of joy and gratitude with such 
unaffected sincerity, as abundantly repaid me for all the 
sacrifices I had made. — Her husband then said, ^ You gave 
me a Tract also, but I was unmoved by it ; since that, 
however, i hope the Lord has shewed mercy to my soul.' 
Four seasons," adds Mr. C— , " I have been out on the 
delightful business of scattering your silent and powerful 
Missionaries, and were I able, I would travel through ev- 
ery destitute portion of our country, dispersing Bibles and 
Tracts, at my own expense — ^ though faint, yet pursuing.'" 
" A man from the country," says a pious Merchant, in 
one of our large cities, " was leaving my store on Satur^ 



SaDMwT 



HG TENTH RUORT. 

day aflemooD ; when, suspecting his purpose lo traijl 
next day, 1 inquired where he would spend the Sao 
He avowed his determination to travel} and Introduced 
many of the reasons, so often urged to show (bat the 
mandment of God can be innocently violated. I remon- 
siraled with him on the wickedness of the course he ia- 
lended to pursue ; and as he left me, placed in his hand 
a Religious Tract, hoping it might prove a blessing lo 
him. It was about three oionths after, that he returned; 
referred me lo the humble effort I had made for his gaoAj 
told me that while he broke God's law by travelling on 
that Sabbath, there was anguish in his heart; and that he 
found no rest, till, as he hoped, he rested on Christ, the 
rock of salvation. He has since professed religion, and I 
am assured, is an active and valuable member of the 
Church." 

In the store of another Merchant, a quantity of Tracts, 
was, several years ago, deposited by a benevolcDt clergy- 
man, for sale. The merchant, supposing that the proms 
were for the Clergyman's personal benetit, disposed of the 
Tracts as be bad opportunity, but took no inlerest in them 
himself; till one day curiosity led him to examine their 
contents. He soOn found among them the S/iephtrd of 
Saliabvry Plain; which its escellent author, Mrs. Hannah 
More, has, mentioned as, in her judgment, the most useful 
of her publications, it found the way to his heart. He 
felt that he needed a religion which would render him 
happy in poverty and affliclion, lie souglil, and fDaud. 
His partner in trade whs influenced by a Tract which he 
found in the same parcel, to attend to the things of relig- 
ion and consecrate himself to God. Both have since fell 
an unwavering attachment to the cause of Christ ; hare 
distributed thousands of Religious Tracts, and been effi- 
cient friends of Missions, Etible Societies, and all the Be- 
nevolent Institutions which God It now using to promota 
the kingdom of his dear Son. 

Thus, Brethren, has (he Lord smiled upon the work i) 
which, ne trust, he has called us to engage, and crowned 
it with his blessing. And your Committee cannot hut re- 



18S4] covcLUsiOtf. 149 

g%rd these tokens of his favoor as an animating eyidence 
that he has chosen this Society to be an important means 
of extending a knowledge of the Redeemer through the 
earth. Thej look forward, with jojful anticipation, to the 
time, when the publications of this Society shall not mere- 
ly be circulated from a few Depositories, scattered hun- 
dreds of miles from each other, but when a fountain of 
them shall be opened in every county, and they shall 
^read to every town^ and church ; when they shall enter 
every family, and be in the hands of every child ; when 
they shall meet the Intemperate man, and the Profane 
Swearer, and the Sabbath Breaker, in all their violations 
of Qod^n law ; and shall speak to every immortal being, 
throughoQt all our territories, and tell him he is ruined by 
sin, and must ffee speedily to the cross of Christ, or per- 
ish. And when they shall not only be found in evei*y dark 
comer ef our own country, but shall be extended to the 
CaMdas, to Mexico, the West Indies^ and South America, 
to Africa and Western Asia, to India and China ; and God 
shall incline the hearts of bis creatures to listen to the mes- 
sages they bear, to believe in a dying Saviour, and live for- 
ever. 

Sueb is ike work which God may accomplisli by the 
means which this Society is using, and which the Commit- 
tee believe he will accomplish in his own appointed time« 
And they would affectionately invite the friends of thia 
Society to remember its interests before him, in fervent 
enpplicatioB ; and while they praise him A>r his goodnesa 
in time past, and the bright prospect he is opening for the 
future,, to unite in ascribing saltation, and glory, and pow- 
er, and might ^^unto Him who sitteth upon the throne, and 
mto the Lamb ^^ ^^ that was shun, and bath redeemed us to 
Ood by bis blood,^ *^ forever said e^er.'' 



13* 



LoHDON Religiods Tbact Societi. 

The Twenty-fourth Annual Report of [his loBlitution, Jnst pob- 

liahed, contains very iQleresting details of the Society's Proceet 

inga, both at honiE and abroad. Tlie following brief BUnunarFoT 

its operations it EXUracted from the Report. 



laterestiu" cooimiinications hare been received from Drs. Hekd- 
saaoH and PiBKBRTOH, respecting the circulation of Tracts inRu- 
sia. Since 1B12, nearly 100 Tracts have been printed at St. Pe- 
tersburg and Moscow, and about 600,000 copies issued. Dr. H. 
has been active in distributing Tracts at Cronstadt, particularly to 
sailors of different nations. Dr. P. states that in Sweden and Fin- 
land the Tract Societies are proceeding with activity. The Evan- 
gelical Society at Stockholm has circulated between two and Ihru 
tniUioru, 501. have been appropriated for printing Tracts at SL 
Petersbui^ in the Polish language, and 301. for the purchaie of 
French and German Tracts, to be circulated in Poland. The Pm- 
sian Tract Society continues its labours. Since its formation in 
1814, about /tal/aimUiDnTracta have been printed at Berlin. The 
efforts of the Societies formed in Germany have been considGrahle, 
and crowned with much success. At Dantzic, Tracts hare l' — 
distributed by commanders of vessels engaged in that trade. ' 
Hamburgh Society coutinnes its labonr. The Society at Ami 
dam has proceeded witli activity and success, and is now become 
a Society for the Netherlands. It has been presented by this Sod- 
ety with 20,000 copies of the Tract " On Regeneration," with Out 
stereotype plates from which the edition was printed: a further eif' 
tion has been printed at Amsterdam. The Paris Society has e: 
larged its sphere of action, with a hope that much good willreiUlta 
The labours of the Rev. C. Malar, of Geneva, demand particnlar J 
mention. This indefatigable and useful servant of the l^rd is aa 
active circulator of Tracts, of which be is also the author and pub- 
lisher, principally at bis own expense. During the past year &,O0(l 
Tracts in the Spanish language have been distnbuted from Gibral- 
tar. The Rev. S. S. WiLtoN is about to return to the Mediter- 
ranean, and measures have been taken to forward the important 
Horkof translating and printing Tracts in the Greek language, ti 
- ■ ' ■ *■ '■ - - Tnf * 



which Mr. Wilsoh is devoting considerable attention, Tn the A- 
Eores, a merchant has distributed several thousand Tracts chiefly in 
The Portuguese language, A ladyat Madeira is active in distributing 



0th BSF.] LONtK>V KEUGIOUS TRACT 80CICTT. ' 151* 

[*ract8 to the residents, and to the sh^ping^ which toneh there ; for- 
her supplies have been sent. Opportunities have offered for sendini^ 
rracts to the Cape de Verd Islands, to Sierra Leone, and other places 
>n the Western Coast of Africa. At the Cape of Good Hope, Drs. 
Phiup and Thom have circulated Tracts extensively ; considerable 
lupplies have also been forwarded to Simon^s 3ay and Graham 
Town. To Chili and Peru 11,000 Spanish Tracts have been for- 
irarded. Eng^lish and Spanish Tracts have also been sent to the 
Rev. J. Armstrong at Honduras. Correspondents from South 
America unite in stating^ that a general avidity for publications of 
all descriptions now prevails throug^hout that extensive field of op- 
eration. To the West Indies nearly 10,000 Tracts were sent last 
year. To New Providence, and to the Burmudas, 3,000. In vari- 
ous parts of the United States of America, Tract Societies are pro- 
ceeding with activity, chiefly in connexion with the American^ 
New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore Societies ; ^^which are g^oing 
through the land in the length and breadth of it, and proceeding to 
occupy it, in every direction, with Branch and affiliated Institutions. 
Your Committee would particularly notice the •American Tract <Sb- 
m^y, which in extent of operations, ranks next to your own ; they 
have also much pleasure in mentioning, that at New York a Ladies* 
•/SuxtZtary has recently been formed.*^ To Virginia, 1,600 Tracts 
have been sent, hoping they might excite attention in that 
province. To Canada upwards of 20,000 Tracts have been for- 
warded, and to Halifax, in Nova Scotia, 11,000. Applications for 
Tracts have been made from NewfouncUand, by a Captain in the 
Royal Navy stationed there, and some respectable Merchants in 
that Island, and your Committee have forwarded to them 54,000. 
The extensive and interesting regions of Asia have not been for- 
gotten. To the Missionaries of the London Missionary Society at 
Bellary, 32r earns of printing paper, and 15,000 English Tracts, 
have been forwarded. To ti^e Societies at Serampore and Calcut- 
ta, 64 reams of paper, and 13,900 Tracts. To Madras, 32 reams of 
paper, and 12,500 Tracts. To the Missionaries of the Church Mis- 
sionary Society, and of the Methodist Missionary Society, at Cey- 
lon, 32 reams of paper, and 10,100 Tracts. The Missionaries pro- 
ceeding to Bombay, from the Church Missionary Society, have re- 
ceived a supply of Tracts ; and scarcely a vessel or a Missionary 
has 'sailed to any part of India without Tracts. To the Baptist 
Missionaries at Bencoolen, 32 reams of paper have been sent. To 
the Missionary Station at Malacca, 32 reams of paper, and 6,500 
Tracts. Renewed exertions are making for China also, and the 
sum of 200/. has been devoted for this cause. The total of grants to 
India and China, during the past year, amounts to more than 450/. 
Australasia has not been forgotten : convict and other ships, and 
settlers proceeding from London, and the out-ports, have been sup- 
plied with Tracts ; and a considerable quantity has been forward- 
ed to the ministers of the Colony, to form a Depot in New South 
Wales. 






"In clOBioflhia detail of Foreign Operalioi 
would earnestly call your attention to what remains m ue oone:— 
' lig-ht may have glanced upon a Continent, it may have parlielly 
illumined an Igland,' but it ie only a> the beams of the morning np- 
on ihe top of the mountains, — ' darknesa ytl tartrs the naliinu^ am 
grow darknai Iht people ,-' bot we may trust the day is at hand, 
and may even now say, ' Ariit ! bt enlightenid,/Br thy light am- 
itk, and Iht gluTi/ of Ike Lard halh riten vpen Ihee.'' Let ui net 
be alothfnl in thia work, but •■ferutnl in apiril, lemKg the Lari.^ " 



I lu Scotland, increased exertion* for the circulation of Tract* hate 

' been made. Duriii§^ the past year the Tract Society at EdinbiU]^ 

N has purchased upwards of 200,000 of your publications, and aa 

I been active in taking measures for their tale and dietribution ; Dot 

I fttrgettins the importance of attentien to hawkers and other itine- 

rant Tenders. Other Societies in Scotland are also proceeding. 
A considerable gTant of Gaelic and English Tracta have been dj*- 
tributed in the Hi;hlandi and Islands. The Religious Tract and 
I Bo<^ Society for Ireland report, that during the past year 443,E1B6 

I Tracts have been sold, and 1B,9S3 issued gratuitausly, from th«ir 

b Depository, tieing one-fourth more than the issues of the fanM* 

I year. In addititm to these, 30,585 boohs have been sold. A Tract 

r Society has been formed, called the Cambrian Union, for pTomol- 

L> ing the cause in Wales. The Crtui af CKriil, and Poor Jottfk, 

B are Edread; translated and published, and others are in progfcM. 

B About twelve mouths since, an edition of Wjitts's Divine soal^ 

r was printed lu Manx, which proved very acceptable. In the U- 

I and of Guernsey a Tract Societj is in operation, and hai printed 

■eveial Tracts in the French langua^. In the Scilly Isles, TnMt* 
p have been distributed from house to house, and a£xed to the waUl, 

which have proved exceedingly useful and acceptable. 

I The total expense to the Society of gra(«i(ouj issues of Tracliy 

for the past yesj, amounts to $5,064, and the toas ou Tr&ctf aod 
Broad Sheets sold to hawkers to upwards of $873, 
The establishment of /arfy Auxiliary Societies and AssociatioD* 
has been reported since the publication of the last Annual Repart. 
From the following italenteut, it will appear that the Society ■• 
still extending its issues of Tracts. 

EngUsh Tracts issued this year . . S,d56,G7S 
I,' Foreign ditto ditto . M,325 



To this increase of n^nrly half a miltian, must 
crease alio in the nnmbir of Cliilih^n's Rooks of 9 
number isiued since the formation of the Society a 



loth BEP.] rOREIOff COBRESPOlTDEirCE. 1 53 

Extract of a Letter from the Lady of Rev. Dr. HmdergeUy St. Pt' 
tersburg^Rtusia^ to a Female Friend in America^ dated Bible So* 
eiety Houte^ August 1, 1821, describing the way in which a iiii- 
GLK TRACT put in Operation aU the BibU Societies in Russia^ and 

• several of the adjoining countries. 

. A mutual friendship subsisted between Mr. Henderson and our ex- 
eellent friend [Rey.Dr.]Paterson,in early life. The latter, having; fin- 
' ished his studies at Glasg^ow, was bent on labouring; as a missionary 
in India. He sought a companion and fellow-labourer; and Mr. Hen- 
derson being; willing to -devote himself to the same work, they em- 
barked tog^ether for Copenhagen,intending to proceed from that port. 
But war breaking out between England and Denmark, they were 
detained in that capital, and laboured in acquiring the language, 
translating and distributing Tracts, &c. It happened one day as 
they were in the royal gardens, that Henderson s^ve a Tract [The 
Great Question Answered. By Rev. Andrew FuUer'j to a young 
Physician, who passed by. He read it, and it made such an im- 
pression on his mind, that he wished to find who was the stranger 
that gave it to him. For this purpose he went to a patient, one of 
the Moravian Brethren, from whom he thought himself likely to ob- 
.tain the information. This pious man rejoiced to find, that such 
measures were taking to evangelize his countrymen, and rested not 
till he found out the abode of r aterson and his friend, and introduc- 
ed himself to them. From this individual our young missionaries 
learned the deplorable state of Iceland^ in respect to the distribu- 
tion of the Scriptures, and a correspondence was entered into with 
the Bible Society for supplying its inhabitants. This laid the 
foundation for our two friends being engaged in the service of the 
Bible Society, and consequently for all the blessings that have flow- 
ed, are still flowing, and, no doubt, will yet more abundantly flow, 
from the Societies now existing in Denmark, Sweden, Russia, Ice- 
land, — I was going to add, by anticipation, Turkey, Persia, &c. 
iic-See^ my friend, what consequences may result from a siivgl£ 
Tract ! 



Extract of a Letter from the Secretary of the Religious Tract Socie- 
ty of London^ dated Jan. 20, 1824. 

Your highly esteemed communication of the 20th Sept. is now 
before me, and permit me to congratulate you on the important 
station the American Tract Society now occupies, and to present 
my most ardent wishes for its increased prosperity. The perusal of 
your excellent Report was productive of the most unfeigned grati- 
tude and thankfulness to the Almighty Giver of all good, for the 
evident manifestations of his divine approbation on the extensive la- 
bours of your Society. 

We observe with much satisfaction the attention you are mani- 
festing towards the Spanish population in America ; and this Com- 
mittee, desirous of strengthening your hands in this good work, re- 



154 AtFssmx. [10th KB. 

quest four acceptancG of 10,500 Tr&cts io the SpOsiBh lai^uigc, 
which, we doubt unt will tooa obtain a tpeedj circulatioa, throi^ 
your instriimentsilitr. We have the pleasnre alio to forwaiil yon 
Complete copies of all our publicatjont. 

We ore greatly obliged by your present of yout RepwtS, oopiw 
i>f the ChristiaQ Almanack, and your other publicatlaos, Thu re- 
ciprocity of kindness and attention between kindred Inatitutions we 
are very desirooa to caltivate, aaaured that the great cauae lit 
which we are privileged to be eng^td, is promoted thereby. The 
geoeral operationa of this Society are extending on every side; aal 
our intelligence, from all quarters, is of the raD!t aniroatiag natiuei 
I apprehend, from present appearances, that our ieauea for the our- 
rent year will be not far from <errn millio-nj. I aolicit the favsW 
of your future correspondence, praj'ing that the blessing of (he God 
of grace may rest on the Societies for wlich we mutually lahwir, 
and that the cause of oar Lord and Saviour may apeedily plevoil 
throughout the tiniverae. 



Exiract of a Ltlltr/rom the Secretary of the Prayer Boakaitd Him- 
its Sociclg, dated, Loitdon, Jan. 7, 1834. ^ 

Having received your last Report, we have taken the opportn- 
ntty, otTerei] us by a parcel proceeding from the Retigioua Tract So- 
ciety, to inclose 1,000 select English Homilies, 4,000 Spuiafa 
do. 1,000 French do. and 500 copies of the Burial Service in Fwnch. 
Too are probably not nnacqaaiDted with the Homilies compowd 
by Cranmer, Ridley, and others, and know the aoond, praoti- 
cbI, and truly evangelical character of the doetrinea cootainJed id 
them. We earnestly hope they may prove aseful among tbe Ihon- 
sanda in America, mentioned in your Report as deatitate of apirit* 
ual instruction. We also forward yon our Reports and specloMnl 
of our publications. These will explain to you our general viewi, 
and our earnest desire to promote the ipiritual welfare of our Al- 
low men. May the great Head of the Church bless all the eBoiU 
that are now made, or ever shall be made, by those who love him, 
to make known hia ways upon earth, and hia saving health amonc 
all nations. 



from Ike Cerrtrpondenl teho tnmmunitaled the inlcrelUng JktU 
TTKnliuti.ei in the Report, page 145. 
Though 1 have circulated thousands of Tracts, fumiafacd by Be- 
nevolent Societies and individuals, and at my own expense, in ft 
dozen oflhe United Stales and id several other countries, in only «pe 
instance has the Tract 1 have presented been refuted, and that bs- 
cauae it waj supposed to be a pulilieal work. At one lime, a IIUl« 

S'r) came running to beg " I would give bet one of those Dice littU 
•vb." Ai nwn a* she bad received it, abe added, " If yoa pltue 



Iflh tm.l nowsam coBMiPONDEircE. 165 

da i^e me one for my school teacher— «]m1 ose for another yottof 
woman — and there is a youngs gentleman wanted I ahould get one 
iff hhn too— and — ^^* She was goin|^ on to aak for more, when I gave 
Ker a dozen, saying I was glad she wanted so many, and hoped the 
I#ord would make them instrumental of salvation to all who should 
read them. 

A wagoner inquired if I could tell him where he could obtain 
such a little book as a man had picked up at the tavern below. 
^^ for,^* said he, ^^ I looked over him, while he was reading, and 
would give any money if I could get such a one.^' After ascertain- 
ing that he lived at a small village, half a dozen miles (rom the 
main road, and some hundred miles from any efficient Religious 
Tract Society, and was not favoured with the preaching of the 
Gospel, and had little access to books, I grave him 24 Tracts, de- 
siring him to loan them in turn to all his nei^bours, believing they 
might be the means of great ^ood to them. The man offered to pay 
the price of the books ; and I was afterwards sorry that I did not 
receive it, for the amount of Tracts sold may always be reserved 
to purchase the same quantity of Tracts again, and be the means 
of putting many in circulation. 

In crossing a ferry over the river Niagara, I was exceedingly pain- 
ed with the profane oaths of one of the ferrymen. I presented 
him a Tract, and said to him in a low tone of voice, and I believe 
with a true spirit of kindness, ^^ When 1 cross again, at some fu- 
ture time, I hope you will be able to manage your boat without 
t^Jdng the Lord^s name in vain.'*^ ^^ I hope I shall be,^' said he, 
" for 1 know it is wrongs and I will try to improve by your advice." 
One such reply is encouraging to him who desires to promote the 
love of God among his fellow men ; and I enjoyed the pleasure of 
hearing many such, in the frequent joumies I have taken. 

In one instance, I gave some Tracts to a Tavern-keeper who was 
aprofessed Deist, and resting on his own good works for salvation. 
HXs promite^ that he would read them has encouraged me to pre- 
sent Tracts in other instances, even when there is but little pros- 
ptct^ apparently, that good will result. 

At a village far from the Atlantic, where we held a prayer meet- 
ing, I gave several Tracts to the children who were present. The 
-next momlBg eight or ten little girls came to attend family wor- 
4h^9 as I supposed ; but after this duty was over, I discovered that 
they came hoping I would give them Tracts. I gladly gave each 
of them one, and a few to carry home to their friends ; but first 
gathered them around me and endeavoured to impress upon their 
minds the necessity of ^^ remembering their. Creator,^^ and the im- 
portance of often repeating to themselves this sentence, ^ l%ou 
Chd teest me." One of the dear children, who was about eight 
years old, came nearer to me and in a very affectionate manner in- 
quired, with tears in her eyes, ^ if I should return to that house in 
six weeks ?" Her appearance was such as led me to held her to 
«j heart, and converse with her further, for I hoped God wm 



[10th KEF. 

about to hkss to her the inatructions I had g-iven her, and the 
Tracts I liad put 'm her band. 

I will aa\y add, that one of the moat evid^at advanta^s of dk- 
tributing Tracta is the facility it affords for iotroducing the subject ■ 
of religion, and the coneequent walchfulneas which euch converM- 
lion ought always to produce in the mind of every Chriatian, lest ha 
should at an; time, undo by his e:rampU what he has taught hj 



Pnm a Jttissionarj/ in a diitant pari of Ike United Stalti. 
Having been for a year past, an eye witness of the denoIatioDi of 
Zion in a part of our beloved country, I ferl that the woA ii 
which you are engaged, must eitcite in the brtaat of every frSend 
of truth, the most ardent desirea for your success. I have seta 
many children and youth, who are literally trained in the ichool 
of vice, who are acarcoly allowed,- much leas eocourajed, by lluk 
profligate Insttncters, to read the Bible or any other relig^ioui book. 
I immediately attempted to gather them in Sabbath Schools, and 
succeeded in several yillagea far beyond my eipectationa : uid ft 
was an or^aoizing these schools, that I felt especially, the wanl gf 
KeligioQB Tracts. I wrote to a friend in a large city, to procmt 
me a considerable supply at my own expenae; stating the uTcnn^ 
etancea in which 1 waa placed, and the purpotes to which I wiA. 
ed to appropriate them. My letter was, however, commanicatsl 
by hiro to pious friends, and a much larger quantity than I h*i) 
requested, was gratuitously furnished. I found them very ftcc^lfr 
able to almost all classes of people. One fact I consider well wo^ 
thy the attention of the Committee, namely, ihMthott TVacff tuliet 
taoit pointedly cOTidtmned Ihttno'l alarming and prcralent ttlUaf 
the cBvnIry acre tht mail papuiar. Among these waa the '* ^iul 
Effects of Ardent Spirits.'" After reading this in a public meetiifi 
one requested a copy and another, till my stock: was entirely n- 
hauated ; and many applications were made which I could Dot (ap- 
ply. One citizen, who had been, till of late, a very respectable aad 
Vidnable member of society, was hopefully reclaimed -^y Lhii Tttet 
from the destructive sin of intemptraU drinking. The Tratte M* 
compliahed all that I had anticipated, and more. Tliey were ^ 
soon disposed of, and I regretted much that my supply of then hal 
not been greater. The Christian Almanack was inquired alter bl 
many, with great interest ; and I believe if 1 had been iQi^iIiM 
_:.v .1. — 1 -„.ij t ij — ,e hundreds in the field of my si*- 



Fram the Agtnl of a Depatdarg lately tstabiiihei in OKia. 

Since Ihe Tracts arrived, I have used my best endea,voBn, bf 

inserting notice* in oar caonty Newspaper, and in other nfi, (• 



loth BEP.] DOMESTIC COREBSPOlTDBirCE. 167 

circulate information of the exbtence of the Depository oofminitted 
to my trust, and haye been instrumental in forming a number of 
Auxiliaries. I have distributed your Reports extensively, and an 
Auxiliary is formed in every town where they have b^n sent. 
Through these Societies, the Tracts come within the reach of al- 
most every one, whether old or youngs, rich or poor. I have rea- 
son to hope that, by the blessing of Heaven, they will produce the 
most salutary effects. Tes, Sir, they have done this already. They 
have attended our public worship on the Sabbath, and have preach- 
ed, in a very pungent manner, the truths of the Gospel. They have 
attended our meetings for religious conference, and spoken the word 
of Ood faithfully. And they are silently preaching in almost every 
family ; and I have much reason to believe, that their preaching 
has not been in vain. 

f^rom an Instrueter atnong 4he Indiaru on the Penobscot j Me, 

I write to request the Committee of the American Tract Society 
to furnish the destitute people among whom I have been labouring) 
with a quantity ot Tracts for gratuitous distribution. Perhaps there 
are few places, where a part of the funds committed to the charge 
of the Society can be appropriated with a greater prospect of good. 
The tribe of Indians which Providence has located here, consists of 
nearly 300, who are deplorably ignorant ; and whose means of in- 
formation, both literary and religious, have been till lately extreme- 
ly limited. Happily, instruction is now furnished them by the be- 
nevolent, and there ig a fair prospect that many of them will soon 
be aible to read with facility. Religious Tracts are very gratefully 
received by them, and are eminently calculated to arrest their at- 
tention ; and could you furnish a supply, they would doubtless be 
productive of great good to children and to their parents, in the 
school and in the private family. 

Ther^ are also numbers of men employed, a great part of the 
year^, in procuring lumber on the Penobscot and its branches. The 
business of these men leads them to retire into the forests, beyond 
the most remote settlements, far from their families, from the Sanc- 
tuary of God, and in too many instances, there is reason to fear^ 
from his holy Sabbath and his precious Word. I can hardly con- 
ceive of any class of men to whom Religious Tracts promise great- 
er usefulness. Could Tracts be obtained, the temporary dwelliugs 
(^ these men might be furnished with them, and on the Sabbath, and 
at niany othfr times, they could hardly fail of being read. And 
could die Benevolent, whose stores God has filled with earthly 
treasure, come and visit the moral desolations which I here behold, 
and which exist to a lamentable extent in other parts of our coun- 
try, I am sure the American Tract Society would no longer want 
means to disseminate thousands and millions of Tracts where there 
is so fair a prospect that they would furnish an abundant harvest 
to the glory of oar Redeemer. 

14 



158 AFFEKDIjr. [lOthBKP. 

From a Correipoildent. 
U would aSbrd me a high degree a! Ealisfaction, if in my power, 
to contribule any thing which might injprcsi moi'c generally on Hie 
Christian public, the deep conTiction I have of the usefuluenrf 
ReligioUH Tracts. This conviction is the rpsnlt ofperafinal expect- 
ence and ohaervation, which have dooc mor? than to confirm oS 
the ar^QTnenti I have erer met with, ia eapport of this ChriitiiB 
charity. I have, for tome years, found it my privilege to ke^ bj 
aie, whether at home or abroad, a supply of the excellent public&> 
tioni of the American Tract Society, and have had more real felio 
ityin the evideOr.Hsnf pleasure and good which have resulted finii 
their distribution, than in all other exei'tione I hare made [n tlH 
cause of benevolence. When 1 journey, I usually take with msB 
supply of Tracts, snd in one inttaoce, some years since, I n&da 
the distribution of them the main ohjert of a somewhat ezteuiin 
tour. They were received with avidity by persons of many relt' 
gious denominations, in the various plares which 1 ri'ited. tn ft 
confiiderable neighbourhood of Friends they were purthaird 

do . 

is likely to he valued more higlily, and to be more useful, than S 
presented gi'atuitonsly. 

Haviiig coneideiable iotercoune with Seamen, I have oflatelMd 
much salisfactioa in (urnishiug them with Rcligioiis Tractt'. Tbef 
are a class ol men wno 1 believe are (IpGigned by Mw I.urd (o be of 
the lirBt importance to the cant^e of Christ ; anil Tracts are inoit 
generally received hj them with apparent interest, and read wilk 
professed pleasure. 

From a CoiretpBjidenI . 

A Clergyman in the state of New York, who aJwayie keepi M 
hand a supply of Tracts for distribution, among his poriihiMeni 
■was one day called upon by two little boys, one of whom reqDHt 
ed, and received, a Tract. Perceiving from eome eHpressioa of IM 
otber, (who belonged to a family noted for vice and irretickB,) 
that he was desirous of a similar present, he fir>t inquired M hi 
if he could read ; and on being answered in the negative, gkf* 
him also an appropriate Tract, with the express condition, tbatte 
j^ould get liii mother to read it to him. On the rollowiDg S»t- 
bath, the clergyman was gratified by the unusual sight of tkl 
mother in the house of God, aud soon after received au inWHttiM 
to visit the family. Both the parents were found lo be under em- 
cera for their salvatioii ; and eventually, by the change Id tbtfr 
lives, gave evidence of a genuine change of heart, 

Theconvertionof this wicked family from the error of their way*, 
was distinctly to be traced to the influence of the Tract — and nnl 
seasonable was the visit of Ibis mesaengpr of mercy, for death 
silready at the door. Nut long after the hopeful change u 



10th m<P.] FOREIOff CORRBWONDERCC 169 

acter, the mother sickened and died ; but not withont leayiiiggfreat 
reason to hope that ^ her sins which were many, had been forgiven 
her/ Here then, may be seen that some contributor to the Tract 
Society, has been the instrument of ^ saving a soul from dtath^ and 
hiding a multitude of sins.^ 

Extract of a Letter from the Secretary of the laverpool Religiotu 
IVaet Society^ dated^ Liverpool^ 5th May^ 1824. 

I have to acknowledge the receipt of your favour which came to 
hand about a fortnight since. 1 now forward you a packet con- 
taining the publications of the Liverpool Religious Tract Society, 
which are presented by the Committee as a token of their cordial 
approbation of the objects your Society proposes to itself— objects 
•f the highest possible importance, since they affect not the tem- 
poral only, but the eternal interests of our fellow men. We have 
read your Reports at various periods, as they have been brought 
before us, and have admired the zeal and patient continuance in 
well doing, of which your labours of love have given such satisfac- 
tory evidence. 

Since the alteration was made in the designation of your Society, 
yonr responsibility is, I dare say you are fully sensible, greatly, I 
might add, fearfully increased. The entire Union is now under 
your charge ; and with such a brilliant prospect before you as the 
London Religious Tract Society, our National Society, presents, 
of what may be effected by heavcu-inspired and heaven-directed 
enterprise, we look with hope and confidence to your Committee, 
trusting you will " quit yourselves like men," " attempting great 
things and expecting great things," in the full assurance that your 
labour in tbe Liord shall not ^e in vain. 

It will always afford our Committee pleasure to hear of the wel- 
fore of your Society, and still more to be able, if in ever so small a 
degree, to contribute to it. 

From the Rev. Messrs, Bird and Goodell^ Missionaries to Western 
mAsia : addressed to the Secretary of the J^ew York Religious 
Tract Society. 

D£AR Sir, Malta^ Oct, 3, 1823. 

The Tracts with which the New York Religious Tract Society 
kindly furnished us, we found to be a very important addition to 
our means of- usefulness in the Mediterranean. Those in Spanish 
were particularly so. Nearly two thousand of them in all we sent, 
at two different times, to Gibraltar, at the solicitation of a Commit- 
tee there, who act equally for the Bible, Missionary, Tract, and 
other Benevolent Societies of Ijiigland. This Committee had daily 
opportunities of distributing them in Gibraltar, or of conveying 
them into the interior of Spain, where a. wide field was then open- 
ed for extensive aind successful operation in this respect. Of these 



160 APPENDIX. lOIhRi 

•pport unities the Committee had availed theniBelvea, till their oi 
stock naa neajlj or quite expended ; aud ver; eeHBODable indeed 
was the aujiply, with which your liberality enabled u» to furnnli 
them, UDlil their Depository ccald be replenished Troni Englaod. 
Others of your Tracts we have put into the band oT the tailor, tb 
soldier, the ciTilian, the gay, the rich, the profane, the child often 
years, and the man of grey haire. Those that we have not yet di«- 
tribuled we have placed at the disposal of a Tract AsBOciatloo, 
thai baa been formed in this city ; and from this we shall supply 
oarseives liberally for the tour, which (exoept we go to faleitine) 
we propose soon to lake to Smyrna and the Greek lalanda. H^pT 
the miisionary, " that hath hie quiver full of (heee." When we 
hare had Berioui conversation with a man, whether he be of Hi* 
Greek or Roman Church, whether he be a scoffer at Religion, <* 
be earnest in seekicg it, we are always happy at parliDg-, to gin 
him a Tract for hit perasal, and an aisurauce of an interest in out 
prayers. Scarcely has a week passed, since we have been beie, 
io which persons have not called, generally on an appointed aven- 
ing, to know what they should do Io be saved. Many of theMwa 
have found exceedingly ignorant of the Scriptures and of religion T 
ajid some of them, we trust, have received mnch light and knaw- 
ledge, not only from our conversation and preaching, but also fnui 
the Tracts which we have given them, and of which theyhnn 
■ometimea made grateful mention — so great a change hM been 
nrau'ht in a few aoldiera, who were formerly abandoned toalmott 
every vice, as to be observed, not only by their fellows, but their 
officera. This should inspire our hearts with thankfulneu, vat 
with renewed ardoar in the cause of Him, who works by wIbU in- 
atromenis he pleaaea. All the results of benevolent effort canitol 
be. known in thii worla. May we learn to wait a while fiw oat 
reward ; and in the mean time never " forget to do good iw ' '" 
cooununicate, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased." 
the morning sow thy seed, and in Ihe evening withhold not t^ 
hand," ahonUl be our motto : and the reason aiineied, " Tor thou 
bnowest nut whether shall prosper, either this or that, or wbottaeF 
they both shall he alike good," abould be. our encouragement. 



From a Letter af the Rtt. J. Handi, tommMnicalfd to Iht BtOorf 

Auxiliary TratI Societs, giring on accoani of the ditlrilnttiiin a/' 

Traill in lino long jauTniyt in, India. 

On arriving, in the morning, at the place where 1 intended Io 

halt for the day, as soon at \ bad taken a little [efreshmeut, 1 gtn- 

erally inquired wbelher there was a fchool in the town, or not : if 

aniiTcred in the affirmative, I requested to be conducted to il, wd 



10th HEP.] FROM THE LONDON REPORT. 161 

after some conversation with the Master and scholars, calculated 
to disarm their prejudices and gain their good will, I presented a 
Tract to the Master or one of iJbe scholars, which I requested him 
to read aloud. While this was reading-, the visit of an Englishman' 
to the school generally excited the attention of the people of the 
town, so much as to draw together a great numh^T of its inhabits 
ants. During the reading, I frequently stopped the reader for a 
time, that I might explain and improve what had been read ; and 
when the reading was over, I made the subject of the Tract mat- 
ter of discourse for some time, which I concluded by distributing 
Tracts among those who could read, and inviting the people to ac- 
company me to the Choultry, where I would give them more 
books, and tell them more about the way of salvation. Frequent- 
ly, a crowd accompanied me, and in several towns, the places I 
occupied were thronged almost the whole of the day, which was 
spent in reading the Tracts, or a portion of the Sacred Scriptures, 
and explaining them to the people : and thus endeavouring to 
make them acquainted with the Great God, and Jesus Christ 
whom he ^ath sent. 

By these means, and by treating all with kindness and respect, 
I generally succeeded in removing prejudice and fear ; and in 
those towns where there were many persons who could read, al- 
ways found much larger demands for books than my stock, though 
at first considerable, would allow me to supply. 

In some places, such was the eagerness of the people to obtain 
Tracts, that they were almost torn out of my hands. I was often 
delighted by seeing the poor people, after they had received a 
number of these little instructers, withdrawing a short distance. 
and sitting down in little groups of eight or ten persons, one read- 
ing, while the others attentively listened. At several towns, where 
I had distributed all that I had allotted for that place, and wa.* 
leaving it to proceed on another stage, persons ran after the Palan- 
quin, and would not return till they had obtained a book. 

In several visits to the large Native City of Bangalore, after ad- 
drf ssing the people in the schools or Bazar, the Tracts were sought 
after with such eagerness, that I was sometimes obliged to desist 
from giving more, to prevent their being torn by the multitude of 
hands that were stretched out to receive them ; and more than 
once, I was followed home, (a distance of two miles,) to obtain a 
Tract. Since that time, a few pious individuals at Bangalore, 
have hired a shop in the Bazar, which they have stored with 
Tracts, in various languages, for sale, at a low price. Numbers 
of the Natives flock there to read them, and many have been in- 
duced to purchase them. 

Having received another good supply from Bellary, while at 
Bangalore, I distributed a great numbe^ on the road from thence 
to Seringapatam ; and during my stay of three weeks at the latter 
place, where I was daily occupied in conversing" and preaching" to 
the natives and others^ I distributed some hundreds m^ore. Many 

14* 



162 APPESDIX. [lOth REP. 

read Ibcm, appaKebtly with mucb attention, and sotae came fre- 
qucntly to my dwetliog, lo aak the meaning of things in the Tracts 
■ which thty could not noderstand. My hopes were much eicitra 
by one man, who professed to have been much impressed by read- 
ing the MtmotT of Felumber Sing, one of the Serampore Chrii- 
tians. He seemed, in many respects, a character similar to thit 
of Petnmber Sing before his coDversion. Thts man was with la 
daily, I'ead all our Tracts, and much of the New Testament ; pro- 
fessed to be fully convinced of the truth and excellence of Chris- 
tianity, and expreBsed much concern to obtain salvation. 'Whali 1 
wai leaving Seringapatam, be wished much to accompany me, and 
said, if I would allow him, he would support himself ; but ail 
had a long journey and a voyage before me, I persuaded him lo 
remain at home for the present, and, in a few months, pay us a 
visit at Bellajy. I hope, at some future time, we shall see or hear 
something more of this poor man, and that it will be found he did 
not read our Tracts in vain. 

While at Beringapatam I was not a little gratified by a respect*. 
ble country-horn young man coming to me, and requNtinj^ me t« 
accept of six Rupees, as a donation to the Bellary Tract Society. 
I had met with him once before at Caoverypank, and had gives 
him a few Tracts, with a copy of Doddridge's Rise and Frogtttt, 
and he told me he had derived so much advantage from the Trart» 
f had given him, that he felt himself bound to do something to 
support the Society. He ga.ve me also, quite uniolicited, a limi* 
lar sum, for the Bellary Branch Bible Society. 

The following is the translaliou of part of a letter, received fim 
one of the Schoolmasters, whoie school I visited in my last Joar- 
Dey 1 — 'You desired me to make known your good book* to n9 
children : I have acted agreeably to your request, and taiqilt 
them the First Catechi'm. Saw, many of the peopip in our village, 
■peaking of your Scripture, say, This ii the Imt Shasttr, and Uv 
much pleased with it. Several are now studying, saying, that If 
they become well acquainted with its contents, they shall find the 
way of nalvatiou, and obtain every blessing. We are thinfeing'Of 
yoa morning, noon, and night ; and we hope you will do sometluilg 
Id afsiit jn the education of our children,' 

In these joumies, thousands of Tracts have been put in circiflv 
tioQ, and much af (he seed of Divine Truth scattered abroad. Vtaj \ 
the sacred influences of the Spirit, like the refreshing rain* of hevi" . 
en, descend and render it fruitful ! It has been sown with much I»- 
bour, and many prayers ; may it produce an abundant harreit, to 
the glory of God! 

Diilribulion o/ Tracli in India, bi/ Rei: W. Rticc. From At 

Bellary Rc/iorl. 

The Rer. W. Reeve, in distributing your Tracts at ths h 

Bumpee Feitival, bad a Gue field for the labours of Chrittlsn hf 



lOth HEP.] FROM TflE LORDOir REPORT. ]63 

nevolence^ which, with the cultivation and tillage of lucceeding 
fears, we would Irust, will ultimately become " white unto the 
harvest.''^ Thousands and thousands, assembled from all parts of 
the country, on that occasion, have, throng^h your means, heard the 
words of eternal life* The throngs that came tog^etlier, to receive 
the fruits of your liberality, were immense ; subsequent to every 
distribution -might be seen, in various directioui<, almost as far ai 
the eye could reach, gproups of people, composed of men, women, 
and children, sittings at the doors of their tents, readings aloud, for 
the Instruction and edification of each other, those interesting^ mes- 
sages of peace and mercy to a guilty world. If every application 
had been attended to, 10,000, instead of 1,000, would have been 
insufficient to meet their importhnity. 



From a Correspondeni in JVora Scotia, 

Some time ago, I lent the Tract, entitled Con vers ATioir iir A 
Boat, to a respect^le farmer, who was here on business, from a 
remote part of the Tountry; he was a pious and intelligent man. 
Some time afterwards he called to see me, and apologized for not 
returning the Tract, and told me, that he had in his establishment 
in the country, an a?ed servant, who h^d been many years at sea, 
and had contracted the vile habit of profane swearing. His master 
had tried every experiment, but in vain, to convince him of the sin- 
fulness of his conduct, and almost despaired of his reformation, when 
one day, going unexpectedly into a room where he was sitting, he 
saw him bathed in tears, reading the Tract, and never afterwards 
found him guilty of swearing ; there was also a reformation in his 
conduct in other respects. 

That excellent Tract, The Swearer^s Prater, I have also 
found very useful. In one instance, a pious young Schoolmaster 
writes thus : ** You gave me a number of Tracts, among which was 
The Swearer's Prater. I had in my School a boy, who habit- 
ually made use of profane language. I made many efforts to reclaim 
him, by inflicting various punishments, but in vain. I directed all 
my Scholars not to associate with him, on any occasion, lest he 
should corrupt th^m, and had almost determined to exclude him 
from the School ; this enraged him so violently, that I was at a loss 
what to do. One day, about twelve months since, while I was re- 
monstrating with him, it occurred to me, that to make him learn 
The Swearer's Prater, by heart, might have a good effect ; I 
therefore gave it to him ou Saturday, to commit to memory. On 
the Monday following, he came to School with a dejected counte- 
nance, and I was convinced there was an outward sign of inward 
sorrow — his tongue faltered while repeating some of his task, and 
tears of contrition ran down his cheeks. I was affected very much 
at the sudden change in this boy, to see what the Lord can do by the 
simplest means. I asked his elder brother, lately, whethfjr he had 
iwom since f— -he replied, ^ No ; — / think The Swsaker^b Paat- 



ER has cmid him o/juicanntr, and he has bsen mart iibtdienl to hit 
parentt since ht gnl li, than he ccer icai before.' I can truly ray, 
Ihnt I hnrn not a better beha.ved lad, amoDg my forty Scholan, 
than he baa been during the last year.''' 

From tht Ren. Dr. Pmkerton, SI. PcleribuTg. 
It vill afford pleasore to hear, tbat duriug- the past year, Otedl- 
FUlation of Religious Tracts ■□ the Russian Empire has not bwp 
neglected. The number of copiee printed, of acarone hundred dif- 
ferent Tracts, in 9t. Petenbarg and Moscow, through the benero- 
lent inetriimentality ofpioua iodividuals, since the year I81S, hM 
been about 600,UOO. The moat of thtse are now in the haudi etaSi 
classes of the people, in eyery pn-yince of the IJnpire. None h»ye 
shown more zeal in this distribulion, than several of the F ' 
Prelalfcf, and a few distinguished nobles. Incalculable is tti 
efit which will arise from the perusal of these publicatiani bf lb* 
people, among whom, before thi'ir appearaiic^ works of this to ' 
treating of moral aud religiouB sutijects, writttS in th« commoni 
guage of the HusiiauB, aod printed in the civil character, wer* li- 
most unknown. In lery many instances they have led the K»itn 
to seek (0 obtain copied of tlie Holy Scriptures ; aodlbejhaTebeM 
read with peculiar deJiiht by the Itusaiau Military, especially b; 
the Ka%aka. " These ^Fracts," writes a correspondent, from tba 

thoresof the Caspian, " E trust have e ' ' 

I have oHen seen the Soldiers ta smal 

(hem, in their dwellings below ground, reading 

ble." i^uother cncrcsiiondent, residing near the mountaios of Ctl^ 

casus, says, "■ 1 he Tracts have been circulated far and wide io Iht 

country around, a> !V1r. , who travelled much about in tba 

course of last summer, sold nearly all that he had witb him ; ut 
disposed of many of them at Mozdak, KiUlaer, k.c. i and then if 
every reason to believe, thai these small publications are peruwd 
with diligence by those who receive them," 



On my clearins: at tb'i Sonnd, J distributed about 110 Tracti ig 
Danish, and 4U in the English language. On mj arrival at Me- 
mel, I generallj carried a quantity of Tracts, in the OennUl 1u- 
guage, in my pocket i at this place I distributed 270. When I re- 
luraed to H ull. finding mj stock of Tracts low, I applied to a frievl 
there fir a fresh supply, and he gave iBe about 50 in German, Ob 
l^iu^ aihnre at Elsinore, during my second voyage, one of the boat- 
men said to me, " Oh, Sir, 1 hope you have some little b«<iki 1 I 
will buy Bome." I replied I had not any to sell, but gOYehimlWO. 
On my •omiig out of the Custom House, I teas surrounded by Hm 
people, saying, » Tbb is the Captain that has the hllU boalit," mot 



10th KEP.] FROM THE LONDOA REPORT. 166 

my pockets were soon cleared. Some of them said, ^^ Have jou 
any more on board ? — We will come for them." Thej did so, and 
I gave them about 30. The wind being fair, we did' not come to 
anchor. 

On my arrival at Memel, a gentleman of some respectability came 
to me, and said, ^^ Captain, I want you.^^ I stepped aside with him, 
and with tears in his eyes he thanked me. I asked him for what. 
** Oh," said he, " that book — that good book you gave me ! It told 
me to read my Bible — I have done so, and I find I must believe in 
Jesus Christ, or 1 shall be miserable for ever." I told him that Je- 
sus Christ offered to make him happy, for he came to save linners^ 
inch as he said he was, and was ready to save him. 

This gentleman was very intimate in a family to which my busi- 
ness called me, and I perceived that he had been exhorting them all 
to seek happiness in Christ ; and I have reason to believe that what 
he had said was not in vain, for I saw a visible change in their man- 
ner, by his exhortations, and the Tracts I had given them before. 
They now revered the Sabbath day, which is, in that country, aw- 
fully profaned. Others also came inquiring for more Tracts ; and 
a very respectable merchant promised that he would have 500 cop- 
ies printed of all the different Tracts I had given him. 



From a Clergyman in England* 

A few weeks ago, I was passing through G , and, while I 
was waiting at the Inn for a conveyance, my feelings were much 

r lined by the dreadful oaths and curses of a man in the next room, 
bore with this some time, but at last could endure it no long- 
er. Taking The Sw£Arer^s Pratjbr in my hand, I approached 
the msm, and looking very seriously at him, I said, ^^ 1 heard you 
pray just now, did not 1 f" — ** Mc pray, Sir," replied the man, 
with a confused and astonished look, ^s if it was the first time he 
had ever had such a charge brought against him : ^^ Me pray. Sir ! 
what did I pray for ?" — " For Damnation," I replied ; " and I have 
got a copy of your prayer in my hand ; if you wish to see it, I will 
give it you.^' Accordingly the man accepted the book : his tone 
and his manners were immediately softened, and his language ma- 
terially changed. — A short time ago, I was travelling in one of the 

steam packets to Ij , and after some time, I went into another 

room, where I found all the passengers vacant and unemployed, ex- 
cept two men who were sitting in the corner playing at cards ; af- 
ter having furnished each of the party with a Tract, except the 
card-players, I ventured to address one of them, and asked him if 
he would accept of some of my card*, " Yes," said he, with per- 
fect good nature, " that I will ; and I will lay my cards down, and 
read yours." His companion followed his example ; and I had 
the satisfaction of perceiving, when I left the room, that not only 
had the Tracts prevailed above the cards, but also that the persons 
who were before lounging away their time in a listless and unprof- 



i66 afpeKDix. [lOdi 

itable manner, Were n6w busily, and I would hope^ osefully em- 
ployed, in reading' important and interesting^ trulhs. 



From the Address of a Clergyman at the Anniversary of the BostM 
(^Eng.) Auxiliary Relig-iovts Tract Society, 

' Some months ag-o, I had occasion to visit a remote part of mj 
parish, the inhabitants of which live at too great a distauce (eleven 
miles') to attend their Parish Church. After pnachin^ to them, 1 
distributed a number of Tracts to the people that were assembltd^ 
and they received them with the greatest avidity and thankfulness* 
It so happened, that TaK Swearer^s Prayer fell into the handi 
of a notorious swearer, and one that was addicted to almost every 
kind of gross immorality. It pleased God to bless the reading of 
this Tract, and to apply it to the mau^s heart ; he was not only 
convinced of the sin of swearing in particular, but of all his other 
sins ; he felt them " as a heavy burden, too heavy for him to bear," 
and he was thus led to the '' Jjamb of God that taketh away the 
sin of the world." lie now regularly attends the ordinances of God| 
which before he as regularly neglected; and is, I understand, a 
consistent, and sober, and upright character. In consequence of a 
blessing from above attending the perusal of this single Tract, the 
drunkard has become sober, the profane has become devout, the 
swearer lias learned to fear an oath, and he that profaned the Sab- 
bath has now a delight in itb holy services, and has been taught to 
hallow that sacred day. 



ErclracI of a Letter from M . Jan. 9, 18S3. 

One of our Tracts fell, some time ago, into the hands of a yomif 
woman, living four miles oS^ who, I believe, had never heard the 
Gospel. The perusal of the Tract was made the means of awak- 
ening her to a sense of her danger as a sinner, fund directing her to 
a Saviour ; she was in an ill state of health, and after lingerii^ 
some time in a consumptioii, she died happy in the Lord. 

The liberal present of Tracts was very acceptable and seasona- 
ble ; two of our young men are now beating through the drifted 
snow, with part of them in their hands. I found a poor old man, 
who had Jived, to the age of fours>core, a life of the greatest iniqui- 
ty, abandoned to every vice — struggling in ail the horrors of black 
despair. He spurned all consolation, refused to join in prayer, or 
listen to the promises of God's holy word, and even told me, he 
would gladly, by an act of suicide, if permitted, leap into hell at 
once. Our Tract Distributors were unwearied in their endeavours 
to direct his views to the " Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin 
of the world ;" and while thus engaged, in their last visit, a pleas- 
ing change took place ; the storm was abated, he began to pray for 
fnercy ; thus He, who once stilled the roaring of the tempest, ia 
like maimer said to the tempeit in his soul,, ^^ Peace ! be itUl !*'— 



lOfh ftlP*] FftOV THE LOiroOlt REPORT. 167 

He lived a few days afterwards — the storm waa succeeded by a 
calm ; his breath Tvas no more employed in uttering^ <he langfuag^e 
of blasphemy and dispair, but in ardent prayer and humble praise. 
He lived till the followiugf Saturday, in a conjfortable framt* of mind, 
and while sitting^ in his armrchair, by the fire-side, he calmly pass- 
ed from time to eleruity. 

4 

Letter J rom a friend at E . July^ 1822. 

In April last, I visited the Workhouses in this place, in order to 
Ccmyerse and leave Tracts with the poor creatures living* in them, 
and found in one of fhem a wretched old man, more than seventy 
years of a*e, and lame and blind ; but for violence of temper and 
profane swearin*. In; was proverbial. I talked with all 1 found in 
the houpc, but chiefly with Old William ; having* previously been 
Informed of liis character, I enlarged on the enormity of profane 
swearing, and read to them The Swearer's Prayer, making re- 
marks on each pa ft separaU ly. Fully to ilescribc the attention of 
the poor creatures, especially of old William, is it^ipossible : — 

Tracts were unknown in B Poorhou&e, the inmates of which 

were exceedingly depfaved. After reading the Tract, and giving 
them others, I read the third chapter of John, and prayed with 
them. The matron also was present ; the greatest seriousness per- 
vaded their minds, and old William, instead of offering any rude- 
ness, as he usually did when spoken to on religious subjects, had 
taken off his hat, an I mentioned his lameness as an apology for his 
inability to kneel with us. I told them that I would come again, 
which I did ; when they said, that they thought it a long time 
since I was there bsfore. Every one was astonished that Blind 
William had left off swearing, and I was told, tiiat during the* fort- 
night, he had not bee.n heard to utter one oath. 



Ji, Letter to the Rev. J. Clayton^ Jun. read by him at the tAnntuU 

Jdtetingy May 16, 1023. 

Rev. Sir, 

The writer requests you to mention his case, (for the encouraM- 
ment of others,) at tlie Annual Meeting of the Religious Tract So- 
ciety. The enclosed Tracts, (Friendly Coitversation and Siw 
»o Trifle,) were placed in the writer's hands, about three years 
since, l)y a female friend, when he was on a visit at her house. He 
received them, and pat them in his pocket, and thought no more of 
them for a long time, but they came again to his view unexpected- 
ly, and were read with attention ; — they led to self-examination^ 
and to a regard of the Sabbath-day— to an attendance on a preach- 
ed Gospel — and to the establishment of family worship in his house. 
He considers himself bound to offer some acknowledgment of hit 
obligation to that excellent Society, through whose means he was 
first awakened to a knowledge of bis own linfulness ; he has there- 



166 APPENDIX. [lOth 

fore enclosed a small donation, (five pounds,) to its fonds ; and, 
through you, pledges himself to aid the Institution by his example, 
influence, and prayers for its success and prosperity. 



^ F)rom a JUtnisier in ihe Cintntry^ (-^^0 

At N— I was assisted in my labours, one Sabbath, (being a* 
gaged in six services that day,) by a person whose prayers were truly 
scriptural and devout, and whose conduct is, 1 believe, exen^laiy. 
In the course of the day, while looking at some Tracts, Thk 9wxab^ 
jui^s Prater met his eye ; — ^^ There,^' said he, ^^ is the instrmiMBt 
of my conversion ! I was one of the most reprobate swearers, iHiea 
that Tract was put into my hand ; — I read and trembled, and flei 
to Christ as my Refuge from the wrath to come.^^ 



From a Friend tpho distributes TrUcts on the River Thcmits. 

Respecting our Seamen I am happy to say the work goes on well, 
and I always enjoy meeting with them at their prayer-meetings. 1 
sometimes read over the first letter I had the pleasure of writinj 
you on their behalf; and when I reflect on the amazing good that 
has resulted from it, I cannot but see the finger of God. Tktn^ it 
was like the grain of mustard seed ; notr, it is like a great tree 
yielding both shade and /rut/. Then it was like the rloud the siie 
of a maii^s hand ; now it has spread over the shores of England.— 
America has caught the flame, and is now leading her seamen to 
the feet of Jesus. In Spanish America the flag has invited sailon 
to worship God ; and English seamen now hoist the signal for wor- 
ship'in the ports where papal superstition abounds. 

The Lord has raised up instruments to carry on this work ; bat! 
will venture to ^ay, that without the liberal grants of the Religioiu 
Tract Society, not one half that has been done would have been 
effected. The sailors acknowledge the fact, and earnestly pray 
for you. They are becoming Missionaries in every port they visit 
They are constantly applying for Tracts when they go on foreign 
voyages, and had I double the number which you have been so 
kind as to supply me with, I could find channels to distribute theo^ 
where they are likely to be of essential benefit. 



1824] TENTH REPORT. 169 

OFHCERS, 

XUECTKDy KAT 26, 1824. 

Hoir. WILLIAM REED, President. 

RsT. MOSES STUART, Vtee Prendent. 

R«v. JUSTIN EDWARDS, Corresponding Secretary, 

R£y. RICHARD S. STORRS, Rtcording Secretary, 

AMOS BLANCHARD, Esa. Treasurer. 

SAMUEL FARRAR, Esa. .OMditor. 
Mr. WILLIAM A. HALLOCK, Assistant Secretary, 

sxxcuTivx comaTTn. 

Rev. JOHN H. CHURCH, D. D. 
Rev. JUSTIN EDWARDS. 
Rev. JOHN CODMAN, D. D. 
Rev. WARREN FAY. 

AMOS BLANCHARD, Esa. 



State of the SocixttH Frin>s. 

Bai«AVCX due from the Society, May 1, 1823 . $ 927,30 

Enense of paper, printing, &c. from Maj 1, 1823, > ^ ^«y^ ^^ 

to May 1,1824 J «,CW,5» 

9,403,97 

REeKi!vxi>,/rom May 1, 1823, t9 May t, 1824. 

Donations, premium on Christian Almanack, &c. 4,195,01 

From the Ag^ents of the General Depository for Tnuits \ a wAoa 

80ld,&c S *»***»"*• 

8,309,87 

Balance due from the Society, May 1, 1824, . 1,094, 1# 

Ajkos Blavcharo, Trtasurer. 

15 



AnsQiMAmams 





OF THE 


/ 


abhemioax tract sogibty. 


- 


June, 1824. 
MAINE. 




Augusta 


Hampden 


Portland 


Brooks and Jackson 


Harpswell 


— : Chapel 


Brunswick 


Jackson 


Prospect 


Pn-nrrl Pnl 


T^itnpri^lr 


Waterford&Vicini^ 
Wiscasset 


Gorham 


North Yarmouth 


Hallowell 


Farsonsfield 






NEW HAMPSfflRI 




Acworth 


Dover 


Marlborough 


Alexandria 


Enfield 


Meredith & Goilfotd 


Aktead 


Fishersfield 


Merrimac 


Andover 


Fitzwilliam 


Nebon 


Atkinson 


Gilsum 


Orford 


Bedford 


Hampstead 


Pelham 


Boscawen 


Hancock 


Richmond 


Bradford 


Haverhill 


Rindge 


Bridgewater 


Hillsborough 


Roxbury 


Burton 


Hinsdale 


Salisbury 


Campton 


Hopkinton 


Stoddard 


Campton 


Jaffrey 


Stratham 


Canterbury 


— Fern. 


Sullivan 


Chester, W. Par. 


Keene 


Swanzey 


Chester, £. Far. 


Kensington 


Troy 


Chesterfield 


Kingston 


Unity 


Chichester 


Langdon 


Walpole 


Columbia 


Lebanon 


Washington 


Concord 


Lempster 


VVUton 


Cornish 


Jioudon 

VERMONT. 




Bamet 


Cormth 


Manchestep 


Barre 


Cornwall 


Peacham 


Barton 


DanvUle 


Pomfret 


Braintree 


Franklin 


Rockingham 


Brandon 


Hartford 


Royalton 


Brattleborough 


Hubbardston 


Rutland 


Chelsea 


Jamaica 


Rutland, W. Par. 



AVXUIART SOCIETIES. 



171 



>ani 

try 

ield 



at, W; Par. 
St, E. Par. 

d 

1 

Boston 

•ee 

jid 

L 

sford 
et 

y 

ington 

oath 

m 

m, S. Par. 

ild 

ible 

ridge water 

urg 

igham 

sster 

1 

n 

ield 



yn 

all 
ry 



}ush 



Sudbury, Fern. 

Thetford 

Tunbridge 

MASSACHUSETTS. 

Hanover 

Hardwick 

Hatfield 

Haverhill 

Hinsdale 

Holden 

Hopkinton 

Leominster 

Ludlow 

Maiden 

Marblehead 

Marlborough 

Medford 

Medway 

Methuen 

Middleborough 

— i & Taunton 

Middlefield 

Middleton 

Milford 

New Braintree. 

Newbury 

Northbridge 

Orleans 

Oxford 

RHODE ISLAND. 

Newport 

CONNECTICUT. 

Lebanon 
Norwicli 

NEW YORK. 



Waitsfield 

Wallingford 

Windham 



Palmer 

Petersham 

Pittsfield 

Plainfield 

Prescott 

Provincetown 

Reading 

Rochester 

Sheffield 

Shelbume 

South Hadley Canal 

Spencer 

Sunderland 

Townsend 

Truro 

Upton 

West Boylston 

Westford 

Western 

Weston 

Whately 

Williamsburgh 

Winchendon 

Worcester 

Worthington 



North Woodstock 
South Woodstock 



Onondaga Hollow 



Jamaica 

PENNSYLVANIA. 

Greensburgh Holmesburg 

OHIO. 

Grafton Steubenville 

Liverpool Strongsville 



Medina 
.* Whole number of Auxiliaries, 205. 



Fern. 



• DONATIONS, 

DVRINO THE FIB8T TEN TEARS, AFPROFRIATED TQ TBE JUEEFIHO' 0^ 
PARTICULAII TRAOTS IN PERrBTUAC OfRCUtJlTION^ OR FOB OlCEK 
SPECIFIED PURPOSES. 

For No. 74, Oreat Effects^ &c. Collected bj Rev. Cyrus 

KiDffsbury, 1816 Bifli 

For. No. 130, RithtMnd Alarm^ E. W. 1820 - - SO^M 

For No. 107, Lifth Henry and hu Beanr^ Ladies in Springs 

field, Mass. 1820 - 1^19 

For No. 9, Dainfinan''s Daughter^ Ladies in Dedham, 

Mass. 1820 56)71 

Friend, 1821 - 5,0§ 

For No. 142, Francis NetDport^ 1821 - - - - 10,00 

'For No. 150, SwearerU Prayer^ Miss Betsey Cleayeland, 

Andover, Mass. 1820 ...... flO,0( 

R. D. Muzzey, M. D. Hanover, N. H. 1821 - - 10,00 

For No. 23, Qod the Only Refuge^ Friends, 1821 - I6|00 

For No. 133, Conversion of Mrs, Emerson^ Mrs. Margaret 

Douglass, Natchez, Miss, by Legacy, 1823 - - 100^00 

F. C. 1823 90^00 

John Parker and others. Maiden, Mass. 1823 - - S1,00 

For No. 169, Harriet Mtoell^ Benjamin Greenleaf, Brad- 
ford, Mass. by his pupils, 1824 - - - - 90,00 
Other IndiTiduals, 1824 ..---- 13,26 

For a Tract on the Duties of Ouardians and Wards, Ab 

Old Judge of Probate, 1824 100,00 

For Conversion of Elisabeth BarUet^ Mrs. John Hall, El- 
lington, Conn, by Legacy, 1824 , « , , 20,00 

For a Tract to Ch^ard Yo%Uh against Intemperance. In- 
dividuals, 1823 and 1824 24,00 

For printing Tracts in Aicfia, Homes J; Homer, Boston, 

Mass. 1823' - : 50,00 

Friend, profits on 6,000 Christian Almanack, 1824 - 36,00 

Misses Bracket, Greenland, N. H. 1824 ... 2,00 

For Printing Tracts at Malta, Moses Ordway, Loudon 

N. H. 1823 -•...... 1,00 

Mrs. William Thurston, Boston, Mass. 1824 - - 20,00 

For Tract in behalf of the Jews. Miss Sally Crosby, 

Brookfield, Mass. 1821 20,00 

Tot TTMi Ua Jimcrican Education Society, Friend - 1^,00 



%ifft Ot 9t9tuAUftittt. 



i & Gould, AgtnU of Otntral Deponlory^ AjfDOVER, Mass. 



MAINE. I 

r, Charles Plummer. 
Henry Hyde. 
I, Rev. Charles Soole. 
trtcib, James H. Mills. 
(1^, Rev. Carlton Hard. 
7dU, Gow & Lincoln. 
bunk^ Owen Bumham. 
Dennis Garland. 
^eWcA;, Rev. Josiah Feet. 
nd^ William Hyde. 
M/on, Rev. J.H. Ing^ham* 
horo*^ Rev.D. M. Mitchell. 
ptWe, Georg^e W. Osborne. 
!JEW HAMPSHIRE. 
r#/, Rev. Nathan Lord, 
•rf, John W. Shepard. 
, Asa A. Tufts. 
•, Mary Haliburton. 
.stovm^ Mary Fairbanks, 
er, Benjamin Perkins. 
^tU, George Woodward. 
, Abijah Kingsbury. 
ieW, Levi Bryant. 
uth^ John Ward. 
wuih^ T. H. Miller. 

VERMONT. 
iboroughy Alex. Putnam. 
ington^ Jasper Robinson. 
igton^ Anson Bowman. 
Mc, Augustine Clark. 
ic*/cr, Rev. H. A. Parsons. 
»6wry, E. Brewster & Co. 
elier^ Warren Swift. 
1(2, James D. Butler. 
bans^f Horace Janes, Esq. 
ror, Nathan Coolidge. 
VTASSACHUSETTS. 
^, Israel Trask. 
I, Samuel T. Armstrong. 
fields A. Phelps. 

15* 



Haverhill^ James Gale. 
Ltsnox^ John G. Stanley. 
Jfetoburypori^ Charles Whipple. 
JStorthampton^ Dea. £. S. Phelps. 
Plymduth^ Eaora Collier. 
Sedem^ Whij^le & Lawrence. 
SpringfiM^ Col. S. Warriner. 
n^iUiamttown^ Chester Balch. 

RHODE ISLAND. 
Providence^ John Hutchins. 

CONNECTICUT. 
Brtd|g:epor/,Lockwood & Sterling. 
Chelsea^ Robinson & Dunham. 
Hartford^ Charles Hosmer. 
Jfew Haven^ Dea. N. Whiting. 
Pomfret^ Rev. James Porter. 
Tolland^ Elisha Steams. 
NEW YORK. 
Albany^ George J. Loomis. 
Angelica^ Rev. Rq^ert Hubbard. 
BrotonvUU^ Rev. niineas Smith. 
Bru/ii#^'ReT. Charlel^Tale. 
Buil^lo^ Abner Bryant. 
CatskiU^ Henry Hyde. 
Ctusenovia^ Luther Bumell. 
Champlain, Rev. Joseph Labafee. 
Columbus^ Isaac Jones, Jr. 
Geneva^ Perez Hastings. 
Horner^ William H. Amell. 
Hudson^ Ira C. Baldwin. 
Jay, Rev. Henry Slater. 
Johnstown^ Rev. Elisha Tale. 
Leiouton^ Rev. David M. Smith. 
Liltle Falls^ Rev. S. W. Burritt. 
Malone^ Rev. Ashbel Parmelee. 
Martinsburg^ Rev. D. Kimball. 
JfetD Haven^ Rev. W. Williams. 
JVeto Tork^ Gray & Bunce. 
0|g:«ien«6ui^, David R. Strachan. 
Onondaga^ 
PUUUburgh^ Rev. S. Whelpley. 



174 



LIST OF DEPOSITORIES. 



Rochester^ Everard Peck. 
Saratoga^ Rev. D. O. Griswold. 
Ulica^ Merrell & Hastings. 

NEW JERSEY. 
Jiew Brunnoick^ S. Seymour. 

PENNSYLVANIA. 
Erie^ Ebenesser D. Gunnison. 
Harrishurg^ Alexander Graydon. 
MtadmUe^ Rev. T. Alden, D. D. 
Pittsburgh^ Rev. R. Patterson. 

DELAWARE. 
Wilmington^ Robert Porter. 
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA. 
Alexandria^ J. & A. Douglass. 
Georgetovm^ Robert Ober. 

VIRGINIA. 
Frederichburg^ W. Kellogg, Esq. 
J^orfolk, John M'PhaU. 
Petersburg^ Joseph Thayer. 
mchmond^ Nathan Pollard. 
Staunton^ Joseph Cowan. 

NORTH CAROLINA. 
Chapel Hill, Prof. E. MitcheU. 
Edenton, Thomas Brownrigg. 
FayetteviUe, James B. Cochran. 
Oxford, Joseph Lindsey. 
Raleigh, William Shaw. 
Statesville, Rev. D. Gould. 

SOUTH CAROLINA. 
Charleston^ H. C. McLeod. 



GEORGIA. 
Savannah, Edward Coppee. 

ALABAMA. 
HuntsviUe, Samuel Hazard, Esq. 
Mobile, Rev. John B. Warren. 

TENNESSEE. 
KnoxviUe, Rev. D. A. Sherman. 
Nashville, Dr. R. P. Hayes. 

KENTUCKY. 
Bowling Green, Alex. Graham. . 
Danville, Rev. Thomas Hand. . 
Elkton, Rev. Wm. K. Stewart. 
Lexington, Rev. Mr. Ward. 
Louisville, Thomas Jones. 

OHIO. 
Chillicothe, Rev. R. G. Wilson. 
Cincinnati, Thomas L. Paine. 
Columbus, O. & S. Crosby. 
Hudson, Rev. William Hanford. 
Marrietta, Mrs. B. Putnam. 
Jforwalk, Henry Buckingham. 
Steubenville, Rev. C. C. Beatty. 
Strongsville, Nathan Brittan, Esq. 
Vernon, Rev. Harvey 'Coc. 
Warren, William Williams. 

MISSOURI. 
St. Louis, Rev. S. Giddinn. 

MICHIGAN TERRITORY. 
Detroit, John I. Derning. 
Green Bay, Maj. Matthew IrTi& 



\* Whole number of Depositories, 124. 



PUBLICATIONS 



OF THE 



SImrtitan Kvutt &ocittn* 



4fo. VOL. I. Pages. 

1. CoDstitutioD, Address, &c. 24 
«. The Work of the Holy 
Spirit. By Rev. Robert 
Hall, A. M. 16 

3. On Intemperance 32 

4. Without Holiness, no Man 

•hall see the Lord 4 

6. The Wammg Voice 8 

6. Traveller and Yourself 4 

7. The Happy Negro 8 

8. On the Lord^s Day 4 

9. The Dairyman^s Daughter 28 

10. Shepherd of Salisbury 

Plain 24 

11. ^Tis all for the Best 16 

12. On the Third Command- 

ment 4 

13. To the Spectator of a Fu- 

neral 

14. The Poor VUlager 

15. The Progress of Sin 

16. Pious Resolutions 

17. Parley the Porter 

18. On Family Worship 

19. Three Dialogues be- 

tween a Minister and 
Parishioner 

20. ^^Remember the Sabbath 

Day" 4 

21. A Closet Companion 8 

22. Repentance and happy 

Death of the Earl of 
Rochester 8 

23. God the Only Refuge 8 

24. The Christian Indeed 12 

25. The Evils of Excessive 

Drinking 8 

26. Sin no Trifle 4 

27. Parental Duties 12 
% VOL. II. 

28. Instruction 6i the Rising 

Generation recommended 16 



4 
8 
8 
4 
12 
12 



20 



29. To ChUdren, on Prayer 8 

30. Assembly's Shorter Cate- 

chism 12 

31. Divine Songs for Children 20 

32. Hymns for Infant Minds 28 

33. A Memorial for Sabbath 

School Boys. By Rev. 
G. Hendley 16 

34. A Memorial for Sabbath 

School Girls. By Rev. 
G. Hendley 16 

35. Sermons to Children 36 

36. Present to Children at 

School 8 

37. A New Heart the Child's 

Best Portion 8 

38. Dinah Doudney 20 

39. Filial Duties , 16 

40. Address to Young Chris- 
tians 8 

41. Persuasive to Public Wor- 

ship 8 

42. Importance of speaking 

Truth 8 

43. On Temperance 4 

44. An Address to Youth 12 

45. The Christian Atonement 12 

46. Subjects for Consideration 8 
47." 
48. 
49. 



8 
8 



To the Afflicted 

To the Ag^d (large type) 

Last hours of the Rev. 

John Cowper. By Wm. 

Cowper, Esq. 16 

50. The- Swearer's Prayer 4 

VOL. III. 

51. A Preservative against the 

Sins and Follies of Youth 20 

52. Letter from an aged Moth- 

er to her only Son 4 

53. The African Servant 20 

54. Friendly Advice 4 

55. The Well-Spent Day 12 

56. Blind Elleti. ^ 



lit 



pvbugahons. 



[1824. 



8 

8 
36 

24 
24 
24 
24 
8 
4 

24 

28 

4 

16 

20 



57. The Duty of Caring for 
the Souls of Relatives 

68. History of Elizabeth 

Loveless 

69. Token for Mourners 

60. Scripture Marks of Salva- 
tion 

61. Growth in Grace 

62. Story of Mr. Anderson 

63. The Cottager's Wife 

64. The Interpreter's House 

65. To a Youth at School 

66. Reflections on the Seven 

Days of the Week 

67. Advice to a Married 

Couple 

68. Poor Joseph 

69. Religion of the Closet 

VOL. IV. 

70. Scripture Extracts 

71. The Bible above aU Price 16 

72. Sixteen Short Sermons 24 

73. On Fashionable Amuse- 

ments 

74. Great Effects result from 

Little Causes. By E. 
Porter, d. d. 

75. Life of William Kelly 

76. To-Day 

77. History of a Bible 

78. Conversion of Abigail 

Hutchinson. By Rev. 
J. Edwards 
• 79. The Young Cottager 

80. The Danger of Delay 

81. The Seaman's Spy-Glass 16 

82. Conversion of a Mahom- 

etan 

83. Account of Eliza Cun- 

ningham 

84. On Uie Lord's Supper 

85. Watchmaker and his 

Family 

86. The Miother's Catechism 

VOL. V. 

87. Conversation in a Boat 

88. To the Sick, without hope 8 

89. The Dairymin 24 

90. A Word in Season 8 
9L letter of RichaidPeanali^ 



12 



12 

16 

8 

12 



8 
36 
12 



12 

20 
32 

16 
28 

24 



94. 
95. 
96. 
97. 



92. The Praying Negro 

93. The Great Question An- 
swered 

History of Mrs. Tooly 
The Sailor's Return 
The Sailor's Friend 
Parting Address to a 
Sabbath School ChUd 

98. The New Birth 

99. Sanctified Afflictions 

100. Advice from a Master 
to his Af^rentice 

101. The Shipmates 

102. Saturday Night, a Di- 

alogue 

103. Every man the Friend 

or Enemy of Christ 

104. Anecdotes illustrating 

the Usefulness of Re- 
ligious Tracts 

105. The Happy Waterman 

106. Pause and thmk, " Am 

I a Christian ?" 

107. Little Henry and his 

Bearer 



108. 
109. 
110. 

111. 
112. 

113. 
114. 

115. 
116, 
117. 

118. 
119. 




VOL. VI. 
True Prophecies 
James Covey 
History of Edward Poc^e 

and George Crosby 
The Christ of God 
History of Peter and 

John Hay 
Questions and Counsel 
Serious Thoughts on 

Eternity 
Catherine Haldane 
Sabbath Occupations 
Important Questions — 

Hymns 
Friendly Conversation 
The Sabbath School Re- 
membrancer — Little 
Hannah 
Heaven Lost 
On the Lord's Prayer 
The Assizes— Hymn 
The way to convert a 
ColU^ into a Palace 



4 

16 
8 

16 
8 

8 

16 

8 
U 

IS 

8 



28 
8 

24 

St 



12 
4 

16 
12 

12 

4 

8 

20 

8 

12 
4 



12 

16 

8 

8 

8 



p — "" -y- 


' - ■- ^^ 




|1824] PUBUCATIOHS. 177 


'1S4. Address to the Sabbath 




147. On Supporting the Gos- 




Breaker 


4 


pel Ministry. By Rev 




ilas. Fatal Effecta of Ardent 




J. Bennett 


20 


Spirits 


38 


148. The Barren Fig Tree 


8 


,188. The Heavenly PUot^ 




149. The Splendid Wedding 


4 


^ Hymns 




150. William Churchman 


12 


117. The Two Sillers 


12 


151. Important Discovery— 




128. Poor Sarah, the Indian 




Hymn 


8 


Woman 


8 


152. Eliaa Thornton 


12 




8 


153. The End of Time 


12 


130. The Richmond Alarm 




164. Memoirof Dr. Baleman 12 


131. On Walking by Faith 
■132. History of Anna Emery 


16 


VOL. VIIL 




16 


155. Universalis™ Exposed 


8 


133. ConvertionofMrs. Em- 




158. Search the Scriptures 


8 ' 




24 


157. To Parents on Sabbath 




134. Eternity of Fnture Pun 




Schools 


4 


iihment. By Rev. A. 




158. Hopes for Eternity 


S 


Fuller 


8 


1S9. Advantages of Drunk- 




VOL., VII. 






4 


156. Life of Colonel Gardiner 20 


160. Two Ends and Two Ways 4 


1S6. Memoir of Eliiaheth 




161. To Keeper of a Turn- 




DavidioD 


24 


pike Uate 


8 


137. The Church Ssfe 


16 


162. Common Errors 


12 


138. Conversion of the World 24 


163. History of Thomas Brown 4 


139. Memoir of Thomas Hogg 16 


164. Bethel, or the Flag 




140. Address to Seamen 


12 


Unfurled 


IS 


141. The Sabbath at Sea 


28 


165. ViUage In the Mountains S 


142. Francis Newport 


ae 


16S. The Alarm 


4 


143. On Early Religioiu 




167. " All Right" 


8 


Education ^ 


16 


168. To a Person engaged 




J44. CoDversion of Presi- 




in a La IT suit 


8 J 


dent Edwards. Writ- 




169. MemoirofMri. Harriet 


4 


ten by himself 


16 


Newell 


24 


J45. On Hearing the Word 




170. To Females, on Sim- 




of God ^ 


16 


plicity in Dress 


4 


146. Helps to Self Examina- 




171. Parental Faithfulness 


13 'i 


tion 


8 


172. A Tune to Da^co 


4 


enillrren's ^ooka. 




1. Advice to Sabbath Schoo 


1 8. LiltleChildren invited 




Children 


16 


to Christ. By Rev. 




2. Memoir of Bowyer Smith 24 


Samuel Uavies, 


et 


3. Bible Happiness 


16 


B. The Image Boys 
10, Milk Tor Babes, or a 


13 


4. The Christian Drummer 


12 




5. John of the Score 


12 


Catechism in verse 


12 


6. Life of Rev. John Bunyanie 


11. Letters to a Child at 




7. Principlenofthe Chriatia 




School. By Rev. 




Religion in Verse. By P. 




^ 


Doddridge, D. D. 


241 la. Tiie\«« 


A 



er THE OPERATiOHS OF TRE Abibkican Tract SocidT, ontiRi 



The folloiriDg Table ahewi the number of Tracti pablished in eadi 
j'ear; the ajioual receipti, ia donatioiu and for Tracti uld; 
and the yeBj) J amount of the Society's debt. 

IP ., Tracts pub- Receiiifa Reeeipts 

IJ^U '"'■edi^ chiefly Chiefl/for Debt. 

^"""^ each year. " — '■ — '^ — '---'-' 



May 23, 1814 


297,000 


May 29, 1815 


141,000 


May 27, 1816 


378,000 


May 26, 1817 




May 27, 1818 


388,000 


May 26, 1819 


250,000 


May 1, 1820 


383,000 


May 1, 1821 


468,000 


May 1, 1822 


355,500 


May 1, 1823 


470,000 


May 1, 1834 


770,000 



Total 



^,?17,500 




,989,09 
,219,09 
!.69l,48 

,448,59 
927,39 
,094,10 



From tbe abore Table it appears, that the nbole amount of do- 
nations received in ten yeara, I9 lees than $12,500. It is eatimated, 
that about one third of this amount has been delivered to donon in 
Tracte at cost. Hence the amount of charity which has been of- 
fered to remain at the dispoaal of the Society is about {8,500. 
With this sum, in ten years, 4,217,500 Tracts hare been printed ; 
that is, each dollar devoted to the objects of the Society, hai al- 
ready been, on an average, the means of printing about &(KI Tracts 
But the value of the Tracts now contained in all the Society's De- 
positories, is more than $8,500. Hence every dollar g-iveo baa not 
only been the means of printing 500 Tracts, bat remaini, some- 
what increased, to print the same number in an equal space of 
time, or about once in five years, so long as the Society shall con- 
tinue its operations. Perhaps an equal sum of money wu nersr 
more advanta§:eoasly nppropriated. 



wmmw "fwrw 



-OF THE PRXNCIFAL RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES, THROUGHOUT 

THE WORLD. 



EUROPE. 

EM'GXkAia'D. 

The first Society known to haye engaged extensively in the 
printing and circulation of Religions Tracts is The Society iir 
England for Promoting Christian Knowledge, incorpora- 
ted by the British Parliament, in 1647. It is not known how ear- 
ly the Society commenced this mode of operation, nor how much 
it accomplished in this way, during the first 150 years. From the 
first Tolume of the Christian Observer, for the year 1802, it appears, 
that it had circulated many Tracts previous to that time. In 1804, 
it circulated 103,000 ; m 1811, 130,000 ; m 1816, 683,301, m 
which year the whole amount of its issues, in Books, Tracts, Broad 
Sheets, &c. was 1,202,961. In 1819, this Society, alarmed by the 
progress of infidelity^ issued a circular requesting funds to print 
Tracts expressly designed to counteract its influence ; j£5,000 were 
toon contributed for the purpose, which enabled the Society to is- 
lae 34 new Tracts, of which, in three months previous to May, 
1819, 400,000 copies were put in circulation. The issues of this 
Sdciety in 1823 amounted to 1,400,711 Books and Tracts and oth- 
^er small publications ; and it had then printed 14,000 Tracts in the 
languages of India. 

The Tracts issued by this Society, however, constitute but a very 
small part of its operations ; its annual receipts and expenditures 
ioT the spread of the Gospel, especially for missions, amount to 
near $250,000. 

The Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge among the Poor 
in England^ and some other kindred Institutions, have circulated 
many Tracts as an Aoxiliary to their other and more prominent be- 
nevolent designs. 



180 RELIOIOXTS TRACT SOCIETIES. 

LONDON RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY. 

This Society was instituted in 1799, and may properly be termed 
the parent of all other Religious Tract Societies, now existing in 
any part of the world. It had circulated several millions of Tracts 
before any other, of any considerable magnitude, was institut- 
ed; and. has given to all, whether in Britain, or in forejj^n 
lands, the use of its publications, the benefit of its example, itsccNT-^ 
dial co-operation, and in many instances, essential pecuniary aid. 
It was instituted four years after Mrs. Hannah More and her friendi 
commenced the publication of the Tracts of the Cheap RepoHiory, 
The happy influence of these Tracts was perceived by the friendi 
of Religion, and the Rev. GEoacE Burder and the Hev. Siuni- 
jBL Greatheed soon published a number of Tracts, ^xdaaiTely 
Religious, under the denomination of Village Tracts, By the sac- 
cess of this measure, the importance of this brandU of beaevolettt 
exertion was more deeply felt, and at the suggestion of the fynati 
of these Gentlemen, a number of valuable friends united witk hi» 
in forming The Religioits Tract Society, on the broad princi- 
ple of circulating those simple evangelical truths, in wkidi «tt, ^ 
everp denomination^ ^^ who are looking for the mercy of the Loid 
Jesoi unto eternal life, may unite with pleasure, as in one gntti 
common cause .^' During the same year, another Society was 
formed in London, ^' for the gratuitous distribution of ETangeUcal 
Tracts ;^^ but a conference being proposed between the Cemmlt- 
tees of the two Institutions,^they were immediately united in the 
RXLiGiovs Tract Society. 

Though the operations of the Society in its commencemeiit, wen 
humble, in comparison with what they have since beea, they wen 
characterized i^y energy and fixedness of purpose. PrevkMU t» 
presenting the first annual report, thirty four Tracts were {mblidh 
ed, twenty three of them original ; and above 200,000 oopiea were 
pat in circulation. At the end of its second year, the aeriee of 
Tracts amounted to sixty one, and 800,000 had been cotmlated. 
At the end of the third year, 1,000,000 had been circulated; at 
the end of the fourth, 1,400,000 ; at the end of the fifth, 1^700,000.* 

^ Jti$an interesting fact^ that the British and FoRKicir Bibli 
Society, inttUuted in 1804, o%oesits origniy under €M^ to the LmF 
ion RtUgiout Tract Society. 



\ 



^^ mJBCIftt LONDON* IM 

tVhile the Committee were thus pormiog^ their operadoiu, they 
discorered a constantly widening^ field of usefulness opening before 
them. They not only increased the exertions they had hilherto 
been making, but commenced the Trantlatium of TracU tn/o other 
langttages ; and in Aug^ust, 1805, moved by the OTerwhelming^ in- 
fluence which a flood of infidel and other vile publications was 
^ikerting* upon the lower orders of society, they conceived the idea 
of publishing^ a distinct series of Tracts^ adapted to gain their atten- 
tion, and to supplant the mischievous publications with which they 
were furnished in great profusion by unprincipled men, for mere 
purposes of gain. A new and considerably extensive series for this 
imrpose, was immediately issued. They were short; and by narrat- 
ing memorable and interesting incidents, with which suitable and 
lerious reflections were interwoven, were peculiarly calculated to 
answer the end designed. They were ornamented with engrav- 
ings illustrating the striking scenes, and were sold, in many instan- 
ces, below the actual cost, that the vender might realize more 
profit from the sale of them, than from disposing oC other and inju- 
rious publications. And so happy was the result of the measure, 
that in nineteen months^ ending May, 1807, seven hundred and fifty 
two thousand copies of this series were put in circulation. In the 
succeeding year, in addition to a million of the first series, four 
hundred and fifty thousand of this gained a circulation ; and the 
Committee reported, at their annual meeting, that in less than ten 
months, about three humlred thousand of the profane and immor' 
al hooks cominonly sold to Hawkers^ were known to hare been kept 
out of circulation^ hy this series of Tracts having heeWpurchasedin^ 
9ttad of them. In order to promote the circulation of this series, 
measures were early adopted to enlist beggars and other vagrants 
in the work. One of these measures was the issuing of IHckets^ 
each of which entitled the bearer to twelve Hawker's Tracts. 
Great numbers of these tickets have been purchased by the benev- 
■olenf , and given to the bego^ar, instead of money. These publica- 
tions were afforded at so low a rate, that, in numerous instances, 
Booksellers, wholly unconnected with the Society, adopted the ex- 
pedient of making them up into little books, with neat covers and 
Coloured prints, for the use of children ; and in 1810, the Society 
printed a selection on superior paper and in a neat style, to be us- 
ed as Reward Books for Children in Sabbath Schools. 

16 



182 RELIGIOUS TIUCT SOCIETIES. 

In 1819, this seriea of Tracts was carefully revised by Uie Com' 
mittee ; and in 1820, those of this series which are not embraced 
in the first series, were republished in a duodecimo Tolmne of 650 
pag^s. Near the close of this year, by a simultaneous effort of the 
Committee and other friends of evangcelical truth, to stem the cur- 
rent of Infidel and other vile publications at that time most indus- 
triously circulated, there were sold and distributed, in the short 
space of nine weeks^ no less than 600,000 Tracts of this series. 

In the year 1814, the Society commenced the publication of 
Tracts on Broad Sheets^ to be affixed to the walls of cottages, pub' 
lie houses, ships, &c. In 1815, it began a new series of ChUd' 
ren'*s Books^ in a small size, ornamented with many engravings, 
and adapted, every way, to excite the attention of the young, and 
to meet their approbation. This series has been constantly re- 
ceiving improvements, and has been sought with such avidity, that 
the issues, in the year ending May, 1824, amounted to 1,688,760. 
Owing to these and other similar efforts, together with the estab- 
lishment of Sabbath Schools, it is calculated, that ^^ more than 
two hundred thousand juvenile readers are, in Great Britain, every 
year added to the mass already athirst for information, and com* 
paratively destitute of the means to obtain it.'^ 

The Society has also, from time to time, seized on the occasions 
which have created great popular excitements, as the death of the 
Princess Charlotte and the. Coronation, to publish Occcuional TracUj 
not numbered in any series. In 1823, a series of Hand Bills was 
commenced, and soon after, a series of Short Stories for Children 
under ten years of age^ calculated to allure their attention and 
leave some important truth fixed in their tender minds. 

To these publications are to be added the Tract Magasiint^ and 
the Child? s Companion^ commenced in January 1824, and issued 
monthly ; the former in a duodecimo size and containing* 12 pa- 
ges, the latter in a very small size and containing 32 pages. Eadi 
of these had, a half year after their commencement, a circulation 
of 30,000 copies monthly. Both are composed chiefly of diort ar- 
ticles, of the same character as the other publications of the Soci- 
ety ; and the Magazine embraces extracts from the correspondence 
of the Society, lists of its new pablications, its monthly receipts, &c. 

In 1820, this Society had printed one Tract in the Welsh Ian- 



EUROPE^^LOMDOIf. 



183 



g^uage, 7 in the Irish, 18 in French, 12 in Dutch, 4 in Spanish, 2 in 
Portuguese, 6 in Italian, 7 in German, 3 in Danish, and 1 in Swed- 
ish. It has since added 9 new Tracts to the series in Spanish. 
Some of the. Society's Tracts, either in part or wholly- at their ex- 
pense, have been translated into each of the following languages : 



Armenian 


Icelandic 


Polish 


Calmuc 


Indian 


Portuguese 


Chinese 


Irish 


Prussian 


Danish 


Italian 


Russian 


Dorpat 


Laponese 


Spanish 


Dutch 


Lascar 


Swedish 


Esthonian 


Lettish 


Tamul 


Finnish 


Lithuanian 


Tartar 


French 


Manks 


Telinga 


Gaelic - 


Mongolian 


Welsh 


German 


Persian 


Wendish 


Greek 







The Society had, at the end of its twenty fifth year. May 1824, 
in its 

First Series 206 Tracts. 

Second Series 84 

Occasional Tracts .... 6 

Broad Sheets 41 

Hand Bills 29 , 

Tracts in Foreign Languages, about 68 

Children's Books .... 62 

For Children under ten years of age 36 

Total 532 

Besides a considerable number of Bound volumes and Christmas 
Carols, and its periodical publications. 



The following brief outline of the progress of the Society, from 
the comparatively small issues of its first year, to the ten millions 
reported at its tiventy ^th anniversary, though given in round 
numbers down to the year 1B18, and in the years 1814 — 1816 prob- 
ably falling somewhat short of the reality, is sufficiently accurate 
for all practical purposes. 



184 



BELfOIOVS TRACT 80CI9DBTIE8. 



Gircahkt 


od in the year endiag May 




laoo 


200,000 


1814 


1,100,000 


1801 


600,000 


1815 


1,110,000 


1802 


250,000 


1816 


1,100,000 


1809 


350,000 


1817 


3,500,000 


1804 


350,000 


1818 


3,610,005 


1805 


350,000 


1819 


4,043,321 


1806 


600,000 


1820 


5,526,674 


1807 


1,400,000 


1821 


4,823«77a 


1808 


1,450,000 


1822 


5,222,470 


1808 


1,550,000 


1823 


5,711,000 


1810 


1,480,000 


1824 


10,012,760 


1811 


1,970,000 






1812 


2,960,000 


Total about 


61,500^000 


1813 


2,330,000 







Receipts in 1824, $49,544,78, of which $14,513,65 wero Gharita* 
hie donations. Treasurer^ Joseph Rstnkr, Esq. Uttrtiarittj 
Rev. Lkgh Richmond, Rev. Joseph Hughes, Rev. Peter 
T&ESCHOw. Jtssistant Secretary^ Mb. William Jones. Superin-^ 
tendent^ Me. John Davis, Depository, No. 56, Paternoster Row« 



AuxUiariet of the London Religious Tract Societjf. 

In the year endings May 1820, this Society acknowledged contri- 
butions from 73 Aoxiliaries, since which 134 new AnxOiariet have 
been added. The sum of these is 207, which is probably some less 
than the whole number recognia^d by the Society. In the year 
endhig^ May 1824, 146 Auxiliaries contributed $4,815. Some of 
these have been very efficient. 

The AuxiUoTjf at Letds^ in the north of Eng^land, has, for four 
years, annually contributed 100 pounds, in aid of th^ Parent Soci- 
ciety^s funds. 

The Boston AwciUary Religious Tract Soeietjf^ formed in 1817, 
which has in its connexion a number of Branch Societies, has giv- 
en essential aid to the Parent Institution, and circulated, in six 
years, 235,876 Tracts. Secretary^ ytr. John Noble. 

The Jforwich Auxiliary Tract Societyy formed in 1823, circnlated 
in its first year 86,820 Tracts. 

These, and the following Auxiliaries, with others, have from 
time to time encouraged the Parent Society and kindred Instito- 
tJooSf by commonicating interesting intelligence of the Divine Ueat* 



ftmonB— HjQiiiKMf* ■Op 

inf^ that has attended the rejaiding of Tracts which tfaej have put 
in circulation. 

Ebenexer Chapel Tract Society, Birmingham. 

Auxiliary Reli^ous Tract Society of Hull. 

Auxiliary Reli^ous Tract Society of Taunton. 

Auxiliary Religious Tract Society of Walworth. 

Auxiliary Tract Society of Truro. 

Bishop Stortford^s Auxiliary Religious Tract Society. 

Hoxton Chapel Sund. Sch. Auxiliary Rel. Tract Society. 

York Auxiliary Religious Tract Society. 

Dundee Tract Society. {Scotland) 

Perthshire Religious Tract Society. (Scotland) 

Branch Tract l£>ciety at Holbeach. 

Stroud Auxiliary Religious Tract Society. 

Cambridgeshire Auxiliary Religious Tract Society. 

Tewksbury Auxiliary Tract Society. 

Gloucester Auxiliary Religious Tract Society. 

Helston Auxiliary Tract Society. 



PRAYER BOOK AND HOMILY SOCIETY, 

Inttituttd at London^ 18 12* 

The ^' sole object^^ of this Society is ^' to distribute gratis, and to 
circulate, at reduced prices— the authorized Formularies of the 
United Church of England and Ireland, without note or comment; 
viz. the Book of Common Prayer, including the Thirty nine Articles; 
and the Homilies, in separate serm<ms, or in the entire volume.^' 

The Honub'M, of which there are thirty three, were originally 
published about the middle of the sixteenth century, and their re« 
puted authors are Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, and Jewell. They 
are ^^ short and familiar sermons, conyeying divine truth in an easy 
and popular manner, adapted to the apprehension of the ignorant 
and uninstrncted.^' They are truly evangelical in sentiment, were 
composed with great care, and on their first publication, ^^ a Royal 
Visitation was undertaken by a Committee of Divines and Laymen, 
who divided the kingdom into six circuits, and distributed a copy to 
every parish." The Thirty fifth Article of the Church of England 
afl^ms, that the Homilies *^ontain a godly and wholesome doctrine, 
and necessary for diete times ;" and ^judges them to be read in 

16» 



186 flCUGIOVS TRACT SOaiGTIES. 

Churches by the Ministers, dUigently and distinctly.'' The fol- 
lowing are the subjects of these Homilies : * 
No. 1. On the Reading and Knowledge of Holy Scripture. 

2. Of the Misery of all Mankind ; and of his Condemnation to 

Death everlasting by his own Sin, 

3. Of the Salvation of Mankind by only Christ our Saviour. 

4. Of the true, lively, and Christian Faith. 

5. Qf good Works annexed unto Faith. 

6. Of Christian Love and Charity. 

7. Against Swearing and Perjury. 

8. Of the Declining from God. 

9. Against the Fear of Death. 

10. On Good Order and Obedience. 

11. Against Whoredom and Adultery. 

12. Against Strife and Contention. 

13. Of the right use of the Church. 

14. Against Peril of Idolatry. 

15. On Repairing and keeping Clean the Church. 

16. Of Good Works ; and first, of Fasting. 

17. Against Gluttony and Drunkenness. 

18. Against Excess of Apparel. 

19. Of Prayer. 

20. Of the Place and Time of Prayer. 

21. Of Common Prayer and Sacraments. 

22. An Information for them which take OjSence at certain 

Places of Holy Scripture. 

23. Of Alms-deeds. 

24. Of the Nativity. 

25. Of the Passion : for Good Friday. 

26. Of the Resurrection : for Faster-day. 

27. Of the worthy receiving the Sacrament of the Body and 

Blood of Christ. 

28. Of the coming down of the Holy Ghost : for Whit-Sunday. 

29. For Rogation Week : that all good things come from God. 

30. Of the State of Matrimony. 

31. Against Idleness. 

32. Of Repentance, and true Reconciliation unto God. 

33. Against Disobedience and wilful Rebellion. 
Articles of Rel%ion. 

They are printed as Tracts, in a plain and cheap style ; and al- 
. so on fine paper and ornamented with engravings. They are like* 
wise printed iu volumes ; in duodecimo, octavo, and folio. Some 
of them have been translated, and published by the Society, in the 
following languages : Irish, Welch, Manks, French, Spanish, Ital- 
ian, German, Dutc|i, Modem Greek, Arabic, and Chinese. 
From the beginning of xta opfratiODs in 1812, to its Twelfth An- 
noal Meetings May l<n4, tbitftoofcty \kaA\)«e.xLUL« means of circa- 



i;inionD--ftiroLAin>. 187 

lating 112,291 prayer Books and Psalters, and 809,904 Homilj 
Tracts. Its receipts daring its twelfth year, were $B,169. The 
Society has seyeral Auxiliaries. 

JosKPH WiLSOH, Esq. Treasurer ; Rev. C. R. Pkitchbtt, M. A. 
Secretary ; Mr. Thobcas Seaward, AtHitant Secretary and Ac- 
eountant ; 134, Salishury Square. 



CHURCH OF ENGLAND TRACT SOCIETY, 

IntlUuted at Brutol^ 1811. 

The object of this Society is professedly, ^^ to circulate in a cheap 
form, among the poor members of the Church of England, her Hom- 
ilies, the lives of her reformers and martyrs, extracts from their 
writings, and from the publications of her bishops : with such short 
pieces illustrative of the primitive history, constitution, and disci- 
pline of the Church, as the Committee may approve.^^ In the year 
ending Dec. 1816, it printed 275,000 Tracts, and had, at the time 
of its annual meeting in that month, a series of 50 Numbers. In 
the year 1817, the Society resigned the printing o{ Homilies to the 
Prayer Book and Homily Society established at London, and a 
Depository was opened at Bristol by the latter Society for the sale 
of Homilies and Prayer Books. The Society at Bristol circulated, 
in the year ending December, 





Tracts. 


1820 


118,821 


1817 


84,396 


1821 


123,504 


1818 


123,812 


1822 


203,240 


1819 


87,260 


1823 


226,716 



The whole number of Tracts issued in 1824 is probably not fiair 
from 1,500,000 ; its General Series embraces 72 numbers ; Sab- 
bath School Series, 10 ; Broad Sheets, 10. ReceipU the last year, 
$2,829. Depositary, W. Richardson, 6, Clare Street. 

This Society has derived essential aid in the circulation of its 
Tracts from several kindred Institutions, among which are the fol- 
lowing: 

Church Tract Society,'Sheffield, instituted, 1816. 

Durham Church Tract Society. 

Cork Religious Tract Society. (Ireland) 

Religious Tract Society at York. 

Bath Religious Tract Society. 

Gloucester Religious Tract Society. 

Prayer Book and Church of England Tract Societt al Du.4U.^. 



188 MELnffOVB TIUCT lOClEnES. 



BRISTOL TRACT SOCDETY, 

It appears that a Tract Society, distinct from the Chnrch of 
England Tract Society, was formed at Bristol in 1806, which stiU 
continues its operations. 



LIVERPOOL RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETT. 

Intiiiuttd^ 1814. 

The object of this Society is, ^^ to promote, by sale or by g^ an 
extensive circulation of Religious Tracts ; especially in the North- 
em Counties of England, in Wales, in the Isle of Man, in Ireland, 
and in foreign parts.^^ In the character of its publications and of 
its operations generally, this Society has taken the Religions Tract 
Society of London for its model. Its series of Tracts, which in 
1823 consisted of no less than two hundred and sixty seven^ is, 
through the first 138 numbers, essentially the same, with the first 
Series of the London Society, and embraces nearly all of that Se- 
ries, with a large selection from the Series designed for circulation 
by Hawkers. Thirty three of these Tracts, and several others, have 
been translated, and published by the Liverpool Society, in one or 
more of the following languages ; Welch, Manx, Danish, C^ermao, 
Dutch, Italian, French, Spanish, and Portuguese. The Society has 
also published a considerable number of Broad Sheets and Hand- 
bills, similar to those issued by the London Society ; and in addi- 
tion to its own publications, has for sale at its D^>ository, a very 
extensive collection of Tracts published by other Societies and by 
individuals. 

The following is an outline ol 'the amount of Tracts distributed 
by this Society in each year since its fonnation. 

1821 249,003 

1822 - 377,931 

1823 494,070 

Total 2,553,768 



1815 


98,998 


1816 


258,134 


1817 


265,757 


1818 


345,631 


1819 


252,795 


1820 


211,449 



EVROPB — BCOTLAIIO. 189 

The Society has distributed many Tracts gratuitously ; and like 
the London Society, has done much to aid in the religious instruc- 
tion of Seamen, With reference to their benefit, it established, in 
its ninth year, a Depository of Tracts on board the Floating^ Chap* 
el belong^; to the Liverpool Seamen*s Friend Society and Bethel 
Uniony under the direction of a trusty ship-keeper. The Society 
has several Auxiliaries, among^ which is the Liverpool Ladiet JS»» 
toeiation^ which has been very efficient. Seerttartet^ Rjcv. Thom- 
as Raffubs, LL. D. and Ma. Samuel Hofje. 



METHODIST TRACT SOCIETY, 

hutiiuted at Sheffield^ 1808. 

This Society, during six years preyious to Dec. 1814, circulated 
160,000 Tracts. At that time it made a donation of five guineas 
to the ReUgUnu Tract Society in London^ and of three guinea« to 
the Methodist Tract Society in London, 



SC0TLA3VD. 

EDINBURGH RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY. 

This has been for some years an efficient Institution, and has pub- 
lished many Tracts, among which are several in Gaelic. The 
number of Tracts and small books circulated during the year end- 
ing in 1823, M 303,661. 



GLASGOW RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY. 

This Society has published a somewhat extensive Series of 
Tracts, which have been put in circulation by its members and by 
other kindred Institutions in the vicinity. 



180 REUOIOXTS TRACT SOCIETIES. 

LONDON RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY. 

This Society was instituted in 1799, and may properly be tenned 
tke parent of all other Religious Tract Societies, now existing in 
any part of the world. It had circulated several millions of Tracts 
before any other, of any considerable ma^itude, was institut- 
ed; and ^ has given to all, whether in Britain, or in foreign 
lands, the use of its publications, the benefit of its example, its of-* 
dial co-operation, and in many instances, essential pecuniary aid. 
It was instituted four years after Mrs. Hannah More and her friends 
commenced the publication of the Tracts of the Cheap Repository. 
The happy influence of these Tracts was perceived by the friends 
of Religion, and the Rsv. George Burber and the Rev. Euro- 
£L Greathsed soon published a number of Tracts, exclunTe^ 
Religious, under the denomination of FiUctgt Tracts, By the no- 
cess of this measure, the importance of this branch of benevoki^ 
exertion was more deeply felt, and at the suggestion of the temtf 
of these Gentlemen, a number of valuable friends united witk his 
in forming The Religious Tract Society, on the broad priio- 
ple of circulating those simple evangelical truths, in wkich «fi, ^ 
ever^ denominatioriH, ^^ who are looking for the mercy of the LovA 
Jesoi unto eternal life, may unite with pleasure, aa in one gntt 
common cause. ^^ During the same year, andther Society was 
formed in London, ^* for the gratuitous distribution of Evaugelicil 
Tracts ;^^ but a conference being proposed between the Commit 
tees of the two Institutions,they were immediately imited in llie 
Religiovs Tract Society. 

Though the operations of the Society in its commencsemeRt, mn 
humble, in comparison with what they have since been, they mn 
characterized i^y eneigy and fixedness of purpose. PrevioRi to 
presenting the first annual report, thirty four Tracts weie pnhliili- 
ed, twenty three of them original ; and above 200,000 oofnet were 
pat in circulation. At the end of its second year, the aenee of 
Tracts amounted to sixty one, and 800,000 had been circfilRted. 
At the end of the third year, 1,000,000 had been circulated ; at 
the end of the fourth, 1,400,000 ; at the end of the fifth, 1,700,000.* 

^ It is an interesting faety that the British and Forsigv Biblb 
BociETT, instituted in 1804, owes its origin^ wider Ood^ to tke Lm^ 
don Jiel^ous Tract Society, 



\ 



1BDB0Pft LOiNDQN* IM 

tVhile the Committee were thiu purtamg^ their operaticms, they 
iftiflcorered a constantly widening field of usefulness openings before 
them. They not only increased the exertions they had hiCherto 
been making, but commenced the Tramlation of Tracts mio other 
ianguaget ; and in August, 1805, moved by the overwhelming in- 
0tience which a flood of infidel and other vile publications was 
^kerting upon the lower orders of society, they conceived the idea 
of publishing a distinct series of Tracts^ adapted to gain their atten- 
tion, and to supplant the mischievous publications with which they 
were fumbhed in great profusion by unprincipled men, for mere 
purposes of gain. A new and considerably extensive series for this 
finrpose, was immediately issued. They were short; and by narrat* 
Ing memorable and interesting incidents, with which suitable and 
Serious reflections were interwoven, were peculiarly calculated to 
answer the end des^ig^ed. They were ornamented with engrav- 
ings illustrating the striking scenes, and irere sold, in many instan- 
ces, below the actual cost, that the vender might realize more 
profit from the sale of them, than from disposing oC other and inju- 
rioufe publication!. And so happy was the result of the measure, 
that in nintteen months^ ending May, 1807, seven hii.idred and fifty 
two thousand copies of (his series were put in circulation. In the 
succeeding year, in addition to a million of the first series, four 
hundred and fifty thousand of this gained a circulation ; and the 
Committee reported, at their annual meeting, that in less than ten 
months, about three hundred thousand of the profane and immor' 
oZ books commonly sold to Hawkers^ teere knovm to have been kept 
otU of circulation^ By this series of Tracts having beefCpurchased in^ 
stead of them, lu order to promote the circulation of this series, 
measures were early adopted to enlist beggars and other vagrants 
in the work. One of these nieasures was the issuing of Tickets^ 
each of which entitled the bearer to twelve Hawker's Tracts. 
Great numbers of these tickets have been purchased by the benev- 
i>lent, and given to the bego^ar, instead of money. These publica- 
tions were afforded at so low a rate, that, in numerous instances, 
Booksellers, wholly unconnected with the Society, adopted the ex- 
pedient of making them up into little books, with neat covers and 
<^oIoured prints, for the use of children ; and in 1810, the Society 
printed a selection on superior paper and in a neat style, to be us- 
ed as Reward Books for Children in Sabbath Schools. 

16 



1812 RELIGIOUS TBACT SOCIETIES. 

In 1819, this series of Tracts was carefully revised by the Com' 
mittee ; and in 1820, those of this series which are not embraced 
in the first series, were republished in a duodecimo volume of 650 
pages. Near the close of this year, by a simultaneous efibrt of the 
Committee and other friends of evangelical truth, to stem the cur- 
rent of Infidel and other vile publications at that time most indus- 
triously circulated, there were sold and distributed, in the short 
space of nine weeks^ no less than 600,000 Tracts of this series. 

In the year 1814, the Society commenced the publication of 
Tracts on Broad Sheets^ to be affixed to the walls of cottages, pub- 
lic houses, ships, &c. In 1815, it began a new series of Child' 
ren*s Sooks^ in a small size, ornamented with many engravings, 
and adapted, every way, to excite the attention of the young, and 
to meet their approbation. This series has been constantly re- 
ceiving improvements, and has been sought with such avidity, that 
the issues, in the year ending May, 1824, amounted to 1,688,760. 
Owing to these and other similar efibrts, together with the estab- 
lishment of Sabbath Schools, it is calculated, that ^^ more than 
two hundred thousand juvenile readers are, in Great Britain, every 
year added to the mass already athirst for information, and com* 
paratively destitute of the means to obtain it.'^ 

The Sociiety has also, from time to time, seized on the occasions 
which have created great popular excitements, as the death of the 
Princess Charlotte and the. Coronation, to publish Occasional TreuUj 
not numbered in any series. In 1823, a series of Hand Bills was 
commenced, and soon after, a series of Short Stories for Children 
under ten years of age^ calculated to allure their attention and 
leave some important truth fixed in their tender minds. 

To these publications are to be added the Tract Magasnne^ and 
the ChiWs Companion^ commenced in January 1824, and issued 
monthly ; the former in a duodecimo size and containing 12 pa- 
ges, the latter in a very small size and containing 32 pages. Each 
of these had, a half year after their commencement, a circulation 
of 30,000 copies monthly. Both are composed chiefly of short ar- 
ticles, of the same character as the other publications of the Soci- 
ety ; and the Magazine embraces extracts from the correspondence 
of the Society, lists of its new publications, its monthly receipts, &c. 

In 1820, this Society had printed one Tract in the Welsh Ian- 



EITROPE — ^LOMDOV. 183 

« 

g^oa^ 7 in the Irish, 18 in French, 12 in Datch, 4 in Spanish, 2 in 
Portoguese, 6 in Italian, 7 in German, 3 in Danish, and 1 in Swed- 
ish. It has since added 9 new Tracts to the series in Spanish. 
Some of the. Society's Tracts, either in part or wholly at their ex- 
pense, haye been translated into each of the following lang^ges : 

Armenian Icelandic Polish 

Calmuc Indian Portuguese 

Chinese Irish Prussian 

Danish Italian Russian 

Dorpat Laponese Spanish 

Dutch Lascar Swedish 

Esthonian Lettish Tamul 

Finnish Lithuanian Tartar 

French Manks Telinga 

Gaelic - Mongolian Welsh 

German Persian Wendish 
Greek 

The Society had, at the end of its twenty fifth year, May 1824, 
in its 

First Series 206 Tracts. 

Second Series 84 

Occasional Tracts .... 6 

Broad Sheets 41 

Hand BUls 29 . 

Tracts in Foreign Languages, about 68 

Children's Books .... 62 

For Children under ten years of age 36 

Total 532 

Besides a considerable number of Bound volumes and Christmas 
Carols, and its periodical publications. 



The following brief outline of the progress of the Society, from 
the comparatively small issues of its first year, to the ten million* 
reported at its tfventy -fifth anniversary, though given in round 
numbers down to the year 1818, and in the years 1814 — 1816 prob- 
ably falling somewhat short of the reality, is sufficiently accurate 
for all practical purposes. 



194 REUOIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES. 

iary Committees, all collectings monies for the central Society, and 
assisting' in distributing^ its publications. 

The Hamburg Religious Tract Society^ for. Lower Saxony y was 
instituted in 1820, two years after the Religious Tract Society at 
Bremen. The former circulated within six months after its forma- 
tion 15,000 Tracts, and during the last year 13,000. 

The Stutgard Religious Trtict Society^ formed in 1809, has dis- 
tributed many thousands of Tracts in Swabia and other parts of 
Germany. — The Elherfeld and Barm^n^ or Wupper VaUey Rdig- 
ious Tract Society^ in the Grand Dutchy of Berg^ established in 
1814, and the Hanover Tract Society ^ established the same year, 
hare each published considerable numbers of Tracts and circu- 
lated them extensively. — The Wurtemhurg Tract Society had is- 
sued in 1817, 109,000 Tracts.— In 1804, a Tract Society was formr 
ed ^t Heidelberg^ and one at Leipsic in 1821. — Other Tract Societies 
have been formed at Prankfort^ Koenegsfeldy Jfeuwied^ Jfuretn^urg^ 
Cologne^ Clevesy Altona^ &c. 



NETHERLANDS. 

The •Amsterdam Religious Tract Society^ instituted in 1820, and 
which has since become a Tract Society for the J^etherlands^ is How 
one of the most active Institutions on the contineiit. It has 2,000 
members, a Series of 53 Tracts in the Dutch language, and has 
circulated 243,875 copies. — The Rotterdam Missionary Society hsA^ 
in 1815, published 23 Tracts, and circulated in the Dutch, Grer- 
man, and French languages, 100,000 copies.— In 1815, a Tract So- 
ciety was formed at Zeist, 



SWITZERLAND. 

A small Tract Association was formed at Basle in 1802, which 

ih. 1813 became a regularly organized Tract Society. In 1815 it 

Tiad printed and purchased 80,000 Tracts, and in 1817 its series 

was so large as to constitute a volume of considerable size.— An 

f^ititution was formed at Bern in 1802, which engaged somewhat 



AFRICA, ASIA. 195 

eztensiyely in the circulation of Tracts ; and in 1815, encouraged 
by the visit of Rev. C. F. A. Steinkopff, Foreigpi Secretary of the 
Religious Tract Society of London, in his second tour to the conti- 
nent, it became a TVoc/ Society, It has published several Tracts, 
which it has circulated extensively in the Bishoprick of Basle, 
amongf the inhabitants of the Alps, and elsewhere. — Other Tract 
Societies in Switzerland are those at Zurich^ St, Gall^ Shqffhausen^ 
Lucem^ and Lausanne ; the latter of which had printed, in 1817, 
66,006 Tracts. 



FEANCE. 

The Paris Tract Society published in the year ending May, 
1824, 200,000 Tracts. 



AFRICA. 

The African Tract Society was formed at the Cape of Good 
Hope^ in 1820, for the ^^ purpose of distributing Prayer Books, 
Tracts, Hymns, and other religious and moral books, in English, 
Dutch, and other languages.'^ 



ASIA. 

The Bellary Tract Society^ (India,) was instituted in 1818, and: 
in 1823 distributed 26,734 Tracts, making the whole number dis- 
tributed. in five years more than 60,000 ; a large^part of them were 
printed by the Society in the languages of India. 

The Madras Religious Tract Association was also formed in 
1818 ; and in 1822 had circulated, in various languages, 40,487 
Tracts. In 1822, a J^ative Tract Society was formed at J^agercoU^ 
in Travancore, — In 1823, a Tract Society was formed at Jaffna^ in 
Ceylon. — In the same year, a Tract Society was form£d at Sydney^ 
in Jiew South Wales. 



id$ RELI0IQV8 TRACT SOCIETIES. 

TRACTS m GOJNNEXION WITH PaRElGK MISSIONS. 

The reports of every Society ezteBsiveiy eng^ed m endesvonn 
to diffuse diTioe knowledge ia pagan lands, tHiow that ^ the Mifr' 
aioBCury^ withmii a iupplj^ of Tn^ett^ i» nnprovided for his wevk ;^^ 
and that tbroiighocit a great part of the heathen world, there it 
'•^ no impediment among the people, to the dispersion of mtUtMU ol 
thent)^' if fundjB) and ^en were provided, for pntting them in circu- 
lation. The few facts which follow are collected from the nkoilti* 
tude which are treasured up in the numerous publications xx>nse- 
crated to the work of evangelizing the world. 

The London Jews Society circulated in 1822, in Hebrew, Eng- 
lish, and German, 1 16,436 Tracts and cards for the diffusion of 
Scripture knowledge among Jews ; by whom they were received 
and read, in many instances;, with great avidity. 

At Aatrachan^ in the Russian dominions near the Caspian, 3,430 
Tracts were circulated the last year by Scottish Missionaries, who, 
in 1821 and 1822, distributed at Orenburg^ 600 miles N. E. of As- 
trachan, 1840 Tracts. 

At the islands of Malta and Coffu^ in the Mediterranean, many 
Tracts have been printed at the expense of the Londos Religions 
Tract Society. At Malta^ the American Missionaries had printed^ 
in 1823, editions of 6 Tracts in Italian and 9 in Modem Greek, to 
which they have since made considerable additions. In three 
months, Messrs. Fisk, Wolff, &c. distributed in Western Asia, 3,700 
Tracts. Large appropriations have been made by the Religious 
Tract Society of London for promoting the circulation of Tracts in 
the places above mentioned, and in the Ottoman Empire, 

Conmderable numbers of Tracts have been circulated at SUrra 
Leone and other parts of •Africa, 

At Bombay y the American and other Missionaries have printed 
more than 79,000 Tracts and portions of the Bible. The Society 
lor Promoting Christian Knowledge printed, at this stetion, in ISfO 
and 1821, 24,166 Books and Tracts. — At Madrat^ 30,000 books 
and Tracts were printed the last year by ttie Churdi Bfisfioiiary 



\ 



FoREiair mssfONS — sabbath sobools. 197 

Society. — In Tinnevetlif^ the circulation is limited only by the 
sapplies. — Several Tracts have been printed at Serampore. 

The CalctUta Baptist Musionary Society had, in 1822, published 
editions of 18 Tracts in Beng^alee, 3 in Sunscrit, 4 in JJindostanee, 
and 4 in other lang^uag^es, making in all 50,200 copies. Various 
Missionary Societies, in England, have printed and circulated 
Tracts at Calcutta. Two presses, established here by the Church 
Missionary Society, have been actively engaged in printing Bibles, 
school books and Tracts, and have been found so inadequate to 
meet the demand, that other presses have been ordered, to cooper- 
ate with them. 

In China, during three years previous to May, 1823, through 
the agency of the lamented Rev. Dr. Milne, Rev. Dr. Morrison, 
and other Missionaries, and at the expense of the London Relig- 
ious Tract Society, editions of 23 Tracts were printed in Chinese, 
making 102,150 copies ; and editions of four Tracts, amounting to 
3,500 copies, in the Malay. 



TRACTS CIRCULATED BY SABBATH SCHOOL UNIONS. 

These interesting Institutions have found a very extensive use 
of Tracts and other small Books for the benefit of pupils and teach- 
ers, to be essential to their success. The Sunday School Union m- 
tablished at London in 1803, has published a series of nearly one 
hundred publications, consisting of Lessons, Primers, Hymn Books, 
Tracts, Catechisms, Instructions for Teachers, &c. and has also for 
sale at its Depository a very large assortment of Books published 
by other Institutions and Individuals, which have been examined 
and approved by the Committee. A very flourishing similar Insti- 
tution is established in Ireland^ and another in Scotland, These 
three Institutions have in their connexion 7,173 Schools, 71,275 
Teachers, and 764,991 Scholars. Schools of this nature are rapid- 
ly spreading wherever the religion of Christ is extending its influ- 
ence. The publications of the American Sunday School Union wiljl 
be mentioned in our notice of the Religious Tract Society of Philay 
delphia. 

17* 



r 



RCUGlOVS 7 



AMERICA. 

Id Sculh America Religioua Tracts have been circulated to mme 
extent by Beoevolent Societies and individnaU, and this conntry is 
contemplated with increasing; interest as a field for future exer- 
tions. — Many Tracts have also been sent into the Weil Indict, and 
gratuitouely diatribnled. — This is true also of vatioiis parti of the 
British Daminiom in Ifbtlk America-y-viiiKTe aome Auxiliaries to the 
London Religious Tract Society have been formed. Among Iheie 
are the AwcHiary Tract Society 0/ Montreal, formed in 1881 ; 
Auxiliary Trad Society al Truro, JVona Scotia, formed 1810 ; and 
that at OuyaboroKgk, JTota Scotia, formed 1834. 



UNITED STATES. 

The Gret Socielj of any considerable ma^itude, known to haTe 
been formed in the United Slates to promote the circulation of 
Tracts, is the MaiiackiuelU Society for Promoting Chrietian Kruntt- 
edge, itultluled al Boilon in 1 603, at the suggestion of the lata 
Ron. Sawdf.l PHti.i,trs aud Professor Tapfah. The protnineot 
object for which the Society was instituted was the circulatioD of 
Tracts and Books, of the latter of which it ditlribulcd in 1S04, 
6,353, and In ISQG, 9,174. In 1S1&, the Society had printed 8^24 
Books, and 30,350 Tracts. Since that period it has depended 
chiefly on the American (then New England) Tract Society to 
publish Tracts and promote their circulation, and has turned its 
eSbrt! to another means of accomplishing the object for nhicfa it 
was insUtuIed, that of sending Missionaries to strengthen tbe luf 
guishing- churches and build up the waste places. 

In 1B04, the Female Tract Seciely of Hancock Counly, Me. irM 
iastituted, having a Committee of three, from the Hancock AnDGia- 
tion of Ministers, to aid in superintending its concerns. ReceipU 
during the three first years, $107. 

In September, 1G07, the Conneclicul Rtligioui TratI Socitly was 
instituted at JVtw Hafen, and continued its operations for leveral 
j-eMrt. Rkv.Dk. Dwiobi wm CimMltnt,Mul J g .n yiHi* h EvAaff. 



£sA« Secretary, It published a series of 26 Tracts, makings a vol- 
ttme of about 300 pag^es. The Tracts were neatly done up in blue, 
and about 100,000 copies were circulated before the Society ceas^ 
ed its operations. 

In 1808, the Vermont Religiotu Tract Society was instituted, 
under the direction of the Trustees of the Vermont Missionary So^ 
tiety. It published a considerable number of Tracts, which wert 
•old at cost and distributed from its Depository in Middlebury ; 
Hooker and Brewster, Agents. 

In 1810, the Protestant Episcopal Tract Society was instituted at 
^ew Yorky and in 1815 had published a series of 13 Tracts. Right 
Rev. John H. Hobart, D. D. (ex officio) President ; Mr. Floyit 
Smith, Secretary ; Depository, No. 99, Pearl Street. 



NEW YORK REU6IOUS TRACT SOCIETY, 

Instituted^ 1812. 

The number of Tracts published by this Society in each year 
i^ce its formation in February, 1812, is as follows : 



1813 


38,586 


1820 


200,500 


1814 


40,000 


1821 


219,500 


1815 


45,000 


1822 


41,008 


1816 


70,000 


1823 


171,650 


1817 


120,000 


1824 


254,500 


1818 


180,000 




-. ,-^ 


1819 


181,000 


Total 


1,561,744 



This Society's series of En«;lish Tracts comprised, May, 1824, 
192 Numbers, making 1800 pages, which are equal to 6 volumes 
of 300 pages each. The series in French has 15 Numbers, and 
that in Spanish, 9. During the last year 17,501 Tracts were de^ 
livered to subscribers ; 19,565 to the Ladies^ Branch Society ; 
39,205 gratuitously distributed, in various parts of the United 
States, the West Indies, South America, and Palestine, among Sea^ 
men and others ; 94,826 sold to Societies and individuals ; and 
there remained in the Depository not far from 300,000. Receipts 
the last year, $2,229,18. The Society has several Auxiliaries, 
Among which is the Religious Tract Society of Young OentlemetL 
of the City of Troy, whidi sold and distributed^ du^in^ ^Vsj^Ns^^ 



200 RELIOtOUS TRACT SOCIETIBSr. 

year, 13,356 Tracts, In which time its Receipts were $ 160,41. The 
Parent Society has about 70 life members, und about 350 members 
by Annual subscription. ^ 

The Female Branch of the New York Religious Tract Society^ 
fbrmed in 1822, has a list of 450 members. In its first year it dis- 
tributed many Tracts and aided the New York Religious Tract 
Society by a g^rant of $550. During^ the last year, 119,000 pa^i 
were delivered to subscribers, 25,262 pag^es sold, and $461,40 
g;ranted to the Parent Society. 



EVANGELICAL TRACT SOCIETY, 

Instituted at Boston^ 1813. 

In the year ending^ May, 1824, this Society printed 66,000 Tracts, 
making the whole number published in eleven years 466,000. Its 
iseries comprises 31 Numbers. Receipts the last year, $322,93. 
Depositaries^ Lincoln &; Edmanos. 

The Albany Religious TVact Society was instituted in 1813, and 
in 1824 had printed 277,000 Trapts ; when it committed its funds 
and Tracts to the Jfew York State Tract Society, 



RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY OF PHILADELPHIA, 

Instituted^ 1815. 

This Society published during the first year of its operations, 
78,000 Tracts, and continued to publish Tracts for five years, when 
the Managers ^^ transferred the printing, publishing, and sale of 
Tracts, to the Board of Managers of the Philadelphia Sunday and 
Adult Schoot Union,,'*'* instituted in 1817. The Union received 
from the Religious Tract Society 75,000 Tracts, and published the 
same year, 43,000. The number of Tracts published by the Re- 
ligious Tract Society in the year in which the transfer was made is 
not known. With this exception^ the following table is sappoeed 
to contain an accurate statement of the Tracts published by the 
two Societies previous to May^ 1824. 



UNITED 8TATE8i — ^FBILADEEFBli. 201 

Th6 ReligiouB Tract Society published in the year ending^ ^^7^ 



]816 


78,ooa 


The Un. in 1821 


43,000 


1817 


141,000 


do. 1822 


173,000 


1818 


156,000 


do. 1823 


80,000 


1819 


271,000 


do. 1824 


133,000 


1820 


149,000 







Total 1,224,000 
If we estimate the number of Tracts published by the Religious 
Tract Society in the^ear ending May 1821, to be 76,000, the sum 
total of Tracts published will be 1,300,000. 

The number of Premium Books, Spelling Books, Cards, Ad- 
dresses, Reports, &c. published by the Union, was, in the yesir 
ending May, 



1818 about 56,000 


1822 


288,000 


1819 60,000 


1823 


113,500 


1820 82,000 


1824 


71,500 


1821 79,000 







Total about 750,000 
At the seventh Anniversary of the Union, May, 1824, it ^^ transl^BC' 
red it» funds, books, and other property, to the jSmeriean Sunday 
School (7nton,'^ and ceased .to act as a distinct Institution. It had 
then in its connexion 723 Schools, 7,300 Teachers, and 49,619 Schokt 
ars. The series of Tracts contained 52 Numbers, besides about 70 
Children's Books, Catechisms, &c. In July, it commenced the 
Sunday School Magazine, publidied monthly, and containing 32 
octavo pages. Receipts the last year, $5,161,19. Alexandjcr 
Henrt, President ; George B. Cijixton, Secretary ; Deposita- 
ry, A. Claxton, No. 29, North Fourth Street. 

The Philadelphia Female Tract Society was formed about the 
year 1816. During its second and third years it printed 190,500 
Tracts $ sold upwards of 35,000, and distributed gratuitously 
nearly 52,000. At the end of the third year it had on its list more 
tiian 400 annual contributors. 



The Providence {R, /.) Female Tract and School Society 
instituted in 1815, and at the end of one year had 469 subscribes!^ 
and had distributed 10,303 Tracts. It has for some years past di- 
rected its efforts mainly to the promotion of Schools. In 1823, its 
receipts were $336,18 ; Tracts distributed, 2,218. Receipts ih 
1824, $175,80 ; Tracts distributed, about 2,000. Secretary y Sallx 
6, Gano. 



202 REUGIOUS TRACT SOCIETIES. 

The Religiotu Tract Society of Charleston^ South Carolina^ was 
instituted in 1815 ; and on presenting its first annual report, June 
1816, had received 20 life membei^ and 241 annual subscribers; 
total receipts during the year, $516,00; Tracts distributed, 
20,000. In the year ending 1822, 18,538 Tracts were distributed. 
Receipts, $111,28. 

The Auxiliary Tract Society of Keene^ JV*. H, was formed in July, 
1815. It received, during the year ending in 1824, $46,50, from 102 
members ; of which $16,17 were appropriated to the American Tract 
Society ; and the remainder expended in purchasing, for circula- 
tion, 26 bound volumes of Tracts, and 17,330 pages unbound. 
Receipts since the formation of the Society, $306,62. Depositary^ 
Mr. Abijah Kingsbury. 



RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY OF BALTIMORE, 

Irutituted^ 1816. 

The number of Tracts purchased and printed, during eadi 
year, not including the edition of the first and second Annual Re- 
ports, is as follows : in the year ending May 



1817 
1818 


purchased 
do. 


21,500 
9,550 


1819 
1820 


( purchased 
\ printed 
do. 


4,863 
60,000 
35,000 


1821 


do* 


47,000 


1822 
1833 


do. 
do. 


42,000 
74,000 


1824 


do. 


36,500 



330,413 
The number of Tracts remaining in the Depository, May, 1824, 
was 91,299. The series of Tracts in English embraces 62 Num- 
bers ; that in German, 3 Numbers. Presiden,t^ Rev. William 
Nkvins ; Secretary^ Mr. Samuel Young ; Depositaries^ CvSHuro 
and Jj&w£TT, and Abmst&ong and Plaskitt, 



\ 



17H1TED 8TATE8-HIABTFOKD. 203 

HARTFdilD EVANGELICAL TRACT SOCIETY, 

Instituted^ January^ 1816. 

This Society has published a series of 57 Numbers, the various 
editions of which, in eight years, amount to 376,237 Tracts. Re« 
ceipts, the last year, about $500. Since the Tenth Annual Re- 
port of the American Tract Society was presented, this Society has 
become the Connscticut Branch of ths American Tract So- 
ciETT. Prttidenty Rev. Joel Hawes ; Secretary (and Depontary^ 
Mr. Charles Hosmer. 



OTHER TRACT SOCIETIES INSTITUTED IN 1816. 

Boston Awciliary Tnut Society. Receipts in eig^ht years, about 
$1,000. The object to which the efforts of this Society have been 
primarily directed is the g^tuitous distribution of Tracts in the 
city and its environs. Whole amount of Tracts distributed, about 
1,000,000 pages. President^ Mr. Henrt Homes ; Secretary, Mr. 
James Clap. 

Female Tract Society of Boston and its Vicinity. Receipts about 
$100, annually. Wholeamount of Tracts distributed, about 800,000 
pages. President, Mrs. Mart Bowers. 

Episcopal Prayer Book and Tract Society for the Eastern Ddo^ 
cese, located in Boston. This Society has published several Tracts. 

Neiohuryport Female Bible and Tract Society, This Society, 
though the annual subscription paid by each member is only 25 
cents, has in eight years received $488,87, and has distributed 
287 Bibles, 177 Testaments, 96 Hymn Books, 181,836 pages of 
Tracts, and some other small publications. It has made a dona- 
tion of $30, to the American Bible Society, of $10, to the American 
Tract Society, and $5, to aid the Rev. Thaddeus Osgood in distrib- 
uting Tracts and other books in the new settlements. Secretarp^ 
Miss Mart D. Hodge. 

Female Tract Society at Raleigh, JV. C. This Society, at ift 
commencement, purchased 6,578 Tracts. In 1819, it purchased 
13,568. Miss R. E. Goodwin, Secretary, 



204 KBLvsaam nukcv ^octernoL 

Augusta {Geo,) ReUgious Tract Society^ Aaoxal lecelpU, $300, 
Secretary^ William Bostwick. 

Religiotts Tract Society at Savannah, Distributed 22,000 Tracts 
during^ the £]st year of its operations ; in I'd!?, .granted "$100, in 
aid of the New York IU%iMit Traot Society ; m 1821, distributed 
^,000 Tractis. Secretar^^ h, Maiioir. 

Other Tract Societies formed in t€16, are the Vtiea Tratt Soei^ 
iy^ which soon after its formation distributed nearly 7,000 Tracts 
in less than one month ; — Fem<YZe Tract Society ut Brooklyn^ L, h 
which in 15 months from its formation distrfboted l'2,'00O Tracts ; 
— Female Tract Society at Morr ist ow n ^ Kew Jersey. 



NEW YORK METHODIST TRACT SOCIETY, 

Instituted^ 1817. 

This Society, in 1823, had published 43 Tracts in Ei^ish «b4 
4 in French. The first 37 Numbers of ^le series in English Wf 
bound in one volume. In the year ending July, 182S, 90,OQI 
Tracts were printed ; in the following year^ 5,000. Rece^ti ia 
1823, $319,97. Presideni^ Rsv. N. Bangs; JSecretary^ Rbv. T. 
Masoit. 



PROTESTANT EPISCOPAL FEMALE TRACT SOCIETY 

OF BALTIMORE, 

Instituted^ 1817. 

The receipts of this Society, during the year ending May, 1823, 
were $520, during which time it published 61,000 Tracts and di*- 
Iributed 32,013. Its series at the end of the year, embraced 44 
Numbers. It then had five Auxiliaries, three of them in the citj 
of Baltimore. President^ Mrs. John Gibsoit; Secretary^ Mbs. 

fiBSSELIVS. 

The Kewark {iNexB Jersey) Religious Tract Society^ formed im 

1817, has published a few Numbers of Tracts. During the first 

jear of its operations, ending January, 1818, its receipts were 

$99fl2y and the whole numbeT of Tracts purchased and printed, 



UMTCD STATES;. 205 

12)052. In 1819, it pwchased 7,479 Tracts of the Ncfw York Re- 
ii^ous Tract Society. In 1820, its receipts were $123,86 and it 
distributed 13,720 Tracts. Secretary^ in 1818, M. Ltov. 

In 1817, a Tract Society was formed at Canonsburgy Penn. 

The Maryland Prayer Book and Homily Society^ instituted. May, 
1818, had in 1820, purchased 1,050 Prayer Books, and printed 
6,000 Homilies, a considerable part of which had been distributed* 

The Rdigwui Tract Society of the City of Woihingtan was insti^ 
luted, December, 1818 ; and on presenting its fifth Annual Re- 
port, July, 1824, had circulated 32,600 Tracts. Secretary^ M&« 

JpHJr COTIiJB, JvN, 

The Western Navigation Bible and Tract Society of CincitmaU 
was instituted in 1819, with the primary object of benefiting th# 
boatmen and crews of steam-boats and other water craft plying be* 
tween the various towns on the Ohio, and New Orleans ; the 
whole number of persons engaged on these waters being estimated 
at 30,000. The Society had printed, in 1824, 700,000 pages of 
Tracts, embracing editions of 54 different kinds ; and had purchasi- 
^ about 25,000 pages. Annual Receipts about $40. President^ 
R£v. Elijah Slack ; Secretary^ Samubl Johnston. 

The Eeut Tennessee Tract Society was instituted in Knoxville, 
liAarch, 1819 ; and in three months after its formation, distributed 
1 13,000 pages of Tracts. 

The Religiotu Tract Society of Richmond^ Va, was instituted in 
1820. In the year ending May, 1824, it sold 36,790 pages of 
Tracts ; delivered 2,458 pages to subscribers ; and distributed 
6,756 pages gratuitously. The whole amount of Tracts circulated 
in four years is 291,755 pages ; and 24,282 pages were remaining 
in the Depository. 

The Homily Society of Si, PauPs Churchy Philadelphia^ was in- 
stituted in 1822. At its first Annual Meeting, March, 1823, it had 
published editions of three Homilies, and five other Tracts ; amount- 
ing in all to 36,750 copies. Receipts during the year, $177,72. 
Secretary^ A. S. Yas Pelt. 

18 



/ 



206 REUOIOVS TRACT 80C1ETIE8. 

The Lexington {Ken,) FemaU VhUm Trtut Society was inBtitiiiecl« 
September, 1823. Receipts, the first year of its operations, $124,25, 
including $7, from a former Tract Society. In the last four months 
of the year, more than 45,000 pages of Tracts were circulated. 
President^ Mrs. Martha Mc Calla ; Secretary^ Miss Margaret 
A. Bltthr. 

The Baptist General Tract Society was instituted at Waahiogton, 
February 25, 1824. It began immediately to issue a series oi 
Tracts, has established several Depositories, and has been encourag- 
ed by <i^onations and the formation of Auxiliaries. President^ Rmy. 
O. B. Brows ; Treasurer^ Rev. Lvthsr Rics. 

The Jfew York State Tract Society was instituted at Albany^ Feb- 
ruary 26, 1824, (the day after the Baptist General Tract Society 
was instituted,) and has commenced the publication of Tracts. It 
has been encouraged by liberal donations and the formation of sev- 
eral Auxiliaries. Immediately after it was established, it commenced 
the New York Tract Magazine, comprising 24 pages •12mo, and iisii* 
ed monthly. President^ Hon. Stephen Van Rbitssrlasr ; SeereU- 
ry, Mr. Ebenezer Watson. 

Several other Tract Societies exist in the United States, of the 
operations of which no definite intelligsnce has been received. 
Among them are the following : -^ 

Albany Female Missionary and Tract Society. Miss C. Carte^f 
Secretary. 

Nassau Hall Tract Society. 

Pittsburgh, Pa. Religious Tract Society. 

Common Prayer Book and Tract Society of Virginia. 

Fredericksburg Auxiliary Common Prayer Book and Tract Sod* 
ety. Mr. John Gray, Secretary. 



\* ?yre 200, line 3, after subscription, read, Mr. ZjecbariAH 
(iswis, Prciident / Dr« James C. Blisb^^ Secretary, 



TABLE OF REU6I0US TRACT SOCIETIES.* 



Tonaias. 



Loodon • • • 


1799 


61,500,000 


Danish, (at Fuehnen) 


1800 


200,000? 


Basle, (Switzerland) 


1802 


200,000? 


Bern, do. • • • 


— 


100,000? 


Heidelberg, (Germany) 


1804 




Haddington, (Scotland) 


1805 


150,000 


Bristol, (England) 


1806 




Stockholm, Evangelical 


1808 


3,000,000? 


Sheffield, Methodist 


— fc 


4O0fiO0l 


Statgard, (Germany) 


1809 


100,000? 


Bristol, Charch of England • 


1811 


1,500,000 


Aberdeen, (Scotland) 


— 


600,000 


London, Prayer Book and Homily . 


181C 


809,904 


RoMia, Individuals and Associations 


— 


800,000 


Northern Union, (Germany) 


-» 


250,000? 


Liverpool • • . . 


1814 


2,553,768 


Ireland, Rel. Tract and Book Soc. . 


•■■^ 


1,500,000 


Prussian, (at Berlin) 


— 


1,000,000? 


Woppcr Valley, (Germany) 


— 




Hanover, do. 


— . 




Zeist, (Netherlands) 


1815 




Iceland . • . . 


1817 


40,000 


Finnish, (at Abo) 


1818 




Bremen, (Germany) • 
Bellary, (India) 


— 




— 


75,000 


Madras, (India) 


— 


75,000 


Lyngby, (near Copenhagen) 


1819 




Amsterdam 


1820 


243,875 


Hamburg . . - . 


— 


60,000? 


African, (at the Cape of Good Hope 


') 1820 




Leipsic • . . . 


1821 




Nagercoil, Native, (Todia) 


1822 




Jaffra, (Ceyloo) 


1823 




Sydney, (New South Wales) 


— 




Wurtemburg, (Germany 


unkn. 


200,000? 


Paris • • . . 


unkn. 


200,000 


Edinburgh . 


unkn. 


1,500)000? 


Soc. for Promoting Christian Knowl. 


England, perhap 


»s 6,000,000? 


Other Foreign Tract, Missionary, a 
lent Societies and Individuals, f 


od other Benevo- 


I 6,942,463? 


)erhaps 



Whole number of Tracts circulated in Foreign Coun* > g^ q^q ^^^ 
tries, about J wu,uuu,uuu 

* Of the above, the issues of the London Prayer Book and Hom- 
ily and Liverpool Societies only, are stated with perfect accuracy. 
The reifults which are not known to be essentially correct are diiT- 
tinguished by a (?). 



-^8 



TABUE OF REUGlOtS TRACT SOCIITI1I0. 



1803 


30,360 


1804 


• 


1807 


100,000 


1808 




1810 




1812 


1,561,744 


1813 


466,000 


1814 


4,217,000 


1815 


1,300,000 


1816 


330,413 


— 


376,237 


— 


200,000 



U17ZTSD STATES. 

MaMachusetts, for Pro. Chr. Knowledge 1803 

Hancock Countj, Fern. 

Connecticut 

Vermont • • • 

New York, Protestant Epiicopal 

New York 

Evangelical, (at Boston) 

Amencan, (at Boston) 

PKUadelphia 

Providence, Fern. ", 

Charleston, S. Carolina 

Keene, N. H. • • 

Baltimore • • 

Hartford, Evangelical 

Philadelphia, Female 

Boston • ' • • 

' Female 
Epis. East. Diocese, (Boston) 
Newburyport, Female 
Raleigh, N. Car. 
Augusta, Gee. 
Savannah, Geo. • 
Utica, N. Y. 
Brooklyn, L. I. 
Morristown, N. J. 
New York, Methodist 
Baltimore, Female Episcopal 
Canonsburg, Pa. • 
Washington City • 
Maryland Pr. Book and Homily 
Cincinnati 

East Tennessee • 
Richmond, Va. 

Philadelphia, St. PauPs Church 
Lexington, Female Union 
Baptist General, (Washington City) 
New York State (Albanjr) . — 

Other Societies and individuals in the U. States, perhaps 898,266 ? 



1817 


200,000? 
200,000? 


1818 




1819 


70,000 


1820 




1822 
1623 


50,000 


1824 





10,000,000 



Total of Tracts published in U. States, about 

Total published in all parts of the earth, about 100,000,000 

According to the above outline, the Religious Tract Society of 
London has published more Tracts than all the world besides ; and 
the American Tract Society has published nearly half of all that 
have been issaed in the United States, 



INDEX. 



Aberdeen Tract Society 190 
Abo, Finnish Tract Soc. at, 192 
Adams, Mr. John, member of Ex- 
ecutiye Committee, 30, 40 
Address to friends of relig^ion in 
New Eng^land 8 

— to Christians on the distri- 
bution of Tracts, 11 
African Tract Society, 195 
Aged, Tract to the, usefulness 
of, 146 
Alabama, a planter in, 123 

Tracts wanted in, 123, 140 

Albany, Fem. Miss, and Tract 
Society, 206 

N. Y. State Tr. Soc. at, 206 

American Board, send exploring* 
Missionary to S. Amer. 1 14 

Colonization Society ,Tracts 

wanted by, 133 
Education Society, dona- 
tions to print a Tract for, 172 

Sunday School Union, 201 

American Tract Society, history 
of its origin, 3. — Its principal 
design, 6,27, 31, 63.— Act of 
Incorporation, 43.: — Change 
of name, 6. — Proceedings re- 
ported at its formation, 24. — 
List of its Auxiliaries, 179. — 
Depositories, 173.— g^blica- 
tions, 175. — Summary of its 
operations, 178. — Plea for 
increase of its funds, 33, 50, 
56,80,83,^110.— Wide field 
of operation before it, 32, 35 
—37, 50, 61, 80, 113, 1J6, 
137— 143. — Operates with 
ease on millions, 82. — Ac- 
complishes great good with 
small means, 83, 89, 1 12* — 
its permanency, 85. — See 
Crrants, Magazines, Letters. 

18* 



Amsterdam Tract Society, 194 
Armstrong, Samuel T. Assistant 
Treasurer, 5, 30 

Asia, Tracts in, 195—1 97 

Astrachan, Tracts published 
at, 193, 196. 

Augusta, Georgia, Tract Socie- 
ty, 204 
Auxiliaries of Amer. Tr. Soc. 170 

of Church of England Tract 

Society, 187 

of London Rel. Tr. Soc. 184 

Auxiliary Tract Societies, Con- 
stitution of, 38. — Their 
formation urged, 33, 55, 1 13, 
135. — Increase of, 134 

B 
Baltimore Rel. Tr. Soc. 202 

Fem. Epis. Tr. Soc. 204 

Bangs, Rev. N. 204 

Baptist General Tr. Soc. 205 
Bartlet, William, Esq. President 
of the Society, 5,30,40 

Basle Tract Society, 59, 194 

Bellary Tract Society, 195 

Benevolent Societies, all aided 
by Tracts, 84. — Funds re- 
quested to publish Tracts 
for, 67 

Bequest, form of a, 2 

Beriin Tract Society, 59, 193 
Bern Tract Society, 59, 194 

Blanchard, Amos, Esq. Treasur- 
er, and member of Execu- 
tive Committee, 47, 53, 62, 
73, 88, 99, 126, J69. 
Bliss, Dr. James C. 206 

Blythe, Miss Margaret A. 206 
Bombay, Tracts wanted in, 93, . 
95, 1 15. — circulated in, 96, 
196. See Grants. 
Boston Tract Society, ^3 



210 IND 

Boston Fem. Tract Soc. 203 
Boston, En^. Aux. Tr. 9oc. 184 
Bogtwick, ^illiiili], 204 

Bowers, Mn. Mary, 203 

Brazil, Tracte wanted in, 114 
Brief View of Belifioua Tract 

Societies 170 

Brighaai, Mr- John C. letter 

from, 125 

Bristol Tract Society, 188 
CbuTOh of England Tr. Sec. 187 
Britisb Doioinions in 14. America, 

Tracts in, 198 

Brooklyn, L. I. Fem. Tr. Soc.204 
Brown, Mr. D. letter from, 124 

Rev. O. B. 205 

Buenos Ayres, Tr. wanted in,114 
Burder, Rev. George, J80 

C 

137 



Onati Tract Society, SOi 
Clap, Mr. Jamee, 303 

Claxton, Mr. George B. MI 
Codman, Rev. John, D. D. Cor- 
responding Secretary, 5, 30, 
40, 47, 63, 62, 73. — member 
of EiecutiTe ComniiltM, 61, 
73, 88, 69, 136, 169. 
Conneclicnt Tract Soc. IM 

Branch of Amer.Tr.8oc 803 
tilution of the Society, S 
versation in a Boat,' uiefal- 



905 



Calcutta, TracU at, 
Canada, Tracts wanted 

113, 114, 140. See Osgood. 
Canonsbnrg Tr. Soc. 
Cape of Good Hope, Tract Sod 
ety al, 195 

Cwter, Miss C. 206 

Ceylon, Tract Society, 195 

Tract* wanted in, 115,143 

distributed in, 143 

Charleston Tract Society, 202 
Chickering-, Rev. Joseph, mem- 
ber of Enecutive Com. 73 
CbUdren's Books, 130, 177 

China, Tracia wanted in, 143.— 
circulated in, 197 

Cbriatian Almanack, its Dseful- 
ness, 76, 02, 108. — Estcn- 
circulatiOD, 76, 9%, 100, 



129.- 



a editio 



1 of. 



, 129.— Avails of pri 
many Tracts,! IT. — Mercan- 
tile House circulates in onr 
year, 10,000 copies, 117 
Church, Eev. John IJ. D. D. 
member of Esecutive Com- 
laittee, 6, 30, 40, 47, 53, 63, 
73, 88,99, 136, 169. 
Cbatcb otEag. Tr. Soe. 187 



Coyle, Mr. John, Jui 



'Dairyman's Daughter,' history 
of, 69.— Usefulness of, 86.— 
Extensive circnlatinn of, 69 

Danish Tract Society, 183 

Denominations of ChriitiftDi, all 
may unite in Amer. Tract 
Society, 6, 13 

Depositories of Amer. Tr. Soc 
173.— Shoald be constantly 
supplied, 70. — Compared to 
fountains, 7B. — Want of. 
West of AUe^- 



nyi 



13! 



print specified 
Tracts, 173 

Donors, Original, 26 

Douglass, Mrs. Margaret, 104 
Dublin, Ret. Tract and Book 
Society, 190 

D\Ti»lit, Mr. Louis, Agent otiht 
Society, 64 • — Tncreuei iti 
activity, 64. — Addresses cir- 
cular to Ladies, 68. — Inter- 
esting incidents in hii a^n- 



C7. 



is>l 



Edinburgh Tract Soriety, 

Edwards Rev. Justin, member of 

Executive Committee, 47, 

53,62,73,811,99, 13S, 16». 



i 



IITDBX. 



211 



Corretponding Secretary^SS, 
99, 126, 169. 
Euleben Tract Society, 193 

Elberfeld Tract Society, 59, 194 
EmersoD, Mrs. Eleanor, Conver- 
sion of^ printed as a Tract, 

104— loe 

Emerson, Rev. Joseph, member 
of f^ecutire Committee, 5 
Eng^Tings used for Tracts, 128 
Evangelical Tr. Soc. Boston, 200 
Emrts, Jeremiah, Esq. Treasur- 
er, 5, 30, 40, 47 



Farrar, Samuel, Esq. member of 
Executive Committee, 5,30, 
40. — ^Treasurer, 25.— Audi- 
tor, 47, 53, 126, 169. 

( Fatal Effects of Ardent Spirits,' 
usefulness of, 156 

Fay, Rev. Warren, member of 
Executive Committee, 88, 
96, 126, 169. 

Finnish Tract Society, 59, 192 

Fisk, Rev. Mr. circulates Tracts 
in Western Asia, 196 

Flag^g* and Gould, appointed 
General Depositaries, 42 

Florida, Tracts wanted in, 82 

Foreign Missions, aided by Tr. 
116, i96.-.Tracts circulat- 
ed in connexion with, 196 

Formation of the Society, 5.-- 
Proceedings reported at, 24 

Fredericksburg Tr. Soc. 206 

* Friendly Conversation,* useful- 
ness of, 167 

Funds of the Society, state of, 
each year, 178 

G 

Gano, Sally S. 201 

Georgia, Tracts wanted in, 111 
Germany, Tract Socc. in, 193 
Gibson, Mrs. John, 204 

Glasgow Tract Society, 189 
Goodwin, Miss R. E. 203 

Grants, of the Society's publica- 



tions, 136 — For gratuitoni 
distribution, 132, 133. — To 
Bombay, 93. — Of funds to 
print Tracts in Mahratta, 93, 
117, 144, 
Gratuitous distribution, funds 
needed for, 80, 133 

Gray, Henry, Esq. elected Treas- 
urer, 5 
Gray, Mr. John, 206 
^ Great Question Answered,' 
translated by Rev. Dr. 
Henderson, puts in opera^ 
tion Bible Societies in North 
of Europe, 84, 153 
Greatheed, Rev. Samuel, 180 
Guardians and Wards, a Tract 
for, 103 

H 

Haddington Tract Society, 190 
Hall, Re V. Gordon, letterfrom,80 
Hallock, Mr. William A. Agent 
of the Society, 100.— Diffus- 
es information, 100. — Visits 
numerous places, 100.— -As- 
sistant Secretary, 169 
Hamburg Tract Society, 194 
Hanover Tract Society, 59, 194 
Hands, Rev. J. Letter from, 160 
Hartford Evangelical Tr. So. 203 
Hawes, Rev. Joel, 203 
Hawker's Tracts, ' 181 
Henderson, Rev. Dr. circulates 
Tracts in Finland and Rus- 
sia, 192. — Letter from La- 
dy of, 153. See ^ Great 
Question Answered,' and 
Paterson. 
Henry, Alexander, Esq. 201 
Hesselius, Mrs. 204 
Hill, Henry, I^sq. distributes 
Spanish Tracts, 136 
History of Tracts, 68 
Hobart, Right Rev. John H. 
D. D. 199 
Hodge, Miss Mary D. 203 
Homes, Mr. Henry, 203.«— Audi- 
tor, 4ft 



212 



liTDEX* 



Homilies, list of, 186 

Hosmer, Mr. Charles, 203 

Huntington, Rev. Joshua, Re- 
cording Secretary, 5, 30, 40, 
47, 53, 62, 

I 

Iceland Tract Society, 191 

India, Tracts wanted in, 80 — 
82. — Acceptable and use- 
ful in, 160--16d.— Dona- 
tions to print Tracts in, 172 

Indians, Penobscot, Tracts want- 
ed for, 157 

•Infidel converted by 'Praying- 
Negro,' 60 

Intemperance, usefulness of Tr. 
on, 101, 120. See Fatal 
Effects. 

Ireland, Tr. and Book Soc. 190 



Jaffra Tract Society, 196 

Jenks, Mr. John, 2d Vice Pres- 
ident, 47, 53 
Jenks, Rev. William, distributes 
Spanish Tracts, 136 
Jews, Tracts wanted for, 96. — 
Donation to print a Tract 
for, 172 
Johnston, Mr. Samuel, 205 
Judge of Probate, aged, donation 
from, 103 



Keene Tract Society, 202 

Kentucky, Tr. wanted in,139,140 



Lady, donation of a pious, 71 
Jjanguages, Tracts printed in va- 
rious, 58, 183, 186, 188. 
Lathrop, Rev. Eleazar, distrib- 
utes Span.Tr. in Florida, 136 
Lausanne .Tract Society, 59, 195 
Leeds Tract Society, 184 

Letters, from Rev. Daniel Smith, 
44. — Gentleman, 12. — Sai- 
lor, 72.— Aged Geutleman^ 



72.^ — Missionary in Bombay, 
95, — Toung Clergyman in 
Tennessee, 123. — Rev. L. 
Whitney, 123.— Mr. David 
Brown, 124. — Mr. John C. 
Brigham, 124. — Valuable 
Correspondent, 145. — Lady 
of Rev. Dr. Henderson, 153. 
— Messrs. Bird and GoodeU, 
159. — Secretary London 
Rel. Tract Soc. isa — Of 
Prayer Book and Homi- 
ly Society, 154. — Of Liver- 
pool Tr. Soc. 159 Mis- 
sionary in United States, 156. 
— ^Agent of Depository in O- 
hio, 156. — Instructor among 
Penobscot Indians, 167.— 
Correspondents, 158. 
Lewis, Mr. Zechariah, 206 
Lexington Tract Society, 206 
Liberia, Tracts wanted in, 133 
Library of the Society, 2, 135 
Life members, how constituted, 
and privileges of, 6. — Im- 
portance of Ladies constitut- 
ing their Ministers, 66, 101, 
1 13.— Their numberincreas- 
ed, 76, 101, 134 
Liverpool Tract Society, 188.— 
Receipt of its publications, 136 
London Religious Tract Society, 
its history and operations, 
58, 180.— Its Auxiliaries, 
184.— Its publications, 183. 
— ^Extracts from 24th Re- 
port, 150, 152,160—168.— 
Grant of Spanish Tracte,136. 
— Receipt of its publications, 
136. — Correspondence with, 
135.— Gives rise to British & 
Foreign Bible Society, 180 

Prayer Book and Homily 

. Society, 185. — Receipt of 
its publications, 136. See 
Letters. - 

Jews' Soc. circulates Tr. 196 

Methodist Tr. Society, 189 

LioaisiaQa, Tr. wanted in, 1 12 



niOEx. 



213 



hynghj Trad Society, 19a 

LyoD, M. 205 

M 

McCalla, Mrs. Martha, 206 

Machias, g^ant to, 133 

Madras Tract Society, 195. — 
Tracts circulated lU, 196 
Ma£;azine, American Tract, com- 
menced, 130 

London Tract, 131, 182 

Malta, Tracts wanted at, 118.— 
Published at, 196. — Dona- 
tion for, 172 
Maryland Pr.Book & Tr. Soc. 205 
Mason, L. and Rev. T. 204 
Massachusetts Society for Prom. 
Chr. Knowlec%e, 198 
Mediterranean, Tracts wanted in 
ports of, 118 
Merchant presents a Tract on the 
Sabbath, 148 
Merchants, two converted by 
Tracts, 148 
Mexico, Tracts woutoa in, tl.^ 
Mills, Rev. Samuel J. distributes 
Tracts at South & West, 44, 
105. 
Milne, the late Rev. Dr. 197 
—Letter from, 143 
Ministers of the Gospel may cir- 
culate Tracts, 57 
Missionaries want Tracts, 196 
Modern Greek, Tracts published 
in, 196 
Montg;omery, the poet, extracts 
from report written by, 51 
More, Mrs. Hannah, usefulness 
of Tracts of Cheap Reposito- 
ry, by her and others, 60, 
180. — Considers Shepherd of 
Salisbury Plain most useful 
of her publications, 148. — 
Compared with Lord Nel- 
son, 60 
Morrison, Rev. Dr. 197 
Morristown Fem. Tr. Soc. 204 
Morse, Rev. Jedidiah, D.D. 
Vice President and member 



of Execntire Committee, 5, 
30, 40, 47, 53, 62. 



N 



195 
206 



46 
194 
202 
204 



Nag^rcoil, Native Tr. Soc. 
Nassau Hall Tract Soc. 
Neg^ a pious, 46.— Tracts 

useful to a, 
Netherlands l^ract Soc. 
Nevins, Rev. William, 
Newark Tr. Soc 
NewburyportFem.Tr. Soc. 203 
New Orleans, Tracts in the con- 
vent of nuns at, 44 
New South Wales Tr. Soc 195 
New York, Religious Tract Soci- 
ety, 199.— female Branch, 
200. 

Protestant Episcopal Tract 

Society, 199 

Methodist Tract Soc. 204 

State Tract Soc. 206 

Tracts wanted in, 138, 141 

N. Carolina, Tr. wanted in. 111 

Northern Union Tr. ^oc. 193 

Nova Scotia, Tracts' in, 198.— 

Letter from a correspondent 

in, 163 

O 

Oetel, Tracts printed at, 193 

Ohio, Tracts wanted in, 138, 

139, 141, 142.— Letter from 

Agent of Depository in, 156 

River, Tr. wanted on, 125 

Ontario, La^ke, Tracts wanted 

on shores of, 139 

Origin of the Society, 3 

Original Donors, 4, 26 

Osgood, Rev. Thaddeus, 140,203 



Palestine, Tr. distributed in, 159 
Paris Tract Society 195 

Paterson, Rev. Dr. unites with 
Rev. Dr. Henderson in be- 
nevolent efforts, 153. — Pro- 
motes cause of Tracts in 
Sweden, 191. — ^Russia, and 
Finland, 192. 



214 



d?DEX. 



* Persuasive to Public Worship,' 
means of conversion, 119 

Philadelphia, Religpious Tract 
Society, 200. — Sunday Sc. 
Union, 201. — Receipt of its 

?ublication8, 136. — Female 
'ract Soc. 201. — Homily 
Soc. St. Paul's Church, 205 

Phillips, Hon. Samuel, suggests 
first Society in U. S. for dis- 
tributing Tracts, 198 

Pinkerton, Rev. Dr. letter from, 
164. 

Pittsburgh Tract Soc. 206 

Prayer Book iand Homily Society, 

London, 185 .-^Receipt of its 

' publications, and French & 

Spanish Tracts from, 136 

' Praying Negro,' means of con- 
version, 60 

Providence Fem. Tr. Soc. 201 

Prussian Tract Society, 193 



Raleisrh Fem. 



R 

Tr. 



Soc. 



903 



Reed, Hon. William, president 
of the Soc. 47, 63, 62, 73, 
. 88, 99. 

Reeve, Rev. W. distributes Tr. 
in India, 162 

Rice, Rev. Luther, 206 

Rotterdam Missionary Society 
publishes Tracts, 194 

Russia, Tracts in, 59, 164, 192. 
— Blessed by a single Tract, 
85, 92. 

S 

Sabbath, profaned in United 
States, 10. — Usefulness of a 
Tract on, 119,124 

School Unions, Tracts in con- 
nexion with, 197. — England, 
Ireland, and Scotland, 197 

— Schools, series of Tracts for, 
130, 177 

Sandwich Islands, grant to, 133 

Savannah Tract S<K)iety, 204 

School Teachers may circulate 

TfRCtSy 57 



Scotland, Tr. Societies in, 189 
Scudder, Dr. letter from, 143 
Seaman converted by Tract, 17 
Seamen, Tracts wanted by, 94 

158, 168. 

'Shepherd of Salisbury Plain,' 

meann of conversion, 94, 148. 

See More. 

' Shi no Trifle,' usefulness of, 167 

^ Sixteen Short Sermons,' history 

of, 68, 86, 121. 
Slack, Rev. Elijah, 205 

Smith, Mr. Floyd, 199 

Smith, Rev. Daniel, letter from, 
44. — ^Travels at South and 
West, 44.— Prints ' Conver- 
sion of Mrs. Emerson,' 104. 
—His activity, 105.— His 
death. 105. 
Society for Prom. Chr. Knowl- 
edge, England, 179. 
South America, Tracts wanted 
in, 95, 113, 114.— Tracts in, 
198. — ^Exploring Missionary 

ocnt to, 114. 

Spanish Tracts, want of, 114.-*- 

Receipt of, 136. 
Stereotype plates, - 128 

Stockholm Tract Society, 59, 191 
Storrs, Rev. Richard S. Record- 
. ing Secretary, 73, 88, 99, 
126, 169 
Stuart, Rev. Moses, Vice Presi- 
dent, 99, 126, 169 
Stutgard Tract Soc. 59, 194 

Summary of operations of the So- 
ciety, 178. See Table. 
' Swearer's Prayer, history of, 69. 
— ^Printed by a poor pious 
female, 71. — Usefulness of, 
86, 87, 114, 144, 146, 163, 
165, 166, 167, 168. 



Table of Tract Societies, 207 
Tappan, Professor, 198 

Tennessee, Tracts wanted in, 141 

East, Tract Society, 205 

TianeveUy, Tracts at, 197 



IVDEX. 



215 



Tradt, influence of a sing^le, 153 

Tracts, should contain pure truth 
18. — Be plain, striking, en* 
tertaining^, full of ideas, a- 
dapted to all conditions, 19, 
20.— Ways of distributing, 1 5 
— Acceptable, 154, 155. — 
the most pungent the most 
popular, 156. — ^Means of ac- 
cess to sinners, 90. — Mdiy be 
used in absence of other 
means, 90. — ^A blessing to 
community, 34. — ^Useful in 
Pagan lands, 91, 196. 

— distribution of, an easy way 
of doing good, 13. — A cheap 
way, not likely to give of- 
fence, 14. — Extensiye in its 
use, 15. — Aids other means 
of gprace, 16. — Happy effects 
of, 17, 69, 70, 72, 85—87, 94 
101, 121, 124, 144—148, 154 
— 168.— A blessing to the 
distributor, 146, 156.— De- 
manded by state of our 
country, 35. — All bound to 
engage in, 56. 

— — - Societies should cooperate 
with all others. See Benev- 
olent Societies, History, Vol- 
umes. 

Troy, Tract Society, 199 



U 

Utica Tract Society, 204 

V • 

Van Pelt, A. S. 205 

Van Rensselaer, Hon. Ste- I 

phen, 206 

Vermont, Tracts wanted in, 139 



Vermont Tract Society, 199 
Virginia, Tracts wanted in. 111 
— Common Prayer Book and 
Tract Society, 206 

Vivian^s Dialogues, means of con- 
version, 17 
Voltaire, publishes infidel Tracts, 
8. — His weapons turned a- 
gainst him, 8, 179, 182. 
Volumes,Tract8 bound in, 67, 77, 
128. — ^Valuable to families, 
77, 107. 

W 
' Warning Voice,^ means of con- 
version, 144 
Wasa Tract Society, 192 
Washington City Tract Soc. 205 

Baptist General Tract 

Society, 206 

Watson, Mr. Ebenezer, 206 

Western States, Tracts wanted 
in, 123—126 

White Mountains, a travel- 
ler near, 147 
Whitney, Rev. L. letter from, 123 
Woods, Rev. Leonard, D.D. 
member of Executive Com- 
mittee, 5, 30, 40, 47. 
Worcester, Rev. Samuel, D. D. 
Vice President, 73, 88. 
Wupper Valley Tract Socie- 
ty, 194 
Wurtemburg Tract Society, 194 



Toung, Mr. Samuel, 203 

*' Young Cottager,^ happy effect! 

of, 49, 120 

Toung woman in a jail, convert* 

ed by Tract, 146 



1*^' v,^ 



/ 



3 2044 020 479 564 



This book should be returned to 
the Library on or before the last dale 
stamped below. 

A fine of five cents a day is incurred 
by retaining it beyond the specified 

Please return promptly. 



2013 ^^S' 




