'■I'irlW-j 



m 



>i>: 












iili'r 









^Al 

^op 



UNIVEILSITY OF PITTSBURGH 




Darl 



in 



gton 



M 



emona 



1L;L 



rary 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2010 with funding from 

University of Pittsburgh Library System 



http://www.archive.org/details/publicationsofamOOamer 





A WONDER IN THREE WORLDS 



A Wonder in three Worlds ! Wliat can this mean ? 
What can it possibly be ? Are you a sabbath breaker ? 
I hope not : but if you are, you are that wonder ! 

You are a wonder in heaven ! I'here all are so happy, 
that they wonder how you can profane tliat blessed day 
which is an emblem of heaven, and which the God of 
heaven has conmianded to be kept holy ; for they well 
know, that if you die a sabbath-breaker, where they are, 
vou can never come. 

You are a wonder upon earth!! All true christians 
enjoy such holy pleasures on the Lord's day, that they 
wonder at you, and mourn over you, as an enemy to God 
and your own soul, while you profane the sacred day. 
God is pleased to say, " Ye shall observe my sabbaths." 
But you say by your actions, " I will not." 

You are a wonder in hell !!! Demons and lost souls 
are so miserable, that they are astonished at vou. as 
being so great an offender against Him who could strike 
you dead in a moment, and send you to their place of 
torment. 

We read in the word of God, of one in hell, who was 
so miserable, that he desired his five brethren might be 
informed of his deplorable condition, in order that they 
might escape that place of torment. Be no longer such 
a wonder. Approach that Saviour, who died for our 
sins, and rose agahi for our justification, as a penitent 
sinner : then the angels of God will rejoice with wonder, 
over " one sinner that repenteth," Luke xv. 7. 

Printed by VV. Clowes atd Sows, Duke-strtet, Lambeth; »old nt 56, raternoiter-row.- No. I. 





0000 ;OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOoaXXX)OOOjijO-JOOOO xxi-ouoooooooocooocoooooomoocooo 



THE SABBATH DAY. 





Do you spend the sabbath day in visiting and pleasure ? 
Pain, and sorrow, and misery, and agony (»noiigh you 
will feel upon your dying bed, and in the eternal world. 

Do you buy and sell on the Lord's day ? Every time 
you buy and sell, you sin ; the sellers tempt the buyers, ! 
and the buyers tempt the sellers, to live in open defiance i 
of their Maker and their Judge ! If he should say ♦o you I 
in the day of judgment. How many sins have you com- ^ 
mitted in your buying and selling on my holy day, what i 
would you answer him ? You would be dumb before i 
him, and fall at his feet as dead I O sabbath-breaker ! I 
sabbath-breaker! take warning ! take warninfj! r 

The Lord's day is one of the best blessings God has I 
bestowed upon us : and those who wilfully profane it are x 
among the worst sinners, and in danger of the worst I; 
curses that he can execute. ; 

God has appointed his day on purpose that men may y 
learn the way to heaven, — but a sabbath-breaker is doing f 
what he can to go to hell ; and, by his wicked example, g 
encourages others to go tnere likewise ! Many have y 
confessed at the i^allows that this sin first led them to | 
that dreadfid end. Oh, if you could but see and feel f; 
your guilt and danger, you would smite upon your breast, ^, 
and cry, " God be merciful to me, a sinner I" Oh that > 
such were your earnest humble prayer, '• for the Lord 
is good, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy to k 
them that call upon him," through faith in Christ Jesus. I 
Amen. t 



Printed by W. CLotrEs & Sons, Duke-st. L«mbeih , solU al 56, I'aiernosler-row. — No. 2. 



0000000000O0C>>:X>3000O00CO000o00O000000OO00OrCO0O00000000 3900000000000000 




^ 






^^c. 



ETERNITY ! 




Iff Onwards, onwards, — you are hastening 
: onwards to eternity as fast as time can fly. 
— Another moment is past, and you are nearer 
to death and judgment — to heaven or to 
hell. Have you ever seriously thought of 
this solemn word ETERNITY ;— for ever, 
and ever? You would consider that person 
guilty of extreme folly, who, for the pleasures 
of an hour, would sacrifice the comforts of a 
life ; yet he is wise compared with the indi- 
I^Svidual, who for the pleasures of time, gives ^P 
^§piip the joys of eternity. The present time is 
l^^lof infinite importance. Do not nec-lect it. (Fl 
^^^You are now warned — you are now living — '^' 
mercy is now offered to you, and Jesus Christ, 
who died on the cross to save sinners, is ahle 
to save unto the uttermost all that come unto 
God by him. He is able to save you. " Seek 
ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye 
upon him while he is near : let the wicked 
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his 
thoughts : and let him return unto the Lord, 
and he will have mercy upon him ; and to our 
God, for he will abundantly pardon," Isa.| 
Iv. 6, 7. 



TVinted b; Wiliiam Ci«wii3 and Sons, Duke-street, Lambeth ; told at S6, Pntrrnsttc-rrow.— N-i. .<<. 





SUNDAY MORNING. 



How are you about to spend tliis day, 
wliich is called, by way of distinction, 
-THE LORD'S DAY?" Are you about 
to devote it to your own pleasure ? Are you 
forgetting whose day this is, and for what 
purpose it is given ? — O pause. Turn not 
the day of God into a day of folly and sin. 
The sabbath is one of tlte greatest blessings, 
if improved ; but the aljuse of it is ruinous 
to tlie soul. God will call vou to a strict 
account for your sabbath hours. What 
reply can you make to your Judge ? O 
consider this ; and if you had purposed to 
spend this holy day in pleasure, receive this 
friendly caution against conduct so dis- 
pleasing to Him, and so dangerous to your 
immortal soul. Retire — search the scrip- 
tures — attend the house of God, " Behold 
the Lamb of God, which taketli away the 
sin of the world," John i. 29. i 



j^. "rinted by W. CLOTran end SoKs, Duke-slreet, LBinbelb ; iold at 56, Paternosier-row. VvJ 



m^^m [41 mm^m^^ 



{gVS§ *S)^'^fe1 



-¥* 



WHAT SHALL I DO TO-MORROW? 




Reader, this is a common thought on a Satur- 
day night. Did it ever occur to you ? The ge- 
neral idea is, Where shall I go to-morrow ? What 
party of pleasure shall I join ? How shall I best 
amuse myself on that day ? Let me ask you a 
question, — How often have you really obtained 
pleasure in these pursuits and excursions ? Have 
you not often found some trouble, some annoyance 
which has taken away all your proposed gratifica- 
tions, so that you have returned home troubled and §^ 
@T@j uncomfortable ? Let me ask you another question ©a@ 
— What pleasure will these ways of spending the Pi€ 
Lord's day give you, when you are on your dying bed? 
Answer these questions to yourself — but do so truly 
and faithfully — and if you have not found your 
usual way of spending the Lord's day quite pleasant, 
try a different plan ; attend the public worship of 
God, read your Bible, pray to God to direct you to 
that true wisdom whose " ways are ways of plea- 
santness, and all her paths ai-e peace." " The 
wages of sin is death ; but the gift of God is eternal 
life through Jesus Christ our Lord," Rom. vi. 23. 



M 




Printed by W. Clowbs and Sons, DoVe-»treet, Lambeth ; »old at M, Paternoiter-row.— No. S. 




UO'l ik'dR 9m i^ 

>5d nallo 



oaafi 9fn< 



aaiois 



8VBW 



THE WAY TO BE HAPPY 



Ask those around you, ask yourself, Is 
real happiness to be found in any of the 
pleasures and gratifications of this life, which 
you and they are so eagerly pursuing ? Are 
not we naturally inclined to indulge in dispo- 
sitions, tempers, and passions, which, when 
gratified, do not produce satisfaction, but leave 
behind many a bitter pang of conscience. But 
this is not all, this is not the most important 
p consideration. Reflect, that those things are 
not only unsatisfactory, but sinful; and " know 
thou, that for all these things God will bring 
thee into judgment," Eccles. xi. 9. Flee 
then to the Saviour, by him only is there life, 
peace, and comfort — he will not cast out those 
who come to him. Pray to the Holy Spirit 
to sanctify your heart and mind, to teach 
you the importance of these truths, and to 
instruct you how you may live with real com- 
fort, and die happy. 



Printed by Wn.llA*:Ct«inii Mid Sow*. Duke-ttreet, Lambeth ; .oUi at M. Pawrnotter-row^Ns. e, 





READER ! 









Have you not heard of a book called 
the Bible ? There you may find the true way %^ 
of obtaining happiness, — lasting happiness ; 
a happiness which will never forsake you. 
There all your inquiries will be answered ; 
there you will learn how to live well, and die 
happily ! 



You have not a moment to lose. To- 
morrow's sun will shine, — but your eyes may 
not behold its light; this night your soul 
may be required of you ; then lose not a 
MOMEiNT. Read your Bible. Read, and you 
will learn how to flee to the Saviour, to the 
only refuge ; — follow the precepts and in- 
structions of this book, and you shall be 
blessed, and wnll be thankful to all eternity 
that this little paper came into your hand. 

Printed by W. Cujn'BS and Sons, Duke-street, LaDiDcth ; »old at S6i Paternocter-row. — No. 7. 




T . A CAUTION. ^"^^ 



My friend, Do you know where you are 

going ? Have you reflected wliat you are | 

engaged in? Is it an object you will be I 

able to think upon to-morrow with plea- I 

sure ? Would you pursue it if you were | 

sure you should die to-night? Have you I 

or can you ask God to bless it ? If you | 

have not done this, if you cannot do this, § 

then reflect; I 

For ALL THESE THINGS GoD WILL BRING | 

I THEE INTO JUDGMENT, EcclcS. xi. 9. | 

I Stop, and consider before it is too late — | 

§ there is yet time, but you know not how | 

I short it may be. — O flee to the Saviour for | 

I the pardon of your sins — pray that Divine | 

i grace may be given to you — entreat the 

I Holy Spirit to convince you of the evil of 

i sin, and its dreadful consequences, and to 

I influence your heart and mind to those 

i things which alone can bring you peace at 

I the last. Read your Bible ; all these trutlis 

I are taught therein. 



^^ Printed by W. Ctowcs nnJ Son. n.>\ce .ti«t. Lambeth ; K,\d «t if. raterc«t«T-r?w -No. 4 pi 




THOUGHTS ON ETERNITY. 




Whether you are old, or whether you are young, 
whether you are decaying with sickness and infirmity, 
or vvhetiier you are blooming in health and vigour, 
every moment brings you nearer to eternity. Eternity 1 
well weiffh that word, and consider how matters stand 
between God and your soul. You are a sinner by nature, 
a sinner by practice, guilty, and undone for ever, unless 
Jesus delivers you, by giving you faith in his precious 
blood and righteousness. Have yojii received him ? Does 
his '^ Spirit dwell in you?" Have you '' redemption in 
his blood, even the forgiveness of your sins ?" Has he 
'^ clothed you with the robeof his righteousness ?" Does his 
Spirit "bear witness with your spirit, that you are a child 
of God ?" Have you peace with him, and do you " rejoice 
in hope of the glory that shall be revealed ?" If not, 
cry unto Jesus, it is still the day of grace; he is willing, 
he is waiting to receive you, " and he is able to save to 
the uttermost all that come unto God by him." He 
created you, he shed his blood upon the cross for you, 
and " he is now exalted a Prince and a Saviour, to give 
repentance and remission of sins." Ask him for these 
blessed gifts. Ask him to enable you to lav hold on 
him by faith, that he may receive you into the arms of 
his mercy; and then you shall never perish; none can 
pluck vou thence ; thus he will present you faultless 
before Uie presence of his glory with exce.dmg joy. 
Even so, Amen, and Amen. ^^^^^^ 




WHOSE SERVANT ARE YOU? 



If it were asked who supplies us with food and 
raiment? all who profess and call themselves chris- 
tians would answer, — " God, by his providence ;" — 
but ** his servants ye are to whom ye obey," Kom. 
vi. 16. God hath commanded, " Remember the 
sabbath day to keep it holy," Exod. xx. 8. To 
disobey God is to sin^ Gen. iii. 17. To be dis- 
obedient in mind is to have a sinful miiid, Mark 
vii. 21 — 23. To be the " servant of sin " is to be 
" free from righteousness," Rom. vi. 20. " The 
wages of sin is death," ver. 23. Did you ever re- 
flect, when you have been doing your own pleasure 
on God's holy sabbath, upon tiiese words of the 
Bible, " Will a man rob God ? yet ye have robbed 
me : ye are cursed with a curse/' Mai. iii. 8, 9. 
O sabbath breaker, consider thy ways, escape for 
thy life, flee from the wrath to come ! Wlio can 
dwell with everlasting burnings? "Behold the 
Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the 
world;" repent, and believe the Gospel ; there is joy 
in heaven over one sinner that repenteth. — It is a 
faithful saying, that Christ Jesus came into the world 
to save sinners — but remember he came to " save his 
people from their sins," Matt. i. 21. If thou desirest 
this salvation, thou will heartily seek it, and He 
will be found of thee, and will be thy Saviour. 
" Every one that asketh receiveth ; and he that 
r^seeketh flndeth ; and to liim that knocketh it shall^ 
W^ be opened," Matt. vii. 8. , ' 





Printed by W. Cmwb* and Sons, Duke-«treet, Lumbeth, »old at 56, Paterno»ter-row.— No. 10. 




REMEMBER THE SABBATH DAY 
TO KEEP IT HOLY. 




Have you considered what is the meaning of this 
command? may you pause a moment and reflect. Are 
you now keeping the sacred hours holy ? You may 
quarrel with the Divine command now, and find many 
excuses to satisfy yourself, and to quiet conscience; hut 
hear what God says, **Thou hast profaned my sabbaths, 
and can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong, 
in the days that I shall deal with thee ? I the Lord 
have spoken it," Ezek. xxiii. 8, 14. You see multitudes 
who do not cease from "doing their pleasure on God's 
holy day," Isaiah Iviii. 13, and yet no harm happeneth 
unto them, and ^' because sentence against an evil work 
is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons 
of men is fully set in them to do evil," Eccles. viii. 11- 
How many sabbaths have you passed in idleness, or a 
more active course of sin ? Hear now the message of 
God.in his word to you, " These things hast thou done, 
and 1 kept silence ; thou thoughtestthat I was altogether 
such an one as thyself; but I will reprove thee, and set 
them in order before thine eyes," Psa. 1. 21. Knowing 
therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men to flee 
from the wrath to come, to betake themselves to the 
blessed Saviour of sinners, that he may give them repent- 
ance whereby they may forsake sin, and so fill their 
hearts with a sense of his love, that they n^ay love to do 
his holy will, and know how blessed is the man that 
keepeth the sabbath from polluting it. ''Thus saith 
the Lord, Consider your ways," Haggai i. 7. 

Printed by W. Clowes and Sons, Duke street, Lambeth. Sold at 5«, Paternofter row. 



[11] 






THE TRUTH— THE WHOLE TRUTH- 
AND NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH ! 



m 



S. FALSE OATH, and THE FALSE-SWEARER'S 

PRAYER. 

What is an oath? — An oath is an appeal to God, as our 
' Witness and Judge, praying him to take notice, when we swear, 'B&B 
what we say ! It is one of the most solemn acts of worship in ^w\ 
which a human being can possibly be engaged with his Maker, 
concluding with that awful appeal, " So help me God ! " 
When a person swears any thing to be true, which he knows 
to be false ; or, that to be false, which he knows to be true; in 
either case it is a false oath ! Can there be a greater sin ? — 
or any thing more offensive to God, or injurious to society ! — 
What ! call upon the God of truth himself to take notice that 
we are going to tell him a lie! Oh, the very thought is tre- 
mendous ; what must the act be ? Our reputations, property, 
and lives, may be endangered by false oaths ! *' Thou shalt not 
take the name of the Lord, thy God, in vain," &c. " I will be 
a swift witness against false swearers ! " Now let us hear the 
awful prayer : — " Behold me, O God, with thy word in my 
hand, deceit in my heart, and a he upon my lips. Show me 
no mercy, punish me with eternal misery, execute all thy 
wrath upon me, fill my body with agonies, and my soul with 
terrors. Curse me in my going out, and coming in ; curse me 
when I lie down, and when I rise up ; curse me while I live, 
and when I die. Shut me out of heaven, and shut me up in 
hell; and damn my soul to all eternity!" Most horrible! 
False-swearer, this is thy hell-taught prayer; and if God, your ; 
Witness and Judge, had taken you at your word, your soul 
would now have been in hell. Reader, art thou a false- 
swearer? O cry earnestly for mercy, through JesusChrist: — "O 
Lord, pardon my iniquity, for it is great. Deal not with me 
after my sins, neither reward me according to my iniquities : 
blot out all my transgressions, through the rich atoning blood 
of Christ; and create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a 
right spirit within me." 



PrInW by W. Ctowst and Sons, Duke-street, Lanibcth ; Bcld at 56, Pat«nioster-row.— No. 1«. 






RICHES. 



If riches increase, set not your heart upon them, 
Ps. Ixii. 10. 

Labour not to be rich ; cease from thine own wis- 
dom : wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not ? 
for riches certainly make themselves wings ; they fly 
away as an eagle toward heaven, Prov. xxiii. 4, 5. 

Charge them that are rich in this world, that 
they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain 
riches, but in the living God, who giveth us richly 
all things to enjoy; that they do good, that they be 
rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to 
communicate, 1 Tim. vi. 17, 18. 

Take heed, and beware of covetousness : for a 
man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the 
things which he possesseth, Luke xii. 15. 

Better is little with the fear of the Lord, than 
great treasure and trouble therewith, Prov. xv. 16. 

Better is an handful with quietness, than both 
the hands full with travail and vexation of spirit, 
Eccles. iv. 6. 

Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his 
righteousness ; and all these things shall be added 
unto you, Matt. vi. 33. 

Let your moderation be known unto all men. 
The Lord is at hand. Be careful for nothing ; but 
in every thing by prayer and supplication with 
thanksgiving let your requests be made known 
unto God. And the peace of God, which passeth 
all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds 
through Christ Jesus, Phil. iv. 5 6, 7. 

Printed by W. Cvowma and So.xs, Duke-street, Lambeth ; sold at 56. rnterno»ler-row.-No. 13. 



f«^ 







THE WORLD. 




1^ What is a man profited, if he shall gain the wliole^ 
world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give 
in exchange for his soul ? Matt. xvi. 26. 

Set your affection on things above, not on things on 
the earth. Col. iii. 2. 

No man can serve two masters : for either he will hate 
the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the 
one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and 
mammon. Matt. vi. 24. 

Love not the world, neither tlie things that are in the 
world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father 
is not in him, 1 John ii. 15. 

Be not conformed to this worid, but be ye transformed 
by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what 
is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God, 
Rom. xii. 2. 

Use this world as not abusing it ; for the fashion of 
this world passeth away, 1 Cor. vii. 31. 

Godliness with contentment is great gain. For we 
brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can 
carry nothing out ; and having food and raiment let us bo 
therewith content. But they that will be rich fall into 
temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurt- 
ful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. 
For the love of money is the root o all evil, 1 Tim. vi. 
6—10. 
-^-^•^ God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross ofj 
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified 
unto me, and I unto the world. Gal. vi. 14. 




Printed by W. Cio^tes and Sons, Uuke-street, Lambeth; sold at M, rnternoster-ron.— No. Ui 







THE BIBLE. 

Seek ye out of the Book of the Lord, and read. Isa. xxxiv. 16. 

What hath the Lord spoken ? Jer. xxiii. 35. 

The testimoi y of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy, Rev. xix. 10. 

Tne word of God is true, Ps. cxix. 160 j 2 Sam. vii. 28 ; and it is pure 
Prov. XXX. 5. * 

He will perform His word, Isa. xlvi. 10 ; Iv, 11 ; xliv. 26 ; Ezek.xii. 28. 

It is said to quicken and give birth to the soul, Ps. xix 7 • cxix 93 • 
1 Pet. i. 23; James i. 18. ' ' ' 

To break the rock, Jer. xxiii, 29. 

Enlighten the eyes, Ps. xi.x. 8 j and restore the soul, Ps. xix. 7 

To be the means of faith, Rom. x. 1 7. 

To make wise unto salvation, and to save the soul, 2 Tim. iii. 15 • Jas. i. 21, 

In every way it is profitable to us, 2 Tim. iii. 16. 

It preserves us from sin, Ps. cxix. 1 1 ; xvii. 4. 

It sanctifies, John xvii. 17. 

It cleanses, John xv. 3 ; Eph. v. 26. 

Is the guide and direction of our conduct, Ps. cxix. 105. 

The food by which we live aud grow, Deut. vii. 3 ; John vi. 63 ; 1 Pet.ii. 2. 

And the weapons to de'eat our enemy, Eph.vi.l7j Ps. cxix. 42; Mat. iv. 10 11. 

By the word we are made fruitful, Deut. xxxii. 2; Isa. Iv. 10, 1 1 ; 1 Thess. 
ii. 13 ; Matt. xiii. 23; Co!, i. 5, 6. 

It is more to be desired than much fine gold ; sweeter also than honey, 
or the honey-comb. Ps. xix. 10. 

It is durable— eternal, Isa. 40. 8; 1 Pet. i. 23; Matt. xxiv. 35. 

It is the means to convince the gainsayers. Tit. i. 9. 

The brethren are established by it, Acts xx. 32. 

Tiie world shall be judged by it, John xii. 48. 

It is our comfort in aflfllction, Ps. cxix. 92 ; 1 Thess. i. 6. 

It rejoices the heart, Jer. xv. 16 ; Ps. xix. 8 ; cxix. 162. 

Believing it we prosper, 2 Chron. xx. 20. 

Loving it we have peace, Ps. cxix. 165. 

By the word we are led into fellowship with the Father, and with his 
Son Jesus Christ, 1 John i. 3. 

Hearing it, and keeping it, we prove our discipleship, John xiii. 31. 

Are pronounced Blessed ! Luke xi. 28. 

And in keeping it there is GREAT REWARD, Ps. xix. 11. 



PRAYER, PREVIOUS TO READING THE WORD. 

Lord, give me thy Holy Spirit, (Luke xi. 13,) to guide me into all truth, 
as it is in Christ Jesus, John xvi. 13. Open thou mine eyes thut I may 
behold wondrous things out of thy liw, Ps. cxix 18. Give me understand- 
ing, and I shall keep tky law ; yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart, 
Ps. cxix. 34. Give me grace to receive with meekness the engrafted word, 
which is able to save my soul, James i. 21 ; to make me wise unto sal- 
vation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Tim. iii. 15. And, as 
man doth not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out 
of thy mouth, Lord, evermore give me this Bread of Life, that I ma)' eat 
and live for ever, Deut. xxxii. 2; John vi. 34 — 51. Lord, hear and answer 
my prayer, for Christ his sake. Amen. 

Printed by W. Clowbs and Sons, Duke-slreet, Lambeth ; told at 56, Paf£rno»ler-roir.--No. \i 



1 






^ 



A MESSAGE FROM GOD UNTO THEE. 



r^ 



.^<i 



God looked down from heaven upon the children of men, 
to see if there were any that did understand, that did seek God. 
Every one of them is gone back, they are altogetlier become 
filthy, there is none that doeth good, nc;, not one, Ps. hii. 2, 3, 
All have sinned and come short of the gh)ry of God, Rom. 
iii. 23. Ye have sinned against the Lord, and be sure vour 
sin will find you out, Num. xxx'i. 23. Fur God shall bring 
every work into judgment, with every secret thing, wliether it 
be good or whether it be evil, Eccl. xii. 14. Because he hath 
appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in righ- 
teousness by that man whom he hath urdf^ined, Acts xvii. 31. 
Now, therefore, thus saith the Lord of hosts, Consider vour 
ways, Hag. i. 5. Prepare to meet thy God, Amos iv.' 12. 
Seek ye the Lord while he may be found ; call ye upon him 
while he is near : let the wicked forsake his wav, and the un- 
righteous man his thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, 
and he will have mercy upon him ; and to our God, for he will 
abundantly pardon, Isa. Iv. 6, 7. This is a faithful saying, 
and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the 
world to save sinners, 1 Tim. i. 15. 'I'lie blood of Jesus 
Christ cleanseth from all sin, 1 John i. 7. And without 
shedding of blood is no remission, Hcb. ix. 22. Believe on 
the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, Acts xvi. 31. 
Neither is there salvation in any other; for there is none 
other name under heaven given among men whereby we must 
be saved. Acts iv. 12. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a 
man be born again, (of the Spirit,) he cannot see the kingdom 
of God ; he cannot enter into the kingdom of God ; marvel 
not that I said unto thee. Ye must be born again, John iii. 3, 
5, 7. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none 
of his, Rom. viii. 9; and they that are Christ's i ave crucified 
the flesh with the affections and lusts. Gal. v. 24. The wicked 
shall go away into everlasting punishment : but the righteous | 
,5- into life eternal, Matt. xxv. 46. ^ 



I tinted by W. Ci/owtn unci So^«8, Dslce-street, Lnmbelh ; irlj nt \6, rslernotler row.— No. 18. 









^^':w ^w '^T' rr^5 



SECRET TO A SABBATH STROLLER. 





You consider j^ourself a christian, do you not? 
— "To be sure I am, you say." But, may you 
not be mistaken ? An habitual breaker of the 
christian sabbath, a christian ! Impossible. You 
do not call the " sabbath a delight, the holy 
of the Lord honorable," Isa. Iviii. 13. Your 
taking pleasure in mingling with those crowds of 
sabbath strollers, shows you to be any thing but 
a friend and follower of the Holy Jesus. U'here 
was once a madman who declared solemnly that 
he was king of England, but nobody believed 
him ; every one pitied him. There was nothing 
of majesty about him. Christians bear some re- 
semblance to Christ. Like him they hate sin, and 
love and seek after righteousness ; they attend to 
the institutions and commandments of God. They 
love to converse of the things of God, which he 
has revealed to them in the Holy Scriptures. 
You know, my friend, that you have no such marks 
of the christian character about you, and this lack 
discovers a secret to you — That you are not a 
christian. Unless you be born again, you cannot 
inherit the kingdom of God; but at the termination 
of the awful day of judgment you will be for ever 
banished from the presence of the Lord, and the 
displays of his glorious power. Pause, and ask 
what you shall now do to be saved, which is the 
great question, and the answer to it is, " Believe 
in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved." 





rrinted ly W. Ciowb. and Soks, Ditk«.>E.trect, Lumbelli ; »old at S6, Paterno>ler-row.- No i;. 








HAVE YOU LIVED TOO LONG IN SIN ? 





Peter, an apostle of the Son of God, says, tliiit 
the time past of our life nuiy suffice us to have lived 
as heathens do, 1 Pet. iv. 3. Heathens know nothing 
of the true God, therefore they do not worsliip him. 
Sahbath stroller ! do you know more of him than 
the heathen do ? Do you know that he is every 
where present^ that he attentively inspects you 
wherever you are — that he knows all that passes 
in your heail:, and all that you do in your life — 
that he perfectly hates sin wherever he sees it ? 
If you do know these things, may I a.sk whv 
you live like heathens, refusing to worship God ? 
How cau you venture habitually to violate his ex- 
press connnand to keep holy his sabbath. Do you 
not believe that a time is coming when God will 
call you before him to give an account of your 
conduct. How will you answer him ? Will con- 
science then so bring home your guilt that you 
shall be speechless, unable to offer the smallest 
apology for your wickedness ? You had better, my 
frieiid, attend to this weighty concern now — do 
not lose an hour. But you feel indisposed for it. 
No wonder, because you are under the dominion 
of sin ; and Satan hath blinded the eyes of your 
mind, to prevent the glorious gospel of the blessed 
God entering into it, to show you the preciousness 
of the Almighty Saviour, who loved sinners, and 
gave himself to the death, to obtain the forgive- 
ness of sin and eternal life for all who believe in 
him. 




'^in'ed by \V. Ciowet end Sovs, Ditke-sireei. I.ambeth ; told al 56, PaUrnonler-row.— No. 18. 



r^tn 










A QUESTION 




The Son of God asks, (Matt. xvi. 26.) " What is a 
man profited if he shall gain the whole world and lose 
his own soul ?" Can you answer the question, my 
friend ? Suppose some mighty king had succeeded in 
conquering all the countries of the whole earth. Sup- 
pose him to enjoy the peaceful possession of all their 
wealth and grandeur for fifty years ; and also that the 
bustle in which he was constantly kept during that time, 
left him no leisure to attend to the great interests 
of the soul, so that at death he perished, and his soul 
was excluded from the happiness of heaven, and was 
plunged into the everlasting destruction of hell, — should 
such a one be considered a gainer or a loser ? Is a few 
years' pleasure \\\ this world, to be preferred to the eternal 
enjoyment of the bliss of heaven, the love of God, the 
fellowship of Christ ? Could such short-lived pleasures 
counterbalance everlasting, uninterrupted misery, dwell- 
ing in blackness, and darkness, and tempest for ever? 
Oh, no; wherefore, my friend, be wise in time; neglect 
not the great salvation, which the Son of God died to 
obtain, and lives to bestow. Believe and trust in him 
I for the salvation of your soul. Spend your sabbaths in 
«,Ly attending the house of your God, in promoting the great -^ 
WM interests of your soul, and the w^elfare of your family, >^ 



"^it both as to this world and the world to come. 



® 



, ^t^ Printed by WiLLiiM Cujwbs and Sons. Duke-»treet, Lambeth-, »old at 5«. ralcrnoncr-toir.— No. 19 












-W^ 





IS IT GOOD TO BE HERE? 




m 



Is it good to be moving along with such a crowd 



pof sabbath ramblers as these roads and iields pre- 
sent? Yes, you saj^ it is good lor health. But is 
it good for the health of the soul ? Is it t)etter for 
your own mind, and the minds of your family, 
whom God has intrusted to your care, than if you 
were soberly leading them to a place of worship, 
or reading to them the wonderful works of the 
Lord as related in the scriptures of truth, and 
uniting with them in prayer to the God of heaven, 
that you might all escape the wrath of God which 
shall finally come upon an ungodly world ? lie- 
member, "there is a ^yiiy which seemeth right 
unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of 
death." What will you think of all this waste of 
precious time, when your heart and flesh fail, and 
your soul is ready to remove to the judgment- 
seat of God, to hear its final doom, an irreversible 
sentence passed upon it ? When you hear pro- 
nounced, '* Give an account of thy stewardship, 
that thou mayst be no longer steward ?" J\Iy friend, 
fear God fear him who can not only kill the 
body, but who can also cast the soul into hell 
fire. Christ is thi^ only Saviour — It is a faithful 
saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that he 
came into the world to save sinners, even the 
chief: thouijh your sins be as scarlet, if you be- 
lieve in Him who died for sinners, they shall 
be as white as snow ; though they be red like 

^crimson, yet then they shall be as wool. Be 
roused from your sleep in sin, awake to right- 
eousness, and sin no more* Adieu. 



rrinted by W. Clowes and Sows, Duke-.trret, Lambotb, sold si JS. I aterno»ter-ro» .— No. tC. 





% STROLLING ON THE SABBATH. 



i' I AM sorry to find you here to-day, my friend. 
— Why are you^sorry for that ? Because you are 
in the way of transgressors of the law of God ; 
this is the Lord's day, which he has commanded 
us all to keep holy, and you have been heedlessly 
wandering about with your wife and children, 
instead of attending to the salvation of yonr own 
and their souls. Is this training up your children 
in the way they should go ? Do you think that 
despising and breaking the sabbath is the way to 
heaven ? Does your wife never try to persuade 
you to stay at home and read your Bible, and at- 
tend the preaching of the gospel ? Perhaps you 
reply, If it be a wet day, she does urge me to keep 
at home ; but if the day be line, she persuades me 
to take a stroll into the country. 

Well^ take my advice — let this be the last ill- 
spent sabbath in your lives ; you live near where 
a faithful minister preaches. Go, hear what he 
has to tell about Jesus the Saviour ; how he died 
for sinners, and rose again, that, through faith 
in him, you may not perish for ever, but obtain 
everlasting lil^. At home, read portions of tlie 
scriptures, and converse together, in the presence 
of your children, about the things you read ; and 
with God's blessing you will find yourselves lar 
more happy, than in wandering about in this 
manner, and be able with the psalmist to say, " A 
day in thy courts is better than a thousand. I had 
^u rather be a doorkeeper in th«' house of my God, ^^ 
W than to dwell in the tents of wickedness." W 

ii — w 



r^,^ Prin'ed by W. Clowes and Sons, DuUe-street, Unibelh ; sold at 56, ratcrno»t«r-row.-No. 21. ^ 



-p >^<-« 



-,- ~_ 'R'^* i«>''^ ■«^'5» -|jr> 






A SAD SCENE. 

What a sad scene is presented to a pious mind 
in the neighbourhood of large towns, on a fine 
summer sabbath evening ! thousands of persons 
of all ages and both sexes rushing out of the 
streets as if the plague were prevailing ; not re- 
tiring, like Lot, from, but to destruction — they are 
flying from their Bibles, from their families, and 
from the preaching of the gospel, to mix with 
crowds of vain, ignorant, and dissolute characters ; 
with multitudes who have thrown off all the 
restraints of early instruction, and have not the 
fear of God before their eyes. Can the sight of 
inns crowded with tipplers, blasphemers, &c. de- 
light you as you pass along ? Can the foolish and 
wicked remarks, which are constantly assailing 
your ears from passing ramblers, please you ? — 
if so, your mind is defiled and depraved; and 
mixing in such scenes will render you more a 
child of the devil, than you were before. God 
in his wrath may finally give you up to a repro- 
bate mind, a seared conscience, and leave you to 
do those things, which shall bring on your ever- 
lasting ruin. 

That these things may not come upon you, cease 
now to do evil, and learn to do well — diligently 
search the scriptures, with humble prayer, for they 
testify of Jesus the only Saviour : they hold him 
forth as crucified for sin, as having finished the 
work of redemption, which Jehovah the Father 
sent him to accomplish ; that whosoever believed 
in him might not perish, but have everlasting life. 

Printed by W. Clows* and Sons, Duke-street. Lambeth ; sold at 56, Paternoster-row.— No. 82. 






:.S&^^ WHAT DOEST THOU HERE, 

^f^ ELIJAH? 

i So said God. to his ancient prophet, when he 

8 found him ^\'here he ought not to have been ; and 

^ may I be permitted to ask. What doest thou here, 

i my friend, on the evening of the Lord's day, in 

I such a mass of confusion, among such a crowd of 

I sabbath-breakers and idlers ? Were not you in 

I your younger years taught to fear God, to hate 

I every wicked way, and entreated to listen to the 

I counsels of God in the scriptures ? You cannot 

i plead ignorance of the law of God ; you know the 

I fourth commandment of God in the law, to re- 

i member the sabbath day to keep it holy. Has God 

i annulled that commandment think you, that I find 

I you here trampling it under your feet ? You desire 

8 me not to press so hard upon you, because you 

I perhaps have attended Avorship once to-day, and 

i heard a sermon in the morning. Hearken to a 

i secret. Let me whisper to you, that the sermon 

I did you no good, or I should not have found you 

I here^ among these rebels against the authority of 

I the God of heaven. Your love of vanity, and dis- 

I taste for the things of God, for his truths, for the 

I company of his followers, inclined you to come 

I here. Hasten from this ungodly company, with 

i eagerness flee from the wrath to come. Enter 

I into your chamber, and pray unto your Father 

I who seeth in secret. Look to Jesus Christ the 

I Lamb of God ; who, by the sacrifice of himself, 

i taketh away the sins of the world, and will take 

J away yours if you believe on him, and trust in 

^1^ him, and live to his glory. 

Printed by W. Clowes & Sons, Duke-st. Lambeth , sold at 56, Paternostcr-row.— No. 83 

::CCC-XlCCO0O:CXX«»0OC0O0OD0OC3000000000OC000O 





SUNDAY EVENING. 



Reader: another sabbath-day is passing from you for ever! 
and now the shadows of evening are closing around, let me ask 
you how the sacred hours of this day have been spent ? The 
house of the Lord has been open, and the voice of praise and 
prayer has ascended with acceptance before the throne of the 
Most High ; but have you attended upon its services, and 
listened to the " ministry of reconcihation ?" Have you es- 
teemed this " sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord honour- 
able; not doing your own ways, nor finding yourowu pleasure, 
nor speaking your own words?" or have you employed its 
valuable time in the pursuit of business and of sinful plea- 
sure? Have you considered that the privileges connected with 
this day were of eternal consequence, and that the neglect 
of them has involved you in deeper guilt? Ah! you will 
know the value of a single sabbath when laid on a bed of death, 
and when eternity is opening before you. Think you that the 
hours spent in the tea-gardens, and public-house, or loitered 
away at home, or in any other way misimproved, will be re- 
flected on then with pleasure ? — Some who were alive on the 
last sabbath, and who probably were as likely to have lived as 
you, have since that time closed their eyes in death, and gone 
to their great account. This may be your last sabbath : it 
certainly will be so to thousands, — and why not to you? 

Were you certain that to-morrow you would be in eternity, 
would you have spent this day as you hare done ? Reflect : 
improve the few remaining hours of this holy day. Retire to 
your home, and, with true penitence, confess before God your 
guilt, and seek his mercy through the " precious blood of the 
Lord Jesus Christ," which cleanseth from the sin of sabbath- 
breaking, and from all sin. And if, in the kind providence of 
God, another Lord's-day be given to you, may the language of 
your heart be, " How amiable are thy tabernacles, Lord of 
hosts ! A day in thy courts is better than a thousand. I had 
rather be a door-keeper in the house of my God, than dwell in 
the tents of wickedness. O Lord of hosts, blessed is the man 
that trusteth in thee," Psa. Ixxxiv. 



.^^ PriruSd bv \V. Clow.s and Sosg, Uulie-»tr««t, Umbeth ; .old .t 54. P«terno.ter-ro». 



[24] 



wm^^^"' 



r^Tv^TV.^ ^7tr 



ioii ^ni> 




T9lfjO0i 



w r '..5 i rr.,/1 



Hjiw ^n« .5)mof{ -w 



haK .ftia IIb moii bi\ 



b«fi 



tdJ 61 BJ7IJ03 Vd} ii 



G'iJ 






STOP AND THINK. 



^a^ 



Stop, poor sinner, stop and think 

Before you further go ! 
Will you sport upon the brink 

Of everlasting woe ? 

Say, have you an arm like God, 
That you his will oppose ? 

Fear you not that iron rod 

With Avhich he breaks his foes ? 

Though your heart be made of steel, 
Your forehead lined wdth brass, 

God at length will make you feel, 
He wdll not let you pass. 

Pale-faced death will quickly come 

To drag you to his bar ; 
Then to hear your awful doom 

Will fill you with despair. 

Turn from all your evil ways 
Before that hour arrive ; 
Death may soon cut shoii; your days, 
O sinner ! turn and live. 

Come to Jesus Christ by faith, 

As guilty and undone ; 
Credit what the Saviour saith. 

And trust in him alone. 



Frinted by W. Clo\vk» ind Sons, Duke-Mreet, La;:ibtth ; sold at 56. ralerno»fer-row. 



l^^ 

^^w^ 



[25J. 



^>- 
^^% 



}mm <^#^^# m\ 



THE WARNING VOICE. 



i^. 



f Woe unto the wicked ! it shall be ill with him ; for 
'*' the reward ot his hands shall be given him. For, 
behold ! tlie day cometh that shall burn as an oven ; and 
all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be 
stubble : and the day tliat cometh shall burn them up, 
saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither 
root nor branch. The Lord will take venoeance on his 
adversaries ; and he reserveth wrath for his enemies. 
Who can stand before his indignation? and who can 
abide in the fierceness of his anger ? His fury is poured 
out like fire. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and 
all the nations that forget God. For the wrath of God 
is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and un- 
^ righteousness of men. Be not deceived ; neither forni- J^ 
r cators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor 
f abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor 
p covetous nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, 
^ shall inherit the kingdom of God. Let no man deceive 
you with vain words ; for because of these things cometh 
the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. 
The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his 
mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them 
that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our 
Lord Jesus Christ ; who shall be punished with everlast- 
ing destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from 
the glory of his jjower. Now consider this, ye that forget 
God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to 
deliver. 

Sinner! you are warned, but why? — that you may, 
without delay, flee for refuge to Jesus Christ, the Lamb 
^ of God, wliirh tt.keth away the sin of the world. Believe 
% on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved. 13 



PWjp Prinied ty WilliahClov^us ani Sows, Duke-etrtet. Laaibelb ; «cld a. j6, ralerncEter-row.— Io- M. )i|3. 






i^ TAKE HEED AND BEWARE. t^ 



Beware of evil company. " Evil communications cor-*^*i» 
rupt good manners. — He that walketh with wise men 
shall be wise : but a companion of fools shall he de- 
stroyed. — My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou 
not. — Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not 
in the way of evil men. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn 
from it and pass aw^ay. — Destruction and misery are in 
their ways, and the way of peace have they not known. 
There is no fear of God before their eyes. — Wherefore 
come out from among them, and be separate, and touch 
not the unclean thing. — Have no fellowship with the 
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them." 

These admonitions are the dictates of unerring wisdom, 
and they are addressed to you from motives of pureJF^ 
benevolence, that you may escape that tremendous ruin J^ 
to which you are hastening every step you take in the ^ 
paths of sin and folly ; for the end of these things is 
death. Should you be disposed to treat these friendly 
w^arnings with levity and contempt; know that in so 
doing you will but the more eftectually stamp your 
character, and seal your doom. Poverty and shame shall 
be to him that refuseth instruction, and he that hateth 
reproof is brutish. And oh remember, he that being often 
reproved hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, 
and that without remedy. Forsake then the foolish and 
live, and go in the way of understanding. Jesus is the 
way, the truth, and the life. He hath said. Look unto 

^^^ me, and be ye saved ; and He is able to save to the utter- 

^^^ most, all that come unto God by him. 

|.^ — ^m^ 

[^ rrintoU by W, Clowes and Sohi, Duke-Btrcet. Lambeth ; »oM at 56. Paternoitcr-row. -No. V- f>jj^ 




AN APPEAL TO REASON. 

CHRISTIANITY AND DEISM CONTRASTKD. 




Suppose the deist to be right, and Christianity to be a 
delusion ; what tlien has the deist gained ; wherein has 
lie tlie advantage ? Is lie happier than tlie christian ? — 
i No. Is he more useful in society ? — No. Can he meet 
\ the sorrows of life with ?nore fortitude ? — No. Can he 
I look into futurity with more composure? — No. His 
I highest bliss arises from the indulgence of base lusts ; 
5 his conscience is his daily tormentor ; his social circle is 
; a wilderness, overgrown with thorns ; his life is perfect 
i madness ; and of his death it may be said, " he died as a 
I fool dieth." 

I But the christian is happy in himself, or rather in his 

j Saviour ; he is useful in his day, and as safe, at least, in 
i his death as any of the children of Adam. 

Suppose the deist to be wrong, and Christianity to be 
true, (and true it will be found,) then has not the chris- 
tian the advantage ? Is lie not a present and eternal 
gainer ? — Yes. He has a constant supply of happiness 
from above ; an unchanging Friend in his Saviour and 
Redeemer, to whom he may unbosom himself freely; 
relief at hand amidst all his troubles; a sure foundation 
for the most solid hope ; and a dehghtful prospect bevond 
the grave. The CHRISTIAN HAZARDS NOTHING; 
HE GAINS ALL THINGS ! ! The deist hazards, yea, 
forfeits all things, and gains nothing ; while he lives, he 
makes himself the tool of the devil, and when he dies, he 
looks for annihilation, but finds damnation! ! 

" ivho is on the Lord's side ?" Reader, if you would 
be happy in time, and safe for eternity, you must take 
the bible for your guide, have God for your Father, Christ 
for your Redeemer, and the Holy Ghost for your Sancti- 
fier ; otherwise vou live under condemnation, vou will 
die accursed, and you will PERISH FOR EVER I ! 

" Godliness is profitable unto all things, having pro- 
mise of the life that now is, and of that which is to 
come," 1 Tim. iv. 8. 

Printed for the Religious Tract Society, 56,Paternoster row.— «d. per loa No. 28 





A GREAT DEMAND. 



It is a general practice among people in trade, to examine their 
books and settle their accounts, that they may see whether they 
are going forward or backward. This is all right. 

There is, however, a certain Creditor, who has a world of 
debtors, and an immense demand upon each of them ; so that 
you, my reader, are one of them. Some of these debts have 
been standing more than threescore years and ten. 

Sins, in scripture, are called debts ; and it may be said to you, 
as to one of old, *' How much owest thou unto my Lord ?' Luke 
xvi. 5. For sins committed, duties neglected, sabbaths profaned, 
ordinances undervalued, mercies abused, providences unimproved, 
warnings slighted, time squandered, goods wasted, talents turned 
against their rightful owner, and the scriptures, the soul, and the 
Saviour neglected ! I Reader, this is your awful case, if you 
are not born again, if you are not a real christian. You are 
overwhelmed with a debt to God, which you can never pay. 
You are every moment liable to be arrested by death, and cast 
into that prison from whence you can never be released, till you 
have paid the uttermost farthing. Matt. v. 25. 

Now there is a way, and only one way in which you can be set 
free from this enormous debt. " God who is rich in mercy," 
Eph. ii. 4, oh ! let all in heaven praise him, and every debtor on 
earth adore him — " God who is rich in mercy," has provided for 
us, and presented to us a Surety, for all that will apply to hiru. 
For he appeared once in the end of the world to put away sin, 
by the sacrifice of himself, Heb. ix. 26. To liim be glory for 
ever and ever. 

Now if, under a deep sense of your dreadful debt, you really 
and sincerely wait upon Him, and tell him you have " nothing 
to pay," and implore him to set you free, — and " if the Son shall 
make you free, you shall be free indeed," John viii. 36, — he 
will, sooner or later, let you know that he himself has paid your 
debt, cancelled the bond, and " blotted out the hand-writing 
that stood against you ;" and in his faithful word, left you as a 
legacy, a receipt in full of all demands. " I am He that blotteth 
out thy transgressions for my own sake, and will not remember 
thy sins," Isa. xliii. 25. 

Reader, if after hearing these things, you do not implore 
him to discharge your debt, it will remain on your own head, 
and sink you down to the lowest hell,— which, God of his in- 
finite mercy prevent, for our dear Redeemer's sake.— Amen, 
and Amen. 



Printed by W. Clowes and SoKS, Duke-street, Lambeth; wld at 56. raterno.Ur-row.-.No. 89. 



i 



liAi 













^^ TIME IS SHORT. 




% Reader ! have you never considered the truth 
of this solemn declaration, by the rapidity of your 
time. Time is progressive, and passes away 
imperceptibly. Time is made up of moments, 
which, when once gone, improved or not, can 
never be recovered. Time is given us for tho 
i^reat purpose of seeking those tilings which make 
for our peace and salvation in the eternal world : 
— If these things have never yet engaged your 
serious attention, oh ! no longer trifle away your 
precious time, but improve it by thinking on your 
latter end. Plitherto you have been spared from 
year to year, througli the protection of your 
heavenly Father, but you know not how long liis 
providential mercy will be extended towards you. 
The present moment is all you can call your own. 
To-day you it ay be in health, to-morrow in the 
GRAVE. — Oh ! then, come to Christ now for sal- 
vation. — It is in this world, and not in the next, 
that you have the opportunity of fleeing from 
the wrath to come. Jesus is not only able, but 
udlling to receive you, if you come unto him with 
a contrite heart. He says, " Behold now is the 
accepted time ; behold now is the day of salva- 
tion.'* Christ does not. say that salvation may be 
obtained to-morrow, for your life is uncertain. 
Therefore, now, redeem your time ; *' Boast 
not thyself of to-morrow, for thou knowcst not 
what a day may bring forth." Live in the recol- 
^ jlection of your mortality, and in all your engage 
^ ments remember that time is short ! 

Printed br W. Clowbs and Sons, Duke-.tre«t. L.mbeth ; .old at 16 Paurrvo«ler-ro»^Nc.. 30 



^ 










'jii ^ 






: ffO— .3VAJ 






;rfirit 




a (il iii(i.'j\» 


^^^ 


It' - 1 I! i I ' . 


,;.., .. .., n; . 


■ -r 


t >=: 7;nv 







IB fli . 
1HOH8 II 



.a ,4KoBL. 



^ 

'^ 



-^wi 



^ WHAT MUST I DO TO BE SAVED ? %, 



"Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall 
be saved," Acts xvi. 31. "Him that comet h to me (saith 
Christ) I will in no wise cast out," John vi. 37. " He is able 
also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God 
by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for 
them,"" Heb. vii. 25. You are a sinner — He is the only 
Saviour. — Oh flee to Him for refujre from the wrath to 
come. " Let the wicked forsake his way, and the ini- 
righteous man his thoughts, and let him return imto 
the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him ; and to oui 
God, for he will abundantly pardon," Isaiah I v. 7. Do 
you feel your sins a burden ? * Is the re«iembrance of 
them grievous unto you? — " Come now, and let us 
reason together, saith the Lord : though your sinf-- be as 
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, though they be 
red like crimson, they shall be as wool,*' Isa i. 18. 
If you reject the way of salvation through Christ, there 
is no hope for you at the last day ; for " he that believ- 
eth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God 
abideth on him," John iii. 36. Sin must be pardoned, 
or you are lost for ever. — The blood of Jesus Christ 
alone can cleanse from all sin, 1 John i. 7. Oh pray 
from the heart, — " God be merciful to me a sinner ;" 
and remember, for your encouragement that, " Who- 
soever shall call upon the name of tlie Lord shall be 
saved." Rom. x. 13. 



Printed by W Clowes aiaJ SoKs, Duke-stree',, I,anili«tb ; »o 



■d «t M. P»Umo«l*r-Tow. — Kc. 81. 



1^ 



p^^' 



<aS'' 




THE CONTRAST. 







There cannot be a greater contrast than between a pious and 
prolane youth. A wicked young man is one of t he most deplorable 
sights in the world H e is engaged in the service of the devil and 
the fallf n angels ; he is the tormentor of his family, and the curse 
of society. He destroys the prime of his life in his unijodly pur- 
suits, rushes into temptation, is a slave to corruption. H e earnestly 
deliijhts in sin, glories in his shame, and is led captive by the 
devil at his will. Reader, if this be thy state, how truly affecting 
is it : saints pray for you, angels pity you, the Saviour weeps over 
you, and Jehovah himself is concerned for you. " As I live, saith 
the Lord God, 1 have no pleasure in the death of the wicked," 
Ezek. xxxiii. 11. " O that they were wise, that they understood 
this, tliai they would consider their latter end," Deut. xxxii. 29. 
If you seek him he will be found of you ; if you forsake him he will 
cast you ofFior ever. Young man ! you are now warned and ad- 
monished; it you are resolved to disregard both, and pursue your 
guilty pleasures, if you love misery, and are determined to perish, , 
then *' rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer ^^ 
thee in the days ot thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, ^^^ 
and in the sight of thine eyes; but know thou that for all these 
things God will bring thee into judgment," Eccles. xi. 9. 

A pious youth is one of the most deliijhtful sights under heaven. 
He is employed in the work of God and angels ; he is remember- 
ing his Creator in the days of his youth, and devoting the morning 
of his life to the Father of his mercies. By divine grace he is 
enabled to strive against sin, resist Satan, " flee youthful lusts," 
contend vNith corruptions, and conquer temptations when exposed 
to them; he avoids the tempter's path, and overcomes a cor- 
rupted and corrupting world. The pious youth is a comfort to 
his family and friends, and a blessing to society. He is training 
up for a useful and honourable life, a happy di-atn, and a blessed 
eternity. His amiable example is worthy of imitation by all around 
him. In a word, he is the admiration of saints, the joy of an^tls, 
and the delight of God himself. The Lord taketh pleasure in 
them that fear him, and in tl,e;n that hope in his mercy, Psa. 
xxxiii. 18. His way is pleasantness and peace in this world ; he 
has hope in bis death ; and will obtain an incorruptible inherit- 
ance when lime shall he no more. " Let me die the death of the 
righteous, and kt my last end be like his." Let the wicked man 
forsake his ways; let him pray for the pardon or his sins, " for 
the blood of Jesus Christ cieanseth from all sin," 1 John i. 7. 



PriDted by \V. Clowbs und Sons, Duk.e-itrect, Lambeth ; sold at 66, Pateri»o',ier-row.— No. 3i. 



n^K:d 



r^AHTZOt) .HTIT 



I ..' J li I :» : , , i . ei 



i lo rfUib ad) ni siu&hhIci < 







J f-:'. u ill vi ; I <j;:( 

I .noiiq/rnoo ot 




-^ ,ni2 ni ah 









If,./ • . 



" .il 

• bfiitiw ^. , ,. ,j ^, ,, 
i i/iy/ sd mz/i jf^ag „oy )j' 

"V If ; 



II ni 99(i 






KJ'J £ 






io iiooid 9nr 



^•wtuO ,7/ f<( tMmit^ 




THE EFFECTS OF DRUNKENNESS. 




Drunkenness expels reason, drowns the memory, distempers the body, 
defaces beauty, diminishes strength, inflames the blood, causes internal, ex- 
ternal, and incurable wounds, is a witch to the senses, a devil to the -onl, a 
thief to the purse, *^e beggar's companion, the wife's woe, and children's 
sorrow. It makes a strong man weak, and a wise man a fool. He is worse 
than a beast, and is a self-murderer, who drinks to others' good health, and 
robs himself of his own. He is worse than a beast, for no animal will de- 
signedly intoxicate itself. By the efl'ects of liquor his evil passions and tempers 
are freed from restraint: and while in a state of intoxication he conunits 
actions, whicli when sober he wjuid have sluuldered only to have thought of. 
Many an evil deed has been done, many a mukdeu has ijeen commilted, when 
those who did these things were intoxicated! Scarcely an assize passes without 
some unhappy prisoner attempting to excuse his guilt by the plea that he was 
under the influence of liquor. This excuse the law allows not, and most justly ; 
for if men voluntarily deprive themselves of their reason, surely they cannot 
be innocent of whatever evils they commit while in that state. Tremble li.en, 
O drunkard ! reflect before you out the cup to your lips : remember that you 
are about to make j'ourself ready to commit every crime lo which an evil 
nature, no longer checked, can incite you, and lliat you may awake from this 
state, guilty of offences against the laws of your country, sufficient to draw 
down just vengeance upon your head ; and, while suffering the punishment 
of your evil deeds, or reflecting on the harm done, perhaps to your best friend, 
what consolation can the remembrance of your worse than beastly enjoyment 
give you ? All the crimes on the earth do not destroy so many of the human 
RACE, nor alienate so much fkopekty, as okijnkesness. 

Hear what the word of Goa oeclares: " Awake, ye drunkards, and weep," 
Joel i. 5. " Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions ? who 
hath wounds without cause ? They that tarry long at the wine, they that gc 
to seek mixed wine. Look not thou upon the wine : at the last it biteth like 
a serpent, and stingeth like an adder," Prov. xxiii. 29—32. " Strong drink 
shall be bitter to them that drink it," Isa. xxiv, 9. " The works of the flesh 
are manifest, u'hich are these: uncleanness, murders, drunkenness, revellings, 
and such like; of the which I tell you, that they which do such things, shall 
not inhe.-it the kingdom of God," Gal. v. 19. 21. " If ye live after the flesh, ye 
shall die; but if ve, through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, ye 
shall live," Rom.'viii. 13. " Be not deceived ; God is not mocked ; for what- 
soever a man sowelh, that shall he also reap. For he that soweth to his flesh, 
shall of the flesn reap corruption ; but he tliat soweth to the Spirit, shall of the 
Spirit reap life everlasting," Gal. vi. 7, 8.— Drunkards, there is yet hope for 
vou. God has said in his word, " Let the wicked forsake his way, and the 





./csus Crtllie iniU LUC wuiiu ik aa>t jiuiivio, \jt ,,,.^... . —... , - - 

'• For God so loved the world, th.at he gave his only begotten Son, tt:at who 
soeverbclievethinhim, should not perish, but have everlastmg life, John m. 10 

Printed by W. CtowBB toA go.•<^ DuY?- strest. LnjcVMi ; ooli >t 56. FaternoMcr-roir^No. 33. 










HOW OLD ART TEiOU ? 



^1^ 



Reader ! startle not at this inquiry, nor think it of 
no importance ; for be assured it is one which intimately 
concerns your everlasting welfare. You may have lived 
in this world thirty, forty, fifty, or even seventy years, and 
yet, during this long period, have never thought of the 
world to come, or lived one day to God. We are brought 
into this state of existence for the great purpose of servino- 
God, and obeying his commands; and therefore, in 
reality, it can only be said that we begin to live, the 
moment we experience a change of heart, and live to 
God. You must now seethe necessity of attending lo 
the inquiry. How old art thou? and examine, not merely 
the number of the days of your years, but whether you 
have fled from the wrath to come. Oh let me affection- 
ately er.treat you, as you valjie your immortal soul, no 
longer to be the willing captive^of Satan, but come to 
Christ Jesus as the only hope for guilty sinners. He 
hath said, " Him that cometh unto me, I will in no wise 
cast out," — " Come unto me, all ye that labour, and are 
heavy laden, and I will give you rest," " Come unto 
me ; hear, and your soul shall live." Ccme in the spirit 
of prayer, come without delay, come instantly, for you 
know not what shall be on the morrow. Christ is waiting 
to be gracious. flead the sacred scriptures, pray over 
them ; and in humble rehance on Christ as your only 
Saviour, you will find that peace which the world 
knoweth not. 






PriB^ed fcy W. Clow bs and Sons, Duke-ttreet. Lambeth , told at .W, Paternoster row.— No. 34. 



^•m^ 



A PROBLEM FOR A SWEARER. m 

Inq. You appear to be a man of information, and capable of 
assigning a good reason for what you say or do ; permit me to ask 
for an answer to a certain problem. 

S. Sir, 1 shall be happy to render you any information which 
is in my power. Will you state your problem ? 

hiq. The problem is simply this, What inducement has the 
swearer to take the name of God in vain ? — The liar pleads as 
a motive and inducement, the advance of his temporal interests. 
The unchaste person pleads, as a motive and excuse, the force of 
the passions. The robber pleads distress, as his motive and ex- 
cuse. The murderer pleads the violence of temper. But none 
of these motives or excuses, insufficient as they are, can be urged 
by the swearer ; yet, what makes the problem more difficult of 
solution is, that by swearing a man does not strengthen our 
confidence in his word, but rather weakens it ; for 1 always ob- 
serve, that a man's word is doubted when he begins to swear. 
By swearing, he does not prove himself to be a gentleman ; all men 
admit that it is an ungentleraanly practice : nor is there any one 
ad\ antage to be gained by it. 

/$. I perceive, sir, the point of your remarks, and thank you 
for this faithful reproof. 1 must confess that there is no induce- 
ment for the swearer to swear ; and I must admit that, as far as 
the violation of the command of God is concerned, the swearer is 
equally guilty with the liar, the unchaste, the robber, or the mur- 
derer. Nay, even more so, as he not only sw'ears without a motive 
or inducement, but against strong personal motives and induce- 
ments. I trust, sir, 1 shall be more careful in future. 

Reader, what do you think of this problem, can you answer 
it? Do you think it impertinent, and therefore resolve to tbrow 
this paper away, and banish it from your mind? But what will 
you do, when the Judge, at the last day, shall call upon you to 
answer for violating his command, and treating lightly his holy 
name ? will you then banish it from your mind ? And what, if 
you cannot ; will you then call upon the rocks and mountains to 
fall on you, that they may hide yuu Irom the power of ihe Judge ? 
Will you attempt to meet the eye of your Judge, and dare to de- 
spise his authority? But what, if then it should be sounded 
in your ears, — '' This man often prayed for the damnation of his 
soul, and now his prayer is answered : bind him, theiefore, hand 
and foot, and cast him into outer darkness, wbere there is weep- 
ing and wailing, and gnashing of teeth." Ah, throuiih eternity 
you will bitterly curse your folly ! Come, then, whilst it is a day 
of mercy, and repent of all your transgressions, Hee to the Saviour, 
and seek for pardon through his precious blood. 

Printed bv W. Clowes and Sons, Duke-street, Lambeth ; »old at M, Palernoner-row 

[35] 





THE HIRING DAY; 

OR, A WORD FOR THE BEST MASTER. 




I SUPPOSE, 



and should like to 



you are out of place, 
be in one." Well, — 



I am, sir, 
you would 



like a good master ? — " Yes, sir, and I take it you would 
like a good seivant; one that would work as hard when 



when 



you can. 



ou are 



right, 



you can't see him, as 

. " Well, master, I wish to be right at all tmics, 

in all places, and in all things, both for this world and 
that which is to come." Well that would be " all right." 
Come, step aside with me, and we'll see if we can't agree. 
I hope my reader is aware that there are two masters 
in the world, one the best, the other the worst, — God and 
Satan. The former is the Author of all the good on earth 
and in hcaveru The latter is the author of all the 
wickedness and misery on earth and in hell. They are 
both in search of servants. God is so orood that he con- 
descends to employ the best means to obtain them, on 
purpose that they may go to heaven ; and the devil is so 
wicked, that he is using all the worst means to make his 
servants wicked that they may go to hell. Now, you and 
I are serving either the one or the other. For ** no man 
can serve two masters," Matt. vi. 24. Who then is your 
master ? — If you are not serving God, you must be serv- 
ing sin and Satan ; and " the wages oi sin is death," Rom. 
vi. 23. But if you wish to change masters, blessed be God 
this may be done, by the help of the Holy Spirit working 
in you repentance tow ards God, and faith in our Lord 
Jesus Christ, who " hath obtained eternal redemption for 
us." O then pray for the Holy Spirit ! If you did but know 
how willing, and ready, and able the Redeemer is to save 
the vilest of the vile, who are willing to be saved by him, 
and who come unto him, you would, I am sure you would, 
rather be the servant of God, than the master of the 
world ! 

Printed V W. Clowks and Sons, Duke-ttn-et, Lambeth ; sold at 56, Faternoittr-rCT 

[36] 










TEsrnioxiEs respecting the bible. 




Lord Bacon. — " There never was found in any age of tlie 
world, cillier ])hilosopher, or sect, or law, or discipline, \\hicli 
did so highly exalt the public good as the Christian faith." 

John Selden (called by Grotiiis, The glory of England.) 

" There is no book upon which we can rest in a dying moment 
but the Bible." 

John Milton., the immortal poet. — " There are no songs 
comparable to the songs of Zion ; no orations equal to those of 
the prophets; and no politics like those which the Scriptures 
teach." 

.^?> MatlheiD Hale. — " There is no book like the Bible, for 
excellent wisdom, learning, and use." 

The Honourable Robert Boyle. — " It is a matchless volume; 
it is impossible we can study it too much, or esteem it too 
highly.'' 

John Locke. — To a person who asked this profound thinker, 
which was the shortest and surest way for a young gentleman { 
to attain to the true knowledge of the christian religion, in the 
full and just extent of it, he replied, " Let him study the holy 
scriptures, especially the New Testament : therein are contained 
the words of eternal life. It has God for its author, salvation 
for its end, and truth, without any mixture of error, for its 
matter." At another time he said, " It is all pure, all sincere ; 
nothing too much, nothing wanting." 

Sir William Jores. — The foUow-ing words were written with 
his own hand in his Bible: — " I have carefully and regularly 
perused these holy scriptures, and am of opinion, that the 
volume, independently of its divine origin, contains* more sub- 
limity, purer morality, more important history, and finer strains 
of eloquence, than can be collected from all other books in 
whatever language they may have been written." 

Reader, oppose these, the deliberate and disinterested opi- 
nions of some of the greatest men that ever lived, to the flippnnt 
sarcasms of the infidel. Clasp the Bible to your heart — be- 
lieve its holy truths — obey its sacred commands — regulate 
your lives by its precepts — and die resting on that Saviour 
whom the scriptures reveal, as having " brought life and im- 
mortality to light through the gospel." 

Printed by W. Ctovrrs and Sons, Duke-»lr pt, Lninbeth ; sold at 36, raternctter-rovr. — Kc. »7 





IMPORTANT INQUIRIES 




My friend, what cotfrse of life are you pursuing? Will tlie 
road in which you are now walking- lead to heaven or to hell ? 
Read Matt. vii. 13, 14. 

Will the pleasures of sin in this world, be a sufficient com- 
pensation for the loss of the soul and heaven for ever? 

What shall a man give in exchange for his soul? Malt, 
xvi. 26. 

Going on as you now do, shall you run no risk of being 
damned ? 

What shall the end be of them that obev not the ifospel 
of God? 1 Pet. iv. 17. 

As life is short and uncertain, should God this day call yoti 
to his bar, are you prepared to die ? 

Since Christ has said, " Except a man be born again, he 
cannot see the kingdom of God," are you born again ? 

Do you diligently read the word of God for the purpose of 
knowing his will, and learning the way to heaven? 

Dost thou believe on the Son of God ? John ix. 35. 

Do you rest your hope of heaven on your own doings, or 
on the merits of Christ? 

What evidence do vou give of your faith in Christ ? 
James, ii. 18. 

Do you pray to God humbly, sincerely, constantly, and 
fervently ? 

Do you heartily repent of every known sin, hate it, and 
endeavour to avoid it ? 

Is your will subject to the will of God? 

Do \ou desire holiness as much as you desire happiness? 
Remember, that ** without holiness no man shall see the Lord " 
Heb. xii. 14. 

^Z you uaie vain thoughts, and shun vain company ? ' 

Do you love Christ sincerely, and obey him conscientiously . 

Let conscience frame an answer to each inquiry as m the 
presence of a heart-searching God, before whom you must 
shortly give an account, for '* it is appointed unto men once to 
die, but after this the judgment." 



rrinted by W. Cix>xvb» and Sons. Duke-sUeet. Lambeth ; .old at 56. raterno.t«.row.-No. W. 



THE Water of life. 



^ 



How necessary and valuable is water, and yet how little is its import- 
ance considered! Besides the common waters for which we should be 
thankful, God has provided us with various medicinal wattrs. \\ lien 
the suubreaks through a gloomy cloud, and cheers creation with its 
illuminating and invigorating beams, it is gratifying to see invalids of 
all descriptions, both male and female, high and low, young and old 
early in the morning, flocking in great numbers to the healin.' waters! 
Certainly they would not thus act were it not in hope, either of preserving 
or restoring the invaluable blessmg of health. 

O my beloved reader, how happy, how blessed a thing would it be, if 
all these persons were half as anxious to drink of the wells of salvation 
for the cure of their diseased souls, as they are to drink of the medicinal 
Waters for the recovery of their diseased bodies. But at the wells of 
salvation they must drink, or else they must die the second death. 

Sin has introduced into our never-dying souls, a malady which none but 
God can cure. Unbelief of God's promises and threutenings, rejection 
of the gospel, pride, envy, carnality, — in a word, " from the sole of the 
foot, even unto the head, there is no soundness in it, but wounds and 
bruises and putrifying sores," Isaiah i. 6 ; that is, from the noblest 
faculty of intellect, to the lowest animal appetite, there is no religious 
health, but a mass of moral impurity, offensive to God, and a symptom 
of approaching death to the sinner. But, W(jnder O heavens and be 
astonished, O earth ! the heavenly Physician, in great compassion to cur 
diseased souls, has been pleased, by the life and death of his only be- 
gotten Son, to open a fountain fur sin and uncleanness in the blood of the 
Saviour, and springs of living water in the promises of the gospel, and 
He invites and even beseeches us to wash and be clean, and to drink of 
the welis of salvation that we may live for ever. When the Redeemer 
was on earth, and weary with his journey, he sat down upon a well to 
rest, and being thirsty as well as weary, he said to a woman at the well, 
'•Give me to drink." He then told her, "If thou knewest the gift of 
God, and who it is that saith unto thee. Give me to drink ; thou wouldst 
have asked of HIM, and he would have given thee living water. Who- 
soever drinketh of this water shall thirst again ; but whosoever drinketh 
of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst ; but the water 
that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into 
everlasting life," John iv. 10. 13, 14; *' If any man thirst let him 
come unto me and drink," John vii. 37. " Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money ; come ye, buy, and 
eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without price," 
Ira. Iv. 1. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come; and let him that 
heareth say. Come ; and let him that is athirst come : and whosoever 
will, let him take the water of life freely," Rev. xxii. 17. God grant 
that the reader may " with joy draw water out of the wells of salva- 
tion !" Isa, xii. 3. 



Printed by W. Clowbs and So:<s, Duke-street, Lambeth , sold at 56, Paterno»ler-row. — No. 39 





T);^ 



] 4^^^" <>x«ocioooocaoooo«>»ooocooooqxooooooo(xo(xooooooooooooeooc j ^^ . 

r SCRIPTURE ADMONITIONS. ¥ 



The wages of sin is death. Rom. vi. 23. 
Prepare to meet thy God. Amos iv. 12. 
Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. 
Hcb. xiii. 4. 

Fools make a mock at sin. Prov. xiv. 9. 
There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked. 
Isa. Ivii. 21. 

Remember the sabbath-day to keep it holy. 
Exod. XX. 8. 

Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy | 
youth. Eccles. xii. 1. 

Awake to righteousness, and sin not_, 1 Cor. 
XV. 34. 

Have no fellowship with the unfruitful v.'orks 
of darkness, Eph. v. 11. 

Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways ; for why 
I will ye die? Ezek. xxxiii. 11. 

I Know ye not that drunkards shall not inherit | 
I the kino^dom of God. 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10. 
i The wdcked shall be turned into hell, Psa. ix. 17. 
I Behold the Lamb of God which taketli away 
i the sins of the world. John i. 29. 

I^fes^ rnotcd by W. Clowes and Sons, Duke-street, Lambeth ; sold ot 56, raternoster-row.— No. *<K ^^P^ 

W' # 



THE RIGHT WAY. 



Most persons, probably, hope to go to heaven when they 
die, and yet it is awfully true that they know not the way which 
leads thilher. One man is walkino- in the broad way ot sin and 
iniquity ; this cannot lead to heaven, for the word of God as- 
sures us that nothingcan enterthere " which defilclh, or worketh 
abomination, or maketh a lie,'' Rev. xxi. 27. 

Another is walking in the delusive path of self-righteousness ; 
this cannot be the right way, for (Christ himself has said, ''Except 
your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes 
and pharisees, ye shall in no case enter the kingdom of heaven," 
Matt. V. 20. 

A third is pursuing the path of formality ; vainly supposing 
that because he is regular at a place of worship, and punctual 
in the other outward forms of duty, he must be in the right way 
to heaven ; whereas our Lord has solemnly declared, that " Ex- 
cept a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom ot God," 
John iii. 3. 

Amidst the various and delusive paths, which so many arc 
eagerly pursuing to their eternal ruin, how may a poor be- 
wildered sinner know the right way? Listen for a moment while 
Christ himself, the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, pro- 
claims the delightful truth — " I am the way." This, reader, is 
the right way ; the only true, safe, holy, and approved way ol 
God. This is the way to life eternal, John xvii. 3. Pause then 
for a moment, and ask yourself in which of those ways you are 
walking ; the broad road of sin and self-delusion, or the narrow 
path of holiness and peace, which is marked out by the Saviour. 
If the latter is your way, then the Holy Spirit has enlightened 
your mind and regenerated your heart. The atonement of the 
Lord Jesus Christ is the only ground on which you hope for the 
forgiveness of your sins. The righteousness of Christ, the foun- 
dation on which you rest for accej)tance and justification; while 
the holy example of the blessed Redeemer is the constant rule 
of your life. If, reader, you are walking in this delightful 
road, if, indeed, Christ is your way, you cannot follow the 
multitude to do evil ; you will not be conformed to the vain 
fashions and maxims of this present evil world. No I you will 
take a higher, a holier, a happier walk ; nor will you trust 
to yourself, but be continually leaning upon Him who is the 
beloved of your soul. 

Printed by W. Ciowks and Sons, Duke-strcct, Lanbeth ; sold ot 30, raternotter-row.— No. 41. 



$(5^- 



CHRISTIAN. 



REMEMBER THAT THOU HAST 

TO-DAY 

A God to glorify, 1 Cor. vi. 20. 

A crucified Saviour to believe in, Acts xvi. 31. 

His example to imitate, 1 Pet. ii. 21. 

A body to mortify through th« Spirit, Rom. viii. 13. 

A soul to be saved, Phil. ii. 12, 13. 

Repentance to seek and perform, Acts v. 31 ; Luke xiii. 3. 

Passions to subdue, 2 Cor. x. 5 ; Eph. iv. 31, 32. 

Sins to weep over and forsake, Luke vii. 33 ; Prov. xxviii. 13. 

Graces and virtues to implore by earnest prayer, Phil. iv. G ; 

Mark xi. 24. 
Mercies and deliverances to be thankful for, Ps. Ivi. 12, 13 ; 

Psa. ciii. 1. 4. 

Works of charity to perform, Matt, xxv, 40. 

A neighbour to edify, Rom. xv. 2. 

A v\'orld to conquer, 1 John v. 4. 

Devils to combat, Eph. vi. 12. 

A hell to avoid. Matt. iii. 7. 

A paradise to gain, Rev. ii. 7. 10. 

Time to husband, Eph. v. 16. 

An eternity to meditate on. Col. iii. 2. 

To prepare for death, Luke xii. 20. 

And to watch for the day of judgment, Mark xiii. 37 ; 

2 Cor. V. 10 

And all these must he met and performed. 

Not in thi/te own strength, which is perfect weakness, 2 Cor. xii. 10 ; Phil. 

iv. 13, but in the 

GRACE OF CHRIST 



Printed by W. Ci owbs and Sons, Duke-street, Lambeth ; sold at 56, Paterno»ler-row.-No. *% 






THE HOLY SCRIPTURES. 




Remember, — it was the Holy Spirit who 
taught the prophets and apostles to write 
this book ; and if you would understand what 
they have written, you must be instructed by 
the same Spirit who taught them. 

Did you ever pray for tlie Spirit's teaching? 
Begin this new habit without delav Pray 
till you love to pray. Reaa your Bible till 
you love to read it. 

When you read any promise from God, 
think. What encouragement does this pro- 
mise give me ? and when you read a command 
from God, ask yourself. Is it my desire to 
follow this command ? 

The book of God is full of treasures ; aim 
at possessing them. It is full of warnings ; 
attend to them. It is full of holy examples ; 
follow them. It describes what Christ has 
done for us — it promises what He will do for 
us. Acquaint yourself with Him; He will 
give you peace. There is no help for you 
but in liis precious death — no help for you, 
but in his converting power. 

Turn to Him — He commands you, Ezek. 
xviii. 30 — 32. 

Turn to Him — He invites you, Joel ii. 12. 

Turn to Him — He will bless vou, Isa. Iv. 7. 

UNLESS YOU TURN, YOU PERISH. 

He offers pardon— Believe him, and take it. 

He promises holiness — Pray for it, and 
practise it. 

Printed by W. Clowbb and Sons, Dnke-street, I-ambetli ; »oU at 56, Faterno»ter-row. 

143] 










O READER! 

SUFFER the realities of that important 
state into which you must very shortly 
enter, to exert their full force and influ- 
ence on your daily conduct, remembering 
that the next remove or scene of being 
is 




Behold the Lamb of God v/hich taketh 
away the sin of the world, John i. 29. 

God commendeth his love toward us, 
in that while we were yet sinners, Christ 
died for us, Rom. v. 8. 

Lord, to whom shall v/e go ? Thou 
hast the words of eternal life, John 
vi.68. 



%^ Printed for the Religious Tract Society, and sold at the Depository, 
\^l 56, Paternoster-row.— Price 6d. per 100. No. 44. 









THE SOUL A PRECIOUS JEWEL, 




If a man were to travel through some dangerous wil- 
derness, having but one jewel in all the world, in which 
his whole property consisted, and should hear some in 
one place, some in another, crying out under the hands 
of cruel robbers ; oh ! in what fear would this traveller go 
lest he should lose his jewel, and be robbed of his all at 
once ! Why, my friend, thou art the man ; this traveller 
is thyself; this jewel is thy soul; this wilderness is the 
world. Thou hast to travel through crowds of sinners, 
legions of devils, and a whole world of temptations. 
These are the robbers that lie in wait for thy soul ; and 
if their utmost spite can keep thee out of heaven, tliou 
shalt never come there. Oh ! what if thy sins com- 
mitted, or duties neglected, thy pride or worldly- 
mindedness, thy delays and triflings in religion, should 
at last betray thy soul into the robbers' liands ! Otlier 
losses may be repaired ; but thy soul being lost, God is 
lost, Christ is lost, heaven is lost, all is lost for evermore. 
Secure then the safety of thy jewel, thy precious im- 
mortal soul. Turn into the strong hold, Nahum i. 7 ; 
the house of defence, Ps. xxxi. 2 ; the city of refuge, Ileb. 
vi. 18, even Jesus Christ, who saveth to the uttermost 
all that come unto God by him, Heb. vii. 25; and will 
preserve them unto his heavenly lingdcm, 2 Tim. iv IS, 



'?> 



Frinted by W. Cloi7es and Sons, Duke-strect, I.nnibelh ; told at 56, IV-ernotcr row.— No ij. 




JQooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooixiooooooooooooooooooacooJc>y:oooooooooooo 



THE SOUL IN DANGER. 




In what state is the soul by nature ? In a state 
of death, a state of wrath, Epiies. ii. 1, 3. Friend, 
bethink thyself where thou art, and whither thou 
art going. In thy natural, unconverted, unbe- 
lieving state, all thy sins are unpardoned, and the 
wrath of God abideth upon thee, John iii. 36, 
If vou saw a poor wretch hanging over a burning 
iiery furnace, by nothing but a slender thread, 
ready to break every moment, woukl not your heart 
ache for such a one ? Is this your case ? If the 
brittle thread of life should break the next 
moment, where would you be ? Oh, flee for refuge 
to the hope set before you in the gosjiel. Escaj>e 
for thy life ; and accept the ofier of salvation 
throuoh faith in the crucified Saviour. For God 
so loved the "world, that he gave his only begotten 
Son^ that whosoever believeth in PJim shoukl not 

perish, ])ut have everlasting life, John iii. 16. 



Printed by \V. Clovtss anJ Sons, Duke-s'.reef, Lambeth ; fold at M, raterno»:«r-rnK.— No «4 



,ii^ i»ccccocooococxxoooco^>"00oococcoocc aoocococooc- oocc ■■■■■.r xc^ yjnr -xiccooor 








u 



..^S^d?: 



9 

% 







ARE YOU 

PREPARED TO DIE ? 



Reader, — You are convinced that the time will arrive when 
you will breathe your last in this world. Should it be to-day 
or the next hour, are you ready to appear before God ? Oh ! 
stop and think ! examine yourself. Are you a humble and 
obedient follower of tlie Lord Jesus, seeking to please him in 
all things ? or have you never thought about your soul and 
death, and God, and heaven, and hell? spending vour days 
and nights in rioting and drunkenness, in chambering- and 
wantonness ? Oh ! let these lines admonish and advise vou. 
Are you determined to add sin to sin, and misery to misery ? 
Recollect, whilst this is your conduct, you are walking in the 
broad road to destruction, " treasuring up unto thyself wrath 
against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous jud"-- 
ment of God," Rom. ii. 5. Oh ! be wise : be wise to-dav ! lest 
at midnight or to-morrow it may be too late ! *' Now is the ac- 
cepted time, now is the day of salvation." If you seek the Lord 
this hour you may, and will find mercy : if vou dehav the 
important work until the next hour, you may then be in hell. 

Oh think of a suffering dying Saviour, whose blood alone 
can save and cleanse your soul. '* Let the wicked forsake his 
way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts : and let him re- 
turn unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him ; and to 
our God, for he will abundantly pardon," Isa. Iv. 7. Fall down 
at his feet, with the publican's prayer in your heart and on your 
tongue; " God be merciful to me a sinner I" Luke xviii. L3. 
Believe in his beloved Son, who gave his life a ransom for sinners. 
Embrace the glorious gospel of the blessed God ; and devote 
your body, and soul, and property, and time to his service and 
glory. Then, with a clear prospect of a blessed immortalitv before 
your eyes, you will be able to exclaim, " O death, w here is 
thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory.? Thanks be to 
God, which giveth me the victory through our Lord Jesus 
Christ," 1 Cor. xv. 5.5, 57. 



I Printed by W. Clowbs and Sons, DuUe-strect, Lnmbeth ; sold at 6«, ratemosler-rov.— No. 47 



J 







EIGHT REASONS ^ 

FOR NOT GOINO TO ,^r'j 

FAIRS, RACES, AND TLAYS. I 



1. Because I expose myself to evil, and can get no good there. 
Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, Luke xi. 4. 

2. Because I should employ my time better. 

See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, 
redeeming the time, Eph. v. 15. 

3. Because it is throwing my money away. 

Use this world as not abusing it, for the fashion of this world 
passeth away, 1 Cor. vii. 31. 

4. Because I do not icish to be seen in bad company. 
If sinners entice thee consent thou not, Prov. i. 10. v^ 
Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of ijc'i 

evil men : Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away, i?5?i 
Prov. iv. 14, 15. '^S^ 

5. Because I will not encourage idleness and vice. y-j^f 

He that biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds, 
2 John ii. 11. 

6. Because I should set a bad example. 

Choose you tnis day whom you will serve ; but as for me and 
my house, we will serve the Lord, Josh. xxiv. 15. 

7. Because God has forbidden it. 

Abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 Thess. v. 22. Be not 
conformed to tliis world, Rom. xii. 2. 

8. BECAUSE I MUST SOON DIE. 

So teach us to number our days that we may apply our hearts 
unto wisdom, Psa. xc. 12. It is appointed unto men once to die, 
but after this the judgment, Heb. ix. 27. For we must all appear 
before the judgment seat of Christ ; that every one may receive 
the things done in his body, accordmg to that he hath done, 
whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. v. 10. God so loved the world 
that he gave his only-bei^otten Son, that whosoever believeth in ^fi 
him should not perish, but have everlasting life, John iii. 16 V^^ 

Friated by W. Clowes and Sons, Duke-»trcet, Lanibeih ; sold atM, Palerno»ter-row,— No. iSL ^^/^ 







BEWARE OF THIEVES AND RORBEIIS 







If you go to the fair you are suie to be robbed. " H 
can you tell that? (you are ready to say,) besides I have 
nothing to lose, and therefore I can't be robbed." In that, 
my friend, you are very much mistaken. If you have not a 
single penny in money, you are in possession of a treasure 
i.ntrusted to your care, and for which you must hereafter 
give a strict account, which is of more real value than all the 
gold and silvei in the world. It is time, precious time ' TIls 
you will certainly lose. Oh, how many hundreds, in a dying 
hour, — and that hour, remember, must shortly come to you, — 
would have given all that they were worth, for a small portion 
of that time which you thus wantonly fling awav. If desti- 
tute of property, it may be you have a character for sobriety, s-iLj 
honesty, and industry, the loss of which would be a serious ^iM 
loss indeed I But this loss has often been incurred by the 
youth of both sexes, through going to the fair. Many have 
entered the fair with an unblemished reputation, but before 
^•B ^^^^y ^^^^'^ quitted those scenes c.f vanity and fo^ly, they have 
S»j^ been robbed of this inestimable jewel ; while, through the 
^i^ cunning craftiness of those that lie in wait to deceive unwary |^ 
youth, they have been drawn into such company, and led to 
form such connexions, as have issued in the ruin of their 
health, their reputation, and all their future prospects in life. 
Say not then that you have nothing to lose. Is time nothing ? 
Is character nothing? And is your precious and immortal 
soul nothing? — that soul which is of more value than all the 
world beside; for, "What shall it profit a man, if he gain the 
whole world, and lose his own soul ? or, What shall a man give 
in exchange for his soul ?" Matt. xvi. 26, 27. And shall all these 
be put to hazard for a few hours' silly amusement ? Oh consider 
your ways, and be wise 1 Flee from the wrath to come : — Flee 
unto Jesus the ^!ily Saviour, who died on the cross to save 
sinners. *■ He is able to save them to the uttermost that come 
unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession 
^1 for them," Heb. vii. 25. 

'i-J^ Pfiai«d by W. Clowes and Sons Di-Ve-street, Lambclb ; sold &t 56. '■ateronsler-row.— No. .<!>. 
















i 






PLEADING FOR PARDON. 



Show pity, Lord ; O Lord forgive ! 
Let a repenting rebel live : 
Are not thy mercies large and free ? 
May not a sinner trust in thee ? 

My crimes are great, but don't surpass 
The power and glory of thy grace. 
Great God ! thy nature has no bound. 
So let thy pardoning love be found. 

wash my soul from every sin, 

And make my guilty conscience clean ; 
Plere on my heart the burden lies, 
And past offences pain mine eyes. 

My lips, with shame, my sins confess 
Against thy law, against thy grace ; 
Lord, should thy judgments grow severe, 

1 am condemn'd, but thou art clear. 

Should sudden vengeance seize my breath, 
I must pronounce thee just in death ; 
And, if my soul were sent to hell. 
Thy righteous law approves it well. 

Yet, save a trembling sinner. Lord, 
Whose hope, still hovering round thy word. 
Would light on some sweet promise there. 
Some sure support against despair. 



1 



* 



Printed by W. Clowes and Sons, Duke-street, Lambeth ; sold at 56, Pateraoster-row. 



^& 



y^. 



€71^r:^<3^j^2 



CHRIST THE BEST FRIEND. 



One there is, above all others. 

Well deserves the name of Friend ; 

His is love beyond a brother's, 
Costlj^, free, and knows no end. 

They who once his kindness prove^ 

Find it everlasting love. 

Which, of all our friends to save us^ 
Could, or would, have shed his blood? 

But our Jesus died to have us 
Reconcil'd in him to God ; 

This was boundless love indeed ; 

Jesus is a friend in need. 

When he liv'd on earth abased, - 
Friend of sinners was his name ; 

Now above all glory raised, 
He rejoices in the same : 

Still he calls them, brethren, friends, 

And to all their wants attends. 

Oh, for grace our hearts to soften ! 

Teach us. Lord, at lengtli to love ; 
We, alas ! forget too often 

What a Friend we have above . 
But, when home our souls are brouo- it, 
We will love thee as we ought. 



Printad by W. Clowes and Sows, Duke-strcet, Lambetli ; sold at 50, Palernostcr-row. 



1:^=&^^' 



[51} 



^■i^ 



^^S.i 






■<^ 



^^.-i^tUo iiiJ 9/0 n^di 3ViO 

.j^N'Jidoui iJ ImoY; . ■ ;?i sill 
'^ .bii'i on ?7^on>f I»fix> ,t}'ji 

i hoolJ aifl borlg oviijl .bhio-w -ro ,bfiJo3 

<U 9YJ5l' 

: boO h'iiouocKJ/i 

; bfi^biii *j 

i eiiciii'* 

.LijrjiiJij aiij. , ... . ....... t.jii <! 

: yfiiji^. ill) III . -H 






®- 



THE INVITATION. 



Come, ye sinners, poor and wretched. 
Weak and wounded, sick and sore, 

Jesus ready stands to save you. 
Full of mercy, join'd with power 

He is able, 
He is willing ; doubt no more. 

O, ye needy, come and welcome, 

God's free bounty glorify ; 
True belief, and true repentance. 

Every grace that brings us nigh 
Without money, 

Come to Jesus Christ, and buy. 
Let not conscience make you linger, 

Nor of fitness fondly dream ; 
All the fitness He requireth. 

Is to feci your need of him ; 
This he gives you, 

'Tis the Spirit's rising beam. 

Come, ye weary, heavy laden, 
Lost and ruin'd by the fall ; 

If you tarry till you're better. 
You will never come at all 

Not the righteous. 
Sinners, Jesus came to call. 

View him prostrate in the garden, 

On the ground your Saviour lies. 
On the bloody tree behold him ; 

Hear him cry, before he dies, 
«' It is finish'd ! " 

Sinner, will not this suffice ? 
Lo ! the' incarnate God, ascended, 

Pleads the merit of his blood . 
Venture on him, venture wholly, 

Let no other trust intrude ; 
None but Jesus 

Can do helpless sinners good. 
Saints and angels, join'd in concert. 

Sing the praises of the Lamb ; 
While the blissful seats of heaven 

Sweetly echo with his name- 
Hallelujah ! 

Sinners here may sing the same. 



FiinteU by W. Clowe* and Sok., Duke-.treet, Lambetb . sold at M, Paternoiter-row. 



[521 



■•^\ 



.^ 



D-a) 



SALVATION 



Salvation ! oh the joyful sound ! 

'Tis pleasure to our ears ; 
A sovereign balm for every wound, 

A cordial for our fears. 

Buried in sorrow and in sin, 

At hell's dark door we lay ; 
But we arise by grace divine 

To see a heavenly day- 
Salvation ! let the echo fly 

Tlie spacious earth around. 
While all the armies of the sky 

Conspire to raise the sound. 




Come, let us join our cheerful songs 
With angels round the throne ; 

Ten thousand thousand are their tongues. 
But all their joys are one. 

*' Worthy the Lamb, that died," they cry, 

*' To be exalted thus ;" 
*' Worthy the Lamb," our lips reply 

" For he was slain for us." 

Jesus is worthy to receive 

Honour and power divine ; 
And blessings more than we can give. 

Be, Lord, for ever thine. 

Let all that dwell above the sky,. 

And air, and earth, and seas, 
Conspire to lift thy glories high, 

And speak thine endless praise. 

The whole creation join in one. 

To bless the sacred name 
Of Him that sits upon the throne 

And to adore the Lamb. 



Printed by \V. Clo-.tks and Sons, Duke Blreei- r.amheili. Sold at 56, Paternoster ro 



^?^( 



llf^^' 








THE REFUGE. 



Jesus, lover of my soul. 

Let me to thv bosom flv. 
While the billows near me roll. 

While the tempest still is high j 
Hide me, O my Saviour, hide. 

Till the storm of life is past ; 
Safe mto the haven guide. 

Oh ! receive my soul at last ! 

Other refuge have I none. 

Hangs my helpless soul on thee, 
Leave, oh ! leave me not alone. 

Still support and comfort me : 
i\.ll my trust on thee is stay'd. 

All my help from thee I bring. 
Cover my defenceless head 

With the shadow of thy wing. 

Thou, O Christ, art all I want. 

Boundless love in thee I find ; 
Raise the fallen, cheer the faint, 

Heal the sick, and lead the blind. 
Just and holy is thy name, 

I am all unrighteousness; 
Vile and full of sin I am. 

Thou art full of truth and grace. 

Plenteous grace with thee is found, 

Grace to pardon all my sin ; 
Let the healing streams abound. 

Make and keep me pure within : 
Thou of life the fountain art, 

Freely let mo take of thee ; 
Spring thou up within my heart. 

Rise to all eternity. 



M 



Printed b)- W. Clowe* and Somj, Duke-sueet, LembtUi ; sold at 65, Fatemo«ter-ro». 



■-[55] 



^^^^ 



1:1 • 



THE DRUNKARD'S CHARACTER. 

(From an old Author.) 



% 



Of all the fools on earth by heaven accurst. 
The drunkard should be reckon'd with the worst: 
No beast that walks the plain, or bird that flies 
Does act so base a part, and so unwise ; 
The slow, the dull, the poor despised ass. 
In wisdom does the drunkard far surpass ; 
It drinks no more, when nature's satisfied. 
But leaves the stream along the vale to glide ; 
But DRUNKARDS, of inferior sense, will drink 
Till they can scarcely walk, or talk, or think ; 
What sin will not a drunkard then commit. 
While in this vile intoxicated fit ? 
Satan can rule him then with easy sway, 
And turn him as he pleases in his way ; 
His health and wealth, his character and time. 
Are all destroyed by this atrocious crime. 
We censure thieves who into houses creep. 
To rob their neighbours whilst they are asleep . 
The drunkard does in drink so much deliofht, 
He robs his wife and children of their right. 
To purchase poison in the flowing bowl ; 
Which brings them all to want, and damns at last 
his soul ! 

Stay, sinner, stay, before it is too late, 
Reflect with sorrow on thine awftil state ; 
The blood of Christ can cleanse thy sins away. 
Oh, seek his mercy — seek without delay. 
Then sober live, and let thy future days 
Be wholly spent to God thy Saviour's praise. 



m 



" Know ye not that drunkards shall not inherit the kingdom of God." 

1 Cor. vi. 9, 10. 



f& 



Printed by W. Clowks and Sows, Duke-3tr«et, Lambeth ; lold at 36, Patemo»ter-row. 





THE FAITHFUL SAYING. 



Whose " faithful saying * is this ? for I liave 
heeii often deceived. It is the word of the Lord 
thy God. What reception does it require ? It is 
** worthy of all acceptation," and none can he saved 
who reject it. Wiiat is this " faithful saying,'* 
which demands so much regard ? " That Christ 
Jesus came into the world to save sinners." — 
Alas ! I am a sinner, a great sinner ; how do I 
know that there is mercy for me ? The apostle 
^|adds, " Of whom I am chief" Yes: there is 
mercy for the chief of sinners with Jesus Christ ; 
heiieve this " faithful saying" of that God A^ho 
cannot lie, and thou shalt be saved. If you believe 
not, you nmst perish in your sins. 

This is a faithful saying, and worthy 

OF ALL ACCEPTATION, THAT ChRIST JeSUS CAME 
INTO THE WORLD TO SAVE SINNERS; OF WHOM 

I AM CHIEF, 1 Tim. i. 15. 




FricleU by W. Clowes and Sons, Duice-stree:, Latnheth ; sold at M, riiierao«ter-rot*.^No. 3^. 







I 



A HUNDRED YEARS HENCE. 




It is a common saying with some people, when they 
are in trouble, " Well, it will be all the same a hundred 
years hence." They are right so far as relates to the 
things of this life, but they are wrong as to their never- 
dying souls. A hundred years hence, and you will be 
either in happiness or in woe, in heaven or in hell. A 
hundred years, did I say ? it may not be a hundred 
days, or hours, or minutes ! Say, then, are you pursuino- 
only those things that " perish with the using," and the 
value of which death will entirely destroy ? or, are you 
seeking the salvation of your soul, which will live for 
ever ? You would blame the folly of that man, who for 
the pleasure of a moment would sacrifice a laige estate ; 
but he is wise, compared with the person who gives up 
eternal happiness for all the pleasures of the world. 
Pray then for the promised gift of the Holy Spirit, to 
turn you from these perishing joys, to Christ, who has 
brought life and immortality to Hgh/, : believe on Him who 
died for our sins, and rose again for our justification : 
seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while 
he is near; then a hundred years hence you shall be 
with Christ, to abide with him for ever. Oh, my soul, 
a hundred years hence, or perhaps in a few days, I shall be 
cither m heaven or in hell ! 



Printed by Williau Clowes and Sons, DuKe-ttreet, Lambeth; sold at M, Paternotttr-row.— No. S& 



i 




^OCO. •• OOOCflCOiLV".". «jO>.CJW'-*^-X'-' -'■i^J^.r -t j.-j, »j^.-.-}j^ . • i/it-- ,.^. OCaji 






A GOOD PROFIT. ^^ 



V* 



\ ES : that IS what all men wish to have. With I 
^\'llat delight do they view their success and cal- 
culate their gains ! Reader, I will propose another 
calculation to you, in which you are deeply inter- 
ested ; it is conveyed in the following important 
question, put by Christ, who knew the value of 
I the souls for which he died. " What is a man 
s profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose 

o 

^ his own soul ?" INIatt. xvi. 26. He may gain 
money ; he may gain some friends ; he may gain 
earthly honours ; he may gain fading pleasures, 

yet \ 

LOSE HIS OWN SOUL. \ 

Balance this account, and see on which side p 

the profit lies. Let eternity be considered in I 

your reckoning, and then ask, whether the vanities | 

of the world are to be preferred to the ** durabhi \ 

riches and righteousness" which the Lord Jesus I 

Christ offers to every believer on Him. | 

^*iS Pi'.nted bv W. Crowds and iSo.Nii, Dukc-tlrc-rt, I.ambfth ; »ol.l at 55, r»ternc*wr-rr.vr.— No. S». ^%t 









AN EXCHANGE. 




When we make an excliange, we try to^^^ 
obtain something which is more valuable 
to us than that with which we part. This 
is very proper. But how many thousands 
there are who thoughtlessly barter the most 
valuable of all their possessions, their souls, 
for comparative trifles ! Some barter their 
souls for the lusts of the flesh, as drunken- 
ness and impurity, others for worldly gain or 
honour, others for evil company and amuse- 
ments. But what a foolish exchange do 
they make ! They gain the fancied plea- 
sures of a moment, they lose the joys of 
eternity ; they receive their portion with 
devils for ever. 

Reader, have you made such a bargain ? 
Let me propose to you this question of 
Christ, " What shall a man give in ex- 
change for his soul ?" Matt. xvi. 26. The 
whole world is but a trifle compared with 
your immortal soul. O hasten to Christ, 
who died to save the perisliing souls of 
men. Seek liis grace and mercy through 
faith, and then, should you even have to 
give up all things for Christ, this would 
,be indeed a profitable exchange. 

Printed by W. Clowbs and Sons, Dulce-street, Lambeth; told at 30. Pdternoiter-row. 





§mm 



•^^#>#- 



i?^ 



REST FOR THE WEARY. 




How sweet is rest to the weary ! Have you 
been seeking rest, but finding none ? Matt. xii. 
43. ]3e assured that you never can find it in 
yourselves, or in tlie world, *' for all have sin- 
ned," Rom. iii. 23. " And the way of peace 

* they have not known." *' There is no peace, 
saitli the Lord, unto the wicked," Isa. xlviii. 22 
Do you ask, where then can rest be found ? O 
listen to the words of Jesus Christ : " Come unto 
me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I ^ 
will give you rest," INIatt. xi. 28. How large, ^ 
how gracious, is this offer to burdened, trembling ^^ 
sinners ! And what kind of rest is this which 
Christ invites us to receive ? " Ye shall find rest 
unto your souls," ver. 29. This is the rest you 
need, and which Christ alone can bestow. Accept 
his offer without delay; you will then find his 
promise true and dehghtful to your souls; and 
then, amidst all the trials of life, you will be en- 
abled to rejoice that '' there remaineth a rest to 

M the peoj)le of God," Heb. iv. 9. 

rj-i\' Printed by W illiau Clowes and Sows, Diike-slreet, Lambith ; loUl m S6, raieriio«ter-row 

mmm — #[6i]# m^^ 





A FRIENDLY HINT. 




I AM sure, sir, you would not speak dis- 
respectfully before me .of my most intimate 
|& friend, yet forgive me if I say tliat you 
t^ have thus spoken of my best Friend, my 
'^Father, my Saviour, my God, on whomj^ 
my present happiness and all my hopes fff 
for the future entirely depend. Excuse Y 
the liberty I take in giving this friendly • 
liint. You know who has said, " Thou [ 
shalt not take the name of the Lord thy 
God in vain;" and who, in order that we 
might be without excuse for the commis- 
sion of this wilful sin, has added, " for 
the Lord will not hold him guiltless that 
taketh his name in vain," Exod. xx. 7. | 
Besides this, Jesus Christ, who died on the '. 
cross to save sinners, and who thus showed ' 
the tenderness of his compassion, has also 1 
5!P solemnly declared, " That every idle word^ 
K that men shall speak, they shall give ac- 
I count thereof in the day of judgment," 
'^^Matt. xii. 36. If we are thus account-? 
able for every idle word, will God overlook ^ 
profane and irreverent language ? 




Printed by W. Clot^kb and Soss, Duko-street, Lambeth ; K>ld at 58, Taternotter-row 



[62] 




i 



^ YET LACKEST THOU ONE THING. 

My fellow-traveller to an eternal world, 
art thou aware of tliy lost and ruined con- 
dition as a sinner in the sight of a holy 
God ? — Art thou sensible of thy need of an 
interest in the merits of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, who is the only Saviour of the world ? 
— Art thou aware of thy need of the teach- 
ings of the Holy Spirit ? — Art thou im- 
pressed with a sense of the worth of thy 
precious and never-dying soul? — of the 
value of time ? — of the uncertainty of life ? 
— of the certainty of death ? — and of the 
necessity of a new heart and a holy life to 
fit thee to stand in the presence of God at 
the last great day ? If thou art a stranger 
to all these things, sad indeed is thy con- 
dition, thou lackest that one thing, in which 
all things relating to thy salvation are 
included. Yet, though thy case is dis- 
tressing, it is not desperate, for God has 
promised the Holy Spirit " to them that 
ask him," Luke xi. 13. Oh then implore 
this invaluable gift, and he will guide thee 
into all truth, he will take of the things of 
Christ, and show them unto thee. Trifle 
not, I beseech thee, with this advice, for if 
thou shouldst die destitute of these bless- 
ings, thou wilt be lost for ever ! 

Printed by W. Clowbb and So:«», Duke-»treet, Lambeth ; sold at 56, Paterno»ter-row 

— [63 1 _ 






-^^ 



oeooo<x»ooooix)OOooooooooooooooooaooo(»c)Oooooooix)X)ooooooocoooooooocaooooooooooooo(»o -6-^b 



r-P A WORD TO THE AGED— TO THE "^ 
ACTIVE— TO THE YOUNG. 



" How old art thou?" — Perhaps you reply, "Three- 
score and ten years have rolled over my head." 
Permit me to inquire to what purpose you have 
lived all these years ? Have you ever been con- 
vinced that you are a lost and ruined sinner ? have 
you ever seen your need of Christ, and fled to him 
for refuge ? and are you living to his glory ? If 
this is your experience, how great are your ])re- 
sent mercies ! and yet a little wliile and you will 
enter into everlasting rest. But if you are an aged 
sinner, and destitute of the grace of God, remem- 
ber it is now your eleventh hour, and unless you 
flee to Christ for refuge, ere the door of mercy is 
shut, you will certainly perish. — Perhaps you are 
in the prime of life, with all the busy cares of this 
world pressing upon you; forgetting God, and 
only thinking of present prosperity. O remember 
" there is but one thing needful," t/w sahatmi of 
the soul — that neglected, that lost, then all is lost. 
May you be wise to choose the better part, Avhich 
shall never be taken from you. — Perhaps jou are 
young, and in full pursuit of earthly pleasure. O 
be assured all earthly joys Avill cheat and deceive 
you. In Christ alone is real happiness. Give 
the Saviour your best affections and your youthful 
days, and you will live blessed and a blessing, and 
eternal happiness will be your portion. 



-^' 



Printed by W. Clowes and Sons Duke-street, Lambeth ; sold at S0, Paterncit«r-row. 



!^;^^^.oooooooo«x«oeoo«x»«x»oo«rocoooooo| o4 I ooeoooooc>XiO<xx»oocooococxx»oooc«coo_|^^ftj^^^ 






i 





THE SAVIOUR'S INVITATION. 



" Come unto me, all ye that labour and are 
heavy laden, and I will give you rest/' Matt 
xi. 28. These are the words of Him who is in- 
finite in power and love ; who made all things, 
and who uphokls all things ; who, in the days of 
his flesh, by his word caused the dead to arise ; 
hushed the raging of the sea ; fed thousands with 
a few loaves and fishes ; healed the sick, and 
cleansed the lepers. He it is who now speaks 
to you, and bids you come to him with all your 
woes and sorrows, be they ever so trying, ever 
so bitter. Are you mourning the loss of a dear 
relative ? Go to Jesus Christ in humble prayer, 
and beseech him to support you under the trial. 
Are you lamentmg the loss of your property ? Go 
to Jesus : he can, by the gift of spiritual bless- 
ings, more than make up all your temporal losses. 
Are you destitute of health ? Go to Jesus : he can 
heal your diseases, and renew your strength like 
the eagle's. Psalm ciii. 5. Are you weary of yonr 
sins, and is the remembrance of iniquity a burden 
to your conscience ? In these circumstances you 
are peculiarly welcome to Jesus ; for he ^^ gave 
his life a ransom for sinners," Matt. xx. 28. 
'' He came to call sinners to repentance," Matt. 
I^ix. 13. O go to him with all your burdens, and | 
be assured " he will in no wise cast you out '" ^\ 
% John vi. 37 

Printed by W. Clowes and Sons, Duice-street, LambeCli ; sold at 56. Paternoster-row. 









A WORD TO THE SLOTHFUL. 




If you would know a sluggard in the things of heaven, com- 
pare him with one that is slothful in the things of this world: 
L^s — 1. He that is slothful is unwilling to set about the work 
[he should follow ; so is he that is slothful for heaven. 2. He 
that is slothful is one that is willing to make delays; so is he 
that is slothful for heaven. 3. He that is a sluggard will 
make any small matter an excuse to keep him off from attend- 
ing to his work ; so is it also with him that is slothful for 
heaven. 4. He that is slothful does his work by halves ; and 
so it is with him that is slothful for heaven : he may almost, 
but he shall never, without he mend, be altogether a saint. 
5. They that are slothful usually let the time in which things 
are to be done pass away ; and thus it is also with them that 
are slothful for heaven, they miss the seasons of grace. 6. 
They that are slothful have seldom or never good fruit ; so 
also it will be with the soul sluggard. 7. They that are sloth- 
liil are chid for the same ; so also will Christ deal with those 
that are not active for him. " Thou wicked and slothful ser- 
vant, out of thine own mouth will I judge thee;" " Take the 
unprofitable servant, and cast him into outer darkness; there 
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." 1. What shall I say ? 
Time runs ; and will ye be slothful ? 2. Much of your lives is 
past ; and will ye be slothful ? 3. Your souls are worth a thou- 
sand worlds; and will ye be slothful.? 4. The day of deatii 
and judgment is at the door; and will ye be slothful? 5. Tlie 
curse of God hangs over your heads; and will ye be slothful? 
6. Besides, the devils are earnest, and laborious, and seek by 
all means, everyday, by every sin, to keep you out of heaven, 
and hinder you of salvation ; and will ye be slothful ? 7. Your 
neighbours are diligent for things that will perish ; and will you 
be slothful for things that will endure for ever ? 8. Was Christ 
slothful in the work of your redemption ? 9. Are his faithful 
ministers slothful in tendering this unto you ? Are not you sloth- 
ful in hearing them ? 10. And, lastly, if all this will not move, 
I tell you, God will not be slothful or negligent to condemn 
you, " whose damnation now of a long time slumbereth not." 

Arise, man, be slothful nolonger ; set foot, heart, and all, in^ 
thewayofGod,andrun; the crown is at theendof the race; there^ 
stands the kind Forerunner, Jesus, who has prepared hea- ' 
,venly provision to make thy soul welcome, and he will give it thte 
with amore willing heart than ever thou canst desireitof him. 

1. Lowsa and Sons, Dukc-strect, Lainbetli; so'd ut 5b", F;iteriiosier-row. 








THE SWEARER'S PRAYER. 







What I a swearer pray ! Yes, swearer, wliether thou thinkest 
so or not, each of thine oaths is a prayer,— an api>eal to ilic l»oly 
and almighty God. 

And what is it, thinkest thou, swearer, tliat thou dost call for, 
wiion the awful imprecations, Danm and Damnation, roll so fre- 
quently from thy profane tongue? Tremble, swearer, while I 
tell thee. Tiiy prayer contains two parts: Thou praykst, first, 
that thou mayest be deprived of eternal happiness ! Secondly, 
tliat thou mayest be plunged into eternal misery ! 

When thou callest for danniation, dost thou not, in effect, say 
as follows? " O God ! thou hast power to punish me in hell for 
ever: therefore, let not one of my sins be forgiven ! Let every 
oath that I have sworn, and all the sins that 1 liave committed, 
rise up in judgment against me, and eternally condemn me ! 
Let me never partake of thy salvation ; and let me never enter 
into the kingdom of heaven !" 

This is the first part of thy prayer.— Let us hear the second. 

" O God ! let me not only be shut out of heaven, but also shut 
up in hell ! May all the members of my body be tortured with 
inconceivable aji;ony, and all the ])owers of my soul tormented 
with horror and despair, inexjuessible and eternal ! Pour down 
thy hottest anger ; ex(H;ute all thy wrath and curse upon nje ; 
arm and send forth all thy terrors against me ; and let thy fierce, 
thy fiery, thy fearful indignation, rest ujwn me, and torment me 
in hell, for ever, and ever, and ever ! I I" 

Swearer, THIS is thypravek!!! Oh dreadful imprecation! 
Oh horrible, most horrible! Dost thou like thy petition! Art 
THOU DESIROUS OF ETERNAL TORMENT? If SO, swear ou — swear 
liard. The more oaths, the more misery ; and, perhaps, the 
sooner thou mayest be in hell. Swearer, be thankful, oh ! be 
exceedingly thankful, that God has not answered thy tremendous 
prayer ! Never let him hear another oath from thy unhallowed 
tongue, lest it should be thy hist expression u])on earth, and tliy 
swearing prayer should be answered in hell. Oh ! let thine oatljs 
be turned into supplications! Repent, and turn to Jesus, who 
died for swearers, as well as for hin murderers. And then, oh! 
then, 'though thou mayest iiave sworn as many oaths as there 
are " stars in the heavens, and sands uj)on the sea-shure inuu- 
mera)jle,") then thou shalt find, to thy eternal joy, that there is 
love in his heart, and merit in his blood, sufficient to pardon thy 

sins, and save thy soul for ever. Swearer ! canst thou ever 

again blaspheme sucii a God and Saviour as this ? Does not thy 
conscience cry, God forbid ? Even so, Amen. 

Clowbs and So.t«, DuKe-street, Laid be) h ; «old at 5«, Patcra.->«ier-row. 

rft7 '=^^54-^^%^4^r^ 





^" ^ 



'4'! 



■><s:^- 





[68] 



(li ALL IS WELL THAI ENDS WELL. 



Mankind are divided into two classes, the 
righteous and the Avicked ; and there is no other 
chiss. (iod thus speaks respecting tlieui in his 
holy word, ^^ Say ye to the righteous, tliat it shall 
be well with him : woe unto the wicked ! it shall 
be ill with him," Isaiah iii. 10, 11. Now, to 
which class do you belong ? Are you one of the 
righteous ? that is, are you holy and humble, 
loving God, his Avord, his day, his people, and 
prayer ; and looking for eternal life through the 
death of the Lord Jesus Christ on the" cross ? then 
it shall be well with you in life, in death, and for 
ever. All will assurealy ena well Avith you. But 
if you are one of the wicked, Avho neglect the 
sabbath, ana prayer, and the Bible, and trifle 
with sin and your soul, it must be ill Avith you in 
the present life, for " the Avay of transgressors is 
hard," Prov. xiii. 15. " There is no peace, 
saith the Lord, unto the AAicked," Isaiah xlviii. 
22. And then, as it regards a future life, all 
must be ill, " for the AAages of sin is death," 
Rom. vi. 28. " The AAicked shall be turned 
into hell," Psalm ix. 17. Be sure an J keep 
your eye upon the end of your life, and remember 
that as you live and die, so you Avill appear in the 
day of judgment^ and be either blessed or miser- 
able for ever. JMay God give you grace to attend 
to these truths, and enable you to flee unto Christ, 
Avho '* is able to save them to the uttermost that 
come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to 
make intercession for them," Heb. vii, 25. 



rrintcd by W. Clowe* and Sons, Duke-strcet, Lambeth ; sold at 56, Paternotwr-row. 



i 




DO YOU EVER PRAY? 




It may be you are astonished at this inquiry, and 
feel almost offended that it should be supposed 
you are living without prayer ; but pardon me, if 
I tell you that it is possible to utter many words 
upon our iinees, and yet never pray ; for prayer is 
a pouring out of the soul before God : it is a 
seeking of him with all the heart, and feeling 
what Jacob did, Avhen he said, " I will not let thee 
go, except thou bless me," Genesis xxxii. 26 ; and 
be assured unless, by the Holy Spirit's teaching, 
you are thus in earnest when you bow your knees 
before God, you do not pray. But, perhaps, you 
never use even the form of prayer ; you rise in the 
morning, and never bless the God who preserved 
you ; you lie down at night, and never thank him 
for his tender care over you, nor ask the pardon 
of your sins through the blood of Christ. You 
never enter your closet to call upon God, Matt. 
vi. 6 ; it may be you have a family, and you never 
lead them to the family altar to seek their JMaker's 
face and favour. Is this your case ? Are you 
living without prayer? exposed to a thousand 
dangers, with a soul to be saved, and yet never 
seeking God for mercy, pardon, protection, peace, 
and salvation. O remember that a prayerless 
soul is a Clmstless soul, and if you die without an 
interest in Christ, you are lost for ever. But still 
the voice of mercy is thus addressing you, ** Seek 
ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon 
him while he is near," Isaiah Iv. 6. 

Printed by W. Cn\wj!» and Sons, Dukc-tlrcet, Lambeth ; sold at M, ratemoster-row. 

[69 1 







THE SLAVE. 




^Are you a slave? — Perhaps you are surprised at 
the question, and feel as the Jews did of old, when 
they said to our Saviour, " We were never in 
bondage to any man," John viii. 33. You pity 
the poor negro, who is subject to hard and cruel 
bondage in foreign lands, because he is a slave, 
and you rejoice that you are not in the same con- 
dition : but did you ever consider, that if you 
are in love with sin — if you are a drunkard, a 
liar, a swearer, unchaste, malicious, or a sab- 
bath-breaker, that you are a slave ? tliat the 
heavy chains of Satan — that cruel tyrant ! that 
hard master ! are upon you ; and that, unless 
these chains are broken off by divine grace, they 
will drag you down to hell ? Oh, then, while you 
pity the poor slave, who will soon be delivered by 
death from the cruel bondage of his fellow-men, 
do not lose sight of your own condition. You 
are dragging about a heavy chain now, and if 
you die the slave of sin, you will be '* reserved in 
everlasting chains under darkness unto the judg- 
ment of the great day," Jude 6 ; and then you will 
hear the final sentence, '' Depart from me, ye 
cursed, into everlasting fire," JMatt. xxv. 41. 
Would you escaj)e from your present slavery, and 
be indeed free ? Then look up to God to give 
you his Holy Spirit, Luke xi. 13, to lead you to 
Jesus, who alone can set you free from the power 
I of sin and Satan; and *' if the Son shall make^j 
^ you free, ye shall be free indeed," John viii. 36, 

I : 13 

K Printed by W. Clowes and Somi, Duke-8tre«t, Lambeth ; sold atM, Paternostrr-row-. 



i 




^^5^^=. 

■-^^^^^•='1 




" ONE GLASS MORE." 

STAY, mortal, stay ! nor lieedless thus 

Thy sure destruction seal 
Within that cup there lurks a curse, 

Which all who drink shall feel. 

Disease and death, for ever nigh, 

Stand ready at the door. 
And eager wait to hear the cry 

Of — " Give me one glass more." 

Go, view the prisoners* gloomy cells. 

Their sin and mis'ry scan, 
Gaze, gaze upon these earthly hells, — 

In drink their woes began. 

Of yonder children, bath'd in tears, 
^ Ask why is mother poor ? — 
S They'll whisper in thy startled ears, 
Wv> " Twas father's — ' one glass more.' " — 

"^y Stay, mortal, stay . repent ; return ! 
Reflect upon thy fate ! 
The poisonous draught for ever spurn. 
Spurn ! spurn it, — ere too late ! 

Oh ! fly the horrid alehouse then, 

Nor linger at the door ; 
Lest thou perchance should'st sip again 

The treach'rous ** one glass more." 

Trust not to thy deceitful heart. 

The Saviour's grace implore ; 
Through him from ev'ry sin depart, 

And touch that glass no more. 



W Printed for the Religious Tract Society, and sold at the Depository, V^!^ 
% 56, Paterno8ter-rc;v.— Price ^d. per IOC. No. 71.'^^;^ 



( 





WHAT AM I?— WHERE AIM I?— 
WHITHER AM I GOING? 




J What am I ? — ^The possessor of a soul that must be 
happy or miserable for ever. — A sinner ao-ainst God. — > 
A transgressor from my birth. I have a heart that is 
deceitful above all livings, and desperately wicked, every 
imagination of which is evil, and that continually. 1 
have a carnal mind, at enmity against God. My under- 
standing is darkened through the ignorance that is in me 
because of my unbehef. I am tied and bound with the 
chain of my sins, and am by nature a child of wrath even 
as others. 

Where am I ? — In a world that lieth in wickedness, 
where Satan, the god of it, blinds the minds of them that 
believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, 
who is the image of God, should shine into them. 
Where men are following divers lusts and pleasures. 
Hateful, and hating one another. Where they are closinor 
their eyes, stopping their ears, and hardening their 
hearts, and saying to God, Depart from us. I am walk- 
ing upon the earth that shall, ere long, be destroyed by 
fire, with all its works 

Whither am I going? — With the "haters of God," 
the despisers of his word, the breakers of his sabbath, in 
the broad road that leadeth to destruction ; — or, am I 
walking in the narrow way that leadeth to life ? Re- 
flect, this night thy soul may be required of thee. Now 
flee from the wrath to come to that Saviour who is able 
to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by Him, 
and who saith, '^ Him that cometh unto me I will in no 
wise cast out." Then you will be going to a better 
country : to the rest that remaineth for the people of 
God : where God shall wipe away all tears from your 
eyes ; and where you will join the assembly of the re- 
deemed, who sing praises to Him that loved them, and 
washed them from their sins in his own blood. — Thither, 
O reader, may you and I be going. 

Pnnted by W. Clowss and Sons, Duk;-9trr«t, Lambeth ; sold at M, raternMt«r-ra«r. 



*-#^ 



1.^ 



% 



'■''< 



V 



COME TO JESUS. 



Come unto me all ye thai labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you 
rest, Matt. xi. 20. 

Come, poor sinner, come to Jesus, 

Weary, heavy-laden, weak ; 
None but Jesus Christ can ease us, 

Come ye all, his mercy seek. 
" Come," it is his invitation ; 

'' Come to me," the Saviour says ; 
Why, O why, such hesitation, 

Gloomy doubts, and base delays? 
Thus invited to his favour, 

Will you pause, and not draw nigh .-' 
This would be to charge your Saviour 

With deceit and cruelty. 
Do you fear your own unfitness, 

Burdened as you are with sin? 
'Tis the Holy Spirit's witness ; 

Christ invites you ;— enter iu. 
Do your sins, and your distresses, 

'Gainst this ?acred record plead ? 
Know that Christ most kindly blesses 
Those who feel the most tlieir need. 
Hear his words so true and cheering'. 

Fitted just for the distress'd, 
Dwell upon the sound endearing ;^^ 
Mourner, " I will give you rest." 
Stay not pond'ring on your sori-ow. 
Turn from your own self away ; 
Dare not linuer till to-morrow. 

Come to Christ without delay. 
He will give— we ne'er can merit, 
Peifec^t peace and heavenly rest ; 
What a treasure we inherit 1 

How are contrite sinners blest ! 
Jesus, with thy word complying. 

Firm our faith and hope shall be ; 
On thy faithfulness relying. 

We will cast our souls on Thee. 

[73] 



W^ 



^ 



(-¥ 




\ 




CO 

O 

in 
W 



CO 



en 

fin 


•i 

s 

.S 
1 


earnestly, 
diligently, 
frequently 


patiently, 
hopefully, 
joyfully, 
thankfully 


carefully, 
watchfully 


zealously, 
dependen 


3 






s 







173 






I- ,0 *J 






CJ (u »^ 'O _ 



^' O ^ rt 3 2 



-^ 



o- r. 



O X 



3 — : 



-a 

CO 



o -5 






rt Se 




SfiiJ^iS- (xxx5oooooooooooooooooe)C»oooooooooooo<xxx>axx5cxxx!aoccoooooooooooc^^ '^/li^^'^ 

f^ HOW LONG ?TAVE I TO LIVE ? ^^ 



Reader! this is a solemn question, which to you may 
be unwelcome, but to trifle with it, will be to trifle with 
your best interests. It is true, with respect to the future, 
that we know not what shall be on the morrow ; what is 
our Hfe ? at the longest it is but a hand-breadth. Whether 
we spend it in ease or in pain, the day will soon come when 
we must enter into eternity. Consider then the frailty of 
your life, and do not defer thinking of your death till to- 
morrow, when you may die to day. May die to day ! 
awful thought! think seriously and frequently of this ; for 
to the bed of death you must surely and shortly come. 
Remember, at this moment, your time is shorter, and the 
grave nearer to you, than it was. The pleasures you may 
have loved — the honours you may have gained — the pro- 
perty you may have amassed — what will they avail you in 
the hour of death ? At that hour your dearest friends 
must all be left behind, and your employments will then 
cease for ever. Are you then prepared for this great 
chancre ? a change which will certainly and perhaps quickly 
come^ If not, oh ! I beseech you, as you value the wel- 
fare of your immortal soul, return to that God against 
whom you have rebelled. Humbly confess your numerous 
sins. Trust in the accepted merits of Christ Jesus, who 
came into the world to save sinners. Look to Him for all 
you need, and He has graciously promised '' Him that 
Cometh to me, I will in no wise cast out." ^ You live under 
the richest dispensation of mercy : — " The Spirit says. 
Come ; and the bride says, Come ; and let him that hear- 
eth sav, Come ; and whosoever will, let him take the water 
of hfe Yreely." There is hope to all who come ; but those 
who wilfully despise the invitation of the Saviour, exclude 
themselves from eternal happiness. Consider these things, 
g and may the Lord give you grace to flee from the 
I wrath to come, and enable you to derive everlastmg proht 
i from reflecting seriously on this solemn question,— How 
I long have I to live ? ^^ 

ife Printed by W. Cvowks and Soss. Dukc-strcc. Lannhcth ; roM at 56. Pa.erno.ler-ro,r. M^^ 




THE RACES. 



What is to be seen tliere ? The horses 
whipped and goaded cruelly on to their ut- 
most speed, amidst the oaths and shouts of 
the multitude ; and thousands of people as- 
sembled, among whom are some of the worst 
of the human race, such as drunkards, 
swearers, gamblers, thieves, and lewd cha- 
racters. Here the evil passions of human 
nature are let loose without restraint, and 
people harden each other in vice. Are the 
Races suitable pleasures for one who calls 
himself a " Christian ?" You cannot be 
really a Christian if you love such amuse- 
ments as these. — No: You are " lovers of 
pleasures more than lovers of God," 2 Tim. 
iii. 4. You are going the downward road 
that leads to perdition. You are triflino- 
away your time and your opportunities, and 
endangering, ruining your souls. Turn ye, 
turn ye, why will ye die ? Flee from your 
sins — flee to Christ. He has died for our 
sins, and risen again for our justification. 
Turn to him for the pardon of your sins, and 
the renewal of your mind; and then you 
will become a Christian indeed, and learn 
the folly and vanity of the Races. 



Printed by W. Clowes and Sons, Uuke-sUeet, Lambeth ; sold at M, Patemoster-ra». 



*- 1 



THE ODDS ARE AGAINST YOU. 




You ^^o to the races to see the sport ; or 
because your comi3auions go ; or because 
the amusement makes you forget your cares 
and troubles : at any rate you wish, and 
are striving to find happiness. But the 
odds are against you ; lor you will never 
find it there. You risk your time, your 
money, and your character. And for what ? 
To see horses running at their full speed 
for a very short time, and then to say. It is 
all over, and I am none the better, but 
rather much the worse. The odds are 
against you ! For surely to waste a whole 
day for such a sight is very foolish. But 
have you not a soul, and will you stake this 
for the pleasures of a moment ? Will you 
run into temptation, evil company, and sin, 
at the races, and give up true happiness, 
holiness, and heaven ? Oh the odds are 
against you as to tliis life, and dreadful 
If against you as to eternity ! Why will ye 
^[i die ? Turn from these lying vanities. Seek 
§ the mercy of Christ while it is called to-day. 
||| With Him there is no uncertainty, no risk ; 
|r for it is " a faithful saying, and worthy of 
\}f all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into 
& the world to save sinners," 1 Tim. i. 15. 

m 

y-}>^] . - 

I'rinted by W. Clowes and Sons, Duke-street, Lambeth ; sold at 56, Patenio3ter-ro» 



'^ 




HARD TIMES. 



The times are hard — work is scarce — and many 
people have very little to do, and very little money 
coming in for their support. And yet they make 
the times harder to themselves by going to the 
Races. How often is more money spent in these 
and similar amusements than is earned in a whole 
week ! and some people are so base as to leave 
their families destitute, in order to seek the«e fool- 
ish and sinful pleasures. From my heart I pity 
the distresses of the poor ; but I must blame them 
for wasting their time, health, money, and cha- 
racter, by going to the Races. Solomon says, 
" He that loveth pleasure shall be a poor man ;" 
and so he will, whatever his income may be ; for 
lust is ever craving, and never satisfied. What 
can such pleasures do for you even as to this life ? 
They only leave you the more miserable when 
they have vanished away. What can they do at 
death ? Then they will fill the conscience with 
dread and anguish. What can they do as to the 
eternal world? Only conduct the soul to ever- 
lastino- woe. Flee then now, without delay, from 
the wrath to come ; and lay hold on the sinner's 
'^ only hope, the Lord Jesus Christ, " the Lamb of 
God which taketh away the sin of the world." 




Printed by W. Clowb. and Son*, Duke-sireet. Lambeth ; lold at 56. Pafernotter-row. 




.8-— *6t! 



fc 



f Of f 







GO NOT. 



My friend, you are hastening to the Race-course. 
Have you ever considered whether it is right to go 
there? or are you only just following the example 
of others, without thinking at all on the subject? 
Let me advise you to pause a little. Just ask 
yourself, — Are the Races worthy of all this bustle, 
and trouble, and expense? Is it right that I 
should place myself in the midst of the company of 
lewd, swearing, gambling people, who flock in 
such numbers to these scenes? What does the 
J3ible say to such a course and such company? 
'' Enter not into the path of the wicked, and GO 
NOT in the way of evil men. Avoid it, pass 
not by it, turn from it, and pass away/' Prov. iv 
14, 15. " Thou shalt not follow a multitude to 
do evil," Exod. xxiii. 2. Such company is dis- 
creditable to a good character, and injurious to 
your temporal interests ; and oh, how dangerous to 
your soul ! What shall a man give in exchange 
for his soul? Are the pleasures of the Race- 
course worth the sacrifice of your soul? Has not 
Christ died on the cross to save sinners, and to 
turn their feet from such pleasures as these, and 
from all sin ; and will you despise Him and his 
commandments— and perish ? O, turn from these 
vanities to Him, and pray that you may be re- 
newed in the spirit of your mind ; then such com- 
pany and such pursuits as are alone worthy of an 
immortal soul will be your delight. 



rrinted by W. Clowe* and Soxs, Duke-street, Lambeth, sold at ■J6, Paternoster-rovr. 

' -[79] 






SIX CONSIDERATIONS 

FOR SUNDAY-SCHOOL TEACHERS 



Yirst— The soul of each child is immortal. 
When the world and all things in it shall come to an end, 
the soul of each child in the school will be unspeakably 
happy or miserable. How important then is your charfre ! 
He that winneth souls is wise. Prov. xi. 30. 

Second. — Each child is a sinner. 
And by nature lying under the awful sentence of condem- 
nation. Rom. iii. 23. Tsa. xiv. 2, 3. John iii. 19. 2 Cor. 
V. 19—21. John iii. 36. 

Third. There ts no Saviour but Christ Jesus. 

All other refuges are false and delusive, but his blood 
cleanseth from alfsin ; and the blessings of his salvation are 
offered freely, without money or price, to all who believe in 
his name. But children naturally know nothing of Christ 
Jesus- and how shall they believe without an instructor? 
Acts iv. 10—12. Isa. liii. 2—12. Heb. ix. 28. John iii. 16, 
18. Rom. v. 1, 8—10. 

Fourth — The time is short 
And death is certain. We know not what a day may bring 
forth • nor are we sure of another opportunity of meeting with 
the children, to tell them of an eternal world, or to exhort 
them to flee from the wrath to come. Now, then, is the time 
to speak of Christ's love to sinners, and to point out his 
ability and his willingness to save to the uttermost, all who 
come unto God through him. Isa. xl. 6, 7. Eccles. ix. 10. 
Psa. xc. 3, 10, 12. Heb. vii. 25. 

p\{\\i, — Success belongs to God. 
But the use of suitable means belongs to us. And whether 
a teacher is permitted to see the fruits of his labours in the 
real conversion of his scholars, or olherwise, his duty is 
equally the same. It should be sufficient for u-s o know, that 
at the time which best pleaseth Him, God will command a 
blessing. Eccles. xi. 6. Acts i. 7. 

Sixth— 7ear/ie7 5 are answerable to God for t-he diligent and 
faithful use of every talent ivhich they possess. 

Matt. XX V. 14—46. Ezek. xxxiii. 2—9 

"' rrinted by W. CtowES nnd Sons, Duke-street, I.ambeth ; sold at 56. Palemoster-row. 





w 



ne-YAci 



■ IS t* 




SIX REASONS 



FOR 



GOING TO A SUNDAY-SCHOOL. 



1. Because I wish to read the Holy Scriptures and to kiiow more of 
their meaning, and to search out what they say of Jesus Christ, and of 
eternal life through him. 

2. Because God's sacred day should he kept holy, and be spent in 
attending his house of prayer, worshipping him, and learning his 
wdl. 

3. Becatise youth is the best time to gain knowledge, and to seek the 
mercy of Christ, who says, 1 love them that love me, and they that seek 
me early shall find me. 

4. Because the teachers wish to do good to the souls of their scholars, 
and fo lead them to Jesus Christ the Lamb of God, whicii taketh away 
the bins of the world. 

5. Because, though young, I have lived too long in folly and sin, and 
now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation. 

6. Because I have a soul that will be happy for ever in heaven, or 
miserable for ever in hell, and I wish to hear of Jesus Christ, who 
alone can save me from the wrath to come, and bestow upon me 
everlasting life. He has said, *' Suffer little children to come onto \i 
me and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God,'' Ltke 
xriii. 16. 



rrinteJ by V/. Ciowicg "ind So.ns, Dnke-strwct, r.amlietii ; gold at 5S, Faternoster-rovT. 




[81} 









TEN REASONS WHY I LOVE TO GO 
TO MY SUNDAY-SCHOOL. 



'^f 



•>- 



I Because I am ignorant and want to be taught. 

2. Because I shall get no good by spending the time 
in idleness and play. 

3. Because God has commanded us to keep holy the 
SabbatVi-day. 

4. Because by improving the Sabbaths, which God has 
given to me, I wish to become wise in the days of my 
youth. 

5. Because good boys and good girls love to go there. 

6. Because prayer is offered to God there, the word of 
God is read there, and the praises of God are sung there. 

7. Because there my mind is improved, and I learn my 
duty to God and man. 

8. Because my teachers kindly tell me of the love of 
Christ to the young, and point out the way of salvation 
through his sufferings and death. 

9. Because when I grow old 1 shall not be able to go, 
and therefore I ought to improve the present time. 

10. Because I wish to go to Heaven when I die, and 
at the Sunday-school I shall learn the way thither. 















Printed for the Religious Trart Society, and sold at 5G, Pateiuostwr-row. 
Price 6d. per 100. No. S2. 



"35, ^7.-t ^r^t, ^^J •^. 




^ 



^^# 




]W THE CHARACTER OF 

^ GOOD SU NDAY SCHOLARS. 

S^ 1 They wish to read and lo understand the Holy Scriptures, which (j^ 
M. are able to make them wise unto salvation, through faith which is g] 

tin Christ Jesus. , , ., . .u ^ 

2 They always strive to be in good time at school, that they may ^ 
)]w( join in the opening prayer, and may neither lose their precious )| 
& sabbath time, nor grieve their kind teachers. « 

^ 8 Thev try to be quiet and attentive while at their lessons, know- ^ 
^ ing that Wisdom is the principal thing, and that the fear of the ^ 
W Lord is the beginning of wisdom. g 

Uk 4 They behave well at the house of God, and when they go to _ 
# and'return from that sacred place. They are not forgetful hearers, ^ 
fv^ but doers of the word of God. * , • , . r- j r ,u ' 

' U' 5 At morning and evening they pray to Almighty God for the , 
*;t* pardon of their sins, through the sufferings and death of the Lord ^ 
"^^^ Jesus Christ, and then ask for the Holy Spirit to teach them and 
rV?) to make them holy and good. «-,-„t^... 

M^ 6 At home thev are dutiful to their parents, affectionate to ; 
^^ their brothers and sisters, and kind lo all iheirneighbours. < 

-^ 7 Thev improve their time in reading and learning good booi<s, ^ 
fVl^ and especially they love the Bible and esteem it as better than gold 
£jo^ and sweeter than honev. . . r 

4^^ 8. In their work they are not slothful in business but fervent in ■ 
(nVj soirit servino; the T^ord. 

yjV 9 They keep from the company of those who he, swear, and 
# steal, and thev love good people, knowing that he who wa kelh with 
H^ the wise shall be wise, but a companion of fools shall tall 
r^T 10 Thev feel themselves to be sinners, they believe on the Lord 
' %i' Je.us Christ to the salvation of their souls, they know that he is the 
"^ <.ood Shepherd who gave his life for the sheep, that be gathers the 
W tambs wilh his arms, carries them in his bosom, gives unto them 
]# eternal life, and that they shall never perish, neither shall any piuck 
4yL them out of his hands 



Printed for the Religious Tract Society, and sold at 56 Paternoster-row. 
Price 6d. per 100. No. 83. 



K#M#M^^i 






^ important'questions. 

1. WILL the road in which I am now walkino-, 
kjk lead to Heaven or to Hell ? 

' ^ 2. VVill the imagiiiary advantages cf sin here, be 
a sufficient compensation for the eternal loss of my 
soul hereafter ? 

3. Going on as I now do, shall I run no risk of 
being condemned for ever 
^^ 4. Have I not committed many sins against God, 
f^j^ and thereby provoked his anger ? 
^^ 5. If God should this moment call me to his bar, 
^^ am I prepared to meet him ? 
^ 6. Am I born again ? 

^^ 7. Do I rest my hope of heaven on my own 
^^ doings, or on the merits and mediation of Christ ? 
f^ 8. Do I humbly and diligently read the word of 
— God, for the purpose of knowing his divine will, and 
learning my way to heaven ? 

9. Do I believe in the Lord Jesus Christ with all 
my heart, and are my sins pardoned and washed 
away by the blood of Christ ? 

10. What evidence do I give of my faith in Jesus ? 

11. Do I pray sincerely, fervently, and constantly, 
^ with all humility of mind ? 

12. Do I heartily repent of every known sm, hate 
and endeavour to flee from it ? 

13. Do I desire holiness as much as I desire happi- 
ness? 

j^ 14. Do I hate vain thoughts, and shun vain company ? 
;^^ 15. Is it my desire to be like Jesus in the temper 
^ of my mind, and the whole course of my life ? 
^ 16. Do I love Christ sincerely, and obey him con- 
^ scientiously ? 

17. Do I avoid all temptations, and constantly watch 
and pray against them ? 

O, my soul ! weigh these questions well. Let my 
conscience dictate the answers. 





Printed for the Religious Tract Society, and sold at 56, Patemoster-rw, 

Price 6d. per 100. jj^ 04 




A PRAYER. 



TUB COMMAND. 

" Pray without ceas- 
ing. In ever)' thing give 
thanks/' IThess. v. 17, 

18. 



TUB PROMISE. 

" If ye shall ask any 
thing in my name, I will 
do it/' John xiv. 14. 




THE TUREATENINQ. 

" Pour out thy fury 
upon the families that 
call not on thy name," 
Jer. X. 25. 



Lord, teach me to pray. Send thy Holy Spirit to 
take away my heart of stone, and to give me a new 
heart ; that I may feel myself a sinner, and my need of 
Christ to be my Saviour. Wash away my sins in his 
precious blood : clothe me in the spotless robe of his 
righteousness ; and, O Lord, sanctify me, by thy blessed 
Spirit, that I may be enabled to serve thee spiritually 
on earth, and be fitted for thy presence in glory. O make 
all sin hateful to me. Deliver me from the temptations 
of Satan, and an ensnaring world, and teach me to watch 
and pray against them. As my blessed Saviour left me 
an example, that I should follow his steps, may I often- 
times ask myself during the day, if thinking, how he 
would have thought; — if speaking, what he would have 
said ; — or when acting, what he would have done. O 
teach me to 'Jove prayer, and to love to read and obey 
thy holy word. Bless all my friends with every needful 
blessing, especially with the saving knowledge of Jesus 
Christ. 1 thank thee for the blessings of health, and 
food, and clothing ; but, abo\^ all, I desire to bless thee 
for the gift of a Saviour, whose precious blood cleanseth 
from all sin, and who ever liveth to make intercession for 
I ask every blessing in the name of our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ, who has taught us to pray, — Our 
Father which art in heaven, &c. &c. 




Pnntefl by \V. Ciovra» and Sons, Duke-street. La-lelh ; sold at 56, Paternosier-row. 

^^>'^'^ [85] 





AN ADDRESS 

TO 

SUNDAY SCHOLARS ON FAIRS. 




Thk season for the return of the Fair is very near, and then 
will be seen what benefit those children have derived, who receive 
instruction in Sunday-schools. My dear children, consider what 
you learn there. Do you not learn many chapters and texts of 
Scripture? Do you not learn catechisms? Do you not learn 
hymns ? Do you not learn that you are sinners by nature and 
practice ? Do you not learn that Jesus Christ died on the cross to 
save sinners? Do you not learn to pray for the teaching of the 
Holy Spirit? And do you not learn to pray for grace to keep God's 
commandments? These, and many other good things, you cer- 
tainly are taught at a Sunday-school from the Bible. Now, the 
Bible is the Word of God, and it tells us, that among "the works 
of the flesh are these — drunkenness, revellings, and such like,' 
and that "they which do such things shall not inherit the king- 
dom of God," Gal. V. 21 ; and Eph. v. 5. It tells us that the 
broad way leadeth to destruction, and many there be that go in 
at the wide gate, Matt. vii. 13. And it exhorts us "not to follow 
the multitude to do evil,'' Exodus xxiii. 2. It tells us not to 
" walk in the counsel of the ungodly, nor to stand in the way of 
sinners," Psalm i. 1 ; for " he that walketh with wise men shall 
be wise, but a companion of fools shall be destroyed," Prov 
xiii. 20. Now, look into your Bibles, ray dear children, and you 
will see these texts, and many others like them ; and you will 
learn how very different every thing at the Fair, and belonging to 
it, is from the directions God gives you respecting your conduct. 
It will do you no good to belong to a Sunday-school, if you do not 
mind what you are taught in the school. It is of no use to know 
the will of God, if you take no pains to do it. Be persuaded then, 
if you value your souls, not to go near the Fair. Beg of your 
parents not to go. Beg of your relations not to go. How many 
families suffer all the year on account of the money spent at Fairs ! 
Oh ! it is a fearful thing to disobey God ; and to seek the com- 
pany of so many thoughtless, giddy, and openly wicked people. 
How can you expect to escape the snares Satan lays for your ruin ? 
Let, then, a true friend persuade you to keep quite away from the 
Fair. 



Printed far the Religious Tract Society, and gold at 56, Patermstcr-row. 
Price 6d. per 100. 




-[86]. 






THE HEAVY BURDEN. 



Good Day, my friend. — Are you aware that you are now 
bearing' a heavy burden ? You are surprised, perhaps, at this 
question ; but permit a stranger, who has a great concern for 
your welfare, to assure you, that though you may not be con- 
scious of its weight, you are indeed carrying about a burden so 
heavi/, that if not removed before you die, it must sink you into 
the pit of endless misery. To be candid with you, my friend, 
I speak of the burden of your sins. Many have been over- 
whelmed with this burden, and now " have their part in the 
lake which burneth with fire and brimstone." But we have 
the testimony even of some of the most holy men that their sins 
were a bukdkn to them. Job cried out in anguish, " I have 
sinned: I am a burden to myself," Job vii. 20. David, who 
was a man after God's own heart, exclaimed '' There is no 
rest in my bones, because of my sins: for my iniquities are 
gone over my head, as a heavy burden, they are too heavy for 
me," Psalm xxxviii. 3, 4. St. Paul cried out, — " O wretched 
man that I Sm ! who shall deliver me from the body of this 
death?'' Rom. vii. 24 ; alluding to his sins, which he compared 
to the BURDEN of a dead body that criminals were compelled to 
have bound to them, and to carry while in a state of putrefaction. 
How is it then, my friend, that yoii can be so easy under 
the BURDEN of youi' sins? — Be assured that if vou go on 
through lite unconscious of their weight, you will find yourself 
miserably undeceived, when it will be too late to seek for de- 
liverance — in a place where " the worm dieth not, and the fire 
is not quenched," Mark ix. 44. O my friend! be merciful to 
your im77zor^«/50w/,while God in mercy permits you to live another 
day, lest the night of death come on you in the midst of your 
sins. Pray to God that he would, by the effectual workings 
of his Holy Spirit, enable you to feel their burden, and to cry 
out, " God be merciful to me a sinner," Luke xviii, 13. Cast 
your burden on the Lord Jesus, he invites you ; " Come unto 
me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you 
rest," Matt. xi. 28. " He himselt bare our sins in his own 
body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto 
[righteousness: by whose stripes ye are healed," 1 Peter ii. 24. 

Trinted by W. Ciowbs and Sons, Duke-street, Lambeth ; sold at 56, Paternoster-roir. 



[87] 





I 




DEATH. 

Death is a solemn event to all. It is tlie sad 
fruit of sin. It often makes the saint tremble. 
It always plunges tlie sinner into woe. It sepa- 
rates from all earth Ij^ friends. It places the soul 
before God. It leads to an unalterable state of 
being. It puts an end to all usefulness in the 
church. It prevents any further use of the means 
of grace. When that dread hour comes, the 
righteous will be righteous still, and the unholy 
will be unholy still. Oh then how solemn, how 
important is Death ! To this event Ave are all 
exposed ; none can esca])e ; it may overtake us 
in a moment, and if we are then lost, we are lost 
for ever. Now, now only is the time to secure 
the salvation of the soul. 

Reader ! are you prepared for this solemn 
change ? Have you fled to Christ, who is the 
only hope set before you in the gospel ? Re- 
member, there is no other way to God ; no other 
name given whereby you must be saved. His 
blood cleanseth from all sin. If this be neglected 
or despised, you must perish for ever. May 
you be avrakened to a serious concern about 
' death and eternity, ere it be for ever too 
late. 




rnnied by W. Clowes and Sons, DuWe-street, Lambclti; so'.il at 50. raltrnoster-ro 




[88]. 




THE GRAVE. 




Therf is something very affecting in looking 
into the cold and silent grave, in seeing our friends 
laid there, and in witnessing the earth hea]>ed on 
their remains ; especially ai hen we consider, that 
before long Ave too must he placed in the same 
situation. If the grave is appointed for all man- 
kind, is it not our wisdom to be prepared for our 
last home ? But what is to be understood by being 
prepared for the grave ? 

It is to be deeply convinced that we are sinners. 
It is to feel our need of an interest in Christ. 
It is to beli ive in the Saviour, and to trust in him. 
It is to live under the teaching and sanctifying ^?4i 
^^ influence of the Holy Spirit. ^^p 

It is to love holiness, and to hate sin. 
It is to love the sabbath, the Bible, and prayer. 

If such is our character and experience, then Ave 
are ready for the grave, whenever God may be 
pleased to call us : v/e may look at our last home 
with comfort, and say, 

My flesh shall slumber in the ground. 
Till the last trumpet's Joyful sound , 
Then burst the grave with sweet surprise, 
And in my Savioui 's linage rise. 

But if not in possession of the aboA^e blessings, you 
may Avell tremble at the grave ; nor should you 
rest imtil you haA^e implored God to pardon your 
sins for the sake of Jesus Christ, and so to prepare 
you for your latter end. 

Printed by W. Clowes and Soxs, Dukc-slrcct, Lambeth , so. a at 56, Paternn»te' -rrw 

i^ f89] 




HEAVEN. 




" I HOPE I shall go to heaven when I die," is a 
common expression. Reader, on what foundation 
does your hope rest ? What reason have you to 
expect that you shall go to heaven when you die*? 
" Heaven is a prepared place for a prepared 
people." Though it is the abode of perfect and 
everlasting happiness, yet none reach that pure 
and blissful place but those who have "washed 
their robes, and made them white in the blood of 
the Lamb." By nature and practice we are all 
sinful and defiled ; therefore we must be par- 
doned, and cleansed from our sins, before we can 
enter into the presence of the holy, holy, holy 
Lord God Almighty. Those whose hearts are 
unchanged would not be happy, even were it pos- 
sible for them to enter heaven; for all the in- 
habitants and all the employments of that place 
are holy and spiritual. Unless your hearts are 
changed by the grace of Christ here, they cannot 
be fitted for the presence of Christ hereafter. 
" Except a man be born again, he cannot see the 
kingdom of God," John iii. 3. Therefore seek 
now the pardon of your sins through the blood of 
Christ, and the cleansing of your hearts by the 
Holy Spirit, for " the time is at hand" when He 
who is now proclaimed as the Saviour of sinners 
shall pass his sentence : " He that is unjust, let 
him be unjust still : and he that is filthy, let him 
be filthy still : and he that is righteous, let him 
be righteous still. And, behold, I come quickly; 
and my reward is with me, to give every man as 
his work shall be," Rev. xxii. 11, 12. 

Printed by W. Clowes tLnd So.vs, Duke-street, Lainbeth ; fo'.d a'. 56, Patcrr.oster-rorr. 

■j^ r 90 1 t-s^^i^ 



[901 





HELL. 




Who does not wish to escape from Hell wJieu he 
dies ? and yet, ahas ! what multitudes are taking 
the very means to plunge their souls into that 
place of endless woe ! Hell is a place of torment, 
prepared for all who live and die in sin ; and the 
only way to escape it is by fleeing to Jesus, and 
thus escaping " the wrath to come." *' Know ye 
not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the 
kingdom of God ?'* 1 Cor. vi. 9. All swearers, 
drunkards, sahbath-breakers, liars, thieves, un- 
chaste persons, are in the road to hell ; and 
unless they are changed in their hearts and lives 
before they die, they will sink into endless flames, 
where there will not be a drop of water to cool 
their parched tongues. Can you dwell with ever- 
lasting burnings ? Can you bear to be banished 
for ever from the presence of God ? Can you 
bear to remember all the mercies you once en- 
joyed, but which will t^^^n be lost for ever? If 
j'ou dread the thought ot such a place and such 
woe, then liasten to God by earnest prayer, be- 
seeching him to pardon your sins through the 
blood of Christ, to give you his promised Spirit, 
to change your heart, to enable you to cast off 
every sin, and to live entirely to his glory. Oh, 
delay not, for death may be at hand, and if you 
are cut off in your sins, you must perish for ever. 



in;cd by V\". Clowes and Sons, Duke-streel, Lambelh ; sold at 5C, I'aternosler-row. 



%^f§^S^j>-^. 



isfSfS^^^ 



.-[91]—- 



li 






?^i 






WHY SHOULD I NOT BE SAVED? 





I AM a sinner, but " this is a faithful saying, and worthy 
of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world 
to save sinners," 1 Tim. i. 15. I am a great sinner, 
but Christ " is able also to save them to the uttermost 
that come unto God by him, seeing he ever livetli to make 
intercession for them," Heb. vii. 25. My sins have 
been attended by innumerable aggravations, yet the God 
whom I have offended says, " Come now, and let us reason 
together : though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as 
white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall 
be as wool," Isaiah i. 18. My sins have been so nu- 
merous, I cannot reckon them up, but '' the blood of Jesus 
Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin," 1 John i. 7. 
While I am so utterly sinful, God is " glorious in holi- 
ness," and he " will bj^ no means clear the guilty;" but 
it is equally true, that " if we confess our sins, he is faith- 
ful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from 
all unrighteousness," 1 John i. 9. And may I, sinful 
and vile as I am, be yet saved and made holy ? Yes ; foi 
Jesus says, " Him that cometh unto me I will in no wise 
cast out," John vi. 37 ,* and the Scripture declares, that 
Christ '' his own self bare our sins in his own body on 
the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto 
righteousness," 1 Pet. ii. 24. 

Why should I not be saved ? Thousands, as guilty as 
I, have believed these gracious declarations, and have ob- 
tained pardon and holiness through the blood of the 
Lamb, and why should not l? " Lord, save, or I peri^-h," 
Matt. viii. 25. " Lord, I believe ; help thou mine unbe- 
lief," Mark ix. 24. 

Printed by W. Clowe* and Sons, Dnlie-slreet, Lambeth; sold at 56, Paternoster-row. 






THE SURE FOUNDATION. 




m 



^d 



Reader ! you hope to go to heaven when you 
die ! so that man hoped for safety who built his 
liouse upon the sand, as well as tlie builder on 
the rock. Each had a house, but only one of 
them had a foundation, as our Saviour tells us ; 
"^^^hosoever cometh to me, and heareth my say- 
ings, and doeth them, I Avill show you to whom 
he is like : he is like a wise man which built a 
house, an J digged deep, and laid the foundation 
on a rock : and when the flood arose, the stream 
beat vehemently upon that house, and could not 
shake it : for it was founded upon a rock,'' Luke 
vi. 48. Now^ are you building on Christ for sal- 
vation ? Do you hear his voice, and follow him ? 
for "other foundation can no man lay than that is 
laid, which is Jesus Christ.*' If not, you are build- 
ing your liouse on the sand, against which, when 
the stream shall beat vehemently, "it will imme- 
diately fall, and the ruin of that house will be 
GREAT." Great because it will be ruin without 
remedy, and that ruin eternal. But you may per- 
haps feel persuaded that you are going to heaven : 
but it is impossible, unless you are building on 
the rock Christ Jesus, the only " sure foundation," 
" in whom all the building fitly framed together 
groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord," Ephes. 
ii. 2L Reader, rest your soul entirely on Christ 
Jesus, the " chief corner stone, elect, precious ;*' 
for " he that believeth on Him shall not be con- 
founded," 1 Peter ii. 6. 



I 



^ 



.Printed Ly W, Clowes and Soms, Duke-street, Lambeth ; sold at 66, Paternoster-row. 




i 



^##^^- mm^ 

TO BUYERS AND SELLERS ON THE M 
SABBATH DAY. M 




r Have you considered, my friend, what you are 
\ now doing ? that you are breaking one of God's 
commandments, and profaning his most holy 
day ? Read the last chapter of Nehemiah, and see 
your sin exposed. How many of your fellow- 
creatures do you witness every sabbath day 
borne to their grave ! perhaps your neighbours 
may see you carried the next ! Then it will be too 
late to lament your present sinful conduct. Re- 
1^ member what our blessed Saviour said : " What ^ 
^ shall it profit a man, if he gain the whole Avorld ^ 
& and lose his own soul ? " I\Iatt. xvi. 26. Oh ! ® 
^ could you be persuaded to leave off this sad ® 
^ custom of either buying or selling on the sabbath ^ 
^ day, to attend the house of God, to read his 
, holy word, and pray for his Holy Spirit to con- 
!. vince vou of sin, and lead vou to Jesus Christ tlie 
I only Saviour of sinners : be assured you would 
• find the benefit of it in this Avorld and that Avhich 
j is to come. You would not be a loser even as to 
things needful for the body ; for Christ has 
declared, '* Seek ye first the kingdom of God and 
his righteousness, and all these things shall be 
added unto you," JMatt. vi. 33. Take the warn in ir 
this little tract would give you, and flee by faith 
to the Lord Jesus Christ, as the only refufje for 
1^ guilty sinners ^ 

Piintcd by William CLowEsand Sons, Diike-tlreet, Lambelb; suld ut 66, rHteriiobtir-row. ' 

mm— M 95 ]# mml 



1 




m 


'>^ 


r^ 


HH 


M 


Q 


^ 


c:^ 


1^ 


O 


'<H 




p 


^ 


•^ 


c^ 


^■i^ 


^ 




c ^"^ o -^ aj > H: ^ c 3 ^ 5 <2 J -5 



O) o 



- S tdO^ ^ J« <u o 



=»£■(-: Zj "« 0) O S ^ 






_o 



iZ c« 









<V 



O 



^ . .^ j= -r a J5 <L> -Q 



O D 



t^-u 



Oi o 



o ^ "^ rt ajfo 
o 3 g ci- o ^ c 

^ ^ rt =«^ 



0) 



o 

D -i-j — , 









JD-^ OJ.S O-^ ._^ JJ^^"^ 

^6 ^^^ ^ ^ - £.§ s s^^ o 

^ O 4J 1, S- CN^ /^ 

•-■I *^ S ^"s ^i s-:'^ g S 

^ • 2 4^ J -^ -^ ^ - o I 1^ g ^ ^ -^ 

- -- - -^ ^ -5 S S ^ S ^ >< |P^ J^ ^ . 

_ 3 o J 'C -^ ca £ 

rK -a o ^ rt . .5 i: . ^^ 'I a; --^ S :£ 



-O'S i--- CU^ fcX)^_Q 



o 



03 



^O 



l/i 



O) 



52C ^t. . 






^^^ C) 5 Q 



j£ ^ 5; 



/^^ _ r" 






c ^ o 



■^ >»"S 









of-'. j?A?- '~^2f^ ^^^ '-?>^ ■^i^'' T, I** ^^;;^-> j-^3rT_ i?^ j-^3f-' ^O-. 

READ, AND CONSIDER! 



Theae was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodenius, 
a ruler of the Jews. The same came to Jesus by night, 
and said unto him. Rabbi, we know that thou art a 
Teacher come from God : for no man can do these miracles 
that thou doest, except God be with him. Jesus answered 
and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except 
a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. 
Nicodemus saith unto him. How can a man be born when 
he is old ? Can he enter the second time into his mother's 
womb, and be born ? Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I 
say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the ^^ 
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That ^^ 



Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdo... „. ^ 

which is born of the flesh is flesh ; and that which is born 
of the Spirit is spirit. Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye 
must be born again. The wind bloweth where it listeth, 
and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell 
whence it cometh, and whither it goeth : so is every one 
that is born of the Spirit. 

As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even 
so must the Son of man be lifted up ; that whosoever 
believetn in him, should not perish, but have eternal life. ^^ 
For God so loved the world, that he gave his only be- 
gotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his 
Son into the world, to condemn the world, but that the 
world through him might be saved. 

He that believeth on him is not condemned ; but he 
that believeth not is condemned already, because he hath 
not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God. 
And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the 
world, and men loved darkness rather than light because 
their deeds were evil. For every one that doeth evil 
hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his 
deeds should be reproved. 

For he whom God hath sent speaketh the words of 
God : for God giveth not the Spirit by measure unto him. 
The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into 
his hand. He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting 
lite ; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life, 
but the wrath of God abideth on him. John iii. 1 — S, 
14—20,34—36. 



Printed for the Religioas Tract Society ; and sold at vhe Depository, 56, Parer- 
noster-row. Price 6d. per lOG. No- 99. 




THE JUDGMENT. 




When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy 
( jigels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory : 
and before him shall be gathered all nations : and he shall 
separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his 
sheep from the goats : and he shall set the sheep on his right 
hand, but the goats on the left. 

Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, 
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you 
from the foundation of the world : for I was an hungred, and ye 
gave me meat : I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink : I was a 
stranger, and ye took me in : naked, and ye clothed me : I was 
sick, and ye visited me : I was in prison, and ye came unto me. 

Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when 
saw we thee an hungred, and fed thee ? or thirsty, and gave 
thee drink ? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in ? 
or naked, and clothed thee ? Or when saw we thee sick, or in 
prison, and came unto thee ? And the King shall answer and 
say unto them. Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have 
done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done 
it unto me. 

Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand. Depart 
from me, ye cursed*^, into everlasting fire, prepared for the 
devil and his angels : for I was an hungred, and ye gave me 
no meat : I w^as thirsty, and ye gave me no drink : I was a 
stranger, and ye took me not in : naked, and ye clothed m*. 
not : sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. Then shall 
they also answer liim, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, 
or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did 
not minister unto thee ? Then shall he answer them, saying. 
Verily, I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the 
least of these, ye did it not to me. And these shall go away 
into everlasting punishment : but the righteous into life eternal, 
Matt. XXV. 31—46. 

THE WAY OF SALVATION. 

By grace are ye saved through faith ; and that not of your- 
selves : it is the gift of God : not of works, lest any man should 
boast. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus 
unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we 
> should walk in them, Eph. ii. 8 — 10. 

f Printed by \V. Ci.owks and Sons, Duke slrect, Lamtelh. Sold at 56, Palernogter row 




[100] 




THE MERCIES OF GOD. 



Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within 

me, bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, O my 

'soul, and forget not all his benefits: who forgivelh 

all thine iniquities , who healeth all thy diseases ; 

who redeemeth thy life from destruction; who, 

crowneth thee with lovingkindness and tender 

mercies; who satisfieth thy mouth with good things, 

so that thy youth is renewed like the eagle*s. The 

I Lord executeth righteousness and judgment for all 

ithat are oppressed. 

The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to aniier' 
and plenteous in mercy. He will not always chide; 
neither will he keep his anger for ever. He hath 
not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us' 
according to our iniquities. For, as the heaven is 
high above the earth, so great is his mercy t6ward , 
them that fear him. As far as the east is from the ( 
west, so far hath he removed our transgressions from j 
us. Like as a father })itieth his children, so the' 
Lord jMtieth them that fear him. ' 

^ For he knoweth our frame, he remembereth that 
^ we are dust As for man, his days are as grass; as' 
i||a flower of the field, so he flourisheth ; for the 
4v wind passeth over it, and it is gone ; and the place [ 
!^ thereof shall know it no more But the mercv of 
igj the Lord is fiom everlasting to everlasting upon them 
^that fear him, and his righteotisness unto children's 
Vj^ children. Ps. ciii. 1 — G; 8 — 17. 
^ God commendeth his love toward us, in that, t^ 
(^ while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. ^ 
W( llom. V. 8. 5%' 

^ God so loved the world, that he gave his only 4 
^ begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him ^ 
M( should not perish, but have everlasting life. John f^l 

r iii. 16 ^ 

^ ^ 

\'^ Priu.txl for the Religious Tract Society ; and soid at the DcDOsitory, ^, Pater- fSi 
M^ no8t«r-row. Price Cd, per 100._ No.' 101. ) r 



^^31 



;~3 "■• ' 






PARDON AND PURIFICATION. 







Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kind- 
ness, according unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot 
out my transgressions. Wash me throughly from mine ini- 
quity, and cleanse me from my sin : for I acknowledge my 
transgressions, and my sin is ever before me. Against thee, 
thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, that 
thou mightest be justified when thou speakest, and be clear 
when thou judgest. 

Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother 
conceive me. Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward parts, 
and in the hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdom. 
Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean ; wash me, and I 
shall be whiter than snow. Make me to hear joy and gladness, 
that the bones which thou hast broken may rejoice. Hide thy 
face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities. 

Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit 
within me. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not 
thy Holy Spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of thy sal- 
vation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit. Then will I teach 
transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted unto thee. 

Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O God, thou God of my 
salvation, and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness. 
Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy 
praise: for thou desirest not sacrifice, else would I give it; 
thou delightest not in burnt offering. The sacrifices of God are 
a broken spirit ; a broken and a contrite heart, God, thou 
wilt not despise, Psa. li. 1 — 17. 

If we walk in the light, as he (God) is in the light, we have 
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ, his 
Son, cleanseth us from all sin. If we say that we have no sin, 
we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess 
our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to 
cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If we say that we have not 
sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us, 1 John 
i. 7—10. 

Printed bjr W. Cloitbs and Son*, Duke-ttreet, Lamb«th ; sold at 66, PaternoEter-row. 



m 



f' 



J4 a/. iA'i 



:noil ^fldgiioixfi not xiafiW MioinHSt^-^. 
osi'ffotrAoB 1 10^ : nia 7m intft am asafislu i' 
^^iii ; .Ota 97oVjcf i.'r/3 8f ifiz 7m fKijB ,3aoir 

-. jsl»i/( i/ofit rrari. 
• [liii iff [)n/ : ui iiixp.ili 8JU'/< I bloriofl 

... Lirii fir ff^uiJ i ;; f/ofi.t (faloriail .sm siiaorn 

off^f ot am 93fBrff ifflrfa j/orfl iiaq adbbjff arit nr f> 
;>aij ,d0J nxs9lo oJ Unda I bua ^qoaa^rf /lJiv7 em i, 

la^ (oj^ijiisd oJ 9(ji dAbI/1 .won«j auffJ i9)i<{w »' 
. ;. .^v Yj^ffi H'jifoTd i'dBii jjofft ifoiWv/ aj^ao^f "■ 
.Lpiiii 9iiiifi l!u 3W0 JoW bun tsnin (oy 

: ' • fiiiw din i> ^ 

i io boi J'oO O ^aeaiidlijj^i boold moit 3'^rr tav/fsO 



'Hi isaiisab ixoh. 
boO io esoiinoBa oilT .gnnafto icnuJ rri ion ifaaJfigiiy. 
1:103 fi bn£ a^Aorv} r ^nr 

,Xl-~l .il .&t^ ,t>..,ov. .... 
rri 8f ^V\oii>N sH i^- tJi/gil arlj nr :^W/r ov^'iJ 
gill ,J8arO anaol Jto booH aJi faii/j ,t3iliorii{ riirw v 

Hasw'il .aif! lla nioi't Bx; littMsixiidb , at 



.f ;^ sfLsn'W. .esanai/oaiiighnjr il4j moil <- so 



fQO 



WHO ARE BLESSED ? 



Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the 
kingdom of heaven. 

Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be 
comforted. 

Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth 

Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after 
righteousness, for they shall be filled. 

Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. 

Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. 

Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be 
called the Children of God. 

Blessed are they which are persecuted for righ- 
teousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 

Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and per- 
secute you, and shall say all mannerofevilagainstyou, 
falsely, for my sake : rejoice and be exceeding glad: for 
great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they 
the prophets which were before you. Mat. v. 3 — 12, 

Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound : 
they shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy counte- 
nance. Psalm Ixxxix. 15. 

Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O 
Lord, and teachest him out of thy law. Ps. xciv. 12, 

Blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in 
me. Luke vii. 23. 

Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and 
keep it. Luke xi. 28. 

Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, 
and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to 
whom the Lord will not impute sin. Rom. iv. 7, 8. 

The blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanseth us 
^ from all sin. John i. 7. 

^ Blessed are they that do his commandments, 
M that they may have right to the tree of life, and may 
^ enter in through the gates into the city. Rev. xxii. 14. 

Hv Printed for the Religious Tract Society ; and sold at the Depository, 56. Pat/«r- 
^^Q noster-row. Price 6d. per 100. No. 103. 





THE SOUL'S ETERNAL STATE! 




*• Wfiere their worm dietn not, and the fire is not '^iictichcd.*' 

Mark ix. 46. 



Come, O my soul, thy certain rum ti*acc, 

If thou neglect the Saviour's offered grace. 

Infinite years in torments must I spend. 

Which never, never, never have an end ? 

Yes ! I must dwell in torturing despair 

As many years as atoms in the air : 

When these are spent, as many thousands more 

As grains of sand upon the ocean shore : 

When these are fled, as many yet behhid 

As forest leaves when shaken with the wiiul: 

When these are gone, as many to ensue 

As blades of grass, and drops of morning Cew: 

When these expire, as many millions more 

As moments in the millions past before ; 

When all these doleful years are spent in pain, 

And multiplied by myriads again. 

Till numbers drown the thought, could I suppose. 

That then my wretched years were at a close, 

This would afford a hope — But 1 have none, 

To all eternity I am undone. 

Friend, is the question on thy heart engraved, 
** What shall I do to be for ever sav'd ?'* 
Believe in Jesus, is the sole reply, 
Believe in Him, and thou shalt never die : 
His precious blood gives pardon, life, and peace ; 
Freedom from guilt, and joys that never cease. 

rrinlcd by W. Clowes and Sons, Duke strtet, Lambeth. Sold a 56, Paternoster row, ^^ yS 

[104] -f 




—v. 

ETERNAL 



!r^#i 



I 



HAPPINESS OR WOE. 



SiNKFBS, remember you must die! Be always ready; for 
1 death will come when you least think of it, and the moment of 
your death will decide that of your everlasting happiness or 
misery! Consider — meditate — think seriously of that awful 
word, Eternity ! Oh Eternity '. thou alone art worthy of our 
thoughts and of our cares! Yet thou alone art forgotten and 
neglected by the greatest part of mankind. Oh, unfathomable 
and incomprehensible Eternity! As many millions of ages as 
there are atoms in this vast universe are nothing compared with 
Eternity! After centuries have passed away, Eternity remains 
entire! Eternity alone never passes away ! The happy state of 
the righteous, who will reign for ever with God in the blessed 
abodes of paradise; the awful condition of the d.imned, who will 
' be tormented for ever with devils in the devouring flames of hell, 
these two Eternities will never pass away. You must abide 
in one or the other of them. As long as God is God, (and that 
will be for ever,) you will glorify, either his mercy in heaven, 
or his justice in that lake of fire and brimstone, where no- 
thing will be heard but weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of 
teeth. What madness, to lose God, to lose a happy Eternity, 
for the sake ofindulging in disgraceful and short-lived pleasures! 
What wondrous stupidity to be insensible to this loss I Woe be 
to him who will only become sensible of the importance of this 
loss when hejeeh it, and in that place where it will be irretriev- 
able. Watch then. — Pray without ceasing. Never forget the four 
ends of all things — Death, which is the gate of Eternity — Judg- 
ment, that will decide which Eternity will be your portion — 
Hell, which is the abode of a miserable Eternity — Heaven, 
which is the abode of a happy Eternity. Labour then with fear 
and trembling at the grand concern of your existence, to se- 
cure a happy Eternity. The fashion of this world passeth away, 
death approaches, Eternity awaits you. Happy for you, if, in pre- 
ference to every other thing, you think of Eternity — suffer for 
Eternity — and strive for Eternity — that you may reign for ever 
in a happy Eternity ! Sinner, return to God. If the blood of Jesus 
Christ had not arrested the avenging arm of Justice, where 
would you have been ? One single sin is sufficient to cause you to 
perish everlastingly. Hasten then to that merciful Saviour, and 
implore his grace to enable you to repent. The past is no more — 
the future is not in your own power — and the present is but a 
moment which is given you, wherein to serve God and to gain 
Eternity! Reflect upon these words — a God — a Moment — 
an Eternity ! A God who sees yoi; — a Moment which is passing 
away from you — an Eternity which awaits you. A God whom 
you serve so ill — a Moment which you emoloy to so little pur- , 
pose — an Eternity which you risk so rashly ! 



Printed for the Religious Tract Society. 



Pnce 6d. per 100. 




PROMISES . 



TO BE PASTED AT THE BEGJx\NING OF A 

BIBLE. 



Whereby are given unto iis exceeding great and pre- 
cious promises, that by these ye might be partakers of 
the divine nature, 2 Pet. i. 4. 

DIVINE TEACHING. 

Isa, xxlx. 18. '* The eyes of the blind shall see out of 
obscurity." 

Jer. xxxi. 34. '* They shall all know me, from the 
least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord." 

John xiv. 26. " The Holy Ghost shall teach you all 
things." 

Isa. Iviii. IL *' The Lord shall guide thee continually," 

PARDON. 

Isa. xliii. 25. " I, even I, atn he that blotteth out thy 
transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remem- 
ber thy sins. 

Isa. i 18. ** Though your sins be as scarlet, they 
shall be as white as snow." 

1 Pet. ii. 24. " Who his ownself bare our sins in his ' 
own body on the tree." 

1 John i. 7. " The blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, 
cleanseth us from all sin." 

JUSTIFICATION. ' 

Rom. viii. 33, 34. " It is God that justifieth." 
Rom. iii. 24. *' Justified freely by his grace." 
Isa. xlv. 24. " In the Lord have I righteousness." t 

2 Cor. V. 21. " He hath made him to be sin for us 
who knew no sin, that we might be made the righ- 
teousness of God in him." ' 

SANCTIFICATION. { 

Ezek. xi. 19. " I will put a new spirit within you." 
Tit. ii. 14. " Christ gave himself for us, that he might 

redeem us from all iniquity." 

Heb. viii. 10. " I will put my laws into their mind, ^ 

and write them in their hearts." \ 

1 Thess. V. 23. " The very God of peace sanctify 

your whole spirit, and soul, and body." 

Printed for the Religious Tract Society : and sold at the Depository, 56, Pater- 
[^ D'jster-row. Price 6J. per 100. Ko. 106. ^S^ 







PROMISES; ^"^ IM, 



TO BE PASTED AT THE END OF A BIBLE. 



TEMPORAL BLESSINGS. 

1 Tim. iv. 8. "Godliness is profitable for all iliiii'rs, 
having the promise of the life that now is." 

Psa-I. xxxvii. 3. *' Trust in the Lord and do good — 
and verily thou shalt be fed." 

Matt. vi. 33. " Seek ye first the kingdom of God, 
and his righteousness, and all these things shall be 
added unto you." 

1 Tim. vi. 17 " Who i^iveth us richly all things to 
enjoy. 

TEMPTATION. 

2 Cor. xii. 9. "My grace is sufficient for thee." 
Rom. vi. 14. *' Sin shall not have dominion over you," 
James iv. 7. '* Resist the devil, and he will flee from 

you." 

Rev. iii. 10. " I will keep thee from the hour of, 
temptation." 

AFFLICTION. 

Job v. 17. "Behold ! happy is the man whom God 
correcleth." 

Lam. iii. 32. " Though he cause grief, yet will he 
have compassion." 

Psal. 1. 15. "Call upon me in the day of trouble, I 
will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me." 

Rev. iii. 19. " As many as I love, I rebuke and 
chasten." 

DEATH. 

1 Cor. XV. 55 — 57. " God giveth us the victory, 
through our Lord Jesus Christ." 

2 Cor. V. 1. " If our earthly house of this tabernacle 
were dissolved, we have a building of God." 

John iii. 15. " Whosoever believeth in him (Christ) 
shall not perish but have everlasting life." 

Psal. xxiii. 4. " Though I walk through the valley of 
the shadow of death, I will fear no evil." 

CONCLUSION. 
Heb. vi. 17. " God, willing more abundantly to 
show unto, the heirs of promise the immutability of his 
counsel, confirmed it by an oath.'* 

Printed for the Relin;ious Tract Society, by William Clowvs, Stamford-street ; 
and soUl at the Depositorv, 56, Pateruoster row.— 6d. per 100. No. 107. 

(44 '. ^ 






PRAYERS, 
IN THE EXACT WORDS OF SCRIPTURE. 



Morning Prayer. 

My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord : in the morning will 
I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up. 1 laid me down and 
slept; I awaked, for the Lord sustained me. Cause me to hear thy 
loving-kindness in the morning ; ibr in thee do 1 trust ; cause me to 
know the way wherein 1 should walk ; tor I lift up my soul unto thee. 
Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not. Order my 
steps in thy word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me. 

1 have sinned ; what shall 1 do unto thee, O thou Preserver of men ? 
O God, thou knowest my foolishness, and my sins are not hid from 
thee. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. 
Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions : according 
to thy mercy remember thou rae for thy goodness' sake, O Lord. God 
be merciful to me a sinner. For God so loved tlie world, that he gave 
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not 

f)erish, but have everlasting life. Him hath God exalted with his right 
land, to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel and 
forgiveness of sins. To God only wise be glory, through J esus Christ, 
for ever. Amen. 

Evening Prayer, 

O God of our salvation, thou makest the outgoings of the morning 
and evening to rejoice. The sun knoweth his going down. Thou 
makest darkness, and it is night ; man goeth forth unto his work, and 
to his labour until the evening. Behold, He that keepeth Israel shall 
neither slumber nor sleep. Thou compassest my path and my lying 
down, and art acquainted with all my ways. If I say. Surely the dark- 
ness shall cover me ; even the night shall be light about me. Yea, 
the darkness hideth not from thee ; but the night shineth as the day ; 
the darkness and the light are both alike to thee. Search me, O God, 
and know my heart : try me, and know my thoughts ; and see if there 
be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. 

Hide thy face from my sins; and blot out all mine iniquities. 
Create in me a clean heart, O God ; and renew a right spirit within 
me. Cast me not away from thy presence ; take not thy Holy Spirit 
from me. Keep me as the apple of the eye : hide me under the 
shadow of thy wings. My mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips: 
when I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the 
night-watches. Because thou hast been my help, therefore in the 
shadow of thy wings will I rejoice. Worthy is the Lamb that was 
slain, to receive power, and riclTes, and wisdom, and strength, and 
honour, and elory, and blessing, Blessing, and honour, and glory, and 
power, be unto Him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb, 
for ever and ever. Amen. 

Grace before or after Meat. 

Blessed be the Lord who daily loadeth us with benefits, even the 
God of our salvation. 

On entering or leaving the House of God. 
Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my iieart be ac- 
ceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength and my Redeemer. 



' 'y^ Religifaus Tract Society ; 56, Paternoster-row. Cd. per iOO. No. lOd 






(/^ 




:^^m 






THOUGHTS IN AFFLICTION. 

EccL. VII. 14. Mic. VI 9. 



Did not infinite Wisdom and Mercy appoint tliis ? Ileb. xii. 9, 

Dan. iv. 35. Ps. xxv. 10. cxv, 3. Rev, iii, 19. 

Shall a sinful worm complain? Lam. iii. 39. Job xxxiv. 31, 32. 

Let me search out the cause. Lam. iii. 33, 40. Hao^. i. 7. Job x. 2. 

Then justify God. Ps. li. 4. Neh. ix. 33. Dan. ix. 7, 8. 

— admire his forbearance. Lam. iii. 22. Ps.ciii.lO. Dan.ix. 9. 

— and come as a poor sinner, to the Cross. 1 John i. 8 — 10. 

ii. 1, 2. 
How much more did Jesus endure for me! Ileb. xii. 3, 4. 

Is. liii. 5. 

Is He not immutably God to help, and man to sympathize? 

Ps. cii. 24—27. Is.xl. 10, 11, 27— 31. xiix. 14— 16. Ixiii. 9. 

Heb.ii.lO, 17, 18. iv. 14—16. v. 7 — 10. xiii. 8. John xi. 35: 

Is not the Spirit promised as a Comforter? John. xiv. 16 — 18. 

xvi. 7. 

Is not this the portion of God's people ? Heb. xii. 6. Ja. v. 10, 11. 

— a mark of my calling? 1 Pet. ii. 21 — 23. Lui^c ix. 23. 

— and intended for my good ? Heb. xii. 10, 11. Eccl. vii. 2 — 4. 
Is it not suited to mortify the flesh ? g Cor. iv. 8—10, 16—18. 

— to wean me from earth ? Mic. u. 10. Heb. xiii. 14. 
— and make me long for heaven? 2 Cor. v. 1 — 4. Rom, viii. 

23—25. 

Let me learn submission. Lev, x. 3. Job i. 21. 2 Sam xvi. 

IG— 12. Ezek. xxiv. 15— 18.— Is. liii. 7. Mat.xxvi. 39, 42. 

And be more anxious trials should be sanctified than removed. 

Jer.x. 24. Prov. iii. 11. 2 Cor. vii. 8— 11. Ja. i. 2 — 4. Mic. vii. 9. 

Has suffering brought me nearer to God ? Deut. viii. 2, 5, 6. 
Job xiii. 5, 6.— Is. ix. 13, 14. Jer. v. 3—6. 

— made His word more sweet? Ps. xciv. 17 — 19. cxix. 67, 71. 

— my prayers more humble and earnest ? Ja. v. 13. Is. xxxviii, 

— taught me sympathy? 2 Cor. i. 3 — 6. Rom. xii. 15. 1 Cor. 

xii. 26. 

— and diligence in intercession? Heb. xiii. 3. Rom. xv. 30 — 32. 

Have I not special promises? Ps. cxxvi, 5, 6. Is. xliii. 2, 3. 

Will not all soon end in joy ' Is. liv. 7 — 11. Ps. xxx. 5. 

And shall I not then bless God for it ? Ps. cxix. 75. Lam. iii 

41. Ja. i. 12. Rev. vii. 14—17. Rom. viii. 35—39. 

Ps. vi. xxii. xxv. xxxviii — xliv. Iv — Ivii. Ixix. Ixxvii. Ixxxviii. 
cii. cvii. cxxx. cxli — cxliii. 



fej Printed for the Religious Tract Soriety ; and sold at the Depository, 56, Pa|er- 



noster-row. Price 6d. per 100. 



No. 109. 






'M 



^H^ 



M 



rS>i 






CONSIDER, 

1. YOU have precious souls which must J 
'^^ be liappy or miserable for ever ; so precious, ^S 
?^ that nothing can make up for their loss. W^ 
S Psal. xlix. 8 ; Mark viii. 36 1^ 

J^ II. Time is short; the past is irrecovera- ^^ 
/^ ble ; the future uncertain ; the present there- 1^ 
ii fore alone can be redeemed and improved. ^& 



fei 



Prov. xxvii. 1 ; 2 Cor. vi. 2. 






^^5^ III. Death is certain. (Heb. ix. 27.) Are^ 
"^ yon ready for it? Are your sins pardoned/ Are ^^ 
^ you a nevy creature in Cin'ist Jesus ? Rom. vi. ^^ 
" 23 ; Acts iii. 19 ; Heb. xii. 14 ; John iii. ^ 
IV. Neoflect of means is dan onerous. There ^3 



^ is salvation in Jesus Christ; (1 Tim. i. 15.)^ 
ji, in no other. (Acts iv. 12.) Out of him you ^ 
^^ are undone. (Heb. ii. 3.) What meanest Sg 
fethou, therefore, O sleeper? (Eph. v. 14.)^ 
^i Wilful ig-norance, impenitence, and unbelief, ^^ 
0fsQ is ruin to the soul. (Mark xvi. 16 ; John iii. §^ 



6s=^ 






^18,19; Prov. viii. 36.) 
^^ You will say, what can we do ? Read the ^^ 
]^ word of God. (John v. 39.) Pray for the Holy ^ 
W Spirit, without whom you can do nothing- "^W 
^ effectually in the o-reat business of your salva- ^^ 
^ tion. Luke xi. 13 ; John xvi. 8. Hasten with- tWi 
:t^ out delay to Christ, for him hath God exalted fes 
&k, with his risfht hand to be a Prince and a Sa- ^.^j, 



^^ v'our, to give repentance and forgiveness of ^, 



l^;^sins. 



Acts V. 31. 



xNo. 110. ^ 



-»^ Printed for the Religious Tract Society; and sold at the Depository, ^H^ 
^^ 56, Pate-nostcr-row. Price 6(/. per 100 " 






\ 



h\ 




STOP, STRANGER, AND BEHOLD ! 
BEHOLD ! WHAT ? 

Bkhold ! The most wonderful of all sights in heaven or earth. 

Behold ! God and man united in the one person of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, that sinners may be saved from eternal 
wrath. For it is written, 

Behold ! A virgin shall conceive and bring forth a son, arwi shall 
call his name Emmanuel, Isa. vii. 14, which in Matt. 
i. 23. is interpreted " God with us.'' 
Furthermore, 

Behold I He is "The Lamb of God who beareth away the sina 

of the world," John i. 29. Who, in Rev. v. 6, is said 

to be, "The Lamb that Avas slain," who has redeemed 

us to God by his blood. " For without shedding of 

• blood there is no remission," Heb. ix. 22. 

Reader, has your heart been captivated with this wonderful 

sight? Then know this same Jesus is looking upon you, 

and saying to you, 

Behold me! Behold me! "Behold! I stand at the door (of 
your heart) and knock ; if any man hear my voice, I 
will come in and sup with him, and he with me," 
Rev. iii. 20. If not he says, 

"Behold ! Your house is left unto you desolate,*' Matt, xxiii. 38. 
Reader, one word more before we part ; trifle no longer, 

" Behold ! noio is the accepted time, ?ww is the day of salvation,' 
t Cor. vi. 2. The Judge is at the door. He says, 

Behold ! I come quickly, to give to eveiy man according as his 
work shall be. 

"Behold! The Lord's hand is not shortened, that it cannot 
save ; nor his ear heavy, that it cannot hear ; but your 
iniquities have separated betj\een you and your God," 
Isa. lix. 1, 2. Wherefore, take with you words, and 
turn unto the Lord ; and say unto him, take away all 
iniquity, and receive us graciously, Hos. xiv. 2. And 
he will say unto you, " I, even I, am he, thatblotteth 
out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will 
not remember thy sins," Isa. xliii. 25. For, 

Behold ! I send the promise of my Father upon you, Lukexxiv. 
49. — The Holy Ghost — who shall turn away ungod- 
liness from Jacob. A new heart will I give you and 
a new spirit will I put within you. I will put a spirit 
of adoption within you, calling me Abba Father, and 
then at the last great day, ye shail sit down with me 
at the marriage supper, and I will say to my Fathei^ 

*' Bejiold ! I and the children whom thou hast given me," Heb. ii. 
13. " Happy are the people that are in such a case, yea, 
happy the people whose God is the Lord," Ps. cxliv. 15. 

Printed by W. Clowbs and Sons, Duke street, Lambeth. Sold al io, Taternubler row 



± 




■run- 





'$;m^ 

^ Art thou a Sinner ? a great Sinner? 

^ Does conscience fly in thy face and tell 
thee, thou art ? 
Then, I have a message from God to 
thee. Judges iii. 20. 

»' As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death 
of the wicked ; but that the wicked should turn from the evil of 
his ways and live." Ezek. xxxiii. 11. Jesus Christ, the Son of 
God, has declared also ; that, " There is joy in heaven over every 
sinner that repenteth." Luke xv. 7. — '* To day^" then, " if you 
will hear his voice, harden not your heart." Heb. iii. 7, 8. — Turn 
not away from a God, whose name " is love." 1 John iv. 8. — 
Know for your encouragement, that, " The Lord God is merci- 
ful, and gracious, long suffering, abundant in gooa.iessand truth, 
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, 
and sin." — but mark, he also adds, " He will by no means clear 
the guilty." Ex. xxxiv. 6, 7. — " Consider this, ye that forget God, 
lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you." 
Ps. 1. 22. — Blessed be God, there is now a Deliverer willing to 
save you and me, and the vilest sinner that ever trod upon the 
earth ; his name is Jesus; " for he shall save his people from their 
sins." Matt, i, 21. — And his invitation is, *' Look unto me, and 
be ye saved, for I am God, and there is none else. A just God 
and a Saviour." Isa. xlv. 21, 22. — He is also called, " The Lamb 
of God who taketh away the sins of the world ;" because, " while 
we were yet sinners, Christ died for us." Rom. v. 8. — Oh ! what 
manner of love was this ! that '' God should so love the world, 
as to give his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him 
should not perish, but have everlasting life." John iii. 16. — "' Him 
hath God exalted at his right hand, to be a Prince and a Saviour, 
for to give repentance, and forgiveness of sins." Acts v. 31. — 
Come then, delay no longer ; do not " treasure up to thyself 
wrath against the day of wrath." Rom. ii. 5. — But come to Christ 
as a poor sinner trusting in his promises for the pardon of your 
sins. Isa.lv. 7. — For his Holy Spirit, Luke xi. 13, to enable 
you to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and to hate every false 
way — and then conscience shall no more fly in your face to con- 
demn you, but you shall possess that peace which is the especial 
gift of Jesus to his children, John xiv. 27, and which the world 
* shall never take away from you. 

Printed for the Religious Tract Society ; and sold at the Depository, 56, Pater- 
no&ter-ro\\-. Price 6d. oer 100. ' Na. 112. 





.02 .'^■ 



foAi 



1UO'( fu 



DllOW OilJ *U)i4W iJOil 



-.f.t«'f .^.' >.-...,;*. ■Ki/'f «.'» ••« f.f.i. f,-« • 6t«i-w»!> «»>iiTT •(•rir>j .«i5T -ifft To^ L' 







^ a 



£ = S = o;-:^ . -3 



o '. 
-♦J 

(D O 









§ 5 



o 

a 



S •- 






a; 

c .S 



o 



cS 









^^^ 






p^ ^. ^ 



CS 



o 






en 



^ ir! 3 

-^ ffi ^ o 
c ^ > -a 

^ o 
fi o 

a!- ^ 






c 



^^ c:^'*- ^^ S 



s 

£ 



O ;- C > ^ ^ 

_, "C c« c3 c3 s- 

c o _ o -t: -^ 

^ = ^^ "O C 

•*^ ^ ^ C :^ 
:S^ £-g S-^ ^-^ 

i:£a;^^go^^. -^g 
-s £ c S o c _r b£^ o _g 



C 
O 

o 

o 

-♦J 



2i "^"s i -g ^ 

S p q; > 



5.^ a; 



OJ 






£ -a (D ^ ^ 
-' a o 3 



. £ 







o a)"oJ^ ^ ^ .9 .2 ^ ^ ^ o 

►^ ^^ ■ ^* ^^ tD ^ t_ r^ . .M 



r-*?- 
''^- 




-JC*^ ^^'^ '-*^V' '-Jt*- ^w% 



-fcf^^P^^XV ^<v^ ^O- -^^ '^♦-' ■''>^ ^^^-^ -^^ •< 



-5CV 






Qw__;5^ bffi c3 



0) <u 5 



CO CO 



O "^ 

o 

►;. C> G 

^ = <i> 
o "^ 

^ O O 
f" -t-> 

>> CO 

o ^ .m -C ■*"* 
3 — li O - 



0) 



1- '^ "t; -*^ 



a; G CO <u -^ 

s fe fi g 

<_r ^j i-i CO o 

— -^ O k! 

CO Cu_ 

'" •, " -J 

- cr 1) -:r ._ 



-1-: S -o 



s- c; 



aj 



3 w 



y -^ O 3 -3 _0 



^^•'^ 



s § 



CO . - 



IS 



I":: iit# 



ct c; 









^ CO -o; 



o 2^ ^ e^ E 






c- (u 



i'o 






<l 



Cw .4_> 






V3 



CO 

a; o - -r: •- 



c- "a; 



o 

S S 3 
2 - o 



I- T3 Cd 3 kJ ^ 

O C jr o c P <= 

^ ^— -S3 "^ >>o -^ ^-^.^ 

c T-s '^ -^ - a> u ^ 

ri ^ a; 3n -o ,-r 7^ S 
<ufcr-e^a;-i2co'^_c: , 






o 



^ o 

o ^ 

o 
o 






<V 



D 



O 



-^ O JS^-^ ^co 1^-^ ^r^iJ 

^ C Q^ ^ O -^ rjl 

^ f^ ^ ^ rh aj 3 



£ -3 ?*- -5 



o c: 'u "^ • - c 



--^ c'J 1^3 ^""-g-^ u c^ 2 5b 

CO :3 O CD ..(-.? j-^u- -> -— > _o CO 




o; 0) - 



«2 T3 0^ c3 ci: X! ^ 
3 C *-2 , H 

CO ^ o3 -^ O '^ ■> 

> .!_) CO -»^ -M 



g ^ i2 _^ ^ J c .-:S 



'^s^ ^ Js ^ 
2 g-^ cu'H 

far:^ "^ rt c3 o 



„ ^ . cd 

fe.2 S-5 






>^>vv 



^:,v- -?iv ■ *i^- -ifrv -KM- ^/3v^ -/„v 



be 



« ^ 



THE CREDULITY OF INFIDELS. 



Infidels scoff at the credulity of the christian. But let us fairly state 
the case, and see whether gf all beings in existence the infidel is not the 
most weakly credulous. What is the infidel's creed ? He believes that 
the whole world united in a consj iracy to impose upon themselves about the 
era of the introduction of Christianity ; that they invented a universal 
persuasion of the coming of some great personage, and that by mere 
accident their conjecture was verified in the birth of Christ; that 
verses or poems, the productions of men who lived several hundreds of 
years before, accidentally happened to apply to that extraordinary person, 
and things the most contradictory did accidentally concur in him • 
that he was a deceiver and an enthusiast, and a false claimant to a Di- 
vine commission, and yet that he was, without excej tion, the purest and 
the most amialile of beings ; and that he succeeded in his object without 
any of the means usually employed by similar characters; for that, 
without money, without trooj s, without power, he convinced multitudes 
of his Divine authority. 

He believes that after Christ was openly crucified as a malefactor, twelve 
illiterate men took up the extraordinary tale that he had risen from the dead 
although these men must have known to the contrary if he was a de- 
ceiver ; and without any assignable motive, in the face of danger and 
death, they formed the bold design of converting the whole world to a 
belief of this strange story; that, although aware of the calamities 
which they must thus occsion to mankind, (and therefore men of un- 
feeling and CTUk'l dispositions,) their writings and actions exhibit the 
purest morality and the most benevolent spirit ; that without education 
or literature, they composed several works, in which the leading cha- 
racter or subject of their memoirs, if a fictitious personage, is unquestion- 
ably one of the most wonderful creatures of imagination that the range 
of literature can lurnish; a character altogether unlike that of any bemg 
who ever dwelt on earth, sustained throughout with the most exact con- 
sistency, and the most minute and apparently unnecessary particularity of 
dates and times and places ; that they travelled over the greater part of 
the world, everywhere successful, though everywhere persecuted ; and 
that they were eventually the means of subverting the religious estab- 
lishments of the most powerful nations upon earth. 

Yet the infidel believes that all this was chance j these men were all 
impostors ; the whole story was a fable and a forgery ! ! The infidel be- 
trays a credulity so capacious, a faculty so prodigious of overlooking diffi- 
culties, that we cannot but suspect there is something wrong in the ordi- 
nary powers of his understanding^:. But the case is otherwise. Infidelity 
is not a derangement of the head, but of the heart. Believing, as we do, 
that the words of Christ are words of eternal truth, and that he has made 
for us " peace through the blood of the cross," we maintain that it is 
im|.ossible for any man to disbelieve the Bible who searches it with a 
right spirit : " If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine 
whether it be of God ;" but, ** Every one that doeth evil hateih the 
Ught." 



Printed by W. Clowes ond Son*, Dukc-strcet, Lambeth ; gold at 56, Paternoster-row. 




EVIDENCES OF CHRISTIANITY 



The deplorable state of relii^ion and moraU in the heathen world 
shows how absolutely necessary a revelation was to make known 
to mankind the proper, object of their worship, and to comniuni- 
cate to them a just rule of life. The manner in which the sacred 
Scriptures have been transmitted to us, their language and style, 
together with the minute circumstantiality of the facts and doc- 
trines recorded in them, tidded to the moral impossibility of im- 
posing forged writings upon mankind — are all indisputable proofs 
of their genuineness and authenticity. Equally sati-fuctory 
is the evidence for the credibility of the writers. For they had 
a perfect knowledge of the subjects which they have related, and 
their moral character was never impeached by their keenest oppo- 
nents ; their accounts were published among the people who wit- 
nessed the events which they have recorded, and who could easilv 
have detected falsehood, if any such there had been ; but who did 
not attempt to question either the reality of those facts, or the 
fidelity of the narrators. There is an entire harmony between the 
sacred writers and profane history, both natural and civil ; and the 
reality of the principal facts related in the Bible is perpetuated 
and commemorated by monuments that subsist to this day in every 
country where either jews or christians are to be found. Tluxt 
the Scriptures contain the re\'ealed will of God, and are Divinely in- 
spired, we have evidence amounting to moral demonstration. For, 
on the one hand, their sacred origin is evinced by the most illus- 
trious external attestations, namely, miracles and prophecy, which 
carry with them the most manifest proofs of a Divine interposition ; 
and which it cannot reasonably be supposed that God would ever 
give, or permit to be given, to an imposture. And, on the other 
hand, the Scriptures have the most excellent internal characters 
of truth and goodness, in the sublimity, excellence, and sanctity 
of the system of doctrines and morals which they announce ; in 
the harmony and connexion that subsist between all the parts of 
which they consist; in their preservation; and in thuir admirable 
tendency, which is shown by its effects wherever they are cordially 
and sincerely believed, to promote the glory of God and the good 
of mankind, and the cause of virtue and righteousness in the world ; 
and to prepare men, by a life of faith and holy obedience upon earth, 
for the eternal enjoyment of God in heaven. 

On all these accounts I thankfully receive and embrace the holy 
4/f Scriptures, as the word of God, and as the rule of christian faith 
•/d and practice. And till I can see the evidence of them disproved, 
pg I am determined, by the grace of God, to hold fast my firm de- 
* 1 endence upon the declaration of Jesus Chi ist, that, " God so loved 
% the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believetli in him should not parish, but have eve!la^ti^g life." 





WHY ARE YOU AN INFIDEL? 



^ To tell you the truth, I am against the Bible because 
the Bible is against me. It commands what I hate, and 
it condemns what I love. I first acted contrary to the 
Bible, and then thought it was most convenient to reject 
it. Instead of asking those who were able to explain 
what appeared to me to be difficult, or beyond my reason 
to understand, I gave up first one part, and then another. 
I found my conscience stinging me, and the threatenings 
of the Bible making me uneasy, and so, rather than re- 
linquish the pleasures and pursuits that I love, I at length 
gave up the Bible which opposed them. How can a 
criminal love the prosecutor who accuses him, and the 
judge who condemns him ? Give me a book supported 
by only one-hundredth part of the evidence which the 
Scriptures possess, that will allow me to pursue the 
pleasures I love, and I will believe it ; but I cannot re- 
ceive the Bible without sealing my own condemnation. If 
the Bible be true, I am undone, and that for ever. Oh, 
I cannot, because I will not, believe it; for I hate its 
strictness, and I love my sins. 

Reader, if you be an infidel, I appeal to your own con- 
science, in the sight of a heart-searching God, and ask if 
this be not the reason why you became an infidel — that 
your heart and life are quite opposed to the holiness of 
the Scriptures ? Be assured of this, that the love of sin is 
the strongest support of infidelity. The Divine Founder 
of Christianity proved that he knew the human heart and 
your heart, when he declared, "This is the condemna- 
tion, that light is come into the world, and men loved 
darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. 
For every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither 
cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved," 
U John iii. 19, 20. O turn from your " refuges of Hes," 
*seek that mercy which Christ died to purchase, and 
' which he lives to bestow; for if you reject him, there 
\ is no other refuofe, and you must perish in your sins. 



rrintcd by VT. Cloweb and Sons, Duke-street, Lambeth ; Bold at 56, raternostPr-ro 




SIX ABSURDITIES OF DEISM. 



i \st Absurdity.— Thai our wise and good Creator has either left 
lis totally in the dark as to the most important of all subjects, 
or has suffered an imposture to possess such evidences ot 
truth as must be convincing to a candid and unprej udiced muid. 

2nd Absurdity. That entirely by c/tance several ancient writers, 
living atditlerent times, foretold many of the leadmg events 
of history, and announced many very minute particulars as 
to the future changes and states of various countries, people, 
and individuals; numerous incontestable proofs of the ful- 
filment of which prophecies exist to the present day. 

3rd Absurdity. That upwards of a million of people could 
all be persuaded bv an impostor that they had passed through 
the Red sea, and been fed for forty years with bread from 
heaven, when no such things had really happened. 

4th Absurdity. That many of the worst of men conspired, in 
different a-^es, to write books of the purest morals; and 
while they condemned all liars to everlasting misery, they 
were themselves the very worst of all deceivers. 

btk Absurdity. That these deceivers spread abroad that im- 
posture for the very purpose of courting persecution, impri- 
sonment, tortures, and death ; and also persuaded innumera- 
ble multitudes, in various countries and ages, to do the same. 

Qth Absurdity. That illiterate men, without Divine assistance, 
did more than the wisest and most learned, namely, imagine 
and describe such a character as the Founder of Christianity, 
which is acknowledged even by his enemies to be perfect ; and 
wrote such inimitable books as those of the sacred Scriptures. 

Reader —these and manv other absurdities you must believe 
if vou reject the Gospel of Christ! You call yourself the friend 
of'reasou ; why then reject those evidences which appeal to you 
as rational beings, and which c.nnot fail to convince those 
whose minds are not preoccupied by pride, prejudice, or vice .'• 
Know that this is not a subject of indifference ; for those who 
reject Christ despise the only means of salvation, that redemp- 
tion which is in his blood, even the forgiveness of sins ac- 
cording to the riches of his grace. O believe in H.m, and you 
i shall be saved; but if you reject him, there remameth no other 
I sacrifice fbr sin, and you must perish, deservedly pensh, as 
wilful rejecters and despisers ot God s unspeakable gift. 

Pnnted by W. C^o"««s aod So^e. D«ke-.tT«t. Lambeth ; sold at 56. PaternCer-ro^.. 

[118] 




m 



f 



k>: 




PLAIN QUESTIONS 

J^ TO THOSE WHO NEGLECT PUBLIC WORSHIP ; ^ 
WITH THE PROPER ANSWERS. ^ 




1. Whose House do you forsake ? — The house of God. See 

Nehemiah xiii. 11. 

2. Whose Worship do you neglect? — The worship of your 

Creator and Lord, Psalm xxix. 2 ; Hebrews ii. 3. 

3. Whose Gospel do you despise ? — The gospel of our Lord 

and Saviour Jesus Christ, Ezekiel ii. 7 ; 1 Timothy i. 1, 2. 

4. Whose Ministers do you reject ? — The ministers of Christ 

who pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God, 
2 Cor. V. 20 ; 1 Thess. iv. 8 ; Luke x. 16. 

5. Whose Sabbaths do you profane ? — Those which God calls, 

" My sabbaths," Ezekiel xx. 13. 16. 24. 

6. Why, then, vou forsake, neglect, despise, and reject God 

himself?— YES. 

7. And does God SEE you ?— And will he JUDGE you ? 

—YES. 

8. And would you like to be called to his judgment- seat, 

while guilty of such sinful conduct ? — NO. 

9. Well may you say so ; for then it would be terrible for you 

for ever and ever : would it not ? — YES. 

Oh my beloved friends ! Ye, who neglect God's house- 
God's worship — God's preached word, etc., etc. — think; 
seriously think of the sinfulness of your conduct, and the 
danger of your immortal souls ! I pray — I beseech you — I 
earnestly implore you — by all that is dear to you in time and 
through eternity, do not tnflc with the great God, and 
his Sabbaths, and Worship, and W^ord, any longer. 

Oh seek forgiveness through Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God, 
who taketh away the sin of the world 1 Despise not that 
great salvation which he died to procure and lives to bestow. 
'*Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon 
him while he is near : let the wicked forsake his way, and 
the unrighteous man his thoughts : and let him return unto the 
Lord, and he will have mercy upon him ; and to our God, 
for he will abundantly pardon," Isa. Iv. 6, 1. 

Printed for the Religious Tract Society, and sold at 55, Paterpo»ler-row. 
Price 6d. per 100. 



[1191, 





A FRIEND. 




Do you want a friend, powerful to protect you, rich to supply your wants, 

kind to sympathize with you, affectionate to feel for you, wise to guide you ? 
A " friend that slickoth closer than a brother P" One to whom you can ijo 
at all times, at all seasons, under all circumstances ? One to whom you can 
open all your heart; one who is able to satisfy your craving desire for happi- 
ness ; who can assist you when all other friends fail ; who can support you in 
your last agonies, and walk with you throi-.gh the dark valley of the shadow 
of death? One whose induence and power extends beyond the grave; who 
is able to save you, and to give you a place among the sons of God ? 

Reader, as you are a lost, perishing sinner, if you desire such a friend, let 
me tell you, to your joy, that I know of One, who is not only a41 this, but who 
is far more valuable, far more excellent, far more desirable, than all that Ibis 
description implies. His name is Jesus. He is powerful to protect you, for 
he is the Son of the living God. He is rich to supply you, for he is God, the 
All-sufficient. In him are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Are 
you, in a spiritual sense, poor, and wretched, and miserable, and blind, and 
naked .-* He will give you his Holy Spirit ; and when oppressed under a sense 
of your sinfulness, this Comforter will g'we you such confidence in the assurance 
that the blood of Christ cleanseth from all sin, as shall bring peace to your soul. 
Whatever temporal things you may want, this kind Friend is no less able 
than willing to supply, if they are suitable for you. Do you want one to sym- 
pathize with you .'' Seek Jesus for your Frienci, and trust in what he has done 
and suffered for you; believe in the efficacy of his atoning blood; and you 
will find that there can be no frieaid more sympathetic than he. He is also 
affectionate to feel for you. That love which brought him from the skies he 
sliU retains; nor is its warmth diminished. He is wise to guide you. He 
knows all your circumstances, your difficulties, and your dangers. He is the 
" Friend that sticketh closer than a brother." He will bear with your weaknesses 
with more than a brother's forbearance. He is not confined to any place; so 
that, wherever you are, you may have access to him. No change of circum- 
stances alters his affection. He will befriend you in sickness, as well as in 
health ; in age, as well as in youth ; in adversity, as well as in prosperity. He 
is one to whom you can open all your heart; for he has given you such 
amazing proofs of his love that you cannot doubt his affection. Think of him 
as God incarnate — God in human flesh dying for our sins, that we might not 
perish, but have everlasting life, and you cannot but be willing to ^xjur out 
3'our heart before him, and to confide in his love. O take him for your friend, 
and then you will perceive how worthy he is of your tenderest afleclion. 

Reader, you thirst for happiness. In vain do you seek for it in earthly en- 
joyments; your desires after happiness are so extensive, that nothing tan 
satisfy them but the eivjoyment o*" God. Take Jksus for your Friend, and he 
will make you completely happy. A time is fast approaching wlien earthly 
friends cannot aid you ; they cannot save you from the hour of death ; they 
cannot support you in your last moments, nor accompany you through the 
dark valley of the shadow of deain. But the Friend now pointed out, the 
blessed Jesus, he can comfort and support you when all other friends can render 
you no assistance: he can receive your parting spirit; convey you safely 
through the dark shades of death, and bring you to everlasting happiness. He 
died for our sins: believe in him: trust in what he has done and suffered; 
pray to God, in his name, for the pardon of your sins and the gift of his Holy 
Spirit, and you shall be delivered from the *' blackness of darkness for ever;" 
and you shall dwell in the abodes of li»ht and glory for ever and ever; "' for 
Ciod so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth in him should not perish but have everlasting life,'' John lii. 16. 



Printed by Williaw Clowes and Soiif, Dukc-otrcct, LAir.bctb; eold at 54, FotcriKx^tcr-rov. 

#[120]#- 



^■ 



WHO EMPLOYS YOU ON THE '*' 



LORDS DAY? 



This is an important question. Were I to ask y a the name 
of the person you work for during the week, you could easily 
tell me ; but is it not right to know who employs you on 
the sabbath-day? Perhaps you say God employs you that 
day. I would ask you how are you employed ? and what 
hours do you give him? Does not your conscience answer, 
•* I sleep longer on that day than any other. I seldom 
go to any place of worship in the morning. I sometimes 
go to the house of God in the afternoon or evening. I 
seldom read the Bible, and my children are never spoken 
to about their souls. As for prayer in my closet or family, 
I am a stranger to that ; I get a neighbour or two to 
take a walk into the fields and converse about the world. 
But if the day is wet, I stop at home. I get sooner to 
bed on the sabbath in order to get up early to work on 
Monday." 

Is this your answer ? Then let me tell you, God does 
not employ you, but Satan ; for if you were God's servant, 
you would rise early on that day, read the Scriptures, 
and pray in your closet and family, go to the house of 
God regularly, spend the hours between the services in 
talking, reading, and meditating on Jesus*s love to poor 
sinners, and speak to your children about the value of 
their souls, and the necessity of remembering God in the 
days of their youth. And consider, friend, if Satan em- 
ploys you on the Lord's day he will soon pay you your 
wages, which is everlasting woe. Fly ere it be too late 
to Jesus, who died to save lost sinners, and who alone 
can save you ; devote yourself to him as your Lord and 
Master ; keep holy that which is the LORD'S day, and not 
your own, and you will find that his service is perfect free- 
dom, his ways are ways of pleasantness, and his paths are 
paths of peace. 



SS- Printed by W. C 'x>WBt aad Sons, DuIu Atre*', Lambeth. Sold at M, PtUraoctar row. 

[1211 





; ix*.vj. < - •x 



^Tfi oj I ?t<)7r 



«f i{ 




l30»:««t30oooc)C(xx»oocos^<»ooocooooecoooccooo<»o<y/:oooooooocoio-/o^/;ooa^ p. 



O 
^ O 

K 

C w 
Oh 

1—4 

C ^ 






K 









o 

o 



:^ fl •;::; '^^ ^ HH 

=! g,t^ '^ ^ c ^- • 

i^ cj c iZ "^ h^ rt 

^ — -^ c-H ^ ^ '•'^ 



PhH 



o 



S 

s 



C€ 









2 . S^;^ o-g 



^ 5 "^ 55 o 



O 



e; 












a; 



"^ >^j 



a 

ri 

S ;- CO 

cs c o 

--H ^ ,iJ 



9 •-" K- 
c o ^ o 

j/5 "^ (/J G 




55^ O 2 






O 



o ?^ 
o 5 



!^ t> E2 ''-=' 





(—1 


<(^ 


p— t 




4-5 




o 

r-l 




c 


tv. 


• r\ 


r-i 


• I-H 






f-1 




(--• 


US 

o 


'■a 




3 


^ 


CI. 




.4.9 


fl 


c« 


CC 





0) 


o 


o; 




3j 


CO 


a; 


r— ' 


0<5 
r-i 




■4-5 

c 


CD 


O 


+^ 


(-H 


psi 






/■^ 



(D 



fo 



o > 

i-l (V) 



o 

O ' 



"^ ^ S So fi 
e^ ^-^ g^.3 



CO 

^-: {^ _ c^ '-" ^ 






o 



S (D rC 

CD ^ O 

^ o 

b ^ ^' 



S ? 






O 









S (D ^ 

O -^ c:S 

-* -, ^ 

t> * 

^-^ '-i 0) ,j2 

pMrf vW ^**^ F"" ■ 



4J 

= § 5 s 

G CO +-i 



w 



3CO<>>5CCCKX)CC :<X>0»OOC C</OC XOO 3000 0100 iOOO 000c ODOO 2000 MCOOOOCOOOOOOOCOOOOOCO"'! 



O! 



^ 




gc^ii^^^: 









WHAT IS MY HOPE? 



What am I ? A reasonable creature ! Born to die ; perhaps 
to night ; or to-morrow ; it may be a week ; or in a month, 
or next year. I cannot tell when ; all that I am sure of, is, 
that I must die ; and that I have a soul which will live for 
ever. Awful thought ! To be happy or miserable for ever ! 
All this I am convinced of in my mind. I know also that 
I am a sinner by nature and by practice, and therefore an 
enemy to God by wicked works, Col. i. 21. A child of wrath, 
and an heir of hell. What fearful truths ! But still, rejoice 
my soul, and listen to good tidings of great joy, made known 
to poor sinners in the bible ; that God who is rich in mercy, 
not willing that any should perish, so loved the world that he 
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him 
should not perish, but have everlasting life, John iii. 16. 1 
may be reconciled to God, through faith in Jesus Christ, who 
died in the place of sinners, and hath obtained forgiveness of 
sins, for them that repent and believe in his name. 

The chief thing then for me to knov/ is, Am I of tliis 
happy number? Do I believe in Christ ? Have I repented 
of my sins, and forsaken them ? Have I turned unto God ? 
Am I born again? John iii. 3. AVHAT IS MY HOPE? 
Wiiat am I trusting to for salvation ? Let me be careful, and 
not deceive myself, for a mistake on this point must be dread- 
fully fatal ! How can I know this? The Saviour himself has 
given me a plain and easy rule to go by, he says, " Every tree 
is known by his own fruit," Luke vi. 44. AV'hat fruit then 
have I produced ? of sin or holiness ? Am I living to God, 
or does conscience tell me that I am living in sin, without 
God ? without prayer ? without repentance ? without reading 
my bible ? Alas ! it is too true, I am daily, hourly, a sinner ! 
God be merciful to me a sinner ! But can there be any mercy 
for me, so great a sinner ? Yes, the bible declares that there 
is mercy for all ; for Jesus Christ came into the world to save 
sinners, 1 Tim. i. 15. and his blood cleanseth from all sin, 
1 John i. 7. O Lord Jesus Christ, have mercy and save a 
poor guilty sinner that crieth unto thee I Pardon my sins, 
and wash away my guilt in thy precious blood ; send thy 
Holy Spirit to change my heart, and teach me what I am to 
do, so that from henceforth I may no longer live unco myself, 
but unto Him who died for me ! Ameji. 

Printed for the Religious Tract Society, 56, Paternoster-row. — 6cf. per 100. 



1 




FOR EVER! 

What heart can possibly conceive, or what ton^o express the 
tonacnts of those souls that are now enduring the wrath of God ' 
If thou couldst ask them what brought them thither, many of them 
would answer, "We thought we were christians, and made sure of 
gettingto heaven ; but, like many others, we lived in sm, forgetful 
, of God, till death came suddenly and hurried us away to this place 
of torment." Reader ! false hopes of being saved while thou art 
living in sin, will prove in the end but a soul-damning delusion. 
Now, the vilest drunkard, or swearer, or scoffer, hopes to be saved] 
although he is living in sin ; but there is none of this believinc 
in hell. ** 

What a pitiable sight it is to see an ungodiy person dyino-, and to 
think that very shortly he must lie down in everlasting' llames. In 
this life, when the ungodly are alarmed, or when conscience 
troubles, they drive away thought by business or com.pany, or they 
drink, play, or sleep away their sorrows ; but in hell all such re- 
medies will vanish. To meditate and pray, or to hear sermons now, 
they fancy would be enough to make them miserable, or run miid.' 
But how will they regret they thought so, when in hell, where they 
shall have nothing but sorrow — sorrow upon sorrow ! How will it 
cut sinners to the heart, when they shall hear the shrieks and cries of 
their wretched companions ; children crying out against their pa 
rents,who gave them encouragement and example in sin : husbands 
and wives, masters and servants, magistrates and subjects, all 
charging their misery one upon another: for discouragement in 
duty ; for conniving at sin ; and being silent, when they should 
have plainly told them their danger! 

But the greatest aggravation of Ihest torments will be their etcr 
nity. When a thousand millions of years are past, they are as fresh to 
begin over again as the first day ; but if for ever is'an intolerable 
thought, what must it be to endure the torments themselves for evei I 

Wilt thou then continue in thy sins? Remember! if thou diest 
impenitent, unpardoned, and unsanctified, hell is thy portion for 
ever ! But if thou art really in earnest, and dost feel thyself a lost 
sinner, then *' believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be 
saved," Acts xvi. 3f. " For God so loved the world, that he "ave 
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should* not 
perish but have everlasting life," John iii. 16. Repent, therefote, 
and forsake thy sins. Come unto Jesus Christ for pardon, for he 
says, " Him that cometh unto me I will in no wise cast out," John 
vi. 37. Delay not one moment while the door of mercy is open. 
Retire to thy room, fall down on thy knees, and when' none but 
God can see thee, cry unto the I>ord for mercy. Plead the merits 
of Christ ; pray that he would give thee his Holy Spirit, and 
create in thee desires after God and holiness. Remember, the 
blood of Christ can alone cleanse thee from all sin, 1 John i. 7. 




Priated by W. Ctow»» and Sows, Duke-strcet, Lambeth | lold at 56, ra'.cmoster-rovr. 




^^«^; 



r 




I DO YOU MEAN TO DIE IN YOUR SINS ? £ 

Ip " To (lie ill my sins ? I hope not : I shudder at the 
fe thought!" — you have spoken rightly my rriend;3 
'-* for, however sweet it may be to live in sin, it is a ^ 
most awful thing to die in it. Poor comfort it o-ives, 
on a dying bed, to look back upon a life spent in ini- 
quity, amidst a thousand warnings and means of 
grace ; to feel a burden of guilt upon the conscience, 
too heavy for us to bear ; to see ourselves sinners, 
condemned and undone, at the very moment when we 
need the greatest consolation ; and to enter into the 
presence of our Judge, knowing that we shall be con- 
demned to everlasting sorrow. But the state of a 
sinner on his death-bed is not half so melancholy as 
his condition afterwards. Oh ! when an enemy to 
his IMaker is called to his bar; when all his ini([ui- 
ties are set before his eyes in the light of eternity ; 
when conscience speaks loud, and the hard heart is 
broken into bitterness of anouish; when the con- 
demnation is pronounced, and the guilty soul departs 
into everlasting burnings, with wailing and gnashing 
of teeth — who can tell the anguish of that hour ? 
Isa. xxxiii. 14 ; Matt. xiii. 42. 50. Reader, do you 
wish ever to know this by experience ? You have 
only to die in your sins, and you will know it all. 
But if it be too dreadful to be endured ; if you know 
that to die in your sins will be an unutterable 
calamity, then why do you live in ther.i ? You 
may die in an hour, in a moment ; and to liv^e in sin 
is the direct and infallible way to die in it too. 
Why do you expose yourself to such a hazard, even 
for a single hour ? '* Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil 
ways, saith the Lord; for why will ye die?" Ezek. -^Sfe 
xxxiii. 11. "Bdiold the Lamb of God, which ^^l^ 
taketh away the sins of the world," John i. 29. 

PrintC'l for the Ui iigmus Tract S'jciilv, and sold .it 56, laterncetj r few. Price 6d. per ICO. 

f^^^ ^[125] 



A 



WILL A MAN DIE FOR HIS ENEMY ? 

p NO one can expect this : it is a wonderful thing- 
• when a man will die for his friend. Yet herein 
^^ God commendeth his love towards ns, in that, 
while we were yet sinners^ Christ died for us," 
Rom. V. 8. We have all of ns been enemies 
to God ; we would not have him to reign over 
us; and therefore we had nothing to expect from 
I? him but just indignation. What does any person 7^'lj 
p commonly do towards his enemies but^ punish J^L 
1 them, or at all events let them alone? Even if W 
I kindness sometimes prevails to do good to them )f( 
\ that hate us, what man was ever known to die for m 
^ his enemies ? But CJirist has died for his enemjks^ ^]^ 
W inasmuch as he has died for iis. Without any ffK 
» necessity or constraint, but that of his own love, f) 
h he gave himself up to death in our stead, and ^0:j 
p in order that we might be delivered from the ^§ 
t wrath to come. 



Was it not remarkable that He, (| 



I above all persons, should do this, w^liose glory jj^' 
^ and happiness were so unspeakably great ? And %^ 
what effect has this most surprising instance of love m$ 
upoji you ? Has it engaged your heart to love ^K 
Christ ? If an earthly friend had done far less 



than this for you_, your bosom would have over- ■xl^ 
flowed with gratitude. And have you never felt ^^ 
i any grateful affection to Him whose love is bevond f|/ 
all comparison ? Do you still disregard, des[)ise, W 
and hate Him? Can you stiil hale him, and m 



f persist in that which he abhors ? Tlien you are a ^% 
p wicked person. What an obdurate and vnmovablc M$ 

heart is yours! And when you muirt see Him in )v 
i his glory, whom you despise in his love, how jk 
^ bitterly will you wail because of him ! Rev. i. 7. w^ 

1 Printed for the Religious Tract Society, and sold at the Dsjxjsitory, ^M 

56, ia'.tinusui-rov.-. 



DLL' (;•;. \xl ICU 



1: 6. 



^fe?2^ 



WELCOME! WELCOME! 







YES, lobt and guilty sinner, welcome to tlie Saviour I Are 
you not a sinner ? Let conscience, and vour many unholy 
tliouglits and passions,'words and actions, testify. You are 
a sinner ; and every sinner is lost and undone, without a 
Saviour. God is angry with the wicked every dav, and vcrv 
soon they will be driven into hell, Psa. vii. 11. ix. 17. Ai/l \f^p 
my friend, who can deliver you from the wrath to come ? ^^^ 
Do you not already feel in your conscience, a burden 
too heavy for you to bear ? What can your prayers do, or 
your tears, or your endeavours, or your sufferings ? Notliin*', 
nothing, absolutely nothing, to stay the just anger of the 
Almighty. You must find some better help, or you are un- 
done. And whither can you go ? Do not look about in use- 
less distraction, but come to the Lord Jesus Christ. He is the 
sinner's only Friend, and is able to save unto the uttermost 
all that come unto God by him, Heb. vii. 25. Flis soul has 
been made an offering for sin, and his precious blood will 
cleanse you from it, 1 John i. 7. He ever iiveth to make 
intercession for us, and with him God is well pleased. Do .'?^ 
not be afraid to trust in him ; he is as willing to save as he %'; 
is able. Does he not call you, almost as distinctly as if he ^5 
uttered your name, when he says, " Come unto me, all ye "}£ 
that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest?" i^ 
Matt. xi. 2S. Does he not ansv/er all your objections, when '^ , 
he proclaims, " Him that cometh unto me, 1 will in no wise ^!^. 
cast out ?" John vi. 37. Think of that blessed declaration. '^^^ 
" In no wise" will he cast you out ; not though you may '%t"i 
have been the greatest of sinners, nor though you may at '^^ 
this moment be so. He caute to save sinners, even t!ie ,^!$ 
chief of them, and is ready to save you, 1 Tim. i. 1 5. O ^-^ 
sinner, what blessed words are these, Welcome, welcome to ^;^ 
the Saviour ! " Take with you words, and turn unto the ffA 
Lord, and say unto him, Receive me graciously, love me ^ 
freely," Hosea xiv. 2. M 

~'. '~~7~. " ; ■ ^^ 

Printed for the Reli}:poiis Tract Society, and sold at the Depository, ^h. 
56, Paternosler-ruw.— Price 6d. per 100. No. 127. ^)i$i 



^ 






r:^^^'' 



-B 




SET THINE HOUSE IN ORDER, 

FOR THOU SHALT DIE AND NOT LIVE !— 2 Kings xx. I. 
WHEN your body dies, where will your soul go? Yes, I ask, 
where will your soul go ? What makes you uneasy ? Does 
conscience whisper that all is not right within ? If you are 
still in your sins, then you may well be uneasy, for death places 
the soul before God. Death is a solemn time to all ! It often 
makes the righteous tremble. It always plunges the sinner into 
woe. It separates us from all earthly friends. The soul deserts 
its ruined habitation, and enters into the eternal world. To 
this event we are all exposed ; none can escape it. It may 
overtake us in a moment, and then if we are lost we are lost 
for ever. What numbers of souls are surprised with a sum- 
mons to the other world ! some taken in the midst of busi- 
ness ; others in their sinful pleasures ; their consciences flying 
in their faces; bringing all their sins to their remembrance ; 
tormenting them with the most painful conviction of their 
own folly ; presenting them with the sight of the angry 
Judge ; the terrors of the day of judgn»,ent ; the worm that 
never dies ; the fire that never is quenched ; the gates of 
hell ; the powers of darkness ; and the bitter pains of eternal 
death ! Friend, are you not then prepared for death ? Have 
you not yet set your house in order ? Remember ! to-day you 
are among the living : to-morrow you may be among the 
dead. Consider how awful the character of God is. He 
hates sin, and has recorded all your actions and thoughts 
in his book, and he will be your Judge at that great day ' Has 
not the certainty of all this often made you wish you were pre- 
pared to die ? O then, turn unto God at once. Repent and 
forsake your sins. Behold, now is the day of salvation Now 
the compassionate Saviour stands with open arms waiting to 
receive you. He died to save sinners, hasten to him to save 
you. Now is the time — this day. O take courage, go to 
Jesus Christ, the Saviour of sinners ; ask him to save you. Be 
persuaded to seek his grace, you will not seek in vain. O 
listen now to his voice of mercy, and refuse liim not. Call 
upon him ; he will have mercy upon you, and will give you 
peace of conscience now, and when you have to pass through 
the dark valley of the shadow of death, Psa. xxiii. 4. his presence 
will cheer you, and he will enable you to triumph, saying, O 
death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory ? The 
sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law ; but 
thanks be to God which giveth us the /ictory, through oui 
Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. xv. 55. 



Printed for the Religious Tract Society, 56, Patcrsoster-row. — Price 6d. per 100. No. 129. 






* 0) 

OS .£ 



t3 
en 



4; « = 

M> « ?> , ^ 5 fee 2 
o .2 .5 a3 ^ ~ to 

-O ^r ^ 3 3 > 



en 

a 



03 



„ o 



en 

5 S S 

03 — '^ w -G 



O • 



r^ ba '-' I"" c > s^ _r^ T^ 



(D 






«-; re C 

c3 en crt 

* a « 



to 






5 



cS 

^ 



^ «C 







en . 

en o! D 



.J" ^ 

O Oi 



0) 

s 
ceo 

O OI o 



>^^^^oo ^6 



en •" « c -= 

- fee c5 o 

en .£ •> fi 

03 M •-? fcD 
c3 50 c5 

•= ly c " 
■^ > O O) . 

o <u «i: •^ CO 
:S ^ ^ o <N 

<u _ '*' fri (M 



en 
0) 



<^ s 



"2 
.s 





jV-- 




w 



WHOSE CHILD ARE YOU .' 




My friend, does this question surprise you? Perhaps 
you are inclined to smile at it, and think it quite useless. 
But listen to me for a moment, while I explain myself. You 
are a child of Adam, I know, but are you a child of God ? 
You have been born into the world of nature, but are you born 
again into the world of grace ? You were created by God, are 
you created anew in Christ Jesus ? You were born of the 
flesh, are you born of the Spirit? Have you ever thought of 
these things ? Oh ! attend, I beg you, whilst I endeavour, in 
dependence on the blessing of God, to show you from his word 
one distinguishing mark of a child of Satan. My poor fellow* 
sinner, does conscience tell you that you are a liar, that you do 
not habitually speak the truth ? Then T have a message from 
God unto thee, " Ye are of your father the devil, for he is a 
liar and the father of it," John viii. 44; and "God who can-iot 
lie," Tit. i. 2, hath said, " All liars shall have their part in i,'^'\e 
lake which burneth with fire and brimstone," Rev. xxi. 8. 
His word says, " Lie not one to another," Col. iii. 9. '* Speak 
every man the truth with his neighbour," Zech. viii. 16. Ly- 
ing is a sin particularly hateful in the eyes of a God of truth ; 
He says, " He that telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight ;" 
and among the number of those who are described as being 
without the gates of heaven, is, '* whosoever loveth andmaketh 
a lie," Rev. xxi. 27 ; xxii. 15. "A lying tongue is but for a 
moment," Prov. xii. 17. "The wicked shall be turned into 
hell," Psa. ix. 17. O then, thou poor unhappy child of the 
devil, flee from the wrath to come. He who struck Ananias 
and Sapphira dead for lying, can execute the same awful judg- 
ment upon you. It is only his long suffering mercy, which 
has spared you until this hour. Bu* he is just as well as mer- 
ciful. He will not be mocked. trifle no longer on the brink 
of hell. Come to him at once. " Now is the accepted time, 
now is the day of salvation," 2 Cor. vi. 2. *' Believe on the 
Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved," Acts xvi. 30. 
And his Spirit, which is the Spirit of truth, shall guide you 
unto all truth. 



Printed by XV. Clowes and Soxs, Duke street, Lambeth. Sold at 59,- Paternoster row. 




[131] 




SEASONABLE WARNINGS. 




TO THE UNPREPARED. 

Are you unprepared ? Is it possible ? Unprepared ! at this 
period, when a new form of disease has reached us, and may 
very soon commence its fatal ravages in our own houses ! Unpre- 
pared to come into the presence of your Maker and your Judge ! 
Unprepared to stand before the great white throne, to answer 
for yourself, before " the Searcher of hearts," and to iiear the 
sentence, " Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kino-. 
dom !" which shall thrill the souls of the righteous with im- 
mortal joy ; or, " Depart ye cursed, into everlasting fire !" 
which shall pierce the wicked with unutterable terror and 
despair ! Think not you will repent to-morrow. " Now is the 
accepted time, this is the day of salvation." If to-day is deemed 
too soon, to-morrow may be too late. To-morrow you may be 
in eternity. " Thou fool I this night thy soul shall be required 
of thee," was the summons to one who counted on years of life 
and enjoyment. Do you feel some feeble conviction of the 
danger of your state ? Do you feel disposed to cry, " What shall 
I do to be saved ?" The reply of the Divine word is, " Believe 
in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved !" Hasten, 
tlien, to the mercy seat of Christ. 

TO THE PREPARED. 

Happy, thrice happy are you ! In this life you have a hap- 
piness that the world knows not of, a joy and peace in believing, 
for which no earthly pleasures could form an equivalent. Happy ! 
for you are in the charge of the " good Shepherd," and " none 
can pluck you out of his hand." Happy ! for your house is 
'' built upon a rock," and it shall not fall when the winds blow 
and the ra n beats upon it. Happy ! for nothing can " separate 
you from the loye of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, — 
neither death nor life, neither things present nor things to come." 
Happy ! for " when flesh and heart fail, God shall be the 
strength of your heart, and your portion for ever." If the pes- 
tilence should attack us, then let us see what christian faith can 
do for its subjects. Let the christian set an example ol calm 
courage, of mild resignation, of active self-denying benevolence ; 
and having shown to others how a christian should live, 
teach them also how a christi.m can die. In our dying hour, 
and at the day of judgment, we shall never think that we have 
done too much for Christ and for the souls of men. 

Printed for the Religious Tract Society, Paterno ;ter-rov.-.— 6<f. per 100. 





'' BE SURE YOUR SIN WILL FIND YOU OUT, 

Numbers xxxii. 23. 

Alas what a drcadfiil evil is sin. It is the cause of all the 
misery and suffering in this world : but what must those suffer 
for their sins, in the world to come, who live and die in their sins? 
Friend, are j^ou one of those who make a mock at sin, and think 
lightly of it, and do not consider its tremendous consequences ? 
Has not God declared that " the wages of sin is death ? " and has 
not conscience often reminded you, that a day of reckoning for sin 
will surely come? Consider this: for, however little you may have 
thought of your sins, God has not forgotten them; but will bring 
you into judgment for them, when your sins must find you out! 
But a man's sins often find him out in this world. Look at the 
drunkard, th? sabbath-breaker, the swearer, the ungodly person, 
how often then* pains, sicknesses, loss of property and character, 
and even premature death, are caused by their sins, and make 
them write bitter things against themselves, proving that " the 
way of trajisgressors is hard," Prov. xiii. 15, and that sin "at last 
biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder," Prov. xxiii. 32. 
But, friend, if you should die in your sins — how dreadful it will be 
to have them found out at the great judgment-day of Almighty 
God ! For in his book are registered your most secret sins, as well as 
every idle word and oath you have ever spoken, and all things tliat 
you ever did ; and, although long since forgotten by you, and 
thought nothing of at the time, they will then be brouglit to your 
recollection, and overwhelm yo'\ ivith guilty confusion. But 
another fearful book wdll also be opened on that day, — the book of 
your OHii conscience : you may refuse to listen to its silent reproofs 
now, but at that day it will rise up in judgment against you. Who 
can bear the torments of a guilty conscience for ever ? Think of 
that day, with what horror you will find that your sins have shut 
you out of heaven, when you hear the Judge pass sentence upon 
you, and you depart from his presence, and are cast into outer dark- 
ness, where *' the worm dicth not, and the fire is not quenched." 
INIark ix. 44. O ! how bitterly you will lament for ever in that 
place of torment that your own folly and madness have brought you 
there ! But bless God that he has yet spared you, and that the 
dooi of mercy is not yet closed against you. O ! forsake your sins, 
and flee at once from the wrath to come to the Lord Jesus Christ, 
for pardon, peace, and eternal life! Be assured, He will not cast 
you out, John vi. 37- If you repent, and believe in Him, all the 
sins which you have committed shall not even be mentioned to 
you, Ezek. xviii.22 ; for his precious blood cleanseth from all sin, 
i John i. 7. He will give you peace of conscience now, and at the 
day of judgment you will have nothing to fear, for he will welcome 
you into those bright regions of glory, where you will join that 
happy company which stand before the throne of God, and praise 
Him day and night for ever. iVmen. 

Printed by W. Cloctss and Son*, Uukc-itrect, Lambeth ; iold at ie, Paiernoslcr-rcw. 




[133] 




■#>#>#>#■ 



?.?- 



A FEW WORDS FOR YOU. || 



A FRIEND, who is sincerely desirous of doing' you g^ood, 
wishes to direct your attention to the following* important 
truths : God grant that they nnay savingly afiect your heart. 

You have a soul, an immortal soul, which must either be 
saved or lost. 

The present life is the period during v/hich alone you can 
secure the salvation of your soul ; if that period be neglected 
or misimproved, you are undone for ever. 

Salvation is the one thing needJul ; " for what shall it ])rofit 
a man if he gain the whole world and lose his soul ?" 

You have no warrant in the holy Scriptures to expect that 
you shall be saved while you neglect to seek the salvation of 
your soul. And without salvation you cannot be happy in 
this world, you cannot die in peace, you cannot go to heaven. 
There is only one means by w hich salvation can be obtained, 
and that is, by faith in Jesus Christ, who " died for our sins, and 
rose again for our justifi«"ation ;" and only one way by whicli 
you can become a disciple of Christ on earth, and inherit his 
glory in heaven, and that is, through regeneration ; for '' except 
a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." 

The Bible is the only guide to direct you in the way to 
heaven; but if you woukl understand '* the holy Scriptures, 
which are able to make you wise unto salvation, through faith 
which is in Christ Jesus," and if you would be saved, you 
must earnestly seek the influences of the Holy Spirit, you 
must attend upon the preaching of the gospel, for " faith 
Cometh by hearing." 

Reader! Are you living in the neglect of God's house? 
Then you are living without God in the world ; you are neg- 
lecting the salvation of your soul ; and if you die in this care- 
less state, where God is you can never come. 

But the time for repentance is not yet past, mercy is yet to 
be found ; God is still waiting to be gracious, and his language 
is, " Him that cotneth to me, J will in no wise cast out." Oil 
then, *' Seek ye the Lord while he may be found. Call ye 
upon him while he is near." " Now is the accepted time, 
and now is the day of salvation." But if you neglect the 
Wj v/arning now given, and refuse the invitation once more offered, 
H remember that death, and jud.^ment, and eternity, are at hand ; 
|| and if you die without being saved, it were infinitely belter 
» for you that you had never been born ! 

aj Printed by William Clowes and Sons, Dulte-slreel. LaniliClh ; sold at M, ratemostcr-rovv. 



l^x»>x)oo^l<»X)ooeo'^'ooo(xxx»^'iOO(»cxx»^ioooo^ooocc)oc»'^a 

I SUGGESTIONS TO ASSIST IN PRIVATE PRAYER. § 

^ m 

^ i 

I LUKE VI, 12. MATT. VI. 6. LUKE XI. I 13. § 

a Lord, for the sake of Christ, grant thy Holy Spirit to teach ^ 
I and enable me to pray as I ought, Rom. viii. 26. I 

m PRAY EARNESTLY FOR ® 

I I 

I 1 Collectedness of mind, Col. iii. 2. 1 Pet. i. 13. g 

m 2. Love of prayer and meditation, Psa. i, 2. Jude 20. X 

I 3. Faith in the atonement and intercession of Christ, Heb. § 
I vii. 25. 1 Pet. iii. 18. | 

m 4. The knowledge of your spiritual wants, and a desire to have A 
s them supplied, Phil. iv. 19. g 

I 5. The forgiveness of all your sins, Isa. i 18. 1 John i. 7. | 
^ 6. The Holy Spirit to witness with vour spirit that you are a X 
I child of God, Rom. viii. 14—16. J 

i 7. Love to God as a Father through Christ, Gal. iv. 6. § 

L 8. The sanctifyinsr and comforting influences of the IIolv J^ 
1^ Spirit, 2 Thess. ii. 13. John xiv. 16. ' T 

I 9. Love to God's people and to your enemies, John xiii. 34. § 
L Matt.v. 44. 1 Thess. iii. 12. ^ 

f ] . Humility, Eph. iv. 2. Col. iii. 12. Jam. iv. 6. 10. T 

I 11. Patience and resignation, Luke xxi. 19. 2 Pet. i. 6. ! 

1^ 12. The disposition to render good for evil, 1 Cor. iv. 12, 13. X 

13. Victory over your easily besetting sins, Heb. xii. 1. % 

14. Power over the love of the world, or of its approbation, § 
James iv. 4. 1 John ii. 15. X 

15. Grace to be kept from sanctioning in any way the sinful^ 
practices of the world, 1 John ii. 16, 17. | 

Lj 16. Faithfulness to reprove sin, 2 Tim. iv. 2. Eph. v. 11. 1, 

r 17. A deep sense of the blessings which you possess, and ay 
grateful heart to God for them, Psa. ciii. | 

. 18, The ministers of the gospel, and the cause of Christ crenerally, A 
^ 1 Thess. V. 25. 2 Thess. iii. 1. Matt. ix. 38. JerTxxxi. S3, y 

19. Tlie congregation to which you are attached, Psa. cxxii. 6. I 

20. Particular persons and families, James v. 13, 16. X 

21. The subjugation of your own will at all times, Luke xxii. 42. ^ 

22. A right judgment in all things, and power to do the will § 
of God from the heart, Mark iii. 35. Eph. vi. G. ^ 

23. A devotional spirit at all times, but especially in prayer, y 
in hearing: and readin" the word of God, and in con- § 
versation, Rom. viii. 6. 2 Pet. iii. 11. Col. iv. 6. 8 

EXPECT all these blessings through Christ, John xiv. 13, 14. Y 

[Priuted for the Religious Tract J^ociety, by ^^illlarn Clowes, Dake-stret-t, Lambeth ; U 
and sold at the Depositorj, 5(i, P.Uernoster-row.— 6rf. per 100. No. 135. g 

roooc^ •cxxoooc(^eoccoo<x^ ooocooor(^ooor^Sooocooor(^ooccoo^c^§«oocoooo^Sooocoooo^B 




A PLAIN PRAYER. 




O Lord, thou great and on-ly God, teach me 
to pray un-to thee. I have great-ly sin-ned a- 
gainst thee, but thou art full of mer-cy. Thou 
hast so lov-ed the world as to give thy dear Son 
Je-sus Christ, to die on the cross for sin-ners. 
O take a-way all my sins, and save my soul for 
his sake. God be mer-ci-ful to me a sin-ner. 
And be-cause Christ now lives to plead for all 
that come un-to God by him, O send thy Ho-ly 
Spi-rit to teach me, and make me ho-ly. Give 
me a new heart, and a right spi-rit. May the 
love of Christ dwell in my heart by faith, and 
may I al-ways live un-to him, who died for me. 

Lord, bless the queen, and all whom thou 
hast set o-ver me : may I o-bey them as a good 
serv-ant of Je-sus Christ. Bless all my friends, 
and have mer-cy on my en-e-mies. May all men, 
ev-e-ry where, learn to love and serve thee. 

1 praise thee, O Lord, for all thy good-ness, 
and pray to thee for all that I need, both for my 
soul and my bo-dy. Hold thou me up, and I 
shall be safe. Keep me from all evil, all my life 
long. And when I come to die, O may I sleep 
in Je-sus, and go to be for ev-er with the Lord. 
All these mer-cies I ask in the name of the Lord 
Je-sus Christ. To God the Fa-ther, the Son, 
and the Ho-ly Spi-rit, be all praise and glo-ry, 
now and for ev-er. A-men. 



Printed bjr W. Clowbs and Sons, Duke atreet, LamVeth. Bold at M. Paternoster row 




[1361 





i[ OUR DUTY TO OUR SOVEREIGN, TO MASTERS 
L AND TO ALL THAT ARE IN AUTHORITY. 



The following passages from the sacred Scriptures, show that 
it is our duty to obey those who are placed over us in all things 
that are not contrary to the word of God. 

Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is 
no power but of God ; the powers that be are ordained of God. 
— Render, therefore, to all their dues : tribute to whom tribute is 
due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honour to 
'whom honour, Rom. xiii. 1,7. 

Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man, for the Lord's 
sake; whether it be to the king, as supreme; or unto governors, as 
unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil-doers, 
and for the praise of them that do well, 1 Pet. ii. 13, 14. 

Honour all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honour 
the king, 1 Pet. ii. 17. 

Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to 
obey magistrates, to be ready to every good work. To speak evil 
of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness 
unto all men, Titus iii. 1, 2. 

Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according 
to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, 
as unto Christ ; not with eye-service as men-pleasers ; but, as the 
servants of Christ, doing the will of Gud from the heart; with 
good-will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men, Eph. vi. 
5—7. See also Col. iii. 22—24. 

Let as many servants as are imder the yoke count their own 
masters worthy of all honour, that the name of God and his doc- 
trine be not blasphemed : and they that have believing masters, 
let them not despise them, because they are brethren ; but rather 
do them service, because they are faithful and beloved, partakers 
of the benefit, 1 Tim. vi. 1, 2. 

Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters, and to 
please them well in all things ; not answering again ; not pur- 
loining ; but showing all good fidelity, that they may adorn the 
doctrine of God our Saviour in all things. Tit. ii. 9, 10. 

Servants, be subject to your masters with all fear; not only to 
the good and gentle, but also to the froward : for this is thank- 
worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure gref, sufi'er- 
ing wrongfully, 1 Pet. ii. 18, 19. 

Whosoever will be great among you, shall be your minister; 
L and whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be servant of all. 
^For even the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to 
h minister, and to give his life a ransom for many, Mark x. 43 — 45. 

' ~ I'rimeii by \V. CtowKs and SoK>, Uukc-»lreci, Lnmbctli ; »o!d at 36, Patcrnoster-row 

— [137] 



^ 




EXCUSES FOR NEGLECTING PUBLIC WORSHIP 




Let us examine the excuses usually offered : 

1. Some say, " I come, wlien it is convenient tome!" Is, 
then, the great God of heaven and earth to \v;u't his creature's 
convenience ? How wonderful his patience, that he should give 
another sabbath to those who dare to make their triflintf concerns 
an excuse for neglecting* his positive command ! But have wc 
not a warning to teach us that the convenieyit season *s never 
likely to come to those who put off salvation to a leisure, moment? 
Acts xxiv. 25, 27. 

2. Others, " I must labour hard for my bread • it may suit 
those who have no families to provide for to attend !' 

Oh, foolish and ungrateful ! Who is it that gives you health 
.'lud strength to get bread for your lamilics, and prosj)ers the 
labour of your hands? Is it not that very God whose sabbaths 
you despise? That God whose worship you desert, and who, bv 
the breath of his mouth, could blight all your endeavours, and 
send both body and soul quick itito liell? 

3. Others say, " I always make a point of sending my children, 
if I do not come myself!" 

But can you expect your children to prize that worship which 
their j)arents neglect? or do you think tliat the piety of tlie child 
will atone for the impiety of the father or the n)olher? or, will 
you be content to be parted from your children, in the world to 
come, by a gulf which cannot be passed ? 

4. Others say, " I get my wages so late on Saturday night tliat 
I cannot go to the shop till the Siniday morning." 

Here there is an utter fault on the part of the employer. Let 
tliose who engage the labour of oth-rs, pay thcni on the Friday 
evening, that they may be deprived of this excuse, and that the 
ifiaster may not share his servants' guilt. 

5. Others, '* I do not see the good of going ; those who go 
there seem to lead no better lives than those who stay away." 

No d(ud)t there are such hypocrites, who assume tlie mask of 
religion on the sabbath, while they are as ungt)dly as others 
during the rest of the week. Their guilt, and a heavy guilt it is, 
rests on their own heads ; but you must not deprive yourselves 
of heavenly food, because others turn it into poison. 

Keep the whole of the sabbath holy. Cad it a delight, holy of 
the Lord ! Wc should rejoice in it to hear and read of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, who, after he had died for our sins, on that day was 
raised again for our justification, Rom. iv. 25. It is the Lords 
day ; let us give the whole of it willingly to the Lord. 

Priaie<l by W.Clowes, Duke-street, Lambeth ; sold at 36, Pateriio6tet-iDw 

Trice 6J. p r 100. No. 13S. 





WHERE DOES THE INFIDEL DWELL? 




NOT in heaven : there the saints continually sing-, ** Unto 
Him that h)ved us, and washed us from our sins in his own 
blood, and hath made us kina;-s and priests unto God and his 
Father, to him be g"lory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen." 
The infidel rejects the Saviour, and therefore he can never be 
found in heaven : tliere are none but believers there. 

Where does the infidel dwell ? — Not in hell ; no, there are 
no infidels there. In hell, " the devils believe and tremble." 
The great secret has been discovered ; the lost soul has found 
out that the gospel is true, without being able to accept its 
blessed invitations. There is a great gulph placed between him 
and the righteous, which can never be passed. The lost soul 
will believe for ever the truths of God's word ; but then his 
belief will not serve him. 

"Where does the infidel dwell ? — He is to be found only in 
this world : he rejects the only revelation of his will which God 
has been pleased to bestow on his fallen creatures. An infidel 
is a wonder in three worlds : — angels in heaven wonder at his 
conduct ; for they know the happiness he proudly rejects : — the 
saints in this world wonder at his conduct ; they know that he 
loves darkness rather than light, because his deeds are evil : — 
the lost souls in hell wonder at his conduct ; they know he is 
in error : one of them, more than eighteen hundred years ago, 
said, — " I pray thee, therefore, father Abraham, that thou 
wouldest send Lazarus to my father's house, for I have five 
brethren, that he may testify unto them, lest they also come into 
this place of torment." Abraham replied : — " If they hear not 
Moses and the prophets," (that is, the holy scriptures,) "neither 
will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead," Luke 
xvi. 31. 

Reader, are you an unbeliever? — are you a despiser of the 
only way of salvation, through Jesus Christ? — have you rejected 
the'inspired Bible without examination ?— are you unwilling to 
listen to the evidence of the gospel ? Be now entreated " to 
consider your ways." Repent, and believe the testimony of 
God in the Bible ; and let the solemn words you have already 
read convince you of the danger of rejecting the evidence of 
the scriptures : — " If they hear not Moses and the prophets, 
neither will they be persuaded, though <me rose from the dead." 



Printed by W. Clowes, Dukc-st, Lambeth ; sold at 56, Paternoster- row. Na. lo9 O 





PREPARE TO MEET THY GOD. 



THE Bible says, ** It is appointed unto men once 
to die, but after this the judgment/' Heb. ix. 27. 
" Behold, ye have sinned against the Lord, and be 
sure your sin will find you out," Numb, xxxii. 23. 
" Except ye repent, ye shall perish," Luke xiii. 3. 
Are you a swearer ? Repent ; for all swearers will 
be cast into the burning lake. Are you a sabbath- 
breaker ? Repent ; for God says, ^^ Remember the 
sabbath-day to keep it holy," Exod. xx. 8, Are you 
a drunkard ? If you are, repent; for you are a curse 
to your family and your neighbourhood ; you are 
bringing a curse upon your own soul and body ! 
Drunkards will have their eternal portion in that 
place of torment, where they will never have even a 
drop of water to cool their burning tongues, Luke 
xvi. 24. 

But you may abstain from these gross sins, and 
yet not be prepared to meet God. The Bible says, 
" Except ye be converted, and become as little 
children, ye shall not enter the kingdom of heaven," 
Matt, xviii. 3. All sin is exceeding sinful, whethei 
in thought, word, or deed. Especially bear in mind 
these two things : First, that nothing can wash away 
sin, except the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, 
1 John 1. 7; and. Secondly, That you must earnestly 
pray for the Holy Spirit to change your heart, to give 
you "' repentance toward God, and faith toward our 
Lord Jesus Christ," Acts. xx. 2L Every good gift 
and every perfect gift cometh from above. The Bible 
says, •* If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature ; 
old things are passed ' away, behold, all things are 
become new," 2 Cor. v. 17. 

READ YOUR BIBLE! CONSIDER! PRAY! 

Printed by W. Clowes, Duke-st., Lambeth ; sold at 56, Paternoster-row. No. 140. 



x^^i? 







REDEMPTION, 




ALL have sinned, and come short of the g\ory of God, Rom. iii. 
23. Without shedding- of blood is no remission, Heb. ix. 22. 
The blood of Jesus Christ, God's own Son, cleanseth us from 
all sin, 1 John i. 7. Tliese passa^-es form the g^roundwork of 
a complete and conclusive arg"ument in favour of the doctrine of 
human redempticm. 1. All have sinned, and come short of the 
glory of God. Tiiose who know and believe the word of God, 
will never deny it. To prove that we are guilty, we only need 
compare our tempers, affections, thoughts, words, and actitms, 
with God's holy law. Tempers. Have '"^e been always meek, 
patient, and resigned? Ats-fections. Jb (te we alwavs placed 
them on God, on Christ, and heavenly things ? Thoughts. 
How often have they been vain and uvjish I "Words. How 
often have they been idle, unprofitable, and untriw ! Actions. 
How often have they been unkind, unjust, and injurious in 
their tendency and effects ! The glory or God is , -omoted by 
our obedience ; sin is the opposite of obedience, con«^^quently 
every sinner comes short of the glory of God ; that ia, he fails 
to accomplish the design of his being. 2. Without shedding 
of blood is no remission ; this is the <mly ground of remission 
which God hath revealed, therefore we have no warrant to ex- 
pect pardon in any other way. Life once forfeited cannot, under 
any government, be equitably redeemed but by that which is 
of equal value. Life must be given for life, and, as ** the blood 
Is the life," so, without shedding of blood there is no remission. 
Yet some talk of the mercy of God, and of the efficacy of rc- 
oei.tance, by virtue of which, they say, sin may be forgiven 
without an atonement. How absurd ! can repentance change 
tne sentence of the Judge ? Impossible. Still we are told tliat 
God is merciful ; we know it, we rejoice to know it; and is He 
not also just, and holy, and unchangeable ? 3. " The blood of 
Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanseth us from all sin." Sinners, 
rejoice! "Help is laid upon One that is mighty." "Behold 
the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world." 
The blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanseth us from all sin, 
from sin of every kind ; from sins, however numerous ; from 
sins, however aggravated , from sins, however hmg indulged. 
Blessed tidings ! O repent, and seek these blessings through 
the atoning sacBitice of Christ, then you will be able to say, 
" God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord 
Jesus Christ," Gal. vi. 14. 



Printed by W. Clowen, Duke-st., Lambeth ; sold at 56, Paterno«ter-row. No. 141. 



} 





i^ FELLOW COUNTRYMEN, 

g'l THERE are many persons in our land wlio fear God and endeavour 
r- to keep his comniandme-iits ; and who are deeply sensible, that his 
m judi^ments are visiting t!ie inhabitants of this country, as well as 
1^ other places, because of their iniquities. Sabbath breaking and 
^ drunkenness abound; and ** because of swearing the land rnourn- 
eth,"' Jer. xxiii. 10. 

r-.et those who read this paper ask their own hearts, if they are 
not contributing to hasten the threatened indijjnation of the Ix)rd, 
which, sooner or latter, will overtake all those who do in^quitv, as it 
did formerly the Jews, unless they repent and forsake their wicked 
ways. '' Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye die ?"' 
Ezek. xxxiii. 11. 

It is true he is a God of love, and would not that any should perish, 
but that all should seek for mercy through the mediation and in- 
tercession of Christ. He waiteth to be gracious. Rut it is no less 
certain, that without re pentance towards God and faith in the Lord 
Jesus Christ, where dxl is, the wicked never can be. For such is 
His abhorrence of sin, and detestation of the sinner, who forsaketh 
not his evil ways, that it is declared, " The wicked shall be turned 
into hell, and all th*e nations that forget God." Ps. ix. 17. " There 
is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the kicked ; but weeping and 
gnashing of teeth," Isa. xlviii. 2'L Matt. viii. 12. 

Breaking the sabbath is the first step to ruin : it is opening the 
door and giving entrance to every sinful practice: it is the broad 
road to perdition. It is in this way more especially, that the enemy of 
souls deceives his votaries, who are thus led captive by him at his 
will, until the measure of their iniquity is tilled up, and the Divine 
judgments overtake them. " For whatsoever a man soweth, thct 
shall he also reap," Gal. vi. 7, 8. 

If you are living a life of dissipation, and will allow yourselves 
to take excursions, and seek for pleasure on the sabbath ; if you thus 
associate with the vain, the thoughtless, and the wicked, you are 
uniting with them in disobedience to God's command, " To keep hofj 
the sabbath day ;" and whatever you may think of your own 
character and conduct, you will partake also in their awful punish- 
ment. Foi God " will render unto every man according to his 
deeds," Rom. ii. fi. * 

When, tlierclore, you are about to unite with the despiscrs of 
Gods authority and commands in " sabbath excursions," suller this 
question of the I^ord Almighty to arrest your attention. — '*' What 
doest thou here ? Be sure your sin will find you out. Thou hast 
despised mine holy things and hast profaned my sabbaths. Behold, 
ye despiscrs, and wonder, and perish,'' 1 Kings xix. 9; Numb, xxxii. 
23; Ezek. xxii. 8. 14 ; Acta xiii. 41. 

I beseech you. therelore. to "consider your ways ;'" and to-day, 






^ 



while it is yet called to-dai/, " let the wicked foisjike his way, and 
the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord 
and He will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for He will 
abundantly pardon,'* Isa. Iv. 7 



Primed by W.Clowes, Duke-st., Lambetii ; sold at 56, I'nteinoster-row. No. 142 










MARY, A PRAYING SERVANT GIRL. 



The following anecdote is taken from a religious magazine :— A 
number of ministers were assembled for the discussion of diffi- 
cult questions, and among others it was asked, how the com- 
mand to '* pray without ceasing" could be complied with. Various 
suppositions were started, and at length one of the number was 
appointed to write an essay upon it to read at the next monthly 
meeting ; which being overheard by a female servant, she ex- 
claimed, "What ! a whole month wanted to tell the meanincj of 
that text ! It is one of the easiest and best texts in the Bible." 
*' Well, well," said an old minister, " Mary, what can you sny 
about it. Let us know how you understand it ; can you pray all 
the time?" " O yes, sir/' "What! when you have so many 
things to do?" "Why, sir, the more I have to do, the more I 
can pray.'* " Indeed ; well Mary, do let us know how it is ; for 
most people think otherwise ?" " Well, sir," said the airl, 
" When I first open my eyes in the morning, I pray, Lord open 
the eyes of my understanding; and while I am dressing, I pray 
that I may be clothed with the robe of righteousness ; and when 
I have washed me, I ask for the washing of regeneration ; and 
as I begin work, I pray that I may have strength equal to my 
day ; when 1 begin to kindle up the fire, I pray that God's work 
may revive in my soul ; and as I sweep out the house, I pray 
that my heart may be cleansed from all its impurities ; and 
while preparing and partaking of breakfast, I desire to be led 
with the hidden manna, and the sincere milk of the word ; and 
as I am busy with the little children, I look up to God as my 
Father, and pray for the spirit of adoption that I may be his 
child, and so on all day ; everything 1 do furnishes me with a 
thought for prayer." "Enough, enough,'" cried the old divine, 
" these things are revealed to babes, and often hid from the 
wise and prudent." " Go on, Mary," said he, " pray without 
ceasing ; and as for us, ray brethren, let us bless the Lord for 
this exposition, and remember that He has said, 'The meek will 
he guide in judgment.' " The essay, as a matter of course, was 
not considered necessary after this little event occurred. 

" Be careful for nothing ; but in everything by prayer and 
supplication with thanKsgiving let your requests be made known 
unto God. And the peace of God, which passeth all under- 
standing, shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ 
Jesus," Phil. iv. 6, 7. " Behold the Lamb of God, which 
taketh away the sin of the world." John i. 29. " Neither is 
there salvation in any other : for there is none other name 
under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved," 
Acts iv. 12. 

Printed for tb« Religioui Tract Society, and sold at 50, Fatemotler Row, (H3.) 




IMPORTANT CONSIDERATIONS. 



1. Three things ought to occupy much of your thoughts and 
time : you are a dying sinner, an accountable creature, and an 
immortal being. *' Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou 
return," Gen. iii. 19. " Every one of us shall give account of 
himself to God," Rom. xiv. 12. " These shall go away into ever- 
lasting punishment : but the righteous into life eternal," Matt. 
XXV. 46. 

2. There are three things which you cannot avoid; the season 
of affliction, the hour of death, and the day of judgment. " Man 
is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upwards," Job v. 7. " It 
is appointed unto men once to die," Heb. ix. 27. " VVe shall all 
stand before the judgment seat of Christ," Rom. xiv. 10. 

3. There are three things you ought to desire and pray to 
secure : the sense of sin pardoned, a heart-felt interest in the sal- 
vation of Christ, and meetness for glory. " Blessed is he whose 
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered," Psa. xxxii. 1. 
*' This is life eternal, that they might know Thee the only true 

^ God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent," John xvii. 3. 
"Be ye also ready : for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son 
of man cometh," Matt. xxiv. 44. 

4. To this end, three things you must daily observe and 
practise, as in the presence of an all-seeing God: searching of 
the holy Scriptures to know your own state and character, 
" Looking unto Jesus" for pardon, peace, and glory ; for every 
comfort in time, and for every blessing throughout eternity; 

^ earnest prayer for the grace and guidance of the Holy Spirit to 
lead you into all truth, to preserve you in the right way, to make 
and keep you humble at the foot of the cross, and to prepare you 
for His everlasting kingdom. 

5. Therefore, " Whatever thine hand flndeth to do, do it with 
all thy might. Behold ! now is the accepted time ; behold ! 
now is the day of salvation. Seek ye the Lord, while he may be 
found a God of mercy, and call upon him, while he is near to 
bless and to save you. How can you escape, if you neglect so 
great salvation ? But why will ye die ? God soloved the world, 
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in 
him should not perish, but have everlasting life. One thing is 
needful. It is the salvation of your soul, and dependence on 
the righteousness of the Son of God for that salvation. What 
will you be profited, if you gain the whole world, and lose 
your soul at last ? Repent, and be converted, and your sins shall 

f^ be blotted out. The blood of Jesus Christ, God's Son, cleanseth 
*" from all sin. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ with all thine 

J heart, and thou shalt be saved." 

j> 

\ rrinUd b^ \V, Clowes and So.ns, Uuke street, Lambeili : sold at S(i< ratcriio^ter-rour 











MOQOOOOOOOOtOOOnOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 



Cv? 



OOOOCOCKOOOOCOOTOOOOOCOCOOOOOCXXIOOOCOOOC 



HE THAT HATH EARS TO HEAR, 
LET HIM HEAR." 




All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, 
Rom. iii. 23. 

The wages of sin is death ! Rom. vi. 23. 

Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, 1 Tim. 
i. 15. 

God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, 
that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but 
have everlasting life, John iii 16. 

Him hath God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince 
and a Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel, and for- 
giveness of sins, Acts v. 31. 



I He that believ*rth on the Son hath everlasting life, John 
iii. 36. 
g I He that believeth not the Son shall not see life ; but the 
I.J, wrath of God abideth on him! John iii. 36. 



Jesus said unto him, (Nicodemus,) Verily, verily, I say unto si^ 
^ thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom 
of God, John iii. 3. 

Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish, Luke xiii. 3. 

When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with 
his mighiy angels, inflaming fire taring vengeance on them 
that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction 
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his 
power. 

When he shall coine to be glorified in his saints, and to 
be admired in all them that believe, 2 Thess. i. 7 — 10. 

Behold I come quickly, Rev. xxii. 12. 

And the Spirit and the bride say. Come. And let him that 
heareth say. Come. And let him that is athirst come. And 
whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. Rev. 
xxii. 17. 

Surely I come quickly : Amen. Even so, e( me. Lord Jesus, 
Rev. xxii. 20. 



j^t^ 



PriBted by \V. Clowbb and Sons, Duke-street, Lambeth ; sold at 66, ratcino»ttr-row.— No 145. ^^ 



iOOOOCOOeCCOCOOOOOOSOOOOOOGOCOOOOOOOOOCXDO 



sCy oocooooo cocxcx)ocoooco«xooocoocxc»>coooe« 






}j^^.^ 




INHERE WILL YOU GO WHEN YOU DlElf^^ 

Ah ' my friend, that is the point, where will you go when 
you die? for it is "what comes after death," which must 
truly alarm you, if your sins are not pardoned ! You may say 
to your soul, '* Soul, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry," 
and thus try to silence the voice ot" conscience, when you do 
evil, but that faithful monitor is continually warning you of 
a *' judgment to come." You may put off repentance and 
prayer, day after day, and thus trifle with God and your soul 
while in health; but should death suddenly hurry you into the 
presence of that God, against whom you have been rebelling all 
your life by your sins, how certain must be your condemnation 
at that fearful day! For the Bible declares, that unless your 
sins are pardoned, Acts xxvi. 18, and your heart chan"-ed, 
John iii. 3, you cannot be admitted into heaven. Where 
else then can you go? Must it be to hell ! Yes: for God has 
declared, that the wicked shall be turned into hell, Psa. ix. 
17. And at the judgment of the great day, when you behold 
Christ seated on his throne, with the righteous on his right 
hand, oh ! how will you feel when you tind yourself on his 
left hand, and then to be shut out of heaven ! When your turn 
conies to give an account of the "deeds done in the bodv," 
and you are asked, why you did not break off your sins, and 
repent, and turn unto God, and attend his house, and read 
his i3ible, and pray for mercy and grace, through Jesus 
Christ, what excuse will profit you then? None. And being 
found guilty, you will be condemned to that place of torment, 
'* where the worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched !" 
Ah ! my friend, does your heart fail you, lest you should die 
as you are ? Do you sigh, and wish it were otherwise with you ? 
What is then to be done? Is there no remedy for your un- 
happy case? No balm to heal your guilty conscience? Yes, 
blessed be God, there is one remedy, and only one, in the blood 
of Jesus Christ, God's own Son, who died to save sinners. If 
you call upon him for mercy, he will pardon all your sins. 
Go then, my friend, to him, and be not afraid ; he will not 
cast you out, John vi. 37, nor even reproach you with your 
past guilt, but will give you pardon and peace of mind now, 
and will receive you into heaven when you die. '' This is a 
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus 
came into the world to save sinners ; of whom I anj chief," 
I Tim. i. 15. 

Primed byW. Clowes and Sows, Duke-»Ueet, I.ambelh ; sold at 58, ralernoeler-row^ -No. 1 ; 6. ^ 



^'•&^" 




SERIOUS QUESTIONS. 




I 



There is a God. He preserves, and he can 
destroy you. Do you daily think of him ? 

You have a soul. Do you care for it ? You 
care for your body, but do you properly care 
for your soul ? 

You are a sinner. Do you know how a 
sinner can be saved ? 

There is a Saviour. Are you anxious that 
he may save you ? 

There is an awful hell. Are you seeking 
to escape it ? 

There is a glorious heaven. Are you in the 
way to It ? 

You must soon die. Are you prepared for 
the solemn change? 

You must appear at the judgment seat of 
Christ. What will then be your lot ? 

There is an eternal state after death. Is 
your's likely to be an eternity of bliss ? or an 
eternity of woe ? 

You must be pardoned through the blood of 
Christ, and sanctified by the Spirit of God, 
or you cannot be saved. Are you daily 
seeking these blessings ? 

" Without holiness no man shall see the 
Lord." Are you living a holy life ? 

There is a Book able to inform you on these 
subjects, and to make you wise unto salvation. 
Do you search the Scriptures? 



Printed bv W, Cl»wb» and Son*. Duke-Kreel, Lambeth ; »old at 5«, Pater»osler-iow.— No H7. 




f<>( 



^^«4)*^^^ 





HAVE YOU A SOUL? 



^^ 



Friend, the reason I ask this question of you, is because I see 
you so busy providing for your body. You rise early and sit 
up late, to work for the wants of your body : your conversa- 
tions are about your body — What shall I eat ? and what shall 
I drink ? and wherewithal shall I be clothed ? Now, as you 
seem to have all your thoughts engaged about the wants of the 
body, let me ask, Have you a soul? If you have, and if you 
profess to believe that the soul will live in happiness or misery 
when the body dies, should you not feel anxious to have a 
home for it when the body lies in the dust ? How very foolish 
to spend all your time providing for the one, whilst you are 
oeglecting the other ! How can you expect to be happy in 
death, or to go to glory after death, if you live as if you had no 
soul ? for had you no soul, could you act in any other way than 
you do ? Jesus came into this world to suffer, bleed, and die 
for the redemption of the soul : this shows its value. Your 
soul is lost by sin, and none but Christ can save it. Have you 
repented of your sins, and asked what you must do to be saved ? 
Attend to your soul before it is too late. The loss of a soul is a 
greater loss than the loss of the whole world ; and a lost soul will 
be in misery through the countless ages of eternity. Have you 
a soul ? Without one moment's delay seek salvation through 
Jesus Christ ; " for what is a man profited, if he gain the whole 
world, and lose his own soul ? or what shall a man give in ex- 
change for his soul ?" Act not the part of that worldly minded 
man, who foolishly said, " Soul," (he should have said body,) 
" thou hast much goods laid up for many years ; take thine ease, 
eat, drink, and be merry," Luke xii. 19: that night his soul 
was required of him. Prepare now to meet thy God. The 
blood of Christ alone can wash thy soul from every stain ; his 
righteousness alone can adorn thy soul : his love alone can 
cheer thy soul amidst every trouble; his fulness alone can 
satisfy thy soul, and render thee happy when time shall be no 
longer. O reader ! think, speak and act as one who has a soul, 
and as one whose soul is preparing for a world of endless joy. 




Printed by W. Clowes and SoKs, Duke street, Lambeth. SolJ at 56. Paternoster re w 






[148 j. 




THE WRONG ROAD. 




Mt friend, you are travelling the journey of life : there are two 
roads that lead through this world, the end of the one is ever- 
lasting life, and of the other everlasting misery. It is a 
serious question, Are you in the right, or the wrong road? 
You may reply, " I have hitherto considered myself right ?" 
That may be, and yet you may be wrong ; for " there is a 
way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are 
the ways of death," Prov. xiv. 12. " But," you say, " I am 
going the way that others have gone before me ; and thou- 
sands are still companions with me here : surely this great 
multitude cannot be wrong!" Hear the words of the Lord 
Jesus Christ ; " Wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that 
leadeth to destruction, and many there be that go in thereat," 
Matt. vii. 13. Here are found men of different conditions, the 
rich and the poor, the wise and the unlearned, the aged and 
the young ; here are the hypocrite and the formalist, as well 
as the openly profligate — all travelling the wrong road ! The 
right road is described as " the way of holiness :" but if you 
are cherishing sin in your heart ; if you are " walking accord- 
ing to the course of this world, fulfilling the desires of the 
flesh and of the mind," Eph. ii. 2 ; if you are a stranger to 
the sanctifying influences of the Spirit of holiness ; if you are 
living in the neglect of the great salvation which is by Christ 
I Jesus, who died on the cross for sinners, you are certainly 
in the wrong road. 

Have you considered that you will soon arrive at the end op 
YOUR JOURNEY? that you are making progress with sure and 
hasty steps to the close of life ? Soon your state will be un- 
changeably fixed in eternity. Concerning those who continufi 
impenitent God has said, "'Woe unto the wicked ! it shall be ill 
with him," for the "wicked shall be turned into hell," Isa. iii. 
11; Psa. ix. 17. Flee, then, from the wrath to come: ap- 
proach unto God by faith in Christ ; trust in his atoning 
sacrifice and justifying righteousness as the ground of your 
acceptance, and you will find that He is able and willing 
" to save them to "the uttermost that come unto God by him," 
Heb. vii. 25. " This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all 
acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save 
sinners," 1 Tim. i. 15. 

Fruited by W. Clowe* and Sow*, DuWe-ttreet, Lambeth ; »ol<J at M, »'Rtenio»ter-Tow. 




-[149] 








M-^i^ 



WHERE ARE YOU GOING ? 




Are you going to break the sabbath, by profaning with vain 
and trifling conversation its sacred hours, which the Lord com- ' 
mands to be sanctified ? Are j'ou going to tlie public-house to • 
drown your senses, and fit yourself for the pit of destruction, 
whose mouth opens wide to receive the ungodly ? Are you 
going to take God*s name in vain, and swear, and thus to pray 
for the curse of the Almighty upon your soul? Stop, sinner, 
the Bible savs, " Flee from the wrath to come !" Look back ! 
Look at your sins, and say, if you are prepared to die ? 
Look forward, and behold your certain doom to everlasting 
misery, except you repent, except you are converted, Luke 
xiii. 3. Where are you going? — to endless woe! — to 
indescribable torment ! — to a gulf of darkness and despair ! 
— Why, sinner? why so mad? why so bent on destruction? 
why hasten to eternity in such an awful condition ? — 
Reflect, pause, and take one moment to consider, and ask, 
if there be a possibility that you may be saved, and plucked 
as a brand from the burning. The question is — Where will 
YOU GO? Let your answer be this once. Lord, to whom shall 
I go, but to thee, for thou hast the words of eternal life ? 
John vi. 68. Flee, then, for mercy to the Saviour, and pray for 
pardon for the past, and for grace to help you for the fu- 
ture. Mourn over the sins which you have committed against 
God, and pray earnestly for a new heart and a right spirit, 
which God has promised to bestow. Pray for his Holy 
Spirit to teach you, and to enlighten your mind, to show 
you the danger of dying without repentance, and to incline you 
to lead a new life of godliness, holiness, and righteousness. 
Attend the Lord's house, and do not trifle with the sabbath, 
nor waste its sacred hours in folly ; but listen to the gospel, 
read the word of God, and believe on that Saviour, whose 
precious blood alone cleanseth from all sin, John i. 7. So shall 
you find salvation, instead of the wrath to come, and the ways 
of religion prove to you ways of pleasantness and paths of 
peace, Prov. iii. 17. 



f 



printed by W. CtewKs and Sons, Duke-strecl, Lambeth; sold al56, Pateino»ter-ro 



rt 






NOT NOW. 



NOW is a short word, but contains much ; inattcL'tion to 
this word has been the cause of many tears and sorrows. 
Men intend to beheve in the Lord Jesus Christ, but not 
NOW. They intend considering the state of their souls, 
but NOT NOW. They intend to reform their Uves, but not 
NOW. They intend giving God their hearts, but not now. 
Now God sends the sinner invitations of mercy. Now 
God calls, warns, and intreats us to consider our ways ; 
to be reconciled to Jesus. Now the door of mercy stands 
opeiL Now there is mercy for sinners of the blackest 
die, and God says, " Come now, and let us reason to- 
gether; though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as 
white as snow ; though they be red hke crimson, they shall 
be as wool," Isa. i. 18 '' Now is the accepted time, now 
is the day of salvatioii," 2Cor. vi. 2. Now God gives 
sinners time and space to repent ; to read, pray, hear 
the word, and be useful to others. Now is proclaimed 
pardon to the guilty, a Friend to the friendless, rest to 
the weary and heavy laden. But, alas ! sinners wait and 
say, Not now. 

If a good bargain is offered, men accept of it now. If 
a promise is made of temporal good, they accept it now. 
If they are ill, they are glad to see a physician without 
delay : and why do sinners refuse spiritual blessings, by 
saying. Not now ? Because they dislike them, they think 
they can. easily get them when they want them ; they 
have no relish for the blessings of the gospel, they do not 
feel their need of them ; they are engrossed about temporal 
affairs. They try to pacify conscience by saying, I will 
believe and repent soon, but not now ; every day brings 
the same objections until it is found that now is changed 
into. It is NOW too late. The sinner dies, and now is a 
word unknown, except it be in the recollection of past pro- 
mises and opportunities ; no more invitations, no longer is 
there hope, and the sinner perishes by neglecting salvation. 
O sinner, think now, flee now to Jesus. *' Boast not ihysellof 
to-morrow; for thou knowest not what aday maybring fort h." 

Primed by \V. Clo\ybs r.nd Son», Duke-strcct, Lambelh. Sold at 56, I'aternosier-roM-. 

PMt^ \ '-if ^^m^'^^ 




I "HER HOUSE IS THE WAY TO HELL." 

PllOVERBS VII. 27. 



LET me request yoiir attention for a few moments, while I ask 
you, Wliat course is tliis you are running? In the greatness 
«f your folly have you gone astray ? Do you lie in wait as for a 
prey, and increase the transgressors among men ? Have you 
given yourself over to work all uncleanness with greediness? 
Are you coveting the wages of unrighteousness, and eating the 
bread of wickedness ? and are you aware that in all this you are 
provoking the Holy One of Israel to anger ? " Let no man deceive 
you with vain words : for because of these things comelh the 
wrath of God !" Where, O ask yourself, where will the path of 
sin, on which you run, with so much thouglitlessness and uncon- 
cern, lead you ? Do not shrink from the question. If you faith- 
fully listen to your own conscience, it will confirm the declaration 
of eternal truth, that it is '* the way to hell, leading down to the 
chambers of death." How miserable — how awfully miserable 
must you be, in looking forward to such an end of your course ! 
And terminate it must, and that perhaps sooner than you are 
aware. Do you not know that the companions of fools shall be 
destroyed? that she who pursueth evil, pursueth it to her own 
hurt ? that " the soul that sinneth, it shall die ?" and that you are 
ruining your own sou], and bringing upon yourself swift destruc- 
tion ? Death and hell are words of awful import. Perhaps they 
are familiar to your eii ; but have you ever thought of the horror 
of the worm that dieth not, and the fire that shall never be 
quenched ? Have you ever thought of the lake of fire and 
brimstone in which impenitent sinners shall agonize through 
all eternity ? Do you shudder to look forward ? Do you feel as 
if you were shut up to utter destruction ? Do you ask with awful 
earnestness, " How shall I escape the damnation of liell ?" 

I rejoice to say there is a way of escape even for you ; and 
allow me to direct you to Him of whom it was said, " This man 
receiveth sinners." "This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all 
acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners ; 
of whom I am cliief." Yes, he saves the chief of sinners ; to one 
as vile as you he said, "Woman, thy sins are forgiven thee ; go in 
peace." By means of this paper he freely offers salvation to you ; 
accept it, I entreat you, now, or you may lose it for ever. T\irn 
away from the paths of vice and destruction. Listen to the voice of 
the compassionate Redeemer, entreating you to come unto him and 
be reconciled. Christ and his people will joyfully receive you ; and 
the angels in heaven will rejoice over you as a repenting sinner. 

Should these few words lead you to think of giving up your 
present ruinous course of .ife,'let me iirform you that there 
^ are friendly asylums, where you will be kindly received. Any 
Christian minister will direct you to these asylums. 

Printed by \V, Clowes and Sons, Duke-sueet, Cjiinbelh. Sold at M, Patern»«Wt-row 

[152]- 







i . 1 






ESTIONS CONCERNING THE BIBLK 

Those who deem the Bible an imposture are rennp^t^^ t^ « 
the following questions:-!. Can an^ o^e iXm 'i^W ""'^ 
was first palmed on tlie credulity of mankind" T Sn ? '^ 
httle adapted to gratify the sinful propo'nsfe of humanVati e'? 
a How IS It so piu-e, and lofty, and godlike in its demands 04 
How has It been so wondrously preserved in a wnr h .^ t J' 
to its interests? 5. Ho^v has OiLipotence «o ofton in? a 

to verify its claims? 6. How is U that Pales inn t'P'''"^ 
Babylon, Egypt, Assyria, and Rome, are a^h 1 '"t^ie 'pZ'ni 

piS in'sTT^Hn' '' ''' '''' ''''''' '' ^^- trulh of it's a X 
piedictions f 7. How can we account for its parlv Qr.,i J; i 

trmmphs over the temples and the rehg on of mJanisn .f" ^ 
no arm of power interposed on behalf SfL 1 c?aids and w h^n 
imprisonment and death awaited its convert J 8 ' Hot is it 
that the happiest states of society have been found under its 
auspices and that nations rise in the scale of civil za on and 
humanity as they yield themselves to its benign and pur?fvin1^ 
influence ? 9. How is it that the greatest ornaments oHuman 
nature, those who hav;e shed an imperishable lustre on the mce 
have been Christians? 10 How is it that the most wonderful' 
transforma ions our world has ever beheld, have been ^vToSJht 
upon indiv dual character by the mighty power of he gospef of 
Christ? 11. How comes it to pass, that the Bible, written by so 
many different persons, in so many different ages, is ye t .0 con- 
sistent and harmonious in all its parts? 1^ How is k 

tnrh-f f^tT.""'"^!^"'^^' '^""-l"'^ ""^^^'^ Christian era, the impos- 
ture IS farther than ever it was from detection, and that the 
advocates and friends of Christianity are more numerous than 
at any former period since Jesus of Nazareth appeared in our 
world? 13 How IS It that all other systems of religion are 
padually sinking into decay, while Christianity is coming forth 
before the nations, " fair as the moon, clear as the sum and 
terrible as an army with banners ?" 

14. In one word ; if it be an imposture, how is it that it 
answers to every just view of the blended rectitude and love of 
Ood ? _ How IS it that it realizes the best hopes of human nature ? 
How IS It that It is the best solace for mourners; the be4 
mitigator of human woes; the best preservative against the 
vices and blandishments of the world ; the best security of all 
the social virtues ; the best conservator of the peace, sanctity 
and happiness of families ; and the best friend in the hour of 
dissolution, when all the visions of life have fled, and the 
anxious, foreboding spirit of man is about to take its flight into 
the unknown regions of the invisible world ? 

Receive, then, the Bible as the word of God ; believe in that 
Saviour whom it makes known, and you shall be saved. < 





Printed by \V. Clowbs and Sons, Duke street, f^mbelli 

[153] 



Sold at 56, raternostcr row. 







RELIGION WITHOUT CHRIST. 



There are thousands who profess and call themselves 
Christians, and who would be highly offended were any 
individual to question the reality of their religion. But 
alas ! their religion — if religion it may be called — has 
nothing to do with Jesus Christ. It is not founded on 
faith in Him. It is not connected with exclusive de- 
pendence on the blood and righteousness of Christ. It 
does not lead them to make constant application to Him 
for mercy and grace and salvation. It does not constiaiu 
them supremely to love the Saviour, habitually to delight 
in Him, gratefully to praise Him, willingly to serve Him, 
universally to obey Him. Is not this the case with mul- 
titudes ? What, then, is the nature of their religion ? Is 
it experimental ? is it genuine ? is it saving ? No ! It is 
a reliorion without Christ ! And will such a religion save 
them from the guilt of transgression, the dominion of sin, 
the wrath of God, the torments of hell ? No ! that reli- 
gion which does not begin by looking to Christ, which 
does not depend on Him for all its supplies, and which 
does not keep the soul within the attraction of His crosir, 
and secure obedience to the Divine commands, is not 
acceptable in the sight of God now, and will not stand 
the test of a judgment-day. 

' Reader! examine yourself. What is the nature of 
your religion? On what is it founded? What are its 
principles ? What are its effects ? Is it connected with 
repentance towards God, and faith in our Lord Jesus 
Christ ? Does it constrain you to love and serve and 
obey Christ ? O ! remember it is only by your exer- 
cising faith in Him, and seeking the influences of His 
Spirit, and the blessings of his salvation, that you can live 
and die in the possession and practice and enjoyment of 
experimental, vital, and saving religion. " This is a 
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ 
Jesus came into the world to save sinners,'* 1 Tim. i. 15; 
'' Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be 
saved," Acts xvi. 31. 

Printed by W. Clowbs and Soys, Duke street, Lambeth. Sold at 58, Paternoiler-ro^T. 






^ 'a 



.TaiHHo X -.wixiicf /loi^uafl 



modi Ubo hi: 
.19W bsbnofto 



;q offw ?.bnB».uoib ein ?Tff3' 
od hiuo'ft odyr hi 
I edi n " 

iflD aueeL iltrw ob oJ iQiiidi 



'o ol V 
hitk I iandO luodihf : 



rr QSGO edi 

I lis [ft . 

'oj-nfisi B i 

inimob ©(i- 
jfcixii ! oVI \ iit,ii 10 ] 9dl ,boO lo 

• ,ianfl!^ o' ■ 'dyfool v . -.^ '< ton gsob il 
7 bne t? ?^tr 11b lol mi 11,^^1^ J)n'3q'>I) 

?ill lo m . 9ffl nirfiiw:ftfoa oiit qoo;! Jui 

' " rnftii. ; * li/iQ srit ot eonsibodo o'? 

,7 bfffi ,7fofJ boO lo irigig srft ai t 

Rb'ln^m^hu'i s lo test 



^olfjinfff 



;]£H 9tiJ 




IfJOY ' 


-;riw ; 






^nrroo 




«3 8bl-G770t 0* 




01 IJ 


t£ 89?"'^ 




- si 11 


!0 ^ 



.a 




SEARCH THE SCRIPTURES 

READER, " Search the Scriptures " John v qo ti 
by inspiration of God, and areVom'abi for doc?;ino fL'' ' ^^"7 
for correction, for instruction in ri^h eousnes^^^^^^^^^ ^ ? 

perfect, and thoroughly furnished unto aS^^rL^'ri^^^^^ 
scribe man as orie nallv formed in th^ i^l^ rT^ 1 ^"^y ^^^" 
mind endued ^vith\no4^edT; his wi ^uSr Ws ^ 1"^ 

his conscience pure ; a stranger to ^^^^^^^^ 

versing with God; as innocent aKppfun'lfedi^ '""^ 

our first parents involved themselves and thlr 1 ^^^?,H^»^?ce of 
misery. After this transSon th^ 

shapen in iniquity and conceTveri; S^ hhunZTZf 'T ^^ 
his will depraved ; his affections earthly ; a L^atd W rL "'N' 
labouring under the condemnation of a broken Taw 'X.h' ^l"^ 
satisfied with no obedience but such as is nerfprt in^' ^ i ""^^ ^^ 
though by the disobedience of onfmanTanrH^o -.^ ' "'' 
yet by the obedience of One it viewed G^TtoZ IT t^ '^"."7f ' 
epus. In the Bible is recorded^that gospel whkh dis^ov Jr^f ^^'" 
smmaybe pardoned consistently with Dh- n^ii^^tice To^ 
ciled, and man completely recovered to Mnp/,«n^ 
through Christ, by 'the gracious^ffluentHrthe Vol^^ 
upon the soul. It points out the Saviour, as wisdom Stb^lSno 
rant, righteousness to the guilty, sanctification to the nolluted" 
and redemption to the captive. Plim has God ev«l l.l^ti • ' 
repentance, and the forgiveness of sins. ^'^^'^' ^° ^^''^ 

Reader if you have been convinced of theexccedinfr ^infnlnocc 
of sin, and have fled for refuge to this hope, which 3 B^b^e se s 
before you. see that you adorn the doctrine of God your Saviour 
n all things ; for you are not your own, but bought S a Wo' 
let the love of Christ, therefore, constrain you to he faithful lis' 
charge of every personal and relative duty. Read Cr Bi iJ 
daily. It will teach you to take the love of God as the^prTndDo 
his word as the rule, and his glory as the end of a 1 yo7rT^^^^^^^ 
Its truths wil be a sovereign remedy for all vour trk?s in hfc 
they will deprive death of its sting, and give you a we 1-founded 
hope of happiness beyond the grave. lounucd 

As a proof of the sincerity of your religious profession ihn 
Bible commands you to be instant in prayer^ WbTe^X' ^^ 
neral behaviour, respectful to your superiors kind to yourequafs" 
condescending to your inferiors : it requires you to ov^erco2 ev il 
with good, to, be merciful.just,temperlte.pure, peacefiJ p^tien 
thankful, resigned ; to mortify your corrupt affcctLnrand to ahn 
at universal obedience in thoVght, word, and deeT' Yet for^^^^ 
not. reader that though the dSties of religion can never W 
too much of your diligence, they can never have too liullof you? 
dependance: or the Bible declares that the atoning blood of tL 

God anTbi^P^^'f l''\' ""^>^ -^'^^"^ ^^ ^^^ reconciliation 
C^od^n d his perfect righteousness our only title to hea ven. 

mnted^by W. Clowbs and Sons. Duke-street, Lambeth. Sold at 56, PatemcKter row' 

—[loo] 





^ "YE MUST BE BORN AGAIN."— John iii. 7. 

» 1 Awak'd by Sinai's awful sound, 

l^ My soul in bonds of guilt I found, 

^ And knew not where to go ; 

^ Behol'd the record clear and plain. 

The sinner must he born again^ 
Or sink to endless woe. 

2 Amaz'd I stood, but could not tell 
Which way to shun the gates of hell. 

For death and hell were near ; 
I strove indeed, but strove in vain. 
The sinner must be born again 

Still sounded in mine ear. 

3 When to the law I trembling fled. 
It pour'd its curses on my head, 

I no relief could find ; 
This fearful truth increased my pain, 
The sinner must be born again, 

O'erwhelm'd my tortured mind. 

4 Again did Sinai's thunders roll, 
And guilt lay heavy on my soul. 

An overwhelming load ; 
Alas ! I read and saw it plain. 
The sinner must be born again. 

Or drink the wrath of God. 

5 The saints I heard with rapture tell 
How Jesus conquered death and hell. 

And broke the fowler's snare : 
Yet when I found this truth remain, 
The sinner must be born again, 

I sunk in deep despair. 
But while I thus in anguish lay, 
Jesus the Saviour pass'd that way, 

And felt his pity move ; 
The sinner, by his justice slain, 
Now, by his grace, is born again. 

And sings redeeming love. 
To heaven the joyful tidings flew. 
The angels tuned their harps anew. 

And loftier notes did raise ; 
All hail ! the Lamb who once was slain, 
Unnumber'd millions born againt 

Will shout thine endless praise. 



Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of' 
5 his. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the 
sons of God, Rom.viii. 9. 14. 

_ ., m\\ 

Printed by U'. Clov.es and So.ss, Duke street, Lambeth. Sold at SS, Paternoster row. ► C^' 



<t5> 




THE DYING SOCIALIST. 




" Call it not Socialism, call it devilism ! for it has 
made me more like a devil than a man," exclaimed 
a poor dying man, at Birmingham, to one of the 
town missionaries who visited him on his death- 
bed. " I got into company, which led me to Social- 
ism and to drinking. I rejected the Bible, denied 
the Saviour, and persuaded myself that there was 
no hereafter ; and as the result, I acted the part of a 
bad father, and a bad husband. I have the testi- 
mony of my master, that I was a steady and re- 
spectable man until I listened to the Owenites ; 
but since that time I have become a vagabond, 
and they who formerly knew me have shunned 
me in the streets. The system of the Owenite is 
worse than that of Paine." Such was the testimony 
of a dying victim of Socialism.* 

Reader, tell the infidel that you will not listen 
to him till he produces a better book than the 
Bible. He knows he cannot do this. If your Bible 
be rejected, what guide have you through life, 
what support in death ? This book alone reveals 
fi Saviour who died for our sins; and through 
faith in Him is certain salvation, present peace, 
and everlasting glory. 

* See James's " Young Man from Home," chap. iii. 

Printed by Vf, Clowb« and Sons, Duke ttrect, Lambeth. Sold ml 90, Pateraoctcr row. 



[1571 





eiiAiDoa GHiYa aHT 



*i- 



*JXI.*J tAX 



.1 ii loi ! mailivdb ii Il^a tfngl" ioa ii 

M&ias audi liveb b sjiil 910x11 era 

) mi no mrri t^^iigiv odn ?. *^ 

8 oj 9fa bal ifiiidv/ t^fl«qmoo oiiu Jv 
l)i*iiit>i) »sldi3 edi Ldio9(9i I * ' hb 0: 

nodi lijffi llsayrn b^buugiyq nn^ ttaoii&f" 
a ii» J liiq sili f)9ioB I%llu39i 9ifJ 8fi bflB { leilf 
-iiasi 9£li svjjfi I .bn^dei/d bed « baa ,-i9iii,u. -v 
=^1 bns ybj89)8 b 8BW I iijfit tist^jsra^rri V "^ , 
,^rri r//0 sd^J ol bsasiaH I Ihnii ujsra 6 2 

7 B smooed ev^il I smit iadi 9 f 

9YfifI 9ra weni ^hecniol orlvr ^^dt 
»r ^tff!'*7f0 ^di lo m9^;^a^8 edT .8J99iJa 9fi 

i 9d;t 8fi7f dDi/8 ".enijjSiloiijdiflijdt'^ 

^.fnaiffiiooB lo miioiv g^n 
c lliw uo^ tolt fobAai sdt list a*.^ 
rted fi 899uboiq ed Hit 
.gidi ob 1 'd sTftoad sH 

3 j/07 9VBd 9blijg Jad'/r 

fli iv 
. ijjiij odw '11101/0.;^ ij 
-.^c^i'^ ^iiuuu'iiiic iiinHso 81 raiH iii dtrr*^ 



^. 



ioH cftfii nuM * a's^msL s 



fTsn — 







IMMORAL EFFECTS OF ^OCIAI T ^ 

an inn m Manchester Jovrp \S ^^* ""^'^^ acting as bar-milH «/ 

promised to marry he. ^Aft^ a lirtirr'"^'?"'"' P^''^ '''^ atton ions and 
njembor of Mr. o\ven's soc d con m^^^^^^^^^^ -presented hin.se?f as a 

irlSr ""^,^^tl^^'^t system^as urr^h'r at'^thf''^ ^'' ^'^ b^^^"^<'' 
poitumties for some t me- but nt ]^r.J!u ^^^^^^- She resisted his im. 
consented to his wishes/nit hmvterl^o;'^r' "'"^'^^" "lonths 4^. 
take her to London, and many her at the ^ ^l^^P^^^edly promised to 
fields. Some time after the bi^th of her chilH^'^'l ' ^'^^'"""'^-in-the? 

had another wife, or at least had HvpH . '•^^''''''^^'■^3'"^^ that Joyce 
young woman whom he had married n "^"jld^'-^ble time with ano?her 
System, but whom, vvith her tS^ee inL. 'I'^i"^ ^^ ^^'' O^^en's Sodal 
father, he also deserted ! About five l'^''" ?^ '^'^^"^ he was the 
applicant, leaving her without the sli-H^ ^ ^°^ h*^ ^'^^ deserted the 
and her infant. % renlv to thp ^ !• ''''* ."""^"^ of subsistence for herself 
said that before she wen t to h^^w^h ?"' '^ '^' rnagistrate, t re applicant 
formed by Mr. Owen at thP X^. ?. ''^■''^' ^ ^""'^ of ceremony wm nor 
nature of the ceremony vasthat'ther'"''^',"^"' Manches't^r ^The' 
vvife; but at the same time if ever tSvf""' l^ "^'' '"^^^'^^^ ^^ man and 
hey could be more comfor able or ha^^v'^h ^ ""^' ^^-^ ^'^« ^^^th whom 
said that neither Joyce nor herseKd^^^^^^^ "' ?'^^^ separate! Shealso 
munity,'- as the latter had only n.M r9. '?^f^' ^""^^^es of the -com - 
^,^^- Owen as admission mc^e'^y^the'as'hou^^^ -hich was reqmVed 
vith the regulations of the - Harmonv " uh-^ 

should be dressed in a particul^rkbd^f H '''"J."' ^^^^ the inmates 
table, and work for a certain nurnbef of hi ^^'' ^'"' ^' ^"^ ^^"^'"on 
spective trades. Sunday they sne^t in / ■^'' •''''*>' ^^^ '"^t their re- 
amusements, instead of going to chVrch '"/'i'"^V"«' ^"^ ^" ^^^-ts of 
from their mothers shortly afferthp.' ' J"^ ^^^ ^^''^'•en «ere taken 
care of nurses appointed^^'^tVem^ X ^i^' '^^^^^^ 
some temporary relief to be given to the annl ^; magistrate ordered 
suffering under extreme mentS anp-„lh ! ^P^'^^."'' ^^ho seemed to be 

Listen for one moment to thi ^ ^""^ imminent starvation » 
ism. He states, Xtarrif4fsT"s"a^:n^ of the leader o?Social- 
his own words, and that marriage is " an n . ^"^^'^^tion.-' These are 
puts in italics,) - a baneful Se a^lsf T'"* -V''"^''' ^^"^ that he 
vised foble." Will the wnmpn T?- against nature," "a cunningly de 
vicious principle ChrSitv^pf h"^ ^'' "P Christianity foVsud 
not to be bitfer against theT/r^^^^^^ -d 

away his wife," 1 Cor. vii. H "Let ev^, ^^ "^^u'^^ ^"^band put 
band," 1 Cor. vii. 2. - Let not fhl ^\fy''''>'''^^ have her own bus- 
J 1 Cor. vii. 10. Oh then love th.f ' ' ^P^^':' ^'"^"^ ^'^ husband" 
5 ;^ho died for the lost, and wii^h vhi e^'tlP'' ''^''\ '''''^' ^ SaviouV 
Christ for a happy e ernity SUer .ipf'f ""k? 'l^''" h>' ^^^^ i" ^^sus 
tions of life. ^^ y nereafter, sheds<its blessings on all the rela- 




-Mrcet. Lambeth. Sold at 56. Pa.emo.ter ro,r 

[158] ., 






THE YOUTHFUL INFIDEL. 

A DYING SCENE. 

A CLERGYMAN at Manchester, visiting a 

tt"lavC' 'T.V ^° ^P^^^ *° •»-^"t 
o Hin. r"'' """l^ ^^'' "'""'^^ty «f looking 

nwV^'rP^'^T ^"'^ P^^*^^- With ago': 
mzing feelings the youth exclaimed " I 

looks with a penitent heart to tlie Saviour " 
Again the dying youth howled out, "I have 
burned my Bible ! " At this moment thiie of 
JUS companions came in. The dying youth 

" Mav r TIi"?"i^ ''^^"' ^"^ '-<^^-- d 
vo7f'L^^V^^f'^'*y '"'■'"-^"^•«e-curse 
you ! and fell back, and expired ! 

Purely " the way of transgressors is hard " 
llns young man liad been brought up in 
different principles, but had befn ruLed 
by his wretched companions, who on one oc- 

t'heir R^hl T nf ''i '"■' ^"^ ^^^'^^'^ ^o burn 
their Bibles ! Oh that such men would re- 
member that although they may burn the 
lioly book they can not destroy the truth, for 
Christ hath declared, " It is easierfor heaven ' 
and earth to pass, than one tittle of the law 
to lail, Luke xvi. 17. 




P/mi.d by W. Ci.,,. .M So»., Duk. ,i,«,t, L^b.ib. Sol4 .1 » 

[159]_ 






THE NEW YEAR. 




A HAPPY NEW YEAR is HOW tlic commor. salutation ; but how few 
seek happiness where alone it can be found ! Witliout the favour 
of God, tliere can be no real peace. " In his favour is life," Psa. 
XXX. 5. His " lovingkindness is better than life," Psa. Ixiii. 3. 
At the commencement of another year, we should pause, and re- 
mem'jer who crowneth the year with his goodness, Psa. Ixv. 
1 1. This season is a fit one to look over the past ; and although 
not all the power in the universe can recall one fleeting moment, 
or bring back one lost opportunity, yet, with a view to the im- 
provement of the future, let us ask ourselves. How have we im- 
proved the past year ? How have we used the talents inti-usted to 
us by God ? Have we by God's grace repented of, and forsaken 
our sins ? Have we received the record God has given us of his 
dear Son .'' Or, Are we living merely for this world ? " dead in 
trespasses and sins," far off from God by wicked works ? 

Are tlierc not many who at the close of the year may say, 
"We are not saved?" 

What a valuable season is this, too, for reflection, and deter- 
mination as to the future ! Why should we not now say, By the 
grace of God, I will begin to seek the Lord; or, with the prodigal 
of old, " I will arise, and go to my father." I will leave the ser- 
vice of Satan, that worst of masters, for the service and favour 
of God ? What should we feel if there were no invitations from 
our Creator for us to return to him ! no opportunities or encourage- 
ment for our seeking God I And shall we neglect God, because 
his mercy and forbearance have been so great toward us .' Let 
us rejoice that there is forgiveness with him, that he may be 
feared, Psa. cxxx. 4. Our merciful Creator is yet stretching 
out his hands, and calling to each and to all of us, to be recon- 
ciled to him, through Jesus Christ. Can we hear of such tender 
mercy— That " God so loved the world, that he gave his only 
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, 
but have everlasting life," John iii. 16, and can we yet turn away 
with indifference, and reject the offer? To you is the word of 
this salvation sent. " Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and 
thou shalt be saved," Acts xvi. 3L " Him that cometh to me," 
sa^'s our Divine Redeemer, " I will in no wise cast out," John vi. 
37. And we are assured that he is able to save to the uttcr- 
most all that come unto God by him, Heb. vii. 25. 

PfinUi ht the Religious Tract Society, nnd gold at 56, Poternottcr ro 
Price 6d. per 100. 



1 160]--. 






ARE YOU GOING TO THE 
HOUSE OF GOD ? 




On a sabbath evening in January, 1840, James M , a^-ed 

19, was asked to go to the house of God. He decHned the 
invitation, and tried to evade it by entering his mother's 
cottage. His friend followed him, and, being again repulsed, 
addressed him thus : " If I had a message from God to you 
to say that tliis was to be your last sabbath, would you not 
tlien attend ?" He replied, " Yes, I think I should." " Now, 
can you say that it will not be your last ?" He answered, with 
some hesitation, " No, no, I cannot." " You admit, then, it 
may be your last." He assented. His friend continued : 
" Well then, James, as it may be so, promise me to come." 
James was there. The text was, " Prepare to meet thy 
God ;" and under the appeal which followed, he experienced 
emotions to which he had hitherto been a stranger. His hands 
concealed his face, but not his tears. On the Tuesday follow- 
ing, he took cold. On Wednesday, he grew worse, and, be- 
coming alarmed for the safety of his soul, eagerly inquired, 
"What must I do to be saved?" He prayed. "Mercy, 
mercy, mercy !" was his unceasing cry, until on the morrow 
death closed his lips in eternal silence, and ushered his soul 
into the presence of his God. 

Reader, you are invited to go to the house of God to-day. 
Do you hesitate? Answer this question. Were this sabbath 
to be your last, would you not go ? If it were, would you 
spend it as you now intend to do ? Can you say that it will 
not be your last ? Then go to tlie house of God to-day 
to hear of that Saviour who died for sinners, and who " is able 
to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him," 
Heb. vii. 25. " Behold, now is the accepted time ; behold, now 
is the day of salvation," 2 Cor. vi. 2. " To-day if ye will 
hear his voice, harden not your heart," Heb. iv. 7. Therefore 
to-day listen to the voice of mercy, lest to-morrow your soul 
should be in eternity. 

rrinted for ihe Ueligious Tr:ict Society, and »old at 56, raternotter row. 
Price Od. per 100. 

[161] 







^ THIS MAY BE YOUH LAST SABBATPI. 

^ On a sabbath in October, 1836, two visitors entered an apartment 
fc, in which they found a husband, wife, and five children, wliom 
they addressed on the importance of observing God's laws, the 
necessity of a change of heart, and the consequences of dying 
without it, John iii. 3, on the frailty of health, and the uncer- 
tainty of life. The husband replied, " I serve God as well as I 
can : God is a God of mercy ; I am not going to die yet, for there 
is nothing the matter with me :" and with a smile he added, " I 
will promise to go to the house of God some day." Much was 
said, and the visit was closed with these solemn words, " Re- 
member, this may be your last sabbath." 

In a day or two after, the poor man was suddenly overtaken by 
a disease which baffled medical skill. He felt his danger; he 
cried, " The visitor ! the visitor !" But the visitor's address was 
not known. He then cried out, "The visitor's tract ! oh, then, 
give me the visitor's tract!" He read it, and its continued read- 
ing was interrupted only by his cries for " Pardon ! pardon!" 
which, on Friday, were silenced by death. 

Reader ! on what are you resting to deliver your soul from tlic 
guilt of sin, and the condemnation and curse of God's broken moral 
law ? Rom. iii. 10 — 19. Is it on serving God as well as you can.-* 
What man living has ever done as well as he could, or as well as 
he might ? Remember, that by the deeds of the law shall no flcsli 
be justified, Rom. iii. 20. Do you rely on the mere mercy of Gud .•* 
Recollect, God's justice must be satisfied before liis mercy can be 
extended to you; for his justice spared not his own Son when the 
iniquity of his people was laid upon him. Oh flee from all 
vain delusions. Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, through wh(^m 
God is both just, and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus, 
Rom. iii. 26. Seek from God the enlightening influences of his 
Holy Spirit. Delay not : health and life may come to an end 
this day. Say not, " I'll believe, I'll repent, I'll turn, I'll obey 
.some other sabbath." " Boast not thyself of to-morrow ; for thou 
'knowesl not what a day may bring forth," Prov. Xivii. 1. Act 
'on the possibility of this being " your last sabbath." 

Printed for the Religious Tract Society, and sold at 56, I'alernoswr Row, Price 6d. per 100. 

)^^^ [162] ^^^ 




^. 



" BEHOLD, I STAND AT THE DOOR, AND KNOCK." ^P 

Rev. iii. 20. * 



Behold a Stranger at the door! 
He gently knocks, has knocked before ; 
Has waited long, is waiting still : 
You use no other friend so ill. 

But will he prove a friend indeed? 
He will, the very friend you need ; 
The Man of Nazareth, 'tis he. 
With garments dyed at Calvary. 

Oh, lovely attitude ! he stands 
With melting heart and open hands : 
Oh matchless kindness! and he shows 
This matchless kindness to his foes. 

Rise, touched with gratitude divine, 
Turn out his enemy and thine ; 
Turn out that hateful monster, sin, 
And let the Heavenly Stranger in. 

If thou art poor, — and poor thou art, — 
Lo ! he hath riches to impart : 
Not wealth in which mean avarice rolls ; 
Oh, nobler far ! the wealth of souls. 

Art thou a mourner ? grief should fly : 
For who should weep with Jesus by ? 
No terror should thy soul annoy ; 
No tear, except the tear of joy. 

Admit him ere his anger burn. 
Lest he depart and ne'er return ; 
Admit him, or the hour's at hand. 
When, at his door denied, you'll stand. 

Admit him, for the human breast 
Ne'er entertain'd so kind a Guest : 
No mortal tongue their joys can tell, 
With whom he condescends to dwell. 

Yet know, nor of the terms complain, 
Where Jesus comes, he comes to reign — 
To reign, and with no partial sway ; 
Thoughts must be slain that disobey. 

Sovereign of souls, thou Prince of Peace! 
Oh may thy gentle reign increase ! 
Throw wide the door, each willing mind; 
And be thy empire all mankind. 

» ^JV^ 

% Printed by W. Clowk» and Sons, Duke street, Lambeth. Sold at 66, raternostfr row. f^l^ 

^#- 1 163 ] ## 




I THE CHRISTIAN AND HIS ECHO. ^ 

' True fditn produces love to God and man, 

Say, Echo, is not this the gospel plan ? 

—The gospel plan 

Must I my faith and love to Jesus show, 
By doing good to all, both friend and foe ? 

— Both friend and foa. 

But if a brother hates and treats me ill, 
Must I return him good, and love him still ? 
— Love him still. 

If he my failings watches to reveal, 
Must I his faults a« carefully conceal ? 

— As carefully conceal. 

But if my name and character he blast, 
And cruel malice, too, a long time last ; 
And if I sorrow and affliction know. 
He loves to add unto my cup of woe; 
In this uncommon, this peculiar case. 
Sweet Echo, say, must I still love and bless I 
— Still love and bless. 

. Whatever usage ill I may receive, 
Mioat I be patient still, and still forgive ? 

— Be patient still, and still forgive. 

Why, Echo, how is this? thou'rt sure a dove? 
Thy voice shall teach me nothing else but love! 

— Nothing else but love. 
Amen ! with all my heart, then be it so, 
'Tis all delightful, just and good, I know. 
And now to practice I'll directly go. 

— Directly go. 

Things being so, whoever me reject. 

My gracious God me surely will protect. 

— Surely will protect. 

Henceforth I'll roll on Him my every care, 
And then both friend and foe embrace in prayer. 
— Embrace in prayer. 

But after all the duties I have done. 

Must I, in point of merit, them disown. 

And trust for heaven through Jesu's blood alone ? 

Through Jesu's blood alone. 

Echo, enough ! thy counsels to mine ear, 
Are sweeter than to flowers the dew-drop tear ; 
Thy wise instructive lessons please me well : 
I'll go and practise them. Farewell, farewell. 

— ^Practise them. Farewell, farewell. 



Printed for the Religious Tract Society, and »old at 5fl, PaternosUr Row, Price 8d. per 100. 






1 PITT nrv 



^vl^Tol Uiii 



.1 .noil 



%e»^^ "' 



ra tilual siii I ieuM 




B 



i^JJ 



REASONS 

FOR 

NOT ATTENDING PUBLIC WORSHIP. 




" Overslept myself — could not dress in time — too 
cold — too hot — too windy — too dusty — too wet — too 
damp — too sunny — too cloudy — dont feel disposed — 
no other time to myself — mean to take a walk — froino- 
out a few miles — tied to business six days in the 
week — no fresh air but on the Sundays — feel a litlle 
chilly — feel a little feverish — feel very lazy — expect. 
to see friends — am thinkincr of visitins: friends — have a 
head- ache — intend taking medicine and nursing my- 
self to-day — was not shaved in time — don't like a 
liturgy, always praying for the same things — don't like 
an extempore prayer, cannot tell what is coming — 
cannot sit in a draught of air — cannot keep awake — am 
nmcli better than many that go regularly — must be 
busy getting ready the dinner — I have been badly 
treated by some of the people." 

Reader, have you ever breathed to yourself any 
one of these excuses? Do you not feel ashamed 
of them? Oh, avoid tampering with conscience, or 
trifling with your Almighty Judge. Do not add to 
your sin by such weak reasons for neglecting public 
ordinancee. God gives you more than fifty sabbaths 
during the year, and awful will be your condemnation 
if those sabbaths are mispent. There are no procla- 
mations of mercy in hell. If lost, what torment in 
your mind to reflect that you resided near the house 
of God, but for some trifling cause you would not 
attend ! Go to the house of prayer, seek the mevry 
of God throuoh that Saviour who died the just for the 
unjust, and you will rejoice m that go-pel wmch pro- 
claims : " God so loved the world, that he gave his only 
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should 
not perish, but have everlasting life," John iii. 16. 

I'rinicd for ihc RcHg ous Tract Society, and Sold at 56, Paternoster r.ow.-rricc CJ pif 100 

[165^ 








PRECEPTS AND PROMISES. 

Precept. — Acquaint now thyself with God, and be at 
peace, Job xxii. 21. 

Promise. — Thereby good shall come unto thee. Job 
xxii. 21. 

Precept. — This is his commandment, That we should 
believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, 1 Johniii.23. 

Promise. — Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou 
shalt be saved. Acts xvi. 31. 

Precept. — Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, 
call ye upon him while he is near, Isa. Iv. G. 

Promise. — I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye ine 
in vain, Isa. xlv. 19. 

Precept. — Let us not be weary in well doing-, Gal. vi. 9. 

Promise. — For in due season we shall reap, if we faint 
not. Gal. vi. 9. 

Precept. — Live in peace, 2 Cor. xiii. 11. 

Promise. — And the God of love and peace shall be 
with you, 2 Cor. xiii. 11. 

Precept. — Trust in the Lord, and do good, Psa. xxxvii. 3. 

ProxMIse. — And verily fhou shalt be fed, Psa. xxxvii. 3. 

Precept. — Be ye merciful, as your Father also is mer- 
ciful, Luke vi. 36. 

Promise. — Blessed are the merciful : for they shall ob- 
tain mercy. Matt. v. 7. 

Precept. — Seek righteousness, seek meekness, Zeph. 
ii. 3. 

■ Promise. — The meek shall inherit the earth, Psa. 
xxxvii. 11. 

Precept. — Cast thy burden upon the Lord, Psa. Iv. 22. 

Promise. — And he shall sustain thee, Psa. Iv. 22. 

Precept. — Let Israel hope in the Lord, Psa. cxxx. 7. 

Promise. — For with the Lord there is mercy, Psa. cxxx. 7. 



I 



Printed for the Religiou* Tract Society, and told at 5«, Paternoster Row.— Price 6d. per 100. 




[166]- 




Our Lord Jesus Christ has made an inseparable connexion 
between the precepts and promises of the gospel — between 
the character and the privileges of his people. If I am re- 
newed in the spirit of my mind, and thus made humble, con- 
trite, meek, spiritually-minded, pure, and peaceable, I shall 
enjoy his presence and love whilst journeying through this 
vale of tears, and his everlasting glory in the world above. 



I 






TRUE WISDOM. 




' THROUGH GRACE, 

1. I MUST believe that the Bible is tlse word of Gael. For the 
writers were " holy men of God, who spake as they were moved by 
the Holy Ghost," 2 Pet. i. 21. 

2. I must feel my lost condition as a sinner, and repent of my 
sins. " They that are v/hole have no need of the physician, but 
they that are sick : I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to 
repentance," Mark ii, 17. 

3. I must trust alone in Jesus Christ for salvation. For " nei- 
ther is there salvation in any other ; for there is none other name 
under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved," Acts 
iv. 12. 

4. I must worship Christ as the " true God," 1 John v. 20, For 
he is " The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of 
Peace," Isa. ix. G; " God, manifest in the flesh," 1 Tim. iii. 16. 

5. I must pray for the Holy Spirit. For, "if ye, being evil, 
know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more 
shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask 
him,'- Luke xi. 13. 

6. I must adore the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. " Go ye, and 
teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of 
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost," Matt, xxviii. 19. 

7. I must be justified by faith alone. For, " being justified by 
faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ," 
Rom. v. 1. " By grace are ye saved through faith ; and that not of 
yourselves : it is the gift of God, not of works, lest any man should 
boast," Eph. ii. 8, 9, ■ _ 

8. I must be " careful to maintain good works," Tit. iii. 8. For, 
*' Wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead," 
Jam. ii. 20. " For we are his workmanship, created in Christ 
Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we 
should walk in them," Eph. ii. 10. 

9. I must abide in Christ. For, " If a man abide not in me, he 
is cast forth as a branch, and is withered," John xv. 1 — 8. 

10. I must promote the spread of the gospel, and '* do good unto 
all men, especially unto them who are of the household of faith," 
Gal. vi. 10. " Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to 
e> ery creature," Mark xvi. 15. " Whoso hath this world's good, and 
seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up his compassion from 
him, how dvrelleth the love of God in him ?" 1 John iii. 17. 

11. I must be inwai'dly born again, besides having the outward 
form of baptism. For, " Except a man be born of water and of the 
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God,"- John iii. 5. 

12. I must strive (" agonize "') to enter into the kingdom of hea- 
ven. " Broad is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many 
there be which go in thereat ; because strait is the gate, and narrow 
is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be tha: find it," , 
Matt. vii. 13, 14. 



Printed for the Religious Tract Society, ar.d »oM at 56, Paternoster Row.— Price 6d. per 100. 



IS — [^^'] w^ 




i 




" I DON'T THINK THESE THINGS HAVE MUCH 
TO DO WITH PEOPLE IN OUR LINE." 

So said an sstler, to whom I was speaking on his habitual 
profanation of the Lord's day, " Have people in your line, 
then, my friend," I replied, " no souls? Will it be a good ex- 
cuse to plead at the last day, I did not care for my soul, or 
seek my Saviour, because — because — I was an ostler ?" 

Is not this ostler's way of thinking a very common method 
of shuffling off the remonstrances of conscience, and helping 
the devil to destroy our souls ? " All very just and true, 
the irreligious man says : '* religion is a good thing ;" but his 
secret, if not avowed " reserve," is, " but not for me, not for 
people in my line." 

The rich sometimes think it right for their minister to 
talk to the poor about religion ; but such conversation is by 
them considered to be out of place in the drawing-room. 
The poor sometimes say that they are too much engaged in 
their work to attend to the things of another world, and that 
such cares are more suitable to the rich, who have time on 
their hands. This appears to have been the ostlers thought. 

The wOrldly-wise man talks knowingly of critical difficulties 
and mysteries in the Scripture. The unlearned man, too, 
puts away the book, saying, " I am no scholar ; I am not 
learned." 

Nay, there is not a trade which some who follow it will 
not consider to be especially unsuited for religious pursuits 
and sabbath-keeping habits. Customers must be served ; 
patients must be visited ; books must be made up ; bad debts 
looked after ; a little fresh air must be taken ; visits must be 
paid ; friends received ; servants must write their letters, 
etc. etc. And so one and all seem to think that religion in 
general, and sabbath-keeping in particular, is not " for people 
in their line." 

Reader, the writer knows not " in what line" you are en- 
gaged, but he knows this — You have an immortal soul, what- 
ever your line may be ; and that soul is stained with sin, and 
will be lost for ever, unless it be sprinkled with the precious 
blood of Christ. You will find hereafter that no calling what- 
ever is excepted from our Lord's warning, " Except ye repent, 
ye shall all likewise perish," Luke xiii. 1—5. Think, then, of 
the value of your soul. You may be great " in your line :" 
but " what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole 
world, and lose his own soul ?" Mark viii. 30. 

Prav to God the Father that he would, for Jesus Chrisfs 
sake, give you the Holy Spirit, that so you may become a new 
creature in Christ Jesus, and an heir of eternal life. 



Printed for the Rcligiou* Tract Society, and sold at 56, Palernobier Uo" .-Price 6d. per iOO. 





[168]- 





54 



AN ADDRESS TO PARENTS, 

BY THB 

TEACHERS OF THEIR CHILDREN. 



Ws feel deeply concerned to be useful to the souls of your 
children ; and you fee] a strong desire that they may be happy ; 
but in order that this may be the case, you must help us to 
bring them up in the fear of the Lord ; that is, you must pray 
for them, and pray with them. If you answer, " I never 
prayed for myself, how then am I to pray for my children ?" 
we ask, how will you, how can you, answer for this awful 
neglect at the day of judgment? Oh begin at once; begin to- 
day ; kneel down with your child, and say, " Lord pjirdon my 
sins for the sake of Jesus Christ. Create in me a clean heart, O 
God ; and renew a right spirit within me."' Pray on in this way 
till you receive an answer. You must be born again, or die to 
all eternity. You often feel very unhappy, very angry, and 
wretched ; and you feel so because your heart is wicked, proud, 
sinful ; opposed to God, to holiness, and your own happiness. 
Now you will never be right till you obtain peace with God 
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Again, you m.ust take your 
children to the house of God. Many parents take their 
children to the gin-shops and public-houses, where they hear 
all manner of bad words, and see their fathers and mothers 
act shamefully, and not like those that must give account of 
themselves to God. It is owing to these sins that we have 
so many wicked boys and girls around us, and that many of 
the people die in such a miserable way. You know these 
things are true ; and you must die in the same hopeless manner, 
except you repent and turn to God. You have had many calls, 
many seasons of sickness and want ; your sufferings have been 
great, but they are nothing to the pains of hell. Shall these 
warnings be lost upon you? Do you wish to die in sin, to be 
shut out of heaven, and shut up in the bottomless pit for ever? 
You say, '* I hope not ;"' but your hope will be vain, if you 
do not turn to God. Many go on till death without repenting 
of their sins. Do not let Satan deceive you in this way to 
your eternal ruin. We want to do you good ; we cannot bear 
to see you so wretched. God does love you; Christ died for 
you; the Holy Spirit strives with you; you maybe happy in 
this world and in the world to come. Seek the mercy of the 
Lord now while it is called to-day. Lead a new life ; and may the 
Lord give you his blessing, and life for evermore. 





Fritted far ibe Religioui Tract Society, and sold at 5«, Paternoster Row.— Price 6J- per IPOi 

[169] 





'V] 



A FEW WORDS TO THOSE WHO PROFESS 
TO WORSHIP GOD. 




K 



Is it the God revealed in the Bible you worship? It is not 
sufficient for man to be sincere or earnest in his worship, if he 
is in error in regard to the object of worship. Such an error is 
fatal. Thousands of nominal Christians are, in their ignorance, 
worshipping an unknown God : a God whose character differs 
greatly from that of the God whom the Bible reveals : and 
all such worship is vain and profitless. The God of the Bible is 
" God in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imput- 
ing their trespasses unto them !'' 2 Cor. v. 19. — A God of infinite 
holiness and infinite love ; who freely forgiveth the iniquities of 
all who, believing that Christ hath put away sin by the sacri- 
fice of himself, come unto Him. 

If the God you worship be viewed as one who will allow you 
to come near to hun, and to rejoice in him, on account of some 
acts or service, or supposed merit of your own, be assured yours 
is not the God of the Bible. The death of Christ has for ever 
removed every obstacle to the sinner's coming to God, except his 
own unwillingness to come ; and now. God is calling upon every 
one to whom the gospel is known, to draw near at once, and to 
drink of the living water ; to draw near at once, and eat of the 
rich provision which is already spread out : to draw near at once, 
and rejoice in God, as the God of his salvation — the God wiio 
freely giveth him eternal life in his Son, 1 John v. 11. Be not 
deceived in so important a matter : your outward observance of 
the forms of religion will avail you nothing, if you do not come 
unto the Father through the Son, John xiv. 6. 

If you are conscious that you have hitherto been a Christian 
only in name — a worshipper of an unknown God — be persuaded 
to listen to these few words, which proclaim to you the glad tid- 
ings of the gospel, the message of reconciliation ; and draw 
near now, draw near at once to the God of the Bible, by the new 
and living way of access— God's dear Son. " The Spirit and the 
bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say. Come. And let 
him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the 
water of life freely," Rev. xxii. 17. 

Printed for the Religious Tract Society, and »old at 5«, Paterno»ter Row.— Price Od. per lOO. 




[170] 





INVITATION TO YOU. ^ 



Are you a sinner? If you are, whither should you go 
but to the '' Lamb of God, which takcth away the sin of 
the world?" John i. 29. Have you a soul? If you have, 
whither should you go but to the Saviour of souls ? Is 
there a life to come? If there is, whither should you ctq 
but to Him who only hath the w^ords of eternal life ? 
Is there a wrath to come? If there is, whither should 
you go, but to Him who only can deliver from " the wrath 
to come?" 

And will He not receive you ? If He yielded himself 
into the hands of those that sought His life, will He hide 
himself from the hearts of those that seek His mercy ? If 
He was willing to be taken by the hand of violence, is He 
not much more wilHng to be taken by the hand of faith ? 
He that died for thy sins, will He cast thee off while 
mourning over them ? Oh ! come ; I beseech you, come to 
him, and He will give you life. He will give you rest. 
He wnll receive you. Knock, and He will open unto 
you. Look to Him, and He will save you. Did ever 
any come to Him for a cure, and go away without it ? 
*'The Spirit and the bride say. Come. And let him 
that heareth say. Come. And let him that is athirst 
come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life 
freely," Rev. xxii. 17. 

Thou desirest to find something in thyself, yet tliou 
findest nothinor but what thou hast reason to be ashamed 
of: yet let not this hinder, but further thy coming. Come 
as thou art ; come poor, come needy, come empty, come 
wretched ; only come, only believe. His heart is free. 
His arms are open ; i^: is His joy and crown to receive 
sinners . 

Art thou willing ? He never was unwilling to save 
I thee. 



Printed for lh» Religious Tract Society, and iold at S«, PaUrno»ler rcw.— Price 6d. per :00. 




[1711- 





HINTS FOR DAILY PRACTICE 




1 . Come by faith to the blood of Christ that all your 
sins may be pardoned. Lev. xvii. 11; Heb. ix. 14, 
22; Eph. i. 7; ii. 13; 1 Pet. i. 19; 1 John i. 7. 

2. Seek by prayer the help of the Holy Spirit. Luke 
xi. 13; Rom. viii. 26, 27; Gal. v. 22, 23; Eph. ii. 18; 
James iii. 17. 

3. Try to recollect continually that God is always 
present, knowing every thought you think, hearing every 
word you speak, and observing every thing you do. 
Prov. XV. 3; Psa. cxxxix. 2 — 4, 12; Ezek. xi. 5; Heb. 
iv. 13. 

4. Live upon Christ as the life-giving root of all 
true hoUness. John vi. 47 — 58; xv. 4 — 8; Col. ii. 
3—9. 

5. Before you speak, ask these three questions : — Is 
what I am going to say true ? Is it useful ? Is it kind ? 
Psa. cxx. 2; cxli. 3; Prov. xv. 1, 2; Eph. iv. 15, 25, 
29, 31, 32. 

6. Pray for a calm and thoughtful state of mind, 
trusting always in the Lord, for you know not what a day 
may bring forth. Job xxii. 21 ; Isa. xxvi. 3, 4 ; Hag. i. 
5; iNIatt. xi. 29; John xiv. 26, 27; Phil. iv. 5—7; Jas. 

i. 2—7. 

7. Remember, if religion has done nothing for your 
temper, it has done little for your soul, and see, therefore, 
that your temper be kind, merciful, cheerful, meek, iind 
affectionate. Rom. xiii. 10 ; James i. 26 ; 1 Pet. iii. 
8—11. 

8. Work while it is called to-day for the glory of God, 
and the g-ood of men. John ix. 4; 1 Cor. x. 31 ; Gal. 
vi. 10. 



ly) Printed for Ihe Religious Tract Society, nnd sold at S«, Pntornostcr Row., and e5, St. I'au 

IfeNi Churchjard.— Price 6J. i>er 1 00. 




--[ 



172]. 




-^s-fl 



THE INVITATION ACCEPTED. 



" Him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out." — John vi. 37, 




Just as I am — without one pica, 
But that thy blood was shed for me, 
And that thou bidd'st me come to thee — 
O Lamb of God, I come ! 

Just as I am — and waiting not 
To rid my soul of one dark blot. 
To thee, whose blood can cleanse each spot- 
O Lamb of God, I come ! 

Just as I am — though toss'd about 
With many a conflict, many a doubt. 
With fears within and wars without — 
O Lamb of God, I come ! 

just as 1 am — poor, wretched, blind ; 
Sight, riches, healing of the mind. 
Yea, all I need, in thee to find — 

O Lamb of God, I come ^ 

Just as I am — thou wilt receive. 
Wilt welcome, pardon, cleanse, relieve. 
Because thy promise I believe — 

O Lamb of God, I come ! 

Just as I am — thy love unknown 
Has broken every barrier down ; 
Now, to be thine, yea, thine alone — 
O Lamb of God, I come ! 

'j3 Printed for the Religious Tract Society, and sold at 50, Paternoster-row.— Price Sd. per 100. VtS^W 

'^^^^ 1.173} .---^- 





SUNDAY CRIES. 




My fellow Sinner — Receive kindly a few words 
which are addressed to you in kindness. As they must 
be few, so they will be plain, and ought not to give 
offence. They may tell you that which you have not 
thought of, though it is true. Most men try to hide 
their sins ; you boldly proclaim yours. Through street 
and lane do you openly announce yourself a sabbath- 
breaker. Through street and lane do you openly invite 
others to partake of your sin. Sinful practices harden 
the conscience, therefore you may not be aware of it ; 
but you are indeed far gone in wickedness ; for you are 
imitating the devil himself, who " walketh about, seek- 
ing whom he may devour," 1 Pet. v. 8. You are 
I undoubtedly working for him, for he makes use of you 
' to tempt others to sin. While the servants of Christ 
are resting and worshipping God, you are working. 
The devU is a hard master. " Rest," saith the Lord, 
" Rest on the sabbath." '' Work," urges the devil ; 
" work, slave !" Yes ! sinner, while you thus act you 
are one of the devil's slaves ! Oh, how sad is your 
condition ! If you continue to work for Satan here, you 
will never have rest : for in that place to which every 
sabbath-breaker goes, who dies without repentance and 
witliout coming to Christ for pardon, " they have no 
rest day nor night. — The smoke of their torment 
ascendeth up for ever and ever," Rev. xiv. 1 1 . Take 
warning then. " Flee from the wrath to come," Matt. 
iii. 7. " Behold the Lamb of God," John i. 29. Christ 
is a Saviour — he saves " his people from their sins." 
Pray to him to save you ; his yoke is easy and his burden 
is light ; make a trial of it in honest sincerity, and you 
will find it so. Give to your body that rest it requires, 
, but of which the devil is robbing you. '*' Remember 
\ the sabbath-day, to keep it holy," Exod. xx. 8. Go to 
^ the house of God. " Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, 

^and thou shalt be saved," Acts xvi. 31. 

§ , ^ 

rrinted for the Religioas Tract Society, and sold at ^6, Paternoster-row.— Price id. per 100. 




[174> 












GOOD TIDINGS OF GREAT JOY TO 
ALL PEOPLE. 



Reader, — Whosoever you are, if vet standing aloof 
from God — there is nothing, be assured, between you and 
the enjoyment of his pardoning mercy, in the free, full, 
and everlasting remission of all your guilt, but either your 
own indifference about it, or your unwillingness to receive 
it in God's way. You are harbouring false and unworthy 
thoughts of him, you are even making him a liar, if you 
are fancying any unwillingness on his part to bestow it. 
He has told you himself that he '*delighteth in mercy." 
The unwiUingness is on your part, not on his. " As 
God is true," his word to you " is not yea and nay." There 
is perfect sincerity in it, and unfailing faithfulness. Let 
the gift of his Son be to you, as it is to all, a sure pledge 
that he will receive graciously, and with Divine joy, every 
sinner that comes to him. But no sinner must presume 
to come in any way of his own devising. He whose sole 
right it is, has prescribed the way. The declaration has 
come from the lips of the Mediator himself, " I am the 

Way no man cometh unto the Father but by me." But 

while no man can come to the Father but by liim— it 
is equally a truth that by him every man may come. 
The proclamation is to all. » It has no exceptive clauses. 
W^herever we find a man, we find a sinner; and 
wherever we find a sinner, we find one to whom we may 
present God's message of mercy, God's " word of recon- 
ciliation," and say, " Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and thou shalt be saved." 



Primed for the Religious Tract Society, nnd sold nt 56, Paterno.er-row.— Price tJ p.-r 100. 




[175> 







^ 



WE CLING TO THEE. 




O Holy Saviour ! Friend unseen. 
Since on thine arm thou bidst us lean. 
Help us, throughout life'^ijchanging scene. 
By faith to cling to Thee ! 

Bless'd with this fellowship divine. 
Take what thou wilt, we'll not repine ; 
For as the branches to the vine 
We only cling to Thee ! 

Though far from home, fatigued, opprest, 
Here we have found a place of rest ; 
As exiles still, yet not unblest. 
Because we cling to Thee. 

Without a murmur we dismiss 
Our former dreams of earthly bliss. 
Our joy, our consolation, this. 
Each hour to cling to Thee. 

What though the world deceitful prove. 
And earthly friends and hopes remove, 
With patient uncomplaining love 
Still can we cling to Thee. 

Though oft we seem to tread alone 
Life's dreary waste, with thorns o'ergrown. 
Thy voice of love, in gentlest tone. 
Whispers, " Still cling to me." 

Though faith and hope are often tried, 
We ask not, need not, ought beside. 
So safe, so calm, so satisfied, 
The souls that cling to Thee. 

They fear not Satan nor the grave 
They know thee near, and strong to save. 
With thee all danger they can brave. 
Because they cling to Thee. 

Bless'd is our lotwhate'erbefal, 
Who can affright or who appal — 
Since as our strength, our Rock, our all, 
Jesus ! we cling to Thee. 



rrinted iV>7 'lie Kcligious Tract Society, and sold at 58, Fatcrnoster-row.— Price M. per 100. 



^«^^8v,^>5i-. r 17*^1 



■m 




A WORD OF WARNING. 




Stranger! This meets you on your way to eternity — 
an eternity of happiness or woe. To which of the two are 
you going? The question is a solemn one. O fellow-sinner, 
put it not away. Has conscience answered the question 
already, whether you would or no ? Is there a voice within 
making you tremble: — " If I die as I am, I shall be lost for 
ever !" Perhaps your only comfortable moments are when you 
can get the thoughts of God and eternity out of your mind. 

" He that believeth not shall be damned," Mark 
xvi. 16. " Except ye refent, ye shall all likewise 
PERISH," Luke xiii. 3. These are the words of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, who is soon to be your Judge. Look at them ; they 
are plain words. Do you wisli they were not true ? Sinner, 
they are true, and you cannot change them. So then, if they 
are true, and if you die without Christ, you are lost ! Does it 
not come to this, that the only hope you have of escape from 
wrath, is that God will not keep his own threatening? In the 
words of the apostle, you thus *' make him a liar." sinner, 
shudder at such madness ! Will you risk your eternity on this ? 

But is there hope ? Has God any mercy for an enemy like 
you ? — Yes. Here again are the words of Him who is to 
judge you : " God so loved the world, that he gave his only 
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life," John iii. 16. Have you 
he-ard this before ? You Mere a perishing sinner when 
you first heard it. It was because you were perishing God 
sent you this message, to tell you how you might be saved ; 
and if you have not come to Christ, you are the same perish- 
ing sinner still. Believe on him 7iow, and you have God's 
sure word for it that you shall be saved. 

Dear fellow-sinner ! you have been clearly warned. You have 
been warned of a coming wrath, and offered a present salvation. 
Remember, if you live unconverted, from this moment forward 
you know where you are going, and if you perish your blood 
will be upon your own head. You will remember, when you 
are lifting up your eyes in tonnent, tliat you fought your way 
to hell in the face of a full and free salvation, offered to you 
by a loving God. 

Oh that the Almighty Spirit would fix these solemn trutlis 
in your heart, like an arrow whicli you cannot remove, and 
give you no rest till you have fled to Christ for refuge 
from the wrath to come ! 




SHORT PRAYERS FOR MERCY. 



O Lord, in my time of need look 
upon me, and forgive my sins. 
Grant me thy Holy Spirit ; teach me 
to think of thee, and teach me to 
pray, for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen. 



O L0RD5I have nothing of my own 
to plead ; I am a ruined, dying sinner. 
Yet, for Christ's sake, have mercy on 
me. May thy Holy Spirit enlighten 
my dark mind, and by his power 
move my hard heart to repentance. 
Amen. 



O Lord, my sins have been as 
scarlet, but do thou make them as 
white as snow ; they have been red 
like crimson^ but do thou make them 
as wool ; since Christ, the Lamb of 
God, died to take away the sin of the 
world. Amen. 



O God, for Jesus Christ's sake, 
give me thy Holy Spirit. Amen. 

r 1 78.1 printed for t'.ie Ueliginus Tract Societv, ar.d so'.d at 56, PatetnoslM-rcw .—Price «d. pet ICa 



SHORT PllAYERS FOR THE AFFLICTED. 

O Lord, may I be humbled in 
heart under this affliction.^ May thy 
Holy Spirit create in me a clean 
heart, and make me holy, for Christ's 
sake. Amen. 



O Lord, give me patience under 
suffering, and refresh my soul with 
thy truth, and assist me in my 
weakness to look to Jesus, that I may 
be saved from my sins, for his sake. 
Amen. 



O Lord, be merciful to me a sin- 
ner, and comfort my soul under 
trouble with thy word, and sanctify 
me through thy truth, for Christ's 
sake. Amen. 



O Lord, give me a firm trust in 
thee; and enable me to be cheerfully 
resigned to all that thou mayest see 
good to do unto me, for Jesus Christ's 
sake. Amen. 



r 1 79.1 Printed ^^ur the Relisicna Tract Society, and sold a". 5«, Paternoster ro» — TV ce 3<f per '00. 



SHORT PRAYERS BEFORE READING 
THE SCRIPTURES. 

O Lord God, grant me the gift 
of thy Holy Spirit, to enlighten, to 
purify, and to rule my heart, for 
Christ's sake. Amen. 



O Lord, grant that thy blessed 
word may make me wise unto sal- 
vation, through faith which is in 
Christ Jesus. Amen. 



O Lord, help me to meditate on 
thy word, and enable me to believe 
it, and to practise it, for Christ's 
sake. Amen. 



O Lord, may thy word dwell in 
me richly in all wisdom ; pour the 
light of thy Holy Spirit into my 
heart ; enable me to understand thy 
word, and constantly to meditate 
upon it, for Christ's sake. Amen. 



("180.1 rrinlcil for the Rdigious Tract Society, and soM at 56, Faternos'ct-row.— Price 60. per iCO. 



\ 



SHORT PRAYERS FOR GRACE, 

O Lord God, pardon all my sins, 
give me true repentance, and grant 
me faith, for Christ's sake. Amen. 



O Lord God, for Christ's sake, 
teach me, by thy Holy Spirit, to feel 
my need of a Saviom*, and to know 
Jesus Christ thy dear Son, Avhom thou 
hast given to be our Saviour. Amen. 



O Lord God, grant me thy Holy 
Spirit, that I may be born again of 
the Spirit, and be a new creature in 
Christ Jesus. Oh may I know that 
the blood of Jesus Christ thv Son 
cleanseth from all sin. Cleanse thou 
m.e, and I shall be clean. Amen. 



r 181.] Printed for the Religious Tract Society 56, Paternoster-row. [Price Cd. per 100. 



, 



VISIT TO A COTTAGE, 

BY A LADY, IN A LETTER TO A FRIEND. 



On entering a house, I found an intelligent-looking woman, 
very busy, with three little children around lier. Her 
attention was soon arrested, and having set a chair for nie, 
Ave both sat down, and her eyes were fastened upon me as 
I began to speak of her soul. To my surprise and delight 
she sobbed out, " Ah, I was up at the Hall once, and 
Mr. read about the poor heathen worshipping croco- 
diles, and all manner of foolisii things; and tliat seemed 
very shocking, but they are not half so bad as I am, for 
they do worship something, and I worship nothing." 

Finding her really burdened with a sense of sin, I said, 
" I have a message from God to you, and I think you will 
find he is addressing you by name." I then read Matt. 
xi. 28 : " Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest." She said, " Ah, that's 
to me, sure enough, for I am indeed weary and heavy 
laden." I read Isaiah xl. 1,2: " Comfort ye, comfort ye 
ray people, saith your God. Speak ye comfortably to 
Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accom- 
plished, that her iniquity is pardoned : for she hath received 
of the Lord's hand double for all her sins." Iler look was 
so eager and expressive, that I hardly knew whether she 
was fully entering into the passage, or waiting for a com- 
ment upon it ; and though I do not like to gild gold, I was 
so anxious to deliver a full gospel, that I added, "Now, 
if you owed an immense bill at the shop, and had nothing 
to pay, and I stood your friend, and went and paid it all 
off, ay, and even double to what you owed, should you be 
in any further trouble about your debt.?" " Oli, I take 
your comparison ; no, I should be in no furtlier trouble 
about the debt, but I should be in a deal of trouble to 
think how I should ever make you amends." 

Never before did I hear so sireet and so simple an 
application of gospel doctrine, so straight and short a 
cut to the true morality which is learned at tlie cross of 
Christ. " Blessed trouble, my dear friend," I exclaimed, 
" may we all feel it more and more ! I could almost 
suppose there would be such a happy trouble as tliis in 
heaven itself. TVhat shall I render unto the Lord for all 
the benefits he has conferred upon me ? Wliat ? why just 
receive more ; take the cup of salvation, and call upon 
the name of the Lord." 

Printed for the Religious Tract Society, and sold at 56, Paternostcr-ro-.^-.— Price 6.1. per 100. 

: |_182] 



*' ACCEPTED IN THE BELOVED." 

Eph. i. 6. 



The wanderer no more -will roam, 
The lost one to the fold liath come, 
The prodigal is welcomed home, 

Lamb of God, in thee ! 

Though clothed with shame, by sin defiled. 
The Father hath embraced his child, 
And I am pardoned, reconciled, 

O Lamb of God, in thee I 

It is the Father's joy to bless — 
His love provides for me a dress, 
A robe of spotless righteousness, 

Lamb of God, in thee' 

Now shall my famished soul be fed, 
A feast of love for me is spread, 
I feed upon the children's bread, 

O Lamb of God, in thee! 

Yea, in the fulness of his grace, 
He puts me in the children's place, 
Where I may gaze upon Ids face, 

O Lamb of God, in thee! 

I cannot half his love express, 
Yet, Lord, with joy my lips confess, 
This blessed portion I possess, 

O Lamb of God, in thee ! 

It is Thy precious name I bear. 
It is Thy spotless robe I wear. 
Therefore, the Father s love I share, 
O Lamb of God, in thee ! 

And when I in Thy likeness shine, 
The glory and the praise be Thine, 
That everlasting joy is mine, 

Lamb of God, in thee ! 



Printed for the Religious Tract Society, and sold at 56, Palernoster-row.— Price Cd. -per IOC. 



[I83J- 




f <i 



A FISHERMAN'S OPINION; 

IS IT RICtIIT ? 




A Scripture reader being in a sea-port town, was talking -vvith a 
fisherman, -wlio seemed to know but little about God's word ; but as 
lie was willing to hear, the reader read to him Psalm cvii, from the 
2-2nd to 32nd verse, about those " that go down to the sea in ships, 
that do business in great waters," and said, " How grateful those.wlio 
ai*e engaged on the sea ought to feel towards Gud for his mercy in 
preserving them amidst its trials and dangers !" 

The fisherman said, " Ah, that is true. He does preserve us wonder- 
fully, and yet, sir, I do not think there is a -wickeder set of meu any 
where than fishermen are." 

The reader answered, " However wicked they are, it is a mercy to 
know that God has opened a way of pardon for the guilty through the 
death of his dear Son, who took upon himself our nature, obeyed 
God's law, and died on the cross, the just for the unjust, to bring us to 
God ; and now all who repent of their sins, and believe on the Lord 
Jesus, shall not perish ; but have eternal life." 

Is the reader of this paper a fisherman ? Is your brother fisherman's 
opinion right ? Are you really a wicked set of men ? Perhaps it is 
the case ; and it may be true that there is among you much of swear- 
ing, and drunkenness, and forgetfuluessof God. Perhaps very few of 
you ever go to the house of God ; while yet you spend many an hour 
at the public house, and in other ways which will give you no pleasure 
in the dying hour. But judge yourself in this matter ; how do matters 
stand between you and your God ? If conscience condemn you, if 
you feel you are not fit to meet God, why should it be so any longer ? 
There have been some good fishermen. Peter, and James, and John, 
the apostles of Christ, were all fishermen ; but they forsook sin, 
followed Christ, and became fishers of men ; why should you not be 
like them, new creatures in Christ Jesus ? you may through grace be- 
come so by trusting in Him. 

Consider these four things : — 

First, that you have a never-dying soul. Take your Bible, and 
read. Gen. ii. 7 ; Ezek. xviii. 4 ; Matt. xxv. 46 ; and Rev. xiv. 11. 

Secondly, that the present time is the only certain time you have to 
prepare for eternity. Read Isa. Iv. 6 ; 2 Cor. vi. 2 : and weigh well 
the solemn warning, Prov. i. 24 to th« end of the chapter. 

Thirdly, that Christ is able and willing to save you, however 
careless aud wicked you may have been, if you repent, and believe in 
Him. Eead Isa. i. 18 ; Ezek. xxxiii. 11 ; Matt. ix. 12, 13, and xi. 
28 ; 1 Tim. i. 15 ; and Heb. vii. 25. 

Fourthly, that the day of reckoning and of judgment will come 
There is but a step between you and death. Read Isa. xl 6, 8 ; Rom. 
xiv. 12 ; 2 Cor. v. 10 ; Rev. xx. 1 1 to the end of the chapter. 

Now do not cast away this little paper as a matter of no moment, 
but think over it ; yea more, pray over it. You ought to do so ; it 
contains solemn truths, and is written with a sincere desire to do you 
good. May God in his mercy bless it to your soul, so that by his 
grace your heart may be changed, and by believing in Christ your 
soul may be saved. 



■mummwmm 







iH;H 









iiiiiliiii 



fM!t/lf(:'(| 



: '■■'' '■liiiiiii 

■'ilijlfiliiiiiisi i' : 



