
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at jhttp : //books . qooqle . com/ 



Hosted by 



Google 



Hosted by 



Google 



Hosted by 



Google 




> '• •" 111 



■111 J] B Hi || Ij 

1 1 lllll III I 111 



« 







^ 



C€ £ 



: ^?^V- 



Hosted by 



Google 



RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON, 



WITH SELECTIONS FROM 



HER INSTRUCTIONS TO THE PUPILS 



MT. HOLYOKE FEMALE SEMINARY. 



BY FIDELIA FISK.f 




PUBLISHED BY THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

28 CORNHILL. BOSTON. 



Hosted by 



Google 



Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1866, by the 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of Massachusetts. 



ROCKWELL AND ROLLINS, 

PRINTERS AND STEREOTYPERS, 

122 Washington St., Boston. 



Hosted by 



Google 



PREFACE. 



The present work is not a memoir. Two considerable 
volumes have already been published sketching the life 
and labors of Mary Lyon, and leaving little room or occasion 
for a third covering the same ground. 

Miss Fisk was led to undertake this work by finding among 
some of the early Holyoke pupils many notes of Miss Lyon's 
instructions, especially on religious topics, and as these were 
talked over and interesting incidents were related of her, 
the desire was very often expressed that they might be put 
together in some form to benefit others, and bring Miss 
Lyon anew before the minds of young ladies preparing for 
usefulness. 

Miss Fisk was peculiarly fitted for the work. Her mind 
and character were of such a type as to receive a deep im- 
press from Miss Lyon's influence. Her birthplace was in 
a town adjoining Miss Lyon's first home, and, from early 
childhood, she had heard of her words and deeds. In later 
years she was brought into intimate connection with her 
as a pupil and teacher, and allowed, as few others were, to 
know her inner life. She most tenderly loved and venerated 



Hosted by 



Google 



IV PREFACE. 

her,, and when Miss Fisk went to a distant field of labor, it 
was to carry Miss Lyon's views and principles with her, and 
make them pre-eminently her own. 

She treasured up every thing she had heard from her lips, 
and, in studying and following her example, her character 
was fashioned into the same image. Her instructions to 
the pupils at South Hadley showed, to all who heard them, 
that she was imbued with the spirit of their first principal in 
a remarkable degree. 

She entered upon the task of collecting and writing out 
these reminiscences with much interest, and had nearly com- 
pleted the narrative portion. It was her purpose to insert 
only those things which had not been published before ; but 
a few letters and other extracts were desirable to make the 
narrative complete. 

Materials accumulated so much while she was writing 
that she changed her plan, and designed to re-write much 
of what she had prepared. Sickness however compelled 
her to lay aside her pen before she had carried out her pur- 
pose, and, after her death, it was thought best to publish 
the manuscript much as she had left it. It has been copied 
and finished by a friend, who was a teacher with Miss Fisk 
at the seminary, and who remained there till after Miss 
Lyon's death. 



Hosted by 



Google 



PREFACE. V 

This book occupied many of Miss Fisk's thoughts, after 
disease had laid its hand heavily upon her, and may, perhaps, 
be considered her last gift to the service of Christ. It was 
one of the last efforts to be given up. She says of it in 
speaking of her health, and not being able to return to 
Persia, — 

"I have nothing that I wanted to do here, except to 
finish that writing. I may have to give it up, but I still hope 
not. If the tabernacle does not shake too much, I will try 
to do it, and may be I shall be more in sympathy with her 
who has laid aside her tabernacle, than if I were well." The 
book would have had much more merit had she been able 
to finish it, but the endeavor has been to carry out her wishes 
and designs in regard to it, as far as possible. 

If this record of the instructions and incidents in the 
life of a beloved teacher shall make her words come home 
to the heart of any of her pupils with fresh power, and 
thus incite them to greater diligence in the Master's service, 
or if it shall give those just commencing life's work new 
and more correct views of life and duty, the earnest desires 
of those who have prepared it will be met. 



Hosted by 



Google 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 

PAGE 

Parentage and Childhood ...... 9 

CHAPTER II. 
Home Duties and Training ...... 20 

CHAPTER III. 
Early School-days . 35 

CHAPTER IV. 
At Byfield and Derry ....... 44 

CHAPTER V. 
The Buckland School . 54 

CHAPTER VI. 
In Derry, Ashfield, and Buckland . , , .65 

CHAPTER VII. 
Founding of Mount Holyoke Seminary . . . .88 

CHAPTER VIII. 

The First Year ........ 101 

CHAPTER IX. 
Second, Third, and Fourth Years . . . . .114 

CHAPTER X. 
Second, Third, and Fourth Years continued . . .131 

CHAPTER XI. 
Fifth and Sixth Years . . . . . , .147 

CHAPTER XII. 
Fifth and Sixth Years continued . . . . .159 

CHAPTER XIII. 
Sixth to the Tenth Year . . . . , .177 

CHAPTER XIV. 

Sickness and Death . . . . . . ,201 

vi 



Hosted by 



Google 



SELECTIONS. 









PAGE 


Morning Exercises . . . . • . 210 


Thy will be done . . . 






. 219 


Sowing to the Spirit and to the Flesh . 






. 220 


Study of the Scriptures 

Our relations to God . . * 






• 222 






. 224 


Willing to live and labor . . 






. 220 


Cultivation of personal religion . 






. 227 


Ye are not your own . . . 






. 228 


Our sinful Hearts 






. 229 


" Take no thought what ye shall eat " . 






. 230 


Eternity .... 






. 231 


" In the world ye shall have tribulation 


» 1 




. 232 


The Great Supper . . . 






. 233 


Afternoon Exercises 






. 235 


Study .... 






. 235 


Punctuality . . • < 






. 236 


Habits .... 






. 237 


Economy • • • 






, . 238 


Health 






, • 239 


Furnishing a Table 






, . 242 


Personal Responsibility in Giving 






. 243 


Benevolence . 






. 245 


Missionary Contributions 






. 249 


General principles of giving 






. 249 


The Reward . 






1 • 250 


Giving in Christ's name . « 






► • 251 


The Bible standard of giving, high 






, . 252 


Reasons for adopting the Bible standan 
What is a high standard ? 


i 




1 . 253 






1 . 253 


Self-denial for Christ's sake . 






, . 255 


Reasons for Self-denial . 






» . 250 


Curse of Selfishness . 






• • 257 


The Parable of the Talents 






• • 258 


Meetings with the Impenitent 






. 259 


Sabbath Evening Instructions 






. 263 


Who are at the eleventh hour ? 






. . 263 


God our portion 






• . 204 


Enemies of Christ . . 






, . 205 


Friends of Christ 






. . 206 


Meeting at the judgment 






# . 208 


Sinners spending with riotous living 






, . 209 


The strait Gate 






• . 270 


Teachings of the Spirit on sin . 






. . 271 


Seeking an interest in Christ . 






• . 272 


Seeking the Lord 






. 273 


Christ crucified . . 






. 273 



Vll 



Hosted by 



Google 



Vlll 



SELECTIONS. 



Choosing the Lord . 

Sovereignty of God . 

The new Song . 

The wailing of despair 

History of Paul 

The Burden of Sin 

Review of the Past 

Satan's Grand Temptation 

Penitence for Sin . 

The Holy Spirit 

Electing love of God . 
Addresses at Morning and Evening Services 

Respect and Honor of Parents 

The Law of God 

Reasons for making a Public Profession 

Hatred to Christ 

Living to God and Living to the World 

Prayer of Faith 

Christian Fellowship . . 

Self-examination 

For Christ's sake . . 

Christ's Prayer for his Disciples 

Feeding the Lambs 

Killing the Lambs 

First Meeting of a Term 

The Christian Hope . 

Prayer of Faith for the Holy Spirit 

Salvation of great Sinners 

Wisdom 

The great choice . , 

Praying always . • 

Regeneration . . 

Sin without excuse . • 

Entering God's Vineyard • 

God's Mercy . . • 

Faith of Abel 

Glorying in Infirmities 

Taking no Thought for the Morrow 

Christ the Light of the World . 
Fasting 

Observance of the Day . 

What is Fasting ? 

Fast for Colleges 

Descent of the Spirit on Literary Institutions 
Detached Sayings . 



275 
276 
277 
278 
279 
281 
282 
283 
284 
285 
28G 
287 
287 
288 
289 
290 
291 
292 
293 
283 
294 
295 
29G 
297 
298 
299 
390 
301 
302 
303 
304 
306 
306 
307 
308 
309 
310 
311 
312 
313 
313 
313 
314 
315 
317 



Hosted by 



Google 



RECOLLECTIONS OF MAEY LYON. 

CHAPTER I. 

THE OLD MANUSCRIPT — JEMIMA SHEPARD — HER SPIRITUAL CON- 
FLICT — MENTAL ANGUISH — RELIEF — PEACE — LOVE TO CHRIST — 
ASPIRATIONS — MARRIAGE TO AARON LYON — HIS CONVERSION — 
BIRTH OF MARY — DEATH OF HER LITTLE BROTHER — AND OF HER 
FATHER — THE PARTING SCENE — THE WIDOW'S GRIEF — AND JOYS. 

"I AM MORE INDEBTED TO MY MOTHER THAN TO ALL 

others except my Maker." — Mary Lyon. 

WE have recently found an old family register, in 
which is the following entry : " Jemima Shep- 
ard, born January 25th, 1765." When this record 
was found, there lay close by it a little manuscript 
book, with a coarse brown paper cover, so unlike 
any thing of the present day, that it might be* sup- 
posed to have had its origin in the 17th century. 
On opening the book, we find that it was written 
by this same Jemima, in her words, " for her own 
meditation." It carried us back to the time, when, 
at the age of fourteen, she opens before us her home 



Hosted by 



Google 



10 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

among the hills of Western Massachusetts, and an 
evening hour when she is watching for the return 
of her parents from a neighboring meeting. She 
says : " They came, telling me that the minister 
preached very powerfully, that some were struck 
under concern, and in particular one of my mates." 
She adds : " This was the first thing that fast- 
ened with any weight on my mind. I thought 
she was going to be taken and I left. I knew that 
I stood in as much need of a Saviour as she did ; but 
how I should find him, I could not tell." She was 
shown how to find him; but not till she had seen 
what an evil and bitter thing is the sin from which 
he saved. " Trying to pray," she says, " God ap- 
peared to me an angry and frowning judge." She 
found no fault with this, but adds : " I saw myself 
justly condemned by his holy and righteous law." 
She realized that the Spirit of God was striving with 
her, and the trembling child feared lest she should 
grieve him ; for she says : " I saw that I was entirely 
helpless without the Spirit of God." But she was 
to see still more of her heart. In the silent hour of 
a night when she was alone with God, she says : " It 
appeared to me that Christ was offered to me, if I 
was only willing to accept him upon the terms of 
the gospel. Then I looked into my heart and said to 
myself, Are you willing to forsake. sin and vanity, and 



Hosted by 



Google 



PARENTAGE AND CHILDHOOD. 11 

all the pleasures of time and sense, and accept of Christ 
as he is offered to you? Then my stubborn heart 
replied, I am not willing, I saw my dreadful, stub- 
born will against God, and that it was as much 
impossible for me to bow my will as to create a 
world. I cried out : ' Lord, bow my stubborn will.' 
I had not a word to say if God should cast me off 
for ever ; for Jesus was offered to me, and I would 
not accept." She saw herself an enemy to God and 
all that was good, and with no power to help her- 
self out of this condition. She continued to cry 
unto God for mercy, and: with such a view of 
her guilt, that she says : " There was no strength 
left in me." "Totally lost, totally lost," was all that 
she could say of herself as she sought her chamber 
one day, after weeks of anguish. She lay before 
her God, "totally lost." And "there," she says, 
" my load of guilt was removed, — my stubborn will 
bowed. I breathed in a new air, and the very first 
breath was love to God and holiness. I could not 
bear to sin any more, and I felt my soul drawn out 
in love to holiness, because God is holy, and to love 
God, because he is just such a God as he is." 
For about a week sh5 delighted herself in a holy 
God, when there came a season of deep distress and 
darkness. She had not as yet fully learned the way 
to her Saviour. Jesus had not been clearly revealed to 



Hosted by 



Google 



12 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

her; but he knew her as his own; and there was 
given to her, to use her own words, " a longing after 
Christ, " and she was u willing to receive him as 
Prophet, Priest, and King." 

She now delighted herself particularly in the text, 
" Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to 
every creature ; " and says of it : "I stood amazed to 
think the gospel was preached to me, whom I viewed 
to be the vilest of Adam's race. But why not be 
preached to all the rest, and I left out ? I thought it 
would be so just. ' I viewed myself so vile. But here 
it was, — ' to every creature,' — and therefore to me. 
Oh, wonder of wonders ! I felt my soul drawn out 
in love to this glorious Saviour, who had died to save 
the vilest of sinners. I wanted to praise him for ever 
and ever." 

Such was the work of conviction, and such the en- 
trance of light into the heart of this young girl, 
whom God had chosen, and was now preparing to be 
the mother of Mary Lyon. As she went on in the 
Christian life, she makes this record of herself: 
" Those that I thought loved Jesus appeared to me 
very lovely and beautiful. I thought they were the 
only excellent ones of the earth, in whom was all my 
delight ; and when I heard the word preached, my soul 
would feed thereon." She adds, in charming simplic- 
ity : u I had many gracious visits from my blessed and 



Hosted by 



Google 



PARENTAGE AND CHILDHOOD. ]3 

glorious Redeemer. The word of God appeared very 
precious to me, and many times opened with abundance 
of clearness to my mind. The cry of my soul was, 
Lord, what wilt thou have me to do ? " 

The soul commencing the Christian life, loving God 
because " he is what he is," and going on with his 
word opening with " abundance of clearness," while 
the Saviour's " gracious visits " are " many," is al- 
ways allowed to glorify that Saviour on earth. And 
when that soul comes to the close of life, the Father 
will not chide if its Redeemer's words are made its 
own : " I have finished the work which thou gavest 
me to do." 

When nineteen years of age, Jemima Shepard be- 
came the wife of Aaron Lyon. He seems to have 
very closely resembled the young man in the gospel. 
And if he said not " What lack I yet ? " others said 
it of him. The young girl, like her divine Master, 
"beholding him, loved him;" but she said to him, 
" One thing thou lackest." Love never blinded her 
to the fact that "one thing " was wanting. 

Her own simple record of her feelings is : "I had a 
great desire for my companion, that he might believe 
in Christ, partake of the gospel feast, and travel with 
me on my heavenly journey." 

When she first saw him interested in the subject of 
religion, she adds : " I was in great distress about him. 

2 



Hosted by 



Google 



14 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

I was afraid that his convictions would wear off with- 
out sound conversion." It was sound conversion, no 
other, that she desired, and for this she prayed most 
earnestly. But, before it was granted, she was led to 
say : " I felt willing to wait upon God ; " and her ex- 
perience was just that of all God's waiting ones, for 
she says : " It was not long before the Lord wrought 
wonders and brought him out of darkness into his mar- 
velous light, and fulfilled all my every desire. When 
I saw the glory shine into his soul, and saw him so 
filled with the love of God that he could not forbear 
crying out, ' Glory to God,' and praising him with all 
his might, I felt myself, as it were, shrink into nothing 
before the Lord. I viewed the mercy so great, which 
I had received, that I wanted to call upon the angels to 
praise God for me, for I thought myself utterly un- 
worthy to attempt the glorious work while here in the 
body. But I could not help lisping forth some broken 
accents of praise to God for his wonderful condescen- 
sion to me, a poor, unworthy, nothing creature." 

And now they could walk together in all the com- 
mandments of the Lord blameless, and they were rich 
in faith and good works. 

It was to such parents that Mary Lyon was given, 
in 1797. That was a year of rich spiritual blessing to 
the little community among whom they resided. 

As that mother folds her precious child in her arms 



Hosted by 



Google 



PARENTAGE AND EDUCATION. 15 

she says : " I hear the birds of Paradise on the boughs 
of free grace, singing redeeming love. My soul can 
•oin in the blessed song, and I rejoice to see the work 
of the Lord prosper in the hands of the glorious Re- 
deemer." 

So she, who was to labor so long and so faithfully 
in revivals, began her existence where God was pouring 
out his Spirit, and she was, as it were, prayed into 
the work by those believing parents. 

For nineteen years Aaron and Jemima Lyon 
walked together on earth, and fifteen of those years 
they were " one in Christ." Eight children were 
given them, all of whom were consecrated to the 
Lord, while one, whom Jesus asked to be with 
him, became the " family treasure in heaven." u Lit- 
tle Ezra" had been in the Saviour's arms six months, 
when Mary was welcomed to the mountain home, as 
she expressed it, u to feel in that family circle the 
sweetly chastening influence of a babe in heaven." 
She ever carried this with her, as well as the influence 
of another scene " where there were sorrowing hearts, 
bursting sighs, and flowing tears," because death had 
come to the same house " to take away that affection- 
ate husband, that kindest of fathers." The mother's 
manuscript tells us how he said in his last days : " Oh, 
lay me near my Ezra to sleep ! Oh, that I had 
strength to tell you what the Lord has done for me ! " 



Hosted by 



Google 



16 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

And her own words shall give ns the account of his 
last Sunday morning, while we remember that Mary, 
then the child of six years, quietly lingered, not only 
to hear and treasure every word, but to receive an im- 
pression upon her young heart that she was to give to 
many others. 

The mother writes : " He said to me, < I want you 
to forgive me whatever you have seen in me that was 
wrong, for I know that I have done wrong a great 
many times.' I said, 'I think I have more need 
to ask your forgiveness than you mine, for I 
think I have been most out of the way.' ' Oh ! ' said 
he, ' I can freely forgive you, I have nothing against 
you.' I said, c I have nothing against you ; I can 
freely forgive you, and I hope the Lord will forgive us 
both ; and I hope you will recover, and that we shall 
walk together as heirs of the grace of life, that our 
prayers be not hindered.' He said : ' Oh, I don't 
know about that ! I wish I had talked more to you 
when I could. But you must not be too much cast 
down.' " 

During all that day, his feelings were expressed in 
his own words : " Let me rise upon the mount and 
wing away." 

Monday, the last day of his life, was, in the words 
of his widow, passed in speaking in holy ejaculations 
to God, in words like these : " Thou art my rock and 



Hosted by 



Google 



PARENTAGE AND CHILDHOOD. 17 

my fortress, my high tower and my deliverer. — The 
name of Christ is as ointment poured forth. — Virgin 
souls love thee. — Lord Jesus, come quickly." 

Tuesday morning, the watching mother brought the 
seven children to their dying father. The little one of 
sixteen months in the sister's arms added tenderness to 
the scene, for in plaintive tones she would say, " Papa, 
papa," while he blessed them and bade them 

" Closer draw that gentle chain 
Round the loved who yet remain." 

They stand in weeping silence to see their mother 
draw close to their father's side, and to hear her say : 
a Are you willing to go and leave me to pass through 
the troubles and trials alone ? " An answer is heard 
in the father's tender question : u Do you feel your 
cords long enough and strong enough to wade through 
the river alone ? " She and they heard his last words, 
and felt that he had gone to be with Christ. They 
entered " December 21st, 1802," in the old family 
Bible, as a never-to-be-forgotten day. 

The mother says : "I was constrained to say 
Amen to the will of God, though my nature strug- 
gled hard; I seemed to but just survive the shock." 
As she stood alone she said : " Oh, the weight that 
rolled on my mind for my dear children, and how 
I should bring them up in the nurture and admoni- 

2* 



Hosted by 



Google 



18 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

tion of the Lord." Her great desire was that the 
affliction might be sanctified to her and to them. 
But she tells us that for ten weeks she prayed in 
great sorrow and with mourning and weeping before 
God. Her own words are : " The grief of my heart 
no tongue can tell. The dearest comfort of my life 
taken from me, I felt myself stripped of all earthly 
comforts, and my Lord hid his face from me." She 
felt that she could bear all things if she might but 
once more feel the fullness of her Saviour's presence. 
And she tells us that after weeks of sorrow, at the 
communion-table, he was made known to her in the 
breaking of bread. She heard him say : " Return, 
O backsliding daughter, for I am married to thee ! " 

Now she had new and precious views of the union of 
believers with Christ their head. In relating the ex- 
perience of those days, at one point she says : " The 
Spirit of God worked powerfully upon me. I wanted 
nothing but to see the glory of God and see and feel 
his Spirit poured out more and more on myself and 
others." At one time after wrestling for hours for 
souls, she tells us that she " went to rest and slept very 
quietly till some time in the night, when," she says, 
" I waked with these words running through my mind 
with great sweetness, Wonderful — Counselor — the 
mighty God — the everlasting Father — the Prince of 



Hosted by 



Google 



PARENTAGE AND CHILDHOOD. 19 

Peace. 1 can not describe the joy and peace that suc- 
ceeded." 

Miss Lyon valued her mother's prayers above all 
earthly treasures, and she learned their worth while yet 
a little child, when that mother often tarried long in the 
closet, and, coming forth, would sink down upon her bed 
exhausted, while the older sister would whisper to the 
little ones, " I think there is going to be an awaken- 
ing." 

Eternity alone can reveal the connection between the 
prayers of this mother in Israel, and the many precious 
revivals of religion, in which the daughter was per- 
mitted to labor. Never can we forget the deep emo- 
tion of that daughter, as she said, in 1840, " I have 
no longer a mother to pray for me and my dear pu- 
pils." She rests from her prayers, but they do follow 
her. 



Hosted by 



Google 



CHAPTER II. 
*§amz $ntuB mttr Craxmng, 

god's ways of preparing his people for service — "the back 
side of the desert" — the three corners — the widow and 
her home — the homespun dress — spinning and weaving — 
household duties — the widow's garden — influence of 
christian homes — her mother's re-marriage — her eldest 
brother — mary his housekeeper — her conversion and 
consecration to christ. 

IN a letter written by one of Miss Lyon's pupils 
long years since, we find the following : " I have 
just been looking out the passages which were read to 
us this morning from Miss Lyon's Bible ; and when she 
reads to us, it always seems to me that there are treas- 
ures in her Bible that were left out of mine. But as 
usual I have found all, and here they are : " Now Moses 
kept the flock of Jethro his father-in-law. And 
Moses was content to dwell with the man. And he 
led the flock to the back side of the desert. And 
when forty years were expired, there appeared unto 
him in the wilderness of Sinai an angel of the Lord, 
in a flame of fire in a bush. The same Moses did 

(20) 



Hosted by 



Google 



HOME DUTIES AND TRAINING. 21 

God send to be a ruler and deliverer." Her subject 
was, " God's ways of preparing individuals for service 
in his church." 

She said : " When God has a great work for any one 
to do in the world, he usually gives him a peculiar 
training for it ; and that training is just what no earthly 
friend would choose for him, and sometimes it is so long 
continued that there seems to us to be but little time 
left for him to work. We should not have led Moses 
into Midian to prepare him to guide a nation, and cer- 
tainly we should not have left him there forty years. 
But God knew that the life of the humble shep- 
herd, and in the desert too, would best fit him to lead 
his people like a flock, and that he needed to be in 
that school no less than forty long years to be the truly 
meek Moses. He who was to bring water out of the 
rock for all Israel, must first humble himself to draw, 
and perhaps many times, water for the sheep of the 
daughters of Jethro. He who was to receive offerings 
for the tabernacle till he should say, ' Let neither man 
nor woman make any more offering,' must needs 
know what some of these cost, by seeing the daughters 
of Midian spin and dye with their own hands. He 
must have long years of quiet, under the shadow of 
Sinai, for meditation on the character of God, before 
he could meet that God on the top of the mount, and 
there receive the lively oracles to give unto us. 



Hosted by 



Google 



22 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

" I can not tell you, young ladies, how I felt while 
pondering this Scripture this morning. It did seem to 
me most delightful to feel that we may be led of God 
all the time, and, like Moses, we should be content 
with the place where he bids us dwell. I doubt not 
that some of you may feel that you have been, and 
even now are, kept back from the greatest usefulness. 
The sickness of friends, and other circumstances, 
may have hindered you in your studies, and may be 
you sometimes long for wealth, and other friends to 
help you rise in life. I would not have you feel thus, 
but rather use very carefully all that the Lord gives 
you. And don't be afraid of the ' back side of the 
desert,' and never think you are forsaken of God be- 
cause kept long there. He knows just how much 
of quiet, humble life we need to serve him in the 
best manner hereafter. The man who cared faith- 
fully for the sheep in the desert, led Israel to 
Canaan ; and he who kept * those few sheep in the 
wilderness ' was afterwards Israel's king and sweet- 
est singer." 

We can hardly feel less interest in Mary Lyon's 
early home, where Conway, Ashfield, and Buckland 
made the " Three Corners," than in Moses dwelling in 
the desert. Her twenty years in that " mountain 
home " were as surely the Lord's preparation for guid- 
ing the thousands of the daughters of America, as 



Hosted by 



Google 



HOME DUTIES AND TRAINING. 23 

were Moses' forty years in the wilderness a prepara- 
tion for leading the thousands of Israel. In that pure 
mountain air, among those hills and streams and the 
rocks and the trees, she acquired that physical strength 
which enabled her to bear a pressure of labor and care 
in after life that might have carried others to an early 
grave. And there, in the care of a mother, who, she 
tells us, " was a sort of presiding angel of good works 
in all that little neighborhood, and whose cheerful 
spirit helped not a little to make her brow as noble 
and as lofty at forty as on her bridal day," she 
learned to love all, and to have so much of cheerful- 
ness and sunshine in her heart, that Dr. Hitchcock 
could say, after thirty years' acquaintance : " Never did 
I see a cloud on her countenance." 

That " wild, romantic, little farm, made more to 
feast the soul than to feed the body," on which was 
that little mountain home, yielded so abundantly, 
under the widowed mother's care, that none of her 
seven children " ever thought of being dependent or 
depressed," least of all the sunny-faced Mary. 

The simple school-day dress, so neat and clean, satis- 
fied her, and she learned its worth as she watched the 
growing flax, and later saw the hired man or her own 
brother break and swingle, and, may be, hatchel it, and 
then saw it wound upon the distaff of the little wheel, 
and her own mother spinning the web. She longed to 



Hosted by 



Google 



24 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

help her, but they told her that " little girls must learn 
to spin filling before warp ; " and so the mother made 
the warp, and Mary the filling, at " the great wheel," 
from the rolls that had been carded for her. Then 
came the day for dyeing the linen. The little country 
store furnished the indigo or copperas, as might be 
called for, and the farm contributed other excellent 
dye-stuffs, in the form of birch-bark, peach-leaves, and 
smart-weed. Then she saw it spooled and warped and 
woven in the loom in her own home, where she could 
watch that same mother as she " sprung the treadle," 
and " threw the shuttle," and Mary wound all the quills 
till the work was done. We do not wonder that she 
was satisfied with such a dress for those bright summer 
days ; and then the winter dress was of hardly less inter- 
est to her, for she watched the sheep-shearing, the wool- 
picking and washing, the sending of the wool to the 
car ding-machine, and the sacks of rolls as they were 
returned. Again there was spinning, in which Mary 
had a large share. Sometimes that " unhanding wheel " 
would trouble her ; then the mother would sing to her, 

" It's not in the wheel, it's not in the band, — 
It's in the girl who takes it in hand." 

And so the girl who took it in hand learned many a 
Valuable lesson for life at the wheel. Weaving again 
followed spinning ; the cloth was sent to the mill, and 



Hosted by 



Google 



HOME DUTIES AND TRAINING. 25 

the bright red flannel came home for the winter dress, 
in which she was never afraid of the snow. The 
pretty linen aprons of blue and white check, from 
the same piece with the mother' short-gown, more 
than satisfied her. And who could wish better shoes 
than the tanner and currier and neighborhood shoe- 
maker produced from the skin of their own fatted calf? 

She helped her mother make the butter, which 
they sold at the store for sixpence a pound, to buy the 
" rare gift of the Sunday suit, kept expressly for the 
occasion," and which, she says, " formed an era in the 
life of the possessor, and was remembered with grate- 
ful smiles for many days to come." She helped make 
the blankets, and bedquilts too, and last, but not least, 
the summer and winter coverlet, from which, she used 
to tell us, she learned many a valuable lesson in the 
building and arranging of Mt. Holyoke Seminary. 

We did not understand all she said about it, but we 
remember just what she said : " For you know, young 
ladies, it had a blue side for winter, and a white side 
for summer, so we could use it all the year round." 

She was learning valuable lessons also, as she stood 
by her mother's side, sorting and arranging those little 
autumnal stores that w^ere to travel hand in hand 
through the long winter, like the barrel of meal and 
cruse of oil in another widow's home ; and when there 
came a season in which the sugar-orchard gave only 



Hosted by 



Google 



26 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

fifty pounds of maple-sugar instead of the two hundred it 
was accustomed to give, she saw that even that would 
not fail before the warm sun and the sparkling snow told 
that sugar-days were again near. Often there was a 
pound of sugar, a basket of apples, or some other good 
thing to be sent to one who had failed to gather manna 
enough for the winter, and that one would ask : 
" How is it the widow can do more for me than any 
one else ? " We find the answer to this inquiry in 
her own words, which thousands have heard fall 
from those lips that ever opened in wisdom : " Comfort 
and economy, good taste, and true Christian liberality, 
may be found together, but their union requires rare 
forethought and good judgment." " Never destroy 
any thing that God has made, or given skill to others 
to make." " Never think any thing worthless till it 
has done all the good it can." u Economy and self- 
denial are the two great springs which feed the foun- 
tains of benevolence. Practice them for Christ's 
sake, but talk very little about them." " Be very 
thankful for a little, and you will, receive the more." 

The sweet little garden, loved as soon as seen, was 
proverbial in that section, and more than one asked to 
place rare plants in it, " because nothing ever died in 
widow Lyon's garden." There was a lesson learned 
there, which led her in after years to care for every 
plant in her garden ; and not a few felt that what they 



Hosted by 



Google 



HOME DUTIES AND TRAINING. 27 

placed there must live for ever. She tells us that " the 
roses, the pinks, and peonies, which keep time with Old 
Hundred, could nowhere grow so fresh and so sweet as 
in that little garden." " And nowhere else, did she 
ever see wild strawberries in such profusion and 
richness as were gathered in those little baskets." 
a Nowhere else were rare-ripes so large and so yellow, 
and never were peaches so delicious and so fair as 
grew on the trees of that little farm ; and the apples 
too contrived to ripen before all others, so as to meet 
in sweet fellowship with peaches and plums, to enter- 
tain the aunts and the cousins." Where, better than 
there, could she have learned that comfort may be 
found closely joined with economy and liberality ? 

There was not a nook or corner of that little farm 
or house which was not loved by Mary, and from 
w T hich she did not draw lessons for the future. A 
few years before she was called to her heavenly home, 
she wrote : " How sweet did I find it once more to lin- 
ger around the dearest scenes of that loved spot, long 
since laid up among the cherished jewels of memory's 
most sacred casket ! " She thanked God that her father 
was spared to her for six years. It was a brief period, 
to be sure, but none of us, who have ever heard her 
talk of a father's love can doubt her feeling its sacred 
influence; and we believed that her little heart had 
trusted and obeyed a father too, when we heard her 



Hosted by 



Google 



28 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

say : " Young ladies, be very slow to depart from a 
Christian father's counsel. In your father you have a 
divinely appointed safeguard ; trust him, lean upon 
him, and there learn your relation to your heavenly 
Father. If you can lose your will in your father's, 
you will much more easily say, 'Not my will, but 
thine be done, my Father in heaven.' " 

She often said to her pupils : " There is nothing 
more pleasant on earth than a cultivated, refined, well- 
organized Christian family." She knew well the 
blessed influence of such a family, for she says of her 
home : " Nothing there was left to take its own way. 
Every thing was made to yield to the mother's faithful, 
diligent hand. Early and late she was engaged in the 
culture of the olive-plants around her table." As she 
watched her, she found, to use her own words, that 
" a mother, whose time and thoughts are necessarily 
engrossed with the care of her family, may yet have 
much enjoyment in God." 

When the Christian father had gone to his rest, 
there was still a family altar in that 'house, though 
Mary calls it a " bereaved family altar," but adds: 
" What child of that household can ever foro-et the 
extraordinary prayers of that sorrowing mother for 
the salvation of her fatherless children, as they were 
offered up day by day through that first, long, cold 
winter of widowhood ? " As one after another of those 



Hosted by 



Google 



HOME DUTIES AND TRAINING. 29 

dear children were brought to Christ, till they could 
not only say We are seven, but We are seven in the 
fold, that mother's agonizing prayers were remembered 
even by Mary, then the little one of six years. We 
seem to see that mother, in what we once heard Miss 
Lyon say in her school : " Our grandmothers were not 
house-keepers only. True, they read but few books, 
but they read those thoroughly, thought deeply, and 
many of them had much mental culture." Miss Lyon 
always desired to make her schools strictly family 
schools, for she said : " Young ladies can nowhere be 
so well cared for as in the family. There the govern- 
ment may be so mild, yet so undeviating and inflexible, 
that there will only be advice on the part of the par- 
ents, and compliance on the part of the child." This 
gives another picture of that home, and we have yet 
another when she looks back and says : " I can see 
through a veil of forty years, in that mountain iftSme, 
growing on the perennial stalk of great principles, the 
buddings of sentiments, of customs, and of habits, 
which, if spread over the country and fanned by the 
gentle breezes of intelligence, influence, and Christian 
sympathy, would produce a rich and abundant harvest 
to the treasury of the Lord." And we may add, they 
have produced not only a rich harvest for the treasury 
of the Lord, but abundant fruit for the garner of eter- 
nal life. 

3* 



Hosted by 



Google 



30 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

Mary loved and honored her mother ; and she only 
asks her pupils to be like herself, when she says : " Let 
your letters to your mother be a picture of a warm- 
hearted, loving, confiding daughter. Bestow your 
choicest expressions of affection upon your mother.'' 
With such feelings, we do not wonder that her young 
heart was tried to have that mother leave the mountain 
home, in 1810, when Mary was only thirteen years of 
age, take her two little sisters with her, assume another 
name, and find her abode in Ashfield. We never 
heard her speak of this but once, and then she said : " I 
would not let it make me unhappy. I found I could 
love my new father ; he was very kind to me. My 
mother was relieved of much care. I really became 
very happy." The experience of her early life led her 
to feel most tenderly for the widow and fatherless, and 
she often said : " I do not wonder God speaks so fre- 
quently of them." Oh ! how her face used to glow 
with more of heaven than earth when she added : " My 
father and mother forsook me, but the Lord took me 
up." 

After her mother's marriage, she learned, as never 
before, the worth of her only and older brother. For 
nine years her home was with him at the old home- 
stead. She could say most truly, " For me he careth ; " 
and she no less carefully sought to make his interests 
her own. Before his marriage, and when only fifteen 



Hosted by 



Google 



HOME DUTIES AND TRAINING. 31 

years of age, she was his house-keeper. She performed 
all the work of that farm-house, and he gave her a dol- 
lar a week for it. If we remember rightly, he paid 
her all in silver dollars. But be this as it may, we 
know she used to say : " I never saw any such dollars 
before, nor have I since. They were mine, and my 
dear brother had given them to me. I did weep over 
them." After his marriage, she was still a member of 
his family, and no one was more welcome there than 
Mary. In those nine years with that brother she 
learned much of Jesus, the elder Brother. As we 
have heard her talk of him with streaming eyes, and 
been led by her to look to a Brother in heaven on our 
Father's right hand, we have said : " It is a blessed thing 
to be led of God to the back side of the desert, for that 
is surely close by the mount of holy vision." 

She often said to us : " We must follow the family 
plan if we would have a good school. In the family 
we get the first ideas of right and wrong, and there 
the most correct ideas of mutual relations, of obedience 
to authority, of treating equals with respect and affec- 
tion." And then she would add : " We thank God that 
the last thing sin can do is to break up the family circle. 
It is wonderful how much better we are made by these 
family relations. The little child makes the father a 
better man, and the excellences of a woman are no- 
where so marked, and they nowhere shine so beauti- 



Hosted by 



Google 



32 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

folly, as in the wife and mother." Then, with a seem* 
ing glimpse of the great family in heaven, she would 
say : " If there is so much that is delightful where there 
is sin, what must that state be, where there is no more 
sin ! What hallowed, what sublime affections shall we 
behold there ! " 

In her brother's family she found great comfort in 
caring for his children, and it was a sore trial to her 
to give them up in 1819, when they removed to West- 
ern New York. We are thankful that she could have 
them so long with her, and, as she used to say of others, 
" become more Christ-like by loving little children." 
The infant of a few days, or even hours, was very pre- 
cious in her sight. We seem even now to see her 
bending over her sister's sick and dying bed, whose 
babe had preceded her to the eternal world, and say- 
ing : "Be thankful, dear, that you have given another 
little one for the ransomed throng." 

It was a beautiful Sabbath afternoon of May, 1816, 
in which Mary Lyon first said, with full heart, 
" Abba, Father," " Jesus my Saviour." Her home 
was there in the humble cottage at the foot of the 
hill. She had that day, as was her wont, mingled 
with the worshippers in the little Baptist church of 
the Three Corners. Good old Elder Smith talked, 
both morning and afternoon, of the character and 
government of God. At the close of the last service, 



Hosted by 



Google 



HOME DUTIES AND TRAINING. 33 

the silver-haired man rose to bless his flock. He 
gazed upon them for a moment with more than pa- 
ternal interest, and then said, with deep solemnity: 
" Remember, my friends, it is a fearful thing, and a 
very wicked thing too, not to love such a God as I 
have told you about to-day." The fatherly hand 
was raised, — there was heard, "Grace, mercy, and 
peace be with you all" — and the congregation scat- 
tered. Mary took the u wild, winding way " to her 
home. She trod that way but slowly, for her heart 
was too full for a hurried footstep. As she approached 
the dwelling, an inexpressible feeling of tenderness 
stole over her. She remembered a scene in the 
" north room," thirteen years before, when, a little 
child of six years, she heard her dying father say 
with faltering voice : " My dear children, — what shall 
I say to you, my children ? God bless you, my chil- 
dren ! " — and then he was parted from them to enter 
into the fullness of blessing. The never-to-be-forgot- 
ten prayers of her mother passed before her, and she 
exclaimed : u Why should I not be blessed of my par- 
ents' God ? " — and turned away from her home to 
the hill-side, to be alone with the eternal One. She 
dwelt upon his wisdom, holiness, mercy, and justice, 
till peace came to v her troubled soul, and she ex- 
claimed : u O God ! thy ways are perfect ; be thou my 



Hosted by 



Google 



34 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

Father, and the guide of my youth, my everlasting 
portion." - 

Her heart now melted in love to him whp had 
brought her to his Father and her Father, and, led by 
that elder Brother, she went to the hill-top near by. 
She looked thence upon the far-off mountains in all 
their grandeur, on the deep valleys with the widely 
extended plains, and the smiling villages below, and 
then thought of the kingdoms of the world, and, to 
use her own words, " longed to lay them all at the 
feet of Him who had redeemed her." Twelve years 
afterward she wrote : " I remember that moment as 
though it were but yesterday." As well she might ; 
for then, and there, she was not only born anew, but 
baptized into a love for souls which made her so much 
like her divine Master that she was continually strait- 
ened till her thirty-three years of labor for souls were 
accomplished, and she beheld her Father, God, and 
Saviour in unvailed glory. 



Hosted by 



Google 



CHAPTER III. 

€arlg Bt^aal gags. 

MARY'S FIRST SCHOOL — "BOARDING ROUND" — HER POPULARITY — 
HER WAGES — THE SECRET OF GOVERNMENT — IS A PUPIL IN SANDER 
SON'S ACADEMY — SUPPORTS HERSELF BY LABOR — LEARNS THE 
LATIN GRAMMAR IN THREE DAYS — " WINGS POTATOES " — RECEIVES 
TUITION FREE — IN AMHERST ACADEMY — STUDY OF THE SCIENCES — 
HER UNSELFISHNESS — MEMORIES OF THOSE SCHOOL-DAYS PRESERVED 
— CHILDREN OF HER SCHOOLMATES SENT TO BE HER PUPILS. 

MARY commenced her work as a teacher when 
about seventeen years of age, at Slielburne 
Falls, Mass. She was paid seventy-five cents per 
week for her services, and received in addition her 
board. But it was understood that she was to " board 
round." And she used in after years to tell her 
pupils how happy she was in dividing up her school 
term, and finding that she must board "just five days 
for each scholar ; " and how, when one family was not 
quite ready to have the school-ma'am come to board, 
nother was, and so her bread was always sure. 

We have loved to listen to those parents as they 
have told us how " she helped the children so much out 
of school that they would not have cared much, if they 

(35) 



Hosted by 



Google 



36 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

had boarded her all the time for nothing." She was 
in families where they sought wool and flax, and 
wrought willingly ; where hands were laid to the 
spindle and held the distaff; and where they made 
their own fine linen. The new teacher rose rapidly 
in the estimation of her employers, when it was whis- 
pered in the neighborhood that she had been teaching 
one of the daughters how to bring out damask from 
the old hand-loom. She could tell her how to " draw 
in " the web into the old twine " harness," never fail- 
ing to put " front wing," u back wing," and " middle 
wing," in their right place. That daughter soon after 
found a home in a distant part of our country, but 
she always loved to speak of Mary Lyon, and to tell 
her children how, when in trouble with her tangled 
web, she said to her : " Perhaps I can help you, — I'll 
try." The lady was not surprised to hear in after 
years of her success in teaching, — of her winning 
hearts to herself and to Christ; for she said: " Even 
then she was so full of benevolence we were all drawn 
to her," and she might have added Miss Lyon's own 
remark : " The same amount of talent will rise higher 
with benevolence." 

But the teacher was not as well satisfied with her 
success as were her employers, and she has told us 
that she resolved many times, during that long summer, 
if once safely through, never to teach again. She 



Hosted by 



Google 



EARLY SCHOOL DAYS. 37 

devised her way, but the Lord directed her steps. 
She continued this occupation, and years afterward 
was accustomed to say to her pupils : " If you com- 
mence teaching, and do not succeed, teach till you do 
succeed.' ' She ever thanked the Lord that she began 
her experience in this capacity, " boarding round," and 
feeling that she was worth only three dollars a month. 

With such a beginning, always giving herself unre- 
servedly to her pupils, and, after going to South Had- 
ley, never receiving more than two hundred dollars per 
year, she could well say : " Ladies should not expect a 
large compensation for teaching. They should go into 
the work with the same motives with which the servant 
of the Lord goes into the ministry." Sometimes she 
w r ould so talk to her pupils of the blessedness of teach- 
ing, the reward in heaven, and the reward even on 
earth, in the love of grateful hearts^ that it would seem 
to them a most delightful privilege to give their lives 
to teaching. Perhaps at this point she would add : 
" I hardly expect many of you to give your lives to 
teaching ; but she who can teach well, control the 
minds of the young happily and rightly, is all the bet- 
ter prepared for every sphere to which a lady can be 
called. But if you teach, never expect to govern 
others till you can govern yourself." 

Her one power in controlling pupils was found here. 
She had learned, in that mountain home, to yield her 



Hosted by 



Google 



38 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

own will to others, and feeling that she had not at- 
tained, or was already perfect, she went on practicing 
her own maxim : " Self-control is never perfect, till we 
can cheerfully meet our own government. Nor is a 
child really governed till he can smile under govern- 
ment." She had herself smiled under her mother's 
authority, and afterward been delighted with God's 
government, exclaiming, " It is perfect ! " and now her 
first little pupils smiled under hers ; while many have 
been made happy for life and for eternity, because they 
learned with her, ^It is easier to obey God than any 
one else." 

We are not aware that Miss Lyon had herself at- 
tended any other than just such a district school as 
the one she taught herself, till the autumn of 1817. 
Then she entered Sanderson's Academy, Ashfleld. 
Her scanty means would not allow of her paying for 
both board and tuition here ; so she sought to defray 
the expense of the former by the labor of her own 
hands. 

Here she so distinguished herself as a scholar that it 
was not teachers and pupils alone that honored and 
spoke to one another of her. " That Mary Lyon " 
was talked of all over Ashfield Plains. It was even 
then matter of speculation what manner of woman she 
would be who could learn the Latin grammar in three 
days, and be able to recite in almost every class in school. 



Hosted by 



Google 



EARLY SCHOOL DAYS. 39 

It is said that a good man in the place one morning 
met the gentleman with whom she boarded, when he 
said : " Well, this Mary Lyon is a wonderful girl, — isn't 
she ? They say that none of the boys can keep up 
with her. But how is it about her work ? Does she 
really do any thing, or do you just about give her her 
board ? " 

" Well," said her friend, " Mary wings the potatoes ! " 
We do not exactly know whether he intended to 
praise her, but he opens to us the good, old-fashioned 
farm-house where she boarded ; the great open fireplace 
with its generous back-log, and fine bed of hot ashes 
in front, where the potatoes were often and well roasted. 
We can see her, wing in hand, bending over the smok- 
ing pile of potatoes, just unburied, and winging each so 
well that no one who sat at that table wished there 
was a better way to cook their potatoes. 

Many will ever thank the good people of Ashfield 
who gave her potatoes to wing ; and more will thank 
the noble trustees of Sanderson Academy, who subse- 
quently gave her free tuition, when she was about to 
return to spinning and weaving, to help her go forward 
in her studies. She felt herself in no small degree 
indebted to them and other Ashfield friends, from 
whom she says : "I received many acts of unfeigned 
friendship while creeping my way along toward a hum* 
ble place in my Master's service." 



Hosted by 



Google 



40 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON 

Mary Lyon always remembered with interest a term 
in Amherst Academy, where her love for the study of 
the sciences was gratified beyond what it had been in 
any previous school. She gathered knowledge there, 
as her room-mate said she afterward did in By field, 
" by handfulls." She delighted herself particularly in 
chemistry while in Amherst, as she did later with Pro- 
fessor Eaton in Troy ; and those who were privileged 
to study it with her in after years knew she had learned 
it well.^v They can never forget those successful experi- 
ments, those clear explanations ; and they love still to 
refer to their seventy pages of notes on " Miss Lyon's 
chemical lectures," found in the marble-covered books 
of her time. And there are other marble-covered 
books which show how she turned from lecture-room 
to hall, there to dwell more impressively than ever on 
the character of the wonderful God, and the blessed- 
ness of dwelling for ever with him, studying those ways 
which are now past finding out. 

Mary Lyon found time, and had a heart, for kindness 
as well as study, when in Amherst. She always de- 
lighted there, as she had done elsewhere, to aid those 
less successful in study than herself. She chose some 
retired place for doing it, and it was always in a way 
that made the person aided feel that she would be glad 
to have her know all she knew. A daughter of one 
who was a member of Amherst Academy with Miss 



Hosted by 



Google 



EARLY SCHOOL DAYS. 41 

Lyon says : " When a little girl, my motlier used to sit 
and tell us about Mary Lyon at school. She would 
make us see just how she looked in her linsey-woolsey 
dress, and how ready she was to give a kind look and 
a loving heart to every one. She was always to be 
found, out of school hours, in her favorite corner, 
studying as hard as she could, but ready to help every 
one that cared to be helped. If any one wished to 
change her seat in the school-room, ' Oh ! I will change 
with you, — I would like to do it, if you prefer my seat,' 
would be heard from Mary Lyon's lips. If there was 
an undesirable seat-mate in all the school, she was 
always ready to sit by her, and help her on her way, 
even though it was on a window-seat; and mother 
would add : ' Do you wonder, my little girls, that we 
all loved and respected Mary Lyon ? ' " 

When that mother came to die, one of her last re- 
quests was: "Send my daughters to Mary Lyon's 
school." Many a father has heard the same request 
from his departing companion. We know of one, an 
Israelite indeed, who has successively placed six daugh- 
ters under her instruction because their mother, with 
heaven in full view, said : " Promise me that these dear 
girls shall be placed in Miss Lyon's school." The 
father promised and fulfilled ; and the last of the six 
daughters there learned to love the Saviour a few 
weeks before Miss Lyon went to be with the sainted 



Hosted by 



Google 



42 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

mother. It often seemed as if there was not a school 
on earth where were so many daughters of mothers 
passed into heaven. And when we saw the truly ma- 
ternal love there given them, we did not wonder that 
the dying mother, with her eye upon Jesus and her 
hand already in his, should have been directed by him 
to whisper Mary Lyon's name as the guardian of her 
children on earth. 

More than once, when some one of Miss L.'s young 
teachers would beg that some wayward girl might be 
removed from school, have we heard the reply with 

tears in her eyes : " Do you know 's mother was a 

very dear friend of mine. I seem to hear her ask me 
from heaven if I can not do a little more for her child. 

Do you not think, Miss , you can bear with her a 

little longer ? " And then her countenance would 
light up, and she would add : " She is a child of 
prayer. Don't forget that." One loved to labor, en- 
couraged by such words ; and many of those daugh- 
ters have been blessed in "Mary Lyon's school." 
But the seeds of this blessing were sown when Miss 
Lyon was the self-sacrificing, self-forgetting pupil in 
Buckland, Ashfield, Amherst, and Byfield; and it 
was doubtless in remembrance of those days that she 
used to say to us in after years : " Young ladies, never 
ask to live simply for yourselves. Live for the good of 
others, and you will find your cup of happiness run 



Hosted by 



Google 



EARLY SCHOOL DAYS. 43 

ning over, even in this world ; and oh, what will it be 
in heaven ! Be willing to do any thing and go any 
where for the good of others, and remember that you 
are responsible for elevating the character of every one 
with whom you have to do," 



Hosted by 



Google 



CHAPTER IV. 

ADVICE ON THE LATE COMPLETION OF AN EDUCATION — OPPOSITION TC 
MISS LYON'S GOING TO BYFIELD — HER DESCRIPTION OF THE JOUR- 
NEY THITHER — HOME-SICKNESS — MR. EMERSON'S INSTRUCTIONS 

— HIS RESPECT FOR WOMAN'S TALENTS — HIS VIEW OF HER PROP- 
ER STATION — THE TRUE OBJECT OF AN EDUCATION, " TO DO GOOD " 

— RETURN TO ASHFIELD — TEACHING IN SANDERSON'S ACADEMY — 
PROFESSION OF RELIGION — ENGAGEMENT WITH MISS GRANT IN DER- 

9 

RY, N. H. — PRINCIPLES INTRODUCED INTO THE SCHOOL — STUDY OF 
THE SCRIPTURES — ATTACHMENT TO MISS G. 

IN 1821, when Mary was twenty-four years of age, 
she found her way to Byfield, Mass., to enjoy the 
instructions of Rev. Joseph Emerson, principal of By- 
field Academy. It should here be said that Miss Lyon 
did not advise young ladies under her care ordinarily 
to defer completing their education to so late a period. 
She used to say to us : a I don't want you to spin and 
weave because I did. It was best for me to do it ; but 
you may be thankful that this necessity is removed, 
and that you may be able to finish your studies earlier, 
and thus have more time to work for the Lord. I 
thank God every day for the hope and the expectation, 
too, that you will do a great deal more than I have 

(44) 



Hosted by 



Google 



AT BYFIELD AND BERRY. 45 

done in the world ; " and the dear woman's face would 
shine when she said this, something as we imagine 
Moses' to have shone when he came down from the 
mount ; but, like him, she knew' it not. 

But we were speaking of Mr. B.'s school at Byfield. 
Like other good things, it cost Miss Lyon a great deal 
to go there, not only of money, but of the richest 
treasures of the heart. When she first proposed " to 
go to Byfield to school," she hardly found a friend to 
encourage her in the desire. Most of the good people 
around her thought she already knew a great deal. 
They were sure she "had learning enough to teach 
their daughters ; " and, as she " never would be a min- 
ister, why should she go off to Byfield to school?" 
But her mother said, " Go, my child." We suspect 
she had already done what she afterward said all 
daughters should do, " come up fully to their mothers' 
standard, and thus invite those mothers to higher and 
higher endeavors and nobler aspirations." With her 
parents' approbation she left home ; and we must per- 
mit her to tell her own story of the journey as she 
once gave it to us in the school-room. 

" You can hardly understand, young ladies, what a 
great thing it was to get to Byfield. It was almost 
like going to Europe now. Why, it took us three 
long days to go from Ashfield to Byfield. Good Esq. 
White, who was one of my fathers, took me in his own 



Hosted by 



Google 



46 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

carriage with his daughter.* I was really a little 
homesick the second night, when I realized that I was 
so far from home. You will laugh, and you may 
laugh, for I am going to tell you that the next day 
I was really very homesick. We lost our way, and I 
did not know as we ever should find the noted Byfield, 
for the good people near Boston did not seem to know 
very well where it was. And can you believe it, 
young ladies, Miss W. and I both cried ! I cried just 
as hard as I could ; and I really think I outcried my 
friend, whose good father smiled upon us. But we 
found Byfield, — for Esq. White did something better 
than weep ; and when he went back to Ashfield, he 
told our friends that he had left us in a good place, and 
that we would come home the next fall." Greatly in- 
terested in her story of finding Byfield, we were always 
glad afterward to hear her refer to the school and its 
teacher. 

Miss Lyon has herself told us of the buddings of 
sentiments, of customs and habits in her " mountain 
home," waiting only the fanning of " the gentle breez- 
es of intelligence, influence, and Christian sympathy," 
to bring forth the choicest fruits. These were truly 
fanned by " good Mr. Emerson," and they were yield- 
ing daily fruit years afterward, when she used to say : 

* Amanda White, afterward wife of Rev. Mr. Ferry, missionary to 
Mackinaw. 



Hosted by 



Google 



AT BYFIELD AND DERBY. 47 

" My dear teacher, now in heaven, said and thought 
thus." 

Miss Lyon, *in her first acquaintance with him, was 
impressed with Mr. Emerson's high regard for woman's 
intellectual powers, and this impression was strength- 
ened, as she observed from day to day his manner of 
treating his pupils and other ladies. She says : " If a 
lady advanced an opinion to which he could not as- 
sent, he did not hesitate to object because it was the 
opinion of a lady ; for he appeared to believe that she 
had a mind capable of weighing an argument, and that 
she would gratefully receive the correction of an error. 
The tendency of the course he pursued was to inspire 
ladies with a modest confidence, not only in their ow* 
individual powers, but also in the native abilities oi 
their sex, and to give them those just views of their rea 
worth, which are so suited to lead them to dislike and 
avoid all mean pretensions to knowledge, genius, and 
greatness ; and to do away the assumption that they 
were never designed to be literary or scientific, and 
that they can not be, without injury to themselves and 
others." With Mr. B., she regarded the jewel of 
learning " in a woman without discretion," just as 
Solomon regards that of beauty, and was equally de- 
sirous to repress a disgusting vanity and to inspire a 
proper confidence. She said : " In a mixed company, 
I never knew him, having talked in a profitable and 



Hosted by 



Google 



48 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

interesting manner and on some practical subject 
with a circle of gentlemen, on one hand, to turn his at- 
tention to a circle of ladies, on the other, and descend 
to needless commonplace inquiries and trifling re- 
marks. In conversation with him, ladies generally 
had a feeling of being regarded like equals as well as 
friends. There was no needless gallantry, no apparent 
consciousness of stooping, or of condescension. His 
sincere and unfeigned regard for the sex was told far 
less by words than by his cordial, familiar, and unaf- 
fected manner." With such »an example as Mr. Emer- 
son, and with his views made her own, it is not strange 
that Miss Lyon sought earnestly to raise woman 
to the place she believed God designed her to occupy, 
and as fully believed man would give her if she 
should prove herself worthy of it. She believed, with 
Mr, E., " that in some things which are not necessary 
to enable " woman " to fulfill her varied and extensive 
duties, her strength of intellect is not equal to that of 
the other sex ; but that in other things no less noble, 
and equally important for the good of the world, she 
excels." She learned to think, with him, that the sta- 
tion of woman " is designed by Providence to be subor- 
dinate and dependent, to a degree far exceeding the 
difference in native talents." She could rejoice in this, 
because she regarded it " as dictated by infinite wis- 
dom and goodness, not for the elevation of the one, or 



Hosted by 



Google 



BTFIELD AND DERRY. 49 

for the depression of the other, but for the promotion 
of the greatest good of the whole." Miss Lyon gave 
such sentiments to her pupils long after Mr. Emer- 
son had gone to his heavenly home, adding : " He 
gave them to me, and I am sure he drew them from 
the Bible : they are the Bible itself." Sometimes, 
going a step further, she would add : " While he 
thought that the wife owes to her husband obedience, 
modified and limited by the laws of God, he did not 
consider it the duty of the husband in any ordinary 
case to command. If in families, so wonderfully fitted 
in their very organization to be the abode of happiness 
and love, there may be found here and there an in- 
stance of strange alienation and discord, how many 
more such scenes should we witness, if the Bible had 
clothed each part of the united head with equal author- 
ity to rule! The obedience which Mr. Emerson 
would inculcate would be so genuine and unaffected 
as scarcely to be recognized as such by either party, 
the whole being clothed in the beautiful robe of mutual 
respect and esteem." Miss Lyon had seen just what 
is here described in her own home, and was all ready 
to be benefited by such words, and to make them 
bring forth abundant fruit in her many pupils. In her 
description of Mr. Emerson's character, she says: 
" Any lady — and the cases are not rare — who has oc- 
casion to excel in guiding her household ; in being the 

5 



Hosted by 



Google 



50 RECOLLECTIONS, OF MARY LYON. 

active head of all her various departments of domestic 
labor ; in presiding in the parlor and at the table with- 
out display or diffidence ; in rendering her house the 
abode of hospitality as well as of domestic happiness ; 
in becoming a skillful teacher for her own children and 
for others who may be gathered into the Sabbath 
school or Bible class ; and in being the mainspring of 
many a benevolent association ; and, beside all, who 
finds it desirable to be intelligent on most subjects of 
practical interest, and it may be, too, to be literary 
without vanity, and scientific without ostentation, — any 
lady, who has occasion for all this, will have great 
reason for gratitude that she ever enjoyed the privilege 
of sitting under the instruction of my dearly beloved 
and highly revered teacher." 

Miss Lyon was often heard to thank God for direct- 
ing her to the place where she learned the true object 
of education, — to do good. She brought with her 
from By field, Mr. Emerson's views of the study of 
Scripture, and both she and Miss Grant carried them 
out more fully than their teacher was able to do him- 
self. The same was true of prayer-meetings, laboring 
for souls, and seeking to save a world. 

Miss Lyon returned from Byfield in the autumn, 
and engaged again as teacher in Sanderson's Acade- 
my in Ashfield, " grateful, " as she said, " to do a little 
for the school that had done so much for her." In 



Hosted by 



Google 



AT BY FIELD AND DERRY. 51 

the spring of 1822, she united with the Congrega- 
tional church in Buckland, upon profession of her 
faith. She continued in the same employment two 
years longer, when Providence opened the way for her 
to be associated with Miss Grant in the Adams 
Female Academy in Londonderry (now Derry), 
New Hampshire. She had become interested in that 
school through others, and had sometimes asked, when 
alone with the Lord, if it might not be possible that 
Miss Grant should do a work for him in L. She 
had never expressed this, which she called " a ro- 
mantic thought ; " but her heavenly Father heeded 
the unuttered desire. In later years, when she better 
knew her dear Father's love, she regarded it as an 
evidence of her having enjoyed " sweet fellowship of 
thought with 11™.'' When, a few days afterward, she 
received a letter from Miss Grant, she broke the seal, 
glanced at the contents, and, finding that the latter had 
really been invited to take charge of the school, she 
exclaimed : " Is this a dream, or is it a reality ? " A 
little later there came a request from her dear friend 
that she would join with her in labor. She looked up 
and said : " Speak, Lord, for thy servant heareth." To 
Miss Grant she wrote : " The prospect since you first 
wrote me has appeared sufficiently pleasant ; indeed, I 
fear too pleasant. I tremble more than if the path 
appeared more rugged." Miss Lyon had learned, 



Hosted by 



Google 



52 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

when in Byfield, to esteem and love Miss Grant most 
highly, and, loving her thus, she was rejoiced to help 
her carry forward that school. Mr. Emerson's prin- 
ciples, modified to meet the wants of the pupils, were 
here acted upon. Miss Lyon was delighted to find 
that her friend had made such an arrangement with 
her employers as to feel at liberty to use one 
seventh part of the intellectual energies of her pupils 
upon what is contained in that storehouse of knowl- 
edge, the Scriptures. The Bible was studied every 
day in that school. There were recitations every 
Monday, and, some parts of the term, every day ; and, 
after months of trial, Miss Lyon says this study had 
excited deeper and more universal interest than any 
other ; and just so she found it in all her schools in 
after years. " It gave pupils," to use her own words, 
" intellectual discipline, guidance, and control over the 
heart, and they really loved their Bible lessons." 

Miss Lyon ever spoke of those months in Derry as 
an important part of her preparation for long years of 
teaching. She valued Miss Grant's counsels and ex- 
perience, and she prized a friend to whom she could 
give her warmest affections. We well remember the 
lesson of love we learned from Miss Lyon a score of 
years afterward, when she was telling us of her happy 
connection with Miss Grant. She spoke from a feel- 
ing heart when she said : u Some suppose the strength 



Hosted by 



Google 



AT BYFIELD AND DERBY. 53 

of affection is greater in youth than in advanced life. 
This may be true of worldly love, but not of Christian 
love. Young ladies, I want you to love so tenderly, 
so deeply, that the roots will not be found spread upon 
the surface alone. Let them strike into your inmost 
souls. You need not fear loving too ardently, if you 
only love in Christ. You may show too much fond- 
ness for your friends in public, but you are in no danger 
of giving them too much true affection. Do you not 
think I can and do love Miss Grant better than when 
we taught together in Derry ? " We all believed her. 
One of her teachers wrote, during an examination at 
Mount Holyoke : " I think I never saw Miss Lyon 
look so happy as she did to-day, when Miss Curtis 
whispered to her on the platform, 'Mrs. Banister 
(Miss Grant) has come.' She excused herself for a 
few moments, and soon returned with Mrs. Banister 
and placed her by her side, to tell us all, by her very 
manner, that a near and very dear friend had arrived. * 
This was the love of advanced life. 

6 * 



Hosted by 



Google 



CHAPTER V. 

RETURN FROM DERRY IN THE AUTUMN OF 1824 — TEACHES IN BUCK- 
LAND THE NEXT WINTER INFLUENCE OF HER SCHOOL — DESIRE 

FOR ITS CONTINUANCE THE WINTER FOLLOWING — THE TUITION 
FEE — PAYING IN ADVANCE OPENING OF THE SCHOOL — HOME- 
SICKNESS — COLBURN'S ARITHMETIC BIBLE STUDIES — BEGIN- 
NING OF RELIGIOUS INTEREST AMONG THE PUPILS — THE REVIVAL 
— ITS FRUITS. 

MISS LYON had passed thirty weeks of 1824 
most happily and profitably with Miss G. at 
Deny, when the school was closed for the winter. 

She returned to Buckland, where she had, the next 
winter, a little school of twenty-five young ladies. 
Most of the pupils boarded with their parents, and 
Miss Lyon found a home in the family of the pastor, 
Rev. Mr. Clarke. This school was little known in the 
vicinity that winter, but its influence worked quietly 
all summer, and many Christian parents, who were 
waiting for salvation to come to Israel, were heard to 
ask before another winter : u Is it certain that Miss 
Lyon will come back from Derry " (whither she had 
again gone), " and teach here next year? We do 
hope she will; for our daughters need just such a 

(54) 



Hosted by 



Google 



THE BUCKLAND SCHOOL. 55 

school. Why did we not know of hers last winter ? " 
The j prayed and waited, and soon they heard, " She 
will almost certainly come." And before November 
had gone by, it was said, " She has come." Yes, she 
was there in season to make all her arrangements. 

The young ladies were to assemble on Tuesday after 
Thanksgiving. There was no newspaper notice of 
the day, and none was needed ; for the last year's 
pupils had not only well advertised the school and 
teacher, but made everybody understand that school 
would commence Wednesday, precisely at nine 
o'clock ; and all those who would enjoy most of Miss 
Lyon's approving smile had better be there Tuesday 
night. The girls of the surrounding towns had hoped 
for a Thanksgiving-day snow to take them to Buck- 
land, but it did not come ; and so, early Tuesday morn- 
ing, the great wagons were brought out, and fathers and 
mothers were busy in planning to keep their daughters 
warm on their way over the frozen ground. They did 
not like, after what they had heard, to wait till 
Wednesday, though it was about certain it would snow 
before night, and be good sleighing the next morning. 

Miss Lyon was all ready for them. She had con- 
cluded to make her charge for tuition only a shilling a 
week ; and the good people in Buckland, in full sym- 
pathy with her spirit, thought they could board for 
five shillings a week ; and so she said to the fathers, as 



Hosted by 



Google 



56 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

they brought in their daughters : " We plan to have 
our term fourteen weeks ; and, as Mr. G. wants to help 
on this work, he will board so cheaply that board and 
tuition for the term will be only fourteen dollars. 
Perhaps you had better give them a few dollars for 
their books, etc., but they will not need a great deal." 
One father, on hearing this, drew out his old black 
pocket-book, — the very embodiment of " Owe no man 
any thing," — and saigl : " You will allow me to pay you 
in advance." " Well, sir, I think you had better not," 
she replied. " Perhaps your daughter will not like us 
well enough to stay ; " and then, turning to the bright- 
eyed daughter, she added : " though I think she will ; 
but we shall not need the money at once. You will 
come over and see us after a few weeks, and you can 
give it to us then if we find we do want it." That 
father saw Miss Lyon for one moment alone, to tell 
her that possibly his daughter might wish to direct her 
own studies ; but Miss Lyon did not allow him to finish 
his story ; for, beginning to pass hand over hand most 
rapidly, she said, " Oh, sir, I don't think we shall have 
any trouble. I presume we shall get along very 
nicely." Her manner, in not allowing him to tell her 
that his daughter had even a single fault, was under- 
stood by that discerning parent. He trusted her with 
his whole heart. He had no more to say ; and, giving 
his good-by to teacher and daughter, he turned away 



Hosted by 



Google 



TUE BUCKLAND SCHOOL. 57 

to give place to other equally anxious fathers, all of 
whom were satisfied before leaving that they had 
found just the right place for their daughters. 
Around more than one hearth-stone's blazing fire 
was Miss Lyon described that cold Tuesday night; 
and more than one listening little girl, as she heard of 
the new-found teacher, wished she were older, that 
she too might be with Miss Lyon. 

The school was opened on Wednesday morning at 
nine o'clock, — just as the young ladies had heard it 
would be ; for punctuality then, as later, meant not 
half a minute from the appointed time. There were 
fifty pupils assembled in the old hall that morning, and 
the indications of home-sickness that were settling on 
some began to scatter, as they heard Miss Lyon say : 
" Now, young ladies, we shall feel very badly if you 
can't give us a part of your hearts. How many of 
you think your hearts are large enough to love, not 
only those good fathers and mothers and dear little 
brothers and sisters, but us also ? " The old scholars' 
hands went straight up, and the new ones had so little 
control over theirs, that they were found almost at 
once in the same position. The teacher said : " I 
thought it was so ; " and then, taking their hearts right 
into her heart, she asked God to bless them in all they 
should do that winter. Now they waited for direc- 
tions in regard to their studies. And there came a 



Hosted by 



Google 



58 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

more lasting than an April cloud over some of those 
countenances, when they heard that the new scholars 
would all be expected to study Colburn's First Lessons, 
Murray's Grammar, and perhaps Adams' Arithmetic, 
and Woodbridge's New Geography. The Colburn's 
Arithmetics were given out, and almost every eye saw, 
for its first question, " How many fingers have you on 
one hand ? " What a feeling ran through those 
young hearts ! If they could not speak, they could 
think, and it needed only Miss Lyon's discerning eye 
to read those thoughts : " Have I come here to count 
my fingers ? It is too bad to spend fourteen dollars in 
this way. Oh, if I could only have known about this 
Colburn's Arithmetic before my father left ! " But 
the fathers were all gone, and the teacher talked so 
cheerfully, and made every thing so pleasant, that they 
all recited their lesson with an outward grace, though 
the inner feeling was of being sacrificed to counting 
those fingers which they had learned to count while as 
yet they hardly knew the right hand from the left. 
The old scholars told the new ones that they were all 
the previous winter going through that arithmetic. 
Some believed, others doubted, while others still knew 
it could not be so. A few very conscientious ones felt 
called upon to make known the state of things to their 
parents. One, who longed to do it, did not think it 
best, because she saw that her father was perfectly de- 



Hosted by 



Google 



THE BUCKLAND SCHOOL. 59 

lighted with Miss Lyon the day he brought her, and 
she thought he said to her : " My child may not know 
what it is best for her to study." There was nothing 
she could do ; but perhaps the father of another might 
be influenced, and thus something be gained. So that 
other one wrote her father, counseled by her compan- 
ions. In those days the mail went out from Buck- 
land only three times a week, and, as no private oppor- 
tunity occurred of sending, the letter was kept over 
Sunday. Miss Lyon made that day so pleasant, they 
were almost sorry they had written such a letter, and 
about concluded that, if they could be let off from Col- 
burn's First Lessons, they would be willing to stay a 
little longer. But what should occur on Monday 
morning, but that Miss Lyon should go into school, and 
say : " Now, young ladies, I should not wonder if you 
felt as though you could not spend your time and 
money to learn to count your fingers, — that is, to study 
Colburn's First Lessons; neither would I wonder if 
you felt that your parents would not be willing to have 
you do it. But I rather think you had better not 
write those good fathers quite yet. I am afraid they 
will be very much troubled ; and I really think you 
will find your powers a little more taxed than you now 
think for, in studying Colburn. Don't you think you 
had better try it for two weeks ? and, if you want to 
leave it then, why, perhaps I shall think it is best for you 



Hosted by 



Google 



60 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON 

to do it. Sometimes I change my mind, — sometimes 
my young ladies change their minds, and you may be 
very sure that I shall not want you to study Colburn's 
First Lessons if you don't want to do it." Oh, how 
ashamed were the letter-writers now ! They longed for 
recess, and when it came, one whispered to the other : 
" She must have heard us talk Saturday." " No one 
can have told her, for we did not tell any one else." 
" She will think us so mean." " We will burn up the 
letter at once." It was consumed before recess closed, 
and those young ladies were in their seats, ready to do 
any thing, but wishing that Miss Lyon had not heard 
that Saturday's talk, of which, and of the letter, she 
really knew nothing till years afterward. 

That was a happy winter for all those pupils. They 
can never forget their satisfaction in their arithmetic, 
nor how delighted Miss Lyon was when she found them 
ready to answer such questions as, " Four-fifths of fifteen 
are six-tenths of how many thirds of twenty-one ? " as 
fast as she could read them ; nor her greater delight in 
their explanations. Adams' Arithmetic became a new 
book under her teaching, and Woodbridge's Geography, 
with the geographical cards prepared by her, was " so 
interesting." And when she told them that " Gram- 
mar measures the whole mind," — and more, that " a 
young lady who can not go into grammar can not pene- 
trate any thing," — they saw new beauties in it. They 



Hosted by 



Google 



THE BUCKLAND SCHOOL. 61 

believed, with her, that it is " a great study," and that " a 
philosophical mind is required to understand the nature 
and foundation of language." And now they loved 
those Bible Lessons, made so pleasant from day to day. 
In their rooms they prepared their paper cards of the 
good old foolscap, and copied what Miss Lyon had 
made ready for them to help them in acquiring Scrip- 
ture History. We do not know how many packages 
of cards there were, but we know there were twenty 
cards in a package, for we have often seen them in 
homes on the hills of Western Massachusetts, where 
children would interest themselves for hours, going 
over them. One perhaps would call out, " Sons of 
Noah ? " — for this would appear on one side of the little 
card ; then would come the answer, " Shem, Ham, and 
Japheth ; " and perhaps the next would be, " Father and 
mother of Moses ? " while the reply would be, " Amram 
and Jochebed." And yet another, " Sarah's age ? " 
and the answer, " One hundred and twenty-seven." 
" Four rivers that watered Eden ? " and a little, lisp- 
ing girl would cry, " Pison, Gihon, Hiddekel, and Eu- 
phrates." How many mothers have thanked Miss 
Lyon for those Scripture cards on foolscap paper, not 
only for themselves but for their children ! 

Miss Lyon commenced that winter's work with 
hopes and fears, and saying : u I would not desire any 
thing, that would not be for the glory of God, and in 



Hosted by 



Google 



62 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

accordance with the will of my Saviour." With the 
hope that her school might be visited by the Holy 
Spirit, and with the fear " that some might become so 
absorbed in their studies as to exclude God from their 
hearts," she prayed and labored to save the souls she 
tenderly loved. The last of December, she writes : 
" Some are thoughtful ; " and adds : "That heart must be 
insensible which could not feel, in observing the gen- 
eral attention manifest when a sermon is reviewed, a 
Bible lesson recited, or any religious subject brought 
forward. Perhaps the Lord may visit us by his grace. 
In him is all our hope." 

Tried in her own soul, she writes still further : " For 
a long time, I have at intervals been anxious about my 
own state of mind. I have felt that if I were ardently 
attached to the Saviour, my desires to honor him would 
be more uniform. I had hoped that the Lord would 
direct to means which would effectually move my soul, 
so that I could no longer sleep when reflecting on the 
cause of our dear Redeemer. But let me depend on 
nothing but God." There followed weeks of serious- 
ness in that school, but no conversions. Miss Lyon's 
soul was stirred within her. She knew that the Spirit 
of God was in the midst of them, and that he was 
grieved. " And why," she asked, " should that Spirit 
be grieved from us, when he is so much more easily 
invited to stay with us, — to come and to bless us ? " 



Hosted by 



Google 



THE BUCKLAND SCHOOL. 63 

Eleven pupils were hopefully pious at the beginning. 
Their souls were joined with hers in prayer ; and when 
they feared that the Heavenly Dove was about to de- 
part, the Lord came suddenly among them, and to 
abide with them by his converting grace. Those who 
witnessed the scenes of that closing term can under- 
stand her feelings as she wrote, a few weeks later : 
" Those days must be numbered with the most precious 
of my life ; and sometimes I can scarcely believe that 
all those scenes were real." This was the first revival 
in a school of which Miss Lyon had the entire charge. 
Having wrestled with her God and prevailed, she 
wrote w Peniel " on that Buckland hall, — to come back, 
in after years, and find that her Saviour made it " Pe- 
niel " still ; for we too had called it by that name. 

Before that school-term closed, there was new joy in 
many of those nomes from wnich daughters had gone 
forth on that cold Tuesday morning. In writing, a 
tender scene in one of those homes comes up vividly. 
A letter was handed to a father. He read and wept. 
It was given to the mother, and her tears flowed as soon 
as her eye fell upon the first line. The little children 
knew that the letter had come from Buckland. They 
looked on and were sad, not having yet learned that 
there are tears of joy as well as sorrow. " What is it, 
mamma ? " said the eldest one. The letter was passed 
to the child and she read : " Your daughter has a trem- 



Hosted by 



Google 



64 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

bling hope that she is a Christian. God is with us. 
Pray for us." Then the child wept with the parents, 
and there arose in her young heart the desire to know 
her sister's God, and she had no rest till she was 
numbered with the Lord's chosen ones. 

Probably in as many as twenty of the homes of 
Western Massachusetts were there scenes like this 
during February and the early part of March, 1826. 
When the fathers went for their daughters, at the close 
of the term, they blessed Miss Lyon in God's name, 
and begged her to return to them the coming winter. 
The influence of those precious daughters, now Christ's, 
was not confined to their homes ; it was felt also in 
their neighborhoods. Little prayer-meetings were 
commenced ; new Sabbath-school teachers were to be 
found ; benevolent societies for little children came 
into existence ; pastors were encouraged, for they felt 
that there had been added to their numbers, not only 
those who should be saved, but also those who would 
seek to save others. 



Hosted by 



Google 



CHAPTER VI. 

ALTERNATE LABORS IN DERRY AND ASHFIELD — PREPARING HER PU- 
PILS TO BE TEACHERS — LETTERS TO MISS GRANT — NARRATIVE OP 
THE REVIVAL IN ASHFIELD SCHOOL — CLASSIFICATION OF THE PU- 
PILS — HER SOLEMN APPEALS TO THE IMPENITENT — AND TO CHRIS- 
TIANS — IN IPSWICH — IN BUCKLAND IN 1829-30. 

"IITISS LYON returned to Deny in the spring of 
1826, to be once more with Miss Grant for the 
summer. Their school was again blessed ; for during 
the first term twenty of the pupils hopefully became 
Christians. There were times when mothers of pupils 
in that school observed a concert of prayer on every 
Wednesday morning, between eight and nine o'clock, to 
offer their petitions that their daughters might there be- 
come Christ's. Miss Lyon's own mother, hearing of this, 
joined with those mothers in praying for their daugh- 
ters. Those teachers alone, and perhaps not they, can 
tell how much they were strengthened by those moth- 
ers' prayers. The second term of this summer was 
also one of rich spiritual blessing. 

The winter of 1826-7 was passed in Ashfield and in 
the old Sanderson's Academy. A goodly number of 

(65) 



Hosted by 



Google 



66 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

young ladies were again assembled, and Miss Lyon, with 
heart and hands full, thanked God every day for so 
much to do. She gave more attention than before to the 
external deportment of her pupils. Some who were 
then with her can never forget her manner of saying : 
" Young ladies should always speak with a gentle voice. 
Gentleness and sprightliness can walk hand in hand. 
Come to see me with a quiet footstep. I shall not care 
to know of your approach till you knock at my 
door." 

New studies were introduced into this school, for 
her pupils were becoming more advanced, and they 
were charged to seek to have their minds act with 
vigor and activity. The " power of abstraction " was 
a prominent topic in the talks of that winter ; and it 
was so acted upon that some really thought they were 
able to do a three hours' work in one hour. Young 
ladies desiring to teach had now begun to resort to the 
school ; and before the term closed, most of the pupils 
had engaged schools on the hills for the summer. 
Miss Lyon's words of counsel to such were not few, 
nor were they ill-chosen. She would say to them : 
"Young ladies, just think what a privilege it is to 
labor for immortal minds. How much better than to 
spend your lives seeking happiness alone ! The life 
that I desire for you is as much above the pleasure- 
seeker's as an archangel is above an infant. You have 



Hosted by 



Google 



IN DERRY, ASEFIELD, AND BUCKLAND. 67 

been accustomed to follow where I have led you, 
Now you are to be seated on a throne of your own. 
You can sway a golden scepter there. Be sure to dc 
it." For those who were not to teach, she had also 
kind words. She pointed them to the homes they 
were to bless, the mothers they were to comfort, to the 
fathers of whom it is truly said : " The daughters shall 
lead them." She bade them continue to seek mental 
improvement, saying : " You can do this, and still be 
good business characters. Versatility is given you for 
this purpose ; and I hope I shall hear that you make 
your mothers' cares your cares." 

When those pupils had really gone to their homes, 
Miss Lyon wrote Miss Grant : " The demand from 
our common schools is so urgent, that I feel it to be a 
duty to endeavor to do something at least one winter 
more. I have therefore made engagements to return 
here next autumn." After a summer with Miss Grant 
in Derry, she was again found in Ashfield, with fifty 
pupils around her. She says of them : " Our school is 
uncommonly good, — several degrees better than the 
school last year." It was Miss Lyon's happiness to 
be always favored with " the best " at the present time. 
She was never mourning over some past good taken 
from her, but enjoying present good, doing present 
work, and impressing upon her pupils that " the duty 
of the present moment is of more consequence than 



Hosted by 



Google 



68 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

all future duty. We never heard her say : " I am dis- 
appointed in my school ; " and she rarely said: " I am 
disappointed in this young lady." In later years she 
was accustomed to say to her school : " I usually find 
young ladies worth a great deal more than I expected. 
Where I am once disappointed for the worse, I am ten 
times for the better." And could those young ladies, 
who heard her thus speak, have passed behind the 
curtain, where she communed with her teachers alone, 
they would have found the same kindness. One of 
those teachers wrote a widowed mother : " Give your 
sensitive E. to Miss Lyon, who is all kindness. I 
found her kind when I was her pupil, but now that I 
am a teacher, and hear her speak of her pupils, I 
realize that she is unlike any one I ever knew. She 
said to us yesterday in our teachers' meeting : ' Do for 
and speak of these young ladies, just as you would 
wish us to do for your own dear sister. They are our 
daughters, — our sisters. We must never speak lightly 
of them. We must remember that we have in them a 
most precious trust.' " These words were penned years 
after Mt. Holyoke Seminary was in successful opera- 
tion, but the spirit was the same when Miss Lyon was 
in Ashfield and Buckland. 

The group that gathered around her in December, 
1827, shared largely in her interest. She saw in them 
the teachers of the summer schools of that region. 



Hosted by 



Google 



IN DERRY, ASHFIELD, AND BUCKLAND. 69 

She knew that " committee-men " had been chosen in 
November, instead of March as had been customary, 
that they might be ready to take as teachers the first, 
best fruits of her school. She knew that what she did 
was to be done over many times, in the old brown and 
the new red school-houses of the hills, when she had 
gone to Ipswich for the summer. Pupils and teacher 
had a mind to work, and Miss Lyon says : " There was 
delightful progress in study ; " but she was not satisfied 
with this alone. She felt that those immortal spirits 
would be satisfied only in knowing and loving God, 
She asked this for them ; and, when alone, she reviewed 
her own life as a Christian, and mourned over it. 
Her own words best give her feelings in that review : 
" What an immense loss I must suffer through life, 
on account of the misimprovement of so long a period 
of my existence ! I humbly hope I shall finally be 
saved, although as by fire ; but I have no reason to 
expect ever in this world all that spiritual enjoyment 
with which I might have been favored, if all these 
years had witnessed a regular advance in a, life of faith 
and piety. Neither can I expect that satisfaction and 
success in laboring in the cause of the Saviour which I 
might have enjoyed, if I had received that preparation 
which can be gained by no means but by a long course 
of active, faithful obedience." 

She particularly felt that she had not done all that 



Hosted by 



Google 



70 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

she should have done for Christians, and says of it : 
" During all these years, I know not how many just 
commencing a life of godliness may have received an 
impression from me which will be felt all their lives. 
May I, in this, be saved from blood-guiltiness. But I 
tremble lest even this winter should bear witness 
against me. Almost half of my pupils have more or 
less hope that they are friends of the Redeemer. 
Several have indulged this hope but a few months ; 
in some it is like the faint glimmering of a distant 
taper. But few can be considered established Chris- 
tians ; and of scarcely any have I much evidence that 
they possess deep feeling and lively faith. Here we 
are : what shall we do<? what can we do ? The influ- 
ence of these on each other, the influence from absorb- 
ing studies, and that which I may exert, may produce 
an impression which shall effect their whole lives. 
These precious souls have been sent here by the provi- 
dence of God; but what to do I know not. I am 
weaker than weakness itself, and my wisdom is alto- 
gether folly. May I be more and more sensible of the 
preciousness of the direction, — ' If any of you lack 
wisdom, let him ask of God.' " 

The above was written to Miss Grant, Jan. 6th, 
1828, and probably to no other one would she have 
opened her heart thus freely. To the same friend she 
writes Feb. 25th, when God was beginning to turn 



Hosted by 



Google 



IN DERRY, ASHFIELD, AND BUCKLAND. 71 

their captivity : " Before my last letter to you, I 
thought I had reason to believe that the Spirit of God 
was finding a resting-place in the hearts of some pro- 
fessors of religion in school. I did hope, too, that 
there was a secret, silent influence on the minds of 
some of the impenitent. This continued to increase 
till not a doubt remained that the Lord was indeed 
among us. Since last Friday morning, our school- 
room has been a solemn place. During these five 
days, four have had a change of feeling, which has led 
them to hope they have passed from death unto life. 
About a week before, there was one instance of hope- 
ful conversion. Several are now deeply anxious ; some 
are inquiring w T ith interest, and I know of only one 
entirely unaffected. I tell you all, for we need your 
prayers. Our state is most critical. I do not feel it 
to be the time for rejoicing, but for mourning, solem- 
nity, and deep humiliation before God. I fear, first, 
lest J shall grieve the Spirit ; and then I fear for the 
friends of the Redeemer here." 

The following letter, written after the term closed, 
gives a fuller account of the work of grace enjoyed in 
the school that winter : — 

"■ Ashfield, March 18, 1828. 

" I have this day parted with my dear pupils. 
Since I last wrote you, my labors have been greatly 



Hosted by 



Google 



72 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

increased ;, but that they have been thus increased, I 
consider one of the greatest blessings I have ever en- 
joyed. 

" When our school commenced, I had a faint hope 
that the Lord would visit us by his Holy Spirit. But, 
on viewing my own heart, I felt that I had very little 
reason to expect it. There I found an apathy, chilling 
and distressing. It seemed almost as if the fallow 
ground could not be broken up. I felt that I was tak- 
ing on myself a great responsibility ; but what to do I 
scarcely knew ; and the little that I did know I was 
very poorly prepared to perform. 

" The first week, I made a separation in the school 
after the plan that you have generally practiced. To 
my surprise, nearly twenty were found, who, in some 
form or other, indulged a hope that they were the 
friends of God. This affected my heart. The respon- 
sibility of attempting to do something for their spiritual 
improvement rested on my mind with an indescribable 
weight. It seemed to me that something must be 
done ; but I felt that I could do little more than en- 
deavor to ascertain something about them individual!? m 
and attempt to commit them to God. . . . 

" For several weeks, my desires for the impenitent 
were faint and few ; and almost all I met, either in 
school or out, appeared to partake of the same spirit. 
I used to say to Miss W., that if the Lord should visit 



Hosted by 



Google 



IN DERRY, ASEFIELD, AND BUCKLAND. 73 

this school, we must always remember it as one of the 
more wonderful displays of his power, which he some- 
times condescends to make. We would recount the 
scenes of Buckland, and contrast some, who, from the 
commencement of the term there, seemed to pray the 
prayer of faith, with those in this school who were the 
most interested for the salvation of souls; and we 
would say, ' There is no prospect of a revival, for this 
is not the way that God generally works ; ' and then 
my heart would sink within me. Thus I lived on, 
week after week, till more than half the term was 
gone. But while man looketh on the outward appear- 
ance, God judgeth righteous judgment. I now believe 
that the eye, which saw seven thousand in Israel who 
had not bowed the knee to Baal, has seen the effectual 
prayer rising continually from some hearts in towns 
around us, though I knew it not at the time. 

" The eighth week of the school, Rev. Mr. M., of 
H., called to take a daughter home on account of sick- 
ness in the family. A friend of mine, who is himself 
a clergyman, has remarked to me that he considered 
it no disparagement to any of his ministerial brethren 
in this region to say that he should prefer Mr. M. for 
his minister ; though he can not be said to excel in 
preaching. At the time he came for his daughter, I 
saw him only a mcment. After expressing a great in- 
terest in the school, on account of its influence on so- 



Hosted by 



Google 



74 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON 

ciety, and on accouut of its containing so many teach- 
ers for district schools the ensuing summer, he said that 
he had been anxious for its spiritual prosperity. He 
only said it ; but it found a resting-place in my heart, 
and there it has rested to the present time. I could 
read, in his countenance and manner, that it was not 
an expression of common interest. It seemed suited 
at once to encourage and reprove me, and also to hum- 
ble me in the dust. I have since learned, in more 
ways than one, that he has undoubtedly had great anx- 
iety for souls here ; and I believe some others have had 
a like spirit. It is worthy of notice that the attention 
commenced among the young ladies from Mr. M.'s 
parish, and was almost entirely confined to them for 
some time. It did seem that the prayers of this good 
man were answered. He has since said to me, that he 
had indeed been anxious for the school ; but in the ar- 
dent desires of his heart, he had not been conscious of 
making any selection, even though he had a daughter 
here without God and without hope. 

" This daughter returned after an absence of three 
weeks ; but her father said he did not bring her, de- 
pending on the school to give her a new heart. She 
found the influences in her room entirely changed. 
Her three companions, young ladies from the same 
town, were all rejoicing in hope. They had been ar- 
dently desiring her return, and now they could not see 



Hosted by 



Google 



IN BERRY, ASHFIELD, AND BUCKLAND. 75 

lier willing to reject the Saviour. She was immedi- 
ately affected ; but I did not dare to hope, for a while, 
that it was any thing but sympathy. Soon, however, 
her tears were exchanged for a solemn and distressed 
countenance, which bespoke deep, heartfelt sorrow. 
For a few days, her distress was great. Though gen- 
erally very much inclined to converse, she would now 
pass the whole morning without scarcely speaking a 
word ; and her companions, though possessing all the 
joy and ardor of young converts, were awed into si- 
lence ; and, like Job's friends," 4 none spake a word.' 
In eight da^s after her return, she was brought to re- 
joice in hope of a blessed immortality. 

" During the whole winter, Scripture recitations 
have been uncommonly impressive, compared with the 
means used to make them so. This interest was most 
manifest when the subject was a solemn one, such as 
4 the mercy seat ; ' 'the thunderings of Mount Sinai,' 
&c. During some of these still and impressive exer- 
cises, it did seem that the effect must remain ; but the 
first recess would carry it all away. It was not until 
about the middle of the term that I became sensible 
that professing Christians were more awake, and felt 
more deeply their responsibility. Sometimes we hoped 
that the mind of here and there one among the im- 
penitent was not quite so indifferent as usual. The 
first of the tenth week I was convinced that the Holy 



Hosted by 



Google 



76 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON, 

Spirit was indeed among us. Prom this time, with a 
very few apparent interruptions, the work went for- 
ward with a regular and increasing advance, till the 
very last day. About twenty expressed hope in the 
Saviour, six or seven left without hope, of whom two 
were not deeply affected. One of them tried to be 
interested, depending on her own efforts ; but her ef- 
forts were in vain. 

" The work was very still ; so much so that many 
in town knew scarcely any thing about it. Our school 
exercises were as usual. Many of our friends, who 
visited us, observed nothing to mark this as the place 
where the Spirit was operating so powerfully, except a 
general stillness, and here and there a deeply solemn 
countenance. But to us connected with the school 
the work has appeared great and wonderful. We 
have daily said to each other, ' Can this be true ? ' 
It has been carried on so independently of means, that 
we have frequently felt that our best hopes might ea- 
sily be blasted ; and as frequently that the Lord could 
work and none could hinder. We have all had the 
conviction daily that this work is wholly of the Lord. 
The effect of this revival on those who indulged a hope 
at the commencement of the school has been favorable. 
Many of them seemed to leave the school with a much 
higher sense of their obligation to labor continually 
for the kingdom of Christ." 



Hosted by 



Google 



IN PERRY, ASHFIELD, AND BUCKLAND. 77 

In this letter Miss Lyon speaks of " a separation in 
the school." By this she means that the pupils were 
requested to class themselves among the friends of God, 
or otherwise, according to their own convictions of 
their state. When this was done, there were meetings 
once a week for each class, and instructions given 
suited to their need. She had first seen this practiced 
in a school by Mr. Emerson in Byfield, and subse- 
quently by Miss Grant in her schools. This was prob- 
ably the first time she had done it herself, but she 
always looked back upon this winter as one in which 
she was specially led of God, and ever after practiced 
this course in her own schools. 

This classification was usually called for at a devo- 
tional exercise in the opening of the term, and will 
never be forgotten by any who were asked to decide 
to which class they belonged. We can even now, 
after the lapse of years, see her loving eye resting 
upon us after the names had been taken of those who 
had professed Christ publicly ; of those who had not 
done this, but still had some hope in him ; then of 
those who had no hope. We hear her say : " This 
should remind us of the last great day of separation. 
If death should come to us to-night, would the separa- 
tion be the same as this now made ? Is it not almost 
certain that some whose names are written as Chris- 
tians, if called away, would hear the fearful words, ' I 



Hosted by 



Google 



78 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

never knew you.' Are there not many whose names 
are written without hope who desire to begin to love 
the Saviour here? Are not the prayers of pious 
parents in heaven and on earth to be answered in 
these names being entered in the Book of Life?" 
Those were solemn moments to us all, when Miss 
Lyon thus spoke, and the prayers that followed led 
not a few to feel, as never before, that we live for 
eternity. 

In her letter to Miss G. she also speaks of Scripture 
recitations, — of the mercy-seat, — the thunderings of 
Mount Sinai. No pupil could dwell on that mercy-seat 
of pure gold with Miss Lyon, and not receive a deep 
impression ; fixing it distinctly in mind that the 
length thereof was two cubits and a half, and a cubit 
and a half the breadth thereof; and making us to see 
a cherub on the one end, and a cherub on the other 
end, she would add, with deepest reverence : " Now 
hear God say, ' There I will meet thee, and commune 
with thee from above the mercy-seat.' Yes, there, 
from off that mercy-seat, the shadow of a good thing 
to come, even of Him who is now in the presence of 
God for us, we hear Jehovah speak. He speaks of 
mercy, — of peace; but with that broken law honored, 
yes, guarded well in the holy ark of the covenant, and 
under the shadow of that blessed mercy-seat, the type 
of Him who covereth our sins. The faces of the cher- 



Hosted by 



Google 



IN DERRY, ASHFIELD, AND BUCKLAND. 79 

ubim are toward the mercy-seat, and thus the holy 
angels c desire to look into ' that 4 way into the holi- 
est ' of all, where we may obtain eternal redemption. 
Shall we refuse what angels desire to know ? " 

Nor was the lesson from Exodus xix. less impressive, 
as she would call us to hear God say to Israel : " If ye 
will obey my voice indeed and keep my covenant, then 
ye shall be a peculiar treasure to me above all people." 
Then she would bid us think of that great multitude, 
— three millions at least, — their voices resounding like 
waves, saying " all that the Lord hath spoken, we will 
do." " This was a striking manifestation to them when 
they had not the Bible ; the influences of the Spirit 
were then mightily felt. There were many circum 
stances that combined to give overpowering solemnity : 
they were not to come near ; to wait for three days ; the 
lightnings and thunderings that made them quake as 
they stood at the foot of the mount, and looked up to 
see it rising to heaven ; the sound of that trumpet, as 
if blown by God himself; the unearthly stillness of 
all else ; Sinai on smoke. Is it not a fearful thing to 
break a law thus given ? But, beloved, you are spoken 
to, not from Mount Sinai, but from Mount Zion. Jesus 
speaks. See that ye refuse not him who speak eth from 
heaven, and who would give you a kingdom, which 
can not be moved. If you will not do it, you shall 
realize that ' our God is a consuming fire.' " 



Hosted by 



Google 



80 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

Such were some of those " still impressive exercises," 
in which the whole school shared from day to day. 
We know that Miss Lyon labored most successfully for 
Christians through that winter, though she hardly 
dared to think it was so at the time. That season of 
blessing led her to feel that in trying to benefit Chris- 
tians, she was especially laboring with Christ, because 
of the love he bears to those whom he has redeemed. 
She studied the epistles of Paul with new interest, and 
found that it was Christians of whom he u always " and 
"without ceasing" made mention in his prayers, and 
for whom he thanked God on every remembrance, 
even on every mention of their names. She realized 
that it was not the impenitent alone that were the bur- 
den of his heart, but that there came on him also and 
daily too " the care of all the churches." His practi- 
cal instructions were made hers, as she met Christians 
from week to week. She did not ask to have them 
removed from the world, but that they might be kept 
from the evil in the world, by being clothed upon with 
Christ. As she thus prayed, always jealous of her 
own heart, and thus labored for Christians and the im- 
penitent, and brought others to labor also, ever look- 
ing up and saying, " All my springs are in Thee," 
should we not expect to see greater things than these ? 
Shall we wonder that the next year, 1829, she thus 
speaks in February of the work in her school at Buck- 



Hosted by 



Google 



IN DER11Y, ASHFIELD, AND BUCKLAND. 81 

land : " I can not describe the scenes I have witnessed. 
It is the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes. 
The rapidity with which this work of grace has been 
carried forward the week past has never been equaled, 
I think, where I have been permitted to be an eye-wit- 
ness." There were fifteen then sealed for Christ in one 
week in her school of seventy-four pupils. During that 
winter, Miss Lyon was suffering from a severe family 
affliction, and she has told us that, when she carried 
her own personal trials to Christ, she found it easier 
than at any other time to speak with him of her dear 
school. 

" Trials made the promise sweet; 
Trials gave new life to prayer." 

The following summer found her in Ipswich, with 
Miss Grant, laboring in a revival which she says was 
" silent and gradual, but the effects certain." "While 
many remained unaffected, there were at least fifteen 
precious souls, as was believed, sealed for eternal life. 
She said of this : " When I can realize a little of the 
value of one soul, I feel that a great work has been 
accomplished ; but when I remember, that Jesus died 
for all our pupils, I can but ask, why did not all hear 
his voice ? Did my unbelief prevent it ? " 

Miss Lyon passed the winter of 1829-30 in Buck- 
land. It was understood that she would no more 
come into those parts, to abide even for a single season. 



Hosted by 



Google 



82 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

The good people of the place made every effort to 
accommodate boarders, one of them saying : " Bring 
all who will come. We will board them all, if neces- 
sary, for nothing." When no other place could be 
found, this gentleman gave up a large room in the 
attic of his house, which was divided into four apart- 
ments by suspending bedquilts and blankets, and was 
occupied by eight persons. He received twenty-four 
into his family ; and, while the wife was sometimes in- 
clined to doubt whether they derived any pecuniary 
benefit from such boarders, he was more than satisfied 
with the arrangement when he saw his boys stimulated 
to greater exertion in their studies by them, and when, 
after the revival commenced, he heard the low mur- 
mur of prayer coming from every room in his house. 

The school, which six winters before had only twenty- 
five pupils, now numbered ninety-nine. Miss Lyon 
found her labors abundant and " cares almost over- 
whelming." But she " never had so good a school, 
never saw young ladies love to study so well, and nev- 
er more docile." She had herself enjoyed much when 
studying, but said this winter : " Much as I value an 
education, I value such a field of labor as this more. 
Who am I, that so many parents should be willing to 
trust their daughters to me ; and what was my father's 
house, that my God should give me such blessed work 
from year to year ? " Early in the term she saw indi- 



Hosted by 



Google 



IN DERRY, ASHFIELD, AND BUCKLAND. 83 

cations for good in the tenderness of some of the im- 
penitent, and felt that some Christians were pleading 
earnestly for the salvation of souls. In January, she 
began to fear that the great blessing was to be denied ; 
but before February had passed, she writes : " It does 
seem as if we had nothing to do this week but to 
stand still and see the salvation of God." " The 
school is very solemn, and marked by a deep and per- 
vading stillness." The results of that winter's labors 
are best told in the following letter to a sister, written 
a week after the term closed : — 

" I should be glad to give you a description of this 
school ; but it would be impossible. 1 believe that my 
schools here have been more and more interesting 
every winter ; and we all think this has been most so 
of all. I have never witnessed such an improvement 
in moral character, in ardent desire to possess meek- 
ness, humility, patience, perseverance, &c. A spirit 
of benevolence has seemed to reign among us to such a 
degree that selfishness has appeared to most of our little 
community somewhat in its own character. We have 
made it an object to gain enlarged and correct views, 
especially relating to our own country, its present 
state, its interesting character, its wants, its prospects, 
as to what needs to be done, what can be done, what 
ought to be done, and, finally, as to what is our duty. 
Many intelligent, refined young ladies, who have been 



Hosted by 



Google 



84 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

brought up in the lap of indulgence, thought they 
should be willing to go to the remotest corner of the 
world, and teach a school among the most degraded 
and ignorant, might it only be said of them by their 
Master as it was said of one of old, ' She hath done 
what she could.' But more than all, we have been 
visited by the influence of the Holy Spirit. Soon 
after the commencement of the school, the gentle dews 
began to descend and continued to increase until the 
last week, when we were blessed with a plentiful and 
refreshing shower. More than thirty expressed some 
hope that they had found the Saviour precious to their 
souls. At the commencement of the term more than 
forty indulged this hope. Among these there was evi- 
dently great improvement in Christian character. It 
has seemed as if the effects of this work of the Spirit 
must continue." 

And they did continue. Miss Lyon often remarked : 
" How easy it is to work with the Holy Spirit ! " It 
was easy for her, because she was, as it were, one with 
that Spirit. Those closing days in Buckland she 
worked " with the Spirit ; " and, feeling that she was 
doing her last work for many, her mind and heart 
wrought with a power almost divine. Mrs. Cowles, 
who knew her well, has said : " In seasons of the most 
intimate communion, her words were often apples of 
gold which one could wish to preserve in pictures of 



Hosted by 



Google 



IN DERBY, ASHFIELD, AND BUCKLAND. 85 

silver. Nothing but pearls and diamonds fell from her 
lips." One of those Buckland pupils has furnished us 
with a few of those precious words which fell from her 
lips when they were sorrowing lest they should see her 
face no more. She says: "Miss Lyon has said to us 
many times during the winter : 4 What you will do in 
the world may depend very much on the way you 
spend your time here.' And when that time was spent 
and we were about to go forth, as we listened to her 
words, we felt that through her we were hearing a 
voice from heaven. We can never forget her earnest- 
ness as she said : ' Now I trust you will be inflexible 

in regard to the right. Do not yield that, even to 

* 

please kings ; but be very careful to distinguish between 

the right and personal gratification.' * Make all you 
can of your intellectual and moral powers and of your 
influence over others.' ' Do something ; have a 
plan ; live for some purpose ; be faithful and conscien- 
tious and understand what you are to do ; but do not 
expect to make over this world, or to greatly change 
your condition in it ; but seek, rather, to be ready to 
do and to bear what comes in your way. Be willing to 
do any thing any where that Providence seems to lay 
upon you.' ' Do not expect to be independent because 
educated. Ladies never can be independent ; and 
those best educated most feel their dependence. They 
must expect great demands to be made upon their time 



Hosted by 



Google 



86 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

and strength ; and they should meet them in the spirit 
of Him who came to minister, rather than to be min- 
istered unto. You will find no pleasure like the pleas- 
ure of active effort. May God give every one of you 
more and more for your heart and hands to do, and 
more and more fellowship with Christ in his sufferings. 
Never be hasty to decide that you can not do, because 
you have not physical or mental strength. Never say 
you have no faith or hope. Always think of God's 
strength when you feel your weakness, and remember 
that you can come nearer to him than to any being in 
the universe. We have desired to educate you to go 
among the rich or the poor, to live in the country or 
the village, in New England, the West, or in a foreign 
land. And, wherever you are, remember that God 
will be with you, if you seek to do good to immortal 
souls.' " 

The traces of the beneficial influence of these 
schools may still be seen strongly impressed on all the 
hill towns about Buckland and Ashfield. Eternity 
alone can disclose what those pupils have done for im- 
mortal souls. Many remember how they labored, in 
the spirit and with the Spirit, in the revivals of 
1830-31, which so soon followed. Many young hearts 
had seen in them that there is a beauty in holiness ; 
and many an Elijah heard from them that there is a 
little cloud, even as a man's hand, rising in the dis- 



Hosted by 



Google 



IN DERRT, ASHFIELD, AND BUCKLAND. 87 

tance. The Elijahs could be sure that they would 
watch the spreading cloud ; and, w T hen there was abun- 
dance of rain, so that plants of righteousness were 
springing up on every side, they knew that, like her at 
whose feet they had sat, they would watch carefully to 
see that not a leaf or twig of the tender plants was 
turned out of its place. 

We find the value of Miss Lyon's labors already so 
fully appreciated, that Mr. Griswold, who had so gen- 
erously welcomed her and her scholars to his house at 
the commencement of this term, proposed to combine 
with others in erecting a large building in Buckland 
for her school, that it might be permanently established 
ther'j ; but the Lord's time had not come. His instru- 
ment w& not yet fully fitted for her work. 



Hosted by 



Google 



CHAPTER VII. 

$amxlmtQ of Iflmrai: JfMgrrke Smirarg. 

FOUR YEARS AT IPSWICH — EDUCATING THE FUTURE MOTHERS OF 
AMERICA — DESIRE FOR A PERMANENT INSTITUTION FOR FEMALE 
EDUCATION — SELF-CONSECRATION TO THIS OBJECT — THE CORNER- 
STONE LAID — FRIENDS AND HELPERS — NAMES OF THE FOUNDERS 
GRATEFULLY CHERISHED — UNWEARIED LABORS — DR. HITCHCOCK'S 
TESTIMONY. 

FOR four years after leaving Buckland, Miss Lyon 
was associated with Miss Grant in Ipswich. There 
they were richly blessed in labor, and many souls were 
brought to Christ. There they enjoyed some seasons 
of very marked outpourings^ of the Spirit. One year 
they could say : " There is seldom a time when some 
one belonging to the seminary is not apparently seeking 
the way of eternal life." They saw pupils go forth to 
bless homes and to bless the world, and their hearts re- 
joiced. They thanked the Lord that they could pre- 
pare teachers ; and, in speaking of seeing young ladies 
who had gone from them, in their own homes, Miss 
Lyon says : " I have realized more than ever before 
that my field of labor was among the most desirable. 
I have thanked . God, who has given me this work to 

(88^ 



Hosted by 



Google 



MOUNT HOLYOKE SEMINARY. 89 

do. Oh, how immensely important is the preparation 
of the daughters of the land to be good mothers ! If 
they are prepared for this situation, they will have the 
most important preparation which they can have for 
any other. While, in the good providence of God, I 
have been permitted to occupy a field of labor where 
I could aid in preparing some who must mold the char 
acter of future generations for their great work, and 
while I have enjoyed much in my labor, I have not 
been quite satisfied." Thus she wrote her mother in 
1834, feeling, as when a child, that in every step she 
must have her mother's approval. She was not satis- 
fied ; for from her quiet scene of labor she looked out 
upon a world. She did not talk of woman's rights, 
and said little of woman's sphere ; but she did love to 
dwell on the great work God has given woman to do ; 
and she was convinced that to do that work well she 
must be educated. 

Miss Lyon was often heard to say : " It does seem 
to me a less evil that farmers and mechanics have 
scanty stores of knowledge, such as our common 
schools give, than that their wives, the mothers of 
their children, should be uneducated." She longed to 
see woman's mind better trained ; to see the public 
feeling that it must be so, and making as liberal provi- 
sion for the education of their daughters as of their 
sons. She believed that there must be permanent sem- 

8* 



Hosted by 



Google 



90 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

inaries for young ladies, under boards of trustees, to 
secure the best literary and religious advantages, and 
to give the public confidence that the advantages of a 
good school would not pass away with teachers 
then on the stage. About this time, good Mr. Emer- 
son was called to heaven. As she saw the chariot of 
God bear him above, and received his falling mantle, 
she asked more earnestly than ever before that a house 
might be built to his God, whither American daugh- 
ters might go up, till the end of time, to be educated 
for high and holy service on earth, and whose works 
should follow them when they should rest from labors 
here. 

Her own words give her ideas of permanency : 
" The permanency of an institution is found in its 
perpetual vitality and in its continued prosperity and 
usefulness. The first is to be secured in the same 
manner that the principle of perpetual life in our 
higher institutions for young men has been so effect- 
ually preserved. A fund is to be committed to an 
independent, self-perpetuating board of trustees, known 
to the churches as faithful, responsible men ; not as 
a proprietary investment, but as a free offering, leaving 
them no way for an honorable retreat from their trust, 
and binding them with solemn responsibilities to hun- 
dreds and thousands of donors, who have committed 
their sacred charities to their conscientious fidelity. 



Hosted by 



Google 



MOUNT HOLY ORE SEMINARY. 91 

Most of our distinguished female seminaries have no 
principle of perpetual life. Amidst all their pros- 
perity, they have no solid foundation, and, in them 
selves, no sure principle of continued existence 
Could we secure to our public institutions the con 
tinued labors of the same teachers, through an ante- 
diluvian life, the preservation of the vital principle 
would be a subject of much less consequence. But 
in view of the present shortened life of man, and in 
view of the many changes which are breaking in upon 
the continued services of those to whose care these in- 
stitutions are committed, every reflecting mind must 
regard it as of the very first importance to secure 
this principle." 

George W. Heard, Esq., of Ipswich, whose name 
and encouragement in the work Miss Lyon always 
gratefully remembered, says of her at this time: 
" Plans for founding a permanent seminary engaged 
her thoughts early and late, and, I might almost say, 
unceasingly." He saw her " reliant trust in Provi- 
dence,' ' and cheerfully helped one whom God was 
using in so noble a cause. Miss Lyon saw very 
great difficulties to be overcome in founding such an 
institution, but she said : " I do believe such a work 
will be effected at some future day, perhaps some 
twenty or fifty years from this time." As she with- 
drew from Ipswich, in the autumn of 1834, to give 



Hosted by 



Google 



92 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON 

herself wholly to the noble cause, she said: u I never 
had a prospect of engaging in any labor, which seemed 
so directly the work of the Lord as this. It is very 
sweet, in the midst of darkness and doubt, to commit 
the whole to his guidance." But she adds : "I am 
about to embark in a frail boat on a boisterous sea. 
I know not whither I shall be driven, nor how I 
shall be tossed, nor to what port I shall be directed." 
It is true that she was in a frail bark and on an 
unexplored, as well as boisterous sea ; for as yet there 
was no such seminary as she proposed in our land or 
world. But the cause was committed to One who 
knew every shoal, breaker, and circling eddy of that 
sea. Rich in the choicest pilots, he gave some to go 
forth with her in the first launching of the frail 
boat ; and when, upon the deep sea, the waves seemed 
ready to swallow it up, he had in reserve others with 
no less skill to go to her aid. And so, after two years 
of tossings and calling unto God from the depths, we 
find that there came a day in which he stilled the 
waves and the billows, and " commanded his loving- 
jkindness," and that day was Oct. 3d, 1836, when 
those friends came together and laid the corner-stone 
of Mt. Holyoke Seminary. Miss Lyon then wrote : 
" And I have indeed lived to see the time when a body 
of gentlemen have ventured to lay the corner-stone 
of an edifice which will cost about $15,000, and will 



Hosted by 



Google 



MOUNT HOLY ORE SEMINARY. 93 

be an institution for the education of females." Upon 
that corner-stone she stooped down and wrote : " The 
Lord hath remembered our low estate," and felt that 
another stone in the foundation of our great system of 
benevolent operations, which are destined, in the hand 
of God, to convert the world, had been laid. 

She said of the prospective seminary : " Had I a 
thousand lives, I could sacrifice them all in suffering 
and hardship for its sake. Did I possess the greatest 
fortune, I could readily relinquish it all, and become 
poor and more than poor, if its prosperity should de- 
mand it." She thanked God for the privilege of 
doing, saying: "The feeble efforts which I am per- 
mitted to put forth in cooperating with others in lay- 
ing the foundation of this new seminary will probably 
do more for the cause of Christ, after I am laid in my 
grave, than all I have done in my life before." 

Miss Lyon went forth to her work committing it to 
God. If ever one prayed "without ceasing" she did. 
She knew how to come to God, for she believed that 
" he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that dili- 
gently seek him." She has told us that from a child, 
she never knew what it was to be skeptical. She 
could no more doubt God's existence than her own. 
She had known what it was to go to an earthly 
father with all the desires of her young heart ; and she 
fully believed that her heavenly Father was as ready 



Hosted by 



Google 



94 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

to hear her, if she was as ready to trust him. And 
now, assured that she was doing God's work, she car- 
ried every thing to him. She expected to meet trials 
as she went on, and she says she never asked to be 
free from them ; she only desired God's will to be 
done. She longed for the sympathy of friends in the 
work ; but she has told us that she became willing to 
labor, if there were only a very few to go with her. 
But friends were given her and her cause. Once, 
when fearing that she had grieved one who had been 
aiding her, she retired to her chamber to plead with 
God that that friend's interest might still be given 
to the dear seminary, willing to lose it herself, if her 
Father saw that to be necessary. She loved to trace 
that Father's hand in providing each of these friends. 
Her book of Providence was a very large one, and it 
was a rich feast to sit by her side, have her open 
page after page, and hear her read those parts where 
" Providence " was inscribed on the left-hand page, 
and " Friends of the Seminary " on the right-hand. 
Mr. Choate of Essex tells us how gently he and oth- 
ers in Eastern Massachusetts tried to rock the cradle 
of Mt. Holyoke Seminary, and how, at Miss Lyon's 
bidding, they endeavored carefully to carry it in their 
arms. Miss Lyon has told us how that band of 
noble men did rock that cradle till it found a resting- 
place in South Hadley. She would say : u I want 



Hosted by 



Google 



MOUNT HOLYOKE SEMINARY. 95 

every one of my pupils to know the names of Dana, 
Felt, Choate, Heard, and Packard. We owe them 
much. They were our friends when our cause had 
hardly taken a place among the good ohjects of our 
day. Upon the one thousand dollars* given by the 
Ipswich ladies, for the seminary, she looked very much 
as she did upon the first money given her by her 
brother. She could seldom speak of those friends 
without a moistened eye, and her early Holyoke pupils 
were not slow to make their names household words, as 
well as the names of all those who were numbered 
among the patrons and guardians of the seminary while 
it was yet in its infancy. One of the early pupils says : 
" I had been hardly a week in South Hadley before I 
had heard of all those early friends of the seminary 
from Miss Lyon's lips. She had so told us of Dr. 
Humphrey and Dr. Hitchcock, that the very mention 
of their names filled us with reverence. We had 
heard of the faithfulness of Mr. Tyler and Mr. Bow- 
doin, and were assured that Deacon Safford, Deacon 
Porter, and Deacon Avery would soon come to see 
us. And when they came, their kind interest showed 
us that their heart was even as Miss Lyon's heart. 
We saw that they needed not the Pauline injunction : 
' Help those women that labored with me in the 

* This was the first donation made toward the seminary, and was often 
spoken of by Miss Lyon as its corner-stone. 



Hosted by 



Google 



96 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

Lord.' " Miss Lyon had said, in 1834, that those who 
should first put a hand to this work, saying to others, 
46 Come and do likewise," would " deserve a place with 
Mills and Robert Raikes, and others of like eminence." 
We would join their names with Miss Lyon's in what 
one has said of her, and repeat : " Oh ! what a glo- 
rious gate to heaven they were permitted to rear. And 
as, age after age, the long procession of redeemed ones 
shall pass through into the kingdom, and each shall 
add a star to their crowns, what a reward will they 
eternally he reaping ! " Their names are reverenced 
on earth, and we are confident that our God has writ- 
ten them among those whose works shall follow them, 
not only to heaven, but through all eternity. They 
not only saw that corner-stone laid, and sympathized 
most tenderly with Miss Lyon as she wept tears of joy 
over the fallow ground now broken up, but, as they 
saw those rising walls, they could say with her : " The 
stones and brick and mortar speak a language which 
vibrates through the very soul." They prayed with 
her that the walls of the new seminary might be salva- 
tion, its gates praise, and " that no wicked hand might 
ever be allowed to turn it aside from its consecration to 
the Redeemer." 

It was more than a year after the laying of that 
corner-stone, before the seminary was opened for the 
reception of pupils, and Miss Lyon felt that she had 



Hosted by 



Google 



MO UNT EOL YOKE SEMINAR Y. 97 

again, to use her own words, " a footing sufficiently 
firm for her feet to rest upon for the remainder of her 
days, and where her hands could work" for young 
ladies, who, she hoped would live for Christ. No hu- 
man pen can record the labors of that year. At one 
time she was by Dea. Porter's side, watching the 
growing edifice; at another making arrangements for 
furnishing the seminary, by writing letters and circu- 
lars. She accompanied Mr. Hawkes, as he went from 
town to town to solicit funds, — a work which she once 
said, " cost me more trial of feeling than any thing I 
ever did, because I knew that my reasons for doing it 
were not understood." But she added with a smile : 
" Perhaps I should not have sufficiently valued the 
precious opportunity for laboring, that is now mine, 
had I not passed through just this trial." But with 
all this labor and trial, she found many bright spots in 
the pilgrimage and toils of that year. One was " a 
very interesting little meeting in Dea. Safford's par- 
lor," in Boston, at the close of which a subscription of 
more than three thousand dollars was taken up for the 
new seminary. As she used to dwell on that meeting, 
she would tell us how Mr. Stoddard, of Boston, first 
paid to her, " Dea. Saftbrd is just the man to carry 
forward this work " for you ; and how, while she was 
praying over it, yet another friend had said the same 
to her ; and then how, in course of time, she received 



Hosted by 



Google 



98 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

letters from Dea. Safford, that led her to his house. 
And she would say : " I can not describe my feelings as 
I found myself really at his door. Between the ring- 
ing of the door-bell and the response, I tried to roll 
all my care upon the Lord, and to be willing to receive 
not one encouraging word, if so my God might be 
most honored. But he was better to me than my 
fears. I found, in Mr. and Mrs. Safford, hearts all 
ready to enter into my plans. God had prepared those 
hearts." And at this point, she would perhaps be 
able to go no further, only adding : " How faithful is our 
God !." But another day would find her asking you to 
sit close by her, while she should tell you a little of 
her first visit in Monson, when Dea. Porter was se- 
cured for the dear seminary. She never forgot to tell 
the one listening to her, that she did not find Mr. Por- 
ter at home when she first went to his house, and that 
she had two days of prayer, and of seeking to be 
willing to give up the counsels and aid of the man 
who seemed so very desirable, before she could even 
talk with him. And she would add : " And now don't 
you think God has given us, in Mr. Porter, the very 
best man his storehouse could furnish?" 

With delight we learned those lessons of truth and 
submission from Miss Lyon, with their fruits before us 
in the seminary. She used to say more impressively 
than any one to whom we ever listened : " Experience 



Hosted by 



Google 



MOUNT ROLYOKE SEMINARY. P9 

has taught me to fear the gratification of any ardent 
desire, unless I first feel a perfect willingness to yield 
my will entirely." In the yielding of that will, Provi- 
dence gave her some of the choicest spirits on earth to 
help her build a house to the Lord. Some of these 
had known her in early years, while others had become 
links in the golden chain of friends of a later period. 
They were all loved by her, and esteemed very highly 
for their work's sake. Perhaps the estimate of these 
friends of hers can not better be expressed than in the 
words of Dr. Hitchcock, of Amherst, at the recent 
quarter-century celebration of Mt. Holyoke Seminary. 
After alluding to her being in his family when he was 
a pastor in Conway more than forty years before, as 
well as at later periods, he says : " And then how often 
have I met her in a great variety of circumstances in 
subsequent years ! Yet I feel constrained to testify, 
what I could of only one or two human beings, that, in 
all this intercourse, I can not recall any thing morally 
wrong in her words or actions, nor unkind or ungen- 
erous feeling toward any human being, although often 
sorely provoked by their treatment of her. I do not 
mean that Miss Lyon had attained to Christian perfec- 
tion ; but, were any one to assert that such a grace 
was hers, I confess that my memory could bring no 
facts to refute the claim." 

But we must not dwell longer on those friends, who 



Hosted by 



Google 



100 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

were given to found Mt. Holyoke Seminary, and who, 
to use Miss Lyon's own words, " were raised up and 
brought into the field just when and where they were 
needed, and were continually receiving fresh anoint- 
ings from the Lord for the holy service." 



Hosted by 



Google 



CHAPTER VIII. 

f&ty Jfirst f)>ar. 

THE OPENING OF THE SEMINARS — RECITATIONS — EDWARDS' HISTORY 
OF REDEMPTION — BIBLE LESSONS — RELIGIOUS EXERCISES — MISS 
LYON'S BIBLE AND HYMN BOOK — WEEKLY RELIGIOUS MEETINGS — 
THE HOUSE-KEEPING DEPARTMENT — JOY IN SUCCESS — THE FIRST 
ANNIVERSARY — MISS LYON'S MANNER ON ANNIVERSARY OCCASIONS. 

NOV. 8, 1837, was the day fixed for the opening of 
Mt. Holyoke Seminary. Sept. 14th, of the same 
year, Miss Lyon had written to Miss Grant : " When I 
look through to Nov. 8, it seems like looking down a 
precipice of many hundred feet, which I must descend. 
I can only avoid looking at the bottom, and fix my eye 
on the nearest stone, till I have safely reached it." 
With the eye fixed on Him who cared for her, she 
went forward ; and, on the appointed day, she had her 
eighty young ladies with her, as of old, thankful for 
such a precious charge, and sad in the thought that she 
had been obliged to refuse other eighties, because there 
was no place for them in the house that had been 
builded to the Lord. It is not strange that she was 
s, * (ioi) 



Hosted by 



Google 



102 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

not at rest till able to lengthen the cords of her taber- 
nacle, while so many were left without ; and indeed the 
pattern first shown her in the Mount provided for two 
hundred and fifty, rather than eighty. But as the 
offerings of God's people were not sufficient for this, 
she said : " We will begin, and when it shall be seen 
what is the manner of our building, and the ordi- 
nances of our house, may be the wise-hearted will give 
us of their treasures till we can finish building the house 
of the Lord." 

Perhaps Miss Lyon never more endeared herself to 
any pupils than those of the first year. Their zeal for 
the prosperity of the new seminary was hardly less 
than her own. They loved it all the more for the 
sacrifices they were called to make, — for sharing her 
toils. They can never forget her manner, as she said : 
u Every brick of this house is sacred to the Lord. 
All the money given to it was consecrated by prayer. 
I look upon all as just as sacred as if the means had 
been drawn directly from our missionary treasuries. 
The founders of this institution expect (and they 
have a right to expect it) that it will be a fountain of 
good to the world; that the cause of Christ will be 
advanced by the influences that go forth from it. 

" You must not call this Miss Lyon's school. I regard 
it so much a child of Providence, that I do not like 
to have my name made prominent. And you would 



Hosted by 



Google 



THE FIRST YEAR. 103 

look upon it much as I do, if you could see a few of 
the many gulfs, that were to me impassable, made 
passable by a divine hand. All has sometimes seemed 
to hang upon some slight pivot, without which the 
whole would have fallen to the ground. I can see a 
ruling Hand in every thing connected with its estab- 
lishment ; and I would have you ever remember that 
you are being educated in an institution built by the 
hand of the Lord, and that you are not to live for 
yourselves." We should add that Miss Lyon contin- 
ued to speak words like these, each succeeding year of 
her life, to those whom she was so happy as to call 
her pupils, and perhaps no one ever left her to be 
happy in living for herself. 

None of those early pupils can ever forget the 
recitation rooms, where Miss Lyon made them delight 
in Whately's Logic and Butler's Analogy ; and 
we can see her even now with Edwards' History of 
Redemption in her hand, and seem to feel that we are 
again seated with her in that first reading-room of the 
seminary, listening to the story of the wondrous plan 
for saving man. In her teachings, we found Christ on 
every page of the Old Testament. She led us on 
from that first promise to Adam, lying so low in his fall, 
through types and shadows pointing to the Messiah, till, 
with Isaiah, we stood on the mountain-top, and could 
see the Desire of all nations coming to his holy tem- 



Hosted by 



Google 



104 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

pie. We discovered then a fullness in Christ, not be- 
fore understood, and we sang the hymn of our child- 
hood with new delight : — 

"Holy Bible, book divine, 
Precious treasure " — 

Those readings of Edwards were always between the 
morning and afternoon service of the Sabbath, and the 
attendance upon them was entirely voluntary. We 
are sure that all who learned of Christ through Ed- 
wards and Mary Lyon will thank God throughout 
eternity for those blessed seasons. 

And they will thank him also for the Bible Lessons 
that followed on Monday morning. Miss Lyon always 
expected us to make ourselves familiar with every thing 
in the Bible in reference to the individuals or scenes 
brought before us. She was at home in all that God 
had said of them; and when she saw that we were 
also, she would make us recognize God's hand in every 
thing. And did we not fear him, as we went with her, 
over five hundred years, from the destruction of Jer- 
icho, to see Hiel come up from Bethel to build again 
the cursed city ? And did we not tremble as we saw 
Abiram, his beloved first-born, fall in the beginning of 
the work ? But still she led us on to see those gates of 
Jericho set up, and, amidst the joy and shouting as 
the top-stone was laid, we must go and stand by the 



Hosted by 



Google 



THE FIRST YEAR. 105 

grave of the youthful Segub, and remember that not 
a word that our God has spoken can be forgotten and 
not be fulfilled. Another Monday morning, she would 
lead us to feel that we should just as surely be left to 
worship a Baal, as did Ahab of old, if the child of 
Ethbaal must be our chosen friend. 

But Miss Lyon's first year's pupils and all others 
must for ever remember those three mornings of the 
week, when she gathered all her family around her in 
the seminary hall, and unfolded religious truth. 
She always entered the hall carrying in her hand her 
cherished Bible, and a little village hymn-book, as she 
came from the secret place of the Most High to meet 
her pupils. 

That u Good-morning, young ladies," which always 
fell from her lips before another word was spoken, 
made us know that there was certainly one heart on 
earth, that desired a good morning for us in its fullest 
sense. And it was good to be there. As the hymn 
was given out, we could see the glance of an eye that 
would know if we had all remembered our hymn- 
books. If some had forgotten, she would not then 
speak of it, but, perhaps, in the afternoon exercise, ask 
us all to read Deuteronomy, and note the words, " ob- 
serve," " remember," " take heed," and see how God 
regards forgetfulness. There were those who realized 
in these words, for the first time, that forgetfulness 



Hosted by 



Google 



106 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

may be a sin. And when we remembered how she 
had wished that her family, like the. great family in 
heaven, might all praise God in singing, we always 
desired to join in the morning hymn. At another 
time she would say : " Secular music gives spirit and 
zest. We should thank God that he has so made us 
that we can enjoy it. It is wonderful kindness. Sing- 
ing exerts a mighty moral influence, and, young ladies, 
I have no doubt that if you cultivate your musical 
powers here, you will sing and enjoy the song of 
Moses and the Lamb as those can not who have hidden 
their talent." 

We realized that no other than her own Bible 
would answer her purpose, as we saw her follow the 
little path-finders placed in hers, and which enabled 
her to read in Exodus and then in Hebrews with so 
little delay that we hardly knew that she had passed 
from one to the other. She often said to us : " Young 
ladies, when I speak to you, I depend much more 
upon the inspiration of your countenances than on my 
preparation." That inspiration was fully given her in 
those exercises, and the preparation no less fully made 
when she was alone with her God. , She felt the 
responsibility of no labor as much as this. What she 
wrote a friend a few weeks before her death expresses 
her uniform feeling : " I want to ask you to pray for 
me in a very special manner about one thing. It is 



Hosted by 



Google 



THE FIRST YEAR. 107 

for divine guidance and strength in giving religious in- 
struction. Pray that I may have hid in my own heart 
all that I attempt to say. Pray that I may speak the 
words of truth, every jot and tittle, — that which God 
sees and knows to be truth. Pray that hearts may 
receive the truth in honesty, sincerity, and faith. 
Pray that in these seasons God may be magnified and 
glorified." At another time she said : " None but 
God knows how the responsibility of giving religious 
instruction to these candidates for eternity weighs on 
my heart. Sometimes, beforehand, my soul is weighed 
down with fear, trembling, ancl anxious solicitude, 
which finds no relief but in God. When I have fin- 
ished, and God has given me some enlargement of 
heart, I am overwhelmed with gratitude, and with a 
view of my unworthiness for such a blessing. Then I 
can only pour out my heart in prayer that the Spirit 
may carry truth to the heart, though spoken in great 
weakness." 

The giving of religious instruction included not only 
the morning exercises of three days in the week, but 
also the weekly meetings for Christians and the impen- 
itent, all of which, she once said, "lie most heavily 
upon my heart. I often feel that I have used for you 
the last crumb that has fallen to me from the Master's 
table." It always seemed to us that she came before 
us with very choice portions from his table, and that 



Hosted by 



Google 



108 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

one thus furnished might be willing to trust to the 
morrow for the manna of the morrow. 

The house-keeping department of the new seminary 
had been considered a great objection to it by many. 
Miss Lyon labored to show her friends that she did not 
design a manual-labor school in any sense, nor a school 
where young ladies would be taught domestic duties : 
but rather one where they would practice what they 
had already learned from their mothers, — each pupil 
taking a daughter's part in the household duties, to 
relieve the necessity for domestics, and thus promote 
the happiness of the "family. She told her first pupils, 
as she did all later ones, that they had not come to the 
seminary to learn domestic work, but to learn how to 
spend time profitably. Miss Lyon gave much time to 
this department, and was able to reduce every thing to 
beautiful order. But she was often heard to say : 
" This department is too complicated, and requires too 
much care to continue it, were it not for the great ad- 
vantage it is to the family. If dollars and cents alone 
were concerned, we would drop it at once. Had I 
fully understood how complicated its working must be, 
perhaps I should never have undertaken it ; but a kind 
Providence hid many of its difficulties from me, and I 
can see so much in it that is for the comfort of our 
household, and favorable to the young ladies individ- 
ually, that I am willing to take all this extra care." 



Hosted by 



Google 



THE FIRST YEAR. 109 

This care devolved mostly upon herself for years, till 
she saw the machinery all working smoothly, — till she 
had carefully adjusted wheel within wheel, and made 
every thing to move with the least possible friction. 

Miss Lyon's own words will give us some of the 
advantages of this department as they lay in her own 
mind. She says : " All are to take part, not as a ser- 
vile labor, for which they are to receive a small weekly 
remuneration, but as a gratuitous service to the insti- 
tution of which they are members, designed for its 
improvement and elevation. We shall thus be re- 
lieved of dependence on private families in the neigh- 
borhood for board ; and without this it will be* difficult, 
if not impossible, to secure perpetual prosperity. We 
shall also be relieved from a depressing dependence on 
the will of hired domestics. We believe that the health 
and happiness of the young ladies will be promoted by 
this daily exercise, and their interest in domestic duties 
preserved. While no one receives reward for her ser- 
vices, no one will be able with her money to deprive 
herself of the privilege of sharing in the freedom, 
simplicity, and independence of her home. The insti- 
tution will not teach domestic duties. This inestimable 
privilege will still be left to the mother. We can only 
seek to preserve the good habits already acquired, and 
to make a favorable impression with regard to the 

10 



Hosted by 



Google 



110 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

value of system, promptness, and fidelity in this branch 
of woman's duties. 

" An obliging disposition is of special importance 
in forming a lovely, social, and domestic character. 
Young ladies at school, with all the conveniences and 
comforts which they should have, and with all the 
benefits of system which they should enjoy, can have 
but little opportunity for self-denial. This little should 
be used to the best advantage. To bring every such 
opportunity to bear on the character is a leading object 
in the arrangements of the family. The domestic 
work done by the young ladies, in the varied and 
mutual duties of the day, furnishes many little opportu- 
nities for the manifestation of a generous, obliging, and 
self-denying spirit, the influence of which we trust will 
be felt through life. 

" It also helps to give a spirit of gratitude and a 
sense of obligation. Domestic life is little else but a 
continued scene of conferring and receiving favors. 
And how much of happiness depends on their being 
conferred with the manifest evidence of a willing heart, 
and on their being received with suitable tokens of 
gratitude ! These two lovely traits go hand in hand, 
not often to be separated. The formation of a charac- 
ter that can be grateful is an object of special impor- 
tance in a lady's education. Parents should seek to 
give their daughters privileges, and especially the means 



Hosted by 



Google 



THE FIRST TEAR. Ill 

of an education, in a manner suited to lead them to 
realize that they are favors for which gratitude is due." 

With such a view as has here been given of the 
importance of this department in Miss Lyon's estima- 
tion, it is no wonder that she could give heart and 
hand to carrying it forward. It was her greatest desire 
to have all find a happy home with her, — " one," as 
she often said, " something like the home above." 

The pupils of that first year, most of whom were 
Christians, felt that this desire was realized. They 
saw " holiness " written not only on those walls, but 
upon every article within. They felt that they were 
not their own, and each moment was to them of more 
value than gold. We have seen that Miss Lyon's 
heart and hands were full. Mrs. Cowles says : "In 
all that year, she had never found an hour to spend in 
astonishment at her success and position." But when 
the duties of the year were all done, and she found 
herself on anniversary day in the crowded village 
church, surrounded by friends, the trustees of Mount 
Holyoke Seminary before her, her teachers at her side, 
and her pupils in the rear, the circumstances forced the 
view upon her, and wonder, gratitude, and praise filled 
her heart with a flood of emotions such as ordinary 
minds can not conceive. Her great soul was sur- 
charged with pent-up joy. Smiles and tears strove for 
the mastery on her radiant face. She retired within 



Hosted by 



Google 



112 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

herself, gave way to a joy with which no one could in- 
termeddle, and for an hour resigned herself to the 
emotions of the occasion. None but her God knew 
through what she had passed to reach that hour, and 
he only knew how sincerely she then and there said, 
" This is not mine, but thine." With a Father's love, 
he directed all the exercises of that day to meet her 
feelings. The morning rose beautiful. The trustees 
and Dr. Hawes decided that the exercises — that is the 
address, and the giving of certificates to the senior 
class of three, — should be in the church. She had 
shrunk from so much publicity, but when they said to 
her, " We think it is best," she was satisfied. Dr. 
Hawes' address was all she could desire. Mr. Condit, 
the pastor of the church in South Hadley, and secre- 
tary of the Board of Trustees, presented the certificates 
and gave farewell words in " his own happy manner," 
just as he continued to give them for ten years to suc- 
ceeding classes. 

One, who has often been present on anniversary 
occasions at Mount Holyoke Seminary, has said : 
" Miss Lyon never appeared better than on such days. 
Kindness, gentleness, ease, and dignity of manner were 
always very marked. She was never disconcerted, 
never in a hurry, and always seemed to have time to 
see every one, and to give appropriate attention to all 
that was laid upon her. There was at such times 



Hosted by 



Google 



TEE FIRST YEAR. H3 

scope for all her powers. They were brought into 
action, and, as I have seen her preside on such occa- 
sions, I have felt that I was permitted to behold the 
highest style of woman performing her duties in a 
manner which reflected great honor upon her sex." 
Such was her appearance on that first anniversary 
day, while, with a full heart, she wrote " Immanuel " 
on each passing event. 



Hosted by 



Google 



CHAPTER IX. 
Sttavto, Cljxrtr, unto $amt\ §>ars. 

BJECOND tear, 1838 — MARRIAGE OF MISS CALDWELL — REVIVAL OF 
THAT YEAR — THIRD YEAK, 1839 — THE REVIVAL — DEATH OF A 
PUPIL — FOURTH YEAR, 1840 — EPIDEMIC SICKNESS AMONG THE 
PUPILS — THE REVIVAL — FIRST MEETING WITH PUPILS. 

THE second year of Mount Holyoke Seminary, one 
hundred were admitted, while, to about four hun- 
dred, Miss Lyon was obliged to say : " There is no 
more room." Miss Caldwell, the Associate Principal, 
left the institution at the close of the first year, and 
married Rev. J. P. Cowles. Miss Lyon felt the loss 
most deeply ; but she gave her friend a farewell, just 
as she did others in later years, with tears and smiles, 
saying : u We should be happy to have you with us 
longer, but we will be thankful that you have been 
able to do so much for us ; God bless you." Miss 
Lyon was often called upon to give up teachers to 
whom her heart clung with an elder sister's love, and 
whom she considered almost indispensable to the sem- 
inary ; but, while she said, " Of all the changes that 
take place, the changing of fellow-laborers, of fellow- 
travelers through this pilgrimage is the most painful," 

(114) 



Hosted by 



Google 



SECOND, THIRD, AND FOURTH YEARS. 115 

it was never with a murmur, and the departing one felt 
as she had not done before, that she lived, and should 
ever live in Miss Lyon's love. 

Miss Whitman, for many years associated with 
Miss Lyon, and at this time a pupil in the seminary, 
thus describes the blessing of that year : " The second 
year the number regarding themselves as unconverted 
was about thirty. During that year God manifested 
his acceptance of the consecrated institution, not by a 
visible cloud, but by a baptism of the Holy Ghost. 
The work was very rapid and advanced with great 
power. It occurred in connection with the fast for 
literary institutions. The whole school bowed beneath 
its influence. The breathings of the Spirit were felt 
in every heart. The lukewarm professor and the 
openly irreligious alike trembled for their personal 
safety. The light footstep, the hushed voice, and the 
solemn countenance indicated the thoughts of all hearts. 
Many a slumbering professor awoke to newness of life. 
" During the three days succeeding the last Thursday 
in February, which had been sacredly observed by the 
teachers and scholars as a season of fasting and prayer, 
about one half of the impenitent indulged the hope of 
having passed from death unto life. Saturday of the 
same week was a day of recreation. In the afternoon 
nearly the whole school came together, filling to its 
utmost capacity the reading-room where the meet- 



Hosted by 



Google 



116 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

ing was held. After continuous prayer for an hour, 
the meeting was appropriately closed by one of the 
teachers. No one rose to leave the room. The feel- 
ing pervaded the circle that prayer must be continued 
until every soul was converted. Another prayer was 
then offered, after which the same teacher proposed 
that all should retire to their rooms for half an hour, 
and then those who desired shouffi. meet again in the 
same place. At the end of the half hour the bur- 
dened souls came together to plead once more for their 
companions who were still out of Christ. But one 
that year remained destitute of the Christian hope. 
Many were the prayers offered for that halting one, 
and in after years it was found that praying breath 
had not been spent in vain. She has since died in 
peaceful hope of divine acceptance, referring its origin 
to that second year of Mt. Holyoke Seminary. 

" Thus did the young seminary receive its baptism 
of the Spirit. Thus did God accept as his own the 
institution which had been privately and publicly 
consecrated to him by donors, the trustees, and most 
^of all by her, who, standing at its head, was often 
heard earnestly pleading that not one of all who should 
enjoy its privileges down to the millennial day, should 
fail of eternal life." Miss Whitman has well added : 
" The effects of such a work were felt for several suc- 
cessive years." 



Hosted by 



Google 



SECOND, THIRD, AND FOURTH YEARS. 117 

Not only Miss Lyon, but many others, had at that 
time, as she expressed it, " a very deep sympathy with 
others as saved or lost." She added: "We are so 
constituted, that we can not in this world sustain a 
great depth of feeling continually ; this is reserved for 
another world. But we should feel deeply at times. 
It has an influence upon our after lives." Perhaps 
this was never more true of any season than of the 
one just described. Its most thrilling scenes were 
hardly passed, when death entered the seminary for 
the first time ; but it was to bear a child to her heav- 
enly home, and to lead Miss Lyon to pray, more ear- 
nestly than ever before, that in all her efforts she 
might be preparing souls for heaven. 

The third year opened as the preceding, with the 
house filled, and hundreds unable to gain admittance. 
The trustees, at Miss Lyon's earnest solicitation, were 
now beginning to plan for enlarging the building. 
While she was exceedingly anxious to have this done, 
she was no less anxious lest, becoming engrossed by it, 
she should lose a spiritual blessing. Her Father saw 
her desire that he should be honored, and led her 
very gently, till her entire school were indulging the 
Christian hope. Thirty expressed that hope for the 
first time. Miss Whitman says of that year : " The 
work was gradual and there was a continued interest 
from the first week of the school till its close. The 



Hosted by 



Google 



118 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

presence of the Spirit was manifested from the first by 
attention to instruction, the tearful eye, and exhibi- 
tion of tenderness of feeling, whenever the subject of 
personal religion was introduced." 

One, who was then a pupil, thus describes the be- 
ginning of this work of grace : "It was our third 
Saturday evening in the seminary. The day had 
been one of recreation, and we had enjoyed just what 
Miss Lyon had always said she wished us to enjoy, 
'lively, pleasurable, social intercourse.' As we gath- 
ered around the tables for our evening meal, there was 
one table where she saw unbecoming mirth ; there was 
even frivolity, and most of those at that table were 
professing Christians. As we sat back for our evening 
devotions, Miss Lyon rose, and said in a manner that 
made us feel that it is a fearful thing for a Christian to 
grieve the Spirit of God : 4 I have thought that per- 
haps soine of God's dear children here do not know 
that his Spirit is striving with some souls in our family. 
There are those who long to find a Saviour before this 
Sabbath has passed. Would you not like to pray for 
them ? ' Not another word was spoken. Careless 
Christians felt that they were on holy ground, and 
more than one of the impenitent buried her face to 
weep, finding her half-formed purpose to seek the Lord 
strengthened. As we passed out, a stranger threw her 
arm around me, saying : ' You do not know me, but I 



Hosted by 



Google 



SECOND, THIRD, AND FOURTH YEARS. 119 

thought perhaps you would pray for me, that I may 
find Christ this Sabbath-day.' I had been reproved 
by Miss Lyon's words, and now my God brought still 
another reproof. I sought my closet to weep, and to 
feel that, if a child of God, I must be ready always to 
pray and to labor for souls." 

Many Christians left that room with similar feelings, 
and those few words of Miss Lyon seemed given to 
guide them all the year, and we know that they have led 
many to watch carefully all their lives, lest by any means 
they grieve the Spirit of God from an inquiring soul. 

From the very commencement of this term, it was 
noticed that Miss Lyon often prayed that God would 
especially prepare for heaven any whom he was about 
to take to himself. There was an earnestness in these 
petitions that we can not describe. It sometimes 
seemed as if it must be that she saw heaven's gates 
opening to receive her dear pupils, and that thus she 
was moved to ask for them this abundant entrance into 
the world of light and love. A few weeks passed, and, 
as she had seemed to expect, the Saviour came to take 
one of his own to himself. The heart that had 
prayed so earnestly was now in tenderest sympathy 
with the departing one. She watched the progress of 
a slow fever for weeks, expecting that her pupil would 
recover ; but saw, at length, that this sickness was unto 
death. The dying one feared no evil in going through 



Hosted by 



Google 



120 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

the appointed valley, and it was Miss Lyon's blessed 
privilege to come and place a rod and a staff in her 
hand for the passage. It was the midnight hour of 
the Sabbath when the attendants first realized that 
Jesus had indeed come for their sister. 

One who was present says : " Miss Lyon asked me 
to go for her at any hour when there should be a 
change that indicated Miss H.'s speedy departure. 
Wearied and worn as she was, I disliked to call her ; 
but this hesitation was removed as I heard her say : 
4 When Jesus comes for one of my dear children, I 
want to go with her just as far as I can. I do not ex- 
pect to pass over with our dear friend at this time, but 
may be the Lord will give me a word wherewith to 
comfort her, and may be, as I see heaven open, I shall 
get a new view of its blessedness, to give to those who 
remain.' As I awaked Miss Lyon from sleep, she 
said : ' Do you think the Saviour has really come for 
Adaline ? ' She was by her side in a few minutes to 
realize that it was even so. The dying one could not 
speak, but her eye kindled with a brightness hardly of 
earth when she saw her teacher approaching. Miss 
Lyon knelt at once by her side, and, taking her hand 
in hers, said, in the gentlest manner : ' Jesus has come 
for you, Adaline. Now you will not be afraid, — will 
you? He will carry you safely over. You have 
nothing to do but to look directly to him. You will 



Hosted by 



Google 



SECOND, THIRD, AND FOURTH YEARS. 121 

suffer only a little while longer.' Then she prayed 
in words as simple as she had spoken. The dying one 
could not tell us that she was comforted, but we knew 
it, for her eye would rest one moment on Miss Lyon, 
and then, with a smile, it would be turned upward to 
see the Saviour to whom she had been pointed. More 
than twenty years have passed since that sad Novem- 
ber night, during* all of which I have thanked my God 
for the lesson I there learned, of speaking only of 
Jesus to those for whom he is waiting. In this case 
the groans and dying strife were continued long after 
the eye closed upon us, and when it seemed to us that 
the ear could no longer hear the name she had delighted 
to have whispered to her. 

" It was not till sunset on Monday that there was the 
calm which death brings. There had been such in- 
tense sympathy with the sufferer that many of the 
family were unfitted for attention to their ordinary 
duties. Those who had heard the departing sighs, and 
realized the pain and not the bliss of dying, were sad, 
and longed to pillow their aching heads upon a moth- 
er's bosom. Miss Lyon saw how we felt, and with 
more than a mother's love she gathered us around 
her to point beyond. She told us what joy seemed to 
fill our sister's heart, as she was directed to Jesus, and 
added : < Why should she not have rejoiced ? To be 
sure there was suffering for a little season, but I felt 
11 



Hosted by 



Google 



122 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

that she saw Christ during all the time that the finish- 
ing process of taking down the tabernacle was going 
on. We, who stood by, could almost see him, and 
we too did groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon 
from heaven. My own heart was so filled w T ith 
thoughts of the blessedness of the departing soul, that 
I could think of nothing else. That room where our 
dear Adaline left her body, to see Jesus as he is, is a 
very precious spot to me. I should love to go and stay 
there for a season, — yes, there where heaven was 
opened to receive one of our number. Jesus has hon- 
ored it, for he came there, just as he said he w^ould, to 
receive one of his dear children to himself. I did not 
say good-by to Adaline when I saw her eye closing in 
death, for I am confident that I shall see her again 
soon. What glories burst upon her view in that room ! 
It can never be to us like other rooms, and who of you 
would like now to go in there, and abide with Christ 
the remainder of this year ? We will all thank God 
that he did not call for one of you who had no Saviour 
to come for her, and to whom we must have said good- 
by, and that for ever. I could not then have sat here 
this morning to speak of the state of such an one. My 
whole soul would have shrunk from it. Now I should 
like to talk to you all day of the state of those who 
have laid aside their earthly tabernacles and have gone 
to be with their Lord.' 



Hosted by 



Google 



SECOND, THIRD, AND FOURTH YEARS. 123 

" As we heard Miss Lyon speak of our dear friend in 
heaven, and of the ' blessed room 9 where she took the 
hand of Jesus, so much gentler than that even of 
father, mother, brother, or sister, we were comforted. 
We passed up from the seminary hall to the room, 
glad to make it ours, and it became the place of a daily 
prayer-meeting during all that year." 

It was a special comfort to Miss Lyon, at the close 
of this school year, that she could look upon all her 
family as Christ's. She felt that much had been at- 
tained in thoroughness, and she was looking forward to 
another year with fond hopes of rich spiritual and tem- 
poral blessing. But at this point, to use her own 
words : " God saw that great trials must be set over 
against great prosperity." The anniversary season of 
1840 had just passed, and the pupils were mostly in 
their homes, when one after another fell sick of typhus 
fever, till forty cases were heard of, and nine were 
called to their heavenly home. Miss Lyon had prayed 
much that all who were to go might be prepared for 
the change, and it was not surprising that dying grace 
was wonderfully given to dying ones. " O death, 
where is thy sting ? O grave, where is thy victory ? " 
was the song of triumph that was heard from each, as 
she turned away from earth to realize that God giveth 
the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 

During the year now closed it had been customary 



Hosted by 



Google 



124 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

for Christians in the seminary to meet together in 
small circles for prayer at sunset on Sabbath evening. 
Those were very precious seasons, where hearts were 
made one in Jesus ; and, as they met on the last Sab- 
bath evening of the year, there was given on the part 
of all the members of our circle, a pledge of remem- 
brance at the same hour, when they should be sepa- 
rated. Three weeks passed, and that Sabbath houi 
found most of the little circle on beds of sickness, but 
all remembered that it was the hour of prayer. One, 
on whom heaven was opening, prayed for the others, 
and then said : " Mother, they will pray for me now. 
They will not know that I am dying, but I am so 
happy to think they will pray for me." Another, as 
she asked the hour, said : " I should be glad to go 
while they are praying for me ; " while a third said to 
weeping friends around her : " There will come peace, 
for they are praying God to bless me." One was 
released from earth at that hour of prayer, and others 
gathered strength to soon follow, while the Lord said 
to some longing to depart : " Ye can not come to me, 
now, but grace shall be given you to meet the ills of 
life, as you go back from this view of your final rest." 
There was fullness of joy in Christ bestowed upon 
all who then died ; and to those who came back to 
earth there was given an experience of his preciousness 
and of trust in him that they had not known before. 



Hosted by 



Google 



SECOND, THIRD, AND FOURTH YEARS. 125 

But, while the departing ones rejoiced, all the " waves 
and billows " seemed to be rolling over Miss Lyon. 
In writing a friend soon after, she says : " The hand 
of God has been laid heavily upon me. I have been 
led through deep waters ; but they have not overflowed 
me. His good hand has been ever my support. None 
but my heavenly Father knows how great a trial this 
has been to my heart. While others have been inquir- 
ing about the natural cause, I have felt that w^e, who 
were most nearly connected, ought particularly to in- 
quire about the moral cause, and to seek to know what 
the Lord would have us learn from his dealings with 
us." Miss Lyon was always as ready to learn as a 
child ; and now she sought very carefully to know if 
her Father would have her change any thing in the ar- 
rangements for her great family. After much prayer 
and consultation with friends, some changes were made. 
And while the great plans went on as usual, she said : 
"If our feelings are grieved by what is reported of 
us, let us remember the example of our Saviour. He 
was silent. He opened not his mouth. Let God, in 
his own way and in his own time, vindicate his own 
acts. Let us commit ourselves to the care of a cove- 
nant-keeping God, who doeth all things well." 

When the school assembled on the last day of Sep- 
tember, 1840, hardly half of those expected had re- 
urned. Several had gone to be with God, and others 
11* 



Hosted by 



Google 



126 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

were detained by sickness. Yet the house was filled , 
for there were many ready to take the places of those 
who had failed. Miss Lyon said of her trial : u The 
dealings of Providence have been such toward me as 
to lead me to think most tenderly of all my friends." 
And her reception of her pupils was now peculiarly 
tender. She was borne down with deep sorrow ; but 
she met them cheerfully, and gave herself most unre- 
servedly to labor, till her failing strength took her from 
them. We have before us the note-book of a pupil 
who entered the seminary on that day, a stranger, 
which shows how the new scholars w r ere impressed 
with her appearance. The note-book says : " The 
young ladies, eighty in number, met in the seminary 
hall at nine o'clock. Miss Lyon read a Psalm, and 
led in a prayer, which was very comprehensive and 
affecting. The burden of her petition was that, if 
any one present had never given herself to Christ, she 
might now be led to do so, even before she entered 
upon her studies ; that the blessings of life and health 
might crown the year, if consistent with our heavenly 
Father's will; but if any were to be removed by 
death, that they might here ripen for heaven." 

It pleased the Lord to grant life and health this 
year, and another blessed outpouring of the Spirit. 
There was a hopeful conversion the very first week of 
the year ; and the work went on, till, of the thirty 



Hosted by 



Google 



SECOND, THIRD, AND FOURTH TEARS. 127 

who entered the school, not Christians, Miss Lyon 
could write : " All but four now express some hope 
that they love Christ." 

In the midst of her sore trial, her thoughts turned 
more to the goodness of God than to any other theme ; 
and she gave this subject for the Bible lesson of the 
first Sabbath of the term. A pupil, who, from her 
first meeting Miss Lyon, seemed to be in full sympathy 
with her, wrote of that day : " The sun rose in bright- 
ness, as if God, in his goodness, had chosen that the 
first pleasant day of our residence here should be the 
Sabbath, that our associations with the day should be 
pleasant." The Bible lesson had been given out on 
Saturday; and as Miss Lyon alluded to it at the 
breakfast-table the next morning, when her pupils 
were seated for devotions, she said : " Now we hope to 
spend forty Sabbaths together ; and will not those who 
fear the Lord speak often one to another ? Then will 
he write for us a book of precious remembrance ; for 
he has said he will do it. We expect to pray together 
here forty Sabbath mornings. Then we shall separate, 
never all to meet again in this world ; and we have 
some dear ones, who have no hope of meeting us beyond 
this life. May not such a hope be given to some of 
them this first Sabbath morning?" This bringing 
home of the subject of being a Christian on that 
morning, when so many were strangers, and when her 



Hosted by 



Google 



128 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

own heart was so tender, deeply affected many. They 
could not easily lose the impression ; and, when, in 
the afternoon, they came together, and she pointed 
them to the heaven where nine pupils had just entered, 
most of whom she had expected would sit there on 
that Sabbath, their hearts were more deeply moved. 
She spoke of heaven as no strange place. She said : 
" We can know much of heaven. If we have ever 
had feelings which we believe to be in unison with our 
heavenly Father's will, we then know something of 
the feelings enjoyed there." 

There was something in Miss Lyon's first meeting 
with her pupils, that can not be described. We forgot 
the teacher, for we seemed only to see the mother, the 
friend, the Christian friend, one in whom our hearts 
could trust. Her interest in our parents and friends 
gave us a confidence in her, and then that cheerful 
countenance seemed to tell of a heart that could em- 
brace us all. On the note-book of one pupil we find 
this record of remarks on the first morning of the 
school year, and many can recall words kindred to 
these : " There is always a peculiar interest in meet- 
ing our dear family at the commencement of the 
school year. We remember those dear familiar faces 
with us last year, which we shall see here no more. 
We thank our God for the precious privilege, which 
was ours, of laboring for those daughters. We follow 



Hosted by 



Google 



SECOND, THIRD, AND FOURTH YEARS. 129 

them with our love, we will remember them around 
this family altar. We welcome old friends returning 
home with smiling countenances, and we also welcome 
these strangers. They will not long be strangers. 
Some of you are the daughters of those I tenderly 
love, and we are ready to give our love and sympathy 
to you all. My heart goes out very tenderly this 
morning to those parents who have intrusted you to 
my care. Those fathers and mothers have no choicer 
treasures than these precious daughters. We are 
ready to labor for you in love and fidelity, and may 
you all be faithful to us. And oh, what inexpressible 
tenderness in the thought, that you may all be prepar- 
ing for heaven here ! " 

Another note-book records another year. " As 
Miss Lyon met us in the hall this first morning, she 
said : I shall not read a chapter from the Bible, but 
only a single verse, ' In every thing, by prayer and 
supplication with thanksgiving, let your request be 
made known unto God.' I could think of no other 
text as my thoughts turned to you. This is what I 
want you all to do every day this year. Carry every 
thing to God. There is nothing too small for his 
notice. When he says every thing , he means just 
what he says. Those who are Christians can do it, 
and those who are not may begin to do it to-day. 
Do not be afraid to do it because you know you are 



Hosted by 



Google 



130 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

not a Christian. Does the heart of one such go out 
tenderly this morning to the friends she has left? 
Does any one feel anxious in reference to her examina- 
tions ? Carry all to your heavenly Father. You 
may thus get an acquaintance with him that will 
make you long to say with a whole heart, my Fa- 
ther." 



Hosted by 



Google 



CHAPTER X. 

INFLUENCE OP TRIALS ON MISS LYON — SPECIMENS OF MORNING RELIG- 
IOUS EXERCISES — DEATH OF HER MOTHER — HER SYMPATHY WITH 
THE BEREAVED — SPECIMENS OF AFTERNOON RELIGIOUS EXERCISES — 
HAD THE CONFIDENCE OF HER PUPILS — ANNIVERSARY ADDRESS BY 
PROF. EDWARDS. 

THE trials of the autumn of 1840, made Miss Lyon, 
if possible, love the seminary more than ever before. 
She felt that she had been sorely chastised, but she 
wanted to know the lesson her Father would teach 
her, and she desired her pupils to learn the same. At 
the first meeting for Christians, she dwelt with peculiar 
interest upon their obligations to the benevolent foun- 
ders of the institution. She had previously said : " On 
entering the seminary, young ladies can scarcely avoid 
feeling that they are sharing the fruits of benevo- 
lent efforts, and that they are enjoying privileges which 
they can not purchase ; that they owe a debt of gratitude 
to the founders which gold and silver can never cancel, 
and which can be met only by a useful Christian life." 
She pressed this home more earnestly than ever, 

(131) 



Hosted by 



Google 



132 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

during this year, and especially at this meeting. After 
presenting other motives for faithfulness, she added : 
" This institution has been blessed of God, because it 
is his. It has been given to him ; let us have no part 
in taking it back. And now there are those here 
who have come to this place with the hope of finding 
the Saviour. Shall we help them to do it ? " There 
were Christian pupils this year, who labored diligently 
for souls, and who cared most faithfully for the young 
Christians as they were brought into the fold. We 
can understand Miss Lyon's confidence in them, as we 
find her saying to them, May 19th : " It is a solemn 
thought that all that most of us do for the four still 
impenitent in our family will be done in a few short 
weeks." Specimens^ of the morning exercises of this 
year are given in the Appendix. 

We have brief notes, also, of some others of these 
morning exercises. At one time we find her taking 
the first epistle of Peter, and commenting upon a few 
verses each morning, while she asks her pupils to study 
it with her in their rooms. Fearing that Christians 
were not prepared to meet the Lord, she takes, on 
another morning, a part of the message to the seven 
churches, and leads them on to feel that they can not 
serve God and Mammon. 

Early in the year, we find her explaining to Chris- 
tians the office-work of the Spirit ; his ordinary and 



Hosted by 



Google 



SECOND, THIRD, AND FOURTH YEARS. 133 

extraordinary influences. And a little later, reading 
to the whole school passages on grieving that Spirit, 
and pointing out many ways in which it might be 
done, saying : " You may grieve the Spirit from your 
own heart and from other hearts. It may be done by 
thinking, doing, or speaking of unsuitable things at 
unsuitable times. It is a solemn thought, that a word 
or look may so influence another's mind, as to lead her 
to grieve away the Spirit. While God's essential pres- 
ence is ever with us, he may be tempted to withdraw 
from us his blessing. It is easy so to grieve him that 
he shall leave us ; and oh, how much more easily is 
he invited to stay with us, and to bless us ! " 

Prayer was dwelt upon, and it was shown that 
watchfulness and prayer, if sincere, can not be separated. 
They will walk hand in hand. The wrestling Jacob 
was one morning brought before the school, and they 
were led to feel that they need not let go of the Eter- 
nal One, even when he lays them so low that they 
can no more wrestle ; and that the Christian often 
prevails when, God having touched him, he must lie 
passive in his hands. 

Dec. 21, 1840, was observed as a day of fasting and 
prayer in the school, the pupils generally desiring it. 
It was not customary to appoint days of this kind so 
early in the year, but a special blessing followed this. 
A pupil made the following entry in her note-book on 

12 



Hosted by 



Google 



134 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

that day : " Miss Lyon's countenance was cheerful, 
and her instructions such as we needed. Her faith 
and hope seemed strong, yet humble. She recom- 
mended us to read portions of the Psalms and Proph- 
ets, the sixteenth and twenty-third chapters of 
Leviticus, and desired us to pray for them who had 
neglected to decide to profess Christ, and that others 
might be guided in their decisions ; for those who are 
not sincere in their professions of interest ; and for those 
just rejoicing in hope, that they might never go back. 
When she met us, in the afternoon, she spoke of the 
different classes of professing Christians ; the back- 
sliding, inconsistent, doubting, easily-tempted, deceived, 
and the active Christian. Her words were solemn 
and cheering." 

Four days later, we find the following in the same 
note-book : " Miss Lyon read passages showing the 
plan of the divine government, — that this world was 
intended as a place of education for heaven, and where 
it is not so used, it has been perverted. It was de- 
signed that we should always exercise diligence and 
watchfulness. We are not to expect respite from la- 
bor, for if we can accomplish some things with facility, 
more will be given us to do. Our first great blessing 
is that we may be saved ; the second, that we may 
labor for Christ." 

Another morning, we find her dwelling upon a uni~ 



Hosted by 



Google 



SECOND, THIRD, AND FOURTH TEARS. 135 

form, serious, Christian deportment. She said : " It 
can be obtained only by having the heart deeply im- 
pressed with eternal things," adding, " a want of uni- 
formity, in this respect, is a great hindrance to Christian 
usefulness." The next day her subject was the propri- 
ety and importance of Christian rebuke, from the most 
delicate incidental question to open reproof. She said : 
" Never excuse yourselves because the person in fault 
has been told, or because she knew, her duty. The 
addition of your kind caution or reproof may be the 
means of saving her." This was the talk of the 
morning, while, in the evening meeting for Christians, 
she dwelt with great animation on the joys of heaven. 
A few days later, we find her speaking upon slander. 
One who knew Miss Lyon well, has said : " When this 
was her subject, we always felt that she not only told 
us what we ought to do, but what she was actually 
doing. For years I was intimately associated with 
her, but I never once heard from her lips an expres- 
sion, in regard to another, that involved unkind feeling. 
There were no hard sayings of those not present. 
She never spoke lightly of a pupil." 

There was perhaps no morning exercise of this year 
more impressive than that of Dec. 3, when Miss 
Lyon entered the school, as was her custom, with her 
great Bible on her arm. She had been absent for sev- 
eral days, watching by her dying mother, and as she 



Hosted by 



Google 



136 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

looked around upon her pupils, and gave them her 
good-morning, there was an irresistible drawing of 
hearts toward her. She read 1 Thess. iv. 13, and 
one there present says : "She spoke to us affection- 
ately of her dear mother, who, as she trusted, had 
been prepared many years to be called home. And 
now that the last object was removed w^ich had shared 
her solicitude for her pupils, she desired to be more faith- 
ful to us, so that if at last all should not stand together 
on God's right hand, it might not be because she had 
been unfaithful." She gives expression to her deep 
feeling in a letter to Miss Grant. u I have now no 
mother or sister, whom I can go and see, and alone I 
followed my dear mother to the grave. Her prayers, 
which I have had daily for so many years, I shall have 
no more. She, to whose comfort I have been expect- 
ing the pleasant privilege of administering for years 
to come, as almost the only child left her, will need 
nothing more. I feel my family loneliness, but with it 
eternity seems very near, with all its precious privi- 
leges purchased by the blood of our glorious Saviour." 
While Miss Lyon's thoughts and feelings turned so 
fully to eternity, she was still in time, and she suffered 
much in her health under these repeated strokes. 
During the winter following her mother's death, she 
says, she was " obliged to give over many portions of 
her work to others, and some weeks nearly all ; " but 



Hosted by 



Google 



SECOND, THIRD, AND FOURTH YEARS. 137 

adds : u I have felt 'that I have nothing to say, and 
scarcely any thing to ask but that God may be glori- 
fied." She was usually engrossed with labor, and said 
so little of personal matters, that few realized the 
strength of her attachment to her friends. Probably 
there was never a mother that received purer, stronger, 
and more lasting love than did the mother of Mary 
Lyon. She had honored and trusted that mother, 
sought her counsels and valued her prayers, and when 
she realized her departure, she says : "I felt a loneli- 
ness of which I had no previous conception." What 
Dr. Hitchcock says of Miss Lyon in another relation, 
we say in this : " How happy a mother must have 
been to receive such love from such a heart ! " Her 
own strong feelings led her to understand those of 
others, and many can fully sympathize with the lan- 
guage of a pupil who says : " When that deep sorrow 
rolled over me, I was allowed to pillow my head, on 
Miss Lyon's bosom. She drew me so near to her that 
I could feel the beatings of her own heart. One friend 
said to me, do this, and another said, do that ; but Miss 
Lyon said : ' Rest here, my child, and we will ask God 
to take care of the whole matter.' And I did rest 
close by that heart of love, which seemed to understand 
my every feeling, and thankful to know that there 
were lips which could open only in gentleness when the 

soul was torn with grief." 
12* 



Hosted by 



Google 



138 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON, 

The following extract from a letter, written soon 
after her mother's death, lays that heart open before 
us. The pupil to whom it is addressed was one who 
had suffered from the severe sickness of the previous 
autumn in person, and in the removal of a loved father 
and sister. Miss Lyon says : " Can you not come 
and stay with me a few days ? I am not able to go 
out of my room much, and it would be a great comfort 
to me to have you with me. Dear one ! I have felt 
for you most tenderly in your trials. They have been 
mine, and my feelings have been such that in my 
present state of health I have hardly dared to trust 
myself to write you. I want to talk with you of your 
loss, of our nine dear pupils who have gone to be with 
Christ, of my mother and sister, and of your own plans 
for the future. Do not try to do much. Rest, and 
rest here with me, if you can leave your mother. 
Arms of love wait to receive you." 

When Miss Lyon met that pupil, some months later 
she felt that there were none other than arms of love 
thrown around her, and she says : "I can never forget 
how fast those tear-drops fell, as she silently laid her 
head upon my shoulder for a few brief moments, and 
then broke the silence by saying: 'How I do thank 
God, that he could spare you to come back to life ! I 
know you would have been glad to go at once to 
heaven, but will you not also be happy in laboring a 



Hosted by 



Google 



SECOND, THIRD, AND FOURTH YEARS. 139 

little longer for Christ ? ' There was to me a new 
view of the preciousness of laboring for Christ, as I 
looked upon that countenance where smiles and tears 
so met. I felt that only a heavenly hand should wipe 
away those tears. As I was with her for several days, 
she told me of her feelings as wave after wave of sor- 
row rolled over her during the autumn. She once 
said : ' When my pupils were dying one after another, 
I was afraid to take up a paper lest I should see some 
new name added to the deceased, and not have strength 
to meet it. I was afraid to ask a question, or even 
listen to conversation, lest I should not find myself 
prepared for what I might hear. There were days 
in which I could not attempt any thing except to ask 
God to hold me by his own hand. I had no heart to 
ask for any thing except to have my trust in God se- 
cured to me." After dwelling on this view for a time 
she added : ' But these events helped to prepare me 
for other trials that were soon to follow, in the taking 
from me of my mother and sister. And then to think 
of all those dear pupils in heaven. Oh, how good 
God was to make all his before he took any away! 
Heaven seems nearer to me than ever before, and 
labor on earth sweeter. A gentler and a safer hand 
than mine leads those who are gone. How com- 
forting ! ' " 

Miss Lyon said, near the close of life : " If trials 



Hosted by 



Google 



140 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

and perplexities come, then we may look for some 
comforting, consoling providence. We may always 
expect enough of trial and difficulty to make us love 
to sing, — 

1 Is this, dear Lord, that thorny road 
That leads us to the mount of God? " 

and enough of consolation and support and blessing to 
make us feel that Christ's yoke is easy and his burden 
light." While the trials of this year were severe, the 
blessings were gre-at. 

During the summer of 1841, Miss Lyon left her 
school and took a journey with her kind friends, Dea. 
and Mrs. Safford. She returned with renewed health 
and every thing around comforted her. The new 
building was so far advanced that she could receive a 
larger number of pupils the coming year. There was 
almost perfect health in the school, and there had been 
a rich blessing of the Spirit, such an one that Miss 
Lyon herself said : " It seems to me that I never had a 
school in which there was more of the spirit of heaven." 
She was obliged to relinquish much of her teaching in 
£he class-room this year, but, so far as able, she gave 
the religious instruction, and also often met the school 
in a general exercise in the afternoon. At such times 
all were assembled in the seminary hall and the talks 
were of a miscellaneous, but strictly practical, charac- 
ter. They were valued at the time, but far more in 



Hosted by 



Google 



SECOND, THIRD, AND FOURTH YEARS. 141 

after life when circumstances led to applying them. 
One, who long since left the seminary, has said : " There 
is not a day of my life in which I do not recall those 
afternoon exercises of Miss Lyon. My increasing ex- 
perience of life increases my admiration, both of her 
ability to select topics on which to counsel us, and her 
power to make so permanent an impression on our 
minds. She certainly understood the will of the Lord 
as fully as Paul, and in secular no less than in spiritual 
matters." We give notes of a few of the afternoon 
exercises of that year, just as they were written at the 
time by pupils.* 

These afternoon exercises were entered into with so 
much interest, that, for the time, one would suppose 
that Miss Lyon's heart was so fully in them that there 
could be no thought for the evening meeting that was to 
follow. But she could turn from one to the other with 
perfect ease because with her all was done for God. 

We have seen her in the afternoon cause the great- 
est merriment as she drew the picture of a family 
wanting in promptness (she would make certain 
courses of conduct appear ridiculous, but never rid- 
iculed persons), and, when the evening came, there 
would be a holy, delightful calm as we gathered around 
her to have her point us to Christ, our Mediator, stand- 
ing at the right hand of the Father, and making this a 
* See Appendix, p. 235. 



Hosted by 



Google 



142 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

reason why we should live holy lives. " Yet," she 
added, " you will not all manifest your Christian 
character in the same way ; you are variously consti- 
tuted. Perhaps some of you are inclined to be very 
silent. Now we wish you to correct this as far as it is 
an evil. But being a Christian will not make such a 
person talk all the time ; neither should it cause a very 
lively person to be silent. Honor God with the consti- 
tution he has given you, keeping your peculiar tem- 
peraments and tendencies in perfect control. It is not 
wise for a Peter to try to be a John, but rather to be 
the best Peter possible, and John to be the best John 
possible, rather than seek to be a Paul. Then she 
would address young Christians with great tenderness, 
beseeching them not to go back to the trifles and van- 
ities of this world, and encouraging them to go for- 
ward, because Christ loves to fulfill his precious prom- 
ises to individuals ; and she would add : "And why, 
dear young friends, should you not be the individuals 
to know the fullness of these promises ? " 

Miss Lyon sympathized so fully with the feelings of 
her pupils that they seldom made plans for doing 
any thing, not even the giving of a present, without her 
approbation. One says on this point : " We were sure, 
if it was best to do it, she would favor it ; but, if she saw 
reasons for not pursuing our plan, we could cheerfully 
relinquish it." She often made such remarks as the 



Hosted by 



Google 



SECOND, THIRD, AND FOURTH YEARS. 143 

following to her pupils : "I do not think the giving 
of presents should be greatly encouraged, and still it 
is at times highly proper. We sometimes receive 
favors, and there are public services rendered which 
money can not repay, and in some gift we can show 
the friend who has conferred them that they are held 
in grateful remembrance. If the gift can be the work 
of our hands, something which costs time rather than 
money, it will only be the more acceptable. Making 
presents sometimes cultivates a spirit of selfishness, be- 
cause gifts are expected in return. Those who are 
most ready to give splendid presents are not, usually, 
the most ready to give to benevolent objects, and thus 
a high standard of benevolence is not cultivated." 

After listening to such sentiments as these, we are 
not surprised to find the following entries in the note- 
book from which we have already drawn : — 

Nov. 16, 1840. " Miss — and I went to Miss Lyon's 
room to propose a plan for giving Mr. Hyde (the stew- 
ard) a present. She favored it, expressing the hope 
that it would not diminish our missionary contribution. 
It is remarkable how she takes every thing into view." 
m Nov. 22. " Miss Lyon sent for four of us to talk 
with us about the present. How she remembers every 
thing ! Each young lady gave six and a quarter cents, 
and we presented Mr. Hyde sixteen volumes of the 
Evangelical Family Library." 



Hosted by 



Google 



144 £E COLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

There was a peculiar satisfaction to the pupils, gen- 
erally, in haying Miss Lyon know all that was going 
forward, and this is but one of a thousand cases where 
her counsel and approbation were sought. We may, 
perhaps, here give the testimony of another to Miss 
Lyon's comforting words : " There was a sick one in 
our family, for whom Miss Lyon wished me to care 
Finding that one of my recitations was Ecclesiastical His- 
tory, and that I had before studied it, she told me, if I 
would take care of the suffering one, I should be ex- 
cused from the review of the book at the close of the 
year, as well as from a public examination. But when 
the time came, I heard my name read, and was called 
to duty. I spoke to the teacher of the class about 
being excused from it by Miss Lyon ; but she thought 
there was a mistake, and I must recite. I spoke ta 
her the second time with a full heart, when she said : 
' I think you are mistaken, but we will go to Miss 
Lyon.' In a moment we were by Miss Lyon's side, 

and her cheerful 'What is it, Miss -?' led me to 

begin to say : ' Am I mistaken, Miss Lyon, in thinking 
that you said I might be excused from the review ? ' 
Here she took the words from my lips : ' I know, dear, 
your History. Why, no, dear, you are not mistaken. 
Was your name read ? ' Her kindness brought tears, 
and the tears brought her hand to wipe them away, 
saying : ' Certainly you are excused, and do you not 



Hosted by 



Google 



SECOND, THIRD, AND FOURTH YEARS. 145 

wish to be excused from something else ? I have not 
forgotten what you did for the sick one.' I could not 
answer ; and seeing this, she said with a smile : ' Did 
you know that Deacon and Mrs. Porter are expected 
this afternoon? Would you not like to come and 
help me arrange the room for them?' Oh, how 
thankful I was for the kindness and for the wisdom 
that turned my heart-throbbings into another channel, 
by giving me something to do ! " 

But the kindness manifested this year was only a 
repetition of the kindness of other years, and her in- 
terest in her pupils at home, as expressed in the follow- 
ing paragraph, only the interest of every year. " Miss 
Lyon spoke of the ways of doing good, after we re- 
turn home, by creating and sustaining an interest in 
female prayer-meetings, by manifesting an abiding 
interest in the Sabbath school, either as teacher or 
scholar, by religious conversation, by seeking out and 
benefiting the poor, by instructing children in relig- 
ious and other subjects, and by our deportment at home. 
Our friends will expect much when we return ; our 
Saviour will expect much. We may do much to ele- 
vate the standard of piety in those around us." 

The year of blessings following the sore trials of the 
autumn of 1840 was closed by the anniversary address 
given by Prof. B. B. Edwards, of Andover. When 
Dr. Anderson had been invited two years before to 

13 



Hosted by 



Google 



146 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

give the anniversary address, many friends had sought 
to dissuade him from bestowing his influence on such 
an enterprise; but Prof. Edwards had advised him 
to do it, and now he himself stood in the same place, to 
give one of the choicest productions of his gifted mind 
and pen. It was a fitting close for the school year. 



Hosted by 



Google 



CHAPTER XI. 

Jfiftjj una §$kfy ffms. 

FIFTH YEAR, 1841 — ENLARGEMENT OF THE SEMINARY BUILDING — DAI- 
LY PRAYER-MEETINGS BEGUN — SIXTH YEAR, 1842 — ASSISTANT 
TEACHERS — WEEKLY MEETINGS OF THE TEACHERS — TEACHERS' 
PRAYER-MEETING. 

IN October, 1841, the seminary was again 
thronged. The new building was not ready for 
occupancy till December, but Miss Lyon told us we 
could certainly be very happy in close quarters with 
the prospect of such ample provision the remainder 
of the year. The whole was anew given to the Lord. 
The dews of the Spirit began to descend very early, 
and the cloud seemed hardly to be lifted during the 
whole year ; yet at its close more were left out of 
Christ than the preceding year. This year was 
marked as one of great growth in Christian charac- 
ter. Many who had been prevented from returning 
the previous year by the sickness of the autumn of 
1840, were now present, and they sat as learners, with 
new interest, at the feet of her who had had fresh 
experience of heavenly guidance during their absence. 

(147) 



Hosted by 



Google 



148 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

It was during this year that little daily prayer-meet- 
ings were commenced. The form of these meetings 
has been somewhat changed since that time, but they 
have been constantly continued. When instituted, 
they were called " neighborhood meetings." Suitable 
rooms were chosen in different parts of the house, and 
all were invited to attend. Teachers were never pres- 
ent on these occasions, — the meetings being conducted 
by the pupils themselves. In some of these circles as 
many different individuals had charge as there were 
days in the week. Monday was given to Foreign 
Missions, and she who had the care of the meeting 
said a few words suggesting particular subjects under 
this head. Then followed voluntary prayers, till the 
time had expired. Tuesday was given in the same 
way to Home Missions. Wednesday, to prayer for 
the Bible and Tract Societies. Thursday, to home 
churches and friends. Friday, to our own and other 
seminaries, while on Saturday we pleaded for Abra- 
ham's seed, and prayed, " Thy kingdom come in all 
the world." There was something in thus praying 
together that united Christian hearts very closely, and 
we expected to hear from week to week of blessings on 
those for whom we had sought to the Lord. There 
was always opportunity for any one at the meeting to 
present special requests for prayer ; and, as many of 
those not Christians attended, there sometimes came a 



Hosted by 



Google 



FIFTH AND SIXTH YEARS. 149 

message like this : " While you pray for the perishing 
heathen, pray for a perishing sister in your own fam- 
ily." Though Miss Lyon never attended these meet- 
ings, yet her heart was in them, and, as she saw the 
crowds pass out, she would say: " Let me decrease, if 
I may only see these increase." 

The autumn of 1842 opened with the enlarged sem- 
inary filled to overflowing, and, desirous of doing all 
that could be done for the school, Miss Lyon made the 
number of teachers larger than before. Six new ones 
were added to the list, while Misses Moore and Whit- 
man, made associate principals, bore the seminary upon 
their hearts with hardly less interest than Miss Lyon 
herself. We love to remember what Miss Lyon did 
and how God honored her in that work ; but her hands 
were stayed up by two as faithful servants as were 
given Moses in the hour of conflict. Misses Moore 
and Whitman entered fully into all Miss Lyon's plans, 
and most faithfully did they carry out what she de- 
vised. The younger teachers looked upon the three 
as of one mind, and one of those teachers has said : 
" With the love that I bore to Miss Lyon, I could love 
any one who helped her faithfully, and met her every 
desire." We can hardly see that Misses Moore and 
Whitman were less esssential to the prosperity of the 
infant seminary than Miss Lyon herself; and her 

words in reference to the trustees apply to them : 
13 * 



Hosted by 



Google 



150 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

" They were raised tip just when needed, and wt b 
continually receiving fresh anointings from the Lord 
for their service." 

Mrs. Cowles has described Miss Lyon's teachers as 
no one could who had not been one of them : " They 
regarded her with mingled love, confidence, and vener- 
ation, entered enthusiastically into her views, and saw 
in her the servant of the Lord raised up for the very 
work that she was doing. In selecting her assistants, 
Miss Lyon's first question was not, Are you of one 
religious denomination or another ? but, Are you like the 
Lord Jesus Christ, willing to make yourselves poor, 
that others through your poverty may be rich ? " And 
Mrs. C. says that when they accepted an invitation 
from Miss Lyon to be with her, it was with " a desire 
to do good " combined " with the pleasure of unfolding 
minds of a higher order, delight in communing with 
congenial spirits, the identification of the seminary 
with themselves, and the luxury of living in what 
seemed to them a miniature paradise, and of antici- 
pating the millennial glory." 

Their pupils were from an intelligent class, the 
course of study from year to year was extended, and 
Mrs. C. has justly said of those teachers : " A solemn 
sense of accountability to God for the right use of 
their time and faculties, secured a higher standard of 
study and recitation among scholars than any motives 



Hosted by 



Google 



FIFTH AND SIXTH YEARS. 151 

drawn from the world of time and sense could have 
done. The fear of the Lord is indeed wisdom and 
instruction." 

Miss Lyon was accustomed to refer to her teachers 
before the school in a manner that led the young ladies 
to see how much she esteemed them, and at the same 
time to realize that she expected they would give 
themselves entirely to their work. We copy the fol- 
lowing from a note-book, bearing date October, 1842 : 
" Such is the value of immortal beings, that all who 
have the care of youth ought to make every sacrifice 
for their good, and, if need be, perhaps lay down 
their lives. With this motive in view, the teachers in 
this school endeavor to make it the best possible in their 
power. I believe that the love and respect of the 
young during the wdiole progress of their education 
are best secured by those teachers who pursue plans 
best adapted to their improvement. Teachers may be 
strict without harshness, and, having decided upon 
what is best, they should seek to carry it out in the 
most kind and acceptable manner." 

Another note-book of a later year says : " Miss Lyon 
said to us, — ' I feel that these teachers are placed here 
by the special providence of God, and therefore they 
may expect, in seeking to him, to know his will. 
We shall wish to do what is right, kind, and benevo- 
lent. We hope and expect that you will be glad to 



Hosted by 



Google 



152 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

meet our requirements. I think that proper parental 
government is a beautiful illustration of the principles 
and spirit of the divine government, and I think that 
school government should be made the same. It is, 
indeed, sometimes more like the divine government 
than the parental, because the latter is more liable to 
be vitiated by parental fondness. ' " She never feared to 
speak to her school of what a teacher's qualifications 
should be. She once said, when both teachers and 
pupils were present : " If you would be good teachers, 
you must seek to have your minds meet other minds. 
You must be able to take charge of any part of a 
child's education ; try to lead in the path of universal 
wisdom." 

Weekly meetings of the teachers were held for 
mutual consultation and prayer. Miss Lyon met her 
assistants as an elder sister, and there was no clashing 
of opinions among them. One of those teachers, under 
date of Oct. 23, 1846, thus writes : " This is our even- 
ing for teachers' business meeting. We had a very 
pleasant time. After the business was finished, Miss 
Lyon went down and had a quantity of peaches 
brought up ; then she said : * I wish you all to consider 
yourselves as visitors and to enjoy yourselves as much 
as possible. I can not talk " (she was suffering from a 
severe cold), " but I can see your smiling faces and 
enjoy it all, though I can not hear very well.' " Under 



Hosted by 



Google 



FIFTH AND SIXTH YEARS. 153 

another date, the same writer says : " At the close of 
the teachers' meeting, Miss Lyon said : ' We have a 
great work to do. Let us be faithful to these dear 
children. How many parents' hearts are beating with 
anxious hopes for our dear charge ! I like to think 
what a number of Christian parents are connected with 
our school. It is a privilege to spend and be spent for 
their children ; above all, let us seek their spiritual 
welfare. Let us keep in mind that our great work is 
to seek the salvation of souls.' At another meeting, 
Miss Lyon said : * Now I would like to know if any 
of you has too much to do. Tell me frankly if it is so. 
There may have been some oversight, that has given 
some one of you more than her share of labor. Do 
not be afraid to speak of it ; if you tell me, it will only 
help me to give you more when you can bear it. I 
know you all esteem it a privilege to do what you can.' 
" At the close of another business meeting, these 
words fell from her lips : ' I think we should be very 
careful to observe the general regulations of our fami- 
ly ; try to be systematic. I have suffered all my life 
from the want of regular habits. I wish you to accus- 
tom yourselves to be thoroughly systematic in the 
division of your time and duties. I know you have 
many interruptions, and many little things to look 
after ; but so it must be with ladies. I really think it 
requires more discipline of mind and more grace to 



Hosted by 



Google 



154 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

meet a lady's duties than a gentleman's. He has 
little of minutiae to attend to. He can rise in the 
morning and go to his business without hindrance ; 
but it is not so with a lady, and I would not have it 
otherwise.' " 

Near the time of a vacation, and when Miss Lyon 
was not able to labor herself, we find the following in 
a letter : " Miss Lyon is rather better. We met in 
her room as usual for business on Friday evening. 
She said, 'she knew, that the few days before we 
should separate would be days of great importance. 
She hoped we should be faithful. She felt that she 
was herself almost a cumberer of the ground, but she 
did sympathize with us in our many labors.' " Miss 
Lyon's teachers always felt that she sympathized with 
them. It was always easy to work with her. They 
were assured that they really helped her, and no 
mother's heart was perhaps ever more gratified for an 
unexpected favor, or relief when weary and worn, 
than Miss Lyon. One who often guarded her door 
carefully that she might sink into unconsciousness and 
thus renew her prostrated energies, says : " Miss Lyon 
almost made me think that I had done an angel's 
work, as she came out of her room, so bright, and 
said : ' Oh, I am so thankful to you for this rest ! You 
have really given me strength for many days of labor.' " 

Besides the business meetings, Miss Lyon held a 



Hosted by 



Google 



FIFTH AND SIXTH YEARS. 155 

prayer-meeting with her teachers, when she en- 
couraged them in their labors for souls. They went 
out of those meetings with new strength, and with the 
conviction that every soul for whom they cared was 
borne by Miss Lyon to the Lord Jesus. We add ex- 
tracts from letters, which show the spirit of these 
prayer-meetings. The first was written soon after the 
close of a vacation. " We had our teachers' prayer- 
meeting in Miss W.'s room. Each teacher's sec- 
tion w^as remembered, — those who had become Chris- 
tians, and those still interested, but not Christians. 
Miss Lyon spoke of the importance of being faithful, 
especially in our closets, and said : 6 We shall doubt- 
less be tried. It must be precept upon precept, and 
prayer upon prayer.' She closed by saying : 6 All 
may be dark to us, but, like Noah's dove, we may find 
a rare, a sweet resting-place with our God. He can 
not fail us.' " 

The same writer says, under a later date in that 
year : " In our teachers' prayer-meeting, Miss Lyon 
requested us to mention any, not Christians, whom we 
would like to have prayed for. Two were mentioned ; 
and then we knelt down and prayed for them ; and 
then two more, and so on, till twelve were mentioned." 
A week later, the same says : " As at the last meeting, 
we remembered individuals in our prayers. One for 
whom we then prayed is now indulging hope. Miss 



Hosted by 



Google 



156 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON 

Lyon said : * Let us pray, expecting an answer.' " Of 
the last teachers' prayer-meeting of that term, we find 
the following : " What shall we pray for while we are 
separated ? Let us remember all the family ; pray for 
all the Christians, that they may be more and more 
consecrated to God ; that they may be kept from temp- 
tation. Let us pray for those with whom the Holy 
Spirit is still striving." She then proposed that the 
names of all those without hope should be mentioned. 
They were all mentioned, and we prayed for them. 
Miss Lyon then remarked: "We never had a year 
like this before, when the Holy Spirit tarried so long 
with us by his special influences." 

In the middle of the last term of that year we find 
Miss Lyon saying, in one of those teachers' meetings : 
u Let us make most faithful effort, during these last few 
weeks, that no one soul among us be neglected." At 
another meeting still, Miss Lyon proposed that subjects 
of prayer be mentioned for the ensuing week ; and re- 
quested the teachers to pray that the young ladies 
might succeed in their studies and in doing right ; and 
that the teachers might have the privilege and the wis- 
dom to help them to do right. 

In the records of those teachers' prayer-meetings 
we also find how Miss Lyon remembered those who 
had gone out from her. The following notes are from 
the journal of Mrs. Mills, whose husband has been 



Hosted by 



Google 



FIFTH AND SIXTH YEARS. 157 

connected for some years with Oahu College, at the 
Sandwich Islands. 

" April 5. At our teachers' prayer-meeting this 
evening, after singing, Miss Lyon said : c We will 
now unite in two prayers for those who once met with 
us in this capacity, and who are now on missionary 
ground or on their way thither.' 

" June 4. Miss Lyon again asked us to remember 
all who had ever taught in the seminary, and espec- 
ially those who were now missionaries, and proposed 
that we should have stated times of praying for 
them. 

" June 18. At teachers' meeting, Miss Lyon spoke 
with interest of a little note from Mrs. B. (a mission- 
ary), and then proposed that the names be mentioned 
of all those who had once been here, but who were 
now missionaries either at home or abroad. So each 
of us mentioned one or more, till the names of all 
were repeated. We then -united in two prayers for 
them, Miss Lyon leading in one. She said : ' Let 
us be faithful, and we shall meet these friends in 
heaven.' " 

Eternity alone can tell how much of blessing was 
bestowed upon those teachers and pupils laboring in 
our own and other lands, in answer to the prayers of- 
fered for them by their friends in the seminary. Those 
absent ones have often said, as blessings descended 



Hosted by 



Google 



158 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

upon them : " Some one is praying the prayer of faith 
for me." And why should not their hearts turn to 
their school home to know where and by whom such 
prayer was offered ? 



Hosted by 



Google 



CHAPTER XII. 

MISS LYON'S EARLY INTEREST IN MISSIONS — LABORS TO KINDLE A LIK.B 
INTEREST AMONG HER PUPILS — THE TRUE STANDARD OF GIVING — 
THE PRACTICE OF THE JEWS — MEETING OF THE A. B. C. F. M. IN 1842 
— HER TEACHERS BECOMING MISSIONARIES — CONTRIBUTIONS — PER- 
SONAL RESPONSIBILITY — SUBJECTS FOR MEDITATION AND PRAYER. 

WE have seen that Miss Lyon's first Christian 
desires were for a world lying in wickedness ; 
and how, from year to year, these desires grew ; and 
how she realized more and more that fellowship with 
Christ in his sufferings, and this alone, will cany to all 
the inhabitants of the earth that salvation, the basis of 
which was laid in tears of blood and groans of the ten- 
derest compassion. But there was a missionary inter- 
est in her heart even before she was a Christian ; for 
she said to her school in December, 1842 : " Some of 
the brightest visions of my childhood are of Carey and 
those who first carried the gospel to the heathen." 
She adds : " I well remember the time when the 
names of Mills and his associates began to fall on my 
ear ; I remember the thoughts of my young heart 

(159) 



Hosted by 



Google 



160 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

when the subject of foreign missions first began to find 
its way into the family circle, and to be spoken of as 
one of the marvelous things of the age. I delight to 
go over the history of the A. B. C. F. M., the first, 
the corner-stone of our voluntary benevolent associa- 
tions. I love the very thought that I can remember 
the beginnings of this great and glorious enterprise. I 
beheld the infant rocked in its cradle. I knew not 
why it was born or wherefore it was there. I have 
seen it grow, become endowed with understanding, and 
give laws to other minds and direction to other powers. 
I remember well my feelings when I heard in my early 
home that our first missionaries had sailed from Phila- 
delphia and Salem. I honored the spirit that led them 
forth, reverenced the God they served, and asked, 
shall I ever be in fuller sympathy with him and with 
them ? Years passed by ; and one* went from my na- 
tive hills, saying, with Paul, ' Behold, I go bound in 
the spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing the things that 
shall befall me there.' A tenderer chord was now 
touched ; for I had begun to love the Saviour, and my 
spirit went forth with his to Jerusalem. 

" And so I watched from afar off the departure of each 
company of our missionaries, and knew as far as I might 
the history of this Foreign Missionary Society. I have 

* Rev. Pliny Fisk. 



Hosted by 



Google 



FIFTH AND SIXTH YEARS. 161 

loved to stand in its inner temple rather than its outer 
court. I have admired it as I have understood its 
noble principles, been familiar with its history, and had 
occasion to thank God for the men whom he has raised 
up to guide in its counsels, and cany forward its work 
at home, as well as those who have taken their lives in 
their hands, and gone forth glad exiles from their coun- 
try, their kindred, and their father's house. In this 
society I have found one of my richest fields of thought, 
of meditation, and of feeling. If I am permitted to 
behold but one more public scene of moral sublimity, 
let that be another annual meeting of the American 
Board. Let me again behold those kindred spirits from 
all parts of the country and from all departments of 
business, assembling with one accord, in one place, 
that they may consult together and transact business in 
this great cause. Let me listen to their deliberations 
till my thoughts gain unwonted strength, and my heart 
an unwonted refreshing. I can never forget our last 
meeting in Norwich. It was called a little heaven on 
earth ; but to me it seemed more like a scene on a vast 
platform raised over that ' great gulf fixed,' which no 
one can pass if he would. On the right was the world 
of glory, and on the left the world of despair. At 
one time our attention was directed to the right, and 
there was but a step between us and heaven, and we 
sung with new delight : — 



Hosted by 



Google 



1(32 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

* Why was I made to hear thy voice 

And enter while there's room, 
When thousands make a wretched choice, 
And rather starve than come ? ' 

" At another time our attention was directed to the 
left, and we beheld beneath our feet an innumerable 
company of immortal beings crowded together and 
plunging over its awful brink. Ah ! we felt then that 
we could never again seek to please ourselves, and 
never again forget the cause for which Christ suffered 
and died. Who among us, in the growth of his mind 
and in the development of his heart, does not feel 
himself indebted to the American Board ? Who, that 
knows what it is to have an expanding and deepening 
Christian sympathy in his bosom, does not in this also 
feel himself indebted to the American Board ? And 
who can bear the thought of one retrograde step in 
all its movements ? Who would not sooner give his 
last mite and divide his last loaf? Though the barrel 
of meal be ever so low, and the cruse of oil be ever 
so far spent, who will not run and first make a little 
cake for this servant of the Lord ? 

" There is not a day in which I do not ask how can 
I enlighten the understanding, and direct the feelings 
of my pupils aright on this great subject, the salvation 
of the world? The trial of giving of my little is noth- 
ing in comparison with my anxiety on this point. 



Hosted by 



Google 



FIFTH AND SIXTH TEARS. 163 

And an important part of your work hereafter may- 
be to lead others to give as they should. I fear I can 
not do for you what 1 would in one short year, 

" What I have said of the American Board applies 
to other societies laboring in this great work. I look 
upon our Home and Foreign Missionary, Bible and 
Tract Societies, as the four corner-stones on which 
our operations rest. And the question with me is not 
so much to which evangelical denomination we shall 
give, as how shall we so unite our efforts as to carry 
forward most rapidly this work ? " 

When Miss Lyon uttered these words, she had been 
for five years in the Mt. Holyoke Seminary. The 
original building had been enlarged, so that the num- 
ber of pupils had been increased to about two hun- 
dred. Revival had followed revival ; but she feared 
lest they were not doing all they ought to do for the 
kingdom of Christ. It had been her desire that the 
seminary should possess the missionary spirit in the 
highest degree, — a school where all should be trained 
to live for the saving of a world. She said : " Our 
hearts must take in the whole world, if we would labor 
aright for Christ." In labor, prayer, and giving, she 
remembered the whole world, so we loved to hear her 
speak such words as these, which she gave us soon 
after the above: "There are two reasons why we 
ought to give, — it is right, and it will do good. Thus 



Hosted by 



Google 



164 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

it is in God's government. He is guided by absolute 
right and infinite benevolence. The manner in which 
we act this year is like investing capital. Its influence 
will be increasing from year to year. There is a 
standard of giving for every individual. We ought to 
give what the Lord would have us give. And this 
we are to find out. If it were written on the walls of 
our rooms how large or how small a sum we should 
give, we should not be treated as moral agents. 

" We are placed here to live for a little while and 
then go away and live in another world. How shall 
we live, and how shall we use what God has given us ? 
He has a plan for every farthing he has placed in our 
hands. If we are willing and obedient, we may know 
his plan ; but no one will know how much he ought to 
give, unless he has a strong desire to know. God will 
make our treasures, whether few or many, a touchstone, 
— a test of the willingness of our hearts. He has 
committed to us these earthly treasures, requiring a part 
to be devoted to spiritual purposes. He might have 
so supplied all that there would have been no oppor- 
tunity for us to give ; but he has seen it best for us to 
divide our treasures with others. The Bible is our 
guide in this, and when it makes known our duty, we 
are not to answer again. If God asks a part of our 
pittance, we must not inquire how we can get along 
without it. 



Hosted by 



Google 



FIFTH AND SIXTH YEARS. 165 

" Our standard of giving must be different from that 
of those who have gone before us. The lowest of us 
ought to rise as high as the highest did thirty years 
ago. We ought to rise as much higher than our 
parents, as we are younger. We cast no reflections on 
them. They will receive a crown if they labored and 
gave according to their light. We have greater light 
and greater opportunities to do good. The providence 
of God is opening to the Christian every where a way, 
a highway, a way of holiness, in which his willing feet 
may run, as on the wings of the wind, carrying the 
tidings of salvation to the remotest corners of the 
earth. It is a privilege to give even the widow's mite. 
I want you to meet all your treasures in heaven. But 
remember that riches may be corrupted. We shall 
find that they have been in the last great day. We 
shall there find garments moth-eaten, gold and silver 
cankered, and rust that will eat flesh as fire. But, 
my dear pupils, you may sell all that you have and 
give alms, and you will find a treasure in heaven. 
And oh, what a treasure it will be ! — redeemed souls 
carried to heaven through your instrumentality ! 

" This sordid money, what is it ? Why, we may 
perhaps keep it till we go to the grave, and then we 
must give it up. This dust, what is it ? God suffers 
us to show by it how much we love him. He has 
thus put his stamp upon it ; so it has become very 



Hosted by 



Google 



166 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

precious. Yes, we can give it to Christ, and so secure 
a never-failing treasure in heaven." 

A little later, the subject was pursued by reading 
passages of Scripture showing the connection between 
doing and giving in this life and the results in eternity. 
44 We should judge of the pleasure which any thing 
affords, not by the present delight, but by the remem- 
brances it will bring ; and these, to be truly delightful, 
must be increasingly joyous through time and eternity. 
Sin has blinded us to the effects of much that we do ; 
but our acts will be to us none the less sources of never- 
ending joy and woe. We must not be careless of what 
we have, but remember that God's blessing depends, in 
no small degree, on the manner we use what he has 
committed to us for his cause. Pardon is not to be 
purchased by our contributions ; but when the gift of 
grace is secured, the precious casket may be filled with 
enduring treasures. There is much in the Bible to 
establish the belief that a certain proportion of our 
property should be devoted to the Lord's service. In 
the Old Testament the system of tithing is fully ex- 
plained. The clearer light which shines in the New 
discloses our duty without any need of specific direc- 
tion. Malachi's words seem to have reference to this 
subject. The tithes must be given if we would secure 
the blessing. It seems probable that the Jews gave at 
least four-tenths of their income. Shall we, under the 



Hosted by 



Google 



FIFTH AND SIXTH YEARS. 167 

gospel dispensation, with increased light and increased 
ability, do less ? The Jews all gave, the rich and the 
poor ; and we should count it a privilege that we may 
do a little if we can not do much. How the Saviour 
honored the two mites of her who gave all her living ! 
The Bible teaches us to give a portion of our income 
to the Lord, and we must give it before we expend 
any thing for ourselves. I should not dare to take 
from that part to give to the common poor, to educate 
a sister or niece. The work of the world's conver- 
sion must not stop for such objects as these. If any 
class is exempt from giving the specified amount, it is 
ministers and educated men, whose efforts in other 
ways are an equivalent. 

" When Nehemiah first returned to Jerusalem, the 
Jews were very poor, but still they gave their tenths 
before using any for themselves. In Hezekiah's day 
what a blessing came with their giving ! God requires 
us to give without great ability. We should consider 
our circumstances, decide what proportion we will give, 
and adhere to it. I regard it my duty to carry out 
in my own course of action what I have said to you. 
You will probably see it all true at the judgment, and 
may be in the light of eternity will find that I have 
fallen far below the true standard. Let us make no 
exceptions in our own favor, but rather, like Paul, make 
exceptions against ourselves." 



Hosted by 



Google 



168 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

Another day of the same month she made the fol- 
lowing remarks under this general head : " Benevolent 
objects assume different garbs. There are societies 
whose work must be planned months and years before- 
hand. Our home and foreign missionary societies 
must pledge support to those whom they send out. 
We should be very careful not to have our contribu- 
tions diverted from such objects even for a single year. 
Let us never go backward one step in such a work as 
this, but rather onward to the day of our death. If 
our parents are not benevolent, let us seek to supply 
their lack of service. 

" Practice would not be so diverse in respect to Chris- 
tian liberality, if the hearts of all were right. Two 
Christians of equal means would not then be found, one 
giving five dollars and the other five hundred. This 
contributing is the current money of the heart. It 
shows to an extent how much we love. And oh, what 
a privilege, by giving money, to show our love to Him 
who has redeemed us ! Unto us who are the least of 
all. The Jews enjoyed a great privilege in being per- 
mitted to build an earthly temple ; we are permitted to 
build a spiritual temple. If you have any desire to 
do good, act at once. In waiting, you may lose the 
little desire you have. These passive impressions are 
exceedingly dangerous. Feeling without action brings 
no reward. Do and suffer, deny yourselves for Christ, 



Hosted by 



Google 



FIFTH AND SIXTH IEA£S. 169 

and you will count it all joy in the end. I am saying 
what I wish you to remember when you are far hence 
and see me no more. May you remember it when I 
am laid in my grave." 

One morning more closed the remarks of that 
series : " I have but a few words more. Before we 
take up our contribution, let us all take time, before 
God, to consider the worth of a single soul. Perhaps 
we can better understand this by trying to think what 
it would be for our souls to be lost. When we trem- 
ble in view of the possibility of being lost ourselves, 
then let us do what is assigned to us for other souls 
that are to exist just as long as we shall exist. Have 
we ever given and toiled and prayed for those in dark- 
ness till we felt the sacrifice ? Are you ready to go 
yourself to the corners of the earth for the salvation of 
others ? If we send others to endure the toils, shall 
we not be willing to practice self-denial ? Do you de- 
sire in agony of heart to know what you ought to do ? 
Then give in proportion to your feeling. I often look 
forward to that day when we shall hear it said : 4 Inas- 
much as ye did it not unto one of the least of these.' 
Let us do it unto Christ, and first of all give him our 
hearts. I seem sometimes to look out through the 
crevices of my prison-house, and see something of the 
work given us to do here. And, young ladies, you 
may see more than I see, and do more than I have 

15 



Hosted by 



Google 



170 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON, 

done. I love to think that my precious daughters will 
do for Christ's kingdom what I have not done and feai 
I never shall do." 

At the meeting of the American Board at Norwich, 
in the autumn of 1842, to which reference has been 
made, Miss Lyon was deeply impressed with the 
thought that the seminary must possess more of the 
missionary spirit. She gathered around her many of 
her former pupils, who were present, and they prayed 
that the year just opening might be one of a marked 
awakening of the missionary spirit. She said : u The 
seminary was founded to advance the missionary cause. 
I sometimes feel that our walls were built from the 
funds of our missionary boards. Certainly much of 
the money expended upon them was given by those 
who hold every thing sacred to the Lord, and who, 
probably, would otherwise have devoted it to sending 
the gospel directly to the heathen." With such senti- 
ments in their hearts, she, and those with her, prayed, 
giving the seminary anew to the Lord, and to the 
missionary work. The Lord accepted the offering, 
but, in so doing, asked not only that they should give 
gold and silver, but that one half of the twelve teach- 
ers who were with her that year should sooner or 
later go in person to the heathen. Miss Lyon was 
often heard to say in subsequent years : " I little knew 
how much that prayer-meeting would cost me." She 



Hosted by 



Google 



FIFTH AND SIXTH TEARS. 171 

had not expected to be called upon to give up those to 
whom she looked for help in carrying on her work. 

Jan. 11th of that year, she said : " Most ladies can 
doubtless do more for the missionary cause at home 
than abroad. Here we can, and w r e will pray, and let 
us do all we can for the conversion of the world. Give 
your cordial support not only to the American Board, 
but to other societies whose great object is to save the 
w^orld. Wives, mothers, and daughters have much 
to do to elevate the standard of liberality in those they 
love. Perhaps, as daughters, you should not be willing 
to have so much lavished upon you, while there is so 
little given for the cause of Christ. By constant well 
doing, you may influence a brother or sister to conse- 
crate all to the cause of benevolence. You may even 
lead a brother to give himself to the work." She then 
referred to the little daily prayer-meetings, where the 
different portions of the world were remembered in 
prayer, and the laborers in each mentioned by name. 
She hoped that many more would find time to attend 
these meetings, and a heart to pray in them. She 
closed by saying : " When you pray, remember that 
every lost soul would consider it a happy exchange 
from the misery of damnation to all the sufferings of 
every individual from Adam to the end of time, and 
you are praying for those hastening to such a state." 
Three days later, she came into school to say : " I 



Hosted by 



Google 



172 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

have said much to you this year upon cherishing a 
missionary spirit, but very little upon giving yourselves 
personally to the work abroad. We are now asked 
for two, to go as teachers to a distant land." She 
dwelt upon the request with much feeling, and asked 
all to pray that " the Lord would show us whom he 
would send." 

We pass over weeks, in which she sought to know 
the Lord's will, to find her at the hour of midnight, 
Feb. 18th, entering a widowed mother's home, and 
that mother's daughter by her side. A month before, 
that mother had said : " If my child thinks that she 
must go, she will go, and I shall probably go soon to 
my grave." No daughter, who realizes that her moth- 
er's heart is in a heavenly Father's hand, would thus 
go forth. Miss Lyon, too, had said : " I think this is of 
the Lord. Another will be found, while you will love 
the seminary more dearly than ever, and may do your 
missionary work here." But another was not found, 
and therefore this meeting at that midnight hour. 
The errand needed no explanation, for it was under- 
stood, and few were the words spoken that night. In 
the morning, the language of the weeping mother 
was : " Who am I, that I should keep back my child, 
when my Lord calls for her ? " Miss Lyon drew near 
to say to that mother : " I came with your daughter, 
because I thought I almost knew your feelings. I give 



Hosted by 



Google 



FIFTH AND SIXTH YEARS. 173 

up a daughter also. I have supposed she might com-* 
fort you in your declining years, and have her home 
also with me at the same time, and labor for our dear 
seminary with me till I go home. If we are to give 
her up, we shall, in so doing, understand as never be- 
fore the gift of the Son of God." Ten days later, that 
daughter left her mother, and closed her labors with 
Miss Lyon to find her home, her work, and her rejoic- 
ing over souls saved in a distant land.* 

In that Norwich covenant, Miss Lyon had assured 
the Lord that she wished the seminary to be wholly 
consecrated to him. In tender mercy he remembered 
the word of his handmaiden. He saved many souls, 
and allowed her to seal her covenant by giving up her 
teachers. As she bade farewell to one after another, 
she said : " We love that cause best for which we 
suffer most." And we are told that she said to the 
widowed mother of whom we have spoken, at the 
midnight hour : " I thought I knew something of self- 
denial in giving money, but I am thankful that I had 
something else to give ; for there is an inner soul that 
was not then reached." These removals of teachers 
were so numerous that she was sorely taxed, and her 
friends sometimes feared that she would sink under 
them. But they were for a cause she truly loved, and 
of which she had said : " If I have two idols, they are 

* The person here referred to was Miss Fiske. — Ed. 
15* 



Hosted by 



Google 



174 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LTOK 

this seminary and the missionary cause ; and these 
were both God's before they were mine." She could 
give to God and say : "It is easiest, safest, and sweet- 
est to trust him." 

There has been an allusion to missionary contribu- 
tions taken up in the school. These were customary 
from the beginning, Miss Lyon giving as her reason 
for it, that "practice will make a more lasting im- 
pression on the mind than any amount of instruction. 
Wherever we are we should consider our missionary 
contribution a part of our expenses, and plan accord- 
ingly." Miss Lyon gave a large portion of her little 
income, contributing, for several years before her death, 
no less than ninety dollars each year, from her salary 
of two hundred, to home and foreign missions. She did 
not say that others ought to do as she did, but with 
such an example, her instructions never fell powerless. 
During the year on which we have been dwelling, the 
sum of nine hundred and fourteen dollars was con- 
tributed to home and foreign missions, and in a later 
year the amount went up to more than twelve hun- 
dred dollars. From 1842 to 1849, no less than seven 
thousand dollars were thus given. 

It was at that time customary for Miss Lyon to 
have two missionary subscriptions in the course of the 
year. She brought the subject before the school a 
second time after this revival, and wrote out her 



Hosted by 



Google 



FIFTH AND SIXTH TEARS. 175 

thoughts before giving them to her pupils. They 
were, about that time, embodied in a little book en- 
titled The Missionary Offering. "When it was written, 
retrenchment in our missions was talked of, and Miss 
Lyon looked at the sixty recently converted in her 
school, saying : u How anxious I should be for you, if 
you were now to be left without Christian watch, and 
how much more the converts from heathenism must 
require it ! " We subjoin in the Appendix the view of 
personal responsibility she then gave.* 

Miss Lyon not only encouraged her pupils to give 
for the cause of benevolence, but she sought to help 
them pray also. On the first Monday in January, 
1843, the day set apart for prayer for the conversion 
of the world, she said to them : " Do you feel that you 
have no abiding spirit of prayer for missions seek to 
gain missionary intelligence from week to week, and 
give an hour, at least, each week, to meditating on 
some great truth, as the love of Christ, the worth of a 
soul. This will help you to pray, and you will love to 
pray." 

The following subjects of prayer were given to her 
school on that day : — 

"SUBJECTS FOR MEDITATION AND PRAYER. 
" I. Confession. Of our sins, individual and particular, 
before and after conversion. Social sins — here, by ex- 
* Appendix, p. 243. 



Hosted by 



Google 



176 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

ample — at home. — Enlarge until you confess the sins of 
the whole world. — Pray for heathen as sinners, not as un- 
fortunate beings. — Think of the guilt of the world. 

" II. Meditate on the atoning blood of Christ. Dwell 
upon it, and enlarge as on the preceding topic. — Sin to be 
the great object of thought, and the atoning blood of Christ 
is the only corresponding thought. 

" III. Eternal punishment. Unless we dwell upon this 
truth we cannot realize the fullness of the atonement. — 
Pray first for ourselves and then for others. — How many 
have gone down to everlasting death since we came into 
this room — since we awoke this morning ! 

" IV. Eternal happiness. Dwell upon eternal happiness 
in the love of Christ. 

" V. Infinite value of the soul, and the equal value of all 
souls. 

"pray for ourselves. 

u I. Pray for yourself as an individual. — What does 
God require of you in regard to yourself ? — What in relation 
to your friends, — in relation to the heathen world ? What 
do we need from God that we may do what he requires 
of us? 

" II. For the conversion of souls in our family. — Pray for 
them on account of their influence in the conversion of the 
world. 



Hosted by 



Google 



FIFTH AND SIXTH YEARS. 177 

"III. Pray for the continued prevalence of religion in 
our family. 

" PRAY DIRECTLY FOR THE CONVERSION OP THE WORLD. 

" I. Dwell on the promises that this world shall be con- 
verted. 

" II. Pray that the fulfillment of these promises may be 
hastened. — Think of the truth that it can be hastened by 
believing prayer, or delayed by the neglect of it. — Pray as 
though you were the only person in the universe. 

" III. Pray for the prevalence of a missionary spirit. — * 
When we pray for the conversion of souls, pray that they 
may be so converted as to have a missionary spirit. 

" IV. Pray for the success of missionary operations. 

" V. Pray for a blessing on missionary societies. 

" VI. Pray for missionaries themselves. 

" VII. Pray for particular missionary stations. 

" VIII. Pray for those who have been members of this 
school and are now missionaries. 

" IX. Pray for eminent laborers at home in the mission- 
ary work. 

" X. Pray for a universal spirit of liberality and a uni- 
versal spirit of prayer throughout the world." 



Hosted by 



Google 



CHAPTEE XIII. 

Jrxmi: % Sktfr to % Cmtjj f)>ar. 

PROSPERITY OF THE SEMINARY IN 1842 — DEPARTURE OF MISS FISKE TO 
PERSIA — RELIGIOUS SORROW — REVIVAL OF 1843 — ITS FRUITS — 
EIGHTH, NINTH, AND TENTH YEARS, 1844 TO 1846 — REVIVAL OF 
1846 — DEATH OF REV. MR. CONDIT — DEATH OF MISS WASHBURN. 

MISS LYON wrote Mrs. Banister in December, 
1842, in regard to her school, as follows : a We 
have had a very prosperous year in worldly things. 
Every thing is systematized, and Miss Moore and 
Miss Whitman urge forward the wheels so beautifully 
that all seems more than ever like clock-work. I en- 
joy very much having every thing done better by 
others than it can be by myself. If this pleasure 
continues to increase as it has done for a year or two, 
I hope I may be prepared to be happy in being old 
and in being laid aside as a useless thing. But in 
spiritual things we are less favored. There has been 
less interest than we have had any year since the 
first. Pray for us that we may not receive all our 
good things in this life." 

Miss Lyon rejoiced in the external prosperity of her 
school and in the increase of missionary interest ; and 

(178) 



Hosted by 



Google 



SIXTH TO THE TENTH YEAR. 179 

when one of her teachers* left this year to go in per- 
son to the benighted, her whole soul was in the matter, 
and she was with her day and night to give some of 
the choicest counsels that ever fell from mortal lips, 
and to know that every thing was done, that could be 
done, for her. When the moment of separation came, 
she whispered a last word of counsel, and then said : 
" You will pray for us — will you not ? — all the way to 
Persia. As you remember the dear seminary, you 
can not do otherwise. When you lie in your berth, 
will you not carry us to God ? " A year afterward, 
she wrote that friend : " It is one year this week since 
we were in Boston together. I can never forget that 
week after you left, which I spent there especially to 
rest, to meditate, and to try to pray ; and I can never 
forget the scenes of the month that followed, — the 
unspeakable grace of God then manifested. I shall 
ever regard those scenes as among the most striking in 
exhibiting and illustrating the great scheme of salva- 
tion." 

That missionary company embarked March 1, 1843 ; 
and Miss Lyon left those departing ones to return to 
Deacon Safford's, where she had been for several days, 
o give her time and thoughts to meditation and prayer 
for her beloved pupils. The hearts of the members of 
that family were drawn into close communion with 

* Miss Fiske. 



Hosted by 



Google 



18b RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

hers, as she pleaded for a heavenly rain to descend on 
the dear seminary. She seemed to them like Elijah 
bowed upon Carmel. We love to think of holy com- 
munings which one of that number now has with her in 
heaven ; and those who remain on earth thank God 
that they were there permitted to have fellowship with 
her in intercessions for immortal souls. They can not 
forget how she appeared as she turned from them, 
March 7th, saying : " Pray, pray for us." 

She reached South Hadley just at the time of the 
afternoon exercise in the seminary hall. She gave the 
pupils the particulars of the departure of the teacher, 
and closed by saying : " Young ladies, you have one 
less to labor for you ; but, I trust, none the less to 
pray for you. The last A +hat I said to Miss Fiske 
was : ' Pray, pray for us.' And, as I watched her till 
she was lost to my sight, I could but fe&l that with her 
last look of her native land she prayed for you. Will 
you not pray for yourselves ? " 

She went from the seminary hall to soon gather her 
teachers around her. One of those teachers wrote 
Miss Fiske soon after : " At that meeting, Miss Lyon's 
heart was too full for us to ask her of your last days in 
Boston. She had told us in school of her request to 
you on parting ; and in repeating it to us, she con- 
vinced us that we had a work in our closets. She 
seemed to be burdened with the thought that prayer is 



Hosted by 



Google 



SIXTH TO THE TENTH TEAR. 181 

our only refuge in this fearful extremity, and that, if 
there is not an immediate work, we shall probably lose 
the blessing. I never felt as when sitting there to 
hear Miss Lyon ask in almost agony : 4 Is there one 
here to pray ? ' Teachers went to their rooms in si- 
lence with the feeling that their work was alone with 
God. The next day was our recreation day ; and the 
very silence of our house seemed to fill us with awe. 
Hearts were too full to pray together much." 

Thursday morning, March 9th, Miss Lyon met her 
school as usual for worship. Mrs. Peabody, of St. 
Louis, has made the following record of that morning's 
exercise : u Miss Lyon said that she wished to stay 
away from us, that she might have an uninterrupted 
opportunity to think of ^^ present religious state of 
the family. It was a ~elief to her feelings that she 
was not saying any thing to us that would harden our 
hearts and prove a savor of death unto death. She 
could pray for us without doing this. But she desired 
to return that she might find others to pray also. She 
could not ask any particular individual to pray, any 
more than when she sought to find the missionary 
teacher, lest she should not ask the right one. If any 
had a heart to pray, she did hope they would do so, 
that we might not separate from one another without a 
rich blessing. In the ordinary course of events, the 
first of the year is the period for fixing impressions, — 

16 



Hosted by 



Google 



182 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

then is the precious revival season, if at all, usually ; 
and the summer term the time to stamp the last im- 
press for eternity to many. That is the sifting time ; 
the chaff is separated from the wheat; Christians 
are built up ; and those who are not Christians yield to 
the temptations which then abound.'' 

In the afternoon general exercise, she left the ordi- 
nary class of topics, and spoke upon religious sorrow. 
She said : " We know that ftiere is a connection be- 
tween religious sorrow and spiritual blessings, though 
we know not why it is. If there were no need of the 
blessing, there would be no need of the sorrow. But 
the Christian must commence his work in sorrow, and 
it follows him all the way along." 

On Friday morning the 10th, Mrs. P. says : 
" Miss Lyon read the account of Abraham's praying 
for Sodom; compared it to a weight thrown into a 
scale, which would have turned in the wicked city's 
favor if ten righteous persons had been found in it." 
Oh ! how Miss Lyon now watched that suspended 
scale ; and prayer after prayer was cast in till the bless- 
ing came most richly. The Sabbath was a day of in- 
terest, and when Miss Lyon invited those who had in- 
dulged hope since the commencement of the school- 
year to meet her, fourteen came together. She rejoiced 
over them, but the burden of her cry was for those out 
of the ark of safety ; and the first time she met her 



Hosted by 



Google 



SIXTH TO TEE TENTH YEAR. 183 

pupils after the Sabbath, it was to speak of Christ sor- 
rowing and praying. Christians felt, as they listened to 
her, that they were almost strangers to sympathy with 
Christ in his sorrow for a world. They went away to 
pray more. Miss Lyon was now partially laid aside 
from labor, but it was to pray ; and though suffering 
she still met the anxious every day. 

The results of the work of grace which followed are 
given in the following letter to Mrs. Banister : — 

"April 13, 1843. 

" I hoped I should have quite a large part of this 
sheet to tell you what the Lord hath wrought for us 
since I last wrote you. I believe, just at the time 
that I sent my last letter, a cloud of mercy was gath- 
ering over our heads, and a few drops had fallen 
upon us. The cloud had so long been gathering, and 
so gently, that we scarcely knew it ; but soon the 
windows of heaven were opened, and the blessing 
descended, so that there was scarcely room in our 
minds or hearts to receive it. When I returned 
from Boston, there were a few more than fifty with- 
out hope. In about three weeks, all but six expressed 
some hope that they had found the Saviour ; in a 
single week of this time, more than thirty of the 
number. 

"In all my privileged experience connected with 
the work of the Spirit, this, I think, has been of un- 



Hosted by 



Google 



184 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

paralleled rapidity ; and yet I have never witnessed 
more quietness and stillness than in its progress, or 
any less of what some call reaction to be watched 
against in the result. It has seemed like a sudden, 
powerful shower bursting upon us, but descending with 
so much gentleness that not a leaf or twig among the 
tender plants is turned out of its place, and then so 
suddenly giving way to the beautiful sun and refresh- 
ing dews. But, as teachers, we have a great work 
to cherish these tender plants. Shall we not have 
your prayers ? Oh, to follow Christ in the work of 
cherishing them is what I want ! This desire enters 
almost daily into the very depths of my soul with an 
untold and unwonted strength." 

The effects of this revival of 1843 were very marked 
upon Christians. Some choice spirits went forth to 
bless the world, and there were many who then re- 
ceived a quickening, which led them to labor most 
faithfully in the seminary that year and while they 
were connected with it. An account of a prayer-meet- 
ing, written by one of the young ladies at the time, 
shows something of their feelings. It occurred near 
the close of the year, and was a meeting at which 
teachers were not usually present. She says: u In 
our little Sabbath morning circle Miss Lyon said much 
of the importance and privilege of having that well of 



Hosted by 



Google 



SIXTH TO TEE TENTH YEAH. 185 

Water within us, of which Jesus spake, springing up 
into eternal life. 4 We ought to attain to that standard 
of piety set before us in' the gospel, and ever be en- 
abled to say : " I will do either this or that, whichever 
may seem most likely to promote God's glory.' ' We 
may be called to honor him by patient suffering, or in 
some prominent station, or in some humble, obscure sta- 
tion. But we may have that state of mind in which 
our first thought in making any change of circum- 
stances will be, not will it promote my own happiness, 
(God can make any situation happy), but will it be 
most for God's glory ? ' The minds of all the circle 
seemed to have been directed to the attainment of a 
high degree of holiness, and Miss Lyon remarked that 
there might be some design of Providence in thus 
directing our thoughts. And she added : i It is a 
means of grace to be accustomed to seek and watch the 
guidance of Providence.' " 

About thirty-five became Christians during this 
year, and there was a delightful state of religious inter- 
est to the close. 

The next year, that of 1844-5, by some mistake 
too many were received, — the house was crowded. 
There was much external prosperity, but only about 
twelve hopeful conversions. Much prayer was offered 
for those out of Christ.* One of the teachers in re- 
viewing the year has said : u It was not answered in 

16* 



Hosted by 



Google 



186 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

the conversion of many of the impenitent, but who 
shall say that it did not avail much ? There were 
blessed restraining influences thrown around us that 
were entirely from God." 

Miss Lyon said of herself, during that year : " My 
sun has already gone beyond the meridian of my use- 
fulness. I feel that my work is almost done. The 
effort of raising my voice teaches me that it can con- 
tinue but a little longer. If I say any thing which will 
lead you to live such a life as you would wish to live, 
to die such a death as you would wish to die, and 
to fit you for such an eternity as you would wish to 
enjoy, treasure it up. It often seems to me, that I am 
giving you my last legacy." 

A teacher wrote the September after the year closed : 
" God was merciful to us ; for though he sent us so 
large a number, they were as a school disposed to do 
right, and to be studious, so that our work was much 
lightened. The year has been a very pleasant one. 
We have lacked but one thing, the presence of the 
Holy Spirit by his converting influences. The blessed 
effects upon the few who felt his power only made us 
feel our need the more. It was sad to see so many 
go away without the love of Christ in their heart. 
May the Spirit of God follow them ! Oh, what a 
work it is to watch for souls, — to feel that one is ex- 
erting an influence upon them for eternity ! I think I 



Hosted by 



Google 



SIXTH TO THE TENTH YEAR. 187 

do desire to do the will of God, — to be found in just the 
place, and doing just what he appoints. But I can do 
nothing without the blessing of God. May a rich 
blessing from him rest upon our school the coming 
year. If we can have that, it will be enough, what- 
ever else may betide." 

Those teachers were observing a concert of prayer 
during all their long vacation, and asking, to use the 
words of one of their number, " if they might be 
counted worthy to once more point souls to Christ." 
Watching and praying, there came a blessing. The 
school year opened, and, as early as the first week, the 
special presence of the Holy Spirit was manifest in the 
conversion of one of the pupils. During the first term 
twenty indulged the Christian hope, and about the 
same number later in the year. 

Soon after the close of this year, two of the teachers, 
Mrs. Howland and Mrs. Webb, left the country for 
India ; another, Mrs. Pitkin, entered the home mission- 
ary field, and several of the pupils were about to en- 
gage in the same work. After mentioning these facts 
to her missionary friend in Persia, one of the teachers 
writes : " Do you not think that dear Miss Lyon's 
heart glows with sacred joy to bring to the altar so 
valuable missionary offerings? Her cup of joy was 
almost full, when for two successive years our contri- 
butions amounted to more than one thousand dollars ; 



Hosted by 



Google 



188 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

but how much more she rejoices to bring her loved and 
efficient daughters and give them to the work ! " 

Before twelve months had passed, Miss Lyon was 
called to make another offering, which touched her 
heart as no other one had done, and required a large 
measure of faith and resignation. When the school 
came together in 1846^ the places of three of the teach- 
ers of the previous year were occupied by strangers. 
Mrs. Burgess and Mrs. Hazen were on their way to 
India, and Mrs. Lord was soon to leave her native 
land for China. One of these had, for years, stood by 
Miss Lyon as associate principal, and was considered as 
almost necessary to the existence of the school, and the 
others could not easily be spared. Miss Lyon was 
cheerful in all these changes, but when she told the 
school of Miss Moore's (Mrs. Burgess) proposal to 
leave her, she could only compose herself by asking the 
young ladies to sing, " God moves in a mysterious 
way." 

She wrote Mrs. Banister the following November : 
u I have passed through many scenes, the last year, of 
deep and tender interest to me, concentrating the feel- 
ings of many years into one, and obviously increasing 
my gray hairs. I feel the loss of my two nieces 
socially more than in our business, though both were 
very important to the school. " 

We here give a few sentences from her letters to 



Hosted by 



Google 



SIXTH TO TEE TENTH YEAR. 189 

Mrs. Burgess, in India, which show with what warm 
affection she followed her friends to their distant homes. 

" May 10th, 1847. — Your first letter arrived Satur- 
day evening. I have read it twice with tears and ten- 
der interest. There is something peculiar in the feel- 
ing of receiving the first. Mr. Condit was here to- 
day. I told him that I would lend it to him, though I 
did not expect to lend the original to but very few, 
because I wish to keep it just as long as I live. I ex- 
pect to read it many times when I am musing alone. 
Your interest in remembering me is a great personal 
comfort, but not so important a duty for you as many 
that will have a claim upon you in your new home. 
As I read your letter, I thought you might like to 
spell out my blind penmanship now and then, if I 
should write nothing more than the little things which 
should occur to me from day to day. So I have begun 
this sheet, and shall add a little from time to time till 
it is full. 

"It is now vacation. A few days before it com- 
menced, Miss Whitman was called to attend the funeral 
of her brother's wife. All the other teachers were wish- 
ing to go away, and all who have rendered any aid in 
the care of the domestic department would like to go, too. 
So I said at once, go. Here I am, lord of all I sur- 
vey, and the undoubted mistress of all the departments 
in the establishment. But we have the best family of 



Hosted by 



Google 



190 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

nearly fifty which could be had. So a kind Provi- 
dence, which tempers the breeze to the shorn lamb, 
takes care of me. But I must bid you good-night and 
go away to sleep. May guardian angels ever watch 
around your pillow ! 

" May 21. — We have had a very pleasant vacation, 
though I have been exceedingly busy. I had consid- 
erable done in the line of the work of masons and car- 
penters, so that I can have more time for rest and 
journeying in the autumn. One afternoon, I invited 
the young ladies to a sewing party to repair our 
church-cushions. As we had no apples, we had 
oranges and raisins. For amusement, we gave each 
an opportunity, taking them in order by States, to give 
some account of their family. Last my turn came. 
In my account, I told them of my three nephews, that 
I expect soon to visit me. . . When I write to you 
and receive your letters, I can not feel that I shall 
never see you again. But it is but a little, short way 
to heaven, — short to both of us, and sure, I hope. 

" June 15. — I was going to add another sheet to 
this, but as the journal is going this morning, I will 
send it as it is. My health all the first part of the 
year was very far from being good. I suppose I am 
in danger, — my lungs especially. My excitement 
about giving up you and Lucy might have done some- 
thing to lay the foundation. But I have not had the 



Hosted by 



Google 



SIXTH TO THE TENTH YEAR. 191 

least regret that you have gone, though my heart 
clings to you with fond and increasing interest. You 
remember I was not in good health last summer. I 
can now bear more than I could a year ago. May 
that life be given to God." 

At an earlier date she says : " I have many things 
to make me remember that my home is not a per- 
manent one here. Last year how many of my kin- 
dred were around me ! Now all are away save one. 
But I have no regret. I am altogether reconciled to 
both your and Lucy's going. The remembrance of 
the years you both spent with me is precious. The 
communion with your hearts is still precious, and 
especially our meeting around the mercy-seat." 

Before Miss Moore left the seminary, Miss Lyon 
wrote as follows to Miss Fiske, in Persia : " You sympa- 
thize in all the things which are passing among us, and 
especially in those events which relate to the missionary 
cause. I know that some of your kind friends will be 
sure to tell you that Miss Moore is really going. It will 
surprise you, as it has many here. The first question 
generally is, — ' What does Miss Lyon think of it ? ' 
I have nothing to say in all these things, only to ask 
that the will of the Lord may be done, and to submit to 
all the dispensations of Providence, whether with or 
without means to carry out our plans. This is certainly 
a great event to us, especially to me. My only wish 



Hosted by 



Google 



192 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

concerning it is, that it may be for the furtherance of 
the gospel. We know so little of the great plans of 
God, that it is wisest and safest and sweetest to leave 
all with him." 

Miss Lyon did leave all with him, though at the 
commencement of the school year in October every 
thing in regard to the seminary looked very dark. 
She was herself laid aside by ill-health. Miss Moore 
was absent, and Miss Whitman's heart sank within 
her, as she looked upon the burden of responsibility 
thus rolled upon her ; but she, too, could look upward, 
assured that might would be increased to one that had 
no strength. He in whom they trusted did not disap- 
point them. Miss Lyon was able to speak to the school 
but few times during the first term. Rev. Mr. Hawks 
conducted the daily morning exercises, and Rev. Mr. 
Condit, the pastor of the church in the village, with his 
usual readiness to aid, came into the seminary, and 
attended a meeting on Thursday evening, for several 
weeks, embracing the whole school. The labors of 
these gentlemen were very acceptable to the young 
ladies, and were much blessed. When the religious 
interest commenced, there were ninety not Christians 
in the family ; sixty of these had just entered the in- 
stitution, and thirty had been under Miss Lyon's in- 
struction, some for one and others for two years. The 
coming of the Spirit was like a rushing, mighty wind. 



Hosted by 



Google 



SIXTH TO THE TENTH YEARS. 193 

At the first meeting for inquirers, which was held the 
second week in December, nineteen were present. In 
a few days, the interest became so deep and general 
that it seemed impossible to give the usual attention to 
lessons, and a day was set apart for fasting and prayer. 
In less than two weeks sixty were rejoicing in a newly- 
found Saviour. A band of youthful Christians from the 
middle class were particularly zealous in their prayers 
and efforts for their impenitent companions ; and their 
labors were not in vain. Miss Lyon lived but two 
years after this revival, always to keep fresh the mem- 
ory of " that precious middle class." 

About this time, a teacher of much promise was 
obliged to leave, on account of failing health ; and 
after passing a few weeks with her friends, she entered 
the mansions above. Miss Lyon had anticipated much 
from her, and mourned her early death ; but, with her 
usual spirit of submission, she said : " I feel that it is 
a blessed privilege to fit dear ones for heaven ; " and 
added, while the tears coursed down her cheeks : "I 
thank God that I have not yet heard of the death of 
any pupil of this beloved seminary without hope in 
Jesus. If any have thus died, I have been spared the 
trial of hearing of it." 

The second term found Miss Lyon's health im- 
proved ; but still she was not able to take the entire 
charge of the religious exercises. As she met her 

17 



Hosted by 



Google 



194 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

school January 22, she told them, that while she could 
not speak to them every day, she intended, as her 
strength might permit, to take up " the Christian's duty 
and privilege in regard to the conversion of the world." 
It seemed to her providential that she had been unable 
to take up the subject before ; for now many hearts, 
that would have been, uninterested, would feel very 
differently. 

The year 1846 closed with twenty still wanting the 
Christian hope. 

During the vacation, Miss Lyon was deprived of the 
counsel and society of a long-tried friend by the death 
of Rev. Mr. Condit. He had been the pastor of the 
church in the village during all her residence in South 
Hadley, and had ever stood by her, sympathizing with 
her and giving her aid in her trials and perplexities, 
and participating in her joy in the prosperity of her 
school. She thus speaks of his sickness, in a letter to 
Mrs. Burgess, dated September 10 : u From the sadness 
of my heart I must write you a few lines this evening, 
Our dear Mr. Condit is very near his home in heaven 
You have doubtless been informed of his feeble health 
the summer past. He has not been able to preach, — • 
has been to church but one half day for many months. 
I have seen him twice since my return from New Marl- 
boro'. The king of terrors is approaching with slow 
and gentle step, as if loth to take his prey ; but he 



Hosted by 



Google 



SIXTH TO THE TENTH TEAR. 195 

approaches nearer and nearer. Here I am alone in 
this great building ; no one near to interrupt my grief. 
I love even this solitude for my tears and my prayers 
in his behalf. The years of our acquaintance pass in 
rapid review before my mind. As I dwell on him as 
a friend, a Christian, a counselor,* a pastor, sadness 
spreads a dark pall over my whole soul. And yet it is 
not all sorrow. Heaven seems to be opening her 
gates in waiting readiness to receive another servant of 
Christ, another redeemed soul, another glorified saint 
into its blest abode." 

The year 1847-8 passed pleasantly and prosperously. 
The changes which Miss Moore's departure made nec- 
essary had been effected. Miss Lyon's health had 
improved so that she was able to be in school regularly. 
The influence of the revival of the previous year was 
favorably felt in the consistent lives of the converts ; 
and cases of seriousness among the impenitent early 
occurred. Between fifty and sixty found hope in the 
mercy of Christ during the year ; and Miss Lyon re- 
marked near its close that " the Holy Spirit had never 
tarried so long with them by his converting influences." 
In May of this year Miss Lyon was called to stand by 
the dying bed of one of her pupils and cheer her by 
pointing to Christ as she went down to the dark valley. 
The following letter to Mrs. Porter gives a brief ac- 
count of the circumstances : — 



Hosted by 



Google 



196 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

" South Hadley, May 28, 1848. 
" Now I must tell you of the dealings of our heav- 
enly Father with us. Death has again entered our 

family, and taken home one of the dear lambs of 

* 7 » 

Christ's fold. The attending circumstances relating to 
this world were rather peculiarly trying ; but to an- 
other world they were all consoling, comforting, joyful. 
The dear one was Emily Washburn, daughter of Rev. 
Mr. Washburn, of Suffield, Conn., seventeen years of 
age, a most lovely character and exemplary Christian. 
She was almost the idol of her devoted parents. One 
week ago last Wednesday she attended the recess 
meeting and led in prayer ; and the next Wednesday 
morning, at four o'clock, she entered heaven, as we 
trust. Thus rapid were the ravages of death. Her 
parents were away on a journey. The intelligence 
could not reach them so that they could arrive before 
her death. A particular friend of theirs came on, as 
soon as he learned of her sickness, and stayed and took 
home the remains. They were sent away by railroad 
at twelve o'clock of the same day. From that time 
till Friday noon, I can not tell you how my heart 
trembled, at every ringing of the bell, at the antici- 
pated meeting with the father and mother. Friday 
noon, the mother arrived. She hastened in the public 
conveyance before her husband, as he was with his 
own carriage. God helped me to tell her, and sus- 



Hosted by 



Google 



SIXTH TO THE TENTH YEAR. 197 

tained her under the stroke. I will some time tell you 
of the precious words and last prayer of the dying one. 
"When asked what message she would leave for her 
father and mother, she sa'id : c Tell them that Jesus 
called me, and I could not wait for them ; for Christ 
says, " He that loveth father or mother more than 
me is not worthy of me." ' So grace has again tri- 
umphed over sin, and another redeemed spirit has gone 
home." 

The morning after Miss Washburn's death, Miss 
Lyon's theme, in addressing the school, was the great 
salvation. She spoke of the difficulty she always 
found in communicating any just views on this sub- 
ject, and added : " No one knows how often or how 
greatly I have been bowed down with this burden, so 
that I could only exclaim, ' Oh that God would 
speak ! ' and now he has spoken to us. It is not so 
much a voice of warning addressed to us, as an invita- 
tion ; not a voice from the tomb, but from heaven. 
We have been led very near to heaven ; the very 
gates have been opened, and are now scarcely shut. 
Through them we have been permitted to see Jesus. 
He has himself, through one of his members, been 
speaking to us in melting tones of persuasion and love. 
He has given us an impressive lesson on his great sal- 
ration. And now I entreat you, c give heed to the 



Hosted by 



Google 



198 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON, 

things you have heard, lest at any time you should let 
them slip.' " 

Many of the extracts from Miss Lyon's letters show 
with what tender sympathy she entered into the 
feelings of those in affliction. We give here a letter 
from Mrs. Porter, which speaks more fully of this trait 
in her character : " Learning, while in Boston last 
week, that reminiscences of Miss Mary Lyon were 
being recorded, my thoughts have reverted much to the 
thirteen years I was favored with an intimate acquaint- 
ance with this dear, faithful follower of Jesus. 

" Others will speak of her superior powers of mind, 
her intellectual attainments, the Bible type of her 
piety, aptness for imparting instruction, and great busi- 
ness talents ; but my mind dwells more especially on 
the sympathizing qualities of her heart. It is so sel- 
dom these traits are combined with great energy of 
character, a ruling mind, and the designing and ac- 
complishing plans of magnitude, that it was the impres- 
sion of many, not intimately acquainted with Miss 
Lyon, that she might be deficient in gentleness and 
appreciation of the sorrows and feebleness of others. 
It is a great mistake. Two years after our first intro- 
duction to Miss Lyon, death was commissioned to 
enter our family and take from us a daughter thirteen 
years of age, — the last of four children. Miss Lyon 
had been much in our family for a year and a half, 



Hosted by 



Google 



SIXTH TO THE TENTH YEAR. 199 

and knew what she was to us. In the large circle of 
relatives and friends who sympathized so deeply with 
us in this sore bereavement, none seemed moro affec- 
tionately, sincerely, softly to come into the depths of 
the sorrows of our stricken hearts, than Miss Lyon. 

" In other cases I have repeatedly witnessed her ten- 
der sympathy. When her beloved pastor, Mr. Condit, 
was borne to the grave, how did her flowing tears 
evince the fountain of grief in her soul ; and how was 
the bereaved widow -cared for, and sympathized with in 
the tender est manner. Once I called with her on an 
aged clergyman, with whom she was but slightly ac- 
quainted, who had recently buried a lovely daughter 
on whom he leaned much for support. The readiness 
with which she entered into his sorrows, and sought to 
direct his mind to sources of consolation, impressed my 
mind deeply, as I knew that just at that time she 
was unusually burdened with cares and perplexi- 
ties relative to her beloved institution. ' Do you not 
think, dear sir,' said she, ' that we should reflect much 
on the goodness of God, that these severe cases of dis- 
cipline and grief are the rare exceptions, and not the 
general experience, of our lives ? Death, I learn, has 
repeatedly entered your family and removed those 
most dear ; but how many years of prosperity have 
passed between those scenes ! Then, and but a little 
while and in a brighter world, all this will be rejoiced 



Hosted by 



Google 



200 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

over, when we see folly that it was all ordered in the 
best time and manner." 

" In no case was sympathy ever expressed because 
circumstances seemed to require it, but to flow forth 
from a full soul, that i mourned with those that 
mourned.' The permanent invalid found in her one 
that could realize how severe the affliction of pro- 
tracted debility and disease, and receive from her 
the most considerate attention and sympathy. What 
watchful care she would uniformly exercise when in 
our family to relieve me of any exertion on her ac- 
count, saying frequently : ' If I can not bear your 
burdens, do let me add to them as little as possible.' 
At times she would gently press in her hands my ach- 
ing head and say : ' I fear you will never have a 
better head on earth, but in heaven the " head will 
be no more sick nor the heart faint." Your kind 
heavenly Father knows just how much it is best you 
should suffer here.' ' 



Hosted by 



Google 



CHAPTER XIV. 

JSkhtwsa smir g*aijj. 

PECLINING HEALTH — HER RELINQUISHMENT OF HOUSE-KEEPING CARES 

— VISIT TO MONSON — SICKNESS AND DEATH OF MISS W. — LAST 
ADDRESS TO HER SCHOOL — HER ILLNESS AND WEAKNESS — VISIT OF 
REV. MR. SWIFT — COMMENCEMENT OF DELIRIUM — HER LAST WORDS 

— DEATH — FUNERAL — PROGRESS OF THE SEMINARY SINCE MISS 
LYON'S DECEASE. 

FROM Miss Lyon's frequent allusions to the shortness 
of life, in her advancing years, it would seem as if 
she realized that the work her Master had for her here 
on the earth was nearly accomplished ; but to her friends 
she appeared to have the prospect of years of useful- 
ness before her. With the exception of a little deaf- 
ness, the hand of time rested lightly upon her, and she 
entered with as much life and energy into whatever 
was brought before her as in her younger years. As 
the house-keeping department w T as a peculiar feature 
in her institution, she desired to make the conveniences 
for it as complete as possible. This led her repeated- 
ly to alter the arrangements of the domestic hall, and 
so frequently had it been done that it had become a 

(201) 



Hosted by 



Google 



202 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

subject of remark with some of her friends. During 
the vacation in the months of August and September 
of 1848, the workmen were kept very busy in that 
room, and it was essentially remodeled. 

When her teachers returned, at the commencement 
of the school year, Miss Lyon took them down to the 
room, one after another, and showed them what had 
been done. After explaining the reasons for her alter- 
ations, she said : " These arrangements are now as 
perfect as I can make them. I shall never change 
them again. My time and strength are now to be 
given more fully to the literary department." 

She gave over the house-keeping cares as she had 
never before done, and professedly turned her atten- 
tion to the studies of her pupils ; but in reality their 
spiritual interests occupied the larger portion of her 
thoughts. Miss Whitman's failing health compelled 
her to seek rest soon after the school was organized, 
and, with only the younger teachers to aid her, an 
unusual burden of care rested upon Miss Lyon ; but 
strength was given her to meet it. Her health was 
good, and never did she manifest more enthusiasm in 
her plans for the improvement of her pupils, never did 
she present truth with more life and power, never with 
more unction and pathos than during this winter. 
She noticed this increased vigor, and one day said to 
some of her teachers : " I don't know why it is that 



Hosted by 



Google 



SICKNESS AND DEATH. 203 

my mind is so active. It sometimes seems to me that 
I am doing my last work." 

At the close of the first term, she went to Monson 
to spend the vacation of two weeks with Mr. and 
Mrs. Porter. Of this visit, Mrs. Porter gives the 
following interesting account : — 

" When at the seminary on the Thanksgiving occa- 
sion previous to her death, I said to Miss Lyon : ' You 
know an invitation to spend your vacations with us is 
stereotyped ; may we not expect you in the winter 
vacation ? ' She replied : ' I think I shall come previ- 
ous to vacation, and rest, for circles are so broken up 
then, that it is more difficult getting along than in the 
term time.' She came, however, in that vacation ; and, 
the first evening after she arrived, she told me, ' that 
what decided her to come after concluding she should 
remain at the seminary during vacation was, she had 
never felt the responsibility of giving religious instruc- 
tion as this winter. Oh, when I come before those 
young immortals to teach them eternal truths, I am 
borne down with a sense of its importance as never 
before, and I wanted to come to my resting-home ' (as 
she was wont to call our house), ' where, in that quiet 
chamber, I could seek anew for wisdom, grace, and 
strength for the great work.' 

" The teachers, she said, were very urgent she 



Hosted by 



Google 



204 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

should go to New York to sit for her portrait, — so 
much so, that she was reluctant not to comply with 
their kind request, and accept of their generous offer 
to bear all the expense. ' But to me,' she added, ' it 
seemed of so little consequence to have my picture 
taken, compared with seeking a better preparation for 
my important duties, that I could not comply.' 

" Every thing in her conversation and appearance 
indicated a ' fresh anointing.' All business with re- 
gard to the seminary was laid aside. Previously, she 
had invariably come with account books, and a list of 
various items of business to consult Mr. Porter about ; 
and, as soon as he came in, business was the theme. 
Now she introduced no subject of business but twice 
during her stay, and one of those times said but a few 
words. 

" Mr. Porter said to me on Sabbath eve (she came 
the Friday previous), c Does not Miss Lyon seem 
unusually spiritual ? ' I replied, ' I think so, evident- 
ly ; I never saw her so heavenly-minded.' Little did 
I then think she was pluming her wings for her up- 
ward flight. She appeared as well as I ever saw her, 
and repeatedly spoke with gratitude of her excellent 
health. At our dinner-table, a day or two previous to 
her leaving, she remarked, playfully, ' Mr. Porter, you 
and Mrs. Porter have been afraid I should break clown 
at the seminary, but ' (dropping her knife and fork, 



Hosted by 



Google 



SICKNESS AND DEATH, 205 

and straightening up), ' Do you not think I am in pretty- 
good trim ? I have an excellent appetite ; I sleep, like 
a child, and have none of that chilliness I have had 
when rather exhausted with my labors. I feel quite 
vigorous.' We both told her we thought we had not 
seen her better, and the conclusion of us all was, that 
she had as good a prospect of physical ability to labor 
on at the seminary for ten years to come as for the 
past ten years. 

" When she left us, I felt, more than ever before, 
that it was a rare privilege to enjoy her personal 
friendship, and have her so frequently an inmate of 
our family. Ever since my first acquaintance with 
Miss Lyon, I had thought I had never seen the 
blessed principles and precepts of the gospel of Christ 
so strikingly exemplified in any of his professed follow- 
ers. But on account of her active business habits, and 
constantly planning for improvements in her beloved 
seminary, I had not seen exhibited that contemplative, 
devotional state of mind which was developed in this 
visit. There was evinced an absorbing love to the 
Lord Jesus ; Christ was her theme, and the privilege 
of laboring for him, and making sacrifices for his cause, 
dwelt on much. I think I have never witnessed a 
nearer approach to the mercy-seat than was apparent 
in social prayer just before leaving. It was almost the 
last sound of her voice I ever heard," 
18 



Hosted by 



Google 



206 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

While thus seeking after intimate communion with 
her Saviour, and new views of his love, that she might 
be more successful in her efforts to win sinners to his 
fold, she was putting her house in order, and preparing 
to enter into fullness of joy and blessedness with him. 
Three weeks after the school assembled for the second 
term of the year, Miss W., a pupil from Ware, N. H., 
died under trying circumstances. She had been con- 
fined to her room for a few days by influenza, then 
quite prevalent in school, but had so far recovered as 
to be able to go out to her recitations, when her sick- 
ness returned, assuming the form of malignant erysipe- 
las. The disease made rapid progress, so that Miss 
Lyon had only just learned that her pupil was again 
sick, when it was told her that she could, probably, 
live but a short time. 

Miss Lyon was suffering at the time from influenza 
and a severe nervous headache, and was in the right 
state to feel most keenly the trying nature of her posi- 
tion. She hastened to the bedside of her dying pupil, 
regardless of exposure to her disease ; spoke words of 
comfort to her, and bent over her to catch, if possible, 
her replies. Then the painful intelligence must be 
communicated to Miss W.'s parents who had not as 
yet heard of her first illness. The next day was the 
last Thursday in February, — the fast for literary in- 
stitutions ; a day that had been looked forward to with 



Hosted by 



Google 



SICKNESS AND DEATH. 207 

earnest solicitude that it might be blessed to the fam- 
ily. With these anxieties upon her mind, Miss Lyon 
passed a sleepless night, and was able to say but a few 
words to her school on Thursday. 

On Friday she was better. Miss W. still lin- 
gered in an unconscious state ; but there was much ex- 
citement among the pupils from the sudden approach 
of death, and the fearful disease that had appeared in 
the midst of them. Miss Lyon met her school both 
morning and afternoon, and spoke to them her last 
precious words, — words which seemed at the time to 
come from one upon whom the beams of heavenly 
light were already shining. She entreated her pupils 
with great earnestness to turn their thoughts from 
the things about them, and follow the dying one up to 
the u celestial city, and, as its pearly gates opened to 
receive her, look in and catch a glimpse of its glories." 
With a rapture not of earth she exclaimed : " Oh, if it 
were I, how happy I should be to go ! " but added : 
" Not that I would be unclothed while I can do any 
thing for you, my dear children." She spoke to the 
impenitent in an impressive manner, saying, with great 
tenderness : " If one of you were on that dying bed, I 
could not take your hand and go with you down to 
that world of despair. It would be too painful for me. 
I should feel that I must draw the veil and leave you." 
She besought them to make the Saviour their friend at 



Hosted by 



Google 



208 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

once, not because they feared death, but because he is 
a being of such infinite perfection. 

She read passages from the Bible, which speak of the 
fear of God, and remarked upon them. She looked 
upon all anxiety about the future as distrust of our kind 
heavenly Father, and asked : " Shall we fear what he 
is about to do ? " adding, with great emphasis : " There 
is nothing in the universe that I fear, but that I shall 
not -know all my duty, or shall fail to do it." 

That evening, which was the last time she met her 
pupils for family prayers, she read 2 Corinthians v. 
She went from the table very soon to meet the sorrow- 
ing father and give him the painful details of his 
daughter's illness, — then to go with him to that daugh- 
ter's side, and see the happy look of recognition and 
unsuccessful effort to speak. Before midnight the spirit 
had entered the realms of bliss. Miss Lyon had ear- 
nestly desired that the father might arrive while his 
child was yet living, and now said she was " so 
filled with gratitude to God for his goodness in this 
respect that she could not rest." 

She again passed a sleepless night, and met her 
school at five o'clock in the morning, when they gath- 
ered for prayers, before the remains of their companion 
should be taken away. This was the last time her 
voice was heard in the school-room. She then read the 
hymn commencing — 



Hosted by 



Google 



SICKNESS AND DEATH. 209 

" Why do we mourn departed friends," 

saying that it was the best expression she could give of 
her feelings. 

She spent Saturday quietly in her room, sleeping 
much of the time, and at evening appeared refreshed ; 
but the mail brought her the sad intelligence of the 
death of a nephew by suicide, without leaving evidence 
of his being a Christian. This was an overwhelming 
blow to her, and the night was one of deep sorrow and 
anguish. On Sabbath morning she was so much worse 
that she could not sit up, and medical advice was 
sought. She was very much prostrated, and could 
make little mental effort, but she desired the friends 
who sat with her through the day to read very slowly 
hymns or passages of Scripture, stopping at the end of 
each line, that she might repeat it and so take in the 
meanings Many hours were spent in thus reading the 
Psalms or the precious hymns in the book entitled 
" Songs in the Night." When any thing of special 
interest to her occurred, she would repeat it several 
times. 

Monday morning found her still worse, and it was 
evident to the anxious friends watching by her side 
that the dreaded erysipelas had fastened itself upon 
her. It was not of the malignant type, but her 
peculiar temperament, her constitution, her past labors, 

18* 



Hosted by 



Google 



210 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

and the nervous excitement from which she was suffer- 
ing when taken, made the case one of great danger. 
This she fully realized, but it caused her no anxiety. 
Giving up her solicitude for her family, she occupied 
herself as she was able with thoughts of her prepara- 
tion for what might be before her. She desired that 
there might be no more change in her attendants than 
was necessary ; that only those should be allowed to 
come into her room who had the care of her ; and, 
prompted by a natural aversion to being gazed upon 
from curiosity, added that it would distress her ex- 
ceedingly, at any time, to look up and see several per- 
sons standing in the doorway or about the room, 
though they might be very dear friends. At one time, 
she desired pencil and paper to be brought, that she 
might dictate some of her thoughts in regard to the 
school, should she not recover ; at another, to leave some 
message for a nephew in whom she had felt a deep inter- 
est ; but in both cases was so overpowered by her disease 
as to be able to give but one sentence. She was peace- 
ful and happy, often repeating, " The will of the Lord 
be done : I desire to be spared only to labor for him." 

On Tuesday afternoon, Rev. Mr. and Mrs. Swift, of 
Northampton, called to see her, at her request. After a 
little conversation with him, she desired Mr. Swift to 
read a short portion of Scripture, a few words at a 
time, allowing her to repeat after him, and pray. 



Hosted by 



Google 



SICKNESS AND DEATH. 211 

When Mrs. Swift went to her bedside, she grasped her 
hand and said : " It is good to look at you." She 
spoke of her sufferings, and remarked that the physi- 
cians hoped for a favorable issue, but it was doubtful ; 
and added that the crisis was near, and if the result 
was unfavorable, she had very little time left in which 
she should be able to think. " Now," said she, " I 
want to tell you how it is, that you may then pray for 
me. If I ever get to heaven, it will be the greatest 
miracle of grace. I am so unworthy, — so unworthy" 
And then, brightening up, she said : "I rejoice to 
be unworthy, and to owe it all to the atoning blood of 
Jesus Christ." She might have said more, but much 
was depending upon her being kept very quiet, and it 
was not thought best to tempt her to tax her strength 
further. After Mrs. Swift had repeatedly expressed 
the fear that she would weary herself, she said: 
" Well, I will not finish the sentence," and bade her 
good-by. 

A few hours more, and delirium came on. The 
force of the disease which had prostrated her seemed 
to be subsiding on Thursday morning ; but the ex- 
citement of the brain increased, and congestion fol- 
lowed. The three ensuing days were very painful 
ones, not only to the sufferer, but to those about hei. 
Sabbath afternoon she became quiet, and passed the 
time mostly in an unconscious state. At one time she 



Hosted by 



Google 



212 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

called her nurse to her side, and with a pleasant smile 
said to her: u So happy, so happy!" but was im- 
mediately wandering again. 

At another time she said, in a lucid moment, " I 
should love to come back and watch over this sem- 
inary. But God will take care of it." 

On Monday morning, as a friend entered her room, 
she greeted her with a sweet smile. On being asked 
how she did, she replied : " Oh, I am so happy ! I 
am the happiest of the happy. I only wish I could 
find words to express my happiness. " 

Monday evening, Mr. Laurie, her pastor, came in to 
see her. His voice seemed to recall her to conscious- 
ness for a little time. He said to her : " Christ 
precious ? " She summoned all her energies to make 
one great effort, raised both hands, clinched them, lifted 
her head from her pillow, and exclaimed audibly and 
with emphasis, " Yes." This was the last word she 
uttered. Short passages of Scripture were repeated, 
and her countenance showed that she understood and 
appreciated them. Those which related to the glory 
of God seemed to interest her most. She repeatedly 
made an effort to speak, but without success. Seeing 
this, Mr. Laurie said to her : " You need not speak ; 
God can be glorified in silence." An indescribable 
smile came over her countenance in reply, giving her 
friends very precious assurance that she was leaning on 



Hosted by 



Google 



SICKNESS AND DEATH. 213 

the arm of the Beloved as she passed through the dark 
valley. An hour after, she had reached the blissful 
shore, — had joined the company of the redeemed, and 
been introduced amid the glories which she had so 
ardently longed to behold. 

Thus Mary Lyon was not ; for her God had taken 
her to himself, even as he did Moses, before her eye 
was dim or her natural force abated. It had not gone 
so ill with her at Meribah but that she could enter the 
promised land ; and she rests in the inheritance prom- 
ised her in the holy mount. 

The funeral was attended the following Thursday. 
Rev. Mr. Laurie conducted the services at the semi- 
nary. Rev. Dr. Humphrey preached a sermon in the 
church from the texts : " The path of the just is as 
the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the 
perfect day ; " " The memory of the just is blessed." 
Rev. Mr. Harris and Rev. Mr. Swift also took part in 
the exercises. At the grave, the school sung the 
hymn commencing, "Sister, thou wast mild and 
lovely." 

Her remains rest in a little enclosure upon the sem- 
inary grounds ; and the spot is marked by a simple, 
massive monument of Italian marble. 

It had been repeatedly said that if Miss Lyon 
should be removed, the institution she had founded 
must change its character ; and it did seem, for a time, 



Hosted by 



Google 



214 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

to those bereaved teachers that they could not go on 
without her upon whose counsel they had leaned so 
implicitly. The Lord helped them. If ever his 
strength was made perfect in weakness, it was during 
the months that followed March 5th, 1849. The ex- 
citement in school was calmed, severe disease was 
stayed, and the Holy Spirit was with them by his re- 
straining, as well as converting, influences. Though 
in a few weeks they saw another of their band called 
suddenly to lay down her armor and enter upon her 
reward, yet blessings were multiplied unto them. At 
the end of the year they could only lift up their hearts 
in thankfulness and praise, in review of the way they 
had been led. 

That summer was a pledge of what the Lord pur- 
posed still to do for the institution consecrated to him 
so entirely and heartily by its founder. Nearly six- 
teen years have passed since she finished life's conflict ; 
but his hand has ever been over it for good. To-day 
finds it carrying out the principles upon which it was 
established, as prosperously as when she left it, and 
with a larger number of pupils. It is no longer 
looked upon as an experiment and with suspicion ; but 
it has a name and an important place among the edu- 
cational institutions of our land. Two seminaries es- 
tablished in Ohio upon similar principles are under 
the direction of Holyoke graduates, and are very pros- 



Hosted by 



Google 



SICKNESS AND DEATH. 215 

perous. The girls' school in Oroomiah is also a daugh- 
ter of Mount Holyoke. And many of our degraded 
sisters in that distant land will bless God through all 
eternity for Mary Lyon, the instructor of their own 
teachers, Miss Fiske and Miss Rice. 

In July, 1862, occurred the twenty-fifth anniver- 
sary of the school ; and, in commemoration of it, the 
graduates were all invited to be present. Many of 
them were able to accept the invitation and join in a 
glad reunion, in which some of Miss Lyons' friends, 
who had aided her in her enterprise, united. That 
was a day of thrilling interest, on w T hich classmates 
and friends long separated met and reviewed the way 
in which they had been led, thanked God for the 
blessings bestowed upon their loved seminary home, 
and pledged anew their prayerful remembrance of it 
and of each other. 



Hosted by 



Google 



Hosted by 



Google 



SELECTIONS 



MISS LYON'S INSTRUCTIONS. 



Hosted by 



Google 



Hosted by 



Google 



SELECTIONS. 



MORNING EXERCISES. 
(See page 105.) 

T. 

"Thy will be done." 

We are so constituted that we have strong desires. 
We would not have it otherwise. But we would have 
our desires lost in God's will. Parents often speak of 
a child's possessing a strong will as a very great calam- 
ity. It is certainly a calamity to have an unsubdued 
will, but a blessing to have strong desires yielded to a 
higher and holier will. The yielding of the will to the 
parent or teacher is often the schoolmaster that leads 
to Christ. Thank God if you have learned to submit 
your will to that of your parents. You have had but 
little occasion to practise submission now, but I trust 
you will treasure up this passage of Scripture in your 
hearts and practise it all your lives. You will often be 
called to yield your will where you least expected it, 
and perhaps to those to whom you would not naturally 
yield it. This is often true in the family relations. 
Unhappiness in domestic circles might almost always 
be avoided, if there were only those found to say from 
the heart, " Not my will, but thine be done." 

219 



Hosted by 



Google 



220 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

We may, perhaps, be submissive to the will of God 
in great events, where we can see his hand, but when 
his will is made known through the agency of man, find 
ourselves unsubmissive. This should not be so. His 
providence makes known his will, and not his audible 
voice. All that is sent upon you is at his bidding, and 
he stands ready to help you to know no will but his. 
We may become like little children, willing to be led 
iust where God would have us go. When we find our- 
selves ready to give up even lawful pleasures and 
possessions, how happy is our life! When we can 
relinquish health and friends and our smile not be dis- 
turbed, how much we enjoy them ! I think our feelings 
are somewhat like those of Abraham and Sarah when 
Isaac was given back to them from Moriah. It is a 
blessed life to be conscious of doing all we do because 
God would have it done, and feeling that all we possess 
is his, and if taken from us will still be found in safe- 
keeping. 

H. 

Sowing to the Spirit and to the Flesh. 

He who sows to the Spirit and denies himself will 
have an increase of happiness and great spiritual 
growth, while those who sow to the flesh, loving self, 
reap only corruption. The most wretched beings in 
this world are those who think only of themselves, 
having no interest in others. How many do we see 
around us seeking for ease, honor, pleasure, or improve- 
ment, just to gratify self. If their object is attained 
there comes little of happiness with it, because all is 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORNING EXERCISES. 221 

expended upon self. We ought to turn the current of 
feeling toward others. Let it flow out in a thousand 
streams. How much happier you will be to live in a 
thousand than to live in yourself alone. The throwing 
out of your whole soul in powerful, disinterested, vig- 
orous action for others, no matter how self-denying, 
will make you to receive a hundred-fold even in this 
life. It is our duty to exhibit to the universe a being 
enjoying all the happiness for which we were created. 
How is this to be done? By a forgetfulness of self, 
and devotion of thought, time, feeling, and money to 
the interests of others. Thus there will be a constantly- 
increasing inward realization of real happiness. No 
one, let him do all he can for others, can make the 
sacrifice that Christ has made for us. His natural life 
was as dear to him as any one's, but he gave it all for 
the good of others. Selfishness contains within itself 
a canker-worm. Loving self supremely continually 
disappoints. 

Selfishness is our greatest enemy. We may be in 
danger of following the advice of friends who would 
lead us to practise less self-denial. I should be afraid 
to dissuade any one from exercising self-denial. If a 
sister or a friend is inclined to give up some article of 
dress, that she may give more to a benevolent object, 
although she may scarcely meet your ideas of respecta- 
bility without it, do nothing to change her inclination. 
If one has or has not a desire to practise self-denial, do 
nothing which may prevent the exercise of it. The act 
brings a rich reward, the most blessed recompense that 
can be asked. 

When in doubt which of two courses to take, follow 



Hosted by 



Google 



222 KECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

that which involves most self-denial. You will then 
find yourself in the safer and happier path, and walk- 
ing with Him who denied himself for our sakes. 

We are told many times in the Bible that we are not 
to seek our own ease — that our life does not consist 
in the abundance of the things we possess. We are 
taught to renounce self. We should first give our- 
selves to Christ, and then seek, like him, to do good to 
all about us. He was never seeking a place where to 
live, but a place where he could deny himself for 
others, 

m. 

Study of the Scriptures. 

Always have a plan for studying the Scriptures. 
Make a plan that you will like to follow for years. 
Seek to give at least two hours of every Sabbath to the 
careful study of the Scriptures. Read the Bible in 
course. There is an advantage in this, especially for 
those who are weighed down with cares, or literary 
pursuits, or those whose minds are undisciplined. Dis- 
inclination to reading is thus overcome. How little we 
read our Bibles ! Might we not find time to read some 
chapters more every day ? Let us think for a moment 
how we should feel, if a voice from heaven should tell 
us that we could never open a Bible again. 

It is a duty to commit Scripture to memory, and have 
a plan for self-teaching. Commit passages that inter- 
est you, and commit them perfectly. Do not mutilate 
them. If you have committed them well, when you 
teach a child, repeat Scripture to a sick person, or 
pray, it will flow forth easily and be just what is 
needed. 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORNIXG EXERCISES. 223 

Bible language is the best body for Bible thoughts. 
* There is a beauty and strength in Scripture language 
that is found nowhere else. Shakespeare is not worthy 
of a place by its side. Treasure the words and the 
truths of the Bible. Make 'these truths the subject of 
frequent meditation. We can not depend on the strong- 
est resolutions, or the impulses of immediate feeling ; 
we must be guided by the truth. How much we may 
accomplish in fifteen years in studying the Bible ! It 
is an inexhaustible mine, and most precious diamonds 
are found in it, after we think all the gems are dug 
out. The historical portions reward long-continued 
and oft-repeated study. We can hardly give too much 
time to the history of the Israelitish nation. There are 
three distinct things that we should bear in mind in 
reference to them. They were the recipients of the ora- 
cles of God ; through them the Messiah was to come ; 
they were the foundation of the church. More knowl- 
edge of human nature is to be derived from the study 
of the history of the Israelites than from any other 
source. If we would learn of God, let us read that 
history. If we would know ourselves, we shall find 
our hearts well portrayed in it. 

When you read the Psalms and the Epistles, dwell 
carefully on each word, and pray over every verse. 
Let your soul sometimes delight itself in reading, med- 
itating, and praying at the same time, over your open 
Bible. The sweet pleasure and satisfaction found in 
sitting down alone to read the Bible is evidence of being 
a Christian. How often some verse will come home to 
the heart as nothing else will ! It seems to penetrate 
deeper than any sermon or religious instruction. 



Hosted by 



Google 



224 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

If the Bible may only be allowed to take the lead in 
our schools, I care not how closely the sciences follow, 

TV. 

Our relations to God. 

Our relations to persons and things around us should 
keep us constantly alive to duty. We ought to think 
and reflect upon them, and not go hurriedly from one 
thing to another, because led by others, but, under- 
standing our relations, with resolution and fixedness of 
purpose perform our duty. But our relations to God 
are the most important subjects of study and thought. 
We should consider them very often, for all our other 
relations flow from these. It is really the whole great 
business of life to know and understand our relations 
to God, and to perform the duties arising from those 
relations. How great, how comprehensive, is our work ! 
We have a threefold duty — to receive the truth, to 
believe it, and to obey it. Our minds are so consti- 
tuted that nothing but God can fill them. He is the 
only object suitable and capable of satisfying the im- 
mortal mind. And the mind craves a spiritual satisfy- 
ing, almost as the physical system does food. It is 
the joy of the Christian that God is his Creator, that he 
lives in Him and receives all good from him. How 
full are the Psalms of this feeling! The Christian's 
heaven is being eternally with his God, and in the 
enjoyment of that bliss of which his communings with 
him here are only a foretaste. And his thought of hell 
is only of being banished from the presence of his God 
for ever and ever. 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORNING EXERCISES. 225 

God is the supreme Governor of the world, and every 
thing which takes place in it. Every act as it is per- 
formed, every thought as it passes through the mind, 
every word as it is spoken, is incorporated by God 
into his divine plan of government. Each individual 
is accountable to God for all he does. We ought to be 
solemn, knowing that the least thing we do is not over- 
looked by God. His government extends over the 
universe ; the winds and the waves obey him ; the 
beasts of the fields, the fowls of the air, and the cattle 
upon a thousand hills ; but he has a law for his moral 
beings. This law is full of glory, and it is easy to be 
obeyed by a willing heart and an obedient mind. The 
law of the Lord is perfect. It is so because if changed 
in the least it would be imperfect. The best laws for 
nations, communities, schools, or societies are capable 
of improvement. Not thus with God's law. It is per- 
fect because it treats all alike. He is no respecter of 
persons. Its commands are in agreement with princi- 
ples of our nature. It is one of these principles to honor 
our parents, to love our brothers and sisters. The law 
of God is easy to be obeyed in health, in sickness, in 
strength, in weakness, by the wise, the ignorant, the 
rich, the poor, by all. It is adapted to the wisdom of 
the wisest, to the poverty of the poorest, to all men in 
their various conditions. Of what other law can this 
be affirmed? But no law is perfect without a penalty, 
otherwise it would be only advice, — and no one but 
its divine author can judge what it should be. The 
penalty of God's law is certainly to be inflicted, and 
rewards for keeping it are equally sure and full of 
glory. 



Hosted by 



Google 



226 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

Willing to Live and Labor. 

2 Cor. v. This chapter describes the state of one 
ready to depart and be with Christ, and yet willing to 
live and labor. It presents two great principles of 
action — the terror of the Lord, and the constraining 
love of Christ. However much we may labor and pray 
for souls, remember that Christ died for them. We 
must make effort for the salvation of souls, and that 
effort must be accompanied by an inward desire and 
love for the work. There is an internal feeling, which 
none know but those who have experienced it, that 
prompts to action, and is never tired of the work, 
though one may feel that she can not make the mental 
and physical effort requisite. 

If the citadel of the heart is once taken possession 
of by its rightful sovereign, it can never be retaken by 
Satan. It may be called the internal heart. Some 
expect religion to free them from all their infirmities 
at once. But it will not be so. "We groan in this life, 
being burdened. The evidence that we are renewed 
is in the effort to counteract every thing that opposes 
our spirituality. We should not rest because the cita- 
del is taken. We should rather make continued con- 
quests on the outlying provinces. The Christian course 
requires exertion. It is a race which demands an effort, 
greater than any physical effort we have ever put forth. 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORNING EXERCISES. 227 

"VI. 

Cultivation of Personal Religion. 

Christians should give much time to cultivating per- 
sonal religion. This family is not now a standard 
in this respect. When the daughters of the millennium 
shall occupy these seats, they will not think a half-hour 
morning and evening sufficient for devotion. "We ought 
to take care of every hour, making a right division of 
time, that we may have more for communion with God. 
To be most careful to meet worldly engagements, and 
give only the fragments of time to religious duties, is 
not seeking first the kingdom of God. Oar time, as 
well as our property, should be tithed to the Lord. We 
should seek to expend it all aright. It is a great thing 
to know how to rest rightly. 

We ought to make progress in religious knowledge. 
We should daily gain new ideas, or gain a new impres- 
sion of some idea. We should never hear a sermon or 
prayer without gaining something. If you will lay 
your minds and hearts open to the truth, you will find 
yourselves growing rapidly in religious knowledge, even 
if your means of grace are not all you would desire. 
Never feel that you can not get good from ordinary 
preachers. If you are where God has placed you, He 
can and will bless you ever and always in his house. 
Your duty is to hear. 

Christians must often go forward in efforts for them- 
selves and others, also, when it seems utterly impos- 
sible. Efforts made in such a way cause us to grow 
rapidly in the strength that God gives. When laboring 
for souls, we are often called upon to speak the last 



Hosted by 



Google 



228 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

word we can speak, give the last bread we have, and 
then look to Christ for more. 

We must often pray till we have not another petition 
that we can offer, and then when in silence we are rest- 
ing on the Eternal Arm, our friend may be saved. 

"Ye are not your own." 

Nothing helps the Christian more in the discharge of 
his duty, than a sense of his responsibility ; but who 
can duly estimate that responsibility! It increases 
with every beating pulse. An immortal spirit is com- 
mitted to him, which is to be an inhabitant of heaven, a 
companion of Jesus Christ for ever, and there is doubt- 
less a very close connection between our religious char- 
acter here and our state in the world to come. There 
is a wonderful adaptation in this world to fitting us for 
our eternal home. But we may do things here, not 
only at a wrong time but in a wrong spirit and man- 
ner, that will not only affect us all our lives but through 
eternity. We should look carefully to the manner of 
performing not only our religious duties, but also our 
temporal duties, for this also is to affect us through all 
eternity. Let us remember that time is really a part 
of eternity. This is our sowing-time, and the reaping 
is at hand. We are bought with a price ; and when we 
consider what that price was, can we ask to be our 
own ? Would we wish to live for any other than Him 
who has given his own life for us ? What a privilege, 
what a comfort, that we can all live and labor for 
Christ ! 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORXING EXERCISES. 229 

There are no Christians so young or so weak that 
they can not labor. All are watchmen. We should all 
lift up our voice to warn those who see not the sword 
of God pursuing them. We should all seek to live 
consistent Christian lives. Perhaps it will be found 
when the history of every conversion shall be made 
known, that there has been no louder and more effectual 
voice than this. God has made it a blessing in every age 
to be associated with the righteous. Those around you 
look to you, — they notice you in the room, in the class, 
in the prayer-meeting, in your calls, your walks, at all 
times, --- in your words, looks, every thing. The consist- 
ent life of the young Christian may be a more effectual 
means for the conversion of youth, than all others com- 
bined. You may do much by religious conversation. 
I do not mean studied conversation, but by always 
having a heart to speak with Christians before others. 
Be free to speak of a passage of Scripture that has 
interested you, of a prayer-meeting, of doing good to 
souls. The great means of doing good, though we 
can not tell why or how, only because God so directed 
it, is by example. We are to be ourselves what we 
would have others be. And this not only when others 
know it, but in all places ; for I believe that even what 
we do in secret affects others. 

vm. 

Our sinful Hearts. 

It is true that we know little of our hearts. If we 
would know what sin is ; if we would know our own 
character, take the Bible and read every verse, from the 



Hosted by 



Google 



230 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

beginning, that speaks of sin. Bead those passages 
that describe all. If we appear not as wicked as we 
are described, it is because of the restraining influen- 
ces thrown around us. Were those removed our hearts 
would disclose all this abominable wickedness. Would 
you see the human heart unsealed, look at the history 
of the children of Israel. There is a counterpart in 
our hearts to all that is revealed of them. Would 
you see God in the silence of your closets, read 
the history of Israel. We see there his leading attri- 
butes, wrath and long-suffering. Dwelling upon these 
attributes helps us to understand ourselves. The 
hatred of the human heart towards salvation is greater 
than towards condemnation. There are delicate young 
ladies who manifest their contempt for a revival, and 
if Christ were on earth, they would cry, "crucify him." 
They would be willing it should be done. This is a 
hard doctrine to those who know not their hearts. 
God has shown his displeasure against sin in the pen- 
alty, he has annexed, and we shall each know in 
heaven or hell how great is his displeasure. The suf- 
ferings of the Son of God show it most clearly. No 
language has as yet fully described the wickedness of 
the human heart. The language of the Bible on this 
subject is labored. If such is sin, what is its penalty ? 

IX. 

" Take no thought what ye shall eat." 

We think of things of which we ought not to think. 
We often make ourselves unhappy by dwelling on our 
condition and prospects, and those of our friends. But 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORmXG EXERCISES. 231 

it is our blessed privilege to commit all these to him, 
who will certainly take care of us, if he sees we 
are not afraid to trust him. What a wonder that the 
Infinite God is willing to take thought for us, and ;t is 
a greater wonder that we are not willing to trust him. 
With God to take thought for us, we need never be sad. 
We have only to go on and do present duty, and God 
will take care of the future. This thought often over- 
whelms me — God, the great God taking care of me, and 
willing to let me trust him ! If all is dark ; if there is 
universal darkness, and long continued, we may still 
trust God, if we are willing to obey him. If you are 
Christ's, do not seek for certainty and security in this 
life. Jesus never led one of his children in that way. 
We must trust him. 

x. 

Eternity. 

Eternity is probably more like time than we imagine. 
All the essential conditions of our existence will, doubt- 
less, continue through eternity ; but we shall follow out 
the shades of condition fully in another world. The 
difference between slight and excruciating pain is great 
here, but it will be greater there. Happiness, whether 
great or little, is important here ; but it will be vastly 
more important there. We are not, perhaps, aware 
how much of our happiness and misery consists in re- 
membering. There would really be but little enjoy- 
ment here were it cut off with the moment and blotted 
out of our being. How much happiness do we some- 
times now enjoy in remembering the past ! What will 
that happiness be in eternity ? There we shall remem- 



Hosted by 



Google 



232 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

ber, with joy, all that was endured to some purpose. 
The remembrance of wrong living causes us unhappi- 
ness here. We have feelings of shame for the moment, 
bu£ throw a vail over such feelings. It is like looking 
at the burning sun. We can close the eyelids and shut 
it out. But, imagine yourself without eyelids. That 
would be like eternity. There will be no vail there. 
We forget in this life, but shall remember in eternit}^. 
Our remembrances here, compared with those there, 
will be like the glimmer of a candle before the sun. 
This life is but a faint picture of eternity. Every 
thing here is helping to make up our future happiness 
or misery. In what we think and say we are weaving 
the web of eternity. The least word here is to live 
with us through those countless ages. How foolish to 
yield to temptation, and forget that we are to live for 
ever. How changed will our views of life be in another 
world ! What views of the Divine character will be 
revealed to us when we reach the eternal shores. 

XI. 

" In the world ye shall have tribulation. » 

Much has been said, and justly, of the pleasures and 
enjoyments and blessings given us in this world. Still, 
it is a life of trial, sorrow, and tribulation. We are 
oppressed by various ills, and, more than all, by the 
weight of sin. But there is a remedy for all this. It 
is looking unto Jesus. And while we can look to him, 
it is a great mistake to desire to be free from trials. 
Trials give us our most delightful sympathy with the 
dear Saviour, and help prepare us to go and dwell with 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORNING EXERCISES. 233 

him. Those happy ones who have been washed in the 
blood of the Lamb, eame out of great tribulation. We 
desire the result, but shrink from the process leading to 
it. To have sympathy with Christ, we must take up the 
cross in the path of duty. We need not seek the cross, 
but we should never try to go around it. It is giving 
but one view of the Christian life to say it is a life of 
joy. It is a paradox that the more he suffers the great- 
er will be his joy. There are three kinds of suffering 
— for sin — the common trials of life — and those trials 
which we might avoid by going out of the path of duty. 
The last are those which, if met, give us an exceeding 
great reward. We should never think of Christ's 
trial as confined to the last agony. His was a life of 
constant trials, and we may expect ours to be. 

The Saviour kindly remembered our weakness, when 
he taught us to pray, " lead us not into temptation. " 
We may, and should, ask the Lord every day to lead 
us where we shall not need to spend our time and 
strength in resisting temptation, but rather give them 
directly to his service. We should ask to be free from 
temptations of pleasure and comfort, no less than those 
of pain and sorrow. And when tried we should inquire 
if we have run into the path of temptation. 

xn. 

The Great Supper. 

There yet is room ; compel them to come in. We 
should not pray for the few, who now remain impen- 
itent in this family, because they are left alone. There 
are many treading the same road with them. Think of 



Hosted by 



Google 



234 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

the multitudes who die daily on heathen shores. But 
we should pray for them, because there is yet room in 
the heart of the Saviour, and because our Father's house 
is to be filled. Sinners ought to believe that the Re- 
deemer has died for them, and that they may occupy 
the mansions above. They should compel themselves 
to come in. Christ has prepared mansions for us, and 
they will be filled. Does it mean that there are just so 
many seats in heaven, and that if they are absent there 
will be a feeling of lack? By no means. Suppose that 
one of you, for whom prayer has been offered, should 
not be found in heaven a thousand years hence. Your 
pious friends there will feel no lack. You will be for- 
gotten. Your name will not come in to disturb the 
joy of heaven. God will not miss you — your friends 
will not miss you. Those friends will feel that heaven 
is filled without you. They will be satisfied with Christ 
and satisfied with each other. 

Each one of you is now called to the supper of the 
Lamb, and I charge you not to put off repentance for 
any thing else. You have only a little time in which 
you may compel yourselves to come in. 



Hosted by 



Google 



AFTERNOON EXERCISES. 235 

AFTERNOON EXERCISES. 

(See page 141). 

I. 

Study. 

We should know, by experience, what hard study is. 
It would be well for all to have one severe study like 
Latin or mathematics through the year. All should have 
thorough discipline in these studies before taking the 
higher English branches. Let the roots grow and ex- 
pand before we gather fruit. There is no reason why 
ladies should not faithfully pursue such studies as well 
as gentlemen. Our course of study embraces much, 
but probably fifty years hence it will appear quite lim- 
ited. We should not study to be pleased, any more 
than we live to eat ; and, as it is an important part of 
discipline not to be fastidious about our food, if we 
would be prepared for usefulness in any sphere, so we 
should study and not expect, for a long while, to find 
pleasure, but when we do reap the fruit it will be very 
sweet. 

At another time she cautioned her pupils against 
school manners. She said, "You can avoid school 
tricks, and we do not expect any who come here to 
practice them. We are a family rather than a school ; 
why have school manners ? Never be boisterous ; treat 
all with respect. Let the Bible have its full influence 
upon your hearts, and you will be gentle, and at the 
same time happy. I am always afraid of those who talk 
a great deal about what they are doing. Some of the 



Hosted by 



Google 



236 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

most efficient characters in the world are the most 
quiet. Cultivate the habit of moving noiselessly, so 
that you will always be welcome in the chamber of 
sickness and suffering. 

Benevolence is drawn out in the house-keeping de- 
partment. In arranging the work we look at justice, 
while you should look at the other side. It is important 
for you to be very quiet in the domestic hall. In the 
rattling of crockery, knives, and forks, and other arti- 
cles, character is read, and your own mothers honored 
or dishonored. 

n. 

Punctuality. 

Perfect punctuality in the time and manner of doing 
things is of great consequence. Consider well what 
you can and ought to do, and be faithful in performing 
it. If you form the habit of being a minute or two late 
it will grow upon you, and you will become very uncom- 
fortable members of society. You will find yourselves 
neglected, losing your influence, becoming very unhap- 
py, and, may be, doubting even whether you are Chris- 
tians, just from the effects of the habit of being a little 
behind time." She here drew a picture of a family 
wanting in system and punctuality — their hurry and 
confusion ; their chasing of the hours, never to find 
them, were vividly portrayed. We should be careful, 
be prompt in paying little debts. It might be impos- 
sible, when praying for some one, to keep out of mind 
a ten cents her due. 

Always be within a half a minute of the time appoint- 



Hosted by 



Google 



AFTERNOON EXERCISES. 237 

ed for any exercise or duty. Carry this through life, 
and always let your influence be felt for good in punc- 
tuality in attending meeting. Our own punctuality will 
greatly assist us in the care of others. 

m. 

Habits. 

Every confirmed habit of doing little things well will 
have an influence upon our future. Our wardrobes 
should always be kept in order, because of the effect 
such a habit will have upon ourselves and others. 
Good habits will enable mothers to have greater moral 
power over their daughters, and daughters should come 
up to their mothers' standard in every thing, thus in- 
citing the mothers to higher and higher endeavors, so 
that each generation will increase in moral perfection, 
till the dawn of the millennium. We give others much 
vexation and trouble by negligence. We should form 
a strong resolution to avoid, through life, trying the 
patience or irritating the feelings of others in this man- 
ner, and strive to possess those habits which will make 
us welcome visitors any where, and valuable friends. 

Oh ! if I were as young as you, with my present 
views, how differently would I begin. Not that I really 
desire to be put back where you are, for I can say, 
" Goodness and mercy have followed me all the days of 
my life ; " but I do wish you to begin right. I entreat 
you to form good habits. You have no time or strength 
to spare in overcoming bad habits. 

Although we are generally neat in the arrangement 
of the house, we need not expect in this, or any thing 



Hosted by 



Google 



238 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

else, to find our duty less because by habit we ac- 
quire the power of doing it readily, for in just such 
proportion shall we always find our duties increase. 
Our amount of duty will always be equal to our amount 
of strength or ability to perform it. We should be 
perfect in all we do, not merely for the present, but to 
help in the formation of a good character. We should 
not be like soapstone, that crumbles as it is rubbed, 
but like gold, that shines brighter and brighter the 
more it is used. 

Economy. 

Economy consists in providing well at little compar- 
ative expense. It implies good judgment and good 
taste. It can be equally manifested in the tasteful 
decorations of a palace and in the simple comforts of a 
cottage. If all ladies possessed it in a high degree, 
how much more would be found, in families, of comfort 
and convenience ; of taste and refinement ; of education 
and improvement ; of charity and good works. Our 
institution is distinguished by its economical features. 
Economy, however, is not adopted for its own sake 
principally, but as a means of education ; as a mode of 
producing favorable effects upon character, and of pre- 
paring young ladies for the duties of life. The great 
object is to make the school really better. An eco- 
nomical character is to be formed by precept, by prac- 
tice, and by example. Example has great effect, not only 
in furnishing a model for imitation, but also in prov- 
ing that economy is practicable, which is one of the 
most essential requisites for success. Let a young lady 



Hosted by 



Google 



AFTERNOON EXERCISES. 239 

spend two or three years on intimate terms in a family 
distinguished for a judicious and constant illustration 
of this principle, and the effect can not be lost. Econ- 
omy should be strict, and based on principle. It should 
extend to the smallest things. Those who resolve upon 
economy on some sudden occasion, or from some unu- 
sual motive, are apt to misplace it and appear mean. 
For instance, a lady may, in listening to some appeal 
for benevolence, resolve to be very economical, and, 
when her house is filled with guests, have it but par- 
tially lighted. She will be considered mean, and it 
would not be strange if, after six months, she should 
go to the opposite extreme. But if she has a fixed 
habit of economy, her house will be well lighted when 
it is necessary, and those same lights will be extin- 
guished when there is no further need of them. Proper 
economy will be an unostentatious habit, offensive to 
to no one, because regulated by wisdom from above, 
and will greatly promote the cause of Christ. In prac- 
ticing it, we shall influence hundreds, and they, in their 
turn, thousands. We can not expect the blessing of 
God if we waste what he gives us. 

We should economize in nothing more than in time, 
and be very careful of the time of others. Young la- 
dies are in great danger of using the time of others too 
freely, and perhaps never more in danger than on 
recreation day. 

Health. 

I know it will be a great self-denial to many of you 
not to study in recreation hours, but we think we have 



Hosted by 



Google 



240 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

assigned as many hours in a day to study as are 
advisable. If you can not see things just as we do, 
we hope you will be willing to yield your judgment to 
ours. If you have brought good health with you, we 
think our arrangements are such that, with the blessing 
of God, you will be enabled to keep it. I would say 
to you what I have said to many young ladies : the 
value of health is inestimable to a lady. Her appro- 
priate duties are so numerous and varied, so constant 
in their demands, and so imperious in the moment of 
their calls, that health is to her above price. She can 
not perform her duties faithfully and successfully un- 
less she possesses a calm mind, an even temper, a cheer- 
ful heart, and a happy face. To possess all these, will 
require a good degree of health. A gentleman may 
possibly do good without much health, but what can a 
lady do, unless she takes the attitude of an invalid, and 
seeks to honor Christ by patience and submission. I 
would not undervalue this, but if you can do good in 
another way, by taking care of your health, will you 
not be happier in it ? If a gentleman can not do his 
wcrk one hour, perhaps he may do it another ; but a 
lady's duties admit of no compromise of hours. 

If a gentleman is annoyed and vexed witli the ner- 
vousness of his feeble frame, he may perhaps use it to 
some advantage, as he attempts to move the world by 
his pen. But a lady can not make use of this infirmity 
in her influence over her children and family ; an influ- 
ence which should, at all times, be under the control of 
gentleness and equanimity. I am very anxious in 
regard to your health and comfort. If you are Christ's 
now, or if you become his, remember that he has redeem- 



Hosted by 



Google 



AFTERNOON EXERCISES. 241 

ed 3^our bodies as well as your souls. He is to present 
them pure and spotless before your Father in heaven. 
These bodies are not your own. They are the temple 
of the Holy Ghost. Can you be negligent of them? 
We will try to help you take care of them. If we 
think that you should see a physician at any time, we 
hope you will be willing to do it, — that you will avoid 
unnecessary exposure, — and seek for a quiet, happy 
frame of mind, which greatly promotes good health. 

God has instituted laws for the regulation of health, 
and the difference between the moral law and the nat- 
ural and physical law is, that the former is right in 
itself, and can never be set aside ; and the latter derive 
their authority from God's appointment : but he has 
given us a certain degree of elasticity, which makes it 
safe for us to turn aside when duty requires it. We 
ought never to lessen this elasticity by using it for self- 
indulgence. Illustrated by the difference between a 
mother's depriving herself of her accustomed sleep to 
care for her sick infant, and doing the same for self- 
gratification. 

Remember, the command, " Thou shalt not kill," 
means not only outright, but slowly ; it means not only 
others but yourself, not only this generation but gener- 
ations to come. It is probable that many of you are 
now suffering from the fact that those who have gone 
before you have not properly cared for their health. 
Your mothers, when at your age, were not living for 
themselves alone — they lived for you, even as they 
have clone in later years. It is a fearful thing, young 
ladies, to disregard the laws of health. You know not 
where the consequences may cease. This view of the 

16 



Hosted by 



Google 



242 RECOLLECTIONS OF MAKY LYON'. 

subject makes life more noble and important. I should 
not dare to speak to those of little cultivation of mind 
and heart as I do to you ; but I expect you to appreciate 
what I say, and to weigh the subject carefully before 
God. 

"VI. 

Furnishing a Table. 

There are three ways of furnishing a table — the 
luxurious, the scanty, and the comfortable. The first 
we often find among the fashionable — but not among 
the most intellectual. It causes depression of both 
mind and body. The second, the scanty, causes more 
depression still. Those who practice the third think 
very little about their food. Eating is not their great 
object. It is desirable to give attention to our tables 
as well as to our souls. I consider bread-making of so 
much consequence, that, in giving attention to it, I am 
confident that I am serving God. 



Hosted by 



Google 



PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY IN GIVING. 243 

PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY IN GIVING. 

(See page 175). 

It is nothing with God to help, whether with many, 
or with them that have no power. But his blessing is 
delayed so as to be given, as a rich reward, to the will- 
ing and obedient heart. Is the spirit of any one stirred 
within him in behalf of this cause, let him be faithful 
in his own place and in his own way, and for himself 
alone. Let him carry his own petition, warm from his 
own heart, to the throne of mercy, rather than to seek a 
friend to carry it in his behalf, and it shall prevail. Let 
him give all — all that he ought, either from his abun- 
dance or from his scanty store, rather than to look to his 
neighbor to do it in his stead, and the deed shall be re- 
membered in heaven, and his work shall not be in vain. 
Is he poor, let him be careful to give the last mite 
which the Lord requires at his hand. That little pit- 
tance which he has laid aside, which he really seems to 
need for his comfort, and on which his eye is now fixed 
with that anxious inquiry, may be more in the Lord's 
treasury than thousands in other hands. It may be of 
more weight in the counsels of heaven, as this great 
question relative to the funds of the American Board 
shall there be settled. 

Is he rich, let him give — not a part — but all which 
the Lord requires. Though he may cast his thousands 
into the treasury of the Lord, it may weigh naught in 
the counsels of heaven if any thing is kept back. But 
let him come fully up to his ability ; let him come fully 
up to the urgency of the case, and he shall receive even 



Hosted by 



Google 



244 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON". 

a richer reward than did the widow with her two mites. 
No one knows to whom in this case it shall be 
said, " Thou hast power with God and hast prevailed." 
No one knows to whom the balancing may be given, 
which shall determine this great question in the court 
of heaven. The balancing power was given to Achan, 
and, with his wedge of gold, he could trouble the whole 
camp of Israel. The deciding power was given to 
Phineas, and, with javelin in hand, he was able, by a 
single act, to stay the plague, and save thousands from 
a speedy death. Let no one say, therefore, that the 
little which he can do will have no avail. When God, 
in the court of heaven, shall weigh the offerings which 
shall decide this great question, he may say, " This 
poor widow hath cast in more than they all." On the 
other hand, let no one feel that he can afford to con- 
sume treasures on himself, because he has already done 
so much for the cause. The little that remains in his 
hand which he can give, and which the Lord requires 
of him, may be the balancing power which shall decide 
the whole case. But let each, in his own condition, be 
faithful unto the last mite, and he shall have his reward. 
"With his faithful hands and willing heart, and through 
that grace by which he is what he is, let him go, in the 
name of Jesus, and carry his petition to the mercy 
seat, and it shall be granted. Is his petition that the 
hearts of others shall be opened to go and do likewise ? 
Then the hearts of others shall be opened, and they 
shall go and do likewise, and the work shall be clone. 



Hosted by 



Google 



BENEVOLENCE. 245 



BENEVOLENCE. 

March 30, 1848. The duty of sacred charity is 
plainly inculcated in the Scriptures. The highest form 
of this charity is that which goes out of ourselves, 
which is not concerned with ourselves or our interests. 
Other charities may partake of the true spirit of giving 
— while other motives are involved. If this great 
principle is paramount other charities will flow out of 
it, illustrated by a church, by individuals. The church 
that will give for the conversion of the world, will give 
for the salvation of her country. A church needs a 
foreign mission to teach it to carry its prayers and 
efforts out of itself ; so the man who will give to send 
the gospel to the heathen, will educate his son to pro- 
mote the same cause. Pray over this subject while you 
are considering it ; remember it morning and evening. 
I trust we shall all have our hearts drawn out to- 
gether, each class of us, that we who hope we are 
Christians, may take a higher stand, and that we may, 
in connection with this, first give ourselves to the 
Lord. 

March 31. Sacred charity is a divine appointment, 
wonderful though it is. The design of this is evident- 
ly the benefit of the giver as well as the receiver. Sa- 
cred charity is a pledge of personal consecration ; a 
test to one's self of willingness to give up all for 
Christ. In order that it may be thus, it must be a 
heart work ; there must be a readiness to give up all, if 
God requires it. In the heart all must be given up, 
and all may enjoy the privilege. Let us all enjoy it. 



Hosted by 



Google 



246 RECOLLECTIONS OF MA3Y LYON. 

April 4. Sacred charity is a pledge of personal con- 
secration. It may be made the test; if we give up in 
heart, we shall have an opportunity to carry it out in 
our lives. The disciple is not above his master — illus- 
trated in the lives of the apostles. Trials for Christ's 
sake were different in different ages. We may not 
suffer persecution, but we may give so much as to suf- 
fer in the opinion of others ; of those, too, whom we 
love, and the trials be the same in essence as of those 
who suffer persecution : and we shall not lose the re- 
ward. If we give in sacred charity, and give for 
Christ's sake, we must give so as to feel the loss of 
what we give continually. I dare not tell any one how 
much to give ; but I have no doubt of certain great 
principles of which this is one, that we ought volunta- 
rily to submit to suffer in person and in feeling for 
Christ's sake. Do you feel willing to make such a sur- 
render of all as to give in charity just as much as you 
believe duty, without conferring with flesh and blood, 
your own wants, and the wants of those you tenderly 
love? 

April 7. Christian charity may be so practiced and 
illustrated as to make us feel what a price was paid for 
our redemption. When you put your hand to this work 
— always remember, " We are bought with a price." 
Christ's example should be a motive to us. " For ye 
know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, how that for 
our sakes he became poor." Shall we be willing to make 
no return ? Oh, I would have our offering made with 
such a spirit that it shall be the means of setting before 
us Jesus Christ and him crucified. 
April 11. We are to study God's plan, and not 



Hosted by 



Google 



BENEVOLENCE. 247 

man's. This is a large plan. There are reasons for 
giving while connected with this seminary, and giving 
here, this year, rather than at home : reasons, also, for 
giving only to two great objects ; these embrace the 
others. We should remember the principle on which 
this institution was founded, and the way in which the 
money was raised for it. It was not to save the money 
of parents or of children that so much was given here 
with so little expense to the scholars, but that great 
and important principles might be inculcated here. 

April 13. No plan but God's plan should be adopt- 
ed. This is large, and should be so large as to have a 
chastening influence upon us. We may bear some of 
the same fruits with Christ. We are to give our money 
to save souls. If we here, this year, give and pray 
as we should, we shall meet souls, at last, saved 
through our instrumentality. Great giving meets the 
will of God. The standard of Christians is too low. 
I censure no one, but I must tell you what I think, that 
the standard of most of our good people is too low. 
We may give too much for the poor, though I do not 
think we do. But there is no danger of giving too 
much for the salvation of souls, and we must give now 
— not wait till we get rich. The telegraphic wires are 
established between us and the heathen ; and if we do 
not work now, do not send them the gospel now, they 
will perish. Illustrated by the great Jewish economy. 
The terms of the gospel itself should lead us to give 
largely ; the terms of discipleship, as given by Christ, 
also. We must deny ourselves ; forsake all that we 
have. This may be done by changing our style of 
dress and of living. I do not think the standard I have 



Hosted by 



Google 



248 RECOLLECTIONS OF MAttY LYON. 

been presenting is too high. When, in eternity, I meet 
you and the many others I have here addressed, I think 
you will all agree with me. And now you ask what 
you shall do. I can not tell you. I can only spread a 
few of my many thoughts before you. I can not un- 
burden my soul as I would. Seek wisdom from on 
high. 

April 14. Miss Lyon gave her reasons for having 
two subscriptions annually, instead of one ; alluded 
to ways in which we may save money intrusted to us 
by our parents to give away, and then left it with us 
and our God, praying that all might be blessed. 

June 27. This morning Miss Lyon dwelt upon the 
truth, " God is love " — especially upon that love which 
was manifested in giving up the Son of his love for 
those who were his enemies. She invited us to try to 
think of this theme, though it is beyond thought to 
know it — it passeth knowledge. As we were about to 
renew our missionary subscription, the subject was 
applied to giving; she hoped that our second subscrip- 
tion would not be a mere gathering of the fragments, 
but that many would give so much as to feel it; and, 
more than this, that some would, first of all, give them- 
selves unto the Lord, and then never count any sacrifice 
too great for Christ. She urged all to bear in mind that 
she was not speaking for the present merely, but she 
would fain give impressions which will live after she 
dies, and asked that, when we should hear of her death, 
we would remember what she had told us this morn- 
ing of the love of Christ. 

July 6. Self-denial, illustrated in the life of a 
foreign missionary, " How often do I wish that once 



Hosted by 



Google 



BENEVOLENCE. 249 

again I could see all my clear missionary children 
together for one hour — and what would I say to them ? 
I would not commend them for what they had done. I 
would sympathize deeply with them in every trial they 
should speak of; but I should want to spend more of 
the hour in pointing out the temptations I should fear 
for them ; in telling them how they might fail to be 
true missionaries" Then, for the sake of those present, 
who might some time find themselves in a heathen land, 
she pointed out some of the dangers, such as the desire 
to improve their style of living, so as not to fall so far 
below the foreign residents with whom they might have 
intercourse, or a wish to approach more nearly to the 
style of the native aristocracy, in order, as it might 
seem, to get an influence over them. Their purse, she 
said, would be very small, like a child's purse, and yet 
they might have temptations to make a wroug use of 
that little. She would not care to have our missionaries 
receive more for their support, lest they would be less 
useful, though she would like to have them receive more 
to do good with, if they had the opportunity. In their 
outfit, and in all their course, she would have them 
study to see how little they might expend on themselves. 
This she ventured to say to us^ though she would not 
say it to the world; just as she would whisper in the 
ears of her children who had become pastors' tvives, to 
be satisfied with a very small salary, though she would 
not say the same to their parishioners. Then she 
charged us to remember that she would not take off the 
burden from those that remain by the stuff, and put it 
on those " who go out to battle," for she was sure she 
did not love those less than those at home ; but she 



Hosted by 



Google 



250 HE COLL EC TIOXS OF MAR Y L YOX. 

thought she could not have shown us better what should 
be our standard for self-denial than in thus speaking of 
missionaries, which very name, she thought, synon- 
ymous with self-denial. 



OUTLINES OF ADDRESSES ON MISSIONARY CON- 
TRIBUTIONS. 

I. 

General Principles of Giving. 

1. We are not our own, in the use of temporal 
things. 

2. We are to live for eternity in the use of money. 
This is possible. Many think it is not. Fix your eye 
on eternity just as it is. Every dollar you spend, cast 
your eye into eternity. 

3. The will of God is to be our only guide. God 
has a mind on the subject ; he has a will. Are you 
willing to know his mind and will ? 

4. The will of God can be known. Whoever seeks 
with his whole heart, shall know it. Three ways — 1. 
The Word — this must be first. 2. The providence of 
God. 3. The Spirit of God. 

5. The general principle of following the calls of 
Providence, in doing good, rather than our feelings of 
ability, is to be applied to this duty. 

6. To give as much as we think we ought, is an easy 
duty. 

7. An important test of Christian character. 



Hosted by 



Google 



OUTLINES OF ADDRESSES. 251 

n. 

The Reward. 

1. The reward comes to all. No respecter of per- 
sons. 2 Cor. viii. 12. The gospel tolerates no com- 
promise of principle with the world. Christ must have 
all or none. Whoever will give a cup of cold water, 
will lay down his life. 

2. There is a direct reward of Providence. " Hun- 
dred-fold." 

3. Reward in our own bosoms : — 
(a) Peace of conscience. 

(&) A supply for the natural cravings of our nature. 

(c) Satisfaction in doing what God requires. 

(d) A feeling of union with Jesus Christ, in his 
work and his sympathies. 

4. Meeting with the fruits of our labor. 

5. A personal interest in the greatest events and 
greatest deeds. 

6. The glorious future reward, which is a continu- 
ance of the hundred-fold in this life. 

m. 

Giving in Christ's Name. 

1. To give in Christ's name, we must give as much 
as he requires. He will allow of no compromise. 
Ananias and Sapphira. 

2. We must give with a feeling of our unworthiness. 
Those who make the greatest sacrifices, have the most 
feeling of their unworthiness to do it. 



Hosted by 



Google 



252 RECOLLECTIONS OF MAKY LYON. 

3. We must feel that we have a privilege in this 
world given us through the blood of Christ. 

4. We must have just views of Christ's poverty. 
No merit to be poor — none to be rich. But to be poor 
as Christ was is accepted. 

5. Submissive to Christ's will. Command of Christ. 
Matt. x. 8-10 ; John xxi. 15-19. 

6. With feelings for others similar to Christ's. 

7. With such a view of the reward as Christ had. 
Heb. xii. 2 ; xi. 24-27. 

rv\ 

The Bible Standard of giving, high. 

1. The general tenor of the Bible gives this impres- 
sion : Let any candid reader, without prejudice, receive 
the Bible impression. Darkness and blindness of self- 
ishness on this subject. This darkness does not cease 
with the selfish mind, but extends to darken the views 
of the benevolent. 

2. Evidence of a high standard from the Jewish 
economy. The requirements of God uniform in prin- 
ciple, not uniform in the detailed application. Time, 
money, fruits of the earth, to be given in how many 
ways. Riches discouraged ; year of jubilee ; non- 
intercourse with foreign nations. The great principle 
of discouraging riches, not to be applied in detail. 

3. Early disciples required to give up all, and become 
poor, for Christ's sake. Houses and lands to be for- 
saken. The principle continued. All suffer tribulation 
not in the same way, but in some way. All poorer 
than they would be. A false impression is sometimes 



Hosted by 



Google 



O UTLINES OF ADDRESSES. 253 

made by saying that no one was ever poorer for what he 
gives. 

4. Early community of goods. Acts iv. 34-37. 

5. The curse for withholding. Acts v. ; Mai. iii. 

6. The blessings promised to the liberal. 

7. Commendation of extraordinary giving. Luke 
xxi. 1-4 ; 2 Cor. viii. 1-4. 

8. The example of Christ as held up to us. 2 Cor. 
viii. 9. 

v. 

Reasons why we should adopt the Bible Standard. 

1. The value of the soul. Dwell on it, and compare 
it with the uses of money. Matt. xvi. 26. 

2. The infinite price paid for its redemption. 

3. The duty of loving others as ourselves. Apply 
this to their future state. 

4. The divine appointment of means. 

5. Doors opened by the providence of God. 

6. Success that God has given to the use of means. 

7. The great cloud of witnesses. 

8. Our knowledge of duty — of what can be done. 

9. The demands of our own consciences. 

VI. 

What is a high Standard t 

In such a great work, reason would often seem to re- 
quire that we give up all. But if we can find a general 
guide in the Bible, we may, from it, take permission to 
keep a part for ourselves. 

Tenth. The generally admitted proportion, if any, 



Hosted by 



Google 



254 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

taken from the Jewish tribes. Two great mistakes in 
this standard. 

1. About the Jewish tribe. A tenth a small part 
of what was required. 

2. In what, in our circumstances, would be a tenth. 
Some take a tenth of their income after supporting 
their families. Others take a tenth after their own 
personal support. Others still calculate to take their 
salary exclusive of board, not reckoning their board 
any thing. Some take only the money from produce 
sold, leaving out the produce consumed, — the house- 
rent, the use of horse and carriage, etc. 

The Jewish standard a general guide, but not a cor- 
rect one for individual duty. 

The Old Testament our school-master to teach us 
New Testament duty. All such requirements allow of 
some deviations. The disciples might pluck the ears 
of corn on the Sabbath. But deviations must be higher 
as well as lower. 

Two grounds of deviation. First ground, our abil- 
ity compared with that of the Jews. The following 
points of comparison : — 

1. Our country, with Palestine. The land to culti- 
vate, how much more. The arts, which increase the 
value of property. The knowledge, enabling us to use 
what we have to the best advantage. 

2. Compare the immediate community in which you 
live with the whole country. 

3. Compare your own standing with all the others. 
Second ground of deviation. Comparison between 

the. two dispensations : — 



Hosted by 



Google 



UTLIXES OF AD DRESSES. 255 

1. The object of the sacrifice required. Ceremo- 
nial burdens removed, but in their stead the com- 
mand, " Go ye into all the world." 

2. The great High Priest. Heb. viii. 1-6 ; ix. 8-14. 
The Jewish priests to be sustained in their work. If I 
may be allowed the expression, the Great High Priest 
needs far more to sustain his work. His sacrifice 
greater. 

3. The direct requirements of Christ to forsake all. 
The young man. Matt. xix. 21. Not so explicit in 
the case of the Old Testament saints. 

4. The voluntary sacrifice of the early Christians 
to extend the gospel. Not so with the Old Testament 
saints. 

5. The new covenant compared with the old. What 
encouragement to work for God under this new cove- 
nant, with such promises. Heb. viii. 7-12. 

General conclusion, that the standard which God has 
raised far higher than that of the most liberal. 

vn. 

Self-denial fob Christ's sake. 
2 Pet. ii. 20-24 ; Heb. ii. 10-18. 

1. What is self-denial? Not what is brought on 
by Providence, but by your voluntary act. 

2. Christ designs sufferings for his disciples. No 
other dare to enter into the sheepfold only to follow 
Christ. 

3. Self-denial is painful for the time. It was with 
Christ. It was a bitter cup. So with his followers. 



Hosted by 



Google 



256 BE COLL EC TIONS OF MART 'L TOtf. 

Giving your money as you ought will be a painful 
work. Whoever doubts it, look at the excuses made 
against it. 

4. It is the most painful of suffering. The struggle 
of yielding to the stroke more painful than the stroke 
itself. 

5. It is crowned with an unspeakable joy. Not a 
joy beforehand but afterwards. Christ has this joy ; 
this hope to sustain us. Christ was thus sustained. 

6. The Captain of our salvation "perfect through 
suffering." 

(1.) Captain in seeking an atonement for us. 
(2.) In sanctifying us. 

(3.) In leading us on in the conflict of self-denial. 
(4.) In giving us final victory. 

7. He calls us brethren. 

8. We are to look to Christ in his sufferings. 

9. We are to behold him as the Son of God there, 
and when we come back from the sight shall we say I 
can not do this, or bear this, or suffer this? 

10. We are to look to him as ever able to redeem 
us. 

vm. 

Reasons fob Self-denial. 

John xii. 25-30. 

1. A reward is given our labors : — 

(1.) Success direct. 

(2.) Success in prospect. 

(3.) Success with others to carry it on. 



Hosted by 



Google 



OUTLINES OF ADDRESSES. 257 

2. Religious communications in your own soul. 
(1.) Reality of the unseen world. That of misery 

and of blessedness. 

(2.) Communion with Christ — his world — his ob- 
ject — his plans — his promises. 

(3.) Faith in the grand doctrine of salvation. We 
are to work on the same principle that Christ did. 
Not that they love us, but that we love them. 

(4.) Daily dependence on Christ — his promises — 
his grace. 

(5.) An advancing onward in our pathway to heav- 
en. How is one to get out from the influence of the 
world ? 

3. Our final reward : — 
(1.) Being with Christ. 
(2.) Sharing in his glory. 

(3.) Our joy and causes of rejoicing. 
(4.) Rejoicing with Christ. 

IX. 

Curse of Selfishness. 

Mai. i. 6, 7, 8, 14 ; iii. 

What is it to rob God ? Not to give what he requires. 
All the tithes. Learn this from, — 
(1.) Jewish dispensation. 
(2.) Christian precepts. 
(3.) Christ's example. 

1 . Curse on your person. 

2. Curse on your relative business with others. 

3. Curse on the work of your hands. 

4. Curse on all the blighted feelings of your heart. 

17 



Hosted by 



Google 



258 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON 

5. Curse in having no heart for the work of self- 
denial — the talent laid up in the napkin. 

The Parable of the Talents. 

Matt. xxv. 14-30. 

Great variety of instruction in this parable. It is 
the plan of God that all should live on little. 

1. God has given on an average but little to the 
human family. Each, of course, must take but little 
and use it. 

2. By the great law of love, God demands of each 
much of the little he has given him. This principle 
essential to meet this demand. 

3. By the duty to co-operate with Christ God has 
made a special demand on the little. This principle 
essential to meet this demand. 

4. God has opened a wide door into the field of his 
service, and thus made a demand on the little. 

5. The increasing calls of Providence more than 
keep pace with all other increasing improvements. 

Look at the improvements in property by agricul- 
ture — the arts — railroads — manufactures — com- 
merce, etc. ; and then look at China, at India, at Per- 
sia, at Africa, at the Islands of the Sea. 

6. It is the only way to be a consistent Christian. 
"Without this established principle of action there will 
be inconsistencies and absurdities. 

7; The only way to be relieved from perplexing em- 
barrassment with regard to duty. 



Hosted by 



Google 



MEETINGS WITH THE IMPENITENT. 259 

8. The only way to receive continued peace of con- 
science ; and 

9. The glorious reward in heaven. 

Apply this to yourselves ; educate yourselves by 
doing. Do not excuse yourselves. 

1. Either because you are so rich or so poor. Pe- 
culiar advantages of each. 

2. Defer not to the future what is to be done now. 

3. Do not forget. 

4. Never faint nor be discouraged. 

5. Keep eternity and the worth of the soul in view. 

6. Keep your eye on the Saviour, day by day, in this 
work. 



MEETINGS WITH THE IMPENITENT. 

(See page 107). 

1848. Jan. 3, Fast-day. Miss Lyon met all those 
in the Seminary hall who usually meet with her on the 
Sabbath. After singing and prayer, she commenced by 
inviting those who could answer the following questions 
affirmatively, to meet with her at seven o'clock this even- 
ing : Does it seem to you that you want religion ? Do you 
feel that now is the time to seek it ? Does it seem to you 
that you are willing to give up the world ? Does it seem 
to you that you are willing to attend to it, even though 
ridiculed for it by your best friends, even if you knew you 
must be alone in seeking it ? Does it seem to you that 
you want your will bowed to God's ? Do you want all 
your portion in God? Do you want to be entirely 



Hosted by 



Google 



260 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

employed in the service of God ? Do you want that 
religion that shall make you to care for souls? — Upon 
each of these questions she dwelt. All who could 
answer them in the affirmative, were to write a note 
saying they would like to attend the meeting. She 
then went on to speak to the other class, who could 
not thus decide, mentioned the various excuses made 
by sinners for not now seeking salvation, and submit- 
ting to Jesus ; and showed how vain they were ; how 
vain they would seem in the light of eternity. Her 
closing remark was, " How vain to resist God ! Did 
you ever see the little insect fall into the flame ; see it 
struggle and strive to escape ? — how vain ! Just so 
you are in the hands of an angry God. What if you 
do resist ? What are you, a feeble worm of the dust ? 
Oh, how vain ! how much better to submit ! " 

Nearly sixty attended the meeting in the evening. 
The Christians met at the same hour in praying 
circles. 

Jan. 10. The meeting, at four, was one of great 
solemnity. Before commencing her remarks, Miss 
Lyon invited to a meeting, at seven, all those who felt 
pained at the thought that this work might cease, and 
they be passed by. Her subject was, Christ Jesus and 
him crucified. About forty wrote notes to attend the 
meeting in the evening. At the same hour a meeting 
was appointed for all those who had some hope that 
they had this year found the Saviour. There were 
thirty-eight present. It seems as though God was try- 
ing his children, to see how faithfully they will labor 
and pray. Last year the Spirit was literally poured 
out ; we could only stand still and say, " What hath 



Hosted by 



Google 



OUTLINES OF ADDRESSES. 261 

God wrought ! " Now he blesses, just as the means 
are used. 

Jan. 12, Recreation-day. Religious meetings this 
p. m., as last week. Those who meet with Miss Lyon 
on the Sabbath, were invited to do so to-day. Most 
were there. Sectional prayer-meetings, also, as last 
week. 

Jan. 16, Sabbath. At the meeting in the p. m. 
Miss Lyon spoke from the words, " Choose ye this day 
whom ye will serve," and, " To-day if ye will hear his 
voice." At the close, she invited all who had decided 
to-day, that they would serve the Lord, and those who 
had to-day felt an uncommon anxiety to decide thus, 
— to a meeting in her room. There were seventeen 
present (there had been forty-seven present at a meet- 
ing in the morning, for all who have indulged hope 
recently) ; Miss Lyon is rather worn ; her anxiety for 
the family, and what she should say as she has met us 
from time to time, has been very great of late. 

Feb. 7. A meeting was appointed yesterday (Sab- 
bath), the first Sabbath after vacation, for those who 
have indulged a hope this year. If any one who at- 
tended a meeting of the same kind before vacation, 
felt that she ought not to do so now, she was to write 
a note ; or, if any who had not attended had some 
hope now, they too were to write a note. Five new 
ones attended. One was not there who had been be- 
fore. She wrote no note, however. 

Feb. 13, Sabbath. Of the large class who were 
without hope, at the beginning of last term, more than 
half now trust they have found the Saviour. In the 
meeting this p. m. Miss Lyon read, "I thank thee 



Hosted by 



Google 



262 RECOLLECTIONS OF MAR Y L TON. 

that thou hast hid these things from the wise and pru- 
dent," etc. And then spoke of the display of Sover- 
eign grace in the salvation of sinners ; of the pardon 
of the sinner ; of important periods in the life of every 
sinner ; when the kingdom comes near ; of the danger 
of passing those periods ; there must be a last one. 
Be entreated to be reconciled to God, to believe on the 
Lord Jesus Christ. Those who hope you have done 
so, do it anew, do it continually ; those who have never 
done it, do it to-day. 

Feb. 27, Sabbath. Object of these meetings, to aid 
them in seeking religion. If they have failed in this 
they are all in vain. She said a burden rested on her 
soul every Sabbath, as she looked forward to this 
meeting. She read the account of the publican, and 
spoke of the way in which religion must be sought ; 
first, there must be a determination to seek it, in spite 
of all that may be said and done by others. It mast be 
sought with a sense of our own unworthiness ; with a 
willingness to venture all, to run the risk of failing or 
succeeding. 

March 5, Sabbath. Miss Lyon invited to her room, 
in the morning, all who had a general interest ; who 
felt that they wanted, more than any thing else, to seek 
the salvation of their souls. There were as many pres- 
ent as could sit round the room. 

March 19. The duty and importance of " consider- 
ing." Miss Lyon then invited to a meeting in her 
room, at seven, all who were ready to decide to con- 
sider the question, this week, of being Christians, 
whatever others might do. Ten were present. 

April 9. Miss Lyon's subject was the " New Song" 



Hosted by 



Google 



SABBATH-EVENING INSTRUCTIONS. 263 

spoken of in Revelation. It was addressed more par- 
ticularly to those who hope they have already learned 
a little of that " Song." At the close of the meeting 
she invited to her room, at seven, all those who thought 
that the Holy Spirit was still striving with them. 
She mentioned some things that would help them to 
judge whether he was ; as she wished them to decide, 
remembering God's eye was upon them, and be care- 
ful that they did not grieve him away entirely by de- 
ciding to stay away. Seventeen came (all but sixteen 
who are without hope) . 

April 23, Subject, " To-day." This, the last of these 
meetings for this term. Alluded to the past and the 
future ; once more entreated those who are yet without 
hope, to come and make their peace with God. At the 
close of the meeting, she invited to a meeting all 
those who were not interested, and yet wished to be, 
and would be willing that others should know that 
they were interested. 



OUTLINES OF SABBATH-EYENING INSTRUCTIONS. 

I. 

WHO ABE AT THE ELEVENTH HOUR. 

Matt. xx. 1-16. 
All acknowledge that the aged are. But the young 
may be. 

1. Those appointed to an early death. 

2. Those who have enjoyed, but have misimproved 
many privileges. 



Hosted by 



Google 



264 RECOLLECTIONS OF MAR Y L YON. 

3. Those who have often grieved the Spirit. 

4. Those who are enjoying their last special call. 

Who believe yourselves at the eleventh hour ? Ur- 
gent reasons why those of you at the eleventh hour 
should enter the vineyard. 

1. The infinite importance that you should be saved. 
What can be the gain if your soul is lost ? 

2. The voice of encouragement from the Saviour. 

3. The calls of the Spirit to your heart. Who are 
now thus called ? 

4. Christ has need of your feeble services. 

5. By your salvation can be magnified the riches of 
graced 

n. 

God our Portion. 

Receiving God as the portion of the soul, often the 
first exercise of the renewed heart. 

Let us dwell on this portion. During these com- 
munings, may some one receive God as her por- 
tion. 

1. God, and only God, can fill the soul with satis- 
fying delight. 

2. There is a great, solemn, and real delight in 
feeling that God is incomprehensible. The wicked 
seek to comprehend God, and deny what they can 
not comprehend. 

3. All difficulties and perplexities can be referred 
to God, and there left. 

4. The feeling, " God will do right." 



Hosted by 



Google 



SABBATH-EVENING INSTRUCTIONS. 265 

5. There is an awful and solemn delight in* the 
feeling that God hates sin. When we struggle against 
sin, it is comforting to know that there is One who 
hates and abhors all sin as it deserves. 

6. God knows our un worthiness, guilt, dependence, 
and want. 

7. God can forgive sin. 

8. Christ, the only door by which we can be admit- 
ted to the presence of God. 

9. The great end of Christ's sufferings and death 
to reconcile us to God, restore us back to his favor and 
presence. 2 Cor. v. 17-21. 

Thus sinners may be entreated to be reconciled to 
God. 

in. 

Enemies of Christ. 

What is it now, to be the enemies of Christ? What 
will it be at the judgment day, and what in eternity? 

1. There are enemies. Are you his enemies? 

2. They forget Christ. They do not feel his pres- 
ence. 

3. They do not feel his excellence and glory. 

4. They are not affected with his history — his life 
and death. 

5. The cross is to them foolishness. Here is an 
exhibition of sin ; of the mind of a sinner ; of par- 
don; of. deliverance; of the Godhead, and all his 
glory, — his wisdom, his justice, his mercy, his power, 
his glory ; but they see it not. 



Hosted by 



Google 



266 RECOLLECTION'S OF MAEY LYON. 

6. # They despise the cross, and Jesus, who died on 
the cross. 

What will it be, at the judgment, to be Christ's 
enemy ? 

1. Christ will come. 

2. This will fill his enemies with terrible anguish. 
The face of the Lamb. This, more than any other 
view of God in Christ. Why ? 

(1.) He is the sinner's friend, but their eternal 
enemy. 

(2.) Their friend once, but now their enemy. 

(3.) His countenance once beamed with infinite 
compassion ; now, with a heart-rending fervor. 

(4.) Once, his voice they heard in accents of invi- 
tation ; now, of eternal banishment. 

What will it be to be his enemy in eternity ? 

The exciting, the changing, the passing scenes even 
of the terrible judgment will be some relief ; but oh, 
the dark, the changeless, the eternal prison of despair ! 
Banishment for ever from Jesus Christ. Never to see 
his face, or hear his voice, or one of his friends, or one 
of his works. But remember him as once your friend, 
but now your eternal enemy. 



IV. 

Friends of Cheist. 

Rev. v. 9-12 ; vii. 9-17. 

Are any of you his friends ? Have you a faint im- 
pression that it may be so ? Most of you know you 



Hosted by 



Google 



SABBATH-EVENING INSTRUCTIONS. 267 

are his enemies. Would you become his Mends to- 
day? 

1. Present state of his friends. They have the feel- 
ings and conduct of friends. 

(1.) They regard and love his character. What a 
combination in Christ ! 

(2.) They feel that they have sinned against a friend. 
Peter and Judas. 

(3.) They have confidence in him as a friend. 

(4.) They are grateful to him as to a friend. 

(5.) They seek to honor him as a friend. 

(6.) They delight in having his will done. What is 
the prominent manifestation of his will? To save sin- 
ners. 

(7.) They do his will. 

2. Condition of his friends at the judgment day. 
(1.) His glorious appearance. 

(2.) The sweetness of his voice. 
(3.) His protection from Divine wrath, as every idle 
thought and every deed is brought into judgment. 
(4.) The blessed find sentence. 

3. Condition of his friends in eternity. 
(1.) For ever with the Lord. 

(2.) Never sin again. Never do a wrong or careless 
deed again. 

(3.) No sickness nor sorrow. 

(4.) Never see any one sin again. 

5. No end to the increasing joy. How shall any 
one become Christ's friend? 

(1.) It is described as believing. 

(2.) As a reunion. 

(3.) As a receiving. All invited. 



Hosted by 



Google 



268 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

What God does in this great work is unknown to us. 
It will be our adoration through eternity whether we 
know or not. What we do is very simple. We fail 
because it is so little more than because it is so much. 
" Go work." 

5. Every one is now invited to become his friend. 

6. The dreadful guilt and misery of those who re- 
fused to become Christ's friend. 

v. 

Meeting at the Judgment. 

After death knowledge of many things, and experi- 
ence not had here. But the realities of the judgment 
not all human. Long suspense 

(1.) Of the wicked. Fearful forebodings. Dreadful 
suspense it may be. 

(2.) Of the righteous. Confidence in Christ satisfies 
the mind. 

The judgment will come. What a great and long 
meeting. Who will there meet who have long been 
separated ? Such vivid recollections, who could bear ? 
Those who lean on the arm of Christ can bear the 
same. 

1. Cain and Abel. 

2. Noah and the men who reviled him. 

3. Abraham and those whom he left in Ur of the 
Chaldees. 

4. Esau and Jacob. 

5. Lot and the men of Sodom. 

6. Pharaoh and Moses. 



Hosted by 



Google 



SABBATH-EVENING INSTRUCTIONS. 269 

7. David and Saul. 

8. David and his son Absalom. 

9. Ahab and Elijah. 

10. Hezekiah and his father Ahaz. 

11. Josiah and his father Amon. 

12. Jeremiah and those whom he warned and en- 
treated. 

13. Stephen and his persecutors. 

14. Paul and his persecutors. 

15. Peter and Judas. 
Whom will you meet ? 

Your father ; your mother ; your teachers ; your 
brothers ; your sisters ; your minister, — all whom you 
knew on earth who love Christ. Where will you 
be ? Where will you go ? 

VL 
Sinners spending with riotous living. 

Luke xv. Describe the young man. 

1. Goods spent. Thoughts; conversation; heart; 
time ; intellectual powers ; social powers ; Sabbaths ; 
seasons for prayer ; opportunities to repent ; offers of 
mercy ; the Bible ; the preached gospel ; special calls 
of Providence ; special calls of the Spirit ; the love of 
Christ. 

2. Coming to himself. 

Describe him as he came in sight of his father's 
mansion ; describe the father ; contrast in their ap- 
pearance ; faint resemblance of the contrast between 
the sinner and his heavenly Father ; fell on his neck ; 



Hosted by 



Google 



270 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LY02T. 

what if the son had then turned away and preferred the 
love of harlots to his father's love. Would not such 
conduct resemble that of some sinners at the present 
day? Apply the whole to those present. 

"VIC. 

The strait Gate. 

First meeting of the school-year. Remarks about 
the solemnity of our position. The object of this 
meeting. Interests of the soul to be sought here. 

Various states of mind. 

1. Some seem to have no state. 

2. Possibly a few may have a great aversion to all 
religion, and a desire to be left alone to themselves. 

3. Some are in a strait between religion and the 
world. Worldly pleasures, worldly companions, and 
worldly prospects ever more. 

4. Some have a general wish that they may in some 
way become Christians ; but it is a very cold wish. 

5. Some came from home expecting here to find the 
pearl of great price. 

6. Some perhaps feel constrained and urged by the 
Spirit to attend to the subject without delay. 

IUad Matt. vii. 13-29. To guide you through this 
strait gate, and into this narrow way, is the object of 
this meeting. Looking forward forty weeks, what will 
then be your condition ? 

Who present wish to be guided into this narrow 
way ? With such I will leave three thoughts. 

1 , You must not expect others to do that which God 



Hosted by 



Google 



SABBATE-EVENING INSTRUCTIONS. 271 

requires of you. "Enter ye." He that is mine is 
mine for himself. 

2. Nothing relating to the soul should be deferred 
till to-morrow which ought to be done to-day. 

3. God is your only strength. Go to him — depend 
on him — ask of him. Go through Christ. 

vm. 

Teachings of the Spirit on the subject of Sin. 
Rom. vii. 7-15. 

1. Sin is every-where a dreadful evil. 

2. The holy law of God, against which sin is com- 
mitted. 

3. The displeasure of God with sin and sinners. 

4. The just condemnation of the sinner. 

5. The personal application of the guilt of sin to 
one's self. 

6. The application of the condemnation of sin to 
one's self. 

7. A great dread and loathing of sin. 

8. A fear of future sin. 

9. A fear of continuing to sin through eternity. 

10. Despair of strength to avoid sin. 

11. Despair of a disposition of heart to avoid sin. 

12. A personal acquaintance with the misery of the 
contest between conviction of duty on the one hand, 
and no heart to perform it on the other. 

13. Perfect helplessness and hopelessness of the sin- 
ner's condition. This is one class. 

There is another. 

1. That there is a Friend of sinners. 



Hosted by 



Google 



272 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

2. The need and sufficiency of the cleansing and 
pardoning blood of Christ. 

3. The almighty Arm which can reach the sinner's 
case. 

4. The personal application to one's self. 

5. The overwhelming feeling which sometimes fills 
the soul on the reception of salvation. 

6. The faint glimmering of hope in Christ which 
sometimes enters the soul and continues to grow. Oh, 
that faint glimmering of hope ! how unlike despair ! 

7. A relying on Christ and Christ alone for strength 
to forsake sin and consecrate one's self to the service 
of Christ. 

rx. 

Seeking an Interest in Christ. 

Isaiah lv. 1-3, 6, 7, 8 ; Matt. vii. 7, 8, 13, 14. 

1. If you ever do this you must make up your mind 
to begin. 

2. One time is more favorable than another. 

3. The favorable time is known to God. 

4. It is not known to us. 

5. The dreadful condition of those who have passed 
and lost the best time. 

6. The daily danger of meeting and passing the 
most favorable time. The present is the most favor- 
able time you will ever meet. 

(a) Circumstances. 

1. You are here. 

2. You were led to think of it before you came. 

3. You have been invited here. 



Hosted by 



Google 



SABBATH-EVENING INSTRUCTIONS. 273 

4. God has called you by his voice. 

5. God is now calling you. 
(b) Your condition. 

1. Your depravity. 

2. Your sin. 

3. Your miserable condition in yourselves. 

4. Your dependence on God. 

5. The salvation promised by Christ, 

6. The necessity of being born again. 

7. The office of the Holy Spirit. 

8. The conviction of your own conscience. 

9. The present thoughts now in your minds. 

10. The present moving of the Holy Spirit. 
Will you seek now ? 



Seeking the Lord. 
Isaiah i. 1-20. 

1. A work of great simplicity. 

2. A work of great sincerity. 

3. A work alone with God. 

4. A salvation for yourselves as you are ; not as 
you are not. 

5. Such a salvation as is provided, and not such as 
is imagined. 

XI. 

Christ Crucified. 

This is an appropriate subject to consider at this 
time ; the Holy Spirit now present. It is adapted to 
every class among us. 

18 



Hosted by 



Google 



274 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

1. God so loved the world. 

2. His only begotten Son was equal with the Father. 

3. From all eternity Christ had this plan of salva- 
tion before his infinite mind. 

4. He never turned aside from his work. 

5. In the fullness of time he came into this world. 

6. His whole temporal life given to this work. 

7. As the last scenes approached he kept his eye on 
this great work. 

8. The last interview with his disciples. 

9. The garden scene. 

10. The scene before his murderers. 

11. The scene on the cross. 

12. His giving up the ghost. 

13. His rising from the dead. 

14. His ascension. 

15. His being seated at the right hand of God to 
make intercession for us. For whom ? Among others 
for us here. 

(a) Those who have recently been born again. 
(6) Those who feel anxious for their souls. 

(c) Those who desire to be interested more deeply 
than they are. 

(d) Those who care not for their doings. 

His coming in the clouds of heaven. His farewell to 
his enemies. His welcome to his followers. Their 
ascension with him to heaven. The gates of heaven 
shut. The song in heaven of redeeming love. The 
mingling of the angelic host. The certainty of the 
eternal presence of Christ. Oblivion of his enemies. 



Hosted by 



Google 



-SABBATH-EVENING INSTRUCTIONS. 275 

XH. 

Choosing the Lord. 

Josh. xxiv. 15 ; Heb. iii. 7, 8. 

1. What to choose between? Belief in Christ or 
unbelief. 

2. Love of forgetting sin or the pleasure of pardoned 
sin. 

3. Worldly pleasure or self-denial for Christ's sake. 

4. Strength of Christ — weakness of self. 

5. Bearing one's own sins, or having them borne 
by Christ. 

6. Presence of Christ in the closet, or alone without 
any access to God. 

7. Rejoicing in the salvation of souls, or an unhap- 
py feeling in having any one saved. 

8. Desiring a revival, or a dread lest there should 
be one. 

9. A pleasure in meeting Christians, or a dread of 
having any one speak to you. 

10. Christ's presence through all this dark world, or 
a wandering alone. 

11. Christ's presence as death approaches, or a 
dread of death. 

12. Christ's presence in the last struggle, or passing 
alone through the solemn scene. 

13. Being received to Abraham's bosom, or lifting 
up the eyes being in torments. 



Hosted by 



Google 



276 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

XTTT. 

Sovereignty of God. 

Luke x. 8-16, 21. 

In governing the visible and invisible world ; espe- 
cially in the invisible work of grace in the heart. 

1. This doctrine a very solemn subject. 

2. Peculiarly suited to excite gratitude. 

3. Sovereign work carried on by gradual steps. 
Three stages. 

(1.) The state of being called. 

(2.) The turning state. 

(3.) The fixed state, unchangeable. 

First state ; offers of mercy free. No decree makes 
it necessary to be lost. Raised to heaven in point of 
privilege. Children of God invited to labor and pray 
— the mind led along — they may be saved. 

Second state ; often known only to God. A final 
fixing of the soul. A final crisis. 

(a) Of the believing ; they can never be lost. They 
will have a willing mind in God's service, and they will 
persevere. God knows who are his. We can only 
know by striving to make our calling and election 
sure ; by continually striving to enter into the strait 
gate. 

(b) The dreadful condition of the wicked. Given 
over of God. Christians may have no heart to pray. 
They may do wrong, but it is a providence of God. 
God in his providence may say, pray not for them. 
They may neglect to labor for them. Here they may 
do wrong. But in God's providence he may say, turn 



Hosted by 



Google 



SABBATH-EVENING INSTRUCTIONS. 211 

from them, and shake off the dust of your feet as a tes- 
timony against them. 

Third state. 

(1.) Becoming more like Christ. 

(2.) Approaching nearer to their home with him. 

(3.) Receiving more assurances of his love. 

(4.) They can never fail of grace — can never be 
lost. 

The wicked. 

(1.) Given up of God. 

(2.) More and more hardened and senseless. 

(3.) Approaching nearer their final doom. 

(4.) They will never be saved. 

Mistake about the second state. 

Sometimes very long and sometimes very short. 

Some persons think themselves in the third when 
they are in the second. It makes them reckless. 
Seek salvation now. 

XXV. 

The new Song. 

Rev. v. 9. 

Christ and his work for us. 

1. He has died for us. 

2. He has given us his Spirit. 

3. He has adopted us as his own. 

4. He has forgiven us all our sins. 

5. He has engaged himself, and all he has, in our 
behalf. 

6. He will give us his presence. 



Hosted by 



Google 



2 78 MEC OLLECTIONS OF MAR Y L YON. 

7. He will give us his sympathy. 

8. He will allow us to partake in all which he has 
and does. 

9. He will never leave us. 

10. He will stand by us in death. 

11. He will shield us at the judgment day. 

12. He will take us home to glory. 

13. He will teach us the new song. 

14. He will reconcile us to our eternal separation 
from Mends. 

The Wailing of Despaik. 

Matt. xiii. 47-50. 

Like the new song, the wailing will enhance the re- 
membrance of the past, and the truth of the pres- 
ent. 

1. Christ's love to them* when on earth — that slight- 
ed love. 

2. His agony and death to save them-from their pres- 
ent dreadful state. 

3. His calling them, and following them with his 
entreaties of love. 

4. His sending the Holy Spirit to urge them to re- 
pentance. 

5. His yearnings of compassion over them, as he 
saw them rushing down to death. 

6. The destruction of all excuses. The dreadful 
thought and feeling, " I could have been saved." 

7. The remembrance of all friends in heaven. 

8. Of the final separation. 



Hosted by 



Google 



SABBATH-EVENING INSTBUCTIONS. 279 

9. Of that eternal banishment. But^ the present, 
what is it in the breast? 

1. Hatred. 

2. Self-condemnation, remorse. 

3. Despair. 

4. Never to end — never to change. 

5. The conviction that the love of God demands this 
endless punishment. 

6. Submission of friends in heaven. 

7. The gratitude of those in heaven, as they see the 
smoke of the torment ascend up, for ever and ever. 



XVI. 

Interesting Chapter in the History of Paul. 

1 Cor. ix. 13-27. 

1. The general principle, that ministers should be 
supported. 

2. He did not claim this for himself. He must 
preach the gospel without reference to the earthly re- 
ward. 

3. His condescension to all. 

4. His fear that he might be a castaway, after all. 

5. His striving against the world, that he might not 
be a castaway. 

Instruction to us. 

1. What a dreadful thing to be a castaway. 

2. Danger of being a castaway. 



Hosted by 



Google 



280 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY L YON. 

(1.) To every one. The most established Chris- 
tian. 

(2.) To the lambs of the fold. Those who doubt 
whether they are Christ's lambs by his converting 
Spirit, or only by his convicting Spirit. These have 
cause to fear. 

(3.) To those who have no hope, how very great is 
your danger ! I look on you and inquire, Will these 
have any place in heaven ? Shall I meet them ? Shall 
I be there myself? 

3. Vast importance of resisting worldly temptation. 
We think of the sovereign grace of God, and we think 
right. But the sovereign grace of God includes 
means. In the efficacy of means, he exhibits his sov- 
ereignty. He has no need of means, he could set all 
aside. To all how important, believers and unbe- 
lievers. 

(1.) Resist bodily temptation, affectation, love of 
ease, dread of pain. 

(2.) Resist worldly friendships and intimacies. 

(3.) Resist temptations of your own heart, dread 
of being watchful, love of excitement, and of follow- 
ing it. 

(4.) Love of approbation of others. Remember 
Christ's words, Matt. v. 29, 30. 



Hosted by 



Google 



SABBATH-EVENING INSTRUCTIONS. 281 

XVUL. 

The Burden op Sin— Past, Present, and Future. 

Ezek. xvi. 1-13 ; 53-63 

1. Convictions of impenitent, only partial. 
(1.) No light from Calvary. 

(2.) Present sin no great burden. 
(3.) Outward reform sufficient. 

2. Some hopeful persons are in the dark. 
(1.) Dark in hope. 

(2.) Dark in view of Christ. 

I should love to stop and dwell on Christ. His 
undying condescension. His unparalleled sufferings. 
His present glory. 

(3.) Dark in view of sin. 

3. But not so all. 

(1.) The light of Calvary shines. 

(2.) In this light what a dreadful burden is sin, 

(a) What a great sinner I have been. 

(&) What a great sinner I now am. 

(c) How I dread future sins ; I know I have an Ad- 
vocate ; I can not abuse him. 

(d) How I long for complete deliverance. Oh, to 
be holy ! 

Many a one, on a dying bed, looks to death as the 
happy deliverance from sin. 



Hosted by 



Google 



282 BECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

xvm. 

Review of the Past. 

Deut. xxx. 11-20. 

The last Sabbath evening of the term. 

1. My responsibility to you, — to God rather for 
you. 

2. My conscious fidelity, and my great unworthi- 
ness. 

3. Contrast between our first and our last meet- 
ing. 

(1.) The anticipation ; that of myself and you. My 
work in prospect — your anticipations ; to some a priv- 
ilege, to some a burden. 

(2.) Now it is done, it is like death. So death will 
come. 

4. What hath God wrought? 

5. How has God been resisted? 

6. Death will come upon us like this meeting, — 
some in readiness ; some like the foolish virgins ; some 
without God. 

7. You hear my voice for the last time; the last 
time of Christ's voice. 

8. I have set before you life and death. 

9. I give you one more invitation, one more entreaty 
to the impenitent. 

10. I exhort all who indulge a hope of salva- 
tion. 



Hosted by 



Google 



SAB BATE-EVENING INSTRUCTIONS, 283 

XIX. 

Satan's Grand Temptation. 

Gen. ii. 8-17; iii. 1-13. 

Thou shalt not surely die. 

A very solemn and awful state to be without hope 
in Christ. A question of infinite importance, How 
shall I escape ? 

God is saying, Do this and thou shalt find salvation ; 
neglect, and thou shalt surely die. 

The difficulty of embracing true religion. 

There are great difficulties. God says you must 
begin, notwithstanding. 

Satan says you can not 

What are these difficulties ? 

1. The coldness of feeling. 

2. The hardness of feeling. 

3. The difficulty of thinking. 

4. The difficulty of praying. 

5. The difficulty of repenting. 

6. The difficulty of believing. 

With reference to time, God says now, or thou shalt 
surely die. Satan says, Thou shalt not die. 
With reference to religion itself. 
It is simple, — simplicity of the gospel. 
It is direct, — believe and thou shalt be saved. 
It humbles self, and magnifies God. 
It puts self out of sight, exalts God as all. 
It is not of works. 
This, an important truth, always brought before the 



Hosted by 



Google 



284 RECOLLECTIONS OF MAR Y L TON. 

conscience by the Holy Spirit ; always strenuously op- 
posed by Satan. This the grand difficulty. 



XX. 

Penitence for Sin. 

Luke vii. 36-50 ; xviii. 9-14. 

1. Impenitence most unreasonable. 

2. Impenitence greatly increases the sinner's guilt. 

3. Penitence an easy duty. 

4. But penitence is the gift of God. (The fruits 
of the Spirit.) 

5. The penitent feels himself to be the greatest 
sinner. We could not be penitent and have any other 
feeling. 

(a) Because he sees the internal source of his own 
sin. We can see nothing in the vilest wretch to equal 
it. 

(5) He sees the internal aggravating circumstances 
of his own sin, and he can see nothing in any other 
one equal to it. 

(c) His reason or philosophy can never prove, till 
all hearts are revealed, that he is not what he feels 
himself to be — the very highest in the scale of sin- 
ners. 

6. There are all degrees of penitence, from the 
faintest — scarcely dreamed by the soul itself — to the 
most overwhelming. 

7. Penitence of the penitent is ever increasing. 

8. Penitence is greatly increased by an assurance 
of forgiveness 



Hosted by 



Google 



SABBATH-EVENING INSTRUCTIONS. 285 

9. The true penitent will fix. his eye on God — an 
injured God, a forgiving God — more than on self; 
guilty, polluted self. 

XXI. 

The Holy Spirit. 

John xvi. 7-15 ; iii. 1-12. Connection of his work 
with Christ. 

1. He is too holy to come to the heart of the sin- 
ner only by the cross. 

2. Christ must go before, and finish his suffering, 
atoning work. 

3. He must appear before the Godhead and plead 
his death, and thus send the Spirit. " He ever liveth 
to make intercession." 

4. He teaches about Christ. He, who was as a root 
out of dry ground, becomes altogether lovely. 

The teaching of the Spirit of great importance to 
every one. 

1. Without this there is no possible hope. 

2. The Spirit can be grieved away. 

3. He comes not at our call. 

None will call for him when he is away. 

4. We know not when he is present always, but we 
can see his work ; and we can feel that he was here, 
and has gone, and left his great work, himself unseen. 

5. The work of the Spirit is often the gentle whis- 
per. Listen to the faintest whisper. 



Hosted by 



Google 



286 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

xxn. 

Electing Love of God. 

Eph. i. 1-12 ; ii. 1-10. Electing love, no electing 
hate. 

God elects for heaven — sinners elect themselves for 
hell. 

This a truth of great solemnity, sublimity, and of 
power. 

To many a source of death unto death. This ac- 
cording to a general principle. 

1. Some led to neglect the Bible. 

2. Some to become infidels. 

3. Some to give up seeking religion. To-morrow 
we die. 

4. Some to entertain hard thoughts of God. They 
look not on God's electing love, but they think of him 
as electing them to misery. But it has proved a source 
of life unto many. 

1. Some have been led to fear to contend against 
such a God. 

2. Some have been aroused from stupidity by this 
truth. 

3. Some cavilers have been silenced, — have feared 
to speak and think, and so have stood still aud sub- 
mitted to God. 

4. Some have been led to fear to trust to their own 
future efforts, — have seen their lost and helpless con- 
dition. 

5. Some have seen the love of God. 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORNING AND EVENING SERVICES. 287 

6. Some have been aroused from a state of almost 
despair. 

They thought they had sinned away the day of 
grace, but their thoughts of a day of grace had not 
been measured by the electing love of God. 

7. Some who have thought their case peculiar. 

8. Some who have almost ventured to hope in Christ 
have, by this, been led to trust. 



OUTLINES OF ADDRESSES AT MORNING AND 
EVENING SERVICES. 



Respect and Honor of Parents. 

Eph. vi. 1-3. 

Honor them when they are absent or dead. 

1. By pleasing your teacher. 

2. Doing what will meet their wishes when absent. 
8. By avoiding folly of all kinds. 

4. By choosing such companions as your parents 
would choose for you. 

5. By faithfulness in all things. 

6. By becoming valuable members of this family. 

7. By serving the Lord. 

Begin now, is my serious advice. 



Hosted by 



Google 



288 BECOLLEC TIONS OF MAR T L YOX. 



The Law of God. 

Matthew xxii. 35-40. 

Two great commandments. The perfections of this 
law. 

1. Its correspondence with eternal right. 

2. Its agreement with the holy character of God. 

3. Its agreement with human conscience. 

4. Its agreement with the glory of God. 

5. Its agreement with the happiness of man. 
How made known ? 

Originally by being written on tt^e mind and heart. 
Eom. i. 18-21 ; ii. 11-16. 

This beautiful law obliterated and darkened by de- 
pravity and sin. 

Its holy obedience all gone, but not all of its im- 
pressions. 

The image of God in its holiness gone — all gone ; 
but a remnant of his real image remains in the mind 
and heart of every one. 

The law given us again by a new revelation through 
Christ, the light of the world. 

The Bible is a transcript of God's holy law. The 
most condensed summary is the Ten Commandments. 
All who love God, love his holy laws. Those who hate 
God, hate his holy laws. 

Eead Psalm cxix. How many times repeated : Thy 
law — thy precepts — thy word — thy statutes — thy 
judgments — thy commandments — thy ways. 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORNING AND E VENING SER VICES. 289 

m. 

Reasons for making a public Profession. 

Matt, xxviii. 19, 20 ; Mark xvi. 12 ; Luke xii. 1-9 ; 
Acts ii. 37, 38 ; xxii. 16. 

1. The honor of God demands it. Essential to hon- 
oring God before men. 

2. The authority of God demands it. A great 
change in the institutions of God since Abraham's day. 
All religious ceremonies positive. The form not inv 
portant, but the thing essential. God blesses every 
form when the doctrine is evangelical. The belief 
that this is not important can not be remedied in an} 7 
plan by any degree of piety. 

3. Peace of conscience requires it. 

4. No one can be for Christ in the protracted neglect 
of this duty. They must be against him. 

5. God will not bless the labors of those who live in 
this neglect. 

6. Whoever lives in the continued neglect of this 
duty must destroy instead of saving souls. 

Objection. 

I do not know that I am a Christian. This can not 
be admitted as an excuse. 

19 



Hosted by 



Google 



290 RECOLLECTIONS OF MAR T L YON. 

TV. 

Hatred to Christ. 

John xv. 18-27. 

1. Universality of this hatred. 

2. Manifested by opposition and neglect. 

3. The principal channel for pouring forth hatred to 
the Father. Christ's words, " if ye had known me ye 
should have known my Father." 

4. Hatred for Christ's sake — to God — to his law 

— to his love — to the disciples of Christ. 

5. Exciting cause of hatred — "had not known sin" 

— comparatively. 

6. No excuse left by Christ for sin. Mouth stopped. 
And why ? 

(1.) Because Christ bears our sins for us. No 
pleading weakness, or ignorance, or thoughtlessness, or 
circumstances. No seeking thus to escape. 

(2.) Because Christ is our advocate with the Father. 

(3.) Because Christ washes our robes in his blood. 

(4.) Because Christ is ready to strengthen us to for- 
sake sin. 

(5.) Because Christ will finally present us spotless 
before the throne (not we ourselves). 

7. Hatred to Christ because he removes the excuse 
for sin. 

8. Hatred to Christ without a cause. 

9. Hatred to Christ because he is their best friend 
And why ? 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORNING AND EVENING SERVICES. 291 

(1.) They are enemies to their own souls, and they 
hate Christ because he loves their souls. 

(2.) They seek to destroy their own souls, and they 
hate Christ because he seeks to save them. 

(3.) They love Satan because he unites with them 
in hating their souls. 

(4.) They love Satan because he unites with them 
in destroying their souls. 

10. They hate Christ because of his unspeakable 
love, amazing condescension, and his glorious work 
of salvation. 

How dreadful is hatred to Christ ! 



•v. 

Living to God and living to the World. 

Rom. vi. 1-16 ; xii. 1 ; 1 Cor. vi. 19, 20 ; x. 31 ; 
Phil. i. 19-23. 

Doing our common business for the Lord or against 
him. 

1. "With prayer — without prayer. 

2. With the feeling, "If the Lord will," — without 
this feeling. 

3. With the impression that this earth is the Lord's 
and the fullness thereof — and without it. 

4. With a connection in our feeling between the 
commands of God and a perfect standard of doing what 
we undertake — and without this. 

5. With the feeling that eternity is the end of every 
thing in time — and without this. 



Hosted by 



Google 



292 EECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYOX. 

"VI. 

Prayer of Faith. 

Praying this prayer for our own family. 
"What to pray for? 

1. That here may abide the manifest presence of 
God. 

2. That every person may be brought under the con- 
trol of this influence. 

3. That every action and every event may be 
brought under the control of this influence. 

4. That all the souls here may be saved. 

5. That all doubting souls may be delivered from 
bondage. 

6. That real Christians "may be holy as God is 
holy." 

7. That as a family we may advance in the divine 
life. This felt in recess meetings — in morning devo- 
tions — on the Sabbath — during recreation clay. 

How shall we seek this spirit of prayer — this prayer 
of faith? 

1. By looking at the subject as an important reality. 

2. By living with the solemnities of eternity in our 
hearts. 

3. By giving up our own souls to God. 

4. By opening our hearts to receive Jesus Christ. 

5. By abiding in Jesus Christ. 

6. By following in the footsteps of Jesus Christ. 

Finally, let us seek first of all to follow in the foot- 
steps of Jesus Christ — to live as he did — to walk as 
he walked — to pray as he prayed — to suffer with 
him, if need be, as he suffered. 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORNING AND EVENING SERVICES. 293 

vn. 

Christian Fellowship. 
John x. 11-16 ; xiv. 20 ; xvii. 9-11, 20-24. 

1. Union together in Christ the most exalted union 
among created beings. 

2. A principle destined to grow. 

3. It must grow by nourishment, — not by medicine, 
but by nourishment enjoyed and relished in the par- 
taking. 

This nourishment is, — 

1. Sympathy together with Christians through their 
Head. 

2. United worship. 

3. United efforts. 

4. Choosing the society of Christians. Especially in 
choosing intimate friends, principle must take the place 
of feeling. 

5. Thanking God, as Paul did, for all their good. 
1 Cor. xiii. 4-7. 

vm. 

Self-Examination. 

Eph. ii. 1-10 ; 19-22. 

Have we evidence of being reconciled to God ? 
Kind, rather than degree, decisive. 
1. A humble and contrite heart. Every iota in the 
holy life of a Christian casts light on himself, and 



Hosted by 



Google 



294 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

sinks him lower in his own view, and gives him new 
views of himself as a sinner. 

2. A believing heart on Jesus Christ. 
(1.) As the Saviour. 

(2.) As my Saviour. 

Every thing sets forth the Saviour — sin, holiness, 
my sins, my feeble efforts in his service. 

3. A subdued spirit. 

The preciousness of being and feeling subdued under 
God. 

4. Desire for the glory of God in salvation. 

5. A subduing of all things in our hearts unto 
Christ. 

Our joys and our sorrows ; our hopes and our fears ; 
our present delights and our future prospects. 

6. A hungering and thirsting after holiness of heart 
and life. 

Groaning under sin, and longing to be delivered 
from easily besetting sins ; from sins in little things ; 
from sins unseen by others ; from sins not esteemed 
sins by others. 

7. A spiritual conscientiousness. 

8. An impress of eternity on temporal things. 



IX. 

Christ the grand Moving Power in Self-denial for Christ's 

SAKE. 

Book of Hebrews abounds in this motive : iii. 1-6 ; 
xii. 1-11; xiii. 12-14. 
Applied to giving money. 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORNING AND EVENING SEE VICES. 295 

That we may abound, be steadfast, immovable, in- 
creasing, and advancing — let us look at Christ. 

1. A view of what Christ has done alone can give 
us that love of others which we must have. 

2. Having a love of others like Christ's love, we 
must look at him to feel the worth of their souls. 

(1.) Through the light of Christ's agony we get a 
glimpse of hell. 

(2.) Through the light of Christ's agony we get a 
glimpse of heaven. 

3. Looking at Christ's work can give us confidence 
that we are right. 

4. Looking at Christ can give a spiritual interest in 
our work. 

5. Looking to Christ will give us strength to bear 
poverty — the want of all things. 

6. Looking at Christ will make us willing to bear the 
reproach. 

There is a reproach — a reproach that can be felt. 
This is a trial, the end of which you will not meet in 
this world. You climb and gain one peak only to dis- 
cover a new one. 

But, 7. Looking to Christ will give us respect to the 
final reward. Through Christ we can behold the joy 
set before us — the crown of rejoicing. 

Christ's Prayer for his Disciples. 

John xvii. 

1. The fact. Christ at prayer. 

(1.) Who is it? Infinite condescension. 



Hosted by 



Google 



296 RECOLLECTIONS OF MART LYON. 

(2.) For whom? Wonderful grace. 

2. Pleas used by Christ. 

(1.) They were given to him of God the Father. 
(2.) Christ had manifested his name to them. 
(3.) Their union with God the Father and the Son. 
(4.) Christ glorified in them. 

3. Particulars of this prayer. 

(1.) That they may be kept and not lost. Why 
shall we not fall as Adam did? Why not fall as the 
angels did ? 

(2.) That they may be kept from the evil of the 
world. When you pray for this, think of Christ's 
prayer. 

(3.) That they may be sanctified through £he truth. 

(4.) That their joy may be fulfilled. 

The glory of salvation unfolded in this prayer. 

1. Their union with the Father and the Son. 

2. Their like union with each other. 

3. Comparison between their relation to Christ and 
Christ's relation to God : v. 18, 21, 22, 23, 26. 

4. Christ, as God, wills in their behalf. 

The Godhead vailed, but uncovered at the close of 
this prayer. 

XI. 

Feeding the Lambs. 

John xxi. 15-23. 

1. What is it to feed sheep and lambs? 

2. Who are to do this ? All — the weakest believers. 
(1.) This agrees with the whole tenor of the gospel 

system. 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORNING AND EVENING SERVICES. 297 

(2.) It agrees with the experience of every new- 
born soul. 

(3.) It agrees with the experience of every returning 
backslider. 

(4.) It agrees with the experience of every advanced 
Christian. 

3. This is a great privilege. 

(1.) To deliver immortal beings from eternal death. 

(2.) To give them a place with the redeemed. 

(3.) Because they are Christ's lambs. 

a. His by creation. 

b. His by his providence. 

c. His by his purchase. 

d. His because he is seeking their salvation. 



XTT. 

Killing the Lambs. 

Ezekiel xxxiii. 1-9. 

Contrast to the command, " Feed my lambs." 
How? 1. Neglect of the heart. God looks on the 
heart of Christians in sending the Holy Spirit. 

2. Neglect of prayer. 

3. Religious deportment deficient. 

4. A worldly deportment suited to draw the heart 
from God. 

The daily deportment a channel through which 
God bestows or withholds his blessings. Confine to 
one prominent point — a heedless, trifling, noisy man- 
ner. 



Hosted by 



Google 



298 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

Specify — rooms — spaceway — domestic work — 
dining hall. 

The sad thought of having destroyed a soul ! 

1. It is like Satan and not like God. 

2. It is acting in opposition to the God whom we 
love. 

3. It is bringing misery upon those whom we love as 
our own souls. 

4. Their blood will be required at our hand. 

5. It is in opposition to all the strongest desires of 
the Christian's heart. 

The cause. 

1. In the heart. 

2. In wrong principles. 

3. In deficient self-denial. 
Remedy : watch and pray. 



XTTT. 
First Meeting op a Tebm. 

2 Peter i. 

The solemnity of our present position. 
My responsibility in this meeting. 
Your responsibility. 
Your duty as Christians. 
Seek to know that you are not deceived. 
Do this by proving yourselves to be Christians. 
1. Before God; 2. To yourself ; 3. Toothers. 
This the natural order — this the order of impor- 
tance. 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORNING AND EVENING SERVICES. 299 

I shall reverse the order. 

To others. 

How? 1. By general manner. 

2. Religious aspect. (1.) Meetings; (2.) Sabbath; 
(3.) Bible lesson ; (4.) Religious conversation. 

3. Serious and stable character. 

4. Consistent character. 

5. Benevolent character — not selfish. 

6. Self-denial. 

7. Resisting temptation. 
To yourselves. 

1. By having a conscience void of offense. 

2. By feeling your own unworthiness. 
(1.) To be called a Christian. 

(2.) To be allowed to be faithful. 

3. Labor for Christ. 

4. Suffer for Christ. 

5. Feel a confidence in God — an unspeakable trust. 

6. Have faith in Christ. 
Before God. 

God knows ; and yet say to him, " Thou knowest 
all things, thou knowest that I love thee." 



xrv. 

The Christian Hope 

Heb. xii. 1-24. 

To be left to doubt is one of the greatest chasten- 
ings of a young Christian. 

Reasons why some are thus left — to try them. 



Hosted by 



Google 



300 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

1. To make them solemn. 

2. To make them humble. 

3. To make them love the gospel for its own sake. 
The hope — instead of my hope — should often fill the 
mind. 

4. To prepare them to entertain and give a consist- 
ent and uniform reason for the hope within them. 

5. To prepare them to be stable Christians ; not 
changeable. 

6. To prepare them to enter on a Christian life as a 
subject of trial rather than of enjoyment — of tribula- 
tion — patience. 

7. To prepare them to labor for the salvation of 
others. 

8. To prepare them to act in obedience to the com- 
mands of Christ rather than according to their own 
present feelings. 



xrv\ 

Prayer of Faith for the Holt Spirit. 

Luke xi. 1-13. 

1. What is prayer? Social or public prayer? Se- 
cret prayer ? 

One is like dwelling in the outer court ; the other 
like entering the inner temple. None enter the inner 
temple who are not found in the outer court. 

2. Objects of prayer : — Every want; every grief; 
every anxiety; every temptation; every Mend and 
every foe. 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORNING AND EVENING SERVICES. 301 

But prayer for spiritual blessings for ourselves and 
others is the essence of prayer. 

In what do spiritual blessings consist ? 

In the gift of the Holy Spirit. Nothing is given us 
but by the Holy Ghost. He is the messenger. He 
takes of the things of Christ and gives them unto us. 

3. What is a prayer of faith? 

General faith implies confidence — trust — reliance 
— belief in God — in Christ. 

In special faith the heart filled with great truths. 
The great atonement by Christ ; the infinite ; the eter- 
nal condition in eternity ; the helpless condition of 
men ; the fullness of salvation ; the power of the Holy 
Ghost ; the promises of the Holy Ghost. 

4. There are special calls for a special prayer of 
faith. 

The disciples at Jerusalem; providential circum- 
stances ; our condition in this Seminary every year ; 
this year. 



XVI. 
Salvation of those who have sinned against great light. 

Ezekiel xxxvi. 1-38. 

1. Sinning against better knowledge a great dis- 
honor to God. 

2. Such are miserable in their sins. In their miser- 
able state they sin the more. 

3. God has pity on them. 

4. It is for his own mercies' : 



Hosted by 



Google 



302 RECOLLECTIONS OF MAR Y L YON. 

5. God's name greatly glorified in the salvation of 
such sinners. 

6. An inward, not an outward, change simply. 

7. An outward change, also. 

8. Such pardoned sinners will loathe and abhor 
themselves. 

9. They are exhorted to be ashamed and confounded. 

10. When such are forgiven, others will know that 
it is the work of God. 

11. God will be inquired of to do it. 

Wisdom, 
Prov. ii. 

1. Be wise in diligence. 

2. In self-control. 

3. In spending your time. 

4. In choice of companions. 

5. In conversation. 

6. In exercising a benevolent disposition. 

7. In seeking the glory of God, rather than your 
own praise. 

8. In seeking for the will of God, rather than your 
own will. 

9. In trusting in God rather than in yourself. 

10. In depending on Christ's atoning blood for free 
pardon. 

11. In seeking for heaven rather than earth. 

12. In seeking that others may be blessed, instead 
of thinking of yourself. 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORNING AND EVENING SERVICES. 803 

XVHI. 

The gkeat Choice. 

Joshua xxv. 14-27. 

A very important subject for you to consider at this 
time, and to attend to without delay. 

1. Because the subject of choice is infinitely greater 
than any other. It is a choice between heaven and 
hell. What is this? Think of hell. The light of 
heaven is shut out from some, and hell opens and 
shoots forth some glimmerings of its dreadful fires. 
Think of its intense torments — • of its eternal damna- 
tion ! 

2. Because all will not be saved. 

3. Because no impenitent sinner can have any prom- 
ise of being among the saved. 

4. Because the heart is deceitful above all things, 
and can not be trusted. 

5. Because you are claimed and sought after by the 
inhabitants of the two worlds. 

6. Because your salvation is entirely dependent on 
the Holy Spirit. 

7. Because the Holy Spirit has special seasons for 
this special work in the heart. 

8. Because the Spirit can be grieved. 

9. Because individuals have a special call to repent. 

10. Because God is now present here by his Holy 
Spirit, and may, for aught I know, and for aught you 
know, be giving you this special call. 

11. Because there is great danger of not believing 



Hosted by 



Google 



StyL RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

the truth taught you by the Holy Spirit, but of believ- 
ing a lie which is taught by Satan. 

12. Because God has no pleasure in the death of the 
wicked. 

13. Because there is joy in heaven over one sinner 
that repenteth. 

XIX. 
Pkating always, 

1. Pray for yourselves ; for yourself as an indi- 
vidual. Connect your prayer with your duty in the 
great work of converting the world. What does God 
require of you, and what should you be to do it? 

2. Pray for the conversion of souls. Connect their 
conversion with their future work in the conversion of , 
the world. 

3. Pray for the continued prevalence of religion in 
our family. Look at the example of Paul in this 
respect. What large blessings he sought. At the 
example of Jesus Christ. Connect this with the con- 
version of the world. God often connects great results 
with small things done in sincerity and faith. 

4. Pray directly for the conversion of the world : — 
1. Dwell on the promises that this world shall be 

converted. Read them. Pray over them. 

Pray that the fulfillment of these promises may be 
hastened. Dwell on the infinite importance that they 
should be hastened. Think of the multitudes who 
perish every year, and will continue to perish till the 
promises are fulfilled. What will the fulfillment be to 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORNING AND EVENING SERVICES. 305 

them when it comes ? Think of the truth, that it can 
be hastened by prayer, and that it can be delayed by 
unbelief. 

2. Fray for the prevalence of a missionary spirit. 
Pray that all who are converted may be converted to 
the missionary work, with a missionary spirit. How 
many reasons why it should be so. It was so with 
Paul. Who that has known the terrors of the law or 
the love of Christ can but have a missionary spirit ? 

3. Pray that the Spirit of God may be poured out on 
all Christians, and, by the light that shines roundabout 
them, they may see the importance of the missionary 
work. 

4. Pray for the success of missionary operations. 

5. Pray for a blessing on missionary societies ; 
American Board, and other societies. 

6. Pray for missionaries themselves, mentioning them 
by name. 

7. Pray for particular stations. 

8. Pray for all those who have gone from this Sem- 
inary, enumerating each, and the fields where they are 
laboring. Write their names. 

9. Pray for all who are laboring at home in an emi- 
nent degree, either personally or by their money. 

10. Pray for a universal spirit of liberality, and a 
universal spirit of prayer* 



Hosted by 



Google 



306 BECOLLEC TlOJSfS OF MAE Y L Y0N 9 

XX. 
Kegeneration. 

John iii. 1-1 1. 

1. An entire change. 
(1.) Not of the mind. 

(2.) But of the religious character. 

2. The figures new birth — raising from the dead. 

3. As great as any miracle. 

4. Not very obvious always to the individual, but to 
God. 

5. Manifestations of increase of grace like the 
growth of an infant. 

6. A work beyond the scrutiny of man. 

7. The circumstances not to be calculated upon, not 
to be predicted. 

8. A revival not to be talked about or calculated 
upon when in progress. 

9. This pre-eminently the work of God. 

10. The crowning work of Jesus Christ. 

11. Prayer, how appropriate; how full of wisdom 
and goodness its appointment. 



XXL 
Sin without Excuse before the Cross of Christ. 

1. Its universality. By a view of the cross it be- 
comes an individual subject. 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORNING AND E VEXING SEE VICES. 307 

2. General confession. At the cross the contrite 
heart needs something more. 

3. A general desire to become a Christian often 
gives a feeling of complacency, and a cloak for sins. 
At the cross this desire is lost sight of. 

4. A discouraged feeling about becoming a Christian 
is a cloak for sin. 

5. Excuses for neglecting to seek salvation. 
(1.) It will do no good for me to try. 

(2.) I would try if I knew I should succeed. 
(3.) I have once had a false hope, and now I want a 
good one, or none. 

(4.) What will others think of me? 



xsn. 

Entering God's Vineyard. 

Matt. xx. 1-16. 

1. God has a vineyard. 

2. It is a great privilege to be called into it. 

3. He rewards. 

4. The reward gratuitous. 

5. Those called into the vineyard often most un- 
worthy. 

6. At a late period, sometimes, 
(1.) Late in age. 

(2.) Late in having refused invitations. 

7. Motives, to enter the vineyard. Not an idle ser- 
vice. 

8. Encouragement to all to ask for a place. 



Hosted by 



Google 



808 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

9. Encouragement to hope against hope. 
Necessity of a spirit of entire consecration to God, 
as is illustrated in the life of Abraham. 



xxm. 

God's Mercy. 
Psalm cxxxvi. 

The great principle in the divine economy. " His 
mercy endureth for ever." 

Vs. 1-3. Leading attributes in God's revealed char- 
acter calling for praise and thanksgiving. 

4-9. Grand cause for all the works of God in crea- 
tion and providence. 

10-20. Grand reason for his judgments and the ex- 
hibitions of his wrath. 

21-24. Reasons for giving to some and withholding 
from others. 

25. Temporal blessings. 

26. General thanksgiving to God. 

1. We can see why God punishes. To lead others 
to repentance. 

2. We can see why he forbears. To lead to repent- 
ance. 

3. In the bestowment of temporal blessings God has 
a higher design than immediate good. 

4. The grand cause of salvation to any. 

Two impressions on my mind — one dark the other 
full of light. 

As a great whole the punishment of the wicked 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORNING AND EVENING SERVICES. 309 

seems wise and good — most for the glory of God ; 
most for the glorious happiness of the created universe. 
With this view we can join in thanksgiving for his 
judgments. 

But looking at individuals, our hearts are filled with 
anguish and our feeble minds clouded with mystery. 
We may sympathize with Christ in his weeping over 
Jerusalem. " Why was I made to hear thy voice ?" 
Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. 

Christians should be made solemn, penitent, and 
prayerful. 

They should bear their own sins and the condition 
of sinners on their hearts as they enter the holy place, 
and lay them on the head of the Lamb of God. Sin- 
ners should tremble lest they should be left, and strive 
to make their calling and election sure. 

I shall never read this verse again without recall- 
ing the impressive manner in which it was spoken 
just one week ago by Miss Washburn ; how she 
repeated, " for ever, for ever, for ever ; " adding, 
" who can tell what that means?" Even judgments 
are to show that his mercy endureth for ever. 



XXTV. 
Faith of Abel. 

Heb. xi. 4 ; Gen. iv. 2-5 ; 1 John v. 12. 

1. First recorded instance of a sacrifice. 

2. Institution of sacrifices a wonderful event. 

3. Describe the reason. 



Hosted by 



Google 



310 RECOLLECTIONS OF MAR Y L YON. 

4. Abel's penitence and Abel's faith in Christ, 

5. Abel's sudden admission into the presence of 
Christ. 

6. Abel being dead yet speaketh. The dead in 
Christ send a voice after them. 

1. He speaks to the impenitent. He was penitent. 

2. He speaks to the unbelieving. He had faith in 
Christ. 

3. He speaks to the self-righteous. He was clothed 
in Christ's righteousness. 

4. He speaks to those who depend on a religion 
which does not purify the life. His works were right- 
eous. 

5. He speaks to those who neglect great light. 

6. He speaks encouragement to the desponding. 

7. He magnifies the grace of God. 

8. He speaks in a voice of praise and glory to God. 
He has commenced the new song. 

9. Joy among the angels when he entered heaven. 
" Glory to God in the highest." 

10. His joy over every repenting sinner. 

11. His joy at every new meeting of a redeemed and 
sanctified soul. 



XXV. 
Glorying- in Infirmities. 

Not in sins, but in infirmities. 

1. Our greatest excellences have, by their side, some 
humiliating fault. This is then the subject of glory 
through our excellences* 



Hosted by 



Google 



MORNING AND EVENING SERVICES. 311 

2. Christ often employs the weakest instruments. 
We may be encouraged by this. 

3. There is often a needful thorn. Needful to open 
the way for communications of glory ; for blessed suc- 
cess in our work. 

4. Our prayers are sometimes not answered, that we 
may desire more than we can ask or think. How much 
better to have the thorn and grace than to have no 
thorn and no grace. 

5. The thorn often grows in our own character. 
This gives it its sharpness. 

6. There is a mystery in being reconciled to our own 
mistakes and missteps, and yet groaning to be delivered 
from all sin ; a mystery known only to the heart of the 
believer. 

Effects of glorying in infirmity. 

1. Our guilt magnifies the grace of God. 

2. Our corruption magnifies the power of the Spirit 
on our hearts. 

3. Our weakness magnifies the strength of Christ. 

4. Our unworthiness magnifies the condescension of 
Christ. 

5. A conviction of our unfitness to receive the 
blessing sought overwhelms us with gratitude when 
the blessing comes. 

XXVI. 
Taking no thought for the morrow. 

Matt. vi. 25-34. 

1. Religion, in general, is a present subject; not fu- 
ture nor past. 



Hosted by 



Google 



312 BE COLLECTIONS OF MAR Y L Y01T. 

2. Duty is present. 

3. Repentance. 

4. Faith. 

Advantages of this course. 

1. Persons can sustain what is laid upon them. 

2. They can do the most trying things. Abraham. 

3. They can bear the greatest burdens. 

4. They can venture to go forward. 



XXYTC. 
Christ the Light of the World. 

John i. 4-9 ; iii. 19-21. 

Human depravity and wickedness are the darkness of 
the world. 

1. Christ is the grand theme of the Bible. 

2. The grand subject presented to the heart by the 
Holy Spirit. 

3. The grand object of opposition by the powers of 
darkness and by wicked men. 

4. Christ is every thing to us ; we live in him ; for 
him ; to him e 



Hosted by 



Google 



FASTING. 813 



FASTING. 



Observance of the Day. 



Fasting has always been observed by eminent Chris- 
tians. Christ spoke of it, as a matter of course, as 
an established thing — ' ' when ye fast." We shou] d fast 
in view of our sins and in view of our necessities. There 
should be no compulsion in reference to the observ- 
ance of the day ; but we shall wish to have our house 
entirely quiet ; let the wheels of business stop, and, 
as it were, step into eternity and spend the day. 
I hope the impenitent will think how they are slighting 
the offers of mercy. 

To spend time in religious services, is like bringing 
the alabaster box and pouring it on the Saviour's 
head. We should give the best of this day to religion. 
If it is asked, Why is this alabaster box broken? — the 
answer is, From love to the Saviour. Spending time 
purely for religion, is more nearly like the service of 
heaven than any thing else. Let us seek to spend the 
day so as to have a realization of eternity. Depart 
far out of the world, and may you come back prof- 
ited, 

XT. 

What is Fasting? 

Fasting — literally to abstain from food ; extended 
to mean to abstain from all worldly pleasures or worldly 



Hosted by 



Google 



314 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

gratifications — society, reading, study, walking, rid- 
ing, writing letters, worldly musings. Spiritually-— 
to afflict the soul by bringing painful subjects before 
the mind. 

Painful subjects. 

1. How many sins I have committed. 

2. How unfit I am now for the Lord's work. 

3. The dreadful world of misery. 

4. The many who have gone there, the painful emo- 
tions in view of it. 

5. The fear that I may go there and fail at last. 

6. The danger in which others now stand. The haz- 
ard of every one without hope. The clanger of death- 
bed repentance — the danger of dela}^ — the painful 
feeling of seeing an impenitent sinner appear happy. 
The ignorant, who have none to teach them, parents 
nor teachers ; their danger — the heathen — every indi- 
vidual and their danger. 

7. The duties I have neglected, the wrong examples 
I have set ; the dishonor I have cast on God ; the souls 
I have led away from God. 

8. The low state of religion — the low standard of 
duty. 

9. Look at institutions of learning. 



Fast for Colleges. 

We met at the usual time for devotions. Miss Lyon 
said there were two objects she wished us to pray for 
to-day — the outpouring of the Holy Spirit in this 



Hosted by 



Google 



FASTING. 815 

family, and upon literary institutions. In praying for 
tliis family, pray especially for the impenitent. Look 
at the encouraging side in doing this. She then read 
2 Chron. xx. 20, also Luke v., the miraculous draught of 
fishes. How many of these dear teachers and pupils 
would say, We have toiled all the night, and taken 
nothing. There are a few in the clear senior class 
who have no hope. Can they not say they have toiled 
all the day, and all the night too, and taken nothing? 
Will they not let clown their nets to-day, and let us all, 
yes, every one, let clown our nets in their behalf? 
Then she turned to the middle class, and asked the 
same of them, and of the junior class, who are yet im- 
penitent. Are you willing to toil on month after 
month as you have clone, and take nothing ? Let down 
your nets to-clay, and let us all let them down, and see 
if we have not a great blessing. 

At half past two p. m. all were invited to a meeting 
in the Seminary Hall. (For the subject of remarks, 
see following section.) 

IV. 

Descent of the Holy Sfirit on Literary Institutions. 

Acts in 12-21 ; Joel ii. 12-32 ; Isaiah xliv. 1-18 ; 
lix. 19-21. 

1. The duty of praying for the descent of the Holy 
Spirit on literary institutions. 
(1.) Colleges. 

(2.) Theological seminaries, 
(3=) Preparatory institutions. 



Hosted by 



Google 



316 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY ETON. 

(4.) Female schools. 
(5.) Common schools. 
(6.) Schools for children. 

2. Duty of all teachers to make this an express 
object. Always keep it in mind. God has laid this 
on you. 

(1.) In preparing to be teachers. 

(2.) In seeking a place to teach. 

(3.) In the immediate anticipation of a definite 
school. 

(4.) As yon commence teaching. 

(5.) As you go on from day to day and from week to 
week. You may inquire what you shall do. " We 
know not what to do." 2 Chron. xx. 12. "But 
our eyes are on thee." I should not dare to try to 
tell you very definitely what to do. But feel that 
you must do something, and look to God to teach 
you what it is. 

3. Encouragement to labor. 
(1.) Promises of God to youth. 

(2.) Promises of God to faithful instruction e 

(3.) Promises to prayers,, 

(4.) Past goodness of God. 

Did a teacher ever enter on the work of teaching as 
a work for the Lord, looking by prayer and faith for 
the conversion of their pupils, who was not blessed ? 

Favorable circumstances. 

1. Teachers to unite with parents for the conversion 
of their children. 

2. Their common work would be an aid. Train the 
mind, cultivate the conscience, self-control, system, 
etc. 



Hosted by 



Google 



DETACHED SAYINGS. 317 

3. The newness of the acquaintance, and the new- 
ness of their situation. 

4. The shortness of the connection. 

5. The approaching separation. 

Who will venture to defer repentance to a better 
season ? 



DETACHED SAYINGS. 

Do not yield to inclination instead of judgment in 
diet, exercise, bathing, rising, etc. Attend to all these 
if you would have religious interest uniform. 

Confide in the judgment of your mothers. It will 
give your mothers great happiness to have you confide 
all to them, and it is the safer way for you. If your 
mother is in doubt in reference to a ride, walk, or a 
correspondence, your duty is certain. 

What is duty is duty, though ever so small. 

Seek to understand propriety in your intercourse 
with gentlemen. It is important to have this knowl- 
edge at the right time, that you may do nothing that 
will be a matter of regret to you. 

Form little rules for the improvement of character, 
but do not speak of them. 

Take just as good care of little things as large ones. 
The young lady who will leave a spoon out of place, 
or drop a clipper where she may chance to use it, can 
hardly expect to have a great deal committed to her. 

Character may be compared to a piece of embroi- 
dery, which is all accomplished stitch by stitch. 

27*- 



Hosted by 



Google 



318 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYOK. 

So live that it will be pleasant for others to think of 
you when you are dead. 

When curses are denounced upon children for par- 
ents' sake, it is upon wicked children for wicked par- 
ents' sake. 

Do not allow pride to make you silent. Some think 
they can say nothing worth saying. Probably none 
of us can ; but if communing together is appointed as 
a means of good, we should not neglect it. 

Be careful in regard to what you do yourself, and 
very charitable to others. 

Winter is the seed-time of health. Take much exer- 
cise in the cold season, if you would be well in sum- 
mer. 

It is as easy to improve five talents as one. 
5 None have more responsibility than others. Teach- 
ers have no more than scholars, except comparatively. 
Absolutely considered in reference to God, all are 
alike responsible. 

If any one thinks he has no responsibilities, it is 
because he has not sought them out. 

One great thing to be gained in an education, is to 
be able to possess comforts and privileges without 
becoming selfish. 

Decide whether you will be selfish or benevolent 
characters. 

Form such a character in this life as you will wish 
to possess through eternity. 

Seek to be always in such a state of mind, and to so 
spend each day, that you will be prepared for afflictive 
intelligence, and even for death itself. 

A sense of eternal things constantly upon the mind 
is calculated to make one uniformly cheerful and happy. 



Hosted by 



Google 



DETACHED SAYINGS. 319 

If we do not resolve to act at once when we are in- 
terested, the impression will react upon the mind, and 
wear away its sensitiveness. 

Never read a book without first praying over it. 

It is better to govern by conscience and judgment 
than by fear, but better to govern by fear than not at 
all. 

You all possess great power of influencing others, 
and I am afraid that some of you are weaving webs of 
sloth, worlclliness, or thoughtlessness which you are 
throwing around" your companions. 

Poor persons often speak disparagingly of the rich 
Christian. If they knew all his trials, they would 
spend the time thus occupied in praying for him. 

Remember, there is no kindness you can show a poor 
person like helping him to do for himself to the extent 
of his ability. 

If we can not yield our will in little things, God will 
almost certainly give us greater trials. He may not 
do it at once, but he will not forget that his child needs 
more discipline, and he will take his own time for giv- 
ing it. 

It is not possible for a person to be thoroughly im- 
bued with a missionary spirit who is not benevolent in 
other respects. 

Good table manners are to be especially sought for 
in such a family as ours, w r here, among so many, there 
is danger of degeneracy. It is said, and I think justly, 
that a lady is known by her table manners. 

In the review of a study at the examination, you 
will often find that some pages of the book were not 
well learned when you first went over it. As this 



Hosted by 



Google 



820 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

troubles you, remember that at the judgment misim- 
provecl clays will thus eome up. 

If you have the care of only one little child, never, 
for a moment, think that you have not a great work. 
If that child is spared to grow up, it may be that you will 
influence thousands through him. If he is early taken 
away, be happy in the thought that you have helped 
prepare a child for heaven. And we can not know bat 
the child in heaven does more for this world than the 
most devoted Christian minister spared to see his three- 
score and ten years on earth. 

Ask for a life of growth in all that is good, but do 
not ask for a life of ease. In asking this you may ask 
for eternal misery. 

Little faith, few works, and a little treasure in heaven, 
go together. 

Taste should be made a subject of practical educa- 
tion. Those articles of dress that are in the best 
taste do not change as much from year to year as 
others. 

I am always afraid of the influence of those ladies 
whose principal subject of conversation is plainness in 
dress. They are very likely to go to the opposite ex- 
treme. Self-respect is acquired and retained by some 
attention to dress. I have only a few brief rules to 
give you on this subject, and may never speak to you 
of it again. Never be singular in your dress, but en- 
deavor to dress so as not to be noticed. Never impress 
people as being fond of dress. Purchase good articles 
when you purchase any, and* seek to use them to the 
best advantage. I have no idea that Christ was neg- 
ligent of his dress. His garment was one counted 
worthy of casting lots upon 



Hosted by 



Google 



DETACHED SAYINGS, 321 

Act from principle in regard to going to church. 
Then you will do right, be it hot or cold, wet or dry. 
You probably know very little how much your vacant 
seat in church on the Sabbath affects your pastor. I 
am sure that it will always do the man of God good to 
see you regularly in your place in the house of worship, 
with the interested countenance which always goes with 
the interested heart. 

Seek for yourself a place where the flame of selfish- 
ness will not be fanned, 

I love to live for you, my dear children ,- but when I 
think of myself alone, I want to go home. 

Never plead native character as an excuse for your 
faults. The Bible gives no such excuse. 

A good Christian hope will not grow dimmer and 
dimmer like the taper, but, like the rising sun, brighter 
and brighter. 

Why are some persons in a hurry? Simply on ac- 
count of slothfulness. 

None can be honest to God who are not honest to 
man. 

. There is a definite time for every thing. If it is not 
done at its time, a place can never be found for it with- 
out displacing something else. If an hour is lost, it is 
never regained. We may crowd its duties into other 
hours, but the day is worth as much less as that hour's 
value, and even more. This is true of the whole of 
life. 

Bring your strongest intellectual powers into action 
when you look at the way of salvation. 

Many ladies are made most miserable by trying to 
be fashionable, because they have no character. 



Hosted by 



Google 



322 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

The cultivation of the ornamental branches without 
a thorough education, is like trying to polish cork or 
sponge ; but with that it is the burnishing of the finest 
gold. 

Follow judgment rather than impulse. Of all the 
leading-strings in the world, the last to follow should be 
fancy. 

We can compare ourselves profitably with others 
sometimes, and we should be careful not to lose what 
we thus gain. From the wise, we may learn to be 
wise ; from the impatient, learn to be patient ; from 
the unreasonable, learn the undesirableness of such a 
course. 

Always remember that there is no possible making 
up of lost time. 

There is a deficiency of grasp of mind if you do not 
think ; a deficiency of moral power if you do not care. 
Want of business habits in ladies consumes their time, 
their hearts, and gives them much perplexity. 

All the sins of the Christian will be remembered in 
judgment to show the exceeding love of Christ in their 
forgiveness. 

In estimating our obligations we must look at our 
means, our blessings, and our light. We must look at 
the wants of a world, — the door open, — - and then ask 
what God requires. Human laws tell us so exactly 
what to do, there is no room for faith. The Bible is a 
rule of duty, but leaves room for faith. There are 
general principles, like great pillars, on which we stand 
and study our duty. 

Do not wait for solicitors to ask for your missiona- 
ry contributions. Lay aside a portion as for a sacred 
purpose, and carry it if it is not asked for. 



Hosted by 



Google 



DETACHED SAYINGS. 823 

The benevolence of the Jews was, to an extent, ex- 
pended on their ceremonies. God seemed to say to 
them, You are not strong enough to convert the world. 

No missionary can give up as much as Christ did 
when he came to this world. We have none of us such 
a Father's house to leave. 

Those obtain the greatest happiness who seek it in- 
directly by promoting the happiness of others. 

Our greatest happiness is derived from our interest 
in and labor for others. The Christian's greatest joy 
or sorrow is in regard to others. 

Treasure up hints ; they may prove the seed of 
principles. 

Wealth and extravagance have no necessary con- 
nection. 

I have been asked if it would not be well for our 
young ladies to give an example of economy, and 
throw their influence in favor of it by pledging them- 
selves to wear certain articles of dress. (There were 
societies of ninepenny calico then talked of.) I would 
not like to have you do any thing of this kind. I do 
not wish you to be singular in your dress. Your time 
is too precious to be given to such an object. Neither 
do I think it best for you to confine yourselves to the 
cheapest articles of dress. It is not economy to do 
this. Nor do I believe that you will thus accomplish 
the greatest good. 

There is a defect in our present system of education. 
Knowledge of books increases faster than knowledge 
of character. 

There were more strong characters fifty years ago 
than now, because knowledge and reflection were bet- 
ter balanced. 



Hosted by 



Google 



824 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYOJST. 

The body and the mind each strive for the mastery. 
The body is of the earth. The mind ranges in eterni- 
ty. The mind should not sit down and wash the body's 
feet. The master should have the master's place. Take 
an illustration. In the morning the mind says, It is 
time to rise. The body says, It is cold. The mind 
listens to the body. Servitude and degradation fol- 
low. When you know it is time to rise, do it at once. 
And will you remember it all your lives, and how I 
stood here and asked you to do it ? 

Young ladies honor or dishonor parents in every 
thing they do. Their parents are judged by what they 
are. 

I have often conceived very high respect, and even 
affection, for the parents of my pupils, before meeting 
those parents. This has been given me by their faith- 
ful daughters. 

Parents are often more grieved by the dishonor 
shown them by their advanced children, than by the 
disobedience of little children. 

Economy for the sake of giving is never mean, but 
noble. 

Many persons are poor not because they have not 
enough, but because they do not know how to use what 
they have. 

I do not expect to ever want while I have so many 
grateful pupils. 

If I were to educate a young lady to fill the highest 
post, as far as intellect, wealth, and station were con- 
cerned, I would say, she should be strictly economical ; 
repair and mend her dresses rather than give them to 
the poor, and thus be able to give money that will flow 
through the world,, 



Hosted by 



Google 



DETACHED SAYINGS. 325 

Makers of fashion are not usually educated persons. 
Always give the throne to conscience. 

The frequent Sabbath headaches probably arise from 
change of employment; but we may so rise above 
them as to be found in church. 

It is important for young ladies to decide early in 
the school year, whether or not they can be cheerful 
and contented. Homesick people I do not place very 
high in the scale of character. 

Take care of your spelling, writing, reading, and 
singing. 

Humility consists not so much in thinking meanly of 
one's self, as in feeling one's dependence on a higher 
power for success. There is no better time for the ex- 
ercise of humility than when we succeed. The feel- 
ing is, Oh ! how unworthy I am to be able to suc- 
ceed. 

We ought to appear benevolent, as well as to be 
really so. This is the reason I think it best to have 
our missionary contributions in the form of subscrip- 
tions. 

Do not break a post-office law to save a ninepence 
or a quarter of a dollar. There is a kind of reverence 
in keeping law, though it be too strict. 

Acquire the habit of accounting for time as well as 
money. Yet avoid appearing too economical of time ; 
as when taking a book or paper into company. A 
lady should be so educated that she can go as a mis- 
sionary at a fortnight's notice. 

The feeling which leads us to say, I may do what 
others may not ; my case is peculiar, — prevents a vast 
amount of good in families, communities, and the 
world. 



Hosted by 



Google 



326 RECOLLECTIONS OF MAR Y L YOJSf. 

Cultivate foresight, and a habit of looking on the 
bright side, Nothing except a good conscience con- 
tributes more to an habitual cheerfulness than this 
habit. 

Cherish such a frame of mind as to be continually 
prepared for great and sudden events. 

In reading for devotion, it is more profitable to read 
a few verses. Read a little, and let the truths fall into 
your mind. Receive them just as they drop, as it were, 
voluntarily into the mind, and see if some thought 
does not seem most precious. Many make a great mis- 
take in making too great an effort to feel. You should 
not make much effort. Keep the mind on the passage, 
without wandering. This is very important. If you 
have one thought peculiarly precious, just think why 
you have it : because you have your mind on the 
Bible. Perhaps these precious thoughts will be some 
of the same you will have in heaven. 

The commands of God in the first ages are definite 
and simple, like those of a parent to young children. 
Little children can not infer their duties from general 
commands, but older ones can judge of parents' wishes 
from definite commands given to the younger. This 
renders their obedience higher, nobler, more gratify- 
ing to parents than if exact rules were given. In the 
same manner God leads us, his elder children, to 
infer our duty from directions given to the younger — 
those living in earlier ages. 

All are not required to act in relation to the same 
laws. Angels are not called upon to obey their par- 
ents, for they have no parents. Every command must 
be obeyed so far as individuals are called to act in 
relation to it« 



Hosted by 



Google 



DETACHED SAYINGS. 327 

If the ceremonial law and moral law had been 
mingled and delivered together, there would have been 
ground for caviling at the latter. But it does not say, 
" Thou shalt have no other gods before me," and then 
say, " Thou shalt not seethe .a kid in his mother's 
milk." 

The Bible was silent on the subject of keeping the 
Sabbath many hundred years, in several instances, yet 
when alluded to it is just as if it were binding. - 

The Bible has no favorite duties, no favorite laws. 
The stress the Bible lays upon subjects is proportioned 
to their importance. 

God is glorified by having his plans accomplished. 
When man's plans are accomplished it proves his wis- 
dom and skill. Just so with God. One way of honor- 
ing God is by increasing the happiness of ourselves 
and friends. Every time we diminish happiness, we 
dishonor him. When we appear unhappy and de- 
jected, we imply that he made us to be unhappy. 

A wish to be remembered after we are dead is not 
wrong, not pride, unless excessive. The Bible pre- 
sents this as a motive for action. 

More than nine tenths of the suffering we endure is 
because those around us do not show that regard for* 
us which we think they ought to. 

Most wonderful and comprehensive are God's laws. 
The reason that the ten commandments are given in 
so little space, is because the willing-hearted under- 
stand easily. They understand duty by the general 
spirit of the Bible ; e. g.> The spirit of the fifth com- 
mandment is, that we observe all relative duties. 

If you have an excellent father, you ought to respect 



Hosted by 



Google 



328 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

him, and so ought every one in the neighborhood ; but 
you have his parental character to respect, too. Even 
if a child have a wicked, degraded, drunken father, 
yet he must pay respect to that father as he does to 
no other person. 

The animal creation are not moral agents. They 
do not design to do things right or wrong, more than 
the plants that grow out of the ground. 

It is one thing to approve, and another to love ; one 
thing to disapprove, and another to hate. Much of our 
unhappiness arises from loving what we most disap- 
prove. 

Settle some great principles of duty for life. All 
who have ever attained to any great degree of per- 
fection have had certain rules by which to abide. 
Doubtful cases cause us much trouble. In these refer 
to your general rule. 

The violation of the seventh commandment may 
and ought to be examined as a general subject, but be- 
ware of learning particulars. 

Choose the society of such gentlemen as will con- 
verse without even once seeming to think that you are 
a lady. 

What course should be taken with children who 
make inquiries on the subject of births ? The mother 
is the proper person to answer such inquiries. Let 
her tell them no strange stories, but speak with sim- 
plicity, never without sufficient cause, and never in a 
way to excite further curiosity. She should lead them 
to feel that they should not speak of the subject, unless 
to her ; that she will talk to them about it when proper, 
and meanwhile they should be willing to be igno- 
rant* 



Hosted by 



Google 



DETACHED SAYIXGS. 329 

It is easier to judge without reason than to stop 
and think. 

It is a divine requirement to u take fast hold of in- 
struction." This implies something more than to sit 
still and merely receive what is brought to our minds. 
You must seek for knowledge, for be assured the heav- 
enly stranger will not force herself into your posses- 
sion, 

A conscience void of offense is the best commenta- 
tor. 

The keeping of the first table of the law is expressed 
in one word, — worship. One command gives us the 
object of worship, another the manner of worship, and 
another, still, the time of worship. 

Always treat your room-mates and intimate friends 
politely. 

Always be in haste, but never in a hurry. 

Accustom yourself to practice self-denial when it 
will promote the happiness of others. 

Acquire knowledge that you may do good. 

Act from principle rather than from feeling. 

Always conduct as if your parents were visibly 
present. 

Avoid undue excitement on trivial occasions. 

At the close of each day carefully review your con- 
duct. 

A time for every thing, and every thing at its time. 

Avoid unpleasant looks. 

Avoid smiling in meeting, and exchanging looks with 
an acquaintance. 

Avoid loud talking in the streets. 

Avoid doing such things as are suited to excite 
attention,, 



Hosted by 



Google 



330 RECOLLECTIONS OF MARY LYON. 

Be punctual to all appointments. 

Be sincere in your professions of friendship. 

Cultivate a pleasant countenance. 

Endeavor to eradicate prejudice. 

Endeavor to acquire that discipline which will enable 
you to judge correctly of yourself. 

Endeavor to improve in conversation. 

Endeavor to impart some knowledge of the Bible to 
some one younger than yourself every week. 

Endeavor to gain a thorough knowledge of domestic 
duties by practice. 

Exhibit such an example in your dress, conversation, 
and temper, as will be worthy of imitation. 

Get good and do good. 

In every thing you undertake, have some definite 
object in view. 

, Investigate every subject with which you would be- 
come acquainted, until you understand it. 

Learn to bear disappointments cheerfully. 

Never call on an individual unless you have a pros- 
pect of doing or receiving good. 

Never make calls on the Sabbath unless duty re- 
quires. 

Never speak unless j^ou have something to say, and 
always stop when you are done. 

Never laugh immoderately. 

Never smile at the infirmities of others. 

Never manifest any peculiar emotion at the looks or 
appearance of a stranger. 

Never be a minute too late. 

Never look behind you, or gaze icily at any person in 
the streets. 



Hosted by 



Google 



DETACHED SAYINGS. 331 

1ST ever make sport of an intoxicated or an insane 
person. 

Observe all the rules of politeness at home which 
you would were you situated among strangers. 

Spend time not only profitably, but most profitably. 

Study the Bible so much that every week you can 
perceive- you are increasing in knowledge of the sacred 
Scriptures. 

The intellectual miser is an object of contempt. 

What ought to be done can be done. 

To Teachers. 

Never engage to teach where you can not give re- 
ligious instruction. 

Say to scholars, " You must not do this because it 
is improper" not u because you are scholars " Whis- 
pering, for instance, is always impolite. 

A teacher should be careful not to appeal to herself. 
Let your actions speak. 

To improve perception, present objects before the 
school, and ask definite questions; e. g., "My watch 
and the bell, do they shine alike ?" — referring not to 
color, but to luster. 

Make the dull ones think once a day ; make their 
eyes sparkle once a day. 

Make a scholar decide as to matters of perception. 
A book of animals is useful. Compare not the whole 
animal, but one part. 

Avoid giving extra lessons for punishment. You 
certainly would not make a boy get a lesson for tell- 
ing a lie. 



Hosted by 



Google 



Hosted by 



Google 



