t LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, t 





$ 



%' ftp yifr/ri / r— ) G-. 



'mj/. 



{UNITED STATES OF AMERICA;} 



SCENES 



IN 



Switzerland 



Gretchen. 

A Night in the Cathedral. 

The Bride of the ^ar. 




PUBLISHED BY THB 
AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU-STREET, NEW YORK. 



Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1868. by the 
American Tract Society, in the Clerk's Office of the District Court 
of the United States for the Southern District of New York. 



*$ 



- 



SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 



? 



RETCHEN 



Time flies swiftly when we are sight- 
seeing ; and it was late in the antumn of 
18 — when I reached Lindau. Lake Con- 
stance lay before me, a pale, green sheet 
of water, hemmed in on the south by 
bold mountain ranges, filling the interim 
between the Rhine valley and the long 
undulating ridges of the Canton Thur- 
gau. These heights; cleft at intervals 
by green smiling valleys and deep ra- 
vines, are only the front of table-land 
stretching away like an inclined plane, 
and dotted with scattered houses and 
cloistering villages. The deep green of 



4 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

forest and pasture land was beginning 
to show the" touch of autumn's pencil ; 
the bright hues striking against gray, 
rocky walls ; the topmost edge of each 
successive elevation crowned with a 
sharp outline of golden light, deepening 
the purple gloom of the shaded slopes. 

Behind and over this region towers 
the Sentis, its brow of snow bristling 
with spear points. It was altogether 
too late to think of the Baths, or even 
to look at the little lake of Wallenstatt; 
and still, I was unwilling to return with- 
out a friendly shake of the hand of my 
old friend Spruner, who had perched 
himself in one of the upper cantons. 
"You should have been here earlier/' 
said the landlord; "in summer we have 
plenty of visitors." 

"I rather look upon the mountains 
in their parti-colored vests, than when 
dressed in simple green," I replied. 



GRETCHEN. 5 

"If you can stand the weather ;" and 
he thrust his pipe deeper into his mouth, 
and twirled the button of his coat. 

Hastily making toy adieus, the postil- 
lion cracked his whip, and we started. 
" There is no clanger of bad weather for 
a month, 77 said the driver, "and when 
we get up farther you will see what will 
pay you for the trouble of coming :' ; a 
speech that promised well for the day, 
I argued ; and a certain share of respect 
leaped up for the man in his laced coat 
and steeple-crowned hat. A good speci- 
men of his class— and once satisfied of 
this, I gave myself up to the present, 
without the least foreboding with regard 
to the future. 

Over us hung masses of gray cloud, 
stretching across the valley like a cur- 
tain, and falling in voluminous folds 
almost to the level of Lake Constance. 
As we passed through this belt, and 



6 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

came out, with cloud and mist below us, 
I listened as the postillion related the 
popular legends handed down from one 
generation to another, for the last six 
hundred years. Beaching the crest of 
the topmost height, he stopped sud- 
denly. 

"It is just the day to see the herds- 
men;" and he threw down the reins, 
and prepared to dismount. I stood up 
and looked around. 

"The' battle you know between the 
herdsmen and the monks, with Austria 
to help. It was a hard battle, and the 
knights were whipped; and ever since, 
on certain days, the herdsmen are seen 
armed with bows and pikes," he con- 
tinued. By this time I had taken in his 
meaning, and turning my attention to 
the misty curtain rolling up into clouds 
about the sides of the mountain, I had 
no difficulty in picturing the discomfited 



GEETCHEN. 7 

Austrians flying from the pursuit of the 
hardy mountaineers. 

11 It was a great battle, and they have 
never tried it since," and there was a 
ring in the voice that sounded like the 
echo of Griitli. 

"No wonder, if your herdsmen are 
still ready to keep up the fight." 

" You do not see them," and he made 
a gesture in the direction where my eye 
still lingered. 

" As plainly as any body can," and I 
tried hard not to smile. 

" It is quite true this ;" and he gath- 
ered up the reins. 

"I do not doubt it," 

As we passed on, the clouds rounded 
into islands, touched with silver on the 
upper edges. 

" This is the place for fine muslin and 
embroideries," said the postillion in a 
changed tone. 



8 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

" Where are they made ? ;; I asked. 

" Every house has a loom," he said. 

A small way to manufacture muslins ; 
but when the density of' the popula- 
tion and the incessant labor is taken 
into consideration, it is not so strange. 
With regard to the houses I was great- 
ly disappointed. Not only are they so 
near that neighbor's can converse freely, 
but they are large, and even luxurious, 
in comparison with the same class in 
other parts of Europe. Many of these 
houses are four stories, with large, 
square rooms at the base ; the upper 
ones narrowed by the high steeple roof 
which projects several feet, forming bal- 
conies, beautifully carved and highly 
ornamented. The outer walls are cov- 
ered with shingles from two to three 
inches broad, overlapping each other, 
and rounded at the ends; reminding one 
of old ropfs seen in the French quarter. 



GRETCHEN. 9 

The lowest story is of stone, plastered, 
and whitewashed. Such a house is very 
warm, very durable ; and painted by the 
successive changes of winter and sum- 
mer, the external appearance is alto- 
gether pleasing. Our ascent was grad- 
ual ; with stately houses one after an- 
other, and fruit-trees on the sheltered 
side. In the balconies, pots of bright- 
hued flowers, and sometimes a face to 
greet us. 

Towards sundown we halted at the 
little town where my friend had depos- 
ited himself; and as my foot touched 
the wooden step of the little hotel, whom 
should I meet but my old college chum ; 
no longer thin and pale as when I knew 
him, but round-faced as an alderman, 
and merry as though his heart was full 
of new wine. 

11 You are not to stop here, 77 as the 
landlord came out to receive me: "My 



10 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

house is not far off, and GtRETCHen, you 
remember her? will be glad to see you. 7 ' 
Of course I remembered Gretchen ; but 
to meet her as my friend's wife was quite 
another thing. A few steps brought us 
to the door of a handsome establishment 
two centuries old, or more ; the front 
frescoed, and the interior neat and order- 
ly as a New England housewife's. The 
floor upon which we entered from the 
street was paved with a species of mar- 
ble, black and white, diamond shaped, 
but too suggestive of cold to be altogeth- 
er pleasing. A broad, wooden staircase 
of a peculiar rich brown hue led to the 
parlor on the second floor. The win- 
dows looking out into the mountain ran- 
ges were draped with ruby-colored dam- 
ask • the floor was covered with a richly 
tufted carpet bordered with flowers, and 
sofas and easy chairs were temptingly 
arranged. On a table in the centre of 



GRETCHEN. 11 

the room, and under an elaborately- 
chased lamp, were implements for let- 
ter-writing, magazines, and newspapers. 
Through the folding-doors we caught a 
glimpse of well-filled book-shelves, and 
a woman's voice came floating out to 
the rich, mellow accompaniment of the 
piano. There was the rustle of a silk 
dress. I turned my head. 

"This is my ambition/ 7 said my friend, 
while a look of pride blended with the 
manly expression of his handsome face. 

There stood Gretchen — the G-retchen 
I had known ten vears before ; no longer 
the slight blushing girl, but mature in 
her beauty, a happy wife and mother ; 
the same sweet smile on her lips, and 
her eye full of gushing gladness as she 
welcomed me to her home. 

The fire was blazing cheerily, and we 
three talking of the old times, with hard- 
ly a thought of the broken links between. 



12 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

"The college is still the same, 77 said 
my friend, "with the high cupola and 
long galleries. Gretchen and I visited 
it last summer*; there were few that we 
knew, and many of the professors have 
slipped away. G-retchen's father was one 
of these. We missed him in his quiet 
home, and above all, in the old church. 
A man with dark hair and black flash- 
ing eyes stood in his place — a learned 
man, but wanting in the inward fire, the 
simple eloquence of the old man we used 
to love. After service, I strolled past 
the college buildings, and tried to trace 
the names we cut on the old beeches, 
but they were all overgrown. 77 

" I know nothing that brings home to 
the heart so quickly the consciousness 
of increasing years, as to find those 
whom we used to look upon as children 
grown to maturity, taking upon them- 
selves the care and responsibility of life. 



GEETCHEN. 13 

Here is Gretchen ; a deeper bloom upon 
her cheek, -and her eye sparkling with a 
higher pride. 77 

11 Just as mid-day is brighter than the 
morning/ 7 said my friend. 

Down the hall came the pattering of 
little feet, and the nurse entered with 
two stout boys and a lovely girl, a sec- 
ond G-retchen, the same roguish blue 
eyes, and golden hair rippling away 
from her white forehead. 

" These are my hopes, 77 said the fa- 
ther, and a smile curled his lip, and his 
eye filled with tenderness as he glanced 
at G-retchen 7 s face. Lingering over the 
tea-table where Grretchen presided with 
more than youthful grace, we talked not 
only of the past, but of present work 
and life. 

"One," I continued, taking up the 
thread, "I met in Southern Italy, dream- 
ing, as I was dreaming, by the dark 



14 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

grotto of Pausilippo. Meeting upon 
classic ground, it seemed strange to talk 
of old times, but we did. And sitting 
down upon the promontory of Baise, look- 
ing off upon the blue sea, we told each 
other our respective stories ; just as ships 
will shift their course to come within 
speaking distance, compare longitude, 
and exchange letters, and — part. I have 
not heard from Eckerman since. " 

My dreams were pleasant that night, 
and the next morning there was another 
surprise for me. Gretchen's brother was 
the pastor of a little church just above 
them ; I must not go without seeing him, 
G-retchen said. How could I ? Euler 
was my classmate ; together we labored 
for knowledge, and our first manly sym- 
pathies run in the same channel. 

On Sabbath I saw my friend in the 
pulpit. "How like his father/ 7 I whis- 
pered to Gretchen ; the poetry in him 



GRETCHEN.- 15 

warming his soul into a burst of fervid 
eloquence, and his face glowing with the 
beautiful truths he was unfolding to his 
hearers. An uncouth church of rough 
stone, with quaint windows and curious 
carvings, the ceiling arched, with a blue 
ground on which blazed innumerable 
stars. Strange and novel as it was, my 
eye never wandered from the speaker ; 
the voice and expression so like the 
kind and generous man who had pre- 
sided over the college, and who carried 
with him the affections of each succeed- 
ing class. This seems to me more of a 
triumph now, than it did then. A cul- 
tivated mind may challenge respect, but 
there is need of a noble one to win affec- 
tion. 

It was a week before I could think of 
leaving, and then the clouds twisted 
through and around the severed pyra- 
mids of the Alps, and the rain began. 



16 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

In such weather the scenery is not only 
shrouded, but the people are shut up 
in their homes. Pastor Euler had an 
ample study however, and here we read 
and wrote, and talked ; with his wife, a 
pleasant-voiced woman, to enliven the 
pauses with music, and children dashing 
into the study giving abrupt and sud- 
den turnings to our dreaming. Christ- 
mas was near, and I was easily persuad- 
ed to see more of a people, shut in as 
they were from the noise and commo- 
tion of the lower world, and still not so 
far as to be unknowing of all that was 
taking place, whether in deliberative 
bodies, state policies, or the lighter chit- 
chat of the day. 

" You will have an opportunity to see 
more of my parish than you can possi- 
bly see on a Sabbath occasion. I visit 
them as often as I can, and twice a y^ar 
I receive them at my own house. The 



GKETCHEN. 17 

' Weihnachtsgeschenk ' is looked forward 
to with great pleasure, and the meeting 
of the Landsgemeinde in April is sure 
to bring my people together." 

Gretchen and her husband were clam- 
orous for me to remain, and there was 
no resisting the pleading tones of the 
children, their little clinging fingers 
stronger than bands of iron. 

All night' the rain beat against my 
chamber window, and in the morning 
the lower slopes of the mountain were 
wiiite with new snow. Dark clouds lay 
heavily on the Alpine peaks, the air 
was raw and chilly — still it was Christ- 
mas. I was aroused at daybreak by the 
chiming of village bells, and then a pro- 
cession of choral singers went through 
the streets, pausing under the window 
of each house, and singing Christmas 
hymns. As they passed on, the chil- 
dren caught up the refrain, and joining 



Scenes in Switzerland. 



18 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

hands made the halls resound with their 
gleeful voices. Before breakfast a huge 
bowl was passed around with a foaming 
drink, not unlike egg-nog in appearance, 
but differing in taste materially. " May 
your Christmas be a merry one," as it 
passed from lip to lip ; " and a profita- 
ble one," was always responded. 

Church was open an hour earlier than 
on ordinary occasions, " so that the peo- 
ple may have ample time for dinner," 
said the pastor. Eeligion with these 
mountain worshippers was not a form. 
The birthday of the blessed Eedeemer 
was to them a reality. They believed 
that he was born and that he died ; and 
it was to commemorate his nativity that 
hymns were sung and garlands wound. 
At an early hour they began to gather,, 
and before the time of service the house 
was closely packed. There were no 
chains of evergreen, but small fir-trees 



GKETCHEN. 19 

were occasionally placed. These were 
covered with garlands and crowns of 
bright-hued flowers, giving a novel and 
striking appearance, as of some floral tem- 
ple or mosque, set in a great pavilion. 
The high pulpit was draped in white, and 
a voluminous white curtain covered the 
background. The effect was charming. 
And as the pastor began the service, 
the melody of his voice broke away 
into tenderness as he touched upon the 
love of God in giving his Son to be the 
propitiation for sin : holding up the pic- 
ture so vividly, and telling the simple 
story with a * pathos and a power that 
little children even could not fail to see 
and to appreciate. How much better 
than studied and elaborate essays, div- 
ing into metaphysics and technicalities 
so deeply that beauty is lost, and the 
mind diverted by the difficulty of fol- 
lowing the intricate windings. 



20 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

First did he impress his hearers with 
the fact that God loved the world, and 
through the fulness of that love the Son 
came down to suffer and to die : second- 
ly, that the natural heart is at enmity 
with God, not willing that God should 
rule. Thus a change must be effected; 
a reconciliation made. This could only 
be wrought by sacrifice ; and Christ was 
offered once for all ; his blood cleanseth 
from all sin. A plain, simple statement, 
and it sunk into the hearts of his hear- 
ers with a power sure to tell upon their 
future lives. * 

After the blessing, eateh remained 
silently upon his knees for a few mo- 
ments. Then all was greeting and con- 
gratulation ; all were friends; the idea 
never entered their heads that a stran- 
ger could be among them at that season. 

At dinner I was introduced to the 
landamman and two other members of 



GKETCHEN. 21 

the council, and from them gathered 
brief notes with reference to the little 
democracy won, and held intact for so 
many years. The dessert was hardly 
removed before they began to come: 
first the old men in black coats and high 
hats, and women with white, pointed 
caps and wide ruffles ; then the middle- 
aged, fathers and mothers, bringing little 
children, all with the same conscien- 
tious expression on their faces, the same 
" Happy Christmas, 77 while the pastor's 
" God bless you, ;; was a benediction 
that carried happiness to the hearts of . 
those who heard it. 

Lastly came the youths ; maidens with 
eyes full of a childlike innocence, the 
quick color coming and going as they 
greeted the pastor and his friends, and 
received his blessing in return. Gret- 
chen and her husband were with us, and 
G-retchen number two was my especial 



22 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

escort, leading me through the rooms, 
and introducing me in her naive man- 
ner, "Mamma's friend, and papa's, and 
uncle Euler's." 

Christmas festivities were kept up dur- 
ing the week; and before that elapsed, 
I was won to add a month, and then an- 
other, it being quite impossible to slip 
away from the kind friends with whom 
I had so much in common ; the fascina- 
tion only the more potent as we listened 
to the beating winds, and looked out 
into the slippery paths leading down 
into the cantons beneath. 

Spring had come when it was "fit- to 
travel, 7 ' as Gretehen said. The green 
of the landscape was brilliant and uni- 
form ; the turf sown with primrose, vio- 
let, anemone, veronica, and buttercups. 
It was time for me to leave ; neither 
could I be persuaded to stay till the 
meeting of the Lanclsgemeinde. It was 



GRETCHEN. 23 

sad to leave them, and the little Gret- 
chen was only pacified by my assurance 
that, if possible, I would return at no 
distant day. My friend Spruner had 
business at Herisau, and spending one 
more evening together, our prayers 
mingling for the last time, we parted. 

Our way led through the valley of 
the Sitter, a stream fed bv the Sentis 
Alps, and spanned by a bridge hun- 
dreds of feet above the water. The 
same smooth carpet of velvet green was 
spread everywhere. 

"There is no greener land," said 
Spruner; "the grass is so rich that the 
inhabitants cannot even spare enough 
for vegetable gardens. Our tables are 
supplied from the lower vallies." - 

"In our countrv we should not dream 
of making hay in the month of April," 
*I remarked, seeing several stout men 
already in the field. 



24 SCENES IN SWITZEKLAND. 

1 1 With suitable care they can mow 
the same field every six weeks, 77 re- 
sponded my friend. "And it is no 
doubt this peculiar process that gives 
such sweetness and splendor of color, 
seen nowhere else, not even between 
the hedgerows of England. 77 

The day proved to be neither clear 
nor rainy: a steel blue sky brougth out 
the broken peaks of Kasten, while the 
white shoulders of the Sentis were veiled 
with a thin, gray suit. 

" A month later and we should see 
the herdsmen, 77 remarked Spruner. " The 
leader of the herd marches in front with 
a large bell suspended from his neck by 
a handsome leathern band • the others 
follow, some with garlands of flowers 
and straps of embroidered leather, with 
milking pails suspended between the 
horns. 77 

Before nightfall, occasional streaks of 



GRETCHEN. 25 

sunshine shot across the mountain. It 
did riot last, however, and when we 
reached our stopping-place, it was rain- 
ing below and snowing above us. 

The next morning our road dropped 
into a ravine, bringing something to ad- 
mire at every turn. Leaving our course, 
we visited the Cascade of Horsfall, the 
beauty of which amply repaid us for the 
delay it cost. That night we slept at 
Herisau, the largest town in the Canton, 
and here I was to part with Spruner. 
There was no difficulty in reaching the 
lower valley. With many shakes of the 
hand, and "May God's blessing be upon 
you, ;; we parted: one to take the rail- 
road to Zurich, the other back to his 
household charms, and the work he had 
chosen. 



26 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND 



A Night in the Cathedral 



Franz Hoffner's father was kappel- 
meister ; and the old cathedral with its 
grained arches and cloistered aisles re- 
sounded with rare music, as the organ- 
ist took his seat, and run his fingers 
oyer the keys with the careless ease of 
one who knows not only to control, but 
to infuse something of his own spirit 
into the otherwise senseless machine be- 
fore him. Under his inspiration it be- 
came a living, breathing form ; lifting 
the hearts of worshippers, and giving 
them glimpses of what is hereafter to be 
obtained. 

•Herr Hoffner was a rare musician ; 
but, alas, musicians are no exception to 
the rule : the wheel is always turning ; 
one goes up and another goes clown. A 



A NIGHT IN THE CATHEDKAL. 27 

new star had risen. Court belles and 
beauties grew enthusiastic. The elec- 
tor's heart was touched ; his influence 
was asked. "Herr Hoffner has been 
here long enough/ 7 it was said. There 
was a twinge of the electoral conscience. 

Herr Hoffner went to his house a 
ruined man ; and the new favorite, Carl 
Von Stein, played upon the keys so dear 
to the heart of the old organist. 

Herr Hoffner had a wife and two- 
lovely children ; and one would suppose 
that he could live in the beautiful cot- 
tage the elector had given him, inde- 
pendent of the favorite. But no; de- 
prived of his old instrument all else was 
lost to him. For hours would he sit 
before his humble door, heedless of his 
wife's entreaties or the childish prattle 
of Franz and Nanette ; his eye riveted 
on the old cathedral, and his hands play- 
ing nervously, as though cheating him- 



28 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

self with the idea he was still at the 
organ. Then roused by a sudden inspi- 
ration, he would rush to the piano and 
play till his hands dropped from mere 
exhaustion. 

Franz and Nanette loved music, and 
they could play skilfully, but they were 
all too young to be of service ; and thus 
they lived cut off from all outward influ- 
ences befitting their age ; loving music 
above everything else, and yearning for 
the time when they could go out and 
win for their father, as he had once done 
for them. 

Years passed. Franz Hoffner was a 
tall, slight boy, and his father was blind. 
Sitting at his cottage door he could no 
longer see the tall towers of the old 
cathedral, but he could hear the chime 
of stately bells — and his fingers played 
on; while Franz and 'Nanette not un- 
frequently climbed up the winding stairs, 



A NIGHT IN THE CATHEDRAL. 29 

just to beg Here Yon Stein to let them 
touch the keys their father used to love. 
It happened one day the organist went 
out and left the key in the lock. Franz 
entered with the evening worshippers. 
A nameless feeling seized him. Urged 
on by the sudden impulse, he mounted 
the stairs. He did not dream of play- 
ing, he only thought of the organ as his 
father's friend; and to seat himself on 
the stool where his father had so often 
sat was all he aimed to do. A moment, 
and he spied the key ; would there be any 
harm in raising the lid and playing him- 
self? Herr Yon Stein had never denied 
him. He grew courageous. A few chords 
and Franz forgot that his father would 
be expecting him ; piece after piece was 
played till his memory could serve him 
no longer, and then he began to impro- 
vise. 
- All at once heavy shadows were cast 



30 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

over the keys : he looked down into the 
church, it was dark and still. A strange 
awe seized him, he felt that it was night ; 
and the great doors locked. Hastily 
as his trembling limbs would allow, he 
crept down the stairs. Darkness shroud- 
ed the. aisles. He reached the doors, 
they were barred and bolted*. What 
would his father say? and Nanette, 
would she think where he was, and rouse 
the old door-keeper? 

High up through the tower-window 
he caught sight of a star ; and the moon 
poured her silver radiance full on the 
face of the organ. Creeping up the 
stairs, he once more opened the instru- 
ment. Surely some one would hear him 
if he played, and Nanette lie knew would 
not leave him to stay in the old cathe- 
dral alone. 

Hours passed : the full moon cast her 
splendor on a sweet child-face bent over 



A NIGHT IN THE CATHEDRAL. 31 

the keys in the organ-loft of the old 
cathedral, a smile still played about his 
lips, and his light brown hair lay in rings 
on his broad, white forehead. Franz 
was asleep, and while asleep he dreamed. 

A beautiful lady, he thought, came to 
the cottage ; she" had a sweet, lovely 
face, but so sad that Franz 'wondered 
what sorrow could have come to one so 
rich and beautiful. The lady caught the 
expression of his eye, and slipping her 
arm around him, drew him still nearer. 

" You think because I am rich that I 
must be happy. Learn then, my child, 
that wealth does not bring happiness; 
neither does beauty win lasting favor. 
To be good is to be rich, and it also 
makes us beautiful. The power that we 
have in ourselves is far superior to the 
outward circumstances that surround us/ 7 

"My father had this power,' 7 replied 



32 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

Franz. " You see it did not profit him ; 
for when he thought himself secure as 
kappelmeister, the elector gave his place 
to another, and now he is growing old 
and blind. 77 

4 'Is this so? 77 exclaimed the lady, a 
warm light flashing into her gray eye. 
"Did the elector give his place to an- 
other r ■ 

"Indeed, he did; and it broke my 
father's heart, 77 replied Franz. "Since 
then, we have neither of us known pleas- 
ure ; only when we go to the cathedral, 
Nanette and me ; and when we return, 
our father never tires of asking ques- 
tions. 77 

"This must not always be, 77 replied 
the lady. "Will you come with me, my 
child, and it is possible we can show 
you a way whereby you can do some- 
thing t for a father whom you so much 
love. 77 



A NIGHT IN THE CATHEDKAL. 33 

"I will go with you/' replied Franz; 
"but I must not be gone long, for my 
father will miss me when he wakes. 77 

Then Franz gave his hand to the 
beautiful lady, and she led him by a 
smooth way through the most lovely 
wood; tall trees, filled with singing birds, 
skirted the banks of clear, running 
streams, while flowering shrubs and vines 
flung their perfume to the air. At length 
she came to a gate so strong and high 
Franz thought it would be impossible to 
open it. But as they approached, it 
seemed to swing back noiselessly on its 
hinges. Franz saw- there w r as a lodge 
there, with a gray-haired man, and little 
children playing before the door, and as 
t]je lady passed all bowed to her. 

Presently they came in sight of a 
magnificent castle, its walls white and 
glistening ; while the sunlight glinting 
against the deep windows, flashed and 



Scenes in Switzefland. . 



34 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

scintillated like a bed of diamonds. As 
they came nearer, the lady left the broad 
road, and wound along a narrow path, 
and came to a little postern gate, and 
up a broad marble terrace, with spark- 
ling fountains, and with flowers brighter 
than he had seen before, and birds of 
gay plumage flashing their beauty through 
the tree-tops. At the top of the terrace 
she gave him into the care of an elderly 
man, with a white flowing beard and 
eyes full of tenderness. A few words 
were said, and the old man took Franz 
by the hand and led him into a room, 
the floor of which was marble, smooth 
as glass, while the walls were green and 
gold. In the centre was a marble basin 
or pool, with steps leading clown; tlie 
atmosphere was dim by reason of a 
sweet and subtle perfume rising from 
the water. Franz was hardly conscious 
till he came out of the bath ; then his 



A NIGHT IN THE CATHEDRAL. 35 

hair was carefully dressed, and a new 
suit of clothfes was brought him. 

He had only time to look at himself 
in the mirror, when the lady returned. 
She was dressed in a rich white silk, 
covered with lace and sprinkled with 
pearls and diamonds. On her head she 
wore a crown ; bright and sparkling as 
it was, it was not half so beautiful as the 
sweet face that beamed below it. • The 
deep traces of sorrow were gone, she 
looked like one happy in the conscious- 
ness of a good deed done, and a sweet 
smile was on her lip as she held out her 
hand to Franz. Together they walked 
down the marble hall and up the broad 
staircase, on through rows of stately la- 
dies and martial-looking men, the crowd 
opening and bowing as they passed. 

At length they came to a room larger, 
more magnificent than the rest. Per- 
sian carpets covered the floor, and the 



36 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

windows were draped with blue and 
gold. On a dais at the extremity of the 
room was an oaken chair of quaint de- 
vice, in which sat a proud-looking man, 
pale and careworn as though weary of 
so much state and ceremony. 

"My child," said the prince, "Do you 
feel like playing for me? I am too weak 
to go to the cathedral, and I fancy if I 
can hear you play I shall feel better." 

Franz was a timid boy, but he loved 
to please. He was always ready to play 
for his father. He glanced at the lady, 
there was a sweet smile resting on her 
face. Dropping on his knee Franz kissed 
the hand of the prince. " I will clo my 
best, since you are so good as to ask 
me." 

Franz looked up, and saw what he 
had not seen before, an organ quite like 
the one his father so loved. 

"Play just as you clo in the old cathe- 



A NIGHT IN THE CATHEDRAL. 37 

dral," whispered the lady, and then she 
seated herself in a chair by the side of 
the prince. Franz saw nothing but the 
keys, he heard nothing; but the sweet 
soul harmony, and this he must inter- 
pret to the beautiful lady and the sick 
prince by means of his instrument. How 
long he played he never knew, but when 
he ceased a slight hand lay on his shoul- 
der, and a sweet face bent above him. 

"To do good, Franz, is the secret of 
happiness. This power is yours, and 
so long as you use it, so long you will 
be happy. The dear, heavenly Father 
watches over and cares for those whose 
lives are given for the good of others." 
Saying this she led him away to the 
prince. But what was Franz's surprise! 
beside him on his right hand were Franz's 
father and mother, no longer blind, but 
dressed in costly robes, their faces radi- 
ant with happiness, while Nanette looked 



38 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

charmingly, in a white gauze dress and 
silver slippers. Franz was bewildered, 
not knowing whether to advance tow- 
ards the prince, or to run and embrace 
his parents. 

"This is the. reward of obedience to 
your parents/ 7 said the lady, kissing the 
boy's white forehead. 

The light of clay came streaming 
through the tower window — the child 
awoke. It was cold. A chill ran through 
his frame. He had been in the cathe- 
dral all night, and his parents — what 
anguish they must have endured. Has- 
tily as his numbed limbs would allow, 
he went down the stairs. A few wor- 
shippers were bowing before the altar; 
Franz dropped on his knees a moment, 
and then ran with all his speed out of 
the door and clown the street. 

Very glad were Franz's parents when 



A NIGHT IN THE CATHEDRAL. 39 

he returned, and Nanette wept for joy ; 
but when at breakfast he related his 
dream, the face of the old organist lit up 
with a great hope. 

"I know, my boy, it will all come 
true. So long as we love and trust Him, 
the good Christ will not leave us to suf- 
fer. 77 

Christmas had come. There were no 
presents for Franz and Nanette. Only 
one could they make, and this was a 
nice, warm dressing-gown for their blind 
father. 

One day a beautiful lady took refuge 
in the cottage ; her carriage had broken 
down, and she must stop till the postil- 
ion could return to the castle. At the 
cottage she he&rd Franz play and Nan- 
ette sing, and listened to the blind or- 
ganist, as the cathedral bells broke on 
the evening air. 

"You must come with me/' said the 



40 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

lady. "We have been planning con- 
• certs at the castle, and you shall give 
them.'.' 

"My children are not old enough to 
go by themselves, and I am blind/' re- 
plied the father. 

" I will not deprive you of your chil- 
dren/ 7 said the lady; "my father has 
influence. And besides, he has near him 
an eminent physician; it is possible some- 
thing can be done to restore your sight." 

In three days the lady returned, and 
carried Herr Hoffner with his wife and 
children to the castle. Charmed with 
the young musicians, the elector repent- 
ed of the thoughtless deed, in depriving 
the father of his position as kappelmeis- 
ter. Very tenderly did he treat him now, 
and under the care of the skilful physi- 
cian, it was soon announced there was 
hope of his recovering his sight. This 
done.. he was once more offered the posi- 



A NIGHT IN THE CATHEDRAL. 41 

tion ; but Herr Hoffner was a just man ; 
to do by others as he would be done by 
was his motto. Herr Yon Stein had 
filled the post acceptably; it was no 
fault of his that the old organist had lost 
his place. Herr Hoffner would not ac- 
cept it, but only asked that he might be 
allowed to give concerts with his chil- 
dren. Franz labored diligently at his 
studies, and already was he beginning 
to surprise his friends, not only with his 
playing, but with his composition. 

Years passed : there was a great gath- 
ering in that grand old capital. A mu- 
sical festival was in progress, and all 
the celebrities the world over had con- 
gregated there. Franz Hoffner was in 
the zenith of his glory. At the close of 
the performance, and while the entire 
audience joined in acclamations of praise 
to the youthful leader, a rich medal was 
presented. On one side the profile view 



42 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

of the elector and his daughter, set 
round with diamonds ; on the other, 
"Music is only valuable as it lifts the 
heart and purifies our fallen nature. 77 

Franz Hoffner lived to be a great 
musician ; but he never ceased to think 
of his parents and Nanette. Honors 
were empty, and applause vain, only so 
far as they contributed to the happiness 
of those he loved. 



CC THE BRIDE OF THE AAR," 43 



i i 



The Bride of the Aa 



It was the clay after Christmas ; a 
heavy fall of snow during the night, the 
tiny flakes full of graceful motion till 
long past noon, had made a gloomy clay 
for the inmates of Myrtlebank. True, 
there was many a gay trill and clear 
silvery laugh ringing through the old 
rooms. Alick was spending his college 
vacation at home, and Frank and Carry 
were merry as school-girls are wont to 
be, when books are flung aside, and fun 
and frolic take the place of study and 
recitation. 

" What are you dreaming about, uncle 
Paul?' 7 and Carry perched herself on 
the arm of her uncle's chair, and patted 
his cheek with her little dimpled hand. 



44 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

U I have been thinking, child 77 — and 
there was a choking sensation in uncle 
Paul's throat, and a strange mist in his 
clear gray eyes. Carry's s} T mpathies 
were awakened. 

" Thinking about something long time 
ago, uncle Paul? 77 and the rosy cheek 
was laid close to the thin, pallid one. 

"Tell us, uncle Paul; you know you 
promised us ; 77 and Carry slid her arms 
about her uncle's neck, and felt his great 
heart beat against her own. 

"It was a long time ago, 77 began uncle 
Paul. "I had just finished my studies, 
and not being strong, the physician ad- 
vised a year's travel on the continent. 
My father was a merchant, and had 
friends in the different European cities, 
and there was little danger that I should 
lack for attention : and with a supply of 
letters, and one in particular to a friend 
of my father's, a pastor among the moun- 



"THE BKIDE OF THE AAR. 45 

tains of Switzerland, I started. I pass 
over the leave-taking; finding myself 
alone on the sea; the nights of calm 
when leaning over the ship's side, look- 
ing clown into the dark depths, mur- 
muring snatches of home songs, bring- 
ing up vividly before me faces of those 
I loved; and as the ocean swells came 
rocking under us, down we went into the 
valleys and up over the hills of water. I 
felt as safe, rocked in the great cradle of 
the deep, as w T hen at home. His eye 
was upon me ; His arm encircled me. 

''But pleasant as the voyage and full 
of memories, I see that you are impa- 
tient to pass over to the mountains of 
Switzerland. Words are weak to de- 
scribe the magnificence of the Juras : 
looking upon the rolling heights shroud- 
ed with pine-trees, and clown thousands 
of feet at the very roadside, upon cot- 
tage roofs and emerald valleys, where 



46 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

the deer herds were feeding quietly. 
All this I had seen, ^nd then we came 
to a little town called Bex; and here, 
from too much expenditure of enthusi- 
asm perhaps, I was confined for weeks 
with a racing fever. 

"One day, when the fever left me weak 
and feeble as a child, who should enter 
but the good pastor Ortler. He had 
heard of my illness, and -leaving home, 
he had travelled over the hills to nurse 
me in my weakness ; and when I grew 
strong enough to bear it, he treated me 
to short drives along Lake Leman, 
whence we could see the meadows that 
skirt Geneva, the rough, shaggy moun- 
tains of Savoy, and far behind them, so 
far that we could not distinguish be- 
tween cap and cloud, Mont Blanc and 
the needles of Chamouni. 

"The good pastor Ortler, with his fine 
voice and clear, earnest eyes, was in 



'•'THE BRIDE OF THE AAE." 47 

possession at all times of a charm of 
manner that had for me an irresistible 
fascination. But when he talked of God, 
his greatness as seen in his works, the 
magnificent and matchless glory by which 
we were surrounded : above all, when 
he spoke of His tenderness and love, I 
realized as I had never done before the 
beauty of holiness, and the happiness, in 
this life even, of a soul firmly anchored 
in the faith of Christ. 

"Once, I remember, he steadied my 
feet to a rocky point overlooking the 
little town of Ferney, and the deserted 
chateau of Voltaire. And then followed 
a conversation, in which the tenderness 
of the good -pastor's heart was manifest 
as he spoke of the fine mind wrecked on 
the sands of unbelief. ' And to think of 
this man's influence, 7 he said, with sor- 
row in his tones, and regrets over a lost 
life and a lost soul. 



48 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

"Upon the shores of the lake stood the 
old home of De Stael 5 and nearly oppo- 
site, its white walls reflected upon the 
bosom of the water the house where 
Byron lived and wrote. In the distance 
we could see the gleaming roofs of Ge- 
neva, the dark cathedral, and the tall 
hotels. As the weeks wore on I grew 
stronger. Winter was coming, and the 
good pastor must go home. He would 
not hear of leaving me, and together we 
went down into Savoy, and over the 
' mer de glace/ and trod on the edge 
of frowning glaciers. 

"We were sufficiently near the monas- 
tery of the great St. Bernard to take it 
in our path ; toiling along where the ice 
cracked in the narrow footway, and the 
moon glittered on the waste of snow 
and glinted across the dark windows. 
Pastor Ortler was at home with the 
monks, and hardly had we thawed our- 



"THE BRIDE OF THE AAE." 49 

selves before the ample fireplace, when 
a supper was prepared, and over their 
well-spread tables the monks told sto- 
ries of travellers lost among the granite 
heights, with clefts and ledges filled 
with ice. 

. "Among the rest, friar Le-Bon gave 
a description of the 'Ice Maiden/ or 
'Bride of the Aar,' said to be seen often 
when the great glacier of Aar sends out 
icy breezes, and the echoes ring from 
rock to rock, as it were the audible voice 
of God. 

'"Years ago/ he said, 'a young Eng- 
lishman and his wife were travelling for 
scientific purposes ; measuring heights, 
and sounding depths. They were al- 
ways accompanied by guides ■ but now, 
charmed by the untold splendor, and 
urged by deep emotion, they climbed 
higher and higher, regardless of danger. 
Twice had the guide called out to them 



Scenes in Sv/itzeilan I. 



50 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

that the very beauty of the clay, the sun 
obscured but not darkened, the softened 
air, were all favorable to a snowslide or 
avalanche. 

'"Full of life and vivacity, the young 
wife went on from one point to anoth- 
er, higher and higher; her lithe figure 
brought out against the sky, as occa- 
sionally she plunged her iron-pointed 
staff deep into the snow, and turned to 
admire the vast panorama at her feet. 
Her husband was making the ascent at 
a slower pace, looking up to admire the 
boldness of the little woman, and then 
playfully scolding her as she stood poised 
in mid-air so far above him. Aware of 
her danger, and fearing to startle her, 
the guide had ascended, and now stood 
with the husband on a little ledge quite 
underneath the cliff on which stood the 
fearless bride. 

" 'A moment — there was a low, mur- 



"THE BRIDE OF THE AAR." 51 

muring sound, as when the autumn leaves 
are swept by the evening breeze. The 
guide heard it, and his cheek paled. At 
the same time a voice was heard above. 

" ' " What is that, Walter, it seems as 
though the mountain was moving ? 77 

" ' "For heaven's sake, jump! we will 
catch you, 77 shouted the guide. 

"'"Quick, Gertrude! 77 A gleam of 
white shot over them, and a piercing 
shriek mingled with one long resound- 
ing crash, and the glittering crystal was 
plunged into the valley below, leaving 
nothing but bare jagged rocks and stunted 
shrubs, where all was smooth and white 
but a moment before. Months after, the 
bones of the fair English girl were buried 
here, 7 continued friar Le-Bon. 

" ' And her husband? 7 I asked. 

" 'They brought him here, and it was 
terrible to see his agony. When he 
grew stronger, we sent a novice with 



52 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

him to England ; it would not do to trust 
him by himself. 7 

" 'You do not mean to say that his 
reason was gope V I asked. 

"'He was never rational after that 
morning/ replied the friar; 'muttering 
and moaning, and repeating the name 
of Gertrude constantly. Carl left him 
with his friends, and we have never 
heard if he recovered. 7 

" 'And the lady? 7 asked pastor Ort- 
ler. 

" 'On calm, still days, and just before 
an avalanche, 7 said the kind friar, 'her 
image is always seen standing upon the 
loftiest height, beckoning with her white 
taper fingers to some one below. 7 

"Entertained with so much hospital- 
ity, we were loath to leave the friendly 
hospice, only for the pastor's anxiety to 
reach home. Down into the sweet val- 
ley of the Megringen, and northward by 



"THE BKIDE OF THE AAB." 53 

Grindenwald and Thun, and up the steep 
heights over which falls the white foam 
of Eeichenbach ; and farther on towards 
the crystal Rosenlani, and the tall, still 
Engel Horner, we came to a little vil- 
lage cradled in security beneath the 
towering hills ; the church-spire glancing 
in the sunlight, and the simple cottagers 
jubilant in welcoming home their beloved 
pastor. 

" At the door of the pastor's home we 
were met by a sweet-browed woman 
with a lovely infant in her arms, crow- 
ing and laughing as the father kissed it 
over and over again ; while a boy of ten 
and a girl of six summers, ran with open 
arms to greet him. 

11 ' You stayed so long, papa. 7 

" ' And we missed you so much, 7 after 
the first greeting. 

•'"This young friend was very ill ; you 
would not have had me leave him V 



54 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

■- l Oh, no, papa, but 7 — when the little 
Gi-risekla stopped suddenly, and threw 
a half-defiant glance at my face, and 
Thorwald stood measuring me with his 
great black eyes. 

■ l Hardly recovered from my illness, 
I stayed with the good pastor Ortler 
through Christmas week, and a month 
afterwards. Never did I pass pleas- 
anter days. The wife Rosalind was as 
kind as a sister, and her children grew 
soon to like me as an old friend. Yery 
simple was their manner of life, while 
the air they breathed was fragrant with 
the love they bore to Him who made 
and redeemed them, and who had in his 
good providence, set them in a pleasant 
place. 

" Christmas to them was not a week 
of jubilee alone. Busy hands decorated 
the little church, and visits were made 
to the poor and sick, and presents were 



"THE BRIDE OF THE AAR." 55 

given without the hope of reward. Sit- 
ting by the parlor fire at night, the 
pastor told of the parishioners he had 
seen, their wants and needs ; while Ro- 
salind knit stockings, and fashioned gar- 
ments. 

- -Vlt would seem that one so well fitted 
for society would tire of this narrow 
bound/ I once said. With an eye brim- 
ming over with tenderness, the pastor 
replied: 'There are souls to save here 
quite as precious as anywhere else.' I 
felt humbled before his quiet glance. 
This was the work for him to do ; this 
was the work he loved. What matter 
in what part of the vineyard ? wherever 
there was a soul. But this mountain 
grandeur pleased him. These quiet sol- 
itudes led him upward. The glorious 
diadem of the hills was always urging 
him onward. Hard and self-denying 
as his life, he had ample recompense in 



56 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

daily, hourly communion with the Fa- 
ther through the majesty of his works.' 7 

" I should like to live where I could 
see all this/ 7 whispered Carry. 

"The heart that loves, finds beauty 
and grandeur everywhere. 77 responded 
uncle Paul; "not only the mountain 
passes, but the valleys echo His praise, 
and there are few places so sterile but 
human lives abound. 77 

" Griselda and Thorwald, have you 
seen them since ? 77 asked Carry. 

"Ten years afterwards, I saw them. 
G-riselda was a tall stately girl, with 
blue laughing eyes, and curls of pale 
brown, and Thorwald was a student at 
Geneva. Pastor Ortler was still the 
same, preaching to his little flock, and 
giving freely of his means, his wife only 
slightly older. Once more we wandered 
over the heights and in the valleys, the 
spots where I lingered years before, 



"THE BRIDE OF THE AAB." 57 

plucking a flower and drinking from the 
cold glacier water. Afterward, when it 
became necessary for me to return, good 
pastor Ortler and his wife went with 
me, and together we passed a winter in 
Milan. 77 

" And G-riselda ? ?; asked Carry. 

"Oh, uncle Paul, Oriselcla was 77 — 
and Carry glanced up at the portrait of 
a young and beautiful woman hanging 
in a niche on the left-hand of the fire- 
place. Uncle Paul's portrait occupied 
the other side. Silence brooded over 
them ; while to Carry it seemed the lady 
in the picture looked as if with recogni- 
tion in her eyes. How delicate, how 
aerial she seemed ! yet real, and true. 
Was it any wonder uncle Paul was so 
good, having had the companionship of 
such a spirit so many years? And as 
she looked, the stately frame seemed to 
open, and the lady to come down from 



58 SCENES IN SWITZERLAND. 

her place and seat herself on the other 
arm of uncle Paul's chair, and to lay 
her head on his shoulder. 

"To do good was her aim, Carry; 
may it be yours/ 7 said uncle Paul, and 
the spell was broken. 



JEW BOOKS FOE THE YOOT0. 

SQUARE I6MO. 



■*— f 



Hours with Mamma. By Mrs. S. E. Dawes. Charm- 
ing productions of Bible narratives, for young children, 
with 33 beautiful Engraving. $1 10. 

Paul Tenner ; or the Forge and the Pulpit. A fine 
story, based on facts in real life, by a favorite writer for 
the young. The reader's liveliest interest goes with the 
young hero and his friends through trials and efforts 
which secure a noble Christian manhood. Three Engrav- 
ings. $1 15. 

The Hopes of Hope Castle, or Times of John Knox 
and Queen Mary Stuart. By Mrs. S. T. Martyn. The 
stirring and momentous events of the days of Knox and 
the bigoted Mary are here given as from the pen of a 
young lady of the Hope family, blending the story of 
home life with scenes of historical interest. A rich treas- 
ure for old and young. $1 15. 

The Climbers. A grand story for boys, and their sis- 
ters too, by a new American writer. It is fitted to awaken 
a desire to excel in the best sense. Five Engravings, 
$1. 

Nats for Boys to Crack. By Kev. John Todd, D. D. 
Treating a variety of subjects in the pointed, shrewd, and 
racy style which makes this author's writings so populai 
wid impressive. $1. 



Sybil tirey; or a Year in the City. By Mrs. S. X. 
Martyn. A bright and charming picture from life, of a 
New England character, thrown amid scenes of tempta- 
tion and trial, and nobly bearing the test. Syoil is a fine 
model for young ladies. Five fine Cuts. $1. 

Grace's Visit, A choice book for young misses, dis- 
playing the power of truthfulness and Christian love to 
win the wayward to the Saviour. With fine Engravings. 
85 cents. 

Sisters, and Not Sisters. A delightful story of a sis- 
ter's influence over a wayward brother. Three Cuts. $1 

Lyntonrille ; or the Irish Boy in Canada. A fresh 
picture of life in the new settlements of Canada. Three 
Engravings. 75 cents. 

Charlie Scott; or, There's Time Enough. Life on 
the sea-shore ; the history of an orphan boy, and his bat- 
tle with a bad habit. Finely illustrated. 60 cents. 

Among the Willows. The blessing of self-denying 
efforts for the neglected. Fine Cuts. 50 cents. 

Phil Kennedy. A new American tale of much interest, 
its facts drawn from life, and illustrating God's providen- 
tial care of his people. Illustrated. 50 cents. 

The Cinnamon-Isle Boy. By Mrs. E. C. Hutchings, 
Newark, N. J. The story of a missionary boy, Charles 
L. Winslow, re-told ; with fresh glimpses at life in Ceylon. 
A true and charming narrative. Three Cuts. 60 cents. 

Published and for sale by the AMERICAN TEACT SO- 
CIETY, 150 Nassau-steeet, NEW YORK ; 40 Coen- 
hilii, BOSTON ; 1210 Chestnut-steeet, PHILADEL- 
PHIA ; and in other cities and principal towns. 



LIFE ILLUSTBATED SEKIES. 



Helen Maurice. A narrative of every-day home life. 
Three Engravings. 

The Glen Cabin, or Away to the Hills. Exciting 
scenes among the White mountains. With Cuts. 

Dora Hamilton. The experience of a Merchant's daugh- 
ter. Three Cuts. 

Lilian. A tale of three hundred years ago. Four En- 
gravings. 

The Huguenots of France, or The Times of Henry IV. 
Some of the most stirring incidents of history. With Cuts. 

Evelyn Percival. Highly interesting sketches and char- 
acters drawn from life. Three Cuts. 

Hrerton Rectory, or The Non-conformists of the Sev- 
enteenth Century. Founded, on fact. Four Engravings. 

Allan Cameron. The eventful life of a Scottish clergy- 
man's son, developing a character of rare beauty and noble- 
ness under the moulding power of religion. Illustrated. 

Walter Martin. Progress through obstacles to a posi- 
tion of great usefulness. Three Cuts. 

Clayton Allyn, or Learning Life's First Lessons. With 
Engravings. 

Save the Erring, or The Gospel Purpose. A pleasing 
and instructive Narrative. Three Cuts. 

Effie Morrison, or The Family of Redbraes. A narra- 
tive of truth. With Illustrations. 



2 

The Weed with an Ill-name. Lessons from nature 
impressed upon the heart. With Cuts. 

Our Tillage in War-Time, Thrilling life-sketches, in- 
culcating true patriotism and piety. Illustrated. 

The Swiss Children, Welcome to the little exiles from 
abroad. Two Cuts. 

The Missing Boat. The perils of mischief, and safety 
of true repentance. With Cuts. 

Madeline. The history of a New England girl. Ulus- 
trated. 

A Little More. The value of contentment. Two En- 
gravings. 

The Lighthouse-Boy. A moral lighthouse for boys. 

May Coyerley. The faithful young Dress-maker. Illus- 
trated. 

Abel Grey. Eaised from poverty to be a distinguished 
Musician. With Cuts. 

Down in a Mine. Thrilling narratives of fact, illustrat- 
ing the Coal-miner's mode of life, his dangers, and his 
security. With Engravings. 

The Happy Fireside. Pleasing glimpses of home life 
in a model Christian household. With fine Cuts. 

Kelly Nash. The boy who ' ' did n't think. " Illustrated. 

Cheerily, Cheerily. An original American book, wor- 
thy of a place in every family library. Three Cuts. 

While They are With Us. A series of narratives show- 
ing our duty to friends. With Engravings. 

PUBLISHED AND FOR SALE BY 

TFfitl AKDEEHIX3AN TEtAGT SOOIKTY, 

150 MSSAU-STRBET, NEW YORK; 

And for Sale at 40 Cornhill, BOSTON ; 1210 Chestnut- 
street, PHILADELPHIA ; 7 Custom-honse-place, 
CHICAGO; and in other cities and towns. 



